Background:
Genome, the genetic blue print of the hereditary information of
an organism comprises many functional regions, non-coding
sections and the vast unexplored areas of the nucleic acids.
Determining the nucleotide sequences of the genome has many
technical hurdles which could be accomplished by the hand of
computational approaches only. Unlocking the knowledge
encoded in the genomes can increase our understanding of
species, which could lead to substantially increase the
productivity of crops. With such enhanced productivity, it
could be the sustainable solution for fulfilling the world’s
demand for the food. Molecular markers are used to provide a
link between genotype and phenotype, for the generation of
molecular genetic maps and to assess the genetic diversity
within and between related species. Molecular markers will
provide the relationship between an inherited disease and its
genetic cause, and can be used to determine the precise
inheritance pattern of the gene that has not yet been exactly
localized. Simple Sequence Repeats (SSRs) or microsatellites are
becoming the most important molecular markers in both
animals and plants, incorporates stretches of tandemly repeated
short oligonucleotides [] whose functional and/or structural
characteristics distinguish them amidst the general DNA
sequence.

Since SSR markers are highly informative, they are widely used
for genetics and breeding studies in several plant species. Thus
characterization of microsatellites is extremely important for the
development of molecular markers. SSRs are highly abundant
and exhibit broad levels of polymorphism in eukaryotic 
[,
]
and prokaryotic [,
] genomes. Their variability in length is
caused by slip-strand mutations and that may affect the local
structure of DNA molecule or encoded protein []. SSRs often
serves to modify the genes with which they are associated and
their influence on gene regulation, transcription and protein
function typically depends on the number of repeats []. Thus
SSRs provide a prolific source of quantitative and qualitative
variation. Transferability between species and sometimes
between genera has often been reported []. The ubiquitous
properties of microsatellites made them important targets for
genetic diversity studies, genetic and comparative mapping [,
]. Moreover, the polymorphism revealed by EST–SSR was
similar to that exposed by genomic SSR []. Also the SSRs are
cross transferable across species and the flanking regions of
SSRs are found conserved []. A high level of polymorphic loci
was obtained regardless of the species considered.

Given the interest of the plant genetics community in SSRs as
genetic markers, there has been a particular concern in the
establishment of methods for rapid identification of robust and
informative SSRs linked to genes of agronomic significance.
Compared to genome-wide isolation approaches, gene-targeted
strategies are more likely to yield SSRs that are relevant to the
goals of marker-assisted selection and germplasm assessment
[].

The distribution of microsatellites in the palm sequences has
practical implications with regard to their use as molecular
markers. Cross transferability or cross species amplification of
coconut microsatellite markers in rattan (climbing palms) 
[]
and other economic palms (date palm, oil palm, palmyrah and
arecanut) [] 
is already reported. Thus the incorporation of
SSR markers in the palm research are extremely valuable and
are increasingly becoming popular in comparative genomics
where SSR markers developed from one species could be
utilized in a related species towards genetic mapping,
characterization, gene cloning, diversity and evolutionary
studies []. This approach gained momentum in plant
genomics during the recent years based on the observation that
despite a wide range in genome sizes, plants were found to
exhibit extensive conservation of both gene content and gene
order []. The availability of a very large set of microsatellite
markers distributed throughout the genome in oil palm and
date palm would facilitate the development of high resolution
maps, which are instrumental for applications like positional
gene cloning and detailed comparative mapping to other palms
like coconut, arecanut, palmyrah palm etc.

Sequences from many genes and genomes are continuously
made freely available in the public databases and mining of
these sources using computational approaches permits rapid
and economical marker development. But the number of robust,
informative and user-friendly markers (e.g., SSRs) publicly
available for palms is still insufficient for some applications,
particularly considering the low intra-specific polymorphism
level observed even with microsatellite markers (10-20%). The
main objective of the present work is to locate and analyze the
SSRs in the sequences of palms.

Methodology:
Sequence Sources:
The substrate sequences, on which we have acted upon, except
date palm sequences, were retrieved from the web base
National Center for Biotechnology Information
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) 
[]. The draft date palm
(Phoenix dactylifera ‘Khalas’ variety) genome investigated in
the study has been obtained from the site of Weill Cornell
Medical College in Qatar (www.qatar-weill.cornell.edu) 
[].
The predicted size of the date palm genome sequence is
˜650Mbp. The sequences of major palms like coconut (Cocos
nucifera), arecanut (Areca catechu), oil palm (Elaeis) and date
palm (Phoenix dactylifera) were processed individually while rest
of the arecaceae members have been underwent treatment in
mass.

Sequence Preprocessing:
Sequences were then pre-processed to minimize the sequencing
errors and to avoid redundant sequences, were grouped into
contigs. The sequence flaws were obliterated using the
standalone tool SeqClean (Gene Index project) [], for the
trimming of poly A (T) tails, low quality/complexity regions
and distal oligoN series. Before execution Seqclean program
was customized by configuring the vector contamination
database UniVec [] with local Blast 
[] for the removal of
vector, linker and adaptor sequences. The filtered sequences
were clustered and then assembled by adapting CAP3 
[] tool.
The tool uses forward-reverse constraints to correct assembly
errors and link contigs and uses base quality values in
alignment of sequence reads. Automatic clipping of 5' and 3'
poor regions of reads and the generation of assembly results in
ace file format are remarkable. The contigs and singletons
acquired were blended to engender the substrate file for SSR
detection.

Microsatellite mining:
Subsequently, the identification and localization of perfect as
well as compound microsatellites were done using MISA
(http://pgrc.ipk-gatersleben.de/misa) tool 
[], a repeat
searching perl script. Among different programs available in
the public domain, the MIcroSAtellite (MISA) search module
has improved features that are useful for EST quality control
and for designing the primer pairs for EST-SSRs in a batch file
[].
The categorized results of the microsatellite searches are
stored in two files, one to hold the localization and type of
identified microsatellite(s) in a table wise manner and a
statistics file which summarizes different statistics as the
frequency of a specific microsatellite type according to the unit
size or individual motifs. The analysis of occurrence and
frequency of SSRs among the palm species was carried out by
exporting the MISA results to Microsoft Excel spreadsheets 
[].
But to advance for further analysis, it has been found onerous
for getting sequences of only SSR containing regions from the
bulk palm sequence source file. To resolve this obstacle, the
MISA perl script has been configured to get an additional
SEQUENCE file holding only SSR containing sequences. This
has considerably reduced the manual effort and toil.

Results and Discussion:
Microsatellite density profile it was found that palm sequences
are rich source of microsatellites repeats. A total of 46,916
sequences were retrieved from the web base National Center for
Biotechnology Information, NCBI
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/). Since the sequences in public
domain are cumulated exponentially, available sequences as on
14th January, 2011 were undergone for the present analysis.
Sequences of coconut (390), arecanut (22), oil palm (41374) and
date palm (250107) were collected besides 5130 sequences of
remaining 546 palm species. These values show the complexity
of different palm sequences, which should be handled carefully.
A minor negligence while processing itself will lead to false
positives. The reliable softwares and programs were met the
needs at this stage and thus the computational approaches
greatly help in getting and manipulating these informations.
After pre-processing of these sequences respective size of them
were significantly reduced and they were subjected to
microsatellite mining. From the 390 Cocos nucifera sequences of
205Kb size, 426 SSRs per Kb were collected. Similarly 5, 3024,
34051 and 577 SSRs per Kb were detected in Areca catechu,
Elaeis, Phoenix dactylifera and other palms respectively. These
repeats were occurred at a frequency of 2.04 (coconut), 0.7
(arecanut), 0.22 (oil palm), 3.5 (date palm genome) and 0.62
(other palms) per Kb of sequences (, see supplementary
material). Thus altogether, 38,083 SSRs were detected in the
entire palm sequences.

Date palm and coconut were observed to be the richest source
of microsatellite repeats. Thus SSR markers developed from
date palm and coconut were cross transferable to other species
of Arecaceae which will be helpful for the generation of genic
regions in the less available species of other palms. With an
earlier report, of microsatellite repeats in oil palm EST
sequences (2413 ESTs), the predicted frequency of 1SSR/4.4Kb
(0.227SSR per Kb) is found to be in agreement with the present
report (41374) in oil palm sequences of 0.22 SSR per Kb. So even
if more genic regions of oil palm are revealed on a daily basis,
the occurrence of its repeat frequency is found to be constant.
This observation discloses the conservative and ubiquitous
character of SSRs over palms. In cereals, including barley,
maize, oat, rice, rye and wheat, lower frequencies of SSRs (7-
10% of total ESTs) were found from their available genome
database. The SSR frequency reported in the present study
might change when the more sequences of other palms are
made available in the public database.

The SSRs were grouped as monomer, dimer, trimer, and
tetramer and above based on the size of the repeating unit
(, see supplementary material). Mononucleotide repeats
were grouped to two as A/T and C/G. Similarly all
dinucleotides motifs were grouped into the following four
unique classes; 
AT/TA

AG/GA/CT/TC

AC/CA/TG/GT

GC /CG

Among all the repeats
dinucleotide repeats (49%) were found to be more abundant in
palms followed by mononucleotides (30%) and then tri
nucleotides (19%) (, see supplementary material). This
observation was in exception with arecanut and date palm
(), as these two can be taken concession due to its less
sequence availability (arecanut) and non-furnished draft contigs
(date palm). Also within dinucleotides, AG/GA/TC/CT motif
(55.8%) was observed as dominant repeats.

Conclusion:
By this study, the wide occurrence and conservative nature of
microsatellite repeats was accomplished in palms. We have
predicted and characterized huge data sets, having all the
possible SSRs, their locations, types and classes in palms. The
predominant occurrence of GA/CT dimeric and A/T mono
type repeats in plants are found to be strengthened in this
study. Also the scarcity of AC/GT repeats in plant genomes
due to the high frequency of certain amino acids in plants is yet
again revealed. The frequency of SSRs in oil palm is found to be
preserving even with the addition of more and more updated
coding regions. Thus the predicted SSR frequency of different
palms can be extended with more upcoming sequence
information. This can be targeted towards the genetic mapping,
characterization, gene cloning, diversity and evolutionary
studies of palms. But, the exploration of genes and genomes
will never commit a pause. Magnificent and convoluted
amount of data and sequences will be depositing in science each
and every day. The development of a specific algorithm which
combines the sequence processing and marker extraction will
outperform in the near future, which will overwhelm the
mining of large data sets. To achieve this target, the currently
generated data will be highly useful to design and train
algorithm for the extraction of microsatellites exclusively for
palms.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work was supported by grants from Department of
Information Technology, India. Our sincere thanks to Dr.
George. V. Thomas, Director, Central Plantation Crop Research
Institute, Kasaragod, for his broad guidance and support.

Citation:Palliyarakkal et al, Bioinformation 7(7): 347- 351 (2011)

Distribution of SSR repeats in palms

