Background
Schizophrenia is a heterogenous neurodevelopmental disorder
characterized by hallucinations; psychotic thought patterns of
neural communication, which contribute to behavioral changes
[,
] and impaired sensory processing 
[–]. GABAnergic
system is principally involved in the balance of excitation and
inhibition in the brain. Involvement of GABAnergic system in
pathogenesis of schizophrenia comes from the compelling
evidence wherein prenatal exposure to infection significantly
increases immune reactivity of β2 subunit of GABAA receptor
in rat cortico-limbic structures resulting in elevating the
incidence of schizophrenia []. Apparently, binding studies
have shown increased binding of high affinity [3H]GABA to
the total population of GABAA receptors in post-mortem
schizophrenic brains compared with controls [–
]. Ubiquitous
presence of GABA receptors makes almost all the neurons to
release GABA [] and for this reason it is expected that most
brain functions involve GABAnergic transmission 
[]
therefore forms an important drug target in neurological
disorders.

In spite of tremendous progress made in confronting the
disease, the present pharmacological properties that confer the
therapeutic effects on GABAnergic system have remained
elusive and certain side effects still impacts patient health and
quality of life. In certain cases the present medication often
produces psychotomimetic responses in humans and has lead
to hypersensitivity in patients [–
]. For example
conventional antipsychotics like as haloperidol, has been
associated with higher rate of extra pyramidal side effects.
Considering the serious side effects of conventional
antipsychotics a new antipsychotics like Olanzapine,
Amisulpride, Clozapine and Risperidone were launched which
presumed to been highly effective. In spite of being efficacious
and providing better treatment schizophrenic symptomatology,
modern antipsychotics still suffer side effects []. For example,
Clozapine is an effective treatment for those who respond
poorly to other drugs, [] but it has potentially serious side
effect of agranulocytosis (lowered white blood cell count) in
less than 4% of people []. People on typical antipsychotics
tend to have a higher rate of extra pyramidal side effects while
some atypicals are associated with considerable weight gain,
diabetes and risk of metabolic syndrome; this is most
pronounced with Olanzapine, while Risperidone has a similar
rate of extrapyramidal symptoms to conventional drug -
haloperidol []. It remains unclear whether the newer
antipsychotics reduce the chances of developing neuroleptic
malignant syndrome or tardive dyskinesia, but however poses
a threat in clinical management of schizophrenia []. Deemed
to such serious side effects, the American Psychiatric
Association suggests considering stopping antipsychotics in
some people if there are no symptoms for more than a year 
[].
Owing to serious concerns that present medication offers and
efficacy being limited, research is being majorly focused to
design novel drugs bestowed to overcome the side effects that
current anti psychotics suffer.

The pursuit for novel antipsychotic GABAnergic drugs has
lately focused on the plant derivatives bestowed with potential
to treat psychotic disorder especially medicinal plants used in
folkloric or traditional medicine like Traditional Chinese
Medicine (TCM). Throughout the long Chinese history, there
has been an accumulation of experience using medicinal plants
to treat a variety of psychotic diseases. For example Honokiol
and Magnolol obtained from Magnolia officinalis is well known
antidepressant and shows anxiolytic effects. In addition many
flavonoids, such as apigenin, chrysin and amentoflavone, have
been purified from plants and shown to treat disorders of
central nervous system in vitro [].

In the given view, the present study centers to identify plant
derivative as a potential inhibitor for GABAA receptor
bestowed with least toxicity, high affinity and appreciable
pharmacological properties for the clinical treatment of
schizophrenia.

Methodology
Dataset selection:
Three sets of compounds were evaluated for their
pharmacological profile in the study. Set 1  (see
supplementary material) consisted of established potent
GABAA receptor inhibitors of plant origin like Acacetin,
Saikosaponin A, Rutaecarpine, Flunitrazepam, Honokiol,
Magnolol, 6-methylflavone. Set 2  (see supplementary
material) consisted of sixteen compounds belonging to Ndiarylalkenyl-
piperidinecarboxylic acid derivatives designed
by Zheng et al., 2006 
[] and finally set 3 
 (see
supplementary material) consisted of thirty two plant
compound analogues of Magnolol and Honokiol proposed by
Fuchs et al., 2014 
[].

Preparation of protein and compounds:
The crystal structure of GABA (A) receptor was retrieved from
Protein Data Bank (PDB) with PDB ID: 4COF []. The X-Ray
diffraction structure of GABA (A) receptor had a resolution of
2.97 Å, R value of 0.206 and R free value of 0.226. Unit cell
parameters were as Length [Å] a = 174.10, b = 108.90, c = 207.44,
Angles [°] β = 90.00, α = 107.43, γ = 90.00. The structure was
downloaded in .pdb format and was further prepared for
docking process. The protein was prepared using the PrepWiz
module of Schrodinger suite []. In the preparation procedure,
the protein was first preprocessed by assigning the bond orders
and hydrogen, creating zero order bonds to metals and adding
disulphide bonds. The missing side chains and loops were
filled using Prime Module of Schrodinger. Further all the water
molecules were deleted beyond 5 Å from hetero groups. Once
the protein structure was preprocessed, H bonds were assigned
which was followed by energy minimization by OPLS 2005
force field. The final structure obtained was saved in.pdb
format for further studies. All the ligands were optimized
through OPLS 2005 force field algorithm [] embedded in the
LigPrep module of Schrödinger suite, 2013 (Schrodinger. LLC,
New York, NY). The ionizations of the ligand were retained at
the original state and were further desalted. The structures thus
optimized were saved in .sdf format for docking procedures
[].

Structure Similarity search:
The compound with superior pharmacological profile amongst
all the datasets was further used as query molecule in pursuit
to identify still better druglike compound than any molecules
mentioned in the dataset. Similarity search was supervised by
Binary Finger Print Based Tanimoto similarity equation to
retrieve compounds with similarity threshold of 95 % against
NCBI׳s Pubchem compound database.

Molecular docking of compounds:
Molecular docking program- Molegro Virtual Docker (MVD)
which incorporates highly efficient PLP (Piece wise Linear
potential) and MolDock scoring function provided a flexible
docking platform []. All the ligands were docked at the
allosteric site of the GABAA receptor with reference to cocrystallized
ligand- benzamidine, present in the protein
structure (Coordinates: x= -20.558, y= -19.574 and z= 127.994).
Docking parameters were set to 0.20Å as grid resolution,
maximum iteration of 1500 and maximum population size of
50. Energy minimization and hydrogen bonds were optimized
after the docking. Simplex evolution was set at maximum steps
of 300 with neighborhood distance factor of 1. Binding affinity
and interactions of ligands with protein were evaluated on the
basis of the internal ES (Internal electrostatic Interaction),
internal hydrogen bond interactions and sp2-sp2 torsions. Post
dock energy of the ligand-receptor complex was minimized
using Nelder Mead Simplex Minimization (using non-grid
force field and H bond directionality) []. On the basis of
rerank score best interacting compound was selected from each
dataset.

Bioactivity and ADMET profiling of compounds:
All the compounds were screened for its drug ability by
lipinksi filters. Biological activity of the ligands was predicted
using Molinspiration webserver (© Molinspiration
Cheminformatics 2014). LC 50 was predicted using T.E.S.T.
Version 4.1 (2012, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency)
software. The complete ADMET properties was calculated
using admetSAR [].

Pharmacophoric Mapping:
Pharmacophoric mapping which involves ligand interaction
patterns, hydrogen bond interaction, hydrophobic interactions
was evaluated using Accelrys Discovery Studio 3.5 DS
Visualizer [,
].

Softwares, Suites and Webservers used:
All the chemical structures were drawn in MarvinSketch 5.6.0.2,
(1998-2011, Copyright © ChemAxon Ltd). Ligands were
optimized with LigPrep module of Schrodinger suite 2013.
Protein was processed and refined with protein preparation
wizard of Schrodinger suite 2013 (Schrodinger. LLC, 2009, New
York, NY). Flexible molecular docking of the compounds with
target was completed using Molegro Virtual Docker 2010.4.0.0.
Accelrys Discovery Studio® Visualizer 3.5.0.12158 (Copyright©
2005-12, Accelrys Software Inc.) was used for molecular
visualizations. T.E.S.T software (2012, U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency) and Molinspiration web server (©
Molinspiration Cheminformatics 2014) were respectively used
for predicting LC50 and bioactivity of the compound. ADMET
profiles were calculated using admetSAR (Laboratory of
Molecular Modeling and Design. Copyright @ 2012, East China
University of Science and Technology, Shanghai Key
Laboratory for New Drug Design,).

Results &amp; Discussion
 shows the best docked compound from each dataset.
Evident from the docking (rerank) scores Honokiol ()
from dataset 1, compound 4e () from dataset 2 and
compound 61 () belonging dataset 3 showed highest
affinity. Compound 61 derivative of Honokiol demonstrated
highest binding affinity against GABAA receptor than any
compound in the either sets. In addition, Compound 61 from
dataset 3 shows 1.21 folds increased affinity than its parent
compound Honokiol. The superior affinity of compound 61 can
be attributed to its excellent interaction profile especially in
terms of electrostatic and H-bonding interactions. Apparent
from the docking profile of compound 61 energy values of
descriptors of external ligand interactions contributes 7.32 folds
higher stability than internal ligand interactions. Further
external ligand interactions were stabilized mostly by steric
energy guided by Piece wise linear potentials. While in internal
ligand interactions, the torsional strain contributes for the
stability of the ligand receptor interactions.

In further approach, in pursuit to identify even better molecule
endowed with superior pharmacological profile than
compound 61, virtual screening was performed against
Pubchem database (taking compound 61 as query). A total of
135 compounds structurally similar to compound 61 were
retrieved. All the 135 compound retrieved hitherto was docked
against GABA receptor. Compound AGN-PC-0DAHLN (CID:
60152869) () showed superior binding affinity out of
all the 135 compounds  (see supplementary material),
further also showed appreciable pharmacological profile.

It is interesting to note that, none of the 135 virtually screened
compounds showed better binding affinity or pharmacological
profile than its parent compound 61. Compound 61
demonstrated 1.30 folds better affinity than its best docked
similar compound AGN-PC-0DAHLN (CID: 60152869). In
addition compound 61 had better pharmacological profile than
its similar AGN-PC-0DAHLN (CID: 60152869). Compound 61
in the active site is shown in .

The ADMET profiles  (see supplementary material) of
the best docked compound belonging to each of the three
datasets and compound 61 akin AGN-PC-0DAHLN revealed
that compound 61 was better compound and most likely
druglike compared to its parent compound honokiol and to its
similar AGN-PC-0DAHLN. The predicted bioactivity 
(see supplementary material) as well as the LC 50 values of
compound 61 was quite appreciable. The LC 50 value at 96
hour interval was predicted to be 4.6 folds superior for
compound 61 than its parent compound honokiol and 1.6 folds
better than its similar AGN-PC-0DAHLN. Compound 4e from
dataset 2 also showed good binding profiles and ADMET
properties but was somewhere intermediate between honokiol
and its analogue compound 61. In addition all the compounds
identified showed enhanced bioactivity providing a clue for
target specificity. The pharmacological profiles of the entire
three best docked compounds and compound 61 similar AGNPC-
0DAHLN were although appreciable, but it was compound
61 which showed best amongst all the compounds studied in
different datasets and therefore it was further analyzed for
pharmacophoric mappings.

Comprehensively shown in , the compound 61
demonstrates van der Waals interactions with Ala 201, Phe 200,
Leu 99, and electrostatic interactions with Tyr 157 &amp; 97, 205 and
Thr 202. Compound 61 is a hydrogen bond donor from
electrostatic residues Tyr 97 and donor to Glu 155. Electrostatic
and hydrophobic interactions of compound 61 in the site is
shown in  and 
 respectively.

It is interesting to note that, findings by Fuchs et al., 2014 also
showed that compound 61 was the best potentiator of GABA
(A) receptor in Xenopus laevis defolliculated oocytes.
Compound 61, increased the GABA-induced current by 5000 %
at 10 µM concentration making it the best allosteric potentiator
[]. Owing to the coherence of our Insilco pharmacological
profiling to bioactivity profiling by Fuchs et al., it can be
anticipated that compound 61 may form potential allosteric
GABA receptor inhibitor in the clinical treatment of
schizophrenia. In addition, in a possible attempt to identify
better compound than 61, we performed virtual screening
process and ended up by retrieving 135 compounds. Contrary
to our expectation, none of the 135 similar compounds
retrieved showed appreciable pharmacological profile than its
parent compound 61, testifying compound 61 to be best
allosteric modulator of GABA receptor hitherto discovered.

Two thirds of previous studies reported positive results using
GABA inhibitors, while, one third reported either no difference
or a negative response. The negative results involved Excessive
sedation, Cognitive impairment, Ataxia, Dysarthria, Postural
hypertension, Worsening of psychosis, Hyperarousal,
“Paradoxical” agitation and Respiratory depression, in addition,
the regular use of the GABA inhibitors in some patients lead to
cumulative toxicity [].

From our study we anticipate compound 61 can be an ideal
inhibitor against GABA which can be put forth for
pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic experiments and
potentially overcome narrow therapeutic window of currently
available GABA inhibitors in the successful treatment of
schizophrenia.

Conclusion
Narrow therapeutic window of available GABA inhibitors
necessitates an urgent need to develop new drugs treatment of
schizophrenia. Therefore in the given view we identified
compounds derived from plant source with optimal
pharmacological profile. In the study, Honokiol and its
analogue compound 61 synthesized by Fuchs et al., 2014
demonstrated drug like properties endowed with higher
binding affinity, least toxicity and optimal bioactivity. The
optimal binding affinity of compound 61 unlike other
compounds undertaken in the study can be attributed for its
optimal electrostatic interactions in the active site of GABA (A)
receptor. In addition, compound 61 also showed better bioavailability,
target specificity and least LC50 values testifying it
to be better compound than rest of the compounds analyzed in
the study. Our study demonstrating optimal pharmacological
profile of compound 61 is complimented by findings by Fuchs
et al. 2014 which also showed compound 61 to be a superior
potentiator of GABA receptor.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Sahila et al, Bioinformation 11(6): 280-289 (2015)

Structure of best docked compound from each dataset (A) Honokiol (dataset -1) (B) 4e [(3R)-1-{4,4-bis[3-
(phenoxymethyl)thiophen-2-yl]piperidine-3-carboxylic acid] (Dataset 2) (C) 61 [2-(4-methoxyphenyl)-4-propylphenol](Dataset 3)
(D) AGN-PC-0DAHLN- molecule similar to compound 61 of dataset 3

Compound 61 of dataset 3 bound at the active site. (Active site represent as solvent accessible surface area. Blue shade
represents high solvent accessible surface area, green shade is vice- versa).

Interactions of compound 61 in the allosteric site of the GABAA receptor. Residues circled in green participate in van der
Waals interaction (labeled as greasy) with the ligand while residues in pink forms electrostatic interactions (labeled as polar
residues). The dotted line around the ligand represents periphery of the active site. Hydrogen bonds formed by compound 61 with
residues Glu 155 and Tyr 97. The arene-arene (π- π) interactions are established between compound 61 and Phe 200.

(A) Compound 61 deeply embedded in the allosteric site surrounded by highly electronegative residues. (B) The site
harboring compound 61 is shown with hydrophobic intensities. The hydrophobic intensities of the binding site ranges from -3.00
(least hydrophobic area - blue shade) to 3.00 (highly hydrophobic area –brown shade).

