Background
Parkinson׳s disease (PD) is the second most common
neurodegenerative disorder after Alzheimer׳s disease 
[],
which affects ~1–2% of the population above age 65 and 4–5%
above age 85 [] with a higher prevalence in men 
[]. The origin
of the selective dopaminergic neuronal degeneration in PD is
unknown, but it may involve oxidative stress, mitochondrial
dysfunction, apoptotic mechanisms, and accumulation of
altered proteins []. It is also supposed that environmental
factors may contribute to PD. The etiology of most
neurodegenerative disorders is multifactorial and consists of an
interaction between environmental factors and genetic
predisposition []. Discovery of 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-
tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)-induced parkinsonism generated
interest in the search for environmental risk factors in the
pathogenesis of PD []. The role of pesticide exposure in PD has
long been suspected, but the specific causative agents and the
underlying mechanisms are not fully understood. There are
evidences, which link PD etiology with long-term/low-dose
exposure to pesticides such as paraquat, maneb, dieldrin,
pyrethroids, and organophosphates. Most of these pesticides
share common features, namely the ability to induce oxidative
stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, alpha-synuclein
fibrillization, and neuronal cell loss [].

Certain types of professions such as farming, carpentry,
cleaning, and welding, cigarette smoking, the use of
coffee/caffeine, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and
head trauma might have some type of association with PD 
[].
Beside this, the influence of well-water drinking [], rural living
[], and 
nutritional factors [] have also been reported with the
risk of PD. In this context, the present study was designed to
find out the association between environmental factors and risk
of PD.

Methodology
Participants:
The present study included 97 patients with Parkinson׳s
disease and equal number of controls. PD patients of age
between ≥40-≤80 years were recruited from the outpatient door
of Neurology, King George׳s Medical University, Lucknow,
Uttar Pradesh, India, from May 2010 to January 2013. Diagnosis
was made according to the UK Parkinson ׳s Disease Society
Brain Bank criteria []. Patients with secondary parkinsonism
or parkinson-plus diseases such as multiple system atrophy,
progressive supranuclear palsy, corticobasal degeneration, and
dementia with Lewy bodies were excluded from the study.
Neurologically healthy controls were recruited from the local
community. The absence of disease was confirmed by clinical
history and physical examination. The controls were neither
related to one another, nor to PD patients. Controls having a
history of any neurological disorder were excluded from the
study. The purpose of the study was explained to all of them.
Written informed consent for the participation in the study was
obtained prior to enrollment from all the participants. This
study was approved by the institutional ethics committee.

Data collection:
A detailed structured proforma was used to record the
information. All the participants underwent same
questionnaire. Patient׳s data was collected during the visit to
the outpatient door of Neurology, King George׳s Medical
University, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India. Information from
the participants was obtained regarding: a) demographic data:
age, age at PD onset, weight, gender, religion, education, place
of living and occupation; b) environmental factors: chemical
exposure, dietary habits, source of drinking water, tobacco
chewing, smoking, and alcohol intake; c) history of other
diseases: hypertension, diabetes and tuberculosis; and d)
history of head injury. On the basis of education, participants
were divided into illiterate, up to high school, up to
intermediate, and more than graduation. Place of living was
divided into rural and urban areas. Occupations of the
participants were classified into service class, professionals,
farmers, business persons, housewives, labors, and
unemployed. Chemical exposure includes exposure to
insecticides, herbicides, rodenticides, and other toxic chemical
such as laboratory chemicals, heavy metals, farming chemicals,
fertilizers etc. Dietary habits were grouped into two categoriesvegetarian
and non-vegetarian. The participant was considered
non-vegetarian if he consumes food such as egg, fish, meat etc.
Source of drinking water was divided into three groups- well
water, hand pump and tap water. Adverse habits include
tobacco chewing, smoking (cigarette / bidi) and alcohol intake.
Data were also recorded for other common diseases and head
injury.

Statistical analysis:
All the analysis was carried out using SPSS 16.0 version
(Chicago, Inc. USA). The results are presented in mean±SD and
percentages. The dichotomous variable was compared by using
Chi-square test. Risk factors showing significance in univariate
analysis were subjected to multivariate analysis. The logistic
regression analysis was carried out to evaluate the risk factors
for PD. The odds ratio (OR) and its 95% confidence interval (CI)
were calculated. The p-value &lt;0.05 was considered significant.

Results
More than half of the PD patients (71.1 %) and controls (70.1%)
were males with mean age of 56.34±9.58 and 53.30±833 years,
respectively (p&gt;0.05). The average onset age of PD patients was
52.59±11.18 years with duration of disease 37.64±32.93 months.
The average weight of PD patients and controls was
53.98±10.70 and 56.40±7.45 kg, respectively (p&gt;0.05). Nonsignificant
differences in age and weight between PD patients
and controls indicated the comparability of both the groups.
Results are shown in  &amp; 
 (see supplementary
material). Gender, religion, education, place of living,
occupation, dietary habits, tobacco chewing, smoking, alcohol
intake, head injury, and other diseases such as hypertension,
tuberculosis and diabetes were not associated with PD.
However, people who were consuming well water (OR: 4.45;
95% CI: 1.96-10.10) and who were exposed to any type of
chemical exposure (OR: 6.57; 95% CI: 2.86-15.09) were at
increased risk of developing PD.

Discussion
The findings of the present study were hospital based not from
the community-based epidemiological surveys. According to
the results, gender was not found to be as a risk factor.
However, Behari et al found gender as a risk factor [], which
was contrary to our finding. Most of the studies are dominant
with male proportion, especially in the Indian context. Thus,
hospital based studies may be misleading. In the present study,
male to female ratio was 2.46:1 in PD group and 2.34:1 was
among controls. The present study showed that place of
residence involving rural living was not a significant risk factor,
whereas any type of chemical exposure was found to be
significantly associated with PD. Most of the studies showed
that an increased risk of pesticide exposure was associated with
an increased risk of PD with rural living. However, association
of rural living with PD is controversial. Some studies favor the
hypothesis for the interrelation between PD and rural living 
[,
,
]
but some reports showed no association between them
[,
,
]; for example, the findings of the present study. The
possible reason behind it might be recruitment of PD patients
and controls from the same area. Occupational status has also
been investigated for PD and controls, but it was not associated
with PD in agreement with several studies [–
]. However,
Tanner et al found that some professions were associated with
postural instability and gait difficulty subtype of Parkinsonism
[]. Occupation involving farming is very common among
rural people. However, in the present study farming was not
significantly associated with PD, but they showed 1.43 folds
increased chances for developing PD. Some studies favor
farming as a risk factor of PD [,
], whereas other studies do
not [,
,
,
,
,
]. Education and religion were also not
associated with the risk of PD in this study. Observations for
education were also consistent with earlier studies [,
].

It is well known that farming is linked to chemical exposure. A
significant association was found between PD and chemical
exposure in the present study. This observation was similar to
the findings of others [,
,
,
]. However, some casecontrol
studies found no clear association [,
,
] and one
study also reported no association between them 
[].
Pesticides and other chemical agents have attracted the
attention of investigators as a PD risk factor, because MPTP
may cause many cases of secondary parkinsonism and is
structurally similar to paraquet []. It can be assumed that
family members of farmers and also people of other professions
such as shopkeepers and small businessman who handle
pesticides during cultivation of land seasonally with longer
years of exposure to pesticides might develop PD in their
lifetime, which indicated that direct exposure to pesticides was
probably more important than rural living or farming as a risk
factor []. However, in contrast, Jimenez et al reported that past
exposure to pesticides does not appear to be associated with an
increased risk of developing PD []. Well water consumption
has also been found associated with increased risk of
developing PD [,
,
,
] as well as in the present study,
although in other reports such association was not found [,
]. Consumption of well water for more than 10 years duration
result in a two-fold increase in the occurrence of PD [].
Jimenez et al also reported that only prolonged exposures of 30
years or longer were significantly different between PD patients
and controls [], whereas consumption of well water for less
than 10 years did not show any significant difference. Well
water could probably act as a carrier of a potentially toxic agent
or an infective agent. However, no difference was found in
chemical analysis between well water consumed by PD patients
and controls. This could suggest that chronic exposure to
exogenous toxic agents may be responsible in some way [].

Dietary pattern might involve with the occurrence of PD,
because an increased risk of PD development after exposure to
nuts and seeds has been reported; the protective effect of
peanuts on females and salads with dressing on males is also
observed. Salads eaten by most Indians are generally raw
vegetables tossed with salt, pepper and lime juice. Salad
dressings and salad oils are only used by a very few people and
could not have been a major risk or protective factor in the
Indian context. Similarly, peanuts are consumed universally by
people of all strata and again were not likely to be a major risk
or protective factor []. In our study, vegetarian and nonvegetarian
dietary habits did not show any significant
association with PD. This result was consistent with previous
studies [,
], whereas Fall et al suggested that nutritional
factors could be of etiologic importance in PD []. A reduced
risk for PD among cigarette smokers has been observed in
several studies [,
,
,
,
]. Behari et al observed the
protective effect of cigarette smoking in smokers of 20 years
duration only. People who smoked for more than 20 years did
not enjoy this protective effect. It might be possible that those
who smoked for more than 20 years had increased mortality
from other smoking-related diseases []. Morano et al found
that cigarette smoking habit in males was near to statistical
significance []. Cigarette smoking may exert its protective
effect through various means: (a) It contains monoamine
oxidase-B (MAO-B) inhibitor activity, MAO-B breaks down
dopamine, releasing free radicals, which, in turn damage nigral
cells (b) Nicotine up regulates nicotinic receptors masking early
symptoms of PD (c) Carbon monoxide from smoke reduces free
radicals []. However, we found no significant association of
smoking with PD, which was similar to earlier studies [,
],
although inverse association of tobacco and tobacco smoking
with PD were found in other studies [,
,
]. Alcohol intake
did not carry any significant association with the occurrence of
PD as observed in previous studies [,
,
,
,
] as well as
in the present study. A decreased risk of developing PD with
alcohol intake habit in males is also reported [].

Some previous studies reported that head injury might increase
the risk of PD [,
], but this observation was not found in the
present study, in agreement with the findings of the others [,
]. Goldman et al suggested that head injury alone was not
associated with PD risk. It may initiate and/or accelerate
neurodegeneration when levels of synuclein are high []. The
results from the present study showed that PD was not
associated with hypertension, tuberculosis and diabetes.
However, these results are preliminary; more studies are
warranted to prove chemical exposure and well water drinking
as a significant risk factors for PD.

Conclusion
Results from the present study showed that gender, religion,
education, place of living, occupation, dietary habits, tobacco
chewing, smoking, alcohol intake, and head injury had no
association with PD. However, chemical exposure and well
water drinking were significantly associated with PD, which
concluded that environmental factors could act as a risk factor
for PD in some way.

Conflict of Interest
The authors report that they have no conflict of interest.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors are thankful to all the participants who
participated in this study.

Citation:Gupta et al, Bioinformation 10(6): 342-346 (2014)

