Background
Oxidative stress is the one of the leading causes of cataract due
to imbalance between oxidants and antioxidants in favor of
oxidants in the human body []. In order to maintain tight
homeostatic control of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and
prevent oxidative stress, external supplementation with dietary
antioxidants or herbal preparations may prove useful. The
major proteins maintaining the lens transparency are crystallins
representing up to 90% of the soluble lens proteins 
[]. Human
gamma-D-crystallin (γD-crys) is one of the most abundant γ-
crystallins in the lens and a significant component of the agerelated
cataract due to its misfolding. Any changes occurred in
γD-crys gene (CRYGD) would result in non-functional protein
[]. 
As shown in (), γD-crys is a monomeric protein
composed of two structurally homologous domains.

Each domain is composed of intercalated double β-sheet key
motifs a characteristic structural feature of the βγ-crystallin
superfamily. The duplicated domains connected by a linker
peptide form a highly conserved hydrophobic interface that
plays a crucial role in determining long-term stability 
(). External supplementation of Noni fruit juice
(Morinda.citrifolia) includes nutraceuticals and dietary
supplements such as vitamin C, vitamin E, Scopoletin,
Damnacanthal and many more compounds 
[–]. In this paper,
we investigated some of the anti-oxidants present in Noni fruit
juice to bind with gamma-D-crsytalline and found that these
anti-antioxidants have considerable binding affinity for human
gamma-D-crsytallin.

Methodology
Tools employed:
Protein Data Bank server (PDB:www.rcbs.org/pdb) 
[],
Whatif server (http: //swift.cmbi.ru.nl/ servers/html/
index.html) [], ACD chemsketch and MoleGro Virtual Docker
and viewer, preparation of Human Gamma D-crystalline
structure was downloaded from PDB server. The ID generated
was 2G98. The structure of the protein was optimized using
Whatif server and was used for further analysis. Vitamin C,
Vitamin E, Damnacanthal and Scopoletin, structures were
constructed using ACDchemsketch 12.01 software. The three
dimensional structure of these compounds was optimized
using ACDchemsketch - structure optimization wizard.

Docking studies of Vitamin C, Vitamin E, Scopoletin and
Damnacanthal with Human lens gamma- D-Crystalline (2G98):
The protein was imported into MoleGro Virtual Docker version
4.0.2.0 and surface was created. Cavities were detected in the
protein surface. Five cavities were found and they were
represented in green color as shown in (). Vitamin C,
Vitamin E, Damnacanthal and Scopoletin were saved
individually into MoleGro Virtual Docker software in “.mol”
format. These ligands were docked into all the cavities to
produce five docking sites with different amino acid sequence.
The MolDock scores and root mean square deviation (RMSD)
values were calculated.

Results and Discussion
Optimization of three dimensional structures of gamma-Dcrsytalline
and its ligands (Vitamin C, Vitamin E, Damnacanthal and Scopoletin):
The optimized structure of gamma-D-crsytalline with five
cavities was shown in (). The protein was subjected to
detect cavities using MoleGro Virtual Docker version 4.0.2.0.
Vitamin C, Vitamin E, Damnacanthal and Scopoletin were
optimized using ACDChemSketch version 12.01. The
optimized structures in two dimensional conformations were
shown in ().

Docking studies of Vitamin C, Vitamin E, Damnacanthal and
Scopoletin with gamma-D-crsytalline:
Docking of Vitamin C, Vitamin E, Damnacanthal and
Scopoletin within the cavities of gamma-D-crsytalline
generated five poses with unique chemical arrangement. The
docking studies within the cavity structures were shown in
(). Docking results of Vitamin C,
Vitamin E, Damnacanthal and Scopoletin were shown in 
 (see supplementary material). The MolDock Scores and
cavity volume of Pose 1 was high in all the docking
experiments; the structure in the pose1 was superior to other
poses.

The present investigation emphasize that Vitamin C, Vitamin E,
Damnacanthal and Scopoletin docked into pose 1, which is said
to be the best fit for PDB Id: 2G98, leading to least MolDock
scores and re-rank scores. Corresponding amino acid sequence
and MolDock scores were also shown in (). This implies
that the structures in pose 1, are firmly bound with gamma-Dcrystalline,
making the protein more active. This may lead to
deactivation of mutated gamma-D-crystalline. This report
suggests that anti-oxidants present in Noni have strong binding
affinity towards gamma-D-crystallin. This investigation
supports the anti-oxidant and cataract treating effects of Noni
fruit juice.

Conclusion
In conclusion, our work highlights the importance of studying
docking parameters of Vitmain C, Vitamin E, Damnacanthal
and Scopoletin into gamma-D-crystallin. The findings in the
present investigation lead to the application of Vitmain C,
Vitamin E, Damnacanthal and Scopoletin during age related,
oxidative stress induced loss of vision problems. Further, antioxidant
activities of Vitmain C, Vitamin E, Damnacanthal and
Scopoletin must be examined separately in in vitro and in vivo
animal models. Thus, a careful selection of the appropriate
tools and experimental approaches for analyzing the roles of
Vitmain C, Vitamin E, Damnacanthal and Scopoletin during
oxidative stress induced cataract treatment is required.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We thank World Noni Research Foundation (WNRF), Chennai,
INDIA, for funding the entire project (Grant No. WNRFFunded
projects/Dr. DSM/MoA/11, 02-07-2011). We thank
Prof. P.I. Peter, Prof. K.V. Peter, Prof. T. Marimuthu and Dr.
Rangadhar Satpathy of WNRF for their valuable suggestions in
preparing the manuscript.

Citation:Rentala et al, Bioinformation 9(14): 721-724 (2013)

X-Ray diffraction structure of human Gamma-DCrystalline
in lens. The above protein was drawn using
Accelerys Discovery Studio ® (http://accelrys.com/). C- and
N- terminal amino acids were shown in ball-stick model. Nterminal
Gly1 (shown in red colour) was selected in chains A
and B, C-terminal Asp171 (shown in green colour) in chain A,
Ile 170 (shown in blue colour) in chain B were shown.

Gamma-D-Crsytalline with five cavities. Gamma-DCrystallin
(PDB ID: 2G98) was searched for cavities using
MoleGro Virtual Docker software. Five cavities were generated.
The five cavities were shown in pink colour. Ligands were
docked into these five cavities.

Two dimensional structures of Vitamin C, Vitamin E,
Damnacanthal and Scopoletin. Figure 3A is Vitamin C, Figure
3B is Vitamin E, Figure 3C is Damnacanthal and Figure 3D is
Scopoletin. All the above figures were drawn in Accelerys
Draw 4.1 ®

Docking of Vitamin C, Vitamin E, Damnacanthal
and Scopoletin within the cavities of gamma-D-crystallin.
Docking studies of Vitamin C with gamma-D-crystallin was
shown in figure (A). Docking studies of Vitamin E with
gamma-D-crystallin was shown in figure (B). Docking studies
of Damnacanthal with gamma-D-crystallin was shown in figure
(C). Docking studies of Scopoletin with gamma-D-crystallin
was shown in Figure (D). Hydrogen bonds were shown in
dotted lines.

