Background
Diabetes is a heterogeneous metabolic disorder characterized by
altered carbohydrate, lipid and protein metabolism 
[]. This can
cause severe short-term and long-term consequences ranging
from brain damage to amputations and heart disease 
[].
Traditional plant remedies have always provided sources of
useful hypoglycemic agents and therefore, should continue to
be investigated for possible drug alternatives 
[]. The increase
in demand for the use of plant based medicines to treat diabetes
may be due to the side effects associated with the use of
orthodox drugs such as insulin and oral hypoglycemic agents.
Effective control of blood glucose level is a key step in
preventing or reversing diabetic complications and improving
the quality of life in both type 1 and type 2 diabetic patients 
[].
In our present study we have selected glycogen synthase
kinase-3 (GSK-3) as a target for the inhibitors because of its
unique multifunctional serine/threonine kinase activity and
inactivation by phosphorylation. In response to insulin binding,
PKB/AKT phosphorylates GSK-3 on serine 9, which prevents
the enzyme from phosphorylating glycogen synthase 
[–].
Unphosphorylated glycogen synthase is active and able to
synthesize glycogen. Thus it plays a key role in the transduction
of regulatory and proliferative signals arising out at the cell
membrane in the insulin signaling pathway, leading to
potential modulation of blood glucose levels 
[]. GSK-3 is also
unique and it requires a substrate that has been phosphorylated
by a distinct kinase before it can phosphorylate the substrate. In
traditional medicine Momordica charantia, under the family
cucurbitaceae is used as anti-diabetic plant because of its
hypoglycemic effect. Polypeptide p, isolated from fruit, seeds
and tissues of M. charantia showed significant hypoglycemic
effect when administered subcutaneously to langurs and
humans []. 
The acetone extract of whole fruit powder of
Momordica charantia in doses 25, 50, 75 mg/100g body weight
lowered the blood glucose from 13.30 to 50% after 8 to 30 days
treatment in alloxan diabetic rats, confirming anti
hyperglycemic activity of this plant in diabetic animals 
[].
Oral administration of M. charantia could lead to the secretion of
insulin from endocrine pancreatic beta cells 
[–]. Charantin,
momordenol &amp; momordicilin are some of the major active
compounds, believed to possess insulin-like chemical structure
and properties. In our present study glycogen synthase kinase-3
(GSK-3), considered as a target for binding energy and docking
study analysis against three of the active compounds using
docking software, Exome™ Horizon. The validation procedures
are carried out and the interactions and scores are generated.

Methodology
Protein Retrieval and Receptor Preparation:
Glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3) was downloaded from
RCSB protein data bank having PDB ID 1Q5K () and
selected for docking analysis. The water molecule and ligands
attached with the protein were removed by Swiss PDV viewer.
After removing the ligands and water molecules the refined
protein was saved in PDB format.

Ligand Preparation and ADMET properties Analysis:
The refined protein structure was taken for Docking with
selected ligands. All the ligands  (see supplementary
material). Were drawn using MOLDRAW tool of Exome TM
Horizon []. 
Then ligands were filtered using ADMET tools of
Exome TM Horizon software for checking drug likeliness by
different rules of lipinski rule []. All the ligands that satisfy
lipinki's rule is also provided  (see supplementary
material).

Binding Site Analysis and Grid Preparation:
The active site and grid map of the receptor was done by of
Exome TM Horizon and total eight active sites were identified.
Residues of the active sites were shown both in molecule as
well graphical structure and grid map result were shown in
 
(see supplementary material). The spacing of grid was
set as 1.00 A° and the no. of grid point was taken as 60 × 60 × 60
A°.

Protein Ligand Interaction studies:
The protein-ligand docking was performed using Lamarckian
genetic algorithm using default parameter [,
]. This is the
same as the standard genetic algorithm except that, before
scoring, each conformation (gene) is subjected to energy
minimization. The next population is then originated by
members of energy-minimized population. The name
“Lamarckian” refers to the failed genetic theory of Jean-Baptiste
Lamarck, who held that an organism could pass on changed
experienced in its lifetime to its offspring. This theory was
eventually abandoned in favor of Mendel's now familiar laws of
inheritance. The LGA is faster than both simulated annealing
and the standard genetic algorithm, and it allows the docking of
ligands with more degrees of freedom. The number of
automated docking runs, number of individuals in the
population, maximum number of energy evaluations and
number of generations were set to 10, 50, 2500 and 3000
respectively. All the molecules successfully docked to the
binding site.

Discussion
In insulin signaling pathway, the phosphorylation of glycogen
synthase by GSK-3 involves the priming phosphorylation by a
distinct kinase to facilitate the binding of the substrate to the
kinase. The importance of protein phosphorylation as a main
regulatory mechanism used by cells to regulate enzymes and
other proteins and the association of many maladies with its
aberrations make kinases to be important targets and the hunt
for kinase inhibitors has attracted a great attention in drug
discovery in recent years. Hence to block the phosphorylation
activity of GSK-3 (1Q5K) three active compounds of Momordica
charantia were used. The protein structure was having 689
groups, 5515 atoms and 5695 bonds. The ligands ()
selected for docking studies and the corresponding interaction
energies are given in  (see supplementary material).

The active site of 1Q5K offers many different binding modes for
these compounds. The active sites from H1 to H8 were found to
be IGNGGVVKQNCD, LDPVDPPALHAR, QPIFEKVHKVF,
LHTSSIVRLTPP, VLGQWCSRLEY, FKLQKNRELFGS,
VYRARHSRYGQPE and PIFGGVEF. All the ligands were
docked into the active sites of the protein and the resulted
binding energy scores that ranges from -2.42 to -5.48 kcal/mol.
After docking study it was observed that these compounds
successfully bind with GSK-3 as a result it may prevent the
phosphorylation of glycogen synthase for which the production
of glycogen will continue and maintain the glucose level. From
the calculation of binding energy it was found that the
compound momordicilin was found to be the most active
compound and having minimum binding energy in all the
active sites. The ADMET prediction of momordicilin showed
good result with least number of violations 
 (see
supplementary material). From this result, we can suggest that
momordicilin is a potent inhibitor of glycogen synthase kinase-
3 and can be used as the major anti-diabetic compound form M.
charantia. The H7 active site of GSK-3 containing
VYRARHSRYGQPE residues was identified as the most
favorable binding site for all the ligands, so H7 site can be used
as the major target site for the anti-diabetic compounds.

Conclusion
In the present work we docked the ligands, charantin,
momordenol &amp; momordicilin from the medicinal plant
Momordica charantia with the protein glycogen synthase kinase-
3, one of the key targets for Type 2 diabetes and momordicilin
found as the most active compound in the respective target site.
Further investigation in this line of research may include
docking studies with other targets involved in carbohydrate
metabolism. The predicted information is hoped to help for
understanding the mechanisms of these plant based three antidiabetic
compounds for the treatment of diabetics cost
effectively. Based on this successful identification of plant-derived
anti-diabetic drug candidates, we can look forward to
further successes in this research area in the future.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors gratefully acknowledge Bioinformatics
Infrastructure Facility (BIF) funded by Department of
Biotechnology, Govt. of India, at Centre for Studies in
Biotechnology, Dibrugarh University.

Citation:Hazarika et al, Bioinformation 8(6): 251-254 (2012)

Structures of the ligands (A) Charantin; (B)
Momordenol; (C) Momordicilin

Structure of the target (1Q5K)

