Background
Bacterial pathogens have evolved numerous defense mechanisms
against antimicrobial agents, and resistance to old and new produced
drugs are on the rise. The alarming increase of antibiotic-resistant
bacterial pathogens points to the need for novel therapeutic approaches
to combat infection.Tuberculosis (TB) is an infectious disease that is
caused by the gram-positive bacteria known as Mycobacterium
tuberculosis. It is the major causes of death from an infections disease
in the world resulting in an estimated 2 billion people have latent TB,
while another 3 million people worldwide die of TB each year [].
This alarming increase of bacterial pathogens points to the need for
novel therapeutic approaches to combat infection. The ATP-dependent
Clp protease of Mycobacterium tuberculosis CDC1551 consists of two
subunits, the ClpP subunit which is capable of degrading peptides in
energy-dependent manner and ClpX, which possesses ATPase activity
and activates the proteolytic activity of ClpP in vitro. ClpP is a core
unit of a major bacterial protease complex imploying as a new drug
target for that isolates, which are resistant to antibiotics. ClpP is
usually tightly regulated and strictly requires a member of the family
of Clp-ATPase and often further accessory proteins for proteolytic
activation. Binding of inhibitor with ClpP eliminates these safeguards.
The inhibitor-activated ClpP core is capable of proteolytic degradation
in the absence of the regulatory Clp-ATPases. Such uncontrolled
proteolysis leads to inhibition of bacterial cell division and eventually
cell death []. ClpP is a key catalyst in proteolytic activation and a
promising attractive drug target for novel antibiotics.

In this study, we targeted the ClpP and proposed the three-dimensional
structure model, determined by comparative homology modeling.
Crystal structure of the proteolytic component of the caseinolytic Clp
protease (ClpP) from E. coli having 55% identity in amino acid
sequence with ClpP was used as a template protein for homology
modeling. Stereochemical property of the model was checked. Model
was further used for virtual screening against Marine Compound
Database (MCDB) [,]. 
Since inhibitor of ClpP can be a good
candidate of the new antimicrobial drug, we studied interactions
between the ClpP with Inhibitors

Methodology
Model building
The single amino acid sequence of ATP-dependent Clp protease
proteolytic subunit in Mycobacterium tuberculosis CDC1551
(Accession No: NP_337022, Version: NP_337022.1, GI: 15841985)
was retrieved from protein sequence database sited at NCBI [] and
taken as target protein sequence. The modeling of 3D structure of
target protein followed a stepwise procedure, starting with a template
structure search from PDB (protein databank) [], related to the target
sequence using BLASTP []. From a number of hits, a potential
template structure (PDB-ID: 1TYF), representing the crystal structure
of the proteolytic component of the caseinolytic Clp protease (ClpP)
from E. coli was taken as template for model building. The template
and target sequences were aligned using the align2d script available in
comparative protein modeling program MODELLER9v6 []. Based
on the alignment, five comparative models of the target sequence were
built by MODELLER, applying the default model building routine
 ’model‘ with fast refinement. In the first step of model building,
distance and dihedral angle restraints on the target sequence were
derived from its alignment with the template 3D-structure.

Evaluation of model
The best model can be selected by picking the model with the lowest
value of the Modeller objective function and DOPE (Discrete
Optimization Protein) score from a collection of models built by
MODELLER. Modeller objective function and DOPE score are the
statistical parameter for assessment of model using the standard
Modeller Energy function. The Stereochemical qualities of the models
are checked by PROCHECK [].

Active site analysis
After the final model was built, the possible Active site residues of
ClpP in Mycobacterium tuberculosis was identified on the basis of
CSA (Catalytic Site Atlas) [] entry of PDB code of 1TYF contains a
GLY-SER -MET -HIS-ASP Catalytic triad []. These residues of
active site are conserved in various bacterial ClpP proteins. Thus the
active site residues of ClpP in Mycobacterium tuberculosis have
GLY68 ‐ SER98 ‐ MET99 ‐ HIS123 ‐ ASP172 Catalytic triad.

Ligand generation and optimization
The 2D structures of ligands used in this study were downloaded from
Marine Compound Database (MCDB) [,
]. The downloaded ligands in
the mol (MDL MOL( format were first converted to the hin
(HyperChem) format using OpenBabel []. The 2D structures of
ligands were converted to 3D structures using the HyperChem7.5
software []. All modeling procedures, including energy minimization
and molecular dynamics, were also performed using the HyperChem.
Energy calculations were carried out using the AMBER force field.
Optimized molecular structure using conjugate gradient method Polak-
Ribiere until the maximum energy derivative was lower than
0.1kcal/Åmol in order to obtain a correct geometry. Further the
optimize ligands in hin format were converted to the PDB (Protein
Databank) format using OpenBabel.

Virtual screening
Virtual screening of the entire 186 marine compounds of MCDB [&gt;,
]against ClpP protein structure, determined by comparative homology
modeling, were done using molecular docking program AutoDock 3.05
[]. The Kollman charges and the solvation term were then added to
the protein structure using the AutoDockTool []. A grid-box was
generated that was large enough to cover the entire protein catalytic site
and accommodate ligands to move freely. AutoDock3.05 and a
Lamarckian Genetic Algorithm (LGA) were used for protein-fixed
ligand-flexible docking calculations. Thirty search attempts (ga
_run parameter) were performed for each ligand. The maximum number of
energy evaluations before the termination of LGA run was 250000 and
the maximum number of generations of the LGA run before termination
was 27000. Other docking parameters were set to the software's default
values. After docking, the ligands were ranked according to their
docked energy as implemented in the AutoDock 3.05 program.

Results and discussion
Five models of ClpP were generated by MODELLER using crystal
structure of the proteolytic component of the caseinolytic Clp protease
(ClpP) from E.coli [PDB-ID: 1TYF] as a template protein for homology
modeling. In order to select the best model, lowest value of Modeller
objective function and DOPE score are used and further checked the
structural validity by PROCHECK and is submitted in Protein Model
Database (PMDB) []. 3D structure of all the 186 compound of
MCDB [&gt;,] were generated and subjected to energy minimization
using conjugate gradient algorithm through HyperChem7.5 software
[]. Docking of these optimized compounds against modeled ClpP at
the catalytic site residues were performed by AutoDock3.05 []. Out
of 186 docked complexes, we got 5 best docked marine compounds
having lowest docked energy and Root mean square deviation from a
reference structure are shown in table 1 ()
and rest of the data not shown in this work. Five best docked complexes
were analyzed through Python Molecular Viewer for their
interaction study shown in . It is evident from this
analysis that the best marine inhibitors are located in the center of the
active site and is stabilized by hydrogen bonding interactions.

Conclusion
ClpP is one of the most recent potent Drug target for tuberculosis. In
this work, we have constructed a 3D model of ClpP, using the
MODELLER software and obtained a refined model after energy
minimization. The final refined model was further assessed by
PROCHECK program, and the results show that the model was stable
and reliable. The stable model was further used for Virtual Docking of
Marine Compounds. Docking results indicate that out of 186 Marine
compounds, there were five inhibitory compounds for ClpP as target for
tuberculosis. As it's well known, hydrogen bonding plays an important
role for the structure and function of biological molecules, especially
for inhibition in a complex. Thus our study confirms Ara-A, Dysinosin
C, Manoalide, Nagelamide A and Strobilin are potential inhibitors for
ClpP as target for tuberculosis forming a hydrogen bonding and with
non-bonded interaction to act as a drug candidates yet Pharmacological
study will yet confirm it to be promising.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Tiwari et al, Bioinformation 4(9): 405-408 (2010)

Docking model of Ara-A inhibitor with active site residues of ClpP.

dysinosin C inhibitor with active site residues of ClpP.

Manoalide inhibitor with active site residues of ClpP.

Nagelamide inhibitor with active site residues of ClpP.

Strobilin inhibitor with active site residues of ClpP.

Hydrogen bond between inhibitor and residue is represented by green line in each case.

