Background
Heart failure still remains as a major public health problem in
the industrialised world, despite of significant improvement in
the filed of diagnosis and medical therapeutics. Globally, the
current prevalence of heart failure is over 23 million 
[]. In
cardiovascular research, microarray technologies are in use to
test the hypothesis about the molecular mechanisms underlying
different pathological conditions and phenotypes and to
identify new therapeutic targets. Human samples are subjected
to many biological variations due to concomitant etiologies,
medications, age, sex and clinical stage. So, the reproducibility
is highly affected in case of human samples. There are number
of studies on chronically instrumented dogs with high
frequency cardiac pacing to study pathophysiological and
molecular mechanism related to dilated cadiomyopathy 
[].

In this paper, the microarray data set on pacing-induced heart
failure model for dogs was considered []. An analysis of
microarray is a search for genes that have a similar or correlated
pattern of expressions. The statistical aspects such as Analysis
of Variance (ANOVA), Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
and cluster analysis were used in the paper for analysing
microarray data in canines (dogs). The main objective of the
paper is to identify differentially expressed genes in three
groups or classes using one way ANOVA test, to separate the
genes which are up regulated in different conditions using
principal component analysis and to identify the cluster of
samples, cluster of genes, relationships between the samples
and genes using cluster analysis.

Methodology
Principal Component Analysis and Cluster Analysis:
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is a variable reduction
procedure and was derived by Karl Pearson in 1901. It is a
classical tool to reduce the dimension of expression data, to
visualise the similarities between the biological samples, and to
filter noise. PCA is often used as a pre-processing step to
clustering []. The basic idea in PCA is to find the components
that explain the maximum amount of variance in original
variables by few linearly transformed uncorrelated
components.  explains schematic diagram of three
dimensional data represented by two dimensional principal
components [].

Clustering is widely used method in the first step of gene
expression data analysis. The aim of cluster analysis is forming
groups (clusters) of the objects on the basis of similarity (or
distance) between the objects []. It is used for finding
correlated and functionally related groups. The most frequently
used clustering techniques are Hierarchical clustering and Kmeans
clustering. There are various methods to define the
distance between clusters and the most widely used clustering
is the average linkage method which works well with
standardised microarray data. In Average linkage Clustering,
average linkage defines the distance between the two clusters as
the average distance between all pairs of items where one
member of a pair belong to cluster 1 and other member of pair
belongs to cluster 2 []. The k-means clustering algorithm starts
with a predefined number of cluster centers (k) specified by the
user [] ().

Application to heart failure data:
The data for the current study were obtained from Gene
Expression Omnibus database at the National Centre for
Biotechnology Information (GEO: 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov / geo/ GSE5247). The data consists of
sixteen male mongrel dogs divided into three groups: the first
group consists of 6 dogs subjected to left ventricular pacing at
210 beats/min for 3 weeks; the second group, 6 others paced for
210 beats/min for 3 weeks and at 240 beats/min thereafter; and
the remaining four used as normal controls. Total cardiac RNA
was extracted from control (n = 4), 3 wk-paced (n = 4), and
decompensated heart failure dogs (n= 4) []. Affymetrix-based
canine oligonucleotide microarrays were used in the study to
determine the changes in gene expression profile from
compensated dysfunction to decompensated heart failure in
pacing induced dilated cardiomyopathy. The Data set consists
of 23,912 genes and 12 samples (arrays) (). The open
source software R version 2.10.0 is used for the microarray data
analysis.

Results &amp; Discussion
Normalisation of Heart failure data:
Before applying statistical analysis, the normality of the gene
expression data should be checked. The  shows step by
step statistical procedure for doing the heart failure microarray
data. The heart failure microarray raw data, were extremely
positively skewed (). The raw data were processed
using log transformation with base 2 and quantile normalized
for 12 arrays in the three groups namely control, T3 and T4 to
reduce variations across arrays ().

Analysis of Variance (ANOVA):
The exploratory microarray data analyses were carried out to
shot list the differentially expressed genes in two or more
known groups or classes. The one way ANOVA was used and
the test was carried out in parallel for all the genes. It was found
that out of 23912 genes, 1802 genes were differentially
expressed in the three groups at 5% level of significance and 496
genes were differentially expressed at 1% level of significance.
The top 40 most differentially expressed genes in the three
groups were selected and corresponding p values were given
the  (see supplementary material).

Principal Component Analysis (PCA):
For the selected 40 genes, PCA based on correlation matrix with
samples as variables was performed. The first two PC from the
table 2 explained more than 96% of the total variations. From
the scree plot, it is observed that first two components are
sufficient (). In the Biplot all control samples (C)
labelled as Gr1 were grouped together, all T2 samples labelled
as Gr2 were grouped together and all T3 groups labelled as Gr3
were grouped together. The angle between arrows of groups
two and three was small, group 2 was between group 1 and
group 3 as expected from definitions of the groups ().
Gene with rank 14 and 1 is likely to be up regulated in groups
(3 and 2) and down regulated in group1(control) whereas gene
29 is likely to be up regulated in group 1 and down regulated in
groups (2 and 3). Gene with rank 14 codes for HSP40 (DNAJB6),
which acts as a chaperone and plays a pivotal role during stress
conditions and heart failure []. Gene with rank 1 is an
uncharacterised protein. Gene with rank 29 codes for
ubiquitination factor E4A (UBE4A), which is involved in the
degradation process of excess, unwanted and mis-fold proteins
which is an important event to save the cells during heart
failure []. Similarly, for the 40 selected genes, PCA based on
covariance matrix with genes as variables was performed. The
number of variables was large and first two PC from the 
 
(see supplementary material) explained 76% of the total
variations.

From the scree plot, it is observed that first two components are
sufficient (). 
From the biplot (), only two
groups were identified among the genes and the genes which
are up regulated and down regulated in groups 2 &amp; 3 and the
outlying genes in the groups are given in the (). Genes
such as PGRMC1, CYBB, AGPAT9 are playing major role in
heart diseases. PGRMC1 and its homologues regulate
cholesterol synthesis by activating the P450 protein Cyp51
which is an important target in cardio vascular disease. CYBB
regulates NADPH oxidase activity and thereby protects from
severe ischemia/reperfusion injury during HF. AGPAT9 is
involved in phospholipid biosynthesis and its up regulation
increases insulin resistance which is highly linked with cardio
vascular disease. On molecular level it was not possible to
distinguish between 3 weeks pacing induced heart failure and 4
weeks pacing induced heart failure however, these two groups
were different from the control group. The genes which are up
regulated in groups 2 and 3 can be used as biomarkers in case
of heart failure models.

Cluster Analysis:
For the selected 40 genes, three clusters were identified and
correctly classified ( &amp; 
 (see supplementary
material)) for the three groups (control, T3 and T4) using cluster
analysis by average linkage method with genes as variables. In
cluster one, genes with rank 35, 15, and 18 were outlying genes,
in cluster two, 1, 38 and 14 were outlying genes and in cluster
three, 25, 37, and 33 were outlying genes. Gene with rank 35
codes for kininogen which is involved is blood coagulation
system. Kinins, peptide products of kininogens may be
involved in hypertensive and diabetic diseases []. As already
mentioned in PCA results, Genes with rank 1 and 14 play a
major role in heart failure models. The other outlying genes
need to be studied further. The () represents the
scatter plot of k means clustering where the two elbows indicate
the two possibilities viz. 2 - cluster solution and 3 - cluster
solutions.

Conclusion
Oligonucleotide or cDNA micorarray has also been used in
cardiovascular disease related gene changes []. Microarray
experiments using two colour comparisons has potential pitfall
for data analysis. We don't measure gene expression directly,
but rather fluorescence intensity by a scanner. Many factors
influence the intensity and produce multicentric effect, creating
a need for bias correction or normalisation between two colour
systems. We have demonstrated in this work, methods for
selecting differentially expressed genes. In conclusion, an
approach to select differentially expressed genes in cDNA
microarray was proposed and studied. This offers basis for
advanced datamining approaches.

There are limited statistical methods to deal with
multidimensional data. The same microarray data set can lead
to very different conclusions by using different data analysis
techniques and different clustering algorithms 
[]. The group
of samples, gene clusters, outlying genes and the relationship
between the samples and genes were analysed using PCA and
cluster analysis. Ojaimi et al compared found that a number of
processes including normalization of gene regulation during
decompensation, appearance of new up regulated genes and
maintenance of gene expression all contribute to the transition
to overt heart failure with an unexpectedly small number of
genes differentially regulated []. In this paper, three group
comparisons were done simultaneously. The genes such as
PGRMC1, CYBB, AGPAT9, DNAJB6, UBE4A and KNG1 are
differentially expressed in the canine heart failure model. These
genes may also be critically involved in human heart failures.
Hence, further studies should be done to understand the role of
these genes in the etiology of heart failure cases.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors thank Ms. Shainaba A.S., Research Scholar,
Department of Bacteriology, National Institute for Research in
Tuberculosis for helping to understand the biological
background of the work.

Citation:Perumal &amp; Mahalingam, Bioinformation 9(15): 759-765 (2013)

Schematic graph showing three dimensional data
represented by two dimensional principal components, where
matrix contain n rows and p columns.

Flow chart explaining steps involved in different types
of clustering.

Flow chart describing the microarray experiment
conducted on the heart failure model.

Flow chart describing statistical procedures for
microarray data analysis.

a) Box plots of all groups for raw data; b) Box plot of all groups for normalised data; c) Scree plot of arrays as variables; d)
Scree plot of gene as variables; e) Biplot of arrays as variables; f) Biplot of genes as variables; g) Average linkage hierarchical
clustering; h) K Means clustering.

