Background
Simple sequence repeats (SSRs) are becoming standard DNA markers for plant genome analysis and are being used as markers in 
      marker assisted breeding. Simple sequence repeats or microsatellite repeats are defined as regions within DNA sequences where 
      short sequences (1-6 bp; monomers to hexamers) are repeated in tandem array [
      ] these stretches of DNA, which consist of only one, or a few tandemly repeated nucleotides, for example, a DNA stretch 
      of GTGTGTGTGTGT would be referred to as (GT)6. These types of simple sequence have been shown to be repetitive and interspersed 
      in many eukaryotic genomes [] and are very polymorphic due to the high 
      mutation rate affecting the number of repeat units. SSRs have several advantages over other molecular markers for example, 
      microsatellites allow the identification of many alleles at a single locus; they are evenly distributed all over the genome. 
      [] SSRs have long been known to be distributed throughout the genomes 
      of eukaryotes and to be highly polymorphic [–], such repetitions occur primarily due to slipped-strand mispairing and subsequent error(s) during 
      DNA replication, repair or recombination. [].These loci mutate by 
      insertions or deletions of one or a few repeat units, and the mutation rates generally increase with an increase in the length 
      of repeat tracks. [] SSRs are a ubiquitous class of repetitive DNA that 
      is widely used in genetic analyses, there is accumulating evidence that SSRs serve a functional role, affecting gene expression, 
      and that polymorphism of SSR tracts may be important in the evolution of gene regulation [–] such repetitive tracts has been described in all 
      eukaryotes analyzed and is thought to result from the mutational effects of replication slippage. [] A high level of SSR informativeness has been demonstrated for a variety of plant species and this 
      has prompted the initiation of SSR discovery programs for the majority of agronomically important crops.
       [–] However, to date, 
       a number of 
      limitations have existed with SSR discovery in plants, including a lack of DNA sequence in databases, a perceived low abundance 
      of SSRs (compared to mammals), and differences in the most common types of repeat found. In the present study we have screened the 
      entire genome of Arabidopsis thaliana to study the occurrence of microsatellite sequences (mono- to hexa-mer repeat).
       Zhang et al., 
      2004 [] also did same type of work but in our study we have performed 
      detailed analysis of each repeat and also given the exact location of each repeat in the genome that is very useful information 
      for Arabidopsis researchers.

Methodology
All the chromosome and coding region sequences were downloaded in FASTA format from Genbank ftp site [] on 12th March 2004 that has been used for generating SSR data. 
			 The SSR data 
      presented here includes both strands of the DNA sequence. The SSRs from 1 - 6, that is, from monomer to hexamer repeats 
      were analyzed in the complete chromosome sequence and in the coding region of all the chromosomes of A thaliana.
       All the 
      possible 501 repeat types were analyzed for their abundance in the entire genome. [] The perfect repeats of 12 bp or more were analyzed because SSRs are often disrupted by single base 
      substitutions. [] Thus, for a 12 bp SSR, one occurrence may comprise 
      a repeat of 12 monomers, or six dimers, or four trimers, or three tetramers and pentamers (except in Chr. 5 where pentamers 
      were searched for two times) or two hexamers.

A perl (Practical Extraction and Report Language) programme was developed for scanning the entire genome to find out the 
      abundance and distribution of these repeats. Perl software was downloaded and installed from the site www.perl.org. [] We have developed a programme that can search repeats of any length, their exact position on chromosome 
      and also their frequency of occurrence in the sequence. The individual chromosomes were broken into sub-sequences of one 
      million base pairs (mbps) then the repeats were searched in these sub-sequences.

Results and Discussion
We have analyzed the distribution of perfect SSRs spanning 12 bp or more in the complete A thaliana 
			genome. For this analysis, 
      we calculated the average frequency (times/mbps) of the particular repeat that occurs in the genome on the per million base pairs 
      basis in the chromosomes, we have also calculated the frequency in the coding regions of all the chromosomes and also we have 
      taken out the exact location of the individual motif on the chromosome. 

All the chromosomes of A. thaliana showed a significant variation in number of monomer repeats (). Among the two types 
      of monomer repeats, (A)n was most abundant in all the chromosomes compared to (C)n. The maximum average frequency of (A)n was 
      found in chromosome 1, 54.5 times/mbps (per million basepairs) while the least occurrence of this repeat type was recorded in 
      chromosome 5 (8 times/mbps) (). The frequency of (C)n was comparatively less in all the chromosomes. Its highest 
      occurrence was found in chromosome 1 and 4 while it was not found in chromosome 3 and 5 ().

Among the dinucleotide repeats AC, AG, AT and CG, AC was most abundant in chromosome 1 (4.7 times/mbps) followed by chromosome 
      4, 2 and 3 respectively, this repeat was not found in chromosome 5 (). AG was most abundant in chromosome 1 (19.8 
      times/mbps) followed by chromosome 4 and 2 while in chromosome 5 the average frequency of this repeat type was only 1 time/mbps.
      AT was most abundantly found in chromosome 2 (61 times/mbps) followed by chromosome 4, 1 and 3 (). CG was not at 
      all found in any of the A. thaliana chromosome. Zhang et al., 2004 [] 
      reported that simple repetitions comprising only pyrimidines were extremely rare in all of the fractions investigated.

Analysis of all trinucleotide repeats AAC, AAG, AAT, ACC, ACG, ACT, AGC, AGG, ATC, CCG revealed that AAG was most abundant 
      type of repeat in the entire genome (). Repeats that were circular permutations and reverse complements of each 
      other were grouped together as one type.

Among the tetranucleotide repeats, the most predominate in all the chromosomes were AAAC, AAAG and AAAT. Chromosome 5 is an 
      exception where occurrence of tetra nucleotide was found less in number (). 

Pentanucleotide repeats were found to be rare in overall genome. In chromosome 1 AAAAT was most abundant (32.5 times/mbps) 
      followed by AAAAC, AAAAG, AAGAG and AAACC. All these repeats except AAGAG were found in non-coding region of chromosome 1. In 
      chromosome 2 also AAAAT (38.25 times/mbps) was most abundant. Analysis of chromosome 3 revealed that AAAAT (15.5 times/mbps). In 
      chromosome 4 also AAAAT (34 times/mbps) was most abundant. In chromosome 5 pentanucleotide repeats were found to be rare in 
      comparison to the other chromosomes. AAAAG (5.5 times/mbps) was most abundant. The most striking feature that we observed was 
      that none of the pentanucleotide repeats was present in the coding region of the chromosome (). 

Hexanucleotide repeats were fairly present in all the chromosomes of A thaliana. In chromosome 1, AAAAAG (7.5 times/mbps) 
      was most abundant followed by AAAAAT, AAAAAC, AAAATT, AAAACT, AAAATC  and AAAATG. The most abundant repeat in chromosome 2 was 
      AAAAAT (8.75 times/mbps). Average frequency of these repeats was relatively less in chromosome 3, some of them were found to 
      present 3.0 to 3.5 times/mbps while others 1.5 to 2 times/mbps only (). Screening of chromosome 4 revealed that 
      hexanucleotide repeats were present in good numbers and mostly the repeats were present equally in coding and non-coding part. 
      AAAAAT (12.25 times/mbps) was the most abundant repeat followed by AAAAAG. The average frequency of these hexanucleotide repeats 
      ranged between 0.5 - 1 times/mbps in chromosome 5 ().

We observed that the length distributions of all SSRs indicated that the number of repeats decrease with repeat length i.e., 
      from monomer to hexamer. Mukund et al. [] reported in 2001 that the 
      frequency of repeats decrease exponentially with repeat length. 

The exact location of each repeat on the chromosomes was mapped. The data representing the positions of individual repeats is 
      given at the site www.geocities.com/amubioinfo/ARD in the data files. This data on the positional information of SSRs have been 
      checked in the AthaMap database [] and the repeats are found at the exact 
      location as given in the table.

Conclusion
In the present study we have examined the abundance of microsatellites with repeated unit lengths of 1-6 base pairs, that is, 
      taking mono-, di-, tri-, tetra-, penta- and hexamers as the six classes of repeats. SSRs were well distributed throughout the 
      genome. The overall number of each class of repeat is variable across the genome (). There is a wide range of variation 
      in the abundance of a particular repeat type in each chromosome (). 
      The locations of all of the SSRs reported in this study are available in the data file at www.geocities.com/amubioinfo/ARD. This information could be useful 
      for the selection of a wide range of microsatellite loci for studying their location and sequence-dependent evolution. 
      Researchers can easily identify the nearest gene or the location of transcription factor binding sites around the SSR. 
      [] They can be used as markers for the fine analysis of recombination 
      events along individual chromosomes. This positional information can also help Arabidopsis researchers to identify new 
      polymorphisms in chromosomal regions of interest based on the SSRs that map in the area. SSRs are an important tool for 
      comparative mapping because of their high polymorphism and transportability. []

The authors are grateful to Professor M Saleemuddin for providing facilities to carryout this work and his morale support 
      throughout this project. We also thanks to the Staff of the Distribution information sub-center for their technical help. 
      Department of Biotechnology, Ministry of Science and Technology, Government of India is acknowledged for the financial support.

Figures and Tables
Total of average frequency of SSRs in A. thaliana chromosomes and total frequency in coding region
SSRs	Chr.1	Coding	Chr.2	Coding	Chr.3	Coding	Chr.4	Coding	Chr.5	Coding	
Monomer	55.5	3	43.7	87	28.5	35	52.0	101	8.0	4	
Dimer	57.5	9	74.2	145	24.5	24	66.5	136	8.0	8	
Trimer	58.2	4	46.7	104	33.0	32	55.5	114	5.0	3	
Tetramer	24.8	16	20.2	41	13.5	12	23.0	51	2.5	2	
Pentamer	238.3	3	214.0	15	128.5	4	259.2	15	25.0	0	
Hexamer	99.0	134	101.0	208	58.0	52	110.5	202	10.0	12	
Chr. = Chromosome

Legend for Figure 1 : (a). Occurrence of mono-, di- and tri- mer repeats in all the five chromosomes of A. thaliana. (b). Occurrence of mono-, 
          di- and tri- mer repeats in the coding region of all the five chromosomes. (c). Occurrence of tetramer repeats in all the five 
          chromosomes. (d). Occurrence of tetramer repeats in the coding region of all the five chromosomes. (e). Occurrence of pentamer 
          repeats in all the five chromosomes. (f). Occurrence of pentamer repeats in the coding region of all the five chromosomes. 
          (g). Occurrence of hexamer repeats in all the five chromosomes. (h). Occurrence of hexamer repeats in the coding region of 
          all the five chromosomes. Each bar indicates one type of repeat. Each bar has different filling that is shown in key box. 


					Citation:Anwar &amp; Khan, Bioinformation 1(2): 64-68 (2005)

