Background
The etiology of lupus disease is not yet clearly entirely
understood. A number of study support that genetic factor
plays a role in disease manifestation [,
]. Hence, studies focus
on the affiliation of genetic polymorphism to lupus
susceptibility and severity []. Several genetic predispositions
to lupus have been investigated, one of which is a cytokine
polymorphism []. The TGF-β1 cytokine concentration is likely
higher in nephritis, which nephritis is one of the mortality
causes in Lupus patients []. Furthermore, the increasing of
TGF-β1 production may be projected to the severity of Lupus
Nephritis [,
]. Another study showed that G915C
polymorphism of TGFB1 gene is related to the progression of
liver fibrosis in patients with chronic Hepatitis C []. Therefore,
the G915C polymorphism is possibly related to renal fibrosis
and it is a dominant feature in renal failure.

The G915C polymorphism changes codon 25 which encodes
arginine into proline of the signal peptide of TGF-β1. The
change from arginine into proline alters the signal peptide
properties that may inhibit transport of TGF-β1 into the
endoplasmic reticulum [,
] and eventually decline the
cytokine production. Consequently, Individuals with
homozygote genotype (arginine/arginine) have more
concentrations of serum TGF-β1 than those with heterozygote
genotype (arginine/proline) [,
]. We further analyze the
effect of G915C polymorphism on the properties of the signal
peptide, the ability of TGF-β1 transport into the endoplasmic
reticulum and the concentrations of urinary TGF-β1 in Lupus
Nephritis patients at Saiful Anwar Hospital, Malang.

Methodology
Sample:
The blood samples for analysis of G915C polymorphism and
serum creatinine were taken from 45 patients with Lupus
Nephritis and 45 subjects as controls. The urine samples for
measuring TGF-β1 and protein were collected from those
subjects. The Lupus Nephritis was determined by ACR
(American College of Rheumatology) 1997 criteria and renal
biopsy was conducted on all patients as the gold standard of
Lupus Nephritis diagnosis.

TGFB1 measurement:
Midstream morning urine specimens were collected in a
sterile container, then immediately centrifuged and stored at -
80°C refrigerator until analysis. TGF-β1 was measured by
sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) using
human kit TGF-β1 (Novatein Bioscience®, USA; detection limit
&lt;1 pg/ml). TGF-β1 assays was performed strictly according to
the manufacturer's instruction.

DNA Isolation and Sequencing:
DNA was isolated from 200 μl vein blood sample by using
Dneasy Blood and Tissue Kit (Qiagen). The TGFB1 gene was
amplified by PCR machine with primer:
5‘CTAGGTTATTTCCGTGGG (Forward) and
5׳CCTTGGCGTAGTAGTCG (Reverse), 100 ng genomic DNA
template, 0.5 unit Taq DNA polymerase and 2.5 μM dNTPs.
The PCR conditions was denaturation at 95°C for 5 minutes,
followed by denaturation at 95°C for 30 seconds, annealing at
50°C for 30 seconds, and elongation at 72°C for 30 seconds. It
was repeated 30 cycles, and the final extension was conducted
for 10 minutes at 72°C. The PCR result was sequenced
(Bioneer, Korea). The G915C polymorphism was analyzed
following the sequencing of DNA from the subject by using
BLAST-NCBI tool. The DNA sequences then were translated
into amino acid sequence by Bio Edit Software for further
analysis (molecule properties and docking).

Protein properties, molecular docking and molecular dynamic analysis:
The structure of the signal peptide of TGF-β1 was built by
using Phyre2 web server. Whereas Signal Recognition Particle
(SRP) 54 M domain (1QB2) and translocon protein structure
(Sec61_2wwb) were retrieved from PDB (http://www.rscb.org) followed by validating and checking using
PROCHECK. The modelled-structure of the signal peptide of
TGF-β1 was analyzed for hydrophobicity and polarity by Prot
Param tool and ProtScale tool (www.expasy.org). The
interaction among the signal peptide of TGF-β1 with SRP and
translocon was examined by using Escher NG molecular
docking from VEGAZZ. The binding stability among them
was simulated by molecular dynamics simulation (YASARA,
Amber 03). All visuals of protein structure were developed
using the PyMol molecular graphic system.

Results
The G915C polymorphism analysis found that none of the
subject had CC genotype, and only one subject had GC
genotype each in both Lupus Nephritis patients and control
groups. So the majority of the population studied had the GG
genotype. The subject with GC genotype tend to had lower
levels of TGF-β1 than the GG genotype in both Lupus
Nephritis patients and control groups. The Lupus Nephritis
patients had higher levels of TGF- β1 and urinary protein, as
well as serum creatinine compared with the control group.
Increasing of serum creatinine and urinary protein
concentration on patients showed the severity of Lupus
Nephritis  (see supplementary material).

Guanine to cytosine substitution on G915C changes codon
number 25 of TGF-β1 signal peptide that changes arginine (R-
25) to proline (P-25). Therefore, we implied that the peptide
substitution will change 3D structure of the signal peptide of
TGF-β1, which plays a role in the transport into the
endoplasmic reticulum. Then, we further analyzed the
structure of both types of signal peptides. The data showed
that the secondary structure of the signal peptide of TGF-β1
arginine (R-25) variant and proline (P-25) variant at residue
number 25 has similar secondary structure (). Hence,
we implied that arginine substitution into proline manipulated
peptide׳s properties. We further completed the polarity
analysis, and the data indicated that the proline declined
polarity of C-terminal of the signal peptide, so that the
hydrophobic core of the signal peptide of TGF- β1 is increased
(). The polarity change is likely to cause differences in
the binding pattern among the signal peptide of TGF-β1,
Signal Recognition Particle (SRP) and translocon.

Further, we analyzed the interactions among the signal peptide
of TGF-β1, SRP and translocon. The docking analysis result
suggested that on the signal peptide of TGF-β1 R-25 variant
and P-25 variant have different binding pattern when bond to
SRP and translocon (). The binding stability between a
complex of the signal peptide of TGF-β1 with SRP/translocon
was analyzed by molecular dynamics simulation (YASARA).
The results show that binding stability for both signal peptide
variants was different. Protein complex stability of
SRP/translocon with the TGF-β1 signal peptide variant R-25
was better than P-25, where RSMD scores for each was 4.03 Å
and 6.01 Å respectively (). The Arginine substitution
into proline decreased the polarity of the signal peptide of
TGF-β1 that change the binding pattern, and decreased the
binding stability to SRP/translocon. This phenomenon
assumed that the arginine substitution to proline might cause
retention for transportability of TGF-β1 to the endoplasmic
reticulum. The transport retention might hinder TGF-β1
maturation that may reduce production of the cytokine.

Discussion
The result indicated that GG genotype on SNP G915C of
TGFB1 gene was more dominant (97.2%) in Malang
population. This is different from the study by Wang et al.
(2007) who stated that codon-25 was not polymorphic in East
Asia population, and there was a polymorphism in Brazil and
Iran ethnics [,
]. The data showed that polymorphism
dependent on region and ethnic type. Moreover, the urinary
TGF-β1 concentration in genotype GG was higher than
genotype GC for both in Lupus Nephritis and control groups.
It suggested that Guanine substitution into Cytosine on G915C
affect TGF-β1 production.

The G915C polymorphism is located in the signal peptide (15-
30 residues in length) of TGF-β1 implying that it altered the
properties of the signal peptide, necessary for protein transport
to endoplasmic reticulum. It usually consists of three parts
namely N-terminal (region n) followed by a region with
hydrophobic amino acid (region h) consisting of 7-15 residues
of hydrophobic amino acid and more polar C-terminal region
[,
]. The signal peptide is involved in targeting of nascent
proteins to their sites of translocation at the endoplasmic
reticulum membrane, initiating a stable interaction between
the ribosome and translocon, and providing a ligand for the
opening of the translocation channel []. Guanine to cytosine
substitution on G915C will cause change to codon number 25
of the TGF-β1 signal peptide that encodes arginine (R-25) to
proline (P-25). The amino acid substitution decreased polarity
of C-terminal of the TGF-β1 signal peptide , which was very
important for the cleavage process of signal peptide by
peptidase enzyme. This cleavage is substantial to continue the
synthesis process of TGF-β1 protein. On the other hand, the
presence of proline in the TGF-β1 signal peptide in bacteria is
predicted to be the reason exporting protein efficiency to
outside the cell was declined [,
,
]. Moreover, the
presence of proline in the TGF-β1 signal peptide had changed
its binding pattern to SRP and translocon. Furthermore, the
Arginine substitution to proline decreased its binding stability
with SRP and translocon. It could possibly start an interaction
disorder with SRP on translocon, that triggering a retention
for transporting TGF-β1 to the endoplasmic reticulum 
[].
Thus, data suggests G915C polymorphism is associated with
the synthesis and maturation of TGF-β1 leading to decreased
cytokine production.

Conclusion
The G915C polymorphism is shown to affect the signal peptide
of TGF-β1 involved in potential maturation and production of
TGF-β1.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors would like to thank the Dean of Medical Faculty
Brawijaya University, Malang, for the grant support and to all
of the patients for their participation. We also thank Dr. Nashi
Widodo from Biology Department, University of Brawijaya,
for the critical review of the manuscript.

Citation:Susianti et al, Bioinformation 10(8): 487-490 (2014)

Substitution of arginine (R-25) A) into proline (P-25);
B) did not affect the secondary structure (Green). However,
this decreased the C-terminal polarity of the signal peptide for
TGF-β1 (Graph below).

Substitution of arginine (R-25) into proline (P-25)
changed binding pattern of the signal peptide of TGF-β1 with
SRP (red) and translocon (grey), R-25 was bound closer to
translocon: A) when compared with P-25; B) The substitution
from arginine (red line) into proline (violet line) declined the
binding stability of the signal peptide of TGF-β1 with SRP and
translocon C).

