Background
Actinomycetes are the well recognized as the richest source of
bioactive compounds including clinically useful antibiotics, anti
cancer agents and cell function modulators and hence of high
pharmacological and commercial interest []. They are widely
distributed in various normal and extreme ecosystems, due to
their unparalleled ability to degrade wide range of complex
substrates and withstand extreme physico-chemical conditions
[]. 
Based on the hypothesis “poorly researched habitats can
offer better prospects for discovering new natural products”,
actinomycetes from such habitats are currently in focus of
considerable scientific interest []. Poorly explored ecosystems
such as desert ecosystems have the potential to become a new
resource for novel actinomycetes and chemical diversity [,
].
Identification of actinomycetes was sufficient earlier using
morphological feature along with chemotaxonomy of many
genera with few demerits [,
]. Now-a-days ribosomal DNA
sequencing has been widely used in the identification of
actinomycetes [–]. During our actinomycete bioprospecting
programme, a pigmented anti-tuberculous compound
producing actinomycete, designated strain D25, was isolated
from Thar Desert soil, Rajasthan, India. A study, based on a
combination of phenotypic and genotypic methods, reported
here to determining the taxonomic position of strain D25.

Methodology
Phenotypic characterization:
The viability of the actinomycete strain D25 maintained in yeast
extract malt extract (YEME) agar slants as well as in 30%
glycerol broth. Micromorphological characteristics of strain D25
was studied by adopting slide culture method. The slides were
observed under bright field microscope (Olympus) and
Scanning electron microscope (JEOL model JSM5600LV). The
recorded microscopic characteristics include presence of aerial
mycelium, substrate mycelium, mycelial fragmentation, spore
chain arrangement and spore surface morphology. Cultural
characteristics of strain D25 were studied by inoculating the
growth of actinomycete culture D25 into different ISP
(International Streptomyces Project) medium. Cultural
characteristics recorded include growth, consistency, aerial
mass colour, presence of reverse side pigment and soluble
pigment production. Effect of carbon and nitrogen sources were
studied using basal medium supplemented with different
sugars and amino acids respectively []. Effect of pH,
temperature and sodium chloride on the growth of strain D25
was studied using ISP2 medium. Lipase, protease and amylase
activities of the strain D25 were determined by adopting agar
plate method using tween 80 agar, skim milk agar and starch
agar, respectively. Antibiotic susceptibility pattern of strain D25
was determined against standard antibiotic discs by adopting
disc diffusion method (Hi media).

Chemotaxonomy:
Isomers of diaminopimelic acid (DAP) and sugars in whole-cell
hydrolysates of strain D25 were analyzed as described by
Hasegawa et al. [].

Molecular characterization:
The chromosomal DNA of actinomycete strain D25 was
extracted using GENEI bacterial DNA purification kit. The
DNA was pelleted and washed with 70% ethanol. The purified
DNA obtained was suspended in TE buffer and stored at -200C.
The PCR amplification of 16S ribosomal RNA gene was carried
out at Kamini Research Foundation, Thuckalay, Nagercoil by
following the methodology as described by Gothwal et al. 
[]
using Thermal cycler (Gene AMP 2720 – Applied Biosystem).
Primers: Forward:'AACGGCTCACCAAGGCGACG 3';
Reverse: 5' GTACCGTCAAGGTGCCGCCC 3'. Reaction
mixture used include sterile water - 38µl; 10x assay buffer -5µl;
dNTPs mix (10mM each) - 3µl; Template DNA (20-30ng) - 1µl;
Forward primer (100mM) - 1µl; Reverse primer (100mM) - 1µl;
Taq poly (1U) -1µl. The amplified 16s rRNA gene was purified
using 2% agarose gel prepared in TE buffer.

Sequencing of 16s rRNA:
Sanger Dideoxy chain Terminator sequencing was done in an
automated DNA sequencer. The sequence detection was made
by subjecting labeled ddNTP to a single capillary tube. DNA
fragments of different colours were seperated by their
respective sizes in a single electrophoretic gel. The sequences
were read by determining the sequence of the colours emitted
from specific peaks as they pass the detector. Colour of each
dye represents the different nucleotides. Computer converted
the data of emitted light in the nucleotide sequences.

16S rRNA sequence analysis and multiple sequence alignment:
The closely related homologs were identified through
phylogenetic analysis by comparing the almost complete 16s
rRNA gene sequence of strain D25 (1400 nt) with the nonredundant
database of nucleotide sequences deposited at NCBI
web server (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov), through Basic Local
Alignment Tool (BLAST) program
(http://www.ncbi.nim.nih.gov/blast/). Dataset of potential
orthologs was prepared by considering those database
sequences which had &gt;98% sequence identity with the query
sequence D25. Phylogenetic analysis and nucleotide
conservation of the data set sequences were studied through
multiple sequence alignment program viz., Mega 5.0 and
clustering was calculated with the neighbour-joining method.
The dendrogram/phylogram was prepared using method of
phylogenetic tree construction. Distances between the studied
sequences help in understanding the evolutionary distance
among the species [].

Criteria for species identification:
Identification of species was performed through sequence
similarity basis following the criteria used by Bosshard et al. 
[]
which states the following selection parameters. 1) When the
percentage similarity of the query sequence and the reference
sequence is 99% or above, the unknown isolate is assigned to
reference species; 2) when the percentage similarity is between
99-95%, the unknown isolate is assigned to the corresponding
genus, and 3) when percentage similarity is less than 95%, the
unknown isolate is assigned to a family.

Nucleotide accession number:
The 16s rRNA sequence of the potential actinomycete strain
was submitted to Genbank to get the accession number.

Results
Phenotypic characteristics:
Under bright field microscopic observation, the vegetative
substrate mycelium was lengthy and the reproductive aerial
mycelium was dark and appeared in recti flexibile (RF)
arrangement (). The aerial and substrate mycelium did
not exhibit fragmentation. Smooth, oval shaped spores were
borne in long straight to rectiflexibile chains with 40-50 spores
in a filament (). Of a range of media tested, strain D25
grown well on ISP2, ISP3, ISP4, ISP6 and ISP7 medium and
moderate growth was observed on ISP1, ISP5 medium. Strain
D25 produced powdery colonies on all the ISP media. Growth
pattern of actinomycete isolate D25 is as shown in 
 (see
supplementary material). The strain D25 grown well utilising
wide range of sugars and amino acids except on basal medium
supplemented with sucrose, raffinose, cellulose and tyrosine.
Growth of strain D25 was observed at a wide range of
temperature (20°C – 40°C) at pH 7-11 and in the presence of 0 –
7.5% NaCl. Poor growth was observed at anaerobic condition.
Strain D25 exhibited lipase, protease and amylase activity.
Strain D25 was sensitive to streptomycin, tetracycline,
chloramphenicol, gentamicin, vancomycin and erythromycin.

Chemotaxonomy:
The whole organism hydrolysates of strain D25 are rich in LLdiaminopimelic
acid (DAP) and glycine. No diagnostic sugars
are found in the cell wall constituents. Based on the studied
phenotypic characteristics and cell wall analysis, actinomycete
strain D25 was identified as the genus Streptomyces.

Molecular characterization:
The PCR amplification of 16s rRNA gene of actinomycete strain
D25 yielded around 1400 base pair sequence. The BLAST
analysis showed 97% similarity to Streptomyces althioticus KCTC
9752. Phylogenetic relationship of the strain D25 and related
taxa are given in (). Based on the criteria given by
Bosshard et al. [], the strain D25 was assigned to be a novel
species of the genus Streptomyces though it showed sequence
similarity between 95–99% with Streptomyces althioticus strain
KCTC 9752. However, it is to be confirmed further by DNADNA
hybridization tests. The 16s rRNA gene sequence of strain
D25 is submitted to GenBank under the accession number
JN604533.1.

Discussion
Actinomycete classification was originally based largely on
morphological observations and physiological characteristics
[,
]. 
The advent of chemotaxonomic criteria has provided
reproducible and reliable tools to identify the genera at genus
level. In the present study, the results of phenotypic
characterisation and cell wall analysis revealed that the
actinomycete strain D25 belongs to a species of the genus
Streptomyces. But it is not adequate in itself to differentiate
between genera. The analysis of 16s rRNA gene sequence has
also revealed that the strain D25 belongs to a species of the
genus Streptomyces. It showed only 97.0% similarity with the
16s rRNA gene sequence of its closely related species
Streptomyces althioticus strain KCTC 9752 deposited in GenBank.
However, the 16s rRNA gene offers limited resolution at the
species level identification, since it uncovered more extensive
genotypic differences than anticipated among many organisms
with almost identical 16s rRNA gene sequences. At this level,
whole genome sequencing and multiple gene derived
parameters provide much more precise measurement of
relatedness among organisms. One of the former parameters,
the average nucleotide identity (ANI) [] of all conserved genes
between any two genomes shows potential to reform taxonomy
because of its high precision and simplicity. Among several
parameters tested, ANI was found to be the genome-derived
parameter, that best co-relate with DNA: DNA hybridization
(DDH) values; with 70% DDH, the most frequently used
standard for species delineation [], corresponding tightly to
95% ANI. Further, no organisms have been described to date
that show less than 98.7% identity in their 16s rRNA gene and
show less than 70% DDH or 95% ANI. These results enabled the
substitution of cumbersome DDH and related procedures with
portable and simple sequence based standard.

Based on the above literature evidence, the potential
actinomycete strain D25 isolated from Thar desert is a novel
species of the genus Streptomyces since its 16s rRNA gene
sequence showed only 97.0% similarity with its
phylogenetically close neighbour Streptomyces althioticus strain
KCTC 9752. From the available literature, it was noticed that,
till now there are no commercially available antibiotics, in
particular the anti-TB compounds, produced from the strain
Streptomyces althioticus strain KCTC 9752, the phylogenetically
closely related species of strain D25. Hence, the actinomycete
strain D25 isolated from Thar Desert soil may be a potential and
novel source for the isolation of antituberculous compound.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors thank the Department of Science &amp; Technology,
New Delhi for their support in the form of research grant
(SR/SO/HS-42/2005). One of the authors (Dr. RB) thanks the
Vice-chancellor of Periyar University for the laboratory facilities
provided.

Citation:Radhakrishnan et al, Bioinformation 9(1): 018-022 (2013)

Micromorphology of actinomycete strain D25 under bright field (A) and scanning electron; (B) microscope

Phylogenetic relationship of the strain D25 and related taxa, based on 16s rDNA analysis. The evolutionary history was
inferred using the Neighbor-Joining method []. The optimal tree with the sum of branch length = 0.19907131 is shown. The
percentage of replicate trees in which the associated taxa clustered together in the bootstrap test (100 replicates) is shown next to
the branches []. The evolutionary distances were computed using the p-distance method and are in the units of the number of
base differences per site. The analysis involved 20 nucleotide sequences. All ambiguous positions were removed for each sequence
pair. There were a total of 1574 positions in the final dataset. Evolutionary analyses were conducted in MEGA5 [].

