Background
Bipolar disorder (BD) is a psychiatric disease with an estimated
around 1% of lifetime risk, causing significant personal and
social losses. BD represents a category of mood disorders,
where BD patients experience episodes of mania or hypomania
interspersed with period of depression with symptoms such as
delusions and hallucinations. Although genome-wide
association studies have identified many susceptibility genes
for BD [–], 
no gene has consistently shown across these
studies. BD is considered to be a polygenic disease with
multiple factors in genetics, each of which is not dominant but
collaborative in the pathogenic process.

Several molecular pathways look definite in their contribution
to BD pathogenesis, while definitive genes are difficult to find
in BD pathogenesis. One of the most studied pathways is
mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation. There were many
reports on mitochondrial dysfunction in BD patients [,
]. That
dysfunction was confirmed by gene expression analysis 
[–]
and haplotype analysis []. The other recently marked
molecular functions contributed to BD pathogenesis is increase
and/or decrease in DNA methylation observed in peripheral
blood cells of BD patients. The shift of methylation patterns in
certain set of genes may the other definitive mechanism that
characterizes risk for pathogenesis and progression of BD 
[].
However, it has not been elucidated why mitochondrial
oxidative phosphorylation or the alternation in DNA
methylation causes the pathogenic state of BD. Obviously, the
other pathways may collaboratively contribute to the BD
pathogenesis together and the collaborative contribution may
unveil pathogenic mechanism of BD.

Historically BD has been studied with samples from
postmortem brain. Recently several studies reported that gene
expression in peripheral blood also reflects pathogenic features
of BD when considering multi-gene polygenic natures of the
disease [–
]. Peripheral blood is regarded to an ideal
surrogate tissue because it is readily obtainable 
[,
]. A
microarray study evaluated the comparability of gene
expression in peripheral blood and brain; it concluded that
peripheral blood shares significant gene expression profiles
with central nervous system tissues []. With a motivation to
detect collaborative activities with BD pathogenesis in blood of
living patients, here we described a method which estimates
the collaborative contribution to any disease between a certain
well-studied pathway and the other candidate pathway in
application of Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) 
[]. This
method is a direct application of “expression screening” 
[]
that determines genes in collaboration with the given gene set
consisted of a certain well-studied pathway. With the gene
expression data measured in BD patients, our modified
“expression screening” analysis reveals molecular mechanism
of 1) “ubiquitin-proteasome” in collaboration with
mitochondrial “oxidative phosphorylation” and 2)
“inflammatory response” and “apoptosis” in collaboration with
alternation in DNA methylation pattern in BD patients.

Methodology
We used a computational procedure called “expression
screening” proposed by Mootha׳s group []. This method was
reported as an application of GSEA []. GSEA evaluates if a
certain gene set correlates with the difference in gene
expression between phenotype classes in general. Meanwhile,
“expression screening” evaluates if a certain gene correlates
with a given gene set in the gene expression (). We
applied the “expression screening” to identify genes that are
differentially expressed between the disease and non-disease
states and consistently co-expressed with a target pathway or
gene set which is deeply related to disease etiology of BD. We
first applied this method to determine genes significantly
correlated with genes in mitochondrial oxidative
phosphorylation pathway. We also applied this method to
determine genes significantly correlated with genes of
characteristic DNA methylation difference in patient genomes.

Gene expression profiles from public resources:
Gene expression profiles of BD:
Three sets of gene expression profiles of BD patients were
employed in this study. Two sets of data measured with
peripheral blood samples were downloaded from the NCBI
Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), i.e. GSE23848 and GSE18312.
A set of data measured with postmortem brain samples was
downloaded from Stanley Medical Research Institute Online
Genomics Database, i.e. Stanley׳s Study No.2. Hereafter we call
the data set of GSE23848 “BD_Blood1”, GSE18312
“BD_Blood2”, and Stanley׳s Study No.2 “BD_Brain”.

Additional gene expression profiles:
In addition to the data from BD, we employed two sets of gene
expression profiles in order to compare the results obtained
from BD data with the equivalent results obtained from the
data other than BD. We employed GSE16129 which were
measured with peripheral blood samples of patients infected by
Staphylococcus aureus. We also employed GSE55235 which
were measured with articular synovial membrane samples of
rheumatoid arthritis patients. Hereafter we call the data set of
GSE16129 “S.aureus_Blood” and GSE55235 “RA_Articular”.

Target genes:
A target gene set represents a group of genes deeply related to
disease etiology upheld by biological evidences. “Oxidative
phosphorylation” is one of the well-studied biological functions
which dysfunction has been confirmed by gene expression
analysis [–
] and haplotype analysis []. The genes consist of
“oxidative phosphorylation” were used as target genes in this
study (OxPhos genes). Alternation of DNA methylation pattern
is recently marked molecular functions in BD patients. The
genes reported in [] as top 100 differentially methylated CpG
sites in BD patients were used as another target genes in this
study (DNA-Met genes).  (see supplementary meterial)
indicates lists of individual genes used as target genes.

Modified “expression screening”:
Let us denote a given gene set by S (target genes) and we will
check the correlation between gene g and gene set S. We take
each gene g, and calculate the vector of Pearson correlation
coefficients γgn(jm) between gn and all other genes jm (
gn(1≤n≤N), jm(1≤m≤n)≠gn, N representing the
total number of genes). We then define the correlation between
g and S as the GSEA enrichment score (ES) statistic, with g as
the “phenotype” variable in ordinary GSEA [,
].






We next calculated randomized enrichment scores ES°gn° (gn° (1≤ n°≤ N°))
by randomly permuting values (arrays) for each gene gn, re-calculating 
γgn(jm)and applying the
above formula to obtain ES°gn° (gn° (1≤ n°≤ N°)), 
where N° means number of permutation. In this calculation, each
other genes jm are not randomly permuted and used as it is. We
set N° equal to 100 and pooled 100 permuted ES° values to
estimate the marginal null distribution of enrichment scores.
We estimated the global false discovery rate (FDR) of each
actual ES value as the ratio of tail probabilities []. The
FDRgn reflects the ratio to which randomized ESogn° exceed
actual measured ES score. The FDRgn is defined as probability
of false positive on each gene.

Data processing and filtering:
The dataset of BD_Blood1 was normalized using Quintile
Normalization method in R package. The datasets of
BD_Blood2, BD_Brain, S.aureus_Blood and RA_Articular were
normalized by RMA processing with the use of custom CDF file
environment (http: //brainarray.mbni.med.umich.edu
/brainarray /Database / CustomCDF /genomic_curated_
CDF.asp). We then filtered out genes without significantly
differentially expression between the disease and non-disease
states using Rank Product methods in library R. Genes were
selected when 1) the genes meet requirement of FDR &lt; 0.5 and
2) a hierarchical clustering produced by the selected genes
clearly divided disease and non-disease states. We thought that
this filtering can eliminate other factors outside of disease
etiology (aging etc.), and can reflect the difference between the
disease and non-disease states precisely.

Gene ontology (GO) analysis:
Functional annotation of DAVID [] was employed to identify
significantly overrepresented GO terms in genes obtained by
our modified “expression screening”. Three hundred genes
with top highest ES score were analyzed by DAVID.

Results
Workflow of our study:
Workflow of data analysis is shown in . The details of
individual steps are described in Methods section. In ,
we illustrate modifications in our modified “expression
screening” in comparison with original GSEA.

Data processing and filtering:
Before our modified “expression screening” analysis, data were
preprocessed by normalization and filtering so that the genes
were selected if they were significantly and differentially
expressed between the disease and non-disease states. After the
data filtering, we obtained 4,587 genes on BD_Brain, 11,203
genes on BD_Blood1, 6,040 genes on BD_Blood2, 3,824 genes on
S.aureus_Blood, and 3,596 genes on RA_Articular.

Modified “expression screening” analysis with OxPhos genes:
In order to identify molecular mechanisms associated with
oxidative phosphorylation in BD, our modified “expression
screening” was carried out on preprocessed BD_Brain and
BD_Blood1 data with OxPhos genes as a target gene set. This
analysis should have provided genes significantly correlated
with OxPhos pathway in BD. We obtained genes with 300 top
highest ES scores and manually investigated biological
activities of the obtained genes. Logically, genes with
annotations representing “oxidative phosphorylation” should
be enriched. Actually the obtained genes included 20 genes of
“oxidative phosphorylation” such as COX5B, NDUFS4,
COX7A2, NDUFB2, UQCRQ on BD_Brain and 9 genes such as
UCRC, NDUFB2, ATP5I, NDUFA1, ATP5J on BD_Blood1
( (see supplementary meterial)). We also found
marked enrichment of genes annotated with “ubiquitinproteasome”
activity (i.e., 18 genes such as UBE2A, PSMC5,
PSMA7, UFC1, PSMB6 on BD_Brain and 12 genes such as
PSMB7, PPP2R5C, PSMC2, PSMB1, PSMA3 on BD_Blood1) in
the obtained genes ( (see supplementary material)).
With reference knowledge of ubiquitin-proteasome activities
observed in BD patients [,
], we considered that some
relations might be detected between genes of “ubiquitinproteasome”
and of “oxidative phosphorylation”. We then
investigated GO analysis of the 300 genes with top highest ES
scores. Results of GO analysis are shown in  (see
supplementary meterial). As expected, GO terms representing
“oxidative phosphorylation” and “ubiquitin-proteasome”were
significantly enriched. The enrichment was observed in both
the gene expression data from brain (BD_Brain) and peripheral
blood (BD_Blood1). Enriched GO terms were also similar
between BD_Brain and BD_Blood1 (). 
 shows
frequency distribution charts of p-values of the obtained GO
terms on BD_Brain and BD_Blood1. In both the results, GO
terms representing “oxidative phosphorylation” and
“ubiquitin-proteasome” show similar distribution, comparing
with distribution of other GO terms. We considered that these
results revealed hidden relations between “oxidative
phosphorylation” and “ubiquitin-proteasome” activities in BD.

Comparability between brain and peripheral blood:
It was reported that gene expression of peripheral blood cells
shared more than 80% of the transcriptome with nine different
human tissue types including brain []. Our study provided a
comparable result between brain and peripheral blood in
collaborative functioning of “ubiquitin-proteasome” with
mitochondrial “oxidative phosphorylation” in BD patients. No
prominent comparability was found in individual genes with
activities of “oxidative phosphorylation” or “ubiquitinproteasome”
in the 300 genes with top highest ES scores
between BD_Brain and BD_Blood1. The result was indicative
that functional analysis like overrepresented GO terms could
reveal functional comparability between brain and peripheral
blood

Modified “expression screening” analysis with DNA-Met genes:
After obtaining collaborative expression between genes of
“oxidative phosphorylation” and “ubiquitin-proteasome”, we
applied this method to explore etiology of alternation in DNA
methylation pattern in BD patients. Preprocessed genes of
BD_Blood1 and BD_Blood2 were analyzed by our modified
“expression screening” with DNA-Met genes as a target gene
set. Since the shift of methylation patterns in DNA was detected
in not brain tissue but peripheral blood cells of BD patients, we
employed expression data obtained from peripheral blood in
this analysis.

With the obtained genes with top highest ES scores, we could
not find any marked enrichment of genes manually (data not
shown), so that we carried out GO analysis with the obtained
genes. As a result of GO analysis, GO terms representing
“inflammatory response” and “apoptosis” were significantly
enriched in the genes correlated with DNA-Met genes (
(see supplementary meterial)). Enrichment of the GO terms
was resulted from both the gene expression data of BD_Blood1
and BD_Blood2. We considered that these results revealed
hidden relations between DNA methylation shift and
“inflammatory-response” and “apoptosis activities” in BD.

Validation of disease specificity:
In order to validate if our results represent facts which were
specific to BD, our modified “expression screening” were
examined with gene expression data obtained for the different
diseases than BD. We employed gene expression data of
“S.aureus_Blood” and “RA_Articular” for this examination
(). No GO term representing “ubiquitin-proteasome”
was obtained with OxPhos genes as a target gene set on
“S.aureus_Blood” and “RA_Articular” data (data not shown).
We believe that this result indicates that the enrichment of
“ubiquitin-proteasome” was specific to BD data.

With DNA-Met genes as a target gene set, no GO term
representing “inflammatory response” and “apoptosis” was
obtained on “RA_Articular” data (data not shown). On
“S.aureus_Blood” data, no GO term representing “apoptosis”
was detected, but GO terms representing “inflammatory
response” were actually detected (data not shown). We
consider that the result on “S.aureus_Blood” derived from
extensive activation of inflammatory responses in patients
infected with S.aureus.

Discussion
OxPhos and ubiquitin-proteasome activities in BD etiology:
Our result revealed a relation between OxPhos dysregulation
and ubiquitin-proteasome abnormalities in BD. Since both the
activities have been reported with BD patients, the found
relation suggests that OxPhos dysfunction may lead ubiquitinproteasome
abnormalities and contribute to the development of
BD pathogenesis. OxPhos abnormalities have been reported in
a number of studies with BD patients [–, 
]. Since OxPhos
pathway consists of genes of energy production, the energy
imbalance may cause dysregulation and degradation of
neuronal cells in depressive disorder of BD patients [,
].
Ubiquitin-proteasome abnormalities have also been reported in
a number of studies with BD patients [,
]. Especially,
USP14 was a well-established susceptibility locus for BD 
[,
]. Ubiquitin–proteasome system was a significant factor of
axon degeneration and neuronal cell death. Neuronal stresses
such as NGF deprivation and injury lead to phosphorylation
and ubiquitination of DLK in neuronal cells [].

Epigenetic change and inflammatory response and apoptosis in BD etiology:
Epigenetic changes have been reported in many psychiatric
diseases []. The epigenetic changes influence cognitive
function and behavior to future generations of psychiatric
diseases []. Among the epigenetic changes, DNA methylation
has been the most studied. The repeated environmental stress
caused shifts of DNA methylation patterns of CpG rich
promoter regions of many genes including SLC6A4 and
increased disease psychiatric susceptibility []. However it is
still difficult to elucidate how the genes with alternation in
DNA methylation pattern develop BD pathogenesis. Our result
suggests that “inflammatory response” and “apoptosis” may
mediate the missing relation of genes with DNA methylation to
BD pathogenesis. Since dysregulation of both “inflammatory
response” and “apoptosis” have been reported with BD
patients, our result suggests that the genes of alternation in
DNA methylation may induce “inflammatory response” and
“apoptosis” and contribute to the development of BD
pathogenesis.

There is a growing body of evidence showing that
inflammatory dysregulation is related to depression 
[].
Recent studies reported pro-inflammatory cytokines involved
in the inflammatory dysregulation [,
]. Increased
production of pro-inflammatory such as IL-8 and TNFa in
plasma of BD patients was reported in []. Apoptosis is also a
biological function related to BD etiology, because BD is caused
in neuro-development when neuronal death is frequent 
[].
GABAergic interneurons have a key role in the neuronal death,
and the deficit of GABAergic interneurons in the cerebral cortex
in BD was accompanied by overexpression of pro-apoptotic
genes []. Another postmortem studies also suggested a high
expression of pro-apoptotic genes [,
], such as BAX, BAD,
caspase-9 and caspase-3, along with a decrease in the
expression of anti-apoptotic genes such as BDNF and Bcl-2 [].

Conclusion
Our modified “expression screening” (improved derivation of
GSEA) revealed a hidden relation between a certain wellstudied
pathway and the other candidate pathway known in
literature. Our results suggest that in BD pathogenesis 1)
mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation may induce
dysregulation in “ubiquitin-proteasome” and 2) alternation in
DNA methylation may induce dysregulation in “inflammatory
response” and “apoptosis”. Our results also indicated
comparability between brain and peripheral blood samples in
analyzing molecular activities that collaboratively contribute to
BD.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Sawai et al, Bioinformation 11(4): 207-216 (2015)

Overview illustrating outline of GSEA and Expression screening. A) GSEA evaluates if a certain gene set correlates with
the difference in gene expression between phenotype classes. B) Expression screening evaluates if a certain gene correlates with a
given gene set in the gene expression.

Workflow of our study: Our data analysis consists of the following steps: a) Microarray data were downloaded from
public data sources, i.e. BD_Blood1, BD_Blood2, BD_Brain, S.aureus_Blood, and RA_Articular. Microarray data on BD patients are
depicted in green boxes, while microarray data on patients of different diseases from BD are depicted in blue boxes; b) Data were
normalized according to indications attached to the downloaded microarray data. Genes were selected if the genes were
significantly and differentially expressed between disease and non-disease states; c) Our modified “expression screening” was
carried out on the preprocessed data with target genes, i.e. OxPhos genes and DNA-Met genes; d) Obtained genes with the top
highest ES scores were investigated by GO analysis in DAVID.

Illustration on modifications in our modified“expression screening” in comparison with original GSEA. Original GSEA is
diagramed in A) and our modified “expression screening” is diagramed in B). Step 2 and 7 in B) are steps carried out only in our
modified “expression screening”. Phrases underlined in B) indicate modified processes from original GSEA.

Frequency distribution charts of p-values resulted in GO analysis. In both the studies (BD_Brain and BD_Blood1), GO
terms of “oxidative phosphorylation” (middle panels in green) and GO terms of “ubiquitin-proteasome” (bottom panels in blue)
showed similar distribution, in comparison with distribution of GO terms representing functions other than “oxidative
phosphorylation” and “ubiquitin-proteasome” (top panels in red).

