Background
Many intracellular proteinsarepost-translationally modified by the
attachment of lipid through a process called farnesylation (a type of
prenylation) []. This modification process has been identified in
numerous protein located in eukaryotic organisms, including RAS
proteins, which plays an important role in the signal transduction pathway
that leads to constant activation of the protein, ultimately resulting in
uncontroll cell proliferation []. The high prevalence of mutated ras
gene, are found in 30% of all human cancer []. Since the farnesylation
of oncogenic RAS protein is required for cellular transformation; a
promising way of interfering with RAS function seemed to be the
inhibition of Farnesyl- Transferase (Ftase) which catalyze the formation of
thioether linkages between the C1 atom of farnesyl (15-carbon by Ftase)
and ―SH of the cystine residue at or near the C-terminus of RAS protein
[]. This enzyme recognizes a common CAAX amino acid sequence
located at C-terminus of substrate protein. In CAAX m o t i f , C i s t h e
c y s t i n e r e s i d u e t o which farnesyl group is attached; A, A are
aliphatic amino acids and X is the carboxyl terminal residue. Crystal
structure of human Ftase was resolved at 2.30 Å resolution and is a
heterodimer consisting of 44865.4 Dalton alpha subunit &amp; 48822.9
Dalton beta subunit [,]. Several 
classes of compound having
selective Farnesyl transferase inhibitory activity have been tested in
clinical trials for example: L778123 [], tipifarnib [], 
lonafarnib [], FTT-
277 [] &amp; L744832 
[]. The promising results in preclinical models
were not confirmed in the clinic. Unexpectedly, tumors containing nonmutated
RAS were also sensitive to the Farnesyl transferase inhibitors
(FTIs). Thus there is still a need for novel, selective and potent Ftase
inhibitors [].Traditional synthesis of a series of new compounds through
high-throughput screening can be carried out at high cost and also are
time consuming; whereas on the other hand, screening small molecule
databasesfor novel compounds represents an alternative process.
Docking various ligands to the protein of interest followed by scoring to
reveal the strength of interaction and to determine the affinity of
binding has become increasingly important in the context of drug
discovery.Screening large databases of compounds can provide a
feasible, alternative technique against high-throughput screening, but
depends on the fast and accuracy of the docking algorithm [].

In this paper we made an afford to develop a selective &amp; potent Ftase
inhibitors by screening a set of compounds from Indian Plant Anticancer
Database (InPACdb) [] against FTase protein, with bound ligand L-739,
750 extracted from Protein Databank, [] by utilizing exhaustive docking
software AutoDock 3.0.5 []. On the basis of Docking result a
pharmacophore map were constructed for those compounds, which are
having high score.

Methodology
Receptor X-ray structure
The 3D coordinates of the crystal structure of Human Protein Farnesyl
Transferase Complexed with Farnesyl diphosphate and the peptidomimetic
inhibitor L-739, 750 (PDB code: 1JCQ) [] was selected as the receptor
model in flexible Docking program. Before Docking all heteroatoms
(Farnesyl Diphosphate, acetic acid, sucrose, Zinc ion, 739) &amp; water
molecules are removed from Protein file 1JCQ. After removing the water
molecule H-atom were added to protein for correct ionization and
tautomeric states of aminoacid residues such as Asp,Ser, Glu, Arg and His.

Active Site Analysis
The active site was analyzed by selecting neighbors within 3Å around
Ligand 739,which is already bound to the crystal structure of protein
Farnesyl Transferase (PDB code: 1JCQ). The active site contains Lys164,
Tyr300, His248 and Tyr361 residues.

Ligand preparation
Indian Plant Anticancer Compounds Database (InPACdb) [] is a free
online database of compounds that possess anticancer properties. These
compounds are derived from various plant species that have an Indian
origin. It contains 125 compounds in ready-to- dock 3D formats, available
at the URL http://www.inpacdb.org/. Molecules in InPACdb are annotated
by molecular property that include molecular weight, molecular formula,
number of rotatable bonds, calculated XLogP, number of hydrogen-bond
donors, hydrogen-bond acceptors, refractivity, Topological Polar Surface
Area &amp; Van der Waals surface area (3D). InPACdb provides several
search criteria such as IUPAC name, Plant name, Cancer type &amp;
Refractivity.

Virtual Screening
Docking of the entire 125 anticancer compounds of InPACdb against
Farnesyl Transferase protein structure was done using molecular docking
program AutoDock v3.05 []. Gasteiger charges are added to the ligand
&amp;maximum 6 numbers of active torsions are given to the lead
compounds using AutoDock Tool []. Kollman charges and the
solvation term were then added to the protein structure using the
same. The grid for docking calculations was centered on Lys164, Tyr300,
His248, and Tyr361 for 1JCQ in the docking studies. An 52 × 52 × 52 3D
affinity grid with 0.381 spacing was calculated, respectively, for each of
the following atom types C, A (aromatic C), N, O, S, H and e by
Autogrid 3.0.The Lamarckian genetic algorithm implemented in Autodock
was used. Docking parameters were as follows: 10 docking trials,
population size of 150, maximum number of energy evaluation ranges of
25,0000, maximum number of generations is 27,000, mutation rate of
0.02, cross-over rate of 0.8, Other docking parameters were set to the
software's default values. After docking, the ligands were ranked
according to their docked energy as implemented in the AutoDock
program.

Pharmacophore Modeling
Three-alkaloid compounds were taken on the basis of higher scoring
function for pharmacophore modeling, which is one of the most powerful
techniques to classify &amp; identify key features from a group of molecules.
And a 3D-pharmacophore is a set of interactions (chemical features or
functionalities) aligned in three-dimensional space.This pharmacophore
model will furnish a new insight to design novel molecules that can
enhance or inhibit the function of the target and will be useful in drug
discovery strategies []. 
LigandScout [] was used to develop
pharmacophore model of these three lkaloids derived from Vinca rosea.
Different types of chemical features for each alkaloid molecule were
examined using feature directory from LigandScout software. By
consolidating all the available features, five common features were used
to generate pharmacophore: Hydrogen bond donar

All these three compounds with lowest docked energy were categorize
under vinca alkaloids [],#x0002C; a class of alkaloids from the genus of
apocynaceous woody herbs including Periwinkle. They are some of
the most useful antineoplastic agent. However several compounds having
selective Farnesyl transferase inhibitory activity (L778123 [], tipifarnib
[], lonafarnib [], 
FTT-277 [] &amp; L744832 
[]) is in clinical trial but
these compounds are not very promising in preclinical models.
Pharmacophore map was constructed for compounds (Vinorelbine,
Vincristine and Vinblastine) using Ligand Scout [] which are shown in
. After that shared featured pharmacophore of these
compounds was generated by aligning pharmacophores and molecules
using reference points as shown in .

Conclusion
Flexible docking of ligand from chemical database to receptor is an
emerging approach and is extensively used to reduce cost and time in
drug discovery. The approach utilized in this study is successful in finding
three potent Ftase inhibitors from Indian Plant Anticancer Database.
Individually these three compounds are from group of vinca alkaloid &amp;
show lowest docked energy and hydrogen bonding stabilizes the
interaction. Hydrogen bonding plays an important role for the structure and
function of biological molecules, especially for inhibition in a complex.
Thus the result demonstrates that Vinorelbine, Vincristine and Vinblastine
are potential inhibitor for Farnesyl Transferase, which is a promising
way of interfering with RAS function. Four shared feature pharmacophore
(one hydrogen bond Donor, Two hydrogen bond Acceptor &amp; one ionizable
area) are generated using LigandScout to discover the essential features of
ligand, which are invaluable to examine the potential lead of Farnesyl
Transferase. Further the work can be evaluated experimentally to study the
receptor-ligand interactions, which would help in designing of compounds
based on virtual screening.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Hafeez khan
et al, Bioinformation 5(2): 62-66 (2010)

A detailed flowchart summarizing the methodology implemented is shown.

2-D Pharmacophore model of alkaloid compound (a) Vinorelbine, (b) Vincristine, (c) Vinblastine generated by LigandScout.

Shared Feature Pharmacophore of Vinorelbine, Vincristine and Vinblastine showing four common features (one hydrogen bond Donar: green
sphere, two hydrogen bonds Acceptor: Red sphere and one ionizable area: Blue asterisk).

