Background:
Current trends indicate that the dissemination of novel, timely 
and critical bio-medical information stands as the next frontier 
of health care. The development of technologies that favor and 
enable clinical practice guidelines that are based on new and 
emerging research evidence, is at the cusp of the modernization 
of public and private health care services, and the task of 
identifying, packaging and disseminating evidence-based 
standards of care1 (see ) lies at the core 
of expanding health information technologies. Standards of care 
must be evidence-based, and not based on the evidence – a 
critical dichotomy in contemporary health services research and 
practice: they must integrate the best available evidence that 
emerges from a concerted hypothesis-driven process of research 
synthesis and meta-analysis []. They should implement 
patient-centered treatment interventions while considering the 
patient's gender, ethnicity, health care history, coverage, and 
socioeconomic level, by integrating the best available patienttargeted scientific evidence.

Patient-centered treatment is optimized through effective 
dissemination of the best available research evidence, and all 
other necessary inputs and factors to provide optimal treatment 
through well-crafted and coordinated health information 
technologies. Novel approaches for the quantification and 
analysis of the textual content of systematic reviews and of their 
summaries in the form of critical reviews and lay-language 
summaries represent the next frontier of health information 
technology [,
].

Evidence-based clinical decision-making, the process of making 
diagnostic and prognostic decisions for health care that are
based on the best available evidence [], rests on obtaining the 
best available evidence through the systematic hypothesisdriven 
process of research synthesis that is framed by the 
characteristics of the patient population under study, the 
interventions under consideration, and the clinical outcomes 
being sought (P.I.C.O.). The P.I.C.O.-driven process uncovers all 
of the available literature pertinent to the research question − 
the bibliome −, which is evaluated for the level and the quality2 
of the evidence. Analyses of the data ascertain the best quality 
reports, and yield over-arching evaluations of the effects (i.e., 
meta-analysis). Reports that describe P.I.C.O.-driven research 
and analysis, termed systematic reviews, are complex, 
sophisticated, and are not user-friendly [–
]. 

Critical summaries (aka, evidence reviews) of systematic 
reviews, and lay-language summaries of critical summaries are 
produced through a stringent writing protocol, and are 
rigorously evaluated for clinical relevance to disseminate the 
information in systematic reviews to the clinicians as well as the 
patients. The American Dental Association (ADA) has stated 
that3(see ): 
“development of a critical 
summary follows a comprehensive process of critical appraisal, 
which focuses on assessing the methodological rigor of a 
published systematic review and the clinical utility and validity 
of the review methodology, design and evidence analysis. 
Critical summaries provide a concise, focused summary of a 
published systematic review: evaluating the appropriateness of 
the review's search strategy and execution; the review’s 
appraisal of the available evidence and other considerations. 
Each critical summary includes ratings of the systematic review 
findings and their clinical applicability and relevance, and 
addresses how this information may be applied in patient care”

A critical summary, the ADA Center for Evidence-Based 
Dentistry states, consists of: (a) Critical summary title and 
author, distinct from the systematic review title and author(s) 
(b) Overview: (1) Systematic Review Conclusion; (2) Overall 
Critical Assessment; (3) Level of Evidence Rank (i.e., SORT; [5]). 
(c) Structured abstract to describe (1) P.I.C.O; (2) bibliome; (3) 
findings; (4) conclusions; (5) source of funding (to ascertain 
absence of conflict of interests).(d) Commentary: 300-400 words 
about (1) clinical context; (2) strengths/weaknesses of the 
systematic review; (3) strengths/weaknesses of the evidence; (4) 
implications for evidence-based practice. Critical reviews must 
be translated in lay language to empower the patients by 
increasing health literacy, and such lay-language summaries 
must also be disseminated through health information 
technology [,
,
]. Moreover (or furthermore), according to 
ADA Center for Evidence-Based Dentistry: “plain language 
summaries provide professionals and patients with one page 
documents that summarize systematic reviews in a consumer 
friendly manner”.

A lay-language summary should consist of the following 
[]: (a) 
Lay-language summary title and author, distinct from the 
systematic review and the critical summary titles and author. 
(b) Overview: (1) Systematic review and critical review full 
citation and link; (2) Clinical questions; (3) Consensus of the 
best available evidence. (c) Background: (1) Glossary; (2) 
Background information; (d) Conclusion: Research must 
develop and validate novel methodologies for ensuring the 
quality of the communications, and the efficiency of the
disseminative process. This is particularly timely and critical in 
the context of the patient-centered medical/dental home 
/neighborhood [], and of the trans-national and global 
perspective of translational effectiveness and health information 
technology [].

From a methodological standpoint, a simple checklist can rank 
critical reviews and lay-language summaries in terms of 
whether they are written in a direct, precise and succinct format 
that contains the main points highlighted above. A measure of 
quality on continuous or semi-continuous scale will require: (a) 
Construct validation: conceptualization of the fundamental 
elements of a critical review and lay-language summary; (b) 
Content validation: item development and analysis (i.e., factor 
analysis, cluster analysis) of items targeted to assess the 
fundamental aspects of the critical review and lay-language 
summary; (c) Reliability: Internal consistency (i.e., Cronbach α), 
inter-rater reliability, and Cohen к coefficient of agreement); (d) 
Contextual extraction: quantification of the salient qualitative 
statements about the reported best available evidence by means 
of text mining and analysis []. The latter entails the very 
essence of the best available evidence, which should permit 
clinicians to make better informed decisions for treatment, and 
will empower patients by raising health literacy and overall 
satisfaction.

The presentation and dissemination of high quality and 
validated critical reviews and lay-language summaries through 
user-friendly and easily accessible health information 
technologies will be an essential turning point in the mode and 
delivery of health care in the XXI century. In computer 
language, information is expressed as binary (0 or 1) bits. One 
byte (8 bits) represents a digit, a letter or a symbol. A total of 1.8 
zettabyte (ZB) digital data was created in 2011 (1ZB= a trillion 
gigabytes (GB) (1GB=109 bytes, 230 
binary bytes, is about 7 min of HDTV). From ZB (1021
, binary 270), the next frontier of 
information technology is the yottabyte (1024 bytes), and thence 
beyond. The gargantuan increase in memory capacity of 
information technology is related to fast accelerated 
computational speed, from a tenth of a second in the first 
Electronic Numerical Integrator And Computer (ENIAC, mid-
1940's) to the close to 10 quadrillionth of a second of today's 
most powerful machines KEI computers4 
(see ). 
These increases in performance were predicted as far 
back as 1965 by Intel co-founder Gordon E. Moore (1929 - ), in 
that processor speed would double every 12 months. He 
revised this prediction in 1975, stating that processor speed 
would double every 24 months. His predictions, now 
commonly referred to as “Moore's Law”, have proven accurate 
over the years. 

Following in this trend, gigantic databases are also being 
amassed: (a) Natural science databases – (1) National 
Geographic-initiated project to collect and catalogue DNA 
profiles across the world to trace human history (“Genographic” 
project, 2005); (2) “encyclopedia of life” (eol.org project) to track 
the over 2 million species; (3) “combined DNA index system, 
CODIS” (FBI, 1998) to store genetic and genomic data for 
forensic purposes; (4) “FAOSTAT and TERRASTAT” databases 
of the United Nations to monitor food, land and water supplies 
worldwide; (5) digitalized survey of the night sky (“Sloan
Digital Sky Survey, SDSS”), to scrutinize the outer frontiers of 
the universe in search for extra-terrestrial life. (b) psycho-social 
databases – (1) “MD: PRO”, centralized anti-malicious 
hardware and software collection center; (2) “OKTRENDS” 
(OKCupid.com) for analyzing and cataloging human behavior. 
(c) Information databases; (d) “worldcat” (world.cat.org) to 
collect the catalogues of over a thousand libraries in 112 
countries in the global Online Computer Library Center 
(OCLC); (e) “Wayback” archival system of the web 
(archiveaccess.sourceforge.net/projects/wayback, 1996) to provide free 
access to nearly 3 million public domain written documents.

Wayback could sustain the expansion of health information 
(e.g., Health Information-Wayback; cf., ), and proffer
the structure for the orderly categorization of all of the available 
evidence on any given condition diagnosis or prognosis, 
including related systematic review, and validated and 
quantified critical reviews and lay-language summaries. Such a 
cluster-randomized multi-level structure [] would require 
novel complex analyses of units at each level, with more 
complex permutations of data for power analyses, in 
comparative efficacy and effectiveness research and analysis for 
health care practice.

Because of inherent limitations of Wayback technology, such as 
limited efficiency or “intelligence”, the new frontier a “Semantic 
Web” (semanticweb.org) is presently being conceptualized that 
would empower searches to infer more “intelligently” what is 
being discussed or stored. The Semantic Web application would 
be more powerful than Wayback in that it could more 
efficiently leverage meta-data – information about information 
– through the standardization of meta “tags”. In this manner, 
each web contributor will use the same syntax to describe in 
explicit detail what was being posted on individual site, which 
will allow high efficiency search engine optimization, speed 
and reliability. Whereas currently available search engines infer 
meta-data by searching and attempting to read for contextual 
relevance, the Semantic Web search engine will have superior 
rigor and robustness in looking for, and in categorizing 
information. The widespread use of the Semantic Web 
structure, when perfected, will obviate the need for systems 
such as Wayback to infer information cataloging, thus devoting 
more processing power towards organizing and presenting the 
information

In brief, evidence-based standards of care pertain to crafting 
and implementing patient-centered treatment interventions 
based on the best available evidence. The quantification, 
analysis and dissemination of the textual content of systematic 
reviews and of their summaries in the form of critical reviews 
and lay-language summaries represent the next frontier of 
bioinformation for evidence-based standards of care.

Supplementary material
Data 1
No funding or grants have been received, and no conflict of 
interest is present in this study. The authors thank the 
Evidence-Based Decisions Active Groups of Stakeholders (EBDAGS) of the EBD-Practice-Based Research Network and the 
EBD Study Group for the invaluable critical contributions to 
this work.

Citation:Barkhordarian et al, Bioinformation 7(6): 315-319 (2011)

Putative Health Information-Wayback - 
OsteoImmunopathology. Looking at the future of health information 
technology, one may conceive of a Health InformationWayback 
structure that geometrically expands Sir T. BrennersLee's 
original 1989 conceptualization of the World-Wide Web, 
and that borrows from the present Linked Data structure (cf., 
linkeddata.org). This higher scale network could be represented 
as an interconnection of texts via hyper-text links. A health 
information-Wayback structure, that is directly connected to, 
and is an integral part of the Wayback database, could be 
constructed, which would for instance comprise the topic 
osteoimmunopathology in HIV &amp; AIDS 
[]. This novel perspective 
on HIT structure, which ought to be articulated in view of 
future improvement in the technology, such as the Semantic 
web meta-data edifice, would represent an ensemble of 
universes of data and information that could be collected, 
connected, and linked - from the basic fundamental 
osteoimmune data describing the intertwined cross-talk between 
cellular immunity and bone metabolism during development 
and aging in health, and in HIV disease &amp; AIDS related 
pathologies, to the genomic and proteomic signatures of specific 
osteo-immunopathologies, and could include subjects from 
rheumatoid arthritis to temporomandibular joint disorders, to 
the best available evidence for diagnosis and prognosis, critical 
summaries and lay-language summaries, and conceptual and 
textual data mining as outlined above - with patient histories, 
values and preferences (inter-linked at this point with other 
databases) in order to ensure the best available patient-centered 
health bioinformation technology-based clinical decisionmaking database of databases.

