Background
Adenosine A2A receptors (AA2AR) are highly distributed in the central nervous
system and are found in abundance in the basal ganglia, a region of the brain
associated with motor function []. 
The colocalization of AA2AR and dopamine
D2 receptors in the striatopallidal neurons provides the anatomical basis for the
existence of a functional antagonistic interaction between these receptors 
[].
Stimulation of the dopamine D2 receptors with dopamine or other dopamine D2
receptor agonists enhances motor activity whereas stimulation of AA2ARs
reduces this effect []. 
Likewise, AA2AR antagonists may provide a novel
therapy for the treatment of Parkinson's disease (PD) with lower risk of
dyskinesias. In addition, they may exhibit neuroprotective effects 
[].
Furthermore, AA2AR antagonists were found not only to diminish the
symptoms of PD but also to potentiate the effect of levodopa 
[], so, it may be
possible to reduce the dose of the dopaminergic drugs and therefore the
occurrence of side effects. AA2AR antagonists are therefore a promising
adjunctive to dopamine replacement therapy, and several companies have now
advanced selective antagonists of this receptor into clinical development 
[].
Significant progress has been made in computer-aided drug design by
pharmaceutical companies at different stages of drug discovery such as
identifying new hits, enhancing molecule binding affinity in hit-to-lead, and
lead optimization []. 
Moreover, in silico approaches are routinely used in
modern drug design to help understand drug-receptor interactions. It has been
shown in the literature that computational techniques can strongly support and
help the design of novel, more potent inhibitors by revealing the mechanism of
drug-receptor interactions [].

Thiazole derivatives have evoked considerable attention in recent years as these
are endowed with wide range of biological activities as well as drugs of PD 
[–]. 
Hoffmann-La Roche discovered benzothiazole derivetives as novel
scaffold for AA2AR antagonists []. 
Furthermore, certain thiazoles with a urea
moiety [] have also demonstrated 
AA2AR antagonistic activities for the
development of a suitable approach to the treatment of PD that may be the
starting point for the future drug design. Recently, we have discovered urea
derivatives of naphtha [1, 2-d]thiazol-2-amine as novel anti-Parkinsonian
agents that cause neuroprotection against haloperidol-induced oxidative stress
in mice []. These findings have 
motivated us to reveal their interactions with
AA2ARs insilico by using AutoDock program and to attest anti-Parkinsonian
activity associated with them.

Materials and Methodology
For the present study, crystal structure of human AA2AR with PDB ID: 3EML
[] 
was downloaded from the protein data bank (www.rcsb.org/pdb). For
docking experiments with AutoDock 4.2, antiparkinsonian molecules reported
by our group [] 
were drawn in ChemBioDraw Ultra 12.0 and converted to
their three dimensional structures in ChemBio3D Ultra 12.0, energy minimized
by PM3 method using MOPAC Ultra 2009 program (http://OpenMOPAC.net)
and saved in pdb format. The prepared ligands were used as input files for
AutoDock 4.2 in the next step. Lamarckian genetic algorithm method 
[] was
employed for docking simulations. The standard docking procedure was used
for a rigid protein and a flexible ligand whose torsion angles were identified
(for 10 independent runs per ligand). A grid of 60, 60, and 60 points in x, y,
and z directions was built with a grid spacing of 0.375 Å and a distancedependent
function of the dielectric constant were used for the calculation of
the energetic map. The default settings were used for all other parameters. At
the end of docking, the best poses were analyzed for hydrogen bonding/π-π
interactions and root mean square deviation (RMSD) calculations using
Discovery Studio Visualizer 2.5 (Accelrys Software Inc.) and Pymol (The
PyMOL Molecular Graphics System) programs. From the estimated free
energy of ligand binding (ΔGbinding, kcal/mol), the inhibition constant (Ki) for
each ligand was calculated Table 1 (see ).

Results and Discussion
Validation of the docking protocol
To evaluate the accuracy of AutoDock 4.2 as an appropriate docking tool for
the present purpose, the co-crystallized ligand (ZM241385) was redocked
within the inhibitor binding cavity of human AA2AR, and the docked position
was compared to the crystal structure position by calculating RMSD values
(0.88 Å, ). 
In general, RMSD values smaller than 2.0 Å indicate that
the docking protocol is capable of accurately predicting the binding orientation
of the co-crystallized ligand []. In this study, RMSD values were within 2.0
Å, indicating our docking methods are valid for the given structures and
AutoDock 4.2, therefore deemed reliable for docking of naphtha [1, 2-
d]thiazolyl urea/thiourea derivatives into the inhibitor binding cavity of AA2AR.

Correlation between docking scores and antiparkinsonian activity
The results signify that the molecular docking approach is reliable and
produces a good correlation coefficient (r2 = 0.483) between docking score and
antiparkinsonian activity (in terms of % reduction in catalepsy score). Removal
of 4 compounds (compounds 17, 26, 28 and 30) identified as outliers from the
docking dataset and yield a better model with correlation coefficient (r2) of
0.646 with 26 compounds (). Outliers in the molecular docking studies
are anticipated because, docking calculations simulate the interaction between a
compound and a protein's active site and the results are comparable to those of
biochemical assays/animal experiments; however, it does not take into account,
the bioavailability, toxicity, and other factors present in the body.

Binding interactions of 1-(substituted phenyl)-3-(naphtha [1, 2-d] thiazol-
2-yl) urea/thiourea derivatives with human AA2AR
All of the naphtha [1, 2-d] thiazolyl urea/thiourea derivatives were docked into
the active site of AA2AR (PDB code: 3EML) to study the possible mode of their
interaction. Docking of these compounds into inhibitor binding cavity of
AA2AR confirms that these compounds dock in a similar binding modus like
native co-crystallized ligand, ZM-241385 (). Inhibitor binding cavity
of AA2AR is outlined by residues Ile-66, Ala-81, Leu-85, Phe-168, Glu-169,
Met-177, Trp-246, Leu-249, His-250, Asn-253, His-264, Leu-267, Met-270,
Tyr-271, Ser-277 and His-278. Analysis of the receptor/ligand complex models
generated after successful docking of the urea and thiourea derivatives was
based on parameters such as: 1) Hydrogen bond interactions; 2) π-π
stacking/hydrophobic interactions; 3) binding energy; 4) RMSD of active site
residues; 5) Orientation of the docked compound within the active site. The
bicyclic triazolotriazine core of ZM241385, native co-crystallized AA2AR
antagonist, is anchored by an aromatic stacking interaction with Phe-168 
[],
an aliphatic hydrophobic interaction with Ile 274 
[] and a hydrogen bonding
interaction with Asn 253 []. 
Likewise, the tricyclic naphthothiazole ring was
found to interact with aromatic ring of Phe-168 by π-π stacking interactions and
compound 22 participated in hydrogen bonding with Asn 253. Adjacent to Phe-
168, a polar residue Glu-169 donates a hydrogen bond to oxygen atom of
methoxy group substituted in phenyl ring of compounds 4, 6, 16, 21 and 22.
Similarly, exocyclic amino group (N-15 atom) of ZM241385 also participates
in hydrogen bonding with Glu-169 [,
]. As a general rule, in most of the
potent and fair antiparkinsonian compounds, both hydrogen bond and π-π
stacking/hydrophobic interactions between the compound and the active site
residues of the receptor have been found to be responsible for mediating the
biological activity. In addition to be involved in π-π stacking/hydrophobic
interactions with most docked compounds, Phe-168 contributes to H-bond
interactions in compounds 5, 6, 9, 10, 18 and 29. Very potent antiparkinsonian
agents (compounds 4, 5, 6, 7, 21 and 22) carried methoxy group in the phenyl
ring and interacted with Phe-168, Glu-169 and His-278 residues for H-bonding.
However, replacement of methoxy group with phenoxy group (compound 8)
lost H-bond that resulted in decreased antiparkinsonian activity. Generally,
compounds substituted with methyl group or halogen in the aromatic ring of
urea or thiourea derivatives (compounds 3, 8, 9, 10, 15, 16, 19, 20, 23 24, 25,
26, 27, 31 and 32) demonstrated poor binding energies as well as both
hydrophilic and lipophilic interactions. These compounds were also noted to be
poor antiparkinsonian agents.

Conclusion
Molecular docking studies of 1-(substituted phenyl)-3-(naphtha[1,2-d]thiazol-
2-yl)urea/thiourea derivatives with AA2AR exhibited very good binding
interactions and warrants further studies to confirm their binding with human
AA2AR for the design and development of potent antagonists as novel
antiparkinsonian agents. These results clearly indicate that before synthesis and
biochemical testing of new analogs, one can use molecular docking studies for
assessment of relative binding affinities with AA2AR for most promising drug
candidates.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Azam et al, Bioinformation 6(9): 330-334 (2011)

The native co-crystallized ligand ZM241385 docked with the active
site of AA2AR.

Docked conformation of compound 22 shown as ball and stick in
grey color. The residues of binding pocket are shown as stick in cyan color.
Dashed lines in green indicate H-bonds and π-π stacking interactions are shown
in orange. Bond distances are given in Å.

A correlation for docking predicted activity and experimental
antiparkinsonian activity.

