Background
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) is a global most
serious pandemic public health challenges 
[]. The study of
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in humans and animal
models in last 31 years suggested that it is a causative agent of
AIDS [–]. The HIV-1 reverse transcriptase (RT) had played a
critical role in the life cycle of HIV and it was, consequently, an
interesting target for anti- HIV drug therapy 
[]. The inhibition
of HIV-1 RT is one of the major and potential targets in the
treatment of AIDS [–]. There was a large number of drugs
elicit anti-HIV-1 activity by inhibiting RT which are available in
the market [,
]. The natural compounds and their
derivatives are rich source of biologically active
pharmacophores. They have been used as lead molecules for
treatment of HIV as well as other vital diseases e.g. fungal and
bacterial infections, parasitic diseases, Cancer and cardiovascular
disease (CVD), Huntington's disease (HD), Alzheimer's and
Parkinson's diseases [–]. The further modifications in natural
compounds (lead molecules for HIV treatment) might improve
their anti-HIV ability [–]. There are two classes of HIV-1 RT
inhibitors: non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors,
NNRTIs [–] and nucleoside/nucleotide reverse
transcriptase inhibitors, NRTIs [–]. The NNRTIs are
chemically diverse group of therapeutic compounds. The
NNRTIs bind noncompetitively with active site residues
(unique allosteric hydrophobic binding pocket) on the enzyme
leading to a conformational change. The conformational change
in the structure of enzyme results in decreased affinity for the
substrate [,
]. The NNRTIs are highly potent, selective, and
specific with very low cellular toxicity []. It was suggested
that NNRTIs could not interfere with normal function of host
DNA polymerase. The factual advantages of NNRTIs were
departed due to fractious resistance displayed by most of the
approved NNRTIs. The emergence of drug resistance mutations
among the different therapies, NNRTIs become less effective.
To overcome this problem, novel NNRTIs were searched by
modifying the existing drug classes with appropriate
pharmacophores.

Computational methods are the successful tools in the area of
drug designing. The computational tools are simple and nonexpensive
which speed up the process of designing novel and
potent therapeutic molecules with desired biological activity.
Docking is one of the commonly used computational methods
for structure based drug designing []. Docking consisted of
two distinct tasks, firstly it involved in the prediction of
bonding geometries for small therapeutic molecules and
encouraged them to bind with bonding site on target
protein/receptor and secondly, it involved in the estimation of
bonding free energy available for newly formed
compound/complex. Docking accuracy reflected an algorithm’s
ability to ascertain a conformation change and alignment of a
ligand relative to protein and to identify the pose exactly 
[].
The ability of a scoring method predicted accurately the binding
affinity of ligands with a target protein 
[]. It gives an idea of
how ligands bind with receptors and how much conformational
changes could be brought into the receptor structure. Therefore,
the quantitative structure activity relationship (QSAR) studies
provided rational inputs for molecular modifications in drug
designing research and discovery [,
]. The objectives of the
study are to explore the active site (binding mode), binding
energy and interactions with RT proteins (HIV drug targets).
The study has been carried out on the derivatives of 4-
thiazolidinone and determined the influence of steric,
electrostatic, and hydrophobic fields effect on HIV-1 inhibitory
activity.

Methodology
Protein selection and preparation:
The PDB structure of unliganded HIV-1 RT (PDB ID=1DLO) at
2.7 Å resolution [] was retrieved from the Research
Collaboratory for Structural Bioinformatics (RCSB) Protein Data
Bank (PDB) (RCSB, www.rcsb.org/). The protein preparation
was the first step for molecular docking. The removal of water
molecules, metal ions, cofactors, and addition of charges and
hydrogen atoms was done in this step using SPDBV
(http://spdbv.vital-it.ch/).

Binding Site Prediction:
Binding sites were characterized by CASTp [,
], PASS 
[],
Q-Site finder [,
] and compared by extensive literature
search. By comparing prediction of CASTp algorithm, PASS
and Q-Site Finder, best active sites were selected. CASTp
method was used to identify and measure the binding sites,
active sites, surface structural pockets (accessible), interior
cavities (inaccessible), shape (alpha complex and triangulation),
area and volume (solvent and molecular accessible surface) of
each pockets and cavities of proteins. CASTp could be used to
measure the number, area, circumference of mouth openings of
each pocket in solvent and molecular accessible surface 
[,
].
PASS (Putative Active Sites with Spheres) method was used to
identify and measure the obscured volume of proteins and to
predict the positions of binding sites on proteins based on the
size, shape and burial amount of proteins []. A method, Q-site
finder, was used to predict the ligand binding site on a protein.
It involves the binding of hydrophobic probes to proteins,
searching probe clusters on the protein with favourable binding
energy and arranged them in a order according to the binding
energy of each cluster []. Pocket finder method was used to
detect pockets on the surface of the proteins. The method is
based on Ligsite algorithm which scans the probe radius (1.6Å)
with a grid resolution 0.9 Å, cubic diagonals and ligands along
the proteins [].

Ligand selection and preparation:
500 derivatives of 4-thiazolidinones were taken as ligand on the
basis of structure similarity and functionality as a
pharmacophore. These were screened and retrieved from
ChemBank (http://chembank.broadinstitute.org/). The
structures were drawn by Chemsketch
(http://www.acdlabs.com/resources/freeware/chemsketch/)
and converted to PDB file by Openbabel software
(www.openbabel.org/). Ligand preparation includes addition
of hydrogen atoms, neutralization of the charge groups and
removal of any miscellaneous structures from the ligand.
Prepared and optimized structures of ligand and protein were
ultimately used for molecular docking.

Molecular Docking:
The docking of unliganded HIV-1 RT was performed against
500 derivatives of 4-thiazolidinones, retrieved from Chembank
database by using Autodock4
(http://autodock.scripps.edu/wiki/AutoDock4). The Python
scripts in MGL tools package were used to analyze the docking
results. The molecular structures of a protein or substrate could
be visualized and analyzed by MGL Tools software 
[]. Auto
Dock Tools are part of this software which used to predict the
smallness of molecule to bind with a known 3D receptor
structure of protein. Python Molecular Viewer (PMV) was used
to observe a molecule surface at advanced level or 3D structure.
PMV has a customizable feature with many command buttons
to display the molecular surface. A visual programme called,
Vision, could be used to narrate different combinations of
computed data and could be predicted a new visualization
based on computed data.

Receptor grid generation and molecular docking:
After preparation and optimization of the protein, the grid was
generated (6.5Å) on the protein for ligand docking. The
structure of HIV-1 RT was a dimer consists of ‘A’ and ‘B’ chain.
The catalytic sites for the derivatives of 4-thiazolidinones were
present on ‘A’ chain. Hence, grid was generated on ‘A’ chain of
HIV-1 RT. Prepared ligands were docked within the grid
region. Docking was performed with the help of Autodock4 
[,
]. 
Possible favorable interactions (of minimum binding
energy and hydrogen bonding) with amino acids at possible
target sites were determined by Lamarckian genetic algorithm
(LGA) and Genetic Algorithm []. Docking was repeatedly
performed thrice, with all softwares.

Analyzing the Docking Results:
The search for the best ways is to fit ligand molecules
(derivatives of 4-thiazolidinones), into HIV1- RT structure,
using Autodock4 resulted in docking files that contained
detailed records of docking. The obtained log files were read in
ADT (Auto Dock Tool) to analyze the results of docking. The
similarity of docked structures was measured by computing the
root mean square deviation (RMSD) between the coordinates of
the atoms and creating clustering of the conformations based on
the RMSD values. The lowest binding energy conformation in
all cluster were considered as the most favorable docking pose.
Binding energies that are reported represent the sum of the total
intermolecular energy, total internal energy and torsional free
energy minus the energy of the unbound system. The top seven
ligands were selected based on the energy score after virtual
screening  (see supplementary material).

Discussion
Active Site Identification:
After getting the PDB (1DLO) structure from RCSB
(http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/home/home.do) the possible
binding sites of structure were searched using the CASTp
server, PASS programme and Q-site finder also confirmed by
extensive literature search. Nine possible binding sites were
obtained  (see supplementary material). These sites
were compared with active site of HIV-1 RT and it was found
that molecules CID 3087795 and 1656714 were highly
interacting with HIV-1 RT.

Virtual screening:
Earlier studies revealed that more than 30 different classes of
NNRTIs have some universal features i.e. the overall structure
may be considered evocative of a butterfly with hydrophilic
centre and two hydrophobic environs 
[–]. The active
conformation and virtual screening and the molecular
alignment of each derivative of 4-thiazolidinone are done using
docking programme, Autodock4 into HIV-1 RT binding pocket.
The molecular alignment is done according to the electrostatic
and structural properties of the active site of RT. The calculated
binding energies, based on the docked structures, agree well
with the experimentally observed inhibitory activities. Binding
energy calculated from programs like AutoDock, and Dock
program etc is reliable. Further, the steric, electrostatic and
hydrophobic fields were mapped onto the active binding pocket
of HIV-1 RT to better understand these interactions. Prediction
of interactions between small molecules and proteins is a crucial
step to decipher many biological processes and plays a critical
role in drug discovery. The top seven ligand molecules having
minimum energy were screened out as the possible inhibitors
for HIV-1 RT  (see supplementary material). All
selected molecules having low energy score were selected and
ranked. The first rank derivative (CID 3087795) was interacting
with active site residues having minimum energy score as
follows: -8.69Kcal/Mol with VAL106, -7.60Kcal/Mol with
ASP185 and ASP186, -7.39Kcal/Mol with MET184, -
7.13Kcal/Mol with TYR181 and -6.34 Kcal/Mol with ASP 110.
The second rank derivative (CID 1442532) has energy score -
7.99Kcal/Mol with MET148, third rank derivative (CID
1187346) has energy score -7.60Kcal/Mol with ASP185, fourth
rank derivative (CID 206166) has energy score -7.43Kcal/Mol
while fifth rank derivative (CID 1656714) have interactions with
ASP185 (-7.34Kcal/Mol), ASP186 (-7.32Kcal/Mol), VAL106 (-
7.30Kcal/Mol), MET184 (-7.24Kcal/Mol), TYR181 (-
6.88Kcal/Mol) and ASP110 (-6.34Kcal/Mol).

With the help of the Ligplot study we have selected CID
3087795 as the possible inhibitor lead molecule, as it has
minimum energy score and one of the highest number of
interactions with the active site residue, it has 05 hydrophobic
and 2 hydrogen bond interactions. (),
represent interactions of the top four ligands drawn by ligplot
according to the energy score. The energy score of the ligands is
independent of their molecular weight and log P value. The
energy score calculated for all selected ligands molecules; log P
value and molecular weight  (see supplementary
material). It was found the inhibitor CID 3087795 has minimum
energy score which reveals higher binding affinity towards the
HIV-1 RT and it was also showing one of the best interactions
with the active site residues (). The other
important drug like properties viz. molecular weight and logP
value were also found within the limits. When detailed 3D
structure of the protein target is available, protein-ligand
complexes are obtained with binding affinity and interactions
using computational methodology. For the wet laboratory
validation of present study, cell lines of HIV-1 RT infected can
be maintained and the molecule CID 3087795 can be procured
from the ChemBank database. The inhibition of HIV-1 RT
activity by (5E) - 3- (2- aminoethyl) - 5- (2- thienylmethylene) - 1,
3- thiazolidine- 2, 4- dione (CID 3087795) can be established by
the qualitative and quantities microbiological techniques. Thus,
the derivative molecule (CID 3087795) of 4-thiazolidinones will
be helpful in enzymatic studies as well as design of specific
inhibitors.

Conclusion
Our approach of molecular docking analysis resulted in the
identification of potential drug molecules. Hence, in present
study, it can be concluded that the molecule 5E - 3- (2-
aminoethyl) - 5- (2- thienylmethylene) - 1,3- thiazolidine- 2,4-
dione (CID 3087795) has the potential to inhibit the activity of
HIV-1 RT and can act as remedy for the treatment of HIV
infection. The interaction of molecule with HIV1-RT is similar to
the interactions of nevirapine, efavirenz, dihydroxy benzoyl
naphthyl hydrazone and delavirdine, some well known drugs
in HIV treatment. However, as most of these drugs exhibit
considerable side effects it merits search for new drugs. 4-
thiazolidinone does not only show interactions with identified
active residues that are important for catalytic activity of HIV1-
RT but the free energy of binding also ensures that 4-
thiazolidinone shows a very strong binding with HIV1-RT at
polymerase active site.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors are thankful to Department of Biotechnology,
Madhav Institute of Technology and Science, Gwalior, for
providing computational facility and support.

Citation:Seniya et al, Bioinformation 8(14): 678-683 (2012)

Ligplot showing the protein-ligand interactions of top four ligands, based on energy score (hydrogen bonding and
hydrophobic), generated by Ligplot program. (A) CID 3087795, (B) CID 1656714, (C) CID 2062983 and (D) CID 1642811

Top four docked molecules showing the protein-ligand interactions, based on energy score (hydrogen bonding and
hydrophobic), generated by Chimera. (A) CID 3087795; (B) CID 1442532; (C) CID 1187346 and (D) CID 2061166

