Background
The first case of HIV infection and AIDS was documented in India in
1986, within five years of the first description of AIDS in North
America. The progress of the HIV epidemic was relatively slow,
initially. Over the years, the number of HIV infected persons increased
and it is a major public health problem now. The estimated number of
HIV-1 infected individuals in India was 2.5 million in 2008, which
placed India at third place behind South Africa and Nigeria [].

HIV-1 Genetic Diversity in India
The expanding nature of the HIV-1 epidemic and introduction of
Circulating Recombinant Forms (CRFs) and Unique Recombinant
Forms (URFs) along with subtypes in addition to the predominant
Subtype C, poses a serious clinical and public health concern in India
from the very beginning of this pandemic. The genetic analysis of
HIV-1 from different parts of India reveals Subtype C strains as a
predominant. However, the introduction of other subtypes in high risk
group HIV-1 infected patients, primarily female commercial sex
workers (CSWs) and intravenous drug users (IDUs), created
challenges for therapy and vaccine development programs. A
diversified HIV-1 pandemic has been found in different regions of
India. The South Indian epidemic is mostly conserved in nature;
although, there is the co-existence of Subtypes C, B and CRF08_BC.
A group lead by Dr. Udaykumar Ranga at Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for
Advance Scientific Research, also found novel B/C recombinant
viruses in these populations that are not represented elsewhere.

The most diverse pattern was observed in the North and North-eastern
regions of India. Work in the North East by Dr. Sekhar Chakrabarti
and his colleagues at the National Institute of Cholera and Enteric
Disease, Kolkata and National AIDS Research Institute (NARI), Pune,
lead by Dr. Ramesh Paranjape, revealed the presence of Subtype C,
Thai B, B and novel B/C recombinants of different ancestral origins in
CSWs and IDUs. The reports from Maharastra, a south-western state
also found diverse patterns. The highest divergent strains were found
in Northern region from the initial stage of its characterizations.
Reports from Dr. Shahid Jameel at International Centre for Genetic
Engineering and Biology, Dr. Pradeep Seth at All India Institute of
Medical Science, and their co-workers found different subtypes
including C, A, B, and E in North India. Recently Dr. Akhil Banerjea
and his group at the National Institute of Immunology have reported
intra- and inter-B/C recombinants with similarity to corresponding
strains in China. According to several Indian researchers, the
prevalence of other predominant HIV-1 subtypes in neighboring
countries primarily including Pakistan, China, Thailand and Myanmar,
plausibly play important determinative factors in HIV-1
epidemiology in India [,]. Co-circulation of different subtypes in
high risk populations mainly among CSWs and IDUs opens a wide
array of chances of generation of intra- and inter-recombinant strains
in India. Recombinant strains already pose serious global health
problems in countries such as China and on the African continent.

Vaccine research
At the risk of losing the battle to control AIDS with slogans,
condoms, foreign grants from World Bank, National Institute of
Health, USA (check numbers of grants on http://crisp.cit.nih.gov/),
and Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation (BMGF) , the Indian
government in 1998 launched a program to develop a vaccine against
the disease []. In India, the first vaccine trial was initiated at NARI
Pune, in 2005 and was completed in January 2007. This was a Phase I
study of the Adeno-Associated Virus (AAV) based HIV-1 subtype C
vaccine tgAAC09. It is a non-pathogenic virus often found in people
infected with adenoviruses, genetically modified with three HIV-1
subtype C Gag, Protease and part of the reverse transcriptase gene.
The second phase I trial was recently completed at the Tuberculosis
Research Center (TRC) with TBC-M4; a modified Vaccinia Ankara
(MVA) based vaccine. The International AIDS Vaccine Initiative
(IAVI) and biotechnology firm Therion Biologics Corporation
(Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA) with the assistance of Dr. Sekhar
Chakrabarty, an Indian Scientist from the NICED, Kolkata, designed
the candidate and manufactured doses of this vaccine for initial
clinical trials. This ’modified vaccinia Ankara (MVA) vaccine‘ is a
genetic modified vaccinia Ankara, a harmless version of pox virus,
incorporated with genetic material from six HIV genes (env, pol, gag,
rev, nef and tat) from an Indian isolate of subtype C []. 62 people
have been enrolled in these trials and the vaccines have been found to
be safe and well tolerated. Expanding on the results and success of the
previous trials in India, a new Phase I trial is being considered in both
NARI and TRC [].

Challenges and Possible Solutions
The genetic hypervariability of HIV-1, persistence of latent integrated
proviral DNA, differential transmission route, limited utility and
relevance of animal models, time consuming and costly clinical trials
among motivated volunteer participants, poses unprecedented
scientific and organizational challenges to develop vaccine and
therapeutic success against this disease. As the transmission routes of
several HIV-1 strains have been traced among several neighboring
countries, an active scientific coordination is needed between these
countries in order to identify the risk groups and geographic locales
where new CRFs or multidrug-resistant HIV-1 strains occur and may
emerge further []. National level vigorous research on HIV-1 genetics
in effective collaboration with clinical and basic science researchers is
essential for successful and effective therapeutics for all patients
suffering from this world's deadly disease.

I would like to thank my “Scientific Guru”, Dr. Akhil C Banerjea, for
giving me opportunity to work under his guidance. And I would also
like to thank Dr. Anura V Kurpad; Dean, Dr. Anita Seth; Associate
Professor, St. John's Research Institute and Dr. Ayesha de Costa,
Karolinska Institute, Sweden for offering me SRF for HIVIND project.

Citation:Neogi, Bioinformation 4(3): 90-91 (2009)

