Background
ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters have been reported to
act as efflux pumps at cellular membranes to transport
molecules against concentration gradients, and consequently
decrease intracellular concentrations of compounds that are
structurally and/or functionally unrelated to the cells. They are
endogenously present in cells, involved in absorption and
elimination of compounds, and also affect the disposition of the
compounds processed by cells. The transport of endogenous
molecules is likely the primary function of ABC transporters,
but they also transport drugs across cell membranes due to
structural similarities between exogenous (foreign) and
endogenous substances. Further, because of their wide presence
in tissues such as the bile canaliculi of hepatocytes, the apical
membranes of enterocytes and various blood-tissue barriers,
ABC transporters play important roles in drug distribution as
well. They also serve protective roles in many normal tissues of
principal organs such as brain, liver, kidney and intestine,
through the ATP-dependent efflux of xenobiotics and toxins.
Taken together, ABC transporters play significant roles in
absorption, elimination and disposition of compounds
including drugs [].

ABC transporters are not only endogenously expressed in
normal cells but also often overexpressed in tumor cells. As a
consequence, they export antitumor drugs actively from the
tumor cells, decrease these drugs below therapeutic thresholds
and confer multidrug resistance (MDR) on the tumor cells.
MDR is the phenomenon of resistance to many structurally
unrelated cytotoxic agents, and is considered one of the major
problems that need to be overcome in tumor chemotherapy 
[].
At the surface of the cell membranes, MDR tumor cells
overexpress efflux proteins (ABC transporters) such as Pglycoprotein
(P-gp). The P-gp-mediated efflux of compounds is
one of the well-studied mechanisms underlying MDR.

The size of P-gp has been reported to be 170 kDa, and it is
encoded by the MDR1 gene in the ABC superfamily. P-gp is
expressed endogenously in normal tissues of major organs such
as brain, lung, kidney, liver and colon [], which suggests that
P-gp may have some specific physiological roles associated
with specialized cell functions in different organs. P-gp is
mainly distributed in the epithelia of excretory organs, and its
ability to transport a wide range of lipophilic substrates
indicates that P-gp functions in the detoxification process in the
body. In tumor cells, P-gp is often overexpressed and acts as an
ATP-dependent efflux pump to transfer a wide variety of
compounds including xenobiotics, carcinogens and
chemotherapeutic agents from cells. As a consequence, it
decreases the intracellular concentrations of antitumor drugs,
and the overexpression of P-gp has been positively correlated
with poor prognosis in cancers. The antitumor drugs that have
been identified as substrates of P-gp are anthracyclines, vinca
alkaloids, epipodophyllotoxins and taxanes [].

P-gp has also been investigated for their interactions with
isothiocyanates (ITCs), and it was demonstrated that certain
ITCs were inhibitors of P-gp []. We have been focusing our
attention on ITCs as multifunctional agents for the prevention
and treatment of cancer. Recently, we found that a naturally
occurring ITC from wasabi (Wasabia japonica), a Japanese
indigenous herb, and demonstrated significant growth
inhibitory activity toward a macrophage-like tumor cell line 
[].
These reports suggest that targeting P-gp with inhibitors from
natural origin could be utilized for controlling the development
and progression of cancer. P-gp consists of 12 transmembrane
domains and 2 nucleotide binding folds with ATPase activity,
and its biological functions are accompanied with its unique
structural changes []. Thus, structural analysis of P-gp with its
possible inhibitory ligands could be of importance for
successful antitumor drug development. However, no human
P-gp (hP-gp) structural model with naturally occurring
inhibitors is available to the best of our knowledge, although a
crystal structure of mouse P-pg (mP-gp) has been reported 
[].
Molecular modeling has found widespread utility in the field of
drug development [,
], and in the present study we will
report the homology modeling and structural analysis of hP-gp
by a highly sophisticated software package, the Molecular
Operating Environment (MOE) 2010.10 (Chemical Computing
Group Inc., Montreal, Canada).

Methodology
Homology modeling of hP-gp:
Homology modeling of hP-gp was executed as previously
reported []. In brief, the hP-gp (NCBI reference sequence:
NP_000918.2) sequences and the crystal structure coordinates of
mP-gp [] were loaded into the MOE. The primary structures of
hP-gp and mP-gp were aligned, carefully checked to avoid
deletions or insertions in conserved regions and corrected
wherever necessary. A series of hP-gp models were
independently constructed with the MOE using a Boltzmannweighted
randomized procedure [] combined with
specialized logic for the handling of sequence insertions and
deletions []. The models with the best packing quality
function were selected for full energy minimization and further
inspection.

Assessment of the Modeled Structure:
The qualities of the protein folds of the hP-gp homology model
were evaluated with the MOE by calculating the effective
atomic contact energies, comprising the desolvation free
energies required to transfer atoms from water to the interior of
the protein []. Briefly, the contact desolvation energies were
calculated for 18 different atom types of the 20 common amino
acids that were resolved based on the clustering pattern of their
properties. The contact potentials for each atom type were
measured within a contact range of 6 Å by explicitly accounting
for neighboring interactions. The overall geometric and
stereochemical qualities of the final modeled structure of hP-gp
were examined using Ramachandran plots generated within the
MOE [].

Binding Site Selection and Exploration:
The binding site selection and exploration for hP-gp was
executed as previously reported []. In brief, the Site Finder
module of the MOE was used to identify possible ligandbinding
pockets within the newly generated 3D structures of
hP-gp. Hydrophobic or hydrophilic alpha spheres served as
probes denoting zones of tight atom packing. These alpha
spheres were utilized to define potential ligand-binding sites
(LBSs) and as centroids for the creation of dummy ligand atoms
[,
]. The dummy atoms were matched to the corresponding
alpha spheres during the characterization of the LBSs in hP-gp.
This method generates bound conformations that approach
crystallographic resolutions [].

Alpha Sphere and Excluded Volume-Based Ligand-Protein Docking (ASE-Dock):
The docking and analysis of the ligand-protein interaction
between 6-(methylsulfinyl)hexyl isothiocyanate (6-MITC) or
cyclic-tris-(R)-valineselenazole (QZ59-RRR) and hP-gp were
also performed with ASE-Dock in the MOE []. In the ASEDock
module, ligand atoms have alpha spheres within 1 Å.
Based on this property, concave models are created and ligand
atoms from a large number of conformations generated by
superimposition with these points can be evaluated and scored
by maximum overlap with alpha spheres and minimum
overlap with the receptor atoms. The scoring function used by
ASE-Dock is based on ligand-protein interaction energies and
the score is expressed as a Utotal value. The ligand
conformations were subjected to energy minimization using the
MMF94S force field []. From the resulting 500,000 poses, the
200 poses with the lowest Utotal values were selected for further
optimization with the MMF94S force field. During the
refinement step, the ligand was free to move within the binding
pocket.

Results
Homology modeling of the hP-gp Structure:
The sequence alignment of P-gp is shown in (). The
alignment revealed that the critical active site residues Gln721
(Gln725 for hP-gp), Gln986 (Gln990 for hP-gp) and Ser989 (Ser993 for
hP-gp) [] at the drug biding site (DBS) were conserved in mPgp
and hP-gp. mP-gp (PDB code: 3G5U) was selected as a
template () for the present 3D structure modeling of
hP-gp because of its sufficient crystal structure resolution (3.8
Å) and it was the only available structure of a mammalian P-gp
with a relatively new information (from 2009) []. The %
sequence identity between mP-gp and hP-gp was 88.2%. For the
construction of the hP-gp model, 100 independent models of the
target protein were built using a Boltzmann-weighted
randomized modeling procedure in the MOE that was adapted
from reports by Levitt [] and Fechteler et al. 
[]. The
intermediate models were evaluated by a residue packing
quality function, which is sensitive to the degrees to which nonpolar
side-chain groups are buried and hydrogen bonding
opportunities are satisfied. The hP-gp model with the best
packing quality function and full energy minimization was
utilized in the present study ().

Analysis of the Contact Energies for the hP-gp Model:
The effective atomic contact energies were calculated using the
MOE for heavy atoms of standard amino acids within a contact
range of 6 Å, assigning energy terms in kcal/mol for each
contact pair []. These energies were summed for each residue,
and in general, a large negative value indicated that the residue
was predominantly in contact with hydrophobic atoms and
therefore expected to be in a buried protein environment.
Conversely, residues with positive energy terms indicated
contacts with predominantly hydrophilic atoms, and were
expected to be in more solvent-exposed regions of the proteins.
The contact energy profiles of the homology-modeled hP-gp
 (see supplementary material) was compared with
that of the X-ray structure of mP-gp  (see
supplementary material). Although 1 out of 3 residues at the
critical active site had differently charged contact energies,
namely Gln986 (mP-gp; -1.35 kcal/mol) and Gln990 (hP-gp; 0.17
kcal/mol), the other residues had similarly charged contact
energies, such as Gln721 (mP-gp; -3.13 kcal/mol) and Gln725 (hPgp;
-0.81 kcal/mol), and the trends of the variation in the
contact energy in most parts of the hP-gp model were in good
agreement with those of the X-ray structure of mP-gp.

Evaluation of the Stereochemical Qualities of the hP-gp Model:
The phi and psi backbone dihedral angles for hP-gp were
scored using 2D probability distributions calculated on a highresolution
collection of X-ray structures containing
approximately 100,000 residues from 500 protein structures
[]. Each probability distribution was estimated with 2-degree
spacing for each of the phi and psi backbone dihedral angles
with separate histograms for pre-proline, proline, glycine and
general amino acids. The stereochemical qualities of the hP-gp
model were assessed by Ramachandran plots  (see
supplementary material). 83.0% of the residues were in the
favored region, 13.5% were in the allowed region and only 3.5%
were in the disfavored region. These results indicate that the
phi and psi backbone dihedral angles in the hP-gp model are
reasonably accurate.

Structural Comparisons of the P-gp Models:
Root mean square deviation (RMSD) values between the main
chain atoms of the mP-gp (3G5U) vs hP-gp after main chain fit
were 1.3 Å  (see supplementary material). RMSD
values for each residue were also analyzed. The RMSD values
for the residues located in the DBS were about 2 Å or less. A
superimposition of the template mP-gp (green) and hP-gp
(magenta) models revealed that the P-gp models exhibited
significant 3D similarities  (see supplementary
material). They also presented similar structures at their DBSs
 (see supplementary material).

Docking Simulations of an ITC to P-gp:
It has been reported that P-gp interacts with ITCs and that
certain ITCs are inhibitors of P-gp []. We recently found that 6-
MITC, an ITC from a Japanese indigenous herb wasabi,
demonstrated significant growth inhibitory activity toward a
macrophage-like tumor cell line [], suggesting that 6-MITC can
be utilized for the antitumor drug development. However, the
precise mode of 6-MITC binding is unknown. The ASE-Dock
[] was performed to evaluate the present docking simulation
and showed that 6-MITC bound at the DBS in the mP-gp 
 (see supplementary material) and hP-gp 
 (see
supplementary material) models with the similar binding
location. The similarity of the bound location at the DBS
between the docked 6-MITC-mP-gp pose and the hP-gp model
suggests that the present methods are capable of generating the
6-MITC-hP-gp model similar to the reported near-native P-gp
complex. Further, a cyclic hexapeptide inhibitor, QZ59-RRR 
[]
was docked to the hP-gp model  (see supplementary
material). The bound location of QZ59-RRR in hP-gp was
similar to that of 6-MITC at the DBSs in the mP-gp and hP-gp
models, which further indicates the accuracy of the present
docking simulation.

Conclusion
Examination of the hP-gp structures provides considerable
insight into the drug transport mechanism of the protein and
suggests approaches by which P-gp inhibitors with greater
selectivity may be attainable. Further, detailed analysis of the
ligand-protein interaction is of great significance in designing in
silico hP-gp-inhibiotor models for successful development of
antitumor drugs. The main objective in the present study was to
create a hP-gp model. Analyses of the structural properties of
the hP-gp and the docking simulations of the 6-MITC (or QZ59-
RRR)-hP-gp pose suggest that the present methods are capable
of generating the hP-gp model similar to the near-native mP-gp.
Consequently, it is proposed that the hP-gp in the present study
will be suitable for further in silico structure-based de novo drug
design. Furthermore, to the best of our knowledge, this is the
first report of a hP-gp model with a naturally occurring
isothiocyanate.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This study was partially supported by a grant-in-aid from the
Promotion and Mutual Aid Corporation for Private Schools of
Japan.

Citation:Yamaguchi et al, Bioinformation 8(22): 1066-1074 (2012)

Evaluation of the 2D structures of the hP-gp model. Homology-aligned sequences of mP-gp (PDB code: 3G5U; green) and
hP-gp (magenta). Red: α-helix. Blue: turn. Yellow: β-sheet.

The secondary structures of the hP-gp models (A) mPgp
(PDB code: 3G5U); (B) hP-gp.

