Background
The actinomycetes are a group of morphologically and
phylogenetically diverse gram-positive bacteria with high G+C
contents (&gt;55 mol %) in their DNA. This indicates marked
chemical and morphological diversity, with a distinct
evolutionary line. They are widely distributed in nature
occupying varied habitats including antarctic soil 
[], desert
regions [,
], hot springs 
[], highly saline areas 
[] and
moderately saline habitats [–].

Actinomycetes grow well in neutral to slightly alkaline media.
The optimal growth of actinomycetes in alkaline media was
described by Baldacci, 1944 and alkaliphilic actinomycetes were
first isolated from soil []. Study of such actinomycetes has
lead to the description of new taxa [] and the discovery of
alkaline proteases and new antibiotics []. Taxonomically,
alkaliphilic mycelial prokaryotes belong to the genera
Streptomyces and Nocardiopsis 
[–]. Halophilic
microorganisms can be grouped based on their requirements of
NaCl for growth []. Marginally halophilic organisms in
marine environments can grow in the presence of 2-3% NaCl,
while moderate halophiles are able to grow over a much wider
NaCl concentration range (5 to 20%, w/v). The extreme
halophiles, including the well-known halobacteria and
halococci, are able to grow in saturated NaCl and fail to grow in
NaCl lower than 12%. The occurrence of actinomycetes in high
saline environments and the tolerance of these organisms to
high concentrations of salts was earlier described by Tresener
[].

Bioinformatics based analysis and prediction has played pivotal
role in understanding and in-depth knowledge of biological
molecules with reference to proteomics and genomics.
Although, despite significant advancement, there have been
limited efforts on the compilation of relevant information for a
specific field of interest. With this realization, in the present
report, we focused on the wide spread data and information
related to the phylogeny and biocatalytic potential of salttolerant
alkaliphilic actinomycetes. The information and
detailed account on these specific actinomycetes are quite
limited and scattered in scientific journals and other reports.
Detailed information from the literature were retrieved,
systematically compiled and analyzed. This followed the
creation of a data base in the form of ‘Actinobase’ that reflect
the diversity and functional analysis of salt tolerant alkaliphilic
actinomycetes.

Methodology
Actinobase contains information regarding salt tolerant
alkaliphilic actinomycetes with respect to habitat, taxonomy,
genus, Gram reaction, biochemical tests, sugar utilization,
antibiotic resistance, phylogenetic relatedness, salt, pH,
temperature profile and 16S r RNA gene sequence analysis.
Back hand database of Actinobase was created in MS Excel and
front end in PHP. Hypertext Preprocessor provided easy web
access to database for data entry, retrieval and analysis. Data
was collected and extracted from original research publications
and public databases, i.e. NCBI, DDBJ and EMBL.

Data Input:
In Actinobase, we selected 40 salt-tolerant alkaliphilic
actinomycetes and integrated detailed information comprising
multiple fields: taxonomy, genus, site of isolation, habitat,
sample detail, Gram reaction, media characteristics, biochemical
properties, sugar utilization, antibiotic resistance, phylogeny,
salt, pH, temperature profile and 16S r RNA gene sequence.

Data Retrieval:
Actinobase is a freely accessed web database constructed using
PHP on windows platform. “Actinobase” is the database which
provides user friendly search criteria and easy access and
retrieval with secure administrator and users. PHP is an HTMLembedded
scripting language to dynamically generate pages.
PHP is a server side scripting language used on the internet to
create dynamic web pages. It's freely available, easy to learn
and can run on Windows and UNIX operating systems. It offers
effective security mechanisms and easy connectivity, which
makes it a popular choice for modular programming.

Discussion
Actinobase Creation:
The Actinobase database () was constructed primarily
in Excel 2007 as back hand and exported to PHP as front hand
with My SQL for the easy access and portability. The efforts
have added to the field of environmental biotechnology with
reference to salt tolerant alkaliphilic actinomycetes 
[, 
–].
Over the years, our group at the Saurashtra University, Rajkot
(India) has focused on the diversity, distribution, molecular
diversity, phylogeny and biocatalytic potential of salt tolerant
actinomycetes [–]. In view of the scientific literature and our
own contributions, we constructed a web driven database
system for salt tolerant alkaliphilic actinomycetes to highlight
their various aspects. This data base would be of helpful to
scientific community on these alkaliphilic actinomycetes.

‘Actinobase’ provides platform for the easy access and retrieval
of data from the database (). While,
Centraalbureau voor Schimmelcultures (CBS) Actinomycetes
database (Utrecht, The Netherlands) already exists, the one
described in the present report represents first attempt on the
creation of a specialized database for salt tolerant alkaliphilic
actinomycetes. The functionality to add and edit data to the
database through a user friendly web based portal facilitates
updating and maintenance of the database system. Information
required by the researchers for salt tolerant alkaliphilic
actinomycetes can be accessed and analyzed under a single
system.

The analysis of the genus wise status of the salt tolerant
alkaliphilic actinomycetes indicated the presence of 6 different
genuses among the 40 classified entries of salt tolerant
alkaliphilic actinomycetes. The results represented wide spread
occurrence of salt tolerant alkaliphilic actinomycetes from the
diverse taxonomic positions. The database contains the
collection of 16S rRNA and protein sequences of the reported
salt tolerant alkaliphilic actinomycetes. Multiple sequence
alignment analysis was carried our and phylograms created for
the available sequences of actinomycetes.

With reference to some actinomycetes, there was direct
correlation between the genus and the cluster, which related to
their geographical occurrence, protein sequences and
physiological requirement under hyper saline or saline
conditions. On the other hand, some members were not
organized in clusters. Few strains of different genera have
closer phylogenetic distances and the clustering reflected on
their geographical location, similarity in sequences as well as
requirement of salt and pH for growth. Thus, the patterns
suggested that halophilic and alkaliphilic nature was not
confined to a specific group of the actinomycetes. Adaptation to
hyper saline and hyper pH conditions can be acquired by wide
range of the actinomycetes from different taxonomic groups
[].

Overall, the work highlighted on the biocatalytic potential and
diversity of the salt tolerant actinomycetes with respect to
colony morphology, Gram reaction, antibiotic profile, sugar
utilization, media characterization and biochemical properties.
The outcome highlighted on the versatility of the organisms
with respect to these features. Additional properties, such as
extra cellular enzyme secretion, growth at different salt and pH
have added wider perspective to the study. The molecular
phylogeny based on 16S rRNA and protease gene sequences is
revealed in the data base. The information obtained on the halo
tolerant, alkali tolerant and alkaliphilic actinomycetes would
provide valuable platforms to research in this field.

We gratefully acknowledge the financial and other logistic
support from UGC, New Delhi and Saurashtra University,
Rajkot, India.

Citation:Sharma et al, Bioinformation 8(11): 535-538 (2012)

(A) Web home page of the ‘Actinobase’, where users can view data and contains the details clicking on the particular link
available on the home page; (B) the Snap Shot for the Data browsing of the ‘Actinobase’, which contains information related to the
names of the isolates, taxonomy, genus, sites of isolation and the habitats; (C) reflects Data browsing of the ‘Actinobase’ for the
individual organism which contains the detail information of the particular organism.

