Background
Diabetes mellitus is a metabolic disorder in which blood glucose 
levels are increased due to insulin deficiency or insulin 
resistance. Type 1 diabetes results from body's failure to 
produce insulin which leads to insulin deficiency. In type 2 
diabetes, cells in the body do not react to insulin (insulin 
resistance). One of the complications of diabetes is diabetic 
retinopathy which causes injury to tissue layer and eventually 
leads to vision loss.DR is clinically characterized by micro 
vascular dysfunction, with retinal vessels basement membrane 
thickening, loss of pericytes and endothelial cells, blood retinal 
barrier breakdown, capillary non perfusion, cotton wool spots 
formation and neo vascularisation []. Based on the methods 
like clustalw and phylogenetic tree construction several proteins 
involved in the pathogenesis of diabetic retinopathy are 
identified [,
,
] and shows that BDNF 
[], aldose reductase, 
nitric oxide synthase has role in diabetes and its complications 
[]. On scrutinizing we tend to take PKCβ and its role in 
diabetic retinopathy. In hypoglycemic conditions, DAG-PKC 
pathway plays a major role by which increase within the levels 
of DAG leads to PKC activation. DAG is derived from the 
hydrolysis of phosphatidylinositol 4-5 bisphosphate, by a 
membrane bound enzyme phospholipase C - (PLC) []. DAG–
PKC pathway can also be activated by hyperglycemia induced 
oxidants such as H2O2 which are known to activate PKC either 
directly or by increasing DAG production [,
]. In early stages 
increase in DAG may activate PKC and in advanced stages, 
when VEGF levels are elevated PKC plays an important role in 
modulation of VEGF action and as a stimulator of VEGF 
expression. PKC activation induced by hyperglycemia could 
alter the expression of various growth factors like VEGF that 
induces retinal vessel permeability. PKCβ activation affects 
VEGF expression through the mRNA-stabilizing human 
embryonic lethal abnormal vision (ELAV) protein, HuR , in the 
retina []. Previous work additionally explains that in order to 
test the linearity of the multiple sequences at a time for a 
number of proteins general regression model technique 
algorithm (GRMT1) can be used and high accuracy sequence 
clustering can also be done by using a clustering algorithm 
[]. 
Inhibition of PKCβ leads to prevention of glucose induced 
increase in VEGF expression [,
] (). Hence oral 
administration of PKCβ inhibitor LY333531 will forestall or 
reverse blood retinal barrier breakdown by inhibiting VEGF 
expression. Ruboxistaurin or LY333531 could be a competitive 
inhibitor that acts by interacting with the ATP binding site 
[,
] which shows selectivity towards PKC and hence found to be 
an important therapeutic agent for diabetic retinopathy.

Methodology
Preparation of proteins and ligands:
The three dimensional structure of Protein kinase C beta 
receptor of homosapiens was retrieved from the Protein 
Databank (PDB: Id 1A25). The list of compounds similar to 
potent PKCβ inhibitor Ruboxistaurin were obtained from Super 
Target Database. The 3D SDF format of ligand molecules were 
obtained from NCBI Pubchem. 

Ligand molecules:
Based on the Lipinski five rules, the ligand molecules which are 
similar to Ruboxistaurin were taken from Super Target 
Database. The ligand molecule which obeys Lipinski rule were 
taken and used for docking studies is 20.

Energy minimization:
Energy minimization studies were carried for both protein and 
ligand molecules by using SYBYL software by applying tripos 
force field, gasteiger- huckel charges were calculated.

Protein networking prediction:
The protein interaction network for PKCβ and VEGF was 
obtained from String 9.05 database [] 
().

Docking studies:
Molecular docking studies of protein and receptor was carried 
out by using software AUTODOCK 4 [], in which hydrogen's, 
kollman charges and gasteiger charges were added. Grid file 
was generated, and docking was performed by creating an
initial population of 150 individuals, Lamarckian genetic 
algorithm (LGA) was implemented with a maximum of 2500000 
energy evaluations and maximum number of generations was 
27000. This gives the best ten binding orientations of ligand 
molecules to its receptor.

Screening of lead molecule for its activity and drug likeliness properties:
The molecular properties of ligands like log P, number of 
hydrogen bonds, number of atoms, molecular weight were 
obtained using molinspiration program  (see 
supplementary material). This tool also provides number of 
violations which mean that there is a deviation from Lipinski 5 
rule. Those compounds having more than one violation were 
eliminated and remaining compounds were used for docking 
studies i.e., CHEMBL315357, CHEMBL91959, CHEMBL328229, 
CHEMBL321529, CHEMBL103055, CHEMBL421217, 
CHEMBL130774, CHEMBL336179, CHEMBL321315, 
CHEMBL105477.

Results &amp; Discussions
Interaction of ligands:
Docking results between PKCβ and maleimide derivative 3 
found to be good as it was giving lowest docking energy (-
9.36kcal/mol) than ruboxistaurin (-8.61kcal/mol)  (see 
supplementary material) ( &amp; 
). By analyzing 
the docked conformations, interaction of PKCβ―ruboxistaurin 
(reference ligand) showed formation of hydrogen bond between 
oxygen atom at Met256 of PKCβ and hydrogen at 51st position 
of ligand molecule  (see supplementary material). The 
non hydrogen bonds include interaction between Nitrogen at 
Met256―with oxygen at 2nd position and additionally with 
oxygen at 1st position; Nitrogen at Gly257―oxygen at 2nd 
position; Nitrogen at Phe255― nitrogen at 6th position. 
Interaction between PKCβ―maleimide derivative 3, showed 
non hydrogen bond interactions between Nitrogen at Met256 of 
PKCβ―nitrogen at 4th position and also with oxygen at 1st and 
2nd position of maleimide derivative 3; Nitrogen at Gly257 –
nitrogen at 4th. Binding energy value of Bisindolylmaleimide I 
from Autodock was found to be (-9.14kcal/mol). Interaction 
between PKCβ―Bisindolylmaleimide I, showed hydrogen bond 
between oxygen at Phe255 of PKC β and hydrogen at 45th 
position of ligand molecule. The non bonded interactions are 
between nitrogen at Gly257―oxygen at 2nd position; amine at
Arg159―oxygen at 1st position. The binding energy of 
CHEMBL316239 from Autodock was (-9.12kcal/mol).-
interaction between PKCβ CHEMBL316239, showed hydrogen 
bond formation between oxygen at Asn253―hydrogen at 57th 
position. The non bonded interactions between nitrogen at Phe 
255―oxygen at 3rd position; nitrogen at Met 256―oxygen at 1st 
position, oxygen at 3rd position and also with nitrogen at 7th 
position; nitrogen at Gly257―oxygen at 1st position. The 
binding energy value of CHEMBL311543 was (-8.88kcal/mol) 
Interaction between PKCβ- CHEMBL311543, showed non 
bonded interactions between amine at Arg159of PKCβ―
nitrogen at 7th position of ligand molecule.

Conclusion
Of all the molecules obtained from the database, maleimide 
derivative 3, showed highest binding affinity than 
Ruboxistaurin by forming bonded and non bonded interactions 
towards PKCβ. We therefore suggest that maleimide derivative 
3 is a potent inhibitor of PKCβ and may be useful in treatment 
of diabetic retinopathy. The potent inhibition can be discovered 
through in vivo and in vitro studies.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Gogula et al, Bioinformation 9(20): 1040-1043 (2013)

Role of PKCβ in Diabetic Retinopathy.

Protein interaction network obtained from string 
database

Docking conformations showing the interaction of 
Ruboxistaurin to PKCβ. Aminoacid residues showing bonded 
and non bonded interactions are represented in Black. Ligand 
molecules are shown in ball and stick representation.

Docking conformations showing the interaction of 
Maleimide derivative 3 to PKCβ. Aminoacid residues showing 
bonded and non bonded interactions are represented in Black. 
Ligand molecules are shown in ball and stick representation.

