Background
Wheat is one of the important staple crops of India. Wheat 
occupies more than 25 million hectares area in India with a production of 
about 94.9 million tones. India has now emerged as second wheat producer 
country the after China. Although there is quantum jump in the productivity 
of wheat yet it׳s adversely affected by several fungal diseases like brown, 
yellow and black rusts, leaf blight, loose smut and bunt. Karnal bunt or 
partial bunts, caused by Tilletia indica (Syn Neovossia indica) although 
occurs sporadically but assumes epidemic proportions in certain year which 
cause substantial losses in both quantity and quality of wheat. Peroxidase 
(POD, EC 1.11.1.7) is amonomeric heme-containing enzyme with a molecular mass 
between 32 and 45 kDa. Plant POD is heme-proteins that use H2O2 to oxidize 
a large variety of hydrogen donors such as phenolic substances, amines, 
ascorbic acid, indole, and certain inorganic ions []. These proteins are 
widespread in the plant kingdom and POD isoenzymes are known to occur in a 
variety of plant tissues. The pattern of expression of each isoform varies in 
the different tissues of healthy plants and is developmentally regulated and 
influenced by environmental factors []; however, the role of each isoform is 
not fully understood. Various experiments suggest the involvement of plant POD 
not only in biosynthetic processes related to wall development such as lignification 
[], suberization 
[], and polymerization of hydroxyproline-rich 
glycoproteins [], but also in the regulation of 
cell wall elongation [] and wound healing 
[]. Also, the POD are sometimes listed as 
the class of pathogenesis related proteins (PR proteins), increases upon viral, 
bacterial, or fungal infection and resistance against infection by pathogens 
[–]. Such a 
wide spectrum of functions is consistent with the presence of several isoforms 
suggesting that different POD isoenzymes might be involved in distinct processes. Moreover, POD can be
considered useful markers for environmental stresses since 
their activity is affected by low temperature, air pollution, 
ozone, heavy metals, wounding, salts, UV radiation, and 
pathogen attack []. In view of the above, present investigation 
has been undertaken to characterize the genotype and organ, 
stage dependent immunity using biochemical and in silico 
analysis during different developmental stages of resistant and 
susceptible wheat spikes.

Methodology
Collection of Wheat Genotypes:
In present study two genotypes (WH-542, HD-29) of bread 
wheat (Triticum aestivum) were used. The seeds of these 
genotypes- one highly susceptible and another resistance to 
Karnal bunt based on pathogenecity testing under field 
conditions were collected []. Different stages of developing 
wheat spikes were selected on the basis of % severity of KB 
induced by inoculating at different growth stages the data 
[].

In gel Assay:
10% native gel was prepared and sample was loaded with 
loading dye, gel was run for 2 hour at 80 mv. POD analysed 
after electrophoresis in PAGE with the use of Guaicol as a 
hydrogen donor. Gel was incubated in 0.02M guaicol for 30 
minute, washed and then immersed in 0.01M H2O2 for band 
development []. A densitometry analysis was done with the 
help of Gene Profiler software, Alpha Innotech Corporation 
USA. Briefly, individual gels were scored by placing the curser 
over individual band and recording the relative densitometry 
values of gels used for expression analysis [].

In Silico Analysis of POD:
Protein sequences of POD from wheat, and different plants 
were retrieved from protein database of NCBI (National Center 
for Biotechnology Information, (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein/) in FASTA format 
 (see 
supplementary material). The homology search of the POD 
protein was done through BLAST search tool of NCBI http://www.ncbi.nlmnih.gov). Secondary structural properties of 
the POD were computed by using SOPMA (Self Optimized 
Prediction Method with Alignment, http://npsapbil.ibcp.fr/cgibinnpsa_automat.pl?page=/NPSA/npsa_s
opma.html) tool of NPS (Network Protein Sequence Analysis). 
PDB structure analysis by (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pdbsum/). 
Domain and family analysis of amino acid sequence was done 
using CDD tool of NCBI (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/cdd) 
and Motif analysis done by MEME (meme.nbcr.net) 
[] and 
functional motif analysis of POD by PROSITE (http://prosite.expasy.org/). 
The ProtParam tool (http://web.expasy.org/protparam/) of ExPASy was used to 
compute physiochemical characterization of POD. Phylogeny 
analysis of wheat, and other plants POD were aligned by 
ClustalW tool (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/clustalw2/) 
and phylogenetic tree constructed by DNAman version 7.0 
(www.lynnon.com).

Results &amp; Discussion
Karnal bunt (KB) caused by Tilletia indica (Syn. Neovossia indica) 
is an economically important disease of wheat. POD, a class of 
pathogenesis related proteins (PR proteins), increases upon 
fungal infection and resistance against infection by pathogens. 
Therefore, it is important to differentiate the resistant and 
susceptible genotypes based on expression of POD at, 
biochemical and also in silico analysis of different plant POD 
was carried out by using various computational tools. 

In gel analysis of POD:
In order to ascertain the role of basal expression level of 
enzyme POD was analyzed using in gel assay at different 
physiological stages of wheat spikes of resistance and 
susceptible genotypes. POD isoenzymes were electrophoreses 
on native-polyacrylamide gels and stained with guaicol and 
hydrogen peroxide (). The native gel analysis showed 
that there were three different bands present in both the 
genotypes. Differential expression analysis of POD was carried 
out by using Gel documentation system, POD activity was 
somewhat increased significantly dominant in resistant 
genotype than susceptible. Surprisingly, POD2 isoenzyme was 
significantly increased in resistant genotype, suggesting that 
this isoenzyme is most likely involved in defense mechanism. 
The expression of POD was significantly higher (p&lt;.05) in Sv 
and S2 stage. There was decreasing trend up to S3 stages of both 
genotypes indicating the enhanced lignification of cell walls in 
developing spikes after fertilization and grain development. 
During earlier stages, higher level of expression of defense 
enzymes and accumulation of chemical at vegetative leaf stages 
(Sv) certainly prevent the fungal mycelial colonization in 
leaves. POD activity in plants can increase in response to a
variety of stresses including biotic stress, indicating that POD 
activities have been suggested to be involved in, cell wall 
biosynthesis by the polymerization of cinnamyl alcohol into 
lignin, in defense against attack by pathogens [], and in the 
response to wounding []. In addition, POD catalyzes 
polymerization of naturally occurring phenolics to produce a 
variety of bioactive products. POD activity is frequently 
increased in plant infected by pathogen, and the level of its 
activity is clearly correlated with disease resistance 
[]. The 
POD expressed constitutively in both susceptible and resistant 
genotype. However, the activity was higher in resistant 
genotype indicating that resistant genotype has significant high 
basal level of POD as compared to susceptible line and could be 
used as marker to define KB resistance. Hence, the S2 stage of 
wheat spike of susceptible genotype is more prone to KB 
infection as compared to resistant genotype.

In silico Study of Peroxidase:
Secondary structure properties, PDB Structure, Motif and 
Physicochemical characterization, for all the Peroxidase, were 
carried out by using various computational tools. SOPMA 
analysis was done for Peroxidase in all monocot selected plants 
and it showed a alpha helix occupied the largest part of the 
protein followed by, random coil, extended strand and beta 
turns, while in dicoty plant random coil occupied the largest 
part of the protein followed by, random coil, extended strand 
and beta turn  (see supplementary material), PDB 
structure also showed (). High value for random coil 
bears important significance in the study of protein tertiary 
structure and related functions. Functional analysis of these 
proteins includes identification of important motifs 
 (see 
supplementary material). There is two important motif found 
in both monocot and dicot plants first motif PS00436 and 
PS00435. PS00436 occur at starting sequence like 57-67 and 
PS00435 is found at middle sequence like 177 – 187. These 
motifs were 10 to 20 amino acids in length arise because specific 
residues and regions proved to be important for the biological 
function of a group of proteins, which are conserved in both 
structure and sequence during evolution. The ProtParam tool 
(http://web.expasy.org/protparam/) of ExPASy was used to 
compute glycine and proline composition (%), in the selected 
monocot plants. It was observed that the average percentage of 
glycine was higher than the proline. When compared the
glycine and proline contain with in Poaceae family, Setaria italic 
have highest glycine contain while in Triticum urartu a diploid 
variety of Triticum have highest contain of proline. The amino 
acid proline is known to occur widely in higher plants and 
normally accumulates in large quantities in response to 
environmental (biotic and abiotic) stresses ().The
results of transgenic modifications of biosynthetic and 
metabolic pathways indicate that higher stress tolerance and 
the accumulation of compatible solutes may also protect plants 
against biotic and abiotic stress. The osmoprotectant role of 
proline has been verified in some crops by overexpressing 
genes involved in proline synthesis. The total number of 
positively (Arg + Lys) and negatively (Asp + Glu) charged 
residues of Peroxidase members were observed  (see 
supplementary material). Peroxidase showed both positively 
and negatively charged nature, varies with their Isoelectric 
point. Some monocot plant Peroxidase showed higher 
positively charged like Triticum aestivum, Cenchrus ciria, Avena, 
and Asparagus. This possible variation might be due to their 
isoelectric point in acidic range. For the remaining members, 
the isoelectric point was within alkaline range. For the 
separation of the protein on a polyacrylamide gel the computed 
isoelectric point will be useful. Extinction coefficient for all 
Peroxidase was observed with in a same range except Avena 
and Medicago. High extinction coefficient means higher 
concentration of lysine, tryptophan and tyrosine. for the
calculation of protein concentration in the solution the 
extinction coefficient can be useful. Stability of protein is 
described in terms of its stability index whether a protein is 
stable or not, can be described by its instability index. 
Instability index of root peroxidase of Triticum aestivum, and 
Cucumis is higher than 40 and thus describing these proteins 
unstable. It is noteworthy that high aliphatic index was 
observed for all plants Peroxidase. The higher aliphatic index 
indicates higher concentration of alanine, valine, isoleucine and 
leucine occupying the relative volume of a protein. Grand 
Average of Hydropathy (GRAVY) was computed for all the 
members. GRAVY index indicate the solubility of protein and 
its range was observed from 0.171 to -0.089 in selected plants. 
A positive and negative GRAVY value for POD designates it to 
be hydrophobic and hydrophilic in nature of Peroxidase 
respectively. Most of selected plant a negative GRAVY value 
for POD designates it to be hydrophilic in nature but diversity 
occurs in nature ().

Domain and MEME Analysis:
in silico studies revealed that peroxidase belong to the Domains 
(functional and/or structural units of a Protein) cl00196 (CDD 
accession). Heme-dependent peroxidases similar to plant 
peroxidases () these enzymes belong to a group of 
peroxidases containing a heme prosthetic group 
(ferriprotoporphyrin IX), which catalyzes a multistep oxidative 
reaction involving hydrogen peroxide as the electron acceptor. 
Peroxidases are found in the extracellular space or in the 
vacuole in plants where they have been implicated in hydrogen 
peroxide detoxification, auxin catabolism and lignin 
biosynthesis [], and stress response 
[]. Multiple 
Expectation-Maximization for Motif Elicitation (MEME) 
[] is 
a suite of tools for motif discovery and searching. Twenty five 
different motifs (subdomain) between 6 and 50 residues were 
detected and distributed by MEME software. One to ten motifs 
sharing by almost all the plant groups with the few exception 
(). Motifs one are almost conserved and found in every 
group and subgroup. These conserved motifs could be the 
essential elements determining the POD family׳s common 
molecular function among different plant species. Motif 19 
absent all the monocotyledon plants. When compared a most 
conserved motifs in a Triticum group, Motifs 9 absent only in T.
aestivum, Motif 5 absent in root part of T. aestivum. While Motifs 
3&amp;6 and2 &amp; 10 absent in T.monoccocum and T. ururtus. Motif 16, 
19 occurs only found in Brassicaceae plants. Unique and 
Absence of Motifs are either, substitution, accumulation of 
mutation or subjected to rearrangements. It is not necessary 
that changes their activity, because that do not have a direct 
impact on the active site contain altered residues.

Phylogenyn analysis of Peroxidase of Triticum aestivum with other Plants:
Homology analysis depicts two main clusters A and B 
(). On the basis of phylogenetical analysis it can conclude that 
overall 51.95% homology is present in monocot plants. From 
the thirteen species, eleven species present in cluster A and is 
divided in two sub-clad (A1 and A2) on the basis of homology. 
Cluster A, first group include Cenchrus, Zea mays, Triticum, 
Oryza Avena, consist 64 % homology and other that include, 
Avena sativa, Triticum aestivum , root peroxidase Triticum 
aestivum, Hordeum and Hordeum vulgare subsp. vulgare consist 
77% homology. When homology determine in poacease family 
with respect to Triticum aestivum it observe that 84% homology 
present in peroxidase taken from root and leaf. Cluster B also 
divided in to sub-clad (B1 and B2). Monocot four species like 
Triticum urartu, Setaria italica, Spirodela polyrhiza, and Asparagus 
present in Clustur B along with dicot plants. This result 
suggests that POD genes were transfer from dicotyledonous 
plants to monocotyledonous or vice versa.

Conclusion
The function of POD in plant defense range from pre-formed or 
inducible. POD activity was significantly dominant in resistant 
genotype than susceptible. The expression of POD was 
significantly higher (p&lt;.05) in S2 stage and in subsequent stages. 
There was increasing trend in Sv and S2 stages followed by 
decrease in S3 stage of both genotypes indicating the enhanced 
lignification of cell walls in developing spikes after fertilization 
and grain development. In this study, physico-chemical 
properties, secondary structural features and phylogenetic 
classification will provide an insight for the biologists working 
with POD in order to understand the functionality of enzymes. 
The POD is expressed constitutively in both susceptible and 
resistant genotype. However, the activity was higher in 
resistant genotype indicating that resistant genotype has 
significant high basal level of these enzymes as compared to 
susceptible line and could be used as marker to define KB 
resistance.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Purwar et al, Bioinformation 10(2): 087-093 (2014)

In Gel analysis of wheat POD at different stages (Sv, 
S1, S2 and S3) of developing wheat spikes in Resistant and 
Susceptible genotypes.

PDB structure of POD in selected plants.

Glycine and Proline percentage of POD in selected 
plants

Functional domain analysis of POD in selected plants.

Schematic diagram of motif distribution of POD 
Proteins. MEME4.6.0 was applied to show that different sub 
groups were distinguished by the motif distribution.

Homology tree of POD with selected plants.

