Background:
The importance of natural products in modern medicine has
been well recognized. Natural compounds isolated from plant
sources have an extensive past and present use in the treatment
of diverse diseases. They also serve as compounds of interest
both in their natural form and also templates for synthesizing
derivatives with higher activity and lower toxicity. More than
20 new drugs, launched worldwide between 2000 and 2005,
originate from natural products. Scrutiny of medical indications
by source of compounds has demonstrated that natural
products and related drugs are used to treat 87% of all
categorized infectious and non-infectious human diseases [].
Vitex negundo (verbenaceae) is an important Indian medicinal
plant, which is a source of such natural compounds. It is a
medicinal herb and various parts of the plant have been
employed in the folklore systems of medicine in Asia including
India, China and Malaysia for various diseases. Many
ethnobotanical and pharmacological activities of V. negundo
have been reported such as: analgesic and anti-inflammatory
activity [,
], antioxidant activity 
[], enzyme inhibitions 
[],
nitric oxide scavenging activity [], antiradical and
antilipoperoxidative activity [], 
CNS activity [],
hepatoprotective activity [], 
anti-bacterial activity [], antifungal
activity [], 
larvicidal activity [], antiandrogenic
effects [] 
and mosquito repellent activity []. V. negundo
leaves were found to have NSAIDs like activity and fresh leaves
have been suggested to possess anti-inflammatory and pain
suppressing activities possibly mediated via prostaglandin (PG)
synthesis inhibition []. The leaf extract was also used as
adjuvant to standard anti-inflammatory drug []. The
methanolic extract of roots was reported to have snake venom
neutralizing property []. Many biologically active compounds
have been isolated from this plant in the past. Recently we
isolated and purified a Polyphenyl compound TDTBPP from
the ethyl acetate extract of V. negundo leaves and reported its
crystal structure () 
[]. 
Phospholipases A2 (PLA2s; EC
3.1.1.4) are enzymes that play a major role in the formation of
pro-inflammatory and inflammatory mediators such as
prostaglandins, leukotrienes, platelet-aggregating factor and
lysophospholipids [,
]. These enzymes catalyse the
hydrolysis of sn-2 acyl bond of phospholipids to produce
unsaturated fatty acids and lysophospholipids. Arachidonic
acid, one of the fatty acids released by the hydrolysis can lead to
the biosynthesis of eicosanoids and hydrolysis of cellular
phospholipids of the activated inflammatory cells and therefore
acts as a very important inflammatory precursor. Increased
concentrations of eicosanoids are found in the state of
inflammation []. PLA2s are classified as intracellular and
extracellular. Intracellular PLA2s are of high molecular weight
and involved in phospholipid metabolism, signal transduction
and other cellular processes []. Extracellular PLA2/secretory
PLA2 (sPLA2) are of low molecular weight and found in
mammalian pancreatic juice, snake and insect venoms 
[–].
The release of arachidonic acid by sPLA2 is followed by the
eicosanoid production. Hence, sPLA2s are considered as “the
inflammatory PLA2s” and act as target for anti-inflammatory
drugs. Thus, inhibition of PLA2 by various biologically active
substances has gained therapeutic importance. Most of the
natural compounds and their derivatives interfere directly or
indirectly with specific molecules or mechanisms, such as
various inflammatory mediators (arachidonic acid metabolites,
peptides, cytokines etc.), production or action of second
messengers (cGMP, cAMP, various protein kinases) and in
release of pro-inflammatory molecules 
[]. The present study
was undertaken to illustrate the anti-inflammatory activity of
TDTBPP by carrageenan-induced rat paw odema model and to
carry out Molecular docking studies (in silico) carried out with
the X-ray crystal structures of PLA2-inhibitor complexes
available in the Protein Data Bank (PDB; http://www.pdb.org/pdb)
to illustrate the interactions exhibited by TDTBPP with the
target protein. D. russelli venom sPLA2 (PDB ID: 3H1X) 
[] and
Hnps PLA2 (PDB ID: 1KVO) 
[] structures were chosen for
docking studies. The favorable interactions of TDTBPP with the
active site residues of the sPLA2 could be correlated with the
potency and the compound is proved to be an antiinflammatory
agent as well as an antidote. TDTBPP therefore
could be co-crystallized with sPLA2 and the in vitro binding
mode can be studied.

Methodology:
Animal Model Studies:
Chemicals &amp; drugs:
The Carrageenan and Sodium carboxymethyl cellulose were
purchased from Himedia Laboratories, Mumbai and the
standard Non-Steroid Anti-Inflammatory Drug (NSAID)
Indomethacin was purchased from Sigma Aldrich, Germany.

Animals:
The experiments were carried out in the animal house of Center
of Advanced Study in Marine Biology, Annamalai University,
Chidambaram. Albino rats of Wistar strains of either sex
weighing between 120-150 g were chosen for study. The
animals were kept on diet and allowed food and water ad
libitum. They were housed in polypropylene cages maintained
under standard conditions.

Preparation of Sample:
TDTBPP was separated and purified as mentioned in our
previous studies []. The crystals of TDTBPP obtained from the
ethyl acetate extract of V. negundo L. were crushed in to fine
powder, lyophilized and suspended in 0.1% sodium
carboxymethyl cellulose in 1M phosphate buffer pH 7.2
(vehicle) and used for the study. It is one of the most commonly
used vehicles and has no effect on the activity.

Evaluation of anti-inflammatory activity:
Acute anti-inflammatory activity was evaluated by
carrageenan-induced rat paw odema method. The ethical
clearance was obtained by the Institutional Animal Ethics
(Registration No: 4620/1A/2011/CPCSEA) before carrying out
the experiment.

Statistical Analysis:
The experimental data were expressed as the mean + standard
error (SE). The standard error of the mean (SEM) is the standard
deviation of the sample mean estimate of a population mean.
SEM is estimated by the sample estimate of the population
standard deviation (sample deviation) divided by the square
root of the sample size. Statistical analysis was carried out using
one-way analysis of variance followed by Dunnet's Multiple
Comparison Test and p values implied significance (p&lt;0.01)
[].

Molecular Modeling Studies:
Molecular modeling studies have been carried out using GLIDE
(Grid-based Ligand Docking with Energetics) 
[] software v5.5
developed by Schrödinger running on Red Hat Enterprise
Linux 5 (RHEL5) workstation. Maestro v9.0 Graphical User
Interface (GUI) workspace was used for all the steps involved in
ligand preparation, protein preparation and Induced Fit
Docking (IFD).

Ligand Preparation:
The ligands used in this study were prepared using LigPrep
[]
module of v2.3 of Schrödinger Suite 2009. LigPrep follows
OPLS-AA (Optimized Potential Liquid Simulations for All
Atoms) force fields for energy minimization. In this study we
used the crystal coordinates of the ligands Indomethacin
(), OAP (4-(s)-[(1-oxo-7-phenylheptyl) amino]-5-[4-
(phenylmethyl)phenylthio] pentanoic acid) ()
retrieved from their corresponding PDB complex structures and
the crystal coordinates of TDTBPP obtained from the crystal
data collected using Bruker's Smart Apex II CCD Single-crystal
X-ray diffractometer available in the department 
[]. The
crystal structure retrieved from PDB lack hydrogen atoms and
hence hydrogen atoms were added to Indomethacin and OAP
structures and energy minimized.

Protein Preparation:
The X-ray crystal structures retrieved from PDB database as
raw could not be suitable for molecular docking studies. A
typical PDB structure consists only of heavy atoms, waters,
cofactors, metal ions and can be of multimeric. These structures
do not have the information about bond orders, topologies or
formal atomic charges. The terminal amide groups may be
misaligned because the X-ray structure analysis cannot
distinguish between O and NH2. Ionization and tautomeric
states are also unassigned. So, the raw PDB structure retrieved
from PDB should be prepared in a suitable manner for docking.
Protein Preparation Wizard of GLIDE software was used to
process and prepare the protein. This Wizard allows one to
properly prepare a protein for docking studies. This also
follows the Optimized Potential for Liquid Simulations-All
Atoms (OPLS-AA) force fields for energy minimization.
Preparation of Daboia russelli's venom sPLA2: The X-ray crystal
structure of D. russelli's venom sPLA2 (PDB id: 3H1X) retrieved
from PDB is a monomeric structure. It consists of 120 amino
acids with one inhibitor molecule Indomethacin, 243 water
molecules and 3 sulphate ions. The protein was prepared by
removing all the water molecules and sulphate ions present in
the structure. Since the raw data do not contain any hydrogen
in it, the implicit hydrogen atoms were added to the atoms to
satisfy their appropriate valancies. Then the structure was
optimized by assigning the bond orders, bond angles and
topology. The formal atomic charges were fixed for the amino
acid residues. The optimized structure was then energy
minimized to remove the steric clashes between the atoms. The
energy minimization was done till it reached a Root Mean
Square Deviation (RMSD) cutoff of 0.18 Å and the resulting
structure was used for docking.

Preparation of Hnps PLA2:
The X-ray crystal structure of Hnps PLA2 (PDB id: 1KVO) was
retrieved from the PDB database. 1KVO is a hexameric
structure with six identical chains. A monomeric unit consists of
one OAP (co-crystallized inhibitor), 2 calcium metals (CA191
and CA192) and 96 water molecules. Since all the 6 chains were
identical, a single chain with OAP, calcium metal (CA191
chelated to OAP and active site residues) and one water
molecule (HOH1260, a significant metabolic water) were
retained and used for further preparation steps. The remaining
95 water molecules of the retained chain and the other five
monomeric units (124 × 5 amino acid residues, 2 × 5 calcium
metals and 96 × 5 water molecules) were removed. The implicit
hydrogen atoms were added to the structure so as to satisfy
their valancies. Then the bond orders, bond angles, topology
and the formal atomic charges for the amino acid residues were
assigned. The calcium metal in the structure was treated and
ionized to Ca2+ ionic state. The structure was then energy
minimized until it reached a RMSD of 0.18 Å and used for
docking.

Induced Fit Docking (IFD):
IFD of the prepared ligands with the prepared proteins was
performed using Induced Fit Docking protocol of GLIDE v5.5
from Schrödinger Suite 2009 []. It is based on GLIDE and
Prime Refinement module. Prime accurately predicts the ligand
binding modes and concomitant structural changes in the
receptor. In IFD, both the ligand and the receptor are flexible
which enables to dock the ligand at the receptor's binding site
to generate multiple poses of the receptor-ligand complex, each
including unique structural conformations of the receptor to fit
the ligand pose and ranks them by Glide score (G-score) to find
the best structure of the docked complex. G-score takes into
account a number of parameters like hydrogen bonds (H-bond),
hydrophobic contacts (Lipo), van der-Waals (vdW), columbic
(Coul), polar interactions in the binding site (Site), metalbinding
term (Metal) and penalty for buried polar group
(BuryP) and freezing rotatable bonds (RotB) G-score = H bond
+ Lipo + Metal + Site + 0.130 Coul + 0.065 vdW – BuryP – RotB.
The prepared structures of 3H1X and 1KVO were used for
induced fit docking simulations. Initially a receptor grid, where
the ligand has to be docked with the receptor was set by picking
the centroid of the co-crystallized inhibitor (Indomethacin in
3H1X and OAP in 1KVO) present at the active site. It creates a
grid box and the size of the grid box was limited to 20 Å. The
generation of different conformations of the docked complexes
(poses) was set to a maximum of 20. Then TDTBPP was docked
at the active site of 3H1X and 1KVO individually. The poses
generated were ranked based on G-score. The pose that made
the maximum hydrogen bond (H-bond) interactions from
TDTBPP-3H1X and TDTBPP-1KVO docked complexes were
considered for further analysis and the results are compared.

Visualization and Analysis:
The PyMol Molecular Graphics System 
[] was used to analyze
the hydrogen bond interactions and preparation of high
resolution images. The hydrophobic interactions were obtained
as Ligplot diagram by submitting the docked complexes to the
online PDBsum server (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pdbsum).

Results and Discussion:
Acute anti-inflammatory Activity:
TDTBPP at the dose of both 50 mg/kg and 70 mg/kg exhibited
significant anti-inflammatory activity in carrageenan induced
paw odema model (p&lt;0.01) (, see supplementary
material). No mortality of rats was observed and hence it is
non-toxic in the administered dosages. It is well known that
carrageenan induced paw edema model is commonly used as
an experimental model for evaluating anti inflammatory
activity of natural products [] and is believed to be biphasic,
of which the first phase is mediated by the release of histamines
and 5 hydroxy tryptamin in the early stage followed by kinin
release and then prostaglandin in the later stage. Prostaglandins
and bradykinins were suggested to play important role in
carrageenan induced edema [,
]. Both steroidal and non
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs can be tested by the
carrageenan-induced paw inflammation test. The edema
induced in the rat paw by the injection of 1% carrageenan is
brought about by autocoids, histamine and 5-hydroxy
tryptamine (5-HT) during the first one hour, after which kinins
act, to increase the vascular permeability upto two and a half
hours. The maximum inflammation is seen approximately three
hours post the carrageenan injection, after which it begins to
decline. Following that the prostaglandins act from two and a
half hours to six hours, which results in the migration of
leucocytes into the inflamed site [,
].

IFD of TDTBPP with 3H1X:
3H1X is a low molecular weight protein (13.6 kDa) and the
structure of PLA2 consists of N-terminal helix, H1 (residues: 2-
12), a calcium binding loop (residues: 25-35), a second α-helix,
H2 (residues: 40-55), a short two stranded antiparallel β-sheet/β
wing (residues: 75-84) and a third α-helix, H3 (residues 90-108)
[]. The anti-coagulation region of the protein lies between the
residues 54 and 77 and it is positively charged with the residues
such as Lys69, Arg72, Arg74, Lys76 and Arg77 []. The
opening and closure of Trp31 was observed in
substrate/inhibitor bound and unbound form of the protein
[] 
(). During the IFD of TDTBPP at the active site of
3H1X, the Trp31 residue remains in open conformation, but the
side chain of the residue found to be displaced to a distance of
2.6 Å by 95.5°down through the C(γ) atom when compared
with the IFD results of Indomethacin with 3H1X. The side chain
of Lys69 was bent 71.2° down to a distance of 1.9Å through the
C(δ) atom when compared to Indomethacin-3H1X complex,
which favored the oxygen atom O(2) bonded to the central
phosphorus atom of TDTBPP to make a H-bond interaction
with the N(ε) atom at a distance of 2.83Å. The tert-butyl group
of the phenyl ring was inserted in between His 48 and Asp 49
and makes hydrophobic contact with them. In addition to that,
all the three tert-butylphenyl ring system of the molecule
formed an array of hydrophobic interactions with the residues
Phe5, Tyr22, Ser23, Tyr28, Gly30, Gly32, Tyr52, Gly53, Pro56,
Cys61 and Pro68 lining the binding region (). The
Glide score of TDTBPP is –5.0 and Glide energy is –50.9
Kcal/mol (, see supplementary material). IFD of
Indomethacin into the active site of 3H1X has not influenced
any significant structural changes in the overall conformation of
the protein backbone. The docked orientation of Indomethacin
was similar to the orientation found in the PDB complex. Trp31
residue was in open conformation. Indomethacin exhibited
three H-bonds with the active site residues. The O(3) of the
carbonyl group of Indomethacin formed H-bonds with the
N(δ1) atom of His48 at a distance of 2.99 Å and O(δ1) atom of
Asp49 residue at a distance of 2.48Å, respectively. The O(2) of
the carbonyl group is involved in H-bond with the N(ε) atom of
the Lys69 at a distance of 2.93Å (). The G-score of is
–5.2 and Glide energy is –41.1 Kcal/mol. The overall binding of
TDTBPP was in such a way that the O(2) atom of phosphate
group maintains the interaction with Lys69 of the anticoagulant
region as exhibited by Indomethacin. The G-score
was also almost same and the Glide energy (directly related
with the binding energy) was higher than Indomethacin, which
indicated that TDTBPP has higher binding energy when
compared to Indomethacin. The tert-butylphenyl ring makes
hydrophobic contact with His48 and Asp49. These residues
form a dyad, and along with other determinants stabilize the
transition state of the catalytic assembly of the sPLA2 
[]. The
molecule was well positioned within the hydrophobic channel
of the newly identified binding site, which is effective in
blocking the exposure of the amino acid residues present in the
anti-coagulant region and also the catalytic region to bind the
substrate, thereby arresting the enzymatic activity of PLA2.

IFD of TDTBPP with Hnps PLA2:
1KVO is also a low molecular weight protein (14 kDa protein)
found in both inflammatory cells [,
] and a variety of
inflammatory exudates fluids in soluble form 
[]. The
chemistry and catalytic activity of this protein is as similar to
3H1X, but with some modifications in the residues forming
hydrophobic channel and their modulations during the
substrate binding. The O(2) of the central phosphate group of
TDTBPP was chelated to the calcium ion at a distance of 2.28Å
(). This is similar to the distances exhibited by OAP
with calcium ion and other reported complexes. The calcium
ion in this complex was also has pentagonal bipyramidal
geometry. As in the PDB complex Gly30, Gly32, His28 and
Asp49 were also chelated to the calcium ion. The water
molecule HOH1260 was chelated to the calcium ion and makes
a H-bond interaction with the oxygen atom O(1) of the central
phosphate group of TDTBPP). The carbonyl group oxygen atom
of Asp42 displaced about 0.4 Å distance has an H-bond with the
main chain N atom of His28, which was not found in the redocked
pose of OAP-1KVO complex. This bond may hold the
residues in the calcium binding loop of the protein to remain
stable in the TDTBPP bound form. The angle between the
calcium ion and the chelating oxygen atoms of water molecule
and TDTBPP is 49.8°. The angle between the chelating oxygen
atoms of His28 and TDTBPP with the calcium ion is 134.1°. The
corresponding angle exhibited by sn-3 phosphate group of
other classical inhibitors of PLA2 was about 164°. This is
significant in the effective binding of TDTBPP with single
phosphate group at the center of three phenyl rings. The angle
between the chelating oxygen atoms of Asp49 and O(2) of
TDTBPP with calcium ion is about 92.9°. The oxygen atoms of
Asp49, Gly30 and Gly32 involved in the chelation with calcium
ion are found to be near equatorial as reported in the PDB
complex. This is much similar to that of the re-docked pose of
OAP with 1KVO. The phenyl rings with substituted tert-butyl
groups are well positioned within the hydrophobic channel of
the protein and have hydrophobic interactions with Tyr22,
Ala18, Ile9, His6, Phe5, Phe24, Gly23, Val31, Leu2, Try52 and
Cys44 lining in the hydrophobic channel within a distance of
4Å. This is much similar to the hydrophobic contacts exhibited
by OAP. The Glide score is –6.8 and the Glide energy is –47.0
Kcal/mol. This is also comparable to that of the co-crystallized
ligand (OAP). The OAP was re-docked nearby the active site
and the orientation was such that, the C(11) atom was displaced
to a distance of 1.9 Å away, the phenyl ring attached to the S(11)
was twisted about 72.9° down and the O(21) atom was
displaced by 1.6Å away. The calcium ion in this re-docked
complex was in the characteristic pentagonal bipyramidal
configuration as that of the PDB complex. The OAP was bound
near the binding site and coordinated with the calcium ion at a
distance of 2.28Å. The oxygen atoms of His28, Gly30, Gly32,
and Asp49 (bifurcated) are also involved in chelation with
calcium ion. In addition to the direct coordination with calcium,
the carbonyl oxygen O(32) atom of amide group of OAP is also
involved in a water (HOH1260) mediated interaction with Ca2+
ion, which was not found in the original PDB complex 
(). 
This water molecule was found to be displaced about 1.2 Å
towards the calcium ion which has made it to make chelation
with the calcium ion and H-bond interaction with the O(32)
atom of OAP. The angle between the calcium ion and
coordinating oxygen atoms of OAP and water molecule is about
68.8°. The angle between the calcium ion and the chelating
oxygen atoms of His28 and OAP was 145.4°. The corresponding
angle was found to be 177° in the PDB complex. The difference
in this angle in the re-docked complex may be due to the
inclusion of water molecule within the channel and the
interactive force exerted by it made the oxygen atom of His28 to
significantly move about 0.7 Å when compared to the PDB
complex. The chelation exhibited by the O(21) was not found in
the re-docked complex due to the significant displacement, and
it only had an H-bond with the N atom of the His48 as that of
the PDB complex. The coordinating oxygen atoms of the amide
carbonyl group of OAP and Gly30, Gly32 and Asp49 were on a
near equatorial plane. O(32) atom also had an H-bond
interaction with the N atom of Gly32. The O(31) atom of the
carbonyl group was also found to have H-bond interaction with
the N(ε) atom of Lys69. The re-docked pose of OAP also
maintained the array of hydrophobic contacts with Cys27,
Tyr22, Ala18, Ile9, His6, Phe5, Phe24, Gly23, Val31, Leu2, Try52
and Cys44 like that of the PDB complex. The Glide energy and
G-score of the re-docked complex were –65.6 Kcal/mol and
–8.2, respectively (, see supplementary material).

Conclusion:
Literature survey shows the anti-inflammatory property of
various parts of V. negundo. Recent literature survey 
[]
indicates that V. negundo is an antidote for D. russelli bites. The
molecular docking with 3H1X and 1KVO confirms that
TDTBPP can bind both the calcium independent as well as
calcium dependent forms of sPLA2s. Hence Tris (2, 4-di-tert-butylphenyl)
phosphate (TDTBPP) can be co-crystallized with
the sPLA2 and the in vitro binding mode and energy with the
protein could be revealed. It may be a good start to use novel
class of compounds from natural sources in treating
inflammatory disorders and snake bites.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work is supported by Indian council of Medical Research
(ICMR), Ministry of Health and Human Welfare, Government
of India. The authors thank UGC, Government of India for
providing financial support under SAP to CAS in
Crystallography and Biophysics, CAS in Marine Biology,
Annamalai University for carrying out Animal model studies
and Bioinformatics Infrastructure Facility (DBT-BIF), University
of Madras for providing computational facilities.

Citation:Vinuchakkaravarthy et al, Bioinformation 7(4): 199-206 (2011)

Crystal structure of TDTBPP (displacement ellipsoids
drawn at 30% probability level. Hydrogen atoms are omitted
for clarity

(a) 3D crystal structure of Indomethacin obtained
from 3H1X. (b) 3D crystal structure of OAP obtained from
1KVO

Cartoon representation of native form of Daboia
russelli's venom sPLA2 (PDB id: 2PYC) showing the H1, H2, H3
α-helices, β-wing, Ca2+ binding loop, anti-coagulant loop and
the key residues Trp31, His48, Asp49 and Lys69.

(a) H-bond and Hydrophobic interactions exhibited by TDTBPP with 3H1X. The O(2) atom of central phosphate group
formed an H-bond with Lys69 (represented as black dotted lines with corresponding bond distance) in the anti-coagulant loop of
the protein and the other active site residues His48 and Asp49 surrounding the tert-butylphenyl ring (b) H-bonds exhibited by
Indomethacin with the active site residues of 3H1X.

(a) The co-ordinations formed by Ca2+ ion with the oxygen atom of TDTBPP and other active site residues of 1KVO are
represented in black dotted lines with their corresponding bond distances (b) The co-ordinations formed by Ca2+ ion with OAP and
the active site residues of 1KVO.

