Background
Bias in the selection of synonymous codons for an amino acid is
termed as codon bias. Codon bias is dominant in structural
parts of genome like exon, t-RNA locations [,
]. Codon bias
enhances the speed of protein translation with high accuracy in
fast growing organisms like E.coli []. Codon bias locations
have high degree of repetition of codons with GC and GC at
third codon position (GC3) in these organisms. Predominance
of GC, GC3, and AT3 bias are the parameters those influence
the codon bias patterns in genome []. The phenomenon of
codon bias is corroborated by presence of a strong spectral peak
magnitude in Fourier domain at a frequency sample N/3,
where N is the length of windowed discrete Fourier transform
(DFT) of structural parts of genome [,
]. Several recent studies
[–] utilized this period-3 spectral property of genomes to
determine exon locations but without identification of its
accessories like stop-start codons, splice donor-acceptors, etc.
Although spectral methods to determine exon locations in
genes are there, no attempt is yet made to utilize the DNA
spectra in evaluating GC, GC3, and AT3 bias spectra. The 3-
phase network model in the paper demonstrates a parallel and
efficient way of computing codon bias spectra (CBS). We have
utilized the 3-phase network model to estimate GC, GC3, and
AT3 bias in spectral domain. Amplitude patterns of CBS in
(, ) 
are showing the strength of codon bias at
nucleotide positions in genome while peaks in GC and GC3
spectra are showing the GC, GC3 bias regions in genome. The
schematics for GC, GC3, and AT3 bias spectra along with CBS
are implemented in LabVIEW and MATLAB platforms.
Structural parts of genome like genes, t-RNA locations, etc.,
have high codon bias those are demonstrated by high
amplitude peaks of CBS, GC and GC3 bias spectra.

In this paper, analysis of the correlation coefficients of GC, GC3,
and AT3 bias spectra with CBS brings out the predominance of
these factors in the total codon bias patterns of genome.
Selection of synonymous codons in structural parts of genome
is demonstrated here by correlating codon spectra (CS) with
CBS. It is shown that the values of correlation coefficients for
the synonymous codons with GC and GC3 contents are higher
in comparison to those of synonymous codons ending with
AT3. This observation shows natural selection of GC and GC3
containing synonymous codons in structural parts of genome.

Methodology
We analyze the 3-phase network model with polyphase filter
bank [,
] over a set of bacterial genomes listed in 
 (see
supplementary material). These genomic sequences are
downloaded in FASTA format from online genome database of
National Centre for Biotechnology Information (NCBI), USA.
Downloaded genomic sequences are represented as an array of
characters l∈ {A, T, C, G}. Genome character sequences are
mapped into four binary indicator sequences such that a
nucleotide base is represented as 1 and all others are 0 []. These
indicator sequences serve here as input to the 3-phase network
model of genome to produce CBS, GC, GC3, and AT3 bias
spectra. Complete flow diagram for this 3-phase network model
is shown in (). Three arms shown in this flow diagram
calculate preponderance of nucleotides at three codon positions
in parallel manner.

GC, GC3, AT3 bias spectra are correlated with CBS and results
are tabulated in  (see supplementary material) or
twenty one genome sequences. Values of correlation coefficients
close to one show the strength of association of GC, and GC3
bias with codon bias of genome. Analysis of correlation
coefficients of CS with codon bias patterns in CBS in 
(see supplementary material) shows the preference of
synonymous codons toward protein translation.

LabVIEW schematic model for GC, GC3, and CBS spectra
The complete LabVIEW schematic for 3-phase network model
of genome is shown in (). In this schematic, connected
blocks are executed through data flow programming. Here the
schematic is shown for nucleotide G. Similarly schematics are
developed for the rest three nucleotides A, T, and C. The length
of the rectangular window function f (n) is L = 117, and the size
of moving window for generation of DFT is N = 351. The
counter i is an index for array. Delay elements or codon
positions are indicated in the schematic by blocks marked as {0,–
1,–2}, and the blocks labeled as {Xg0, Xg1, Xg2} are the
convolution outputs. DFT of nucleotide G sequence Xg [3n] is
generated by summation of {Xg 0, Xg 1, and Xg 2} after complex
multiplier. Power spectrum of genome or CBS S [3n, N/3] with
period-3 properties is generated by summation of absolute
squared magnitude of X1 [3n, N/3]. CBS of genome thus
obtained are in decimated form, and we have performed the
cubic spline interpolation to match with exact length of genome.
GC bias spectra is obtained by fixing l ∈ {G, C} while GC3 and
AT3 bias spectra are obtained by fixing index j= 2 with l ∈ {G, C}
or l ∈ {A, T} in the schematic shown in ().

Discussion
Generated patterns of CBS, GC, GC3, and AT3 bias spectra
through the 3-phase network model are shown in 
(, )
for the first 15000 nucleotide bases of E. coli, and Y. pestis
genomes. High peaks in the amplitude spectrum of CBS
indicate the codon bias strength at nucleotide positions in
genome. It is visually shown in these figures that the spectral
patterns of CBS, GC, and GC3 bias are associated. GC and GC3
spectral peaks are increasing with increase of peaks in CBS
while AT3 spectral peaks are not correlated with CBS. These
visual observations are statistically validated by correlation
coefficient analysis of CBS over GC, GC3, and AT3 spectra and
results are listed in  (see supplementary material) for
twentyone bacterial genomes. High values of correlation
coefficients listed in this table for GC, GC3 bias in comparison
to AT3 bias indicate the selectivity of GC, GC3 bias for the total
codon bias pattern generation.  (see supplementary
material) is showing the correlation coefficient values of
synonymous codons for amino acids Pro, Ala, and Gly those are
obtained by correlating their CS with CBS. High values of
correlation coefficients shown in this table demonstrate
preference towards synonymous codons ending with GC3.
These observations explain natural selection of GC3 ending in
synonymous codons.

Conclusion
There is requirement of fast computational schemes for
producing GC, GC3, and AT3 bias spectra along with codon
bias spectra. 3-phase network model of genome has shown the
fitness in extracting GC, GC3, and AT3 spectra along with
parallel computation. LabVIEW schematic of this model is a
gateway for hardware implementation. High correlation
coefficient values are observed for the synonymous codons
which are richer in GC, and GC3 contents and correlation
coefficients for GC and GC3 bias are higher than AT3 bias.
These statistical observations state that the synonymous codons
with GC and GC3 contents are less prone to mutations.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors acknowledge the financial support for the research
work from DIAT (DU), Pune, India.

Citation:Rizvi et al, Bioinformation 8(3): 163-166 (2012)

Schematic for the 3-phase network model of genome,
where X1(n) is binary nucleotide sequence and ↓3 is down
sampling after delay element Z-1 for codon positions. F (z) is
rectangular window function before complex multiplier {1,
ej2π/3, ej4π/3{. 
Summation of X1 [3n, N/3] for l ∈ {A, T, G, C}
construct decimated CBS S [3n, N/3].

LabVIEW schematic for computation of decimated CBS S [3n, N/3] of genome.

Plots of CBS, GC, GC3, and bias AT3 spectra with first 15000 nucleotide bases of E. coli 536 genome.

Plots of CBS, GC, GC3, and bias AT3 spectra with first 15000 nucleotide bases of Y. pestis C092 chr. genome.

