Background
Milk fat percentage is the major factor that determines the
quality of milk and hence affects the economics of milk
production. There is a significant variation in average milk fat
percentage across the buffalo breeds. Buffalo contribute 57% of
the total milk produced in India. For example the breed,
Murrah consists of average 6.7% milk fat wile Bhadawari
contains average13% milk fat. There are about ten breeds of
buffalo: Murrah, Pandharpuri, Bhadawari, Surti, Toda, Nili-
Ravi, Jaffarabadi, Mehsana, Marathwada, Nagpuri reported in
India. Out of them Murrah gives maximum amount of milk (~
18-20 ltr), however, the quality of the milk is not good because
of low fat content. This difference in milk fat percentage across
the different breeds clearly indicates that there is an
involvement of a genetic factor. It also implies that over the
evolutionary period the genes affecting milk fat percentage
have segregated and fixed differently in the various breeds of
buffaloes. Since within a species the basic physiological
processes are more or less the same this difference in
production potential can be attributed only small variation.
These small differences which are probably the differences in
the allelic distribution of the genes involved in the milk fat
synthesis are resulting in remarkable differences of production
potential. The knowledge of these small genetic differences
would be invaluable as they can be used to enhance the rate of
genetic improvement.

With the development of refined analytical tools in the genome
analysis, the identification of causal genes and their sequence
variation underlying complex traits has become feasible in
humans, animals, and plant []. The dissection of quantitative
trait loci (QTL) with impact on complex, economically
important traits in livestock and the identification of the
underlying genetic variation will help to gain insight in to the
metabolic pathways and associated genes involved []. The
detection of single nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) is
important in various fields of biological sciences. Genotyping is
widely used in association studies aimed at characterizing
genetic factors underlying the inherited traits [,
]. In dairy
cattle and other live stock species, there is an increasing interest
in using a positional candidate gene approach for the
identification of the actual gene that control economically
important traits. At present, candidate quantitative trait genes
are chosen for association studies because of previous linkage
mapping studies and comparative biological functions in the
same or other species [].

Peroxysome proliferator-activated receptor-γ coactivator-1α
(PPARGC1A termed PGC-1α) plays a key role in the activation
of various nuclear hormone receptors and transcription factors
regulating energy balance. It has also been demonstrated that
PPARGC1A mediates the expression of genes involved in
oxidative metabolism, adipogenesis and gluconeogenesis 
[].
PPARGC1A plays a significant role in many aspects of glucose
and fat metabolism and energy balance and is able to
coordinate the metabolic processes of the liver, fat and muscle
tissue in humans and mice. The bovine PPARGC1A gene acts as
a plausible positional and functional candidate gene for a QTL
for milk fat yield on BTA6 because of its chromosomal position
and its key role in energy, fat and glucose metabolism. To
analyze the role of bovine PPARGC1A gene in regulation of
milk fat synthesis in dairy cattle, Weikard et al. 
[] determine its
cDNA sequence, genomic organization, chromosomal
localization and expression pattern. In this study attempt has
been made to study the molecular differences in PPARGC1A
among different breeds of buffalo that have different percentage
of milk fat.

Methodology
Samples collection and DNA isolation:
We have used five different breeds of buffaloes such as Murrah,
Pandharpuri, Bhadawari, Surti, and Toda that are reared in
different agroclimatic regions of India. Murrah is the major
buffalo breed from northern India whereas Pandharpuri is from
western India. Bhadawari is the major breed of Agra and Etawa
(U.P) Bhind and Morena (M.P). Surti is major breed from north
Gujarat and Rajasthan. Toda is major breed of Nilgiris hills
(Tamilnadu). High milk fat yields and breed-specific traits were
the main selection among these breeds—Bhadawari composed
of high milk fat (13%) followed by Toda (8.2%) Surti (8.10%),
Pandharpuri (7.0%), Murrah (6.7%). Only healthy animals with
the characteristic traits of each breed were selected.
Approximately 10 ml venous blood was collected from each
breed with 0.5 ml of 2.7% EDTA as anticoagulant. The samples
were brought to the laboratory in a double walled ice box
containing ice with cool pack and stored at-20 0C till the
isolation of DNA. Genomic DNA was isolated from buffy coat
of venous blood sample of buffalo using phenol chloroform
extraction. The quality of DNA was checked by
spectrophotometer taking ratio of optical density (°D) value at
260 and 280 nm. Good quality of DNA having OD ratio
between 1.80 and 1.85 were used after an appropriate dilution
for further work.

Primer design and amplification of PPARGC1A:
PPARGC1A from bovine has been well characterized but not in
buffalo. It consists of 14 numbers of exons with 6324 total base
pairs, exon 8 is the second largest one consisting of 919 base
pairs. The amino acid sequence of PPARGC1A spanning within
10 Å of active site of the enzyme was extracted and its
corresponding gene sequence was used for the primer
designing. This region composed of approximately 767 bp of
Exon 8 and covered 143 bp to 919 bp as mentioned in 
(), two sets of primers were used forward primer of first
primer pair consisting of 22bp of P1f5'
ACTCCTCCTCATAAAGCCAACC 3'reverse primer consisting
of 24 bp P1r5' TGGAGCTCCTGTGATGTACTAACG 3'and
forward primer of second primer pair consisting of 20bp P2f5'
GCTTGGGACCAGACCTTAATTTG 3' and reverse primer
consisting of 20bp P2r5' TGTACTTGGGCTTGTTGACGTC 3'
were designed by using the Bos taurus sequence available on the
NCBI.

For amplification of these partial sequences of PPARGC1A, 50
µl of PCR reaction was prepared by adding10pM of each
primer, 0.2µM of each dNTPs, 1.5mM MgCl2, 10xPCR assay
buffer, 130ng DNA template and 1 unit Taq DNA polymerase.
The amplification was carried by using a programmable
thermal controller (PTC-100, MJ Research) with the following
conditions for first primer: initial denaturation of 5 minute at
940C followed by30 cycles of denaturation at 94°C for 30 second,
annealing at 53°C for 30 second and extension at72°C for 30
second and lastly the extension of 10 min. at 72°C and for
second primer with the following conditions: initial
denaturation of 5 minute at 94°C followed by 30 cycles of
denaturation at 94°C for 45 second, annealing at 64°C for 45
second and extension at72°C for 45 second and lastly the
extension of 10 min. at 72°C. For sequencing, the PCR products
were run in 1.5% agarose gel and product band was eluted
using gel elution kit for purification. The amplified products
were sequenced by Sanger method by outsourcing (Xclaris lab.
Ahmadabad, India).

Comparison of DNA and protein sequences:
The gene sequences obtained based on forward and reverse
primers from different breeds of buffaloes were assembled
utilizing overlapping sequences (consisting of 320 and 753 bp)
and were compared. These sequences were aligned using
multiple alignment program, Clustal W
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/clustalw2/) with DNA
weight matrix and multiple parameters like gap opening 10.0,
gap extension 0.20, transition weight 0.50. A phylogenetic tree
based on similarity coefficients generated by neighborhoodjoining
method was performed. Furthermore, all DNA
sequences obtained were translated to protein sequence using
EMBL trans seq (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/st/). These
protein sequences were further aligned using multiple
alignment program, Clustal W
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/clustalw2/) with protein
weight matrix and default parameters for gap opening and
extension. A phylogenetic tree based on similarity coefficients
was also generated.

Modeling of protein structure:
The protein sequences were BLAST with PDB data base that
gives only one similar protein with sequence similarity of 68%
(PDB ID: 3U9Q). This homolog protein structure was used as
template for homology model building of PPARGC1A using
Prime accessible through the Maestro interface (Schrodinger,
Inc.). During the homology model building Prime keeps the
backbone rigid for the cases in which the backbone does not
need to be reconstructed due to gaps in the alignment. The
model was screened for unfavorable steric contacts and
remodeled using a rotamer library database of Prime. Explicit
hydrogen was added to the protein and the protein model was
subjected to energy minimization using the Macromodel (Prime
version 1.5) force-field OPLS-2005. Energy minimization and
relaxation of the loop regions were performed using 300
iterations in a simple minimization method. The steepest
descent energy minimization was carried out until the energy
showed stability in the sequential repetition. Model evaluation
was performed in PROCHECK v3.4.4 [] producing plots which
were analyzed for the overall and residue-by-residue geometry.
Ramachandran plot [] provided by the program PROCHECK
assured very good confidence for the predicted protein.
Nevertheless, PROCHECK assured the reliability of the
structure and the protein was subjected to VERIFY3D 
[]
available from NIH MBI Laboratory Servers.

Prediction and characterization of binding site:
For each protein structure that has been modelled the binding
sites were defined as a set of site points that were predicted
using ‘SiteMap’ (Schrödinger Inc., version 2.4). A SiteMap
calculation has three stages. In the first, relevant site points are
selected based on geometric and energetic properties and the
points are grouped in sets to define the binding sites. Next,
hydrophobic, hydrophilic, and other key properties are
computed at grid points and contour maps are prepared.
Finally, binding site properties such as site score, size, volume,
enclosure, exclosure, contact, hydrophobic, hydrophilic and
ratio of hydrogen donor to acceptor are computed. Finally, each
binding site is scored by an expression that uses just three
terms: (1) the square-root of the number of site points, capped at
100 site points to avoid overly rewarding large sites; (2) the
enclosure score, and (3) the hydrophilic score. The ‘SiteScore’
function is represented by the following equation.

SiteScore = 0.0733 n1/2 + 0.6688 e – 0.20 p (1);

where n is the number of site points (up to 100), e is the
enclosure score, and p is the hydrophilic score, capped at 1.0
(the average for the submicromolar sites) to limit the impact of
hydrophilicity in charged and highly polar sites.

Discussion
Genomic DNA from blood samples was isolated as per the
method of Sambrook and Russel (2001). The quality of genomic
DNA was checked in 0.8% submarine agarose gel
electrophoresis. Most of the DNA samples were of good quality
and exhibited single band, where as few samples of poor
quality DNA showed a smear throughout the lanes. Smearing
of the DNA was found either due to the shearing of DNA or
presence of protein in the sample. Those samples were reextracted
by phenol-chloroform method. Spectrophotometric
reading of DNA samples also exhibited purity of DNA. The
observed ratio of OD260 to OD280 was between 1.7 and 1.9 in
most of the DNA samples indicating their purity. Samples with
OD ratio beyond this range were reprocessed by phenol:
chloroform extraction method. The samples were diluted in
nuclease free water in 1.5 ml micro-centrifuge tube so that 1 µl
solution contains approximately 80-100 ng of double stranded
DNA. This diluted DNA was used for PCR amplification of all
the experiments.

Amplification of PPARGC1A gene:
PPARGC1A gene from different breeds of buffaloes was
partially amplified using the primer specifically designed for
PPARGC1A. Primer 1 gives an amplified product of ~ 320 bp,
whereas the primer 2 produced an amplified fragment of ~753
bp. A clear, high reproducible and distinct band of size 320
and753 bp was obtained (). The amplified products
were confirmed by nucleotide sequencing using the same set of
primers and by comparing with the reference gene of
PPARGC1A from bovine. The amplified fragments of
PPARGC1A correspond to part of Exon 8.

Sequence comparison of PPARGC1A:
A relatively small variation was detected among the
PPARGC1A gene sequences obtained from different breeds of
buffaloes. All the gene sequences were compared using
multiple sequence alignment program and level of variation in
gene sequences is represented in (). Genomic variation
among various breeds ranges from 0.013-1.69% in comparison
to PPARGC1A reference sequence obtained from bovine. The
breed, Murrah has the minimum percentage of variation
(0.013%) followed by Surti (0.26%), Bhadawari (0.65%), Toda
(1.04%) and Pandharpuri (1.69%). Furthermore, the sequences
were used to generate a dendrogram (). It reveals that
Murrah and reference are very close to each other, similarly
Toda, Bhadawari and Surti are closely related, whereas
Pandharpuri is separated from both the cluster. Based on the
comparison of protein sequences of PPARGC1A, a relatively
small variation was detected among the different breeds of
buffaloes (). Overall the rate of variation varies in
between 0.42% to 2.99%, with Toda having the highest variation
(2.99%), followed by Pandharpuri (2.56), Bhadawari (1.70), and
Surti (0.85) Murrah (0.42) in comparison to the reference
sequence of bovine. The dendrogram () obtained from
pairwise comparison of protein sequence also reveals similar
findings as mentioned above: Pandharpuri and reference are
very close to each other, similarly Toda, Bhadawari and Surti
are closely related, whereas Murrah is separated from both the
cluster. The variation in gene as well as protein sequences of
GPAM might be associated with variation in milk fat content. It
is previously reported that all the breeds; Toda, Bhadawari and
Surti are having high milk fat content (Bianca Moioli and
Antonio Borghese).

Modeling of PPARGC1A protein structure and comparison among different breeds:
The atomic coordinates of PPARGC1A protein structure for the
organism Bubalus bubalis was not available in Protein Data Bank
which necessitated for developing a protein model. The final
model, which we modeled and took for further analysis,
consisted of 269 amino acid residues. We used both
PROCHECK and VERIFY3D softwares to check the quality of
the modeled protein. Ramachandran plot obtained from the
program PROCHECK, which checks the stereochemical quality
of a protein structures, producing a number of postscript plots
analyzing its overall and residue-by-residue geometry, assured
the reliability of the modeled protein with 91% residues in most
allowed region and 3.7% in additional allowed region. There
were only 1.2% residues in disallowed region and 4.1% in
generously allowed region. The assessment with VERIFY3D,
which derives a “3D-1D” profile based on the local environment
of each residue, described by the statistical preferences for, the
area of the residue that is buried, the fraction of side-chain area
that is covered by polar atoms (oxygen and nitrogen) and the
local secondary structure, also substantiated the reliability of
the three dimensional structure. The residues that deviated
from the standard conformational angles of Ramachandran plot
were the members of N terminal domain of the protein. This
was an ignorable condition since the N-terminal end was not
critical in our study. The distance of these residues to the active
site residues also were found to be more than 10 Å, which
suggested that those residues would interfere little with the
binding of ligands in the active site region of PPARGC1A.

The structural comparison of PPARGC1A from different breeds
revealed small variation among each other (). The
pairwise comparison of protein structure (expressed as root
mean square deviation, RMSD) varies from 0.736-1.507; the
minimum RMSD value of 0.736 was found between
Pandharpuri and the reference from bovine, whereas the
maximum RMSD value of 1.507 was obtained between Murrah
and Surti (). Furthermore, the dendrogram generated
based on pairwise matrix of RMSD corroborate similar findings:
Pandharpuri and reference are very close to each other,
similarly Toda, Bhadawari and Surti are closely related,
whereas Murrah is separated from both the cluster ().
Various mutations detected in the gene and protein sequence of
PPARGC1A among different breeds of buffaloes have different
level of impact in the binding site  (see supplementary
material). We have predicted the binding sites using SiteMap
algorithm (Schrodinger software package). However,
considered only the best binding site (based on Site Score) for
the comparative study. The characteristic features of binding
site analyzed using SiteMap is included in  (see
supplementary material). The significant variation in binding
site among different breeds of buffaloes may be associated with
variation in milk content.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Kumar et al, Bioinformation 8(13): 600-606 (2012)

Primer and partially amplified PPARGC1A from
different breeds of buffaloes. (a) A gene specific primer was
designed based on Exon 8 sequence from bovine with a product
size of 320 and 752 bp out of total length of 919 bp; (b) A
representative gel picture showing the amplified product of
PPARGC1A gene from different breeds of buffaloes (B): 1 &amp; 2,
Murrah; 3 &amp; 4, Pandharpuri; 5 &amp; 6, Bhadawari; 7&amp; 8 Surti; 9 &amp;
10 Toda.

Comparison of PPARGC1A gene sequence. (a) The PPARGC1A sequences obtained from different breeds of buffaloes
were aligned using multiple sequence alignment program, the changed nucleotide bases were represented in white box. Only few
mutations were detected between different breeds; (b) The dendrogram representing the similarity between PPARGC1A gene
sequences obtained from different breeds.

Comparison of PPARGC1A protein sequences. (a) The
PPARGC1A sequences obtained from different breeds of
buffaloes were aligned using multiple sequence alignment
program, the changed amino acids were represented in white
box. Only few mutations were detected between different
breeds; (b) The dendrogram representing the similarity between
PPARGC1A protein sequences obtained from different breeds.

The modeled protein structure of PPARGC1A and its
comparison. (a) The carton structure of PPARGC1A protein
modeled using homology based technique from different
breeds. The protein structures are more or less similar to each
other; (b) The pairwise comparison of modeled PPARGC1A
protein structure from different breeds. The value represents
root mean square deviation (RMSD); (c) A dendrogram
representing the similarity between protein structures of
PPARGC1A from different breeds. The tree was constructed
using pairwise RMSD matrix.

