Background
The Comparative Toxicogenomics Database (CTD) is a public
resource that promotes understanding about the effects of
environmental chemicals on human health []. CTD
biocurators manually curate interactions from the scientific
literature in a structured format using controlled vocabularies
for chemicals, genes, diseases, molecular interactions, and
organisms []. These datasets can be used to explore
relationships and to generate novel, testable hypotheses about
chemical-gene-disease pathways.

Analyses of the human disease network strive to categorize
diseases with respect to common genes and molecular
pathways, enabling hypotheses about shared or predisposing
co-disorders and putative genetic susceptibilities 
[]. Disease
names, especially cancers, were often originally based upon
histology (e.g., carcinoma) or tissue of origin (e.g., liver cancer).
With the advent of molecular genotyping, however, many
cancers are now being further differentiated by their unique
molecular signatures (e.g., HER2-positive vs. HER2-negative
breast cancer). Bioinformatics analyses of human disease
networks have also discovered sets of interacting proteins and
molecular pathways often shared by multiple diseases 
[]. This
shift to analyzing, classifying, and describing diseases via their
molecular perspective can help discover new therapeutic
approaches not previously considered. For example, shared
molecular connections between diabetes and dementia are now
fueling research into the possible use of insulin to treat
Alzheimer disease [].

Personalized medicine (which seeks to improve a drug's
therapeutic potential as well as minimize its side-effects) is
dependent upon understanding the unique molecular profile of
the patient and their disease []. Genes alone, however, are not
solely responsible for all complex diseases, since the
environment also plays an important role []. Thus, CTD,
which integrates datasets for all three components of
environmental chemicals, genes, and diseases, can be uniquely
leveraged to further advance hypotheses on human disorders.
Discovering analogous diseases (based upon their shared
toxicogenomic portrait) could promote alternative methods for
classifying diseases beyond the standard histological
techniques, and more towards a molecular basis.

Here we report a new bioinformatics approach to discovering
analogous diseases based upon shared chemical and/or gene
relationship profiles in CTD, which we call DiseaseComps (for
comparable diseases). This metric parallels our previous
implementation of GeneComps and ChemComps, which
organized analogous genes and chemicals, respectively, based
upon common toxicogenomic interactions [].

Methodology:
CTD biocurators manually curate the literature to capture
chemical-disease and gene-disease relationships []. A chemical
or gene can have an M-type relationship (wherein the molecule
acts as either a biomarker or plays a role in the molecular
mechanism of the disease) or a T-type relationship (wherein the
molecule is described as either a real or putative therapeutic for
the disease). Here we used the data available in CTD in
September 2011, which included 13,530 chemical-disease
relationships (for 2,652 chemicals and 1,180 diseases) and 14,173
gene-disease relationships (for 5,470 genes and 4,149 diseases).
Similarity indices were computed using a modification of the
Jaccard index, whose value ranges between 0 and 1 [].
DiseaseComps are delineated by the type of relationship (M or
T-type). For example, chemicals with a T-type relationship to a
disease can be used to find comparable diseases wherein the
chemicals have the same T-type relationship. Six types of
DiseaseComps are generated: (1) via all chemical relationships
(M- and T-type combined), (2) via only chemical M-type
relationships, (3) via only chemical T-type relationships, (4) via
all gene relationships (M- and T-type combined), (5) via only
gene M-type relationships, and (6) via only gene T-type
relationships.

Utility:
CTD computes values that reflect the degree of similarity
between the molecular interaction profiles of each curated
disease and generates a list of DiseaseComps, delineated by the
six possible types of relationships. DiseaseComps provide a
simple approach to view diseases that share common molecular
interactions, allowing disorders to be classified in a novel
manner without regard to histology or tissue of origin. Every
curated disease in CTD now includes a DiseaseComps data tab
that lists the top 20 comparable diseases based upon their
ranked similarity index. For example, the disease schizophrenia
has 160 genes curated with an M-type relationship in CTD.
DiseaseComps identifies the top comparable diseases for
schizophrenia that share the greatest number of those 160 Mtype
genes to produce a ranked list that includes bipolar
disorder, autism, and psychoses, as well as non-intuitive
diseases such as breast, lung, and colorectal cancers 
(),
suggesting that schizophrenia shares many of the same
molecular networks common to some cancers. The shared
genes can be viewed by clicking on the hyperlinked numeral in
the “Common Interacting Gene” column 
(). This new
CTD metric provides researchers with additional predictive
information that can help construct novel, testable hypotheses
about the mechanisms (and potentially treatments or targets)
underlying schizophrenia based upon its shared molecular
profile with other diseases.

Future development:
DiseaseComps find similar diseases based upon shared
chemical or gene relationships. The algorithm can be reversed
to now find similar genes (or chemicals) based upon shared
diseases, a feature we hope to soon add to our already
established GeneComps and ChemComps data-tabs at CTD 
[].
CTD is also expanding its content via the targeted curation of
over 50,000 additional toxicology publications selected for four
disease areas (cardiovascular, renal, hepatic, and neurological
disorders). This will provide significantly more data as input
for the generation of DiseaseComps calculations.

This project is supported by R01ES014065 from the National
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS) and the
National Library of Medicine (NLM), R01ES014065-04S1 from
NIEHS, and P20RR016463 from the National Center for
Research Resources (NCRR). The content is solely the
responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent
the official views of the National Institutes of Health.

Citation:Davis et al, Bioinformation 7(4): 154-156 (2011)

(a) DiseaseComps (orange tab) for schizophrenia via
gene marker/mechanism (M-type) relationships include
familiar diseases such as bipolar disorder, autism, and
psychoses (ranked #1-3), but also discovers non-intuitive
diseases like breast cancer (ranked #6) that share ten M-type
genes with schizophrenia (red circle). (b) The common curated
genes can be viewed by clicking on the hyperlinked numeral
(red circle) to produce a Venn diagram and a list of the ten
genes shared between schizophrenia and breast cancer.

