Background
-1 ribosomal frameshifting is a programmed recoding event
during which a certain percentage of the translating ribosomes
shift back by one nucleotide along the mRNA to the -1 reading
frame [,
]. Two cis-acting elements in the mRNA are typically
required for efficient -1 ribosomal frameshifting: a
heptanucleotide “slippery sequence” with a consensus of X XXY
YYZ (the zero reading frame is indicated by the triplets) and a
downstream RNA structure.

When frameshifting happens, the two tRNAs recognizing XXY
and YYZ condons in the zero reading frame shift back one
nucleotide to pair with the XXX and YYY condons in the -1
reading frame. While the actual frameshifting occurs at the
slippery sequence, an RNA structure that is located several
nucleotides downstream of the slippery sequence plays a
stimulatory role for efficient frameshifting. Most often, the
frameshift stimulating RNA structure is a compact H-type
pseudoknot. An H-type pseudoknot is a structural motif of
RNA formed when a stretch of nucleotides within a stem-loop
(hairpin) basepairs with a complementary sequence outside that
loop [–]. 
-1 ribosomal frameshifting is a well-established
mechanism that is utilized by many RNA viruses to express
their structural and enzymatic proteins at a defined ratio 
[–],
which is important for the viral life cycle. For the expression of
cellular genes, only a few cases have been reported for the
involvement of -1 ribosomal frameshifting. So far, only three
mammalian genes are known to use the -1 frameshifting
mechanism. These are the human paternally expressed gene 10
(PEG10) [] and the paraneoplastic antigen Ma3 &amp; Ma5 genes
[]. All of these genes are derived from retroelements and they
encode viral-like proteins. They all use a retrovirus-like -1
frameshifting mechanism to express the overlapping -1 reading
frame sequences with 15-30% efficiencies.

Here we report a possible case of -1 ribosomal frameshifting in
the translation of the human SEMA6C (semaphorin) mRNAs.
Sequence analysis indicates that the frameshit product most
likely represents a novel isoform of the protein.

Methodology
mRNA sequences:
Three mRNA (cDNA) sequences for the three variants of Homo
sapiens sema domain, transmembrane domain (TM), and
cytoplasmic domain, (semaphorin) 6C (SEMA6C) protein were
obtained from the NCBI Reference Sequence database, with
accession IDs NM_001178061 (4024 bp), NM_030913 (3928 bp) &amp;
NM_001178062 (3904 bp) for variants 1, 2 &amp; 3 respectively.

Identification of potential frameshifting events:
The mRNA sequences were subjected to analysis by a program
written in C++. The search for potential -1 frameshifting events
was carried out in three steps. First, the program searches for X
XXY YYZ heptanucleotide slippery sequences that register in
the correct reading frame (XXY &amp; YYZ denote two codons in
the zero reading frame). Second, the program tests whether an
H-type pseudoknot can form within 10 nucleotides downstream
of the identified slippery sequences. Details for identifying
pseudoknots have been described elsewhere. Briefly, an H-type
pseudoknot contains four essential elements: two helical stems
(S1 &amp; S2) and two connecting loops (L1 &amp; L2), with another
loop (L3) as being optional. The program scans through the
mRNA sequence and tests whether the sequence elements for
pseudoknot formation are present within a given sequence
window (defined by the default ranges of stem and loop
lengths). If a sequence contains two pairs of complementary
stretches (forming S1 &amp; S2) that are separated by two or three
connecting loops (L1, L2, and L3), then the sequence has the
potential to fold into a pseudoknot. In the final step, providing
that a slippery sequence and a downstream pseudoknot are
identified, the program tests whether the -1 reading frame
encodes a polypeptide with 100 or more amino acids residues
after the slippery sequence, i.g. 300 or more nucleotides in the -1
reading frame without a stop codon. Of course, -1 ribosomal
frameshifting may also lead to the synthesis of less than 100
amino acids residues in the -1 reading frames. However, this
scenario is not considered in the current study.

Sequence analysis of the frameshift product:
Similarity searches for the amino acids sequence of the
polypeptide generated by -1 ribosomal frameshifting were
performed by using the BLAST program available at NCBI
[
http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/], against the non-redundant
protein sequences database. Multiple sequences alignment of
amino acids sequences was carried out by the ClustalW
program [].

Results &amp; Discussion
Human SEMA6C has three variants in the NCBI Reference
Sequence database (962, 930, and 922 aa for variant 1, 2 and 3
respectively). Compared to variant 1, the mRNAs of variants 2
and 3 apparently lack an exon encoding 32 aa and 40 aa
respectively. The three variants otherwise have identical protein
and DNA sequences.

As shown in (), a potential slippery sequence of C CCU
UUA was identified, with the CCU codon coding for residue
Pro-821 (residue numbering refers to the variant 1 sequence). C
CCU UUA is an established slippery sequence utilized by
giardiavirus (GLV) at the viral gag-pol junction for -1
frameshifting []. Five nucleotides downstream from the
slippery sequence, a potential H-type pseudoknot were
identified. A -1 ribosomal frameshifting event induced by these
signals would produce a polypeptide of 238 amino acids
residues encoding by the -1 reading frame. In comparison, the
normal protein sequence contains 142 amino acids residues
after the frameshifting site (). Sequence similarity
between the frameshift product and the normal sequence is
low, as can be seen from the pairwise alignment.

We performed a similarity search for the frameshift product
using BLAST against the non-redundant protein sequences
database. When using the 238 amino acids sequence as the
query, only one hit was found: AAI14624, which is annotated as
a human SEMA6C protein with 537 residues. Residues 74-238 of
the query are identical to the last 165 residues (aa 373-537) of
AAI14624 except at one residue (Ala-137 vs Val-446). More
interestingly, the protein AAI14624 is encoded by a complete
cDNA clone (IMAGE: 40036285), indicating that the protein is
actually expressed. AAI14624 contains 537 residues; residues 1-
371 are identical to corresponding sequence of SEMA6C variant
1 and residues 373-537 match the C-terminal 165 residues of the
frameshift product (). Therefore, AAI14624 likely
represents a novel alternatively spliced isoform of human
SEMA6C with the N-terminal ~70% of the sequence being
encoded by the zero reading frame and the C-terminal ~30% of
the sequence being encoded by the -1 reading frame (using the
mRNA of variant 1 as a reference). We also used the residues 1-
73 of the frameshift product as the query in a BLAST search.
Only one hit was found: AES06293, which is annotated as a
partial sequence of a SEMA6C protein from Mustela putorius
furo. Residues 15-60 of the query show a high degree of
similarity to the last 46 residues of AES06293 (identities 54%,
positives 63%, no gap).

From the above sequence analysis, it is clear that ~90% of the
238 amino acids residues of the frameshift product match to
SEMA6C protein sequences in the database. These results
provide strong support for the utilization of -1 ribosomal
frameshifting mechanism in the translation of human SEMA6C
mRNAs. A SEMA6C protein isoform produced by -1 ribosomal
frameshifting would contain 1058 amino acids residues, which
is 96 residues longer than the longest known SEMA6C variant
().

Conclusion
A probable case of pseudoknot-stimulating -1 ribosomal
frameshifting is reported here for the mRNAs of three variants
of human SEMA6C proteins. This case differs from the
previously established cases of human PEG10 [] and Ma3 &amp;
Ma5 gene expressions [] in two important aspects. First,
SEMA6C is a true cellular protein without a viral origin, while
PEG10, Ma3 and Ma5 are all retrovirus-like proteins. The
frameshift site in SEMA6C mRNA locates more than 400
nucleotides upstream of the 0 reading frame stop codon, while
the frameshift sites in the PEG10, Ma3 and Ma5 mRNAs all
locate at the end of the 0 reading frame (also retrovirus-like).

Results from sequence analysis of the frameshift product shows,
beyond any reasonable doubt, that the polypeptide sequence
generated by -1 frameshifting in SEMA6C mRNA is genuine
SEMA6C protein sequence. Very likely, the proposed -1
ribosomal frameshifting event represents a real case of recoding
in human gene expression. Of course, more evidence provided
by further biochemical studies is required to establish the case.

This work was supported by the start-up fund and a seed grant
from Southern Illinois University Carbondale to Z.D.

Citation:Huang et al, Bioinformation 9(14): 736-738 (2013)

Potential signals for -1 ribosomal frameshifting in the
human SEMA6C mRNAs. The heptanucleotide slippery
sequence is boxed. A potential H-type pseudoknot is located
five nucleotides downstream of the slippery sequence.

Comparison of the polypeptide sequences encoded by
the 0 and -1 reading frames after the slippery sequence. The
alignment is carried out by ClustalW. Identical or highly similar
residues are boxed and highlighted with background colors.

A schematic diagram of the human SEMA6C variants
and isoforms, including the protein product generated by the
potential -1 ribosomal frameshifting. Thick solid bars represent
amino acids sequences. Thin lines indicate gaps in the
sequences. Numbers indicate the number of residues in each
protein and the position of the frameshift site in variant 1. All
three variants have the same potential frameshifting signals.
Only the frameshift (fs) product generated by the variant 1
mRNA is shown. Colors of the sequences are used to indicate
the identity of the sequences. Sequences in black indicate they
are identical in all proteins (except gaps). Sequences of the same
color are identical (or almost identical), while a difference in
color indicates sequence dissimilarity.

