Background
Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS) is an
infrequent syndrome of the genes that encode the proteins of
nuclear lamina (laminopathy) []. It is caused by de novo
dominant point mutations in lamin A gene leading towards
the premature aging [–]. The phenotype of the affected
individuals resemble old people, having minimal fats,
wrinkles on their faces, having cardiac dysfunction, weak
bones and osteoporosis problem which is heart-wrenching
and very conspicuous. Most of the affected people that
survive to some extent often die in teen age due to heart
failure [].

The LMNA gene is present on chromosome 1q21.1-21.2
having 12 exons encompassing around 25 kp 
[,
] encoding a
protein of 664 amino acids with molecular weight of 70 kDa
[]. 
Lamins are classified as type A and B. The type B lamin is
mostly expressed in all types of cells during development
while in case of type A, it is expressed only in differentiated
cells and are three in number i.e. lamin A (LA), lamin C and
Lamin A delta 10. They are involved in multiple functions
like nuclear envelope assembly, DNA synthesis,
transcription, apoptosis, etc []. Lamin A is produced as a
prelamin A which has a motif called CAAX-box at Cterminus
which undergoes farnesylation and then an internal
proteolytic cleavage which removes the terminal 18 coding
amino acids, producing mature lamin a 
[]. It is supposed
that permanently farnesylated mutant form of prelamin a
(progerin) acts as a dominant-negative which directs the
progressive defects in the structure of nucleus showing HGPS
[].

Lamin A form heterodimer together with Lamin C through
their rod domains in order to form the filamentous structure
found in the nuclear lamin []. This filamentous network is
directly underlying the inner nucleus membrane at the fringe
of the nucleus in higher eukaryotes. A number of integral
proteins in the inner nuclear membrane binds to the lamins
and make a link in between the nuclear membrane and the
network of the lamina []. Proteins are subjected to
mutations in nature which can affect them directly or
indirectly in different ways. Protein Properties are affected
either by change in their amino acids, interactions or folding
pattern. This study will provide a comprehensive insight into
the molecular level and 3D level changes and folding patterns
in Lamin a proteins which will provide a platform for future
therapeutics against HGPS.

Methodology
Changes at molecular level in a protein can affect the phenotype
of the cells, tissues and finally the organisms. The sequence of
Lamin A protein was retrieved from the UniProt
(http://www.uniprot.org/) database as a prerequisite to
analyze the effect of mutations on Lamin A protein structure, its
function and folding pattern. Mutations were identified from the
literature and were substituted in seed sequence of Lamin A
using MUTATE_MODEL [] to get the mutated versions of
the protein for investigating changes in the structure,
function and physiochemical properties. Patterns are useful
tools to identify short and well-conserved regions, such as
catalytic sites, binding sites, post-transcriptional modifications
(PTMs) or zinc fingers etc [] were predicted through
ScanProsite (http://prosite.expasy.org/scanprosite). Domains
were identified using Pfam online tool [] to check that, either
the mutations are in the domain, active site or in other non
binding sites.

Assignment of the secondary structural elements is an essential
step in characterizing the three dimensional structures, which
also serves as a departure point in many theoretical studies
devoted modeling, description of folding motifs, etc 
[].
Secondary structures of the seed along with the mutated versions
were predicted through Hierarchical Neural Network (HNN)
tool (http://npsa-pbil.ibcp.fr/cgi-bin/npsa_automat.pl?page
=/NPSA/npsa_hnn.html). All the predicted secondary
structures were compared to analyze the changes and their
impacts on the structures. Tertiary structure of the Lamin A
protein was previously unpredicted, so the 3D structure of
Lamin A protein and its filament domain was predicted as a seed
by using combination of threading and ab initio technique
through I_TASSER web based server []. 3D structures for the
mutated sequences and both of the domains were also predicted
through the same technique.

All the predicted structures were refined by using Chiron
server [] 
and were evaluated for Z score through ProSA-web
[], 
further validated for different parameters through WHAT IF
[] 
and for rotatable angles through RAMPAGE 
[]. The
Ramachandran plot describes the two angles called phi and
psi that describes the rotation of polypeptides. The less the
residues in disallowed region the less will be the steric
hindrance so the energy will be lower. As a final check,
physiochemical properties were predicted through ProtParam
(http://web.expasy.org/protparam) for all the structures to
analyze the effect of mutations on them because these
properties can affect the protein interactions. The computed
parameters include the molecular weight, theoretical pI
(isoelectric point), amino acid composition, atomic composition,
extinction coefficient, estimated half-life, instability index,
aliphatic index and grand average of hydropathicity
(GRAVY).

Discussion
The sequence of Lamin A protein consisting of 664 amino acids
was retrieved from UniProt with accession No. P02545 in FASTA
format, this protein is the product of LMNA gene and belongs to
the family of intermediate filament, involved in making a
two-dimensional filamentous network at the periphery of the
nucleus maintaining shape of the nucleus. Mutation analysis of
the protein shows the type of changes and how they affect the
properties and structures of the protein. For this purpose, the
sequence of Lamin A protein was subjected to substitution of
identified mutations i.e. E145K, R471C and R527C. The structure
of Lamin A protein is divided into 2 domains, residues 30 to 386
called filament (domain A) and residues 425 to 540 the IF_tail
domain (domain B). It was observed that mutation E145K lies
in the filament domain, while mutations R471C and R527C are
in IF_tail domain. Secondary structures were predicted for seed
protein as well as for mutated Lamin A proteins and significant
changes were observed in them  (see supplementary
material). It can therefore be inferred that, these changes may be
translated in the tertiary structures due to their effects on the
folding pattern and thus tertiary structures were predicted for
all the sequences ().

The I-TASSER predicted 5 models for each sequence, out of which
the best one was selected on the basis of C-score, which is an
assurance for estimating the quality of predicted models,
calculated based on the significance of threading template
alignments and the convergence parameters of the structure
assembly simulations. It typically ranges from -5 to 2; higher Cscore
signifies a model with a high confidence and vice-versa.
TM-score and RMSD are known standards for measuring
structural similarity between two structures which are usually
used to measure the accuracy of structure modelling when
the native structure is known. Distance between the
predicted model and the native structure was predicted
through the TM score and RMSD relative to the native
structure based on C-score through I-TASSER. C-score for
seed, E145K, R471C and R527C was recorded as -2.013, -2.040, -
1.678 and -2.040 respectively, while TM- score was 0.47±0.15,
0.47±0.15, 0.51±0.15, 0.47±0.15 respectively. Similarly the RMSD
for seed, E145K, R471C, R527C was 12.9±4.2Å, 13.0±4.2Å,
12.0±4.4Å, 13.0±4.2Å respectively. Comprehensive analysis
of the tertiary structures showed that these mutations have
affected the structures and thus the functions of the protein.
E145K and R527C pose medium effect while R471C has high
impact on the Lamin A protein function
(http://mutationassessor.org/).

The structures of Lamin A seed protein and mutated versions
were compared and superimposed using DALILITE ()
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/dalilite/) by superimposing with
a root mean square deviation (RMSD) value of 7.0 Å and a
high Dali Z-score of 1.9 (48 Cα atoms were aligned, 10%
sequence identity to lamin A seed protein). E145K was
observed with RMSD of 1.9 Å, Z-score of 27.2 (611 Cα atoms,
95% sequence identity); R527C with RMSD of 7.0 Å, Z score of
1.9 (48 Cα atoms, 10% sequence identity). As the mutations are
in the domain so the domain structures were also predicted
through M4T online tool to further analyze and compare
changes taking place in mutated domains. Slight changes were
observed in the energy profiles of IF_tail domain, where in
E145K the energy was increased from residue 64 to 72 while in
R471C energy reduction from residue 30 to 50 and then
increases from 64 to 72 was observed as compared to the seed
protein. The accuracy of the predicted models was quite
acceptable but to avoid any inconsistency all the models were
refined and validated for multiple parameters. The structure of
seed protein after validation was submitted to Protein Model
Database (PMDB) and was assigned with the PMDB ID
PM0077829. Z-score was calculated through ProSA-web which is -
4.2. The residues of seed protein, E145K, R471C and R527C in
favored region are 519, 581, 519 and 581, in the allowed region
are 110, 56, 103 and 56 while in outlier region are 33, 35, 40 and
25 respectively. According to physiochemical properties,
mutations affected atoms and molecular weights as well as the
isoelectric point, GRAVY and instability index. The instability
index and isoelectric point of R471C is the lowest (5.11 and
6.44) but its hydropathicity is highest (-0.852) (Tab). The
isoelectric point and hydropathicity both are important
properties. Any change in them can affect the protein
function, folding pattern and finally the protein-protein
interaction as well. It was also observed that the mutations
under studies are of non synonymous in nature. It was further
confirmed that the mutation E145K is a non-synonymous
conservative substitution while R471C and R527C are nonsynonymous
radical substitutions.

Conclusion
Our current study focuses on the structural analysis of
Lamin A and the types of changes enforced by the
mutations under study. Lamin A protein is divided into 2
domains, filament domain from residues 30 to 386 and
IF_tail domain with residues from 425 to 540. It was
observed that mutation E145K lies in the filament domain
while mutations R471C and R527C are in IF_tail domain
respectively. This study bridges computational biology to
molecular, structural biology and experimental biology, which
may deepen our understanding towards novel therapeutics
against genetic disorders. Structure and sequence based
computations were systematically evaluated and have
provided a comprehensive structural explanations for impacts
of the mutations under study. These changes affect the protein
secondary and tertiary structure as well as the energy profiles
and physiochemical properties. All these changes effect the
Lamin A protein interactions with other integral and binding
proteins in the inner nuclear membrane thus affecting the link
in between the nuclear membrane and the network of the
lamina causing the HGPS.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Navid et al, Bioinformation 8(5): 221-224 (2012)

Tertiary structure of refined seed and mutated lamin
a protein and their comparison. Arrows are showing the major
point of effects. (A) Tertiary structure of the seed protein; (B).
Tertiary structure of mutated lamin a protein E145K; (C)
Tertiary structure of mutated lamin a protein R471C; (D)
Tertiary structure of mutated lamin a protein R527C

