Background
G-Protein-Coupled-receptors (GPCR) are the largest family of
membrane bound receptor and they play a significant role in
mediating various biological processes. They have seven
hydrophobic regions that cross the membrane, an amino terminal
region outside the cell, 3 intracellular loops, 3 extracellular loops
followed by C terminal region in intracellular region (). A
diverse array of chemical substances act as ligand, including amino
acid, ions, lipids, peptide hormones, chemokines, odorants,
hormones, pheromones, odorants, purines, neuropeptides, tastants
[]. GPCR are considered as an excellent potential therapeutics
target class for drug design and the focus of current pharmaceutical
research and therapeutic intervention. Traditional experimental
method are very expensive and time consuming so there is need to
develop computational models to expedite the drug discovery
process.

Domains are considered to be the molecular signatures. They are the
building blocks of proteins. A protein domain is a structurally
compact, independently folding unit that forms a stable threedimensional
structure and shows a certain level of evolutionary
conservation. Typically, a conserved domain contains one or more
motifs. During evolution, they have been duplicated, fused and
recombined, to produce proteins with novel structures and
functions. Domain varies in length between 25 amino acids up to
500 amino acids. One domain may appear in a variety of
evolutionary related proteins. Each domain forms a compact three
dimensional structure and often can be independently stable and
folded. Some protein domains are “promiscuous” and can be found
in association with a variety of other domains. Therefore, during
protein sequence analysis, it is often advantageous to deal with one
domain at a time. The shortest domains such as zinc fingers are
stabilized by metal ions or disulphide bridges. Domains often form
functional units, such as calcium-binding, EF domain etc.

Attempts have been made by various research groups to develop
classifiers. The first classification attempt was made by Attwood
and Findlay, when they developed sequence based finger prints of
the seven characteristics GPCR hydrophobic domains. Kolakowski
gave the important, well known A-F classification system [].
Bockaert &amp; Pin represented classification system on the basis of
structural and ligand binding criteria classified GPCR in five classes
[]. After the availability of human genome in 2001, Fredriksson
and colleagues, [] classified GPCR in five major classes
commonly known as “GRAFS” (glutamate, rhodopsin, adhesion,
frizzled and secretin) based on phylogenetic criteria. Elrod and
Chou, [] suggested a covariant discriminant algorithm to predict
GPCR's type from amino acid composition. Karchin et al, []
developed a system based on support vector machines built on
profile HMMs. Inoue et al., [] gave the classification by binary
topology pattern. Qian et al., [] suggested a phylogenetic tree
based profile Hidden Markov model (T-HMM) for GPCR
classification. Papasaikas et al., [] developed classification using
sequence alone using signatures derived from profile hidden markov
models. Gaulton and Attwood [] used bioinformatics approaches
for GPCR classification. Kuo-Chen Chou, [] generated model
based on primary sequence by using covariant discriminant
predictor. Yang and Deogan, [] used probabilistic suffix tree
prediction model for each of the subfamilies. Erguner et al. []
developed a classification model based on ligand specific features.
Mathew N. Davies et al., [] performed classification based on
sequence and motif. Gangal and Kumar, [] made classification
based on reduced alphabet motif methodology. Mathew et al. []
performed classification based on simple representation of a
protein's physical properties. Gupta et al. [] performed
classification on dipeptide based SVM approach. But from the
literature survey it appears that no attempt has been made to
develop computational approaches for the classification of GPCR
using domains. Thus, an attempt has been made to develop a model
for domain based classification of GPCRs.

Methodology
GPCR superfamily can be organized into a hierarchy of classes,
class sub-families and class sub-sub-families according to GPCR
database (GPCRDB) []. Here the GPCR family tree has been
shown, of which the present work focuses on the further
classification of Amine subfamily up to sub-sub-family level.
Various softwares are available for prediction of domains which
have been developed using different approaches such as SVM,
HMM, Neural Network etc. Thus, for the same input they give
different result and also differ in accuracy. This variation in result
and accuracy leads to dilemma of choosing software for prediction
of domains. This information of domains is required in the proposed
classifier. Classification using merely the predicted domain from the
input sequence. Here five well known softwares, namely SBASE
(SB), SMART (SM), NCBI CONSERVED DOMIAN (NC), SCAN
PROSITE (SC), and PHYLODOME (PHY) have been used. Sbase,
a support vector machine based tool, is a collection of protein
domain sequences collected from the literature, protein sequence
databases and genomic databases. The protein domains are defined
by their sequence boundaries given in one of the primary sequence
databases (Swiss-Prot, PIR, TREMBL etc.) []. Smart, simple
modular architecture research tool is a web based tool that allows
domain identification and annotation. The tool compares every
sequence with its databases of domain sequences and multiple
alignments as well as identifies compositionally biased regions such
as signal peptide, transmembrane and coiled coil segments [].

NCBI conserved domain database (CDD) is a collection of multiple
sequence alignments and derived database search models, which
represent protein domains conserved in molecular evolution. CDD
provides annotation of domain footprints and conserved functional
sites on protein sequences []. Scan PROSITE is a new and
improved version of the web-based tool for detecting PROSITE
signature matches in protein sequences. For a number of PROSITE
profiles, the tool uses ProRules to detect functional and structural
intra-domain residues []. Phylodome performs the analysis of
taxonomic distribution and lineage-specific variation of domains
and domain combinations. It provides a fast overview on the
taxonomic spreading and potential interrelation of domains.
PhyloDome is a tool which can visualize and analyze the
phylogenetic distribution of one or more eukaryotic domains [].
Different Machine learning approaches such as Naïve Bayes, Bayes
Net, J48 and Bagging of WEKA has been employed [].

Naive bayes classifier
It is a simple probabilistic classifier based
on applying Bayes theorem with strong independent assumptions. In
other words, Naïve Bayes classifiers assume that the effect of a
variable value on a given class is independent of the values of other
variable. This assumption is called class conditional independence.
It is made to simplify the computation and in this sense considered
to be “Naïve”. The conditional independence assumption can be
formally stated as in equation 1 (see )

Bayes net
It represents a more flexible approach for modelling the
class conditional probabilities P(X/Y). This approach instead of
requiring all the attributes to be conditionally independent specifies
the exact pair of attributes that are conditionally independent [].

J48
A decision tree is a flowchart-like tree structure, where each
internal node (non leaf node) denotes a test on an attribute, each
branch represents an outcome of the test, and each leaf node (or
terminal node) holds a class label. The topmost node in a tree is the
root node. Internal nodes are denoted by rectangles, and leaf nodes
are denoted by ovals. The construction of decision tree classifiers
does not require any domain knowledge or parameter setting, and
therefore is appropriate for exploratory knowledge discovery [].

Bagging
Bagging also called as bootstrap aggregating, is a
technique that repeatedly samples from a data set according to a
uniform probability distribution. Each bootstrap sample has the
same size as the original data [].

The proteins used for this study were collected from GPCRDB (GProtein
Coupled Receptor Database) []. The sequences of Protein
in GPCRDB are derived from the SWISS-PROT and TREMBL
Data banks. The incomplete sequences containing fragments were
removed. NRDB program was used to verify that none of the
sequences were identical to each other in the data set.

Discussion
Receiver Operating Curve (ROC) is a graphical technique for
evaluating data mining schemes. ROC curves depicts the
performance of a classifier without regard to class distribution or
error costs .They plot the number of positives included in the
samples on the vertical axis, expressed as a percentage of the total
number of positives, against the total number of negatives on the
horizontal axis. For each fold of a 10 fold cross validation ,weight
the instances for a selection of different cost ratios train the scheme
on each weighted set, count the true positives and false positives in
the test set, and plot the resulting point on the ROC axes. The ROC
curves for different classes have been plotted as shown in . As ROC depicts the performance, we can refer from the
confusion matrix that in case of Metabotropic Glutamate class, the
false positive ratio is 0, which clearly indicates that the true positive
ratio is 100% i.e. 1. Similarly with Rhodopsin, frizzled and Secretin
the ratio is 1 .In case of Adhesion, the false positive value is 0.017,
which shows that the ratio is below 1 and it is 0.986. The accuracy
of results for the three levels obtained from all the four classifiers
with input as domains predicted from five different softwares and
their combinations is presented in (Tables 1-8 in ) given in appendix.

In the FAMILY LEVEL (see Table 1 in ), when predicted domains from Sbase are taken, the accuracy of is
98.59% is achieved, which is consistent with all classifiers used and
is highest as compared to results obtained with input predicted from
remaining four softwares individually. Further with two, three and
four combinations of softwares, involving Sbase gives same
accuracy of 98.59%. This depicts that all the domains that are
predicted by the other softwares are also predicted by Sbase only, as
Sbase predicts more number of domains than the remaining four
softwares used. In the SUB FAMILY LEVEL, when input is taken
as domains predicted by Sbase, it gives accuracy of 90.85% which
is highest as compared to the results obtained by classifiers with
input predicted from remaining four softwares (see Table 2 in
) individually. But when Sbase is used in
combination with Smart to predict domains as input to J48
classifier, it gives 92.07 % accuracy (see Table 3 in
). This implies that adding input from
Smart improves accuracy marginally from 90.85- 92.07%. Further
with three and four combinations, same accuracy is achieved,
indicating no improvement in accuracy due to redundancy in
prediction of domains. In the SUB-SUB FAMILY LEVEL,
domains predicted by Sbase as input to all classifier gives an
accuracy of 80.35 % consistently (see Table 4 in ). For combinations of two softwares for predicting
domains as input to classifiers gives an accuracy of 82.14% with
bagging (see Table 5 in ). Similarly in this
level too, with three and four combinations the highest accuracy
obtained is 82.14%. The accuracy of results obtained is comparable
with those obtained by earlier research workers [] and shown
below

Analysis
Among all the five softwares, the domains predicted by Sbase when
used as input to all the classifiers trained, consistently give result s
with best accuracy. Thus we conclude that Sbase predicts domains
with better accuracy compared to remaining four software used.
Further it is concluded that no single classifier works best for all the
three levels. Hence classifier Bagging for level III, J48 for level II
and all the four classifiers (J48, Bagging, Naïve Bayes and Bayes
Net) for level I are recommended to achieve better accuracy.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors are highly thankful to Department of biotechnology,
New Delhi for providing Bioinformatics Infra Structures Facility at
MANIT, Bhopal for carrying out this work.

Citation:Kumari et al, Bioinformation 4(4): 138-142 (2009)

(a) Representation of GPCR; (b) GPCR Family Hierrarchy; (c) ROC curve for metabotropic glutamate; (d) ROC curve for
rhodopsin; (e) ROC curve for adhesion; (f) ROC curve for frizzled; (g) ROC curve for secretin

