Background
The UNAIDS World AIDS Day Report-2012 declares that of the 
34 million HIV-infected patients about 1.7 million died of 
AIDS in 2011-12 [,
]. HIV infection is being treated by 
blocking steps in the life cycle of the virus from entry 
through multiplication. There are 33 singular antiretroviral 
drugs approved by FDA for the treatment of HIV infection, a 
combination of which is used in highly active anti-retroviral 
therapy (HAART) [,
]. Presently 10 HIV Protease (HIV-PR) 
inhibitors including Saquinavir are being used as drugs to disrupt 
enzyme HIV Protease essential for virus replication cycle 
[–]. 
The drugs in use become ineffective due to resistance by HIV-mutants 
and there is therefore always a need to develop new drug molecules. 
Structure-based pharmacophore designing provides a platform to 
design novel lead molecules that may have potential as drugs against 
HIV-PR. The addition of new classes of drugs is also important to 
tackle the rapid emergence of resistant protease variants that develop 
a chain of mutations and result in limiting the long term efficiency of 
these drugs [–]. 
Largely most of the studies with HIV-drugs and their resistance have been 
carried out in HIV-1 subtype B [] 
whereas there are very few studies that have been carried out in 
HIV-1 subtype A. It is the HIV-PR sequence, protein-structure or binding 
dynamics of its ligands that are fundamental to a protease inhibitor 
design []. 
This work is an attempt to study the binding thermodynamics of protein 
HIV-1 PR subtype-A (PDB ID: 3ixo) with the reference drug Saquinavir and 
its designed structural analogs as ligands to elucidate if any of these 
have potential to be a possible HIV-1 PR-inhibitor and if they are 
competent to evade the reported drug resistance mutations in HIV-1 
[]. Herein we 
designed two structural analogs of Saquinavir and analyzed them by 
docking with the enzyme HIV-1 PR subtype A. These two Saquinavir 
analogs were compared with the parent drug molecule for binding 
dynamics with the reported drug-resistant mutation sites in literature. 
The pharmacokinetic attributes and toxicity of the analogs have also 
been tested in silico.

Methodology
Designing and evaluation of ligands (structural analogs of Saquinavir):
The approved drug molecule Saquinavir for HIV-1 PR was 
retrieved as .mol, .sdf, SMILES and InChi formats at DrugBank 
online []. Using Saquinavir as template, various 
modifications were made in Saquinavir side chains at 
Chemsketch version 12 [] for Windows, manually. Two 
structures analogous to Saquinavir were designed with a 
possibility that multiple contacts with atoms or amino acid 
residues of HIV-1 PR may occur. Molecules with high 
hydrophobicity or charges or containing disulfide bonds were 
avoided. Strategies included replacing double rings with single 
rings, substituting separate rings with fused rings, or 
substitution of H-bond acceptor atoms with other 
electronegative atoms. Idea was to prune and cure the 
established drug to design its analogs in a manner which least 
interferes with its Lipinski profile. The new molecules, 
structural analogs of Saquinavir designed as above were named 
S1 to S2 and have been illustrated as (). 


Molecular docking and prediction of binding energies:
The Lamarckian genetic algorithm in AutoDock 4.2 was used to 
perform docking experiments [] using the .mol format of
ligands and converted into .pdb at OpenBabel 
[]. 
The .pdb file for the crystal structure of native HIV-1 
PR protein subtype A (PDB ID: 3ixo) [] was obtained from 
the protein data bank (PDB) []. The designed analogs S1 
and S2 were obtained as 3D models and flexible docking with 
HIV-PR protein subtype-A (PDB ID: 3ixo) were performed. 
Binding energies of the different dockings with Saquinavir, 
S1 and S2 were listed. Molecular graphics and analyses were 
performed with the UCSF Chimera package [].

Binding study analysis of docked ligands with HIV-1 PR-subtype A (PDB id: 3ixo) for resistance mutation:
The unbound form of HIV-1 PR-subtype-A protein (PDB id: 
3ixo) retrieved above was compared for those amino acids 
reported to undergo mutations for developing resistant 
protease variants [] and are involved in binding with 
Saquinavir, S1 or S2 as ligands. 


Prediction of pharmacokinetic properties:
Saquinavir and the two designed analogs S1 with minimum and 
S2 with equal binding energy as that of Saquinavir were 
selected for pharmacokinetic studies as earlier [] 
at ACD/I-lab [] 
and the profile of the reference drug was collated to establish the 
practically desirable benchmark. The pharmacokinetic profile of the 
S1 and S2 molecules included absorption, distribution, metabolism, 
excretion (ADME) and toxicity, drug-like characteristics viz. 
including Lipinski profile, logP, pKa, solubility and toxicity 
tests for mutagenicity (AMES test), genotoxicity, LD50, endocrine 
disruption and health effects.

Results &amp; discussion
The two designed structural analogs of HIV-1 PR inhibitor 
Saquinavir with IUPAC names are illustrated as (). 
Both the analogs showed binding with HIV-1 PR involving the 
residues in the enzyme catalytic site and the flap region. 
 (see supplementary material) 
lists the binding energies of Saquinavir, S1 and S2 analogs obtained 
after docking with HIV-PR at AutoDock-4.2. Saquinavir (reference drug, R) 
has a docking energy of -3.07 kcal/mol and S1 has least binding energy 
of -4.08 kcal/mol. Analog S2 had binding energy similar to the reference 
drug -3.07 kcal/mol. From the IUPAC names and corresponding structures of 
analogs it can be noted that in S2 the 3-oxo 3-phenyl propanoyl group 
replaces quinolin-2-yl carbonyl of Saquinavir at N2. In S1 however, there 
is an introduction of a N2-benzoyl group at N1 of Saquinavir.

 
The introduction of this Benzoyl group in S1 perhaps lowers 
the number of contacts between the HIV-1 PR and ligand as 
reflected in the lowered binding energy of the corresponding 
complex (). The binding results of the amino acid 
residues involved at catalytic or flap region of protein in 
forming bonds between Saquinavir/S1/S2 with HIV-PR 
subtype-A (PDB id: 3ixo) have also been listed in  (see 
supplementary material). 


Resistance to protease inhibition occurs largely due to 
mutations within the active site and non-catalytic distal sites of 
the protein that results in lowered affinity of protease inhibitors 
with respect to substrate, the biological activity of the enzyme 
protein in parallel []. The number of contacts between the 
ligands Saquinavir, S1 and S2 with HIV-1 PR subtype-A protein
are 211, 112 and 182 respectively. All the three ligands bind to 
the active site of the HIV-1 PR involving nine amino acid 
residues at positions 8, 23, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 32 and 48, 49, 50, 
82, 84 of the flap region. Unlike that in Saquinavir, one 
additional position 47 of the flap region is seen involved in 
binding with S1 and S2. 


According to a resistance mutation update using HIV patients׳ 
data [] the mutations in the protease gene associated with 
protease inhibitor Saquinavir, take place at 08 minor and 02 
major positions where amino acid substitution occurs 
conferring resistance to HIV-1 PR towards Saquinavir. In the 99 
amino acid residues long HIV-1-PR backbone, Gly 48 and Leu 
90 are sites for major resistance mutations whereas, Leu 10, Leu 
24, Iso 54, Iso 62, Arg 71, Gly 73, Val 77, Val 82 and Iso 84 are 
documented as sites for minor resistance mutations []. 
Interestingly of these 10 possible mutation sites, only 03 (01 
major and 02 minor) sites are noted to be involved in bound 
forms of 3ixo with Saquinavir, or analogs S1 and S2 (). 
More surprisingly all these three mutational positions lay in the 
flap region of HIV-1 PR subtype-A (). From the results 
it can be inferred that both S1 and S2 have similar chances of 
resistance to HIV-1 PR mutants as that of Saquinavir. Therefore, 
owing to the involvement of position 47 in the former there is a 
probability that S1/S2 would prove a better inhibitor for 
HAART therapy in patients with HIV-1 PR subtype-A than 
Saquinavir. On the other hand using conformational dynamics 
studies common polymorphic changes in HIV-1 non-subtype B 
clades as reported by Mao [] suggest 21 most common 
resistance-related mutation patterns against all HIV-PR 
inhibitors. The bound form of HIV-1 PR subtype-B (PDB id: 
1hxb) [] using conformational dynamics studies with 
Saquinavir is reported to have resistant-mutation positions (10, 
24 and 32) in the enzyme active site and positions (46, 47, 48, 50,
53, 54, 82 and 84) in the flap-region of the same protein. 

Drug resistance not only influences protease binding but also 
generates differential binding affinity between the substrate 
and inhibitors. The protein backbone of HIV-1 subtype-A and B 
are similar except that in subtype B the scaffold has amino acid 
substitutions I13V, K20R, M36I, R41K, H69K and L89M. 
Though the crystal structure of HIV-1 PR subtype-A (3ixo) is 
reported to differ from subtype B in having closed flap region 
as compared to the open structure observed in subtype B, their 
crystal contacts are similar to the unbound or bound forms of 
PR crystallized. These workers opined that as there appeared 
differing RMSD for HIV-1 PR crystal structures from subtypes 
across the clades, the conformation of the flaps in the different 
subtypes, bound and unbound may be a ‘cause-and-effect’ 
observation only. In our study no amino acid residues that 
confer structural differences in binding with ligand between 
subtype A and B are involved therefore both the novel 
Saquinavir analogs (S1 and S2) are expected to work with 
similar potential as Saquinavir in blocking HIV-1 PR across the 
clades. 

The results of the physico-chemical parameters studied at 
ACD/ilab for Saquinavir, and its two designed structural 
analogs S1 and S2 are listed as  (see supplementary 
material). The Lipinski profile for S2 was the best among the 
three molecules studied. Both S1 and S2 have a lower molecular 
weight of 619.79 and 661.83 respectively, than Saquinavir (mol 
wt. 670.84). Number of H-bond donors was six for all the 3 
molecules. Number of H-bond acceptors was 11 for Saquinavir 
and S2 however, the number decreased to 10 for S1. Number of 
rotatable bonds was 13 for both reference drug and S1 whereas 
it was more i.e. 15 for analog S2 (). Of the three 
molecules the topological polar surface area (TPSA) was 
comparatively larger for S2, followed by Saquinavir and S1. 
LogP values decreased as Saquinavir&gt;S2&gt;S1 respectively. 
Predicted pKa values for the strongest base were similar for the 
three molecules whereas pKa for strongest acid was lower for 
S2 than Saquinavir or S1. Solubility calculated twice as logSw 
(AB/logSw 2.0) and Sw was almost similar for all three 
molecules tested ().

Drug design essentially focuses on optimizing the binding 
interactions of ligands with their targets. However a compound 
with the best binding interactions is not necessarily the best 
drug because there are other critical issues downstream. A 
clinically used drug has to travel through the body to reach its 
target. There isn׳t wisdom in perfecting a compound with good 
drug-target interactions if it has no chance of reaching its target. 
These issues are grouped as pharmacokinetics and broadly 
qualified as ADME properties (Absorption, Distribution, 
Metabolism and Excretion).  also lists the absorption, 
distribution, metabolism and excretion (ADME) properties of 
Saquinavir, S1 and S2 predicted in silico in terms of Absorption, 
Bioavailability and logBB (blood-brain barrier) at ACD/ilab. 
Absorption min-1 was in the order Saquinavir&gt;S1&gt;S2. All 3 
molecules studied had 100% passive absorption and 30% oral 
bioavailability. Potential to cross blood brain barrier as 
suggested by logBB values for the three was the least for S2 
(). 


Toxicity Tests:
Getting the drug to the market invariably involves 
toxicity tests. This phase is significantly more expensive 
in terms of time and money than either lead discovery 
or drug design.  lists the important toxicity 
parameters for which Saquinavir and its analogs S1 and 
S2 were tested. Potential mutagenicity of a molecule 
predicted by AMES test suggests that all of the three 
molecules have a probability of positive AMES test below 
1 indicating almost no potential for mutagenicity and can 
be used as drug (). 
Moreover, none of the three molecules have any genotoxicity 
hazard. In silico test to measure whether Saquinavir and its 
analogs may (not) block the HERG K+ ion channels of the heart 
suggest S2 to be a better molecule with minimum HERG inhibition 
value of 0.12 followed by S1 (0.13) and Saquinavir drug (0.14). 
The LD50 value which measures the dosage in mg/kg which is fatal 
for an organism was least for Saquinavir but increased for S1 and 
S2 implying thereby that even at higher doses the two analogs 
would not be fatal. Toxicity increases numerically. This study 
places all the three molecules in similar toxicity category of 3 
or 4. No endocrine disruption was noted for all the three ligands 
studied herein. Note that the HIV which causes immune deficiency 
creates a situation where the lesser the health effects of an 
administered molecule on the housekeeping organs the better it is 
for long term use upon infection. The various health effects listed 
in Table 3 suggest S2 to 
be the safest among the three ligands with its significantly lowered effect 
on cardio-vascular system and lungs that suggest important health 
implications. The maximum recommended daily dose (MRDD) in correspondence 
with LD50 above assigns the largest value to S2 (13.79 mg/kg/day) &gt; S1 
(8.50 mg/kg/day) which is better than the marketed drug 
(). Results 
suggest that analog S2 has more potential to evade the problem of drug 
resistance mutation against HIV-1 PR subtype-A. S2 can be further 
developed and tested clinically as a real alternative drug for HIV-1 
PR across the clades in future.

Conclusion
Computational lead discovery and lead design can be 
attempted using chemoinformatics tools and resources. 
Analogs S1 and S2 of Saquinavir, the approved drug were 
computationally designed and tested for binding to the drug 
target, and also with respect to toxicity profile. The position N2 
of Saquinavir inhibitor can perhaps be potentially targeted for 
designing new but potential HIV-PR drugs. Among the two 
analogs studied the designed molecule S2 appears to be the 
best. S2 has a better pharmacodynamic profile and all desirable 
physico-chemical properties required as a drug. It can therefore 
be concluded that for a realistic understanding of the identified 
lead analog S2, in vitro and/or in vivo tests in animal models 
may be carried out prior to its recommendation as a drug.

Conflict of interest
There is no conflict of interest and all the authors have 
contributed equally to this work.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We acknowledge the computational facilities at Mahila 
Mahavidyalaya, BHU. AJ acknowledges University Grants 
Commission, New Delhi for Junior Research Fellowship. 

Citation:Jayaswal et al, Bioinformation 10(4): 227-232 (2014)

Structure of the reference drug, Saquinavir and 
structural analogs S1 to S2 with IUPAC names designed and tested 
for inhibitor qualities where. A: N1- {(2S,3R)-4-[(3S)-3-( tert-butylcarbamoyl) 
Saquinavir Reference: A-octahydroisoquinolin-2 (1H)-yl]-3-hydroxy-1-phenylbutan-2-yl}-N2- 
(quinolin-2-ylcarbonyl)-L-aspartamide-methane (1:1); S1: 
N2-benzoyl-A-octahydroisoquinolin-2(1H)-yl]-3-hydroxy-1-phenylbutan-2-yl}-L-aspartamide; 
S2: A-octahydroisoquinolin-2(1H)-yl]-3-hydroxy-1-phenylbutan-2-yl}-N2-(3-oxo-3 phenylpropanoyl)-L-aspartamide

