Background
Kala-azar or Leishmaniasis is identified by clinical syndromes caused by
obligate intracellular protozoa of the genus Leishmania and transmitted from
one host to another by the bite of blood sucking sand fly vectors 
[]. The
genomes of three species have been sequenced. There are relatively few
species-specific differences in gene content between the sequenced genomes,
but nearly 8% of the genes appear to be evolving at different rates 
[].
Knowledge about protein function is essential in the understanding of
biological processes []. 
No computational functional analysis of different
proteins of Leishmania is available till date. As the gap between the amount of
sequence information and functional characterization widens, increasing efforts
are being intended for the construction of databases. For scientist, it is therefore
helpful to have a single data collection point, which integrates research
interrelated data from diverse domains. Large scale of protein sequences is
available at the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) protein
database [] 
and supplementary data in the published literature. In silico
analysis gives us an idea on the role of different proteins in replication, survival
and spread in the host []. 
Computational proteomics of Leishmania (CPL)
involves the general tasks related to analysis of any novel sequences, such as
functional annotation and template information of the sequences. Support
vector machine (SVM) is a useful classifier for predicting the functional classes
of distantly related proteins [,
]. The function of a protein depends on its
tertiary structure. The structure and function of a protein gives much more
insight of the protein than its sequence []. Structural genomics are yielding
many protein structures that have unknown function. Nevertheless, successive
experimental investigation is costly and time-consuming, which makes
computational methods for predicting protein function very attractive 
[].

Therefore, a number of methods for the computational prediction of protein
structure from its sequence have been proposed. The simulated model of the
protein structure refers to the construction of an atomic-resolution model of the
target protein from its amino acid sequence and an experimental threedimensional
structure of a related homologous protein (i.e. template) 
[]. The
critical first step in homology modeling is the discovery of the best template
structure based on which a tertiary structure will be modeled 
[]. Considering
the biological significance of protein and with the aim of providing easy access
to large and growing volume of data, we have developed a repository for most
common proteins in which user can get the information about the template and
functional family of protein. As drug resistance problem persists in case of
Leishmaniasis, template information will help further modeling and analysis of
different essential proteins which would lead to the discovery of novel lead
compounds.

Methodology
The large scale of protein sequences have been reported in the NCBI protein
database and supplementary data in the published literature. The commonly
available virulent sequences of Leishmania have been downloaded from the
National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) and GeneDB 
[].
Different strains of the same species from samples collected from diverse
location or at different times may have completely identical sequences.
Redundancy and repetition in protein sequences has been carefully removed by
using ALIGN software to obtain a unique dataset 
[]. Exactly matching
sequences taken from multiple sources were eliminated while constructing the
dataset. The raw dataset was preprocessed to remove the sequence smaller than
50bp while analyzing with different software.

Database design
A rational database was constructed in MySQL for storage and query of data. It
includes two key entities namely molecular function and template structure
which fetches the probable function and most appropriate virtual structure of
the protein. The database consists of three layers: the basal layers',
‘Application layer’ and ‘UI’ layer. These layers is developed using Php, CSS
and JavaScript. The information's are managed in protein level to provide
timely and general view of the data. The data and information have been stored
in MySQL relational database. Meta information for different types of
biological data is placed as individual table in this layer ().

Database features
The data/information store in database can be accessed in very simple way like
Search by species name and protein functional family: The user can enter the
desired species name to access the common protein present in other strain of
that species e.g. if somebody enter the sp. name L.donovani then it will show
all protein of L.donovani which is also present in other three strain i.e. L.major,
L.infantum and L. braziliensis).The user can select the different protein
functional family to find out the proteins that possesses the same function
(). The user can compare the proteins of different species and their
functional families. The user can also compare tertiary structure of the
templates ().

Results and Discussion
Identification of diverse protein functions may facilitates a mechanistic
understanding of different proteins and opens novel means for drug
development. Nearly 25 important proteins of each species have taken into
consideration. Our study from SVMProt suggests that the proteins of different
strains are having lyases - carbon-oxygen lyases, actin binding, DNA-binding,
hydrolases - acting on ester bonds, magnesium-binding, calcium-binding,
copper-binding, metal-binding, DNA repair, zinc-binding, transmembrane and
all lipid-binding group of functional family. But most of the proteins
commonly belong to all lipid-binding proteins, zinc-binding and metal-binding
functional families. It is analyzed that the most of the homologous amino acid
sequences belong to same functional group. But change in amino acid
composition may affect the functional properties of the proteins. For example
the analysis of RAD51 protein suggests that mutation of RAD51 protein of L.
braziliensis may change the availability of some functional groups (Table 1 see
). From multiple sequences alignment of RAD51
protein of L. braziliensis, it is analyzed that the mutation of glycine to
threonine , arginine to glutamine, serine to valine, valine to methionine, alanine
to cysteine, glutamic acid to valine, proline to phenylalanine, glutamine to
proline, serine to glycine , aspartic acid to glycine, methionine to valine,
cysteine to tyrosine and serine to alanine at different position may lack the
availability of aptamer-binding protein, outer membrane and RNA-binding
functional family and availability of lyases - carbon-oxygen lyases, actin
binding, all lipid-binding proteins group of functional family. Mutation of
arginine to glutamine at 41st position and valine to isoleucine at 321st position
may increase the availability of oxidoreductases -acting on the CH-CH group
of donors and manganese-binding functional family (). In L. donovani
the insertion of proline at 43rd position and mutation of glutamic acid to
aspartic acid may increase the frequency of DNA recombination and mRNA
splicing functions.

Utility
With the aim of providing easy access to large and growing volume of data, a
database of most common protein is developed. This is the first web resource
which provides the common protein sequence of four strains as well as their
functional classes for comparison. The database has been analyzed, organized
and integrated to develop a user friendly interface. The web interface enables
the user to execute a quick and efficient search and comparison. The database
will be an extremely useful resource for computational and experimental
biologists working in Leishmania proteomics and related areas.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We thank Dr. Meera Singh of ICMR, New Delhi for helping us in setting up
our new biomedical informatics department in RMRIMS, Patna, India. The
authors would like to thank Mr. Rajani Kanta Nahak, Mr. Kanhu Charan
Maharana, Miss Smita Sahoo, Miss Chanda Jha and Miss Mukta Rani for
helpful discussion and valuable suggestions.

Citation:Dikhit et al, Bioinformation 6(1): 20-22 (2011)

System architecture.

Typical screenshots of the Database showing the functional family of
two compared protein with Database id, species name and protein name.

Structural (template) comparison of the two proteins.

Representation of Multiple sequence alignment of RAD51 protein.

