Background
α-like toxins are scorpion toxin induce a prolongation of the
action potential of excitable cells such as nerves and muscle by
slowing down the inactivation of the voltage gated sodium
channel (VGSC). Most α-like toxins are single chain composed
of 60-70 amino acid cross-linked by 4-disulfide bridges [,
]. In
the field of Iranian scorpion toxicology, the Iranian scorpion
Odonthubuthus doriae has received mark attention with
reference to isolation and pharmacologically characterization of
its venom toxins. A number of peptide toxins from its venom
have been reported. They are Od1, an α-like toxin 
[], OdK1 
[],
and OdK2 [] with an effect on voltage gated potassium
channels. The pharmacological effect of Od1 showed that the
inactivation process of the insect channel para/tipe, was
severely hampered by 200nm Od1 (EC50=80) ±14nm), whereas
Nav1.2 /β1, was not affected on concentration up to 5µm.
Nav1.5/β1 was influenced only at micromolar concentrations
up to 5µm []. The potent modulation of the VGSCc Nav1.7 was
seen by Od1 at low nanomolecular concentrations. The
inactivation of Nav1.7 is dramatically impaired with an EC50
value of 4.5nm. The pharmacological evidences show that Od1
is a high affinity ligand with a unique selectivity pattern on
Nav1.7 which found mainly in peripheral sensory and
sympathetic neurons and plays a critical role in short-term and
inflammatory pain (Wood et al., 2007). This selective high
affinity modulation of Nav1.7 currents is seen with well-known
VGSC modulators, local anesthetic and class I antiarrhythmic
drugs such as lidocain in a frequency dependent matter with an
EC50 value of 450µm []. The isolated analgesic peptide from
scorpion venom such as BmKITAP, an excitatory insectselective
toxin []; BmkdITAP3, a depressant insect-selective 
[],
BmKAGAP, an antitumor analgesic peptide showing inhibitory
effect on visceral and somatic pain 
[] BMkAngp1
[];
BmkAngM1[]; BMKAs 
[]; BMKIT2 
[] could target VGSCs
by virtue of their primary structure homology and similar
scaffold among long-chain sodium channel toxins 
[]. Od1
exhibits different and specific sensitive for insect or mammalian
VGSCs unlike other pharmacologically studied scorpion toxins
such as Lqh-3 and Lqh-2 [,
], in addition to the tarantula
peptides protx-1 and protx-11 []. In the present study, the
three-dimensional (3D) structure of Od1 was identified based
on the available template structural homologues of BmK
M1[], 
and the model validation with standard parameters 
[,
]. This study may useful in further functional characters
action of natural toxins with a specialized role for VGSCs
involved in pain pathway and inflammatory pain.

Methodology
Homology modeling of OD1:
The protein sequence of Od1 was previously indicated but there
is no available 3-D structure of Od1. We utilized MODELLER
[] for modeling Od1. Sequence similarity of known structures
to Od1 has been searched using profile build of MODELLER.
The result of sequence alignment showed homologues sequence
with identity range between 60- 75%, and selection of best
model has been done based on parameters including lowest
value of the DOPE assessment score together with the highest
GA341 assessment score. BmK M1 (PDB ID: 1DJT) 
[] – an α-
like toxin and in same family with Od1- with sequence
similarity and e-value about 75% and 0 respectively, was
selected as the template. Final 3-D structure of Od1 model has
been exhibited in the (). Also Sequence alignment of
template and target was calculated with CULSTALW 
() 
[]. To assess reliability of model, we executed online
VERIFY 3D (http://nihserver.mbi.ucla.edu/SAVS/) and
PROCHECK V 3.4.4 software [].

Simulation Protocol:
The molecular dynamics simulation was carried out for both
toxins, homology model of Od1 and BmK M1.The system was
neutralized by 1Cl- and 2 Cl- respectively, we utilized cutoff of
12 Å for short-range non-bonded interactions. Energy
minimization was carried out in 10000 step in 20ps.All
simulation was performed at NPT at 310k and a pressure of 1
atm and set 2fs for time step. The MD simulation was
performed for 10ns using NAMD Version 2.8 
[] and Charmm
27 force field [] and the model visualized by visual molecular
dynamic (VMD) [].

Result
Homology model:
Analysis of the model Verify 3-D score 
[] was depicted for the
template and target proteins, which has been used for
assessment of the reliability of the structure of the model. The
() showed that 100% of residues in homology model
like template show score greater than 0.2, this imply that this
model is reliable model for more investigation (The percentage
of residues with a score &gt; 0.2 should be more than 80% for a
reliable model) []. Furthermore we plot Ramachandran plot
of the homology model by using PROCHECK [] as a further
test of model, we found that 90.3% of the residues placed in
most favored regions and 9.3% of amino acids placed in
additional allowed regions and there is no residues (except Gly)
in disallowed residues. In general, a score close to 100% implies
good stereo-chemical quality of the model ().

General structural feature of Od1 modeling:
Since all toxins have similar secondary structure but different
in toxicity and selectivity function, assignment of secondary
structure of Od1 was evaluated by STRIDE [] as implement in
VMD and contains 3-beta sheets and alpha helix in βαββ motif
that residues 2-9, 34-40, 43- 52 form 3 β-sheets anti parallel
respectively and alpha helices composed of residues 20-29 with
coils and turns that connect these regions (). Also
Superimpose of Od1 and BmK M1 in  show similarity
structure of them.

Molecular dynamic simulation:
RMSD The root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) is the
measurement of the average distance between the atoms which
is calculated for protein structure to check its stability and we
measured RMSD for all atoms of the two proteins backbone
during 10 ns simulations (). Square deviation (SD) of
protein reached 0.2 and 0.1 Å respectively, which shows
stability of two proteins during simulation and are equilibrium
for more investigation.

Functional site:
The two structural regions of the alpha-like scorpion toxins
consisting of the NC domain which composed reverse turn
(residue 8-12) in the combination with the C-tail (57-65) and
core domain (residues: 40-42) have notable attention in the
binding preference for the distinct VGSCs () 
[]. The
five residue of the reverse turn in the scorpion toxin consist of
some conserved and variable residues in 3 subgroups α-toxins.
In the our study, alignment of these two α-like toxins shows
that three residues in position 8, 9 and 10 are different and more
acidic in Od1 including Asp (). Since it has been
shown that substitutions at the five-residue turn and
stabilization of the 9-10 bond in the cis conformation show no
significant effect on mammalian and insect sodium channel 
[–]. 
Consequently we can suggest that these two acidic residues
make little difference between these two α-like toxins. Granier
et al found that antigenic segments of scorpion toxins are
located at exposed regions of the molecular surface 
[] so
measurement of the solvent accessible surface area (SASA) of
functional region is an important comparison structure-function
analysis between Od1 and BmK M1. For this SASA ( &amp;
) of these two functional regions has been evaluated and it
show that SASA of 5 turn is similar in both toxins but SASA of
C-terminal (58 to 64) of Od1 has a little more exposure rather
than SASA of same region in BmK M1. Also It has been shown
that positive residues in position 58, 62 and 64 in BmK
M1strongly affect affinity of binding to sodium channels and
these residues are more exposed and accessible in BmK M1
rather than buried as in the classical a-toxins 
[–]. Od1
similar BmK M1contains same residues in this position except
position 64 which it has been occupied by Arg and His in Od1
and BmK M1 respectively (). So we measured solvent
accessible surface area (SASA) of these residues after
simulation, the data in the table 1 show that Arg is more
exposed than His  (see supplementary material) 
(). 
Since the key functional residues such as 58 and 62 are same
but SASA of them exhibit difference (). In the one hand,
this imply that more exposing residues can interact stronger
and better to sodium channels which may be more favorable
than that of in BmK M1 and increased toxicity of Od1, in the
other hand this feature demonstrate that Od1 as an α-like toxin
has exposed Arg in position 58 .

NC domain at the experimental studies:
It has been shown that α-toxins have a unique tertiary structure
in C-terminal (58-64) and 5-turn (8-12) which caused by
disulfide bond between Cys12 and Cys 63, and constitute NC
domain (). 
This region is functionally site for binding
to sodium channel []. Existence cis peptide bond between
Pro9 and His10 in BmK M1mediates the spatial relationship
between the turn 8-12 and the C-terminal stretch 58-64 and
cause a proximity of C-terminal and 5-turn which forms a local
tertiary structure unique for this functional site [,
].
Distance between C-terminal and 5-turn is an important
indicator for structure-function studies. We calculated distance
between two regions during simulation using VMD DisRg
plug-in [], 
and plot of distance () of two studied α-
like toxins during 10 ns of simulation show that latter distance
in Od1 is more than BmK M1maybe due to absence of cis
peptide bond in the Od1.

Discussion
As showed and verified previously, two opposite molecular
surface, face A and face B are conservative among BmK M1,
M4, M8 and Aah2, even along with well known difference in
their primary sequence. These two faces in OD1 are same with
described toxins. This similarity may highlight the conserved
general conformation of these two faces among alpha-toxins
and alpha-like toxins groups. The hydrophobic residue of face
A consist Tyr 35, Trp47, Trp38 and Tyr5 together with face B
residues Tyr21, 42 and14 are same in the alpha-like and alphatoxins.
SASA deformation of residues Tyr42 of OD1 showed
significant difference with BmK M1.These residues between
OD1 and BmK M1 are identical and their SASA are same only
in Tyr42 located in functional core domain of α-like toxin (core
domain: residues 40-43) (). Since Trp38 and Tyr42
(located in the β2-sheet and loop between β2-sheet and β3-sheet)
are involved in the pharmacological effect of the toxin, so this
position maybe affect the difference binding and affinity of α-
like toxins OD1 and BmK M1[,
]. Arg58 has a key role for
binding to VGSCs. The accessibility and feasibility of this
position has been shown to be important for pharmacological
characteristics [,
]. However this position is identical in
both toxins. Their SASA of Arg is 87.5 and 37.66 in OD1 and
BmK M1 respectively. This difference may responsible for two
pharmacological characteristics profile of alpha-like toxins
 (see supplementary material).

Conclusion
The α-like toxin, Od1 has two specialized domains in its
structure that are responsible for binding to S3-S4 of IV domain
of sodium channel 1.5 and 1.7 called NC domain and core
domain. In this paper the first, we modeled Od1 using
homology modeling based on another α-like toxin BmK M1 and
then, MD simulation was carried out for two toxins to refine
model and comparison structural feature and toxicity of them.
The presented model will be potentiate and facilitate structural
and functional investigations to use these two toxins in targeted
drug delivery.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We would like to extend special thanks to Prof. Pedersen for his
advice.

Citation:Karimi et al, Bioinformation 8(10): 474-478 (2012)

(A) alignment of two toxins using CLUSTALW. A line
above the alignment is used to mark strongly conserved
positions. Three marks (“*”, “:” 
and “.”) are used: “*” mark shows
fully conserved residue, “:” mark shows ‘strong’ groups is fully
conserved and “.” mark shows ‘weaker’ groups is fully
conserved; (B) Final 3-D structure of the of Od1 model. 5 turn (8
to 12) has been shown with red turn and C-ter segment
(residues 58 to 64) with blue coil which these two regions make
NC domain (both blue coil and red turn). Plots for checking
reliabity of homology model; (C) This figure illustrates
reliability of homology model provided that residues in
homology model (black line) like template (gray line) show
score greater than 0.2,; (D) Ramachandran plot of homology
model of Od1 shows good stereo-chemical quality of the model.
Most favored regions [A, B, L], Additional allowed regions [a, b,
l, p], generously allowed regions [~a, ~b, ~l, ~P], another
regions are disallowed regions. Glycin residues have been
shown as triangles.

(a) Root mean square deviation (RMSD). RMSD plot
of two toxins which black line is Od1 and gray line is BmKM1;
(b) Distance between 5-turn and C-ter and black line is Od1 and
gray line is BmKM1.

Solvent accessible surface area (SASA). (A) SASA of Cterminal
(residue 57 to 64); (B) SASA of 5turn (residue 8 to 12)
are presented and in both of the plot black line is Od1 and gray
line is BmKM1; (C) Superimposition illustration of OD1 (the red
ribbon) and BMKM1 (the blue ribbon) along with SASA of
residue 64 using VMD is exhibited. The red surface is Arg64 in
Od1 but the blue surface is His 64 in BmKM1.

