Background
Urease (urea amidohydrolase; EC 3.5.1.5) a metalloenzyme
catalyze the breakdown of urea into ammonia and carbon
dioxide. Urease is present in a variety of plants, algae, fungi
and bacteria [–
]. Several microorganisms utilize urea as a
source of nitrogen for growth. Urease plays an indispensable
role in the nitrogen metabolism during the germination process
of plant [,
]. Unfortunately, the higher level of urease in soil is
responsible for more rapid hydrolysis of urea, which leads to
the phytophathic effects and loss of volatilized ammonia 
[].
Moreover, urease is also a virulence factor in certain human
being and animal ailments. Ureases play a crucial role in the
progression of kidney stones, pyelonephritis, peptic ulcers
leading to cancer, and other diseases []. The conspicuous
remedy for treating infections caused by bacteria with
antibacterials, yet, often proved to be unsuccessful 
[]. Gastric
cancer [–
] is the fourth most frequent cancer and the second
most frequent cause of cancer related deaths in the world 
[].

At present, it is accepted that Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) has
an important contributing role in gastrointestinal tract infection
[]. Before neoplasia development, chronological changes in
the gastric mucosa occur []. This comprises low level of
inflammation and gastrointestinal membrane ulceration.
Research has focused on the possibility that “oxidative stress”
because of chronic inflammation might be a basic step in the
series of pre-neoplastic events []. H. pylori infection leads to
high expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase and nitric
oxide production []. The species of reactive nitrogen oxides
produces DNA damage and change in epithelial cell cycle [].
Antioxidant enzymes like Catalase and superoxide dismutase
might prevent the cell damage induced by the oxidative stress
produced by H. pylori associated inflammation []. It has been
observed in a clinical trial conducted in China that subjects
taking antioxidant supplements have reduced rates of gastric
related cancer death. Removal of the infection and/or dietary
supplementation with β-carotene, vitamin C, or both agents
separately, resulted in a considerable decrease in peptic lesions
[]. These findings support the assumption that oxidative
stress might represent the final common path of H. pylori
related carcinogenesis.

In the present study, interaction behaviors of nine arylidene
barbiturates were predicted at the binding pocket of BP using
molecular docking method. The synthesis and biological
activities of arylidene barbiturates were recently reported by
Khan, et al []. These compounds were docked in the binding
site of the receptor and the energies of these complex structures
were calculated via molecular mechanics generalized born
(MMGB) method after post docking. New thiobarbiturates
were then designed on the basis of obtaining findings and
structural information.

Methodology
Receptor 3D structure preparation:
The three dimensional (3D) X-ray structure of BP urease with
the resolution 1.55 Å was retrieved from the protein data bank
(http://www.rscb.org./pdb; code 4UBP) 
[]. All the water
molecules were removed from the structure and hydrogen
atoms were added. This structure was then energy minimized
with amber99 force field in the MOE Software packages
(http://www.chempcomp.com). The three dimensional
structure of the compounds were modeled using Builder
software implemented on MOE. All the structures were then
energy minimized using mmff94 force field in MOE prior to
molecular docking studies.

Docking of compounds:
The docking of all the reference compounds into the binding
pocket of BP urease were achieved using MOE-Dock
implemented on MOE. Docking was carried out with London
DG scoring function, triangle macher as placement method and
30 conformations for each compound were generated and
stored in MOE database.

Prediction of generalized Born interaction energies:
To identify potential compounds as urease inhibitors, the
MMGB interaction energies of all the compounds and urease
binding pocket were computed with generalized Born/volume
integral (GB/VI) implicit solvent method [] as implemented
on MOE. The energy minimization was carried out using the
conjugate gradient method by implementing the amber99 force
field and distance-dependent dielectric potential with the rms
gradient of 0.5. During minimization, all heavy atoms in the
protein were kept fixed. The MMGB interaction energy is the
non-bonded interaction energy (van der Waals, Coulomb and
GB implicit solvent interaction energies) between the receptor
and the ligand whereas the ligand and receptor strain energies
were not included in the calculations. Solvent molecules are
ignored in the computation. Same protocol and units as
mentioned in our previous article [] was used in the present
study for calculation of MMGB interaction energies. The
MMGB/VI interaction energy serves as a descriptor in selecting
the most active compounds.

Selection of possible active BP urease inhibitors (Stage 1):
The design of new compounds was based on the shared
structure of the said compounds. These new compounds were
designed by following, individual addition of substituent
groups including (-OH), (-MtOH), (-EtOH), (-CHO), (-NO2)
and halogens onto the various positions of an aryl ring of
thiobarbiturate as shown in  (see supplementary
material). These new complexes were then energy minimized
by the following steps: addition of the substituent groups to
aryl ring followed by minimization with heavy atoms fixed.

The MM/GBVI interaction energies of these new protein-ligand
complexes were then calculated. In stage 2, new compounds
were designed based on information retrieved from the
enzyme-ligand complexes that showed the lowest MM/GBVI
interaction energies and close to the values produced by the
reference molecules.

Design of new BP urease inhibitors (Stage 2):
It was noted that the complexes showing the lowest or closed
interaction energies to the reference molecules were those
substituted at ortho position of aryl ring of thiobarbiturates. So,
in this stage, only these two positions of an aryl ring were
substituted with various substituent groups. Subsequently, the
MM/GBVI interaction energies and binding affinities were
calculated and compared.

Results &amp; Discussion
In the present study, calculations on the interactions at the
binding pocket of Bacillus pasteurii urease (PDB entry Code
4UBP) were carried out for nine arylidene barbiturates. All
these compounds have shown to be potent inhibitors for the
Bacillus pasteurii (BP) urease activity. Arylidene barbiturates are
synthetic compounds synthesized by Khan, et al research group
[]. 
These compounds were docked into the receptor binding
pocket and these complex structures were then energy
minimized. Subsequently, MMGB interaction energy for each
compound with the active site residues was calculated. New
potent thiobarbiturate derivatives were then designed based on
the structural requirement of the active site Bacillus pasteurii
(BP) urease.

Docking of arylidene barbiturates to BP urease:
Nine arylidene barbiturates were docked into the binding
pocket of BP urease. The superimposed view of the top ranked
docked confirmations of these ligands (arylidene barbiturates)
is shown in . All the compounds were observed to
adopt analogous conformations with a like binding mode
around the binding site of BP urease and these compounds
were observed to interact with nickel ions and the important
binding pocket residues (His 137, His 275, Asp 363 etc.).

It has been shown in a number of reports that most of the
urease inhibitors interact with nickel ions and the important
active residues (His 137, His 275 etc.) [–
]. The spatial
arrangement of the most active compounds in the reference
molecules (compound 1) bound to the binding pocket residues
of urease is shown in . One of the carbonyl oxygen of
the compound 1 interact directly with both of the nickel atoms
in the protein. Furthermore, the compounds also established
hydrogen bonds with important active site residues ().
The MMGB interaction energy for all these compounds were
computed and tabulated in  (see supplementary
material). These results showed good correlation between the
predicted interaction energies of these compounds and their
biological activities. For example the most active compound
(compound 1) was observed to have minimum MMGB
interaction energy in the series. Whereas the compound having
lowest activity was observed with highest MMGB interaction
energy ().

Design of new BP urease inhibitors based on arylidene barbiturates:
New ligands with potential urease inhibitory activities were
then designed, first replacing the oxygen of arylidene
barbiturate with the sulfur atom and then adding various
substituted aryl group in the R position, since this oxygen and
the aryl ring gave the maximum contribution and has many
possibilities for substitution. In the present study, several polar
substituents including hydroxyl (–OH), methoxy (-OMe),
ethoxy (-OEt), nitro (-NO2), carbonyl (-CHO) and halogen
group (i.e., -Cl) were placed in different position of the aryl
ring. These substituent groups were added individually on
each position of the aryl ring.

This combination led us to design ninety five new
thiobarbiturates that were docked into the active site of BP
urease. The MMGB interaction energy was calculated for each
compound. On the basis of MMGB interaction energy and
visual inspection, fifteen compounds were predicted as the
most active urease inhibitors. The MMGB interaction energies
for these newly designed thiobarbiturates are summarized in
. 
The derivative for the ligand having hydroxyl group at
ortho position was observed to have lowest MMGB interaction
energies as compare to compounds having hydroxyl group in
other positions ().

Based on this finding, other positions in the aryl ring of diethyl
thiobarbiturates were substituted with other groups and
computed for MMGB interaction energies. The calculated
binding interaction energies for these newly substituted
derivatives were presented in  (see supplementary
material). Generally, these compounds showed interactions
within the binding pocket with residues as reported in a
number of literatures [–
]. The interaction of the most active
diethyl thiobarbiturate derivative is shown in .

Based on the hypothesis that the predicted MMGB interaction
energies correlates with the biological activity, hence
compounds with the lowest predicted MMGB interaction
energies and closest to that of the reference molecules are
supposed to be the most active. The MMGB interaction energies
of these newly designed thiobarbiturates were calculated and
the predicted interaction energies for the most active
compounds 1a, 2b, 8b, 5b, 18b, 7b and 13b were -22.95, -21.11, -
21.19, -20.18, -19.59, -19.22 and -19.12 Kcal/Mol respectively.

Conclusions
The molecular docking of nine arylidene barbiturates as urease
inhibitors were carried out on the active site of BP urease. In the
present work, the MM/GBVI interaction energy was used as
descriptor for selecting new candidates for BP urease inhibitors.
The selection was performed in two stages. In the first stage
substitutions were carried out individually for positions 1, 2, 3,
4, and 5 of the aryl ring of thiobarbiturates. Based on the
calculated MM/GBVI interaction energies, substitutions at
ortho position of aryl ring of thiobarbiturates gave the lowest
and closest interaction energies to the reference molecules.
Consequently, the focus was placed on: ortho position for all
the reference molecules. New compounds were designed by
substituting various substituent groups on this position. The
MM/GBVI interaction energies for all the new enzyme-ligand
complexes were calculated. This approach reflects a logical
progression for early stage drug discovery that can be exploited
to successfully identify potent drug candidates.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Wadood et al, Bioinformation 10(5): 299-307 (2014)

Superposition of arylidene barbiturates in the
binding pocket of BP urease.

Spatial arrangement of binding pocket of BP urease
for the most active reference compound.

Spatial arrangement of the binding pocket of BP
urease for the potent diethyl thiobarbiturate.

