Background
Recent years have witnessed a great thrust in the number of completely
sequenced microbial genomes available online to the scientific community. Till
date, more than 1600 microbial genomes have been completely sequenced and
sequencing of ˜5000 is in progress. This leads to an increase in demand of
functional annotation of genomic and proteomic data through computational
methods. Functional annotation allows categorization of genes in functional
classes, which can be very useful to understand the physiological meaning of
large amounts of genes. Bacteria on the basis of staining procedure can be
classified into Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. While the Grampositive
bacteria contain a single plasma membrane followed by a thick cell
wall, Gram-negative bacteria comprise of double membrane layer enclosing the
periplasmic space and peptidoglycan layer between the two lipid bilayers 
[].
Bacterial organisms have evolved dedicated secretion systems that aid in the
transport of polypeptides across their outer membrane. While little has been
studied about the secretion system pathways in Gram-positive bacteria, various
detailed studies have been performed on Gram-negative bacteria 
[,
].
Furthermore, genome sequencing of a variety of Gram-positive bacteria
showed that many of the secretion genes, which are initially identified in
E.coli, are also present in these organisms 
[]. Secretion systems in gramnegative
bacteria secrete a wide range of proteins across the cell membrane
such as those involved in biogenesis of pili and flagella, nutrient acquisition,
virulence and efflux of drugs and other toxins. On the basis of molecular nature
of transport machineries and their catalyzed reactions, Secretion systems can be
classified into several classes: (1) Type I Secretion (T1S); (2) Type II Secretion
(T2S); (3) Type III Secretion (T3S); (4) Type IV Secretion (T4S); and (5) Sec
Secretion system pathway [,
]. Being critical of the export of virulence
proteins, functional annotation of proteins involved in export machinery
pathways can provide novel drug targets that will be crucial in combat against
rapidly evolving pathogenic microorganisms. Most of the tools developed for
the identification for secretion systems are either dedicated to only one major
class of secretion systems, Type-III [,
,
], or are not specifically meant for
secretion systems []. 
In this context, similarity based search tools like BLAST
[] 
have aided in the functional annotation of proteomic data, but the major
limitation of these tools have been in identifying novel and distantly related
proteins. This work explores the use of machine learning approach, Support
Vector Machine (SVM), for the identification and classification of proteins
involved in secretion system pathways from their sequence. SVM is a widely
used machine learning approach for biological sequence analysis due to its
ability to handle high dimensional and noisy data. Further, due to its strong
mathematical background, it has a great generalization capacity that makes it
less susceptible to over-fitting, an important feature in learning algorithms 
[].
SVM has been widely used for diverse range of Biological applications 
[].
We have implemented the approach as a web-server application SSPred,
available online at 
http://www.bioinformatics.org/sspred. SSPred predicts a
protein to be involved in secretion system pathways on the basis of SVM
modules developed using amino acid composition (AAC), dipeptide
composition (DPC), physico-chemical composition (PCC), combination of all
the three aforementioned properties and combination of PSSM profiles with
AAC. A query protein sequence predicted to be part of secretion systems was
further classified into one of the five major sub-types i.e. T1S, T2S, T3S, T4S
and Sec secretion systems. (Supplementary Figure 1 available at

http://www.bioinformatics.org/sspred). The development and performance
measure analysis of SSPred will be discussed in the subsequent sections of the
manuscript.

Methodology
Dataset
Training Dataset
1977 secretion system proteins (Positive dataset) were collected from the
KEGG [] and SWISS-PROT 
[]. Similarly, 1932 non-secretion system
proteins (not located in the cell wall) were obtained from PSORT-B 
[] and
SubLoc [] making it as our negative dataset.

Test Dataset
Only 70% of the sequences in the training dataset were used for training
models. Remaining 30% were used as the test dataset for evaluating the
performance of SVM models.

Independent Dataset
For unbiased evaluation, an independent set of 112 secretion system and 88
non-secretion system protein sequences were retrieved from Transport
Classification Database (TCDB) [] and UniProtKB 
[], respectively. All the
datasets were manually curated such that only validated and non-redundant
protein sequences existed in the datasets (Supplementary Table 1 available at

http://www.bioinformatics.org/sspred).

Support Vector Machine
SVM is a machine learning algorithm that from a set of positively and
negatively labeled training vectors learns a classifier that can be used for many
complex binary classification problems 
[,
]. Freely downloadable package,
SVM_light (
http://www.cs.cornell.edu/people/tj/svm_light/) was used to
implement SVM. In this study, the Radial Basis Function (RBF) was adopted
and all the regulatory parameters were set as default, except for C and γ, which
were varied to get the best results. The best C and γ parameters correspond to
accuracy value at which sensitivity and specificity values are nearly equal. For
both C and γ parameters, a range of 0.05 to 500 was searched.

Input features
Amino-acid composition
Amino acid composition is a fraction of each amino acid present in the protein
sequence. If L is the length of protein and Qi is the frequency of occurrence of
an amino acid i, then amino acid composition is Ci = Qi/L, where, i is any of
the 20 amino acids.

Dipeptide composition
It transforms a protein into an input vector of 400 dimensions (20 by 20). Let
Qij be the fraction of paired amino acids (i, j = 1, 20) and L be the total number
of all possible dipeptides (L = 400) then the dipeptide composition is Cij =
Qij/L, where i, j are any of the 20 amino acid residues.

Physico-chemical properties
Feature vectors of 36 elements corresponding to 36 physico-chemical
properties for each amino acid were also used to train SVM modules. The
values of each physico-chemical property were normalized between 0 and 1 for
all 20 amino acids.

Fraction of phy-chem property i = (Sum total of phy-chem property i in the
protein sequence) / (Sum total of all phy-chem properties in the protein
sequence)

Position Specific Scoring Matrix (PSSM)
The PSSM for each query sequence was generated using three rounds of PSIBLAST
against a non-redundant protein database, with an E-value cut-off of
0.001. The PSSM provides a matrix of dimension L rows and 20 columns for a
protein sequence of L amino acid residues, where, 20 columns represent
occurrence/substitution of each type of 20 amino acids. This PSSM matrix was
further transformed into an input vector of 400 dimensions using methodology
described in earlier studies [].

SVM Models
Different SVM models, first using amino acid composition, dipeptide
composition, physico-chemical properties individually and then by combining
amino acid, dipeptide and physico-chemical (hybrid-I) and amino acid and
PSSM (hybrid-II) properties were developed. To overcome the imbalance in
positive and negative dataset, an ‘ensemble of SVM classifiers’ as suggested in
[] were used (Supplementary Figure 2, available at

http://www.bioinformatics.org/sspred).

Performance evaluation
5-fold cross validation
The performance of various SVM models was evaluated using 5-fold crossvalidation.
The training dataset was randomly partitioned into five subsets of
approximately equal size. The training of each module was carried using
collection of four subsets as training data and the fifth subset as test data. This
process was repeated five times so that each subset was used once as the test
data.

Validation test
Test and independent datasets were used to evaluate the performance of
different SVM models. A confusion matrix was employed to quantify the
efficiency of classification between secretion and non-secretion systems using
TP (True positive – known and predicted secretion systems), TN (True
negative – known and predicted non-secretion systems), FP (False positive –
known non-secretion systems and predicted secretion systems), FN (known
secretion systems and predicted non-secretion systems). We further defined
sensitivity (TP/ (TP+FN)), specificity (TN/(TN+FP)), accuracy, Matthews
correlation coefficient (MCC) and Reliability index [] for evaluating model
performance.

Discussion
The aim of this study was to develop a prediction server based on SVM for the
identification and classification of bacterial secretion systems. Different SVM
models based on diverse set of input features were developed and their
performance was evaluated based on training, testing and independent datasets.
The results are shown in  and Supplementary Table 2 available at

http://www.bioinformatics.org/sspred.  shows Mathew Correlation
Coefficient (MCC) observed during 5-fold cross-validation and validation test.
SVM models based on hybrid-II input features achieved highest MCC at each
prediction level, for all three datasets (training, test and independent) as shown
in . Figure 1a displays the MCC for various SVM models
evaluated using 5-fold cross validation on training dataset. The highest MCC of
0.80 was observed for hybrid-II based SVM model in distinguishing secretion
system proteins from non-secretion system proteins. Similarly, at subclassification
of secretion systems, hybrid-II based models achieved highest
MCC of 0.95, 0.71, 0.85, 0.72 and 0.76 for Type-1, Type-2, Type-3, Type-4
and Sec Secretion Systems, respectively (). This suggested that
inclusion of evolutionary information using PSSM matrix significantly aided
the SVM models in increasing sensitivity and specificity of predictions. It is to
be noted that inclusion of additional features in the input vector for training
SVM modules does not necessarily result in improvement in accuracy as
observed for low MCC for some dipeptide based SVM models in comparison
to amino-acid based models (). 
 displays the
MCC for various SVM models evaluated using validation test and independent
dataset respectively. As observed during 5-fold cross-validation, hybrid-II
based models achieved the highest MCC. For the test dataset, hybrid-II based
models achieved a MCC of 0.81 in the classification of secretion system
proteins from non-secretion system proteins. Similarly, for the subclassification
of secretion system proteins in test dataset, hybrid-II based
models performed best with the highest MCC of 0.92 and lowest MCC of 0.72
was observed for Type-I and Type-II secretion systems, respectively. On
unbiased evaluation of trained SVM models using independent dataset, hybrid-
II based models achieved a MCC of 0.94 for the classification of secretion
system proteins from non-secretion system proteins. Similarly for the subclassification
of secretion systems, the MCC for hybrid-II based models ranged
from 0.53 to 0.86 for Type-II and Type-I secretion systems respectively. The
performance of other SVM models based on input features like amino-acid,
dipeptide, physico-chemical and hybrid-I are also displayed in 
 for
performance comparison to hybrid-II based models.

Earlier studies have shown that various secretion systems share protein
components among them like four of the proteins in the T2S and T4S systems,
viz. the prepilin peptidase/N-methyl transferase, ATPase, the secretin and the
multispanning transmembrane (TM) proteins are shown to be homologous,
suggesting a common evolutionary origin [,
]. Similarly, T3S protein
components share their injectisome apparatus with flagellar apparatus and
some proteins like type-II/III secretion proteins are common in both T2S and
T3S system apparatus []. It is worth mentioning that for training SVM
modules the ideal dataset should not have two identical objects with opposite
labels (positive and negative) [] as this may result in misclassification of
shared labels. In this context, shared proteins among T2S, T3S and T4S
systems may be misclassified by SSPred. In fact, the confusion matrix derived
from validation test on independent dataset displays some of the protein
sequences from Type-III and Type-IV secretion systems misclassified as Type-
II secretion systems (). Many of these proteins were indeed observed
to be shared components of Type-II, III or IV secretion system machinery
(UniProtKB Id: Q7CMH0) and this partially explains the relatively low MCC
observed for Type-II in comparison to other secretion system classes. Although
this may be regarded as a drawback of the current prediction tool, considering
the fact that biological data does not always qualify the prerequisites of
machine learning algorithms. Moreover, long recognized similarity between the
T2S, T3S and T4S proteins may tend any machine learning algorithm towards
a certain level of misclassification. Furthermore, if SSPred was considered as
the first tool for functional annotation of huge proteomic data it may prove
significant in refining the candidate proteins for further wet-lab based research.
All the SVM modules trained in this study have been implemented in the form
of a web-server available at 
http://www.bioinformatics.org/sspred. Server-side
programming was implemented using Perl-CGI while for client-side
programming HTML and JavaScript were used. SSPred provides a userfriendly
interface where the user can type or paste the query sequence(s) in the
text-area or can upload the sequence(s) as a single file. Input sequence should
be in FASTA format. The server provides options to select any of the
prediction approaches (AAC-, DPC-, PCC-, Hybrid-I or Hybrid-II based) for
the identification and classification of secretion systems.

Conclusion
Protein secretion plays a central role in modulating the interactions of bacteria
with their environment. Despite a considerable diversity of proteins involved in
various classes of secretion systems, our knowledge of the complexity of
bacterial secretion systems has expanded. With the rapid accumulation of
bacterial genome data, assistance of computational tools for automated
functional annotation of genomic data is inevitable. We present here a
prediction server, SSPred for the identification and classification of proteins
involved in bacterial secretion systems. SSPred is based on a machine learning
approach, SVM and is trained using fixed length input vector derived from
compositional and evolutionary features of the protein sequence. SSPred has
shown good prediction accuracy and authors believe that SSPred will enlighten
the path of researchers in their quest in further understanding the complex
machinery of bacterial secretion systems.

This work was supported by the Grants received from the Department of
Biotechnology, Ministry of Science and Technology, Government of India,
New Delhi under the Bioinformatics Sub-Centre at DAVV, Indore.

Citation:Pundhir &amp; Kumar, Bioinformation 6(10): 380-382 (2011)

Prediction performance of various SVM models. a) Prediction
performance of models on a) training dataset evaluated using 5-fold crossvalidation;
b) Test dataset evaluated using validation test and; c) independent
dataset evaluated using validation test. Each bar represents MCC achieved by a
model based on distinct input features. Hybrid-II based models achieved
highest MCC both for the classification of secretion system proteins from nonsecretion
system protein and at the sub-classification of secretion system
proteins; d) Confusion matrix showing prediction results of SSPred in the subclassification
of secretion system proteins from independent dataset. A
relatively low MCC was observed for Type-II secretion systems due to many
false positive predictions. This can be partly explained by the fact that many of
Type-II secretion systems proteins are shared among Type-III and Type-IV
secretion system proteins [,
].

