Background
Data mining techniques can be applied to study the behavior of
different amino acid in protein sequences. The association rule
mining technique is a popularly used data mining technique.
Association rule mining involves counting frequent patterns (or
associations) in large databases, reporting all that exist above a
minimum frequency threshold known as the ‘support’ 
[].

The receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) pathway plays critical roles
in growth and division of cells. The RTK family comprises
numerous cell-surface receptors that mediate cell growth,
differentiation, migration and metabolism 
[]. RTKs have an
extracellular portion to which polypeptide ligands bind, a
single-pass transmembrane helix, and a cytoplasmic portion
containing a protein tyrosine kinase domain that catalyses
phosphoryl transfer from ATP to tyrosine (Tyr) residues in
protein substrates []. In cancer cells, mutations in the genes
encoding RTKs and various epigenetic mechanisms like
alternative splicing lead to inappropriate activation of kinases
resulting in uncontrolled cell division 
[].

Amino acid restriction sends normal cells into a quiescent
mode, their growth and division cycles being shut down in a
reversible manner. Tumour cells usually fail to move out of
cycle, the resulting imbalance generally leading to cell death in
a matter of days []. Our preliminary studies reveal that the
percentage of the amino acids present (except glycine, arginine
and alanine), is approximately the same in most of the Receptor
Tyrosine Kinase (RTK) protein sequences irrespective of
different species or taxa, whether it is vertebrate or invertebrate
or cancer sequences. Glycine is a non polar neutral amino acid
with hydropathy index -0.4. The amino acid glycine was found
to reduce tumour growth in rats. Dietary glycine prevented
increases in cell proliferation, a key event in cancer
development, suggesting that it may be an effective anti-cancer
agent []. 
Arginine is a nonpolar positively charged amino acid
with hydropathy index of -4.5. It is involved in a number of
biosynthetic pathways that significantly influence
carcinogenesis and tumour biology []. Alanine is a neutral
nonpolar amino acid with hydropathy index 1.8. Elevated rates
of glucose and alanine turnover and gluconeogenesis from
alanine were detected in patients who had advanced lung
cancer with weight loss [].

This study attempts to analyse the variations in the occurrence
of amino acids glycine, arginine and alanine in RTKs of
invertebrates, vertebrates and cancers using association rule
mining technique.

Methodology
Data Source and Data Selection:
The complete RTK protein sequences have been collected from
NCBI databases (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) and Swiss Prot.
There are 28 vertebrate sequences, 6 invertebrate sequences, 7
prokaryote sequences and 2 cancer sequences. The minimum
length vertebrate and invertebrate sequences are 1045 and 799,
respectively. Two cancer sequences namely human cancer and
mouse cancer are of same length 1620. The ProtParam software
from Expasy server (web.expasy.org/protparam/) is used to
calculate the protein parameters. The protparam results showed
interesting features in glycine, arginine and alanine amino
acids, hence these three amino acids have selected as a feature
set for the association rule mining.

In this study, we consider each amino acid as an item, the
protein sequence as basket that contains items and each taxa or
species as one transaction. On these transactions association
rule mining technique has been applied to obtain meaningful
association among the amino acids, also how frequently the
amino acid is present in the transactions. The quantitative value
for the items has been mapped to Boolean values, and then
Boolean association rule mining techniques has been applied to
study the behaviour of the amino acids in the sequences.

Association rule:
An ‘association rule’ is a pair of disjoint item sets. If LHS and
RHS denote the two disjoint itemsets, the association rule is
written as LHS→RHS i.e LHS and RHS are sets of items, the
RHS set being likely to occur whenever the LHS set occurs. The
‘support’ of the association rule LHS→RHS with respect to a
transaction set T is the ratio of support (LHS U RHS)/ T. The
‘confidence’ of the rule LHS→RHS with respect to a transaction
set T is the ratio of support (LHS U RHS)/ support (LHS) 
[].

Boolean association rule:
Boolean values were used to represent the present or absent of
the item in transaction. ‘0’ represents the absence of particular
item in the transaction and ‘1’ represents presence of particular
item in the transaction.

Data Optimization:
The quantitative values of glycine, arginine and alanine
columns are converted to boolean form i.e. 0 and 1 
(see
supplementary material). Every amino acid column is divided
in two groups, the grouping is necessary to convert into
Boolean form. Based on the quantitative values, their variations,
range etc. the grouping is done like glycine&lt;6.1% and
glycine&gt;=6.1%. For example in most of the transactions glycine
percent is either very less than 6.1% or more than it. 6.1% can be
used as a boundary for this classification. The ‘1’ in the table
represents the presence and ‘0’ represent the absence of that
item for that particular transaction. Total eight items are been
considered (i.e. glycine&lt;6.1%, glycine&gt;=6.1%, arginine&lt;5.9%,
arginine&gt;=5.9%, alanine&lt;=6.2% and alanine&gt;6.2%) 
().

Disscussion
Association rules are used widely in the area of market basket
analysis and can also reveal biologically relevant associations
between different genes or between environmental effects and
gene expression []. 
The results show that in 42.86% normal
vertebrates the glycine composition is more than or equal to 6.1,
which is 50% in invertebrates, 85.71% in prokaryotes and 100%
in cancer sequences, thereby reflecting the increasing trend of
glycine from normal vertebrates to cancerous RTK protein
(). 
Similarly, alanine and arginine show increasing and
decreasing trends, respectively, from normal vertebrate
sequence to cancer sequences. Correspondingly, the confidence
value shows that if the arginine is less 5.9%, then alanine is
always less than or equal to 6.2% in vertebrates. Similarly, if
glycine is less than 6.1%, then 93.75% alanine is less than or
equal to 6.2% and arginine will be less than 5.9%. It describes
how one amino acid is associated with another.

Both the human and mouse cancer sequences possess similar
characteristics (). It can be seen that the support is either
0 or 100. This reflects that in both the cancer sequence
transaction one particular item is either present or absent. The
confidence levels show zero for the above-mentioned
combinations. It can be assumed that the association between
different items is varying from vertebrates to cancer.

RTK activity in resting, normal cells is tightly controlled. When
they are mutated or structurally altered, RTKs become potent
oncoproteins: abnormal activation of RTKs in transformed cells
has been shown to be involved in the development and
progression of many human cancers []. Consequently, RTKs
and their growth-factor ligands have become rational targets for
therapeutic intervention using humanized antibodies and small
molecule drugs. Although a complete understanding of RTK
function and dysfunction in diverse tissues and multiple
biological processes is still to be achieved, studies of members
of this family have already had a significant impact on cancer
therapy [].

Analysing the data it is clear that glycine and alanine show
increasing trend from normal vertebrate sequences to cancer
sequence and on the other hand arginine show the decreasing
trend. The association among these three amino acids can be
established as follows: support for glycine&lt;6.1 decreases when
the support for arginine&lt;5.9 increases. It is also evident that
there is a trend in the increase/decrease of amino acid
composition from vertebrates to cancer sequences

Conclusion
In this paper the Boolean association rule mining technique has
been applied to find differences in the frequency of incidence of
a few important amino acids in various RTKs of different
species. The analysis shows that the three amino acid characters
− glycine, arginine, alanine - of cancer sequences are more
similar towards invertebrates and prokaryotes, which may lead
the cancer RTK's to de-evolve.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors are thankful to Department of Biotechnology
(DBT), Govt. of India, New Delhi for the financial support in the
form of Bioinformatics Infrastructure Facility (BTISNeT).

Citation:Kalita et al, Bioinformation 8(8): 344-347 (2012)

Flow chart of the in silico analysis of RTK protein
sequences

