Background
The advent of next generation sequencing techniques has made
a large amount of nucleotide sequence data available for
analysis. Whole genome sequences of six malarial parasites:
Plasmodium falciparum, Plasmodium chabaudii, Plasmodium yoelii,
Plasmodium berghei, Plasmodium knowlesi and Plasmodium vivax
are now available [–], and are extensively used in studying
application of codon usage bias phenomenon for comparative
genome analysis.

Apart from human host, Plasmodium species infect a wide range
of vertebrate hosts including birds, rodents and primates.
According to specific ecological and physiological
requirements, Plasmodium species are non-randomly distributed
across different ecological habitats. Codon usage analysis
provides insight into the environmental adaptation and
evolution of organisms []. It is well-known that sixty four
codons coding for twenty-odd amino acids results in
synonymous codons (different codons coding for the same
amino acid). Eighteen out of twenty amino acids are encoded
by multiple synonymous codons (exceptions being methionine
and tryptophan) and their probability of occurrence is not
equally distributed. This phenomenon was first explained by
the “genome hypothesis” which suggested that this observed
bias is species specific []. In most genomes, it is observed that
synonymous codons are not used with equal frequency.
Various genes show differential patterns of codon usage and
these results in enhancing their efficiency and accuracy of
translation into proteins [–]. The gene length, compositional
constraints, expression level and RNA stability are the main
factors responsible for influencing codon usage. In general,
pattern of codon usage is determined by mutational pressure
acting specifically over entire genome and selective forces
acting on coding regions []. In some prokaryotes like E. coli
and single cell eukaryotes like C.elegans, codon usage is
determined by both mutational and translational selection
pressure [–]. The intra-genomic and inter-genomic codon
usage variability is mainly governed by various biological
factors simultaneously but directional mutational pressure on
DNA sequences and translational selection forces are the key
role players [].

Previous investigations on these parasites and their vectors 
[]
showed differences in their genomic architecture as well as
ecological habitat. Codon distribution and factors shaping
codon usage bias can be explained by understanding their
usage patterns in Plasmodium species. The aim of this study is to
understand a few questions. First - whether the codon usage
pattern in Plasmodium genus is conserved or not; second - is the
comparative analysis of six different Plasmodium species to
understand their phylogenetic relationships possible on the
basis of codon usage bias and third-to identify the role of
mutational and translational selection forces using their genome
sequence data for shaping codon usage pattern.

Codon usage pattern of Plasmodium species appears to be
conserved at the genus level but on further analysis, this
conservation level is less and changes gradually from species to
species. The atypical A+T richness of the genome in P.falciparum
leads to codon bias of these bases at the wobble position in all
the coding sequences []. The genome of P.vivax has GC
content close to fifty percent, hence the variation in codon usage
bias is expected to be different and it is found to be so. The
other four malarial parasite genomes were analyzed for the first
time, and the codon usage bias of these rodent parasites,
P.berghei, P.chabaudi and P.yoelii are very similar to that of
P.falciparum. The simian and human parasite, P.knowlesi,
however, shows behavior similar to P.vivax. This grouping of
Plasmodium species were also confirmed by principal
component analysis (PCA) using sequence data. PCA
categorizes the studied species into different clusters, which are
similar to their phylogenetic status []. Equilibrium among
various forces like mutation pressure, translational selection
and genetic drift are some of the factors responsible for
explaining complex codon usage patterns in any species 
[].
The highly expressed and less expressed genes of studied
malarial species show significant differences in their codon
usage bias. Our analysis based on CDS (complete coding
sequences) and highly expressed genes of Plasmodium species
find a more pronounced role of compositional mutational
pressure instead of selection at translational level for shaping
different codon usage pattern.

Methodology
Plasmodium Genome Sequences:
Complete coding sequences (CDSs) of six Plasmodium species
(P.falciparum, P.vivax, P.knowlesi, P.yoelii, P.chabaudi and
P.berghei) were taken from PlasmoDB database 
[] and their
redundancies were removed. Total number of CDSs analyzed:
5523 (P.falciparum), 5435 (P.vivax), 5197 (P.knowelsi), 7724
(P.yoelii), 251 (P.chabaudi) and 4904 CDSs (P.berghei). The whole
genome sequence of P.falciparum and P.vivax were obtained
from NCBI site [www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov].

Codon usage analysis:
The frequency of codons (excluding stop codons)
corresponding to each amino acid in the CDSs is used for codon
usage analysis. Codon frequency, codon bias, amino acid
frequency per thousand, GC, GC1, GC2 and GC3 percentage
were calculated by using in-house code using Matlab 7.12.0
[www.mathworks.com].

Relative synonymous codon usage (RSCU):
RSCU value of each codon is the observed frequency of that
codon divided by the expected frequency for synonymous
codons of an amino acid using equal usage as a conjecture (see
).

Effective Number of Codons (ENC):
ENC is the most widely used estimator of codon usage bias 
[]
and provides the range of codon preferences in a gene. Its value
lies among 20 to 61. ENC value of 61indicates equal codon
usage for coding an amino acid and, its value is 20 when only
single codon codes it (see ).

Detection of tRNA:
The tRNA genes of all Plasmodium species except P.vivax were
taken from GeneDB database [http://www.genedb.org]. The
tRNA genes of P.vivax were searched using tRNAscanSE 
[]
using default parameters. Their respective anti-codons were
predicted using WebMGA server [http://www.weizhonglab.
ucsd.edu]. The correlation between amino acid frequency of
highly expressed genes and their respective tRNA copy number
in Plasmodium species were analyzed using linear regression
analysis model with significance level of P&lt;0.05.

Highly and lowly expressed genes, and frequency of optimal
codons were identified in six Plasmodium species using CodonW
1.3 (written by John Peden and taken from
fttp://molbiol.ox.ac.uk/cu/codonW. tar.Z/).

Principal Component Analysis (PCA):
PCA is one of the most commonly used multivariate statistical
techniques. Here PCA is used to analyze major trends in codon
usage pattern of different Plasmodium species. It involves a
mathematical procedure that reduces the original variables to a
lower number of orthogonal transformed variables (principal
components), without losing much of its information. Each
species was represented as a 59 dimensional vector (the number
of possible codons minus the two unique ones for methionine
and tryptophan and the three stop codons) where each vector
contains RSCU value of codons. Finally top 2 uncorrelated PCs
having greatest variance, was taken in to consideration for
analyzing the variation of codon usage bias within each species.
Here statistical analysis was carried out using Microsoft® Excel
2007/ XLSTAT©-Pro (Version 2012, Addinsoft, Inc., Brooklyn,
NY, USA).

Result and Discussion
Codon usage blueprint in Plasmodium species:
Codon usage summary of six Plasmodium species is given in
 (see supplementary material). Though all the species
have the same number of chromosomes, they differ in their
genome size. GC percent of coding sequences (CDSs) is greater
than their genomic GC percent in all six species, which is a
usual trend. GC percent of coding sequences is one of the
important factor affecting the codon usage in Plasmodium
species and it varies from 23.73 to 46.21 percent. The GC1 and
GC2 content of Plasmodium species coding sequences are
generally higher than their GC3 content except for P.vivax and
P. knowlesi. Genomic GC and GC at third synonymous position
(GC3) are closely associated. Usage of G/C ending codons will
increase the overall GC bias and decreases with increase in
usage of A/T ending codons. This variation is observed because
GC content is an important factor explaining the variation of
genome wide pattern of codon usage in different species.

Among six Plasmodium species analyzed, P.falciparum and
P.vivax are the most studied malaria causing species as they are
the main pathogens affecting humans. A separate study is done
here in context of GC3. GC3 content in P.falciprum is lowest and
it is highest in P.vivax CDSs. Nonetheless apparently there is
some heterogeneity in the dataset, given that the GC3 value
ranges from 10 % to 32.5 % () in case of P.falciparum
and 10 % to 82.5 % in P.vivax (). This indicates that
high variation in codon usage occurs between genes present in
both species. This large range of variation in codon usage is
probably due to differential mutational pressure acting on
different coding regions of a genome during the course of
evolution.

Codon usage data shown in  (see supplementary
material) provides ample evidence of codon usage bias in six
Plasmodium species. Here the codon count, RSCU values and
tRNA copy numbers are calculated. It is expected that G/C
ending codon usage should increase with increasing genomic
GC bias. This trend is followed in CDSs of P.vivax, where most
of the codons are G/C ending and other five Plasmodium species
show preference towards A/T ending codons at the wobble
position.

Transfer RNA is an adaptor molecule that decodes protein
information residing in mRNA codons. Anti-codon of tRNA is
responsible for encoding multiple codons differing only at
wobble position. The total copy number of tRNA in Plasmodium
species shows greater variation and its copy number is higher
in case of P.falciparum (tRNA copy number: 72) and P.vivax
(tRNA copy number: 72) when compared with the other species
like P.knowlesi (tRNA copy number: 41), P.yoelii (tRNA copy
number: 50), P.chabaudi (tRNA copy number: 53).

Arginine, an amino acid having six fold degenerate codons,
uses more copy number of tRNA for preferred codons(AGA,
AGG, CGT) and tRNA for less preferred codons (CGC, CGG) is
absent in all chosen Plasmodium species. C and G ending codons
are encoded by wobbling with T ending codons. Equal copy
number of tRNA genes are available for all codons in leucine
except CTT in P.vivax, CTA in P.knowlesi and CTC in rest of the
species and wobbling takes place between A-T or T-A, and
between C and G-ending codons. In serine, tRNA genes for
AGC (less preferred) are more expressed rather than AGT
(preferred codon). The tRNA for TCC and AGT codons are
absent in all Plasmodium species and here wobbling takes place
between T and C, and between C and G-ending codons.
Wobbling phenomenon seems very common in all six fold
degenerate codons of studied Plasmodium species. The four-fold
degenerate codons encoding amino acid uses high copy number
of tRNA genes in highly preferred codons among all
Plasmodium species except P.vivax. Wobbling is observed
between G/C and between T and A-ending codons in all
Plasmodium species. Isoleucine has three fold degenerated
codons where tRNA genes are expressed for highly preferred
codons and C ending codons wobble with A or T bases. The
amino acids: asparagine, aspartate, cysteine, histidine,
phenylalanine and tyrosine, are coded by pyrimidine ending
two fold codons. The tRNA copy number is higher in less
preferred codons (exception is P.vivax) of Plasmodium species.
Here wobbling plays a prominent role for coding XYT codons.
The purine ending codons of amino acids: glutamine, lysine
and glutamate show high copy number of tRNA for their highly
preferred codons except glutamate in case of P.yoelii and
wobbling does not occur for these amino acids.

Strength of codon bias:
Codon usage bias is the parameter that delineates the
differences in the occurrence of synonymous codons in genomic
coding sequences []. This codon bias is calculated for all
coding sequences of six Plasmodium species. On analyzing
codon usage bias of six different Plasmodium species, we see two
distinct groups (), four (P.falciparum, P.yoelii, P.chabaudi
and P.berghei) following similar pattern in codon usage bias and
the other two, P.vivax and P.knowlesi, varying together in a
noticeably different manner. The pattern of codon usage bias
within each group is remarkably similar. Although the species
of the second group show a similarity in the overall codon bias
pattern, but some prominent differences are also seen when
detailed analysis is done. These differences in the codon bias
pattern of all the six Plasmodium species are due to mutation
and genetic drift as well as translation selection acting on
coding sequences [,
]. Selection favors the preferred codons
over the non-preferred ones. Nevertheless the existences of nonpreferred
or non-optimal codons are due to the action of
mutational and genetic drift forces [].

Variation in translated amino acid frequency in Plasmodium species:
Proteins comprise of amino acid residues encoded by
degenerate codons. Amino acid usage is calculated here for
understanding the codon bias pattern in all six Plasmodium
species. Amino acid frequency variations are clearly visible
(). Amino acid usage varies among different
Plasmodium species but the overall picture represents higher
usage of Asn, Asp, Glu, Ile, Leu, Lys and Ser residues
considering whole proteome. This represents high adaptivity of
these amino acid residues over evolutionary time. P.vivax and
P.knowlesi genomes are found to be closely related 
[], having
nearly similar amino acid frequencies. These species shows
higher usage of Ala, Val, Arg, Gly and Pro amino acids when.
Compared to other Plasmodia species

The occurrence of low-complexity regions in variable surface
proteins of P.falciparum is well known 
[]. Amino acid repeats
require one particular preferred codon being chosen repeatedly
to code for that particular amino acid. Therefore frequency of
that particular codon becomes high. Amino acid content of
proteome depends upon the symmetric GC pressure and AT
pressure [–]. The P.falciparum proteome have high Asn- and
Lys- rich low-complexity repeats and this is basically due to
high AT bias compositional pressure which leads in increase of
their frequencies. The higher usage of Asn and Lys amino acids
in P.falciparum is clearly visible (). While in case of
P.vivax, amino acid residues (Ala, Arg, Gly and Pro) encoded by
GC rich codons are higher in number and can be explained by
GC pressure. A wide range of variation occurs in amino acid
composition of only two species namely P.falciparum and
P.vivax, compared with the others due to disparity in their
genome composition.

Determination of preferred codons for each amino acid in Plasmodium species:
Preferred codons are used at higher frequencies for encoding a
particular amino acid. Generally, preferred codons encoding the
same amino acid are similar in five Plasmodium species with
the exception of P.vivax (). Glu, Lys, and Phe shows
identical preferred codons throughout the species and
represented by A/T at the third codon position. For Ala and
Val, P.falciparum has two alternative codons as optimal, but they
differ by having A/T at the third place, providing a very good
example of A/T wobble. Although P.vivax and P.knowlesi have
high GC content, but preferred codon encoding Ile is ATT, not
ATC and this might be due to C -&gt; T mutations resulting from
deamination of cytosine.

Identification of codon usage preferences by PCA:
PCA was carried out to look at the similarities and differences
of codon usage patterns in different Plasmodium species. Here
Dictyostelium discoideum, having similar GC content to
P.falciparum is also taken in this statistical analysis to
understand the role of factors influencing codon usage bias. The
7 x 59 RSCU matrixes was created and used as initial data for
PCA. The PC1 has the Eigen value of 48.27, so it shows higher
variability of 81.81 % in codon usage. The first two PC vectors
accounted for 94.56 % of cumulative variance in codon usage
pattern. PC1 value was much bigger than the other component
values, so it has a higher interpretation degree for explaining
the total variability in codon usage.

The principal component analysis grouped the given species
into three clusters according to their positions along first two
principal components (). Here PCA is done using RSCU
values and variations in these values depend on their codon
usage. These species occupy different ecological niche
according to their ecological and physiological needs, resulting
in wide separation of these species. Although P.falciparum and
D.discoideum, are similar in their GC composition but they lie in
different clusters when PC2 is taken in to consideration. This
shows that apart from compositional constraint, few other
factors like translational selection and tRNA availability are also
responsible for shaping codon usage bias.

Relationship between ENC and GC3:
Based on the codon homozygosity, ENC is the most useful
concept reflecting codon usage bias pattern in different
organisms []. ENC values are calculated for coding sequences
of six Plasmodium species (). Here the degree of codon
usage bias in two species namely P.vivax and P.knowlesi is
lowest altogether as measured by ENC. This implies almost
random usage of synonymous codons, while the other four
species have lower values of ENC; this implies almost random
usage of synonymous codons, while the other four species have
lower values of ENC, showing more biased usage of
synonymous codons ().

ENC and their corresponding GC3 values are used to
demonstrate the role of dominant factors in shaping codon
usage bias in Plasmodium species. The normal curve represents
the relationship between ENC and GC3, in absence of selection
pressure (). In other words when GC-composition bias
is not responsible for any codon usage bias, all genes must be lie
on normal curve. Here P. falciparum shows extreme GC3 content
from 3.02 % to 39 % with a mean of 17.4 % and a wide range of
ENC variation from 26.62 to 59.15 with a mean value 38.22
among different coding genes (). Most of the genes of
P.falciparum plotted on ENC-GC3 plot, lie near the extreme end
of normal curve and group of genes with low ENC values
comprises of putatively highly expressed genes and as a
consequence, selection for codon usage can be easily seen.
While in P.vivax, GC3 values vary from 7 % to 87 % with a mean
value 54 % and their corresponding ENC values varies from 28
to 61, having 52.75 mean values (). ENC-GC3 plot
clearly shows that variation of GC3 is greater in P.vivax and its
correlation with ENC is less compared with that of P.falciparum;
resulting in variation of codon usage among them. The average
ENC value for all genes is less in P.falciparum and this shows
overall codon usage bias is more in P.falciparum compared to
P.vivax. Correlation analysis between ENC and GC3 shows
higher correlation coefficient for P.falciparum (0.63) compared
with that of P.vivax (0.21). This shows expression of genes in
P.falciparum is more dependent on composition biased
mutational pressure than P.vivax.

To highlight the role of various factors in shaping codon usage
bias, we diversified our codon data between highly expressed
and lowly expressed genes using their respective ENC values.
Here 5 % of genes are taken from extreme ends. Significance of
chi- square test is performed to visualize the variation of codon
usage between two groups of gene. Optimal codons occur more
frequently in highly expressed genes and their frequency is low
in less expressed genes []. 
In case of P.falciparum, putative
highly expressed genes show higher usage of 25 optimal
codons. Adenine (36 %) and Thymine (36 %) are the dominant
bases at third position in optimal codons of highly expressed
genes and their occurrence is due to compositional-biased
mutational pressure acting on P.falciparum genome. While
presence of G3 (20 %) and C3 (12 %) in optimal codons of highly
expressed genes predicts that G3 base is under higher
translational selection pressure than C3.

P.vivax chromosomes have scattered regions of constant AT and
GC-content, also called ‘isochore’ regions. Genes lying near the
centromere are more GC rich and their richness subsequently
decreases with increase in distance from centromere 
[]. Genes
residing near telomeric and sub-telomeric (high AT rich) shows
codon usage equivalent to P.falciparum. Highly expressed genes
of P.vivax contain 30 optimal codons, and are mostly A3 and T3
rich. Higher usage of A/T at the third position of optimal
codons in highly expressed genes of relatively GC-rich P.vivax
genome shows higher translational selection pressure acting at
AT3 codons. The correlation between amino acid frequency of
highly expressed genes and their respective tRNA copy number
is weak, and this hints at limitation of the role of translational
selection in shaping codon usage bias in Plasmodium species.
The correlation coefficient between amino acid frequency of
highly expressed genes and their respective tRNA is slightly
higher in case of P.vivax than P.falciparum. This represents the
role of translational selection in shaping codon usage bias is
also weak but more in P.vivax compared with P.falciparum.

Conclusion
Various factors affecting codon usage bias in Plasmodium
species is studied here considering larger data-sets. A strong
correlation is found among exonic GC content and their codon
usage bias in six Plasmodium species. The GC content of a
genome also explains much of the observed variation in amino
acid frequencies, effective number of codons and other factors
related to codon usage. The separation of each aspect of codon
usage behavior of studied species classifies them into two
separate lineages. This diversification is clearly seen via PCA.
Our PCA result shows a large evolutionary distance between
P.falciparum and P. vivax and these results are also confirmed by
previous phylogenetic studies []. The three rodent parasites,
P.berghei, P.chabaudi and P.yoelii cluster together as expected
and are close to P.falciparum; the genome-scale synteny among
them, confirmed that these species evolved from a common
ancestor []. Higher average ENC values, lower dependence
on GC3 content and location of all genes on ENC-GC3 plot in
P.vivax, shows more random usage of synonymous codons
compared with that of P.falciparum.

Correlation study of ENC-GC3 graph among these species
explains that P.falciparum gene expression level is highly
dependent on its biased genome composition. The optimal
codons of highly expressed genes in both, P.falciparum and
P.vivax, show higher usage of A/T ending codons. This stresses
higher role of compositional biased mutational pressure rather
than translational selection in shaping codon usage bias of
these species. Amino acid usage of highly expressed genes and
their tRNA copy numbers in studied Plasmodium species
displays a weak correlation, hence shows a limiting role of
selection at translational level for shaping codon usage. Our
findings confirm that codon usage bias phenomenon differs for
genes having differential expression level and factors
responsible for it are also different in studied Plasmodium
species. This study involves comparison of six Plasmodium
species using codon usage bias and our main focus is on
P.falciparum and P.vivax, as they are human malarial parasites.
Although both of these species use composition biased
mutational and translational selection pressure for shaping
their codon usage, but their relative strength is different. The
expression of genes in P.falciparum shows higher role of
compositional mutation pressure than P.vivax, and though the
role of translational selection for shaping codon usage bias is
weak in both species, but its effect is higher in P.vivax as
compared to P.falciparum. The CUB variation in the three rodent
parasites, P.berghei, P.chabaudii and P.yoelli is strikingly similar
to P.falciparum. The simian and human malarial parasite,
P.knowlesi shows a variation in codon usage bias similar to
P.vivax but on closer study there are differences confirmed by
the PCA analysis.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Yadav &amp; Swati, Bioinformation 8(24): 1230-1239 (2012)

GC3 distribution in P.falciparum (A) and P.vivax (B), coding sequences

Comparative codon bias analysis in Plasmodium species.

Amino acid frequency in different Plasmodium species

Graph showing preferred codons for each amino acid in six Plasmodium species. Numerical values inside blocks show
RSCU values of preferred codons.

Principal component analyses of relative synonymous codon usage (RSCU) indices of seven species

Graph showing the relationship between the effective number of codons (ENC) and the GC content of the third codon
position (GC3) in P.falciparum (A) and P.vivax (B)

