Background
Schizophrenia is a severe form of mental illness affecting
~0.001% of the adult population globally in the age group
15-35 years []. Schizophrenic patients have delusions,
hallucinations, disorganized speech and bizarre behaviour as
positive symptoms and have poverty of speech, blunted affect,
social withdrawal, absence of normal emotional feelings and
expressions, lack of energy, interest, motivation as well as
absence of purpose of life as negative symptoms 
[–].
Neuroleptics are used to treat Schizophrenia and divided into
two main classes such as typical neuroleptics (Chlorpromazine,
Promazine, Haloperidol, Phenothiazines etc) and atypical
neuroleptics (Clozapine, Melperone, Risperidone, Olanzapine,
Quetiapine etc). Typical neuroleptic acts by blocking the
action of the neurotransmitter dopamine at the level of D2
receptor. D2 receptor blockade is the main target for
antipsychotic drugs, because there is a higher density of D2 in
schizophrenic brains [–
]. The lower level of dopamine
stimulation mainly reduces positive symptoms. However,
decreased dopamine level results in increased acetylcholine
levels that may cause side effects called extrapyramidal
symptoms (EPS) [,
,
]. Atypical neuroleptics have effect on
positive symptoms as well as on negative symptoms tha t's
why the atypical neuroleptics are more effective than typical
neuroleptics []. Five dopamine receptors D1, D2, D3, D4,
and D5 have been identified and each of the receptors
contains about 400 amino acids, and they have seven regions
spanning the neural membrane [,
]. When drugs block
dopamine receptors in the basal ganglia, the symptoms of
schizophrenia are reduced. Their function is to bind to
dopamine secreted by presynaptic nerve cells and this
binding triggers change in the metabolic activity of the
postsynaptic nerve cells [].

Risperidone is second generation antipsychotic agent used for
the treatment of Schizophrenia. In a large population of elderly
patients the use of risperidone is associated with a lower risk of
extrapyramidal side effects compared to First Generation
Antipsychotics [,
]. In this work we had made a Homology
model for D2 dopamine receptor of Homo sapiens. The
computed model's energy was minimized and reliability of
model was checked by Ramachandran plot and ERRAT
value. Stable model was docked with the risperidone and
their 15 antagonists of D2 dopamine receptor. The docking
results were further used for the QSAR modelling; Multiple
Linear Regression (MLR) model was engendered using
energy-based descriptors yielding correlation coefficient r 2 of
0.513.

Methodology
Retrieval of target protein Sequence:
Amino acid sequence of D2 dopamine receptor (ID: P14416)
of Homo Sapiens was obtained from uniprot database
(http://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/).

Template Searching:
To find a suitable template protein for the modeling of the
target D2 dopamine receptor BLAST [] program was used
against the PDB database. By the BLAST search, we selected
structure of the human dopamine D3 receptor in complex with
Eticlopride (PDB Id: 3PBL) as template protein for query
sequence and has sequence identity 50%.

Sequence alignment:
The sequence alignment of target sequence with template was
performed by using dynamics programming based align2D
module in Modeller 9.11 software []. Default parameters
were applied and the aligned sequences were inspected and
adjusted manually to minimize the number of gaps and
insertions.

Homology modeling and structure refinement:
Homology model of D2 dopamine receptor was constructed
using Modeller 9.11 software []. Alignment of query with
template protein was used as input for model single script in
Modeller program and five comparative models were
generated. These models were validated with the help of
Modeller objective function and DOPE score, which were the
statistical parameter for the assessment of model using the
standard Modeller energy function. The constructed models
were subjected to constraint energy minimization with a
harmonic constraint of 200 kJ/mol/Å, applied for all protein
atoms, using the steepest descent and conjugate gradient
technique to eliminate bad contacts between protein atoms.
Computations were done in vacuo with the GROMOS96 43B1
parameters set, without reaction field. Energy computations
were done with the GROMOS96 implementation of SWISSpdbViewer
(http://iqc.ethz.ch/gromos) 
[]. The qualities of
models were checked with the help of Procheck [] and Errat
[] tools.

Docking:
To gain better insight for the interactions between Risperidone
and their derivatives with D2 dopamine receptor molecular
docking studies were carried out []. AutoDock Software
along with a graphical user interface, AutoDock Tools (ADT)
was utilized to generate grids, calculate dock score and
evaluate the conformations. ADT requires the receptor and
ligand coordinates in either Mol2 or PDB format 
[,
]. The
receptor PDB file was transformed into the PDBQT format file
containing the receptor atom coordinates, partial charges and
salvation parameters. The ligand file was transformed into a
PDBQT file, merged nonpolar hydrogen atoms and torsions
were defined. The grid calculations were set up and maps
were calculated with the programme AutoGrid. All docking
runs were performed using the Lamarckian genetic algorithm
and the obtained dock score were reported in kcal/mol.
Docking of Resperidone and their 15 antagonists on the
predefined and experimentally characterized binding pocket,
where the residues ASP78, ILE148, THR376, and TYR380 were
being particularly important.

2D QSAR study:
Risperidone and their 15 antagonists of D2 dopamine receptor
were used for 2D QSAR studies. Using MLR, the QSAR model
was developed with eight types of independent variables
Binding Energy, Ligand Efficiency, Inhib Constant, Intermol
energy, vdW + Hbond + desolv Energy, Electrostatic Energy,
Total Internal Energy and Torsional Energy and one
dependent variable activity (ki) with the help of different crossvalidation
procedures values.

Results &amp; Discussion
The sequence alignment of the query and template was
shown in (). The query sequence was made up of 443
residues; however, the structure of template was containing
481 residues. Using manual editing query was modelled from
residue number 23 to 443 and after alignment the sequence
identity was 50%. The result of alignment was employed to
build new homology model. After the optimization and
energy minimization process, the best model was selected
among five 3D models generated for D2 protein on the basis
of Modeller scores and the Molecular Objective Function of
the selected model was 2174.2141 kcal/mol and the DOPE
score result was -46843.125002141 kcal/mol. Energy
minimization of 3D structure is vital for providing the
maximum stability to the protein. Ramachandran plot drawn
through PROCHECK [] program validated the model with
91.6% of total residues in most favoured regions, 7.0%
residues in additional allowed regions, 0.5% in the
generously allowed regions and 0.8% in the disallowed
regions. ERRAT (http://nihserver.mbi.ucla.edu,
http://www.doe- mbi.ucla.edu/Services/Errat.html) is a
protein structure verification algorithm that is especially wellsuited
for evaluating the progress of crystallographic model
building and refinement. The program works by analysing the
statistics of non-bonded interactions between different atom
types. A single output plot was produced by errat program
that gave the value of the error function vs. position of a 9-
residue sliding window. By comparison with statistics from
highly refined structures, the error values have been
calibrated to give confidence limits []. This was extremely
useful in making decisions about reliability. After the errat
the overall quality factor was 87.940 which have been shown
in the ().

On the basis of R groups () at four different positions,
Risperidone and their 15 derivatives were taken from literature
[] is shown in 
 (see supplementary material).
Docking studies predicted the interaction of ligands with
protein and residues involved in these complexes. In this work,
optimal interactions and the best autodock score were used as
criteria to interpret the best conformation among the 15
conformations, generated by AutoDock program.

To assess the predictive performance of QSAR models,
different cross-validation procedures were adopted. First, in
leave-one-out strategy (LOOCV), one molecule was removed
from the dataset as a test compound and the remaining 15
molecules were used to build the model. This process was
repeated 15 times with each inhibitor as a test molecule. Once
a model was constructed, goodness about the fit and
statistical significance was assessed using the statistical
parameters [].

Docking and QSAR results of Risperidone and their 15
derivatives with D2 receptor are shown in 
 (see
supplementary material) in which the Antagonist potency
(Observed pKi and Predicted pKi) are mentioned. A graphical
representation between experimental pKi vs Predicted pKi is
shown in ().

Conclusion
Flexible docking of ligand from chemical database to receptor
is an emerging approach and is widely used in drug discovery
to reduce the cost and time. Risperidone and their fifteen
known derivatives having inhibitory value pKi with D2
dopamine were used for 2D QSAR study. Using MLR analysis,
a QSAR based model was generated having eight descriptors
namely Binding Energy, Ligand Efficiency, Inhib Constant,
Intermol energy, vdW + Hbond + desolv Energy, Electrostatic
Energy, Total Internal Energy and Torsional Energy, which
accomplished correlation coefficient r2
value 0.513.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors are grateful to the Bioinformatics Division of
Biotech Park, Lucknow for providing computational facilities.
The authors are thankful to the Department of Pharmacology
and Therapeutics, KGMU, Lucknow, for providing necessary
facilities for research work. This study is financially supported
by the Ragiv Gandhi National Fellowship of University Grants
Commission.

Citation:Bhargava et al, Bioinformation 10(1): 008-012 (2014)

The sequence alignment of the query protein and the
template protein using align 2D script of modeller software.
Target and template have 50% sequence identity.

Errat plot for D2 dopamine receptor structure. Error
values for residues as predicted by ERRAT for D2 dopamine
receptor. Y axis presents the error value and X axis presents the
amino acid sequences of D2 dopamine receptor. An error value
exceeding 99% confidence level indicates poorly modelled
regions. The overall quality factor assigned to D2 dopamine
receptor is 87.940.

Risperidone Derivatives: On the basis of four different
groups at R1, R2, R3 and R4 positions

Depict the experimental and predicted pKi value in X
and Y direction respectively with r2= 0.513 using MLR.

