Background
Glycosyl hydrolases (GH) are a widespread group of enzymes hydrolyzing the glycosidic bond between two or more carbohydrates or 
between a carbohydrate and a non‐carbohydrate moiety. GH was classified traditionally based on their substrate specificity. However, the 
classification based on substrate specificity was complicated by the fact that some enzymes hydrolyze more than one substrate. This 
resulted in reorganization of glycosyl hydrolases into families based on amino acid sequence similarities and intends to better reflect 
the structural features of these enzymes than their sole substrate specificity []. 
At present there are about 113 GH families that are available on the continuously updated Carbohydrate Active enZYmes (CAZy) web server 
[]. β‐glucuronidase (GUS) is a well characterized glycosyl hydrolase classified 
under two GH families, 2 and 79 respectively (CAZy). The enzyme catalyzes the hydrolysis of β‐glucuronic acid residues from the 
non‐reducing termini of glycosaminoglycans (GAGs). The reaction catalyzed by β‐glucuronidase is, 
β‐D‐glucuronide + H2O → D‐glucuronate + alcohol.

The family‐2 β‐glucuronidase sequence was reported in a wide range of organisms, this include Homo sapiens, Rattus 
norvegicus, Drosophila melanogaster, Penicillium canescens and Escherichia coli. However, family‐2 β‐glucuronidase 
sequence has been so far not reported in plants. The family‐79 β‐glucuronidase had been characterized in Homo sapien 
and was known as heparanase, it is involved in the hydrolysis of heparan sulfate, a proteoglycan 
[]. Apart from vertebrates, heparanase homologous sequence had 
been reported in a few microorganisms and in plants as well (Scutellaria baicalensis, Arabidopsis thaliana, 
Oryza sativa, Hordeum vulgare and Medicago truncatula). Referring to family‐2 
glucuronidase, the E. coil GUS encoded by (uidA) had been used for the development of a reporter gene 
system for plant transformation experiments []. Transgenic plants expressing 
E. coli GUS resulted in histochemical staining with the substrate 5‐Bromo‐4‐chloro‐3‐indolyl‐beta‐D‐glucuronide 
(X‐Gluc) on GUS assay at the physiological pH (7.0). The enzyme GUS cleaved the β‐glucuronic acid from the substrate X‐Gluc and 
resulted in the development of a blue color of the transformed tissues. However, the untransformed/wild type plant remained unstained 
due to the absence of uidA activity. Jefferson and coworkers had also reported the absence of endogenous GUS activity in a broad 
spectrum of higher plants []. On the contrary, endogenous GUS activity evidenced 
by blue staining with X‐Gluc had been reported in wild type (untransformed) plants particularly in immature tissues of a few species. 
The GUS activity was found to be present in male gametophyte of several solanaceous plants []. 
Similarly an extensive study of 52 seed‐plants species showed that plants lack GUS activity in vegetative organs but has activity in 
reproductive tissues []. Alwen and coworkers reported endogenous GUS activity at 
pH 5.0 in a wide variety of plant species []. Further, the presence of endogenous 
GUS activity had been reported in vegetative and floral organs of Arabidopsis thaliana at pH 5.0 
[]. Above all, characterization of endogenous GUS activity in selected models 
such as Arabidopsis thaliana, Oryza sativa, Zea mays and Nicotiana tobaccum clearly demonstrated the 
ubiquitous presence of GUS activity at an optimum pH of 4.0 []. In the light of 
reports on histochemical staining in wild type plants, the present study aim to resolve the basis for GUS staining in plants. We took to 
bioinformatics approach and analyzed the amino acid sequences of β‐glucuronidases from family‐2 and family‐79. As an outcome of 
this study, we propose the absence of family‐2 β‐glucuronidase in plants and implicate family‐79 
β‐glucuronidase (heparanase) for the alleged histochemical activity in wild type plants.

Methodology
The GeneBank and GenPept databases of National Centre for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) and the Carbohydrate‐Active enZYmes server 
(CaZY) were accessed for this study []. Amino acid sequence of 
β‐glucuronidase (family‐2): Homo sapiens (NP_000172), Escherichia coli K12 (AAC74689), 
Penicillium canescens (AAV91787) and β‐glucuronidase (family‐79): Homo sapiens (AAD54516), 
Scutellaria baicalensis (BAA97804), Arabidopsis thaliana (BAB09947), Oryza sativa 
(BAD36026), Hordeum vulgare (CAD42650), Medicago truncatula (ABE93308) were downloaded from GenPept. 
Pairwise sequence alignment was done using align program with BLOSUM62 matrix []. 
The search for β‐glucuronidase (family‐2) homolog in plants was performed with PSI‐BLAST and TBLASTN programs 
[]. Multiple sequence alignment of the heparanase sequences was done using 
ClustalW []. The chemical structures of X‐Gluc and Baicalein 
7‐O‐β‐D‐glucuronide were retrieved from PubChem database [].

Discussion
β‐glucuronidase sequences belonging to family‐2 and 79 reflected the existence of only a weak similarity/identity at the 
amino acid level. Pairwise alignment of human heparanase (family‐79) and human β‐glucuronidase (family‐2) showed only 
11.4% identity and 18.7% similarity. Similarly, human heparanase and E. coli β‐glucuronidase (family‐2) had only 
11.7% identity and 22.0% similarity. In contrast, human and E. coli β‐glucuronidase of family‐2 shared significant level of 
identity (42.6%) and similarity (55.6%) despite their distance of separation in evolution. This impelled us to note that 
β‐glucuronidase classified under the glycosyl hydrolase families (2 and 79) are two distinct categories of enzymes. Here we 
wish to discuss the role of E. coli family‐2 β‐glucuronidase (uidA) as a reporter gene in plant transformation experiments []. 
The alleged absence of homologous GUS activity in plants formed the basis for successfully devising one such system. In fact, till date 
there have been no reports on gene sequence cloned/annotated to encode for family‐2 β‐glucuronidase in plants. However, to 
belie this, there are a few reports on GUS activity in wild type plants, as revealed by histochemical staining with X‐Gluc 
[,,,,]. 
To resolve the basis for GUS staining, we searched the GenBank for plausible nucleotide sequences that are 
homologous to the members of family‐2 β‐glucuronidase in plants. PSI‐BLAST which helps to find distantly related members was 
carried out with family‐2 β	‐glucuronidase from E. coli, Penicillium, Homo sapiens 
and other organisms as query, but the search failed to detect corresponding homolog in plants. Subsequently, a translated BLAST (TBLASTN) 
search was done against the whole genome sequences of Arabidopsis thaliana and Oryza sativa using the same query sequences. However, the 
search failed to detect homologous sequence of family‐2 β‐glucuronidase in the above genomes for which the complete genomic 
sequence is available in the GenBank.

Now that we refer to sGUS of Scutellaria baicalensis, the only well characterized plant endo‐β‐glucuronidase 
belonging to family‐79. Sasaki and coworkers reported the cloning of sGUS, a family‐79 β‐glucuronidase from the plant 
Scutellaria baicalensis []. sGUS encodes for baicalinase 
[] and is required for the initiation of H2O2 metabolism. 
It acts on baicalein‐7‐O‐β‐D‐glucuronide (the physiological substrate), leading to the formation of baicalein and glucuronate 
(when Scutellaria cells produced a large amount of H2O2 in response to different stresses, baicalein 
7‐O‐β‐D‐glucuronide gets hydrolyzed into baicalein by baicalinase). As that of human heparanase, sGUS too showed a very weak 
similarity with the β‐glucuronidase of family‐2 (16.4% and 4.6% for human and E. coli respectively). 
However, sGUS shared a high level similarity of 56.3%, 56.9%, 54.7% and 61.1% with other plant 
heparanase sequence, Arabidopsis thaliana, Oryza sativa, Hordeum vulgare and 
Medicago truncatula, respectively. Albeit the lack of appreciable sequence similarity between the β‐glucuronidases 
of family‐2 and family‐79, a glutamic acid and tyrosine residue implicated in the catalytic activity of family‐2 β‐glucuronidase 
[,] was found to be strongly 
conserved in sGUS at Glu212 and Tyr281 []. This hinted 
that, catalytic site residues likely glutamic acid and tyrosine are conserved across family‐2 and family‐79 β‐glucuronidases. 
Hence, we did a multiple sequence alignment for available plant heparanase sequences from Scutellaria baicalensis, 
Arabidopsis thaliana, Oryza sativa, Hordeum vulgare and Medicago truncatula. 
A similar conservation of glutamic acid and tyrosine residues was observed in all plant heparanase sequences at positions corresponding 
to sGUS (). This find led to propose that, conserved glutamic acid and tyrosine residues in 
heparanase are involved in the cleavage of glucuronate moiety from the physiological substrate (e.g) Baicalein 7‐O‐β‐D‐glucuronide. 
We further extend to state that heparanase does also hydrolyze unintended substrates, such as X‐Gluc. The hydrolysis of X‐Gluc is 
hypothesized to have taken place due to the broad substrate specificity of family‐79 β‐glucuronidase on X‐Gluc under acidic pH, 
about 4.0. From the chemical structure of Baicalein 7‐O‐β‐D‐glucuronide and X‐Gluc, it is evident that ’β‐glucuronate‘ 
is the only common moiety found in the above two structures (). Heparanase, may therefore 
bind either with Baicalein 7‐O‐β‐D‐glucuronide or X‐Gluc via the glucuronate moiety and result into hydrolysis of the glycosidic 
bond. The above hypothesis further qualifies from the fact that glycosyl hydrolases in general were known to possess broader substrate 
specificity [].

Conclusion
The gene encoding for family‐2 β‐glucuronidase has been so far not reported in plants. However, it was known to be present in 
different groups of organism such as archaebacteria, eubacteria, fungi, invertebrates and vertebrates. Our search to find family‐2 
β‐glucuronidase homologous sequence in plants turned out to be unsuccessful, suggesting that family‐2 GUS could be missing in 
plants. Further, analyses of family‐2 and family‐79 β‐glucuronidases provided a sequence based functional insight on the origin 
of histochemical staining in wild type plants. The proposed broad substrate action of family‐79 β‐glucuronidase on X‐Gluc 
explains the basis for GUS staining reported in wild type plants at low pH. However, the absence of histochemical staining at 
physiological pH is on expected lines, as plant heparanase was known to have acidic pH for its optimal activity. On the other hand, 
family‐2 β‐glucuronidase works only at pH 7.0 and transgenic plants overexpressing GUS contributes for the histochemical 
activity, the absence of GUS staining in wild type plants at the physiological pH confirms that family‐2 β‐glucuronidase is 
missing in plants.

This work was carried out at the Bioinformatics centre developed with the financial support of the Department of Biotechnology, 
Government of India under the Biotechnology Information System (BTIS) program.

Citation:Murthyet al., Bioinformation 2(1): 12-16 (2007)

A segment of the multiple sequence alignment of plant heparanase from Oryza sativa, Medicago 
truncatula, Arabidopsis thaliana, Hordeum vulgare and Scutellaria baicalensis 
is shown. The conserved catalytic site residues (glutamic acid and tyrosine) are shown in boxes.

Structure of (a) Baicalein 7‐O‐β‐D‐glucuronide and (b) X‐Gluc showing 
the glucuronate moiety present in common (encircled).

