Background
During the last few years, the common paradigm that protein folds
tend to be mutually exclusive and to cluster into well separated groups
started to be criticized. The expression “gregariousness” was used to
indicate the number of close neighbors of each fold and such a concept
was applied to examine weather the fold space is a continuum, where
existing motifs are used to enlarge old folds and create new types of
structures []. It was observed that high levels of gregariousness are
observed when different folds contain the same motif []. The protein
structure space was also analyzed by Kim and co-workers, by using
several representative data sets and several computational approaches
[,]. It was observed that protein structures can be discriminated
essentially by three features: the prevalence of residues that adopt a α
or a β secondary structure and the presence of α-β-α motifs (two
flanked parallel β strands separated by an antiparallel α helix) [,
].
However, significant overlaps were observed amongst different
structural classes. Folds in the overlap regions contain features of both
classes, and this was considered the main reason why structure-based
function predictions are not very efficient []. A detailed review on the
nature of the protein fold space showed both advantages and
disadvantages of considering it a continuous and multidimensional
object rather that an ensemble of discrete categories [].

In the present paper, a robust statistical approach is adapted to the
problem of the estimation of the degree of clustering within the fold
space. The term “clustering tendency” refers to the problem of
deciding weather the subjects have an intrinsic predisposition to
cluster into distinct groups or they are randomly arranged. This is also
referred to as the spatial randomness problem and while intrinsically
aggregated subjects are characterized by mutual attraction, randomly
arranged subjects show mutual repulsion []. The clustering tendency
was estimated with the Cox-Lewis coefficient [,] on different
datasets and it was observed that protein folds are partially
overlapping.

Methodology
Data Selection
Four types of data sets were selected. Care was taken to avoid
redundancies between the data. In fact, a purely random selection of a
set of protein structures might produce results completely biased. The
clustering tendency measured in a data set that contains several
proteins nearly identical to each other would be considerably
overestimated since many experimental points would be extremely
close to each other.

Scop_fold data set
A representative example of each protein fold was
taken from the Scop database of protein domain structures []. Only
the four most populated classes (α, β, α/ β, and α+ β) were considered.
Entries containing “unobserved” residues were disregarded. 624 files
were retained.

Scop_fold/X data sets
10 subsets, each containing 62 structures, of the
Scop_fold data set were randomly built (X = 1, 10). They do not
overlap with each other.

Pisces data set
Protein chains were taken from the Pisces database
[]. Their crystal structures were determined at resolution not worse
than 2 Å and the maximal sequence identity between two of tem is
25%. Entries containing residues “unobserved” in the electron density
maps were removed. 2237 structures were retained.

Pisces/X data sets
10 non-overlapping subsets, each containing 223
structures, of the Pisces data set were randomly built (X = 1, 10).

Structural similarity between proteins
A very wide variety of techniques were used to compare pairs of
protein structures[–]. In the present manuscript, we used a
technique that allows one to represent a structure with a geometrical
point in a n-dimensional space and to select a random (geometrical)
point in the fold space (this is necessary to evaluate to clustering
tendency; see below). This task cannot be accomplished, in general, by
using protein structure comparison techniques, since the similarity
scores are nearly never metrics, in the mathematical sense. An
exception is the program GI, in which the protein topology is
described always by 30 numbers ‐ its number of residues and its Gauss
integrals - independently of the protein dimension []. Therefore,
each protein, either large or small, is associated with a point in a space
defined by 30 variables. The distance between two protein structures
can be measured with the Euclidean distance between two points in
this space. A further advantage of this method of protein structure
comparison is its extreme velocity (thousands of comparisons can be
made in few minutes).

Cox-Lewis coefficient of clustering
The Cox-Lewis coefficient is defined in the following way [,].
Given m proteins, each characterized by 30 variables, k ≪ m
geometrical points are randomly selected in the 30-dimensional space.
The smallest distance ui between the ith point and one of the m proteins
is then recorded together with the minimal distance wi between such a
protein and another protein (see). The ratio R is given using
equation 1 &amp; 2 ( ) is the Cox-Lewis
coefficient. R values close to 1 are expected for uniformly distributed
data, because wi ≈ ui. Values much larger than 1 are on the contrary
expected to arise if the subjects tend to cluster into well defined
groups. Given that the R values clearly depend on the procedure of
selection of random points and on the treatment of the border
conditions, this procedure is described in detail in the next paragraph.

Details about the computations
Computations were performed as schematized in . The output
file of program GI, f_gi.out, contains the 30 variables necessary to
describe each protein. If there are np proteins, f_gi.out is a table of np
lines and 30 columns. The program p_quartili determines, for each of
the 30 variables, the first and the last quartile, outputted in the file
f_quartili.out. Together with the file f_random.seed, which contains a
randomly selected integer number, the file f_quartili.out is read by the
program p_random that generates k random numbers ranging from
the first to the last quartile of each of the 30 variables that represent a
protein structure. The value of k was defined as np/10, where np is the
number of proteins described in the file f_gi.out. It is essential to select random numbers within the two quartiles in order to avoid insidious
problems at the boundaries of the protein fold space. Eventually, the
files f_gi.out and f_random.out are read by the program p_cox_lewis,
which computes the Cox-Lewis coefficient of clustering tendency. 500
different values of the seed (contained in the file f_random.seed) were
randomly generated and 500 values of the Cox-Lewis coefficient were
computed for each data set and averaged.

Discussion
Table 1 (see  ) shows the minimal, maximal,
and average values (and the standard deviation of the mean) of the
Cox-Lewis coefficient computed on 22 different data sets. The average
values oscillate amongst different data sets. However, they are always
significantly larger than one, the value that would indicate that protein
fold structures are uniformly distributed. This first conclusion is
therefore that protein structures tend to cluster into separate groups.
Noteworthy, similar results were obtained also by using the Hopkins
coefficient, another measure of clustering tendency.

A second observation is interesting. The Cox-Lewis coefficients were
computed on two types of data sets. Eleven of them (Scop and
Scop/X) were based on the Scop database of protein domain
structures, where the redundancy was reduced essentially on the basis
of structural features []. In the other eleven of them (Pisces and
Pisces/X), the redundancy was reduced only on he basis of the amino
acid sequences []. Despite these approaches are different (structureand
sequences-based redundancy reduction), the Cox-Lewis
coefficients are nearly the same. The fact that smaller values tend to be
observed for the Pisces data sets is likely dependent on the fact that
these data sets contain entire protein chains, sometime made by more
than a single domain and sometime participating to permanent
oligomeric assemblies. Consequently, and this is the second
conclusion, coefficients close to 1.3-1.4 are likely to be rather reliable
estimations of the clustering tendency of protein structures.

Are these values really high? To answer this question, one would need
to “see” the 30-dimensional fold space defined by the GI approach
[]. This is impossible. Human perception is limited to two or three
dimensions. In principle, reductions of dimensionality are possible, for
example by using principal component analysis []. However, this is
impossible in our case, since the first three principal components, out
of the original 30 variables, accounts for an insufficient fraction of the
original, overall variance (less than 70%). The visualization in a
reduced 3-dimensional space would be useless, since about one third
of the overall variability amongst structures would be ignored.

The only possibility to get a visual assessment is thus based on
simulations, the simplest of which are in two dimensions. Four sets of
bi-dimensional data, each containing 1000 points, were generated by
using a pseudo random number generator. One contained 1000 points
within distance = R from the point (-1, 0) (arbitrary units, a.u.); the
second was centred on the point (1, 0); the third on the point (0, -1);
and the fourth on the point (0, 1). By increasing R, it is possible to
reduce arbitrarily the clustering tendency of the entire data set of 4,000
points. It is thus possible to see, with a simple plot, how the clustering
tendency changes and to relate is with the Cox-Lewis coefficient. This
is shown in . For small R values, the data are clearly
segregated into four clusters and the Cox-Lewis coefficient is high
(6.93). For large values of R, the four clusters are completely
superposed to each other and the Cox-Lewis coefficient decreases to
1.04 and approaches the value of one, expected for data uniformly
distributed. If the Cox-Lewis coefficient is close to 1.3-1.5 (values
close to those that are shown in Table 1 ‐ ),
the four clusters are partially superposed. About 6-7% of the members
of a cluster tend to invade a neighbour group.

Conclusion
This implies that protein fold structures have a natural tendency to
aggregate into different groups and that it is, as a consequence,
infrequent that a structure of a certain type is observed into a cluster
that groups other structure types. However, some overlap between
different clusters is possible and seldom observed, with the
consequence that false positives or negatives cannot be completely
avoided in the various structure-based prediction methods that were
designed. As expected and as already observed [,
], the
superposition between different types of protein 3D structure clusters
tends to occur for the cases that are known to be relatively similar.
Typically, this mix up is observed for structures that are essentially α
or β, on the one hand, and α+β, on the other, according to the SCOP
classification. Obviously, this does not mean that the classification
adopted in the Scop database is useless or inappropriate. This only
means that a description of the fold space based only on structural
features cannot produce well isolated islands.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work was partially funded by the BIN-II and BIN-III programs of
the Austrian GEN-AU.

Citation:Carugo et al, Bioinformation 4(8): 347-351 (2010)

Example of Cox-Lewis statistics. Filled circles represent subjects in a bi-dimensional space. Open circles represent geometrical points.
ui is the minimal distance between a geometrical point (a) and a subject (b). wi is the minimal distance between the same subject (b) and another
subject (c). The geometrical point (a) is randomly selected. The geometrical point (a) is randomly selected. The Cox-Lewis coefficient can be
computed with equation (2) on the basis of a set of randomly selected points (a).

Scheme of the computations performed to obtain the Cox-Lewis coefficient of clustering tendency

Examples of various levels of clustering tendency in a bi-dimensional space. Four types of objects are plotted in each graph (white
diamonds, black diamonds, plus symbols, and black triangles). The Cox-Lewis coefficient decreases from 6.927 to 1.037 if the separation
between the four clusters decreases. Both axes are in arbitrary units (a.u.).

