Background
One third of the world's population is considered to be infected with
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, which leads to nearly 9.4 million new patients
and 3 million deaths every year []. 
Multi-drug-resistant strains of this
pathogen, emerging in association with HIV, have added a frightening
dimension to the problem []. 
Outbreaks of extensively drug-resistant (XDR)
tuberculosis have also been an increasing threat in certain regions around the
world []. 
As M. tb H37Rv is virulent and susceptible to most of the
antitubercular drugs used so far, H37Ra which is an avirulent strain 
[], and M.
tb KZN strain is resistant to different drugs like isoniazid, rifampicin,
kanamycin, ofloxacin, ethambutol, pyrazinamide etc. 
[], there must be some
genetic or proteomic mutations present in them. So, there is a need for genomic
as well as proteomic analysis among different strains of MTB to know the
variation among them. The complete genome sequences of four clinical strains
of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (H37Rv, CDC 1551, F11 and KZN 1435) and
one avirulent strain H37Ra is available. In this study we did proteomic
comparison amongst these strains of MTB by using NCBI's standalone BLAST
algorithm [].

Materials and Methodology
Data Collection
Whole proteome sequences of four clinical (H37Rv 
[], CDC 1551 
[], F11 
[]
and KZN 1435 []) 
and one avirulent (H37Ra) strains of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis were taken from NCBI Entrez Genome database 
[] whose
complete genome sequences were available as follows: (1) Mycobacterium
tuberculosis H37Rv (GenBank version-AL123456.2, Proteins-3988). (2)
Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Ra (GenBank version-CP000611.1, Proteins-
4034). (3) Mycobacterium tuberculosis CDC1551 (GenBank version-
AE000516.2, Proteins-4189). (4) Mycobacterium tuberculosis F11 (GenBank
version-CP000717.1, Proteins-3941). (5) Mycobacterium tuberculosis KZN
1435 (GenBank version-CP001658.1, Proteins-4059).

Database Architecture &amp; Design
Standalone BLAST program from NCBI was also downloaded and configured
for local system. The proteome sequence were formatted using formatdb
program of standalone BLAST, followed by pairwise comparison (Local
BLAST) among each strain using blastall program of standalone BLAST
taking whole proteome at a time. Mycobacterium tuberculosis Proteome
Comparison Database (MTB-PCDB) was developed using Microsoft SQL
Server as the back end. The output of the BLAST result was then parsed and
stored in MS SQL relational database tables using in-house developed PERL
code. While parsing BLAST output results, percentage identities, positivities,
number of gaps, identical residues, bits, bits score, e-value, query length,
subject length, query sequence, subject sequence, consensus sequence etc of
the first hit obtained were taken into consideration for each protein comparison.

Data Access
The interfaces of MTB-PCDB are designed in a manner to help users in easy
navigation and retrieval of information from database for analysis. The
database interfaces include: Home, Statistics, Advanced Search, Advanced
Comparison, Useful Links and Help. The database can be queried to obtain the
proteome sequence comparison information in different ways through a user
friendly web interface as follows (). The user can search protein
sequence comparison data between any two strain of MTB by giving desired
identities and percentage similarity. ii) Advanced Search options like identity,
similarity, query coverage, bits, bits score etc. are provided for searching more
specific information regarding pair wise proteome comparison. iii) A dynamic
result page appears after any search in which user can sort the comparison
results by identities, similarities, query coverage, bits score, query length,
subject length etc. iv) The user can restrict the number of items to be shown per
page obtained in searched result. v) The user can also download sequence
comparison data. vi) Each comparison also navigates to the details of
comparison between the two sequences of respective strains i.e., Protein Name,
Protein Length, Start, End, Strand, Accession No., Gene ID, Locus, etc along
with whole alignment between the query and subject sequence besides the
consensus sequence showing the matches, mismatches and gaps present in the
alignments between them. vii) There is also an advanced comparison page for
comparing proteome of multiple strains at a time.

Comparison with other Databases
Some freely available online databases also host MTB information such as
Tuberculist [] 
which includes genomic, proteomic, drugs, transcriptomics,
mutant, operon annotations data etc. and Tuberculosis Database (TBDB) 
[]
provides access to genomic and annotation data of 28 different M. tb strains
and related bacteria, also provides access to comparative genomic and
microarray analysis software. For proteome comparison there is a web-based
tool named Procom [] 
for finding a subset of proteins of interest by
comparing proteomes of 32 different species. However it does not consider M.
tb. species for comparison. The uniqueness of MTB-PCDB is the involvement
of comparative proteomics of five M. tb. strains whose genomes are completely
sequenced. MTB-PCDB compares proteome of selected strains and displays
detail information about each comparison pair along with the complete pair
wise alignment to find out the point mutations and the consensus sequence.
This may helps users to identify mutations involved in drug resistance and
pathogenicity.

Utility
MTB-PCDB, a comprehensive database with total of 40252 protein sequence
comparison data. The proteomic variation found in five M. tuberculosis strains
may have vital role in each species. This comparative study may help
understand the mechanism of pathogenesis and survival of M. tuberculosis
within the host. This information also facilitates design of new antitubercular
vaccines and therapeutic agents based on the identified virulence-associated
mutations.

Caveats
MTB-PCDB does not include comparison of all the strains of M. tb as they are
not completely sequenced.

Future Developments
As and when in future, new TB strains are sequenced and available in public
databases, we shall attempt to update MTB-PCDB including newly proteome
comparison data. We would continue working on analyzing and correlating the
proteomic variation among different strains with their drug resistance,
virulence and pathogenic properties.

This study was supported by Department of Biotechnology, Ministry of
Science &amp; Technology, Govt. of India. Authors convey thanks to Shri Dhiru S
Mehta, President, KHS for his keen interest and encouragement. Technical
assistance of Ms. Amrita Bit is appreciated.

Citation:Jena et al, Bioinformation 6(3): 131-133 (2011)

MTB-PCDB snapshots (a) Search option; (b) Search result; (c) Details about 
each comparison pair; (d) Advanced comparison; (e) Advanced comparison results

