Background
The genetic code is the sequence of nucleotides in DNA or RNA
that determines specific amino acid sequence in synthesis of
proteins. It employs 64 codons, which can be grouped into 20
disjoint families, one family for each of the standard amino acid,
and 21st family for translation termination signal. Different
codons that encode the same amino acid are called synonymous
codons and they usually differ by nucleotide at the third codon
position. According to the number of synonymous codons
related to each amino acid, thus for a gene using the universal
code, there are two amino acids with one codon choice, nine
with two, one with three, five with four, and three with six.
These represent five synonymous families types (SF),
designated as SF types 1, 2, 3, 4 and 6 []. The unequal or
preferred usage of a particular codon by an amino acid among
the SF family is termed as synonymous codon usages (SCU).
Specific SCU patterns may be due to mutational bias, bias in
G+C content, natural selection etc. However, SCU pattern is
non-random and species-specific []. It has also been reported
that there is significant variation of codon usage bias among
different genes within the same organism [–].

Microorganisms belonging to diverse genetic lineages of
bacteria and archeans are adapted to unusual limits of one or
more abiotic factors in environment such as temperature,
pressure, pH, radiation, salinity, etc. Salinity is an important
deterrent to agriculture in many parts of the world, but
investigations on its molecular effects are very few. Moderately
halophilic bacteria, which are distributed through wide range of
saline environments, constitute a heterogeneous group of
microorganisms of different genera. These organisms are
characterized by optimum growth at concentrations between
0.5M and 2.5M-NaCl []. Most of these have been isolated from
either salted food or the Dead Sea, which are specialized
hypersaline environments. The molecular basis of microbial
resistance to salt stress is not fully understood in relation to
regulation of gene expression during salinity, or anaerobic
stress and this has little been examined in microorganisms.
Understanding of molecular mechanisms involved in the
halophilic adaptation will not only provide insight into factors
responsible for genomic and proteomic stability under high salt
conditions, but also, has importance for potential applications
in the field of agriculture.

Chromohalobacter salexigens is a gram-negative aerobic
bacterium, which is moderately halophilic in nature. It grows
on a wide range of simple carbon compounds at NaCl
concentrations between 0.5M and 4M, with an optimum growth
at 2.0–2.5M and at an optimum temperature of 37°C 
[–]. So far
codon usage bias in C. salexigens has not been investigated in
detail, and it is not clear how different genes are expressed
under saline environment in this organism. Therefore, it is of
interest to understand factors that shape codon usage bias in
this organism. Thus in this study, codon usage bias of C.
salexigens genes was investigated using codon usage statistic,
multivariate statistical technique and correlation analysis. The
pattern of codon usage of this organism was studied based on
values of codon usage indices and their correlation. The factors
responsible for codon usage variation among genes were
determined. Moreover, the expressivity level of genes,
according to various functions was also determined with a view
to understand the highly expressed genes and their optimal
codons.

Methodology
The gene sequences (2230) in FASTA format related to various
functions in Chromohalobacter salexigens were retrieved from
comprehensive microbial resource (http://www.tigr.org/CMR)
and given in  (see supplementary material). In order to
minimise sampling errors, sequences with length &lt; 300bp,
redundant data and sequences with intermediate termination
codons were excluded for this study. Thus the remaining
dataset consisting of 2147 gene sequences were used for the
analysis. PERL script was developed to merge all the individual
gene sequences together for further data processing and
analysis.

Codon Usage indices:
In order to investigate the base composition of codons used by
these genes, different statistic has been calculated. For each
individual gene, the percentage of codons for nucleotides i.e. A,
G, T and C at third position, which is represented as A3s, G3s, T3s
and C3s respectively were calculated. Apart from this, values of
total number of G and C nucleotides in gene i.e. GC content,
frequency of codons with G or C at the third positions (GC3s)
and GC skewness [(G-C)/(G+C)] were also calculated for each
gene.

Measures of codon usage:
In order to investigate the characteristics of synonymous codon
usage without the confounding influence of amino acid
composition, the Relative Synonymous Codon Usage (RSCU)
values among different codons in each gene was calculated.
RSCU is defined as the ratio of the observed frequency of a
codon to the expected frequency, if all the synonymous codons
for those amino acids are used equally []. RSCU values
greater than 1.0 indicate that the corresponding codons are used
more frequently than the expected frequency, whereas, the
reverse is true for RSCU value less than 1.0. The effective
number of codons of a gene (NC) [] was also used to quantify
the codon usage bias of a gene (Wright 1990). It is calculated by
the equation: Nc= 2 + s + [29/ {s2 + (1- s2)}], where, s is the value
of GC3s. Nc can take values from 20 to 61, when only one codon,
or all synonymous in equal frequencies were used per amino
acid respectively. The sequences in which Nc values are &lt;30 are
considered as highly expressed, while those with &gt;55 are
considered as poorly expressed genes [–]. Another measure
used for identification of gene expression is Codon Adaptation
Index (CAI) is described in . CAI value
ranges from 0 to 1.0, and a higher value indicates a stronger
codon bias and higher expression level []. In order to
understand the properties of protein coding sequences,
hydrophobicity ‘GRAVY’ score [] and frequency of aromatic
amino-acids ‘Aromo’ [] in the translated gene product were
also estimated.

Multivariate Statistical Analysis:
Correspondence analysis (CA) is a data dimension reduction
technique which takes multivariate data and combines them
into a small number of variables (axes) that explains most of the
variation among the original variables []. In this study, CA
was applied to RSCU values of 59 codons (excluding Met, Trp,
and stop codons). Further, correlation analysis (P&lt;0.01) was
used for explanation of variation and association of gene feature
values with axes scores. Correlation analysis was also applied
for the statistics obtained from base composition with Nc value.
Chi squared contingency test (P&lt;0.01) was performed to
estimate the optimal codons i.e. synonymous codons frequently
used in highly expressed genes.

Software implementation:
CodonW [] was employed for calculating the indices and
measures of codon usage and also for CA. SPSS 17.0 and SAS
9.2 were used for statistical analysis.

Discussion
Codon usage analysis:
 (see supplementary material) depicts the codon usage
data and RSCU values for each codon. These values were
calculated by summing all the 2147 genes of C. salexigen. It was
derived that C3s and G3s accounted for 54.2% and 45.3%
respectively, whereas, T3s and A3s accounted for 13.2% and 8.3%
respectively. This suggests that, there was much greater
preferential stability in the usages of codons with C and G
nucleotides at the third position as compared to A and T in the
genes of this organism. Moreover, C ending codons were
preferred over G ending codons. The average percentage of GC
content among genes of this group was 64.9%, which is quite
high and average value of GC skewness of the genes was low
(0.0079), this indicated the influence of mutational bias.

Further, analysis and the usage of amino acid depict maximum
usage of acidic amino acids (Asp, Glu), low proportion of
hydrophobic amino acids and a high frequency of amino acids
such as Gly and Ser which corroborated the work reported by
Lanyi [] for halophilic protein.

Heterogeneity of codon usage:
In order to study the codon usage variation among genes of this
organism, two different indices, namely, Nc and GC3s were used
to detect the codon usage variation among the genes 
[].
Wright [] suggested that genes, whose codon choice is
constrained only by a G+C mutational bias, will lie on or just
below the curve of the predicted value in the Nc plot (a plot of
Nc versus GC3s). It is evident from Nc plot (), that a few
points lie on the expected curve towards GC rich regions, which
certainly originates from the extreme compositional constraints.
However, considerable number of points with low Nc values lie
considerably below the expected curve. This suggests that apart
from compositional bias, majority of genes have an additional
codon usage bias []. Furthermore, most of the genes in the Nc
plot fall within a restricted cloud, at a relatively narrow range of
GC3s between 0.765 to 0.890 () with large variation of
Nc values ranging between 30 and 45 (). This suggests
that translational selection is also responsible for codon bias
among the genes. However, the presence of significant negative
correlation between GC3s and Nc (r= -0.81, P&lt;0.01) suggests
strong influence of compositional constraints on codon usage
bias in the genes of this organism.

Relationship between codon bias and gene length:
In order to study the relationship between codon bias and gene
length, a plot was drawn between gene length and Nc. From
, it is understood that shorter genes have a much
wider variance in Nc values, and vice versa for longer genes.
The lower Nc values in longer genes may be due to the direct
effect of translation time or to the extra energy cost of
proofreading associated with longer translating time. A low
negative correlation was observed with gene length against Nc
(r= -0.15). This reveals that gene length has little influence on
codon usage of these genes. However Eyre-Walker 
[] has
reported that the selection for accuracy in protein translation is
likely to be greater in longer genes because the cost of
producing a protein is proportional to its length. Correlation
between gene length and values of GC3s as well as gene position
has also been worked out and similar type of result has been
obtained i.e. low correlation ( &amp; ). These
findings suggest that gene length is not playing major role in
the case of codon usage bias in this organism.

Multivariate Statistical Analysis:
In order to investigate the major possible trends in shaping
codon usage variation among the genes, Correspondence
Analysis (CA), a method of multivariate statistical analysis, was
performed on the data of RSCU values of genes. Axis 1 shows
the largest fraction (14.52%) of the variation in the data. Axis 2
describes the second largest trend (6.79%), and so on with each
subsequent axis describing a progressively smaller amount of
variation. Although, the first principal axis explains a
substantial amount of variation of codon usage among the
genes in this microorganism, its value is still lower than found
in other organisms studied earlier []. The low value might be
due to the extreme genomic composition of this genome. It is
also obvious from  that the majority of the points are
clustered in an elliptical shape around the origin of axes. This
indicates that, these genes have more or less similar codon
usage biases. There are very few points that are widely
scattered along the positive side of the first major axis,
indicating that codon usage biases of these genes are not
homogeneous. The first major axis is negatively correlated with
G3s and C3s while correlated positively with A3s and T3s

(see supplementary material). Also, strong positive correlation
exists between position of genes along the first axis with Nc
() and high degree of negative correlation with GC3s
(). These findings suggest, that highly biased genes,
those ending with G and C, are clustered on the negative side,
whereas, the codons ending in A and T predominate on the
positive side of the first major axis. Further, significant negative
correlation is observed with Nc against GC3s (r=-0.81, P&lt;0.01)
and GC (r=-0.43, P&lt;0.01), which suggests that highly expressed
genes tend to use “C” or “G” at the synonymous positions as
compared to lowly expressed genes in this organism. Further
study reveals that, C-ending codons are preferred over Gending
codons in highly expressed genes. Preference of Cending
codons in the highly expressed genes might be related
to the translational efficiency of the genes as it has been
reported that RNY (R-Purine, N-any nucleotide base, and Ypyrimidine)
codons are more advantageous for translation 
[].
Thus, compositional mutation bias possibly plays an important
role in shaping the genome of this organism.

Effect of gene expression level on synonymous codon usage bias:
CAI has been widely used to estimate the expressivities of
genes by many workers and has been considered to be the best
measure of gene expressivities [–]. In order to assess the
effect of expressivities of genes on codon usage biases, codon
adaptation index (CAI) values of all the genes of C. salexigens
were calculated. In order to investigate, whether, there is a
correlation between the codon usage bias and the gene
expression level, the correlation coefficients were estimated
between CAI values against the positions of genes along the
first major axis, nucleotide composition and Nc values. From
 (see supplementary material), it is found that
significant negative correlations exist between the gene
expression level assessed by CAI value and the positions of
genes along axis 1 and Nc values. A significant positive
correlation between CAI value and GC3s content is noticed
while CAI has negative correlation with GC, though lower
negative value. From this analysis, it can be concluded that
codon usage bias among genes of C. salexigens is also affected by
gene expression level. From the analysis, it can be suggested
that genes with higher expression level, exhibiting a greater
degree of codon usage bias and distributed at the left side of the
first axis, are GC-rich and prefer to the codons with C or G at
the synonymous position. A scatter diagram of the position of
genes along the first major axis produced by CA on RSCU and
their corresponding CAI values is shown () and it is
interesting to note that there is a significant negative correlation
between the positions of the genes along the first major axis and
their corresponding CAI values (r= -0.49 (P&lt; 0.01), confirming
that axis 1 is significantly correlated with the expression level of
each gene of C. salexigens. This is a clear indication that gene
expression also affects the codon usage variation among the
genes in this organism. Correlation analysis of synonymous
codon usage bias against hydrophobicity of each protein was
also investigated (r=0.22, P&lt; 0.01). The findings indicated that
genes, encoding more hydrophobic protein and bias to G/C
bases at synonymous third codon positions, showed a stronger
codon bias. This was also reported by Liu et al. 
[] on
synonymous codon usage in maize. Although, the absolute
value of this correlation coefficient is low, but it is statistically
significant. Subsequently, it has been inferred that the
hydrophobicity of the encoded protein played a minor role in
affecting codon usage in C. salexigens too. However, no
significant correlation has been observed between synonymous
codon bias and aromaticity scores.

Translational optimal codons:
The χ2 test (P&lt;0.01) has been applied between top 10% genes
(highly expressed) having higher value of the major axis and
10% genes (lowly expressed) having lower value of the axis.
Through this analysis, twenty-three codons were determined as
the ‘optimal codons’, which were significantly more frequent
among the highly expressed genes. From 
 (see
supplementary material), it was derived that among 23 codons,
there are 16 C-ending (69.6%) and 7-G ending codons (30.4%).
These optimal codons might be significant to introducing point
mutation, and modifying heterologous genes in order to
increase the product of specific protein. Ikemura showed that
there is a match between these codons and the most abundant
tRNAs. In Escherichia coli [], 
Drosophila melanogaster [] and
Caenorhabditis elegans [] highly expressed genes have a strong
selective preference for codons with a high concentration for the
corresponding acceptor tRNA molecule; the preferred codons
are those which are best recognized by the most abundant
tRNAs. This trend has been interpreted as the co-adaptation
between amino acid composition of protein and tRNA-pools to
enhance the translational efficiency. Remarkably, in this study,
there is a strong positive correlation (r = 0.84, P &lt;0.01) between
the frequency of optimal codons in each gene and respective
CAI value. This suggests that translational selection influenced
the codon usage of C. salexigens and the optional codons are
more frequent in highly expressed genes.

Categorization of genes based on expressivity:
In order to differentiate the genes on the basis of expression
level, the scores of axis 1 calculated for CA on RSCU values,
were classified into three quantiles representing three different
gene expression levels with corresponding cut-off percentages
viz., high (75% and above), moderate (between 25% and 75%),
and low (below 25%) expressed genes as shown in 
 (see
supplementary material). The analysis depicted maximum
percentage of genes belonging to category of moderately
expressed genes. Further analysis revealed that genes related to
regulatory functions, mobile and extrachromosomal element
functions, cell envelope, protein function and cellular processes
are highly expressed. Moderately expressed genes include
functions related to DNA metabolism, transcription, signal
transduction and protein synthesis, whereas, low expressed
genes regulate central intermediary metabolism, purines,
pyrimidines, nucleosides and nucleotides; amino acid
biosynthesis; energy metabolism; and transport and binding
protein (). This pattern of expression is expected for this
halophilic bacterium.

Conclusion
It can be inferred that high level of heterogeneity is seen within
the genes of various functions in Chromohalobacter salexigens.
Though codon usage of C. salexigens is largely determined by
compositional constraints, translational selection is also
operating in shaping the codon usage variation among the
genes. The study revealed that G/C-ending codons are
preferred over A/T-ending codons in highly expressed genes.
Total number of codons in highly expressed genes is much
higher than those in lowly expressed genes. Length of the genes
also affects the codon usage bias, while aromaticity and
hydrophobicity of the encoded proteins play minor role in
shaping codon usage bias. A set of twenty-three codons are
identified as the optimal codons. Using χ2 test at P&lt;0.01, it was
found that these codons are significantly more frequent among
the highly expressed genes. As more genomes of halophilic
bacteria with known gene sequences become available at public
databases, it will be interesting to see if these effects are
universal and whether these bacteria follow a similar trend of
codon usage pattern for haloadaptation. The study could be
explored to derive unique salt tolerant traits and for prediction
of genes responsible for salt stress which could potentially be
used in agricultural crops that are almost exclusively
glycophytes.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors acknowledge the NAIP for financial assistance of
this study under the project entitled ‘Establishment of National
Agricultural Bioinformatics Grid in ICAR’.

Citation:Sanjukta et al, Bioinformation 8(22): 1087-1095 (2012)

Nc plot of 2147 genes of C. salexigens. The continuous
curve between GC3s and Nc under random condon usage.

(A) Frequency of GC3s; (B) Frequency of Nc

(A) Plot of Nc versus gene length; (B) Plot of GC3s versus gene length; (C) Plot of gene position on axis1 versus gene
length; (D) Correspondence analysis of Relative Synonymous Codon Usage values of C. salexigens genes; (E) Scatter plot of gene
position on axis 1 and Nc values; (F) Scatter plot of gene position on axis 1 and GC3s values; (G) Scatter plot of gene position on
axis 1 and CAI values.

Expression level of functional genes of C. salixigens on
the basis of Axis 1 based on RSCU values. AA= Amino acid
biosynthesis; BCP=Biosynthesis of cofactor, Prosthetic groups
and carriers; CE=Cell envelope; CP=Cellular processes;
CIM=Central intermediary metabolism; DM=DNA
metabolism; EM=Energy metabolism; FPM=Fatty acid &amp;
phospholipid metabolism; MEF=Mobile &amp; extrachromosomal
element functions; PF=Protein fate; PS=Protein synthesis;
PPN=Purines, pyrimidines, nucleosides &amp; nucleotides;
RF=Regulatory functions; ST=Signal transduction;
T=Transcription; TBP=Transport &amp; binding protein

