Background
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE or ‘lupus’) is a major autoimmune
rheumatic disease where autoantibodies frequently target against
intracellular antigens of the cell nucleus (double and single stranded DNA).
According to the result of an experiment on more than five million U.S.
Armed Forces personnel, in 115 of the 130 patients with SLE (88 percent),
at least one SLE autoantibody tested was present 3.3 years before the
diagnosis []. This fact suggests that SLE can be predicted several years
before the diagnosis.

In patients with SLE, a wide variety of antibodies against nuclear antigens
can be found, including antibodies to nucleic acids, histones and nonhistone
nuclear proteins. However, anti-dsDNA antibodies are considered
the most important autoantiboies in SLE. These antibodies were identified,
for the first time, nearly forty years ago in the serum of patients with SLE
[]. Based on similar findings, many researchers have concluded that there
is a close relationship between disease activity and levels of anti-dsDNA
antibodies. In other words, dsDNA binding antibodies have been
implicated in the pathogenesis of this autoimmune disease [].

Anti-dsDNA antibodies seem highly likely to cause tissue damage in
patients with SLE. They are present in the serum of patients several years
before its diagnosis. Therefore, their identification and analysis may be
useful in the identification of patients who would benefit from early
diagnosis, as well as patients who do not require further evaluation. In
addition, a powerful method of their analysis may lead to design of new
drugs that interfere with antibody―DNA interactions, which might have
therapeutic applications.

Recently, bioinformatics approaches, including statistical techniques and
intelligent systems, have tried to obtain a better grasp of the DNA-binding
structures and utilize them in an early prediction of autoimmune diseases
such as SLE. Although these kinds of works have been able to explain
many biological phenomena, lead to the development of mathematical
models for prediction and lead to reduction in the cost of experimental
research, there is still no accurate mathematical method for identifying
dsDNA binding antibodies []. We can trace the roots of this difficulty in
the long amino acid sequence of antibodies, lack of suitable mathematical
tools, and more importantly the vast diversity of antibodies.

In this paper, we extended the computer-assisted autoantibody analysis
methods by proposing a new approach with the capability of identifying
dsDNA binding antibodies. The proposed identification system is
constructed using a General Regression Neural Network (GRNN).

In the proposed method, we encode the amino acid sequence of antibodies
using Hydrophilicity values of amino acids. These signals are fed to a
GRNN. In order to better interpret the role of different parts of the antidsDNA
antibodies, we have investigated the roles of light and heavy
chains and their bindings to DNA. In general, the proposed method
provides an efficient and accurate method to identify the dsDNA.

Methodology
Dataset
In order to use ANN to identify dsDNA binding antibodies the training set
needs to include a set of anti-dsDNA, as the positive set, and a set of other
non dsDNA binding antibodies, as the negative set. Our training data set
was constructed using the Kabat database. Kabat antibody sequence
database contains primary structure and sequence information on
antibodies and other proteins of immunological interest []. There are 42
sequences of anti-dsDNA (both heavy and light chains) available in the
Kabat database, which we used as positive patterns, and we took 608 of the
other non dsDNA binding antibody sequences (both heavy and light
chains) as negative patterns.

Encoding
As we know, Immunoglobulins are heavy plasma proteins, composed of 20
different amino acids. From a one-dimensional point of view, a protein
sequence contains characters of these 20 amino acids. In other words,
function of a protein depends on its specific amino acid sequence called
the primary sequence structure 
[]­[].

An important issue in applying computer-based systems to identify dsDNA
binding antibodies is how to encode protein sequences; i.e., how to
represent the protein sequences as the input of a system. This is crucial to
the success of neural network learning process. Several different methods
have been used for encoding proteins. For example, Wu [] has utilized
the 2-gram encoding method, which extracts various patterns of two
consecutive amino acid residues in a protein sequence and counts the
number of occurrences of the extracted residue pairs. Huang [] has
employed another encoding technique using six physiochemical properties
(attributes) of amino acids, namely, composition, predicted secondary
structure, hydrophobicity, normalized Van Der Waals volume, polarity,
and polarizability.

In fact, amino acids have many physiochemical properties such as
isoelectric pH, surface area, hydrophilicity, polarity and the ability of
reaction between the ion and the electron 
[]­[]. In this work, we have
used just one physiochemical property of amino acids, which called
Hydrophilicity, for encoding the protein sequence. In other words, the
normalized number of the Hydrophilicity of the amino acid is used instead
of each amino acid in the protein sequence. Consequently, each antibody
was transformed into an array, which is used as the input of the GRNN.

Evaluation Criterion
As mentioned, new method based on ANNs, is introduced for identifying
pathogenic antibodies in SLE. The efficacy of the proposed method is
evaluated by calculating the following three parameters: positive accuracy,
negative accuracy, and general accuracy. ( )

Anti-dsDNA Identifier
As mentioned, for the simulation a GRNN was used. For training and
testing of the proposed system, we have formed a database, from the
KABAT database, consisting of 42 anti-dsDNAs, as the positive data set,
and 608 other antibodies, as the negative data set.

A. Training Phase
To train the GRNN, a training set is formed by randomly choosing 33
positive and 99 negative samples from our database. 
illustrates the general architecture of the system in training phase. In the
first layer, each antibody is encoded into an array, based on normalized
quantities of the amino acids, Hydrophilicity. In the second layer, a GRNN
is trained by arrays obtained from the previous layer so that +1 is assigned
as the output for positive samples and -1 is assigned as the output for
negative samples.

B. Testing Phase
To test the proposed scheme, a testing set is formed by randomly choosing
9 positive and 27 negative samples from the part of our database that was
not used in the training set.

Architecture of dsDNA binding antibodies identification system in testing
phase is illustrated in . In the first layer, like the training phase,
each antibody is encoded into a discrete signal, based on normalized
quantities of the amino acids Hydrophilicity property. In the second layer,
signals from the previous step are fed to the neural network. The output of
each network will be a number between ­1 and +1. By considering a
threshold number between ­1 and +1, we can separate the anti-dsDNAs
from other antibodies. This threshold was selected to be ­0.9.

Discussion
It is important to note that no mathematical method has been introduced
for identifying anti-dsDNA antibodies yet. Therefore, we could not
compare the effectiveness of proposed method with any other introduced
scheme.

In order to assure the validity of the results, the training, and testing phases
of the proposed system were repeated 100 times and the final results were
calculated by averaging over all 100 runs.

Positive Accuracy, Negative Accuracy and General Accuracy obtained
using the proposed methods are 78.55, 82.92 and 81.83, respectively. For
investigating the roles of light and heavy chains of anti-dsDNA antibodies
in binding to DNA, an experiment was also designed. Heavy chain and
light chain of antibodies were extracted from the Kabat database. Next, we
repeated the last simulation using heavy and light chains. Table 1 contains
these results ( ).

As illustrated in Table 1 ( ), the heavy chain
of anti-dsDNA is more important than the light chain in binding to DNA.
Our simulation results confirm the experimental studies [,]. Results
indicated in  show that the proposed method, using heavy and light
chains, provides a more accurate identification of anti-dsDNA than the
heavy chain or light chain alone. The reason is that by considering a more
inclusive model, we are including more information and therefore, we
should expect better results. Results of  also indicate higher
numbers for negative accuracies. This is because we have more negative
(non anti-dsDNA) samples. Deleted

We should mention that in this work negative accuracy (non-dsDNA
binding antibodies) is more important than positive accuracy.
Furthermore, the available data corresponding to the protein sequence for
non-dsDNA binding antibodies are much more available than their
counterparts. Using unequal number of data points for non-dsDNA and
dsDNA during training will introduce some bias, but as it was mentioned
since the negative accuracy is more important this action is justified.
Simulations using equal number of data points for non-dsDNA and dsDNA
produced much lower negative and general accuracy.

Conclusion
In this paper, we have introduced a new method for identifying pathogenic
antibodies in SLE based on GRNN. For identification of dsDNA binding
antibodies, the protein sequence of 42 dsDNA binding and 608 nondsDNA
binding antibodies were extracted from the KABAT database.
Next, they were encoded using Hydrophilicity values of their amino acids.
Coded antibodies were used to train a GRNN. The simulation results
indicate that the proposed method is very accurate in recognizing antidsDNA
antibodies. We have also investigated the roles of light and heavy
chains of anti-dsDNA antibodies in binding to DNA. Our simulation
results confirmed the experimental findings that the heavy chain is more
important than the light chain in regard to binding to DNA.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Bahari et al, Bioinformation 5(2): 58-61 (2010)

(a) Architecture of the of dsDNA binding antibodies identification system in training phase. (b) Architecture of dsDNA binding antibodies
identification system in testing phase.

