Background
Defects in cardiovascular system are the leading causes of 
mortality in present times. Diseases like heart attack, stroke and 
peripheral vascular disease are the major diseases of the cardiac 
system []. Despite exponential development in the field of 
cardiovascular research, current therapies, diagnosis and 
treatments have not sufficed the efficiency of curing these 
ailments. However appearance of small noncoding microRNAs 
(miRNAs) over past few years in various physiological and 
pathological fields including cardiovascular system has opened 
new opportunities for therapeutic developments [].

During the time of cellular stress or patho-physiological 
conditions such as oxidative stress, cardiac cells undergo 
cardiac hypertrophy, a complex phenomenon that comprises 
the involvement of numerous intricately connected intracellular 
signal transduction cascades []. These pathways are activated 
in response to the biomechanical stress conditions that prevail 
on the heart. The cardiac muscle tries to compensate the tension 
through an increase in the size of the terminally differentiated 
cardiomyocytes. This is accompanied with re-expression of 
genes normally expressed in the fetal heart and an increased 
protein synthesis []. There are certain essential marker genes 
which play a prominent role to cause cardiac hypertrophy such 
as alpha-Actinin, Atrial Natriuretic Peptide, Brain Natriuretic 
Peptide, beta-MHC, Troponin C, MYL2, MYL3, TPM1, TITAN 
etc. Prolonged cardiac hypertrophy witnesses a transition from 
physiological to pathological hypertrophy which further 
progresses towards an increased risk of cardiac failure 
[].

The short, endogenously expressed, non-translated microRNAs 
are involved in various biological processes, which include 
developmental patterning, differentiation, proliferation, cell 
death and metabolism. They act as negative regulators of gene 
expression by inhibiting the translation or promoting the 
mRNA degradation []. These miRNAs are generated by the 
Dicer which is a multidomain enzyme of the RNase III family 
[]. 
They maintain homeostasis across a wide variety of tissues 
including the cardiovascular system. Single miRNAs regulate 
the expression of several of mRNAs that often share related 
functions and thus govern various biological processes 
[]. The 
diverse functions exhibited by individual miRNAs and the 
number of miRNAs that are expressed in the cardiovascular 
system, both lead towards the idea that majority of
physiological as well as pathological processes in the 
cardiovascular system may be controlled by miRNAs, at least in 
parts []. There are number of introns encoded miRNAs which 
are involved in RNAi mediated gene silencing. The majority of 
human gene transcripts contain introns and changes in these 
non-protein-coding sequences are frequently observed in 
clinical diagnosis of myocardial dysregulation and other 
injuries related cardiac hypertrophy []. Therefore, our studies 
were designed to screen the potential intronic miRNAs which 
may be characterized further as a key molecule to regulate the 
cardiac hypertrophy.

Methodology
The work flow to screen the potential intronic and 3' UTR 
targeted miRNAs is shown in (). 

Sequence dataset:
The complete nucleotide sequences and the intronic sequences 
associated with the cardiac marker genes from Rattus 
noveregicus were downloaded from GenBank in FASTA 
format.

Sequence Analysis:
The miRbase Database (http://www.miRbase.org/) was used 
for the identification of relevant miRNAs, expressing in heart. 
The sequences were further confirmed by employing BLASTN, 
implemented in miRase 
(http://www.miRbase.org/search.shtml) with default E-value 
and hit number.

3'UTR Targeted miRNA Prediction:
Target scan (http://www.targetscan.org/) was used to predict 
3'UTR targeted microRNAs. Subsequently, Target scan 6.2 
(modified version of Target scan) was used for the prediction of 
conserved and poorly conserved miRNAs from all the 3'UTRs 
of essential and selected cardiac marker genes (as reference to 
human and rat).

Comparative analysis of intronic and targeted microRNAs:
A comparative analysis was performed by expanding and 
sorting the data using several computational tools to find: (1) 
the true putative regulatory microRNAs, (2) intronic
MicroRNAs, originating from intronic sequences, and (3) 3'UTR 
targeted microRNAs from 3'UTR of selected cardiac marker genes.

Results &amp; Discussion
MicroRNAs are the potent regulators of gene expression either 
by inhibiting the posttranscriptional modification or repression 
of translation. Biogenesis of intronic miRNA and target 
recognition seems to be mediated through base paring of a 7-
8Nts short seed sequence in the 5'region of the miRNAs 
[]. 
Intronic miRNAs are based on two important aspects, (i) they 
must have the same promoter with their encoded target genes 
and (ii) they spliced out of the transcript of such encoded genes 
[]. 
During cardiac hypertrophy, stress induced up-regulation 
of miRNAs featured to the suppression of a set of targeted 
mRNAs and vice versa due to possible loss of ionic inhibitory 
control of the miRNA on its target mRNA [].

For isolating the miRNAs, which may have therapeutics 
applications for the heart diseases, six essential cardiac marker 
genes (ANP, BNP, alpha-Actinin, beta-MHC, TNNT2, TNNI3) 
were studied. Numbers of intronic sequences from all the 
marker genes were analyzed to screen the miRNAs originating 
from cardiac marker intronic gene sequences by implementing 
search and BLASTN in miRBase database. We also analyzed the 
miRNAs targeting the 3'UTRs of the same cardiac genes by 
using Target scan and miRanda application.  (see 
supplementary material) summarizes the compiled 
information of the intronic and 3'UTR targeted microRNAs 
screened from selected cardiac gene pool.

We found 10 true putative regulatory miRNAs after 
comparative analysis between the intronic miRNAs and 3'UTR
targeted miRNAs using computational tools. hsa-Mir-4710, hsa-
Mir-3934, hsa-Mir-665 &amp; has-Mir-4695-5p, hsa-Mir-4476 &amp; hsa-
Mir-4763-3p, hsa-Mir-30d, , hsa-Mir-4489 &amp; has-Mir-4638-5p &amp;
hsa-Mir-4635 in respect to ANP, BNP, TNNT2, TNNI3, α-
Actinin, MYH-7 were identified, as shown in  (see
supplementary material). These 10 true putative regulatory
microRNAs are fishing out from the intronic sequences of
selected cardiac marker genes and all these 10 potential
microRNAs are targeted the same selected cardiac marker
genes. Therefore, these 10 true putative regulatory microRNAs
can be hypothesized as potential microRNAs regulating the
cardiac development and diseases such as hypertrophy where
re-expression of fetal genes has been witnessed ().
These uncharacterized microRNAs can further be studied to
understand the mechanism of their effect on cardiac gene
program. They may play significant role in regulating the
cardiac hypertrophy. After characterizing the role of the
miRNAs screened by our insilico study, miRNA mimic and
Antimir can be designed for future therapeutics against cardiac
hypertrophy.

We also found Mir-208, Mir-22, Mir-29, Mir-30, miR133,
miR122, Mir-150, miR23a, Mir-125, Mir-199, miR195, miR196
and Mir-214 during our analysis. The role of some these
mirRNAs have already been reported in the heart context.
miR23a, Mir-125, Mir-199, miR195 and miR196) has been found
to be up-regulated whereas miR133, Mir-29, Mir-30 and Mir-150
down-regulate during hypertrophy []. Mir-133 has already
been characterized to regulate the myogenesis in adult cardiac
and skeletal muscle in mammals []. Mir-208 plays a
prominent role in the expression of β-MHC in response to
cardiac stress but it appears to show the dominant function in
regulating cardiac hypertrophy and remodeling although, the
expression level of this Mir-208 remains stable during cardiac
stress []. MiR-195 was the first characterized miRNAs, which
induces the hypertrophy in cultured neonatal rat cardiomyoctes
[]. Over-expression of Mir-199a was found sufficient to
increase cell hypertrophy while the antisense oligonucleotide
mediated knockdown of Mir-199a was sufficient to decrease
cardiomyocyte size []. The presence of these already reported
miRNAs validate our approach and hypothesize that hsa-Mir-
4710, hsa-Mir-3934, hsa-Mir-665 &amp; has-Mir-4695-5p, hsa-Mir-
4476 &amp; hsa-Mir-4763-3p, hsa-Mir-30d, and hsa-Mir-4489 &amp; has-
Mir-4638-5p &amp; hsa-Mir-4635 isolated in our study may play an
essential role to regulate cardiac marker genes during
hypertrophy and other cardiac diseases. invitro and invivo
experiments can be conducted in future to understand their
expression during cardiac development and diseases.

Conclusion
Small changes in actions and modifications in genes affect
developmental and regulatory pathways for heart function.
Therefore, it is of interest to characterize their molecular
features using miRNAs associated with the heart. We report 10
uncharacterized miRNAs during cardiac hypertrophy in heart
through this sequence based computational analysis. The
diversity of miRNAs and the complexity of genomic introns are
intriguing. Hence, investigation and characterization of disease
specific intronic miRNAs and their targets can help in the
understanding the corresponding diseases.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work was supported by the research grant awarded
to Dr.Vibha Rani by the Department of Biotechnology,
Government of India (BT/PR3642/AGR/36/709/2011).
We acknowledges Jaypee Institute of Information
Technology, Deemed to be University, for providing the
required support.

Citation:Rustagi &amp; Rani, Bioinformation 9(18): 919-922 (2013)

Workflow to screen potential MicroRNAs.

Possible Role of screened microRNAs in cardiac
hypertrophy. During cardiac hypertrophy normal heart
increases in size due to re-expression of cardiac marker genes
(shown in white boxes). We screened 10 potential intronic and
3'UTR targeted microRNAs by analysis, shown in Red boxes,
and these microRNAs are originated from intronic sequences of
essential cardiac marker genes and these microRNAs are also
targeted same cardiac marker genes. Previously reported and
characterized microRNAs are shown in purple boxes, also
found during our analysis which makes validate our study.

