Background
Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) belongs to the Flaviviridae 
family of dengue virus and yellow fever virus. It is one of the 
major causes of encephalitis in Eastern and Southern Asia. JEV
infection of host cells produces three structural and seven non
structural proteins (NS). The structural proteins consist of 
positive sense single stranded RNA genome which is packaged 
in the capsid and formed by the capsid protein, acting as a 
major antigen used to draw out neutralizing antibody response 
and protective immunity in hosts []. On the other hand, the 
non-structural, nucleocapsid protein is the most important 
protein of the virion. JEV is known to infect the lumen of the 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) [] thereby accumulating 
significant amount of nonstructural viral protein. The genome 
of JEV encodes several nonstructural proteins which are 
differentiated into NS1, NS2a, NS2b, NS3, N4a, NS4b and NS5. 
NS3 is a putative helicase, and NS5 is the viral polymerase. 
These NS proteins tend to bind on a glycoprotein receptor, 
ribophorin (RPN) present on ER resulting in its malfunctioning 
and ultimately triggering an unfolded protein response 
[].

In response to JEV infection, the host cell produces virus 
neutralizing antibodies and cytotoxic T cells (CTLs). It has 
been shown that defense against JEV infection is primarily 
antibody dependent, and virus-neutralizing antibodies lacking 
help are sufficient to convey protection [,
]. It is known that
small segments of protein called the antigenic determinants or 
the epitopes are limiting for eliciting the preferred immune 
response. Thus, the B-cell epitopes on JEV NS protein can be 
developed as important determinants as vaccine candidates 
against viral infection. Since peptide vaccines in which small 
peptides derived from target protein epitopes are used to 
aggravate an immune reaction, peptide(s) from JEV protein 
that forms the virus-neutralizing epitope (s) could, therefore be 
used for neutralizing antibodies produced against JEV 
[].

The current developments and continued use of computational 
tools and techniques for vaccine design help to decrease the 
time essential to recognize the contender peptide as vaccine by 
providing data related to its structure function association of 
virus proteins. Therefore, it is of interest to the explore 
molecular interaction and binding mechanism of several NS
proteins present in JEV with RPN in an attempt characterize
the interface residues between interacting molecules with
useful insights in predicting epitopes for vaccine design
against JEV.

Methodology
Collection of NS protein sequences:
The full length protein sequences of nonstructural (NS) 
proteins of JEV were retrieved from the NCBI protein 
database. It is known that JEV infection of host cells produces 
seven NS proteins namely, (NS) viz NS1 (NP_775667.1), NS2A
(NP_775668.1), NS2B (NP_775669.1), NS3 (NP_775670.1), NSA
(NP_775671.1), NS4B (NP_775673.1) and NS5 (NP_775674.1).

Protein 3D structure modeling of NS and RPN:
The 3D structures of NS and RPN are not yet known. 
Therefore, we generated their homology models using 
homology modeling [] with Modeller 9v10 
[] and SWISS
MODEL from ExPASy server [,
].

Protein-Protein Docking data:
It is known that NS proteins preliminarily interact with RPN of 
Endoplasmic reticulum. Therefore, it is of interest to explore
the interacting interface residues between them. Hence, we 
explored Protein- Protein interaction of NS class of proteins
NS1 Vs RPN1, NS1 Vs RPN2, NS2A Vs RPN1, NS2A Vs RPN2,
NS2B Vs RPN1, NS3 Vs RPN1, NS3 Vs RPN2, NS4A Vs RPN1,
NS4A Vs RPN2, NS4B Vs RPN1, NS4B Vs RPN2, NS5 Vs RPN1
using PDBe PISA, an interactive tool for the exploration of 
macromolecular (protein, DNA/RNA and ligand) interfaces 
residues [] and Discovery studio 2.5 Zdock (Dock Proteins) 
module for protein-protein docking [].

ZDOCK calculations:
ZDOCK is an initial stage rigid body molecular docking 
algorithm that uses a fast Fourier transform (FFT) method to 
improve performance for searching in translational space 
[].
All of the available structures were used to calculate the 
docking poses and the structures obtained were subjected to 
energy minimization using the smart minimize algorithm (Max 
steps 200, RMS gradient 0.01) in the program Accelrys 
Discovery studio 2.5. The resulting Zdock scores with the 
highest value were used as appropriate conformational pose 
[]. 
After obtaining all protein-protein docking scores we 
screened the highest NS interaction with RPN score for further 
analysis.

BCPred:
The identification and characterization of B-cell epitopes play 
an important role in vaccine design, immunodiagnostic tests, 
and antibody production. Therefore, computational tools for 
reliably predicting B-cell epitopes in protein sequences are 
highly desirable. Because it is often valuable to compare 
predictions of multiple methods, and consensus predictions 
are more reliable than individual predictions, the BCPREDs 
server allows users to choose the method for predicting B-cell 
epitopes among several developed prediction methods. The
current implementation of BCPREDS allows the user to select 
among three prediction methods: (i) our implementation of 
AAP method [] (ii) BCPred 
[] (iii) FBCPred 
[].

Prediction of antigenic peptides:
The antigenic peptides server was employed to predict
segments from a protein sequence that are likely to be 
antigenic by eliciting an antibody response. Antigenic peptides 
were determined using the method of Kolaskar and 
Tongaonkar [] 
(www.mifoundation.org). Predictions are 
based on a table that reflects the occurrence of amino acid 
residues in experimentally known segmental epitopes. 
Segments are only reported if they have a minimum size of 8 
residues.

Results &amp; Discussion
Prediction and Validation Studies of 3D structures of NS and Ribophorin:
Three dimensional structures of NS and RPN were successfully 
built using Modeller 9v10 [] and SWISS-MODEL from 
ExPASy server as shown in  &amp; 
 []. Suitable templates 
for structure prediction were obtained using BLASTp program 
against PDB. Generated 3D structures were further set for 
validation run using RAMPAGE server from crystallography 
and Bioinformatics Group, University of Cambridge 
(http://mordred.bioc.cam.ac.uk/~rapper/rampage.php) on the basis 
of Ramchandran Plot analysis.

The validation studies of the generated model of RPN and NS 
showed most of the residues of the modeled proteins in most 
favored regions, whereas 0.0% of amino acid residues were
found in the disallowed region as represented ( &amp; 
), 
 (see supplementary material).

ProSA - Protein Structure Analysis server 
(https://prosa.services.came.sbg.ac.at/prosa.php) 
[] has also been used to 
evaluate energy pattern and verify the structure using Z score, 
representing the taken as a whole eminence and measures the 
variation of total energy []. The Z score value of the obtained 
models of RPN and NS were well within the acceptable range 
−10 to 10. It has been reported that the Z score is dependent on 
the length of the protein and negative Z-scores are very good 
for a reliable model ().

Protein-Protein docking studies:
The binding efficiency between the Nonstructural Proteins 
(NS1, NS2A, NS2B, NS3, NS4A, NS4B and NS5) and 
Ribophorins (RPN1 and RPN2) were calculated using ZDOCK. 
The docked poses were analyzed and the top 10 complexes on 
the basis of their ER-scores were selected (). 2000 
different poses were generated, which were further subjected 
for refinement using RDOCK, where top 10 poses were 
selected for further analysis. Finally top 3 complexes on the 
basis of their binding energy obtained using ER_scores were 
selected, which includes NS1-RPN2, NS4A-RPN2 and NS3-
RPN2, which interacts with binding energies of -42.685 
kcal/mol, -45.6684 kcal/mol and -51.0376 kcal/mol 
respectively (). Our results revealed that NS3 was found 
to be interacting most efficiently against RPN2, with highest 
ER-score i.e. -51.0376 and with maximum hydrogen bonding 
residues between both the molecules ( &amp; 
).

B cell predicted epitope of NS3:
It has already been reported that protection against JEV 
infection is mainly antibody dependent and thus the prediction 
of B cell epitopes on JEV nucleocapsid protein may provide 
important determinants of protection against virus. 
Subsequently BCPred server was employed which allows 
users to choose the method for predicting B-cell epitopes 
among several developed prediction methods []. Based on 
the protein docking scores obtained above B cell epitopes of 
specifically NS3 nucleocapsid protein was predicted as 
presented in  (see supplementary material).

Following were the B cell epitopes predicted having highest sc
ore position  (see supplementary material).

 (1) ‘IFMTATPPGTTDPFPDSNAP’(313) and
(2) ‘SAIVQGDRQEEPVPEAYTPN’(163)

These small segments of NS3 protein called antigenic 
determinants or epitopes obtained above were supposed to be 
sufficient for eliciting the desired immune response.

Prediction of antigenic peptides:
The Nucleocapsid protein (Japanese encephalitis) NS3 sequence 
is 618 residues long. There were 22 antigenic determinants 
predicted in the sequence (). The highest pick was at 
start position 537 to end position 558. The antigenic sequence is
- NFLELLRTADLPVWLAYKVASN. The average for the whole 
protein is above 1.0 then all residues having above 1.0 are 
potentially antigenic. Average antigenic propensity for this
protein was found to be 1.0121. The conformation of the 
peptide is an important determinant of its immunogenicity, 
and it may determine whether the anti-peptide antibodies 
would also recognize the native protein from which the 
peptide was derived []. Thus, to improve chances of 
producing anti-peptide antibodies proficient of recognizing 
JEV nucleo-capsid protein segments from a protein sequence 
that are likely to be antigenic by eliciting an antibody response 
has been predicted.

Conclusion
The design and development of short peptides as vaccine 
candidate for JEV is gaining momentum in recent years. 
Therefore, Thus in the percent study we document predicted 
epitope like region in the NS3 protein having RPN interaction. 
Hence, these data could be useful in designing candidates 
capable of producing antipeptide antibodies which are 
competent of recognizing JEV specific nucleocapsid protein.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Sayeed et al, Bioinformation 10(8): 496-501 (2014)

Homology 3D structure model of RPN2 (Ribophorin 
II) visualized by Pymol

Homology 3D structure model of JEV NS3 visualized 
by Pymol.

 Structural validation of modeled RPN2 protein using 
Ramachandran plot. Number of residues in favored region 
(~98.0% expected): 385 (87.7%), Number of residues in allowed 
region (~2.0% expected): 32 (7.3%) Number of residues in 
outlier region: 22 (5.0%).

Structural validation of modeled JEV NS3 protein 
using Ramachandran plot. Number of residues in favored
region (~98.0% expected): 587 (95.1%), number of residues in 
allowed region (~2.0% expected): 21 (3.4%), number of 
residues in outlier region: 9 (1.5%).

 Energy plot of modeled protein (a) NS3 and (b) RPN2 
obtained by ProSA web server and corresponding Graph 
showing Z score of modeled protein.

Protein-protein interaction model of JEV-NS3 and 
RPN2 receptor of Endoplasmic reticulum visualized by 
Discovery Studio Visualizer.

