Background
On viewing the protein folding differently, a unifying spatial
arrangement in protein is proposed despite there is different
structure and function []. The nature of forces involved for the
molecular conformations of proteins is reviewed some time
back by Kauzmann []. Hydrophobic forces play an important
role in structure creation, stability and to carry out specific
function. Carbon involved towards these hydrophobic forces.
Carbon distribution in different sequences makes the proteins
to have different function. It is reported that proteins try to
maintain specific fraction of carbon content along its sequence
in over all [] or in portion 
[]. Carbon content and distribution
is related to arrangement of amino acid along the sequence.
Each amino acid in a sequence is accountable to its carbon
distribution. So the importances of carbon atoms in 20 amino
acids are to be described carefully rather than simple
classification as non polar versus polar/charged. Carbon
substance can become magnetic when in contact with a
magnetic material. Scientists say that the mechanism relies on
the transfer of spin carried by electrons of the magnetic
substrate to the carbon compound. A theoretical study to
capture this phenomenon accepts the fact that the carbon has
magnetic property []. It is widely believed that graphite and
other forms of carbon can have ferromagnetic properties, but
the effects are so weak. After measuring the magnetic
properties of a meteorite sample [], it is argued that carbon
has magnetic effect. Coey and coworkers were able measure
this tiny magnetic moment by using magnetic force
microscope and applying to nanotube. It is 0.1 Bohr magnetons
per carbon in room temperature. It is 2.2 Bohr magnetons for
iron. This magnetic property of carbon opens up a new avenue
in biology of carbon compounds. The nature and extent of
carbon distribution in protein structure is investigated here.
The crystal and solution structure of globular proteins are
taken and analyzed with a question, how the fraction of carbon
varies around individual atoms in the structure?

Methodology
Dataset:
 (see supplementary material) gives the list of PDB
structure identified for comparison of carbon distribution in
monomeric and dimeric proteins and differentiates solid
structure with liquid structures. The PDB coordinates of
proteins are taken from Protein Data Bank. The super oxide
dismutase (SOD) (Uniprot ID: P00441) gives the requirement of
different structure like monomer, dimer in liquid and solid
form. To understand the carbon fraction distribution in fiber
proteins, coronin (2AQ5) was identified. A toxin protein
(1XTC) is also identified for carbon comparison study.
Hydrogen atoms in X-ray structures are added using online
kinemage.biochem.duke.edu (reduce version 3.16) software.

Method:
The Flow chart () describes how carbon fractions are
calculated. In a simple term, (1) the crystal structure (PDB
coordinates) of a given protein is taken into array, (2) the first
atom is selected as center atom, (3) a spheres around this
center atom is drawn with specified radius, (4) number of
carbon and total atoms are counted in the sphere, (5) the ratio
between carbon and total atom is taken as carbon fraction
around the center atom, (6) the center atom is accounted based
on the carbon fraction, (7) the procedure is repeated until the
last atom is reached and finally (8) the number of atoms in the
groups are divided by total number of atoms to (9) plot
number of sphere versus carbon fraction. The maximum
number of spheres at a given carbon fraction is taken as
probable one. A Perl program (called CARd3D) has been
developed to carry out these accounting. The carbon fractions
around individual atoms in different radii are captured for
comparison and plotted X-Y plot for discussion.

Results &amp; Discussion
Carbon Fraction Distribution Profile:
Carbon Fraction distribution (CFD) for super oxide dismutase
in monomeric and dimeric form is calculated for 15Å diameter
and given in . It is argued that globular proteins are
trying to maintain carbon fraction around 0.3145 
[]. Here,
both monomer and dimeric form are in agreement with
expected term. But the dimeric form is narrow and maximum
at expected value. So the carbon distribution profile stabilises
the dimer over the monomer. There are instances where a
sphere containing 22 and 42 percent of carbon with less
frequency. The distribution pattern is expected a normal one
with both side are in equal numbers. The monomer does not
show up with correct distribution while the dimeric form is in
normal distribution. The existence of this protein is
proportional to the normal distribution. Abnormal
distributions can be disorders and diseases. Formation of
protein dimer can be better understood based on this CFD
formula. A sharp narrow carbon distribution profile was
observed at 25Å while it was discontinuous broad pattern of
distribution at 4Å. The optimum value of distribution found at
15Å which can be used as standard of measure. In fact this
spherical diameter, 15Å roughly covers up the protein patterns
of length 15 amino acid long which is equal to 225 atoms.
Diameter 35Å and above show a same CFD for all atoms.
There is no variation in carbon fraction.

The carbon distribution in muscle (fiber-2AQ5) protein was
analysed for existence of such pattern. The pattern was
compared with globular protein (SOD-1SPD) as given in
. The fiber protein is in no way following the carbon
distribution pattern. It is not important for its functional role.
The distribution curve is flat on top. There is no narrow
distribution curve but broad curve. The fibrous protein does
not maintain carbon distribution profile for its survival like
globular protein-(for example SOD). But both proteins
maintain a definite carbon fraction distribution along the
sequence. The CFD is different for fiber proteins than the
globular proteins. That is why the fiber proteins are static
while globular proteins are dynamic. The solution structure of
dimeric form of SOD (1L3N) determined from NMR is
compared (result not shown here) with X-ray structure (1SPD).
The solution structure allows better CFD than the solid
structure. Of course the medium influences the structure. Solid
structure is slightly distorted over the solution structure.

CFD in fiber(2AQ5) and toxin (1XTC) proteins reveal that the
fiber protein does not have the tendency of having maximum
at 31.45% of carbon in its structure. It lacks hydrophilic
elements. More over the variation in carbon fraction is found to
be from 27% to 36% while it is 28% and 34% for globular
protein. The maximum fraction was greater than in globular
protein. In atomic profile plot as in , there was no
specific gapped carbon rich or carbon less stretches. But two
broad spectrum of maximum carbon fraction with length
approximately 200 aminoacids were observed. These are all
may be essential for fiber proteins. A clear difference in CFD
and atomic profile are observed in globular and fiber proteins.
On the other hand the toxin protein shows up an unusual
distribution. This is in no way in tune with globular or fiber
protein. The carbon fraction varies arbitrarily in toxin protein.
In CFD calculation, accounting carbon in sp3/sp2
hybridization and carbon in planar and flexible side chains will
improve the quality of results.

CFD around individual atoms, particularly around O, N and C
at lower diameters ranging from 4 to 8Å will certainly help the
result. An inclusion of water molecules of the crystal structure
will improve the distribution result. Protein active sites are
having higher carbon content. This can be better visualized
from CFD analysis. That is identification and modification of
active site becomes easier from CFD analysis. The binding
sites, structural domains and patterns can also be identified
from this analysis. Disordered regions in diseased proteins can
be identified and suggest a possible mutation for existence. It is
observed that for every 2.25 residues there is increase or
decrease in carbon fraction. The selection of amino acid for
mutation is in such way that it follows the profile of carbon
distribution to maintain 31.45% carbon. A wide range of
diameters are workedout for CFD analysis for different
proteins. The CFD curve is somewhat broad at 5Å and after 6Å
a normal narrow distribution appears. At diameter 70Å, only
two points at 31 (99.95%) and 32 (.05%) appear for SOD. The
spherical diameter 15Å sounds ideal for analysis purpose. But
at 25Å a smooth transition between hydrophobic and
hydrophilic with a periodicity length of 15 amino acids are
observed normally. Calculations involving diameter between
15 and 25Å can be used for CFD calculation. Neglecting H
atom in the plot and averaging of carbon fraction values of
individual atoms of given amino acids gives better
observation.

Atoms in a given spherical diameter are analysed. Results
reveal that there are maximum of 14 continuous amino acid's
atoms are included in the vicinity of central amino acids. At
higher diameter a distance amino acids are also observed
nearby. The continuous stretch of amino acids varies in Cterminal
and N-terminal side. It is also noticed that any
difference in CFD for given diameter is counter balanced at
higher diameter. So the ultimate structure is determined by not
only the local atoms but also by distance amino acids. The
averaged CFD for individual amino acids represent better over
the atomic level representation. Further excluding the
hydrogen atom from averaging, improves the results to an
appropriate CFD plot. As the codons XAX and XTX (X=A, T, G
or C) are playing an important role in producing proteins with
adequate CFD. Producing mRNAs with this principle of CFD
is important task for solving genetics diseases and production
[]. Similar studies with number of carbon rather than fraction
can yield different results and observation.

The atomic profile (AP) that is carbon fraction around
individual atoms of monomer SOD (1DSW) is shown in 
. 
The figure is a plot of carbon fraction for individual atoms
within a given spherical diameter. Though the analyses were
carried out for range of diameter from 3 to 50Å, the result is
shown for 15Å (blue), 25Å (red) and 45Å (green). A wide
spectrum of variation in carbon fraction is observed with 15Å
(see blue lines). On the other side a narrow variation among
atoms are observed with 45Å (green). At 25Å a moderate
variation in carbon fraction among the atoms (red) is observed.
Notice that a carbon rich and carbon less stretches with specific
gap is observed in this 25Å diameter. This novel set of spatial
arrangement of carbon fraction variation observed with an
interval of 15 amino acids is remarkable. That is a fluctuation
between hydrophobic and hydrophilic elements with 15 amino
acid gap is observed. This is clearly visible in diameter 25Å
(red). It could be the factor deciding the protein folding,
stability and existence. The globular proteins trying to
maintain 31.45% carbon is evident from this factor. Alteration
in carbon fraction with every 8th residues is observed. Side
chain atoms (as center atom) contribute more in the carbon
fraction fluctuation than the main chain atoms. A 7 amino
acids long similar stretches with different amino acid sequence
can be retrieved for hydrophobic and hydrophilic stretches.
The presence of disulphide bond between 57 and 146 amino
acids makes an improper carbon distribution (at stretch from
60 to 150) in lower diameter that is at 15Å. The globular
proteins trying to maintain 31.45% carbon is evident from
these observations. This trend was found weak in lower
diameters (less than 15Å). It may not be the factor for existence
at smaller local structure. The repeats in 7 amino acids interval
are also confirmed with CARd program at sequence level. At
90Å the plot becomes flat at .3145 with no variation in AP at all.

Similar AP plot for fiber and toxin proteins are compared. The
fibrous protein shows a similar trend of hydrophobic and
hydrophilic patterns as in globular proteins, but the local
hydrophobic/hydrophilic patterns together form another
broad sense of hydrophobic peaks. In fact this is better visible
with total number of carbon rather than the fraction. The
periodicity of this broad stretches are at an interval of 45 amino
acids. In the AP plot another very broad peaks are noticed with
an interval of 280 amino acids. The toxin protein shows no
such a distribution pattern. The periodicity of hydrophobic
and hydrophilic patterns with 7 amino acids gap is not
observed. The distribution of carbon content is important. The
uneven distribution regions can be mutated for stabilization.
One has to do a mutation that takes these issues in different
levels of distribution, particularly at spherical diameter up to
25Å. The carbon distribution in protein structure can be
modified for better stability and existence of the protein.
Comparison of native and mutated form of SOD monomer
suggests that the alteration in carbon fraction distribution is
not at specific site rather observed in many amino acids. This
gives an idea that the mutation changes the course of activity
by slowing down the dynamics or aggression of the protein.
On the other side the productivity is hampered. If the
hydrophobic mutation occurs at binding site, the protein
encourages for strong action. The hydrophilic mutation at
active site does encourage water molecule to interact and
neglecting the active interaction. Alteration in carbon
distribution due to mutation can damage the conserved
domains and motif and change the total function of the
biomolecules. Any unusual distribution can lead to disorder
and can cause disease. An accumulation of carbon can
manipulate the magnetic effect in fold form. What happens to
this distribution analysis in terms of other elements like O, N, S
and H atoms? The analyses were carried out. The results need
not be presented here. The residues in unfavorable regions of
Ramachandran plot can be defined by carbon distribution plot
as the folding itself is due to hydrophobic elements. One can
think that the beta sheet formation itself is due to hydrophobic
elements. A strong H-bond donor/acceptor water molecule
can penetrate into protein and fulfill required H-bonds. The Hbond
only favors the beta sheet formation.

Every 2.25 amino acids alter the course of hydrophobic
formulism. Diameter 15Å includes approximately 225 atoms
which covers a small amphipathic pattern which is 15 amino
acids length. Diameter 22.5Å includes approxmately 700 atoms
covering another larger 45 amino acid long amphipathic
domains. Diameter 25Å contains 800 atoms in it. The inner
most core of the domain contain hydrophilic atoms or
residues. Eventhough the presence of sulphur atom is minimal,
it affect the carbon distribution profile significantly.
Particularly the cys-cys disulphide bond makes drastic changes
in the carbon distribution pattern. For example the 12Å
calculation on SOD shows no carbon domains between 49 and
69 while other stretches contain. So the cys57 alters the local
structure. Because of this violation of carbon distribution,
avoiding cys will yield better proteins. One can apply this
concept of avoiding Cys for other proteins as well. General
observation is, more the hydrophilic adjacent to hydrophobic
pocket better the domain is or more stable. In all these
calculations, the H centered statistics are not taken into account
as it is significant. The carbon density around O and N is
different than C atom, particularly at near surroundings (&lt;
12Å). The O is surrounded by more carbon than that of N
followed by C. The O water attraction is quenched by this way.
The electrical conductance also damped. The carbon fraction
distribution plot around O, N&amp;C using 5Å diameter can be
maneuvered for identification and modification of unusual
amino acids, active site, hydrophilic region, hydrophobic
pockets etc. Plots between 4Å and 10Å diameter will be
helpful for this purpose. Analysing carbon around oxygen
atoms in ASP&amp;GLU (carboxyl, aspartate and glutamate) and
ASN&amp;GLN_SER&amp;THR (amide, aspartamine and glutamine
and alcohol, serine and threonine oxygens), reveals that greater
carbon around charged carboxyl oxygen atoms. That too
happens in diameter between 4 and 8Å. Any change in C
fraction for individual atoms can leads to instability. In fact,
one can arrange to get rule for C fraction like Chargaff's rule
for protein stability analysis that can be used for comparison of
two protein states and mutational effect. CARd-3D program
can be better utilised for identification and modification of
hydrophobic/hydrophilic/amphipathic stretches in globular
proteins.

Conclusion
Analysis leading to carbon distribution in 3D structure of
proteins reveals that carbon is better distributed in dimeric
form than in its monomeric form. Liquid (NMR) structure has
better carbon distribution than the solid (X-Ray) structure.
Fiber proteins follow the principle of carbon fraction
distribution, but broad spectrum of carbon distribution than in
globular proteins. The toxin protein follows an abnormal
carbon fraction distribution. These analyses reveal the role of
carbon distribution deciding the structure and shape of
proteins. It is hoped to help in understanding the protein
structure and activity. Any deviation from this scale of
measure is less probable and leads to instability. Sometime the
core of the proteins contains greater carbon content which may
not be required from stability point of view. An even
distribution with correct carbon fraction distribution will
stabilize a protein with required hydrophobicity and electrical
conductivity. This needs to be validated experimentally.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Rajasekaran et al, Bioinformation 10(3): 138-143 (2014)

Flow diagram showing computation of carbon
fraction distribution in structure of protein.

Carbon distribution profile of super oxide dismutase
in monomeric and dimeric form. Note that the dimer shows
better distribution over monomer one.

Carbon distribution profile of globular protein (super
oxide dismutase) compared with fiber protein (Coronin). The
fiber protein does not follow the normal distribution curve.

Atomic profile of super oxide dismutase (1DSW) in
spherical diameters of 15, 25 and 45Å are shown. The carbon
fraction fluctuates around 0.3145 which is measure of
hydrophobic scale. In 25Å (red) the fluctuation is visible
clearly. The fluctuation in hydrophobic value occurs at every
15 amino acids gap. The presence of disulphide bond between
57 and 146 amino acids makes an improper carbon distribution
(from 60 to 150) in 15Å.

