Background
In the plant–insect ecosystem, there is an arms race between the 
plant and insect to encounter each other through array of 
chemically mediated interactions. Plants produce different 
kinds of secondary metabolites that may negatively influence 
the behaviour and biology of those insects that interacts with 
the plants either for feeding, shelter or oviposition. Similarly, 
insects employ behavioural and physiological adaptations to 
encounter the chemical armory of the plants. Insect 
detoxification enzymes (esterase and glutathione S-transferase) 
and oxidoreductases (polyphenol oxidase, peroxidase, and 
catalase) are one of the important agents used by insects that 
involved in the resistance against the secondary plant 
metabolites found in host plants. Glutathione S-transferases 
(GSTs) belong to a protein family (EC No. 2.5.1.18) and are the 
important detoxifying enzymes found in bacteria, plants, 
vertebrates, insects and mammals []. These enzymes catalyze 
the conjugation of electrophilic molecules with reduced 
glutathione (GSH) and the convert the products to more water 
soluble and excretable form. In insects, the GST activity is 
found to be present in the midgut [,
], fat body, haemolymph 
and other tissues []. Among the GSTs, sigma class GSTs is one 
of the largest GST subfamilies which exhibit multiple functions 
and are found to be present in vertebrate as well as invertebrate 
animals []. Sigma class GST genes can be said as the most 
common or second most common genes among different insect 
order like hemiptera, orthoptera, coleoptera and hymenoptera 
[]. The previous studies on Drosophila sigma GST had revealed 
that sigma GSTs were associated with an indirect flight muscle 
and only possess oxidant role []. However, it is observed that 
these GSTs also play a role in xenobiotic detoxification and 
insecticide resistance []. The cotton aphid, Aphis gossypii
Glover (Hemiptera: Aphididae) is a cosmopolitan species 
colonizing more than 600 host plants. It is the vector of more 
than 50 plant viruses and is a major pest of many crops, 
including melon and other cultivated members of the 
Cucurbitaceae family []. A. gossypii has developed resistance 
against insecticides like monocrotophos, acephate, dimethoate, 
phosphamidon and triazophos in Guntur district of Andhra 
Pradesh in India []. It has been found that virus transmission 
can reduce the cotton yield up to 30-40%. To manage insecticide 
resistance, application of piperonyl butoxide (PBO) along with 
the insecticides is used []. The PBO is found to be a potential 
inhibitor of GST in combination with other insecticides 
[]. 
Likewise, plant natural compounds have been identified to 
inhibit insect GSTs that includes plant phenols (quercetin, 
ellagic acid, juglone, menadione and plumbagin), ethacrynic 
acid, organotin compounds and hydroxyamic acids 
[].

In context with the issue mentioned above, we have focused on 
the two GSTs viz., sigma 1 (GenBank Accession No: JN989964.1) 
and sigma 2 (GenBank Accession No: JN989965.1). We have 
carried out the molecular docking of sigma 1 and sigma 2 GST 
protein models of cotton aphid A. gossypii with different 
insecticides and previously studied plant natural compounds 
that act as GST inhibitors. As the structures were not deposited 
in the PDB, we have manually prepared protein structure 
models for these GSTs by using different bioinformatics tools 
and software which were then validated with standard range of 
parameters. The molecular docking was performed using 
Maestro 9.3 (Schrodinger, USA). Based on the glide score the 
potent GST inhibitors for both the GSTs were identified.

Methodology
Generation of 3D model of sigma 1 and sigma 2 GSTs of A. gossypii and their validation:
PDB structure of sigma 1(accession No: JN989964.1) and sigma 
2 GST (accession No: JN989965.1) in A. gossypii were generated 
using Swiss model workspace [] in automated mode by 
submission of protein FASTA sequences collected from
GenBank database of National Center for Biotechnology 
Information (NCBI) []. The models were checked for quality 
by using Structural Analysis and Verification Server NIH MBI 
Laboratory for Structural Genomics and Proteomics 
[] and 
resulting values were compared with the standard values of 
parameters like sequence identity, E-value, QMEANscore4, 
QMEAN Z score, ERRAT, Verify 3D and Ramachandran plot.

Active site residue prediction and ligand selection for docking:
Active site residues used for grid generation in docking of 
sigma 1 and sigma 2 GSTs were predicted using Q-Site Finder 
tool []. Ligands were selected based on the previously
studied different GST activity inhibitors that include different 
insecticides (9), natural compounds and secondary metabolites 
in cotton as well as other plant sources (32). The chemical 
structures for these compounds were downloaded from 
PubChem database [] in SDF format. 

Sigma 1 and sigma 2 GST model structure preparation:
Protein model structure for sigma 1 and sigma 2 GSTs was 
prepared using protein preparation wizard in Schrodinger 
Maestro 9.3 software that corrects and optimize the protein 
structures. Energy minimization for models (sigma 1 and sigma 
2 GST) was done using OPLS_2005 force field. The active sites 
of the proteins were defined for generating the grid.

Ligand structures preparation and grid generation:
The ligand structures obtained were prepared using Ligprep 
wizard in Schrodinger Maestro 9.3 by submission of ligands in 
SDF format as an input. Ligprep optimizes the ligand 
structures. The force field OPLS_2005 was used for 
minimization and the ionization states were generated at the 
default pH of 7.0 ± 2.5 using Epik. In Ligprep, desalt option was 
used to exclude other molecules from the ligand structure. 
Tautomers were generated using Generate Tautomer option. 
The option Retain specified chiralities were used to order to fix 
the irregularities of ligand. Active site residues obtained for 
both the GSTs were added in grid generation wizard of 
Maestro 9.3 and gird generation was performed.

Molecular docking of sigma 1 and sigma 2 GSTs:
In order to know the binding mode of inhibitors of sigma 1 and 
sigma 2 GSTs, molecular docking of sigma 1 and sigma 2 GSTs 
model was carried out using XP (extra precision) module in 
which model was docked in different orientations with the 
ligands. Performance of GST inhibitors was analyzed based on 
the parameters like Glide score, H-bonding score, H-bond 
interaction and bond distance (Å). For ligands with multiple 
Glide score in different orientations, the best scoring pose and 
XP Glide score were taken into consideration.

Result &amp; Discussion
Generation of 3D PDB model of sigma 1 and sigma 2 GSTs of A. gossypii and quality check:
The 3D structure model for sigma 1 and sigma 2 GSTs of A. 
gossypii were downloaded from Swiss model work space in 
PDB format (), which was further used for 
identification of active site residues and protein preparation in 
docking. When the sequence similarity between the target and 
the template sequence drops below 40%, the quality of model 
obtained is reduced []. The sigma 1 and sigma 2 GSTs had 
shared homology of 48% and 43% with Chain A crystal 
structure of the Drosophila GST-2 in complex with glutathione 
(PDB ID : 1M0U). Hence, our models were quite good in terms 
of similarity between target and template. The raw Q mean 
score values should be in the range from 0 to 1 for good models 
[]. QMEANscore4 obtained from swiss model workspace had 
shown values of 0.722 and 0.714 for sigma 1 and sigma 2 GSTs 
respectively, which has satisfied the range of standard 
parameters. The standard value of QMEAN Z score should not 
be too much negative [] is satisfied by QMEAN Z score of 
sigma 1 and sigma 2 GSTS which are -0.962 and -1.076 
respectively. Generally structures with high resolution produce 
ERRAT values around 95% or higher, whereas for lower
resolutions (2.5 to 3A) the average value is 91%. The values for 
sigma 1 and sigma 2 GSTs were 84.375 and 92.746 respectively 
which were not showing much difference with the standard 
parameters. Verify 3D output had shown that at least 80% of 
the amino acids have scored &gt;= 0.2 in the 3D/1D profile which 
has satisfied the verified 3D test []. A good quality protein 
model should have above 90% of the residues in the “core”
regions Ranchandran plot (Morris et al., 1992) as it is a measure 
of stereochemical quality of proteins. In Ramachandran plot 
analysis, sigma 1 and sigma 2 GSTs had shown 91.6% and 
89.6% residues in most favored regions showing the good 
quality of our models 
 (see supplementary material). 
Active site residues (LEU, ILE, ASN, PHE, TYR, LYS, VAL and 
GLY) predicted for model sigma 1 and sigma 2 GSTs 

(see supplementary material). The minimized energy for the 
optimized model structures of sigma 1 and sigma 2 GSTs using 
OPLS_2005 force field were found to be -389.522 kcal/mol and -
280.469 kcal/mol respectively. In molecular docking, the lower 
glide score with no hydrogen bonding were not taken into 
consideration. In Glide, the better binders possess more 
negative scores than loose or non binders. Among the 
insecticide class, Piperonyl butoxide was found to show the 
best glide score for the model sigma 1 GST (-6.8) with good H
bond score (-4.6), whereas it was less in the case of sigma 2 GST 
(-5.5) for the same. Among the compounds in cotton plants, 
tannin was found to have the highest score in all the compound 
classes for both the sigma 1 (-8.9) and sigma 2 GST models (-8.4) 
with strong H-bonding score of -4.6 and -5.2 respectively 
(Figure 1 c, d, e &amp; f). Likewise, among other plant natural 
compounds ellagic acid was found to show a good glide score 
for both the sigma 1 (-6.2) as well as sigma 2 (-6.1) GSTs 
 (see supplementary material).

Conclusion
From the molecular docking results, based on the glide score 
obtained for sigma 1 GST, it was found that the compounds 
were in the order of Tannins&gt; PBO&gt; α-mangostin&gt; Capsaicin&gt; 
Ellagic acid&gt; Myricetin&gt; Catechin as GST inhibitors, whereas 
the order was Tannins&gt; Gossypol&gt; Ellagic acid&gt; Quercetin&gt; α-
mangostin for sigma 2 GST.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Gawande et al, Bioinformation 10(11): 679-683 (2014)

Structure of 3D models generated for sigma1 and sigma 2 GSTs using swiss model workspace

