Background
Oceans have provided a complacent base for biological
activities on earth. Many biological compounds with varying
degrees of action, such as anti-tumor, anti-cancer, antiproliferative,
cytotoxic as well as antibiotic properties have
been isolated from marine sources. The marine environment is
an unexplored source for isolation of new microbes (bacteria,
fungi, actinomycetes, cyanobacteria and diatoms) that are
potent producers of bioactive secondary metabolites. The
bacteria and fungi from sea are reported to produce substances
which affect central nervous system (CNS), respiratory system
(RS), neuromuscular system (NMS), autonomic nervous system
(ANS), cardiovascular system (CVS) and gastrointestinal
system (GI). Marine secondary metabolites can easily impede
other micro organisms []. Among marine microorganisms,
particularly fungi have gained an important role as a source of
biologically active secondary metabolites []. Marine fungi have
proved to be a rich source of new biological natural products.
Because of their characteristic properties with reference to
temperature, nutrients, competition and salinity, they have
developed specific secondary metabolic pathways compared
with terrestrial fungi []. Marine filamentous fungi have proved
to possess tremendous potential as a source of new medicines
even at low concentrations of their secondary metabolites, as
some recent studies prove too []. Approximately 56 species of
Facultative marine fungi had been described until 1999 
[].
Between 2000 and 2005, approximately 100 marine fungal
metabolites were described and between 2006 and 2010, a total
of 690 natural products were reported as being isolated from
fungi in marine habitats []. Major anti – bacterial compounds
isolated from marine fungi have been listed as under the table
tiled „Major Antibacterial compounds from marine derived
fungi׳ [] 
 (see supplementary material).

Main Bioactivity Groups of the Novel Compounds
According to a study by Hu et al., (2015) 
[], out of 4196
bioactive compounds isolated from marine organisms, 2225 had
anticancer activity (56% of the total bioactive compounds). This
was followed by antibacterial activity of 521 compounds (13%).
The other five groups were represented 14%, including antifungus,
pest resistance and anti-virus. The remaining 16% of
the bioactive compounds could not be classified into the above
bioactive groups and were termed the “other” activity group.

Bioactive metabolites from marine derived fungi
Marine fungal strains are potent producers of polyketide
derived alkaloids, terpenes, peptides and mixed biosynthesis
compounds which represent chemical groups of secondary
metabolites produced by fungi. Miriam et al. (2012) 
[] isolated
marine fungal strains, they yielded several bioactive secondary
metabolites among which are (E)-4-methoxy-5-(3-methoxybut-
1-enyl)-6- methyl-2H-pyran-2-one, a new metabolite was
isolated from the Penicillium paxilli (strain MaG) K.
Norliquexanthone, also known as 1,3,6- trihydroxy-8-methyl-
9H-xanthen-9-one, was isolated from the fungus P. raistrikii
obtained from the sponge Axinella corrugate. Two new indole
alkaloids, (2-3, 3-dimethylprop-1-ene)-costaclavine and (2-3, 3-
dimethylprop-1- ene)-epicosta-clavine, together with the
known compounds costaclavine, fumgaclavine A and C, were
isolated from the marine fungus Aspergillus fumigatus. An
essential antibacterial compound, xanthocillin X(3) (),
and 14 other known compounds comprising three steroids, two
ceramides, six aromatic compounds and three alkaloids were
isolated from Penicillium commune SD-118, a fungus obtained
from a deep-sea sediment sample [].

Chrodrimanin B, along with five new phenolic bisabolane type
sesquiterpenoids were isolated from fermentation broth of the
marine fungus Aspergillus sp. isolated from South China Sea by
Mei Yan (2011) []. Antibacterial and cytotoxic activities were
reported from marine isolates of the fungal strain
Myceliophthora lutea Costantin by Smetanina et al. (2011) 
[].
Antimicrobial activity of marine fungi isolate was evaluated
against six human pathogenic bacteria, they are Enterobacter
aerogenes, Escherichia coli, Proteus mirabilis, Bacillus subtilis,
Staphylococcus aureus and Klebsiella pneumoniae, with different
solvents like n-butanol, chloroform, water and acetone.
Anticancer activity of the selective fungi Aspergillus protuberus
SP1 extracts were tested and they showed activity against Hep
2 cells using MTT assay []. Alkaloids with anticancer activity
were isolated from Penicillium citrinum, Fusarium sp., Apiospora
montagnei and polyketide asco-sali pyrrolidinone-A40 isolated
from the Ascochyta Sali-corniae having potential antimalarial
activity []. 
The fungal genus Aspergillus has been reported to
produce a considerable number of cytotoxic compounds as well
as other bioactive compounds ().

Anti tumour compounds from marine derived fungi
In the year 2005, the pharmacology of Verrucarin A, a chemical
compound isolated from the culture broth of the Palauan
marine fungus Myrothecium roridum was described 
[].
Verrucarin A significantly inhibited interleukin-8 production
from human promyelocytic leukemia cells, by a mechanism
that involved inhibition of the activation of the mitogen
activated kinases c-JUN and p38. A new chromone derivative,
(2-hydroxymethyl)-8-methoxy-3-methyl-4H-chromen-4-one
chromanone A44 was isolated from a marine fungal isolate of
Penicillium sp. which acts as an active tumour anti-initiating via
modulation of carcinogen metabolizing enzymes and
protection from DNA damage []. Penicillium sp.( strain DG
M3) 6׳C, isolated from the ascidian Didemnum granulatum, was
reported to yield 13-desoxy-phomenone []. Penicillium paxilli
strain (Ma G) K, obtained from the sponge M. angulosa gave an
extract which was cytotoxic against MDA-MB435 human
mammalian cancer cells (HCT8 human colon), CNS 295 central
nervous system cancer cells and HL60 leukemia cells 
[]. The
marine fungus Trichoderma virens, originated from ascidian
Didemnum molle has been used for the isolation of
Trichodermamides A and B. In vitro cytotoxicity against
human colon carcinoma has been reported from
Trichodermamide B () 
[].

Leptosins belong to a series of epipolysulfanyldioxopiperazine
class of chemical compounds produced mainly by various
strains of Leptosphaeria sp. that have been originally isolated
from the marine alga Sargassum tortile. These secondary
metabolites have similar structures (indole derivatives) and
exhibit in vivo cytotoxic activity, to broad spectrum of cell lines.
The anticancer potential of leptosins M, M1 and N were
examined using the murine P-388 lymphocytic leukemia cell
line and a disease-oriented panel of 39 human cancer cell lines
(HCC panel) () [].

Zygosporamide is a cyclic depsipeptide isolated from the
seawater-based fermentation broth of a marine-derived fungus
Zygosporium masonii, this compound was tested for cytotoxicity
against 60 cancer cell lines in NCI ().

Cephalimysin A belongs to a family of natural products
containing a unique 1-oxa-7-azaspiro non-2-ene-4,6- dione core
structure, isolated from a strain of Aspergillus fumigatus OPUST106B-
5 originally separated from the marine fish Mugil
cephalus. Cephalimysin A exhibited significant cytotoxic activity
against the murine P-388 leukemia cell line and the human HL-
60 leukemia cell line () 
[].

The diterpene conidiogenone C was isolated from Penicillium
sp. Several more members of conidiogenone were isolated from
the culture extracts of Penicillium chrysogenum QEN-24S, an
endophytic fungus derived from an unidentified marine red
algal species of the genus Laurencia. This compound has shown
potent cytotoxic effect to HL-60 []. Fusaranthraquinone,
fusarnaphthoquinones A-C and fusarone were obtained from
Fusarium spp. (sea fan Annella sp., Koh Hin Ran Pet, Suratthani
Province, Thailand) along with austrocortirubin, a metabolite of
Australian Cortinarius toadstools (C. basirubescens and C.
persplendidus) [] and a known Fusarium metabolite, the
naphtoquinone anhydrofusarubin ().
Austrocortirubin was selectively toxic to MCF-7 cells (breast)
while anhydrofusarubin displayed potent and selective
cytotoxicity. Anhydrofusarubin also showed cytotoxic effects
on human cancer cell lines HCT-8 (colon), MDA-MB-435
(melanoma) and SF-295 (brain).

Cryptosphaerolide is an ester-substituted sesquiterpenoid
related to the eremophilane class, isolated from Cryptosphaeria
sp. (unidentified ascidian, Bahamas). It is an inhibitor of the
protein Mcl-1 (a cancer drug target implicated in apoptosis) in
the Mcl-1/Bak fluorescence resonance energy transfer assay
(FRET). Cryptosphaerolide is also significantly cytotoxic
against HCT-116 cells () 
([,
]).

Paeciloxocins A and B, (2-(1-hydroxy-3-methylbutyl) and 2-(1-
acetoxy-3-methylbutyl)-11-hydroxy-9-methyl- 1-methoxy-
5H,7H-dibenzo[b, g]-1,5-dioxocin-5-ones), are two new
aromatic metabolites isolated from the mangrove fungus
Paecilomyces sp. collected from the Taiwan Strait. Both
paeciloxocin A and paeciloxocin B exhibited cytotoxicity
against the HepG2 cell line (liver) () 
[].

The monomeric C-methylated hexaketide (2E,4E)-1- (2,6-
dihydroxy-3,5-dimethyl-phenyl)hexa-2,4-dien-1-one, a marine
secondary metabolite with strong activity to HeLa (cervical
cancer) and SW-620 cells has been reported from Penicillium sp..
The anthraquinone SZ-685C was isolated from the mangrove
endophytic fungus Halorosellinia sp. (South China Sea). It
suppressed the proliferation of six cancer cell lines derived
from human breast cancer, prostate cancer, glioma and
hepatoma [].

Recent research
In a recent study by Henrik Harms (2015) 
[], isolation,
identification and biological evaluation of secondary
metabolites from the marine-derived fungus Dichotomomyces
cejpii proved that it serves as powerful producer of compounds
exhibiting activities toward cannabinoid and type II nuclear
receptors and possesses Aβ-42 lowering activity potentially
useful to treat Alzheimer dementia. In a research by Didha
Andidni Putria (2015) [], 
soft coral Sinularia sp. as source of
marine fungal symbionts from Panjang island of the North Java
Sea was collected. A total of 15 fungal symbionts that were
capable of growth inhibition of pathogenic fungi were
successfully isolated and screened using overlay method
against pathogenic fungi Candida albicans and Aspergillus.
Phytochemical tests showed that phenolic, triterpenoid and
flavanoid compounds were detected within fungal extract.
Molecular identification based on 18S rRNA gene showed that
the active fungi was closely related to Aspergillus unguis.
Arumugam et al., 2015 [] successfully isolated a piezotolerant
fungus Nigrospora sp. NIOT from deep sea environment and
cultured it under submerged fermentation. The secondary
metabolites produced from this organism showed potent
antimicrobial and anticancer activities with immediate
application to cosmetics and pharmaceutical industries.
According to a study by El- Hady et al., 2015 
[], the fungus
Aspergillus unguis RSPG_204 associated to the marine Sponge
(Agelas sp., Red Sea , Egypt) was investigated. The supernatant
and mycelial extracts [culture static (clt.st.)] had the highest free
radical scavenging activity against superoxide anion radical.
The fungus Aspergillus unguis RSPG_204 2ry metabolites
showed significant acetyl cholinesterase and high α -
glucosidase inhibition, beside its high antioxidant activities. For
the first time it was evidenced that these 2ry metabolites in
further in-vivo studies could play an important role as acetyl
cholinesterase and α -glucosidase inhibitors, besides
their antioxidant activities. In a study by Virupakshaiah (2014)
[], seven secondary metabolites obtained from marine
derived fungi were taken that were experimentally proven to
be cytotoxic against various human/cancer cell lines. Using
Pharmmapper - a web server for drug target identification, the
potential anti tumor targets of these compounds were found
and their cancer relevance was determined. Seven new
alkaloids including tryptoquivaline K (1) and fumiquinazolines
K–P (2–7), bearing a rare 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic
acid residue, together with six known compounds, were
isolated from the fungus Aspergillus sp. obtained from the
Mediterranean sponge Tethya aurantium which exhibited
pronounced cytotoxicity against the mouse lymphoma cell line,
but only moderate activity was observed against human
ovarian cancer and human Philadelphia chromosome-positive
chronic myelogenous leukemia cell lines [].

Conclusion
Marine environments present an invaluable source of new
natural products that may hold important leads for future drug
discovery and development []. Natural products of marinederived
fungi are expected to inspire medicinal chemists in
their search for better antitumor agents than existing ones,
bearing in mind that simplification and computer-aided design
may be particularly useful tools. Study on the bioactivity of
marine natural products should be emphasized to develop new
natural compounds from marine organisms. The novel
structures and metabolism (biosynthesis) pathways fascinate
chemists and the biological activities of these compounds are
interesting to the drug development community [].

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Hasan et al, Bioinformation 11(4): 176-181 (2015)

Xanthocillin

Metabolites from Aspergillus fumigatus

Trichodermamide A R=OH, Trichodermamide
BR=Cl

Leptosin A x=4, Leptosin B x=3, Leptosin C x=2

Zygosporamide

Cephalimycin

Fusaranthraquinone; (b) Fusarnapthoquinone A

Cryptosphearolide

Paeciloxocin A R=H, Paeciloxocin B R=Ac

