Background
P-loop NTPases represent a large protein family that are
involved in variety of cellular functions, for example, in signal
transduction, translation, protein transport and localization,
signal-sequence recognition, chromosome partitioning, and
membrane transport [–]. Walker A also known as phosphate
binding loop (P-loop) is a common feature of P-loop NTPase
fold that bind nucleotide. The consensus sequence of Walker A
(GXXXXGK[S/T], where X is any residue) is often used as a
motif for identifying new members of this group 
[–]. Walker
A sequences are also present in many proteins that do not form
P-loop, for example, peroxidases, and enzymes like α-amylase,
glutamate dehydrogenase, Taq polymerase, carbonic
anhydrase, binding proteins (lectin, trypsin inhibitor),
proteases, and others []. Here, we investigated the features that
maintain the P-loop architecture by employing a well
established global network parameter closeness centrality.
Protein structures can be represented as a residue–residue
interaction network where the residues are nodes and
interactions between them constitute edges. This approach has
been useful in various studies like predicting functional
residues in enzyme families [], protein structure flexibility 
[],
protein folding [], and side-chain clusters 
[]. Closeness
centrality is a global network parameter that correlates more
accurately with critical residues than any other centrality
measurement tested []. High closeness residues interact
directly or by a few intermediates with all other residues of the
protein []. By definition, closeness-centrality is calculated by
mean distance of a node (residue) to all other nodes (residue) in
the network. Amitai et al., [] have shown that important
residue positions like those involved in substrate and co-factor
binding, catalysis, and mutation intolerant residues show high
closeness centrality in networks. Del sol et al. 
[] have shown
that centrality residues integrate and propagate the information
to all other residues in protein.

Here, we show that Walker A and its flanking regions (N- and
C-terminal) have high density of high closeness centrality
residue positions in P-loop NTPases. We report that closeness
centrality of these residue positions are conserved across
common structural core of Ras superfamily and diverse
domains of P-loop NTPase fold. No such high densities of high
centrality residue positions are observed in the proteins
containing Walker A sequence that do not form P-loop. The
presented data clearly indicate the role of globally connected
residues in conservation of the local conformation of an ancient
motif such as Walker A.

Methodology
Selection of structures of P-loop containing NTPases:
High resolution X-ray crystallographic structures of diverse
domain of P-loop containing NTPases were used in the study.
Initially, ScopTree search of protein databank
(http://www.rcsb.org/pdb) was used to retrieve a set of 1203
structures of P-loop containing nucleoside triphosphate
hydrolase. The search was then refined to 227 distantly related
protein structures by using ScopTree homologue removal tool
at 30% sequence identity cutoff. This was primarily done to
avoid redundancy and utilize the diversity present in the P loop
NTPases. Complete structures (i.e., without chain breaks or
missing residues) with resolution ≤ 2.4 were chosen. Finally, we
selected 23 structures of P-loop NTPases 
 (see
supplementary material). We retrieved 22 PDB files for protein
structures containing Walker A sequence (GXXXXGKS/T) that
do not form the P-loop  (see supplementary material)
[].

Computation of closeness centrality:
Protein structures can be represented as a residue–residue
interaction graphs in which amino acid residues serve as the
nodes and their interatomic contacts are the edges. Closeness
centrality correlates more accurately with critical residues than
any other centrality measurement tested []. Therefore, we
used SARIG server which efficiently calculates the closeness
centrality (please see  for calculation
and explanation).

Beginning with the atomic coordinates of a protein structure,
server calculates the interaction between each pair of atoms by
using the CSU program []. Closeness values were calculated
for each residue and standardized by calculating their standard
deviation from the mean value. The z-score of the closeness
centrality was calculated by z-score = (C (x) − µ) / σ, where µ is
the mean value of closeness and σ is the standard deviation. The
residues with z-score ≥ 1.0 were considered significant (for
detailed descriptions, please refer to Amitai et al 
[]). Protein
structure analysis was performed using Chimera
(http://plato.cgl.ucsf.edu/chimera).

Results and Discussion
Walker A motif forms a typical architecture in P-loop fold
NTPase (). A distortion in the P-loop
conformation makes it incompatible with the binding of
nucleotides []. The features that contribute in preserving the
architecture of this ancient motif remain unidentified and
uncharacterized. Therefore, an important and open question is
how P-loop forms a typical architecture in structurally and
functionally diverse P-loop NTPases. Here, we used a well
established closeness centrality network parameter to study the
global impact of residues on the typical local conformation of Ploop.
Residues with high closeness value are central in network
and interact with other residues directly or by a few
intermediates [].

High closeness residue positions around P-loop and its flanking regions in Ras Super family members:
In order to understand the P-loop architecture, we first
analyzed the residue-residue interaction network of Ras
superfamily (Ras: 5P21; Rab: 3RAB; Ran: 1IBR, Rho: 1M7B and
Arf: 1R4A) experimental structures in GTP bound form.
Interestingly, Walker A and its flanking regions showed high
density of high closeness residue positions (). Here, the
high closeness centrality positions are defined as those positions
with statistically significant closeness values (z-score ≥1.0). Five
Walker A residue positions (W1, W2, W5, W6, W7), four
contiguous N-terminal residue positions (N2-N5) and two Cterminal
residues (C2 and C3), flanking the Walker A, showed
high closeness centrality in Ras superfamily members 
().

High density of high closeness residue positions in 
P-loop and its flanking regions in diverse set of P-loop NTPases:
Since the Ras superfamily belongs to P-loop NTPase fold, we
then extended the centrality analysis on high resolution X-ray
crystallographic structures of P-loop NTPases (). The
structural overlay of highly diverse P-loop NTPases fold
showed that the typical P-loop architecture is maintained
(). In order to avoid redundancy and utilize the
diversity present in the P loop NTPases, we selected a set of 23
NTPase structures at 30% sequence identity cutoff (see
methodology). We wanted to look at the impact of sequence
diversity on the closeness value of the residues of P-loop and its
flanking region. Intriguingly, the highly diverse P-loop
NTPases exhibited a similar pattern of high density of
conserved high closeness centrality residue positions around
Walker A motif, as seen in Ras Super family. Here, the
conserved high closeness centrality positions are defined as
those positions with statistically significant closeness values (zscore
≥1.0) in at least 60% of the structures of P-loop NTPase
fold ( &amp; 
). 11 such residue positions around
Walker A and its flanking regions showed high closeness value.
Four contiguous residue positions (N2-N5) of the N-terminal,
two residue positions of C-terminal (C2-C3) and five residue
positions of Walker A (W1, W2, W6, W7, W8) were showing
high closeness centrality. The residue positions N4 (100%), W7
(96%) and C2 (100 %) were highly conserved in their centrality
across the diverse structures. The invariant residue positions (G,
K, S/T) and variant residue positions (W2) of Walker A showed
high closeness centrality (). Walker A sequence has
wider distribution and observed in many proteins that do not
bind nucleotides []. The structural analysis revealed that these
proteins do not form the conspicuous P-loop architecture 
[]. To
test our prediction, we calculated the closeness value in Walker
A sequences that do not form P-loop (). We did not
observe high density of high closeness centrality pattern.

Our results indicate the high density of conserved high
closeness residue positions in P-loop and its flanking regions in
P-loop fold NTPase and underscore its role in supporting the
architecture of P-loop. The study presented is in concord with
the observation that highly central residue positions correlate
well with active site residues or their neighbors that provide
supportive scaffold []. However, high closeness value of
invariant (G, K, and S/T) residues of Walker A indicates its role
in catalysis. P-loop lysine interacts and forms hydrogen-bond
with oxygen of γ -phosphate of bound nucleotide and
serine/threonine binds with Mg2+ [,
]. Recently Grüber et al.
[] demonstrated the role of conserved glycine residues of
Walker A motif in guarding the active-site region for nucleotide
entrance in archaea-type ATP synthases. The altered
conformation of the P- loop resulted in the active-site region
being closed to nucleotide entry [].

Conclusion
In the context of network, protein structural scaffold and
sequence diversity can be visualized as a dramatic change in the
type of node, and also the connections between the nodes.
Regardless of such diversity, depicted in Ras superfamily and
diverse domains of P-loop fold NTPase, the closeness centrality
of residue positions in P-loop and its flanking regions are
remarkably maintained to be high. Thus, our finding supports
the observation that centrality of a residue is maintained
evolutionarily to assure the proper functioning of protein 
[,
]. 
We did not find such high centrality residue positions in
proteins containing Walker A motif that do not form P-loop.
This strengthens the evidence that required geometry of
archetypal P-loop is achieved by high density of residue
positions which are globally connected in short steps.

Supplementary material
Data 1
EP acknowledges CSIR, India for the JRF and SRF. We thank
Department of Bioinformatics, MMV, Banaras Hindu
University, for providing computational facility.

Citation:Pathak et al, Bioinformation 9(1): 023-028 (2013)

A) Ribbon diagram of typical architecture of P-loop (Red) with bound nucleotide molecule (stick) of Ras superfamily
proteins [Ras (green), Rab (cyan), Rho (blue), Ran (yellow), and Arf (magenta)]; B) Ribbon diagrams of typical architecture of Ploop
(red) in representatives of diverse P-loop containing NTPases. 4 letter words are the PDBID.

Bar graph showing distribution of high closeness residue positions in diverse set of P-loop NTPases (red bar). Walker A
containing proteins that do not form P-loop are depicted in blue bar. High density of high closeness residue positions (star marked)
shown around Walker A (W1-W8) and its flanking regions N terminal (N1-N5) and C terminal (C1-C5).

