Background
Development of multicellularity requires a sophisticated but
robust machinery to communicate among different cells. In this
machinery, the sensing unit is usually activated by ligandreceptor
interaction, generating specific effects mostly in gene
transcription, morphology, motility, adhesion and
endo/exocytosis []. Ras (Rat sarcoma) proteins family
comprises of highly conserved molecular switches involved in
controlling canonical process like homeostasis, cell growth,
differentiation and apoptosis []. These switches works by
altering their conformation to Guanosine triphosphate (GTP)
bound active mode to Guanosine diphosphate (GDP) bound
inactive mode []. Their significance in human life form can
easily be assessed by the fact that nearly in 25 - 30% of human
tumors, RAS mutations are present [,
]. Its role in cancer
development has raised this promising protein family as one of
the most lucrative and extensively studies cancer drug target for
nearly three decades with more than 40,000 research articles
published on it till year 2011 []. However, comparatively fewer
efforts have been made to decipher its evolutionary history
creating a huge lacuna in its utmost exploitation. Thus, an indepth
evolutionary study will broaden the scope of
understanding of this particular target and will aid in designing
better drugs against different menacingly dangerous cancers
and developmental diseases.

Ras family consists of key regulatory proteins mainly conserved
in eukaryotes []. Despite of early reports on its evolutionary
presence in lower eukaryotes and prokaryotes by Robins et al.
in the year 1990 [] and Dong et al. in 2007 
[], a comprehensive
route to its evolutionary expansion in higher and complex
eukaryotes was still missing. To facilitate the understanding of
higher eukaryotic evolution, RAS evolutionary study was
imperative. Ras evolutionary canvas can be drawn in two levels
viz., Ras Superfamily and Subfamily. The Ras superfamily
consists of five major families i.e., Ras, Rho, Arf/Sar, Ran, and
Rab. However, to best of our knowledge, evolutionary studies
have been conducted on RAS superfamily [,
,
,
], Rho
subfamily [] and Rab subfamily 
[,
] only, leaving rest of the
family members still untouched. The present study is an
endeavor to understand RAS subfamily evolutionary history
and sequence structure relationship to an unprecedented indepth
level. The aim of this study was to decipher the
evolutionary path followed by individual RAS subfamily
members viz., K-Ras, H-Ras, M-Ras, N-Ras and R-Ras [] during
the course of evolution on both sequence and structural level.

Methodology
Tracing RAS family architecture and sequence retrieval:
The gene protein architecture (forms and isoforms) of all
individual RAS family members i.e., K-Ras, H-Ras, M-Ras, NRas
and R-Ras were traced in Homo sapiens by generating
Boolean queries against NCBI׳s Gene database (
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/). Furthermore, the Gene sequences,
the Coding sequences (CDS) and the Protein sequences in fasta
format were downloaded from genbank ((
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/)) and genpept 
(
http:// www.ncbi. nlm.nih.gov/protein/) databases respectively.

Homolog (Ortholog and Paralog) Searching:
A homolog searching was carried out for all the RAS family
members. A rigid parameter was set to get only the true positive
results. The searching was done against Non Redundant
Database by using NCBI׳s BLAST tools, blastn and blastp 
[].
All the subject sequences which were synthetic constructs and
sequences that aligned to the queries with e-value more than 0,
identities less than 100 % and coverage less than 90% were
eliminated. Apart from tracing the distribution of RAS family
among the different biodiversity, our endeavor was also to
understand the extent of evolution in individual genomes.
Therefore, a paralog sequence search was conducted against all
the homologous genomes already found out through previous
analysis. However, the analysis was done with flexible
parameters i.e., all the sequences with their identity more than
90% to the query and spanned more than 90% of the query were
considered as paralogous sequences. The flexibility in the
parameters was introduced to extract all the false negative
sequence from the entire raw data.

Multiple Sequence Alignment, Structure Prediction and Validation:
Multiple sequence alignment was carried out through guide
tree approach using windows ClustalX program [] on both
gene and protein level. To leverage the potentiality of protein
structures on tracing evolutionary level, 3D structure of all the
longest isoform of each individual Human RAS family members
were predicted using Modeller software [], except for RRAS1
which was modeled by I-TASSER server using ab-initio
methodology [] due to its high degree of divergence from
other RAS subfamily members. The structural models were
further evaluated using Structural Analysis and Verification
Server׳s PROCHECK tool which checks stereochemical quality
of a protein structure utilizing Ramachandran plot []. The best
models from each individual isoforms were taken under
consideration for further analysis.

Phylogenetic tree generation and Selection Pressure analysis:
Topali software [] was used to generate trees and clustering.
Phylogenetic trees were generated in both gene level and
protein level using neighbor joining method with a
bootstrapping iteration value of 100. To analyze positive or
negative selection of specific amino acid sites within the fulllength
sequences of all the RAS individuals, the protein
sequence and the modeled structures were subjected to
SELECTON server which calculated substitution rate ratios of
nonsynonymous (Ka) versus synonymous (Ks) mutations. A
Ka/Ks ratio greater than 1 suggests positive selection and a
ratio less than 1 suggests purifying selection [].

Discussion
The existence and role of RAS family in lower eukaryotic and
prokaryotic development are reported early by Dong et al, and
Robbins et al. [,
,
]. Moreover, Díez et al., showed
expansion of RAS family in complex higher order of eukaryotes
like humans []. However, the route followed by this canonical
family during the course of evolution was still eluded. This
study was carried out to understand the biodiversity of RAS
family and how this family might have been derived during
evolution. All the form and isoforms of RAS subfamily in
human were traced from NCBI gene database using Boolean
queries like AND and OR  (see supplementary
material). An ortholog search for each forms and isoforms were
then carried out against Non Redundant Database with strict
parameters (see supplementary material). The
expansion of RAS family in complex higher organisms was
clearly visible conforming Diego Díez et al. work 
[].
However, the rigid parameters also removed false negative data
from results i.e., due to long evolutionary distance and time,
the RAS eukaryotic forms substantially diverged from lower
organisms showing no significant similarity on gene and
protein level for entire stretch of sequence. Therefore, all the
prokaryotic and lower eukaryotic RAS family members were
subjected to BLAST all-to-all method. Surprisingly even in
lower eukaryotes and prokaryotes, no significant similarity for
entire stretch of sequences was found indicating a long
evolutionary distance and many parallel evolutionary events
among lower organisms. Thus to decipher the evolutionary
path from prokaryotes to eukaryotes, gene and protein
sequences were utilized to draw phylogenetic tree using
neighbor joining approach followed by clustering ( &amp;
).

From both the gene and protein tree, it was evident that it was
H-RAS which came from prokaryotes to eukaryotes which
eventually due to evolutionary gene modification events like
gene duplication, bifurcated among different RAS forms present
today in just higher eukaryotes. The study clearly showed that
HRAS subfamily has further evolved, diverged into NRAS on
one cluster and KRAS, MRAS and RRAS in the other
cluster/sub clusters. To assess the different selection pressures
on all the sites of all RAS forms, SELECTON server was used.
All the protein structures of longest RAS forms were modeled
through homology modeling except R-RAS1 which was
modeled by I-TASSER server using ab-initio methodology
 (see supplementary material) and then were subjected
to site specific selection pressure analysis using SELECTON
server  (see supplementary material) 
[]. While
considering the distribution of calculated Ka/Ks ratio (ω), the
evaluation of selection pressures indicated that maximum
number of the codons in RRAS and KRAS were under purifying
selection and HRAS, NRAS and MRAS showed neutral
selection. It is also interesting to note the correlation on location
of RAS members on the human chromosome arm i.e., the
classical RAS members, HRAS (11p15.5), KRAS (12p21.1),
NRAS (1p13.2) are located on the short arm (p) of human
chromosome whereas MRAS (3q22.3) and RRAS (19q13.3-qter)
are located on the long arm (q) of the human chromosome. The
phylogenetic tree and selection pressure results showed that
HRAS diverged into KRAS and NRAS on the short arm and
then a gene duplication event was observed where either of the
then present form duplicated to long arm of the human
chromosome with sudden evolutionary expansion giving rise to
more evolutionary dynamic RRAS and MRAS. It is worth
mentioning that RRAS itself comprises of 53.5% of the entire
RAS subfamily bio-distribution. The maximum percentage biodistribution
density was observed in RRAS2c (24.56) followed
by RRAS2b (14.91), HRAS1 (13.16), NRAS (8.78), HRAS2 (7.89),
MRAS1 (7.89) and RRAS1 (7.89), RRAS2a (6.14), MRAS2 (3.52)
and KRAS1 (2.63) and KRAS2 (2.63).

Conclusion
Ras family proteins play pivotal role in key regulatory process
in eukaryotes. The study on evolution of this family has
immense significance in both understanding of multicellularity
evolution and cancer biology. From our finding, we speculate
and hypothesize that RAS family in higher eukaryotes started
with H-RAS and then parallely evolved in two distinct domains
viz. K-RAS with N-RAS and M-RAS with R-RAS where N-RAS
and M-RAS with their higher divergence rate are involved in
ever expanding RAS forms. Moreover evidence of K-RAS and
R-RAS being negatively selected opens opportunity to exploit
these proteins as preferred targets over other family members.

Conflict of interests
None to declare

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors acknowledge the support of Department of
Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Sam Higginbottom
Institute of Agricultural, Technology and Sciences, Allahabad,
U.P., India.

Citation:Saad et al, Bioinformation 10(5): 293-298 (2014)

Phylogenetic tree on gene basis

Phylogenetic tree on Protein basis

