Background
Rivers are of special significance in Hinduism, not only for
its life-sustaining properties, but also because of its use in
rituals and because of the stress given to cleanliness.
Throughout India seven principle holy rivers are nourishing
flora and fauna of the region. Of the seven, the Ganges
(Ganga), Yamuna, and Sarasvati are most important.
The river Yamuna in India represents a unique niche
for biodiversity. Nowadays, Indian textile Industry is one
of the leading textile industries in the world. However, risks
of pollution of water and air have been highly increased.
Previously, textile effluents have been considered as the
most polluting among all in the industrial sectors by
volume and composition of effluent [–
]. Typically, textile
effluents is characterized by high values of BOD, COD, color
and pH [–
]. In-complete use and the washing operations
give the textile effleunts a considerable amount of dyes 
[].
That induces persistent color coupled with organic load
leading to disruption of the total ecological/symbiotic
balance of the receiving water stream []. Allergic,
neurotoxic, carcinogenic effects of these dyes have been
reported by several scientists [–
]. Dyes may also affect
photosynthetic activity in aquatic habitat because of reduced
light penetration and induce toxicity due to presence of
aromatics compounds, heavy metals, chlorides and other
toxic compounds. Humans׳ non-cancer health hazards are
affecting the kidneys, liver, male reproductive organs and
developing foetus. Recent approaches are much focused on
the use of microorganisms for the elimination of dyes as it is
comparatively low cost and easier than other conventional
processes of decontamination. The present study was
carried out to characterize textile dye degrading bacteria
isolated from dye contaminated soil.

Methodology
Isolation and purification of bacteria from Soil samples:
The soil samples (50gm) taken from University campus was
seeded with Acid Green dye (0.5%, 1% and 2%) in nutrient
broth (10ml) and incubated at 37°C for 14 days in a soil- pot.
The soil samples were also seeded with 10ml Acid Green
Dye and 10 ml distilled water on alternate days till 14th
day. Serial dilution of this processed soil was poured on
nutrient agar to isolate bacterial cultures. The bacterial
colonies were characterized on the basis of colony
morphology (Color, shape, elevation and optical
characteristics) and Gram staining reaction then purified
by repeated streaking. Each of the pure bacterial culture
was maintained in the slants as a pure or stock culture.

Screening of dye decolorizing bacterial cultures:
Decolorization in solid culture media
Each cultures (24 hr. old) was streaked on nutrient agar
supplemented with Acid Green dye at the concentration
100 mg/l and incubated at 37°C for 14 days.
Uninoculated petriplates were incubated as control. On 14th
day plates were observed for disappearance/change of color.

Decolorization in liquid culture media:
Nutrient broth (20ml) supplemented with Acid Green
dye (100 mg/l) was poured inoculated with 24 hr old
bacterial culture (5% inoculum) in culture bottles.
Uninoculated culture bottles were taken as control. The
inoculated and control bottles were incubated at 37°C for 14
days to observe disappearance/change of color. After
14days 10ml sample was withdrawn from each of the culture
as well as control tube and centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 10
min. The supernatant were analyzed by
spectrophotometer and thin layer chromatography (TLC).

Spectrophotometric analysis:
Absorbance of the supernatant was recorded at dye specific
wavelength: 602nm (Visible range). Sterilized nutrient
broth was used as blank. Experiments in triplicate
were recorded for mean values along with standard
deviation values. Absorbance values of samples and control
at 602nm were utilized to calculate Percent decolorization (a
measure of decolorization efficiency) for the bacterial cultures
according to the following formula:

Percent decolorization = (Ao − A) ×100/Ao
Here: Ao = Absorbance of control at the λmax (nm) of the
dye (602nm); A= Absorbance of culture supernatant after
incubation period (14 days) at the λmax (nm) of the dye
(602nm).

TLC analysis:
To perform TLC analysis, stationary phase of silica gel
(50gm; Merck India) with gypsum (7.5gm; Qualigens) and
mobile phase solvent system ammonium hydroxide and 1-
propanol (1:6) was used to separate degraded dye from
cultures with highest degrading potential in experiment.
The separated spots were visualized after spraying with
conc. HCl and incubated at 110°C for 8 min.

Bacterial species identification using 16SrRNA sequence analysis:
The sequencing of 16S rRNA gene culture was done
from Microbial Type Culture Collection (MTCC),
IMTECH, Chandigarh, India (
http:// www.mtcc .imtech.res. in). 
Pairwise sequence alignment of 16S rRNA gene
sequence was performed to identify closely related
homologs with the help of search tool available at
EZTaxon webserver (http://www. eztaxon.org). Bacteria was
grown on Nutrient agar medium for 24 hr at 37°C and
genomic DNA was isolated from the cell mass according to
the method described by ZR Fungal/ Bacterial DNA
Miniperp kit manufacturer. The 16S rRNA gene was
selectively amplified by PCR using universal primers.
Amplification was carried out with an initial incubation (5
min, 94°C) followed by denaturation (35 cycles of 1 min at
94°C), annealing (1 min, 58°C) and elongation (1min, 72°C).
The reaction was terminated with a final extension at 72°C
for 10 minutes. The 16S rRNA gene sequencing of PCR
product was achieved using three different internal
primers with three different sequencing PCRs.

Result &amp; Discussion
Isolation and purification of bacteria from soil sample:
The bacterial cultures obtained from soil samples
pretreated with 0.5%, 1% and 2% Acid Green Dye, were
characterized on the basis of colony characteristics and
Gram׳s reaction. The isolates were quite dissimilar on
comparison of colony characteristics. There were 15
bacterial cultures were isolated from soil sample  (see
supplementary material) and classified as per appearance of
colony morphology and Gram staining. On the basis of colony
morphology it was observed that the cultures were either
white or pale yellow in color, whereas on the basis of the
remaining parameters (shape, elevation &amp; optical
characteristics) the cultures were showing variable
morphology. These isolates were further screened for their
dye decolorization capabilities.

Dye decolorizing bacterial cultures:
Decolorization of dye solution may take place in two
ways, either adsorption on the microbial biomass or
biodegradation of the dye molecules by the bacterial
cells. Dye adsorption may be evident from the inspection
of the bacterial growth, those adsorbing the dye will be
deeply colored (similar in color to the adsorbed dye), while
those degrading the dye will remain colorless. In this
experiment all of the isolate were found to be colored with
dye Acid green after completion of decolorization
experiment, indicating that these isolates were decolorizing
the dye mainly by adsorption but the biodegradation also
cannot be ruled out. The dye supplemented nutrient broth
supported growth of bacteria that able to use dye as
energy source using Azoreductase enzymes. On the visual
analysis of the culture tubes, all culture tubes were
showing slight to almost complete change in color from
green to blue (). The bacteria adsorbed dyes to
reduce using Azoreductase that relies upon
tautomerisation of the substrate to the hydrazone form
[]. Azo-reductase activity is associated with various
Gram positive and Gram negative bacteria. The
bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa has three azoreductase
genes, paAzoR1, paAzoR2 and paAzoR3, which as
recombinant enzymes have been shown to have different
substrate specificities [].

The efficacy of microorganisms in degrading certain dye
components of the effluent is somewhat compromised by
the complexity of the effluent composition itself, in addition
to other conditions, such as extreme alkaline pHs,
high salt concentrations, and high temperatures 
[–].
Bacteria from the Pseudomonas genus have shown
noteworthy metabolic robustness and versatility in soil and
wastewater bioremediation.

Azo dye are not carbon or energy source for bacterial
metabolism, but required some other organic compounds
(co-substrates), to act as acceptors of electrons that are
supplied through the reducing equivalents that are
generated by the electron transport chain. Brige`et al. 
[]
demonstrated that dye decolorization is an extracellular
reduction process requiring a multicomponent electron
transfer pathway that consists of cytoplasmic
membrane, periplasmic, and outer membrane components.
Similarly, we have obtained the ability of bacteria to
decolorize Acid Green dye from Nutrient Agar, which
suggested the accumulation of redox active enzymes or
biochemical substances that were released into the
medium during growth of the bacterial cells []. These
studies imply that reducing equivalents are transferred from
an intracellular electron transport chain to the mediators
(), which consequently reduces the extracellular
dye non-enzymatically. Another possibility is that the
bacteria establish a link between their intracellular
electron transport systems and the extracellular dye via
electron transferring proteins in the outer
membrane []. Spectrophotometric analysis indicated the
most promising cultures were AMC2 and AMC3 showing
81.3% and 94.6%, respectively. Dye Decolorizing efficiency:
Spectrophotometric analysis showed that all the cultures
were showing absorbance values lower than the control, at
both the dye specific wavelengths i.e.; 602nm ().

All the 15 cultures were showing decolorization capacity
33.9% to 94.6% (). The culture no. AMC4, AMB2,
AMB3, AMB6, AMB5, AMA3, AMA4, AMB7, AMA2, AMA1,
AMB1 were not showing any color change in comparison
to control () but on the basis of spectrophotometric
analysis they were showing slight decolorization (33.9%
to 47.8%), respectively. The cultures showing color change
from green to blue in comparison to control included culture
AMC1, AMB4, AMC2, and AMC3. Only culture AMC3 was
able to decolorize up to 94.6% at 602nm and considered as
the most promising cultures. Cultures AMC2 could be also
considered as good cultures since it was showing more
than 80% decolorization. After this AMC3 was coded as
NSDSUAM and selected for 16SrRNA sequencing analysis.
The thin layer chromatographic analysis of supernatant from
dye sample degraded by culture and Acid Green dye
sample showed 3 spots having Rm value 0.258, 0.516 and
0.761 respectively. In case of samples AMC3 and AMC2 no
spot was obtained after development (). Observations suggest that the Acid Green dye might
have been degraded by the respective bacterial cultures
during the incubation period.

TLC analysis of AMC2 and AMC3 was confirmed the
decolorization of dye by adsorption as well as metabolic
enzymes like azoreductase since no dye specific spot could
be obtained after incubation in comparison to dye sample.
16SrRNA sequencing: A total of 1383 bp of the 16S rRNA
gene was sequenced and used for the identification of
isolated bacterial strain. The 16S rRNA sequencing suggested
that it belongs to Pseudomonas geniculata (99.85% pairwise
similarity) with difference of 2 base pairs to reference strain
Pseudomonas geniculata ATCC 19374(T) (bp1358). The
identified strain could be a variant as having property of
degrading Acid Green Dyes. The 16SrRNA gene sequence was
also submitted to NCBI genebank with accession number
KP238100. 

Conclusion
Pseudomonas genus having noteworthy metabolic robustness
and versatility in soil and wastewater bioremediation. This
has earned Pseudomonas species preference as a laboratory
model for pure culture systems, and with azoreductase
genes they can be a component of mixed bacterial
consortia for azo dye treatment under both aerobic and
anaerobic conditions. Therefore, such bacteria can be used to
develop an effective biological treatment system for the
wastewaters contaminated with dyes.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Kumar et al, Bioinformation 11(1): 001-005 (2015)

Absorbance values of control and culture
supernatant at dye specific wavelengths.

Absorbance values of control and culture supernatant at dye specific wavelengths.

TLC plate did not show any spots for supernatant of
dye sample treated with B) AMC3 and C) AMC2 while A)
Acid Green Dye Sample showed 3 spots.

