Background
Rubisco (Ribulose 1, 5-bisphosphate carboxylase/ oxygenase CE:
4.1.1.39), the most abundant enzyme on the earth, is the key enzyme
in photosynthesis, which incorporates CO2 and O2 into substrate
Ribulose -1, 5-bisphosphate to initiate photosynthesis and
photorespiration, respectively. To be catalytically competent, the
active site in Rubisco need to be open, carbamylated by addition of
CO2 to the lysine (Lysine 201 in spinach rubisco) and stabilized
with Mg+2. [] This enzyme is composed of tow types of subunits
in most photosynthetic organisms (higher plants, algae and
cyanobacteria), four small subunits cap the top and the bottom of
the core of eight large subunits (encoded by rbcS gen located in
nuclear genome) and look as though they hold together the four
large subunit dimers (encoded by rbcL gen located in chloroplast
genome), each of which forms tow active sites. In higher plants,
Rubisco has a hexadecameric structure being composed of eight
large and eight small subunits. This is also known as Form I
Rubisco. Each large subunit has two major structural domains, an
N-terminal domain and a larger C-terminal domain which is an
alpha/beta barrel. Most of the active site residues are contributed by
loops at the mouth of the alpha/beta barrel with the remaining
residues being supplied by two loop regions in the N-terminal
domain of the second large subunit within a dimmer. The
availability of high resolution 3-D structure has provided detailed
insight into the catalytic mechanism of the enzyme. [] Activity of
rubisco is modulated in vivo either by reaction with CO2 and Mg+2
to carbamylate a lysine residue in the catalytic site, or by the
binding of inhibitors within the catalytic site, binding of inhibitors
blocks either activity or the carbamylation of the lysine residue that
is essential for activity. []

It has been observed that the reaction of catalytically competent
Rubisco changed with light intensity. The principal cause of this
change is the binding of inhibitor called 2-Carboxy-D-arabinitol 1-
phosphate (2CA1P) which coexists in some plants such as
Phaseolus vulgaris. [].This inhibitor is tightly bound to the
carbamylated active site []. This tight binding property results from
the resemblance to the transition state intermediate of the
carboxylase reaction (gemdiole). The 2CA1P inhibitor has an
efficient role in the regulation of Rubisco, through the binding with
the active site in activated state (Carbamylated + Mg+2) and keep it
until the exposure to light. Another study showed that this inhibitor
can protect Rubisco against proteolytic breakdown. [] Due to the
important role of this inhibitor in regulation and protection of
Rubisco enzyme and the absence of published work on the binding
mechanism of this inhibitor in the active site of Rubisco, and the
amino acids attached to it. This study tries to predict the binding
position of this inhibitor in the active site using bioinformatics tools
consisting of GOLD (Genetic optimisation of Ligand Docking) and
Hyperchem7.5 software. To achieve this study, first, a model of the
inhibitor 2CA1P is built using Hyperchem7.5. Second, a search,
selection and preparing of Rubisco enzyme structure with a higher
resolution from PDB (Protein data bank). And third, docking the
inhibitor model in the active site of Rubisco using genetic
algorithm (GA). The molecular docking aims to predict the
structure of a molecular complex from the isolated molecules,
which is considerably easier to implement, cheaper and faster
compared to experimental methods.

Methodology
Building inhibitor model
The inhibitor is known as 2-carboxy-D-arabinitol 1-phosphate. [] It
consists of carbon backbone including five atoms linked to five OH
groups at the level of toms C2, C3, C4 and C5. The phosphate and
craboxylate group linked to the carbon atoms C1 and C2
respectively.

Hyperchem software
The inhibitor model was built using Hyperchem 7.5 software
(www.hyper.com/) based on Lewis structure. Atoms have been
chosen from dialog box (default elements) in build menu, the 3D
structure of the inhibitor 2CA1P is shown in .

Assigning Atomic Charges to the functional groups
In this step we added the formal charge to the carboxylate and
phosphate groups using the approximation of the charge method.

Energetic calculations
Single point calculation
A single point calculation was performed in order to compute the
energy and gradient of the inhibitor model, this method allowed the
calculation of the total energy and gradient before the geometry
optimisation.

Optimizing the Structure of inhibitor model
In this step, the inhibitor model structure was minimized by
performing a molecular mechanics optimization using MM+ force
field and Polack Ribier algorithm to obtain the most stable structure
geometry.

Preparation of enzyme structure
The crystal structure coordinates of the Rubisco enzyme
(PDB_ID:1WDD with a resolution of 1.35 Å) was obtained from the protein data bank (http://www.rcsb.org). In this case we
obtained two large and two small subunits.

Enzyme structure optimization
Two large subunits were selected for docking studies which
included one active site at least. Water molecules and hetero atoms
were removed. [] All hydrogen atoms were added to the protein
including those necessary to define the correct ionization and
tautomeric states of amino acid residues such as Asp, Ser, Glu, Arg
and His using Hyperchem software. A two step procedure was set
up for the energy minimization of protein using the same software
and CHARMM22 algorithm. In the first step, all hydrogen atoms in
the protein were allowed to optimize. The hydrogen locations are
not specified by the X-ray structure but these are necessary to
improve the hydrogen bond geometries. In the second stage, all
protein atoms were allowed to relax. Minimization in both stages
was performed using 100 steps of steepest descent and 2000 steps of
conjugate gradient algorithm. []

The docking procedure []
Docking of the inhibitor in the active site of Rubisco enzyme was
carried out using GOLD software (Genetic optimisation of ligand
docking). The procedure consisted of tree main parts: 
A scoring function to rank different binding modes; the Goldscore function is
a molecular mechanics-like function with four terms were used.

A mechanism for placing the ligand in the binding site; GOLD use a
unique method to do this, which is based on fitting point.

A search algorithm to explore possible binding modes; GOLD uses a
genetic algorithm (GA)

. This method allows a partial flexibility of
protein and full flexibility of ligand. [] For each of the 10
independent GA runs, a maximum number of 100000 GA
operations were performed on a set of five groups with a population
size of 100 individuals. Operator weights for crossover, mutation, and migration were set to 95, 95, and 10, respectively. Default cutoff
values of 2.5 Å for hydrogen bonds and 4.0 Å for van der Waals
distance were employed. When the top three solutions attained
RMSD values within 1.5 Å, GA docking was terminated. []

Discussion
The GA described in materials and methods required as input the
approximate size and location of the active site, together with the
coordinates of the protein and a ligand conformation. In any
docking experiment it is required that the co-ordinate of the active
site be known to reasonable accuracy, and the protein has high
resolution. [] Therefore, we used the highest resolution of
RubisCO structure in the PDB (1.35Å), and defined the residues
included in the active site by creating text file containing list of
residues, and add the following commands to gold.conf file.

Floodfill_center =list_of_residues Cavity_file = path to tewt file

Gold will then read in the specified text file and extract the residues
listed. After 10 GA runs, three highest fitness score were obtained
(65.71, 64.72, 62.04) . In these three solutions the
phosphate and carboxylate groups of 2CA1P were bound to the
active site of the enzyme in the same positions, however the
positions of OH groups were different in the three solutions. When
examining the binding place of the 2CA1P in the three solutions, we
found that approximately the same binding place of the 4CABP
with regards to the phosphate group P1. [] Table 1 (see
)

In the results obtained after docking, the highest fitness score is
65.71  which makes it the closest result, compared to the
other results (64.72, 62.04). When the fitness score increase, the
molecular docking become better []. For each docking study, the
solution with the highest fitness score was compared with the
crystalographically observed binding mode, Depending on how
close to the predicted binding mode, the result was assigned to one
of four subjective categories. The first, good, was for those
prediction where the binding mode, all hydrogen-bonding and metal
coordination interactions and other close contacts between the
protein and the ligand were reproduced correctly. If an acceptable
result was generated with the ligand binding mode reproduced, but
with some displacement of ligand groups from the experimental
result, the GA prediction would be assigned to the close category. A
third category, errors, was used for those predictions that were
partially correct but contained significant errors. Finally, the forth
category, wrong, was used for completely incorrect prediction. []
Due to the absence of any experimental results concerning the
binding of the inhibitor 2CAIP in the active site and in order to
classify the prediction results obtained and check the accuracy of
the GA, the artificial inhibitor 2CABP was docked back in the
active site of the enzyme using the same parameters and algorithm's
used for the docking of natural inhibitor 2CA1P. The results were
compared with the experimentally observed binding mode as
illustrated in . We observed that the docked back and
crystalographically binding inhibitor 2CABP occupy the same place
with some deviation in the functional groups , Table
1(see )

The superposition of Cα atoms of the active site before and after
docking shows that the RMSD between the tow binding modes was
in the range of 0.93 Å. It is a reasonably good result if compared
with the result obtained by Jones and co-workers (1997) when they
docked back the NADPH in Dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR).
These authors found that the deviation between the two modes of
binding (the crystalographically binding mode and the feed-back
binding mode) are in the range of 1.2 Å, which is effective
prediction. [] Through this result we can say that the prediction
obtained in the case of 2CA1P inhibitor is close to the real binding
mode. This study may have important implications for the
elucidation of photosynthesis regulation through the regulation of
Rubisco activity by tight binding inhibitors. And we can consider it
as a start point to study the binding mechanism of 2CA1P inhibitor,
and also the residues that are involving in the liberation of this
inhibitor from the active site of rubisco by Rubisco activase
enzyme. Such regulation is important in biomass production and
yield. Moreover, the modulation of Rubisco activity offers the
possibility to control the stability of Rubisco under stress.

Conclusion
In this work, we attempted to predict and define the position of
2CA1P inhibitor in the active site of Rubisco using the GOLD and
Hyperchem softwares, in order to classify the prediction results
obtained and check the accuracy of the GA, we docked back the
artificial inhibitor 2CABP in the active site of the enzyme using the
same algorithm and parameters used for the docking of 2CA1P
inhibitor. The results were compared with the experimentally
observed binding mode, we found that the docked back and
crystalographically 2CABP inhibitor occupy the same place with
some deviation in the functional groups. This result helped us to
verify the accuracy of the algorithm in the case of the docking of the
2CA1P.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Ounissi et al, Bioinformation 4(5): 206-209 (2009)

The three dimensional structure of 2CA1P inhibitor (a) shows in stick conformation (b) show in ball and stick (colored by CPK).

The binding modes of the 2CA1P in the active site of Rubisco; the three highest fitness score represented in a, b, c (65.71, 64.72,
and 62.04 respectively) and d Superposition between the active site of rubisco before (colored green) and after (colored bleu light) the
docking of the inhibitor 2CABP (Stick).

