Background
Alzheimer's disease is a costly disease for society. Its causes and
progression are not well understood. Current treatments only
help with the symptoms of the disease. Alzheimer's disease
affects the brain regions of neocortex and hippocampus. The
cause for most Alzheimer's cases is still essentially unknown
(except for 1% to 5% of cases where genetic differences have
been identified). The factors that increase the risk of
Alzheimer's disease include age, gender, family history,
Down's syndrome, head injury and environmental toxins 
[]. A
large number of potential therapies have emerged for
Alzheimer's disease. Among these, some compounds have
confirmed effectiveness in delaying the symptoms of
Alzheimer's disease. However, the cause and development of
Alzheimer's disease is still not well understood. According to
Cholinergic hypothesis [], Alzheimer's disease is caused by
decreased synthesis of Acetylcholine. Cholinergic hypothesis
proposes that regional cerebral blood flow may be increased in
patients with Alzheimer's disease by Acetylcholinesterase
(AChE) inhibitors.

Acetylcholine is a neurotransmitter present in many synapses
of the nervous system. Acetylcholinesterase (AChE) catalyzes
the hydrolysis of Acylcholinesters with specificity for
Acetylcholine []. The reactiontakes place by nucleophilic
attack on the carbonyl carbon, acylation of the enzyme and the
release of Choline. It is followed by hydrolysis of the acylated
enzyme to produce acetic acid, and then re-cycling of the
enzymeback to its original state. AChE can also synthesize the
neurotransmitter Acetylcholine by the transition of acyl-groups
of acetyl CoA [–
]. Acetylcholine is distributed in the
cytoplasm of both synaptic endings and synaptic vesicles and it
transmits nerve impulse signals in the synapse of myoneural
junction.

AChE is bound to cellular membranes of excitable tissues at
cholinergic synaptic junctions. Itis also found in red blood cell
membranes. The active enzyme is a monomer with a molecular
weight of around 60,000 Daltons. AChE is a a/γ protein that
contains 537 amino acids. The structure of AChE comprises a
12-stranded mixed γ-sheet surrounded by 14 a- helices. The
catalytic triad is present in the active-site gorge of the enzyme
and it consists of three amino acids, namely Ser238, His440 and
Glu367 []. AChE enzymes have high structural homology. The
root-mean-square (RMS) difference between Cα atoms of the
vertebrate enzyme (TcAChE) and the insect enzyme (DmAChE)
is 0.8 Å (). Some regions in surface loops show up to 8
Å difference between the DmAChE and TcAChE structures.
The active-site triad of DmAChE(Ser238, His440 and Glu367),
the oxyanion hole-forming residues (Gly150, Gly151 and
Ala239) and the peripheral anionic binding site (Trp 83) overlap
well with TcAChE. The side chains show some differences in
conformations from those ofTcAChE [,
].

Porphyrins are a class of naturally occurring macro cyclic
compounds, which play a very important role in the
metabolism of living organisms. They have an18-p electron
system that makes them aromatic. Each Porphyrin molecule
contains four pyrrole rings linked via methine bridges 
(). 
The Porphyrin nucleus is a tetradentate ligand in which the
space available for a coordinated metal.They have a diameter of
approximately 3.7 Å []. Porphyrin complexes with Mg (II),
Cd(II), Zn(II) and Fe(III) can combine with another ligand to
form penta-coordinated complexes with square-pyramidal
structure []. In this study, molecular docking was used to
predict the strength of binding of Porphyrin-derivatives: TPPS,
FeTPPSandFeNOTPPS to DmAChE.

Methodology
Ligands:
All the three molecules, Tetraphenylporphinesulfonate (TPPS),
5, 10, 15, 20-Tetrakis (4-sulfonatophenyl) porphyrinato Iron (III)
Chloride (FeTPPS) and 5,10,15,20-Tetrakis (4-sulfonatophenyl)
porphyrinato Iron (III)nitrosyl Chloride (FeNOTPPS), were
constructed on a Silicon Graphics Octane2 workstation using
IRIX 6.5 operating system. The energies of all the molecules
were minimized using theTRIPOS force field and Gasteiger-
Hückel charges [] with a convergence gradient of 0.05
kcal/mol/Å. For FeTPPS, the coordinate bonds of Fe(III) and
pyrrole nitrogen were defined first before energy minimization.
For FeNOTPPS, the coordinate bonds of Fe(III) were first
defined with pyrrolenitrogen and then with nitric oxide. The
totalenergies of TPPS, FeTPPS and FeNOTPPS after
minimization were 67.9, 90.9 and 125.8kcal/mol respectively.
The breakup of energies is shown in  (see
supplementary material).

Molecular Docking:
SYBL software was used for docking TPPS, FeTPPS and
FeNOTPPS in the crystal structure of DmAChE (PDB code:
1QON). These complexes were then subject to molecular
dynamics simulation for duration of 10,000 fs then submitted
for energy minimization using a TRIPOS force field and
Gasteiger-Hückel charges [] with convergence gradient of
0.05 kcal/mol/Å for TPPS, FeTPPS and FeNOTPPS bound to
DmAChE ().

Analysis of Binding:
The strength of binding was determined by use of Scoring
Functions. They approximate the free energy of binding of a
ligand to a receptor  (see supplementary material).
Scoring Functions are expressed as a sum of separate terms that
describe the various contributions to binding [,
]. Scoring
Functions estimate the binding affinity by taking into account
the various terms that can contribute to the binding free energy.
These terms may include, for example, van der Waals
interactions, hydrogen bonding, de-solvation effects, metalligand
bonding, etc [–]. 
A high value of the Scoring
Function represents “tight” binding between the protein and
the ligand and vice versa.

Results &amp; Discussion
An important feature about DmAChE structure is a deep and
narrow gorge that is about 20 Å long (). It penetrates
halfway into the enzyme and widens out close to its base. This
cavity has been named the “active-site gorge” because it
contains the catalytic triad. The active-site gorge of DmAChE is
narrower than that of Torpedo californica AChE (TcAChE). Its
trajectory is shifted by several angstroms. The volume of the
lower part of the active-site gorge of DmAChE is half the size of
TcAChE. This is due to a shift in the position of the indole ring
of Trp83, the replacement of Asp72 in TcAChE by Tyr71,
Tyr121 in TcAChE by Met153, and Phe330 in TcAChE by
Tyr370 in DmAChE. The active-site gorge of DmAChE is coated
with aromatic residues. Their side chains interact with various
inhibitors via non-covalent interactions [,
]. These side
chains allow the gorge to accommodate inhibitors by assuming
different conformations.

The shape of the acyl-binding pocket at the bottom of the
active-site gorge is different in DmAChE versus TcAChE. This
is due to differences in two important amino acid residues:
Leu328 (Phe288 in TcAChE) and Phe440 (Val400 in TcAChE).
These changes change the shape of the acyl pocket ().
One of the differences between vertebrate and insect enzymes
is DmAChE's ability to hydrolyze substrates with larger acyl
moieties such as butyrylcholine []. A possible reason for this
difference is that residues equivalent to Leu328 and Phe371 of
TcAChE in DmAChE are both phenylalanines that form a π–π
stacking pair.

Due to the toxic effects of pre-existing AChE inhibitors, current
research has been focused on developing new AChE inhibitors
or modifying existing ones using computational resources to
determine which ligand best fits the AChE binding site. In this
study, molecular docking was used to predict the strength of
binding of Porphyrin-derivatives: TPPS, FeTPPS and
FeNOTPPS with DmAChE. The strength of binding was
quantified by use of a Scoring Function that approximates the
free energy of binding.  (see supplementary material)
gives the different values of the Scoring Function [,
]
obtained by Molecular Docking of TPPS, FeTPPS and
FeNOTPPS with DmAChE. The values of the Scoring Function
show that FeNOTPPS is energetically the most stable in
DmAChE. This can be due to the greater hydrophobicity of
FeNOTPPS as compared to TPPS and FeTPPS. The larger size of
FeNOTPPS makes it less soluble in water and more stable in the
active-site gorge of DmAChE.

Conclusion
The cure for Alzheimer's disease suggested by Cholinergic
Hypothesis involves searching for candidate compounds that
can act as inhibitors for Acetylcholinesterase enzyme. The
compound, FeNOTPPS, emerged as one such compound from
this study. It is energetically more stable than TPPS and FeTPPS
when bound to Acetylcholinesterase of Drosophila melanogaster.
The future direction can be in vivo experiments that can check
the efficacy of FeNOTPPS for the treatment of Alzheimer's
disease.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Hai et al, Bioinformation 9(12): 645-649 (2013)

Superimposition of AChE structures from various
sources (orange color for Homo sapiens, pink color for
Musmusculus, deep-salmon color for Torpedo californica, and
split-pea color for Drosophila melanogaster) 
[].

Chemical structures of Tetraphenylporphinesulfonate
(TPPS), 5,10,15,20-Tetrakis(4-sulfonatophenyl) porphyrinato
Iron(III) Chloride (FeTPPS) and 5,10,15,20-Tetrakis(4
sulfonatophenyl)porphyrinato Iron(III)nitrosyl Chloride
(FeNOTPPS) (clockwise from top).

Schematic representation of the sites in AChE. The
catalytic triad in the Acyl-binding pocket consists of three
amino acids, Ser238, His440 and Glu367.

Schematic representation of the sites in AChE. The
catalytic triad in the Acyl binding pocket consists of three
amino acids, Ser238, His440 and Glu367.

