Background
Inflammation is a disorder involving localized increase in the
number of leucocytes and a variety of complex mediator
molecules []. Inflammation has shown to associate with
numerous environmental and genetic factors []. Environmental
factors include allergens, infectious agents, toxins and
chemicals. Whereas, genetic factors include prostaglandins,
cyclooxygenases (COX), interleukins, cytokines, tumor necrosis
factor alpha and interferon-gamma []. Among those, some
COXs have shown to play a major role in triggering the
inflammation caused by both genetic and environmental
factors. COX are two distinct isoforms, such as COX-1 and
COX-2, they have shown to play a vital role in conversion of
arachidonic acid to prostaglandins []. Generally the expression
levels of COX-2 in normal tissues are below the level of
detection, but enhanced expression of COX-2 was detected by
proinflammatory cytokines, growth factors and exposure of
several carcinogens. Therefore, regulation of COX-2 is very
important for therapeutic approaches against inflammatory
associated disorder. Many natural products have also been
identified as COX-2 inhibitors []. For example a synthetic
compound azoxymethane has shown to inhibit COX-2 mediated
anti-inflammatory and anticancer agent against colon cancer 
[].
In the present investigation we have identified one of the
widely distributed medicinal plant Cyperus scariosus, to treat
inflammation associated disorders via COX-2.

Cyperus scariosus (R.Br) belongs to family Cyperaceae, popularly
known as Nagaramotha is an important herb in the Ayurveda
[]. 
In Ayurveda, Nagaramotha is tikta, katu, kashaya and
sheetala, pacified deranged kapha, beneficial in the treatment of
fever caused by aggravated pitta, in diarrhea, anorexia thirst
burning sensation and fatigue []. In Southern India, it׳s
essential oil is employed in the perfume industry and the nut
grass is used in the formulation of hair and skin care products;
it stimulates sebaceous glands near hair roots []. The dried
tuberous roots of C. scariosus are used in traditional medicine
[]. Tubers are credited with astringent, diaphoretic, diuretic,
desiccant, cordial, and stomachache properties 
[]. In
traditional medicine, the rhizomes of the plant are used in the
treatment of inflammation []. However there is no scientific
proof for justifying the traditional use of rhizomes in the
treatment of inflammation. Hence, the present work was under
taken to evaluate the anti-inflammatory activity of C. scariosus
rhizomes.

Methodology
Collection of plant material:
Cyperus scariosus plant material was collected from Sri
Satyadeva nursery, Kadiyam, East Godavari district, Andhra
Pradesh, India. The plant was taxonomically identified by Dr.
A.Prasada Rao, Senior Botanist in K L University, Vijayawada,
Andhra Pradesh, India. A voucher specimen has been deposited
at K L University Botanical garden (voucher specimen number
KLU-1250) for further use.

Preparation of plant extract:
Cyperus scariosus rhizomes were separated from the plant,
washed with running tap water to remove the dust, followed by
sterilization with double distilled water, shade dried and made
into a fine powder with a blender. 500 g of the rhizome powder
were exhaustively extracted with various organic solvents such
as petroleum ether, hexane, chloroform, ethyl acetate, methanol
and ethanol with soxhlet apparatus for 12–24 h. The extracts
were filtered with Whatman filter paper (type 4) and the filtrate
was concentrated under reduced pressure on rota vapor under
vacuum (BUCHI, R-3000, Switzerland) at 400°C temperature.
The filtrate was used for analysis of phytochemical compounds,
anti-oxidant activity and for gas chromatography-mass
spectroscopy (GC-MS) studies.

Phytochemical analysis:
The various solvent extracts were subjected to phytochemical
analysis to investigate the presence or absence of various
phytoconstituents such as glycosides, terpenoids, saponins,
phytosterols, alkaloids, phenolic compounds, tannins,
flavonoids and diterpenes as per the standard methods 
[].

Gas chromatography and mass spectroscopy separation conditions:
The phytochemicals were analyzed by GC-MS Agilent 5975-C
Series instrument employing the electron impact mode (ionizing
potential – 70 eV) and a capillary column (DB-5 ms Agilent)
(length 30 m × diameter 0.25 mm, film thickness 0.25 µm)
packed with 5% phenyl dimethyl silicone) and the ion source
temperature was monitored at 200°C. Further, the GC-MS
settings were indicated as the initial column temperature was
set at 70°C and kept hold for 2 min; the temperature was
increased to 300°C at a rate of 10°C/min for 9 min, and placed
in isothermal condition for 2 min. The column oven temperature
was maintained at 70°C. Helium was used as carrier gas with
99.9995%purity. Samples were injected at a temperature of
about 250°C with a split ratio of 10:1 with a flow rate of helium
1.51 ml/min. Mass scan (m/z): 45–1000, total MS running time:
36 min []. 
The constituents were identified after comparison
with those available in the computer library (National Institute
of Standards and Technology [NIST] vs. year 2005) attached to
the instrument and reported.

Evaluation of total antioxidant potential by phosphomolybdate method:
The total antioxidant capacity of the methanolic rhizome extract
was evaluated by phosphomolybdate method []. A volume of
3 ml of phosphomolybdate reagent is mixed with the series of
300 µl of C. scariosus rhizomes methanolic extract (CSRME) of
the plant or standard solution or methanol in a test tube. The
test tubes were capped with silver foil and incubated in water
bath at 95°C for 90 min. Later, the tubes were cooled down to
room temperature, and the absorbance measured at 695 nm
against blank. Ascorbic acid was used as a standard. The
antioxidant activity of CSRME was expressed as µg/ml of
ascorbic acid equivalents.

In vitro anti-inflammatory activity using bovine serum albumin denaturation assay:
To evaluate the anti-inflammatory activity of phytochemical
compounds present in C. scariosus, we used an antidenaturation
of bovine serum albumin (BSA) assay []. In brief
the reaction mixture consist of 0.2 ml (10 mg/ml) of BSA, 2.8 ml
of phosphate buffered saline (PBS, pH - 6.4), and 2 ml of varying
concentrations of methanolic extracts of C. scariosus 50, 100, 200,
400, 800, 1200, 1600, 2000, 5000 µg/ml to a final volume of 5 ml.
PBS lacking BSA served as control. The samples were incubated
at 37°C ± 2°C for 15 min and then transferred to 70°C water bath
for 5 min. After cooling the sample, the turbidity was measured
at 620 nm using a spectrophotometer. The anti-inflammatory
activity of phytochemical compounds was determined by
plotting the percentage of inhibition with respect to control
against treatment condition. In the present study diclofenac
sodium tablet was used as a positive anti-inflammatory drug.
The percentage inhibition of protein denaturation was
calculated by using the following formula.

Where, Vt = absorbance of the test sample,
Vc = absorbance of control.

Protein (receptor) preparation:
The three-dimensional protein structures were obtained from
protein data bank (PDB). Crystal structure of human COX-2
proteins (PDB ID: 1PXX and 2AW1) and their respective ligands
such as diclofenac and valdecoxib were retrieved from RCSB
(Research Collaboratory for Structural Bioinformatics) protein
databank. Hydrogen atoms were added using free online
program reduce (http://kinemage.biochem.duke.edu /software/reduce.php). 
Then the PDB files are uploaded to make
receptor 3.0. Make receptor is a graphical utility program for
creating receptor protein compatible to fast rigid exhaustive
docking (FRED 3.0), which uses the structure of a target protein
(receptor file) and the structure of a bound ligand to dock and
score molecules. Make receptor workflow have four parameters,
which include (1) uploading a target PDB, which separates
protein from bound ligand (2) creating a box enclosing the
active site using molecular cavity detection followed by (3)
shape potential determination and selecting reasonable inner
and outer contours (4) detecting and adding amino acid
constraints to dock specific interactions with small molecules.
Finally, the prepared molecule is saved as a receptor file in OEB
format.

Ligand preparation:
Cyclooxegenase-2 inhibitory anti-inflammatory compounds
were extracted from (1PXX and 2AW1). The conformational
space of the compounds was employed using optimized
ensemble generation application (OMEGA) program from Open
Eye Scientific Software, Inc., Santa, NM, USA, 
(www.eyesopen.com). 
In our computations we generated a maximum of 500
conformers per molecule as a default using OMEGA 2.4.6 and
build as a single database per molecule including C. scariosus
phytochemical compounds. All possible confirmations of ligand
were generated at physiological pH ± 4–7. High-throughput
docking using fast rigid exhaustive docking Fast rigid
exhaustive docking 3.0.0 was used in this study to dock the pre
generated multi-conformer library. FRED filters the poses based
on adequate contact with the receptor. Fred dock/score all
possible positions of each ligand in the binding site and clash
poses with the protein get rejected from the docking analysis.
The final poses are scored using chemgauss 4 score as default
parameter. The filtered compounds were docked into the
binding site of human COX 2 (PDB code: 1PXX and 2AW1).

Absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion prediction:
Qikprop module was used to predict adsorption, distribution,
metabolism, elimination and other molecular properties. The
foremost criteria for screening ligands are Lipinski׳s rule of five.
In this process various pharmacological, pharmacokinetic, and
physiochemical properties were screened [].

Results
Identification of phyto-chemical constituents:
Phytochemical analysis showed the presence (+) and absence
(−) of phytochemical compounds in different solvent
extractions. Petroleum ether, hexane, chloroform, ethyl acetate,
methanol and ethanolic extraction fractions revealed the
presence of phenolic compounds and terpenoids. Phytosterols
and tannins are found in all solvents except petroleum ether.
Glycosides and saponins shown to be positive in solvents like
ethyl acetate, methanol and acetone respectively ().
Among all solvent extracts, methanol extract hold all
phytoconstituents and therefore it is used for further
biochemical analysis.

Gas chromatography-mass spectroscopy analysis of Cyperus scariosus rhizomes methanolic extract:
The powdered rhizoids of the C. scariosus are carefully packed
into the soxhlet apparatus and extraction is carried in the
presence of 100% methanol. Excess of the methanol were
removed by simple evaporation technique. The final fine form
of the crystalline powder was sent for GC-MS analysis. The
spectrum profile of the GC-MS data of the Cyperus was
compared with the spectrum of the known components stored
in the NIST library. Results showed three major peaks along
with remaining nine phytochemical constituents. The peak
number one shows retention time at 15.925 min at an area of
376598 with 40.19% area and it gives three best hits from each
library such as 1,5-diphenyl-2H-1,2,4-triazoline, 2-Propene-1-
one,3-(4-nitrophenyl), phenylacetamide N-ethyl-N-(3-methyl).
The second peak showed retention time at 17.087 min at an area
of 402087 with, 42.91% area. This will also give three best hits
from each library and the compounds were 6-(2-Aminophenyl)-
1, 2, 4-triazine, benzene-1, 2-diol, 4-(4-bromo-3-chloro),
thiazolidine-4-one, 2-(4-bromophenyl) respectively. Peak three
shows retention time at 19.411 min with an area of 158425 which
occupies 16.91% of the area and the third peak also represents
the same number of hits from each library (E)-2-
bromobutyloxychalcone, N-methyl-1-adamantaneacetamide, 2-
ethylacridine. The name, molecular weight and structure of the
components of the compounds were ascertained in 
 (see
supplementary material).

Antioxidant activity of Cyperus scariosus rhizomes methanolic extract:
The total antioxidant capacity of the CSRME was calculated
based on the reduction of Mo (VI) to Mo (V) by the extract and
subsequent formation of a green phosphate/Mo (V) complex at
acid pH, which was measured spectrophotometrically at 695
nm. Our results showed that the antioxidant activity of CSRME
increases in a dose dependent manner at a concentration of 50
µg/ml–5 mg/ml. However, the concentration above 2 mg/ml
does not shown any marginal difference as compared to 5
mg/ml of CSRME. The antioxidant activity of CSRME at 100
µg/ml is similar to ascorbic acid at 50 µg/ml concentration. It
suggests that the CSRME contain strong antioxidant activity
and attributed due to the presence of phenolic compounds
().

Anti-inflammatory activity of Cyperus scariosus rhizomes methanolic extract:
Anti-inflammatory effect of CSRME was evaluated by
measuring percent inhibition of bovine serum albumin
denaturation (BSA). Our results confirm that CSRME inhibits
the denaturation of BSA in a dose-dependent manner
throughout the concentration range of 50–5000 µg/ml. The per
cent inhibition of BSA denaturation is enhanced with an
increase in the concentration of the plant extract. Diclofenac
sodium tablet (50–5000 µg/ml) was used as reference drug
which also demonstrate concentration dependent inhibition of
protein denaturation. However, at higher concentration, the
effect of diclofenac sodium was found to be less as compared
with CSRME ().

Identification and characterization of the active site aminoacid constraints for human cyclooxegenase-2:
To identify the active site amino acid constrains, the three
dimensional structural information of the target proteins (1PXX,
2AW1) were retrieved from the RCSB data bank 
(http://www.rcsb.org). 
As a first step, hydrogen atoms were added to
both proteins using reduce-a command line execution program
(
http://kinemage. biochem. duke. edu/software/reduce.php).
To identify the location, shape and docking constrains around
the active site of bound ligands, grid box was generated using
molecular cavity detection algorithm in receptor setup
workflow module at Open Eye software. The box dimensions
for crystallographic diclofenac and valdecoxib displayed
dimensions as 13.49 Å × 16.21 Å × 15.48 Å with a box volume
of 3383 Å. Two flexible amino-acid constrains such as Tyr-385
and Ser-530 with diclofenac and Thr-199 and Thr-200 with
valdecoxib formed a direct hydrogen bond interaction 
().

Receptor based molecular docking using a library of small
molecule compounds from Cyperus scariosus against human
cyclooxegenase-2 Based on the importance of diclofenac with
human COX-2 and the interactive amino acid constrains, further
we decided to search for small molecule inhibitors from C.
scariosus similar structure activity relationship. For those natural
compounds from C. scariosus were filtered by applying the
expanded Lipinski׳s drug-likeness criteria: Molecular weight
between 150 and 440 Da; the presence of 0–6 hydrogen-bond
acceptors and 0–4 hydrogen bond donors; &lt;10 rotatable bonds;
and overall hydrophobicity below log P - 5.0. The
physicochemical properties of all natural compounds are listed
in . 
Among all N-methyl-1-adamantaneacetamide and
1,5-Diphenyl-2H-1,2,4-triazoline bound deep within a narrow
pocket formed by the inner lobe cleft as reported to X-ray
crystallographic structures of 1PXX and 2AW1. N-methyl-1-
adamantaneacetamide formed one direct hydrogen bond
interaction between Ser-530 with a distance of 1.79 Å, whereas
1,5-diphenyl-2H-1,2,4-triazoline formed direct hydrogen bond
interaction with Tyr 385. On the other hand, benzene-1,2-diol,4-
(4-bromo-3-chloro) formed two hydrogen bond interactions
with Thr-199 and Thr-200 with a distance of 2.10 and 2.12 Å,
distance as similar to crystal ligand valdecoxib for 2AW1. Some
important hydrophobic amino acid residues surrounding the Nmethyl-
1-adamantaneacetamide, 1,5-diphenyl-2H-1,2,4-
triazoline and benzene-1,2-diol,4-(4-bromo-3-chloro) are Ser-
353, Leu 384, Leu 352, Tyr 385, Phe 381, Leu 531, Ser-353, Leu
198, Val 121, Val 143, and Ala 527 ().

Discussion
The use of traditional medicine by the people for treatment of
different ailments is expanding to newer horizons as plants still
remain the novel source of structurally important compounds
that lead to the development of innovative therapeutics 
[].
Enormous number of plants, even though identified, their
medicinal values are still with local people and tribal
populations []. Many herbal preparations are being
prescribed as anti-inflammatory and analgesic in the traditional
literature []. The search for new anti-inflammatory and
analgesic agents from the huge array of medicinal plant
resources is intensifying []. Several drugs has been discovered
to inhibit or delay the inflammation of rheumatoid or osteoarthritis
by targeting anti-inflammatory protein COX-2. Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) approved selective COX-2
inhibitors namely nimesulide, etodolac, and meloxicam showed
potent anti-inflammatory compounds in preclinical models. All
three compounds selectively bind Ser-530 amino acid residue,
which is depicted by crystallographic and molecular docking
studies []. Very recently second generation drugs have also
been developed to target COX-2, considering minimal effects on
gastrointestinal or renal problems. However, they could not
able to overcome the combined side effects associated with
digestive and urinary tract infections []. Therefore, plant
metabolites are increasingly paying attention over synthetic
derivatives against inflammation to reduce side effects. In our
continuing efforts, we have identified selective COX-2 inhibitors
from C. scariosus. Several phytochemical constituents are
abundant in the rhizoid methanolic extract, which include
alkaloids, tannins, terpenoids, flavonoids and phenol
derivatives. It should be noted that phenol components are of
importance and interest in pharmacy due to their relationship
with antioxidant activity []. On the other hand, the rhizomes
of C. scariosus demonstrate effective inhibition of BSA
denaturation. Denaturation of tissue proteins is one of the welldocumented
causes of inflammatory and arthritic diseases [].
The increments in absorbance of test samples with respect to
control indicated stabilization of protein that is inhibition of
heat-induced protein (BSA) denaturation by plant extract. It
suggests that this plant is the reservoir of potentially useful
chemical compounds, which serve as drugs, provide newer
leads and clues for modern drug design. Molecular docking
approaches are generally used in modern drug design process
to understand the protein ligand interactions []. The threedimensional
structure of the protein-ligand composite could be
served as a considerable source of understanding the proteins
that interact with one another and perform biological functions
[]. Hence, knowledge of protein and ligand interactions with
the specific drugs may provide a significant insight into the
binding interactions and relativeness of the drug []. To
identify the bioactive compounds present in the C. scariosus we
have retrieved COX-2 protein co-ordinates from 1PXX and
2AW1. Respective ligands such as diclofenac and valdecoxib
were separated from COX-2 and self-docking results were
performed to identify the active site amino acid residues.
Results showed that diclofenac forms a hydrogen bond
interaction with Ser-530 and Tyr-385, whereas, valdecoxib forms
a hydrogen bond interaction with Thr-199 and Thr-200. It
supports previously published anti-inflammatory activity of
diclofenac and valdecoxib toward human COX-2 [,
]. The
hybrid chemgauss4 score for the diclofenac and valdecoxib is -
10.6 and - 7.73 Kcal/mol respectively. The docking scores
against selected natural compounds showed higher binding
affinity towards COX-2, which is evident from the hybrid
chemgauss4 score for N-methyl-1-adamantaneacetamide
(−11.786 Kcal/mol), 1,5-diphenyl-2H-1,2,4-triazoline (−10.909
Kcal/mol) and benzene-1,2-diol,4-(4-bromo-3-chloro) (−7.806
Kcal/mol) are significantly equal to the diclofenac and
valdecoxib. All selected compounds including Diclofenac show
molecular weight below 450, hydrogen bond donor (&lt;5) and
acceptor (&lt;10), log P ≤ 5, and rotatable bonds ≤ 5 of Lipinski׳s
rule of five [] Polar surface area (PSA) has shown to inversely
correlate with lipid penetration ability [] Compounds that are
completely absorbed by humans tend to have PSA ≤60Å2, while
compounds with PSA &gt;140 Å2 are &lt;10% absorbed. The selected
compounds show PSA values in the range of 25–65, suggests
that these compounds likely to support the drug-likeness
proposed by Lipinski [] Qualitative human oral absorption
showed the score between three and two and is higher than
FDA approved anti-inflammatory drugs diclofenac and
valdecoxib. All the compounds satisfy the values of partition
coefficient of octanol/gas (QPlogPoct) (−2.0−6.5), brain/blood
(QPlogBB) (−3.0−1.2) predicted to be blood brain and gut blood
barrier. Collectively our results suggest that natural compounds
of C. scariosus have anti-inflammatory activity and they can be
further considered for in vivo experimental study in context to
normal and disease state.

Conclusion
Cyperus scariosus belonging to the family Cyperaceae and
methanolic extract of this plant rhizomes (CSRME) is rich in
anti-oxidants and anti-inflammatory compounds. In-silico
molecular docking analysis showed N-methyl-1-
adamantaneacetamide, 1,5-diphenyl-2H-1,2,4-triazine and
benzene-1,2-diol,4-(4-bromo-3 chloropheyl iminomethyl)
interacted with anti-inflammatory COX-2 binding receptors
like 1PXX and 2AW1. It justifies the use of this plant as a
folklore medicine for preventing inflammation associated
disorders.

Source of Support
This work was partly supported by a grant from the
Department of Biotechnology (DBT), Government of India to
Mahendran Botlagunta.

Conflict of Interest
None.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We wish to thank Sunil Chawla for providing Open Eye
Software. Authors also thank to Dr. S.V. Saradhi, Head, and
Department of Biotechnology for his continuous support.

Citation:Kakarla et al, Bioinformation 10(10): 637-646 (2014)

Phytochemical screening of Cyperus scariosus plant. a) Geographical representation of C. scariosus plant region in India; b)
C. scariosus (Cyperaceae) plant, rhizomes; c) Phytochemical screening of C. scariosus rhizome extracts using various solvents. + andindicates
presence and absence of phytochemicals.

Evaluating medicinal importance of Cyperus scariosus rhizomes methanolic extract: a) Antioxidant activity of ascorbic acid
(left top panel) and plant extract (right top panel); b) Anti-inflammatory activity of diclofenac (left bottom panel) and plant extract
(right bottom panel).

Protein-drug interaction against human cyclooxegenase-2 (COX-2): a) Diclofenac; b) valdecoxib interactions with human
COX-2 (protein data bank ID: 1 PXX, 2AW1). Green dotted lines indicate direct hydrogen bond interaction with flexible aminoacid
residues. Numbers indicates the hydrogen bond distance in Angstroms with their respective aminoacid constrains.

Protein-plant compound interaction against human anti-inflammatory protein cyclooxegenase-2 using molecular docking
analysis; a) N-methyl-1-adamantaneacetamide with 1PXX; b) 1, 5, diphenyl-2H-1,2,4-triazine with 1PXX; c) Benzene-1,2-diol,4-(4-
bromo-3-chlorophenyl iminomethyl) with 2AW1.

