Background
With the advances of high throughput sequencing
technologies, lots of genomes have been sequenced and need
to be analyzed. The huge amount of genomic data has in turn
led to the development of visualization tools. Visualization
tools can make the large data sets more meaningful, and
mitigate the difficulties in detecting, filtering and classifying
patterns within large gene sequences. Circos is one of popular
visualization tools that are used to display genome
information in circular ideogram with various configurations
[]. 
This tool provides a great help for visually identifying and
analyzing of similarities and differences across multiple
genomes. It is also capable of generating data as line,
histogram plots, heat maps, tiles, connectors, scatter, and text.
We have recently developed a tool named GIV, a customized
Circos, for displaying the locations of genomic islands and
corresponding feature values in genomes. Genomic islands are
chromosomal regions in a genome that have the origin of
horizontal transfer. The stabilized GIs in the host genome can
help itself adapt its new environment or condition, or even
make it more competitive. For instance, the incorporation of
drug-resistance genes in GIs can protect itself being killed,
while the recruitment of secondary metabolite genes in GIs can
help itself use surrounding resources more efficiently. The
display of the locations of such GIs will make it extremely
helpful for microbiologists and evolutionary biologists to
study GIs, such as the study of the mechanism of forming GIs,
or establishing the evolutionary relationships across genomes
based on these GIs.

Methodology
Software Input:
The main purpose of generating GI visualization is to illustrate
the positions of predicted GIs in the genome. In addition, we
want to show the evidences of predicted GIs region by
displaying all GI-associated feature values in the
corresponding positions. To this end, we can display all feature
values by different circular ideograms. By aligning different
feature circles along with the original predicted GI circle, we
can also identify which feature values are important when
used in predicting GIs. Therefore, our tool GIV requires two
input files: 1) genomic island locations; and 2) eight genomic
island associated feature values (including IVOM, HEG, tRNA,
Density, Phage, Integrase, Intergenic Distance and
Transposases).

Raw Data Collection
For any fully sequenced genome, all eight GI-associated
feature values can be generated by AlienHunter [], and our
in-house program GIHunter. Since AlienHunter is embedded
in our program GIHunter, GIHunter can be used to calculate
all eight feature values, including the IVOM score, which is
actually generated by AlienHunter. GIHunter can be obtained
at http:// www5.esu.edu/cpsc/bioinfo/software/GIHunter.
 (see supplementry material) shows an example of part
of raw data generated by GIHunter, which consists of start
positions and end position of all genomic regions, and eight
feature values corresponding to each of the regions.

Data Conversion
In order to use the Circos program to create GI images, we
must convert all GI raw data into Circos' formatted data.
Specifically, we read the original data file () and
separate them into different feature data files. In our study,
eight features were used, and thus there are eight
corresponding data files, with each of them with the Circos
formatted, which include the fields of chromosomal ID, start
position, end position and value.

Configuration Setting
In Circos, each image should have a main configuration file,
which includes general parameter setting, input files and
output file. The parameter setting may include global color,
font settings and tick mark setting, and they are defined in a
separate configure file. In addition, the user is also required to
define all input data files for the genome. In this study, we
need to include eight GI feature-related data files, as well as
predicted GI location file. Each of input data can have a choice
of several Circos data type formats. In this study, we used the
histogram representation, which includes chromosomal ID,
start position, end position and value.

Sample Output
The output of our program will be an image, which will be
saved in the same folder of input files, with the output name
given by its genome name. Such information was
automatically generated from our program input, where we
provide genome information. A sample GI image is shown in
, 
where nine concentric circles were represented, with
the most outside one representing the locations of predicted
GIs, and the remaining circular ideograms representing eight
feature values. Therefore, we can clearly see the relationships
between the feature values and predicted GI region. We have
run our GIV tool on more than 2000 genomes, converted the
predicted GIs and GI-associated feature values by GIHunter to
Circos' file format, and generated GI images for each of the
genomes. The generated GI images have been uploaded to our
genomic island database website: http://www5.esu.edu/cpsc/bioinfo/dgi.

Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we report the development and the usage of our
genomic island visualization tool, GIV. We believe that this
visualization tool will be helpful for medical and microbial
scientific communities to study horizontal gene transfer,
evolutionary microbial genomes. We also hope such a kind of
visualization tool can serve as a model for visualizing other
kinds of genomic structures with supporting feature values in
the same genome for future genome analyses and studies.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This research was partially supported by President Research
Fund, FDR major grant, and FDR mini grant at East
Stroudsburg University of Pennsylvania, USA.

Citation:Che &amp; Wang, Bioinformation 9(17): 879-882 (2013)

Genomic island visualization of Escherichia coli O157:H7 str. Sakai. There are eight circles (label 1-8), representing each
of GI-associated features. The order of features from inside to outside is: 1) tRNA, 2) Phage, 3) Integrase, 4) Transposons, 5) HEG, 6)
Intergenic-Distance, 7) Density, and 8) IVOM. The most outside circle colored with orange color indicates the predicted GIs
locations. The shaded areas cover the corresponding feature values for each of GI regions.

