Background
Rice (Oryza sativa L.) is the staple food for more than three billion people, 
over half the world's population. It provides 27% of dietary energy and 
20% of dietary protein in the developing world. About 90% of the world's 
rice is grown and consumed in Asia []. Research into rice is crucial for 
the development of technologies that will increase the productivity for 
farmers who rely on rice for their livelihood. Research in rice is aimed at 
increasing the yield, yield stability and improving resistance against abiotic 
and biotic stresses. There exist a huge collection of rice germplasm 
carrying useful genes for the above traits and have been continuously 
exploited by the plant breeders towards developing improved rice varieties. 
Detailed documentation of the germplasm/varieties facilitated by an easy 
and efficient search and retrieval system is an absolute necessity 
considering the wide range of breeding activities taken up globally in rice, 
and other crops. There are a select public/private databases carrying 
molecular and genetic data of specific model species such as maize  [], 
Medicago [], 
rice  [] and  Arabidopsis  
[]  which caters to more of an 
investigative nature of research. However, when it comes to applied 
varietal developmental programs, familiarity of the plant breeders on 
aspects such as, pedigree, yield, resistance levels to biotic and abiotic 
stresses etc., is important for evolving a successful hybridization program. 
TNAURice is an initititve in this direction to serve as ready reckoner to the 
rice breeders, it is a compilation of the rice varieties developed from Tamil 
Nadu Agricultural University, Coimbatore, one of the premier institutes 
engaged in rice research for the past 100 years in India. About two hundred 
and fifty rice varieties developed using different breeding approaches from 
various research stations of TNAU are included in this database. Here, we 
describe the construction and utility of TNAURice, this database will be of 
use to the plant researchers in general and rice breeders in particular 
towards successful planning of their breeding objectives. 

Methodology of development
The data pertaining to the rice cultivars had been collected from records 
maintained at the Paddy Breeding Station (PBS), Coimbatore and from the 
constituent research stations of TNAU involved in rice breeding program. 
The varieties included in the database are from the following research 
stations located at different places in the state of Tamil Nadu: Coimbatore, 
Aduthurai, Ambasamudram, Tirurkuppam, Talainayar, Palur, Paramakudi, 
Thirupathisaram, Madurai, Pondicherry, Paiyur and Trichy. The rice 
varieties are identified by the following 29 descriptors: Name, Parentage, 
Duration, Season, Area of adoption, Yield(t\ha), Habit, Leaf sheath, Axil, 
Junction, Auricle, ligule, Septum, Leaf blade, Flag leaf, Fertile glumes, 
Apiculus, Awns, Panicle, Exsertion, Grain: L*B*T(mm), 1000 grain 
weight(g), Brown rice: L*B*T(mm), L/B ratio, Rice Grade, Rice colour, 
Abdominal white, Transluency, Hulling(%), Milling(%) and Protein 
content

The TNAU rice database was structured using Microsoft Structured Query 
Language (MS-SQL). The user interface of the database was enabled with 
Microsoft ASP.NET, a standard generalized and most advanced web 
development application. The home page contains the textual information 
organized under “Home, About database, Link outs and Help desk” 
(). The information available under the above mentioned 
subcomponents was compiled separately in an abridged form. A navigable 
link to the data is enabled under “Research stations”, the varieties 
developed in each of the research stations were listed, accordingly. 
Keyword based searching of the data is enabled for the following eleven 
varietal descriptors such as “Varieties, Popular name, Parentage, Duration, 
Season, Area of adoption, Habit, Awns, Panicle, Rice grade and Rice 
colour” as listed in the search window. 

Utility
The use of database technologies has drawn the attention of a subset of the 
biological community, as of now it is limited to a small sector of the 
scientific community.  However, more and more individuals/institutions 
are generating experimental data on a large scale and are in need of 
developing and managing databases of their own. Effective use of 
information may strongly promote biological studies, and may lead to 
many important findings []. Plant germplasm resources play an important 
role in crop improvement programs []. The use and benefits derived from 
conserved germplasm is the sole criterion for assessing the genetic 
conservation program of a crop. The use of rice germplasm includes both 
direct use in rice production and indirect use in rice breeding programs as 
parents. Presently, information regarding the available and evaluated 
germplasm is rarely documented in the form of a well structured database. 
It is therefore, time-consuming and laborious for individual researchers to 
extract and organize varietal information from sources such as, 
notebooks/records or from typed electronic pages. Thus the primitive 
nature of documentation of the varietal information is a major limitation 
and restricts its utility by time and space. This draws an urgent need to 
consolidate rice germplasm through a database system  []. The present 
database is well structured, comprehensive and complete with respect to 
the details of rice varieties that have been released from TNAU till date. It
is aimed at the Indian and International rice researchers and the progressive 
farming community. In future, we plan to include rice varieties and hybrids 
released from other Indian agricultural institutions as well. 

This work is supported by the Department of Biotechnology, Government 
of India under Biotechnology Information System (BTIS) scheme.

Citation:Ramalingamet al, Bioinformation 5(6): 264-265 (2010)

TNAURice architecture showing the network of front and back end of the database.

