Background
The decomposition of organic compounds in the absence of oxygen produces
methane as a main product []. Likewise, the anaerobic bacteria are mostly
performing the function of decomposition in the absence of oxygen known as
anaerobic microbial decomposition. Most of the methane producing bacteria
belongs to the domain archaea []. They further extended to the kingdom
Euryarchaeota. These methane producing bacteria i.e methanogens are
classified in to five orders i.e Methanopyrales, Methanococcales,
Methanobacteriales, Methanosarcinales and Methanomicrobiales 
[,
]. Apart
from these, Methanobrevibacte phlotypes are the most dominant phylotype of
methanogens present in Australia, Canada and European countries. These
bacteria’s used different substrates for completing their energy requirement and
produce methane. The well known substrates for methanogenic bacteria are
carbon dioxide, hydrogen, acetate and methanol etc []. But this increasing
level of methane in the environment is a matter of global concern. Everyday
scientists are making experiments in order to reduce methane by mitigating
methanogens. A major portion of the methane in the environment is coming
from the livestock sector so it is worthwhile to stress majorly on the strategies
or methods that will mitigate the methane emission from rumen 
[,
].
Methane producing pathway in methanogens that utilize carbon dioxide and
molecular hydrogen involves ten methanogen specific enzymes which catalyze
unique reactions using unique coenzymes [,
,
,
].

One of them is F420 H2: NADP oxidoreductase (Fno) that catalyzes the
electron transfer step between NADP+ and F420 
[]. During the reaction,
NADP isreduced to NADPH by accepting one or more hydrides (H−) from
F420 []. 
It is an important step for regulation of methane formation in
methanogen bacterium such asMethanobrevibacter smithii (ATCC 35061).
Therefore, the NADP oxidoreductase enzyme may play vital role in the
formation of methane in Methanobrevibacter smithii. This group of
methanogens also finds in human gut and helps in the digestion of
polysaccharides which affects harvesting of host calorie 
[]. It also dominants
the 10% of anaerobes in the human gut. Methanobrevibacter smithii uses large
carbohydrates as sole carbon source and degrades them to methane which is
toxic to body. Furthermore, the excreta with high methane content is consumed
by bacterium in order to release free methane which is a major issue for
environmental safety. Therefore, there is need to block the synthesis of
methane in Methanobrevibacter smithii to reduce its toxicity in the
environment. The synthesis of methane can be hindered by decreasing the
activity of NADP oxidoreductase enzyme in Methanobrevibacter smithii.
However, the 3D protein structure of NADP oxidoreductase enzyme from
Methanobrevibacter smithii is still unknown. Therefore, in the proposed work
we developed 3D model structure of F420- dependent NADP oxidoreductase
protein from Methanobrevibacter smithii whose protein sequence is available
in genebank (Accession number: ABQ86254.1). We explored comparative
homology modeling method for 3D model development. In addition, we
determined the putative functional site for the model protein via various
prediction servers which was further validated by molecular docking approach.
Moreover, several works have been already reported for direct or indirect
inhibition of methane production [–]. Therefore, in our research work we
determined putative inhibitor of F420 dependent NADP oxidoreductase protein
to inhibit the methane producing pathway in Methanobrevibacter smithii.

Methodology
The protein sequence of F420-dependent NADP oxidoreductase enzyme from
Methanobrevibacter smithii was obtained from gene bank (Accession number:
ABQ86254.1) and furnished as query sequence for homology modeling.

Homology modeling
The protein sequence was subjected for comparative homology modeling via
Swiss model [] 
and ESyPred3D (via Modeller 6v2) software's 
[] to
generate putative 3D model. The Swiss model performs the sequence
alignments and searches the putative template protein for generating the 3D
model for query sequence. The ESyPred3D has been incorporated with
Modeller (version 6v2) program for generating the putative 3D model. All the
modeling parameters were set to be default. The model structure was further
verified by PROCHECK and PROSA analysis.

Energy minimization by GROMOS96
The model structure was further optimized by energy minimization via
GROMOS96, implemented in Swiss pdb viewer software. GROMOS96
performs the molecular dynamics of all the bonded and non bonded atoms with
in the model structure and obtain the minimum potential energy.

Functional site prediction
We subjected the model structure to different function and functional site
prediction servers e.g. DALI, BLAST, PSI-BLAST, PROFUNC, Q-SITE
FINDER and PROSITE. The BLAST and PSI-BLAST were used for function
verification. On the other hand, the PROFUNC and Q-SITE FINDER were
used for structure based functional site prediction.

Substrate verification
We determined the putative substrate for the query protein (modeled protein)
via Molecular docking. Here, we used the Patch dock 
[] and Autodock
(version 4) [] 
software's for performing molecular docking. We extracted the
substrate molecules files from the template protein pdb file (obtained from
homology modeling approach) and converted into 3D structure via CORINA
server (
http://www.molecular-networks.com/online_demos/corina_demo). The
substrates were docked against the model structure via mentioned docking
software's. We further divided the docking approach in two steps (1) Blind
docking (2) Refined docking. In the blind docking via Patchdock, we
considered the whole modeled protein structure as docking target. On the other
hand, in refined docking approach via Autodock4, we generated the grid map
around the selective active site residues (obtained from fuctional site prediction
servers and from blind docking approach) with grid point spacing of 0.375 A°
(). 
All docking parameters were set to be default.Subsequently, the
substrates were ranked based on docking score obtained after Patchdock. On
the other hand, in Autodock4.0, a log file has been generated (dlg) from where
we calculated docking energy which is the sum of Intermolecular energy and
internal energy .We selected the most stable confirmations of the substrate
based on lowest docking energy and their binding mode was analyzed at
resulting selected functional site.

Inhibitor prediction
Finally, the inhibitor compounds were detected for modeled F420-dependent
NADP oxidoreductase protein in order to decrease its catalytic activity. We
obtained reported inhibitor compounds for methanogenic bacteria from
literature. Their SMILES strings were obtained from Pubchem database and 3D
structures were generated by CORINA server. The compounds were docked
against the modeled structure of F420-dependent NADP oxidoreductase.

Results
Molecular Modeling
We are interested in uncovering structure, substrate and inhibitor of
F420dependent NADP oxidoreductase (target) from Methanobrevibacter
smithii. The Swiss model software generated the 3D model structure of query
protein F420dependent NADP oxidoreductase at resolution of 1.8 Ǻ based on
template protein 1JAX (chain A) with sequence identity of 34.272% and evalue
of 2.40e-26 (). On the other hand, the EsyPred3D (via Modeller
(version 6v2)) developed model structure based on same template protein
1JAX (chain A) with sequence identity of 35.40% (using ALIGN program).
The Ramachandran plot analysis (by PROCHECK) of the model structure from
ESyPred3D is showed that 97.30% of the residues are in favored and additional
allowed regions. However structure from Swiss model is showed 98.90%
residues are in favored and additional allowed regions .Quality assessment of
the model via ProSA revealed that the models from both EsyPred3D and Swiss
model matched with NMR region of the plot with Z score of -7.25 and -7.26
(). ProSA analysis indicated that the model structure of NADP
oxidoreductase obtained match with the known proteins whose structures have
been already determined by NMR experiments. It signifies good quality of our
model. Furthermore, we considered Swiss model structure for our further study
(). The measurement of bad non-bonded interaction for Swiss model
structure showed that at 2.0 Ǻ of resolution, the number of bad contacts is of
five residues per 100 residues. In addition, Secondary structure prediction of
F420dependent NADP oxidoreductase revealed that the modeled structure
consist of Helix-Strand-Coil like structure. Energy minimization was
performed by GROMOS96 which optimized the model structure from initial
energy -4019.835 KJ/mol to final energy of -5671.013 KJ/mol.

Functional site residues
Functional site prediction by state of art methods such as DALI, PINTS,
Profunc and Q Site Finder enumerated the putative active site residues in the
model structure (). DALI server produced close match with 1JAX
(chain A) (Z score 37.4, RMSD 0.7) and 1JAY (chain A) (Z score 34.9, RMSD
0.9). These are known oxidoreductase enzymes with structures in RCSB data
bank and were also detected during homology modeling of query protein.
These servers detected the following putative functional site residues in the
target protein: GLY7, GLY 8, THR 9, GLY 10, PRO 11, GLN 12, GLY 10 13,
LEU 14, SER31, ARG32, LYS36, LEU 73, THR 74, VAL75, PRO 76, LEU
77, GLN 80, ALA 99, THR 100, VAL101, ASN 142, ASN 146, THR 201. The
ligand molecules F420 and NADP were separated from pdb file of 1JAY. Note
that no ligand has been reported for 1JAX.We download their SMILES strings
from Pubchem and converted into 3D structures by CORINA server and saved
in pdb file format (). The docking of the ligands against modeled
oxidoreductase protein produced higher docking score for F420 (score 6150) as
compared to NADP (score 4195). The ligand F420 binds at the cavity of
oxidoreductase protein. We took docked F420 ligand as a centre and at 6 Ǻ of
radius to select the surrounding residue environment. The following active site
residues surround the ligand F420: GLY7, GLY8, THR9, PRO11, GLN12,
GLY13, ILE16, ILE72, LEU73, THR74, VAL75, PRO76, LEU77, GLN78,
ALA79, GLN80, LEU97, ASP98, ALA99, THR100, VAL101, PRO102,
LEU103 ,GLU104, THR105 ,PRO114, LEU115, ILE117, ALA122, ALA140
,PHE141, ASN142, ASN143, ILE144 ,SER145, ASN146, SER147, HIS148,
LEU149 ,ASP154, ILE156, CYS158, ILE197, GLU198, SER199, ILE200
,THR201, PRO202, LEU203, LEU204, ILE205, GLY206, MET207, ASN208,
ILE209, LYS210, PHE211 and LYS212. These residues are in agreement with
the functional site residues predicted by different function site prediction
servers. Furthermore, refined docking by Autodock4 for selective functional
site (obtained by blind docking approach and predicted by servers) produced
lower docking energy of - 14.40 Kcal/mol for F420 ().

Docking with inhibitors
Docking via Patchdock produced higher docking score for Lovastatin (score
4852) and Compactin (Mevastatin) (score 4778) along with oxidoreductase
natural ligand F420 (score 6150) (). Refined docking (making grid
map on previously predicted active site) also produced lower docking energy
for Lovastatin -22.07 Kcal/mol and Compactin (Mevastatin) -21.91 Kcal/mol
which is much lower then oxidoreducatse natural ligand F420, -14.40 Kcal/mol
( &amp; ). 
Both the inhibitors bind at the cavity of modeled F420
dependent NADP oxidoreducatse protein and show higher affinity as compared
to F420 ( &amp; ). 
Our research establishes that Lovastatin and
Compactin (Mevastatin) may act as potent inhibitor for F420 dependent NADP
oxidoreducatse protein in order to block its active site.Based on the matches,
we propose the following putative functional role of the target: The target may
participate in hydride transfer of DNA photolyase reaction. The N terminal of
the protein may have dinucleotide binding Rossmann fold domain. The target
may be a homodimer catalyzing the reversible reduction of NADP+ by the help
of F420H2. It may have NADP binding site at N terminal domain and F420
binding at the C terminal domain.

Discussion
In our study, we determine the 3D model structure of the F420-dependent
NADP oxidoreductase from Methanobrevibacter smithii. We investigate that
Swiss model software develop more accurate protein model for our query
sequence as compare to ESyPred3D. It also verifies by PROCHECK and
ProSA analysis. These methods confirm the accuracy of our protein model.
Structure based functional site prediction methods enumerate the putative
amino acid residues from our protein model of F420- dependent NADP
oxidoreductase enzyme. We detect that these residues are making ligand
binding site pocket. Therefore, in extension of our study, we determine the
substrate and inhibitor for our model protein via docking. We find that ligand
F420 binds at protein cavity. Results from functional site prediction and
residues selection from docking experiment are complementary to each other.
In addition, the inhibitor compounds Lovastatin (-22.07 Kcal/mol) and
Compactin (Mevastatin) (-21.91 Kcal/mol) show more affinity for model
protein as compare to natural ligand F420 (-14.40 Kcal/mol). They share the
same cavity as by F420 and surround by similar residues. The Lovastatin is a
fungal metabolite isolated from cultures of Aspergillus terreus and Compactin
(Mevastatin) is an antifungal metabolite from Penicillium brevicopactum. Our
research establishes that Lovastatin and Compactin (Mevastatin) may act as
potent inhibitor for F420 dependent NADP oxidoreducatse protein in order to
block its active site.

Conclusion
The sequence and functional site prediction servers confirmed that the query
sequence is putative F420-dependent NADP oxidoreductase protein. Model
development and functional site prediction of F420-dependent NADP
oxidoreductase protein will give greater insight in understanding the role of
amino acids for catalyzing the reaction mechanism. Docking experiments
detected putative inhibitor of F420-dependent NADP oxidoreductase protein
which may help in blocking the methane production function of protein. As the
production of methane in excess amount is harmful for the environment
therefore blocking the active site by Lovastatin and Compactin (Mevastatin)
inhibitors render the enzyme unable to bind with the substrate which results in
decreased methane production and reduction in environment pollution. Our
prediction may help the biologist to design putative inhibitor against F420-
dependent NADP oxidoreductase protein for regulating its active related to
global environment concern.

Ashwani Sharma greatly acknowledges Bioroutes Life Sciences and
NewEraProteomics for all financial support. Prem Prashant Chaudhary would
like to thank National Fund for Basic and Strategic Research in Agriculture
(NFBSRA) funding agency from ICAR for all the financial help and providing
Senior Research Fellowship.

Citation:Sharma et al, Bioinformation 6(1): 15-19 (2011)

Schematic of the Methodology: (1) The protein sequence of F420-
dependent NADP oxidoreductase enzyme from Methanobrevibacter smithii
was obtained from gene bank database, (2) The query sequence was subjected
to homology modeling via Swiss model and ESyPred3d (Modeller6v2)
software's, (3) The 3D model structure was obtained, (4) The quality of 3D
model was further verified by PROCHECK and PROSA analysis, (5) The
selective 3D model was further furnished for energy minimization by
GROMOS96, (6) Next, the optimized model was subjected for functional site
prediction by PINTS, PROFUNC and Q-SITE FINDER servers, (7) In
addition, the substrate prediction was performed for modeled NADP
oxidoreductase enzyme, (8) Subsequently, the potential inhibitor compounds
were predicted for the model protein of NADP oxidoreductase enzyme.
Furthermore, the binding site residues were extracted from model protein. The
analysis was divided in three steps (9a) The putative functional site residues
were extracted from servers, (9b) The substrate and (9c) inhibitors binding
cavity was determined after docking, (10) The binding site residues were
enumerated which surrounded (10a) substrate and (10b) inhibitor (as center)
with 6Ǻ of radius and (11) The extracted residues from steps 10a, and 10b were
compared with the residues from functional site prediction servers.

Modeled structure of F420-dependent NADP oxidoreductase protein
(Gene bank accession number: ABQ86254.1)

ProSA analysis of Modeled protein structure of F420-dependent
NADP oxidoreductase protein via (A) Swiss model (B) ESyPred3d. It
represents that the model structures from both the software's are matching well
with the known proteins whose structures have been determined by NMR
experiments.

Structure of Compactin (Mevastatin), Lovastatin and F420.

The F420 (pink) binds at the cavity of modeled structure (green) of
F420- dependent NADP oxidoreductase protein and residues surrounding the
F420 ligand at 6A0 radius. The residues GLN12, LEU77, ALA99 and VAL101
make hydrogen bonds with F420.

The figure showed (A) Lovastatin inhibitor (pink) binds at 
the cavity of modeled structure (green) of F420-dependent NADP oxidoreductase protein and
residues surrounding the Lovastatin ligand at 6A0 radius. The residues 
GLY10, GLY13 THR74 and ILE144 make hydrogen bonds (blue) with Lovastatin. (B)
Compactin (Mevastatin) inhibitor (pink) binds at the cavity of modeled 
structure (green) of F420-dependent NADP oxidoreductase protein and residues
surrounding the Compactin (Mevastatin) ligand at 6A0 radius. The residues 
GLN12, GLY13, THR74 and ILE144 make hydrogen
bonds (blue) with Compactin.

