Background
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of endogenous non-coding small
RNAs. They negatively regulate gene expression at the post transcriptional
level through binding to complementary sites in the 3'-
untranslated regions (3'-UTR) of target genes [,
]. The first miRNA
was found by Victor Ambros and his colleagues in 1993. During the
last several years, hundreds of miRNAs and their target genes have
been identified in mammalian cells. Recent studies suggest that
miRNAs play critical roles in multiple biological processes, including
cell growth, cell differentiation, embryo development and so on [,
].
In cellular organisms, the regulation of gene expression is an important
mechanism to control biological processes. To understand how
differential gene expression is controlled at the genome-wide level, it
is important to identify all factors involved, and how and when they
affect gene expression. To date, differential gene expression can be
regulated at the transcriptional and at the post-transcriptional levels by
transcription factors (TFs) and miRNAs []. TFs can activate or
repress transcription by binding to cis-regulatory elements located in
the upstream regions of genes. Many TFs are well characterized, and
corresponding binding motifs have been identified in various species.
The combinatorial interactions between TFs have been well studied [,
]. MiRNAs repress gene expression by physically interacting with
cis-regulatory elements located in the 3'-UTR of their target
messenger RNAs (mRNAs). Compared with the work on
transcriptional regulation by TFs, the study of biological regulatory
networks mediated by miRNAs is just beginning. There are a few
studies which have investigated the regulatory functions of miRNAs in
the gene regulation network [,
].

Similar to TFs, miRNAs regulate gene expression in a combinatorial
fashion, i.e., an individual miRNA can regulate multiple genes, and an
individual gene can be regulated by multiple miRNAs. We also know
that a gene is regulated through multiple mechanisms before producing
its products. Thus, an attractive possibility is that miRNAs and TFs
may cooperate in regulating the same target genes. This cooperation of
miRNAs and TFs reflects the collaborative regulation at the
transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels. The combined
complexity of miRNAs and TFs may be relevant to creating cellular
complexity in a developing organism []. However, how TFs and
miRNAs function together in the gene regulatory network has not yet
been examined. Investigating coordinated regulation of genes by
miRNAs and TFs is an effort that may elucidate some of their roles in
various biological processes.

Detection of microRNA regulatory modules within biological
meanings has received much attention recently. Tran et al. []
presented a rule-based learning method to find miRNA regulatory
modules that contain coherent miRNAs and mRNAs. Joung and Fei
[]
 used an author-topic model, which is a family of probabilistic
graphical models for identification of miRNA regulatory modules.
Recently, Liu et al. [] tried to identify negatively regulated patterns
of miRNAs and mRNAs which are associated with specific conditions.
These studies, however, only concentrated on finding miRNA
functions at the post-transcriptional level. Two other recent studies
also showed that miRNA mediated regulatory circuits are prevalent in
the human genome [,
]. Thus, the question regarding to the
combined roles of miRNAs and other factors in gene regulatory
network still remains unanswered. Unlike previous studies as
discussed above, in this paper, we propose a new computational
method to discover the gene regulatory modules consisting of
miRNAs, TFs, and the genes regulated by them. The method combines
TF-gene binding information and miRNA target gene data for module
discovery. Specifically, we analyzed the regulatory associations
among the sets of predicted miRNAs and sets of TFs on the sets of
regulated genes by them in the human genome. We found 182 gene
regulatory modules of combinatorial regulation by miRNAs and TFs,
named miR-TF regulatory modules (miR-TF modules in short). By
validating these modules with the Gene Ontology (GO) and the
literature, it was found that our method allows us to detect
functionally-correlated gene regulatory modules involved in specific
biological processes. Moreover, our miR-TF modules provide a global
view of coordinated regulation of target genes by miRNAs and TFs.
Results suggest that combinatorial regulation at the transcriptional and
post-transcriptional levels is more complicated than previously
thought. Taken together, our results may provide insights into how
miRNAs and TFs function in the complex regulatory network of the
human genome.

Methodology
Datasets
We obtained the miRNA regulatory signatures and TF regulatory
signatures from CRSD database []. CRSD utilizes and integrates six
well-known, large-scale databases, including the human UniGene,
TRANSFAC, mature miRNAs, putative promoter, pathway and GO
databases. The miRNA regulatory signature database was constructed
using mature human miRNA from miRBase [] and 3'-UTR
sequences, and TF regulatory signature database was constructed using
TRANSFAC [] and the promoter database []. From these
databases, we build a data set that contains three components,
miRNAs, TFs, and genes regulated by them. To avoid trivial cases of
binding associations, each gene in our data set is regulated by at least
two miRNAs and two TFs with a significant binding score (p-value &lt;5 x 10−2 for miRNA-target gene binding, and p-value &lt; 5 x 10−2 for
TF-target gene binding). Specifically, our data set contains 267 mature
miRNAs, 483 TFs, and 1253 genes regulated by miRNAs and TFs. On
average, each miRNA binds to 22 genes and each TF binds to 17
genes. In addition, each gene was regulated by 5 miRNAs and 6 TFs
on average. A schematic description of the data set construction is
illustrated in .

Algorithm
In this section we present our algorithm for discovering miR-TF
regulatory modules. As mentioned above, each module consists of
genes, miRNAs, and TFs that all these miRNAs and TFs regulate these
genes with a stringent p-value. Our method exhaustively and
efficiently searches on the entire combinatorial space of subsets of
miRNAs and subsets of TFs to discover what factors control what
genes.Algorithm: Let A be a matrix of miRNA-gene binding p-values,
where rows correspond to genes and columns correspond to miRNAs,
so that Aij denotes the binding p-value of gene i with miRNAj. And,
let B be a matrix of TF-gene binding p-values, where rows correspond
to genes and columns correspond to TFs, so that Bij denotes the
binding p-value of gene i with TF j. Let M(i, p) denotes the set of all
miRNAs that bind to gene i with a p-value less than p. Let T(i, p)
denotes the set of all TFs that bind to gene i with a p-value less than p.
Let G(X, p) be a set of all genes to which all the factors (i.e. miRNAs
or TFs) in X bind with a given significance threshold p. Our algorithm
begins by going over all genes i. Using a strict p-value p1, we search
all subsets of M’⊆ M(i, p1) that not have been explored in previous
steps (i.e. the function IsAvailable(M’) is true). For each M’, we search
all subsets of T’⊆ T(i, p2) that not have been explored in previous
steps (i.e. the function IsAvailable(T’) is true). Then, we find the set of
all genes G that are bound by all miRNAs in M’ and all TFs in T’ with
given significance thresholds p1 and p2. Finally, if the number of
genes in G is greater than 1, we obtain a module and mark all the
subsets of M’ and T’, so that they are not considered next time. All
steps of the algorithm are presented in Algorithm 1. Basically, our
algorithm works with a dataset containing more than one hundred
miRNAs and TFs. Thus, there are potentially exponential numbers of
larger-size subsets of miRNAs (or TFs). However, as we showed in
the previous section, each gene is bound by only 5 miRNAs and 6 TFs
on average. In addition, we mark all the subsets of M’ and T’ when
they are involved in the same module, so that the number of subsets of
T and M to be considered is reduced in the algorithm. Therefore, the
number of actual subsets we are searching is much smaller.

Results and Discussion
miRNA-TF regulatory module detection
We have applied our module discovery algorithm to genome-wide
binding data for 267 mature miRNAs and 483 TFs. In order to
determine the appropriate values for miRNA-gene interaction
threshold p1 and TF-gene interaction threshold p2, we have tested
binding data at a number of different confidence levels (0.05, 0.01,
0.005, and 0.001). Table 1 ( ) shows the
number of modules found by our algorithm with different p-value
thresholds. As can be seen, when we relax the binding thresholds, the
number of modules found increases. For further analysis, we selected
the values of p1 and p2 equal to 0.01. Consequently, we obtained 182
miR-TF modules. These modules contain the relationships between
107 miRNAs, 176 TFs, and 261 target genes regulated by them (Table
1 -  ). Among 182 miR-TF modules found,
we take fifteen modules as examples (Table 2 -  ), 
the remaining module data can be found in the supplement files.

As mentioned above, each module consists of three components,
miRNAs, TFs, and genes regulated by all miRNAs and TFs in the
module. And the relationship between one gene and one miRNA or TF
represents the strength of binding score. We found that some of our
modules share a subset of miRNAs or TFs on regulation of the target
genes. This is because of the complexity of the miRNA regulation
network. Consequently, our results provide a global view of the
combinatorial coregulation of two main factors on gene regulation
network. A part of the network constructs from miR-TF modules is
shown in . Three modules (68, 66, and 67) share a common
miRNA hsa-miR-125b; two modules (66 and 67) share two miRNAs:
hsa-miR-125a and hsa-miR-125b. Also, modules 68 and 66 have the
same TF Zic3. This suggests that the coordinated regulation of target
genes by miRNAs and TFs is more complicated than previously
thought.

Validation using Gene Ontology annotations
To test if the regulated target genes and the host genes of TFs for each
miR-TF module might be enriched functionally based on arbitrary GO
terms, we performed GO annotation and significance analysis using
GOstat []. We observed terms associated significantly with the
target genes included in the GO gene-association database. To find
significantly overrepresented GO terms associated with a given gene
set, GOstat counts the number of appearances of each GO term for the
genes in this group, as well as in the reference group. Then, for each
GO term, a p-value is calculated, representing the probability that the
observed numbers of counts could have resulted from randomly
distributing this GO term between the tested group and the reference
group. The GO terms most specific to the analyzed list of genes will
have the lowest p-values.

Table 3 ( ) shows fifteen significant GO
terms directly related to the set of regulated target genes and host
genes of TFs in miR-TF modules. Some of them are annotated as
regulating specific biological processes (GO:0019219, GO:0019222,
GO:0045449, GO:0031323). Other terms have function in organ
morphogenesis (GO:000987), gland development (GO:0048732), and
organ development (GO:0048513). In addition, GO terms associated
with the gene set of miR-TF modules are not so general, for example:
GO:000987, GO:0019222, and GO:0019219 are located at levels 8, 6,
and 7 in the hierarchical structure of Gene Ontology. Thus we
speculate that our miRNA-TF modules may be functional biological
modules in gene regulation and molecular development.

Functional validation from the literature
We did a literature review and found that some miRNAs and TFs in
miR-TF modules were discovered to have associations with cancer
development. Interestingly, several miRNAs have been confirmed to
be related to lung and other human cancers. For example, hsa-let-7d
acted as a tumor suppressor in human lung cancer; hsa-miR-15a was
downregulated in B-cell chronic and lymphocytic leukemia []. HsamiR-
125b was downregulated and hsa-miR-25 was upregulated in
human breast cancer. These facts suggest that these miRNAs may
potentially act as tumor suppressors. Several transcription factors in
miR-TF modules have roles in the development of several types of
cancers. NF-κВ kappa prevents apoptosis in several untransformed and
tumor cell types. AP transcription factor family (AP-1 and AP-2) is
encoded from a gene which is known to regulate a variety of cellular
processes including cellular proliferation, differentiation, and
oncogenic transformation []. In addition, ETS family regulates
numerous genes, and is involved in stem cell development, and
tumorigenesis []. Taken together with evidence shown in  , it
is reasonable for us to think that the miR-TF modules we have
discovered may be related to human cancers.

Conclusion
Transcription factors and microRNAs are two main and important
factors regulating gene expression. TFs play the functions at the
transcriptional level by binding to promoter regions of the target
genes. In other way, miRNAs regulate the messenger RNAs at the
post-transcriptional level by binding to their 3’-UTR. The functions of
miRNAs and TFs in biological regulatory networks recently have been
quite well explored. However, the combinatorial regulation by
miRNAs and TFs on the common target genes is less understood. In
this paper, we introduced a computational method for discovering functional miR-TF modules and applied this method to the data set in
the human genome.

Using GO annotations and the literature review, we found that our
algorithm allows us to detect functionally correlated gene regulatory
modules involved in specific biological processes. Specifically,
miRNAs and the host gene of TFs in our modules may be involved in
some development processes, and may be involved in several types of
cancer diseases. Moreover, our miR-TF modules provide a global view
of coordinated regulation of target genes by miRNAs and TFs.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The first author has been supported by Japanese government
scholarship (Monbukagakusho) to study in Japan. This work is also
supported in part by NAFOSTED project No. 102.03.21.09 from the
Ministry of Science and Technology, Vietnam. The author would like
to thank Dr. Chun-Chi Liu and his colleagues for sharing the CRSD
database.

Citation:Tran et al, Bioinformation 4(8): 371-377 (2010)

Schematic description of the data set construction. The miRNA-gene binding information is constructed from miRNA and 3’-UTR
databases by using a miRNA target prediction, and the TF-gene binding information is constructed by TF binding site prediction integrating
promoter and TRANSFAC databases.

An illustration of three miR-TF modules discovered by our algorithm Inside green rectangle, black rectangle, and cyan rectangle are
modules 68, 66, and 67, respectively. The line from a miRNA/TF to a gene indicates that miRNA/TF regulates that target gene. MiRNAs repress
target genes, while TFs may activate or repress target genes.

