Background
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of ∼22 nucleotide (nt)
evolutionary conserved endogenous non-coding RNAs and believed
to play important roles in gene regulation by either inactivating or
degrading mRNA genes []. Up to date, more than 9,000 miRNAs
have been reported in animals, plants and viruses by using
computational and biological skills. They have been reported to
participate in the regulation of almost every cellular process [].
Some evidences support that miRNAs play an important role in the
intricate host-virus interaction network. The early researches
suggested that some plant miRNAs are involved in plant defense
and viral offense systems []. Later, Lecellier et al. [] reported that
human miR-32 could inhibit retrovirus primate foamy virus (PFV)
replication; Jopling et al. [] presented that the liver-specific
miRNA miR-122 could enhance the replication of hepatitis C virus
(HCV); Murakami et al. [] found that miR-199a could inhibit HCV
genome replication; Hariharan et al. [] predicted candidate targets
of five human miRNAs in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV);
Ahluwalia et al. [] conformed that human miRNA miR-29a could
down-regulate the expression of Nef protein and interfere with
HIV-1 replication; And Hakim et al. [] observed that many human
microRNAs can target lentiviruses and retroviruses. On the other
hand, viruses have also evolved to escape host’s RNAi machinery
by a variety of strategies [–]. Though studies into the
microRNA mediated host-influenza virus interactions are still in its
infancy, some reports have suggested that miRNAs may be involved
in anti-flu viral response. Ge et al. [,]
 showed that RNA
interfering (RNAi) could decrease influenza virus production in
mouse. Matskevich et al. [] indicated that human Dicer, an
enzyme essential for miRNA processing, might inhibit the influenza
A virus replication. An unpublished data mentioned that two human
encoded miRNAs miR-136 and miR-507 could target HA and PB2
genes in influenza A (H5N1) virus [].

Swine-Origin 2009 A/H1N1 influenza virus (S-OIV) is a newly
emerged virus which transmitted abroad quickly. More than 10,000
cases from 56 countries have been diagnosed as 2009 A(H1N1)
influenza in the world within 2 months. It trends to be thought that
this S-OIV are homogeneous and similar to North American swine
A(H1N1) viruses []. Traditionally, swine influenza viruses (SIV)
could cause the swine flu among pigs. But there has been no
evidence of the S-OIV transmission among the swine up to date.
Here we reported the discovery of pig miRNAs and human
miRNAs which putatively target in SIV and S-OIV genes
respectively. In all of 36 Sus scrofa miRNAs predicted to target
specific SIV genes, the putative interactions of ssc-miR-124a,
ssc-miR-136 and ssc-miR-145 with their SIV target genes had been
found to be maintained throughout virus evolution. In all of 22
Homo sapiens miRNAs predicted to target specific S-OIV genes,
hsa-miR-145 and hsa-miR-92a putatively target the HA gene and
hsa-miR-150 putatively targets the PB2 gene. Analysis of
previously reported gene expression profiles of miRNAs revealed
that these three miRNAs are expressed at higher levels in human
lung or trachea tissue. Analysis results based on the location
distribution from which virus was isolated and sequence
conservation imply that some putative miRNA-mediated host-virus
interactions may characterize the location-specificity.

Methodology
 depicts the flowchart in the present study. And the
following description is about the explanation for all the data and
tools mentioned in this figure:

Datasets
885 Homo sapiens and 74 Sus scrofa microRNA mature sequences
were downloaded from the miRbase database 
(http://microrna.sanger.ac.uk/sequences/, Release 13.0) 
[]. The
Swine-Origin 2009 A/H1N1 influenza virus and the swine influenza
virus sequences with annotations in GenBank flat file format were
downloaded from the NCBI Influenza Virus Sequence Database
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/FLU/) 
[].

MicroRNA expression enrichment analysis
Because the respiratory tract is the main organ through that
influenza virus invades, replicate and spread , all human miRNAs
expressed in the respiratory tract including oral cavity, larynx,
pharynx, trachea, bronchus and lung tissue were collected from
experimental data published in literatures [,] and database 
[,]. Data normalized by Z score transformation can be used directly
in the calculation of significant changes in gene expression between
different samples and conditions []. We used Z scores (Equation 1
in ) to compare the expression levels of the
same miRNA in different tissues, and then sorted all microRNAs
expressed in a specific tissue by their expression levels.

Micro RNA target prediction
MiRanda is a dynamic programming global alignment algorithm,
that places double score on bases 2 ­ 8 from the 5' end of the
miRNA []. We used this software to initially predict miRNA
targets with default parameters (Gap Open Penalty: -8.0; Gap
Extend:-2.0; Score Threshold: 50.0; Energy Threshold: -20.0
kcal/mol; Scaling Parameter: 2.0). After this initial matching,
several post-filters were applied: 1. a cutoff score of 120 was used
according to ref. 7; 2. an exact matching to 5'end seed region
(positions 2-8) of the mature miRNA was used and the G:U base
pairing was not allowed. 3. Only the miRNAs which are expressed
in the human respiratory tract were considered. The third criterion is
not applied in target identification in SIV genes due to the lack of
the pig miRNA expression profile data.

Sequence conservation analysis
The sequence segments of influenza viruses isolated from different
patients were aligned using Clustal X []. The conservation of
target sites for the respective miRNAs was analyzed based on these
alignment results and the mutations in target sites were identified at
the same time.

Discussion
Pig microRNAs target in swine influenza virus
The top scoring miRNA-target pairs were identified by miRanda
software with a perfect heptamer match in positions 2-8 of the
mature miRNA. We found that 36 Sus scrofa miRNAs had putative
target sites in SIV genes ( and Table 1 in ). We collected viral sequences isolated in different 38 years,
ranging in years from 1931 to 2008. Three putative pig miRNA-SIV
interactions were found to be maintained almost throughout all the
swine virus evolution (). For example, ssc-miR-124a targets
the NP genes isolated in all different 38 times, ssc-miR-145 targets
the NP genes isolated in different 35 times of 38 times and
ssc-miR-136 targets the NA and NP genes isolated in different 31
times of 38 times. The influenza A virus nucleoprotein (NP) is a
single-stranded RNA-binding protein that encapsidates the virus
genome and has essential functions in viral-RNA synthesis.
Moreover, the sequences of the NP gene are highly conserved
across subtypes of influenza virus. There have been reported that
small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) specific to the nucleocapsid
protein (NP) gene can inhibit influenza virus production [,].

Human microRNAs target in Swine-Origin 2009 A/H1N1 influenza virus
We used miRanda for identifying human microRNA target sites in
S-OIV gene sequences with a perfect heptamer match in positions
2-8 of the mature miRNA. The miRNAs can act as effectors in the
intricate host-virus interaction networks based on the premise that
miRNAs expression and virus replication should happen at the same
cell. Because influenza virus invades，replicates and spreads at the
respiratory tract in humans, we filtered out miRNAs without
evidence for expressing in human respiratory tract. And then, we
identified 22 miRNAs with putative target sites in S-OIV genes. The
human homologs of ssc-miR-145 and ssc-miR-136, hsa-miR-145
have putative target sites in S-OIV HA and NP gene whereas
hsa-miR-136 also has putative target sites in S-OIV NP and NA
genes (Table 2 in ). The imprinted miRNA
miR-136 fully complementary to a retrotransposon-like gene Rtl1 in
mouse may support this miRNA can also target exogenous nucleic
acids, as in the case of viruses [].

Based on Z-score analysis of previously reported gene expression
profiles of miRNAs [], three miRNAs with putatively target sites
on S-OIV genes are expressed at higher levels (top ten significantly
abundant miRNAs) in human lung or trachea tissue among all 240
previously studied miRNAs (). The miR-145 and miR-92a
putatively target the HA gene whereas miR-150 putatively targets
the PB2 gene. HA is known to be critical for pathogenicity of
influenza virus and immuno-suppression and PB2 is one component
of ribonucleoprotein which is responsible for virus RNA replication
and transcription []. Analysis results based on the isolated virus
location distribution and sequence conservation imply that some
putative miRNA-mediated host-virus interactions characterize the
location-specificity. For example, putative regulation mediated by
miR-145 may focus on the virus isolated from Texas State in the
United States of America and putative regulations mediated by
miR-92a/92b may focus on virus isolated from the location of Spain
(Table 1 in ). Conservation analysis of
putative miRNA target sites shows that a T to G mutation in
miR-92a/92b target region and a G to A mutation in miR-145 target
region affect the perfect match to the seed region of corresponding
miRNAs ().

Conclusion
At present, our knowledge about the miRNAs' role in viral
infections is still in its infancy. Genome-wide prediction of
miRNA-virus interaction by computational skills may present some
important clues for anti-virus defense. In summary, our study
implies that human and pig miRNAs have the potential to affect the
expression of S-OIV and SIV genes. Whether or not any of these
interactions mediated by the host cellular miRNAs to enhance virus
replication, or instead act to inhibit virus replication, is still unclear.
Further studies focusing on these interactions are needed to reveal
the interplay mechanism of host miRNAs and viruses, and the
conserved interaction between miRNAs and S-OIV or SIV genes
may be potential drug targets for anti-S-OIV or anti-SIV therapy.

Supplementary material
The detailed supplementary materials are given at 
http://www.compbio.net.cn/siv.htm	.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work is supported partially by the National Hi-Tech Research
and Development Program of China (No.2007AA022204), the
National Key Technologies R&amp;D Programme (2003A08-4-6) and
National Natural Science Foundation of China (30800644).

Citation:He et al, Bioinformation 4(3): 112-118 (2009)

A systematic flowchart in the present study. All the data, software or databases are described in Methodology or 
.

The putative interactions between swine influenza viruses isolated in different times with the pig miRNAs. The first row shows
pig miRNAs with putative target sites in SIV genes. The first column shows the different 38 times in which swine influenza viruses were
isolated (ranging in years from 1931 to 2008).

Heat maps of Z-score-normalized microRNA expression profiles in lung and trachea. The Table 3 in 
contains miRNA name and corresponding Z scores with the same rank order in this figure.

Sequence alignments of the S-OIV HA genes derived from different isolated sources. The T to G, A to G and T to C mutations
were identified in miR-92a/92b target region and a G to A mutation was identified in miR-145 target region.

