Background
The availability of the complete genome sequences of several
pathogenic bacteria and the completion of the human genome
project has revolutionized the field of drug-discovery against
threatening human pathogens []. Novel drug targets are required in
order to design new drugs against antibiotic sensitive pathogens. In
general, a target should provide adequate selectivity yielding a drug
which is specific or highly selective against the pathogen with
respect to the human host. Moreover, the target should be essential
for growth and viability of the pathogen at least under the condition
of infection []. The search for potential drug targets has
increasingly relied on genomic approaches. The entire approach is
built on the assumption that the potential target must play an
essential role in the pathogen's survival and constitute a critical
component in its metabolic pathway. At the same time, this target
should not have any well­conserved homolog in the human host.
This would preclude the possibilities of unacceptable crossreactivity
that might prove detrimental to the host []. Leprosy is
caused by Mycobacterium leprae, which primarily affects the skin,mucous membranes and peripheral nerves causing deformities.
Leprosy remains a major global health problem, especially in the
developing world. For over a century leprosy has presented major
challenges in the fields of microbiology, pathology, immunology,and genetics; it continues to do so today. Computer analysis
demonstrated that only half of the sequence contains protein­coding
genes. The other half contains pseudo genes and non­coding
sequences. These findings indicate that M. leprae has undergone a
major reductive evolution leaving a minimal set of functional genes
for survival []. Study of the coding region of the sequence provides
evidence accounting for the particular pathogenic properties of M.
leprae which is an obligate intracellular parasite. Mycobacterium
leprae remains non­cultivable []. M. leprae had mutational
changes in some of their genes like gyrA, rpoB, and folP which
developed resistance against drugs like newer quinolones,
refampicin and dapsone []. Resistant strains of M. leprae appeared
due to mutations in the macrolide target, the ribosome []. These
findings suggest the emergence of multi­drug resistant M. leprae.
Hence the mycobacterial cell wall with its specific composition and
structure is considered to be a major factor in promoting the natural
resistance of mycobacteria to various antibiotics. Early detection of
Mycobacterium leprae infection is considered an important
component of strategies aiming at reducing transmission of
infection, but currently available diagnostic tools often lack
sufficient sensitivity and specificity to reach this goal []. In clinical
studies, notable progress has been made concerning the
immunology and immunopathology of leprosy, the genetics of
human resistance, mechanisms of nerve injury, and chemotherapy.
In nearly all of these areas, however, leprosy remains poorly
understood compared to other major bacterial diseases []. Here, we
present a computational approach to identify the genes essential to
M. leprae using comparative pathway analysis followed by mapping
of non­homologues genes with list of minimal set of essential genes
required for cell­wall biosynthesis of M. leprae. In addition, our
approach successfully identified a unique group of common
enzymes as promising protein targets for new antibiotic
development and further characterization in the laboratory.

Methodology
Collection of metabolic pathway enzymes of M. leprae
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) [] is a
collection of online databases dealing with genomes, enzymatic
pathways, and biological chemicals. KEGG maintains five main
databases. They are KEGG Atlas, KEGG Pathway, KEGG Genes,
KEGG Ligand and KEGG BRITE. First, we collected all the
metabolic pathways of M. leprae and H. sapiens from KEGG
pathway database. Each of the pathways of M. leprae was compared
with all the available pathways of H. sapiens to identify whether
that particular pathway of M. leprae is present in H. sapiens or not.
The pathways which were present in both M. leprae and H. sapiens
were separated out and were named as shared pathways. The
pathways which were present only in M. leprae but were not present
in H. sapiens were grouped together and were called as unique
pathways. The gene name and the enzyme commission number
(EC) of all the enzymes present in both shared and unique pathways
were identified and collected from KEGG Genes database.


Retrieval of protein sequences and BLAST
The protein sequence of all enzymes in both shared and unique
pathways of m. leprae were retrieved from UNIPROT [] in
FASTA format. Each protein sequence was subjected to BLASTP
analysis against the H. sapiens at an E­value cutoff of 10-4 [].
BLAST results with no hits with H. sapiens were identified as nonhomologues
enzymes of M. lepare.


Identification of Essential Enzymes
The minimal set of essential genes required for cell envelope
biosynthesis of m. leprae was reported previously using
comparative genome sequence method by Vissa and Brennan [].
The M. leprae enzymes which were non homologous to H. sapiens
were mapped with the gene list of Vissa &amp; Brennan and the most
common M. leprae genes were identified and further explored.


Results and discussion
Metabolic pathway information
In KEGG pathway database we found 99 metabolic pathways for M.
leprae and 210 metabolic pathways for H. sapiens. Out of 99
metabolic pathways for M. leprae five pathways are unique to M.
leprae alone and comprised of 29 enzymes and remaining 94
pathways are present in H. sapiens as well and comprised of 731
enzymes. The five unique pathways of m. leprae, 29 enzymes
specific to these pathways and their corresponding gene id and the
EC number were represented Table 1 (see  ).


Prediction of enzymes which were non homologous to human
Removing enzymes from the pathogen that share a similarity with
the host protein ensures that the targets have nothing in common
with the host proteins and thereby, eliminating undesired host
protein­drug interactions. BLASTP similarity search of all these 760
(29 unique + 731 shared) enzymes at an E­value cutoff of 10-4
resulted 179 non­homologues enzymes of m. leprae of which ten
enzymes from the unique pathways and the remaining 169 belong to
enzymes from shared pathways. All these 179 enzymes with their
corresponding gene­id and EC number were represented in Table 2 (see  ).


Comparison of non­homologues enzymes with essential gene set
The 179 (10 + 169) non­homologues enzymes were further
compared to the minimal set of 48 essential genes required for cellwall
biosynthesis of M. leprae and reported by Vissa and Brennan
[]. There are eight enzymes common in both data sets (Table 3 in  ). Among the eight common enzymes only
one enzyme was found to be present in unique pathway and the
remaining seven enzymes were found to be present in shared
pathways. All these eight enzymes were categorized as essential
enzymes of m. leprae.

Role of essential enzymes of M. leprae
All the eight essential enzymes were further analyzed for the
identification of potential drug targets. One of the eight essential
enzymes Alanine racemase (alr) is the enzyme found in D­Alanine
metabolism which is a unique pathway of M. leprae. It is also found
in Alanine and Aspartate metabolism which is a shared pathway of
M. leprae. Another essential enzyme Putative dTDP­4­dehydrorhamnose 3, 5­epimerase (rmlC) was found to be essential
for Nucleotide sugar metabolism which is a shared pathway of M.
leprae. It was also found to be essential for polyketide sugar unit
biosynthesis which is a unique pathway of M. leprae. The remaining
6 essential enzymes murC, murD, murE, murF, murG and murY
were found to be essential for Peptidoglycan biosynthesis. It is
noteworthy that all these 6 enzymes belong to the same family. This
particular pathway, peptidoglycan biosynthesis was analyzed for the
prediction of drug targets.

Peptidoglycan biosynthesis and Mur enzymes
M. leprae posses a multilayered cell envelope which basically
consisted of, from inner to outer layer, a plasma membrane (PM), a
peptidoglycan layer (PG), an electron translucent layer (ETL), and
an irregular electron dense outer layer (OL) []. This bacterial cell
envelope provides strength and rigidity to counteract internal
osmotic pressure, and protection against the environment. The
peptidoglycan layer gives the cell wall its strength, and helps to
maintain the overall shape of the cell. The basic peptidoglycan
structure of both Gram­positive and Gram­negative bacteria is
comprised of a sheet of glycan chains connected by short crosslinking
polypeptides. Biosynthesis of peptidoglycan is a multi­step
process comprising three main stages: 
Formation of UDP­Nacetylmuramic acid (UDPMurNAc) from N­acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc). 

Addition of a short polypeptide chain to the UDPMurNAc. 

Addition of a second N­acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) to the disaccharide­pentapeptide building block and
transport of this unit through the cytoplasmic membrane and incorporation into the growing peptidoglycan layer.



The second step of the petidoglycan biosynthesis was carried out by
four of the mur ligase enzymes MurC, MurD, MurE and MurF.
These four Mur ligases are responsible for the successive additions
of L­alanine, D­glutamate, meso­diaminopimelate or L­lysine, and
D­alanyl­D­alanine to UDP­N­acetylmuramic acid. The final step in
the formation of peptidoglycan was carried out by murG enzyme
(N­acetyl glucosaminyl transferase). This enzyme is peripherally
associated with the inner face of the cytoplasmic membrane.
Therefore, the peptidoglycan subunit is completely assembled
before it traverses the cytoplasmic membrane. Phospho­Nacetylmuramoyl­
pentapeptide­transferase (mraY) is an important
enzyme in murein synthesis. It is responsible for the formation of
the first lipid intermediate of the cell wall peptidoglycan synthesis
[]. As the layer of the bacterial cell wall that confers strength is
the peptidoglycan meshwork if we target murC, murD, murE and
murF which catalyze the addition of a short polypeptide chain to the
UDP­N­acetylmuramic acid (UDPMurNAc), we can easily prevent
the synthesis of bacterial cell wall. Thus, these are excellent
candidates for further exploration.

Conclusion
The availability of full genome sequences and computer­aided
analysis to identify probable antimicrobial drug targets has become
a new trend in pharmacogenomics. The use of a comprehensive set
of unique pathways and enzymes present in these pathways of M.
leprae to identify new drug targets were documented in this study.
We have found peptidoglycan biosynthetic pathway and the six mur
enzymes (murC, murD, murE, murF, murG and murY) involved in
this pathway to be used as potential drug targets. Protein structure
and inhibitors of these important enzymes are not currently
available. Further analysis on the structural studies on these mur
enzymes is believed to provide valuable insights towards the design
of an inhibitor specific to the peptidoglycan biosynthesis of M.
leprae for the treatment of leprosy. The availability of the newer
anti­leprotic drugs in the future would definitely support our present
findings such that there would be a possibility of mur enzymes
which were proposed by us for targeting M. leprae.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We would like to acknowledge Dr. R. Ravishankar and Dr. S.Sivamani for critical reading of the manuscript and for helpful
discussions

Citation:Shanmugam &amp; Natarajan, Bioinformation 4(9): 392-395 (2010)

