Background
Signal transduction pathways in plants are very well developed 
while at the same time they are extremely complex to reveal all 
the cross talks. Out of many signaling pathways involved in 
abiotic and biotic stress response in plants, mitogen activated 
protein kinase (MAPK) cascade is one of the major pathway. 
Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) play central roles in 
the signaling network as terminal components of MAPK 
cascades, which are composed of at least three sequentially 
activated MAPK family modules MAP3Ks (for MAPK kinase 
kinase), MAP2Ks (for MAPK kinase), and MAPKs. The MAPKs 
are known to regulate a myriad of physiological and 
developmental responses such as cell growth, cell 
differentiation, hormone signaling, pathogen infection, 
wounding, drought, low temperature, high salinity etc. 
Although very little is known about MAPK׳s downstream 
targets but despite this gap in our knowledge it is clear that 
MAPKs interact with the transcription factors []. Transcription 
factors are master regulators of gene expression at the 
transcriptional level, and controlling the activity of these factors 
alters the transcriptome of the plant, leading to metabolic and 
phenotypic changes in response to stress. The functional 
analysis of interactions between transcription factors and other 
proteins is very important for elucidating the role of these 
transcriptional regulators in different signaling cascades. Six 
major families of transcription factors involved in plant defense: 
basic leucine zipper containing domain proteins (bZIP), amino
acid sequence WRKYGQK (WRKY), myelocytomatosis related 
proteins (MYC), myeloblastosis related proteins (MYB), 
APETALA2/ ETHYLENE-RESPONSIVE ELEMENT BINDING 
FACTORS (AP2/EREBP), no apical meristem (NAM), 
Arabidopsis transcription activation factor (ATAF) and cup
shaped cotyledon (CUC) (NAC) []. MYB transcription factors 
represent a family of proteins comprising over 131 members in 
Arabidopsis that include the conserved MYB DNA-binding 
domain. MYB proteins regulate transcription by binding to their 
target motifs as MYB/MYB homo- or heterodimers. Members of 
the MYB family have been characterized to various extents in a
diversity of species, and a role in germination, development, 
and responses to stress and hormone treatment [–
]. It is 
difficult to identify the downstream interacting partners or the 
substrates of MAPKs, primarily because MAPK-substrate 
interactions are very transient and unstable. Many experimental 
methods have been developed to study the protein-protein 
interactions including yeast two hybrid systems, affinity 
purification followed by mass spectrometry and the phage 
display libraries, but these methods have its own limitations 
and suffer from high false positive rate []. In order to overcome 
these limitations in silico studies has been carried out. For 
studying protein –protein interactions in silico “Docking” 
strategy is extensively used in mitogen-activate protein kinase 
(MAPK) signaling [–
]. Regulation of protein activity is 
required for functional signaling pathways and metabolism. 
Protein interactions can be regulated by post-translational 
modifications. Protein phosphorylation is one of the most 
common posttranslational modifications in eukaryotic 
organisms and is involved in almost all cell biological processes. 
The phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues 
can affect protein structure, enzymatic activity and subcellular 
localization, interaction with other proteins as well as it is 
crucial in signal transduction []. In eukaryotes MAPKs are 
catalytically inactive in their base state and require 
phosphorylation. The dual-specificity MAP2Ks phosphorylate
MAPKs on both serine/threonine and tyrosine residues in the 
activation loop []. Once activated, MAPKs phosphorylate 
many evolutionarily diverged substrates on serine or threonine 
residues within a minimal S/T-P motif [–
]. To mimic this 
regulation activity we phosphorylated the AtMAPK3 protein at 
threonine (196) and tyrosine (198) residue in TEY motif located 
in the activation loop (T-loop). In an effort to better understand 
the protein-protein interactions, we have generated a protein −
protein network based on docking approach to predict the 
downstream interacting MYB proteins in Arabidopsis with 
AtMAPK3P.

Methodology
The sequences for MYB transcription factors were downloaded 
from DATF (Database of Arabidopsis Transcription factor) 
[] 
and the sequence of Arabidopsis thaliana (AtMAPK3) is 
downloaded from TAIR Arabidopsis genome database 
[] in 
FASTA format. Homology modeling of the AtMAPK3 and MYB 
transcription factors was done with the help of MOE (Molecular 
Operating Environment). For constructing the structures of all, a 
template for homology modeling was searched with PDB search 
Programme of MOE. For each molecule 10 structures were 
generated in the database, out of which the minimized average 
models with maximum score, lowest E-value and with a cut off 
sequence identity of &lt; 40% were selected. Structure of 
AtMAPK3 was phosphorylated (AtMAPK3P) with MOE as 
phosphorylation is essential for its enzymatic activity. The final 
structures were done after constructing and evaluating 3D 
models. Structural refinement through energy minimization 
model was performed using energy minimization tool keeping
parameter value constant for all structures i.e Gradient: 0.5, 
MMFF94x Forcefield Cutoff: On=8, Off=10 Solvation: 
Dielectric=1, Exterior=80. The minimized structures were finally 
saved as *.pdb files which were validated by Ramachandran 
plot. After structure formation the refined structure of 
phosphorylated AtMAPK3P was taken as receptor and the 
structures of MYB transcription factor family were taken as
ligand for the docking studies on the online patch dock server 
[] which is based on shape complementarity principles and 
results were refined using FireDock on-line server 
[] which 
rearranges the interface side chains and adjusts the relative 
orientation of the molecules. Taking the global energy of the 
interacting MYB transcription factor with MAPK3 reported in 
the literature MYB44 [] and other interacting MYB 
transcription factors [] as a criterion, we identified the 
interacting and non interacting partners of AtMAPK3P. After 
docking, the results were analyzed.

Results &amp; Discussion
Networks of protein–protein interactions provide a framework 
for understanding the biological processes and can give insights 
into the mechanism of diseases. Thus the understanding of 
biological mechanisms requires the knowledge of protein
protein interactions. MAPK is a conserved link between cell 
receptor and cell response and is mediated through gene 
expression which is regulated by transcription factors. To best 
of our knowledge no work in the literature has been done 
regarding the prediction of AtMAPK3P with MYB transcription 
factor family in Arabidopsis. As MYB transcription factor 
reported to play prominent roles in the regulation of the plant 
defense response [–
]. Therefore, the paper focuses on 
identifying the interacting MYB transcription factors with 
AtMAPK3P of Arabidopsis thaliana which is involved in disease 
signaling process through docking approach. Docking studies 
use geometric and steric considerations to fit the two proteins 
(AtMAPK3P and MYB) into a bound complex, the more stable 
the complex structure (less global energy) higher the probability 
of their interaction. The docking studies performed here, 
suggested that out of 131 members of MYB transcription factors, 
41 members are showing interaction with AtMAPK3P while the 
rest are showing non-interaction  (see supplementary 
material). Sorensson et al. (2012) determined the primary 
sequence specificity of Arabidopsis MAPK3 and MAPK6 
substrates []. They indicated a minimal motif sequence L/P
P/X-S/T-P-R/K by random positional peptide library search to 
be the substrate for both the kinases. In an another study 
conducted by Hoehenwarter et al. (2013) they have reported 
other sequences surrounding the minimal motif S/T-P 
(see supplementary material).) through the use of tandem 
metal oxide affinity chromatography to be the MAPK3/6 
substrate []. Using the minimal sequence motif identified in 
the above studies, we have derived a list of potential novel 
substrates (MYB transcription factors) from Arabidopsis thaliana
which also showed interaction with AtMAPK3P through 
docking studies . It could be hypothesized that the 
amino acids surrounding the minimal S/T-P motif contribute to 
MAPK specificity. Those motif sequences are also considered in 
Arabidopsis in which the given hydrophobic residue is being 
replaced by the other hydrophobic residue and so and so for. 
The results of our study clearly revealed the complexity of 
AtMAPK3P interaction with several MYB transcription factors 
triggered in response to diverse upstream stimuli. Number of 
novel candidate AtMAPK3 substrates was predicted and need 
to be confirmed by in vitro kinase assay.

Conclusion
The PPI networks can give insights into the mechanisms of 
diseases and provide a spectrum for the understanding of 
biological processes. Interaction networks can aid in designing 
signal transduction pathway and help to find the disease 
suppressive agents as well as uncover the key genes those are 
responsible for senescence and defense responses against 
pathogens.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors are grateful to sub-DIC, Bioinformatics unit at G.B. 
Pant University of Agriculture and Technology, Pantnagar, 
India for providing computational facility. This study was 
supported by Department of Biotechnology, Govt. of India 
under Programme Mode Support Project.

Citation:Giri et al, Bioinformation 10(12): 721-725 (2014)

