Background
Neem tree (Azadirachta indica A. Juss), native to Indian subcontinent,
has long been recognized for its pesticidal and
medicinal properties[,
]. It has gained the distinction of being
the most researched tree in the World. Extracts of neem fruit,
seeds, seed kernels, twigs, stem bark and root bark have been
shown to possess repellent, anti-feedant, insect growth
regulatory (IGR), anti ovipositional, fecundity and fitness
reducing properties on insects []. Many species of insects are
known to be sensitized by neem formulations [,
]. Diverse
biological properties of neem are due to many secondary
metabolites found in various parts of the tree. Major
constituents of its metabolite pool such as Azadirachtin,
Azadirone, Gedunin, Meliacarpin, Nimbin, Salannin, Vilasinin
groups were proved to be significant pesticidal and/or
medicinal principle []. Crude extracts of neem are found to be
more potent than pure Azadirachtin [] suggesting there are
many more compounds in the neem extract, which even at low
concentration have potentiating abilities.

Searching information of each and every metabolite of neem is a
formidable task as most of the details are scattered over many
forms of literature. The most studied Azadirachtin, has a
complex molecular structure which belongs to
tetranortriterpenoid class and exist in many forms of which
Azadirachtin A and Azadirachtin B () are well
documented []. Both secondary and tertiary hydroxyl groups
and tetrahydrofuran ether are present and their molecular
structures reveal 16 stereogenic centres, 7 of which are
tetrasubstituted making the structure more complex. Similarly,
most of neem secondary metabolites are triterpenoids and have
complex structure. The epimers such as, Nimbidin and
Nimbidinin, Salannolactame I and II, hydroxyazadiradione
alpha and beta, Gedunin and DiepoxyAzadiradione,
Isomargosinolide &amp; Dihydrogedunin, are compounds with
same molecular weight but structurally different which are all
difficult to isolate and identify using conventional methods. To
minimize manual work in searching biologically potent neem
secondary metabolites, we have curated and developed Nee
MDB (
http://www.vmsrfdatabase.org/index.php), providing
information on secondary metabolites from different parts of
neem tree and other details such as their molecular structure,
molecular formula, and physicochemical properties with
appropriate references.

Methodology
The NeeMDB contains information of 250 secondary
metabolites collected from available scientific reports and
published articles. The database is built on MolDB5R, a
collection of fully functional PHP scripts for running a structure
database with search options for text, functional groups, and
structure/substructure/similarity. The “checkmol/matchmol”
utility program [] was used to create a web-based searchable
structure database. Besides standard search capabilities (text,
structure/substructure/similarity), “checkmol/matchmol”
offers a fast additional search option, entirely based on binary
pattern matching, which uses automatically assigned functional
group descriptors, details of which is explained elsewhere 
[].
Minimum software include, Browsers Firefox 10.0 or above or
Chrome 27.0 or above; Java 6 or above.

Utility
The NeeMDB will serve as an open access repository of
published neem secondary metabolite information. One can
easily browse for the target neem principle using the provided
features (), 1) list of 250 neem metabolites, 2) Sort the
list according to either alphabetic or molecular weight (by
clicking on the column heading), 3) Structure (2D and 3D) of the
metabolites, 4) predicted clogP and IUPAC name, 5) Chemical
functional group characterization and 6) Text &amp; Structure based
searching options.

Caveats
The care was taken in proper assignment of stereo bonds and in
performing 2D to 3D structure conversions. However, we urge
users to refer to original publications for any fine details of the
structure. Jmol, an open source JAVA applet is used to view
molecules in 3D. Some browsers recognize Jmol as a threat and
might block the application with following error “Your security
settings have blocked an untrusted application from running”.
The 3D feature can be allowed by setting Java settings to
Medium.

Future development
Even after decades of research on neem, new secondary
metabolites are being explained and added continuously.
Efforts will be made to update the NeeMDB with newly defined
neem metabolites on a regular basis. A simulated Mass
Spectroscopy (MS) profile for all the compounds would help
identify match such profiles in LC/MS profiles of crude neem
extracts. Such a feature would be added in the next update.

This work was supported from Department of Biotechnology
(DBT), Government of India. Authors would like to thank Prof.
Ram Samudrala and his group, University of Washington,
Seattle and Mr. Santhosh Kumar for their valuable suggestions
during the course of this work.

Citation:Hatti et al, Bioinformation 10(5): 314-315 (2014)

Two most prominent forms of Azadirachtin in neem

Front end of NeeMDB: A) Home page; B) Browse option; C) Details page; D) Functional group based searching; E)
Structure based searching of the database.

