Background
Metallothioneins (MT) constitute a super family of low molecular weight, cysteine-rich metalloproteins and 
      metallopeptides responsible for regulating the intracellular supply of biologically essential zinc and copper ions. 
      They have role in protecting cells from the deleterious effects of  high concentration metal ions. [] MT is now known to occur in all animal phyla examined so far as well as 
      in certain fungi, plants and cyanobacteria. The function of MT is to detoxify non-essential metals such as mercury,
      cadmium and essential metals such as zinc and copper. MT is generally induced during stress conditions. 
      [] Hence, identification of MT from tissues/animal models is  very 
      important during analysis. Here, we describe a method for the identification of metallothionein proteins using expert 
      system. 

An expert system is a set of  computer programs that mimic a human expert. [
      ] Expert system has been used for the identification of proteins using mass spectrometry 
      in peptide mapping by ProFound. [] It has 
      also been used for detecting the protein domain structure in sequence [] 
      and for the prediction of protein localization sites in Gram-negative bacteria.
      [] Classification and characterization of proteins are generally 
      laborious dealing with large datasets and experimentations. [] 
      Here, we describe a framework using expert system developed from a set of physical and chemical properties of known proteins, 
      especially MT. This procedure utilizes knowledge organized as “IF-THEN”  rules for metallothionein protein. 
      This methodology finds application in protein recovery, isolation and detection of proteins.

Methodology
The physical and chemical characteristics of MT proteins were used in the development of a rapid identification 
      system in silico. These characteristics were derived based on the experiments conducted using animal models 
      (wistar rats).
      Different groups of animals were exposed to different concentrations of heavy metals like Cr(VI), Cd, Zn and Hg. 
      Tissue samples containing MT were isolated from various organs after a series of centrifugation steps with alcohol extraction 
      and purified by Ion exchange followed by Gel filtration chromatography. Purified MT was further subjected for the estimation
      of metal content, molecular weight and non-aromatic amino acid content using atomic absorption spectro-photometry, SDS-PAGE 
      and Bradford assay, respectively. The derived characteristics from experimental results were divided into a set of rules.
      These rules include, (1) protein with low molecular weight / high molecular weight, (2) proteins with metal content / without 
      metal content, (3) aromatic amino acids / without aromatic amino acids and (4) sulphur content / without sulphur content. 
      The derived rules at every step were trained in an expert system (ID3 algorithm) as described elsewhere. 
      [­]A minimum number of rules were selected (each rule is a series of conditions 
      consisting of attributes and value pairs, followed by a single conclusion that contains the class and the corresponding 
      class value) using human expertise to maximize true positive identification. The rules were then formulated into an 
      IF ― THEN ― ELSE algorithm and translated into VISUAL BASIC language statements. Thus a software solution is proposed for 
      the identification of MT during protein recovery. The methodology for the identification of MT is illustrated in 
      .
      

Limitation
Expert systems are useful tools for the identification of MT during protein characterization. Here, we propose the 
      utilization of expert system for the identification of MT from a mixture of unknown proteins during a series of purification 
      steps. A pilot development shows that the procedure is successful in identifying proteins with high specificity towards 
      low or very low molecular weight components. The major limitation in the use of expert system is the need to train specific 
      systems using specific sets of rules. This requires domain expert regarding the protein of interest. In other words, this 
      procedure cannot help in the identification of unknown proteins other than metallothionein, unless the methodology is modified 
      for other proteins.

The authors are grateful to Director, IICT for providing financial assistance.

Figures and Tables
Identification of MT proteins. The rules are given in boxes


      Citation:Praveen
      et al.,Bioinformation, 1(1), 14-15 (2005)

