Background
The pathological events involved in Cerebral ischemia (CI)
include oxygen-glucose deprivation [], inflammation 
[],
leukocyte infiltration, calcium overload and glutamate
excitotoxicity that culminates in mitochondrial oxidative stress,
apoptosis and neuronal cell death []. Hyperactivation of
cyclooxygenase (COX) -1 and COX-2, which are constitutively
expressed in brain, following CI increases the production of
prostaglandins (PGs). PGs are further processed to produce
several reactive oxygen species (ROS) including ȮH radicals.
These molecules exaggerate the inflammatory cascade leading
to neuronal demise []. In addition to COX, activation of
aquaporin-4 (AQ-4), the most common water channel of the
brain, has been reported in CI, which leads to influx of water in
the brain thereby causing brain edema [,
]. AQ-4 is thus
regarded as a vital drug target against CI [,
]. Genetic
deletion of AQ-4 has been found to prevent brain edema in CI
[]. Acid-sensing ion channel-1a (ASIC-1a), activation of which
causes calcium overload into the neurons thereby eliciting
excitotoxicity and acidotoxicity [], is another target for
preventing neurodegeneration in CI.

Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are known
to exert their effect by inhibiting both COX-1 and COX-2 with
varying affinities [], and therefore are among the most
prescribed drugs for the treatment of inflammation and pain
across the world. Several studies have reported the use of COX
inhibitors (like nimesulide, aspirin) for the effective treatment
of CI [] and suggested that these inhibitors posses
neuroprotective effect in addition to anti-inflammatory effect
[]. Piroxicam - which is also an NSAID - has been in use in
clinics to treat rheumatoid arthritis, musculoskeletal disorders
and postoperative pain. It was also reported that piroxicam
was more effective than other NSAIDs such as ibuprofen or
aspirin in preventing vascular abnormalities 
[]. We
previously reported that piroxicam can potentially inhibit
matrix metalloproteinase 2/9 [] and NMDA receptor 
[].
However, the binding affinity and the interaction of piroxicam
and the other two popular NSAIDs (Aspirin and Nimesulide)
with COXs, AQ-4 and ASIC-1a, and its possible role in
preventing neurodegeneration associated with CI are not yet
reported. We performed a comparative study on inhibition of
these receptors by the three NSAIDs.

Methodology
The Receptors:
The 3-D structures of COX-1, COX-2, Aquaporin-4 and ASIC-
1a were downloaded from Protein Data bank (http://www.rcsb.org /pdb) 
in .pdb format. We searched for 3-D
structures of the receptors, and have selected one best fit
structure of each based on the completeness of the structure,
bound ligand and the resolution.

The Ligands:
The structures of Aspirin, Nimesulide, Piroxicam and
Arachidonic acid (AA) were downloaded from NCBI
PubChem Compounds (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov /pccompound) 
in .sdf format. The structures of ethoxolamide
and hydroxamic acid were available with the respective
receptors − AQ-4 and ASIC-1a respectively, and were used for
reference of binding site and comparison of inhibitory
potential, while AA - the natural substrate of COXs − was used
for the same purpose in case of COXs.

Molecular Docking:
Flips, rotations and protonations in the receptor molecules
were corrected before docking by using FlexX, following
Mazumder et al. []. The enzymes were docked using FlexX
with their natural substrate and/or known inhibitors as well as
with the NSAIDs under investigation. Known inhibitors of the
receptors were used for reference of binding sites; and amino
acids within a region of 20Å were included in the simulation
following Mazumder and Borah []. The best poses, in terms
of free energy of binding, were compared following
Mazumder et al. [,
].

Results
Interactions of ligands with COX-1: A total of 2 hydrogen
bonds and 19 weak interactions are being formed between AA
and COX-1. Aspirin forms 2 hydrogen bonds and 3 weak
interactions; nimesulide forms 3 hydrogen bonds and 6 weak
interactions (Supplementary ) while piroxicam forms
2 hydrogen bonds and 8 weak interactions ().

Interactions of ligands with COX-2: AA forms 1 hydrogen
bond and 13 weak interactions with COX-2; aspirin forms two
hydrogen bonds and five weak interactions; nimesulide forms
four hydrogen bonds and seven weak interactions
(Supplementary ); while piroxicam forms six
hydrogen bonds and eight weak interactions ().

Interactions of Aquaporin-4: With the inhibitor ethoxolamide,
AQ-4 forms 2 hydrogen bonds and 2 weak interactions; with
aspirin, it forms 1 hydrogen bond and 3 weak interactions;
with nimesulide, 1 hydrogen bond and 5 weak interactions are
formed (Supplementary ); while with piroxicam, 2
hydrogen bonds and 3 weak interactions ().

Interactions of ligands with ASIC-1a: The ASIC-1a inhibitor −
sinomenine − forms 3 hydrogen bonds and 4 weak interactions
with the receptor; aspirin forms 4 hydrogen bonds and 3 weak
interactions; nimesulide forms 2 hydrogen bonds and 3 weak
interactions (Supplementary ); while piroxicam forms
2 hydrogen bonds and 6 weak interactions ().

Inhibition of the receptor activities:
From our study, we find that piroxicam has highest free
energy of binding with both COX-1 and COX-2 as well as with
Aquaporin −4 as compared to the other NSAIDs in question
and the natural substrate AA. In case of ASIC-1a, aspirin
shows highest free energy of binding and Piroxicam has the
second highest score  (see supplementary material).
When a ligand binds with the active site of a receptor with
higher free energy of binding as compared to the natural
substrate and/or other inhibitors, the activity of the receptor is
inhibited [,
].

Discussion
From our study, we find that the active site residues of COX-1
and COX-2 with which piroxicam interacts are those which
were reported to be responsible for catalytic activity of COX-1
[] and COX-2 
[]. The catalytic domain of COX-1 and COX-
2 comprises of the residues 117-587 [] with which piroxicam,
aspirin and nimesulide have been found to interact directly
(, Supplementary 
 (see supplementary
material)). This suggests that the binding sites are similar as
reported for other drugs, thereby bringing about similar mode
of inhibition. The finding that piroxicam can potentially inhibit
both COX-1 and COX-2; and has higher affinity for both as
compared to nimesulide and aspirin is attributed to the
presence of more number of interacting groups in piroxicam.
Although, aspirin and piroxicam form same number of
hydrogen bonds, piroxicam forms more number of weak
interactions with COX-1 (; supplementary 
 (see supplementary material)); while forming hydrogen bonds
and weak interactions with more number of residues of COX-2
() than the other two NSAIDs shown in
supplementary  (see Supplementary material),
thereby showing greatest affinity for both COX-1 and COX-2,
and potentially interacting with the residues in the receptor
which are involved in catalytic activity []. As aspirin is a
smaller molecule, it showed lowest affinity and lesser
interactions with both COXs (supplementary  (see
supplementary material)). Thus, it may be concluded that
piroxicam - by virtue of its larger size and more interacting
groups - can interact more efficiently with COXs than aspirin
and nimesulide.

Our finding that piroxicam has better ability to inhibit AQ-4
and ASIC-1a, compared to the other NSAIDs (except for
Aspirin with ASIC-1a), is of immense importance, since these
channels are known to be associated with the pathophysiology
of CI [,
]. Similar to the AQ-4 inhibitor- acetazolamide 
[]
(supplementary  (see supplementary material)),
piroxicam forms hydrogen bonds and weak interactions. With
ASIC-1a, aspirin shows a bit more affinity but piroxicam
shows more affinity than the others, including sinomenine
(Supplementary  (see supplementary material)) 
[].
While our study confirms the findings of Bhattacharya et al.
[] who previously reported inhibition of AQ-4 and ASIC-1a
by Piroxicam, we report for the first time a comparative study
of inhibition of these receptors by the three NSAIDs. We also
report that piroxicam has better ability to inhibit both COX-1
and COX-2, AQ-4 and ASIC-1a ( (see supplementary
material), and the mode of inhibition of the receptors is similar
to their known inhibitors involving same residues. Thus our
findings elucidated a novel mechanism of neuroprotection in
CI by piroxicam as compared to other NSAIDs. Therefore,
piroxicam may be a drug of choice to counter
neurodegeneration in CI ().

Conclusion
Our study confirms that piroxicam may confer
neuroprotection by multiple mechanisms, owing to its unique
property − unlike other NSAIDs - to prevent brain edema and
acidotoxicity, in addition to inflammation; and thus may be the
drug of choice to prevent neurodegeneration in CI ().
In addition, as the intrinsic causes of most of the
neurodegenerative disorders are neuroinflammation, oxidative
stress, acidotoxicity and excitotoxicity; piroxicam may be a
potential drug in these conditions as well. Since CI has become
a major global health issue, our finding is of immense
significance.

Author׳s Contribution
MKM performed the molecular docking and contributed to the
acquisition, assessment and interpretation of data, and drafting
the MS. AB contributed to the overall design and conception of
idea, and final approval of the MS.

Conflict of interest
None declared.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We thank the Bioinformatics Centre, Assam University, Silchar
(INDIA) for software (under DBT-BIF) and e-journal (under
DBT-DeLCON) facilities. MKM is recipient of Maulana Azad
National Senior Research Fellowship (MAN-SRF) from
University Grants Commission (Govt. of India).

Citation:Mazumder &amp; Borah, Bioinformation 11(4): 217-222 (2015)

Docking pose of Piroxicam with (A) COX-1; (B) COX-
2; (C) AQ-4 and (D) ASIC-1a, developed using FlexX. The
dotted lines represent hydrogen bonds formed between the
respective ligands and the receptors; the green lines represent
weak interactions. Docking scores (free energy of binding), in
kcal/mol, for each are shown against respective poses.

Different pathways leading to neurodegeneration in CI and the differential role of aspirin, nimesulide and piroxicam in
neuroprotection. CI induces expression and activation of COX-1, COX-2, AQ-4 and ASIC-1a. Although Aspirin and Nimesulide are
inhibitors of COXs, Piroxicam is a better inhibitor of all the four receptors and thus will provide more neuroprotection in CI. There
is no report of the inhibition of AQ-4 by Nimesulide and Aspirin, and the present study revealed weaker inhibition (denoted by
dotted lines) of the receptors by the two drugs. Thus, Piroxicam is the most potent drug in preventing neurodegeneration in CI ,
owing to its multi-modal action.

