Background
Thermophiles provide comprehensive physiological,
biochemical and molecular insights into the biology of
microbial life at high temperature []. Hyperthermophiles grow
optimally above 65°C, thermophiles have optimal growth
temperature (OGT) between 45 to 65°C while mesophliles grow
well below 55°C (OGT 37°C) []. Possible relation between OGT
of the organisms and nucleotide content of their genomes 
[,
,
,
] and specific trends in amino acid composition 
[,
,
] has
widely been worked out as signatures for thermophilicity.
Genomic evidences for thermal adaptations suggest a positive
correlation between G+C content and OGT because G:C pair is
more stable than A:T but, there are contradictions too 
[]. The
composition of purine/pyrimidine dinucleotides is shown to
correlate linearly with the OGT in Archaea []. Increase in the
purine (A+G) load index in the genomes of thermophilic
bacteria [] 
represents possible primary factor of adaptation
mechanism. Several other identified factors for the thermal
adaptations in the organisms include high core hydrophobicity
[], 
high secondary structure propensity and packing density
[,
], increase in van der Waals interactions in thermophilic
proteins [], 
ionic interactions [], high content of disulphide
bonding [,
], 
hydrogen bonding [], increase in Glu (E)
and Lys (K) and decrease in Gln (Q) and His (H) residues 
[].
Although genomic information facilitates the study of
thermophily in the prokaryotes and determines thermostability
at proteome level [], the central issue lies in finding out the
adaptive strategy of nucleic acid molecules towards different
OGTs [].

Despite significant efforts, compositional biases representing
most definitive signatures of thermophilic adaptations in
genomes and proteomes still remain elusive []. Thermophilic
adaptations based on nucleotide biases are largely governed at
the level of amino acid composition but additional adaptation
in DNA sequence at the level of high-order correlation in
nucleotides is inferred in prokaryotes using codon usage
analysis [] has also been suggested 
[]. While thoroughly
analysing Thermosynechococcus elongatus BP-1, a thermophilic
unicellular rod-shaped cyanobacterium (OGT 55°C) inhabiting
hot springs and comparing the same with 39 other
cyanobacteria for whom whole genome sequences are available
(NCBI, Genome database, May 2012), we found different levels
of correlations among physical OGT, nucleotide and amino acid
composition and codon biases. We discussed the relation of the
observed pattern at nucleotide, proteome and amino acid level
with the physical growth of T. elongatus and trends that
appeared after comparative genomic analysis with other
cyanobacterial organisms to find out determinants for the
thermophilic or mesophilic behavior.

Methodology
Sequences:
Out of 42 complete genome sequences available for
cyanobacteria (NCBI Genome, Apr. 2012), 40 sequences were
taken for the study. For Arthospira platensis NIES-39 sequencing
is incomplete and only one out of two sequences available for
Synechocystis sp. PCC6803 was taken. Complete genome,
protein and rRNA sequences were downloaded from NCBI for
each of the 40 genomes  (see supplementary material).
OGT of the organisms was obtained from the available
literature.

DAMBE version 5.2.73 [] was used for counting number of
individual nucleotides (A, T, G, C) in each of the 40 genomes.
PERL scripts were used to calculate the composition of different
combination of dinucleotides [YR (TA, TG, CA, CG), RY (AT,
AC, GT, GC), YY (TT, CC, TC, CT) and RR (AA, GG, AG, GA)].
J2 Index is the subtraction of the frequency of all combinations
of YR (TA,TG, CA,CG) and RY (AT, AC, GT, GC) from that of
all YY (TT, CC, TC, CT) and RR (AA, GG, AG, GA)
combinations [].

The index was calculated by the following formula: J2 index = Σ
(FYY + FRR – FYR –FRY). Total number of particular codons in the
genome and relative synonymous codon usage (RSCU) was
calculated through CUSP from EMBOSS package
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/emboss/).

The relationship between G+C content of RNA and OGT (OGTRNA)
was expressed by the equation - OGT-RNA= 2.91× (G+C)
-103; Where, OGT-RNA is the OGT estimated in degree Celsius
(°C) and G+C is the percentage of guanine and cytosine in 16S
rRNA [].

Percent composition and total number of each amino acid in the
proteome was calculated with the help of PERL script. The
difference between charged (Lys, Arg, Asp, Glu) and polar-noncharged
amino acid (Asn, Gln, Ser, Thr) i.e. CvP-bias and
E+K/Q+H ratio in the proteome was calculated.

Results &amp; Discussion
Analysis of genomes:
All 40 genomes varied in size from 1.44 Mb (Cyanobacterium
UCYN-A) to 9.04 Mb (Nostoc punctiforme PCC 73102). Genomic
GC content varied from 30.8% (Prochlorococcus marinus subsp.
pastoris CCMP1986 and P. marinus MIT 9515) to 62 %
(Gloeobacter violaceous PCC 7421). In cyanobacterial genomes,
number of CDS (coding sequences) vary from 1199
(Cyanobacterium UCYN-A) to 6312 (Microcystis aeruginosa
NIES-843) ().

Out of these 40 cyanobacteria, except T. elongatus, two other
cyanobacteria Synechococcus sp. JA-2-3B'a(2-13) (OGT 50 to
55°C) [] and 
Synechococcus sp. JA-3-3Ab (OGT 50 to 60°C) 
[]
are also reported as thermophiles while rest of 37 are
mesophiles. Thermophiles have shown higher proportion of
G+C that varied from 30 to 60% or more, irrespective of their
behaviour []. 
The genomic GC content in T. elongatus is 53.9%
while over-all GC content of rRNA operon is 55.15% 

(see supplementary material). In comparison to other two
thermophilic cyanobacteria that showed higher GC content i.e.
58.5% (Synechococcus sp. JA-2-3B'a(2-13) and 60.2%
(Synechococcus sp. JA-3-3Ab) GC content of T. elongatus seems to
favour mesophilic behaviour.

Purine load is a preferred index for thermophiles with low GC
content like T. elongatus but this is uncommon in nonthermophilic
organisms []. Purine load index i.e. the
concentration of A+G is known to exhibit highest correlation
with OGT and represents a primary adaptation mechanism to
thermophily []. In contrast to other thermophilic cyanobacteria
that showed nearly similar purine and pyrimidine nucleotides,
T. elongatus showed no biasness towards purine but had higher
pyrimidine (51%) than purine (49%) content  (see
supplementary material). This organism, therefore, neither
strongly favours GC bias nor nucleotide bias for its
thermophilic character.

Combination of purine (R)/pyrimidine (Y) dinucleotide
composition is shown to correlate linearly with the OGT among
thermophilic Archaea []. A higher J2 index is considered as
important criteria for hyperthermophiles [] and a positive J2
value is reported for the sequences of all the thermophiles,
while negative value represented mesophiles []. A positive J2
index ranging from 0.003599 (Gloeobacter violaceus PCC 7421) to
0.148216 (P. marinus MIT 9301) was calculated for all the
cyanobacteria studied except Synechococcus sp. RCC307 (J2 index
-0.00142)  (see supplementary material). Among
thermophilic cyanobacteria under study, J2 index calculated to
be the least for T. elongatus (0.046) while Synechococcus sp. JA-3-
3Ab and Synechococcus sp. JA-2-3B'a(2-13) showed J2 index
value as 0.079 and 0.083, respectively. It is suggested that for the
thermophiles, J2 value should be positive whereas for
mesophiles, a negative value is recommended []. Although, T.
elongatus showed a positive value (0.046) for J2 index, this
criterion is insufficient to establish this organism as mesophile
or thermophile because, a high J2 index value is important but
not a sufficient criterion for thermophilc behaviour [].

rRNA analysis:
Significant correlation between G+C content of structural RNAs
(rather than entire genome) and OGT [] along with an
additional preference for purine rich RNA (particularly adenine
as compared to guanine in t-RNA and r-RNA but not in m-
RNA) is reported in thermophiles []. Showing thermophilic
tendency, T. elongatus uses purines more frequently than
pyrimidine for both tRNA and rRNA but prefer guanine over
adenine that further reflects mesophilic nature. While
considering distribution of individual nucleotides i.e. A, T, G, C
in 16S rRNA across all cyanobacteria, we identified that purine
content is higher than pyrimidine in all of them where G
occupied the maximum percentage and T the minimum.
However, for A and C, there is different trend for thermophiles
and mesophiles. Among thermophilic cyanobacteria (including
T. elongatus) maximum percent content in rRNA is of C after G,
whereas for mesophilic cyanobacteria it is for A. Comparative
analysis of T. elongatus rRNA GC content (55.15%) with Bacillus-related
mesophilic species (in which it varied from 52.7 to 54.4%
in rRNA GC content and 42 to 58°C in growth temperatures)
[] showed behavioural similarity. But, significant difference is
observed when we compare the genomic G+C content of T.
elongatus (53%) and Bacillus-related mesophilic species (35.3-
43.7%) in relation to the OGT. On the basis of 16S rRNA GC
content,calculated OGT for T. elongatus was 57.25 °C and this
correlated with the physical growth temperature of this
organism. More or less, the same is reflected by the GC content
of rRNA (52.7-54.4%) in Bacillus-related mesophilic species,
OGT of which lies in the range of 42-58°C and the organism is a
mesophile.

Analysis of protein content:
In organisms, enhanced thermostability reflected specific trend
of their amino acid composition [,
,
] and that too,
especially in the increased fraction of charged residues 
[,
]
and/or enhanced content of hydrophobic residues []. We
examined difference between charged (Lys, Arg, Asp, Glu) and
polar non-charged amino acids (Asn, Gln, Ser, Thr) which were
considered as a characteristic signature of thermophilic
microorganisms []. T. elongatus, along-with other 39
cyanobacteria under study, did not show any preference for
charged amino acids and there is no significant difference
between charged and polar amino acids across all the
cyanobacteria. Charged amino acids occupy 20%, polar-noncharged
19.3% and others 60.7% of entire proteome ()
and therefore, significant difference between charged and noncharged
amino acids does not exist in T. elongatus ().

CvP bias, the ratio of charged (Lys, Arg, Asp, Glu) and polar
non-charged amino acids (Asn, Gln, Ser, Thr) is an important
signature and a global characteristic of all thermophiles
(OGT&gt;55°C) in which it remains markedly higher than the
mesophilic organisms []. Among all cyanobacteria, Gloeobacter
violaceus PCC 7421 showed highest value for CvP bias i.e. 3.83.
Synechococcus sp. JA-3-3Ab (2.713) and Synechococcus sp. JA-2-
3B'a(2-13) (2.06) also have a higher value for CvP along with
some other strains of P. marinus but T. elongatus showed a small
CvP bias value of 0.68 that establishes a mesophilic life style for
this cyanobacteria. The ratio of Glu (E) +Lys (K)/Gln (Q) +His
(H) for T. elongatus proteome is calculated to be 1.12 that again
indicates mesophilic behaviour. Other two thermophiles also
show quite similar but comparatively higher value. Some
strains of P. marinus showed higher value. In T. elongatus
genome, 30 genes are predicted to be responsible for
thermophily. On considering each gene (and their protein
products) individually, similar results for CvP bias as of entire
proteome except for three proteins namely chaperonin2,
chaperonin GroEL and chaperonin GroES (4.2, 5.27 and 9.5
respectively) were found. Chaperonins are potentially
thermostable proteins that are expected to favour thermophilic
behaviour in organisms [].

Total fraction of the universal set of amino acids (Ile, Val. Tyr,
Trp, Arg, Glu, Leu [IVYWREL]) in the proteome is considered
to correlate with OGT []. In T. elongatus proteome, the
fractional composition of the universal set of amino acids
(IVYWREL) is 41.56%. Similar distribution of IVYWREL is
observed across all the cyanobacteria. In comparison to
mesophiles, thermophiles have significantly higher content of
Val and Glu than Gln and Thr [] along with the reduced
frequency of His and Gln. No significant change is observed in
the distribution of Val and Glu across meso- and thermophilic
cyanobacteria. Leu is in high proportion (11.97%) in the
proteome in terms of amino acid composition but the
composition of His is only 2.2%. Across all the cyanobacteria
under study, Leu occupies the largest proportion whereas Cys
occupies the least and there remains no exception. These results
indicated a thermophilic pattern for His only but a good
proportion of Gln (5.76%) and Thr (5.48%) along with the low
fraction of IVYWREL indicated mesophilic behaviour for T.
elongatus
 (see supplementary material). Similarly,
among the amino acids Glu, Arg, Tyr, Asp and Lys that are
reported to be abundant in thermophiles [,
], T. elongatus
proteome contains high proportion of Glu (5.84%) and Arg
(6.61%) but other amino acids are poorly contained ().

Codon usage pattern:
Synonymous codon usage pattern in thermophilic prokaryotes
is different from mesophiles and the difference is a result of
natural selection linked to thermophily. Moreover, this
phenomenon is not restricted to specific set of genes and affects
all of the genes within the genome []. Synonymous codon
usage pattern in T. elongatus genome does not show any
distinguishable thermophilic pattern. Except for proline and
termination codons, T. elongatus shows synonymous codon
usage pattern which is expected for mesophiles and not for
thermophiles.

Thermophilic prokaryotes characteristically include increased
usage of AGR codons for arginine, ATA for isoleucine and
decreased usage of CGN for arginine [,
,
]. For Arg, T.
elongatus preferentially uses CGC out of the 6 codons available
along with other two thermophilic cyanobacteria. For
isoleucine, ATC is used by both Synechococcus sp. JA-3-3Ab and
Synechococcus sp. JA-2-3B'a(2-13) whereas T. elongatus uses ATT
which resembles mesophilic cyanobacteria. Biasness for
arginine codon family containing the largest number of codons
[] in organisms is a signature of thermophiles and
hyperthermophiles that represent important implications to
thermostability []. T. elongatus preferentially uses CGC not
only in arginine codon family but also in the entire genome
followed by CGG. This is supported by the relative
synonymous codon usage (RSCU) value for CGC which is
highest followed by CGG and CGU in the entire genome. These
results contradict with the fact that thermophiles and
hyperthermophiles tend to employ AGR to encode arginine.
Preferential usage of AGR for arginine implies positive error
minimization and contributes to avoid mutations that harm
protein thermostability and represent alternative mechanism of
adaptation to proteins []. In T. elongatus, AGA and AGG are
least used for Arg in the entire genome reflecting a mesophilic
character of the genome because encoding for arginine by CGT
and CGC are positive indicators for mesophiles []. Similar
codon usage pattern was observed when all the 30 genes
predicted for thermophily were considered individually (data
not shown).

Entire proteome composition of T. elongatus showed that out of
the total number of Leu, maximum is encoded by CUG codons.
Thermophiles prefer GGR over GGY and vice-versa and this
pattern is characteristically established for glycine (Gly) and
arginine (Arg) []. It is observed that maximum cyanobacteria,
including thermophiles preferentially use GGY over GGR. Also
among GGY, GGC is more commonly used than GGT by
thermophilic cyanobacteria. Like other mesophilic
cyanobacteria and previous studies, preferences of T. elongatus
genome for GGY and CGY codons for Gly and Arg again
indicated mesophilic behaviour of the organism (data not
shown).

A preference for specific nucleotides at 3rd position of codons of
some amino acids has been shown by some thermophilic
organisms []. Given a synonymous choice between T and C
(Asn, Asp, Cys, His, Phe, Tyr) at 3rd position, thermophiles
systematically favour C-ending codons. Similar trend was also
followed by the two thermophilic cyanobacteria (with an
exception for phenylalanine). However, T. elongatus prefers Tending
codons instead of C-ending codons. When the choice at
3rd position is between A and G (Gln, Glu, Lys), G-ending
codons are preferentially favoured []. Synechococcus sp. JA-3-
3Ab and Synechococcus sp. JA-2-3B'a(2-13), like other
thermophiles, show expected pattern but T. elongatus
preferentially uses A-ending codons for these amino acids as is
evident for mesophilic cyanobacteria. Among codons ending
with pyrimidine, T-ending codons are most widely used across
all mesophilic cyanobacteria including T. elongatus whereas
Synechococcus sp. JA-3-3Ab and Synechococcus sp. JA-2-3B'a
prefer C-ending codons as expected for thermophiles. G-ending
codons also share a significant proportion among two
thermophilic cyanobacteria whereas for T. elongatus and other
mesophiles studied, they are the least used codons (data not
shown). For termination codons, T. elongatus favours G-ending
codons like thermophiles but mesophiles prefer A-ending
termination codons. This characteristic reflects thermophilic
behaviour of T. elongatus.

Thermal adaptations in T. elongatus:
Potential adaptations to high temperatures in thermophilic
organisms lie in their highly efficient and specialized DNA
repair systems []. A specific DNA repair system largely
confined to thermophiles is known to be regulated by a
pathway consisting of more than 20 genes []. This pathway is
missing in T. elongatus genome. Even no gene of T. elongatus
showed significant similarity to the genes conferring the DNA
repair system. The genes encoding fatty acid desaturases (desA,
desB, desC) are missing reflecting the absence of highly
unsaturated fatty acids in lipids composition which is
characteristic of thermophiles []. Genes for replication,
recombination and repair (as per COG classification) occupy a
major composition (6.7049%) in T. elongatus genome along with
a significant composition of genes involved in posttranslational
modification, protein turnover, chaperones (4.0158%) showing
thermal adaptation mechanisms.

Conclusion
T. elongatus requires high temperature (55°C) for physical
growth []. To a certain extent, genomic determinants but
majority of proteomic determinants indicated mesophilic
behavior of this organism with an OGT of (38.41°C) and that
too, was supported by various reports [,
,
]. In
correspondence analysis performed for the proteomes of 279
prokaryotes, T. elongatus occupies the position under a large
group of mesophiles []. Phylogenetically, T. elongatus is again
found to be closely related to a large group of mesophiles
suggesting a recent gain of thermophily by this organism [].
Thermophilic adaptation mechanisms such as the presence of
additional genes for heat-shock proteins [], 28 copies of group
II introns comprising of almost 1.3% of the whole genome 
[,
], and heat- induced 
groEL2 gene [] gained by T. elongatus
over the time has made it comfortable in mesothermophilic
conditions. Additional features like presence of widely
temperature compensated endogenous circadian rhythm is
known in mesophilic organisms [] and presumptive
counterparts of all the genes involved in circadian clock system
have also been identified in T. elongatus []. Adaptation to a
new environment often necessitates a coordinated change in the
genomic organization, rather than independent modifications of
individual components []. Our results indicated that among
the cyanobacteria, majority of genomic and proteomic
determinants put T. elongatus very close to the mesophiles and
the whole genome of this organism represents continuous gain
of mesophilic rather than thermophilic behavior.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Financial support from Indian Council of Agricultural Research,
India in the form of “National Agricultural Innovation Project”
entitled “Establishment of National Agricultural Bioinformatics
Grid” (NABG) is gratefully acknowledged.

Citation:Prabha et al, Bioinformation 9(6): 299-308 (2013)

Distribution of charged amino acids (Asp, Glu, Arg,
Lys), polar non-charged amino acids (Asn, Gln, Ser, Thr) and
non-polar amino acids (Gly, Ala, Val. Leu, Ile, Phe, Trp, Tyr,
Pro, Met, Cys, His) in T. elongatus proteome

Distribution of different amino acids in T. elongatus

