Background
Typhoid fever is caused by Salmonella typhi, a Gram-negative
bacterium, which is an obligatory human pathogen []. It has
three outer membrane proteins- OmpC, OmpF and OmpA,
those are good as vaccine candidate []. Among these three,
OmpF, a major general diffusion porin of Salmonella typhi, has
more conserved sequences and higher antigenicity than others
[,
]. In spite of serious health complications, the scientific
knowledge of the epidemiology and ecology of this virus is
limited [,
,
] to design an universal vaccine. Bioinformatics,
especially immunoinformatics, is an emerging field in vaccine
design. The combination experimental and in silico methods
are crucial to solve complex problems such as revealing
immune responses and vaccine design []. Available
bioinformatics tools provide the searching option to scan for
probable epitope candidate from huge sets of protein antigens
which are encoded by complete viral genomes. This
computational vaccine design approach has proven very
effective in fighting against few diseases such as multiple
sclerosis [], malaria 
[], and tumors 
[]. The most crucial job in
this experiment is the identification of HLA ligands and T-cell
epitopes []. Through T-cell epitope prediction tools to
identify allele-specific binding peptides, it is possible to reduce
the number of potential peptides considered as vaccine
candidates. Along with these tools, different types of methods
have been developed for the identification of proteosomal
peptide cleavage sites, major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) binding peptides and transporters associated with
antigen presentation (TAP) molecules [, 
–].

T lymphocytes only recognize processed peptides or antigens
and usually these peptides are presented by antigen presenting
cells in association with HLA molecules. As a result, an epitope
will only able to elicit immune response in human individual if
he or she expressing this particular HLA and capable of
binding with it efficiently []. In addition, over thousands of
different HLA allelic variants have been identified so far 
[].
And specific HLA alleles are prevalent in different ethnic
group. Therefore, binding of predicted epitopes with different
HLA results increased population coverage. It has been found
that as much as 90% population coverage with different ethnic
groups can be obtained by targeting different HLA molecules
[]. Due to the tedious and expensive nature of experimental
screening procedures, computational compound screening has
been pursued extensively in recent years [], which make
ligand-protein interaction more vivid in knowledge before any
expensive wet lab trial.

Methodology
Retrieving the protein sequences:
The sequences of outer membrane protein F (OmpF) of
Salmonella typhi were retrieved from the NCBI protein database
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein/) from different
isolates.

Multiple sequence alignment (MSA):
Retrieved sequences were used as a platform to generate
multiple sequence alignments, which were the basis of finding
the conserved regions of the protein sequences. The MEGA5
software package (www.megasoftware.net) was used to build
the alignment.

T cell epitopes processing prediction:
To evaluate the immunogenicity of the conserved peptide,
different bio-computational tools were employed. In order to
discover the immunogenicity of the conserved peptide, firstly a
reverse immunogenic approach was employed for the
selection of candidate epitopes. The T-cell epitopes from the
conserved peptide were predicted using the NetCTL
(http://tools.immuneepitope.org/stools/netchop/netchop.do) 
prediction method, which is
based on neural network architecture and predicts the epitope
candidates based on the processing of the peptides in vivo. The
threshold was set at 0.50 during analysis. A combined
algorithm integrating MHC class I binding, transporter of
antigenic peptides (TAP) transport efficiency and proteosomal
cleavage prediction was involved to predict a total/overall
score. Based on this overall score the best epitope candidates
were selected for further analysis.

The Immuno Epitope Database (IEDB) MHC-1 binding
prediction tool made the option of using a different prediction
method available. Stabilized Matrix Method-based (SMM)
prediction was used to calculate IC50 values for peptides
binding to specific MHC molecules. Note that all the alleles
were selected and length was set at 9.0 prior to the prediction.
For the selected epitopes a web based tool “Proteosomal
cleavage/TAP transport/MHC class I combined predictor”
was used to predict proteosomal scores, TAP score, processing
score and MHC-1 binding score using the SMM based
prediction method for each individual peptide. The parameters
for immunogenicity detection (TAP score, proteosomal score,
IC50 values) were normalized on a scale of 0 to 1 and were
given a weighted score to prioritize the parameters in order to
determine immunogenicity. The binding energies for HLAepitope
interactions were predicted using the MHC-1 peptide
binding energy predictor tool.

Epitope conservancy analysis:
Epitope conservancy analysis was done with Epitope
Conservancy Analysis of Immuno Epitope Database
(http://tools.immuneepitope.org/tools/conservancy/iedb_input) 
by comparing the conservancy of predicted epitope with
the sequence of Omp F.

Retrieving 3D structure of HLA:
The 3D structure of HLA-C*12:03 (PDB ID: 1EFX) was
downloaded from the Protein Data Bank Database (www.rcsb.org/) 
and visualized in the PYMOL molecular graphics
system. Prior to docking, all the water molecules were
removed from the 3D structure of epitope free HLA-C*12:03.

Designing the 3D epitope structure:
For the docking study, the ESYTDMAPY epitope was chosen
because it showed the maximum interactions with different
HLAs. The 3D structure of ESYTDMAPY was designed using
the PEP-FOLD server: De novo peptide structure prediction
(http://bioserv.rpbs.univ-paris-diderot.fr/PEP-FOLD/).

HLA-epitope binding prediction:
The AutoDock tool from the MGL software package (version
1.5.6) was employed for docking purpose. Both the protein
[HLA-C*12:03] and ligand (epitope ESYTDMAPY) files were
firstly converted to PDBQT format to use them for the docking
study. The grid space for center was set manually to facilitate
the binding of epitope at the binding groove of HLA-C*12:03.

Population coverage:
Population coverage for individual epitope was predicted by
the population coverage tool (
http://tools.immuneepitope.org/ tools/population) from the IEDB analysis resource. The
allele frequency of the interacting alleles was used to measure
the population coverage for the corresponding epitope.

B-cell epitope prediction:
Linear B-cell epitopes were predicted from the given protein
sequence using the B-cell epitope prediction tool from the
IEDB analysis resource (
http://tools.immuneepitope. org/tools/bcell/iedb_input). The Kolaskar and Tongaonkar
antigenicity prediction method was employed for prediction in
which, predictions are based on a table that reflects the
occurrence of amino acid residues in experimentally known
segmental epitopes. This method can predict antigenic
peptides with approximately 75% accuracy.

Results
Identification of evolutionary conserved proteins/regions:
From the output of multiple sequence alignment for Omp F
protein, it has been found that the sequence is conserved over
all of the sequences. But, it's not true for Omp A and Omp C.
That's why we exclude those proteins from out study.

Immunogenicity of conserved peptides:
The NetCTL prediction tool predicted 355 overlapping
potential epitopes from the given sequence, but only 16
potential T-cell epitope candidates were chosen on the basis of
a total score (above 0.5) that was combined result of different
parameters  (see supplementary material). SMM based
IEDB MHC-1 binding prediction tool retrieved 784 possible
MHC-1 allele interactions with the 16 different T-cell epitope
those were selected before. The MHC-1 alleles for which the
epitopes showed higher affinity (IC50&lt;100) were selected for
further analysis  (see supplementary material). Among
the 16 T-cell epitopes, one 9-mer epitope (ESYTDMAPY) was
found those interact with six HLA molecules. Here,
ESYTDMAPY interacts with HLA-C*03:03, HLA-C*12:03,
HLA-C*14:02, HLA-A*25:01, HLA-A*26:01, HLA-B*35:01. No
other T-cell epitope interacted with as many MHC-1 alleles
with as great an affinity as this epitope  (see
supplementary material).

Epitope conservancy analysis:
Epitope conservancy analysis with all of the Omp F protein
sequences from different strains revealed that all 14 out of 16
peptides have a 100% protein sequence match. The results are
summarized in  (see supplementary material).

Molecular docking study of HLA-epitope interaction:
AutoDock Vina predicted nine possible binding models. On
the basis of higher binding energy with HLA-C*12:03, the best
output model for ESYTDMAPY epitope was found to have a
binding energy of -5.4 kcal/mol. The interacting and binding
of HLA-epitope is illustrated in .

Population coverage:
The population coverage for different population is
summarized in  (see supplementary material). And the
graph shows that Europe, South Africa and East Asia have
highest population coverage and it's over 60% ().

Prediction of B-cell epitopes:
The antigenic determinant plot was presented in ; the
x-axis shows sequence position and the y-axis shows antigenic
propensity. Average antigenic propensity of this protein is
1.003. There are 13 antigenic determinants in the sequence and
shown in  (see supplementary material). The average
for the whole protein is above 1.0; all residues above 1.0 are
potentially antigenic.

Conclusion
In vitro and in vivo studies are required to determining the
actual effectiveness of the peptide for mounting an immune
response. Binding chip assay for HLA and peptide would also
be useful to determine the binding affinity of the peptide as a
whole. The best predicted T cell epitope (ESYTDMAPY) is
nonamer and it covers 126 to 134 positions of amino acids. At
the same time, there is a potential B-cell (YGIVYDVESY)
epitope which covers 119 to 128 positions of amino acids. If we
take peptide from 119 to 134 amino acid positions and add
potential molecules to enhance immunogenicity, then it would
be possible to design a universal epitope based vaccine against
Salmonella typhi.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors express sincerest thanks to University Grants
Commission, Agargaon, Dhaka-1207, Bangladesh to support
this project during the fiscal year 2014-15.

Citation:Tanu et al Bioinformation 10(8): 480-486 (2014)

Docking to predict the binding of predicted epitopes
to MHC class I molecule, HLA-C*12:03. Binding of
“ESYTDMAPY” to the binding grooves of the retrieved
structure of HLA-C*12:03 (binding energy: -5.4Kcal/mol). The
yellow colored portion and green portion in both figure (A &amp;
B) represent HLA-C*12:03 molecule and ESYTDMAPY epitope,
respectively.

Population coverage by MHC Class I + II restricted epitopes from outer membrane protein F (OmpF) of Salmonella typhi.
In case of epitopes from Omp F, the maximum coverage was found for the population of Europe, South Africa and East Asia.

Linear B-cell epitope prediction using Kolaskar and
Tongaonkar prediction tool of IEDB. The pick shows above the
threshold corresponding to those sequence position which can
act as B-cell epitope to elicit humoral immune response.

