Background
Expression microarrays allow the evaluation of thousands of
genes simultaneously, but the correct analysis of this amount of
data remains an important challenge and depends on the
particular goals of each study. There are many tools for the
analysis of microarray data. Although a comprehensive analysis
is desired sometimes, the most common is a specific or targeted
analysis. Usually, the first treatment of the microarray data is
data normalization and the extraction of differentially
expressed genes. Both analyses could be easily performed using
software like TM4 or Limma[,
]. Once a differentially expressed
genes matrix is obtained, the next step will be the functional
analysis of these data. There are other programs that help with
this functional analysis like GenMAPP [] or KEGG 
[]. GenMAPP
allows general analyses and gives a list of representative
pathways. KEGG offers the opportunity of downloading lists of
a particular condition like apoptosis, response to stress, cell
cycle, insulin secretion, etc. There is also Gene Ontology (GO)
where some lists of biological processes, molecular function,
and cellular component lists of genes are available[,
].
Sometimes we have a list of interest genes, a condition that our
group is researching about, or a combination of some cellular
processes like Hematopoietic cell lineage and cellular motility.
In any of these cases, the HOMO script here presented helps to
adjust the microarrays results to a specific gene list and so
simplify the subsequent analyses.

HOMO offers a gene specific extraction from a microarray data
table using a gene list that could be obtained from any source or
made by your own. The extraction that does HOMO is easily
handmade when the interest data and the microarray data are
small (about hundreds of registers), but when the microarray
data is extensive (about thousands) this easy step becomes a
trouble. HOMO's goal is to reduce this kind of trouble.

Inputs
The HOMO script asks for two principal inputs. The first one is
a list of words; these could be genes or any other kind of words.
This list must have a word by row. A pathway gene list or a
GO-Term gene list would be good examples of this input. The
second input is a table of microarray results. This kind of table
has one or more columns assigned to gene identifiers, these
could be symbols, or accession numbers, or any other. It is
important that the list of the first input has the same type of
identifier that the second output does. The format for both
inputs must be tab delimited text. HOMO.pl as a perl script
runs in a console and the name of the results table must be
captured complete including the extension of the file.

Output
The principal HOMO's output is an adjusted table. Using the
second input (the microarray data) HOMO extracts all the
registers present in the first input and creates a new data file.
When a file is adjusted, HOMO allows to adjust another file to
the same gene list, so you will be able to adjust many archives
to the same gene list, for example when you are studying a
pathway and you have many different microarrays or a course
time and you need to use the same list for adjusting all the
datasets.

HOMO also calculates a non-repeated gene list and the new
gene list is a secondary output.

Caveat &amp; future development
It is preferable that the microarray data be normalized for the
immediate analysis of the adjusted data. For a future
development, more functions including a selection of datasets
of genes will be added. We are working on a database of
relevant gene lists or datasets involved with isolated interests;
these include Response to Virus gene list, Immune Response
gene list, Motility of tumor cells gene list, Stem cell gene list and
many others. The final goal is to simplify the way to make a
functional analysis of a microarray result.

Citation:Chequer et al, Bioinformation 9(14): 748-749 (2013)

