Background
Presently more than 1/3rd of world population is suffering
from tuberculosis [,
]. Isoniazid (INH) is one of the popular
first line anti-tubercular drugs available for management of
tuberculosis. There is experimental evidence to believe that
INH is a prodrug, either mammalian lactoperoxidase or
Mycobacterial catalase peroxidase (KatG) is required for its
activation []. In the presence of the nicotinamide coenzyme,
the INH oxidation produces the formation of INH-NAD(H)
adducts which are potential competitive inhibitors of the enoylacyl
carrier protein reductase InhA, an INH target in the
biosynthetic pathway for mycolic acids, an important cell wall
biomolecule for the bacteria to survive []. There is
experimental evidence to believe that INH-NAD adduct is a
slow, tight-binding competitive inhibitor of InhA 
[]. With this
experimental evidence it appears that KatG activity is an
absolute requirement for anti-tubercular activity of INH 
[]. But
at the present moment there is experimental evidence to believe
that neither catalase nor peroxidase activities, the two inherent
enzymatic functions of KatG are absolute determinants of
isoniazid resistance at least in in-vitro condition 
[]. There is
one study to show that for the N138S trans-dominant mutant,
the catalase-peroxidase activity is significantly decreased while
the sensitivity to INH is retained []. Therefore, INH inhibits
mycolic acid synthesis by some other way or not needs to be
explored.

Mycolic acid cyclopropane synthase is an important enzyme for
mycolic acid biosynthesis and the known drug target for
thioacetazone, one of the second line antitubercular drugs 
[]. It
is presently known that thioacetazone directly binds with the
mycolic acid cyclopropane synthases but its exact binding site is
presently unknown. It is unknown whether INH inhibits this
enzyme or not. If it is found that INH can bind with this
enzyme that can account for an alternative anti-tuberculosis
activity mechanism even in situations with diminished catalaseperoxidase
activity of KatG.

In this paper we have analyzed binding of thioacetazone and
INH with the active site of mycolic acid cyclopropane synthase
and observed that analogous to thioacetazone, INH also binds
to the active site of the enzyme which can account for its antitubercular
activity even in case of KatG mutant cases with
diminished catalase peroxidase activity.

Methodology
The structures of the receptor, mycolic acid cyclopropane
synthases - CmaA1 and CmaA2 are taken from Protein Data
Bank (PDB) [] having PDB code 1KPG and 1KPI 
[]. The
structures of the drugs – thioacetazone, ethambutol, isoniazid,
amoxycilin are taken from PubChem database 
[]. The
receptor-drug complexes are built by using docking software
GOLD []. The cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) and
didecyldimethylammonium bromide (DDDMAB) located at the
active site of the crystal structure of CmaA1 and CmaA2,
respectively, are considered as reference ligands while Tyr265
and Tyr280 are chosen as one of the active site residues of the
receptor for the docking study. Pictorial representations of the
receptor-drug complexes are done by pymol 
[].

Discussion
The active site of cyclopropane synthase is constituted by
cofactor and substrate binding sites []. Further it is known
that quaternary ammonium ion of substrate is stabilized by
cation-π interaction with receptor molecule []. Thioacetazone
and isoniazid drugs have amino group. We have observed that
amino group of these drugs may interact with Tyr33 of CmaA1
through N-H-π interaction (). N-H-π interaction
plays a significant role in protein-protein and protein-ligand
interactions [,
]. The quaternary ammonium group of CTAB
and primary amino group of thioacetazone and isoniazid are
geometrically oriented in same way at the quaternary
ammonium ion binding region facilitating cation-π and N-H-π
interactions. The long alkyl chain of CTAB makes hydrophobic
interactions with cyclopropane synthase []. The methylphenyl
acetamide and pyridine moieties of thioacetazone and
isoniazid drugs are oriented almost in the same fashion like the
alkyl chain of CTAB at the active site. In case of CmaA2, we
have observed that thioacetazone is interacting through N-H-π
interaction () like DDDMAB but isoniazid has failed to
fit at the active site.

Melamine, which is structurally similar to INH and
diethylamine, a primary aliphatic amine are also considered.
But these ligands are not fitted at the active sites of both CmaA1
and CmaA2. Structural homologues, thioacetazone-sulfinic acid
and thioacetazone-carbodimide are the two metabolites of
thioacetazone. In case of thioacetazone-sulfinic acid the amino
group can also participate in N-H-π interaction with
cyclopropane synthase. However in thioacetazone-carbidimide
the nitrogen in amide group is sp2 hybidised. As a result the
strength of N-H-π interaction is much stronger. So
thioacetazone-carbidimide is much more active than
thioacetazone-sulfinic acid []. Rifampicin, another antitubercular
drug has complex structure in compare to
thioacetazone and isoniazid and polar groups are distributed.
We have also docked rifampicin at this active sites but it is not
fitted there.

In these days INH induced mycolic acid biosynthesis reduction
is a proved fact in tuberculosis bacilli. But there are still
possibilities of unidentified targets of INH other than its known
target []. It is in this context our observed results are
important. We have observed that INH can fit in the manner
analogous to CTAB and thioacetazone at the active site of
CmaA1 (). CTAB is a known ligand for the active site of
CmaA1, an important enzyme for mycolic acid biosynthesis in
the tuberculosis bacteria []. It is possible that binding of INH
if actually happening in reality at the active site of CmaA1, may
inhibit the enzyme. At the present moment there is no
experimental data to support the same but if it is proved to be
true by experimental studies we will discover a yet not
explored target for INH in the context of its anti-tubercular
action which will explain its activity in KatG mutants with no
significant catalase-peroxidase activity.

It is proved by experimental studies that thioacetazone inhibits
mycolic acid biosynthesis by directly acting on the above
enzyme [] 
although the exact binding site is not known. There
is enough possibility that thioacetazone inhibits the enzyme by
binding directly at the active site and that idea is strengthened
by the docking results. In this context it may be noted that here
thioacetazone is observed to be binding at the active site of both
CmaA1 and CmaA2 but INH is fitting only at the active site of
CmaA1. Moreover, the thioacetazone metabolites –
thioacetazone sulfinic acid and thioacetazone carbodimide
which have active anti-tubercular role may also bind at the
active site by N-H-π interaction analogous to thioacetazone 
[].
We also propose for experimental validation of our observed
results with thioacetazone which will unravel the exact binding
site of thioacetazone with CmaA1 and CmaA2. With increasing
burden of tuberculosis throughout the globe experimental
validation of such result is warranted.

RB has done the computational analysis and DB developed the
basic hypothesis. DB acknowledges DST, New Delhi for
financial assistance.

Citation:Banerjee &amp; Bhattacharyya, Bioinformation 8(16): 787-789 (2012)

Interaction of a) Thioacetazone and b) Isoniazid drugs
at the active site of CmaA1 and c) thioacetazone at the active
site of CmaA2 are represented. Three tyrosine residues (in
green colored and labeled) at the active sites, reference ligands
CTAB and DDDMAB (in cyan) and the two drugs are
represented in stick mode while the nitrogen and oxygen atoms
are shown in blue and red color. The receptors are represented
in green cartoon.

