Background
Burgeoning rise in demand for industrial enzymes is
anticipated to touch the mark of $5.1 billion soon. With the
advent of technological advancements, the remarkable
growth in biotechnological use of Xylanases has spurred new
interest in these enzymes [,
]
. Market trends reveal that
xylanase and cellulose takes the major chunk of share
amounting to 20% of the world enzyme market, together with
pectinases []. Xylanases are glycosidases (O-glycoside
hydrolases, EC 3.2.1.x) which degrade the linear
polysaccharide beta-1, 4-xylan into xylose and produced by a
myriad group of microrganisms belonging to varied genera
and species of bacteria, actinomycetes and fungi 
[,,,
].

This group of enzymes has been attracting a lot of attention
in the recent past due to its probable applicability in a
spectrum of industrial processes []. Xylanases are mainly
exploited in the Kraft process for the removal of the lignincarbohydrate
complexes [,,]. Other important processes
where xylanases are used frequently in extraction and
preparation of beverages []; clarification of juices [];
detergents []; generation of protoplast in plant cells [];
production of pharmacologically active polysaccharides for
use as antimicrobial agents [] or antioxidants [];
production of surfactants [] and bioconversion of
lignocellulosic materials to fuels. Broadly xylanases are
classified under two classes: Family 10 (F) and Family 11
(G), based on hydrophobic cluster analysis and sequence
homology [,,]. Xylanases differ in their
physicochemical properties, structures, specific activities,
thermo stability and yields, thus providing a great deal of
choice in their potential usage. In this paper, we report the in
silico analysis and characterization studies on 8 xylanases
from various organisms.

Methodology
Xylanase protein sequences were retrieved from the SWISSPROT,
a public domain protein database [].During the
sequence retrieval process, key word ’Xylanase‘ was used.
The database search yielded 76 xylanase protein sequences.
Sequences representing putative, partial, precursor and
fragment of Xylanase protein were excluded from the study.
Hence, 8 unique proteins were retrieved and considered for
this study (Table 1 in ). The
selected xylanase protein sequences were retrieved in
FASTA format and used for further analysis.

Physico-chemical characterization
Theoretical isoelectric point (pI), molecular weight, total
number of positive and negative residues, extinction
coefficient [], instability index [], aliphatic index []
and grand average hydropathy (GRAVY) [] were
computed using the Expasy’s ProtParam server []
(http://us.expasy.org/tools/protparam.html) (Table 3 in
supplementary material). Amino acid composition of the
protein sequences can reveal their nature; hence, amino acid
composition was also computed (Table 2 in ). PROTSCALE
(http://us.expasy.org/tools/protscale.html) was used to
calculate the number of codons, bulkiness, polarity,
refractivity, recognition factors, hydrophobicity,
transmembrane tendency, percent buried residues, percent
accessible residues, average area buried, average
flexibility, relative mutability and number of amino acids.

Secondary structure prediction
SOPMA [] was employed for calculating the secondary
structural features of the selected target protein sequences
considered for this study (Table 4 in ).

Functional characterization
Disulphide bonds are important in determining the functional
linkages, so, SS bonds were analyzed using the primary
protein sequence data with the help of CYS_REC (Table 7 in
). CYS_REC identifies the positions of
cysteines, total number of cysteines present and computes the
most probable SS bond pattern of pairs in the protein
sequence. Motifs in the considered sequences were scanned
using Motif Search (Table 5 in )
[]. SOSUI server [] was used to predict the
transmembrane tendency of the proteins considered for this
study (Table 6 in ). Hydrophobicity
score and plot was obtained using Kyte and Doolittle method
keeping a window size of 7 ().

Tertiary structure prediction and structure Validation
Since the crystal structures for P35809, Q12603, P26223 and
P48791 are not available, SWISSMODEL [] was used to
model the 3D structure of these proteins based on the best
template. The details of template and the criteria used for
selection are listed in Table 8 in .
No model could be built for P48791 using the first approach
mode of SWISSMODEL. Structure validation tools like
ERRAT [], PROVE [], PROCHECK 
[],
WHATCHECK [] and Verify 3D [] were employed to
evaluate the stereochemistry and quality of the models
(Table 9 in ).

Active site analysis
Possible catalytic sites were assessed and explored applying
CASTp []. Out of many binding sites predicted, active site
was selected on the basis of maximum surface area and
volume. Important residues involved in active sites were
identified and compared for the modeled proteins (Table 10
in ).

Discussion
Amino acid composition determines the fundamental
properties of the enzyme. The amino acid composition of
xylanase sequences is represented in Table 2 (see
). Isoelectric point (pI) is the pH at
which net charge existing on the protein is zero. The pI
values of all protein sequences are in the range of 4.78-8.71
indicating that all considered xylanase sequences are acidic
except P56588 and P48793. The calculated isoelectric point
(pI) will be useful because at pI, solubility is least and
mobility in an electro focusing system is zero. The instability
index which gives clue about the stability of a protein in vitro
can be calculated using equation 1 (see ). All the considered sequences were classified as
stable with value ranging from 13.57 to 37.23 as a value &gt; 40
indicates an unstable protein.

The aliphatic index (AI) which is defined as the relative
volume of a protein occupied by aliphatic side chains is
regarded as a positive factor for the increase of thermal
stability of globular proteins. It can be calculated by equation
2 (see ). Aliphatic index for the
xylanase sequences ranged from 48.71- 87.76. The very high
aliphatic index of all xylanase sequences indicates that these
xylanases may be stable for a wide temperature range. From
the molar extinction coefficient of tyrosine, tryptophan and
cystine (cysteine does not absorb appreciably at wavelengths
&gt;260 nm, while cystine does) at a given wavelength, the
extinction coefficient of the native protein in water can be
computed using equation 3 (see ).
The computed protein concentration and extinction
coefficients help in the quantitative study of protein–protein
and protein–ligand interactions in solution. The Grand
Average hydropathy (GRAVY) value for a peptide or protein
is calculated as the sum of hydropathy values of all the amino
acids, divided by the number of residues in the sequence.
GRAVY indices of xylanases are ranging from -0.608 to -
0.173. This low range of value indicates the possibility of better interaction with water. The secondary structure
indicates whether a given amino acid lies in a helix, strand or
coil. Secondary structure features as predicted using SOPMA
are represented in Table 4 (see ). The results
revealed that random coils dominated among secondary
structure elements followed by alpha helix, extended strand
and beta turns in P40942, P81536, P35809, P26223, P48791,
and P48793 while alpha helix outnumbered random coils in
Q12603, P56588. A set of conserved amino acid residues
located in vicinity that provides clues to the functions is
termed as motif. Motifs predicted using Motif Search is
shown in Table 5 (see ).

It was found that P40942 and P26223 contained Glycosyl
hydrolases family 10 motif. Glycosyl hydrolases family 11
contains two signature motif viz signature 1 that spans upto
11 residues and signature 2 motif of l2 residues. The average
length of the motif predicted was 11 in both Glycosyl
hydrolases family 10. Motifs could not be predicted for
Q12603 and P48791. SOSUI distinguishes between
membrane and soluble proteins and predicts the
transmembrane helices from amino acid sequences quickly
with high precision. Xylanase from Dictyoglomus
thermophilum was classified as membrane protein by SOSUI
server while all other xylanases were predicted to be soluble
proteins (Table 7 in ). The
transmemebrane region predicted was found to be rich in
hydrophobic amino acids and it is also evident in Kyte and
Doolittle mean hydrophobicity profile generated using online
tool (http://gcat.davidson.edu/rakarnik/kyte-doolittle.htm)
() in which many points lie above the 0.0 line and a
clear peak was observed in plot that indicates about the
plausible transmembrane region. As disulphide bridges play
an important role in determining the thermostability of these enzymes, CYS_REC was used to determine the Cysteine
residues and disulphide bonds. CYS_REC predicted no
Cystine residues in P40942 and P48793. Possible pairing and
pattern with probability indicated by scores are presented in
Table 7 (see ). Since there is lack
of experimental structures for 4 Xylanases considered,
SWISSMODEL was used to predict the 3D structures of
proteins. 1YNA_A (Thermomyces lanuginosus), 1N82
(Bacillus stearothermophilus), 2F8Q (Bacillus sp.ng-
27) were selected as templates from PDB database for
P35809, Q12603 and P26223 respectively based on sequence
identity (Table 8 in ). The final
modeled structures are shown in . The predicted
structures were validated using various structure validation
servers. 90.5%, 81.4%, 82.5% of amino acids lie in the
most favored regions of Ramachandran Plot as revealed by
PROCHECK analysis for the structure modeled for P35809,
Q12603 and P26223 respectively. The predicted structures
conformed well to the stereochemistry indicating reasonably
good quality and were used for further analysis. These
structures will provide a good foundation for functional
analysis in dearth of experimentally derived crystal structures. It is important to explore and characterize the
active site of an enzyme for understanding its interactions
with substrate. CASTp was used to investigate the possible binding sites (Table 10 in  and
). The results indicate that Asn72 was present in
active site of both P35809, Q12603 thus implying its
essential role in enzyme–substrate interactions.

Conclusion
For obtaining desirable results in industrial application, it is
essential to manipulate the characteristic properties of
enzyme which is a tedious task. Protein engineering
techniques used to achieve this goal require a sound
knowledge about the protein both at sequence and structure
level. In this study, 8 xylanase sequences were selected to
acquire an understanding about their physico-chemical
properties and various protein structure levels by using in
silico techniques. Primary structure analysis reveals that most
of the xylanase under study are hydrophobic in nature and
three of them contain disulphide linkages. Secondary
structure analysis established that in most of the sequences,
random coils dominated among secondary structure elements
followed by alpha helix, extended strand and beta turns.
Three dimensional structures were predicted for proteins
where such data was unavailable and active sites were
explored for determining important residues. This study will
provide an insight about the physiochemical properties and
function of xylanases and thus aid in formulating their uses in
industries.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors are grateful to Dr. J. S. Yadav, Director, Indian
Institute of Chemical Technology for his constant support
and encouragement during the study. AKB thanks Council of
Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), Govt. of India, for
the Senior Research Fellowship (SRF).

Citation:Aroraet al, Bioinformation 3(10): 446-453 (2009)

Kyte and Doolittle hydropathy plot for xylanase of Dictyoglomus thermophilum

Modeled Structure of xylanase proteins (A) P35809 (B) Q12603 (C) P26223

Active site of modeled proteins (A) P35809 (B) Q12603 (C) P26223 as predicted by CASTp server.

