Background
Arabitol dehydrogenase is involved in the reduction of a five
carbon sugar ribulose to form arabitol in pentose phosphate
pathway []. This enzyme is produced in various osmophilic
fungus species under osmotic stress, to produce compatible
solute arabitol to balance the osmotic pressure across the cell
membrane. The D-arabitol dehydrogenase belongs to the short
chain hydrogenases/reductases superfamily. It is a group of
enzymes with a broad spectrum of substrates and is produced
by all domains of life. It catalyzes the oxidation of D-arabitol to
D-ribulose and therefore belongs to the class of D-arabitol 2-
dehydrogenases, which are typically produced by yeast. Similar
to other polyol oxidizing or reducing enzymes, ArDH requires
NAD/NADP(H) as a co-substrate. Polyols matching the
Bertrand–Hudson rules (such as D-arabitol, D-sorbitol, Dmannitol,
meso-erythritol, etc.) are all good substrates of ArDH,
while those that do not match the rule (L -arabitol, xylitol, etc)
are either poor substrates or not accepted at all 
[]. If desirable,
arabitol can also be converted to xylitol by arabitol
dehydrogenase. Arabitol dehydrogenases have been produced
by bacteria also. A membrane-bound arabitol dehydrogenase
was purified from acetic acid bacteria that could oxidize
polyhydroxy alcohols. The ArDH has the potential to be a
useful biocatalyst for the production of D-ribulose starting from
the inexpensive D-arabitol due to its regiospecificity 
[].
Arabitol dehydrogenase gene can be used as selectable marker
as plants especially edible crops can grow on d-xylulose, so if a
plant cell could express arabitol dehydrogenase, then such a cell
would be able to grow in a medium containing d-arabitol,
whereas an untransformed plant cell would not proliferate 
[].
Since most plants cannot metabolize most sugar alcohols,
including d-arabitol, there is an opportunity to develop positive
selection systems based on sugar alcohols. ArDH also cloned
for the production of xylitol from arabitol in different arabitol
producing species. The d-arabitol dehydrogenase converts
arabitol into xylulose that is an intermediate of the oxidative
pentose phosphate pathway. The arabitol can maintain cell
turgor and thus it is the driving gradient for water uptake
under stress conditions [,
].

Arabitol dehydrogenase is well known the conversion of many
rare sugars &amp; sugar alcohols like arabitol to xylulose, manitol to
fructose, sorbitol to fructose, erythritol to erythrose, xylulose to
arabitol, fructose to manitol and ribulose to arabitol in bacteria
and other organisms. Rare sugar derivatives are used as
effective antivirals, for example against hepatitis-B virus and
human immunodeficiency virus, and antitumor agents [,
].
The demand for rare sugars has been rising recently; global
production was in excess of 133 million tons in 2002. These
sugars are useful in the sweetener and pharmaceutical
industries. Five-carbon rare sugars are also used as sweeteners
and normally do not have an unpleasant after taste that is
common in artificial sweeteners, such as saccharin and
cyclamates. Moreover, D-ribulose produced from D-Arabitol
dehydrogenase is an important precursor for the synthesis of
oligosaccharides, amino sugars, and glycosides and is used for
the industrial synthesis of the alternative sweetener xylitol 
[].
Keeping in view the its importance and applications we have
done structural as well as functional annotation of ArDH from
Candida albicans using bioinformatics tools, for the very first
time. The study presents novel insights into the structural
features and substrate binding of ArDH.

Methodology
The study was conducted using Intel(R) Core(TM) i3-2370M
CPU@ 2.40 GHz, 4 Core(s) processor and 64-bit Operating
System.

Sequence Retrieval:
The 281 amino acid long sequence of ArDH from Candida
Albican was obtained from the Protein sequence database of EBI
(Id: JN578089) and subjected to BLASTP on NCBI against
Protein Data Bank (PDB) entries to find similar sequences. The
default parameter values of BLASTP were used for search.

Characterization of Target Sequence:
The physicochemical properties such as molecular mass,
theoretical pI, amino acid composition, atomic composition,
extinction coefficient, estimated half-life, instability index,
aliphatic index, and grand average of hydropathicity (GRAVY)
were calculated by ProtParam from EXPASy server
(www.expasy.ch/tools) 
[]. The CELLO v.2.5 
[] was used to
analyze the subcellular localization of ArDH. MEMPACK from
UCL [] was used to study the transmembrane topology. In
order to know the key residues responsible for catalytic activity
of the enzyme, multiple sequence alignment of ArDH with
other closely related enzymes of dehydrogenase family having
known crystallographic structures was done on ClastalW2
server [].

Secondary structure prediction:
The secondary structure prediction was done by SOPMA 
[]
and PsiPred [], server. The predicted secondary structural
information of the enzyme was considered to improve the
target-template alignment and for building conformations for
3D model of the ArDH.

Model building by Homology Modeling:
Homology modeling was used to predict the 3D structure of the
ArDH being the most suitable method for protein model
building []. The template was selected from CPH Model
Server []. The template and query alignment was done using
Modellerv9.11 [] program using align2d command, the
output file (PIR format) was used to build ten models by
Modeller. The constructed models were then solvated and
subjected to energy minimization with the GROMOS 96 43B1
parameters set through Swiss-PDB Viewer program []. Model
evaluation, model quality and stereochemical analyses were
performed by Errat, verify 3D. ProSA-web Z-score, 
[] Qmean
plot [] and PROCHECK Ramachandran plot 
[].
Furthermore, Root Mean Squared Deviation (RMSD),
superimposition of query and template structure, performed
using UCSF Chimera 1.7.3 workbench [].

Molecular docking analysis:
Docking studies were carried out using the MOE (Molecular
Operating Environment) software [].

Ligand preparation:
Chemical structures of substrate molecules
were downloaded from pubchem (pubchem. ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/ ). These structures were optimized by adding hydrogens
and energies were minimized with parameters (gradient: 0.05,
Force Field: MMFF94X).

Preparation of Receptor Structure:
ArDH model was predicted
through homology modeling, best model was selected for
docking analysis. This model is subjected to 3D protonation and
energy minimization using parameters (gradient: 0.05, Force
Field: MMFF94X+Solvation). The minimized structure was used
as the receptor protein for Docking.

Docking Run:
MOE docking program with default parameters
was used to bind the selected ligands with receptor protein and
to find the correct conformation of substrate. Free energy of
binding of the ligand from a given pose was estimated by MOE
London dG scoring function.

Results &amp; Discussion
Characterization of ArDH:
Physiochemical properties of ArDH by ProtParam tools is
presented in  (see supplementary material). Results
show that ArDH protein has a molecular weight of 30642.8
Daltons and an isoelectric point of 5.59. The computed pI value
revealed that ArDH is an acidic protein. The computed
isoelectric point will be useful for separating the protein on a
polyacrylamide gel by isoelectric focusing. The extinction
coefficient can be used to calculate the concentration of a
protein in solution. Stability of ArDH was studied by analyzing
the values for instability index, aliphatic index and Grand
average of hydropathicity (GRAVY) index []. The value of
instability index was 44.16 hence it could be safely predicted
stable protein. The aliphatic index refers to the relative volume
of a protein that is occupied by aliphatic side chains and
contributes to the increased thermo stability of protein.
Aliphatic index of ArDH was 85.77. GRAVY index indicates the
solubility of proteins, GRAVY index of ArDH was -0.118. A
negative GRAVY value for ArDH describes it to be hydrophilic
in nature. Subcellular localization was predicted by Cello 4
MEMPACK from UCL was used to study the transmembrane
topology. These results showed that ArDH protein has two
trans-membrane domains and it is a cytoplasmic protein having
two transmembrane regions: Region I consists of 29-44 amino
acid and Region II 59-77 amino acid. This shows that ArDH has
membrane binding properties and can be involved in transport
of materials across the cell membrane.

Multiple Sequence Alignment Results:
The identification of catalytic residues is a key to understanding
the function of enzymes. With the information from other
functionally similar sequences with known crystallographic
structures we can identify the key catalytic residues. ClastalW2
server was used for multiple sequence alignment of ArDH with
other dehydrogenases from Mycobacterium marinum (PDB Id:
3R1I), Candida parapsilosis (PDB Id: 3CTM) and Thermotoga
maritima (PDB Id: 1VL8) shown in  (see supplementary
material). The compared sequences varied in length but
essentially conserved the key catalytic residues which have
been highlighted with an asterisk (*) symbol.

Secondary structure prediction:
Structure prediction was done by PsiPred and SOPMA
secondary structure prediction server. The results from SOPMA
are shown in  (see supplementary material). High
percentage of helices in the structure makes the protein more
flexible for folding, which might increase protein interactions.
Moreover the predicted secondary structural information of
ArDH was considered to improve the target-template
alignment and for building 3D model of the ArDH.

Homology Modeling and Model Evaluation Results:
Homology modeling was done by Modeller v9.11. The
templates was selected (PDB ID: 3R1I) on CPH server.
Alignment between template and model with secondary
structure elements is shown in (). Ten models were
developed using Modeller v9.11 and the best model was
selected on the basis of structural evaluation and stereochemical
analyses by using Errat, ProSA-web Z-scores and PROCHECK
Ramachandran plots (Predicted model is shown in ).
Superimposition of the model with the template (used as
reference structure) by using UCSF Chimera v1.7.3 program
() showed a very low RMSD of 0.241 Å, proved a
high similarity between them. Z-score of 7.930 indicated that
both template and target protein have similar folds. Verify3D
analyzes the compatibility of an atomic model (3D) with its own
amino acid sequence. Verify 3D analysis revealed that 86.71 %
of the residues had an average 3D-1D score of &lt;0.2, predicting
that the model is well compatible with its sequence.
Ramachandran plot was obtained from ProCheck server,
showed that 91% of residues were in most favored region
(). The predicted model was submitted to Protein
Model Database (PMD) and has been assigned the following
PMID 0078880. Furthermore, the predicted model of (ArDH)
was used to study enzyme substrate interactions by docking
analysis.

Docking Analysis:
All substrate structures were docked with the active site of
ArDH enzyme and top ranked conformations were obtained
through MOE S-score. Depicted view of interaction is shown in
(). The values of estimated free energies of binding are
as Arabinose -9.8224 Kcal/mol, d-ribose -11.3701 Kcal/mol, dribulose
8.9230 Kcal/mol, xylose -9.7007 Kcal/mol and dxylulose
9.7802 Kcal/mol. These results clearly indicate that dribose
is best substrate for the production of sugar alcohols by
using ArDH. The interacting atoms and calculated distance
between these, for each substrate are shown in ().

Conclusion
Present study explored the physicochemical nature, three
dimensional structure and detail of interactions with substrates
of ArDH enzyme by using docking analysis for very first time.
Because of sweet taste and pharmaceutical applications the
demand by sugar alcohols/polyols is increasing day by day.
From our analysis it is revealed that d-ribose showed lower
value of free energy of binding hence, it can be concluded that it
can bind with ArDH more efficiently and can be a best substrate
for the production of sugar alcohols. The result from this study
will eventually give a better idea to experimentalist and
Industrialists to design more efficient fermentation process
using ArDH enzyme and d-ribose its substrate with higher
yields of sugar alcohols in cost effective way. Additionally, on
the basis of this study mutational analysis of ArDH can be done
to enhance product yield.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors would like to thank Dr. Zakir Hussain, Vice
Chancellor, GC University Faisalabad, Pakistan. for providing
support for completion of this project.

Citation:Sarwar et al, Bioinformation 9(19): 952-957 (2013)

A) Query and template (3R1I) alignment with secondary structure elements showing alpha helixes and beta sheets; B)
Predicted Model of ArDH; C) Template (Blue) model (Green) superimposition showing very high similarity as done by Chimera
v1.7.3 showed a RMS value of 0.241 A;o D) Ramachndran plot analysis for Predicted Model of ArDH. The plot statistics are: Total
number of residues are 281 with 91% residues in the most favored region (red); 6.1 % residues in allowed (yellow) and 2% in
generously allowed (light yellow) region. Number of glycine residues (labelled as G) is 24 and Number of Pro residues is 11; E) Zscore
plot from ProSA-web server showing the quality of predicted model in NMR region (dark blue); F) Energy plot showing all
residues of predicted model at very stable position (dark green line).

Molecular docking analysis by MOE software.
Depicted view of interactions between a ligand (in magenta
color) and ArDH atoms, dotted lines are showing the
interactions.

Ligand Interaction 2D diagram with calculated
distances (Å) showing interactions of ArDH atoms with (A)
Arabinose (B) D-ribose (C) D-ribulose (D) Xylose (E) Dxylulose.

