Background
Autoimmune diseases arise from an overactive immune response wherein the
immune system mistakes some parts of the body as pathogen and attacks its
own cells. Systemic autoimmune disease such as Rheumatoid arthritis (RA)
affects the synovial membranes of multiple joints, cartilage and bone as well as
bursa and tendon sheaths []. 
Osteoarthritis (OA), on the other hand, is a
degenerative disorder of the joints showing similar symptoms such as RA.
Although both the diseases share similar symptoms, it has been proposed that
RA follows an inflammatory pathway of pathogenesis, thus, differentiating it
from OA. Diagnosis and assessment of RA and OA depend to a great extent on
the symptoms, joint damage and physical function which are semi quantitative
methods of diagnosis. Till date no definite cure has been proposed for RA,
management of this disease depends upon early detection and aggressive
treatment. Several studies have been undertaken to identify and validate
biomarkers that would help in early detection and better monitoring of these
diseases. Studies have revealed biomarkers for RA including genetic
association of RA with HLR-DR family (DR4, DR1, DR6 AND DR10) alleles
within class II MHC region within chromosome 6 [,
], increased level of pro
inflammatory cytokines (TNF-α,IL-1β and IL-6) [,
], elevated level of
SPHK1 in synovium membrane of RA [–
]. Similarly, investigation of gene
signatures of OA provided significant results including presence of MMPs,
collagenase -1, MMP-3, IL-6 and TNF-α in the synovial fluid of arthritis
patients [,
,
]. Despite these findings and the on-going intensive
investigation of the genetic pattern of these diseases, we are yet to reach an
integrated outlook. Microarrays [] have been used to study the gene
expression patterns associated with various diseases models in both basic and
translational research in the past decade [–
]. It helps to probe into the key
biomarkers implicated in the pathogenesis and may provide clues for the
treatment or management of human diseases. Thus, for our investigation, we
applied the bioinformatics approach on publicly available microarray datasets
of RA and OA in an attempt to identify key biomarkers specific to each of
these diseases.

Methodology
For our analysis, all the datasets used were Affymetrix CEL files. Using the
Gene Expression Omnibus (
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) and search
criteria based upon our aim of the experiment, three datasets were selected out
of the available 77 datasets related to RA and OA. These datasets were
obtained from experiments which were performed with cell lines or tissue,
using different technology and platforms (see 
). 
Affymetrix CEL files were uploaded into GeneSpring GX 10.0 for
statistical analysis. Normalization was performed using RMA and baseline
transformation algorithm. Quality check was performed to remove unreliable
data if any from each of the datasets. Statistical analysis was performed to
determine differentially expressed genes. In case of all the datasets the fold
change for every condition was calculated keeping Normal Donor expressions
as the control condition. The cut off was set at 2.0 for all the datasets. The
resulting fold change list was then subjected to statistical analysis. For all the
datasets, the entity list selected was the one obtained after filtration by Fold
Change (&gt; = 2.0). The statistical test selected was one way ANOVA for data
sets GSE1919 &amp; GSE 12021, since there were more than two groups in each of
these datasets and the cut off was adjusted at p&lt; = 0.05. Student t-test was used
for GSE10500 (since there were only two groups to be compared). Multiple
testing, Benjamini Hochberg FDR was used for data set GSE1919. Hierarchical
clustering was run for each of the resulting statistically significant entity lists.
Cluster on both entities and condition was selected for all the datasets and the
distance metric selected for all the datasets was Euclidean.

Results and Discussion
Cluster analysis of the selected datasets
Statistical analyses performed on the datasets showed encouraging results
(see ) and hence, hierarchical clustering
(HCL) was applied to each of the datasets to visualize the significant gene
clusters and their specific pattern of expression in normal as well as test
samples. As expected, the HCL () uncovered the differential gene
expression patterns for each of the dataset analyzed when compared with the
corresponding control groups. The differential expression of genes in normal
control against RA patients showed regions where there was down regulation
of genes in the normal control whereas up regulation at that region can be
observed in RA genes, indicating the difference in gene expression patterns in
diseased and normal states. Similar observations can be made for each of the
other datasets.

Gene expression analysis in RA
Data set GSE10500 was used in understanding the pathogenesis of RA. Pro
inflammatory genes such as TNF, NFAT, cJUN, IL15 showed increased
expression in diseased state (see ). On the
other hand, anti-inflammatory cytokines such as Interleukin 10 (IL 10) and its
receptor (IL10RB) showed decreased expression. Additionally, there was
increased expression of chemokines such as IL8 and CCL7. Up regulation of
genes related to signal transduction such as GEM, NR4A2 were also reported.
Genes regulating proteases were also found to be up regulated (MMP1,
MMP3). Additionally, one of the interesting observations was the expression of
transcription factor ATF4 associated with Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress
pathway and VEGF associated with angiogenesis.

Gene expression profile of RA and OA
The datasets GSE1919&amp; GSE12021 were used to distinguish between OA and
RA. These datasets showed interesting results (see 
). 
The expression of genes related to pro inflammatory genes were up
regulated in case of both OA and RA indicating inflammation as a condition in
both the diseased states. Chemokines (IL8, CXCL12, CCL5, CCR5) that aid in
mounting an increased immune response were also found to be expressed.
Other Immunoregulatory genes such as FCGR1A, FCGR3A were found to be
up regulated in both RA and OA. Additionally, certain genes involved in
regulation of Phospholipase C (PLCG2) were seen to be up regulated in both
OA and RA. Though activity of PLC in RA has been reported earlier, in case of
OA, it was something unusual. Cytokines have been found to be playing a
major role in RA. They promote autoimmunity by maintaining chronic
inflammatory synovitis leading to the destruction of adjacent joint tissues(1).
Cytokines have therefore, been found to combine the immune regulatory and
tissue destructive events that lead to progression of RA. In our metanalysis, we
have found that there was an up regulation of genes coding for proinflammatory
cytokines IL-1β, TNF-α, IL-15 etc., 
(). IL-1β plays a key
role in triggering the up-regulation of pro-inflammatory factors (Okusawa S
et.al 2005).

Role of T cells in RA
In all the datasets analysed, there was an up regulation of T-cell receptor alpha
chain (TRAα) ( &amp; 
) indicating that T-cells play pivotal role in the
pathogenesis of RA. Another indication of involvement of T cells is the up
regulation of IL-15 which is one of the key growth factor for the synovial Tcells
[]. Some of the studies have shown that IL-15 exhibited pro
inflammatory activity in vitro [] as well as in the animal models of arthritis
[] suggesting that IL15 plays an important role in RA. Interleukin 8 (IL8) a
chemokine, showed increased activity in RA samples in two out of three
datasets (GSE10500, GSE1919). It can be seen IL8 might possibly play an
important role in the pathogenesis of RA. It helps in up regulating the
expression of genes involved in angiogenesis (VEGF), as well as tumor
invasions (MMP2 and MMP9). IL8 triggers inflammation in cells like
neutrophils leading to chemotaxis, respiratory burst, granule release, increased
cell adhesion and mobilization of Ca2+ in the cell, thus, helping initiation of
expression of Ca2+ dependent transcription factors like NFAT. It thus,
becomes evident that IL8 plays an important role in the pathogenesis of RA
patients. Our results on RA datasets have shown the differential regulation of
most of these genes already found in the literature and strongly supports the
involvement of proinflammatory mediators released from the auto-reactive
immune cells in the pathogenesis of RA.

Role of B cells in RA
The potential involvement of B cells in the development of RA is also
indicated by the up regulation of some of the specific genes (CXCL13, CCL21,
MMP1, MMP3) ( &amp; 
). Mature dendritic cells in synovial membranes
ectopic germinal centres produce increased level of B-cell survival factor
(tumor necrosis superfamily member TNFSF13) [,
]. Increased expression
of Tumor Necrosis Factor Superfamily (TNFSF) members () indicates
the B cell survival during the pathogenesis of RA. The lymphocyte infiltrate in
the RA synovium has various patterns of structural organizations. A study has
shown that that the formation of ectopic germinal centres aids in the improper
regulation of self-reactive B cells, due to local affinity maturation and receptor
editing []. In addition, the cytokines and chemokines contribute to this
lymphocyte organization. For example, the CXC-chemokine ligand 13
(CXCL13) and CCL21 help the formation of synovial germinal centres 
[]. In
our results, although expression of CXCL13 was not observed, another
chemokine family member, CXCL12 () was found to be up regulated in
RA samples. Moreover, the chemokine CCL5, MMP1and MMP3 were up
regulated in patients with RA () which are expressed by synovial
fibroblasts and are shown to support the recruitment and activation of T cells
[]. Production of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) was reported by
samples from dataset GSE1919 &amp; GSE10500 ( &amp; 
). The potential
function played by VEGF in pathogenesis of RA is angiogenesis. It has been
reported that several pathological conditions including RA are characterized by
excessive angiogenesis where vessels develop in an uncontrolled or
disorganized manner []. Together, these data indicate a central role played by
cytokines in integrating the inflammatory and destructive phases in RA.
Certain genes such as GTP binding protein overexpressed in skeletal muscle,
Nuclear receptor subfamily 4, group A, member 2 (GEM &amp; NR4A2) belonging
to the functional group of signal transduction showed up regulation in RA.
During mast cell activation, many signaling molecules are engaged in diverse
activities including generation of lipid derived pro inflammatory mediators and
the production of cytokines and chemokines []. Hence, the up regulation of
the above mentioned genes indicate an inflammatory state that is typical in
patients with RA. Thus, it was observed that across all datasets, the samples
from RA patients showed the differential expression of genes involved in the
inflammatory response, which aids in the pathogenesis of the disease.

Association of RA with Atherosclerosis
An interesting finding from the analysis of the dataset GSE10500 was the
increased expression of genes related to the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis
such as IL8, MMP1, and TNFSF14. Our findings support several other
recorded data that the above mentioned genes play a role in promoting
inflammatory response in atherosclerosis []. It can be seen that pro
inflammatory cytokine producing genes IL1 and IL8 have been increased
across the datasets. Additionally, tissue factor (TF) and MMP3 are also up
regulated indicating an inflammatory condition. This condition stimulates
Smooth Muscle Cells (SMC) proliferation and initial migration towards the
lesion ultimately forming the stable plaque which is large lipid core covered by
a thick fibro-muscular cap with SMC and extra cellular matrix (EMC). Under
conditions of chronic inflammation, this stable plaque transforms into a
vulnerable plaque. This is aided by a cascade of events that ultimately lead to
rupturing of the vulnerable plaques resulting in thrombosis and possible
myocardial infarction. As can be seen, a condition of chronic inflammatory
response, such as in case of RA, simply helps in initiation and deterioration of
atherosclerosis. There is evidence that cardiovascular disease is the leading
cause of mortality in patients with chronic inflammatory disease [].
Additionally, it has been reported that RA patients have increased prevalence to
subclinical atherosclerosis []. This observation suggests that patients with
chronic inflammatory disorders, such as RA, are at an increased risk of
cardiovascular disease due to shared pathogenic pathways.

Association of ER pathway and RA
An important observation was up regulation of gene ATF4 (). This
particular gene has previously been associated with Endoplasmic stress
reticulum pathway [].This suggests that there is a correlation between
patients suffering from RA and the development of stress due to the disease.
ER-initiated cell death pathways have been recognized for several diseases
such as hypoxia, ischemia, heart disease, neurodegeneration and diabetes 
[].
Although no data have been published on the involvement of stress pathway in
RA, our finding suggests a possibility that the stress might also play a pivotal
role in the aggravation of RA or vice versa.

Role of PLCγ in OA
An interesting finding was the differential regulation of genes Phospholipase C
gamma (PLCγ) (). 
PLCγ signaling has been previously associated with
disorders related to cellular development and cell signaling. Although there
have been reports of PLC in rheumatoid arthritis, no records have been
published related to involvement of PLC in OA. Expression of PLCγ in patients
with RA is expected as PLC γ is activated by TCR, BCR, the high affinity IgE
receptor and IgG receptors. In RA, there is an increased expression of TCR and
BCR, thus, aiding the activation of PLCγ. Previous studies have shown that RA
can be associated with increased expression of PLCγ in synovial tissues 
[].
Activation of PLCγ leads to hydrolysis of PIP2 which releases second
messengers DAG and IP3, out of which, IP3 stimulates the release of stored
Ca2+ from ER. This released Ca2+ aids in the activity of transcription factor
NFAT. A study by the same group showed that PLCγ does not play any role in
osteoarthritis in human []. However, from our results, PLCγ can be seen to
be up regulated even in case of OA, suggesting a similar potential role played
by it in the pathogenesis of RA. The number of genes up regulated in both RA
and OA was more when compared to the genes uniquely expressed by each of
them (). This indicates that both RA and OA share the key pathway
responsible for the pathogenesis to some extent. The differentially expressed
genes in the pathogenesis of RA and OA from the dataset GSE1919 showed up
regulation of genes linked to the proinflammatory pathways. In case of RA, this
was very well expected. However, increased expression of these genes in OA
was very interesting; since it is not an inflammatory disorder, but a
degenerative disorder. However, it may be assumed that in case of OA, after
the initial cartilage damage due to physical/mechanical stress, the infiltration of
immune cells leading to the release of inflammatory effectors as a part of the
innate immune response. This could explain the differential expression levels
of these proinflammatory genes in OA. However, the observation of the fold
change of the genes in RA and OA indicates that there is a much higher up
regulation of the genes in RA than OA.

Conclusion
This study is an attempt to identify potential biomarkers for RA and OA as well
as to differentiate between the two disorders with respect to biomarkers. As it is
observed from the results, the expression of cytokines plays an important role
in the pathogenesis of these two debilitating diseases. Understanding the
cytokine signaling cascade might aid in targeting these pathways during early
stages of these diseases to induce tolerance. Apart from the pro inflammatory
genes, other genes that help in mounting an increased immune response were
also identified across all the datasets. Our study also identified some unique
gene signatures such as ATF4 in RA (ER stress pathway), PLCγ signaling in
OA, IL8 signaling in RA from our datasets. These pathways can be further
investigated in detail for their roles in the disease prognosis to design
personalized medicines or therapeutics based on the disease type and stage in
individual patients. Moreover, this study highlights how inflammatory
cardiovascular disease like Atherosclerosis and RA are co-related in terms of
their pathogenic pathways. Hence, it can be concluded that patients with RA
run a higher risk of atherosclerosis and therefore, should be screened regularly
for cardiovascular disorders.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors would like to thank Prof.Iain McInnes for providing access to the
Genespring GX10 software (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) for
performing the meta-analysis of high throughput gene expression data from
GEO.

Citation:Biswas et al, Bioinformation 6(4): 153-157 (2011)

Dendrograms generated by hierarchical clustering algorithm using
GeneSpring GX10.0 for each dataset (GSE10500, GSE1919, GSE12021)
showing the gene signatures of RA and OA compared with NC (NC-Normal
Control, RA- Rheumatoid Arthritis, OA- Osteoarthritis).

Representation of number of genes up regulated in RA and OA
(GSE1919) using Venn diagram. Entity List 1 represents up regulated genes
associated with OA. Entity List 2 represents up regulated genes associated with
RA. Entity List 3 represents all the up regulated genes obtained after filtration
by fold change (cut off &gt;&gt; 2.0).

