Background
Increasing interest in the biological role of miRNA has resulted
in a number of publications dedicated to these unique
regulators of gene expression []. Correlations have been shown
between changes in miRNA concentration and the development
of certain cancers, such as lung [], esophageal 
[], stomach 
[],
colon [], liver 
[], prostate 
[], and breast 
[,
]. Cancer
diagnostic methods have been developed based on changes in
miRNA expression levels during the stages of oncogenesis 
[–]. 
Searching for binding sites for miRNAs in mRNAs is an
important challenge. The conventional point of view is that
miRNAs bind primarily to the 3'UTR of mRNA, while other
regions of mRNA (specifically the 5'UTR and CDS) do not have
a significant role in the regulation of translation by miRNAs
[]. However, there are publications demonstrating miRNA
and mRNA interactions in the 5'UTR and CDS 
[–]. Let-7
inhibits mRNA translation of the lin-41 gene in Zebrafish
embryos by binding to a site in the 3'UTR. If this binding site for
let-7 appears in both the protein-coding sequence and the
5'UTR, it is likely to also be functional in the 5'UTR 
[]. In
Drosophila, it has been shown that binding sites in the 5'UTR
and CDS are similarly functional. MiR-2 represses translation
initiation in the 5'UTR and stimulates mRNA deadenylation
[]. Another article presented data using a reported gene assay
that confirmed the presence of binding sites for miR-181a in the
coding sequence of ZNF mRNA in several cell lines 
[].
Information about the number of miRNA binding sites and the
features of miRNA binding could improve the current
understanding of interactions between miRNAs and mRNAs.
The number of genes regulated by an individual miRNA and
the number of miRNAs affecting the expression of an
individual mRNA remain unknown []. In this research, the
binding sites of more 700 intergenic miRNAs within the 5'UTRs,
CDSes, and 3'UTRs of mRNAs for 54 human oncogenes were
investigated. These genes participate in the development of
esophageal, stomach, colon, liver, breast, prostate, and ovarian
cancers. The aims of the present work are as follows: a) to
identify features of interactions between miRNAs and different
regions of mRNAs; b) to establish differences in the ability of
miRNAs to bind to different mRNAs; and c) to determine
features of nucleotide interactions during the formation of
complexes between miRNA and mRNA

Methodology
Nucleotide sequences of mRNAs of 54 human genes (Homo
sapiens Genome build 37.2.) were obtained from Genbank. This
set comprises well-known oncogenes and tumor suppressor
genes provided by literature review. Nucleotide sequences of
ig-miRNAs were obtained from the miRBase database. The
program Finder 2.2 was created and used to find genomic
origin of ig-miRNAs. All miRNA:mRNA pairs were found by
RNAHybrid 2.1 program that provides position of potential
binding sites, the free energy value (ΔG) of binding and
interaction schemes. As a comparative quantitative criterion of
binding was inserted the ΔG/ΔGm value (%), where ΔGm equals
the binding energy for a miRNA with a completely
complementary nucleotide sequence. Searching for miRNA
binding sites was performed along the total mRNA sequence.
miRNA binding sites were selected for each target sequence
based on the ΔG value and its standard deviation. The binding
ability of ig-miRNAs, in-miRNAs, and eх-miRNAs to the
5'UTRs, CDSes, and 3'UTRs of the 54 mRNAs was estimated
with a significance of p &lt; 0.0005 (Student's criterion). The
density of the binding sites in the 5'UTR, CDS, and 3'UTR per
1000 nucleotides was computed as the number of sites divided
by the nucleotide length of the region and multiplied by 103
(s/l).

Results
Interactions between intergenic miRNAs and the mRNAs of genes involved in oncogenesis:
The interactions between 784 intergenic miRNAs and the
mRNAs of 54 protein-coding human genes were explored. It
was revealed that 47 mRNAs are targets for these miRNAs,
while the mRNAs of seven genes (ABCB1, MSH2, MSH3, MYC,
PROM1, SNAI1, and TNFSF10) have no binding sites for igmiRNAs
based on established interaction criteria (see Materials
and Methods). Only 111 miRNAs out of the 784 ig-miRNAs
bind to these 47 mRNAs with a high interaction energy, at a
total of 165 binding sites.  (see supplementary material)
represents the characteristics of ig-miRNA binding sites that
have an ΔG/ΔGm value is greater than or equal to 75%
(p&lt;0.0005). Each mRNA binds one or several ig-miRNAs. Some
of these mRNAs are bound by six or more ig-miRNAs. For
example, the mRNAs of the AXIN1, CCND1, CDH1, FLCN,
MMP2, SMAD4, and SRC genes have from 6 to 13 sites for igmiRNAs.
This number is greater than the average number of igmiRNA
binding sites for the 47 genes, which is 3.3.  (see
supplementary material) shows that each of the mRNAs has
one binding site for a miRNA. Several miRNAs associate with
several mRNAs. For example, miR-4472 binds to the mRNAs of
seven genes, and miR-1279 has five target mRNAs. There is no
relation between the length of the mRNA and the number of igmiRNA
binding sites because the correlation coefficient equals -
0.061. The number of binding sites is not proportional to
mRNA length, and consequently the established binding sites
are not random. Shuffling the mRNA nucleotide sequences
reduced the number of binding sites. Of the binding sites for igmiRNAs,
21.8%, 43.0%, and 35.2% are located in the 5'UTRs,
CDSes, and 3'UTRs of the 47 mRNAs, respectively. The density
of the binding sites for miRNAs varies among mRNAs. Data
from Additional  (see supplementary material) shows
that the density of sites varies from 0.14 s/l (for the mRNA of
BRCA1) to 3.09 s/l (for the mRNA of SRC), with an average
density of 0.89 s/l for all 47 mRNAs. The mRNA of SRC has the
highest binding site density, showing an important role for
intergenic miRNAs in the regulation of the expression of this
gene.

The mRNAs of the studied genes have different numbers of
binding sites for ig-miRNAs in their 5'UTRs, CDSes, and
3'UTRs. The average binding site densities for ig-miRNAs in the
5'UTR, CDS, and 3'UTR of the 47 mRNAs are 2.60 s/l, 0.65 s/l,
and 0.68 s/l. The average number of binding sites for miRNAs
in the 5'UTR is 4.4 times more than in the CDS and 4.1 times
more than in the 3'UTR. These data show that miRNAs can bind
not only in the 3'UTR but also in the 5'UTR and CDS of target
mRNAs. mRNAs of the GNAS, and PTEN genes interact with
five ig-miRNAs at sites all located in their 5'UTRs. The mRNAs
of CCND1, MTHFR, SMAD4, and SRC associate with igmiRNAs
preferably in their 3'UTRs  (see supplementary
material). These data indicate the specificity of the interactions
between mRNAs and miRNAs. The nucleotide sequences for
binding sites between some miRNAs and mRNAs are shown in
 (see supplementary material). These interaction
schemes represent different examples of the miRNA
contribution to the interaction energy in various regions of the
mRNA. There are three types of interaction that differ
according to the contribution of the ig-miRNA binding regions
to interaction energy: 1) where binding occurs predominantly
through the 5'-region of the miRNA (miR-4455:ABCG2 mRNA
and miR-1279:PTPN12 mRNA); 2) where binding occurs
predominantly through the 3'-region of the miRNA (miR-
1972:FLCN mRNA and miR-4455:CD44 mRNA); and 3) where
binding occurs predominantly through the central region of the
miRNA (miR-1285:TP53 mRNA and miR-320f:APC-1 mRNA).
First type of interaction has some nucleotides, which are not
complementary in 3'-part of miRNA site. Second type of
binding has not complementary base pairs in 5'-part of miRNA.
Third type of interaction may have not complementary base
pairs in both ends of miRNA. Therefore, all parts of the igmiRNA
can contribute to the interaction energy between the
miRNA and the mRNA. Data from  show that igmiRNAs
can bind in the 5'UTR, CDS, and 3'UTR with a high
interaction energy.

Discussion
The number of miRNAs identified in humans is constantly
increasing, and currently more than 1500 miRNAs are known.
Most studies use near 300 well-described miRNAs; our
investigation provided for 784 miRNAs the best binding sites
with 54 target genes. The identification of target genes for
miRNAs depends on the quality of prediction data in silico.
Several miRNAs are able to interact with multiple mRNAs 
[].
This data suggests that the majority of human genes are
regulated by miRNAs. It is known that many miRNAs appear
to have a tissue-specific pattern of gene expression, and the
concentration of a miRNA might be lower than would be
necessary to repress the expression of its target mRNA 
[]. In
this case, miRNAs that are completely complementary to a
given mRNA do not affect its expression. Intronic miRNAs
comprise 45% of the total number of miRNAs and their
expressions directly depend on the transcription of host gene.
miRNA expression may increase a hundred-fold under
environmental condition and mutation, and might alter the
gene expression of target mRNAs []. In the 54 mRNAs, 21.8%,
43.0%, and 35.2% of the miRNAs bind within the 5'UTRs,
CDSes, and 3'UTRs, respectively, of their target genes 

(see supplementary material). These results suggest that
3'UTR, the 5'UTR and the CDS regions of mRNA may all be
involved in translation regulation by miRNAs. While
considering miRNA sites only in 3'UTR, we lose 1.8 times more
sites in 5'UTR and CDS. While miRNA binding sites are
perfectly complementary to mRNAs in plants, animal miRNA
binding sites are rarely fully complementary. Weak sites have 6
complementary base pairs []. Based on our data, the human
genome contains many strong miRNA binding sites in many
genes. The miR-4693-5p: APC-1 mRNA complex has a ΔG/ΔGm
of 89.8%; the miR-378b: MLH3 mRNA has a ΔG/ΔGm of 90.6%;
the miR-1260: MTHFR mRNA complex has a ΔG/ΔGm of 90.4%;
and the miR-212: MMP2 mRNA complex has a ΔG/ΔGm of
81.7% (further information can be found in 
(see
supplementary material). Each of these sites has about 13–14 or
more complementary base pairs.  (see supplementary
material) shows interaction schemes for miRNA binding sites
with 15–22 complementary base pairs. There are several
miRNA sites with near perfect complementarity in human
genome. For example, the miR-1285:TP53 mRNA pair has 19
complementary base pairs and a ΔG/ΔGm of 98.7%, and the
miR-1972: FLCN mRNA pair has 22 complementary base pairs
and a ΔG/ΔGm of 89.9%. Most verified sites have fewer
complementary base pairs and hybridization free energy than
the sites described in this paper.

To confirm validity of existence of binding sites, experimentally
well-established miRNAs sites were searched from the
literature data. The analysis of such data has shown that
researchers used sites with low hybridization energy and of
ΔG/ΔGm value. Majority of these miRNA and target gene pairs
were reported as being important in cancer development. That
may influence to choice of miRNA:target mRNA pair. In our
work we used more strict threshold level for selection and
chose significant sites with p&lt;0.0005. For example, luciferase
experiments [] for AXIN2 gene showed sites of miR-34a using
wild and mutant site for this miRNA. Hybridization energy of
described site is -24.3 kcal/mol and ΔG/ΔGm value equals
52.2%  (see supplementary material). We found 5
interaction sites for AXIN2 with ΔG/ΔGm value varying from
69.6 to 86.7% and suppose that they might work more
effectively. Nagel Remco et al. showed regulation expression of
APC gene by miR-135a in MCF-7 cells []. But selected pair of
miRNA and mRNA has a low interaction energy (-16.9
kcal/mol) with a low ratio of ΔG/ΔGm (43.1%) 
 (see
supplementary material). We recommend using miR-302f and
miR-4693-5p that have sites with larger ΔG/ΔGm values 89.8
and 99.6% respectively. Olive V. et al. validated interaction sites
of PTEN and mir-17-92 cluster []. Mir-17-92 transcribes
polycistronic primary transcript that encodes six mature
miRNAs: miR-17, miR-18a, miR-19a, miR-20a, miR-19b, and
miR-92a. Luciferase reporter assay provided two miR-19b
binding sites in 3'UTR of PTEN mRNA the specifically regulate
gene expression of PTEN gene, but other members of cluster do
not inhibit expression of this gene. Mutations in miR-19b
binding sites decrease inhibiting effect.  (see
supplementary material) represents one out of two binding
sites of miR-19b. Both sites score poor hybridization energy (-
16.9 and -16.4 kcal/mol) and ΔG/ΔGm value (39.5 and 38.3%).
According to our data, there are stronger sites in this gene for
the following miRNAs: miR-3187-5p, miR-3195, miR-3676, miR-
3677-5p and miR-4472. Also were experimentally verified
association sites for miR-141 and PTEN gene 
[]. In 3'UTR of
PTEN mRNA has been validated location of miR-141 site.
Described site has low hybridization energy (-16.2 kcal/mol)
and ΔG/ΔGm value (39.2 %).

Conclusions
Present research data suggest that the miRNAs described here
may regulate gene expression more effectively than miRNAs
studied in other experimental investigations. ADAM29, BAX,
MSH2, PIK3CA genes have only one strong potential site for
considered miRNAs. We recommend that described new sites
are validated by experimental investigation. Several miRNAs
affect only one gene, and this information could be useful in
molecular medicine to modulate translation of the target
mRNA.

Conflict of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We thank S.A. Atambayeva for her critical discussions on
results and V. Khailenko for the program Finder 2.2 and helpful
discussions. This study was supported by grant No. 1095/GF
(2012-2014) from the Ministry of Education and Science,
Kazakhstan Republic.

Citation:Issabekova et al, Bioinformation 8(11): 513-518 (2012)

