Background
Type III polyketide synthases (type III PKSs) are large superfamily of proteins
that produce wide variety of secondary metabolites which possess antibiotic,
antifungal, antitumor and immunosuppressive activities 
[]. For example,
resveratrol, a stilbene synthase derivative from grapes shows cancer
chemopreventive activity in murine models 
[]. To discover more of these
novel proteins, Support Vector Machines (SVMs) have been used successfully
for the purpose of classification. Earlier we have developed SVM based
“PKSIIIpred”, in which only labelled data were used for training set 
[]. But in
the improved version, we used an innovative variant of SVM, the so-called
‘Transductive SVM’ (TSVM) that not only take into account the labeled
training data but also integrate unlabeled data.

Methodology
Dataset
Positive (type III PKSs) and negative (non-type III PKSs) datasets were
prepared (1000 each). Sequences were retrieved in FASTA format from Swiss-
Prot. Unlabelled dataset (2000) was generated by profile hidden Markov
models (HMMs) using the positive dataset to extract certain proteins from
Swiss-Prot. In the case of unlabeled dataset, we are not sure whether they are
type III PKS or not. BLASTCLUST was used to verify the non-redundancy of
datasets [].

TSVM- implementation
SVMs are group of fast optimization machine learning algorithms which have
been used for many kinds of pattern recognition 
[]. The performance of SVM
based methods has been optimized by tuning SVM parameters (linear,
polynomial, radial or sigmoid). In classical SVMs, the training data that are
used to build the model ideally cover the whole problem space; the model is
then used to predict the labeling of new data points. But in most of the
biological datasets the number of labeled data points is rather small, but a large
number of unlabeled data points are available. To take advantage of these
unlabeled data, the so called ‘TSVMs’ have been developed 
[]. Here, TSVM
was implemented using SVMlight package which posess two modules:
SVM_learn (preparing models) and SVM_classify (classifying samples). For
each cluster of composite specificity, we prepared a feature file with the
sequences belonging to this specificity labeled +1, all other sequences with
different but known specificity labeled −1, and the uncharacterized sequences
labeled 0. TSVM was trained as described above, to obtain a model for
composite specificity. During several rounds of evaluation, many parameters
produced poorly performing models with poor MCC values. Therefore,
selected a set of consistently performing parameters for identifying the
optimally performing models. After training the SVM models, it is necessary to
combine the predictions of all models to one single prediction. Here the SVM
that outputs the largest score is used to assign the specificity to the unknown
sequence.

Numerical properties
The models were trained by using dipeptide and multiplet frequencies 
[] of
amino acid composition. For each protein, a matrix of 400 dipeptides was
generated and fed as an input to SVM. The repetitiveness of the amino acid
sequences were analyzed by means of multiplet which comprise
homopolymeric stretches of any length (XX, XXX, ... (X)n) where X denotes
any specific amino acid and n≥2.

Webserver
The server was prepared in Apache version 2.0 and the scripting was done in
PHP version 5.3.2. The background running programs for dipeptide and
multiplet frequencies were written in Perl 5.8.5.

Performance assessment
Fivefold cross-validation technique was used to evaluate the performance of all
the models. We computed the Error rate (err) specificity (SP), sensitivity (SN),
and MCC [–] 
for assessing the performance of a method (given in
Supplementary material). Sensitivity gives the fraction of positive events;
specificity represents how many false subjects are incorrectly recognized as
positives; the ‘error rate’ is the fraction of type III PKS data that is classified
incorrectly []. 
MCC ranges from −1 to +1 and the highest value indicates
better prediction. We identified the model with highest MCC value in each of
the five subsets. In the second subset, three models with different parameters
sets 47, 65 and 89 were equally good and therefore both of them were included
(Table 1 see ).

Discussion
The web-interface of “PKSIIIexplorer” allows, one to ‘upload’ or ‘paste-in’ the
sequences in fasta format. Here we describe the application of TSVMs to
functionally predict the peptides, based on the chemical fingerprint of the
residues. By using various kernal functions, we got the best results for
polynomial and radial (RBFs), over linear and sigmoid 
() and found
that SVM models yield very good results (MCC = 0.84–0.97). In addition to
the plant proteins, we also provided type III PKSs from bacteria, fungi and
bryophytes in the training dataset, so they can be perfectly predicted during
user investigation. It is noted that the server efficiently predicts type I PKS,
ketosynthase domain as negative which adopts similar structural fold and
shows sequence similarity to type III PKS. These results demonstrated that the
sequence features used by PKSIIIexplorer have powerful discriminating power.
The system also found to be superior () to the previous prediction
server “PKSIIIpred” (http://type3pks.in/prediction/).

Conclusion
Because of the diverse pharmacological functions, the volume of data on type
III PKS is rapidly increasing. With this regard developing a highly sensitive
method to identify the protein ‘in silico’ will accelarate the experimental
research. Our results give high reliable predictions, even though the training
data is relatively low, leaving a room for further improvement with a growing
number of type III PKSs. BLAST could be helpful especially for rare
specificities and therefore, we plan to integrate it in a future version of
PKSIIIexplorer.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors are thankful to Department of Information Technology, Government
of India for financial support. The authors acknowledge BTISNet, Department
of Biotechnology, Government of India for the Bioinformatics facility.

Citation:Mallika et al, Bioinformation 6(3): 125-127 (2011)

Statistical comparisons indicates that TSVM based PKSIIIexplorer is
superior in the case of sensitivity (SN), specificity (SP) and accuracy (AC) than
PKSIIIpred.

