Background
In folded proteins, pairs of oppositely charged residues often interact to form salt bridges. Salt bridges play
important roles in many aspects of protein structure and function (i.e. oligomerization, molecular recognition,
allosteric regulation, domain motions, flexibility, thermostability and alpha-helix capping). Both experimental and theoretical 
estimates of the electrostatic free energy contribution of the salt bridges range from being stabilizing, insignificant or destabilizing 
[–]. The formation of salt 
bridges has been proposed to be a slow step in the protein folding. Concerning the continuum electrostatic calculations, highly 
stabilizing salt bridges have been reported both within protein monomers and across subunit interfaces. Using site directed mutagenesis,
some studies have known that the disruption and the introduction of a salt bridge reduces and increases the stability of the thermophile 
and mesophile protein, respectively []. Some surveys have shown that salt
bridges tend to be both more energetically favourable in hydrophilic environments or at the surface of proteins, and destabilizing in 
the center of a protein []. However, there are a large number of “buried” 
salt bridges being energetically favourable for the overall protein and the single most important factor in determining their
contribution to a protein's overall stability is the geometry of the interaction [].

A salt bridge is constituted by a couple of oppositely charged groups, so in proteins it is recognized if at least
one Asp or Glu side-chain carboxyl oxygen atom (i.e. OD in Asp or OE in Glu) and one side-chain nitrogen atom of
Arg, Lys or His (i.e. NH in Arg, NZ in Lys or NE &amp; ND in His) are within a distance of 4.0 Angstroms 
[–]. ESBRI is a user-friendly 
tool that can analyse any peptide or protein structure, obtained from experimental data or modelling studies or molecular dynamics 
simulations. It evaluates all the salt bridges in the whole protein structure or in a single protein chain, among complexed chains and
those between user-specified charged residues and the rest of protein. Moreover, in ESBRI the threshold distance between two oppositely 
charged residues can be modified in order to verify if two oppositely charged residues are at a distance higher/lower than 4 Angstroms.

Methodology
Program input
The user can indicate the protein name, paste the coordinates file (in PDB format) in the box and choose five
possible analysing options to evaluate: (1) all salt bridges in the peptide or protein structure; (2) the salt bridges
present in a specific chain chosen from the user; (3) the salt bridges between two complexed chains indicated from the
user; (4) the salt bridges between a positively charged residue (i.e. Arg, Lys or His) and the rest of the structure;
(5) the salt bridges between a negatively charged residue (i.e. Glu or Asp) and the rest of the structure. In the fourth
and fifth options the user may indicate the “type residue” choosing between those possible, the chain in which it's
located and its “residue number”. By default settings, the threshold distance to find a salt bridge is fixed at 4.0
Angstroms. As additional options, the user can also modify the threshold distance between two oppositely charged
residues, and evidence in the result table the differently charged amino acids by using a color code (blue for
positively charged residues, red for negatively charged residues). 

Program output
In the first option ESBRI shows the table with all the putative salt bridges in the analysed structure. The table reports 
the atom types of two residues involved in salt bridge and their distance, expressed in Angstroms. When the user chooses the second 
option, ESBRI reports in the table only the possible salt bridges in the chain chosen from the user (). 
In the results page of the third option ESBRI shows the salt bridges between two protein chains chosen from the user and the related 
distances between the atoms involved in the bonds (). This option allows the user to 
obtain quickly useful information regarding protein binding sites, protein interfaces, and structural characteristics of protein 
interactions. When the user chooses the fourth or fifth options, ESBRI reports in table the putative salt bridges between the positively 
or negatively charged residue, respectively, chosen from the user and the rest of the chain in which it's located or other
chains present in the structure file (). This option allows to identify if a specific 
charged amino acid has a stabilizing effect in its protein chain or if its presence can stabilize the interaction with other proteins. 
For these reasons, ESBRI can be useful in protein residue mutations and protein-protein interactions studies. The results appear
in few seconds and are presented in a HTML page. The user can also save directly the results in text format.

Caveats and future development
ESBRI is a CGI script written in Perl language. We are developing an interface to integrate ESBRI and other tools
developed in our lab within a unique web service.

This work was partially supported by the CNRBioinformatics Project, 
“RNBIO ‐ Rete Nazionale di Bioinformatica Oncologica” Conv. no. ACC2/R7.11, and Programma Italia‐USA 
“Farmacogenomica Oncologica” ‐ Conv. no. 527/A/3A/5.

Example of output results for second (a), third (b) and fifth (c) options


