Background
Sulfur concentrations in crude oil supplies are increasing,
resulting in high sulfur concentrations in finished petroleum
products. Hydrodesulfurization (HDS) used to achieve lower
sulfur concentrations in refiners that need to high temperatures
and pressure, requiring high operating costs 
[].
Benzothiophene (BT), DBT, and alkilated derivatives are
recalcitrant organic sulfur and more resistant to HDS treatment
than other sulfur compounds such as mercaptans and sulfides
[]. 
Application of HDS also elicits undesirable effects on fuel
quality; other chemical compounds in the oil reduced due to
high temperature and pressure needed to achieve low sulfur
levels. Biodesulfurization is used as a more selective method for
lowering the sulfur content of petroleum products. DBT has
been used as a model aromatic sulfur compound for the
isolation and characterization of bacteria capable of
biodesulfurize organosulfur compounds found in a variety of
fossil fuels. The 4S pathway is a specific desulfurization
pathway in which DBT is desulfurized and converted to 2-HBP.
Through this pathway the carbon skeleton of DBT is released
intact and thus the calorific value of the fuel is not lost.
Consequently, development of biocatalytic desulfurization for
the selective removal of aromatic sulfur compound from
petroleum products has focused on the 4S pathway. Several
bacterial species have been identified, including Rhodococcus
erythropolis, Gordonia, Arthrobacter, Brevibacterium, and
Pseudomonas, which are capable of either biotransforming DBT
or growing with it as a sole sulfur source. The DBT
desulfurization (dsz) operon from Rhodococcus erythropolis IGTS8
encodes three proteins, DszC, DszA, and DszB. These proteins
have been isolated, cloned, mutated, and overexpressed 
[,
].
DBT is oxidized by DszC, first to DBT-5-oxide (DBTO) and then
to DBT-5, 5'-oxide (DBTO2). DszA catalyzes transformation of
DBTO2 to 2-(2'-hydroxyphenyl) benzene sulfinate (HPBS),
which opens the thiophenic ring. HPBS is then desulfinated by
DszB to produce 2-hydroxybiphenyl (2-HBP) () 
[].

The transport of substrates and products might also contribute
to desulfurization activity, as demonstrated by the fact that cellfree
lysates of desulfurization cultures can exhibit a broader
substrate range than the intact cell culture 
[]. There is no
evidence that Dsz enzymes are excreted from IGTS8 cells, but
the size of substrates metabolized show that desulfurization
does not occur intracellular; desulfurization occurs in
association with the external surface of cells 
[]. Immobilizedcell
or free-cell biocatalyst (Dsz enzymes) was used to remove
sulfur from oil in two-liquid phase systems in researches 
[]. To
increase the rate of biodesulfurization by cultured or
immobilized cells and Dsz enzymes, more researches are
needed in areas such as increasing specific desulfurization
activity, enzymes stability and hydrophobicity. The purpose of
this study was the changes in the structure of DszC enzyme to
increase stability and improve its performance in the oil phase
in biphasic system. The sequence of key desulfurization
pathway enzyme DszC, retrieved from NCBI database with
accession number 32363475, was used to optimization of the
protein stability and increasing hydrophobicity.

Methodology
Prediction of 3D model of DszC:
Phyre2 [], SAM-T08 
[] and m4t 
[] servers used for
predicting 3D structure of DszC. M4t model choosed best based
on prosa score [].

Optimization of model:
Modeller v9.8 [] used for optimization of predicted model.
Also molegro virtual docker 2011.4.3.0 (MVD) used for final
check of model. For this purpose charge calculated by MVD
and added to model. Explicit hydrogen bonds created and
explicit bonds assigned. Energy minimization performed using
UCSF chimera candidate version1.5.3. During minimization
step update interval was 10 and step size was 0.02.
Minimization performed in 100 steps.

Finding ligand binding sites:
3DLigand Site server [] used for prediction of potentially
binding sites of model. This server searches query structure
against Uniprot [] library using matching molecular models
obtained from theory (MAMMOTH) [] method. In the server
output 129 ASN, 131 SER, 132 SER, 137 HIS, 138 VAL, 160 HIS,
161 PHE, 162 CYS, 163 SER, 215 SER, 391 HIS, 394 VAL, 396TYR
predicted as present in binding site. Also as an alternative
approach MVD used for finding cavities of model. For this
purpose probe size was 1.2, max number of ray checks was 16,
minimum number of ray hits was 12 and Grid Resolution was
0.8. Five cavities found by MVD ().

Point mutation:
Point mutation performed in positions that had not any
significant effect in 3D configuration of DszC model. To do this
we selected amino acids which were not present in cavities and
their side chain did not affect 3D structure of binding sites, as
candidate for point mutation. Selected positions submitted to IMutant2
server [] 
and in output data energy level of protein
for changing a specific position to any other 19 possible amino
acids received. This was done for all positions that had
potential to perform mutation. Based on increasing stability of
the protein, hydrophobic amino acids according to the energy
business were selected. The best amino acid substitution was
not selected in terms of energy but the selection only was taken
in hydrophobic amino acids.

Based on the output of the server, best spots for performing
point mutation in a manner that the protein become more
hydrophobic and enhance its stability were in positions
including:9,11,12,13,14,51,119,122,178,179,180,203,204,221,222,27
8,295 and 338. Since conditions of DszC enzyme activity are at
30°C and neutral pH, thus protein stability upon point mutation
was measured regarding to the same temperature and pH.

Mutation in three-dimensional model:
MVD software was used for doing mutations in 3D model. In
Selected locations on three-dimensional model, first, native
amino acid was replaced with a new amino acid. Replaced
residues in new position may stand with it's beside residues at
a smaller distance than the threshold. In this case residue sidechain
charges are in interference. To avoid interference of
charges, optimization of neighborhood residues performed.
During this step the charge of replaced amino acid root with
lateral-roots of neighbor amino acids became in optimal state,
because of the minimum force of mutated amino acid to its
neighbors. Mutation and optimization of all selected positions
were done to hydrophobic amino acids  (see
supplementary material). The final model for analysis, again
submitted to the prosa server. The Z-score for this model was -
5.08

Analysis of mutated model in aspect of affinity to water and
oil:
BioEdit version 7.0.8.0 used for generating hydrophobicity plot
of native and mutant sequence of query (). Kyte-
Doolittle scale used for depiction of hydrophobic plot.

Discussion
Predicting 3D structure of query:
Phyre2 server uses comparative modeling and any twenty
identical amino acids are hits for this server. In phyre2, 3D
model of query generated based on template of chain A from
acyl CoA dehydrogenase (C2Z1QA). 394 residues (94%
coverage) with 100% confidence have been modeled by this
server. M4t and SAM-T08 servers used as alternative for
predicting 3D structure of query. M4t uses comparative
modeling for predicting query model. In this server five known
structures used as template. (2rfq_12_367_A, 2vig_10_374_E,
2vig_10_368_C, 3mpi_5_378_C and 1ukw_4_379_A). SAM-T08
uses Hidden Markov Model algorithm to predict 3D model of
Protein. In SAM-T08 serve misaligned residues in query, that
have not any identical structure in database, are modeled by
HMM algorithm and 3D model of misaligned residues
conjectures by this server. Generated models checked in prosa
server and Z-score of phyre2 was-7.53, SAM-T08 reached score-
6.83and score of m4t model was -7.66. M4t output use for
further study.

Prediction of protein stability:
I-Mutant 2 which used in this research is a Support Vector
Machine –based server that is trained based on a dataset from
ProTherm. Trained SVM in this server can predict stability of
protein upon point mutation based on both protein sequence
and structure. When protein sequence is used, overall accuracy
of prediction is 0.77  (see supplementary material).
Output of server is energy level of protein in DDG value. DDG
is defined as unfolding Gibbs free energy of mutated protein
minus unfolding Gibbs free energy of wild type protein. DDG
unit is Kcal/mol.

Point mutation:
Mutation in positions 9, 11, 12, 13, 14 changes structure of first
loop of protein (). This fold has a loop. Because
amino acids that present in this loop were not detected as
present in binding site by 3DLigandSite and MVD, it is
probable that structure changing which caused by mutating 5
amino acids has not significant effect in structure of protein
pockets. Mutation in position 51 () changes structure
of a separate and surface exposed fold of protein. This fold has
not any effect in configuration of detected binding sites of
enzyme. Positions 119 and 122 are located in an alpha helix and
mutating these positions do not change helix form ().
Positions 142, 278, 295 and 338 are in surface of protein and
mutation in these positions does not affect structure of fold and
cavities of protein significantly. Mutation in 178, 179 and 180 do
not change 3D configuration of protein (), because
neighbor tern is made by prolin 182. Also as we see in (), mutating positions 203 and 204 do not have any significant
effect on protein folding. His 221 and Asn 222 are two surface
amino acids that are located away from cavities and turns. After
performing mutation, protein stability increased 6.24 units in
DDG scale.

Generating hydrophobicity plot of query:
BioEdit version 7.0.8.0 was used for generating hydrophobicity
plot and hydrophobicity scale was Kyte-Doolittle []. This
scale is widely used for detecting hydrophobic regions in
proteins. In this scale, regions which reach positive value are
hydrophob. Depending on the window size, this scale can be
used for surface exposed and transmembrane regions.Window
sizes of 5-7 is used for surface-exposed regions and window
sizes of 19-21 is used for finding transmembrane domains if the
values calculated are above 1.6 . Because DszC is not
transmembrane protein, default window size of 13 used for
detecting surface exposed regions of query.

Conclusion
In native DszC enzyme affinity to water is more than oil,
because of the side-chain root of amino acids present in surface
of protein. Causing the mutation in surface amino acids of DszC
to hydrophobe residues changed hydrophobicity properties of
this protein. After performing mutation, the DszC enzyme had
more tendencies to oil surface in a manner that its stability
increased. This mutated enzyme can work better in biphasic
system by increasing hydrophobicity, and can maintain in
active structure in longer time by increasing stability. Also
differences in coloring of native model and mutant model
(Figure 3-G) showed the more water escaping in mutant model.
Since the stability of this enzyme increased with mutation, so it
is suggesting that mutated enzyme can be used by high
performance for biodesulfurization in biphasic system as
immobilized enzyme.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Torktaz et al, Bioinformation 8(5): 246-250 (2012)

Proposed Dsz (4S) pathway for the biodesulfurization
of DBT by R. erythropolis IGTS8. DBTO, DBT-5-oxide; DBTO2,
DBT-5, 5'-dioxide; HPBS, 2-(2'-hydroxyphenyl)-benzene
sulfinate; HBP, 2-hydroxybiphenyl; DBT-MO, DBT monooxygenase;
DBTO2-MO, DBTO2 mono-oxygenase; FMN, flavin
mononucleotide

Cavities of DszC predicted model. MVD used for
cavity detection. Detecting parameters: probe size 1.2, max
number of ray checks was 16, minimum number of ray hits 12
and Grid Resolution 0.8

(A): Hydrophobicity plot of mutated (red) and native
(blue) sequence of DsZc; (B): Mutation in positions 9, 11, 12, 13,
14; (C): Mutation in position 51; (D): Mutation in positions 119
and 122; (E): Mutation in positions 178, 179 and 180; (F):
Mutation in positions 203 and 204; (G): hydrophobicity based
coloring of native and mutated model, (a: after mutation, b:
before mutation), Blue color shows hydrophilic area.

