Background
Influenza viruses are part of Orthomixoviridae Family and
possess segmented genomes consisting of seven or eight
separate RNA molecules, each coding for one or more viral
proteins. The viruses can exchange segments, leading to
diversity of reassortant strains. Together with accumulation of
point mutations, segment reassortment is the basis for evolution
and maintenance of diversity for these viruses. It provides them
with the ability to rapidly adapt to the pressure of the host
immune system and leads to the continuous emergence of new
virus variants that cause seasonal and pandemic outbreaks of
influenza. Because of this ability, segmented viruses can exist in
numerous genotypes and serotypes, presenting a challenge to
the creation of protective vaccines and detection methods 
[,
].

Because of these reasons, the early detection and diagnostic
confirmation of influenza virus infections is fundamental for an
appropriate control of the disease. Several molecular biology
techniques, most of them based on PCR amplification, have
contributed to the diagnostic of the different types and subtypes
of influenza virus. However, PCR techniques are frequently
unable to detect new potentially virulent strains. Other
techniques such as sequencing are able to perform a precise
identification of such strains but still are not so widely available
for routinary diagnostic [,
].

The creation of a microarray is complicated when genomic
structures are similar. Probe selection is further complicated
when the number of known sequences is very large. When this
happens the probe selection strategy becomes critical 
[]. There
are several methods [–] for the selection of specific probes for
influenza virus detection. Direct search for probes based on
traditional computational methods is labor-intensive and often
requires plenty of time. The Shannon entropy (H), is a
bioinformatics technique that has been used to sort the
influenza virus, to analyze the evolution of influenza 
[], to
facilitate the development of an anti-influenza vaccine 
[], and
to create a profile of these areas of high variation, observing
characteristic patterns for each subtype [].

In the present approach we designed and tested in silico, an
Influenza Probe Set (IPS) which consists in 1,249 probes with a
length of 9mer, extracted from sequence alignment zones with
maximum entropy within the full viral genome of over 5,000
viruses reported, considering almost all viral subtypes of
Influenza A. Using Virtual Hybridization (VH) technology, in
silico Genomic Fingerprints were generated, which in turn were
compared to estimate a phylogeny based on the fingerprint
pairwise distances. Other studies have employed the use of the
VH technology to create genomic fingerprints for in silico
classifying of microorganisms as Human Papillomaviruses []
and bacterial genomes [].

Methodology
Shannon entropy is a measure of the lack of predictability of an
element [], 
such as a given base, in a particular position of
alignment. Highly variable columns in an alignment will yield
maximum values of entropy.

Search Probe:
This program developed in Java, calculates the Shannon
entropy of aligned sequences. It finds the points having
maximum entropy, then, selects 9-mer sequences (the size can
be modified by the user), using the point of maximum entropy
as the 9-mer center.

The equation used by SearchProbe to calculate the Shannon
entropy is: H (n) =-Σ f (i, n) ln f (i, n); Where H (n) is the entropy
at position n, i represents a residue (in this case there are only
four possible options A, C, G and U), f (i, n) is the frequency of
residue i in the n position. The information content in position
n, is defined then as a decrease in uncertainty or entropy in that
position. In our particular case, SearchProbe seeks regions with
maximum entropy values [].

CalcProbes. This Perl script refines the search of probes using
the 9-mer sequences provided by SearchProbe. These sequences
are subject to the next restrictions: i) Select only sequences
having between 35-65 %G + C (4 or 5), ii) Eliminate 9-mers
having tandem repeats of 2 or 3 nucleotides, iii) Select
sequences having a minimum of 2 differences between them
and iv) Chose 9-mer sequences having 34 to 36°C Tm values.
Tm values were calculated with the thermodynamic Nearest-
Neighbors (NN) model using SantaLucia parameters []. The
final 1,249 9-mer probe set selected by this procedure is the IPS
(Influenza Probe Set).

Virtual Hybridization (VH):
Virtual Hybridization is a computer program able to predict
perfect and mismatched target/probe hybridizations under a
selected Tm cutoff value. The stability of target/probe duplexes
is calculated with the NN model. This program was used to
determine all the hybridizations occurring between each
Influenza virus genome, or control strain, and the IPS. The
group of hybridization signals produced by each viral genome
corresponds to its particular fingerprint [].

Genomic Fingerprinting Analysis with UFA software:
Universal Fingerprinting Analysis (UFA) software transforms
genomic fingerprints produced by Virtual Hybridization under
any chosen stringent condition, into images. It also allows
visual comparison of any selected pairs of fingerprints,
producing spots with specific colors for both distinctive as well
as for shared hybridization signals. Besides, this tool is able to
calculate pairwise distances between pairs of genomic
fingerprints. From a table of such distances Taxonomic trees
were built using the Neighbor -Joining method with the
program MEGA 5 [].

Distinction of Influenza strains with the IPS:
Two types of analysis were performed: I) A Taxonomic tree,
based on distances between IPS-Genomic Virtual Hybridization
fingerprints, comparing several types of Influenza and other
viruses, was made. II) Overlapped images from selected pairs of
genomic fingerprints for strains having: low, medium, or high
degree of relatedness, were made. Influenza A /mallard duck/New
York/170/1982(H1N2) and Influenza A/Mexico/InDRE4487/200
were used as references.

Results &amp; Discussion
In the first step an average of 550,500 non-unique sequence
probes were selected from the alignment. Furthermore probe
sequences were clustered in order to remove the repeated ones
and to select only those with entropy higher than a convenient
threshold (ProbeSearch). Calcprobes is responsible for applying
the design parameters explained in the methodology. After the
above-mentioned, we performed a third selection, by removing
sequences containing probes with the lowest entropy values
and taking probes with a Tm range of 34.5 to 36.5°C and free
energy values between -9.00 and -13.5Kcal/mol.

Virtual Hybridization:
A database of tested target viral genomes used for the in silico
experiments was created. The VH programs conducts a
rigorous and reliable analysis to find and track all the sites in
each viral genome where the probe sequences can hybridize
taking into account the degree of complementarity between the
probe and the recognized site in the target (allowing at least a
mismatch difference) and the thermodynamic stability between
them. The generated information constitutes an in silico
genomic fingerprint listing details of the specific sites in each
target DNA where hybridization occurred, the number and
sequence of the probe that hybridized as well as the free energy
value of the hybridizations and it also provides the sequence of
the target site recognized by each probe. A free energy cutoff
value of -9 kcal/mol for 9mer probes was used.

Evaluation of the genomic fingerprint:
The analysis of the performance of our set of probes to
distinguish between several viral sequences the in silico
evaluation was divided into several steps: A) Viral Family Test:
Two kinds of trees were calculated: One derived from the
alignment of the concatenated fragments calculated with
Clustal X 2.0 and the other resulting from the comparison of
genomic fingerprints obtained with the IPS and VH. Both trees
are derived from 12 different viral genome families including
Paramyxoviridae, Coronaviridae, Picornaviridae, Adenoviridae,
which cause respiratory symptoms similar to influenza and
several family Orthomixoviridae viruses like influenza B,
influenza C, influenza A (H1N1, H1N2, H3N2) Thogotovirus
and Isavirus are shown in ().

The comparison of the two trees shows a close correspondence.
The tree from genomic fingerprints groups the influenza A
(H1N1, H1N2 and H3N2) on a branch, influenza B, C and
Isavirus in another branch and other viral families in other
clusters. It is noteworthy that Human Respiratory Syncytial
virus (which is a Paramyxovirus) was grouped with the
Rhinovirus Human Rhinovirus B, together with Thogotovirus
in the tree based on genomic fingerprints. Thogotovirus has
been classified as belonging to the Orthomixovirus family,
although other studies make comparisons of Orthomyxoviridae
PB1 proteins, showing low percentages of amino acid identity
when compared with influenza viruses and Isavirus 
[,
].
Likewise, influenza virus types A, B and C yielded
characteristic patterns for each virus, so IPS probes allowed
creating distinctive fingerprints for each one and create one
fingerprint characteristic for each virus ().

B) Hybridization of viral genomes of the same subtype was
carried out on two subtypes of Influenza A H1N1, that infect
different hosts (human and swine), to check if the IPS is able to
generate distinctive genomic fingerprints. The virus A/New
York/18/2006/H1N1 causes seasonal influenza whereas the virus
A/ Swine/Wisconsin/1915/1988/H1N1 infects swine. It is
highlighted that the IPS probes generated specific genomic
fingerprints for each one. This result is very relevant showing
that IPS is capable of an appropriated identification when there
are outbreaks of this disease in humans by strains from animals
such as pigs ().

C) Comparison of Genomic Fingerprints of two genomes with
very high similarity. Overlapping Genomic Fingerprints of
Influenza A H1N1 viruses A/Méxicoindre4487/2009 and
A/California/04/2009 from the 2009 pandemics are shown in
Figure 2. It is clear that both viruses are very similar with only
minor mutations, as expected for viruses from the same
outbreak. However IPS genomic fingerprints are able to show
seven differences between then, with five specific probes for
A/Méxicoindre4487/2009 H1N1 virus and two for the
A/California/04/2009. This is very important for molecular
studies of influenza because IPS is highly sensitive as to spread
viruses even those very closer; this will help in the management
of influenza epidemiology, and not depend on a previous
sequencing.

Conclusions
Following the established parameters, the set of 1249 highly
specific probes (IPS) allowed us to correct typing and subtyping
of influenza viruses, including human and animal strains, as
well as very similar strains. The IPS design based on the
construction of probes from regions of the viral genome with
maximum entropy allows a highly sensitive discrimination.

Through an in silico hybridization, the performance of the IPS
microarray was simulated, allows us to know the possible
behavior of the probes, and predicting genomic fingerprints of
these viruses. Prediction is based in experimentally supported
thermodynamic models, which suggest that the IPS microarray
would be a valuable Influenza diagnosis tool.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors would like to thank to Engineer Cesar Arturo Zapata
Acevedo for their contributions to this work

Citation:Durán et al, Bioinformation 9(8): 414-420 (2013)

Taxonomic trees of 12 viral families including Paramixoviridae, Orthomixoviridae, Coronaviridae, Picornaviridae, Adenoviridae,
Influenza A (H1N1, H1N2, H3N2), B and C, and two other Orthomixovirus, Thogotovirus and Isavirus is given (in red). (A)
Fingerprinting Tree, (B) Alignment Tree. It is shown that all the Influenza A virus subtypes were clustered into a single group.

A) Genomic fingerprints of different influenza viruses and other viral families. Using as reference organism the virus
Influenza A A /mallard duck/New York/170/1982(H1N2) (in red) and the Infectious salmon anemia virus(Isavirus), Thogotovirus,
Human respiratory syncytial virus(Paramixoviridae), Human rhinovirus B (Picornaviridae), SARS coronavirus (Coronaviridae),
Human adenovirus D (Adenoviridae) in green to compare the fingerprints generated , Genomic fingerprints of different viral types
of influenza virus. Using as reference organism the virus Influenza A A /mallard duck/New York/170/1982(H1N2) (in red) and
Influenza B B/Mexico/84/2000 and Influenza C C/Ann Arbor/1/50 (in green) to compare fingerprints B) Genomic fingerprints of
different viral types of influenza virus. Using as reference organism the virus A/New York/18/2006/H1N1 (in red) and A/
Swine/Wisconsin/1915/1988/H1N1 (in green) to compare fingerprints; C) Genomic fingerprints of different viral types of influenza
virus. Using as reference organism the virus A/Mexico/InDRE4487/2009(H1N1 (in red) and A/California/04/2009 H1N1 (in green) to
compare fingerprints.

