Background
Spices and medicinal herbs are known to have anti-cancer 
characteristics which can be used to target the tumor growth 
and further damage []. 
One such spice is Nigella sativa, also 
called as black cumin. The spice Nigella sativa belongs to 
Ranunculaceae family. It is an annual herb widely seen in India, 
Middle East, Europe, Greece and Egypt []. It is listed in the 
“Medicine of the Prophet” as a natural remedy to cure all 
pathological conditions. Its active ingredients are used from 
ancient times as Unani, Ayurveda, and Chinese medication for 
various diseases like asthma, rheumatoid arthritis, immune and 
inflammatory diseases []. The main active component of black 
cumin volatile oil is Thymoquinone (TQ), of about 54% and 
others include monoterpenes like p-cymene, dithymoquinone 
(TQ2), thymohydroquinone (THQ) and alpha-pinene 
[]. The 
seeds are thought to contain active ingredients having anti-tumor characteristics 
[].

A number of theories have been postulated concerning the anti
tumour mechanism of action of black cumin and its bioactive 
ingredients against cancer. The first theory states that 
Thymoquinone, a principle component in Black cumin inhibits 
the DNA synthesis process leading to apoptosis and thereby 
hindering the cell proliferation. 5-fluorouracil inhibits 
thymidine synthesis and is seen to cure many forms of cancer. 
A number of studies have established that the pro-apoptotic 
mechanism of thymoquinone is mediated by both p53 
dependent pathways and p53 independent pathways. It is also 
observed that there is a substantial inhibition of Bcl-2 proteins, 
NF-kappa B, DNA methyl transferases, Histone deacetylase by 
thymoquinone []. 
The second theory postulated that the anti
tumour effects of black cumin is because of its potent anti
inflammatory properties. This was established by a research 
study on thymoquinone on pancreatic cells, in which it was 
observed that this compound inhibits NF-κβ pathway leading 
to reduction in the growth of pancreatic cancer 
[]. The third 
theory postulated that the anti-cancer effect of black cumin is 
because of its anti-angiogenic mechanism. In this context, it 
was observed in invitro and invivo study that thymoquinone 
inhibits the AKT and EKT signalling pathways and depicts 
inhibitory action on key cancer regulatory proteins such as, 
VEGF, NF-κβ, c-Jun [].

The process of identification of molecular targets for the 
established small molecules utilizes a series of biochemical and 
quantitative proteomics protocols. These techniques are time 
consuming and protocols needs to be standardized. In recent 
times, an alternative approach named “Insilico Reverse 
Screening“ has become very popular for the task of molecular 
target identification. This method utilizes a computational 
search strategy on a panel of chemogenomics- derived target 
database to derive a set of putative targets for a given small 
molecule []. This approach has been successfully employed to 
decipher the molecular targetability of active ingredients used 
in Ayurveda medicine []. Reverse pharmacophore mapping is 
based on alignment of the ligand to an available 
pharmacophore from a panel of pharmacophore database. 
Many such tools have been developed in the recent years. They 
include Tarfisdock [], PharmMapper 
[], ReverseScreen3D 
[], idTarget 
[], Target Hunter 
[] and ChemMapper 
[].

In the current study, a unified approach integrating 
PharmMapper, ReverseScreen3D and TargetHunter to identify 
the potential targets for N.sativa bioactive ingredients. The 
targets prioritized were further validated for its anti-cancerous 
activity by matching up to experimental proven targets. 
Optimization is performed by studying the binding poses of 
these probable targets against the bioactive agents.

Methodology
Identification of bioactive constituents of Black cumin by Literature review:
Black cumin has number of chemically diverse bioactive agents 
contributing to its anti-cancer functionality. Literature review 
revealed the principal bioactive components of black cumin i.e. 
Thymoquinone, alpha-hederin, dithymoquinone and 
thymohydroquinone. The structures of these molecules were 
retrieved from NCBI PubChem in sdf format. The structure of 
Thymoquinone is shown in .

Reverse Screening approaches to identify potential therapeutic targets:
The reverse screening strategy in this study has been 
implemented using three insilico platforms namely, 
PharmMapper, ReverseScreen3D and TargetHunter. The sdf 
and .mol2 formats of the bioactive constituents of N.sativa i.e. 
Thymoquinone, Alpha-hederin, Dithymoquinone and 
Thymohydroquinone were submitted to the three tools as an 
input. The PharmMapper gives the best mapping poses by 
comparing with available targets in PharmTargetDB and the 
respective N-best fit poses are generated. In ReverseScreen3d, 
for each target protein a single ligand that has highest similarity 
with 2D similarity of input molecule is generated, furthermore, 
a 3D similarity search is performed to match the ligands 
generated from the database with the input molecule. Target 
Hunter utilizes an algorithm for predicting the targets, namely 
the "Targets Associated with its MOst SImilar Counterparts to 
generate hits. The target list generated as output from the three 
tools was further annotated to screen out the possible target list 
having significant association to cancer.

Retrieving experimentally validated target׳s information from Bioassay databases:
The targets identified from the reverse screening approach 
were further validated for their anti-cancer properties 
experimental repositories including NCBI PubChem, NPACT 
[] and Cancer Resource database 
[].

Comparative analysis of identified putative targets with the experimental targets:
The potential targets identified from reverse screening 
approaches were compared with the experimental results to 
validate the results obtained from the inverse screening 
approaches.

Classification of potential targets based on mode of action:
To understand the precise mechanistic behaviour of each 
bioactive agent, the identified targets were categorized into 
different functional classes: a) anti-proliferation b) anti
apoptosis c) anti-inflammation d) anti-invasive.

Molecular Docking studies of the potential targets with the bioactive components:
Docking studies were performed to depict the protein and the 
bioactive agent interactions using AutoDock PyRx4.2. The 3D 
structures of identified targets were retrieved from RCSB PDB 
and the structures of small molecules were retrieved from 
NCBI PubChem. These molecules along with targets were 
submitted to AutoDock PyRx4.2 to perform docking 
simulations.

Validation of the docked poses:
To re-affirm the successful target identification in the current 
study, molecular docking studies was conducted on 
Crystallographic structure having bound ligand. The structure 
of Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor-2 (VEGF-2) was 
retrieved from RSCB-PDB (PDB ID: 3CP9). The co-crystallized 
ligand was removed from the original structure and was re-docked.

Results &amp; Discussion
The targets identified for thymoquinone from insilico 
techniques are depicted in  (see supplementary 
material).

Anti-proliferative and Anti-apoptotic mechanisms in N.sativa:
The principle agents of N.sativa including Thymoquinone, 
Alpha-hederin and Dithymoquinone were found to have potent 
anti-proliferative and anti-apoptotic mechanisms. From the “set 
of putative targets” identified for Thymoquinone by Insilico 
Reverse Screening process, it was observed that many of these 
identified targets Cyclin-A2, Cell division protein kinase 2, 
Dihydrofolate reductase, Deoxycytidine kinase, Caspase 3, Bcl
X, Heat shock protein HSP-90 alpha, are significant contributor 
to the process of cell proliferation and apoptosis in cancer. 
Alpha-hederin also identified some prevalent targets including 
Ras related protein rap-2a, Cathepsin K, Estradiol 17-beta 
dehydrogenase-1, GTPase HRas, Cellular retinoic acid-binding 
protein 2, Dihydroorate dehydrogenase and many more.

Anti-inflammatory mechanisms in N.sativa:
The anti-inflammatory potency of Nigella sativa is 
predominantly contributed by its principle ingredient 
Thymoquinone. Using the Insilico Reverse Screening protocol it
was identified that the putative targets of thymoquinone 
responsible for its anti-inflammatory action are the following: 
Aldose reductase, Leukotriene A-4 hydrolase, inducible 
nitrogen oxide synthase (iNOS), and Glutathione-requiring 
prostaglandin D synthase.

Anti-angiogenesis mechanism in N.sativa:
Using the Insilico Reverse Screening protocol it was identified 
that the putative targets of thymoquinone, alpha-hederin, 
dithymoquinone and thymohydroquinone responsible for its 
anti-angiogenic action are the following: VEGF, MMP-9,
Macrophage metalloelastase, Stromelysin, Basic fibroblast 
growth factor.

Molecular Docking analysis with VEGF 2:
VEGF is a cell signalling protein that initiates vasculogenesis 
and angiogenesis. It acts as supplier of oxygen during 
inadequate blood supply. Overexpression of VEGF expression 
leads to cancer followed by metastasis. The cellular response is 
mediated by binding to tyrosine kinase receptors called 
VEGFRs which dimerize and activate by trans phosphorylation. 
They are categorized as VEGFR-1, VEGFR-2 and VEGFR-3. It is 
seen that VEGF binding to VEGFR-2 domains 2 and 3 enhances 
the likelihood of other VEGFR-2 binding. It forms a dimer and 
they are stabilized followed by auto phosphorylation leading to 
activation of extracellular receptor kinase (ERK) signalling 
pathway.

VEGFR-2 tyrosine kinase domain has a dual 70 amino acid 
insert region for kinase. The dimer is formed when VEGF-A 
binds to VEGFR-2 followed by auto-phosphorylation at insert 
kinase region and carboxy terminal tail []. VEGFR-2 (PDB ID: 
3CP9) protein used in this study for molecular docking 
simulation has an inbound ligand 3-(2-aminoquinazolin-6-yl)-1-
(3,3-dimethylindolin-6-yl)-4-methylpyridin-2(1H)-one, referred 
as C19. It is an aminoquinazoline pyridine capable of inhibiting 
several targets like KDR, p38, Lck and Src []. The original 
crystallographic ligand was removed from the protein and re
docked to analyse the conformation difference of the ligand in 
pre-docking and post-docking poses. The pre-docked and post
docked poses were superimposed using PyMOL software.

The pre-docked pose of the ligand with the VEGF-2 retrieved 
from PDBsum indicated that the bound ligand formed 3 
hydrogen bonds: one bond with Asp1046 (A) and two bonds 
with Cys919 (A). The post-docked pose (Seen in 
and ) indicated that original ligand (C19) formed 4 
hydrogen bonds: one bond with Ile1044 (A), Asp1046 (A) and 
two bonds with Cys919 (A). The H-bonds formed and RMSD 
(Root Mean Square Deviation) were calculated for the 
theoretical model as well as the experimental structure and it 
was observed that the H-bond length deviation between the 
crystal structure and docked pose was less than 0.20Å.The 
RMSD for C19 between the crystal structure and docked poses 
was 0.065Å. The results indicate ability of AutoDock 
simulations to replicate the experimental binding information 
of ligand-VEGF 2 complex.

Binding pose of Thymoquinone with VEGF 2:
The post-docked binding conformation of thymoquinone with 
VEGF2 is illustrated in the . It has a binding energy 
of -7.57 kcal/mol. The observations indicate that thymoquinone 
binds to VEGF-2 at the same catalytic site as that of the C19. 
Interaction of thymoquinone at the active site involves Leu840, 
Val848, Ala866, Val867, Glu885, Thr916, Leu1035, Cys1045 and 
Asp1046, which is analogous to the binding pattern of C19 at 
the catalytic site. Thymoquinone forms single N-H…O 
hydrogen bond with Asp1046 having bond length of 3.20Å. The 
similar hydrogen bond can be observed in the C19 with bond 
length of 3.08 Å. The interaction of thymoquinone is mainly 
hydrophobic. The docking cluster analysis of all runs showed a 
consistent interaction with Asp1046. The interactions are 
studied via the electrostatic pattern and hydrogen bonds 
formed. The results indicate capacity of thymoquinone to act as 
a potent inhibitor of VEGF2 at its catalytic site.

Conclusion
Many spices have traditionally been used in culinary and 
therapeutic applications by traditional practitioners without 
being aware of their precise mechanism of action. The current 
study is a true attempt to elucidate the exact poly 
pharmacological targetability of bioactive agents of black 
cumin. The putative target set identified by the “Insilico target 
fishing” approach in this study correlate well with the 
experimental findings. The theories of the anti-cancer 
mechanism of bioactive agents of N. Sativa were further 
strengthened by the identification of targets from different 
categories including, anti-proliferative, anti-apoptosis, anti
inflammatory, and anti-angiogenic. Molecular docking studies 
of the “putative target set identified targets” with their 
respective bioactive compounds demonstrated their binding at 
the catalytic site of the protein targets, thereby proving their 
antagonistic mechanism. Further validation studies with VEGF 2 
with thymoquinone demonstrated that the catalytic action is 
because of the inter-molecular H-bonds and other interactions. 
The “putative target set identified targets” has to be further 
validated in invivo and invitro bioassays to support the 
findings of this study.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors express their sincere gratitude to Department of 
Biotechnology, PESIT Bangalore for the continuous support 
during the work.

Citation:Sridhar et al, Bioinformation 10(11): 684-688 (2014)

a) The molecular structures of bioactive agents of N.sativa namely, Thymoquinone and alpha-hederin; b) The binding site 
of Thymoquinone and C19 to VEGF2 depicted in microenvironment. Thymoquinone binds with a single H-bond with Asp1046, 
whereas in c) the original ligand, C19 forms 4 hydrogen bonds with residues Asp1046, Ile1044 and two hydrogen bonds with 
Cys919 (green dotted lines); d) The docked conformation of Thymoquinone and the original ligand, C19 with VEGF2 chain A.

