Background
Chili pepper (Capsicum annuum, L.) constitutes one of the most
important crops in Mexico. Mexico is the second largest chili
pepper producer in the word and it has been suggested as a
center of domestication of this species [], which is reflected in
the large number of pepper types found in the country.
Sequence and analysis of Expressed Sequence Tags (ESTs) are
primary tools for the discovery of novel genes in plants and
other organisms. As the chili pepper genome is not currently
available, transcriptome data can provide major insights into
the genes and gene families involved in important biological
processes. In this report, we present the Capsicum
Transcriptome DB (Database), a web-based EST database. We
constructed cDNA libraries derived from different organs of
chili pepper plants including root, stem, leaf, flower and fruit.
In some tissues, samples were collected after exposure to a
variety of stress agents or during several developmental stages.
The leaf transcriptome was deeply sequenced with both
pyrosequencing and Sanger technologies, while cDNAs from
the remaining tissues were sequenced solely with the Sanger
platform. Sequences were assembled using a hybrid approach
resulting in a reference transcriptome () of 32,314
contigs and 59,991 singletons. The Capsicum Transcriptome DB
integrates comprehensive information including functional
annotation, Gene Ontology (GO) [], and metabolic pathway
assignments []. To provide public access to the sequence and
annotation data, we developed and implemented a userfriendly,
SQL query-builder tool into the Capsicum
Transcriptome DB web site publicly available at
http://www.bioingenios.ira.cinvestav.mx:81/Joomla/.

Methodology and Results
Data Source:
The Capsicum Transcriptome DB was established using
sequence data from two C. annuum varieties, Serrano
Tampiqueño 74 and Sonora Anaheim. For the Sanger-based
data, we generated 83,116 ESTs from 30 cDNA libraries derived
from root, stem, leaf, flower and fruit tissues  (see
supplementary material). mRNA was isolated using Poly(A)+
capture and cloned using Gateway technology. After
sequencing, Phred and custom Perl scripts were used to extract
high-quality regions from the raw sequences, trim vector
sequences, adaptors, polyA/T regions and eliminate short ESTs
(&lt; 90 bp)  (see supplementary material). A total of
70,743 high-quality Sanger sequences with an average length of
678.35 nucleotides (nt) were obtained. Three cDNA libraries
constructed from DNA virus-infected and non-infected pepper
leaf tissue (C. annuum cv. Sonora Anaheim) were sequenced
using 454 pyrosequencing [] 
 (see supplementary
material). A total of 1,838,567 pyrosequencing reads were
obtained with an average length of 99.89 nt with an average
quality of 27.90  (see supplementary material).

Capsicum reference transcriptome
Three rounds of assembly were performed using Newbler
(v1.3) with default parameters. First, each library was
assembled independently to identify sequences classified as
“assembled reads” and “singletons” by Newbler ,
 (see supplementary material) . Sequences classified as
“repeats” were discarded due to over-representation, which are
problematic in the assembly process. A total of 1,253,773
sequences from all 9 runs derived from the “assembled reads”
and “singletons” were used for a second assembly () in
which, 887,718 reads were assembled into 33,652 contigs with
an average length of 251.7 nt  (see supplementary
material). A third assembly was performed using a hybrid
approach in which a total of 1,324,516 sequences (1,253,773
pyrosequencing-reads plus 70,743 ESTs) were assembled
(, ). A total of 1,144,574 sequences were
assembled into 32,538 contigs with 92,211 remaining as
singletons  (see supplementary material). Custom Perl
scripts were used to filter polyA/T regions, low quality, and
short contigs (&lt;90 nt) obtaining 32,314 high-quality contigs and
51,118 singletons  (see supplementary material). The
hybrid assembly compared to the 454-only strategy increased
the contig length from 251.71 nt (454-only) to 388.5 nt (hybrid)
() 
and the number of large contigs (≥ 500 nt) increased
from 3,438 to 8,792 with an average size increasing from 777 to
871 nt ().

Assembly quality measurement:
Using BLASTN [] an analysis of alignment coverage was
carried out against pepper ESTs database []. The results
revealed than 60% (19,388) of the contigs had coverage greater
than 90% with average identities of 99%; 21% (6,575) of the
contigs have 60-89% coverage and 99% identity; the remaining
contigs (6,351) had coverage less than 60% with 98% identity.
The assembled contigs were examined for similarity to pepper
and other plant sequence databases. We found that 52.5%
(17,090) of our contigs (E ≤1e-06, % identity ≥ 90) had high
identity with sequences in the Pepper ESTs dataset ().
The remaining contigs (47.5%) were then compared against the
Tomato Unique Genes database [], and 14.3% (4,654) of contigs
had high similarity (E ≤1e-06) in this dataset (). For the
remaining contigs, a sequential BLASTX-based search [] was
extended to three protein sequence datasets, Arabidopsis thaliana
peptides (TAIR) [], 
Oryza sativa peptides (RefSeq) [] and NCBI
nr. Of the remaining contigs, ~7.5% (2,452) had high identity to
Arabidopsis and Rice proteins (E ≤1e-05) and 1% (375) had
matches to NCBI nr sequences (E ≤1e-04). In summary, 75.5% of
our contigs share sequence similarity with transcripts, genes or
proteins in public databases () and 7,481 of these
sequences (23%) have not been previously reported for the
species Capsicum annuum. A total of 7,743 (23.8%) contigs are
novel transcripts that are specific to the C. annuum.

Features of the Web database
A website and database were constructed using open source
technologies with the Linux operating system (Ubuntu v9.1).
MySQL Database Management System (v5.1) was used to store
and manage the data. An Apache HTTP server (v2.2.4), PHP
Hypertext Pre-processor (v5.3.1), JavaScript (v3.1.0) and HTML
(v4) were used to create the query-builder module for
connecting and querying the database. Custom Perl (v5.10)
scripts were used to automatically parse the database and
Joomla (v1.5) was used as content management system (CMS)
for building the web site. Information stored in the database is
divided into two main sections: assembled (contigs) and
singleton sequences. Each section is then sub-divided into two
categories, Functional Annotation and Sequences. 
()
shows the tables that store the data derived from assembled
sequences (contigs) and their relationships. A total of eight
tables store information related to functional annotation. The
genomics databases used for functional annotation were: S.
lycopersicum unigenes [], A. thaliana peptides 
[], O. sativa
peptides [], P. patens 
[], NCBI nr and UniRef100 (UniProt).

The GO terms [] and KEGG metabolic pathway 
[] annotations
derived from the highest scoring BLASTX results from TAIR
[]. 
The assembly and sequence data are stored in tables named
“assembly information” and “contigs”, respectively. The
“assembly information” table contains the number of sequences
(either Sanger or 454 reads) that were assembled into each
contig, and the sequence origin (root, stem, leave, flower or
fruit). The “Contigs” table stores the assembled sequences. Two
additional tables were created to store information for
singletons. The majority of the singletons (97.4%) are 454
pyrosequencing reads with an average length of ~100 nt.
However, 1,349 are Sanger-derived ESTs with an average length
of ~650 nt  (see supplementary material). We annotated
all singletons using BLASTX against the NCBI nr database.
Sequence and annotation are stored in separate tables (
) using “seq_id” as a primary key to relate the two tables. A
query-builder module, adapted as user-friendly Web interface,
was developed. The module allows the user to explore the
database in three different ways: 
Simple search,

Advanced query, and

Query builder (.

 
Using the “Simple
search” option, the user is able to access and download the full
content of a specific table (). The searches can be
refined using “search options”. The advanced query section
was designed for users with SQL knowledge in which searches
can be performed through SQL (). The Query-builder
permits the user to collect functional annotation and sequence
information from different tables (). This module was
designed to use checkboxes to make multiple attribute
selections from a number of tables and columns and also
provides search options to define a query (). In every
result generated by the module, the user is able to download a
file in CSV (comma separated value) format ().

Utility
Our user-friendly web interface is a straightforward tool,
providing access to molecular data in a simple and dynamic
manner without requisite training in bioinformatics. The user is
allowed to perform queries to analyze a group of sequences or
an individual sequence. The database contains 32,314 highquality
assembled contigs and 51,118 high-quality singletons.
Functional annotation was assigned to 75% of the contigs
including 21,744 sequences common to Solanaceae (Pepper
ESTs and Tomato unique genes) and 7,481 novel sequences not
previously reported for Capsicum annuum.

Future Developments
We will continue sequencing several chill-pepper tissues and
updating the database with new sequences and functional
annotation. Comments and requests regarding the database
should be sent to Dr. Rafael Rivera-Bustamante at
capsicum@ira.cinvestav.mx

Conclusions
The data presented in this study shows the advantages of using
multiple sequencing technologies for de novo assembly of a
transcriptome in the absence of a reference genome. With the
hybrid assembly approach, we were able to improve multiple
contig quality measures. A detailed coverage analysis showed
the high quality of the assembly suggesting that the rate of
contig artifacts is low. Using an in-depth annotation pipeline,
we identified 75% of the contigs including 7,481 novel
sequences not previously reported for Capsicum annum. These
data expand our knowledge of gene expression across diverse
pepper tissues and complement the data in existing databases
[,
]. In summary, the bioinformatics methods applied to the
reported data demonstrate that our Capsicum Reference
transcriptome is a reliable resource and an important “hot” tool
for downstream functional studies.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work was supported by Secretaría de Agricultura,
Ganadería, Desarrollo Rural, Pesca y Alimentación (SAGARPA)
and Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnologia (Conacyt)
[11806] We acknowledge support from Conacyt-Mexico to Elsa
Gongóra-Castillo (Ph. D. fellowship).

We acknowledge and thank Lisset Herrera-Isidrón, Rosa M.
Adame-Alvarez, Cesar Aza-González, Martha G. Betancourt-
Jiménez, Fernando Hernández-Godinez, Enrique Ibarra-
Laclette, Hector G. Nuñez-Palenius and Harumi Shimada-
Beltran for participating in the construction of cDNA libraries.
We would like to specially thank to Eduardo Jaramillo-Olvera
for his support during the database and website development,
and Drs. Robin Buell and Rebecca Davidson for critical reading
of the manuscript and helpful comments.

Citation:Góngora-Castillo et al, Bioinformation 8(1): 043-047 (2012)

Schematic of the hybrid assembly process and
database construction. The diagram represents the process
followed to obtain the hybrid assembly and to construct the
Capsicum Transcriptome database. The process included a
sequential comparison with several genomic sequences
databases (NCIB nr, UniRef100, P. patents peptides 
[], O.
sativa peptides [], 
A. thaliana peptides [], GO 
[], KEGG 
[]) to
annotate the contigs.

Comparison of contig sizes obtained with 454-only
and hybrid assembly process. When the reads from 454
pyrosequencing are assembled separately, the majority of the
contigs are in the 100-499 nt size range. When Sanger-derived
sequences are included in the assembly, the number of contigs
in the 101-500nt decreases almost 20% and the number of
contigs in the next size ranges dramatically increase, especially
the 1001 – 2000 size range.

Sequential comparison of hybrid contigs with
different plant databases. BLASTN searches of the contigs were
performed against two Solanaceae databases, Pepper ESTs
hosted at KRIBB [], and Tomato Unique genes from the Sol
Genomic Network []. We use an E-value threshold ≤ 1e-06 and
identity rate ≥ 90% for Pepper ESTs, and E-value ≤ 1e-06 for
Tomato Unigene. Sequences without a significant match were
compared (BLASTX) against Arabidopsis and Rice proteome [,
]
using an E-value ≤ 1e-05. Finally, the remaining contigs (no
match in the previous four databases) were searched against the
NCBI nr database (E-value cutoff ≤ 1e-04). The chart shows the
percentage of contigs sequences identified in each database
with 23.8% lacking homology to any of these databases.

Database tables. Several tables were created for the
Capsicum database. A) Tables for the assembled sequences. The
functional annotation category has eight tables in total. Six
tables have the same structure; the “blast” which stores tabular
outputs from BLAST alignments is representative of these six
tables. Two other tables store Gene Ontology [] and Metabolic
Pathway information []. The sequence category has two tables:
“assembly_information” and “contigs”, which store
information of the assembly and the assembled sequences,
respectively. B) Two tables store information for singleton
sequences. The “functional annotation” table stores the tabular
output from BLAST alignment and the “singletons” table stores
the sequences. Each group (assembled sequences or singletons)
has an additional table called “relations” showing the relations
between the tables. Tables for each group are related using
“sec_id” as primary key; however, assembled sequences and
singletons tables are not related each other.

Examples of resources available in Capsicum
Transcriptome DB. Access to different tools available in the
module is demonstrated. A) The Simple Query module where a
user can perform a table-specific searches is shown. Each button
represents one table and search options are provided to define
the query. B) Specific-table search. After the data retrieval by
the module, the user is able to go back to the tables, redefine
searches by using “Advanced query” or “Query Builder” or
simply download the results file in cvs-format file. The results
are displayed on the screen in groups of 30 rows. C) Using the
Advanced Query the user can perform searches through SQL
queries. D) The Query Builder module was designed with
checkboxes to make multiple selections across different tables
and columns where every box represents a different column or
attribute from each table.

