Background
Proteins are the working force in all living systems. These
proteins that are translated from mRNA are evolved to
have a defined structure and specified function. There is lot
of work gone into proteins to understand the ultimate truth
of real hideous information [–]. A thorough
understanding of protein evolution from sequence
information is now possible to study as many whole
genome and proteome sequences are made available
online. From various statistical and computational
approaches it can be studied that which is making a portion
of amino acid or mRNA sequences unchanged during
evolution.

White and Jacobs [] reported the statistical distribution
of hydrophobic residues along the protein chains and its
implications to protein folding and evolution. They have
tested for randomness of hydrophobic residues in the
proteins with limited sequences. Currently most of the
protein sequences of several model organisms are
available for thorough understanding, which we have
carried out here. The authors argue that the distribution of
hydrophobic residues along a sequence cannot be
distinguished from that expected for a random
distribution and suggests that functional proteins may
have originated from random sequences, the folding of
proteins into compact structures may be much more
permissive with less sequence specificity than previously
thought and the clusters of hydrophobic residues along
chains which are revealed by hydrophobicity plots are a
natural consequence of a random distribution.

Brooks et al. [] reported the evolution of amino acid
frequencies in proteins over time and its order in genetic
codes. Recently, we have reported that the protein coding
frames of mRNA sequences prefers to have 27% of XTX
(X= A, T, G or C) [] that code for only Large
Hydrophobic Residues (LHR) such as phenylalanine,
isoleucine, leucine, methionine and valine. This paper
analyzes further this in proteins by studying the complete
sets of protein sequences of 15 different species.

Methodology
Dataset
The complete sets of protein sequences different species
including human, chimpanzee, dog, cow, mouse, chicken,
fruitfly, honeybee, mosquito, zebrafish, worm, plant, yeast,
Influenza virus and P.falciparum are taken from
ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/. The numbers of
protein sequences in each set are listed in the table 1 (See ).

Definitions and analysis
The distribution of LHR in different proteins of different
species is studied using our program written ’C‘. That is
the number of LHR residues in a defined window length
(number of amino acids between 10 and 100) counted and
grouped as shown in . The amount of LHR at
which there is a maximum number of windows is taken as
the probable amount of LHR. All this procedure is repeated
for different species and different window length. A plot of
probable amount of LHR versus window length for
different species is plotted in  and discussed.

Discussion
The probable amount of LHR is observed to be 27%.
Though this amount varies from 5 to 55%, the occurrence
in proteins is very less. It is observed that given any
window length, the amount of LHR is preferably 27%.
That is proteins prefer to have 27% of LHR. Generally, in
animals the amount of LHR is less compared to fungi and
plants. The shortage of LHR in animals is balanced by
adding more number of small hydrophobic residues such as
Glycine, Alanine, Proline and Cysteine. In another
calculation it was found that each LHR is compensated
with three small hydrophobic residues. This is the reason
why the length of the animal proteins increases. The
probable amounts of LHR for different window lengths in
all 15 species are plotted in . The window lengths
are studied from 10 to 100 amino acids. Below the window
length of 45, the animal's sequences are having less than
27% of LHR and is not so in yeast and plant. The 27% of LHR is observed very much near window length of 45
amino acids. It is also observed that the amount of LHR in
active site is higher and proteins prefer to have 27% of
LHR. So there is an alteration in amount of LHR in and
around active site. This leads to slight changes in the
amount of LHR in different window length. In another
term an optimum level of LHR is observed when window
length is between 40 and 50 i.e., at 45 amino acids. After
the window length of 45 the amount of LHR is either not
changed or slightly more.

Thymine is responsible for coding LHR in protein. This
thymine has one extra methyl group compared to its RNA
counterpart uracil. As the animals are hetero sexual, the
alteration in thymine content in mRNAs is altered. This
leads to reduction in LHR in animal sequences. This is not
so in plants and fungus. As argued earlier [] the
distribution of LHR are not randomly distributed but with
specific definition. Functional proteins have not originated
from random sequences. The clusters of hydrophobic
residues along the protein chains are a natural consequence
of protein function and not random event. A further atom
level understanding in these protein sequences might give
clear idea on why it happens at window length of 45 amino
acids will be of worth doing which is underway in our lab.
Globular proteins are expected to follow this distribution
profile. The sequences taken here are complete set of the
given species. It may include membrane proteins. However
the numbers of such sequences are less. Their impacts in
the overall results are minimal and ignored. The influenza
virus and P. falciparum show a different trend unlike other
species.

Conclusion
The nature of proteins is that except the active site the
other portions of the proteins prefer to have a definite
amount (27%) of LHR that gives local stability all along
the sequence and overall structure. This is in agreement
with our earlier work on distribution of XTX in mRNA
sequences []. Heterosexual animals show a less number of
LHR in its proteins compared to fungi and plants. The
diseased sequences lack these LHR in total or in some
portion along the sequences that leads to malfunctioning of
the protein. Globular proteins are expected to follow this
behavior. An optimum level of LHR is observed when
window length is 45 amino acids. The alteration in amount
of LHR leads to malfunctioning of the proteins.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Jayaraj et al, Bioinformation 3(9): 409-412 (2009)

Flow diagram showing how the distribution of LHR is computed.

Amount of LHR in different windows and different species.

