Background
Collagen is the most abundant family of fibrous proteins in
mammals which is secreted by the connective tissue cells 
[]. To
note about its localization, it is found mostly in flesh and
connective tissues in vertebrates []. Collagen structure is a
triple helix with three different chains and these three alpha
chains are wound around one another to form the superhelix
structure which gives the long, stiff structure of collagen protein
[]. 
The amino acids in collagen are arranged in such a manner
that glycine is present in every third residue []. Glycine is the
smallest amino acid and thus fits perfectly in the helix and
allows the alpha chains to wrap around together to form the
superhelix. Collagen is rich in glycine and proline residues. So,
other than glycine in every third residue, the remaining two
amino acids are mostly occupied by proline. Pro-collagens are
inactive precursors of collagens. During the synthesis of
collagen, pro-collagens are synthesized at first. The mature
active collagen molecules are formed by the action of
peptidases cleaving the pro-peptides at the N and C terminals.
Vitamin C acts as a cofactor in conversion of pro-collagens to
collagens. Pro-collagens are cleaved only after secretion from
the cells by proteolytic enzymes. Pro-collagens are fibrillar
molecules which are lot more (about a thousand fold) stable
than the collagen fibrils. Cleaving of pro-collagens to collagens
inside the cell can lead to catastrophic consequences.

Collagen is the most abundant protein of the extracellular
matrix (ECM). ECM is an intricate network of macromolecules
filling the extracellular space inside the tissues. Other than
collagens, ECM is rich in proteoglycans, glycoproteins and
proteases []. In vertebrates, the main function of ECM is to
serve as a scaffold to stabilize the physical structure of tissues.
But ECM also has more complex functions which involve cell
survival, cell development, cell migration, cell-cell interaction
and cell proliferation []. Evidenced and hypothetical together
constitute 28 genetically distinct members of collagen protein in
Bos taurus. In bovine, several pathological disorders are
involved with imperative role of collagen. Genetic disorders in
collagen synthesis include mutations in genes that encode for
collagen proteins. Mutations in these genes can lead to five
varieties of diseases in cattle such as Ehlers-Danlos syndrome,
Osteogenesis imperfecta, Marfan syndrome, Epidermolysis
bullosa (junctionalis and acanthylosis). Protein structure is the
key to protein function and interaction. Protein structure
analysis can provide lots of complex protein functions related
disorders. Wet lab based research requires the trial and error
method and cannot make a prediction before the original result.
This problem can be overcome by the use of computational
biology. Alteration in protein structure leads to altered protein
function which in turn leads to development of diseases. So, a
study that involves both dry and wet lab approaches can help
to understand better about the protein function related to its
structure. This type of study has been done to characterize the
human matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), in which, dry lab
predictions were confirmed by experimental approaches and
MMP-7 was proved as potential target in cardiac hypertrophy
[,
]. Collagen acts as substrate of MMPs and is involved in
many pathological conditions. A derivative of collagen, gelatin
also shows such kind of relation to diseases. Analysis of
collagen is thus essential to understand the process of matrix
remodeling in diseases. In this specific study, analysis of bovine
alpha-1 collagen sequences is done by using computational
tools. Alpha-1 is present in all 28 bovine collagen. So, bovine
collagen alpha-1 chain was selected for further study of
collagen sequences. In our study, secondary structural, physicochemical,
phylogenetic and functional analysis of bovine alpha-
1 collagen sequences were done. The target of this research is to
give an insight about the nature of collagen proteins and
characterize this protein family. Proposal about the potential
members involved in disease conditions is also an intention of
this study by examining the collagen protein family and finding
any abnormal characteristics in the protein molecules. Thus
further studies on collagen protein family would be facilitated
by this research.

Methodology
Protein sequence retrieval:
For all 28 members of bovine alpha-1 collagen family, protein
sequences were derived from protein database of NCBI
(National Center for Biotechnology Information,
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein/) in FASTA format.
Various other computational biology tools were used for
further analysis of these sequences.

Analysis of Physico-chemical properties:
The ProtParam tool (http://web.expasy.org/protparam/) of
ExPASy was used to compute amino acid composition (%),
molecular weight, theoretical isoelectric point (pI), number of
positively and negatively charged residues, extinction
coefficient, instability and aliphatic index, Grand Average of
Hydropathy (GRAVY). Another ExPASy tool known as
ProtScale (http://web.expasy.org/protscale/) was used to
compute the number of codons, bulkiness, polarity, refractivity,
recognition factors, hydrophobicity, transmembrane tendency,
percent buried residues, percent accessible residues, average
area buried and average flexibility [].

Analysis of Secondary structural properties:
Secondary structural properties of the protein including alpha
helix, 310 helix, Pi helix, beta bridge, extended strand, beta turns,
bend region, random coil, ambiguous states and other states
were computed by the use of SOPMA (Self Optimized
Prediction Method with Alignment, 
http://npsapbil.ibcp.fr/) tool of
NPS (Network Protein Sequence Analysis) [].

Analysis of functional properties:
For functional analysis, the motifs of the alpha-1 protein
sequences were identified by using the Motif Scan tool
(http://myhits.isb-sib.ch/cgi-bin/motif_scan) tool 
[]. The
input data type was in FASTA format and motifs were scanned
against Prosite patterns.

Phylogenetic analysis:
Phylogenetic analysis of bovine alpha-1 collagen sequences was
done by two softwares, ClustalX and TreeView. All the
sequences were aligned by using the clustalx version 2.1. Then
phylogenetic tree was generated by using NJ method. The
output of phylogenetic tree in Phylip format was then viewed
by TreeView.

Discussion
For all the collagen, three criteria were analyzed- the biological
processes they are involved in, cellular components they are
part of and their molecular function  (see
supplementary material) Collagen 1 and 2 seem to be involved
in a huge number of biological processes. No data involving the
three selected criteria were found for 8 collagen members. It
signifies that these collagen members are yet uncharacterized
for their biological process, cellular component and molecular
function. From ProtParam result, it was observed that for all the
residues, the percentage of glycine and proline was higher than
the other residues. Except collagen 12, 14 and 20 glycine content
was higher than 12% (). High glycine content is a
necessity for collagens to maintain their triple helical structure
since larger amino acids cause steric hindrance 
[]. Proline
content for all members except collagen 12, 14 and 20 was
observed more than 10% (). Proline residues of collagen
are necessary to stabilize the helix and disrupt the structure of
secondary structural elements []. So, for collagen to be a
protein molecule and carry out processes like cell migration and
cell adhesion, proline concentration is important. The total
number of positively (Arg + Lys) and negatively (Asp + Glu)
charged residues of the collagen members were observed 
 (see supplementary material). For 14 members, the total
number of positively charged residues exceeded the total
number of negatively charged residues; they showed their
isoelectric point in alkaline range. For the remaining members,
the isoelectric point was within acidic range. Extinction
coefficient for collagen 7, 11, 12, 14, 17, 18 and 20 was observed
higher than remaining members. Higher extinction coefficient
means higher concentration of lysine, tryptophan and tyrosine.
This observation is important for protein-protein interaction
studies. Whether a protein is stable or not can be described by
its instability index. Instability index for collagen 14, 17, 18 and
20 is higher than 40 and thus describing these proteins as
unstable []. High aliphatic index was observed for collagen
12, 14 and 20. Higher aliphatic index indicates higher
concentration of alanine, valine, isoleucine and leucine
occupying the relative volume of a protein []. Again, higher
aliphatic index provides higher thermostability. For bovine
alpha-1 collagen, aliphatic index ranges from 35.18 to 84.29. It is
a wide range and suggests that most of the collagens may be
stable. For collagen 14 and 20, the instability index and aliphatic
index results contradict greatly. According to instability index,
these proteins are unstable but their aliphatic index is high
enough to say that they are stable.

Grand Average of Hydropathy (GRAVY) was computed for all
the members. A broad range of GRAVY value was observed
from -0.955 to -0.223 for bovine alpha-1 collagen. By ExPASy's
ProtScale tool hydrophobicity was measured and it ranges from
-0.3555 for collagen 20 (most hydrophilic) to 0.1275 for collagen
23 (most hydrophobic). Average flexibility ranges between
0.4365 and 0.459; a short range which indicates high glycine and
proline content in the proteins  (see supplementary
material). SOPMA analysis was done for all bovine alpha-1
collagen members and it showed a high value for Random coil
in all the members  (see supplementary material). The
values for alpha helix were found higher than extended strands
in 13 collagens. High value for random coil bears important
significance in the study of protein tertiary structure and related
functions. Collagen 1, 2, 3 motifs were described as VWFC
domain signature and the other two were described as
pancreatic trypsin inhibitor family signature. As VWFC domain
is involved in oligomerization, so it could be related to the
assembly of collagen into a triple helical structure. Furthermore,
Collagen 7 and 28 were showed to have pancreatic trypsin
inhibitor (Kunitz) family signature which manifest strong
matches in the motifs  (see supplementary material).
Phylogenetic tree was constructed with distance based
Neighbor-Joining method. A number of clusters were found
including 6 and 28, 12 and 14, 21 and 22, 1 and 2, 4 and 13, 17
and 25 lying in close proximity to 26, 20, 9, 3, 7 and 23
respectively (). Proteins in close evolutionary
relationship may be analyzed together for their involvement in
similar biological processes. Collagen 1 has already been
reported as a key player in cattle osteogenesis imperfecta 
[].
The FACIT (Fibril Associated Collagens with Interrupted Triple
Helices, Collagen 9, 12, 14 and 20) get associated with collagen 1
and then form fibrillar structure. In human, collagen 9 has
already been reported as responsible for skeletal disorders 
[].
Collagen 12, 14 and 20 might be potent target in pathological
conditions. Based on their similarities and abnormalities in
structural properties, these protein molecules might be
accounted for investigation for their involvement in
pathological conditions.

Conclusion
In this research, we tried to disclose the hidden information
about bovine alpha-1 collagen by analyzing their structural
features e.g. amino acid content, physico-chemical properties,
secondary structural features and phylogenetic classification.
Various computational tools were used to ease up the process of
finding. Change in protein structure can cause impairment of
protein function and develop many pathological conditions.
Disease conditions interfere with the normal biological
processes in animals. Apart from these, based on comparative
characterization and analyzing the evolutionary relationship it
can be hypothesized that collagen 12, 14 may be potential target
in pathological conditions and they show a close resemblance
with collagen 20 in phylogenetic tree for which cellular and
molecular function still not revealed. Hence it can be assumed
that collagen 12 and 20 also can interact with the fibril surface
and regulate fibrillogenesis which is a unique feature of
collagen 14. Moreover, all of these collagens belong to FACIT
collagen family and share similar properties and abnormal
behaviors; e.g. they have very low percentage of glycine
content, high instability index and high aliphatic index. To sum
up, this experiment will provide an insight for the biologists
working with ECM proteins in order to prosecuting research on
collagen to find out different cell mediated injuries and so on.
Findings of this study need further studies and validation by
experimental research.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Saha et al, Bioinformation 9(1): 042-048 (2013)

Glycine and Proline content (in %) of bovine alpha-1 collagens.

Phylogenetic tree of bovine alpha 1 collagen sequences
by using Neighbor-Joining Method.

