Background
Elastase is a proteolytic enzyme or protease that breaks down
the proteins. Elastase-1 is a serine-protease with broad substrate
specificity. It is mainly expressed in skin, although first found
in pancreas in unexpressed form. It preferentially cleaves
peptide bonds involving the carbonyl groups of particularly
alanine and other amino acid residues devoid of or with small
hydrophobic side chains, such as Gly, Val, Leu, or Ile. Elastase
is also used in protein sequencing studies, and in preparations
for releasing cells from tissues during experiments []. The
neutrophil form of elastase or elastase-2, also a serine
proteinase, is 218 amino acids long with two asparagine-linked
carbohydrate chains and is present in azurophil granules in the
neutrophil cytoplasm. Unlike elastase-1, it has a very narrow
specificity and is involved in the preferential cleaving of Val-X
bonds, and rare Ala-X links []. It also possesses the ability to
degrade elastin, cartilage proteoglycans, and several other
collagens and fibronectin which are involved the degradation of
foreign materials during phagocytosis. The neutrophil elastase
also breaks down the outer membrane protein A (OmpA) of
Escherichia coli and other Gram negative bacteria, along with the
virulence factors of Shigella.

The virulence form of elastase is produced by microorganisms
such as P. aeruginosa. Elastolytic proteinases were also found in
Aspergillus fumigatus and Aspergillus flavus and are pathogenic
to humans. Bacterial elastases disrupts tight junctions, cause
proteolytic damage to the tissues by breaking down cytokines
and alpha proteinase inhibitors, cleaving immunoglobulin A
and G (IgA &amp; IgG), cuts C3bi, a component of the complement
system and crops CR1, a receptor on neutrophils for another
complement molecule and disrupts phagocytosis. The cleavage
of IgA, IgG, C3bi and CR1 contributes to the decreased ability
of neutrophils to kill pathogens by phagocytosis and contribute
to human pathogenesis. Damage to connective tissue caused by
leakage of enzymes is normally limited to proteinase inhibitors,
mainly by the acute phase protein α1-antitryspin (A1AT), and
insufficient levels of these inhibitors leads to pulmonary
emphysema. Elastase in particular has also been implicated in
abnormal lung connective tissue turnover []. The rare disease
called cyclic hematopoiesis, an autosomal dominant genetic
disorder is also caused due to uncontrolled elastase secretion,
essentially due to α1-antitryspin deficiency (A1AD) that is
linked to ELA-2 mutations. Elastase is also responsible for the
blistering in bullous pemphigoid, a skin condition, in the
presence of antibodies. Elastase inhibitors are essential for the
treatment of diseases like pulmonary emphysema and elastase
inhibitors were also found to promote anti-inflammatory action.
The aim of this work is to screen the active compounds from
essential oils of plants for in silico evaluation for the effective
inhibition of elastases of neutrophil, porcine pancreas, and
P.aeruginosa. They were also analyzed for their subcutaneous
toxicity properties by ADME – TOX – Web server.

Methodology
Structure Retrieval:
The three dimensional crystal structures of the three elastases
were retrieved from the Protein Data Bank []. The elastase of
P.aeruginosa bound with an inhibitor (1U4G), the crystal
structure of Human Neutrophil elastase complexed with an
inhibitor (1H1B) [], and the native porcine pancreatic elastase
(1QNJ) [] were taken as targets. The ligand molecules were
retrieved from PubChem and were refined using ACD
ChemSketch, a tool that offers functionalities such as structure
refining, optimization etc.

Active Site Prediction:
The active sites of all the three elastases were identified using
Q-SiteFinder and it works by binding hydrophobic probes to
the protein, and finding the clusters of probes with most
favorable binding region based on energy values. These clusters
are then ranked according to the sum of total binding energies
for each cluster in the order of likelihood of being a binding site.

Docking studies:
The three targets were docked various natural phytochemical
compounds that constitutes the active molecule of essential oils.
AutoDock 4.2 [] was used to calculate the free energy of
binding between the ingredients of essential oil and the
elastases. It uses charge-based desolvation force fields and well
defined improved models of the unbound state. Docking
calculations attempts to place the ligand into the binding sites
of the target and then gives the best docked conformations with
minimal energy, as the output. Semi-flexible docking protocol
was applied, wherein the enzyme elastase was kept rigid while
the ligands were kept flexible for being docked upon. A 5A°
grid was built surrounding the binding pocket and the grid
maps were set to the dimension of 60 × 60 × 60 points with the
spacing of 0.375A° to yield the receptor model that included
atoms within 0.5 A° of the grid center. All the other parameters
were set in default and Lamarckian Genetic Algorithm (LGA)
was chosen to predict the best conformers. The protein - ligand
interactions were viewed by PyMOL viewer.

Subcutaneous Toxicity Prediction:
Toxicity is defined as any undesirable adverse effect of a
chemical compound on a life form. Safety and issues pertaining
to the ADMET (Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism,
Excretion and Toxicity) accounts for the failure of most of the
drugs and it is crucial to identify the toxicity in the early stages
of drug discovery in order to avoid late-stage attrition. ADMETox
Box Web Server of Pharma Algorithms was used to predict
the subcutaneous toxicity and toxic effects such as mouse LD50
with other parameters such as ion fraction values, pKa, Ames
test etc

Discussion
The docking results highlights that the Pseudomonas elastase
had a strong affinity for compounds such as citral, thymol,
geranial and geraniol, of which thymol was having best
docking score and the best ADMET profile. In the case of
elastase-1, both geranial and geraniol indicate binding property
and geranial has more score. Human elastase-2 has affinity with
both thymol and geranial and the former have better score.

Essential oils from plants such as Cymbopogon citratus,
Cymbopogon martini, Rosmarinus officinalis, Mentha piperita,
Pelargonium odoratissimum and Vitex negundo are effectively used
in aromatherapy to treat various types of diseases. This study
clearly highlights the effective use of essential natural oils for
inhibiting the deleterious activities of elastase to treat diseases
caused by them. Different natural compounds such as
Citronellal, Citral, Geranial, Geraniol, Thymol and Linalool
were used to screen for their elastase inhibitory properties.
Among them, Citral was having least toxicity and good docking
results with the best inhibitory profile against Pseudomonas
elastase (). It was ranked second in the energy values
against Porcine Pancreatic elastase (), while Thymol
was having the least energy when bound with Human
neutrophil elastase () though Gerenial showed the best
toxicity parameters with minimal toxicity. The  (see
supplementary material) summarizes the effect of essential oil
components on various elastases.

Conclusion
Natural essential oils long used in aromatherapy and massages
have significant medicinal properties. Elastases which are
responsible for conditions like pulmonary emphysema, bullous
pemphigoid etc could be effectively treated using the
components of essential oils, subcutaneously. Although most of
these essential oil shows toxic nature, when needs to be
administered for internal use, there is a good prospect for
development of ointments and aerosols for nebulizers for the
treatment of bullous pemphigoid and pulmonary emphysema
respectively, by utilizing these natural compounds in future.
Also, the natural compounds could be developed for the
inhibition of Pseudomonas elastase by applying the aerosol
model

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors thank Microlabs, Institute of Research and
Technology, Vellore &amp; Arcot, Tamilnadu, India for providing
required facilities.

Citation:Sivamani et al, Bioinformation 8(10): 457-460 (2012)

Elastase enzyme of Pseudomonas aeruginosa docked
with Citral

Porcine pancreatic elastase docked with Citral

Human neutrophil elastase docked with Thymol

