Background
Protein structures are determined by experimental methods which
include NMR, X­ray and Electronic Microscopy. The
experimentally solved protein structures are archived at the publicly
available databases such as, Protein Data Bank (PDB) []. Protein
Data Bank (PDB) is an internationally referred protein structure
database, it comprises of the atomic coordinates of the three
dimensional (3D) structure of proteins []. The coordinate file is
organized in a common file format, called the PDB format [].
Amino acid sequence, secondary structural information and atom
positions are organized systematically in the PDB file enabling
machine learning []. Many molecular visualization tools (RasMol,
JMol, PyMOL etc.) have been developed based on the PDB format
leading to visualization of the 3D structure of proteins from the
atomic coordinates. The information pertaining to the fold class at
the tertiary level and the arrangement of secondary structural
elements (motifs) at the lower levels in the structural hierarchy
could directly be inferred from the 3D structure. However,information that are embedded in the PDB file such as the amino
acid sequence of the secondary structural elements viz., α­helices
and β­strands, is of significant interest to the scientific community.
Knowing the amino acid sequence of the secondary structures throw
light on the biochemical and structural properties of the residues
which inturn governs the formation of α­helices and β­strands in
proteins. It furthers understanding on the relationship between
proteins and their possible evolutionary origins, the relationship
between the amino acid sequence and the tertiary structure and,
structure­function analysis. To the best of our understanding, the
amino acid sequence is manually extracted based on the identifier(s)that are associated with the secondary structural elements in PDB
format. Towards an automated extraction of the amino acid
sequence encoding the secondary structural regions, we developed a
standalone tool entitled ExSer (Extract the amino acid Sequences of
secondary structures). ExSer decipher the amino acid sequence
encoding the secondary structural elements (helices and strands),
number of residues, position and their percentage composition,
given the PDB coordinate file as query.

Implementation
ExSer was developed using Practical Extraction and Report
Language (PERL) [] and Tool kit 
(Tk) []. PERL is used for
scripting and Tk for designing graphical user interface (GUI). ExSer
provide the option to either select a PDB file via the browse button
or to paste the structural information in the PDB format. Firstly, the
tool extract the entire amino acid sequence of the polypeptide
chain(s) based on the identifier “SEQRES” defined in the PDB
format (latest ver. 3.20) []. Simultaneously it picks up the start and
end positions of the helices and strands using “HELIX” and
“SHEET” identifiers mentioned in the PDB file. Finally, based on
the above positions the amino acid sequences of helices and strands
were extracted from the PDB coordinate file (). The ExSer
output comprise of, the complete amino acid sequence of the
polypeptide chain(s) (likely A, B, C etc.) that make the protein
structure, the amino acid sequences of secondary structural regions
(helices and strands), the number of residues involved, the start and
end positions of the secondary structural regions and their
percentage composition with respect to the total protein. Subclassification
in the helices such as right­handed alpha, omega, pi,
gamma, 310 and left­handed alpha,omega,gamma etc., finds
mention in the output. Similarly, the parallel and anti­parallel nature
of the strands with respect to the previous strand is indicated. The
extracted amino acid sequence finally appears in the FASTA format
as output and can be saved in a separate text file, as well.

Caveats and future development
ExSer had been validated with more than 300 coordinate files
downloaded from PDB. Since, turns finds no explicit mention in the
PDB format (ver. 3.20), the tool cannot retrieve the amino acid
sequence corresponding to the turns in protein structure. This tool
can work on all windows operating systems including windows
vista. In future, ExSer will be available for Linux and Macintosh
operating systems.

This tool was developed at the Bioinformatics centre, Tamil Nadu
Agricultural University with the financial support of the Department
of Biotechnology (DBT), Government of India under the
Biotechnology Information System (BTIS) program.

Citation:Vignesh et al, Bioinformation 4(9): 390-391 (2010)

Flow chart illustrating the ExSer working processes. The identifiers, SEQRES, HELIX and SHEET are as per the PDB format

