Background
Biology today is a highly information rich science, thus
necessitating the use of bioinformatics and computational
techniques. The foremost challenge is the management of
scientific data are which is important for the support of life
science discovery. As computational models of essential
cellular components are gradually produced, biology research
would require computer intervention more often. Cross domain
access to biological data and information followed by
management, organization and integration is needed for the
successful conversion to in silico biology. Biologists and other
scientific research workers need to be provided with integrated
platforms which would shorten the time for query processing
as well as provide apt and intelligent answers to the queries.
Quite a few interfaces have been designed for accessing and
retrieving biological data in the past []. Few Of them being:
The Sequence Retrieval System (SRS); TAMBIS: transparent
access to multiple bioinformatics information sources; and The
Kleisli Query System [,
]; however, the lack of continuous
back end support and the ever changing nature of the biological
ontologies have rendered them inconsequential.

Implementation
IASSD integrates heterogeneous data sources from NCBI
(PubMed, Nucleotide, Protein, NLM, MedLine and Structure
Databases) and PDB. This interface is general purpose, written
in Java, and provides a navigable interface for a variety of
special-format bioinformatics repositories. The system has a
universal internal data model that allows for the direct
representation of relational, electronic data interchange (EDI) formats, including XML-based sources [4].

Key Features
IASSD provides on demand access and retrieval of the most upto-
date biological data and is benchmarked with the ability to
perform complex queries across multiple heterogeneous
databases to find the most relevant information. Apart from
this, it is also equipped with a robust information integration
infrastructure that connects various computational steps
involving database queries, computational algorithms, and
application software with a strong base in the use of wsdl
services across the web []. This is one of the unique interfaces
which allow the user to navigate from a paper directly to the
structure of the molecule described in the publication utilizing
JMOL ().

Handling of functional routines using Java
IASSD uses log4j , NCBI eutils for sending and retrieving
information from NCBI. Its uses Jmol Application for
visualization of protein structure. Log4j can be configured by
external configuration file at runtime. Log4j keep watch in
terms of levels of priorities and provide mechanisms by which
it direct logging information to a great variety of destinations
like file, console, database etc. The eUtils(Entrez Programming
Utilities),a group of eight server-side programs [] that ensures
availability, of a stable interface into the Entrez query and
database system at the National Center for Biotechnology
Information (NCBI), is always fixed and it translates a standard
set of input parameters into the values necessary for searching
and retrieving data from different NCBI software components.
Thus the eUtils serve as organized interface to the Entrez
system. For accessing data, software first sends an eUtils URL
to NCBI, then get the results of this posting, after which data
are being processes as required. The software can thus make
use any computer language like Java, Perl, Python, for sending
a URL to the eUtils server and interpret the XML response.
Apart from the Jmol [] java applet, a version of Jmol that
works only when embedded in web browsers, the Jmol
application is a stand-alone program (as are PyMol and
Rasmol). The Jmol application runs independently and has
nothing to do with web browsers. The Jmol program is
implemented with help of Java and performs identically on
Linux, Macs, Windows and Apple. The workflow is explained
in .

Caveat
IASSD requires a high-speed internet connection in the
terminal where it is to be used since it does not come with a
predefined database. Apart from that, the current version only
supports key word based search strings and no database
specific identifier can be used for the search.

Future Development
Accessing and retrieving data from various databases;
integrating more best-of-breed analytical tools and algorithms
for extraction of useful information from the massive volume
and diversity of biological data; Making the application
available in LINUX and OS-X.

Citation:Ganguli et al, Bioinformation 10(12): 764-766 (2014)

The features of IASSD; (i) the interface; (ii) Typical result for a keyword based query, (iii)PDB query and display in Jmol;
(iv) Editing the structure using Jmol commands.

The scripting pipeline

