Background
Despite being a controllable, preventable and curable disease,
Tuberculosis (TB) still remains as a major public health problem in
many parts of the world. The recent increase in multi-drug resistant
(MDR-TB) and extensively drug resistant (XDR-TB) has further
worsened the situation. Drug resistance in TB is essentially a potential
threat to the TB control programmes. Genetic and molecular analysis
of drug resistance in M. tuberculosis suggests that the bacilli usually
acquire resistance either by alteration of the drug target through
mutation or by titration of the drug through overproduction of the
target. PZA is an important sterilizing drug and a principle component
in the current six-month short course TB-chemotherapy. PZA plays a
unique role in shortening the therapy from a period of 9 to 12 months
down to 6 months, because PZA kills a population of semi dormant
tubercle bacilli, residing in an acidic environment, which cannot be
killed by other TB drugs [].

In M. tuberculosis, the susceptibility to PZA correlates with the
presence of a single enzyme with nicotinamidase and pyrazinamidase
activities. Strains of M. tuberculosis that are resistant to PZA are often
defective in PZase activity []. PZA-resistant (PZAr) M. tuberculosis
clinical isolates are usually defective for PZase activity, and there is
very good correlation between PZA resistance and loss of this enzyme.
Scorpio and Zhang in 1996 had identified the PZase gene (pncA) from
M. tuberculosis and had shown that pncA mutations are a major
mechanism of PZA resistance []. The identified pncA mutations are
largely missense mutations causing amino acid substitutions, and in
some cases nucleotide insertions or deletions and nonsense mutations
in the pncA structural gene or in the putative promoter region of pncA
[]. The uniqueness in the mutations of pncA gene is its diversity and
scattering along the whole gene though there does appear to be some
degree of clustering at three regions of PncA protein (3 to 17, 61 to 85,
and 132 to 142). These regions are likely to contain catalytic sites for
the PZase enzyme []. PZA as a prodrug needs to be activated by the
bacterial nicotinamidase-PZase into pyrazonic acid (POA), the active
moiety of the drug [].

A study [] depicting the structure-function relationships of PncA
protein (PZase) has clearly shown that the decrease in PZase activity
observed in the mutant proteins correlates well with the structural
modifications. However, the report also emphasizes the need for
further structural studies to validate the positioning of the catalytically
important amino acid residues (Asp8, Asp49, Lys96, Trp68, Ala134,
Thr135 and Cys138). Although the report has provided both kinetic
and structural data related to nine different mutants of PZase in
connection to Cys138 a putative active site residue, but it did not
provide any information regarding the mutants of Cys138. In another
recent report [] comprehensive enzymatic characterization of PZase
was carried out with the generation of nine different mutants. It
suggested that the Asp8, Lys96 and Cys138 were key residues for
catalysis and Asp49, His51, His57 and His71 were essential for metal
ion binding, this report too demanded the need to promote structural
studies. In the light of which, we therefore have made an attempt to
develop a three dimensional (3D) model of PZase along with the
generation of five mutant models with Cys138Ser, Cys138Tyr,
Asp8Gly, Lys96Thr and Ser104Arg and in the process, to explore its
interactions with PZA. Out of the five, two (Cys138Ser and
Cys138Tyr) were created in our study whereas the other three mutants
Asp8Gly, Lys96Thr and Ser104Arg were created on the basis of prior
kinetic studies. In addition, a basic analysis was performed to
determine the correlation between kinetic and the docking data based
upon the above-mentioned studies.

Methodology
Homology modeling of PZase
Homology modeling helps in predicting the 3D structure of a
macromolecule with unknown structure (target) by comparing it with a
known template from another, structurally highly similar,
macromolecule. The sequence of PZase from M. tuberculosis was
searched against PDB (Protein databank) using PSI-BLAST (Basic
Local Alignment Search Tool) [] program to identify the related
protein structure to be used as a template. The X-ray structure of
PZase (PDB code, 1im5) from Pyrococcus horikoshii (P. horikoshii)
was chosen as the template for the modeling PZase of M. tuberculosis
(SWISSPROT accession no. Q5UFH2). Sequence and structural
alignment of 1im5 and 2hor with PZase sequence was performed using
ClustalW [] and MSDFOLD. Aligning was carried out carefully
without insertion of any gaps in the conserved secondary structural
regions. From the alignment, spatial restraints were derived and used
in the 3D model construction with MODELLER (Discovery Studio;
Accelrys). The stereochemical quality of the model structure was
analyzed with RAMPAGE program using Ramachandran plot [].
This model was further used for the identification of active site and for
docking with PZA.

Modeling of mutant PZase was similar to the WT showing 99%
similarity owing to change in single amino acid. Sequence alignment
of WT with the five mutant sequences was performed using ClustalW
(see supplementary materials available with authors).

Active site analysis of PZase enzyme
The active site of PZase from M. tuberculosis was analyzed using DS
package. To identify a binding site, the receptor is first mapped to a
grid. Grid points within a given distance of a receptor atom are marked
as occupied by the receptor, and thus designated as undesirable
locations for ligand atoms. The remaining unoccupied grid points are
used to define the binding site (See supplementary material available
with the authors for procedure to analyze active site) [].

Docking of PZA-PZase
Docking was performed using CDOCKER. The CDOCKER protocol
is an implementation of the CDOCKER algorithm [] in the DS
environment. It allows running a refinement docking of any number of
ligands with a single protein receptor. CDOCKER is a grid-based
molecular docking method that employs CHARMm. The ligand was
added with H (Hydrogen) atoms using DS. The models were energy
minimized with CHARMm force field and metal ion Zn was added
before performing docking. The receptor is held rigid while the ligands
are allowed to flex during the refinement. Docking was performed
using the default settings. The default speed selection was used to
avoid a potential reduction in docking accuracy.

Discussion
Homology modeling of PZase
In the results of BLAST search against PDB, 1im5 and 2hor were
identified as template and reference proteins respectively. 3D-PSSM
algorithm was used for fold recognition analyses by threading and
provided similar results to that of BLAST. PZase of P. horikoshii
(1im5), a member of α/β isochorismatase-like hydrolases family,
having high level sequence identity of 37%, was chosen as a template
for modeling PZase of M. tuberculosis. Previously, a study []
provided structural details about the of PZase on the basis of model
obtained from Arthrobacter CSHase as template which had sequence
homology of about 26%, whereas in the present study the chosen
template showed 37% identity; indicating a greater degree of
reliability. In general, 30% sequence homology is required for
generating useful models.

Secondary structure of PZase was predicted using JPRED. Amino acid
sequence of the target was aligned to the template sequence based on
the secondary structure information for building an accurate model.
Structurally conserved regions (SCRs) for the target sequence and the
templates were determined by superimposition of two structures and
multiple sequence alignment. Coordinates from the reference protein
(1im5) to the SCRs, structurally variable regions (SVRs), N-termini
and C-termini were assigned to the target sequence based on the
satisfaction of spatial restraints. The initial model was thus generated
with the above procedure. On the basis of PFAM analysis it was found
that the model contains isochrismatase domain (residues 2-185)
consisting of seven α-helices and six strands of a parallel β-sheet,
which is similar to those in alpha and beta (a/b) proteins. The 3D
structure of PZase is as shown in . The connectivity between
the secondary structures is represented in TOPS diagram ().

Validation of PZase
The models were validated using Ramachandran plot. For the WT, a
total of 94.5 % of the residues were in favored region. The number of
favorable region residues for the mutants viz., Asp8Gly, Lys96Thr,
Ser104Arg, Cys138Tyr and Cys138Ser are 95.1, 96.7, 96.2, 93.4, and
94.5% respectively (see supplementary material for Figures).

Superimposition of 1IM5 with PZase enzyme
The 3D structures of PZase (final model) was superimposed with 1im5
and 2hor using MSDFOLD (refer supplementary material for figures).
Based on the above analysis, it was evident that the secondary
structures were highly conserved among the three proteins but 2hor
showed 25 residues (forming two antiparallel strands) insertion
between βB and α3. The weighted root mean square deviation
(RMSD) for 2hor was 1.4 Å with PZase. The RMSD of Cα trace
between 1im5 and PZase was 0.5 Å with a Z score of 7.0 supporting
that 1im5 is the right template for modeling PZase protein.

The mutant models obtained was also validated using the
Combinatorial Extension (CE) method. The structural alignment was
performed for the WT and mutant models and was indicative of good
structural alignment (99.5%) due the change in single amino acid. The
3D structures of WT and mutants were also superimposed. The RMSD
score was calculated using the sequence identity and gaps in the
alignment. The RMSD value of 0.1 Å and Z-score of 7.3 was shown
for the mutants Asp8Gly, Lys96Thr and Ser104Arg, and for the
mutants Cys138Tyr and Cys138Ser the values were of 0.6 Å and 1.0 Å
respectively (see supplementary materials available with the authors).

Active site analysis of PZase
The final model was analyzed for identifying the possible binding sites
of PZase using binding site tool in DS and Qsite finder tool []. Six
binding sites were identified using DS. Out of 6 sites, site one was
considered as active site consisting of Asp8, Phe13, Asp49, Trp68,
Lys96, Ser104, Ala134, Thr135 and Cys138, which was found to be in
concordance with the earlier reports [,]. Of these, Asp8 occur
within the loop region connecting βA and α1, Phe13 within α1, Asp49
within βB, Trp68 within 20 residues long loop connecting α3 and α4,
Lys96 emerge from βC, Ala134 and Thr135 within loop region
connecting βB and α6. Ser104 emerge form the loop connecting βC
and α5. The putative active site residue Cys138, which is highly
conserved, is located within α6 region of the model. Hence, site one
was chosen as the most favorable binding site for exploring the
interaction with drug molecule.

Mutated models
In this study, PZase was modeled using the DS 2.0 and the models
were constructed based on the sequence of pncA gene for WT and five
mutants Asp8Gly, Lys96Thr, Ser104Arg, Cys138Tyr and Cys138Ser
(refer supplementary materials available with the authors). No
significant conformational change was observed in the structure of the
mutant models Lys96Thr and Ser104Arg whereas in the mutant
Asp8Gly changes were detected at Lys96 (a key active site residue).
Mutated model with Cys138Tyr substitution imparted certain
conformational changes at the active site with deviation in the side
chain of residues viz., Asp49, Trp68 and Lys96. Structural evaluation
with RAMPAGE showed a decrease in number of residue in the most
favored region (93.4%). Model structure with Cys138Ser substitution
also produced some degree of conformational changes at the active
site. Structural evaluation showed 94.5% residues in the most favored
region using RAMPAGE using (see supplementary material).
Superimposition of WT with mutant (Asp8Gly, Lys96Thr and
Ser104Arg) models using CE implies that there was a little degree of
deviation from the WT (on the basis of RMSD score of 0.1 Å); hence
the change in single amino acid did not produce any significant change
in the overall conformation of the protein. In case of mutants such as
Cys138Tyr and Cys138Ser (0.6 Å and 1.0 Å) the deviation was more
pronounced affecting the conformation drastically, this was quite
apparent in Cys138Ser model (refer supplementary material available
with authors). Superimposition of binding residues of WT (Cys138)
with mutant (Tyr138) and (Ser138) models are shown in  and
 respectively.

Docking of PZA-PZase
All the six models were flexibly docked with PZA using CDOCKER.
Of the ten poses produced, the best ligand pose was selected based on
CDOCKER top score and the target structure was selected for further
analysis. The ligand poses were analyzed and a heat map was
produced to count H bonds made by the poses to the receptor molecule
and count close contacts (van der Waals clashes) between the poses
and receptor molecule. No van der Waals clashes were seen between
the PZA and model structure (data not shown). Docking results
indicate that conserved amino acid residue (Cys138) in PZase play an
important role in maintaining a functional conformation and directly
involved in drug donor binding.

Interaction of the drug molecule with mutated models was also studied
on the basis of H bonding. As it is well known, H bonds play an
important role for the structure and function of biological molecules,
especially for the enzyme catalysis. The H bonds present in the
enzyme-drug complex along with their distances are shown in .
 In this study, it was found that mutated model with Cys138Tyr
forms five H bonds: 3 with Asp49, 1 with His71 and 1 with Ala102.
The mutated model with Cys138Ser forms three H bonds with Asp49.
The mutated model with Asp8Gly forms three H bonds. There
occurred no H bond formation during the docking process for the
mutants Lys96Thr and Ser104Arg. WT model with Cys138 forms four
H bonds: Three H bonds were identified to form with Asp49 and one
H bond with Ala102 these are important for strong interactions with
the drug. The PZA-PZase complex was visualized using DS in order to
get insight into the interaction between the drug and target. Surface
representation of model structure with PZA docked into the cavity is
shown in . It is evident from the figure that PZA is located
in the center of the active site, and is stabilized by H bonding
interactions. The drug is bound between α1- α4 alpha helices and βA –
βD beta strands. The binding energy between the enzyme and drug
was found to be -27.9397 kcal/mol. The electrostatic and Van der
Waals energies were -5.48845 and -3.35432 kcal/mol respectively. It
can be speculated that the conformational changes which occurs due to
mutations at the active site of target protein, causes alteration in the
drug binding ability of the protein. At instances when the mutations
are severe, the binding ability gets diminished resulting in survival of
the organism in the presence of drug, leading to drug resistance.

According to the inverse relationship between the binding affinity of
drug and drug resistance (higher the affinity-lower will be the
resistance). It can be pointed out that docking, although an important
parameter to judge the affinity of protein (high score leads to high
affinity) towards the ligand, cannot be considered as a sole factor for
the determination of binding affinity. In the present context it has
Lys96Thr and Ser104Arg displayed a similar and low docking value (-
7.21 kcal/mol) indicating lower affinity hence may contribute to highlevel
drug resistance, is in agreement with the reported [,
] kinetic
data showing no activity and conferring high degree of resistance. On
the contrary, the mutant with Asp8Gly conversion showed relatively
high docking value (-16.51 kcal/mol) suggesting its higher affinity
towards the drug molecule leading to low-level drug resistance in
concordance with the report [] showing higher activity, but in sharp
opposition with the report [] with virtually no activity. The mutated
model with substitution of Cys to Ser at position 138 showed higher
value (-19.18 kcal/mol) compared to Cys to Tyr model (-17.75
kcal/mol). Therefore, Cys to Tyr substitution may lead to higher
degree of PZA resistance than Cys to Ser.

The mutant models Lys96Thr and Ser104Arg showed significantly
lower score (60%) compared to WT value (-17.95 kcal/mol). The
models Asp8Gly and Cys138Tyr displayed a low score of 9% and 2%
respectively. However the mutant Cys138Ser presented higher score
(7%) compared to WT and others. Overall the interaction between the
WT and mutant models with the drug indicates differences in the
binding ability, with the WT values being higher than the mutants such
as Lys96Thr, Ser104Arg, Asp8Gly and Cys138Tyr and lower than
Cys138Ser. Thus it can be hypothesized that the above mutants may
contribute to high-level drug resistance in the following descending
pattern: Lys96Thr/Ser104Arg ≫Asp8Gly ≫Cys138Tyr ≫Cys138Ser.

Conclusion
With the help of predicted models, the conformational changes due to
mutations at the active site residues were determined. On the basis of
docking score, it can be interpreted that the steric constraints resulting
from such mutations could significantly alter the folding of the mutant
protein and or the positioning of the side chain of the catalytic
residues. This may readily explain the loss of PZase activity thereby
inhibiting the conversion of PZA to POA. Also, how point mutations
can dramatically alter the ability of drug binding which eventually
may lead to differences among the WT and mutants. Thus, we suggest
that the mutant Cys138Ser represented with high docking score may
contribute to low-level drug resistance than other mutants. The
findings suggest that redesign of the PZA molecule to improve drug
binding may be a viable approach to overcome resistance in PZase
especially for mutant with Lys96Thr, Ser104Arg andAsp8Gly
substitutions. Such studies will be helpful in better understanding
about the mechanism of drug resistant. Detection of mutations at the
active site of the target protein enables to gain novel insight into the
drug-target interactions, leading to the rational design of more
efficacious wonder drugs that not only shorten TB-therapy but also
can prevent the emergence of drug resistance.

A. Nusrath Unissa received financial support from the Indian Council
of Medical Research as Senior Research Fellow. We are grateful for
the computational support provided by Biomedical Informatics Centre
of TRC.

Citation: Unissa et al, Bioinformation 4(1): 24-29 (2009)

(a) Three-dimensional model of PZase. (b) A TOPS cartoon of PZase model. Strands are shown in yellow triangles and helices in red
circles. The direction of elements can be deduced from the connecting lines. ’Up‘ strands are indicated by upward pointing triangles.

(a) Superimposition of binding residues of WT (Cys138) and mutant (Tyr138) model. (b) Superimposition of binding residues of WT
(Cys138) and mutant (Ser138) model.

(a) PZA docked with PZase. The dotted line represents H bonds with Asp49. (b) Surface representation of model structure with PZA
(shown in red stick form) docked into the cavity. The residues surrounding the active site are colored yellow. Surface color red and blue
represents electro negative and electro-positive.

