Background
Polymerase Chan Reaction (PCR) is a fundamental technique
widely employed in current molecular biology for amplification
of a given DNA sequence to exponential copies. In course of
gene flow and subsequent species formation, evolution dictates
that coded amino acid sequences unlike nucleic acids are
conserved. While a particular amino acid of a protein can be
conserved between two species, the corresponding codons may
differ and have all the alternatives (to choose from four
nucleotide bases) and is called degeneracy []. Thus by having
nucleotides in a primer set at alternative positions it becomes
possible to identify all those closely related homologous genes
and amplify them in a PCR reaction. By designing primers
using degenerate positions all the possible variants of the target
sequence can be amplified.

Implementation
Degeneracy is a critical factor in defining sensitivity in PCR
since a highly degenerate primer will have a few matches that
precisely match the template. In the initial cycles of PCR more
homologous primers are likely be included in the amplicon. The
efficiency with which amplification proceeds in next cycles
depends on similarity of the remaining primers in the selected
pool. Also primers with least number of degenerate positions
always have high success rate. Given a set of DNA sequences,
our goal is to design a pair of degenerate primers, so that the
primers match and amplify as many of the sequences as
possible []. To design right primers that match and amplify
large number of genes, we need to use highly degenerate
primers. At the same time, to cut short the chances of
amplifying non-related sequences, the degeneracy should be
defined and limited. The goal of primer design strategy is to
achieve a balance between the coverage of the variant
sequences with the negative effects of degeneracy. This tradeoff
can be resolved by defining and optimization of various primer
properties and thermodynamic parameters essential for a
successful PCR. Hence we consider degenerate primer
designing a problem involving optimization of various
parameters i.e. degeneracy at most P and length l of the
designed primer K, that define the suitability of primers and
amplification success of desired DNA fragment.

DPPrimer designing includes three major steps
Collection of related input sequence set from sequence
alignment, defining, scoring, filtering and selection of a primer
set with desired functions.

Collection of related input sequence set:
Firstly a candidate protein sequence was submitted to
InterProScan [] to check presence of desired functional
domains. The sequence was subsequently searched against
blastp [] and the resulting output containing homologous
sequences obtained using 60 percent similarity threshold.
Choice of user defined similarity scores in blastp search helps in
limiting the number of related sequences especially from distant
homologues. A phylogenic tree was constructed to visualize the
evolutionary relationships existing among these homologous
sequences. Collected homologous protein sequences were also
subjected to multiple sequence alignment [] at 90 percent
sequence similarity level and consensus sequence was
generated. Features such as functional domain presence, choice
of similarity score selection and illustration of a phylogenetic
tree further enhance the user friendliness of DPPrimer tool.

Scoring &amp; filtering:
The obtained consensus sequence was reverse translated and
evaluated for primer properties such as degeneracy, Tm, GC
content and potential amplicon size. Obtained primer sets with
above properties (at a specified parameter threshold level) were
searched and filtered. Computationally the obtained sets
represent the desired primer quality and potentially assure
coverage of sequences by the template primer. The next step
involves determination of a minimal set of primers required to
amplify all potential sequences in the aligned set (after
filtration) thus avoiding all other unrelated homologues.
Greedy set approximation algorithm described by Slavik 
[] is
employed to obtain a minimal set of primers and to select a
primer pair that satisfies the chosen ideal parameters to cover
all the sequences. For alignment of Mi,…i+j with its matching
primers B*= [B1,B2,…Bn] and the set S B* that minimizes Σ Ki
(where Ki is a cost function) and matches all sub sequences in
Mi…i+j.

Primer count is taken as the primary cost function for primer
number minimization. The cost function reflects approximation
quality and a best primer is optimized, parameter threshold
values are used to correct deviations. This permits to select one
of the two primers that can potentially cover all sequences. This
gives an answer yielding minimum set of primers for
amplification of all given sequences in the alignment set of Mi…i+j.

Selection of minimum number of flanking primers: Both
forward and reverse primers are selected by optimization of
Tm, product length and cross reactivity. For a successful PCR it
is required that the distance between the 5' – and 3' – primer
match site is large (so that biologically valid region is
amplified). Primer length can be extended as long as its
degeneracy falls in the user pre-defined limits.

Performance of DPPrimer was tested using the degenerate
primer pair with PCR amplification ADP-glucose
phosphorylase genes [] from wheat and barley. Primer pair
used for PCR amplification was designed using ADP glucose
phosphorylase amino acid sequence from oryza sativa (NCBI
accession: ABL74524.1). Designed primer set: Forward primer –
GGNTAYTGGGARGAYATH (degeneracy of 96), Reverse
primer – ATGGGNGCNGAYAAYTAY (degeneracy of 128). The
size of amplified DNA fragments was found to be identical in
both wheat and barley () demonstrating robustness of
DPPrimer in degenerate primer design and successful
amplification of members of orthologous genes from various
species.

Software requirements
DPPrimer works best with Mozilla Firefox and Chrome
browsers. The standalone version requires perl and Bioperl
insalled in the unix enviornment.

Input options
DPPrimer accepts a protein NCBI accession number or amino
acid sequence either in raw or fasta format.

Output options
Output comprises chosen parameter information, pair of
primers (forward and reverse), InperProScan output depicting
presence of desired functional domain, homologous sequences
to input sequence and a Phylogenetic tree.

Conclusion
DPPrimer is more selective in defining degeneracy of input
sequences from both distant and related gene families as
compared to other primer designing tools. A popular tool
Hyden [] and CODEHOP 
[] employed widely for designing
degenerate primers for example does not offer the user choice
to know the presence of desired functional domain in input
query sequence. Besides all other degenerate primer design
tools unlike DPPrimer do not let the user to set the required
level of similarity score while analyzing homologous sequences
using blastp and display of phylogenetic tree.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We wish to thank National Agricultural Bioinformatics Grid of
Indian Council for Agricultural Research for gracious support
for conducting the experiments and payment of salaries to SG.
Authors are thankful to Ajit Mishra for making DPPrimer
available on World Wide Web.

Citation:Gahoi et al, Bioinformation 9(18): 937-940 (2013)

PCR amplification in Wheat and Barely using
degenerated primer for ADP-glucose phosphorylase [1:C 306
(Triticum aestivum), 2:HD 2307 (Triticum aestivum), 3: A-9-30-1
(Triticum durum), 4: WH912 (Tritticum durums), 5: DDK 1001
(Triticum dicoccum), 6: DDk 1009 (Triticum dicoccum), 7: Dolma
(Hordeum vulgare, Hullles), 8: BH331 (Hordeum vulgare, Hulled),
M-50bp molecular weight marker (MBI Ferments)].

