Background
The analysis of codon usage patterns can be traced back to
when the first molecular sequence databases were being
collated []. Since then, a great many different causes and
consequences of codon usage variation have been identified
[]. Amino acid usage also varies between proteins and this
variation has also been shown to correlate with the properties
of the proteins []. Codon usage data are used as a guide to
direct back-translation of protein sequences to their probable
DNA sequences, to identify protein-coding regions of DNA
[] and to identify regions that probably do not encode a
protein.

In order to evaluate codon and amino acid usage variation,
multivariate analysis options are available. Correspondence
analysis (CA) [] is the most popular and appropriate
multivariate analysis method for contingency table data such
as codon usage values. The program also has some principal
components analysis (PCA) methods implemented for
comparative purposes. CA can identify the major sources of
variation in the dataset. The output from a CA can be used to
evaluate other aspects of the genes, such as base composition,
expressivity, aromaticity, location on the genome, etc. In the
event that the user wishes to perform a more in-depth
multivariate analysis, there is an option of writing the data to
disk in ADE-compatible format [].

A synonymous codon usage of an organism is not random []
and varies not only among genomes but also among genes of
a given genome. Mutational bias [], translational selection
[] and replication-transcriptional selection [] are
responsible for codon usage variation.

RSCU is dominantly used as one of the best indicators of
bias. To investigate major trends in codon usage variation
among genes, correspondence analysis on RSCU values have
been used widely []; []; 
[]. One distinct advantage of
RSCU values is that when correspondence analysis is applied
on RSCU values, optimal codons can be selected for high
translation efficiency []. RSCU is defined as the ratio of
observed frequency of codons to the expected frequency if all
the synonymous codons for those amino acids are used
equally []. RSCU values greater than 1.0 indicate that the
corresponding codon is more frequently used than expected,
whereas the reverse is true for RSCU values less than 1.0.
GC3S is the frequency of (G + C) and A3S, T3S, G3S and C3S
are the frequencies of A, T, G and C at the synonymous third
positions of codons. NC, the effective number of codons used
by a gene, is generally used to measure the bias of
synonymous codons and independent of amino acid
compositions and codon number []. The values of NC range
from 20 (when one codon is used per amino acid) to 61
(when all codons are used with equal probability). Highly
biased genes are generally highly expressed [].

Xylanases are hydrolytic enzymes which randomly cleaves
the β­1, 4 backbone of complex plant cell wall
polysaccharide, xylan. Diverse forms of these enzymes exist,
displaying varying folds, mechanisms of action, substrate
specificities, hydrolytic activities and physicochemical
characteristics. Research has mainly focused on only two of
the xylanase containing glycoside hydrolase families, namely
families 10 and 11, yet enzymes with xylanase activity
belonging to family 5, 7, 8 and 43 have also been identified.
Driven by industrial demands for enzymes that can work at
process conditions, a number of extremophilic xylanases
have been isolated. The adaptation strategies of
extremophilic xylanases have contributed a lot to there
potential industrial application. Our analysis showed that the
codon usage pattern of almost all xylanase gene were very
similar and among all fungi Aspergillus nidulans,
Chaetomium globosum, Aspergillus terreus and Aspergillus
clavatus were maximum biased.

Methodology
All xylanase gene sequence of Aspergillus clavatus,
Apsergillus nidulans, Aspergillus terreus, Aspergillus niger,
Chaetomium globosum, Pistia stipitis, saccharomyces
cereviseae, Aspergillus fumigatus, Giberrella zeae,
Magnaporthe grieasa, Neosartorya fischeri, Neurospora
crasa were downloaded from NCBI
(www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) and EMBL (www.ebi.ac.uk). A
total of 94 xylanase coding genes from 12 different fungi
were studied. All information regarding the xylanase gene
taken for study was extracted from gene bank (NCBI and
EMBL) records. The relative synonymous codon usage had
been determined to study the overall codon usage variation
among the xylanase gene. RSCU is dominantly used as one
of the best indicators of bias []. The parameters RSCU,
GC3S (frequency of G+C at synonymous third position of
codon), A3S (frequency of A at synonymous third position of
codon), T3S (frequency of T at synonymous third position of
codon), G3S (frequency of G at synonymous third position of
codon), C3S (frequency of C at synonymous third position of
codon) were determined and correspondence analysis were
carried out by program codonW v1.3 (available at
http://www.molbiol.ox.ac.uk/cu).

Discussion
Synonymous codon usage variation in xylanase
To study the codon usage bias in xylanase the overall RSCU
in 94 xylanase coding gene in 12 fungi were determined. The
value of NC ranged from 33.74 to 61 with a mean of 47.37
and the value of GC3S ranges from 0.315 to 0.904 with a
mean of 0.6045.

The effect of mutational bias on codon usage variation of xylanase
To determine the determinants of codon usage variation NC
plots (a plot of NC Vs GC3S) and correspondence analysis was
used. The NC plot of the genes of xylanase suggests that
maximum points lie on the expected curve with almost none
towards GC poor region and very few above the line towards
GC rich region. Points demonstrating xylanases from
Aspergillus nidulans, Chaetomium globosum, Aspergillus
terreus, Aspergillus clavatus, Neosartorya fischeri,
Aspergillus niger and Neurospora crasa in majority lied
towards or almost on the expected curve whereas points
demonstrating xylanase genes from Pistia stipitis,
Magnaporthe griesa lied below the expected line ().
This suggests that effect of mutational bias on codon usage variation in Pistia stipitis and Magnaporthe griesa is weak as
compared to other organisms whose gene demonstrating
points lie towards or on the curve. Some xylanase
demonstrating points from Chaetomium globosum lie away
from the expected line which suggests that effect of
mutational bias on codon usage variation of this organism is
not uniform and it varies from one xylanase gene to other of
the same organism (). The correspondence analysis
of RSCU values of 94 xylanase coding genes (of the above
12 fungi) states that there is very little effect of mutational
bias and other factors as most of points demonstrating
xylanase gene lie clustered to the principal line.
Correspondence analysis is a multivariate statistical analysis
tool to study codon usage variation among genes []. CA is
a sophisticated technique in which the codon usage data (59
codon) are plotted in a multidimensional space of 59 axes
(Met, Trp and stop codons are excluded) and that it identifies
an axis which represents the most prominent factors
contributing the variance among genes. The positions of the
genes along the first two major axes are shown in ().
The position of gene of the first two major axes ()
shows that almost all genes from Aspergillus nidulans,
Aspergillus terreus, Chaetomium globosum, Giberrella zeae
and Pistia stipitis are clustered. The number and occurrence
of each codon and its RSCU values for two groups of genes
with maximum codon biased are shown as . The two groups of genes taken
are xylanase coding genes from Aspergillus nidulans and
Aspergillus terreus.

Effect of translational selection on codon usage variation in xylanase
Along with mutational bias, translational selection also
influences codon usage variation in xylanase coding gene
from fungi. A scatter plot is drawn between the position of
genes along the second major axis and NC values ().
It was seen that xylanase gene from almost all fungi has a
higher NC value except for genes Magnaporthe griesa and
Pistia stipitis which had comparatively lower NC values.
Genes from Chaetomium globosum showed mixed response
with two genes which were not biased having the least NC
values in the entire model system.

Conclusion
A synonymous codon bias of xylanase gene was studied in
the present work. Codon usage of 94 xylanase gene from 12
different fungi was analyzed and a comparative analysis of
codon usage and RSCU values of xylanase coding gene was
done. Study of effect of mutational bias on codon usage
variation of the gene suggested weak biasing in case of Pistia
stipitis and Magnaporthe griesa as compared to gene from
other organisms taken for study. Moreover effect of mutation
bias in xylanase genes from Chaetomium globosum mixed
characteristics with few genes showing weak biasing and
remaining with strong biasing effect. The position of gene on
the first two major axes () shows that almost all
genes from Aspergillus nidulans, Aspergillus terreus,
Chaetomium globosum, Giberrella zeae and Pistia stipitis are
clustered. RSCU values of two groups of genes located at
extreme ends of first major axis determined by CA for
xylanase gene from two fungi Aspergillus nidulans and
Aspergillus terreus suggested that none of the codon
occurred significantly higher in the highly expressed genes.
The occurrence of codon was not influenced by expression
level of the gene. A comparative analysis of codon usage and
RSCU values of xylanase encoding gene from the 12 fungi
was done. From the analysis () it is observed that
xylanase gene from Aspergillus nidulans and Aspergillus
niger are most expressed genes compared with other fungal
xylanase gene. Based on this data it can also be suggested
that translational selection also influences codon usage
variation in case of fungal xylanase gene expression.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors are thankful to the Sub-Distributed Information
Center (BTISnet SubDIC), Department of Biotechnology
(No. BT/BI/04/065/04), New Delhi, India. Our thanks are
also to Jharkhand government for the lab infrastructure.

Citation:Shrivastavaet al, Bioinformation 3(10): 425-429 (2009)

NC plot of 94 xylanase from 12 fungi

Position of 94 xylanase coding gene from 12 fungi along the two major axes of variation in the correspondence
analysis on RSCU values

Scatter plot of 94 xylanase coding genes from 12 fungi. A plot of second major axis Vs NC value.

