Background
Folate metabolism has long been recognized as an attractive target for cancer chemotherapy because of its indispensable role in the 
biosynthesis of nucleic acid precursors []. Within folate metabolism, 
Dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) which catalyzes the reduction of folate or 7, 8-dihydrofolate to tetrahydrofolate and intimately couples 
with thymidylate synthase has been of particular interest. The DHFR is present in all cells and is necessary for the maintenance of 
intracellular folate pools in a biochemically active reduced state []. Inhibition 
results in depletion of intracellular reduced folates, which are necessary for one carbon transfer reactions. One carbon transfer 
reactions are important for the biosynthesis of thymidylate, purine nucleotides, methionine, serine, glycine and many other compounds 
necessary for RNA, DNA and protein synthesis []. Therefore, DHFR represents an 
attractive target for developing antitumor agents.

Several DHFR inhibitors, as separate entities, have found clinical utility as antitumor agents []. 
The classical antifolate like methotrexate (MTX) has been used clinically for more than 50 years. Because of the frequent occurrence of 
tumor resistance and ineffectiveness against many solid tumors, extensive structural modifications of MTX have been reported to improve 
its antitumor spectrum of activity and to circumvent tumor resistance. [] 
However, none of these modified analogues showed better DHFR inhibitory or antitumor activity than MTX. In addition, they require an 
active transport mechanism to enter cells, which, when impaired, causes resistance. In an attempt to overcome these potential drawbacks, 
non classical lipophilic antifolates have been developed as antitumor agents which do not require the folate transport system(s) and 
enter cells via diffusion. One such group is the derivatives of 2, 4-diamino-5-methyl-5-deazapteridine (DMDP) having structures similar 
to the trimetrexate/piritrexim class of antifolates. Due to an interest in new anticancer drugs, several DMDP inhibitors were chosen 
from the Southern Research Institute chemical repository for screening against human DHFR 
[].

Nowadays, molecular docking approaches are routinely used in modern drug design to help understand drug–receptor interaction. It has 
been shown in the literature that these computational techniques can strongly support and help the design of novel, more potent 
inhibitors by revealing the mechanism of drug‐receptor interaction. However, so far, there has been no report concerning the 
application of molecular docking methodology for understanding the binding of DMDP derivatives.

In this study, we have used docking studies to study the binding orientations of DMDP derivatives to human DHFR. Such studies have been carried out to understand 
the forms of interaction of seventy eight compounds, synthesized by Suling and colleagues [6] for the human DHFR. The results obtained 
from this study would be useful in both understanding the inhibitory mode of the DMDP derivatives as well as in rapidly and accurately 
predicting the activities of newly designed inhibitors on the basis of docking scores. These models also provide some beneficial clues 
in structural modification for designing new inhibitors for the treatment of cancer with much higher inhibitory activities 
against DHFR.

Methodology
Molecular structures and optimization
The biological activity data of DMDP derivatives (Seventy Eight molecules), reported by Suling and colleagues 
[] was used in the present study 
(Table 1 under ). The structures of all the compounds were constructed 
using the InsightII 2000.1 Builder module (
http://www.accelrys.com). The geometries of these compounds were subsequently optimized using Discover module of 
InsightII 2000.1 using CVFF force field. The structure of human DHFR protein (PDBid code 1KMS) was obtained from Protein Data 
Bank

Molecular docking
Molecular docking of DMDP derivatives to the active site of human DHFR was carried out using modern docking engine LigandFit 
available with Cerius2_4.9. (http://www.accelrys.com). 
This algorithm makes use of a cavity detection algorithm for detecting invaginations in the protein as potential active site regions. 
A shape comparison filter is combined with a Monte Carlo conformational search for generating ligand poses consistent with the active 
site shape. Candidate poses are minimized in the context of the active site using a grid-based method for evaluating protein-ligand 
interaction energies. The docking was carried out with the following non default settings in LigandFit: site partitioning in order to 
fully access the potential docking orientation of the active site, maximum trials variable table values to help the pseudorandom 
conformational analysis, and the CFF force field [] option was used for the grid 
energy calculations. The flexible fitting option was selected for generation of alternative conformations on the fly, as was the diverse 
conformer's option to ensure the solutions generated covers a broad range of conformations with similar low-energy docking scores, and a 
maximum of 30 top scoring diverse ligand poses were returned for each of the compounds.

Scoring function
The docked conformations were further scored using various scoring functions available with Cerius2 
[]. The LigandFit algorithm [] 
uses an internal scoring function, DockScore, to select and return dissimilar poses for each compound. DockScore is a simple force field 
based scoring function which estimates the energy of interaction by summing the ligand/protein interaction energy and the internal 
energy of the ligand. CFF force field [] was used to resolve the van der Waals 
parameters for DockScore. The top DockScore pose was used for post docking scoring. The scoring was performed using a set of scoring 
functions as implemented in Cerius2 []. These included LigScore1, LigScore2, 
-PLP1, -PLP2, -PMF and DockScore available from the docking process. The putative 3D poses and score results were then stored as a SD 
file. Each docking was minimized, using DockScore, the only purely molecular mechanics based scoring function employed in this study, 
and this minimized pose was then presented to each of the other scoring functions, which were either knowledge based or 
regression based.

Protein preparation
The high-resolution (1.09 Å) X-ray structure of human DHFR complex with SRI 9439 (PDBid code 1KMS) was imported into Cerius2 
[], and the ligand was extracted to leave a cavity. Thereafter, the docking 
simulations were carried out with and without cofactor NADPH and water molecules, to elucidate the role of NADPH and water molecules 
for the binding of DMDP derivatives.

Hardware and software
InsightII 2000.1 (http://www.accelrys.com) and Cerius2 
[] were used for molecular modeling on a SGI Origin 300 workstation equipped 
with 4 * 600 MHz R12000 processor.

Results and discussion
To date, several crystal structure of human DHFR in complex with different inhibitors have been reported viz 1DHF with folate 
[], 1 KMV with NADPH and (Z)- 6-(2-[2,5-Dimethoxyphenyl] 
Ethen-1-yl)-2,4-Diamino-5- methylpyrido [2,3-D] Pyrimidine (SRI-9662), a lipophilic antifolate 
[], 1KMS with NADPH and 6-([5-quinolylamino]methyl)-2,4-diamino-5-methylpyrido 
[2,3-d]pyrimidine (SRI-9439), a lipophilic antifolate [], 1DLS with methotrexate 
[] and 2DHF with 5-deazafolate 
[] etc. which provide information about the exact location and composition of 
inhibitor binding pocket and opportunity to use the enzyme in a functional conformation. We used X-ray structure of human DHFR in 
complex with SRI- 9439 and NADPH (PDBid code 1KMS) for the docking study.

Validation of the docking method
To ensure that the ligand orientation obtained from the docking studies were likely to represent valid and reasonable binding modes 
of the inhibitors, the LigandFit program docking parameters had to be first validated for the crystal structure (PDBid 1KMS). The ligand 
SRI-9439, in the conformation found in the crystal structure, was extracted and docked back to the corresponding binding pocket, to 
determine the ability of LigandFit to reproduce the orientation and position of the inhibitor observed in the crystal structure. 
Results of control docking showed that LigandFit determined the optimal orientation of the docked inhibitor, SRI-9439 to be close to 
that of the original orientation found in the crystal shown in 

The low RMS deviation of 0.502 Å between the docked and crystal ligand coordinates indicate very good alignment of the experimental 
and calculated positions especially considering the resolution of the crystal structure (1.09Å).

Interaction Modes between the DMDP derivatives and human DHFR
The binding modes of DMDP derivatives in the binding site of human DHFR were identified using intermolecular flexible docking 
simulations by means of LigandFit program. All the compounds in the dataset were docked into the active site of human DHFR, using the 
same protocol.

 depicts the binding conformations of the DMDP derivatives in the binding pocket of 
the DHFR. The active site of DHFR comprises of mostly hydrophobic amino acids as Ile7, Val8, Trp24, Phe31, Phe34, Pro61, Val115 and 
these amino acid residues are involved in strong hydrophobic interactions with the DMDP derivatives. As expected, inhibitors used in 
this study bind to the same site like the docked ligand in the crystallographic complex. The inhibitors bind in a hydrophobic pocket 
adjacent to helix αB, with the 5-deazapteridine ring almost perpendicular to the 5-quinolylamino group. The 5-deazapteridine ring of the 
inhibitors forms hydrophobic contacts with Val8, Ile7 and Phe31. The 5-deazapteridine rings of DMDP derivatives therefore bind to the 
human DHFR active site in an identical fashion, as reported in case of other inhibitors like 
methotrexate [], SRI-9439 [], 
SRI-9662 [] etc. The DMDP derivatives bind to human DHFR mainly using the pterin 
moiety. As originally observed for methotrexate [] and subsequently above 
inhibitors, DMDP derivatives bind with their 5-deazapteridine rings flipped approximately 180° along the ring long axis relative to the 
position of folate in the active site. Thus, the opposite side of the pteridine ring is presented to the NADPH cofactor. The N1 and N2 
nitrogen atoms of the 5-deazapteridine rings form hydrogen bonds (shown in  as dotted lines) to oxygen atoms OE1 and OE2 of the 
side-chain of Glu30, which is highly conserved in the active site of all vertebral DHFRs [,
,].

The binding mode of the most active compound 63 has been shown in . As expected, 
compound 63 bind to the DHFR active site in the similar conformation as other known DHFR inhibitors (SRI-9662, SRI-9439, methotrexate) 
which mainly bind using the pterin moiety and this moiety is presented to nicotinamide ring of cofactor NADPH. This pterin ring is 
involved in π-π stacking interactions with the nicotinamide ring of NADPH. This stacking interaction is very important and has been 
conserved in most of the DHFR's for which crystal structures have been solved with NADPH and inhibitors in ternary complex with the 
enzyme. The chloro substituted naphthyl ring of compound 63 makes significant hydrophobic contact with Leu 22, Phe 31 and Pro 61 of the 
DHFR active site leading to enhanced inhibition of the enzyme when compared with compound 29 (least active) where chloro substituted 
naphthyl ring is substituted with phenyl ring with methoxy substitution at 2 and 5 positions leading to decreased hydrophobicity of 
the compound and hence low amount of inhibition as shown in . The two amino group of the 
pterin ring makes strong hydrogen bond with main chain oxygen atom of Ile 7 and Val 115 and side chain oxygen atom of Glu 30. These 
particular interactions play a very important role in DHFR inhibition and need to be present for good inhibition by the inhibitors. 
Moreover, any bulkier substitution at R1 position of the DMDP derivatives may lead to steric clashes with Phe 34 and the cofactor NADPH 
and that is why compound 29, 45, 50, 51 are not very much active, whereas compounds with methyl substitution are more active as in case 
of compound 63, is shown in .

Correlation between docking scores and inhibitory activity
The predicted inhibitory activity of DMDP derivatives as inhibitors on the basis of dock score is listed in 
Table 1 (). Linear regression analysis was performed to explore whether the 
docking scores could be correlated with the experimental activities. The equation was obtained for the inhibitory activities represented 
as pIC50 values, using the Dock score, Ligscore1, Ligscore2, -PLP1, -PLP2, -PMF and Consensus score as the variable descriptors. A model 
with the correlation coefficient (r2) of 0.356 was obtained for 78 compounds using the Equation 1 under 
.

Removal of 5 compounds [Comp 29, Comp 32, Comp 46, Comp 48, and Comp 49] identified as outliers from the docking dataset yield a 
better model with correlation coefficient (r2) of 0.499 was obtained for 73 compounds. This rather good correlation demonstrates that 
the binding conformations and binding models of the DMDP derivatives with human DHFR are reasonable shown in 
. Activity can be best explained for rest of the compounds using the Equation given in 
.

Conclusion
In this work, molecular docking studies were carried out to explore the binding mechanism of DMDP derivatives to the human DHFR 
enzyme to enable the design of new DMDP-based human DHFR inhibitors. Both the binding conformation of DMDP and their binding free 
energies were predicted by molecular docking. The binding free energies of these compounds to human DHFR were found to have a good 
correlation with the experimental inhibitory activities. The results provide insight into the structural requirement for the activity 
of this class inhibitor and the most favorable binding mode of the top ‐ ranking compounds will be useful in designing new DMDP 
derivatives as human DHFR inhibitors.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We acknowledge to Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), New Delhi, for financial support as a 
SRF (Biotechnology) at Institute of Engineering and Technology, UP Technical University (UPTU), Lucknow, India.

(a) Conformation of SRI-9439 crystal structure (red) as compared to the docked conformation of SRI-9439 (Yellow) with 
cofactor NADPH (green). Amino acid residues are presented in magenta, (b) The docked 3-D structures of DMDP derivatives, (c) Docked 
Confirmation of Compound 63 and (d) Docked Confirmation of Compound 29.

A correlation for binding conformations and binding models of the DMDP derivatives with human DHFR.

