Abbreviations
DCA = Dichloroacetate, PDH = Pyruvate dehydrogenase, PDHK = Pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase.

Background
Cancer development and its confrontation to chemotherapy depend, at least
in part, on suppression of apoptosis. Although mitochondria are recognized
as regulators of apoptosis, their importance as targets for cancer therapy
has not been adequately explored or clinically exploited. Studies suggest
that mitochondrial dysfunction in cancer cells may result in a characteristic
aerobic glycolysis phenotype []. This bioenergetic feature is a good
marker of cancer but has not been therapeutically pursued, as it is thought
to be a result and not a cause of cancer; that is, the cells rely mostly on
glycolysis for energy production because of permanent mitochondrial
damage, preventing oxidative phosphorylation. It is also proposed that
because early carcinogenesis occurs in a hypoxic microenvironment, the
transformed cells initially have to rely on glycolysis for energy production
[]. However, this metabolic adaptation also appears to offer a proliferative
advantage, suppressing apoptosis. Lactate formation during anaerobic
glycolysis contributes to the breakdown of the extracellular matrix,
facilitate cell mobility and increase the metastatic potential []. Many
glycolytic enzymes have been recognized to also regulate apoptosis, and
several oncoproteins induce the expression of glycolytic enzymes []. The
switching in the metabolism of glucose to end with glycolysis in the
cytoplasm by converting pyruvate to lactate or continue with glucose
oxidation in the mitochondria is controlled by a gate-keeping
mitochondrial enzyme, pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) which in turn is
regulated by phosphorylation by PDH kinase (PDHK) [].

Human PDHK has 4 isoforms which exhibit tissue-specific expression;
PDHK1 is found in heart, pancreatic islets, and skeletal muscles; PDHK2
is expressed in all tissues; PDHK3 is present in testes, kidney, and brain;
and PDHK4 is profuse in heart, skeletal muscle, kidney, and pancreatic
islets []. Preferential expression of PDHK might contribute to its cancer
selectivity. In a study of lung cancer specimens, cancer cells had increased
PDHK2 and decreased PDH expression (compatible with a glycolytic
phenotype) compared to neighboring non-malignant cells []. Selective
inactivation of PDHK isoforms by the specific inhibitor dichloroacetate has
been shown to trigger apoptosis by promoting a mitochondrial potassiumion
channel which inhibits tumor growth [,].

Dichloroacetate is effective in the treatment congenital lactic acidosis
(CLA). People with CLA have defective PDH enzymes and are thus
unable to efficiently produce energy. In one study, patients with CLA were
treated with 25-50 mg of dichloroacetate per 1 kg of body weight. No
major complications were observed in the participants []. However other
side effects were observed somewhat frequently. These side effects varied
in their presentation and severity, but all involved the central nervous
system. Reversible neuropathy, or altered sensory or motor neuron
function was the most common symptom observed. One study found that
50% of patients treated with DCA developed this neuropathy causing the
hindrance in pursuing further studies on using DCA for cancer therapy
[].

Thus in order to find a less toxic analogue of DCA a series of halogen
substitutions were tried and their binding energies, toxicity, C logP, mi
logP, Drug score etc., were analyzed to sort out the better performing DCA
analogues capable of inhibiting PDK.

Methodology
Receptor and ligands
The three dimensional crystal structure of pyrvuate dehydrogenase kinase
2 (PDB ID: 2BTZ) [] was used as the receptor throughout the work and
the two dimensional structures of the ligands were drawn using ACD
chemsketch software []. The halogen substitutions using fluorine, iodine,
bromine atoms were done on the DCA molecule with the following
combinations DIA ― Diiodoacetate, DFA ― Difluoroacetate, DBrA ―
Dibromoacetate, CIA ―Chloro(iodo)acetate, CFA ― Chloro(fluoro)acetate,
BrCA ― Bromo(chloro)acetate, BrIA ― Bromo(iodo)acetate, FIA ―
Fluoro(iodo)acetate and BrFA ― Bromo(fluoro)acetate. The three
dimensional structures of the ligands were obtained using the Dundee
PRODRG tool [].

Docking and descriptor analysis
The docking scores of the prepared ligands with PDHK2 receptor were
determined using Argus lab software and Autodock Vina [,]. The
molecular descriptors such as C logP, mi logP, solubility, drug likeliness,
Total Polar Surface Area (TPSA), molecular weight, volume, drug score,
G-protein coupled receptors (GPCR) ligands, kinase inhibitor, ion channel
modulator and nuclear receptor were obtained using Molinspiration []
and OSIRIS Property explorer [].

Toxicity prediction
The toxicity analysis such as Ames test, mutagenicity, tumorogenic,
irritant, reproductive effective, mouse LD50 and oral bioavailabilty were
obtained using ADME-TOX BOX of Pharma Algorithms [].

Results and Discussion
Docking analysis
The Docking scores (Table 1  ) were obtained
from the analogues () with PDK2 as the receptor. The docking
scores were the highest for DBrA with ―7.47 Kcal/mol followed by BrIA ―
7.36 Kcal/mol, CIA ―7.32Kcal/mol, DIA with ―7.27 Kcal/mol, DCA with ―
7.19 Kcal/mol, BrCA with ―7.17 Kcal/mol, DIA with ―7.27 Kcal/mol,
BrFA &amp; CFA with ―6.33 Kcal/mol, FIA with ―6.62 Kcal/mol and DFA
with ―5.88 Kcal/mol.

Descriptor analysis
The descriptor analyses for the halogen substituted analogues of DCA are
listed in Table 1 ( ). The C logP which
measures the hydrophilicity of the molecule, favouring its entry through
the lipid bilayer, indicated DFA with a low value of ―0.44 followed by
CFA with a score of 0.13. The solubility prediction showed DBrA with a
high score of ―1.44. Drug likeness was low for DIA (―1.97) and high for
BrFA (16.6). The drug score indicated DIA with a high value of 0.53
which is significantly higher than that of DCA with a value of 0.06. The
score for kinase inhibition was high for BrFA (―4.15) and least for DCA (―
5.18). The score for Nuclear receptor ligand was high for CFA (―3.4) and
least for DCA (―4.52). The mi logP was highest for DIA (1.554) followed
by BrIA (1.28). The TPSA was found to be a constant for all the analogues
with a value of 37.299. The GPCR ligand value was highest for BrFA (―
3.82) and low for DCA (―4.85). Finally the ion channel modulator score
was high for CFA (―2.18) and low for DCA (―4.5). It was observed from
the data that certain desirable parameters such as C logP, mi logP and drug
score were potent for advocating DIA and BrIA as effective analogues for
DCA.

Toxicity prediction
The Toxicity characteristics of the DCA analogues are listed in Table 1
( ). The in silico studies on mutagenicity,
tumorogenic, irritant and reproductive effective characteristics of DIA,
DFA, BrIA, FIA and BrFA showed that they were in the safer levels. The
Ames test values indicated DFA with a low value of 0.208 and BrIA with a
high value of 0.517. The LD50 values in the intraperitonial, oral,
intravenous and subcutaneous as 710, 1400, 260 and 900 mg/kg
respectively for DCA followed by 410, 1100, 310 and 650 mg/kg
respectively for BrIA. It is interesting to note that in both the low toxic
analogues, DIA and BrIA, iodine is a constituent whose importance is
required to make this discussion complete.

Iodide is comparatively less toxic since nature has provided us with iodine
metabolizing ability through thyroid gland. Studies have found an
epidemiologic correlation between iodine deficiency, iodine-deficient
goitre and gastric cancer [] a decrease of the incidence of death rate
from stomach cancer after implementation of the effective iodineprophylaxis
was reported with the proposed mechanism of action wherein
the iodide ion functions in gastric mucosa as an
antioxidant reducing species that can detoxify poisonous reactive oxygen
species, such as hydrogen peroxide goitre and gastric cancer [] a decrease of the incidence of death rate. Further iodide moiety is more
hydrophobic, which along with the overall small structure, compared to
other anticancer drugs, makes the analogues an effective candidate to cross
the blood brain barrier.

Conclusion
The docking and toxicity analyses of DCA and its halogen substituted
analogues showed that DIA and BrIA are effective in meeting the
objectives of this study, namely low toxicity and high binding nature. Thus
these analogues may be considered for further wet lab evaluation using in
vitro and in vivo studies to develop an effective anti cancer drug.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Subramanian et al, Bioinformation 5(2): 73-76 (2010)

Two dimensional structures of DCA and its halogen substituted analogues

