Background
Due to generous use of antibiotics and disinfectant in hospitals,
their presence and level is increasing continuously in the
discharged wastewater []. In most of aquatic environments the
concentrations of antibiotics are very low but they have
tendency to convert non pathogenic bacteria to pathogenic
bacteria by increasing the resistance against antibiotics 
[]. The
wastewater has a high content of both organic and inorganic
matter, as well as high densities of living organisms, including
pathogenic, commensal and environmental bacteria. This
characteristic makes a suitable condition for the spread of
antibiotic resistance []. Numerous studies have indicated that
hospital waste water receive inputs of heavy metal from the
increased use of pharmaceuticals. Redionucleocides and other
antimicrobial solvents []. There has been considerable
speculation about possible genetic association between bacterial
tolerance for these metals and multiple antibiotic resistances 
[,
,
]. It has been suggested that genes encoding resistance to
heavy metals can be located together with antibiotic resistance
genes on either the same genetic structure (eg. plasmid), or
different genetic structures within the same bacterial strain 
[,
]
had suggested that metal and antibiotic resistance among
bacteria are linked very closely together and that expression of
antibiotic resistance may be dependent on exposure to metals.
Heavy metals used in industry and in household products are
along with antibiotics creating a selective pressure in the
environment that leads to the mutations in microorganisms that
will allowed them better survive and multiply []. Bacterial
resistance to toxic heavy metals is a widespread phenomenon
and reported to enhance the antibiotic resistance ability of
microorganisms []. Antibiotic resistance is increasing among
the bacteria due to excess use of the drugs and improper
management of the hospital wastewater containing heavy
metals, toxic chemicals, and radioactive elements. Heavy metals
played a key role in increased antibiotic resistance among the
bacteria from the environmental samples. Our research work
has revealed the multiple antibiotic resistance and patterns
among the metal tolerant E.coli from hospital wastewater. It
may provide new ways in treating the infectious diseases
especially by E.coli and important for risk assessment as well as
risk management related to hospital effluents

Methodology
Sample collection:
Composite sample of hospital wastewater were collected from
three different department i.e Medicine and Surgery (Site-1),
Trauma centre (site-2) and Gynecology (site-3) during month of
December to February from King George Medical University,
Lucknow (KGMU). Sample was collected from 15cm depths of
sewage in 250 ml sterilized glass bottles and transferred to
laboratory (in ice box at 4°C) immediately , so the elapsed time
between the sample collection and initial processing did not
exceed more than 8 hours.

Isolation and Identification of metal tolerant E. coli:
Isolation of metal tolerant E. coli isolates from hospital
wastewater samples were done on metal (Cr, Cd and Ni)
amended EMB agar plates at 100 µg/ml concentration. Serial
dilutions of the water samples were plated by spreading 0.1 ml
on EMB medium for metal tolerant E. coli. Plates were incubated
at 37°C for 24 h. Greenish with metallic sheen colonies were
identified as E. coli These isolates were finally identified on the
basis of morphological, cultural and IMVic tests (indole, methyl
red, voges proskeur and citrate utilization tests) 
[].

Determination of minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of heavy metal among E. coli isolates:
The heavy metal resistance was determined by the minimum
inhibitory concentration (MIC) against the test bacterial strain
by spot plate method []. Nutrient plates of each heavy metal
(Chromium, Cadmium and Nickel) of different concentrations
(100 µg/ml to 2000 µg/ml) were prepared. Inoculum of test
strain (3×106 CFU/ml) was spotted on heavy metal amended
plates and control plates in duplicate with the help of platinum
loop of 5mm diameter. The plates were incubated at 37° C for 24
hr to observe the growth of bacterial strain on the spotted area.
The MIC was defined as the minimum inhibitory concentration
of the heavy metal that inhibits the visible growth of test strain.
Metal concentration range bellow MIC was considered as sub
MIC of the isolates.

Antibiotic Sensitivity Test:
All the isolates of E. coli were tested for their sensitivity to anti
microbial agents by disc diffusion method []. Petri plates
containing approximately 25-30 ml of Mueller-Hinton medium
were spreader with 0.1 ml of 24 hour old culture of the isolates
with sterile glass spreader and then impregnated with the
antibiotic discs. The plates were incubated at 37c for 24 hours.
The zone of inhibition was recorded in millimeter and
interpreted as sensitive or resistant according to
recommendation by the National committee for clinical
laboratory standards NCCLS. (2008). The E. Coli ATCC 25922
was used as a control strain. The antimicrobial discs tested for
all isolates were Nalidixic acids(NA) 30µg, Chloramphenicol (C)
30µg, Erythromycin (E)15µg, Cephradin (CH) 25µg,
Streptomycin (S) 25µg, penicillin ( p) 10µg, Neomycin (N) 30µg
, Methicillin (Met) 5µg, Gentamycin ( Gen) 30µg, Rifampicin (
Rif ) 2µg.

Multiple antibiotic resistances (MAR) indexing:
The MAR index profile based on isolate and sampling site was
performed to evaluate the health risk of the environment. MAR
index for test isolates was calculated according to the formula:
No. of antibiotics to which all isolates were resistant/No. of
antibiotics tested x No. of isolates as recommended by 
[].
Sampling site based MAR index was calculated by the same
formula modified by the total number of isolates from a
sampling site as described [].

Results
All the E. coli isolates were tested for their resistance to Cr6+,
Cd2+ and Ni3+ at their varying concentrations (100-2000 µg/ml)
in term of their visible growth. Growth patterns of the isolates
were recorded at their sub MIC concentrations. The MICs of the
heavy metals were also determined among all metal tolerant E.
coli isolates. A varied trend of full, moderate and less growth
patterns was observed among all the E. coli isolates at different
MIC level of the metals tested. Maximum 48, 36 and 25 of the
isolates showed less (+) growth pattern at different sub MICs of
Cd,Cr and Ni while full growth (+++) was obtained by 8 and 5
of the isolates at sub MIC of Ni and Cr respectively. No full
growth was observed against Cd. The highest number of
isolates showed moderate growth (++) against Ni at its variable
sub MIC levels as compared to Cr and Cd  (see
supplementary material).

All the E. coli isolates showed their MIC range 100-1600 µg/ml
against Cd2+ and Cr6+ while 200-2000 µg/ml against Ni3+. No
MIC was observed at lower (100µg/ml) concentration against
Ni. Most of the isolates demonstrated their MIC at 1200 µg/ml
against Ni3+ while 800, 400 µg/ml against Cr6+ and Cd2+
respectively. 34.61% of the isolates showed their MIC at 800
µg/ml against Cr6+ while 25% isolates demonstrated MIC at
400 and 1200 µg/ml against Cd2+ and Ni3+ respectively 
(). All metal tolerant 52 E. coli isolates were tested for their
multidrug resistance and resistance patterns. A high level of
resistance was observed against Methicillin (86.53%) and
penicillin (73.07%) followed by Cephradin (57.69%), Rifampicin
(34.61%), Erythromycin (26.92%) Nalidixic acids (25%),
Chloramphenicol (3.84%) and least to Gentamycine (1.92%). No
resistance was found against streptomycin among the total
isolates  (see supplementary material). A varied trend
of resistance patterns was observed among all the E. coli isolates
against 10 antibiotics tested. The resistance patterns were
recorded for 1 to 6 antibiotics tested. 7.69% of the isolates
showed resistant patterns against 6 antibiotics at a time in 4
different combinations. 13.46% and 25% of the isolates showed
their resistance patterns against 5 and 4 antibiotics at a time in 3
and 5 different combinations respectively Multi drug resistance
index was also obtained in between 0.02-0.15. Among the all E.
coli isolates tested are shown in  (see supplementary
material). In our observation only five isolates were found to be
sensitive for all antibiotics tested.

Discussion
Studies have shown that the release of wastewater from
hospitals was associated with an increase in the prevalence of
antibiotic resistance []. Even, exposure to low concentrations
level over long periods of time may results in selection and
consequent spread of resistance to pharmaceuticals.
Antimicrobial resistant gram negative bacterial species were
identified in final hospital effluents [,
]. Antibiotic
resistance in bacteria is a serious threat to society today, and one
of the reasons responsible for this problem is over use of
antibiotics in humans [,
]. Quantified antibiotic residues in
waters associated with a hospital in India and assessed their
association with quantities of antibiotics prescribed in the
hospital and the susceptibility of E. coli found in the hospital
effluent []. A positive correlation was found between the
quantity of antibiotics prescribed in the hospital and antibiotic
residue levels in the hospital wastewater. Increased
introduction of antimicrobial agents into the environment via
medical therapy, agriculture and animal husbandry has resulted
in selective pressures on bacterial populations [].
Microorganisms that are resistant to both antibiotics and metals
have been isolated from nosocomial and burn wound infection
[,
]. A high frequency of resistance among E. coli isolates
isolated from hospital wastewater to antibiotics was observed in
the present study. E. coli isolates showed a high resistance
against methicillin (86.53%), penicillin (73.07%), cephradin
(57.69%) and lower against rifampicin (34.61%), erythromycin
(26.92%), nalidixic acid (25%),, chloramphenicol (3.84%) and
least to gentamycin (1.92%) (). The resistance patterns
were also recorded against 6 antibiotics in different
combinations among the total E. coli isolates. Similar results
have also been obtained in other studies [,
,
,
,
,
,
]. They have also reported on transferable plasmids encoding
resistance to various heavy metals and antibiotics in gram
negative bacteria. All the E. coli isolates showed their MIC range
100-1600µg/ml against Cd2+ and Cr6+ while MIC 200-2000
µg/ml was recorded against Ni (). Similar findings were
also reported by other authors [,
]. The situation concerning
antibiotics and their resistances resembles in some aspects to
heavy metal contamination. Like antibiotics, heavy metals are
natural compounds present in different ecosystems. In this
study the incidence of antibiotic and metal resistance among E.
coli isolates was investigated. Hospital wastewater contained a
higher number of single and multiple antibiotic resistances
among coliform species []. The finding of this study presents
a potential health problem as the predominant coliform species
have increasingly been associated with outbreaks of hospital
infections []. It is recommended that hospital waste must be
treated before its release into the environment.

Conflict of interest
The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors express gratefulness to Syed Waseem Akhtar Vice -
Chancellor of Integral University, Lucknow for providing the
facilities to execute the research work and thankful to the Heads
of the departments of Biosciences and Bioengineering
respectfully.

Citation:Alam &amp; Imran, Bioinformation 10(5): 267-272 (2014)

MIC of heavy metal among E. coli isolates from
hospital wastewater.

