Background
Mycobacteria has high amount of phospholipids in their cell
membranes. The mycobacterial phospholipids include
cardiolipin (CL), phosphatidyl ethanolamine (PE), phosphatidyl
inositol (PI) and phosphatidylinositolmannosides (PIMS).
Among the phospholipids of mycobacteria, cardiolipin is often
the most abundant (30-50%) of total phospholipids present in
both pathogenic as well as in saprophytic species of
mycobacteria. Virulent strains of mycobacteria contain a higher
percentage of phospholipids as compared to the avirulent
strains [,
]. High content of CL in pathogenic mycobacteria is
further, confirmed by the presence of three functional pgsA
genes in the M. tuberculosis []. The past studies have revealed
that crude phosphatide fractions of mycobacteria when injected
intraperitoneally into rabbits elicited typical tuberculosis
lesions. Antibodies to phospholipids have been demonstrated
in patients suffering from tuberculosis. Recent studies have
demonstrated that, during infection of macrophages by
mycobacteria, phospholipids (PLs) are released from the
mycobacterial cell wall within infected macrophages and
transported out of this compartment into intracellular vesicles.
The release of these PLs may have functions that influence the
outcome of mycobacterial infections Owing to their serological,
antigenic and physiological properties, phospholipids of
mycobacteria are well studied [,
].

The cell membranes of E. coli, S. aureus, M. lysodeikticus, L.
plantarum, Bacillus stearothermophillus, Bacillus firmus, and
Mycobacterium smegmatis contains CL which is synthesized by
Cardiolipin synthase (cls) and the enzyme is located on the cell
membrane of these organisms [, 
–] Kornberg and coworkers
reported that CL plays an important role in DNAreplication
in E. coli by displacing the bound ADP from dnaA
protein thereby, reactivating the enzyme required for
replication, and also activates gyrases in E. coli. Thus, mutation
in cls gene makes E. coli susceptible to novobiocin. A 10 fold
increased activity of cls was observed in E coli in stationary
growth phase while the activity of other enzymes in
phospholipid biosynthesis decreased, accordingly, CL should
play a role in survival of the E. coli [,
]. Presence of large
content of CL in the mycobacteria in particular in pathogenic
mycobacteria and its physiological importance of CL in the
prokaryotes, it is imperative to study the Cardiolipin synthase
involved in the biosynthesis of CL in the mycobacteria. In this
report, we describe the isolation, purification and physical and
chemical properties of cls enzyme isolated from Mycobacterium
phlei. The molecular weight, isoelectric point, KM value of the
enzyme, the optimal pH for activity, requirement of various
divalent cations for its optimal activity, and the partial amino
acid sequence of the enzyme are also established.

Methodology
Bacterial Strains and culturing Methods:
Mycobacterium phlei TMC 1548 was cultured in TYE medium
containing 0.2% Tween-20 at pH-7.4. The pelleted cells were
washed with 50 ml of 50mM Tris-HCl, pH-7.5, and these cells
were used for the isolation of cardiolipin synthase 
[].

Isolation and Purification of the cardiolipin synthase (cls)
Preparation of Membrane Fraction:
The cells of M. phlei were sonicated then centrifuged in a
ultracentrifuge Beckman L7-35. The pellet was washed with
50mM Tris- HCl, pH 7.5 and was used as the starting material
for purification and isolation of Cardiolipin synthase enzyme.

Assay of Cardiolipin synthase activity:
The enzyme assay was carried out in 50µM of acetate buffer pH
4.8. Each test tube contained 30µM of phosphatidyl glycerol
(PG), 10µM of ATP, 100µM of MgCl2, 80µM of MnCl2, and 0.1
ml of enzyme fraction (crude or pure). For CDP-diacylglycerol
pathway 0.4µM of CDP-diacylglycerol was used instead of PG.
The reaction mixture was incubated at 37°C for 1 hour, and
stopped by addition of 2.5 ml methanol. The solution in the
tubes was suspended in chloroform-methanol (2:1 v/v) mixture
and stirred for 4 hours at room temperature. The homogenate
was filtered and the residue was again stirred for 2 hours in
chloroform-methanol (2:1 v/v) and vaccum dried at 45°C in
rotatory vaccum evaporator. The dry mass was dissolved in a 1
ml of chloroform, and washed with one fifth volume of KCl and
left overnight at 4°C. The upper phase was discarded and lower
layer was evaporated to dry in a rotatory vaccum evaporator at
45°C. The residue was dissolved in 0.5 ml of chloroform. This
sample was now subjected to thin layer chromatography (TLC).
To the activated chromatoplates samples were spotted along
with blank and developed for 90 minutes in the Chloroform :
methanol : ammonia (115:45:7.5, v/v/v). Phospholipid
standards were also run alongwith mycobacterial lipid samples
for identification. The plates were air dried and sprayed with
50% H2SO4 and heated for 15 minutes at 110°C till charred spots
appeared. The spot corresponding to the cardiolipin was
identified in all the samples and scrapped into test tubes and
used for the estimation of phospholipid phosphorous. Presence
of phosphorous in phospholipids was estimated by Marinetti
(1962) method []. The KM values of the purified Cls for both
CDP-Diacylglycerol (CDP-DG) and Phosphatidyl Glycerol (PG)
were determined. The effect of substrate concentration was first
determined by varying concentration of PG between 20 to 100
µmoles. The concentration of CDP-DG was kept constant at
0.4µmoles. The concentration of CDP-DG was varied from 0.2 to
4µmoles. The concentration of PG was kept constant at
0.5µmoles. The enzyme activity of cls was expressed as µM of
CL phosphorous. ml-1 minute-1. Km and Vmax were calculated
by plotting Hanes–Woolf plot ([S/V] vs [S]) [,
,
,
]. By
taking varying concentrations of MgCl2, CaCl2 as 50 to
150µmoles and MnCl2 as 40 to 150µmoles, the effect of Mg2+,
Ca2+ and Mn2+ ions on enzyme assay was determined as
described in earlier section [,
,
,
]. The M. phlei membrane
fractions were solubilized in 2M Urea. After solubilization the
suspension was dialysed to remove urea [,
].

Protein sequencing of cls:
The peak fraction from reverse phase C-18 (4.6 × 150× 5
microns) column was subjected to amino acid analysis. For Nterminal
sequence analysis, cls of M. phlei 10µg in 25 µl of 10
mM Tris-HCl, pH-7.5 was applied to prospin device (Applied
Biosystems) according to manufacturer's protocol. The
resulting PVDF blot was washed twice with 20% methanol
prior to sequencing in a Blot cartridge (Applied Biosystems) on
a model 477 A pulsed liquid protein sequencer equipped with a
model 120APTH analyzer (Applied Biosystems) using methods
and cycles supplied by the manufacturer. Data was collected
and analyzed on a model 610A data analysis system (Applied
Biosystems).

Enzymatic digestion and internal Amino acid se:
20µg of cls in 10mM Tris-HCl, pH-7.5 was dried in a speed vac.
(Savant, Formingdale, NJ). The resulting residue was taken up
in 25µl of 8M urea and 0.4M NH4 HCO3 and subjected to
reduction, alkylation and proteolytic digestion with 0.3µg
modified sequencing grade trypsin []. The resulting digest
was separated by reversed phase HPLC on a narrow bore (21.1
× 250mm) Vydac 218TP52 column and gaurd column
(separations group, Hesponia, CA) and eluted at 0.25 ml /min
at 35oC utilizing a gradient on a system Gold HPLC equipped
with a model 168 diode array detector (Beckman, Fullerton,
CA). Solvent A was 0.1 %TFA in water and solvent B was 0.1 %
TFA in acetonitrile. The column effluent was monitored at 210
and 280 nm. Fractions were collected at 30 seconds interval and
stored at -20°C. Fractions (200µl) containing tryptic peptides
were applied to Biobrene (Applied Biosystems) treated glass
fiber filter and dried prior to amino acid sequencing on the
previously described sequencer [].

Results &amp; Discussion
The 2M urea was observed to be a useful solubilizer of M. phlei
membranes while maintaining the enzymatic activity of cls
(). The solubilized membranes of M. phlei were used
initially to study the synthesis of CL using both CDPdiacylglycerol
(CDP-DG) and Phosphatidyl Glycerol (PG) as
substrates and the enzyme activity was observed to be 4.5+0.25
µM of CL phosphorous.ml-1 minute-1 and 6.5+0.25 µM of CL
phosphorous.ml-1 minute-1 and the optimal activity of the
enzyme was achieved at pH 4.8. This urea solubilized fraction
was further used in the purification of cls the increased enzyme
activity was observed with increased purification ()
(see supplementary material). The cls enzyme eluted on
GPC-HPLC (TSK G-3000 SW) at a retention time of 42 minutes
() was concentrated and fractionated on C-18 RPHPLC
which was eluted as single peak at a retention time of 15
minutes () gave single band on SDS-PAGE with a
molecular weight of 58kDa () and IEF analysis
showed an isoelectric pH 4.5 () which confirms that cls
of Mycobacterium phlei is an acidic protein.

The pure cls showed an enzyme activity of 11.5+0.15 µM of CL
phosphorous.ml-1 minute-1 for PG as substrate and 14+0.35 µM
of CL phosphorous.ml-1 minute-1 for CDP-DG as substrate with
absolute requirement for divalent cations with Mg2+ and Mn2+
in particular however, Ca2+ ions completely inactivated the cls
enzyme (). At an optimal concentration of
phospholipid the KM vlaues were 55+0.05µM and 2.56+0.04µM
for PG and CDP-DG, respectively. The cls appeared to be
highly thermostable as it retained its 60% activity even at 550C
when kept for one hour. Attempts to detect the amino terminal
residue were unsuccessful, indicating that the amino terminal
was blocked therefore, the protein was digested with trypsin
and the fragments were resolved by C-18 RP-HPLC. The
peptide obtained at 72 min had
ITDFMDGYIARKYGLKTIAGTILDPLADKL sequence and
BLAST-P search analysis indicated that the sequence had
resemblance with the cls reported so far (SWISS -PROT data
bank with Accession Number-P82260) also the sequence
showed significant homology with the pgsA3 (Rv2746c) gene of
M. tuberculosis H37Rv and pgsA genes of E. coli and Bacillus
subtilis.

The complete Mycobacterium tuberculosis genome was recently
sequenced and annotated. However, of the 3,924 putative gene
products, only a minority are assigned experimentally
established physiological functions []. Thus, continued
analyses of the M. tuberculosis proteome are required to fully
elucidate the biology of this intracellular pathogen. In this
context researcher's all over the world are concentrating and
studying various genes in the closely related organisms like
Mycobacterium smegmatis and Mycobacterium phlei in
understanding the physiological functions of these genes and
implicating their role in M.tuberculosis. This would help in
understanding quickly the physiological importance of these
enzymes/ proteins in the pathogenicity of the organism, further
that are required for the formation of successful pathogen 
[].

The partial sequence of cardiolipin synthase (cls) of
Mycobacterium phlei (Acc.No P-82260) showed significant
homology with the pgsA3 (Rv2746c) gene of the M. tuberculosis
H37Rv shows the physiological importance of this enzyme in the
mycobacteria which has high amount of cardiolipin in their cell
membranes. The high content of cardiolipin (CL) appears to
have an important role on the stability of the mycobacteria
particularly in the pathogenic mycobacteria, cardiolipin is often
the most abundant (30-50%) of total phospholipids. This is
further corroborated by the fact that there are three pgsA genes
in M tuberculosis, where as only one cls gene is found in E coli
[–]. 
Expression of cls is highest in the stationary phase of E
coli, since mycobacterial species grows even in low oxygen
conditions thus; the requirement of CL is very high in this
genus. Thus, probably the CL-biosynthesis is pivotal
requirement in the mycobacteria especially in pathogenic
mycobacteria [,
].

The purified cls showed an absolute requirement for Mg2+ and
Mn2+ions however, Ca2+ ions inactivated cls enzyme. The SDSPAGE
analysis indicated that cls had a molecular weight of 58
kDa while the same cls isolated from E. coli, Bacillus firmus had
a mol .wt of 45 and 57 kDa respectively [,
]. The isoelectric
point of cls was achieved at pH 4.5 indicating acidic in nature
() which is in agreement that optimum activity of cls
was observed at 4.8 pH. Similarly cls of S. aureus and L.
plantarum exhibited optimum activity at pH-4.4 [,
].
Temperature dependent analysis showed the cls of M. phlei
retained its 60 % activity even at 55°C which is consistent with
nature of M. phlei which can even grow at 55°C. The low KM
values of 2.56µM and 55µM for CDP-DG and PG respectively,
suggests that the cls of M. phlei has very high affinity for its
substrates. Similar properties were observed for cls present in E.
coli and in human cardiac cells and in rat liver mitochondrial
membranes indicating [,
,
,
].

It has been observed by Nigou and Besra [] that phospholipids
are released from the mycobacteria within the infected
macrophages plays an important role in the outcome of
mycobacterial infections. The important factor in understanding
the virulence of M. tuberculosis is its survival inside the host cell
phagosome. The pathogen is able to convert the hostile
environment of the phagosome by inhibiting the acidification
and phagosome-lysosome fusion [,
]. It is very much clear
that in CL in bacteria reactivates polymerases and gyrases 
[];
it is therefore, possible to predict that the requirement of CL is
very pivotal in pathogenic mycobacteria. These findings open
up plausible explanations for the presence of high amount of
CL in the cell membranes of M. tuberculosis for its survival in
the macrophages. Therefore; enzymes involved in the
biosynthesis of phospholipids may be attractive drug targets in
the development of new anti-mycobacterial drugs.

Conclusion
Cardiolipin synthase which catalyses the formation of
cardiolipin, was purified from the membranes of Mycobacterium
phlei. The purified enzyme showed a molecular weight of 58KD
and pI of 4.5. The enzyme showed absolute requirement of
Mg2+ and Mn2+ ions for its activity however, Ca2+ ions inhibited
the cls activity. The partial amino acid sequence of cls showed
significant homology with pgsA3 gene of M. tuberculosis.
Cardiolipin in bacteria activates polymerases, gyrases and
presence of high amount of cardiolipin in the memebranes of
M. tuberculosis possibly explains its survival in the macrophages
therefore; enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of CL may be
an attractive drug targets in the development of
antimycobacterial drugs.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This paper dedicated to late Dr. P.S. MURTHY, who inspired
me a lot and ignited many innovative thoughts among scientific
entities. I wish his soul to be rest in peace.

Citation:Sarma et al, Bioinformation 9(13): 690-695 (2013)

A) Gel filtration profile of cardiolipin synthetase (cls) isolated from Mycobacterium phlei; B) Thin layer chromatogram of
cardiolipin synthesized by the cls isolated from Mycobacterium phlei. S-TLC: Phospholipids, Phosphatidyl ethanolamine (PE),
Phosphatidyl glycerol (PG) and cardiolipin (CL) obtained from sigma, mp-TLC: Phospholipids, PG and CL obtained from the
synthesis of CL by cls of M. phlei.; C) HPLC profile of cls obtained from Sephacryl S-200 column. 2.5 mg of cls purified on
Sephacryl S-200 column was applied on HPLC-Gel permeation column [TSK G-3000SW (21.5 × 300 mm)]; D) RP-HPLC profile of
cls obtained from HPLC-GPC column. 1 mg of cls purified from HPLC-GPC column was applied on C-18 RP-HPLC (Waters); E)
10% SDS-PAGE analysis of cls purified on HPLC. Lane 1. 5 µg of cls purified on Sephacryl S-200, lanes 2 and 3 5 µg of cls
fractionated on HPLC-GPC lane 4 cls purified on C 18 RP HPLC, lane M. molecular size markers obtained from Bangalore genei
pvt ltd.; F) Isoelectric focussing of gel pattern of purified cls; G) Effects of Mg2+, Mn2+ and Ca2+ on cls activity by using CDP-diacyl
glycerol and phosphotidyl glycerol as substrates.

