Background
An important task in molecular biology is to identify DNA regulatory elements for transcription factors. These binding
sites are short regions and called as ’motifs‘. Despite considerable efforts to date, DNA motif finding in whole
genome remains a challenge for researchers. There are several approaches to identify the conserved motifs but the
recent one is through weight matrix based. So far no such tool is available to construct the different types of weight
matrices according to user defined set. Earlier tools uses promoter sequences of co-regulated genes from single
genome and search for statistically over-represented motifs. However, most of these motif finding tools have been shown
to work successfully in yeast and other lower organisms, but perform significantly worse in higher organisms. Over the
past few years, numerous tools have become available for the prediction of TF binding sites 
[–]. Especially popular are
those tools which use information of known binding sites that are collected in databases such as TRANSFAC [], EpoDB
[], TRANSCompel []. More sophisticated approaches
include consideration of nucleotide correlation in different positions of the sites, HMM, taking into account flanking
regions and others [–]. But usually, complex approaches
require large training sets, which is rather problematic since, only small sets of binding patterns are known for a motif (i.e.
up to 10 sites). Currently the genome wide motif prediction tools required either direct pattern sequence (for single motif)
or weight matrix (for multiple motifs). Although there are known motif pattern databases and tools for genome wide
prediction but no tool for weight matrix construction. Considering this, we have developed D-MATRIX tool which
constructs the different types of weight matrices based on user defined motif sequences and width. D-MATRIX can use
both orthologous and co-regulated genes upstream sequences as input data set. For demonstration, we used the known
LexA transcription factor binding site of Deinococcus radiodurans (a radiation digestive bacterium), to construct
the weight matrix similar to earlier reported one [].
Predictions performance showed promising results, as on comparison of weight matrix with known one, we found 90%
accuracy with aligned motifs of same width. D-MATRIX can generate different types of matrices i.e., alignment, frequency
and weight matrix. D-MATRIX also offers weight matrix conversion into different file formats as per user ease. These
converted files can than be used as input files by genome wide motif prediction tools e.g. PoSSuMsearch [] and
RSAT-Patser []. Aligned motif sequences can be retrieved
through available motif discovery tools e.g. SIGNAL SCAN [], MATRIX SEARCH [], 
MatInspector [], Fuzzy clustering tool [], 
FUNSITE [], Gibbs Sampling tool [], 
AliBaba2 [] etc. D-MATRIX differs from existing tools by providing liberty to design user defined weight
matrix model &amp; signature.

Methodology
D-MATRIX takes aligned DNA motif sequences ’N‘ and motif width ’w‘ as input, searches for nucleotide frequency at
each position ’F(ij)‘ and outputs the found consensus patterns/motifs according to conservation priority based on
nucleotide frequency ’F(ij)‘, constructed frequency matrix, alignment matrix and weight matrix along with motif
signature and degenerate consensus sequence according to IUPAC/IUB convention. Scoring of the weight matrix was done through following equation (see equation 1 in
) as described elsewhere 
[,].

Implementation
The D-MATRIX web tool is implemented in CSharp and wrapped in ASP.Net to maintain a user friendly web interface. The D-MATRIX user interface is shown in
snapshots (). It has been designed so that the user has all necessary parameters available on one screen. The top
panel is used to paste the input sequences (or aligned known TF binding sites) and to specify the name and width of motif to be search. The results panel contains five major sections:
consensus pattern/motif sequence, frequency matrix, alignment matrix, weight matrix and signature sequence as per IUPAC code. Along with these results a tool for matrix
transformation is also associated in right panel, which can transform the derived matrix according to input file format of various genomic motif discovery tools. Since input sequence
set required is experimental one, thus all weight matrices constructed through D-MATRIX tool can be considered as a source of well supported hypotheses for further experimental
verification.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We would like to thank experts of ICT division, CIMAP, for web hosting support. We also acknowledge Department of
Biotechnology, New Delhi for financial support as Bioinformatics Centre at Central Institute of Medicinal &amp; Aromatic Plants (Council of Scientific &amp; Industrial
Research), Lucknow (UP) INDIA.

Citation:Sen et al, Bioinformation 3(10): 415-418 (2009)

Snapshots of D­Matrix tool

