Background
Proteases are proteolytic enzymes that catalyze the breakdown
of proteins by hydrolysis of peptide bonds. Proteolytic enzymes
are ubiquitous in existence, being found in all living organisms,
and are crucial for cell growth and differentiation. Proteases
represent one of the three largest groups of industrially
essential enzymes []. 
Bacteria are the most dominant group of
alkaline protease, Bacillus being the most relatively prominent
and serve as an ideal source of these enzymes of
biotechnological importance [,
] because of their rapid growth
and small space required for their cultivation 
[]. Among
different types Acidic, neutral and alkaline proteases, alkaline
protease plays very significant role as most commonly used
industrial enzyme in view of their activity and stability at
alkaline pH. Proteases are one of the highest value commercial
enzymes as they have broad applications in food,
pharmaceutical, detergent, and dairy industries and serve as
vital tools in determination of structure of proteins and
polypeptides [,
]. 
The biotechnological promise of proteases
makes them an ideal candidate for structure function
relationship studies. Alkaline proteases hold a great potential
for application in leather and detergent industries due to the
increasing awareness of developing environmentally friendly
technologies. Fungal alkaline proteases offer a distinct
advantage over the currently used bacterial proteases in terms
of the ease of preparation of microbe free enzyme as against the
cost-effective filtration technology required for the isolation of a
bacterial enzyme []. 
Multiple application of these enzymes
stimulated interest to discover them with novel properties and
considerable advancement of basic research into these enzymes.
A broad understanding of the active site of the enzyme and of
the mechanism of its inactivation is essential for delineating its
structure-function relationship.

Studies of DNA and protein sequence homology are essential
for a variety of purposes and have therefore become routine in
computational molecular biology. The nucleotide and amino
acid sequences of a number of proteases have been determined
and their comparison is useful for elucidating the structurefunction
relationship []. The homology of proteases with
respect to the nature of the catalytic site has been studied
previously [,
]. Accordingly, the enzymes have been
allocated to evolutionary families and clans. It has been
suggested that there may be as many as 60 evolutionary lines of
peptidases with distinct origin. The availability of genome
sequences from several species of Aspergillus has facilitated the
identification of a huge number of putative secondary
metabolism genes and gene clusters which were previously
unknown. While some limited prediction of function has been
possible through bioinformatics, functional analysis has been
necessary to confirm such predictions. Some of the putative
secondary metabolism genes are not expressed at a sufficient
level to detect products. This difficulty can sometimes be
overcome by manipulating regulatory and structural genes to
obtain expression, or by studying different strains of the same
species, since expression can be strain dependent. Comparison
of the genomes of Aspergillus species has revealed a surprising
degree of secondary metabolic diversity within the genus, and
provided some insights into how new clusters might evolve.
The present study is an attempt to determine the functional and
structural aspects of alkaline protease from Aspergillus flavus
adopting in-silico analysis approach.

Methodology
Primary and Secondary Structure Analysis:
Percentages of hydrophobic and hydrophilic residues were
calculated from the primary structure analysis. The
physicochemical parameters were computed using Expasy's
ProtParam prediction server. The tool SOPMA, in Expasy was
used for the secondary structure prediction, secondary
structure class identification and for the computation of
percentages of α-helical, β- strand and coiled regions.

Functional site prediction in the Alkaline Protease:
ScanProsite tool in Expasy was used to determine the functional
regions present in alkaline protease.

Sequence Alignment:
The FASTA sequence of alkaline protease was retrieved from
the UNIPROTKB with ID Q71RZ0 that has 403 amino acids.
Comparative modeling usually starts by searching the PDB of
known protein structures using the target sequence as the query
[]. 
This search is generally done by comparing the target
sequence with the sequence of each of the structures in the
database. The target sequence was searched for similar
sequence using the BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool)
[] 
against Protein Data bank. The BLAST results yielded X-ray
structure of 3F7O chain a (template) with an Eval of 2e-84 and
53% similarity to the target protein 
 (see supplementary
material). Swiss- PdbViewer was used to produce a structure based
alignment and SWISS-MODEL was used in the optimized
mode to minimize energy.

Comparative Modeling:
The theoretical structure of alkaline protease from 3F7O is
generated using Swiss model workspace. SWISS-MODEL
repository is a database of annotated 3D protein structure
models generated by the SWISS-MODEL homology-modelling
pipeline. The resultant output model files consists of one or
more 3D models accompanied by detailed information about
the target protein and the model building process, functional
annotation, a detailed template selection log, target-template
alignment, summary of the model building and model quality
assessment.

Validation of Model:
ProSA:
ProSA program explores the advantages of interactive webbased
applications for the display of scores and energy plots
that highlight potential problems spotted in the modeled
protein structure. ProSA is a tool widely used to check 3D
models of protein structures for potential errors. In particular,
the quality scores of a protein are displayed. Its range of
application includes error recognition in experimentally
determined structures.

Saves:
SAVES tool is used for Errat value prediction, Verify 3d plot
and Ramachandran plot determination. ERRAT is a protein
structure verification algorithm that is especially well-suited for
evaluating the progress of crystallographic model building and
refinement. The program works by analyzing the statistics of
non-bonded interactions between different atom types. Verify
3d plot determines the compatibility of an atomic model (3D)
with its own amino acid sequence (1D) by assigning a structural
class based on its location and environment (alpha, beta, loop,
polar, nonpolar etc) and comparing the results to good
structures.

Procheck:
A versatile protein structure analysis program [] available at
the Joint Centre for Structural Genomics, Bioinformatics core,
University of California, San Diego; was used in validation of
protein structure and models by verifying the parameters like
Ramachandran plot quality, peptide bond planarity, bad no
bonded interactions, main chain hydrogen bond energy, alpha
chirality and over-all G factor and the side chain parameters
like standard deviations of chi gauche minus, trans and plus,
pooled standard deviations of chi1 with respect to refined
structures []

ProsaII:
This program compares Z scores between target and template
structure. The Z scores of model is a measure of compatibility
between its sequence and structure. The model Z score should
be comparable to the Z scores obtained from the template 
[]

RMSD:
Root Mean Squared Deviation (RMSD) is commonly used to
represent the distance between two objects. In a structural
sense, this value indicates the degree to which two three
dimensional structures are similar. The lower the value, the
more similar the structures are. The RMSD value 
[] between
the template and the model structure was calculated using
SPDBV program.

Discussion
Primary and Secondary Structure Analysis:
Number of amino acids, molecular weight, and total number of
negatively and positively charged residues, grand average of
hydropathicity (GRAVY), theoretical pI and the individual
composition of each amino acid are shown in 
(see
supplementary material). The results show that the alklaine
protease seems stable []. The target protein is good for 3D
modeling as the alpha helix content is 42 % which will make the
protein stable ( &amp; ).

Functional site evaluation:
Three functional domains were present in the alkaline protease
as a serine protease belonging to subtilase family with the given
functional residues. These proteins belong to family S8 in the
classification of peptidases. Subtilases are an extensive family of
serine proteases whose catalytic activity is provided by a charge
relay system similar to that of the trypsin family of serine
proteases that evolved by independent convergent evolution.
The sequence around the residues involved in the catalytic triad
(aspartic acid, serine and histidine) are completely different
from that of the analogous residues in the trypsin serine
proteases and can be used as signatures specific to that category
of proteases  (see supplementary material).

Modeling of Alkaline Protease:
Tertiary structure of a protein is built by packing of its
secondary structure elements to form discrete domains.
Comparative modeling predicts the 3-D structure of alkaline
protease model as a given protein sequence (target) based
primarily on its alignment to template. The hypothetical protein
model created is stored as PDB output file. The 3D structures of
the template and the model are given in ().

Evaluation and Validation of Model:
The results of ProSA program used for the display of scores and
energy plots that highlight potential problems spotted in the
modeled protein structure are shown in (). The
hypothetical protein model generated was analyzed online by
submitting to Joint Center for Structural Genomics (JCSG),
Bioinformatics core, University of California, San Diego.
Accuracy of the protein model generated was judged by
validity report generated by PROCHECK. Parameter
comparisons of these proteins were made with well-refined
structures that have similar resolution. The main chain
parameters plotted are Ramachandran plot quality, peptide
bond planarity, Bad non-bonded interactions, main chain
hydrogen bond energy, C- alpha chirality and over-all G factor.
In the Ramamchandran plot analysis, the residues were
classified according to their regions in the quadrangle. The
Ramachandran map for alkaline protease is represented in
().

Homology protein modelling uses experimentally determined
protein structures (templates) to predict the 3-D structure of
another protein that has a similar amino acid sequence (the
target). This approach to modelling is possible since a small
change in the protein sequence usually results in a small change
in its 3D structure []. Homology modelling remains the only
modelling method that can provide models with a root mean
square error lower than 2Å. The FASTA sequence alkaline
protease was obtained from Uniprot. The primary requirement
for reliable homology modeling is a detectable similarity
between the sequence of interest (target sequence) and a known
structure (template). Due to high sequence identity between
target and the template, it is good enough to use
crystallographic structure of 3F7O as a template in order to
obtain high quality alignment for structure prediction by
homology modeling. The alignment between target and 3F7O is
shown in  (see supplementary material). Homology
modeling is currently restricted to protein sequences (targets)
that share 30% or more sequence identity to an experimentally
solved protein structure template []. Under this sequence
identity, the reliability of the sequence alignment between
target and template declines fast, resulting into significant
modeling errors, low accuracy models should still be treated
with attention. Medium accuracy models, obtained with a
template-target sequence identity of 30–50%, tend to have
nearly 85% of their C-α atom within 3.5 Å of the correct
position. These models often fit a variety of applications,
including the testing of ligand binding states by designing site
directed mutants with altered binding capacity, and
computational screening of databases listing small molecules
for potential lead compounds or inhibitors. Top accuracy
models, based on sequence identities more than 50%, usually
have structures comparable to 3 Å resolution X-ray structures
and can be used for more reliable calculations as (ligand
docking, drug design), however sequence identities more than
90% can be used to facilitate a meaningful biophysical
description of the active site [].

The model was also tested for φ and ψ torsion angles using the
Ramchandran plot. A comparison of the results show that one
of the models generated is more acceptable. The molecular
visualization Pymol program was used to manipulate the
models based on residue interactions, energy minimization and
steric hinderance. The best model predicted was used for
further analysis by PROCHECK (13). Ramachandran plot
analysis showed that main-chain conformations for 83.4 % of
amino acid residues are within the most favored or allowed
region, 14.5 % in the allowed and 1.7% in the generously
allowed region and only 0.4% in the disallowed region. In
general, a score close to 100% implies good stereochemical
quality of the model [].

The overall general similarities and subtle difference among the
3D structure of template 3F7O and predicted model can be seen
from the backbone superposition. As evident from
superposition (), general folding topology of the
structure is similar; however, some structural differences
appear between the predicted model and template. These
differences are mostly due to insertion and deletions in
different loop regions. The RMSD (Root Mean Square
Deviation) between predicted model and template is 0.24 Å.
The low RMSD between the target and template echoes the
presence of strong homology (The lower the value, the more
similar the structures are). The z-score indicates overall model
quality and measures the deviation of the total energy of the
structure with respect to an energy distribution derived from
random conformations []. In order to facilitate interpretation
of the z-score of the specified protein, its particular value is
displayed in a plot that contains the z-scores of all
experimentally determined protein chains in current PDB.
Groups of structures from different sources (X-ray, NMR) are
distinguished by different colors (NMR with dark blue and Xray
with light blue). This plot can be used to check whether the
z-score of the protein in question is within the range of scores
usually found for proteins of similar size belonging to one of
these groups. It can be seen in () that Z-scores value of
the obtained model (-7.53) is located within the space of
proteins determined by X ray. This value is extremely close to
the value of the template (-7.88) which recommends that the
obtained model is reliable and very close to experimentally
determined structure.

Conclusion
In summary, based on the template structure it is clearly
observed that the theoretical structure generated is structurally
similar to the template structure which is highly sufficient for
the development of specific ligand for alkaline protease. Our
model of NIR is only a predictive, and needs to be confirmed
experimentally.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Syed et al, Bioinformation 8(4): 175-180 (2012)

Secondary Structure Analysis of Alkaline Protease.

Distribution of secondary structure elements in
Alkaline Protease.

(A) 3D structure of template (3F70) obtained from
PDB; (B) 3D structure of alkaline protease predicted using 3F70
as the template.

PROSA result showing Z-score

Ramachandran Plot

Superposition of template (green) with the predicted
model of alkaline protease (pink). The picture has been taken
from Swiss PDB viewer

