Background
Species of Candida are considered important opportunistic
pathogens. Thus, C. albicans is the most common cause of
genital tract infections, in approximately 85-95% of cases, while
other species such as C. glabrata, C. krusei, C. tropicalis, C.
parasilosis, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, and Rhodutorula spp., have
also been increased lately []. Positive vaginal cultures for
Candida spp. can be found in almost 30% of pregnant and 15%
of non-pregnant women []. Candida spp. is now the fourth
most common cause of hosp ital-acquired blood stream
infections. Despite advances in antifungal therapy, the high
attributable mortality rate (~40-60%), due to Candida infections
has not clearly improved in the last 2 decades [,
]. Many of
these infections are implant-associated infections, where the
micro-organisms form adherent biofilms on the surfaces of
catheters, joint replacements, prosthetic heart valves, and other
medical devices []. Biofilm formation on biotic and abiotic
surfaces is a key pathogenic attribute of Candida spp. that
enhances its ability to adhere to surfaces and thereby maintain
colonization and/or cause diseases in humans. Therefore,
biofilm formation represents a major challenge for the treatment
of biomaterial-related Candida infections; and in most cases
removal and/or replacement of the infected device is difficult
or high risk. Policy-management of biomaterial-related
complications includes the use of antibiotic lock therapy,
heparin locks, and heparin-coated catheters. Ironically, the use
of systemic heparin has been identified as a risk factor for
catheter-related sepsis in dialysis patients []. Heparin has also
been found to stimulate Staphylococcus aureus biofilm formation
in vitro []. Also, 
[] found, that benzyl alcohol, frequently
associated with heparin as preservative, induced the most
significant increase in biofilm production in Staphylococcus
epidermidis. In contrast, Miceli et al., demonstrated the inhibitory
effects of heparin, though at high concentration (10,000 IU/ml),
with or without methyl paraben and/or propyl paraben as
preservatives on C. albicans (5 strains) mature-biofilm formation
in vitro. EDTA (Ethylene di-amine tetra-acetic acid) has also
been reported to inhibit in vitro biofilm formation by Candida
spp. []. Additionally, several studies indicated that tetracycline
[]; inhibited the prokaryotic Staph. epidermidis biofilm
formation and also affects Candida-colonization and/or
virulence factors []. Although the toxicity of cycloheximide, a
potent protein synthesis inhibitor in eukaryotic cells, precluded
its clinical use, the drug is being extensively used in
mycological culture media to inhibit saprophytic fungi
including yeasts. However, as a valuable research tool in
laboratory, its effects on the biofilm formation in Candida
albicans strains have not been previously explored. Therefore,
the present study deals with the investigation of in vitro effects
of EDTA, cycloheximide, and heparin (-benzyl alcohol
preservative) on biofilms formation by C. albicans (126 strains)
and non-albicans (31) yeast isolates previously isolated from
vaginal specimens of pregnant and non-pregnant Saudi women
and recently reported from out laboratory, as well as their
susceptibility patterns against amphotericin B, 5-flucytosine and
itraconazole using Etest strips method.

Methodology
Microorganisms:
One hundred and fifty seven isolates belonged to eight species
of yeasts were recently recovered from vaginal specimens (707
HVS) of pregnant and non-pregnant Saudi women, and used in
this study. These comprises C. albicans (126); C. glabrata (20); C.
tropicalis (4); C. kefyr (2); S. cerevisiae (2); and one strain of C.
famata; C. utilis ; or R. mucilaginosa. The collected Candida species
strains were stored in 10% glycerinated water at −20°C until
experiments were performed. The reference strain C. albicans
(ATCC 10231) was used as control in biofilm assay, and
antifungal susceptibility tests [].

Inoculum-preparation and Biofilm quantification:
Biofim formation was assisted as previously described 
[,
].
Briefly, fresh yeast-inoculum-pellets were collected by
centrifugation (5 minutes at 4000 rpm) from static logarithmic
growth in Sabouraud Dextrose Broth (SDB) at 37°C for 6 h,
washed and re-suspended in sterile saline to match 3
McFarland turbidity scale. To each well of the microtiter plates
(flat bottom) 180µl of SDB (supplemented with extra 8%
glucose) were added, then inoculated with 20µl of the above
yeast cell suspension. C.albicans (ATCC 10231) reference strain
and yeast-free medium controls were also included. Four wells
for each yeast isolate were performed: i-saline (50µl), ii- EDTA
50µl (to give final concentration 0.3 mg/ml; iii- heparin from its
appropriate dilution in sterile saline, 50µl (to give final
concentration of heparin 1000 IU/ml and 0.4 mg/ml benzyl
alcohol; and cyclohexamide 50µl (only for C. albicans strains), to
give final concentration of 100µM. The plates were then
incubated for 48 h at 37°C []. After incubation, plate growth
was assessed by measuring the absorbance at 490nm (A490).
Then for biofilm quantification, the planktonic cells were
aspirated, and the wells were washed thrice with sterile saline.
The plates were then inverted on filter paper and were allowed
to dry for 1 h at room temperature, 200µl of 1% crystal violet
(Sigma, USA) was added to each well, and the plate was
allowed to stand for 20 min at room temperature. The wells
were subsequently washed thrice with sterile saline to wash off
the excess crystal violet. A volume of 200µl of ethanol was
added to each well and absorbance was measured at 630nm
(A630). Testing of these isolates was performed thrice for each
yeast strain. As control the background crystal violet binding
was measured for wells exposed only to the medium with no
Candida spp. Biofilm positive strains were considered those
wells where the A630 of which was higher than mean A630 of
negative control plus 3X SD.

Antifungal susceptibility testing:
Antifungal susceptibility testing was performed using Etest
strips (ETS). Amphotricin B, 5-flucytosine, and itraconazole,
ETS were provided by AB BOIDISK (Solna, Sweden), with a
concentration gradient range from 0.002µg/ml to 32µg/ml. The
strips were stored at –20°C until use. The medium used was
RPMI-1640 agar (Sigma Aldrich Ltd., st. Quentin Fallavires,
France) at 10.4g/l supplemented with MOPS (3-[Nmorpholino]-
propanesulfonic acid at 165mM), glucose at 20g/l,
agar at 15g/l, and L-glutamine at 200mM (added after
autoclaving). The tested Candida spp. isolate colony previously
grown on Sabouraud Dextrose Agar (SDA) plate for 24 h at
37°C, was picked up, suspended in 0.85% sterile saline, and
adjusted to match (0.5) McFarland turbidity. A swab of the cell
suspension was then spread in three directions on entire surface
of a RPMI plate, and left for 15 min to allow moisture
absorption at room temperature before applying the ETS on the
agar. The agar plates were then incubated with bottom up at
37°C for 24 h except for C. glabrata, R. mucilaginosa, or S.
cerevisiae the incubation time was 48 h. After incubation, the
MICs of the tested antifungal agents were determined as the
lowest concentration at which the border of the elliptical
inhibition zone intercepted the scale on the ETS []. The
interpretive susceptibility criteria were performed according to
Negri et al., (2009) breakpoints: amphotericin B (≤1µg/ml,
susceptible; ≥2µg/ml, resistant); 5-flucytosine (≤4µg/ml,
susceptible; 8-16µg/ml, intermediate; ≥64µg/ml, resistant);
itraconazole (≤0.125µg/ml, susceptible; 0.25-0.5µg/ml,
susceptible-dose dependent; ≥1.0µg/ml, resistant).

Statistical methods:
The results were analyzed using SPSS 19 (Statistical Package for
Social Science; release 19.0). Chi-square test and Fishers exact
test were used to compare association between proportions and
a P-value &lt; 0.05 was considered as significant.

Result
Results revealed that biofilm formation varied from one strain
to another within the same species as well as from species to
species. As presented in  (see supplementary material),
only 29 % of C. albicans strains formed biofilms, while as much
as 68 % of non-albicans spp. strains were capable of biofilm
formation. The rank order of biofilm formation was C. kefyr, C.
utilis, C. famata, and R. mucilaginosa (100%), followed by C.
glabrata (70%), C. tropicalis (50%), C. albicans (29%), and S.
cerevisiae (0%). As illustrated in  &amp; 
 there was no
correlation between intensity of growth and capacity of biofilm
formation. EDTA proved efficient in reducing the biofilm
formation by non-albicans spp. (P&lt;0.0001) almost completely
 (see supplementary material), and with considerable
reduction in the biofilm formation capacity of most C. albicans
strains (P&lt;0.0001). Likewise, cycloheximide (100µM)
significantly (P&lt;0.0001) inhibited () the biofilm
formation capacity of all C. albicans strains, and this effect was
even three fold more pronounced than that of EDTA inhibition.
Heparin at the concentration used (800U/ml, benzyl alcohol
preservative) unanimously enhanced the biofilm formation in
all tested non-albicans spp. (P=0.567) and C. albicans (P= 0.414)
strains, yet this enhancement, as compared to respective salinecontrol
was not significant  (see supplementarymaterial) &amp; 
. Whether this observed biofilmenhancement
is due to heparin as such and/or the associated
benzyl alcohol preservative is not clear and warranted further
investigation.

Additionally, () 
summarizes the in vitro susceptibility
testing (MICs) of 126 C. albicans and 31 non-albicans spp. strains
against amphotericin B, 5-flucytosine and itraconazole by Etest
method. The data were computed as the concentrations of
antifungal agent necessary to inhibit 50% of the isolates (MIC50)
and concentration to inhibit 90% (MIC90) of the isolates. C.
albicans isolates taken together gave (MIC90) value for
amphotericin B, 5-flucytosine and itraconazole of 0.047, &gt;32 and
2 µg/ml, respectively. Whereas, non-albicans spp. isolates taken
together gave MIC90 value for amphotericin B, 5-flucytosine and
itraconazole of 0.064, 0.064 and &gt;32 µg/ml, respectively 
(). Amphotericin B MICs showed a very narrow range for the
species tested. In contrast, 5-flucytosine and itraconazole MICs
showed a broad range for all the species. As expected, most of
C. glabrata strains were susceptible to amphotericin B and 5-
flucytosine but resistant to itraconazole (). Results also
showed that all Candida spp. including C. albicans were
susceptible to amphotericin B and also to 5-flucytosine with the
exception 14% of the C. albicans strains. Mean while as much as
32 % of non-albicans isolates (mostly C. glabrata) were resistant
to itraconazole, but only 14% of C.albicans isolates where
resistant this drug.

Discussion
The phenomenon of in vitro biofilm formation by microbes on
various abiotic surfaces has been extensively studied in bacteria
and to a lesser extent in fungi, and there appears to be a direct
relationship between the capability of organisms to form a
biofilm and their pathogenicity. Many Candida spp. infections
involve the biofilm formation on implanted devices such as
intrauterine devices and urinary catheter. In this study, SDB
medium supplemented with extra glucose (8%) was used to
induce biofilm formation by examined Candida isolates. The
ability of our yeast-isolates to form biofilm varied among
different Candida species and even within the same species. The
non-albicans spp. exhibited greater capacity in biofilm formation
(68%) than that of C. albicans (29%). These findings are
consistent with those previously reported by Shin et al 
[],
Silva et al [], 
Parthak et al []. However, Kuhn et al 
[]
reported, that isolates of C. albicans consistently form higher
biofilm formation in vitro than non-albicans spp. EDTA disrupts
microbial biofilm through its chelation of calcium, iron, and
magnesium with established anticoagulant activity and some
inhibitory activity against Staphylococci and Candida spp. 
[]
..These findings were confirmed by ours, where EDTA
significantly inhibited the capacity of biofilm formations by
non-albicans spp. As well as C. albicans strains. According to
previous studies, EDTA inhibits C. albicans biofilm formation
through its inhibitory effect on filamentation. Whereas Percival
et al [] reported that EDTA is a more appropriate
anticoagulant and antimicrobial catheter lock than heparin.
EDTA has also been shown to inhibit biofilm formation in S.
aureus and in Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
[].

In the present study heparin at the concentration used
(1000U/ml, benzyl alcohol preservative) unanimously
enhanced the biofilm formation in all non-albicans spp. as well
as C. albicans. In contrast one of the latest studies reported, that
heparin with or without, methyl paraben, and/or propyl
paraben inhibited C. albicans (only five strains) biofilm
formation up to 90%. These controversial findings regarding the
effect of heparin on Candida spp biofilm formation, has also
been reported for its effect on biofilm formation by
Staphylococcus spp. Thus in agreement with our findings on
yeast isolates. Likewise, the use of systemic heparin has been
identified as a risk factor for catheter-related sepsis in dialysis
patients. In contrast, Sauer et al 
[] reported that, heparin
reduced biofilm formation in Staphylococcus aureus. Further,
heparin markedly reduced biofilm formation by 87% of
Staphylococcus lugdunensis strains 
[]. These discrepancies may
be attributed to differences in heparin associated preservatives
and /or used medium cation-contents, particularly calcium and
magnesium which have been reported to restore the S. aureus
heparin inhibitory effect.

Our finding that heparin enhances biofilm formation by all
tested Candida spp. including albicans is compatible with
previous findings that the use of systemic heparin has been
identified as a risk factor for catheter-related sepsis in dialysis.
On the other hand cycloheximide is incorporated in fungal
media to inhibit saprophytic fungi including yeasts. However,
as a research tool in the elucidation of steps in biofilm
formation, the effect of cycloheximide on C. albicans biofilms
formation has not been previously explored. In the current
study, cycloheximide strikingly inhibited biofilm formation by
all C. albicans strains, presumably due its attenuation of de novo
synthesis of proteins, enzymes [,
] and/or complex
molecules necessary for the biofilm expression. In this context,
several protein synthesis inhibitor antibiotics have been shown
to reduce the formation of biofilm in several bacteria (McCool et
al., 2008; Flemming et al., 2009). In contrast antibiotics which
inhibit cell wall synthesis have been reported to stimulate
biofilm formation in prokaryotic pathogens, apparently due to
weakness of cell wall integrity which facilitate out diffusion of
complex molecules for biofilm formation [] (Bagge et al.,
2004).

In this study, the susceptibility testing profiles indicated that
amphotericin B exhibited a very narrow range MIC90 of (0.047
µg/ml and 0.064 µg/ml) for 126 C. albicans strains and 31 nonalbicans
strains, respectively. In a similar study, Hanafy and
Morsy [], found that all the tested clinical isolates (39) were
susceptible to amphotericin B. Whereas Kabli, 
[] found that
all the isolates (107) were also susceptible to the amphotericin B,
tested by Etest strips. These findings confirm previous
conclusion that amphotericin B was active against the majority
of the tested yeast and filamentous fungi, including species
known to cause rare and difficult to treat infections, and
therefore this agent plays an important role in the management
of invasive fungal infection [,
]. In contrast, in Taiwan 
[]
(Cheng et al., 2004), reported that three isolates 2% (out of 170
isolates) of non-albicans spp. were resistant to amphotericin B.
Whereas in Brazil Negri et al., [] reported, that two isolates,
2% (out of 100 isolates) of Candida spp., from Iran twenty
isolates, 7% (out of 285 isolates) and from Iraq [] 7 isolates,
47% (out of 15 isolates) of C. albicans strains were resistant to
amphotericin B. This discrepancy confirms that Candida spp.
susceptibility patterns varied from country to another,
presumably due to frequent use of antifungal drugs per se.

Further our results indicated that with the exception of 14% of
C. albicans (126 isolates) and all non-albicans Candida spp. were
susceptible to 5-flocytosine. In comparison Mokaddas et al., 
[]
reported, that 9% out of (107 clinical isolates) and 1% (out of 240
isolates) were resistant to 5-flucytosine, respectively. On the
other hand itraconazole is among oral antifungal agents
currently used in the management of sever fungal infections.
However, in this study as much as 32% of non-albicans strains
(mostly C. glabrata) were resistant to itraconazole, but only 14%
of C. albicans strains where resistant the same drug. Wheras
Hanafy and Morsy, found that 12 out of 18 C. albicans strains
and 3 out of 21 non-albicans strains were resistant to
itraconazole. A lower rate of resistance to this drug was found
in Brazil (10%, 5/52); an even higher rate of resistance (40%,
17/43) to this drug was reported from Taiwan. Again as stated
above this discrapancy may reflect extensive use and/or
rational use of the drug per se. The resistance observed in this
study against conventional antifungal agents should be viewed
with concern and necessitates continuous monitoring through
surveillance studies.

Financial Disclosure
The authors state no conflict of interest.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors would like to express their thanks and gratitude to
King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology (KACST),
Riyadh, for funding this research project through a MSCstudent
grant No: A-S-11-0608 to Mr Ziab Zakey Al-Ahmadey..

Citation:Al-akeel et al, Bioinformation 9(7): 357-362 (2013)

Distribution of Candida spp. isolates on the basis of
their capability for growth and biofilm-formation at 37 c for
48h.

The blue line represent the absorbance of the growth,
wells read at (490nm); and the red represent the absorbance of
bioflim-formation crystal viloet ethanol extracted stained-wells
read at (630).

Effets of EDTA, cycloheximide and heparin on tested
candida spp. capability to form biofilms at 37°C for 48h.

