Background
Building 3-dimensional (3D) structures of molecules is a
starting point for computational analysis because physical,
chemical, and biological properties of a molecule are related to
its 3D structure. Observed physicochemical properties reflect
the statistical average of all possible conformations, and are
predominantly associated with the global energy minimum
structure and its periphery. Thus, conformational space for
flexible molecules is often explored after 3D structure
generation to find minimum energy structures, i.e., conformers.
Searching for conformers, finding the global energy minimum
conformer and its periphery, and taking into account the
Boltzmann distribution can help with the spectral assignment
during spectroscopic analysis such as NMR, IR, and VCD. For
rational drug design, searching for conformers is a crucial step
because most drugs have an optimal bioactive conformation in
the active site of their target biomolecule, and this conformation
is likely to be close to that of low-energy conformers.

I herein report a free script for automated building of 3D
structures and conformer searching based on 2-dimensional
(2D) drawing of chemical structures. This is a Bash shell script,
and runs on Mac OS X and the Linux platform. Without a 3D
molecule builder, the tasks are consecutively and iteratively
executed via the command line interface and free (academic)
programs OpenBabel [,
], Balloon [,
], and MOPAC2012 
[,
]. There are many commercial applications for conformer
generation using a 3D molecule builder []. On the other hand,
scientists are familiar with 2D skeletal formulas, and bench
scientists routinely draw 2D chemical structures using molecule
editor such as ChemDraw [] or MarvinSketch 
[]. The
proposed script is convenient in this regard, and processes a
large number of 2D chemical drawing files simultaneously. It
also functions with stereoisomers. Energy-minimized
conformers are generated using a force field, and are further
processed using semi-empirical quantum chemical calculations
to estimate their heats of formation. In addition, input files for
ab initio and density functional theory (DFT) calculations are
dumped to predict rigorous electronic energies, structures and
properties. After completion of all energy calculations of the
generated conformers, an energy-sorted list of file names of the
conformers is provided.

Settings
OpenBabel is a freely available chemistry toolbox designed to
accept inputs in all languages that are used for processing
chemical data, and was installed in /usr/local/bin. The
executable babel (version 2.3.1 for Mac and 2.3.2 for Linux) is
used to convert file formats and to generate input files for
MOAPC2012 and Gaussian09 [] in the script.

Balloon is a freely available tool that generates 3D atomic
coordinates from molecular connectivity via distance geometry,
and conformer ensembles by using a multi-objective genetic
algorithm (GA). This tool also considers stereochemistry of
double bonds and tetrahedral chiral atoms. The executable
balloon (version 1.4.1.1068 for Mac and Linux) was installed in
the home directory, and is used for addition of hydrogen atoms
to a skeletal formula, generation of a 3D model and its
conformers, and energy minimization using a MMFF94-like
force field.

MOPAC2012, a free academic program, is a general-purpose
semi-empirical molecular orbital package for studying solid
state and molecular structures and reactions. The executable
MOPAC2012.exe (version 13.306 for Mac and Linux) was
installed in /opt/mopac and is used for single point energy
calculation by the PM7 method.

Input &amp; Output
When the shell script confs.sh (see supplementary material) is
run in a working directory, it reads the file name of a 2D
chemical structure saved in MDL SDfile (.sdf) format (i.e., the atoms
are recorded as coordinates), and creates a new directory with the
file name. In the new directory, hydrogen atoms are added to
the skeletal formula, and 100 3D conformers, minimized with
the MMFF94-like force field, are generated as a single output
molecule entry in the .mol2 file format. After each conformer
put into consecutively numbered files, its single point energy
calculation is performed using the PM7 method in
MOPAC2012. After completion of the calculation, the heat of
formation is printed in kcal/mol in a text (.txt) file. The script
also dumps a short summary (.arc) file of computational results
including the geometry, and its converted (_1scf.sdf) file. These
(.mol2, .arc, and _1scf.sdf) files are accessible for visual
verification of the geometry using a molecular viewer such as
Jmol [,
], ViewDock in Chimera [,
], and DS Visualizer
[]. The Gaussian input (.com) file is also generated for
geometry optimization and vibrational analysis through highlevel
quantum chemical calculation. After completion of all
single point energy calculations, an energy-sorted list of file
names of the conformers is dumped with the extension .xls in
the same directory. The lowest-energy conformer can be
considered as the global energy minimum structure. As shown
in ( &amp; 
), the lowest-energy conformers being close to
the X-ray crystal structures of the small molecules [,
] were
predicted as a result of selecting adequate options and
keywords for Balloon and MOPAC2012. These data would be
confirmed through high-level ab initio and DFT calculation for
the several low-energy conformers. The Boltzmann distribution
of optimized conformers at certain temperature can be
estimated from their energies [].

As mentioned above, this script runs on Mac OS X and the
Linux platform, and can process a large number of chemical
drawing files simultaneously.

Caveat &amp; Conclusion
When working with any stereoisomer, a user must check the
spatial arrangement of its atoms visually with one initial 3D
model (_3d.sdf) generated by an auxiliary shell script
check3d.sh (see ). Suitable
arrangements of atoms and choices of bonds in a 2D chemical
structure will result in a desired 3D model. The user should
always check the initial 3D model using check3d.sh before
running confs.sh. Open source MOPAC7 [,
] can be used in
place of MOPAC2012, but the PM7 method cannot be processed
in MOPAC7. The installation path names and Gaussian
keywords in the script should be changed accordingly.

In conclusion, this script integrates excellent free scientific
applications and has the following advantages: (i) 2D chemical
drawing files are available as input; (ii) 3D molecules are built
and conformers are sampled without a 3D molecule builder;
(iii) time is saved because of batch processing via the command
line, and (iv) accurate energies are provided along with input
files for high-level quantum chemical calculations. I hope that
this free script will be useful for scientists who study molecules
using experimental and computational methods.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Ishikawa, Bioinformation 9(19): 988-992 (2013)

(Top) skeletal formula of 1,4-bis(hexyloxy)benzene;
(bottom) superposition of the X-ray crystal structure (gray
carbon) [] with the lowest-energy conformer (cyan carbon).
The superposition was done using DS Visualizer.

(Top) skeletal formula of (3R,4S,5R)-methyl 3,5-
bis[(tert-butyldimethylsilyl)oxy]-4-methoxycyclohex-1
enecarboxylate; (bottom) superposition of the X-ray crystal
structure (gray carbon) [] with the lowest-energy conformer
(cyan carbon). The superposition was done using DS Visualizer.

