Background
With the availability of rice genomic information [] it is
possible to exploit gene sequences from rice varieties, for stress
management and enhanced crop yield []. Rice plants respond
to various abiotic and biotic stresses via a number of
mechanisms []. Salicylic acid and Jasmonic acid have been
reported to act as signal molecules in abiotic stress amelioration
in plants [–]. Protective action of SA in the presence of abiotic
stress is tied with cell membrane stabilization [] and
suppression of antioxidant enzyme activities []. Jasmonic acid
a derivative of linolenic acid [] is involved in the plant
defense mechanism through a family of peptide ligands 
[–]
resulting from enhanced antioxidant levels []. Since plants
response to abiotic stress, salicylic acid and jasmonic acid is
characterized by the altered formation of reactive oxygen
species, therefore it is quite likely that genes involved in SA and
JA pathways collide in plants under abiotic stress. The authors
used the gene sequences reported in SA/JA pathway from
model plant Arabidopsis thaliana and searched for similar genes
in rice genome. Surprisingly most of the resultant sequences for
SA/JA pathway obtained upon similarity search from rice were
unannotated. The present study therefore aims to annotate the
selected unknown gene sequences of rice having similarity with
A. thaliana genes involved in SA/JA pathway by using gene
ontology, homology search, structural modeling and
superimposition tools in silico, so as to better understand role of
these genes in SA/JA pathway in rice plants.

Methodology
Sequence retrieval and data analysis:
Nucleotide sequences were obtained from National Centre for
Biotechnology Information (http://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). Full
genome of model plant Arabidopsis thaliana (Arabidopsis
Genome Initiative 2000) [] was initially chosen and retrieved
from the nucleotide database at NCBI and the protein coding
genes identified in the cross linking pathway of salicylate and
jasmonate were retrieved from NCBI's database []. The
corresponding proteins of the genes retrieved from Arabidopsis
were checked for the presence of functional domains and
protein signatures using InterPro Scan sequence search [] of
EMBI (European Bioinformatics Institute).

Prediction of Gene Ontology:
The ontology of the genes involved in SA/JA pathway was
decided using TAIR (The Arabidopsis Information Resource), a
database of genetic and molecular biology data for the model
higher plant Arabidopsis thaliana 
[]. Data available from TAIR
includes the complete genome sequence along with gene
structure, gene product information etc which is updated every
two weeks from the latest published research literature and
community data submissions. Protein products for the thirteen
genes were obtained and their sequences were retrieved. Shown
in SA/JA pathway  
and listed in  (see
supplementary material).

Homology Search and Structural Modeling:
Sequences obtained above were used as query for searching
homologous sequences in Oryza sativa using BLASTp 
[].
Seven protein sequences (homologous) in rice that had not been
assigned any function till date were obtained. Of these five
proteins of O. sativa and A. thaliana were then modeled for their
respective 3-dimensional structures using Geno3d []. Proteins
of O. sativa and corresponding protein of A. thaliana were
superimposed [] for structural similarity based upon RMSD,
percent identity, and other parameters. The structures were
viewed using UCSF Chimera tool [] an interactive molecular
graphics program with high extensibility, interactive molecular
visualization and analysis system. The sequence for each
protein from O. sativa and A. thaliana for best 20 structures were
obtained.

Validation of various physiological parameters:
The obtained proteins were also checked using ProtParam tool
of ExPASy Proteomics Server. This allows the computation
of various physical and chemical parameters like theoretical pI,
hydropathicity, estimated half-life, etc. for a given protein
stored in Swiss-Prot or TrEMBL or for a user entered sequence.

Result &amp; Discussion
SA/JA pathway genes of Arabidopsis thaliana and Gene ontology prediction:
Overall 13 genes involved in SA/JA pathway were retrieved
from A. thaliana database at NCBI and 13 homologous gene
sequences were obtained for each gene from O. sativa genome
by BLAST algorithm. Of these five gene sequences OSJ_014658,
Os04g0689900, OsI_04142, OsJ_33269, OSJ_23610 and
Os01g0194300 from rice having &gt;70% identity and
corresponding to genes of A. thaliana TAIR ID: AT3G48090,
AT1G75040, AT3G52430, AT2G40690, AT1G64280 respectively
were selected, which resulted in hypothetical proteins whose
structure and functions are not known. Gene ontology study of
A. thaliana genes using Interpro domain search program
predicted presence of conserved gene specific domains and
their function in SA-JA cross linking () and this is still
not reported in rice.

Retrieval of predicted cross linking genes from O. sativa genome:
Protein known in O. sativa to that of A. thaliana were screened
using BLOSUM62 matrix. Protein sequences with more than
70% identity with Arabidopsis genome were selected in 
O. sativa. Of which OSJ_014658, Os04g0689900, OsI_04142,
OsJ_33269, OSJ_23610 and Os01g0194300 corresponding to
EDS1, PR5, PAD4, SFD1, and NPR1 genes (TAIR ID:
AT3G48090, AT1G75040, AT3G52430, AT2G40690, AT1G64280
respectively) of A. thaliana respectively were obtained as
hypothetical protein and are still unannotated.

Structural modeling of proteins of A. thaliana and O. sativa involved in SA/JA pathway:
Sequence similarity could be a measure for functional
similarity; however for two proteins to be functionally similar it
is important that the two proteins are also structurally similar.
Model were created for the known proteins of SA/JA pathway
retrieved for A. thaliana and corresponding proteins
(BAF25000.1, NP_001049473.1, EAZ17725.1, EEE66834.1,
NP_001042286) of O. sativa. Five unknown protein sequences of
O. sativa were modeled for their structure using Geno3d tertiary
structure prediction tool which resulted in three PDB files for
each of the query protein, out of which the most appropriate
structural coordinate file was chosen based on R-value, B-factor,
Ramachandran plot etc. (data not included). The O. sativa
proteins were aligned structurally with corresponding 
A. thaliana protein and their superimposed structures were
evaluated  (See supplementary material). Reasonably
good RMSD values were obtained that lie between 0.6-1.7
suggesting proper structural and functional similarities
between the proteins of the two species. The functional
similarity was further validated by Protparam (, see
supplementry material) that suggest the rice proteins to have
similar estimated half life of &gt;20 hrs (in yeast), a varied
hydropathicity and all had a theoretical pI ranging between 4.75
and 9.83.

Conclusion
In conclusion results suggest that similar to that in Arabidopsis
there exist a SA- JA cross linking pathway in O. sativa as well. In
SA-JA interacting pathways 13 genes, are found to be expressed
that either activate (EDS-1, R-gene, CPR-6, PAD-4, EDS-5, SID-
2, TGA-2, SFD-1, PR) or inhibit (CPR-5, NPR-1, SNI-1, SSI-2) the
effect of abiotic stress in A. thaliana. Of these, the structure and
function of five gene sequences from O. sativa genome are not
known. In silico comparative structural modeling and
comparison of physiological parameters of the proteins coded
by these five genes in A. thaliana and O. sativa using different
bioinformatics tools, suggest them to be conserved in nature.
Results, predict that the hypothetical protein translated from
these five unanotated genes in rice are similar in structure to the
proteins obtained for similar genes from A. thaliana and
therefore these protein probably have similar functions as that
in A. thaliana. It is also likely that these genes are involved in
SA- JA cross linking pathway where OsJ_014658 or EDS1,
Os04g0689900 or PR4, OsI_04142 or TGA2, OsJ_33269 or PAD4
and OsI_23610 or SFD-1 might activate the SA-JA signaling
pathway in rice whereas Os01g0194300 or NPR1 perhaps inhibit
the pathway. Further investigation through wet-lab
experiments are in progress that would provide a better insight
into suppression or activation of these genes involved in SA-JA
signaling in rice plants exposed to abiotic stress.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We are grateful to the bioinformatics section at MMV from
providing computational grid for carrying out this work.

Citation:Singh et al, Bioinformation 8(1): 001-005 (2012)

Genes involved in signaling via salicylate and
jasmonate derivatives in plants exposed to abiotic/biotic stress
and plant defense. EDS-1: Enhanced Disease Susceptibility1;
CPR-6: Constitutive expressor of PR genes 6; PAD-4:
Phytoalexin Deficient 4; EDS-5: Enhanced Disease Susceptibility
5; SID-2: Salicylic-acid-Induction Deficient 2; TGA-2: TGAelement
binding protein 2; SFD-1: Suppressor of Fatty-aciddesaturase
Deficiency 1; PR: Pathogenesis-Related gene.; CPR-
5:Constitutive expressor of PR genes 5; NPR-1: Non-expressor
of PR1; SNI-1: Transcriptional repressor of SAR genes; SSI-2:
Suppressor of SA-Insensitivity.

