Background
The availability of the complete genome sequence information of the
human genome and a large number of microbial genomes' sequences
has led to the development of new approaches to understand hostpathogen
interaction. Use of bioinformatics approach and comparative
analysis of the genome of a pathogenic microbe allows one to identify
essential genes necessary for the survival of that pathogen. The proteins
encoded by these essential genes, that are not present or are nonhomologous
to the host, can be used as drug targets. Such an approach
has been effectively used to identify drug targets in other bacterial
species such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa [,], 
Helicobacter pylori [], Mycobacterium tuberculosis [], 
Burkholderia pseudomallei []
and Aeromonas hydrophila []. Clostridium perfringens is a Grampositive,
rod shaped, anaerobic bacterium that is able to form spores. It
is widely distributed in the environment (e.g. in soil and sewage) and is
frequently found in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract of humans, many
domestic and feral animals, as well as in soil and freshwater sediments
[]. In humans, it can cause gangrene and gastrointestinal disease (e.g.
food poisoning and necrotic enteritis), whereas in other animals,
gastrointestinal and enterotoxemic diseases occur more frequently [].
C. perfringens does not invade healthy cells but produces various toxins
and enzymes that are responsible for associated lesions and symptoms.
As a species, C. perfringens is one of the most prolific producers of
toxins []. It has five biotypes (A, B, C, D and E), which are identified
by the main types of toxins they produce (alpha, beta, iota, epsilon and
theta), each type of toxin being associated with a specific syndrome. C.
perfringens type A is the most common toxin type in the environment,
and is responsible for gas gangrene, enterocolitis, dysenteria, and
enterotoxemia. In the present study, comparative genome analysis of C.
perfringens type A with that of the human genome, and use of the
Database of Essential Genes (DEG) compiled by Zhang et al., [],
have resulted in the identification of the essential genes of C.
perfringens, that could be used as potential drug targets.

Methodology
Comparative genome analysis
The complete genomes of C. perfringens type A, strain SM101
(Accession No. NC_008262) [] and its human host have been
sequenced and were downloaded from the NCBI website []. The
Database of Essential Genes[] was accessed from its website[]
and sequence alignment was performed using BLASTP. In this analysis,
the assumption described by Dutta et al., [] was followed, and proteins
of less then 100 amino acid residues were excluded from the analysis.
The remaining proteins were subjected to BLASTP on the NCBI server
against human protein sequences to identify non-homologous sequences
[]. A minimum bit score of 100 and an Expectation value (E-value)
cutoff of 10-10 was selected for shortlisting genes. The shortlisted genes
were subjected to BLASTP against DEG to identify essential genes.
Further analysis of the essential genes using the Kyoto Encyclopaedia
of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway database [], revealed the
information about different biological process in which potential target
genes were involved.

Structure modeling and visualization of mode
BLASTP analysis was used to identify the most suitable template for
homology modeling of Clostridium perfringens ABC transporter, ATP
binding protein (CpABC) (Accession No. YP_698054). Subsequent to
BLASTP analysis, the sequences of the structures of ABC transporters
available in the PDB were used. The available structure of ABC
transporter from Methanococcus jannaschii (Mj0796) in the Protein
Database (PDB entry 1f3o, resolution=2.70, R value=0.204) was used
as a template. The target and the template sequences were aligned using
ClustalW. MODELLER [], an automated comparative protein
modeling program, was used for homology modeling to generate the 3-
D structure of CpABC. Further, the structural model generated was
visualized using the Swiss PDB viewer software [].

Validation of the generated model
Different structure verification servers such as PROCHECK [],
WHAT_CHECK [], VERIFY3D [] and ProSA []were used to
evaluate the 3D-model. These verification programs validate the
predicted structure by checking various parameters. While
PROCHECK, a structure verification program that relies on
Ramachandran plot [], determines the quality of the predicted
structure by assessing various parameters such as lengths, angles and
planarity of the peptide bonds, geometry of the hydrogen bonds, and
side chain conformations of protein structures as a function of atomic
resolution, WHAT_CHECK, a subset of protein verification tools from
the WHATIF[], program extensively evaluates the stereochemical
parameters of the residues in the model []. The Verify3D determines
the compatibility of an atomic model (3D) with its own amino acid
sequence (1D) by assigning a structural class based on its location and
environment (α, α, loop, polar, nonpolar etc.) and comparing the
results to valid structures [].

Discussion
Identification of drug targets in C. perfringens
C. perfringens is the most common cause of gas gangrene in humans.
Clostridial gas gangrene is a highly lethal necrotizing soft tissue
infection of skeletal muscle caused by toxins secreted by C.
perfringens. Although penicillin is one of the preferred antibiotics, it is
only useful if the infection is diagnosed at early stages. There is no
other specific drug that can be given to a patient infected with C.
perfringens. Therefore, more research in this field is required to identify
new drug targets and develop therapeutic agents for controlling C.
perfringens infections. Since most antibiotics target essential cellular
processes, essential gene products of microbial cells are promising new
targets for antibacterial drugs []. Targetting an essential gene
necessary for the bacterial cell survival may provide an effective way to
control infection.

The circular genome of C. perfringens comprises 2,897,393 nucleotides
with a total number of 2701 genes. Of the 2558 protein encoding genes,
only 2300 genes encode proteins of greater than 100 amino acid
residues. BLAST analysis of these genes against the human genome
sequence revealed 1991 genes to be non-homologous to humans.
Further BLASTP analysis of the 2300 protein coding genes with DEG
resulted in identification of 726 genes, which had a bit score of at least
100 at an expectation cutoff value of 10-10, as similar to the essential
genes required for the growth and survival of bacteria listed in the DEG.
Of these, 426 were found to have no human homologue (see Table 1 in). Pathways information for these genes was
obtained from KEGG database. All these genes are involved in the
production of proteins that are useful for various important functions in
C. perfringens. Out of the 426 identified genes, function of 10 genes
remains unknown, and 17 genes encode conserved hypothetical
proteins. The percentage distribution of the genes amongst different
biological process is shown in . A large population of these
genes (∽33%) is involved in metabolic pathways. The major share of
these genes constitute the proteins involved in transport and translation
(17% and 12%, respectively). Highly conserved genes, in theory, are
more likely to be physiologically important []; however, they need to
be experimentally validated. Therefore, the analysis of the 426 essential
genes of C. perfringens for overall similarities with all 14 species
present in DEG database was carried out. Results of such an analysis
are shown in . Out of the 426 essential genes, 160 genes have
similar match to at least 1 species, whereas on the other end of the
spectrum, only 4 genes have similar match to 11 species and only 1
gene has an identity score of more than 100 with 12 different microbial
species listed in the DEG. From this analysis, it is evident that the
products of 5 genes (1 gene similar in 12 species and 4 genes similar in
11 species) are essential for most of the bacterial species present in
DEG. These species include Acinetobacter baylyi ADP1, Bacillus
subtilis, Escherichia coli MG1655, Francisella novicida U112,
Haemophilus influenzae, Helicobacter pylori 26695, Helicobacter
pylori J99, Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv, Mycoplasma
genitalium G37, Mycoplasma pulmonis UAB CTIP , Salmonella
typhimurium, Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus pneumoniae.
Therefore, these 5 genes can be used as potential drug targets for more
than 10 highly pathogenic bacterial species, in addition to C.
perfringens. These 5 target genes, thus identified, are ABC transporter-
ATP-binding protein, cell division protein FtsZ, RNA polymerase
sigma factor RpoD, 50S ribosomal protein L13, and 30S ribosomal
protein S5. A drug designed against these targets can be effectively
used to treat other bacterial infections as well. Since the number of thus
identified potential candidate genes is relatively small, these can be
experimentally validated to develop broad-spectrum antimicrobial
drugs. Since ABC transporter-ATP-binding protein is one of the 5
potential drug targets identified, an attempt has been made to predict its
structure for effective drug design.

ABC transporter ‐ a potential broad spectrum target
ABC (ATP-binding cassette) transporters are ubiquitously present ATPdependent
transmembrane solute pumps and ion channels. These
superfamilies contain both uptake and efflux transport systems and form
one of the largest transporters []. The ABC transporters couple
hydrolysis of ATP to the translocation of various substrates across cell
membranes. Members of this superfamily recognize substrates ranging
from single ions to entire protein toxins. ABC transporters have a
number of highly conserved ABC cassette motifs, many of which are
involved in the binding and hydrolysis of ATP. It is generally assumed
that all ABC cassettes bind and hydrolyze ATP in a similar way and use
a common mechanism to provide energy for substrate transport through
the membrane-spanning domains []. When the substrate has traversed
the membrane, the transporter returns to the resting state through
dissociation of ADP and inorganic phosphate. Fluoxetine and
omeprazole, few of the most widely prescribed drugs in the world, have
a transporter protein as site of action. Therefore, ABC transporter
structures have potential value in drug designing.

Structural model and overall architecture of ABC transporter (CpABC)
Sequence alignment of the C. perfringens CpABC and ABC
transporters from other species revealed Mj0796 to be the best template
for homology modeling of the target sequence as the CpABC and
Mj0796 shared 41% identity (). Mj0796 is a member of the
o228/LolD transporter family, involved in the export of lipoproteins via
the Lol system. LolD contains a characteristic sequence called the LolD
motif, which is highly conserved among LolD homologs, but not in
other ABC transporters, and is located between the Walker A
(GSGKST, boxed) and ABC signature (LSGGQ, marked as bold
overline) motifs (). Comparative sequence analyses, motif
search, and secondary structure prediction indicated that CpABC is
structurally similar to the monomer structure of the Mj0796, a lipid
transporter. The crystal structure of Mj0796 (PDB entry 1f3o) was used
as a template to predict the structure of CpABC and the predicted 3D
structure model of CpABC was generated by Modeller, a homologymodeling
program.  shows the predicted structure in the form
of ribbons as a Swiss PDB viewer representation.

Validation of generated model of CpABC
The quality of the model was evaluated using the PROCHECK program
and assessed using the Ramachandran plot. It is evident from the
Ramchandran plot that the predicted model has 91.4%, 8.1%, and 0.5%
residues in the most favorable regions, the allowed regions, and the
disallowed regions, respectively. Such a percentage distribution of the
protein residues determined by Ramachandran plot shows that the
predicted model is of good quality. All Ramachandrans show 6 labelled
residues out of 220 whereas chi1-chi2 plots show 2 labelled residues out
of 140. The model shows all the main chain and side chain parameters
to be in the ’better‘ region. Another factor that is important for the
predicted model to be reliable is G-factor, which is a log odds score
based on the observed distribution of stereochemical parameters. For a
reliable model, the score for G-factor should be above -0.50. The
observed G-factor score for the present model was -0.05 for dihedrals
bonds, -0.31 for covalent bonds, and -0.15 overall. The distribution of
the main chain bond lengths and bond angles were 98.5% and 93.2%
within limits, respectively. Also, all the planar groups were within the
limits. The quality of the generated model of CpABC as evaluated by
ProSA provided a z-score of -7.2, which falls within the range of values
observed for the experimentally determined structures of similar
lengths. The validity of the predicted model of CpABC was also
verified by employing the structure verification servers
WHAT_CHECK and Verify-3D. Superposition of the predicted
structure of CpABC and the Mg-ADP bound Mj0796 (template, PDB
entry 1f3o) is shown in . It is evident from the figure that the
Mg-ADP binding core of the ABC subunit and all the structural motifs
are highly conserved in both structures. The two superposed structures
match 214 Cα atoms with an rms distance of 0.47Å. Three residues
Q90, E171, and H204, important for activity of Mj0796, superposed
very well with conserved residues Q92, E164 and H197 from model
CpABC. However, a deletion of seven amino acids (RKRALEC),
which forms an α-helix in the Mj0796 (indicated by arrow), and an
insertion of three amino acids (PIS) at the C-terminal end of CpABC, is
observed. Thus, the predicted model structure of C. perfringens ABC
transporter, ATP binding protein, and CpABC is comparable to the
structurally resolved Mj0796.

Conclusion
Comparative genome analysis is a highly efficient approach for
idendifing potential proteins that can be used as potential targets for
effective drug designing against pathogenic organisms. It allows
restricting the potential pool of genes to a much smaller number,
compared to the whole genome capacity, which can be experimentally
validated. In the present study, around 426 drug targets in C.
perfringens were identified by comparative genome analysis with DEG. 
Further, by using the subtractive genomic approach five essential genes
were identified that are conserved in more than 10 other pathogenic
organisms. Since the number of these conserved genes is very small,
these can be experimentally tested for the development of a broadspectrum
anti-microbial drug. The drug thus developed is likely to
inhibit other bacterial infections, which share high sequence similarity
with the five essential genes of C. perfringens SM101.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Financial assistance from the Department of Biotechnology, New Delhi,
India is acknowledged. The Council of Scientific and Industrial
Research, New Delhi, India, and the University Grants Commission,
New Delhi, India is gratefully acknowledged for senior research
fellowships to AA and KG, respectively.

Citation:Chhabra et al, Bioinformation 4(7): 278-289 (2010)

Percentage distribution of 426 target genes encoding different classes of proteins in Clostridium perfringens. Around 2% gene
encode the proteins of unknown function.

Graphical representation of the number of target genes aving similarity with those of bacterial species present in DEG. The number of
genes of C. perfringens having similar match to different number of bacterial species is shown on top of the respective bars.

CLUSTALW Multiple sequence alignment of CpABC with Mj0796. Single fully conserved residues are represented by (*), conservation
of strong and weak groups is denoted by (:) and (.), respectively. The boxed sequence represents the Walker A motif, whereas the ABC signature
sequence is marked by bold overline.

(A): Homology modeled structure of the C. perfringens ABC transporter, ATP binding protein based on template Mj0796. Model is
represented in ribbon form as Swiss PDB viewer representation in secondary structure succession color scheme. N and C termini of modeled
structure are represented as NH3+ and –OOC. (B) Superimposed image of the modeled structure of CpABC onto Mg-ADP bound Mj0796 (PDB
entry 1f3o). CpABC is represented in red color, Mg-ADP (shown in green color) bound Mj0796 is represented in blue color. Signature sequence
LSGG with three conserved residues, Q90, E171, H204 form Mj0796 and Q92, E164, H197 from model CpABC are mentioned. Arrow indicates
the deletion of seven amino acids (RKRALEC) in CpABC, which forms an α-helix in the Mj0796.

