Background
Human immunity comprises the innate and the adaptive
immune response. Vaccination is principally concerned with
humoral and cell mediated adaptive immune responses 
[].
Vaccination generates effective and appropriate adaptive
immune responses, to be activated subsequent to immunisation.
The overall goal is the generation of long lasting immunity
against microbial pathogens via the production of diverse
immune memory cells. The Major Histacompatibility Complex
(MHC) is a large region encoded on human chromosome 6;
genes of the MHC are also known as Human Leukocyte
Antigens (HLA), and demonstrate the highest levels of
sequence polymorphism within the human population 
[]. This
genetic diversity is responsible for the adaptability of the
human immune system to microorganisms and pathogens.

T lymphocytes are integral to the adaptive, cell-mediated
immune response against foreign substances, falling into two
broad groups: T-cells (CD4) and cytotoxic T-cells (CD8),
depending on the co-receptors they express. CD4 cells associate
with Class I MHC and CD8 cells bind to class II MHC. In order
for an effective immune response to occur, various threshold
need to be surpassed []. Without effective processing of
antigens by intracellular pathways and efficient presentation on
the surface of Antigen Presenting Cells (APCs), then effective
epitope-MHC-T-cell complexes cannot form. Effective T-Cell
epitopes possess several key characteristics: the ability to be
bound by MHCI and MHCII with high specificity and affinity;
to form stable peptide-MHC complex that can bind with high
affinity to T-cell receptors and subsequently activate T cells;
antigenic peptides must be cleaved by the proteasome; for class
I antigen presentation potential epitopes must be successfully
transported by TAP; must be successfully secreted and
presented on the cellular surface of Antigen Presenting Cells
(APC); and to bind many MHCI and MHCII alleles with high
affinity to provide wide population coverage. Epitopes which
bind with high affinity to several MHC alleles tend to be
stronger candidates for use within epitope-based vaccines.
Currently, however, there is no real consensus as to what
constitutes an optimal smallest set of ‘promiscuous‘ epitope's
for inclusion in a vaccine. Within the context of reverse
vaccinology, computer software enables rapid processing of
genomic data for vaccine discovery []. Gene sequences are
identified as open reading frames, epitopes predicted within
them, and filtered from several thousand epitopes to a few
dozen candidate immunogens. Such immunogens then undergo
experimental validation in vitro, in vivo, and in challenge
models, before entering clinical trials. Current
immunoinformatic software focuses on multi-step approaches
for T-cell epitope identification, including: proteasome
cleavage, TAP transport and MHC binding. These methods
have the advantages of higher accuracy and a lower rate of false
positive predictions, greatly reducing the number of peptides
requiring testing.

Computationally-driven genomic approaches to vaccine
discovery remain challenging due to the high genetic diversity
of pathogens. Gram-VE bacterium Escherichia coli are usually
harmless, and are an important component of the gut
microbiome; however, certain strains do cause disease and can
be fatal. Specifically, uropathogenic Escherichia coli (UPEC)
infection is a prevalent disease with potentially severe
complications []. 
Globally, UPEC accounts for over 4 out of 5
urinary tract infections. In the urinary tract, UPEC colonizes the
bladder preferentially causing cystitis, and also infects the
kidneys, causing pyelonephritis. Isolated initially from a patient
with a urinary tract infection, the uropathogenic Escherichia
coli strain 536 (O6:K15:H31), is now among the best-understood
model pathogens; the availability of the O536 genome facilitates
the computational identification of vaccine components. In this
work, we describe the use of a novel immunoinformatic
protocol to identify an optimal epitope ensemble as a putative
candidate vaccine against uropathogenic E coli; we then explore
the limitations of such strategies, highlighting the pressing need
for experimental validation of this and other similar studies.

Methodology
Rationale:
Promiscuous high-affinity epitope candidates suitable for
inclusion in a vaccine were sought using a novel epitope
prediction pipeline implemented using web-accessible
prediction servers, as described below. Each step in the pipeline
generates data requiring filtering. The process of re-scaling has
its own problems []. A balance needs to be struck between
conserving variability across epitope sequences and filtering
out sub-optimal epitopes. Having a common measure
describing the strength of epitope binding to MHC is important.
It allows a direct comparison to be made between data obtained
from different prediction servers.

Pipeline Structure:
The structure of the pipeline is given in (Figure 1). SignalP 
[]
predicts which proteins from a virtual proteome files will be
secreted via the Type II secretion pathway. Proteins predicted
to be secreted by the SignalP server were filtered to isolate the
top 5 scoring antigenic proteins using VaxiJen 
[]. Class I and
Class II peptide-MHC binding afinity for these proteins was
then predicted using 3 reliable servers. MHCPred 
[] (MHC
Class 1 and 2) is an implementation of the additive method.
CRB [] 
predicts binding to 57 Human class I and 26 class II
MHC alleles. IEDB [] again predicts binding to a wide range of
human MHC alleles. All three servers cover a wide range of
human MHC alleles, all of which exist at high frequency in the
global human population, and are based on a large collection of
literature binding data. EpiJen predicts T-cell epitopes using a
combination of proteasome cleavage, TAP transport, and MHC
binding [].

Operation:
The pipeline described was in part run in serial mode (SignalP
and VaxiJen) and in parallel mode (MHCPred, IEDB, and CRB).
Epijen was run as a control, and its outputs compared to those
generated by MHCPred, IEDB, and CRB. For all data harvested
from web-servers, extensive off-line integration and filtering
was used subsequent to data gathering.

Exegesis:
Only proteins which are secreted or expressed on the cell
surface proteins are accessible to immune surveillance, as
identified here by SignalP, and are thus of interest. Only a
subset of these, antigenic proteins as identified by VaxiJen, are
likely to possess immunodominant epitopes. Such epitopes are,
as predicted by MHCPred, IEDB, CRB, and EpiJen, those
binding promiscuously at high affinity to many MHC alleles.
From the final ranked lists of epitopes generated by MHCPred,
IEDB, CRB, and EpiJen, a set of epitopes showing high affinity
across servers and across multiple alleles was selected using a
greedy breadth-first search protocol.

Discussion
We have described the identification of a multiple epitope
ensemble as a candidate peptide vaccine. The virtual E coli
proteome was assessed for potential epitopes using a pipeline
composed of several servers: SignalP [] (likelihood of protein
secretion) followed by VaxiJen [] (ranked antigenicity of
secreted proteins) followed in parallel by MHCPred 
[], IEDB
[], and NetMHC 
[] 
(binding affinities of epitopes). EpiJen []
was used as a control to assess the likelihood of epitope
processing. The rationale for this pipeline is straightforward:
only secreted proteins or those found on the cell surface, are
accessible to immune surveillance, and of these, only a subset is
likely to be antigenic, and are thus also likely to possess
immunodominant epitopes []. The main problem in filtering
strong epitopes from weak epitopes is defining a suitable
threshold. A balance must be maintained between conserving
successful epitopes and keeping the number of epitopes
manageable for subsequent in vitro testing stage. Thus, only
epitope sequences that occurred in two or more server outputs
were used. This utilised the strategy implicit in all meta-servers
that consensus prediction is inherently more robust and
reliable. Only very high affinity epitopes with an IC50 value
less than or equal to 50 were used. Epitopes also had to bind to
more than one class I and class II allele.

Using a breadth-first search strategy, the following 23 epitope
sequences were identified as the smallest set of
most promiscuous epitopes: ALAGVVPQY (active versus
HLA0101, HLA0201); KLATLFLTA (HLA0101, HLA0201,
HLA0203), MLSDAAPEV (HLA0201, HLA0202, HLA0203,
HLA0206), SLISGSFLL (HLA0201, HLA0202, HLA0203,
HLA0206), VMLNFKKTF (HLA0201, HLA1101), TLAAKDINV
(HLA0202, HLA0203), LLSACIALA (HLA0202, HLA0203),
ALSGDNNSV (HLA0202, HLA0203), NLNGGIQFV (HLA0202,
HLA0203), TLSNSSSAV (HLA0202, HLA0203), FLSSSGGSA
(HLA0202, HLA0203), ALITTLAIV (HLA0203, HLA0206),
GIFAISALA (HLA0203, HLA1101, HLA6801), IVFSGSALA
(HLA0203, HLA0206, HLA6801, HLA6802), FSLVTNEGI
(HLA0203, HLADRB0701), FAISALAAT (HLA0206, HLA6801,
HLADRB0101), AVLLLALLT (HLA0206, HLADRB0401),
FNSLATMGV (HLA0206, HLADRB0701), KAVLLLALL
(HLA6801, HLADRB0401), ISLAGSMKV (HLA6801,
HLADRB0101, HLADRB0701), LSYVKSQRT (HLADRB0101,
HLADRB0701), FNNSVSSMM (HLADRB0101, HLADRB0701),
VQLVNSGTI (HLADRB0401, HLADRB0701).

The current work shows strongly similarity to that of Wieser et
al. [] 
They identified computationally immunodominant
epitopes from six virulence-associated E coli antigens: Usp, Iha,
FyuA, ChuA, IreA, and IroN; creating two wholly artificial
genes were created, each encoding eight extended peptide
epitopes, which when expressed recombinantly resulted in a
vaccine active against pathogenic but not benign E. coli in the
gut. The important difference here was that this study, led by
experimentalists, was validated experimentally 
[].

There are clear deficiencies in this and all other such studies.
The poor predictivity of available software limits the ultimate
reliability of all such studies. Servers facilitate vaccine
development by assessing epitope binding affinity of different
MHC alleles. Currently, the most reliable algorithms revolve
around MHC I presentation with a heavy bias towards so-called
HLA ‘supertypes’ []. There are 9 major supertypes showing
commonality of peptide anchor binding specificity. Predictions
for MHC class II binding by T cell epitopes, is by contrast poor
and unreliable. Overall, the predictivity of software mirrors the
degree to which particular HLA alleles have been studied. A
strict consensus surrounding what a promiscuous epitope is
and what features might make such an epitope suitable for
inclusion in a vaccine remain largely undefined. If incorrectly
defined it could lead to strong potential epitopes being missed
out. The consequences including a longer development process
with increased cost and enhanced chances of a poorly
efficacious vaccine. Extending on the above discussion, size and
variability of the immune response to pathogens and vaccines
alike probably precludes the identification of very small sets of
epitopes, as is common in published studies of this kind, since
they will not evoke responses of sufficient strength and
duration in a large enough section of the population to induce
either immune memory or the necessary herd immunity
essential for all effective vaccines.

Likewise, failure properly to account for sequence similarity to
other bacteria and to human proteome imposes severe
constraints on the ultimate utility of any such study. We need to
correct for any clear sequence similarity to other components of
the gut microbiome, since vaccines also active against other,
useful commensal bacteria would be of little utility. The
problem here is that microbiome is large, complex, and variable
on a local and global basis. Comparison with metagenomic
analyses of the microbiome might prove the answer in this
regard. Nor would it be good to induce autoimmunity against
components of the human proteome that bare sequence
similarity to an epitope ensemble. Unfortunately, proven and
robust protocols able to identify such similarity are currently
lacking.

Conclusion
For all or nearly all in computational studies addressing realworld
problems, there is a pressing need for experimental
validation. An increasing number of papers describing in silico
analyses of genomes and proteomes, producing epitope
ensembles as putative candidate vaccines, are now being
published [–]. Most are sound, and, like the present study,
even rigorous; yet their value cannot easily be quantified. As a
consequence, their significance is questionable. Other studies
[,
] 
by contrast combine immunoinformatic-driven vaccine
design with experimental validation in various animal models,
giving credence to their computational results. It has been said
that theoreticians cannot “exist solely on morsels swept
contemptuously from the experimentalists' table” 
[], but
equally prediction without validation will exert little influence
and convince no one. Continuing to publish experimentally
unverified papers is almost counterproductive in this context.
Moreover, current research methodology is largely embodied in
web-servers; operating such virtualised systems is facile, and
the concomitant analysis of results straightforward. As the
current paper amply demonstrates, the technical strictures
inherent in the in silico design of epitope ensembles as candidate
vaccines are quite within the ambit of undergraduate
researchers. In sum, we can say that we have at once generated
a sound prediction of an epitope ensemble vaccine and at the
same time sought to highlight the severe limitations of all such
studies in the absence of proper experimental validation.

Citation:Rai et al, Bioinformation 8(6): 272-275 (2012)

Epitope Prediction Pipeline, Flowchart summarising
the epitope prediction pipeline described in methods.

