Background
Human Lymphatic Filariasis (HLF) is a neglected tropical
disease caused by three types of thread like round worms;
Wuchereria bancrofti, Brugia malayi, and Brugia timori. Adult
nematodes live for 6-8 years and produce millions of small
larvae. The circulating microfilariae are transmitted by bloodsucking
arthropods (e.g. Culex mosquito). More than 120
million people are currently infected, with about 40 million
disfigured and debilitated by the disease. HLF results in an
altered lymphatic system and chronic lymphoedema, causing
pain and severe disability. Disease transmission is prevented
by annual mass drug administration of single doses of two
medicines given together – albendazole plus either ivermectin
in areas where onchocerciasis is also endemic or
diethylcarbamazine citrate (DEC) in areas where
onchocerciasis is not endemic []. These drugs eliminate
microfilariae from the bloodstream, but cannot clear adult
nematodes that lodge in the lymphatic system. In addition,
studies have reported that many helminth parasites are
developing resistance against albendazole and ivermectin 
[].

Therefore, potential research strategies are needed to develop
or design other effective pharmacological therapeutics to
eradicate HLF globally. Due to difficulties in procuring human
filarial parasite material, cattle filarial parasite Setaria digitata
was studied as a model organism to identify novel drug targets
against HLF. S. digitata closely resembles W. bancrofti in many
aspects such as morphology, histology, response to drugs and
antigenicity. S. digitata cDNA library was constructed and
several cDNA clones had been sequenced and characterized to
identify novel filarial proteins []. The present work is
primarily focused on a selected cDNA sequence which has
nucleotide similarity to human filarial parasite gene sequence.
The structure-function relationship of the hypothetical protein
of S. digitata is predicted using similarity search, homology
modelling, superimposition tools, Ramachandran plot analysis
and molecular docking studies in silico.

Methodology
cDNA Sequencing:
Twenty recombinant clones from S. digitata cDNA library were
randomly selected and amplified. Plasmid DNA was isolated
by alkaline lysis method and digested by EcoR1 and Xho1
restriction enzymes. Clones having inserts of more than 500 bp
in length were chosen for DNA sequencing. Sequencing
reactions were performed using BigDye Terminator v3.1 Cycle
Sequencing Kit (Applied Biosystems) with pBK-CMV vector
specific primers T3 and T7. Products of sequencing reactions
were resolved by the genetic analyser; Applied Biosystems®
3500 Dx and data were viewed by BioEdit Sequence Alignment
Editor.

Nucleotide analysis:
Segments of vector origin were removed from insert sequences
by VecScreen program []. Obtained cDNA sequences were
used as query for searching homologous sequences using
BLASTn []. cDNA which contains uncharacterized filarial
parasite protein and shows only partial similarity to human
proteins was selected for further bioinformatics
characterization.

Amino acid sequence analysis:
All possible open reading frames (ORFs) for the selected cDNA
were identified by ORF finder []. Amino acid sequences
derived by conceptual translation of each of the ORFs were
used as query for searching homologous sequences using
BLASTp []. Amino acid sequence which contained putative
conserved domain and shows sequence similarity to human
filarial parasite protein was selected for structural modelling.

Homology modelling and structural analysis:
Three dimensional (3D) structure of S. digitata hypothetical
protein was built by SWISS-MODEL Workspace of ExPASy
Proteomics Server [] using RRM (RNA recognition motif) of
cleavage stimulation factor 64 kda subunit (CstF-64) (PDB ID:
1P1T_A) as template and viewed by UCSF Chimera tool [].
Amino acid sequences of both S. digitata and the homologous
protein were aligned using MultAlignViewer function of UCSF
Chimera and active site residues, organization of protein
secondary structures and amino acid sequence of functional
domains were analysed.

Structure validation and structural comparison:
Quality of sdRBP model built was validated by
Ramachandran׳s map using PROCHECK []. 3D structure of
CstF-64 (PDB ID: 1P1T) was downloaded from RCSB-PDB 
[]
and RRM domain of CstF-64 was separated using UCSF
Chimera. For comparative analysis, RRM of CstF-64 was also
submitted to PROCHECK program and plot statistics were
compared. sdRBP and RRM of CstF-64 were superimposed for
structural similarity using Matchmaker function of UCSF
Chimera and RMSD (root mean square deviation) value was
obtained.

Automated Molecular Docking:
3D structures of two octameric RNAs (PDB ID: 1SA9 and
472D) were retrieved from RCSB-PDB. RNA duplexes were
separated into single strand RNAs (1SA9: 5'-
R(*GP*GP*CP*GP*AP*GP*CP*C)-3', 472D_A: 5'-
R(*GP*UP*GP*UP*UP*UP*AP*C)-3', and 472D_B: 5'-
R(*GP*UP*AP*GP*GP*CP*AP*C)-3') by UCSF Chimera and
docked with sdRBP by Hex 8.0.0 Cuda software 
[]. Docking
results were viewed by UCSF Chimera. Default parameters
were used for docking process and Energy (E) values of each
docking event were obtained. For comparative analysis RRM
of CstF-64 was docked with the same RNA molecules and E
values were compared.

Validation of various physiological parameters:
Structure-function relationship of sdRBP was further validated
using ProtParam tool of ExPASy Proteomics Server [] for
various parameters such as theoretical pI, estimated half-life,
instability index, aliphatic index and grand average of
hydropathicity (GRAVY).

Results &amp; Discussion
cDNA sequencing:
Upon plasmid isolation and restriction enzyme digestion of the
twenty recombinant clones from S. digitata cDNA library,
eighteen clones had inserts of more than 500 bp in length and
their nucleotide sequences were obtained.

Nucleotide sequence analysis:
In nucleotide database searches, a 549 bp long cDNA showed
82% nucleotide identity to complete coding sequences of B.
malayi putative RNA binding protein (bm-rbp-1) and W.
bancrofti putative RNA binding protein. The full-length cDNA
containing a poly A tail and a hypothetical polyadenylation
signal sequence (AATAAA) was named sdrbp for S. digitata
RNA binding protein. The entire sdrbp sequence contains four
ORFs and sequence analysis of the shortest ORF (249 bp)
reveals an initiation codon (ATG) located within the Kozak
sequence context, GAAAACATGT).

Amino acid sequence analysis:
The shortest ORF encodes an 82 amino acid polypeptide which
contains a RRM domain. In protein database searches, the
polypeptide shows 100% identity to RNA binding protein -
identical [B. malayi] and hypothetical protein - partial [W.
bancrofti] and 54% identity to the RRM of human CstF-64.

Homology Modelling and structural analysis:
Homology modelling of the hypothetical protein, sdRBP by
SWISS-MODEL Workspace resulted in three PDB files, out of
which the best quality model () built using RRM
domain () of 
human CstF-64 () as template
was chosen based on QMEAN scoring function and sequence
identity. sdRBP adopts classical β1α1β2β3α2β4 RRM-topology
forming four stranded β‑sheet packed against two α‑helices.

Structure validation and structural comparison of sdRBP:
sdRBP model built was validated using PROCHECK server
which produced Ramachandran plot calculations and plot
statistics for Φ and ψ distributions for non-glycine non-proline
residues. Similar results were obtained for RRM of CstF-64
template (1P1T_A) suggesting sdRBP model built is reliable.
For structural comparison, sdRBP was superimposed with
RRM of CstF-64 () and an RMSD of 0.084 A0 was
obtained. Reasonably, a low RMSD value indicates proper
structural and functional similarities between the two proteins;
so it is considered as the best model.

Assessment of structure-function relationship:
The template protein, cleavage stimulation factor (CstF) is a
heterotrimeric protein complex which plays a key role in
polyadenylation of mRNA precursors. In vertebrates,
polyadenylation site comprises two elements: AAUAAA
hexamer and a more diffuse GU-rich sequence. GU-rich
sequence is recognized by the 64 kDa subunit of CstF (CstF-
64). CstF-64 is a multi-domain protein and the RRM is a 104
amino acid long domain located at the N-terminus of the
protein. Studies have revealed that CstF-64 forms more stable
complexes with GU-rich sequences containing at least two
consecutive Us [].

Classical RRM domain is identified at the primary sequence
level as a 90 amino acids long polypeptide containing two
conserved sequences of eight and six amino acids called RNP1
([R/K]-G-[F/Y]-[G/A]-[F/Y]-[I/L/V]-X-[F/Y]) and RNP2
([I/L/V]-[F/Y]-[I/L/V]-X-N-L) located in the two central
β‑strands, β3 and β1 of the motif respectively exposing three
conserved aromatic residues []. In the proposed RNP1
(RGFGFCEF) and RNP2 (VFVGNL) sequences of sdRBP, all
amino acids except for one residue are conserved and expected
to form the primary RNA binding surface ().
Four key amino acids of the RRM of human CstF-64 reported
to be essential for RNA binding activity are conserved in
sdRBP in similar positions ().

Automated molecular docking:
Consistent with structure-function similarities, automated
molecular docking studies have demonstrated that sdRBP has
a greater binding affinity to GU-rich RNA (). Upon
docking of sdRBP with the three types of RNA octamers, larger
energy values  (see supplementary material) were
obtained for GU-rich RNA which comprises of consecutive Us
and similar results were obtained for docking of RRM of CstF-
64 with same RNA octamers (). Since RRM of CstF-64
and sdRBP share 54% sequence identity and their docking
energy values are similar, this is an evidence to believe that
sdRBP has similar biological function as that for CstF-64.

Validation of various physiological parameters:
The functional similarity was further validated by Protparam
which reveals sdRBP to have a theoretical pI of 5.75 and
estimated half-life to be &gt;20 hours (yeast, in vivo). The
instability index (II) is computed to be 30.60 and this classifies
the protein as stable. Grand average of hydropathicity
(GRAVY) is -0.293 and aliphatic index of sdRBP is 65.37. As
mentioned in the Protparam tool, aliphatic index is regarded as
a positive factor for the increase of thermo stability of globular
proteins.

Conclusion
In silico structural modelling and automated molecular
docking of S. digitata predicted protein using different
bioinformatics tools, suggest that it has similar structural and
functional features as human CstF-64 and therefore, predicted
to be involved in pre-mRNA polyadenylation process.
Therefore, this study brings new dimensions to the functional
analysis of RNA binding proteins of S. digitata and their
evaluation as new drug targets against HLF.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Financial support from International Programme in Chemical
Sciences, University of Uppsala, Sweden and sida Secretariat
for Research Cooperation with Developing countries (formerly
SAREC) are gratefully acknowledged. We would like to thank
Kanchana Senanayake for providing computational assistance
and Anoma jayasoma for supporting in DNA sequencing.

Citation:Nagaratnam et al, Bioinformation 10(8): 512-517 (2014)

(a) Homology model of the hypothetical protein,
sdRBP built by SWISS-MODEL Workspace. (b) NMR structure
of the N-terminal RRM domain of human CstF-64 (PDB ID:
1P1T_A). (c) NMR structure of human CstF-64 (PDB ID: 1P1T)
retrieved from RCSB-PDB (d) Superposition of sdRBP (blue)
with the RRM of CstF-64 (pink) showing how similar these
proteins are even in the orientation of the loops, with one
significant exception at two N- and C-terminal helices of the
RRM of CstF-64 which are not found in sdRBP. (e) Proposed
RNP1 (RGFGFCEF) and RNP2 (VFVGNL) sequences of sdRBP
are located in the two central β‑strands, β3 and β1 respectively

(a) 82 amino acid polypeptide (sdRBP) derived by the conceptual translation of the shortest ORF (249 bp) showing the
locations and sequences of four β strands (green) and two α helices (yellow). (b) Multiple alignment of sdRBP with CstF-64 using
UCSF chimera results in 54% amino acid identity and the four key amino acids of the RRM of CstF-64 (S10, F12, R39, and F54)
reported to be essential for RNA binding activity are conserved in sdRBP (conserved positions are indicated in the alignment by
red spots).

(a) Automated molecular docking of sdRBP with three types of RNA octamers shown in pink (1: 5'GUGUUUAC-3'
[472D_A], 2: 5'GUAGGCAC-3' [472D_B], 3: 5'- GGCGAGCC)-3' [1SA9]) using Hex 8.0.0 Cuda software (viewed by UCSF Chimera)
showing sdRBP has greater binding affinity to GU-rich RNA which comprises of consecutive Us (a.1). (b) Automated molecular
docking of RRM of CstF-64 with the same three types of RNA octamers results in comparable results as obtained for sdRBP
revealing the fact that sdRBP has significant functional similarity with human CstF-64.

