Fundamentals of Viral Immunity
General Features:
Immune surveillance broadly consists of two principal
branches: innate immunity includes those immune processes
that are triggered by the recognition of a novel pathogen.
Acquired immunity (i.e., antigen-dependent immunity)
describes immune responses that are consequential to an
antigen that was encountered previously. Both innate and
acquired processes of immune surveillance are brought about
principally either by humoral or cellular events. Humoral
immunity provides protective immune surveillance by means
of circulating soluble factors, such as cytokines, growth factors,
complement factors and antibodies. These factors are detected
and measured in a variety of bodily fluids (e.g., blood serum,
cerebrospinal fluid, saliva, synovial fluid). Humoral immune
factors are produced by cells, which principally belong to the
immune system per se. Certain cell populations that are not
immune cells by functional definition (e.g., fibroblasts,
astrocytes) contribute to the production of humoral factors at
local sites of inflammatory and immune responses. Cellular
immunity consists of immune surveillance events that are
brought about by concerted, regulated myeloid and lymphoid
cell populations. There are two principal families of innate
immunity cells: the natural killer (NK) cells, and the antigenpresenting
cells, composed of myeloid derivatives, including
dendritic cells and monocyte/macrophages. Cellular immune
components of acquired immunity involve the lymphoid
derivatives the T and B cells.

Immune cell populations are described and recognized by
their functional status, and their phenol type. The latter is
defined by glycoproteins that constitute the plasma membrane
clusters of differentiation (CD). In most, but not all cases, CD׳s
correspond to an identified function or functional structure,
such as CD3 associated with the T cell receptor and marking all
T cells. T cells express either CD4 or CD8 as their final stage of
differentiation in the thymus. The majority of CD3+CD4+ cells
are T cells endowed with the functional ability to assist cellular
immunity to commence, expand, sustain and control a fully
developed acquired immunity response. CD4 T cells are often
referred to as helper T cells, despite the fact that a small
proportion of CD4 T cells can be cytotoxic. The cytotoxic
immune function is primarily managed by CD8+CD3+ T cells,
which also produce humoral factors and contribute to assisting
cellular immune processes. The CD4 moiety recognizes and
binds to the major histo compatibility complex (MHC) Class II,
whereas CD8 recognizes and binds to MHC Class I. Because of
the fact that MHC Class I is ubiquitously expressed by every
cell in the body, it follows that CD8 T cells provide immune
surveillance of any cell that expresses foreign antigen on its
membrane in association with MHC Class I, such as a tumor
cells and virally infected cells.

Thus, this broad-stroke overview of immune surveillance
mechanisms reveals that viral infections, in general, generate a
CD4 response, which leads to the activation and maturation of
B cells for the production of specific antibodies, and a CD8
response that directly targets the virally infected cells. The
acquired viral immune response favors the recruitment of
primed CD8 cells, which promptly activate their powerful
cytotoxic actions to destroy virally infected cells. Over the last
decade, the known spectrum of CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell effect
or subsets has become broader, including their particular
cytokine commitment, stage of differentiation, role in local
immunity, and specific functional activity. Discrete subsets of
CD4 T cells (e. g., TH1, TH2, TH17; T regulatory cells [ Tregs
]; CD45RA +CD4+ /CD8+; CD45R0 +CD4+ /CD8 +;
CD25+Foxp3+CD4+/CD8+) work in complementary synergy
and with the M1 and M2 macrophage activation states to
mediate viral protection: a large arsenal of mechanisms, by
which CD4+ and CD8+ T cells act to combat virus infection 
[].

The TNF Receptor:
Many cytokines are involved in the process of inducing and
regulating the immune-mediated clearing of a viral infection.
Receptors and ligands of the tumor necrosis factor (TNF)
family play important roles in controlling CD8 T cell activation
and survival during a viral immune response. The role of
specific TNF receptor (TNFR) family member in antiviral
immunity depends on the stage of the immune response and
can vary with the virus type and its virulence. TNFR 
(see supplementary material), the death receptor, is critical in
determining the cytotoxic response. The trimeric nature of this
cytokine receptor cooperates with the tumor necrosis factor
receptor type1-associated DEATH domain protein (i.e., TNFRSF1A-associated
via death domain [TRADD]). TRADD media
test hecytotoxic response. The TNFR-associated factor (TRAF)
modulates primarily the inflammatory response. The receptorinteracting
protein (RIP) kinases are a group of
threonine/serine protein kinases with relatively conserved
kinase domain that mediate broad-base dregulation of
activation events.

CD120 is a member the TNFR family with a specific role in
viral immune surveillance as it binds to the pro-inflammatory
cytokine TNF -α. The CD137 (..) is expressed by activated T
cells, but to a larger extenton CD8 rather than on CD4 T cells.
CD27 is required for generating and sustaining T cell
immunity. CD95is (.) the apoptotic death membrane receptor
that engages the cytoplasmic pathways of programmed cell
death, which is distinct from the mitochondrial pathway.
CD358, the tumor necrosis factor receptor super family
member 21 (TNFRSF21) (aka, death receptor-6) closely
interacts with TRADD. The related TNFRSF25 does not have
CD number yet, but is recognized to be endowed with the
ability of facilitating the antigen-dependent response:
costimulation of TNFRSF25 with a vaccine antigen sharply
enhances vaccine-stimulated immunity. TNFRSF25 stimulation
may be a critical driver of specific T cell mediated viral
immunity [].

Virus Recognition Receptors &amp; Virus Infection:
The innate immune system plays an important role in viral
immunity. Innate cells and humoral factors are essential for
the initial detection of invading viruses and subsequent
activation of acquired immunity. Three classes of receptors
“sense” the foreign viral double-stranded RNA, the singlestranded
RNA, and the DNA, and in response play essential
roles in the production of type I interferons (IFNs) and proinflammatory
cytokines  (see supplementary material).

Retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIGI-I)-like receptors (RLRs)
are cytoplasmic RNA helicase-like receptors that bind to
intracellular viral double-stranded RNA. RIGI-I interacts with
the IPS-1/MAVS/Cardif/VISA protein complex. The latter
complex sits on the outer membrane of mitochondria, to signal
the presence of virus-derived RNA, and induces type I IFN
production. This activation event is regulated by the K63-
linked polyubiquitin chain mediated by Riplet and TRIM25
ubiquitin ligases. Riplet is required for RIG-I RNA binding
activity, and for TRIM25 to activate RIG-I. Riplet induces the
release of RIG-I auto repression of its N-terminal caspase
activation and recruitment domains (CARDs), which leads to
the association of RIG-I with TRIM25 ubiquitin ligase and
TBK1 protein kinase. TRIM25 mediates lysine 63-linked
polyubiquitination of the RIG-I N-terminal CARD-like region.
Both Riplet and TRIM25 are critical to RIG-I activation, but the
exact molecular foot print of these interlocked mechanisms
remains to be fully elucidated. Hepatitis C (HepC) virus NS3-
4A proteases appear to target Riplet and to prevent
endogenous RIG-I polyubiquitination and association with
TRIM25 and TBK1.RIG-I, upon sensing RNA, induces
activation of the transcription factors NF-кB and interferon
regulatory factor (IRF)-3 &amp; -7 through the adaptor
mitochondrial antiviral-signaling (MAVS) protein. MAVS
proteins are CARDs-containing proteins that reside in the
mitochondrial membrane, and play a crucial role in antiviral
innate immunity. In point of fact, Hep C and other viruses can
also use their proteases to cleave MAVS off the mitochondria,
there by escaping immune surveillance 
[].

Toll-likereceptors (TLRs) are single membrane-spanning noncatalyticrecep
to rsexpressed by myeloidanddendriticsentinel
cells. TLRsact as pattern recognition receptors (PRR)
recognizing pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs),
specific structurally conserved molecules derived from in
vading pathogens, that activate in nateimmune cell responses.
TLRs are criticalin the detection phase of viral invasion.TLRs
areRLRs, and sense viral infection and activate transcription
factors, including IRF3, leading to inductionof IFN production.
The membrane phospholipid phosphatidy linositol-5-
phosphate (PtdIns5P) is increase dupon viral infection and
facilitates IFN production by binding to IRF3 and it supstream
kinase TRAF family member-associated NF-kB activator
(TANK)-bindingkinase 1 (TBK1) promoting TBK1-mediated
IRF3 phosphorylation and activation. TBK1 is a
serine/threonine kinase that playsan essential role in
regulating in flammatory responses to viral pathogens.
Following activation of TLRs by the viral components, TBK1
associates with TRAF3 and TANK to phosphory late IRF3 and
IRF7, and them ulti functional ATP-dependent RNA helicase,
DDX3X. This function leads to the homodimerization and
nuclear translocation of the IRFs, and eventually transcriptiona
lactivation of pro-inflammatory and antiviral genes including
IFN-α and IFN-β. Inorder to establishsuchan antiviral state,
TBK1 needs to interact with diversescaffolding molecules in
the cytoskeleton (e.g., FADD, TRADD, MAVS, SINTBAD) to
facilitate TBK1-mediated functions such as, phosphorylation of
NF-kB inhibitors, phosphorylation of endosomal sorting
complex required for transport-I (ESCRT-I) subunit VPS37C
for retroviral budding, phosphorylation and activation of
AKT1. Case in point, TBK1 mediates the phosphorylation of
Borna disease virus (BDV) P protein, a multi-helical protein
that regulates viral RNA synthesis and transports nucleotide
oligomerization domain (NOD)-like receptors (NLRs), the
intracellular sensors component for the recognition of
pathogen-associated molecular patterns.

NLRs are important in the production of mature interleukin1-β
(IL1-β) consequential to dsRNA stimulation, and are for
thatreason, the basis for DNA vaccines. Small RNAs (sRNAs),
a newly discovered universal class of powerful RNA-based
regulatory biomolecules that regulate gene expression by basepairing
with multiple downstream target mRNAs to prevent
translation of mRNA into protein, also modulate immune
regulation in general, and in viral immune surveillance in
particular [].

The Ebola virus (EBOV), for instance, infects dendritic cells,
disables the interferon system, and disrupts henceforth the
host antiviral immune surveillance response. The virus targets
myeloid cells (i.e., monocytes/macrophages) and induces
alterations in the blood clotting pathway, which together lead
to significant increase in pro-inflammatory cytokines,
including IL6, IL1-b and TNF-a, as well as nitric oxide, which
damages the lining of blood vessels. The virus operates in a
sequential fashion by first disabling the immune system, then
the vascular system, during which observed symptoms can
include hemorrhage, hypotension, drop in blood pressure, and
catastrophic organ failure. These symptoms are usually
followed by shock and death. The glycoprotein, protein from
EBOV forms a trimeric complex, which binds the virus to the
endothelial cell lining and the interior surface of blood vessels.
The small glycoprotein also forms a dimeric protein that
interferes with the signaling of neutrophils, allowing the virus
to evade the immune system by inhibiting early steps of
neutrophil activation. Neutrophils serve as carriers to transport
the virus throughout the entire body, to places such as the
lymph nodes, liver, lungs, spleen, and presumably other
organs, including the central nervous system (CNS (vide infra)
[].

Immune “Escape”:
Following viral infection, IL10 levels are elevated, and so are
the levels of soluble intracellular adhesion molecule (sICAM)-
1, and soluble vascular cell adhesion molecule (sVCAM)-1.
This pattern reflect early excessive, and ultimately detrimental,
endothelial activation in virally infected patients, with
consequential increased plasminogen activator inhibitor 1
(PAI-1). The over-active endothelial response may contribute
to hemorrhagic symptoms (cf., viral hemorrhagic fever caused
by EBOV or Dengue virus [DENV]).The initial immune
responses include a rapid rise in pro-inflammatory cytokines
(e.g., IL6, IL1-β, TNF-α), which trigger a relatively short-lived
initial burst of fever and inflammation and cellular immune
migration factors (e.g., IL-8). Soon into the immune
surveillance response, a slower process on cellular pathology
ensues, which includes myeloid cell and endothelial cell
infection and cytopathology, followed by a sharp rise in fever
indicating systemic inflammatory responses. As the damage to
the infected cells progresses, loss in vascular integrity leads to
increased permeability of blood vessels with transudates
increasingly rich in micronutrients, red blood cells (and
eventually white blood cells in the case of EBOV), DENV and
other VHFs. The organism is ultimately overwhelmed by a
combination of inflammatory factors and virus-induced cell
damage, which together can lead to death from liver and
kidney failure complicated by septic shock [,
]. This follows
type I interferon, which include IFN-α, IFN-β, IFN-к, IFN-δ,
IFN-ε, IFN-τ, IFN-ω, and IFN-ζ, impairment. The EBOV and
the Marbug virus (MBGV) escape immune surveillance by
means of their respective viral protein, which inhibits the
phosphorylation of IRF3/7 by TBK1, thus, masking the virus
[]. The HIV, by contrast, can escape from systemic immunity
assessments simply by becoming hidden in macrophages and
dendritic cells that transmigrate from the systemic
compartment to organs and lymph nodes, such that
lymphadenopathy is a clinically relevant sign and important
guiding tool for detecting hidden HIV in asymptomatic
individuals []. It is possible and even probable that Dengue,
EBOV, MBGV and a host of other viruses also escape cellular
immune surveillance by transmigrating to “hidden” lymphoid
compartments including the CNS via infected cells.

The Microenvironment:
The microenvironment is greatly dependent on the intricate,
fluid relationships that exist between different subpopulations
of CD3+ cells, and the pattern of cytokines they produce. Two
principal T cells-mediated cytokine patterns can be
characterized on the basis of whether they foster T or B cell
activation and proliferation. Whereas the human TH1
cytokines (e.g., IL2, INF-g, IL12) predominantly favor T cell
activation, proliferation and maturation for cellular immunity
toward parasites, virally infected cells and tumor cells, the
human TH2 cytokine profile (e.g., IL4, IL5, IL10) favors the
activation, proliferation and maturation of B cells and
enhances humoral immunity and the production of antibodies.
A third T cell population blunts cellular immunity: the
regulatory T cell subpopulation (Tregs) characterized by triimmunofluorescence
flow cytometry to express either CD4 or
CD8, the a chain of the IL2 receptor, CD25, and FoxP3.
Depending upon the microenvironment, TH1 populations
might also engender a TH17 subpopulation, whose cytokine
profile (e.g., IL17A, IL-17F, TNF-a, IL22, IL23, and IL9) lends to
a state of sustained T cell-driven inflammation seen in
autoimmune diseases and allergic reaction. TH2 cells may
generate TH9 subpopulations characterized by elevated levels
of IL9 and IL10, which down regulate TH1 activity. Tregs play
a critical role in directing and regulating the dynamic plasticity
required for balancing TH1/TH2, and the intimately related
TH17/TH9 subpopulations [,
].

Cellular immune surveillance is a dynamic and fluid system
that is driven by a finely balanced and delicately regulated
equilibrium of cytokines. The microenvironment dictates and
regulates whether or not there is a predominant TH1 and
TH17, or TH2 and TH9 pattern of cytokines, and controls
cellular immune surveillance to tumors [], and viral
infections. The TH1/TH2 and TH17/TH9 relationships are
pivotal in maintaining the efficiency of anti-viral cellular
immune surveillance. IL23 is also important for the
microenvironment mediating the expansion of TH17 cells and
the production of IL17A and IL9 [,
]. Should the hypothesis
that certain viruses, such as HIV, MBGV, EBOV or DENV,
impair the host׳s cellular immunity by altering the Tregsmediated
regulation of TH1, TH2, TH17 and TH9 plasticity be
proven true, then novel immune therapies could be designed
and tested on virus-infected patients directed specifically at
restoring the physiological homeostasis in TH1, TH2, TH17
and TH9 cytokines.

Myeloid derivatives, such as monocytes and macrophages,
process foreign materials by phagocytosis, a process that has
evolved in vertebrate immunology to recognize pathogens and
damaged tissues through Toll receptors, which are pattern
recognition receptors (PRRs) that recognize pathogenassociated
molecular patterns (PAMP) and damage-associated
molecular patterns (DAMP). In a classic pattern of cellular
immune surveillance to viral infections, pathogens and
cytohistological damaged tissues are detected through PAMP
and DAMP within hours. This recognition event engenders a
set of signals by resident macrophages. Levels of IFN-γ sharply
rise, and anti-viral immune surveillance commences.
Macrophages either turn on their killing program or “fight”
against an invading pathogen, or they engage in a “fix”
repairing, healing and remodeling programs. Depending on
the microenvironment, macrophages can either elicit responses
that include nitric oxide and oxygen radical production - the
destructive M1 response, or produce factors that promote
proliferation, angiogenesis, and matrix deposition -the
reparative M2 response [,
]. IFN-g produced by natural
killer cells and activated T-cells may be the most potent
stimulus for the inducible nitric oxide synthase pathway for
arginine catabolism.TGF-к1 stimulates the arginase M2
pathway, and is a potent inhibitor of the M1 pathway of
arginine metabolism. Macrophages constitutively produce
TGF-b, which is inversely related to their NO production, thus
suggesting that TGF-b may act as an autocrine regulator for
NO formation and M1 activity [–
].

The M1 and M2 states of macrophages activity represent a
useful dichotomous functional classification that segregates the
macrophage toxicity from its repairing physiological function.
The M1 macrophage pattern reciprocally influences TH1
cytokines, including IL-12, which drive T-cells toward
sustained inflammation (i.e., TH17), activation, proliferation
and maturation; by contrast, the M2 state reciprocally favors
TH2 patterns of cytokines to support humoral immunity,
including B cell proliferation, maturation and production of
antibodies [–].

In brief, the INF-g/TGF-b-1 and the TH1/TH2 balance
correspond to the M1/M2 and the balance of tissue destruction
(i.e., excessive nitric oxide and related cytotoxic compounds)/
tissue regeneration modality (i.e., arginase-mediated
production of polyamines for DNA repair and L-proline and
ornithine for cell and tissue repair) [–
]. The hypothesis can
be brought forward that certain viral infections (e.g., DENV,
HIV) selectively alter the M1/M2 balance because of their
relative trophism to macrophages and dendritic cells− this
novel hypothesis that could be tested by in vitro manipulations
followed by tri- or tetra-immuno fluorescence flow cytometry.
Should it be proven true, then the inference would follow that
these and perhaps most viruses contribute to drive and sustain
an M1 state simply because of chronic depletion of infected
macrophages, and the need to generate new myeloid
derivatives to combat the pathogens. A state of iNOS
activation would ensue and profound cellular toxicity, leading
to the physiological collapse that is evident in the advanced
stages of virally infected patients. Novel immune-based
therapies for these patients could then be developed that
would be directed specifically at modulating the M1/M2
balance by attenuating M1 responses and favoring an M2
macrophage state might result in a positive treatment
outcomes.

Neuroimmunology
Neurocognitive Pathology:
Many viral infections are associated with symptoms such as
headache, encephalitis, meningitis, cerebral edema, and
seizures, which suggests viral involvement in CNS pathology.
Considering our current knowledge of viral mechanisms,
reported complications from long-term survivors, and
knowledge of the adverse effects of pro-inflammatory
cytokines on neuronal function, the potential contributors to
ongoing CNS dysfunction may include the persistent
inflammation of the CNS through the release of cytokines,
chemokines and recruitment of infected monocytes. These
events lead to the disruption of the blood brain barrier (BBB),
which increases its permeability to virus, immune and other
cell types through deregulation of tight junction proteins,
resulting the acquired neurological insults.

Inflammation and CNS:
Virus infection causes the initial activation of monocytes/
macrophages, which in turn releases cytokines that target the
vascular system, particularly endothelial cells. While transient
innate immune responses in the form of cytokines are
beneficial to the host, the same essential spectrum of cytokines
can lead to deregulation of homeostatic mechanisms,
destruction of host tissues and apoptosis 
[].

Macrophage-like cells have varied tissue distributions, and
have different names depending on their anatomical sites. In
the central nervous system, macrophages are called microglial
cells whereas hepatic macrophages are referred to as Kuppfer
cells. In the lungs they are recognized as the alveolar
macrophages and in skin they are the Langerhans cells.
Monocytes/macrophage subpopulations release large
quantities of cytokines and chemokines in the CNS, following
viral infection. A variety of pro-inflammatory proteins is
released due to viral infection that include IL1β, IL6, IL8, IL15,
IL16, the chemokine macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP-
1)-α and -β, monocyte chemotactic protein 1 (MCP1),
macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF), macrophage
migration inhibitory factor (MIF), IFN- β-induced protein 10
(IP-10), and eotaxin.

Cytokines have both atherogenic and prothrombotic effects
that can influence neurological events such as ischemic stroke
or vascular dementia. IL1β, IL2, IL6, and TNF-α have been
directly implicated in the stimulation of the coagulation
system. Abnormalities of the brain coagulation system have
been implicated in traumatic brain injury []. Neuro-
inflammation, mediated in part by chemokine activity and the
release of proinflammatory cytokines, contributes to the
breakdown of CNS microvascular endothelial cells that
constitute the BBB, increasing the potential for continued viral
invasion into the brain. While most studies have focused on
the inflammatory response of microglia and astrocytes,
perivascular cells also play a key role in brain inflammation.
Pericytes of CNS are involved in recruitment of peripheral cells
to the brain, which may directly induce neuronal damage, or
promote microglial hyper-activation and inflammation 
[].

Blood Brain Barrier (BBB) Disruption:
The BBB separates the brain from the circulatory system, thus
maintaining a stable micro-environment. It is formed by
specialized endothelial cells that are attached through tight
junctions and adherence junctions, which function to separate
the CNS from the circulation and restrict and prevent bloodborne
molecules and peripheral cells from entering the CNS.
Specialized endothelial cells line brain capillaries and form its
structure. They transduce signals to and from the vascular
system and brain. Both structure and function of the BBB is
dependent upon the complex interplay between different
surrounding cell types, including the endothelial cells,
astrocytes, pericytes, and the extracellular matrix of the brain
as well as the capillary blood. Tight junction proteins also
provide the BBB with two functionally distinct sides: the
luminal side facing the circulation and the abluminal side
facing the CNS parenchyma, which are highly sensitive to
major cytokines produced during immune response, including
TNF-α, IL1-β, and IL6. Three sites have been identified with a
physical barrier via tight junctions including the brain
endothelium that forms the BBB, the arachnoid epithelium,
which constitutes the middle layer of the meninges, and the
choroid plexus epithelium, which secretes cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF) [–].

The concerted cellular immune and inflammatory processes
described above can disrupt the tight junctions of the BBB
specialized endothelium thereby opening a gate, which enables
the leakage and trans-vasation of activated immune cells and
factors from the systemic circulation into the CNS and the
brain parenchyma. A preliminary characterization of the
molecular mechanisms of the BBB gateway proposes that it
might be mediated in large part by NF-кB via the signal
tranducer and activator of transcription-3 (STAT3) activation.
Inflammatory cytokines, including IL-17, can act as a trigger to
NF-кB-mediated transcriptions, and IL-6 as a target of NF-кB,
play a critical role in opening the BBB gateway []. A role for
certain other inflammatory modulators and chemokines has
also been proposed in regulating the permeability of this BBBgate
pathway [–
]. In animal models, exposure to an
inflammatory stimulus at the time of an experimentally
induced stroke leads to an identifiable Tregs response, which
modulates the TH1 response, and an uncontrolled TH1
response to brain antigens is associated with higher
neuropathologic scores [–
]. Case inpoint, IL-17 production
by T cells contributes to ischemic brain injury up to 7 days
following the stroke onset []. Based on current
understanding of the role of TH17 and TH9, and specifically
the TH17/TH9 balance in regulating viral immune
surveillance mechanisms, and immune processes of chronic
sustained inflammation, such as what is observed in peripheral
or central neuroinflammation, it is possible and even probable
that the “gateway theory” can be revised and expanded to
involve and incorporate the role of TH17 and TH9 cytokines
().

nted by Arima, Kamimura, Ogura and collaborators (refs.
21-23). In their original description, these authors
characterized a rodent NF-кB-mediated “inflammation
amplifier”mediated by IL-17, which was hypothesized to lead
to a localized gateway through the BBB. We propose those
systemic inflammatory processes that involve macrophages in
the M1 or the M2 states have differential effects upon the
balance of TH17 and TH9 cytokines systemically, regulated in
part by TH1 and TH2 cytokines. Together, these factors act
locally on the tight junction of the BBB endothelium, and
modulate the inflammation amplifier molecular cascade. The
prevalence of M1 or M2 state of macrophage activation
determines the porosity of the TH17/TH9 BBB gateway, which
functions, we propose, at the molecular level quite as they
described NF-кB-mediated gate theory of Arima, Kamimura,
Ogura et al. In brief, the TH17/TH9 BBB gateway shown in
the figure is gated, as it were, by the M1/M2 balance through
its regulatory effects upon the molecular events of the
inflammation amplifier, and thus mediates the extent of
systemic inflammation that can permeate into the central
nervous system. By acting on the TH17/TH9 BBB gateway,
novel patient-centered therapies can now be developed to
blunt NF-кB-mediated inflammation amplifier pathway, and
block inflammation of the brain consequential to a variety of
neuroimmune pathologies, from cranial nerve neuropathies
(e.g., trigeminal neuralgia), to neuropathologies (e.g.,
Alzheimer׳s disease, multiple sclerosis), to viral infections of
the brain including neuroAIDS. In the same vein, the etiology
of Major Depression has now been hypothesized to be
associated with some form, or some degree of
neuroinflammation.

The degree to which CNS-specific TH17 cells contribute to
injury in neurological disorders has yet to be explored.
Nevertheless, should the hypothetical TH17/TH9 BBB gateway
model proposed here prove correct, it could open timely and
critical new therapeutic interventions in viral infections that
penetrate the central nervous system, varied neuroimmune
pathologies that involve local brain immune responses,
following neurological injury, stoke, and a spectrum of
neurological diseases, including central trigeminal neuralgia
consequential to peripheral neuroinflammation.

Neurological Syndromes:
In 1967, cases of hemorrhagic fever occurred in Marburg. The
Marburg virus (MBGV) and EBOV, as noted above, are both
members of the family Filoviridae, and are very similar in
terms of morphology, genome organization, and protein
composition. The pathology of Marburg disease was
investigated from gathering tissues from brain, spleen and
liver from those infected and have been used to make
inferences about the pathology of Ebola virus. Brain tissue
derived from patients infected with the Marburg virus were
noted to have brain swelling, increase in vascular permeability,
associated reduced effective circulating blood volume, and
interstitial edema in the brain. It was inferred that the
pathologic alterations found in Ebola virus infection would
share similar features to those found in Marburg virus
infection, though an absence of comprehensive comparative
studies remain.

EBOV infects the meninges, and most viral infections that
involve the meninges manifest into progressive neurologic
disorders. In general, disease progression and severity are
determined in part by whether specific areas of CNS are
involved, which is determined by viral tropism. Polioviruses
(PV) preferentially infect motor neurons, and mumps infects
epithelial cells of the choroid plexus. Encephalitis due to
infection and post-infection encephalomyelitis, which may
occur after measles or Nipah virus encephalitis (NVE), or
conditions such as post-poliomyelitis syndrome, a putative
persistent manifestation of PV infection, is examples of
neurological syndromes that can follow due to viral infection
of the CNS. Symptoms that signal encephalitis due to viral
infection of the meninges include sudden fever, headache,
vomiting, heightened sensitivity to light, stiffness of neck and
back, confusion and impaired judgment, drowsiness, weakness
of muscles, a clumsy and unsteady gait, and irritability. Even if
the blood brain barrier is not impaired, neuroinflammatory
mediators crossing the BBB may result in neurotoxic effects
due to the accumulation of free radicals from the brain׳s
cytotoxic response. Symptoms that require emergency
treatment include loss of consciousness, seizures, muscle
weakness, or sudden severe dementia. Chronic meningitis
from Cryptococcus usually develops among patients with
compromised immune systems (e.g., elderly, AIDS patients).
CT or MRI is usually recommended first, before the lumbar
puncture. Encephalitis and meningitis can cause cerebral
edema, a dangerous condition where the brain's water content
rises, causing an increased pressure in the skull [,
].

Conclusion
In conclusion, we propose that viral infection and other
immune activation states disrupt the specialized tight junction
of the BBB endothelium, thus making it permeable to immune
cells and factors, including inflammatory cytokines, not only
through IL-17-initiated and IL-6-mediated events, but also via
the regulation by cytokines of the TH9 profile, which modulate
TH17-mediated sustained inflammatory responses
systemically [,
]. Expectations are that experimental and
clinical immunology experiments will demonstrate that
immune surveillance events to viruses, such as HIV, EBOV,
DENV and others, disrupt the BBB and open a TH17/TH9
induced gateway. Together, these events contribute to
neuroimmune pathology. It is possible and even probable that
the “TH17/TH9 BBB gateway” we propose here opens as a
consequence of any state of immune activation and sustained
chronic neural inflammation, whether associated with viral
infection or any other cause of peripheral or central
neuroinflammation, including neuronal damage consequential
to nerve ending constriction. The TH17/TH9 BBB gate we
describe here will proffer a novel and useful model for
improved understanding of psychoneuroendocrine-immune
interactions.

Supplementary material
Data 1
EBD-PBRN is registered with the US Agency for Healthcare
Research &amp; Quality (AHRQ) PBRN Resource Center as an
affiliate primary care Practice-Based Research Network. The
authors thank the past and present members of the Evidencebased
research group who have contributed to the research
presented here. The authors also thank the stakeholders of
EBD-PBRN who have contributed many critical discussions of
fundamental concepts. Support for this research was from
Fulbright grant 5077 and UC Senate grants to FC; NIH/NIMH
Career Development Award (K23 MH095661) grant to AT.

Citation:Chiappelli et al, Bioinformation 11(1): 047-054 (2014)

The TH17/TH9 BBB Gateway

