Background
The identification of metabolic pathway's genes and proteins is an
emerging area of great interest. The accumulation of data from different
origins and the development of methods to mine that data create an
opportunity to bridge the gap between the fragmentary view of genes
and proteins and the more integrated approach of Bioinformatics [].
Moreover, increasing amounts of experimental data that can be mined
for information about how proteins in cells assemble as metabolic and
signal transduction pathways circuits are generated each day [–].
Datasets available for such tasks include the primary literature, whole
genome two hybrid screenings, large scale microarray experiments, full
genome sequences and the patterns of conserved/non-conserved
homologues and orthologues in them. Theoretical and experimental
methods are being developed and used to analyze these different types
of data and infer networks of proteins or genes that are involved in the
similar type biological processes []. In general, the networks derived
by the computational analysis of these data are static, in the sense that
they provide little information []. This can be an important problem
while assembling the network structure of either novel pathways or
complex pathways with an unclear reaction network. Thus, it is a
challenge to identify the correct bioconversion pathway that allows for
the creation of sequence synteny based pathway network whose
mechanism can be analyzed and tested against experimental
observations. To achieve such a goal, strategies that combine the
different theoretical and wet lab confirmations to identify proteins and
generate a set of plausible pathway network for the process of interest
are needed. Such a process integrates homologous data and provides
testable predictions and information about unexplored pathway
mechanism in other organisms. In the present work, we studied eugenol
to vanillin bioconversion pathway in Pseudomonas fluorescens as a
reference pathway and successfully reconstructed in Aspergillus niger
on the basis of participating enzyme's protein sequences synteny map.
However, vanillin (4- hydroxy-3- methoxybenzaldehyde) is one of the
high value aided aromatic product of the flavor, food, cosmetic and
pharmaceutical industry. Moreover, flavors and fragrances find wide
applicability in food, cosmetic and pharmaceutical industries and
represent a worldwide market of about 18 billion US dollars per year.
Abundantly the flavors in the world market are chemically synthesized
which is environmentally unfriendly and the production process too
lacks the substrate specificity resulting in the formation of undesirable
reaction mixtures, hazardous to health and increase the downstream cost. Less than 55 of the flavors are extracted from the plants and are
natural products []. However, the biotechnological means using
naturally originated product as substrate for the production of flavors in
high quantities are also considered as natural and is an emerging
approach for the flavor production []. On the other hand, production of
natural vanillin from the orchid Vanilla planifolia is very low and
unable to fulfill the demand of the world market of 12,000 tons per
year. The microbial conversion of various phenyl propanoids such as
ferulic acid, isoeugenol, eugenol, coniferyl aldehyde etc. to produce
vanillin at a cost effective rate and free from health hazardous
chemicals, has been an area of great interest [–]. The bioconversion
of eugenol to vanillin has been studied in various bacterial systems
including different species of Pseudomonas, Rhodococcus,
Corynebacterium and recombinant strains of Amycolatopsis so as to
establish the pathways in the prokaryotic system. The drawback lies
within the eukaryotic fungal system where no single fungus has been
reported since now to be able to biotransform eugenol to vanillin [–]. 
A combination of two fungal systems A. niger and Pycnoporus
cinnabarinus were reported to convert ferulic acid to vanillin by
catalysis in two different steps [,]. The establishment of the
bioconversion pathway in fungal systems would lead to hypothesize the
metabolic fate of eugenol in eukaryotic systems.

Aspergillus genome indicates the presence of 13,071 predicted genes
with average gene length of 1,384 bp spread across 8 chromosomes.
Notably, a number of hypothetical/unknown proteins are annotated in A.
niger []. This fact emphasizes the need to identify gene function by
new approaches. In this work, we focus on eugenol to vanillin
bioconversion pathway in A. niger. Currently, there are gaps in eugenol
to vanillin bioconversion pathway of A. niger because of the insufficient
annotation. We try to resolve such missing enzymes by using the
protein local region sequence similarity in terms of conserved domain
and motifs. Later these predicted domain and motifs were analyzed for
their localization in orthologous sequences through KEGG and COG
databases []. Results showed conserved protein domains and motifs
in both the organisms on the basis of pathway specific enzyme's
functional domain and motif sequences &amp; structural similarity. These
predicted proteins motifs are evolutionarily conserved and form a basis
for the identification of missing or unexplored enzymes, which
ultimately helped in reconstruction of eugenol to vanillin bioconversion
pathway. However, most of the works have been done in prokaryotes only and the details of this pathway are not fully understood in any
eukaryotic system. In P. fluorescens, the pathway has been more
extensively studied and so far following pathway enzymes are reported:

Eugenol hydroxylase cytochrome C subunit (EhyA),

Eugenol hydroxylase flavoprotein subunit (EhyB),




Coniferyl alcohol dehydrogenase (CalA),

Coniferyl aldehyde dehydrogenase (CalB),

Feruloyl CoA synthase (Fcs) and 

Enoyl CoA hydratase/aldolase (Ech) (Table 1 in ).

 The reconstruction of biosynthetic pathway in A. niger indicates that functionally unexplored
hypothetical proteins may have important role in the bioconversion of
eugenol to vanillin. We also predicted the functional role of these
hypothetical/unknown proteins as an enzyme for the development of
high value aided aromatic product of the flavor, food, cosmetic and
pharmaceutical industry.

Methodology
Biological sequence retrieval
Relevant information on the pathway specific genes and proteins of P. fluorescens involved in the bioconversion of eugenol to vanillin was
studied through reported literature and later biological sequences were
retrieved through nucleotide and protein sequence databases of both
GenBank (NCBI) (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) &amp; UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot
(Expasy-EBI) (http://expasy.org/uniprot/) web servers.

Selection of datasets for pathway reconstruction
Two types of datasets were used for pathway construction: 
Known or Reference data set - which includes protein sequences of five
enzymes such as EhyA/EhyB, CalA, CalB, Fcs and Ech, participating in
the vanillin biosynthetic pathway of model organism i.e., P. fluorescens
with conserved protein domains &amp; motifs,

Predictive or Target data set - which includes potential homologous protein sequences such
as Cytochrome-c CYC_ASPNG or hypothetical protein
(gi|2829474|sp|P56205.1 predicted as EhyA), hypothetical protein
An09g01380 (gi|145241618|ref|XP_001393455.1 predicted as EhyB),
hypothetical protein An15g01840 (gi|145250419|ref|XP_001396723.1
predicted as CalA), hypothetical protein An01g09260
(gi|145230075|ref|XP_001389346.1 predicted as CalB), hypothetical
protein An14g05630 (gi|145249694|ref|XP_001401186.1 predicted as
Fcs) and hypothetical protein An02g02820
(gi|145231906|ref|XP_001399422.1 predicted as Ech) predicted to be
the pathway’s enzymes of target organism i.e., A. niger with conserved
protein domains  &amp; motifs (Table 1 in ).



Sequence similarity and homology search
We first identified the number and details of enzymes participating in
eugenol to vanillin bioconversion through literatures. Then, each of the
all-against-all proteins in the list were checked for sequence homology.
Here homologous clusters are computationally defined clusters of
similar proteins having ≥ 50% similarity and E-value threshold ≤1.00E-
63 with similar conserved protein domain and motif local regions. Later
this information was utilized to reconstruct the pathway reaction
network in A. niger. Calculation of the statistical significance of
matches was performed through Protein BLAST program
(www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/BLAST/) at NCBI, USA webserver. Pairwise
sequence alignment based studies indicates functional and evolutionary
relationships between both the organisms as revealed by phylogenetic
analysis and so helped in the identification of other family members
which are not yet identified.

Detection of orthologs based on conserved protein domain, motif &amp; superfamily
Homologous proteins in A. niger were searched for conserved protein
regions such as protein motifs, domains and superfamilies, having
related functions to that of the P. fluorescens (Table 1 in ). For conserved protein functional domain
identification Conserved Domain search tool (CDD-Search at NCBI)
was used (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Structure/cdd/wrpsb.cgi), while
InterPro-EBI (www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) and Pfam-Sanger
(http://pfam.sanger.ac.uk/) databases were used for conserved protein
motifs identification. Cluster of Orthologous Group (COG) database
(www.ncbi.nih.gov/COG/) was used for identification of orthologous
cluster group. We used P. fluorescens gene entries from the KEGGGENES
database (www.genome.jp/kegg/) [,
] and performed
further annotation of motifs conservation to these genes in A. niger, by
using the information about the gene ontology assignments through
GenBank database at NCBI.

Experimental validation
Since protein sequence similarity or homology between reference and
predicted pathway genes/proteins was lower therefore to confirm the
theoretical predictions, localization of participating hidden and
unexplored enzymes was further verified through chromatographic &amp;
mass spectroscopic techniques. The bioconversion of vanillin was
screened on UV-TLC plates and later confirmed through GC and GCMS
techniques.

Discussion
The proteins of P. fluorescens that are known to be involved in eugenol
to vanillin biosynthetic pathway are shown in Table 1 (see ). Conserved common protein domain and
motifs local regions in protein sequences of both the organisms are
shown in Table 1 (see ). We first describe
how the different large scale datasets are analyzed and combined, in
order to inferred initial pathway network assembly in reference
organism i.e., P. fluorescens. Then, we used local region sequence
synteny mapping approach to analyze the pathway enzymes homolog in
target organism i.e., A. niger. Finally, we hypothesized the most
potential pathway enzymes based on the conserved protein motifs  &amp;
experimental observations. Bibliographic analysis of published abstracts
and papers were used to verify the different proteins/genes involved in
bioconversion process (  &amp; ). We have used the genes known
to be involved in eugenol to vanillin biosynthetic pathway inP. fluorescens to test this assumption in A. niger as an alternative organism
for production of vanillin at industrial level.

Pathway reconstruction using Phylogenetic profiling
It is not possible to infer probable reaction network structure for the
pathway just from the co-occurrence of genes. Additional data is
necessary in order to translate the group of proteins that are identified to
be involved in the biological process of interest into a structured
network. Phylogenetic profiling of the genes assists in adding some
structure to the network [,]. We searched for motif patterns of cooccurrence
of sets of orthologs in other species of A. niger. The
assumption behind the use of this approach is that, if the conserved
pattern or motif present in two or more proteins of different species of
Aspergillus is very close, this is an indication of co-evolution among the
proteins. Such co-evolution can be taken as an indication that they are
likely to be involved in the same cellular process [,]. Results from
phylogenetic co-evolution analysis of the different genes involved in
eugenol bioconversion are explained in Methodology section. This
additional information assists in inferring some form of common motifs
to the network structure of the studied pathway (Table 1 in ). For example, 
in P. fluorescens, conserved
motifs viz. PS51007, IPR003088 &amp; PF00034 of EhyA enzyme showed
100% homologues coincide with CYC_ASPNG gene of A. niger with
58% amino acid similarity and 38% identity. Similarly enzyme of P. fluorescens EhyB showed common evolutionary conserved motif viz.,
Pfam01565 and Pfam02913 in A. niger with 50% amino acid sequence
similarity and 34% identity. This suggests that predicted hypothetical
proteins are more likely to act directly on these reactions as
participating unexplored enzymes, which are not yet functionally
annotated.

Experimental validation through TLC and GC &amp; GC-MS
Of five P. fluorescens genes, we annotated all five as putative enzymes
of the eugenol to vanillin bioconversion pathway in A. niger with the
information on common conserved protein motifs &amp; domain. We
predicted enzymatic reactions for all the participating enzymes on the
basis of functionally conserved protein motif and domain homology and
co-evolution. Later, we mapped them on target organism based on
KEGG metabolic pathway database (Table 1 in ). We hypothesized cases where the reaction steps of missing
enzymes can be catalyzed by other enzymes. Besides, to validate the
above pathway, species of Aspergillus were screened experimentally in
our lab for bioconversion capability from eugenol to vanillin. Two of
the Aspergillus species namely, A. niger and A. flavus were found
capable for bioconversion of eugenol to vanillin. The bioconversion of
vanillin was screened on UV- TLC plates and later on confirmed
through GC and GC-MS techniques (). Experimental
observations of UV- TLC and GC &amp; GC-MS showed the likely roles of
proteins that have been analyzed and also predicted through homology
search and conserved domain and motif search tools. This eliminates
some of the alternative network structures and assists in refining the
remaining, by suggesting experiments that can further differentiate
between them. As shown in this paper, bioinformatics tools like
Interpro, ProDom, Pfam, COG, KEGG, BLAST etc. were successfully
used along with experimental data through chromatographic and
spectroscopic techniques so that to assist in the predictive analysis of
the missing metabolic pathways. Another useful aspect of our approach
is that it can be used in reassessing the interpretation of experimental
chromatographic data. It is our goal to refine predictions based on
updated sequence data and to apply this method to other organisms,
thus assisting in the understanding of how the pathway of vanillin
bioconversion has evolved. In principle, the combination of integrated
approach presented here could be used in a flexible way to analyze
similar problems in other biological system ().

In our present work, we used a combination of experimental and
theoretical methods to reconstruct the topology of the eugenol to
vanillin bioconversion pathway in A. niger with the help of P.
fluorescens reported data. The pathway enzymes were identified and a
network of interactions between them was predicted using literature
mining and computational analysis. Although bioinformatics tools do
provide a synteny of the pathway network structure, human analysis
remains necessary for curating all the relevant information. In fact,
human curation of the pathway chain is a critical step for the derivation
of possible alternative reaction schemes for the pathway. At this point,
theoretical predictions are needed to validate experimentally in wet lab.

Conclusion
The eugenol to vanillin bioconversion pathway of P. fluorescens was
reconstructed by using a flexible computational methodology that
combines sequence analysis, literature search and bioinformatics
applications. The roles of different P. fluorescens proteins in vanillin
bioconversion were successfully predicted in A. niger. Some predictions
are cross checked through published experimental data. Other
predictions need further experimental work to validate it. The
methodology used here is flexible and can be applicable in other
systems. This methodology could be a step forward in integrating
different types of data to obtain systemic knowledge about novel
pathways and to clarify how current prediction of known pathways
would work, thus generating rational hypothesis for testing. Besides, to
validate the above pathway, different species of Aspergillus were
screened experimentally in our lab for bioconversion capability from
eugenol to vanillin. Two of the Aspergillus species namely, A. niger and
A. flavus were found capable of vanillin bioconversion. Moreover, our
hypothesis of vanillin biosynthetic pathway was later successfully
confirmed through UV - TLC and GC &amp; GC-MS data, which showed
sign of vanillin synthesis in A. niger. Thus, vanillin production along
with the formation of intermediates like ferulic acid strongly supports
the significance of bioinformatics approaches in the reconstruction of
unexplored metabolic pathway. We found mainly hypothetical proteins
of A. niger which are in the same gene groups as real enzymes on the
basis of conserved protein domain and motifs. There are so many
missing enzymes in the biosynthetic pathways of eukaryotes, using such
strategies we can find more hypothetical proteins that may replace
missing enzymes information of important pathways. Validation of the
results by using additional information, such as microarray and
proteomic data analysis could be our future works.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We acknowledge Council of Scientific &amp; Industrial Research, New
Delhi Network Project'09 (CSIR-NWP09) for financial support at
Central Institute of Medicinal &amp; Aromatic Plants, Lucknow, India.

Citation:Srivastava et al, Bioinformation 4(7): 320-325 (2010)

Mass spectra (MS) of standard vanillin (A), Aspergillus mediated biotransformed extracellular vanillin (B), intracellular vanillin (C),
standard eugenol (D), eugenol extracellular (E) and eugenol intracellular (F).

Comparison of reference vanillin biosynthetic pathway of P. fluorescens with reconstructed pathway of A. niger. Values in parentheses
showed protein sequence similarity and BLAST E-value.

