Background
Age-related impairments in cognition and memory have been
known since ancient times, but the clinical pathological features
of the syndrome, now termed “Alzheimer׳s disease” (AD),
were not documented in the medical literature until the first
decade of this century. It is now established that AD is a
complex and genetically heterogeneous, neurodegenerative
disorder. It is the most common type of dementia. Dementia is
derived from the Latin word, [de-=out from + mentia=the
mind] means loss or impairment of mental powers due to a
disease. There is no cure for AD till today, however promising
research and development for early detection and treatment is
underway.

Plaques and Tangles: The Hallmarks of AD:
The brains of people with AD have an abundance of two
abnormal structures:
Amyloid Beta (Aβ) plaques build up between nerve cells. They contain deposits of (Aβ), a protein fragment.

Neurofibrillary tangles, which are twisted fibers that build up inside the nerve cell.




Amyloid Precursor Protein (APP) can be processed by at least
three secretases: α-, β-, and ϒ-secretases [,
]. Cleavage of APP
by an ‘α-secretase’ enzyme (a member of the ADAM family of
metalloproteases) [] occurs within the, Aβ sequence, and
results in the secretion of an approx. 100 kDa N-terminal
fragment []. On the other hand, intact, Aβ is derived from APP
by cellular processing pathways that involve the excision of the,
Aβ region by the sequential action of ‘β,-’ and ‘γ-secretase’
enzymes, possibly in distinct subcellular compartments 
[]. β-
secretase (a membranebound aspartyl protease also called
BACE) cleave the ectodomain of APP, resulting in the shedding
of APPsα and APPsβ (12 kDA). The 12-kd fragment may then
undergo γ -secretase cleavage within the hydrophobic
transmembrane domain at either valine 710, alanine 712, or
threonine 713 to release the 40, 42, or 43 residue Aβ peptides.
The strongest evidence that abnormal proteolytic processing
and increased Aβ generation are central to the disease process
comes from studies of very rare inherited forms of AD [].

Amyloid-β Peptide Conformations: Monomers:
The Aβ is a peptide that is ubiquitously and normally
expressed in humans predominately in two forms, 39- and 43-
amino acids in length (Aβ40 and Aβ42, respectively) [,
].
Monomers are about 1.0 ± 0.3 nm in size, with a molecular
weight of: 4329.9 Da for Aβ (1-40) and 4514.1 Da for Aβ (1-42).
Monomers present mostly random coils and α-helix secondary
structures. Two α-helical regions exist at residues 8-25 and 28-
38, and these regions are separated by a flexible hinge. The rest
of the peptide adopts random coil-like conformation [].

Common Pathways of Aggregation amyloid-β peptide:
The earliest event in the process of aggregation is the formation
of dimmers. Aβ derived from a segment of APP is believed to
be predominantly α-helical in its native state. On the other
hand, monomeric Aβ is largely conformed as random coil in
solution. The formation of Aβ dimmers coincides with the
adoption of partial β structure. The Aβ dimmers assemble into
higher order aggregates or oligomers, since there is a
remarkable increase in the amounts of higher order aggregates
and a decrease in the amount of dimmers. These higher order
Aβ aggregates are protein micelles with a hydrophobic core
and a polar exterior that appear as 3 nm spherical particles
determined by atomic force or electron microscopy These
higher order Aβ aggregates are protein micelles with a
hydrophobic core and a polar exterior that appear as 3 nm
spherical particles determined by atomic force or electron
microscopy. At later times, these spherical shape particles
appear to form curvilinear strings or “protofibrils”. The
protofibrils undergo a conformation change to form the
straight, unbranched mature fibrils. Once the amyloid fibril
lattice has been established, the fibril can grow by the addition
of Aβ monomer or dimmer at the ends of the fibril. The higher
order aggregates have molecular weights ranging from
approximately 105 to 106 Da and with an average size
corresponding to approximately 24 monomers. Aβ oligomers
that appear as spherical particles are approximately 3 nm in
diameter and have the characteristics of a protein amphipathic,
since it lowers the surface tension of water. At longer
incubation times, the oligomers also appear to co-aggregate to
form curvilinear fibrils with a characteristic beaded appearance.
The spherical oligomers and protofibrils appear to be
intermediates in the pathway of fiber formation because they
disappear as mature fibrils accumulate and the rate of
monomer dissociation from them is too slow to account for
fibril growth. The transition appears to involve a major
conformational change, because fluorescence quenching
analysis indicates that the carboxyl terminus is highly shielded
from the aqueous solvent in the soluble oligomeric state,
whereas it is exposed to the solvent in the fibrillar state. Once
the amyloid fibril lattice has been established, it can grow by
the addition of monomers onto the ends of the fibrils 
[].
Molecular simulations offer a direct means of accessing the
conformational states of the Aβ peptides in aqueous media. MD
studies have suggested that Aβ peptides, rather than being
entirely disordered, are usually able to sample sequencespecific
secondary structures. Using chemical shifts calculated
from replica exchange molecular dynamics simulations, Wood
and Rothlisberger investigated the differences observed
between theoretical studies and experiments. They showed that
the assigned random coil structures often derive from an
averaging of β-sheet, α-helical and random coil structures 
[].
Insertion of a bulky group or proline as β-sheet breaker within
the self-recognition-derived peptide sequenc, KLVFF, has been
demonstrated as effective in inhibiting amyloid aggregation.
Furthermore, peptidic inhibitors were also reported that via
stabilization of the helical structure in residues 13−23 of Aβ
prevented the formation of neurotoxic aggregates [,
].

Methodology
Sequence &amp; Structure:
Solution NMR structure PDB 1IYT was taken from the RCSB
Protein Data and employed as starting configurations for the
MD simulations and other analysis ().

NetPhos Server &amp; Phosphorylation:
The identification of the phosphorylation sites of Aβ was
carried out using NetPhosK 1.0 (Blom et al., 1999), and NetPhos
2.0 sever (Blom et al.,2004) (). These two prediction
programmes employ neural network based algorithms
prediction processes which are based on the evolutionary
information obtained from sequence similarity of the
phosphorylation site and taxonomy. The NetPhosK 1.0 is a
kinase specific eukaryotic phosphorylation site predictions
server. The kinase predictions are verified with homologues
phosphorylation sites obtained from other protein homologues
from higher eukaryotes. The NetPhos 2.0 server is a generic
(non kinase specific) phosphorylation predictions server and
perform the predictions for serine, threonine and tyrosine
phosphorylation sites in protein/peptides. The input sequences
of any protein/peptide in the one-letter amino acid code in
FASTA format can be used for carrying out the predictions. The
instructions for the usage of the programme are provided with
the respective tools. In-silico phosphorylation of Aβ was done
using ArgusLab 4.0.1. and also by making changes in the
coordinate file.

Mutations &amp; Hydrophobicity:
The Aβ was mutated at residues 19, 21 and 41 using Swiss-
PdbViewer 4.0.3. The energy of the mutant structure was
minimised. The most probable binding sites for Aβ and its
phosphorylated and mutant form was analysed using PPI-Pred
(http://bmbpcu36.leeds.ac.uk/ppi_pred). The hydrophobicity
comparison between the three forms was carried out using
chimera-1.6.2.

Simulation:
Three molecular dynamic simulations, one for each form of Aβ
was performed for 25 ns using GROMOS96. GROMOS ffG53a6
force field was used. The peptide was cantered in a cubic
simulation box with a 1 nm distance allowed between the
peptide and the edges of the box treated with periodic
boundary conditions. The particle mesh Ewald method was
employed for treating long-range electrostatics with a 1.4 nm
cutoff for calculating short-range forces. After steepest descent
energy minimization in vacuo, the box was solvated with the
SPC explicit water model, and Na+ and Cl− ions were added to
obtain a NaCl concentration of 150 mM and to achieve charge
neutrality. The solvated peptide was then minimized using
both steepest descent and conjugate gradient energy
minimization methods. We performed a 100 ps equilibration
dynamics (NVT/NPT) in which the water molecules were
allowed to equilibrate around the restrained peptide atoms, in
the process removing bad contacts and bringing the system
near equilibrium conditions for the subsequent production MD
run. For the equilibration step, the system was coupled to a
Berendsen thermostat and barostat. The restraints were
subsequently turned off, and a 25 ns production run was
performed at 300 K in an NPT ensemble with temperature and
pressure modulated by coupling to a Nosé−Hoover thermostat
and a Parrinello−Rahman barostat, respectively. The neighbor
list was generated every 10 ps, with a cutoff of 1.4 nm, and
coordinates were saved every 20 ps. Pymol was used for the
visualization of the simulation results.

Secondary Structure:
Dictionary of Secondary Structure of Proteins (DSSP)
(http://2struc.cryst.bbk.ac.uk/about/) was used to analysise
the secondary structure conformation of the wildtype and
mutant Aβ after simulation.

Results
Prediction of putative phosphorylation sites of Aβ:
The preliminary identification of the putative phosphorylation
sites of Aβ and identification of the responsible kinases were
carried out by in silico analysis using freely available world
wide web (www) based Netphos2.0 computational tool
(www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/NetPhos). The results from the in
silico analysis indicate that Ser-8, Ser-26 and Tyr-10 residues
might be potential phosphorylation sites in Aβ sequence. The
serine at 8th position had the highest prediction score of 0.963.
The serine at 26th position had a prediction score of 0.787. The
tyrosine at 10th position has a score of 0.870 ()

Phosphorylation of Aβ:
The Aβ sequence contains two serine residues at 8th and 26th
position, a tyrosine residue at 10th position which could
possibly undergo phosphorylation. The primary goal of this
work was to identify the role of phosphorylation in Aβ
aggregation and pathogenesis of AD. Therefore, investigations
were carried out to predict/identify/determine putative
phosphorylation sites of Aβ. Phosphate group was added on
serine 8 using ArgusLab (). PPI-pred analysis shows
that the binding patch is increased (red) in case of pAβ which
depicts that pAβ will interact more efficiently ().
Phosphorylation of amyloid beta increases the hydrophobicity
of the binding site (black circles) which means self aggregation
of the peptide will be enhanced. RED and ORANGE regions
are hydrophobic ().

Discussion
The current investigation was aimed at understanding the role
of extracellular phosphorylation and mutation of Aβ peptide in
aggregation. The aggregation of Aβ peptides is significantly
related to the pathogenesis of neuronal degeneration in AD.
Despite many previous studies on the structural analysis of Aβ
aggregates, the precise mechanism has not yet been clarified.
To obtain information on the structure of Aβ42 fibrils, we
performed in-silico phosphorylation as well as proline
replacement in Aβ peptide. The aggregative ability of the
modified forms was analysed by hydrophobicity comparison
and molecular dynamics. The analysis gave an insight into the
role of phosphorylation at serine 8 which is capable of
enhancing the propensity of Aβ to adopt a β-sheet rich
conformation due increase in the hydrophobicity in binding
sites. The phosphorylation induced β-sheet rich structures may
accelerate the formation of small oligomeric aggregates that
might seed aggregation into larger oligomeric and fibrillar
assemblies. Phosphorylation of Ser8 negatively regulates Aβ
degradation. It decreases the clearance by microglial cells and
thus promotes its aggregation. Thus the inhibition of
extracellular Aβ phosphorylation might play a role in the
therapy and/or prevention of AD.

This analysis also sheds light on the effect of mutation in Aβ.
Proline-substituted mutants of Aβ42 were formed in-silico and
their aggregative ability was studies using MD simulation. The
analysis revealed that F19P-, and F21P-Aβ42 did not form β-
sheet therefore their aggregative ability was reduced. Whereas
Aβ42 formed β-sheets thus they aggregated far more rapidly
than the mutant forms.

Previous studies revealed that the C-terminal two residues of
Aβ42 play a critical role in its aggregative ability and
neurotoxicity. Weinreb et al. proposed the “hypothesis of
hydrophobic cluster,” stating that hydrophobic interaction
among the side chains at the C terminus induces aggregation.
In this hypothesis, Ile-41 is incorporated in the hydrophobic
core formed by Leu-34 and Met-35. To confirm the role of the
hydrophobic side chains at the C terminus of Aβ42, the
hydrophilic threonine mutants at positions 41 or 42 (I41T- and
A42T-A_42) were prepared and examined for their aggregative
ability and neurotoxicity. Both I41T- and A42T-Aβ42
aggregated rapidly similar to wild-type Aβ42. Substitution with
Thr did not abolish their cytotoxic effects [].

Thus in this work C-terminal residue Ile 41 was also replaced
by proline to find out whether C-terminal residues participates
in the β-sheet formation. MD simulation was performed for the
mutant to test the aggregative ability and neurotoxicity. The
analysis revealed that the mutant did not form β-sheet
therefore their aggregative ability was reduced. However, the
C-terminal structure in the Aβ40 aggregation model is quite
different from that of Aβ42. Our analysis data indicated that the
C-terminal residues adopt a β-sheet structure thus helps in
aggregation because of which Aβ40 aggregates far more slowly
than Aβ42.

Conclusion
Beta sheet is responsible for the formation of aggregates of Beta
Amyloid (Aβ) in the Brain cells and since Proline (P) is a Beta
sheet breaker, so Proline was used in order to reduce the Beta
sheet formation and thus to reduce its aggregation too 
(). Simulation of Wild type Beta amyloid at 25 nano second by
using Gromacs shows that Beta sheet is formed at the rate of
9.5% while for mutant Beta Amyloid i.e. F19P, F21P and I41P,
Beta sheet formation was decreased to Zero ( &amp; 
).
Thus mutation (substitution of Proline) at position 19, 21 and 41
show the null Beta sheet formation thus resulting to no
aggregation of Beta Amyloid and thus can be employed for the
treatment of Alzheimer disease.

Citation:Singh et al, Bioinformation 10(9): 569-574 (2014)

Amyloid Beta sequence and structure

In silico analysis of putative phosphorylation sites of
Aβ: Protein sequences of human Aβ1-42 sequences were
analyzed by using NetPhos 2.0 computational prediction tool
(www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/NetPhos). The result from
NetPhosK contains three parts for each of the protein/peptide
sequence analyzed. The first part indicates the name, length of
the aa sequence and predicted phospho sites (a). The second
part shows the predicted phospho residues, their positions in
the sequence and the respective phospho prediction score (b).
The third part shows the graphical illustrations of
phosphorylation potential of predicted phospho sites (c).

In silico phosphorylation of Aβ. Phosphate group was
added on serine 8 using ArgusLab and making changes in the
coordinate file. The above figure shows phosphorylated and
non phosphorylated Aβ.

PPI-Pred Analysis- Shows that the binding patch is
increased (red) in case of pAβ which depicts that pAβ will
interact more efficiently.

Hydrophobicity comparision: Phosphorylation of
amyloid beta increases the hydrophobicity of the binding site
(black circles) which means self aggregation of the peptide will
be enhanced. RED and ORANGE regions are hydrophobic
(UCSF Chimera Version. 1.6.2)

Residues 19, 21, and 41 are replaced by PROLINE to
study the effect of mutants (Arguslab 4.0..1) and Comparing the
hydrophobicity of the wildtype and mutants in UCSF Chimere
Vers;ion. 1.6.2 revelated that hydrophobicity of self-recognition
site of the peptide was reduced with might reduce their
aggregative ability.

Shows secondary structure transition in wild type, mutant F19P, mutant F21P, MUTANT 141P respectively during 25ns
MD Simulations using the GROMS forcefiedl ffG53a6. Thr helical peptide is converting into parallel beat sheet. The three state
Composition was predicted using DSSP server. (http://2struc.cryst.bbk.ac.uk/twostruc).

RMSD׳s of the wild type, mutant F19P, mutant F21P, mutant 141P respectively trajectories plotted vs time and RMSF plot
for each residue of wild type, mutant F21P, mutant 141P respectively.

