Background
Viruses have always been a major cause for a large number of infectious
diseases. Furthermore, recent emergences of new viral diseases have been of
concern in normal human activities. Molecular knowledge of viral protein is
thus seen to play an important role for developing improved protein-based
vaccines, designing novel anti-viral agents and understanding the entry
mechanisms of viruses. Although there exists numerous databases and
resources for virus structure information, a comprehensive viral protein
structural database is unavailable till the date which can provide detailed
sequential as well as structural information on each viral protein (see
). 
ViperDB [], VIDA 
[], VirusMint 
[], and
PhEVER [] 
are the few databases available online for viral proteins. ViperDB
archives the icosahedral virus capsid structures, whereas VIDA incorporates
open reading frames of animal virus proteins. The VirusMint database contains
protein interactions between viral and human proteins from 490 unique viral
proteins of more than 110 different strains. PhEVER is a recently developed
database that aims to provide accurate evolutionary and phylogenetic
information for the analysis of virus-virus and virus-host lateral gene transfer.
There is currently no unique resource available till the date for viral protein
structure along with their detailed annotated binding interaction information.
To address this problem, we have developed VPDB as a comprehensive
derived database from the analysis of a large set of viral proteins obtained from
PDB [], PDBsum 
[], and UniProtKB 
[]. VPDB comprises of derived data
from viral proteins designed to serve as a single-stop solution for retrieval and
analysis of viral proteins from all the viral groups and species whose 3-
dimensional structure has been solved and present in PDB.

Database design
VPDB is based on three layer structure, namely data layer, middle layer and
presentation layer. Data layer is consisted of MySQL, whereas middle layer
comprises server side PHP and Java scripts. User friendly web based online
presentation layer was developed using PHP, Java, HTML and CSS. The
database system is implemented in Red Hat (Linux). It employs Apache as a
web-server.

Result and Discussion
VPDB is a user friendly database, which allows the user to input their query
text and accordingly select the query type ( PDB IDs or Keywords, Author
name or Title of the article and Experimental methods) in order to retrieve the
related information from the database. Query related hits are displayed in a
result page. User can then select the protein of interest by selecting PDB IDs
() for further detailed information.

Database description
Result page has been further classified into nine different tabs. Each tab has its
own web page that provides a larger set of data. Summary tab contains the
summary of the five sub categories under the five sub headings such as
molecular summary, structural summary, experimental details, general
annotation and citation (). Sequence tab contains information about
the protein sequence, sequence length, chain type, source method, protein
sequence in fasta format and UniProtKB reference. Furthermore, secondary
structure of protein has been computed using DSSP server 
[] for the secondary
structural analysis of proteins. Knowledge of the binding pocket is also well
known to play an important role for drug designing and existing drug
refinement. To make VPDB more comprehensive, the largest binding pocket is
identified from the CASTp server based upon the area-volume, although the
result shows high but not absolute correlation between pocket volume, and
binding affinities. MolProbity tab contains the MolProbity Ramachandran
analysis for the three-dimensional protein. It is a web based tool offering
quality validation for three-dimensional structure of proteins. The LigPlot tab
contains the name of ligand, LigPlot and Nucplot interaction data 
().
Three java based open-source tools Jmol, WebMol and STRAP has been
incorporated in the database for tertiary structure analysis. These tools require a
java-enabled browser. Reference tab summarizes the detailed literature
information obtained from PubMed. Moreover, Quick links tabs and download
tab has been provided for other related database links and to download the
database files for viral protein respectively.

Further, for the comparison of viral proteins with the other database, VSE
(Virus Search Engines) offers search tools to retrieve the data instantly from
source databases. All these information embedded in a single database makes
VPDB a better resource for viral protein analysis in comparison to other
available virus databases. We believe that VPDB, due to its rich information
content will be a useful and novel resource for researchers in the field of
structural virology providing an insight into the molecular mechanisms brought
about by different viral proteins.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors would like to thanks the anonymous reviewers for their valuable
comments and Department of Information Technology (DIT), Government of
India for their financial support.

Citation:Sharma et al, Bioinformation 6(8): 324-326 (2011)

A snapshot of VPDB web interface, showing detailed results with 
various tabs and options. (a) the list of the hits as a result of a given query for HIV
virus, (b) Summary tab: It contains the detailed information of the selected 
protein from the list (1A1T), (c) Sequence tab: It contains the sequence information,
secondary structure and 3D model, (d) Methodology tab: Parameters for the 3 
Dimensional protein building method, (e) MolProbity tab,(f) Ligplot tab, (g)
Reference tab: It contains the journal article in detail, (h) Quick links tab, and (i) Download tab.

