Background
Staphylococcus aureus can colonize and survive in a wide variety
of environmental niches. It is capable of causing a range of mild
to life-threatening diseases, including septicaemia, meningitis,
toxic shock syndrome, food poisoning and skin abscesses 
[]. It
colonizes tissues using a repertoire of virulence determinants
that includes cell surface-associated protein, as well as
extracellular proteins. One of the extracellular proteins is α-
amylase secreted by the bacteria. α-amylase is randomly cleaves
the 1,4-α-D-glycosidic linkages between adjacent glucose units
to yield smaller starches and ultimately Maltrotriose, maltose,
amylose, glucose and limit dextrin from amylopectin. These
sugars are further converted to glucose-6-phosphate; this very
step is the basis for the synthesis of exopolysaccharide matrix,
Polysaccharide intracellular adhesion (PIA), and thus finally
leading to Biofilm formation. Biofilms are defined as
communities of microorganisms that are encased in a selfsynthesized
extracellular polymeric matrix (EPS) and grow
attached to a biotic or abiotic surface []. Staphylococcal biofilms
have a significant impact on human health [] as they
frequently exhibit an enhanced pathogenic capability relative to
bacteria in solution by virtue of their sessile behaviour,
increased resistance to antimicrobial agents, and the potential
for detachment and distal embolization of large biofilm
fragments [].

α-amylases are classified as family 13 of the glycosyl hydrolases
which have similar structures and catalytic sites and the same
catalytic mechanisms []. In general they are composed of three
domains. Domain A central barrel containing the active site
residues and chloride ion binding site, domain B a long loop
region inserted between third β strand and the α-helix of
domain A, that contains calcium binding site and domain C a
terminal β-sheet domain consisting of a motif which appears to
show some variability in sequence and length between
amylases according to the organism [].

The kinetics of α-amylases varies distinctly different among
bacteria for example in case of Psuedoalteromonas arctica and
Bacillus subtilis the kinetics of α-amylase showed Km of 7.28
mg/ml; 2.68 mg/ml and Vmax 13.07 (mg/ml)mg/min;
1.773U/ml/min respectively [,
]. The α-amylase gene from
Bacillus stearothermophilus was expressed in S. aureus and
secreted in to the culture filtrate. All staphylococcal species were
able to secrete α-amylase, since more than 80% of the enzyme
activity was found in the culture supernatant [] making very
important role in this human pathogen, large amounts of
monosaccharides which may have profound role in the
pathogenicity of S. aureus therefore; the present study is
focussed on characterization of α-amylase from Staphylococcus
aureus ATCC 12600 and its comparison with Bacillus subtilis and
Streptococcus bovis α-amylases.

Methodology
Staphylococcus aureus ATCC12600 was grown on modified Baird
Parkar Agar media at 37°C. After overnight incubation single
black shiny colony with distinct zone was picked and cultured
in Brain Heart Infusion (BHI) broth at 37°C. Thus, grown S.
aureus ATCC12600 culture was used to characterize α-amylase
enzyme and extraction of chromosomal DNA [].

α-amylase enzyme assay:
The α-amylase activity was measured with the Dinitro salycylic
acid (DNS) according to the method described protocol by 
[]
using 10mg/ml starch dissolved in a 50 mM phosphate buffer
pH 6.9 and 42° C. One unit of amylase activity was defined as
the amount of enzyme that released 1mg of reducing end
groups per minute at 42°C. Maltose was used as standard of
reducing end sugar.

α-amylase gene was amplified from S. aureus chromosomal
DNA using the primers α-amylase -F: 5'-
CATGAATAAGCAATGG-3' and α-amylase -R: 5'-
TTAATTTAGTTCGAT 3' which were designed from the α-
amylase gene sequence of S. aureus Mu50 strain 
[]. The
reaction mixture contained in a final volume of 50µl which
consisted of 100ρmoles of each primers, 100µmol of dNTPS mix,
10 mM Tris- HCl (pH 8.8), 1.5 mM MgCl2, 1U of hot start Taq
DNA Polymerase (Bangalore Genei pvt ltd) and 0.25µg of
chromosomal DNA. Amplification parameters included an
initial denaturation step for 10 min at 94°C; 35 cycles of 94°C for
60 seconds of denaturation, 60 seconds of annealing at 33°C and
100 seconds of amplification at 72°C which was followed by a
final extension step at 72°C for 5 min in a Mastercycler gradient
Thermocycler (Eppendorf). Amplified products were purified
with NP-PCR Purification kit, Taurus Scientific, USA and were
sequenced by dye terminating method at MWG Biotech India
Ltd. Thus, obtained α-amylase gene sequence was deposited at
Gen Bank(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/HM067708).

Cloning, expression and purification of α-amylase gene:
α-amylase gene was cloned in the Sma I site of pQE 30 and
transformed into E.coli DH5α. The resultant clone was named as
PLAM1. The insert in the clone was sequenced and after
ascertaining the sequence, the α-amylase was over expressed
with 1mM IPTG. The r α-amylase was purified from the
cytosolic fraction of PLAM 1 clone by passing through nickel
metal chelate agarose column (by following QIA express
expression system protocol) and protein was eluted using
300mM immidazole hydrochloride the product was analysed
on 10% SDS-PAGE [,
]. The enzyme kinetics of purified α-
amylase was performed as described earlier in section.

In silico structure prediction:
As the α-amylase structure of S. aureus and Streptococcus bovis
were not available so far in the PDB we have constructed 3D
structure using homology modelling method. The three
dimensional models of S. aureus and Streptococcus bovis α-
amylase was constructed by using Modeller 9v8 tool. The S.
aureus α-amylase protein sequence was subjected to BLASTp
[] against PDB and the crystal structure of a putative α-
amylase from Geobacillus sp (PDB ID: 2ZE0A) showing the
maximum identity of 52% was chosen as template. Similarly the
α-amylase of Streptococcus bovis was subjected to BLASTp
against PDB and the crystal structure of putative α-amylase
from (PDB ID:1WP6) showed 48% identity with maltohexose
producing α-amylase from alkalophilic Bacillus sp. Alignment
files were generated in PIR format for Query and template
sequences using ClustalX tool []. Python scripts were written
and 20 best models for each organism were generated. The
model with the lowest discrete optimized protein energy
(DOPE) score was selected for further analysis.

Validation of S. aureus and Streptococcus bovis α-amylases Model:
The stereo chemical quality of the predicted model was
validated by PROCHECK and ProSA web servers. Both can
read the atomic co-ordinates of the 3D model and judge the
quality of the structure. Ramachandran plot generated from
PROCHECK [] validation server was used to access the
quality of the model by looking into the allowed and
disallowed regions of the plot. A Z-score value was generated
from ProSA web server that can determine the overall quality of
the model and its identity nearest to crystal structure.

Superimposition of S. aureus α-amylase:
The comparative structural prediction studies to ensure the
identity and variability of S. aureus α-amylase structure with
other α-amylase structures were carried out using MATRAS
(MArkovian TRAnsition of Structure) program. This program
has unique features where it can define the structural similarity
score as the log-odds of two probabilities using a scheme
similar to Dayhoff's amino acid substitution score. In the
program we have assigned structures by inputting the PDB
code and by uploading the PDB format files in the user's
computer. An alignment, superimposed structures and various
kinds of structural similarities, such as raw score, RMSD values
were predicted for the following structures. The validated 3D
model of S. aureus α-amylase was super imposed with available
and built structures of α-amylases from other bacteria such as
Bacillus subtilis (1BAG), Streptococcus bovis (built structure).

Result &amp; Discussion
In S. aureus cell wall biosynthesis is a crucial factor for its
survival in the host and in the formation of small colony
variants, which is one of the key factors observed in the host
with increased relapsed episodes of S. aureus infections 
[,
]
this is probably augmented in S. aureus due to the high activity
of α-amylase which is secreted in the culture filtrate. This
increased production of monosaccharides elevates the glucose
levels which is phosphorylated by glk A [] in this pathogen
and is primarily utilized in the synthesis of PIA,
exopolysaccharides and in cell wall biosynthesis [,
,
]. This
in turn suppresses the TCA cycle resulting in reductive
conditions [,
] and in this situation rate of biofilm formation
is very high. This type of scenario is seen in all multi drug
resistant strains (MDR) and Vancomycin resistant strains
(VRSA) S. aureus [,
,
]. Therefore in the present study α-
amylase gene of S. aureus ATCC 12600 was cloned, sequenced
and expressed in E.coli DH5α, the resultant clone was named as
PLAM 1.

The α-amylase gene expression in PLAM 1 clone was obtained
by adding extra “ C ” residue in the 5' end of the forward primer
such that the gene is cloned in −1 frame in the Sma I site of pQE
30, and thereby, correct expression of enzyme could be
achieved [,
]. The insert in the PLAM 1 clone was confirmed
by sequencing and ascertaining the sequence which is the same
as the one deposited in the GenBank (accession number
HM067708). The α-amylase gene expression was induced with
1mM IPTG. The product of α-amylase was purified with nickel
metal chelate chromatography column and the pure
recombinant enzyme showed similar properties with that of
native α-amylase [,
]. The α-amylase identified in the
extracellular fraction of S. aureus ATCC 12600 showed an
enzyme activity of 0.0193±0.0015 mg/ml/min, Vmax
0.032±0.0036 (mg/ml)/mg/min and Km 11.57±0.409 mg/ml. The
pure recombinant α-amylase showed single band in SDS–PAGE
(10%) with a molecular weight of 58kDa, which is
corresponding to the insert cloned and monomeric size of the
protein (). The kinetics of pure recombinant α-amylase
was close to the secreted native α-amylase of S. aureus
ATCC12600  (see supplementary material) which are in
accordance with the results reported earlier [].

The sequence of S. aureus α- amylase (GenBank accession
number for amylase gene is HM067708) showed complete
homology with amylase gene of all the S. aureus strains
reported in the database. The multiple sequence alignment of α-
amylase protein sequence of S. aureus ATCC12600 showed
highly conserved regions with Bacillus subtilis and Streptococcus
bovis while very low identity in the sequence was observed with
both human salivary α- amylase (). As the crystal
structure of S. aureus α- amylase was not available hence in the
present study we have built the 3D structure using homology
modeling method using X-ray crystal structure of Geobacillus sp
as template which showed 52% identity. Similarly, the 3D α-
amylase for Streptococcus bovis was also constructed using the Xray
crystal structure of Alkalophilic Bacillus Sp as template
however, the comparative structural analysis showed extensive
variations as indicated from the RMSD values which also
correlated with the enzyme kinetic results of α-amylase 
 
(see supplementary material) &amp; ). These results also
suggest that in various MDR and VRSA strains of S. aureus α-
amylase expression may be critical in the colonization and rate
of biofilm formation.

Conclusion
S. aureus can colonize and adopt on any anatomical locales in
the human host for which the organism requires large amount
of monosaccharides which can be easily generated by α-
amylase. In this context this enzyme may be playing pivotal
role in the colonization and biofilm formation which are one of
the key factors in the pathogenesis of S. aureus.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This paper forms a part of Ph.D thesis work going to be
submitted to JNT University, Hyderabad- 500085, A.P, India.

Citation:Lakshmi et al, Bioinformation 9(6): 281-285 (2013)

Cloning of α-amylase gene from S.aureus ATCC 12600.
A. PCR amplification of α-amylase gene using α-amylase
primers from the S. aureus ATCC12600 following the method
described. Lane M molecular size marker obtained from
Bangalore genei pvt ltd, lane L1 and L2 PCR amplified
products. B. Schematic representation of pQE 30 plasmid
vector, C. Electrophoretogram showing the expression of
recombinant α-amylase from PLAM1clone in SDS-PAGE (10%).
Lane M: Molecular weight markers obtained from Bangalore
Genei Pvt ltd. Lane 1: induced cell lysate of PLAM1 clone Lanes
2 : uninduced cell lysate of PLAM1 clone. Lane 3: pure
recombinant α-amylase eluted from nickel metal chelate
chromatographic column.

Multiple Sequence alignment of S.aureus α-amylase with Bacillus subtilis and Streptococcus bovis.

Structural comparison of S. aureus α-amylase with
Bacillus subtilis and Streptococcus bovis.

