Background
Some prokaryotic genomes contain genomic sequences with
different patterns than the remaining parts of the host genomes.
Such differences may include GC content bias 
[], codon usage
bias [,
], k-mer nucleotide frequency bias 
[], and the
existence of mobile genes such as integrase genes and
transposes genes []. 
In some other cases, such regions are also
bordered by transfer RNAs (t-RNA) []. The abnormal regions
that contain such types of characteristics are known as Genomic
Islands (GIs). Research on identifying genomic islands has
become more important as the scientific community can be
significantly benefitted from such findings. Biomedical
researchers and microbiologists can use the results to explain
the pathogenicity of organisms, or discover industrial
important metabolic components from GIs. Based on such
findings, pharmacists can use them to design corresponding
vaccines and antibiotics, and eventually promote
pharmaceutical companies to produce medicines at a large
scale. As it is generally believed that each genome contains
unique genomic sequence signature, some computation tools
based on sequence signature have been developed. Such
sequence composition based tools include AlienHunter 
[],
COLOMBO SIGI-HMM [], GIDetector 
[], IslandPath 
[],
INDeGenIUS [], and PAI-IDA 
[]. Recent studies have
shown that none of these tools can predict GIs accurately in all
genomes []. 
Hence it necessary to develop a computational
framework that produces a better prediction results by
combining the results of existing programs 
[]. We have
recently developed a tool, EGID, which has shown to optimize
the results of individual tools, and produce a better prediction
result for all genomes [].

We realize that the majority users of these tools are biologists.
Unfortunately, these programs are command line based, and
different programs usually require different inputs to predict
GIs, thus making it difficult for such group of people to use
these tools for genomic island analyses. To this end, we have
developed a user friendly graphic user interface, GIST, which
contains a suite of tools for GI prediction. GIST provides a
feature that allows user to download the necessary files
required to run the tools automatically from the FTP server of
the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI)
ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/Bacteria). Depending on the
user's interest, GIST allows the user to select any combination
of the tools, invokes and runs selected programs in the back
end, generates and organizes prediction results. We believe that
the development of GIST should benefit the scientific
communities for easy use in studying genome evolutions and
gene transfer mechanisms.

Software Input and Output
GIST includes five individual GI prediction programs, as well
as the optimization tool EGID, which uses the prediction results
of any combination of individual programs as the inputs, and
produces consensus predicted GIs. The GUI layout of GIST is
shown in . 
GIST requires five different types of files for
any single genome for GI prediction. These file types include
FNA, FAA, FFN, GBK and PTT, where the required information
such as k-mers, G+C content, codon usage, and dinucleotide
frequency can be extracted. For the same genome, all of these
files need to be saved in the same directory that is used as the
input for that genome. If users are only interested in a particular
program, they can select the program from the ‘Programs’
panel and hit the ‘Start Prediction’ button. It is important to
note that if EGID is selected, it executes other tools along with
itself thereby produces the optimized prediction results.

Users can specify the output folder location; otherwise the
output files are saved into the default output directory. The
output file for each tool is a text file containing the start and
stop positions of the genomic island regions for the input
genome. For the detailed usage of GIST for GI prediction, please
refer to the user guide of our website
(http://www5.esu.edu/cpsc/bioinfo/software/GIST).

Automatic Genome Download Feature
One of the most important features of GIST is the functionality
of automatic connecting and downloading of the required
genomic files through the FTP server of NCBI, as shown in
(). 
The panel ‘FTP Directory’ contains the tree
representation of the organisms available in the FTP server of
NCBI. User can select any genome that belongs to any of the
organisms by exploring the tree node of that organism.

To add a genome into the download list, the user can double
click on that genome name or use the ‘Add’ button in the
‘Add/Remove’ after selecting that genome. On the other hand,
to remove any genome from the download list, the user can use
the ‘Remove’ button. When the ‘Start Download’ button is
pressed, necessary files of all genomes in the download list are
downloaded automatically and the progress bar shows the
download progress status. Downloaded files are saved into the
corresponding directory of each genome. User can specify the
directory location to save the downloaded files. By default, this
program saves the downloaded files in the ‘Download’
directory (GIST_1.0/Download) if the location is not specified
by the user.

Caveat and Future Development
The current version of GIST produces prediction results in text
file. In the next version, we will integrate the visualization
feature such as circular representation, so that users can easily
compare the results.

This research was partially supported by President Research
Fund, FDR major grant, and FDR mini grant at East
Stroudsburg University, USA.

Citation:Hasan et al, Bioinformation 8(4): 203-205 (2012)

Main window of the GIST tool.

Graphical User Interface to download genomes

