Background
Atrial fibrillation (AF) is a frequent chronic dysrythmia with an incidence that
                increases with age (&gt;40) []. Due to its medical and socio-economic impacts and, of the
                aging European/ Western /Japanese populations, it is projected to become an
                increasing burden on most health care systems []. Besides the obvious medical emergencies, the
                costs include the chronic corrective therapies (pacemakers, surgical ablations,
                etc.), the severe complications (thromboembolisms, strokes e.a., []) and various other
                hospitalisation costs. Atrial fibrillation is a multi-factorial disease for which
                the identification of subtypes - molecular categories - will be both useful and
                needed to provide better and cost-effective therapies [] and to improve the quality of
                future clinical studies.

With the advent of high-throughput molecular analyses, the classical paradigm of a
                failing gene corresponding to an altered/pathological phenotype is being lost. It is
                widely accepted that an altered genotype can lead to a healthy phenotype via
                numerous compensation mechanisms, but it is becoming also apparent - and much less
                known - that even healthy genotypes could lead to defective/pathological phenotypes.
                Indeed a given cell phenotype could be considered as a state more akin to the orbit
                of a chaotic strange attractor than a definitive frozen combination of gene
                expression []. There
                seem to exist many ways to dissociate genotypes from phenotypes [], hence the conceptual
                impossibility of a bona fide control group. In this context of a
                blur between the notions of normal and pathological phenotypes, novel analytical
                approaches are warranted based on the broad concepts of system biology
                    [].

To provide evidence of robust/reliable stratification based on molecular profiles is
                one of the biggest challenges in molecular medicine. Exploratory tools from
                multivariate statistics and data mining offer solutions, but often miss a biological
                and physiological focus, and neglect the dynamic reality of the biological system.
                As part of a series of feasibility studies, we are using an internal contrast
                analysis - i.e without comparison with a control population - of an existing
                micro-array data-set from chronic AF patients [] in which up-regulation of metabolism was found
                to be a key marker. Prior to their chronic stage where tissue remodelling acts as a
                positive feedback for the phenotype, AF patients enter this pathology either via
                ischemia-related, work-load and hypertension, and/or degenerative problems, each of
                which can be potentially traced at a molecular level.

Methodology
Datasets
We used the RMA (Robust Multichip Average, []) normalized gene expression micro-array data
                    set for 4 series of probes linked to either apoptosis, glycolysis, OXPHOS and
                    MAP kinase pathway. Those probe sets were selected because of their potential
                    physiopathogenic links with the entryways toward AF: apoptosis (remodeling), MAP
                    kinase (cell and tissular differentiation), OXPHOS (ability to sustain workload
                    including high tensions), glycolysis (ischemic or pre-ischemic situations). The
                    data were obtained from 10 patient samples in an Affymetrix -set (geo_accession
                    #GSE2240).

Gene selection
Bioconductor, version 2.2 [] and R, version 2.7.1 (packages: hgu133b, KEGG, annotate,
                    cluster) provided the tools to select functional category-related genes that are
                    prevalent in the KEGG database (function hgu133bPATH2PROBE).

Contrast analysis
Overall similarity in genetic profiles between patients was apparent from the
                    dendrograms after hierarchical clustering (HC) [] based on the
                    “dissimilarity” correlation matrix. To select genes with
                    high contrast value between all patients a principal component analysis (PCA)
                        [] was
                    done. Gene probes were selected based on the loadings vector of the first and
                    second principal component. Selected genes were further classified according to
                    absolute univariate expression levels. We found contrast mostly interpretable
                    for genes with (i.) low variance in between-probe (ii.) high difference between
                    patient groups and (iii.) high deviation from the over-all median patient value
                    for a given gene.

Discussion
Micro-array analysis is a high-throughput technique, which allows probing the
                expression levels of thousands of genes simultaneously. Though at first sight arrays
                provide a powerful tool, conclusions and robustness of the technique are still
                heavily debated and solutions are presented to address standardization of
                experimental conditions, calculation of proper sample size, pre-processing of data
                and statistical inference of gene signals, to name a few. Systems biology provides a
                useful framework, mainly addressing the “dynamics” and the
                concepts of normality, and of modularity in biological networks. In
                supra-ventricular arrhythmia, time-dependent changes for functional groups of genes
                were recently investigated in canine models [].

Barth and colleagues found that atrial tissue acquires ventricular characteristics,
                up-regulation of metabolic genes was also apparent in chronic AF patients. The
                multi-factorial pathophysiological patterns may come more apparent from a
                patient-centric viewpoint. Therefore we applied contrast analysis within the AF
                patient group, aiming at finding the genes for which divergence were maximal, and
                which contributed the most to the variations in the expression signals.

In , HC and PCA of AF patients based on
                the apoptotic gene set is illustrated. Based on gene expression profiles,
                multivariate analysis (HC and PCA) of patients revealed distinct clustering patterns
                of the patients in all 4 datasets. The most striking observation is the consistent
                grouping of 3 patients (patient id: 1, 2, 3) for the 4 datasets, clearly separated
                from the rest, and the isolation of one patient (patient id: 10), bearing little
                resemblance to all of the other AF patients. The analysis also revealed high
                similarity of another group (id: 5, 6, 9) in all datasets.

For all datasets a substantial proportion of the variance (54% till
                67%) in the dataset is captured in the first 2 principal components
                (cumulative proportion for apoptosis: 0.53 0.67, oxphos: 0.51 0.63, glycolysis: 0.31
                0.54, MAPK: 0.42 0.67). Gene probes with high discriminatory value were selected
                based on high loadings in PC1/2, either positive (+) or negative (-)
                (see Table 1 under ). These probes are likely to be the most relevant in terms of
                the between-patient contrast. It should be noted that genes are often mapped to
                multiple probesets. Affymetrix arrays such as the hgu133b are designed to target the
                600 bp at the 3' end of the transcript, not the start of the transcript. Therefore
                many-to-one mappings between probesets and genes are often due to alternative
                splicing, use of alternative poly (A) sites, or annotation errors [,]. This could add to the variations, a point we will
                discuss later.

We are especially interested in genes for which the expression range for all probes
                (i.e. with identical annotation), clearly differs among patients, and thus provide
                unambiguous discrimination between those patients. To identify such genes, we also
                explored the univariate expression levels of all probes. Doing so, we could identify
                3 types of genes. The genes for which all probe levels were markedly different
                between patients and displayed nearly no variance within a single patient, those
                were defined as Class I, and are reliable signals. The genes, for which the
                intra-patient variance of the expression levels between their various probes was
                large, were identified as Class II. For those, the high contrast was more likely due
                to the spread response instead of bona fide differences in
                expression levels; hence these are not correct signals. Then we also identified
                genes for which both a marked difference in levels between different patients could
                be recorded, and at the same time a large intra-patient variance for the response of
                gene expression for the various probes, those were termed Class III and could be
                considered acceptable signals. Hence we evidence that we could identify and classify
                36 different genes, which are reliable markers and could be used to categorize the
                patients. The split per pathological entryway was: for MAPK (8 class I, 0 class II,
                3 class III), for glycolysis (7, 0, 4), for OXPHOS (7,1,1) and for apoptosis (4, 2,
                2).

The Class II – i.e. the non-reliable and/or irrelevant markers – were GAPDH (glucose
                phosphate dehydrogenase), Acetyl-coA synthase 1 (whereas Acetyl-coA synthase 2 fell
                into class I), ADHFE (alcohol dehydrogenase), ENOβ3 (muscular isoform of
                    β˜enolase), PPP3R (protein phosphatase 3
                regulatory subunit α), CYC (cytochrome C). Surprisingly these are all
                metabolic markers.

A closer look at Class I markers reveals interesting facts (, PCA lower inset for an example). For instance, in 3
                patients (id:1,2,3), MAP3K16 levels - an apoptotic effector involved in the
                re-organization of actin filaments [] - are up-regulated and, this occurs in parallel with the
                marked up-regulation of the SOS1 gene - a well known guanine nucleotide exchange
                protein which links mitogen- activated kinase and cytoskeletal elements like actin.
                Hence these patients differ from all the others in that they are re-modelling their
                heart tissue. In those 3 patients, PPP3CA (the catalytic subunit of protein
                phosphatase A), (NDUFFS8) NADH-coQ reductase, and ubiquinol-cytochrome C reductase
                core protein II (UQCRC2) are also up-regulated. Those would reflect an enhanced
                electron transport chain activity. It is worth noticing that dehydrolipoamide
                dehydrogenase (DLD), a flavoprotein linked to electron transport and the Krebs cycle
                is also up-regulated. It could thus be concluded that these 3 patients are markedly
                different from a metabolic standpoint. The CFLAR (caspase 8 FADD-like apoptosis
                regulator and CASP8 (caspase 8 itself) are respectively up- and down regulated.
                CFLAR is transducing external triggering of apoptosis; this is coupled with the fact
                that effector caspases are not up-regulated and the fact that XIAP - a
                post-mitochondrial inhibitor of apoptosis - is normal. In contrast within 3 other
                patients (id: 5,6,8), XIAP is down-regulated, those latter patients are hence more
                apoptotic and less remodelling than the 3 former ones. The patients (id: 4, 5, 6)
                had marked increases in FG18 - a fibroblast growth factor isoform, important for
                cell proliferation and inflammation, and whose overexpression can lead to
                abnormalities - whereas patients (id: 1,2,3) had decreases. Once more, this is
                consistent with those 2 groups of patients being functionally very different.
                Another and potentially important marker distinguishing those two groups is the AKT3
                gene, a protein kinase B isoform with some oncogenic activity but selectively
                expressed in the heart []. It promotes cell growth and is known to have some
                cardioprotective effect during re-modelling, but a continuous overexpression would
                lead to dysfunctional maladaptive hypertrophy. Patients (id: 1, 2, 3) are
                up-regulated whereas patients (id:4,5,6) are down-regulated. The first group is
                hence cardio-protected vs. the second, but could also become more dysfunctional on
                the long term. At any rate AKT3 is likely to be an important follow-up marker. Two
                isoforms of aldolase (ALDOA and ALDOB, a glycolytic enzyme) showed an interesting
                pattern: all patients who were up for ALDOA were down for ALDOB and conversely, with
                the exception of 2 of the 10 patients (id: 1, 5). Noteworthy patient 10 was markedly
                different from all the other for most of the 36 markers we studied.

Conclusion
We aim for a reliable patient stratification based on molecular profiles without the
                use of a “normal” group. We showed that by contrast
                analysis; we could identify patient clusters and individual markers. By using
                objective criteria, those markers could be further appraised for their biological
                reliability. Even with a small cohort (10 AF patients in total), we could identify
                at least 2 markedly different sub-populations, which differed based on potential
                entryway into the disease. One group (id: 1,2,3) differs metabolically and
                functionally from another. While both groups have some apoptotic markers, their
                molecular context is highly different as the first had more MAP-kinase activation
                (hypertrophy) and effector caspases were less controlled in the second. We could
                also identify an interesting prognostic follow-up marker. However we have to
                highlight several caveats. There is a high variance between probes for one gene and
                hence quality control is warranted. This variance can arise from actual differences
                (alternate splices,…), problems on the DNA CHIP or in annotation. In our feasibility
                study, we face clear limitations, e.g. the number of patients is small and not all
                apoptosis genes are included (e.g. no VDAC's). However we showed that
                stratification is possible based on physiologically relevant gene sets. Genes with
                high contrast value in PCA are likely to give pathophysiological insight into
                “permanent” AF subtypes. It is our interest to extend this
                exploratory analysis with classification approaches using independent training and
                validation data sets. In a future programme we also like to contrast dynamic changes
                in expression patterns with a focus on AF entry point-related molecular signatures
                in a reductionist animal model.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Analysis of apoptosis gene set. HC (a) of AF patients shows 2 distinct
                        clusters of patients. PCA analysis (b) corroborates clear differentiation of
                        patient AF1-2-3 (dashed group). Inset: example of univariate expression
                        levels within patients of CFLAR (CASP8 and FADD-like apoptosis regulator), a
                        gene with highest loadings on PC1.

