Background
Enzymes from Extremophiles can be used extensively at industrial scale due to
their defying nature at various robust processing conditions. However, most of
the enzymes used in industrial processes are sourced from mesophiles and
show many advantages, but their usage in bioprocess has been gradually
decreasing due to their less stability at the extremes of temperature, pH and
ionic strength []. 
In this context, much attention has been given to cold active
enzymes as the efforts and cost cutting measures for downstream processing
are less compared with other enzymes []. It was reported that Psychrophiles
have the ability to degrade a wide range of polymeric substances and produce
various enzymes like amylases, cellulases, pectinases, β-Galactosidases,
oxidases, proteases and lipases etc. []. Cold adaptive enzymes catalyze the
reactions at low temperatures with higher specific activity. They possess
unique features when compared to thermophilic and mesophilic enzymes to
cope up with the cold environment that leads the researchers to explore these
enzymes for industrial applications. The enzyme β-Galactosidase (EC No.
3.2.1.23) hydrolyzes β (1→4) linkage in disaccharide lactose and liberates
glucose and galactose as products. It has been reported that 75% of adults show
decrease in lactase activity during adulthood which causes lactose intolerance
[]. 
Therefore, in present days the diary industries are mainly focusing on the
production of lactose free products at a cheaper cost. This enzyme has potential
application in dairy industry in removing lactose from milk and milk products
to enhance the digestibility as well as sweetness of milk. Its high specific
activity at low temperature is the main advantage and also it can be used while
the food is in transportation or in storage. The present study is mainly focused
on constructing a new 3D model of cold active β-Galactosidase enzyme from
psychrophile by computational approach which can be used in comparing the
relative affinities of enzyme towards different substrates (lactose, ONPG and
PNPG) by comparative docking studies against to its counter parts of
mesophilic and thermophilic enzymes.

Materials and Methodology
Retrieval of Sequences and Multiple sequence alignment
Amino acid sequence in the FASTA format for psychrophilic, (Accession No.
AJ131635.1_1) was retrieved from NCBI database, where as for mesophilic
and thermophilic enzymes the sequences were available in Protein Data Bank
(PDB) with PDB IDs 1f49 and 1kwk, respectively. Multiple sequence
alignment was carried out for all the three sequences using clustalW.

Homology Modeling
Psychrophilic amino acid sequence was searched against PDB using BLAST-P
[,
,
]
to identify the potential template structure for molecular
modelling. MODELLER 9v8 program was used for predicting the 3D model of
the enzyme [] 
and was subjected to PROCHECK [,
]and ProSA (Protein
Structure Analysis) to determine the stereo chemical quality of the structure.

Molecular docking studies
Preparation of protein structure
Modeled psychrophilic enzyme along with PDB structures of mesophilic
enzyme (1F49) and thermophilic enzymes (1kwk) were taken and hetero atoms
in the form of water molecules, bound ligands were removed. With the help of
Q-site finder, functional site amino acids were predicted for the enzyme.

Preparation of Ligand structures
The 3D structures of all the three substrates namely lactose, ortho-Nitrophenyl-
β-Galactoside (ONPG) and para nitro phenyl-β-D-Galactopyranoside (PNPG)
were obtained from the Chemspider database [].

Molecular Docking Studies
AutoDock 4.0 was used for docking simulation [,
,
] which
employs the preparation of receptor by adding hydrogens and assigning
Kollman charges, followed by conversion of PDB file to pdbqt. Ligands were
assigned with Gasteiger charges and non polar hydrogens. Docking simulations
were run using Lamarckian Genetic algorithm(LGA) which is known to be the
most efficient and reliable method of Auto Dock. The grid points for Autogrid
calculations were set to be 44 × 44 × 40 Å with the active site residues at the
centre of the grid box. The docking parameters were set to a LGA calculation
of 10,000 runs. The energy evaluations were set to 1,500,000 and 27,000
generations. Population size was set to 150 and the rate of gene mutation and
the rate of gene crossover were set to 0.02 and 0.8 respectively. The obtained
conformations were then summarized, collected and extracted by using
Autodock Tool.

Results and Discussion
Multiple sequence alignment
The psychrophilic and mesophilic enzymes showed 50.2% identity and 65.1%
similarity as when compare to psychrophilic and thermophilic enzymes which
showed 11.0% identity and 17.4% similarity. From the above results it was
clear that structurally, psychrophilic enzymes were more related to mesophilic
enzymes when compared to thermophilic enzymes.

Homology modeling of β-Galactosidase enzyme
Template structure for modeling the protein was searched through BLAST and
among all the hits obtained, PDB ID:1F49 was selected, having 0.0 E-value
Using this, a valid 3D structure was generated by the help of Modeler 9v8
(). The DOPE 
(Discrete optimized protein Energy) score values for all
the five models generated were ­113439.30469, ­112441.01563, ­
113630.60938, ­112431.86719 and ­113359.10938. Among all, the model
having lowest DOPE score (­113630.60938) was considered as the final model
(). 
The final model was confirmed and used for further studies as the
ProSA Z-score value of ­9.6 and 88% of favored region was obtained through
ramachandran plot ().

Validation of functional Site
Among the binding pockets obtained through Q-site finder, the related active
site amino acids were selected on the basis of available literature 
[] and the
residues in the active site were confirmed as Glu460, Glu536, Met501, Tyr502
and Arg387.

Molecular Docking Studies
Modeled psychrophilic, mesophilic and thermophilic enzymes were docked
against the three substrates viz., lactose (), ONPG and PNPG. It was
observed that the modeled enzyme of Psychrophilic origin has significantly low
binding energy values with all the three substrates (­20.18, ­39.24 and ­39.48
K.Cal/mole) when compared with mesophilic and thermophilic enzymes
(see ). The reasonable low binding energy
values of psychrophilic enzyme indicate that the ligands are in most favorable
region of the protein and that the enzyme has more affinity towards all the three
substrates when compared with enzymes from other origins.

Conclusion
From molecular Docking studies it was observed that the modeled enzyme has
good affinity towards substrates like lactose, ONPG and PNPG when compared
with mesophilic and thermophilic counterparts. Low binding energy values
with respect to psychrophilic enzymes indicates the high specificity of the
enzyme towards substrates at low temperatures. Moreover, the valid and stable
3D model of β-galactosidase from P. haloplanktis structure will help in further
in silico studies to evaluate the structural stability and provide better
understanding of topological parameters of the enzyme and molecular basis of
cold adaptation.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors thank the Department of Biotechnology, Govt. of India for the
financial assistance provided to carry out the project work. The authors would
also like to thank Acharya Nagarjuna University and R.V.R &amp; J.C. C.E.,
Guntur, India for providing the congenial environment and also for extending
the lab facilities to carry out the work.

Citation:Kumar et al, Bioinformation 6(8): 311-314 (2011)

Sequence alignment between Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis 
β -galactosidase and enzyme with templates 1F49 and 1BGL.

Modeled psychrophilic β -galactosidase enzyme

Ramachandran Plot showing different regions of the modeled
enzyme

Docking β- galactosidase against substrate lactose

