Background
Genomic copy number alterations such as gains or losses of chromosomal regions have been shown to be on the basis of many human pathologies. Classical approaches
to characterize these genetic aberrations used comparative genomic hybridisation (CGH), in which genomic DNA was hybridised to metaphase
chromosomes. [] Recently, the use of different types of microarrays to directly study genomic variations in DNA
copy number is becoming more and more popular. Such massive genomic approaches are known as array comparative genomic hybridisation, or Array CGH. []
These new technologies along with the use of expression arrays allow for a highly accurate characterisation of the dependence of gene expression on alterations in genomic
copy number. []

As in many genome-scale methodologies data analysis and, in particular, the biological interpretation of the results constitutes a well-known bottleneck. Specific
problems related to the analysis of Array CGH can be circumscribed mainly to two types: appropriate mapping and visualisation of the data onto the chromosomes, and
efficient copy number estimation. This last aspect has been the motivation for a number of analytical approaches recently proposed [], that can be considered
the first generation of algorithms for Array CGH analysis. Obviously, copy number variations are expected to have a strong effect on gene expression. [,] Nevertheless, the ultimate aim of studies of copy
number chromosomal alterations is to understand what is the effect produced in functional terms. In the classical vision one or a few key genes are the causative factors
for the this type of pathologies, and the problem consisted in identifying such genes within the region amplified or deleted. The existence of regions in the
chromosomes containing coexpressing genes [] which, in addition, are functionally related has recently been
reported even in higher eukaryotes. [] Actually, regional arrangements of genes have found to be
regulated not only by copy number alterations but also by different mechanisms such as epigenetic modifications. [] This reinforces 
the functional role of chromosomal regions including groups of functionally related genes and its possible impact on diseases such as cancer. [] 
These observations give credence to a new vision in which chromosomal alterations can be causing effects not by altering single key genes but by acting on
complete molecular sub-systems such as pathways of functionally related genes. Recently, different approaches have focused on the functional aspects of the
results of microarray experiments. [,] Nevertheless,
the possible functional significance at regional level of copy number alterations has been largely ignored. Here we present a combined approach to the study of copynumber
alterations, gene expression and functional profiling, exemplified in a case of multiple myeloma. []

Methodology
Functional profiling of Array-CGH experiments under this new perspective would require of three steps: 1) detection of regions with copy number variations (the
origin of the disease), 2) detection of regional alterations in gene expression (the causes of the disease) and 3) analysis of enrichment in functional terms in the detected
regions (the consequences of the alteration or the functional basis of the disease). While copy number alterations can be detected by means of different
methods, alterations in the levels of gene expression are not always easy to be detected using the typical methods (t-test or similar) due several factors such as small
sample sizes. For this reason here we will only use plots to visualize the effect of one variable (copy number) into the other one (expression level). The third step, the functional profiling, becomes then the most important
aspect of the analysis given that it will provide a functional explanation of the molecular basis of the disease caused by copy number alterations.

Detection of copy number alterations
We have used a segmentation method which is a variant of the circular binary segmentation method [], for copy number change detection (isowindow).

The isowindow method tries to identify boundaries between regions with a significant change in the values of intensity of hybridisation of the probes by some
consecutive steps. Firstly a t-test is used to determine differences between regions around all possible boundary points. Once all the candidate boundaries have
been selected (a liberal p-value is used at this stage) there are sorted from small to high minimum p-values. In a second step the boundary candidates in the list with
overlapping neighbourhoods are filtered to obtain a refined list of optimal non-overlapping boundary candidates. All the p-values are recalculated for the
redefined neighbourhoods and a more stringent threshold is applied here. Finally, regions at both sides of each boundary candidate are again compared with a t-test. If
they are not significantly different in their average hybridisation values, then they are merged as a unique region. Otherwise they define two regions with different
copy number value. This is a simple and quick procedure that allows for easily changing from fine to coarse resolution by modifying the thresholds for the p-values.

We have compared isowindow to other two methods for breakpoint detection, GLAD [] and circular binary
segmentation (CBS) [], which are among the best performers. [] 
In the GLAD method a likelihood function with weights determined adaptively is used to solve the copy number estimation problem locally based
on data smoothed. Then, the algorithm finds, for each probe, the maximal neighbourhood in which the local constant assumption holds. Each of the constant pieces
of the line define a block of probes with similar copy number among them and different copy number from that of the nearby regions. On the other hand, the CBS
method selects firstly a segment of the data (a group of probes that are all consecutively arranged in the genome or in a chromosome). The copy number measures of the
probes in that segment are compared to those in the reminder dataset using a t-statistic. Hence, the method can distinguish whether the segment chosen has a copy
number that is higher or lower than the overall copy number in the data, assumed to be the normal reference. This scheme is iterated exhaustively for all possible
segments in the dataset, spotting those that correspond to regions of altered copy number.

An approximation to the relative performances of the methods used was obtained by means of simulated data sets. Such datasets were generated by means of a
piecewise constant function plus random alterations normally distributed with mean value and three different levels for the standard deviation (corresponding to noise
levels 0.2, 0.5 and 1). A mean value of 0 would correspond to a normal region, without copy number alterations, while mean values lower and higher would
correspond to deletions or amplifications at different degrees, respectively. Amplified and deleted regions of different sizes are randomly situated within the simulated
normal chromosome and the methods have to locate them at different noise levels. The method proposed here performs at least as well as the GLAD and CBS (Table
1) while being more efficient in terms of runtimes. Isowindow shows a better performance in finding small amplicons.

Functional profiling of regions with copy number alterations
The final aim of a Array-CGH experiment is to find a molecular explanation for the effects of the detected copy umber alterations. The interpretation of genomescale
data is usually performed in two steps: in a first step genes of interest are selected in this case because they are located in the amplified (or lost) region detected.
In a second step, the selected genes of interest are compared to the background (here the rest of genes in the chromosome) in order to find enrichment in any
functional category (gene ontology, KEGG pathways, etc.) This comparison to the background is required because otherwise the significance of a proportion (even
if high) cannot be determined. Different approaches have been developed to this end. [] Here we will use the
FatiGO+ (16) program, which uses a Fisher's exact test to determine the enrichment in different functional categories including gene ontology, KEEG pathways,
Interpro functional motifs, Swissprot keywords and some regulatory elements such as transcription factor binding sites or other regulatory motifs. []

Discussion
We have implemented all the described functionalities in a program, ISACGH (an acronym for In Silico Array CGH), which is used to illustrate the concept of
functional profiling of CGH arrays with an example of multiple myeloma (MM), an incurable form of haematological neoplasia.

Nine MM cell lines were obtained from the DSMZ (Deuche Sammlung von Mikroorganismen und Zelkuturen GmbH, Braunschweig, Germany) and were
cultured under recommended conditions. DNA and RNA were extracted using supplier's protocols. Microarray assays were performed using the CNIO OncoChip,
which contains 7657 different cDNA clones of cancer related genes. [] CGH experiments onto cDNA arrays
and hybridisation were performed as described in [] and quantified using the GenePix Pro 5.0 software (Axon
Instruments Inc., Union City, CA). Cy3/Cy5 ratio values were normalized using the DNMAD tool from the GEPAS [,
,] and the resulting data were transformed to log2 ratios. Our purpose was to identify
any possible region that contained copy number gains (amplifications), to study the expression of the genes included in that particular region and to understand the
possible functional consequences of such alterations.

Using the segmentation method as implemented in the ISACGH we could detect a putative amplicon in the chromosome 18 (which remained undetected with both
GLAD and CBS, because of the low density of the array, although the effect would have been the same in a high density arrays with a small amplicon) The figure shows
the region (left) and the slight, although appreciable, differences in gene expression levels within the amplicon (right).

A unique feature offered by ISACGH is the possibility of obtaining a functional profile of the detected chromosomal regions. When the amplicon is analysed
through the FatiGO+ program [,] a number of GO
terms arise as over-represented in the genes contained in such region. Thus, the GO terms regulation of cellular process (GO:0050794) and regulation of physiological
process (GO:0050791) were significantly overrepresented in the amplicon (FDR adjusted p-value=0.0336). Genes annotated with these terms were: BCL2,
MALT1, NEDD4L, MBD2, TNFRSF11A and TCF4. Some of them have annotations at more detailed levels in GO, although the number of genes was too small as to
produce statistically significant results. For example BCL2 and MALT1 are annotated as negative regulation of programmed cell death (GO:0043069). These
observations suggest that some processes altered, that ultimately lead to diseases, are not produced by the deregulation of one unique gene, but are the combined
result of simultaneous deregulations of genes involved in a pathway or a particular biological function. In addition, these findings stress the importance of the use of
functional profiling methods for the proper understanding and interpretation of the results of the genome-scale experiments. This unique feature included
in ISACGH is of extreme importance since growing evidence suggests the existence of clusters of functionally related genes in the chromosomes [] 
and the possible impact on diseases such as cancer. []

Although ISACGH [] can be used alone, it is tightly integrated in the GEPAS package. [,
,] GEPAS, that stands for Gene Expression Profile Analysis Suite
(GEPAS), constitutes one of the most complete resources for microarray data analysis available over the web. GEPAS includes facilities for normalisations, clustering,
gene selection, predictors and functional profiling. Thus, different operations (including pre-processing or normalization) can directly be performed within the
same environment, without the necessity of any file reformatting step.

Conclusion
Despite a number of applications dealing with the estimation of genomic copy number have been recently published [], 
there are different aspects of the analysis of Array CGH data that have been poorly addressed or even ignored. Recent evidences strongly support the
existence of regional arrangements of functionally related genes [], with obvious consequences for the understanding of diseases 
characterised by copy number alterations, such as an important number of cancers. []
This fact reduces the validity to the classical vision, in which one or a few key genes would be the causative factors of the disease, and urges to take into
consideration the functional dimension in the interpretation of the effects of copy number alterations. In this new scenario, the deregulation of blocks of
functionally related genes located in the chromosomal regions with copy number alterations would be behind the disease phenotype.

The methods for functional profiling have proven in many scenarios its usefulness. An obvious challenge is to increase our knowledge in different aspects of function
and cooperation between genes in order to be able of applying this methods in a way that allows us to unravel new unknown functional aspects of the biology of the
cell and their connections to pathologies.

This work is supported by grants from Fundació La Caixa, NRC Canada-SEPOCT Spain, project BIO 2005-01078 from the MEC and National Institute of Bioinformatics 
(www.inab.org) a platform of 
Genoma España.

Figures and Tables
Percentage of success in finding copy number alterations in the simulation of the four methods for copy
          number estimation included in ISACGH
Method	
Noise level	GLAD	Isowindow	CBS	
0.2	96.9	100.0	90.6	
0.5	40.6	62.5	87.5	
1.0	9.4	21.9	21.9	
Detection on an amplicon in the chromosome 18 and the relationship between copy number estimation and
gene expression. Left: the blue line represents the copy number estimation and the grey bars represent the individual
gene expression values represented onto the same chromosomal coordinates. Right: boxplots of gene expression
values for the regions with no copy number (a log-ratio of approximately 0) and the amplicon region, which is a
duplication (a log-ratio of approximately 1) There is a slight increase in gene expression values in the region of the
amplicon


        Citation:Conde 
        et al., Bioinformation 1(10): 432-435 (2007)

