Background
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is a common
pathogen in healthcare facilities which frequently causes
infections to the patients. Treatment of Staphylococcal
infections is complicated by antibiotic resistant strains, most
notably those with resistance to penicillin and γ-lactamase
resistant γ-lactam antibiotics []. In the past decade, MRSA has
emerged as a challenging pathogen in the community settings
besides healthcare settings. In addition to the widespread
problem of MRSA in hospitals, community-acquired
methicillin-resistant S. aureus (CA-MRSA) has emerged as a
nosocomial pathogen to the community []. The most common
type of CA-MRSA infections are Skin and soft-tissue infections
(SSTIs) which accounts for approximately 90% of cases, of
which 90% are abscesses and/or cellulitis with purulent
drainage []. CA-MRSA strains also appear to be especially
virulent with the capacity to cause severe infections, such as
necrotizing fasciitis, necrotizing pneumonia, bone and joint
infections accompanied by septic thromboembolic disease,
purpura fulminans with or without Waterhouse-Friderichsen
syndrome, orbital cellulitis and endophthalmitis, infections of
the central nervous system, bacteremia and endocarditis 
[]. In
comparison to infections caused by healthcare-associated
MRSA (HA-MRSA) strains, CA-MRSA infections have been
associated with lethal infections and worse clinical outcomes
giving rise to the clinical impression that CA-MRSA strains are
more virulent than other strains []. CA-MRSA has had intense
impact on traditional therapy of suspected staphylococcal
infection. Most beta-lactam antibiotics are no longer effective
for a variety of common staphylococcal infections and skin and
soft-tissue infections in particular. This underlines the high
urgency to find novel treatment alternatives for drug resistant
S. aureus [].

Availability of the complete genome sequence of CA-MRSA
(strain MW2) has paved the new way to identify the novel drug
targets which have been unexplored yet. Recently Fructose 1,6
biphosphate aldolase-II (FBA) has been identified as potential
drug target in CA-MRSA through metabolic pathways analysis
[]. FBA has also been reported as potential therapeutic drug
target in Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Candida albicans 
[,
].
Fructose 1,6-biphosphate aldolase enzyme (EC: 4.1.2.13)
catalyses the retro-ketolic cleavage of fructose-1,6-bisphosphate
(FBP) to yield dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) and
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate (G3P) in glycolytic pathway. It
also plays important role in gluconeogenesis and the Calvin
cycle, in which it catalyses the reversible aldol condensation of
DHAP with G3P [,
]. The present research work was
undertaken to determine the 3D structure of FBA using
molecular modeling method, to perform the molecular
dynamics simulation of modelled structure, and to perform the
virtual screening for the target using a ligand database.

Methodology
Molecular modeling:
The amino acid sequence of target protein fructose 1, 6-
biphosphate aldolase (FBA) was retrieved from the UniProtKB
database (Uniprot accession no: P67478) (www.uniprot.org).
The length of target protein was 286 amino acid residues. In
order to find the most similar template(s) for the target protein,
database searching was performed against the PDB database
using the BLASTp program []. Based on high sequence
identity (76%) a template (pdb id: 3Q94) was selected,
subsequently multiple sequence alignment was carried out
between the target and template sequences using the clustalW2
program (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/clustalw2/). The
target-template aligned sequences were submitted in
PIR/NBRF file format to the HHpred server (http://toolkit.tuebingen.mpg.de/hhpred). HHpred is an interactive
server for protein homology detection and structure prediction
[]. The 3D structural models of FBA were predicted by the
MODELLER 9v9 software from those target-template
alignments (http://www.salilab.org/modeller). To evaluate
and identify any anomalies in the predicted model of FBA, it
was submitted to the Structural Analysis and Verification
Server (http://nihserver.mbi.ucla.edu/SAVES/). SAVES is a
metaserver for analyzing and validating protein structures
which integrates five modules i.e. Procheck, What_check, Errat,
Verify_3D and Prove. To improve the quality of predicted
model of FBA, energy minimization was performed with the
GROMOS 96 forcefield [] implementation of DeepView v4.04
(spdb viewer) tool. This force field permits to evaluate the
energy of the modeled structure as well as overhaul distorted
geometries through energy minimization. All computations
during energy minimization were done in vacuo, without
reaction field. The predicted 3D structure of FBA was visualized
by PyMOL v1.3 Viewer (http:// www.pymol.org/).

Molecular dynamics simulation:
The molecular dynamics simulation of modelled 3D structure of
the Fructose 1,6 biphosphate aldolase was performed using the
Gromacs ver 4.53 program [] to track the motion of individual
atoms. Two methods energy minimization and molecular
dynamics were employed to optimize structure and simulate
the natural motion of atoms respectively. Before starting
simulation, Gromacs environment was set up and input files
necessary for the simulation were prepared, and the structure
was solvated in water, minimized and equlibrated. In order to
prepare the topology from the pdb file, ‘pdb2gmx’ tool was
used. The solvent water was added around the protein to
generate a simulation box using the ‘genbox’ program. The
dimensions of the box were set to as 0.9 nm from the protein
molecules periphery. The energy minimization was performed
in 1000 steps using the steepest descent minimization
algorithm. GROMOS 96 force field [] was chosen for the
calculation of potential energy of the structure. A standard cutoff
of the 1.0 nm, both for the neighbourlist generation and the
Coulomb &amp; Lennard-Jones interactions was employed. The
system was neutralized by adding a Cl¯ ion in the model. To
avoid the unnecessary distortion of the protein, an equilibrium
run of water around the protein was performed using the 100
pico second (ps) time scale and 50000 steps (iterations). Finally
molecular dynamics simulation was performed using the 2000
ps time scale and 1000000 steps at 300 °K temperature and 1
atm. pressure. The simulation results were analyzed using the
‘grace’ program.

Virtual screening:
In order to perform the virtual screening for fructose 1, 6-
biphosphate aldolase (FBA) in CA-MRSA, the active site was
predicted in the modelled structure using the metaPocket 2.0
server (http://projects.biotec.tu-dresden.de/pocket/). The
metaPocket server [,
] is a meta server to identify ligand
binding sites on protein surface based on a consensus method,
in which the predicted binding sites from eight methods:
LIGSITEcs, PASS, QSiteFinder, SURFNET, Fpocket, GHECOM,
ConCavity and POCASA are combined together to improve the
prediction success rate. In the 3D structure of 1, 6-biphosphate
aldolase, 3 potential ligand binding sites were predicted and
ranked according to their z-score. Out of all 3 predicted active
sites, second active site was chosen for the screening of a set of
ligand databases. This active site was predicted by LIGSITEcs
(LCS) and SURFNET (SFN) methods and average was taken
from these two methods. Using the protein-ligand docking
method, virtual screening was performed for the fructose 1, 6-
biphosphate aldolase against the NCI diversity subset-II
molecules retrieved from the ZINC databases. ZINC is a free
database of commercially-available compounds for virtual
screening. ZINC contains over 21 million purchasable
compounds in ready-to-dock, 3D formats. ZINC database is
provided by the Shoichet Laboratory at the University of
California, San Francisco (UCSF) (http://zinc.docking.org/)
[]. The virtual screening was carried out using the Autodockvina
package (http://vina.scripps.edu/). Before performing the
screening process, a set of 1,364 compounds (NCI Diversity
subset-II) available in mol2 file format were converted into
pdbqt file format using a small python script
prepare_ligand4.py. The receptor molecule (target) was also
converted into pdbqt format using prepare_receptor4.py script
available in Autodock Tools package. After performing the
virtual screening, a python script in the MGL tools package was
used to analyze the best docked ligands for the fructose 1, 6-
biphosphate aldolase (FBA) based on their energy score. Top
ranked ligand-receptor complexes were further analyzed to
study the protein-ligand interactions using the LigPlot+ v.1.4.3
program. LigPlot+ is a successor to the
original LIGPLOT program for automatic generation of 2D
ligand-protein interaction diagrams (
http://www.ebi.ac.uk/thornton-srv/software/LigPlus /) 
[]. Using this program the
hydrogen and hydrophobic interactions between the ligand and
amino acid residues within the active site of the FBA were
analyzed.

Discussion
Homology modeling and validation:
The availability of 3D structure of the target is foremost step to
proceed for the structure-based drug designing. Since the 3D
structure of fructose 1, 6-biphosphate aldolase (FBA) in CAMRSA
is not yet available in the Protein Data Bank (PDB),
therefore unknown structure of FBA was predicted by the
homology modeling method using the HHPred server 
[]. This
server uses Modeller 9v9 program for 3D structure prediction.
To identify the best template(s) for the target protein, database
searching was carried out using the BLASTp program. A
template (PDB ID: 3Q94_A) having 76% sequence identity, 1.2e-
100 E-value and alignment score(S) of 711.74, was selected for
generating the 3D model of the FBA. The sequence identities
and E-values are important parameters which are considered
during the template(s) selection. The templates which are
having high sequence identity, high alignment score(S), and
low E-value are often selected for the reliable model generation
of the target protein. The expect(E) value is a parameter that
measures the significance of similarity between sequences
during the database searching. This value decreases
exponentially with the Score(S) that is assigned to a match
between two sequences. The multiple sequence alignment was
performed for the target-template sequences using the
clustalW2 program and aligned target-template sequences were
submitted to the HHPred server. Then 3D model of the FBA
was created (). In order to evaluate the stereochemical
properties as well as to find any anomaly in the predicted
model, it was uploaded to the SAVES server. Procheck 
[]
results show that on the Ramachandran plot [] , 94.7% amino
acid residues fall in core (most favored) regions, 4.9% in
allowed, 0.4% in generously allowed, and no any residue falls
in disallowed regions ().

A good quality model would be expected to have more than
90% amino acid residues in the most favoured (core) regions
and the results suggest that the predicted model is of good
quality. But total 3 bad contacts were present in the modelled
structure which could have lead to instability to the structure.
In order to minimize the bad contacts in the model, it was
subjected to the energy minimization using the GROMOS 96
forcefield [] implementation of DeepView v4.04 (spdb
viewer) tool []. After the minimization, the modelled
structure of FBA was further subjected to the SAVES server and
it was found that there was no any bad contact present in the
structure. Verify_3D [] result shows that 88.85% of residues
had an average 3D-1D score &gt;0.2 and the model was passed.
According to Errat module [], the overall quality factor of the
predicted model was found to be 94.60 which reveal good
quality of the predicted 3D structure of FBA in CA-MRSA.

MDS:
The protein dynamics of modelled 3D structure of fructose 1, 6-
biphosphate aldolase was studied using the Gromacs v4.53 tool.
Before performing molecular dynamics simulation (MDS), the
protein was solvated in a water box followed by equilibration
using the Newton's laws of motion. Using steepest descent
minimization method, the energy of the structure was
minimized in 1000 steps at 100 ps time scale to obtain the
preferred conformation, which was converged in 465 steps. The
average potential energy of the structure was calculated using
the GROMOS 96 force field which was found to 5.345e+05
KJ/Mole. The starting structure was having potential energy of
-4.646+e05 KJ/Mole and the minimization were converging at -
4.670e+05 KJ/Mole () which shows the stability of the
protein structure. Since our model has a net charge of +1.00,
therefore one chloride ion was added to neutralize the net
charge. Before starting the actual MDS, position-restrained
molecular dynamics was performed. In this process the atom
positions of the protein molecule were restrained (partially
freezed) while solvent was allowed to move. This was done to
soak the water molecule in to the protein molecule. The
relaxation time of 100 ps was given to water molecule.

The molecular dynamics simulation of the modelled structure
was performed using the 2000 ps time scale and 1000000 steps
(iterations) at 300 °K temperature and 1 atm pressure. Thetrajectory of the MDS was analyzed using the ‘Grace’ program.
The trajectory of radius of gyration (Rg) of modelled structure
was analyzed which gives a measure of the mass of the atom(s)
relative to the center of mass of the molecule. This quantity
gives a measure of the compactness of the structure. The
average of Rg of the protein was found to be 1.87 nm which
reveals that the modeled structure is compact (). One
of the most important criteria to analyze the stability of the
protein structure is to measure the root mean square deviations
(RMSD). The deviations from the original starting structure
have been measured over the course of simulation. RMSD
increases pretty rapidly in the beginning of the simulation, but
stabilizes around 0.275 nm (). The trajectory of root
mean square fluctuation (RMSF) of individual amino acid
residues of protein was also analyzed, which computes the
fluctuations of atomic positions in the structure. Except very
few amino acid residues, the RMSF (i.e. standard deviation) of
almost all amino acid residues was found between the 0.05 nm
to 0.21 nm, which indicates that the structure is stable ().

Virtual screening:
Active site identification in the target protein is the starting
point for virtual screening. Using the metaPocket 2.0 server,
ligand binding site (pocket) was located in the 3D structure of
the fructose biphosphate aldolase (FBA) of CA-MRSA. Three
pockets were located in the target, and based on further
analysis of amino acid residues involved in the active site, 2nd
pocket was chosen for the docking. This pocket was having 13
residues in which Asn26, Gln237, Asp85, His86, His181 and
His209 have been reported to be conserved in the active site of
FBA []. The active site in the 3D structure of FBA on X, Y &amp; Z
coordinates were located as -22.686Å, 55.957Å and 36.002Å
respectively. Before performing the virtual screening for the
FBA as a drug target, the receptor was prepared using a Python
script in the MGL tools package. The grid size for the receptor
for docking was given as 30 Å, 30Å and 30Å on X, Y &amp; Z
coordinates respectively, which makes sure that the search
space is large enough for the ligand to rotate in. Using the
Autodock vina package, 1364 molecules from the NCI diversity
subset II were screened by the protein-ligand docking method.
The Autodock vina algorithm searches the ligands in different
orientations in the active site of receptor. Two components
searching and scoring are involved in most of the docking
algorithms. The vina scoring function amalgamates knowledgebased
potentials and empirical scoring functions, which extracts
empirical information from both the conformational preferences
of the receptor-ligand complexes and the experimental affinity
measurements []. After performing the virtual screening
using the vina package, the docking results were analyzed from
the log files using a Python script in the ADT (Auto Dock Tool).
Based on the energy score, top 10 ligands from the NCI
diversity subset II molecules were selected for further analysis
 (see supplementary material). Using the
LigPlot+ program, schematic diagrams of protein-ligand
interactions for top four receptor-ligand docked complexes
were generated in 2D space. This diagram represents the
hydrogen and hydrophobic interactions between ligand and
active site residues of the FBA (). The molecule
ZINC01690699 was interacting with Lys65 and Glu68 residue
through hydrogen bond at a distance of 3.01 Å and 2.97 Å
respectively while Tyr61, Met66, Asn27, Tyr56, Leu261, Tyr260,
Pro257, Glu29, Leu28 &amp; Gly69 residues were involved in
hydrophobic interactions.

The molecule ZINC13154304 was interacting with Tyr56 residue
through hydrogen bond at a distance of 3.21 Å, and Ala264,
Leu261, Pro257, Tyr260, Glu29, Asn27 &amp; Phe30 residues were
involved in hydrophobic interactions. The molecule
ZINC29590257 was interacting with Tyr56 residue through
hydrogen bond at a distance of 3.08 Å, and Tyr260, Arg265,
Phe30, Leu261, Ser240, Ile268, Glu29, Asn27, Ala264, Leu28,
Lys65, Met66 &amp; Thr62 residues were involved in hydrophobic
interactions. The fourth molecule ZINC29590259 was
interacting with Tyr56 residue through hydrogen bond at a
distance of 2.87 &amp; 3.05 Å respectively, and Phe30, Ser240,
Ala264, Ile268, Leu261, Arg265, Met66, Leu70, Lys65, Thr62,
Leu28, Asn27 &amp; Glu29 residues were involved in hydrophobic
interactions. Interestingly it was found that Tyr56 amino acid
residue was involved in hydrogen bond interactions within the
active site of FBA in all top ranked ligands except in
ZINC01690699. This Tyr56 residue might play crucial role in
ligand interaction with the active site of FBA receptor in CAMRSA.
Top four ligands i.e. ZINC01690699, ZINC13154304,
ZINC29590257 and ZINC29590259 are having lower docking
energy scores which show higher binding affinity towards the
FBA. These ligands might act as potent inhibitors for the FBA in
CA-MRSA.

Conclusion
The three dimensional structure of fructose biphosphate
aldolase (FBA) in CA-MRSA was predicted and the quality of
the model was validated which confirms the good quality
model. The molecular dynamics study was carried out at 2000
ps and results suggest that the modeled structure is stable. The
predicted model of FBA was used for virtual screening against
the NCI diversity subset-II ligand databases which contain 1364
compounds. Based on the docking energy scores, it was found
that top four ligands i.e. ZINC01690699, ZINC13154304,
ZINC29590257 and ZINC29590259 are having lower energy
scores which reveal higher binding affinity towards the active
site of FBA. These ligands might prove to be potent inhibitors
for the FBA so that the menace of antimicrobial resistance in
CA-MRSA can be conquered. However, pharmacological
studies are required to confirm the inhibitory activity of these
ligands against the FBA in CA-MRSA.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors are grateful to Sam Higginbottom Institute of
Agriculture, Technology &amp; Sciences (Deemed University),
Allahabad for providing facilities and support to complete the
present research work. We are thankful to Dr. Roman
Laskowski for providing the academic license of LigPlot+
program.

Citation:Yadav et al, Bioinformation 9(3): 158-164 (2013)

(A) The 3D model of fructose biphosphate aldolase; (B) The Ramachandran plot of modeled structure validated by
PROCHECK program.

(A) Potential energy of the structure; (B) RMSD of protein from backbone; (C) Radius of gyration; (D) RMSF of amino
acid residues of protein.

Schematic representation of FBA-Ligand interactions in CA-MRSA A) ZINC01690699; B) ZINC13154304; C)
ZINC29590257; D) ZINC29590259.

