Background
Antibodies render higher specificity than small molecules 
(drugs) against a given biological target. The mouse is the most 
favored model system for producing specific antibodies to an 
antigen of interest. Mouse monoclonal antibodies (mAb) are 
routinely used not only for diagnostic purposes but also as 
therapeutic agents. However, administration of mouse mAbs in 
patients can lead to allergic reactions against the therapeutic 
antibody, otherwise known as the human anti-mouse antibody 
(HAMA) response []. To address this problem, chimeric 
antibodies have been designed, which could lessen the HAMA 
response but not eliminate it []. Further engineering was 
undertaken to replace the mouse scaffold with that of human 
origin by transplanting mouse complementarity determining 
regions (CDRs) onto a fully human scaffold []. As the CDR 
paratope usually binds and engages the antigen epitope, the 
mouse CDRs in the humanized antibody are minimally 
exposed to the human immune system and, in theory, should 
be non-allergenic in nature.

Humanization of mouse antibodies refers to the replacement of 
mouse framework regions with similar human germline 
framework regions based on amino acid sequence similarity. 
The mouse scaffold is replaced with a human scaffold primarily
to reduce immunogenicity of the mouse antibody and prevent 
its neutralization when administered to humans. This process 
renders the humanized antibody with a greater therapeutic 
index than its mouse counterpart. Humanization of mouse 
antibodies has been shown to prolong the serum half-life, 
improve interactions with effector cells and reduce 
immunogenicity. The rat antibody CAMPATH-1G, upon 
humanization (CAMPATH-1H), demonstrated not only a 
longer half-life but also improved therapeutic effects 
[].

Other strategies that have been used to minimize 
immunogenicity of the humanized antibody include veneering 
and super-humanization. In veneering (re-surfacing), the 
mouse mAb sequence in the crystal structure or homology 
model is examined for surface exposure or solvent accessibility, 
and the protruding residues (e.g., lysine) are mutated to human 
germline residues []. This process drastically reduces the 
immunogenic potential of the humanized antibody. In addition, 
certain mouse CDR residues have been further eliminated via 
the super-humanization technique, which improved the 
therapeutic value of the antibodies 
[–].

Current approaches for antibody humanization involves 
replacement of numerous mouse residues in the scaffold, as 
well as CDR regions, with human antibody-derived residues, 
but the consequences is usually a reduction or in some cases 
complete loss of affinity towards the antigen. Therefore, these 
methods are not viable options for the conversion of mouse 
antibodies to the humanized form, and further optimizations 
are needed to improve binding kinetics of humanized 
antibodies to match their original parental mouse monoclonal 
antibodies. Indeed, antibody humanization is an iterative 
process that requires engineering at all stages of development 
to produce a successful therapeutic agent.

As an alternative to antibody humanization based on the linear 
sequence, an approach relying on the 3D structure and 
conformation provides an ideal platform to address the above 
concerns in a rational manner. X-ray crystallography and 
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) imaging are currently the 
only tools that can deduce the 3D structure of antibodies at an 
atomic level. However, these techniques require elaborate 
infrastructure and time. The rapid pace of deposition of 
antibody structures in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) has helped 
in the creation of various structure based molecular prediction 
programs for biologics.

De novo antibody structure prediction via homology model 
building is being used currently for antibody design, engineering 
and humanization to reduce immunogenicity and restore affinities 
similar to those of parental mouse antibodies. This process 
entails PDB searches, simultaneously carried out for both frameworks 
(scaffold) as well as CDRs for light and heavy chains, for the most 
homologous 3D antibody structure to the query sequence and results 
in the creation of a structure-based homology model from the primary 
sequence of the mouse antibody. These approaches tend to save time 
from the computational prediction to experimental validation stages. 
State-of-the art antibody structure prediction programs include Web 
Antibody Modeling (WAM) [], 
Prediction of Immunoglobulin Structures (PIGS) [], 
Rosetta Antibody Modeling (RAM) [] and more recently commercially
developed algorithms, such as Accelrys (Discovery Studio), 
Molecular Operating Environment (MOE), Schrodinger 
(BioLuminate) and Macromoltek. Although publicly available 
servers help to build a good antibody homology model, they do 
not contain any algorithms to further complete the 
humanization of mouse antibodies.

To validate the applicability of structure-based biologic design 
as a universal strategy for humanization of mouse antibodies, 
we applied our humanization strategy to 17 unique mouse 
antibodies. In addition, this study highlights the importance of 
conformational folding for antibody design given the 
limitations of the linear sequence method. A threshold filter 
was placed to consider only mouse antibody structures released 
in the PDB since 2010 in order to prevent redundancy with 
previously published studies. Importantly, no benchmark 
studies on antibody structure predictions and homology model 
building as a platform for antibody design for the purpose of 
humanization of mouse antibodies have been reported since 
that period. 


This study involved creation of an antibody homology model 
from mouse antibody primary sequences and subsequently 
introduced mutations to match the most highly similar human 
germline gene sequence. Furthermore, a surface accessibility 
screen was performed to locate conformationally exposed 
residues, and they were mutated to minimize or eliminate 
potential immunogenicity. This humanized model was then 
subjected to simulated annealing (energy minimization). In 
order to synchronize the structural disparity between the 
human scaffold with mouse CDRs, simulated annealing was 
performed to energetically minimize this hybrid structure. This 
procedure allowed the homology model to fold systematically 
and mimic the most favorable native conformation state. Force 
field errors resulting from this simulation were then observed 
for further analysis and optimization. Therefore, this study 
extends our knowledge of antibody design for purposes of 
converting mouse antibodies to fully accommodate a human 
germline scaffold for therapeutic drug development. It also 
demonstrates the advantages of coupling structure-based 
antibody design with simulated annealing (energy 
minimizations) for the deduction of important conformational 
residues required for proper antibody folding, function and 
affinity.

Methodology
Mouse antibody sequences and structures :
Mouse Fab (fragment antigen binding) antibody structures 
were searched in the Protein Data Bank (PDB). In order to 
prevent any redundancy in antibody modeling with earlier 
studies, only mouse antibodies released since 2010 were taken 
for further evaluation. Out of 104 mouse antibody-antigen 
crystal structures, 17 unique unbound mouse antibodies were 
chosen randomly for the final study.

Prediction of Immunoglobulin Structures (PIGS):
Each mouse antibody sequence obtained from the PDB as a 
FASTA file was truncated to contain only the variable heavy 
and light chain sequences (Fv, fragment variable format) and 
submitted to the PIGS server (
http: // www.biocomputing.it/pigs/) 
via single sequence submission. Default server settings 
were used for template selection and generation. Top scoring
heavy and light chain templates were chosen from 20 templates 
displayed. These mouse homology models were then subjected 
to a surface accessibility screen set at a threshold of 30% using 
Swiss-PdbViewer to determine the location of various surface 
accessible residues, which may be immunogenic in nature 
[].

Rosetta antibody modeling (RAM):
Mouse FASTA sequences for the heavy chain and light chain 
were submitted in the Fv format to the Rosetta Online Server 
that Includes Everyone (ROSIE) antibody modeling server 
(http://antibody.graylab.jhu.edu) 
[]. The first antibody 
model was selected among the top ten scoring antibody models 
based on their energy minimization scores. Root mean square 
deviation (RMSD) scores were calculated using the PyMOL 
built-in combinatorial extension (CE) module alignment tool to 
gauge the validity and model prediction properties as shown in 
Supplementary  (see supplementary material). In 
addition, PDBsum structural analysis with PROCHECK and 
Verify3D programs were used to validate the homology 
models. All homology models are available upon request.

Humanization:
The IMGT DomainGap alignment module was used to find and 
align each mouse sequence to the most homologous human 
germline sequence (http://www.imgt.org/3Dstructure-DB/ 
cgi/DomainGapAlign.cgi) []. Except the CDR regions, 
mutations were manually introduced in the mouse framework 
regions of the homology model to match the human germline 
sequence via the PyMOL mutagenesis wizard tool. 
Furthermore, a surface accessibility screen was performed, and 
the identified surface-exposed mouse residues were manually 
mutated to reflect the human germline sequence.

Numbering of antibodies:
The IMGT database unique Lefranc numbering system for 
antibodies was used for sequence alignment. Antibody crystal 
structures derived from the PDB have Kabat numbering, and 
homology models generated via the PIGS server have the 
Kabat-Chothia numbering scheme. Meanwhile, the RAM server 
utilizes the Chothia numbering scheme.

Energy minimization:
The Swiss-PdbViewer (DeepView) software was downloaded 
and run locally for energy minimization (simulated annealing) 
[]. The humanized homology model was subjected to the 
GROMOS force field energy minimization. Default settings 
were used, and the output model was further examined for 
residues with various force field errors, which were displayed 
by energy minimized model. These residues were individually 
examined via PyMOL. Mutations were then introduced to 
rationally correct select steric clashes, which were predicted 
after simulated annealing. All homology models were again 
subjected to force field simulated annealing to validate the 
chosen mutations or substitutions.

Results
A total of 17 mouse antibody homology models generated via 
the PIGS and RAM servers were carefully examined for 
modeling errors. Among these, the 3I75 model obtained via the 
PIGS server, as well as the 4DCQ and 3MNV models via the 
RAM server, contained a broken chain or modeling failure. 
Therefore, they were omitted from the rest of the study 
(). 
The amino acid sequence alignment of the 17 different mouse 
antibody sequences with the closest human germline sequence 
found in the IMGT database revealed a high sequence similarity 
in the heavy and light chains with ~60% identity or higher to the 
human germline sequence (). 
This high level of sequence identity was crucial in minimizing the 
mutations required for humanization of the mouse antibodies. The human 
germline sequence with the highest Smith-Waterman score obtained via 
IMGT/DomainGap alignment through the IMGT database was selected as a final 
template for humanization of the mouse antibody 
 (see supplementary material).

Furthermore, RMSD analysis between the X-ray crystal 
structure (PDB) and mouse homology models generated from 
the PIGS and RAM servers via PyMOL revealed a deviation 
between the Cα backbones (3.3 Å maximum and of 0.7 Å 
minimum deviation over &gt; 200 residues) as shown in  
and (). Therefore, these antibody homology models 
appeared to be relatively reliable for generating the overall 
tertiary fold and homologous structures. In addition, certain 
solvent accessible residues (outside the CDR regions) revealed 
from a surface accessibility screen of the mouse homology 
model were manually mutated to the human germline 
sequence to reduce or avoid immunogenicity ().

The humanized homology model exhibited various force field 
problems when subjected to simulate annealing. Further 
examination of these problems in the energy minimized model 
revealed steric clashes, unfavorable geometry and incorrect 
hydrogen bonding (). These residues were either 
mutated to the parental mouse sequence (back mutation) or 
substituted with similar amino acids. The “back mutations” or 
substitutions did ameliorate these force field errors in the 
humanized antibodies. As shown in (), the 
humanized homology model 3UJT generated via the PIGS 
server indicated a close proximity between residues Val13 and 
Leu78 in the light chain of 3UJT. Therefore, Val13 was back 
mutated to Met13,its parental mouse residue, which corrected 
the proximity error. In addition, Asn57 was substituted to Gln50 
to resolve the steric clash between the Trp50 and Asn57 residues 
in the heavy chain (). 

Output data of the GROMOS force field simulated annealing 
(energy minimization) revealed that most of the force field 
errors originated from the “non-bonded” parameter. 
Humanization performed through antibody homology models 
generated by the PIGS server had significantly more steric 
clashes compared to that from the RAM server (Supplementary 
). 
When these residues were closely examined, a 
suitable mutation or substitution seemed to dramatically lower 
the non-bonded energies, hence energetically stabilizing the 
antibody molecule. 

Discussion
The majority of approaches for conversion of a mouse antibody 
to humanized form are based either on sequence or structure 
guided methods. These strategies help reduce the 
immunogenicity of mouse antibodies but fail to address the loss 
of affinity usually observed using this procedure. To our 
knowledge, antibody humanization servers are not publicly 
available. Accordingly, our study lays the platform for 
generalized structure guided homology model based 
predictions, coupled with simulated annealing for 
humanization of mouse antibodies, which can be easily 
adapted. For the current study, the RAM and PIGS servers 
were used for the prediction and generation of antibody 
homology models. For each antibody, the first model among 
the top 10 models generated via the RAM and PIGS servers was 
selected for this study.

Most humanization strategies tend to rely heavily on primary 
sequence differences, rather than conformational folding. The 
former sequence-based strategy may lead to minimized 
immunogenicity, but the humanized antibody may be 
improperly folded, resulting in loss or reduced affinity towards 
the target. Antibody humanization undertaken by homology 
model building alone does offer information on the overall 
folding, conformation and delineation of surface exposed 
residues. However, humanization of antibodies via sequence 
alignment and homology model generation with 
conformational sampling, together with the simulated 
annealing approach, offer additional knowledge-based 
information. This approach provides a rational strategy to 
correct mutations that not only aid in antibody folding but also 
improve overall kinetics for antigen binding.

Critical Assessment of Protein Structure Prediction (CASP) 
studies and other investigators have shown independently that 
all of the publicly available antibody homology servers (i.e., 
WAM, RAM and PIGS) generate very similar homology 
models, and none of them can accurately predict the loop 
conformation of the CDR3 of the heavy chain (CDRH3) 
[–]. 
Simulated annealing is a powerful tool to be used after 
homology modeling for humanization of a mouse antibody to 
examine the effects of individual mutations. Most 
humanization methods omit this important step that can 
potentially hinder their antibody kinetics against a cognate 
target. In this study, homology models generated via the RAM 
server had fewer steric clashes compared to those from the 
PIGS server upon humanization of the mouse antibodies. This 
finding may be attributed to additional optimization protocols 
utilized in the RAM server, which include simultaneous 
optimizations of the VH/VL orientation, side chain and loop 
backbone. The PIGS server usually generates rigid homology 
models, which frequently contain steric clashes. 


As with most computational predictive studies, certain 
limitations exist in this study as well. In silico predictions can 
reveal potential problems in humanization of mouse antibodies 
as a proof of concept, but those predictions need to be 
experimentally validated. Homology model-based 
humanization of antibodies has been successfully demonstrated 
computationally, as well as validated experimentally in the 
recent past [–, 
]. Mader et al. utilized CDR grafting to 
humanize mouse antibodies along with the above-mentioned 
methods and demonstrated that conservative CDR grafting via 
a homology model-based design could restore affinities similar 
to the parental mouse/chimeric version, whereas aggressive 
super-humanization led to complete loss or reduced affinity.

Conclusion
The intricate process of humanizing mouse antibodies requires 
rational introduction of amino acid substitutions to not only 
correct force field errors but also to minimize immunogenic 
reactions or anti-drug responses against the humanized 
antibody. This study highlights the importance of certain 
canonical and non-canonical residues responsible for the loss of 
affinity and addresses antibody protein folding problems. Our 
results also confirmed previous studies that revealed the 
benefit of simulated annealing after humanization of a mouse 
homology model [,
]. 
This step pinpoints the importance of 
certain force fields, as well as contributions of certain residues 
in the overall folding and kinetics of antibody-antigen 
interactions. For example, framework residues that are
determined to interact and contribute to the overall 
conformation of the CDR loops may be reverted back to mouse 
residues during the process of humanization 
[–]. Predictive 
structure guided homology models such as those developed in 
this work help to save time and effort through rapid in silico 
predictions and screening which act as a rational guide for 
specific experimental validations. Thus, structure-based 
predictive antibody homology modeling and force field 
simulated annealing strategies may be adopted universally for 
antibody humanization due to their ease of use and efficiency.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work was conducted with support from Harvard Catalyst. 
The Harvard Clinical and Translational Science Center 
(National Center for Research Resources and the National 
Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, National 
Institutes of Health Award TR001102-01 and financial 
contributions from Harvard University and its affiliated 
academic health care centers.

Citation:Kurella &amp; Gali, Bioinformation 10(4): 180-186 (2014)

Sequence and structural alignment of mouse 
antibody 3UJT. A) 3UJT heavy and light chains were sequence 
aligned to the most homologous human germline genes 
IGHV1-2*02 and IGKV4-1*01, respectively, via IMGT 
DomainGap alignment. 28 mutations (shaded red) in the heavy 
chain and 16 in the light chain were made to humanize (green) 
the mouse antibody 3UJT. CDRs (yellow) were unchanged; B) 
Structural alignment of the mouse antibody 3UJT crystal 
structure (gray) and mouse homology models generated via the 
PIGS (purple) and RAM (blue) servers. RMSD between the Cα 
backbones of the crystal structure (grey) and PIGS homology 
model (purple) was 0.9 Å, whereas that for the RAM homology 
model (blue) was 2.5 Å over 224 residues.

Strategy for humanization of a mouse antibody based 
on in silico homology modeling and energy minimizations 
(simulated annealing). The mouse Fv sequence was submitted 
to the PIGS/RAM server to generate a homology model, and 
IMGT DomainGap alignment module was used for sequence 
alignment to identify the most homologous human germline 
sequence. Mutations were made in the framework regions (red) 
to humanize the mouse antibody model. The Swiss-PdbViewer 
(DeepView) energy minimization tool was applied to the 
humanized homology model to find force field errors in the 
model. The identified residues were carefully examined and
rationally mutated (green) to correct the force field errors in the 
humanized homology model.

: GROMOS force field errors and rationally chosen 
mutations to correct them. A) Simulated annealing of a 
humanized antibody (PdbID-3UJT) revealed force field errors 
highlighted in red/yellow/orange. These errors range from 
steric clashes, unfavorable geometry and irrelevant hydrogen 
bonding; B) Upon humanization of the light chain framework1, 
residue Val13 was in close proximity with Leu78 of framework3 
in the light chain. Therefore, Val13 was back mutated to its 
parental mouse residue Met13, corrects the clash; C) Humanized 
residue Asn57 in framework3 of the heavy chain clashed with 
Trp50 in framework2 of the heavy chain. Therefore, Asn57 was 
back mutated (mouse) to Gln57.

