Background
The tumor microenvironment consists of paracrine factors, various cells, 
the stroma and its constituents.  Compelling evidence suggests that it may 
contribute to the progression of various tumors  [,
]. A better 
understanding of the roles of microenvironmental factors, and in particular 
the extent to which the microenvironment may modulate the plasticity of 
activities of tumor-surveilling immune cells, including the cytokines they 
produce, is advocated.

A variety of immune cells are involved in regulating the microenvironment 
in oral lichen planus (OLP), oral premalignant diseases (OPM), including 
oral epithelial dysplasia, and oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC)  
[]. 
These cells exert antitumor activities,  but may also have a role in the 
inflammatory process and in the secretion of several cytokines with prooncogenic activity 
[].

Here, we review the role of the microenvironment in the plasticity of tumor 
immune surveillance.  We use OLP, OPM and OSCC as models to discuss 
the context of diseased tissues and their microenvironment.  We focus on 
the role of T-cell signaling, the modulating effect of microenvironment 
factors on key signaling pathways, such as PI-3k, and examine several 
important unresolved questions that pertain to the putative role of the 
tumor microenvironment in the design  of therapeutic approaches. Taken 
together, the evidence we discuss sheds new light on the importance of the 
microenvironment in the progression of OLP, OPM and OSCC. Successful 
management of these conditions in the near future may involve a 
coordinated early interventional treatment targeted towards the diseased 
tissues and their microenvironment, while taking full advantage of the 
malleability of T cell plasticity. Our novel perspective provides a 
promising premise for early interventional management of the 
microenvironment in a variety of tumors.

CD4+plasticity and T cell signaling
CD4+T cells play a central role in immune functions, in the etiology of 
allergy and autoimmune diseases, including OLP, and in tumor immune
surveillance. The extensive plasticity of T cells was recently reviewed in 
Science  []. 
In brief, the model counters the current dogma that CD4+T 
cells yield distinct subsets of end-stage maturation that are uniquely 
capable of producing distinct sets of certain cytokine profiles. Rather, the 
novel model  [].
proposes that CD4 +T cells alter their end-stage 
commitment in response to varying circumstances  []., putatively 
determined, at least in part, by the microenvironment.  The model further 
argues that these cells can equally alter the pattern of their produced 
cytokines, and shift from, for example, a TH17 commitment to a TH1 or a 
TH2 or a Treg-specific pattern, in response to the demands dictated by the 
microenvironment  [].. The shift patterns ultimately affect changes and 
determine the functional role of these immune cells. For example, TH17 
cells, the subset of CD4 +T cells that produces IL-17 has a critical role in 
autoimmunity, as well as in interconnection with other immune cells in the 
microenvironment []., 
and tumor immunology.  For these reasons, this cell 
population is targeted in cancer therapy protocols  [,
,
]. It is expected 
that this model of plasticity shift in T cell patterns will directly impact on 
functions, such as those enumerated for TH17 cells.

The plasticity of conversion of CD4+T populations results in a great 
potential diversity in cytokines profiles. If this T cell plasticity model is 
correct, then the question arises as to whether or not targeted therapeutic 
interventions may be designed that can effectively direct T cell subsets 
toward this or that pattern of cytokines to enhance, or to diminish certain 
physiological processes at the molecular level, and reduce pathological and 
proto-oncogenic events.

Evidence suggests that pro-inflammatory activities of immune cells may 
lead to cancer associated with  chronic inflammation. Esophageal 
adenocarcinoma, for example, is associated with chronic esophagitis  
[]. 
Colorectal cancer from inflammatory bowel disease and gastric cancer is 
associated with chronic infections from Helicobacter pylori 
[].

Chronic inflammation resulting in cancer  is also well established in the 
oral cavity. Evidence, albeit still controversial, indicates that OLP may  
evolve, in certain cases, into OSCC [].  Other OPM are also characterized 
by chronic inflammation, and could ultimately precipitate transformation 
[]. The model of CD4 
+T cells plasticity [] begs the question, therefore of 
what might be the best immunotherapeutic approach to target these plurifaceted situations 
().

Case in point, OLP lesions are characterized with such T cell subset 
plasticity: the OLP pathology reflects, among others, both aspects of 
autoimmunity and associated CD4 +T cell involvement. Cytotoxic 
outcomes result from the concerted activities of CD4 +and CD8+ T cells on 
activated dendritic cells and apoptotic keratinocytes. It is possible and even 
probable that the activities of the CD8+ T cells in OLP are modulated by 
subsets of CD4+ T cells, themselves subject of plastic alterations driven by 
the microenvironment, which may determine the course of the pathology in 
each individual case. If this process obtains, we speculate that it might 
contribute to explain why certain OLP patients have high rate of recurrence 
with low remission, while others do not, while still others develop OSCC 
at the site of the OLP lesion. If the interplay between the 
microenvironment and T cell plasticity is indeed critical to the potential of 
OLP lesions for transformation, then the model may also shed light on 
proteomic-based intervention measures aimed at halting or slowing disease 
progression. T cell signaling and signaling generated by stroma cells and 
paracrine factors may further modulate T cell subset plasticity 
().  
The PI-3k pathway may play an important role in this context:  we have 
shown that OLP biopsy samples from patients at high risk of cancer 
progression display increased expression of Lck, PI-3k and survivin 
[].

T cells and PI-3k signaling
PI-3k signaling is critical in T cell activation and T cell migration. 
Inhibition of the PI-3k pathway has been invoked in T cell-mediated
immunopathologies [], 
including cases of transplant rejection, as well as 
autoimmune and inflammatory disorders. Furthermore, premalignancies 
and several cancers exhibit a derangement in the PI-3k pathway. Clinical 
trials of PI-3k inhibitors are ongoing  [,
].  T cell-mediated oral 
pathologies, including OSCC present an increased activity in the PI-3k 
pathway [].

We speculate that the PI-3k pathway may play an important role in 
defining T cell plasticity, if only in part because PI-3k’s modulation of T 
cell migration may contribute to slight (or important) changes in the 
microenvironment.  Consequently, in the context of tumor immune 
surveillance, the overall impact of  PI-3k signaling in T cells may be 
exerted both at the intra- and extracellular level.  A case in point pertains to 
the reports that demonstrate that  chemokine receptors (CXCR-4) and 
adhesion molecules (VLA-4 and CD44) are therapeutic targets in a 
leukemic microenvironment [].

Taken together, these multiple threads of evidence lend support to the 
hypothesis that, in the treatment of leukemia for instance, molecular 
therapies must target both the leukemic cells and its microenvironment, 
since there appears to be both genetic and epigenetic aberrations in the 
stroma associated with leukemia  [].  We propose the argument that, 
since excessive PI-3k signaling is reputably one of the causes of leukemia, 
it is possible and even probable that a biological situation similar to that 
described in leukemia also manifests in OLP, OPM and OSCC.  
Consequently, as is the case in the treatment of leukemia, we suggest that 
there may be a place for PI-3k inhibitors in the therapeutic intervention of 
oral cancer, oral premalignant  lesions, autoimmune and chronic 
inflammatory disorders, and OLP.

Methodology
Molecular mapping of microenvironment in OLP, OPM and OSCC
Using breast cancer as a model, current molecular trends 
[] indicate that 
the same cancer type may present distinct molecular signatures in different 
individuals. This observation dictates that effective modes of therapy must 
be tailored to each specific molecular signature.   
Similar observations of distinct molecular signatures have been noted in 
oral lesions []. 
Hence, it is likely that reticular and erosive OLP lesions 
will be found to be characterized by distinct molecular signatures, which, 
putatively, will be determined in large part by, and may contribute to the 
architecture of the microenvironment. These alterations may contribute in 
explaining the reported increase rate of cancer transformation associated 
preferentially with erosive, compared to reticular OLP lesions 
[]. Similar 
arguments stand for the increase rate of cancer transformation from the two 
distinct forms of OPM, epithelial  dysplasia (EpD) and erythroplakia, 
compared to leukoplakia [].  
A case in point pertains to our data, which 
showed that OPM cases of EpD revealed similar molecular signatures with 
OSCC cases [].

Taken together, these lines of evidence suggest that appropriate 
management of different oral pathologies (OLP, OPM, and OSCC) will be 
improved if the distinct physio-pathological dimensions of the 
microenvironment of the lesion per se will be considered; including 
associated biological and viral factors (). While there might be a 
dynamic gradient of various cytokines or concentration of CD4+ T cell 
subpopulations within the microenvironment of OLP, OPM, and OSCC, 
basic similarities and commonalities will exist, we anticipate, in these 
microenvironments.

The dynamics of the microenvironment is further complicated with direct 
communication between cancer cells and their microenvironment.  Such 
direct communication is expected in OLP and OPM cases  
().

Early detection and prevention of transformation of OLP lesions will 
benefit from active studies of microenvironment, and better inform 
evidence-based therapeutic interventions.

Current studies on microenvironment have focused more on its impact on 
invasion and metastasis in cancer  [].  Evidence-based assessment for 
OLP therapy  [] has not revealed superior choice of drug in the 
management of this disease, which suggests that the future of personalized 
therapy will depend on the full and accurate molecular and proteomic 
description of the disease entity and associated microenvironment in each 
patient. This approach will only be possible in a translational evidencebased 
medicine context, with novel  and improved technological tools to 
characterize the pathology of the microenvironment.

Discussion
Important Unresolved Questions:  The Putative Role of Proteomic 
Inhibitors?
Our recent work on molecular biomarker profiling [] in OLP evaluated T 
cell signaling. Lck, a src tyrosine kinase, acts downstream of the TCR 
complex to regulate T-cell signaling. OLP biopsy samples show robust 
expression of Lck  [], which suggests that the chronic inflammatory 
nature of the microenvironment in OLP might be reduced by targeting T 
cell signaling, and specifically the pivotal role of Lck  (). Such 
therapeutic measures may curtail the impact of T cell plasticity and subsets 
signatures of cytokines, while minimizing inhibition of basic physiological 
activities.

Another similar approach is to multi-target key proteins in the T cell 
signaling pathways, such as those found at the level of the surface 
receptors or downstream to Lck, or  those that act as co-stimulatory 
receptors. Multi-targeting may be advantageous, because it may preclude 
drug resistance, and be, overall, more potent by reducing or hindering
signaling pathway crosstalk  (Table 1 see ). 
Multi-targeting ZAP-70, PI-3k, and  nuclear transcription factors are 
alternate prime targets because these factors act downstream to Lck.

Trials of PI-3k inhibitors for cancer are ongoing  [,
]. These 
interventions have not been tested in the context of the oral pathologies 
discussed here.  However, based on the novel perspectives explored above 
[] and our own data  
[] we argue that PI-3k inhibitors may soon find 
effective therapeutic use in the treatment of premalignant oral lesions, 
including OLP.  Considering the adoption of these drugs in the 
armamentarium for treating premalignant oral lesions will improve the 
current understanding of the molecular efficacy of these drugs, and their 
mechanisms of action as well as resistance, and ultimately lead to 
improved treatment.

Molecular proteomic profiling, such as our work [], further indicates that 
OLP, OPM, OSCC and other oral and pharyngeal cancers may benefit 
from therapy based on inhibitors of PI-3k, Lck, and related signaling 
pathways, used as single or multi-drug therapy.  It is our contention here 
that a principal mode of action of these interventions is to target specific 
events modulated by T cells subpopulations, and driven by the 
microenvironment, such as, for instance, the use of anti-Lck to control 
inflammation, cancer progression and metastasis, or the use of PI-3k 
inhibitors in modulating the microenvironment to subdue tumor 
transformation and proliferation in oral premalignant lesions such as 
epithelial dysplasia.

Our proteomic profiling studies indicate  that other proteins in the 
PI-3krelated pathways may also be targeted, including Akt and mTor. Case in 
point, our data mining analysis suggested a critical role of Akt 
[] in these 
disease entities. mTor acts downstream  to Akt, and the mTor inhibitor 
rapamycin is already undergoing clinical development, with promising 
efficacy in the treatment of OLP lesions [].

Another approach to intervene in OLP, OPM and OSCC may be to target 
directly certain key factors of the microenvironment  (). Such 
direct targeting might require specific antibodies or decoy receptors. The 
fact that certain cytokines, immune cells and enzymes distinguish the 
microenvironments of the OLP and OSCC is a further confirmation of the 
similarity between these disease entities at the molecular and proteomic 
levels ().

Conclusion
Multi-factorial assessment informs multi-drug personalized targeting:  
Outlining the future:
With the advent of more reliable tools for molecular analysis (e.g., protein 
microarray, MALDI), the future management of disease entities such as 
those proposed here as models for our discussion (i.e., OLP, OPM, OSCC) 
can be based on the proteomic signatures of the lesion proper, and 
microenvironment analysis. Analysis  of the latter will include stromabased 
classifications, cytokine assessment; in-cell western blot analysis for 
signaling pathways and laser capture micro-dissection (LCM). LCM is 
effective in living and non-living tissue types to obtain localized segments 
for analysis of DNA, RNA and protein [].

This approach will provide better insights into the biology of OLP, OPM 
and OSCC, and it will allow a more  robust global molecular outlook of a 
disease, than the current micro-targeting approach that exists  
(). 
Current micro-targeting has resulted in an ineffective management of OLP 
lesions and in failure of cancer therapy, including drug resistance, and 
rapid progression of OPM cases to full blown cancer.

Personalized translational evidence-based medical therapy based on a 
characterization of the microenvironment and the model of T cell plasticity 
[[,
]] 
will follow the same global assessment disease state that we 
currently use.  But, it will be supported with a more robust molecular 
picture of both the lesion proper,  its microenvironment and related 
biological factors  (). Through the concept of biomarker voting 
[[,
]], 
the molecular pictures provided by these spatial segments can be 
correlated together for translational use. Taken together these correlated 
data will vary from patient to patient, but they will lead to fully informed 
translational evidence-based decision-making on treatment success, and 
afford better understanding for failure. The novel perspective we proffer 
will permit an easier identification and a better understanding of the 
complex network of biological factors that currently mask our management 
of these disease entities.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors thank the University of California Senate, and the UCLA 
School of Dentistry for providing partial funding for this research.

Citation:Oluwadara et al, Bioinformation 5(7): 285-290 (2011)

The multiple players in the microenvironment. Immune cells, cytokines, growth 
factors that mediate specific signaling pathways, stroma and paracrine factors, viral particles 
that may be oncogenic, and a myriad of additional biological factors actively compose the microenvironment.  Based on 
the existing research evidence, we proffer the hypothesis that fine alterations in the balance of 
these components of the microenvironment distinguish OLP, OPM and SCCA. Changes in the 
microenvironment may contribute to the reported plasticity of CD4 + T cell lineages, which itself results in altered 
cytokine profiles with associated important changes in the microenvironment that may drive 
significant alteration in the regulation of T-cell signaling events, including PI-3k, Lck, mTor, etc.

Pooled simultaneous molecular information from spatial segments is critical. 
The molecular spatial segments of the disease entity encompass the microenvironment and 
associated biological factors.  A full realization of the complex nature of the microenvironment 
is critical to achieve personalized therapy:  bringing together the molecular events 
in these spatial segments, drug micro-targeting modes of intervention will prevent drug 
resistance, and help predict possible treatment failure or success.

Lck inhibitors and PI-3k inhibitors in the management of OLP, OPM and OSCC. 
Lck is a src tyrosine kinase critical to T-cell signaling. PI-3k inhibitors target the 
PI-3k enzyme and inhibit its activities. Current clinical trials are ongoing to test 
PI-3k inhibitors. We postulate that Lck inhibitors will be found to be beneficial for 
OLP, particularly in combination with PI-3k inhibitors.  We propose that such inhibitor 
cocktails will be beneficial for most cases of OLP, OPM and OSCC, because this 
combinational approach will target the disease itself (OLP, OPM and OSCC) as well 
as stroma factors in the microenvironment.

The profiles of cells and cytokines associated with microenvironment in OLP and OSCC. 
The profile of cytokines and cells in OLP and OSCC share few similarities. In OLP, the 
microenvironment has several interleukins (IL-2, 4, 6, 10), as well as CD4+, CD8+
T cells, enzymes, and other cell populations associated with inflammation. In OSCC, enzymes, 
interleukins (IL-6, 8), inflammatory cells and mediators, angiogenesis factors (VEGF) 
contribute associated to the microenvironment. The microenvironment may strongly impact remission and 
recurrence patterns in OLP patients and the pattern of OLP-cancer transformation. Other than 
classification of tumors, stroma-based tumor classification may enhance combined tumor-stroma 
classification. Simultaneous assessments of microenvironment and these lesions should inform better 
correlation of molecular information.

