Background
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA) is a gram negative, rod-shaped and
opportunistic bacterium known for causing chronic infections
in cystic fibrosis and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) patients []. Its mode of action involves adherence to
tissue surface using its pili, flagellum and exo-S and replication
to form a mass of cells. The bacterium gradually synthesizes
biofilm for its prolonged attachment with host tissues and by its
virulent factors causes severe tissue damage. The bio films
protect these bacteria from adverse environmental factors,
hence raised a serious problem for medical care in
industrialised societies, especially for immune-compromised
patients and the elderly []. PA is capable of acquiring
resistance genes and hence, shows multiple drug resistance. The
increasing number of multi drug resistant PA (MDRPA) strains
has rendered many existing drugs as ineffective, including the
most powerful anti-pseudomonal beta-lactams [].

The capacity of PA to resist multiple front-line antibiotics makes
the eradication of the organism nearly impossible 
[]. This has
rendered an urgent need of discovery of new drugs and
drug/ligand molecules for treating infections caused by
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Recently, several drug targets for PA
PAO1 are predicted using network biology []. A protein
protein interaction network shows all possible interactions
between proteins of an organism. These interactions are
weighed and are considered on the basis of datasets available
for an organism. Hubs are identified using network measures
viz. degree and centrality. Disruption of these hubs by
drug/ligand molecules will cause disruption of essential
pathways in the organism and will help in the treatment of
infections. To address the issue of new drug/ligand discovery
we have employed the Orthologous gene mapping approach to
identify the suitable ligand molecule for the DNA Gyrase A
target in PA POA1 and structure modelling subsequently,
docking with various ligands []. Homologous sequences are
orthologous if they were separated by a speciation event. Two
organisms that are very closely related are likely to display very
similar DNA sequences between orthologs []. Pseudomonas
aeruginosa PAO1 is closely related to Bacillus subtilis and shows
statistically significant orthologs with it. Hence, a drug against
Bacillus subtilis could be effective against Pseudomonas aeruginosa
as shown by our analysis.

DNA Gyrase is an enzyme that influences all metabolic
processes involving DNA by regulating negative supercoiling
of bacterial DNA and is essential for replication 
[]. The enzyme
gets inhibited by two classes of antimicrobials. This shows that
its composition is from reversibly associated subunits 
[].
Inhibition of GyraseA subunit affects breakage and rejoining of
DNA, thereby, affecting metabolic pathways. Here, we have
modelled the structures of predicted drug targets of PA PAO1
using I-Tasser. Following this, Orthologous gene mapping is
done and a set of drugs that have been used for Bacillus subtilis,
are docked with PA proteins. The energies obtained on docking
with PA PAO1 proteins are comparable with Bacillus subtilis
subsp. subtilis str. 168 as control. These drugs could be effective
in overcoming PA multi drug resistant (MDRPA) problems as
the drugs are directed against hubs found in the network.

Methodology
In this study, primary focus is to identify the suitable drug
molecules against DNA Gyrase A PA PAO1. Recently, several
drug targets viz. PA0004gyrB, PA3168 gyrA, PA3482 metG,
PA3834valS, PA3987 leuS, PA4238 rpoA, PA4268 rpsL, PA4269
rpoC, and PA4967 parE have been reported on the basis of
network biology approch. We have selected PA0004 gyrB,
PA3168 gyrA and PA3987 leuS, drug targets on the basis of
finding statistically significant (orthologs; similar function in
divergent species) in COG (cluster of orthologs) database. We
collected orthogus genes in model organism Bacillus subtilis
subsp. subtilis str. 168 and their corresponding known drug
molecules. Drugs available for Bacillus sp. have been docked
with proteins of PA PAO1and the ligands have been tested for
drug-likeness, toxicity and other pharmacological properties.
The results have been analyzed in terms of energies or ‘poses’ to
give the best five poses which bind satisfactorily to the target
protein. These molecules could be analysed in-vitro and in-vivo
for confirmation and evaluation of its properties.

Retrieval of drug target and orthologous mapping:
From reported drug targets in PA PAO1, we have selected
PA0004, PA3168 and PA3987 for hypothesis of drug / ligand on
the basis of statistically significant orthology in close model
organisms. Orthologous genes have been found using Cluster
of Genes (COG) database and the e-value of 1e-5 has been used
for statistical significance []. All three targets of PA PAO1
show orthology with three distinct genes of Bacillus subtilis
subsp. subtilis str. 168 were selected.

Sequence analysis (MSA) and Phylogenetic analysis:
Sequence alignment has been performed for finding the
similarity and identity between PA PAO1 and Bacillus subtilis
subsp. Subtilisstr. 168 using ClustalW/MSA-Emboss Needleand
ClustalW2-Phylogeny softwares []. BSgyrB, BSgyrA and
BSleuS genes from Bacillus subtilis subsp. subtilis str. 168 have
exhibited orthology with PA3168, PA0004 and PA3987 genes of
Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA PAO1 [].

Ligand structure generation, modelling and docking:
Drugs against Bacillus subtilis genes have been searched from
literature and the structures have been downloaded from Pub
Chem in a 2-D format []. For refining the structures based on
alignment and hydrogen bonding, the 2-D structures have been
modified to 3-D structures using Marvin Sketch tool (3D
structure of ligand shows better binding efficiency with the
receptor proteins, as compared to 2D structures). The protein
structures of BS gyrB, BS gyrA, BSleuS, PA0004, PA3168 and
PA3987 have been modelled using the I-Tasser web server, a
package of standalone computer programs which is used for
protein structure prediction, refinement and structure-based
functional annotations [].

Docking has been performed using Mole Gro virtual docker
tool where the largest cavity in the target protein is identified
on the basis of cavity volume. This could be done online viz
castP software []. The docking is represented by MolDock
scoring function which has been derived from the PLP
(Piecewise Linear Potential) scoring functions 
[]. Docking of
ligand / drug has been performed in the largest cavity based on
cavity volume, and the results obtained are saved. From the
docking results, energy vs. conformations graph, the MolDock
score representing the binding energy and the hydrogen
bonding energy score are of particular importance for analysis.
These docking result as .MVD file format have been loaded on
the same workplace containing the ligand and the target cavity
to visualise and analyse the docking in various poses or
conformations of ligand as in .

Study of Ligand-Substrate Interactions:
Interactions of different poses of ligands have been investigated
on LigandScout 3.0.3 software package. Pharmacophores are an
ensemble of universal chemical features that characterises a
specific mode of action of a ligand in the active site of the
macromolecule in 3-D space necessary to ensure the optimal
interactions with a specific biological target and to trigger (or
block) its biological response. In other words it is the 3D
arrangement of functional groups that enable a compound to
exert particular biological effects. Pharmacophores
corresponding to all the drugs have been studied and
comparative differences of interactions between drug-drug
targets have been identified. The optimal interactions between
drug-drug targets and Chemical features including hydrogen
bonding, charge interactions and hydrophobic areas are
depicted in .

Discussion
BSgyrB, BSgyrA and BSleuS genes from Bacillus subtilis subsp.
subtilis str. 168 showed orthology with PA0004, PA3168 and
PA3987 genes of Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1. The identity
and similarity as obtained by ClustalW/MSA Orthologous gene
mapping method are summarised as follows: 2-
hydroxyquinoline, Nalidixic Acid, Oxolinic Acid, Norfloxacin
and Ciprofloxacin are known to affect BS as found from
literature [–]. 
These have been docked with BSgyrA gene of
Bacillus subtilis subsp. subtilis str. 168. The energies (docking
score) for these ligands have been found as -79.8034,-88.5147,-
107.328,-111.648 and-122.139 kJ/mol respectively with BSgyrA
 (see supplementary material). For BSgyrB, the drugs
found are 2 hydroxyquinoline, Novobiocin, Oxolinic Acid. The
energies after docking have been found as -75.4863,153.154 and
-107.975 kJ/mol respectively. Further, Norvaline has been used
as a drug for BSleuS. The energy obtained after docking is -
61.046 kJ/mol. Since, Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 protein
PA0004 showed orthology with BSgyrB gene, the drugs viz. 2-
hydroxyquinoline, Oxolinic Acid, Novobiocin have been
docked with PA0004. The energies obtained after docking are -
65.0716,-102.641,-115.071 kJ/mol. Similarly, for PA3168, 2-
hydroxyquinoline, Nalidixic Acid, Oxolinic Acid, Norfloxacin,
Ciprofloxacin drugs have been used.

The energies after docking have been found as -52.9323,-
86.9967, -72.9273, -72.4611, -76.2732 kJ/mol.For PA3987,
Norvaline has been docked and MolGro Docking energy was
found to be -50.1084kJ/mol as given in 
 (see
supplementary material). The drug Nalidixic acid is known to
target Bacterial DNA Gyrase along with other antibiotics
agaisnt Bacillus sp. could be used to control the growth of
orthologous close organism like PA PAO1. While conducting
docking experiment, Nalidixic Acid has shown -88.5147 kJ/mol
MolGro docking score with BSgyrA, which is comparable with
PA PAO1 protein PA3168 (docking score -86.9967 kJ/Mol).
Hence, it can be used for targeting PA3168 protein in PA PAO1,
which is an essential protein and once disrupted, can cause
elimination of the pathogen. However, other drugs used against
Bacillus subtilis subsp. str168 have not shown comparable
energy scores in PA PAO1. Also, the results obtained for other
drug target proteins, PA0004 and PA3987, have not shown
comparable energies in PA PAO1.

Conclusion
Orthologous gene mapping of Pseudomonas aeruginosa
PAO1genes namely PA0004, PA3168 andPA3987 showed
orthology with BSgyrB, BSgyrA and BSleuS genes of Bacillus
subtilis subsp.subtilis str. 168 respectively. Drugs have been
found for PA3168 (DNA Gyrase subunit A), PA0004 (DNA
Gyrase subunit B), and PA3987 (leucyl tRNA synthetase) based
on orthologous genes found in Bacillus subtilis subsp. subtilis
str.168. Nalidixic Acid is reported as an excellent inhibitor for
Gyrase A in Bacillus sp. and have been found to show
comparable energies and hydrogen bonding levels in PA PAO1
orthologous gene (statistically significant) PA3168 while the
docking results of target PA3168 drug target of PA PAO1 with
other drug molecules namely 2-hydroxyquinoline, Oxolinic
Acid, Norfloxacin and Ciprofloxacin cited for BS gyr A of
Bacillus subtilis subsp. subtilis str.168 were not comparable.
Thus, our study suggests that Nalidixic acid drug molecule
could be a potential DNA Gyrase A inhibitor in PA PAO1,
which could be validated by in-vitro experiments. Further, the
computer aided drug discovery process along with genomic
information of drug targets may enhance our understanding
towards in-sight of mechanism of drug- target interactions and
their binding patterns.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We are thankful to Jaypee Institute of Information Technology,
Noida for providing the necessary facility to conduct the study
and Prof. G.B.K.S Prasad, SOS Biotechnology, Jiwaji University,
Gwalior, M.P. for his visionary support.

Citation:Gupta et al, Bioinformation 9(3): 116-120 (2013)

Snapshots of docking and interaction between DNA Gyrase subunit A protein receptor and their respective drug
Nalidixic acid from Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Bacillus subtilis. (A) and (B) Red color represents ligands or drug molecules and
wireform and amino acid residue represent protein structure; (C) The interaction of ligands with Bacillus subtilis subsp. subtilis str.
168 proteins; (D) The interaction of ligands with Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 proteins.

