Background
The retrotransposons constitute the most common class of
repetitive DNA in a broad range of taxa, interspersed within the
genome and ubiquitous in eukaryotes. It is currently believed
that they have played a role in shaping genome architectures
contributing significantly to the remarkable variations in
genome size and evolution by changing the structures and
expression patterns of genes []. The advent of PCR methods
for amplifying conserved domains of retrotranspons has led to
the rapid increase of finding on sequence evolution and
phylogenetic relationships of the Ty1-copia in plant genomes 
[,
]. 
In this scenario, the prevailing view is that the Ty1-copia
retrotransposons existed in the early phase of eukaryote life and
diverged into heterogeneous subgroups before modern plant
species aroused []. Previous studies have shown large
heterogeneity within LTR retroelements as a result of mutations
accumulated during evolution. These mutations originated
different lineages of retrotransposons, characterized by
differences in activity and chromosomes distribution 
[].
Retrotransposon are usually located in intergenics regions and
tend to accumulate in centromeres, telomeres and
heterochromatic regions. In many cases, the same
retrotransposon is found in different cultivars of the same
species and in several related species, but not in far distant taxa
[,
].

Phylogenetic analysis of reverse transcriptase (RT) sequences
from the Ty1-copia retrotransposons showed that the sequence
heterogeneity is generally proportional to the evolutionary
distance of their host plant species, implying that the vertical
transmission has been a major factor in the evolution of Ty1-
copia retrotransposons within the plants 
[]. On the other hand,
based on the high sequence conservation across large
evolutionary distances and a lower sequence similarity between
elements from the same genome and related species, it has been
postulated that the horizontal transmission (HT) of Ty1-copia
retrotransposons can occur in plants []. Few cases of HT
involving transposable elements have been reported, and most
involved Class II transposable elements []. In this study we
have isolated and characterized new Ty1-copia retrotransposons
in seven dicotyledon plants and carried out a phylogenetic
analysis. Distinct evolutionary lineages of Ty1-like were
identified, and according to several authors significant variation
among Ty clade elements were observed. The similarity
between Solanum melongena and Phytophthora infestans
retroelements shown by molecular analysis and phylogenetic
relationships was intriguing since these two species are
unrelated. This similarity suggested that HT of the LTR
retrotransposon named Phythophthora (GenBank accession no.
CAI72292.1) has occurred within the Solanum melongena
genome.

Methodology
Plant material and genomic DNA isolation:
Taxonomic classification of the studied angiosperm species is
listed in  (see supplemental material) Plants were
obtained from a nursery in South-Italy (Caserta). Total DNA
from each plant species was extracted from the fresh leaf tissues
according to Fantaccione and coworkers [].

PCR strategy, internal controls, cloning and sequencing:
Total DNA (2 µg) was completely digested with EcoRI (Roche)
and digested samples (200 ng) were used for PCR
amplifications with three combinations of degenerate
oligonucleotide primers (RT1/RNase H1; RT2/RNase H1;
RT3/RNase H1). The sense RT1 (5'-
GATGTDAARACKRCNTTYYTD-3'), RT2 (5'-
ATGGAGCARCCDGAMGGHTTY-3'), RT3 (5'-
TATGTDGATGAYATGYTDATT-3') and the antisense RNase
H1 (5'-CCTCACATCWATRTGYTTBGW-3') degenerate
oligonucleotide primers, which respectively correspond to the
conserved RT (DVKTA(T)FL, MEQPE(D)GF, YVDDMLI) and
ribonuclease H (RNase H) (T(S)KHIDVR) peptide motifs of the
Ty1-copia group retrotransposons were used. For each species,
PCR amplifications (0.8-1 kb) were performed in 50 µL volume
of 2 mM MgCl2, 200 µΜ of each dNTP, 200 µΜ of each primer
and 2 U of FastStart Taq DNA Polymerase (Roche). After an
initial denaturation step for 4 min at 94°C, the PCR reactions
were subjected to 30 cycles of amplification consisting of 1 min
denaturation at 94°C, 1 min annealing at 44°C and 1 min
extension at 72°C with a 10 min final extension at 72°C. PCR
products were purified from the agarose gel, cloned in pDrive
vector (Qiagen) and sequenced using ABI 377 automated DNA
sequencer (Applied Biosystems). Internal PCR controls: Pinci1-
26 forward (5'-GTATGTGGGGCTCCAAGCC-3') and Pinci1-26
reverse (5'-GCGGCTGCACGGTCATTG-3') were designed on
Pinci1-26 noncoding infection-specific mRNA sequence of P.
infestans (GenBank accession no. EF091740). The control PCR
was carried out as described above. All clones were named as
follows: The first letter meant cloning product, the second and
third letter indicated the genus and species (pC.a.= C. Annuum,
pC.m.= C. Melo, pC.s.= C. Scolymus, pH.m.= H. Macrophylla,
pP.a.= P. Avium, pS.m.= S. Melongena, pV.v.= V. Vinifera) the
fourth letter identified the numeric sequence of the screened
clones.

Databases, sequence analysis and phylogenetic trees:
Nucleotide sequences were compared to the GenBank-NCBI
database using the BLAST network service
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/BLAST/) and analyzed using
CENSOR software (http://www.girinst.org/censor). Multiple
sequence alignments were performed utilizing the Clustal
(1.8) program [] from the DDBJ Homology Search system
(http://www.ddbj.nig.ac.jp) with blosum matrix. The
phylogenetic trees were constructed by Neighbor-Joining
method [] and plotted by DrawTree using the PHYLIP
software package []. Nonparametric bootstrap resampling
(1000 replicates) was used to estimate the clade robustness. Cvalues
of genome plants were estimated using the Angiosperm
DNA C-values database available at
http://www.rbgkew.org.uk./cval/database1.thml site.

Analysis of synonymous and nonsynonymous substitution per site and codon bias:
pC.a.D and pS.m.D 
retrotransposons were compared to the P.
infestans RT-ORF sequence (GenBank accession no. CAI72292.1)
to examine the differences in synonymous and nonsynonymous
changes using the SNAP (Synonymous/Nonsynonymous
Analysis Program) tool in the HIV Sequence Database
(http://www.hiv.lanl.gov). This program uses the algorithm
devised by Nei and Gojobori []. Codon bias as determined by
the Nc value was computed using the Codon W program
(http://bioweb.pasteur.fr/seqanal/interfaces/codonw.html).

Discussion
Identification of Ty1-copia retrotranspons in various plant species:
In order to study the evolution of Ty1-copia, we performed a
PCR-based assay using genomic DNAs from seven plant
species. By using the degenerate oligonucleotide primers
described in methodology, single products of the expected size
(approx. 1000 bp) were obtained and 52 clones were sequenced
 
(see supplemental material). Based on a search against
the GenBank database and CENSOR software, 37 sequences
showed clear similarity (40%-60%) to RT-RnaseH domains
 
(see supplemental material). The majority of detected
Ty1-copia elements revealed defective translated products for
the presence of stop codons and short indels that resulted in
frameshift and frame stop mutations, resulting transcriptionally
or transpositionally inactive. The variations within the inactive
elements can contribute to the evolution of the plant genome,
leading to gene duplication events and providing new
properties in the retrotransposition mechanisms 
[].

Phylogenetic analysis of Ty1-copia-like retrotransposons in plants:
Phylogenetic relationships were determined by comparing the
thirty-seven clones among them or with retrotransposons from
other plant species (,
,
,
 &amp; 
 see supplemental
material) Phylogenetic analysis in () showed that the
retrotransposons were clustered in three clades (A, B and C).
Clade A was further divided in four subclades (AI, AII, AIII
and AIV), as judged by the bootstrap values. The subclades AI
and AIII contained members from monocotyledon and
dicotyledon plants. These results could be explained by the
universal idea that the different retrotransposons already
existed before the divergence between monocotyledon and
dicotyledon plants and have been vertically transferred 
[].
Vertical relationships were found also among several copia-like
retrotransposons from related plant species belonging to the
Solanaceae family (L. esculentum, N. tabacum, L. chilense, C.
annuum, S. melongena and I. batatas), as shown in subclades B
and C (). However, vertical and horizontal
transmissions are not mutually exclusive []. In fact, pS.m.D
and pC.a.D retrotransposons were clustered in the subclass AI
together with same dicotyledon plant retrotransposons (B. rapa
and A. thaliana). In addition, pC.s.D retrotransposon and a
monocotyledon retrotransposon from O. sativa genome
clustered together in the subclade AIII (79% of positivity score).
Similar phylogenetic relationships were observed about plant
retrotransposons belonging to the Rosids subclass, too 
().

Interestingly, when we submitted the pC.a.D and pS.m.D
retrotransposons from C. annuum and S. melongena genomes
(Asterids subclass and Solanaceae family) to a Blastx search
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/BLAST/), the P. infestans
fungal hit (GenBank accession no.CAI72292.1) matched with
59% and 63% positivity scores, respectively. This plant
pathogen parasitizes a large number of host species, including
S. melongena and C. annuum 
[,
]. Although fungi and
angiosperm plants last shared a common evolutionary ancestor
about 2.5 billion years, pC.a.D and pS.m.D elements are
included in the same group with P. infestans retrotransposon
(). Codon bias is a possible selective constraint on
synonymous nucleotides []. A bias in codon usage occurs
when synonymous codons are not all used at the same
frequency in coding DNA and such bias in codon usage could
result from mutational pressure or from selective pressure 
[].
A common measure of codon bias is the effective number of
codons (Nc), which can vary from 21 (when only one codon is
effectively used for each amino acid) and 61 (when codons are
used randomly) []. 
The P. infestans, S. melongena and C.
annuum retrotransposon sequences have an Nc value of 52.81,
51.84 and 47.60, respectively, consistent with only relatively
moderate codon bias. Since selection operates much more
efficiently on nonsynonymous base substitution 
[], a common
measure of selection for function is the ratio of synonymous to
nonsynonymous substitution per site (dS/dN). When RT
sequences from pC.a.D and pS.m.D retrotransposons were
separately compared to P. infestans putative polyprotein using
the SNAP program, the corrected frequencies of
nonsynonymous substitutions for this region were 0.3408 and
0.3481, and the corrected frequencies of synonymous
substitutions ranges were 0.8415 and 0.9013. Importantly, the
ratio dS/dN for these two analysis pairs was only 2.4695 and
2.5895, consistent with a weak selection for function at the
amino acid level. To eliminate any possible DNA contamination
from host-oomycete interaction, we instituted internal PCR
controls using primers designed on Pinci1-26 pathogen
sequence from P. Infestans 
[] and we found no PCR
amplification products that are no contamination.

Conclusion
Our analysis showed that the phylogenetic relationships
between Ty1-copia retrotransposons in several plant genomes
are complex and consistent with the universal idea that today
the different retrotransposons pervade the entire plant kingdom
as large and highly heterogeneous populations. The high
degree of similarity between retrotransposons from divergent
species and, in addition, the sequence divergence in the same
species and/or related species suggests that the horizontal
transmission events occurred in Ty1-copia evolution. In this
scenario, we have attempted to understand whether the
relatively high degree of the sequence conservation between the
retrotransposons from pathogen oomycete P. infestans and two
Asterids species may be a new example of horizontal gene
transfer.

Taken together, our data support the horizontal transmission
hypothesis since it seems unlikely that this high degree of the
sequence conservation over such a length of time is the product
of standard vertical transmission. Our example is a minor
contribution and further studies are needed to exhaustively
identify retrotransposons from plant species to gain further
insight into the evolutionary history of the relationship between
retrotransposons and their genome hosts.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors are grateful to Joseph Sepe (II University of Naples,
Caserta, Italy), for improving the manuscript.

Citation:Woodrow et al, Bioinformation 8(6): 267-271 (2012)

Phylogenetic evidence of horizontal transmission from
P. infestans to their host flowering plants. Bootstrap values of
50% and higher are shown (1,000 trials).

Phylogenetic trees of the Ty1-copia group
retrotransposons from seven plant species based on RT and
RNase H domains. Numbers on the branches are the bootstrap
percentages for 1,000 replicates.

A phylogenetic tree based on the RT and RNase H
domain analysis from Ty1-copia group retrotransposons in
Asterids species and in different plant using the Neighbor-
Joining method. Numerals adjacent to branches indicate are the
bootstrap values for 1,000 replicates. Ty1-copia retrotransposons
previously identified are shown as accession number and
source species.

A phylogenetic tree based on the RT and RNase H
domain analysis from Ty1-copia group retrotransposons in
Rosids species and in different plant using the Neighbor-Joining
method. Bootstrap values of 50% and higher are shown (1,000
trials). Ty1-copia retrotransposons previously identified are
shown as accession number and source species.

