Background
Hairs are one of the defining features of mammals, are a
complex structure, epidermal in its origin, grow from the
dermal skin layer, making a protective layer and serves for a
number of important biological functions. They may be of
many types from very fine to the stiff quills, but soft woolly
hairs are more common. Human body is covered with very
fine vellus hairs except some parts like lips, parts of the
genitals, nipples, soles and palms. Hair growth on the human
body starts at the age of six months when the fetus is in the
uterus. It has been observed that hair grow at different rates
among different ethnic races.

Hypertrichosis is an excessive hair growth at inappropriate
body parts, which can be localized or generalized and may be
acquired or congenital []. Congenital hypertrichosis, is an
inherited autosomal dominant trait [], characterized by
increased lanugo hair at birth covering the whole body except
some parts like palms and soles etc []. The affected
individuals display certain abnormal facial characteristics like
triangular, coarse face, broad intercanthal distance and long
palpebral fissures [], small anteverted nares, thick nasal
wings, a trapezoid mouth and bone abnormalities [,
].

Cytogenetics analysis has revealed an important association
between rearrangements of chromosome 8, with the break
point 8q22–8q24 [,
]. Trichorhinophalangeal syndrome 1
(TRPS1), a transcription factor is one of the candidate that
maps to 8q23 []. Trps1 has also been found expressing in
highly proliferative epithelial cells of rat, mouse and human
hair follicles []. In this paper, we considered the congenital
hypertrichosis associated SNPs of structural and UTR regions
of TRPS1 with respect to their effect on structure and also to
reveal the extent to which these SNPs affect the respective
protein. This study will also help to better understand the
potential molecular causes of several other genetic disorders,
which will provide guidance for further studies towards
developing treatment of the genetic disorders.

Methodology
A single nucleotide substitution, addition or deletion can
significantly affect structure and function of a gene product or
some times of multiple gene products. Associating sequence
variations with heritable phenotypic characters is an
important area of research in molecular biology. Single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are the most common
sequence variations found nearly in all genomes. For detailed
structure based assessment of non-synonymous SNPs, the
human TRPS1 protein sequence was retrieved from Ensembl
(www.ensembl.org/) and it's associated SNPs from dbSNP
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/SNP/). The
deleterious or intolerant SNPs were determined through SIFT
(Sorting intolerant from tolerant) [], sorting intolerant from
tolerant amino acid substitutions based on sequence
homology and predict whether an amino acid substitution in a
protein will have a phenotypic effect. Functionally important
residue positions should be conserved, whereas unimportant
appear diverse in an alignment of the protein family. The
damaging SNPs were further sorted from benign by using
PolyPhen server (genetics.bwh.harvard.edu/pph/), predicting
the possible impact of residue substitution on the structure
and function of a human protein. It identifies homologues of
the input through BLAST in the nrdb database and computes
the absolute difference value between profile scores of both
allelic variants in the polymoprphic position.

Proteins are complex organic compounds, essential to the
structure and function of all living cells and viruses. Usually
they do not exist as linear polypeptides but rather as compact
and folded structures. Protein functions are determined by
their overall three-dimensional conformation. They can be
better understood in terms of the simple secondary structure
elements put together in high order arrangements which
ultimately define their biological functions. Prediction of
protein structure and its features is therefore an important
area of computational biology. The screened SNPs were
substituted in the native TRPS1 protein sequence to get the
mutants, secondary structures were predicted using GOR IV
method [] and were aligned through PRALINE
(http://www.ibi.vu.nl/programs/pralinewww/), a multiple
sequence alignment program based upon progressive
alignment to compare the proteins for their variations in the
secondary structure elements. The three-dimensional structure
of TRPS1 protein and its mutants were predicted through ITasser
server [] which builds the 3D models based on
multiple-threading alignments. The predicted models were
refined through FG-MD
(http://zhanglab.ccmb.med.umich.edu/FG-MD/) to enhance
the quality of predicted structures and validated for quality
assurance through multiple servers like ProSA-web [],
WHATIF [] and RAMPAGE 
[]. Ramachandran plot is a
two-dimensional plot of φ-ψ angles for the assessment of
protein backbone, depicts information about the protein
structure and conformation and also provides information
about the residues lying in favored, allowed or outlier region
[].

The predicted models were compared in 3D against the native
protein through PDBeFold for the assessment of structural
impacts enforced by the SNPs. Physiochemical properties for
the native and mutants were predicted through ProtParam for
further analysis of the impact of SNPs on molecular weight,
theoretical PI, amino acid composition, instability index,
grand average of hydrophobicity etc which can thus affect the
interactions of TRPS1 protein in the network.

Discussion
The TRPS1 gene, located on chromosome 8 from 116,420,723 to
116,681,227 provides instructions for making a protein that
regulates the activity of many other genes. A total of 38 SNPs
of TRPS1 protein were retrieved from dbSNP which were
further screened by SIFT and PolyPhen based on their
functional impacts. It was observed that, 17 SNPs were
categorized as intolerant that can affect protein function on the
basis of their tolerance index &lt;0.05 and three were categorized
as damaging by Polyphen server on the basis of PSIC value.
Out of the screened SNPs, rs181507248 (tolerance index 0.01)
and rs146506752 (tolerance index 0.00) were categorized both
as intolerant by SIFT as well as damaging by PolyPhen (PSIC
value 1.773 and 1.692 respectively), were modeled and
compared to the native TRPS1 protein for investigating their
structural variations. rs181507248 cause substitution of R→L at
position 814 while rs146506752 causes V→I substitution at
residue position 639. There were observed 278 Alpha Helices
in the native protein which remained conserved after
substitutions V639I (rs181507248) and R814L (rs146506752),
but changes were observed in the extended strands and
random coils. Substitution V639I (rs181507248) caused a
decrease in extended strands from 215 to 213 while increase in
random coils from 801 to 803. Similarly, R814L (rs146506752)
caused an increase in extended strands from 215 to 216 while
decrease in random coils from 801 to 800.

The alternations of key residues in a protein cause loss of its
normal biological functions. Theoretical pI of mutant TRPS1
protein with rs181507248 was lower than normal (7.53) by 0.26
while that of the mutant with rs146506752 by 0.37, which
means increase in net negative charge and thus promoting
hydrophobicity. Both the SNPs caused changes in the
secondary structure elements and physiochemical properties
thus it was inferred that these changes may be translated into
the tertiary structure. Protein tertiary structures are vital to
narrate the function of protein and thus were predicted for the
native TRPS1 Protein as it was previously unpredicted. The
predicted native model was properly refined and validated for
quality enhancement. It was ensured that there lie no errors in
valine, threonine, leucine, isoleucine, arginine, phenylalanine,
tyrosine, aspartic acid, glutamic acid and torsion angle
conventions. Bond lengths were in agreement with typical
bond lengths, side chain of residues was planar and lie within
the expected RMS deviations, there were no atoms with wrong
handedness and z-score was observed -2.89. After fulfilling
the necessary formalities, the model was successfully
submitted to the Protein Model Database and was assigned
with PMDB ID PM0077843.

Knowledge of protein structure provides an insight into its
interactions [], 
which define the protein's biological role and
functions []. 
3D structure are more conserved than sequence
[], 
thus native and mutant structures were superimposed in
three dimensions which actually produces a measure to assess
the level of similarity of the aligned structures. RMSD value of
2.316Å was observed for R814L (rs181507248) and 2.11Å for
V639I (rs146506752). Generally RMSD value between 0 and
1.5Å represent very similar structures while increase in RMSD
means increase structural dissimilarity. Moreover, small
RMSD computed over large structures are also very
significant as compared to larger RMSD values computed over
structures with small number of residues. TRPS1 protein is a
large protein so the observed RMSD values of 2.11Å and
2.316Å means significant structural variations 
(),
reflecting significant functional variations.

Conclusion
SNPs represent the most common and frequent type of
sequence variations in human DNA. Non-synonymous coding
SNPs are considered to have the highest impact on phenotype
of an organism. Thirty eight non-synonymous coding SNPs in
the structural and UTR regions of TRPS1, associated with
hypertrichosis unversalis were considered in this study with
respect to their effect on structure and the extent to which they
affect the respective protein. Sequence and Structure based
computations were systematically evaluated and applied to
the single nucleotide polymorphisms and it was observed that
two of them (rs181507248 and rs146506752) are damaging as
they affect the protein structure both at secondary and tertiary
levels and also affecting other physiochemical properties of
TRPS1 Protein, so damaging its interactions in the network
also. It is hoped that this study will help to better explain the
consequences posed by these SNPs. Our comprehensive
investigation will also provide a valuable insight into some of
the features that have not been previously studied and
computational confirmation for some of the previous results
by other researchers. It is obvious from the results that these
computational approaches can be used against other genetic
disorders as well.

Citation:Waheed et al, 8(7): 316-318 (2012)

Tertiary structures of the Native and mutated TRPS1
proteins predicted through I-Tasser and refined through FGMD,
circles shows the areas of structural variations. a)
Unrefined tertiary structure of Native TRPS1 (b) Refined
tertiary structure of Native TRPS1; (c) Tertiary structure of
V639I (rs181507248); (d) Tertiary structure of R814L
(rs146506752)

