Background
It is often expensive and time consuming to obtain biological samples for 
microarray studies. To obtain statistical power for testing whether genes are 
differentially expressed across experimental conditions, investigators need to 
know the minimal sample size required for their experiments. On the other hand, 
if microarray experiments are done with available samples only, investigators 
need to know the statistical power of the test.

We developed a web-based calculator, called SPCalc, to help 
investigators calculate (1) sample size and (2) power in the planning stage of 
a microarray study. This program helps investigators to determine how many 
samples are needed to achieve a specified power for testing differentially 
expressed genes. Conversely, this program can help determine the power when the 
study sample size is given.

To the best of our knowledge, SPCalc is the only web-based 
calculator for sample-size and power calculation for microarray studies. The 
web interface of SPCalc is user-friendly. It is simple to use 
and is well documented.

Methodology
This web-based calculator, which is based on methodologies described in 
[] and [], provides two utilities for 
sample-size calculations for two types of experimental designs (a completely 
randomized treatment-control design and a matched-pairs design) and three 
utilities for power calculation for four types of experimental designs (a 
completely randomized treatment-control design, a matched-pairs design, a 
multiple-treatment design having an isolated treatment effect, and a randomized 
block design).

Input
For both sample-size and power calculation utilities, there are five input 
text fields corresponding five input parameters. Clicking the 
Calculate button submits input parameters. A Clear button is used to 
clear inputs in all five input fields. Validation of the values of input fields 
is performed after the Calculate button is clicked.

Output
For sample-size calculation utilities, there are three output text fields 
corresponding to (1) statistical difference between treatment and control 
conditions under H1, (2) sample size 
n for each group, and (3) total sample size 2n needed 
for the study, respectively. For power calculation utilities, there are two 
output text fields corresponding to (1) non-centrality parameter 
ψ1, and (2) power, respectively.

Caveats and Future Development
SPCalc was written via JavaScript and can be run via any 
JavaScript-enabled web browser. The current version of SPCalc 
uses the Sidak approach to control type I error. The new version of 
SPCalc will add options to control false discovery rates. [
]

This project was support by NIH grant HG02510 (Lee, M-L.T.).

Figures and Tables
A snapshot of the home webpage of SPCalc


      Citation:Qiu &amp; Lee, Bioinformation 1(7): 251-252 (2006)

