Background
HIV-1 is a member of retrovirus family that cause AIDS in
human. AIDS epidemic is considered as one of the most
destructive disease in the modern era. It will make immune
system weakened and leading into lethal opportunistic
infection [,
]. More than 33 million people have been infected
by AIDS until 2010 and this number increases approximately by
2-3 million per year [].

When replicating in the host cell, HIV utilizes vital production
enzymes to create mature virions. One of these enzymes is
reverse transcriptase (RT). HIV contains RNA genomic in its
virion, and within host cell it will be converted by reverse
transcriptase to cDNA (complimentary DNA) which in turn
will be integrated into the host cell to produce essential protein
of new viral maturation []. Because of RT essential role in the
HIV life cycle, it has been considered as major anti HIV-1 drug
targets []. FDA clinically approved HIV-1 reverse transcriptase
inhibitors could be categorized into nucleoside reverse
transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs), nucleotide reverse
transcriptase inhibitors (NtRTIs), and non-nucleoside reverse
transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs). NRTIs were the first HIV
drug approved for clinical use; it has structure similar to
reverse transcriptase's substrate but lack hydroxyl functional
group at position 3'. In the other hand, NNRTIs target the
binding site of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase directly [].

HIV has high mutation rate as it lacks the ability to proofread
its reverse transcription process. If the mutation occurred at the
HIV binding pocket, it will more likely to develop resistances.
Because of that reason, there is constant need for new drugs 
[,
]. Novel drugs could be developed from synthetic molecules or
natural resources. Natural products have been reported as HIV-
1 RT potent inhibitor, most notably from flavonoid groups 
[–]. The development of natural products compound as lead
could provide benefits for HIV future treatment.

Indonesia has been considered as one of the most varied
biodiversity center in the world, only outranked by Brazil in the
first place. There are more than 30,000 plant species in
Indonesia from approximately 40,000 species known on earth.
At least 9,600 species have pharmacological activity 
[].
Previous research has collected few of the natural product
compounds and turns it in into database []. This database
could provide us valuable and potential lead compounds for
various diseases and targets, including HIV-1 RT.

Virtual screening is known to be useful method for selecting
hits and searching lead from vast database. It has many
advantages such as less cost, and time consuming. It also
reduces the number of compound to be extracted or
synthesized, and assayed by a factor of 10 to 1000 []. It could
be applied to screen a large set of library compounds and
complement HTS technique to identify hits []. Because of its
applicability, virtual screening will be done to search potential
HIV-1 RT inhibitors from herbal database of Indonesia.

The aim of this research was to apply the virtual screening to
the Indonesian herbal database as HIV-1 reverse transcriptase
inhibitors. This research employed structure based screening
(docking) with AutoDock 4 [] and PyRx 
[] as tools of the
virtual screening. Potential hits from the natural compounds
will be represented as ranks. Top ten compounds will be
considered as hits.

Methodology
This research was done using literature study and virtual
screening by molecular docking (structure-based virtual
screening). The experimental design applied was as follow.

Preparing the HIV-1 RT protein structure:
This research started by selecting HIV-1 reverse transcriptase
structure suitable as docking target. The HIV-1 reverse
transcriptase structure consists of p66 and p51 subunit was
obtained from protein databank website []. Inclusion criteria
used to choose the target are: wild type HIV-RT, binding with
ligand or inhibitor, complete chain information and has
resolution less than 2.5 Å. The chosen protein structure was
3LP1, HIV-1 RT bound with NVP (nevirapine) []. The
macromolecule downloaded as *.pdb file format.

The structure was optimized using VegaZZ []. The
optimization includes addition of hydrogen with “protein” and
“each residue ends” option, separation of solvent molecules and
cofactor or ligand continued by adding partial charges
(Gasteiger), applying AutoDock forcefield with AutoDockTools
in MGLTools 1.5.4.

Preparing Ligand File Format:
Indonesian herbal compounds structure were obtained from the
Herbaldb []. The database 3D structure was generated using
VegaZZ script “2D to 3D”. This structure then optimized by
adding hydrogen with “generic organic” and “after each heavy
atom” option, After adding hydrogen to the structure, the
minimization was done using steepest descent and conjugate
gradient 1,000 steps for each method. The last step was adding
Gasteiger partial charges, and applying AutoDock force field
with AutoDockTools.

Validating of Molecular Docking Protocol:
Using 3LP1 crystal structure containing nevirapine as ligand
reference, the ligand binding site coordinates were defined by
AutoDockTools. This binding site will be used as the center
target of molecular docking for the virtual screening. The
coordinates of binding site center were x = 10.350; y = 14.076;
and z = 18,252 in NNRTI pocket.

After defining the binding site, preliminary docking was done
to validate the protocol using 14 control compounds given in
the  (see supplementary material). The control used
was referring to the FDA approved drugs. NNRTIs used as
positive controls, while protease inhibitors (PIs) and integrase
inhibitor as negative controls []. Molecular docking was
attempted in triplicate using AutoDock 4.

Virtual Screening of Indonesian Herbal Database:
Virtual screening was done using PyRx software with best
parameters of the control compounds orientation docking. Grid
parameter used was 50 x 50 x 50 units with 0.375 Å per unit.
Docking parameter was set at 250,000 calculations; 27,000
generations; 150 populations; mutation and crossover rate at
default. Virtual screening was applied five times.

Refinement Analysis:
Top ten compounds screened were refined by afterward
docking. The parameter was set at 2,500,000 calculations. Best
pose then analyzed to observe its binding site and interactions
using PyMOL []. Binding site was defined as residues in
proximity of 5 Å from the docked ligand pose.

Results &amp; Discussion
The preliminary docking was done three times (N=3) with 14
control compounds listed. Five compounds as positive controls
which were known to have inhibition activity to HIV-1 RT:
etravirine, nevirapine, rilpivirine, efavirenz and delavirdine.
The docking results were ranked based on its best docked
binding energy and shown in (). Using optimized
parameter, positive controls outrank all negative controls.

After obtaining the parameter from preliminary docking,
virtual screening was applied to the Indonesian Herbal
Database (http://herbaldb.farmasi.ui.ac.id) 
[]. Top ten
compounds were given in the  (see supplementary
material). The average binding energies varies from -11.28
kcal/mol to -10.36 kcal/mol. From five virtual screening runs,
three of the compounds were consistently ranked as top ten
from each run. The three compounds are vitexilactone, brucine
N-oxide, and morusin. The first ranked compound, mulberrin,
alongside with morusin and sanggenol N (ranked 9 and 10,
respectively) were flavonoids from Moraceae family, notably
from Artocarpus fretessi, A. gomezanius Wallich ex Trexcul, A.
heterophyllus, Morus alba, M. australis Poir, and M. mongolica 
[,
–]. Recent research shows that flavonoids from Morus alba
(e.g morusin, kuvanon H and morusin-4'-glucoside) have anti-
HIV activities []. However, we have not found any research
that shows the anti-HIV activities of sanggenol N.

Plucheoside A ranked as second compound. It is terpene
glycoside from Pluchea indica [,
,
]. Locher et al have
studied the anti HIV-1 activities of Hawaiian plants. From that
research, it was concluded that Pluchea indica could inhibit HIV-
1 activities, but the mechanism of inhibition was not revealed
further []. Compound ranked on third position is
vitexilactone, a diterpene from Vitex cannabifolia, V.
cannabinifolia, V. trifolia and Tinospora rumphii [,
,
–].
This plant is known well as a treatment for HIV-AIDS and
shown anti HIV-1 RT activities []. However, there was not
any recent research that directly connects vitexilactone with
HIV-1 RT inhibitor activities.

Brucine N-oxide as fourth ranked compound is an indole
alkaloid from Strychnos atlantica, S. lucida R. Br, S. Spinosa, and
S. wallichiana [,
,
]. The compound itself has no recent
study which shows its activities as HIV inhibitor. Nevertheless,
indole alkaloids have been researched because of its antiviral
activities. Some research also show indole derived alkaloid
activities as anti HIV, such as the study of derivates of isatisine
A done by Ji-Feng Liu et al which shown moderate anti-HIV
activity []. The appearance of brucine N-oxide as hits could
suggest us a possibility of new indole alkaloids to be anti HIV-1
RT lead compound.

Cyanidin 3-arabinoside is a flavonoid compound that spreads
among plants of Ericaceae familia such as Empetrum nigrum and
Vaccinium spp. Also spread amongst other plant like Theobroma
cacao, Malus sylvestris, Mangifera indica, and Camellia japonica 
[,
,
,
]. 
The aglycone of this compound, cyanidin and its
derivates predicted to have antiretroviral activities 
[,
].

Alpha-mangostin, ranked sixth, is a xanthone compound from
Allanbackia monticola STANER L.C., Garcinia cowa, G. dulcis, G.
echinocarpa, G. fusca, G. mangostana, G. terpnophylla, and
Cratoxylum cochinchinense 
[,
,
–]. Mangostin was known
for its anti HIV activities, but the suggested inhibition
mechanism was noncompetitive HIV protease inhibitor as
shown in study done by Chen et al 
[].

Guaijaverin is a 3-arabinopyranoside glycoside of quercetine
from Psidium guajava, Taxodium distichum, and Ericaceae familia
[,
,
]. Eventhough it is more famous for its bacteriostatic
and antiplaque activities, its aglycone was also exhibit antiviral
and HIV-1 inhibitor [,
], erycristagallin is a pterocarpane
from Erythrina genus plants such as Erythrina orientalis 
[,
].
The plant species of Erythrina abyssinica was suggested to have
anti-HIV activities []. However, no recent research seems to
directly relate the plant activities with erycristagallin.

Out of top ten compounds, five compounds were belong to
flavonoid group or its glycoside. This could give a new view on
potential development of flavonoids derived compound as anti-
HIV by their inhibition mechanism of HIV-1 reverse
transcriptase. A research in the future should be done to refine
and enhance the better criteria for making flavonoid as HIV-1
RT inhibitor lead compound.

Mulberrin, morusin, sanggenol N, erycristagallin, and
plucheoside A were amongst the top ten compounds from
plants that show anti HIV-activities but not specifically show
RT inhibitor activities. Further in vitro anti-RT research should
be done with these compounds to find the direct connection
between the plants' compounds with their activities as anti-
HIV. Anti-HIV activities of brucine N-oxide and its source plant
never been reported on recent research. But as a member of
indole alkaloid group, it still show some promise to be
researched by in vitro study as a member of indole alkaloid
group. Alpha mangostin, vitexilactone, guaijaverin and
cyanidin 3-arabinoside has shown anti HIV activities from
previous experiment, but they could be developed further by
initiating medicinal chemistry studies to improve the molecules
as leads.

From further docking of the top ten compounds, we can find
residues contributing as binding site and might be referred in
future research. The interaction analysis of these compounds
was observed on docked pose with lowest energy. All the
compounds in docking process involves in hydrogen
interaction with Lys101, where it serves as the hydrogen bond
donor or acceptor. Some of the compounds have more than one
hydrogen bond with Lys101 notably cyanidin 3-arabinoside,
guaijaverin, and sanggenol N. Pose of top three best dock
compound shown at ().

Other residues that likely to have hydrogen bond with more
than one top ranked compound in the best docking pose were
as follow: Asn103 with vitexilactone, cyanidine 3-arabinoside,
and guaijaverin; Val179 with mulberrin; Tyr181 with
guaijaverin, morusin and sanggenol N; Tyr318 with mulberrin
and plucheoside A; and also Glu318 from chain B with
mulberrin, plucheoside A, cyanidine 3-arabinoside, and
erycristagallin.

Residues that consistently within 5 angstrom boundaries from
docked ligand were Leu100, Lys101, Lys102, Asn103, Val106,
Val179, Ile180, Tyr181, Tyr188, Leu234, His235, Pro236, Tyr318
of p66 subunit in chain A and Glu138 p51 subunit in chain B
of HIV-1 RT. This could suggest that the p51 subunit also
contribute as part of the NNRTI binding site.

Conclusion
Ten potential inhibitors against HIV-1 RT obtained from the
virtual screening of Indonesian herbal database such as
mulberrin, plucheoside A, vitexilactone, brucine N-oxide,
cyanidin 3-arabinoside, alpha-mangostin, guaijaverin,
erycristagallin, morusin and sanggenol N provide an
opportunity for further investigation as lead compounds.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We are grateful for funding provided by the Directorate
General of Higher Education, Ministry of Education and
Culture Republic of Indonesia through the National Strategic
Research Project 2012 to Arry Yanuar.

Citation:Syahdi et al, Bioinformation 8(24): 1206-1210 (2012)

Best pose of top three rank from virtual screening with
HIV-1 RT. Magenta: 1st rank (mulberrin), yellow: 2nd rank
(plucheoside A), bluish purple: 3rd rank (vitexilactone).

