Background
Dehydrogenases (DHs) or oxidoreductases are a group of well
studied enzymes that catalyze transfer of protons from
substrate to an acceptor or coenzymes, such as NAD or NADP
or FAD or FMN in an oxidation-reduction reaction 
[]. DHs are
generally characterized by two domains, one substrate binding
domain and another co-enzyme binding domain. The coenzyme
binding domain illustrates Rossman folds 
[] for binding the
dinucleotide or mononucleotide coenzyme and is practically the
most conserved part of the protein. On the other hand, due to
the immense diversity in the range of substrates catalysed by
DHs, from steroids, prostaglandins, sugars, dyes, porphyrins,
acids to alcohols, the substrate-binding pocket demonstrate
high variability. As a matter of fact, DHs are classic examples of
proteins where two domains (co-enzyme binding and substrate
binding) of the same proteins are considered as separate
evolutionary units.

DHs are essential in most of the metabolic pathways, both
aerobic and anaerobic, including Glycolysis, TCA cycle,
oxidative phosphorylation and amino acid metabolism in living
cells. DHs as well take part in several pathways of various type
of cancers i.e. breast cancer [], prostrate cancer 
[] and diverse
life style disorders. DHs also serve as novel drug targets viz.
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase of trypanosomatids, 
[]
11β-hydroxy steroid dehydrogenase 1 for cardiovascular and
other metabolic diseases, [] type 1 inosine monophosphate
dehydrogenase as an anti-angiogenic drug target []. On the
other hand, lactate dehydrogenase acts as a biomarker for
hemolysis-associated NO resistance, endothelial dysfunction
and end-organ vasculopathy []. Aldehyde dehydrogenase 1β1
does the same for human colon cancer [] and glutamate
dehydrogenase for acute hepatic injury [].

In this situation, existence of vast number of members makes
the classification very cloudy, our effort is to explore and
reclassify the enzyme dehydrogenase on the basis of their
available sequential, structural and functional data and put
them all at one place to make it more comprehensive. We here,
built a completely web based structural database on
dehydrogenase, based on published structures from almost 160
species. This database contains brief pathway, co-enzyme, cofactor
information, disease association, sequences, taxonomic
characteristics, structural details, references and links to other
resources of all entries.

Methodology
Methodology of development:
The relational database was developed, using MySQL as back
end. The website is powered by Apache HTTP Server, HTML,
JavaScript and CGI-PERL based web interfaces have been
developed to execute the SQL queries dynamically. The
application layer between the web interface and the backend
relational tables has been implemented by using CGI-PERL.

Data collection and validation
All the data were initially collected from Protein Data Bank
(PDB), [] and validated with UniProt Protein Knowledgebase
[]. To reclassify in a better way; we considered the sequence,
domain architecture, protein affinities, binding mechanisms,
cofactors, substrates, inhibitors and products. For these we dealt
with various web resources like NCBI [] followed by
BRENDA, [] PDBsum, 
[] KEGG, 
[] IUBMB, 
[] MetaCyc,
[] SYSTERS, 
[] PRIAM, 
[] InterPro 
[] and published
literatures.

Data Access and Generation
The database interfaces include: Home (general information),
Advanced Search (a combined multiple search), Basic Search
(by name, organ, organism, co-enzyme, keyword),
Classification (by enzyme class, organism), External Links
(cross-reference) and Help (guide to database). The
implementation of a menu-based bespoke search system allows
the user to perform either a broad or user specific search from
one simple search interface. The organizational framework in
DB Dehydrogenase is designed in a manner to help users in
easy navigation and retrieve information from database 
().

Utility to the biological community
Proper classification of dehydrogenase enzyme was always
been a hectic job due to multiple substrate affinity, manifold
cofactor resemblance, multiple functional domains etc. We have
developed a coherent system of classification by considering
each enzyme class with reference to its substrate binding sites.
The annotating method, we have used is quite appropriate for
better classification of dehydrogenase enzymes. The data
contained in DB dehydrogenase is compiled manually from
previously published peer reviewed articles and verified, where
possible, from the original literature. This suggests that,
compared to other databases, it will be more accurate and
reliable.

Caveats
We would like to mention, initially, as with all databases,
random errors may occur due to human slip-up during the data
accumulation or due to error within the original experimental
data. Intimations to the authors for these kinds of mistakes will
be highly appreciated.

Future Development
In future we plan to add an option to show the recently
published articles on dehydrogenase and to update and
improve the database in regular time interval.

The study was supported by grants from DBT, Ministry of
Science &amp; Technology, Govt. of India, New Delhi.

Citation:Nandy et al, Bioinformation 8(20): 1000-1002 (2012)

Data organization for DB Dehydrogenase.

