Background
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is a lentivirus (a member of the 
retrovirus family) that causes  acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
(AIDS),  [–] 
a condition in humans in which the immune system begins 
to fail, leading to life-threatening opportunistic infections. Once HIV 
enters the human body, its primary target is a subset of immune cells that 
contain a molecule called CD4. In particular, the virus attaches itself to 
CD4+T cells and, to a lesser extent, to macrophages. Reverse Transcriptase 
(RT) converts the single-stranded HIV RNA genome to a double-stranded
DNA copy by catalyzing both DNA-dependent and RNA-dependent DNA
polymerization as well as RNase H cleavage activity to remove the RNA 
template once the DNA has been synthesized. Because of its unique 
catalytic properties, RT has been the target enzyme for many antiviral 
therapeutic agents used in the treatment of AIDS, including nucleoside and 
nonnucleoside analogues [–].

The aim of molecular docking is to evaluate the feasible binding 
geometries of a putative ligand with a target whose target site is known. 
The binding geometries is often known as binding poses, includes, in 
principle, both the position of the  ligand relative to the receptor and 
conformational state of the ligand and the receptor. There are three basic 
tasks any docking procedure must accomplish: (1) characterization of the 
binding site; (2) positioning of the ligand into the binding site (orienting); 
and (3) evaluating the strength of interaction for a speciﬁc ligand-receptor 
complex (“scoring”). The  ﬁrst challenge for computer-aided design is to 
identify one or more lead compounds that show activity in an appropriate 
assay. Until recently most drugs in the market come from the lead 
compounds discovered by screening of natural products or exploring the 
analogues of known structures.

There are many small molecule databases in public domain such as ZINC, 
Pubchem, ChemDB, ChemSpider, KEGG ligand database and DrugBank 
for virtual screening. The procedure  of structure based virtual screening 
through docking has become crucial when it is necessary to test a database 
of thousands of compounds against one or more protein targets in a 
feasible time.

An increasing number of patients with HIV infection cannot use the 
currently approved anti-HIV drugs, including the reverse transcriptase and
protease inhibitors, due to the adverse effects and the emergence of drug 
resistance, the search for new effective and safe as well as affordable antiHIV 
agents is not merely an academic curiosity but rather a necessity 
[]. 
It is important to note that a number of promising anti-HIV natural 
products have made it to the clinical level and are anticipated to be 
available to patients very soon []. The following natural products can be 
cited as promising anti-HIV agents of plant origin: baicalin (a  ﬂavonoid) 
[], 
calanolides (coumarins)  [], 
betulinic acid (a triterpene)  [–], 
polycitone A (an alkaloid)  [], lithospermic acid, sulphated 
polysaccharides, cyanovirin-N  [], pokeweed antiviral protein 
[] and 
alpha-trichobitacin (proteins). In this context six different set of 
phytochemicals were taken and docked  into the cavities of the Reverse 
transcriptase and results were discussed.

Methodology
The three dimensional structure of target HIV reverse transcriptase 
(PDBID: 1REV) was retrieved from protein data bank at 2.6  Å RMSD 
resolution. Phytochemicals with anti-HIV activity such as Curcumin, 
Geranin, Gallotannin, Tiliroside, Kaempferol-3-o-glucoside and 
Trachelogenin were obtained from  Dr. Duke database 
(http://www.arsgrin.gov/duke/), 
which were searched against pubchem and chemspider 
database for the 2D structures and  then with the help of open babel 
[http://openbabel.org/wiki/Main_Page] 
these 2D structures are converted 
to 3D structures. The 3D structures which are obtained are minimized 
using Hyperchem's MM+ force field.   Molegro Virtual Docker  
[] was 
used to detect the active sites and docking was performed by moldock 
function, which is an implementation of evolutionary algorithms (EAs), 
focused on molecular docking simulations. Docking was performed with 
all the potential active sites detected on HIV reverse transcriptase enzyme.  
During Docking at first the molecules were prepared and bonds, bond 
orders, explicit hydrogens, charges, flexible torsions, were assigned if they 
were missing by the MVD program to both the protein and ligands. From 
the docking wizard ligands were selected and the scoring function used is 
Moldock score. The Ignore distant atoms option is used to ignore atoms far 
away from the binding site. It reduces overall computing time. The Enforce 
hydrogen bond directionality option is used to check if bonding between 
potential hydrogen bond donors and acceptors can occur. If hydrogen 
bonding is possible, the hydrogen bond energy contribution to the docking 
score is assigned a penalty based on the deviations from the ideal bonding 
angle. Using this option can significantly reduce the number of unlikely 
hydrogen bonds reported also internal  electrostatic interaction, internal 
hydrogen bond sp2-sp2 torsions are calculated from the pose by enabling 
the ligand evaluation terms. The search algorithm is taken as Moldock SE 
and numbers of runs are taken 10 and max iterations were 2000 with 
population size 50 and with an energy threshold of 100 also at each step 
least ‘min’ torsions/translations/rotations are tested and the one giving 
lowest energy is chosen. If the energy is positive (i.e. because of a clash or 
an unfavorable electrostatic interaction) then additional ‘max’ positions will 
be tested. Pose clustering was done by tabu based clustering method, using 
this clustering technique each found solution is added to a ‘tabu list’: during 
the docking simulation the poses are compared to the ligands in this ‘tabu 
list’. If the pose being docked is closer to one of the ligands in the list than 
specified by the RMSD threshold, an extra penalty term (the Energy 
penalty) is added to the scoring function. This ensures a greater diversity of 
the returned solutions since the docking engine will focus its search on 
poses different from earlier poses found. The energy penalty was set to 
100, RMSD threshold was 2.00 and RMSD calculation by atom ID (fast) 
were set.

After the docking simulation is over the poses which were generated were 
sorted by rerank score. The Rerank Score uses a weighted combination of 
the terms used by the MolDock score mixed with a few addition terms (the 
Rerank Score includes the Steric (by LJ12-6) terms which are LennardJones 
approximations to the steric energy ­ the MolDock score uses a 
piecewise linear potential to approximate the steric energy)  
[]. The 
reranking score function is computationally more expensive than the 
scoring function used during the docking simulation but it is generally 
better than the docking score function at determining the best pose among 
several poses originating from the same ligand  
[]. Ligand efﬁciency is 
most commonly deﬁned as the ratio of the free energy of binding over the 
number of heavy atoms in a molecule  []. Binding affinities were 
calculated using Molegro data modeler and MVD used to find Ligand 
Efficiency 1(LE 1) as Moldock score divided by Heavy Atoms count, 
ligand efficiency 2(LE2) as a result of binding Affinity divided by Heavy 
Atoms count and Ligand Efficiency 3  (LE 3) as rerank Score divided by 
Heavy Atoms count.

The coefficients for the binding affinity terms were derived using multiple 
linear regression. The model was calibrated using a data set of more than 
200 structurally diverse complexes  from the PDBbind database with 
known binding affinities (expressed in kJ/mol)  []. The Pearson 
correlation coefficient was 0.60 when doing 10-fold cross validation. It is 
important to note that this particular model was trained only on strongly 
interacting ligands in their optimal conformation known from the PDB 
complexes. Since the binding affinity measure was trained using known 
binding modes only, it might sometimes assign too strong binding 
affinities to weakly or non-binding molecules (false positives). Therefore 
recommend ranking the results of a virtual screening run using the rerank 
score. The binding affinity measure may then be used subsequently to get a 
rough estimate of the highest ranked poses.  
The scoring function used by MolDock is derived from the piecewise 
linear potential (PLP) scoring functions []. The scoring function used by 
MolDock further improves these scoring functions with a new hydrogen 
bonding term and new charge schemes  []. Based on evolutionary 
agorithms (EAs) classification moldock algorithm may be classified as an 
Evolutionary simulator (ES), since it employs direct ranking of the 
solutions and the crossover operators. MolDock showed better overall 
performance in docking simulations when compared with other software.

ADMET (Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism, Excretion and Toxicity) 
properties were predicted using PreADMET server 
(http://preadmet.bmdrc.org/) 
to know whether the phytochemicals has the potential of adverse effect in human.

Results and Discussion
A total of five cavities  () were able to detected in reverse 
transcriptase enzyme (PDB ID: 1REV) by using Molegro Virtual Docker 
and  were named cav1, cav2, cav3, cav4 and cav5, the volume and surface 
area details were given as (see ). Details 
of five cavities are given in Table 4(see ).

Reverse Transcriptase has, there are two p66 domains and one p51 domain. 
p66 and p51 share a common amino terminus; p66 is 560 amino acids in 
length, p51 is 440 amino acids long. The larger subunit of the RT 
heterodimer, p66, contains the active sites for both of the enzymatic 
activities of RT (polymerase and RNase H); the smaller subunit plays a 
structural role. p66 is composed of two spatially distinct domains, 
polymerase and RNase H. The polymerase domain is composed of four 
subdomains: fingers (residues 1­85 and 118­155), palm (residues 86­117 
and 156­236), thumb (237­318), and connection (319­426). The nucleicacid binding 
cleft is formed primarily by the p66 fingers, palm, thumb, 
connection, and RNase H subdomains of p66. The polymerase active site is 
composed of three catalytic carboxylates in the palm subdomain of p66 
(D110, D185, and D186) that bind two divalent ions []. The cavity 5 has 
such residues in them and the residue shows their contributions to their 
inhibitors.

Curcumin is mainly found in Curcuma longa, Curcuma xanthorrhiza, 
Curcuma zedoaria, Costus speciosus  and Zingiber officinale.  Geranin is 
found in  Phyllanthus amaru,  Erythroxylum coca var. coca,  Geranium 
thunbergii, Spondias pinnata and Terminalia catappa. Gallotannin is found 
in following plants Camellia sinensis, Salvia officinalis, Arctostaphylos 
uva-ursi, Juniperus communis, Rosmarinus officinalis, Vaccinium 
myrtillus, Ginkgo biloba, Prunus cerasus, Psidium guajava, Thymus 
vulgaris, Plantago major, Urtica dioica, Achillea millefolium, Equisetum 
arvense, Fragaria spp, Terminalia  catappa, Cynara cardunculus subsp. 
Cardunculus and Glechoma hederacea. The compound tiliroside is found 
in  Althaea officinalis, Helianthemum  glomeratum, Pteridium aquilinum, 
Rosa spp, Tilia sp. Trachelogenin found in  Arctium lappa  and Cnicus 
benedictus.  The compound kaempferol-3-o-glucoside found in Vitis 
vinifera, Urtica dioica and Echinacea spp. Structures of each compound is 
displayed in .

All the phytochemicals were used as ligand at mentioned 5 cavities of  
reverse transcriptase enzyme (PDB ID: 1REV) and the results of the top 
ligands whose rerank score &gt; -100 were selected and which were given in 
(a-e) (see ) of the context along with the 
hydrogen bond interaction values, the hydrogen bond number and other 
electrostatic interaction values. Binding pose of each ligand at their highly 
bound cavity is showed in . Selected phytochemicals were studied 
with potential Anti HIV compound 4,5,6,7-tetrahydroimidazo[4,5,1-
jk][1,4]benzodiazepin-2(1H)-thione (TIBO)  [] and rerank score and 
moldock score were found to be good than (TIBO)  (Table 5 see
).  A study also conducted by using similar 
structural analogue of ligands in all the cavities and phytochemicals 
showed higher binding score than structural analogue  (Table 6 see 
).

The molecules were searched for Lipinski rule of 5, lead like rule, CMC 
like rule, MDDR like rule, WDI like rule, Reactive functional group for 
drug likeness. Typical ADME prediction methods involves Caco-2cell 
permeability, Madin-Darby Canine Kidney Cell Permeability (MDCK), 
Human Intestinal Absortion (HIA), Skin Permeability, Blood-Brain Barrier 
(BBB) penetration were also calculated for the molecules along with the 
mutagenicity and carcinogenicity test based on Ames Test using 
PreADMET online webserver (http://preadmet.bmdrc.org/). 
The results of ADMET and drug-likeness are given as  Table 3 (see 
). 
All the phytochemicals were bound to its target with rerank 
scores ranging from -100.56 to -136.23 at multiple binding sites on the 
enzyme. ADMET prediction resulted any carcinogenic effects in selected 
compounds. Trachelogenin found to be mutagenic by Ames test model of 
preADMET  (Table 3 see ). These results will 
probably become a lead phytochemical for further drug discovery process.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Seal et al, Bioinformation 5(10): 430-439 (2011)

Five cavities detected in reverse transcriptase enzyme (PDB ID: 1REV).

Structure of compounds used for docking study. (a) Trachelogenin (b) Curcumin (c) Geraniin (d) Kaempferol-3-O-Glucoside (e) Gallotannin (f) 
Tiliroside.

Different ligands at highly bound cavity. (a) cucurmin in cavity  1, (b) geranin in cavity 2, (c)kaempferol-3-o-glucoside in cavity 5, (d) 
gallotannin in cavity 3, (e) tiliroside in cavity 1, (f) trachelogenin in cavity 1.

