Background
Receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) constitutes a large family of
growth factors all of which contain an integral protein tyrosine
kinase (PTK). Growths factors like PDGF, VEGF, EGF, FGF and
IGF-1 belong to RTKs are involved in regulating cellular
growth and development []. Angiogenesis is the sprouting of
new blood vessels from existing vasculature, is a crucial process
in tumor growth and metastasis. This process is critical in
normal physiological development but excessive angiogenesis
is a common cause in a wide range of pathologies, most notably
cancer []. During tumor growth, transformed cells secrete a
group of pro-angiogenic proteins such as vascular endothelial
growth factors (VEGFs), fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) and
platelet derived growth factors (PDGFs) []. Among the many
proangiogenic factors, VEGF and PDGF have been identified as
the most important regulator of tumor angiogenesis 
[]. These
proteins stimulate endothelial cell proliferation, migration and
vascular remodeling, which contribute to tumor
neovascularization. An enriched blood supply provides the
tumor with nutrients for further growth and facilitates invasion
and metastasis [].

Retardation of angiogenesis process by interfering these
signaling cascades have been emerged as one of the most
potential new approaches for the treatment of cancers 
[]. Out
of the three VEGF receptors, vascular endothelial growth factor
receptor 2 (VEGFR2) is reported to be the most important
regulator of cancer angiogenesis, mediating the majority of
angiogenic effects of VEGF-A []. VEFG receptor activation
depends on PDGF upon activation of PDGF receptor, VEGF-A
binding to VEGFR2 promotes receptor dimerization, tyrosine
kinase activation and trans-autophosphorylation of specific
tyrosine residues within the cytoplasmic domain 
[]. Plateletderived
growth factors (PDGFs) represent a group of growth
factors consists of five different disulphide-linked dimers,
PDGF-AA, -BB,-AB, -CC and -DD that act through the two
receptors PDGFRα and PDGFRβ []. After receptor activation,
several intracellular pathways are stimulated; leading to cell
proliferation and several other crucial processes that play a
significant role in angiogenesis []. Blocking of PDGF receptor
beta and VEGFR2 retards angiogenesis, vascular maturation
and cell proliferation leading to tumor regression.
Bevacizumab (Avastin), Sunitinib malate and Sorafenib, are
inhibitors of VEGFR2 and PDGFRβ approved by FDA 
[].

The medicinal plant Indigofera aspalathoides (Family- Fabaceace)
found in South India and Srilanka and is traditionally used for
treating various skin disorders and tumors. Phytochemical and
Pharmacological studies have been investigated much due to
its anti-cancerous and antioxidant property []. The major
bioactive compounds are indigocarpan, indigocarpan diacetate,
mucronulatol, erythroxydiol X and erythroxydiol Y 
[]. Thus,
plant derived natural bioactive compounds can be a better way
to find a new potential anti-PDGF and VEGF agents with less
side effects to control metastasis by angiogenesis through
interfering tyrosine kinases. Many reports are available on
phytochemistry, and pharmacological action of I. aspalathoides,
the main bioactive compounds and their mechanism of action
to control the angiogenesis not been reported. In this
perspective, in the present work I. aspalathoides׳s key
metabolites indigocarpan, indigocarpan diacetate,
mucronulatol, erythroxydiol X and erythroxydiol Y were
studied for their inhibitory activity on PDGF and VEGF
receptor tyrosine phosphorylation. Different cheminformatics
approaches like target identification, active site prediction, drug
likeliness properties, ADMET properties, drug metabolism,
biological activity, molecular docking of selected phytoligands
with VEGFR2 and PDGFRβ were studied.

Methodology
Hardware and Software used:
All the computational studies were executed by the PC
windows 7 ultimate with Intel Core i5 microprocessor, 4 GB
memory and 32 Bit operating system. We used biological
databases such as PubChem, PDB (Protein Data Bank) and
PharmMapper server. Online tools such as Molinspiration,
Osiris property explorer, admetSAR, Online pass server and
Meta print 2D and software׳s like Autodock 4.2, Chemdraw
Ultra 6.0 were used.

Potential therapeutic target identification:
The precise identification of drug target was performed by
PharmMapper server (http://59.78.96.61/pharmmapper). It is
a freely accessed web server designed to identify potential
target candidates for the given plant derived small molecules
by means of reverse pharmacophore mapping approach. This
model is supported by a large repertoire of pharmacophore
database composed of more than 7000 receptor based
pharmacophore models that are extracted from Target Bank,
BindingDB, Drug Bank and Potential Drug Target Database. A
strategy algorithm of sequential combination of triangle
hashing and genetic algorithm was designed to solve the
molecule pharmacophore best fitting task. The possibility of
potential interaction between compounds derived from I.
aspalathoides and protein tyrosine kinase receptors (PDGFRβ &amp;
VEGFR2) were studied using this server. The SDF format was
submitted to the pharmMapper server to find out fit score. The
target set was limited to human targets, and all parameters
were kept as default [].

Active Site prediction:
The active sites of selected target proteins were identified by
using CASTp server (Computed Atlas of Surface Topography
of proteins) (http://cast.engr.uic.edu). It detects all the feasible
pockets in the protein structure. It measures analytically the
area and volume of each pocket and cavity, both in solvent
accessible surface (SA, Richards׳ surface) and molecular surface
(MS, Connolly׳s surface) []. The first pocket was chosen as
the biologically most favorable active site for docking studies.

Preparation of phyto-ligand:
The 3D structure of the ligand molecule Mucronulatol was
retrieved from pubchem (
http: // pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pccompound) 
in SDF format, and converted to PDB format
using Accryl Discovery studio visualizer 3.5 software. Other
ligands were drawn by using Chemdraw ultra 6.0 and are
shown in ().

Preparation of target protein:
Two targets VEGFR2 (PDB ID: 3VHE) and PDGFRβ (PDB ID:
3MJG) retrieved from PDB website were viewed by discovery
studio visualizer 3.5 () and used for docking
simulation. The crystal structures of target proteins were
retrieved from RCSB protein data bank (
http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/home/home.do). 
The VEGFR2 protein was resolved by
X-ray diffraction method with a resolution factor of 1.55 Å, R
value 0.186 and other target protein PDGFRβ was resolved by
X-Ray diffraction method with a resolution factor 2.30 Å, R
value 0.237. After obtaining the pdb format of proteins, they
were processed by removing native ligand and crystalline
water from the structure and subjected for docking studies.

In silico pharmacokinetics analysis:
a) Molinspiration:
Molecular descriptors and drug likeliness properties of
compounds were analyzed using the tool Molinspiration server
(http://www.molinspiration.com), 
based on Lipinski Rules of
five []. 
The rule states that most “druglike“ molecules must
have log P≤ 5, molecular weight ≤ 500, number of hydrogen
bond acceptors ≤ 10, and number of hydrogen bond donors ≤ 5.
Molecules violating more than one of these rules may have
problems with oral bioavailability. Molinspiration supports for
calculation of important molecular properties such as (LogP,
polar surface area, number of hydrogen bond donors and
acceptors), as well as prediction of bioactivity score for the most
important drug targets (GPCR ligands, kinase inhibitors, ion
channel modulators, enzymes and nuclear receptors 
[]. TPSA
was used to calculate the percentage of absorption (%ABS)
using the equation reported by []. Percentage of absorbance =
109 − 0.345 × TPSA.

b) admetSAR Predictions:
The pharmacokinetic properties such as Absorption,
Distribution, Metabolism, Excretion and the Toxicity of the
compounds can be predicted using admetSAR (http://www.admetexp.org) 
database. In admetSAR, web based query
tools incorporating a molecular build-in interface enable the
database to be queried by SMILES and structural similarity
search. It provides the latest and most comprehensive manually
curated data for diverse chemicals associated with known
ADMET profiles (admetSAR@LMMD) [].

c) Toxicity risk assessment:
To identify the any undesirable toxic properties of our
compounds, Osiris Property Explorer (
http://www.organicchemistry.org/prog/peo/) 
was used. The prediction was based
on the functional group similarity for the query molecules with
the in vitro and in vivo validated compounds present in this
database. The toxic properties such as mutagenic, tumorogenic,
irritant, reproductive effects, drug- relevant properties [c Log P,
Log S (Solubility)], molecular weight, and overall drug-score
were calculated. The results were visualized using different
color codes. Green color shows less toxic, orange color shows
the mid and red color shows high tendency of toxicity.

Metabolic site prediction by MetaPrint2D:
MetaPrint2D is a tool for predicting the sites of a molecule that
are most likely to undergo Phase I metabolism, based on their
similarity to known and unknown sites of metabolism to be
metabolized []. It builds based on a database of atom
environments found in molecules known to undergo metabolic
transformation, such as the data found in the Symyx(R)
(previously MDL), Metabolite database http://www. symyx.
com, which contains over 80,000 metabolic transformations of
xenobiotics, curated from reports in scientific literature. This
software was used on the web platform (http: //wwwmetaprint2d.
ch.cam.ac.uk / metaprint2d/), by uploading the
SMILES string of compounds.

Molecular docking Simulation:
To validate drug- target association, the molecular docking
stimulation was performed on active compounds with PDGFRβ
&amp; VEGFR2 by Autodock software (version 4.2) by employing
Lamarckian genetic algorithm []. The receptor was kept rigid,
while ligands were set flexible to rotate and explore most
probable binding poses. All the torsional bonds of ligands were
set free by Ligand module in AutoDock Tool (ADT). The Grid
was set at the centre of active site pocket, which covers all the
residues present inside the active site pocket with 60×60×60
points in x, y, z direction and 14.631, -9.472, -24.167 grid centre
for VEGFR2. Similarly another active site pocket with 65×65×65
points in x, y, z direction and 1.583, -2.444, -5.305 grid centre
was set for PDGFRβ. The parameters were saved as grid
parameter file (.gpf) and followed by Autogrid run. In third
step of docking, parameter files (.dpf) were prepared in which
genetic algorithm was selected, the value of which remains as
default. These values determine the optimal run parameter
which depends upon the nature of ligand molecules and
proteins (receptor). Fifty generations were set for each GA run
and each run with a population size of 150. A maximum
mutation rate is 0.02 and crossing over rates of 0.08 were used
to generate docking trails for subsequent generation. This was
followed by saving the parameters as docking parameter file
(.dpf) and finally subjected to autodock run. The results
generated were visualized in Discovery studio visualizer 3.5.
The interactions were studied in terms of minimum binding
energy (Kcal/mol), Ki (Inhibition constant) value (µM), and
number of hydrogen bonds and stacking interaction formed
between the active site residues of macromolecule and ligand.

Biological activity spectrum (BAS):
BAS of a compound represents the complex of pharmacological
effects, physiological and biochemical mechanisms of action,
specific toxicity (mutagenicity, carcinogenicity, teratogenicity,
and embryotoxicity) which can be revealed in compound׳s
interaction with biological system. BAS describes the intrinsic
properties of the compound depended on its structural
particularities []. The set of pharmacological effects,
mechanisms of action, and specific toxicities that might be
exhibited by a particular compound in its interaction with
biological entities are predicted by PASS and it is termed as
“biological activity spectrum” of the compound 
[]. PASS uses
Sdffile (.sdf) or MOLfile (.mol) formats as an external source of
structure and activity data (http://www.mdli.com). Their
values vary from 0.000 to 1.000. Only those activity types for
which Pa &gt; Pi were considered possible.

Discussion
Possible drug target prediction:
In the present study, the bioactive compounds from I.
aspalathoides were used to find out the possibility of selected
putative angiogenic targets based on the high fit score using
PharmMapper Server. The results were shown in  (see
supplementary material). Annotations of these putative targets
were carried out to derive their association to the proposed
anticancer mechanisms. Further exploratory studies on the
binding postures of bioactive principles of I. aspalathoides with
its therapeutic targets were carried out to validate the outcomes
of the docking simulation. The pharmMapper results revealed
that the selected phytoligands have significant interaction with
VEGFR2 protein, while none of the compounds interact with
PDGFRβ protein. However, VEGFR2 activation depends on
PDGFRβ stimulation by growth factor PDGF-BB and it was
supported our docking. PDGFRβ closely associated with
VEGFR2 protein in their signaling pathway 
[]. Mucronulatol
had highest fit score value 3.196 followed by indigocarpan
3.113. Lowest fit score value 2.866 was noticed for
Erythroxydiol X. This result suggests that mucronulatol and
indigocarpan can be considered as a better insight to tyrosine
kinase inhibitor. Further exploratory studies on the binding
postures of bioactive principles of I. aspalathoides with its
therapeutic targets were carried out to validate the outcomes of
the docking simulation.

Active site identification:
The prominent binding site of proteins VEGFR2 and PDGFRβ
was evaluated through CASTp server with ideal parameters
(). CASTp calculation showed the surface accessible
pockets as well as interior inaccessible cavities of VEGFR2 and
PDGFRβ. In VEGFR2 protein, all 38 binding pockets were
characterized to obtain the residues around probe radius 1.4Å.
The green color represents amino acid residues involved in
configuration of binding pockets which is ranging from
ASP814-PHE1047. Similarly all 33 binding pockets of PDGFRβ
protein was characterized to obtain residues around the probe
radius 1.4Å. The green color represents amino acid residues
involved in configuration of binding pockets which is ranging
from GLU63-ASN298.

Molinspiration Calculation:
The CLogP (octanol / water partition co efficient) was
calculated by the methodology developed by Molinspiration as
a sum of fragment based contributions and correlation factors.
The molecular descriptors of five compounds given in 

(see supplementary material) were tested to Lipinski׳s rule of
five, interestingly all the ligands which we selected have
molecular weight in the range of 292 − 400 (&lt; 500). Low
molecular weight drug molecules (&lt;500) are easily transported,
diffuse and absorbed as compared to heavy molecules.
Molecular weight is an important aspect in therapeutic drug
action; If it increases beyond certain limit, the bulkiness of the
compounds also increases correspondingly, which in turn
affects the drug action []. Number of hydrogen bond
acceptors (O and N atoms) and number of hydrogen bond
donors (NH and OH) in the tested compounds were found to
be within Lipinski׳s limit range from 7-2 &amp; 3-2 i.e. less than 10
and 5 respectively.

Lipophilicity (log P value) and TPSA values are two important
properties for the prediction of per oral bioavailability of drug
molecules []. Permeability property of compounds were
analyzed, the calculated log P value of five compounds was
ranging from 3.381 to 4.759 (&lt;5), which is the acceptable limit
for the drugs to be able to penetrate through biomembranes.
Topological Polar Surface Area (TPSA) was calculated as
described by []. O- and N- centered polar fragments were
considered. TPSA has shown to be a very good descriptor
characterizing drug absorption, including intestinal absorption,
bioavailability, Caco-2 permeability and BBB penetration.

The highest degree of lipophilicity was found with all the
compounds which are an indication for good lipid solubility
that will help the drug to interact with the membranes. TPSA
was calculated from the surface areas that are occupied by
oxygen and nitrogen atoms and by hydrogen atoms attached to
them. Thus, the TPSA is closely related to the hydrogen
bonding potential of a compound []. In our study, all ligands
exhibited 77% to 95% absorption, indicates good bioavailability
by oral route. Good bioavailability is more likely for
compounds with ≤10 rotatable bonds and TPSA of ≤ 140 Å 
[].
As the number of rotatable bonds increases, the molecule
becomes more flexible and more adaptable for efficient
interaction with a particular binding pocket. Interestingly, all
the five compounds have 3-6 rotatable bonds and flexible.

Drug likeliness property of five compounds against GPCR
ligand, ion channel modulator, kinase inhibitor, nuclear
receptor ligand, protease inhibitor and enzyme inhibitory
activity were studied and summarized in  (see
supplementary material). The molecule having bioactivity
score more than 0.00 is likely to possess considerable biological
activities, values -0.50 to 0.00 are expected to be moderately
active and if score is less than -0.50, it is presumed to be
inactive []. The results of the present study demonstrated that
the investigated compounds were biologically active and
produced the physiological actions by interacting with GPCR
ligands, nuclear receptor ligands, inhibit protease and other
enzymes. GPCR ligand-based signaling cascade was used for
the development of a new functional drug with increased
binding selectivity profile and less undesirable effects. Though
bioactivity score for GPCR ligand was found to be &gt;0.00 for all
tested compounds, but the highest score 0.24 was observed for
indigocarpan closely followed by the compound Erythroxydiol
X (0.22). Ion channel modulators allowed the movement of
charged particles across cell membranes and are important
therapeutic targets which are modulated by a range of
therapeutic drugs. Bioactivity score for ion channel modulator
activity was in between 0.00 and -0.50. Similar results were
obtained for all five compounds showed score value of &gt;-0.50.
Kinase inhibitors for development of selective inhibitors that
can block or modulate diseased signaling pathways are
considered a promising approach for drug development 
[].
Bioactivity scores for nuclear receptor ligand, protease inhibitor
and enzyme inhibition was found to be in the range of 0.38 -
0.68, 0.02 - 0.35 and 0.51- 0.51 respectively.

admetSAR prediction:
The ADMET (Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism, Excretion
and Toxicity) properties of the target compounds were
calculated using admetSAR as described by []. Blood-Brain
Barrier (BBB) penetration, HIA (Human Intestinal Absorption),
Caco-2 cell permeability and AMES test were calculated. The
predicted ADMET data were summarized in  (see
supplementary material). The cytochrome P450 super family
plays an important role in drug metabolism and clearance in
the liver, and the most important isoforms are CYP1A2,
CYP2A6, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, and CYP3A4
[]. Thus, inhibition of cytochrome P450 isoforms might cause
drug-drug interactions in which co-administered drugs fail to
metabolized and accumulate to toxic levels []. The analysis
showed ROS to be a substrate for P-glycoprotein, which
effluxes drugs and various compounds to undergo further
metabolism and clearance. If P-glycoprotein is induced, drugs
in the medication would be transported out of the cells at a
greater rate and could lead to therapeutic failure because the
drug concentration would be lower than expected 
[].
Therefore, dosage control and knowledge of co-administered
drugs might be considered to reduce therapeutic failure. Based
on the predicted values of admetSAR, all the selected
phytoligands are able to penetrate to BBB, Caco-2 and absorbed
by human intestines. Furthermore, all the compounds did not
show any acute toxicity and mutagenic effect with respect to
the AMES test data.

Biological activity predictions:
In order to find out the possible biological activity of selected
bioactive constituents were obtained by using PASS online
server. The set of pharmacological effects, mechanisms of
action, and specific toxicities, that might be exhibited by a
particular compound in its interaction with biological entities,
and which is predicted by PASS, is termed the “BAS” of this
compound []. The Pa and Pi values vary from 0 to 1, and Pa +
Pi &lt; 1, since these probabilities are calculated independently. Pa
and Pi can be considered to be measures of the compound
under study belonging to the classes of active and inactive
compounds respectively.

The PASS prediction results denoted that the highest Pa value
than Pi value occurred for antineoplastic and thereby it
obviously showed the anticancerous potential of selected
compounds evaluated in  (see supplementary
material). All the five compounds showed anti-neoplastic
property, and the values ranges from 0.342-0.67. However,
among the five mucronulatol showed a strong Pa value while
compared to erythroxydiol X &amp;Y. These compounds may block
metastasis by blocking angiogenesis by interfering VEGFR2
and PDGFRβ as evidenced by docking studies.

Toxicity prediction by Osiris:
Structure based design is now fairly routine but many potential
drugs fail to reach the clinic because of ADME/Tox liabilities.
One important class of enzymes, responsible for many ADMET
problems, is the cytochromes P450. Inhibition of these or
production of unwanted metabolites can result in many
adverse drug reactions. Toxicity risks (mutagenicity,
tumorogenicity, irritation, reproduction) and physico-chemical
properties (cLogP, solubility, drug-likeness and drug-score) of
selected compounds were calculated by Osiris and their results
were shown in  (see supplementary material). In the
present study, drug-likeliness property and toxicity were
studied using Osiris tools and indicated no Toxicity risks
(mutagenicity, tumorogenicity, irritation, reproduction) and
revealed a good score as compared to positive control
Sorafenib.

Drug solubility is an important factor that affects the movement
of a drug from the site of administration into the blood. It is
known that insufficient solubility of drug can leads to poor
absorption []. All the compounds shown good soluble while
compared to sorafenib. The Drug-Score values were in the
range of 0.08 to 0.85. The drug likeliness is another important
parameter in drug development. Because drug like molecules
exhibit favorable absorption, distribution, metabolism,
excretion, toxicological (ADMET) parameters. Currently, there
are many approaches to assess a compound drug-likeness
based on topological descriptors, fingerprints of molecular
drug-likeness structure keys, clogP and molecular weight 
[].
Toxicity risk includes mutagenic, tumoregenic, irritant,
reproductive effective parameters and green color which
represents the drug conforming property. Interestingly, all our
compounds appeared as green color, which clearly indicates no
toxicity ().

Metaprint2D:
MetaPrint2D is a fast, efficient and accurate predictor of both
the sites and products of metabolism in small molecule drugs
using circular fingerprints and substrate/product ratios 
[].
The atoms indicated in red color would be metabolized high
followed by medium orange color, low green color, and very
low is not colored. Our MetaPrint2D predicted that the various
oxygen and methoxy group were most likely to be metabolized
(colored in red) in the flavonoid and diterbenes, followed by
the group colored in orange and then by the groups marked in
green. Although all the compounds have metabolic site,
indigocarpan have more metabolic site than other compounds
(). In the case of lead compound indigocarpan, the
carbon atom no 4 and 9th position showed good metabolic site
and hydroxyl group showed moderate metabolic site.
Molecular docking studies can be particularly useful for
gaining selectivity and steric information about potential
compounds, which can be used to predict their sites of
metabolism and possible toxic metabolites 
[].

Molecular Docking Simulations:
The molecular interaction leading the ligand from the surface of
the protein to the active site reveals the cytotoxicity of the
flavonoids which have strong affinities towards the target
proteins that were examined in the docking analysis. Among
the five selected bioactive compounds listed in 
 &amp; 
 (see
supplementary material), indigocarpan, an isoflavonoid
compound were found to consistently have lower binding
energies and showed higher interaction with proteins VEGFR2
and PDGFRβ. Docking results showed that the bioactive
compound indigocarpan has the lowest binding energy of -7.04
Kcal/mol, lowest ligand efficiency value of -0.31 Kcal/mol,
lowest inhibitory constant of 6.88µM with VEGFR2 protein. It
showed lowest binding energy of -4.82 Kcal/mol, lowest ligand
efficiency value of -0.21 Kcal/mol and lowest inhibitory
constant of 293.55 µM were observed for PDGFRβ protein. This
suggests that therapies that target a wide range of RTKs will
provide a more effective and long term anti-angiogenic effects
than those that target a limited numbers of growth factor
receptors [].

a) Binding affinity of phytoligands with receptor tyrosine kinases:
The activation of VEGFR2 kinase is known to be an ATPconsuming
process. The ATP-binding site of VEGFR2 is located
between the N-terminal lobe and C-terminal lobe within the
catalytic domain. Many kinase inhibitors act as ATP minetics
and compete with the cellular ATP for the binding with the
ATP binding site and subsequently suppressing the receptor
autophosphorylation []. It has been previously reported that
the ATP binding site of VEGFR2 is mainly constituted with
residues such as LEU 868, GLU 883, LYS 885, GLU 915, PHE
916, CYS 917, LYS 918, PHE 919, GLY 920, ASN 921, LEU 926,
ARG 927, SER 1035, ASP 1044 and LYS 1053 
[]. In our present
study, as shown in () it has been viewed that
indigocarpan stably locate at the ATP binding pocket near the
hinge region. Hydrogen bonding interaction makes the lead
compound Indigocarpan (C-3 position of hydroxyl group in
ring A) interacts with the (Sulfur and basic amino acid group of
the residues) main chain of Cys 919 and Lys920 at a distance of
1.85Å &amp; 2.47Å and it has Vander Waals interaction with
residues such as Phe 918, Gly 841, Asn 923, Val 848, Phe 1047,
Lys 868, Asp 1046, Cys 1045, Val 899, Val 916, Leu 1035, Leu
840, and Ala 866. These interactions mediate the binding of
indigocarpan to the ATP binding site of VEGFR2 and hence
inhibit the function of VEGFR2.

Similarly, PDGFRβ as shown in () has hydrogen
bonding interaction with indigocarpan (C-9th position of
hydroxyl group and the corresponding phenyl ring D) could
interact with the (oxygen atom) main chain of Thr88 (1.89Å),
THR86 (2.00Å). THR86 and THR88 are found to be the major
active residues for the inhibition of PDGFRβ. Vander Waals
interaction occurs with residues Met 65, Pro 69 and Leu 90. The
presence of a methoxy group at C3 &amp; C9 position seemed to be
an important structural requirement for the cytotoxic activity of
the indigocarpan compound compared with other compounds.
Specifically, the presence of methoxy group in the benzofuran
ring which enables the ligand to fit within the ATP binding
residues of PDGFRβ to inhibit its activity. From this it is
evident that Indigocarpan may act as potent tyrosine kinase
inhibitor than Sorafenib (positive control) in respect of its
binding affinity and inhibitory activity against receptor tyrosine
kinases.

Conclusion
Among the five compounds, indigocarpan has potent
inhibitory activity against angiogenic targets namely PDGFRβ
and VEGFR2. Targeting VEGFR2 and PDGFRβ, which
simultaneously targets endothelial cells and pericytes, acts as a
potent anti-vascular strategy including endothelial cell
apoptosis and tumor blood vessel regression. Future studies
will have to address the stability of protein-ligand complex by
molecular dynamic simulation. However, experimental studies
will also have to address the interaction of indigocarpan with
targets.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Dr. Kannan thanks Science and Engineering Research Board
(SERB) for financial assistance (No. SB/YS/LS-148/2013), New
Delhi, Government of India.

Citation:Paramashivam et al, Bioinformation 11(2): 073-084 (2015)

Structure of various phytoligands reported in
I.aspalathoides

The three dimensional structure of selected target
proteins a) VEGFR2 – 3VHE; b) PDGFRβ (Only X Chain –
3MJG)

Binding pocket identification by CASTp server. (a,c) Shows the binding sites of PDGFRβ and VEGFR2 protein
respectively, and (b,d) Green color boxes highlights the amino acid residues present in the binding site.

Osiris property prediction of lead compound
(Indigocarpan). It indicates that there are no toxicity risks
(mutagenicity, tumorogenicity, irritating effect, reproductive
effect).

Plot of Metaprint 2D predictions. Site of metabolism; the atoms in red color that most will be metabolized are colored
according to the likelihood of a metabolic site; High: red, Medium: orange, Low: green, very low is not colored, and No data: grey.
NOR indicates the Normalized Occurrence Ratio; a high NOR indicates a more frequently reported site of metabolism in the
metabolite database.

The favorable binding portion of indigocarpan with lowest binding free energy in the ATP-binding site of VEGFR2 (PDB
ID: 3VHE) as analyzed by molecular docking study. (a) 2D structure of Indigocarpan, (b) The three dimensional diagram displays
the interaction of indigocarpan (the green stick) to the ATP binding site of VEGFR2 with the labeled amino acid residues CYS 919
and LYS 920 which significantly contributed to the binding. (c) The two dimensional diagram shows the interactions of
indigocarpan to the amino acid residues. (d, e) denotes the binding mode of Sorafenib with VEGFR2. Similarly, colors of the
residues indicate the forms of interactions as follows: van der Waals forces, green; polarity, magenta. Green arrow represents Hbonding
with the amino acid main chain.

The favorable binding position of indigocarpan with lowest binding free energy of PDGFRβ (PDB ID: 3MJG) as analyzed
by molecular docking study. (a) The three-dimensional diagram displays the interaction of indigocarpan (green stick) with
PDGFRβ labeled amino acid residues of THR86 and THR88 which significantly contributed to the binding. (b) The two
dimensional diagram shows the interactions of indigocarpan to the amino acid residues in the ATP- binding site. (c &amp; d) denotes
the binding mode of Sorafenib with PDGFRβ. Similarly, colors of the residues indicate the forms of interactions as follows: van der
Waals forces, green; polarity, magenta; Green arrow represents H-bonding with the amino acid main chain.

