The M1 alanyl aminopeptidase from Plasmodium falciparum has
been shown to be an essential hemoglobinase enzyme,
catalyzing the final stages of hemoglobin break-down within
intra-erythrocytic parasites 1. Recently there has been much
interest in this protease as a potential drug target for the
development of novel antimalarials [–]. In a recent report,
Krishnamoorthy and Achary propose that Sitagliptin may serve
as a potent competitive inhibitor of the M1 alanyl
aminopeptidase enzyme from Plasmodium falciparum 
[]. The
molecule of interest, the M1 alanine aminopeptidase or PfA-M1,
has been well studied and characterized by our group and
others (For examples of recent papers, see 
[–]). To date,
multiple published X-ray crystal structures and models are
available of inhibitors bound to the active site of PfA-M1.
Krishnamoorthy and Achary report a docking analysis of the
enzyme with “about 100 low molecular weight protease
inhibitors …”. The docking results were validated by inclusion
of specific substrate (Ala-β-naphthylamide) from which they
calculated an in silico Km value that was closely correlated with
experimental data. Unfortunately, this correlation with
experimental data was not observed with the selected positive
inhibitor control, Bestatin. The interaction / inhibition of PfAM1
by Bestatin has been reported previously [,
,
,
] and
the dipeptide analog has an in vitro Ki in the nM range for PfAM1.
The in silico value calculated was ~ 100 μM, indicating that
the parameters defined for docking were likely inadequate for
the cation-occupied active site. The article states that Sitagliptin
is the most potent in silico inhibitor with a Ki(avg) of 2 uM
(however only 8/100 docking results were provided in
Supplementary Table 1). We have completed an in vitro analysis
of the effect of Sitagliptin on the activity of both PfA-M1 and the
second neutral aminopeptidase, PfA-M17. Aminopeptidase
activity assays were carried out in 200 µl total volume in 50 mM
Tris-HCl pH 8.0, at 37 °C (with the addition of 2 mM CoCl2 for
PfA-M17). Following a 10 min incubation of enzyme and
Sitagliptin (0 – 0.5 mM), reactions were initiated by addition of
fluorigenic substrate (L-Leucine-7-amido-4-methylcoumarin).
Progress curves were monitored using a spectrofluorimeter
until a final steady-state velocity was reached. We determined
the inhibitory kinetics via Ki values from Dixon plots of 1/υs
versus inhibitor concentration when [S]&lt;&lt;KM. We report here
that this compound had no effect on the aminopeptidase
activity of either enzyme. in silico drug docking suffers from
several problems, including modeling the physics of the system,
solvent effects, dynamics, and the difficulty in accurately
ranking the docked results, and therefore relies critically on
validation by experiment. It is vital that we rigorously test
hypotheses generated from webservers to ensure that these
algorithms continue to improve in their accuracy and hence
usefulness. Blanket statements about efficacy from untested in
silico studies will confound the literature and waste precious
resources by following up on false positives identified in poorly
controlled in silico studies. Computational biology has an
important role to play in research and drug design; however, it
is absolutely vital that we apply critical evaluation of results
obtained to ensure that it becomes a robust method in the
future.

Citation:McGowan, Bioinformation 9(13): 661-662 (2013)

