Background
Neurologic disorders, including dystonias, and Parkinson’s disease, are 
common in aging adults. Treatments vary, but evidence-based and 
comparative effectiveness analysis has not yielded systematically reviewed 
best available evidence of satisfactory interventions. The auriculotemporal 
(AT) nerve, a branch of the mandibular nerve, innervates the 
temporomandibular joint, and courses to the tympanic membrane and 
anterior cochlear surface and neighboring tissues.  AT fibers project to the 
sympathetic otic ganglion.   Clenching, grinding, trauma, bone loss and 
stress can change the jaw bite, and decrease its vertical dimension.  
Subsequent irritation and compression  of the AT nerve can occur, with 
associated parasthesia, pain and discomfort. Symptoms can be local and 
specific (e.g., TMD), as well as varied and systemic (e.g., neurologic, 
dystonic and neuro-muscular disorders, including tremors, muscle spasms 
leading to impaired and awkward positional control of the head, hands, 
other extremities, speech impairment, incontinence, impaired sleep, 
associated depressive symptomatology).

Diagnosis of TMD, for example by comparing the temporomandibular 
joint space and condylar position by meticulous scanning of tomographic 
or cone beam projections in patients with anterior disc displacement, is 
challenging. Managing patients with TMD is also a complex endeavor 
[].

We have observed that intervention, aimed at changing the 
maxillomandibular occlusal relationship by changing the vertical 
dimension of the patient’s jaw  bite, relieves AT compression and 
associated irritation, and leads to immediate and sustained symptomatic 
improvement clinically  (). A profile of certain proteomic 
biomarkers of pain and of temporomandibular joint dysfunction may be 
assembled to assess and detect the prognostic  changes  in  TMD following  
intervention directed specifically at relieving the irritation and compression 
of the AT nerve.

Radiographic, arthrotomographic and histologic investigations have 
established the anatomic relationship between the joint components and the 
different nerves running in the vicinity of the joint.  In several instances, 
the AT nerve had its course between the condyle and the temporal bone 
glenoid fossa wall, exposing it to the  risk of mechanical irritation during 
medial disc displacement. These findings may explain the pain associated 
with the joint movements, and other sensations projecting to the terminal 
area of distribution of the nerve branches in the vicinity of the joint, such 
as the ear, temple, cheek, tongue, and teeth, and perhaps more distally 
[].  
Systematic reviews of the best available evidence indicate that hard 
stabilization appliances, when adjusted properly, have good-to-modest 
efficacy in treating TMD pain, compared to non-occluding appliances.  
Hard appliances may have increased  effectiveness and reduced risk for 
potential for adverse events  []. Our hypothesis also rests on the 
anatomical observation that the AT nerve is repeatedly and positively 
identified in every specimen examined on each side, as a single trunk 
coursing along the medial aspect of  the condylar neck. At the posterior 
border of the lateral pterygoid muscle,  the nerve trunk is in direct contact 
with the condylar neck, thus being at risk of injury as occlusion of the 
temporomandibular joint is altered by bone loss, trauma, grinding and 
other pathological etiologies []. 
Indeed, in most cases, the AT nerve is 10-
13 mm inferior to the superior surface of the condyle and 1-2 mm posterior 
to the neck of the condyle, thus in an anatomical location that position that 
is at high risk for entrapment with adjacent tissues  [].  Moreover, the 
anatomical relationship of the AT nerve course and the superficial 
temporal artery was proposed to contribute to explaining the source of 
migraine headaches and other referred pains in certain patients with TMD 
[].

Systemic exacerbations of pathologies of the AT branch of the trigeminal 
nerve can arise as manifestations of the trigeminal reflex. Case in point, the 
trigemino-cardiac reflex presents  as parasympathetic dysrhythmia, 
sympathetic hypotension, apnea, or gastric hyper-motility, consequential to 
the stimulation of any of the sensory branches of the trigeminal nerve.  The 
proposed mechanism of this response involves the Gasserian ganglion, 
which ochastrates the mechanical stimulation of all the central and 
peripheral branches of the trigeminal nerve.  Remarkably patients may 
develop severe bradycardia, asystole,  and arterial hypotension, and other 
symptoms which subside almost immediately with cessation of the 
stimulus  [,
].  The loops of this reflex involves multisynaptic neck 
muscle withdrawal responses, mediated by neural circuits at brainstem 
level, and absent or impaired in  patients with Parkinson's disease or 
progressive supranuclear  palsy, putatively because of a degeneration of 
brainstem neural structures [,
].

In brief, we propose that markers may be tested in aspirates of the synovial 
fluid at the temporomandibular joint for local assessment, as well as in 
whole or parotid saliva, plasma and cerebrospinal fluid for distal and 
systemic measurements of AT pathology.  We suggest that a carefully 
assembled proteomic biomarkers will  be beneficial in supplementing the 
clinical imaging profile provided by cone beam Computed Tomography 
(cb-CT), which will provide a representation of the structural alterations in 
TMD, and Positron emission tomography (PET) to yield a threedimensional image 
of the functionality of the joint, as well as its associated 
musculature and neurological processes centrally and peripherally.

Methodology
Admitted patients provide  a thorough clinical history of symptoms and 
chief complaints, including allergies to medications, current medications 
being taken, and other physicians consulted.   Photos of their posture with 
a posture grid, close up photos of the head and shoulders with and without 
a tongue blade between the teeth, to  evaluate a cant of the maxilla are 
taken.  Intra-oral photos are also taken.  The physical examination consists 
of palpations of the head, neck, facial and intraoral muscles for evaluation 
and diagnoses.  The mandibular range of motion serves to establish 
deviations of deflection of the jaw while opening and closing.  Clicking, 
popping or lack of translation of the joints are noted.  The intraoral 
examination serves to establish signs of infection, decay, and oral cancer.  
Signs of bruxism are noted, evident through presence of occlusal wear 
patterns, abfractions, recessions at the bicuspid areas, loss of vertical 
dimension, missing teeth, tori, and  dental midlines deviation while closed.  
Cervical range of motion is measured: extension, flexion and rotation are 
noted.  Skeletal morphology and posture is evaluated for facial asymmetry, 
including forward head position, kyphotic cervical spine and difference in 
shoulder heights.

Computerized testing of the muscles of mastication followes, and 
electrognathologic assessments measure and document jaw mobility.  A 
velocity test measures how fast the jaw moves to evaluate any restrictions 
of muscular movements in the opening and closing of the jaw.  Joint 
vibration analysis evaluation allows  listening and measuring of any joint 
sound, what type and at what point the sound occurs, such as an early 
opening click or grating sound like crepetus (bone on bone rubbing).  The 
physiologic properties of the masticatory muscles (left and right anterior 
temporalis, masseters, anterior digastrics, and sternocleidomastoids) are 
obtained by electromyography ().

When the patient suffers movement disorder (e.g., facial tics, tremors, or 
improper posture, dystonia), the maxillomandibular vertical dimension is 
opened at 2 mm increments by placing tongue blades between the teeth to 
obtain a normal physiological maxillomandibular relationship, which is 
observed and/or achieved when symptoms and dysfunctions disappear or 
are greatly improved.

We hypothesize that the levels and concentrations of certain pain mediators 
(e.g., Substance P), catecholamines (e.g., norepinephrine), proinflammatory 
cytokines (e.g., interleukin [IL]-1b, IL-6, IL-10, tumor 
necrosis factor, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1  
[], and soluble 
cytokine receptors  [] 
can be obtained locally in synovial fluid from 
patients with different stages of TMD, as well as distally (e.g., parotid and 
whole saliva) and systemically (e.g., plasma, cerebrospinal fluid).  These 
measurements will be correlated with the covariate of synovial lubricin and 
hyaluronic acid concentrations, which has been used as a staging indicator 
of TMD [].  
Markers will be assessed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay (ELISA), radio-immune assays (RIA), or Surface-enhanced laser 
desorption/ionization (SELDI) or matrix-assisted laser 
desorption/ionization (MALDI), as required.  The proteomic profile will be 
correlated with the clinical observations, imaging (i.e., cb-CT, PET), and 
cumulative neuroendocrine assessments  of chronic pain stress, such as 
what can be obtained by measurement of cortisol levels in hair shaft 
[].

Discussion
The proteome represents the entire  complement of proteins, including 
epigenetic alterations, that characterize a physiocellular site, organ or 
organism. The proteome is a set of characteristics that determines and 
defines the physio-pathological, biochemical and molecular state of a 
system within the organism, and of the organism at large.  The proteomic 
profile changes and varies with time  and age, and adapts to the distinct 
demands and requirements of the environment, during the lifetime of the 
organism.

The normal physiological proteome of, for example, the 
temporomandibular joint represents  the set of proteins and molecules 
expressed by the cells in that anatomical locus, and involved in its normal 
anatomical functioning.  The proteomic signature of the  healthy joint is 
distinctively different from what is observed in the pathological conditions 
of TMD, where pain is expressed and identified biologically by pain 
transmitters, inflammation is observed  and recorded as pro-inflammatory 
agents, and fundamental lubricants of a well-functioning joint decrease or 
are absent.  A variety of sensitive,  reliable and valid techniques are now 
commercially available to ensure the replicable assessment and monitoring 
of such factors.  Methodologies such as ELISA, RIA, SELDI and MALDI 
- the latter usually tested in conjunction with time-of-flight (TOF) mass 
spectrometry (hence, SELDI-TOF and MALDI-TOF) ‐ are now routine in 
most laboratories specialized in the detection of proteomic signature  
[,
].

Structural and functional imaging techniques (e.g., cb-CT, PET), while 
costly and requiring sophisticated clinical equipment, yield important 
clinical information about TMD.  Expectations are that the proteomic 
signature we propose here will be  strongly correlated with the imaging 
data.  The proposed proteomic approach will also be less taxing to the 
patients than the imaging protocol because the process of obtaining body 
fluids, such as blood for isolation of plasma, and whole saliva are routine 
and associated with minimal discomfort and risk.

Obtention of parotid saliva through the Stensen duct is a bit more 
uncomfortable for the patient, but it has the advantage of producing a body 
fluid that is considerably more pure than whole saliva, which can be 
contaminated by plasma emanating from bleeding gums or oral ulcers. 
Collection of synovial fluid from the capsule of the temporomandibular 
joint can be painful to the patient, and suffers from the disadvantage of 
producing only trace amounts of fluid.  However, SELDI and MALDI 
require only very microliter amounts of sample, thus this limitation is not 
prohibitive.

Synovial fluid has the superlative  advantage of providing real-time 
changes in the proteomic signature of the joint as our intervention of 
increasing the bite vertical dimension aimed at decreasing the compression 
and irritation of the AT nerve immediately relieves the response of the 
Gasserian  ganglion  (i.e.,  the  trigeminal  ganglion  deep  within  the  dura  
mater, near the apex of the petrous  part of the temporal bone), as noted 
above.  The systemic distal equivalent may be obtained by assessments 
obtained from the cerebrospinal fluid, which may be an equally disturbing, 
invasive and painful clinical procedure for the patient.

Whether it is a disc disorder or a mal-relationship between the mandibular 
condyle and the cranial base, we believe that there is a light pressure or 
irritation of the auriculotemporal nerve which is sending impulses through 
the trigeminal system to the brain stem. As the trigeminal enters the brain 
stem at the pons, sensory fibers go to the medulla and the spinal cord.  In 
the nucleus caudalis of the trigeminal system of the spinal cord are 
crossover fiber connections of other cranial nerves as they pass by  
[].  
The proper maxillomandibular relationship affects this complex system.   
When the trigeminal signals are produced properly it effects all the cross 
over fibers of the brain stem, thus causing the changes/improvements 
measured in movement disorder patients (i.e., tics and tremors decrease or 
stop immediately, correcting of the head posture or position, release of 
tension in the face, strengthening of upper body, gait and balance 
improvement, and release of neck tension) [].

At present, PET, which requires a  radioactive tracer (i.e., 2-deoxy-2-)(18F)fluoro-D-glucose,  
a glucose analog with the positron-emitting 
radioactive isotope fluorine-18 substituted at the 2' hydroxyl position of 
glucose), with consequential limitations of prohibitive  cost, intravenous 
injection risks, and patient reactivity, is the only clinical protocol available 
to obtain functional metabolism of  central and peripheral neurological 
activity. Cb-CT yields accurate anatomic information in TMD, but subjects 
the patients to X-ray, and thus should be used sparingly.

However delicate, the collection of the body fluids proposed here will be 
informative, we predict, by providing a proteomic signature in healthy and 
diseased joint that will complement  the diagnosis obtained by clinical 
examination.  The levels of the proband biomarkers in each of these fluids 
will be specifically indicative of the course of the resolution of TMD 
following our intervention directed at opening the bite, and decompressing 
the AT nerve.  The proteomic signature will be complementary to, and 
predictive of the imaging data.

Conclusion
From a clinical standpoint, the evidence is mounting in support of the 
notion that several of the patients we see with neurological disorders, 
including Torticolli and Parkinson's disease, dystonia and even Tourette’s 
syndrome and Tics may actually be suffering from TMJ issues.  Our 
clinical observation supports the hypothesis that this group of patients may 
be suffering of undiagnosed TMJ disc dislocation, subsequent distal 
condylar displacement and associated compression and irritation of the AT 
nerve.  We have shown that by treating the TMD and making changes in 
the maxillomandibular relationship with some type of a hard intraoral 
appliance or a neurocranial vertical distractor (NCVD)  
[], we are not 
only effectingand treating the symptoms of pain and discomfort, but we 
also resolve symptoms of neurologic disorders, neuromuscular 
dysfunctions, and dystonia. Clinically, this is accomplished simply by 
removing the irritation or compression of the AT nerve, which serves the 
joint disc and capsule.

With the help of the biomarkers,  we will be able to monitor the 
physiological changes being seen clinically such as the cessation or 
reduction of tics and tremors, improvements of gait, improvements in head 
posture and decrease in facial tension. The proteomic signature of TMD, 
obtained by assessing certain biomarkers in local and distal body fluids, 
will aid TMD diagnosis, prognosis and treatment. It will yield measurable 
outcomes of the progress of treatment aimed at returning the nervous 
system to normal function, and  not be overloaded with noxious 
stimulation.  This will be achieved by reliable molecular biological 
protocols, and minimal risk and discomfort to the patient.  The assessment 
of proteomic signatures, while somewhat costly, is considerably more costeffective, 
as informative clinically, and less biohazardous than imaging 
techniques available presently (e.g., cb-CT, PET).

Citation:Demerjian et al, Bioinformation 5(7): 282-284 (2011)

(A) Before Treatment; (B) Immediately after delivery of 
Intraoral Applianc.

