Background
HK catalyzes the phosphorylation process by transferring the γ-
phosphoryl group from ATP to the OH group of sixth carbon of
Hexose sugars to give Hex-6-P. There are four isozymes of
mammalian HKs namely HK-I, HK-II, HK-III and HK-IV, which
are tissue specific and are located in different organs of the
body [,
]. Liver contains all four types of HKs while kidney
and intestine lacks HK-IV. HK-I and HK-II are found in
epididymal fat pad, skeletal muscle, brain and heart. However,
HK-I is predominantly present in brain and kidney and HK-II is
predominant in skeletal muscle and epididymal fat pad 
[]. The
formation of Hex-6-P by HKs commits hexose sugars to
alternative metabolic pathways: the formation of glycogen and
short-term carbohydrate storage in liver, immediate use in
energy production by glycolysis and the formation of pentose
phosphates in the anabolic reactions 
[] 
(). Up
regulation and down regulation of metabolic pathways can be
linked to the different organs in the body and these differences
may be attributed to the structure, affinity for substrates,
inhibitors and sub cellular location of the isozymes 
[]. HK-I
and HK-II have a tail on the N-terminus that is important to
bind with mitochondria whereas, HK-III and HK-IV lacks such
structures and hence they are unable to bind to mitochondria.
Thus, these isozymes may be associated with metabolic
pathways other than glycolysis. All HKs share a common ATP
binding site core surrounded by more variable sequence that
determines substrate affinities. Although they share a common
ATP binding site, the difference in their kinetic functions was
observed []. This may be probably due to the variation in the
active site residues and conformations which will finally affect
the phosphorylation machinery. In order to ascertain these
variations we carried out an insight structural analysis of all
HKs concentrating on the kinase domain conformations. These
different conformations may results in variable binding of ATP
among HKs and hence there may be variation in the
phosphorylation mechanism. In the present study we have
carried out molecular docking study to predict the catalytic
interactions between ATP and kinase domains of all HKs.

Methodology
Hexokinase Structures:
The three dimensional structures of HK-I (1HKC), HK-II
(2NZT) and HK-IV (1V4S) were obtained from Protein Data
Bank (PDB) []. As the structure of HK-III is not available so far
in the PDB we have constructed its 3D model by homology
modeling method.

Homology modeling of HK-III:
The three dimensional model of the HK-III was constructed by
using Modeller 9v8 tool []. The HK-III protein sequence was
retrieved from NCBI [] (AC No: NP_002106.2) and it was
subjected to BLASTp [] against PDB and the crystal structure
of human Hexokinase-II (PDB ID: 2NZT) was chosen as
template for modeling which is having a maximum identity of
56%. The protein sequence and 3D structure of the template
were retrieved. A sequence alignment file was generated in PIR
format for Query and template sequences using ClustalX tool
[], a Python script was written and 20 models were generated.
Among 20, the model with the lowest DOPE score was selected
for further analysis.

Validation of HK-III Model:
The stereo chemical quality of energy minimized HK-III model
was assessed and validated by PROCHECK validation server
[]. The recognition of errors in this theoretical protein model
is also a critical point employed in protein structure validation.
Hence the overall quality of the structure was calculated by
ProSA web server []. It reads the atomic coordinates of the
model and generates the Z-Score that is a determinant of the
quality of the model.

Identification and alignment of kinase domains of Hexokinases:
The kinase domains of all HKs were identified by scanning their
protein sequences against PROSITE data base that consists of
documentation entries describing protein domains, families and
functional sites as well as associated patterns and profiles 
[].
The identified domains were aligned by multiple sequence
alignment process using ClustalX tool to find out the
similarities and dissimilarities among the domains.

Superimposition of kinase domains:
The kinase domains of all HK structures were superimposed to
find out the conformational variations using multiple 3D
alignment module of MATRAS tool [].

Molecular Docking:
Molecular docking was carried using MOE docking soft ware
tool (MOE 2011.10). The 3D structure of ATP was retrieved
from PubChem [] and its geometry was optimized in MOE
working environment. All the HK structures were protonated
and energy minimized individually in the MMFF94x force field
at a gradient value of 0.05 by enabling all bonded and non
bonded interactions. Individual dockings were performed
between the kinase domains and ATP to find out the binding
modes and affinity variations. The Proxy triangle methodology
was applied where the conformers are pre-superposed prior to
be placed in the kinase domains. The docked conformers are
ranked by alpha HB scoring function, which is a linear
combination of two terms, i.e. the geometric fit of the ligand to
the binding site and the hydrogen bonding effects and finally
both terms are summed over all ligand atoms. The
conformations were refined and rescored in the same force filed
to remove the duplicate conformations. At the end of docking
process the conformation with least docking score was chosen
in each docking to study the binding orientations of ATP
among all kinase domains.

Results
Homology modeling of the HK-III structure using Modeller 9v8
generated 20 best models and among them, the lowest DOPE
score of -111452.515 was found with the 18th model and this
structure was chosen to validate the stereo chemical quality by
PROCHECK and ProsaWeb servers. The Ramachandran plot
generated by PROCHECK showed that 93.4% of residues in
allowed regions, 6.1% in additional allowed regions, 0.5% in
generously allowed regions and no residues were found in the
disallowed regions (). The ProsaWeb analysis showed a
quality Z-Score of –10.56, which falls in the range of native XRay
crystallographic, structures (). Both of these results
indicate that the generated HK-III model is valid with good
stereo chemical quality. The kinase domains of HKs identified
from PROSITE database showed that they are all having an
identical length of 26 residues. The sequence alignment of these
domains showed that they share 13 identical, 7 similar and 6
dissimilar residues (). To find out the conformational
variations, these domain structures were superimposed and it
was found that they share a common structural conformation
() with two anti parallel β-sheets and their RMSD
values were found to be nearby zero, which indicated the close
structural identity among those domains  (see
supplementary material), but no significant structural variation
was observed in the conformations during alignment.

The molecular docking of ATP into these kinase domains
revealed that the binding orientations are completely different
among all HKs (). ATP is found to be interacting with
G170, K621, S682 and E742 residues of HK-I with six hydrogen
bonds and among S682 is showing predominant role to bind
with ATP with three hydrogen bonds. HK-II is showing
interaction with ATP with H504, Q608 and N609 residues
forming three hydrogen bonds. HK-III is found to be interacting
with ATP by T626, R520, L623 and N624 residues with five
hydrogen bonds and among N262 showing two hydrogen
bonds with ATP. Finally HK-IV is showing interaction using
H156 and E157 residues with a single hydrogen bond each. The
interaction of phosphate of ATP was observed with all kinase
domains except HK-IV, where the interaction of ATP was found
with its 2'-OH group of ribose sugar and H156 residue and
amino group of Adenine ring with E157 residue of the kinase
domain. In HK-I the three phosphates of ATP (α, β and γ)
were found to be interacting with the kinase domain residues.

In HK-II only the γ−phosphate of ATP is found to be interacting
with kinase domain along with its 2'-OH group of ribose sugar.
The three phosphate groups and amino group of Adenine ring
of ATP were found to be interacting with HK-III kinase domain
(). The docking scores for the four HKs indicated that
HK-IV is showing best lowest docking score of -13.1834 and the
remaining three HKs are showing almost similar docking scores
of -12.417, -12.2306, -12.6445 for HK-I, HK-II and HK-III
respectively  (see supplementary material). These
values indicate the ATP-kinase domains complex strengths
where the lowest value indicates the greater stability.

Discussion
HKs work continuously to provide energy and thereby keeping
the cells alive although they are tissue specific and confined to
specific organs of the body. Their activity differs based on the
requirement of energy sources at different stages 
[]. Among
the four HKs, the first three shows a low Km and HK-IV shows
high Km and hence it is called as a predominant HK among HK
family i.e. Glucokinase. This Km values determines the binding
ability of the enzyme with substrate or ATP. This variation in
the Km will result in the variable catalytic mechanism among
their kinase domains []. This Km variation may be due to
many factors and here in the present study we aimed to explain
an important reason with respect to the binding affinities and
orientation of ATP molecule in the binding site. Glucokinase
which is HK-IV shows high affinity for glucose than other HKs
and is the major enzyme associated with glucose
phosphorylation in the body to process them to successive
metabolic processes. Such a high phosphorylation rates may be
due to high affinity towards substrate and ATP by its kinase
domain []. Although the similar domains are shown by other
HKs they are not showing high affinity as to that of HK-IV. The
kinase domains of all HKs showed the similar conformation
with two anti parallel β-sheets that providing the stability of the
domains during catalysis. The structural alignment of kinase
domains cleared that there is no conformational variation
among them and the catalytic variation may not be due to the
conformational variation of kinase domains (). The
residual composition of the domains is also found to be similar
to major extent (). The molecular docking study
revealed the variation in the interaction of ATP which may
explain the reasons for variable phosphorylation rates among
four kinases. Interestingly it was found that the phosphate
moiety of the ATP was in free form without interacting with the
kinase domain residues in the HK-IV and hence it may be
readily available for the phosphorylation of the sugars. But, in
HK-I and HK-III, the α, β,and γ phosphates of the ATP were
found to be in bound condition with their kinase domain
residues, where as in HK-II, only γ phosphate is found to be in
bound condition to its kinase domain (). In all these
hexokinases, during catalytic process only γ phosphate that is at
free end will be donated to the OH group of the sixth carbon of
hexose sugar []. In this study it was found that among first
three HKs there is no availability of the free γ phosphate where
as it is available in HK-IV so that facilitating its transfer to
hexose sugars. This might be an important evidence for the high
Km and rapid phosphorylation rates by HK-IV than remaining
HKs. This is more strengthened by their docking score
variations where HK-IV showed a lowest docking score among
all indicating the highest affinity for ATP than other HKs 
 
(see supplementary material). Finally this study gave an
insight into the variation of binding modes of ATP in the
respective kinase domains. These orientations along with their
variable docking scores may explain the variation and provide a
theoretical basis for the variable phosphorylation rates among
hexokinase family.

Conclusion
The molecular docking of ATP into the kinase domains of four
HKs revealed the binding mode variations and the phosphate
moiety of ATP is found to be available only in HK-IV but not in
remaining HKs. This might be responsible for their variable
catalytic rates of phosphorylation.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We are highly thankful for DST INSPIRE Division, Department
of Science and Technology (DST), Government of India, for
supporting with INSPIRE Fellowship.

Citation:Kumar et al, Bioinformation 8(12): 543-547 (2012)

Fate of Hexose Sugars by Hexokinases

Ramachandran plot showing the stereo chemical
quality of homology model of HK-III generated by PROCHECK
validation server.

ProsaWeb quality plot of HK-III model showing a Zscore
of -10.56 that is observed in the range of native X-Ray
crystallographic structures.

Sequence alignment of kinase domains of HKs. *
indicates the identical residues: indicates similar residues and
the remaining residues are dissimilar residues.

The super imposed kinase domain structures of HK-I
(Yellow), HK-II (Green), HK-III (Pink) and HK-IV (Blue).

Molecular docking of ATP showing binding mode
variations in the kinase domains of HKs. Arrow marks indicate
hydrogen bonding between ATP and kinase domain residues
and blue shaded region indicates the solvent contacts made by
ATP.

