Background
Spinach (Spinacia oleracea) is a flowering plant in the family of 
Amaranthaceae. Though Spinach is most often commonly used as a food, 
it has medicinal value as well. Dietary supplementation with blueberries, 
spinach, or spirulina reduces ischemic brain damage  []. Natural 
antioxidant mixture (NAO), a water-soluble extract obtained from spinach 
leaves has been shown to have anti-inflammatory [], antiproliferative and 
antioxidative properties  [] in biological systems. A detailed analysis of 
the protein sequences which are responsible for these properties, their 
probable structures and mode of action has yet to be accomplished.  

Flavonoids have various biological activities such as antioxidant, 
antibacterial, and anticancer effect  []. Flavonoids comprise a class of 
abundant secondary metabolites and the most common group of plant 
polyphenols. It provides much of the flavor and color to fruits and 
vegetables and contributes in many ways to the growth and subsistence of 
plants. Flavonoids act as antioxidants against harmful free radicals in 
animals. More than 5000 different flavonoids have been described. The six 
major subclasses of flavonoids include the flavones (e.g., apigenin, 
luteolin), flavonols (e.g., quercetin, myricetin), flavanones (e.g., 
naringenin, hesperidin), catechins or flavanols (e.g., epicatechin, 
gallocatechin), isoflavones (e.g., genistein, daidzein) and anthocyanidins 
(e.g., cyanidin, pelargonidin),  []. Anthocyanin pigments and the related 
oligomeric proanthocyanidins are under investigation for their medicinal 
potential []. 

The red colors of flowers are mainly produced by anthocyanin and 
betacyanin. They serve essential functions in plant reproduction as flower 
and fruit colors by recruiting pollinators and seed dispersers. 
Dihydroflavonol 4-reductase (DFR) is the first enzyme committed to 
anthocyanin biosynthesis in the flavonoid pathway. DFR catalyses the 
NADPH-dependent reduction of dihydroﬂavonols into 
leucoanthocyanidins which is considered as the immediate precursor of 
anthocyanidin. Anthocyanidin synthase (ANS) is one of the four 
dioxygenases (DOX) of the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway. ANS is a 2-
oxoglutarate iron-dependent oxygenase, which catalyses the next step to 
anthocyanidins. It is responsible for the formation of the colored 
anthocyanidins from the colorless leucoanthocyanidins  []. The 
leucoanthocyanidins are precursors for catechins and proanthocyanidins, 
which are involved in plant resistance and influence food and feed quality 
of plant products  []. They are also direct precursors of one of the most 
conspicuous flavonoid classes, the anthocyanins, which are found in fruits, 
flower petals, and leaves exhibiting a wide range of functions such as 
attraction of pollinators and seeds dispersers, UV light damage protection, 
and plant defense against pathogen attack. In humans, the antioxidant 
properties of anthocyanins have been involved in protection against 
oxidative stress and certain tumors, and age related and cardiovascular 
diseases [].

The structure of the spinach ANS and DFR proteins have not yet 
determined experimentally (X-ray or NMR), and therefore models are built 
following homology modeling protocol. A large number of computational 
tools are available from different sources for making predictions regarding 
the identification and structure prediction of proteins. The major 
drawbacks of experimental methods, used to characterize the proteins of 
various organisms are the time frame involved, high cost and the fact that 
these methods are not amenable to high throughput techniques. 

In silico approaches  provide  a  viable  solution to these problems. 
Computationally based characterization of the features of the proteins 
found or predicted in completely sequenced proteomes is an important task 
in the search for knowledge of protein function. In this study, an effort is 
made to generate three-dimensional (3D) models of ANS and DFR based 
on the available template crystal structure from protein data bank. The built 
models are validated using widely followed Procheck and WHATCHECK 
programmes.  

Methodology
Modeling of anthocyanidin synthase and dihydroflavonol 4-reductase
The amino acid sequence of ANS and DFR were retrieved from the 
sequence database SWISSPROT, a public domain protein database []. It 
is ascertained that the three-dimensional structure of these proteins is not 
available in Protein Data Bank. 

BLAST [] search was performed against Brookhaven Protein Data Bank 
(PDB) with the default parameters to find suitable templates for homology 
modeling. Sequences were aligned and the one that showed the maximum 
identity with high score and lower e-value and maximum sequence identity 
is used as a reference structure to build a 3D model for ANS and DFR. The 
ClustalW program  [] was used for sequence alignment. The secondary 
structures were analyzed and compared by the JOY  [] server (protein 
sequence-structure representation and analysis).

The academic version of MODELLER 9v7 [] was used for model 
building. Out of 10 models generated by MODELLER for each protein, the 
one with the best G-score of PROCHECK  [] was selected. The 
constructed 3D models were energy minimized in GROMOS96 force field 
using steepest descent minimization Algorithms  [].  The validation for 
structure models was performed by using WHATCHECK  [] and 
PROCHECK.  The stereo chemical qualities of the three dimensional 
models were assessed by PROCHECK analysis and Ramachandran plot 
was drawn  []. Structural analysis is performed and figures 
representations were generated with Swiss PDB Viewer  []. The 
weighted root mean square deviation (RMSD) of the modeled protein is 
calculated using combinatorial extension (CE) algorithm [].

Results and Discussion
Model Building
Experimental (X-ray or NMR) structures of the spinach proteins ANS and 
DFR were not available therefore models are built following homology 
modeling protocol. BLAST search was performed against Brookhaven 
Protein Data Bank (PDB) with the default parameters to find suitable 
templates for homology modeling. Based on the maximum identity with 
high score and lower e-value in the BLAST search, 1GP5 and 2C29 were 
used as the structural template for modeling of the spinach ANS and DFR 
proteins respectively. Sequence alignment between target and template was 
done by using ClustalW program. The sequence structure alignment used 
for model building was shown in  . The 
predicted 3-D models will be very useful while studying the real structure 
of the protein. The academic version of MODELLER 9v7 (Sali et al., 
1993) (http//:www.salilab.org/modeler) was used for model building. Out 
of 10 models generated by MODELLER, the one with the best G-score of 
PROCHECK (Laskoswki et al., 1993) was selected. The final stable 
structures of the ANS and DFR obtained were shown in .

The secondary structures were analyzed and compared by the JOY 
(Mizuguchi K et al, 1998) server (protein sequence-structure representation 
and analysis). Given their PDB files, secondary structures were analyzed 
and compared by the JOY program. The secondary structures of templates 
and final models were highly conserved which showed that final models 
were highly reliable as shown in .

Evaluation and validation of the 3-D structure
The stereo chemical quality of the predicted models was evaluated using 
PROCHECK. Validations of the models were carried out after the 
refinement process using Ramachandran Map calculations computed with 
the PROCHECK program. The Φ  and ψ distribution of the Ramachandran 
Map of non glycine, non proline residues were summarized in  Table 1 
(See ). The overall PROCHECK G-factor for 
ANS and DFR homology modeled structures were  -0.04 and -0.23. The 
score indicates that the modeled structures were acceptable as value is 
greater than the acceptable value ‐ 0.50. Table I shows that more than 90% 
of the residues were in allowed regions for ANS and 89.3% residues were 
in allowed region for DFR, leading to a good validation for the model.

The constructed models of ANS and DFR from spinach were examined for 
validation using different criteria. Standard bond angles of the models are 
determined using WHATCHECK  (Table 1, See ). 
The analysis revealed RMS Z-scores of bond angles for ANS 
and DFR were found to be 1.090 and 1.349, respectively. The values are 
almost equal to 1 suggesting high model quality. The quality of model was 
also assessed by comparing predicted structure to experimentally solved 
structure via superimposition and atoms root mean square deviation 
(RMSD) assessment. A model can be considered as reliable or accurate 
model when its RMSD is less than 3 ‐ 4 Å (accurate &lt;=2 Å reliable &lt;=4 
Å) []. The structural 
superimposition of C trace of templates and query sequence (ANS and DFR) are estimated by using CE program 
(http://cl.sdsc.edu/ce.html). 
The weighted root mean square deviation of C trace between the template and final refined model for ANS and DFR were 
found to be 0.23 Å and 0.38 Å respectively which suggests further that the models were reliable.

The information concerning biological function can be derived from a 3D 
protein structure. The homology models developed in this study for ANS and 
DFR will be used for the identification of active site and for docking 
study. Active sites were explored for determining important residues. The 
residues that are buried in the core of the molecule or exposed to solvent 
on its surface can be identified. Protein-ligand complexes carry functional 
information such as where the ligand is bound and which residues in the 
active site interact with the ligand can be identified. These models could be 
further explored for characterizing the protein. 

Conclusion
A 3D structure of anthocyanidin synthase and dihydroflavonol 4-reductase 
from spinach were constructed in this study through homology modeling. 
The homology modeling was done by using the MODELLER 9v7 
software. The energy of models is minimized by applying molecular 
mechanics method. The final models were assessed by PROCHECK and 
WHATCHECK which showed that the final refined models were reliable. 
The molecular models of ANS and DFR will provide a good foundation for 
functional analysis of experimentally derived crystal structures. 

Supplementary material
Data 1
Financial assistance from Council of Scientific and Industrial Research 
(CSIR), Govt. of India, for the Research Associate Fellowship (RA) is 
gratefully acknowledged. The authors are grateful to the Department of 
Bioinformatics and Department of Mathematics, MANIT, Bhopal for 
providing the necessary facilities and encouragement.

Citation:Sahay &amp; Shakya, Bioinformation 5(6): 259-263(2010)

(a) Sequence alignment of ANS from spinach using CLUSTAL W server, (b) Sequence alignment of DFR from spinach using CLUSTAL W server.

The final 3D structure of (a) ANS (b) DFR. 

(a) Structure based sequence alignment of template and final structures of the spinach 
ANS using JOY program. The key to the JOY annotation is as follows: lowercase red letter,  α-helix; 
lowercase blue letter,  β-strand; lowercase maroon letter, 310 helix; uppercase letter, solvent-inaccessible 
residue; lowercase letter, solvent-accessible residue; italic lowercase letter, positive Φ.(b) Structure based sequence alignment of 
template and final structures of the spinach DFR using JOY program. The key to the JOY annotation is as indicated in Figure 3a.

