Background
Microsatellites, also known as Simple Sequence Repeats (SSRs) or Short Tandem Repeats (STRs), 
are tandem repetitions of a nucleotide motif of size 1-6 bp. They are distributed in both coding 
as well as non-coding regions of all known genomes. Because of their polymorphic nature, they are 
known to play an important role in gene regulation, pathogenesis, bacterial adaptation and in evolution 
of genomes [–]. 
They are also applied in various fields such as DNA fingerprinting, Paternity studies, Forensics, 
Evolutionary studies etc. As the sequencing of new genomes is increasing day-by-day, 
microsatellites of many genomes remain unexplored. Analysis of these microsatellites is important 
to understand their role in various studies. Computational analysis is a better alternative to the 
time-consuming and money-intensive traditional wet lab microsatellite studies. A software tool that 
can extract all types of microsatellites with greater sensitivity and provides flexible options to 
analyze the repeats detected is the need of the day.

Few tools [–] 
exist in the public domain for extracting microsatellites from genome sequences, but many of them suffer 
from certain lacunae in- terms of their features and their efficiency. In the course of our studies on 
evolution of microsatellites in prokaryotic genomes, we developed a novel algorithm 
[] to detect imperfect microsatellites from 
nucleotide sequences. The algorithm has been implemented in the form of a stand- alone software with 
a user-friendly graphical user interface (GUI) called G-IMEx. The present communication gives the 
details of this software.

Methodology
The algorithmic details of IMEx have been reported elsewhere []. 
For the sake of continuity we reiterate the method. IMEx scans the input sequence and looks for two 
consecutive exact repeat units or two alternate exact repeat units and considers them as the ‘ 
candidate ’ microsatellite repeat tract. The ‘ candidate ’ tract is expanded 
on both sides by allowing few mismatches in each individual repeat unit ( ‘ k ’ ‐ 
imperfection limit / repeat unit) such that the percentage of imperfection of the entire tract does not 
cross the threshold set by the user. The expansion is also terminated if a repeat unit with more than 
‘ k ’ mismatches is encountered. The program further collates and clusters equivalent 
microsatellite repeats into families. It also has an option to identify compound microsatellites, which 
are regions containing more than one microsatellite tract separated by a certain distance as defined by 
the user.

Software Requirements
G-IMEx has been developed on the Linux platform and requires preinstalled C and Java 
(for graphical interface). An ideal environment for running G-IMEx would be a latest Fedora or 
other Linux distribution with a gcc compiler (version 3.4 or higher), Java version (1.6 or higher) 
and any browser software.

Input options
G-IMEx offers several options for identification, extraction, collation, clustering and reporting 
of microsatellites from an input DNA sequence in FASTA format. The software can handle large sequences 
such as genomes easily and is comparatively faster than many other tools. Users can set thelimits 
for repeat size, repeat number, repeat type and imperfection level. In addition users can set levels 
(0 to 4) for clustering of equivalent microsatellites and also to detect compound microsatellites 
i.e., those microsatellites which are close to each other sequentially. There is also an option to 
use the core IMEx program in batch mode for scanning multiple sequences.

Output options
G-IMEx creates a folder with the name of the input sequence file and the results are 
stored in two formats ‐ html and text. The text format of results is optional and 
separate directories are created for text and html results. The output includes a well-formatted 
summary table file with information such as the repeating motif, repeat number, imperfection %, 
tract size, nucleotide composition and protein information (if it falls in coding region) etc. 
Along with the information about the microsatellite extracted, its corresponding alignment with 
its perfect repeat counter part is also produced automatically in a separate alignment file which 
facilitates analysis of mutational events in a microsatellite tract.  Figure 1 shows the snapshot of 
the GUI and the result pages of G-IMEx.

Future Work
The current version of G-IMEx is available only for Linux users. Efforts are underway to 
develop versions compatible to Windows and Macintosh systems. 

The authors acknowledge the support from the lab members of computational biology 
and the core grant of CDFD. SBM would like to thank Mr. Priyatosh Mishra for his valuable help 
during the development of the graphical interface and the management of AEC for providing necessary 
facilities.

Citation:Mudunuri etal; Bioinformation 5(5): 221-223 (2010)

Snapshots of Graphical User-Interface and Results Pages.

