Background
Predicting the functions of uncharacterized proteins from their
sequence is one of the major goals of bioinformatics. Large-scale
genome projects and high-throughput experiments are
generating enormous amounts of data. The central challenge of
bioinformatics however, is to derive biologically valid
information to understand the function of proteins. The concept
of protein function is highly context-sensitive and typically acts
as an umbrella term for all types of activities that a protein is
involved in, be it cellular, molecular, metabolic, structural or
physiological mechanisms. Proteins play a crucial role in
mediating function in different contexts by interacting with
other biological macromolecules or small molecules 
[–]. The
functions of proteins in different cellular or pathological
contexts were previously deciphered through biochemical
experiments. However, irrespective of the validated functional
data, these approaches have low throughput because of the
experimental effort required in analyzing a single gene or
protein. Due to such limitation of experimental methods for
functional characterization, a large fraction of proteins in the
protein sequence database remains un-annotated.
Approximately 20%, 7%, 10% and 1% of annotated proteins in
the Homo sapiens, Mus musculus, Drosophila melanogaster and
Caenorhabiditis elegans genomes respectively, have been
experimentally characterized []. The delay in the experimental
characterization of the biochemical role of proteins resulted in a
continually expanding sequence-function gap [,
]. This may
further hinder the systematic understanding of the biological
processes or molecular mechanisms mediated by them. To
minimize such sequence-to-function gap various bioinformatics
procedures have been proposed to predict the functional
mechanisms associated with a protein and its role in mediation
complex diseases including cancer [–]. In a typical function
association experiment, researchers have been using nucleotide
sequences in case of genes, or amino acid sequences in case of
proteins to determine the function of genes or the
corresponding proteins []. This approach relies on the fact that
sets of genes that have sufficiently similar sequences may also
perform the same function. The explosive growth of the amount
of sequence information available in public databases has made
such an approach particularly accurate. Phylogenomics
approaches [,
] can be considered as a useful tool in
functional genomics, personalized medicine and genomic
medicine [,
] due to its predictive power. Several database
and webservers that utilize the phylogenomic information for
functional inference of related proteins are available. Multiple
approaches are currently available to investigate the
mechanisms leading to the accomplishment of a protein's
function and its therapeutic role. These procedures have
generated a wide variety of useful data such as gene expression
data sets [,
[–], phylogenetic data 
[, 
[–] and protein
interaction networks []. These data sets offer various insights
into a protein's function and related concepts. Recently, protein
structural data was also analyzed in the perspective of
phylogeny and the pathogenic role of functional variants were
also assessed from evolutionary perspective to understand the
role of non-synonymous variations and disease phenotypes
[]. In this study, we considered phylogenetic profiles 
[–]
that come under phylogenetic data category for predicting the
function of gene products [,
,
]. The phylogenetic profile
of a protein is a binary vector whose length is the number of
available genomes. The vector contains a 1 in the ith position if
the ith genome contains a homologue of the corresponding gene,
and 0 otherwise. Phylogenetic profiles were used as a
quantitative method to annotate proteins, derive evolutionary
relationships [,
], examine functional transfer between
whole genomes, predict functionally linked proteins 
[,
,
,
,
]
correlate genotype and phenotype [], predict
metabolic activities [] and conduct network analysis
including network organization 
[,
,
].

In this paper we propose a new method using the weighted
hypergeometric probabilistic approach to incorporate two
important aspects of functional relatedness. We considered the
co-evolution of the reference genome that gives the basic
similarity measure, which is the background phylogeny of
target genomes for profiles generation and the ordering of
genomes was used to derive phylogeny. We compared our
results with existing approaches such as weighted
hypergeometric probability without runs, weighted
hypergeometric probability with runs. Our work focuses on the
Escherichia coli K12 genome where we considered 305 genomes
for phylogenetic profiles generation. Functional interactions
(protein-protein interactions in this context) were extracted
from the STRING database for the validation of generated
functional interactions []. Our experimental results show the
accuracy achieved by incorporating the phylogeny in addition
to the similarity measure for identification of functionally
linked proteins that could include the same pathways or
pathophysiological mechanisms. The concept of phylogenetic
profiles was introduced and extensively used in function
association in the seminal work by Pelligrini et al 
[,
]. Earlier
work in the analysis of phylogenetic profiles can be briefed into
three categories based on the measure used to compare pairs of
proteins. During the initial stage of application of phylogenetic
profiles in functional correlation studies, more emphasis was on
various ways of comparing two phylogenetic profiles. These
methods ignored the underlying phylogeny of the organisms.
The underlying hypothesis was that proteins, which function
together in a pathway or a protein complex, are likely to have a
similar evolutionary path [,
]. Enault [] proposed an
approach for relaxing phylogenetic profiles particularly for the
annotation of bacterial genomes. The modification suggested
here is to use the normalized BLAST score [] denoting the
best match for a protein in a genome, instead of using a 0 or 1.
Wu et al. advocated the use of more general measures of
similarity for pairs of phylogenetic profiles []. Three
popularly used measures of similarity, namely the Hamming
distance (D), Pearson's Correlation Coefficient (r) and mutual
information (MI) were evaluated for the task. The second
category of work used the underlying phylogeny of organisms
and also the relative positions of the genomes while generating
phylogenetic profiles. Vert and others proposed the use of
support vector machines (SVM) for learning protein functions
from their phylogenetic profiles [,
,
]. However, instead
of the common kernel functions such as linear kernels used in
SVMs, a tree kernel is proposed to calculate the similarity of the
profiles in higher dimensional space used by SVM. Narra et.al
used the extended real-valued profiles to the above approach
[]. Here, all the internal nodes of the phylogenetic tree were
also assigned scores equal to the average scores at their child
nodes. An extended profile can be constructed for each protein
by a post-order traversal of the tree. Recently, Kotaru and Joshi
proposed a method for classification of phylogenetic profiles
using supervised machine learning method which supports
vector machine classification along with radial basis function as
kernel for identifying functionally linked proteins 
[]. In
evaluation using three-fold cross validation on the same data,
performance of the radial basis kernel is similar to polynomial
kernel. In case of some functional classes application of both
kernels together were better than linear and tree kernel 
[],
and over all radial basis kernel have shown to outperform the
polynomial kernel [], linear kernel and tree kernel 
[]. The
third category of work is an approach that considers only an
ordering of genomes and not a full phylogenetic tree. Cokus et
al. proposed a method based on similar kind of metric, which
considers ordering of genomes and clustering optimization
using swiveling technique [,
]. They showed that such an
approach superior to the first class of metric that considered
only co-evolution because the current method considers both
co-evolution and phylogeny. One drawback such method was
while calculating the runs probability in the conditional
probability, rather than considering the runs of the proteins, the
similarity was taken as the right side of conditional probability.

Methodology
The phylogenetic profile of a protein can be described as a
string that encodes the presence or absence of the protein from
the reference genome in every sequenced target genome. It is a
binary vector whose length is the number of sequenced target
genomes. The vector contains 1 in the ith position if the ith
genome contains a homologue of the corresponding gene, else a
zero [,
,
]. The homologue of the genes is obtained using
the BLASTP (protein-protein Basic Local Alignment Search
Tool) algorithm []. Phylogenetic profiles were generated
using 305 prokaryotic genomes using proteome sequences
downloaded from NCBI database http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ 
[]. Profiles were computed for each target organism
using BLASTP searches (using an e-value 0.01) [] to define the
presence and absence of homologs across the genomes. All the
4,195 genes encoded in the genome of Escherichia coli K12 were
used as query for sequence searches they have the most
comprehensive annotations and therefore allow us to accurately
assess the performance of methods. We believe similar to
previous methods that used phylogenetic profiles for gathering
functionally similar proteins in a high-throughput manner from
sequence approach, the proposed approach can be applied to
other fully sequenced genomes.

A modified weighted hypergeometric probability method:
The proposed method considers both similarity and
background phylogeny. Briefly the whole methodology is as
follows: identifying the order of the genomes using the
hierarchal clustering and optimal leaf ordering algorithm; then
calculating the two probabilities of the similarity and runs
between a given pair of proteins; and finally calculating the
total score which gives the functional relatedness between the
pair of proteins using the above two probabilities. This is
similar to the model Cokus et al []. The proposed method was
formulated based on two basic hypotheses. The first basic
hypothesis is based on the similarity between the two given
proteins. The second hypothesis is based on the runs of
consecutive matches both the proteins span. Here, a run was
defined as the maximal non-empty string of consecutive
occupancy matches between two phylogenetic profiles. For
calculating runs the ordering of genomes is important because
the number of runs generally changes as target genomes were
permuted. The ordering of genomes is established such that the
order reflects the evolutionary relationships among the target
genomes []. Further for hierarchal clustering, we used the
target genomes' phylogenetic profiles. For calculating the
distance matrix, we used Jaccard dissimilarity to measure the
distance between two genomes. Complete linkage was used
here to define the pairs using the largest distance between
objects in the two clusters. Here, we used the ordering of the
genomes that are the leaves of the tree generated from
clustering. We have used the complete dendrogram obtained in
the above step to infer the co-clustering pattern. Hierarchal
clustering is generally topological in nature and there is an
ambiguity about the ordering of genomes, we used optimized
swiveling approach to handle such ambiguities. . A detailed
explanation of the concept of runs, ordering of genome and
optimal swiveling is available elsewhere (See Cokus et al 
[]).
In short, the two basic hypotheses of our proposed method are:
1) The greater the similarity, the more the proteins that are
functionally related [,
]; 2) The profiles with more runs are
more likely to involve functionally related proteins than profiles
in which all the matches are concentrated in one interval of the
tree [].

The weighted hypergeometric similarity probability was
defined as the probability of two phylogenetic profiles having a
certain number of matches using an extension of the
hypergeometric distribution that accounts for number of
proteins in each genome. The basic assumption was based on
biologically plausible hypothesis that protein pairs with more
matches in their profiles are more likely to co-evolve. We used
the same similarity probability defined by Cokus et al. 
[]. The
similarity probability for a pair of genes (Gene 1 and Gene 2) is
defined as the number of genomes that have the first gene
(Gene 1) is a &gt;= 0, the number of genomes that have the second
gene (Gene 2) is b &gt;= 0 and the number of genomes that have
both genes (Gene 1 and Gene 2) is c &gt;= 0. The similarity Pvalue,
the number of genomes with both genes, is at least as
large as c, given that a and b are defined using equation (1).

P (c &gt;= observed |a, b) = P(c &gt;= observed, a, b)/ P (a, b)

Where a = number of genomes with Gene 1; b = number of
genomes with Gene 2; c = number of genomes with Gene 1 and
Gene 2.

The weighted hypergeometric runs probability was defined as
the probability of two profiles having a certain number of runs
using an extension of the hypergeometric distribution that
accounts for the number of proteins in each genome.

The runs probability for a pair of genes (Gene 1 and Gene 2)
was defined as the number of runs that have the first gene
(Gene 1) in some number r &gt;= 0, the number of runs that have
the second gene (Gene 2) is s &gt;= 0 and the number of runs that
have both genes t &gt;= 0 is the value of the unique entry of P that
is P[r+1, s+1, t+1]. The runs P-value, then the number of
genomes with both genes (Gene 1 and Gene 2) is at least as
large as c given a and b is defined using equation (2).

P (t &gt;= observed |r, s) = P(t &gt;= observed, r, s)/ P (r, s)

Let k take values 0, 1…n and random variables Rk, Sk and Tk
take values in 0…k and Rk be the number of runs that have the
Gene 1, Sk be the number of runs that have Gene 2 and Tk be the
be the number of runs that have both genes (Gene 1 and Gene
2), restriction to genomes 0…k. To obtain the conditional
distribution of Tn given Rn and Sn it is sufficient to calculate the
joint distribution of Rn, Sn and Tn. P` represent a 3-dimensional
table with three variables, and the runs P-value was derived
using equation (3)

P(t &gt;=observed|r, s) = n/2Σt=tP`[r+1, s+1, t`+1] /n/2Σt=0 P`[r+1, s+1, t`+1]

We further expanded the approach to score pairs of proteins
using the following assumptions. If H is the weighted
hypergeometric similarity P-value for a given pair of proteins
encoded by Gene 1 and Gene 2 and R was the modified
weighted runs P-value for the same pair of proteins (Protein 1
and Protein 2), then we scored the pair of proteins as H*R or, on
a logarithmic scale score, defined it using equation (4). The
lesser the score of a given pair of proteins, the more the pairs
were considered as functionally related. The score was derived
using equation 4.

Score = log10H + log10R

The proposed method was implemented in MATLAB
(MathWorks, Massachusetts, USA) and validated using a
benchmark data set; we have also applied the method to a
specific example to illustrate the application. Source code in
MATLAB is available from the corresponding authors upon
request. An outline of the methodology is provided in ().

Results
All pairs of proteins with a probability score &gt; 0.5 were
considered for evaluation in our study. A total of 100, 000
protein pairs were evaluated and provided as Supplementary
Material (Data submitted to Dryad (URL:
http://www.datadryad.org/); Supplementary file (xls)
doi:10.5061/dryad.m6t4j). The phylogenetic profiling approach
that uses the weighted hypergeometric probability with runs
proposed by Cokus et al. outperformed all the previous
methods []. We compared our method with the weighted
hypergeometric probability with runs, with a hypothesis that, if
the results are comparable or better than these methods then it
indicates that the proposed method could perform better than
all the above methods. All the three methods were
benchmarked against pairs derived from the STRING []
database.

Validation of method based on comparison of benchmark pairs:
 compares three methods, considering one method at a
time. Each method assigns a P-value to every pair of genes
(100,000 pairs). Gene pairs are then sorted in ascending order by
the P-value. The graph in () was plotted as given x-axis
value x, y was plotted as the mean (total score) of first x gene
pairs after sorting based on P-value. Here, the total score is the
score obtained from the STRING database. Data used to
generate the plot is provided in the supplemental file. STRING
is an integrated database of known and predicted proteinprotein
interactions. A given interaction in the STRING
database was derived from one or a combination of association
methods: gene fusion, neighborhood, co-occurrence,
experiments, databases, text mining and homology. Detailed
explanation of scoring of protein-protein interaction reported in
STRING database can be found elsewhere []. The score ranges
from value 0 to 1. The greater value of the score indicates the
strength of the functional relatedness between the proteins.
From the graph it shows that the pairs obtained from the
proposed - method modified weighted hypergeometric
probability with runs (green line) – shown comparable or better
performance than the other two methods weighted
hypergeometric probability with runs (blue line) [] and
weighted hypergeometric probability without runs (red line)
[]. The cumulative average considering the 10,000 pairs for
the proposed method was 0.769, whereas the values of
weighted hypergeometric probability with runs was 0.756 and
for weighted hypergeometric probability without runs was
0.753  
(see supplementary material); (). The
margin observed here between the two methods was 0.003;
though it is a numerically low value, since it is an average on
10,000 pairs. We noted that our approach (weighted
hypergeometric probability with runs) is complementary or in
the context of the analyzed genomes when compared to the
existing method by a value of 0.013.

Comparative analysis of degree distribution of interaction networks:
A network (an undirected graph with no multiple edges and no
self-edges) was obtained from a computational method by
ranking gene pairs by the P-values from that method and then
collecting the top ranked 10,000 pairs. The nodes are the genes
mentioned in the kept gene pairs and an edge was placed
between two different genes if and only if the gene pair
consisting of the two genes was among the kept gene pairs. The
degree of a node was defined as the number of edges incident
with that node.  shows two histograms (with a
logarithmic scale for frequency) of node degree, one (blue) for
the network from the weighted hypergeometric with runs
computational method and the other (red) for the modified
weighted hypergeometric with runs computational method. We
can observe that the proposed weighted hypergeometric with
runs network (blue) contains many nodes with 90 or more
edges, while the modified weighted with runs (red) have almost
none. From the above graph, we can say that the network
formed by the proposed method show sub-clusters clusters
when compared to the pure weighted hypergeometric
probability with runs. Large clusters of protein pairs are often
not very useful for functional studies since they bring together
proteins with a broad range of diverse functions. In contrast,
small clusters can contain proteins with well-defined functional
relationships and can be tested using targeted functional
genomics or protein-protein interaction experiments.

Application of modified hypergeometric probability method using nitrate reductase:
To illustrate an example using our method, we considered the
subunits of nitrate reductase enzyme 
[–] from Escherichia
coli K12. () shows all the interactions of the six
subunits of nitrate reductase, which are narY, narH, narZ, narV,
narJ and narG, those that are present in the STRING database.
 shows the network containing all the interactions of
the six subunits of nitrate reductase that are observed using our
proposed methodology modified weighted hypergeometric
probability with runs. Visualization was generated using
Cytoscape []. These proteins belong together as they are
subunits of a protein complex that catalyzes the reduction of
nitrate to ammonia. In the network generated using our
methodology, the interactions missing are narG-narZ, narZ-narJ
and narJ-narG and these links had less scores implying less
significant edges. The network obtained from the approach was
similar to the existing interactions observed in the STRING
database (version 8).

Discussion
Rapidly lowering costs of next-generation sequencing
methodologies are increasing the repertoire of gene and protein
sequences in molecular databases. Various bioinformatics
methods based on similarity measures, phylogenetic
approaches, machine learning, protein-protein interaction, gene
expression and integrative approaches are available for the
prediction of functions of proteins encoded in a genome. In this
manuscript we explored the possibility of using phylogenetic
profiles to find the functional similarity of genes; a new
probability based function association method using
phylogenetic profiles was proposed and validated. We
proposed a new approach using functional protein association
network for identifying functionally linked proteins. We used
the probabilistic approach to incorporate two important aspects
of functional relatedness, which are similarity measure and the
number of runs the profiles span given the ordering of
genomes. We tested the method using the 4195 phylogenetic
profiles of Escherichia coli K12 generated using 305 genomes. The
functional links obtained by our proposed method are validated
using the STRING database functional links. We compared our
results with hypergeometric probability with runs and
hypergeometric probability without runs. The cumulative
average of STRING score considering the top ranked 10,000
pairs for the proposed method was 0.769; whereas the values of
weighted hypergeometric probability with runs was 0.756 and
for weighted hypergeometric probability without runs was
0.753. Our proposed method weighted hypergeometric
probability with runs has shown comparable or better results
than existing method in our evaluation at the same time the
method may need additional testing with independent datasets
and statistical validation to estimate errors and homology bias
that could be introduced during sequence search in generating
phylogenetic profiles. For example we considered the top hit
from the BLAST search in our analysis – including additional
hits and filtering orthologs or paralogs may have further
influence the performance of the method. Further the proposed
method can be extended to an increasing number of target
genomes.

Conclusion
In the current era of rapidly increasing number of genomic and
transcriptomic sequencing projects, assigning functions to
individual gene products, fusion transcripts and novel protein
isoforms and novel protein products will remain as a primary
challenge in bioinformatics. We envision that bioinformatics
approaches including the application of phylogenetic profile
based methods could enhance function assignment in such
scenarios.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Kotaru et al, Bioinformation 9(7): 368-374 (2013)

Brief outline of methodology

Pairwise comparison of weighted hypergenometric
probability method with runs (blue), weighted hypergeometric
probability method with runs (red) and modified weighted
hypergeometric method runs (proposed) (green).

Network degree distributions derived using two
different methods

a) shows the interactions of the six subunits of nitrate
reductase, mediated by narY, narH, narZ, narV, narJ and narG
derived from protein-protein interaction database STRING; b)
shows the network based on protein pairs mediated by six
subunits of nitrate reductase that were identified using our
proposed methodology.

