Background
Wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) is one of the most important staple crops
worldwide, with a total production of over 600 million tonnes annually. The
seed number and seed weight are critical yield components of wheat. Starch,
which accounts 65-75% of wheat seed weight, is a major determinant wheat
yield. Starch is known to be an important carbohydrate and the primary energy
source for plants, having numerous industrial applications [,
]. It is generally
accepted that four enzymes may play a key role in starch biosynthesis: ADPglucose
pyrophosphorylase, starch synthase, starch branching enzyme and
starch debranching enzyme []. ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase (AGPase) is
regarded as rate- limiting enzyme in starch biosynthesis. This enzyme plays a
key role in the modulation of photosynthetic efficiency in source tissues and
also determines the level of storage starch in sink tissues, thus influencing
overall crop yield potential. It catalyzes the first step of starch biosynthesis by
generating the sugar nucleotide ADP-glucose and inorganic pyrophosphate (Pi)
from glucose-1-phosphate and ATP. ADP-glucose functions as the glucosyl
donor for glucan synthesis by starch synthase. AGPase from higher plants is
heterotetrameric, consisting of two large subunits (AGP-L) and two small
subunits (AGP-S) encoded by two distinct genes []. Seed yield and plant
biomass increases are conferred by deregulation of endosperm AGPase and
thus, AGPase has attracted wide interest for potential crop improvements 
[].
In the present study the 3D structures of the subunits (large and small) from
wheat were modelled by the in silico homology techniques using the crystal
structure of small subunit from potato tuber as a template. Moreover, molecular
docking between these subunits was also performed to gain the insight of
interaction.

Methodology
Amino acids sequences of large subunit (P12299) and small subunit (P30523)
were retrieved from Swiss-Prot database []. Template was searched by
BLAST-P analysis against PDB database. The crystal structure of potato
AGPase (1YP2) available at PDB was used as template for modelling.
Sequence alignment between the model sequence and template was done with
ClustalW []. Homology models of large and small subunits were built by
Modeller [] version 9v7. One model from each subunit was selected using
PROCHECK [] and Prosa-web 
[]. Further, models were subjected to energy
minimization using GROMOS96 implemented via Swiss-pdb viewer 
[].
RMSD of the model structures of AGP-L and AGP-S were evaluated form its
template using the SUPERPOSE []. Docking of model structure was
performed by GRAMM-X []. Model structure was further evaluated by
Patchdock []. Best docked structure based on RMSD and Patchdock score
was chosen for further analysis. Hydrogen and hydrophobic interactions
between these subunits were analyzed by Ligplot []. Figures representation
was generated with Discovery studio visualizer programme 
[]. Accessible
surface area was calculated by Mark Gerstein's calc-surface programme
implemented in Chimera [].

Results and Discussion
Model building and quality assessment
BLAST analysis of gene sequences showed highest homology with the small
subunit of ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase (AGPase) from potato. The
alignment between the sequence of small subunit of ADP-glucose
pyrophosphorylase (AGP-S) from wheat and potato tuber revealed at least 90%
identity (), which allowed for a predictable homology modelling
approach. However, the alignment between sequences of small and large
subunits revealed 52% identity (Data not shown). Template (1YP2) from
potato AGPase was used for modelling the small and large subunits of wheat
with Modeller 9v7. The final models were selected based on DOPE score.
Evaluation of the selected models was done by Procheck and Prosa-web server.
The analysis of the Ramachandran plot and Prosa-web of the template (1YP2)
were used to compare the overall stereochemical quality of AGPase subunits
(AGP-L, AGP-S). Ramachandran analysis showed 89% and 90% amino acids
of AGP-L and AGP-S, respectively, in most favourable region ( &amp; 
).
The main chain conformation within the favoured or allowed region of
Ramachandran plot and G-factor indicated the accuracy of generated models.
Analysis of AGP-L and AGP-S models revealed the Z-score value of -9.56 and
-8.57, respectively, which is in the range of nature conformation of the
template (Table 1 see ). Furthermore root mean
square deviation of AGP-S and AGP-L models with respect to the equilibrated
structure of AGPS (1YP2) from potato and was found to be 1.08 and 1.30,
respectively. Thus overall quality assessment of the selected models assisted us
to use these models for further analysis.

In silico docking
We used GRAMM-X programme for docking purpose. This programme
perform a rigid-body docking using Fast Fourier Transformation methods
(FFT) by applying smoothed Lennard-Jones potential, knowledge-based and
refinement stage scoring, which give rise to best surface match. Simulation of
structural flexibility is a computational expensive process for protein- protein
docking. Thus, computationally docking is difficult for putting two proteins in
a complementary manner. High computational complexity restricts the flexible
docking algorithms and is rarely applicable to practical protein docking at
present. This problem can be overcome by using Rigid body docking
algorithm. Rigid body algorithm assumes two proteins as rigid bodies. The
conformation change is tolerated by allowing certain degree of penetration
between proteins. This assumption will limit the problem to a six-dimensional
(three for translation and three for rotation) search space 
[].

GRAMM-X generated a PDB file containing the structures of ten models
ranked according to the scoring function. We selected best docked complex for
analyzing the interaction mechanism ( &amp; 
). For accuracy of our result
we checked our model by Patchdock [] which uses molecular docking
algorithm based on shape complimentary principle. Complementary patches
are matched in order to generate candidate transformation which further
evaluated by scoring function, considering both geometric fit and atomic
desolvation energy []. For each complex top 15814 score from the Patchdock
was retained for further consideration, while other were rejected due to lower
score. Thus, best result from two algorithm not only increase our confidence
level but also provide strength in accuracy for our output data. Ligplot analysis
depicted the involvement of six amino acids in hydrogen bonding ( &amp;
Table 2 see ). Amino acids (Gln70, Gln113, Glu241,
Ser259, Arg420, Thr422) of AGP-S were found to form hydrogen bonds with
amino acids (Gln47, Met138, Glu286, Lys291, Ser306, Ile311) of AGP-L
(). Six hydrogen bonds were also formed in complex of small and
large subunits of AGPase from potato []. The hydrogen bond lengths
between AGP-L and AGP-S were found to be shorter then 3.3Å. Moreover,
seventeen amino acids of AGP-L were involved in seventy five hydrophobic
contact with fifteen amino acids of AGP-S (Table 3 see 
). 
This shows that complex is stabilized by both hydrogen bonding and
hydrophobic interactions. Out of these amino acids two amino acids were
found to be crucial. Amino acid Gln113 of small subunit donate the hydrogen
bond to Glu286 of large subunit with 1.96Å distance which was the smallest in
the complex. This amino acid also made five hydrophobic contacts with
Glu286 in the distance of 2.3Å to 3.7Å. Amino acids Ile311 of AGP-L made a
hydrogen bond with Glu241 of AGP-S with a distance of 3.1Å. Eight
hydrophobic contacts were formed by this amino acid (Ile311-AGP-L) with
Pro244 of AGP-S within the range of 2.5Å to 3.5Å. Moreover, decrease in
accessible surface area in the docking complex has been observed. Change of
accessible surface area of Gln113 AGP-S was found to be significant and it
changed from 109.75 to 17.85 in complex (Table 4 see 
). 
As mention previously this amino acids was also found to be critical
for hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic interaction (Table 3 see
). Similarly accessible area of other amino acids of
AGP-L; Lys291 (167.82 to 36.53), Thr300 (203.14 to 104.67) and Pro303
(102.86 to 20.94) were also found critical in the complex (Table 5 see
). Thus these outcomes suggest that the interaction
complex is feasible and useful for understanding the binding mechanism
between AGP-L and AGP-S subunits of ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase in
wheat.

Conclusion
ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase (AGPase) is a major enzyme controlling
starch synthesis, and has been demonstrated in many different plant species.
The crystal structure of AGPase (small and large subunits) from wheat has not
yet been solved. Thus, the rationale in building the AGPase subunits models
and performing in silico docking study was to gain the details of interaction
between two subunits (AGP-L and AGP-S). This docking study revealed the
important residues involved in formation of the complex. Six amino acids of
AGP-S and AGP- L were involved in hydrogen bonding where as fifteen amino
acids of AGP-S were involved in hydrophobic interaction with seventeen
amino acids of AGP-L. Importantly, all the amino acids that were involved in
hydrogen bonding were found to be crucial as they were also caught up by
hydrophobic interactions. Thus, this study hypothesise the model which can be
used for further study to elucidate the role of AGPase gene in starch
biosynthesis to increase the starch content in wheat and thus, grain yield.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The financial support for Agri-Bioinformatics Promotion Program provided by
Bioinformatics Initiative Division, Department of Information Technology,
Ministry of Communications &amp; Information Technology, Government of India,
New Delhi is gratefully acknowledged. The authors are thankful to Project
Director, DWR, Karnal for providing facilities for this work.

Citation:Danishuddin et al Bioinformation 6(4): 144-148 (2011)

Sequence alignment between the small subunit, large subunit of
wheat and corresponding sequence of small subunit of potato (PDB: 1YP2).

Model structure of AGP-S and quality assessment evaluated by
Procheck and Prosa-web.

Model structure of AGP-L and quality assessment evaluated by
Procheck and Prosa-web.

Model of AGP-S and AGP-L complex interaction and hydrogen
bonding pattern.

