Background
Trichomonas vaginalis was first described by Donne in 1836 
[].
T. vaginalis cause of trichomoniasis with an estimate, number
one nonviral and second most sexually transmitted disease
(STD) []. According to WHO trichomoniasis results women
with 250 million infections in the world each year. T. vaginalis
transmitted mostly by sexual contact it results in bad pregnancy
outcome and also increases the chances of HIV infection 
[,
].
Infection is treated and cured with metronidazole or tinidazole,
and is prescribed to any sexual partner(s) as well because they
may be asymptomatic carriers []. The draft genome sequence
of the Trichomonas vaginalis, a sexually transmitted human
pathogen has been published in 2007 []. Its genome presents
many unusual genomic and biochemical feature like, an
abnormally large genome size of 160 Mb. T. vaginalis has been
evolved to the pathogenic urogenital environment from the
enteric environment. Therefore it is important to get insight into
the mechanism of genome evolution that enabled T. vaginalis in
acquiring the adaptations essential for the pathogenic behavior.
Essential enzymes are those which are indispensable for the
survival of an organism, and therefore are considered a
foundation of life. Therefore the identified orthologous and
paralogous enzymes were also analyzed whether they belongs
to essential gene category or not. The N-acetylneuraminate
lyase was investigated as the candidate of lateral genes transfer.
Here, we present a comparative metabolic pathway analysis 1)
To identify metabolic pathways in T. vaginalis which are
common in selected organisms; 2) To identify orthologous and
paralogous enzymes among common identified metabolic
pathways; 3) To identify the essential enzymes.

Methodology
The enzymes and metabolic pathways of T. vaginalis and other
22 common selected organisms were retrieved from KEGG
pathway database []. Metabolic pathways which were
common with T. vaginalis were identified. Each T. vaginalis
enzyme in common metabolic pathways are used for the
database search against all 22 selected organisms for the
identification of orthologous enzymes. The database search was
performed with BLAST program []. Using sequence identity
more than 40 %, query coverage more than 80 % and having
significantly low e value. Paralogous enzymes were identified
from selected orthologous enzymes by performing the database
search of selected orthologous enzymes against the T. vaginalis
proteome. The identified orthologous &amp; paralogous enzymes
were again screened against the Database of Essential Genes.
BLASTP search for N-acetylneuraminate lyase of T. vaginalis
(Q27818) was performed to select the related sequences in
different organisms. Four other N-acetylneuraminate lyase
sequences in Haemophilus parainfluenzae (E1W1D4), Pasteurella
dagmatis (C9PLY8), Haemophilus influenza (A4N656) and
Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans (G4B7P9) were selected.
The physicochemical properties were calculated by ProtParam,
motif prediction by motif search
(www.genome.jp/tools/motif/), secondary structures
prediction by GOR IV method, predicting Pfam families and
conserved domain by (NCBI CD search tool).

Discussion
The comparative analysis of T. vaginalis metabolic pathways
was carried out with the selected 22 common organisms. Most
of the selected organisms were having maximum conserved
metabolic pathways (). We have found that although
the selected organisms belong to different kingdoms like
Eukaryota, Animalia, Fungi and Bacteria most of the metabolic
pathways were common. Some metabolic pathways like
Caffeine metabolism, N-Glycan biosynthesis and
Glycosaminoglycan degradation were conserved only in few
organisms like Aspergillus niger, Bacillus subtilis, Homo sapiens,
Candida albicans, Entamoeba histolytica, Plasmodium vivax, Giardia
lamblia etc,  (see supplementary material). The
orthologous and paralogous T. vaginalis enzymes which were
and found in the selected organism were also identified 

(see supplementary material). In most of the organisms almost
all metabolic pathway are conserved, except some organism,
like Entamoeba histolytica, Plasmodium vivax, Salmonella enteric,
Haemophilus influenza and Helicobacter pylori where there was
difference in the metabolic pathways (). Red pattern
represents total metabolic pathways present in selected
organism while blue pattern represent common metabolic
pathway.

T. vaginalis has evolved from enteric environment to the urinary
tract environment where it causes the infection. The evolution
of a parasitic lifestyle of T. vaginalis necessitates adaptations to
specialized features essential for pathogenesis 
[]. Examples of
common adaptive features include host interaction systems,
metabolic pathways that allow the acquisition of nutrients from
the host and mechanisms to evade host defenses. Such traits
could originate by a process of gradual change, but there are
mechanisms that would allow potential parasites to adapt very
quickly. One of these mechanisms is lateral gene transfer.
Lateral transfer is the process by which genetic information is
passed from one genome to an unrelated genome, where it is
stably integrated and maintained. There is growing evidence
from whole-genome analyses, which concludes this process as
an important mechanism in genome evolution 
[]. In the
present study we have found total 101 orthologous enzymes
 
(see supplementary material), present in different
organisms. Presence of large number of orthologous proteins
across wide range of different organisms indicates the active
participation of lateral gene transfer events in the T. vaginalis
from other genomes. This may have helped T. vaginalis in
acquiring features required for pathogenicity as lateral transfer
could allow a previously harmless organism to rapidly colonize
a new environment by acquiring highly specific biochemical
functionality by gradual adaptation.

Herein, the important identified orthologous enzymes which
are possible of lateral gene transfer and also playing key roles
like host interaction systems, metabolic pathways that allow the
acquisition of nutrients from the host and mechanisms to evade
host defenses, are discussed. TVAG_044970 (N acetylneuraminate
lyase) identified as orthologous enzymes. N acetylneuraminate
lyase is an enzyme involved in the
metabolism of sialic acids. N-acetylneuraminate lyase is an
enzyme involved in the metabolism of sialic acids. N acetylneuraminate
lyase is the final enzyme in the sialic acid
degradative pathway therefore, plays significant role in the
sialic acid metabolism. Moreover, this event may represent an
important factor in the evolution of parasitism 
[]. The
physicochemical properties  (see supplementary
materials) and amino acid composition  (see
supplementary material) of N-acetylneuraminate lyase in
selected organisms was found to be similar with no significant
variations. The percentage of different secondary structures
(alpha helix, extended strand &amp; random coil) was also found to
be similar (). Similarly no significant variation was also
found in the number of motif, their length and their
composition  (see supplementary material). The Pfam
 (see supplementary material) and conserved domain
 
(see supplementary material) predicted for N acetylneuraminate
lyase in different organisms was also found
to be same. From the sequence (physicochemical properties),
pattern (motif &amp; conserved domain), Pfam and structural
(secondary structures) analysis, it is clear that the N acetylneuraminate
lyase of T. vaginalis was very similar with N acetylneuraminate
lyase in other selected organisms (bacteria).
It thus supports the role of lateral gene transfer mechanism in
the transfer of N-acetylneuraminate lyase from bacterial
genome and to the T. vaginalis genome []. Similar studies can
also be carried out to investigate other identified enzymes as
the possible candidate of lateral gene transfer.

TVAG_318670 (AP33), TVAG_318670 (AP33), TVAG_144730
(AP51) and TVAG_183500 (AP51) were identified as
orthologous proteins, all are adhesin proteins helping the T.
vaginalis in adhering the site of infection and colonization of
vaginal mucosa. T. vaginalis is a mucosal parasite of the
urogenital vaginal tract thus it needs pathogenesis of adherence
to the cervicovaginal epithelium and get colonization therefore
these adhesin proteins are playing key role in host-pathogen
interaction. These proteins mediate the interaction of the
parasite to the receptor molecules [,
]. Similarly other
important enzymes like TVAG_261970 Carbamate kinase and
TVAG_387920 cysteine synthase were also identified as
orthologous. Carbamate kinase catalyzes the reversible reaction
of carbamoyl phosphate, ADP to ATP and ammonium
phosphate which is then hydrolyzed to ammonia and
carbonate. This enzyme has involved in the different metabolic
pathways like purine, arginine, proline, and nitrogen
metabolisms of the T.vaginalis. These metabolic pathways in
trichomonads cause the rapid depletion of arginine in vaginal
and seminal fluid with an accompanied production of
putrescine. This carbamate kinase pathway has been reported in
many prokaryotes and two primitive eukaryotes namely Giardia
lamblia and T. vaginalis []. TVAG_387920 (cysteine synthase) is
also identified as orthologous. T. vaginalis is an anaerobic
protozoan parasite of humans that relies heavily on cysteine, a
major redox buffer, as it lacks glutathione. This has been
reported that for synthesis of cysteine from sulfide, T. vaginalis
relies upon cysteine synthase. This parasite enzyme could be an
exploitable drug target [], TVAG_474980 (thioredoxin
reductase) also identified as orthologous protein. The
thioredoxin system is one of the important defense mechanisms
in trichomonads as if offers major antioxidant activity in
response to environmental changes. Increase in the levels of
thioredoxin and thioredoxin peroxidase has been reported.
Sequence data indicate that the thioredoxin reductase of
trichomonads differs fundamentally in structure from that of its
human host and thus may represent as a useful drug target 
[].

In the present study 75 orthologous enzymes were identified
which were found as essential enzymes while 26 enzymes as
non-essential  
(see supplementary material). Essential
genes constitute a minimal genome, forming a set of functional
modules, which play key roles in activities essential for the
survival of an organism. Therefore essential gene products also
comprise excellent targets for antibacterial drugs. It has been
reported that the most recent common ancestor of T. vaginalis
underwent a population bottleneck during its transition from
an enteric environment (the habitat of most trichomonads) to
the urogenital tract. During this time, the decreased
effectiveness of selection resulted in repeat accumulation and
differential gene family expansion. One of the possible
mechanisms behind genome expansion is gene duplication. In
case of gene duplication, a non functional copy of a gene gets
incorporated in the host genome. Many protein families
underwent massive duplication []. Pseudogenes are DNA
sequences that were derived from a functional copy of a gene
but which have acquired mutations that are deleterious to
function. This duplicated copy of original functional gene gets
incorporated into a new chromosomal location leading to
expansion of the existing gene family and hence can lead to
genome expansion []. 
The pseudogenes get expressed in the
form of paralogous proteins. In present study we have found
that except TVAG_243770 (hypoxanthine
phosphoribosyltransferase) and TVAG_248810 (Glutathione
peroxidase) all identified orthologous enzymes were also
identified as paralogous proteins. In case of T. vaginalis it is an
interesting finding because the genome draft of T. vaginalis
reveals exceptionally large genome size of 160 Mb nearly ten
times larger than predicted earlier. The genome expansion has
been thought to be cause of exceptionally large genome 
[].

It will be interesting to predict and validate other examples of
lateral gene transfer and investigate whether these examples are
involved in pathogenesis or not. Due to a lack of supporting
data in the literature, about other identified orthologous and
paralogous enzymes in T. vaginalis, these predicted enzymes
reported in this paper are only a “first order guess” for probable
candidate of lateral gene transfer mechanism. These enzymes
are of particular interest for further characterization to verify
the roles and essentiality for T. vaginalis survival.

Conclusion
The comparison of metabolic pathways of T. vaginalis with 22
common organism revealed 101 enzymes present in T. vaginalis
as orthologous while 99 enzymes as paralogous. It is significant
finding as 75 of these enzymes were also identified as essential
for the survival of T. vaginalis. Identification of orthologous and
paralogous enzymes clearly indicates the involvement of lateral
gene transfer (indicated by case study of N-acetylneuraminate
lyase) and gene duplication events during the genome
evolution of T. vaginalis. We can conclude that the expansion of
genetic material may be due to the adaptations of the T.
vaginalis during its transition to a urogenital environment from
enteric environment (the habitat of most trichomonads).

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors are grateful to the Sam Higginbottom Institute of
Agriculture, Technology and Sciences (Formerly Allahabad
Agriculture Institute) (Deemed-to-be-University) Allahabad for
providing the facilities and support to complete the present
research work.

Citation:Singh et al, Bioinformation 8(4): 189-195 (2012)

Comparison of metabolic pathway comparison with
selected organism

Secondary Structure of N-acetylneuraminate lyase in
selected organisms.

