Background
During recent years, simulations of biological systems have
been spurred by the massive acquisition and availability of data
in molecular and cell biology. It is increasingly becoming
evident that simulations can be paired with experiments, and in
fact, they are customarily used by computational scientists to
understand the quantitative behavior of many complex
biological systems. Additionally, in-silico simulations are also
successfully employed in the design of new Biomolecular
experiments thus driving experimentalists. Although the gap
between in vivo and in-silico biology has been remarkably
reduced, there are still many limitations hindering the adoption
of computational approaches in everyday Biomolecular
research. Filling in this gap with Systems level approaches will
help for a better understanding of mechanisms and operation of
cellular processes in the Tuberculosis (TB) bacterium. TB
continues to be a devastating public health problem. With the
first cases of Total Drug Resistant strains reported in India
during January 2012 and the mortality rate of Multi-Drug
Resistance (MDR), Extremely Drug Resistance (XDR) and Total
Drug Resistance (TDR)-TB is 30%, 60% and 100% respectively,
there is an urgent need to identify novel targets and to develop
new drugs [].

In this paper, we create a network of Molecular Interaction Map
(MIP) from a list of 141 possible targets reported in the
comprehensive in-silico target identification pipeline, TargetTB
[,
]. 
The proteins span across 5 broad functional categories 1)
Cell Wall Biosynthesis; 2) Lipid Metabolism; 3) Intermediary
Metabolism and Respiration; 4) Information Pathways; 5)
Regulatory proteins. MIP Interactome was increased using the
STRING database version 9.0, with confidence scores as edge
weights. The MIP now includes the interactions among these
141 targets and their interactions across other pathways. The
network captures different types of interactions such as (a)
physical complex formation between two proteins required to
form a functional unit; (b) genes belonging to a single operon or
to a common neighbourhood; (c) proteins in a given metabolic
pathway and hence influenced by each other; (d) proteins
whose associations are suggested based on predominant coexistence,
co-expression, or domain fusion. Network
Decomposition through K-Core analysis gave rise to the most
influential target among the 141 selected targets and their
interacting neighbors.

Methodology
The interacting partners of all the 141 reported protein targets
were selected from the STRING database and a network was
constructed with Cytoscape 2.8.0 [], a network visualization
and analysis software. The shortest paths between all pairs of
proteins in the network were computed. For every node in a
network, the Network Analyzer computes its degree, its
clustering coefficient, the number of self-loops, and a variety of
other parameters. ClusterOne plugin used on the network
strives to discover densely connected and possibly overlapping
regions within the Cytoscape network. It essentially looks for
groups of high cohesiveness based on the parameters,
minimum size, minimum density, edge weights, merging and
seeding methods. The minimum size of the cluster for all the
proteins in the network was set to 15 resulting in 19 clusters
().

The minimum sizes for the individual networks were set to 7.
The highly interacting nodes in the cluster was identified by
molecular complex detection (MCODE) algorithm [], by
keeping K-Core =4 - 8, node score cutoff = 0.2 and max depth
up to 100. At each level topological properties were studied to
justify the important nodes/hubs playing crucial role in the
functional pathways of the TB bacterium.

Discussion
An MIP with 141 targets and their interacting protein partners
depicting 344 molecules as nodes and 587 edges is a
mathematical graph, permitting analysis with graph theoretical
algorithms. Molecules like genes, proteins, transcriptional
factors are denoted as nodes in the graph and interactions
between them are called as edges. This MIP is a scale free
network which obeys power law distribution of connectivity.

Network Analysis:
Molecular interaction map can be represented as undirected
graph M (N, E), which consists of set of nodes as N and set of
edges as E. The size of the graph is given by the number of its
nodes. The degree of its nodes indicates the number of
interaction to a single node with all the other nodes. A clique is
a complete n-node sub-graph, which means that within a sub
graph, each pair of nodes is connected by an edge. Using the
MCODE plugin, we have found clusters (highly interconnected
regions) in the networks (). At K-core 7, 5 subnetworks/
cliques from the entire 141 proteins developed 
 (see supplementary material).

Clique A represents enzymes of the Lipid Metabolism.
Phospholipids represented by phosphatidylethanolamine (PE),
phosphatidylinositol mannosides (PIMX) and cardiolipins (CL)
constitute about 25 % of total lipids and 3–7 % of total dry
weight of mycobacteria (). Clique B are Cytochromes
(), the major enzymes involved in drug metabolism and
bio-activation, accounting for about 75% of the total number of
different metabolic reactions []. Clique E is represented by
Menaquinones (2-methyl-3-polyprenyl-1,4- naphthoquinones)
which are the predominant lipoquinones of mycobacteria. The
lipoquinones involved in the respiratory chains of bacteria
consist of menaquinones and ubiquinones [], while mammals
have only ubiquinone. A detailed characterization of an aerobic
respiratory chain in M. tuberculosis showed that
NADH:menaquinone oxidoreductase is a viable target for antitubercular
agents [].

Clique C represents Cys proteins (Sulphate Assimilation
Enzymes) and Clique D represents Aro proteins (Shikimate
pathway enzymes) are found to repeat themselves in the
network with a stringent K-core (). The Sulfur
metabolic pathways are essential for survival and the
expression of virulence in many pathogenic bacteria, including
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Extracellular presentation of sulfated
metabolites plays important regulatory roles in cell-cell and
host-pathogen communication []

Mutants with defects in sulfate assimilation indicate that the
fate of sulfur in Mycobacterium tuberculosis is a critical survival
determinant for the bacteria during infection and suggest novel
targets for tuberculosis drug therapy []. The Shikimate
pathway leads to the biosynthesis of chorismate, a precursor of
aromatic amino acids. This pathway is absent from mammals
and shown to be essential for the survival of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis [,
,
]. PheA (Prephenate Dehydratase) is a new
interacting partner appearing along with other Shikimate
pathway enzymes in the MIP  (see supplementary
material)

Topological analysis of the 5 functional classes of networks in
TB was done through three properties of network analysis i.e,
Closeness centrality, Betweenness centrality and Node degree
distribution. The R-squared value (also known as coefficient of
determination) gives the proportion of variability in a data set,
which is explained by a fitted linear model.

Closeness centrality is a measure of how fast information
spreads from a given node to other reachable nodes in the
network. The closeness centrality, Cc (n) was calculated for
every functional category taking into consideration, all of the
shortest path for each node. Cc(n) of node n is defined as the
reciprocal of the average shortest path length and is computed
as follows: Cc(n) = 1 / avg (L(n,m)), where L(n,m) is the length of
the shortest path between two nodes n and m. Cc(n) was high
for all the functional categories leaving Intermediary
Metabolism and Respiration.

The Betweenness centrality of a node reflects the amount of
control that this node exerts over the interactions of other nodes
in the network. In undirected networks, the node degree of a
node n is the number of edges linked to n. A self-loop of a node
is counted like two edges for the node degree. Node degree
distribution for all the functional categories is high ranging
from 0.91 to 0.98 which shows high interactive networks with
the edges  (see supplementary material).

Conclusion
The proposed approach uses the creation of molecular
interaction map and then finding the best cliques by using kcore
application. Topological parameters were calculated for the
proposed Molecular Interaction Map representing the core
proteins responsible for survival of the TB pathogen and the
proteins not found in mammalian systems, making them
suitable targets for Structure Based Drug Design. Analysis of
closeness centrality, betweenness centrality and node degree
distribution showed that enzymes of the Sulphate Assimilation
pathway and the Shikimate pathways part of the Intermediary
Metabolism of Mycobacterium tuberculosis are crucial for the
survival of the microbe. From the Shikimate pathway clique,
Prephenate dehydratase (pheA), a key regulatory enzyme in Lphenylalanine
biosynthesis was identified as a potential drug
target. The absence of a human counterpart of the aromatic
amino acid biosynthesis pathway makes the member enzymes
promising targets for therapeutic interventions against the
Tuberculosis bacterium.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Priya et al, Bioinformation 8(9): 403-406 (2012)

Interactome of all the 141 proteins showing 144 nodes
and 587 edges in the protein-protein interaction map
encompassing all 5 functional categories of protein targets in
Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Best five interconnected cliques among all the 141
target proteins and their interactions with neighboring proteins.

