Background
The prevalence of obesity and diabetes has increased
exponentially in recent years around the globe, with special
mention about India. Sweet proteins have the potential to
replace the sugars by acting as natural, good, low-calorie
sweeteners. The design of safer sweeteners is very important for
people who are affected by diabetes, hyperlipidemia and other
diseases that are linked to the consumption of sugars. Sweet
proteins which are found in several tropical plants, are many
times sweeter than sucrose on a molar basis 
[]. Although sugar
substitute are now reasonably safer, there is a continuous search
for new, and safer ones. Their design requires a good
understanding of the interaction of sweetener molecules with
their receptors []. The physiological basis of sweet taste
perception has captured the imagination of many philosophers,
cooks and scientists []. A good understanding of their
structure-function relationship can compliment SAR studies on
small molecular weight sweeteners and thus help in the design
of safe sweeteners []. Research groups have recently identified
a likely sweet taste receptor, T1R3 []. Despite numerous
studies on taste receptors there remains a great deal of
understanding in what characteristics of the molecules govern
the perception of taste []. The computational studies on
molecular recognition between proteins and low molecular
weight molecules have experienced a significant development
in the recent decade. Various enzyme and receptor systems of
chemical, biological and medicinal interest have been studied
by simulating ligand-protein interactions at the molecular level
[]. These computational approaches give a promising vision to
predict, find and explore the availability of new sweetener
products especially low-molecular proteins, non-conventional
natural plants and microbial sources. Previous studies show
that there is virtually no homology among the known sweet
proteins, but a little structural similarity exists. In monelin
(209U) replacement of AspB7 by L-2 aminobuteric acid, Gly and
D-Asp resulted in complete loss of sweetness. Replacement of
IleB6 and IleB8 by different amino acids resulted in significant
decrease of sweetness, or complete loss of sweetness. These
results suggested that the free β-carboxyl group of the AspB7
would possibly bind to the receptor site through ionic bonding
and trigger the sensation of intense sweet taste, and IleB6
and/or IleB8 would be involved in the hydrophobic interaction
with the receptor site []. Similarly our detailed study also
stands with slight and very vital different that the Ile residues
making hydrophobic interactions with residues in the active
sites of receptor protein. The binding regions are conserved in
most of them and they posses similar secondary structure
formation and relative reasonable tertiary structure in monelin,
curculin and mablin. Residues like IleB6, AspB7 and IleB8 in
monelin identical residues are there in curculin(2PDF) they are
Ile36, Asp37 and Val38 here valaine is notable and Isoleusine
are functionally identical secondary structure formation in
protein folding. Similar structure search and structure
comparison resulted in a hypothetical protein (2GPI), from a
marine bacterium, Shewanella loihica. It also showed the
availability of two adjacent residues, Ile5 and Ile6, and the
formation of similar secondary structure suggests strongly the
possibility of a sweet protein.

Methodology
Interaction of sweet fingers with T1R3 active site is carried out
by docking studies. Since T1R3 is a membrane protein, it has
not been crystallized and its structure is not yet determined. To
perform virtual interaction studies T1R3 structure was
developed by homology modeling. Previous studies on
homology modeling of T1R3 protein used 1EWK 
[] and 1EVW
[] 
as template to build the extra-cellular domains and/or
complete backbone. The IEWK shows 27% of sequence identity
and 35% of similarity, and the 1EVW shows 40% sequence
identity with T1R3 amino acid sequence. In the modeling
approach, we used 2E4U as template protein which is a crystal
structure of extra cellular region of the metabotropic glutamate
receptor and showed 75% sequence similarity. SWISS-PDB
viewer and workspace are used for model building and energy
refinement. Energy minimization was performed up to 20 times
to get a biologically stabilized conformation. The T1R3 receptor
model was validated using Ramachandran Plot available in
CCP4 computational crystallographic suite 
[]. It showed 85%
of residues are in the favored region, 10% of the residues in the
allowed region and remaining 5% of residues also in outlier
region ().

The relationship between amino acid sequence and structure
gives deeper insights into the basic principles of protein
structure and function. Study of monelin, an intensely sweet
protein reported that some structural domains are working as
sweet fingers []. 
We considered that the free β-carboxyl group
of certain Asp residue in monelin would possibly bind to the
receptor site through ionic bonding and trigger the sensation of
an intense sweet taste. Monelin was taken as query to search
protein having similar structural properties with expected
sweet fingers, likely present in this known protein. Search
performed against monellin (209U) on ProteinDBS, showed a
hypothetical protein from Shewanella loihica having reasonable
structure similarity, among the top scored hits for 2GPI, with
expected adjacent Ile residues assumed as sweet fingers. 2GPI is
a conserved hypothetical single chain small protein with the
length of 91 amino acids. Pairwise structural alignment of 2GPI
with monelin gives high similarity (). Potently
sweet compounds possess a hydrophobic site, which
participates in the binding to the receptor through a
hydrophobic interaction. In aspartyl peptide sweeteners, both
the amino acids adjacent to Asp residue are restricted in shape,
size, stereo chemistry, and so on [].

The exact mechanism of sweet proteins with the T1R2-T1R3
sweet taste receptor had not yet been elucidated 
[]. Interaction
study of our modeled structure of T1R2-T1R3 protein and
assumed novel sweet protein candidate 2GPI reveals the
possibility of having active sites with sweet taste activity in the
hypothetical protein. A new drug/molecule should fit the
active site of a specific receptor. Although electrostatic,
hydrophobic and van der Waals interactions affect greatly the
binding affinity of the molecules, shape complementarity is a
necessary condition. []. Protein-protein docking was carried
out to examine the interaction between predicted active site of
2GPI and taste receptor protein by using PATCHDOCK 
[].
Standard parameters with clustering RMSD value of 4.0 and
default complex type were followed in the docking process. The
final docking results were analyzed. Among the top docking
solutions the complex with most optimal interaction distance
was used to visualize the hydrophobic interaction 
().

Results
Computationally predicted hypothetical protein candidate is
validated by protein-protein docking. The adjacent
hydrophobic residues cause hydrophobic interaction with
receptor site. One Asp residue between the hydrophobic amino
acids () 
triggers ionic interaction with the active site of
taste receptor protein as reported in previous studies. The 2GPI
is a low molecular weight (10.5 K Da) protein. In addition the
source of this hypothetical protein is a cultivatable marine
bacterium, Shewanella loihica. Our study gives a promising
opportunity to design and develop novel intense sweetener
proteins through a structure-based similarity search and
computational modeling techniques. It may ensure potential
health beneficial sweetener products to enhance industrial
production and marketing of low-calorie food items.

Citation:Gnanavel &amp; Muthukumar, Bioinformation 7(3): 112-114 (2011)

Ramachandran Plot showing residues in the optimal
energy level.

(A) Predicted novel sweet protein, Ile residue in green
colour makes ionic interaction; Ile and Phe residues in orange
colour make hydrophobic interactions with taste receptor. (B)
Known intense sweet protein monelin (209U) with similar
structural finger print.

Dockpose of 2GPI in the active site of the extracellular
region of T1R2-T1R3 receptor model.

Residues making ionic and hydrophobic interactions
with receptor site.

