Background
Presence of mobile genetic elements is a widespread
phenomenon in various taxonomical groups. For every genus
there are families of MGE, which are classified based on
sequence similarity, origin and mode of transposition. For
example in Human genome Alu is the most successful MGE in
terms of copy number whereas LINE-1 occupies most of the
human genome. In mouse- B1 and L1, in E. coli – Tn7, in
Drosophila – P element, in E. histolytica- EhLINE, EhSINE etc.
are some of the widely studied elements. The role of mobile
genetic elements has always been debatable in relation to their
mode and site of insertion and their effect on biology of
organism. Some of the functions which have been documented
are in the context of gene inactivation, transduction of genomic
sequences, regulation of gene expression and genomic
expansion.

Identification of specific motifs or patterns at insertion site of
MGE is one of the interesting problems studied by several
researchers in the past. Patterns or motifs are found in number
of important contexts in biological systems which include DNA
sequences, protein sequences, RNA etc. Motifs such as TATA
box, β-α- β, Greek key, HTH etc are some of the well studied
examples in the literature. The presence of specific patterns or
motifs like TTAAAA at Alu insertion sites was reported by
Jurka []. This motif was validated by the several numbers of
experiments which find that Alu insertion occurs with highest
frequency in site downstream of TTAAAA motif []. Presence
of such patterns has also been discovered in P-element of D.
melanogaster [] 
and EhSINE1 of E. histolytica [].

Here, we present a method of analyzing the DNA sequence of
insertion site based on its secondary features. These features can
be broadly divided into structural parameters like Bendability
and Propeller twist; energy profiles like Stacking energy,
duplex stability free-energy and stabilizing energy and protein
interaction parameters like Protein induced deformability,
Nucleosomal positioning and Bending Stiffness; sequence based
parameters like A-philicity, AT-rule, B to A trimeric form of
DNA, C-rule, G-rule and T-rule. We hypothesize that
transposition machinery first recognizes donor DNA based on
these structural parameters and then the specific nucleotides
such as TTAAAA. We applied our approach on wide variety of
examples which includes pre-insertion loci of Alu element of
Human, B1 (type of SINE) element of mouse, P-element in
Drosophila melanogaster, EhSINE1 of E. histolytica, Ty3 in S.
cerevisiae and Tn7 in E. coli and D. desulfuricans.

Previously our group has identified several sets of signals at
insertion sites of various MGEs []; for example in Alu element
at around 9-12 base pairs upstream of insertion site. During this
study we found that TTAAAA motif is in highest frequency at
flanking region of site of insertion of Alu. Set of experimental
studies have independently verified these results [,
].
Encouraged by the results, we applied this approach to other
examples from various taxonomic groups and also attempted to
identify most frequently occurring motif in the flank of MGE
insertion sites showing distinct physiochemical signals.

Methodology
Identification of the most frequently occurring motif in flank of Alu insertion site:
To find motifs within 10-20 base pairs upstream of Alu, the full
length hits are selected using the tool EleFinder []. The flanks
(100 base pairs) are retrieved using Perl scripts and position of
occurrence of motif nearest to insertion site is generated 
(). Ten highest frequency motifs from the previous work 
[] are
analyzed in detail ().

Retrieving Genomes and Repeat sequences:
The sequence of human chromosome 22, X and Y, mouse
chromosome 16, X and Y and E. histolytica genome are retrieved
from ftp server of NCBI. E. coli and D. sulfuricans genome are
retrieved from NCBI, accession no. NC_011601.1 and
NC_007519.1 respectively. For Ty3 insertions in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae genome, we selected tRNAs and flanking region.
These are downloaded from genomic tRNA database 
[]. Alu
and B1 sequences are downloaded from RepBase 
[]. EhSINE1
sequence was taken from our previous work 
[].

Finding insertion site:
There are two types of insertion sites that can be used- one
which are in-silico and the other in-vitro. While in-vitro data
gives the actual insertion sites, in-silico methods are designed to
give potential insertion sites and corrected statistically to give
results close to as would be obtained in-vitro. We used
EleFinder [] to find the insertion site of Alu in human, B1 in
mouse and EhSine1 in E. histolytica.

For elements Tn7 and Ty3, insertion is site-specific. Tn7 inserts
downstream of glmS at 3' end [,
] and Ty3 inserts upstream
of tRNA gene []. These are the most probable and highly
specific site, thus are located directly. Tn7 insertion site in E. coli
is extracted from EcoGene database []. It consists of 100bps of
end of glmS and 100 bp downstream of it. Since glmS is
conserved among bacteria, insertion site in D. sulfuricans is
taken by identifying the glmS (of E. coli) in the bacteria by Blast
and extracting 200 bps in similar way as E. coli. Ty3 insertion
sites are taken from Genomic tRNA database, tRNA is removed
and region upstream of it, 1500 bps and downstream of it, 1500
bps is used for analysis. Results of Elefinder for Alu and B1 are
summarized in the  (see supplementary material). Pelement
insertion sites consisted positive strand dataset of 51 bp
as described in Linheiro et al 
[].

Computational analysis of pre insertion sequences:
For each of the features discussed above, a graphical profile is
generated in sliding window along a sequence. DNA scanner
[] 
for Alu upstream sequences is run with window size of 5
and start position of 0, representing insertion site. The
parameters are same for Chromosome 22, X and Y and B1
insertion sites in mouse chromosome 16, X and Y. EhSINE1
analysis is done using window size of 5 and start position as 0
representing insertion site. For E. coli and D. sulfuricans start
position is taken as -100, 0 represents nucleotide at the end of
glmS and window sizes were selected from 15 to 25; 20 is
considered to be optimal size. For Ty3 window size is taken as
200 and start position as -1500, 0th position representing end of
5' upstream region of tRNA. For P-element window size is 5
and start position as -25, 0 marks the insertion site.

Finding motifs in the region around signal:
After signals are found, the nucleotide sequence around
extrema was used for finding the highest occurring motif for a
given MGE. This was done using RSAT suite of tools 
[],
under which we used ‘Oligo Analysis’. We used following
options–‘mask non-DNA’, ‘prevent overlapping matches’,
‘count on single strand only’, and results were displayed as
‘Pattern Count Distribution’. The result was sorted based on
occurrence of one instance of motif in a sequence. This is
because the presence of just one motif per sequence is required
for identifying the target by transposition machinery. Even if
similar motif is present more than once in a sequence it will not
affect the transposition though it may affect the site of
transposition by few base-pairs.

Results
(A) Distribution of motifs in 10-20 bps upstream of Alu insertion site:
Jurka reported presence of n-mers (n&lt;5&lt;20) or motifs such as
TT'AAAA in upstream sequence of around 400 examples of Alu
sequences []. The first task was to find out whether such motifs
are also present in several thousand full length copies present in
context of whole human genome. Our analysis revealed that out
of the ten most frequently occurring motif according to
previous work, TTAAAA has the highest frequency 

(see supplementary material), as reported earlier 
[]. Our
approach extended the work at genome wide level. TTAAAA is
found in highest frequency at 10-20 bp upstream of insertion
site (). Apart from this, it is observed that CTAAAA is
not present on Y chromosome insertion sites and TAAAAA
motif is the second most frequent occurring motif instead of
TTAAGA  (see supplementary material).

As a representative case we report 1464 examples in
chromosome 22, 3314 in X chromosome and 391 in chromosome
Y in the current work. Using this dataset of pre-insertion loci,
full length alu insertions are characterized using sliding
window method of DNA Scanner tool []. We identified 14
physiochemical properties in terms of energetics and structural
parameters, described above and obtained extrema at the site of
insertions. The method is also applied to large number of
elements in other organisms which include E. coli, S. cerevisiae,
E. histolytica and Drosophila melanogaster. At sites of extrema we
found presence of certain ‘words’ or substrings of DNA
sequences which are found in higher frequency than others.
Incidentally in some cases, these substrings are found to be
experimentally determined endonuclease nicking sequences or
consensus sequence. These words are mostly present in flank of
insertion sites correlating with physiochemical signals
identified by the DNA Scanner.

(B) Signal in pre-insertion sites:
(1) Signals and motif in 5' upstream region of Alu insertion sites in Human and B1 insertion sites in Mouse:
Alu elements are non-autonomous retrotransposons that
mobilize in a copy and paste fashion. It is proposed that the first
nick at the site of insertion is often made by the L1
endonuclease at the TTAAAA consensus site 
[]. B1 element of
mouse is similar to Alu element of human, both of which
originated from 7SL RNA, a signal recognition particle involved
in translation initiation of eukaryotic secreted proteins. Like in
human, B1 occupy a significant portion of mouse genome 
[].
Unlike, Alu which is a dimer, B1 is a monomer- 140 bps in
length but like Alu they are type of SINEs and require reverse
transcriptase encoded by L1 for their transposition.

We show results of 1464 Alu and 1861 B1 examples as a
representative case  (see supplementary material). We
found that extrema lie in the region of 9-12 bp upstream for Alu
and 15-18 bp upstream for B1. The minima are denoted as ‘D’
and maxima as ‘U’ in  along with other details such as
position of signal and value of the parameter. The T-rule shows
major deviation, its extrema being at -20 bp for Alu and at -50
for B1. The site of extrema for Alu coincided with the region
where TTAAAA is found in highest frequency as compared to
other motifs ( &amp; 
). Using RSAT 
[], we found
out that TTAAAA is the most frequent occurring motif for both
the elements. The presence of signals in the same region as well
as utilization of similar motifs indicates that B1 and Alu tend to
retrotranspose using similar mechanism.

(2) Signals and motifs at 5' upstream regions of EhSINE1 insertion sites in E. histolytica:
E. histolytica occupies a unique position in evolution between
prokaryotes and eukaryotes. The EhLINEs and EhSINEs
account for 6-8% of host genome []. EhSINE1 is the most
frequently occurring MGE in E. histolytica genome. We used 64
pre-insertion loci to screen 50 bp flanks. The unique
physiochemical signals are found in the region of around 5 bp
upstream i.e. near insertion site (). The region has
relatively high bendability, low stacking energy and AT
frequency. The results are similar to work done previously 
[].
Most frequent 5-bp motif using RSAT [] is found to be
AAGGT.

(3) Signals and motif at insertion site of P-element:
The P-element is 2907 bps long and contain transposase gene.
Non-autonomous P-element exists due to some internal
deletions which makes transposase gene inactive. Such element
can move with the help of autonomous P-element. The mode of
transposition is via cut-and-paste sequence of DNA transposon
without involving any RNA intermediate. The donor element is
excised and inserted into target site leading to target site
duplication. We analyzed 5091 such insertion sites. Each site is
extracted and centered around the insertion site with 25 bps on
each end. The signals are very sharp showing perfect dyads
centered on the insertion site (). All the 14 rules are
positive. This suggests the presence of palindromic motif as has
been postulated previously []. Most frequent 8-bp motif is
found to be CTCTCTCT.

(4) Signals at insertion site of Tn7:
Tn7 is 14kb element carrying 5 genes apart from 2 resistance
genes - Trimethoprim (TmR) and Streptomycin/ Spectinomycin
(SmR, SpR). The Tn7 transpositions have been studied
extensively because of the high efficiency of transposition and
also because of the specificity of its insertion site called attTn7.
This site is located downstream of the coding region of glmS
gene, in its transcriptional terminator.

Tn7 encodes 4 proteins- TnsA, TnsB, TnsC and TnsD which
help in insertion. Site specific protein TnsD recruits to attTn7
which help in directing other Tns proteins and ends of
transposon to the site. TnsA and TnsB constitute transposase
which nicks and inserts the transposon []. The actual site of
insertion is such that glmS remains unaffected. The gene glmS
encodes glucosamine synthetase- required for cell wall
synthesis and is conserved in bacteria and the same site, attTn7
has been found in many different bacteria like D. sulfuricans 
[,
]. Site specific insertion at attTn7 site requires binding of TnD
to region -25 to -55 in glmS, the actual site of insertion is away
from this site. In our data we find unique patterns at the end of
glmS (). For D. sulfuricans the signals lie just
downstream of glmS gene i.e. 0th position suggesting that
insertion in this host also does not affect the gene 
().

(5) Signals at insertion site of Ty3 in S. cerevisiae:
Ty3 is one of the five Ty element found in the host organism.
They have insertion specificity and ability to transit the nuclear
membrane that is a characteristic of retroviral elements. Their
site of integration is the site of transcription initiation by RNA
Polymerase III []. Around 3000 bps sequence in chromosome
4 and chromosome 7 are analyzed. Very sharp signals are
observed at 5' upstream of tRNA, extrema is observed at
around 0th position (). Results of chromosome 4 are
discussed here as a representative case. Most frequent 6-mer
motif in chromosome 4 and 7 is found to be GTTCGA and
TTTTTT respectively. Other motifs of 7 bps and 8 bps are
shown in  (see supplementary material). Results other
than given here can be accessed at:
https://www.dropbox.com/sh/ctufqucoq6dl24l/0mp6KMa-R_.

Discussion
Our work compiles and identifies several motifs and patterns in
wide variety of the examples drawn from E. coli, E. histolytica,
Human genome etc. It identifies some of the previously
reported motifs such as TTAAAA in Alu in human and the
same motif for B1 element in Mouse genome. It also misses out
or reports new motifs in case of E. histolytica genome. The
unique and clear signals are seen in yeast genome w.r.t. tRNA
sequences showing strong signals at their sites of insertion. The
presence of Dyad motif at P element is also important aspect of
our work.

Alu occupies 10 % of human genome and is the most actively
transposing element in human genome. It is found that
TTAAAA is the most frequently occurring motif upstream of
Alu insertion sites. The distribution pattern showed that it
occurs most frequently in 10-20 bps upstream (Figure 2). The
results are encouraging as they are in agreement with previous
work done [,
,
]. It was shown in previous work that apart
from TTAAAA, other motifs like TTAAAA, TTAAGA,
TTAGAA, TTGAAA, TTAAAG, CTAAAA, TCAAGA,
AAAAAA, TTTAAA, TAAAAA, and GTAAGA etc. were also
present 15-16 upstream of insertion loci 
[]. Thus the
distributions of these patterns are studied, in respect of their
occurrence within 10 bp interval. Though identified across 100
bp upstream of insertion sites, they are majorly found 10-20 bp
upstream regions except CTAAAA  (see supplementary
material).

Target DNA chromatinization affects L1 endonuclease 
[]
activity therefore different parameters such as nucleosome
based parameters as well as physiochemical properties are
characterized at insertion sites. The signals observed for Alu
pre-insertion loci in human chromosome 22, are present 9-12 bp
upstream of insertion sites. The adenine excess at 10 bp
upstream of insertion site relative to other regions is a marked
characteristic of Alu pre-insertion loci. A region of low
bendability is observed in the pre-insertion locus which gives a
sharp dip at 9 bp upstream. Low denaturation energy and
higher free energy at -9 to -12 signifies that endonuclease
identifies such region for retrotransposition. Also high stacking
and stabilizing energy signals show that such regions are
preferred for insertion. Apart from chromosome 22,
chromosome X (3314 insertion sites) and chromosome Y (391
insertion sites) are also analyzed. We found similar signals as
well as motifs.

B1 is a monomer and seem to depend on L1 for its movement.
This indicates that B1 has similar preference of insertion sites as
seen in Alu. B1 shares structural similarity with Free Left Arm
Monomer (FLAM) of Alu. We found that the most of the signals
are observed 15-18 bp upstream of insertion sites in 1861
insertion examples of mouse as compared to human where
signals were mostly seen 9-12 bp upstream (). The preinsertion
loci of B1 are characterized by relatively high stacking
and stabilizing energy and also adenine excess. Most frequently
occurring motif is TTAAAA in all chromosomes of mouse
analyzed- 16, X and Y. This seems to validate the hypothesis
that both Alu and B1 share similar mode of retrotransposition.

The EhSINE1 of E. histolytica is also an example of SINE, whose
mode of retrotransposition is similar to Alu. It requires
EhLINE1 for its transposition machinery. Among all the SINEs
found in host organism, its frequency of insertion is the highest
and hence it is used as a representative element. The signals are
found in region up to -5 bp of insertion sites. The positive
signals found in our work and previously reported 
[] are same.
The pre-insertion loci have adenine and cytosine excess, high
bendability, low denaturation energy and duplex stability free
energy (). We analyzed 50 bp upstream of insertion site
in RSAT [] for the most frequently occurring motif and found
- AAGGT, TCGAA, GAAGG, AGATC, and ATCGA occurring
in highest frequency. This is different from previous reported
motif- GCATT. This can be attributed to different amount of
data-set analyzed by us as compared to in-vitro studies done so
far.

P-element is a classic example of DNA transposon which moves
by cut and paste mechanism. The extracted insertion site
consists of 25 bp of 5' and 25 bp of 3' end of insertion site, 0
representing insertion site. The signals are perfect dyads
(). The pre and post insertion sequences show adenine
excess whereas insertion site gives a sharp dip. High
bendability value i.e. low rigidity and low bending stiffness at
insertion site reflect their role in transposition machinery. We
tried to identify 8 bp motifs and found it to be CTCTCTCT. The
results are in complete agreement with the dyads peak which
shows that insertion site is palindromic. Other frequently
occurring motif found are AGAGAGAG and TCTCTCTC which
are also palindromic. Also the signals shows region of adenine,
cytosine, thymidine and guanine excess consistent with
observed motif composition ().

Tn7 is one of the site-specific transposon which inserts
downstream of transcriptional terminator of glmS gene by
identifying a region -25 to -55 bp at its 3' end. This suggests that
region is highly specific for various parameters that we are
studying using DNA Scanner. Downstream region of glmS has
cytosine and guanine excess and low adenine content and has
high bendability. The insertion site has 13 out of 14 parameters
positive, which means that certain characteristic features decide
the insertion sites of Tn7 (). The same set of signals is
obtained for Desulfovibrio desulfuricans G20 which previously
has been shown to have attTn7 site []. Since we analyzed only
E. coli and D. sulfuricans genome for this work, motif
identification is not done. To find the motif, we need to analyze
more bacteria like Shigella sonnei Ss046, Raoultella terrigena,
Enterobacter cloacae, Pseudomonas aerugenosa, Shewanella
putrefaciens CN-32 etc [] that show Tn7 transposition.

Ty3 of S. cerevisiae is one of the three actively retrotransposing
element. Ty3 shows site-directed insertion, with reported
insertion 0-2 bp upstream of tRNA []. All the 14 parameters
are positive and showed signals upstream of 5' end of tRNA.
The pre-insertion region shows low adenine and high guanine,
cytosine and thymidine content. It has low Bendability and thus
high bending stiffness (). Motif analysis of 200 bps
sequence around the insertion site is done. Since no previous
study is done in this regard we extracted 6, 7 and 8 bp motif.
The most frequently occurring motifs have GTTCGA as
common pattern which is consistent with high T, C, and G
content. Also the next most frequently occurring motif is
thymidine rich  (see supplementary material).

Conclusion
This work combines previously reported experimental work
with in-silico approach to identify insertion sites, patterns,
signals and endonuclease nicking sites. Our work shows that
insertion sites for DNA transposon and pre-insertion site for
retrotransposons have clear signals that can be useful for
identifying potential insertion sites. These signals also show
presence of motifs which are traditionally identified through
experimental systems. This approach can help experimentalist
to deduce potential motifs and can help in setting up directed
experiments to find statistically and biologically important
motifs at insertion sites.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Dev et al, Bioinformation 8(16): 777-786 (2012)

Flowchart to plot the distribution of motif in upstream
sequences of the Alu.

Distribution plot for TTAAAA motif, upstream of full
length Alu.

Various signals upstream of the insertion sites of alu in human chromosome 22 and mouse chromosome 16, for (A, B) AT
rule, (C, D) Bendability, (E, F) Nucleosomal Positioning. The y axis represents value of the property and the x-axis gives the relative
position with respect to the insertion site (taken to be 0). Red line indicates distance of insertion site from the signal.

Various signals upstream of the insertion sites of EhSine1, for (A) AT rule, (B) Bendability, (C) Nucleosomal Positioning
and (D) Stacking Energy. The y axis represents value of the property and the x-axis gives the relative position with respect to the
insertion site, taken to be 0.

Various signals of the insertion sites of P-element, for (A) AT rule, (B) Bendability, (C) Nucleosomal positioning energy
and (D) Stacking energy. The y axis represents value of the property. Red line indicates 5' upstream and blue indicates 3'
downstream of insertion site, 0 being insertion site

Various signals at insertion sites of Tn7 in E. coli and D. sulfuricans, for (A, B) AT rule, (C, D) Bendability, (E, F)
Nucleosomal Positioning. The y axis represents value of the property and the x-axis gives the relative position with respect to the
insertion site, taken to be 0.

Various signals of the insertion sites of Ty3, for (A, B) A rule, AT rule (C, D) B to A trimeric and Bendability, (E, F)
Stacking Energy and propeller twist. The y-axis represents value of the property and the x-axis gives the relative position with
respect to the insertion site (taken to be 0). Red line indicates 5' region upstream of tRNA and blue indicates 3' downstream of
tRNA.

