Background
In many genomic studies, it is important to examine the 
interactions/associations between genes and how these 
interactions change under different experimental conditions or 
differ between two populations. Various permutation-based 
statistical tests were presented in [] for determining whether a 
gene or set of genes behaves differently in two networks. Each 
type of test is based on connectivity scores which measure the 
strength of the associations for each pair of genes in a network 
and on an associated distance function. In this paper, we 
describe the dna package which provides a versatile 
implementation of these tests with several options for 
connectivity scores and distance functions. The package is 
based on the open source R [] software environment and 
freely available at []. The built-in source code for performing 
the tests is primarily written in C to improve computational 
speed, but optional arguments are provided allowing the user 
to supply R functions for computing customized scores and 
distances. The function test.individual.genes identifies genes 
for which the connectivity scores differ significantly between 
the two networks, test.class.genes determines if there are 
significance differences in the scores for a subset of genes of 
interest while adjusting for all available genes, and test. 
modular.structure uses the scores to identify modules of genes 
that are connected and tests if the structures of the networks 
differ significantly using a statistic involving intersections and 
unions of the modules. Mathematical descriptions of the 
statistical tests are given in the vignette for the package.

The default connectivity score for the tests is based on partial 
least squares (PLS) regression using the algorithm in []. There 
are other built-in options for connectivity scores including 
principal components regression, ridge regression, and the 
correlation coefficient. As mentioned before, users can define 
their own function for computing the connectivity score. A 
detailed example of a user-defined implementation of the 
LASSO based on the lars package [] is provided in the 
vignette.

By default, the distance functions for test. individual.genes and 
test.class.genesis the absolute value of the difference between 
two scores; a built-in squared distance function is also 
available. Also, user-defined distance functions can be used, 
and an example of a piecewise distance function is provided in 
the vignette. For test.modular.structure, the user can select the 
minimum module size and the threshold connectivity 
parameter. A real data example based on mouse weight data 
previously analyzed in [], 
[], and 
[] is included in the 
vignette. A screenshot of the test for differential connectivity 
of a class of four genes is shown in .

Software input
For each network, the user supplies a matrix of expression 
values in which the rows represent experimental units and the 
columns represent genes. If column names are provided, the 
package automatically selects only the genes common to both 
networks and aligns the corresponding genes in the custom S4 
object used for differential network analysis. The user also has 
many options for preprocessing the data and calibrating the 
connectivity scores.

Software output
The functions which perform the significance tests return 
objects, and there are summary and get. results methods for 
each type of object. For the test for individual genes, summary 
prints the number of genes which are significant at various 
levels and get.results returns a list of significant genes, their 
test statistic values, and their p-values. For the test for a class 
of genes, summary prints the test statistic value and p-value, 
and get.results returns a list of these values which can be 
accessed with R code. For the test for modular structure, 
summary prints the number of genes in the modules for each 
network, and get.results returns a list including the 
composition of each network, the test statistic, and p-value for 
the test. The functions for computing connectivity scores can 
also be accessed directly to create a score matrix. Additionally, 
there is a function network.modules which determines the 
modular structure of a network based on the connectivity 
scores. This function includes the option of displaying a graph 
of the network using the tkplot function from the igraph 
package [].

Future development
Several additional options will likely be made available in the 
dna package in the near future. Currently, regression models 
are used to compute connectivity scores based on modeling 
each gene׳s expression values based only on the expression 
values of the other genes; future versions will allow users to 
include other covariates to model each gene. In addition, the 
number of built-in methods for computing connectivity scores 
will increase. Finally, there are plans to develop specific objects 
for differential network analysis of different types of genetic 
data, such as objects specifically for next-generation 
sequencing data with discrete read counts.

This work was partially funded by NIH/NCI Grant CA170091-
01A1 to Susmita Datta.

Citation:Gill et al, Bioinformation 10(4): 233-234 (2014)

Usage and output from the dna package to perform a 
test for differential connectivity of the four genes Anxa2, 
Anxa5, F7, and Proz in a data set which includes genomic 
expression values for liver tissue from two groups of mice.

