Background
The risk assessment of environmental chemicals has historically
been conducted based on independently produced exposure
and hazard data []. The disconnection between exposure and
hazard information inherent to separate studies often leads to
data gaps and scientific uncertainties. One promising tool for
linking exposure and hazard information for improving the
understanding of human and ecological health implications of
chemical exposures is biomarker research. Biomarkers of
exposure have been used to identify the presence of chemicals
in workplaces for decades. However, using biomarkers to
estimate the degree of health risk posed by environmental
chemicals can be a great challenge for several reasons. In a
population-based biomonitoring study, biomarkers are often
measured as a snapshot of some internal or excreted
concentrations. Also, biomarkers are only measured in
accessible biological media (e.g., blood, urine), and they may or
may not have a correlation with biologically effective dose, and
thus health effects []. Besides the difficulty of evaluating or
bounding potential health risk, it is also difficult to relate
biomarker data to sources and routes of exposure for
developing effective risk mitigation or management strategies.

Biomarkers of exposure are not a direct measure of exposure or
risk, nonetheless, regulatory bodies at the state, tribal, and
federal level are being called upon to better utilize biomarker
data for risk and exposure assessment [] as the number of
biomonitoring studies increases. One approach to place
biomarker data in a risk context is to convert these
measurements into exposure concentrations (i.e., exposure
reconstruction). Exposure construction allows for the
subsequent comparison to “safe or acceptable” exposure
concentrations derived from a point of departure (e.g., no
observable adverse effect level) in animal toxicity studies. One
of the current state-of-the-science approaches for exposure
reconstruction involves the use of pharmacokinetic models in
two steps: (1) elucidating the time-course dose-biomarker
relationship under the conditions of realistic exposure scenarios
using available exposure data and pharmacokinetic modeling;
and (2) conducting reverse dosimetry calculations from
pharmacokinetic model simulations using statistical tools (e.g.,
Monte Carlo, Bayesian approach).

Reverse dosimetry does not equate to forward dosimetry (i.e.,
predicting biomarker concentrations at a given exposure
concentration) in reverse; because of the complexity of forward
dosimetry simulations and multiplicity of potential solutions, it
is impossible to perform a deterministic simulation that
calculates exposure from a biomarker concentration. Rather, it
“reverses” forward dosimetry using statistical tools. Several
reverse dosimetry approaches have been developed to
reconstruct exposures from biomarker data including,
optimization [,
], Exposure Conversion Factors 
[],
Discretized Bayesian Approach [,
], Markov Chain Monte
Carlo [,
]. The reliability of the exposure/dose estimates
from these reverse dosimetry approach depends on the
accuracy of the dose-biomarker time-course relationship
described by the PBPK model, the amount of information on
exposure scenarios and their variability, and the capability to
characterize biomarker samples and study design (e.g., urine
outputs for urinary biomarkers, time of sampling).

PROcEED provides access to two of these approaches allowing
risk assessors, exposure scientists, and toxicologists to readily
(1) utilize biomarkers of exposures to assess exposure
probabilities, (2) study the cause of exposures, and (3) compare
the estimated distribution of exposure concentrations with an
exposure guidance value to assess health risks.

Methodology
Exposure Conversion Factors (ECF):
ECF provides a simple method for converting biomarker
concentration distributions into exposure distributions by
assuming that the dose-biomarker relationship is linear in the
range of the observed biomarker concentrations. To use the ECF
approach, a forward dosimetry simulation at only a single
exposure concentration is needed. The resultant distribution
(due to modeled variation in a population-wide physiology) of
biomarker concentrations is used to extrapolate the exposure
concentrations that would elicit the measured biomarker
concentrations assuming a linear exposure-biomarker
relationship. A simplified flowchart of the ECF technique for
reverse dosimetry is displayed in ().

Discretized Bayesian Approach (DBA):
DBA is a more robust reverse dosimetry approach which relies
on the completion of a forward dosimetry simulation that
bounds the observed biomarker concentrations. Several
potential exposure concentrations must be simulated so that a
resultant probability distribution for exposure can be
interpolated using Bayesian inference. A simplified flowchart of
the DBA technique for reverse dosimetry is displayed in 
().

Implementation
The graphical user interface for PROcEED has been developed
using HTML, JSP, CSS, Java, Struts2, Javascript, and JQuery.
Graphical representations of the results are created via
JFreeChart. PROcEED is intended to be deployed to an Apache
Tomcat 7.0 webserver and accessed using either Internet
Explorer or Mozilla Firefox.

Software Input and Output
The PROcEED interface takes in 3 forms of input: A forward
dosimetry simulation file, a measured biomarker file, and a
priors file (only needed for DBA). The dosimetry simulation file
can either contain the predicted biomarker concentrations or for
DBA, the pre-descretized counts of simulation runs for which a
particular concentration was observed. The measured
biomarker file can be comprised of a vector of measured
biomarkers or the percentile information for the observed
biomarker distribution. PROcEED provides both graphical
visualization of the predicted exposure distribution as well as
downloadable “.csv” formatted files. A detailed description and
examples of the various input and output files are available in
the software help documentation.

Caveat and Future Development
PROcEED currently supports two methods of reverse
dosimetry estimation greatly enhancing the accessibility of this
key technique. However, other methods9 are documented in
the literature. Unfortunately, many of these methods require
sequential running of forward dosimetry simulations. It is our
intention to develop a web-accessible forward dosimetry
simulation platform and integrate that platform into PROcEED
to enable the variety of reverse dosimetry techniques. The
creation of a comprehensive reverse dosimetry calculator will
enable thorough analysis of the ever increasing data resulting
from biomonitoring surveys.

Disclaimer
The United States Environmental Protection Agency through its
Office of Research and Development funded and managed the
research described here. It has been subjected to Agency's
administrative review and approved for publication.

Citation:Grulke et al, Bioinformation 9(13): 707-709 (2013)

a) The ECF technique requires as input a single dosimetry simulation run at 1 unit of exposure. Assuming a linear
relationship between exposure and biomarker concentrations, biomarkers concentrations (bmi) resulting from the simulation are
turned into conversion factors (ECFi). The compendiums of conversion factors are then multiplied to the measured biomarker
concentrations to estimate the distribution of possible exposures (expji). b) DBA relies on binning the resultant biomarker
concentrations from multiple dosimetry simulations run at varying exposure concentrations. Once binned, the probability of
seeing a biomarker concentration given an exposure concentration can be evaluated (P(bmj|expi)). Using Bayes theorem, these
probabilities can be reversed to estimate the probability of seeing an exposure concentration given a biomarker concentration
(P(expi|bmj)). The probability resulting from this Bayes conversion can be multiplied with the probability of measuring a
biomarker concentration (P(mbml)) to determine the probability of exposures in the measured population.

