Background
Since ancient times, plants have an exemplary source of herbal
medicines. Indian literature mention the use of plants in
treatment of various human diseases. Research conducted in
last few decades on plants mentioned in ancient literature or
used traditionally for diabetes have shown anti-diabetic
property []. Diabetes is considered as the fourth leading cause
of deaths by diseases in world. According to International
Diabetes federation, the total number of diabetic subjects in
India is 41 million in 2006 and that this would rise to 70 million
by the year 2025 []. Diabetes represents a spectrum of
metabolic disorders, which has become a major health challenge
worldwide. The treatment of diabetes with synthetic drugs is
generally not preferred because of its high cost and the range of
side effects caused []. Hence there has been a growing interest
in herbal remedies that can be introduced into the general
population with the least side effects and the maximal
preventive outcome.

Many traditional plants medicines are used throughout the
world to treat the Diabetic diseases [,
]. Many herbs have
been used to cure diabetes since ancient times in countries like
India, Egypt, China and some Arabian Peninsula countries. In
this database we collected the data of antidiabetic medicinal
plants and phytochemicals responsible for their antidiabetic
activity and we emphasized the role of information derived
from various systems of traditional medicine (Ethno medicine)
and its utility for drug discovery purposes. Keeping in mind the
importance of Anti diabetic plants and their phytochemicals,
this customizable database provides detailed information on
properties, taxonomic information of plants and structure of
phytochemicals, which can be used for molecular docking
studies on the components of insulin signaling pathway in
order to determine the insulinomimetic or insulomimitic
properties.

Methodology
Construction of Phyto Diab Care:
PhytoDiabCare is constructed using hypertext mark-up
language (html) and can be accessed at 
http://www.gbpuatcbsh.ac.in/departments/bi/database/phytodiabcare/HOME%
20PAGE/Home%20page.html. Data were collected from
various literature sources from the web. Phyto Diab Care
containing data of about 230 plants and 155 phytochemicals
which are obtainted from different plants and possess
medicinal properties against diabetes. The PDB structures of
155 phytochemicals were generated through ligbuilder utility of
Molecular Operating Environment (MOE) v 2008-10 [] using
the SMILES notation obtained from the PuBChem [] and
convert into 2D and 3D structure and also save them into
images. The database can be accessed alphabetically using plant
and phytochemical name for information on specific plants.

Features of PhytoDiabCare
PhytoDiabCare is provided information about the diabetes,
insulin receptor, insulin signaling pathway along with its
components, 230 anti diabetic plants and 155 phytochemicals,
The Anti Diabetic Plant and phytochemicals link display an
alphabetically list of medicinal plants and list of phytochemicals
respectively. The Anti Diabetic Plants provides Texan
information, morphololigal characteristic, anti diabetic
properties and economic &amp; other medicinal importance uses of
each plant. Besides the information of about phytochemical, the
page of each phytochemical provides 2D and 3D structure of
them.  is showing a screen shot of the different pages of
PhytoDiabCare database.

Utility to the biological community
Phyto Diab Care emphasizes the information of anti diabetic
plants and phytochemicals. The database finds utility to the
scientific community for a quick review on the number of
plants and phytochemicals for diabetes medicinal plant
research and provides enormous scope for development of
drugs.

Future development
Continuous updates shall be released to include other plants of
anti-diabetic properties periodically and also docking studies of
phytochemicals with insulin receptor. The present access
method shall be upgraded for faster access to accommodate the
growing number of data to browse records on the studied
plants and phytochemicals. We plan to develop provisions to
search the database to identify plants of interest using
keywords.

Authors are grateful to Sub-DIC, Bioinformatics at G.B. Pant
University of Agriculture and Technology, Pantnagar, India for
providing computational facility.

Citation:Luhach et al, Bioinformation 9(7): 375-377 (2013)

A screen shot of the PhytoDiabCare database.

