Background
Plants are subjected to wide range of biotic and abiotic stresses
during growth and development. They respond to these
stresses by activating a series of hypersensitive reactions (HR),
which contribute to the neutralization of the stresses and
reducing productivity loss. HR response is accompanied with
synthesis of secondary metabolites and induction of defense
enzymes and proteins for triggering active defense. The defense
proteins include pathogenesis-related (PR) proteins that are
suggested to be effective in variety of mechanisms. They are
involved in inducing plant cell wall reinforcement, suppressing
and degrading pathogenic enzymes and proteins, and are
associated with development of systemic acquired resistance
(SAR) to impede pathogenic attacks and environmental stresses
[]. These proteins accumulate in vacuolar compartment,
cytoplasm and apoplastic space []. They are pathogen specific
and are regulated at the level of transcription []. PR proteins
were first observed in tobacco and subsequently, many other
types of PR proteins have been detected and characterized in
tobacco and other plant species. Based on serological properties
and sequence homology, seventeen major groups of PRs (PR-1
to PR-17) have been identified []. PR-1 proteins with 15-17 kDa
molecular mass are the dominant group, and have been
detected in Arabidopsis, maize, wheat, tomato, tobacco, barley,
rice and pepper. They are resistant to proteolysis and adapted
to extracellular environment []. Despite other groups, exact
mode of action of the PR-1 proteins is still unknown, but some
of recent studies have been assigned antifungal activity to
members of this group, which include HvPR-1a. In 1993
Alexander et al. reported that tobacco plants transformed to
constitutively express PR-1 showed increased tolerance to two
oomycete pathogens, Peronospora tabacina (blue mold) and
Phytophthora parasitica var nicotinae (black shank). But the
transgenic tobacco plants remained susceptible to infection with
tobacco mosaic virus (TMV), potato virus Y (PVY), Cercopspora
nicotianae, and Pseudomonas syringae pv tabaci 
[]. In vitro activity
test of tomato PR-1 revealed that PR-1 inhibited zoospore
germination of Phytophthora infestans and, in vivo, its
application decreased the surface area of leaf discs infected with
this oomycete []. PR-1 proteins are strongly conserved proteins
and their homologues sequences have been detected in fungi,
insects, and vertebrates, including human [].

Barley is a vitally important crop for human consumption. In
this study we modeled three dimensional structure of HvPR-1a
based on the high quality homology modeling approach to
establish a basis for future researches about its biological
function and interaction properties. Computational structure
prediction methods provide cost-effective and time-effective
alternative in absence of experimentally derived structures. This
study predicts some of the properties of HvPR-1a and proposes
a high quality 3D structure for it. The results will be useful to
understand structural features and anti-pathological function of
HvPR-1a, and will raise the prospects of its potential use for
engineering plants for resistance to phytopathogenic fungi.

Methodology
Template identification and structure prediction:
The amino acid sequences of HvPR-1a protein were retrieved
from NCBI protein sequence database []. Following BLASTP
run of the query model, appropriate template to use in building
a 3D model was selected based on the high score, lower e-value
and maximum sequence identity. Although some techniques
can produce 3D models from more than one template, most of
them depend on a single template. Accordingly, choosing the
appropriate template is a critical stage to certify quality of the
final structure. To ensure the high accuracy of the structure,
sequence alignment between query and template has shown in
 
(see supplementary material). Prediction of the 3Dstructure
of query protein was performed by popular homology
modeling program, MODELLER 9v10 []. After careful
alignment of query and template proteins and removing
potential errors, loop refinement was performed using loop
optimization method of MODELLER.

Model evaluation:
Model evaluation is the most important step in homology
modeling to show the acceptable quality of the modeled
protein. Hence, we used PROCHECK [] to evaluate the quality
of our predicted models by Ramachandran plot assessment.
Models subjected to energy minimization with GROMOS 96
43B1 parameters set, implementation of Swiss-PDB Viewer
(SPDBV) to rectify unfavorable clashes and improve the quality
of stereochemistry []. The Root Mean Square Deviation
(RMSD) values were computed to measure differences between
the predicted model and the template protein structures.
SPDBV and Chimera programs [] were used to analyze and
represent the structure of generated model. Further, models
verification was performed with VERIFY3D [], ERRAT 
[],
and WHAT IF [] programs. ProSA 
[] was employed for the
analysis of structural errors and making plot of residue scores
and calculating Z scores.

Functional characterization:
HvPR-1a protein submitted to three different protein
annotation databases including InterProScan [], Proteins
Families Database (Pfam) [], and NCBI Conserved Domains
Database (NCBI-CDD) [] for functional characterization and
classification. InterProScan classifies sequences, predict the
occurrence of functional domains and adds GO terms to protein
signature. Pfam is a large collection of annotated protein
families that generated using hidden Markov models. NCBICDD
is a database for fast identification of conserved domains
in protein sequences. Protein was further subjected to CYS_REC
program(http://linux1.softberry.com/berry.phtml?topic=cys_rec&amp;gro
up=programs&amp;subgroup=propt) for locating SS-bonding states of
cysteines and disulphide bridges in proteins, if present.

Discussion
Assessment of resultant structure with several model
evaluation tools demonstrated high quality of the model.
Ramachandran plot of the structure showed that 93.9% of
residues fell in most favorite regions, and 6.1% fell in additional
allowed regions; none of the residues found in the generously
allowed regions and disallowed regions. This validates the
quality of modeled structure. Overall average G-factor of
dihedral angles and main-chain covalent forces was -0.21 that
was greater than acceptable cutoff -0.5. The G-factor provides a
measure of the plausibility of a stereochemical property and a
high G-factor means the property corresponds to a high
probability conformation. Other structure validation programs
such as WHAT IF, VERIFY3D and ERRAT were employed for
further validation of models. WHAT IF server assigned a
Ramachandran Z-score of -1.274 and structural average packing
score of -1.138. Both of these scores were within the expected
range (between 0.0 to -2.0) for well-refined structures. RMS Zscores
for bond angles and bond lengths as determined by
WHAT IF was 1.404 and 0.936 respectively which is very close
to 1.0 suggesting high model quality. VERIFY3D found that at
least 80% of the amino acids have scored &gt;= 0.2 in the 3D/1D
profile. This suggests that atomic model (3D) is compatible with
its amino acid sequence (1D).

Overall calculated quality factor of ERRAT was 94.40 for
modeled protein, indicated the error values of individual
residue are negligible. ProSA calculated Z-score for modeled
protein was -6.79 which fell in the range of scores typically
found for experimentally determined (X-ray, NMR) structure
for native proteins of similar size (137 AA) in current PDB
database. The z-score measures the deviation of the total energy
of the structure with respect to an energy distribution derived
from random conformations []. Z-scores outside characteristic
range for native proteins indicate erroneous structures. Further,
calculated average energy over 40 residues with ProSA
validated good quality of the modeled structure.

SPDBV analysis of predicted model:
Analysis of the model using SPDBV reveals that none of the
residues were found to make clashes in their existing position.
HvPR-1a final model shows four α-helices (I to IV) containing
the residues 2 to 16, 24 to 39, 64 to 75 and 93 to 99, and four β-
strands (A to D) compromising the residues 21-22, 51 to 57, 106
to 112 and 118 to 124 arranged antiparallel between helices I, III
and IV and II, respectively (). This identifiable α + β
topology having helices in above and below the β strands
clearly forming a compact folding. This unique 3 layer alphabeta-
alpha fold which first detected in PR-1 proteins reflects the
high stability of modeled structure and its resistance to several
proteases []. Estimated RMSD after superimposition structures
of modeled and template proteins with SPDBV was 0.7. This
indicates high similarity between HvPR-1a and template
protein and therefore good quality of modeled HvPR-1a
structure.

Functional characterization:
In this study, several bioinformatics tools and databases were
used for structural prediction and validation of the HvPR-1a.
For identifying conserved domains and functional annotation of
the HvPR-1a protein we used three different web tools
including InterProScan, Pfam, and NCBI-CDD. All of these
tools confirmed that HvPR-1a belongs to CAP super family and
contains CAP domain. This family includes plant pathogenesisrelated
protein 1 (PR-1), which accumulates after infections
with pathogens with hypersensitive reaction, and may act as an
anti-fungal agent or be involved in cell wall loosening.
Therefore, they play important roles in plant defence systems.
Furthermore, the sequence and structural evidences support
that members of this family are involved in Ca2+ chelating
function and potentially act as either protease or protease
inhibitors. Members are most often secreted and have an
extracellular function. This family also includes CRISPs,
cysteine-rich secretory proteins, which combine CAP with a C terminal
cysteine rich domain. Further, analysis with PROSITE
[], 
database of protein domains, families and functional sites,
two conserved CRISP family motif in C-terminal of the protein
was detected  (see supplementary material). Cysteine
rich proteins form disulfide bridges that are important for their
stability and extracellular function. For prediction disulphide
bridges in proteins we used CYS_REC program. This program
recognized three probable SS bounding patterns of pairs
between cysteine residues 41-113, 86-92, and 108-123.

To have an accurate interpretation about function of the model
we used Expasy's ProtParam server [] for computing
physicochemical properties. The computed parameters were
included the molecular weight (MW), theoretical isoelectric
point (pI), extinction coefficient (EC), instability index (II),
aliphatic index (AI) and grand average of hydropathicity
(GRAVY)  (see supplementary material). The results
showed that protein have a basic nature and is thermostable
and hydrosoluble. These properties are compatible with the
extracellular function of the protein.

Biological function of the protein:
Antifungal activity: Since the discovery of pathogenesis-related
proteins in 1970 the biological function of the PR-1proteins
remained unclear. To understand the functions of proteins at a
molecular level, determining their three-dimensional structure
is a prerequisite. This is the first work in proposing a three
dimensional model to HvPR-1a protein. Having this structure
will provide an opportunity for researchers to discover its mode
of action. It has been reported that PR-1 proteins suppress
infections induced by selected pathogens from oomycete
mainly by targeting their cell wall. By using cell wall polymer
microarrays researchers can design different substrates from
cell wall components of these fungi and assign the candidate
substrates with high confidence to the protein by employing
various and powerful protein docking tools. These
achievements will help to develop in vitro protein function
assessments against candidate substrates to explore biological
activity of the protein.

Disturbing Ca2+ channel function: Although the exact antifungal
and enzymatic activity of the plant PR-1 proteins remains
largely unknown, a PR-1-like protein, helothermine, from the
Mexican banded lizard interacted with membrane-channel
proteins of target cells, inhibiting the release of Ca2+ 
[]. A tiphigh
Ca2+ gradient is observed in growing fungal hyphae, and,
low Ca2+ concentrations result in inhibiting hyphal growth and
branching []. High sequential and structural similarity of the
helothermine and HvPR-1a increase the probability that PR-1
proteins may be act as antifungal agents by inhibiting the
release of Ca2+ in fungi cells. Positioning of the secondary
structures elements in helothermine as shown in  is
more similar to HvPR-1a. However, more computational and
experimental studies are required for assessment Ca2+ channel
disturbing function of the HvPR-1a.

Submission of the protein structure in Protein Model Database (PMDB):
The modeled structure of HvPR-1a was successfully deposited
in PMDB [] with accession number PM0078336 after
successfully passing PMDB stereochemical checks. This in silico
generated proteins structures database is freely available for
public use and users can access to the model by its accession
number.

Conclusion
In this study PR-1a protein from Hordeum vulgare subsp. Vulgare
was modeled based on the comparative modeling approach
using MODELLER. After refinement of the model, verification
of the modeled structure performed with different programs.
Results of these verification tools and low RMSD value
indicated that the modeled structure possess good and
reasonable structural quality. Physicochemical and functional
studies performed for characterization of HvPR-1a in reaching
conclusions about the biochemistry and biological function of
the modeled protein. The results have shown that this protein is
stable and secretory protein and it is play antifungal and Ca2+
cannel blocking function in extracellular environment.
However, the significance and precise characterization of
HvPR-1a associated with defensive response of plants against
infections remain to be determined. High quality modeled
structure of HvPR-1a may be exploited in molecular docking
and developing wet lab experiments for profound insights into
its biological activity and for biotechnological engineering of
the protein for improvement its anti-pathogenic response in
transgenic plants.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We thank Mostafa Afshari for critical reading of the manuscript.

Citation:Aslanzadeh &amp; Ghaderian, Bioinformation 8(17): 807-811 (2012)

Modeled structure of HvPR-1a as visualized by
Chimera 1.6.1. The structure has been formed of four α helices
and four β strands. Strand D is antiparallel with strand B and C;
and short strand A is parallel with strand B. Strands A and B
connected to each other with helix II that is located under the β
sheets. Helices III and I are parallel, located above the β-sheets
and attached as horizontal and right angle related to β-strands.
Helix IV located between helices I, III and β-strands. Locating
helices in two sides of the beta plane provide a tight and stable
folding for protein. N shows the N-terminal and C shows the Cterminal
of the protein. C-terminal is longer because it contains
CRISPs family signal motifs which are important for protein
function. A 310-helix located just following the helix III
compromising the residues 76, 77 and 78.

3D modeled structure of SCP_CRISP region of
helothermine protein (GenBank: AAC59730.1). This structure is
compromised of four antiparallel β-strands and four α helices
located above and below the β plane same as the HvPR-1a
protein. A short α helix also located under the β-strands.

