Background
P-loop containing nucleoside triphosphate hydrolase 
superfamily represent a large protein family that are involved 
in diverse cellular functions, for example, in translation, 
transcription, replication, DNA repair, signal transduction, 
protein transport and localization, signal-sequence recognition, 
chromosome partitioning, membrane transport and activation 
of various metabolites. [–].

P-loop NTPase folds are α-β proteins that contain regularly 
recurring α-β units with the five β-strands (β1–β5) and 
characterized by the presence of sequence patterns such as 
GxxxxGKS/T (where x is any residue), known as a Walker 
A motif and a Walker B motif (hhhh[D/E], where h is a 
hydrophobic residue) []. In diverse NTPases, Walker A motif 
adopts an archetypal loop shape (), facilitating the 
accommodation of phosphate moiety of a bound nucleotide, 
thereby acquiring the name “P-loop” NTPases [].

P-loop NTPases are divided into two major structural classes: 
the KG (kinase-GTPase) class, where the β-strand leading to the 
P-loop and the Walker B strand are direct neighbors. This 
group includes Ras-like GTPases and its circularly permutated 
YlqF-like; and the second class ASCE (characterized by an 
additional β-strand inserted between the P-loop strand and the 
Walker B strand) which includes ATPase Binding Cassette 
(ABC), DExD/H-like helicases, 4Fe-4S iron sulfur cluster 
binding proteins of NifH family, RecA-like F1-ATPases, and 
ATPases Associated with a wide variety of Activities (AAA). 
Also included in this group are the diverse sets of 
nucleotide/nucleoside kinase (NK) families 
[–].

Despite the presence of Walker A as a common sequence motif 
and P-loop as common conserved structural feature, the P-loop 
NTPases exhibit extreme sequence as well as structural 
divergence (). Evolutionary classification of highly 
diverse groups of P-loop NTPases may provide insights into 
their diverse physiological processes. Earlier, attempts have 
been made for constructing an evolutionary classification for 
closely related superclass such as P-loop GTPases and 
GTPase-related proteins [] and classification of P-loop 
kinases and related proteins []. However, a clear 
understanding of the phylogenetic relationships taking all the 
diverse groups of P-loop NTPases is not yet accomplished, as it 
is hampered by enormous sequence diversity present within the 
groups of P-loop NTPases. In the present study, an attempt is 
made to identify the unique features that classify the diverse 
groups of P-loop NTPases. We find that the sequence features of 
the P-loop and its flanking region, termed as “extended Walker A motif”, 
are distinct for each of the NTPase domain containing groups of 
functionally diverse proteins. Based on our analysis, we propose 
that identified features can be utilized to annotate hypothetical 
proteins as well as classify the proteins with deviant walker A 
motifs in their respective NTPase group. This study extends the 
evolutionary information in addition to already known sequence-structure features.

Methodology
Selection of sequences and structures of P-loop containing NTPases:
Conserved domain database at NCBI (CDD; 
http: //www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov /Structure/cdd) and protein databank 
(http://www.rcsb.org/pdb) were utilized to retrieve the 
sequences and representative high resolution X-ray 
crystallographic structures of diverse domains of P-loop 
containing NTPases, respectively. Diverse set of sequences of 
Ras-like G-proteins, circularly permutated YlqF-like, ATPase 
Binding Cassette (ABC), DExD/H-like helicases, 4Fe-4S iron 
sulfur cluster binding proteins of NifH family, RecA-like F1-
ATPases, and ATPases Associated with a wide variety of 
Activities (AAA), and nucleotide/nucleoside kinase (NK) 
families were retrieved from CDD database of NCBI and 
utilized for the analysis.

P-loop based superimposition was applied to overlay the 
highly diverse groups of X-ray crystallographic structures of 
representatives of P-loop NTPases (). Structural 
analysis and image snapshots were generated by using chimera 
tool, version 1.8.1 (
http://www.cgl.ucsf.edu/chimera/).

Classification of diverse P-loop NTPase:
Full length multiple sequence alignment (MSA) of diverse 
P-loop NTPase sequences was retrieved from CDD database of NCBI. 
MSA of NTPase domain sequences of diverse groups were then pooled 
to form one MSA file, and subjected to realignment of multiple 
sequence. As expected, due to extreme sequence divergence pooled 
and realigned MSA showed poor and meaningless alignment to draw 
phylogenetic conclusions. Therefore, we set out to choose a 
subsequence of a structural component that is maximally and 
contiguously aligned for all the P-loop NTPases. Walker A motif 
sequence (8 residues) and flanking region sequences comprising 
of 5 residues from the N-terminus α-helix and 5 residues from 
the C-terminus β-strand region were emerged out to be such a 
structural component (). We termed this structural component 
as “extended-WalkerA motif”. Further, we utilized this extended-Walker 
A motif to construct a neighbour joining tree. Subsequence of P-loop 
and flanking region was trimmed using Jalview tool 
[] and multiple 
sequence alignment was done using ClustalX tool 
[], using its 
default parameters. MEGA5.0 [], was used to calculate the 
distance matrix and neighbour-joining tree were constructed 
by taking extended Walker A motif subsequence. Tree was visualized 
using MEGA5.0 software tool [].

Weblogo analysis of extended Walker A motif:
Full lengths of diverse set of P-loop NTPases domain sequences 
were retrieved from CDD database of NCBI. The subsequence 
containing the Walker A and flanking region were subjected to 
Weblogo generation []. The consensus sequences are 
presented as sequence logos generated with WebLogo 
(
http://weblogo.berkeley.edu/).Weblogo depicts an alignment 
as a sequence logo, in which each of the position is represented 
as a stack of one letter amino acid residue. The height of each 
amino acid letter is proportional to its frequency at that 
particular position, while the height of the stack, expressed in 
bits, indicates the mutual information in that position 
[]. 
Mutual information (i.e. stack height) is often interpreted as an 
indicator of evolutionary conservation at each position.

Results and Discussion
Currently, a total of 832,282 proteins belonging to P-loop 
containing nucleoside triphosphate hydrolase superfamily 
(SSF52540;http://supfam.org) have been listed in 3,218 
genomes, and they are found in all three major kingdoms of 
life. At the core of conserved P-loop substructure, these 
NTPases exhibit huge sequence divergence. Therefore, it is 
desirable to search for sequence features/profile which can be 
used to identify, classify and annotate the P-loop NTPases.

P-loop and flanking region subsequence delineate the diverse NTPases:
P-loop of Walker A motif adopts a typical arch shaped 
conformation in diverse groups of NTP binding proteins. It has 
a structurally distinct feature consisting of β-strand towards the 
N-terminus and α-helix at the C-terminus of Walker A motif 
[,
]. 
Overall structures of P-loop NTPases are highly diverse 
() and therefore difficult to multiply align (see 
methods). However, P-loop based superposition nicely aligns 
the substructures containing P-loop and flanking N- and C- 
terminus region, we termed this region as an “extended-Walker 
A motif” (). Interestingly, despite the sub-structural 
similarity, corresponding subsequences are highly diverse, 
except for the conventional invariant positions such as G, 
GKS/T of Walker A motif (GXXXXGKS/T, where X is any 
residue). This incited us to check if the subsequence of such a 
structurally conserved and well superimposed region is 
evolutionarily selected for diverse group of NTPases. Secondly, 
can it be utilized in classifying the highly diverse NTP binding 
proteins? Intriguingly, when 18 residues spanning of Walker A 
(8 residues) and flanking region subsequence (5 residues each 
from N-, and C- terminus of Walker A) from the diverse set of 
NTPases sequences were utilized to construct an unrooted tree, 
based on neighbor joining method, a clearly classified group of
diverse NTPases such as G-proteins, RecA like, DExDc, AAA, 
CPT, NK, ABC transporter and NifH proteins emerged out 
(). As shown in 
, NK is linked to G-proteins 
and CPT group; ABC group is associated with RecA. However, 
DExDc and NifH clades are clustered separately. Interestingly, 
Ylqf, circularly permuted GTP binding protein, which 
otherwise would have not aligned with Ras like GTPases at the 
full length sequence alignment, due to its circular permutation, 
showed a close phylogenetic similarity to Ras-like G-proteins. 
This suggests that extended Walker A motif has an 
evolutionary feature that relates Ylqf to G-proteins. This 
strengthens our notion that there are residue positions around 
P-loop, other than conventionalWalker A motif that are 
evolutionarily selected within distinct NTPase families.

Extended Walker A Motif contains distinct patterns across diverse NTPases:
In order to gain insight into the evolutionary selected residues 
of P-loop NTPases, we generated and compared the sequence 
patterns within the P-loop (GX1X2X3XG4KS/T) and its 
flanking region subsequence (). The difference in the 
overall residue propensity of the P-loop and its flanking region 
can be analyzed by generating Weblogo []. We utilized 
Weblogo analysis which revealed distinctive sites in the 
subsequence spanning from P-loop and flanking region 
(). 
The larger the letter, the more information it provides about 
the respective position in the protein family []. Letters are 
sorted in descending order depending on their probability. As 
shown in , an informative Asparagine residue was 
present just adjacent to the Glycine position of Walker A in CPT 
and lie at X2 and X3 of P-loop of ABC transporters and Ylqf, 
respectively. In contrast, Glycine as an informative site was 
observed in different patterns: in DExDc, X3-position; in AAA 
domains, X3-position; in NifH, X2-X3 positions of P-loop. A 
deviant Walker A sequence was observed in DExDc and NifH 
group, where the conserved Glycine is substituted by other 
amino acids (). Such a pattern of evolutionary selected 
set of residues may distinctively cluster the DExDc and NifH in
the N-J tree (). Pattern of distinctive signatures were 
also seen at the N-terminus and C-terminus flanking region of 
distinct NTPase groups (). Convincingly, distinct 
propensity of amino acid around P-loop and well classified 
neighbour joining tree demonstrates the evolutionary selected 
residues.

Applications of Extended Walker A Motif:
The consensus sequence of Walker A (GXXXXGK[S/T], where 
X is any residue) is often used as a motif for identifying new 
members of P-loop NTPases [–
]. However, with the 
availability of large number of NTPase sequences, diversity in 
their conventional conserved motifs is becoming evident. 
Therefore, the conventional motif based searches limit the 
NTPases characterization. Also, some of P-loop NTPases have 
deviant Walker A sequences and there are instances where 
these Walker A signatures are present in many proteins that do 
not form P-loop, for example, peroxidases, and enzymes like α-
amylase, glutamate dehydrogenase, Taq polymerase, carbonic 
anhydrase, binding proteins (lectin, trypsin inhibitor), 
proteases, and others []. Consequently, a novel signature is 
required to identify and classify the P-loop NTPases sequences 
independent of conventional Walker A and Walker B motif. 
Therefore, we propose that Walker A and its flanking region 
subsequence profile, instead of just a Walker A sequence, may 
be used to identify and classify P-loop NTPases.

Conclusion
Our analysis indicates that patterns of amino acid around and 
within P-loop region are evolutionary distinct. Such a pattern 
may provide distinct conformational flexibility and functional 
diversity during Nucleotide (GTP or ATP) binding and 
hydrolysis in diverse groups. Earlier, we have identified 
presence of high density of highly central residue positions in 
P-loop and its flanking region subsequence []. These 
closeness residues are connected to all other residues in short 
steps in an amino acid network of protein structure, thereby 
facilitating a fast dynamic conformational signaling 
[]. Taken 
together, our analysis suggest that that P-loop and its flanking 
region residues are evolutionarily engineered not only to cater 
the binding of nucleotide and fine tuning the catalytic activity, 
but also to disseminate the conformational changes from the 
nucleotide binding site to distinct sites of diverse P-loop 
NTPases. 


Ekta Pathak acknowledges CSIR, Govt. of India for providing 
the Junior Research Fellowship and Senior Research 
Fellowship.

Citation:Pathak et al, Bioinformation 10(4): 216-220 (2014)

P-loop based superposition of diverse structures of NTPases. (A-P) Tile display of P-loop based superposed 
representative structures of diverse P-loop NTPases (see methods) using matchmaker tool of UCSF Chimera 
(http://www.cgl.ucsf.edu/chimera/). Four letter words are the PDBID. Q) Ribbon diagram of typical architecture of P-loop and 
its flanking region (termed as “extended-WalkerA motif”) with bound nucleotide molecule (stick) of diverse NTPases.

Extended Walker A motif based classification of Diverse group 
of NTPases. Unrooted neighbour-joining tree constructed by using multiple 
sequence alignment of extended WalkerA motif containing subsequence of Walker 
A (8 residues), N- and C-terminus (5residues from each end) of Walker A of 
diverse P-loop NTPases.Tree was generated using Mega5 software tool. gi 
number is indicated for each of the diverse sequences utilized in the analysis.

Web logo analysis of P-loop and its flanking region 
sequence.Graphical sequence logos were created using 
Weblogo3 for visualization of the conserved sequence pattern. 
Multiple sequence alignment of diverse P-loop NTPases 
sequences such as Ras-like G-proteins, circularly permutated 
YlqF-like, ATPase Binding Cassette (ABC), DExD/H-like 
helicases, 4Fe-4S iron sulfur cluster binding proteins of NifH 
family, RecA-like F1-ATPases, and ATPases Associated with a 
wide variety of Activities (AAA), and diverse set of 
nucleotide/nucleoside kinase (NK) families are utilized. The 
overall height of each stack indicates the sequence conservation 
at that position (measured in bits). 

