Background
Many codons in the genetic code are functionally synonymous.
A single amino acid is encoded by two to six codons, a
phenomenon called synonymous codon usage. All the
synonymous codons of an amino acid show a variation in the
occurrence in a gene frequency. Some codons show a high
frequency indicating that the usage of the particular codon is
biased. The study of the codon usage bias may assist to design
the DNA primers []. The synonymous codons show variation
between as well as within the genome of an organism [,
].
This variation could be a consequence of natural and/or
mutational pressure to determine the accuracy and the
efficiency of the translation process of the organisms. Study of
the synonymous codon usage patterns of a gene in various
organisms could provide an insight into the evolution profile
and the level of gene expression as well [,
]. In due course of
evolution, plants have developed their own mechanisms to
combat the stresses- both biotic as well as abiotic which they
are continually subject to. Mitogen activated protein kinase
(MAPK) genes present in the plants actively respond to
various stresses. Abiotic stresses mainly include drought, high
salinity, heat, cold, freezing, limited nutrient availability,
heavy metals etc. [,
]. The MAPK genes are generally
classified into three distinct types-MAPKKK, MAPKK and
MAPK. The string of reactions in the stress signalling
pathways involve these three MAPK families; MAPKKKs
phosphorylate the serine/threonine of MAPKKs at their
activation loop which in turn double phosphorylate the
MAPKs at their T-D-Y motif in the activation loop. The MAPK
genes get activated by the stress stimuli and form various
cascade which form the metabolic pathways to regulate the
stress response. The cascade actions acts downstream of the
receptors on extracellular surface or acts as a sensor that׳s
transduces the extracellular signals into intracellular responses
[].

Arabidopsis genome has been reported to harbour 80
MAPKKKs, 10 MAPKKs and 20 MAPKs genes. Whole genome
analysis of rice (Oryza sativa) has revealed 75 MAPKKKs, 8
MAPKKs and 15 MAPKs [,
]. In-silico studies of the
Soybean (Glycine max) has identified 38 MAPKs, 11 MAPKKs,
and 150 MAPKKKs []. Chilling stress is one of the serious
problems associated with the production of major crops such
as rice and maize [] in temperate zone. The Arabidopsis
MAPKs, based on their structural motif and sequence
similarities, is classified into four groups (A-D). The group A, B
and C possesses a T-E-Y motif whereas the fourth group A
possesses a T-D-Y motif [,
]. A signalling pathway
comprising of MEKK1-MKK2-MPK4/MPK6 is reported to
regulate the response to abiotic stresses in Arabidopsis 
[]. The
abiotic stresses induce the production of ROS (reactive oxygen
species). Several MAPK signalling pathways are induced only
by ROS and in turn regulate the ROS production. Many MAPK
pathways in response to abiotic stresses have been studied in
rice. Experiment on long term exposure of rice plants to
cooling stress revealed the involvement of several MAPKs
namely MEK1 (MAPKK) and MAP1 (MAPK) []. MAPK5
gene in rice has shown multiple activities, responding to both
biotic and abiotic stress. Resistivity to drought in rice plants is
provided by an MAPKK of the B3 subgroup named DSM1 
[].
MAPK33 has also shown activity withstanding drought 
[].

Microarray analysis of MPK4 activity in soybean revealed that
it negatively regulates SA and H2O2 accumulation. Therefore
silencing of MPK4 in soybean significantly increases SA and
H2O2 accumulation, up-regulating genes involved in defense
response and providing the plants a better resistance to downy
mildew and soybean mosaic virus as compared to vector
controlled plants. MPK4 has been reported to down-regulate
genes involved in growth and development, such as those in
auxin signalling pathways and in cell cycle and proliferation
[]. 
Very little information is available on the codon usage
pattern of MAPK genes across plant species despite substantial
literature on physiological mechanisms. The present study has
therefore been undertaken to elucidate the codon usage of
MAPK genes. Overall comparative analysis of the codon usage
patterns of the MAPK genes reported in the three organisms -
A. thaliana, G. max and O. sativa could be beneficial to analyse
the conservative nature of the genes, codon usage patterns and
the compositional role in determining the optimal codons.
Information regarding the codon usage patterns could help
reveal the evolutionary history of individual genes within or
between organisms, and the expression of genes as well.

Methodology
Coding DNA sequence data:
Coding sequence data (a total of 127 cds) of the different genes
of the MAPK families of Arabidopsis, soybean and rice were
retrieved from NCBI (www.ncbi.mlm.nih.gov). The genes with
different accession numbers are listed in  (see
supplementary material). Different analytical parameters for
codon usage bias of the MAPK genes with different accession
number were estimated and analysed.

Analysis of the codon usage profile:
Several parameters have been used to characterize the
sequence data of the genes. Gene members of each of the three
MAPK families are analysed and compared family-wise across
the three organisms.

RSCU:
The relative synonymous codon usage (RSCU) measures the
frequencies of optimal codons of each of the synonymous
codons encoding an amino acid. It assists in characterising the
codons in a genetic sequence, whether it follows unbiased
pattern of the codons being used or certain codons are more
preferred. Codons with RSCU values greater than 1 are
generalised to possess a positive codon usage bias and those
less than 1 are considered to possess negative codon usage bias
[]. Bioinformatics tools available online, codonW
(mobyle.pasteur.fr/cgi-bin/portal.py#forms::codonW) have been
used to estimate the RSCU which is mathematically expressed
as: (For equation-&gt; (1) please see ).
where, xi is the number of frequency of jth codon for ith amino
acid and ni being the number of alternative synonymous
codons available for the ith amino acid.

GC content:
It is a measure of the occurrence of the nucleotide bases
guanine (G) and cytosine (C) in the entire genetic sequence
[]. 
The GC content can be measured partially at the 1st, 2nd
and 3rd synonymous codon position throughout the sequence,
designated as GC1S , GC2S , and GC3S respectively 
[]. Other
indices for nucleotide bias such as A%, T%, G%, and C% are
measured. The nucleotide measure at the third codon positions
designated as A3S, T3S, G3S and C3S are also calculated.
Mathematically GC% is expressed as: (For equation-&gt; (2)
please see ).

Effective number of codons (NC):
As proposed by Wright in the year 1990, Nc measures the
absolute synonymous codon usage bias []. It measures the
total number of synonymous codons used for each amino acid.
The values of Nc ranges from 20 (when only one codon is used
for an amino acid), to 61 (when all the codons are used with
equal frequency) []. It may be expressed as: (For equation-&gt;
(3) please see ). Where, F2 is the
probability that two randomly chosen codon for an amino acid,
possibly encoded by two distinct codons, are identical, F3 is
the probability that three randomly chosen codons for an
amino acid with three synonymous codons are identical and
so on [,
].

Gene expression analysis:
The expressivity of a gene is characterized on the basis of CAI
value for a gene. It is measured as calculating the geometric
means of the relative adaptiveness (w) of all the codons in a
gene. The CAI value ranges from 0 (when less frequent codons
are used) to 1 (when most frequent codons are used) 
[].
Highly expressed genes tend to have high CAI values whereas
less expressive genes possess low CAI values. CAI is
mathematically expressed as: (For equation-&gt; (4) please see
), where, L is the number of codons in
the gene and wc(k) is the w value for the kth codon in the gene.
Relative adaptiveness (w) can be calculated as: (For equation-&gt;
(5) please see ). Where Xij is the
number of occurrence of jth codons in the reference set of
highly expressed genes and Xmax is the maximum Xij for ith
amino acid.

Results
Characteristic patterns of nucleotide composition:
The nucleotide composition of the MAPK genes in three
organisms shows a clear characteristic pattern of resemblance
with a few exceptions in rice (). In case of MAPKKK
family, the overall GC% of Arabidopsis is 35.6%, which is low,
revealing that the organism has high overall AT content. The
overall GC content in rice and soybean gene sequences is
43.99% and 53.10% respectively. This result suggests that there
exists a balance between the AT and GC content in the soybean
genes, while in rice the overall AT content slightly exceeds the
overall GC content for MAPK genes. From the GC3% in all the
three gene families across three species, it is evident that the
GC% is markedly suppressed in Arabidopsis and soybean at the
third synonymous codon position. The rice genes show an
overall consistent pattern from the other two species in respect
of the GC3%. The overall GC3 content in all the gene families of
rice is slightly lower (40.02%-45.39%) as against the AT3
content (54.61%-59.08%). Thus the comparative study of the
MAPKKK, MAPKK and the MAPK family genes show that
Arabidopsis and soybean have resemblance in their pattern of
nucleotide usage whereas rice genes deviate from the other
two species ().

Synonymous codon usage pattern:
Codons with RSCU values greater than 1 are considered to
have positive codon usage bias []. The most preferred codon
for each of 18 amino acids bearing the highest RSCU values are
shown in  (see supplementary material). Inspection of
the overall RSCU values reveal that the codons TTT, GTT,
AAT, and GAT coding for phenylalanine, valine, asparagine
and aspartic acid respectively, have got the highest preference
in all the three organisms. Besides this, the comparative study
between the Arabidopsis and soybean (G. max) reveals
significant resemblance in the preference of codons; 11 out of
18 amino acids show the same preferred codon. But rice does
not show any significant trend: only two amino acids resemble
with soybean, and three with Arabidopsis for preferred codon.
The resemblance between Arabidopsis and soybean is further
evident from the codon preference in the MAPKK family; 12
out of 18 amino acids show the same preference of codons.
Only one amino acid i.e. valine is encoded by the most
preferred codon GTT in three MAPK gene families across all
the species. The MAPKKK family has shown the extreme
resemblance for the most preferred codons between
Arabidopsis and soybean; 15 out of 18 amino acids have the
same preferred codon. But in rice the most preferred codon for
most amino acids differs from Arabidopsis and soybean. The
comparison of RSCU values for most preferred codon for each
amino acid in three organisms is shown in  for each
gene family. The third codon position of all the preferred
codons predominantly possesses the nucleotide T followed by
A in all the three gene families indicating that this preference
could be due to translational selection or mutation bias.

Expressivity of genes:
Codon adaptation index (CAI), as proposed by Sharp and Li in
the year 1987, is a measure to predict the expressivity of genes
[]. 
The CAI value of each gene belonging to different families
was found to be very low, ranging from 0.147 to 0.208 
(), 
which indicates that the genes are not possibly optimized
for high expression (). This could be due to the fact
that stress induces the MAPK gene expression and that MAPK
genes are not house-keeping genes by nature. Hence their CAI
values are usually low indicating low expression under nonstress
environment.

Biasness in codon usage:
The Nc values of all genes are towards higher side, ranging
from 50.83 to 56.55. The higher values of Nc signify that the
gene sequences show low biasness in the codon usage profile.

Discussion
The comparative study of the codon usage for MAPK genes in
three species i.e. Arabidopsis, soybean and rice have shown that
the first two organisms share a high degree of similarity
between them. The MAPK genes of these two organisms have
shown very high resemblance in codon preference in the
coding sequences. The gene family wise comparison across the
three organisms revealed that Arabidopsis and soybean are
compositionally alike. In contrast, rice showed a somewhat
different nucleotide composition from the other two species.
This could be due to the fact that Arabidopsis and soybean are
dicots unlike rice which is a monocot. Arabidopsis and soybean
genes are overall AT-rich as well as at the third synonymous
codon position. The rice MAPK sequences, on the other hand,
are overall GC-rich and at the third synonymous position. Guo
and his co-workers (2007) also reported a high GC content in
rice genes []. The results suggest that the codon usage
pattern in all the MAPK genes in the three species used in the
study might be influenced by their base compositional
properties. The general trend of the Nc values in the three
species is consistently higher side for all the genes indicating a
low bias in the codon usage pattern in these genes.

The overall perusal of the RSCU values for the three gene
families revealed a high similarity between the codon usage in
Arabidopsis and G. max. Majority of the preferred codons in the
genes of these two species are T-redundant at the silent third
codon position. This may be due to the high prevalence of AT
content in these genes. However, in case of O. sativa, the
preference for the nucleotides at the third synonymous codon
position is balanced in MAPK and MAPKK genes, which is
evident from the nearly equal distribution of overall GC and
AT content in these two gene families. In MAPKKK gene
family of O. sativa, however, the preferential codons showed
the increased tendency of using T at the third position. Valine
is encoded by the most preferred codon GTT in three species.
Highly expressed genes generally show a tendency of using a
limited number of codons which they use preferentially 
[].
The level of gene expression as estimated by the CAI values
has shown that the MAPK genes are not possibly highly
expressed. Since stress induces the expression of MAPK genes,
these genes might be evolutionarily so organized as to give
low expression under non-stress or normal conditions. CAI
values of all the genes have shown a close proximity to 0,
suggesting that they have less expressivity []. Translational
selection might have played a role in this context, rendering
the MAPK genes to be optimized for low expression under
non-stress environment.

Conclusion
This work is the first attempt to gain insight into the codon
usage profiles of stress induced MAPK genes across three
plant species. Mutational pressure and natural selection have
been projected as the main impetus behind the codon usage
bias in various organism ranging from small prokaryotes to
large plants and animals [,
,
]. In the present study, the
results indicate that apart from the mutational pressure,
translational selection might be playing a pivotal role in order
to make these genes optimized for translating efficiently.
MAPK families comprise of a huge number of genes
interacting with each other in order to combat different
environmental stresses. Based on the type of stress and the
species involved, the codon usage as well as the expression of
genes may vary. Thus, it is necessary to carry out further
detailed analysis of the codon usage pattern in MAPK and the
associated genes involved in the cascade of actions under
biotic and abiotic stress environments in different species.

Disclosure
The authors do not have any competing interest. No financial
aid from any funding agency was obtained for undertaking the
present study.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors are grateful to Assam University, Silchar-788011,
Assam, India for providing the research facility.

Citation:Singha et al, Bioinformation 10(7): 436-442 (2014)

Nucleotide composition (%) of the three MAPK gene
families, in Arabidopsis, soybean and rice

RSCU values of the Arabidopsis, soybean and rice showing three families: (A) MAPK; (B) MAPKK and (C) MAPKKK

Frequency of estimated CAI values of different genes
in Arabidopsis, rice and soybean

