Background
Stigmatomycosis is one of the most common fungal diseases in
cotton (Gossypium hirsutum) and various subtropical citrus
fruits. The causative agent of the disease in various plant
species is a fungal pathogen, Ashbya gossypii, first identified and
characterised by Ashby and Nowell in 1926 []. Ashbya gossypii
is a filamentous fungus which relies on heteropterous insects
for its dispersal of spores or mycelia fragments. Apart from
being a well known plant pathogen, Ashbya gossypii is also
recognized for its ability to produce riboflavin (vitamin B2)
which has been exploited for the commercial interest. Ashbya
gossypii is known to be closely related to the unicellular yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisae and share a considerable level of
conservation in gene order and synteny [,
]. Earlier analysis
established that over 95% proteins share homology with the
Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteins indicating the conservation of
essential cellular machinery between the two species 
[]. Last
decade has witnessed the technological advancement in various
molecular biology techniques. This improvement in technology
has been widely exploited to sequence large number of
genomes. With the completion and availability of genome
sequence in A. gossypii one could look into crucial hidden
mechanisms pertaining to its economic importance. A. gossypii
genome sequence has been considered as one of the bestannotated
eukaryotic genome due to the simplicity and
compactness of the genome []. Reactive oxygen species (ROS)
is generated as a consequence of metabolism in all aerobic
organisms, in response to various environmental stress
conditions such as drought, salinity etc. and also during plantpathogen
interactions []. Oxidative stress causes damage to
cysteine amino acids and due to their unique ability to form
intra or intermolecular disulfide bridges by oxidation, the thiol
groups of cysteine residues are of physiological importance for
many biological reactions such as protein folding and dynamic
regulation of protein structures under oxidative stress 
[].
Various species have developed an elaborate mechanism
comprising of antioxidants and enzymes in order to control the
ROS, which can otherwise damage the cellular components 
[].
Cellular milieu has plethora of antioxidant molecules like
thioredoxins, glutaredoxins, glutathione, superoxide dismutase,
catalase etc []. Glutaredoxins are small (~10-15 KDa)
thermostable molecules classified as oxidoreductases of
thioredoxin superfamily and conserved in both prokaryotes and
eukaryotes [–]. 
The GRXs catalyze the reduction of
oxidatively damaged proteins via a dithiol (2-Cys) or monothiol
(1-Cys) mechanism []. The monothiol and dithiol GRXs
contain a conserved Cys-X-X-Ser and Cys-X-X-Cys active site,
respectively []. Although the glutaredoxin family exists in
most of the fungal species, only a few fungal GRXs account for
functional significance, till date.

GRXs play role in glutathionylation and de-glutathionylation
reactions, thus have binding region for glutathione molecules
[]. These reactions regulate the activities of many enzymes
and molecules which aid in signalling during normal and stress
conditions []. Monothiol GRX from some fungi have been
studied such as, cloning of CGFS type GRX from Taiwanofungus
camphorata [], analysis of yeast GRX5 knockout mutant 
[],
yeast Grx6 and Grx7 associated with the early secretory
pathway [] and CGFS-type GRX4 glutaredoxin from
Schizosaccharomyces pombe [] etc. In the present analysis, we
have identified two monothiol glutaredoxins from Ashbya
gossypii using in-silico approach and one protein having
probable mitochondrial location (AgGRX1-NP_984149) was
chosen for homology modelling. Both the protein sequences of
A.gossypii were analysed and compared with respect to the
other known monothiol GRX homologues. The molecular
phylogeny also shed light on the evolutionary relationship of
monothiol GRXs in fungi. We have also attempted to predict
docking with glutathione molecule.

Methodology
In-silico isolation of monothiol GRXs from Ashbya gossypii:
In order to identify monothiol GRX protein sequences from
Ashbya gossypii, BLAST [] searches were made in non
redundant database of NCBI using yeast monothiol GRXs as
query. The sequences obtained were aligned using MUSCLE
multiple alignment software []. The specific sequences of
monothiol glutaredoxin proteins were identified using the
conserved signature of monothiol glutaredoxin proteins.
Further, in order to have an exhaustive overview, pfam domain
of glutaredoxin (PF00462) was used to search monothiol GRXs
in A. gossypii genome. All the sequences obtained were aligned
and checked for conserved monothiol glutaredoxin signature
“CGFS”.

Sequence analysis and multiple alignments:
The sequence analysis of two proteins (NP_984149 and
NP_986777) was performed by Compute pI/Mw, using ExPASy
server (http://www.expasy.org/tools/). The homologues were
searched using BLASTp program available at NCBI
(http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi). The protein
sequences of full-length monothiol glutaredoxin from various
organisms were aligned with MUSCLE software (v3.8) 
[]. The
putative localization of monothiol glutaredoxin in Ashbya gossypii, 
was predicted using TargetP (v1.01) [] and PSORT
[] web based software.

Phylogenetic analysis:
The full-length protein sequences obtained from NCBI were
used to perform phylogenetic analysis using Mega (ver 5.05)
software []. The tree was calculated using maximum
likelihood approach using 500 replicas. The final tree was
plotted in Mega (ver 5.05) software and bootstrap values were
mentioned on the tree.

Secondary structure analysis and fold recognition:
Secondary structures of monothiol glutaredoxin in Ashbya gossypii 
were predicted using JNET [], SABLE 
[], STRIDE
[], PSIPRED 
[] and SAM-T08 
[] softwares. Foldrecognition
analysis was carried out using mGENETHREADER
[], and 3DPSSM 
[] softwares. The architectural motifs and
the topology of proteins with known 3-D structure were
analysed according to SCOP [] and CATH 
[] classifications.
Topology of the modelled monothiol glutaredoxin protein in
Ashbya gossypii was analysed using PDBSum
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/thornton-srv/databases/pdbsum).

Comparative modelling and analysis:
The comparative modelling of 3-D structure of monothiol
glutaredoxin protein in Ashbya gossypii was performed in a
stepwise procedure and templates were searched from PDB
database using BLASTp program. The crystal structure of
human glutaredoxin with bound glutathione in FeS cluster
(PDB entry: 2WUL) and Arabidopsis monothiol glutaredoxin
(PDB entry: 3IPZ) were identified as the template for modelling
monothiol glutaredoxin domain in Ashbya gossypii. The
template structures were downloaded and aligned using
STAMP, structure alignment software, STAMP []. These
aligned structures were used as a profile for aligning the target
sequence using ClustalX []. The automated comparative
protein modelling program MODELLER9v10 [] was used to
generate a 100 all-atom model by alignment of the target
sequence with the selected template sequences in an alignment
file. Molecular visualisation and analysis of the final modelled
structure were carried out with Visual Molecular Dynamics
(VMD) (http://www.ks.uiuc.edu/Research/vmd/) 
[].

Validation of AgGRX1 structure:
The best structure model was chosen on the basis of the
stereochemistry quality report generated using PROCHECK
(used for inspection of ψ/Φ Ramachandran plot) [] as shown
in  (see supplementary material). The spatial restraints
and the energy minimisation steps were performed within
Modeller using the CHARMM22 force field for proper
stereochemistry of proteins. Further, PROSA-web test was
applied on final model to check for energy criteria in
comparison with the potential of mean force derived from a
large set of known protein structures [].

Docking analysis:
The glutathione (GSH) molecule was docked into the active site
of the modelled protein using PatchDock software []. The
software works on the principle of finding the suitable docking
transformations that yields molecular shape complementarity
using geometry based docking algorithm. The docking was
performed with the default parameters.

Discussion
Sequence analysis of AgGRX1 monothiol glutaredoxin:
The protein sequences of monothiol glutaredoxin in Ashbya gossypii 
has been identified using Blast and hmmer software
(see Methodology) using whole genome protein sequence of
Ashbya gossypii. The search resulted in the identification of two
sequences with accession number NP_984149.1 and
NP_986777.1 which are subsequently named as AgGRX1 and
AgGRX2 respectively. The identified protein sequences were
further validated as monothiol glutaredoxins using their
signatures “CGFS”. The protein sequences of AgGRX1 and
AgGRX2 were classified as monothiol glutaredoxins where
cysteine is conserved only at the first position of redox active
motif. However, cysteines at the first and fourth position of the
redox active motif like ‘CXXC’, is conserved in dithiol GRXs.
The proteins sequence of AgGRX1 and AgGRX2 were found to
be of 138 and 237 amino acids respectively. The AgGRX1
showed 68% identity with ‘CGFS' type glutaredoxin of
S.cerevisiae i.e. ScGRX5 while AgGRX2 showed 65% identity
with both ScGRX4 and ScGRX3 respectively. AgGRX1 and
AgGRX2 have a molecular weight of 15.0 kDa and 26.0 kDa
respectively. Their theoretical pI's are 4.76 and 4.52 respectively.
The AgGRX1 possesses a 32 amino acid transit peptide for
mitochondrial localization while predicted localization of
AgGRX2 is cytoplasmic  (see supplementary material).
Analysis of the GRX module present in AgGRX1 and AgGRX2
showed single instance of their occurrence on the protein
sequence. Recently, members of monothiol glutaredoxins
having ‘CXYS’ motif in the active site has been identified
namely, ScGrx6 (CSYS) and ScGrx7 (CPYS) []. The genome of
S. cerevisiae and S. pombe contains approximately 5 and 3
monothiol GRXs, respectively [,
]. In S. cerevisiae, ScGRX6,
ScGRX7 and SpGRX3 has single GRX module of ‘CS/PYS’ type.
Similar single GRX module of ‘CGFS’ type were earlier found to
be present in S. cerevisiae (ScGRX3, ScGRX4, ScGRX5) and S.
pombe (SpGRX4 and SpGRX5) []. Some cases of convergent
evolution in domain architecture have been identified, where
two independent recombination events of a TRX domain to a
GRX domain have occurred []. The TRX domain in hybrid
molecules helps in the localization of the protein. Earlier reports
shows that ScGRX3, ScGRX4 and SpGRX4 belongs to the TRXGRX
class and Posses a WAxPC motif []. In ScGRX3, the TRX
domain seems to be required for the nuclear targeting of the
molecule []. Further analysis showed the presence of WAxPC
motif at the N-terminal region of AgGRX2 while in AgGRX1 the
motif was found missing in the protein sequence. In order to
analyze the conservation in AgGRX1 and AgGRX2, the protein
sequences were aligned with the representative monothiol
glutaredoxin protein sequences from prokaryotes (E.coli,
Thiobacillus denitrificans and Pseudomonas aeruginosa), fungi
(Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Schizosaccharomyces pombe),
animals (Xenopus tropicalis, Drosophila melanogaster and Homo
sapiens), algae (Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Volvox carteri,
Micromonas pusilla and Ostreococcus lucimarinus) and plants
(Arabidopsis thaliana, Zea mays, Pteris vittata, Populus trichocarpa,
Ricinus communis, Oryza sativa, Glycine max and Physcomitrella
patens). Their protein entry code, protein length and putative
localization have been shown in .

The resulting multiple sequence alignment showed that ‘CGFS'
being the redox active motif was highly conserved in AgGRX1
and AgGRX2 (). Glutaredoxins contain a putative
glutathione binding site which consists of a glycine pair at Cterminal.
The putative glutathione binding site (V/QGG) was
present in both AgGRX1 and AgGRX2. ‘IGG’ was reported as a
putative glutathione binding site in Grx2 of human, mouse and
rat []. In fungal glutaredoxins, towards C-terminal region,
two consecutive glycine residues assist in the formation of the
GSH cleft of the GRX molecule []. In all the sequences
analysed, tripeptide ‘PAK’ is present only in AgGRX1 and yeast
GRX5 but was absent in AgGRX2. A conserved stretch of
‘WPT[I/F]PQL’ was observed in both the sequences and was
not found in the sequences of H.sapiens, D. melanogaster, X.
tropicalis, C. reinhardtii, V. carteri, O. sativa, G. max and M. pusilla.
Similar stretch was also reported in Synechocystis, which assists
during glutathione binding []. The study of the fungal
monothiol GRXs showed diversity at sequence level, but the
redox active motif and invariable residues involved in the
glutathione binding were conserved.

Phylogenetic analysis of ‘CGFS’ GRX proteins:
Phylogenetic and evolutionary relationships among monothiol
glutaredoxins of Ashbya gossypii and its homologues were
investigated using the full-length protein sequences to construct
an unrooted phylogenetic tree. The tree was sub-divided into
three distinct clades: ‘A’, ‘B’, and ‘C’ 
(). The largest
clade ‘A’ (purple color labels) encompasses AgGRX2 along with
algae (Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Volvox carteri, Micromonas
pusilla and Ostreococcus lucimarinus), plants (Arabidopsis thaliana,
Zea mays, Pteris vittata, Ricinus communis, Glycine max and
Physcomitrella patens) and fungi (ScGRX3 and SpGRX4). In the
clade ‘B’ (Blue color labels) - animals (Xenopus tropicalis,
Drosophila melanogaster and Homo sapiens), were clustered
together. Clade ‘C’ (red color labels) had AgGRX1, prokaryotes
(E.coli, Thiobacillus denitrificans and Pseudomonas aeruginosa),
Yeast GRX5, plants (Populus trichocarpa and Oryza sativa).
AgGRX1 and AgGRX2 were significantly divergent and
grouped under different clades. Similarly, Yeast GRX3 and
GRX5 were placed in different clades. AgGRX2, ScGRX3 and
SpGRX4 contain ‘WaxPC’ motif and belong to TRX-GRX hybrid
class and all were placed in clade ‘A’. AgGRX1, Yeast GRX5 and
Oryza sativa were having mitochondrial localization signal and
clustered together in clade ‘C‘.

Comparative modelling of AgGRX1 protein:
The structure model of monothiol glutaredoxin protein in
Ashbya gossypii, BLAST searches were performed against the
PDB for proteins with similar sequence and known 3D
structures using the protein sequence of AgGRX1. The search
identified crystal structure of human glutaredoxin with bound
glutathione in FeS cluster (PDB entry: 2WUL) and Arabidopsis
monothiol glutaredoxin (PDB entry: 3IPZ) were identified as
the template for modelling monothiol glutaredoxin domain in
Ashbya gossypii (see Materials and Methods). The Pfam analysis
of AgGRX1 showed the presence of glutaredoxin domain (89 to
153 amino acids). Due to the lack of template structure for the
N-terminal region (1-88 amino acids), only glutaredoxin
domain of the protein has been modelled. The Ramachandran
plot for the modelled domain of AgGRX1 showed 93.5%
residues in most favourable regions with the remaining 6.5% of
residues occurring in allowed regions while none of the
residues were found to be in generously allowed and
disallowed region (). The PROCHECK result
summary showed none out of 109 residues labelled. The torsion
angles of the side chain designated by χ1-χ2 plots showed only
2 labelled residues out of 60 in the modelled structure of
AgGRX1. The observed G-factor scores of the modelled
AgGRX1 glutaredoxin domain were found to be 0.07 for
dihedral bonds, -0.26 for covalent bonds and -0.05 overall. The
distribution of the main chain bond lengths and bond angles
were 98.7% within limits for the modelled AgGRX1 protein
structure. The PROSA-web energy plots for modelled
glutaredoxin domain in AgGRX1 protein showed a z-score for
pair, surface and combined energy which was found to be -7.39
( &amp; ).

Analysis of modelled AgGRX1 protein:
AgGRX1 model shows the presence of four stranded β-sheet
flanked by six a-helices (). In AgGRX1, redox active
motif ‘CGFS’ was present at the start of α2, putative glutathione
binding sites ‘WPT[I/F]PQL’ was between α3 and β3 and
‘VGG’ was located between α4 and β4 structures. Tripeptide
‘PAK’ which was unique to AgGRX1 was located between α2
and β2 structures (). In AgGRX1 model there is a core
of four mixed β-strands out of which, three (β1, β2 and β4) are
parallel and one (β3) remains antiparallel ( &amp; 
). The AgGRX1 model of glutaredoxin domain was similar to
other known monothiol GRXs. The overall fold of the AgGRX1
glutaredoxin domain remains close to previously known
thioredoxins with (αβαβαββαα) topology, thus having a
signature fold of thioredoxin family with central mixed b-sheet
sandwiched between a-helices []

Docking of AgGRX1 with glutathione (GSH) molecule:
In order to understand the mechanism of monothiol
glutaredoxins in maintaining the cellular redox homeostasis,
the AgGRX1 protein was docked with the glutathione molecule
using PatchDock software (See materials and Methods).
Docking of glutathione molecule into the active site of AgGRX1
revealed the hydrogen bond interaction of Lys46, Ile98, Cys111
and Asp112 ( &amp; 
). Similar interaction of the
glutathione with the active site cysteine was observed in human
Grx2 proteins []. Other residues such as Phe56, Thr97, Arg86
and Gly110 were found to have non-bonded interaction with
the glutathione molecule (). All the residues were
found to be well conserved in the multiple sequence alignment
of the monothiol glutaredoxins (). Earlier, residues such
as Lys23, Thr71 and Asp86 were found to be located in the GRX
cleft and had role in glutathione binding in Synechocystis
SyGrx3 protein [].

Conclusion
Ashbya gossypii is one of the filamentous fungi and known for its
commercial importance as well as for causing the disease in
various crop plants. With the genome sequence available for the
fungi, various important processes can be understood in the
fungus which may help in harnessing it for better commercial
success. Oxidative stress is common for all the aerobic species
and various organisms develop intrinsic mechanisms in order
to survive under this stress condition. Glutaredoxins are one
amongst the antioxidant system which deals with oxidative
stress and is well conserved in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. The
analysis of “CGFS” monothiol glutaredoxins of Ashbya gossypii
can shed light on its antioxidant mechanism. The protein
sequence of the AgGRX1 was used for modelling and analysis
of monothiol glutaredoxins in Ashbya gossypii. The sequence
alignment of the protein sequence revealed the conserved
residues of monothiol glutaredoxins in AgGRX1. The protein
sequence of AgGRX1 was found close to the Saccharomyces
cerevisiae monothiol glutaredoxin. The structure model of
AgGRX1 protein showed important features about the
structural aspect of the protein and the topology resembles with
thioredoxin molecules. Further, the docking analysis of
glutathione molecule in the active site of GRXs revealed the
probable interaction of the molecules with various residues. The
cysteine which is considered as relevant for the glutathione
binding as well as protein dimerization, was also found to be
conserved in AgGRX1. This study will help in the
understanding about the structural account of fungal monothiol
glutaredoxins, its interaction with glutathione molecule and
add valuable information about its biochemical function and
interaction properties in molecular detail.

Supplementary material
Data 1
HRK would like to acknowledge ICGEB, New Delhi for
providing facilities and DST, Govt. of India for providing funds
under DST-INSPIRE faculty scheme.

Citation:Yadav et al, Bioinformation 9(5): 243-249 (2013)

Multiple sequence alignment of AgGRX1 (NP_984149), AgGRX2 (NP_986777) with- Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Q03835,
DAA11371), Schizosaccharomyces pombe (NP596647), Homo sapiens (NP057501), E.coli (P0AC71), Thiobacillus denitrificans (AAZ98452),
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (AAG06921), Drosophila melanogaster (NP572974), Xenopus tropicalis (AAH75374), Arabidopsis thaliana
(At3g54900), Zea mays (NP001150229), Pteris vittata (ABM91435), Populus trichocarpa (EEE71408), Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
(XP001702880), Volvox carteri (XP002955066), Oryza sativa (Os01g07950), Glycine max (ACU14796), Physcomitrella patens
(XP001784398), Ricinus communis (XP002512782), Micromonas pusilla (XP003056004), Ostreococcus lucimarinus (XP001415947). The
redox active motif ‘CGFS’ is marked by asterisks*. The conservation and consensus sequence is depicted below the alignment.

Phylogenetic tree of monothiol glutaredoxins from
different organisms showing various clades. Clade A: Purple
colour label, Clade B: Blue colour labels, Clade C: Red colour
labels

Ramachandran plot of the modelled AgGRX1 protein
(A) Z-plot (B) and e-plot (C).

Secondary structure topology of AgGRX1
glutaredoxin protein. A) Topology diagram of AgGRX1 protein,
the four sheets and six helices are represented in purple and
yellow colour respectively; B) Cartoon representation of the
modelled AgGRX1protein with the labelled secondary
structures.

A) Glutathione binding to the modelled AgGRX1
domain showing hydrogen bonds and other non-bonded
interactions; B) Cartoon representation of the modelled
AgGRX1protein docked with glutathione molecule showing
residues forming hydrogen bonds with glutathione.

