Background
One of the important factors highlighted recently in cancer is the
activation of glycolysis leading to angiogenesis [] and cell
proliferation, decreased apoptosis, cellular immortalization and
invasion/metastasis. Novel molecules for cell proliferation are
provided through glycolysis, which is activated by the well known
factor HIF-1 α [–]. Transcription factor is a guide to many cancers
by activating the transcription of many genes that code for proteins
involved in several pathways which are closely related to cancer
growth. The progressive survival of cancer cells depends on glycolytic
energy through ATP generation [–] and the level of ATP is reduced
remarkably under oxygen starved conditions in the absence of HIF-1 α
[]. In most common human cancers as well as in pre-neoplastic and
pre-malignant lesions, such as colonic adenoma, breast ductal
carcinoma HIF-1 α is over-expressed. It is reported that HIF-1 α
expression may occur very early in carcinogenesis, before histological
evidence of angiogenesis or invasion []. It has been suggested that
HIF-1 α is a biomarker of carcinogenesis and for drug design,
pharmaceutical companies use it as suitable target for cancer chemoprevention.

Studies suggest that HIF-1 α can only operate in the presence of free
radicals and it does not work if antioxidants remove these free radicals
[]. They showed that while this protein was abundant in untreated
cancer cells taken from mice, it disappeared in vitamin C-treated cells.
It might be possible that antioxidants adopted two alternative pathways
for reducing the activity of HIF-1 α, firstly, these directly remove the
free radicals and make the survival of HIF-1 α difficult and another
way may be that these antioxidants bind at the active site of the protein
to inhibit its activity. HIF1 is a hetero-dimer composed of two subunits
(an alpha and a beta). The beta subunit has been recognized as the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear trans-locator (ARNT) []. Two
alternative transcripts of hypoxia inducible factor-1gene encodes for
different isoforms (NP_001521.1 and NP_851397.1). The HIF1 alpha
is isoform 2 (NP_851397.1) and it is shorter with a distinct Cterminus,
compared to isoform 1 as it lacks an alternate segment at the
3´ CDS region. Therefore, it is important to describe the mechanism of
in induction by HIF-1 α. However, the protein databank (PDB)
contains the NMR structure of cysteine/histidine-rich 1 (CH1) domain
of p300 bound to the C-terminal transactivation domain of HIF-1α,
which is smaller than the target receptor protein []. Hence, we
employed threading technique to construct the model. We then used
docking tools to evaluate the binding of anti-oxidants like lycopene,
curcumin, α tocopherol and ascorbic acid. We also docked curcumin
dipiperoyl ester for comparison as its bioavailability is enhanced
remarkably to curcumin and it is a potent anticancer drug to curcumin
[].

Methodology
Target sequence
The 735 residue long protein sequence of Human hypoxia inducible
factor 1 (NCBI_ID: NP_851397.1 (hypoxia-inducible factor 1, alpha
subunit isoform 2) was downloaded from NCBI RefSeq database [].

BLAST search
The target sequence for HIF-1 alpha was submitted to NCBI-Blast and
searched against PDB [] to select suitable structural templates.

Wurst server
Wurst server is used in the absence of a suitable homolog. The target
sequence is aligned to more than 3000 templates using a dynamic
programming algorithm with a structure and sequence features based
score function [].

ArchPRED
We used ArchPRED for loop region prediction [].

SwissPdbViewer
We used swisspdbviewer to subsequently model the structure using the
selected template and loop structures [].

RAMPAGE server
The RAMPAGE server is used to validate the predicted model [].

Discussion
Ramachandran plot analysis of the modelled structure show 77.4% in
favoured region, 14.1% in allowed region and 8.1% in outlier region
of the plot. This modeled protein structure has five cavities detected
using the molegro software with volumes 288.768 A3, 29.184 A3,
26.112 A3, 25.6 A3 and 19.968 A3. The cavity with volume 288.768
A3 shows good energy score for all the five antioxidants (lycopene,
ascorbic acid, tocopherol, curcumin and dipiperoyl ester of curcumin)
used in this study. The ranking of the anti-oxidants using the energy
score is curcumin-dipiperoyl ester 〈 lycopene 〈 curcumin 〈 tocopherol 〈 ascorbic acid. Data shows curcumin dipiperoyl ester with the lowest
energy score is most favourable. The five antioxidants used in the
study exhibit hydrogen bond interaction with the interacting residues
as shown in . The analysis shows ascorbic acid with
maximum H-bond interaction and tocopherol with minimum H-bond
interactions. Table 1 (see  ) shows the
interacting properties of the anti-oxidants to the target protein.
Curcumin also show low energy score which is close to lycopene. The
energy score of curcumin molecule was changed by substituting it
with dipiperoyl ester as reported eslwehere [].

Conclusion
It is known that antioxidants inhibit the activity of HIF-1 α by
scavenging free radicals. Data here show that the five antioxidants
(lycopene, ascorbic acid, α- tocopherol, curcumin and curcumin
conjugates with piperic acid) have similar mode of binding at the site
of the hypoxia inducing factor-1 α with varying binding energy scores.
Current analysis also shows the H-bonds interactions of these
compounds with the active sites. However, subsequent experiments
should be designed to validate these observations.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Upadhyay et al, Bioinformation 4(6): 233-236 (2009)

HIF-1 α protein docked with (a) curcumin dipiperoyl ester; (b) curcumin; (c) lycopene; (d) tocopherol; (e) ascorbic acid 	 


