Background
Protein glycosylation is the most common post⁷ translational
modification of proteins. It is a complex process involving
many functional proteins resulting in a great diversity of
carbohydrate–protein bonds and glycan structures.
Glycosylation plays a key role in biological processes and is
linked to several molecular and genetic disorders. Glycosylation
of some proteins has a great impact on their structures and
functions resulting in modulation of many important biological
processes. Alterations in glycosylation occur in many
pathological states, and genetically determined defects in
glycosylation are the reason of severe diseases. Thus, literature
on protein glycosylation has been of interest to several
researchers. However, the ever increasing amount of scientific
literature and biological data calls for tools and methods to
make this information available from text into more computable
forms. Existing approaches to annotate the data in biological
databases rely heavily on expert human curation 
[]. Given the
growing volume of literature and new high-throughput
methods, it is becoming necessary to provide tools that can
reduce time and cost of curation, increase consistency of
annotation, and provide the linkages to supporting evidence
in the literature that make the annotations useful to researchers.
Several dictionary and rule based approaches have been
designed in the past decade to address similar needs.
Dictionary based approaches have been extensively used in text
mining systems. Oscar is an open source system for recognizing
chemical entity ‘mentions‘; it integrates a dictionary of
compound names, as well as using regular expressions,
heuristics, and certain word combinations to find chemical
names in text. Several recent works include dictionary look up:
PLAN2L, a web-based online search system that integrates text
mining and information extraction techniques 
[]. Enzyme
databases such as FRENDA and AMENDA are additional
databases created by continuously improved text-mining
procedures and employ the usage of dictionaries 
[]. MGI scans
full text articles and performs entity recognition for mouse gene
‘mentions‘ based on a dictionary of mouse genes and human
orthologs []. Also, several teams at the Biocreative task 
[] have
also employed dictionary based approaches for term
identification

Rule based approaches are frequently used for text mining
tasks. One of the most successful rules-based approaches to
gene and protein NER (Named Entity Recognition) in
biomedical texts has been the AbGene system of Tanabe and
Wilbur. ProMiner [] is a dictionary- and rule-based system that
applies sophisticated algorithms for recognizing complex,
multi-word named entities in abstracts and full text articles.
Other methods include statistical and machine learning based
methods such as Support Vector Machines, co-occurrence based
approaches and C-value method. With this work we describe a
text mining approach to categorize text that has ‘mentions‘ of
protein glycosylation from those that do not. The work
presented here employs both a dictionary based as well as a
rule based approach to detect abstracts having ‘mentions‘ of
glycosylation. The dictionary based approach was designed
keeping in mind that certain concepts can be expressed using
different type of grammar. However, the choice of usage of
terms related to glycosylation is restricted to a limited set of
words and their synonyms. The dictionary based approach tries
to cover the scope of these words that one can use if possibly
speaking of or referring to protein glycosylation. The abstracts
were screened for ‘mentions‘ of these terms which have been
categorized into 10 different dictionaries and then scored using
several scoring schemes. For each scoring scheme a weighting
methodology was used so that a different confidence is
associated with each type of word as all the terms in the
dictionary are not equally important with respect to
glycosylation. Also these terms might be associated with text
that is not related to glycosylation or merely as a passing
reference. For example an abstract may speak of homology
modeling of mucin (a glycosylated protein which is a part of the
dictionaries constructed). However the text may be irrelevant
with respect to glycosylation. This calls for the development of
a robust scoring and thresholding scheme to distinguish such
text from the relevant one. The rule based approach makes use
of the J48 module available at the WEKA data mining tool 
[].
J48 is an implementation of the C4.5 algorithm for generating a
pruned or unpruned decision trees. A set of words having high
information content were selected for framing these rules.
Several combinations were tried to arrive at a set of rules with
the best coverage and support. The performances of both the
approaches, as well as variations within the approaches have
been evaluated using a manually curated corpus.

Methodology
A summary of the methodology incorporated has been
diagrammatically represented ().

Preparation of the Corpora:
Abstracts were fetched from PubMed by querying for the terms
associated with protein glycosylation and subjected to the
following process: 
Abstracts were annotated as positive if they contained information on the glycosylation process along with at least a ‘mention’ of the glycoprotein, glycosylating enzyme or the site of glycosylation;

Abstracts having some ‘mentions‘ from the dictionaries however not implying glycosylation were selected as the negative dataset.


Two datasets were prepared in this fashion. Corpus 1 which
comprises of 300 positive &amp; 300 negative abstracts was used in
the initial studies to check for the ability of the approach to
categorize the dataset. In order to validate the results obtained
the dataset was scaled up to contain 1600 positive and 1533
negative abstract Dictionary based approach

Preparation of Dictionaries:
10 dictionaries containing several variations, alternative names
and synonyms for words which are relevant to Protein
glycosylation were constructed: 
Carbohydrate names;

Amino acid common names, one letter code and three letter codes and chemical formula;

Gene Ontology Terms;

Pathway Names;

Names and synonyms of enzymes that glycosylate proteins from several resources such as SwissProt, TrEMBL, BRENDA, CAZY and KEGG BRITE databases;

Gene Names and synonyms of enzymes that glycosylate proteins obtained from the alternative names and recommended gene names section of the SwissProt database;

E.C numbers of enzymes those glycosylate proteins;

Names and synonyms of proteins that are observed/reported to have undergone glycosylation from the UniProt database, OGLYCBASE and MESH database;

Gene Names and synonyms of proteins that are observed/reported to have undergone glycosylation from SwissProt entries;

Words that are observed to appear most frequently in biomedical text having ‘mentions‘ of protein glycosylation with the help of LingPipe tool.



Derivation of weights:
Weighting schemes were devised in order to attach higher
significance to dictionary terms that are strong markers of
glycosylation vis-a-vis ones that are not. The Weighting
methodologies used in this approach are those that are
proposed by Lan et al [] and are classified into two types.

Unsupervised weighting methods:
This approach included using normalized weights (weight for
the dictionary depends on the contribution of words from that
particular dictionary with respect to the total set of words from
all the dictionaries), term frequency (TF), normalized term
frequency (TF values are normalized with respect to the
number of words in the abstract), TF-IDF as used by 
Lan et al []
as the weights.

Supervised weighting methods:
This approach included using Relevance Factor (RF), TF-RF,
and Normalized TF–RF as the weights. The weighting schemes
in the Supervised category are also implemented as that used
by Lan et al [].

Scoring of abstracts and determination of thresholds:
PERL scripts were written to match occurrences of terms from
the dictionary. The frequency of occurrence of terms in
combination with the weights associated with dictionary to
which they belong was used to compute a score for the
abstracts. A combination of thresholds was used to arrive at a
threshold that could accurately categorize abstracts. Once the
abstracts were scored using all the schemes the results were
then analyzed to assess the performance by means of statistical
measures like Precision, Recall, and F-measure.

Rule based approach:
J48 module available at the WEKA data mining tool was used
for rule based approach.

Feature Calculation:
In the rule based approach used, individual abstracts were
considered as data points. The features for these abstracts were
given as numerical values which were vectors of fixed lengths.
Features used were the term frequencies in the abstracts.

Feature Selection:
A subset of high frequency words in the corpora were used to
select the most informative attributes. On subjecting them to
the Information Gain module for the ranking of attributes, the
J48 algorithm returns a tree which contains decision rules. Rules
were selected so as to contain only those with good Coverage
and Support. Instances which were not covered by any rule
were assigned to majority class of the left out examples.

Approaches using Decision Rules:
Approach 1: Subset of 100 features selected by Information
Gain; Approach 2: Since most of the terms in these 100 features
come from the ‘most-frequently occurring words dictionary’ an
approach which filtered out these words was used; Approach 3:
Subset of 500 features from the dictionary words excluding
words from the most frequent dictionary; Approach 4: The term
occurrences were normalized with respect to the occurrence of
terms from the dictionary to which the term in question belong
to.

Discussion
It was observed that the weighting methodologies were not able
to assign very different weights to the different dictionaries.
This resulted in similar resolving power for terms from all the
dictionaries and a relatively poor performance of the
dictionaries as compared to the rule based approach and the
machine learning approach. Since the normalized weights did
have some significant differences for different dictionaries, this
approach fared better than other weighting methodologies.
Several rule based approaches were tested for performance. In
the first approach the attributes used as input comprised of
frequencies of the top 100 high frequency words from the
dictionaries in individual abstracts. Since the features in the
above approach were independent of the dictionary from which
the terms came from, another approach was devised such that
dictionary information was also taken into account. Thus, in
the second experiment the attributes used were the frequencies
normalized with respect to the frequency of occurrence of the
words from the dictionary from which the word came. It was
observed that on normalizing the frequencies of occurrence of
the words from the dictionaries with respect to the dictionary
from which the word came there was no significant increase in
the accuracy of categorization (see supplementary
material). Since the approaches used so far resulted in
maximum number of rules coming out of the “Most
Frequently” occurring words dictionary another approach was
devised. In this approach the same procedure was repeated as
before. But this time the terms from the most frequent words
Dictionary were not included in the feature set. This was done
in order to arrive at some domain related rules from other
dictionaries whose performance was being over shadowed by
the “Most Frequently” occurring words dictionary. However,
the removal of these words from the attributes resulted in a
significant drop in accuracy for both the corpora, the results for
which are tabulated. All the approaches discussed above were
repeated, such that numbers of features selected were scaled
from 100 to 519. This approach performed well when ‘Most
frequent words’ dictionary was included. However on removal
of the attributes from the ‘Most frequent words’ dictionary this
approach too showed poor performance in spite of significantly
increasing the words from the other dictionaries. Thus the
strength of the dictionary approach lies with terms from the
most frequently occurring word dictionary.

Conclusion
With the enormous increase in Scientific literature, researchers
and manual curators are unable to keep at pace with the
available information. There is thus a pressing need for text
mining systems that automate the process and simplify this
task. Several text mining systems have been successfully
developed and tailored to the several problems at hand. With
this study we have tried to use a text mining approach in order
to detect mentions of protein glycosylation in text. The study
has been conducted only with biomedical abstracts. The
approach has used both a Dictionary-based and a Rule-based
approach for this task. Categorical dictionaries have been
created for this task. These dictionaries serve as the reference
for the term identification in text. In the Dictionary-based
approach a number of schemes for scoring have been
experimented with. Both the supervised and unsupervised
weighting do not show any significant difference in
performance. The “Rule-based approach” fares better than the
“Dictionary-based” for both the Corpora used for this task.
Reduction in the dictionary size shows some improvement in
performance.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Dr. VKJ gratefully acknowledges DST, New Delhi for financial
support and we also thank CDAC, Pune and Department of
Bioinformatics, University of Pune for providing the required
facilities to carry out our research work.

Citation:Shukla &amp; Jayaraman, Bioinformation 8(16): 758-762 (2012)

Summary of Methodology

