Background
Diabetic nephropathy (DN) is one of the major microvascular
diabetic complication in diabetic patients have been seen in
worldwide with the characteristic of hyperfilteration, basement
membrane thickening, microalbuminuria, proteinuria,
glomerular and mesangial hypertrophy and finally results in
kidney failure [–]. TGF-β expression is increased under
diabetic condition in renal cell has been relatively increased in
tubulointerstitial fibrosis, enlarged kidney glomeruli,
fibronectin, EMT, proteinuria and excess collagen deposition 
[,
,
–].

Although a different key regulatory signaling pathway
increases the DN includes inflammatory response and oxidative
stress like NADPH oxidase leads to formation of superoxide in
different cell/tissue [,
]. MiRNAs (microRNAs) are small
regulatory endogenous noncoding RNA with a length of 22-25
nucleotides present in all mammals, plants and virus. miRNA
silence the target genes by binding to 3'UTR during transition
and repress the target mRNA or degradation of mRNA by
cleaving. miRNA play an important role in physiological and
pathological in the development. Recent discoveries are to
identify the miRNA and the target mRNA in different
regulatory cascade of cancer cell. Recent review explains overall
molecular target sites like RAAS, TGF-β, NADPH oxidase, p27
(Kip1) and adenosine are involved in the progression of DN
[]. Many studies explain the role of miRNA in DN. To
prevent any diseases the molecular signaling cascade is
important to understand. In this paper we consolidated
different pathways which are regulated by miRNA in molecular
signaling which result in causing DN, embed the entire
pathway in the form of regulatory network and found out some
of the miRNAs control the regulation to prevent DN.

Methodology
Data Mining:
The data were collected from maximum published papers on
diabetes nephropathy relating to miRNA and their regulation
models which are tabulated in  (see supplementary
material). Finally with inter-bridging the data of observations
and form a new molecular signaling cascade of miRNA 
().

Sequence Analysis:
Pre-mature and mature miRNA sequences which are involved
in the diabetes nephropathy are obtained from microRNA.org
(http://www.microrna.org) which was stored in FASTA format
and analyzed for further studies. Stored sequences are imported
to Geneious 5.6.4 software for aligning the sequences. The entire
pre-mature miRNA sequences are aligned by using
CLUSTALW tool in multiple alignments. Among them some of
the sequences show similarities in the sequences which are
discussed more in results.

Results &amp; Discussion
Data compilation:
The data's were collected from various journals with reference
to miRNA and diabetic nephropathy, then we started pulling
out the information with the headlines- name of the organism,
name of miRNA, miRNA target mRNA, types of the
cell/tissues, regulation of miRNA in a cell, effect of miRNA
interaction, in experimental condition like presence of HG or
TGF- β which simulate the diabetic milieu and also the pathway
involved. Entire data had been examined and consolidated as
show in .

Diabetes Nephropathy Network regulated by miRNAs:
We collected data from various schools of thoughts and tried to
consolidated information in the form of a network which states
the regulation of different miRNAs in different types of cells in
the kidney by causing DN.

Numerous studies have revealed the major causes of DN.
Although our finding from previously existing studies, the
earlier reports have explained the features in causing DN
including ECM accumulation, fibronectin, collagen deposition,
hypertrophy and EMT which is regulated by small non-coding
RNA (miRNA). In our current studies, we explained different
miRNAs involved in targeting the features of DN in
progression of the disease. HG/TGF-β is mainly involved in
causing DN regulated by different pathways.

The regulatory network was drawn by consolidating all the
molecular signaling. The idea behind this regulatory network is
to understand different types of miRNAs regulation (Overexpression/
Down-regulation) which contributed to different
types of cell in the kidney and also to identify a key regulatory
miRNA which are involved in progression of DN (). In
mammalian model the major renal abnormalities includes
tubulointerstitial fibrosis, low glomerular filtration rate 
[]
glomerulosclerosis [] mesangial and lgA hypertrophy 
[–]
podocytes effacement and apoptosis which leads to DN [].

Numerous studies have been examined to understand the
mechanism of miRNA expression in-vivo and in-vitro model by
treating the cell with TGF-β or HG to induced diabetes.
Evidence shows that increased expression of TGF-β is observed
in renal cell under the diabetic condition [,
]. In in-vitro
studies different type of renal cells such as PTC, MC, glomeruli
endothelial cell, HUVEC and renal cortical cell are used.

In mouse three E-box elements are present at the enhancer
region of Col1a2 gene transcription start site []. Suppressor of
E-box element by Zeb1 (also known TCF8/δef1/nil-2a) and
Zeb2 (SIP1/ZFXHIB) [,
] were regulated by miR-192, miR-215
and miR-200 family member [,
,
–,
,
]. Increased
expression of miR-192 in mouse MC involves in enhancing
col1a2 expression by down-regulating the SIP1 in response to
TGF- β1 []. In human and rat PTC miR-192 were downregulated
by enhanced collagen and fibrosis in diabetic
condition [,
]. Another study shown that in rat PTC, MC and
in human podocytes cells miR-192/215 were down-regulated
by zeb2 and enhanced E-cadherin expression []. In addition
miR-192 regulate miR-200 family, col1a1, col4a1 and TGF- β1
through suppressor of E-box element by repressing Zeb1/2 in
mouse MC by TGF- β1 []. Over-expression of miR-192 is
observed in MC of mouse [,
] and in PTC miR-192 were
down-regulated [,
,
]. It is interested to note that miR-192
regulation is different in two types of cells. This also suggested
that even though the miRNA expression is different in cells, but
the biological effect of miRNA in the kidney remains the same.

In mouse genome the miR-200 family is present in two clusters
of less than 2000bp cluster 1 located on chromosome 4 contain
three miRNA namely miR-200a, 200b and miR-429 . Cluster 2
located in a 500bp region of chromosome 6 which includes miR-
200c and miR-141. The seed sequences of all five miRNAs in
miR-200 family are similar []. In human genome miR-141 and
miR-200c genes are located on chromosome 12p13.31. The
spacer sequences are separated by 388bp other miRNA cluster
are located on chromosome 1p36 []. Over-expression of miR-
200c in human cancer cell line A5A9 leads to reduced TCF-8
(zeb1) resulting in altered cell morphology and increased in
expression of E-cadherin [] similar studies in mouse
carcinoma cell line NMUMG treated with TGF-β induced EMT
and enhanced E-cadherin by repressing Zeb1 and Zeb2 through
ectopic expression of miR-200 family member []. In
undifferentiated cancer cell over-expression of miR-141 and
miR-200c leads to decreased TGF-β and Zeb1 induces MET and
expression of E-cadherin []. Recent reports have shown that
down-regulation of miR-200a and miR-141 induced EMT and
fibrogenesis in NRK52E cell in diabetic mice []. Fibrogenesis is
associated with typical change in EMT and decreased
expression of E-cadherin in tubular renal cell by TGF-β. TGF-β
also induced expression of CTGF which in turn increased miR-
192/215 level by inhibiting Zeb2 and consequently increased Ecadherin
expression. In PTC both CTGF and TGF-β results in
increased ECM production []. Thus various studies show that
miR-200 family member and miR-192/215 involved in
regulation of E-cadherin and EMT by targeting Zeb1/2 in
diabetic condition.

Under diabetic condition in mouse MC, TGF-β induced upregulation
of miR-192 repressing Zeb2. Repressed Zeb2
enhanced RP23. miR-216a and 217 are located within second
introns of RP23 in mouse chromosome 11 and in human
genome it is located on chromosome 2. Further miR-216a and
217 promote activation of Akt, increased Foxo3a, mTOR, GSK3-
β caused survival oxidant stress and ECM expression
hypertrophy, and these are the characteristics of DN []. Other
studies in MC of diabetic mice shown that miR-21 downregulate
PTEN and activation of P13K/Akt pathway which
played a protective role in renal MC hypertrophy []. Recent
studies showed that in T1D mice increased level of miR-21
reduced PTEN and enhanced phosphorylation of Akt resulting
in the inactivation of PKAS40, there by increased TORC1
activity lead to increased fibronectin content in MC and PTC in
response to HG []. In diabetic mouse over-expression of miR-
216a by targeting Ybx1 lead to increased expression of collagen
in glomeruli and MC [].

In presence of HG/TGF-β in HK-2 cell induced downregulation
of miR-29a, increased collagen IV deposition in PTC
[]. Similar studies showed that increased collagen expression
of col-l, III and IV reducing miR-29a/b/c results in increased
expression of ECM protein under TGF-β treatment []. In
mouse kidney glomeruli cell over-expression of miR-29c
induced apoptosis and increased fibronectin through
spry1/Rho-kinase pathway []. The studies suggest that miR-
29 family is mainly involved in collagen deposition in turn
increased ECM protein in diabetes which is the main cause of
DN.

Inflammatory stimuli and reactive oxygen species induced by
TGF-β in diabetic condition which progress for DN. TGF-β
leads to increase in IL-8 expression in human PTC through the
activation of MAPK pathway []. In presence of HG in MC,
downregulation of miR-25 regulate redox signaling molecules
[]. Similar study in MC oxidative stress increased expression
of miR-377 lead to enhanced fibronectin protein by reduced
expression of superoxide dismutase and PAK1 in DN 
[].

Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is one of the aspects
mainly involved in microvascular complication of diabetes
majorly in DN []. In diabetic condition miR-93 regulates
VEGF expression. In mouse miR-93 is located within the intron
13 of MCM7 gene. Downregulation of miR-93 by targeting
VEGF-A which leading to diabetic nephropathy in mouse
podocytes []. In human umbilical vein endothelial cell
(HUVEC) HG induced downregulation of miR-320 with
consequently increased multiple molecules like ET-1, ERK1,
VEGF and FN [].

In the network () we have shown the different
pathways regulated by miRNA which contributed to cause DN.
Controlling the expression of miRNAs (Overexpression/
Down-regulation) would prevent the progression of
disease. Recent studies have been shown that LNA-anti-192 act
as a potential therapeutic molecule preventing DN. LNA-anti-
192 injected to diabetic mice with both short and long term
periods (2-17 weeks) significantly decrease the expression level
of miR-192. It also attenuated the key features in causing the
DN such as col1a2, col4a1, TGF-β, CTGF and FN which is
regulated by E-box repressor Zeb1/2. Renal hypertrophy in
diabetic mice can also be prevented by injecting with LNA-anti-
192. LNA-anti-192 inhibit Akt signaling pathway leading to
decreased hypertrophy and oxidant stress and also decreased
proteinuria and albuminuria in diabetic animal without
increased in toxicity []. This shows that miR-192 act as central
molecules by controlling the regulation of other miRNA. Other
studies show that in DN mice miR-21 were down-regulated.
Over-expression of miR-21 acts as a protective role in
glomerular hypertrophy in DN by downregulation of PTEN
and activation of P13k/Akt pathway in kidney []. Data
compilation from various schools of thoughts, we suggested
that down-regulation of miR-377, miR-29c and IL-18 by LNAanti-
miRNA or inhibitor which inhibit the oxidative stress,
hypertrophy, podocytes apoptosis and effacement in turn
prevent the DN. Likewise expression of miRNA like miR-29a
and miR-25 through the insertion of miRNA by plasmid
injection which inhibit oxidation and collagen production to
prevent DN. A further study is required for clinical trial
approaches. miRNAs act as key regulator molecules in diseases.

Analysis of miRNA sequence:
Further, we analyzed the miRNAs sequences to determine the
identical region of similarity that show commonality in
evolutionary, structural or functional aspects, for this we used
simple alignment tool (pairwise alignment and multiple
alignment).

We analyzed the sequences of pre-mature miRNAs involved in
the regulatory network , from the regulatory network
we observed only few of the miRNAs sequence are conserved
and identical which are targeted to same mRNA. Zeb2 is target
to different miRNAs like miR-200 family (miR-200a, 200b, 200c,
141 and 429), 215 and 192 all this sequence are approximately
conserved . In miR-200 family member contains five
miRNAs have similar sequences in mature miRNA. The seed
sequence of miR-200b, miR-200c, and miR-429 is UCAUAA,
differs only by one nucleotide to the seed sequence UCACAA
of miR-200a and miR-141 []. miR-192 and 215 regulated by
zeb2, there is 100% similarity in human, where as in case of
mouse a single nucleotide change between miR-192 and miR-
215 . miR-21, 216a and 217 are target to PTEN the
sequence are conserved and show similarly in functions 
. 
Further our analysis shows that miR-29 family and miR-141
have similarity in sequence they may have commonality in
functions .

Conclusion
Diabetes nephropathy is one of the major complex disease in
diabetic patients and the complication lead to kidney failure.
Prevention of the DN is a challenging task in today's world.
Because due to it complication and unusual molecular
mechanism includes inflammatory cytokines, oxidation, stress
and also different miRNAs regulation contributes to DN. The
identification of initial molecular mechanism acts as a
significant factor and new therapeutic approaches to cure DN
complication. In our study, we have showed few of the
miRNAs in the regulatory network which could have played a
role as a biomarker to prevent DN. A further clinical trial
approach is necessary.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We are grateful to online databases miRBase 
(http://www.mirbase.org/), 
NCBI (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov)
and online diagram drawing software lovely chart. This work
was supported by University Grants Commission, New Delhi.

Citation:Padmashree &amp; Swamy, Bioinformation 9(8): 401-408 (2013)

Outline of regulatory network complexity involved in diabetes nephropathy. The possible biomarker miRNA names are
bold in the network.

Pre-mature and mature miRNA sequence alignments in mouse and human by using Geneoius software.

