Background
Cellulases are important enzymes in many proposed processes
for producing fuels and chemicals from plant biomass 
[]. They
are multienzyme complexes, comprising three major
components; endo- β-glucanase (EC 3.2.1.4), exo- β - glucanase
(EC 3.2.1.9.1) and β- gucosidase (EC 3.2.1.2.1), which have been
shown to act synergistically in the hydrolysis of cellulose 
[].
These enzymes are being isolated from many microbial sources
and characterized. Cellulase plays a major role in carbon
cycling in the biosphere by contributing towards the major
carbon source []. The role of cellulase in host- pathogen
interaction is quite important when considering the cellulase
producing ability of pathogenic strains []. These enzymes help
in hydrolysis of substrates available and for the utilization of
microbial growth and for their metabolism. There are no much
reports available on computational characterization of the
cellulase enzyme. Clostridium thermocellum is a thermophilic
bacterial strain with high cellulolytic activity of about 5.32IU/L
[]. However, when eukaryotic cellulases are concern,
Trichoderma sp. are widely used as a cellulase source and
reported to possess very high activity. It was found to be the
best strain for conversion of substrate into glucose of about
0.92mg/0.5ml which shows its higher cellulolytic activity 
[].

Cellulase being an enzyme of wide application needs to be
characterized in all aspects to understand the structural and
functional relations. Present study is to identify more efficient
cellulolytic enzyme producing microorganism for
bioprospecting using the computational analysis. Protein
sequences of cellulase retrieved from NCBI and were subjected
to ProtParam to analyze physicochemical parameter, secondary
structure prediction using GOR IV and SOPMA, homology
modeling (Swiss model), phylogenetic analysis and active site
prediction by SCFBio.

Methodology
Sequence retrieval and alignment:
Cellulase protein sequence of Clostridium thermocellum
[AAA23226.1] was retrieved from the National Center for
Biotechnology (NCBI) and made as the query sequence for the
structure, properties prediction and modeling. Blastp was
performed and obtained nine similar sequences of different
strains. Clustal W multiple sequence alignment was done for
those sequences using BioEdit5.0.

Secondary structure and physicochemical characterization cellulose:
The sequences obtained were analyzed using various softwares
available in the ExPASy server []. The GOR IV analysis was
performed to understand the presence of helices, beta turns and
coils in the protein structure []. Self-optimized prediction
method with alignment (SOPMA) analysis was done for
analyzing the structural components []. Comparison was made
between the GOR IV and SOPMA analysis results. ProtParam
software analysis was done to understand about the amino acid
composition, molecular weight, instability index, aliphatic
index and grand average of hydropathicity (GRAVY) [].
Hydropathy plot analysis for all cellulase sequences was
performed and the nature of amino acid residues were studied
using ProtScale [] based on Kyte and Doolittle scale.

Homology modeling of cellulase:
Homology models were predicted using SWISS- MODEL 
[–] and the quality was analysed using VMD 1. 9.1 [13]. RMSD
values were calculated using the RMSD calculator and the best
homology model was selected. Ramachandran plot for the best
predicted model was depicted by RAMPAGE software [].

Phylogenetic analysis:
Phylogenetic relation among the aligned cellulase sequences
obtained from Blastp were analyzed based on neighbor joining
method [] using MEGA 4.0 
[]. The cellulase sequence of C.
thermocellum [AAA23226.1] was considered as the root taxon for
the analysis. Confidence level was analyzed using bootstrap of
1000 replications.

Activity validation by active site comparison:
Active sites of the predicted models and the template were
analyzed using Automated Active Site prediction AADS server
of SCFBio []. Amino acid compositions of all the cavities were
analyzed and the frequency of amino acid occurrence in the
cavities of each models were analyzed.

Discussion
Blast analysis and sequence retrieval:
The cellulase protein sequence of Clostridium thermocellum
[AAA23226.1] was used as query sequence and nine sequences
were obtained by performing Blastp. Multiple sequence
alignment was done in BioEdit software and further used for
phylogenetic analysis in MEGA.

Secondary structure and physicochemical analysis:
SOPMA and GOR IV were used to predict the secondary
structure, percentage of alpha, extended and random coils of
cellulase producing microorganism are presented  (see
supplementary material). SOPMA analysis for the structure
prediction was also done and obtained the percentage of alpha,
extended, beta and random coils (). The secondary
structure indicates whether a given amino acid lies in a helix,
strand or coil [,
]. SOPMA was used for structure prediction
of cellulase protein []. Random coil dominates the other forms
in the cellulase analyzed by SOPMA and GOR IV. It was
identified that random coils of M. abomyces (58.72%) and T.
longibrachiatum (57.88%) were dominant compared to other
forms. However, followed by random coils, extended forms
ranging from (10%-27%) was dominant over α and β helix. All
the cellulases analyzed, α-helix was ranging from (13%-37%)
dominates β-helix, which had less percentage of conformation
(4%-10%).

ProtParam analysis was performed and the number of amino
acid residues, molecular weight, pI value, aliphatic index and
GRAVY index was obtained for each sequence  (see
supplementary material). Comparison of the amino acid
residue occurrence in cellulase sequences were done and the
most dominant residues were highlighted  (see
supplementary material). It was found that molecular weight
ranging from 25-127 kDa and it was higher in C. thermocellum
(83 kDa) and lower in M. albomyces (25kDa). Comparing to the
eukaryotic cellulase available, the higher aliphatic index of up
to 97.51 was noted in T. subterraneus strains which indicate their
stability over a wide range of temperatures. GRAVY value was
negative in all species studied. It was notable that the bacterial
strains had lower GRAVY values indicating the better
possibilities of aqueous interaction. pI value showed that
cellulase is acidic in nature. T. subterraneus had a slightly neutral
pI value and the highest GRAVY value. Generally it was
observed that towards acidic pI values the GRAVY tends to be
low. In eukaryotic cellulases, the occurrence of α helices was
found to be too low. In case of A. bisporus, α helices was similar
to that of lower taxonomic groups. Moreover these cellulases
possess higher percentages of random coils. A general pattern
of inverse relationship between the percentage of occurrence of
α helices and random coils were observed in both higher and
lower taxonomic levels.

Cellulase of M. albomyces, T. longibrachiatum and R. flavefaciens
FD-1 was classified as unstable (II &gt; 40) with an instability
index (II) of 53.54, 55.23 and 54.34 respectively. It is notable that
the M. albomyces and T. longibrachiatum are eukaryotic isolates
and possess the least percentage of alpha helices in their
structure. P. haloplanktis and R. flavefaciens FD-1 with dominant
amino acid residues Asn (10.1%) and Ser (11.6%) respectively
which are hydrophilic residues, all the other sequences had
ALA and GLY as dominant residues which are hydrophobic in
nature. ALA was dominant in cellulases of A. bisporus, C.
thermocellum, P. carotovarum, Saccharophagus sp. and T.
subterraneus whereas, Gly was dominant for C. thermocellum, M.
albomyces and T. longibrachiatum.

Homology model validation:
SWISS MODEL was used to predict the homology model of the
cellulase sequences and the protein structure quality was
analyzed. RMSD values for the models were calculated and the
model with least value i.e. the best predicted model is shown in
(). Ramachandran plot for the model was constructed
using RAMPAGE software. Residue B 169 -LEU belonged to
outlier region and the number of residues in the allowed and
favoured region was very close to the expected values. It was
observed that 94.8% of residues were in favored region and
5.5% in allowed region. It was found that 0.2% was found in
outlier region.

Phylogenetic analysis:
Phylogenetic tree was constructed using the ten sequences
based on neighbour joining method with reference sequence C.
thermocellum [AAA23226.1] as a root (). It was observed
that the cellulase of T. subterraneus [ZP_07835928.1] was found
to be more related to the eukaryotic cellulases. T.
longibrachiatum [CAA43059.1], T. subterraneus [ZP_07835928.1],
M. albomyces [CAD56665.1], A. bisporus [CAA83971.1], C.
thermocellum [CAA43035.1] were belonging to same group. It
can be implied that cellulase sequence of T. subterraneus and C.
thermocellum were much similar to eukaryotic cellulase and it is
not much evolved from the C. thermocellum [AAA23226.1]
cellulase sequence. But the higher boot strap values for the
other sequences supports its divergence from the root sequence.
However, all the taxa of the group belonged to prokaryotic
origin. There was no much influence for evolutionary
divergence of the sequence with respect to variations in
secondary structure.

Compared to bacterial cellulases, fungal cellulases are widely
used. Moreover, the cellulolytic activities are high for fungal
cellulases. Highest cellulase activity for C. thermocellum was
12.05IU/ml []. P. haloplanktis being a psychrophilic bacterium
the cellulase obtained is cold adaptable. Cellulase from the
former has conserved five amino acid residues in their active
sites []. C. thermocellum is a thermophilic bacteria and its
cellulase has a better heat stability. It is known to be
ethanogenic strain and cellulase from this source has high
commercial applications []. Cysteine residues contribute to
protein thermal stability []. Amongst fungi, species of
Trichoderma and Aspergillus are well known for cellulolytic
potential []. Apart from the above, other fungi used for
cellulase production are Humicola and Aspergillus sp. 
[].
Hydropathy plot for the cellulase sequence was constructed
using ProtScale based on Kyte and Doolittle and the
hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity nature was observed from
the plot. It was observed that the majority of the residues were
belonging to the hydrophilic regions confirming the interaction
of the enzymes in aqueous medium. Aliphatic residues namely
ALA, LEU, ILE and VAL were among the hydrophobic residues
in the profile. Similarly, Phe which is an aromatic residue and
sulfur containing residues MET and CYS were the other
residues belonging to hydrophobic regions of ProtScale profile.

Active site prediction based on active site:
Active sites for each model and template were predicted using
Active Site prediction server and tabulated  (see
supplementary material). It was found that T. longibrachiatum
had most number of cavities (192). C. thermocellum
[AAA23226.1] had 84 cavities which were very close to template
with 85 cavities. Comparison of amino acid residues present in
the cavities of each models were made. It was inferred that THR
rich active sites may be favouring the enzyme activity in
extreme environments and ASN rich cavities may be
contributing towards better enzyme activity. Among the
analysed models, 4 models and the template was found to
possess ASN as the dominant residue in its active sites. Both C.
thermocellum and R. flavefaciens FD-1 cellulases had LYS rich
active sites. ARG was dominant in active sites of M. albomyces
[CAD56665.1] and T. subterraneus DSM 13965[ZP_07835928.1]
cellulases. However P. haloplanktis, an extremophile had THR
dominant active sites. In T. longibrachiatum ASN and THR was
found to be dominant in active sites with a frequency of 10.58. It
is clearly notable that the hydrophilic amino acid residues are
high in the active sites of these enzyme structures ensuring their
interaction with substrate in aqueous phase. However the least
found residue was CYS which assures stable interaction and
bonding. Though the frequency of CYS was too low, it was
found in both C. thermocellum and 3 eukaryotic cellulases. So
this result validates the higher cellulolytic activity and T.
longibrachiatum could be the source of most active cellulase from
the present study.

Conclusion
These studies provide an insight for better prospecting of
cellulolytic isolates from the environment for various industrial
applications. Among the microbial cellulase used in the present
work, T. longibrachiatum cellulase was found to be best with
high number of active sites.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors are thankful to Department of Science and Technology,
Government of India and TNSCST for providing the grant to
facilitate the research. Moreover, we thank the Management,
Lady Doak College, Madurai for providing us facilities and
support for our work. JS thank the UGC Govt. of India for
sponsoring the Networking Resource Centre in Biological
Sciences at Madurai Kamaraj University, Madurai.

Citation:Kumar et al, Bioinformation 8(22): 1105-1110 (2012)

Homology Model of Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis
cellulase based on template 1tvn predicted using SWISS
MODEL. The model showed least RMSD value compared to
other models

Neighbor joining tree showing evolutionary
relationship among cellulase sequences of different origin were
depicted using MEGA 4.0.Boot strap values are depicted at the
nodes and branch lengths are also shown. Clostridium
thermocellum CAA43035.1 and T. subterraneus ZP07835928.1
was grouped among eukaryotic cellulase sequences.

