miRNAs are a well-established RNA phenomenon. Previously,
we analyzed the involvement of HIV-1 protein Tat in cellular
gene networks and aspects of its interaction with miRNAs 
[].
Here we mention an additional HIV-1 protein, HIV-1 viral
protein R (Vpr) that interacts with miRNAs and it is involved in
gene expression networks. The manipulation of miRNA
expression is anticipated to become important in the attack on
disease. miRNAs are generally derived from non-coding
portions of the human genome and are intricately involved in
gene expression control []. Moreover, it is estimated that
although 1% of human genes are miRNAs, these miRNAs are
involved in the control of gene expression of 10% of all the
genes [].

HIV-1 modifies the miRNA profile of infected cells. On the one
hand, HIV-1 infection suppresses miRNAs that promote
proteins that interfere with HIV-1 replication.
Contemporaneously, on the other hand, HIV-1 enhances
miRNAs that promote proteins that are beneficial for the
replication of HIV-1 []. There are diverse effects on cells and
tissues due to HIV-1 infection. For example, HIV-1-infected
individuals often undergo pathological brain changes that
result in disorders of cognition. Neuronal dysfunction is a
hallmark of such pathologies. Proteins released from HIV-1-
infected cells are associated with such dysfunction and HIV-1
Vpr is one such protein []. HIV-1 Vpr exhibits complex
functions during HIV-1 replication and is involved in viral
replication, shuttling between the infected cell’s nucleus and
cytoplasm []. In neuron culture, in vitro, exposure to Vpr
results in several adverse changes including v- synaptic
retraction, mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress pathway
activation, expression of inflammatory molecules including
cytokines, calcium homeostasis dysregulation, and calcium
release from endoplasmic reticulum. Vpr dysregulates miRNAs
including miR-34a as well as the miRNA target genes IRBIT,
SERP1, SIRT1, NEFM, Drp-1, Orai, STIM1, IP3R, and CREB 
[].

It should be noted that in the GNCPro database, Drp-1 maps to
three genes CRMP1, DAPK2, and UTRN. Similarly, the gene
IP3R maps to two genes ITPR1 and ITPR3 []. The proteins
affected by miRNA-34a are identified as and include IRBIT -
inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3) receptor-binding protein;
AHCYL1 - adenosyl-homocysteinase-like 1; SERP1 - stress associated
endoplasmic reticulum protein 1; SIRT1 - sirtuin 1;
NEFM - neurofilament, medium polypeptide; Drp-1 -
dystrophin related protein 1/utrophin; CRMP1 - collapsin
response mediator protein 1; DAPK2 - death-associated protein
kinase 1; UTRN -utropin; ITPR1 - inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate
receptor, type 1; IP3R - inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor,
type 3; ITPR3 - inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor, type 3;
STIM1 - stromal interaction molecule 1; CREB - cAMP
responsive element binding protein; and Orai - calcium releaseactivated
calcium modulator [, 
–]. It should be noted that the
Orai gene is absent from the GNCPro database. In addition, it
should be noted that the terminology - semantics - is not fully
consistent for a few of these proteins across all databases. As
mentioned previously, a future analysis of semantics in the
public databases will be done []. The figures illustrate various
gene interactions among the proteins mentioned above. It is left
as a puzzle for the interested reader to identify the various
genes and their functions in  &amp; 
 
[–].

There are no financial conflicts.

Citation:Shapshak, Bioinformation 8(25): 1243-1244 (2012)

Network of input proteins and the input neighbors of
these proteins. Consequent to HIV-1 infection, expression of
these proteins may be modulated by miRNAs. In this figure,
line-colors and various interactions with other genes are red
Down-regulation, green Up-regulation, beige Regulation,
purple Co-expression, brown Physical Interaction, turquoise
dotted Predicted Protein Interaction, and mauve dotted
Predicted TFactor Regulation (GenePro SA Biosciences,
http://www.sabiosciences.com/).

Network of neighbor interactions of the input genes
with the various networks through which they interact.
Consequent to HIV-1 infection, expression of these proteins
may be modulated by miRNAs. In this figure, line-colors and
various interactions with other genes are red Down-regulation,
green Up-regulation, beige Regulation, purple Co-expression,
brown Physical Interaction, turquoise dotted Predicted Protein
Interaction, and mauve dotted Predicted TFactor Regulation
(GenePro SA Biosciences, http://www.sabiosciences.com/).

