Background
Epigenetics is the study of changes in phenotype due to factors other than 
an alternation of the underlying DNA sequence. Environmental factors can 
influence gene expression by either turning specific genes on to express 
their phenotype or by turning them off. Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) 
provide an example of epigenetic changes, demonstrating the capability of 
differentiating into distinctive cell types. MSCs support the growth of 
hematopoietic cells and take part  in the maintenance of the skeleton 
throughout life. Since there are no unique markers for MSCs, methods of 
identification are limited to some  functional and morphological criteria 
such as growth on plastic, resistance  to trypsin, presence of specific cell 
surface antigen, and the potential to  differentiate into adipocytes, 
chondrocytes, and osteocytes. Over the past few decades, MSCs have been 
the subject of considerable research, and because of their differentiation 
potential, they became a valuable asset in many areas of cell therapy and 
regenerative and reconstructive medicine, specifically bone regeneration 
[].

Osteoprogenitor cells, found at the external and internal surfaces of bone, 
are capable of giving rise to osteoblasts, which secrete the extracellular 
matrix of bone. Osteoblasts secrete the collagen fibers and ground 
substance, which together form the matrix of bone called osteoid, 
otherwise known as unmineralized bone. When an osteoblast is completely 
surrounded by matrix, it is called an osteocyte. An osteocyte can both 
secrete and resorb matrix, which is important in the maintenance of healthy  
blood calcium levels. Osteoblasts are responsible for the calcification of 
the matrix through the secretion of small membrane–limited vesicles that 
are secreted during the production of bone matrix. Matrix vesicles contain 
enzymes like alkaline phosphatase that cause the accumulation of calcium 
and phosphate inside the vesicles. Later, loaded vesicles rupture, increasing 
the local concentration of minerals and initiating mineralization. Thus, 
osteoprogenitor cells, osteoblasts, and osteocytes are all part of a series 
derived from MSCs and their differentiation capabilities 
[–].

Embryology and the Formation of Bone
In the embryo, bone tissue arises through two principal processes: 
Intramembranous ossification, and  
Endochondral ossification.  
In intramembranous ossification, bone is formed directly from 
mesenchymal tissue. In endochondral  ossification, a cartilage model is 
formed first, and is later replaced by bone. The first step in 
intramembranous ossification is the  aggregation of mesenchyme cells in 
the area where bone is to be formed. The tissue in this area becomes more 
vascularized, and the mesenchyme cells begin to differentiate into 
osteoblasts, secreting collagen and proteoglycans of the bone matrix. Over 
time the osteoid calcifies and the cell becomes enclosed in canaliculi. 
Some of the mesenchymal cells surrounding the developing bone spicules proliferate 
and differentiate into  osteoprogenitor cells. Osteoprogenitor 
cells in contact with bone spicules become osteoblasts and secrete matrix, 
resulting in oppositional growth of the spicule [[], 
[–]]. 

Cell Markers
For the purpose of this proof-of-concept study, the cells used in this 
experiment were analyzed by  indirect immunocytochemistry. 
AML3/Runx2 was one of the primary antibodies used and is a 
transcriptional factor involved in osteoblastic and skeletal morphogenesis. 
It is essential for the maturation of osteoblasts and for intramembranous 
ossification. Runx2 induces osteoblastic function and differentiation in 
non-osteoblastic cells by expression of osteoblast specific genes. ALP, 
another primary antibody that was used, is a hydrolase enzyme that 
removes phosphate groups from the 5’ end of DNA and RNA, and from 
proteins at high pH. High expression of ALP is observed in pre-osteoblasts 
and osteoblasts. Lastly, STRO-1 is a cell membrane single pass type I 
protein that translocates from the endoplasmic reticulum to the cell 
membrane in response to a depletion of intracellular calcium. This 
monoclonal antibody recognizes the progenitor cell of the fibroblast 
colony-forming units. High expression  of STRO-1 could be found in 
osteoprogenitor cells and pre-osteoblasts; by utilizing these antibodies, 
specific cells can be selected. The secondary antibody was labeled with 
horseradish peroxidase (HRP) [], 
[–].

Fractal Dimensions
The complex morphology of HEPM is not easily quantified using classical 
measures such as length, diameter or surface. However, the complex 
morphology of natural objects can be quantified using the statistical 
selfsimilarity concept of fractal geometry introduced by Mandelbrot. We have 
used this method to obtain objective quantification of shape border 
complexity of immunostained lymphocytes by measuring its fractal 
dimension (FD) []. 
Fractal dimension is a measure of how complicated a 
self-similar figure is. Since cells are self-similar objects, fractal analysis 
can be used to compute cell complexity for the means of comparison  
[,
,
]. 

Methodology
Commercially obtained frozen HEPM stem cells were plated in T75 
culture flask using control culture medium (BGJb). Once cells were 
attached the medium was replaced in  order to remove preservatives and 
possible non-adherent cells. Medium was replaced every 3-4 days until cell 
density reached 70% -80% confluence. Half of the cells in the first passage 
(P1) were shifted from BGJb medium to Osteoinductive medium (OIM). 
To have a back up, cells were frozen at each passage to -80° C. 
Osteogenically differentiated and control cells were seeded at ˜1.2X104
cells per well in 24 well plates using either BGJb medium or OIM. Cells 
were collected at different passages and were subjected to 
immunocytochemical analysis once they were at 50% confluence. 
Immunocytochemical and morphometric  analysis were performed using: 
STRO-1, ALP, and Runx 2 markers.

Immunocytochemistry on Cultured Cells
When cells were attached and reached a 50% confluence level, transfer 
pipettes were used to discard the spent BGJb medium and OIM. Then, cells 
were gently washed with 1X phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) three times 
with a 5 minute intervals. 200µL of fixative solution (0.1% Formaldehyde 
and 0.01% Triton-X) was added to each well of the 24-well plates, which 
covered the cell surface for ˜15 minutes. This procedure was followed by 
repeated washing three times with 1X PBS and 5 minute intervals 
[].

Mouse monoclonal antibody (for Runx-2 and STRO-1) and rabbit 
polyclonal antibody (for ALP) were the primary antibodies used. 
Antibodies were diluted (1/500 dilution) for overnight incubation and 
washed three times with 1X PBS and 5 minute intervals. The secondary 
antibodies used were anti-rabbit IgG-peroxidase produced in goat, and 
anti-mouse IgG-peroxidase produced in rabbit. Appropriate dilutions of the 
secondary antibodies were prepared using PBS supplemented with 10% 
fetal bovine serum (FBS). 200µL of the diluted antibodies were added to 
each corresponding well and incubated overnight (1/1000 dilution). Cells 
were then washed three times using copious amounts of 1X PBS with 5 
minute intervals as above. In order to remove the remaining PBS from the 
cultures, cells were further washed with a 0.05 molar Tris (hydromethylaminomethane) buffer (pH 7.4) 
[].

Color Development
Color development was done using the EnVision Dako Kit. One drop of 
diamino benzidine (DAB)/Chromogen solution (5% 3, 3'-
diaminobenzidine and tetrahydrochloride chromogen solution) was added 
to each mL of the provided substrate buffer solution.  200µL of the mixture 
was added to the wells, and the color was developed for 45 minutes.  
Cultures  were then washed three times with cold 1X PBS to stop the 
reaction, and stored in 1X   PBS until microphotography (Nikon 
microscope, 20X &amp; 40X magnification, with 10X eyepiece) 
[].

Fractal Analysis
Using Benoit 1.3 Fractal Analysis Software, 40X black/white pictures of 
the cells were binarized. The fractal dimensions were calculated by 
evaluating the number of boxes needed to cover the fractal completely, as 
previously described []. 
Repeating this measurement with different sized 
boxes resulted in logarithmical function of box size (x-axis) versus the 
number of boxes needed to cover the fractal (y-axis). The slope of the 
function is referred to as box dimension. In other words, the fractal 
dimension was calculated from the slope of the linear regression between 
the log of the number of occupied boxes and the log of the corresponding 
size of the boxes. Box dimension was taken as an appropriate 
approximation of fractal dimension [].

Discussion
This proof-of-concept study was designed to obtain preliminary support for 
the hypothesis of using HEPM to assess osteogenic differentiation from an 
early undifferentiated to a differentiated stage. Specifically, we presented 
phenotypical and morphometric comparison of sequential steps towards 
osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells from an early 
undifferentiated passage (P1) to a late more differentiated passage (P7). 
The goal of this research project was to identify and compare epigenetic 
biomarkers that characterize human  embryonic palatal mesenchyme stem 
cells (HEPM) undergoing progression through osteogenic differentiation. 
The purpose of this study was to further understand and increase our 
knowledge of the biological variabilities that control and determine 
osteogenic progression and differentiation. This was obtained by 
investigating time dependent regulation of ontogenesis in commercially 
available cultured HEPM stem cells through monitoring the phenotypic 
expression of certain epigenetic biomarkers (i.e., ALP, STRO-1, Runx-2), 
established key signatiures of osteogenesis in bone marrow studies. The 
patterns of marker expression during the progression of osteogenic 
differentiation from an early undifferentiated passage (P1) to a late or more 
differentiated passage (P7) were investigated using recognized inducers of 
osteogenesis, such as dexamethasone, and beta-glycerolphosphate, in 
osteogenesis-inducing growth medium. In addition to comparing the 
expression of these biomarkers between the control BGJb and the 
experimental OIM at P1 versus P7, we quantified and compared cell shape 
complexity by means of fractal dimension analysis 
[].

Using immunocytochemical staining techniques HEPM stem cells were 
marked with the aid of commercially available mono- and poly-clonal 
antibodies. We determined that immunostaining of cells cultured in BGJb 
medium using different biomarkers  resulted in a pattern of relative 
infrequent and less prominent marker expression in cells from P1 to P7. 
The intensity of marker expression from P1 to P7 in BGJb medium was 
more visible for P7 Runx-2 positive cells. According to the literature, high 
expression of STRO-1 marker could be found in osteoprogenitor cells and 
pre-osteoblasts while ALP markers are observed in pre-osteoblasts and 
osteoblasts  [[,
,
,
]]. Runx-2 is a marker of osteogenic 
differentiation and is strongly expressed in osteoblasts of bone marrow and 
subpopulation of mature endosteal osteoblasts in extraction sockets  
[[,
,
,
]]. 
The P1 Runx2-positive (Runx-2+) cells cultured in BGJb
medium had lower initial marker expression compared to P1 cells 
expressing other markers; they  were more intensely expressed  throughout  
all seven passages. It is possible that the difference in staining of the P7 
Runx2+ cells may be attributable to the fact that they are nucleus markers 
in comparison to the ALP and STRO-1 markers that are cell surface 
markers. We interpret these observations as putatively suggesting that the 
staining may be concentrated in the cell nuclear components.

As summarized in  , the difference in the staining pattern of 
biomarker expressing cells from P1 to P7 generally increased for cells 
cultured in OIM, compared to BGJb medium. This difference in staining 
was more noticeable in Runx2 expressing cells. Most of the P1 cells 
cultured in OIM were stained more frequently and intensely than the P1 
cells cultured in BGJb medium. This may have derived from the fact that 
cells cultured in OIM differentiated in  a much faster rate than the cells 
cultured in BGJb medium; hence, expressing Runx-2 osteoblastic markers.

In order to compare the effects of the media on the expression of 
biomarkers, cells cultured in BGJb medium were compared to their 
equivalent biomarker expressing cells of the same passage in OIM. At P1, 
ALP+ and STRO-1+ cells stained equally low in both media. The P7 cells 
expressing ALP markers stained considerably more in OIM compared to 
BGJb medium, but the STRO-1+ cells at P7 did not. The immunostaining 
of these cells were more concentrated on the surface of the cells. On the 
contrary, P1 Runx-2+ cells stained more visibly in OIM in comparison to 
BGJb medium. The expression of the markers was about the same for the 
P7 cells in both media, although the staining of cells in OIM cultures was 
well defined ().

For further identification of cellular developmental stages, morphological 
differences of cells were quantified  using fractal analysis technique. The 
fractal dimension is a measure of the cellular shape complexity, and was 
used to quantify the complex morphology of the cultures, as we had 
reported previously [].

In this experiment, decreased value of fractal dimension correlated to less 
complexity reflecting a more differentiated, and specialized cell. The 
results of morphometric analysis of immunostained cells at P1 compared to 
P7 cultured in BGJb medium showed an overall decrease in fractal 
dimension value for all cultured cells correlating to less complexity and 
more differentiated cells. The effect of BGJb medium on cell 
differentiation was studied and the results showed no significant effect on 
differentiation of ALP+ and STRO-1+ cells from P1 to P7. By contrast, 
Runx-2+ and the unmarked cells were affected significantly 
().

The results obtained for the effect of OIM on cell differentiation from P1 
to P7 showed no significant effect on ALP+ and Runx-2+ cells; whereas, 
the STRO-1+ and the unmarked cells were significantly affected. The 
mean fractal dimension values for cultured cells from P1 to P7 showed a 
decrease for ALP+, STRO-1+, and unmarked cells indicating less 
complexity and more differentiation of cells in both media. The Runx-2+ 
cells showed an increase in the mean fractal dimension value in OIM. The 
results for Runx-2+ and ALP+ cells could be affected due to the 
heterogeneity of the samples. 

The effect of the two media on marked cells cultured in BGJb medium and 
OIM was tested the result indicated a significant effect for ALP+ and 
STRO-1+ cells in BGJb medium,  and for Runx-2+ cells in OIM  (). 

Conclusion
In conclusion, the results of our study allowed us to conclude that 
according to our fractal analysis profiling the Runx-2+ cell population was 
the most differentiated cell population followed by the ALP+ and STRO-
1+ cell populations. This is in agreement with our results of the 
immunocytochemical staining study. The Runx+2 cells were stained more 
prominently compared to other marked cells and there was no increase in 
their cell size, they reached a plateau in which cell differentiation was at 
rest. Also, according to the results of our cell media study, OIM affected 
the rate of cell differentiation driving the cells to become a more 
osteogenically differentiated and specialized cells, as the data summarized 
in  suggest.

We propose the hypothesis that the model research approach we have 
described here lays the foundation for future research studies relating 
osteoimmunological bone disorders and dysfunctions such as osteoarthritis, 
and temporomandibular joint disorders (TMD) correlating proteomic 
profiling using biomarkers and innovative instruments to assess and detect 
prognostic changes as well as provide progressive treatments.

The authors thank Professor George Bernard, D.D.S., Ph.D. for his 
indefatigable guidance, support and constructive suggestions.

Citation:Barkhordarian et al, Bioinformation 5(7): 278-281 (2011)

Summary table of fractal analysis and immunocytochemistry observations for immunostaining 
with ALP, STRO-1 and Runx-2 for HEPM cultures at passage 1 (P1) vs. passage 7 (P7)  grown in control 
BGJb medium, compared to Osteoinductive medium (OIM).

