Background
The pandemic flu of influenza A viruses had caused deaths of
millions of people Worldwide. It is proved in April 2009 that
swine flu is contagious disease and it is spread from human to
human []. Hemagglutinin (HA) protein of influenza A virus is
a surface glycoprotein of virus []. Swine flu subtype H1N1
belongs to the Orthomyxoviridae influenza family of viruses
[]. There are 16 different HA antigens subtype present in swine
flu []. These subtypes are labeled H1 through H16 (H1, H2,
H3…H16) []. The structure of HA differs from strain to strain.
HA occurs as mushroom shaped structure found on the virus
surfaces and it is spread 135Å from the membrane []. The
molecular size of HA is approximately 75kDa []. It is an
antigenic glycoprotein and having capability for binding the
cell of the host. HA glycoprotein binds to sialic acid receptors in
the host's membrane cells []. After HA binds to these
receptors, the viral membranes and cellular membranes are
fuse, and the virus is taken entry into the cell with a small
envelope of cellular membrane. According to the updates of
WHO (2009 June 10) 27,737 cases of H1N1 had been reported
among 74 different countries. The fatality rate of H1N1 is 0.4%
(range 0.3%-1.5%) []. There are four drugs commonly used in
the treatment of the above said disease, Amantadine and
Rimantadine drugs worked by blocking the proton channel M2
and two drugs Zanamivir and Oseltamivir inhibit
neuraminidase protein function []. These antiviral drugs are
given to treat those people who become severely ill.

Now a days it has been reported that thiazolide is a potent drug
that inhibits the replication of swine flu virus by selectively
blocking the maturation of HA, thereby it hampers HA by
preventing its insertion in the host's membrane []. This study
is basically aimed to develop new type of drug molecule for
which, we used combinatorial library approach and K-means
clustering approaches for finding drug like molecules. The
newly designed drug molecules may help in the treatment of
swine flu and many other related diseases.

Methodology
The structure of HA protein of swine flu H1N1 along with a
ligands and water molecules were downloaded from RCSB
Protein Data Bank (PDB ID: 1RUY in website
http://www.rcsb.org/pdb) 
(). 1RUY protein 3D
molecules and anti drug molecule thiazolide were used for
designing new inhibitor molecules. We took thiazolide as seed
molecule and chemical structure was drawn using software
ACD ChemSketch into as a mol file ().

Then mol file was converted into .sdf file by using Open Babel
software. Combinatorial library designed by using known
inhibitor thiazolide with the help of random library generation
process []. For the high quality molecular diversity library
generation, ILib diverse software was used []. This program
was also designed for obtaining compound libraries with an
optimal molecular diversity [] in which molecules were
filtered by using the Lipinski's rule of 5 which is the most
approved filter for discernment between drug-like and non
drug-like molecules []. For the conversion of 2D SDFile
format into 3D SDFile format Corina software was used. It
automatically generates three-dimensional atomic coordinates
from the structure of a molecule and expresses it as a
connection table or linear code, for large databases. The
generated 3D library was used for virtual screening for finding
new inhibitor for HA [].

Molegro Virtual Docker:
Molegro Virtual Docker (MVD) is software for studying and
predicting ligands interaction towards macromolecules. The
docking performed by using flexible docking method of MVD
[]. 
Docking was performed for designed combinatorial library
molecules on binding site of 1RUY protein.

K-mean clustering:
On the Top 200 molecules were taken from a combinatorial
library in which these molecules having all information about
molecular descriptor for K-means clustering purpose 
[–].
These molecules having many descriptors values such as log p
value, hydrogen bond acceptor, hydrogen bond donor,
topological polar surface area, rotatable bond count, rings
numbers and molecular weight etc were calculated. Cluster
these molecules by k-mean clustering algorithm. Two
descriptors were selected in which molecular weight present on
the X-axis and log p value present on the Y-axis. K-means
clustering was done by Matlab.

Results &amp; Discussion
The structure of HA was taken from protein data bank with the
resolution of 2.70Å, R-factor of 0.248 and R-free: 0.265.
Ramachandran plot analysis showed about 83.2% residues
falling in the most favorable region, 15.2% residues falling in
the allowed region and 1% generously allowed regions while
0.7% in the disallowed region.

Docking result of Thiazolide with 1RUY protein:
 shows thiazolide drug molecule was docked with
1RUY protein, and the energy score comes out -77.5712KJ/mol.
() Illustrate the interaction between thiazolide and the
active site of 1RUY. Thiazolide shows one hydrogen bond
interaction within the active site of 1RUY. This hydrogen bond
is donated by ligand molecule. Hydrogen bond energy of the
protein-ligand complex is -1.13817. The residues that are
distantly interacted with the ligand are Asp 585 was obtained
by Molegro virtual docker.

Residue involved in active site:
Possible binding site of 1RUY protein for design drug like top
10 ligands:

Molecule_1899:
In (), Molecule_1899 was docked with 1RUY protein,
and giving the energy score of -169.672KJ/mol. In (),
shows the hydrogen bond interaction between Molecule 1899
and the active site of 1RUY. Molecule_1899 shows four
hydrogen bond interaction and one strong electrostatic
interaction within the active site of 1RUY. All the four hydrogen
bonds are donated by target molecule (1RUY). This proteinligand
complex is having hydrogen bond energy of -5.01256.

Molecule_1730:
In (), Molecule_1730 was docked with 1RUY protein,
and giving the energy score -162.303KJ/mol. In (),
Illustrate the interaction between Molecule_1730 and the active
site of 1RUY. Molecule_1730 shows three hydrogen bond and
two strong electrostatic interactions within the active site of
1RUY. All the three hydrogen bonds are donated by target
molecule (1RUY) and is having hydrogen bond energy of -
5.20299.

Molecule_4488:
In (), Molecule_4488 was docked with 1RUY protein,
and giving the energy score of -161.455 KJ/mol. In (),
it illustrates the interaction between Molecule_4488 and the
active site of 1RUY. Molecule_4488 shows four hydrogen bond
and two strong electrostatic interactions within the active site of
1RUY. Out of four hydrogen bonds, two hydrogen bonds are
donated by target molecule and the remaining two hydrogen
bonds are donated by ligand molecule. Hydrogen bond energy
of the protein-ligand complex is -6.41833. These ten molecules
having the high negative energy score compare to thiazolide
molecule were docked with 1RUY protein. These ten molecules
had energy scores ranging from -151.601 to -169.672KJ/mol

Clustering result:
K-means clustering approach used in a top 200 molecules of
combinatorial library were found assign five clusters 
[]. For
each cluster two molecules were represented in all clusters
centroid. Which are nearest to the cluster centroid. For k-means
clustering were selected descriptors molecular weight and log p
value. Select top five ligands which were found from virtual
screening by using Molegro program had energy scores ranging
from -90.893 to -120.842KJ/mol.

Molecule_45:
In () Molecule_45 was docked with 1RUY protein, and
giving the energy score -120.842KJ/mol. In (),
Illustrate the interaction between Molecule_45 and the active
site of 1RUY. Molecule_45 shows one hydrogen bond
interactions within the active site of 1RUY. This hydrogen bond
is donated by target molecule (1RUY) and energy of this
hydrogen bond is -0.328907.

Molecule_77:
In (), Molecule_77 was docked with 1RUY protein,
and giving the energy score -106.101 KJ/mol. In (), it
illustrates the interaction between Molecule_77 and the active
site of 1RUY. Molecule_77 shows five hydrogen bond
interactions within the active site of 1RUY. All five hydrogen
are donated by target molecule (1RUY). Hydrogen bond energy
of this protein-ligand complex is -5.17897.

Molecule_35:
 Molecule_35 was docked with 1RUY protein, and
giving the energy score -92.996KJ/mol. In (), it
illustrate the interaction between Molecule_35 and the active
site of 1RUY. Molecule_35 shows 2 hydrogen bond interactions
within the active site of 1RUY. All the hydrogen bonds are
donated by target molecule (1RUY). The hydrogen bond
interaction energy of this protein-ligand complex is -0.517533.
After docking, the above said top five molecules were found
with better energy scores comparison the energy score of
thiazolide drug molecule.

The structure of hemagglutinin (HA) protein along with ligands
and water molecules are taken from PDB (PDB Code: 1RUY)
[]. 
To prevent H1N1 replication thiazolide, proved to be a
potent drug. Thiazolide drug represses viral HA's maturation at
a level which exists just before the resistance from digestion of
endoglycosidase-H and thereby it hampers HA preventing its
insertion in host membrane. Hence we have used this protein
structure for virtual screening to find out thiazolide specific
new inhibitors []. We first built a diverse combinatorial
library of 5000 molecules by incorporating the features of
known inhibitor []. This library was pruned by using Lipinski
rule of 5 []. Each compound was automatically docked into
the binding region of protein and given a score. These scores
were given by the quality of fitting compound to the target site.
So after careful docking generated more ligands in which top 10
ranking ligands displaying the lowest predicted energy were
selected. These molecules having more negative energy score
(KJ/mol).

After docking of thiazolide antidrug molecules with 1RUY, the
energy score was found to be -77.5712 KJ/mol. Top ten ligands
which were found from docking had energy scores ranging
from -151.601 to -169.672 KJ/mol. These 10 molecules had better
energy compare to thiazolide energy score in  (see
supplementary material). Then we checked the hydrogen bond
interaction between 1RUY protein and top10 molecules were
obtained by Molegro virtual docker. K-means clustering
approach was used for finding more new inhibitor by virtual
screening. After this process top 5 ligands were selected. These
5 molecules had energy score ranging from -90.893 to -120.842
KJ/mol. These molecules had also high negative energy
compare to thiazolide, in  (see supplementary material).
Then we had checked the hydrogen bond interaction between
1RUY protein and top 5 molecules. More negative the energy
score (KJ/mol) more is the binding affinity. These new ligands
molecules will help for the prevention of swine flu and many
other related diseases.

Conclusion
It was found that drug like molecules for the inhibition of
hemagglutinin, thiazolides antidrug molecule play an
important role for designing a new novel drug like molecules.
The structure of HA (PDB Code: 1RUY) was considered as
target receptor. HA protein was used for virtual screening for
generating new ligands. These ligands having better energy
scores than known inhibitor thiazolides by generated diverse
combinatorial library ILib diverse and docking based virtual
screening of this library by using the Molegro Virtual Docker
program. In which top 10 ligands having better energy scores
compared to thiazolide. K-mean-clustering approach was also
used and found top five molecules having energy ranging from
-90.893 to -120.842 KJ/mol. Energies of these molecules were
also high in compare to thiazolide. These ligands may function
as a potent and specific inhibitor for HA and will help the
prevention of swine flu and other related diseases.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Prasad et al, Bioinformation 9(11): 565-571 (2013)

3D structure of Hemagglutinin protein (Pdb Code:
1RUY).

2D structure of Thiazolide.

a) Hydrogen bond interaction between Thiazolide and
1RUY; b) Possible binding site for Thiazolide drug in 1RUY

a) Possible binding site for Molecule_1899 in 1RUY
protein; b) Hydrogen bond interactions between Molecule_1899
and 1RUY

a) Possible binding site for Molecule_1730 in 1RUY
protein; b) Hydrogen bond interactions between Molecule_1730
and 1RUY

a) Possible binding site for Molecule_4488 in 1RUY
protein; b) Hydrogen bond interactions between Molecule_4488
and 1RUY

a) Possible binding site for Molecule_45 in 1RUY
protein; b) Hydrogen bond interaction between Molecule_45.

a) Possible binding site for Molecule_1779 in 1RUY
protein, b) Hydrogen bond interactions between Molecule_77
and 1RUY.

a) Possible binding site for Molecule_35 in 1RUY
protein; b) Hydrogen bond interactions between Molecule_35
and 1RUY.

