Background
One of the major challenges in limiting pest population below
threshold level is enhanced resistance of insects and pests
towards chemical pesticides. The pests mutate and develop
resistance to newer molecules. Biological control of insect pests
has generated interest among farmers for sustainable
management. Entomopathogenic fungi possess the ability to
active penetration through cuticle by mechanical pressure of
invasive hypha and production of proteo-, chitino- (exo- and
endochitinases) as well as lipolytic enzymes, which provide
nutrients for subsequent development of fungus. Important
barriers to invading micro organisms include enzymes, chitin
and associated lipids, found in insect integument 
[].
Pathogenesis requires secretion of hydrolytic enzymes like
protease, amylase, lipase, for penetration through these barriers
[]. 
Entomopathogenesis entails involvement of proteases,
chitinases and lipases [], involved in hydrolysis of ester bonds
of fats and waxy layers of the insect integument. Due to
lipolyitc activity, free fatty acids are released, thus contributing
to host adhesion. Lipids are primarily first barriers in epicuticle
acting against pathogenic microbes, thus reinforcing the
importance of these enzymes in penetration and hence
infection. The aim of this work is to explain the mechanisms
involved in extraction and purification of extracellular enzymes
produced during pathogenic action in entomopathogenic fungi.

Methodology
Isolation of the pathogen:
Routine collection of water samples was made at regular
intervals from insect breeding sites. Isolation of the
entomopathogenic fungus Verticillium lecanii from natural water
was frequently made on SMYA medium. Cultures for
preparation of conidia were seeded onto SMYA (contained (in
gl-1) peptone 10; maltose 40; yeast extract 10 and agar-agar 20)
plates and incubated at 28 ± 1°C for 7-10 days

Identification:
Slide culture technique was adopted to identify the pathogen. A
loopful of conidial suspension was inoculated on plates and
incubated at 28 ± 1°C for 7-10 days. On sporulation, slides were
stained with cotton blue and examined under Nikon
microscope for identification.

Biochemical studies:
Fungal enzymes play an important role in host infection since
they can be localized on infection structures of both
necrotrophic and biotrophic mycoparasites 
[,
]. Hence,
quantitative assay was performed to estimate activities of
protease, amylase and lipase enzymes of Verticillium lecanii.

Estimation of proteolytic activity of Verticillium lecanii:
Protease activity of Verticillium lecanii was determined by two
methods: Spectrophotometric analysis – Kunitz (1947) 
[]; Plate
assay method []: Production of proteolytic enzymes by
Verticillium lecanii was detected by using gelatin as protein
source in growth medium. The fungal strain was spot
inoculated in petridishes with nutrient agar medium
supplemented with 1% gelatin (Peptone, 5g; Beef extract, 3g;
NaCl, 5g; Agar, 15g; Distilled water, 1 liter, pH 6). Prior to
inoculation, the petridishes were incubated at 28 ± 1°C for 7
days. After a week of incubation, gelatin degradation was
observed as a clearing zone around fungal colonies. This zone
of gelatinolysis was seen clearly upon flooding the plate with
aqueous saturated solution of mercuric chloride reagent (15g
HgCl2 dissolved completely in 20 ml 7M conc. HCl, then raised
to 100 ml with sterile distilled water). Mercuric chloride
solution reacted with gelatin to produce a white precipitate
which made the clearing zone visible. The clearing zone was
measured indicative of the extracellular protease activity of the
fungal strain. Enzyme activity was measured by the following
formula: EA = D-d; D- diameter of colony plus clearing zone; ddiameter
of colony.

Spectrophotometric (Quantitative) analysis (Kunitz 1947):
Minimal broth supplemented with 1% gelatin was used as the
growth medium. Erlenmeyer flasks with capacity 150 ml were
dispensed with 25 ml broth each. These flasks were inoculated
with spore suspension of Verticillium lecanii and were incubated
at 28 ± 1°C in an incubator. The enzyme activity was measured
at the end of 7th, 14th and 21st day. Aliquots were asceptically
removed from the flasks and were centrifuged at 5000 rpm for 5
minutes. The supernatant was used as crude enzyme extract
(CEE). To determine extracellular protease activity, reaction
mixture was prepared by mixing crude enzyme extract- 1 ml
and Buffered casein stock solution (1g casein in 100 ml of 0.1 M
PO4 buffer)- 1 ml. This reaction mixture was incubated in water
bath set at 36±1° C for 60 minutes. At the end of one hour of
incubation, the reaction was terminated by addition of 3 ml of
TCA which precipitated the unhydrolysed casein. Precipitate
was removed by centrifugation and to the supernatant, 5 ml
Na2CO3 (0.4 M) and 0.5 M Folin's reagent were added. These
were incubated at room temperature for 20 minutes and
enzyme activity was read as absorbance at 660 nm in UV- VIS
Spectrophotometer. Control was prepared by taking 1 ml
distilled water in place of crude enzyme extract.

Characterization of Fungal Proteases:
Protease assay was performed by varying the cultural
conditions in terms of pH of medium keeping the temperature
constant. Minimal broth supplemented with 1% gelatin was
employed as the growth medium and pH of the broth was
maintained at 3,5,7,9 and 11 respectively. The minimal broth
was inoculated with 1 ml spore suspension of Verticillium lecanii
and all flasks were incubated at 28 ± 1°C. Proteolytic activity of
the fungal strain was measured quantitatively at the end of 7th,
14th and 21st day and absorbances were observed in
spectrophotometer at 660 nm.

Estimation of amylolytic activity of Verticillium lecanii:
Production of amylase by the fungal strain was assessed by two
parameters viz Plate assay method and Spectrophotometric
method.

Plate assay method:
Starch was employed as a carbohydrate source in the medium.
The fungal strain was spot inoculated in petridishes with
minimal media supplemented with 1% starch. These plates
were incubated at 28 ± 1°C for one week. At the end of
incubation period, colony diameter was measured and plates
were flooded with iodine reagent (65 mg Iodine crystals and
130 mg KI in 100ml sterile distilled water). A clearing zone
developed immediately around the colony which was
measured. Enzymatic activity was measured by the following
formula: EA = D – d; D- diameter of colony plus clear zone; ddiameter
of colony.

Spectrophotometric (quantitative) analysis:
Growth medium employed 1% starch supplemented in minimal
broth. The broth was dispensed in Erlenmeyer flasks (150 ml
capacity), autoclaved and inoculated with equal concentration
of conidia of Verticillium lecanii. These flasks were incubated at
28 ± 1°C and enzyme activity was measured at the end of 7th,
14th and 21st day of incubation. Aliquots were asceptically
removed from flasks and were centrifuged at 5000 rpm for 5
minutes. The supernatant was used as a crude enzyme extract
(CEE). This appropriately diluted enzyme was mixed with
equal amount of starch solution (1 ml) and reaction was
allowed to proceed by incubation at 27°C for 15 minutes. At the
end of incubation period, reaction was stopped by addition of 6
ml water. Enzyme activity was observed as absorbance at 540
nm and readings were recorded. Control tubes were prepared
by addition of distilled water in place of CEE.

Characterization of fungal amylases:
Amylolytic capability of the fungal strain was assessed at
different pH (keeping the temperature constant). pH of minimal
broth ( supplemented with 1% starch ) was adjusted to 3,5,7,9
and 11 respectively. Inoculation of the broth was done with
equal concentration of spore suspension followed by incubation
at 28 ± 1°C. Quantitative estimation of amylase activity was
done at the end of 7th, 14th and 21st day of incubation by the
protocol described above and observations were reported in
terms of absorbances.

Estimation of lipolytic activity of Verticillium lecanii:
Production of the enzyme lipase by the test fungal strain was
also considered as an important parameter in biochemical
analysis. Sorbitan monolaurate (Tween-20) was used as a lipid
substrate. Lipolytic activity of Verticillium lecanii was analysed
by the following two methods: A) Plate assay method; B)
Titrimetric assay.

Plate assay method:
Production of the enzyme lipase by the fungal strain was
confirmed through this method. Growth medium
supplemented with 1% Tween-20 contained peptone 10; NaCl 5;
CaCl2 0.1; Agar 20 gl-1. Petridishes with sterile solidified media
were spot inoculated with Verticillium lecanii and was incubated
at 28 ± 1°C for one week. Zone around the fungal colony
developed as a visible precipitate. This zone formation was
attributed to the production of fatty acids from lipid substrate
due to lipolytic activity of the fungus. Diameter of this zone was
noted.

Titrimetric method:
For determination of lipase activity, the test fungal strain was
grown on basal medium (KNO3 0.1g, MgSO4.7H2O
0.025g,ZnSO4.7H2O 0.022g, FeSO4.7H2O 0.055g, Tween –20 1% ,
Distilled water 50 ml). This medium was inoculated with equal
amounts of inoculum. Lipase activity was determined by
titrimetric assay [] with 0.05 M NaOH using emulsified oil as
substrate. 1 ml of appropriately diluted enzyme was added to 5
ml of emulsion containing 25% (v/v) olive oil, 75% (v/v) gum
acacia and 2 ml of 10 mM phosphate buffer at pH 7. The assay
was carried at 37°C and 30 minutes incubation. Reaction was
stopped by addition of 15 ml of acetone /ethanol (1:1) (v:v). The
amount of fatty acid liberated due to enzyme activity was then
titrated against 0.05M NaOH till the colour of reaction mixture
changes to pink. One unit of lipase was defined as the enzyme
that liberated 1mmol of fatty acid per minute at 37°C, pH 7. One
ml of titration volume is equal to 2.5 units of lipase.
Observations were recorded at the end of 7th, 14th and 21st day.
Substrate buffer (5 ml) contained Olive oil 1.25 ml, Gum acacia
0.25g, Distilled water 3.75 ml whereas Indicator contained
Phenolphthalein in alcohol + water (1:1).

Discussion
Growth studies of Verticillum lecanii:
Integrating an organism for microbial control in a pest
management strategy requires basic studies such as isolation,
culturing, biological testing and prediction of it's effects on the
pest population and the environment. A greater adoption will
require, among other important aspects, a predictable
performance under challenging environmental conditions, for
example cool or warm weather, and a higher production
efficiency []. 
Studies on biochemical aspects of V lecanii have
been done by Lopez- Llorca et al (1999) 
[] and substantial
results have been obtained.

Identification of Verticillium lecanii:
V. lecanii attacks a wide range of insects and is grouped into the
extremely diverse aggregate species. The present isolate of V.
lecanii was maintained on SMY agar at 28±1 °C. It was observed
that colonies of V. lecanii on SMY agar media grow white or
pale yellow, cottony or velvety, turning cream in colour with
mealy appearance and gradually to purplish pink pigmentation
(). Mycelium was composed of septate, branching
hyphae, hyaline or light coloured, conidiophores erect, septate,
simple or branched. Phialides formed either singly or in whorls
of 3-4.

Biochemical profile of V. lecanii:
Protein, chitin and lipids form the major composition of insect
cuticle, the prime barrier to infection. For degradation of
chemical constituents in cuticle, extracellular enzymes are
secreted by entomopathogenic fungi. Infection process is
facilitated by cuticle degrading enzymes. Entomopathogenic
fungi produce protease, chitinase and lipase which can degrade
insect cuticle [,
]. During fungal infections, a range of
hydrolytic enzymes are secreted to help promoting host
colonization. Depending on the ecological niche occupied by
each fungus, a particular set of enzymes mainly composed of
proteases and carbohydrases, are displayed to degrade specific
tissues and scavange for nutrient sources []. Because these
enzymes work outside the fungal cell, activity as well as
mechanisms that control synthesis and secretion are under the
influence of several environmental factors such as ambient pH
[].

Enzyme assay at different pH:
Differential expression of gene governing survival within a
particular niche, is regulated by pH as an important
environmental factor. In the present investigation, enzyme
activities (protease, amylase and lipases) were assessed at
different pH conditions of the medium as pH has a considerable
effect upon enzyme production and hence enzyme activity of
the fungus.

Protease activity at different pH:
Proteases are very important enzymes required in large
amounts for complete digestion of insect cuticle complex.
Activity of proteases in the test fungal strain was estimated by
two methods:

Method of Hankin and Anagnostakis (1975):
Enzyme production by the V. lecanii isolate was confirmed by
using gelatin as substrate whose degradation could be
evaluated by addition of HgCl2 on solid medium. Halo zones
produced colony growth of V. lecanii on agar confirmed activity
of protease enzyme by the V. lecanii isolate. These halo zones
were measured as indices of protease activity (). This
result is in accordance with the results given by Lopez Llorca et
al. (1999) [] who determined production of extracellular
enzymes by V. lecanii and found out that V. lecanii showed high
proteolytic activity. Enzymatic activity (EA) was calculated by
the following formula (Jackson et al., 1985):

 Colony Diameter
Enzyme activity(EA) =
Diameter of halozone

Lopez Llorca et al. (1999) [] also deduced that proteolytic
activity with respect to time was highest for Verticillium lecanii
i.e. reaching peak values at only two days after inoculation on
the plates. The results obtained in the present investigation are
also in accordance with results of Gomez- Santiesteban et al.
(2004) [] 
who showed that after 16 hours of fermentation of V.
lecanii, proteolytic activity was reported in the form of
degradation zones on agar.

Spectrophotometric analysis by Kunitz (1947):
Proteolytic activity if V. lecanii isolate was measured
spectrophotometrically at five different pH – 3, 5, 7, 9,11 on 7th,
14th and 21st day of incubation. Highest proteolytic activity of V. lecanii 
isolate could be seen at pH 7 and 9 on the 7th day of
inoculation whereas proteolytic activity was minimum at acidic
pH 3 (). Hence the test strain portrayed an increasing
trend in protease production, starting from the acidic range,
thereby reaching a maximum at neutral pH and declining again
on the alkaline side only upto 7th day of incubation and then
gradual decrease in enzyme activity upto 21st day. St. Leger et al. 
(1999) [] 
investigated the influence of M. anisopliae on the
environmental pH and it's influence on protease production.
They concluded that protease production reduced by
acidification of medium (acidic pH).

DeMoraes et al. (2003) [] analyzed secretion of proteases by
M. anisopliae in single and combined C/N sources and detected
good proteolytic activities in all carbon sources tested. Yang et
al. (2005) [] produced an extracellular protease (Ver112) from
Lecanicillium psalliotae on SDS-PAGE with a molecular mass of
32kDa. Optimum activity of Ver112 was at pH 10 and 70°C.

Amylase activity at different pH:
Extracellular enzymes capable of carbohydrate degradation in
plant tissues are produced by pathogenic fungi. Plant tissues
are analogous in structure to insect cuticle (containing fibrous
chitin or cellulose within a matrix of protein, pectic substances
or hemicelluloses). All enzymes are secreted in a pH dependent
manner by all isolates. Ambient pH seems to be a general factor
controlling enzyme secretion in fungus – host interactions
through a conserved genetic circuit []. In the present
investigation, amylase activity was assessed by two methods:

Hankin and Anagnostakis (1975):
This method of plate assay employed starch as the substrate
whose breakdown was confirmed by iodine solution, hence
appearance of blue colour upon addition of iodine to the
colonial growth of V. lecanii. Amylolytic activity of V. lecanii
was confirmed by appearance of the halo / clearing zone whose
diameter was measured ().

Miller (1959) - Dinitrosalicyclic acid method:
Spectrophotometric analysis was conducted for quantitative
estimation of amylase activity in the V. lecanii isolate at five
different pH – 3,5,7,9,11 on 7th, 14th and 21st day of incubation. It
was observed that maximum amylolytic activity of V. lecanii on
the 7th day of inoculation was at pH 3 i.e. in an acidic
environment in contrast to neutral pH – 7. Activity gradually
decreased upto 21st day (). 
Valadres –Inglis et al. (1997)
[] 
estimated the amylolytic activity of M. anisopliae and found
that amylase activity showed no variation even after
recombination and formation of prototrophic recombinants.
Maccheroni Jr. 1 et al. (2004) 
[] tested amylase activity in
Colletotrichum spp. and observed that amylase activity was not
seen at an alkaline pH and starch was degraded at neutral and
acidic pH. Lopez- Llorca et al. (1999) 
[] deduced the same
result on extracellular amylase production by V. lecanii strains.
He found that amylolytic activity was scarcely studied in V.
lecanii strains.

Lipase activity at different pH:
Exoenzymes of fungi have a role in cuticle digestion during
penetration of the fungus into the insect. Evaluation of enzyme
activity appears to be a promising method for screening new
genotypes with potential for biocontrol. Lipase activity of the V. lecanii 
isolate was assessed by two methods:

Hankin and Anagnostakis method:
The production of lipolytic enzymes by the test strain of V.
lecanii was measured by estimation of degradative capacity of
Tween- 20 substrate of this enzyme. Lipolytic activity was
confirmed by appearance of a transport zone around the radial
colony growth of V. lecanii. Diameter of the transparent zone
was measured as index of lipase activity ()

Kaamimura et al. (2001) – Titrimetric assay:
Lipolytic activity of the V. lecanii isolate was estimated
titrimetrically at five different pH -3,5,7,9,11 on 7th, 14th and 21st
day of inoculation. Maximum lipolytic activity of V. lecanii was
found at pH 7 (). This result is in accordance with the
result of Maccheroni et al. (2004) [] who deduced that lipase
was absent at acidic pH and secreted at neutral and alkaline
pH. Gomez-Santiesteban et al. (2004) 
[] showed lipolytic
activity of V. lecanii by development of inhibition zones on
solidified agar. Lopez –Llorca et al. (1999) 
[] estimated
production of extracellular lipase activity. Lipolytic activity in
V. lecanii was followed by proteolytic activity when enzymatic
activity (EA) due to degradation of substrate was studied.
Krikstaponis et al. (2001) [] revealed that some of the tested
strains of Aspergillus fumigatus are able to produce extracellular
lipases and hydrolyze fatty acids of vegetable oil. Nahar et al.
(2004) [] deduced that M. anisopliae constitutively produced
the enzyme lipase. Silva et al. (2005) [] investigated lipase
from a Brazilian strain of M. anisopliae and concluded that lipase
activity was highest for olive oil (108.38 U/mg).

Conclusion
Pathogenicity, being a multi component process, still, infection
can be stopped by production of cuticle degrading enzymes.
The test strain of Verticillium lecanii that was screened in the
present study produced good amounts of proteolytic as well as
amylolytic and lipolytic enzymes which are instrumental in
breakdown of complex organic nutrients, thus implying genetic
versatility. In invitro plate screening studies, enzyme
production is typically indicated by formation of zones and
clearing surrounding the colony or by appearance of coloured
product. The test strain of Verticillium lecanii showed good
levels of extracellular enzyme secretion during in vitro studies.
Morphological and growth studies showed that these isolates
had almost similar growth rates and formed colonies with
powdery and fluffy traits. Dispersal of mycopesticide occurs
through powdery growth rather than fluffy colonial growth.
Thus, in absolute terms, the test strain of Verticillium lecanii was
observed to be an outstanding source of enzyme secretion and
can be rationally advocated towards production of improved
mycopesticides.

Citation:Hasan et al, Bioinformation 9(5): 238-242 (2013)

Colony Morphology and Growth characterisitics of V. lecanii.

Comparative analysis of extracellular enzyme activity
(Amylase, Protease and Lipase) in V. lecanii

Protease activity of Verticillium lecanii at different pH

Amylase activity of Verticillium lecanii at different Ph

Lipase activity of Verticillium lecanii at different pH

