Background
Prostate cancer (PC) is a cancer that occurs in a man's prostate gland, it is one
of the most common types of cancer in men []. PC generally does not present
any symptoms until it becomes locally advanced or metastatic disease 
[].
Androgens are essential for the normal development as well as the onset of
prostate cancer through their interactions with the androgen receptor (AR) 
[],
However, androgen depletion is usually associated with the recurrence of
prostate cancer, as monitored by rising PSA levels, and this recurrent disease is
termed ‘‘androgen independence’’ since advanced prostate cancer remains
dependent on AR function. The androgen receptor also known as NR3C4
(nuclear receptor subfamily 3, group C, member 4), is most closely related to
the progesterone receptor, and progestins in higher dosages can block the
androgen receptor. The main function of the androgen receptor is as a DNA
binding transcription factor which regulates gene expression; however, it has
other functions as well. Androgen regulated genes are critical for the
development and maintenance of the male sexual phenotype. In some cell types
testosterone interacts directly with androgen receptors while in others
testosterone is converted by 5-α reductase to dihydrotestosterone, an even more
potent agonist for androgen receptor activation. Testosterone appears to be the
primary androgen receptor activating hormone in the Wolffian duct while
dihydrotestosterone is the main androgenic hormone in the urogenital sinus,
urogenital tubercle, and hair follicles. Hence testosterone is primarily
responsible for the development of male primary sexual characteristics while
dihydrotestosterone is responsible for secondary male characteristics 
[].
5-α reductase is an enzyme that was first discovered in the male prostate. It
catalyzes the conversion of testosterone to dihydrotestosterone, which in turn
binds to the androgen receptor and initiates development of the external
genitalia and prostate. The gene for 5-α reductase has been mapped to
chromosome 5 []. 
The isozyme 5-α reductase 2 is transiently expressed in skin
and scalp of newborns. Type 2 is the predominant isozyme detectable in fetal
genital skin, male accessory sex glands, and in the prostate, including benign
prostatic hyperplasia and prostate Aden carcinoma tissues. 5-α reductase 2
(5αR2) is considered predominant in human accessory sex tissue and is
responsible for prostate and male external genitalia development 
[]. Prostate
cancer continues to represent a major cause of cancer related mortality and
morbidity, despite the much recent research progress in the field of prostate
cancer. Since the early studies of 5-α reductases that lead to the advent of
androgen deprivation therapy in the 1940s, 
[] there has been great interest in
knowing basic mechanisms underlying prostate cancer initiation and
progression, as well as the potential to target these processes for therapeutic
intervention. Here, we present a study on herbal compounds and their potential
binding affinity to the receptor molecule 5-α reductase.

Methodology
Computer aided screening: Two dimensional (2D) similarity searches
On the basis of chemical similarity, 2D search with natural inhibitor
testosterone was performed to find new inhibitors. The presence or absence of
common functional groups such as alcohols or ring systems such as
pyrimidines was investigated []. 
These 5-α reductase inhibitors were selected
from natural products based on their inhibition specificity, drug application and
quality. In further steps each compound was analyzed for its possible
application as a drug. First, we investigated the absorption and permeability
using the Lipinski's rule of five, which implies that molecules should contain
less than 10 H-bond-acceptors and less than 5 H-bond-donors. The calculated
logP value (describes the lipophilic properties) should be less than 5 and the
molecular weight should be less than 500 g/mol []. Any compound violating
more than one rule was not considered since it is not a promising candidate for
a drug.

Homology modeling for 3D structure of 5-α reductase-2
The PDB structures of drug targets were not available. So, modeling of the
target proteins were performed using MODELLER. A template search has been
performed through BLAST and PSI-BLAST programs 
[]. Global alignment
method was used for comparison between the target-template sequences 
[].
Gaps with variable gap penalty function are included for structural loops and
core regions, in order to get maximum correspondence between the sequences.
Alignment file for MODELLER was prepared by CLUSTALW 
[]. Fold
recognition was done through mGenThreader, and LOMETS server for fold
assignment []. Energy minimization of generated 3D-model was done
through GROMACS (OPLS force field) by using Steepest Descent and
Conjugate Gradient Algorithms []. Parameters like covalent bond distances
and angles, stereo-chemical validation, atom nomenclature were validated
using PROCHECK and overall quality factor of non-bonded interactions
between different atoms types were measured by ERRAT program. RMSD
(root-mean-square deviation) and RMSF (Root Mean Square Fluctuation) was
calculated for modeled structures. Functionally important residues (Active-site)
were identified through comparative result of POCKETFINDER and
SURFACE RACER 4.0.ADMETox box was used to analyse the ADME
properties of the candidate molecules.

Result and Discussion
Around 132 small molecules from different categories such as Alkaloids,
Flavanoids, Tannins and glycosides were taken as targeting agents that are
responsible for inhibiting the biological processes, important in causing cancer.
The investigational drug i.e. Finasteride, which is under clinical trial was used
as a reference drug in this study [,
,
]. Since 5-α reductase type 2
pathways were mainly responsible for causing prostate cancer, we considered it
as our target protein and structure for the same was retrieved through
Homology modeling. Modeling of 5-α reductase type 2 was a tedious task due
to very low sequence similarity and coverage. Three dimensional model of the
drug targets were generated through identified templates along with fold fitting.
Fold recognization was done through mGenThreader and LOMETS server for
fold assignment. Helices have dominance over other secondary structure i.e.
sheet, coil in generated model shown in . The generated 3D model of
target proteins was checked by Ramachandran plot using PROCHECK
program. Ala (69), Leu (86) were identified as active site residues. Initial
screening of the molecules was based on Lipinski's rule of five. The molecules
which satisfy the criteria were subjected to receptor-ligand interaction study
using docking tool such as Quantum. Molecules which showed better
interactions with 5-α reductase type 2 than Finasteride (reference drug) were
considered and subjected to one more docking tool i.e. Quantum, a commercial
tool for finding Receptor-ligand interaction and docking score was considered
for further result interpretation.

Docking, Binding Site Analysis, and Catalytic active site Analysis
Protein ligand docking was performed using Quantum 3.3.0 and Hex 4.5. The
active site of an enzyme contains the catalytic and binding sites. The structure
and chemical properties of the active site allow the recognition and binding of
the substrate. The Gbind scores from docking of our chemopreventors were
compared to our standard drug (finasteride) and screening was done further to
narrow our search for potent inhibitor of 5-α reductase type 2 
().

Post Docking Study Analysis
The receptor-ligand complex of the molecules was subjected to active site
analysis using SwissPDBviewer (Version 4.0.1) to find the amino acids
contributing for binding pocket. The Finasteride, an investigational drug for 5-
α reductase type 2 is interacting with Methionine-222, Leucine-42 and
Glutamine-224 in terms of hydrogen bond. The Berberine is interacting with
Leucine-154 and Isoleucine-182 whereas Monocaffeyltartaric acid is
interacting with Aspargine-144, Methionine-141, and Isoleucine-128. The
hydrogen bonds of all complexes were located using this tool. Table 1 (see
) shows the binding site results along with the
Hydrogen bond distance, IC50 (calculated using Quantum 3.3.0) for Berberine
and Monocaffeyltartaric acid. The half maximal inhibitory concentration
(IC50) is a measure of the effectiveness of a compound in inhibiting biological
or biochemical function. This quantitative measure indicates how much of a
particular drug or other substance (inhibitor) is needed to inhibit a given
biological process (or component of a process, i.e. an enzyme, cell, cell
receptor or microorganism) by half. In other words, it is the half maximal
(50%) inhibitory concentration (IC) of a substance (50% IC, or IC50) 
[]. IC50
value for standard drug (Finasteride) is calculated to be 3.64e-001 whereas the
values for natural compounds: Berberine=9.71e-001 and Monocaffeyltartaric
acid = 3.05e-001

ADME and toxicity analysis
Twelve major pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics features were
predicted for molecules which showed good interaction with 5-α reductase type
2. Moreover, the important features like bioavailability, solubility, drug plasma
binding protein and volume of distribution was considered for comparison
studies. Toxic effects of molecules were predicted solely from the chemical
structure. The ADME and Toxicity properties were predicted using ADME
Box and TOX Box tool (
http://pharmaalgorithms.com/webboxes/). Tox Box
employs large and validated databases, robust Structure-Activity Relationship
(QSAR) models in combination with expert knowledge in organic chemistry
and toxicology. AMES test parameter was used for finding mutagenicity of the
molecules. Health effects in blood, cardiovascular, gastrointestinal system,
kidney, liver, and lungs were predicted. Table 1 (see 
) 
shows the ADME and toxicity properties of molecules and
Finasteride. It has been found that among all the top twelve small molecules
showing better docking score lower than Finasteride (reference drug),
Berberine and Monocaffeyltartaric acid were non-commercially available
hence both Berberine and Monocaffeyltartaric acid were considered as a better
lead compound than our reference drug (Finasteride) (Table 2 see
). Further, ADME-TOX results predict that the
Berberine and Monocaffeyltartaric acid natural compounds have lower toxicity
than the reference drug. The above synthetic Finasteride inhibitors, prevent or
slow down the growth of cancer by dihydrotestosterone suppression 
[], and
in turn reduce the prostate size []. 
The natural compounds, Berberine and
monocaffeyltartaric acid (Flavonoid) are found to be the major phenolic
constituents in flowers, roots, leaves and involucral bracts and also in the
medicinal preparations tested []. 
Berberine is a quaternary ammonium salt
from the group of isoquinoline alkaloids, derived from tyrosine L- DOPA. It is
found in such plants as Berberis, goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis), and Coptis
chinensis, usually in the roots, rhizomes, stems, and bark. Berberine prevents
and supresses proinflammatory cytokines. Berberine is an alkaloid derived
from tyrosine, L-DOPA. Berberine has drawn extensive attention towards its
antineoplastic effects. It seems to suppress the growth of a wide variety of
tumor cells including breast cancer, leukemia, melanoma, epidermoid
carcinoma, hepatoma, oral carcinoma, tongue carcinoma, glioblastoma,
prostate carcinoma, gastric carcinoma. Animal studies have shown that
berberine can suppress chemical-induced carcinogenesis, tumor promotion,
tumor invasion, prostate cancer, neuroblastoma, and leukemia. It is a radiosensitizer
of tumor cells but not of normal cells. Berberine seems to act as an
herbal antidepressant and a neuroprotector against neurodegenerative disorders.

Conclusion
Our study further confirms that computer aided drug screening is an effective
alternative for identification of lead compounds. Several natural lead
compounds were identified and tested using molecular docking for their
effectiveness against prostate cancer. Berberine and monocaffeyltartaric acid
were identified to be effective inhibitors that have the ability to bind to 5-α
reductase type 2. Their binding energies were also found to be lower than
finasteride. Our results contribute to understanding the mechanisms to explain
previous experimental observations and may provide a lead into anticancer
research.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This research has been carried out in Maharani lakshmi Ammanni College For
Women, Kumau University, DBT- BIF facility under BTIS (Biotechnology
information system), DBT (Department of biotechnology), Ministry of Science
and Technology, Government of India, India. We would also like to thank Dr.
T. L. Shantha, director of MLACW for moral and financial support all through
the work.

Citation:Bhattacharjee et al, Bioinformation 6(7): 262-265 (2011)

(a) Structure of Finasteride; (b) structure of Berberine; (c) structure
of Monocaffeyltataric acid; (d) Modelled Structure using Modeller and Cartoon
showing the Α- helix and Coil

(a) Natural inhibitors of 5α reductase typeII; (b) Results of docking
using Quantum program; (c) Comparison of IC50 of natural compounds with
standard.

