Background
Adhesins in microbes are cell surface proteins that confer the
ability of attachment to cells and tissue surfaces []. Adhesins
are the first line of a pathogen's strategy of host cell invasion
and are an indispensable determinant of its virulence.
Investigations into this primary event of host–pathogen
interaction have revealed a wide array of proteins with adhesin
function in a variety of pathogenic microbes []. Toxoplasma
gondii is an apicomplexan parasite that is capable of infecting a
broad host range, including humans []. The most important
human health consequences of toxoplasmosis are the congenital
transmission and the reactivation in immune suppressed
patients, which are an important public health problem in some
countries []. The emergence of parasites that are resistant to
commonly used drugs and the lack of availability of vaccines
aggravate the problem. One of the preventive approaches
targets the adhesion of parasites to host cells and tissues. The
abrogation of adhesion using the adhesins could be a focus for
the development of new drugsor vaccine targets [].

The Toxoplasma tachyzoite lytic cycle begins with an active
invasion of host cells that involves the release of adhesive
proteins from apical secretory organelles called micronemes.
Many microneme proteins (MICs) contain well-conserved
functional domains, which are associated with adhesive activity
[]. Such protein regions are the thrombospondin type 1 (TSP-
1), von Wille brand Factor A (VWA) and plasminogen apple
nematode (PAN) domains, which were originally defined based
on their role in mediating protein-protein and cell-cell
interactions in mammalian cells []. They are thought to interact
with the extracellular matrix to mediate motility, attachment
and/or invasion into host cells [,
].

Experimental methods used for characterizing adhesin-like
proteins are time-consuming and demand large resources.
Computational methods such as homology searching can aid in
identification, but this procedure suffers from limitations when
the homologues are not well characterized. Sequence analysis
based on the compositional properties provides relief for this
problem []. The amino acid composition is a fundamental
attribute of a protein and has a significant correlation with the
protein's location, function, folding type, shape and in vivo
stability. In recent years, compositional properties have been
applied to problems as diverse as the prediction of functional
roles []. One of the statistical methods to analyze these
properties is the cluster analysis of proteins according to shared
annotation, which can reveal related subsets that warrant
further investigation []. In this method, a successful
hierarchical clustering is defined as the point in the hierarchy at
which one of the clusters contains no false positive annotations
[]. The results based on the metrical distance of protein
families are very useful for classifying according to the distinct
biological context without relying on another type of
information such as domains or phylogenetic profiles. The
advantage of this methodology relies on the fact that, without
complex information, good classification power can be obtained
that complements the traditional classification methods.
Accordingly, we wonder whether a cluster statistical method
would identify the primary structural level features that
exclusively characterize Toxoplasma adhesin proteins, providing
novel amino acid features that surely will indicate a protein
sequence to be an adhesin.

Methodology
Dataset:
Toxoplasma adhesin-like proteins were downloaded from the
recent release (Version 7.0, 21 July2011) of the predicted
proteome of theToxoplasma gondii ME49 strain database
(www.toxodb.org). The sequences were filtered, searching the
experimental data (we considered only sequences with a
proven adhesion function).To obtain a better sequence
representation, the searches for adhesin domains such as EFG
(epidermal growth factor),TSP-1, VWA, PAN and functional
motifs were performed by using Smart and the Prosite domain
and motif databases []. We found 20 well-characterized
Toxoplasma proteins with an adhesion function that was
experimentally tested. To increase the adhesin data set, we also
searched the orthologous adhesins in the Neospora caninum
genome because the Neospora and Toxoplasma genomes are
closely related species, and we obtained, in total, an adhesin set
with 30 Toxoplasma Neospora.

For the negative dataset, we included ribosomal, metabolic, and
other intracellular and membrane-associated protein sequences.
In total, a negative dataset of 600 proteins was assembled,
which was grouped into 12 sets with 50 non-adhesin proteins in
each set. All of these sequences were filtered with a 60%
sequence identity using the program CD-HIT.

Compositional properties as numerical features:
Each protein sequence is represented by a set of five attribute
feature vectors: 
Amino acid frequencies: amino acid
frequency fi = (counts of the i-th amino acid in the sequence)/1,
where i = 1, … , 20 and 1 is the length of the protein;

Dipeptide frequencies: the frequency of a dipeptide (i, j) fij =
(counts of theij-th dipeptide)/ (total dipeptide counts), where i,
j are from 1 to 20.There are 20*20 = 400 possible dipeptides;

Multiplet frequencies: Multiplets are defined as homopolymeric
stretches (X)n, where X is an amino acid and n (an integer) &gt; 2.
After identifying all of the multiplets, the frequencies of the
amino acids in the multiplets were computed as follows: (a)
fi(m) = (counts of the i-th amino acid that occurs as a
multiplet)/1; (b) where 1 is the length of the sequence. There
are 20 possible values for fi (m) for the 20 amino acids;

Hydrophobic composition: The amino acids were classified into
five groups, based on their hydrophobicity scores: 1 (–8 for K,
E, D and R), 2 (–4 for S, T, N and Q), 3 (–2 for P and H), 4 (+1for
A, G, Y, C and W) and 5 (+2 for L, V, I, F and M) []. The
inputs for each group are as follows: (a) fi = (counts of the i-th
group)/(total counts in the protein), where i = 1,2,…,5; (v)
Polarity, polarizability and Van der Waals volume: used as
concatenated attributes. For each attribute, twenty amino acids
were divided into three groups (),
and for each protein sequence, every amino acid was replaced
by the index 1, 2, or 3, depending on its group. Polarizability,
polarity and Van der Waals volume composition was calculated
for each group based on the simple formula: (a) fi = (counts of
the i-th group)/ (total counts in the protein), where i = 1, 2, 3.



Therefore, we had 442 frequencies that were used as numerical
feature inputs for each sequence. Thus, each protein was
represented by 442 numerical features obtained from its amino
acid sequence. We implemented 5 algorithms for each attribute
using a MATLAB 2009Ra platform. The algorithms were
implemented to read FASTA sequences files. Once we had all of
the frequencies from each attribute within a matrix, the
Euclidean distances were calculated for adhesins as well as for
non-adhesin groups through cluster analysis. These analyses
were conducted using the STATGRAPHICS plus package.

External cluster evaluation:
Clustering results were evaluated based on knowing the class
labels, which were, in our case, proteins with or without
adhesin function. We calculated the Rand index RI 
[], the
Fowlkes.0-Mallows index FM [] and the Matthews correlation
coefficient MCC [] 
(For equations see ).

Results
We found that, when we used each single amino acid frequency
as an attribute into a set of 30 Toxoplasma and Neospora,the
adhesin proteins could branch off from the non-adhesin set
(proteins with no adhesive domains); the analysis pictured two
large cluster groups that separated the Toxoplasma and Neospora
adhesin domains' subcluster 1 from the negative subcluster 2
().

We wanted to know what is the relative frequency for each
amino acid that grouped subcluster 2 (non-adhesins) away from
subcluster 1 (adhesins) in (). We found that cysteine
“C” had the highest relative frequency difference between the
two sets. Likewise, leucine “L”, isoleucine “I”, arginine “R”,
and threonine “T” also showed measurable differences
(). We applied a hypothesis test for
the difference between two means for each amino acid
betweenthe parasites' adhesin and non-adhesin sets. We found
that a t-Test forthe mean differences of the five amino acids
mentioned above had a high significance level P&lt;0.01 
(see supplementary material).

When we used the dipeptide frequency as a classifier of the
adhesin feature, we also observed that this property in the
Toxoplasma and Neospora adhesins set made this group cluster
together (). Among the 400 possible combinations of
dipeptides, those with a large relative frequency in the
Toxoplasma adhesin set were the following: AC, DC, EC, GC,
KC, PC RC, SC, and TC (). It can be
noted that all of these combinations include cysteine.

Afterward, we merged the two attributes of the individual
amino acid and the dipeptide occurrences into a characteristics
vector, to strengthen the classification of the adhesins; we
included 15 Cryptosporidium and P. falciparum adhesins. We
found than Toxoplasma and Neospora adhesins merge into only
one subcluster; however, 7 non-adhesins (FP) clustered within
it, but those separated from the P. falciparum and
Cryptosporidium branch had none mixed with the nonadhesins
().

We calculated the frequency of multiplets (a repetition of more
than 2 of the same amino acid) in addition to physical and
chemical characteristics such as hydrophobicity, polarity,
polarizability and Van der Waals volume, but these properties
do not work as good classifier attributes, at least in the adhesin
family proteins. We observed that hydrophobic amino acids are
less frequently in adhesins compared with non-adhesins and
those there are no large differences in the frequencies that are
observed between the two groups (observations in


We also wanted to know whether these two attributes can
group the human extra-cellular domain; according to other
reports, there is possible interaction with Toxoplasma adhesive
motifs. We extracted single amino acids and dipeptide
frequencies from 26 human extra-cell receptors and applied a
cluster analysis along with 30 Toxoplasma adhesins; we found
that human extra-cell proteins clustered with Toxoplasma
proteins but not with non-adhesin proteins ().
According to the clustering, it was observed that some human
proteins are closely related to Toxoplasma adhesins, such as
integrin and spondin 1 with Tg_PAN/APPLE 7, beta-nerve
growth factor with Tg_TSP6 and Tg_EGF7 with semaphoring 5
().

We evaluated all of the cluster results based on knowing the
class labels (in our case, adhesin or non-adhesin from parasites).
We performed 3 indexes, the Rand index, the Fowlkes-Mallows
index and the Matthews correlation coefficient for each cluster.
We calculated the indexes from 36 dendrograms with 4
different negative sets for 3 attributes into 3 species adhesin
groups. We found that the sensitivity and specificity as well as
the 3 indexes are over 90% for Toxoplasma and Neospora clusters
using the frequency of each amino acid and the dipeptideamino
acid merge  (see supplementary material). These
algorithms also classified adhesin in other apicomplexa with a
sensitivity of over 80%, even though it could classify Human
receptors as adhesins with a sensitivity of over 70% ().
These results demonstrated that the information at the primary
structure level of the proteins has a high sensitivity and
specificity for the classification of proteins that are involved in
the same processes.

Discussion
Clustering is the classification of objects into different groups,
or more precisely, the partitioning of a data set into subsets
(clusters) in such a way that the data in each subset (ideally)
share common traits that implicate more proximity according to
a defined distance measure []. In our case, the amino acid
composition feature, which was based on normalized counts of
single or pairs of amino acids, identified clusters of proteins
that were close to each other from a biological perspective.

It is well known that cysteine is a key amino acid because of its
capacity to form disulfide bonds and to contribute to the
folding and bioactivity of some adhesive domains such as apple
and epidermal growth factor (EGF) []. Although cysteine is
not the most frequent amino acid in Toxoplasma adhesin
proteins, we have observed that this amino acid is one of the
less frequent in the negative set (), which are cytosolic
proteins, and we demonstrated that cysteine frequency is a
valuable clue to classifying a protein family according to its
function and location.

Cysteine is unique among the coded amino acids because it
contains a reactive sulph-hydryl group. Therefore, two cysteine
residues can form a cysteine (disulfide link) between various
parts of the same protein or between two separate polypeptide
chains. It is known that one or more disulfide links are
frequently found in excreted or plasma membrane proteins. In
contrast, cytosolic proteins often lack disulfide links []. The
known scarcity of disulfide bridges in cytosolic proteins may or
may not translate into lower protein cysteine content for this
reason [].

In accordance with the implication to infection, previous
analyses have shown that conserved cysteine-rich domains play
important roles at critical times during the invasion process in
the life cycle of apicomplexan parasites. For example, Duffybinding–
like (DBL) domains, which are expressed as a part of
the erythrocyte-binding proteins (DBLEBP), are essential
cysteine-rich ligands that recognize specific host cell surface
receptors. DBL domains also mediate cytoadherence as a part of
the variant erythrocytic membrane protein-1 (PfEMP-1) on the
surface of P. falciparum-infected erythrocytes 
[].

Hydrophobic amino acids in proteins are a crucial attribute for
the proteins' function and location. Hydrophobic amino acids
that segment in the protein could be important because of
possible interaction with plasmatic membranes [,
].
According to our analysis, the hydrophobic amino acid
composition was not a useful compositional attribute for
separating most of the adhesin from the non-adhesin proteins
(). Most of the cytosolic proteins
interact with cytoplasmic organelle membranes, which make
hydrophobic composition an unimportant feature when
classifying proteins those are located extra-cellularly.

Apicomplexa parasites such as Toxoplasma and Plasmodium
might invade different organisms and even different types of
cells; they share some domains that are evolutionarily
conserved among them, such as Apple, EGF, PAN and TSP1,
which are crucial for invading host cells [,
]. Even they are
also conservative in animal cytoadhesion, which make it
possible for the parasite and host to exploit similar mechanisms
for cytoadherence. We found that features at the amino acid
level allow us to gather information that is common among
them. It was observed that certain attributes make the best
classification when only applied to a single species or regarding
a species protein set (for example, Toxoplasma and Neospora
adhesins vs. a negative set); as a result, we avoid evolutionary
confusion in conserved and polymorphic residues in other
species that are from different adaptations by the parasites to
the respective host environment (). These data could be
useful for classifying and predicting new sequences with regard
to the adhesin function into the apicomplexa group, and the
data help to predict the possible human receptor interaction.
This information also suggests the possibility that certain
properties of proteins are not fully captured in algorithms that
search only for protein domains.

It is possible that evolution also works at the amino acid level
because the frequencies of certain amino acids are maintained
when evolution attempts to retain conserved structures; there
can be increases in the occurrence of a more reactive amino acid
such as cysteine, with more cysteine developing in new
adaptations in protein families such as the proteins that are
involved in the adhesion process.

In conclusion, cluster statistical analysis of aminoacid
compositional attributes of Toxoplasma adhesin proteins
revealed that single amino acids and dipeptides that included
cysteine are common characteristics for this group of proteins.
An exhaustive analysis of primary sequence level attributes
based on amino acid compositional features could improve the
classification and prediction power. Our method provided
essential attributes that will be included in the algorithm for
learning machine techniques to look at predicting the functional
roles of amino acid sequences that are not yet experimentally
validated.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work was funded by Colciencias (Grant 111351928976), a
Colombian scientific governmental agency.

Citation:Arenas et al, Bioinformation 8(19): 916-923 (2012)

Cluster analysis by Euclidean distance using the Ward method from the relative frequency of each amino acid, taken up
from a set of 30 Toxoplasma and Neospora proteins (representing its adhesive domains) and 30 proteins with no adhesin function. Tg
and Nc means Toxoplasma gondii and Neospora caninum, respectively. Here, EGF means epidermal grow factor, PAN/APPLE
meansthe pan or apple domain, TSP means trombospondin, SAG means the surface antigen group, and AMA means the apical
membrane antigen. The numbers at the end of the parasite domain signs mean the numbers of repeat domains, and N means the
non-adhesins. The dendrogram shows that this simple attribute can separate the two groups.

cluster analysis by Euclidean distance using the Ward method, from the relative frequency of 400 dipeptide combinations
calculated from a set of 50 Toxoplasma and Neospora and 50 non-adhesins. Tg and Nc means Toxoplasma gondii and Neospora caninum,
respectively, EGF means the epidermal growth factor, PAN/APPLE means the pan or apple domain, TSP means trombospondin,
SAG means the surface antigen group, and AMA means the apical membrane antigen. The numbers at the end of the parasite
domain signs mean the numbers of repeat domains, where N means non-adhesins. This attribute grouped most of the Toxoplasma
adhesins away from Toxoplasma non-adhesins.

cluster analysis by Euclidean distance using the Ward method, from the relative frequency of the individual amino acids;
400 dipeptides concatenate into only one feature vector, which was calculated from 50 hypothetical Toxoplasma, Neospora and 17
Plasmodium falciparum, Cryptosporidium adhesins. Pf and Cp mean P.falciparum and Crypstosporidium, respectively, EGF means the
epidermal growth factor, PAN/APPLE means the pan or apple domain, TSP means trombospondin, SAG means a surface antigen,
and AMA means the apical membrane antigen group. The numbers at the end of the parasite domain signs mean the numbers of
repeat domains, and N means the non-adhesins. (TSP1-EGF is a special multi-domain architecture in the Crypstosporidium
adhesins).

Cluster analysis by the Euclidean distance using the Ward method, from the relative frequency of the individual amino
acids; 400 dipeptides concatenate into only one feature vector, which is calculated from 30 hypothetical Toxoplasma adhesins and 26
human receptors extracted from the literature, which is suspected to interact with Toxoplasma adhesins. Tg means Toxoplasma
gondii, EGF means epidermal growth factor, PAN/APPLE means the pan or apple domain, TSP means trombospondin, SAG means
the surface antigen group, and AMA means the apical membrane antigen. The numbers at the end of the parasite domain signs
mean the numbers of repeat domains, and N means non-adhesins. (Human extra-cell receptors were included in the dendrogram
with their respective names).

