Background
ATP sulfurylase enzyme (ATPS, sulfate adenylyltransferase, EC
3.7.7.4) produces APS and AMP from sulfate and ATP or
viceversa. Its physiological function is dependent on the
metabolism of the organism []. This enzyme is widely
distributed in all living organisms: Archaea, Bacteria, protista,
yeasts, filamentous fungi, plants, animals and humans 
[–].
Variations in size of this enzyme are due to that ATP
sulfurylase domain (ATS) can be bound to the APS kinase
domain or similar to APS kinase (ASK). Exceptionally, ATP
sulfurylase has been found to bind to other enzymes such as
pyrophosphatase and APS reductase []. ATPS is involved in
the assimilatory and dissimilatory reduction of sulfate
catalyzing the activation of inorganic sulfate by ATP to form
adenosine-5í-phosphosulfate (APS) and pyrophosphate 
[]. The
assimilation pathway is performed by aerobic organisms for
amino acid synthesis such as cysteine, and the dissimilation
pathway is carried out by prokaryotes, which in the absence of
molecular oxygen they use sulfate as a terminal electron
acceptor for cellular respiration, releasing hydrogen sulfide
(H2S) []. Moreover, ATPS is involved in the indirect oxidation
of sulfite, which could be present in a variety of
chemolithoautotrophic and phototrophic bacteria, allowing for
energy conservation by a chemiosmotic mechanism or by a
substrate-level mechanism [] where sulphite would be
oxidized via a reverse adenosine phosphosulfate reductase
(APR) activity according to: H2SO3 í AMP ↔ APS í 2e- í 2Hí,
with participation of ATPS (sulfate adenylyltransferase) in the
final step according to: APS í PPi ↔ ATP í SO42-.

Chemolithoautotrophic bacteria such as A. ferrooxidans would
be responsible for the oxidation of sulphite in mining
environments, where there is a large quantity of reduced
inorganic sulfur compounds (RISC). In previous research the
genomic sequence of A. ferrooxidans has been analyzed by
bioinformatics software [] and there are potential gene
sequences that would encode the ATP sulfurylase enzyme. It is
postulated that ATP sulfurylase is a monomer or homooligomer
in organisms that oxidize reduced sulfur compounds and
presents a subunit molecular weight (MW) ranging from 41 to
69 kDa, in a similar fashion to the ATPS sequence involved in
sulfate assimilation found in Penicillium chrysogenum and
Saccharomyces cerevisiae (58 kDa and 63.7 kDa subunits,
respectively). ATPS from hyperthermophile chemolithotrophic
Aquifex aeolicus is an ortholog of the filamentous fungi enzyme,
with a functional ASK domain (APS kinase domain) [,
] and
presents high similarity to the true APS kinases in the “P-loop”
region.

By contrast, ATPS from chemolithotrophic Riftia pachyptila
symbiont bacteria presents only the ATS domain. It is
postulated that ATPS present in chemolithotrophic organisms is
more similar to ancestral ATPS that gave rise to all
homooligomeric ATP sulfurylases (ATPSs) [,
]. Other
homooligomeric ATPSs are present in higher eukaryotic
organisms with domains in inverted orientation (ASK domain
at the N-terminus and ATS domain at the C-terminus) different
in relation to the ATPS from A. aeolicus and fungi 
[]. Their
presence has been reported in several animals, such as the
marine invertebrate Urechis carpo 
[], fruitfly 
[], mouse 
[]
and humans [], and express a single polypeptide, named
PAPS synthetase [] that participates in a sulfation process.
Other ATPSs only have the ATS domain, and are found in the
bacteria Thermus thermophilus HB, in a similar way to the Riftia
symbiont [], Bacillus subtilis, Chromatium vinosum and
Geobacillus, cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp., archaeon
Archaeoglobus fulgidus [] 
and plants (Arabidopsis thaliana).
ATPSs of Desulfuvibrio species are metalloproteins that bind
cobalt and zinc, and present a C-X2-C-X8-CXH characteristic
sequence (metal binding site) []. Homooligomeric ATPSs are
not similar to heterooligomeric ATPSs found in E. coli and
responsible for sulfate assimilation [,
].

Homooligomeric ATPSs have V blocks in the ATS domain, II
and IV blocks are rich in basic amino acids suggesting that they
participate in the binding of MgATP2-and SO42- (Sperling et al.
1998). In the ATPS from Riftia bacterial symbiont has been
determined that the phosphosulfate motif 199QXRN202 and the
motif 205HXXH208 [,
] are the active site and the substratebinding
site, respectively. It presents a mobile loop of the active
site that includes an extended sequence: 224(hp)
3HXhpXGXXKXXDhpXXXXR243 (hp = hydrophobic residues) [], where
the Asp234 in the ATPS from P. chrysogenum (Asp237 in the
Riftia bacterial symbiont and Asp207 in Aquifex) orients Arg199
(Arg172 in Aquifex) in the sulfate-binding pocket which is
necessary for sulfurylase activity [], and these motifs are
conserved in all homooligomeric ATPSs. In the present study,
the ATPS enzyme that would participate in the oxidative
metabolism of sulfite in the bioleaching bacterium A.
ferrooxidans was characterized at the molecular level. The atpS
gene was cloned and expressed in E. coli showing a high
activity towards the synthesis of ATP, similar to other studied
chemolithotrophic bacteria, demonstrating a high similarity to
the bifunctional ATPS from A. aeolicus. Later studies about this
enzyme could be used in the acid water control because one of
the products of the enzymatic reaction is the sulphate ion that
reacts with hydrogen and generates sulfuric acid, an important
environmental polluting agent.

Methodology
Strains, plasmids and culture conditions:
A. ferrooxidans ATCC 23270 was cultured in a modified 9K
medium at pH 1.5, in a rotary shaker at 28°C for 7 days 
[]. E.
coli TOP10 and BL21Star™ (DE3) (Invitrogen) were cultured on
Luria Bertani (LB). For growth of transformant E. coli strains in
LB medium agar was added to a final concentration of 1.8í
(w/v) and ampicillin (100 µg/ ml). PET101/D-TOPO plasmid
was used for gene cloning obtaining a pET101-atpS plasmid.

DNA manipulation:
The extraction of genomic DNA from A. ferrooxidans was
carrying out by using a Miniprep Wizard Genomic Purification
Kit (Promega) following the supplier´s instructions. Previously,
the cells were concentrated by centrifugation at 13000 x g for 2
min and then washed 3 times with acidic water (pH 1.72) and
10 mM sodium citrate (pH 8.0). Genomic DNA was stored at -
20°C. The atpS gene encoding ATP sulfurylase was directly
searched analyzing the genome sequence from A. ferrooxidans
ATCC 23270 using the tBlastn algorithm v2.0 
[]. The gene was
amplified with the: atpS-N-term primer: (5í-CAC CAT GCC
ATC CAT TCC TCA GGT TG-3í) with the addition of
nucleotides CACC at the 5í end to allow ligation to the vector
and the atpS-C-term primer (5í-CGC CTC CTC CGC GAT GCG
TTT CAC-3í). Cloning of the atpS gene was carried out using a
ChampionTM pET directional TOPO expression kit (Invitrogen)
according to the supplier´s instructions. The atpS gene (1674 bp)
from A. ferrooxidans was amplified by PCR using the Thermal
Ace Polymerase (Invitrogen) and the following PCR program: 3
minutes at 95°C followed by 30 cycles at 95°C for 30 s, 60°C for
30 s and 72°C for 2.5 minutes and finally to 72°C for 15 minutes.
For cloning, the amplified fragment was linked to the
pET101/D-TOPO plasmid (5753 bp) resulting in the pET101-
atpS plasmid. Then, chemically competent cells (E. coli TOP10)
were transformed with the pET101-atpS plasmid. The
recombinant clones were selected growing in LB agar í
ampicillin (100 µg/ml) and incubating for 18 h at 37°C. The
presence of the insert in E. coli TOP10 transformants were
verified by colony PCR using the N-terminal primer of the
vector (T7-TopoF-vector) and the atpS-C-term primer of atpS
gene. The pET101-atpS plasmid of E. coli TOP10 positive
recombinant was extracted using the plasmid DNA
Minipreparation method with cetyl trimethyl ammonium
bromide (CTAB).

Briefly, 4.5 ml of an overnight culture grown in Luria broth plus
ampicillin was centrifuged, and the resulting pellet was
resuspended in 200 µl of lysozyme (50 mg/ml) and 4 µl of STET
and incubated for 5 min at room temperature. After that, the
suspension was placed in water at 100oC for 45 s, centrifuged at
13000 x g for 10 min and 8µl of RNAse (10 mg/ml) was added,
following incubation for 15 min at room temperature. 8 µl of 5í
CTAB was added and incubated for 3 min at room temperature.
The pellet obtained by centrifugation at 13000 x g for 10 min
was resuspended in en 300 µl of 1.2 M NaCl. The plasmid DNA
was then precipitated with 750 µl of absolute ethanol, incubated
for 5 min at room temperature and centrifuged at 13000 x g for
10 min. The obtained pellet was resuspended in 70í ethanol
and centrifuged at 13000 x g for 5 min. Supernatant was
discarded and the pellet was dried for 30 min. Then, it was
resuspended in 10 µl of ultrapure water.

Genomic DNA, plasmid and PCR products were visualized by
1í agarose gel electrophoresis (Gibco BRL®) in TAE 0,5X. The
molecular weight marker used was the 1kb Plus DNA Ladder
(Invitrogen). Ethidium bromide (0.5 µg/ml) was used for a 5
min gel staining. Gels were visualized with a UV
transilluminator at 320 nm. The atpS gene obtained from
plasmid pET101-atpS was sequenced to verify the correct
insertion of the gene in the plasmid and to obtain the nucleotide
sequence of the gene. Sequencing was done using the following
primers: T7-TopoF-vector (5í-TAA TAC GAC TCA CTA TAG
GG-3í), T7-TopoR-vector (5í-TAG TTA TTG CTC AGC GGT
GG-3 í) and internal primers atpS-R673 (5í-AGT CTT CGT ATA
ATG GGG-3í), atpS-F1005 (5í-ATT ACG GGT TCC TTG GAG-3
í) and atpS-R1075 (5 í-GTA GCG ACC GGC CTG ACG-3í).
Sequences were viewed and assembled using the SeqAssem
software []. Accession number for the atpS gene sequence of
A. ferrooxidans ATCC 23270: FM177944.

Expression of recombinant ATPS protein of A. ferrooxidans in E. coli BL21 StarTM (DE3):
E. coli BL21 StarTM (DE3) transformation with pET101-atpS
plasmid was made according to manufacturer's instructions.
The induction-expression analysis of recombinant E. coli was
conducted in the presence of 1 mM IPTG at 37°C for 3 hours
with constant agitation (DO600nm of 0.6). E. coli BL21 StarTM
(DE3) without plasmid was used as a control strain.
Recombinant protein expression was analyzed from total cell
extracts by SDS-PAGE []. For determination of MW was used
marker Page RulerTM Protein Ladder (Fermentas).

ATPS enzymatic activity of A. ferrooxidans by bioluminescence:
The protein concentrations of E. coli BL21 strain StarTM (DE3)
cell extracts was analyzed under induction and no induction
conditions with IPTG and were determined using the Bradford
reagent [] to an absorbance at 595 nm. A bioluminescent test
ATP Determination Kit (Molecular Probes) was used to
determine the ATP sulfurylase activity according to
manufacturerís instructions. It produced the standard reaction
solution (10 ml) containing: H2O, 8.9 ml reaction buffer (20X),
0.5 ml; DTT (0.1 M), 0.1 ml; D-luciferin (10 mM), 0.5 ml; and
luciferase (5 mg/ml), 2.5 µl. A 100 µl reaction was started with
the addition of luciferase. Testing with extracts de E. coli to the
reaction was made by addition of 0.125 µl of APS (8 nmol/µl)
and 0.5 µl of PPi (40 ρmol/µl) for ATP production (according to
the reaction: PPi í APS → ATP í SO42-). Subsequently, ATP
produced was detected by bioluminescence (according to the
reaction: Luciferin í ATP í O2 → oxyluciferin í AMP í
pyrophosphate í CO2 í light). The following controls were
used: a) Control without luciferase, APS and PPi, b) Control
with APS and PPi without luciferase and c) Control of the
positive reaction with 5 µl of ATP (5 µM). Relative light units
(RLU) readings were carried out in a microplate reader
luminometer Synergy ™ HT Multi-Detection Microplate Reader
(Bio-Tek, USA). Readings were controlled by KC4 v3.0 software
with PowerReports (Bio-Tek). All RLU measurements were
performed in duplicate at a wavelength of 530 nm for 15 min of
reaction at 25°C. The quantity of ATP produced was calculated
from the URL of standard ATP concentrations (0.25 to 10 µM) in
duplicate at a wavelength of 530 nm at 25°C. An enzymatic unit
produces 1.0 µmol of ATP from APS and PPi per minute at
30°C.

Bioinformatics and phylogenetic analysis of the amino acid sequence of the ATPS of A. ferrooxidans:
From the amino acid sequence of the ATPS of A. ferrooxidans
obtained in this work (CAQ76453) was determined the
molecular weight and pI using the ProtParam program 
[].
PSLpred software [] and PSORTb v.2.0 
[] were used to
determine the subcellular localization. The presence of signal
peptide was determined using SignalP v1.1 software 
[]. For
comparison of A. ferrooxidans ATPS, amino acid sequences of
other ATPS were obtained from Genbank []. Sequences were
aligned with Clustal W [] and edited with Bioedit 
[] or
BOXSHADE []. For structural alignment of A. ferrooxidans
ATPS sequence, the Cn3D software was used []. Previously,
the structure of ATPSs from A. aeolicus (MMDB ID 44452, PDB:
2GKS_A) and APS kinase from P. chrysogenum (MMDB ID: 21216,
PDB: IM7G_A) were obtained from NCBI. Phylogenetic analysis
of the ATPS from A. ferrooxidans, was made using the amino
acid sequences of homooligomeric ATPSs obtained from NCBI
database [] 
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov), including the
sequence for A. ferrooxidans ATPS (CAQ76453). Sequence
annealing was made using the Clustal X program 
[] and
edited with the BioEdit program []. For the construction of
phylogenetic trees the MEGA v.5.05 program was used 
[].
Gaps were excluded and the Neighbor-joining method 
[] with
Poisson correction model was used. Consistency of tree was
evaluated by bootstrap analysis of 1000 repetitions.

Result
Identification of ATPS gene in the A. ferrooxidans ATCC 23270 genome:
An open reading frame (ORF) for the atpS gene (1674 bp)
encoding ATP sulfurylase (ATPS) was located at nucleotide
positions 2327613 to 2329286 in the genome of A. ferrooxidans by
bioinformatic analysis. Comparing this sequence with other
ATPS of GenBank indicates the presence of an ATP sulfurylase
domain (ATS) conserved typical of this type of enzyme, which
is associated with an APS kinase domain (ASK) as occurs in
some ATPSs []. 
The expected size of amplified atpS gene was
obtained (1674 bp) and cloned in the pET101-TOPO vector
resulting in the plasmid pET101-atpS, which was used to
transform E. coli cells. Secuencing of atpS gene was performed
from the plasmid extracted from recombinant E. coli TOP10.

Expression of recombinant A. ferrooxidans ATCC 23270 ATPS protein in E. coli:
The cells of recombinant E. coli BL21 StarTM (DE3) on induction
conditions with IPTG expressed a recombinant ATPS protein of
approximately 63.5 kDa (). E. coli BL21 StarTM (DE3)
without plasmid was subjected to the same experiment and did
not express the protein in any condition. The weight of the
monomer of A. ferrooxidans ATPS is 60.49 kDa based on their
amino acid sequence.

Enzymatic activity assay of the ATPS protein of A. ferrooxidans:
Bioluminescence carried out at a wavelength of 530 nm at 25°C
for 15 min of reaction showed enzyme activity in cell extracts of
recombinant E. coli strain BL21 (íIPTG) expressing ATPS,
which is higher compared with those obtained from extracts of
recombinant E. coli BL21 (-IPTG), and from negative controls.
Specific activity of recombinant ATPS from A. ferrooxidans was
calculated from cell extracts of E. coli, obtaining 106.9 µM
ATP/mg/min.

Bioinformatics analysis of the amino acid sequence of ATPS from A. ferrooxidans:
The biochemical characteristics of the ATP sulfurylase from A.
ferrooxidans was determined from its amino acid sequence
(CAQ76453) using bioinformatics programs. According to these
results the ATPS of A. ferrooxidans would be a soluble protein of
cytoplasmic localization similar to other homooligomeric
ATPSs that have been described. It has a molecular weight de
60.49 kDa and has not signal peptide. The comparison of the
amino acid sequence of ATP sulfurylase from A. ferrooxidans
(CAQ76453) with other ATP sulfurylase, shows 93í identity
and 95í similarity with ATP sulfurylase from A. ferrivorans
(YP_004784724), 70í identity and 80í similarity with ATP
sulfurylase from A. caldus ATCC 51756 (EET28427) and 44í
identity and 60í similarity with the ATP sulfurylase from A.
aeolicus (O67164), but also has similarity to ATPS found in
Coxiella burnetii RSA493, fungi and yeasts. The high similarity of
ATPS from A. ferrooxidans with homooligomeric ATP
sulfurylases is demonstrated by multiple alignments using the
Clustal W program (). From the alignment there was
deduced residues comprising the N-terminal domain (1-144),
the central catalytic ATS domain (145-304), C-terminal APS
kinase domain (residues 369-557) and a subdomain (305-368)
which is considered part of the ATS domain by Yu et al. (2007)
[]. The ATS domain of ATPS from A. ferrooxidans presents 5
blocks highly conserved in other homooligomeric ATPSs 
[]
(). The active site of ATPS from A. ferrooxidans has
conserved amino acids presenting the phosphosulfate-binding
motif 170QXRN173 and the 176HXXH179 motif found in Block II
and is similar to the R. pachyptila symbiont 
[], A. aeolicus 
[]
and P. chrysogenum []. Furthermore, the mobile loop at the
active site of ATPS from A. ferrooxidans found in block III
presents the consensus sequence:
196(hp)3HXhpXGXXKXXDhpXXXXR215, which is conserved
among various families of homoligomeric ATP sulfurylases (hp
= hydrophobic residues). The ASK domain of the ATPS from A.
ferrooxidans has a high similarity with the ASK domain of the
bifunctional ATPS from A. aeolicus and is identical to the active
site of the true kinases (376GLSASGKST384) 
().

Phylogenetic analysis of ATP sulfurylase:
The construction of a phylogenetic tree by the Neighbor-Joining
method shows that the homooligomeric ATPSs comprise fourth
subgroups (). 
Subgroup 1: This subgroup consists of
those who have only the ATS domain and are found in most
Gram positive bacteria, Gram negative bacteria, archaea,
protista and plants. Our results reveal the presence of certain
clades, such as cyanobacteria (Nostoc, Anabaena, Trichodesmiun,
Synechococcus and Synechocystis) with a bootstrap of 100í.
Brassica oleracea, Arabidopsis thaliana, Glycine max, Zea mays and
Solanum suberosum plants are grouped with a bootstrap of 100í.
The ATPSs of Phaedoactilum tricornutum, Thalassiosira
pseudonana, Prochlorococcus marinus and, Chlamydomonas
reinhardtii are grouped (bootstrap 100í). Subgroup 2: Consist of
ATPSs that have both ATS domains in the N-terminus and the
ASK or ASK-like domain at the C-terminus found in fungi,
yeasts, Dictyostelium discoideum amoebae, Toxoplasma gondii
protozoa and some bacteria such as A. ferrooxidans, A. ferrivorans
and A. caldus. ATPS from genus Acidithiobacillus is grouped
with ATPS of fungi and of other bacteria that have both
domains being located at the base of all ATPSs of this subgroup
but with bootstrap of 49í. The filamentous fungi, Aspergillus
niger and P. chrysogenum and yeast S. cerevisiae,
Schizosaccharomyces pombe and Candida albicans form a clade
with a bootstrap of 95í. Bacteria of the genus Sulfitobacter,
Roseobacter, Jannaschia, Oceanicola batsensis, Silicibacter pomeroyi
and Rhodobacter sphaeroides form a clade with high bootstrap
value (100í). Subgroup 3: Consist of ATPS with both domains
but with a different arrangement (ASK domain in the Nterminus
and ATS domain in the C-terminus) which is present
specifically in higher eukaryotes (Metazoa: animals and
human). The ATPS of higher eukaryotic organisms (Mus
musculus, Cavia porcellus, Urechis caupo and Homo sapiens)
represent a clade with a bootstrap value of 99í. Subgroup 4:
Consist de ATPSs with three domains (ASK domain in the Nterminus,
ATS domain and Pyrophosphatase domain in the Cterminus)
and are found in Phaeodactylum tricornutum and
Thalassiosira pseudonana diatoms and Phytophthora infestans
forming a cluster (bootstrap 100í) meaning an evolutionary
advantage in the way of the sulfate in these organisms.

Discussion
The enzymes ATP sulfurylases (ATPSs) belong to a superfamily
of proteins and are widely distributed among microorganisms,
protista, plants, animals and humans 
[,
,
,
] involved in
desassimilative sulfate reduction, activation of sulfate
assimilation and sulfur oxidation. The direct oxidation pathway
of sulfite is the most widely distributed, but photolithotrophic
and chemolithotrophic bacteria belonging to the β- and γ-
Proteobacteria also have an indirect oxidation pathway 
[],
where ATPS participate in the final oxidation reaction,
producing ATP and SO42- from APS and PPi 
[]. We have
cloned and overexpressed the ATP sulfurylase from A.
ferrooxidans in E. coli as a recombinant protein of approximately
63.5 kDa bound to six histidines (), being the monomer
molecular weight of 60.49 kDa protein (based on its 557 amino
acids) similar to the monomer molecular weight of ATP
sulfurylase (62.8 kDa) of the thermophilic chemolithotroph A.
aeolicus []. Probably, the ATPS from A. ferrooxidans has a
dimeric structure similar to chemolithotroph A. aeolicus 
[]
because it has conserved amino acids involved in the
dimerization in the ATPS from A. aeolicus (results not shown),
whereas in the ATPS from P. chrysogenum the subunits dimerize
and then form a triad of dimers []. These results are consistent
with the proposal by Sperling (1998) et al. 
[], which each
subunit of the monomeric or homooligomeric ATPSs would
range from 41 to 69 kDa. The specific activity of ATPS from A.
ferrooxidans for the synthesis of ATP determined from crude E.
coli extracts is 106.9 units/mg/min. The specific activity for the
ATPS purified from A. aeolicus was 13.1 units/mg proteins 
[].
In contrast, The ATPS from T. denitrificans synthesizes around
400 units/g cell weight of ATP and the levels in the R. pachyptila
symbiont is similar assuming that the bacterium represents 50í
of trophosomal tissue []. The ATPS of A. ferrooxidans is
functional in the direction of ATP synthesis involved in the
oxidative metabolism of sulfite, and possibly with a low activity
in the direction of APS synthesis (experiments not conducted)
similar to the ATPS from A. aeolicus and the R. pachyptila
symbiont [,
]. In organisms such as sulfate assimilators P.
chrysogenum and S. cerevisiae, ATPS activity by the molybdolisis
method was 60 units/mg of protein and 39 units/mg of protein,
respectively []. However, by the luminometer method the
reported activity was 140 units/mg proteins for ATPS from S.
cerevisiae due to the addition of APS in the filtration step of
purification []. Moreover, in higher eukaryotes, the ATPS that
integrates human PAPS synthetase has an activity of 18.7
units/mg []. In plants, ATPS activity in leaves of spinach
(Spinacia oleracea L.) is 23.1 nmol ATP/mg/min 
[] and
Arabidopsis thaliana is 0.012 units/mg 
[]. Some
chemolithotrophic bacteria such as Acidithiobacillus could have
three enzymes: sulfite-dependent cytochrome oxidase (APS),
adenylyl phosphate (APAT) and ATP sulfurylase (ATPS),
which could catalyze the reaction of terminal sulfate production
in the complete oxidation of reduced sulfur compounds while
others seem to possess one or two enzymes (9). The gene for the
APS reductase (cysH gene) involved in the pathways of sulfate
reduction and sulfide oxidation in the biological sulfur cycle
[] 
has been reported in A. ferrooxidans. The organisms that
possess this APS reductase pathway are widely distributed in
natural environments with high concentrations of sulfide or
other reduced sulfur compounds and use this pathway to
generate ATP or by attaching electrons to reduce CO2 
[].
Although the conserved hypothetical gene (orf2) embedded in
the hdr locus of sulfur oxidizers could also be involved, that
strongly suggests that these microorganisms have a novel sulfur
oxidation pathway in which sulfite is hypothesized to be
produced in the cytoplasm by heterodisulfide reductase that in
turn would catalyze the oxidation of sulfite to APS.
Furthermore, the enzyme responsible for the second step in this
pathways, has been reported by quantitative RT-PCR analysis
of the atpS gene expression of A. ferrooxidans in the presence
reduced inorganic sulfur compounds oxidation [] and the
presence of the an ORF to ATPS in the genome of the new
specie described A. ferrivorans [], which along with our results
in the functionality of ATPS, leads us to suspect the
involvement of ATPS from A. ferrooxidans in the oxidation of
sulfite through the reverse path of APS reductase or a novel
sulfur oxidation pathway.

The ATS domain of ATPS from A. ferrooxidans has five highly
conserved regions or blocks similar to all the homooligomeric
ATPSs from archaea to higher eukaryotes (), with
blocks II and IV rich in basic amino acids that participate in the
binding of MgATP2-and SO42- 
[], corresponding these blocks to
domain II of homooligomeric ATPSs. Block II presents the
170QXRN173, 176HXXH179 motifs and Block III presents the
sequence of the active site loop 196(hp)3HXhpXGXXKXXDhpXXXXR215 motif 
(), both
blocks are important for enzyme activity [,
]. An alignment
with the structure of ATPS from Aquifex aeolicus shows that the
active site loop motif presents Asp209 amino acid described in
the ATPS from P. chrysogenum (Asp234) and A. aeolicus (Asp207)
that would help to guide the Arg172 (Arg172 also in A. aeolicus)
in the sulfate-binding site that is required for sulfurylase
activity [] and this amino acid would regulate the catalytic
activity and preference for the of APS as substrate for the
synthesis of ATP as in other chemolithotrophic bacteria and
allow an open conformation of the loop for more time,
compared to the Asp234 of the enzyme from P. crhysogenum
(sulfate assimilator) that regulates the activity to active or
inactive forms []. The amino acids Arg172, Gln170 and Ala270
form the sulfate-binding site and amino acids Arg267 and
His269 would interact with ribose. Whereas, Arg267 and Tyr307
(Leu307 in A. aeolicus) would be responsible for the preference
of this enzyme by ATP over other nucleosides. These amino
acids have been identified in the crystallized form of ATPS from
A. aeolicus (). However, so far it has not been
determined which residues are involved in determining the
direction of the physiological reaction of the ATPS enzyme.
Possibly minor perturbations are responsible for the
optimization of the kinetic properties for the physiologically
relevant direction []. The ATPS of the genus Desulfuvibrio 
[]
and some other ATPSs (Archaeoglobus fulgidus, Entamoeba
histolytica and Bacillus subtilis) have the ability to bind metals,
but the ATPS of A. ferrooxidans does not present the sequence
responsible for binding to metal C-X2-C-X8-CXH [] (results not
shown).

The ASK domain activity of ATPS from A. ferrooxidans remains
to be established. However, it is possible an APS kinase activity
because it has conserved amino acids compared to the ATPS
from A. aeolicus that presents APS kinase activity ( &amp;
) [], 
showing “P-loop” 376GLSASGKST384 motifs, whose
sequence is identical to that found in true APS kinases
(32GLSASGKST40) and is similar to the ATPS from A. aeolicus
that presents the 379GLPCAGKST387 motif. By contrast, in ATPS
from filamentous fungi this motif in the ASK-like domain has
changed and only conserves four amino acids:
403GYMNSGKDA411 
[]. Other key residues of the ASK domain
presents in the ATPS de A. ferrooxidans that have been described
in the ATPS from A. aeolicus are present: a) Asp405 (Asp407 in
A. aeolicus) that interacts with Mgí2 í ATP; b) Phe419 (Phe421 in
A. aeolicus) and Phe503 (the same position in A. aeolicus), which
would bind to the adenine ring of APS; c) the amino acid
Arg410 (Arg412 in A. aeolicus) and Arg424 (Arg426 in A.
aeolicus), which would associate the phosphosulfate group of
APS, and d) Tyr453 (Tyr455 in A. aeolicus), which would help to
align the Arg424 (similar to Arg426 in A. aeolicus). Additionally,
e) the residue Lys489 (similar to A. aeolicus), as in true APS
kinase, while in P. chrysogenum is Arg515 
[]. Furthermore, the
arrangement of some helices, beta sheets and loops of this
domain with true ASK kinase is very similar.

The evolutionary origin of homooligomeric ATPSs has not been
determined; they have no similarity to heterooligomeric ATPSs.
These two classes of ATPS with the same function are probably
originated by convergent evolution []. The phylogenetic tree of
homooligomeric ATPSs rooted with archaeal ATPSs leads us to
suppose that probably the evolution of this enzyme started
from the existence of ancestral atpS gene similar to subgroup 1 of
the homooligomeric ATPSs with only ATS domain, presents in
archaea and in Gram-positive bacteria mainly. Later, from
ATPS ancestral gene would have originated in two subgroups:
a) The subgroup 2 of the homooligomeric ATPSs which has two
domains (ATS in the N-terminal and ASK or ASK-like in the Cterminal)
and b) subgroup 3 of the homooligomeric ATPSs who
have both domains in the reverse order to subgroup 2. Possibly
the subgroup 2 is originated from a fusion of ancestral atpS gene
with a gene encoding the APS kinase protein giving rise to a
primitive bifunctional ATPS, whose homologous representative
could be the bifunctional ATPS found recently in
chemolithotrophic bacteria A. aeolicus from which the ATP
sulfurylase of fungi would have evolved []. The ATPS from
A. ferrooxidans has a high level of homology to the C-terminal
domain (kinase domain) of the ATPS from A. aeolicus and
presents an identical P-loop region to that of true APS kinases
( &amp;
), which probably suggests that A. ferrooxidans
possesses a functional enzyme of the subgrupo 2 more ancestral
than that in A. aeolicus. The most basal location of the enzyme
from A. ferrooxidans with A. ferrivorans and A. caldus in the
phylogenetic tree would corroborate our hypothesis ().
Moreover, the subgroup 3 would have originated during the
course of evolution after the divergence of an ancestral ATPS
similar to subgroup 1 gave rise first to the ATPS of plants and
then by fusion with the gene for APS kinase generated a
bifunctional enzyme called PAPS synthetase in metazoans (ASK
domain and ATS domain) as postulated earlier 
[].
Alternatively, the domains of the ATPSs subgroup 2 or subgroup
3 probably originated by a rearrangement of domains in the
bifunctional enzyme similar to primitive bacterial ATPS of the
subgroup 2 as A. aeolicus and A. ferrooxidans, and are possibly
intermediate forms between the ATPS of fungi and metazoan
PAPS synthetases as postulated Hanna (2002) et al. 
[].
Additionally, subgroup 4 includes ATP sulfurylases with ATS,
ASK and pyrophosphatase domains would have originated
from subgroup 3 during the course of evolution. This is
postulated the variations of ATPSs are the result of ancestral
fusion genes evolving by an assortment of gene fissions,
duplications, deletions, and horizontal transfers in different
lineages []. Our phylogenetic tree is consistent with the
possibility that the enzyme ATP sulfurylase from the
chemolithotrophic Riftia symbiont (subgroup 1) is most similar
to ancestral ATP sulfurylase from which the family of
homooligomeric ATP sulfurylase would have evolved 
[] but
probably there are other ancestral ATPS present in other
microorganisms ().

During the evolution of the homoligomeric ATPSs, occurred
horizontal atpS gene transfer events between some organisms
whose expression allowed them to adapt their metabolism and
lifestyle []. 
Similar results were obtained by Patron et al. (2008)
[] 
whose proposed that the inheritance of the enzymes of the
ATPS, APR and PAPR have multiple origins in lineages that
comprise opisthokonts (fungi and animals), gene fusions with
other enzymes of sulphate assimilation pathway and evidence
an eukaryote-to-prokaryote lateral gene transfer. Some
organisms (Thiobacillus denitrificans, Phaeodactylum tricornutum,
Thalassiosira pseudonana) present yet ATPS with only ATS
domain and ATPS with ATS; ASK domains or fusion with
pirophosphatase domain. The crystallography of the putative
bifunctional ATPS (with ATS and ASK domains) from
Thiobacillus denitrificans has shown that it only presents APS
kinase activity, and exhibits numerous structural and sequence
differences in the ATS domain to other ATPSs that render it
inactive with respect to ATP sulfurylase activity, probably has
unknown function []. The fusion of ATPS has happened not
only with the gene for APS kinase, but with the inorganic
pyrophosphatase enzyme in stramenopiles (in the diatom
Thalassiosira pseudonana and Phaeodactylum tricornutum, and the
oomycete Phytophtohora sojae) and on haptofites (algae such as
Pavlova lutheria and Emiliania huxleri). Furthermore, in
Heterocapsa triquetra is found the fusion of ATPS to APR, which
probably would ensure a rapid transition from APS to the site
of its reduction by increasing the production rate of sulfite 
[].
Genomic analysis of the atpS gene region of A. ferrooxidans
ATCC 23270 (16 kb) shows that the atpS gene is not associated
with other genes in the metabolism of sulfur compounds
especially with the APS reductase involved in the indirect route
of oxidation of sulphite, but is associated with other
transferases and chaperonins. An ORF that encoded the APS
reductase of A. ferrooxidans was found in the genome the A.
ferrooxidans ATCC 23270 strain but not adjacent to the atpS gene.
By contrast, in the phototrophic sulfur oxidizer Chromatium
vinosum, genes encoding for ATP sulfurylase and APS reductase
(aprMBA, aprM encodes a membrane anchor protein) form an
operon []. 
In the sulfate reducing archaeon A. fulgidus, the
aprC gene that encodes a soluble protein with no known
function, is inserted between the atpS gene (called sat) and the
aprBA gene []. 
In the genome of C. tepidum, the genes for ATP
sulfurylase and APS reductase are located adjacent to each
other [].

Conclusion
We have demonstrated the expression of the gene encoding the
enzyme ATP sulfurylase in the chemolithotrophic bacterium A.
ferrooxidans 23270 that it would participate in the indirect
pathway of sulfide oxidation to obtain energy. It presents an
homooligomeric ATPS with: a) similarity at the sequence level
and structure to homooligomeric ATPS with conserved motifs
and mobile loop at the active site, b) Five blocks present in all
homooligomeric ATPS, c) Enzyme activity producing ATP from
APS and PPi, d) Presence of amino acids similar to ATPS from
A. aeolicus involved in dimer formation, e) similarity to subgroup
2 of the homooligomeric ATPS, and f) size protein and
cytoplasmic location. Subsequent studies of the ATPS present in
A. ferrooxidans as purification and crystallization involved in the
indirect oxidation of sulfite will be vital in understanding the
mechanism of acid drainage generation used in bioleaching
processes to improve the recovery rate of metals.

This work was supported in part by grant from CONCYTEC
(contract No 245-03-CONCYTEC-OAJ). LJdV was supported by
grant from AECID (A/9727/07). MLJ was the recipient
CONCYTEC Master in Molecular biology scholarship.

Citation:Jaramillo et al, Bioinformation 8(15): 695-704 (2012)

In vivo overexpression of the ATP sulfurylase from A.
ferrooxidans 23270 in E. coli. The molecular weight standard is
indicated on the left in kilodaltons. 1 and 2, total protein
extracts of E. coli BL21 Start (DE3) with and without IPTG, 4 and
6, induction of protein expression of the ATP sulfurylase in
recombinant clones BL21-22 and BL21-42 containing the atpS
gene with histidine tail. The recombinant plasmids were used to
transform the E. coli BL21 Star (DE3) strain. In the logarithmic
growth phase, strains were grown in the presence (2, 4 &amp; 6) or
absence (1, 3 and 5) of 1 mM IPTG for 3 h. Samples of total
protein (1 to 6) were separated by SDS-polyacrylamide
electrophoresis and stained with Coomassie blue. The right
arrow indicates the band corresponding to the induction of
ATPS protein bind to 6xHis at the C-terminal domain.

Multiple alignment of the ATPS from A. ferrooxidans with other homooligomerics ATP sulfurylase presenting 5 conserved
regions or blocks in the ATS domain. Amino acids were aligned using Clustal W. Residues identical in most sequences are
indicated in black and similar residues are indicated in gray. The arrows indicate the site of initiation of the N-terminal, domain
ATP sulfurylase, Domain APS kinase and subdomain of the ATPS from A. ferrooxidans. A. ferrooxidans (CAQ76453), A. ferrivorans
(YP004784724), A. caldus (EET28427), A. aeolicus (O67174), C. burnetti (AAO90244), P. chrysogenum (Q12650), Sch. pombe (P78937), S.
cerevisiae (P08536), T. gondii (EEB04289), T. pseudonana (EED89391), P. tricomutum (EEC48794), H. sapiens (O43252), A. thaliana
(NP188929), B. subtilis (O34764), Synechocystis sp. (P74241), Chromatium vinosum (O66036), Simbionte of Riftia pachyptila (AAA72419),
A. fulgidus (O28606).

Multiple alignment of the APS kinase domain of ATPS from A. ferrooxidans (CAQ76453) and A. aeolicus (2GKS) with the
APS kinase (APSK) from P. chrysogenum (1M7H), S. cerevisiae (CAA46252) and St. epidermidis (Q5HL02). Identical amino acids
(black) and similar (gray) are indicated. The arrow indicates the conserved component of the ATPS from A. ferrooxidans:
487DPKGLYAKAVRGEITGFTGVD507. The black square indicates a P-loop region of the APS kinase that has identical sequence
GLSASGKST in the ATPS from A. ferrooxidans.

Phylogenetic tree of the homooligomerics ATPS rooted with the ATPS de archaea building by Neighbor Joining method
from multiple alignment of amino acid sequences of the ATPS. An analysis of 1000 bootstrap replicates, using the Poisson
correction model for Mega v.5.05 program. There are fourth subgroups de ATPS: 1) Some bacteria, archeae, algae, Entamoeba
histolytica, Phaeodactylum tricornutum, Thalassiosira pseudonana diatomeas and plants with ATPS only with domain (sulfurylase:
ATS), 2) fungi, yeasts, Dictyostelium discoideum amoebae, Toxoplasma gondii protozoa and some bacteria with the ATPS with both
domains (sulfurylase: ATS and kinase: ASK o ASK-like) and 3) eukaryotic higher animals and man have the ATPS with both
domains in the reverse order (kinase: ASK and sulfurylase: ATS), and 4) Phaeodactylum tricornutum and Thalassiosira pseudonana
diatoms and Phytophthora infestans have the ATPS with three domains (kinase: ASK, sulfurylase: ATS, and Pyrophosphatase
domain: P). Tree based on a comparison of 342 amino acids of the ATS domain of A. ferrooxidans.

Structural alignment of the ATPS from A. ferrooxidans (CAQ76453) with ATPS of A. aeolicus (MMDB: ID44452; PDB:
2GKS). a) Active site of the ATS domain with an ADP molecule, and b) most important amino acid residues of the active site for
function and binding nucleotides are marked with numbers in the ATPS sequence from A. ferrooxidans. The molecule in sky-blue is
ADP. Identical amino acids are shown in red and similar ones in blue. The HXXH motif (in gray) stabilizes PPi and QXRN motif (in
yellow) is the catalytic motif. Residues R267, H269 and Y307 (in green) are joined with the ATP.

Comparative structural alignment of the ASK domain of ATPS from A. ferrooxidans (CAQ76453) with: a) ASK domain of
ATPS from A. aeolicus (MMDB ID 44452, PDB: 2GKS_A); b) APS kinase from P. chrysogenum (MMDB ID: 21216, PDB: IM7G_A). It is
shown the catalytic site of APS kinase domain with the P-loop motif (yellow). Red color indicates identical amino acids and blue
indicates similar ones blue in the activity of true APS kinase. In a) the molecule lies in the ADP and in b) it does in the ATP (in sky blue).
The numbering is based on the sequence of ATPS from A. ferrooxidans.

