Background
Nature has gifted the genetic code that provides the basic
instructions and information to direct efficient protein synthesis
and folding. There are sixty-one codons that specify for only
twenty amino acids found commonly in protein sequences;
most of these amino acids (building blocks of protein) can be
encoded by more than one codon (i.e., a triplet of nucleotides);
such codons are described as being synonymous, and mostly
differ by one nucleotide in the third position []. The term
codon bias or more preferably codon usage bias represents the
unequal usage of synonymous codons for encoding amino acids
which may vary significantly between genomes, between genes
in the same genome, and within a single gene 
[–]. Since the
1970s, the unequal use of synonymous codons has been
confirmed in many organisms. To date, the codon usage
patterns in many organisms have been interpreted for diverse
reasons. Recently, it has been reported that two major factors
are involved in the continuation of codon usage bias: weak
natural selection and mutational pressure []. The selection
associated with translational efficiency/accuracy is often
termed as ‘translation selection’. Moreover, scientific
investigation also reported that synonymous codon usage
pattern varied at distinct sites along a coding sequence, balances
of strong versus weak base pair bonding, maintenance of DNA
and RNA secondary structure, and translational efficiency and
fidelity []. That is why codon usage bias among different
organisms or within the genes of the same organism has invited
much attention and various works on the subject have been
published in recent years.

Lavner and Kotlar (2005) suggested that there are three possible
ways in which selection may act on codon bias in the human
genome: (1) Increasing translation efficiency in highly expressed
genes; (2) Regulating translation efficiency of some proteins that
can be a disadvantage at high levels; and (3) Improving
translation efficiency and reducing the rate of amino acid
misincorporation in the production of biosynthetically
expensive proteins []. Many genomic analyses have been done
on oncogenes but till date very little is known about the codon
usage patterns and the factors that influence them. Codon usage
patterns are important for bringing out molecular mechanism
and evolutions of oncogenes. In this paper we have analyzed
the key genetic factors playing crucial role in determining the
codon usage pattern in fifty (50) oncogenes. To the best of our
knowledge, it is the first systematic study to verify and insist
that the synonymous codon usage pattern is one of the factors
affecting the codon usage in oncogenes.

Methodology
Retrieval of Sequence data:
A list of human oncogenes was compiled from the web site
(http://cbio.mskcc.org/CancerGenes/Select.action). Complete
nucleotide coding sequence of each of the concerned gene, was
obtained from NCBI nucleotide database website 
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). 
Codon usage bias was measured in
the 50 oncogenes listed in  (see supplementary
material). The complete coding sequence (cds) of each oncogene
was analyzed using PERL program developed by us.

Analysis of synonymous codon usage bias:
We measured the non-uniform usage of synonymous codons for
the oncogenes by analyzing several genetic indices given below-

Nucleotide composition:
The frequency of the nucleotide G+C at the synonymous third
codon position (GC3s) is a good indicator of the extent of base
composition bias []. The frequencies of the nucleotides A, C, U
(T), G in the complete coding sequences of each oncogene and
the occurrence of overall (G+C)% content at the different codon
positions GC1%, GC2%, GC3% was calculated to study the
relationship between codon usage variation and compositional
constraints.

Effective number of codons:
The effective number of codons (ENC) is generally used to
measure the codon usage bias of a gene that is independent of
the gene length and number of amino acids []. The ENC value
ranges from 20-61. For a gene in which only one codon is used
for each amino acid, this value would be 20 while all codons are
used equally the value would be 61 []. The ENC value closer
to 20 indicates, strong codon usage bias in the gene and these
biased genes are expressed highly []. The ENC values for all
cds sequence were computed as per Wright (1990) []. In
addition, to examine the influence of GC content on codon
usage, the relationship of ENC and GC3s content of each gene
was plotted according to the equation described by Wright
(1990) [].

Codon adaptation index:
Codon adaptation index (CAI) is used to estimate the degree of
bias toward codons in highly expressed genes and thus assesses
the effective selection which helps in shaping the codon usage
pattern [–
]. The CAI ranges from 0 to 1, for a gene in which
all synonymous codons are used equally, the value would be 0
for no bias while only optimal codons are used, value will be 1
for strongest bias []. The CAI value was measured as per
Sharp PM et al. [].

Frequency of optimal codons:
Frequency of optimal codons (Fop) is used to measure codon
usage bias in a gene []. Fop is calculated as the ratio of the
number of optimal codons used to the total number of
synonymous codons []. The Fop value ranges from 0.36, for a
gene in which codon usage pattern is uniform, to 1 for a gene in
which codon usage is highly biased []. We used the formula
given by Lanver &amp; Kotlar to calculate the Fop values for each of
the cds selected for the present study [].

Relative synonymous codon usage:
Relative synonymous codon usage (RSCU) is calculated by
dividing the observed frequency of a codon by the expected if
all synonymous codons for that amino acid were used equally
[]. 
Thus, an RSCU value close to 1 indicates a lack of bias,
RSCU &gt;1 indicates a codon used more frequently than expected
randomly, and RSCU &lt;1 indicates a codon used less frequently
than expected randomly [].

Correlation analysis:
Correlation analysis was used to identify the relationship
between the pattern of synonymous codon usage and the
genetic indices used for the present study. This analysis was
implemented based on the Spearman's rank correlation
analysis. All statistical analyses were carried out by using
software SPSS.

Results
In this present study, the selected oncogenic cds sequences were
downloaded from NCBI nucleotide database using a perl
program. The program was written in such a way that it selects
only those cds sequences which have perfect start and stop
signal and devoid of any unknown bases (N). We found fifty
cds sequences in correct format for codon bias study. The extent
of codon usage bias was determined in these fifty oncogenes
. 
Two amino acids methionine and tryptophan coded by
single codon ATG and TGG, respectively and three stop codons
(TAA, TAG, and TGA) would not reveal any usage bias and
therefore discarded from the calculation.

Codon usage bias and correlation with GC3s:
The overall percentage of guanine and cytosine contents GC%
and adenine and thymine contents AT% on the first, second,
and third codon positions of the 50 target oncogenes of human
were investigated  (see supplementary material). It can
be assumed that the evolution of codon usage might be either
controlled by natural selection or by mutation pressure. To
determine the extent of the role of these two evolutionary forces
on the codon usage pattern of human oncogene, we performed
correlation analysis between different nucleotide constraints.
First we calculated the GC content at different codon positions
() and it was found that the GC content at each codon
position varies among the genes. Finally, compared GC content
at first codon position (GC1) and second codon positions (GC2)
with that of third codon positions (GC3s) and observed a
significant positive correlation (r=0.45, P&lt;0.01) 
(), that
reveals base compositions are prone to the result of mutation
pressure rather than natural selection, since at all codon
positions its effects are present.

Effective number of codons and its relationship with GC3s values:
The average ENC value used by the oncogenes was found to be
53.74 with a range of 38 to 60. Thirty eight oncogenes had ENC
values in the range 50-60, 11 in the range 40-50 and 1 between 38
and 40 (). Therefore, codon usage bias is in most cases
little, although some variation is evident. Moreover the GC3
values were found to range from 0.3 to 0.1. We calculated the
correlation coefficient between ENC and GC3s values. The
results showed that the ENC value was strongly negatively
correlated with the GC3s values of each gene (r = -0.771, P &lt;
0.01). These calculations suggested that genes with higher GC3s
values and lower ENC values had strong bias. Finally, we
plotted the ENC against the GC3% values to investigate the
general codon usage variation with different GC content of each
gene () 
[]. The continuous curve represents the
expected positions of genes where GC3 values are the only
determinant factor shaping the codon usage pattern. Most genes
were found to be located on or above the reference line,
representing that the codon usage pattern was only determined
by GC3 values. Moreover, some genes located above the
reference line, indicates that GC3 is not the only factor for
shaping the codon usage pattern other factors like nucleotide
composition, may be involved for these genes.

Level of oncogene expression and codon bias:
The level of expression of oncogene was measured through
codon adaptation index (CAI) values [,
], which varied from
0.124 to 0.735 with the mean of 0.395 and standard deviation of
0.159. The CAI value indicates that most of the genes selected
for the present study are highly expressive in nature. Moreover,
a significant negative correlation was observed between CAI &amp;
GC3s (r=-0.489, P&lt;0.01) and CAI &amp; GC content (r=-0.463,
P&lt;0.01). Furthermore, significant positive correlation was also
observed in between ENC and CAI (r= 0.644, P&lt;0.01) 
().
The results revealed that codon usage pattern determines the
level of all expression in human and highly expressed genes
have high GC contents and a greater extent of codon usage bias.
We also calculated the frequency of the occurrence of
synonymous codons for the amino acids. The frequency was
allied with statistical analysis to find out the highest and lowest
frequently used codon (). Relative synonymous codon
usage (RSCU) values for each synonymous codon were
calculated to find out the highest and least abundant codons.
The results of our analysis indicate that the highest abundant
codon is CTG for Leucine and GTT for Valine. Least abundant
codons are GTC, ACT, TCG, CTA, and ATA for amino acid
valine, threonine, serine, leucine and isoleucine, respectively
().

Discussion
In brief, we analyzed the codon usage pattern and the key
genetic factors playing decisive role in determining the pattern
of codon usage for the fifty oncogenes. Based on the hypothesis
that gene expressivity and codon composition are strongly
correlated, the codon adaptation index has been defined to
provide an intuitively meaningful measure of the extent of the
codon preference in a gene. The present study was carried out
to analyze the CAI, Fop, ENC, RSCU, base composition for the
oncogenes, and also to find out the level at which the above
mentioned genetic factors are involved in the formation of
codon usage pattern. As per our mentioned objectives in this
present study, we selected fifty oncogenes from Homo sapiens for
CUB analysis. The accurate coding sequences having correct
initial and termination codons were retrieved using a program
in perl, developed by us. After analyzing the cds sequences it
was found that 70% of the cds selected for the study are rich in
GC. We also predicted the heterogeneity of codon usage by
analyzing the effective number of codons (ENC). We also
measured the variation of codon usage bias among the
oncogenes, further confirmed by the distributions of GC content
at the third synonymous codon positions. These results indicate
that apart from compositional constraints, other trends might
influence the overall codon usage variation among the
oncogenes. We calculated the CAI values for the oncogenes and
it was found that seventy five percent of the cds selected from
Homo sapiens qualify as highly expressed genes. We analyzed
normalized AT and GC frequency at each codon site. Significant
correlation was observed between gene expression as measured
by CAI and GC content at any codon site. Among all GC3s
showed highest correlation (-0.489) with gene expression. The
frequency of the occurrence of each synonymous codon for the
amino acids was calculated. The frequency was allied with
statistical analysis to find out the highest and lowest frequently
used codon. At the end of our frequency analysis we found that
AAC, GAC, TGC, CAG, GAG, CAC, AAG and TAC are the
codons used most frequently among cds sequence of oncogenes.

Conclusion
The mutation pressure is the major determining factor in
shaping the codon usage pattern of oncogenes rather than
natural selection since its effects are present at all codon
positions. The results revealed that codon usage bias determines
the level of oncogene expression in human. Highly expressed
oncogenes had rich GC contents with high degree of codon
usage bias.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We are thankful to Assam University, Silchar, Assam, India for
providing the necessary facilities in carrying out this research
work.

Citation:Mazumder et al, Bioinformation 10(5): 256-262 (2014)

Percentage of GC content at three codon positions.

Correlation between GC content at first and second
codon positions (GC1 &amp; GC2) with that at synonymous third
codon positions (GC3s). GC12: average GC content at first and
second codon positions.

ENC distribution of 50 selected oncogenes.

Distribution of ENC and GC content of the third
codon position of 50 different oncogenes. The continuous curve
represents the expected curve between ENC and GC contents
under random codon usage.

Correlation between Effective number of codons
(ENC) and Codon adaptation index (CAI).

Frequency of highest and least used codons among the 50 cds selected for the present study.

Relative synonymous codon usage and codon usage bias among the selected 50 cds. (A): Most abundant codons, RSCU &gt;
1. (B): Least abundant codons, RSCU &lt; 1.

