Background
Tuberculosis (TB), a bacterial origin infectious disease caused
by obligate human pathogen Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb).
TB as a single infectious disease is responsible for the leading
cause of deaths in developing as well as developed countries. It
is estimated that annually 2 million people are dying due to this
treatable disease. According to World Health Organization
(WHO) reports for the year 2010, 8.8 million incident cases of
TB were estimated globally. The highest number of deaths was
in the African region. Without treatment against TB, mortality
and morbidity are high. Despite the overwhelming research
going on to understand the pathogenesis of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis, increasing drug resistance in pathogen requires
development of new therapeutic and preventive strategies 
[].

Co-infection with HIV has given new dimension to the TB
epidemics. It has been reported that 1.1 million deaths among
HIV-negative cases of TB and an additional 0.35 million deaths
among people who were HIV-positive occurred [,
]. Major
setback to the Global TB eradication program is the rise of
Multidrug Resistant (MDR) and Extreme Drug Resistant (XDR)
mutants of M. tuberculosis, which are resistant to the first line
and second line of anti-tuberculosis drugs. Drug resistance can
be defined as the temporary or permanent capacity of
organisms and their progeny to remain viable or to multiply in
the presence of the concentration of the drug that would
normally destroy or inhibit cell growth []. Multi-drug resistant
tuberculosis (MDR-TB) is a disease caused by strains of M.
tuberculosis that are at least resistant to treatment with isonazid
and rifampicin. Extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis (XDRTB)
refers to disease caused by multidrug-resistant strains that
are also resistant to treatment with any fluoroquinolone and
any of the injectable drugs used in treatment with second-line
anti-tuberculosis drugs (amikacin, capreomycin, and
kanamycin) []. There are many factors like clinical, biological
and socioeconomic which are responsible for the rise of drug
resistance associated with Mtb infection 
[,
,
].

The resistance acquired by pathogen may be due to plasmid,
which carries different antibiotic resistance genes. The other
MDR mechanisms are due to sequential accumulation of
chromosomal mutations in different drug resistant genes that
commonly occurs in case of MDR-TB and XDR-TB.
Chromosomal mutations may be responsible for the different
effect like reduced permeability, increased efflux, enzymatic
inactivation, or alteration of drug target []. In light of this, it
becomes necessary to search for the new targets to contain the
TB epidemic globally. To counter the drug resistance in Mtb,
global efforts are on to explore novel strategies for drug
development and search for new therapeutic molecules as a
drug target. Methods such as rotations of antibiotic
combinations, improved medical surveillance to ensure proper
patient compliance towards drug therapy are proving less
useful compared to speed with which pathogen is becoming
resistant to drugs. Identification of new targets that may be less
prone to mutations, search for new chemical modulators for
known molecular targets , use of virulence factors as targets and
‘phenotypic conversion’, which aims to inhibit the resistance
mechanism employed by the bacterium [,
]. In this era of
“Omics” where various databases are available, use of
computational approaches to mine the possible therapeutic
target seems much feasible requiring future experimental
validation.

This study includes construction and analysis of molecular
interaction networks, which provides a powerful means to
understand the complexity of biological systems and to reveal
hidden relationships between drugs, genes, proteins, and
diseases. In recent years, several computational methodologies
have been developed to predict and develop models to
understand the complexity of diseases like tuberculosis 
[–].
Analysis of genetic makeup will provide information about the
crosstalk between different proteins, which can provide a new
way to identify a potential targets. Here, we use wide-scale
network and phylogenetic analysis of genes and proteins
association to discover possible new target to combat against
MDR-TB and XDR-TB. The network analyses reported here
further help in identification of genes, which are activated in
response to resistance against antibiotics. The complete
methodology for this analysis is represented as flowchart
(). The study also identify some protein that could be
explored for their use as drug ‘co-targets’.

Methodology
Data collection and Network analysis:
Genes and Proteins encoding for the antibiotic resistance
against first line antibiotics, like, aminoglycoside, ethambutol,
isonazid, pyrazinamide, flouroquinoles and rifampin were
retrieved from the Antibiotic Resistance Gene Database 
[] and
collected in form of subset of main database. We analyzed and
compared the genes for their screening and inclusion criteria of
interactions. The interaction network for these genes were build
and visualized by Cytoscape v2.8.2 software [,
]. In order to
map the common genes in the interaction network, we used
Entrez Gene ID as the unique identifier for genes.

Sequence analysis and Phylogenetic analysis:
The protein sequences that are found to be common through
network analysis from M. tuberculosis H37Rv and other
Mycobacterium species were retrieved from NCBI
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). Similarity in the selected
sequences were evaluated by Blastp []. The multiple
alignments and phylogenetic analysis of selected sequences
were done using MEGA5 software [,
]. Furthermore,
analysis of the conserved motif in common 53 proteins aa
sequence was performed by MEME online server, which use
comparative analysis mode for finding conserved motifs 
[–].

Protein Interaction Network:
A proteome-scale interaction network of proteins in M.
tuberculosis with aminoglycoside 2'-N-aminoglycoside 2'-Nacetyltransferase
AAC was derived from the STRING database
[,
], using “High-confidence” and “Medium-confidence”
data. Coexpression and Occurrence analysis for this protein was
obtained from STRING database. Blastp analysis 
[] against a
human protein database was done to validate that this
particular protein not share any homology with human
proteins.

Homology modeling and structural comparison:
Seven different Aminoglycoside 2'-N-acetyltransferase (AAC)
(AT-1 to -7) from different clads were selected and amino acid
sequence analysis was done by performing a multiple sequence
alignment using ClustalX and also conserved sequences and
motifs were identified using PSI-BLAST search [,
] and
Pfam database []. Amino acid sequence of selected
aminoglycoside 2'-N-acetyltransferase (AACs) of M. tuberculosis
was aligned with bovine trypsin sequence (PDB ID: 1M4D;
Aminoglycoside 2'-N-aminoglycoside 2'-N-acetyltransferase
(AAC) from Mycobacterium tuberculosis in complex with
coenzyme A and aminoglycoside substrates; Resolution=
1.8A°). The 3D models were generated using the MODELLER
package (version 9.10) []. All the models were energy
minimized using a conjugate gradient algorithm and short MD
simulations, as part of the MODELLER protocol in order to
refine the side chain orientations. 50 models were generated for
each sequence, which were rated according to the GA341 and
DOPE scoring functions []. The structures were analyzed
using PyMol software [,
] and superimposed using TM
align server (http://zhanglab.ccmb.med.umich.edu/TMalign/)
[]. The models were also analyzed for oligomeric
states using SCORER 2.0 program [,
]. The 3-D structures of
predicted models were validated with the programs
PROCHECK and ProSA analysis. These programs
generate Ramchandran plots of the amino acid residues in the
allowed region and consider the overall G -factors to give scores
for predicting model quality.

Result
All antibiotics share common genetic makeup for resistance:
Network analysis shows that selected 1221 resistant genes form
1220 interactions with six nodes, which represent each
individual antibiotic (). Fifty-three genes were found to
be common among selected first line and second line antibiotics
resistant genes, whereas aminoglycosides and Flouroquinoles
share 41 common resistance genes. These common 53 genes
encode for mechanisms of destruction and detoxification of
antibiotics. Out of common 53 genes, 28 codes for
aminoglycoside N-acetyltransferase, this modifies
aminoglycosides by acetylation. Remaining genes were
encoded for a product like Class A beta-lactamase (Q5951; This
Enzyme breaks the beta-lactam antibiotic ring open and
deactivates the molecule's antibacterial properties), tetracycline
Efflux pump (AAB84282, YP_889433), and Sulfonamideresistant
dihydropteroate synthase (Q49184). Another major
group of genes (21 genes) produces pentapeptide as functional
product, which protect DNA gyrases from the inhibition of
quinolones.

Acetyltransferases shows divergent evolution:
Outcome of multiple alignments () gives that, 53 amino
acid sequences of common genes from Mycobacterium
tuberculosis and related species of M. tuberculosis shares 90% of
sequence similarity. Phylogenetic analysis shows that out of
these 53 genes, 28 genes which codes for Aminoglycoside 2'-Nacetyltransferase
(AAC) activity cluster together. This
acetyltransferase cluster is subdivided in 7 different clad,
signifies for small sequence variation in related sequences. All
results from multiple alignment and phylogenetic analysis
show that acetyltransferases in Mycobacterium tuberculosis were
evolved divergently from ancestral component.

M. tuberculosis aminoglycoside 2'-N-acetyltransferase (AAC)
shows association with Non-Housekeeping genes:
From STRING database, proteome-scale interaction network of
proteins in M. tuberculosis H37Rv was derived 
 (see
supplementary material). This database takes account of
interactions from published literature describing
experimentally studied interactions as well as those from
genome analysis using several well established methods such as
domain fusion, phylogenetic profiling and gene neighborhood
concepts. This network comprises of different types of
interactions such as Coexpression, co-existence and common
neighborhood (or domain fusion) of query protein. In our
study, we found that aminoglycoside 2'-N-acetyltransferase
(AAC) form M. tuberculosis are interacting with 10 different
proteins as summarized in (). Out of these 10 proteins, 5
proteins MT3587, MT2804, MT027, mmpS5 and MT0276 codes
for hypothetical proteins, whereas remaining proteins are also
of specialized function. Prediction of Coexpression shows that
only three proteins pra, MT0185 and mmpS5 are associated
with each other with medium confidence value (0.4) and also
this association is specific for M. tuberculosis H37Rv ().
From the STRING database Neighborhood analysis we can
predict that aminoglycoside 2'-N-acetyltransferase AAC
(Rv0262c) is closely associated with two hypothetical proteins
Rv0264c and Rv0263c. Blastp analysis against Homo sapiens
protein database show that aminoglycoside 2'-Nacetyltransferase
AAC doesn't share any homology with human
protein.

All acetyltransferase shares a common ancestral core:
Predicted models of aminoglycoside 2'-N-acetyltransferases
show common structure despite of their sequence divergence.
According to Ramchandran pot analysis using PROCHECK, all
predicted models have 98% of aa in favored and allowed region
(). SCORER 2.0 analysis shows that all protein were
predicted to form dimer. Each structure is composed of two
interconnected beta sheets and four alpha helices. Strands β1-4
form relatively flat antiparallel β sheet, while helices α1, α2, α3
lie against the flat surface of β sheet, whereas strands β5-10 and
portion of β3, β4 forms the open barrel with mixed topology.
Helix α4 lies against the outer surface of this barrel. This allstructural
features were remained common for all selected
acetyltransferase, which leads to conclusion that all seven
acetyltransferase share common ancestral structural core.

Validation of acetyltransferase as co-target for Antituberculosis drugs:
PyMol and Accelerys Discovery Studio Visualizer 3.0
(http://accelrys.com/) were used for structural analysis. The
mapping of a conserved motif obtained from MEME analysis,
on predicted models of acetyltransferases (Supplementary
) shows that the binding pocket of this particular class
of protein is highly conserved in Mtb and related species
(). Blastp analysis shown that (AT) from M.
tuberculosis were unrelated to any class of human protein 
 
(see Supplementary material). This all features makes
acetyltransferases as potential co-target for existing and new
developing class of drugs.

Discussion
Complexity in “Omics” of M. tuberculosis and also the
emergence of MDR and XDR strains gives it potential to be one
of most lethal infectious pathogen. Multidisciplinary and
multifaceted approaches can serve as better mean to solve the
complexity of this pathogen. During the course of time,
different terms like drugome, reactome, and pocketome had
developed in the context of tuberculosis study. Here we are
using term ‘Resistome' that signifies interaction of genes,
proteins and metabolites, to evoke resistance of the organism
against drugs and antibiotics. There are few reports, which
show use integrative approach to study the complexity in the
resistance mechanism of M. tuberculosis [,
,
].
Computational analysis in terms of network analysis, statistical
analysis and other way provides a very effective tool to handle
very large and complex data and also to produce some
concluding remarks about the complexity of Mtb. Network and
interaction analysis is a very useful tool to study genome wide
and proteome wide interaction analysis in M. tuberculosis. In
2008, Chandra et al. had shown the proteome wide interaction
in Mtb. Here in this report we had used network analysis to
make a systematic cluster of 1, 221 genes which are responsible
for antibiotic resistance against the first and second line of
drugs. Our analysis also provides information about genes
found to be common in resistance mechanism against different
antibiotics. Fifty-three genes were found to be common for
aminoglycosides, flouroquinolones, rifampicin, isonazid,
ethambutol, and pyrazinamide, whereas 41 genes were found
to be overlapping in flouroquinolones and aminoglycosides
resistance. According to the ARDB functional annotation, out of
53 common genes 28 gene codes for acetyltransferase AT, 21
codes for pentapeptide that is responsible for resistance against
flouroquinolones. From this analysis AT was found to be a
major enzymatic mechanism of resistance against all first and
second line drugs, which make this molecule as a potential
target as a Co-target for existing and new developing drug
strategies.

Phylogenetic and structural analysis shows that all the
candidates of selected AAC shares common ancestor. Structural
analysis of representative AAC from each clad of the
phylogenic tree provides very important informatics about the
basic ancestral core of all different AAC from M. tuberculosis
and related species. From SCORER 2.0, analysis all AAC was
predicted to form dimer and MEME analysis shows that region
which is involved in dimer formation is conserved for all
structures. Another important result from MEME analysis
shows that region which is responsible for ligand for in AAC is
also conserved in all selected AAC. Development of AAC as Co
target also requires some pre requisite like it should not show
homology with human proteins, and it should be involved in
housekeeping functions in M. tuberculosis. Blastp search against
the human proteome shows that AAC is not homologous to any
human protein, so it is concluded that AAC is specific for M.
tuberculosis. From the STRING database analysis it is found that
AAC can probably interact with 10 different proteins from M.
tuberculosis. This AAC protein interaction comprises of 5
hypothetical protein (Rv3483c, Rv2735c, Rv0264c, Rv0677c and
Rv0263c), 2 membrane protein (Rv0403c, Rv0200), proline-rich
antigen (Rv1078), MCE associated protein (Rv0177), and mce
associated transmembrane protein (Rv0176). Coexpression
analysis of these interacting proteins shows that Rv1078 and
Rv0176 found to be Co-expressing, whereas AAC (Rv0262c)
found to be coexisting with Rv0263c and Rv0264c. This
Coexpression and Coexistence analysis is found to be specific
for M. tuberculosis, and it shows that AAC is not involved in or
interacting with the housekeeping function of M. tuberculosis.
This all data will be useful for exploiting AAC as Co-target.

Emergence of drug resistance in M. tuberculosis leads to put
efforts aimed at identifying new potent broad-spectrum
drugs/antibiotics, but along with this, it is necessary to take
account of drug resistance mechanism and the way to overcome
this. Development of drug targeting co-target like
Aminoglycosides transferases will be effective in enhancing
efficacy of existing anti mycobacterial regime and it will
provide additional strength for newly developing drugs.

Conclusion
Network analysis of different antibiotic resistance gene in M.
tuberculosis has provided the platform for identifications of cotargets.
Further structural characterization and analysis using
different tools like structural superimposition and binding site
predictions might be useful for targeting these co-targets.
Furthermore, it is also useful to develop several inhibitor
molecules against these co-targets in process of antituberculosis
drug development.

Supplementary material
Data 1
RSJ and MDJ acknowledge CSIR for the research fellowships.
MSS is grateful to acknowledge the financial support provided
by the Department of Biotechnology (DBT), Government of
India, New Delhi. The authors are grateful to acknowledge
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, New Delhi, India
for their financial support to this work. The authors are grateful
to acknowledge Dr. Rajesh Kumar Singh, Gennova
Biopharmceticals Ltd., Pune, India and Dr. Milind S. Patole
from NCCS, Pune 411007, MS, India for their critical comments.
The authors have declared no conflict of interest.

Citation:Joshi et al, Bioinformation 9(4): 174-181 (2013)

Progression of experiments in this study: A flowchart
illustrating the progression of experiments in this study.
Different aspects indicated in this are Database construction,
curation of the resistance proteins, identification of common
genes by network analysis, Phylogenetic analysis for homolog
analysis, Protein-protein interaction analysis, and structural
analysis.

Illustration of the gene network: Hexagonal node
represents antibiotics (Pink in colour) and circular nodes
(Yellow) correspond to the individual genes in the network
while the edge (Grey) indicate interactions between them.
Enlarged view of network show the common genes present in
all antibiotics.

Phylogenetic analysis of common genes: Phylogenetic
tree comprises of 53 common genes which were identified by
network analysis. Shaded region shows sequences which code
for acetyltransferase activity.

Illustration of the AAC protein interaction from STRING database: A) Network of protein-protein Interaction of AAC in
M. tuberculosis; B) Heat map showing degree of Coexpression in AAC interacting proteins; C) Prediction of Co-occurrence of ACC
(Rv262c) with two hypothetical proteins Rv263c and Rv264c respectively.

Structural comparison between acetyltransferase:
Conservation in structure between aminoglycoside
acetyltransferase in M. tuberculosis. Common region from all
seven structures is highlighted as ancestral core, which is
shown at the centre; B) Mapping of conserved region obtained
from MEME analysis (Ball and Stick form) and central sphere
signifies for predicted binding site.

