Background
The occurrence of antibiotic resistant bacteria in the aquatic 
environment has been demonstrated in many studies as a 
consequence of uncontrolled discharges urban and animal 
wastewater [–
]. Antibiotics may be present at levels that 
could not only alter the ecology of the environment but also 
give rise to antibiotic resistance []. Several studies have 
reported that antibiotic resistance patterns are becoming a 
global problem [–
]. Antibiotic resistance genes commonly 
transfer via conjugation or transformation. Conjugative gene 
transfer mediated by plasmids with a broad host range is 
generally believed to be a common and widespread mechanism 
for the transfer of genes across a broad phylogenetic range of 
bacteria. Horizontal transfer of antibiotic resistance genes in the 
environment is one of the main reason contributing to the 
evolution and emergence of antibiotic resistant bacteria and has 
been demonstrated in many studies []. As consequence of 
uncontrolled discharges of various waste products containing 
antibiotics and heavy metals, lakes and sewages are principle 
recipients of enteric bacteria encoding multiple antibiotic and 
metal resistance genes []. The significance of this finding is 
that, gram negative bacteria and related organisms harbor 
different plasmids which confer them multiple antibiotic 
resistances to many unrelated antibiotics and give the ability 
to survive in these hostile environments especially in the sewage, 
where many toxic compounds are routinely discharged from factories 
in India and do not have any proper disposal facilities. Since, 
the coliforms are dominant bacteria in the sewage and lake, 
horizontal transfer of antibiotic resistance genes through 
conjugative plasmids do often occur among them and therefore, 
make these important bacteria multiple resistant to several 
antibiotics (sometimes 10 antibiotics). The incidence of resistance 
among bacteria has been noted mainly among clinical isolates and 
little is known about the antibiotic resistance of bacteria that 
occur in the environment. Monitoring the density of coliform bacteria 
in surface water is critical in order to protect public health 
[]. Coliforms are Gram-negative, rod shaped bacteria that are 
members of the family Enterobacteriaceae. They are normal flora 
of the gastrointestinal tracts of all warm-blooded and some 
cold-blooded animals. Escherichia coli, a well-known resident of 
animal digestive tracts, is a coliform that can be shed in faeces 
that is used as an indicator of fecal contamination in water 
[]. Several workers have drawn attention to the incidence of 
antibiotic resistance among coliforms in treated and untreated 
drinking water []. 
The aim of our study was to investigate the drug resistant coliforms 
contamination in the Gomti river water at Lucknow city to mitigate the public health risks.

Methodology
Sample collection:
Water samples were collected from three sites of Gomati River 
Water along with Nadwa Bridge (I), Gomati Nagar Bridge (II), 
and Nishatganj Bridge (III) at Lucknow city as shown in 
. 
Samples were collected in sterile 250-ml polypropylene 
bottles, according to internationally recommended 
methodology []. Samples were kept at 4°C until their arrival 
to laboratory.

Isolation and identification of coliform bacteria:
Isolation of antibiotic resistant coliform bacteria from water 
samples were done on antibiotic amended Mac conky and EMB 
agar plates at varying concentration (5-100µg/ml). Serial
dilutions of the water samples were plated by spreading 0.1 ml 
on both medium for total antibiotic resistant coliforms. Plates 
incubated at 37°C for 24 hours and coliform counts were 
expressed as CFU/ml. On Mac conky agar medium, pink 
colored colonies were identified as coliform bacteria. On EMB 
agar, only two types of bacterial colonies were observed 
greenish with metallic sheen and pink mucoid which were 
identified as E. coli and Enterobacter spp. respectively and 
further identified on the basis of IMViC tests (Indole, Methyl 
Red, Voges Proskauer and Citrate Utilization Tests).

Determination of minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of antibiotics among the coliforms:
The MIC of five different drugs (Ciprofloxacin, Erythromycin, 
Tetracyclin, Amoxicillin, and Penicillin) was determined by the 
plate dilution method as adopted by Rennie et al., 2012 
[]. The 
antibiotics were used in varying concentrations ranging from 2 
to 100 µg/ml and supplemented individually in nutrient agar, 
which were then spot inoculated with approximately 3×106 
microbial cells with the help of platinum loop of 5mm 
diameter. The plates were incubated at 37°C for 24 hr. lowest 
concentration of the metal which inhibits the growth of the 
microorganisms was considered as MIC.

Results
In this study, antibiotic tolerant population of coliforms from 
the river water samples was observed against five antibiotics 
(Erythromycin, Amoxicillin, Ciprofloxacin, Tetracyclin, 
Penicillin) at their varying concentrations (5 to 100µg/ml). 
Viable count of coliforms was higher in non antibiotic 
supplemented control plate than antibiotic supplemented 
plates in site I, II and III respectively. A decrease in viable count 
was recorded with the increase of antibiotic concentrations 
tested in all I, II and III sampling sites. The prevalence of drug 
resistant coliforms indicates the faecal pollution in the Gomti 
river water at Lucknow city. Higher population of antibiotic 
resistant coliforms was observed on Mac conky medium as 
compared on Emb medium. On Eosin Methylene blue (EMB), 
only two types of bacterial colonies were observed and 
identified as E. coli and Enterobacter spp, on the basis of their 
morphological and biochemical tests.

On Mac conky medium,  (see supplementary material) 
the viable count of coliforms in different concentrations (5-100 
µg/ml) of antibiotics ranged from (3.54×104-1.7x103), (9.3×103-
4.0×102), (4.5×103-5.0x102) cfu/ml of water in site I, II and III 
respectively. In case of site-I maximum viable count was 
recorded against erythromycin (3.54×104), followed by 
ciprofloxacin (1.16×104), amoxicillin (3.2×104), tetracycline 
(3.2×103), and penicillin (1.8×103) at 5 µg/ml respectively. All 
antibiotics showed no viable count at 100 µg/ml rather than 
amoxicillin. In case of site II, maximum viable coliforms count 
was recorded against erythromycin (9.3×103) followed by 
amoxicillin (6.4×103), tetracycline (4.1×103), ciprofloxacin 
(2.4×103) and penicillin (1.4×103) at 5µg/ml concentration 
respectively. Similar trend of coliform count was recorded at 
10, 20 and 40 µg/ml concentration of the antibiotics tested. No 
viable count was found at 50, 75 and 100 µg/ml concentration 
of ciprofloxacin, tetracycline and penicillin respectively. In site 
III: A different trend of antibiotic toxicity was observed as 
compared to site-A and B. Maximum viable count of coliform 
ranged from (4.5×103-1.6x103) against erythromycin followed by
(3.9 ×103- 5.0 ×102), (3.2×103-4.0 ×102), 
(2.5 ×103- 5.0 ×102)
and (8.0×102-2.0 ×102) against amoxicillin, ciprofloxacin, tetracycline 
and penicillin at 5-75 µg/ml concentration range respectively. 
No viable coliform count was observed against tetracycline and 
penicillin at above 50 µg/ml concentration as compared to 
other antibiotics tested. Almost same trend was observed in 
Erythromycin and Amoxicillin no growth was detected at 75 
and 100 µg/ml concentration. Similar trend of antibiotic 
resistant coliforms (cfu/ml) recorded on EMB medium. 
Antibiotics and sampling site based variations were also 
recorded regarding the occurrence of E. coli and Enterobacter 
spp .

Percentage of antibiotic resistant E. coli isolates was observed 
higher among the total coliforms against Erythromycin, 
Amoxicillin, Ciprofloxacin, and Tetracycline as compared to 
Enterobacter spp. Percentage of Enterobacter isolates was 
obtained higher only against erythromycin and penicillin in the 
sampling site I and II respectively. A varied trend of resistance 
order Penicillin &gt;Ciprofloxacin &gt;Tetracycline &gt;Amoxicillin &gt; 
Erythromycin, Penicillin &gt;Amoxicillin &gt; Ciprofloxacin &gt; 
Erythromycin &gt; Tetracycline and Penicillin &gt; Erythromycin &gt; 
Amoxicillin &gt; Ciprofloxacin &gt; Tetracycline was recorded 
among the coliforms from site I, II and III respectively. 
Percentage of Drug resistant E. coli and Enterobacter isolates 
among the total coliforms against individual antibiotic at its 
different concentration has been shown in , 
 &amp; 
.

Drug tolerance was also determined among the isolates of E. coli 
and Enterobacter species in terms of their MIC level. Isolates 
showed similar trend of resistance (MIC level) against 
antibiotics tested. Maximum number of E. coli and Enterobacter 
isolates exhibited their MICs at lower range (2-5µg/ml) against 
ciprofloxacin, tetracycline and amoxicillin. No MIC level was 
found in the range of 2- 5, 5- 10 and 40- 50µg/ml among the 
E. coli isolates against Penicillin as compared to Enterobacter 
spp. Maximum number of isolates of E. coli and Enterobacter 
demonstrated their MIC range 50- 80 and 20- 40µg/ml of 
Penicillin respectively. Isolates of E. coli showed no MIC level in 
the range of 50- 80 and 80- 100 µg/ml against ciprofloxacin and 
tetracycline as compared to Enterobacter spp. higher number of 
E. coli isolates exhibited their MIC in the range of 80-100 µg/ml 
against Amoxicillin and Erythromycin than Enterobacter 
isolates shown in  &amp;
 (see supplementary 
material).

Discussion
During recent years, the distribution of antibiotic-resistant 
strains of Enterobacteriaceae in the aquatic environment like 
river and sewage waters, surface waters, sea water, and 
shellfish has been studied in different parts of the world. River 
and sewage waters, surface waters, sea water, and shellfish 
have been investigated for the presence of antibiotic-resistant 
Enterobacteriaceae. Drug concentrations sufficiently high to 
represent an ecological threat have already been reported in 
different rivers worldwide [–
]. Antimicrobial resistance 
(AR) determinants may be considered as a form of pollution 
[] when they are introduced into the environment by the 
release of faecal bacteria that have been exposed to high levels 
of antimicrobials in the human or animal digestive track 
[]. 
An extensive literature describes and analyses the resistance 
pattern of faecal bacteria, mainly Escherichia coli and 
enterococci, in aquatic environments [].

In our observation, a varying trend of antibiotic resistant 
coliform population in the Gomti river water receiving long 
term domestic, municipal small industries and hospital 
wastewater was observed. We recorded a varying viable count 
of multidrug resistant coliform bacteria in three different 
sampling sites of the Gomti River. Viable count of coliforms 
was higher in non antibiotic supplemented control plate than 
antibiotic supplemented plates in site I, II and III respectively. 
A decrease in viable count was recorded with the increase of 
antibiotic concentrations tested in all I, II and III sampling sites. 
The viable count of coliforms in different concentrations (5-100 
µg/ml) of antibiotics ranged from (3.54×104-1.7×103), (9.3×103-
4.0×102), (4.5×103-5.0×102)
cfu/ml of water in site I, II and III 
respectively. The viable count from sampling site-c receiving 
water from treatment plant showed lower count as compared 
to site-I and II our findings are in agreement of many people 
reports, [–
] also reported E. coli strains from sewage 
treatment plants were less resistant against quinolones, while 
Namboodiri et al. [] have reported quinolones-resistant E. coli 
from the faecal flora of Accra residents, Ghana. [] Hsu et al. 
pointed out that the differences in the extent of bacterial 
resistance to various antibiotics might reflect the history of 
antibiotic applications and allow bacterial drug resistance to be 
used as an indicator of antibiotic application. b-Lactamase is the 
major defense systems of Enterobacter species []. However, 
efflux pump mediated resistance to µ-lactam antibiotics, 
quinolones, tetracycline, and chloramphenicol has been 
reported [–
] observed higher numbers of antibiotic resistant 
bacteria from upland tarns (receiving no sewage/effluent). 
They noticed variation in bacterial species in different aquatic 
habitats and growth in oligotrophic environments contributes 
to the incidence of antibiotic resistance. 

Most of the authors consider that faecal bacteria released by 
wastewaters (treated or not) could play a key role in AR 
determinants dissemination. Indeed, in sewage contaminated 
rivers []. Although the mortality of pathogenic bacteria or 
their indicators is very high in extraenteral environments, their 
great abundance and certain environmental conditions might 
keep these populations viable for quite some time. Several 
authors have found a high correlation between bacteria density 
in the water of different environments (beaches and freshwater 
shores) []. In general, treatment plants reduce the abundance 
of inflow water bacteria by between 1 and 3 log units 
[]. This 
reduction, however, is not necessarily accompanied by a 
reduction in the number of resistant bacteria; quite the contrary, 
the number of resistant bacteria increases [].

In this study, Antibiotics and sampling site based viable count 
showed variations in the ccurrence of E. coli and Enterobacter 
spp. Percentage of antibiotic resistant E. coli isolates was 
observed higher among the total coliforms against 
Erythromycin, Amoxicillin, Ciprofloxacin, and Tetracycline as 
compared to Enterobacter from the sampling site- I, site-II and 
site III. Percentage of Enterobacter isolates was obtained higher 
only against erythromycin and penicillin from the sampling 
sites I and II respectively. Similar results have also been 
obtained in other studies [–
]. Variations in the occurrence of 
E. coli and Enterobacter spp. Was due to the survival of the 
fittest depending upon the antibiotics and sampling site. The 
resistance percentages obtained in this study tally with the 
resistance ranges found by other authors, Manji and Antai in 
2012 []; Kumar and Joseph in 2011 
[]. Thus, the Enterococci 
show very low amoxicillin resistance rates, coinciding with the 
findings of Fernandes and Watanabe []. The resistance levels 
of E. coli and Enterobacter spp. populations are also comparable 
to those found by other authors [–
]. Resistance patterns in 
the population of coliforms were recorded as erythromycin&gt; 
amoxicillin &gt; tetracycline&gt; ciprofloxacin&gt; penicillin, 
tetracycline &gt;erythromycin &gt;ciprofloxacin &gt;amoxicillin 
&gt;penicillin and tetracycline &gt;ciprofloxacin &gt;amoxicillin 
&gt;erythromycin &gt;penicillin from site I, II and site III 
respectively. This resistance order has similarity with the
antibiogram among the members of Enterobacteriaceae by other 
reporters. Reinthaler et al. chiming in with the findings 
of this study. Multiresistance is another constantly studied 
factor []. 
Chelosi et al. found that more than 56% of the Gram negative 
bacteria from cultivated marine sediment were resistant to 5 
or more antibiotics. Lefkowitz and Durán [] 
measured the multi-resistance of E. coli in wastewater 
treatment plants, obtaining outflow readings of 60% of bacteria 
multi-resistant to 2 or more antibiotics and 25% to 4 or more. 
Other authors have studied the same factor [], 
and the findings of this study fall within the same ranges found therein.

We also determined tolerance level among the coliform isolates 
against tetracycline, penicillin, amoxicillin, erythromycin and 
ciprofloxacin. All the isolates exhibited their MIC in between 
the 2-100µg/ml against antibiotics tested. Maximum number of 
isolates of E. coli and Enterobacter spp. showed their MIC at 
lower range 2-5 µg/ml against ciprofloxacin and tetracycline 
while no MIC level was recorded in the range of 5-10 µg/ml 
against penicillin. Higher number of E. coli isolates showed 
their MIC in the range of 80-100 µg/ml against erythromycin 
and amoxicillin than Enterobacter isolates. Similar findings 
regarding the drug MIC levels in the members of 
Enterobacteriaceae have been reported by many workers 
[]. 
Significant rise in bacterial contamination exhibited by 
pollution indicator organisms is a risk to public health, 
particularly due to the emergence of resistance and microbial 
diversity in the Gomti river water. This study may be relevant 
and useful in conservation of riverine systems for the safety of 
the aquatic environment and human health. In this study, the 
distribution of resistance to antimicrobial drugs among 
coliforms in surface water was investigated without 
differentiating transferable and nontransferable resistance, but
paying attention to the effect of the species composition of the 
sample on the incidence of resistance and resistance orders.

Conflict of Interests
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interests.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We are thankful to Prof. S.W. Akhtar, Vice Chancellor, Integral 
University, for providing the necessary facility to conduct this 
research.

Citation:Akhter et al, Bioinformation 10(4): 167-174 (2014)

Map showing sampling sites I, II and III.

Percentage of Antimicrobial resistant E. coli and Enterobacter isolates among Coliforms (site-I)

Percentage of Antimicrobial resistant E. coli and Enterobacter isolates among Coliforms (site-II)

Percentage of Antimicrobial resistant E. coli and Enterobacter isolates among Coliforms (site-III)

