Background
Arrays of steps are involved in leukocyte extravasation that occurs during the
acute inflammatory response(s) [,
]. The neutrophils present in the
bloodstream first loosely adhere to the endothelium through carbohydratebased
ligands to cause sampling of the local micro-environment for signs of
inflammation. Activated endothelial cells produce both soluble and surfacebound
molecules that trigger tight, integrin-mediated adhesion between the
neutrophil and the endothelium. Neutrophils depart the flowing blood stream
by first tethering and then rolling on the inflamed endothelial coating of the
blood vessels. This occurs primarily in post-capilary and collecting venules in
the systemic circulation. Under favourable environment, firmly adherent
neutrophils then transmigrate across the endothelium. In vitro studies 
[] have
shown that the transmigration is a rapid process which is being completed in
less than 2 minutes (). Each step of neutrophil emigration has been
associated with specific cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) and CAM activators
and chemo-attractants [,
]. The neutrophil-endothelial cell interactions are
initiated by interacting sets of CAMs and chemoattractant/activator molecules
to form an “adhesion cascade.” The initial phase of inflammation, a transient
slowing of neutrophils in postcapillary venules, is mediated by selectins.
Subsequently, firm adhesion of neutrophils to the vessel wall occurs via
interaction of the CD11/CD18integrins to endothelial ligands such as
intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) []. This binding requires
activation of CD11/CD18 by exposure of the neutrophil to a variety of
activating/chemoattractant molecules, such as platelet activating factor (PAF)
or interleukin-8 (IL-8). The transmigration into tissues occurs, a process that
requires both a chemotactic stimulus by chemokines and engagement of
platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1(PECAM-1) () 
[].
Several approaches have been used to probe the role of CAMs in vivo. These
include the use of blocking antibodies, chimeric selectin-immunoglobulin
proteins, Sialyl Lewis oligosaccharides and peptides, along with the study of
humans and animals with genetically determined adhesion deficiencies. These
studies demonstrate that CAM blockade can effectively inhibit inflammation
[,
]. 
Here, we specifically focus on the acute inflammation induced by
Dextran Sulphate Sodium (DSS) using high throughput microarray data
obtained from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) and discuss how the precise
interaction as well as coordination of CAMs and the chemokines facilitate the
neutrophil extravasation and transmigration during acute inflammation.

Material and Methodology
Meta-Analysis of High-Throughput Genomics Data for deciphering Genes
Implicated in the Leukocyte Transmigration in Acute DSS Colitis in Mice
The raw Affymetrix CEL files downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus
(GSE22307) were normalized with RMA algorithm and subjected to a very
stringent Statistical Analysis using One Way Analysis of Variance (ANOVA),
followed by Tukey Honestly Significant Difference (HSD) Post-Hoc Test and
Multiple Testing Correction (MTC) by applying the Benjamini-Hochberg False
Discovery Rate (FDR) (p&lt;0.05) using the latest Genespring GX11 (Agilent,
USA). The statistically significant gene list result was filtered based on the
standard 2 Fold cut-off compared with the Day 0 expression values. The
differentially expressed genes were then classified and clustered based on the
Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery (DAVID)
Analysis [,
]. 
Furthermore, the differentially expressed pathways were
visualized through KEGG pathway interaction maps 
[–].

Results
The Dextran Sulphate Sodium (DSS) induced acute and chronic colitis models
are often performed in experimental animals, especially in the most susceptible
strains of mice, such as C57BL/6j to mimic the ulcerative colitis (UC) in
humans. Fang et al. (2011) have recently performed a high throughput
genomics study by administering 3% Dextran Sulphate Sodium (DSS) in the
drinking water to C57BL/6j mice and collected the colonic tissues from
individual cohorts at days 0, 2, 4 and 6 for total RNA extraction and detected
the differential gene expression patterns using Affymerix GeneChip Mouse
Genome 430 2.0 Array []. 
We have obtained the raw CEL files deposited
into the Gene Expression Omnibus (GSE22307) to further decipher the key
genes implicated in the positive regulation of acute inflammation, leukocyte
adhesion, and neutrophil chemotaxis across in acute DSS colitis.

The induction of acute inflammation by the oral administration of DSS causes
the expression of various proinflammatory genes in the colonic epithelium.
Specific focus into the expression of adhesion molecules as well as the genes
implicated in the chemotaxis of leukocytes such as the neutrophils through the
Gene Ontology Analysis module in Genespring GX11, have revealed the
differential expression of key genes which positively regulate the acute
inflammation such as IL-1ß, IL-6, CCL5, CCR5, FcgRI, FcgRIII, FceRIg, and
PTGS2, were significantly up-regulated at least 2 fold in the log scale by the
acute inflammation triggered by DSS in the colonic tissue 
(). A
plethora of genes positively influencing the leukocyte chemotaxis such as
CCL2, CCL7, CCL8, CCL5, IL-1 beta, CXCL1, CXCL2, CXCL3, etc., were
significantly up-regulated by the acute inflammation triggered by DSS 
(). 
In addition, the adhesion molecules such as ICAM1, VCAM1, ITGAM,
ITGAL, and P-Selectin, were up-regulated (at least 2 Fold) 
(). These
adhesion molecules play a key role in the adhesion and transmigration of
neutrophils across colonic epithelium as well as vascular endothelium to the
site of infection or inflammation. Furthermore, the genes specifically
influencing neutrophil chemotaxis such as CXCL1, CXCL2, CXCL3, CCL2,
CCL2, C5aR1, ITGAM, ITGB2 etc., were significantly up-regulated by the
acute inflammation triggered by DSS (). In addition, the leukocyte
activating genes such as CD86, HDAC9, Fc Receptors, Dock2, LCP2 etc. were
also up-regulated in this model (). In order to decipher the cellular
and molecular processes induced to cause the leukocyte transendothelial
migration across the blood vessels, we have performed the DAVID analysis of
the differentially expressed genes. Furthermore, we obtained the KEGG
pathways for the leukocyte transendothelial migration () as well as
Chemokine Signaling () and identified the differentially expressed
genes from our gene list in the Canonical Pathway to decipher the key
chemokines as well as cytokines implicated in the leukocyte transendothelial
migration induced by DSS.

Discussion
Several classes of adhesion molecules mediate neutrophil attachment to
endothelial cells during acute inflammatory state, including selectins, which
bind to their carbohydrate-based ligands, and integrins, which in turn bind to
CAMs []. 
The initial tethering event is initiated through selectins, and the later
development of tight adhesion is proposed to exploit α4β1 (VLA-4)–VCAM
(vascular CAM interactions, followed by αL/Mβ2 (LFA-1/Mac-1)–ICAM
(intercellular CAM) adhesion []. 
The selectins include a group of three related
molecules. L-selectin is constitutively expressed on neutrophils and is shed
from the cell surface on cell activation, assumed to occur immediately after
rolling begins. P-selectin is found on platelets and is stored in Weibel-Palade
bodies where it is rapidly (within few minutes) transported to the cell surface
after endothelial cell activation by stimuli such as histamine, thrombin,
bradykinin, leukotriene C4 (LTC4), or free radicals. E-selectin (ELAM-1) is
expressed solely on endothelial cells where it is synthesized rapidly after cell
stimulation by cytokines (TNF-α, IL-1) or endotoxin and then translocated to
the luminal surface of the venular endothelium. Each selectin shares a common
molecular structure, most notably an NH2-terminal lectin-like domain, which
imparts the ability of each selectin to bind to specific carbohydrate ligands 
[,
]. 
In addition, during the primary phase of acute inflammation, the initial
selectin-based adhesive events stimulate sequential activation of downstream
adhesion receptors [,
]. Involvement of neutrophil L-selectin increases the
adhesiveness of β2 integrins for ICAM 
[–]. 
Further analysis shows that Lselectin cross-linking induces firm adhesion of neutrophils under flow
conditions, accompanied by increases in actin polymerization and
colocalization of β2 integrins with L-selectin 
[]. Engagement of L-selectin
induces calcium release, MAP kinases, tyrosine kinases and small G-protein
signaling in the neutrophils that may influence β2 integrin adhesiveness 
[–]. 
It was reported that p38MAPK inhibitors block L-selectin-induced
changes to both neutrophil shape and β2- mediated adhesion. Hence, selectins
play an important role in initiating the sequential adhesion cascade through
both adhesive and signaling events in the neutrophils 
[].

For neutrophils, tight adhesion needs activation of the β2-integrin family
(CD18), resulting in binding to one of the intercellular adhesion molecules on
the surfaces of endothelial cells. The CD11/CD18 integrins, such as Mac-1 and
LFA-1, interact with the immunoglobulin superfamily member and ICAM-1.
The CD 11b is capable of binding a wide range of ligands on endothelial cells
[,
,
,
]. 
An important characteristic of the neutrophil integrins is that
under baseline conditions they exist in a relatively inactive conformation,
rendering the leukocyte non-adhesive. One of the key events of the adhesion
cascade is the activation (occasionally accompanied by the inclusion of a
protein on the cell surface) and deactivation of these integrins at the proper
times and places. Integrin-mediated adhesion is regulated by modulating either
the affinity of the integrin for its ligand or by altering the avidity of adhesion
through integrin clustering and cell spreading phenomenon. The coordination
of adhesion by integrin molecules is mediated by two types of signaling events
which are particularly appropriate for transendothelial migration of leukocytes,
namely, cross-talk between CAMs and stimulation by chemokines through
chemokine receptors on neutrophils [,
,
,
].

The diapedesis or transmigration of neutrophils across an endothelial
monolayer requires a chemotactic gradient [].
The cytokines, such as TNF-α
and IL-1, cause expression of potent chemotactic stimuli such as IL-8, which
affect both adherence and transmigration of neutrophils 
[]. The plateletendothelial
cell adhesion molecule-1 (PECAM-1), a member of the
immunoglobulin super family, is expressed at relatively low levels on the
surface of leukocytes and platelets but at higher levels (&gt;106molecules per cell)
on endothelium. PECAM-1 plays a key role in transmigration of neutrophils
across the endothelium [,
]. Its localization at the junctions between
endothelial cells has suggested a role in transendothelial cell migration. Using
an in vitro model, Muller et al. (1993) demonstrated that antibodies against
PECAM-1 significantly blocked leukocyte transmigration through TNF-α
activated endothelial cell monolayers but did not affect the adhesion of
neutrophils []. 
This effect has been confirmed earlier in animal models of
neutrophil transmigration []. The mechanisms by which PECAM-1 may
regulate transendothelial migration are not yet known; however, the
possibilities include direct binding of PECAM-I to the leukocyte (perhaps
serving as a molecular guide as it passes through the junction), or regulation of
adhesion molecules on the surface of the leukocyte (i.e., β2 integrins), thus
facilitating transmigration []. 
Available data indicate that cross-linking of
PECAM-1 on the surface of leukocytes by antibodies can up-regulate integrinmediated
binding []. 
Another process that may play an important role in
transendothelial migration is the ability of the endothelial cell monolayer to
regulate an opening of its junctions, allowing neutrophil transmigration. Recent
work by Huang et al. suggests that transmigrating neutrophils (in response to a
chemotactic stimulus) exert an active influence on the endothelial cell
monolayer, resulting in increased intracellular endothelial calcium levels and
opening of intercellular junctions [].

Role of Chemokines and Cytokines in Neutrophil Transmigration
Several chemokines regulate the order and timing of integrin adhesions 
[],
and several chemokines upregulate β2-mediated adhesions of neutrophils 
[].
More recently, a role for specific chemokines in distinct steps of neutrophil
extravasation has been described [,
]. These studies show that the
chemokines GROα and fractalkine mediate the initial firm adhesion, whereas
the chemokine MCP-1 is required for the later steps of neutrophil spreading
and diapedesis []. 
The chemokines play a key role in directing the multi-step
model of extravasation by promoting the appropriate sequence of integrin
activation/ inactivation and the associated cell behavior. Migration of
neutrophils is the result of choreographed changes in both cell morphology and
adhesion. Membrane protrusions and the formation of new adhesive contacts at
the leading edge of a migrating cell must be coordinated with down-regulation
of adhesion and retraction at the rear of the cell 
[]. PAF is synthesized by
endothelial cells within minutes after stimulation by thrombin, histamine,
LTC4, or other agonists, and is expressed on the cell surface where it activates
neutrophils and up-regulates CD 11b by binding to a specific cell-surface
receptor []. 
Many of the same factors that stimulate PAF expression also
cause rapid translocation of P-selectin to the surface of the endothelium. Thus,
for at least one set of stimuli both a specific tethering molecule (P-selectin) and
a specific activator molecule (PAF) are produced. A similar situation may exist
for the neutrophil chemoattractant/activator IL-8, which appears to bind to the
luminal surface of activated endothelial cells where it is able to activate
neutrophils []. 
Since cytokines, such as TNFα, and other factors (such as
endotoxin) cause the synthesis of both IL-8 and E-selectin from endothelial
cells [], 
it is likely that these mediators may augment neutrophil
transmigration by stimulating expression of both the tethering molecule and the
activating factor []. 
Important ligands for the CD11/CD18 integrins are
ICAM-1, and possibly ICAM-2 [,
]. These molecules, members of the
immunoglobulin superfamily, are present constitutively on endothelial cells
both in vitro and in vivo. CD11a and CDI1b bind to ICAM-1 in different
regions of the molecule. Only CD 11a has been shown to be capable of binding
to ICAM-2. The cytokines such as TNF-α and IL-1 cause expression of potent
chemotactic stimuli such as IL-8 [,
], which affect both adherence and
transmigration of neutrophils.

Conclusions and Future Directions
Leukocytes such as neutrophils undergo dynamic changes in cell-shape and
adhesive properties during transmigration through endothelium of blood
vessels in response to inflammatory signals. In this article, we have addressed
the dynamics of CAMs and chemokine interactions in mediating this
extravasation. Moreover, we discussed the key molecular events which lie
beneath these key steps of neutrophil transmigration in acute inflammation
induced by DSS in the colon of mice. In future, the evolution of State of the Art
cellular and molecular imaging techniques in vitro and in vivo will definitely
offer a finer resolution of the spatio-temporal regulation of key CAMs and
chemokines to decipher the complete picture of how the activities of individual
molecules are orchestrated during neutrophil transmigration in acute
inflammatory diseases. This knowledge is pivotal for specifically
targeting/designing personalized medicines/therapeutics 
[–] to ameliorate
various inflammatory diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis, asthma,
anaphylaxis, atherosclerosis, ulcerative colitis etc., in the near future.

Authors would like to thank the “Beacon Biosoft Pvt.Limited”
(www.beaconbiosoft.com) 
for the wonderful graphics on the Molecular and
Cellular Mechanism of Neutrophil Extravasation in our article. We would like
to extend our sincere thanks and gratitude to Prof. Iain McInnes and Dr.
Charles McSharry, Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, the
University of Glasgow, Scotland, UK, for kindly providing us the Genespring
GX 11 (Agilent Technologies, USA) and the Dell Precision T7500 Workstation
(Dell, UK) respectively.

Citation:Kumar et al, Bioinformation 6(3): 111-114 (2011)

The Key Cellular Events Implicated in the Neutrophil Extravasation
Model. The selectins, chemokines and integrins coordinate in capturing a
circulating neutrophil to the vessel wall at the specific sites. This process
usually takes within few milliseconds to seconds during the acute inflammatory
process(s) triggered by invading microbes such as gram negative bacteria.
Further neutrophil exposure to the apical endothelial chemokines causes the
chemotaxis and triggers their potential to undergo transendothelial migration
within minutes and more importantly without disrupting the integrity of the
endothelial barrier surrounding the blood vessels.

Molecular and Cellular Events in Neutrophil Transmigration during
Acute Inflammation. During the‘resting-state’, the junction between
endothelial cells lining the blood vessels is closed, and this integrity is
mediated by homotypic binding of VE-cadherin, PECAM-1 and JAM
molecules. The VE-cadherin is linked to the cytoskeleton via β catenin, and
this association is required for its adhesive activity. As it proceeds through the
multi-step adhesion cascade, a neutrophil might trigger the dissociation of the
VE-cadherin-β-catenin complex by degradation of the β-catenin and
redistribution and/or internalization of the VE-cadherin. During
transendothelial migration, the homophilic interactions (JAM-JAM and
PECAM-1-PECAM-1) between opposing endothelial cells might be disrupted
by the neutrophil, which would result in loosening of the junction. Engagement
of PECAM-1 might provide a scaffold to ‘walk’ the cell through the junction
via haptotactic migration.

Genespring GX11 analysis of Affymetrix Gene-Chip Expression
Data from the colonic epithelium of 3% DSS-induced Colitis on Day 0, 2, 4,
and 6 respectively in C57BL/6j mice. The raw Affymetrix CEL files
downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus (GSE22307) were normalized
with RMA algorithm and subjected to One Way ANOVA, Tukey HSD and
Bonferroni FDR(p&lt;0.05). The resulting gene list was filtered based on 2 Fold
cut-off compared with the Day 0 expression values. The differentially
expressed genes were then classified and clustered based on Gene Ontology
(GO) Analysis to decipher the differentially expressed genes in (A) Positive
Regulation of Acute Inflammation, (B) Chemotaxis, (C) Leukocyte Adhesion,
(D) Neutrophil Chemotaxis, and (E) Leukocyte Activation.

Leukocyte Transendothelial Migration Pathway. KEGG Pathway
Analysis of Genes Implicated in the Leukocyte Transendothelial Migration
(Red Stars) in the colonic endothelium of 3% DSS-induced Colitis in C57BL/6j
mice.

Chemokine Signaling Pathway. KEGG Pathway Analysis of Genes
Implicated in the Chemokine Signaling (Red Stars) in the colonic epithelial
tissue of 3% DSS-induced Colitis in C57BL/6j mice.

