Background
Neo-angiogenesis has a crucial role in the progression and
survival of most types of cancer beside some other proliferative
diseases []. 
Vascular endothelial growth factors (VEGFs) are
the most important angiogenesis regulators 
[]. Recognition of
the crucial role of VEGF pathway in the regulation of
angiogenesis has led to the development of VEGF-targeted
therapy for the development of selective and safe anticancer
agents. Several strategies were taken in consideration in
targeting the VEGF signaling pathway. Neutralization of the
VEGF or VEGFR using antibodies was investigated and has
been reported for treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer 
[],
non-small cell lung cancer [] and metastatic breast cancer 
[].
Targeting VEGFR using small molecule inhibitors was another
strategy as well. The small molecule VEGFR-2 kinase inhibitors
sorafenib [] and sunitinib 
[] have been approved by the FDA
for the treatment of advanced renal cell carcinoma 
[]. A
number of other small-molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors are
currently under investigation in Phase III clinical trials.
Another approach includes the use of Peptoid ligands for the
extracellular domain of VEGFR5 []. VEGFR-2 is considered to
be the major receptor responsible for mediating physiological
and pathological effects of VEGF- A on endothelial cells 
[].
Although VEGFR-1 has a tenfold higher binding affinity to
VEGF, it exerts less activation of intracellular signaling
intermediates than VEGFR2 and consequently it can act as a
negative regulator of angiogenesis by binding VEGF and
preventing its binding to VEGFR-2 []. After the Determination
of the crystal structure of the most membrane proximal domain
[], 
it was revealed that homotypic contacts between them are
essential for ligand-induced receptor activation and cell
signaling. These contacts were shown to be mediated by salt
bridges and van der Waals contacts formed between Arg726 of
one protomer and Asp731 of the other protomer which was
proved by the fact that ligand-induced auto-phosphorylation
and cell signaling via VEGFR1 or VEGFR2 harboring mutations
in critical residues (Arg726 or Asp731) are impaired. The newly
discovered homotypic contact region of VEGFR2 provides a
novel target for pharmacological intervention of pathological
activation of VEGFR2 which is essential for cancer
development. In this study, we have used the newly discovered
crystal structure of the extracellular domain of the VEGFR for
the purpose of developing a small molecule anti-angiogenic
drug candidate as anticancer agent through inhibition of the
VEGFR dimerization process. For this purpose we have used
molecular docking techniques for virtual high throughput
screen (v-HTS) for an inhibitor of this process 
[].
Additionally, fragment based design (FBD) was also employed
in contrast as an alternate strategy in developing molecular
designs of relatively higher binding affinities 
[].

Materials and Methodology
The 3D X-ray crystal structure of monomeric and homodimeric
forms of membrane-proximal Ig-like domain of the ectodomain
(D7) of VEGFR-2 [PDB ID: 3KVQ] was exploited as target for
vitrual High-throughput screening (v-HTS) and fragment-based
design (FBD). Both the proteins were prepared, undergone rigid
and flexible docking, energetically probed, and subjected to
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. All computational
analysis was carried out using Discovery Studio (DS) 2.5
(Accelrys Software Inc., San Diego; 
http://www.accelrys.com).
The hardware used was the workstation cluster of
pharmaceutical chemistry department, at Ain Shams
University, Faculty of Pharmacy.

Receptor/Ligands preparation
The target domain monomeric form as well as the
homodimerized complex (biological assembly coordinates file)
were obtained, structure cleaned, the hydrogen atoms were
added, typing was carried out by all-atom CHARMm forcefield
(version 35b1) (Momany-Rone partial charges method) 
[] and
followed by Smart Minimizer algorithm – an algorithm that
performs 1000 steps of Steepest Descent with a root mean
square (RMS) gradient tolerance of 3, followed by Conjugate
Gradient minimization – until the RMS gradient for potential
energy was less than 0.05 kcal /mol/Å. Using the ‘Binding Site’
tools available in DS 2.5 the binding site was defined to be the
homotypic contact region inscribed inside a sphere of 13.5 Å
radius. Ligands for virtual screening were obtained from Zinc
database (
http://zinc.docking.org) from commercially available
lead-like compounds, filtered and then prepared using the
‘Prepare Ligands’ protocol in order to standardize charges,
enumerate ionization states and generate tautomers at
physiological pH range (the eventual count of the library
reached around 110,000 molecules). The ligands were typed
similarly by CHARMm for partial charges set up. The last two
steps were additionally carried out to the ‘De Novo’ designed
ligands prior to their flexible docking.

High-throughput docking
Rigid molecular docking is the computational method used to
predict the binding of the ligand to the receptor binding site by
varying position and conformation of the ligand keeping the
receptor fixed. Initially LibDock, 
[] a relatively fast algorithm
that conducts ‘HotSpots’ matching of ligand conformations with
rigid binding site's HotSpots map that is well-suited for largesized
libraries, was used to filter the obtained library according
to their binding capacity into the proposed active site in order
to decrease the library size. With specified 200 hotspots and 3
saved for each ligand with conformational sampling using the
‘BEST’ algorithm. By the utilization of CDocker 
[], the
protocol that employs a CHARMm-based MD scheme, the
ligands were docked into receptor binding site, to further
narrow down the number of top hits on a more precise scale.
Thus, refining each hit through simulated annealing between
300 and 700 K. Finally the top ligands were selected for flexible
docking by using the corresponding protocol in DS 2.5 that
allows for receptor flexibility []. The flexible residues were
determined to be those of ASP710, SER711, ILE713, ILE724,
ARG725, ARG726, VAL727, ARG728 and ASP731, which are
thought to be the critically interactive residues during the
dimerisation process, and post-docking ChiRotor and ligandannealing
refinement were allowed.

De Novo design
A set of novel ligands were designed by the help of the ‘De
Novo Evolution’ protocol, that constructs larger molecules in
the binding site of the receptor starting from an initial scaffold
molecule employing a genetic algorithm. The core scaffold was
manually chosen and further manual modifications were
carried out on the resulting structures. The protocol was run in
‘Full Evolution’ mode starting with a population of 40 at each of
the 6 generations with the selection of 15 survivors per
generation using the top LUDI 3 [] – an empirical function
that provides a fast and accurate score describing the binding
affinity – for scoring structures. Designed ligands were first
heated in the receptor site up to 300 K and trajectories analyzed
to assure the mode of binding at physiological temperature for
5 fs with Generalized Born Simple Switching (GBSW) implicit
solvation conditions – the methodology is well suited with
molecular dynamics trajectory [], in order to initially filter the
candidate structures.

Scoring and Energetics
The ligand-receptor complexes of selected clustered poses from
each flexibly docked ligand, as well as the designed ligands
were further subject to a minimization process using the
‘Minimization’ protocol in DS 2.5 through the ‘Smart Minimizer’
– steepest-descent followed by conjugate gradient method –
until potential energy RMS gradient was less than 0.05
kcal/mol/Å, with generalized born simple switching implicit
solvation at salt concentration of 0.145 M to better mimic
physiological conditions []. The same was done to the
homodimerised complex for acquiring an energy estimate of the
low-affinity D7 dimerization. The last followed binding energy
calculation by the ‘Calculate Binding Energy’ protocol yet
through the more robust Poisson-Boltzmann solver. The
binding energies were used for scoring due to the lack of prior
arts correlating scoring functions reproducibility on the current
binding site.

Molecular Dynamics
The ‘Standard Dynamics Cascade’ Protocol 
[] of DS 2.5 was
implemented with a time step of 1 fs. The initial minimization
of the implicitly solvated protein–ligand complex was carried
out in two steps on residues of a selected sphere of a 13 Å
radius inscribing the ligand, binding site and its surrounding
residues and loops, keeping about two thirds of the protein
domain fixed throughout the whole dynamics simulation
cascade. Bad contacts were corrected using the steepest-descent
algorithm without major distortion in the structure down to
0.01 kcal/mol/Å RMS gradient. Further minimization was
carried out using the conjugate gradient algorithm with a lowenergy
starting point down to 0.0001 kcal/mol/Å final RMS
gradient. Initially the temperature of the system was raised
from 50 to 330 K for 5000 heating steps at each temperature. The
system was then equilibrated for 200 ps, and finally the
production run was carried out for another 1500 ps.

Results and Discussion
The detailed investigation conducted by Yang et al., 
[]
concluded the critical role of the dimerization process of D7
through the homotypic contacts in ligand-induced (VEGF-A)
autophosphorylation of VEGFR-2 and that latter's eventual
activation. Such interaction was regarded to be of low affinity,
the fact proven by analytical centrifugation that determined the
dissociation constant for (Kd) dimerisation of the isolated D7
region was found to exceed 10-4 M. Relating the total binding
energy to the dissociation constant, the following formula was
used:

ΔG(lgd-ptn)•ln Kd(ptn-ptn)/ΔG(ptn-ptn) = ln Kd(lgd-ptn)
Where ΔG is the binding free energy, and Kd is the dissociation
constant. The reference value was calculated from the molar
dimerisation free energy of D7 that approximately corresponds
to a Kd of 100 µM. The above formula was then used to
calculate dissociation constants of the ligand-protein complexes.
Eventually, showing potentially efficacious leads resulting from
the design procedure as opposed to the virtual screening 
[].

Virtual High-throughput Screening
The aforementioned selected library of commercially available
compounds (approximately 110,000 compounds) was initially
docked with LibDock into the binding pocket () to
reduce its size down to approximately 35,000 poses − with a
maximum of three poses per molecule, which was appropriate
for the more robust CDOCKER protocol, that was allowed to
perform final annealing, has shrunk down the size into 751
poses. Based on the ‘CDOCKER Energy’ score which includes
internal ligand strain energy and receptor-ligand interaction
energy, the 19 non-redundant structures of the top 50 poses
were chosen for an additional flexible docking simulation in
order to better investigate their mode of binding. The resulting
complexes output by the latter process were retrospectively
investigated, and five poses for each ligand-flexible receptor
poses were selected as candidates for the energetics simulation.
The purpose of the re-ranking the compounds based on
thorough energetic probing was to better account solvation and
entropy-related factors that could strongly affect the binding
efficacy. So, the complexes were minimized with implicit
solvation and then the total binding energies (regarding
receptor and ligand entropy) were calculated to select the best
ligand. Fifteen out of the nineteen ligands have shown negative
total binding energies as shown in (Table 1, see 
). 
The results show a range from very poor to modest
binding affinities. Hence, FBD is capable of generating more
robust solutions provided chemical compatibility and synthetic
feasibility are addressed.

De Novo Design of Small Molecule Inhibitors
Firstly, we have selected two pharmacophoric groups as
scaffolds from the designed prototype D3 that have been
manually placed into the active site and then minimized for the
Ludi algorithm to start with in ‘Full Evolution’ mode, namely,
guanidinium group at the acidic pocket of the active site − by
natural binding mode mimicry − and tetrazolyl sandwiched
between the two guanidinium groups of the ARG725 and
ARG726. The standard Ludi fragment libraries − ‘Link’ and
‘Receptor’ − developed by Böhm 
[] were used. The 6th
generation has proved to supply optimally sized candidate
ligands with sufficiently high LUDI scores. The selected ligands
were those of the acceptable synthetic feasibility. Later, manual
optimization for binding enrichment was carried out, mainly
through replacement of weakly interacting or misplaced
moieties and addition of electron-rich annular systems in the
vicinity of the ionisable guanidinium groups of the active site in
aim to the formation of multiple cation-pi interations, the kind
of non-covalent bonding that has proved capable of competing
with full aqueous solvation as well as baring binding energies
beyond ­20 kcal/mol between various protonated amines and
activated ring systems []. Other condition-specific
interactions were also sought during the design process like
cyclodione-arginine reversible covalent interaction 
[],
distributed formal and densely charged groups. Preliminary
heating to 300 K was conducted to discard poorly bound
ligands, and then the stable complexes were re-cooled to
decrease the gradient after relieving steric clashes. Then, the
complexes of the five remaining compounds 1D-5D 
()
were minimized and binding energies were calculated (Table 2,
see ).

Molecular dynamics simulation
To account for the effect of solvent on binding stability; GBSW
implicit solver was used with the same parameters of prior
minimization. The total energy and simulation temperature
were found to remain steady with little fluctuation during the
production stage time interval (1500 ps), which was preceded
by heating followed by equilibration. The conformational
sampling of the trajectory at 0, 250, 500, 750, 1000, 1250, and
1500 ps of the production run are shown in 
.
Conformations of both the ligand and the protein showed that
they stayed conserved with slight perturbation, at the solvent
accessible region by the residues of Arg726 and Arg725,
especially in the case of the ligands' 2D rotatable tail. Due to the
mandatory role played by hydrogen bonds and cation-pi
interactions, they were closely monitored and their existence
sampled through the trajectory (Table 3, see 
). 
From the table it is clear that the bond showed a high
temporal stability throughout the production dynamics phase.
Calculating the molecular properties (Table 2, see
) of the designed ligands could predict
good pharmacokinetic properties. This should lead to the
expectation of a valuable in vivo performance of such agents.
Also in most of the cases, Lipiniski's ‘rule of 5’ was satisfied,
which suggests a good oral bioavailability of the compounds
[]. 
Due to the high potentials of these compounds, we are
planning to synthesize and report their activities in due course.

Conclusion
A novel homotypic dimerization region that is believed to play
a critical role in VEGFR signal transduction was exploited as
target in structure-based drug design. A large sized library of
commercially available compounds were virtually screened and
showed Kd values higher than that of D7 dimerisation.
Nevertheless, the de novo design process has resulted in many
promising ligands in the sub-micromolar range (binding
affinity exceeding 340-fold that of dimerisation). In addition
designed compounds could be utilized in construction of a
pharmacophore model to screen much larger databases of
compounds for possible hits. This study could be a promising in
developing lead compounds in the discovery of anticancer
drugs.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We gratefully acknowledge the pharmaceutical chemistry
department, Faculty of Pharmacy-ASU for computational
resources, including hardware and licensed software. Special
thanks for Amr Hamed for his critical logistic support and
helpful discussions.

Citation:ElGamacy et al, Bioinformation 7(2): 52-58 (2011)

Interpolated charge surface of the binding pocket
residues.

The binding modes of the designed compounds 1D-
5D (from left to right). Hydrogen bonds visualized as dashed
black lines; Cation-pi interactions visualized as orange lines.

Molecular dynamics trajectory for the complexes of
the ligands 1D-5D (from left to right). Snapshots of the designed
ligands and the side chains of the binding site residue
conformers extracted from the production dynamics trajectory
at times 0, 250, 500, 750, 1000, 1250, 1500 ps.

