Background
Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are among the most common
infectious diseases all over the world. Urinary tract infections
encompass ranges of morbidity including pyelonephritis and
cystitis which are characterized by the existence of
microorganism in urinary tract []. Escherichia coli are a
bacterial organism that belongs to the family
Enterobacteriaeceae. E. coli is one of the main causes of both
nosocomial and community acquired infections in humans. The
organism is therefore of clinical importance and can be isolated
from various clinical specimens. It is one of the organisms most
frequently isolated from urine and blood []. In addition to
Urinary Tract, E. coli is the most frequent pathogen associated
with Intra-Abdominal Infection (IAI) []. Understanding the
prevailing pattern of antimicrobial resistance is the most
important question especially when gram negative isolates
continue to demonstrate uncontrolled resistance to various
currently in use antimicrobial drugs [].

As an extraintestinal pathogen, E. coli is best known for causing
urinary tract infection (UTI), bacteremia, and neonatal bacterial
meningitis (NBM). The distinctive strains of E. coli responsible
for most cases of UTI, sepsis, and NBM represent a limited
number of virulent clones that are characterized by specific
O.K.H serotypes and derive predominantly from E. coli
phylogenetic group B2, as defined by multilocus enzyme
electrophoresis and to a lesser extent from group D 
[]. It has
been observed that antibiotic susceptibility of bacterial isolates
is dynamic and varies with time and environment []. There is a
need for a periodic screening of common bacterial pathogens for
their antibiotic susceptibility profiles in different communities.
According to [], E. coli is highly resistant to ampicillin,
amoxicillin, tetracycline and trimethoprim &amp; sulfamethoxazole.
The widespread occurrence of drug resistant E. coli and other
pathogens in our environment has necessitated the need for
regular monitoring of antibiotics susceptibility trends to provide
the basis for developing rational prescription programs, making
policy decisions and assessing the effectiveness of both 
[].

Methodology
Sample collection:
69 clinical specimens comprising of urine were screened for E.
coli in the microbiology laboratory section of Sheikh Zayed
Hospital, Lahore. The specimens were processed using standard
microbiological methods. All isolates were identified using
conventional techniques [].

Antibiotic susceptibility testing:
The specimens were processed for isolation of E.Coli by using
standard microbiological techniques and the antimicrobial
susceptibility was determined by using Kirby-Bauer disk
diffusion technique recommended by Clinical &amp; Laboratory
Standards Institute (CLSI), 2010 guidelines []. Susceptibility of
isolates to antibiotics were tested against the eight antibiotics,
namely ampicillin, nitrofurantoin, gentamicin, amikacin,
ciprofloxacin, augmentin, imipenem and tazocin. Inhibition
zone sizes were interpreted using standard recommendations.

Ethical issues:
In present study, we made an effort to protect the health,
privacy and secrecy of personal information and rights to selfdetermination
of all the participants. All ethical issues were
considered and the study was conducted after approval from
institutional review board and with hospital׳s permission.
Consent was taken from all the volunteer participants of this
study to use their urine samples to determine antibiotic
resistance patterns of E. coli isolates. The name, personal and
medical information of all the participant was kept secret.

Results &amp; Discussion
The distribution of E. coli from various clinical urine specimens
is shown in  (see supplementary material). Total 69
urine samples from UTI patients were screened for E.Coli out of
which 40 were positive for E.Coli. Results of antimicrobial
resistance of E. coli. A total of eight antibiotics were used against
40 strains (n = 40) of E. coli(table 1). The table indicates the high
resistance pattern among strains as most strains are resistant to
different antibiotics. The resistance rates for ampicillin (67.5%),
nitrofurantoin (52.5%), gentamicin (70%), amikacin (55%),
ciprofloxacin (65%), augmentin (77.5%), imipenem (32.5%) and
tazocin (12.5%) were observed. High resistance to augmentin
and gentamicin was observed whereas more than eighty seven
percent of the strains were sensitive to tazocin, 67.5% to
imipenem, 47.5% to nitrofurantoin, 45% to amikacin and 35% to
ciprofloxacin. In  (see supplementary material) are
presented the detailed results of the antibiotic resistance
screening tests and summary of the antibiogram profiles.of
strains showing antibiotic resistant pattern against different
number of antibiotics (1 to 7). But no strain showed resistance
against all eight antibiotics. The results show that about 65% of
the E. coli isolates are multidrug resistant, i.e. are resistant to 3 or
more drugs.

Discussion
The antibacterial drugs most frequently prescribed in UTIs׳
treatment throughout the world are cephalosporins, semisynthetic
penicillins with or without beta-lactamase inhibitors ,
trimethoprim- sulfamethoxazole, and quinolones [,
],
however, it was proved that resistance to penicillin,
sulfamethoxazole, trimethoprim and cephalotin were 100%,
30.89%, 16.26% and 20.32%, respectively []. High resistance of
E. coli to antimicrobial agents tested was observed in this study
which is similar to what was observed by who reported very
high resistance of E. coli isolates to ampicillin and amoxicillin.
Resistance to ampicillin observed in this study was similar to
what was observed in South Africa, Israel, (62 - 84%) and Hong
Kong, Philippines (64 - 82%) []. They further reported 53% of
E. coli isolates resistant to nitrofurantoin and 67% to
gentamicin. Their findings are in harmony with the reports of
this study, showing very high resistance to nitrofurantoin and
gentamicin.. The reason for this high resistance to commonly
used antibiotics may be due to widespread and indiscriminate
use in our environment.

Isolates in this study were (67.5%) sensitive to imipenem. This
type of sensitivity of E. coli isolates to imipenem has earlier been
reported by []. Concern over increasing resistance to β-lactam
antibiotics led to the development of β-lactamase inhibitors.
These drugs, including clavulanic acid, sulbactam, and
tazobactam, have little intrinsic antibacterial activity, but can
bind irreversibly to the β-lactamases produced by many
bacteria, thereby inactivating the enzymes and leaving the
microorganisms sensitive to β-lactamase susceptible antibiotics
[]. In clinical practice, the β-lactamase inhibitors are often
administered in combination with β-lactam antibiotics to extend
the spectrum of antibacterial activity of the antibiotics.
Tazobactam irreversibly inhibits a broad range of plasmidmediated
and chromosomal bacterial β-lactamases and is
considered the most active of currently available β-lactamase
inhibitors. The combination of this agent with piperacillin, a β-
lactamase-sensitive antibiotic, expands the activity of
piperacillin to organisms that produce β-lactamases, including
Enterobacteria, Staphylococcus, and Bacteroides species .Isolates in
this study were highly sensitive to tazocin (87.5%). From the
present study, it appears that tazocin and imipenem are the
drugs of choice for serious infections with E. coli organisms as
has been recommended earlier [].

In recent years, use of fluoroquinolones has increased in many
countries and emergence of resistance of bacterial isolates to
fluoroquinolones has been observed. Consistent stepwise
increase in E. coli resistance to ciprofloxacin was observed from
1995 (0.7%) to 2001 (2.5%) by []. Ciprofloxacin resistance in
Portugal was 25.8% and Italy 24.3% while in Germany and
Netherlands it was 15.2% and 6.8% respectively []. The
percentage of ciprofloxacin resistance observed in this study
was 65%, which is on the high side. In pervious years, E. coli
was 100% susceptible to the fluoroquinolones. In 1996, Egri-
Okwaji reported 100% susceptibility of E. coli isolates to
ofloxacin. High resistance of E. coli to ciprofloxacin has also
been documented by []; they observed that 24% of 189 E. coli
isolates were resistant to ciprofloxacin. Fluoroquinoloneresistance
is typically encoded chromosomally. This resistance
against Fluoroquinolones in our study may reflect significant
antibiotic pressure in the environment rather than co-carriage of
this resistance gene on plasmids.

The reason for the high resistance to ciprofloxacin observed in
this study may be due to increasing an irrational consumption
rate, transmission of resistant isolates between people and
consumption of food from animals that have received
antibiotics. Self-medication and non-compliance with
medication and sales of substandard drug may account for the
rise in antibiotic resistance observed in this community. The
strategy to overcome bacterial resistance is multidirectional. The
knowledge that improper exposure of microorganisms to
antibiotics results in emergence of resistance strains requires
that antibiotics should only be prescribed on receipt of culture
sensitivity testing reports to ensure proper and effective
therapy. Moreover these must be given in optimal doses, in
appropriate combination and for sufficient duration. Such
findings are indicative of the overall health-care system within
Pakistan with regard to proper post-operative care, hygiene and
patient awareness. Since antimicrobial resistant patterns are
constantly evolving there is the necessity for constant
antimicrobial sensitivity surveillance. This will help clinicians
provide safe and effective empiric therapies.

Conclusion
Urinary tract infection (UTI) is most frequent infection after
respiratory tract infection. As more than 2/3 of all pathogenic
organisms are E. coli, antibiotic susceptibility profiles especially
of E. coli should be considered during the selection of antibiotics
for the treatment of UTIs. In the set up of Pakistan and other
third world countries, regular urine cultures may be advisable,
as treatment failure may likely to occur with frequently
prescribed antibiotics.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Jafri et al, Bioinformation 10(7): 419-422 (2014)

