Background
Malaria is a non-contagious disease of chronic evolution that
manifests in acute episodes []. Currently, millions of people in
the tropical and subtropical zones of the world are affected by
malaria []. The malaria parasite manifests disease condition
only during its blood stage in its lifecycle. This part occurs
largely within the red blood cell of the human host [], where it
digests a major proportion of the red cell haemoglobin []. It has
been demonstrated that Plasmodium falciparum, the causative
agent of almost all fatal cases of malaria, detoxifies host
haemoglobin-derived ferriprotoporphyrin IX (Fe (III) PPIX) in
an acidic digestive vacuole (DV) mainly by converting it to
haemozoin []. Fe (III) PPIX produced by autoxidation of haeme
(Fe (II) PPIX) released from haemoglobin is known to be
capable of causing lipid peroxidation [] and to destabilize
membranes through a colloid osmotic mechanism [].
Packaging Fe (III) PPIX into compact and highly insoluble
haemozoin crystals decreases its pro-oxidant capacity [] and
likely also avoids colloid osmotic effects. Haemozoin is now
known to be a crystalline cyclic dimer of Fe(III)PPIX in which
the propionate group of one porphyrin moiety coordinates to
the Fe(III) center of its partner and vice versa, while the second
propionic acid group of each Fe(III)PPIX hydrogen bonds to a
neighbouring dimer in the crystal [].

The widely used quinoline drugs chloroquine, quinine, and
mefloquine, as well as amodiaquine and the nonquinoline
drugs such as halofantrine and lumefantrine are known to act
against the blood stages of the infection by inhibiting
detoxification of Fe (III) PPIX into haemozoin, resulting in a
build-up of toxic Fe (III) PPIX [,
] and artemisinin cause a
similar effect by reacting with haeme (FeII-protoporphyrin IX)
to give free radicals and adducts [,
]. The artemisinins are the
most effective antimalarial drugs with a remarkable therapeutic
index []. As a fact World Health Organisation (WHO) has
advocated the policy of Artemisinin-based combination therapy
(ACTs) for treating P.falciparum malaria []. The rationale for
this combination is that the artemisinin derivative rapidly clears
95% of the parasites and the remaining 5% are cleared by the
longer half-life partner drug and thus the risk of recrudescence
is minimized. Because of the paucity of promising novel
antimalarial drugs under development and fear of loss of the
artemisinin to resistance, in malaria drug combination therapy,
the current trend is to co-formulate two or more agents into a
single tablet, as a multicomponent drug []. However, based on
the wide interest in the hybrid molecules as well as numerous
encouraging efficacy and toxicity reports, the next generation
antimalarial may well be hybrid drugs as opposed to
multicomponent ones. There are numerous advantages of
employing hybrid molecules over multicomponent drugs in
malaria therapy. Compared to the latter, hybrid drugs may be
less expensive since, in principle, the risks and costs involved
may not be different from any other single entity. Another
advantage is that of the lower risk of drug–drug adverse
interactions compared to multicomponent drugs [].

The mechanism of action of any drug is very important in drug
development. Generally, the drug compound binds with a
specific target, a receptor, to mediate its effects. Therefore,
suitable drug–receptor interactions are required for high
activity. Understanding the nature of these interactions is very
significant and theoretical calculations, in particular the
molecular docking method, seem to be a proper tool for gaining
such understanding. The docking results obtained will give
information on how the chemical structure of the drug should
be modified to achieve of new and more effective drugs. As a
proof-of-concept and the reported antimalarial synergism
between artemisinin/other endoperoxides and quinine, we
conceptualize to evaluate in silico the molecular interaction and
binding affinity of a covalently linked artemisinin–quinine
hybrid in which the vinyl functionality of quinine was modified
to allow for the attachment of dihydroartemisinin 
()
with intra-parasite prosthetic haeme group of human
haemoglobin [].The rationale behind the design was to address
the fact that artemisinin is lipophilic, fast-acting but quickly
eliminated drugs that is associated with high rates of
recrudescence when used in monotherapy []. It was suggested
that coupling of the slow-acting, relatively polar quinine
derivative might increase the half-life of the artemisinin moiety.
Current research in this field seems to endorse hybrid
molecules as the next-generation antimalarial drugs [].

Methodology
Preparation of protein:
Studies on the mode of action of artemisinin and its derivatives
have shown that free haeme could be the molecule targeted by
artemisinin in biological systems [–].Similarity
spectrophotometric study revealed that quinine and related
antimalaria drugs interact with Ferriprotoporphyrin-IX 
[].

So the X-ray structure of halofantrine-Ferriprotoporphyrin-IX
(CCDC_659633) from the Cambridge Crystallographic Data
Centre is used as initial structure in the preparation receptor
binding site []. Ferriprotoporphyrin-IX is a planar molecule
with a strong positive charge on its central iron atom 
(). After removal of halofantrine structure, the charge on the
iron was assigned as +2 but the structure was kept the same.
Hydrogen's were added to the model automatically via the
Maestro interface [] leaving no lone pair and using an explicit
all-atom model. The multi-step Schrödinger's protein
preparation tool (PPrep) was used for final preparation of
receptor model. The complex structure was energy minimised
using the OPLS-2005 force field and the conjugate gradient
algorithm, keeping all atoms except hydrogen fixed. The
minimisation was stopped either after 1000 steps or after the
energy gradient converged below 0.01 KJ/mol.

Virtual library design:
The virtual library of Artemisinin-Quinine hybrid analogues
contain 34 compounds divided into nine sub libraries. All these
compounds are taken from various sources belonging to
different derivatives of Artemisinin and Quinine 
[–].The
following physiochemical parameters are considered for design
of Artemisinin -Quinine hybrid derivatives. 
(, see
supplementary material).

Log P (partition coefficient):
The logP value of Artemisinin-Quinine-OH hybrid is estimated
to be 5.57. In view of background; the logP value is set to be in
the range of 4.5-6.10 [].

Molecular weight:
The molecular weight of the hybrid molecule is estimated to be
622.74 g/mol. So the molecular weight kept below 650 g/mol to
enhance the membrane permeability [].

H-bond donor and acceptor:
In designing inhibitor with reference to hydrogen bond donor
and acceptor we have refereed to ‘Lipinski rule of 5’ which state
that hydrogen bond donor and acceptor should not be more
than 5 and 10 respectively [,
].

Sub lib-I:
Dihydroartemisinin-Quinine Hybrid-This library consist of only
of one ligand. The structure is designed experimentally in
which the vinyl functionality of quinine was modified to allow
for the attachment of dihydroartemisinin.

Sub lib-II:
Artemisinin-Quinine Hybrid - This library consists of five
ligands which are designed by attachment of Quinine moiety to
the Artemisinin molecule at O-14.

Sub lib-III:
C9 Artemisinin-Quinine Hybrid- This library consists of two
ligands in which the C9 substituted Artemisinin entity is
attached to Quinine at O-14 position.

Sub lib-IV:
C3 Artemisinin-Quinine Hybrid- C3 substituted Artemisinin
derivatives are attached to Quinine moiety and two hybrids are
present in this sub library.

Sub lib-V:
C10 Artemisinin-Quinine Hybrid- This library consist of five
ligands in which the C10 carbon atom of Artemisinin is
modified and Quinine molecule is attached to it at C9 carbon
atom.

Sub lib-VI:
Seco Artemisinin-Quinine Hybrid-This library is having three
ligands (16-18) with logP in the range from 5.22 to 5.79.The
Quinine molecule is attached to the seco artemisinin entity at C9
carbon atom.

Sub lib-VII:
Miscellaneous Artemisinin-Quinine Hybrid- This library
consists of four ligand in which various substitution in different
carbon atom of Artemisinin molecule are attached to the
Quinine entity.

Sub lib-VIII:
Quinoline-Artemisinin Hybrid-Quinoline-Artemisinin sub
library is having twelve ligands in which the various
substitutions at quinoline ring of the Quinine molecule is
attached to artemisinin phramacophore.

We used ISIS Draw 2.3 software for sketching structure and
converting it its 3D representation by using ChemSketch 3D
viewer of ACDLABS 12.0. LigPrep was used for final
preparation of ligands from libraries for docking. LigPrep is a
utility of Schrodinger software suit that combines tools for
generating 3D structures from 1D (Smiles) and 2D (SDF)
representation, searching for tatutomers and steric isomers and
perform a geometry minimization of ligands. The ligands were
minimized by means of Molecular Mechanics Force Fields
(OPLS-2005) with default setting.

Docking procedure:
It is quite important to have an accurate model for the haeme-
Art-Qui-OH complex, because this knowledge can be used to
design better and more potent antimalarial. The Schrodinger
Glide program version 4.0 has been used for docking. After
ensuring that receptor and ligand are in the correct form for
docking, the receptor-grid file was generated using a gridreceptor
generation program. The default size was used for the
bounding and enclosing boxes. The grid box was generated at
the centroid of the haeme. The ligands were docked initially
using the ‘standard precision’ method. The best 10 poses and
corresponding scores have been evaluated using Glide in single
precision mode (Glide SP) .The pose with the lowest Glide SP
score has been taken as the input for the Glide calculation in
extra precision mode (Glide XP). To soften the potential for nonpolar
parts of the receptor, we scaled van der Waals radii of
receptor atoms by 1.00 with partial atomic charge 0.25.

The docked poses were minimized using the local optimization
feature in Prime and the energies of complex were calculated
using the OPLS-AA force field and generalized-Born/surface
area (GB/SA) continuum solvent model. The binding free
energy (ΔG bind) is then estimated using equation 
[].

ΔG bind = E R: L – (ER+EL) +ΔG solv+ ΔGSA (1)

Where ER:L is energy of the complex, ER + EL is sum of the
energies of the ligand and unliganded receptor, using the
OPLS-AA force field, ΔG solv (ΔGSA) is the difference between
GBSA solvation energy (surface area energy) of complex and
sum of the corresponding energies for the ligand and
unliganded protein. Corrections for entropic changes were not
applied in this type of free energy calculation.

Discussion
Early reports have revealed that P. falciparum 3D7 strain growth
was inhibited by much lower concentrations of the hybrid than
that of quinine or artemisinin alone. This suggested that the
actions of both quinine and artemisinin moieties were
preserved. Moreover, when the activity of the hybrid was
compared with that of a 1:1 mixture of quinine and artemisinin
(on a mol quinine/mol artemisinin basis), the hybrid was about
3 fold superior. Similar results were obtained with the
chloroquine-resistant strain FcB1 
 (see supplementary
material).

Prompted by the experimental study; a set of Artemisinin-
Quinine hybrid with its 34 analogous structures have been
computationally analyzed by molecular docking simulation to
identify new analogues that have a similar mechanism of action
yet superior activity. Glide 4.0 [] in XP mode has been used to
dock the library (I–IX) of Art-Qui-OH with the putative receptor
Fe-PPIX. Interaction of Art-Qui-OH and its derivatives with Fe
(II) PPIX (Iron (II)) involves binding between the endoperoxide
bridges (O1 and O2) bridge of the hybrid to the front of the iron
bridge of protoporphyrin-IX shown in ().

The XP score of the experimental structure; dihydroartemisininquinine
compound is computed to -7.485 kcal/mol. Out of 34
derivatives; seven novel ligands among the library; two from
C3-Artemisinin-Quinine hybrid, three from C10-Artemisinin-
Quinine hybrid and two from Miscellaneous Artemisinin
Quinine hybrid have better Glide score. Previous studies
showed that interactions between peroxide linkage in
artemisinin compounds and haeme iron play major role in the
binding mode, therefore, distances between haeme iron and
two peroxide oxygen's; O1, O2 as well as O11 and O13 and
ΔG bind of these seven derivatives were monitored.

For each of the seven ligands, the pose with the lowest Glide
score was rescored using Prime/MM-GBSA approach. This
approach is used to predict the free energy of binding for set of
ligands to receptor. The ΔG bind energies among the ligands vary
in between -49.00 to-32.35 kcal/mol. The calculated relative
binding energy (ΔΔG bind-cald) of the ligands was also obtained
by using Art-Qui-OH as reference. The drop in calculated
relative binding energy of the ligand provides a favourable
energetic evaluation of the binding affinity  (see
supplementary material).

In any binding energy calculation, the correct binding structure
of each ligand has to be determined first prior to binding energy
estimation. Excluding only one structure from C10 Artemisnin-
Quinine hybrid; in other docking configuration it was observed
that artemisinin moiety of the hybrid prefers to dock at
endoperoxide oxygen's (O1 and O2), with O2–Fe as the shortest
haeme–artemisinin distance and O1–Fe as the second shortest
distance. Configuration of dihydroartemisinin-quinine hybrid
had the peroxide oxygen O1 and O2 close to the haeme iron
(3.273 Å &amp; 2.817 Å) with O11 and O13 atom further removed
(5.071 Å &amp; 5.149 Å). The ΔGbind value of the structure is -32.35
kcal/mol. Configuration of ligand 9 and 10 of C3-Artemisnin-
Quinine hybrid series were almost identical. In both the cases
O1 (3.281 and 3.282 Å) and O2 (2.817 and 2.825 Å) were closest,
with other oxygen atom being further away: O11 (4.867 and
4.951 Å) and O13 (5.125 and 5.172 Å). The docked configuration
of ligand 11 of C10 Artemisinin-Quinine hybrid the binding
with the endoperoxide moiety of artemisinin is in a different
configuration, and a stronger O11–Fe attraction is resulted
(3.812 Å) than O1, O2 and O13 (6.487 Å, 6.176 Å and 5.325 Å).
The relative binding energy (ΔΔG bind-cald) of the ligand is
calculated to be -10.13 kcal/mol. Such deviation may be
explained on the basis of stereochemistry of artemisinin
analogues that is controlled by steric hindrance. The analogues
which approach the haeme-iron as close as possible will have
better interaction and thus a good glide score. However, owing
to the planar structure of the Ferriprotoporphyrin-IX, the
repulsion between artemisinin and the protoporphyrin ring
prevents artemisinin from approaching haeme-iron. Ligand 12
and 14 of this group produce final orientation with a relative
binding energy ΔΔG bind-cald of -11.76 Kcal/mol and -5.08
kcal/mol. Both the configuration involved interaction of the
peroxide-derived oxygen with the Fe atom of protoporphyrin-
IX. In the most favourable configuration between haeme and
miscellaneous Artemisinin-Quinine hybrid with a Gscore of -
8.913 kcal/mol (the lowest), the iron is between 3.317 and 2.817
Å from each of the oxygen in the endoperoxide bridge (O1 &amp;
O2). This structure has the lowest (ΔGbind) score of -49.00
kcal/mol. From the docking simulation study it revealed that
the structure as well as orientation of Artemisnin-Quinine
hybrid with respect to haeme has a significant effect on drug
action. It could then be concluded that iron in haeme interacts
with O2 more preferably than O1, a preference which might
arise from the more negative charge at O2 and the steric
hindrance at O1. This observation is in agreement with docking
results reported by Shukla et al. 
[].

Artemisinin-Quinine hybrid molecule is novel due to its
modified structure and has potent anti malaria activities with
presence of artemisinin consisting of endo-peroxide Bridge.
Studies suggest that the antimalarial activity of artemisinin is
due to the interaction of its peroxide group with the prosthetic
haeme group of human haemoglobin. Reduction of the
peroxide group may lead to cytotoxic free radicals and
electrophilic intermediates, which may be able to react which
may be able to react with specific P.falciparum membrane
associated proteins, leading to the parasite's death. As shown
by Walsh et al., 2007 their hybrid was highly active in vitro
against the strains of P. falciparum 3D7 (with IC50 value 8.95 nM)
and Chloroquine resistant strain P.falciparum FcB1 (IC50 value
9.59 nM).The reported results demonstrate a proof to the
concept that linkage of artemisinin and quinine is being
retained in a single molecule and possibly enhances the
antimalarial activity of the parent compounds. It is likely that
the hybrid can interact with haeme or its oxidation product
haematin as a common target since these are both present in the
eryhrocytic parasite.

There is no doubt that the hybrid molecules show potent and
novel anti malarial activity. The next major steps, therefore, is to
experimentally analyze the antimalaria activity by determining
the IC50 value of Art-Qui-OH and its structural derivatives by
BHIA (β-haematin inhibitory assay). Though the analogues
ranged from poor to good binding affinity; the structures are
yet to be synthesized. The information that we have obtained in
this study may lead to the design and hopefully (synthesis) of
more potent hybrid derivatives with receptor as haematin.

Conclusion
We propose a model for the binding mode and binding affinity
of Art-Qui-OH and its derivatives with a putative receptor. This
model will help the rational design of new artemisinin based
hybrid anti-malarial that target haemozoin formation.

Competing interests
The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors acknowledge R. Raghu, Schrödinger Inc. for
providing trial license software for preparation of the
manuscript.

Citation:Mahapatra et al, Bioinformation 8(8): 369-380 (2012)

A) 2D molecular structure of Dihydroartemisinin-
Quinine hybrid; B) 2D structure of Haeme

Representative docking Fe-(O1-O2) interaction of
Dihydroartemisinin-Quinine hybrid with Fe-(II) PPIX as a
putative receptor

