Background
Classical methods for degenerate primer design include
software applications such as Gene Fisher [], CODEHOP 
[] or
PrimaClade []. These methods usually rely on the
identification of clear blocks of conserved regions in multiple
global alignments. Therefore, alignment quality should be very
high among the sequences in order to utilize the software.
However, in many cases, primer design using multiple global
alignments is unsuccessful [], due to poor conservation among
the sequences under study. Here a method is analyzed which
suggests the common motif region could be used to design
degenerate of primers for sequences with poor global similarity
or without well-conserved blocks in multiple global alignments.
The technique is based on multiple local alignments, using the
Multiple Expectation – Maximization for Motif Elicitation
(MEME) algorithm [], in order to search for conserved regions
long enough to serve as primers. The results of MEME were
then compared with Primer3 [] result. Using MAST 
[] two
well conserved motifs sites were generated from the common
motif regions. The potential primer properties of these motifs
will be verified further in wet lab.

We employed this technique to design primer from the
common motif regions for the sequences related to glutathione
synthetase gene (gshB) of Rhizobium etli CFN 42. We
demonstrate that the amplification of sequences with similarity
to genes reported in other species (possibly homologues) is
possible, even when the species in question is poorly
characterized at the molecular level.

Methodology
Employing BLASTN [] homologous sequences of the gshB
gene (Accession number: gi|86355669:327589-328536) of
Rhizobium etli CFN 42, were extracted from nucleotide sequence
databases of NCBI (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) 
[] and are
summarized in  (see supplementary material). One
database of collected nucleotide sequences was constructed.

Original query (gshB gene) and its group of related sequences
were aligned using T-COFFEE [] to determine global
similarity. A lack of block conservation was observed in all
cases in the multiple global alignments which discarded this
technique to design degenerate primers for considered
sequences. Then multiple local alignments were performed
using MEME to generate common motif regions for the
sequences. The conditions of these alignments included a
minimum motif length of 18 and a maximum of 50, and
minimum sites to find was two. Then two motifs were
generated using MAST by considering and combining
evidences of all p-values associated with motifs resulted by
MEME run.Primer3 was employed to generate primers for
every individual sequence, which were then compared with the
common motif portions of that sequence 
 (see
supplementary material) suggested by the first MEME result.
Again another MEME run was conducted to detect motifs of
minimum width 18 and maximum width 22 (criteria of good
primer) with all the previous parameters remaining unchanged
for the similar sequence set and two motifs were generated
employing MAST.

Discussion
To design degenerate primer for this group of sequences, it was
necessary to predict block of conserved regions present in the
sequences, which indeed needed sequence alignment study of
the sequence set. Therefore, a multiple global alignment
algorithm of the T-coffee software was performed for the set of
gshB gene homologous sequences. From the result of T-coffee
no significant block conservation was detected. So the idea of
designing of degenerate primer from a simple multiple global
alignments of these sequences was dropped. In order to predict
common motif regions for the sequences, an attempt was made
for a multiple local alignment using MEME. From the MEME
result common arrangement of motifs among the analyzed
sequences were detected which proved the existence of two
well-conserved regions among these sequences. Then combing
evidence of all the p-value of the motifs, two motifs were
generated using MAST server. The predicted common motifs
were (1) AAGATCTTCGTCACCGAATTTCCCGATCTGA
TGCCGAAGAC (+),
GTCTTCGGCATCAGATCGGGAAATTCGGTGACGAAGATCTT
(­) and (2)
ACGTGATCGGCGATTACATGACCGAGATCAACGTCAC (+),
GTGACGTTGATCTCGGTC ATGTAATCGCCGATCACGT (­)
Then an attempt was made to predict primers form each
sequence using Primer3. From the first MEME run and Primer3
test it was detected that sequences having accession number
gi|86355669: 327589-328536, gb|CP000133.1|, gb|CP001191.1|,
gi|115254414, gb|CP000628.1|, gb|CP001389.1|,
gb|CP000738.1, gb|CP000781.1|, gi|288909149,
gb|CP001029.1|, and gb|CP001510.1| shared same site of
common motif regions with primers. It indicates that in many
sequences, primer can be generated from these common motif
regions  (see supplementary material).

The resulted motifs of the first MEME run were too long to
consider or analyze as primers. Therefore, another MEME run
was conducted to detect motifs of minimum width 18 and
maximum width 22 (criteria of primer) with all the previous
parameters remaining unchanged in this test.In this study, more
than half of the results exhibited a common arrangement of
motifs between the analyzed sequences, indicating a global
similarity that could not be well resolved with common
algorithms of multiple global alignments. This indicates the
existence of well-conserved regions and similarity in the
analyzed sequences, which can be useful for primer design.

The second MEME run predicted two distinct similar regions of
motifs (). Then two specific motifs were generated
employing MAST algorithm from the resulted motifs of the
second MEME run. The motifs were (1)
TTCGACATGGCCTATATCACCT (+), AGGTGAT
ATAGGCCATGTCGAA (­) and (2)
AAAAGATCTTCGTCACCGAATT (+), AATTCGGTG
ACGAAGATCTTTT (­). The pair will be further verified in wet
lab and with other in-silico primer analysis techniques. If these
resulted primers will fail to be applied for any sequence, the
motifs of individual sequence obtained in second MEME run
can be extracted and ordered according to the score given in the
program. Then by pairing those in all possible ways, pair of
primers may be generated and analyzed.

Conclusion
Our analysis attempts to design degenerate primers from
common motif regions of a group of less conserved
homologous gene sequences related to gshB gene of Rhizobium
etli CFN 42. These sequences have a low sequence similarity in
multiple global alignments. So the applied technique in this
present study can be used for sequences those have very few
known homologues, or to confirm them, and to design
degenerate primers when the classical methods do not work.
However, the experimented method in this study needs to be
improved, for instance to reduce the time-consuming steps and
avoiding sequences with low similarity patterns. It is also
needed further investigation to apply it in the gene coding
analysis study as this technique may deform the functional
region of the gene in order to predict a common motif region.
Therefore the predicted technique is needed to be validated in
wet lab.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Sahu et al, Bioinformation 8(4): 181-184 (2012)

Second MEME run showing combined block diagram
for all motifs with corresponding GENE ID and combined Pvalue

