Background
Over the last decade, more than 150 complete genomes of
diverse bacteria, archaea and eukaryotes have been sequenced,
and many more are currently in the pipeline []. It is well
known that, in any newly sequenced bacterial genome, as many
as 30–40% of the genes do not have an assigned function 
[].
This figure is even higher for archaeal and eukaryotic genomes
and for the relatively large genomes of bacteria with a complex
life style, such as Anabaena, Streptomyces, etc 
[,
].

‘Conserved hypothetical’ proteins pose a challenge not just to
functional genomics, but also to biology in general []. As long
as there are hundreds of conserved proteins of unknown
function even in model organisms, such as Escherichia coli,
Bacillus subtilis or Saccharomyces cerevisiae, any discussion of a
‘complete’ understanding of these organisms as biological
systems will remain in the realm of wishful thinking. Although
it appears likely that the central pathways of information
processing and metabolism are already known, crucial
elements of these systems could still be lurking among the
‘conserved hypotheticals’, and important mechanisms of
signalling and stress response, in all likelihood, would remain
undiscovered [].

Aromatic compounds are widely distributed throughout the
biosphere predominantly in the form of recycled material 
[].
Because of the inherent thermodynamic stability of the aromatic
ring, natural turnover of these compounds is slow and instead
relies on complex microbial degradation pathways. With
aromatic compounds comprising &gt;25% of the earth's biomass,
these pathways play a crucial role in the biogeochemical carbon
cycle. However, despite the abundance of microbial degraders,
man-made aromatic pollutants are often recalcitrant to existing
bioprocessing pathways. As a result, these xenobiotic
compounds, many of which are derived from the processing of
crude oil, persist in the environment causing irreversible
damage to the biosphere [].

Aromatic ring-hydroxylating dioxygenases, also called Rieske
dioxygenases (RDOs), are class of multi-domain proteins that
catalyze the initial step in microbial aerobic degradation of
many aromatic compounds. Two hydroxyl groups are
introduced into the aromatic ring yielding cyclic cisdihydrodiols
or cis-diol carboxylic acids () [Substituents
X and Y can be hydrogen atoms or any of several other groups]
[,
].

More than three dozen distinct RDOs have been identified.
RDOs consist of a reductase, an oxygenase and in some cases,
an additional ferredoxin that mediates electron transfer
between the former two components. The oxygenase
component catalyzes the insertion of both atoms of molecular
oxygen into the aromatic substrate, which is believed to occur at
a mononuclear iron site and to be accompanied by electron
insertion from a Rieske-type [2Fe–2S] centre. Either the
reductase or, where present, the intermediary ferredoxin
component, supplies the two electrons from NAD(P)H to the
dioxygenase []. RDOs have been empirically classified
according to the various combinations of subunits and electron
transfer co-factors involved in reducing the oxygenase
component [,
] as mentioned in 
 (see
supplementary material).

Here we present a protocol to data mine and computationally
characterize redox hypothetical proteins possessing multiple
domains. Most proteins consist of multiple domains, and
domains determine the function and evolutionary relationships
of proteins []. Thus, it is important to understand the
principles of domain combinations and their associated inter
domain interactions especially, in hypothetical proteins.

Primarily, 2Fe-2S (Ferredoxins) and FMN/FAD (Flavodoxins)
were considered due to their vital and diverse roles in
biological systems, the most important amongst it being their
role in Electron Transport Mechanisms. Ferredoxins are small,
acidic, electron transfer proteins that are ubiquitous in
biological redox systems. Members of the 2Fe-2S ferredoxin
family have a general core structure consisting of beta(2)-alphabeta(
2). They are proteins of around one hundred amino acids
with four conserved cysteine residues to which the 2Fe-2S
cluster is ligated []. Flavoenzymes have the ability to catalyse
a wide range of biochemical reactions. They are involved in the
dehydrogenation of a variety of metabolites, in electron transfer
from and to redox centres, in light emission, in the activation of
oxygen for oxidation and hydroxylation reactions. About 1% of
all eukaryotic and prokaryotic proteins are predicted to encode
a flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) or Flavin Mono Nucleotide
(FMN)-binding domains which are involved in electron
transport [].

Methodology
The proteins belonging to oxidoreductase (Ferredoxin,
Flavodoxin) families were retrieved from the ExPASy Prosite
interface []. However, engineered and mutated sequences
were not considered to avoid redundancy. Additionally, only
reviewed sequence from Uniprot containing a structural entry
were considered. Binding sites of all the proteins belonging to
the same group were analyzed in order to arrive at a consensus
pattern through multiple sequence alignment. Extended regions
which had no information with the other sequences were
clipped to strengthen the alignment. The protocol adopted is
shown in ().

The search for Ferredoxin family (PDOC00175) yielded 14
sequences with 2Fe-2S binding signature. As there existed
heterogeneity within the group, the sequences were clustered
based on phylogenetic analysis. The sequence alignment was
performed through ClustalW [] and the tree was obtained
using MEGA (NJ method) []. The tree obtained is shown in
(). Further to the clustering, multiple sequence
alignment was performed using Multalin [], for all the 3
clusters (groups) to obtain a representative sequence containing
strong signatures. The multiple sequence alignment of
sequences belonging to group 1 yielded better consensus
compared to the other clusters, which is as depicted in 
().

Similarly, the search for flavodoxin family (FNR reductase -
PDOC51384) yielded 7 sequences, whose Phylogenetic tree is
shown in (). When multiple sequence alignments of
both the clusters were critically analyzed, the MSA of group 1
exhibited strong signatures of the FNR domain when compared
to cluster 2, which is depicted in ().

Thus, a consensus of the cluster of sequences from group 1, for
both the 2Fe-2S and FNR domains respectively, were
considered as possible representative patterns, towards
generating the probable synthetic sequence, which was used as
the basis for BLAST tool [] search against the non-redundant
database. Interestingly, this approach yielded 2078 sequences,
and clearly contained both 2Fe-2S and FNR domains when
analysed through the conserved domain database (CDD) 
[].
Amongst these 2078 sequences, 129 belonged to that special
class of hypothetical proteins, which were taken up for further
characterization and analysis.

Results and Discussion
Upon critical evaluation of the 129 multi-domain hypothetical
sequences through CDD, significant differences in the location
of 2Fe-2S domain, relative to other domains, were found. Of
these 129 sequences, 61 contained an N-terminus 2Fe-2S and a
C-terminus FNR domain while this order was reversed in 25
sequences as shown in the ().

The remaining 43 sequences contained an N-terminus MOSC
domain [] (pfam03473 and pfam03476) which is a super
family of beta-strand-rich domains identified in the
molybdenum cofactor sulfurase and several other proteins from
both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. The MOSC domain is
predicted to be a sulfur-carrier domain that receives sulfur
abstracted by the pyridoxal phosphate-dependent NifS-like
enzymes, on its conserved cysteine, and delivers it for the
formation of diverse sulfur-metal clusters. The pie chart in
() illustrates the distribution of the domains amongst
these 129 proteins.

In the current study, 61 sequences containing N-terminus 2Fe-
2S and C-terminus FNR domains are only considered. The
remaining sequences, 25 of which contain an N-terminus FNR
and C-terminus 2Fe-2S domains, and 43 of them containing
MOSC domain will be considered for detailed analysis in near
future. The phylogenetic analysis of the 61 sequences
containing an N-terminus 2Fe-2S and C-terminus FNR domains
is depicted in (), which exhibits the domination of the
genus Pseudomonas (46% amongst 61 sequences).

The sequences were searched against the PDB database (using
the PDB BLAST tool) towards identification of a suitable
template. This yielded 1KRH (which has 338 amino acid
residues), a benzoate dioxygenase (BenC), from Acinetobacter sp.
strain ADP1 at 1.5A resolution. BenC contains an iron–sulphur
and a FAD domain []. The [2Fe–2S] domain is similar to that
of plant ferredoxins, and the FAD and NADH domains are
similar to members of the ferredoxin:NADPH reductase
superfamily.

Of these 61 sequences, 21 sequences had very low (&lt;20%)
sequence identity with the template 1KRH, and hence were
discarded from further analysis due to lack of clarity. The
remaining 40 sequences were considered with confidence for
homology modelling exercises, as they exhibited high similarity
with 1KRH. The overall sequence identity between the query
and template was between 20-30% for most sequences, except 7
of them which was in the higher range of 40-70%. However, in
spite of lower overall identities will the template, the
appreciation with the patterns at domain regions was indeed
revealing. The () shows the distribution of the overall
sequence identity, identities at the FAD and 2Fe-2S binding
regions for each sequence, which clearly illustrates the
conservation at critical regions of functional relevance.

The FNR family contains two conserved motifs, viz., (R-x-Y-
[ST]) where positively charged Arg residue forms hydrogen
bonds to the pyrophosphate oxygen atom and (G-x(2)-[ST]-x(2)-
L-x(5)-G-x(7)-P-x-G) which is the phosphate-binding motif 
[].
Similarly, 4 conserved Cys residues at positions i, i+5, i+8 and
variable i+38 is required for binding of 2Fe-2S ligand 
[]. Both
the FAD and 2Fe-2S binding regions are highly conserved in all
the 40 models.

In view of the poise in the signatures between the template and
the 40 target sequences, model building exercises were carried
out with Swissmodel automated mode []. The RMSD between
the modelled structure and template for the Ca- atoms
confirmed the quality of the models in spite of seemingly low
sequence identity (refer table 3 and figure 10), in addition to the
satisfaction of various criteria calculated using ProCheck 
[].
Individual models were analysed for the binding of ligands
through docking studies which was performed using FlexX
algorithm []. As a case study, modelling of GI ID 238795496 is
illustrated below, to define the quality of the structural and
functional aspects of these hypothetical protein sequences.

1KRH based model for the GI ID 238795496
The query protein 238795496 from Yersinia mollaretii ATCC
43969 was successfully modelled using SWISS model interface,
where the overall identity between the query and template is
25.22%. The alignment between the template and query is
shown in (). In spite of the low overall sequence
identity, it can be appreciated that the binding regions of 2Fe-2S
and FAD exhibit conservation up to 35%.

The RMSD for C-alpha atoms between the modelled structure
and template is found to be 0.53 Å (for 93.2% of the atoms
superposed). The quality of the model was assessed with
PROCHECK (Ramachandran map) which showed that 96.8% of
the residues were in allowed regions and only 3.2% non-critical
residues in disallowed regions. Interestingly, none of these
residues in the outlier regions belong to the functionally
important regions of the model. The 2Fe-2S and FAD ligands
were docked into the model and all the interactions were found
similar to that of the template. The binding of 2Fe-2S Ligand
and FAD are shown in ( and 
).

 (see supplementary material) summarizes the residues
forming the Pharmacophore (within 4 Å radius) for FAD ligand
in template, FAD ligand redocked to template and the model,
where good conservation is observed. The docking of the FAD
to the template (using the program FlexX) was done to reconfirm
the ligand binding pose, and normalize the artefacts
due to the software, if any. The residues highlighted in bold
forms H-bonds with the FAD, which further reiterates decent
bind of the ligand.

The modelled and docked structures were deposited at the
Protein Model Data Bank (PMDB) [] where all the 40 models
were judged to possess clashes within acceptable limits. 

(see supplementary material) summarises the details of all the
models generated with IKRH (which contains 338aa) as the
template.

Conclusion
129 hypothetical proteins from across the prokaryotic genomes
have been data mined, and the 3D description of 40 sequences
has been derived with confidence. The statistics related to
comparative modelling and docking studies (with acceptable
energy values) have revealed a strong interaction of redox
ligands, viz., 2Fe-2S and FAD, which further strengthens the
argument that these proteins may be involved in cleavage of
aromatic compounds.

Though degradation of aromatic compounds by Pseudomonas is
a well established fact [,
], characterization of hypothetical
sequences from Pseudomonas in the present study could aid in
better understanding of these microbial systems. Additionally,
large number of other bacterial systems containing these
dioxygenases have also been mined and characterized in the
present investigations, which could provide insights into their
degradation properties.

Thus, this study on multi-domain hypothetical proteins could
prove critical in two ways viz., in understanding the
mechanism of uptake of nutrients which contain aromatic ring
structures and hence enabling engineering of these proteins
towards effective degradation of harmful xenobiotics.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors would like to thank R Sowdhamini and Jagadeesh
Kumar D for the technical discussions and Sir MVIT for the
infrastructural support. NS would specifically like to thank
Srignanakshi, Ojal Sarah Paul and Harshal Soni for the
assistance provided during the initial stages of the work.

Citation:Nitish &amp; Nagendra, Bioinformation 8(23): 1154-1161 (2012)

Reaction of ring cleavage mediated by RDO

Protocol

A) Phylogenetic tree of 2Fe-2S family; B) MSA of group 1 of 2Fe-2S family

A) Phylogenetic tree for FNR reductase family; B) MSA of group 1 of FNR reductase family

A) Position of domains; B) Pie-chart showing the
distribution of domains in the 129 hypothetical proteins.

Phylogenetic tree of the hypothetical proteins
containing N-terminus 2Fe-2S and C-terminus FNR domain.

Bar graph showing the overall sequence identity (blue), identity at FAD binding region (red) and 2Fe-2S binding region
(green) against the model 1KRH (Please see  for cross-reference).

Template to query alignment (2Fe-2S binding region marked in black and FAD binding region marked in red).

A) Modelled structure of GI : 238795496; B) 2Fe-2S
interaction with Cysteins ( C37, C42, C45 and C75) in the model

A) Surface representation of ligand binding region in model; B) residues at the pharmacophore (4 Å radius) in model; C)
2D representation of the ligand-residue interaction in model.

