Background
The human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum infection
leads to over two million deaths every year worldwide [,
].
During last six decades, considerable non-therapeutic malaria
control measures have resulted in only limited success and with
the limited success׳ of RTS,S/ASO1 in long term clinical trials,
effective malaria vaccine is not in pipeline [].The number of
available antimalarial drugs are limited and Plasmodium has
developed resistance against most of them, including second
and third generation therapeutics such as artemisinin,
antifolates and their derivatives [,
]. The problem of
antimalarial drug resistance gets further aggravated by the
existence of cross-resistance amongst drugs belonging to the
same chemical series [,
]. Thus, it is essential to explore novel
targets for antimalarial drug development.

Parasite specific hemoglobin degradation pathway is of special
interest for development of antimalarial drugs []. During its
intra-erythrocytic developmental stage Plasmodium catabolises
&gt;75% of the host cell haemoglobin inside its digestive vacuole,
followed by terminal stage degradation in both parasite cytosol
as well as vacuole [,
]. The free amino acids released from
hemoglobin digestion are not only vital for parasite growth and
development but also for maintaining osmotic integrity of the
infected red blood cells and exchange of isoleucine with leucine
from the RBC cytoplasm []. During this haemoglobin
degradation process, two families of proteases- aspartic
proteases (plasmepsins) and cysteine proteases (falcipains)
degrade haemoglobin in small peptides which are subsequently
digested by exopeptidases []. Plasmepsins and falcipains
have not been much successful as antimalarial drug target
possibly because of their overlapping functions []. On the
other hand, out of eight available exopeptidases in Plasmodium,
leucine and alanine exopeptidases are non-redundant and
genetically essential [,
,
]. These two metalloaminopeptidases,
leucine aminopeptidase (PfA-M17) and
alanine aminopeptidase (PfA-M1) are critical for parasite
survival, because leucine (12.53 %) and alanine (13.23%) are not
only most abundant amino acids in hemoglobin but also
because plasmepsin and falcipainen prefer either of these two
amino acids at their cleavage sites []. Thus, possibility of
getting either alanine or leucine as N-terminal amino acids of
hemoglobin derived peptide is very high. PfA-M1 further gets
validated as drug target because inhibition of this enzyme by
dipeptide analog bestatin leads to the parasite death [,
].

PfA-M1 belongs to M1-aminopeptidase family and has twelve
homologues in human genome []. Available aminopeptidase
inhibitors (bestatin and its derivatives) are non-specific in
nature and inhibit almost all known aminopeptidases,
including those from Plasmodium and human 
[].

Although key active site residues are conserved across
aminopeptidases, but during the course of evolution and neofunctionalization,
these M1 aminopeptidases have gone
considerable sequence and structural changes, both in the
active site cavity and rest of the protein structure. These
sequence and structural differences between Plasmodium and
human aminopeptidases can be exploited for the development
of parasite specific aminopeptidase inhibitors. However, it is
essential for any potential PfA-M1 specific inhibitor, identified
either through ‘high throughput screening’, ‘virtual screening’,
or any other method to be evaluated for their off-target activity.
In silico structure based screening can be useful to predict offtarget
binding of PfA-M1 inhibitors to human aminopeptidases.
This approach has advantage of discarding compounds that
show high affinity binding to targets human M1-
aminopeptidases, at earlier stage of drug development.
However, 3D-structures of only five out of twelve known
human M1-aminopeptidases are available [–
]. Therefore, in
the present study 3D-structures of remaining seven human M1-
aminopeptidases were modeled using combination of
homology modeling, threading and ab-initio modeling. After
stereochemical and geometric evaluation of the modeled 3Dstructures
were subjected to docking studies with their
respective known inhibitor, to evaluate correlation between
docking based predictions with enzyme assay experiments.
Fifteen potential PfA-M1 inhibitors identified through virtual
screening were further tested for their PfA-M1 specificity, out
of which three compounds showed preferential binding
towards PfA-M1 in comparison to the human M1-
aminopeptidases.

Methodology
Selection of PfA-M1 human homologues:
The human homologues of PfA-M1 were selected from both
literature [,
], and similarity search tools BLAST and PSIBLAST
 (see supplementary material). The protein
sequences of human M1-aminopeptidases, Aminopeptidase-Q
(APQ) (Accession no. NP_776161.3), Placental
LeucineAminopeptidase (PLAP) (Accession no. NP_005566.2),
Puromycin Sensitive Aminopeptidase (PSA) (Accession no.
NP_006301.3), Thyrotropin Releasing Hormone Degrading
Ectoenzyme(TRHDE) (Accession no. NP_037513.1),
Aminopeptidase-B (APB) (Accession no. NP_064601.3),
Aminopeptidase-O (APO) (Accession no. NP_001180258.1) and
Aminopeptidase B-like (APB) (Accession no. NP_060696.4),
were retrieved from NCBI database ().

Modeling of 3D structure of PfA-M1 human homologs:
Reference structural templates for each protein sequence were
identified through pairwise and multiple alignment using
BLAST and CLUSTAL OMEGA. Modeling was done by using
multiple templates through Phyre 2, Modeller 9.11 and Robetta
server [–]. 
Ten models were generated for APQ, PLAP,
TRHDE and PSA each by Phyre 2. For each APB, APB-L and
APO, 5 models were generated using Modeller 9.11 and
Robetta respectively [,
]. The generated models were
energy minimized in water using OPLS force field with the
convergence threshold of 0.05 by using Macromodel of Maestro
– Schrodinger to remove steric clashes between atoms and to
improve overall structural quality of predicted models 
[].

Validation of Models:
3D- models were validated on the basis of stereochemical and
geometric consideration and docking studies. The quality and
stereochemistry of the models were evaluated using the
Procheck, Whatcheck, Verify-3D, ERRAT, QMEANnorm and
alignment with their respective template [–
]. The predicted
protein structure models were ranked on the basis of
QMEANnorm score, geometric and stereochemical
considerations. The top ranked models were further validated
and analyzed based on their Ramachandran plot, root mean
square deviation values, Verify3D and ERRAT analysis.

Docking:
Docking studies were done in two stages using Grid based
ligand docking with energetic (GLIDE) 
[]. 1. The 3-D models
of all seven human M1-aminopeptidases were docked with
their known inhibitors retrieved from literature and Pubchem
Bioassay search and most effective compounds were used for
docking [–
]. 2. General aminopeptidase inhibitor Bestatin
was docked against all seven human M1-aminopeptidases
structural models and ligand striped PfA-M1 (3EBG). The
receptor grid was generated using the metal binding sites as
well asblind docking. The different conformations of the
compounds were docked flexibly and maximum 1000 poses per
compound were generated. The analysis of the poses,
complexes and the binding affinities between the receptor and
ligands was analyzed using Schrodinger׳s software 
[] and
correlation coefficient between Ki/IC50 and docking score was
calculated using ‘CORREL’ function of MS Excel.

Screening of potential PfA-M1 Inhibitors for off target binding:
Fifteen potential PfA-M1 inhibitors, screened through virtual
screening, were selected on the basis of their binding affinity
and stability (as evident from docking score and binding
energy). The selected compounds were evaluated for off-target
binding by docking against human M1-aminopeptidases using
the docking protocol as mentioned above.

Hypothesis:
Multiple sequence alignment showed high sequence diversity
amongst human (7.3 to 12.7% identities) as well as between
human and P. falciparum aminopeptidases (6.5% to 12.7 %
identity), with high variability at N-terminal region as
compared to C-terminal catalytic domain (Supplementary data
). 
The signature ‘GAMEN’ motif is conserved in P.
falciparum and six human M1-aminopeptidases (APN, APA,
PLAP, ERAP1, ERAP2 and PSA). This motif is uniquely
substituted by ‘HAMEN’ motif in APQ, ‘GGMEN’ motif in LTA4
and APB, ‘AAMEN’ motif in TRHDE, ‘VAMEN’ motif in APBLikeprotein
and ‘LGMAS’ motif in APO. The Zn++ binding
motif (HEXXHX18E) remains conserved across all the M1-
aminopeptidases studied in the present work. Further, it was
also observed that active site residues of PfA-M1 Glu 519, Tyr
580 are conserved in all its human homologues and Glu 463
and Ala 461 residues are conserved in 11 (except APO) and 9
(except APB, APO, LTA4) of the human M1-aminopeptidases
respectively Supplementary data .

Validation of predicted structural Models
Stereo chemical evaluation of models:
All the proteins show same four domain architecture but differ
in arrangement of helices and sheets (). The potential
energy of the predicted human M1-aminopeidases ranged from
1.948e+05 to -1.750e+05 Kcal/mol, Qmean global score 0 to 1,
the global Qmean6 score 0.544 to 0.625 and Qmean Z-scores -
1.95 to -2.43 and G-factor value -0.12 to -0.35, indicating
absolute quality of models.The geometry of structural models
were further evaluated using Ramachandran Plot and 98%-99%
of residues were observed in favorable and allowed region
 (see supplementary material). RMS Z-score were
positive and near to 1, Verify-3D score ranged from 0.64 to 0.77,
and ERRAT score ranged from 71.4 to 89.33 indicating primary
structures compatibility with the environment of the residues
in the 3D structure ().

Molecular docking vs in vitro enzyme inhibition assays:
Results summarized in  (see supplementary material).
Showed that most of the active compounds had good
agreement between the docking score and experimental results
(r2≈0.7). It suggests that the parameters of docking simulations
and quality of structural models are good in reproducing
experimental course of these compounds in all the modeled
human M1- aminopeptidases. Further, bestatin docked in active
site of all human M1 aminopeptidases and shoed interactions
with active site residues () The observed difference
among bestatin docking scores among PfA-M1 (- 6.0) and
different human M1-amnopeptidases (-5.0 to 7.1) and binding
energy (-35.30) and (-47.28 to -71.29) may be due to difference in
binding affinity of bestatin towards different aminopeptidases
as observed in inhibitory efficiency (Ki) of bestatin against
different aminopeptidases [,
]. The bestatin PfA-M1
interactions observed with in silico docking and in the
experimentally resolved structure were also in agreement 
[].

Human M1-aminopeptiadases structural models:
Structural alignment of predicted human M1-aminopeptidase
structural models with their respective templates show an
alignment score ranged from 0.07 to 0.20 and an RMSD score
from 1.44 to 2.18 respectively. While superimposition of the Cα-
backbone of predicted models with PfA-M1 shows RMSD value
of ranged from 3.04-3.95 Å () and RMSD value 1.47
- 3.96 Å among different human M-aminopeptidases.
Indicating high level of structural difference among different
human M1-aminopeptidases and between that of human and
Plasmodium M1-aminopeptidases. Volume of active site cavity
also varied among PfA-M1 (2132.77 Å3) and human M1-
aminopeptidases (347.80 -2684.66 Å3). These differences have
possibly evolved to accommodate substrates of different shape
and size in their respective enzyme active site cavity viz
antigenic peptide and cytokine receptors for ERAP1 and
ERAP2, Leukotriene A4 for LTA4, oxytocin and vasopressin for
PLAP.

Screening of potential PfA-M1 inhibitors for off target binding:
Out of fifteen compounds selected for high binding affinity
towards PfA-M1, three compounds (Compound 1, Compound
2 and Compound 3) showed weak binding affinity towards
human M1-aminopeptidases as compared to PfA-M1 
(). 
Compound 1 had strong binding affinity for PfA-M1
(docking score -11.25 and binding energy -84.71 Kcal/mol) and
forms very stable complex with it as compared to human M1-
aminopeptidases. Strong H-bond interactions were formed
with Glu 497, Arg 489 and Glu319 and hydrophobic
interactions observed with His 500, Met 571, Thr 305, Val 459
and Met 1034. Docking result shows that human LTA4
(docking score -10.80) has strong affinity for compound1 but in
terms of stability LTA4 does not form a stable complex,as
indicated by less binding energy (-54.10 Kcal/mol) than PfAM1
(-84.71 Kcal/mol). APQ and APB-L having docking score of
-5.56 and 4.86 respectively had weak affinity for Compound 1.
In APB-L the ligand formed hydrogen bond with Phe 217and
had major hydrophobic interactions with Ala 318, Val 218, Ala
175, Leu 314andAla 317. Interestingly no interactions were
observed in the conserved metal binding site region. Other
enzymes that appeared to be sensitive to Compound1 are APN,
ERAP2 and PSA.

Compound 2 showed strong binding affinity for PfA-M1
(docking score -11.07 and binding energy -54.98 Kcal/mol). The
ligand formed coordination bond with Zn and hydrogen bonds
with residues Ala 461, Glu 463 and Glu 319 of active site
(). Human M1 aminopeptidases LTA4, ERAP1, APO,
APB, APB-L, PSA, APQ and APA had weak affinity for
Compound 2 (docking score ranging from -8.3 to -4.9) as
compared to PfA-M1. Human M1-aminopeptidases that have
better docking score than PfA-M1 are ERAP2, TRHDE, PLAP
and APN (docking score ranging between -10.421 to -9.18) but
none forms a stable complex with Compound 2 as indicated by
low binding energy ranging from -50.15 to -41.0 kcal/mol
().

Compound 3 also had high binding affinity for PfA-M1
(docking score -10.27) and forms very stable complex (binding
energy -84.71 Kcal/mol) with it as compared to human M1-
aminopeptidases (docking score -3.95 to -8.98). Amongst
human M1-aminopeptidases APA, THRDE, APB, APB-L, APO
and LTA4 showed weak binding affinity for Compound 3.

Discussion
Conserved motifs between PfA-M1 and its human homologues,
especially at active site are not only involved in interaction with
metal ion but also with the other ligands (inhibitors). Hence,
most of the compounds that show high binding affinity for
PfA-M1 also had high binding affinity for human M1-
aminopeptidases as well, limiting their applications as potential
anti-malarial drugs. However, phylogenetic shows that PfA-M1
is evolutionary diverged from all of the human
aminopeptidases (Supplementary data ) that provides
an opportunity to design PfA-M1 specific inhibitors. In the
present study, three compounds showed preference toward
PfA-M1 in comparison to human M1-aminopeptidases.
Although these compounds will require further validation
through enzyme inhibition assays. Nevertheless a good
correlation observed between molecular docking with in vitro
enzyme inhibition assay provides us confidence to believe that
the three PfA-M1 inhibitors selected in the present study could
be PfA-M1 specific inhibitors. In cases where a PfA-M1
inhibitor shows good docking score against some human
aminopeptidase as well, it does not completely preclude its
possibility of using as anti malaria drug. Because some
enzymes like PLAP and TRHDE that are target of selected
compounds are required for certain physiological functions
only viz PLAP in degradation of oxytocin and vasopressin etc
and TRHDE in specific inactivation of Thyrotropin Releasing
Hormone after its release.

Moreover, aminopeptidases are being targeted for drug
development against other human parasitic infections also viz
Trypanosoma cruze, Fasciola gigantic and Paragonimus westermani
[,
,
]. 
The availability of human M1-aminopeptidases
structural models will be useful for studying the specificity of
inhibitors designed against these pathogens also. Besides, these
three potential lead compounds can act as scaffold for
developing inhibitors with increased specificity towards PfAM1.

Conflict of interest
Authors declare no conflict of interest.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The financial assistance of the Department of Biotechnology
(DBT): Ministry of Science and Technology, Government of
India towards this research is hereby duly acknowledged

Citation:Sahi et al, Bioinformation 10(8): 518-525 (2014)

Ribbon representation of predicted 3D structural
models of seven human M1 aminopeptidases. All the proteins
show same four domain architecture but differ in arrangement
of helices and sheets leading to differences in volume and
accessibility of active site.

Ligand interaction diagrams of bestatin docking in
PfA-M1 (A) and human PSA (B). Bestatin shows formation of
hydrogen bond with active site residues and metal ion in both
PfA-M1 and human PSA.

Backbone superimposition of PfA-M1 (in dark blue)
with PSA (in turquoise) with (A) and (B) APN (in brown). C
Molecular structureof three PfA-M1 inhibitors that shows high
affinity binding towards P. falciparum PfA-M1 than most of the
human M1 aminopeptidases.

Ligand interaction diagrams of Compound 2 docking
in PfA-M1 A) and human PSA; B) Compound 2 docking shows
metal ion interaction with PfA-M1 but not with PSA. Number
of hydrogen bonds formed by Compound 2 with PfA-M1 are
more than with human PSA.

