Background
The proteins are generally directed to their subcellular
destinations by different embedded signals, such as secretory
signal peptides (SP), mitochondrial targeting signals (MTS), and
nuclear localization signals (NLS). The majority of secreted
proteins is secreted via the classic secretory pathway and is
directed by secretory signal peptide sequences []. The signal
peptide is a short peptide chainthat binds at the N-terminus of
the protein and directs translocation of the protein to certain
organelles such as nucleus, endoplasmic reticulum or cell
membrane. The sequence is normally started with a methionine
and includes a positively charged n-region, a central
characteristic hydrophobic region, and a c-region ending with a
cleavage site. After translation of mRNA to the nascent protein,
the signal sequence interacts with the signal recognition particle
(SRP) for co-translational translocation. In the sequel, the
complex binds to the SRP receptor [], and signal peptide is
then cleaved off from the mature protein at a specific site by
signal peptidase []. Finally, after undergoing further posttranslational
modification and folding process, the mature
protein is secreted outside of the cell.

Secreted proteins play an important role in genome and have
particular value in industrial and medical applications. They
constitute about 10% of all proteins in genome [] and represent
collections of hormones, enzymes, immune-proteins, antibodies
and many others. Therefore, predicting and identifying secreted
proteins from their primary sequence is a major step in
automated protein annotation. Several studies have been done
within past decades to efficiently recognize and identify this
class of proteins. The proposed methods commonly predict
signal peptide sequence using machine learning techniques
such as neural networks, support vector machines, and hidden
Markov models [–]. 
The methods are used to identify targets
of nascent proteins for secretion, export to the extracytoplasmic
compartment, outer membrane, or tethering to the cell wall 
[].

Hidden Markov models (HMM) as a superior to any formal
statistical modeling technique provide a powerful method to
profile protein domains based on a training dataset and have
been widely used to model biological sequences. The key
concept in this approach is a finite model that represents
probability distributions over infinite numbers of possible
sequences. The model is used to describe a series of
observations by a hidden stochastic process which is called
Markov process. An HMM constructed for proteins consists of a
set of states, each with a characteristic amino acid distribution.
The states are connected by transition probabilities which
specify possible orders of states. The model is constructed on
protein sequences with varying length and used to predict the
most probable way for generation of a given sequence.
Moreover, insertions and deletions of sequences are
implemented as regular transition states, where it is
traditionally a difficult problem in modeling. The most
commonly used form of HMM in computational biology is
profile HMM [,
], with a structure based on profiles 
[].
HMM is introduced in several literatures [,
].

The knowledge of biological sequences is easily transformed to
HMM in contrast to other machine learning techniques such as
neural networks. In order to model signal peptides, HMM has
the facility to design model according to three parts of these
sequences. It also has the capability of extending the model by
adding new modules. HMM has already used to predict and
model signal peptides in various studies 
[,
–] and has been
proven to be the most successful technique in terms of accuracy
[]. Using a given sufficient dataset of signal peptides, the
model can be trained to describe signal peptides, score an input
sequence to predict a signal sequence, and generate artificial
sequences at given bit scores.

The strength of signal peptide sequence plays an important role
in secretion of a particular protein. Since the signal peptide is
removed after secretion, replacing an original signal peptide
with a strong artificial one does not change the structure of
mature protein. Accordingly, it is highly interested to generate
and replace a strong artificial signal peptide to improve protein
secretion. In this study, we have developed a signal peptide
model based on HMM for modeling and optimizing protein
secretion via lactococcus lactis bacteria. To this end, a model
was built on signal peptide sequences of a set of proteins
synthesized within the bacteria and translocated to different
organelles. It has been proven that the strength of secretory
signal peptides depends on bit scores given by HMM, whereas
the higher bit score represents the stronger secretory signal 
[].
Thus, the model is used to evaluate bit scores of signal
sequences of different organelles and determine thresholds of
secretory signals. The underlying objective is to constitute an
artificial strong signal peptide using the model and replace it
instead of a native signal sequence of target protein in
lactococcuslactis bacteria. This replacement causes to increase
secretion of the target protein via the bacteria.

Methodology
HMM Model for Signal Peptide:
In order to make the model based on HMM, we used HMMER
software version 2.3.2 developed by S. Eddy under Ubuntu
operating system. HMMER is implemented for biological
sequences analysis based on profile hidden Markov model 
[,
]. 
The HMMER software package includes a set of programs
in order to manage the model. We used “hmmalign” program
to train the model and “hmmemit” to emit sequences of the
model of a required bit score. Therefore, the package is utilized
to model and analyze signal sequences of the dataset and
classify them based on the bit score.

One of scoring criteria provided by HMMER is bit score, which
indicates the sequence is a better match to the profile model
(positive score) or to the null model of non-homologous
(negative score). The bit score is computed in log base 2 via the
following formula:

S = log2P(seq|HMM)/P(seq|null)

Where P(seq|HMM) denotes the probability of the target
sequence based on the model, and P(seq|null) is the probability
of the target sequence according to a “null hypothesis” model
of the statistics of random sequence. The null hypothesis model
in HMMER is considered as a simple one-state HMM that
means that random sequences are constituted with a specific
residue composition. Accordingly, a positive bit score indicates
that the model gives good match for the target sequence than
the null model.

Dataset:
In order to collect training and test dataset, we used UniProt
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/uniprot/) from EMBL-EBI to extract
proteins synthesized within lactococcuslactis bacteria. A set of
147 proteins is selected from the databases belong to different
subcellular locations of lactococcus lactis bacteria. In this
collection, effort was made to include only one representative
from each group of closely homologous proteins.  (see
supplementary material) shows a summary of the selected
proteins from different organelles. Moreover, signal peptide
database (http://www.signalpeptide.de/) was used to retrieve
signal sequences of each protein in the dataset.

Results &amp; Discussion
A hidden Markov model (HMM) was built in order to model
training dataset. To this end, firstly, a multiple sequence
alignment of signal peptides within the dataset was prepared
using HMMER software 2.3.2. The output multiple alignment
shows start methionines in the first column for all sequences,
141 out of 147 cleavage sites which are aligned in the same
column, and all 147 hydrophobic cores. This resulting output
demonstrates that HMM produces a high accurate model of
signal peptide. Thus, the HMM model was created based on
maximum likelihood parameter estimation. The background
data for random model was prepared from the amino acid
frequencies of the dataset.

In order to optimize the boundary of the sequences within the
dataset, the resulting HMM model was re-estimated based on
maximum discrimination method. Accordingly, any bias in the
maximum likelihood model was removed due to repetition of
the members of sub-families. This also partitions effectively
sequences to the related organelles based on bit scores
calculated by the method.  represents obtained bit
scores distribution for different sets of signal sequences in the
dataset. As seen in the figure, secretory proteins have been
partitioned from the others at a threshold of bit score of 12.

According to the bit score boundaries obtained in the above
experiment, an experiment was setup to create an artificial
strong signal peptide. The “hmmemit” program of HMMER
software package was used to emit sequences at HMM bit
scores of +12, +14, +16, +18, +20, and +24.  (see
supplementary material) represents the emitted sequences at
different bit scores.

Conclusion
The major objective in this study was to describe and model
signal peptides by hidden Markov model to improve protein
secretion via lactococcuslactis bacteria. The underlying purpose
was to replace original signal peptides of secreted proteins with
a strong one in protein production. Accordingly, we have
developed a hidden Markov model (HMM) to analyze signal
peptide sequences and generate a strong artificial signal
sequence for the proteins synthesized within lactococcuslactis
bacteria. Based on the correlation between strength of secretory
proteins and their HMM bit scores, we experimented signal
sequences of different organelles and analyzed their HMM bit
score. The results shows that they are partitioned effectively
according to the thresholds of HMM bit score. Therefore, a set
of artificial signal sequences is generated at different bit scores
for secretory proteins. In order to confirm the validity of the
strength of generated artificial signal sequences, an in vitro
activity has been devised by replacing original signal sequences
by the computationally generated sequences. In conclusion, the
study suggests a general idea to improve the strength of signal
peptides to increase secretion of target proteins via bacterial
cells.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We would like to thank our research grant sponsors, Universiti
Teknologi Malaysia (UTM) Research Management Center
(RMC) for their support (research vote number:
Q.J130000.2528.04H91).

Citation:Razmara et al, Bioinformation 9(7): 345-348 (2013)

The bit scores histogram of signal sequences of the
dataset for known subcellular locations: a) Cell membrane, b)
Cytoplasmic proteins, c) Secretory proteins, d) Signal
sequences, e) Transport proteins, f) Nuclear proteins, and g)
Biosynthesis proteins.

