Background
The PKC family belongs to the AGC superfamily of
serine/threonine kinase. The PKC enzymes play a key role in
intracellular signal transduction for specific hormonal,
neuronal, and growth factor stimuli [–]. This family comprises
more than ten isoforms categorized into three classes (classical,
novel, and typical) based on their structure and cofactor
regulation [–]. PKC β-II is a predominant isozyme activated in
vascular tissues during hyperglycemia, the underlyingfactor for
diabetic vascular abnormalities. These classes have conserved
N-terminal regulatory region (C1 and C2) and C-terminal
catalytic region or kinase domain. The N and C terminal
domains are connected by a proteolytically labile hinge
sequence []. The catalytic or kinase domain requires three sites
of phosphorylation for full activation of the PKC [,
].
Phosphorylation of threonine 500 (Thr 500) occurs in the
activation loop, which subsequently leads to
autophosphorylation at threonine 641 (Thr 641) in the turn
motif and serine 660 (Ser 660) in the hydrophobic motif 
[,
].

The classical PKC (α, β-I, β-II, and γ) is activated by DAG,
phosphatidylserine (PS), and calcium. These enzymes contain
two cysteine-rich zinc finger-like motifs in C1 region, which are
essential for phorbol ester binding and for interacting with
DAG, and a putative calcium binding domain in C2 region. The
novel PKC (δ, ε, η, and θ) requires DAG and PS, but is
insensitive to calcium. Since, the C2 region (calcium binding
domain) is absent in the novel PKC, they are generally activated
by DAG and PS. The typical PKC (ζ and 1/ λ) isozymes require
only PS but neither DAG nor calcium for full activation. In the
structural features, one of these cysteine-rich zinc finger-like
motifs in the C1 region and calcium binding domain in the C2
region are missing in the typical PKC 
[–].

PKC β-II is an essential isozyme among the PKC isoforms,
which is activated in vascular tissues during hyperglycemia–
induced situation, leading to diabetic complications 
[–].
This enzyme regulates in the pathogenesis of diabetic
complications such as retinopathy, nephropathy, neuropathy,
angiopathy, and cardiac dysfunction []. The PKC β-II
activation may increase retinal endothelial permeability,
basement membrane protein synthesis, and stimulate
angiogenesis [–]. When the diabetic animals were treated
with PKC β-II inhibitors, pathological changes such as reduced
retinal blood flow, increased retinal mean circulation time, and
diabetes-induced retinal vascular permeability and leakage
were observed [,
].

The first structural information of catalytic or kinase domain of
PKC β-II with bound bisindolylmaleimide (BIS), a potent and
competitive inhibitor of ATP is available in the Protein Data
Bank (2I0E). Our study aims to evaluate the structural features
of PKC β-II that provides essential information for developing
potent inhibitors using SBDD approach. Five stranded β sheets
(β1-β5) in the N-terminal lobe (residues 339-421) and two α
helices (αB and αC) in the C-terminal lobe (residues 426-620)
constitutes the kinase domain of PKC β-II. These two terminal
lobes are connected by a linker region defined by residues 422-
425 []. The designed SBDD inhibitors (SBDDIs) were
subjected for Induced Fit Docking followed by Prime MMGBSA
evaluations. These results were compared with IFD of
BIS-PKC β-II complex. Finally, the conformational changes (Cα
and χ (chi) angles) and interactions studies (hydrogen bond and
hydrophobic) were analyzed in the PKC β-II-SBDDIs
complexes. These designed inhibitors may be potent in the in
vitro and in vivo studies of diabetes complications and may help
to design new potent inhibitors for PKC β-II in future.

Methodology
Protein preparation:
The crystal structure of human PKC β-II with BIS inhibitor
complex was retrieved from the Protein data bank (PDB: 2I0E)
for HTVs and IFD studies. The raw crystal structure consisted
of a dimer (A and B chains) molecule with waters where bond
orders, topologies, formal atomic charges, ionization, and
tautomeric states were not available. The A chain of PKC β-II
alone was taken for further molecular modeling studies. The A
chain was employed for protein preparation where removing
waters, assigning H-bond, formal charges, ionization, and
tautomeric states were carried out. Moreover, the amino acid
flips were assigned and non Hydrogen atoms were literately
minimized until RMSD reaches 0.3Å.

Ligand energy minimization:
Staurosporine is a natural compound [], which is uniquely
potent as an inhibitor against PKC in in vitro studies 
[,
].
Based on the ADME/TOX properties, the Staurosporine
(PubChem Compound: CID 44259) related sixty molecules (data
not shown) were obtained from PubChem Compound database.
Using Ligprep module, all the compounds were energy
minimized by addition of hydrogens, 2D to 3D conversion,
realistic bond lengths and bond angles, low energy structure
with correct chiralities, ionization states, tautomers,
stereochemistries and ring conformation (Schrodinger LLC
2009, USA).

High Throughput Virtual screening:
HTVs was carried out against the active site key residues Glu
421, Val 423, Thr 404, and Asp 470 of PKC β-II [] for filtering
the sixty compounds. HTVs was performed by Glide module
that requires a previously calculated grid receptor with a set of
ligands. During the receptor grid generation process, the energy
minimized complex of PKC β-II with BIS was loaded in the
workspace; the active site of the receptor was calculated
automatically by picking the BIS. The grid box represents the
shape and properties of the receptor active site that provides
progressively more accurate scoring function and energy of
complex, when the ligand is docked. Glide searches for
favorable interactions between one or more ligands and the
active site receptor. In HTVs, the grid allows the ligand binding
where more than one possible and meaningful conformations
were generated with the rigid receptor. However, van der
Waals radii of non-polar atoms were calculated using Glide to
decrease close contact penalties between the ligands and the
active site residues. The docking score glide energy, glide
emodel and non-bonded interactions were calculated in the
HTVs results. Based on these results, the active site residues of
PKC β-II and inhibitors synthetic viability, four new inhibitors
were designed using SBDD approach (). The designed
SBDD inhibitors were energy minimized using Ligprep.

Induced Fit Docking studies:
Upon any ligand binding, many proteins usually undergo sidechain
or back bone (Cα atom) movements or both in reality. But
in the conventional docking methods, as the receptor is held
rigid and the ligand is free to move, these methods may provide
misleading results. Hence to overcome these problems, the IFD
(flexible docking) methodology was employed using Glide
software (Schrödinger LLC 2009, USA). In SBDD studies, IFD is
one of the essential factors to predict accurate ligand binding
and concomitant structural movements in the active site of the
receptor []. The human PKC β-II- BIS complex was energy
minimized and subjected for IFD with the SBDDIs. The grid
was generated to specify the active site by choosing the BIS in
the receptor. In IFD study, the active site of PKC β-II conforms
more closely to the shape and binding mode of the ligand. The
energetically favorable docked complexes were obtained and
the best poses were chosen by docking score, glide energy, and
glide emodel. The hydrogen bond and hydrophobic interactions
were analyzed using Ligplot [] and PyMol 
[].

Binding free energy calculation:
The ligand binding energies and ligand strain energies were
calculated for the SBDDIs and BIS inhibitor using Prime MMGBSA
panel (Schrödinger LLC 2009, USA). In this study, the
best pose from the IFD complexes was chosen to obtain the
binding free energy calculation. The combination of parameters
viz., OPLS-AA, molecular mechanics energies (EMM), an SGB
solvation model for polar solvation (GSGB), and a nonpolar
solvation term (GNP) composed of the nonpolar solvent
accessible surface area and van der Waals interactions were
subjected for carrying out Prime MM-GBSA. The total binding
free energy: ΔGbind = Gcomplex – (Gprotein + Gligand )

Prediction of biological activity and ADME:
PASS (Prediction of Activity Spectra for Substances) is a
prediction tool for predicting the biological activity of the
chemical structures on the basis of structural orientation 
[,
]. The SBDDIs were tested for their biological activity using
PASS. Moreover, Using Qikprop3.2 module, the energy
minimized ligands were evaluated for their Absorption,
Distribution, Metabolism, and Excretion (ADME) properties.
Qikprop is quick, accurate and predicts physically significant
descriptors and pharmaceutically relevant properties of organic
molecules. It provides the ranges of molecular predicting
properties for comparing the properties of a particular molecule
with those of 95% of known drugs (Schrödinger LLC 2009,
USA).

Conformational changes of Cα and χ angles:
The crystal structure of PKC β-II (2I0E_A) and the IFD
complexes have been taken for analyzing conformational
changes of the active site Cα atoms. The four IFD complexes
were superimposed with 2I0E_A reference structure for
matching the structure based alignment using Chimera 
[].
Hence, Needleman-Wunsch algorithm and BLOSUM-62 matrix
were used to align amino acid residues, followed by the
alignment of the helix and strand Cα atoms of the crystal
structure with the respective helix and strand Cα atoms of the
IFD complexes. Then, the active site residues of side-chain chi
angles (χ1 (N-Cα-Cβ-Cγ), χ2 (Cα-Cβ-Cγ-Cδ), χ3 (Cβ-Cγ-Cδ-Cε),
and χ4 (Cγ-Cδ-Cε-Cζ)) were analyzed with all the SBDD
complexes for understanding conformational changes at the
active site of PKC β-II. The side-chain chi angles were calculated
and analyzed using Chimera and MolProbity 
[] software.

Results and Discussion
BIS inhibitor was redocked at the active site of PKC β-II. The
binding of BIS - PKC β-II complex has closely mimicked the
crystal structure of PKC β-II (2I0E_A). This inhibitor has
maintained three hydrogen bond interactions with Glu 421 (O),
Val 423 (N) and Thr 404 (OG1) residues as found in the crystal
structure. Hydrophobic interactions were observed viz Leu 348,
Gly 349, Phe 353, Val 356, Ala 369, Met 420, Tyr 422, Asn 471,
Met 473, Ala 483, and Asp 484 with a docking score -8.67, glide
energy -57.66, and glide emodel -84.85. The binding free energy
was -55.27 Kcal/mol  (see supplementary material).
The superimposition of crystal and docked complexes has
yielded rms deviation of 0.19Å.

SBDD1 bound PKC β-II complex has docking score -10.71, glide
energy -62.59, and glide emodel -103.57. Upon inhibitor
binding, hydrogen bond interactions with Lys 371 (NZ), Glu
390 (OE2), Glu 421 (O) and Val 423 (N) residues and
hydrophobic interactions with Phe 353, Ala 369, Thr 404, Met
420, Tyr 422, Met 473 and Asp 484 were observed at the active
site. The inhibitor O4 atom formed two hydrogen bond
interactions with Glu 390 (OE2), 2.76Å and Lys 371 (NZ), 3.05Å.
The binding free energy was -47. 7 Kcal/mol  (see
supplementary material). The PASS has predicted PKC
inhibitor activity for the SBDD1.

SBDD2 has five hydrogen bond and five hydrophobic
interactions with Lys 371 (NZ), Glu 390 (OE2), Glu 421(O), Val
423 (N) and Asp 484 (OD1) and Phe 353, Ala 369, Met 420, Tyr
422 and Met 473, respectively at the active site of PKC β-II. The
inhibitor O4 atom has three hydrogen bond interactions with
the active site residues. The O4 atom act as a hydrogen bond
acceptor with Lys 371 (NZ), (2.79Å) and a bifurcated donor with
Asp 484 (OD1), (2.73Å) and Glu 390 (OE2), (3.31Å) in the Hbond
interactions (). The inhibitor binding exhibits a
docking score -10.93, glide energy -64.74 and glide emodel -
108.30. The binding free energy was found to be -57.80
Kcal/mol for this complex  (see supplementary
material). SBDD2 has showed PKC inhibitor activity by PASS
prediction.

Docking score -11.54, glide energy -63.92, and glide emodel -
110.88 were obtained in the SBDD3 bound PKC β-II complex.
This inhibitor has maintained six hydrogen bond interactions
with Lys 371 (NZ), Glu 390 (OE2), Glu 421(O), Val 423 (N &amp; O),
and Asp 484 (OD2) and five hydrophobic interactions with Leu
348, Phe 353, Val 356, Ala 369 and Met 420 at the active site of
PKC β-II. The inhibitor O4 atom has three hydrogen bond
interactions that have shown a hydrogen bond acceptor with
Lys 371 (NZ), (2.69Å) and a bifurcated donor with Asp 484
(OD1), (2.66Å) and Glu 390 (OE2), (3.16Å). The binding free
energy -53.14 Kcal/mol was obtained in the SBDD3 bound
conformation in the PKC β-II  (see supplementary
material). PASS confirmed that this inhibitor has potential
inhibitor activity against PKC.

SBDD4 docked orientation at the active site of PKC β-II has
shown four hydrogen bond interactions with Lys 371 (NZ), Thr
404 (OG1), Glu 421 (O), and Tyr 422 (OH) and six hydrophobic
interactions with Leu 348, Gly 349, Phe 353, Val 356, Met 473,
and Asp 484. Docking score -11.26, glide energy -67.94, and
glide emodel -105.06 were observed in this complex. The
binding free energy between the SBDD4 and the active site of
PKC β-II was calculated to be -48.67 kcal/mol  (see
supplementary material). The ligand has PKC inhibitor activity
that was observed using PASS.

Conformation changes of Cα and side-chain χ angles:
The Cα conformational changes were analyzed for all the
SBDDIs complexes with crystal structure of PKC β-II. SBDD 1,
2, 3, and 4 complexes showed RMSD values 0.255 Å, 0.226 Å,
0.244 Å, and 0.213Å, respectively (). The side-chain
conformational changes were analyzed by measuring chi angles
at the active site residues for all the complexes. Leu 348, Val
356, Glu 390, Leu 394, Tyr 422 and Val 423 residues showed
slight side-chain conformational changes. However, Phe 353,
Lys 371, Thr 404, Met 420, Glu 421, Met 473, Asp 484 and Phe
485 residues showed more side-chain conformational changes
(, 
 (see supplementary material). These results
have shown that SBDDIs induced conformational changes at
the active site.

Analysis of physicochemical properties:
The physicochemical properties were calculated for SBDDIs
using Qikprop simulation. The molecular weight of the
designed inhibitors are less than 500Da (expect SBDD4) and
QPlogPo/w (octanol/water partition coefficient) for all the
inhibitors is less than five. The partition coefficient of
octanol/gas (QPlogPoct), water/gas (QPlogPw) and
brain/blood (QPlogBB) values are satisfied by all the SBDDIs.
The aqueous solubility (QPlogS) and the skin permeability
(QPlogKp) were predicted for the inhibitors which are in the
allowed solubility and permeability range  (see
supplementary material). Total solvent accessible surface area
(SASA), hydrophobic component of the SASA (FOSA) and
hydrophilic component of the SASA (FISA) were predicted for
the inhibitors that were abiding the ranges specified in the
Qikprop. Qualitative human oral absorption was predicted
where SBDD2 and 3 have favorable oral absorption score of 3
and 2 respectively. However, SBDD1 and 4 have shown low
oral absorption (score: 1). Polar nitrogen and oxygen van der
Waals surface area (PSA) of SBDDIs fulfill the limit in
physicochemical calculation  (see supplementary
material).

Conclusion
In this study, sixty inhibitors similar to Staurosporine were
screened and based on the screening and the PKC β-II active
site residues four new inhibitors were designed using SBDD
approach. These inhibitors were subjected for IFD studies to
observe the interactions between the SBDDIs and the active site
of PKC β-II. These inhibitors were compared with redocked
BIS- PKC β-II complex using docking score, glide energy, glide
emodel, hydrogen bond and hydrophobic interactions, and
binding free energy. All the SBDDIs have better docking score,
glide energy and glide emodel compared to BIS bound PKC β-II
complex. However, BIS, SBDD2 and SBDD3 showed good
binding free energy. Hydrogen bond and hydrophobic
interactions were analyzed for SBDDIs that have exhibited
favorable interactions with the active site residues.

In physicochemical properties, all the SBDDIs showed favorable
results. All the inhibitors satisfied partition coefficient of
QPlogPoct, QplogPw and QplogBB and surface area
calculations of SASA, FOSA, FISA, and PSA. According to
molecular weight calculation, SBDD1, 2 and 3 compounds are
below 500 Da. The human oral absorption properties showed
that SBDD1 and SBDD4 have low oral absorption. SBDD3
compound has favorable oral absorption. Surprisingly, SBDD2
has high oral absorption value in the physicochemical
properties calculations. SBDD1, 2, and 3 compounds satisfied
all the in silico parameters like docking score, glide energy, glide
emodel, binding free energy, ADME, hydrogen bond and
hydrophobic interactions. Hence, SBDD2 has more potent
inhibition in the PKC β-II and favorable physicochemical
properties than all the designed inhibitors. The potent
inhibition of SBDD2 could be revealed through in vivo and in
vitro studies and it may be used to design new potent inhibitors
against diabetes complications.

Supplementary material
Data 1
BV thanks the University Grant Commission (UGC),
Government of India, New Delhi, for Meritorious Fellowship
and DBT-Bioinformatics Infrastructure Facility, University of
Madras for providing the software facility to do in silico studies.
DV thanks the Department of Biotechnology (DBT) for BIF
facility and UGC, Government of India, New Delhi, for
financial support under SAP to the department.

Citation:Vijayakumar &amp; Velmurugan, Bioinformation 8(12): 568-573 (2012)

Chemical diagrams of Bisindolylmaleimide and
inhibitors used in the SBDD study.

Hydrogen bond interactions (blue dot line) of SBDD2
with active site residues

a) Superimposed docked structures of PKC β-II in
ribbon representation. b) Side-chain conformational changes in
the PKC β-II complexes. BIS, SBDD1, 2, 3, and 4 bound
complexes are colored in red, green, magenta, cyan and yellow,
respectively

