Background
Lung cancer is one of the leading causes of cancer deaths
worldwide. It accounts for more than 1.3 million deaths per
year []. Tobacco smoking causes about 90% of lungs cancer
(Landi et al., 2008). Non-smoker׳s lungs cancer accounts for
10%-15%. The etiology behind the non-smokers lungs cancer
are genetic factors [], chemical physical agents and radiation,
clinical history of lung disease [], air pollution which may
have second hand smoke. Lung cancer is the uncontrolled
growth of altered cells which may begin in one or both lungs.
Most often the cells that line the air passage are affected. smallcell
lung cancer (SCLC) and non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) are the primary type of lungs cancer. The secondary
lung cancer originates somewhere else and metastasizes to
lung. Reported genes which are associated with lung cancer are
TP53 [], EGFR 
[], KRAS 
[], PIK3CA 
[], EML4-ALK 
[], PTEN,
FHIT, MYO18B [,
,
], SEMA5A and SEMA6A 
[].

Several researches have been done in order to understand the
mechanism behind uncontrolled cell growth in lung tissue. A
high mutation rate was observed in factors such as p53, p16,
Rb, and EGFR []. p21 has significant role in controlling G1/S
transition and if altered may cause lung cancer []. Many
genes such as myc, her2 and neu are involved in the cell growth
and differentiation, are found mutated in lung cancer cells 
[].
The involvement of cyclin D1 in the development and
progression of NSCLCs was well demonstrated []. ARF
proteins encoded by INK4A oncogene undergoes alteration due
to gene hyper methylation may cause NSCLC []. Higher
expression of endothelial growth factor VEGF is inversely
related to lung cancer survivals [].

It is clear from the scientific studies that any cancer is caused by
genetic alteration [] and researchers have identified several
marker genes and potential drug targets for different types of
cancer []. Cancer is considered complex and heterogeneous in
nature and about 5% - 10% of our total pool of genes play
significant role in oncogenesis [].

Bioinformatics provides important tool and platforms for
performing in-silico studies. Microarray is one such in silico
approach which examines tens of thousands of genes together
at a time and measures their expression levels. The best usage
of microarray is to compare the expression level of genes from
cell maintained in a particular condition to a same set of genes
from a reference cell maintained under normal condition.

High mortality rate caused due to lung cancer can be reduced
by early stage diagnosis and effective therapeutic methods.
Methods for lung cancer diagnosis vary from person to person
as medical team suggests. Different kind of imaging tests such
as CT, PET and bone scan and direct tests such as
bronchoscopy, endobronchial ultrasound, fine needle biopsy,
sputum cytology, endoscopic esophageal ultrasound and
thoracentesis are prescribed.

Apart from the conventional diagnostic methods, biomarkers
may serve as an easy diagnostic method for cancer diagnosis
and may add to the development of new molecular targets for
drug development. Microarray data analysis has a great role in
disease biomarker identification [,
]. As data analysis is
cheaper and less time consuming than wet lab procedures, this
sets our goal to identify new biomarkers for lungs cancer.

The earlier researchers has successfully identified single or two
three genes involved in lungs cancer [,
,
]. Contributing
additionally to the present scientific knowledge this study was
undertaken with two objectives. The first was to find out, if
there is any differentially expressed gene (DEG) in smoker and
non-smokers normal tissue samples which is common in
smoker and non-smoker tumor tissue sample. The common
DEG could be regarded as the biomarker for potential
development of lung tumor in smokers. The second objective
was to find out the relation of smoking with lung cancer
development. To achieve the goal, genome wide analysis of
three different types of expression data was conducted. In order
to identify biomarkers for lung cancer caused due to smoking
specifically, only those data sets were selected which were
related to smoking.

Methodology
Data and Data Source:
All the gene expression datasets were downloaded from
NCBI׳s GEO Database (
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/GDSbrowser). 
The first data set GDS3837 has samples
taken from nonsmoking females. It has a total of 120 samples
out of which 60 were normal and 60 were tumor. The second
data set GDS3257 has samples taken from former, current and
never smokers. It has a total of 107 samples out of which 58
were tumor and 49 were normal. The third data set GDS3054
has the samples taken from the buccal epithelia of smokers and
non-smokers. Out of 10 samples 5 samples each were of
smokers and non-smokers. The data sets were downloaded in
.CEL format and were analyzed on R (3.1.2).

Data Normalization:
Normalization of expression data helps in adjusting individual
hybridization intensities and balances data appropriately in
such a way that a meaningful biological comparisons could be
made. Moreover it brings data closer and makes data less
scattered. Data normalization was done using bioconductor׳s
packages such as RMA and GCRMA.

Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) extraction:
The procedure was done twice by fixing the p-value to 0.05.
The top 50 DEGs were used for further analysis. Firstly DEGs of
datasets GDS3837 and GDS3257 were extracted and common
DEGs among both dataset were selected out. For the second
DEG extraction datasets GDS3257 and GDS3054 were used.
Their samples were shuffled to make four new datasets and
then DEGs from each datasets were extracted. The new datasets
were tumor smokers, tumor non-smokers, normal smokers and
normal non-smokers ().

Extraction of smoking specific DEGs:
The newly formed four datasets were further analyzed
comparatively to extract DEGs specific to smoking. Top 50
DEGs were selected from each dataset and p-value was 0.05.
DEGs which were present in tumor smokers and were not
present in tumor non-smokers (set 1) were selected out. In the
same way the DEGs which were present in normal smokers and
were not present in normal non-smokers (set 2) were selected out.

Gene annotation and GRN construction:
David online gene annotation tool was used for DEGs
annotation in order to check their relation with different types
of diseases and the pathways in which they are enriched. GENE
MANIA a Cytoscape plugin tool was used for GRN (Gene
Regulatory Network) construction. GRN was constructed for
analyzing the co-expression association of smoking specific
genes.

Results
Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) extraction and Gene Annotation:
Nine DEGs were found common in both types of datasets, i.e.
tumor and normal samples from non-smokers (GDS3837) and
tumor and normal samples from smokers and non-smokers
(GDS3257). Those DEGs are AGER, CA4, EDNRB, FAM107A,
GPM6A, NPR1, PECAM1, RASIP1, and TGFBR3. These DEGs
are independent of smoking, as these are common in both
datasets (or in any tumor samples, i.e. smokers or nonsmokers).
Average expressions of these DEGs in both the
datasets are very close.

These DEGs were then subjected to annotation in DAVID
online tool. Gene AGER, CA4, EDNRB, PECAM1 and TGFBR3
were found to be associated with NSCLC, Colon, Cancer,
Cancer and Prostate cancer respectively. Table1 shows average
expression of these DEGs in both the data sets and their cancer
sub type association.

A total of sixteen and fourteen smoking specific DEGs were
found in set1 and set2 respectively, out of which three genes,
ANXA9, CLCA4 and GPR110 were found common in both
datasets  (see supplementary material). Gene
annotation and literature survey of all the DEGs revealed that
CLCA4, ANXA9, GPR110, IL1RN, KLK12, PPARD, FLG and
HSP90AA1 including the above mentioned three genes were
associated with cancer sub types  (see supplementary
material) [–]. Among These eight genes, GPR110, IL1RN
and HSP90AA1 were associated with lung cancer and six genes
were found to be enriched in several growth promoting
pathways such as Akt signaling pathway, Ubiquitin
proteasome pathway, Wnt signaling pathway, etc.

GRN construction of all the genes from set1 and set2 revealed
that only FLG is associated with functions like epidermal cell
differentiation, epidermis development, epithelial cell
differentiation, skin development and keratinocyte
differentiation () 
 (see supplementary
material). False Discovery Rate corresponding to each function
varies from 1.44E-07 to 5.71E-05. Moreover FLG was found to
be co-expressed with query genes such as KLK13, GYS2, KLK12,
IL1RN, TMPRSS11D, ZNF185, CLCA4 and HTN3.

Discussion
Biomarker identification of any disease helps in the
development of better diagnostics and improves the clinical
treatment efficacy and microarray data analysis has been
widely used for disease biomarker discovery [,
,
]. With
the aim to discover biomarkers for lung cancer independent of
smoking, we identify nine Differentially Expressed Genes
(DEGs), AGER, CA4, EDNRB, FAM107A, GPM6A, NPR1,
PECAM1, RASIP1 and TGFBR3. These genes were found
common in both lung cancer datasets and their average
expression was very similar in either type of dataset 

(see supplementary material), that is, lung cancer dataset of
non-smokers (GDS3837) and lung cancer dataset of smokers
(GDS3257). Gene annotation of these DEGs revealed that genes
like AGER, CA4 and TGFBR3 were involved in NSCLC, colon
cancer and prostate cancer respectively Whereas EDNRB was
found to be associated with several human cancers such as
prostate, colorectal and oral. PECAM1 was found to be
associated with lung cancer, breast cancer, colorectal cancer
ovary and prostate cancer. These genes were not reported in the
researches from where both dataset were taken for study.
Dataset GDS3837 corresponds to the research of Lu et al (2010)
[]. They identified several semaphorin gene family members
such as SEMA5A, SEMA6A, SEMA3B and SEMA3F to be
potentially associated with lung cancer among non-smokers.
Our analysis to the same dataset correlates with previous
findings that semaphorin family gene are associated with lung
cancer among non smoker. SEMA6A was found to be up
regulated with an average expression of 7.061 and a log fold
change of 2.280.

Dataset GDS3257 corresponds to the research of Landi et al
(2008) []. They successfully identified candidate target genes
for lungs cancer among smokers. Even they did not found any
semaphorin family genes associated with lung cancer among
smokers. This clearly suggests that semaphorin family genes
are only associated with lung cancer independent of smoking.

Our further research was aimed to explore the correlation of
smoking with gene alteration. In the way to achieve our goal
we selected out DEGs specific to smoking, with the help of new
datasets which was formed by sample shuffling of datasets
GDS3257 and GDS3054 (). A total of sixteen DEGs were
extracted and categorized in two sets, i.e. set1 and set2 Gene
annotation revealed that among those sixteen DEGs, CLCA4,
ANXA9, GPR110, IL1RN, KLK12, PPARD, FLG and HSP90AA1
were involved in cancer subtypes such as lungs, breast,
colorectal, prostate, vulva, urothelial, oral, gastric, vaginal and
different epithelial cancers  (see supplementary
material). GPR110, IL1RN and HSP90AA1, were involved in
lungs cancer.

Lung tissues are epithelial tissue and cancer in lung tissue are
the result of uncontrolled cellular growth in it. Lung cancer
develops in multistep process involving several genetic and
epigenetic alterations. Alteration includes activation of growth
promoting pathways and inhibition of tumour suppressor
pathways. These pathways regulate different cellular cycle
events such cell proliferation arrest, DNA unwinding,
phosphorylation, DNA replication, transcription factor
expression, protein ubiquitination, mitotic spindle assembly,
nuclear envelop break down, etc. Pathway analysis of tumor
specific DEGs revealed that six genes, CLCA4, GYS2,
HSP90AA1, ITCH, PPARD and IL1RN, were enriched in several
growth promoting pathways. HSP90AA1 is enriched in Akt
signaling pathway, Ahr sinaling transduction and NOD-like
receptor signaling pathway. ITCH is enriched in ubiquitin
proteasome pathway. PPARD is enriched in wnt signaling
pathway.

The GRN analysis for all smoking specific genes was carried to
investigate gene function association and gene co-expression.
Only FLG was found to be involved in fuctions such as
epidermal cell differentiation, epidermis development,
epithelial cell differentiation, skin development and
keratinocyte differentiation  (see supplementary
material). Several nonquery genes (non smoking specific) such
as SPRR2B, SCEL, SPRR3, SPRR1A, TGM3, TGM1, SPINK5,
KRT16 and RHCG were co-expressed with FLG ().
Earlier studies have suggested the fact that, a single gene is not
responsible for the tumor development, rather group of genes
expresses together for the development of such clinical
condition [,
]. In the favor of this fact we found that alone
FLG among the query genes is involved in epidermal cell
regulation, moreover FLG was found to be co-expressed with
several query genes such as KLK13, GYS2, KLK12, IL1RN,
TMPRSS11D, ZNF185, CLCA4 and HTN3.

Conclusion
AGER, CA4, EDNRB, FAM107A, GPM6A, NPR1, PECAM1,
RASIP1, TGFBR3 are the DEGs which are smoking independent
whereas AGER, CA4, EDNRB, PECAM1 and TGFBR3 are
associated with various cancer subtypes. Semaphoring family
gene SEMA6A is differentially expressed only in non-smoking
lung cancer samples. CLCA4, ANXA9, GPR110, IL1RN, KLK12,
PPARD, FLG and HSP90AAl are smoking dependent DEGs
whereas GPR110, IL1RN and HSP90AAl are associated with
lung cancer FLG is co-expressed with several query genes
which are enriched in different cellular growth promoting
pathways and FLG together with other genes plays key role in
epidermal cell regulation. These query genes were found to be
smoking specific. This suggests that smoking alters several
genes and associated pathways. This study needs to get
validated in vitro so that effective biomarkers could be
identified and effective targeting of affected biological pathway
could be achieved for treatment and prognosis of lung cancer.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Hasan et al, Bioinformation 11(5): 229-235 (2015)

Schema for the generation of new data sets from
GDS3257 and GDS3054. Sample subtypes from both the data
sets were separated and shuffled and four new data sets were
made, i.e. tumor smokers, tumor non-smokers, normal smokers
and normal non-smokers.

Gene FLG gene regulatory networks (GRN). FLG GRN for (A) epidermal cell differentiation, (B) epidermis
development, (C) epithelial cell differentiation, (D) keratinocyte differentiation, (E) skin development.

