Background
Chickpea (Cicer arietinum L.), a member of the Fabaceae
(Leguminosae), is the third most important food legume worldwide
after pea and common bean, with over 10 million hectares
under cultivation (FAO 2009). It is a self-pollinated, diploid (2n
= 16) annual crop having genome size of ~ 740 Mbp. Chickpea
has one of the most balanced nutritional compositions, and its
protein digestibility is the best among the dry season food
legumes. Chickpea seeds contain 20-30% protein,
approximately 40% carbohydrates and many other useful
nutrients. Chickpea fits well in crop rotation programs because
of the ability of fixing atmospheric nitrogen. It leaves large
amount of residual nitrogen behind for subsequent crops and
adds much needed organic matter to maintain and improve soil
health, long term fertility and sustainability of the ecosystem.

Chickpea is primarily a crop of developing countries
contributing to a large part of human food and animal feed in
these areas. Current global yield average of chickpea is 0.9 t/ha,
is much lower than its estimated potential of 6 t/ha under
optimum growing conditions (FAO 2009). India is the largest
producer of chickpea, but still is the largest importer. Chickpea
yield in India has remained at 0.89 t/ha, which is much lower
than the maximum yield reported in china i.e. 3.2 t/ha (FAO
2009). Chickpea yield and productivity are adversely affected
by various biotic and abiotic stresses like Ascochyta blight,
Fusarium wilt, Helicoverpa pod borer, Botrytis grey mold,
drought and cold []. Abiotic stresses stand to be the number
one problem in chickpea growing regions causing a 40–50%
reduction in yield globally []. Considering the effect of
drought, temperature and salt stress on yield, it is very
important to intensify work in the direction of developing
improved varieties or devising alternate strategies to sustain
chickpea cultivation in adverse environmental conditions
thereby improving chickpea production.

Application of available approaches to improve crop
productivity under adverse environmental conditions requires
a better understanding of the mechanisms involved during
crop's response to abiotic stresses. Since response to abiotic
stress is a complex phenomenon, information about gene(s)
involved in the process is essential. Tracking the candidate
genes responsible for stress tolerance through sequence
similarity and functional studies is becoming increasingly
important for marker-assisted breeding []. Such candidate
genes serve as useful resource for comparative genomics and
can be further used as molecular markers or for genetic
transformation to develop desired cultivars.

Conventionally, plant breeders aiming to introduce drought
tolerance in crop plants used to exploit selection of yield and
yield components under water limiting conditions. Such
conventional efforts directed towards breeding drought
tolerance did not meet desired success due to limited
knowledge about the genetic basis of drought tolerance and its
negative correlations with productivity. Recent advancement in
the technology has allowed development of various genetic
tools and genomic approaches to identify genomic regions and
genes/ quantitative trait loci (QTLs) underlying plant stress
response in many crop species [].

Recent advancements in the sequencing technology has
provided a rapid and cost effective method for generation of
enormous sequence data facilitating identification of plant
genes mediating stress tolerance. Researchers have
concentrated on the identification of candidate genes involved
in abiotic stress response in plants, which can further be used in
crop improvement programs, directly through transgenic
approach or indirectly exploiting SNPs associated with the
desired trait. A number of abiotic stress responsive genes have
been identified in model plants and other legume species.
Exploration of sequence data on coding regions is in regular use
for the identification of genes in different plant species such as
Medicago, wheat, barley, tomato, potato, pine, sunflower and
many others [,
]. Environmental factors such as drought,
fluctuating temperatures, high salinity can affect plant growth
and performance and in the case of agronomical important
crops, this may translate into reduced yield [].
Characterization and cloning of plant genes that confer abiotic
stress tolerance thus remains an important exercise in modern
plant research.

The present study focused on the identification of abiotic stress
responsive genes in chickpea based on sequence similarity
approach using previously identified abiotic stress responsive
genes, in model plants like Arabidopsis and rice and other
legume crops including Medicago truncatula and Glycine max.
During present study, ten abiotic stress responsive genes have
been identified in chickpea on the basis of sequence similarity.
These candidate genes will help in overcoming various abiotic
stress related problems limiting chickpea production and
subsequently in marker-assisted breeding of superior varieties
that survive and give better yield under different abiotic
stresses.

Methodology
Plant material and DNA extraction:
Eight diverse chickpea genotypes namely Avrodhi, ICCV 2,
ICCV 10, L 550, Pusa 256, Pusa 362, Pusa 391 and Pusa 1103
obtained from Division of Genetics, Indian Agricultural
Research Institute, and New Delhi were used for the
identification of abiotic stress responsive candidate genes. Total
genomic DNA was extracted from leaves of 2-week old
seedlings using a modified CTAB method []. The quality and
quantity of extracted DNA was checked on 0.8% agarose gel.

Identification of abiotic stress responsive genes:
Sequence similarity approach was adopted for the identification
of stress responsive genes. Ten known candidate genes were
selected on the basis of prior information about their
involvement in drought tolerance mechanism in other crop
species  (see supplementary material). ESTs available in
NCBI EST database (dbEST
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/dbEST/) for abiotic stresses,
were used for contig assembly after eliminating redundancy
using sequence assembly program CAP3 []. These contigs were
then used for similarity search against known candidate genes
for abiotic stress tolerance. Unigene sequences showing
significant match with a candidate gene were selected and used
for primer designing using primer3 software  (see
supplementary material).

PCR and confirmation of candidate genes:
PCR amplification for all 10 genes mentioned in  (see
supplementary material) was standardized and carried out for
eight diverse chickpea cultivars in Eppendorf gradient thermal
cycler in 10 µl reaction containing 20 ng template DNA, 0.2 mM
dNTPs, 2 mM MgCl2, 10 pmol of each of forward and reverse
primer, 0.5 U of Taq DNA polymerase (SafLabs Pvt. Ltd.), and
1X PCR buffer. The amplification profile included: initial
denaturation for 5 min at 94°C followed by 35 cycles of
denaturation for 40 s at 94°C, annealing at temperature specific
for each target gene for 40 s and extension at 72°C for 1 min 20
s. Final extension was allowed for 10 min at 72°C and storage at
4°C. Amplified PCR products were resolved on 1.2% agarose
gels.

PCR products were gel extracted using QIAquick gel extraction
kit (Qiagen, USA). Quality and quantity of eluted samples was
checked on 1.2% agarose gel. Sequencing of eluted samples was
performed on MegaBACE 500 automated DNA sequencer (GE
Healthcare) using DYEnamic Dye terminator kit (GE
Healthcare). Sequencing PCR was carried out in 10 µl reactions
containing template DNA 50 ng, sequencing premix (8 µl), 5
pmol of any of the forward and reverse primer in separate
reactions. Sequencing PCR was carried out using Eppendorf
thermal cycler and amplification regime included 35 cycles of
denaturation at 95°C for 15 s followed by annealing at Tm-5°C
for 15 s and extension at 60°C for 2 min and left at 4°C till
further processing. Sequencing PCR products were precipitated
in 96 well PCR plate using precipitation solution provided with
sequencing kit. Sequence data was processed for base calling
and assembled using Phred and CAP3 software's, respectively
[]. 
Good quality sequences generated from CAP3 were used for
similarity search against the corresponding target gene using
BLASTN and BLASTX. BLAST results confirmed the presence

Result and Discussion
EST sequences available at NCBI EST database were used for
the identification of abiotic stress responsive genes. A total of
~24,700 chickpea ESTs were downloaded from NCBI database.
These EST database sequences show high sequence
redundancy. Using CAP3 software, these 24,700 EST sequences
were assembled into 3,236 contigs and about 5,300 singletons. A
total of 8,536 unique long coding sequences were then used for
the identification of abiotic stress responsive genes using
sequence similarity approach. Chickpea homologues of these
abiotic stress responsive genes were identified by sequence
similarity search BLAST (BLASTN and BLASTX) from these
chickpea coding sequences.

All ten abiotic stress responsive candidate genes were partially
amplified in eight diverse chickpea cultivars using gene specific
primer pairs. Researchers have isolated the AKIN homologues
in various plant species including Arabidopsis, rice, potato and
tobacco and established their role in abiotic stress response [].
AKIN homologue was amplified using AKIN specific primer
pair designed considering unigene sequence showing match
with Arabidopsis AKIN (SNF-1 related protein kinase).
Approximate amplicon size of AKIN was ~1100 bp ().
Amplification of AMADH (Aminoaldegyde dehydrogenase)
homologue yielded a product of ~1200 bp ().
Protective/curative role of AMADH gene in response to stress
events caused by mechanical injury has been reported earlier in
pea seedlings []. Dehydrin homologue was amplified using
primer pair designed for known dehydrin gene using chickpea
unigene. Approximate amplicon size of Dehydrin (DHN) gene
was ~380 bp (). DHNs are one of several proteins that
have been specifically associated with qualitative and
quantitative changes in cold hardiness []. Arabidopsis plants
engineered for DHN over-expression, showed improved
survival when exposed to low temperature []. DREB
(Dehydration response element binding) homologue in
chickpea was also amplified using primer pairs designed using
unigene showing match against DREB gene. Approximate
amplicon size of the DREB gene was ~1200 bp ().
Researchers have shown the role of chickpea DREB2
homologue in plant-growth development and abiotic stress
response pathway using transgenic approach [] and isolated
DREB2A homologue in rice, barley, sorghum and legumes
using specific or degenerate primers []. About 350 bp long
MYB genes was amplified using unigene sequence showing
match against Glycine max Myb transcription factor ().
Role of plant Myb-proteins have been well characterized by
using different genetic approaches. In most of the cases, the
Myb domain binds to a specific DNA sequence
(C/TAACG/TG) to facilitate transcriptional activation [].
About 500 bp long Cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase (CAD)
gene homologue was isolated from eight chickpea genotypes
using primers designed for contig showing match with
cinnamyl-alcohol dehydrogenase (CAD) gene of Arabidopsis thaliana
(). CAD is expected to play a key role in plant
defence against various abiotic and biotic stresses []. For
isolation of ethylene-responsive element binding protein
(EREBP) gene homologue in chickpea, primers were designed
using contig sequence showing similarity against ethyleneresponsive
transcription factor from Arabidopsis thaliana.
Amplification carried out across eight chickpea genotypes
produced about 400 bp amplicons (). The AP2/EREBP
genes play various roles in developmental processes and in
stress-related responses in plants. Late embryogenesis abundant
(LEA) genes represent a gene family that plays important role in
vegetative tissues in response to drought, salinity, cold stress
and exogenous application of abscisic acid []. Primers
designed using contig showing sequence similarity with LEA
domain-containing protein Arabidopsis thaliana were used to
isolate late embryogenesis abundant (LEA) gene in chickpea.
Amplicons across eight genotypes in chickpea yielded products
of about 600 bp (). Expression analysis of the SAMS
genes during ovary senescence and fruit development showed
that SAMS transcript levels were up-regulated by auxins during
fruit setting and by ethylene during ovary senescence []. For
isolation of S-adenosylmethionine synthetase 1 gene homologue in
chickpea, primers were designed using contig sequence
showing similarity against S-adenosylmethionine synthetase 1
(SAM1) gene of Arabidopsis thaliana. PCR amplification yielded
about 300 bp amplicons across eight chickpea genotypes
(). Serine/threonine protein kinase (STPK) gene
homologue was amplified using the STPK specific primer pair
designed considering unigene sequence having similarity with
Arabidopsis thaliana putative serine/threonine protein kinase.
Amplicon size of STPK gene was approximately 450 bp (
). STPK have been shown to play an important role in
response to abiotic stress response and seed development in
peanut [].These PCR amplicons were purified and sequenced
from both ends. These forward and reverse sequences were
used for the construction of single longer sequence, later used
for similarity search using BLAST tool (BLASTN and BLASTX)
to confirm the presence of chickpea homologues of these genes
 (see supplementary material).

Conclusion
Present study was undertaken with an objective to identify
abiotic stress responsive genes in chickpea. Ten abiotic stress
responsive candidate genes previously validated for their
significance in stress responses in various model crops and
other legumes, were amplified in chickpea and sequenced after
purification using gene specific primer pairs. PCR amplicons
were directly used for DNA sequencing after purification using
gene specific primers. Good quality sequences were then used
for confirmation of these genes in chickpea using sequence
similarity approach based on sequence information of these
genes from related crop species or model plants. Therefore,
present study provides basic information about some abiotic
stress responsive genes in chickpea that can be exploited in
overcoming various abiotic stress related problems limiting
chickpea production and subsequently in breeding superior
varieties giving better yield under abiotic stresses conditions by
pyramiding favorable alleles for stress response in single
variety using modern molecular breeding approaches.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Manish Roorkiwal acknowledges research fellowship from
University Grants Commission (UGC).

Citation:Roorkiwal &amp; Sharma, Bioinformation 8(2): 092-097 (2012)

PCR amplification of ten abiotic stress responsive genes from eight diverse chickpea genotypes a. AKIN; b. AMADH; c.
DHN; d. DREB; e. Myb; f. CAD; g. EREBP; h. LEA; i. SAMS; j. STPK

