Background
Sugarcane is cash crop and primary use of this crop is to
produce sucrose. It has been reported that almost 70% of the
sugar used through out the world is derived from the sugarcane
[,
]. Sugarcane belongs to the family poaceae (C4 Plant) and is
able to accumulate up-to 25% (w/w) of fresh weight in the form
of sucrose under normal growth conditions []. This is the only
crop plant having large amount of sucrose storing capacity.
Sugarcane varieties can store sucrose in higher concentration as
that can be crystallized in the form of sugar. Increases in sugar
(sucrose) have been achieved by the conventional breeding
programme which led to improve in cane yield not in sugar
content []. It has been investigated that invertase enzyme plays
important role in sucrose hydrolysis so role of invetase
activities is very important []. In sugarcane crop invertase
enzymes play an important role in cellular mechanism process
and direct the utilization of carbohydrates for the growth or
storage. Invertase enzymes have been characterized in several
plants and have been reported that these play important role in
growth, development and storage of sugars in the plants [,
].
Invertases in plants have been classified as neutral, acid or
alkaline on the basis of pH range that is required for the
maximum activity of enzyme. In sugarcane two types of this
enzyme have been reported on the basis of pH (acid invertase
pH 5.0-5.5 and neutral invertase pH 7.0) and cellular
localization. Role played by this enzyme in sucrose metabolism
have been elucidated by several scientists [].

Role of invertase in metabolism:
In sugarcane invertase cleave sucrose in the hexoses to provide
the cell with fuel for the process of respiration and energy and
carbon source for the synthesis of different compounds. In
sugarcane plant sucrose starts accumulation in internodes when
they start elongation till elongation achieve to maximum 
[]. In
the ripening stage sucrose concentration increased and glucose
and fructose concentrations at very low level []. Invertase
enzyme play important role in sucrose metabolism with sucrose
phosphatase synthetase and sucrose synthetase enzymes. This
enzyme involve in the transport of sucrose by balancing the
sucrose concentration of phloem loading and unloading 
[].
Invertase break down the sucrose into glucose and fructose as a
result increase in osmotic pressure of cells, so this play role in
cell elongation and growth process []. It has been reported
that in sugarcane plants the amount of invertase in immature
intermodal tissue was linearly related to the rate of intermodal
elongation process that may rise to even ten fold []. Further it
has been reported that soluble acid invertase present in vacuole
and apoplastic space of elongating internodes, and this
disappear when intermodal growth stopped and again
reappeared when growth started. The neutral invertase have
been reported with increased level during maturation process
as this play role is in storing the sugar at mature stage 
[]. It is
also have been reported that acid invertase lacking in mature
sugarcane tissue []. Different varieties of sugarcane vary in
the potential of accumulation of sucrose. It has reported sharp
decline in the acid invertase with the maturity of sugarcane
related with the higher level of sucrose in the sugarcane
varieties those mature early []. But with late maturing
varieties decline in the acid invertase was slower [,
]. In
other crops also high acid invertase has been reported in
growing tissues of carrot [] stem elongation of bean 
[] the
reason acid invertase hydrolyzed the sucrose where there is
high demand of hexose sugars. Invertase also play important
role in regulation of cell turger for the cell expansion and sugar
composition in storage organ [,
,
].

Role of invertase in sucrose storage:
Sucrose storage is a process in which there is continuous
cleavage and synthesis of sucrose in the sucrose accumulation
process []. In the immature tissue of sugarcane sucrose
synthesis achieved is degraded by the acid invertase enzyme
but during the ripening process production rate of sucrose is
almost twice and hydrolysis by the acid invertase also
decreased []. It has reported that at immature stage of
sugarcane the import of carbon from phloem to the internodal
consumed for the growth but during ripening process almost
half of carbon is consumed for the storing of sucrose []. It has
been reported that soluble acid invertase activity decreases 
[,
], and neutral invertase activity increases on increases with
tissue maturation and sucrose accumulation [,
]. Decrease of
soluble acid invertase and elevation of neutral invertase
activities with different sugarcane tissue maturation varieties
was observed high sucrose accumulation []. It has been
reported that neutral invertase activity positively correlated
with hexose sugars levels in the stalk of sugarcane while soluble
acid invertase did not have any correlation []. The storage
sucrose is metabolized by the invertase enzyme (sucrose
cleaving enzyme) have multiple functions that effect different
physiological process []. Invertase enzyme also involved in
the long distance transport of sucrose for sucrose storage
through generating the sucrose concentration between the sites
of phloem unloading and loading [,
].

Conclusion
To increase the sucrose in sugarcane it is very important to
control the invertase. Strategy to increase the concentration of
sucrose in sugarcane plant needs a through understanding of
role of invertase and transgenic manipulation of invertase gene
which is involved in sucrose accumulation. Antisense approach
or gene suppression can be attempted to target expression of
invertase which will control the level of hexoses and enhance
sucrose storing in sugarcane varieties. Several biochemical and
physiological studies on sugarcane invertase activity have
reported it as a key step in the sucrose accumulation process.
Further down regulation of invertase in spatiotemporal manner
may be targeted by the RNAi approach. Reduction in the
sugarcane invertase activity using the post-transcriptional gene
silencing approach may be very useful in controlling the
sucrose loss at post-harvest stage. Use of stage and tissue
specific promoter can be exploited to express the antisense RNA
(ds RNA) for invertase in later stages, which would reduce the
invetase level thereby presenting the catabolism of sucrose. In
my opinion plant physiologist, biochemist and molecular
biologist should work together to overcome this problem. The
idea has tremendous potential and if seriously looked upon
may resolve the problem of post harvest sucrose loss to a
greater extent.

This research work was supported by the Amity University
Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow Campus, Lucknow, India.

Citation:Ansari et al, Bioinformation 9(9): 464-465 (2013)

