Background
The river Gomiti in India represents a unique niche for
biodiversity. We initiated a systematic screening
programme to catalogue the microbial composition of
Gomti river water at the Indian city Lucknow (isolate
Bz02). Characterization of bacterial species using classical
methods is not as specific as the genotyping methods.
Comparison of the bacterial 16S rRNA gene sequence has
emerged as a preferred genetic technique []. Species
specific 16S rRNA gene sequence is present across the
bacterial kingdom. Studies related to the strain Bz02 with
potential similarity to Comamonas strains is of interest and
relevance to this work (as observed by morphological
characterization). It is known that Comamonas strains are
involved in bioremediation. The degradation of 4-
toluenesulfonic acid in a continuously operated fixed-bed
biofilm reactor is shown using Comamonas testosteroni []
and degradation of the anion-active surfactant dihexylsulfosuccinat
is shown using Comamonas terrigena strain
N3H []. The Comamonas strains JS46 and JS47 have
been used in mixed and non-mixed culture immobilized
cell reactors for the degradation of m- and p-nitrobenzoate
[]. Thus, members of this genus have potential application
in bioremediation. Therefore, it is of interest to isolate
novel bacterial strains from different environments for
potential bioprocess application. This involves isolation
and characterization using classical microbiology and
genetic screening. The genotyping method used in the
identification of new strains is simple and effective []. In
this study, we describe the isolation and identification of an
unknown bacterium from the Indian river Gomti using 16S
rRNA gene sequence to characterize the strain Bz02 as a
member of the Comamonas.

Methodology
Culturing of Bacteria
Water sample collected from the Gomti River was serially
diluted and spread onto peptone/Beef extract/Nacl/Agar-
Agar plates followed by for incubation at 30°C under
anaerobic conditions. Single colonies of bacterial strains were picked and further grown and sub-cultured several
times to obtain a pure culture.

DNA isolation of bacteria
Pure culture of the target bacteria was grown overnight in
liquid NB medium for the isolation of genomic DNA using
a method described by Hiney and colleagues [].

PCR amplification 16S rDNA gene
PCR reaction was performed in a gradient thermal cycler
(Eppendorf, Germany). The universal primers (Forward
primer 5´- AGAGTTTGATCCTGGCTCAG -3´ and reverse
primer 5´- CTTGTGCGGGCCCCCGTCAATTC-3´) were
used for the amplification of the 16S rDNA gene fragment.
The reaction mixture of 50 μl consisted of 10 ng of
genomic DNA, 2.5 U of Taq DNA polymerase, 5 μl of 10
X PCR amplification buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl, , 500 mM
KCl pH-8.3) , 200μM dNTP, 10 p moles each of the two
universal primers and 1.5mM MgCl2. Amplification was
done by initial denaturation at 94°C for 3 minutes,
followed by 30 cycles of denaturation at 94°C for 30
second, annealing temperature of primers was 55°C for 30
second and extension at 72°C for 1 minute. The final
extension was conducted at 72°C for 10 minutes.

Agarose gel electrophoresis
10 μl of the reaction mixture was then analyzed by
submarine gel electrophoresis using 1.0 % agarose with
ethidium bromide at 8V/cm and the reaction product was
visualized under Gel doc/UV trans-illuminator.

Purification of PCR product
The PCR product was purified by Qiagen gel extraction kit
using the following protocol described below. The DNA
fragment was excised from the agarose gel with a clean
sharp scalpel. Then the gel slice was weighed in an
eppendorf. We then added 3 volumes of buffer QG to 1
volume of gel (100 mg ∼ 100 μl). The mixture was then
incubated at 50°C for 10 minutes. The gel was dissolved by vortexing the tube every 2-3 min during the incubation
until the mixture color is uniformly yellow. We then added
1 gel volume of Iso-propanol to the sample and mixed. A
QIAquick spin column is then placed in a 2 ml collection
tube provided. The sample is applied to the QIAquick
column followed by centrifugation for one minute so that
DNA binds to the column. The flow-through is discarded
and the QIAquick column is placed back in the collection
tube. We then added 0.75 ml of buffer PE to QIAquick
column and centrifuged for 1 minute to wash. The flowthrough
is again discarded and the QIAquick column
centrifuged for an additional 1 minute at 10,000 × g. The
QIAquick column is now placed into a clean 1.5 ml
eppendorf. We then added 50 μl of buffer EB (10mM Tris-
Cl, pH 8.5) to the center of the QIAquick membrane and
centrifuged the column for 1 min to elute DNA

DNA sequencing of the 16S rDNA fragment
The 16S rDNA amplified PCR product (100ng
concentration) was used for the sequencing with the single
16S rDNA 27F Forward primer: 5´-
AGAGTTTGATCCTGGCTCAG-3´ by ABI DNA
sequencer (Applied Biosystem Inc).

Computational analysis
Identification of Comamonas sp
A comparison of the 16s rRNA gene sequence of the test
strain with the non-redundant collection (Genbank, DDBJ,
EMBL &amp; PDB) of sequences was performed using BLAST
[,]. A number of sequences of the genus comamonas
aligned with 16S rRNA gene sequence of test strain. We
then developed a multiple sequence alignment for these
homologous sequences using the algorithm described in
ClustalW []. Subsequently, an evolutionary distance
matrix was then generated from these nucleotide sequences
in the dataset. A phylogenetic tree was then drawn using
the Neighbour joining method []. Phylogenetic and
molecular evolutionary analyses were conducted using
MEGA (Molecular Evolutionary Genetics analysis)
version 4.0 []. We compared the 16S rRNA gene
sequence of test strain with different set of sequence
databases such as small subunit ribosomal RNA (ssu
rRNA) and large subunit ribosomal RNA (lsu rRNA) []
by using Ribosomal RNA BLAST []. 16S rRNA gene
sequence of test strain is also compared against those
sequences in Ribosomal Database Project (RDP) [] by
using the RDP Classifier check Program []. The
annotated information for the sequence in the database to
which 16S rRNA aligns is used for the bacterial
identification.

Discussion
The rRNA based analysis is a central method in
microbiology used not only to explore microbial diversity
but also to identify new strains. The genomic DNA was
extracted from isolated bacterial strain Bz02 and universal
primers 27F and 939R were used for the amplification and
sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene fragment. A total of 758
bp of the 16S rRNA gene was sequenced and used for the
identification of isolated bacterial strain. Subsequently, a
16S rRNA gene sequence based phylogenetic tree showing
the relationships between the test strain Bz02 and selected
representatives of the genus Comamonas is given in . It is evident from phylogenetic analysis of 16S rRNA
gene that the isolate Bz02 represents a genomic species in the genus Comamonas. Comparison of test strain against
known sequences of ssu rRNA and lsu rRNA databases
showed that the gene sequence of isolate Bz02 has 95%
sequence similarity (Score=1199 bits, Expect=0.0) with
16S rRNA gene sequence of Comamonas testosteroni
(Genbank Acc. No.: M11224). Thus, data shows that the
isolate Bz02 is a member of the genus Comamonas.
Similarity rank program classifier [] available at the
Ribosomal Database Project [] classified the isolate
Bz02 as a novel genomic species of the genus Comamonas
with a confidence threshold of 95%.

Conclusion
Bacterial species have at least one copy of the 16S rRNA
gene containing highly conserved regions together with
hyper variable regions. The use of 16S rRNA gene
sequences to identify new strains bacteria is gaining
momentum in recent years. We showed the use of 16S
rRNA gene sequence to characterize the bacterial isolate
Bz02 from Gomti River in the Indian city of Lucknow.
Thus, the genotyping method using 16S rRNA gene
sequence is both simple and effective in strain
characterization.

The present work was supported by a joint venture of the
laboratory facilities at Chromous Biotech Pvt. Ltd.
Bangalore, India and Biotechnology and Bioinformatics
Division, BIOBRAINZ, Lucknow, U.P., India.

Citation:Yadavet al, Bioinformation 3(9): 381-383 (2009)

Neighbour­joining tree of selected 16S rRNA gene sequences of the genus Comamonas obtained from BLAST search of the Bz02 strain sequence for phylogenetic inference.

