Background
Protein folding and unfolding dynamics are still under
scrutiny by the scientific community using in vivo, in
vitro and in silico approaches [–]. Protein unfolding is
one of the most fundamental biochemical processes and it
is very difficult to characterize using in vivo methods.
However, several theoretical methods with the use of
computing power have been used in recent years to
address this issue. We use molecular dynamics (MD)
simulations to characterize the unfolding process of an Nacetylmuramoyl-
L-alanine amidase (PDB ID 2IR0), a cell
wall hydrolase enzyme from Bacillus anthracis at high
temperature. We used high temperature for this study
because it is known to accelerate the unfolding path
during simulation []. Most micro-organisms have a
major cell wall component called peptidoglycan []. The
peptidoglycan layer constantly undergoes modification by
hydrolysis through the transfer of new molecules and by
the release of old molecules. The hydrolysis activity is
essential for the correct cell wall assembly and other
metabolic activities. The enzymes performing
peptidoglycan cell wall hydrolysis have been classified as
N-acetylmuramidases, N-acetylglucosaminidases and Nacetylmuramoyl-
L-alanine amidases based on their
substrate specificity [].

Amidases-03 (503 residues) is a well studied enzyme
protein encoded by the gene amiA present in the plasmid
pXO2. It should be noted that B. anthracis has two virulent
plasmids pXO1 and pXO2 causing cutaneous anthrax,
gastrointestinal, oropharyngeal anthrax and inhalation
anthrax. AmiA consists of two functional domains, of
which the N-terminal one consists of three SLH (S-layer
homology domain) repeats (50 residues). The remaining
part of the protein is composed of two sub-domains (one
domain of 100 residues with unknown structure and the other N-acetylmuramoyl-L-alanine amidase with similarity
to pfam01520 family) []. The amidase-03 domain shows
enzymatic activity of hydrolyzing the peptidoglycan at
MurNAc-L-alanine linkage []. It decreases the
inflammatory response and hence favoring the
multiplication of B. anthracis in the host. However, some
peptidoglycan hydrolases increase the inflammatory
response by releasing the muramyl peptide [,]. The
stability of yet another amidase-03 domain (GenBank
accession NP_844822) is described here using data
obtained from MD simulations.

Methodology
Homology model
A homology model of amidase-03 domain (245 residues)
was constructed using template PDB structure (PDB ID
1XOV) and the model is deposited in PDB with PDB ID
2IR0. The analysis shows that amidase-03 domain is made
up of 6 α-helices and 6 β-sheets (see Table 1 in
). The protein contains β-sheets
surrounded by the α-helices ().

Molecular dynamics simulation
Molecular dynamics simulation uses classical Newton
mechanics to generate trajectories to study molecular
motion using force fields. Molecular trajectories are
coordinates formed by recording structural changes over
time showing the positions of each atom along a series of
small time step (usually 2 fs). The G43a1 force field with
explicit SPC water and cubic boundary conditions are used
to parameterize system interactions. The system consists of
8614 water molecules surrounding the protein, in a box of
edge length 65.69 Å. This was subjected to an isobaricisothermal
MD simulation at 1 atom through a Berendsen
thermostat-barostat [] with coupling constants of 0.1 ps
and 0.5 ps, respectively. The real space Coulomic and short range contributions were truncated at 9 Å and 14 Å,
respectively. The net negative charge on the protein was
offset by replacing two water molecules with two sodium
ions. This resulted in 8612 water molecules and 2 Na+
surrounding the protein. The resulting box had a density of
1.02 g/cc. All simulations were performed using a 2 fs time
step.

Energy minimization and calculation methods
The amidase-3 model (PDB ID: 2IR0) was used as a
starting structure. In an initial equilibration, the protein
amidase-03 was kept fixed, whereas the solvent and Na+
were subjected to an energy minimization using steepest
descent avoiding any steric energy conflicts. The minimum
energy was achieved in 475 steps. Electrostatics is
calculated using the Particle Mesh Ewald (PME) method
[]. All rigid bonds were monitored using the Lincs
method [].

Simulation package and system
The software package used for simulation is GROMACS v
3.3.2 []. All simulations were performed in a desktop
AMD64 4300+ processor, with 2GB RAM, using Fedora
Core 8 as operating system.

Simulation temperature
The protein was simulated at two temperatures - 300 K and
498 K. Simulation data at high and low temperatures
provide measurements for studying protein conformation
stability []. Proteins are usually stable at 300K and often
undergo unfolding at 498 K [].

Analysis parameter
We used the root-mean-square-displacement (RMSD)
parameter to analyze the unfolding of the protein during
simulation. The RMSD of the backbone and different
secondary structures of the protein were computed with
respect to the initial structure of the respective trajectories
after a least square fit of the non-hydrogen atoms. A cutoff
value of 5 ns was used for equilibration simulation. The
precompiled Dictionary of Protein secondary structure
(DSSP) [] was subsequently used to analyze the
secondary structure unfolding, while Visual Molecular
Dynamics (VMD) software [] was used for structure
visualization.

Discussion
The amidase-03 enzyme from B. anthracis is composed of
a central core made of six β-sheets and an outer sheath of
six α-helices (). The RMSD of the protein
backbone was found to be stable in the range of 2-3 Å at
300 K, but increased to 6 Å after 1 ns at 498 K ().
The RMSD of three α-helices (H1, H2 and H6) was
similarly increased to 6 Å in 0.5 ns time step at 498 K.
Most of the helices except H4 and H6 uncoil in 1 ns. The
short helix H4 (residue 127 to 131) remains stable up to 4.3
ns and H6 near the inner core is stable throughout the
simulation. The unfolding of the helices leads to the
opening of the core to the solvent. A transition state is
observed after equilibration until unfolding of α-helices at
high temperature and is described as the Transition State
Ensemble (TSE) []. The RMSD for β-sheets increases
after 2 ns until end of simulation () and hence β-
sheets are recorded to have greater stability than α-helices.
The collapse in the core consisting of β-sheets is
accompanied by increment in backbone RMSD and is
indicative of protein denaturation. This is similar to the two
state reversible denaturation process described elsewhere
[]. The native structure showed RMSD ≤ 2 Å, the
intermediate (partial unfolded) state showed ≥ 2 Å RMSD
≤ 8 Å () during the transition state. The high
RMSD value (≥ 8 Å) is associated with unfolded state.

Solvent accessible surface area (ASA) shows a drastic
increase from 30 to 40 nm2 during 2-3 ns simulation
(). This is described as the sudden unfolding of
outer β-sheets (B2 and B4), and their consequent
compaction. Yet another compaction found near 6 ns leads
to reformation of few secondary structures. DSSP program
confirms a sudden fall in total number of secondary
structure including α-helices, β-sheets, bridges and turns
between 2-3 ns (). Nonetheless, ASA increases
after 3 ns. It should be noted that the number of secondary
structures with respect to initial number decreases rapidly
in the first 0.5 ns. RMSD begins to decline with unfolding
of β-sheets during 2- 5.5 ns. However, it becomes stable
afterwards because the system contains small secondary
structures.

The amidase-03 enzyme unfolds in a definite hierarchy at
high temperature. We observed that some secondary
structures are denatured earlier than others at high
temperature in the systematic analysis of trajectories at 498
K. The most stable secondary structures are β-sheets,
forming inner core of the protein surrounded by six helices.
Similar path of unfolding has been reported in SH3 domain
[]. It has been reported that β-sheets denature more
quickly than helices []. Tsai et al. (1999) [] discussed
these β-sheets are stabilized by hydrogen bonding within
the sheets and the hydrophobic contacts. However,
hydrophobic core becomes entirely unfolded within 4.2 ns
in amidase-03. Nonetheless, helices are elements of the
outer core and most of which are denatured rapidly within
1ns during simulation. Proteins are usually denatured at
high temperature and by using chemical denaturants. The
molecular basis of temperature dependent unfolding is
often studied using molecular dynamics simulation with
force fields. The data described on amidase-03 simulation
is in agreement of the observation reported by Degget and
Fersht [] on folding.

Conclusion
The unfolding of amidase-03 from B. anthracis was
studied using MD simulations at temperatures 300 K and
498 K. The β-sheets and α-helices of amidase-03 are
shown to play a role in unfolding at high temperature. Data
show that α-helices are less stable than β-sheets during
simulation. The protein was found fairly stable for 8 ns
simulation in this study. The amidase-03 unfolding occurs
in transition state ensemble (TSE).

Supplementary material
Data 1
We are thankful to Dr. S. T. Pasha, National Institute of Communicable Diseases (NICD), Delhi and Prof. Tasneem
Fatma, Department of Bioscience, Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi for their support. The authors are thankful to
Manish and Prerna for their help.

Citation:Sharma et al, Bioinformation 3(10): 430-434 (2009)

(a) Structure snapshot of 2ir0. The N-terminus and C-terminus, with β -sheets named as B1, B2, B3, B4, B5, B6
(forming the core inner part of the protein) surrounded by α-helices named likewise as H1, H2, H3, H4, H5, H6; (b)
Evolution of Root-mean-square-deviation (Å) of the 2ir0 protein backbone with respect to its initial structure at 498 K. (c)
Structural changes observed in terms of RMSD in α-helices from its native structure with time at 498 K. (d). Structural
changes observed in terms of RMSD in β-sheets from its native structure with time at 498 K; for clarity all RMSD values are
incremented by n, where n is the no. of the β-sheet. (e). Variation of solvent accessible surface area correlates with time at
498 K. (f). Decrement in total secondary structure including α-Helix, β -Sheet, B-bridge, turn at 498 K confirms unfolding.

