Background
MRSA has emerged as major cause of bloodstream infections associated with raised 
risk of nosocomial infection and an increase in morbidity, mortality and hospitalization 
costs [,
]. Recently MRSA infections have also appeared 
in community settings in many different countries [,
]. 
Although S. aureus is relatively easy to cultivate, conventional identification methods 
may yield false-positive or false-negative results []. 
Conventional methods require 48 h for the detection of MRSA, in spite of shorter detection 
times using the most recent generation of chromogenic selective agar media 
[]. Furthermore, the sensitivity of blood 
cultures is markedly reduced if blood samples are obtained during antimicrobial treatment 
[]. Therefore, several real-time PCR methods 
have recently been developed for detecting MRSA directly from clinical samples on the same 
day acquired [,
].

The purpose of this study was to investigate the effectiveness of a duplex real-time PCR assay 
using the TaqMan system in detecting MRSA from serum seeded with bacteria and patients' sera to assess the diagnostic efficacy.

Methodology
Patients and clinical samples:
A total of 100 clinical isolates of MRSA strains and 35 isolates of a number of different 
species collected that had been previously identified by Manchester clinical bacteriology 
laboratory staff in the MRI were utilised in this study. In addition serum samples were taken 
from nine different MRSA septicemic (deep-seated infection) patients to evaluate this duplex 
real-time PCR. These patients were enrolled in a clinical trial with NeuTec Pharma (Manchester, UK).
Full ethical approval for analysis had been granted by the Northen and Yorkshire MREC with reference number 04/MRE03/33.

Taqman™ Duplex real-time PCR:
DNA was extracted from 200µl of each bacterial suspension and 
from each patient's serum following manufacturer's instruction 
according to Qiagen kit. The oligonucleotide primers and 
fluorescence-labelled hybridization probes for the mecA and 
femB genes sequences were selected by using Primer Express 
software (Applied Biosystems)  (see supplementary 
material). The mecA probe was labelled with the fluorophore 
FAM (6-carboxy fluorescein) and the femB probe labelled with 
the fluorophore VIC (Perkin-Elmer, Applied Biosystems, UK), 
The TaqmanTM probes were synthesized with the reporter dye 
covalently linked to the 5' ends, and the quencher dye, TAMRA 
(6-carboxy tetramethyl rhodamine) at the 3' ends. In addition, 
the 3' ends were phosphorylated to prevent probe extension. 


After primer and probe optimisation had been performed, the amplification of both mecA and 
femB genes in a duplex PCR reaction was performed on all of the samples. A sufficient volume of 
PCR mastermix solution was made for the number of reactions to be tested comprising of, Taqman™ 
Universal mastermix, 4µM of mecA forward and reverse primers, 4µM of femB forward and reverse primers, 
2µM of mecA and femB probes (Perkin-Elmer, Applied Biosystems, UK) and pharmacy grade sterile 
injectable water (Phoenix Pharmaceuticals) to give final concentrations of forward primer 200nM, 
reverse primer 200nM and probe 100nM. A 20µl volume of PCR mastermix was placed into a well on the 
Micro-Amp reaction plate (Perkin-Elmer, Applied Biosystems, UK) for each reaction to be tested. To 
this approximately 0.4µg of each sample of DNA extract was added giving a total reaction volume of 25µl. 
Each well was then capped using Micro-Amp optical cap strips (Perkin-Elmer, Applied Biosystems, UK) and 
the plate was loaded onto the PE-ABI 7700 automated Taqman™ system where amplification was performed using 
the following thermocycling parameters: one cycle for 2 min at 50°C, one cycle for 10 min at 95°C, 45 
cycles for 15 sec at 95°C, and finally 45 cycles for 1 min at 60°C.

Data points collected at the end of each extension stage were 
analysed after thermal cycling. During the first 15 cycles, data 
was collected from all wells and the background fluorescence 
was determined. A threshold value was calculated as 10 SD 
above the mean background fluorescence. A sample was 
considered positive if the fluorescence signal crossed this 
threshold within 45 cycles; the cycle number at which this 
occurs was recorded as the Ct value.

After performing the duplex real-time PCR the amplification 
plots of both the dye layers VIC and FAM were examined to 
determine that both gene target sites had been amplified. This 
was verified by analysing the multi-component view which 
shows an increase in both dye layers as the reporter dye is 
released and the quencher dye fluorescence decreased 
(). 


Detection limit of duplex real-time PCR :
DNA was extracted from three samples (200µl each) of an 
EMRSA 15 strain grown in broth culture. The concentration of 
DNA in each sample was determined by using Genequant II 
apparatus (Pharmacia Biotech) according to the manufacturer's 
direction for use. The known concentration of extracted DNA 
was serially diluted with PBS from10-1 to 10-7 final dilution 
factor for each sample. A 5µl aliquot from each dilution was 
used as template for duplex real-time PCR in order to 
determine the lowest amount of DNA that is able to be detected 
by this assay. 


A single colony of MRSA was inoculated into 300µl of normal 
serum from a healthy individual and mixed well by vortex. 
Subsequently, serial dilutions from 10-1 to 10-7 using healthy 
human serum as diluent was performed. DNA was extracted 
from a 200µl aliquot of each dilution and then used as a 
template for amplification in duplex real-time PCR.:
Statistical analysis:
The number of genomic DNA copies for the different groups 
was compared using the Mann-Whitney test. Data was 
analyzed in SPSS. A P&lt; 0.05 was considered to be statistically 
significant.

Results
Specificity and sensitivity of duplex real-time PCR:
This test amplified these genes with 99% (99 of 100) sensitivity 
and 100% (35 of 35) specificity. Only one strain was incorrectly 
identified by the duplex real-time PCR assay. This strain was 
confirmed by conventional methods as MRSA. However, this 
strain was found to be positive for femB and negative for mecA
in this investigation  (see supplementary material). 


Detection limit of duplex real-time PCR:
The assay used in the current study was able to detect a 
minimum of 1.23× 102 CFU/ml from serum seeded with MRSA 
cells, and the limiting concentration of DNA for detection was 
18 fg, which equates to 5.14 genomic DNA copies(3.5 fg/cell) 
[,
]. In addition, this assay was found to be able to detect
MRSA from patient's serum (7 out of 9). This gives a sensitivity 
of 77.8% for the assay as applied to patients' sera. 


Discussion
Although there are numerous reports on PCR assays for 
detecting MRSA, the present study is believed to be the first to 
investigate the effectiveness of PCR in detecting MRSA directly 
from serum samples [,
]. It was found that the sensitivity 
and specificity of a PCR assay is dependent on target genes, 
primer sequences, PCR techniques, DNA extraction procedures, 
and PCR product detection methods. In addition, the extraction 
yield of target DNA is a critical factor in the PCR detection of 
bacteria in clinical specimens, particularly when only a few 
bacteria are expected to be in specimens [,
]. 


Detection of mecA in conjunction with femB as a second target 
has been reported for identification of MRSA [,
]. In the 
present study, the gene femB was selected as a gene target for 
MRSA confirmation. Primers and probes were chosen in a way 
so that they do not form considerable hair-pin or secondary 
structures and do not form stable dimers, which reduce the 
efficiency of PCR amplification. In order to confirm the 
identification of MRSA isolates, both mecA and femB genes 
targets should be amplified (positive), because these two targets 
exist as single copies within the genome, an extracted culture 
would contain equal numbers of both genes. This assay was 
optimised to amplify these two genes with equal efficiency. The 
use of the TaqmanTM ‘real time' PCR enabled the performance 
of each primer to be accurately assessed with respect to the 
accumulated fluorescent signal (ΔRn) and to the Ct value. All 
samples were identified correctly for both mecA and femB genes 
except one sample, which was identified as MRSA by 
conventional methods. After using this assay, this sample was 
found positive for femB and negative for mecA. Further 
conventional tests confirmed that this strain was MRSA, which 
was a borderline oxacillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus 
(BORSA). In this case, the mecA gene might be present or 
absent. BORSA isolates lacking the mecA gene have been 
reported to possess other mechanisms of resistance, such as the 
hyper-production of β-lactamase [,
]. 


It has been reported that one out of 327 CNS strains had the 
femB gene []. 
Jonas et al, also found that the product of the 
femB gene can be detected in Staphylococcus auricularis, which is 
a CNS species. Nonetheless, the habitat for this organism is the 
external auditory meatus of the ear and it does not appear to 
colonise the sites that are normally screened for MRSA. 
Therefore, the assay designed in the present study could be 
applied potentially in clinical laboratories to detect MRSA 
directly from clinical samples []. 


The low sensitivity of this assay in detecting MRSA from 
patients' serum might be because of the degradation of DNA 
due to the repeated freezing and thawing of the samples. This 
result is supported by the findings of a study in which the 
sensitivity of PCR was found to be affected by the duration of 
serum storage at -20°C, through the progressive degradation of 
frozen DNA. Moreover, repeated thawing of frozen samples 
may have played a role in the observed decrease in sensitivity 
as previously documented []. A mixture of mecA positive 
CNS and a BORSA isolate sample could be misdiagnosed by 
conventional PCR since both mecA and femB genes can be 
detected. However, this problem is less likely to occur using 
TaqMan real- time PCR as analysis of the amplification plots 
would show similar Ct values if the two genes were present in 
equal amounts. A mixed culture would be unlikely to contain 
equal amounts of both targets and therefore suspicion would be 
placed on such a result. 


The system showed good specificity and sensitivity for the 
detection of MRSA without any requirement for isolation or 
enrichment of the bacteria. This reduced the number of sample 
preparation steps and the time consumed. This assay also 
eliminates the risk of contamination by sealing the micro-titre 
plates prior to amplification and without the need for further 
analysis. Although positive, PCR results always need 
confirmation with the culture in order to exclude false-positive 
results or to gain isolates for further testing (susceptibility, 
virulence factors), this assay could help to reduce the workload 
associated with MRSA surveillance programs. Moreover, this 
assay could minimize the nosocomial MRSA transmission by 
the well-timed detection of MRSA carriers which may be useful 
in the screening of some high-risk groups of patients. Focusing 
on the cost-effectiveness of rapid MRSA technology still 
remains a debated issue []. 


Financial Disclosure
The authors state no conflict of interest. 


Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Awad et al, Bioinformation 9(18): 896-900 (2013)

Multicomponent view of a Taqman amplification. The multicomponent view shows 
fluorescent intensity of background, passive dye (ROX), quencher dye (TAMRA) and reporter dyes 
FAM and VIC. During amplification digestion of the reporter dye from the 5'end of the probe results 
in an increase in fluorescent signal. As the reporter dye is released the quencher dye fluorescence 
decreases. This sample showed positive amplification of the gene targets mecA and femB and was therefore MRSA.

