Background
The Chikungunya disease burden is highly associated with the large-scale
morbidity. The disease manifests itself with an acute febrile illness that
lasts for 2-5 days, followed by prolonged joint pain which may persist for
weeks, months or even years. [] The causative agent Chikungunya virus
was first isolated in Tanzania in 1953 and since then it was associated with
a number of epidemic outbreaks in Africa, Southeast Asia and India. []
Aedes mosquitoes, primarily Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus have
been identified as the vectors responsible for disease transmission.

In the 2006 epidemic, nearly 1.38 million people were reported with
symptomatic disease across several states of India. [] Confirmed cases
have been reported even in 2009 from various Indian states. There is no
vaccine or any specific treatment for the disease and prevention by vector
control is still the best policy. Most studies in literature are related to
epidemiological aspects of CHIKV. The causative agent Chikungunya
virus is a positive ssRNA virus belonging to the family Togaviridae and
genus Alphavirus. The viral genome (approximately 11.8 kb) encodes for
two polyproteins ‐ the non structural polyprotein consisting of four
proteins (nsP1, nsP2, nsP3 &amp; nsP4) and the structural polyprotein
consisting of five proteins (Capsid, E3, E2, 6K &amp; E1). []

Development of new tools for diagnosis, prevention and treatment of
Chikungunya need to be supported. There is a need to characterize the
proteome of various CHIKV strains isolated during different outbreaks.
CHIKVPRO, a database with computational analysis and integrated
information of different CHIKV strains is an attempt in this direction to
provide proteomic data to those involved in virology research.

Methodology
Dataset
The complete genome sequences of 25 Chikungunya strains (submitted till
October 2009) were downloaded from NCBI nucleotide database. [] The
translated protein sequence for each strain was extracted from NCBI
protein database in two sets ‐ the non-structural polyprotein sequence and
the structural-polyprotein. For all strains, the non structural polyprotein
sequence was divided into 4 protein sequences ‐ non structural proteins
nsP1, nsP2, nsP3, and nsP4; and the structural polyprotein sequence into 5
protein sequences – capsid, 6K, envelope protein E1, E2 and E3. This
fragmentation was done computationally using parameters such as amino
acid positions and sequence alignment in reference to the strains 37997 and
African S27 characterized in Uniprot database. []

Database
MySQL was used to construct a relational database to store information of
viral proteins in the form of related tables. Data consistency and non
redundancy was maintained by using normalisation techniques. HTML and
PHP were used to provide a dynamic web interface which was
appropriately connected with the database. The database is freely available
to view and download data.

Database features
CHIKVPRO provides its users to search a protein through its name,
accession ID and virus strain (). After selecting a particular
protein, the user can perform the following: 

Molecular prediction ‐ gives molecular weight, amino acid composition, atomic composition and
physiochemical properties like theoretical pI, instability index, aliphatic index and grand average of hydrophobicity (GRAVY). The tool used for
this analysis was Protparam. []

Peptide cleavage prediction ‐ provides proteases cleavage sites for the selected protein analysed by the tool
Peptide cutter. []

Hydrophobicity plot ‐ provides hydrophobicity plot for each protein sequence analysed by ProtScale 
tool. [] 

Transmembrane domain prediction ‐ shows potential trans-membrane domains for each protein predicted 
by DAS tool. [] 

Functional family prediction ‐ classifies a protein into related functional families by using 
SVM Prot software. []


 

Database utility
The in silico analysis gives us a brief idea about the role of each protein
and helps us to understand its biological significance. Such information
might help virologists better understand the mode of virus replication, its
mechanism of pathogenesis, strain specific variations and to develop
potential anti-viral agents. [] Since earlier studies have shown that a
single mutation in the virus affects vector specificity, severity and
epidemic potential, this database may also provide useful information for
determining the virulence of the new isolates. [,
] The database
provides its users a web-interface which is highly user-friendly and easy to
access ().

Conclusions and future aspects
CHIKVPRO, a protein sequence annotation database of Chikungunya virus
was designed to provide an easy access to the large and growing volume of
data. The database provides useful resource of information on viral
proteins for molecular biologists and virologists working in related areas.
In the submitted version, CHIKVPRO provides information on
physiochemical, molecular and functional properties of each protein. It
also illustrates the various peptide cleavage sites, transmembrane and other
functional domains present in each protein. We plan to further include
additional features such as higher structural conformations, post
translational modifications, etc. and also upload the data for the remaining
strains in our advanced version of CHIKVPRO. The database shall be
updated timely as more data on viral proteins is generated through our
ongoing experimental analysis and future sequence submissions.

Citation:Mishra  et al Bioinformation 5(1): 4-6 (2010)

Database Structure of CHIKVPRO: The inner circles represent the search criteria to select a desired protein sequence and the outer rectangles
represent different types of predictions that can be performed by the user.

