Background
Vif is an essential protein for in vivo viral replication 
[–] that
targets the human DNA-editing enzyme, APOBEC3G (A3G)
[] thereby inhibiting replication of retroviruses 
[,
]. As Vif
has no known cellular homologs, it is an attractive target for
antiviral intervention. Most currently available antiviral drugs
target the pol-encoded retroviral enzymes PR, RT, and
integrase (IN); in addition, inhibitors that target HIV-1
envelope-receptor interactions have also been recently
approved. Recent understanding of the interactions between
HIV-1 and host restriction factors has provided fresh avenues
for development of novel antiviral drugs. The host restriction
factors include apolipoprotein B mRNA editing enzyme,
catalytic polypeptide-like 3 (APOBEC3) proteins which inhibit
viral replication in the absence of Vif [–
]. Vif suppresses
A3G antiviral activity by targeting these proteins for
polyubiquitination and proteasomal degradation [–
].

HIV-1 Vif is a 192 amino acid protein that binds to A3G and
forms an E3 ubiquitin ligase complex consisting of Elongin B,
Elongin C, Cullin 5, and RING finger protein 1, which results
in A3G polyubquitination and degradation []. As a result,
A3G's are not packaged into virions, and HIV-1 replication is
spared from A3G-mediated inhibition. Pioneering studies of
HIV-1ΔVif viruses have shown that their replication is
significantly delayed in nonpermissive cells [], implying that
interfering with the Vif- A3G interactions should strongly
suppress viral replication. A large proportion of proviruses in
infected patients is hypermutated [–
] and has G-to-A
mutations in RT and protease []. Interaction should allow the
host APOBEC3 protein to carry out their natural activity and
inhibit HIV-1 replication.

Methodology
Molecular Modeling of Vif:
Protein sequence of Vif Human immunodeficiency virus 1
retrieved from NCBI using accession num: NP_057851. The
protein contains 192 amino acids and has Molecular weight of
22511.79 Daltons. 3D structure of Vif is not available in Protein
Data Bank; hence 3D structure prediction of Vif has been
performed using computational homology modeling method.
Similarity searching with Vif has been performed against PDB
database for finding an appropriate template for homology
modeling using BLAST. Top 10 templates were used for the
alignment against Vif. All the residues are colored in black;
however, those residues in template which are identical to the
residue in the query sequence are highlighted in color.

The entire top 10 template alignment file (.ali) has been used
for building loops using modeler (). MODELLER
requires the sequence in PIR format in order to be read. The
FASTA was converted to PIR using Readseq, an algorithm
developed by EMBL. Structure similarity has been performed
by using the profile.build(), an in-built command in
MODELLER. The build_profile.py was used for the local
dynamic algorithm to identify homologous sequences against
target Vif Target sequence. The final model obtained from
modeler further been used for structure validation using
Procheck [,
].

Prediction of Inhibitory Site in Vif:
The inhibitory site of the modeled structure was identified
using Q site finder []. Q site finder is a method of ligand
binding site prediction which works by hydrophobic (CH3)
probes to the protein and finding clusters of probes with most
favourable binding energy.

Selection of Inhibitors:
To inhibit the Vif-A3G interaction, two potent inhibitors -
RN18 [] and VEC 5 
[] were selected.

Ligand Receptor Docking:
The optimized structures of RN 18 and VEC 5 were docked
into the inhibitory site of Vif protein. Docking parameters were
set to 0.20 Å as grid resolution, maximum iteration of 1500 and
maximum population size of 50. Energy minimization and
hydrogen bonds were optimized after the docking. Simplex
evolution was set at maximum steps of 300 with neighborhood
distance factor of 1. Binding affinity and interactions of
inhibitor with protein was evaluated on the basis of the
internal ES (Internal electrostatic Interaction), internal
hydrogen bond interactions and sp2-sp2 torsions.

Protein-Protein Docking Studies:
Apolipo protein 3D structure was retrieved from Protein
Databank with PDB accession number: 3V4J. Protein - Protein
docking was executed through Patchdock server 
[].
Patchdock algorithm is inspired by object recognition and
image segmentation used in computer vision. Default
parameter was set as clustering RMSD at 4.0.

Solvent Accessible Surface Area (SASA) and Interface Property Calculation:
Solvent accessible surface area of the complexes was calculated
by GETAREA server [], protein interfaces calculated by
Aquaprot [] and interface property was calculated using
2P2I inspector [] online server.

Results
Protein Model Evaluation and Details of Predicted Inhibitory Site:
The procheck results revealed the modeled Vif protein to be
bonafide (). In final model of the protein out of 167
amino acids 133 were in core region, 21 were in additional and
9 were in generous allowed region. Overall 97.6 percentages of
amino acids were in allowed region. Hence the same has been
used for the Protein - Protein studies with Apolipo protein.
Three cavities with different volume were detected by Qsite
finder in Vif protein. As a convention, the volume with highest
volume was considered to be an active (inhibitory) site. The
inhibitory site had a volume of 841 Cubic Angstroms with
minimum coordinates of (-21, -15, -10) and maximum
coordinates of (-1, 14, 14) ().

Binding Affinity of RN18 and VEC5 against Vif:
As evident from rerank score derived from Moldock and PLP
aided algorithm, VEC5 showed better receptor ligand affinity
to Vif compared to RN 18.  (see supplementary
material) represents the docking scores of RN 18 and VEC 5
against Vif.

Protein –Protein Docking Studies:
Three modes of protein-protein interactions were investigated
in the present study. One, interaction between inhibitor
unbound Vif with A3G, Two, interaction between RN18 bound
Vif with A3G and three, VEC5 bound Vif and A3G interaction.
 (see supplementary material) represents the
comparative binding scores of RN18 and VEC5. Vif bound to
RN18 and Vif bound to VEC5 showed almost similar binding
affinity against A3G. Evident from the scores, Vif bound to
RN18 and VEC5 showed declined interaction with A3G.
 respectively shows, inhibitor unbound Vif
A3G interactions, RN18 bound Vif –A3G interactions and
VEC5 bound Vif-A3G interactions

Interface Analysis:
 
(see supplementary material) shows complete profile
of solvent accessible surface areas of the protein complexes.
Complex of A3G and Vif bound to RN18 or VEC5 shows
higher solvent accessible surface area than complex of
unbound Vif-A3G (ΔSASA =1145.86), indicating declined
interaction of A3G and Vif due to presence of inhibitors.
Further the poor interaction of A3G and Vif is complemented
by the calculated interface properties  (see
supplementary material). There was almost twice (1.90) the
decline in the interface area between A3G-Vif when bound to
RN 18 or VEC 5. Further the gap index in the complex was
increased by two folds double (2.05) in presence of RN 18 or
VEC 5 compared to the complex unbound by either inhibitor.
A closer perusal in the interface in Vif unbound A3G
interaction revealed that the interface areas are mostly
comprised of coils. Since coils are flexible in nature they may
assist the better protein-protein interactions. In case of RN 18
or VEC5 bound Vif, the interfaces prominently are helices
which are less flexible in nature thereby discouraging the
decline interactions between Vif and A3G.  shows the
interacting residues and electrostatic interfaces.

Discussion
In the absence of an effective vaccine or antiviral treatments,
AIDS is likely to expand and continue to claim the lives of
millions for decades. Despite heroic efforts over the last 25
years, a protective vaccine is not currently on hand, and the
recent suspension of the Merck vaccine trial suggests that an
effective vaccine is not likely to be available in the near future
[,
]. Since the approval of AZT in 1987 
[] approximately
30 anti-HIV drugs or drug combinations have been approved
for clinical use. An understanding of the interactions between
Vif, A3G, and the proteasomal degradation pathway is
essential for developing novel drugs for therapeutic
intervention. In a view of above, we made a possible attempt at
the molecular planes to probe into the A3G-Vif interactions in
presence and absence of inhibitors. The study revealed the
potential inhibitory actions of drugs RN18 and VEC5. Both
inhibitors successfully hampered the A3G-Vif interactions as
evident from interface analysis where in, there was almost
twice decline in the interface area between A3G and Vif in
presence of these inhibitors. In addition, flexible coils were
replaced by rigid helices in the interface area confirming the
declined protein-protein interactions. Further, the interface
area between inhibitor (RN18 or VEC5) bound Vif and A3G
has twice the number of charged residues in comparison to
interface between A3G and inhibitor unbound Vif. The
charged residues may likely confer repulsive columbic forces
at the interfaces which perhaps may result in increase in gap
volumes in turn decreasing the interface areas.

Conclusion
Our interest was to analyze the inhibitory potentials of RN18
and VEC5 in inhibiting Vif and A3G interactions. In the
structural planes, we were able to comprehend the possible
rationale underlying the decline A3G-Vif interactions in
presence of inhibitors like RN18 and VEC5. Though our
interpretations were approached in silico, our study can be
complemented by in vitro studies for real time understanding
underlying the basis of A3G-Vif interactions.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Sinha et al, Bioinformation 10(10): 611-616 (2014)

Alignment between top 10 templates and Vif

A) Modeled structure of Vif; B) Predicted inhibitory site in Vif protein.

Interface residues (in ball and stick representation) between A3G (violet) and Vif (green) in A) A3G-Vif (unbound); B)
A3G-Vif (bound to RN18); C) A3G-Vif (bound to VEC5)

Electrostatic surfaces of Vif (Solid) and A3G (mesh) in A) A3G-Vif (unbound); B) A3G-Vif (bound to RN18); C) A3G-Vif
(bound to VEC5) interactions.

