Background
Ancient Indian medicinal science was based on the natural products of
plant origin. Recently, numerous bioactive compounds have been
isolated from plant sources and several of them are currently in clinical
trials. Plant-derived compounds have been a vital source of varied
clinically useful anti-cancer agents: Camptothecin derivatives [],
Topotecan and Irinotecan, Etoposide, derived from
Epipodophyllotoxin [], and Paclitaxel (taxol) []. Furthermore, other
potent molecules include Vinca alkolloids (Vinblastine, Vincristine)
[], Flavopiridol, a semi-synthetic analogue of the chromone alkaloid
and Rohitkine, a pyridoindole alkaloid derived from leaves of
Ochrosia species []. Presently, research on anticancer drug
development is largely dependent on exploring potential
phytochemicals. Indian sub-continent is rich in its diversity of flora,
being a tropical country with a large spread of rain forests and river
basins. It is floristically rich with about 33 percent of its botanical
wealth (over 15,000 species of higher plants) being endemic [].
Hence, analyzing this potential, InPACdb initiative is taken to expose
the potent anticancer phytochemicals of Indian Origin in international
arena.

Methodology
InPACdb's search engine is based on Google's proprietary search
technology which utilizes java scripting and custom indexing [];
making search comparatively faster and user friendly. The database
presently comprises a dataset of 144 compounds (Table 1 in ) which has been manually sorted from 990
compounds; 200 from National Cancer institute drug list and 690 from
Asian anticancer material databank and other 100 compounds from
other miscellaneous sources. The Cancer type, Molecular target and
Mechanism of action for each segregated compound were documented
from elsewhere []. The chemical descriptors and 3D structure for
each compound were calculated using Marvinsketch [] and
Chemsketch [], respectively. Finally, each compound's entry is
indexed via Google Custom Search for database information retrieval.
A detailed flowchart summarizing the methodology implemented is
shown in .

InPACdb features:
Ayurveda is an ancient Indian herbal medicine system and is followed 
till date for anticancer treatment. This medicinal system is also proven
to be at par with traditional Chinese Medicinal System. Currently,
there are numerous herbal databases that provide information on
herbal anticancer compounds: Traditional Chinese Medicine Database
System [], Asian Anticancer material database [] etc. These
databases largely concentrate on Chinese Traditional Medicine system
and are limited to data like taxonomical classification, pictures of
plants and SMILES notation of bioactive compounds. InPACdb is
unique in providing comprehensive information on phytochemicals of
Indian origin with anticancer activity via 32 descriptive fields;
encompassing the basic data like plant image, nomenclature etc. to
advanced data like stereochemical properties, chemical descriptors etc.
The customized search engine of this database enables wildcard
querying, which shall include SMILES string, Cancer type and names
of organs, Compounds and plants etc. Each entry in the database is
subdivided into 6 parts: General information, origin, target, structure
information, Computed Chemical Descriptors and Literature
references ().

The general information part of the database entry displays the
compound's unique InPACdb accession number, followed by its
nomenclature, 2D-structure image, compound type (Alkaloid,
Flavonoid, Phenolic etc), IUPAC name and an external link to the
compound’s PUBCHEM ID (if available). Origin section provides
detailed information about Indian plant origin from which the
compound is isolated. The Indian nomenclature of the plant is given
either in Sanskrit (if available) or general name in other Indian
languages, subsequently followed by its Binomial name and respective
plant's image. Target section gives information on the probable types
of cancers on which the compound can act upon, which were curated
based on peer-reviewed literature sources. Furthermore, the molecular
targets of the respective compounds are also provided along with its
bioactivity. Atomic coordinates of each compound entry is provided in
the form of PDB and MOL format in structure information section.
Moreover, additional information of the compounds like isomers
(Sterioisomers, Tautomers, Resonance) and conformers are also given
in SDF format, in addition to SMILES notation.

Properties Computed from the structure: this section of the database
provides various computed descriptors like Molecular Weight,
Molecular Formula, XLogP, H-Bond Donors, H-Bond Acceptors,
Refractivity, Rotatable Bond Count, Tautomer Count, atomic Mass,
Topological Polar Surface Area, Vander Waals surface area (3D) and
Complexity. Finally, reference section lists the citations relevant to the
anticancer activity of the respective compounds in the database.
Moreover, the multiple links to the citations are also provided (if
available).

Utility
The data presented in InPACdb can be effectively used for
Cheminformatics studies like QSAR analysis, pharmacophore search,
molecular docking etc. pertaining to anticancer drug discovery.
InPACdb also clearly portrays the potential role of google custom
search as a Biological information retrieval system.

Caveat and Future Developments
The database will be extended with more data on molecular
interactions, embedded interactive visualization tools and additional
chemical descriptors. The users are also welcome to contribute
relevant data to the database via email to authors. The dataset and web
interface InPACdb shall be upgraded periodically.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Vetrivel et al, Bioinformation 4(2): 71-74 (2009)

Flowchart showing the methodology implemented in database development

Showing an entry from InPACdb

