Background
Streptococcus mutans is now regarded as the principal microbiological 
aetiological agent of dental caries and a target of novel preventive 
strategies.  Beyond initial adherence, it appears that a variety of genes 
are required for the proper maturation of biofilms formed by S. mutans
and other oral streptococci. By  the use of specific- and randommutagenesis 
strategies, many different types of genes that are required 
for these organisms to transition from adherent microcolonies to 
complex, three-dimensional biofilms have been identified. These 
include those for intercellular communication systems and 
environmental sensing systems, components of the general stress 
response pathway involved in protein repair and turnover, global 
regulators of carbohydrate metabolism, and adhesion-promoting genes 
[].

Interestingly, many of the genes identified to affect biofilm formation 
affect the expression of a large panel of genes, many of which are 
either unidentified or have no known function  []. There are a large 
number of hypothetical proteins of as-yet-unknown function present in 
the annotated genome of  S. mutans 
(http://www.stdgen. lanl.gov/oragen). 
Among these proteins, there could be other unknown 
surface proteins that play an important role in adhesion and maturation 
of biofilms. Techniques like 2D protein analysis and microarray are 
now being used to screen out the expression of all genes involved in 
the formation of a biofilm  [,
]. An integrated approach to study 
protein-function relationship was also employed to study the variation 
in S. mutans genome [].

Chemical mutagenesis induces change in morphological and characteristic 
traits of S. mutans, had been demonstrated earlier by Murchison et al. 
[,
]. 
However, a deeper insight into the effect of EMS on the adherence and 
biofilm formation by S. mutans was lacking. The biofilm formation by S. 
mutans on saliva-coated surface is believed to be a multi-step process 
[]. 
The initial adherence of  S. mutans on the saliva-coated surface is mainly 
due to the interaction of its cell-surface adhesin with the salivary agglutinin 
[]. 
The later stages of biofilm formation are marked by active formation
of exopolysaccharides that mediate  the clumping and effective biofilm 
formation of S. mutans [].

The transition from planktonic phase to biofilm phase of  S. mutans is a 
resultant of many differential and altered genes  []. To explore this, we 
isolated the EMS-induced adherence defective mutants of  S. mutans and 
characterized them on their defects in biofilm formation. The protein 
profile of the mutants that show defective initial adherence and biofilm 
formation was then evaluated.

Methodology
Bacterial strains
The strain of  Streptococcus mutans UA159 (MTCC#497), was purchased 
from Microbial type culture collection (MTCC), Institute of Microbial 
Technology, Chandigarh.

Generation and isolation of mutants
Mutants from UA159 strain of S. mutans were generated by the method of 
Murchison et al. []. 
PCR amplification for was performed by the method 
of Yano et al. [] 
to confirm of S. mutans.

Glass-dependent adherence and initial adherence of S. mutans
Glass surface adherence assay was performed by the method of Hamada et 
al. with slight modifications [].  
For checking the adherence of S. mutans
on saliva-coated surface, human saliva from four healthy individuals was 
collected and clarified by the method of   Shellis et al. 
[]. Assessment of 
the adherence of bacteria to saliva coated surface was done on 96 well 
flatbottomed microtitre plate, using the protocol of Jakubovics  et al. with 
slight modifications [].

Confocal microscopy
The biofilms were developed on saliva-coated glass cover slips for 
comparison between parent strain and mutants. The 9-well microtitre plate 
with seeded saliva-coated cover slips, containing 10 ml of TSB with 0.25% 
sucrose was inoculated with 100 µl of mid-exponential grown cultures of 
parent strain and mutants BSM3,  BSM5 and BSM61 respectively. The 
cover slips were removed and noninvasive confocal analysis was 
performed as described elsewhere [].

Scanning electron microscopy
The cells were fixed with 25% SEM grade glutaraldehyde in PBS, pH 7.2 
for 15 minutes. Fixed samples were then dehydrated through a graded 
series of ethanol concentrations, mounted, and sputter coated with goldpalladium. 
Samples were analyzed by SEM (Hitachi S-3000 N; High 
Technology Operation, Japan) at several magnifications (×500 to ×13,000) 
at the EM core laboratory of JALMA, Agra

Isolation of total cellular proteins of Streptococcus mutans
Cells of  S. mutans UA159 and mutants BSM3, BSM5 and BSM61 were 
grown at 37°C in an anerobic environment up to an OD 600nm of 1.5. The 
washed cell pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer containing 5 M Urea, 
4% (w/v) CHAPS, 50 mM DTT and 0.5% (v/v) IPG buffer (pH 4-7) (GE 
healthcare, NJ, USA), and left on ice for 10 minutes with intermittent 
sonication. The cell lysate was centrifuged at 12,000 g for 10 minutes at 
4°C. The supernatant was collected and protein in it was measured by the 
method of Lowry et al. [].

Two-dimensional protein electrophoresis
The total protein isolated by the above described method was analyzed by 
2D electrophoresis using the method of O'Farrell  []. Gels were then 
silver stained, digitally scanned and analyzed using automated software 
Decodon Delta 2D version 3.6. The gel pictures of parent strain and 
mutants BSM3, BSM5 and BSM61 were loaded on the Delta 2D platform 
and warped for the 2D image analysis. The spot detection was done using 
the software and a synthetic fusion image was constructed of all the four 
images. The spots were transferred from the fusion image to the individual 
images and were then quantified [].

Statistical analysis
All the values were calculated as the mean of individual experiments in 
triplicate, compared with control groups. Comparison between the 
thickness of control and mutant  biofilms was done using SPSS 11.0.0 
statistical software using one-way ANOVA and posthoc tests (LSD); 
statistically significant tests were set at a P-value of &lt;0.05. Absorbance 
from adherence assays was evaluated for statistically significant 
differences using Student's unpaired two-sided t test (assuming unknown 
and unequal variances).

Discussion
The EMS-induced mutagenesis had earlier been done by Murchison et al.
[,
], 
for the isolation of adherence defective mutants of S. mutans. A
similar methodology was followed in this study and mutagenized cells
were subcultured four times for isolation of stable mutants, containing
chains of genotypically similar cells []. In our experiments, the survival
frequency after mutagenesis was 14% whereas Murchinson et al. 
[]
reported it to be 10%. Nearly 70% of the picked mutagenized cells showed
some amount of decrease in adherence to the glass surface. The S. mutans
cells showing nearly or more than 50% decrease in adherence to the glass
surface were selected for further characterization.

The salivary proteins act as a receptor of S. mutans as they carry the anchor
sites for the wall proteins of S. mutans 
[]. The initial adherence of
selected S. mutans mutant cells on the saliva-coated hydrophobic surface,
specifically polystyrene microtitre plates was examined for further
characterization of the mutants (see ).
40% of the isolated mutants showed more than 50% decrease in initial
adherence to saliva-coated polystyrene surface. The decrease in initial
adherence of these mutants implies a possible mutation in bacterial
proteins that interact with the saliva.

The interaction of S. mutans cells with saliva plays a key role in the
biofilm formation on the dental plaque []. The biofilm formation by S.
mutans on the saliva-coated surface was reduced in all the mutants (Table
3 see ). Also, the biofilm formation was found to
be least in the mutants showing the least initial adherence (BSM3) and
maximum in the mutants showing maximum initial adherence (BSM61).
This implies that the biofilm formation is dependent on the initial
adherence of the mutants.

The biofilm formation by S. mutans is a phase dependent process. The
time-dependent assay (see ) reveals that
the sucrose-independent adherence defective mutants show less biofilm
formation (61% of the control) even in the initial phase. The initial phase is
marked by initial adherence of the bacteria to the substratum, here salivacoated
polystyrene plate (8). However, the sucrose-dependent adherence
defective mutants show just 1.5% inhibition at initial phase while showing
a distinct inhibition at the multiplication (40%) and maturation (42%)
phase of biofilm formation. The later stages of biofilm are marked by the
synthesis of exopolysaccharide (glucan). The time-dependent analysis of
biofilm formation thus implies that sucrose-independent mutants are
altered at the stage of saliva-bacteria interaction. However, sucrosedependent
mutants showed an alteration in glucan mediated adherence of
the cells for the biofilm formation.

The thickness and the architecture of the biofilm of some sucroseindependent
mutants were studied by confocal microscopy. Quantitative
estimations show that amongst the mutants BSM3 showed the least biofilm
formation while BSM61 showed the maximum biofilm formation 
(see ). BSM5 also showed stable and relatively
more adherence defective character; hence we selected these three sucroseindependent
adherence defective mutants for Confocal Microscopic
analysis. The micrographs suggest that the biofilm formed by the parent
strain covered a larger surface area and had a definite architecture 
(). However, the biofilms formed by the mutants showed more or less
spread cells with no distinct pattern of arrangement. The biofilm formed
by BSM61 showed more clumped and aggregated cells than mutants
BSM3 and BSM5. The thickness of the biofilm was also found to be more
for BSM61 than mutants BSM3 and BSM5, possibly due to more clumping
and aggregation of the bacteria. Thus the confocal microscopic revelations
go well in agreement with the quantitative estimations of biofilms.

The scanning electron microscopy also showed that the biofilms formed by
the parent strain have aggregated and clumped bacteria with a cloud of
exopolysaccharide surrounding the cells. The apparent biofilm formed by
mutant BSM3 has very few cells individually scattered along the surface.
The cells were arranged in short chains with absence of exopolysaccharide
matrix. The biofilm formed by the mutant BSM61 was very much patchy.
The aggregates of cell clumps were separated by large voids, indicating
that original biofilm forming ability as of the parent strain was disrupted to
some extent by mutation ().

The two-dimensional protein electrophoresis of total protein from parent
strain and mutants BSM3, BSM5 and BSM61 was carried out to compare
the expression of total proteins. The protein profile of parent strain was
called as group1 while the protein profile of mutants BSM3, BSM5 and
BSM61 was collectively called as group 2. The ratio of group 2 to group 1
was used to identify the differentially expressed proteins between the
parent strain and the mutants. The proteins were identified on the basis of
their MW and pI data obtained from 

www.stdgen.lanl.gov/oralgen/bacteria/smut/. 
(Table 1 see ).
shows the identification of proteins that are at least five-fold over- or
under-expressed in the parent strain and the mutants. The number of these
proteins was 57 whereas the total identified spots were 401. Of these 57
proteins, 13 are expressed more in parent strain than in the mutants. 10
amongst 13 of these proteins could not be identified. Rex A which
modulates transcription in response to changes in cellular NADH/NAD(+)
redox state is expressed 5.5 folds more in parent strain while amongst
group 2, it is more expressed in BSM 61 and least in BSM 3. Two other
under expressed proteins in group 2 are ribonucleotide reductase and a
conserved hypothetical protein (Table 1 see ).

 
shows that 44 proteins are expressed more in group 2 than in
group1. Apart from the 3 unidentified proteins, most of these proteins are
associated with basic metabolism that takes place in the cell. This can be
accounted as the planktonic cells have more active metabolism than the
biofilm cells. Heat shock protein Dna K (spot id 26) was expressed 6.65
fold more in the mutants than in the parent strain. An up regulation of Dna
K by 5.6 folds after radiation had also been reported earlier 
[]. Rec A
shows a 9.74 folds up regulation in the mutants while it shows 2 fold up
regulation after radiation []. It might be due to the exposure of cells to
chemical mutagen results in constitutive over expression of heat shock
protein and Rec A. These proteins are also over expressed in biofilm phase,
salt and oxidation stress []. 11 proteins are identified to show quite low
expression in the parent strain (mean percent volume nearly 0). Cap A, a
membrane associated protein, possibly a capsule biosynthesis protein
shows a high expression in mutants but insignificant expression in parent
strain.

Conclusion
We describe the concerted involvement of several proteins in the formation
of Streptococcus mutans biofilm. These mutants show low ex-pression of
cell surface adhesion proteins. Some of the differentially expressed
proteins are basic metabolic proteins, redox proteins and heat shock
proteins.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors would like to thank Dr. Shahid Jameel for providing us the
2D-protein gel facility at ICGEB, India. This work was supported from the
DST grant 100/IFD/5160/2007-2008 to AUK. BI, SNK and MA
acknowledge SRF from CSIR, India.

Citation:Khan et al, Bioinformation 5(10): 440-445 (2011)

Confocal Laser Scanning microscopy of the parent strain and the sucrose independent mutants; top left panel is control (wild type), top right
panel is BSM3 (mutant), bottom left panel is BSM5 (mutant), bottom right panel is BSM61 (mutant). All mutant are showing scattered pattern of cells as
compared with wild type.

Scanning electron micrographs (4000X) of parent strain and sucrose independent mutants of S. mutans; top left panel is control cell (wild type)
with strong biofilm, top right panel is biofilm mutant cells (BSM3), bottom left panel is again biofilm defective mutant (BSM61); these mutant showing
reduced biofilm.

