Background
Methylotrophic bacteria are a diverse group of organisms that
possess a great number of specialized enzymes that enable
them to grow on reduced carbon substrates without carbon–
carbon bonds and use these as energy as well as a carbon
source. They play an important role in biogeochemical cycling
and possess a potential for use in bioremediation 
[]. The
members of Methylobacterium have a property to oxidize
methanol due to the presence of methanol dehydrogenase
(MDH), a pyrroloquinoline quinone (PQQ)-linked protein with
an α2β2 tetramer structure [], known as Methylotrophy, a
capacity to aerobically utilize single carbon (C1) compounds as
a sole source of carbon and energy by a bacterial metabolic
pathway used to assimilate carbon or retrieve energy 
[]. Until
recently, the ability to oxidize methanol by gram-negative
bacteria has been attributed almost exclusively to the MDH
enzyme encoded by mxaF1. The study of amino acid sequences
of mxaF protein show that several key amino acids that are
required for the MDH enzyme activity are located in the
deduced MxaF peptide []. The mxaF genes are well conserved
among different classes of proteobacteria (alpha, beta, and
gamma) in terms of both gene clustering and protein sequence
identity [,
], suggesting a monophyletic origin for the mxa
(mox) encoded methanol oxidation machinery. Based on its
conservation, mxaF has served as a genetic marker for
environmental detection of Methylotrophy []. Protein
structure prediction is one of most intensely studied subjects in
modern computational biology. It could be achieved at both the
secondary structure level and the three-dimensional level.
These are intimately related to each other. The accuracy of
secondary structure prediction has increased gradually over the
years as we gain a better understanding of the principles of
sequence-structure relationships and the effect of evolution on
the proteomes of organisms []. But the prediction of the threedimensional
structure of a protein from its amino acid sequence
is a challenge that has fascinated researchers in different
disciplines for many years.Because Proteins play a key role in
almost all biological process like maintaining the structural
integrity of the cell, transport and storage of small molecules,
catalysis, regulation, signaling and the immune system. Their 3-
D structure and functional properties depend intricately upon
their structure. As a result there has been much effort, both
experimental and computational, in determining protein
structures.

Due to the high impact of mxaF protein, it is necessary to
extract structural information from sequences, has become
increasingly important for bioinformatics research. So a
detailed structural analysis of mxaF, a large subunit of
methanol dehydrogenase protein has yet to be reported. In this
study it was achieved by homology modeling. A comparative
and detailed structural analysis of methanol dehydrogenase
protein was assessed among facultative, restricted facultative
and obligate methylotroph strains. The 3-D structure of
methanol dehydrogenase was developed for three
methylotrophic strains follow Serine pathway for
methylotrophic metabolism and was compared.

Methodology
The amino acid sequence of MxaF protein of three different
types of methylobacteria was retrieved from the NCBI database
(CAI30806, CAA69318 and AAR88789) []. The interrogatory
sequences from mxaF of methylotrophs were skim to find out
the related protein structure to be used as a template by the
BLAST program [] against Protein Data Bank database.

Primary structural analysis:
Expasy's ProtParam server [], has been applied for study of
physiochemical characterization like theoretical isoelectric
point (pI), molecular weight, molecular formula, total number
of positive and negative residues, instability index 
[],
extinction coefficient [], aliphatic index 
[] and grand
average hydropathy (GRAVY) []. The sulphide (S-S) bond
pattern is predicted by using the tool CYS_REC []. The
predicted results were shown in  (see supplementary
material).

Secondary structural analysis:
For the enumeration of the secondary structural features of
MxaF protein sequences, PSIPRED view [], a new highly
accurate secondary structure prediction method was employed.
PSIPRED incorporates two feed-forward neural networks
which perform an analysis on output obtained from PSI-BLAST
(position specific Iterated BLAST) []. Results are shown in
 (see supplementary material).

Homology modeling, Structure refinement and identification of functional site:
3-D model of MxaF protein sequence of three different
methylobacterium was generated by I-TASSER, a web based
server. Further the models were evaluated by VARIFY 3D 
[],
Profile 3D [] and Errat 
[], to check the correctness of the
overall fold/structure, errors over localized regions and
stereochemical parameters such as bond lengths and angles.
Visualization and protein contact map of target proteins were
carried out by Accelry's Discovery Studio software. Structural
validation of target proteins model were done by PROCHECK
which determine stereochemical aspects along with main chain
and side chain parameters with comprehensive analysis. The
shows that various The MxaF residues falling under allowed,
favoured and in disallowed regions was predicted by
Ramachandran plot perform by PROCHECK []. Structure
based protein functional site of mxaF of three methylotrophs
were predicted by Q-site Finder [].

Discussion
The primary structure of MxaF protein of Methylosinus
trichosporium, Hyphomicrobium zavarzinii and Methylobacterium
podarium was speculated and compared  (see
supplementary material). The computed isoelectric point (pI)
for the computed pI value of all three strains are 5.13, 5.78 and
5.46 and is less than 7 (pI&lt;7), reveals the acidic nature of
protein []. Total predicted negative residues of mxaF protein
are more in comparison to positive residues. These results also
supported the acidic nature of target proteins of above
Methylotrophic strains. Among those Methylotrophic strains,
the extinction coefficient of H. zavarzinii is high, that indicates
the presence of high concentration of Cys, Trp and Tyr which
helps in the quantitative study of protein-protein and proteinlegend
interactions in solution. The sulphide (S-S) bonding
pattern has been shown that the M. tricosporium and H.
zavarzinni have two cystein at position 145, 174 but M. podarium
have three cystein at position 3, 146, 175.

These results unveil that the mxaF protein residue of these
methylotrophs has high enthalpy at folded state because
disulphide bond increase the enthalpy of the folded state by
stabilizing local interaction []. The thermal stability of mxaF
protein was determined by Instability Index. The predicted
Instability index of mxaF of target strains were 16.74, 22.65 and
27.18 reveals that mxaF protein is thermostable because
Instability index of a protein smaller than 40 make it stable
while more than 40 make it unstable []. The mxaF protein of
above strain are stable at wide range of temperature due to the
Higher aliphatic index (51.73, 51.73 57.62) since higher AI
indicate increased stability while lower AI indicate increased
flexibility in the protein structure []. GRAVY (Grand average
hydropathy) value of mxaF protein is -0.812, -0.970 and -0.728
expresses the hydrophilicity of protein of target strains due to
their lower value because lower value indicates possible better
interaction with water. The GRAVY value of H. zavarzinii was
lower (-0.970) in comparison to other strains, indicates the
better solubility of mxaF protein.

Most algorithms for protein secondary structure prediction
currently in use are based on machine learning techniques in
which PSIPRED view has been shown to be capable of
achieving an average Q3 score of 76.5%, a highest level of
accuracy published for any method to date []. The secondary
structure of mxaF proteins of target methylotrophs were
predicted and analyzed by PSIPRED view and were shown in
 (see supplementary material). The results were
expressed that all the residues lies under the strands and coil
and have only little differences among them. There is no alpha
helix found in the predicted structure. It reveals the unfavored
structural property of protein in non-polar solvent. These
results also can help in experimental verification of a predicted
folding motif because it may be gained by measurements of
protein secondary structural elements of which the motif is
composed [].

Three dimensional structure of mxaF protein of three
methylotrophic strains were predicted and compared. The
comparative protein structure analysis for methylotrophs is still
untouched and unavailable. The tertiary structure prediction
was performed by I-TASSER server by using the best align
template (4aahA). The template was selected to analyze 3-D
structure because a high level of sequence identity should
guarantee a more accurate alignment between the target
sequence and template structure []. Out of five generated
similar models of the target sequence, the best one have been
chosen to employing the criteria of good alignment with
template, C-Score, TM score and RMSD values  (see
supplementary material). The developed 3-D model of mxaF
protein of methylotrophs was deposited to the PMDB database
and their PMDB accession number is given in . The
Predicted models were visualized through Accelry's Discovery
Studio visualize 2.5 (). The generated contact map of
mxaF protein of methylotrophs explains the reduced
representation of the target structure that helps in to the
superimposition and similarity with other protein. The quality
of predicted structures of mxaF were further assessed and
confirmed by VARIFY 3D [] Profile 3D 
[] and Errat 
[].
The scores (from -1 to +1) were added and plotted for
individual residues. The residues falling in the area where the
orange line crosses 0.0 have low prediction accuracy and less
stable conformation whereas, most of the residues fall above
0.15-0.4 so we can say that the model is of good quality. The
stereochemical quality and accuracy of the predicted model of
mxaF were evaluated after the refinement process using
Ramachandran Map calculation with the PROCHECK program
[]. The Ramachandran plot has been shown a tight clustering
of phi~ -50 and psi~ -50. In the plot analysis, the residues were
classified according to its regions in the quadrangle. The red
regions in the graph point out the most allowed regions
whereas the yellow regions represent allowed regions. Glycine
is restrained by triangles and other residues are represented by
squares.

The analysis report of Ramachandran plot concluding phi and
psi angles to contribute in conformation of amino acids
excluding glycine and proline. PROCHECK analysis of mxaF
protein reveals in Ramachandran plot concluding phi and psi
angles to contribute in conformation of amino acids excluding
glycine and proline with 85.3%, 83.2%, 85.7% residue in most
favoured region, 11.3%, 15.4%, 12.3% (16 amino acid) in
additional allowed region, 2.7%, 1.3%, 1.9% generously allowed
region and 0.7%, 0.0%, 0.0% residue in disallowed region in M.
trichosporium, H. zavarzinii and M. podarium respectively.Q-Site
Finder server was employed for the prediction of functional
sites in the modeled mxaF proteins. Server were detected the
11, 13 and 14 putative functional site residues with significant
matches in the modeled protein of H. zarzvinni, M. podarium and
M. trichosporium respectively. The putative residues are given in
 (see supplementary material), which could be
important for protein interactions and/or activity of mxaF. The
predicted 3-D structures of the target methylotrophs have been
shown good stereochemistry among the strains, indicating
reasonable good quality. The Overall 3-D structure of mxaF is
well conserved among the methylotrophs who differ at the
level of their nutrition.

Conclusion
Precise evaluation and modeling of proteins is a major goals
and key aspect of computational Biology. The methylotrophs
play a vital role in biogeochemical cycling and have potentiality
for use in bioremediation due to the mxaF a major sub-unite of
MDH protein. So the structural exploration and 3-D model was
generated for the first time of three different methylotrophs
which varying at nutrition level. It offers an alternative way to
obtain structural information well before the structure of the
new protein is determined by X-ray crystallography or NMR.
Physicochemical and functional studies performed for
characterization of mxaF in reaching conclusions about the
biochemistry and biological function of the modeled protein.
Structure prediction and functional analysis of mxaF will give
an insight to the location of these proteins along with site of
utilization of methanol. The present study would aid in
detailed molecular mechanism of biostimulation of
contaminant biodegradation and biotransformation through
mxaF protein of methylotrophs.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Singh et al, Bioinformation 8(21): 1042-1046 (2012)

(A Hyphomicrobium zavarzinii; (B Methylobacterium
podarium; (C Methylosinus trichosporium

