Background
CD36 gene encodes a membrane glycoprotein, and has been
identified in wide variety cells types, including platelets,
monocytes, and erythroblast, capillary endothelial and
mammary epithelial cells [–
]. CD36 (also known as platelet
glycoprotein IV or IIIb) is also a membrane glycoprotein highly
expressed in heart tissue. It was shown that CD36 works as
receptor/transporter of long chain fatty acids (FA) in muscle
tissue and is proposed as one of thrombospondine receptor in
endothelial cells []. CD36-KO mice (with no expression of
CD36 gene) exhibits defective FA uptake by the heart, which is
paralleled by an increase in the heart/body index and by an
enlargement of left ventricular space []. Two sets of studies
were done to identify a comprehensive set of genes that are
differentially regulated by CD36 expression in the heart. In
2002 and 2007, we used respectively the Affymetrix and the
Agilent technologies to analyze CD36 involvement in the fatty
acids uptake and heart hypertrophy [,
–, 
]. We propose to
compare results obtained from the two microarrays
technologies and investigate the consequences of CD36 absence
on CD36-KO hearts. In this paper, we will describe the
methodology used to identify the differentially expressed genes
using the Affymetrix and the Agilent technologies. In the
second section, we will use the classification results to
determine the gene clusters. Finally, these classifications will be
used to annotate the functional class of each cluster and
characterize the molecular pathways involved in the
myocardial phenotype of KO-CD36 mice.

Methodology
Data analysis:
In order To search for differentially regulated gene networks in
the absence of CD36 gene, we performed a comprehensive gene
analysis by hybridizing microarray chips with RNA probes
prepared from mouse heart CD36-KO and CD36-WT. Two
technologies were used. The Affymetrix GeneChip Murine
Genome U74 which contains 36.000 probes (Affymetrix, Santa
Clara, CA). Once the probe array had been hybridized, stained,
and washed, it was scanned using a GeneArray scanner. A
GeneChip Operating System, running on a PC workstation was
used to control the functions of the scanner and collect
fluorescent intensity data. The second approach used was the
Whole Mouse Genome Microarray 4x44K (Agilent
Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). Arrays were washed and dried
out using a centrifuge according to manufacturer's instructions
(One-Color Microarray-Based Gene Expression Analysis,
Agilent Technologies). Arrays were scanned at 5 mm resolution
on an Agilent DNA Microarray Scanner (GenePix 4000B,
Agilent Technologies) using the default settings for 4x44k
format one-color arrays. Images provided by the scanner were
analyzed using Feature Extraction software v10.1.1.1 (Agilent
Technologies). Raw data files were analyzed using the software
R associated to packages of “Bioconductor” project 
[].
Developed affymetrix workflows begin with data
normalization using Robust Multichip Average Method (RMA)
[], which allows reduction of block effect done at the probset
level. The second step consisted in selecting differentially
expressed genes between CD36-WT' and CD36-KO using the
Significance Analysis of Microarrays (SAM) algorithm 
[] with
the Fold Change and P-value Cutoffs respectively fixed to at 1.5
and 0.002. Agilent workflow begins with data normalization by
using Lowess normalization [] that applied to a two-color
array expression dataset. The second step, as in the case of
Affymetrix, SAM algorithm was used to identify differentially
expressed genes with the same FC and P-value cuttoffs. Class
discovery analyzed a given set of genes to produce subgroups
that share common features. An analysis method often used for
class discovery is “cluster analysis” or clustering. It is aimed at
dividing the data points (genes or samples) into groups
(clusters) using measures of similarity [,
] creating
hierarchical clustering of co-regulated genes

Identification of differentially expressed genes:
Using Affymetrix technology, we were able to identify 39
differentially expressed genes between CD36-KO and CD36-
WT and when using the Agilent technology with the same
parameters, we identified 35 differentially expressed genes. The
comparison of the two lists of identified genes showed that 30
of them were common to the two technologies. Differentially
expressed genes were clustered by hierarchical clustering
(). This type of classification and class discovery
involves analyzing a given set of gene expression profiles with
the goal of discovering subgroups that share common features.

Functional Analysis:
After establishing a differentially expressed gene list common
to the two technologies (Affymetrix and Agilent), functional
annotation allowed the determination of each gene function in
the list. Functional classes were extracted using Gene Ontology
tools. Associations, biochemical pathway data were retrieved
from the Gene Ontology consortium (GO) [,
], Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) []. Gene sets
were arranged and associated with different functional
categories. Integrated expression data and evolutionary
conservation of proteins were used to predict interacting
proteins, protein complexes and proteins functions 
[,
,
].
 (See supplementary material) showed the first
classification leading to the identification of three gene
categories: a gene group involved in metabolism, another
group involved in the Angiogenesis  (see
supplementary material) and a third one implicated in cellular
remodeling  (see supplementary material) (structural
genes).

The results appear to be consistent with the role of the CD36
protein in cardiac muscle cells. The identification of the
metabolism genes could be explained by the role of CD36 as a
receptor / transporter for long-chain fatty acids in heart cells
[]. 
Indeed, Randle et al. [] showed that fatty acids are the
main energy source for the heart and have brought to light
from in vitro experiments that long chain fatty acids is
preferentially metabolized. He also demonstrated the existence
of competition between glucose and fatty acids as heart fuel
[]. Moreover, Dyck et al. showed that CD36 plays an
important role in the choice of substrate in the heart 
[]. In the
CD36-KO hearts, the shift to glucose substrate since less FA is
available led to the expression and down regulation of genes
involved in both metabolisms. Secondly, in endothelial heart
cells; CD36 has been described as a thrombospondin membrane
receptor (TSP-1) and plays a role in the inhibition of endothelial
cell migration and apoptosis induction. The absence of CD36
led to down regulation of the expression of its ligand (Tsp1)
and the expression of new signaling genes. Finally and in order
for CD36-KO to go through heart hypertrophy, a set of
remodeling genes is expressed and can be grouped into the
category of structural genes as shown in .

Discussion
In this study, we compared results obtained from two
technologies using the same analysis workflow. We first
evaluated variance among replicates within each of the
platforms and found low levels of variance and high correlation
among the two platforms eventhough the two technologies
were used at different labs and time. Agilent oligonucleotide
technology was used in 2007 at Georges Washington University
(SL, MO) and the Affymetrix U74Av2 technology was used in
2002 at Stony Brook University (Stony Brook, NY). Using SAM,
we were not able to find any significant differences among the
two platforms looking at their ability to detect differential gene
expression between WT-CD36 and KO-CD36. Technological
differences may influence the results of transcriptional profiling
and are important to consider while using published results.
However, and based on our study and given high-quality
arrays and the appropriate normalization, the primary factor
determining variance is biological rather than technological.
The biological conditions of the two experiments could explain
the small diffrences in the obtained results. Questions remain
regarding the importance of technology choice in evaluating
the data generated and comparing among experiments from
different laboratories. One of the objective of this comparative
study was to elucidate whether gene expression profiles are
more influenced by biology or by technological artifacts.
Eventhough, the two platforms are based on two distinct
manufacturing technologies; a two-color cDNA spotted arrays
(Agilent) and in situ synthesized oligonucleotide chips
(Affymetrix), our results showed comparable results.

Conclusion
Our comparative study led to the validation of a data analysis
workflow and the identification of, at least, 30 genes involved
in the phenotype of CD36 heart hypertrophy. More biological
studies are needed to validate the expression of the identified
genes using the qRT-PCR. These studies will be complemented
with a modeling project based on constructing a bioinformatic
platform. It will be reproducing the behavior dynamic of the
system under normal conditions and automatically predicting
the involvement of different gene networks in the development
of pathologies such as cardiomyopathy related to the absence of
CD36 protein.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work was carried out under intramural funding from the
Stony Brook University and Mohammed the Vth Souissi
University to AI. We acknowledge support from Volubilis
(French-Moroccan Grant) to AI, BV &amp; AM. This work was also
supported by a grant from the NIH for H3Africa BioNet to AI
&amp; AM. We would like to thank Microarrays facilities in Stony
Brook and George Washington Universities for conducting the
arrays hybridization experiments.

Citation:Sabouni et al, Bioinformation 9(17): 849-852 (2013)

Hierarchical clustering of selected genes: A)
Hierarchical clustering using selected genes from Affymetrix
Technology; B) Hierarchical clustering using selected genes
from Agilent Technology

