Background
Simple sequence repeats (SSRs) or microsatellites are tandemly repeated tracts 
consisting of 1-6 base pair (bp) long units [,
]. Comprehensive analysis of 
SSRs in 8619 pre-miRNAs indicates SSRs are widely present in these very 
small non-coding RNA sequences []. It has been demonstrated that SSRs can 
affect gene expression and the corresponding gene products and even cause 
phenotypic changes or diseases [,
]. Correspondingly, computational tools 
for detection of SSRs and their related information from whole genome 
sequences are increasing as well []. The growing number of analytical tools 
for SSRs has greatly assisted the understanding of SSRs at the genome-wide 
level. Our examination of the available tools reveals certain faults. In order to 
efficiently screen viral genome sequences for SSRs, we have developed a new 
tool called MfSAT.

Methodology
Consider a sequence or multiple sequences over a finite alphabet {(a, t, g, c) or 
(a, u, g, c)}. A tract at a given locus will be defined as a microsatellite if that 
tract can be expressed as a tandem repeat of a motif of 1−6 bp size 
[]. Our 
goal is to efficiently detect SSRs in a sequence or multiple sequences given an 
arbitrary motif size or minimum repeat number. The proposed algorithm has 
two parameters, maximum motif and minimum repeat number which are 
independent. When you run according to the first parameter, the minimum 
number is three, whereas if you run by use of another parameter, the maximum 
motif is “hexa”. If users select the “HexaÆmono” tag, MfSAT progressively 
scans for nucleation sites starting from hexanucleotide repeat to 
mononucleotide repeat at a given locus. If no hexanucleotide repeat tract is 
detected, then pentanucleotide repeat nucleation site will be searched for and so 
on. This algorithm is the same with IMEx [,
]. However, if users select 
another tag, “MonoÆhexa”, in contrast to above step, in this section we 
assume the algorithm advances the shortest repeats. Given a candidate 
trinucleotide repeat motif k and its starting position j together with the starting 
position d of coding sequence of analyzed genome sequences, the verification 
formula determines whether an SSR is a codon repeat. The formula is as 
follows: 
S = (j-d)/3 (1) 
If S is an integer, the trinucleotide repeat is a codon repeats. It remains to judge 
what its corresponding amino acid is.

Software Requirements
MfSAT can be used in any computer with windows system

Input
MfSAT uses a advanced and power algorithm ‘regular expressions’ to screen 
one or multiple viral DNA/RNA sequences in fast format for SSRs and reports 
the motif, repeat number, genomic location, abundance of each of six classes 
SSRs and many other features useful for SSRs’ studies.

Output
We have developed a new tool that can be successfully used to identify SSRs in 
viral genomes consisting of viral DNA or RNA sequences for escaping 
statistical troubles. Judging according to its performance, MfSAT is a definite 
advance compared to other available tools. A stand-alone software with several 
videos is available online at http://hudacm11.mysinamail.com/hunan.html. This 
tool is also available from authors Zhongyang Tan and Guangming Zeng on 
request (zhongyang@hnu.cn; zgming@hnu.cn). The output is composed of 
three parts: the first part consists of a list of SSRs, each with information such 
as repeat motif content, repeat number, starting position, end position, SSR 
length; the second part is the numbers of proportions of each of the six classes 
of SSRs (mono-, di-, tri-, tetra-, penta- and hexanucleotide repeats); the third 
part comprises the numbers of poly(A), poly (T/U), poly(G), poly(C), and 12 
classes of dinucleotide repeats including AG, GA, GT (GU), TG (UG), AC, 
CA, CT (CU), TC (UC), AT (AU), TA (UA), GC and CG repeats. It is clear 
from the results that MfSAT is more attractive in terms of consideration. 
 shows the software interface and output results of MfSAT. 

Future Work
Development of a linux version of MfSAT is in process.

The authors sincerely thank Editor and anonymous reviewer for suggestions on 
improving the paper. The study was ﬁnancially supported by Production, 
Education and Research guiding project, Guangdong Province 
(2010B090400439), Great program for GMO, Ministry of Agriculture of the 
people Republic of China (2009ZX08015-003A), the National Natural Science 
Foundation of China (No. 50608029, No.50978088, No. 50808073, 
No.51039001), Hunan Provincial Innovation Foundation for Postgraduate, the 
National Basic Research Program (973 Program) (No. 2005CB724203), 
Program for Changjiang Scholars and Innovative Research Team in University
(IRT0719), the Hunan Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China 
(10JJ7005), the Hunan Key Scientific Research Project (2009FJ1010), and 
Hunan Provincial Innovation Foundation For Postgraduate (CX2010B157).

Citation:Chen et al, Bioinformation 6(4): 171-172 (2011)

Software Interface and Output Results of MfSAT.

