Background
RNA-seq is a revolutionary tool for transcriptomics  
[]. This 
high-throughput sequencing technology quickly becomes 
valuable for many functional genomics applications such as 
digital gene expression (DGE) study. Typically, RNA-Seq reads 
are classified based on their mapping to a common region of the 
target genome such as exon or transcript. One of the 
fundamental data analysis tasks for RNA-seq studies is to 
determine whether there is evidence that read counts for a 
transcript or gene are significantly different across experimental 
conditions. At present, there are three major algorithms to 
address this problem. EdgeR is designed for the analysis of 
replicated count-based expression data and is an 
implementation of methodology developed by Robinson and 
Smyth  []. DESeq is similar to edgeR. Both assume negative 
binomial distribution model.  The difference between the two 
methods lies on their estimation of the squared coefficient of 
variation (SCV)  []. Recently, Hardcastle and Kelly developed 
bayseq, which assumes a negative binomial distribution for the 
data and derives an empirically determined prior distribution 
from the entire dataset  []. 
DEB is a web interface () 
that integrates the three algorithms into one place. The user can 
select any or all of the algorithms for data analysis. In case more 
than one algorithm is selected, the shared genes among the 
algorithms are generated.

Implementation
DEB was developed using HTML, PHP, Perl scripting 
language, R programing language and MYSQL as the database 
backend. The pipeline book-keeps users' input information, 
initiates job-running process, updates job status, delivers the 
final results and deletes the results after 48 hours. DEB has been 
tested on the following browsers, Firefox 4.0, IE 8.0, Chrome 
12.0, Safari 5.0 and Opera 11.5

Software Input
The input to DEB is a tab-delimited count data file. The format 
of the input file is as follows: 1) The leftmost column must be 
the gene list, the rest columns are count data; 2) The first row 
(header) contains sample names. The samples are categorized to 
two groups, e.g. patient and control; 3) Sample names within 
one group are differentiated only by the last suffix, e.g. T1, T2, 
T3. A demo input file is provided for illustration and test 
purpose. The user can select one of the following False
Discovery Rate (FDR) level, i.e. 1%, 5%, 
10%, 15% and 20%. The 
default value is 10%. The user can also select any one, two or all 
of the algorithms provided, i.e. edgeR, DESeq and baySeq. The 
default is all the three algorithms.  It is required that an email 
address is provided so that the final result is conveniently 
delivered to the user in case the computation takes long time to 
complete. 

Software output
For each algorithm selected, the final result generates a list of 
genes that are significantly expressed under the user-selected 
FDR level. If more than two algorithms are selected, the shared 
gene lists among all the results of the selected algorithms, are 
also provided. For users’ convenience, the gene list files are 
made in different formats, such as text, excel and html. In 
addition to the data files, smear plots () of significantly 
expressed genes are also generated for the user to download. 
We tested the software with the demo file that contains 25,668 
genes and a selection of all three algorithms. The total time 
response is about three minutes.

Conclusion
DEB is a convenient web tool to identify significantly expressed 
genes for RNA-seq data analysis using edgeR, DESeq and 
baySeq algorithms.

Caveat and future development
Currently, the program can only accept count data which is 
generated by users using other bioinformatics tools. It is our 
plan to develop a pipeline so that the user can submit the raw 
sequencing data files to the server. The server can automate 
cleaning, mapping and counting processes to generate the count 
file.

Citation:Yao &amp; Yu, Bioinformation 7(1): 44-45 (2011)

The DEB web-interface.

The edgeR smear plot showing significantly expressed 
genes (red) 

