Background
Protein tyrosine phosphatases 1B (PTP1B) is a non-receptor
phospho-tyrosine protein phosphatase, which is considered as a
major negative regulator of both insulin- and leptin- simulated
signal transduction [,
]. Previous studies have revealed that
the lack of PTP1B can enhance insulin sensitivity, improve
glycaemic control, and resist to high fat diet-induced obesity 
[,
].
Besides, using PTP1B antisense oligonucleotides to treat
diabetic mice could reduce the PTP1B expression level, and
subsequently normalize blood glucose, finally improving
insulin sensitivity [,
]. It is suggested that PTP1B inhibitors
may enhance insulin and leptin sensitivity and act as effective
therapeutics for type II diabetes, insulin resistance, as well as
obesity. Therefore, PTP1B has been a potential drug target for
type II diabetes and obesity []. Considering the importance of
PTP1B in type II diabetes and obesity the development of
PTP1B inhibitors began in early 1990 and continues today 
[,
].
In an effort to develop a small, potent and selective PTP1B
inhibitor, we used iterative structure based drug design to
identify and optimize lead molecule entity. In the present study,
we identified novel classes of PTP1B inhibitors by means of a
structure-based drug design protocol involving virtual
screening with docking. 523,366 molecules from ZINC database
have been screened and based on DOCK grid scores five new
inhibitors were identified. The identified molecules were
subjected for ADME/T analysis.

Methodology
The docking library for PTP1B comprising about 523,366
molecules was constructed from the latest version of the ZINC
database provided by Shoichet Laboratory, Department of
Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of California, San
Francisco (UCSF) [].

Virtual screening of PTP1B inhibitors:
The 3-D coordinates in the X-ray crystal structure of PTP1B
complexed with a 1, 2, 3, 4- Tetrahydroisoquinolinyl sulfamic
acids inhibitor (PDB code: 2F71) [] were selected as the
receptor model in the virtual screening. After removing the
ligand and solvent molecules, hydrogen atoms were added to
each protein atom. We used the UCSF DOCK 6.2 program 
[]
in the virtual screening of PTP1B inhibitors. Residues within a
radius of 4 Å around the center of the 1,2,3,4-
Tetrahydroisoquinolinyl sulfamic acid binding in the PTP1B
structure were defined as the active site to construct a grid for
the virtual screening. The position and conformation of each
molecule were minimized by the anchor fragment orientation
as well as by the torsion minimization method implemented in
the DOCK 6.2 program []. Hundred conformations and a
maximum of 100 anchor orientations for each molecule were
generated, and the binding energy of all the docked
conformations were minimized by 100 iterations using the
standard approach as described [].

ADME/T evaluation:
Pharmacokinetics is a term used in the pharmacology which
gives idea about Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism and
Excretion/Toxicity (ADME/T) of a drug molecule. It has found
that more than 50% drugs are fail during clinical trial due to
their weak ADME properties []. Recent advancements in
Computational studies and the overall drug discovery process
have rapidly generated large numbers of potential
pharmacologically active compounds waiting for optimization
and pre-clinical ADMET evaluation. Thus before clinical trail
ADME and toxicity property must be tested. For this analysis
we have used Pharma-algorithm server 
http://pharmaalgorithms.com/webboxes/ []. The Lipinski's rule of five
parameters was obtained by using the Molinspiration program
[].

Results and Discussion
Virtual screening:
In the first step of research, the 1, 2, 3, 4-
Tetrahydroisoquinolinyl sulfamic acids inhibitor, was docked
with PTP1B using Dock 6.2, and the complex was analyzed for
the putative functional amino acid residues that are involved in
hydrogen bonding. The obtained complex results are
summarized in  (see supplementary material) &amp; 

It was observed that, eight residues (ARG'24, ARG'254,
TYR'20, ASP'181, ARG'221, ALA'217, GLY'220, and ILE'219)
form eleven hydrogen bonds were formed with the inhibitor.
This particular binding site was utilized for Virtual Screening of
molecules from the Zinc database. As a result, 88 lead
molecules were identified that had better DOCK grid scores
than 1,2,3,4-Tetrahydroisoquinolinyl sulfamic acid, and these
were compared with its binding conformation; eventually 5
lead molecules were identified as potential lead molecules for
inhibition of PTP1B based on their hydrogen bonding
interactions. The chemical names of the five lead compounds
() are: 2,5-Anhydroglucitol-1,6-Biphosphate
(ZINC12502589); (2S,4S)-2-[3-hydroxy-2-methyl-5-
(phosphonooxymethyl)-4-pyridyl]thiazolidine-4-carboxylic
(ZINC13213457); [(2S,3R,4R,5R)-5-amino-2,3,4-trihydroxy-6-
oxo-hexyl] (ZINC25721858); aldehydo-D-glucosamine 6-
phosphate (ZINC31392733); and 7-(5-phospho-alpha-Dribosyl)
adenine (ZINC04096400). The chemical structures of
these lead molecules are illustrated in Figure 1, and the binding
modes of these five lead molecules and their interacting
residues are shown in () &amp; 
 (see
supplementary material).

ADME–Tox evaluation:
Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism, Excretion and Toxicity
(ADME/Tox) are main five parameters to test the drug likeness
of a molecule was tested by the pharma algorithm []. Thus,
the algorithm gives an overview about the oral bioavailability,
absorption and the toxic effect of drug like molecule. By this
study, it becomes easy to optimize the lethal doses of any
molecule without killing any animal, which reduces the cost
[]. Oral bioavailability of drug must be low, and shows the
oral bioavailability of all five ligands . 
Lipinski et al. []
have proposed a series of rules imposing limitations on logP
(the logarithm of octanol/water partition coefficient), molecular
weight, and the number of hydrogen bond acceptors and
donors, known as ‘rule of five’. The rule states that most ‘druglike’
molecules have logP ≤5, molecular weight ≤500, and molar
refractivity between 40-130, number of hydrogen bond
acceptors ≤10, and number of hydrogen bond donor's ≤5.
Molecules violating more than one of these rules may have
problems with bioavailability.  (see supplementary
materials) shows that compounds did not violate any rule.
More specific analysis of pharmacological parameters may be
scrutinized through a complete ADME–Tox evaluation. 
depicts some specific parameters related to absorption,
distribution, metabolism, excretion and toxicity for the
predicted compounds. In general, all compounds presented
advantages and disadvantages when compared to each other.
No marked difference in health effects and toxicity profiles
were observed among the compounds.

Conclusion
PTP1B is an important target for drug development against
cancers, diabetes and obesity. Using structure based drug
design protocol involving virtual screening with docking
studies five new inhibitors for PTP1B were identified namely
ZINC12502589, ZINC13213457, ZINC25721858, ZINC31392733
and ZINC04096400. The identified molecules were subjected to
Lipinski's rule of five parameters and the molecules did not
violate any rule. Pharma algorithm was used to Calculate
ADME–Tox (absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion
and toxicity). In general, all the molecules presented advantages
and as well as disadvantages when compared to each other. No
marked difference in health effects and toxicity profiles were
observed among these molecules. Considering both the binding
affinity and bioavailability, we recommend these molecules as
potential inhibitors for PTP1B, although further experimental
investigation regarding the oral bioavailability should be
pursued to confirm that these inhibitors can function effectively
in humans.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Rao et al, Bioinformation 8(17): 834-837 (2012)

Structures of the five lead molecules with their
respective Ids.

Binding modes of the five potential ligands to the active site of PTPIB: (a) (1,2,3,4-Tetrahydroiso quinolinyl sulfamic acid,
(b) ZINC12502589, (c) ZINC13213457, (d) ZINC25721858, (e) ZINC31392733 and (f) ZINC04096400

