Background
Paraoxonase (EC 3.1.8.1) belongs to the family of A-esterases
consisting of three members namely PON1, PON2 and PON3.
PON1 and PON3 are produced in liver and secreted into blood.
PON2 is not present in blood, but is expressed in tissues like
liver, kidney, intestine, brain and heart. The genes coding for
these enzymes are located adjacent to each other on the long
arm of chromosome 7 (7q21.3-q22.1) 
[]. PON1 is the most
abundant form and hence extensively investigated. HuPON1
consists of 355 amino acids exclusively associated with highdensity
lipoprotein (HDL) in association with human
phosphate binding protein (HPBP). ApoA1 is major protein in
HDL which stabilizes PON1 and binds it with very high affinity
[]. 
HuPON1 plays a major role in the prevention of
atherosclerosis by protecting HDL and LDL against oxidative
stress mediated through the uptake of oxidized-LDL by
macrophages, inhibition of macrophage cholesterol biosynthesis
and stimulation of HDL mediated cholesterol efflux from
macrophages []. HuPON1 activity is reduced in type 1 and
type 2 diabetes independent of individual’s genotype; hence
diabetic patients are at high risk to develop atherosclerosis 
[,
]. 
The low serum paraoxonase activity in type 2 diabetes was
recently shown to be correlated with the levels of oxidized LDL
and vascular complications []. A study demonstrated that
HDL from type 1 diabetic patients showed higher levels of lipid
hydroperoxides and lower activity of HDL-PON1 than healthy
subjects. Moreover, HDL from these patients was unable to
protect erythrocyte membranes against oxidative damage. In
diabetic patients, significant decrease in HuPON1 activity in the
lipoprotein deficient serum (LPDS) fraction in comparison with
healthy subjects was reported, where most of HuPON1 activity
was in HDL []. The interest in HuPON1 is mainly because of
its implications in cardiovascular diseases. HuPON1 being an
antioxidant enzyme, also has a thiolactonase activity and
prevents homocysteinylation of proteins by homocystein
thiolactone []. It can also activate statin prodrugs, many of
which are lactones. Hence, the cardioprotective functions of
HDL are attributed to the HDL associated PON1. Because of its
great biological diversity, the active site of paraoxonase has
received much attention from researchers for understanding the
active site conformation capable of handling multiple
substrates. Site directed mutagenesis and kinetics have
identified various amino acids necessary for the different
substrate binding and catalysis []. Since crystal structure of
HuPON1 was not available, it has been modeled using crystal
structure of rePON1 (rabbit PON1, PDB ID: 1V04).

Aspirin is analgesic, anti-inflammatory and anti-pyretic drug,
well known for treatment of cardiovascular diseases. A recent
study reported in vitro and in vivo induction of PON1 and
ApoA1 gene by aspirin and salicylate []. Studies have also
shown aspirin competes with ρ-nitrophenylacetate and
paraoxon for hydrolysis by PON1 in human plasma and
isolated HDL preparations []. It also inhibits cyclooxygenase
(COX) enzyme by acetylation of the active site and prevents the
formation of cyclooxygenase products like prostaglandins,
thromboxanes and prostacyclin []. Cefazolin sodium is a
known cephalosporin antibiotic to inhibit Enterobacter
aerogenes, Escherichia coli, Haemophilus influenza, Klebsiella
species, Proteus mirabilis and Streptococcus pneumonia.
Cefazolin sodium significantly decreases liver glucose 6-
phosphate dehydrogenase and human carbonic anhydrase I
and II. A study has shown that cefazolin sodium causes a dose
and time dependent decrease on PON1 activity in HepG2 cells
and effectively inhibit purified human serum PON1 
[].
Though studies involving the effect of aspirin as an activator
and cefazolin as an inhibitor of rePON1 have been reported 
[,
], 
no reports are available on the 3D model of HuPON1 with
aspirin and cefazolin. In view of the above, the present study
establishes the active site amino acid residues by in silico
approaches and docking studies and also deduces the structural
interaction between PON1 and one inhibitor cefazolin and an
activator aspirin.

Methodology
Sequence alignment and Structure prediction
The FASTA sequence of query protein (HuPON1) was retrieved
from NCBI Entrez sequence search
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). Following BLASTp run
(http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi), a Serum paraoxonase
by directed evolution (PDB ID: 1V04) was selected as template
sequence (http://www.rcsb.org/pdb). The sequences were
subjected to pairwise alignment using ClustalW followed by
secondary structure prediction using ESPript2.2
(http://espript.ibcp.fr/ESPript). The 3D-structure of query
protein was predicted by automated homology modeling
program, Modeller9v8 []. For Modeller, the template and
query sequences were carefully aligned to remove potential
alignment errors. The default modeling process did end up
with a loop. The model obtained was further submitted to
modbase server
(
http://modbase.compbio.ucsf.edu/modloop/server) to
rebuild the loop (Met1-Phe17) into its secondary structure.
Validation of the model was done by Ramachandran plot
analysis []. 
Structural models were visualized by PyMol™
Molecular Graphics System version
0.97 (http://www.pymol.org).

Docking studies and Binding site prediction
Two molecules, aspirin (activator) and cefazolin (inhibitor)
were chosen for docking studies. Docking study was carried out
using Autodock software, which uses Genetic algorithm (GA).
HuPON1 was loaded into AutoDock Tools (ADT)
(
http://autodock.scripps.edu/ resources) as a receptor and
made ready for docking by the addition of hydrogens which
any PDB file of the molecule usually does not contain, using the
edit option in ADT. The ligands aspirin and cefazolin were
separately and individually docked with HuPON1, grid for
dock search was built for the whole molecule to find the most
probable binding site in HuPON1 and to measure its interaction
parameters with aspirin and cefazolin. The docking process was
carried out in the default parameters of ADT. Binding sites has
been predicted by submitting the model to 3D2GO binding site
prediction server (
http://www.sbg.bio.ic.ac.uk).

Results and discussion
Structural evaluation
Present study reports the structural interaction between
HuPON1 with one inhibitor and one activator separately.
rePON1 (PDB ID: 1V04) having high degree of homology with
HuPON1 was used as a template with identity of 83% with
atomic resolution of its x-ray crystal structure at 2.2 Å and R
value being 0.189. The secondary structure alignment obtained
between the query and template sequence is shown in Figure
1a. The query (HuPON1) subjected for homology modeling by
Modeller ended up with a loop by default modeling process.
Then, it was submitted to

http://modbase.compbio.ucsf.edu/modloop/ server to rebuild
into secondary structure, where loop attained alpha helix
conformation (). Root mean square deviation (RMSD)
value between the template and predicted loop model was
found to be 0.202, indicative of a good model. The G-factors
indicating the quality of covalent and bond angle distance were
­0.09 for dihedrals, ­0.32 for covalent, and overall ­0.14. The
predicted model was subjected to PROCHECK analysis to
determine psi and phi torsion angles, the comparable
Ramachandran plot characteristics and G-factors confirm the
quality of predicted model (Table 1, see ).

The overall topology of modeled structure is a β propeller
consisting of five alpha helices with multiple beta folds. Top
view of PON1 appears to be a 6 bladed β propeller; each blade
is composed of four β strands. The residues comprising the β-
sheets of the propeller were highly conserved among all PON
sequences, while the majority of the variation among the
paralogs was located primarily in the 3 helices forming a
unique lid over the active site of PON1. The crystal structure of
the rePON1 also revealed a six bladed β-propeller protein
centrally arranged around two calcium ions (PDB: 1V04), which
is similar to the DFPase-based homology model [,
]. The Nterminal
sequence (helix1) is the main determinant for PON's
cell distribution, translocation and secretion; both Helix H1 and
H2 provide hydrophobic anchors for binding to the HDL
particle and retain its hydrophobic N terminus which resembles
a signal peptide. It is believed that PON1 anchors to HDL
through this peptide and the other helices are also likely to have
a profound effect on their protein-lipid and protein-protein
interactions []. 
HuPON1 is always found in association with
ApoA1 of HDL suggesting strong protein-protein interaction.
Insights into the 3D structure and mechanistic studies also
enabled a detailed description of PON1 active site. PON1 has
two calcium atoms, one of which probably has catalytic and the
other has structural role. These are 7.4 Å apart and are located
in the central tunnel of the β propeller. The catalytic calcium is
within 2.2-2.5 Å from oxygens of N224, N270, N68, D269 and
E53 []. 
HuPON1 is considered to be a complex in substrate
recognition and catalytic reactions mediated through multiple
mechanisms and residues. Substantial efforts have focused on
identifying amino acid residues important for HuPON1
enzymatic activity and have revealed that the residues affecting
the diverse activities of HuPON1 (lactonase/esterase and
phosphotriesterase) are located in different regions of the active
site []. 
The enzymatic catalysis of various substrates by PON1
is known to be mediated by a unique H115–H134 dyad, which
deprotonates a water molecule to generate the attacking
hydroxide ion and accounts for the hydrolytic activity of PON1
[,
]. 
Kinetic and site-directed mutagenesis studies have been
extensively investigated to delineate substrate specificity and
identified number of residues important for esterase and PON1
activities, These residues include L69, H115, H134, D169, F222,
D269, H285, F292, T332, V346 and W281, and substitution of
these residues results in diminution or loss of function 
[]. A
disulphide bridge formed between C42 and C353 stabilizes the
3D structure. Moreover, eight amino acids have been identified
as essential for PON1 activities, which are W280, H114, H133,
H154, H242, H284, E52 and D53 []. Sequence variation
between HuPON1 and rePON1 found in regions that do not
affect their active sites. Since HuPon1 has been modeled after
the template (PDB: 1V04), it is likely that these interactions
which are predicted may also hold good for the HuPON1-HDL
interaction as predicted by the superposition analysis 
().

Docking study and binding site prediction
Docking was performed using AUTODOCK 4.0 for the receptor
of PON1 with ligands aspirin and cefazolin, loaded
individually into ADT to analyze ten best conformations. The
study showed that the conformation of cefazolin with PON1
has binding energy of ­5.5k.cal M-1 and binding
constant/inhibitory constant of 80.71µM. While, the
conformation of aspirin had lower binding energy than that of
cefazolin (­4.85k.cal M­1) and higher binding
constant/inhibitory constant (276.3µM). The ligand binding
residues of cefazolin and aspirin showed similarity with
binding site predicted in our model and those predicted by the
3D2GO (Table 2, see ). Cefazolin was
found to dock in the vicinity of predicted binding site 1 of
HuPON1 () and restored all its H-bond contacts with
predicted site residue by residue with slight variations from
3D2GO. However, aspirin was found to dock in vicinity of the
predicted binding site 2 of HuPON1 () and restored
the geometrical premises of the predicted binding site but not
the residues (Table 3, see ). Cefazolin
shares three hydrogen bonds and aspirin shares four hydrogen
bonds with HuPON1. Furthermore, cefazolin docks at residues
N166, S193 and Y71 () and aspirin at residues N309,
I310 and L311 ().

Conclusion
In conclusion, model building and docking study were used to
attain details of interaction between protein and ligands-aspirin
and cefazolin. Docking studies of aspirin and cefazolin into the
active site of HuPON1 revealed two binding sites; the first
region is occupied by cefazolin and the second with aspirin. The
multiple binding sites may possibly explain the multifunctional
nature of HuPON1 towards structurally unrelated substrates.
Furthermore, site directed mutagenesis has identified distinct
amino acids for PON1 and phenyl acetate binding which are
distinct from the residues important for binding aspirin and
cefazolin. Therefore, screening many more substrates and
inhibitors might provide the answers to the multi-factorial
nature of HuPON1 and may help understand its cardioprotective
function.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors thank Department of Science and Technology
(SR/WOS-A/LS-209/2004), New Delhi, India for financial
assistance.

Citation:Salman et al, Bioinformation 7(2): 59-63 (2011)

(a) Sequence alignment of HuPON1 with rePON1
(PDB: IV04). Strictly conserved residues are highlighted in red
and partially conserved residues in white boxes. (b) Theoretical
model of HuPON1 predicted using homology modelling. (c)
Superimposition of HuPON1 (colored in green) with rePON1
(colored in red).

Receptor-ligand interaction between cefazolin and
modeled HuPON1 enzyme obtained using Autodock 4.0; (a)
Active site of HuPON1 with cefazolin; (b) Electrostatic surface
of HuPON1 binding pocket and interacting residues for
cefazolin drug.

Receptor-ligand interaction between aspirin and
modeled HuPON1 enzyme obtained using Autodock 4.0; (a)
Active site of HuPON1 with aspirin; (b) Electrostatic surface of
HuPON1 binding pocket and interacting residues for aspirin
drug.

