Background
Periodontal disease, including gingivitis and periodontitis, is among the 
most common chronic disorders of infectious origin in humans.  The 
American Academy of Periodontology reported in 2004 a prevalence range 
for this condition between 10 to 60% in adults, depending on diagnostic 
criteria, with a 30-90% overall across age, gender and ethnicity prevalence 
range in the United States. The national health and nutrition examination 
survey 111(NHANES 111) confirmed that over 90% of individuals above 
13 years of age present some form of periodontal disease.

Periodontal disease is associated with certain systemic conditions as 
increased risk of cardiovascular and  cerebrovascular diseases, including 
atherosclerosis and diabetes  []. Cardiovascular disease has complex 
determining factors, including genetics and gender, but evidence shows 
that chronic periodontal infection is detrimental to the cardiovascular 
system. Several theories have been proposed to explain the pathway 
between oral infection and cardiovascular complications  [].  One is that 
chronic infection of the mouth may lead to thromboembolic disease (blood 
clotting) via bacterial protein interfering with platelet aggregation  [].  
Another possibility is that bacteria  from the mouth enter the bloodstream 
and trigger the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, which are 
responsible for promoting inflammation and over time lead to pathology of 
the cardiovascular system.3 Respiratory infections have also been linked to 
periodontitis [].

The rate of preterm birth is increasing worldwide while efforts to prevent 
or reduce its prevalence have been unsuccessful []. Developing countries 
report high incidences of low birth weight; and, in industrialized countries, 
prematurity rates have ceased to fall since the 1980s, and even shown a 
consistent rising trend. Taken together, these data point to an alarming 
situation of major social and economic public health concern worldwide 
[].

Approximately 500,000 infants (over 12% of live births) were delivered 
preterm (gestational age ≫37 weeks) in 2003, which signifies a 16% 
increase since 1990, in the US  [].  Preterm birth is the leading cause of 
neonatal mortality and morbidity worldwide. Preterm birth and low birth 
weight, which often occur together, are risk factors for certain serious 
lifelong health problems, from blindness, deafness, developmental delay, 
heart disease, chronic lung disease, to a range of neurological disorders. 
Health care costs associated with preterm birth are substantial both 
prenatally and into adulthood  []. Preventing preterm birth and low birth 
weight is the most timely, critical,  and effective approach to avoid and 
prevent these lifelong health conditions [].

Risk factors of adverse pregnancy potentially leading to preterm birth and 
low birth weight include previous  history of prematurity, placental 
abnormalities, smoking, diabetes, gestational weight gain, vaginal 
infections, and oral health. Whereas certain risk factors associated with 
preterm birth and low birth weight are non-modifiable factors (e.g., higher 
incidence of multiple births and advanced maternal age (Health Canada)), 
others can be controlled.  Case in point, approximately 50% of preterm 
births occur without a known cause, of which up to half may be attributed 
to maternal bacterial infections [].

The putative link between periodontitis and adverse pregnancy outcomes 
was proposed by Galloway (1931). Galloway suggested that Gramnegative anaerobic 
bacteria might “provide sufficient infectious microbial 
challenge [to have] potentially harmful effects on the pregnant patient and 
developing fetus”  []. This hypothesis has been supported by a growing 
consensus that preterm birth and low  birth weight may be influenced by 
chronic bacterial infections [], and specifically that bacteria from the oral 
cavity enter the bloodstream and affect the placenta and amniotic fluid. 
The bacteria in the placenta and amniotic fluid trigger an inflammatory 
response, which can, under appropriate conditions that require the release 
of prostaglandins, induce preterm  labor, or, in early pregnancy, 
miscarriage. Copious evidence now demonstrates that normal induction of 
labor occurs when the fetus has reached complete gestation, but with 
maternal periodontitis during pregnancy, prostaglandin release 
significantly increases the risk of preterm labor  []. Furthermore, 
periodontitis, as a low-grade chronic infection, may also be blunt growth of 
the fetus, and lead to low birth weight [].

Taken together, the copious evidence at hand strongly suggests a strong 
association between periodontal diseases in pregnant women and increased 
risk of adverse pregnancy outcome. This study is aimed at utilizing the 
research synthesis design to provide a clinically relevant complex 
systematic review (CRCSR) of the best available evidence on the 
association between periodontal status in women and pregnancy outcome 
preterm low birth weight. We also propose a hypothesis about how the 
clinical relevance of the CRCSR  findings may be broadened by a 
translational arm addressing the proteomic signature of periodontal disease 
in pregnancy, in order to yield novel understanding of the predictive 
variables for adverse pregnancy outcomes.

Methodology
To conduct this complex systematic review, we utilized a research 
synthesis design as follows: the PICO question was stated as “is there an 
association between maternal periodontal disease and preterm low birth 
weight infants from which flowed the search protocol and strategy, and 
inclusion/exclusion criteria, the quantification of the quality of evidence, 
and homogeneity, reliability and acceptable sampling analyses.”  The 
clinical relevance of the consensus statement was estimated, and clinical 
recommendations formulated.

Specifically, the search used electronic databases, The National Library of 
Medicine-Pubmed, The Cochrane library, CINAHL, Google Scholar, Web 
of Science, and the American Dental Association web library to identify 
systematic reviews on the association of maternal periodontal disease and 
preterm birth and low birth weight.  Inclusion criteria included published 
systematic reviews and meta-analysis on the risk of adverse pregnancy 
outcome and maternal periodontal disease. Exclusion criteria included 
traditional reviews, theses, dissertations, and conference proceedings, 
reviews that were neither published nor available online and non peerreviewed articles. 
Selection of reviews was performed based on the criteria 
for considering systematic reviews for  inclusion. The data were recorded 
onto a extraction sheet as part of  the CRCSR: study design, diagnosis, 
number of patients, types of intervention, outcome measures, results, 
quality score, and author's conclusion. The reviewers evaluated the 
methodological quality of each using the R-AMSTAR  []. R-AMSTAR 
also produces a quantifiable assessment of systematic review quality and 
clinical relevance. All the articles were discussed until consensus was 
reached. The inter-rater reliability was calculated with Cohen’s kappa 
coefficient. Homogeneity was tested by means of the Chi-square analysis. 
Acceptable sampling analysis was performed using the Friedman test for 
non-parametric analysis of factorial designs using MDAS statistical 
software.

Discussion
The search term ‘pregnancy’ resulted in 681977 citations and there were 
64193 results with periodontal disease. They were reduced to 1027 
citations. After the initial  screen, 1016 citations were excluded since they 
did not meet the inclusion criteria. Of the 11 potentially relevant citations, 
two were literature reviews, one was a correspondence to a review, one 
was an editorial, and one review was  in Polish. Therefore, these five 
reviews were not included. Finally, using the inter reliability testing as well 
as R-AMSTAR  [], 6 systematic reviews were obtained by this 
systematic search and used for this Clinically Relevant Complex 
Systematic Review (CRCSR). The Friedman test was done for nonparametric 
analysis of factorial designs. Each systematic review was tested 
to see if it was statistically significant (p-value = 0.0032). Each review was 
then compared of their individual  means and standard deviations. The 
results of the acceptable sampling analysis based on R-AMSTAR scoring 
of included systematic reviews are shown in Table 1 (see ). 
The horizontal rows indicate each included systematic review. 
The vertical column indicates the eleven question items on the RAMSTAR. 
The highest scoring systematic review is with 35.5 points, 
while the lowest scoring systematic review is with 20.5 points  []. This 
gives us an indication of the quality of the included systematic reviews 
within the domain of this association.

The results of two of the systematic reviews, Vergnes et al. (2007) [] and 
Khader and Ta'ani (2005) [], showed relation that lead to the consensus 
statement that there is an association between maternal periodontal disease 
and adverse pregnancy outcomes. However, methodological weaknesses of 
the systematic reviews conducted to date and the individual studies 
included in them render this conclusion tentative, hence more research 
should be conducted. In particular, we believe that the identification of 
genomic and proteomic markers may represent an added value in the 
further investigation of the association between periodontitis and adverse 
pregnancy outcomes, as previously suggested  []. Theoretical studies 
have investigated the molecular mechanisms underlying periodontitis, and 
led to the identification of some candidate genes and/or proteins which can 
become the targets of ad hoc theoretical studies []. Similar studies have 
investigated the association between periodontitis and diabetes  []. In 
another recent analysis, a proper combination of experimental and 
theoretical findings was applied to provide further insights into the 
malignant progression from oral lichen planus to oral carcinoma []. We 
are presently pursuing a similar approach to increase our knowledge of the 
adverse pregnancy outcomes in periodontal patients at a molecular level. 
This analysis study can suggest new potential risk factors and therapeutic 
targets.

Conclusion
There is growing evidence that there  is an association between maternal 
periodontal disease and adverse pregnancy outcome, in particular preterm 
low birth weight. While researchers would move towards a deeper analysis 
of the consistent and strong association between periodontal disease and 
adverse pregnancy outcomes, the decision makers like the clinicians, 
policy makers and the patients should be aware of this emerging evidence 
and should appreciate the role of maternal oral health during pregnancy.  
Many guidelines have been established “to assist health care professionals 
in improving clinical practice and to  promote oral health in pregnant 
women” by the New York State Health Department [] It is essential that 
women get the needed treatment that is provided by their dentist during the 
period between 14th and 20th week of their pregnancy, and get regular 
checkups throughout the course. It is also optimal to have an adequate diet: 
the appropriate use of fluoride, eating fruits and drinking water will 
encourage a smaller amount of sugar intake and thus prevent from building 
up plaque and cavities in the mouth. Good oral hygiene should be adopted 
by brushing and flossing twice daily. Expectant women are prone to get 
bacterial   transmission that   promotes   tooth   decay through any saliva 
exchange, and thus should avoid sharing food or utensils with others. Oral 
health education triggers significant health benefits while also preventing 
complications of dental diseases during pregnancy and thus reducing the 
chances of low birth weight deliveries. Note that the guidelines are not 
limited to the ones mentioned above. Therefore, maintaining good oral 
health care should be highly encouraged for women who are pregnant or 
wish to become pregnant.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Ramchandani et al, Bioinformation 5(7): 300-303 (2011)

