Background
The excessive use of natural resources and large scale synthesis of
xenobiotic compounds have raised a number of environmental issues like
air and water contamination along with harmful effects on different biota
and disruption of the biogeochemical cycle. Presently, the most widely
used pesticides belong to the group of organophosphates and consequently
the organophosphorus compound poisoning is a worldwide health problem
with approximately 3 million poisonings and 200,000 deaths annually
[,].

These compounds have been implicated in several nerve and muscular
diseases in humans. Some of the early organophosphates were developed
as nerve poisons for human warfare. The organophosphates recommended
for non-residential uses are relatively toxic to vertebrates. Their primary
mode of action on insects and other animals is by the phosphorylation of
acetylcholinesterase enzyme which results in the accumulation of
acetylcholine. Higher levels of acetylcholine result in sensory and
behavioral disturbances in coordination and depressed motor function.
Symptoms such as muscle twitching, weakening, vomiting, abdominal
cramps and diarrhea all indicate a worsening condition. Recovery from
organophosphate exposure depends upon production of a new enzyme
which may further be complicated due to lack of paraoxonase in some
individuals [,].

Organophosphates are widely used as pesticides today. They are quite
effective in controlling pests but exposure to organophosphates not only
damages the predators of plants but also adversely affects all sorts of other
living organisms in the surroundings. Living organisms are equipped with
enzymes that degrade these highly toxic compounds. These
organophosphate degrading enzymes are found in many different living
organisms ranging from bacteria to human beings 
[,] like Parathion
hydrolases (OPH) in Flavobacterium species, Organophosphorous acid
anhydrolase in Alteromonas species, Phosphotriesterase homology protein
in Escherichia coli, Diisopropyl fluorophosphatase (DFPases) in Squid,
Serum Paraoxanases / arylesterases 
[,] in Mammals and Prolidases in
Mammals and other organisms []. Though these enzymes are present in
different organisms but they still perform the same function. Here, we
carried out a comparative study of these enzymes from different organisms
in order to analyze these enzymes for their common features that enable
them to maintain their functional conservation.

Methodology
Sequence retrieval
Organophosphate degrading enzymes from different organism were
identified after careful literature review and sequences retrieved from
Swiss Prot &amp; TrEMBL databases [p://www.expasy.org/] using
keywords such as parathion hydrolases, organophosphatases and
organophosphate degrading enzymes (OPD). A total of sixty different
enzymes that are involved in organophosphate degradation were retrieved.
These sequences were then used independently as a query to search for
their homologs using the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) at
the National Centre of Biotechnology Information database
[http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi]. Eight subgroups were created
based on the type of organism in which these enzymes are present and a
representative sequence from each of the subgroup was selected for further
analysis. As each subgroup showed a high degree of intra group homology
therefore one representative sequence was considered adequate.

Multiple sequence alignment
Representative sequences were aligned using ClustalW that generates
multiple sequence alignment file for a set of given sequences.
[http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/clustalw/].

Search for motifs
MEME was used to search for the presence of conserved motifs among
these representative sequences. [http://meme.sdsc.edu/meme/memedownload.html].

Secondary structure analysis
Secondary structures for those enzymes whose structures were not already
available in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) were predicted using PSIPRED
[http://bioinf.cs.ucl.ac.uk/psipred].

Tertiary structure analysis
Tertiary structures of two of the eight enzymes, Parathion hydrolase
precursor (Accession No: P0A433) and Serum paraoxonase/arylesterase
1(Accession No: P27169) were retrieved from the Protein databank (PDB)
[http://www.pdb.org/pdb/home/home.do] and visualized using the Swiss
PDB viewer [http://ca.expasy.org/spdbv].

Composition analysis
The detailed analysis of the amino acid composition and properties of the
chosen proteins were calculated using AminoComp software
[http://144.16.71.10/thgs/aminocomp.html].

Glycosylation &amp; Phosphorylation Site Prediction
O-linked Glycosylation sites in selected proteins ( ) were predicted by NetOGlyc whereas N-linked
Glycosylation sites were predicted using NetNGlyc 1.0 Server. For the
prediction of phosphorylation sites, NetPhosBac was used.
(http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/NetPhosBac-1.0).

Results and Discussion
Sequence retrieval
Sequences of sixty (60) enzymes that are involved in the degradation of
toxic organophosphates were retrieved from the SwissProt and TrEMBL
databases. The initial data was subjected to BLAST search in order to
retrieve homologous sequences. Once these searches were completed, data
was organized into eight homologous groups and a representative sequence
was chosen to correspond to each group. Table 1 ( ) enlists the selected sequences.

Multiple sequence alignment
All the representative sequences were aligned using ClustalW but no
significant similarity was found in these sequences specifically the ends of
proteins are very poorly aligned (). In addition, no conserved
motif was reported by MEME. Furthermore the sequence analysis showed
that the active sites in all these enzymes do not possess conserved amino
acid sequences and consequently they give rise to a different active site
structure. This can be seen in and . Therefore, the
possibility of diverse members of this family of enzymes possessing
identical motifs can be ruled out. Although in most cases, it is the sequence
homology that results in the functional conservation but exceptions to this
rule do exist. Examples of this exception are the enzymes GOAG_ECOLI
(aminotransferase, E.C. 2.6.1.19) and GSA_ECOLI (glutamate- 1-
semialdehyde aminomutase, E.C. 5.4.3.8). Both these enzymes have very
little sequence identity but both function as aminotransferases []. Both
these enzymes function with the help of a similar cofactor pyridoxal
phosphate (PLP). The organophosphate degrading enzymes under study
also show very little sequence similarity and are known to have similar
divalent metal cofactors.

Secondary and tertiary structure analysis
Secondary structures were predicted using PSIPRED and it was observed
that some of these enzymes seem similar to others but no global
conservation was found. This can be seen in Table 1 (). Like the secondary structure, tertiary structure analysis showed
no characteristic similarity between the two enzymes studied which are
serum paraoxonase from humans and Parathion hydrolase precursor from
Flavobacterium. Beta sheets are the dominant secondary structure in the
human enzyme whereas Flavobacterium enzyme is rich in alpha helices
().

Studies of the bacterial, mammalian and plant purple acid phosphatases
have shown that they do not have any significant sequence homology but
the structures of these enzymes are similar. Tertiary structure comparison
was carried out using the root mean square values to assess the structural
homology between these enzymes. This showed some degree of similarity
but could not account for the overall homology of the functioning of these
enzymes. This may be caused by the similar amino acid composition of
these enzymes [].

Composition analysis
Analysis of the overall composition of amino acids yielded significant
results. The fraction of hydrophobic and hydrophilic residues in these
enzymes seemed to be quite conserved. Moreover they also possess the
same isoelectric points due to this reason. This is shown in Table 2 ().

Since amino acid composition can play a significant role in substrate
selection [] therefore, one of the reasons for the hydrolysis of the same
substrate by these enzymes may be the similar amino acid composition.
Moreover this may be the basis of the little homology that was observed
among some of the enzymes at the secondary and tertiary structure level.

Glycosylation &amp; Phosphorylation Site Prediction Results
It has been shown that many bacterial enzymes are glycosylated, however
glycosylation does not seem to play any critical role in enzymatic activity
[,], whereas on the other hand it has been shown to enhance the
thermostability in a number of enzymes. []. Potential O-glycosylation
sites occur less frequently as they were shown to be present only in two
proteins i.e. Xaa-Pro dipeptidase (P12955) and Parathion hydrolase
precursor (P0A433). The results of NetNGlyc show that there is a
relatively higher level of such sites which are N-glycosylated. Potential Nglycosylation
sites were seen in all cases studied except Parathion
hydrolase precursor (P0A433) and Phosphotriesterase (Q7SIG4). Results
of NetOGlyc and NetNGlyc are given in Table 3 (). The occurrence of all three sites in a single protein was also
noted in Mammalian prolidase (P12955). Moreover, potential
phosphorylation sites were predicted in all proteins and serine amino acid
was found to be the most frequent in N-X-S/T motif.

Post-translational modification is a chemical modification that alters the
physical and chemical properties of proteins for example: folding,
conformation distribution, stability, activity, therefore, these modifications
play an important role in the regulation of various intracellular processes.
Glycosylation has been found to alter the function of both eukaryotic and
prokaryotic proteins [,]. In agricultural areas, where
organophospahtes are the potential risk factor for developing various
diseases, it is important to understand various enzymes involved in the
detoxification/biodegradation of these toxic materials. For example,
recently, op-pesticide degrading bacteria have received considerable
attention as the potential agents of bioremediation in clean-up operations
of op-pesticide polluted environments and industrial waste [,]. All
these soil isolates synthesize an enzyme called parathion hydrolase (PH)
and it would be interesting to gain information using available data with
the help of bioinformatics tools.

Conclusion
We have concluded that the organophosphate degrading enzymes do not
have significant sequence similarity however they show some similarity at
the structural level. The content of alpha helices and beta sheets in a few of
the enzymes is conserved. In tertiary structures, the active site is
surrounded by beta sheets in all of them but overall all the structures do not
have significant resemblance. However the amino acid content of all of
these enzymes is quite similar and conserved. It has been verified that the
amino acid content of proteins plays a major role in their similar
functioning. Therefore, we believe that the basis for the analogous
functioning of these sequentially divergent enzymes is due to the
compositional homology of these enzymes. Moreover, it would be
interesting to carry out wet lab work to assess the role of each potential
glycosylation site by mutagenesis study on the averall activity of the
protein.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We thank the Higher Education Commission (HEC) of Pakistan and
COMSATS Institute of Information Technology (CIIT), Islamabad for all
the support and facilities provided to carry out this work.

Citation:Salman et al, Bioinformation 5(2): 67-72 (2010)

Alignment file generated by ClustalW for eight organophosphate degrading enzymes. No significant homology is observed overall and poorly
aligned regions at the ends of proteins can be easily seen.

Active sites of the five experimentally verified structures out of the eight representatives. These structures were retrieved from Protein
databank. The active site residues of a. Bacterial PH{PDB ID1P6C} are H55, H7, K169, H201, H230, D253, D301, H254, b. Bacterial PHP{PDB ID
1P6B} are H12, H14, E125, H158, D243, c. Squid DFPase {PDB ID 2IAR} are E21, E37, N120, N175, D229, D232, L273, H274, H287,d.Mamalian
Pon1 {PDB ID 1V04} E53, D54, H115, I117, H134, N168, I170, N224, N270,and e.Mammalian Prolidase {PDB ID 2IW2} are D276, D287, H370,
E412, E452, H37).

Active sites of the three structures out of the eight representatives that have been predicted using Swiss PDB viewer. The table with the figure
shows the active site residues. Active site residues of a. Mamalian pon 2 (E53, D54, H114, I116, H133, N167, I169, N223, N269), b. Insect PRP (H22,
H24, E169, H201, H230, D298) and c. Archeal PH (H23, H25, H200, D203, D257).

Tertiary structures of two enzymes, Parathion hydrolase precursor (Accession No: P0A433) and Serum paraoxonase/arylesterase 1(Accession
No: P27169). Content of alpha helices (colored red) is greater in the Flavobacterium enzyme as compared to the human enzyme. Beta sheets are colored
yellow.

