Background
Immortalized cell lines represent powerful model systems in
experimental biomedical research – they have an indefinite
growth capability, they can be frozen for decades, and shared
among scientific laboratories world-wide. Although the
functional resemblance between cell lines and their in vivo
counterparts in the intact tissue is subject to much variation, cell
lines still constitute a fundamental tool in drug development
studies and in unraveling the cellular mechanisms of many
human diseases [,
].

Most cell lines are available through bioresource providers or
cell line banks, such as the American Type Culture Collection
(ATCC) and the German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell
Cultures (DSMZ). Other important cell line resources include
the Cancer Cell Line Project, which aims to systematically
characterize simple mutations and large genomic alterations in
~800 cancer cell lines, and the Cell Line Data Base, which is a
cross-reference resource for all available cell lines in any given
species [,
].

The scientific literature contains extensive reports about
functional relationships between specific cell lines and other
biomedical properties, such as drugs, diseases and biological
processes. Cell line models have been particularly important for
cancer research, highlighted by a recent study that used a panel
of &gt;130 cell lines to unravel mechanisms underlying drug
sensitivity []. There is however no simple means by which one
can query cell line names and retrieve the most relevant
biomedical concepts in a structured fashion. In an effort to
address this matter, we have used text mining techniques to
develop CellLineMiner, a web database that is intended to serve
as a knowledge resource companion to the cellular model
systems used in biomedical research.

Methodology
Creation of biomedical dictionaries:
A human cell line dictionary was created by integration of
known cell line designations from three primary sources: the
American Type Culture Collection (ATCC []), the German
Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures (DSMZ 
[]),
and the Cancer Cell Line Project []. We manually identified,
through inspection of the indexing results (see below) cell line
designations that coincided with gene symbols or other general
abbreviations. Cell line contexts were added to these
designations in order to retrieve true positive hits. For example,
the cell line ABC-1 was found to coincide with an alias for the
human ABCA1 gene (ATP-binding cassette, sub-family A), so
this designation was replaced with the more specific terms “cell
line ABC-1” and “ABC-1 cells”. The final dictionary contained
nevertheless designations for a total of 1,622 different human
cell lines.

Dictionaries of human diseases, symptoms, anatomies,
procedures/treatments, genes/proteins, drugs, chemicals, gene
ontology terms, and medical subject headings (MeSH) were
indexed in free text in the same manner as human cell line
names (more below). See  for more
detailed information about how these dictionaries were created.

Creation of literature indices:
Abstracts and titles of all records in the MEDLINE database
(baseline November 2011; 20,494,848 citations) were used as the
source for the creation of a literature index of human cell lines
and related concepts. The indexing pipeline included text
tokenization, part-of-speech tagging, chunk extraction, and
finally mapping of cell line names to the resulting chunks. The
implementation of the pipeline was based upon work from a
previous study [].

Associations between cell lines and other biomedical concepts
were established based upon the citation co-occurrence
principle. This is a well-known approach within text mining
[]. The observed co-occurrence frequency between two terms
was compared with the expected random co-occurrence
frequency under a binomial distribution. A chi-square
goodness-of-fit test was used to rank the term relationships in a
statistical manner.

Our NLP pipeline produced MEDLINE hits for approximately
58.8% of the cell lines in our manually curated dictionary (954
out of 1622). These hits corresponded to 182,290 unique
MEDLINE records.  (see supplementary material)
shows the total number of statistically significant co-occurrence
relationships between cell lines and entities in other concept
categories.

Utility to the biological community
The web interface to the CellLineMiner web database consists of
a search suggestion box where a user can type in cell line names
and choose among the ones that exist in the CellLineMiner
dictionary. Next a ranked list of literature associations are
displayed for each of the other concepts that have been mined,
also allowing the user to further explore the actual MEDLINE
records where cell lines and concepts are co-occurring 
(). If available, we also display links to cell line mutation data,
as provided by the Cancer Cell Line Project [].

Caveats &amp; future developments
Our attempt to disambiguate cell line names was done in a
manual fashion. One may therefore suspect that there could still
be some designations in our cell line dictionary that are
ambiguous. Future developments will thus include a
benchmark of our performance with respect to cell line
identification in biomedical text. Moreover, we will update
CellLineMiner according to MEDLINE updates, and add more
cross-references to cell line mutation data as these are identified
and made available.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This research received funding from the European Commission
(FP7-2008, No 223367-MultiMod).

Citation:Nakken et al, Bioinformation 8(22): 1119-1122 (2012)

Web interface for search results in CellLineMiner, exemplified through the associated concepts for the cell line A549.

