Background
Since the first AIDS case detection in Cête d׳Ivoire in 1985, the 
infection number is in constant decline with an actual 
estimated prevalence of 3.7%. Although this constant decrease, 
Cête d׳Ivoire continues to have the highest HIV-1 prevalence 
rate in West Africa and 60% of HIV-infected patients are 
women, most of them of childbearing age []. Based on partial 
polymerase (pol) and/or envelope (enν) sequences, the high 
prevalence of circulating recombinant form CRF02_AG (82%) 
and cocirculation of subtype A (5%), CRF01_AE (1%), 
CRF06_cpx (4%), and complex intersubtype recombinants 
(11%) has been documented in Cête d׳Ivoire []. One 
important feature of HIV-1 infection is the diversification and 
evolution of the viral genome over the course of infection. 
From all the protein encoding genes, the most variable is the 
enν gene. It encodes for the envelope proteins associated with 
the host cell-HIV interaction []. Changes in this highly 
conserved residue provide an interesting case of study to test 
whether selective pressure was altered with the substitution.

Nevertheless, due to their functional relevance, several amino 
acid residues are extremely conserved among HIV-1 variants. 
The external envelope protein is a likely site of selection, being 
targeted by the patient׳s antibody response 
[] and responsible 
for receptor binding and entry into host cells 
[], and therefore 
constitutes an ideal region with which to investigate the 
evolutionary processes acting on HIV-1. The long term fate of 
these abundant genetic changes depends on the interplay of 
effective population size and natural selection, resulting in an 
extremely high rate of HIV genomic evolution []. Population 
level process such as selection, migration, population dynamic 
and recombination shape HIV genetic diversity both among 
and within hosts []. The ratio of nonsynonymous/
synonymous substitution rates has proved useful in
investigating molecular adaptation; however, changes in the 
absolute rates of nonsynonymous and synonymous 
substitution should provide greater insight 
[]. Changes in 
synonymous substitution rates can reflect changes in 
generation time or mutation rate, while nonsynonymous rates 
can also be affected by changes in selective pressure and 
effective population size. Previous studies of HIV evolution 
have typically assumed that the rate of neutral or synonymous 
change (per month or year) is approximately constant among 
patients [].

Differences in the mutational profile among HIV subtypes 
have been reported []. Such high viral genetic diversity 
among subtypes is involved in difference in the rate of disease 
progression and response to antiretroviral therapy including 
the development of resistance []. Therefore it is crucial to 
acquire further knowledge concerning the real significance of 
these differences; it may be important to determine strategies 
of initial treatment for infected individuals. Studying the 
evolutionary relationship of HIV-1 and characterizing the 
distinct adaptation patterns in different parts of the HIV-1 
genome that interact with the immune system will be key to 
elucidate how HIV-1 overwhelms the immune system and 
leads to AIDS []. In this study, we present sequence analyses 
of envelope glycoprotein V3 loop region of viruse isolates from 
HIV-1 untreated patients living in Cête d׳Ivoire, to decipher 
the temporal relationship between diversity, divergence and 
selection, in the HIV-1 envelope gene. Understanding the 
process that determines viral genetic diversity will 
undoubtedly assist in the struggle against viral infections and 
will contribute to our knowledge of past epidemiologic events 
in Cête d׳Ivoire

Methodology
Data sets compilation:
All HIV-1 sequences classified as subtype A derived from Cête 
d׳Ivoire were downloaded from the Los Alamos National 
Laboratory and GenBank databases. Pseudogenes (as noted in 
GenBank), clones and sequences with less than 250 bp were 
excluded from the following analyses. The sequences included 
in this work were from individuals in the asymptomatic phase 
of infection and they were naïve to drug therapy. The 
description of data sets and the GenBank accession number of 
each sequence are summarized as supplementary material. The 
final set included the 189 subtype A sequences described and 
four non-A sequences, (subtypes B), which were used as out
groups. Fifteen (18) sequences originating from other African 
countries were also included for phylogenetic comparison: 4 
from Mali, 8 from Senegal, and 6 from Congo Democratic
Republic. The sequences were first aligned using the ClustalX 
program []. All sites with deletions and insertions were then 
excluded in order to preserve the reading frames of the genes. 
The final alignment was 406 bp long and is presented as 
supplementary information.

Phylogenetic inference:
For the maximum likelihood analysis of selection pressures, 
phylogenetic trees were constructed. We first determined the 
most appropriate model of nucleotide substitution for each 
data set using the program jModeltest 2.1 []. Models GTR+G, 
and GTR+I+G were suggested to have better Likelihood 
scores. Then we reconstructed the phylogenetic tree using the 
ML method under GTR+G and GTR+I+G methods. We used 
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods as implemented 
in BEAST 1.7 to obtain a posterior distribution of trees under 
an uncorrelated relaxed clock []. In order to assess 
confidence in each of the internal nodes of the constructed 
phylogeny, a bootstrap resampling (1,000 replicates) of the 
data using the neighbor-joining method based on maximum
likelihood distances performed with FigTree []. To 
investigate the diversity change, we inferred between-host 
mean diversities for the 1995s to 2009s, using the nucleotide 
diversity, p, implemented in MEGA 6 [] under the GTR+G 
model again. For Setup Data, the viral sequences obtained 
from the same year were grouped as one subpopulation. Then, 
the within-year diversity was calculated by Mean Diversity 
within Subpopulations, whereas the between-year diversity 
was calculated by Mean Interpopulational Diversity.

Analysis of selective pressures:
Codon models of coding sequence evolution were used to 
detect positive selection operating on the HIV-1 enν gene. In 
particular, we were interested in differences in positive 
selection pressure on the virus from the 1995s to the 2009s.
Selective pressures were analyzed using two distinct
approaches that estimate the number of nonsynonymous (dN) 
and synonymous (dS) at all sites in the sequence alignments. 
This compares the fit to the data of various models of codon 
evolution, which differ in the distribution of nonsynonymous 
and synonymous ratio (dN/dS) among sites and takes into 
account the phylogenetic relationships of the sequences.
HyPhy software [] was used to generate simulated data 
under a neutral model with trees generated from the original 
alignments. The same sequence alignments used as input in 
the initial analysis were used and one hundred simulated 
datasets were generated for each alignment. Each simulated 
dataset was then analyzed using the Dual Model as described 
above. The minimum value of mean dS across all sliding 
windows of three adjacent codons, in all of the one hundred 
simulated datasets, was used as a conservative threshold to 
identify windows of reduced dS in the observed data. This 
stringent threshold and a less stringent one that included 95% 
of the values inferred from the simulated data are shown in the 
sliding window plots.

Codon usage analysis:
The Relative Synonymous Codon Usage (RSCU) values were 
calculated for the dataset. The RSCU statistics is calculated by 
dividing the observed usage of a codon by that expected if all 
codons were used equally frequently. Thus an RSCU of 1 
indicates a codon is used as expected by random usage, RSCU 
&gt; 1 indicates a codon used more frequently than expected 
randomly, and RSCU &lt; 1 indicates a codon used less 
frequently than random. RSCU analysis was conducted using 
Mega 6 software []. Rare codon was computed by the 
improved implementation in DAMBE [].

Results
Evolutionary analysis :
The nucleotide frequencies are 45.59% (A), 26.29% (T/U), 
10.41% (C), and 17.71% (G). The transition/transversion rate 
ratios are k1 = 1.729 (purines) and k2 = 8.445 (pyrimidines). 
The overall transition/transversion bias is R = 1.596. The 
analysis involved 189 nucleotide sequences. Codon positions 
included were 1st+2nd+3rd+Noncoding. All ambiguous 
positions were removed for each sequence pair. There were a 
total of 82 positions in the final dataset.

Selection analyses:
A faster increase of dS was detected with respect to dN 
through time, and a slowdown of dN/dS in enν gene due to a 
slower increase through time of dN with respect to dS 

(see supplementary material). The dN/dS ratio of enν regions 
fluctuates was less than 1. For the fragment of enν region 
analysed, the dN/dS ratio was lower than 1 for viral 
populations analysed within each of the 15 years, which 
showed the lowest levels of divergence (). A low 
dN/dS ratio indicates that, the sequences did not undergo 
adequate immune pressure to lead to changes in amino acids. 
The dN/dS ratio of the years 1997 and 2008 showed a 
significant difference (P &lt; 0.022) compared to the other years, 
except for year 2001 and 2006. Both the years 1997 and 2008 
showed any significant difference (p = 0.215). The synonymous 
substitution rate was always significantly higher (P = 0.001, 
Student׳s t) than the nonsynonymous substitution rate.

Phylogenetic tree:
In the Maximum Likelihood (ML) tree, viral sequences from 
the same year or from other West African countries do not 
form a distinct cluster (). No significant change in 
sequence diversity was found after nearly two decades of 
evolution. The reconstructed phylogenetic tree of 211 
sequences demonstrated distinctly long internal branches and 
short external branches, suggesting that only a small number 
of viruses infected the new host cell at each transmission so 
that these founder viruses usually are quite different among 
hosts. These results are compatible with a severe bottleneck at 
each new infection. The topology of the tree is notable in that 
the sequences sampled through different times are evenly
distributed among the terminal branches (). This 
suggests that most of these mutations have occurred 
independently and have not been transmitted for sustained 
periods of time. Sequences did not cluster according to year or 
compartment. Using this model of evolution, the neighbor
joining tree for the entire data set shows that sequences cluster 
predominantly by host individual. Furthermore, no sequences 
clustered strongly (bootstrap values 50) with known laboratory 
strains of HIV subtype B, an indication of no evidence for 
recombination.

Phylogenetic Signal and Informativeness:
The level of substitution saturation in enν gene was measured 
by comparing the number of transitions and transversions 
with the size of the genetic distance for each pair of sequences 
(). The analysis of these sequences showed that the 
amount of substitutions was increasing with the extension of 
genetic distance. Only the number of transversions within the 
enν gene showed a lower increasing tendency. However, none 
of the plots took the form of a plateau, typical of the state of 
saturation with substitutions.

Evolution of enν-V3: nucleotide distances:
Mean nucleotide distances per year of the enν-V3 region of the 
viral genome of strains A1, are shown in . Overall 
nucleotide distances slowly rise over the years. This rise is 
mostly accounted for by an increase in synonymous 
substitutions, while non-synonymous nucleotide distances are 
more constant throughout the period investigated.

Codon usage analysis:
Relative synonymous codon usage (RCSU) patterns support 
the attenuation hypothesis as well  (see supplementary 
material). Those with the greatest rate of positive change over 
time were UUU, UUA, CUG, AUA, GUA, GUG, UCU, UCA, 
CCA, ACU, ACA, GCU, GCC, GCA, UAC, CAU, AAU, GAC, 
GAA, AGU, AGC, AGA, AGG, GGC, GGG. These changes are 
due to simple transition mutations, possibly associated with 
some mutational bias. The variation of relative synonymous 
codon usage (RSCU) values not only indicated the different 
frequency of occurrence of each codon for a given amino acid
in different protein but also revealed the preference of either A 
+ U or G + C codon usage as listed in . Preferential 
codon usage in the portion of enν gene analysed indicates that 
the codons with A or U at the third position are more preferred
compared to G or C ending codons.

Codon Based Analysis:
To examine how the variation of codon usage pattern over 
time reflects in the usage of individual codons in HIV-1 enν
genes in Cête d׳Ivoire, the normalized frequency of each codon 
in each sequence was compared between the years 1995 and 
2009. A graph of codon frequency distribution was plotted to 
identify the quantities of rare codons present in each sequence 
(). Frequency of codon usage with a value of 100 
indicates that the codons are highly used for a given amino 
acid. Conversely, the frequency of codon usage with a value of 
less than 5 is determined as low-frequency codon (blue bars) 
which is likely to affect the expression efficiency. Low
frequency codon are ACG, ACC, AUC, AGA, CCG, CGA, 
CCC, CGG, CGC, CGU, CUC, GAU, GCG, GGU, GUC, GUU, 
UAU, UCC, UCG, UGC, UGG, UGU, UUC, and UUG, 
respectively. This result suggested that the enν gene analysed 
contain a large number of rare codons that may reduce 
translational efficiency of the gene. We detected fewer 
nonsynonymous substitutions than expected by chance and 
dN/dS &lt; 1. Taken together, these results indicate that these 
regions are subject to very strong purifying selection. The 
location of the midpoints of the window showing negative 
selection is given in . On average, we detected 68% of 
codon sites under negative selection and 28% neutral sites.

Discussion
In this study, we contrast the changes in genetic diversity and 
adaptive evolution of the HIV-1 enν gene between samples 
collected during fitteen years. Since HIV-1 is an obligate 
pathogen on human for replication and assembly, codon usage 
bias, that affects the translational efficiency, is likely to be 
subjected to host selection pressure []. Thus, codon usage 
bias can play a significant role in host adaptation of HIV-1. For 
Cête d׳Ivoire, no study has examined the enν genes at the 
global scale over a long time period to address this issue.

Phylogenetic tree:
The enν sequences analysed indicated that substitution 
saturation has not been reached, so that the data can be 
expected to provide reliable phylogenetic signal. No significant 
change in between-year-sequence diversity was found after 
more than a decade of evolution. The reconstructed 
phylogenetic tree of 211 sequences demonstrated distinctly 
short internal branches and long external branches, suggesting 
that a large number of viruses infected the new host cell at 
each transmission. Moreover, the viruses that successfully 
infected new host cells are not under strong selective pressure 
from the host immune system, which does not limited 
between-host diversification, as indicated by those large 
clusters on the tree. The selective pressure does not 
significantly vary between the early and the recent samples. 
These samples seem most likely infected with the virus 
representing the transmissions between the populations with 
different genetic backgrounds. This is supported by the 
intermixing of Ivorian strains to these isolated from other 
African countries (Senegal, Mali, RDC). Since, Cête d׳Ivoire 
has for decades been the most important destination for 
migrants in West Africa, the exchange of HIV-1 gene pools 
between and the populations of Cête d׳Ivoire and those of the 
neighboring countries may increasingly affect the diversity of 
HIV-1 gene pools in Cête d׳Ivoire. The data indicate a 
maximum intragenotypic subtype A distance of 7.3%, lower 
than these reported by Janssens et al. 
[] who observed a 
maximum intragenotypic subtype A distance of 14.1% in their 
limited number of samples collected during 1990±1991 in 
Abidjan. It is likely that the intragenotypic distance obtained 
by these authors is skewed on the basis of so few years 
analysed. The low intragenotypic distance obtained by our 
data is supported by a large number of silent (synonymous) 
mutations that cause no change in the amino acid sequence. 
The viruse sequences were remarkably well conserved at the 
amino acid level, both within and among different individuals.

Selective pressure :
A low dN/dS ratio indicates that, the sequences did not 
undergo adequate immune pressure to lead to changes in 
amino acids and hence a reflection of the lower variability in 
the enν gene when compared. The analyses indicate that the 
enν sequences analysed are subject to purifying selection 
overall and that the derived proteins are not subject to positive 
selection favoring diversity at the amino acid level but actually 
tend to be conserved evolutionarily. Since the continuity of the 
various patients analysed are not known over time, the 
changes described may not reflect immune pressure. Indeed, 
purifying immune selection dominates evolution of HIV 
within hosts, but evolution between hosts is largely decoupled 
from within-host evolution []. The ratio of 0.701 found in our
study is lower than the ratio of 0.90 found by Yamaguchi
Kabata and Gojobori [], and higher than that of 0.68 reported 
by Brown &amp; Monaghan []. Although we did not analyze the 
four variable regions where insertions, deletions, and partial 
duplications might be very frequent, we think that the ratio in 
this study is realistic. We are aware that changes in the 
strength of the immune response may not result in predictable 
changes in the dN/dS ratio if the selection coefficient is on the 
same order of magnitude as the effective population size and 
hence providing only a little information about the status of 
the immune system [].

Codon usage biais:
Although we are studying changes in codon usage pattern 
over a decade, the data were not collected throughout the time 
for each host analysed. Hence, our results may represent 
outcome of additional and may be even contradictory selective 
forces (e.g., effect of anti-retroviral therapies). Such a scenario 
can also give rise to results similar to this study. On studying 
the codons, Meintjes and Rodrigo [] found that the early enν
sequences displayed a very biased codon usage pattern, where 
many codons occurred at very low frequency and the 
preferred codons were used at a very high frequency.

Conclusion
This study is the first that examine the selective pressures that 
governed the evolution of the subtypes of HIV-1 in Cête 
d׳Ivoire, the most affected country in West Africa. No 
significant change in the HIV-1 enν gene sequences diversity 
was found over one decade of evolution. We detected fewer 
nonsynonymous substitutions than expected by chance, 
indicating that the sequences analyzed are subject to very 
strong purifying selection. In addition to identifying sites 
under purifying selection, we also identified neutral sites that 
can cause false positive inference of selection. These sites 
presented form a resource for future studies of selection 
pressures acting on HIV-1 enν gene in Cête d׳Ivoire and other 
West African countries.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors are grateful to Laboratoire de Génétique at UFR 
Biosciences, Université Félix Houphouët Boigny for funding 
this research.

Citation:Gonedelé Bi et al, Bioinformation 10(11): 671-678 (2014)

Synonymoud and nonsynonimous ratio (dN/dS) plot along HIV-1 enν gene. Interhost overall dN/dS ratios at all sites 
within the enν gene fragments from HIV-1-infected individuals. Box plot showing the mean, standard error and 95% confidence 
interval for dN/dS ratios obtained for each codon of the HIV-1 alignments. Statistical significance was determined using the 
Kruskal–Wallis test.

Radial phylogeny tree reconstructed by Maximum likelihood methods based on fragment of HIV-1 subtype A enν V3 
loop sequence isolated from HIV-1 untreated patients in Cête d׳Ivoire from 1995 to 2009. The tree was generated using the GTR + I 
+ G model of nucleotide substitution. Sequences were named according to their accession number and year of isolation

Transitions and transversions versus genetic 
divergence plots of enν gene fragment isolated from HIV-1-
infected individuals in Cête d׳Ivoire (s: transitions, v: 
transvertions). The estimated number of transitions and 
transversions for each pairwise comparison was plotted 
against the genetic distance.

Graph showing the relative codon frequency of 
portion of HIV-1 subtypes A enν gene fragment isolated from 
HIV-1-infected individuals in Cête d׳Ivoire. The blue and black 
color bar indicating codons that are used less than 5% and 
more than 5% respectively.

Sliding-window analysis of the cumulative dN/dS across Bayes factor for the event of negative selection at a site along 
the enν gene fragment isolated from HIV-1-infected individuals in Cête d׳Ivoire.

