Background
Nature has provided innumerable number of culturally 
important medicinal plants that have been indispensable for 
the treatment of various diseases and maintaining health. 
Plants produce a wide variety and high diversity of secondary 
metabolites, which are not required for the immediate survival 
of the plant but which are synthesized in response to stress as a 
means to protect themselves from organisms, diseases or the 
environment []. Medicinal uses of plants have been 
documented in approximately 10,000 to 15,000 of world׳s 
plants and roughly 150-200 have been incorporated in western 
medicine []. And, it is currently estimated that approximately 
420,000 plant species exist in nature []. A good number of 
secondary metabolites from plants possess interesting 
biological activities with various applications, such as 
pharmaceutical ingredients, insecticides, dyes, flavors, and 
fragrances [,
]. Despite decades of research, active 
compounds of plant remain poorly characterized [].

Usage of natural substances as therapeutic agents in modern 
medicine has sharply declined from the predominant position 
held in the early decades of last century, but search for 
bioactive molecules from plants continues to play an important 
role in fashioning new medicinal agents. With the advent of 
modern techniques, instrumentation and automation in 
isolation and structural characterization, we have on hand an
enormous repository of natural compounds. In parallel to this, 
biology has also made tremendous progress in expanding its 
frontiers of knowledge. The interplay of these two disciplines 
constitutes the modern thrust in research in the realm of 
compounds elaborated by nature []. 


MPDB 1.0 database is dedicated to provide the first window to 
find the plants around Bangladesh claimed to have medicinal 
and/or nutritive values with their scientific names, family 
names, local names, and utilizing parts, sources, ailments, 
available extraction procedure and active compounds. The 
user or researcher may search any plant from this repository 
according to any key words. Thus, MPDB 1.0 will be a useful 
platform which would act as an efficient search engine for the 
researchers and clinicians who are interested to work with 
reported Bangladeshi plants having medicinal and/or 
nutritive values for the production or synthesis of more 
effective drugs. 

Methodology
Literature mining:
To retrieve data, over 100 of literatures (published in 
international and local journals till 2013) were collected 
claiming information regarding any medicinal or nutritive 
values of Bangladeshi plants around the country. Search items 
include their scientific names, family names, local names, 
utilizing parts, sources, ailments, available extraction 
procedure and active compounds.

Database preparation:
MySQL 5.0 (http://www.mysql.com/), an object-relational 
database management system was used (RDBMS) at the 
backend which stores information as tables and performs SQL 
(Structured Query Language) queries that provides speed and 
flexibility in data retrieval. Hypertext Preprocessor (PHP) 
programming language along with HTML was used as the 
front end in order to provide dynamism to the Web interface. 
MPDB 1.0 was deployed on Apache HTTP server and runs on 
a server managed by the Windows operating system.

Database access:
The lists of medicinal plants from Bangladesh with Scientific 
name, Family name, Local name, Utilized part, Source of plant, 
Ailment, Active compounds and PubMed ID have been 
organized here. The user can type any key word i.e. Scientific 
name, Family name, Local name, Utilized part, Source of plant, 
Ailment, Active compounds to find the corresponding 
information available in the database (). 

Conclusion
MPDB 1.0 is a specialized, first of its kind value-added 
database that will enable effortless pursuit of relevant 
knowledge on medicinal plants and active compounds. MPDB 
1.0 will help in the process of drug discovery by acting as a 
promising search engine for in silico screening of 
phytochemicals in future. Though a web site named medicinal 
plants in Bangladesh (www.mpbd.info) is providing 
information about beneficial effects of Bangladeshi plants, but 
this site is not bonafide for the researchers for citation and also 
less user friendly considering the fact that it is difficult to 
retrieve complete information. Our database is completely 
customized based on search engine where by putting any
keyword users can find all the related information. To develop 
the database, some of the data were collected from the research 
articles published in nationally reputed journals which are yet 
to be indexed in PubMed and this is why some of the spaces 
under PubMed ID are blank. Moreover, in the interface of the 
search result within MPDB 1.0 database (), some of the 
spaces in the context of active ingredients will be found blank, 
though those plants have beneficial role in many ailments. 
When we searched for the active compounds/agents of these 
plants in the PubMed, no reports were found. This, we believe, 
will easily open a door for the researchers who are interested 
to work with the active ingredients of the medicinal plants in 
future. Further work is required to elaborate the database by 
incorporating data on disease targets of active compounds of 
these medicinal plants. Additional search and retrieval features 
will also be added to enhance the usability of the web interface 
in future.

Future development
We are working to elaborate the database by incorporating 
data on disease targets of active compounds of these medicinal 
plants. Additional search and retrieval features will also be 
added to enhance the usability of the web interface in future.

Conflict of interest
Authors declared that there is no conflict of interests. 


Citation:Ashraf et al, Bioinformation 10(6): 384-386 (2014)

Screenshot from the web interface of medicinal plant database, MPDB 1.0.

