Background
The Indian black berry or jamun (Syzygium cumini Skeels) is
important minor fruit of commercial value belonging to the
family Myrtaceae []. It is widely grown throughout the
tropical and subtropical countries of the world due to its wide
adaptability and nutraceutical properties []. Jamun possesses
diverse health benefits that can be accredited due to the
presence of various pharmacological active phytoconstituents
such as tannins, alkaloids, steroids, flavanoids, terpenoids, fatty
acids and anthocyanins [,
]. Seeds of S. cumini are used as a
remedy for diabetes mellitus and as a productive source of
natural antioxidants [,
]. It has various pharmacological
activities such as hypoglycaemic, cardioprotective, antioxidant,
anti-proliferative, anti-inflammatory, chemoprotective and
gastroprotective properties that have been proven on animal
models by different researches [–
]. Ripe fruits used for
making health drinks, preserves, squashes, jellies and wine. The
bark is acrid, astringent, anti-inflammatory and useful for
strengthening the teeth and gums, treating sore throat,
dysentery and ulcers [,
]. The leaves are used as
ethanomedicine for leucorrhoea, stomachalgia, gastropathy,
dermopathy and constipation and act against biochemical
changes occurring in diabetes []. Jamun is highly nutritive as
it also contains important carbohydrates, free amino acids and
minerals as sodium, potassium, calcium, phosphorous, iron,
zinc and water soluble vitamins like ascorbic acid, thiamine and
niacin [,
].

Most of the S. cumini trees available in India are seedling type
in origin that shows enormous variability with respect to tree
and fruit morphology, fruit quality, maturity and productivity
due to pre-dominance of seed propagation. These provide good
scope for breeding programme [,
]. Phenotypic characters
have traditionally been used to obtain information on variation
within plant species, but usually influenced by environment
and controlled by many loci. Therefore, genetic resource
characterization is required to be complement with molecular
markers improving valuable traits []. Molecular markers
provide a quick and reliable method for evaluating DNA
polymorphism and phylogenetic relationships among
genotypes of any species without requiring prior knowledge of
the target sequence or genome [,
]. Several classes of
molecular markers have been used to evaluate the genetic
diversity in collections of genetic resource of horticultural
crops. Random amplified polymorphic DNA (RAPD) markers
provide an opportunity for direct comparison and
identification of diverse genetic material independent of any
environmental influences [,
]. Earlier, molecular markers
like RAPD have been used to assess genetic diversity in various
fruit crops.

RAPD markers have widely been used for estimating DNA
polymorphism and phylogenetic relationships in many tropical
and subtropical fruit species viz. olive 
[], mango 
[], Peach
[], grape 
[], guava 
[] and Eucalyptus 
[]. Few reports on
the use of RAPD markers are also available to study the
phylogenetic relationships among jamun accessions 
[]. In this
study an attempt has been made to use the DNA
polymorphisms for deriving phylogenetic relationships among
Syzygium cumini using phenotypic characters and RAPD
markers that could be extremely helpful for germplasm
management, crop improvement, varietal selection for breeding
programs and to protect indigenous crop wealth in India.

Methodology
Plant materials:
Syzygium cumini accessions from different geographical regions
comprising Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, Gujarat and Tamil
Nadu maintained in the field genebank at Central Institute for
Subtropical Horticulture, Lucknow (U.P.) were used for the
s tudy of phenotypi c cha ra c ter s and assessment of the
phylogenetic relationship based on RAPD markers.

Morphological characteristics:
Twelve accessions of S. cumini with uniform growth and vigour
were selected to the study the phenotypic characteristics. The
observations on quantitative characteristics viz. fruit weight,
fruit length, fruit breadth, fruit length breadth ratio, fruit size,
pulp weight, pulp content, seed weight, seed length, seed
breadth and pulp seed ratio were recorded for selected S.
cumini accessions.

DNA isolation and PCR reaction:
The extraction of total genomic DNA was carried out from
young disease free fresh leaves of selected accessions using the
Qiagen DNeasy mini kit guidelines. The isolated DNA samples
were quantified at 260-280 nm absorbances and the DNA
quality checked using 0.8 % agarose gel [–
]. A set of five
RAPD primers series of 10 bases in length with GC content
(≥ 60%) of OPA, OPB, OPX, OPD and OPG series (Operon
Technologies, Almeida, California USA) were tested for their
ability to amplify scorable and reproducible DNA fragments.
PCR reaction on each DNA sample was performed in a 25 µ l
reaction mixture containing 50 ng template DNA, 0.4 mM
dNTPs, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 1.5 U Taq DNA polymerase and 0.5 µM
primer. Amplification was carried out on a thermocycler (Bio
Rad, USA) programmed with 1 cycle of 2 minutes at 94 °C
initial denaturation followed by 35 cycles ( 1 minute at 94 °C
for denaturation, 1 min at 35 °C for annealing, and 2 min at 72
°C for extension) along with a final extension at 72 °C for 5
min. The reaction products were mixed with 4 µl of loading
dye (0.25 % bromphenol blue, 0.25 % xylene cyanol and 40 %
sucrose, w/v) and spun briefly in a microtube before loading.
A 100 base pair DNA ladder (Fermentas) was added as a
molecular ruler. The amplified products were separated by
electrophoresis in 1.5 % (w/v) agarose gels with 1X TAE buffer,
stained by 0.5 µg/ml of ethidium bromide. The PCR products
were resolved by running gel at 5 V/cm for 3 h. The gels
visualized under UV light were photographed using photo
documentation sys tem (Alpha Innotech Corp., USA). RAPD
analysis was repeated at least three times to ensure strong
reproducible bands for the analysis.

Data analysis:
The morphological data were used in multivariate analysis
with emphasis on distinctness among jamun accessions. Data of
each phenotypic traits viz. weight, length, breadth lenght-breadth
ratio, size of fruit as well as physiological parameters viz. pulp
weight, pulp content, seed weight and pulp - seed ratio of
jamun fruits and seeds were analyzed through software
DARwin 5.0 []. The Rogers-tanimoto dissimilarity coefficient
used to summarize variation based on phenotypic characters.
The dendrogram was constructed for examining the clustering
based on phenotypic relatedness among twelve Syzygium
cumini accessions. The cophenetic value matrix of the NJ
clustering was used to test for the goodness-of-fit to the
dissimilarity matrix [] by computing the cophenetic
correlation (r) with 1000 permutations [].

DNA polymorphism was evaluated and scored on the basis of
presence or absence of bands (1 or 0) and each RAPD fragments
was treated as a unit character. For each primer, the numbers of
alleles and polymorphic ones as well as the percentage of
polymorphic bands (PPB) were calculated. The latter was
determined as the percentage of polymorphic bands over the
total number of the yielded bands. Polymorphism Information
Content (PIC) for each RAPD locus was also calculated based
on the number of bands/primer using the formula PIC = 1 –
Pi2, where Pi is the frequency of the ith band in the genotype
examined. The dissimilarity coefficients between cultivars were
analyzed and clustering was carried out using unweighted pair
group method and arithmetic average (UPGMA) and
neighbour joining (NJ) method through Darwin software
(dissimilarity analysis and representation for windows
(DARwin) Version 5.0.148 (http://darwin.cirad.fr/darwin).
The principal coordinates analysis (PCoA) was also used for
analysis of the phylogenetic relationship among S. cumini
accessions. The two-dimensional PCoA was performed based
on the dissimilarity matrix.

Result &amp; discussion
Morphological characterization:
Morphological markers correspond to the visually scoring
qualitative traits as well as physical measurements of
quantitative traits are influenced by plant biology and the plant
developmental stage [,
]. The selected accessions were
characterized phenotypically in this study by comparing the
tree traits, leaf characteristics and fruit characteristics. The
maximum pulp weight was recorded (21.29 g) in J - 37 followed
by J - 36 (19.97 g) however, highest pulp content was recorded
in J – 42 (98.47 %) followed by J - 44 (98.10 %) and lowest pulp
content was recorded (66.04 %) in J - 49. Though the maximum
weight of the fruit was observed in J – 37 (22.90 g), maximum
pulp content (98.47 &amp; 98.10 %) was recorded in J – 42 and J-44,
due to seedlessness of these accessions. The maximum seed
weight was recorded in J – 49 (2.65 g) followed by J – 51 (2.19
g). Data revealed that pulp: seed ratio in various accessions
ranged from (4.10) in J – 51 and J – 55 to (64.40) in J - 42 that
showed wide range of variability  (see supplementary
material). Higher pulp: seed ratio is a desirable character for
table purpose jamun as well as crop improvement programmes.
Similar variability studies were also reported for jamun
accessions [,
].

Clustering based on phenotypic traits:
The weighted neighbor joining (NJ) method based on Rogerstanimoto
dissimilarity coefficient was used to determine the
variation in S. cumini accessions []. A cophenetic value matrix
of clustering was used to test for the goodness-of-fit of the
clustering to the dissimilarity matrix by computing the
cophenetic correlation (r) with 1000 permutations. The
cophenetic correlation between the dendrogram and the
dissimilarity matrix revealed a good degree of fit (r= 0.9517;
p&lt;0.001). The dendrogram was constructed and the cluster
analysis based on phenotypic traits using weighted neighbor
joining (NJ) method is presented in (). Genotypes
under study were broadly divided into three major clusters.
Cluster I was observed to be the largest one with 6 accessions
followed by cluster II (4 accessions) and Cluster III (2
accessions). Bootstrap values above 65 are shown in
dendrogram. Each cluster was further subdivided into
subclusters that represent the grouping of 12 S. cumini
accessions according phenotypic characteristics.

Plant DNA extraction:
DNA sequences give information about the genetic makeup of
a S. cumini accessions and to distinguish them to understand its
uniqueness. The total DNA isolation was carried out using the
Qiagen plant DNA isolation kit as it offers a better and a pure
yield of DNA that can be used for further molecular analysis.
The quality and quantity of DNA concentrations in the samples
were determined spectrophotometrically and for all the S.
cumini accessions the 260 nm/280 nm ratio was in the range
1.74 to 1.79 which indicated significant levels of purity. The
quality of the extracted DNA checked on 0.8 % agarose gel
electrophoresis was carried out using 0.5 x TBE and it is found
to be pure for further analysis through PCR amplification.

Molecular discrimination based on polymorphism:
Assessment of genetic variability and identification of superior
genotypes are the fundamental step for any crop improvement
programme in particularly in era of genomics.

The aim of present the study was to characterize different S.
cumini accessions and to assess their phylogenetic relationship
on the basis of RAPD fingerprints. The arbitrary 10-mer
primers of OPA, OPB, OPD, OPG, OPE and OPX series were
first screened for twelve accessions of S. cumini and only 18
informative primers were retained to assess the genetic
variability for the selected accessions based on their ability to
produce polymorphic, unambiguous and stable RAPD pattern.

A total of 207 scorable alleles were detected, out of which 201
alleles were observed to be polymorphic and the size varied
from 300 bp to 3500 bp. Number of alleles scored per primer
ranged from 7 to 19 and the lowest number of alleles per primer
was produced by OPX - 4 while the highest numbers of alleles
were obtained with primer by primer OPD -18 with an average
17.5 alleles per primer  (see supplementary material).
Reliable and reproducible DNA amplification was obtained for
18 primers and 97 per cent of polymorphism was cumulatively
sourced.

Earlier report on Syzygium species endemic to Mauritius
explored using both morphological characters and molecular
techniques have reveled Random amplified polymorphic DNA
(RAPD) and inter simple sequence repeat (ISSR) techniques to
be successfully used to amplify all the 6 Syzygium species. The
RAPD analysis resulted an average of13.6 markers and the
average polymorphism of 41.2 % per primer was observed as
compared to an average of 11 markers and 33.3 %
polymorphism per ISSR primer [].

The representative RAPD profile generated by primers OPD -
18, OPA - 13 and OPG - 13 were shown in (, 
 &amp; ). The
polymorphic information content (PIC) was used for
comparison of polymorphism levels across the markers and to
determine the usefulness of markers for specific studies. The
polymorphic information content (PIC) indicates
polymorphism levels was also determined and discriminating
power ranged from 0.78 (OPG-13) to 0.94 (OPD-12) with an
average of 0.88 ().

Factorial analysis for variability:
The principal coordinates analysis (PCoA) was used for
evaluating the phylogenetic relationship among selected
accessions. The PCoA showed significant grouping of the
populations that were plotted into four sub-plots, representing
Each group of S. cumini accessions with distinctive features
(). The groupings of populations were largely in
accordance with their geographical localities. The
representation of genetic relatedness was depicted by
twodimensional principal coordinates analysis (PCoA) based
on jaccard similarity which revealed diversity among different
S. cumini accessions. The first and second coordinates revealed
26.04 % and 20.91 % of the variations in the standardized data
set of the twelve accessions. The PCoA analysis is a good
indication of the genetic relationships and both the principal
coordinate analysis (PCoA) and cluster analysis grouped
together the S. cumini accessions according to their similarity
based on their DNA patterns [–
].

Genetic distance and Cluster analysis:
The cluster analysis was carried out based on Jaccard׳s
similarity coefficients generated from 207 RAPD bands ranged
from 0.284 to 0.844. The maximum dissimilarity found in
between the accession J -37 and J -44 (0.844) however, the
minimum dissimilarity coefficient was recorded for the
accessions J -51 and J -55 (0.284). The cophenetic correlation
values for the dendrogram UPGMA and NJ based on the
Jaccard dissimilarity coefficient revealed a good degree of fit.
The cophenetic correlation value of UPGMA (r = 0.967; ρ&lt;0.001)
and NJ (r = 0.987; ρ&lt;0.001) dendrograms suggest the cluster
analysis strongly represents the similarity matrix.
Bootstrapping analysis resulted in at least on an average of 72.5
% of confidence limits for the two major clusters.

The dendrogram calculated by using Jaccard coefficient based
on UPGMA () and Neighbour joining 
()
algorithm showed three main clusters. Cluster 1 contained five
accessions out of which two J-51 and J-55 were grouped
together showing coalignment with accessions J-49, J-23 and J-
43 which are apparently unrelated. These accessions originating
from different eco-geographical regions as J-51 from Godhra
Gujrat and J-55 from Konkan, Maharastra, however, J-23 and J-
49 from different regions of Lucknow and J-43 from Varanasi,
U.P. These all accessions are characterized by big canopies,
producing small fruit, bold seeded with less pulp content,
perhaps grouping in same cluster according to their
morphological characteristics and sharing common gene pool.
In a molecular study, Khan [] was reported that ten random
primers generated 129 amplified products with an average of
12.9 bands per polymorphic primer displaying adequate
informativeness for the genetic and ecological diversity among
S. cumini accessions. The dendogram generated by UPGMA
method grouped accessions into four clusters with no region
specific grouping. Nevertheless, the study provides a
population level genetic profile that could be further correlated
with ecogeographical factors for further investigations.

Cluster II was presented by populations of S. cumini accessions
from two different locations of Lucknow, U.P. Cluster II was
further divided into two subgroups. One of the subgroups
included three accessions namely J-37, J-36 and J-34 and another
subgroup comprise two accessions J-40 and J-26. This cluster
appears to be quite distinct as compared to other cluster.

These accessions grouped together according to their respective
geographical origin and having medium size tree, broad leaf,
bold sized fruit, small seed with high pulp content. The cluster
III included accessions J-42 and J-44 which are not from the
same geographical origin as they are the accessions from
Varanasi, U.P. and Periyakulum, T.N. but grouped with each
other, because of these are the seedless accessions. The
phylogenetic tree for different S. cumini accessions as illustrated
in dendrogram generated by UPGMA and NJ algorithms were
also clearly shown in topological phenogram ( &amp; 
).
It reveals the facts that these accessions grouped according to
their genetic characteristics. The present investigation
categorizes 12 S. cumini accessions originating from diverse ecogeographical
regions and morphological characteristics, into
different clusters and gives a useful insight into their genetic
relationships that may be of value in the crop improvement
programs.

Conclusion
The genetic variability as assessed by various phenotypic
characteristics as well as molecular marker showed significant
variations among the different accessions of S. cumini. The
dendrogram grouped the accessions in to three main clusters
according to their eco-geographical regions which give useful
insight into their p h y l o g e n e t i c relationships. The
obtained results are important in to varietal selection
programme for breeding, germplasm management, crop
improvement and also to protect indigenous crop wealth in
India.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Singh et al, Bioinformation 10(4): 201-208 (2014)

Dendrogram illustrating the phenotypic relatedness among the 12 Syzygium cumini accessions based on Rogers-Tanimoto
dissimilarity coefficient and the bootstrap values are shown by supporting nodes.

PCR amplification products using primer OPD – 18.

PCR amplification profile using primer OPA – 13.

Banding pattern as revealed by primer OPG – 13

Two-dimensional plot of principal coordinates
analysis (PCoA) depicting the genetic relatedness among S.
cumini accessions.

A) Dendrogram illustrating the phylogenetic relationship among S. cumini accessions (UPGMA method); B) The
topological phenogram of S. cumini accessions depicting the phylogenetic relationship (UPGMA method).

A) Dendrogram illustrating the phylogenetic relationship among S. cumini accessions (Neighbour-joining algorithm) and
the bootstrap values are shown by supporting nodes; B) Topological phenogram illustrating the phylogenetic relationship among
S. cumini accessions (Neighbour-joining algorithm) and the bootstrap values are shown by supporting nodes

