Background
Repeat proteins form an abundant and ubiquitous class of
proteins. These proteins are characterized by tandem
homologous structural motifs of 20-40 amino acids and are
categorized based on their structures. Owing to their modular
structural properties, repeat proteins have displayed
evolutionary success and a wide range of functions 
[].
Computational screening of rice full-length cDNA sequences
discovered the existence of proteins containing eicosapenta
peptide repeats (EPRs) a novel class of repeat proteins 
[]. EPRs
genes code for ~67 kDa proteins that have 10 successive repeat
units of a 25 amino acids repeat unit (X2CX4CX10CX2HGGG).
The repeats are characterized by, glycine-rich motifs, and
periodic occurrence of cysteine residues. EPRs are unique by
specific occurrence only in flowering plants and highly
conserved amino acid sequences. Although EPRs occur in
multiple copies, they are far fewer compared to PPRs.
Extraordinary sequence conservation at protein level as well as
angiosperm specific occurrence compels the assignment of
functional significance to EPRs. However, absence of even a
remote homology to known DNA and protein sequences meant
that conclusions on functions would be conjectural 
[].

It is established that protein structure is much more highly
conserved than protein sequence since sequence evolves faster
than the corresponding structure [], and hence structural
characteristics can better identify functional aspects of the
proteins. Protein function can be annotated, based on different
protein features such as 3D fold, sequence, structural motifs
and functional sites using likelihoods []. In an effort to
understand the functional significance of EPRs, tertiary
structure was determined using computational methodologies.
Here, we describe (1) prediction and validation of 3-D structure
of protein coded by a rice EPR locus (GI: 32984786) and (2)
deduction of its functional role based on the structural features.

Methodology
Fold prediction:
Protein sequence was subjected to LOMETS (Local Meta-
Threading-Server) analysis (
http://zhanglab.ccmb.med.umich.edu/LOMETS/). LOMETS generates consensus protein
structure predictions from nine locally-installed threading
programs of FUGUE, HHsearch, PAINT, PPA-I, PPA-II,
PROSPECT2, SAM-T02, SPARKS, and SP3. The output of
LOMETS include: Consensus threading models based on TMscore;
Spatial C-alpha and side-chain contact and distance
restraints; and Full-length models built by MODELLER with
consensus restraints.

3-D structure prediction:
Ab initio sequence-based tertiary structure prediction was
carried out using a Monte Carlo fragment insertion proteinfolding
program, ROSETTA [] at http: //www.bioinfo.rpi.edu/bystrc/hmmstr/server.php. The constructed
model was evaluated for its backbone conformation (structural
quality) using Ramachandran plot []; Procheck Validation
Suite for Protein Structures (http: //biotech.ebi.ac.uk:8400) as
well as Verify3D at http://nihserver.mbi.ucla.edu/Verify_3D
[].

Prediction of functional sites:
To identify the conserved residues that are often functionally
significant, the multiple sequence alignment of rice EPR
homologs (based on BAYES Model of substitution for proteins)
was mapped onto the structure using ConSurf at http://consurf.tau.ac.il 
[]. Putative pockets of interactions with
ligands in a protein structure were identified by Putative Active
Sites with Spheres (PASS) at http:// bioserv.rpbs.univ-parisdiderot.fr/RPBS/cgibin/Ressource.cgi?chzn_lg=an&amp;chzn_rsrc=PASS 
[]. Structural
pockets and cavities, expected to be associated with binding
sites, were identified by Computed Atlas of Surface
Topography of Proteins (CASTp) server at http://sts.bioengr.uic.edu/castp 
[].

Annotation of function:
Bayesian weights were computed for putative GO terms
indicating the likelihood of predicted biochemical properties
using the ProKnow server (http://www.doembi.ucla.edu/Services/ProKnow/) 
[]. The interpretation of
the Bayesian Score was done in conjunction with the Evidence
Rank and the Number of clues (Clue Count). An altogether
different function prediction methodology that uses local 3D
templates by comparing fold matching, residue conservation
and surface cleft analysis was employed using ProFunc server
https://www.ebi.ac.uk/thornton-srv/databases/profunc/index.html 
[].

Construction of phylogeny:
EPR sequences of rice and Arabidopsis EPR loci, as well as
ESTs belonging to 20 species of monocots from five families
and 45 dicot species belonging to 20 families were downloaded
from the NCBI databases. To ensure correct alignment of
recursive units, sequences were anchored at the carboxyl-end of
the repeat stretch, X2CWX for phylogenetic analysis. The
sequences were aligned using ClustalX (version 1.81). The
phylogenetic tree was constructed by the neighbor-joining
method using MEGA version 4.0, with the setting of complete
gap deletion and Poisson correction. Bootstrapping (1,000
replicates) was performed to evaluate the degree of support for
a particular grouping in the neighbor-joining analysis.

Results &amp; Discussion
Fold prediction for EPR structure determination:
Fold recognition returned eight models based on fold
homology to five templates, all of which were receptors. Top
hits were mouse herceptin2 epidermal growth factor receptor
(1N8Y), human Toll like receptor (1ZIW), and Arabidopsis TIR1
plant hormone receptor (2P1M). However, the length of
sequence overlap and quality of the fold match (RMSD of the
model template alignment were always in double digits) in all
the models developed by MODELLER were inadequate.

Ab initio tertiary structure prediction of EPRs:
Ab initio methods have been consulted only under difficult
conditions such as very low sequence homology and low scores
of meta-prediction. Nevertheless, ab initio structures, despite
their low quality, provide biological hints. The objective here
was to obtain clues on the functional aspects of the EPR protein
rather than study the structure per se. The 3D structure of only
the 259 residue repeat region of protein coded by a rice EPR
locus (GI: 32984786) was determined. The resultant structure
comprised of seven alpha helices and thirteen anti-parallel beta
sheets (). The recursive units observed in the sequence
showed no specific pattern in the structure. Further, unlike
typical alpha helix groove of a TPR protein, EPR protein did not
show particular structural pattern. Tandem repeat proteins
have been classified based on their tertiary structures [] EPR
did not seem to fit into any of these categories. With α and β
protein type of folds connected by long loops, EPR was found
to be altogether different from typical tandem peptide repeats
such as TPR, HEAT, LRR, ANK, WD40, Fib, etc., whose 3-D
structures have been solved []. The observations on EPR
putative structure as well as the absence of homologs for any of
its domains indicate a completely novel structure, forming an
interesting subject for further investigation on solving the
actual structure.

It was crucial that the quality of the predicted structure was
validated before drawing any functional cues from the
structural characteristics. However there is no single method
able to consistently and accurately predict the errors in a
protein structure. Hence, two distinct approaches were used,
which could complement each other to impart greater
confidence to the predicted error of specific regions in the
protein. From Verify3D analysis, it was found that 223 residues
scored more than 0.2, denoting that 86.1% of the residues
complemented with the 1D-3D profile (). Since
satisfactory models are expected to have a minimum of 80%
score, quality of EPR structure was considered good.
Ramachandran׳s statistics showed that more than 90% of the
residues were found to be located in the most favored regions,
and none in disallowed regions (). These observations
confirmed predicted EPR protein structure to be a good quality
model. From the predicted model, it was evident that recursive
residues, conserved pattern and disulphide bonds played major
role in determining the 3D structure of EPR protein ().

Prediction of Functional sites on EPR protein:
Identifying mutual interactions with proteins/peptides, nucleic
acids or ligands play a vital role in determining the function of
a protein. Therefore, clues on the function can be obtained by
identifying functionally important amino acids on the protein
surface that are responsible for these interactions. It is also
known that functional sites are the most conserved residues
among sequence homologs. Residue conservation data
obtained from all rice EPR protein sequences were surfacemapped
onto the predicted structure by ConSurf. The analysis
revealed predominantly conserved residues in the carboxylterminal
half of the protein particularly in β11, β12, α5, α4 with
α4-β7 junction, β8 and β9. A few scattered conserved sites in
the amino-terminal half were also observed ().

Binding sites and active sites of proteins are often associated
with structural pockets and cavities, and it has been shown that
by locating, defining and measuring concave surface regions,
functional sites can be recognized. Surface topography analysis
revealed that EPR protein possesses putative functional regions
in the interior of the molecule (, blue colored areas) as
if to resemble a groove or a grotto, in which ligands could
interact. Mouth openings of pockets were predicted to be
typically on the surface, particularly around the groove
opening (, red colored areas), indicating that the
binding sites, although in the interior, are readily accessible to
ligands and substrates.

The binding sites were also identified using a completely
different algorithm that probes the protein surface for
identifying putative pockets of interactions. PASS analysis of
EPR structure showed the possibility of three putative active
site points (, blue spheres) among the final set of
probes (sky blue dots). Location of these active sites completely
agreed with the CASTp output and thus, three common
putative functional sites were delineated upon the EPR protein
at (i) β12, (ii) α4 and α4-β7 junction, and (iii) a groove defined
by a β-turn between α2- α3 and a β-hairpin between α1-β1.

Prediction of Function of EPR protein:
Bayesian weights were computed for putative GO terms
indicating the likelihood of predicted biochemical properties.
Since the GO assignment was very strong (number of clues was
always six) and reliable (the rank scores were never greater
than 2.9), the Bayesian weight seemed to have confident
inference of the ontology in case of EPR. Top prediction for
molecular function was calcium ion binding with a Bayesian
Score of 0.7. EPR protein was further predicted to have
functional role in development (Bayesian Score of 0.73).
Analyses using local 3D templates by comparing fold matching,
residue conservation and surface cleft analysis, confirmed
binding as the most likely function of EPR protein, although it
could not be precise about the ligand. However, in the process,
the ProFunc server identified PDB structure matches that could
provide clues on the nature of EPR proteins. All the top hits
turned out to be plant agglutinins (lectin) indicating that at
least some part of EPR structure has similarity to lectin
structures. The top matching proteins were WGA isolectin 3
(1K7T and 1WGT) and Pokeweed lectin-C (1ULK).

Phylogenetic distribution of plants based on EPR sequences:
Detailed database searches confirmed that EPR proteins and
EPR motifs are extraordinarily taxa-specific to only
Magnoliophyta, compared to other tandem repeat protein
domains such as PPRs and TPRs that are distributed in wider
taxa. Such observations proposed that EPRs must be of recent
origin. This was further supported by the existence of
remarkable sequence similarity across species and occurrence
of perfect recursive units in almost all the available sequences.
Sequence alignment could not show any sequence pattern
specific to monocots and dicots, the two major taxonomical
sub-units of flowering plants. The phylogenetic analysis to
construct a neighbor-joining tree showed two major clades,
both of which contained monocot and dicot species ().
However, it was observed that, in the overall presentation,
monocots appeared to be partially differentiated from dicots,
which occur in two groups. This kind of phylogenetic
distribution is indicative of an on-going evolution process
towards taxa-specificity in sequence. Although, it is apparent
that EPR proteins must have undergone unit-duplication, lack
of sequence data from basal eudicots and other primitive
flowering plants restricts the analysis from drawing
conclusions on common ancestor where EPRs are likely to have
had their origin.

Conclusion
Origin of tandem peptide repeats is attributed to intra-genic
duplication and recombination [] and that selection for repeats
is a relatively recent evolutionary occurrence []. High
conservation combined with narrow phylogenetic specificity of
EPRs observed in the study brings forth two facts: first, EPRs
have resulted from recent evolutionary events and second, they
are functionally significant. When all types of predictions were
put together, interesting results emerged. It was evident that
regions of EPR coded by rice cDNA (GI: 32984786) exhibiting a
great degree of conservation were those that are putatively
involved in function such as functional sites 1 and 2 (equivalent
to β12 and α4 with α4-β7 junction). However, putative
functional site 3 (a groove defined by a β-turn between α2- α3
and a β-hairpin between α1-β1) did not seem to be conserved as
much although CASTp analysis marked the site for likely
ligand interaction. The alignment between EPR protein and
legume lectin as well as WGA isolectin 3 overlapped with
functional sites 1 and 2. On the other hand, EPR protein aligned
with pokeweed lectin-C in the region of functional sites 2 and 3.
Lectins, have a common requirement for divalent metal ions,
usually Ca2+ and Ca2+ binding residues are highly conserved
than sugar binding residues []. The observation that EPR
protein has domains for Ca2+ binding leads us to consider if the
conserved regions that are functionally active actually
participate in Ca2+-binding and that EPR protein could in fact
be a lectin-type protein (). Even the threading metaserver
identified the top template (1N8Y) that contained a lectin
fold. Additionally, the phylogenetic analysis () showed
a taxa-specific distribution of EPR proteins that is typical of
lectins observed earlier, for instance, monocot-specific (now
GNA-like) mannose binding lectins. It looks obvious that EPRs
as repetitive units must have been a product of duplication
events as found in for instance mannose binding lectins. Plants
are capable of acquiring novel domains from existing structural
scaffolds with a different activity []. E.g. Curculin from
Curculigo latifolia is a homolog of GNA related lectin that has no
sugar binding activity but has sweet tasting properties [];
Arcelins are lectins by structure but do not bind to
carbohydrates and have insecticidal activity []. EPR proteins
could therefore have lectin-like binding properties ().

Prediction of a single function merely based on computational
analyses could be speculative for repeat proteins. For instance
in well-characterized repeat family of TPRs, the bi-helical
structure has proliferated to form various sequence subfamilies
with a wide range of function []. Proteins like EPRs
could also be multifunctional; our analysis revealed calcium ion
binding function as a definite possibility.

Javaregowda Nagaraju passed away on 31 December 2012 and
this article is dedicated to his memory.

Citation:Archak &amp; Nagaraju, Bioinformation 10(2): 063-067 (2014)

Predicted structure of EPR protein. EPR protein is
made up of seven alpha helices and 13 beta sheets.

Quality evaluation of EPR protein structure.
Assessment by a) Verify3D and b) Ramachandran statistics
confirmed a good quality model. Out of 194 non-glycine and
non-proline residues, 175 (90.2%) residues were in most
favored regions [A,B,L]; 18 9.3% in additional allowed regions
[a,b,l,p]; one residue in generously allowed regions
[~a,~b,~l,~p]. There were 60 glycine and four proline residues
along with a lone end-residues (excluding Gly and Pro).

Contribution of recursive residues and patterns in
achieving structural stability of EPR protein: a) Predicted
structure of EPR is represented as cartoon showing helices
(green), sheets (ochre) and loops (blue); b) Cysteine was found
be a part of all the helices and beta strands. Other patterns such
as c) triple glycine; d) motif end, AHGGG; e) motif start, XRC;
and f) additional three amino acids in the 8th repeat unit (GGV,
GGL, GGI or DDP) were all found to occur in beta sheets 10, 11
and 12.

Prediction of functional sites of EPR protein: a)
Conserved residues (blue surface representation) that are often
functionally important, are mapped onto the EPR structure
(mesh representation); b) Structural pockets of EPR protein that
could be functionally significant (blue surface areas); c) Mouths
of the structural pockets showing the accessibility of the
putative functional sites for interactions (red surface areas); d)
to f) Molecular probes (blue grains) and ligand binding sites
(blue balls) show three binding sites. Predicted structural
pockets, conserved regions and ligand binding sites overlap at
many sites.

Phylogenetic analysis of EPR proteins. Only those
EPR sequences that possess carboxyl-end terminal motif
X2CWX are used to align and construct the neighbor-joining
tree. Each OTU is represented by the binomial name and the
genbank accession number of the sequence. Bootstrap values
(1000 replications) are shown on the nodes. Grouping of
monocots is indicated by the green lines.

Is EPR protein a lectin-like protein? (a) The cartoon
representation of EPR protein marked with conserved domains
(in red color) and structural pockets (in blue color). Functional
pockets (red balls surrounded by red colored probes) that are
putatively calcium-binding overlap with conserved domains as
well as structural pockets. (b) Calcium binding domains of EPR
protein and a legume lectin. (c) It is the same region (functional
pockets 1 and 2, see Figure 4) that aligns with a plant lectin
(blue frame).

