Background
The past two decades have seen an exponential rise in the accumulation of
genomic and proteomic data stored in the form of countless numbers of
nucleotide and protein sequences in the data banks. Massive efforts by
thousands of research scientists are being done to annotate the structures and
functions of proteins in biological organisms. Conversely, the understanding of
the function of newly discovered proteins that may potentially play a
designated role in normal or diseased conditions is greatly aided by this
amassing collection of data []. The systematic annotation of these protein
sequences with the help of bioinformatics tools is one of the major thrust areas
of application biology today. The progress in the field of bioinformatics is
marked by the development of numerous tools through which the classification
and identification of certain significant proteins has been made systematic and
easier, thus saving the time and cost of experimentation by repeated trial and
error in the laboratory. Such a prior analysis may also provide a direction to
wet laboratory studies and thus help to integrate the fields of in silico and
experimental work together. Protein families consist of proteins that have
evolved during the course of time from a common ancestor and exhibit a
threshold level of relationship []. MMPs are a family of zinc containing
endopeptidases, which is a subset of the metzincin superfamily of
metalloproteinases. These regulatory proteases are the extracellular matrix
(ECM) remodelers characterized by their substrate specificity to degrade ECM
proteins. Based on this, they have been classified as collagenases, gelatinases,
stromelysins, matrilysins, membrane type MMPs (MT-MMPs) and other
unclassified MMPs []. 
Structurally, MMPs consist of four domains: an amino
terminal hydrophobic pro- domain, a Zn2+ containing catalytic domain, a
flexible hinge region and a carboxy terminal hemopexin-like domain
responsible for their substrate specific nature []. Activity of MMPs is
regulated by Tissue Inhibitors of Matrix Metalloproteinases (TIMPs). Under
normal conditions, this control is responsible for maintenance of the ECM. An
imbalance in the regulation of activity may thus, disrupt the integrity of ECM
[]. 
MMPs have been implicated as clinical targets in numerous physiological
and pathological conditions, such as arthritis, atherosclerosis, cancer, eye
diseases, skin diseases, cardio-vascular and neurodegenerative disorders 
[].

Out of the 26 MMPs reported till date, 23 have been identified in humans 
[].
Our study reports an in silico comparative characterization and analysis of
human MMPs using various bio-computational tools, pertaining to their
physico-chemical, secondary structural and functional features. Any atypical
but significant feature may have various connotations with respect to the role of
MMPs in pathological conditions. The aim here is to identify potential disease
responsive MMPs that might possibly be implicated for their role in diseases.
Moreover, such an in depth knowledge of all human MMPs would greatly aid
researchers to identify the MMPs of interest relevant to their respective
working systems. This would further set a precedent for similar comparative
characterization studies for other large protein families, using the numerous
resources from the field of computational biology.

Methodology
Protein sequence retrieval
UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, a high quality manually annotated and non-redundant
protein sequence database, was used to retrieve the complete sequences of the
23 human MMPs []. 
These sequences were used for further analysis using
various online bio-computational tools.

Physico-chemical analysis
The computation of various physical and chemical parameters, such as amino
acid composition, molecular weight, isoelectric point (pI), total number of
negative and positive charged residues, extinction coefficient, instability index,
aliphatic index and Grand Average of Hydropathy (GRAVY), was done using
ExPASy's ProtParam tool (http://us.expasy.org/ tools/protparam.html).
ExPASy's ProtScale tool was used to analyze the number of codons, bulkiness,
polarity, refractivity, recognition factors, hydrophobicity, transmembrane
tendency, percent buried residues, percent accessible residues, average area
buried, average flexibility and relative mutability
(http://us.expasy.org/tools/protscale.html) 
[].

Secondary structural analysis
SOPMA tool (Self-Optimized Prediction Method with Alignment) of NPS@
(Network Protein Sequence Analysis) server was used to characterize the
secondary structural features of the proteins such as, alpha helix, 310 helix, Pi
helix, beta bridge, extended strand, beta turn, bend region, random coil,
ambiguous states and other states [].

Functional analysis
The analysis of the MMP motifs was done with the help of Motif Scan tool
(http://myhits.isb-sib.ch/cgi-bin/motif_scan) 
[]. The SOSUI server prediction
yielded the transmembrane regions of the human MMPs, which were further
classified as membrane bound and soluble proteins [].

Results and Discussion
MMPs are secreted in latent form as pro-MMPs and these zymogens are
required to be cleaved for activation. They are found to exhibit pro and active
forms, characterized by a difference in molecular weights (Table 1 see
). The exceptional behavior of MMP-12, with two
active forms (45 kDa and 22 kDa), is because of an internal autolytic
processing mechanism causing its carboxy terminal domain to be cleaved from
its catalytic domain, thus yielding three products 
[].

Analysis of amino acid composition indicates that while the percentage of
cysteine residues in majority of MMPs lies in the range of 0.6-1.3%, MMP-2, 9
and 23 show a significant rise with values 2.9, 2.7 and 2.8 percent, respectively
() (See Table 2 in
). High percentage of
cysteine residues in MMP-2 and 9 might be correlated with presence of
cysteine switch motif and role of these MMPs in pathological conditions. These
gelatinases have been previously implicated in carcinomas and cardio-vascular
disorders. High cysteine content of the unclassified MMP-23 might be
attributed to the presence of cysteine array in its structure. Highly significant
presence of cysteine suggests its role as a critical residue for MMP activity and
thus these MMPs may be investigated for possible role in diseased conditions.
Further analysis of the amino acid composition can help to locate amino acid
presence at an unusual level and be correlated with specific pathological
conditions [].

Other physico-chemical parameters also signify the behavior of MMPs in
different conditions (see Table 3(a) and Table 3(b) see 
). pI
values for majority of MMPs (MMP-7, 12, 14, 15, 16, 19, 20, 21, 23, 24, 25, 27
and 28) lie in the alkaline range (pH&gt;7) while for the others, (MMP-1, 2, 3, 8,
9, 10, 11, 13, 17 and 26) it falls in the acidic range (pH&lt;7). In addition to this,
the instability index classifies MMP - 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 10, 12, 13, 16, 19, 20, 26
and 27 as stable (Instability index &lt;40) and remaining as unstable
metalloproteinases (Instability index &lt;40) (). Furthermore, aliphatic
index, signifying the relative volume of protein occupied by aliphatic side
chains helps to study thermo stable properties of an enzyme. It is found to span
within a range of 61.09 to 83.59 (). Stability of human MMPs in a
small range suggests their unstable nature over wide temperature range, though
MMP-23 is observed as the most thermostable MMP. Moreover, high
extinction coefficients are observed for MMP- 2, 15, 16, 21, 24 and 28, which
is correlated with a high concentration of lysine, tryptophan and tyrosine
residues in the sequence and may be useful in protein-protein and proteinligand
interaction studies in solution. Hydrophobicity values range from -
0.6720 of MMP-19 (most hydrophilic) to 0.4615 of MMP-14 (most
hydrophobic).

Secondary structural analysis indicates a pre-dominance of random coils,
followed by α-helices, extended strands and β-turns in 20 MMPs while the
extended strands exceed α-helices in MMP-9, 11 and 19 () 
(see ). This is useful to predict three dimensional
structures of proteins and can help in approximation of some aspects of protein
function and their classification into families [].

The Motif Scan tool predicts the presence of a cysteine switch, a zinc protease
and a hemopexin motif in human MMPs which have been the subject of
discussion in various literatures (see 
). The
cysteine switch regulates activity of MMPs via complex formation between
cysteine residue of prodomain and zinc atom of catalytic domain 
[]. The
hemopexin domain is an essential part of MMPs performing multiple functions
in activation and inhibition, homodimerization and multimerization, binding
and cleavage of substrates, attachment to cell surface and degradation of MMPs
[]. 
The primary sequence motif HExxH is present in the catalytic domain of
zinc-dependant MMPs. While the two conserved histidine residues coordinate
the zinc atom, the glutamic acid residue is a member of the active site of
enzyme []. 
The zinc binding region signature has been defined as
(uncharged)-(uncharged)-H-E-(uncharged)-(uncharged)-H-(uncharged)-(hydro
phobic) []. 
Furthermore, an extra type II domain of fibronectin is found in
MMP-2 and 9 at three regions within the catalytic domain, playing a pivotal
role in the collagen binding region of these enzymes. MMP-17, 19, 21, 23, 25,
26 and 28, classified as ‘other MMPs’, show the presence of zinc protease
motif only. Also, transmembrane regions of length 20-23 base pairs are
predicted in 14 MMPs using SOSUI server (see 
). 
MMP-15, 16, 24 and 25 are found to possess two transmembrane regions.

Conclusion
Intensive characterization and comparative analysis of the MMP family of
proteins with the help of numerous bio-computational tools yielded new
insights and perspectives which can be used to identify and group MMPs that
play a crucial role in a pathological condition. In this study, physico-chemical,
secondary structural and functional analysis of the large human MMP family
was carried out. The findings through this study may be used by researchers
working on MMPs in context of any experimental system. The amino acid
composition shows a considerably high percentage of cysteine residues in
MMP-23, along with MMP-2 and 9. Also, MMP 23 is found to be the most
thermo stable MMP. We, thus, hypothesize that MMP-23, along with MMP-2
and 9, might be a key player in pathological conditions. Further studies with
the help of experimental research and testing need to be carried out to validate
this proposal. In this manner, certain other groupings and clustering of disease
responsive MMPs can be made by analysis of the various parameters of MMPs
computed using bioinformatics tools. Additionally, this study may be taken as a
prototype for similar in silico investigational studies with regard to other large
proteins families, wherein such comparative analysis might aid in giving a
direction and help to streamline the conduct of experimentation.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Jaiswal et al, Bioinformation 6(1): 23-30 (2011)

Percentage of cysteine residues in human MMPs computed by
ExPASy's ProtParam tool. The amino acid composition of the 23 human
MMPs was analyzed. Cysteine showed an abnormal trend as the percentage of
cysteine residues in MMP-2, 9 and 23 was found to be exceptionally high as
compared to other MMPs.

Distribution plot of Stable and Unstable MMPs as computed by
ExPASy's ProtParam tool. The instability index classified MMP - 1, 2, 3, 7, 8,
10, 12, 13, 16, 19, 20, 26 and 27 as stable (Instability index &lt;40) and MMP - 9,
11, 14, 15, 17, 21, 23, 24, 25 and 28 as unstable (Instability index &gt;40)
metalloproteinases.

Computation of aliphatic index by ExPASy's ProtParam tool. The
aliphatic index indicates the thermostability of proteins. MMP-23 was found to
be the most thermostable MMP with a high aliphatic index of 83.59.

Analysis of secondary structural features through SOPMA. The
computation of 23 human MMPs showed a pre-dominance of random coils,
followed by α-helices, extended strands and β-turns in 20 MMPs, while
extended strands exceeded α-helices in MMP-9, 11 and 19. The figure shows
an average plot of the data of all 23 human MMPs.

