Background
Pto encodes a cytoplasmic serine/threonine protein kinase 
[]
that interacts with the avr Pto gene product of the bacterial
pathogen Pseudomonas syringae pv tomato 
[]. The interaction
appears to launch a cascade of molecular events that triggers
the hypersensitive disease-resistance response 
[]. These
experiments provided the first molecular confirmation of Flor's
(1956) gene-for-gene hypothesis that predicted a host resistance
(R) gene encodes a receptor that recognizes a ligand encoded or
produced by the corresponding Avr gene. Protein kinases are a
group of enzymes with possess a catalytic subunit which
transfers the gamma phosphate from nucleotide triphosphates
(often ATP) to one or more amino acid residues in a protein
substrate side chain, resulting in a conformational change
affecting protein function. The enzymes classified into two
broad classes based on substrate specificity are
serine/threonine specific and tyrosine specific 
[]. Protein
kinase also play a major role in a multitude of cellular
processes, including division, proliferation, apoptosis, and
differentiation []. 
The catalytic subunits of protein kinase are
highly conserved, and several structures have been generated
[,
].

Methodology
The amino acid sequence of serine/threonine protein kinase Pto
of Solanum lycopersicum (311 amino acids).was retrieved
(Accession No: AAB47421) from the NCBI Genbank database
(http:www.ncbi.nlm.gov). A BLAST 
[] search (PDB-BLAST) 
[]
was performed with the amino acid sequence of
serine/threonine protein kinase pto. The PDB-BLAST resulted
with two best entries: Crystal Structure of effect protein
AvrptoB complexed with Kinase Pto (PDB ID: 3HGK (Chain A))
[] 
and bacterial effector protein Avrpto (PDB ID: 2QKW
(Chain B)) []. 
These two proteins have a common sequence
identity of 83% (269/321) with serine/threonine protein kinase
Pto. Additionally, these two proteins have a crystal structure
resolution of 3.30 Angstrom (3HGK) and 3.20 Angstrom
(2QKW) respectively to make them excellent reference
templates for performing homology modelling. The present
study, we approached three different modelling approaches
using the Modeller 9v7 [] 
software for modelling the threedimensional
structures of serine/threonine protein kinase Pto.
First we aligned the serine/threonine protein kinase Pto with
the sequence of the template protein 3HGK (Accession No:
3HGKA) using the ALIGN2D command of Modeller 9v7 and
built a model. In next phase we aligned the serine/threonine
protein kinase Pto with the sequence of the template protein
2QKW (Accession No: 2QKWB) using Modeller 9v7 to build
another model. And finally, we created a model using multiple
templates of Chain A of 3HGK and Chain B of 2QKW. The
rough models generated were further refined using loop.py
script in Modeller9v7.

Discussion
Sequence analysis, alignment and Model generation:
Initially a structural analysis of the two template structures
3HGK and 2QKW were performed using ICM Molsoft Browser
www.molsoft.com/icm_browser.html which revealed that
crystal structure of Chain A of 3HGK consisted with only 288
amino acid residues (LYS31-GLU312) whereas crystal structure
of Chain B of 2QKW consisted of 292 amino acid residues
(PRO30-ILE321). Therefore, we manually retrieved out the
sequence form MET01 up to PHE29 of our target sequence and
sequences form PRO25-ILE311 (a total of 287 residues) to
perform our homology modelling and generated the best fitting
structure. For convenience sake, PRO25 was designated as the
first residue i.e. PRO01.

Using 3HGK as a template, we created an alignment (using the
ALIGN2D command of Modeller9v7) between the sequence of
serine/threonine protein kinase Pto (pto) and the sequence of
Chain A of 3HGK and generated five different structures in
185.80 seconds using the Modeller 9v7 program. Out of the 5
structures generated the best structure was chosen based on the
evaluation of molecular Probability Density Function, DOPE
Score [] and GA341 
[]. The best structure gives a molecular
Probability Density Function 2520.30786, DOPE score of -
29699.56836 and GA341 score of 1.0. In the next phase, 2QKW
was used as a template to create another alignment between the
sequence of serine/threonine protein kinase Pto (pto) and the
sequence of Chain B of 2QKW), we again generated another
five 5 structures and choose the best structure with molecular
Probability Density Function 2494.73193, DOPE score -
30093.53711 and GA341 score 1.0 Finally using both templates
3HGK and 2QKW we created an alignment between
serine/threonine protein kinase Pto, 3HGK and 2QKW. Using
this alignment we generated another five structures and choose
the best structure with molecular Probability Density Function
9821.59473.

Model refinement and assessment:
The best structure generated using 3HGK as a template was
evaluated with ANOLEA energy assessment using the
ANOLEA server [,
] showing a total non-local energy of -
742. The structure was further assessed for Ramachandran Plot
with the RAM page server [,
] showing 250 residues in the
favoured regions, 27 residues in the allotted regions and 8
residues outside the outlier region. The ANOLEA energy
assessment revealed that the energy of few loop regions were
high with positive values, therefore, a loop refinement was
performed [] that generated a structure with a total non-local
energy of -902 with ANOLEA assessment. It showed 261
residues in the favoured regions, 22 residues in the allotted
regions and 2 residues outside the outlier region in the
Ramachandran plot. ANOLEA energy assessment [,
] of the
best structure generated by using 2QKW was evaluated which
showed a total non-local energy of -871. The structure was
further assessed for Ramachandran Plot with the RAM page
server [,
] showing 255 residues in the favoured regions, 22
residues in the allotted regions and 8 residues outside the
outlier region. Further loop refinement for the loop regions
where the energies were high was performed to generate a
structure with a total non-local energy of -1110 with ANOLEA
assessment and showing 271 residues in the favoured regions,
13 residues in the allotted regions and 1 residues outside the
outlier region in the Ramachandran plot.

Similarly, the best structure generated using 3HGK and 2QKW
as template was evaluated with ANOLEA energy assessment
[,
] showing a total non-local energy of -886. The structure
was further assessed for Ramachandran Plot with the RAM
page server [,
] showing 255 residues in the favoured
regions, 20 residues in the allotted regions and 10 residues
outside the outlier region. As the ANOLEA energy assessment
displayed few loop regions with high energy, we performed
loop refinement for the loop regions where the energies were
high and generated a structure with a total non-local energy of -
1043 with ANOLEA assessment and showing 257residues in the
favoured regions 19 residues in the allotted regions and 9
residues outside the outlier region in the Ramachandran plot. A
detailed comparative statics on ANOLEA energy assessment
and Ramachandran analysis of the three models generated and
their Z-score [] based on the templates 3HGK, 2QKW and
3HGK-2QKW in comparison to the templates strucures 3HGK
and 2QKW is shown on  (see supplementary material)

Structural Comparison:
The assessment of homology models' accuracy is
straightforward when the experimental structure is known. In
our study we used the most common method of comparing two
protein structures i.e. the root-mean-square deviation (RMSD)
metric which measure the mean distance between the
corresponding atoms of two superimposed structures. We
superimposed the backbone of the built proteins and computed
their RMSD - 3HGK based model over the template 3HGK
(RMSD 1.33), 2QKW based model over the template 2QKW
(RMSD 2.17) and 3HGK-2QKW based model over template
3HGK and 2QKW (RMSD 1.72) using ICM Molsoft Browser
www.molsoft.com/icm_browser.html 
().

Additionally we performed a comparative analysis on the
secondary structure of the three built models and found out the
difference in the secondary structures. There is a major
similarity between all the helix.

Conclusions
The three-dimesnsional model of serine/threonine kinase
protein has been generated based on the homology of Crystal
Structure of effect protein Avr ptob complexed with Kinase Pto
(PDB ID: 3HGK (Chain A)) and bacterial effector protein
Avrpto (PDB ID: 2QKW (Chain B)). The model generated by
using the template 2QKW proved to be the best model
generated as compared to the other templates based on the
result in model assessment  (see supplementary
material). The model contains a compact and a topology
common to the template protein. These models have a very
similar topology compared to its corresponding template
2QKW. The secondary structural analysis also revealed that the
model has a common helix and sheets regions. Based on the
promotif [] 
analysis, both the template 2QKW and the model
built by 2QKW as a template consist of 10.5 percent Strands,
30% alpha helix and 2% 310 Helix. The present study would aid
in studying protein-protein interactions in future.

Protein structure accession number:
The predicted 3D structures of serine/threonine kinase protein
domains were submitted to the Protein Model Database
(PMDB) [] and assigned the PMDB ID PM0077821.

Competing interests:
The authors declare that they have no competing interests

Supplementary material
Data 1
S.P.S thanks Director, NEIST, Jorhat for providing Project
Assistant Level-II. The authors also thank DBT, Govt of India &amp;
CSIR for providing Bioinformatics Infrastructure Facility to
carry out this work.

Citation:Singh et al, Bioinformation 8(5): 212-215 (2012)

Superimposition of the backbone structures of the
three predicted proteins after refinement and computed their
RMSD using ICM Molsoft Browser: (A) 3HGK based model;
RMSD: 1.33 A (1132 atoms superimposed) over the template
protein 3HGK; (B) 2QKW based model; RMSD: 2.17 (1148
atoms superimposed) over the template protein 2QKW; (C)
3HGK-2QKW based model; RMSD 1.72 A (1148 atoms
superimposed) over the two templates 3HGk and 2QKW

