Description
Microsatellites or simple sequence repeats (SSRs) are short (1-5
bp long) DNA elements which are repeated tandemly having
extensive coverage over the entire genome. Compared to other
neutral regions of DNA, Microsatellites show a high level of
length polymorphism due to an increased rate of mutation of
one or more repeats. The use of SSRs markers developed for
one particular species is normally applicable across wide range
of related species. ESTs are single-read sequences generated
from partial random sequencing of cDNA libraries and
particularly attractive for marker development as they
represent the coding regions of the genome. Another
importance of ESTs is that they are being deposited in the
public databases at an extremely faster pace. Moreover, recent
studies have observed that the frequency of microsatellites was
significantly higher in ESTs than in genomic DNA. Moreover,
SSRs derived from ESTs essentially represent expressed genic
sequences and hence are potential candidates for markers for
comparative genomic studies. EST-SSR markers are potential
candidates for gene tagging and comparative studies in related
species. Expressed Sequence Tags of many crop species has
been generated and a number of SSRs have been detected using
powerful bioinformatics tools leading to the development of
EST-SSR Markers.

The in silico approach is the analysis of the available sequence
data using various computational tools which helps in
connecting more varied types of biological data to be integrated
and stored. The traditional methods of developing SSR markers
are usually time consuming and labor-intensive. SSRs can be
rapidly and cheaply identified from ESTs and other genomic
sequence data using computational methods. It takes very less
time and low cost to design EST-SSR markers at a large scale
using different computational facilities and large set of EST data
available on the Web. Additionally, bioinformatics tools also
supplement existing approaches by automating the task of SSR
identification from available DNA sequences. The EST
sequences can be mined using various bioinformatics tools to
find the SSRs. The EST-SSR mining is done in three steps such
as Preprocessing, Assembly and SSR detection. In the
Preprocessing step, the EST sequences downloaded from the
public databases like dbEST [] 
are modified to find the high
quality EST sequences. This step helps in reduction of the
overall noise in EST data to improve the efficacy of subsequent
analyses []. 
The sequences are searched for the vector
contaminated sequence and then removal of the contaminated
sequences can be done using Cross_match tool. Cross_match is
a program for rapid protein and nucleic acid sequence
comparison and database search []. 
UniVec is a database that
stores the update vector sequences for all the species which can
be obtained from the NCBI FTP directory 
[]. Using Trimest,
another tool from EMBOSS, the poly A and poly T tails can be
trimmed []. 
Also discarding the low quality and very short
ESTs improves the process. In general the Masking of low
complexity regions is done for a better preprocessing of the EST
sequences during EST analysis but in case of EST-SSR mining it
is restricted as it may remove some of the repetitive portions in
the sequence which contains valuable microsatellites.

The purpose of EST clustering is to collect overlapping ESTs
from the same transcript of a single gene into a unique cluster
to reduce redundancy. Phrap and CAP3 are among the most
extensively used programs for sequence clustering and
assembly [,
]. A simple way to cluster ESTs is by measuring
the pair-wise sequence similarity between them. Then, these
distances are converted into binary values, depending on
whether there is a significant match or not, such that the
sequence pair can be accepted or rejected from the cluster being
assembled. The CAP3 program includes a number of
improvements and new features and has a capability to clip 5'
and 3' low-quality regions of reads. It uses base quality values
in computation of overlaps between reads, construction of
multiple sequence alignments of reads, and generation of
consensus sequences. The program also uses forward-reverse
constraints to correct assembly errors and link contigs. CAP3 is
available to use both on the web and standalone.

There are several tools available for detection of SSRs from the
nucleotide sequence with different parameters such as MISA
(Micro Satellite identification tool by Thomas Thiel), TROLL etc
[,
]. 
MISA allows the identification and localization of perfect
microsatellites as well as compound microsatellites which are
interrupted by a certain number of bases. S. Rozen in 2000
developed Primer3 (Rozen and Skaletsky, 2000), a software
which allows researchers to design the primers using a
sequence with many different parameters 
[]. Also there are
many other computational tools (both web based and
standalone versions) available for primer designing. 
()
shows a general methodology of in silico EST-SSR Marker
development.

Citation:Sahu et al, Bioinformation 8(4): 201-202 (2012)

In silico approach to develop EST-SSR Markers

