Background
Lymphatic Filariais is an infectious disease that causes serious social and economic burden. [–] Filariasis is caused by 
      worms, Wuchereria bancrofti (Wb), Brugia malayi (Bm) and Brugia timori belonging to the order “Filariidae”. The worm is 
      transmitted to man by different mosquito species. Wb is responsible for 90% of the cases worldwide followed by Bm which 
      is confined to some regions of Southeast and Eastern Asia. [] 
      Filarial disease management requires effective anti-filarial inhibitors. [
      ] Current anti-filarial drug discovery aims towards the development of safe and effective macrofilaricide 
      (a drug targeting adult filarial worms). GST (glutathione S-transferases) are a family of detoxification enzymes that catalyze 
      the conjugation of reduced GSH (glutathione) to xenobiotic (endogenous electrophilic) compounds. They protect tissues against 
      oxidative damage and are involved in the intracellular transport of hydrophobic substrates such as non-catalytic carrier 
      proteins. [] The worm and human GST are structurally different. 
      [] Hence, the worm GST is a promising chemotherapeutic target. 
      Previous studies show defense mechanisms evolved by the worm against the host immune system. [] The worm develops the capacity to neutralize host-derived reactive oxygen species 
      (H2O2, 
      super oxide radicals, hydroxyl ions, and nitric oxide). [] The worm 
      GST provides the defense against electrophilic and oxidative damage. []
      Therefore, it is our interest to study the structural features of GST from human and worm using homology modeling techniques. 
      Here, we describe the structural differences between human and worm GST towards the design of potential inhibitors as 
      anti-filarial drugs. 

Methodology
The protein sequences (208 residues long) for Wb-GST (Q86LL8) and Bm-GST (O02636) were 
			obtained from the Swiss-Prot Database. 
      The protein databank (PDB) contains several GST structures from different species ((Schistosoma japonicum 
      (PDBID: IM9A), 
      Fasciola hepatica (PDBID: IFHE), Sus scrofa (PDBID: 2GSR), Homo sapiens 
      (PDBID: 19GS)). However, structures for Wb GST and Bm 
      GST were not available. Sequence analysis using PSI-BLAST show Wb GST and Bm GST having 
      42% and 41% sequence identity 
      (highest homology compared to other known structures) with Sus scrofa, respectively. Therefore, we used the 
      structure of Sus 
      scrofa GST (PDB: 2GSR) as template for building homology models for Wb GST and Bm 
      GST using MOE (molecular operating environment), 
      an automated molecular modeling tool. [] The predicted models were 
      evaluated for geometry, stereo-chemistry and energy distributions. The models were systematically analyzed using WHATIF 
      [] for various structural properties. The model was also 
      evaluated using the model assessment procedure described elsewhere by Luthy, Bowie and Eisenberg. [] The Bm-GST predicted model contains 96.6% residues in the favored regions 
      and 99.5% 
      residues in the allowed regions of the Ramachandran Plot. Similarly, Wb-GST predicted model contains 97.1% residues in the 
      favored regions and 99.0% residues in the allowed regions of the Ramachandran Plot. We then superimposed the predicted models of 
      Wb GST and Bm GST with the crystal structure of human GST for the calculation of RMSD (root mean square deviation) of the Cα 
      backbone atoms of all residues in GST. []
      

Results and Discussion
An active GST is a homodimer of a 208 residue long monomer consisting of two domains (smaller α/β domain and larger α domain). 
      The N-terminal small domain (residues 1 to 74) is an α/β structure []
      with the folding topology βαβαββα arranged in the order β2, β1, 
      β3 and β4 with β3 anti-parallel to the others, forming a 
      regular β-sheet with a right-handed twist surrounded by three α-helices. The C terminal, large domain 2 (82-208 residues) is 
      Ά-helical. GST does not contain the typical α-class α-9 helix which distinguishes between α and π-class enzymes. The residues 
      that interface the two βαβ and ββα motifs are Trp 38, Phe 8, Val 33, Cys 47, Leu 52 and Leu 43 in human π GST. In Wb-GST and 
      Bm-GST the residues Val 33, Cys 47, and Leu 43 are replaced by Ile 38, Phe 47 and Met 43.

 The human π-class GST recognizes GSH 
      by an induced-fit mechanism [] and the apo-enzyme helix α-2 is 
      flexible. [] The active site residues (Tyr 49 and Cys 47) binding 
      to GSH are not conserved in Wb-GST and Bm-GST and they are replaced by Phe 49 and Phe 47. 
      The human GST forms a disulphide bond between Cys 47 and Cys 101 under oxidized conditions and thus making the enzyme inactive. 
      [––]In Wb-GST and Bm-GST the Cys residues (Cys47 and 
      Cys101) are 
      replaced by Phe and Thr, respectively. The effect of this mutation in Wb-GST and Bm-GST is not 
      known. A previous study shows the inactivation of GST and not able to bind GSH. [] Therefore, it is important to document the residue level mutations between human, Bm and 
      Wb GST sequences and their significance in 3D structures.

The residues involved in the formation of H-site (Xeno-biotic binding site) binding pocket are shown in the  and the 
      residues involved in the formation of G-site (GSH binding site) binding pocket are given in . A further understanding of 
      residue changes in H and G-site between human, Bm and Wb GST is critical. Tyr 108 in H site is 
      known to enhance GSH binding [] and this residue is conserved in all 
      π-class GSTs. The hydrogen bonding interaction between the hydroxyl group of Tyr 108 and the amide nitrogen of Gly 204 is also 
      been observed in mouse, pig and human π-class structures. [] A 
      comprehensive understanding of residue mutation at the H and G sites in human, Bm and Wb will 
      provide insight towards the design of an GST inhibitor specifically for Bm and Wb.

Conclusion
DEC (Diethyl carbamazine) is the only drug that is commonly used for Filariasis control. Therefore, it is important to design 
      effective anti-filarial drugs. The comparison of modeled Wb and Bm GST structures with human GST structure provide insights 
      towards the design of GST inhibitors. This study also demonstrates the effect of mutations towards function among homologous 
      sequences.

Authors are thankful to the Director, IICT, Hyderabad, for his encouragement and support. RB thanks ICMR for Junior Research Fellowship.
			

Figures and Tables
Residue changes between human,
        Bmand
        WbGST is shown. These residues are involved in the formation of H-site.            The sequence residue positions are with respect to the human GST sequence.
Residue Positions	Human	Wb	Bm	
008	Y	Y	Y	
010	V	I	I	
013	R	L	L	
035	V	A	A	
101	C	T	T	
104	I	A	T	
108	Y	Y	Y	
205	G	G	G	
Residue changes between human,
        Bmand
        WbGST is shown. These residues are involved in the formation of G-site. 
        The sequence residue positions are with respect to the human GST sequence.
Residue Positions	Human	Wb	Bm	
07	Y	Y	Y	
12	G	G	G	
13	R	L	L	
38	W	W	W	
44	K	K	K	
49	Y	F	F	
51	Q	Q	Q	
52	L	L	L	
53	P	P	P	
64	Q	Q	Q	
65	S	S	S	
71	H	H	H	
97	E	R	R	
98	D	D	D	

      Citation:Bhargavi
      et al.,Bioinformation 1(1): 25-27 (2005)

