Background
SSRs (Simple Sequence Repeats) otherwise known as
Microsatellites are short repeat motifs that are present in both
protein coding and non-coding regions of DNA sequences.
SSRs show a high level of length polymorphism due to
mutations of one or more repeats. The use of SSRs as molecular
marker is being favored due to their multiallelic nature,
reproducibility, high abundance and extensive genome
coverage []. 
Expressed Sequence Tags (ESTs) are single pass
sequence of cDNA classes that provide direct information of
gene expression and serve as the main source for microsatellites
[]. 
The traditional methods of developing simple sequence
repeat (SSR) markers are usually time consuming and laborintensive.
Generally these processes involve genomic library
construction, hybridization with the repeated units of
nucleotides and sequencing of the clones. The computational
approach for developing SSR markers from ESTs provides a
better platform than the conventional approach. The EST
databases stores EST sequences which are redundant, so they
contain repetitive units. The EST sequences can be obtained
from the databases and undergo preprocessing and assembly to
develop potential SSR markers. Numerous tools (both
standalone and web-based) are available for the mining of EST
data to design EST-SSR markers at a large scale. The free
computational programs and large set of EST data available on
the web helps the researchers to perform data mining very
easily from their local system rapidly in a very low cost. The
tools like cross_match and trimest provided non redundant
high quality EST sequence which do not contain the vector
contamination and poly-A, -T talils. CAP3 tried to assemble the
EST sequneces having overlapping region and produces
Contigs by joining the sequeneces. The sequences that do not
have common portions are remained as Singletons. MISA
helped in detection of the Simple Sequence Repeats from both
contigs and singletons.

EST-SSR markers are potential candidates for gene tagging and
comparative studies in various species as they are gene specific.
Studies have been reported regarding the use of EST-SSR
markers in a large number of commercially important plants.
Best known for its commercial value, Camellia sinensis (Tea), a
perennial ever green shrub is the perfect companion in the daily
life. It is perhaps the second most consumed beverage in the
whole world with some important health benefits. Tea
promotes a healthier immune system by lowering blood
pressure and cholesterol. It is mainly produced in a measure
amount in India and Sri Lanka in many varieties. Huge amount
of EST data in tea have been generated and stored in the
databases. Present study deals with the detection of SSRs from
the EST sequences of Camellia sinensis available in the public
domains and functional annotation of the SSR containing ESTs.
The annotation helps to know the putative functions of the ESTs
and to find the important functional domain markers (FDM)
related to the SSR-ESTs leading to gene ontology study. The
gene ontology covers three domains: biological process:
operations or sets of molecular events with a defined beginning
and end, pertinent to the functioning of integrated living units:
cells, tissues, organs, and organisms, cellular component: the
parts of a cell or its extracellular environment and molecular
function: the elemental activities of a gene product at the
molecular level, such as binding or catalysis.

Methodology
Data source:
Sequence data were collected from the public domain
GeneBank at NCBI (National Center for Biotechnology
Information) []. 
A search for EST sequences of Camellia sinensis
resulted in 12851 sequences. All the sequences were
downloaded to the local machine for further analysis.

Processing EST sequence:
6148 non-redundant EST sequences were searched for vector
sequence and removal of the vector sequence was done using
cross_match software []. 
The vector sequences were obtained
from the UniVec database []. 
Then the trimest program from
EMBOSS was used for removing the poly-A and poly-T ends of
the EST sequences []. 
This is freely available on the web which
can be downloaded and installed in the PC. It allows to trim the
poly-A and poly-T ends from the given sequence according to
the parameters given.

EST assembly:
After the EST sequences were fully processed up to trimming,
they were subjected to CAP3 for assembly 
[]. CAP3 is a DNA
sequence assembly program, freely available for academic use.
CAP3 results Contig files, Singlets files, Qual files, Info files and
Out files.

SSR detection:
The 6148 unique EST sequences i.e. 4779 singlets and 1369
contigs were searched for microsatellite sequences using MISA
(MIcroSAtellite identification tool) 
[]. MISA is a freely
downloadable perl script available on internet. Alongwith
misa.pl another file misa.ini was also downloaded which
contains the search parameters.

Primer designing:
Primer pairs were designed from the obtained SSR sequences
using Primer3 tool []. 
The parameters were changed according
to own interest. The primer size parameter was changed to min-
17, opt-21 and max-27. The GC% was changed to min-45%,
max-65%. Then the SSRs were searched for both forward and
reverse primers.

Functional annotation:
The Functional Domain Markers were found from the SSR
containing sequence using InterProScan at EBI 
[].
InterProScan provides the platform to analyze the functional
domains with the help of the member databases such as
BlastProDom, FPrintScan, HMMPIR, HMMPfam, HMMSmart,
HMMTigr, ProfileScan, HAMAP, PatternScan, SuperFamily,
SignalPHMM, TMHMM, HMMPanther and Gene3D. The SSRESTs
sequences were searched for the significant matches using
a special type of BLAST program BLASTx at National Center
for Bioechnology Information against non-redundant protein
database entries []. 
BLASTx searches protein database using a
translated nucleotide query. The BLASTx was performed
keeping the value of identity parameter &gt; 70%. The SSR-FDM
contig sequences found from Interproscan were annotated for
Biological process, Cellular component and Molecular function
using QuickGO (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/QuickGO) at the EBI
server []. 
QuickGO is a fast web-based browser for Gene
Ontology terms and annotations, which is provided by the
UniProtKB-GOA group.

Discussion
Powerful computational tools were used to mine the publicly
available Camellia sinensis EST data. In the present study, 2371
SSRs were found from the total screened EST data 
 (see
supplementary material). The EST sequences containing SSRs
are generally referred to as SSR-ESTs, whereas the markers
developed from SSR-ESTs are called EST-SSRs. Total number of
6148 sequences of size 3822.68 kb was examined for
microsatellites, out of which 1636 (26.61%) numbers of
sequences were found to contain SSRs with a density of 1
SSR/1.61 kb. () shows the frequency distribution of
different repeat types identified and () shows the
frequency distribution of mono, di, tri, tetra, penta and hexa
nucleotide repeat motifs in EST sequences of Camellia sinensis
The most frequent repeat type found within the EST sequences
were mono- nucleotide repeats (65.9%) followed by dinucleotide
repeats (24.6%), tri-nucleotide repeats (7.8%), tetranucleotide
repeats (0.8%) and penta- and hexa-nucleotide
repeats (0.8%). The frequency of identified SSR motifs are
provided in the  
(see supplementary material). The
detected SSR motifs put insight into the frequency distribution
of different types of nucleotide repeats in Camellia sinensis. The
analysis showed that the frequency is not so high but better
than many other species. Ignoring the mono-nucleotide repeats,
the di-nucleotide repeats were the most abudant repeat types.
Among the di-nucleotide repeat types, CT and AG have the
highest frequency. This adds emphasis to the fact that in plant
EST-SSRs, AG/CT repeats have been found to be most frequent
[,
].
According to the previous reports, in most of
eukaryotes, the GC repeats are abudant but in this study,
however, the GC repeats were completely absent 
[,
].
Compared to di-meric repeats, tri-nucleotide repeats are less in
Camellia sinensis. Studies revealed that in plant the most
common tri-SSRs are AAG and CCG []. In Tea AAG repeat
was not present and though CCG repeats were present but with
less frequency. The most frequent tri-repeats in tea were GAA,
TCT and CAC.

In Tea the length of the SSRs detected varried from 10 to 392.
Polymerphic markers are mostly found in lengthy repeats. So
the ESTs containing SSRs more than length of 100 were choosen
for the design of primer pairs. Out of 97 such SSR-ESTs, 245
primer pairs were designed. () describess the flowchart
of the stepwise procedure involved with in sillico mining of
SSRs from Camellia sinensis EST sequences. From 469 SSR
containing EST contigs, the Mono nucleotide SSR containing
sequences were not taken into account. Using InterProScan the
rest 314 contigs were analyzed and total 935 differentfunctional
domains were found  (see supplementary material).
250 sequences were found to be SSR-FDMs containing both
SSRs and FDMs. These sequences were then assigned to gene
ontology terms in the Swissprot database.

All the 469 SSR containing sequences were annotated against
the non-redundant protein database to know the functions
using BLASTx. The BLASTx result summarizes () 54
(11.51%) putative proteins, 74 (15.77%) predicted proteins, 50
(10.67%) hypothetical proteins, 146 (31.13%) of different
functional classes and for 145 (30.29%) sequences no functions
were found as there was no specific similarity. The SSR-ESTs
were also assigned to gene ontology terms. 59 out of 250 contigs
containing FDMs were found to have vital role in various
processes, and functions. The () describes the details
about the biological Processes, the Cellular Components and the
Molecular Function of gene ontology. The gene ontology
provided information regarding ESTs related to many genes
coding for secondary metabolite production, translation, lipid
transportation, stress response, GTP binding proteins, iron and
sulfur cluster binding proteins and many other functions.

Currently a number of studies are being reported regarding the
development of EST-SSRs in vast number of plant species using
the computational tools. Microsatellite markers are very
important for studing genetic variability and understanding the
genetic information. In the present study, 2371 microsatellites
were detected from the available EST data for Camellia sinensis.
The redundancy in the EST sequences was reduced by
preprocessing and assembly of the EST sequences which helped
in detecting unique SSRs. The primer pairs designed can be
checked for the transferability in the related species. BLASTx
results helped to know the putative functions of the ESTs and
the GO annotation revealed lots of functional domains. This
will lead to the development of the specific markers to find
different secondary metabolites, stress responsible gene and
many other gene information that may present in the plants.

Conclusion
Camellia sinensis commonly known as Tea is a plant of great
commercial value. Till date not many work has been reported
regarding the application of molecular markers in this plant
mainly because of unavailability of suitable markers. Simple
Sequence Repeats (SSRs) are the most powerful genetic markers
for genetic linkage analysis, diversity study and marker assisted
selection. The microsatellite markers are mainly being used in
plant genetic analysis due to the reducing cost of DNA
sequencing and increasing availability of EST sequence data in
different plants. To look into the genetic make-up of Camellia
sinensis, inter-species variability, evolutionary relationship
study, development and application of molecular markers are
of immense importance. The EST-SSRs developed in the present
study will shed light into the discovery of the information.
These SSRs can also be used as molecular markers to identify
gene function, if the SSRs are found to be linked to a gene of
importance. The SSRs derived from the ESTs can be used in the
related species for which very less number of sequences is
available because of high cross-species transferability nature of
EST-SSRs. These can enhance the cross species applications to
develop conserved orthologous marker sets. Also this study
provides a brief idea about the approach to develop
computationally mined SSRs from ESTs.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This project is supported by the Agri-Bioinformatics Promotion
Program, Bioinformatics Initiative Division, Department of
Information Technology, Ministry of Communications &amp;
Information Technology, Government of India, New Delhi. The
authors are grateful to Assam Agricultural University, Jorhat,
Assam for providing the necessary facilities as well as to BTIS
Net, DBT, Government of India for constant support.

Citation:Sahu et al, Bioinformation 8(6): 260-266 (2012)

Frequency distribution of different repeat types
identified in EST sequences of Camellia sinensis.

Frequency distribution of (A) mono- and di-, (B) tri-, (C) tetra-, (D) penta- and hexa-nucleotide repeat motifs in EST
sequences of Camellia sinensis.

Work Flow Chart

BLASTX results analysis.

Gene Ontology (A) Biological Process; (B) Cellular omponent; (C) Molecular Function

