Well preserved biocompounds are discovered for the first time
from permineralized fossil palm stem, Palmoxylon belonging to
Late Cretaceous Deccan Intertrappean sediments [,
,
] of
central India (79°11'E:22°1'N) 
[]. Anatomically specimen
(8.4X3.2 cm) shows irregularly oriented fibrovascular bundles,
800 to 1500 µm, 10-25/sq cm, dorsal sclrenchymatous sheath
reniform, slightly lignified; xylem mono to trivasal with
scalariform thickenings, scabrate -type stegmata occur in
fibrous bundles, parenchymatous ground tissues lacunar, cells
elongated, form loose network () and features are
comparable with phoenicoid fossil stem of Palmoxylon lametaei
[]. The biochemical study of the specimens was performed
following the latest protocol [,
,
]. Powdered sample (app 10
g) was processed for individual and gradual solvent extraction
using hexane, dichloromethane and methanol. Another set of
sample was used only for Individual methanol solvent
extraction. Thin layer chromatography (TLC) used for
qualitative scrutiny of the compounds and their identifications
were confirmed by gas chromatography mass spectroscopy
(GCMS, ). Distinct presence of different
compounds of Alcohol, Esters, Terpenes, Hydrocarbons, Fatty
Acid and Phenol is recorded in the samples. Maximum
matching compounds with retention time and percent area
(peak) is sorted out in the  (see supplementary
material).

Compounds are fairly comparable with the known compounds
of modern palm species of Phoenix dactylifera L. and P.
canariensis Chabaud  (see supplementary material) in
having Alcohal (1- Tridecanol), Hydrocarbons (Dodecane,
Tetradecane, Hexadecane, Pentadecane, Undecane) and Fatty
acids (Lauric acid, Myristic acid, Stearic acid) [,
,
,
].
Discovery of well preserved natural biocompounds in fossil
specimen recovered from rock sequence formed in between
intermittent volcanic episode signifies the slow rate of
preservation under anoxic condition with minimal disturbance.
Similarly the exceptionally preserved plant fossils of almost all
the groups of plant [,
,
] in the Intertrappean sediments
of central India suggests the optimum condition for the
preservation. The floral and faunal studies of Deccan
Intertrappean series indicate that the elements survived
successfully during episodic volcanism []. It has been
estimated that there were seven volcanic episodes and biota
survived in between successive lava flows []. During the time
there were lakes, rivers and such conditions helped the plant to
preserve in their adjoining areas, subsequent volcanic eruption
and cooling of lava provided an admirable condition for the
preservation of plant and animal remains []. Late Cretaceous
Intertrappean sediments are considered as Maastrichtian and
Danian in age 4 [,
]. Interestingly K/T boundary represents
the phase of mass extinction of flora /fauna. However, record
of well organized plant communities, micro palaentological
assemblages and present recovery of natural compounds in
fossil plant substantiate the existence of life forms
during/beyond the limit of K/T. Plausibly sequential volcanic
phenomenon did not dissuade the flora and fauna to extinct
from the biological scenario in Indian peninsula during K/T
boundary [].

Supplementary material
Data 1
We are thankful to Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi for
help in GCMS analysis. Grateful thanks are due to Hon'ble Vice
Chancellor, Integral University for his help and cooperation.

Citation:Sharma et al, Bioinformation 10(5): 316-319 (2014)

A) Inner zone showing lacunar ground tissue
parenchyma consists of variable shapes and circular to
elongated cells showing spongy nature of ground tissue; B)
Cross section of stem showing orientation and distribution of
closely spaced fibrovascular bundles, thick walled fibrous
sheath cell with small and larger lumen; C) Enlargement of oval
shaped fibrovascular bundle consisting of 2 circular metaxylem
vessel, thick walled sclerenchymatous fibrous sheath around
the vascular part of the bundle.

A) GCMS profile in Hexane; B) GCMS profile in Dichloromethane; C) GCMS profile in Methanol; D) GCMS profile in
Dichloromethane (gradual).

