Background
Genomic sequences provide understanding of the structure,
function and evolution of genetically diverse organisms. The
recent genomic era has seen a massive explosion in the amount
of biological information and data arising from the rapid
research and unprecedented progress in molecular biology and
genome sequencing []. The field of bioinformatics has been
intermingled with traditional computational biology and
biostatistics. It is not only concerned with handling the
information, but also to extract biological meaning from it 
[].
The applications of novel and modern techniques are carried
out on the biological information base to extract the knowledge
[]. This knowledge has profound impacts on different fields,
such as human health, agriculture, environment, energy and
biotechnology []. Therefore, this biological information needs
to be systematically stored and managed using appropriate
tools and standard database management practices. It also
requires advanced hardware resources and parallel computing
facilities for high speed information processing for knowledge
extraction. Sharing genomic resources and bio-computing
processes is desirable for enhancement in the growth of the
biotechnological research and also useful for avoiding
redundancy and duplication of efforts. This will not only
reduce cost and time for development of biotechnological
product but also help in sharing knowledge for the social
benefits.

International Nucleotide Sequence Database Collaboration
constitutes three major genome databases in the world; (i)
National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI), (ii)
DNA Data Bank of Japan (DDBJ) and (iii) European Molecular
Biology Laboratory (EMBL). The sequence submission process
of these databases is governed by international collaborative
agreement. Sequences submitted to any one of the three
databases are automatically added in the other two databases
within a few days of their release to the public [,
]. To
maintain data accuracy and integrity, well-defined procedures
exist for submitting and changing entries in these databases 
[].
These databases comprise of feature tables giving shared rules
to allow information exchange among these databases,
qualifiers for explicit referencing of specific sequences and the
country qualifier for providing geographical location. These
organizations have been providing a convenient and common
platform for submission of sequences which they share among
themselves [].

Agricultural research scientists from various organizations of
India is also significantly harnessing these resources and
contributing to these international genomics and proteomics
databases. These scientists are using NCBI, EMBL, DDBJ and
other biological resources for their sequence submissions,
analysis and other data mining tasks. The Indian Council of
Agricultural Research (ICAR) is the apex body for coordinating,
guiding and managing research and education in
agriculture including horticulture, fisheries and animal sciences
in India. ICAR is conducting research at 4 Deemed Universities,
49 Research Institutes, 19 National Research Centres, 6 National
Bureaus, 27 Project Directorates and 8 Zonal Project
Directorates placed all over India. These institutes have
scientists conducting research on different aspects of
biotechnology and bioinformatics. The various studies
conducted by them, generate massive biological data related to
plants, animals, insects, microbes, fisheries etc. These valued
information needs to be validated, curated and shared to the
scientific communities to eliminate the duplication of efforts
and expedite the research related to agriculture. The National
Agricultural Biotechnology Information Center (NABIC)
developed a Web based relational database for agricultural
plants with biotechnology information [].

ICAR has recently initiated a World Bank funded project named
as National Agricultural Innovation Project (NAIP) under
which it is proposed to establish a National Agricultural
Bioinformatics Grid (NABG) with lead center at Indian
Agricultural Statistics Research Institute (IASRI), New Delhi for
providing a biological computing platform to the researchers in
agricultural bioinformatics and computational biology 
[,
].
This platform will not only help in development of biological
databases/ data warehouses for storage and analysis of
indigenous biological information but also provide information
in the international biological resources at local server of
national super-computing facility for its computational analysis.
This consolidated effort would enable accelerated growth in
biotechnological research in the country. A portal handling
biological databases and derived databases would finally be
installed on high-end computational hardware with
parallelized processing/computing facilities. A secured
common submission portal system for biological data with
user-friendly interfaces along with integrated help and error
checking facilities would facilitate wider accessibility and
acceptability of the stored information. Therefore, a portal with
above features is required to be developed. Taking a step
towards the development of this, a biological sequence
submission portal for genomic sequences has been taken up on
priority basis. This portal would help to build and strengthen
genomic database in India. The backend database of this
genomic portal has been developed using MySQL employing
the concepts of Relational Database Management Systems
(RDBMS). This database has been designed keeping in view the
information contents of NCBI, EMBL and DDBJ databases. This
portal can be run on any java enabled internet browser. The
sequence and other necessary details can be submitted to the
portal by any user after the profile creation. These details
include information about the sequence/ reference authors,
release date, organism name, organelle/ location, source
modifiers, molecular types, genomic completeness, topology,
features, qualifiers and so on. The information entered by the
user is updated in the database every time a user clicks on
“Next” button which enables proper handling of incomplete
submissions made by the user.

Data sources
The greatest challenge being faced by molecular biology
community today is to make sense of the wealth of data that has
been produced by the genome sequencing projects []. A large
number of laboratories in India and abroad are generating
genomic data through their laboratory experiments. The data
from these sources can be an important source for populating
the database on this portal. In (), it shows different data
sources which will be used to populate genomic sequences in
this portal. The portal is installed on the central server located
at Indian Agricultural Statistics Research Institute, New Delhi.
The five domain institutions of NABG are National Bureau of
Plant Genetic Resources (NBPGR), New Delhi, National Bureau
of Fish Genetic Resources (NBFGR), Lucknow, National Bureau
of Animal Genetic Resources (NBAGR), Karnal, National
Bureau of Agriculturally Important Microbes (NBAIM), Mau
and National Bureau of Agriculturally Important Insects
(NBAII), Bengaluru. These five domain institutions, associated
with this development and implementation work, will be
responsible for ensuring data quality in their respective fields.
In these institutions, domain expertise is available along with
the scientists from the field of computational biology. In
addition to these domain institutions, other institutions of
National Agricultural Research System (NARS) as well as
institutions working in the field of agricultural and allied field
would be making use of this portal. However, access to this
portal is not limited to any specific user or institute, but can be
used by any user, any organization across the globe, as it has
been made available in public domain. In (), it shows
the data flow architecture of the portal.

Design of database for sequence submission portal:
In order to achieve scalability and consistency of an integrated
genome database, relational database management system
(RDBMS) concepts were applied. MySQL RDBMS software has
been used to store the submitted data in the form of associated
tables. The data consistency and non-redundancy were
maintained through the principles of database normalization.
The database tables have been created and relationships were
established to ensure querying and information extraction.
However, few database tables have been kept de-normalized
for faster information retrieval. Tables of this database consist of
registration details of users, submission/ accession number,
features, qualifiers with their data formats, organelles, reference
details, molecular types, source modifiers, third party
annotation details and so on [,
]. The names of entities
along with their descriptions can be found in the
supplementary  
(see supplementary material). The
database tables and their fields along with their descriptions as
implemented in the portal database have been shown in 

(see supplementary material) available online. In order to
provide easy and interactive features to the user while
submitting genomic sequences, the relationships have been
established among database tables. The Entity Relationship
diagram has been shown in ().

Features of genomic sequence submission database:
An extensive study on the features available with NCBI, EMBL
and DDBJ sequence databases have been carried out and it was
observed that most of the attributes are same/ similar in all
three databases except few attributes. This is otherwise also
expected as these databases exchange their biological
information among them. Therefore, an attempt was made to
develop the database taking superset of all these features. 
 
(see supplementary material) in the supplementary material
provides detailed comparison of the features/ fields available in
the databases of NCBI, EMBL and DDBJ with this database.
Sequence submission portal available on NCBI, DDBJ and
EMBL contains information on locus, definition, accession
number, version, keywords, source, organism, reference,
authors, title, journal, PubMed, comment, features, base count
and origin of the submitted sequence. In case of EMBL, the
information about sequence version number and data
class under locus description were found, which is not available
on other two databases.

Network architecture
The portal has been presently installed on a Windows server
machine (central server) which uses WAMP bundled package
[]. After establishment of High Performance Computing
system this is likely to be reconfigured to this parallel
computing environment. WAMP is a Windows based package
of independently-created programs that uses Apache web
server, MySQL open-source database, and scripting language
PHP, Perl or Python. However, for development of this portal
PHP was used []. WAMP can manipulate information stored
in a database and generate Web pages dynamically for every hit
by a browser. The central server communicates with MySQL
server, whenever, a user accesses it, for any operation. This
portal can be accessed from LAN for internal access and from
outside LAN on the web address
http://cabindb.iasri.res.in:8080/sequence_portal/ or
http://nabg.iasri.res.in through a firewall for secured access.
The architecture for user access of this portal has been shown in
(). The sequence submission is implemented in three
layers - user registration, sequence submission and storage as
shown in ().

First section includes user authentication and profile creation,
which is a mandatory requirement for any user. After profile
creation, a user can login, by entering login-id and the
password. A user can submit as many sequences as required.
This portal maintains the history of sequence submissions for
each user in the database. For submitting a new sequence or
viewing already submitted sequence, the portal extracts
information from sequence submission section, where all details
related to sequence are stored. Each sequence submitted on the
portal is linked with a unique submission/accession number.
This submission number is generated immediately after a user
chooses to submit a new sequence. The submission number is
generated through date, time and a counter as
[YYYYMMDD][hhmmss][n] where YYYY is year, MM is month,
DD is date, hh, mm and ss are time in hour, minute and second.
The last character in the submission number is a counter, shown
as n. The details about the sequence and reference author,
submission category, features and qualifiers are entered by the
user in a set of wizard like pages. The third section stores all the
details entered by the user pertaining to a particular submission
number.

Plan of submitting sequences
The portal would be deployed on HPC system at IASRI under
NABG. The HPC system, which is presently in the process of
implementation, will have capacity of around 70 teraflop with
256 nodes computational power controlled by 2 masters in linux
operating system environment with a total of 500 terra byte of
storage. Sequence file submitted at the central server will
populate the database automatically using developed
programs. This portal accepts the FASTA format sequence for
submission. The submitter details are also stored in the
database to keep track of the sequences submitted by a
particular researcher. During the process of submitting
sequences, various parameters such as author details,
registration details, molecular type, source name, source
modifier, journal name, references, organism name, third party
annotation details etc. are stored in the database. The sequence
data will then be made available for public access. The sequence
submission plan has been shown in ().

Portal description
In order to achieve scalability and consistency of an integrated
genome database, relational database management system
(RDBMS) concepts were applied. MySQL RDBMS software has
been used to store the submitted data in the form of associated
tables. The data consistency and non-redundancy were
maintained through the principles of database normalization.
The database tables have been created and relationships were
established to ensure querying and information extraction.
However, few database tables have been kept de-normalized
for faster information retrieval. Tables of this database consist of
registration details of users, submission/ accession number,
features, qualifiers with their data formats, organelles, reference
details, molecular types, source modifiers, third party
annotation details and so on [,
]. The names of entities
along with their descriptions have been given in the ().

The database tables and their fields along with their
descriptions as implemented in the portal database have been
shown in (). In order to provide easy and interactive
features to the user while submitting genomic sequences, the
relationships have been established among database tables. The
Entity Relationship diagram has been shown in ().

The resources available with BankIt submission tool have been
very helpful for designing web forms for this submission portal
[]. The sequence submission process through this portal
consists of the following activities:

• User authentication
• Sequence submission details
• Reference details
• Source information
• Molecular types
• Submission report

Registration is must for a submitter for submission of sequence.
The registration page needs details about the user for creation
of user account. The user login is linked with the submitter's
email address. Upon successful registration the sequence
submission portal page is displayed for immediate use to
submit genomic sequence through this portal. The home page
of the submission portal containing login screen and a brief
description of the portal has been shown in ( &amp; 
).
shows the signup screen which can be used by a new user to
enter his registration details to the portal database.

After logging in to the portal, submitter needs to provide
descriptive information of the sequence to be submitted. 
 
(see supplementary material) lists item names along with
their possible values either on the text boxes or on the combo
boxes of the web pages of the portal. For example - nucleotide
information page seeks information about submitter name,
reference information, sequence author, submission release
date, molecular type, topology, genomic completeness,
organism name, sequence and definition line, organelle, source
modifiers and submission category. The portal accepts
submission of FASTA sequence to be pasted on a text box. On
the other pages of the portal requires adding features of the
sequence. Every feature being added against the sequence
needs some mandatory information to be supplied. Each feature
can include adding many optional qualifiers and their values.
Supplementary  (Available with Author) lists all the
features along with their allowable qualifiers and value formats.
In (), it shows the web page where a user can see his
previously made submissions and an option for new
submission. It also shows a screen where the submitter can add
sequence authors. A screen has been shown in (), where
a user can specify required details about the sequence and paste
the sequence.

Final output is generated after successful submission of the
sequence (in a FASTA format). The portal displays a final
output in a customary flat-file with all the information filled at
the time of submission. A screen showing the generated
submission report is given the ().

Conclusion
Scientific databases are nowadays essential for the progress of
science as they provide means for data sharing (compatible and
complementary to traditional scientific publications) and longterm
preservation (archive) of data to enable further analysis
[]. Currently, the enormous volume of genomic data is
generated by agricultural researchers regularly which are
inaccessible to the public domain for further research.
Therefore, this genomic database has been developed,
integrated and deployed for benefit of agricultural as well as
other biological researchers. A sequence submission portal
provides a distinctive workflow from data acquisition, storage
and submission of knowledge enriched genomic sequences. The
database resources generated through this portal would be
deployed on the high performance computing environment to
achieve the speedy access and enable the user in carrying out
computational and statistical analysis for important findings.

The integration of genomic data pertaining to various
agriculturally important species would be accessible through
the implementation of sequence submission portal and provide
higher level of data storage for faster access to the user. It
would be made available on the public domain and facilitate
information exchange through global exchange programmes,
national, international consortiums for sharing resources with
proper credit/ acknowledgement to the contributor for their
findings. It would be feasible to extract meaningful biological
information for enhancement of agricultural productivity
through development and deployment of the parallel
computing tools to enable faster access of the resources
available on this portal.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Lal et al, Bioinformation 9(11): 588-598 (2013)

Data flow architecture of sequence submission portal.

Schematic entity-relationship diagram.

Network architecture of portal.

Sequence submission process.

Architectural plan of sequence submission.

Home page of the submission portals

User registration on the portal.

A view of old and new submissions made by the user.

Pasting the sequence and other related information.

Submission report.

