Background:
Aristolochia species have been used from ancient time during 
child birth and as a cure for snake bites []. Extracts Aristolochia
plants are used in the traditional medicine of in many countries, 
such as China, Turkey, India and Argentina [–]. In recent 
findings, compounds from Aristolochia manshuriensis has been 
reported as PIK1 [] inhibitor and CDK2 (Cyclin-Dependent 
Kinase 2) inhibitors []. Aristolactams, a group of phenanthrene 
lactam alkaloids, is claimed to be responsible for most of the 
bioactivities Aristolochia manshuriensis. Structurally and 
biologically aristolactams are related to aporphines []. 
Phenanthrene lactams are regarded as the principal products of 
aristolochic acids detoxiﬁcation metabolism []. Knowledge 
about the mode of action of aristolactams is somewhat 
nebulous; however, a recent opinion explains that cytochrome 
P-450 induced reduction pathway is involved in to aristolochic 
acid metabolism, while peroxidase involved in to the formation 
of a cyclic N-acylnitrenium ion embedded in an aristolactam 
unit with delocalized positive charge []. It is believed that this 
ionic species binds prefer to bind the exocyclic amino groups of 
purine nucleotides by the carbon atom at ortho position to the 
lactam nitrogen []. In the present study we considered on two 
aristolactames recently isolated from Aristolochia manshuriensis- 
a Chinese medicinal herb and considered as inhibito of CDK2. 
Molecular formulas of two compounds are C16H11NO4 and 
C22O9H19N (A and B respectively) (). Both compounds 
are composed of phenanthrene ring skeleton fused with a γ-
lactame ring. Compound A has a hydroxy group (-OH) at C3 
and C6 position and methoxy group (-OCH3) at C4 position 
[]. 
This compound is closely related to Aristolactam AIIIa. 
Compound B is glycoside analog of compound A that is, a 
hexose sugar moiety has a glycosidic linkage at C8 position of 
phenanthrene ring. Dissimilar to compound A, position C3 and 
C4 of phenetherene ring is occupied by a dioxol (3, 4-dioxol) 
moiety in compound B. Compounds A and B were found to be 
active in the CDK2 enzyme inhibition assay, with IC50values of 
140 nM and &gt;10 µM, respectively interestingly, compound B 
showed more selectivity against other kinases like CDK4, 
aurora-2 kinase and MAP-kinase [].

CDK2 (cyclin-dependent kinase 2) is a member of cyclindependent kinase family of serine/threonine kinases, this is 
believed to be regulating cell-cycle progression. Since, 
CDK2/cyclin E complex phosphorylates and inactivate 
retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein (RB), in turn 
transcription factor E2F get activated, hence during G1/S 
transition phase CDK2 is involved in to initiation of DNA 
synthesis [,
]. During S-phase CDK2/cyclin-A complex 
prevents unscheduled E2F activation and cell cycle passes this 
phase without interruption [].The exact role of CDK2 during 
the S phase of cell cycle is not well defined. However, due to its 
rate-limiting role the cell cycle, it has been regarded as a 
potential target for cancer therapy. This makes it an attractive 
target for antitumor drug discovery and drug design. Due to 
increasing attention of scientists toward CDK2 as a potential 
target for cancer therapy, a number of inhibiters had been 
studied. Few of the inhibitors are roscovitine, olomoucine, 
purvalanols, staurosporine, hymenialdisine, paullones and 
indirubin etc. All the inhibiters have same mode of action, 
competitive inhibitor of ATP as they bind kinase binding site of 
CDK2 []. Extensive X-ray crystallographic studies on 
complexes of the above listed inhibiters had elucidated the key 
features of interaction responsible for their affinity toward 
CDK2 protein. In this present in silico study we selected two 
newly isolated arisolactams from Aristolochia manshuriensis, 
which have been claimed to be a potent inhibitor of CDK2 and 
probably a lead for the development of anticancer drugs []. We 
studied and proposed structural basis of interaction of these 
two molecules with binding site of olomoucine on CDK2 
protein (PDB ID 1W0X).

Methodology:
Softwares and data source:
Symyx Draw 4.0 [] and Dundee PRODRG Server 
[] used in 
this study are freely available for academic use. Molecular 
docking server [] was used on paid subscription. The pipeline 
software for server built on several world-leading applications 
in the field of molecular modeling. Autodock 
(http://autodock.scripps.edu) 
[], the most popular molecular 
docking program is used for molecular docking calculations. 
Chemaxon tools (www.chemaxon.com) are used for small 
molecule visualization and processing. MOPAC2009 
(http://openmopac.net) and the revolutionary PM6 semi 
empirical method can be used to calculate small molecule 
geometries and electric properties. A detail about the working 
methodology can be retrieved from server from an URL 
http://www.dockingserver.com/web/gettingstarted/#featurs. 
(, See supplementary material) lists the software and 
servers used. PDB files of CDK2 protein was obtained from 
Protein Data Bank (http://www.pdb.org).

Protein Files Preparation:
In our previous studies [] we used Auto Dock Tools (ADT) to 
remove the added waters, add polar hydrogens and merge all 
non polar hydrogens. Then Kollman charges were added. 
Further .pdbqt, .pdbq .gfp etc files were prepared before start 
docking. But in present Study this all steps were performed by 
using molecular docking server. Briefly, PDB file for CDK2 
protein (ID 1W0X) downloaded from Protein Data Bank was 
uploaded to server. At protein clean step charge calculation 
method was selected as Gasteiger. The ligand-inhibiter (OLO) 
was not, selected since we had to dock to the same inhibiter 
binding site. All water molecules were selected for cleaning. By 
completion of this step, protein clean, calculation of protein 
charges and solvation parameters as well as protein parameter 
file created. In the next step a Grid (a three-dimensional box) 
was created with a dimension of X=20 Angstrom, Y= 20 
Angstrom, Z= 20 Angstrom, while center of mass was kept at a 
co-ordinate of X= 103.61, Y= 100.67, Z= 78.536. By complication 
of this step the protein was ready for the simulation/ Docking 
experiments.

Ligand file preparation:
Molecular structures of the Compound A and B were taken 
from the published report [] and drawn in “Symyx Draw 4.0” 
program. Files were saved as MOLfile (*.mol). MOLfiles were 
uploaded in to the Dundee PRODRG Server to retrieve PDB 
files []. Whereas, .pdb files for the known inhibitors of CDK2 
inhibitors, namely olomoucine (OLO), 6-Cyclohexylmethyloxy-
5-Nitroso-Pyrimidine-2, 4-Diamine (NW1) and 6-O 
Cyclohexylmethyl Guanine (CMG) were retrieved from protein 
data bank (PDB) server. Unlike our previous study we used the 
molecular docking server for the preparation of ligand before 
docking experiment. Briefly, ligands were uploaded singly to 
server. Charge calculation and geometric optimization methods 
were selected as Gasteiger and MMFF94 respectively; while pH 
was kept as 7.0. By the end of this process ligand files are ready 
for the docking.

Docking:
Docking was started by selecting a ligand (compound A, say) 
and protein (CDK2) from their respective folders. The number 
of individuals in the population (ga_pop_size) was kept 150, 
AutoDock counts for numbers of energy evaluations 
(ga_num_evals) were kept 25000000 and the number of 
generations (ga_num_generation) selected as 540000. And rest 
other settings kept as default setting. Finally simulation 
experiment started with keeping the numbers of run as 100. 
Since, AutoDock [], the most popular molecular docking 
program is used for molecular docking calculations at 
Molecular Docking Server and fidelity of Molecular Docking 
Server as a whole [] and AutoDock separately, is tested 
several times in previous studies [–]. Hence we considered 
Molecular Docking Server as an appropriate docking tool for 
the present purpose. AstexViewer™ viewer (default viewer of
docking server) and PyMol [] viewer were used for the 
visualization of docking results.

Results and Discussion:
Calculated binding energy for compounds A and B in the 
inhibitor binding site (IBS) were ­7.38 and ­9.70 kcal/mol 
respectively in the best pose (). Frequencies of 
occurrence out of total population were 100% and 73% as well 
as total surface of interaction between compounds and IBS were 
689.78 and 913.12 respectively (, See supplementary 
material). A comparison of different energies, interacting 
surfaces and frequencies of species etc. between compounds A 
and B as well as OLO, NW1 and CMG (known inhibitors) is 
listed in (, see supplementary material).

Compound A structure can be split into two fragments, namely 
a phenanthrene ring skeleton (PRS) and a γ-lactame ring fused 
with PRS. A hydroxy group (­OH) at C3 and C6 position and 
methoxy group (­OCH3) at C4 position attached. Similarly 
compound B structure can be split in to three fragments. PRS 
and γ-lactame ring are there in same fashion as in compound A. 
A hexose sugar moiety has a glycosidic linkage at C8 position. 
Oxygen atoms bound at C3 and C4 positions are attached with 
a single carbon atom to form a dioxol moiety () 
[]. As 
outlined in (), compound A docked in to IBS of CDK2 
outlined by ILE 10, VAL 18. ALA 31, LYS 33, PHE 80, PHE 82, 
LEU 83, LEU 134 and ASP 145. In this position nitrogen atom of 
γ-lactame ring appears remain hydrogen bonded with the 
oxygen atom of LEU 83(bond length = 2.74 γ Å) 
(). 
Polar interactions were made between hydroxyl group at C6 
position and ASP 145. The hydrophobic cage for compound A 
comprised of ILE 10, VAL 18, ALA 31 and ILU 134. From our 
results we presumed that compound A is anchored in to the 
hydrophobic cage by a hydrogen bond between nitrogen atom 
of γ-lactame ring and oxygen atom of LEU 83, while the 
confirmation stability is bring about by other week interactions 
like π - π and cation-π, which involve PHE 80 and PHE 82 
respectively.

Interestingly, docking results reveal that compound B inside 
IBS of CDK2 protein is outlined by GLU 8, ILE 10, VAL 18, LYS 
20, ALA 31, PHE 82, LEU 83, ASP 86, LYS 89, and LEU 134 
(). And the hydrophobic pocket is comprised of ILE 
10, VAL 18, PHE 82 and LEU 134. In a fashion similar as 
compound A, compound B is anchored by a hydrogen bond 
(bond length = 2.78 Å) between nitrogen atom of γ-lactame ring 
and oxygen atom of LEU 83 (). GLU 8, LYS 20 and 
LYS 89 are involved in polar interactions as well as PHE 82 
involve in cation-π interaction, which stabilize compound B 
conformation inside the IBS of CDK2 protein.

In the present study, we have made a detailed analysis of 
structure–activity relationship for compound A and B in the 
context of its inhibition of CDK2 activity. Both the compounds 
screened in the present study had the intact phenanthrene ring 
which is fused with γ-lactame ring (). Compounds 
having such moiety, most likely, offer a wide range of 
bioactivities including anti-inﬂammatory, antimycobacterial, 
and neuro-protective and antiplatelet activities 
[–]. 
Recently, such compounds had been shown to have anticancer 
activities [,
]. Hence, phenanthrene ring with a fused γ-
lactame ring seemingly to be important for imparting CDK2 
inhibitory activity.

Aristolochic acid which have phenetherene ring but no γ-
lactame ring, has been reported for antitumor activity 
[]. 
Sauristolactam and aristolactame AIIIa- derivatives of 
aristolochic acid which have γ-lactame ring fused with the 
phenenthere ring have been reported for their anti cancer and 
antitumor activities in several cancer cell lines 
[,
].

Particularly, aristolactame AIIIa recognized recently as a 
ligand/inhibitor for polo-box domain of polo-like kinase 1. All 
these evidences indirectly suggest that the phenetherene ring is 
deemed to be an essential feature for aristolactams and a fused 
γ-lactam moiety increases their activity as an inhibitor. Further 
enhancement of activity is bringing about by presence of dioxal 
moiety []. In present study we found that compounds are 
anchored in to the hydrophobic cage of IBS by a hydrogen bond 
between nitrogen atom of γ-lactam moiety and oxygen atom of 
LEU 83 whereas phenetherene ring is involved in to making 
week interaction inside the hydrophobic cage. In addition of 
this a higher binding energy (9.7okcal/mol) of compound B 
with CDK2 IBS is observed. These all evidences suggest that our 
present finding is in the agreement earlier in vitro findings. 
CDK2 is involved in to initiation of DNA synthesis during G1/S 
transition phase [,
] and in S-phase CDK2/cyclin-A 
complex prevents unscheduled activation of transcription factor 
E2F and facilitates cell cycle to passes this phase without 
interruption []. 
The role of CDK2 during the S phase of cell 
cycle is not well defined. However, due to its rate-limiting role 
the cell cycle, it has been regarded as a potential target for 
cancer therapy. A study recent study claims that in comparision 
of compound B, compound A is more selective for CDK2 
compared to other related kinases but CDC2 kinase has a close 
homology with CDK2 and compound A shows similar 
inhibitory activity. However A showed more selectivity against 
other kinases like CDK4, aurora-2 kinase and MAP-kinase 
[]. 
In our study, we found that compound A shows 100% 
frequency in its best possible position inside IBS of CDK2, 
whereas it is only 73% for compound B. Since a frequency of a 
species in the population corresponds to the probability of 
occurrence. In other words later is a parameter of selectivity
and specificity of compounds to IBS of CDK2. Hence, our 
finding is in agreement with the finding of 
[]. The seemingly 
greater selectivity of compound A with CDK2 as earlier studies 
reported could make it a better lead for designing anticancer 
drugs.

Conclusion:
We have shown the possible interactions of compound A and B 
isolated from a Chinese herb Aristolochia manshuriensis with 
the IBS CDK2. This could provide a structural and molecular 
basis for the existing evidences for anticancer properties of 
compound A, B and related compounds. Such observations can 
also help to consider compound A and B as an effective scaffold 
for rational design of novel and potential drugs against cancer.

Competing interests:
Authors declare that there is no competing interest among 
them.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work was supported by grants from the King Saud 
University, Deanship of Scientific Research, College of Food &amp; 
Agriculture Science, Research Center.

Citation:Alshatwi et al, Bioinformation 7(7): 334-338 (2011)

Proposed Structure of compound 1 and 2 isolated 
from Aristolochia manshuriensis.

Visualization of the lowest energy conformation of 
compounds and CDK2 complex is shown in AstexViewer™ (an 
in built application of molecular docking server).

(a) An illustration of the amino acid residues involved 
in hydrophobic cage formation and stabilization of compound 
A inside the IBS of CDK2 (viewed with PyMol); (b) Illustration 
of hydrogen bond between nitrogen atom of γ-lactam of 
compound A and LEU 83 residue of IBS of CDK2.

(a) An illustration of the amino acid residues involved 
in hydrophobic cage formation and stabilization of compound B 
inside the IBS of CDK2 (viewed with PyMol); (b) Illustration of 
hydrogen bond between nitrogen atom of γ-lactam of 
compound B and LEU 83 residue of IBS of CDK2.

