Background
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a robust, flexible and fast technique
that is essential to the modern Molecular Biology and is currently used in
many applications. One of the fundamental assets for a successful PCR
reaction is the quality and reliability of the oligonucleotide primer
design.Designing primers in conserved regions of related nucleotide
sequences is of great importance for molecular biologists as it allows the
usage of the same primer to successfully obtain a PCR product across
multiple and/or understudied organisms. Softwares that can design
conserved primers using multiple alignments have been developed, and are
free to use, such as Primaclade [].

PrimerIdent, however, uses the concept of conserved primer design for a
different purpose: PCR (or RT­PCR) amplification of a specific isozymecoding
sequence.Isozymes are multiple forms of enzymes from the same
class arising from genetically determined differences in primary structure
and frequently sharing a great identity amongst them. As a consequence, it
is very difficult to design primers that effectively differentiate between
related genes that share a high degree of similarity. The difficulty lies on
choosing primers that are specific for one sequence coding a particular
isozyme and simultaneously less identical to similar sequences coding
other members of the same gene family.In order to design a suitable primer
for a nucleotide sequence coding a specific isozyme, it is necessary to
ensure that the primer is designed for a exclusive region for that isozyme.
This primer design approach makes the conserved primer design tools
described above unsuitable.One way of doing this, albeit time-consuming
and complex, is to find these primers using a trial/error method, with the
aid of BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool ― []), by comparing
the match score of the different published sequences, and therefore
minimizing the risk of amplifying more than one nucleotide coding
sequence for a type of isozyme at the same time.

Such approach proves to be even more complex if the studied organism
doesn't have any nucleotide sequences published for a particular multigene
family. This means that, in this case, it is necessary to find a primer that is
conserved across multiple organisms phylogenetically close to the
organism studied, and simultaneously

specific for a given isozyme.

This isozyme specificity should also be consistent across those related
organisms.To circumvent these complex tasks, PrimerIdent was developed
aiming to automate this primer design and selection process, in a given
nucleotide sequence alignment providing an intuitive, easy to interpret
graphical output.

Input
PrimerIdent was implemented as a Perl-CGI script that uses Primer3 core
[] as the primer design engine and accepts a FASTA alignment of no
more than 8 sequences with a maximum length of 10 kbp at a time. shows the web frontend. The website is located at
http://primerident.up.pt, hosted by the University of Porto, Portugal. In an
interactive user interface, the menu on the left 
provides basic information about PrimerIdent, which includes an introduction section and
application examples, as well as a F˙A˙Q. (Frequently Asked Questions)
section and contact information.In order to use PrimerIdent, the user pastes
the FASTA sequence alignment into the textbox

This alignment can
be made in programs such as ClustalW 
[] or 
MEGA4 []. Before
submitting the alignment for analysis, the user has to select one of the
sequences to be considered the template for primer design, normally
corresponding to a cDNA of the target isozyme of the most closely related
species 

, and choose between left and right primer design

 As the
Primer3 core is used as the primer design engine, the user can also modify
the different criteria that the Primer3 engine should use to pick all possible
primers for that template sequence 

It is also possible to sort the found
primers by sequence location or output order (i.e. the same order by which
the Primer3 core finds them ‐ F).




Output
PrimerIdent runs the Primer3 core in the background against the template
sequence assigned in the web form, listing all possible primers for the
template sequence, using the criteria submitted in the web interface by the
user.

PrimerIdent will then calculate the identity of all the primers from that list
to each sequence included in the alignment and renders a final HTML
report with the list of all primers depicting for each one the identities
calculated for each sequence and a colour encoded pattern for easy
interpretation ().The colour code reflects the degree of identity of
each primer to the aligned sequences. The colour variation is a function of
the identity match using the following references: 0% identity corresponds
to the colour pink, 50% to red, 90% to yellow and 100% to green.The
resulting PrimerIdent report can then be used to easily find a primer with a
specific identity pattern that will suit the needs of the researcher. In the
case of the sample report shown in , PrimerIdent easily depicts
primers with a high identity to Catalase 1 (CAT1) sequences and
simultaneously an identity as low as possible for Catalase 2 (CAT2).

The HTML report includes useful information about the designed primers:
their position in the alignment, size, melting temperature, GC percentage,
3' self­complementarity and any self­complementarity. This additional
information helps researchers to choose the best primer for a certain
application if more than one primer with the identity pattern that suits their
needs is found. If a primer pair is required, then the researcher will have to
get separate reports for left and right primers, see what primers have the
identity pattern needed and choose the pair based on the primer position
included in the report.

The authors wish to thank the Systems Management and Computation
Unit, (Digital University Department, Reitoria ― University of Porto),
especially to José António Sousa and Anabela Vieira for providing and
supporting the web hosting facilities for http://primerident.up.pt.

Citation:Pessoa et al, Bioinformation 5(2): 52-54 (2010)

PrimerIdent sample report for left primer analysis of Solanaceae Catalase (CAT) isozymes sequences. This sample report was trimmed in order
to fit the page. Along with Solanum tuberosum (potato) CAT1 (AY442179 ― used as template sequence) the alignment also includes Solanum
lycopersicum (tomato) CAT1 (AF112368), Capsicum annuum (chilli-pepper) CAT1 (AY128694), Nicotiana tabacum (tobacco) CAT1 (NTU93244), S.
tuberosum CAT2 (AY500290), S. lycopersicum CAT2 (M93719), C. annum CAT2 (AB007190) and N. tabacum CAT2 (NTU07627). In this example it is
possible to find primers with a high identity to CAT1 sequences and simultaneously an identity as low as possible for CAT2 sequences.


PrimerIdent Web Interface. Although best viewed in Microsoft Internet Explorer 6 or above, PrimerIdent also works in other mainstream
browsers, such as Mozilla FireFox, Apple Safari and Opera.

