Background
The intestine is the largest mucosal organ of the body and also 
the first line immune homeostasis [,
], inflammatory bowel 
disease or IBD is divided into ulcerative colitis and Crohn's 
disease. Ulcerative colitis (UC) are recognized by recurrent and 
episodic attacks that limited to the mucosal layer of the colon 
[]. In critically ill patients with severe conflicts the 
inflammation may even pass through the mucous layer and 
reach the muscle layer. In this condition intestinal motility has 
been impaired, bowel movements decreased and the patient 
may go into the toxic mega colon [,
]. The disease was 
introduced first by Wills in London as a separate disease from 
clinical diarrhea []. The genetic relationship between UC and 
IBD has been demonstrated and if a person is infected, the risk 
of incidence of IBD in first-degree relatives is 10 % 
[]. The 
incidence of UC varies within different geographic regions. It`s 
prevalence is lower in Asian races than in European and North 
American races. The first peak age of UC is between 15 and 30 
years. Second peak occurs between the ages of 60 and 80 and 
male to female ratio for UC is 1:1. Studies have shown that risk 
of UC and its episodes in smoker persons is 40% in comparison 
to nonsmokers. In terms of pathology, UC usually involves the 
rectal mucus and extends proximally to involve all or part of 
the colon. Most of the patients who have disease limited to the 
rectum and recto sigmoid and involvement of more than 
sigmoid is in the next level. On the other hand, genetics and 
environmental factors play a major role in the pathogenesis of 
UC and having a family member increase the risk of the other
family members [,
]. Among environmental factors the micro 
flora of colon and the components of food (antigens) may play 
important role in the pathogenesis of IBD and UC 
[]. One of 
the problems that can occur with UC is dietary allergy to some 
foods. Food allergy involves an abnormal immune response 
that is usually causes hypersensitivity to the protein 
[,
]. 
There are three mechanisms for this sensitivity, they are: 
Dependent to IgE, Independent to IgE and Mix mechanism 
[,
] 
Dependent to IgE reaction is usually fast and due to 
specific IgE like food allergens and allergy. Studies have 
shown that the food allergy in patients with ulcerative colitis is 
mainly due to an IgE-dependent reaction and IgE in rectal 
mucosa of patients indicated. It is because that, today is 
strongly recommended for patients with ulcerative colitis to 
use of special diets and main diet is milk and dairy-free diet for 
them []. The objective of this study is to assess dairy allergy 
among patients with ulcerative colitis.

Methodology
Study Population:
Case - control study, in this study, 72 patients with Ulcerative 
Colitis, after recording history of the disease, colonoscopy and 
confirmed by biopsy entered into the study. In the control 
group, we selected 72 persons without a history of intestinal 
problems, of course with normal colonoscopy view. Control 
group as possible in terms of status, age and gender is 
conformed to case groups.

Clinical Investigations:
The diagnosis of ulcerative colitis was performed by the typical 
history of patient endoscopic, seeing the mucosal view and 
biopsy of intestinal and final confirmation of pathologist. 
Biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of ulcerative colitis, in 
Pathologic appearance can be seen many cases such as chronic 
mucosal changes, atrophy of the glands and deficiency of 
niacin in goblet cell. For patients whose disease was in its early 
stages use of Flexible sigmoidoscopy for diagnosis of disease 
[–] 
().

Laboratory Investigations:
In this study, in order to investigate of food allergy, we used 
the EUROMMUM kit with an international code number 
DP3420-1601-11E. Buy this kit; we checked Cow milk, Cow 
milk UHT and Casein allergy among case and control groups. 
Complete Blood Count (CBC) checked for anemia. (World 
Health Organization criteria for anemia in men and women are 
hemoglobin ) &lt;13 and &lt;12 g/DL).

Study Measurements:
The food allergy kit is a work based on the measurement of IgE 
levels and the bands calculated in Enzyme Allergo Sorbent 
Test (EAST). In this study also were used Mayo Scoring System 
to investigate and judge about the severity of the disease and 
control of being treated patients. Received points of patients 
were between zero and 12 higher numbers indicate greater 
severity of illness [].

Feeding in Patients:
Initially, the nutritional status of patients were evaluated that 
including body mass index, dietary received, daily intake of 
energy and protein in the serum [–
].

Statistical analysis:
The Statistical Package for the Social Science program (SPSS, 
version 19.0) was used. We used chi-square and Monte Carlo 
method for analysis of data.

Results
One hundred forty two cases, including 72 patients (50%) with 
UC and 72 healthy subjects (50%) were studied. Among case 
group, most patient were between 26-30 and 31-35 years (each 
category 41.7% ) but in control group, 20-25 and 26-30 years 
category (each category 38.9%) were the dominant groups 
(Table 1). Of educational, most patients were bachelor (BA) 
(41.7%) and in control group, diploma and advanced diploma 
(38.9%) with BA (38.9%) had the highest frequency. In 
Complete Blood Count or CBC, 47.2% of patients and 19.4% 
from control group had anemia. 33.3% of UC patients were 
active smoker and fourteen cases from control group (38.9%) 
were active smoker. Among case group, only ten patients 
(13.9%) reported a history of screening for gastrointestinal 
cancer and also, twenty patients (27.8%) expressed the familial 
history about cancer of gastrointestinal. Among UC patients, 
30.6% mild, 52.8% moderate and 16.6% of cases were in sever 
stage. 9.7% of them reported a history of abdominal surgery 
due to disease. According to the chi-square and Monte Carlo 
methods, dairy allergy (including: cow milk, cow milk UHT 
and casein) in UC group was significant (P=0.00). Complete 
information׳s about severity of allergic reaction in both case 
and control groups in table was written  (see 
supplementary material).

Discussion
Ulcerative colitis is an inflammatory bowel disease, its etiology 
is not properly identified [–
], the pattern of disease is 
chronic in most patients that determined with acute attacks 
that periodically takes weeks []. Food allergy is one of the 
problems that can arise with ulcerative colitis. Food allergy is 
an abnormal immune reaction that usually occurs against 
proteins [,
]. So in Ulcerative colitis patients, it is 
recommended that have the diet with a minimum 
consumption of dairy products. Use of some medications, 
especially non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs can because 
of similar symptoms. Bleeding by induced -Penicillin is rare, 
but should be considered [–
]. The fact of the matter is that, 
although most of the patients mention specific foods as 
aggravate their symptoms, but so far do not a complete and 
comprehensive study in this regard. And this is a very clear 
need that, in recent study evaluated Dairy allergy among 
ulcerative colitis patients. In this case-control study, 72 UC
patients were compared with 72 healthy persons to determine 
the dairy allergy. In this study, for better and more precisely 
study, according to the Mayo criteria, patients with ulcerative 
colitis were classified to mild, moderate and sever group. In 
Mekkel G study which has done on IBD patients, results 
showed that anti casein-antibody in UC group have higher 
levels in comparison to control group. D'Arienzo et al showed 
that serum level of antibody against food protein and clinical 
symptoms in ulcerative colitis patients significantly was higher 
than normal persons. In this study level of allergic symptoms 
in 56% and allergic reaction in 52% of UC patients was found. 
But in control persons these amount was 18% and 26%. In 
other hand, our results were shown that levels of anti-body 
against dairy protein significantly were higher than control 
group []. In our study like Mishkin S, using dairy and 
lactolose due to allergic reaction in UC patients, but D B Jones 
and Brignola C study expressed different results 
[]. In D B 
Jones and Brignola C study, dairy allergy in both groups (UC 
patients and control group) haven׳t a clearly difference. Most 
previous studies has correlate with this study and all of them 
indicated the dairy allergy between patients with ulcerative 
colitis and this is very important for treatment of these 
patients. At the end of, however, in the old studies likes D B 
Jones and Brignola C, results denied the existence of the food
allergy, especially dairy allergy among UC patients, but in new 
study like this study, there is a significant relationship between 
dairy allergy and ulcerative colitis [].

Conclusion
This study indicated that there is significant relationship 
between UC and cow milk, cow milk UHT and casein. UC 
patients who are allergic to dairy products and the use of dairy 
products can increase the severity of UC. It is recommended to 
UC patients that less use from dairy products.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Judaki et al, Bioinformation 10(11): 693-696 (2014)

Three view of colon disorder in Ulcerative colitis

