Background
The classic model of an oil drop representing the hydrophobic core in proteins given by Kauzmann [] 
			was intended to visualize the importance of hydrophobic interactions responsible for forming and stabilizing the protein tertiary structure. [,,] The hydrophilic 
			surface with the hydrophobic center of the molecule is generally accepted [,] as the model according to which the amino acid sequence partitions a protein into its inside and outside. []

The model oriented on localization of the area responsible for ligand binding, based on characteristics of spatial distribution of hydrophobicity which 
			changes from protein interior (maximal hydrophobicity) to exterior (close to zero level of hydrophobicity), can be represented by a three-dimensional Gaussian 
			function. [,,
			] The simple comparison of theoretical (Gaussian function) and empirical spatial distributions of hydrophobicity in protein allows identification of 
			the areas of high discrepancy, which, as observed in crystal forms of protein-ligand complexes, can be recognized as ligation sites in proteins.

Methodology
Data
Complexes selected for analysis presented in this paper are: cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PDB ID: 1CDK), cyclin-dependent protein kinase 2 (PDB ID: 1E1V), 
			proto-oncogene tyrosine-protein kinase ABL (PDB ID: 1IEP), S-lectin (PDB ID: 1SLT).

Grid system
The grid system (with constant step size) is constructed for the protein molecule localized with its geometrical center in the origin of the coordinate 
             system (0,0,0)and oriented as follows: longest inter-effective atoms (side chains represented by the geometrical centers) distance along the X-axis and longest 
             distance between projections (on YZ plane) of effective atoms along the Y-axis. The size of the ellipsoid can be calculated by taking the maximum and minimum 
             values of the X, Y and Z coordinates found in the molecule, oriented as above.

Theoretical hydrophobicity distribution:
The theoretical hydrophobicity value for each grid point can be calculated according to a three-dimensional Gaussian function:
             as given in the  linked below             

             

Empirical hydrophobicity distribution
The empirical hydrophobicity distribution can be calculated using the original function introduced by Levitt []:as given in the  linked below 
             
             

Prediction results
Theoretical versus empirical hydrophobicity distribution
Since theoretical (Equation 1) and empirical (Equation 2) hydrophobicity 
			   distributions are standardized, the hydrophobicity values attributed to each grid point can be compared by a simple subtraction:
			     The color scale introduced to express the magnitude of difference ΔĤ in a particular protein () area enables the visualization of the localization of these discrepancies in the protein molecule. The profile of
         ΔĤi along the polypeptide chain (also in color scale) reveals the fragments of polypeptide of high difference between idealized and
         empirical hydrophobicity density. The same color scale applied to a three-dimensional representation of protein molecule allows for the localization 
         of the ligation site in the protein molecule. The results of analysis of selected protein molecules are shown in .

        

Conclusion
The many proteins of unknown biological function, identified on the basis of genome analysis, await a unified automated method for determining 
			their biological activity. [] The next step is to develop methods able to predict a protein's function
            from an examination of its structure. Some of the techniques used to identify functionally important residues from the sequence or structure are based on 
            searching for homologues of proteins of known function. [,]
            However, homologues need not have related activity, particularly when the sequence identity is below 25%. [] The model presented in this paper is oriented on localizing the area responsible for ligand binding, based on the 
            characteristics of the spatial distribution of hydrophobicity in a protein molecule. It is generally accepted that the core region is not well described by a
            spheroid of buried residues surrounded by surface residues due to hydrophobic channels that permeate the molecule. [,] This being so, we should be able to identify regions with
            high deviation versus the ideal model by making a simple comparison of the theoretical (idealized according to the Gaussian function) and empirical spatial 
            distribution of  hydrophobicity in a protein. The regions recognized by high hydrophobicity density differences seem to reveal functionally important sites 
            in proteins.

Supplementary Material
Data 1
Data 2
Many thanks to Prof. Marek Pawlikowski (Faculty of Chemistry, Jagiellonian University) for fruitful discussions. This research was supported by the Polish
     State Committee for Scientific Research (KBN) grant 3 T11F 003 28 and Collegium Medicum grants 501/P/133/L and WŁ/222/P/L.

Figures and Tables
One-dimensional profiles of ΔĤ per amino acid (color scale) (left column) and three-dimensional distribution of
       ΔĤ on protein surface (right column): A ­ AMP-dependent protein kinase complexed with 5'-adenyly-imido-triphosphate,
       B ­ cyclin-dependent protein kinase 2 complexed with 6-O-cyclohexylmethyl guanine, C ­ proto-oncogene tyrosine-protein
       kinase ABL complexed with STI-571, D ­ S-lectin complexed with D-galactose. The ligands (dark blue thick line) are
       localized at their binding sites according to crystal structure


        Citation:Brylinskiet al., Bioinformation 1(4): 127-129 (2006)

