Background
The avian influenza (bird flu) is an infectious disease of the birds, ranging from mild to severe form of the illness. 
      Influenza viruses pose significant challenge to both human and animal health. Highly pathogenic avian influenza virus infection 
      can result in huge economic loss. Viruses of low virulence are changed to highly pathogenic viruses when they are circulating 
      in the poultry population due to high mutation rate in their genome. [] 
      During the 1983­1984 outbreaks in the United States, the virulence of H5N2 virus started low. However, within six months the 
      mortality rate caused by the virus reached 90%. [] The influenza viruses 
      mutate rapidly and it is important to estimate and predict the rate of mutation in these viruses. [] We describe a PERL script, named MAP MUTATION, for identifying mutations in the rapidly evolving avian 
      influenza virus. MAP MUTATION can compare sequences of varying lengths by padding the shorter sequences with asterisks (*).The 
      program is tested for H5N1 proteins (unpublished data).

Methodology
Input
MAP MUTATION is an interactive, user-friendly program for identifying mutations by comparing sequences of two different strains. 
      MAP MUTATION accepts input sequences in the program console (for short sequences as shown in ) 
      or using TEXT file (as 
      shown in  using two different files for two sequences) containing the sequence (for longer sequences).

Output
MAP MUTATION produces result instantly in the console when input is given in the console and the file output.txt is generated 
      from sequences obtained through input files.

Caveats and Future Development
MAP MUTATION is a PERL script. A web based CGI (common gateway interface) is being developed for MAP MUTATION.

The authors are grateful to Professor M. Saleemuddin for providing facilities to carryout this work and for his support 
    throughout the project. BTIS is acknowledged for technical help. Department of Biotechnology, Ministry of Science and Technology, 
    Government of India is acknowledged for the financial support.

Figures and Tables
(A) Description of program flow while entering the input through console. (B) Description of program flow while entering            the input through files.


      Citation:Anwar &amp; Khan, Bioinformation 1(3): 92-93 (2006)

