Background
The members of family Gemini viridae consist of singlestranded
DNA (ssDNA) viruses that infect a wide range of
plants and cause serious crop damage. One of the four genera
of Gemini viruses is Begomovirus []. Most members of
Begomovirus have bipartite DNA, called DNA A and DNA B.
DNA A encodes the proteins required for viral DNA replication
and encapsidation, whereas, DNA B encodes two proteins that
are essential for systemic movement. Recently some whiteflytransmitted
Begomovirus have been shown to require the
presence of single-stranded DNA satellite (known as DNA γ) to
induce characteristic symptoms of Cotton Leaf Curl Disease
(CLCuD) in some hosts [,
].

Approximately half of the Begomovirus DNA consists of DNA γ
(1.3 to 1.4 kb) [,
]. Sequence analyses have shown that the
complementary-sense strand of all DNA γ molecules encode a
γC1 gene which is conserved in sequence, position and length.
This gene has the capacity to encode 13 to 14 kDa protein
comprising of 118 amino acids [,
]. The precise function of
DNA γ and the γC1 protein in the pathogenesis of CLCuD is
still not fully understood. It has been proposed that DNA γ may
play a direct or an indirect role in viral DNA replication,
facilitation of the movement of viruses or countering the host
defense response [].

The functions of DNA γ have been shown to be mediated by
complementary-sense gene, γC1. The protein product of γC1
gene has been shown to act as a suppressor of posttranscriptional
gene silencing [–]. The DNA γ-encoded
protein, γC1, is the cause of both pathogenicity and suppression
of gene silencing []. In this study, the 3D structure of
CLCuDγ01-Pakistani protein has been predicted by use of the
online structure prediction server, called I-TASSER. DoBo
server was used to predict the domains of the protein.
PROCHECK and VERIFY 3D servers were used for evaluation
of the predicted γC1 structure. The final 3D model was
evaluated in terms of functional capability of the protein.

Methodology
The amino acid sequence of CLCuDγ01-Pakistani protein was
retrieved from ExPASy Bioinformatics resource portal
(http://expasy.org) with accession number (UniProtKB=
Q911I3). The nucleotide sequence was accessed through EMBL
nucleotide sequence database (Accession number: AJ292769).
The nucleotide sequence is 357 base pairs long, which encodes a
protein of 118 amino acid residues. The primary sequence of
118 amino acids was used to unravel the structural aspects of
this protein. Both structure prediction and evaluation tools
(data not shown) were used, but the following tools were relied
upon more for greater accuracy. The secondary structure
elements were determined using the DoBo [] and
PredictProtein (results not shown) [] severs. For protein
homology modeling, we used online available tool called ITASSER
[]. This server uses the threading technique to
predict the 3D models. The server generated 5 best models
based on multiple-threading alignments and iterative template
fragment assembly simulations along with their confidence
scores (). The 5 models were visualized by the Visual
Molecular Dynamics (VMD) software []. To evaluate these
models, different validation techniques were used. In a similar
fashion, PROCHECK [] and VERIFY 3D 
[] servers were
used to validate the predicted protein structures. The
PROCHECK software generates ramachandran plot which
nicely explains the steriochemical configuration of amino acid
residues. The VERIFY 3D analyzes the compatibility of an
atomic model with its amino acid sequence. Each amino acid
residue is assigned a structural class. A collection of structures
is used as a reference to obtain a score for each of the 20 amino
acids in any structural class. The scores are then plotted for
individual residues [,
]. Finally, the better model was
evaluated based on the aforementioned tools.

Results &amp; Discussion
The CLCuDγ01-Pakistani protein and Chinese Y10γC1 are
distantly related from each other with respect to amino acid
sequence. However, when the secondary structure elements of
CLCuDγ01-Pak were compared to Chinese Y10γC1, the
structural conservation was observed between the two species
[] 
(). Since no template was found for homology
modeling of CLCuDγ01-Pakistani protein, it was decided that
threading technique can be useful for tertiary structure
prediction. This guided us towards the implementation of the
threading-based I-TASSER server. Five models of the tertiary
structure were received from the server (). These
models were verified using PROCHECK and VERIFY 3D online
available servers. The overall percentage representation of
results is shown in  (see supplementary material). The
threading-based method was successful in determining the 3D
structure of the CLCuDγ01-Pakistani protein and it provided
five complete models. Model numbers 3 and 5 had good scores
in terms of Ramachandran plots and 3D-1D amino acid
distributions. Both the models passed the percentage
representation and averaged 3D-1D scores. Model number 5
was selected as the better model because of the presence of
larger percentage of amino acid residues in the core and
allowed regions in the Ramachandran plot. None of its amino
acid residues were present in the forbidden or disallowed
region of the Ramachandran plot as shown by () and
(). The accuracy of the model was also verified by use
of the criteria developed by VERIFY 3D server. This server
verifies the 3D structural distribution of amino acids as
compared to the 1D distribution of amino acid residues 
[].

The selected model number 5 showed structural conservation
between the CLCuDγ01-Pakistani protein and Chinese Y10γC1
for two a-helices located near the C-terminus (). These
a-helices have been implicated in the multimerization of the
protein []. From the amino acid sequence analysis it was
observed that CLCuDγ01-Pak lacks cysteine residues.
Therefore, a zinc finger DNA-binding domain (Cys-His motif)
is missing from the protein structure [,
&amp;
]. However, a
Histidine-based DNA-binding domain might still be present in
the protein that may allow it to bind single stranded or double
stranded DNA without size or sequence specificity and to be
able to suppress the host RNA silencing activity as observed in
Chinese strain []. The exact sequence location in CLCuD γ01
protein still needs experimental verification.

The secondary structure elements of CLCuDγ01-Pakistani
protein () comprise three a-helices and five γ-strands.
Three of the γ-strands (γ1, γ2 and γ3) are at the N-terminus, the
fourth γ-strand (γ4) is located almost in the middle of the of
sructure and the fifth γ-strand (γ5) is present near the Cterminus.
All of the three a-helices (α1, α2 and α3) are located in
the middle of the protein structure. Five Glycine residues
present in the secondary strcuture elements. Glycine 5 is
present in the middle part of γ1; Glycine 10 is at the beginning
of γ2; and Glycine 44 and Glycine 64 are present in α1 and α2
respectively. Only one Proline residue is present in the
secondary structure elements (Proline 109 in γ5). Glycines and
Prolines can both produce a “kink‛ in α-helices and γ-strands.
The amino acids residues: Alanine, Aspartic Acid, Glutamic
acid, Isoleucine, Leucine and Methionine favor the formation of
α-helix. The three α-helices of CLCuDγ01-Pakistani protein
contain a total of 31 amino acid residues out of which 18 belong
to the type that favor formation of α-helices. The secondary
structure elements were further compared with those of the
Chinese viral protein Y10γC1 [] 
(). Both the proteins
were found to be comparable. The only region showing any
difference between the two proteins is the region between
amino acid 35-55 where an extra a-helix and a γ-strand are
present in CLCuDγ01-Pakistani strain.

The predicted tertiary structure of CLCuDγ01-Pakistani protein
shows three α-helices and five γ-strands. The four γ-strands are
arranged antiparallel to each other (). According to the
results provided by the DoBo server, CLCuDγ01-Pakistani
protein contains two domains: an N-terminal domain which
stretches from amino acid 1-51 and contains three γ-strands and
one α-helix and a C-terminal domain which stretches from
amino acid 55-118 and one γ-strand and two α-helices. Both the
domains are critical for functioning of the protein [].

 shows the secondary elements distribution across the
primary sequence (a), the predicted 3D model (b) and
Ramachandran plot (c) for the amino acids distribution. To
analyze the stereochemical quality of the predicted structure
PROCHECK software was used. According to PROCHECK
results, the fifth model (model#5) () seems the most
appropriate one because it has most of the amino acid residues
present in the core and allowed regions (92.2%) while only 4.7
% of the total amino acids are found in the generous region as
indicated by Ramachandran plot (). Further, the
quality was assessed by the VERIFY 3D software. Both the
PROCHECK and VERIFY 3D results are shown in the 
(see supplementary material). The  shows the
secondary elements distribution across the primary sequence
(a), the predicted 3D model (b) and Ramachandran plot for the
amino acids distribution (c).

The molecular basis of pathogenicity of γC1 can be explained
by the suppression of RNA silencing activity. RNA silencing is
a surveillance system that exists in many species under
different names but with same phenomena e.g., in animals
(RNA interference), fungi (quelling) and plants (posttranscriptional
gene silencing) [,
]. RNA silencing, either
initiated or inhibited by different viruses, plays an important
antiviral role in eukaryotes (e.g. animals and plants etc.). Some
viruses have evolved or acquired functional proteins that
suppress RNA silencing by targeting different steps of silencing
pathways [,
,
]. This role has only recently been elucidated
in γC1 protein of tomato yellow leaf curl China betasatellite
(TYLCCNB) which forms a multimeric complex with the help of
cysteine residues for its proper functioning []. However, this
type of role in CLCuDγ01 has not been experimentally
elucidated yet. γC1 is also involved in other functions also such
as pathogen (virus) movement in host plants, DNA-binding and
post-transcriptional gene silencing [].

It is known that expression of γC1 interferes with local silencing
in transient Agrobacterium-based assays. γC1 protein targets
different stages in silencing process by overlapping the miRNA.
It binds both single stranded and double stranded DNA in a
non-specific manner without the presence of a zinc finger
domain []. The γC1 fusion proteins have been shown to be
primarily localized in the nucleus in both insect and plant cells.
They require a nuclear localization sequence (NLS) for entering
the nucleus of a cell []. Although comparable with other
Begomovirus proteins such as AL2/AC2, with respect to size,
DNA-binding properties, and nuclear localization, γC1 lacks
the zinc finger motif and shares little or no sequence homology
with these proteins []. The predicted structure can help
virologists in pinpointing the major regions of interaction
between plant hosts and viruses to uncover the interaction
mechanism. Future research in the direction of predicting the
binding sites will also help uncover the possible mechanisms of
RNA-silencing and several other functions. By knowing the
structural aspects of this protein, it will be easier to target the
disease causing viruses by introducing the novel drugs inside
the plants or using the gene therapy techniques in plant to
eliminate the disease effects and to increase the potential
economic growth at industrial level.

Conclusion
The secondary and tertiary structures of CLCuDγ01-Pakistani
protein associated with Cotton Leaf Curl Disease CLCuD have
been predicted using in silico methodologies. The novel aspects
of the protein structure have been highlighted using already
available literature. The secondary structure elements were
compared with the Chinese viral protein Y10γC1 which
revealed that both the proteins are structurally somewhat
similar despite sequence dissimilarities. The only difference is
in the region between amino acid 35-55 where an extra a-helix
and a γ-strand are present in CLCuDγ01-Pakistani protein. The
novel structural aspects can be further used to highlight the
potential role of this protein inside the host to unravel the
potential role of the disease causing protein inside the host. The
future advancement such as protein-protein interactions, role in
DNA binding and RNA interference need expert level
approaches to investigate the structural and functional aspects
of this protein and to control its role in spreading of Cotton Leaf
Curl Disease (CLCuD).

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Shahzad et al, Bioinformation 9(9): 471-476 (2013)

The five models for tertiary structure of CLCuDγ01-Pakistani protein predicted by the I-TASSER server. Each model is
represented by a-helices (purple colored) and γ-strands (yellow colored).

Schematic comparison of predicted structural elements of CLCuDγ01-Pakistani protein and Chinese viral protein Y10γC1
[]. The γ-strands and α helices are shown by yellow arrows and purple colored bars respectively for γC1 (Pakistan). While in
Chinese Y10γC1 sequence, the γ-strands and α-helices are shown by green arrows and yellow bars respectively. The part of the
amino acid sequence where structural differences are found between the two proteins is outlined by a box.

(a) Amino acid sequence and secondary structure elements of the CLCuDγ01-Pakistani protein. The consensus secondary
structure elements were determined by use of DoBo, PredictProtein and I-TASSER servers. Highlighted in red are amino acids that
are highly conserved between Malvaceous γ satellites; those in yellow are the amino acids that are highly conserved between all the
γ satellites; arrows indicate the position of Glycine and Proline residues in the secondary structure elements. (b) Model number 5
for the tertiary structure of γC1 predicted protein by I-TASSER server. The a-helices are represented by purple color, while γ-
strands are represented by yellow color. N- and C-terminus residues are colored red. (c) Ramachandran plot of the predicted protein
model of γC1 showing the values of Psi and Phi angles.

