Background
Staphylococcus is a genus of Gram-positive bacteria, a major
human pathogen. The Staphylococcus genus includes at least
forty species, of which; nine have two subspecies and one has
three subspecies. Most are harmless and reside normally on the
skin and mucous membranes of humans and other organisms.
Found worldwide, they are a small component of soil microbial
flora. The continuous emergence and spread of antibiotic
resistant strains (e.g. MRSA, VRSA) leads to limited treatment
options. Being a commensal organism living asymptomatically
in the nasal cavities of a large number of the human population,
S. aureus is also responsible for a raft of different infections that
range in both anatomical site and severity. These infections are
assisted by a vast array of different virulence factors like
adhesins, invasins, toxins and modulins, which enables evasion
of host immune responses and also contribute to colonization,
dissemination, tissue damage and transmission. Though some
infections are superficial and self-limiting, S. aureus is also
responsible for serious invasive diseases. S. aureus is a leading
cause of sepsis and infective endocarditis. Colonization of the
heart and subsequent formation of vegetations involves a
number of complex interactions [].

The first bacterial species in which tandem repeats were
identified was Mycobacterium tuberculosis, being described as
mycobacterial interspersed repeat units [,
]. The sequences of
six Staphylococcus aureus genomes; COL, MRSA252, MSSA476,
Mu50, MW2 and N315 were studied along with four
Staphylococcus aureus plasmids; COL pT181, MSSA pSAS,
VRSAp, pN315 DNA which were downloaded from the
GeneBank database. Five strains (COL, MRSA252, Mu50, MW2
and N315) are MRSA, while MSSA476 is methicillin sensitive.
N315 and Mu50 are closely related strains that are hospitalacquired
and vancomycin-intermediate resistance respectively,
while MRSA252 is an epidemic hospital strain. MW2 is a
hypervirulent community strain. The sequencing of these
genomes has allowed us to identify novel multiple tandem
repeats that are similar to MIRUs in M.tuberculosis, and the
present study describes the nature and distribution of these
repeats, and their potential as a novel tool for understanding
the micro-evolution of hospital MRSA.

Microsatellites are also called simple sequence repeats (SSRs) or
short tandem repeats (STRs) which are a group of tandem
repeated sequences. SSR are comprised of mono-, di-, tri-, tetra-,
penta-, or hexa-nucleotide units and are widely present in plant
and animal genomes. These repeats can be either perfect
tandem repeats or interrupted by several non-repeat
nucleotides or compound repeats called compound SSRs 
[].
These sequences experience frequent mutations that alter the
number of repeats. The distribution of particular motif classes
within a genome can vary substantially among different species
[,
]. Repetitive DNA consists of simple homopolymeric tracts
of a single nucleotide type [poly (A), poly (G), poly (T), or
poly(C)] or of large or small numbers of several multimeric
classes of repeats. These multimeric repeats are built from
identical units (homogeneous repeats), mixed units
(heterogeneous repeats), or degenerate repeat sequence motifs
[]. SSRs are highly polymorphic characterized by high rates of
insertion and deletion (INDEL) mutations of their repeat units.
INDELs of repeat units in a SSR arise due to slipped strand
mispairing during the process of DNA replication. Slippage on
the template strand tends to contraction of SSRs whereas
slippage on the growing strand manifests into expansion of
SSRs. The bias in SSRs either toward expansion or contraction is
referred to as the directionality of SSR evolution. Ever since it
became known that several hereditary diseases are associated
with expansion of triplet repeats and colon cancer is associated
with instability of certain mono and di-nucleotide repeats, there
has been a lot of interest on the discovery of the mechanisms
behind directionality of SSR mutations. Despite some
investigations into the directional evolution of the SSRs, there is
still an insufficient understanding of the factors influencing
directionality of SSR mutations [].

SSRs have been extensively studied in eukaryote genomes and
are well-established targets for pedigree analysis 
[]; though
there is insufficient information about microsatellites in simple
organisms []. Bacterial SSR-type DNA can be divided into
four main categories. First, dispersed repeat motifs that
generally do not occur in tandem. These are repeats that occur
throughout genomes of a mass of microorganisms, and are
sometimes organized in tandem. A second class is formed by
the homopolymeric tracts. Multimers of one of the four
nucleotides that are frequently encountered in the genome, for
instance the homogenous stretches of S.cerevisiae have occurred
for as much as 42 nucleotides. The third category is short-motif
SSRs with repeat units differing from 2 to 6 bases, this class of
repeats are more likely to unit number variation at a given
locus. Mostly, when these short-motif repeats are located within
genes and are not 3 or 6 nucleotides long, they are likely to
upset the coding potential of a given transcript. Fourth, the
repeats of more than 8 nucleotides per unit, form a separate
category. In addition, the longer repeat unit, the greater the
chance that point mutations will be introduced []. The
pathogenic phenotypes caused by unstable tandem repeats
have been described in human beings. However, a few notable
examples of diseases caused by repeats have been described in
other species. Canine epilepsy is reported to be caused by
expansion of 12-nucleotide repeats in the single exon of the Epm
2b gene [].

The increasing availability of prokaryotic genome sequences
has shown that SSRs are also widespread in prokaryotes and
that there is extensive variation in their length, number and
distribution [–]. The present study is an attempt to analyze
distribution and composition of SSRs among whole genomes of
six strains of Staphylococcus aureus.

Methodology
Tools for analysis of SSRs:
A tool for Simple Sequence Repeats was developed to find out
the short tandem repeats from the input sequences, the SSR tool
is hosted on a local webserver i.e. wampserver which has a
combination of Apache, MySQL and PHP to run the scripts for
analysis. The front-end of SSR tool has Perl based links for dinucleotides,
tri-nucleotides, tetra-nucleotides, penta-nucleotides
and hexa-nucleotides. This tool is used to find out the number
of nucleotide repeats of all the possible (mono, di, tri, tetra and
pentanucleotide) combinations out of input nucleotide
sequence. For combined analysis of all the five repeats; a
separate script is developed where an input sequence is
screened for repeats from di- to penta-nucleotides. A script for
finding repeats for selective combinations for all the five SSR is
also developed where a user can select a particular repeat (di-,
tri-, etc.) for selective combinations (di-AA, tri-ATC, etc.). This
program can also analyse whole genome sequences. Apart from
finding occurrences of all possible combinations of repeats,
graphical presentation along with numerical data for research
analysis can be viewed using SSR tool.

Mononucleotide AAAA
Dinucleotide CACACACA
Trinucleotide ATGATGATGATG
Tetranucleotide GTATGTATGTATGTAT
Pentanucleotide CGTAGCGTAGCGTAGCGTAG

For the present study, we have used two tools, a webserver
based Simple Sequence Repeats (SSR) tool as mentioned above
and software developed by Gur-Arie (Ssr.exe) downloaded
from (ftp://ftp.technion.ac.il/pub/supported/biotech) to
screen the genomes and plasmids of the selected
Staphylococcus strains for comparative analysis. Using web
based SSR, possible combinations of repeats were searched
from the input sequence and results were displayed with its
frequency occurrences. On comparing the repeats of six
genomes and four plasmids of Staphylococcus strains, the result
showed frequency of particular repeat conserved in all the
selected genomes and plasmids and also showed which
particular combination occur the most. The offline tool Ssr.exe
was used for extensive study by setting parameters with
minimal number of repeats = 2, minimal motif length = 1,
length of whole SSR array = (2*1) = 2. This software searches for
all of the SSRs with motif lengths up to 10bp; records motif,
repeat number and genomic location and reports the results in
an output file.

DNA sequences:
The whole genome sequences of Staphylococcus aureus COL
(NC_002951), S. aureus MRSA252 (NC_002952), S. aureus
MSSA476 (NC_002953), S. aureus Mu50 (NC_002758), S. aureus
MW2 (NC_003923) and S. aureus N315 (NC_002745) were
downloaded from the GeneBank database. Similarly plasmid
sequences of Staphylococcus aureus COL pT181 (NC_006629),
Staphylococcus aureus MSSA pSAS (BX571858), Staphylococcus
aureus VRSAp (NC_002774) and Staphylococcus aureus pN315
DNA (AP003139) were downloaded from NCBI GenBank
database.

Results and Discussion
From the investigated six whole genomes and four plasmids of
Staphylococcus aureus strains, the observations were as under: (1)
Large numbers of Simple Sequence Repeats were found to be
scattered in whole genome and plasmid sequences of
Staphylococcus aureus. Shorter repeats were found to be more
than longer repeats. High density of repeats was occurred in
genomic sequences; (2) The strain Staphylococcus aureus
MRSA252 and VRSAp shows high density and more percentage
of SSR in genomic and plasmid sequences. The SSR
mononucleotide repeats were found to be large in number
followed by dinucleotide, trinucleotide and higher motif
repeats; (3) The number and percentage of repeats obtained
were comparatively more in genomic regions as compare to
plasmid sequences of all the studied strains of Staphylococcus;
(4) Number of mononucleotide SSRs decreased rapidly with
increase in size of repeat unit in all six genomic and four
plasmid sequences of Staphylococcus; (5) Total frequency of
SSRs in plasmid regions is less than genomic regions; (6) In all
investigated strains, ratios of AT/TA repeats were
overrepresented over GC/CG repeats in genomics as well as
plasmid sequences; (7) Dinucleotide combination of AT
dominated all the six Staphylococcus genome sequences.

For the comparative genomic analysis of Staphylococcus
genomes and plasmids; we searched for SSRs with minimal
number of repeats 2 and motif length from 1 to 10 base pairs.
The length of whole SSR array was multiples of 2 ie. 2*1 =2. No
significantly large SSR with mononucleotide motif was
identified among the studied genomic and plasmid sequences.
The longest repeat in genomic sequences was T11 and A10, which
showed similarity with hypothetical proteins and transposase
genes. The over-representation of nucleotides was tested among
six genomic and four plasmid sequences and the results 

(see supplementary material) showed that AT/TA repeats
were dominating.

Conclusion
SSR of many types are found in prokaryotic genomes as well.
These are present in functional domains and play an important
role in functional alterations and implications in mutation
helping the organism to adapt to its surroundings. Higher
nucleotide repeats have been observed in our study. The
environmental changes cause because of stress reactions such as
change in copy number of tandem repeats. With this high
density of SSR stress response genes and virulent genes may
undergo such change resulting in a change in activity of
additionally relevant genes and further relaxation of stress by
adapting to changed environment []. The overrepresentation
of A and T mononucleotide SSR can be explained by different
ways like slipped strand mispairing, which is more likely for
poly A or poly T as strand separation is energetically more
favorable compared to poly GC. Similarly the higher energy
cost of synthesis of CG dNTPs by the cells []. Longest SSR in
sequences was 11bp for T and 10bp for A, whereas plasmids of
selected four strains showed 8bp for A, 8bp for T, 6bp for G,
and 6bp for T. There is overrepresentation of A and T
mononucleotide SSR in plasmids as well as genomic sequences.
The frequency of AT/TA dinucleotide repeats was higher in
genomic sequences as compared to plasmids (). It has
been proposed that GT, CA, CT, GA GC or AT repeats binding
proteins could participate in recombination process by inducing
Z conformation of DNA or other alternative secondary DNA
structures.

Presence of GC/CG dinucleotide in genome more frequently
compared to AT/TA could be due to the fact that TA forms
thermodynamically least stable DNA. RNases preferentially
degrade UA dinucleotides in mRNA. The motifs containing
predominantly A and T are found to be over represented in
genome. Whereas, the motifs containing predominantly G and
C, are found to be over represented in plasmids except in
plasmid of strain COL pT181. The over representation of poly
(A) and poly (T) mononucleotide repeats in all the
Staphylococcus strains could be explained by the fact that
strand separation for these poly (A) and poly (T) tracts is
considerably easier than for poly (G) or poly(C) tracts,
increasing the possibility of slipped strand mispairing. The
distribution of tri and hexa-nucleotide repeats reflects codon
repetition and that of amino acids suggesting these repeats are
strongly selected and shows its association with protein
function. The mono nucleotide repeats were over represented in
plasmids whereas penta-nucleotide repeats are slightly over
represented in genome. The penta nucleotide repeats are
present more in genome.

Our study suggests that genomic distribution of SSR is non
random and apart from nucleotide composition of repeats the
characteristic DNA replication, repair and recombination
machinery might have important role in the evolution of SSR.
Our analyses performed on the genome and plasmid of genes
of Staphylococcus aureus clearly indicates that, due to the
presence of this large number of SSRs, the organism has an
enormous potential for generating this genomic and phenotypic
diversity. Though SSRs play an important role in the dynamics
of eukaryotes, their presence in bacteria is rare, and mostly
reduced to pathogenic organisms. The results found from the
present study are difficult to analyse and predict the instability
of such small SSRs from sequence alone. Nevertheless, these
results can be useful for further experimental studies.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Thorat &amp; Thakare, Bioinformation 8(24): 1182-1186 (2012)

Frequency of repeats in (A) genomic; (B) plasmid sequences.

