Background
The hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a small enveloped DNA virus
that causes acute and chronic hepatitis []. Integration of
hepatitis B virus into the genome of hepatocellular carcinoma
patients will likely increase carcinogenic opportunities in HBVinfected
individuals []. HBV infection is a worldwide health
problem and may lead to lifelong infection, cirrhosis of liver,
liver cancer, hepatocellular carcinoma, liver failure and death
[]. Recent epidemiological data have demonstrated that liver
cancer incidence has been continuously rising for more than a
decade, not only in Asia and Africa but also in America and
Europe []. Chronic Hepatitis B Virus (HBV) infection is the
dominant global cause of HCC, accounting for 55% of cases
worldwide and 80% or more in eastern Pacific region and sub-
Saharan Africa, the regions with highest rates for incidence of
the tumor []. Although vaccination programs are implemented
in various countries but it is still affecting 350 million to 400
million people worldwide []. The mechanisms whereby HBV
causes malignant transformation remain uncertain. However,
much of the evidence available supports a pathogenetic role for
the product of HBV X gene, the HBx protein [,
]. HBx gene is
the smallest of the four partially overlapping open reading
frames of HBV. It comprises 452 nucleotide that encode a 154
amino acid regulatory protein with a molecular mass of 17 kDa.
HBx was the name assigned to the gene and protein because
the deduced amino acid sequence did not show homology to
any known protein []. The protein is highly conserved among
all eight major genotypes (A to H) of the HBV; it is present in
the cytoplasm and, to a lesser extent, the nucleus of
hepatocytes. In addition, high levels of HBx lead to an
abnormal mitochondrial distribution [].

The HBx protein is multi-functional and leading source of liver
cancer. It functions by protein-protein interaction, and is a
promiscuous transactivator of viral and cellular promoters and
enhancers [,
]. HBx protein does not bind directly to DNA,
but causes transcriptional activation by its interaction with
nuclear transcription factors and modulation of cytoplasmic
signal transduction pathways, including the Ras, Raf, c-jun,
MAPK, NFkB, AP-1, Jak-Stat, FAK, and protein kinase C
pathways, as well as Src-dependent and phosphatidylinositol-3
kinase signalling cascades [–
]. Transcriptional activation is
thought to be essential for replication of the virus. Activation of
these signalling pathways may also contribute to HBx proteinmediated
hepatocellular carcinogenesis through transactivation
of cellular signalling cascades and oncogenes that stimulate
proliferation of hepatocytes [].

Some studies demonstrate the correlation between
mutation/inactivation of p53 and HBx in hepatocarcinogenesis.
In that process, HBx will suppress p53 function which leads to
unlimited liver cell division and results in the formation of
tumour in liver []. p53 is a protein which play essential role
for protecting, maintaining and repairing of cells. HBx may
cause inactivation of p53 function, therefore if HBxAg-p53
complex is formed, p53 will lose its function, and it is the
beginning of cancer development [].

Historically the majority of new drugs have been generated
from natural sources and from compounds derived from
natural products []. Natural products are becoming an
important research area for novel and bioactive molecules for
drug discovery []. Plant-derived substances have currently
become of great interest due to their versatile applications.
Medicinal plants are the richest bio-resource of drugs of
traditional medicines, modern medicine, nutracetical,
pharmaceutical intermediate and chemical entities for synthetic
drugs []. Several active compounds have been discovered
from plants and used directly as patented drugs like Taxol,
Artemisinin and Maprouneacin. Due to multitargeting effect,
inexpensive and safety of plant-based compounds compared to
synthetic agents, there is a necessity for more and more
searching and discovery of new novel drugs from plants 
[].

Plants have a key source of highly effective conventional drugs
for the treatment of many form of cancer; in many instances,
the actual compounds isolated from the plants may not serve as
the drug, but leads to the development of potential agents. In
order to understand the effectiveness of natural compounds as
anticancer molecules, there is a need of computational drug
designing tools that can identify and analyze active sites and
suggest potential drug molecules that can bind to these sites
specifically and play vital role in investigation of novel drug
molecules. In our study, eight plants derived natural
compounds viz., Curcumin, Oleanolic acid, Resveratrol,
Bilobetin, Luteoline, Ellagic acid, Betulinic acid and Rutin
() were selected, these natural molecules possess
anticancer activity [–
]. It may be useful for treatment and
prevention of liver cancer and HBV related diseases.

Methodology
Sequence retrieval and analysis:
The FASTA sequence of the HBx protein of HBV (Accession no.
ABR68892.1) was retrieved from NCBI (
http:// www.ncbi.nlm.nih. gov /) database; MATLAB Bioinformatics ToolBox
(http://www.mathworks.in/) was used for analyzing HBx
protein.

Protein structure prediction and validation:
The three dimensional structure of HBx protein from sequence
was predicted using threading algorithm by LOMET server
(http : //zhanglab.ccmb.med.umich.edu /LOMETS /). For
constructing the structure BLAST was performed against PDB
database to identify the sequence identitiy, the final structure
was done at LOMET server by using amino acid sequence of
HBx protein []. Structural refinements through energy
minimization were performed using SPDB viewer
(http://spdbv.vital-it.ch/). The Stability of the predicted model
were validated by the Structural Analysis and Verification
Server (http:// nihserver .mbi.ucla.edu/SAVES/), which has
inbuilt tools such as PROCHECK, WHAT_CHEK, ERRAT,
VERIFY_3D, and PROVE; PyMOL (http://www.pymol.org/)
was used for the visualization of 3D structure of HBx protein
().

Surface analysis:
Accessible surface area (ASA) analysis of the predicted HBx
protein was carried out by ASAView (http://www.abren.net
/asaview/), this server provides graphical representation of
solvent accessibility of amino acid residues in proteins 
[].

Retrieval and preparation of ligand molecules:
The structure of natural compounds derived from plants viz.,
Curcumin (CID: 969516), Oleanolic acid (CID: 10494),
Resveratrol (CID: 445154), Bilobetin (CID: 5315459), Luteoline
(CID: 5280445), Ellagic acid (CID: 5281855), Betulinic acid (CID:
64971) and Rutin (CID: 5280805) were retrieved from PubChem
database at NCBI (http://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). The
three dimensional coordinates of ligand molecules were
generated by MarvinSketch (http://www.chemaxon.com
/products/ marvin/marvinsketch/) and saved in *.pdb files
for docking studies.

Molecular docking approach:
Molegro Virtual Docker (MVD) was used for docking studies.
MVD requires a three dimensional structure of both protein
and ligand. MVD performs flexible ligand docking, so the
optimal geometry of the ligand is determined during the
docking []. The candidates with the best conformation and
energetic results were selected. MVD was used to calculate the
interaction energies between ligands and macromolecular
systems from the three dimensional structures of the protein
and ligand molecule.

Results &amp; Discussion
Binding sites prediction and ASA analysis of HBx:
MVD cavity detection algorithm was used dynamically for
predicting the cavities by search algorithm guided differential
evolution to focus the search during docking simulation. The
volume of cavities present in HBx protein was calculated by
MVD; it predicted five cavities by default parameters. Mostly,
cavity with the largest size and volumes is associated with the
binding site. Therefore cavity with largest volume (Cavity-1
257.024 Å3) has been selected as binding site for HBx protein
during molecular docking studies. Accessible surface area
(ASA) or solvent accessibility of amino acids in an HBx protein
was predicted by ASAView []. It display the ASA of amino
acid residues in Spiral and bar plots, Spiral plot representing
amino acid residues in order of their solvent accessibility and
bar plots representing the length of amino acid in terms of
solvent accessibility ().

Molecular docking studies of natural compounds with HBx:
Molecular docking were carried out with each natural
compounds viz., Resveratrol, Luteoline, Ellagic acid, Betulinic
acid, Oleanoic acid, Curcumin, Bilobatin and Rutin at the
specific sites of interaction predicted from MVD. For each
compound, out of the many docking poses, only those which
possess the highest MolDock score and relatively good
hydrogen bond interaction were chosen. Resveratrol was
docked with HBx showing binding energy -85.25 Kcal/mol
with six hydrogen bonds, Luteoline showing binding energy -
89.42 Kcal/mol with four hydrogen bonds, Ellagic acid
showing binding energy -99.88 Kcal/mol with six hydrogen
bonds, Betulinic acid showing binding energy -127.47 Kcal/mol
with one hydrogen bond, Oleanoic acid showing binding
energy -124.15 Kcal/mol with two hydrogen bonds, Curcumin
showing binding energy -138.55 Kcal/mol with two hydrogen
bonds, Bilobatin showing binding energy -157.37 Kcal/mol
with five hydrogen bonds and Rutin showing binding energy -
161.65 Kcal/mol with seven hydrogen bonds  (see
supplementary material).

Prediction and identification of lead molecule:
MVD and its visualizer were used for interaction site analysis.
The interaction analysis for binding of natural compounds with
HBx protein has been done to find out the residues that are
involved in binding. The Rutin shows very high affinity to bind
with HBx proteins with energy value -161.65 Kcal/mol 
(). 
It interacted with HBx amino acid residues LYS95, LYS96,
LEU93, HIS52, ASP48, GLY50, and LEU5 with seven hydrogen
bonds (). The hydrogen bonding is very significant in
the interaction of biomolecules. A comparative study with the
docking energy values (if the docking energy value are more,
the protein-ligand interaction between compounds is low, and
vice-versa) reveals that the natural inhibitor Rutin has greater
affinity towards the HBx protein of HBV. Hence this
information would prove to be important for designing of
novel drug molecule against liver cancer.

Designing of Rutin derivatives:
Molecular docking studies of natural compounds with HBx
protein of HBV confirmed that the Rutin is the best natural
compounds for the treatment of liver cancer. On the basis of
this investigation we designed the twenty derivatives of Rutin
for improvement of binding affinity towards HBx (),
 (see supplementary material). Taking the references
from anticancer, antiviral natural and synthetic drug available
in market like Indivanir, Tazarotene, Paclitaxol and other
commercial drugs, the functional groups -CH3, -OH and -NH2
are commonly found [,
]. Protein-ligand interaction studies
of Rutin with HBx shows the pharmacophoric part of Rutin that
is participating in interaction, other functional group that were
not participating in protein ligands interaction were replaced
by -CH3, -OH and –NH2 to design the derivative of Rutin
(); the physicochemical properties were
calculated by Marvin Sketch.

Molecular docking studies of Rutin derivatives with HBx:
The designed derivatives of Rutin were docked against HBx.
Out of the 20 derivatives, Rutin01 and Rutin08 was found to
possess best binding affinity towards HBx (). Rutin01
was found to be binding with HBx by interacting with amino
acids residues LEU5, PRO42, ALA70, ARG72, LEU93, LYS96,
and SER104 by forming hydrogen bonds. It formed seven
hydrogen bonds with high interaction energy of -163.16
Kcal/mol. Similarly Rutin08 was found to bind with HBx by
forming five Hydrogen bonds by interacting with amino acids
residues LEU5, ARG72, LEU93, LYS96, and LEU98, exhibiting
interaction energy of -165.76 Kcal/mol ().

Drug like properties of Rutin derivatives:
Drug like properties of lead candidates play key roles in drug
discovery. Results of molecular docking studies of Rutin
derivatives clearly shown that Rutin01 and Rutin08 have
greatest affinity towards HBx. The drug like properties of
Rutin01 and Rutin08 were predicted by OSIRIS Property
Explorer tool (http://www.organic-chemistry.org/prog/
peo/); we have found that Rutin01 and Rutin08 were nonmutagenic,
non-toxic and showed drug like properties. In this
tool property with high risks of undesired effects like
mutagenicity or a poor intestinal absorption are shown in red,
whereas a green color indicates drug-confirmed behavior
().

Investigating the novel molecule for treatment of liver cancer:
From early until now, natural products, especially plants, have
been widely used for discovery of new therapeutic agents 
[].
The results of present studies clearly reveal that natural
compound Rutin is a lead molecule for the prevention of liver
cancer. Rutin is found in many medicinal plants; its name
comes from the name of Ruta graveolens, a plant that also
contain rutin. Rutin is well known as antioxidant, and as
natural compound with wide range of medicinal properties
[]. 
We have found that designed derivative Rutin01 and
Rutin08 showed highest affinity towards HBx with drug
confirmed behavior, which may be useful for treatment of liver
cancer.

Conclusion
The present in silico study provides insights in to the inhibition
of HBx protein by natural inhibitors. Rutin was predicted to be
the most potent inhibitor amongst all the known selected
natural compounds. Twenty derivatives of rutin were further
designed and screened to HBx. Of these twenty derivatives,
Rutin01 and Rutin08 were observed as the most effective
inhibitor to be considered as potential drug for treatment of
liver cancer. These results can further be validated through in
vitro and in vivo studies.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors would like to thank Bioinformatics Lab,
Department of Biotechnology, G. B. Pant Engineering College,
Pauri Garhwal, Uttarakhand, India for providing all necessary
facilities. One of the authors RKP gratefully acknowledges
Technical Education Quality Improvement Programme
(TEQIP), G. B. Pant Engineering College, Pauri Garhwal, India
for the Research fellowship.

Citation:Pathak et al, Bioinformation 10(7): 428-435 (2014)

(a) Structure of natural compounds, (b) Structure of HBx protein, (c) Spiral Plot: which shows amino acid residues of
HBx, in the order of their solvent accessibility; most accessible residues come on the outermost ring of this spiral. Blue, red, green,
gray colors are used for positively charged, negatively charged, polar and non-polar residues respectively. Yellow color is used for
Cystein residues. Radius of the solid circles representing these residues corresponds to the relative solvent accessibility, (d) Bar
Plots: which shows solvent accessibility of amino acid residues; Length of the bar represents the ASA in units relative to extended
state ASA of that residue, (e) Docked structure of HBx with Rutin; shows H bond interactions with LEU5, ASP48, GLY50, HIS52,
LEU93, LYS95 &amp; LYS95, (f) Black circle shows modification point in the structure of Rutin (g) and R shows functional groups.

Designed derivative׳s of Rutin (2-(3,4-dihydroxyphenyl)-5,7-dihydroxy-3{[(2S,3R,4S,5S,6R)-3,4,5-trihydroxy-6-
({[(2R,3R,4R,5R,6S)-3,4,5-trihydroxy-6-methyloxan-2-yl]oxy}methyl)oxan-2-yl]oxy}-4H-chromen-4-one).

(a) Docked Structure of HBx with Rutin01 shows H-bond interactions with LEU5, PRO42, ALA70, ARG72, LEU93, LYS96
&amp; SER104; (b) Docked Structure of HBx with Rutin08 shows H-bond interactions with LEU5, ARG72, LEU93, LYS96 and LEU98; (c)
Drug like properties of Rutin01 and (d) Rutin08: represents drug confirmed behavior.

