Background
An increasing number of three-dimensional structures of macromolecules such
as proteins and DNAs have been reported in recent years. As of July 5, 2011
there are 74,297 structures accumulated in RSCB Protein Data Bank and they
are available to use for the scientific community. At the same time, structure
databases in which numerous numbers of small molecules are stored and
supplemented by physico-chemical properties, have been made available. One
of those notable examples is ZINC (
http://zinc.docking.org/choose.shtml). On
the other hand, docking application tools, in which the ligand-macromolecule
interaction conformation is predicted and scored in terms of binding free
energy between the ligand and macromolecule, have made a remarkable
progress in their accuracy and speed, although molecular docking is an
extremely demanding task for computer resources. There is no question about
the fact that the CAMD (computer-aided molecular design) approach is
becoming a common practice in drug discovery and development []. Owing to
all these advancements in structure data bases and application software, a highthrough-
put virtual screening technology, in which one can screen thousands of
compounds for their binding affinity against a target macromolecule, has been
developed and utilized to aid in the drug discovery. Indeed, virtual screening
tools have been reported in the literature [,
]. However, there exist various
constraints such as strict computer hardware requirements, demands for highlytechnical
computer knowledge, complex operation steps, and user-unfriendly
procedures. Herein, we have developed a virtual screening application system
which functions under the Windows environment. This is a user-friendly,
flexible, and versatile tool which can be used by anybody who is familiar with
Windows OS.

Computer environments
VSDK is designed to run on any version of MS Windows in addition to Linux
platform. The system is a console application for MS Windows platform.

Required input files and directories
AutoDock is one of the most widely used docking application tool, and its use
requires a set of preparation steps for general screening 
[]. Included in the
process are preparations of acceptable ligands and a receptor macromolecule,
calculation of maps, creation of folders for each ligand, and so on. AutoDock
Vina is a new program for molecular docking and virtual screening and
achieved an approximately two orders of magnitude speed up compared to
AutoDock4 []. 
At this point users face several difficulties to execute
AutoDock Vina, and so we developed a user-friendly and flexible application
tool for virtual screening based on AutoDock Vina. VSDK needs two
preparation steps only: preparations of the receptor and ligands, and config file
in which a grid center, a grid box size, and a docking run number are assigned
(). The virtual screening with a new receptor can simply be repeated
by changing the receptor *.pdbqt file and modifying the config file
accordingly. Users create a working directory (we use, as an example,
c/my_document/VS01) in which all necessary files will be saved. Users
download a target macromolecule (*.pdb format) from the Protein Data Bank,
and identify the grid center by using AutoDock Tools (ADT). Then the *.pdb
format of the macromolecule should be converted to *.pdbqt format by using
ADT, and the *.pdbqt format will be saved in the VS01 directory. For the
ligands, users search and obtain small molecules from molecular databases
such as ZINC. Finally, users create a conf.txt file which includes a receptor
in *.pdbqt format, a grid center with x, y, z coordinates in Å, a grid box size in
Å, and a docking run number, usually 10 or more. After converting ligands
from *.mol2 format to *.pdbqt format, the ligands with *.pdbqt format will be
saved in the VS01 directory. Users access VSDK, go to “Application Tool”,
select (copy) an appropriate bash file from the “bash file list”, and paste it in
the VS01 directory.

Details of algorithm and the execution of virtual screening
The detailed flow chart of VSDK algorithm is shown in . All pertinent
ligand and receptor (macromolecule) files required for virtual screening along
with conf.txt file will be saved in VS01 directory, and executed by a bash file
(VS01.bash was used as an example). For the virtual screening execution, users
open Cygwin, go to c/my_document/VS01, and input [./VS01.bash]. Upon the
execution, new directory named “Data” is automatically created as an output
file and the virtual screening result will be saved in it.

Output file processing
A “result” file is automatically created in “Data” directory, and converted to
Excel format which sorts and evaluates the result automatically.

Testing of VSDK
A virtual screening was performed for small molecules (MW = 200s)
downloaded from ZINC against FGFR tyrosine kinase (pdb code: 1agw). The
specifications of Windows computer used are: model; NEC Value star, and
cpu; Intel Pentium 4. It took one minute when a virtual screening for one
molecule was performed with its grid size of x,y,z = 30 and run number of 10.
Further investigation revealed that it took 10 minutes for 10 molecules, 90 for
100, and 451 for 1000. Another virtual screening was performed against
EGFR tyrosine kinase (pdb code: 1m17) on a different computer whose
specifications are: model; HP compaq, and cpu; AMD Sempron. It took about
700 minutes for 103 molecules with its grid size of x,y,z = 30 and run number
of 10. Prakhov et al. reported that they achieved an average throughput virtual
screening of about 420 molecules/CPU/day 
[]. This means that the outcome of
our system in the former case executed about 3.5 times more molecules in one
day than their system. Since any virtual screening tools handles thousands of
compounds obtained from huge databases of small molecules which may
include flawed, or unusual datum, the virtual screening by this system on the
Windows platform encounters an unexpected transaction which ends up with
the aboard incidence, although this incidence rarely happens. This type of
aboard incidence does not occur on the Linux platform. This is an operating
system problem and we hope that an elaborated improvement of Windows OS
will solve this kind of problem in the near future.

Discussion
AutoDock Vinacertainly contains the function of virtual screening. However,
the procedure is highly complicated. It requires typing-in of the complicated 27
command lines, while VSDK needs only one line to type. Moreover, VSDK
automatically create the file which sorts the virtual screened result in the
descending order with the lowest ⊿G at the top. The high through-put virtual
screening method has been increasingly utilized along with molecular
databases for the drug discovery and development 
[,
]. It is important for
those tools to be user-friendly and easy to use. VSDK enables any user of a
Windows computer to perform virtual screening of thousands of small
molecules against a macromolecule of interest. It is an open access, flexible
application tool, and users can modify it as needed. It was found that the more
molecules for screening we have in this system the less time it is required per
molecule. It is a challenge to combat against the aboard incidence and to evade
it.

We are grateful to Dr. Arthur J. Olson and Dr. Oleg Trott of the Scripps
Research Institute, USA, for generous consideration and kindness toward this
paper.

Citation:Baba &amp; Akaho, Bioinformation 6(10): 387-388 (2011)

A flowchart showing VSDK algorithm

