Background
Spore-forming, gram-positive Clostridium perfringens belong to a
heterogeneous group of anaerobic bacteria which are major
human and animal pathogens [,
]. Different species of
Clostridium perfringens produce a variety of lethal toxins, based
on which they are divided into five sub-types, A to E. Of these,
the Clostridium perfringens type D is a major causative organism
of fatal enterotoxaemia or pulpy kidney disease in domestic
animals. The host pathology is attributed mainly to the epsilon
toxin (Etx), a potent angiotoxin that damages endothelial cells
leading to cell death/necrosis.

Overfeeding of domestic animals leads to an imbalance in gut
microflora and an anaerobic environment that is highly
conducive to the overgrowth of Clostridia in the gut of infected
animal. As a result, large amounts of epsilon toxin produced by
the pathogen gets absorbed by the gut mucosa and results in
severe vascular damage [,
] and lesions in various major
organs viz. brain, heart, lung and kidney [,
].

As the disease progression is quite rapid, often leading to fatal
consequences, vaccination is the best defence against the
disease. Conventional vaccines are based on heat inactivated
culture supernatants leading to non-specific and uncontrolled
immune response. Several recombinant vaccine approaches are
also being researched and offer a convenient alternative to the
conventional vaccines. A protective immune response against
the pathogen is largely based on B-cell mediated immune
pathways. Therefore, the major task during recombinant
vaccine development is to identify the surface antigens
containing antibody binding epitopes (B-cell epitopes). Epitopebased
vaccines provide a better approach compared to
conventional vaccine strategies since they can be easily
produced and do not elicit non-specific responses commonly
observed in conventional vaccines.

Experimental identification of epitopes is relatively time
consuming, and laborious. On the other hand in silico epitope
analysis helps in rapid identification of promising epitopes with
higher confidence and accuracy. B cell epitope prediction
softwares use different algorithms based on various physicochemical
properties of amino acids such as hydrophilicity,
flexibility, beta-turns, and surface accessibility. Since an epitope
is a small entity and not highly immunogenic by iteslf, a
suitable carrier protein is required as an adjuvant for triggering
an immune response of high magnitude.

Vaccines development based on B cell epitope identification has
been great success in many cases of infectious diseases 
[]. The
present study was therefore undertaken to identify the B cell
epitopes on epsilon toxin, which may aid in generating
potential vaccine against the epsilon toxin infection. As an
epitope is likely to only generate limited immunogenicity, it is
proposed to couple the identified epitope with a carrier protein
such as LTB to generate chimeric antigen, which is likely to
have augmented immunogenecity due to the presence of fusion
partner. LTB is selected as a fusion partner as it has been
reported to be highly immunogenic and leads to a better
immune response against the specific epitope fused to LTB 
[].

Methodology
In silico analysis of surface exposed B-cell epitopes of epsilon toxin:
Bioinformatics approach employing Kyte- Doolittle 
[], Parker
Hydrophilicity plots [], BepiPred 
[] and Chou- Fasman
epitope prediction algorithms [] was used to predict different
hydrophilic regions, potential B cell epitopes, in the Etx
(accession no. AJ250956.1). The amino acid sequence common
among hydrophilic areas of different sizes (epitopes) identified
by various algorithms was chosen to decrease the probability of
inaccuracy from these predictions.

Generation of ltb-epitope fusion construct:
To make recombinant fusion of the predicted epitope, the
amino acid sequences of the epitope was translated into
nucleotide sequences. Complementary oligonucelotides
corresponding to the coding and non-coding strand of the
identified epitope were designed with a spacer of nucleotide
sequence coding for 5-glycine residues at the 5' end and
termination codon at the 3' end. PstI and HindIII sites were
included at the spacer and termination ends, respectively. A
unique XhoI restriction site was also added just before the
HindIII site for restriction analysis of the putative recombinants.
Strategy for cloning the epitope at the C-terminus of ltb in
pQE32 is given in (). The two oligonucleotides were
annealed and ligated to the SacI-PstI digested pQELTB plasmid,
harbouring the LTB gene in plasmid pQE32. The ligated
product was transformed into E. coli DH5α cells and the
putative recombinants were selected on LB agar plate
containing ampicillin (100 µg/ml). The recombinants were
analyzed by XhoI digestion and confirmed by automated DNA
sequencing (DNA Sequencing Facility, University of Delhi
South Campus, New Delhi). The insert carrying epsilon toxin
epitope in fusion with LTB was subsequently cloned into
pMMB secretory expression vector (derived from pMMB66EH
vector, GenBank Accession no. X15234) digested with SacI and
HindIII.. The resultant plasmid is designated as pMMBltb.etx40-62.

Conjugal transfer of the pMMB positive construct to Vibrio cholerae cells for secretory expression:
E. coli DH5a cells harbouring the secretory expression plasmid
pMMBltbEtx40-62, JBK70 and E. coli pRK2013 cells were used as
donor, recipient and helper strains, respectively. The
pMMBltb.Etx40-62 from E. coli DH5α cells was transferred to the
Vibrio cholerae JBK70 cells essentially as described earlier 
[].
The putative transformed JBK70 cells were selected in the
presence of both ampicillin (50 mg/ml) and polymyxin B (50
units/ml). Expression analysis of the fusion construct was
carried out by growing the transformed cell culture till the
absorbance (A) reached to 0.6-0.8, followed by addition of 1mM
IPTG ((isopropyl-.beta.-D-thio-galactopyranoside, Sigma
Aldrich Chemical Co., USA) to induce the expression of the
fusion protein. The cells were grown further for 6 hr at 37°C and
secretory expression of the recombinant fusion protein was
analyzed by SDS-PAGE (15%) of the culture supernatant.

GM1 receptor binding assay:
In vitro GM1 receptor binding activity of the fusion protein was
determined using sandwich ELISA as described earlier 
[]. For
this, GM1 ganglioside receptor (100 µl, 20µg/ml) was coated
onto ELISA plates and incubated at 4°C for 12-16 hr. Nonspecific
sites were saturated with 1% BSA in 50 mM PBS.
Immunoplates coated with GM1 ganglioside were incubated
with the secretory fusion protein. This was followed by
incubation with goat anti-LTB polyclonal antiserum at half-log
dilutions ranging from 1:30 to 1:100,000. The final incubation
was carried out with rabbit anti-goat horse radish peroxidase
(HRP- conjugated secondary antibody (1:2000). Colour was
developed by the addition of the substrate (ophenylenediamine
dihydrochloride) and the absorbance was
read at 490 nm.

Western blot analysis:
Expression of the rltb.Etx40-62 in V. cholerae was checked by
immunoblotting of the induced culture supernatants with anti-
LTB [] available in the lab. The samples were analysed on
SDS-PAGE (12%) and electro transferred on to nitrocellulose
membrane at 90 mA for 2 h in transfer buffer. Nonspecific sites
were blocked by 5% non-fat milk in 1×PBST (0.15 M PBS, pH
7.3, and 0.2% Tween 20) for 1 hr on a rocker. The membrane
was then incubated with the primary antibody (1:500) for 1h at
room temperature followed by incubation with HRPconjugated
secondary antibody (1:3000) for 1h. The blot was
then washed three times thoroughly with 1×PBST, and
developed with 3, 3'diaminobenzidine solution (0.05% DAB)
after addition of hydrogen peroxide (30%, 1µl H2O2/ml of DAB
solution). The reaction was terminated by washing the
membrane several times with water.

Results &amp; Discussion
Antigenic epitopes are made of amino acid residues involved in
antigen-antibody interactions. Therefore, epitope analysis plays
an important role in the development of effective vaccine and
diagnostic tools for different infections. To predict the linear B
cell epitopes of epsilon toxin, the causative agent of
enterotoxemia in domestic animals, a combination of
algorithms such as hydrophobicity plot [], hydrophilicity 
[],
BepiPred based on hidden Markov model [] and Chou-
Fasman secondary structure predicton [] were used. Using
these programmes, we were able to map several short
hydrophilic regions that can be potential epitopes of the Etx
(). Use of number of algorithms in predicting the
putative epitopes is critical as a single programme may not
reliably identify the epitopes. Thus, when an epitope is
predicted by multiple programmes, it is likely to be a correctly
identified epitope, resulting in an increased confidence in the
predicted epitope.

Therefore, in the present study, a single linear stretch of
hydrophilic residues spanning amino acid residues 40-62 (Etx40-
62) was selected for further studies as it was common in all the
programmes used for identification, and had the highest
predicted antigenic and physicochemical scores among all the
identified epitopes.

The epitope being a very small entity may not be able to elicit
immunogenic response, it has to be linked with a carrier or
adjuvant to increase its immunogenicity. Since LTB has been
reported to be a potent immunogen, and possesses adjuvant
properties [,
], the identified immunodominant region
Etx40-62 was cloned at the C-terminus in translation fusion with
LTB, with a glycine spacer between the epitope and LTB in a
secretory expression vector. Strategic placement of glycine
spacer allows proper and independent folding of the fusion
partners. Release of an insert of ~380 bp of the recombinant
clone with SacI (present at the 5'- end of the ltb) and HindIII (at
the 3' end of the synthetic oligonucleotide encoding the epitope)
confirmed successful cloning of the epitope in fusion with ltb
().

Nucleotide sequencing of the recombinant plasmid further
confirmed the in frame cloning of the epitope (etx40-62) with ltb.
Subsequently the fused ltb.etx40-62 DNA fragment released by
digestion of pQEltb.etx40-62 was cloned into pMMB68 plasmid
digested with the same enzymes. Release of a fragment of the
expected size by digestion of the putative recombinant with
XhoI confirmed the cloning of fusion gene (ltb.etx40-62) in
pMMB68 (, lane 1). E. coli is incapable of transporting
proteins to extracellular milieu, lacks main terminal secretory
branch of the general secretory pathway, therefore a closely
related strain, Vibrio cholerae, having the ability to secrete some
of its natural toxins to the medium is of great interest 
[].
Therefore, transfer of the fusion gene construct from E. coli cells
to Vibrio cholerae cells was carried out for secretory expression of
the recombinant fusion protein (rLTB.Etx40-62).

V. cholerae cells harbouring the recombinant plasmid were
induced with IPTG. The culture supernatant of the induced
culture was analysed for presence of the fusion protein by SDSPAGE.
Presence of a band of the expected size under nonreducing
conditions in the induced culture supernatant 
(, lane 1) confirmed successful expression and secretion of the
fusion protein to the extracellular milieu. Large-scale
production [] and overexpression of many heterologous
proteins including LTB have been achieved using Vibrio cholerae
[,
]. In the present study also, the presence of the fusion
protein in the induced culture supernatant of V. cholerae cells,
showed that the protein is efficiently expressed, processed and
secreted into the extracellular milieu.

LTB, used as a fusion partner in the present study, is a 55 KD,
homo-pentamer of 11.6 KD polypeptide []. LTB in its
pentameric form binds to GM1 ganglioside receptors present on
the surfaces of mammalian cells []. GM1 receptor binding is
regarded as an essential property for the stimulation of immune
response and adjuvant activity of LTB is also associated to its
receptor binding activity. Presence of a band at the expected
pentameric position in (), lane 1 (under non-reducing
and non-denaturing condition) suggests that the LTB present in
the fusion protein retained the ability to pentamerize. Also,
efficient binding of rLTB.Etx40-62 fusion protein to the receptor,
comparable to that of the native LTB, was observed (),
in GM1 receptor binding assay, No binding was detected with
negative control BSA. The ability of the rLTB.Etx40-62 to
pentamerize and bind to GM1 ganglioside receptor indicates
that the carrier protein LTB has retained its functional activity
even after the C-terminal fusion with epsilon toxin epitopes.

For the rLTB.Etx40-62 fusion protein to be effective as a vaccine, it
is important to retain its ability to pentamerize and bind to GM1
ganglioside []. Studies have shown that the fusion of HBV
surface antigen epitopes and glycotransferase B epitope [,
]
with CTB retained not only the biological function of CTB but
also the antigenicity of both the fusion partners. Genetic fusion
of small peptides/epitopes to protein carriers has long been an
established practice both to improve intrinsic immunogenicity
and for conformational expression of the epitopes.

Immunoblot analysis of the expressed protein was carried out
in order to assess the ability of the fusion partners to be
recognized by the antisera raised against the native LTB. As
evident, the fusion protein was detected by anti-LTB 
() antisera, thus confirming the integrity and antigenicity of
the fusion partner in the recombinant protein. Slower migration
of the rLTB.Etx40-62 (, lane 2) in comparison to the
native LTB (lane 1) is due to the addition of the Etx epitope at
the C-terminus of LTB. Also, the purified fusion protein could
efficiently form a pentamer (required for GM1-receptor binding)
indicating that the epsilon toxin epitope fused to the C-terminal
of LTB did not alter the conformation/protein folding of the
LTB, while maintaining its own integrity.

Conclusion
In conclusion, the present study demonstrates the utility of this
novel 2 step approach of identifying epitopes using
bioinformatics/computational analysis and generating fusion
proteins comprising the epitope and LTB a potent adjuvant.
These approaches were successful in maintaining the
antigenicity of both the epitope and the carrier protein and
significantly minimize the time and efforts in vaccine design.

Financial support from the Department of Biotechnology, New
Delhi is acknowledged.

Citation:Kaushik et al, Bioinformation 9(12): 617-621 (2013)

Cloning strategy for epitoes in fusion with LTB. Pairs
of oligonucleotides corresponding to the Etx epitope spanning
40-62 residues of the Etx were annealed and ligated to Pstl-
HindIII digested vector pQELTB clone. The final construct
carried the E. coli LTB gene under the control of T5 promoter in
C-terminal translation fusion with the Etx epitope with 5-
Glycine residues in between. The fusion gene is tagged with 6-
Histidine residues on the 5' end.

in silico analysis of surface exposed B-cell epitopes of
Epsilon toxin: Computaional prediction of surface exposed
region of epsilon toxin was done by using different algorithms
(A) Kyte Dolittle plot (B) Parker Hydrophilicity prediction, (C)
BepiPred linear epitope prediction, (D) Chou Fasman β turn
prediction.

(A) Restriction analysis of pQEltb.etx40-62 putative
recombinants harboring the DNA fragment encoding the Etx40-
62 epitope as C-terminus fusion of LTB. Lanes 1 and 2 show the
two putative clones digested with SacI- PstI. Arrow points to
the released ltb.etx40-62 fusion insert. M indicates DNA molecular
weight marker; (B) Restriction analysis of the putative
pMMBltb.etx40-62 clone. The insert released by digestion with
XhoI (present at the c-terminus of the epitope and the vector) is
indicated by arrowhead in lane 1. Lane 2 shows the linearized
pMMB68, digested with XhoI. M indicates DNA molecular
weight marker.

(A) Expression analysis of rLTB.Etx40-62 in V. cholerae:
V. cholerae cells harboring the plasmid pMMBltb.etx40-62 were
induced with 1 mM IPTG for 6 h. Culture supernatant (after
ammonium sulphate precipitation) was analyzed on 12% SDSPAGE.
Lanes 1 and 2 indicate the samples prepared under nondenaturing
and denaturing conditions, respectively. The arrow
points to fusion protein pentamer and the arrowhead points to
fusion protein monomer. M indicates protein molecular weight
marker; (B) GM1 ganglioside receptor binding of rLTB.Etx40-62
fusion protein. Binding of the rLTB.Etx40-62 fusion protein to
GM1 ganglioside was checked by sandwich ELISA using anti-
LTB antibodies. Immunoplates coated with GM1 ganglioside
receptor (10 ng/µl) were incubated with 5 ng/µl of purified
rLTB.Etx40-62 fusion protein. 1% BSA was used as a non-specific
protein and pure LTB protein was used as a positive control.
Log dilutions of goat anti-LTB antibodies and 1:5000 dilution of
anti-goat IgG-HRP antibodies were then used to detect the
bound protein; (C) Western blot analysis of the rLTB.Etx40-62
fusion protein using anti-LTB antibody. The rLTB.Etx40-62 fusion
protein and rLTB was electrophoresed on 12% SDS-PAGE,
transferred onto nitrocellulose membrane and immunoblotted
with anti-rLTB antibody. Lanes 1 and 2 show the rLTB and the
rLTB.Etx40-62 fusion protein bands detected by the anti-LTB
antibodies. M indicates protein molecular weight marker.

