Background
Recently, with the application of NGS technologies, the number
of sequenced prokaryotic genomes has increased dramatically.
According to published reports (GOLD database 
[], February
2012) the current number of completed prokaryotic genome
sequences is 2,802, and the number of incomplete prokaryotic
genome sequences is 7,001. In addition, a vast number of
prokaryotic genomes are predicted to be sequenced in the
upcoming years. At present, one of the most challenging
problems for microbiologists is how to quickly analyze and
annotate the huge amount of raw bacterial genome sequence
data that is rapidly being deposited into public databases. One
way to solve this difficulty could be to develop more userfriendly
genome analysis programs that can be used by
microbiologists with no professional informatics training. In
particular, accurate contig mapping is an important step in
constructing the final bacterial genome sequences. Although
several contig-mapping programs are currently available, they
are still insufficient to guarantee both the accuracy of the final
bacterial genome sequence and user-friendliness. In this paper,
we present a newly developed web-based program, Bacterial
Genome Mapper, which is used to map bacterial genome
contigs. This program maps contigs using the information that
is obtained from multiple alignments between target contigs
from bacterial genome sequence raw data and one or two
corresponding reference genome sequences. The unique
mapping process used by this program also enables the
comparative genomics analysis of a draft bacterial genome
sequence.

Methodology
The pipeline process of the Bacterial Genome Mapper is
explained in (). This web-based program constructs
contig maps by performing multiple alignments between target
genome contigs and reference bacterial genome sequences
(). The Bacterial Genome Mapper is composed
of two parts, Mapper 1 and Mapper 2 ().
Mapper 1 aligns target contigs with a reference bacterial
genome sequence, thereby mapping the target contigs and
constructing a comparative genome map simultaneously. The
user must provide target contig sequences and one reference
genome sequence. Target contigs are aligned with the reference
genome sequence by BLAST [] and then ordered and merged
based on BLAST outputs. Unmerged separate contigs are
merged by adding 100bp of N sequence between them. The
merged contig is aligned to the reference genome sequence by
BLAST, generating a comparative genomic map. Optionally, the
Genbank file of the reference genome sequence and the paired
end sequence FASTA files for the target contigs can be
uploaded to provide detailed annotation of the gene regions
(arrowheads indicate the transcriptional direction in 
().
Users should also provide a list file of the paired
end sequences, based on which Mapper1 can retrieve correctly
each pair of paired end sequences from an input paired end
sequence FASTA file. The positions of the paired end sequences
are indicated in the merged contig map.

Mapper 2 aligns target contigs with two reference bacterial
genome sequences, I and II, and can thereby draw a
comparative genome map. The user must provide target contig
sequences and two reference bacterial genome sequences.
Target contigs are aligned with reference bacterial genome
sequence I by BLAST and then merged based on the BLAST
output. The merged contig is aligned with reference bacterial
genome sequence II by BLAST, generating a detailed
comparative genome map. Optionally, the Genbank files of the
two reference bacterial genome sequences can be uploaded to
indicate each reference gene region on the map. The servlets
associated with the Bacterial Genome Mapper platform are
hosted on an Apache-Tomcat 5.5 server running the Linux
operating system. JSP is employed as the web engine of the web
server. The web interface of Bacterial Genome Mapper is
implemented in an operating system-independent manner and
has been tested in Internet Explorer 8.0 and Chrome.

Discussion
Bacterial Genome Mapper has been tested using three bacterial
genome sequences from Streptococcus pyogenes MGAS315 
[], S.
pyogenes M1 GAS [] 
and S. pyogenes MGAS8232 [], with
genome sizes of ~1.9 Mb, ~1.85 Mb and ~1.89 Mb, respectively.
First, Mapper 1 was tested using the genome sequences from S.
pyogenes MGAS315 and S. pyogenes M1 GAS as the reference
genome and target genome, respectively. The target genome
was randomly divided into 20 contigs, and 20 pairs of paired
end sequences were created. The results are shown in 
(). The detailed locations of individual contigs in the merged
contig relative to the reference genome sequence are shown in
the result analysis file (blastout file). Second, Mapper 2 was
tested using the genome sequences of S. pyogenes MGAS315 and
S. pyogenes MGAS8232 as reference genomes I and II,
respectively. The target contigs were the same as those used in
the test for the Mapper 1. The results are shown in ().

Also, the detailed locations of individual contigs in the merged
contig relative to the two reference genome sequences are
shown in the result analysis file (blastout file).

Conclusion
Bacterial Genome Mapper is used to map contigs and construct
comparative genome maps by wide alignments between target
bacterial genome contigs and one or two reference bacterial
genome sequences. In addition, using the paired end sequences
and the Genbank files of the reference genomes, the Bacterial
Genome Mapper helps in finishing and annotating a draft
bacterial genome sequence. It is a user-friendly web-based
program that can be used even by microbiologists with little or
no professional informatics training. Due to its userfriendliness,
free accessibility and effective applications toward
finishing a draft genome, Bacterial Genome Mapper is likely to
become one of the most popular bioinformatics programs for
bacterial genome analysis in the future.

Citation:Lee et al, Bioinformation 8(11): 532-534 (2012)

Bacterial Genome Mapper: (A) Pipeline process of Bacterial Genome Mapper; (B) Schematic outline of the Mapper 1
workflow; (C) Schematic outline of the Mapper 2 workflow; (D) A local region in a result image file generated by Mapper 1. The
color of each beam connecting a region in the merged contig and a region in the reference genome indicates sequence identity, as
shown by the multicolored bar symbol with numbered sequence identity intervals. The red and blue arrowheads in the thick black
line (reference genome) represent transcriptional direction within gene regions. The gray regions in the reference genome and the
merged contig represent unmatched regions; (E) a local region in a result image file generated by Mapper 2. The black regions in
reference genome I (thick orange line), reference genome II (thick green line) and the merged contig represent the unmatched
sequence regions between reference genome I and the merged contig and between reference genome II and the merged contig. The
orange and green portions in the thick line showing the merged contig represent the comparisons between reference genome I and
the merged contig and between reference genome II and the merged contig, respectively.

