Background
There are over 600 million people worldwide covering Asian
and Oceanic countries, have the habit of chewing areca nut as
masticator in different forms. Chewing the mixture of areca nut
and betel leaf is a part of cultural tradition, custom or ritual in
these countries which dates back thousands of years. Arecoline
(C8H13NO2) has been reported as one of the abundant
constituents of areca nut. A good number of scientific
publications have focussed on Arecoline as a responsible agent
for oral cancer. Interestingly there are some controversial
scientific reports available about the role of Arecoline in relation
to oral cancer.

Reports are available that Arecoline inhibits p53, represses
DNA repair, and triggers DNA damage response in human
epithelial cells []. It is also reported that Arecoline induced
disruption of expression and localization of the tight junctional
protein ZO-1 is dependent on the HER 2 expression in human
endometrial Ishikawa cells []. Adverse effects of Arecoline and
nicotine on human periodontal ligament fibroblasts in vitro has
also been reported []. In a review article it is suggested that
Areca nut should be highly suspected as a human carcinogen
but toxicity studies relating to areca nut containing polyphenols
and tannins are not conclusive, with both carcinogenic and anticarcinogenic
effects being reported []. The mutagenicity and
genotoxicity of areca alkaloids has been detected by many
short-term assays. However, their genotoxicity to oral
fibroblasts and keratinocytes, the target cells of betel quid, has
not been identified. It would thus appear that areca nut toxicity
is not completely due to its polyphenol, tannin and alkaloid
content []. Decreasing interleukin-6 production and induction
of apoptosis and cell cycle arrest in human basal cell carcinoma
cells by Arecoline has been reported []. Report regarding
induction of cell cycle arrest, apoptosis, and cytotoxicity to
human endothelial cells by Arecoline is also available 
[].
Contradictory report saying that areca nut extract and
Arecoline induced the cell cycle arrest but not apoptosis of
cultured oral KB epithelial cells has also been published 
[]

It is thus seen that over the last two decades scientists have
been paying attention to Arecoline only from the point of view
of cancer. No significant attention has been focussed on other
possible adverse effect of Arecoline. Although there are some
reports on possible correlation between Betel Quid chewing and
Cardiovascular Disease available [,
], sufficient evidence for
the mechanisms of action of Arecoline specifically enhancing
Cerebro Vscular Disease (CVD) are still lacking. It is observed
that in North East India – one of the most betel quid chewing
areas of the country, prevalence of stroke is increasing at an
alarming rate though there is no hard statistics available and
stroke patients die or suffer from different degrees of disability
because of absence of properly organised stroke services in any
of the privately or publicly funded hospitals. Based on
observation from clinical situation, we suspected a link between
consumption of areca nut and stroke. Therefore, we focused on
Low Density Lipoprotein (LDL) receptor discovered only in
1985 as our target. We studied the binding potential of
Arecoline with LDL receptor using computational tools because
mechanism of endocytosis of LDL cholesterol is LDL receptor
dependent process. The hypothesis of the work is that if any
molecule can bind with active site of LDL receptor with higher
affinity than that of LDL cholesterol, that molecule will have
atherogenic activity and atherosclerosis in turn is responsible
for the majority of Cerebro Vascular Diseases (CVD) including
stroke. Though, High Density Lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol is
a good cholesterol (athero-protective) as it helps in lowering
LDL cholesterol, article published in the Jan. 13 issue of the New
England Journal of Medicine 2011 specifically states that a specific
receptor is essentially required for the athero-protective
function of HDL as this receptor mediates uptake of cholesterol
by liver from HDL.We, therefore, also looked at Arecoline HDL
receptor bonding in silico to see if Arecoline has any inhibitory
role on HDL receptor over and above its action on LDL
receptor. For this experiment, thiosemicarbazone a
commercially available known HDL receptor inhibitor was
considered as control.

Methodology
The 3D structure of the extracellular domain of human LDL
receptor (PDB ID: 1N7D) was obtained from RCSB Protein Data
Bank (PDB). The structure was downloaded in PDB (Text)
format. The active site of the receptor was predicted using QSite
finder []. 
The amino acids forming the first probable
active site were recorded. The structure of Arecoline and
Cholesterol were obtained from NCBI PubChem database in
SDF format. To study the binding efficacy of Arecoline and
Cholesterol to the human LDL receptor, docking experiment
was carried out using BiosolveIT FlexX 1.3.0, 
[]. The PDB
structure of human LDL receptor was loaded in the BioSolveIT
FlexX interface. The bound "12-Tungstophosphate" was
considered as cofactors of the protein. Analyzing the Q-Site
Finder result, CYS 337 was considered as the central active site
amino acid. Active site was defined as an area of 10+ radius
surrounding CYS 337. Separate docking experiments were done
for Arecoline and Cholesterol molecule with human LDL
receptor, taking the same active site and same docking
parameters.

As structure of human HDL receptor is not available in PDB
and sequence for human HDL receptor could not be obtained,
taking into account the c DNA sequence of bovine HDL
receptor [], and the sequence obtained from Uni-Prot
database (Accession No. O18824), 3D structure of bovine HDL
receptor was predicted by homology modelling using
Bhageerath-H tool []. Because BLAST against PDB database
could not show significant alignment. So, the structure was
predicted with a hybrid approach of homology modelling as
well as ab initio prediction. Active site of the predicted bovine
HDL receptor was determined again using Q-Site finder [].
Arecoline and thiosemicarbazone were docked against the
predicted structure again using BiosolveIT FlexX 1.3.0 [].

Discussion
The extracellular domain of human LDL receptor consists of 699
amino acid residues and 38 β-strands. The structure (PDB ID:
1N7D) was determined using X-Ray Diffraction technique at
3.7+ resolution at a pH of 5.3 []. Analyzing the PDB file with
Q-site finder, it was observed the most probable active site
consists of CYS 337, GLN 338, ASP 339, PRO 340, THR 342, CYS
343, SER 344, GLN 345, LEU 346, CYS 347 and VAL 348.
Docking result showed that both Arecoline and Cholesterol
have affinity towards the extracellular domain of human LDL
receptor. Cholesterol forms one H-bond with SER 432 and other
weak interactions with TYR 444, ASP 445, THR 446, VAL 447
and SER 432. The total docking score for cholesterol-LDL
receptor is -0.1810, whereas, Arecoline has much higher affinity
towards the LDL receptor. It forms four H-bonds with the
active site amino acids, viz. ASP 451, ARG 487, THR 489 and
ARG 492 and other weak interactions with ARG 487, ASP 451
and ARG 492. The total docking score of Arecoline-LDL
receptor is -12.3560. It was observed that much of the energy
contribution i.e. -16.3511 KCal/mol in the binding of Arecoline
and LDL receptor is due to the shape complementarity,
whereas, in case of Cholesterol, it is -6.7911 KCal/mol 
(), 
 (see supplementary material).

Docking result of Arecoline and thiosemicarbazone with HDL
receptor is presented in () 
 (see
supplementary material) from the table it is clearly observed
that Arecoline also has the potential (Score, -6.2690Kcal/Mol) to
block HDL receptor though its potential is less than that (score,
-10.0509 Kcal/Mol) of control. Thiosemicarbazone forms three
Hydrogen bonds with the active site amino acids viz. PRO 297
and TRP 246 and other weak interactions with PRO 297, THR
298 and TRP 246. Whereas, Arecoline forms two Hydrogen
bonds with TRP 246 and ARG 300 and other weak interactions
with THR 298, ARG 300 and PRO 297.

Although initial report on betel quid as cardiovascular risk
factor exists [,
], our work predicted that Arecoline - the major
secondary metabolite of betel quid enhances atherosclerosis by
interfering with LDL and HDL receptors. The result of our
study showed that Arecoline binds with active site of
extracellular domain of human endothelial LDL receptor with
higher binding efficacy than that of Chloesterol molecules. This
may inhibit initiation of endocytosis by LDL receptor thereby
enhancing deposition of cholesterol in the wall of blood vessels.
While looking at HDL receptor-Arecoline bonding it is
observed that Arecoline has 60% bonding potential with HDL
receptor in comparison to control. The work thus suggests two
fold activities of Arecoline as risk factor of CVD. Though betel
quid chewing habit was correlated with CVD earlier, its exact
mode of action was not explained and a number of possibilities
have been suggested as follows: (a) Linked to diabetes mellitus
and metabolic syndrome which are independent risk factor for
atherosclerosis [,
]; (b) Related to elevated level of
triglycerides []; (c)Linked to thrombin like enzyme activity
and defective fibrinolytic action [,
]; (d) Stimulates platelet
aggregation and thromboxane B2 production []; (e) Related to
acute myocardial infarction []. Present observation differs from
all the explanations mentioned above in the context that it has
given a deeper insight into receptor mediated possible
molecular mechanism of action of Arecoline in relation to CVD.

Conclusion
We, therefore, suggest that Arecoline may be responsible for
initiating and accelerating the process of atherosclerosis in the
population who regularly consume areca nut by the following
mechanisms: 
by way of inhibition of endocytosis of LDL cholesterol by interfering with LDL receptor

by preventing the uptake of LDL cholesterol by liver by interfering with HDL receptor.


This study therefore, hints that there is a positive
correlation between chewing betel quid and stroke or other
CVD. However, wet lab study either in vitro or in vivo with
Arecoline is needed to see the activity in real experimental
situation. This suggestion (if confirmed) will have high
relevance to the developing nations in the habit of chewing
betel nut as the incidence of stroke is rising in these population
and there is very little organised health care frame work to cope
with this rising tide. Prevention is more cost effective than
treating the disease.

Supplementary material
Data 1
MDC, PC &amp; ADT sincerely acknowledge DBT. Govt.of India for
establishment of Bioinformatics Centre in Assam University,
Silchar. India.

Citation:Choudhury et al, Bioinformation 8(5): 229-232 (2012)

Docking mode of Different Ligands and Receptors.
(A) Cholesterol bound to Extracellular domain of Human LDL
Receptor; (B) Arecoline bound to Extracellular domain of
Human LDL Receptor; (C) Arecoline bound to Bovine HDL
Receptor; (D) Thiosemicarbazone bound to Bovine HDL
Receptor (The red dotted line represents H-bonding and Green
curves represents weak interactions)

