Molecular mechanisms of cognitive impairment in patients with HIV infection:
HIV encephalitis (HIVE) is the common pathologic correlate of
cognitive impairment in patients with HIV infection. In the
central nervous system (CNS) of these patients, brain
mononuclear phagocytes are reservoirs for persistent viral
infection. HIV-infected monocytes/macrophages release
several viral proteins, some of which activate glial cells such as
microglia and astrocytes to release chemokines, cytokines and a
number of soluble neurotoxic substances. Neurotoxins, in
conjunction with secreted HIV proteins, damage the synaptodendritic
axis of neurons, resulting in neuronal dysfunction
and cell loss via apoptosis []. Previous studies already
reported that HIV proteins abnormally activate the CDK5 
[]
and GSK3β [] cascades. The deregulation of the GSK3β
enzyme could contribute to HIV-induced neuronal apoptosis.
In addition, HIV proteins might activate the CDK5 pathway
and subsequently upset the various actions that CDK5
regulates, including synapse formation and plasticity and
neurogenesis. Past studies also speculated that in patients with
cognitive impairment, the neurodegenerative process might
correlate with an altered expression of neurotrophic factors
such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), interleukin-
8 (IL-8), and fibroblast growth factors (FGFs). FGFs exert their
effects via receptor tyrosine kinases, leading to inactivation of
GSK3β through phosphorylation of a serine residue. Other
growth factors, such as insulin growth factor-1 (IGF-I),
epidermal growth factor (EGF) and platelet-derived growth
factor (PDGF), causes a similar inhibition of GSK3β activity by
inducing phosphorylation [].

CDK5 is a protein kinase with postmitotic activity that
phosphorylates cytoskeletal proteins (MAP1b, tau, NF, nestin,
DCX), synaptic proteins (PSD95, synapsin, cadherin) and
transcription factors (MEF2). Its activity is regulated primarily
by the metabolism of the activating proteins p35 and p39. A
recent investigation indicates that p25, a truncated form of p35,
accumulates in neurons of patients with neurodegenerative
diseases. Binding of p25 to CDK5 constitutively activates
CDK5, changes its cellular location and alters its substrate
specificity. Expression of the p25/CDK5 complex results in
abnormal phosphorylation of toxic substrates that induces
cytoskeletal disruption, morphological degeneration and
apoptosis [].

Understanding the molecular pathology of cognitive
impairment in patients with HIV infection: current concerns
and the need of new investigation tools:
As described above, several inflammatory molecules including
cytokines, chemokines, growth factors, and excitatory
compounds are associated with brain inflammation and
damage. Genomics and proteomics could be applied to reach a
deeper understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying
complex multifactorial disorders. However, mass-scale
molecular genomics and proteomics suffer from some pitfalls:
gene and protein expression is not significant per se, but only if
inserted in a detailed cross-talk of molecular pathways and
gene/gene, gene/protein and protein/protein interactions.
Many diseases, including HIVE, are complex, polygenic
disorders. In these diseases, the etiology is not attributed to the
expression of a single gene or to the encoded protein, but it is
spread over several different genes, each having a modest
effect. However, although each gene has a small effect, the
overall effect of all the genes and of all the encoded proteins
involved may be substantial. Therefore, the pathophysiology of
complex diseases is characterized by the involvement of
various biologic pathways. A simple variation in expression of
a single gene or of the encoded protein is not meaningful per
se, but only if put in a proper framework of interactions (i.e.
physical interaction of different molecules, involvement in the
same metabolic pathway, and co-expression in microarray
studies). The analysis of the complex network of connections
between genes/proteins may allow the identification of
potential molecular markers and targets 
[].

The study of interaction networks requires the systematization
and the analysis of a huge amount of information emerging
from experimental studies, but a complete experimental
analysis of all the molecules involved in a given process,
including both genes/proteins and small molecules, appears a
challenging task. For instance, the greatest part of genes
displayed on an array is often not directly involved in the
cellular process being studied. Commercial arrays with a lower
number of genes – usually 150–200 – are currently available,
but the genes displayed are usually once again chosen without
a precise consideration of the particular target of the study 
[].
The contribution of theoretical disciplines, such as
bioinformatics and data-mining, is therefore required to
integrate this huge amount of data. Bioinformatics can become
an added value in this context []. This discipline is defined as
the application of information technology to the field of
molecular biology, via the development of original algorithms
[]. Another discipline playing an important role in the analysis
of genomics/proteomics experiments is data mining, i.e.
extracting patterns from data, thus developing new information
from previous knowledge []. With these methods, a further
simplification of complex information emerging from
genomics/proteomics experiments becomes possible. Properly
combined with bioinformatics techniques and algorithms, data
mining may allow to draw a simpler, but at the same time
powerful picture of complex amount of data.

Novel approaches for the analysis of the molecular events
underlying neurodegeneration in HIV-infected patients:
Bioinformatics and data-mining can play a central role in the
analysis and interpretation of genomic and proteomic data. In
particular, these disciplines may be useful to further clarify the
pathophysiology of complex diseases, which are characterized
by various biologic pathways, dependent upon the contribution
of a large number of genes forming complex networks of
interactions [,
]. We (FC in Shapshak et al, 2006) provided a
preliminary description of the molecular mechanisms
underlying these processes using expression and gene
annotation data []. This information has been stored in a user
friendly, online database that, when made available in the
public domain, will enable scientists to retrieve biochemical
and physiological information on neuro-degeneration in HIVinfected
patients. They are also developing methods to
structure anatomical information (location where specific
biochemical reactions occur) so that essential structural features
are included along with the topological attributes 
[].

Recently, another data-mining method, defined as the “Leader
Gene approach” have been proposed () 
[,
]. This
mining algorithm is based on the systematic search for the
genes involved in a given process; the interaction among these
genes are then calculated and genes are ranked according to the
number and the confidence of all experimentally established
interactions, as derived from free Web-available databases,
such as STRING (Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting
Genes, Heidelberg, Germany). Genes in the highest rank are
defined as “leader genes”, since they can be preliminarily
supposed to play an important role in the analyzed process.
These genes may become potential targets for a targeted
experimentation, which may be simpler than mass-scale
molecular genomics and, at the same time, powerful [,
,
].
The Leader Gene approach was applied to different cellular
processes and pathological conditions, such as the human T
lymphocyte cell cycle, human kidney transplant and
periodontitis [,
,
]; the results were integrated with a
targeted experimental analysis, to draw an overall picture of
these processes.

First, a preliminarily set of genes with an established role in a
specific process is identified by an iterative search of large-scale
gene databases (PubMed, GeneBank, Geneatlas, Genecards),
using several keyword-based searches and the official HGNC
nomenclature. Second, the preliminary set of genes is expanded
using the STRING database, excluding text-mining-derived
interactions, to identify genes linked to those playing an
established role in the process under study, and therefore
potentially involved in it. Only interactions with a confidence
score &gt;0.9, as given by STRING, are considered. Results are
then filtered to discard false positives via a keyword-based
query in PubMed, until no new genes are retrieved. Third, the
interactions between all the genes identified are mapped using
STRING. This database gives a combined association score to
each gene-gene interaction, representing its strength. The
combined association scores referring to each single gene are
then summed to obtain a weighted number of links (WNL).
Fourth, genes are clustered (hierarchical and K-means
algorithms) according to their WNL. The genes belonging to the
highest class are defined as leader genes. This analysis could
further confirm that data-mining of existing databases may
represent a starting point to improve our knowledge about
cellular processes and diseases, to formulate new hypotheses
and to plan targeted experimentation []. In particular, the
analysis of gene interaction maps and the ranking of genes
according to their interconnections might help in identifying
new targets for dedicated experimental analyses, which may
confirm or discard each hypothesis and suggest potential risk
factors and therapy targets []. Taken together, and in the
current context of translational effectiveness, the utilization of
the best available data in specific clinical settings for patientcentered
care, the cutting-edge concepts we have discussed
here confirm that bioinformatics and data-mining will have an
increasingly important role in the integration of translational
research findings for evidence-based diagnosis and prognostic
interventions for patients with Neuro-AIDS, which require new
and improved bioinformation dissemination structures, such as
those we have proposed previously [–
].

We thank Professor Shapshak, and several of the stakeholders
of the Evidence-Based Decision Practice-Based Research
Network for the many discussions and feedback. Funded in
part by Fulbright Specialist program to FC. The authors declare
no conflicts of interest.

Citation:Orlando et al, Bioinformation 9(12): 656-658 (2013)

Flow chart of the leader gene approach.

