Background
β-lactam antibiotics are the most wieldy used in antibiotics
because of their wide spectrum of efficiency, bactericidal
activity, and low toxicity. But, the drastic emergence of
resistance has become a serious problem []. The major
resistance mechanism of bacteria is the production of β-
lactamase, which can hydrolyze the amide bond of the β-lactam
ring, leading to antibiotic inactivation []. Class A β-lactamases,
which are considered to be responsible for many failures in the
treatment of infectious diseases, are most widespread enzymes.
TEM β-lactamase is one type of class A type β-lactamase, it is
commonly found in Escherichia coli, which is one of the most
common pathogens in community-acquired and nosocomial
infections []. To overcome the problem of β-lactamase, one of
the effective methods is the combination of β-lactamase
inhibitor and β-lactam antibiotic. Beta-lactamase inhibitors can
protect β-lactam antibiotics by inhibiting β-lactamase. Their
antimicrobial activities are low, but they can be irreversible
bound with the β-lactamase, in order to prevent the hydrolysis
reaction of β-lactam antibiotics []. However, the emergence of
inhibitor resistance strains aggravated the problem. Mutation in
some positions can lead to high catalytic activity and resistance
to β-lactamase inhibitors, turning the wild type β-lactamases
into extended spectrum β-lactamase (Esbls) or inhibitor
resistant β-lactamases(IRTs) [,
]. M69I, S130G and R244S are
three clinical inhibitor resistant TEM β-lactamase mutants
which have been reported [,
,
]. Studies focused on them
showed that Met69, Ser130 and Arg244 were three active
residues close to Ser70, the active site of TEM-1 β-lactamase,
and played very important roles in the hydrolysis reaction of
antibiotics [,
]. Therefore, it is necessary for developing
inhibitors against these resistant mutants. The study mainly
focused to screen new compounds against IRTS based on
docking studies. The compounds screened out from database
were later used for in vitro studies.

Methodology
Proteins preparation:
The crystal structure of tem-1 β-lactamase (pdbid: 1bt5) was
downloaded from RSCB website [], then the software
Discovery Studio 3.5 was used for design the mutants of tem-1
β-lactamase. The crystal structure of M69I was constructed by
the amino acid substitution Met-69→Ile, and the S130G was
constructed by the amino acid substitution Ser-130→Gly, and
the R244S was constructed by the amino acid substitution Arg-
244→Ser. Each structure was refined by removing the
heteroatoms. These structures of the proteins would be used as
drug targets in molecular docking.

Preparation of ligand library:
It was reported that many compounds based herbal had high
medicinal values against many pathogens []. Hence, it was
possible to find out the inhibitors against the IRTs by computer
aided screening and the data would be useful to screen best
lead molecules. A library of about 10,000 compounds from 300
different Chinese medicinea was prepared for molecular
docking. All the 3D structures of ligands were retrieved from
Traditional Chinese Medicine Database@Taiwan
(http://tcm.cmu.edu.tw/) 
[].

Molecular docking:
The software FlexX (a component of LeadIT) was used for
molecular dock in this study. In the docking, three mutants and
the tem-1 β-lactamase from wild type stain were treated as
receptor protein, which were docked with the ligand library
receptor respectively. The docking was semi-flexible, and
receptor residue bond angles were immutable, furthermore
ligands were variable, finally the accessible surface area was
within radius 6.5 A . 
Results are  to 
(see
supplementary material).

In vitro studies:
The fabrication of inhibitor-resistant β-lactamase mutants:
The mutation of the single amino acid would lead to the drug
resistance []. According to the mechanism, and the ampicillin
resistance genes from PAMP was used as template, the No.139-
141 loci of tem-1 β-lactamase are GCG, the No.141 locus G was
changed to T, it would lead the arginine of No.244 mutate into
serine, and this mutant protein was R244S. In a similar way, the
No.478-480 loci ACT were changed to ACC, leading to the
serine of No.130 was mutated into glycine, and this mutant
protein was S130G. And the No.661-663 loci CAT were changed
to AAT, leading to the methionine of No.69 was mutated into
isoleucine, this Mutant protein was M69I. The mutated
plasmids were transformed into BL21 competent cells in order
to get three mutated strains.

The experiment of mutant strains resistant to enzyme inhibitors:
The MIC was determined by the doubling dilution method. On
the sterile microplate, 200ul LB liquid medium were added into
each hole, and the cefperazone-sulbactam was added into the
first hole of each row with the final concentration of
1024mg/ml, then stepwise double dilute it to the next holes of
the row. At last, three mutant strains and the primordial strain
were inoculated in the microplate respectively and the
microplate was incubated at 37°C for 24 hours. Result is shown
in  (see supplementary material).

Invitro studies of combination of cefperazone-sulbactam and traditional Chinese medicine ingredient:
Based on the docking studies, five Chinese herbal medicinal
ingredients were identified for in vitro testing. The Chinese
herbal medicinal ingredients used in the study are caffeic
acid(ligand id:1066):, curcumin(ligand id:9863), Salvianolic acid
E(ligand id:6013), ferulic acid(ligand id:3070) and p-coumaric
acid(ligand id:1680) [,
,
,
]. Similar to the above, the MIC
was determined by the doubling dilution method,but the
Chinese medicinal ingredients were mixes into Cefperazone-
Sulbactam with the final concentration of 20% respectively. The
blank control groups without inoculation were seted up, as well
as the control groups which added no Cefperazone-Sulbactam
but only Chinese medicine ingredients. Result is shown in
 (see supplementary material).

Discussion
Inhibitors-resistant mutants of TEM β-lactamase:
In this study, three mutant strains which resistant enzyme
inhibitors were constructed by site direct mutagenesis. Based
on the experiment of mutant strains resistanted to enzyme
inhibitors, the results showed that the sulbactam could
effectively inhibit the activity of wild-type β-lactamase, leading
to cefoperazone could inhibit the growth of bacteria with the
concentration of 1ug/ml . It also showed that R244S mutant,
S130G mutant and M69I mutant could certain resistant the
inhibitor, sulbactam. In the experiment, R244S mutant had the
best result of inhibitors-resistance, the MIC could reach
32ug/ml. The result of S130G mutant is worst, but its MIC
could still reach 4ug/ml. And the MIC of M69I mutant is
8ug/ml. The results was consistent with previously reported 
[,
,
], 
showed that mutation in these three positions could lead
to resistance to β-lactamase inhibitors, turning the wild type β-
lactamases into IRTs.

Molecular docking:
Virtual screening of chemical databases is an efficient method
of computer aided drug design []. In this study, we used
virtual screening in order to find out new compounds with
high affinity against three IRTs from traditional Chinese
medicine ingredients. According to the results of molecular
docking, caffeic acid, curcumin, salvianolic acid E, ferulic acid
and p-coumaric acid have high binding score with the mutants
().
Hence, these five Chinese medicine ingredients were chosen as
inhibitors for in vitro study.

Combination of antibiotic and Chinese herbal medicinal ingredients:
The invitro studies of five Chinese medicine ingredients aimed
to verify the accuracy of molecular docking. The results showed
that using the Chinese medicinal ingredients alone could not
inhibit the growth of mutated E. coli in vitro. But the
combination of cefperazone-sulbactam and Salvianolic acid E
could inhibit the growth of R244S mutated strain effectively
(). The MIC of cefperazone-sulbactam reduced from
32ug/ml to 1ug/ml by using salvianolic acid E.

Experiments show that salvianolic acid E did not have
antibacterial activity, but it could reduce the MIC of
cefperazone-sulbactam when it was used in conjunction with
cefperazone-sulbactam. This illustrates that the mechanism of
salvianolic acid E was binding with β-lactamase as enzyme
inhibitor, protecting cefperazone from hydrolysis, to achieve
the purpose of inhibiting bacterial growth. This is consistent
with the results of molecular docking. The other Chinese herbal
medicinal ingredients such as caffeic acid, curcumin and so on,
also had high affinity for these β-lactamase mutants, but they
did not show this feature, the reason of that remained to be
further in-depth study.

Conclusion
Computer aided modeling followed by in vitro validation show
that the ingredient of traditional Chinese medicine salvia,
salvianolic acid E inhibits the r244s β-lactamase mutant. The
MIC of cefoperazone significantly reduced, and drug-resistant
mutant strains of Escherichia coli growth has been effectively
suppressed by combination of cefperazone-sulbactam and
salvianolic acid E. This finds application in the development of
compounds to combat inhibitor resistant strains.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors thankfully acknowledge all colleagues at SWU
College of Pharmaceutical Sciences for their support and help.

Citation:Zhu et al, Bioinformation 10(12): 750-756 (2014)

The accessible surface areas of wide type and three mutanted β-lactamases.

The combination of antibiotics and Salvianolic acid E flight the R244S mutant. The MIC was determined by the doubling
dilution method in the microplate. A row was the blank control, C row was Ampicillin, D row was Ampicillin and salvianolic acid
E, E row was Cefperazone-Sulbactam, F row was Cefperazone-Sulbactam and Salvianolic acid E. The turbid holes indicate the
growth of bacteria, and the limpid ones indicate the bacteria were killed.

Binding of salvianolic acid E within the active site of R244S.

