Background
Plant biomass is primarily consists of cellulose, lignin and
hemicellulose. Lignin is the most abundant natural polymer
which makes 15 to 30% of the woody cell walls of
gymnosperms (softwood) and angiosperms (hardwood). An
encrusting matrix is formed by lignin around the cellulose, the
most abundant natural polymer. As this matrix significantly
prevents the microbial de-polymerization of cellulose, lignin
degradation is a crucial step in the global carbon cycle.
Furthermore, the presence of this imperturbable polymer is
responsible for the inefficient utilization of cellulose in a wide
range of industrial processes [].

Lignin peroxidase (Lip) is a monomeric haemoglycoprotein
peroxidase secreted by the white wood-rot fungus Phanerochaete
chrysosporium. Lignin peroxidases are of much interest
biotechnologically because of their potential applications in
bioremedial waste treatment and in catalyzing difficult
chemical transformations. Due to their role in lignin
biodegradation they are also of agricultural and environmental
importance [].

A recent study revealed the second occurrence of lignin
peroxidase in Macrophomina phaseolina, which is one of the most
devastating necrotropic fungal pathogens that infect more than
500 plant species throughout the world. It invades the
lignocellulosic barrier in fibre crop jute with the help of various
ligninolytic and cellulolytic enzymes. The lignin
depolymerizing enzymes are laccases, lignin peroxidases,
galactose oxidases, and chloroperoxidases, haloperoxidases,
and heme peroxidases. Among them, lignin peroxidase is the
one, which is main concern of our study. Following invasion,
M. phaseolina can grow rapidly in infected jute plant and
produces a large amount of sclerotia which plugs the vessels,
and then causes wilting of the plant [].

So, identifying different properties of this enzyme from M.
phaseolina along with predicting the 3-D structure and its active
sites could be helpful in designing strategies against this
catastrophic fungus. Moreover, pollutions owing to olive mill
wastewaters (OMW) is creating a serious ecological problem in
the Mediterranean area, particularly in Italy, Spain, Greece, and
Tunisia, which are the main producers of olive oil. These
countries produce more than 3 × 107 m3 of OMW per year. Due
to high concentration of aromatic compounds, this effluent is
black &amp; highly noxious []. This wastewater includes the black
high-molecular-weight polyphenols such as tannins,
anthocyanins, and catechins []. The phytotoxic and
antibacterial effects of the OMW have been attributed to the
phenolic content of OMW []. Conventional bacterial water
treatment processes are relatively ineffective at removing these
pollutants. OMW must be diluted more than 10-fold prior to
treatment with aerobic activated sludge or by anaerobic
digestion. Hence, it requires more effective treatment.

The irregular and recalcitrant nature of lignin and the fact that
the substructures contained in lignin are also found in primary
pollutants such as phenols, anisoles, biphenyls, and diarylethers
led researchers to postulate that the nonspecific ligninolytic
enzyme produced by white rot fungi might be able to degrade
such persistent aromatic pollutants. Moreover, a wide variety of
phenolic compounds and environmentally persistent
xenobiotics and chlorinated hydrocarbons, including DDT
[1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethane], TNT (2,4,6-
trinitrotoluene), alkyl halide insecticides, chloroanilines,
polychlorinated phenols, and polychlorinated biphenyls are
degradable by P. chrysosporium Thus, characterization of lignin
peroxidase enzyme from M. phaseolina will be an added benefit
in accordance with P. chrysosporium in the field of bioremedial
waste treatment [].

Until now, purification from the native fungus (Phanerochaete
chrysosporium) has been the only method of producing the
active enzyme []. Heterologous expression in E. coli genes,
encoding the mature sequence of Lip from P. chrysosporium has
been done successfully. Moreover, the first successful
homologous expression of rLiPH8 in P. chrysosporium and the
characterization of the recombinant enzyme has also been
reported as well as enlightened the fact that increased
expression of Lignin peroxidase in M. phaseolina can also be
achieved []. In this present study, several features of lignin
peroxidase of M. phasaeolina have been revealed using different
web based tools.

Methodology
Several characteristics of M. phaseolina have been identified
along with its 3D structure and active site prediction by using
different databases and software's maintaining as shown
().

Sequence retrieval and physicochemical characterization:
At the beginning, protein sequence of lignin peroxidase of M.
phaseolina was retrieved in FASTA format from NCBI [] and
then physicochemical properties of the enzyme were obtained
by using ProtParam [].

Identification of proteolytic cleavage site:
Proteolytic cleavage site was identified by using a web based
tool, peptide cutter [] which predicts protease cleavage sites
and sites cleaved by chemicals in a given protein sequence.

Identification of conserved domain:
To search the conserved domains present in the Lignin
Peroxidase of Macrophomina phaseolina, we utilized Conserved
Domain Search tool which can be found in NCBI []. The
sequence can be added to this tool by the use of accession
number, gi, or sequence in FASTA format. In this study, we
added sequence in FASTA format.

Prediction of three-dimensional structure:
To predict the three dimensional structure of Lignin peroxidase,
the most popular tool, Phyre2 (Protein Homology/Analogy
Recognition Engine) [] an online protein fold recognition
server, was used in this study. The retrieved amino acid
sequence in FASTA format was used as input data in Phyre2. In
this respect, the intensive mode of protein modeling was
selected in order to get an accurate model.

Validation of lignin peroxidase model:
To check the accuracy of the predicted three dimensional
structure, PDBsum was used. PDBsum is a database that
provides an overview of the protein structures stored in the
Protein Data Bank for the protein structures that have already
been generated. PDBsum has a page for each structure denoted
by a specific PDB id. But for lignin peroxidase, there is no
PDBsum page. So a customized page for lignin peroxidase was
generated by using PDBsum ‘generate’ option []. In this case
the PDB file obtained by using Phyre2 server for lignin
peroxidase was used as input data.The PDBsum generated
result was further subjected to documentation analysis by
PROCHECK.To obtain an idea about the protein chains and
their steriochemical quality, like Ramachandran plot quality,
peptide bond planarity, Bad non-bonded interactions, main
chain hydrogen bond energy, C alpha chirality and over-all G
factor and the side chain parameters like standard deviations of
chi1 gauche minus [] PROCHECK analysis was done.

Active site prediction:
To predict the active site of the sequence of interest a web based
tool named CastP was used []. The weighted Delaunay
triangulation and the alpha complex for shape measurements
are used by CastP which provides identification and
measurements of surface accessible pockets as well as interior
inaccessible cavities, for proteins and other molecules. It
assesses analytically the volume as well as the area of each
cavity and pocket, both in molecular surface (MS, Connolly's
surface) and solvent accessible surface (SA, Richards' surface). It
also measures the number of mouth openings, circumference of
mouth lips, and area of the openings, in both SA and MS
surfaces for each pocket [].

Results &amp; Discussion
Physicochemical characterization:
Different physicochemical properties of Lignin peroxidase has
been characterized.Computation of Isoelectric point (theoretical
pI) and molecular weight (Mw) of an amino acid sequence is
important because these data dictate the approximate condition
of a 2D-gel in which a protein of interest can be detected 
[].
Lignin peroxidase is moderately acidic (5.22) in nature. The
instability index (II) for the respective enzyme is computed to
be 29.87 which classifies the protein as stable. A protein whose
instability index is smaller than 40 is predicted as stable; a value
above 40 predicts that the protein may be unstable 
[].

The half-life is the time which is taken by half of the amount of
protein in a cell to disappear after its synthesis in the cell. The
half-life is given for three organisms (human, yeast, and E. coli).
The estimated half-life is: 30 hours (mammalian reticulocytes, in
vitro; &gt;20 hours (yeast, in vivo); &gt;10 hours (Escherichia coli, in
vivo) [].

The relative volume of a protein occupied by its aliphatic side
chains is termed as Aliphatic index (AI). Aliphatic index plays
role in protein thermal stability. The higher the Aliphatic index
of proteins, the more thermally stable the proteins. Aliphatic
amino acids also are hydrophobic in nature [].The aliphatic
index of lignin peroxidase is 86.44 which indicated this enzyme
is thermally stable as well as it have high amount of
hydrophobic amino acids. The protein is hydrophobic (due to
positive GRAVY value: 0.022).

Identification of proteolytic cleavage site:
Protease digestion can be useful if one wants to carry out
experiments on a portion of a protein, separate the domains in a
protein, remove a tag protein when expressing a fusion protein,
or make sure that the protein under investigation is not
sensitive to endogenous proteases. One or several reagents can
be selected from a list of (currently) 33 proteases and chemicals
[]. The proteolytic cleavage sites found in lignin peroxidase
enzyme of Macrophomina phaseolina is given in 
 (see the
supplementary).

Identification of conserved domain:
The fundamental units of protein structure, function, and
evolution are known as protein domain. As a result, domain
prediction is critical step in the annotation of protein sequences
[]. 
Domain predictions are also the starting point for a range
of more sophisticated analyses, including comparative
genomics of domain families in diverse organisms studies of
the evolution of protein and domain structure and function,
prediction of protein-protein interactions and identification of
complex evolutionary relationships [].

The conserved domain of lignin peroxidase lies between 30-300
amino acids of the enzyme (). Within the conserved
domain, there are several heme-binding sites. This enzyme
belongs to a group of peroxidases or a superfamily named plant
peroxidase-like superfamily. The enzyme,lignin peroxidase
contain a heme prosthetic group (ferriprotoporphyrin IX),
which catalyzes a multistep oxidative reaction involving
hydrogen peroxide as the electron acceptor.

3-D sructure determination:
Three-dimensional (3D) protein structures provide valuable
insights into the molecular basis of protein function, allowing
an effective design of experiments, such as site-directed
mutagenesis, studies of disease-related mutations or the
structure based design of specific inhibitors []. Therefore, the
high resolution 3D structure of a protein is the key to the
understanding and manipulating of its biochemical and cellular
functions [].

The theoretical structure () of lignin peroxidase from M
phaseolina is generated using Phyre2. Greater than 90%
confidence match was obtained, which is a high confidence
match. This implies that, overall fold of the model was almost
certainly correct and the central core of the model was tend to
be accurate [].

Validation of Lignin peroxidase Model:
Accuracy of the protein model was measured by PROCHECK.
Parameter comparisons of these proteins were made with wellrefined
structures that have similar resolution. Ramachandran
plot and Ramachandran plot statistics is shown in ()
and  (see the supplementary). Thus, analysis of
PROCHECK reveals that all residues are within the limits of
the Ramachandran plot and hence it can be considered as a
good model.

Active site prediction:
The identification and characterization of functional sites on
proteins has increasingly become an area of interest. Because
analysis of the active site residues for the binding of ligands
provides insight towards the design of inhibitors of an enzyme
[]. In this study, we have also reported the best active site
area of the experimental enzyme as well as the number of
amino acid involved in it. ().

Conclusion
Lignin peroxidase of M. phaseolina, an enzyme having
undoubted biotechnological prospect, was terra incognita. This
work has unearthed its several crucial aspects, on the basis of
which, it could be concluded that further inquiry into such a
deadly weapon of M. phaseolina might be of significant value
in the regulation of the diseases caused by this phytopahogen.
The model of the enzyme can be effectively used to design
mutagenesis experiments and broad screening on inhibitors of
the protein could be done as well using knowledge obtained
from this study. Last but not least, the study paves the way to
asses M. phaseolina as a potential bioremedial agent such as in
phenolic- rich effluent olive oil waste water.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Akbar et al, Bioinformation 9(14): 730-735 (2013)

Methodolgy involved in characterisation of M.
phaseolina.

Conserved domain over lignin peroxidase

The final 3D structure of lignin peroxidase model
from Macrophomina phaseolina. The α-helices and β –sheets are
represented by redhelices and yellow ribbons respectively. This
model was conducted by Phyre2 MODELLER program.

Ramachandran's Map of lignin peroxidase model
from Macrophomina phaseolina. The Plot calculation was done
with PROCHECK program

a) Active site information by CASTp. Green color shows the active site position from 76 to 287 with the β-sheet in between
them and 3D representation of the best active site of lignin peroxidase generated by using CASTp; b) The table shows the area and
the volume for different active sites of lignin pefroxidase and the best active site remains in an area of 1027 and a volume of 1359.9
amino acid.

