Background
Cancer is an abnormal growth of cells caused by multiple
changes in gene expression leading to dysregulated balance of
cell proliferation and cell death and ultimately evolving into a
population of cells that can invade tissues and metastasize to
distant sites, causing significant morbidity and, if untreated,
death of the host.

Breast cancer is a malignant neoplasm originating from breast
tissue, most commonly from the inner lining of milk ducts or
the lobules that supply the ducts with milk 
[]. Highly complex
and heterogeneous nature of the disorder makes it exceedingly
difficult to analyze and understand the disease in a
comprehensive manner, in spite of strenuous efforts. Breast
cancer is the second leading cause of cancer deaths in women
today (after lung cancer) and is the most common cancer among
women, excluding nonmelanoma skin cancers. According to the
American Cancer Society, about 1.3 million women will be
diagnosed with breast cancer annually worldwide and about
465,000 will die from the disease []. Breast MRI, biopsy,
ultrasound, CT scan, Mammography, lymph node biopsy are
the most common protocols employed in the diagnosis of breast
cancer.

Out of ~ 20 pathological types that have been defined - invasive
ductal (IDCs) and invasive lobular carcinomas (ILCs) are the
most common malignancies of the breast. Invasive ductal and
lobular breast carcinomas account for 80% and 15% of all
invasive breast tumors, respectively []. Invasive (or
infiltrating) ductal carcinoma (IDC) starts in a milk passage
(duct) of the breast, breaks through the wall of the duct, and
grows into the fatty tissue of the breast. At this point, it may be
able to metastasize to other parts of the body through the
lymphatic system and bloodstream, whereas Invasive lobular
carcinoma (ILC) starts in the milk-producing glands (lobules)
and subsequently it can metastasize to other parts of the body.

ILCs and IDCs vary from each other with respect to various
histological, biological and clinical features. Remarkably, ductal
tumors tending to form glandular structures, whereas lobular
tumors are less cohesive and tends to invade in single file. This
feature has been associated with the frequent inactivation of the
E-cadherin gene (CDH1) []. ILCs are predominantly estrogen
receptor (ER), and progesterone receptor (PR) positive, and thus
presumably more homogeneous than IDCs. Their pathological
grade is generally lower than that of IDCs and they exhibit
lower proliferation index []. ILCs are less sensitive to
chemotherapy [] and are more prone to form bone,
gastrointestinal, peritoneal and ovarian metastases than IDCs
[]. 
They also have lower vascular endothelial growth factor
expression []. 
Despite these differences, ILCs show similar
prognoses as IDCs [], and the diagnosis and treatment of ILCs
and IDCs is similar.

A differential diagnosis is a systematic method used to identify
unknowns. It is essentially a process of elimination used
medical professionals to diagnose the specific disease in a
patient. The high degree of similarity in the prognoses of IDC
and ILC makes it beneficial to develop a differential diagnostic
protocol to classify the two conditions. Therefore, it is crucial to
gain deep insight into the molecular differences that distinguish
the two pathological types in order to attempt differential
diagnosis and to tailor specific treatment methods.

A few microarray studies have been performed to identify the
differential gene expression between IDCs and ILCs, but they
still utilize the traditional unsupervised clustering methods to
realize the potential molecular variation between the two
pathological types. Manual analysis of tumors based on
expression array analyses can identify a gene set that
distinguishes these two subtypes of breast tumors. Microarray
data can reveal information pertaining to not only gene
expression but also regarding genetic networks of a particular
biological process.

Networks are pervasive in biology []. These network data
extend and compliment a great deal of other information
available in the biomedical sciences. Although various datasets
can appear quite different in quality and quantity, they all are
reflections of the same underlying biological system and its
responses []. Thus a network elucidating the molecular basis
and interaction between the components can yield a possible
insight for differentiating pathological types.

The main goal of the study is to construct the genetic regulatory
network from the microarray data using biological knowledge
and constraint-based inferences, in order to explore the
potential significant gene regulatory networks that can
differentiate IDC and ILC and thereby understand the complex
interactions that are influenced by the genetic networks.

Methodology
Dataset Collection:
A comprehensive search of all eligible studies on differential
gene expression of IDC and ILC (as on April 2010) was made by
searching the electronic literature (PubMed database) for
relevant published reports and by manual searching of
reference lists of articles on this topic. Only human studies in
the English language were included in the analysis. Based on
the literature survey GEO record GDS2635 of the Platform
GPL570. 5 diseased and 10 control samples for each of IDC &amp;
ILC were taken for analysis.

Gene expression analysis:
A meta analysis of the chosen datasets was performed using the
Gene Spring Gx 7.3 software. GeneSpring GX provides
powerful, accessible statistical tools for fast visualization and
analysis of expression and genomic structural variation data.
Designed specifically for the needs of biologists, GeneSpring
GX offers an interactive desktop computing environment that
promotes investigation and enables understanding of
microarray data within a biological context 
[].

The datasets were normalized to standardize microarray data to
enable differentiation between real (biological) variations in
gene expression levels and variations due to the measurement
process. The genes were filtered based on fold changes. The
fold changes in gene expression levels between the disease
samples control samples to check for the differential expression.
Genes which were differentially up regulated by 4 fold were
filtered out and their gene ontology was identified.

Gene Network Construction:
Two gene networks to study the molecular differences between
IDC and ILC were constructed using BisoGenet plugin 
[] for
Cytoscape was used for generation of biological networks. The
Networks were generated taking as input an initial list of
identifiers of genes filtered out on basis of fold change.

Network Analysis:
The network obtained from the BisoGenet Server is analyzed
using the plugin Network Analyzer. For every node in a
network, NetworkAnalyzer computes its degree, its clustering
coefficient, the number of self-loops, and a variety of other
parameters [].
The Overrepresentation or underrepresentation
of GO categories was assessed using The Biological Networks
Gene Ontology tool (BiNGO)

Discussion
Preliminary Analysis:
The gene expression profiling of Invasive Ductal carcinoma and
Invasive Lobular Carcinoma dataset containing 5 samples each
was used to find the up regulated and down-regulated genes.
First the up regulated and down-regulated genes were obtained
by comparing Invasive Ductal carcinoma samples to control
samples at a fold change of 4.

The gene expression data pertaining to both invasive ductal
carcinoma and invasive lobular carcinoma was subjected to
meta analysis. The genes which were upregulated by 4 fold
were chosen. Out of the 54676 genes present on the gpl570
platform- 29 genes exhibited 4 fold up regulation in case of IDC
and 22 in the case of ILC.  (see supplementary
material) illustrate the list of the filtered genes in each of the
two pathological states. These upregulated genes were
analyzed systematically based on their ontology.

Accurate and precise diagnosis and subsequent treatment of
IDC and ILC remain elusive and difficult owing to high degree
of similarity in the prognosis of the two pathological types 
[].
Gene expression profiling technique is widely in the
measurement of the expression of thousands of genes at once
and thereby creates a global picture of a biological
phenomenon. The technology is employed in order to obtain a
clear insight on how the expression of every individual gene is
altered in a particular physiological state. Ideology was to look
for subtle differences in gene expression may be responsible for
the phenotypic differences between them.

The Gene expression profiling datasets available from
previously concluded studies were used to find the list of gene
which is significantly differentially expressed genes between
the Invasive Ductal Carcinoma and Invasive Lobular
Carcinoma. Detailed analysis of tumors was used to identify a
gene set that distinguishes these two subtypes of breast tumors.

As indicated by the highly similar prognosis and physiological
manifestation of the two pathological subtypes - It is observed
that both the types of tumor exhibit a very similar expression
level for numerous genes.

Construction of Gene Regulatory Networks:
Gene regulatory networks of the gene set compiled on the basis
of expression level altercations can yield a heuristic insight into
the molecular basis of the prognosis and thereby can be utilized
to discover specific diagnostic and tailored disease targeting.
The two complex gene networks that emerged as a resultant of
the interaction between upregulated genes was broken down
into smaller sub networks using mcode module of cytoscape.
The top ranked gene dense cliques were found and subjected to
further analysis by mapping each node to be corresponding
ontology. The top ranked gene dense cliques are depicted in
(). The 
 (see supplementary material)
show the list of genes which constituents the top ranked dense
clique along with their respective ontology.

Analyzing Gene Clusters:
The gene clusters obtained contain only 3 genes in common -
CDK1, HDAC and ESR. Cyclin dependent kinase 1 is a key
player in cell cycle regulation. Cdk1 substrates frequently
contain multiple phosphorylation sites that are clustered in
regions of intrinsic disorder, and their exact position in the
protein is often poorly conserved in evolution, indicating that
precise positioning of phosphorylation is not required for
regulation of the substrate []. Cdk1 interacts with nine
different cyclins throughout the cell cycle. The interaction with
cyclins is important for activation of its kinase activity 
[].
CDK1 and ESR are key components of estrogen responsive
protein efp controls cell cycle and breast tumors growth.
Histone deacetylases (HDAC) are involved in removing the
acetyl groups (O=C-CH3) from an ε-N-acetyl lysine amino acid
on a histone. The fact that acetylation is a key component in the
regulation of gene expression has stimulated the study of
HDACs in relation to the aberrant gene expression often
observed in cancer. Although no direct alteration in the
expression of HDACs has yet been demonstrated in human
oncogenesis, it is now known that HDACs associate with a
number of well characterized cellular oncogenes and tumoursuppressor
genes [e.g. Mad and retinoblastoma protein (Rb)],
leading to an aberrant recruitment of HDAC activity, which in
turn results in changes in gene expression 
[,
].

A notable observation was that ductal and lobular tumors
displayed a striking difference in the expression of genes
associated with cell adhesion (PCDH9, IBSP, COL11A1, and
CTNNB1), motility (S100P), apoptosis (HDAC1, IKBKB and
BUB1), protein folding (CPB1, RAB26), extracellular matrix
(COL11A1, PRMT1), and protein phosphorylation and invasion
(ESRRA, SMAD3, HDAC2, STRN), This suggests that they may
achieve invasive growth through separate mechanisms and
evolve via distinct genetic pathways.

The ILC genes are differentially expressed compared to IDC
genes and are involved in other biological processes such as
nucleosome disassembly- HIST1H2AD, SMARCE1, intracellular
signaling pathway - GSK3B, GRB2, CALM3, DNA repair and
negative regulation of DNA binding - SUMO1, TOP2A, UBC,
BRCA1 .

HIST1H2AD gene codes for Histone H2A type 1-D which is a
core component of nucleosome involved in compacting DNA
into chromatin and limiting DNA accessibility to the cellular
machineries which require DNA as a template [,
].

SMARCE1 is involved in alteration of DNA-nucleosome
topology, Involved in transcriptional activation and repression
of select genes by chromatin remodeling []. The gene
regulatory network constructed can be used as a hypothetical
molecular framework to develop a diagnostic marker specific to
each of the two pathological states of interest. The validity of
the hypothesized biomarkers can be validated by employing
available in vitro techniques.

Conclusion
To sum up, we have utilized the Construction of separate gene
regulation networks for IDC and ILC on the basis of gene
expression altercation reveals clear distinction in the
mechanism that underlies the pathological differences between
the two. The molecular level understanding of the pathological
manifestations can be exploited in future to find unique bio
markers for diagnosis and to identify ideal therapeutic drug
targets.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Ragunath et al, Bioinformation 8(8): 359-364 (2012)

The top ranked gene dense cliques for A. IDC &amp; B.
ILC

