Background
DNA microarrays [,,,]
 are widely used tools capable of measuring expression levels of genes at genomic scale. Microarrays
heavily rely on the process of hybridization between DNA sequences
affixed to the surface of the microarray (probes) and DNA or RNA
sequences present in solution (targets). The process of hybridization
between a probe and a target relies on complementary A-T and C-G
base pairs. The gene expression level is thus estimated by optical
measurements of the fluorescence intensity obtained from the
interaction of labeled targets and surface-bound probes. It is widely
believed that gene expression fluorescence intensities are typically
given by hybridizations of probes and their corresponding targets, but
often, strong non-complementary hybridization events (crosshybridizations)
are observed. The existence of cross-hybridization is
attributed to many factors, the most prominent being poor probe
designs. Some freely available tools allow statistical quality
assessment for specific microarray platforms, such as Affymetrix [],
Illumina [], cDNA arrays []. Other tools have the computational
capabilities to detect imperfections in spotting [], hybridization [] or
intensity values [], but most of them do not provide interactive
means of visualization.

This paper introduces MMCT (the Microarray Manual Curation Tool)
‐ a web server application that provides computational and visual
insights into microarray probe and target sequence hybridizations. The
tool provides the means to explore the quality of individual probes on
virtually any oligo microarray chipset (currently only Affymetrix data
is loaded) by performing computational hybridization simulations for
each probe and consecutive sub-sequences of user-specified length
taken along a pre-specified target.

Methodology
The core of MMCT is a MySQL database containing microarray
sequence information relevant to Human chips from Affymetrix
website []. Wrapped around the database, we built a web interface
powered by PHP, Java-Script, Python and Ajax. The computational
aspect of the web application consists of a modified version of the free
energy prediction tool PairFold [], and a set of Perl pre-processing
and GD-powered drawing scripts.

Input
MMCT takes as input the microarray platform, the probe (and target)
identifiers (Affymetrix probe set IDs) or directly the user input
sequences, together with the length (L) of a subsequence of the target
and computes the hybridization free energies for all length L
subsequences of the target and the probe. The free energies are
computed using PairFold ‐ a publicly available tool that predicts
minimum free energy secondary structures formed by two input DNA
or RNA molecules.

Computations
When a chip platform together with probe and target identifiers are
passed as input to the web interface, MMCT queries the MySQL
database containing up-to-date information about the chip and extracts
the corresponding probe and target sequences. MMCT provides also
an auto-completion Ajax based mechanism that helps the user to locate
and select the desired probe and target faster. The extracted probe and
target sequence are passed as input to a Perl script that calls PairFold
[] on consecutive sub-sequences of the target and free energy
estimates of hybridization strength are calculated.

The hybridization strength of two DNA sequences is typically
modeled using the Nearest-Neighbor Thermodynamic model originally
developed in Crothers Lab [] and is estimated computationally using
minimum free energies. The lower the free energy is, the stronger the
hybridization of a probe and a target subsequence is. and 
show the free energy profiles of a perfect-match and, respectively, an
imperfect-match probe from probe set 1213_at on Affymetrix chipset
HG_U95Av2.

Output
Once the input is provided and the free energies are estimated using
predefined thermodynamic parameters, a plot with free energy profiles
is displayed. The plot shows two curves: 
a blue curve representing probe versus sub-target hybridization free energies and

a red curve representing sub-target perfect match hybridization free energies 
(see  and )


. The red curve is used as a baseline for identification
of potential matches along a target. If the probe perfectly matches a
subsequence of the target, then the red and the blue curves intersect.
The vertical distance between red and blue points with equal x-axis
coordinates decreases if the probe hybridizes stronger with the subtarget
sequence. The bi-dimensional plot represents the start positions
of the sub-targets on the x-axis and the estimated ree energies
measured in kcal/mol on the y-axis. MMCT provides also means for
visualizing secondary structures of probe-target interactions.

 shows the secondary structure formed by probe interrogating
position 3582 from probe set 1213_at on Affymetrix chipset
HG_U95Av2 and a subsequence of the corresponding target. Intuitive
browsing features allow the user to explore the relation-ships between
the probe and target sequences and secondary structure information via zooming in and out and automatic highlighting of structural
nucleotides when the text-input cursor is moved along one of the
sequences. The probe sequence is depicted in black and has gray 5‘
and 3‘ ends, while the sub-target sequence is depicted in blue with
light blue 5‘ and 3‘ ends. All plots produced by MMCT can be
exported as Portable Network Graphics (PNG) images.

Future development
We continue the development of this tool by integrating alternative
hybridization model parameters and by adding more attractive data
browsing features including annotation information relevant to each
microarray probe.

Funding for this research was kindly provided by the National
Research Council of Canada.

Citation:Tulpan et al, Bioinformation 4(8): 344-346 (2010)

Free energy profile for the probe interrogating position 3582 from probe set 1213_at on Affymetrix chipset HG_U95Av2.

Free energy profile for the probe interrogating position 3666 from probe set 1213_at on Affymetrix chipset HG_U95Av2.

Secondary structure for the probe interrogating position 3582 from probe set 1213_at on Affymetrix chipset HG_U95Av2 and a subsequence of the corresponding target.

