Background
Leishmaniasis is an infectious disease complex caused by several species 
that are members of the protozoan parasite genus Leishmania. In humans, 
disease manifestation ranges from self-healing cutaneous lesions to 
lifethreatening visceral leishmaniasis (VL). This disease complex affects 12 
million people, and there are 1.5 million new cases annually  
[]. VL, 
caused by  Leishmania donovoni, Leishmania infantum and  Leishmania 
chagasi, remains the main agent of  morbidity and mortality in 
leishmaniasis. The parasite has a simple life cycle, and abundant clinical 
and experimental evidence indicates that of all the parasitic diseases, 
leishmaniasis in particular should be  an appropriate target for effective 
control through vaccination. There are, however, no vaccines in routine use 
against any form of the disease [,
]. Currently available vaccines against 
a variety of infectious diseases mediate protection by a long-lived humoral 
response through the production of antibodies. For diseases such as 
tuberculosis, malaria, human immunodeficiency virus infection, and 
leishmaniasis, however, the cellular immune response comprising 
primarily Th1 and CD8 effector T cells has been shown to be critical for 
mediating protection against the infection 
[].

Visceral leishmaniasis is fatal if not treated, and development of a vaccine 
with long-term immunity remains a challenge. The attachment of 
Leishmania promastigotes to macrophages, crucial for intracellular 
parasitism and for the outcome of the infection, has been demonstrated by 
many investigators to be a specific receptor-mediated event  
[–]. 
Emphasis has been placed on the critical role of two abundant surface 
molecules gp63  [–
] and lipophosphoglycan  
[] that independently 
mediate parasite attachment to macrophages. Both molecules, when 
reconstituted   into   liposomes,  mediate   protection    against   cutaneous  
leishmaniasis and are considered as good vaccine candidates  
[]. The 
current study has been undertaken with an idea to determine the regions of 
identity in the gp63 protein which will help in the development of a 
vaccine against all forms of VL. 

Methodology
By Sequence alignment we arranged the sequences of  protein obtained 
from NCBI to identify regions of similarity that may be a consequence of 
functional, structural, or evolutionary relationships between the sequences.

Basic Local Alignment Search Tool
Basic Local Alignment Search Tool,  or BLAST, has been applied for 
comparing  primary biological sequence  information, like the  amino-acid 
sequences of gp63 obtained from different species of leishmania. A 
BLAST search enabled us to compare a query sequence with a library or 
database of sequences, and identify library sequences that resemble the 
query sequence above a certain threshold.

Conservation
Changes at a specific position of an amino acid sequence that preserve the 
physico-chemical properties of the original residue.

Bit score
The value  S' is derived from the  raw alignment score S in which the 
statistical properties of the scoring  system used have been taken into 
account. Because bit scores have been normalized with respect to the 
scoring system, they have been used to compare alignment scores from 
different searches.

H
H is the relative entropy of the target and background residue frequencies. 
H can be thought of as a measure of the average information (in bits) 
available per position that distinguishes an alignment from chance. At high 
values of H, short alignments can be distinguished by chance, whereas at 
lower H values, a longer alignment may be necessary.

HSP
High-scoring segment pair.  
HSPs are local alignments with no  gaps that achieve one of the top 
alignment scores in a given search.

P value
The probability of an alignment occurring with the score in 
question or better.The p value is calculated by relating the observed alignment score, S, to 
the expected distribution of HSP scores from comparisons of random 
sequences of the same length and composition as the query to the database. 
The most highly significant P values are close to 0.

PAM
Percent Accepted Mutation has been used to quantify the amount of 
evolutionary change in a protein sequence. 1.0 PAM unit is the amount of 
evolution which will change, on average, 1% of amino acids in a protein 
sequence. A PAM(x) substitution matrix is a look-up table in which scores 
for each amino acid substitution have been calculated based on the 
frequency of that substitution in closely related proteins that have 
experienced a certain amount (x) of evolutionary divergence

Identity
The extent to which two (nucleotide or amino acid) sequences are 
invariant.

Similarity
The extent to which nucleotide or protein sequences are related. The extent 
of similarity between two sequences can be based on percent sequence 
identity and/or  conservation. In BLAST similarity refers to a positive 
matrix score

Expect value
The Expect value (E) describes the number of hits one can “expect” to see 
by chance when searching a database  of a particular size. It decreases 
exponentially as the Score (S) of the match increases. Essentially, the E 
value describes the random background noise. The lower the E-value, or 
the closer it is to zero, the more “significant” the match is. 

Gap
A space introduced into an alignment  to compensate for insertions and 
deletions in one sequence relative to another.

Clustal
It is a widely used multiple sequence alignment computer program

ClustalW
command line interface.  
A phylogenetic tree or evolutionary tree shows the  evolutionary 
relationships among various biological  species or other entities that are 
believed to have a  common ancestor. In a phylogenetic tree, each node 
with descendants represents the  most recent common ancestor of the 
descendants, and the edge lengths in some trees correspond to  time 
estimates. Each node is called a taxonomic unit. Internal nodes are 
generally called hypothetical taxonomic units (HTUs) as they cannot be 
directly observed.

Dendrogram
A dendrogram (from Greek dendron “tree”, -gramma “drawing”) is a tree 
diagram used to illustrate the arrangement of the clusters produced by a 
clustering algorithm

Discussion
BLAST  (Table 1 see ) shows a high level of 
similarity and identity almost in the range of more than 90% and negligible 
percentage of gaps among the amino acid residues of the gp63 molecule. 
T-COFFEE  () results show high level of identity, similarity and 
positives almost towards Good then  towards Average and least towards 
Bad which again strongly advocate the high level of conservation with in 
aminoacid residues of gp3. CLADOGRAM and PHYLOGRAM  () 
analysis also show tight vicinity among the gp63 residues during the 
process of evolution since the nodes  are very close to each other. The 
Cladogram is lower in length, it has fewer homoplasies and it is more 
parsimonious. CAB51784.1 and CAB42815.1 are more closely related and 
both of them are close towards CAB42816.1. Moreover CAB51783.1 is 
related to all three. In the other branch CAB51797.2 and CAB51794.1 are 
closely related. They are further close to CAB51793.1. These gp63 
proteins obtained from seven different species strains of Leishmania are 
more closely related amongst themselves as they arose from gene 
duplication. Moreover the sequence CAB06018.1 has altogether a different 
branch and it has relatively much less  similarity with other gp3 proteins. 
The scale of Phylogram is 0.3 and it also strongly supports the results of 
Cladogram analysis.

Conclusion
Previous findings support the major Leishmania surface glycoprotein 
(gp63) as a proteinase  []  
with acidic pH optimum  []. Specifically, 
evidences also show that it is a metalloenzyme, possibly with Zn in its 
active site and that it is present on the surface of both leishmanial stages 
with certain molecular changes during leismanial differentiation. The 
studies also suggest that its catalytic activity as a proteinase may protect 
Leishmania to parasitize macrophages successfully  []. Immunization of 
susceptible BALB/c mice with gp63 entrapped in these vesicles protected 
virtually all of the mice against progressive nonhealing infections with L. 
donovoni  []. 
Moreover data from other studies demonstrated that gp63 
encapsulated in stable cationic liposomes provides long-term protection 
[]  
in contrast to previous studies of protein-based vaccines  
[]. Our 
results of BLAST Cladogram and Phylogenetic tree analysis throw light on 
the fact that a high level of conservation and identity amongst gp63 
residues may help in the designing of a common vaccine against visceral 
leishmaniasis caused by different species strains of  Leishmania. TCOFFEE 
(Version_6.85) also showed that the level of similarity ranged 
from average to good in the strains we selected. The results reinstate our 
claim that a common gp63 based vaccine can be designed against all forms 
of visceral leishmaniasis.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Sukrat Sinha is thankful to the financial support provided by the University 
Grants Commission, India under Dr. D.S Kothari Postdoctoral Fellowship.

Citation:Sinha et al, Bioinformation 5(8): 320-325 (2011)

Cladogram and Phylogram analysis of gp63 sequences of different species strains of 
Leishmania associated with Visceral Leishmaniasis 

T-COFFEE showing the conservation  of aminoacid residues of gp63 in different 
species strains of  Leishmania associated with Visceral Leishmaniasis

