Background
Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) is an international public health
problem affecting 5–10% of the world population 
[].
Individuals who are suffering from this also experience
secondary health problems like osteoporosis, a disease that is
characterised by low bone mass and poor bone quality. Reports
have shown that CKD patients show high level of bone fracture
than the normal population and it is increasing with
progressive decline in renal function. Almost 50% of the CKD
patients undergo dialysis show severe osteoporotic conditions.
One way to reduce the incidence of osteoporosis in CKD
patients is to stimulate new bone formation [].

To improve bone mass and control renal problems in patients
with CKD, several phosphate binding drugs in combination
with vitamin D therapy have been developed. However, most
of these approaches are becoming expensive and less effective
[]. 
Therefore, there is a need in search of alternate molecules to
reduce the pathogenesis of CKD and incidence of osteoporosis
in humans. To address this concern, we used E-Pharmacophore
mapping and Glide High Throughput Virtual Screening (HTVS)
to look for possible candidates to increase vitamin D synthesis
by binding to Vitamin D receptor (VDR) []. We collected the
VDR agonists from the literature and docking analyses were
performed with the VDR protein. The docked complexes were
given as input for E-Pharmacophore mapping. Based on this
pharmacophore we screened large collection of databases.

Finally we have identified five potential lead molecules based
on docking score and ADME/T properties. Among these five
compounds, compound BD_230, BD_12938 show an excellent
agonistic activity against VDR protein. Further in vitro and in
vivo studies will determine if any of these five identified
molecules have the ability to synthesize Vitamin D and
regulating phosphate-calcium metabolism. Such findings will
pave the way for preclinical studies and eventually develop into
a therapeutic molecule to treat osteoporotic conditions in CKD
patients and improve the quality of life in these individuals.

Methodology
Protein preparation of the VDR:
Docking studies were conducted on the three dimensional (3D)
structure of the VDR (PDB ID: 3A3Z) which was obtained from
protein data bank []. Before performing docking, hydrogen
atoms and charges were added to this crystal structure of 3A3Z.
The complex was submitted to a series of restrained, partial
minimizations using the optimized potential for liquid
simulations-all atom (OPLS_2005) force field []. The 3D
structures were processed by use of the ‘Protein Preparation
module’ with the ‘preparation and refinement’ option before
docking. Hydrogen atoms were added and all unwanted water
molecules were removed from the structure. Partial charges
were assigned according to OPLS_2005 force field.

Ligand structure Preparation:
The Vitamin D3 analogues (8 molecules) were retrieved from
the literature [] and the chemical structures of these molecules
were drawn by using ChemSketch version 11.01
(http://www.acdlabs.com). All these eight ligands were
prepared for docking by using LigPrep, version 2.3 
[]. The
tautomers for each of these ligands were generated and
optimized. Partial atomic charges were computed using the
OPLS_2005 force field.

Molecular docking and E-Pharmacophore generation:
The eight different vitamin D3 analogues were docked in the
active site of VDR using Glide extra-precision (XP), version 5.5
[]. 
The grid box enclosed at the centroid of the VDR cocrystallized
ligand. All reasonable conformations for each lowenergy
conformer in the designated binding site were
determined by Glide XP mode. We used Glide XP score for
finding the best conformer with optimum binding affinity. The
best conformer of the each compound along with the binding
pose was given as input for E-pharmacophore mapping. EPharmacophores
were constructed by mapping the energetic
terms from Glide XP scoring function onto atom centres.
Protein-ligand complexes were given as input for generating
pharmacophore sites. The constructed e-pharmacophore was
used as query for virtual screening []. Phase 
[] module of
schrodinger was used for pharmacophore generation using
default set of six chemical features: hydrogen bond acceptor
(A), hydrogen bond donor (D), hydrophobic region (H),
positive ionizable region (P), negative ionizable region (N) and
aromatic ring (R).

E-Pharmacophore based database screening:
Explicit matching must required for the most energetically
favourable site in the e-pharmacophore approach. Screening
molecules should match at least 3 sites for a hypothesis with 4
sites. Different databases namely Asinex
(http://www.asinex.com), 
TOSLab (http://www.toslab.com),
Binding database (http://www.bindingdb.org/bind/index.jsp)
and zinc database (http://zinc.docking.org) were used for
compound screening. The fitness score is a measurement of
how well the aligned ligand conformer matches the hypothesis
based on RMSD site matching, vector alignments and volume
terms. Database hits were ranked based on this fitness score.
The ligand with the best fitness score were docked into the
active site of the VDR protein.

Result &amp; Discussion
Molecular docking results for VDR agonists:
A total of eight Vitamin D3 analogues having agonistic activity
against VDR were collected from the literature 
[] and docked
with the VDR enzyme. The docked complexes were given as
input for e-pharmacophore mapping. The 2D structures of these
eight agonist molecules are depicted in ().

E-Pharmacophore generation and database screening:
E-Pharmacophore generation is the combined aspects of ligandbased
and structure-based approaches to enhance enrichments
rather than ligand information alone. The method presented
here attempts to take a step beyond than simple contact scoring
since it incorporates structural and energetic information using
the scoring function in Glide XP. Six pharmacophore features
were predicted, but only four pharmacophore sites have been
chosen based on the site score. The final hypothesis consists of
one hydrogen bond acceptor (A), one hydrogen bond donor (D)
and two hydrophobic regions (H) and their distances are shown
in (). These energetically favourable sites encompass
the specific interactions of vitamin D3 analogues and the VDR
protein, and this information will be helpful in the development
of new VDR agonists. Compounds were screened against
Asinex, TOSLab, Binding database, etc.: Molecular docking is a
computational approach which samples conformations of small
compounds at protein-binding sites; the best complements of
the protein-binding sites are assessed by scoring functions. The
quality of docking method is assessed two main aspects: 
docking accuracy

screening enrichment.



Thirty compounds were selected from the HTVS for further
Glide XP docking study based on the Glide score. Here, we
report five compounds from the Glide XP docking study with
the best Glide scores (-9.24 to -15.57) and Glide energies (-69.95
to -91.85), which suggest strong enzyme-ligand interactions.
The chemical names of the five lead compounds and their
corresponding database id numbers are: BD_230 - 5-{[(5-{[(2S)-
3-carboxy-1-[5-(2,6-dichloro phenyl)-1,3-oxazol-2-yl]-1-
oxopropan-2-yl] carbamoyl} thiophen-2-yl) methyl] sulfamoyl}-
2-hydroxy benzoic acid BD_12938-({4-[(2S)-2-carbamoyl-2-[(2S)-
2-(2-{4[difluoro (phosphono) methyl] phenyl} acet amido)-3-
phenyl propanamido] ethyl] phenyl} difluoromethyl)
phosphonic acid, BD_18601 - (R)-{[(S)-{[(2R,3S,4R,5R)-5-(6-
amino -9H- purin-9- yl)- 3,4-dihydroxyoxolan-2-yl]
methoxy}(hydroxy) phosphoryl]methyl}[2-(4-hydroxy-6-
methoxy-7-methyl-3-oxo-1,3-dihydro-2-benzofuran-5-yl)
ethoxy] phosphinic acid, BD_19517 -4-[(2S)- 2-{[(2S)-1-[(2S)-2-
{[(1S)-3-carbamoyl-1-{[(1S,2S)-1-carbamoyl-2- hydroxy propyl]
carbamoyl}propyl] carbamoyl} pyrrolidin-1-yl]-4-methyl-1-
oxopentan-2-yl] carbamoyl} -2-(phenyl formamido) ethyl]
phenoxyphosphonic acid and BD_19584 - (4S)-4-{[(1S,2S)-1-
{[(1S)-1-carbamoyl-2-methylpropyl]carbamoyl}-2-hydroxy
propyl]carbamoyl}-4-{[(2S)-1-[(2S) -2-[(2S)-2-acetamido-3-[4-
(phosphonooxy)phenyl]propanamido]-4-methyl
pentanoyl]pyrrolidin-2-yl]formamido}butanoic acid. The
chemical structures of these lead compounds are illustrated in
() and () represented the binding modes of
these five lead molecules and their interacting residues. The
docking results for the nine compounds have shown in 

(see supplementary material).

Binding mode of the best five compounds:
Binding mode analysis of the compound_230:
The hydrogen atom from the –OH group is interacted with side
chain oxygen atom in the Tyr 236. The oxygen atom from P=O
group interacted with hydrogen atom in the amino group of
Asp 144. The hydrogen atom from the two different group of C
O interacted with two different group of backbone NH in Arg
274.

Binding mode analysis of the compound_12938:
The three oxygen atoms in the side chain PO3 group are well
interacted with hydrogen atom from NH group of three
different atoms of Asp 144, Lys 240 and Arg274. The oxygen
atom from the C=O group of ligand interacted with hydrogen
atom from OH group of two different amino acids namely Ser
275 and Ser 278.

Binding mode analysis of the compound_18601:
The compound_18601 shows two interactions with VDR. The
hydrogen atoms from two different OH group of the ligand
interacted with backbone oxygen atoms of Ser 278.

Binding mode analysis of the compound_19517:
The oxygen atom from the ligand molecule interacted with two
different hydrogen atoms in the amino group (NH2) of Arg 274.
Another oxygen atom of the ligand molecule interacted with the
hydrogen atom of the OH group in Tyr 143. The hydrogen atom
from the OH group in Asp 144 interacted with oxygen atom in
the ligand molecule.

Binding mode analysis of the compound_19584:
The hydrogen atom (NH) from the ligand molecule interacted
with the oxygen atom (C-O) of Arg 274. The oxygen atom (C-O)
from the ligand molecule interacted with two different
hydrogen atom (NH2) of Arg 274. The oxygen atom from the
imidizole ring has been interacted with hydrogen atom of (NH)
Asp 144.

ADME/T or pharmacokinetics prediction of the lead molecules:
QikProp settings determine which molecules are flagged as
being dissimilar to other 95% of the known drugs. Predicted
significant ADME/T properties such as permeability through
MDCK cells (QPlogMDCK), QikProp predicted log IC50 value
for blockage of K+ channels (QPlogHERG), QikProp predicted
gut-blood barrier (QPPCaco) and violations of the Lipinski's
rule of five (LROF) were reported in 
(see
supplementary material). The number of stars indicates the
deviations from the 95% of the known drugs. In accordance
with Lipinski's rule of five, QikProp was used to evaluate the
drug-likeness of the lead molecules by assessing their
physicochemical properties. These properties are well within
the acceptable range of the Lipinski rule for drug-like
molecules. These compounds were further evaluated for their
drug-like behavior through analysis of pharmacokinetic
parameters required for absorption, distribution, metabolism,
excretion and toxicity (ADME/T) by use of QikProp. For the
five lead compounds, the partition coefficient (QPlogPo/w) and
water solubility (QPlogS), critical for estimation of absorption
and distribution of drugs within the body, ranged between ~ -
1.98 and ~ -6.83, cell permeability (QPPCaco), a key factor
governing drug metabolism and its access to biological
membranes, ranged from 0.00 to 63.54. All these
pharmacokinetic parameters are within the acceptable range
defined for human use, thereby indicating the selected three
drug-like compounds their potential as drug- like molecules
could be a potential agonists for VDR protein and further
analysis can be performed through various experimental
studies.

Conclusion
In summary, a new approach combining molecular docking
and pharmacophore filtering have been employed to meet the
critical challenges faced in designing efficient VDR agonists to
treat calcium phosphate metabolism disorders. Primarily, eight
experimentally proven VDR agonists were docked into VDR
active site by using molecular docking program glide, and the
compounds were selected for additional study. Based on the
protein-ligand complexes common pharmacophore model has
been created for VDR agonists. Pharmacophore based virtual
screening retrieved nine compounds from different databases.
Based on glide score, glide energy and ADME/T properties five
lead molecules are identified as potent lead molecules for VDR
agonism. Further study using in vitro and in vivo approach will
delineate the therapeutic utility of this molecule in improving
bone mass and reducing renal abnormal function in patients
with Chronic Kidney Disease.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Nagamani et al, Bioinformation 8(15): 705-710 (2012)

The 2D structures of the experimentally proved VDR agonists

(a) Generated pharmacophore model for VDR along with its inter feature distance (b) Overlay of the most active
compound in the training set of VDR.

The 2D structures of the top five identified lead molecules

Binding mode analyses of the top five identified compounds with the target protein VDR

