Background
Simple sequence repeats (SSRs) are tandemly repeated DNA
motifs (1-6 bp long) which are present in both protein coding
and non-coding regions of DNA sequences, and show a high
level of length polymorphism due to mutations of one or more
repeats. SSRs are easy to use and analyze by virtue of their
multiallelic nature, reproducibility, high abundance and
extensive genome coverage [,
]. The traditional methods of
developing SSR markers are usually time consuming and laborintensive.
Generally these processes involve genomic library
construction, hybridization with the repeated units of
nucleotides and sequencing of the clones. The computational
approach for developing SSR markers from the genome
sequence provides a better platform than the conventional
approach. Several bioinformatic tools for the identification of
microsatellites in genomic sequences have been developed. The
most commonly used tools for SSR search are: SSRIT [],
TROLL [], MISA 
[], SSRFinder 
[], Modified Sputnik I and II
[,
], and SciRoKo 
[]. SciRoKo is a user-friendly software tool
for the identification of microsatellites in genomic sequences 
[].

Cotton (Gossypium spp.) is a major world agricultural crop, and
the annual planting area is about 3,300 million hectares 
[]. In
recent years, molecular marker technology has been widely
applied to such studies on cotton as genetic mapping 
[–],
genetic diversity analysis [], MAS 
[,
], and gene tagging
[]. Due to the facts that the cotton genome is relatively large,
with a 1C content of 2,250 Mb, and that intraspecific molecular
polymorphism in this species is low, there is a major
preoccupation for more highly polymorphic genetic markers for
marker-assisted breeding programs. To date, approximately
17,000 pairs of SSR primers have been developed from four
cotton species (G. arboretum L., G. barbadense L., G. hirsutum L.,
and G. raimondii Ulbrich) []. However, rare of them are able to
represent the large cotton genome adequately. In this study, the
frequency and distribution of SSRs in the G. raimondii genome
were characterized.

Methodology
Data source:
The genome sequence and annotation information of G.
raimondii were download from the CGP
(http://cgp.genomics.org.cn/page/species/mapview.jsp).

SSR scanning and analysis:
The genome was scanned for SSRs 1oci with program software
SciRoKo 3.4 (SSR Classification and Investigation by Robert
Kofler) []. The parameters were set for detection of mono, di,
tri, tetra, penta, and hexa -nucleotide (nt) motifs with a
minimum of 15, 7, 5, 3, 3 and 3 repeats, respectively (under the
mismatched and fixed penalty search mode). Initially, each SSR
was considered to be unique and was subsequently classified
according to theoretically possible combinations. The motif
association statistic requires the standardizations. During
standardization, the reverse complements of microsatellite
motifs were considered, and similar microsatellite motifs are
grouped together. For example, a poly-A repeat is equivalent to
a poly-T repeat on a complementary strand, and an AAG is
equivalent to AGA and GAA in different reading frames and to
CTT, TCT and TTC on a complementary strand. Thus, there are
two possible combinations for mono-nt repeats, four for di-nt
repeats, and ten for tri-nt repeats, 33 for tetra-nt repeats, 102 for
penta-nt repeats, and 350 for hexa-nt repeats. In this study, we
defined two genomic location categories as genic (5'-Utr, exon,
intron, and 3'-Utr) and intergenic regions. To locate the
distribution of SSRs in different genomic regions, the position of
SSRs were compared with the genome annotation by Perl
scripts. To describe the abundance of SSRs in different genomic
regions, we calculated the “relative abundance” (RA) by
dividing the number of SSRs by the mega base-pair (MB) of
sequences in our analyses.

Primer designing:
Primer pairs were designed from the obtained SSR sequences
by using Primer3. Perl scripts were used to operate Primer3
core code for batch designing primer. The major parameters for
primer design were as follows: primer length, for which we
selected 17-27 bp, with 20 bp being optimal, PCR product sizes
of 100-250 bp, an optimum annealing temperature of 57°C, and a
GC content of 30%-65%, with 50% being optimal. Then the SSRs
were searched for both forward and reverse primers.

Discussion
A total of 136,345 microsatellites were identified in the 775.1 Mb
(containing 4447 scaffolds) genomic DNA sequence of G.
raimondii using the SciRoko programs. With the help of core
primer3 and Perl scripts, 112,177 primer pairs were obtained
(Data was not shown). Among the SSRs we analyzed, 113,766
(83.4%) were perfect repeats, 22,579 (16.5%) were mismatched
repeats. The results showed that SSRs were abundant in the G.
raimondii genome with about one SSR every 5.69 kb 
 (see
supplementary material). The most abundant microsatellite
was the penta-nt repeats of which 41,567 (30.5% of the SSRs)
were identified, followed by the tetra-nt repeats (24,876, 18.2%)
and di-nt repeats (23,109, 16.9%). The numbers of mono-nt, trint
and hexa-nt repeats were 11,611 (8.5%), 20,199 (14.8%), and
14,983 (11.0%), respectively (). The SSR loci were
classified by repeat type and frequency of repeats per motif
 (see supplementary material). We found 457 types of
repeat motifs in these SSRs. Among the SSR groups
(standardization), the most abundant repeat motif type was
poly-A/T in mono-, ploy-AT/TA in di-, poly-AAT/TTA in tri-,
poly-AAAT/TTTA in tetra-, poly-AAAAT/TTTTA in penta-,
and poly-AAAAAT/ TTTTTA in hexa-nucleotides. For each
SSR type, the less frequency the SRR has with number of
repeats the more.

These SSRs put insight into the frequency distribution of
different types of nucleotide repeats in G. raimondii. More SSRs
were found in the intergenic regions (64.1%) than in the genic
regions (35.9%)  &amp; 
 (see supplementary
material). The different SSR repeat units showed obviously
differential or non-random distributions in the different
genomic locations. The microsatellite analysis showed that the
distribution of SSRs in exonic, intronic and intergenic regions of
the genome were non-random and strongly biased, probably
reflecting the functional significance of SSRs. In general, the
relative abundances of 3-UTR, 5-UTR, and intron region were
considerably higher than that of intergenic region 
 (see
supplementary material); the tri-nt repeats were the most
abundant SSR type in the genic region, whereas, penta-nt
repeats were the most abundant SSR type in the intergenic
region ().The relative abundances of the tri-nt SSRs in
the Coding Sequence (CDS) regions were 51.3 per Mb, which
significantly higher other SSR types. The enhanced frequency of
tri-nt SSRs in the coding regions might indicate the effects of
selection against possible frameshift mutations.

In an attempt to analyze the differential distribution of SSRs
more clearly, we characterized the distribution of the SSR types
in each repeat unit across the different genomic locations 

&amp;  (see supplementary material). The results showed
that the distribution of the different SSR types in the genome
was non-random. For instance, of the two possible types of
mono-nt SSRs, poly-A/T was the predominant form with 10,141
loci, about 89.6% of the total mono-nt loci. Of the ten possible of
tri-nt SSRs, the poly-AAT/TTA accounted for 54.8% of the total
tri-nt loci, followed by ploy-AAAT/TTTA accounted for 51.5%
of the total terta-nucleotide. In genome, the most frequently
occurring repeat motifs were poly-AT/TA, which accounted for
79.8% of the total di-nt SSRs  (see supplementary
material). In the genic region, the most frequently occurring trint
repeat motifs were poly-AAG/TTC, which accounted for
27.1% of the total tri-nt SSRs in CDS region  (see
supplementary material). Ignoring the mono-nucleotide
repeats, the di- and tri- nucleotide repeat motifs with the
highest frequencies were poly-AT/TA and -AAG/TTC in the
genic region, respectively, which were identical with the
previous reports [].

Currently a number of studies are being reported regarding the
development of EST-SSRs in cotton species using the
computational tools [,
]. Microsatellite markers are very
important for studing genetic mapping, genetic diversity
analysis, molecular marker-assisted breeding (MAS) 
[–]. In
the present study, 18,834 microsatellites were detected from the
total protein-coding genes, and the frequency of gene
containing SSRs was 46.0% in 40,976 genes of G. raimondii.
Although G. raimondii seeds contain no valuable fibers, the
epidermal seed trichomes grow thickly. As one of the
allotetraploid cotton donors, the D-subgenome has contributed
important quantitative trail loci (QTLs) and/or genes to fiber
development [] With the help of gene function annotation, the
putative functions of the genes could lead to find the important
functional domain markers (FDM) related to gene ontology
study such as stress response and fiber development, and
develop the important FDM related to genetic diversity analysis
and MAS for breeding in cotton species.

Conclusion
Cotton commonly known as fiber crop is a plant of great
commercial value. Up to now many works have been reported
regarding the application of molecular markers in this plant for
genetic mapping, gene discovery, genetic diversity analysis,
and MAS. As such, the cotton research community has made
efforts to develop many portable markers to overcome the
problem of low DNA polymorphism rates among various
cultivated cotton breeding programs
(http://www.cottonmarker.org/). SSRs are the most powerful
genetic markers for genetic linkage analysis, diversity study
and marker assisted selection. High-resolution mapping in
cotton has not been got because of limited DNA polymorphism
within a cotton species. To explore the genetic make-up of
cotton, inter-species variability, evolutionary relationship,
development and application of molecular markers are of
immense importance. The genome-based SSRs developed in the
present study will shed light into the discovery of the
information. This investigation is laying the groundwork for
developing large numbers of SSR markers in cotton. The
growing collection of portable markers in cotton provides a
cost-effective tool for genome mapping and gene discovery to
understand and improve the cotton species.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work was supported by a grant from the Specical Forehead
Investigation for 973 Program (Grant No. 2011CB111511), and
also by the Central Public-interest Scientific Institution Basal
Research Fund, China (Grant No. SJB1210). The authors are
grateful to Dr. Qin Li for providing the necessary facilities
about analyze the SSRs in genome.

Citation:Zou et al, Bioinformation 8(17): 801-806 (2012)

Frequency distribution of different repeat types
identified in the G. raimondii genome

Genome-wide distribution and relative abundance of
SSR types by their unit size. Each bar represents the relative
abundance of the SSR types in different genome locations.
Relative abundance = number of SSR type/region size in mega
bases (Mb)

