Background
Amyloid fibril forming proteins are found to be related to
amyloid illnesses. Recent experiments suggest that it is not the
whole protein; rather short fragments are responsible for
amyloidosis []. The major limitations of wet lab experimental
methods are the time frame involved, high cost and effort.
Therefore, a viable solution is through computational
approaches. There are web tools available online such as
AGGRESCAN [], AMYLPRED 
[], FOLDAMYLOID 
[] and so
on, but they have varied limitations in maintaining a balance
between true positive rates and false positive rates as evaluated
[–]. 
AmylPepPred thus provides an open access platform that
enables easy and comprehensive retrieval of fibril forming short
stretches that compensates the gap in existing amyloid fibril
prediction tools by maintaining equilibrium between sensitivity
and specificity. This prediction model is a practical
implementation of the computational architecture depicted in
figure 1 that purely follows a sequence-based design strategy.

Methodology
The training dataset (Amylpreddataset) has been compiled
using experimentally proved proteins related to amyloidosis
and proteins with no experimentally determined amyloidogenic
regions as described in [,
]. The length of wet lab proven
positive regions of proteins varies. In fact, the long positive
protein segments are broken up into smaller fragments
comprising of six amino acids to make the data uniform.
Among the 559 properties identified, we extracted a new and
complementary set of 40 physicochemical and biochemical
properties through Memetic Algorithm, an evolutionary
Support Vector Machine (SVM) feature selection approach,
besides their auto-correlation function of 5 best pre-selected
features in AAIndex database [] with accession nos.
VINM940104, ENGD860101, PRAM900101, KUHL950101,
JANJ790101 through SVM within a residue in forming the
feature vector to train the SVM model. The overall methodology
is illustrated in (). The programs are written in C#

Software input/output
Once all the related files are downloaded in the same directory,
double click the application named, Hexpepfinder. Choose
Finder from the menu in the Main window. The user can now
browse the input text file containing protein sequence in
FASTA format and an output text file. Click Run Finder. The
program separates the header and sequence and checks if the
input is valid or not. Wait for a pop-up window. To view the
output, choose Output file viewer from the menu. By selecting
appropriate radio buttons, user can view the fibril forming,
non-fibril forming hexmer sequences or both along with
positions.

Conclusion
The study of protein aggregation is crucial to develop rational
therapeutic stratagems against amyloid diseases. An
encouraging tactic to spot such deposits is through
computational prediction models. Nevertheless, these models
cannot substitute the wet lab experiments; they might assist in
recognizing the regions of concern for further molecular
research. AmylPepPred provides a user-friendly interface, a
convenient menu driven search option, allowing efficient
discrimination of fibril forming and non- fibril forming short
protein sequences.

The authors would like to thank Manipal University,
Karnataka, India for the open access publication charges.

Citation:Nair et al, Bioinformation 8(20): 994-995 (2012)

Flowchart illustrating the computational architecture
of AmylPepPred

