Background:
Cytochromes P450 (CYP) which are a superfamily of heme
containing enzymes play an important roles in detoxification
and metabolic activation of large number of xenbiotic chemicals
such as drugs, carcinogens and many endogenous compounds
like hormones and vitamins.. There are 57 CYP isoenzymes
found in humans which are well-known for their
monooxgenase reaction. However, one quarter of the CYP
family remains orphan, which means that their function,
expression studies and substrate information are not yet clearly
understood. Thirteen members of this superfamily are classified
as orphans by Guengerich [].

Human CYP4F22 was considered as one such orphan CYPs,
amino acid sequence of which has been identified recently. The
three-dimensional structure of this protein is not yet known.
Experimental studies of CYP4 family members, previously
reported to metabolize arachidonic acid (AA) 
[] like
endogenous compounds to its hydroxyl product. CYP family
members were found to share their substrates with one another.
CYP4F22 gene as a part of a cluster of cytochrome P450 genes
on chromosome 19 encodes an enzyme thought to play a role in
the 12(R)-lipoxygenase pathway. Mutation in this gene is the
cause of ichthyosis lamellar type 3. It was recently found that
CYP4F22 was specifically expressed in human breast cancer
tissues. For this reason, human CYP4F22 has been suggested to
be a potential drug target for cancer therapy. However, to date,
information regarding the structure and ligand binding site is
not available for CYP4F22 and hence structural information
might help us to understand the ligand interaction.

In this study, a 3D model of CYP4F22 was constructed using
comparative modeling method, followed by energy
minimization to refine the initial model. The quality of the
resulting 3D model of P450 4F22 was critically assessed through
geometric and energetic assessments. After that, arachidonic
acid (AA) was docked into the active site of the proposed 3D
structure of CYP4F22 and certain key residues responsible for
substrate specificity were identified. Further 2D QSAR study
was used to find out the pharmacological characteristics of the
ligand. The results obtained in this study will be useful for
further elucidation of the biological role and the structure-based
drug design of P450 4F22.

Methodology:
Sequence retrieval:
The protein sequence (531 amino acids) of human CYP4F22 was
obtained from the UniProtKB database (accession number:
Q6NT55).

Template identification and sequence alignment:
For template selection, BlastP [] search was used against
Protein DataBank (PDB). The templates having high similarity
were selected for the model building. The templates were
aligned and examined for conserved sequence with the target
by ClustalW [].

Comparative modeling of human CYP4F22
The alignment was used as the input and the homology model
of P450 2F22 was generated using Modeller 9v5 []. Loops were
modeled using ModLoop server []. The coordinates for heme
were obtained from 1TQN and positioned as in the template.

Energy minimization and structural quality assessment:
The resulting model was further refined by energy
minimization using the Amber9 package [] and subjected to
quality assessment. The Procheck [] and Verify 3D 
[] were
utilized for geometric evaluation. The Prosa [] was employed
to examine the energy of residue-residue interactions using a
distance-based pair potential approach. The energy was
transformed to a score called z-score where residues with
negative z-score indicate reasonable side-chain interactions. The
final model was then submitted to the protein modeling
database [] as PM0077605.

2D QSAR study:
The selected ligand arachidonic acid (AA) is a long-chain fatty
acid with a hydrophobic tail. The arachidonic acid was
downloaded from Pubchem in Structure Data Format (SDF).
Conversion of SDF to Protein Data Bank (PDB) format was
carried out using Swiss PDB viewer. The molecular structure of
ligand was optimized using the Polak-Ribiere algorithm until
the root mean square gradient was 0.01 kcal mol-1 using
Hyperchem V 8.09 []. The molecular descriptors were
calculated for the ligand using QSAR properties of Hyperchem.

Prediction of key residues in homology model of CYP4F22:
The homology model of CYP4F22 was submitted to automated
ConSurf web server [] for the identification of functional
regions of CYP4F22 by estimating the degree of conservation of
the amino-acid sites among their close sequence homologues.

Molecular docking of CYP4F22-ligand complex:
Both the modeled protein and ligand were optimized using
“dock prepare” of the USCF chimera []. The optimized ligand
molecule was docked into the refined CYP4F22 protein model
using Hex software []. The molecular graphical
representation was prepared using Pymol program [].

Results and Discussion:
The first step in homology modeling is to detect appropriate
template proteins whose structures are known that are expected
to be similar to the target protein. A BlastP search confirmed
that there are several mammalian CYPs structures which could
serve as potential templates for P450 4F22 modeling. The topranked
two templates are 1W0E [] and 1TQN 
[]. The
sequence conservation and the signature motifs of CYP4F22
were examined using multiple sequence alignment with
templates (). The essential signature motif FxGxxxCxG
is characteristic motif for the CYP superfamily which includes a
conserved cystine residue that ligates to the Fe of the heme. The
amino acid sequence identity between target and the templates
was above 40% which is high enough to construct a 3D model.
The initial 3D model of CYP4F22 was energy-minimized and
assessed for both geometric and energy aspects. The Procheck
evaluation for good stereochemistry of the refined model
resulted in 97.8% in the allowed regions and 2.1% in disallowed
regions. Verify 3D analysis resulted in a model with about 81%
of residues with a score over 0.2, indicating a good model. The
Prosa analysis showed that z-score in the CYP4F22 model was
negative in most residues, further indicating a reliable model.
The 3D structure model of P450 CYP4F22 exhibits a fold similar
to those of other P450s and contains the heme group
sandwiched between helices (). CYP4F22 model of this
study also reveals that a highly conserved threonine is located
in the middle of helix I which is similar to other reported
human CYP structures. This conserved residue has been
suggested to participate in the protein delivery and play an
important role in the dioxygen bond cleavage during the
catalytic cycle []. The CYP4F22 model was further tested
using ConSurf server for the prediction of active residues
() that are expected to be accessible, either at the
surface or in a pocket of the protein. The functional residues of
CYP4F22 model with high conservation scores were identified
 (see supplementary material). The energy minimized
model of arachidonic acid was also subjected to 2D QSAR study
using Hyperchem. Topological (surface area of 603.66 Å2) and
constitutional descriptors (LogP of 10.10, molecular weight of
303.46 amu, polarizability of 36.83 Å3 and refractivity of 62.82
Å3) were computed and found to be desirable pharmacological
characteristics for docking. To determine the key residues
responsible for ligand interaction, the homology model of
CYP4F22 was docked with arachidonic acid (). The
free energy of binding (ΔGbind kcal/mol) for the designed
ligand was found to be ­3.53 kcal/mol. The negative and low
value of ΔGbind indicates a strong favorable bond between
CYP4F22 protein and the AA ligand in most favorable
conformations. Several important residues were detected in
homology model of P450 2F22. The residue ARG 156 appears to
play an important role in substrate specificity. The
corresponding TRP 152 and THR 160 pairs were conserved and
they were directly in contact with ligands. In addition, the rest
of the ligand-interacting residues GLY 471, CYS 475, ILE 476and
GLN 478 were mostly located near the key residues ().

Conclusion:
The human P450 4F22 theoretical 3D model was constructed
using homology modeling and refined with energy
minimization and assessed for sterochemical and energetic
aspects. Docking approaches were employed to dock
arachidonic acid ligand into the active site of the proposed 3D
model in order to probe ligand binding modes. The docking
studies as well as the ConSurf analysis revealed the important
residues involved in the substrate specificity. The docking and
ConSurf analysis are in concurrence with each other reflecting
the importance of crucial residues. Interacting key residues
gave information on the substrate specificity of the CYP4F22
active site when they interact with arachidonic acid ligand of
hydrophobicity. Also these residues might act as ligandchanneling
and could help the reaction center of the protein.
The current results might be very helpful for the determination
of biological role to provide insights into arachidonic acid.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Kumar et al, Bioinformation 7(4): 207-210 (2011)

Multiple sequence alignment of target
(CYP4F22:Q6NT55) and two templates (1W0E and 1TQN)
represented using ClustalW Program. The alignment figure was
prepared using Espript 2.2. The red colour indicates the
residues conserved in all three sequences.

(a) Ribbon schematic representation of the homology
model of CYP4F22. The heme is shown in the center of the
figure in red stick. Various visible regions of secondary
structure elements are labeled in the figure, (b) Predicted active
sites of CYP4F22, (c) 2D structure of arachidonic acid and (d) a
close view of CYP4F22 with arachidonic acid. Key residues are
shown in red spheres and labeled. The substrate arachidonic
acid is shown as grey stick.

