Background
It is a common perception that only eukaryotes indulge in sex, whereas
prokaryotes rely on vertical inheritance to meet new environmental challenges.
In reality, prokaryotes are highly promiscuous, and the role of lateral gene
transfer (LGT) as a driving force in prokaryotic evolution has been grossly
underestimated []. 
The continuous ongoing process of evolution of bacteria is
predominantly associated with the occurrence of events such as point
mutations, genetic rearrangements, and horizontal gene transfer. A large
number of human, animal and plant pathogens have evolved the capacity to
produce unique set of virulence factors that are directly implicated in the
process of establishing infection and disease. Additionally, many bacteria
present in the environment express resistance traits against antibiotics. Both
virulence factors and resistance determinants are subject to intra strain genetic
and phenotypic variation. They are often encoded on unstable DNA regions.
Thus, they can be readily transferred to bacteria of the same species or even to
non-related prokaryotes. Archaea are widely distributed around the world but
there are few documented diseases of archaeal origin. Difficulties in isolation,
cultivation of archaea, and amenable genetic manipulation systems may
contribute to a relative lack of knowledge. Different opinions exist to explain
this possible anomaly and it has recently been agreed upon that pathogenic
archaea might exist but have been systematically overlooked 
[], whereas
others [] 
have suggested a different context in which archaea could be relevant
to disease indirectly if not directly as donors through LGT of virulencepromoting
genes to pathogenic bacteria. Attempt has been made in recent past
partly by two different research groups [,
], both of which compiled literature
data about archaea in possible association with human disease. Various
toxin/antitoxin systems have been found in Methanococcus jannaschii,
Archaeoglobus fulgidus, and haloarchaea. In addition, virulence genes for
lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis and the tadA gene (e.g., required by
Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans for nonspecific adherence) have been
identified in archaea [,
]. In fact, methanogens have recently been linked to
periodontal disease [], 
a polymicrobial infection that affects the gums and
supporting structures of the teeth and is characterized by periodontal pockets.
Archaea, like bacteria, often have their genes arranged in the form of operons
and hence are co-regulated and this arrangement would promote co-inheritance
by LGT. The extent to which archaea are ‘contaminated’ by bacterial genes
vary from species to species. LGT might account for some variation in
archaeal genome sizes e.g. Methanosarcina mazei has an expanded genome of
4.10 Mb, 30% of which is bacterial in origin 
[]. The comparison of complete
genome sequences has already revealed that archaea are more than a sum of
their (eukaryotic and bacterial) parts []. 
Archaeal genomes are believed to be a
mosaic of molecular features, which are encoded by two different groups of
genes: a lineage that codes for information processing which is eukaryotic in
nature and a lineage that codes for operational (housekeeping) functions with a
bacterial origin []. 
When the genome of Escherichia coli O157:H7 was
compared with that of K12, half a dozen O157:H7-specific genes could be
recognized as having been derived from archaea []. For instance, It has been
reported that a gene coding for a bifunctional catalase-peroxidase is likely a
transfer from archaea to a variety of pathogenic bacteria, including E. coli
O157:H7 []. 
Although not yet directly implicated in E. coli O157:H7 as a
virulence factor, this enzyme has been implicated as a virulence factor in
Mycobacterium tuberculosis [] and in 
Legionella pneumophila [].
Furthermore, this E. coli O157:H7 catalase-peroxidase has been associated
with enterohaemorrhagic hemolysin in a variety of shiga-like toxin-producing
(verotoxin-producing) E. coli []. 
This correlation of the presence of catalaseperoxidase
in many virulent but not in avirulent strains, suggests a direct role in
the virulence of enterohaemorrhagic E. coli. In short there is no virulence
factor known to date in archaea which directly implicates it as a pathogenic
microorganism. Keeping in view the above mentioned fact, we have analyzed
the available genome sequences of various pathogenic and nonpathogenic
bacteria to determine if there are any potential archaeal genes that are present
in pathogenic bacteria and absent in respective non-pathogenic bacteria. Thus,
we hypothesize that pathogen genomes contain a number of archaeal-like genes
of known or unknown functions that may contribute towards the pathogen's
overall virulence.

Methodology
In order to determine whether the acquisition of archaeal genes by lateral gene
transfer is an important feature in the evolutionary history of pathogenic
bacteria, we have developed a scheme of stepwise eliminations that identifies
archaeal like genes in various bacterial genomes. Specifically, we compared
BLASTP E-value/bit score for selected pathogenic bacterial
hypothetical/putative/uncharacterized proteins and proteins conferring drug
resistance against all subsets of GenBank as a preliminary screen for horizontal
transfer candidates. Proteins from pathogenic bacteria that were absent or
scored &lt;95 bit score from corresponding non pathogen bacteria and scored
&gt;100 bit score when compared with archaea were selected as possible
candidates for lateral gene transfer. In order to show that the traffic of LGT is
from Archaea to Bacteria, those cases were selected where at least two archaeal
genomes possess the suspected ORFs. In order to confirm horizontal transfer,
representative protein sequences from the two kingdoms selected after steps 1-
3 were aligned using CLUSTALX 1.83 and subjected to phylogenetic analyses.
Two methods were used for the estimation of phylogeny: Neighbor joining
package of PHYLIP and Bayesian estimation of phylogeny using the program
MrBayes. All potential candidates for LGT from archaea which showed noncongruent
phylogenies, i.e. grouping within the bacterial representatives with
bootstrapping support of greater than 90% were classified as lateral transfers.

Data mining &amp; Sequence alignment
Initially the bacterial hypothetical or putative protein sequences (see
) were retrieved from the GOLD database and were
used as queries to search for homologues against complete genome sequences
of 461 bacterial and 39 archaeal species (20 May 2007 data) from the National
Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) databases by BLASTP. In some
instances archaeal hypothetical protein sequences were used to identify
bacterial and archaeal homologues. All significant hits with &gt;100 bit score
were considered potential homologues, provided that archaeal and bacterial
proteins were among the top best hits in Blast and there was no significant
similarity to the respective non-pathogenic member and other members of
eubacterial domain or cousins from same domain in case of archaea. Multiple
sequence alignments of all the homologues were generated for sequence
comparison and preliminary neighbor joining (NJ) as described below. We
selected cases where pathogenic bacteria group more closely to archaea than
their bacterial neighbors. To eliminate the possibility of such grouping by
chance further screening was carried out where more than one archaeal types
were present.

Phylogenetic analysis
Sequence alignment was performed with the multiple sequence alignment
software CLUSTAL X ver. 1.83. These alignments were subjected to two
different phylogenetic approaches: neighbor joining and bayesian analysis. For
neighbor joining, distance matrices were computed through Protdist component
of Phylip software suite. To confirm neighbor joining results the alignments
were also subjected to Bayesian analysis using MrBayes. Trees from both
analyses were drawn using TreeDyn.

Results
Most investigations in the past, as reviewed above, have however, centered on
transfer of known virulence genes and genes involved in establishing infections
(antibiotic resistance, toxins, capsule, etc.) between close relatives who are
both pathogens. However, many different functions − proteases, metabolic
genes, oxygen protection genes, secretion systems, transporter genes, iron
acquisition systems, antibiotic resistance can, under the right circumstances,
contribute to enhance the virulence potential of pathogens. This is well
summed up by Doolittle []: 
“lateral transfers have effectively changed the
ecological and pathogenic character of bacterial species.” A prerequisite to
comprehending the pathogenecity mechanisms of an organism is the
identification and examination of all its virulence genes. A total of 9 events
() 
of gene acquisition from archaea by bacterial pathogens were
detected by the above algorithm. All 9 candidates have homologues in
pathogenic bacteria since they are either not present in corresponding nonpathogenic
counterparts or their bit score is below the cutoff value.

Clostridium tetani spsG
One unusual finding was the identification of a homologue of spore coat
polysaccharide biosynthesis protein, spsG, from Clostridium tetani in
Methanocaldococcus janaschii (). 
Clostridium tetani is a
neuropathogenic Gram positive, spore forming bacterium predominantly found
in the soil while Methanocaldococcus janaschii is found in diverse
environment such as flooded soils, human and animal gastrointestinal tracts,
termites etc. In deep wound infections Clostridium tetani occasionally causes
spastic paralysis in humans and animals commonly known as tetanus disease
and is caused by the secretion of a potent neurotoxin called tetanus. Spores are
produced by many species of bacilli and clostridia in response to severe
external stress. These highly resilient dormant spores are able to withstand
extremes of temperature, radiation, chemical assault, and even the vacuum of
outer space. Upon the return of favorable environmental conditions, spores can
readily convert to actively growing vegetative cells through a process known as
germination. These abilities enable spores not only to survive in extreme
conditions but, in some species, to cause significant disease. In contrast C.
acetobutylicum, a nonpathogenic solvent producer does not harbor the gene
spsG. Strong grouping of spsG with Methanocaldococcus jannaschii suggests
that it has been acquired through LGT and plays a significant role in the
establishment and maintenance of a pathogenic lifestyle of C. tetani.
Furthermore there is a strong similarity of the spsG neighboring genes Nacetylneuraminate
synthase and spore coat polysaccharide biosynthesis protein
(spsF) of C. tetani and M. jannaschii. Recently, spsG-like sequences from an
uncultured archaeon and CMP-N-acetylneuraminic acid synthetase of Hahella
chejuensis have been shown to be very similar to each other suggesting the
possibility of an LGT event. CMP-N-acetylneuraminic acid synthetase has also
been reported to be present in milk microbial communities 
[].

Listeria innocua protease
The human gut is pre-occupied by a complex community of trillions of
microorganisms representing all three known domains of life: Bacteria,
Archaea, and Eukarya. Listeria innocua is widespread in the environment and
in food. This species has to date never been described in association with
human disease and is generally considered to be nonpathogenic and
noninvasive sharing 84% of its genes with L. monocytogenes, an enteroinvasive
human pathogen that can cross the intestinal, blood-brain and placental barriers
[]. 
Only recently, Listeria innocua has been found to be associated with
severe bacteremia and the virulence factor in this particular case is protease.
Thus, proteases may play important roles in parasite life cycles and hostparasite
interactions. The presence of very similar proteases between
Methanocorpusculum labreanum and .Listeria innocua makes protease another
possible candidate of LGT (supplementary figures 2a and 2b available with
authors).

Clostridium tetani multi drug efflux pump
Previous study has shown that resistance-nodulation division, (RND) and small
multidrug resistance (SMR) pumps are not present in M. jannaschii, and these
systems have so far been identified only in eubacteria. To our knowledge this
report suggests for the first time that such efflux pumps exist in archaea
Methanosarcina burtonii, which group strongly with C. tetani (supplementary
figures 3a and 3b available with authors). This means that efflux pumps have
been encoded within bacterial genomes for hundreds of millions or even billion
of years ago through an LGT event from archaea to bacteria. This also puts to
rest the previous belief about efflux pumps arising in response to drug use. It is
possible that this multidrug transporter in C. tetani and other virulent strains is
used for the transport of antibiotics or toxic substances.

Flavobacterium virulence protein
The strong similarity of Flavobacterium hypothetical protein, which possesses
the features of virulence protein, with the one from Methanosarcina mazei
suggests an LGT event (supplementary figures 4a and 4b available with
authors). The Flavobacterium spp. has been studied in the past for multiple
factors. Flavobacterium spp. are gram-negative non-fermenting aerobic bacilli
that are mainly distributed in water and soil. They are not normally a
component of human microflora and are rarely isolated from clinical
specimens. It is a facultative human pathogen, capable of biodegrading nylon
oligomers [], 
and is found in contaminated soils []. As it happens with
several microorganisms, Flavobacterium spp. can undergo adaptation. Some
skin infections as well as serious, even lethal cases of bacteraemia have been
reported to have caused by Flavobacterium often in association with catheter
sepsis []. 
Furthermore due to the production of metallo-beta-1actamase,
Flavobacterium spp. is resistant to carbapenem antibiotics. In addition capsule
components have been shown to form part of the virulence mechanism of
certain pathogenic Flavobacterium spp. and also play an important role in the
adhesion and biofilm formation of certain bacterial species 
[].

Shewanella puterefaciens restriction modification system
Bacteria like S. enterica and E. coli, within the Enterobacteriaceae were
initially described to possess type I R−M systems. However, this list gets
bigger with the inclusion of functional type I systems in a wide variety of
bacterial taxa, such as Helicobacter pylori, Neisseria gonorrhoeae,
Lactococcus lactis and Mycoplasma pulmonis 
[]. During this study we have
seen the clustering of type I R-M system among bacteria such as Shewanella
puterefaciens and archaea such as Methanospirillium hungatei (supplementary
figures 5a and 5b available with authors). This clustering of Shewanella and
other bacteria with archaea becomes more relevant to the scope of current study
as recent study suggested a Shewanella species role as human pathogen 
[].
The occurrence of RM systems that are shared between the two different
domains suggests that R-M systems are readily acquired through LGT. Thus, it
contradicts the fact that R-M systems would pose restriction barriers in gene
flow. R-M systems are a remarkable characteristic of bacterial species and are
probably involved in the adaptation of these bacteria to different environmental
conditions as many R-M genes show repeats within their coding sequences,
indicating that their expression is under the control of phase variation
mechanisms.

Discussion
Lateral gene transfer is the major mechanism for acquisition of new virulence
genes in pathogens and archaea in this regard, by virtue of their diverse
evolutionary history and environments which may provide a pool of potential
virulence genes to bacterial pathogens. The new discipline of genomics
stimulated interest in these exotic microorganisms, as biologists started finding
their genes of interest in a new context. The genes described here, having been
retained in the genome through selective advantage, most likely play a key role
in the biology of pathogenic bacteria. The strong selection for some of the
functions that these 9 transferred genes encode may provide clues regarding
virulence of the bacterium. However, study demonstrates the need for a
systematic, comprehensive approach to the study of LGT based on first
principles, i.e. rigorous inference and statistically based comparison of
molecular phylogenetic trees. In addition with the availability of more archaeal
genomes as well as non pathogenic bacteria, a tree-based approach will become
both more challenging and more rewarding. The confirmation of archaea
having clear association with disease is rather a difficult proposition as
suggested by Gophna et al. 
[] mainly due to the lack of understanding of
their interaction with host or animal model systems in which to evaluate
virulence. However, a simple approach like ours can indirectly implicate them
as the predominant engine of variation in prokaryotes and the catalyst for the
emergence of new bacterial pathogens. Further confirmation to our findings
based on our hypothesis will come from experimental data where the role of
such potential virulence factors can be validated and hence significance of LGT
established.

Conclusion
A few of the genes detected during this study have yet to be directly or
indirectly linked to virulence. However it appears that there is diverse range of
genes acquired by LGT from archaea e.g. metabolic functions, enzymes like
proteases, antibiotic resistance genes, restriction modification system and
hypothetical proteins whose role has yet to be elucidated.

Competing Interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Authors' Contributions
All authors have contributed equally to this research.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We thank the Higher Education Commission, Life sciences core group of
Pakistan, COMSATS Institute of Information Technology and George Mason
University for making collaborative interaction possible between the authors.

Citation:Bokhari et al, Bioinformation 6(8): 293-296 (2011)

A phylogenetic tree of Clostridium tetani, spore coat polysaccharide
biosynthesis protein spsG: a simple topology where the bacterial protein
sequence groups strongly with archaeal sequence rather with other clostridium
members or bacterial cousins. The tree was constructed using MrBayes.

