Background
Preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) is an established
procedure of embryo genetic analysis. It allows couples
carrying genetic diseases to have an unaffected child, without
facing an invasive prenatal diagnosis and termination of
pregnancy. It consists in realizing genetic analyses on
embryonic cells and transferring the embryos identified
unaffected into the uterus. Advancements in molecular
biological and in vitro fertilization (IVF) techniques have
enabled the perfecting of PGD []. PGD is an accepted and
realistic alternative to traditional prenatal diagnosis in families
with inherited disorders in many countries. In the affected
families, the risk of having a child with a severe disease can be
as high as 50%, and many carriers of inherited chromosome
abnormalities suffer from recurrent miscarriages and
subfertility []. Already in 1967, Edwards and Gardner
succeeded in sexing rabbit embryos at the blastocyst stage, and
predicted the use of similar technology to avoid genetic disease
in humans []. Research with the goal to perform genetic testing
of the Preimplantation embryo was initiated in the UK in the
mid-1980s. The first successful use of PGD was reported in 1990
when an X-linked disorder was avoided by sex determination
and selection of female embryos for transfer to the mother.
Handyside et al [] reported the first established pregnancies
using this procedure, in two couples known to be at risk of
transmitting adrenoleukodystrophy and X linked mental
retardation. Two female embryos were transferred after IVF,
biopsy of a single cell at the six to eight cells stage, and sexing
by DNA amplification of a Y chromosome-specific repeated
sequence. Both women were confirmed as carrying normal
female twins. In France, the bioethical laws (1994) allowed PGD
practice in 1994, and the decrees have been published in 1998.
The first birth was then obtained in 2000, for a couple with the
woman carrying ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency which is
an X-linked dominant metabolic disorder with partial
penetration in heterozygous females [].

Two decades after the first clinical application, PGD is still a
challenge due to the small amount of DNA available for
analysis as well as time constraints. To allow transfer of
unaffected embryos, PGD requires IVF, biopsy of the early
human embryo and subsequent genetic analysis of single cells
for the specific disorder. By using PGD the couple can start a
pregnancy assured that the disease has not been transmitted to
the child, and the risk of having to terminate the pregnancy to
be avoid. However, due to technical complexity and high cost
(~SR 21,000), PGD is at present available in a rather limited
number of centres worldwide [].

Selected Procedures:
Biopsy:
There are different PGD approaches according to when the
biopsy is performed. The earliest, with regard to embryo
development, is sequential or simultaneous biopsy of the first
and second polar body. Polar body biopsy can be the first
and/or second polar bodies, which are removed after their
extrusion from the oocyte and are studied by genetic analysis
which is possible to study specific maternal contribution for the
embryo and identify chromosomal translocations or genetic
mutations from maternal origin. Polar body biopsies can be
used as an alternative for preimplantation diagnosis of common
aneuploidies in IVF patients with advanced age, to detect and
avoid fertilization and transfer of oocytes with common
aneuploidies []. Embryos are obtained by in vitro fertilization
with intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI). Indeed, ICSI is
recommended for all PGD cases to reduce the risk of paternal
contamination by sperm attached to the zona pellucida. Embryo
biopsy was performed on 6-10 cell stage embryos, 3 days at the
eight cells stage, after insemination, in Ca2+/Mg 2+-free medium
under oil (SAGE BioPharma) with the use of a double-needle
approach, even if some alternatives mentioned later can be
proposed. The zona pellucida is opened by one of the three
methods reported for this procedure: mechanical, chemical, or
laser. The presence of a clearly visible nucleus guides the
selection of the blastomere to be biopsied. One or two
blastomeres are sampled and the genetic analysis is performed
on the same day. Only unaffected embryos are transferred into
the uterus. Ovarian reserve has to be optimal because it is
particularly important to obtain an adequate number of
embryos. Indeed, there will be a selection among them and
PGD implantation rate is not as high as the rate observed in
classical IVF with ICSI [].

Embryo Transfer and Amniocentesis:
Embryos with normal or balanced FISH signals can be selected
and transferred into the uterus of the patient on the 4th or 5th
day after oocyte retrieval. Clinical pregnancy will be
ascertained by confirming fetal heart beat using
ultrasonography at 6 or 7 weeks of gestation. Amniocentesis
technique can be used to confirm the results of PGD in clinical
pregnancies. Cytogenetic, FISH and molecular analyses can be
performed in cases of miscarriage when abortus samples were
available [].

Chromosomal Analysis:
PGD has been used for the identification of chromosome
abnormalities in couples who are at risk for either aneuploidy
that is based on maternal age or an unbalanced parental
karyotype chromosome rearrangement (such as translocations
and inversions). PGD for chromosomal abnormalities or
rearrangements provides an alternative to prenatal diagnosis
and termination of affected foetuses and theoretic enhancement
of implantation and pregnancy rates for the couples 
[].

FISH:
Although fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) probes can be
designed to identify normal or balanced embryos from polar
bodies or blastomeres of cleaving embryos, there are significant
limitations to this technique. The process requires controlled
ovarian stimulation and IVF and may result in too few oocytes
recruited, particularly in women with advanced maternal age,
which limits the number of embryos to analyse. In the analysis
of translocations, unique FISH probes that flank the breakpoints
of each translocation or that require the use of subtelomeric
probes (specific to the chromosome ends of the translocated
segments) for each affected individual must be designed and
validated to detect normal and balanced products in embryonic
tissue []. The application of (FISH to a single embryo cell
(blastomere) presents special challenges both in practicalities
and in interpretation of the signal pattern. The biopsied cell
needs to be spread within a pre-defined area on the slide in
order to facilitate its localization following FISH; extreme care
needs to be taken in ensuring that the cell is lysed, that the
cytoplasm has been dispersed, and that the nucleus is visible
and intact; and, as the diagnosis depends on the results from
this single cell, stringent scoring and interpretation guidelines
should be applied. However, in experienced hands, FISH is a
robust technique for PGD in clinical practice. The principle of
PGD by FISH is that target-specific DNA probes labelled with
different fluorochromes or haptens can be used to detect the
copy number of specific loci, and thereby to detect chromosome
imbalance associated with meiotic segregation of chromosome
rearrangements which includes the Robertsonian translocations,
reciprocal translocations, inversions, and complex
rearrangements. FISH can also be used to select female embryos
in families with X-linked disease, for which there is no
mutation-specific test. More controversially, FISH has also been
used to screen for sporadic chromosome aneuploidy in order to
try and improve the efficiency of assisted reproduction;
however, the predictive value of this test using FSIH is likely to
be unacceptably low in most people's hands and it is not
recommended for routine clinical use [].

For the molecular diagnosis, future improvements include the
use of quantitative PCR, DNA fingerprinting and microarray
technology. DNA microarrays manufactured to date are not
able to analyse limited amount of genetic material in a single
cell. Microarrays containing oligonucleotide mutation probes
are emerging as useful platforms for the diagnosis of genetic
disease. Further automation of part of this technique will enable
a greater number of diseases to be accurately diagnosed at the
single cell level [].

PCR Analysis:
PCR is used to amplify sufficient DNA from cells obtained from
an oocyte or embryo to diagnose monogenic diseases 
[]. Polar
body or a blastomere is placed in a solution that lyses the cell
and releases the DNA and the PCR reaction mix is then added
to begin the PCR. Because of its high sensitivity, contamination
of the study sample with extraneous DNA is a danger and has
led to the adoption of rigorous laboratory procedures and
standards, such as the use of intracytoplasmic sperm injection
[]. Moreover, amplification of only one, rather than both, of
the genes present in a cell can result in misdiagnosis of disease
and the transfer and implantation of affected embryos 
[]. To
overcome this potential difficulty, dubbed allele-drop out,
various techniques have evolved for the analysis of PCR
fragments; fluorescent PCR and fragment analysis on
automated sequencers were introduced first and, later,
multiplex PCR was developed. Since then, the introduction of
automated sequencing, minisequencing, and real-time PCR has
further refined the diagnostic capabilities 
[].

PGD Procedure:
Before PGD was initiated, it was important that the couple
received genetic counselling to ensure that they were informed
regarding the nature of the genetic disorder, the pattern of
inheritance and the risk for their offspring. The genetic defect
has to be identified and DNA must be available from both
parents, and sometimes other members of the family, in order
to establish a reliable test. The counseling included information
about alternative reproductive options such as traditional
prenatal diagnosis. If PGD was a realistic alternative from
genetic point of view, the possible success of an IVF treatment
was evaluated. Briefly, this includes estimation of the ovarian
reserve and the probability for conception based on factors such
as female age, physical examination, ovarian transsonographic
examination, hormonal profile and semen quality 
[].

Methodology
This is a retrospective review of couples who had undergone
IVF at Habib Medical Centre, Riyadh between March 2011
through March 2012, and specifically for the purpose of using
PGD to identify chromosomally normal/balanced embryos for
transfer and to test the sex chromosomes for sex selection. The
indication for PGD was a history of recurrent pregnancy loss,
history of translocation in the family, recurrent failure of IVF
cycles and advance maternal age. All patients in the PGD
program were received advice appropriate to their
circumstances. Indications for PGD and prenatal diagnosis are
often rather similar, but the efficiency of the methods as well as
the consequences of the tests and treatment may be different.
We have provided the necessary information to the patients to
understand the risks, discomfort, costs, benefits and various
alternatives to the PGD. All couples completed the informed
consent process as approved by the Institutional Review Board.
All the patients underwent ICSI and PGD procedure was
according to the biopsy method mentioned above []. The
characteristics of the PGD patients are summarized in 

(see supplementary material).

Statistical analysis:
Statistical analysis was performed using SAS software (SAS
Institute, Cary, NC). A chi-square test was used to compare
frequency distributions among collapsed categorical groups of
score ranges. Nonparametric analysis was conducted to make
comparisons in the overall distributions. Bonferroni correction
was used to calculate a significant P value based on the number
of comparisons that were made. A P value of &lt;0.05 was
considered statistically significant.

Results
In the present study 137 patients were enrolled for the PGD
analysis. PGD procedure was followed in the invitro laboratory
and on day 3 a total of 802 embryos were biopsied and among
them 193 (24%) were transferred and 609 (76%) were not
transferred because of the chromosomal abnormalities (n=290)
and undesired sex of the embryos (n=309). The average age of
women in the study was 34.83±4.99. Respondents represented a
cross-section of Saudi families, with a wide range of age,
education and background. The normal embryos (n=512) were
in the age range of 34.30±4.43, whereas abnormal embryos
(n=290) were in the age group of 34.65±4.48. When we perform
t-test for both age group normal and abnormal embryos we did
not find any significance value (p=0.82). In this study the couple
had visited the clinic for the sex selection, recurrent fetal loss,
recurrent IVF failure and advanced maternal age. 57.7% of
patients came for sex selection, 24% of the women were having
the history of recurrent fetal loss and 18.3% of the women were
having recurrent IVF failure. The frequencies of abnormalities
of sex selection, recurrent fetal loss and recurrent IVF failure
groups are 68.3%, 57.5% and 12% respectively. The abnormal
embryos constituted 36.2% (290), the abnormal sex
chromosomes were 12.2% trisomies and triploidies were 3.2%
(n=25) and 3.5% (n=25).There is only one Tetraploidy were
present i.e. 0.2% (n=01). Chromosomal analysis was tabulated
in the table 2. The abnormal chromosomes presented in this
study are categorized as abnormal sex chromosomes (structural
abnormalities, numerical abnormalities), trisomies and
tetrasomies. The demographic details of the overall
chromosomes are displayed in the  (see supplementary
material).

Discussion
In the present study the most frequent indication for PGD was
the sex-selection (57.7%), 24.3% was recurrent fetal loss &amp; 13%
were recurrent IVF failure. In all IVF cycles, the microscopic
evaluation of the embryo is carried out at varied stages to
identify those with the best overall appearance and
developmental characteristics to be chosen for embryo transfer.
In some IVF cycles PGD is performed to identify the embryos
with abnormalities in the number and structure of chromosome
present. In our study 36.2% of the human embryos were found
to have abnormal chromosomes. 12.2 % of them were abnormal
sex chromosomes and 3.2% were trisomies. This is compatible
to the study done by Plachot et al [] who find 4.8% of
trisomies in abortions in spontaneous pregnancies and 6% in
IVF pregnancies []. Chromosomal abnormalities such as
aneuploidies are thought to be responsible for implantation
failure, miscarriage and birth defects. There was only one
Tetraploidy in our study and this was also comparable to
Plachot et al study in 1988. Mosaicism XO is the most frequent
abnormality in the sex chromosome and this was also
comparable to the study done by Boue [] and Shields 
[].
The most common indication for PGD in general is advanced
maternal age which increases the rates of chromosomally
abnormal eggs which after fertilization would become
chromosomally abnormal embryos. However, in our study the
most common reason for PGD was sex selection (79%). The
controversy then arises as to whether PGD testing of the early
embryos before transfer will increase the chances of a successful
outcome or not []. PGD can clearly benefit the couple if both
are carriers of a recessive disease (such as cystic fibrosis), if
child (conceived naturally) would have a 25% chance of having
this terrible disease. By having IVF /PGD, they can have
“normal” embryos transferred so that (if the IVF is successful)
their child should not have cystic fibrosis. However, if the
embryos are damaged significantly from the testing procedure,
then the risk of losing more than gaining from the test results.
For example, couple (the husband or the wife) who has a
balanced chromosomal translocation they are normal until they
try to have a child []. When their chromosomes join with those
of their partner in the fertilized egg they make a high
percentage of chromosomally abnormal embryos. These
embryos are at very high risk for miscarriage or could result in
the birth of a child with birth defects. This is another situation
where PGD can help by having IVF/PGD, they can have
chromosomally normal embryos transferred, greatly reducing
their risk for miscarriage and birth defects []. In our study the
frequency of chromosomal abnormality in this group was 57.5
%. PGD is a technique used mainly in two broad indication
groups. The first group consists of individuals at high-risk of
having a child with a genetic disease, with the carriers of a
monogenic disease or of chromosomal structural abnormalities
such as translocations, infertility, recurrent miscarriages. The
second group is those being treated with IVF, who might have a
low genetic risk but whose embryos are screened for
chromosome aneuploidies to enhance their chance of an
ongoing pregnancy. PGD can increase the choices available to
families at risk of having children with genetic abnormalities
[].

PGD may improve the chance of a viable pregnancy for couples
suffering from recurrent miscarriages as a result of
chromosomal abnormalities. One of the advantages of PGD in
IVF programs is to screen for aneuploidies and transfer only
embryos with a genetically normal complement and also avoid
the possible adverse consequences of embryo manipulation in
Prenatal Diagnosis (Amniocentesis and Chronic Villi Sampling)
[]. 
However, major problems with the use of PGD in IVF
programs are that the number of embryos available for
cryopreservation after embryo transfer is likely to be less, and
biopsied embryos may have a lower potential for survival in
cryopreservation and thawing processes. The current evidence
was that routine use of PGD to improve IVF outcome is
inconclusive. PGD can be used for the selection of embryos with
similar HLA types to that of an existing child suffering from a
certain hematopoietic disorders such as Fanconi anemia,
leukemia and thalassemia requiring donation of cells from a
“savior sibling”. Cells from the umbilical cord of the donor
child may then be grafted to the affected child. This technique
has also been successfully applied to a group of
immunodeficiency syndromes [].

In this study normal Chromosomes are 63.8% and among them
60.9% of the embryos were XX and 39.1% XY. The abnormal sex
chromosomes present in the study were 12.2%. Only 3.2%
trisomies and 3.5% triploidies and 0.2% tetrasploidies were
observed. The reason for testing sex chromosomes can be the
important role of X chromosome in transferring certain diseases
For example: Duchenne muscular dystrophy which affects only
the boys and mother passes the hemophilia disease to their sons
through X chromosome []. The purpose of PGD for sex
selection is the potential for inherent gender discrimination,
inappropriate control over nonessential characteristics of
children, unnecessary medical burdens and costs for parents,
inappropriate and potentially unfair use of limited medical
resources. Sex selection can be used based on the prevention of
transmittable genetic diseases is strong enough to clearly avoid
or override concerns regarding gender equality. For the above
reasons, in Saudi Arabia sex selection just for the sake of
choosing certain gender is provided only in private hospitals.

PGD for certain sex linked diseases is provided in some
governmental hospitals (for example- King Faisal specialist
hospitals) []. PGD is permissible in Islam provided the
sperms and oocytes are from the husband and wife. Muslim
jurists have agreed that PGD is a technique that is permissible
in Islam because IVF does not conflict with God's desire and
might []. Furthermore, this technique is not considered a
modification of God's creation, because it is a kind of treatment.
It has been argued that Muslims might reject PND and
termination of pregnancy because of religious convictions 
[,
]. 
PGD may be preferable to PD for Muslim parents, because
it is done when embryos are only at the eight-cell stage and
‘breathing the soul’ has not occurred at this stage 
[].
Alsulaiman A [] was the first group to study the attitude of
patients towards PGD in the Saudi Arabia. This study reported
attitudes towards PD and PGD of Saudi couples offered genetic
counseling following the birth of a child with a single gene or
chromosomal condition. Eight of the 30 couples (27%) selected
for the PGD, four (13%) of them selected for the PD and three
(10%) were either technology. The remaining couples were not
interested in either test or were unsure. The main concerns of
those who would accept neither technology were related to
personal religious views. Specific concerns about PGD related
to the IVF procedure, the risk of multiple pregnancies, the
chance of mistakes and the chance of not getting pregnant. A
high proportion of couples (six out of seven ~86%) who had a
child with thalassaemia expressed interest in PGD and all
would be prepared to use technology to avoid having an
affected child [].

Supplementary material
Data 1
Appreciation is expressed to all volunteers who have
participated in this study. We are thankful to Al-Habib fertility
clinic, Riyadh.

Citation:Abotalib, Bioinformation 9(8): 388-393 (2013)

