Background
Ebola virus is a dreadful, horrible term for those who exposure
to this deadly agent or at least the possibly risk of pandemic
distribution might make them frighten of this catastrophic
disaster. The current outbreak of Ebola virus in West Africa
with more than 23000 cases and 9000 deaths possess a severe
situation of human-being threat [].

The Ebola Virus (EBOV) belongs to Filoviridae family with
Marburg virus. So far, 4 species of the virus including: Zaire,
Sudan, Ivory Coast and Reston EBOV have been identified,
with the highest human lethality of Zaire species []. The EBOV
glycoproteins are considered to play major role in pathogenesis.
The fourth gene from the 3׳ end of the Ebola virus genome
encodes two glycoproteins and the envelope glycoprotein (GP),
which is held responsibility of receptor binding and fusion of
the virus with host cells []. Currently GP protein is a potential
drug target, because inhibition of GP, prevents virus entrance
to the cell. The non-structural secretory glycoprotein (sGP),
which is secreted from infected cells [,
] and the matrix
protein, usually encoded by the most enveloped RNA virus
genomes, has a key role in efficient assembly and virus particles
budding. The matrix protein is another target for anti-Ebola
drugs. Targeting this protein results prevention of virus
assembly and budding. This proteins interact with membrane
proteins []. Structural information on viral matrix proteins
shows four different matrix protein structures including VP40
from Ebola virus, M from Vesicular stomatitis virus, a fragment
of M1 from influenza virus and a number of retroviral matrix
proteins []. The Ebola virus matrix protein VP40 is an
elongated, two-domain monomeric assembly, composed of two
structurally related b-sandwich domains connected by a
flexible linker. In fact, the unique fold of both domains suggests
that the two domains probably arose from a common ancestor
by gene duplication []. The ring-structures are either octamers
or hexamer. In both cases, the N-terminal domain of VP40
makes the oligomerisation domain, which forms an antiparallel
dimer and is the building block for oligomerisation 
[].
So the N-terminal domain of VP40 is another potential drug
target foe anti-Ebola therapy. The C-terminal domains are
flexibly attached to the rings and mediate membrane
association in vitro and in vivo. The octamer was found to bind
single stranded RNA at the dimer–dimer interface having the
sequence 50-UGA-30. RNA binding creates a new dimer–dimer
interface and its binding stabilizes the protein– protein
interaction generating the octamers []. Preventing octamerRNA
interaction can also inhibit Ebola virus. Based on the
crystal structure of the octamer, the complete N-terminal
segment from residues 1 to 68 has to unfold in order to create
the new ssRNA-binding interface. This interface is highly
potential area for drug binding. Interestingly, the SDS resistant
octamer is present in Ebola VLPs and in virus particles 
[]. A
role for the ring structures in assembly and budding is also
evident from the fact that only oligomeric VP40 interacted with
WW3 from human Nedd4 in vitro via its N-terminal PPXY
motif [], an interaction which is important in vivo. A number
of studies also showed the importance of the PTAP motif
present at the N-terminus for budding. This motif binds to the
UEV domain of Tsg101 independent of its oligomeric state.
Thus, monomeric VP40 recruits Tsg101 to the site of budding
[,
], which in turn might recruit the complete Vps
machinery for efficient budding. The structural studies of Ebola
virus VP40 have now firmly established three conformations of
Ebola virus VP40, although their role in assembly and budding
or additional functions during the life cycle of Ebola virus is far
from clear. It is, however, an interesting example of evolution
that packs different functional aspects into one relatively small
protein probably due to the limiting size of the viral genome
[]. 
In the present study we tried to target a key protein of
Ebola virus which has the vital role in both virus assembly and
budding processes. Prevention of CP40 assembly prevents
octamer structure formation and frustrates a critical stage in the
virus life cycle. Unoligomerized VP40 proteins are unable to
play the role of octamer matrix protein and as the results virus
assembly process will be misadjust. In this study we tried to
simulate a single VP40 structure in the biological condition,
then by high throughput virtual screening we tried to find a
pharmacophore model which prevents oligomerization of VP40
structures.

Methodology
Protein and ligands structure:
Crystal structure of VP 40 protein of Ebola virus obtained from
protein data bank (www.rcsb.org/) with pdb code: 4LDB. The
provided model is in tetrameric form with the quality of X-ray
diffraction and resolution of 1.89 Å. The monomeric structure
extracted and the further study were performed in one chain.
To simulate the biological condition of a single VP 40 protein,
we solved the structure in a water box with 10 A border. The
system was then neutralized with Na+ and/or Cl- by using
GROMACS 4.5.4 software. Moreover zinc database 
[] was
used as the ligand database for virtual screening. 120.000
ligands in reference pH and were obtained used as virtual
screening library.

Virtual screening:
PyRX software [] was used as the virtual screening software.
It includes AutoDock [] and AutoDock vina 
[] with the
Lamarckian genetic algorithm as scoring function. In this
research we used AutoDock Vina for molecular docking
simulation. Before initiation of docking operation charge
assigned to protein and ligand structures by AutoDock Vina. A
docking radius with coordinate of X: -22.30 Y: -62.57and Z: 8.61
was used to cover interacting area of monomers.

Pharmacokinetic analysis:
FAFDrugs3 [] and admetSAR web servers were used to
analyze the absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion
properties of top 10 Virtual screening hits. ADME properties of
top successive hits were checked in optimal descriptors
(hydrogen bonds, charge) in pH=7.4. Moreover the oral toxicity
properties were analyzed by PROTOX web server []. Also
with this server the probable accessorial human protein targets
were checked for every successive hits.

Results &amp; Discussion
To theoretically prevent interaction between VP40 monomers, it
is essential to make a steric condense by finding a high affinity
ligand. For gaining this purpose, we set the docking radius in
the interaction area. The structure of VP40 provided in protein
data bank (4LDB) is in tetramer form in a manner that each
monomer engages in interaction with 3 other monomers. The
monomers are tightly in interaction with hydrogen bonds,
electrostatic and steric interactions. Also in this structure inter
molecular interactions are mainly created by beta sheets.
Moreover in this structure, the interacting area has the volume
of 22 Â, but in virtual screening process we used a radius of 26
Â to ensure that the entire intermolecular interaction era
between single monomers are assumed as the target for ligand
binding. Among 120000 ligands, top 10 virtual screening
successive hits were selected for further chemo informatics and
pharmacokinetic analysis.  (see supplementary
material) describes the binding affinity of top 10 hits. Top 10
hits could reach the binding affinity of -8.2 to -11.3 kcal/mol.
Based on binding affinity, the top successive hit (-11.3) is the
first drug candidate but further pharmacokinetic analysis were
performed on top 10 hits to check a wide range of
pharmacophore properties of potential inhibitors. Also the
structure of top 10 chemical inhibitors are shown in .
As depicted in this figure, all of the hits have aromatic rings
mostly containing carbon atoms. This implies that hydrophobic
interactions play a key role in ligand binding. Moreover
existence of hydrogen bonds between VP40 and inhibitor
makes the ligand more stable into its binding position. The
coordinate of hydrogen donor and acceptors in ligand structure
makes a specific binding pattern for it. In the step, we checked
oral bioavailability properties of ligands by FAFDrugs3
webserver. Interestingly the FAFDrugs3 results indicated that
all of the top 10 hits has accepted statues with good oral
bioavailability rank. So we assumed that the entire 10 ligands
can be used for complementary pharmacokinetic study. The
results of FAFDrugs3 with more details is illustrated in 
(see supplementary material). Although all of top 10 chemicals
could reach accepted statues in FAFDrugs3, but based on the
provided dada in the table, there are only 4 highly specific
chemical inhibitors of VP42 assembly. It is probable that this
specify (binding affinities: -11.3, -11.1, -10.9 kcal/mol) is due to
engaging more pharmacophore properties in interaction with
VP40. So we performed the supplementary pharmacokinetic
tests on top 4 hits which showed more specific binding pattern.
The toxicity of chemicals were then checked by PROTOX
webserver and as described in  (see supplementary
material), the first successive hit has the LC50 of 5000mg/kg
with the toxicity class of 5 (1 high toxic and 6 nontoxic). The
predicted LC50 indicates that it has low toxicity level. Also the
distribution of molecular weight of this ligand is under normal
distribution curve. The results of preliminary in silico analysis
indicated that this ligand has high potential for being used as a
drug candidate.

The second hit reached the LD50 equal to 3322mg/kg in
PROTOX webserver, while its toxicity level is 5. This chemical
is also predicted to be less toxic. This ligand also has fine
potential to be considered as a drug but it is more toxic that
first successive hit. The third chemical with the binding affinity
equal to -10.9 gained the rank of 4 in toxicity level with the
LD50 of 1670mg/kg. It means that because of high toxicity
value this ligands need to be modified before consideration as
the basic structure of a potential inhibitor of VP40 assembly.
The forth theoretical inhibitor also reached class 4 of toxicity
level with the LD50 of 1690mg/kg. This ligand is also has
accepted toxicity level but it needs modification before
consideration as a potential inhibitor.

To reach more details about toxicity, admetSAR webserver also
has been used. As described in  (see supplementary
material), none of the ligands indicated the carcinogenic
properties. Other characteristics related to toxicity is described
in the table. The results of  (see supplementary
material) in support of  (see supplementary material)
indicates that top found hits generally has high potential to be
used as the base structure for structure based drug design but
also there are some undesirable characteristics in the
pharmocophore model of ligands. It seems that further in vitro
and in vivo studies following chemical modifications are
required to achieve a final anti Ebola drug which targets VP40
assembly.

Conclusion
The presented study introduced 4 drug like chemicals which
could specifically bind to VP40 and by making steric condense
prevents octamer and hexamer formation and frustrates the
virus life cycle. The presented chemicals showed considerable
binding affinity and the results of pharmacokinetic studies also
confirmed the potential of structures to be considered as a base
structure for anti-Ebola treatment.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Abazari et al, Bioinformation 11(5): 243-247 (2015)

the ligand map of top 10 successive hits. A: the top chemical inhibitor, binding affinity: -11.3. B: second successive hit,
binding affinity: -11.1. C: third successive hit, binding affinity: -10.9. D: fourth successive hit, binding affinity: -10.1. E: fifth
successive hit, binding affinity: -9.8. F: sixth successive hit, binding affinity: -9.8. G: seventh successive hit, binding affinity: -9.4. H:
eighth successive hit, binding affinity: -9.2. I: ninth successive hit, binding affinity: -8.7. J: tenth successive hit, binding affinity: -8.2.

