Background
In the developing embryo, a group of proteins involved in 
hedgehog pathway send signals that help cells to grow in the 
right place and in the right way. The hedgehog pathway can 
also control the growth of blood vessels and nerves. In adults, 
hedgehog pathway proteins are not usually active, however in 
cases documented; changes in a gene switch them on. 
Hedgehog pathway blockers are designed to switch off the 
proteins and impede the tumor growth. ‘Hedgehog’ proteins 
(Hh) are secreted signaling proteins that were first discovered 
in Drosophila, along with many components of their signal 
transduction machinery []. They are highly hydrophobic 
proteins, which, after secretion, can diffuse and establish 
gradients in tissues, which have a paramount role in the proper 
development of the embryo [].

The first connection between aberrant Hh signalling and cancer 
was the discovery that the rare condition Gorlin syndrome is 
caused by a mutation in PTCH1 [,
]. Gorlin patients develop 
numerous basal cell carcinomas (BCCs) during their lifetimes 
and are predisposed to other kinds of cancer as well, especially 
medulloblastoma, a tumor of cerebellar granule neuron 
progenitor cells, and rhabdomyosarcoma, a muscle tumor. 
More importantly, it was further determined that a large 
majority of sporadically occurring BCCs also involve hyper
activated Hh signalling, as judged by high levels of mRNA of 
the Hh target genes GLI1 and PTCH1 in tumor cells 
[,
].
Inactivating mutations in PTCH1 occur most commonly in 
these tumors, with activating mutations in SMOH found in 
about 10% of all BCCs [,
]. These results implicate the Hh 
pathway as an important pharmacological target for a variety 
of conditions.

The Hedgehog (Hh) proteins comprise a group of secreted 
proteins that regulate cell growth, differentiation and survival 
[]. They are involved in organogenesis, and promotes adult 
stem cell proliferation [,
]. Inappropriate activation of the 
Hh signaling pathway has been implicated in the development 
of several types of cancers including prostate, lung, pancreas, 
breast, brain and skin [–
]. Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) is the best 
studied ligand of Hh pathway in vertebrates. In the absence of 
the ligand, the Patched (PTCH) receptor inhibits Smoothened 
(SMO), a downstream protein in the pathway. Binding of Shh 
to PTCH alleviates this inhibition, thus regulating the 
expression of Gli transcription factors []. Loss-of function 
mutations of PTCH, gain-of-function mutations of SMO and 
misexpression of the Gli2 and Gli3 have been associated with 
tumor formation and maintenance in animal models of 
medulloblastoma and basal cell carcinoma of the skin 
[–].
Hedgehog signaling also has an important role in angiogenesis, 
metastasis and suppression of apoptosis 
[–].

Hedgehog pathway inhibitors are a relatively new class of 
therapeutic agents that act by targeting the proteins involved in 
the regulation of Hh pathway. Cyclopamine is the prototype 
inhibitor of the Shh pathway that inactivates SMO by binding 
to its hepta-helical bundle []. It is currently undergoing 
preclinical and clinical studies as an anticancer agent in basal 
cell carcinoma, medulloblastoma and rhabdomyosarcoma 
[].
Saridegib (IPI- 926), a synthetic analog of cyclopamine, has 
shown positive results in phase I clinical trial of advanced solid 
tumors. Similarly, itraconazole, an antifungal drug, has also 
been shown to suppress growth of medulloblastoma in mice 
allograft models []. Other candidates for future trials include 
Novartis׳ LDE-225, Millennium Pharmaceuticals' TAK-441, 
Exelixis BMS-833923 (XL139) and Pfizer's PF-04449913 
[,
].
Vismodegib (IPI-926; Erivedge) has been recently approved by 
the FDA for treatment of advanced basal cell carcinoma 
[].
Due to its mechanism of action, it is contraindicated during 
pregnancy, as it is teratogenic, embryotoxic and fetotoxic 
(Genentech Inc., 2012).

SMO being candidate protein in hedgehog pathway therefore is 
a fundamental target in anti tumor drug development. Hence 
in the view of above, the objective of the present study centers 
to identify effectual inhibitor amongst the previously stated 
drugs as aforementioned.

Methodology
Selection of inhibitors:
Inhibitors with their PubChem ID selected for molecular 
docking is listed in (see supplementary material).

Preparation of protein and inhibitors:
The structures of selected SMO inhibitors were optimized and 
cleaned in 3d format using Marvin View (MarvinView 5.6.0.2, 
1998-2011, Copyright © ChemAxon Ltd) (Csizmadia, 2000). The 
three-dimensional structure of SMO [PDB: 4JKV] was retrieved 
from the Protein Data Bank []. The protein was prepared by 
removing all bound water molecules and ligands. Explicit 
hydrogens, bond orders, hybridization and charges were 
assigned to protein structure if missing.

Virtual screening parameters:
Molecular docking program Molegro Virtual Docker (MVD) 
which includes highly efficient PLP and MolDock scoring 
function provided a flexible platform for docking all the similar 
compounds [–
]. All the selected SMO inhibitors were 
docked into inhibitor binding site of SMO in reference to 
coordinates of bound ligand 1KS_601 (C26 H24 F4N6 O) in the 
crystal structure of 4JKV as shown in . Docking 
parameters were set to 0.20 Å as grid resolution, maximum 
iteration of 1500 and maximum population size of 50. Energy 
minimization and hydrogen bonds were optimized after the 
docking. Simplex evolution was set at maximum steps of 300 
with neighborhood distance factor of 1. Binding affinity of 
ligand receptor interactions (otherwise depicted by rerank 
scoring function) was evaluated on the basis of the internal ES 
(internal electrostatic interaction), internal hydrogen bond 
interactions and sp2-sp2 torsions.

Results &amp; Discussion
Interpretation of receptor ligand interactions:
 (see supplementary material) represents the 
descending order of docking scores of the inhibitor. In the 
present investigation BMS 833923 (XL 139) demonstrated 
superior binding affinity in comparison to remaining inhibitors. 
Owing to its best binding affinity BMS 833923 (XL 139) was 
further investigated for its pharmacophoric features.

Structure based pharmacophoric identification of BMS 833923 (XL 139):
Virtual screening of SMO inhibitors identified a molecule BMS 
833923 (XL 139) to have best binding affinity against SMO 
recptor. This candidate showed a better receptor-ligand 
interaction as evidenced from the MolDock and PLP aided 
docking scores. Comprehensively shown in , the 
molecule demonstrated van der Waals interactions with Ile389, 
Phe 484 &amp; 391, Trp 281 Asp 384 &amp; 480, Leu 515, 221 &amp; 522 &amp; 325 
Asn 521, Ile 215, 231 &amp; 381, and shows electrostatic interaction 
with Tyr 394, Gln 477, Arg 400, Glu 518, Asn 219, Tyr 207. 
Further BMS 833923 (XL 139) showed good hydrogen bond 
interaction as shown in . The hydrogen bonding profile 
of BMS 833923 (XL 139) is shown in  (see
supplementary material). The overall ligand receptor affinity 
score i.e. rerank score (a function of stearic interactions, 
electrostatic interactions, H bond interactions etc.) is shown in 
 (see supplementary material). Further BMS 833923 (XL 
139) was also evaluated for electrostatic interactions, 
hydrophobic interactions, and solvent accessible surface area 
upon ligand binding which is shown in 
&amp;
respectively.

Conclusion
Uncontrolled proliferation of cells witnessed in tumor 
formation is often triggered by the hedge hog pathway that has 
been once active in embryonic development. Due to 
environmental and genetic disturbances the pathway is 
triggered in adult cells leading to tumor formation. Targeting 
proteins in this pathway has surfaced as an important 
therapeutic strategy in anticancer drug development. In the 
present study eight potential inhibitors have been evaluated for 
its binding affinity against SMO − a G protein coupled receptor 
which forms a candidate protein in hedgehog pathway. In our 
study one among the eight established inhibitors, Exelixis׳s ® 
BMS 833923 (XL 139) demonstrated superior binding affinity 
with appreciable interactions. Currently this drug is only for 
research use and undergoing clinical trials. We anticipate from 
our study that BMS 833923 (XL 139) can be a good nominated 
drug compared to other existing ones, nevertheless, further 
research studies are required to support our investigation.

Conflict of interest
The authors confirm that this article content has no conflict of 
interest.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The financial support from BCIL-DBT (Biotech Industrial 
Training Programme (BITP) 2013-14) for providing Industry 
training at Eminent Biosciences, Vijaynagar, Indore, India is 
gratefully acknowledged.

Citation:Akare et al, Bioinformation 10(12): 737-742 (2014)

KS_601 (green) bound to SMO in the inhibitory site

BMS 833923 (XL 139) and its interactions with SMO

Hydrogen bond interactions of BMS 833923 (XL 139) 
with SMO

Electrostatic interactions of BMS 833923 (XL 139) with 
SMO

Hydrophobic interactions of BMS 833923 (XL 139) 
with SMO

Solvent accessible surface area analysis of BMS 
833923 (XL 139) with SMO

