Background
Diabetes is a syndrome characterized by deranged carbohydrate metabolism resulting in abnormally high blood sugar level
(hyperglycemia). It is caused by hereditary, increasing age, poor diet, imperfect digestion, obesity, sedentary lifestyle, stress, drug-induced,
infection in pancreas, hypertension, high serum lipid and lipoproteins, less glucose utilization and other factors. It is estimated that the
diabetic patients in India will increase by 195% in the near future [].
The treatment of diabetes with synthetic drugs is costly and chances of side effects are high. For example, long-term use of Exenetide (Byetta)
[] has lead to side effects such as nausea, vomiting, diarrhea,
dizziness, headache, jittery feeling and acidity. Sulfonylureas cause abdominal upset, headache and hypersensitivity, while Metformin[]
causes diarrhea, nausea, gas, weakness, indigestion, abdominal discomfort and headache. Thiazolidinediones has side effects like,
upper respiratory infections and sinusitis, headache, mild anemia, retention of fluid in the body which may lead to heart failure and
muscle pain.

Ayurveda and other traditional medicinal system for the treatment of diabetes describe a number of plants used as herbal drugs. Hence, they
play an important role as alternative medicine due to less side effects and low cost. The active principles present in medicinal plants have
been reported to possess pancreatic beta cells regenerating, insulin releasing and fighting the problem of insulin resistance []. Aloe vera
juice stimulates the release of insulin from the beta-cells in human, Acacia catechu wood extract enhances the regeneration of pancreatic
beta cells in rabbits, Momordica charantia fruit extract enhances insulin secretion by the islets of Langerhans etc. A significant
proportion of these plants have been observed to possess potent antioxidant activity, which may contribute to anti-diabetic property in
streptozotocin/alloxan, induced animal model []. Not only in
Ayurveda, but also in several other traditional systems of medicine, it
is described that plants useful in diabetes also possess strong
antioxidant/free-radical scavenging properties []. In Ayurveda,
diabetes is described as ’Madhumeha‘. Ayurvedic preparations in spite
of their established efficacy for the treatment of diabetes are not very
popular due to lack of systematic information about the active
constituent(s) for a given plant, their mechanism of action, side effects,
clinical or experimental data etc. Thus, there is a need to document
such information in the form of a database. Limited databases are
available for anti-diabetic plants. However, information on
clinical/experimental trial and supplier industries of raw materials of
anti-diabetic medicinal plants are not available in such databases.Here, we describe a database containing information for anti-diabetic
plants and their use. The database describes medicinal plants having
anti-diabetic activity with other related information including relevant
references. The database also contains detailed information about the
plant raw material supplier industries in India with respective
products.

Methodology
Data collection
Data of anti-diabetic plants on clinical/experimental trials were
collected from literature sources such as PubMed [], Science Direct
[], Biomed Central [], Springerlink[], Scirus [], Wiley journals
[], Journals of phyto-medicine [], Journals of
Ethanopharmacology [] and through collection of folklore
medicinal usage. The information about the plant raw material suppliers or manufacturers has been collected from their websites. 
The database includes 203 genus and 238 species of plants having role in the treatment of diabetes and 123 plant raw material
suppliers/manufacturers within India(see ).

Database design
The Database was constructed using standard HTML and JavaScript.
It has a web-based, flat-file type user interface with simple global
search, specific database search, keywords help and with links to
references in other external databases. The schema for anti-diabetic
plant database is given in .

Software
Microsoft Windows 95/98/2000/2003/XP operating system was used
in the development. HTML was used for the creation of web pages and
java script was used for the development of database front end.

Hardware
Personal computer with high-speed processor with Windows
95/98/2000/XP OS was used. We used 10.08 MB memory for running
the database.

Database features
The record entry contains the following information: 
name of the plant;

geographical distribution;

part of the plant investigated;

dosage;

active constituents with anti-diabetic property (active
constituents also have a link which provided compound structure as
well as their physical and chemical properties.); 

action; 

model
organism (Human, dog, rabbit, rat, mice etc. and their quantity) on which the clinical /experimental studies have been done. 


This web database also contains information about plant raw material supplier or
manufacturer industries in India such as company name; contact
person; address; contact number; E-mail ID; websites and products.
These industries are the sources of plant raw material for direct use
and production of herbal drug material for treatment of diabetes as
well as other diseases. The database also contains current information
about diabetes incidences across the world. The information about
plants can be retrieved alphabetically using botanical name or common
name of plant and about plant raw material supplier industries through
name of the industry.

Utility
This freely available web database provides supplementary and
useful information about anti-diabetic plants capable of
controlling diabetes. The database also contains clinical or
experimental trials data with source of plant raw material for
potential use as therapeutic material. The database is also useful
for the scientific community and industries for a quick and
informative review on anti-diabetic plants.

Future development
We plan to further refine and update this database with links to
known drugs related data in the near future.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The support of Department of Biotechnology, Ministry of
Science and Technology, Government of India, to
Bioinformatics Centre at Biotech Park Lucknow is gratefully
acknowledged.

Citation:Singhet al, Bioinformation 4(6): 263-268 (2009)

Schema diagram representing anti diabetic plants data

A screen shot of the database “Database on anti-diabetic plants” home page with links and dropdown search window.

