Background
Methanogens are the methane producing bacteria
accommodate the rumen liquor of animals in large numbers
varying from 107 to 109 cells/ml. This large concentration of
methanogens in the rumen liquor depends upon the feed
resources provided to the animals as regular diet, especially the
fiber content in the ration. Moreover, rumen fermentation is
coordinated by supporting role of methanogens and making
this a continuous process however it leads to a significant loss
of gross energy consumed by the animals [,
]. Manipulation
in the basic ingredients of feed additives is the most direct and permissible
means of lowering CH4 emissions from ruminants in most
systems. Because it is well established that feeding grain-based
diets reduces enteric CH4 (g/kg of DM) as compared with
feeding forage-based diets [].

Herbal plants are used in animal feeds as the growth
promoters. They play a major role as antibacterial, antioxidant,
anthelmintic and anticoccidial. Majority of medicinal plants do
not have the residual effects. It has been shown that
phytochemicals and plant secondary metabolites could increase
protein flow to the duodenum []. The plants containing
saponins have been found to suppress or eliminate protozoa
from the rumen and reduce methane and ammonia production
[]. 
Cheeke et al. (2000) [] reported that plant secondary
metabolites i.e., saponin- containing plants are reported to
suppress or inhibit protozoa and certain bacteria in the rumen.
Patra et al. (2006) [] reported decrease in DM and OM
digestibilities due to Acacia concina extract addition. Dey and
Ghosh (1995) [] reported that the dry matter consumption and
digestibility of DM, CP, OM, EE, and NFE were higher (P&lt;0.05)
in kids supplemented with livol, an herbal preparation.
Ishtiyak et al. (2010) [] 
also reported an improvement in the in
vitro dry matter and organic matter digestibility after addition
of Trigonella foenumgraecum in ration. Earlier studies with
different herbal additives reported different types of results.
Kumar et al. (2009) [] reported that addition of eucalyptus oil
at different dose level reduced methane production and
protozoa number under in-vitro system. Sirohi et al. (2009) 
[]
reported that acetone and methanol extract of E. globules and
aquos extract of S. mukorossi and E. globules were the best
inhibitor of methane production. Patra et al. (2010) 
[] reported
that ethanol and methanol extract of fennel, cloves and garlic
had inhibitory effect on methane production. Similar finding of
methane reduction, with Acacia angustissima, Sesbania sesban
[], Sapindus spp., Populus tremuloides, Syzygium zromaticum,
Psidium guayaba, Terminalia chebula [], horsetail and sage 
[].
Patra et al. (2006) [] found that addition of extracts of A.
concinna, E. officinalis and T. belerica resulted in a significantly
(P&lt;0.05) higher production of gas per gram dry matter as
compared to control. Herbal feed additives Ocimum sanctum,
Curcuma longa, Emblica officinalis and Clerodendrum phlomidis did
not show any adverse effect on blood haematology in weaned
Barari kid []. It was observed that feeding Neem leaf powder
improved growth of broilers []. Yang et al. (2009) 
[]
suggested that supplementation with Neem oil inhibited
bacterial activity, which could be beneficial in treating acute
acidosis in feedlot cattle fed high-grain diets.

Therefore, because of beneficial effect of herbal plants, our
present study was to evaluate effects of feed additive on
methane production, IVDMD, and gas production. According
to ruminant grazing behavior selected plants were used in their
crude form in substrate feed. Plant combination sometimes
enhances the activity of other plants and sometime shows
antagonistic effect. Herbal plants individually mixed at the
percentage of 0.5% with the Substrate feed and further their
effects were analyzed.

Methodology
Selection of plants:
Based on the available literatures on the beneficial effects of
herbal pants on the ruminant and availability of such plants in
northern Indo-Gangetic plain of India following herbal plants
were selected for the evaluation under in-vitro fermentation
system. Selected five locally available medicinal plants taken
parts are mentioned in  (see supplementary material).
First, the different parts of the five medicinal plants were
selected such as leaf and small stems of Ocimum sanctum (Tulsi),
roots of Curcuma longa (Haldi), fruits of Emblica officinalis
(Amla), leaves of Azadirachta indica (Neem) and leaves and
small stem of Clerodendrum phlomidis (Arni). All five plants
were mix. with each other. Ten different combinations of herbal 
treatments were divided like T1 Control, T2 Tulsi: Haldi, T3
Haldi: Amla, T4 Amla: Neem, T5 Neem: Arni, T6 Arni: Tulsi, T7
Tulsi: Amla, T8 Tulsi: Neem, T9 Haldi: Neem, T10 Haldi: Arni
and T11 Amla: Arni. After estimating the Dry Mass (DM)
content, the samples were grinded with Wiley mill in the
laboratory. Furthermore, the samples were preserved in the
polythene bags.

Preparation of the substrate feed:
The substrate feed for all combinations was prepared using
concentrate mixture (40%), gram straw (40%) and cowpea hay
(20%). Concentrate mixture was prepared using Barley 37%,
Linseed cake 30%, Gram Chuni 15%, Wheat bran 15%, Mineral
mixture 2% and Common salt 1% Add Vitamins, minerals in
feed supplements for in-vitro study.

Estimation of chemical composition:
Concentrate mixture, gram straw and cowpea and all substrates
were analyzed for proximate analysis of OM, CP, Total
carbohydrate, EE and Total Ash []. Representative samples of
herbal samples were analyzed for cell wall components (NDF,
ADF, Hemi cellulose, Cellulose and Lignin) in accordance with
Goering and Van Soest method (1970) [].

Collection of Rumen Liquor:
Rumen liquor was taken from the kids maintained under
uniform feeding system on (5-6 hour grazing, Gram straw,
Concentrate mixture and Green fodder). Rumen liquor was
collected from the donor bucks by the stomach tube from all
parts of the rumen into a clean thermo flask. The rumen liquor
was taken to ensure the maintenance of optimum temperature,
while collecting and handling of rumen liquor.

In-vitro techniques:
In each in-vitro bottle, 0.5g (DM) of same substrates was added.
In each bottle, 40 ml McDougall׳s buffer and 10 ml of SRL
collected from donor animals of respective groups were added.
Each bottle was infused with CO2 before sealing with
aluminium cap and rubber cork. Further, the in-vitro bottles
were incubated for 48h at 39°C±0.5°C.

Analysis of DMD, Total gas and Methane:
After 48h of incubation, the contents of the flask were filtered
through Grade-1 crucible. The DM was estimated according to
AOAC (1984) [] in the samples of substrates as well as the
residues. Total gas production was observed in the in vitro
bottles, which were incubated at 39±0.5 °C. Total gas
production was measured by using siphon system at 48h of
incubation. The siphon system was prepared with the help of
two 50 ml burettes with connecter PVC tubes. The total gas
produced in the bottle was measured with the help of 50 ml of
syringe and tri-way valve. Water (in the burette) displaced by
the pressure of gas was kept at initial level by sucking with the
help of syringe. Total gas collected in the syringe was measured
with the help of its graduation. The gas sample was taken from
each bottle with the help of gas tight syringe (3ml capacity) and
analyzed for methane using Gas Chromatograph (Amil Nucon
5700).

Rumen fermentation:
The pH of rumen fluid was determined within 10 min. of
aspiration using digital pH meter (PCS Tester 35, Eutech
Instruments Pte Ltd. Singapore), thereafter samples were
strained through four layers of muslin cloth and stored at -20°C
for further fluid (SRL) was used to determine total volatile fatty
acids (TVFA). The Micro kjeldahl procedure [] was followed
for ammonia-N, and TCA-perceptible-N determinations in the
SRF. Fractionations of VFA in rumen fluid were separated by
GC according. In brief, a 5 ml SRL was mixed with 1.0 ml of
20% meta-phosphoric acid (w/v in 5N-H2SO4), stand overnight
and centrifuged at 5000 rpm for 15 minutes. The
supernatant was used for VFA fractionation in Amil Nucon Gas
chromatography, series-5700 fitted with glass columns
(chromosorb 101). The standard ratio 60:25:15 was used to
Acetate: Propionate: Butyrate by GC and Area of peak for
acetate, propionate and butyrate was calculated as
‘1/2×hight×width’ and were compared with the area of the
peaks of standard and presented as percentage of total VFA
concentration. With the help of data station in the GC machine
the area of each peak was calculated in terms of mv for each
corresponding peak.

Statistical analysis:
Data pertaining to the in-vitro studies were statistically
analyzed using randomized block design (RBD) with one-way
ANOVA. Computerized SPSS 7.5 statistical package was used
for the analysis.

Results
Chemical composition of substrates measuring:
Chemical composition of different substrates is presented in
 (see supplementary material). Herbs analyze during
current investigation reflect full conformity in proximate
composition and hold nutritional worthiness commensurate to
traditional feed.

In-vitro DMD:
Data on IVDMD using double combination of herbal plants
were presented in  (see supplementary material).
IVDMD ranged from 55.71 in T5 to 62.09 in T7 and T8. However,
the difference was statistically similar. The data showed that
combined effect of two herbals had no specific effect on
IVDMD under in-vitro system using goat rumen liquor.

Total gas and methane production:
Total gas (ml) production/g of DM ranged from 114.32 in T7 to
130.08 in T10. Methane production (mg/g of substrate DM) was
significantly (P&lt;0.05) reduced in T4, T5 than control T1

(see supplementary material).

Effect of herbals on pH:
Observation regarding to pH concentration of rumen liquor
were given in  (see supplementary material). In-vitro
pH values found statistically similar. The values ranged from
6.44 in T11 to 6.69 in T1 (control).

Effect of herbal additives on ammonia-N and other nitrogen fractions:
Data on rumen fermentation pattern were presented in 
(see supplementary material). Ammonia nitrogen (mg/dl) was
statistically (P&lt;0.05) reduced in treatments T2, T7, T8, T9, T10 and
T11 as compared to control T1. TCA-precipitable nitrogen
(mg/dl) was statistically (P&lt;0.01) higher in T2, T3, T4 and T5
than control T1. Total nitrogen (mg/dl) was increased (P&lt;0.01) 
in T2 and T4 than control T1 and other treatments. NPN (mg/dl)
concentration in the incubation medium were significantly
(P&lt;0.01) reduced in all treatments than control. Studies with
different herbal plants revealed variable types of results on
ammonia-N concentration.

Total VFA concentration and its fractionation:
Total VFA concentration (mmol/dl) was similar among all
treatments; it range between 8.02 in T4, to 9.36 in T2. Acetate,
propionate and butyrate concentration were also unaffected
due to such supplementation  (see supplementary
material).

Discussion
The addition of different herbal additives did not influence
IVDMD in present study. However, Sirohi et al. (2009) 
[]
reported 15% increased in IVDMD due to supplementation of
Aloe-barbadanis extract. Methane production (in vitro) was
reduced by combination of Amla: Arni and Neem: Arni when
supplemented @ 0.5% in the substrate. All double combinations
of herbal plants had no adverse effect on pH of incubation
medium under in-vitro system. pH were within normal range
(6.5-7.0) showing no adverse effect of plants addition on rumen
environment. However, different herbal components (crude or
extract) may have variable effect on the pH in rumen ecosystem,
which is evident in the present study as well as earlier
studies. Total nitrogen increased in treatment Tulsi: Haldi and
Amla: Neem. TCA–ppt-N increased in T2 (Tulsi: Haldi), T3
(Haldi: Amla), T4 (Amla: Neem) and T5 (Neem: Arni). NH3-N
significantly decreased in all treatments [] showed that adding
water extracts of Neem seeds decreased total ruminal volatile
fatty acid (VFA) concentrations, the ratio of acetate to
propionate and ruminal feed digestibility. However, such
negative effect was not seen in all combinations of herbal
plants. TVFA and propionate production marginally increased
in T2 (Tulsi: Haldi) and T11 (Amla: Arni) because of
improvement of propionate A/P ratio, decrease slightly.

Conclusion
Our research work concludes that the screening of plant
combinations, Amla: Neem and Neem: Arni have potential to
decrease methane production. IVDMD and total gas shows that
these herbal feed supplements have no side-effects on the
ruminant in trace amount. Different herbal combinations
increase the total nitrogen significantly however TCA–ppt-N is
significantaly increased in T2 (Tulsi: Haldi), T3 (Haldi: Amla), T4
(Amla: Neem), T5 (Neem: Arni). NH3-N (mg/dl) significantly
decreased in all treatments. Because of natural origin of herbal
plans, they are easily available and able to reduce the cost of
designing effective and balanced diet for the ruminant. Our
work will help the animal biologist to design potential herbal
feeds for the ruminant.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Indu Chaturvedi is very much thankful to CIRG Mathura, India
for providing all Lab facilities for conducting experiments and
ISTF for providing financial support for publication.

Citation:Chaturvedi et al, Bioinformation 11(5): 261-266 (2015)

