Background
It has now been realized that Vitamin E, traditionally known as α­ tocopherol, is a mixture of eight different compounds, four tocopherols and four tocotrienols, each one being 
designated as α, β, γ and δ forms. The two groups differ in the hydrophobic tridecyl side chain which is saturated (phytyl) in tocopherols and unsaturated 
having three double bonds (geranyl) in tocotrienols. Detailed reports are available on α­tocopherol. However, during the last few years it has been found that all the eight forms are 
biologically active and perform specific functions. Clinical research has shown that mixture of tocotrienols and tocopherols offer synergistic protective action against heart ailments and 
cancer that is not exclusively offered by α­tocopherol. The other advantage of mixed tocopherols and tocotrienols is their role in slowing down aging. Diseases like diabetes 1 and 2, 
autoimmune diseases, bacterial and viral infections, Alzheimer disease, fungal (Candida) infections are prevented by these compounds. It helps in the maintenance of bones, 
muscles, eyes (vision), memory, sleep, lungs, infertility, skin and wrinkles. []

The main function of α­Tocopherol is to terminate a chain reaction of lipid peroxidation and thus protecting the cell membranes and LDL from oxidative disintegration. It has
been reported in literature that the cell signaling activity of the enzyme protein kinase C is considerably reduced due to the presence of α­tocopherol []. 
This also affects the activity of both inflammatory and immune cells []. α­Tocopherol also dilates blood vessels and 
interferes with aggregation of platelets. Recent reports have suggested better activity of γ­tocopherol Vis­a­Vis α­tocopherol. γ­tocopherol can trap NO and other 
nitrogen free radicals more efficiently than α­tocopherol []. γ­Tocopherol is known to have a balanced effect on the 
transport of Na+ (sodium ions) thus affecting beneficially the uretic activity []. δ­Tocopherol and its metabolites have been 
found to be the most effective inhibitors for the proliferation of prostate cancer cells [].

γ­Tcopherol has unique properties unlike alpha­tocopherol including the ability to neutralize certain free radicals and suppress expression of a gene (ras­p21) that is known to 
cause cancer []. Stone and colleagues have reported that γ­tocopherol can hinder the growth of colon cancer 
[]. An interesting observation has been reported elsewhere [], that if 
α and γ­tocopherols are taken up together into the cells, the γ­tocopherol increases the level of α­tocopherol. It has been reported that excess of 
α­tocopherol displaces the more important gamma component in the body. The cellular uptake of tocotrienols through lipid bilayer is more due to the presence of double bonds in their 
side chains, enhancing their bioavailability and hydrophobicity. This makes them potentially more useful for cosmetic products. It is evident from the fact that amongst the two 
α­components, the α­tocotrienol has been found to be 40 to 60 times more potent than α­tocopherol in preventing lipid peroxidation and 6.5 times better at defending 
cytochrome P­450 against oxidative damage. The efficiency of α­tocotrienol in scavenging peroxyl radicals in liposomes is 1.5 fold more than α­tocopherol.

It is found that δ­tocotrienol is uniformly distributed in cell membranes due to its hydrophobic nature which is due to its unsaturated side chain. δ­ tocotrienol has been 
shown to possess anti­thrombic activity and decreases platelet aggregation. δ­tocotrienol is the most effective form of vitamin E family in reducing the risk of developing 
atherosclerotic plaque. One of the most striking discoveries in tocotrienol research is their ability to clear atherosclerotic blockages (stenosis) in the carotid artery, potentially reducing 
the risk of stroke. These are more potent in quenching and scavenging the free radicals. Due to their molecular structure they have greater recycling activity and more effective collusion 
with free radicals [].

One of the metabolite of γ­tocotrienol is LLU­alpha which reduces the high blood pressure and congestive heart failure []. 
Tocotrienols inhibit cancer cell proliferation through apoptosis. Studies on estrogen responsive and estrogen non­responsive human breast cancer cells have shown that tocotrienols are 
effective in preventing the proliferation of both []. Tocotrienols inhibit NF kB signaling pathway leading to suppression of 
antiapoptotic gene products and starts apoptosis. Tocotrienols are known to cross the blood­brain barrier, and are potent protectors of neuron cells that may get destroyed through stroke and 
other neurodegenerative diseases.

The reports discussed thus far about the enhanced activity of other members of the vitamin E family besides the mostly studied α­tocopherol, motivated us to study the
structure­activity relationship of the whole group. It is known that α­tocopherol is taken up together with dietary lipids and bile in the proximal part of the intestine. The
tocopherols get assembled together with triglycerides, cholesterol, phospholipids, and apolipoproteins into chylomicrons. The exact mechanism of this process of chylomicron formation is not 
very well known. In this paper we have made an effort to structurally align all the four mammalian phospholipids viz. phosphatidyl choline, phosphatidyl ethanolamine, phophatidyl inositol,
lysophosphatidyl inositol , present in the human liver with tocopherols and tocotrienols to establish their mechanism of action.

Methodology
ACD/CHEMSKETCH
2­D structures of all the eight compounds of vitamin E were developed using ACD/chemsketch software (to draw molecules, reactions and schematic diagrams and calculate
their properties).

CHIMERA
3­D structures of all the eight isomers of vitamin E were obtained from chimera (python based software generates 
three dimensional atomic coordinates from 2­D structure of
a molecule).

AUTODOCK
Docking was performed using AUTODOCK version 3.0 software package running on PC Intel­based Pentium 4, running 
Linux operating system.

Protein receptors for docking
The following four target proteins were selected for the study,

Alpha­tocopherol transfer protein (ATTP)
Alpha­tocopherol (α­T) transfer protein (ATTP) is a
member of the family of lipid­binding proteins containing
two CRAL­TRIO domains, pfam03765 (residues 11­83)
and pfam00650 (residues 89­275). The corresponding
structure with PDB ID 1R51 is downloaded from PDB.

Alpha­tocopherol associated protein (TAP)
It is tocopherol binding protein with a molecular mass of
46 kDa present in the cytosol of bovine liver. This is
referred as alpha tocopherol­associated protein (TAP). The
corresponding structure with PDB ID 1OLM is
downloaded from PDB.

P­glycoprotein (P­gp)
3­D structure of p­glycoprotein was downloaded from
PDB (PDB ID 2GHI). P­glycoprotein is found in the gut,
gonads, kidneys, biliary system, brain and other organs. It
belongs to the family of efflux transporter. P­gp is also
called ABCB1, ATP­binding cassette sub­family B
member 1, MDR1, and PGY1. It is a 170 kDa encoded by
the MDR (multidrug resistance) gene(s) that are highly
conserved across species.

Human serum albumin (HSA)
3­D structure of human serum was downloaded from PDB
(PDB ID: 1E7H). The protein is a helical monomer of 66
kDa containing three homologous domains (I­III) each of
which is composed of A and B sub­domains.

Structural Alignment
We used the VMD software for structural alignment of the
phospholipid molecules present in human liver with all the
eight forms of tocopherols and tocotrienols. The lipid
structures were first downloaded from lipid database, and
thereafter the 2D structures were drawn using the
Chemsketch software. Root mean square deviation was
then calculated using appropriate tools in Chemsketch.

Molecular docking
ATTP
The PDB ID used for ATTP is 1R51. The crystal structure
of human alpha­tocopherol transfer protein bound to its
ligand α­tocopherol is used. The bound tocopherol was
removed and the active site of the ligand was analyzed
with the help of CASTP server. Volume of the active site is
1030 Å3 and surface area is 727 Å2. This active site is
made of residues TYR100 to ILE222. This is tested for all
the eight isomers.

TAP
The PDB ID used for TAP is 1OLM. The structure is
protein complex with rrr­alpha­tocopherylquinone. The
active site has volume 10262 Å3 and surface area 6402.2
Å2.

HSA
The PDB ID used for HSA is 1E7H. HSA forms complex
with palmitic acid. The volume of the active site (LYS413­
LYS538) 88.7 Å3 and the surface area is 90.2 Å2.

P­gp
The PDB ID used for P­gp is 2GHI. P­gp has four chains
with ATP binding sites. The volume of the active site
(LYS37­ILE231) is 10.1 Å3 and the surface area is 18.9 Å2.

Docking procedure
The active sites are located in each of the target proteins
before being loaded to AUTODOCK. Polar hydrogens
were then added using the protonate utility available in
AUTODOCK. The ligand is made flexible by providing
rotation to bonds. AUTOGRID (using Kollman united
atom charges and salvation parameters) is then used to map
grid to active sites of target protein. The grid dimensions
are [1.344, 63.053, 14.596] for TTP, [-20.33, 19.575,
87.289] for TAP, [-3.188, 1.003, 26.114] for HSA and
[45.57, 14.8, -17.9] for P­gp. The genetic search algorithm
with 100 iterative runs was selected for dockings.

Discussion
We aligned all the structures of eight tocopherols and
tocotrienols with four human phospholipids to elucidate
the exact binding mode in the formation of chylomicrons
before reaching the intestine []. Literature reports
suggest that α­tocopherol along with lipids is packed into
chylomicrons and transported to the liver []. They
appearance in plasma is only after passing through the liver.
Most of the ingested β­, γ­, and δ­ tocopherols are secreted
into bile are not taken up and hence excreted in the feces.
This is true for all the other compounds used in this study.
However, results show that α­tocopherol and α­tocotrienol
are more structurally similar to phophatidyl inositol. β­
tocopherol is similar to phosphatidyl choline and betatocotrienol
is aligned with phosphotidyl ethanolamine. δ
and γ forms are more similar to lysophosphatidyl
ethanolamine. Nonetheless, all the four phospholipids are
associated with the transportation process. The binding
mode of these eight components of vitamin E with
different proteins in metabolism, transport and absorption
is of interest. The binding energy of these compounds with
four metabolizing enzymes is given in .

?lpha­tocopherol transfer protein (α­TTP) present in liver
is selectively involved in retension of α ­ tocopherol from
dietary vitamin E (a mixture of α, β, γ, δ tocopherols and
corresponding tocotrienols). The components of vitamin E
are taken up along with emulsified lipid molecules,
extracted from food, in equal amounts in an unspecific
manner. These are transported from intestine packed in
chylomicrons and subsequently found as remnants in the
liver. The cytosolic protein α­TTP is then released into
circulation from the liver. This enzyme is responsible for
the stereo­selective transfer of α­ tocopherol to VLDL. In
vitro and in vivo assays have shown that α­ TTP
preferentially binds to the α­tocopherol. However, our
docked complex shows that α­tocotrienol shows the
highest binding affinity among all the eight isomers tested
for the protein. The other three tocotrienols (β, γ, δ) have
appreciably high binding energy as compared to the
corresponding tocopherols. Data also show that the four
tocopherols have almost equivalent binding energy. We
then selected the specific active sites for docking of all the
eight isomers. The docked conformation of α­tocotrienol
with α­ TTP has two hydrogen bonded interaction with α­TTP 
(). The interaction is with ser140 of intensity
-0.28 and with ser136 of intensity -1.26.

Tocopherol­associated protein (TAP) is also been
documented extensively as a metabolizing enzyme. It is
present in brain, liver and prostate gland. It increases the
uptake and absorption of Vitamin E and hence facilitates
the anti proliferation effect in prostate cancer cells. TAP
also functions like a tumor suppressor gene to control
cancer cell viability through a non­vitamin E functional
mechanism. Therefore, TAP is a new prophetic marker for
prostate cancer progression. TAP is a vitamin­binding
protein and it is involved in transport of Vitamin
components specifically tocopherols. Docking data
suggests that γ­tocotrienol binds better than others. Three
tocotrienols except δ­tocotrienol have comparable binding
energies higher affinity than tocopherols. They are easily
transported between the membranes due to unsaturated
side chains. Thus, trienols are potential tumor suppressors
for prostate cancer. Docking data shows that gamma
tocotrienol have four hydrogen bond interactions with
active site residues of TAP (). The interactions are
with Ile80 of intensity -0.899, Leu84 of intensity -0.4962,
Leu84 of intensity -0.30 and Asn259 of intensity -2.203.

HSA is the target protein for circulation of tocopherols and
tocotrienols through blood. This protein has an ability to
bind variety of hydrophobic small molecules. These
include fatty acids, bilirubin, thyroxin, bile acids, steroids
and a group of other bio active molecules. HSA can
solubilize the ligands to facilitate transport and buffering
effect in free concentration. It is documented that HSA
binds a wide variety of drugs in two primary sites which
overlap with the binding locations of endogenous ligands
[]. We then selected a site specific for palmitic acid.
Data suggest that γ­ tocotrienol and δ­tocotrienol have
highest binding energy with HSA as compared to other
members of the family. Overall the binding of tocotrienols
with HSA is comparatively higher than the four
tocopherols. The docked conformation of γ­ tocotrienol
with the highest binding energy.-11.34 and docking energy
is -14.24 kcal/mol.  shows the electrostatic
interactions of γ­ tocotrienol with the aminoacid of HAS.
This shows the better absorption and transport potential of
tocotrienols.

P­glycoproteins are involved in active transport of various
ligands across cell membranes through ATP mediated
processes. These are either localized in the plasma
membrane or intracellular and are responsible for efflux of
various foreign substances including drugs. This protects
the body against toxic xenobiotics and drugs. It prevents
their accretion in sensitive organs like brain, placenta and
gonads by removing these compounds into bile, urine, and
the intestinal lumen. The role played by P­gp efflux
transporters in assaying the overall bioavailability of drugs
is emphasized in recent years. The involvement of P­gp in
drug metabolism has immense pharmacokinetic
importance. The role of efflux transporters in determining
the permeability and overall bioavailability of drugs has
gained considerable attention. P­gp efflux pump is
localized in a wide range of tissues, including enterocytes
of the GI tract. The interaction of P­gp with vitamin E
components highlights their bioavailability and
pharmacokinetics for distribution in organs/tissues. The
docked conformation of α­tocotrienol with P­gp shows a
single hydrogen bond interaction (). The interaction is with Gln100 of interaction energy -0.781
kcal/mol, binding energy -9.06 kcal/mol and docking
energy -11.91 kcal/mol.

We selected the ATP binding site for docking of all the
eight components of vitamin E in order to analyze their
efflux potential. When binding intensity is high efflux is
low resulting in more bioavailability. In this study, data
shows that α­ and δ­tocotrienols show highest binding
affinity at the ATP site. Therefore, it can stop the efflux of
all other components more efficiently and thus, enhancing
their bioavailability. The other two tocotrienols (β and γ)
have comparable activity. Tocotrienols are potent
candidate as antioxidant and anticancer agent and thus it is
important to increase their bioavailability. The
bioavailability of all the components of vitamin E is
increased when taken with compounds (eg. piperine) that
bind strongly at the ATP site of P­glycoprotein which
enhances the bioavailability of many antioxidants like
curcumin and vitamin C.

Conclusion
A study to understand the mechanism of cellular uptake of
phospho­lipids through the formation of chylomicron with
lipids is of interest. The eight components of vitamin E
show similar mechanism of cellular uptake (chylomicron
formation with lipids). The docked complexes of ATTP,
TAP, HSA and P­gp with tocotrienols and tocopherols
provide insight to their binding mode during metabolism,
absorption, transport and efflux. Data shows that the
tocotrienols with unsaturated side chain show better
activity than tocopherols due to high binding with the
corresponding metabolizing enzymes. This suggests
tocotrienols as potential antioxidants and tumor
suppressors than tocopherols. Nonetheless, it should be
noted these docked data should be verified using
appropriate experiments.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Upadhyay &amp; Misra, Bioinformation 3(8): 326-331 (2009)

The docked conformation of α­tocotrienol with α­ TTP has two hydrogen bonded interaction with α­ TTP.

Docking data shows that gamma tocotrienol have four hydrogen bond interactions with active site residues of TAP

The electrostatic interactions of γ­ tocotrienol with the aminoacid of HSA.

The docked conformation of α­tocotrienol with P­gp shows a single hydrogen bonded interaction

