Background
The function of proteins depends on their interaction with other molecules
like proteins, DNA, RNA, carbohydrates and other ligands []. Therefore,
identifying amino acid contacts is important for understanding the
biological processes. In order to understand the mechanism of these
interactions it is important to calculate the amino acid contacts at different
distance thresholds [–]. Binding site residues of proteins can also be
identified from pictorial databases [], visualization tools like Ligplot [],
or many other web servers developed earlier [, ], but this becomes
overwhelmingly imposing when a large set of proteins have to be
analyzed. With the help of ContPro (), user can identify a binding
residue by selecting a protein chain and ligand of interest and retrieve the
results in the form of different output files. Additionally, it can also parse
the multi model PDB file, sequence of selected protein chain from the 3Dstructure
of protein and gives the atomic details of contacts including
distance as compared with the previous developed tools for calculating
binding-site residue from PDB structures [,,]. Protein Data Bank
(PDB)is repository of for 3D structures of biological macromolecules
which contains coordinates of its atoms [], and by using these coordinates
of two atoms, one can compute the distance between them.

Methodology
A residue is defined as a binding residue if the distance between atoms of
the interacting partner is less than a certain distance cutoff [,]. Upon
uploading the protein 3D-structure file of interest and option selected for
interacting partners by user, ContPro searches the PDB file for the protein
chains, DNA chain and the number of protein models (if multi model
protein). If more than one model is present, ContPro gives option to select
and parse the desired model present in the uploaded PDB file. Distance
threshold in angstroms, protein chain and ligand of interest can also be
selected by the user. Then ContPro calculates the distance between
selected protein chain residue atoms and interacting partner atoms, and
when this distance falls below or equal to the selected distance threshold,
this residue is considered as binding residue. The overall methodology is
illustrated in figure ().

Web interface
Web interface of current version of ContPro was developed using HTML
and CGI-PERL scripting language. Help &amp; Documentation, Sample Input
file, Sample output file are provided at the ContPro web site.

Program input
The input to the Contpro is a protein 3D coordinate file like PDB, modeled
protein or a docked complex file. The user can select between proteinprotein,
protein-DNA and protein-ligand interaction type as well as protein
chain, ligand, distance threshold, model number if structure has more than
one model after uploading file.

Program output
At the top of the program's result page (), the uploaded file name
and distance threshold selected for the calculations are displayed. The
calculated distance between the two atoms, its residue, protein chain and
the interacting atoms is displayed in a tabular form (). The page
summary section at the end has three downloadable output files. These
three downloadable files are:- 
the protein sequence file in the Fasta format which was extracted from the structure of selected protein chain,

result.txt for details about contact and

Con.txt which has three column data.


First column has residue in one letter code of selected protein chain,
second column has chain name of protein and third column has 0 or 1
where is 0 indicates non binding and 1 indicates binding to respective
residue.

Conclusion
The developed tool will be useful for the identification and analysis of
binding sites of protein from 3D-structure at different distance threshold.

The financial support under Project “Biomedical Informatics Centre of
ICMR” is gratefully acknowledged.

Citation:Firoz et al, Bioinformation 5(2): 55-57 (2010)

Screen shot of ContPro Home page. From this home page user can upload PDB file.

Flow chart of ContPro, where overall methodology is illustrated

Screen shot of ContPro result page

