Background
Mycoses or invasive fungal infections such as Candidiasis,
Aspergillosis, Histoplasmosis, Coccidioidomycosis,
Blastomycosis, Penicilliosis, Cryptococcosis and Zygomycosis
have been on the rise since the past two decades. They are
caused by fungi belonging to either of the phyla, Ascomycetes,
Basidiomycetes and Zygomycetes. The fungi afflict patients
mostly suffering from immunocompromised diseases 
[] and
the existing drugs have limited antifungal spectrum due to
increased resistance and varied susceptibility of fungi. Hence, it
is imperative to search for novel antifungal drug targets against
which an effective lead compound can be generated. The
enzyme glucosamine-6-phosphate (G-6-P) synthase [EC
2.6.1.16] acts as a potential antifungal drug target which
catalyzes the rate-limiting step of the fungal cell-wall
biosynthetic pathway []. It consists of four conserved domains,
two glutaminase (GATase) and sugar-isomerising (SIS)
domains with active sites. These domains are highly conserved
and functional across the mycoses-causing fungi as detected
from their multiple sequence alignments (MSA) and variability
analyses within the consensus sequences []. However, there
are probabilities that within these domains, the amino acids
might get mutated simultaneously. Identification of such ‘nonindependent
evolution’ of residues can highlight the
interactions and subsequent functions among them and this
motivated us to carry out co-evolutionary study of these
domains at the molecular level.

Methodology
20 amino acid sequences of G-6-P synthase for mycoses-causing
fungi (Table 1, see ) as listed in the
World Health Organization were retrieved and compiled from
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard
(
http://www.broadinstitute.org/), DOE Joint Genome Institute
(
http://genome.jgi-psf.org/programs/fungi/index.jsf) and NCBI fungal databases
(
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/genome/guide/fungi/). 
These sequences were manually separated according to the
protein families predicted by PFAM and the variability of the
individual domains was estimated by the Shannon entropy (H)
analyses [] using the Protein Variability Server. Subsequently,
intra-domain co-evolutionary parameters were averaged out
throughout the MSA by InterMap3D 1.3 server []. The
intersection between predictions of 3 methods viz. MI/Entropy
[], entropy dependency (RCW-MI) 
[] and dependency 
[]
were selected to obtain top 10 coevolving pairs. Only those
coevolving groups with one or both the residues having H≦1
were taken into consideration.

Discussion
GATase II and SIS domains are the conserved protein families
of G-6-P synthase obtained from PFAM across mycoses-causing
fungi. These domains specify the active sites of the enzyme
which are flexible for mutations. Single mutation can be lethal,
but if amino acids co-evolve simultaneously, the deleterious
effect of mutation can be neutrally fixed through random
genetic drift over a period of time which ideally has no effect
upon the fitness of the organism. The co-evolutionary pairs
exert mutual evolutionary pressures on each other leading to
adaptations such as antifungal drug resistance or varied
susceptibility of fungi. Hence, investigation of coevolving pairs
becomes critical for better antifungal drug designing. 

represents co-evolutionary pair within a domain where 2 amino
acids have been mutated; concurrently during evolution they
tend to play a significant role in the structure and function of
the enzyme. To begin with Shannon entropy (H) analyses, one
of the most sensitive tool, was performed to compute variability
within the domains () and residues with H≦1 have
been considered because they represent highly conserved
positions. Subsequently, InterMap3D 1.3 server 
[] detected
intra-domain co-evolutionary pairs () and the same pair
of residues repeatedly arose from the phylogenetic tree (data
not shown), implying true and strong co-evolution. The
coevolving pairs having either one or both the highly conserved
amino acid residues with H≦1 as shown 
( Table 2).

In the first GATase II domain, the coevolving pair at positions 9
and 14 of Aspergillus niger2 (i.e. Y-N) is not present along with
the other Aspergillus species (Y-D). Rhizopus oryzae1 (N-A) is
separated from the rest of the zygomycetes (N-S) at positions 24
and 27. In the case of first SIS domain, 50% of the results show
A. niger2 along with the other Aspergillus species. It is possible
that the coevolving residues of A.niger2 and R. oryzae1 might
have an additional functional role viz. increased resistance
against antifungal drugs. The result is in accordance with our
previous study []. Moreover, most of the coevolving pairs of
the first SIS domain show interactions with the hydrophobic
amino acid, leucine. It might be suitable as one of the antifungal
drug target sites. Coevolving pairs were obtained for the second
GATase II and SIS domains as well, but none of the amino acids
had H≦1 because the co-evolutionary residues were lying
within slightly variable regions which are generally comprised
of loop portions of an enzyme structure and known to be
highly mutable. Consequently, targeting to such sites would not
be a very good choice. It is also interesting to note that
coevolving pairs have mostly either hydrophobic-hydrophobic
or hydrophobic-hydrophilic type of interactions, directing the
nature of the antifungal drugs. Furthermore, in the 3-
dimensional structure, the coevolving residues are closer to
each other, i.e. they are spatially coupled as shown in 
.
Thus, co-evolutionary relationships might be crucial for
carrying out enzymatic functions or maintaining its structure,
but the reverse is not true. Hence, it is vital to consider
coevolving positions for stronger receptor-ligand interactions to
come up with an improved lead compound.

Conclusion
Co-evolutionary study of functional domains within G-6-P
synthase of mycoses-causing fungi was conducted at the
molecular level to better understand the factors that influence
the functional and structural aspects of the enzyme, particularly
the increasing fungal resistance against drugs. Admissible
changes at one residue alter the selective forces on other amino
acids; referred to as coevolving pairs. These coordinated neutral
mutations help in the functional annotations and are spatially
coupled in the 3-dimensional structure of the enzyme. The
current study evaluated the coevolving pairs within the
conserved domains of the enzyme subsequent to estimation of
their Shannon entropies. This study implies the functional
diversification of residues at active sites which might be the
cause for antifungal drug resistance or other untoward fungal
adaptations in the future. Such analyses could assist in better
computer-aided drug designing of antifungal drugs.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We are thankful to Jaypee Institute of Information Technology,
Noida for providing the necessary facility to conduct the study
and Prof. G.B.K.S Prasad, SOS Biotechnology, Jiwaji University,
Gwalior, M.P. for his academic support.

Citation:Banerjee et al, Bioinformation 7(1): 5-8 (2011)

Representation of intra-domain co-evolutionary pair
of amino acid (aa) 1 and 2 which corresponds to spatially
coupled sites at active site of the enzyme.

Shannon entropy analyses of all domains of G-6-P
synthase of mycoses-causing fungi. X-axis represent the
sequence of domains, Y-axis represent their Shannon
variability.

Coevolving pairs of all domains of G-6-P synthase of
mycoses-causing fungi. X-axis represent the coevolving
residues, Y-axis represent the distance (Å) between them.

Spatially coupled coevolving groups identified in the
domains of G-6-P synthase of mycoses-causing fungi (Pymol
software used for visualization). a) Domain First GATase I
(PDBID: 1XFG) with coevolving aminoacids Gln9 &amp; Glu14,
Glu24 &amp; Gly27, and Asp11 &amp; Glu18. b) Domain First SIS
(PDBID: 2PUW) with coevolving aminoacids Leu411 &amp; Arg485,
Thr413 &amp; Arg485, Leu411 &amp; Tyr511, Thr413 &amp; Tyr511, Leu411 &amp;
Leu514, Thr413 &amp; Leu514, Arg485 &amp; Tyr511, and Arg485 &amp;
Leu514.

