Background
The Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) is one of the most valuable
commercial salmonid species with well-established markets in
Europe, Japan and the United States, being the major producers
Norway, Chile, the United Kingdom, and Canada. One of the
major problems related to the mass production of salmonids, is
the development of diseases, affecting directly survival and
production rates. To efficiently manage disease problems in
Atlantic salmon aquaculture is necessary improve our
knowledge of the transcriptome and their regulation on this
specie. One of the most important regulators of the gene
expression is microRNAs (miRNAs). miRNAs are small, highly
conserved, single-stranded RNAs generated from hairpinshaped
transcripts (pre-miRNA) [], which regulates gene
expression at post-transcriptional level by translational
repression or cleavage of the target mRNA, being involved in
several cellular processes, such as diseases and virus induced
immune response []. In this work we develop “Ssa miRNAs
DB”, an online repository of in silico predicted Salmo salar
miRNAs and their targets. The identification of miRNAs in
Atlantic salmon sequences was performed following an strategy
based on the most distinctive characteristics of miRNAs: a) high
conservation and size, b) pre-miRNA secondary structure and
energetic stability, and c) complementarity with miRNA*.

Methodology
Data collection:
Transcriptomic sequences of Atlantic salmon from Unigene
database of GenBank (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/unigene),
Gene Index (http://compbio.dfci.harvard.edu/tgi/), and
GRASP (http://web.uvic.ca/grasp/) were downloaded, as well
all sequences of mature miRNAs of vertebrates deposited on
miRBase, release 16, and (http://www.mirbase.org) 
[].

In silico prediction of Atlantic salmon miRNAs:
To identify miRNAs on sequences of Atlantic salmon a local
alignment was performed between vertebrate miRNAs and
salmon sequences using BLASTN [] 
(word length=7, low complexity filter=off), choosing only gapless, plus/plus
alignments with a maximum of 3 mismatches. Fragments of
~420 nt were generated from selected hits (200 nt in both
directions from the alignment).

Secondary structure of each fragment was predicted with
RNAfold [] 
and then analyzed with an in house developed
script to identify hairpin-shaped structures (minimal stem
length = 13 nt). Minimal Folding Free Energy Index (MFEI) was
calculated with RNAfold and in house developed script for
every hairpin detected, discarding all hairpins with an MFEI
lesser than 0.85. All remaining hairpins were analyzed with
miPred [], 
determining if is pre-miRNA-like hairpin or not.

Classification and annotation:
The pre-miRNA-like hairpins where classified, using an in
house developed script, as pre-miRNA of an homolog miRNA
or precursors of a novel miRNA, based in the information of the
local alignment, as the location of the mature miRNA and
complementarity with miRNA*. For precursors of novel
miRNAs the location and sequence of the mature miRNA was
determined by MatureBayes []. All the precursors and mature
miRNAs were annotated according to the standard set by
miRBase. miRNA target prediction. The target prediction of the
identified miRNAs was performed using RNAhybrid 
[] and
miRanda [], 
with settings that allows seek perfect
complementarity of the seed region of the mature miRNA. Only
those targets predicted by both programs were selected, to
diminish the rate of false-positive results.

Utility
miRNAs are small molecules, which play a crucial role in gene
regulation. Several functional genomics efforts are currently in
progress in salmonids species to help deciphering their function
in immunological and biological basic processes. We believe
that a detailed knowledge of the relationship between miRNA
and their genomic environment provides extremely valuable
information towards a better understanding of their functional
role. In this context, was developed Ssa miRNAs DB, a database
that provides an easy-to-use web interface retrieval of miRNA
genomic data. A total of 41 homologous miRNAs and 266 novel
miRNAs were identified in Atlantic salmon, which have
approximately 30 thousand targets predicted by RNAhybrid
and miRanda simultaneously. All the information about
predicted miRNAs and their targets have been stored in a
relational database developed in mySQL, with a PHP web
interface hosted in 
http://www.molgenv.com/ssa_mirnas_db_home.php 
().

This study was supported with a grant from CORFO-INNOVA
Chile 09MCSS-6694.

Citation:Reyes et al, Bioinformation 8(6): 284-286 (2012)

A snap shot of Ssa miRNAs DB.

