Background
Protein - protein interaction network approaches in better
understanding of protein function was initiated in the present
approach, starting with defined biological processes. Most
proteins interact with few partners, whereas a small but
significant proportion of proteins, those hubs, interact with
many partners []. The interaction between hormone and
derived factors such as kit ligand and oocyte secreted is
essential for oocyte growth. As elementary constituents of
cellular protein complexes and pathways, protein–protein
interactions are key determinants of protein function 
[].
Thomas et al., 2008 proposed several target genes contained
cAMP response elements (CREs), serum response elements
(SREs), activator protein 1 (AP1) elements and GC-rich regions,
but otherwise no common regulatory promoter element could
be identified []. Peptide hormones exert unique actions via
specific G protein–coupled receptors; however, the therapeutic
potential of regulatory peptides is frequently compromised by
rapid enzymatic inactivation and clearance from the circulation
[]. in vitro maturation (IVM) is one of the essential steps in the
in vitro fertilization (IVF) process. In most of the experiments
maturation media were supplemented with fetal bovine serum
(FBS) [,
], horse serum (HS) or porcine serum albumin (PSA)
[] 
and albumin [] as protein source and glucose/amino acids
as an energy source [] for embryo development Hormone
supplementation varies in experiments as per the usage of these
supplements.

Methodology
Collection and transportation of ovaries:
Morphologically normal ovaries from sheep, irrespective of age
and body condition were collected immediately after slaughter
from Chennai corporation abattoir. The ovaries were
transported to the laboratory in a thermos flask containing
normal saline maintained at 37°C and supplemented with
10µl/ml penicillin-streptomycin. Sheep oocytes were aspirated
from ovaries collected from a commercial slaughter house
during the breeding and non-breeding seasons.

Retrieval of oocytes:
The extra ovarian tissues were trimmed off and the ovaries
were washed thoroughly under running tap water and rinsed
five times in normal saline. Thereafter, the ovaries were kept in
a sterile beaker containing normal saline at 37°C. Oocytes were
retrieved by slicing technique as described by Wani et al. (2000).
The cumulus oocyte complexes (COCs) were screened using a
stereo zoom microscope and transferred into a 35 mm petridish
containing fresh oocyte collection medium (TCM-199).

Effect of various protein supplements on in vitro maturation,
fertilization and subsequent embryo development:
This experiment was designed to evaluate animal protein
supplements and its replacement with plant peptones during in
vitro maturation, fertilization and subsequent embryo
development of ovine oocytes. In each group six replicates were
carried out.

Group I 10% FBS in maturation, fertilization and culture
media

Group II 5mg/ml BSA-FAF in maturation, fertilization and
culture media

Group III 0.18mg/ml wheat peptones in maturation,
fertilization and culture media

in vitro maturation of oocytes:
The in vitro maturation (IVM) medium was TCM-199
supplemented with 1 µg/ml of follitropin (FSH), 0.02 IU/ml of
luteinizing hormone (LH), 1 µg/ml of estradiol, 100 ng/ml
epidermal growth factor (EGF) and 10 µl/ml penicillinstreptomycin.
10 per cent fetal bovine serum (FBS), 5 mg/ml
bovine serum albumin (BSA) and 0.18 mg/ml wheat peptones
were supplemented separately in maturation medium to assess
the maturation rate. 50 µl IVM droplets were made in a 35 mm
Petri dish and overlaid with mineral oil and pre-equilibrated in
a CO2 incubator for a minimum of 2 h at 38.5°C under 5 per cent
CO2. The graded and selected oocytes were washed four times
in maturation medium and 10 COCs were transferred to each
droplet and allowed to mature at 38.5°C in a humidified
atmosphere under 5 per cent CO2 for 24 h on a static platform.

Assessment of maturation of oocytes:
Maturation was assessed based on the cumulus cell expansion
by examination of oocytes under stereo zoom microscope.

Protein Interaction studies:
To find out the protein interactions preliminarily, an interaction
profile studies and experimental graphs has been studied using
string database. The present work is conducted on STRING
(version 9.0) and SignalLink databases for extracting protein
protein interaction data. STRING is a database of
experimentally known and predicted protein-protein
interactions (Kaladhar et al 2012). The interactions will include
direct (physical) and indirect (functional) associations derived
from four sources: (1) genomic context; (2) high-throughput
experiments; (3) co-expression (conserved) and (4) known
knowledge. A STRING and SignalLink database quantitatively
integrates interaction data from these sources for a large
number of organisms, and transfers information between these
organisms where applicable.

Results
The result shows the different steps of in vitro production of
sheep embryos up to the blastocyst stage in semidefined
conditions: (1) oocyte maturation, (2) in vitro fertilization, and
(3) in vitro development. The result of protein supplements are
also be observed based on interactions using in silico
approaches. There was no difference in efficiency of IVM of
oocytes collected during the breeding and non-breeding
seasons. The number and recovery rate of ovine oocytes
following slicing technique are presented in  (see
supplementary material). Using slicing technique, a total of
1,407 oocytes were recovered from 341 sheep ovaries with an
average yield of 4.13 oocytes per ovary. The percentage of
different grades of oocytes recovered by slicing technique was
presented in (). Among the total of 1,407 oocytes,
546(38.81%), 648(46.06%) and 213(15.14%) ooytes were classified
as grade A, B and C, respectively.

Influence of protein supplements on maturation rate of ovine oocytes based on cumulus expansion:
The effect of animal protein supplements and its replacement
with plant peptones during IVM of ovine oocytes is presented
in  (see supplementary material). In FBS supplemented
group (group I), out of 206 oocytes cultured, 184 oocytes
matured with a mean maturation percentage of 89.32±1.67. In
BSA supplemented group (group II), out of 196 oocytes
cultured, 157 oocytes matured with a mean maturation
percentage of 80.10±1.64. In wheat peptone supplemented
group (group III), out of 199 oocytes cultured, 108 oocytes
matured with a mean maturation percentage of 54.27±1.81. The
difference in oocyte maturation rate between groups was highly
significant. The maturation rate of Oocyte was significantly
higher in the FBS supplemented group when compared with
BSA and wheat peptone supplemented groups.

in silico interaction studies:
The observed results has also shown that the proteins EGFR
(epidermal growth factor receptor), CCK (cholecystokinin)- a
peptide hormone, Alb – a serum albumin, ESR- estrogen
receptor 1, TGFA- transforming growth factor, STAT- signal
transducer and FN1- fibronectin 1 has direct interaction and
produces cell growth in in vitro culture ( &amp; 
). Alb is
directly activates EGF and promotes MAPK3 that mediates
diverse biological functions such as cell growth, adhesion and
proliferation. Alb may also involve in stress response signalling
and may be in cell cycle control.

Discussion
Rao et al., 2002 has also proposed that there was no difference in
efficiency of oocytes of IVM collected during the breeding and
non-breeding seasons []. IVM/IVF capability is associated
with reduced animal numbers, reduced animal welfare
concerns and reduced financial costs. Nuclear transfer cloning
and most other reproductive biotechnologies are established in
the pig and can generate close anatomical, physiological and
biochemical parameters using in silico approaches []. The
widespread use of large mammal models in respiratory
research, coupled to the limited availability by in silico methods
can provide an opportunity for identification probes with
detectable hybridization signal using probe level analysis 
[].
The combination of cellular, in vivo, and in silico modeling
promises the eventual creation of a heterogeneous population
of virtual patients for understanding the pathogenesis of this
chronic inflammatory disease []. Maternal MATER, ZAR1,
GDF9, and BMP15 transcripts persisted during oocyte by in
vitro maturation and fertilization and in preimplantation
embryo, until the five- to eight-cell or morula stage, but
transcription was not reactivated at the time of embryonic
genome activation [].

Recent progress towards understanding biological processes
such as sperm maturation and fertilization indicates that the
paternal contribution has been underestimated []. Blastocysts
derived from in vitro maturation, fertilization, and embryo
culture protocols undergo apoptosis but that apoptotic levels
are not greatly influenced by the oocyte maturation
environment. EGF supplementation of oocyte maturation
medium resulted in a concentration-dependent has increase in
blastocyst development but did not influence blastocyst total
cell number or apoptosis []. According to Calder et al. 2005, a
relative abundance of COC mRNAs is altered by serum in the
maturation medium, which may signify long-term
consequences for embryonic development []. Endogenous c-
Abl mediates endothelial apoptosis [] and BSA significantly
stimulated and accelerated development to the blastocyst and
expanded blastocyst stages [].

Conclusion
The present research work has performed the embryo
development of sheep through in vitro method. Various protein
supplements are essential for cellular modifications and growth
in various living systems. The present approaches are predicted
need of protein supplements using protein interaction
networks, that supports the interactions with cellular
proliferation and MAPK networks.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors acknowledge the support from Chennai Fertility
Centre, GITAM University and Tamilnadu Veterinary and
Animal Sciences University for providing the necessary
research facilities.

Citation:Sreenivas et al, Bioinformation 8(21): 1030-1034 (2012)

in vitro Embryo development of sheep

(A) Preliminary Search (B) Advanced search of
protein interactions with EGF, Alb and CCK (Note: EGFRepidermal
growth factor receptor; CCK- cholecystokinin; a
peptide hormone; Alb- Serum albumin; ESR- estrogen receptor
1; TGFA- transforming growth factor; STAT- signal transducer;
FN1- fibronectin 1)

(A) Preliminary search; (B) Advance search. Pathwaylinker has also been shown the neighbor interaction of serum
albumin with proteins such as Alb, CCK, AFM and EGF.

