Researchers in almost all disciplines of Biology use mathematical,
statistical models and computer programs to analyze and validate
biological data. Systematic data mining is frequently completed in
recent years using Bioinformatics soft-wares. The available
Bioinformatics techniques and tools help annotate functions for
newly generated data in biological investigation. The book (ISBN
978-1-4419-0518-5 e-ISBN 978-1-4419-0519-2) entitled
“Bioinformation Discovery: Data to knowledge in Biology” by Dr.
Pandjassarame Kangueane is published by Springer USA. This
book describes the use of Biological data and Bioinformatics
techniques and tools in Biological knowledge discovery. The book
contains ten chapters. The first chapter describes concepts,
principles and components of Bioinformatics with its various
applications in agriculture, healthcare and industrial biotechnology
sectors. The author precisely highlights that a sound knowledge in
the basic concepts of bioinformatics is the real foundation for
Bioinformation discovery from data. In the same chapter he also
discussed the importance of Bioinformatics in Drug Discovery. The
second chapter describes biological datasets and methods to create
data subsets from primary databases like GenBank, EMBL, DDBJ
and Protein databank (PDB). The provided dataset examples
illustrate the importance of specialized datasets in Biological
knowledge discovery.

There are number of Bioinformatics tools and techniques freely
available online for data mining and knowledge discovery in
specific areas of Biology. In this context, Chapter 3 (Tools and
Techniques) gives an account of some of the commonly used tools
frequently cited in this book. The ongoing trends in biological
sciences are to understand the protein-protein interaction within and
across cells. The chapter 4 (Protein Subunits Interaction) highlights
the use of 3D structure datasets to derive information and
geometrical (interface size, planarity, sphericity, and
complementarity) and chemical (the types of amino acid chemical
groups, hydrophobicity, electrostatic interactions, and H-bonds)
properties for protein subunit interactions. The formation and
mechanism of folding for homodimers (dimers of identical subunits)
is intriguing. The fifth chapter relates structural features to
homodimer folding and binding using structural datasets. The
provided schematic illustrations help in understanding the
homodimer folding and binding mechanism. In Chapter 6 (Fusion
Proteins), the author discusses on fusion proteins in one species
mimic operons, protein-protein interaction, alternative splicing and
multiple functions in another species. This chapter help relate gene
fusion in establishing optimal dynamics and kinetics.

The study of genetic variation among ethnic groups (American
Indian, Australian aboriginal, Black, Caucasoid, Oriental, Hispanic,
Mixed race, and Pacific Islander) is fascinating. Chapter 7 (Major
Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) and Peptide Binding) discusses
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) genes and their sequence
polymorphism (sequence level variation). The discussion on issues
in human MHC genes and methods for MHC peptide binding
prediction helps to get insights into gene polymorphism and its
impact in population based medicine. Chapter 8 (HLA Supertypes)
gives the precise account of the human leukocyte antigen (HLA)
alleles that demonstrates functional overall lap among HLA alleles
for population coverage. To take readers further, in Chapter 9 (TEpitope
Designer) the author described a web server named ’TEpitope
Designer‘ which can be used to facilitate HLA-peptide
binding prediction for peptide vaccine design. The last Chapter
(Chapter 10: Eukaryotic Genes, Functions, Genomes, Design, and
Evolution) has highlighted the main issues associated with the study
of eukaryotic genes, genomes, function, design, and their evolution.
Database such as U-Genome (database of relevant genome
information in unicellular eukaryotes) which plays an important role
in the understanding of unicellular genomes, their design and
evolution is also discussed along with some other databases like
ExInt (database of exon­intron gene structure in eukaryotic genes).
This chapter gives a summary of several issues (exons, introns,
single exon genes, intron organization and chromosome content) in
comparative and functional genomics.

In summary, this is a very useful book. It is written meticulously by
an expert in the emerging field of Bioinformation discovery. This
book provides plenty of interesting tips to use data in knowledge
discovery. Each chapter concludes with a set of exercise problems
for mastery of the subject. The language used in the book is
extremely lucid, and hence book is very useful for undergraduate.
This book is highly recommended for post-graduate students in
Biology and Life Sciences. It should be noted that the book is
available in both hard bound and electronic versions.

Citation:Subhash et al, Bioinformation 4(14): 175 (2009)

