Alkali-Ion-Crown Ether in Art and Conservation:
The Applied Bioinorganic Chemistry Approach
Uwe Hilfrich, Harold Taylor, Ulrich Weser*
Anorganische Biochemie, Physiologisch-Chemisches Institut der
Eberhard-Karls Universitit Tiibingen, Hoppe Seyler- Str. 4
D 72076 Tiibingen, Germany
ABSTRACT
Dried varnish is rich in many ester moieties, which may be broken down into small, soluble compounds
by esterase activity or alkaline hydrolysis. Two methods for varnish removal have been developed, including
the treatment of either lipase or RbOH PEG-400 crown ether which allow aged oil varnishes or paint
coverings to be removed or thinned. These techniques are designed to proceed in a controlled manner without
damaging lower paint or base layers. Unfortunately, lipase did not react with the aged ester groups of dried
linseed oil varnish. Surprisingly, the varnish came off in the presence of Tris buffer alone which, in addition,
formed reactive metal complexes. A better choice was the use of high Mr alkali ion polyethylene glycol- 400
(PEG-400) crown ether type chelates. PEG-400 complexes alkali ions including rubidium and other alkali-
ions impeding the diffusion of their basic counter ions into lower varnish or paint layers. Possible migration
of alkali metal ions into the paint layer during alkaline varnish removal was determined by labelling the
cleansing solutions with 86Rb. Fortunately, varnish is degraded on the surface only. Lower paint or varnish
layers are not attacked even if chemically similar to the varnish or over painting to be removed as virtually no
86Rb was detected on the paint surface.
Keywords: varnish removal, lipase, Cu (II) -Tris, linseed oil, RbOH PEG-400 crown ether.
1. INTRODUCTION
Varnish is the final, sealing layer of a painting, imparting depth, luminance, gloss or matte while
protecting it from mechanical as well as atmospheric influences.
Corresponding author: Tel.: +497071 295564; Fax.:+497071 295564
e-mail: uirich.weser@uni-tuebingen.de (U. Weser)
lnternet: http://www.pci.chemie.uni-tuebingen.de/weser/weser.html
Vol. 2, Nos. 1-2, 2004 Alkali-Ion-Crown Ether in Art and Conservation:
The Applied.Bioinorganic Chemistry Approach
The varnish layer itself is the most exposed layer of a painting and should in cases of age-related
discoloration be easily removable. Due to its composition, large surface area and small depth, varnish layers
react to mechanical and environmental influences with more or less extreme changes including, yellowing,
cross linking and crazing. These changes to a painting's shape and tonal balance ultimately necessitate the
removal ofthe varnish layer.
Varnishes for paintings were based primarily on drying oils until the late Middle Ages. Recipes
describing such varnishes can be found in the tractates of medieval painters/1/. The simple process of boiling
certain oils or boiling them with natural resins prepared these varnishes. The resulting highly viscous, dark
liquids were applied to the paintings by a brush or manually. Occasionally, pure, unadulterated oil was
applied as a varnish. Upon exposure to air, a varnish will dry slowly over a period of months or years. This
drying process can be accelerated by sunlight or dryers (siccatives). Whereas lead white (basic lead
carbonate) or lead oxides were traditionally used, modern dryers contain lead, manganese or cobalt oleates or
resinates.
The discovery of distillation in the late Middle Ages led to the application of turpentine oil and as resin
solvents resulting in improved varnishes. These resin essence varnishes dry faster and are considerably
lighter than oil varnishes- very likely the reason they have largely replaced oil varnishes in modern painting.
There is a chemical relationship between aged linseed and resinous varnishes in that they represent in part or
full a polyester type structure.
While resin essence varnishes are usually easily removable with organic solvents, aged oil varnishes are
resistant to these solvents. Varnishes always cover paint layers, which are, of their nature, susceptible to
solvents. Selective removal of varnish becomes almost impossible if the paint binder is of similar or greater
solubility than the covering varnish. A similar situation occurs when trying to remove over-paintings of oil
paints, if the over-painting was applied directly onto the original layer. The chemistry of aged oil paint and
varnishes, as well as the gentle removal thereof, are accordingly of special interest in the conservation of our
cultural heritage ofpaint; current technology cannot solve this problem chemically.
A promising new technique for the cleaning of painting surfaces was introduced employing lipase. The
lipase based removal of aged oil varnishes was claimed to be both gentle and protective/2,3/. Alternatively, a
new concept in alkaline varnish removal was developed taking into account the reactivity of strong bases and
larger counter cations. The large relative molecular mass solvent PEG-400 was expected to form complexes
with alkaline ions as macromolecular crown ethers impeding the diffusion of their basic counter ions into
lower varnish or paint layers. These two biochemical approaches employing enzymic and bioinorganic
methods in the cleaning of paint surfaces will be comprehensively dealt with.
10
Uwe Hilfi*ich et al. Bioinorganic Chem&try andApplications
2. EXPERIMENTAL
2.1. Materials
2.1.1. Chemicals
Radioactive rubidium-86 (half-life: 18.7 days; type of decay: 13; 13 energy (max.): 0.69 MeV (8.8%)
1.77 MeV (91.2%);), radiation 1.077 MeV (8.8%)) was delivered as an aqueous rubidium chloride solution
from Amersham Pharmacia Biotech, code RGS.2. The radioactivity was 37 185 MBq/ml or 5 mCi/mi.
4C polyacrylic acid was generously donated by Dr. Eugen Barbu, School of Pharmacy and Biomedical
Sciences, University of Portsmouth, Hampshire, UK.
Window glass plates, length: 18 cm; width: 10 cm, thickness: 3 mm, were obtained from Glaserei Hiirle,
Ttibingen, Germany.
All other reagents including rubidium hydroxide were of the highest purity available and obtained from
Sigma-Aldrich, Steinheim Germany.
2.1.2. Buffergel and enzymic cleaner
300 mg hydroxymethylpropylcellulose were allowed to swell in 20 ml water for one hour. A stiff gel was
obtained after stirring. The gel was mixed with 10 ml 0.1 M Tris buffer (adjusted with HCI to pH 8.4 or pH
7.7) and 0.02 ml Triton X- 100.
The enzyme gel was prepared by dissolving 10 mg (- 8600 u/ml) lipase VII (E.C. 3.1.1.3 from
Candida cylindracea, Sigma L-1754) in the buffer gel.
2.1.3. Gel chromatography
Gel chromatography of RbOH-PEG-400 complex was carried out using Bio-Gel P-2 (100-200 mesh) from
Bio-Rad Laboratories, Richmond, California. 10 ml of a mixture of mol/! RbOH and a 28 fold excess of
PEG-400 were passed through a column 1.3 x 43 cm. Quantification of Rb-ions was performed using atomic
emission spectroscopy at 780.023 nm on a Zeiss M4 Q 111 unit equipped with a PM QII detector.
2.1.4. Reaction of Tris buffer solutions with copperpigments
Samples of dried linseed oil paint film containing a copper pigment (malachite or verdigris) were scraped
off with a scalpel and placed into a glass dish containing aqueous 0.05 M pH 8.4 tris buffer solution. Within
20 minutes the solution turned light blue, attributable to the formation of tris copper complexes. The colour
became dark blue overnight. Removal of the buffer solution showed the paint samples had turned brown and
deteriorated.
2.1.5. Paintings"
An authentic fragment of a late 17th century oil painting on canvas was cleansed employing the crown-
ether method at the Courtauld Institute of the History of Art, London. The partial cleaning of the painting
'Die Fischhandlerin' 1874 ('pseudo Frans Hals') was possible at the lnstitut for Restaurierungs und
Konservierungs-wissenschaften,
11
Vol. 2, Nos. 1-2, 2004
2.2. Preparations
2.2.1. Varnish
Alkali-Ion-Crown Ether in Art and Conselwation:
The AppliedBio#torganic Chemis#y Approach
Type 1: Fresh cold pressed linseed oil (Kremer, Aichstetten) for direct use as a varnish. Type 2: Linseed
oil varnish accelerated drying in the presence of lead oxide.
The 0.5 g PbO are suspended in 100 ml fresh linseed oil. The suspension is heated to 220 l)r 2-3 hours
under nitrogen while stirring is maintained. The dark brown varnish is decanted after cooling and stored
under nitrogen.
Liquid varnishes are applied in a thin layer to cleansed glass plates (0.2 0.5 ml per 100 cm2). The plates
are then dried at 25C. The drying rate may be increased by raising the temperature ofthe drying cabinet to a
maximum of 40C. To achieve complete and thorough hardening, as well as a minimum of similarity to aged
varnishes, the varnish plates are subsequently stored for up to seven years. The time required for non-stick
drying depends upon the type of varnish. Average times at 25C required for non-stick drying of the various
varnishes are:
pure linseed oil: 2 3 weeks accelerated drying;
linseed oil varnish in the presence of PbO: 3 -4 days.
2.2.2. Model oilpaint surfaces
The corresponding pigments (Kremer, Aichstetten) are mixed with linseed oil until smooth. The resulting
paint is applied to the meticulously cleansed glass plates and dried at 25C. When thoroughly hardened (3 7
days), the paint layer is varnished as described in section 2.1. The plates are stored for several years.
2.2.3. Alkali-ion PEG-400 crown ether
One gram of rubidium hydroxide is dissolved in l0 ml PEG-400 at 60 70C. Alkaline solutions of PEG
gradually turn brown due to oxidation. They should consequently be stored under exclusion of oxygen.
RbOH in PEG-400 is applicable in cases of thick layers of grime. However, the surface should be neither
porous nor contain craquelures. The varnish dissolves with an orange-brown color and can be removed with
cotton swabs. The solution should be agitated slightly to improve the cleansing action by using a
polypropylene spatula. The thinning of varnish must be monitored continuously. For safety purposes, a thin
varnish layer should be left covering the paint. If required, the alkaline cleansing solution may be neutralized
rapidly by the addition of polyacrylic acid in PEG-400.
Should the picture surface be soiled with the salts of small cations, a pre-treatment with an acidic cation
exchanger or polyacrylic acid in PEG-400 is required. The surface should then be cleansed with pure PEG-
400. After varnish removal or thinning, the cleanser should be removed with dry cotton swabs. The surface
should then be cleansed with PEG-400. A gel containing polyacrylic acid in PEG-400 should be applied and
incubated for 5 min. to neutralize possible alkaline remnants. Once the polyacrylic acid gel is removed,
the surface of the painting should be treated step by step with the following solutions: PEG-400 dodecanol
1: I, poly-(l,2-propanediol) 1000 and then PEG-4000. The solvent polarity will be reduced to the point at
which the non-volatile Iolyethers can be removed completely in a final step by several treatments with iso-
dodecane (ShellsoI-T). The surface ofthe painting is then allowed to dry by iso-dodecane evaporation.
12
Uwe Hilfrich et aL Bioinorganic Chemkoy andApplications
2.3. Analytical procedures
2.3.1. Back titration ofaged varnish
Three month aged layers of dried linseed oil varnish are scraped off from glass plates with a scalpel. The
carboxylic acid content of the varnish is determined by maceration of 50 150 mg varnish in 10 ml sodium
hydroxide (50mM) for hour in an ultrasonic bath at 25C. Upon this treatment, the sample solution is
yellowish-orange and slightly turbid.
This solution is back titrated using 25mM sulfuric acid. The amount of sodium hydroxide consumed by
saponification is the difference between the amounts of sulfuric acid theoretically and actually required for
titration. The titration results of fresh linseed oil as a control and dried varnish are compared to ascertain that
the former does not contain free carboxylic group and that the glycerol esters of the latter are not already
hydrolysed by sodium hydroxide at 25C. It could be shown that neither fresh linseed oil (type 1) nor linseed
oil varnish with a lead siccative (type 2) contain significant amounts of free carboxylic acid or ester groups
which can be hydrolysed at 25C.
2.3.2. Infraredspectrometry
FT-IR spectrometry of different linseed oil samples was performed on a Beckman Acculab 4
Spectrometer. Fresh and aged linseed oil were incorporated into a KBr-pill prior to the measurements.
2.3.3. Absorption studies on thepaint surface using S6Rb-PEG400 crown ether and t4C-polyacrylate
In order to locate Rb+-ions in the course of alkaline varnish removal, the cleansing solution was enriched
with 86Rb. Possible remaining rubidium ions on the paint surface could be determined in this way. The 86Rb-
solution was diluted 1:1 with water and applied in the following experiments (stock solution).
The 86Rb stock solution (50 lal) was diluted with 500 lai of a mixture containing 1% triton X-100, 19%
methanol and 80% water. An aliquot (200 tl) of this labelled solution was applied to a varnish plate and
distributed evenly on a rectangular area of 50 cm using a fine-haired, plastic brush. When dry, possible 13-
radiation at the varnish surface was determined using an automatic TLC-Linear Analyzer LB 2821, Berthold
Technologies, Bad Wildbad, Germany. The apparatus allows measurements along a segment of the surface
creating point-to-point radioactive emission profiles ofthe test plate.
The emission density of the calibration surface as determined by the detector was 900 + 100 cpm (counts
per minute; measured: 4500 + 450 counts in 5 min.). The standard deviation of 10% results from a non-
uniform distribution of the calibration solution. As with the 86Rb-PEG400 crown ether experiments 4C-
polyacrylic acid was added to the polyacrylate neutralisation step and carbon-14 was monitored using the
same experimental setup given in 2.2.3.
Alkaline RbOH /PEG cleanser; an equimolar solution of RbOH in ethanol and an aqueous solution of
RbOH in water, each of which were labelled with the same amount of 86Rb (501ul 8'Rb stock solution and
500 ti of the solution to be tested), resulted in the same final concentration of 86Rb as in the calibration
solution. The volume of these labelled solutions (200 lul), as well as the types and surface areas (50 cm2) to
which they were applied, were identical to those used for calibration. The rubidium concentration in all three
solutions was identical. The application of 200 lal to a 50 cm surface results in a rubidium density of
13
VoL 2, Nos. 1-2, 2004 Alkali-lon-O'own Ether in Art and Conservation:
The AppliedBio#organic Chemis#y Approach
2.36 .tmol/cm or 900 cpm as determined in the calibration step. After 3 minutes the Rb(86Rb)-solution was
wiped off using an analytical grade cellulose filter paper. Post-treatment of the paint surface following the
Rb(86Rb)-PEG-crown ether cleansing was carried out stepwise with polyacrylate and two washes of PEG-
400. Rb(86Rb)-ethanoi treatment was followed by two ethanol washes. After the aqueous Rb(a6Rb)OH
treatment the paint surface was rinsed two times with water. In the case of 4C-polyacrylic acid, neutra[isation
experiments, aiming at possible surface absorption of 4C-polyacrylate following the cleansing process, were
carried out as described above.
3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
3.1. Chemistry and structure of aged linseed oil varnish
Currently, one of the major problems in the chemical removal of dried oil varnishes and paints is their
unknown chemical composition. Any reliable conservation concept would have to be based on a thorough
and complete knowledge of the chemical nature of varnish and binder. Although sound in its scientific
elucidation on the mechanism of oxidative hardening of 'drying oils' by Kaufmann/4/, no further genuine
advance in this uncontrolled mechanism is available/5/.
Linseed oil consists primarily of various triglycerides containing linolenic (cis, cis, cis-9, 12, 15-
octadecatrienic acid) and linoleic acid (cis, cis-9, 12-octadecadienic acid). Current reaction mechanism
postulates that the drying of linseed oil begins with an autoxidation of the glyceride fatty acids within the oil.
In addition polyunsaturated fatty acid residues are progressively oxidized leading to uncontrolled cross
linking and carboxylic acid residues (Fig. 1).
The end product is called linoxin and its structure remains unknown. In the presence of oxygen, the state
of the oil molecule progresses from a liquid via semi-solid intermediates to a firm, elastic layer. This layer
can store pigments, thus 'binding' them to the support. In an attempt to obtain some structural information
the drying process of linseed oil was monitored by infrared spectrometry. The spectrum of dried linseed oil
differs only slightly from that of fresh oil. The numbers of double bonds decrease in the course of drying.
The vibrational bands at 3011 cm-1
(alkenyl H-valence vibrations), 1652 cm!
(C=C-valence vibrations) and
722 cm-t
(cis olefines, deformational vibrations) diminish or disappear completely (Table 1).
The spectrum of dried linseed oil shows an intense OH-valence band at 3450 cm resulting either from
absorbed water or from hydrogen-bonded OH-groups. The vibrational bands ofthe ester groups in linoxin are
essentially unchanged compared to fresh linseed oil (C=O-valence vibrations at 1745 cm and C-O-valence
vibrations at 1163 cm). Consequently, the drying process does not affect the glyceride ester function.
An emulsion of fresh linseed oil is extraordinarily resistant to hydrolysis in the presence of cold sodium
hydroxide. Significant hydrolysis of linseed or similar vegetable oils requires prolonged boiling in strong
alkalines. By way of contrast, the carboxylic acid groups of slowIy dried linseed oii or the fast dried version
in the presence of PbO usually called linoxin react effectively with sodium hydroxide.
Comparative back titration experiments using both fresh and aged linseed oil were performed. Each
component was treated with cold, aqueous sodium hydroxide. Back titration was performed using suiphuric
14
Lh,e Hilfrich et al. Bio#7organic Chemistry andApplications
0 0 0 0
Oxitiveattp
CO CO CO0" | CO
CO
R
dative attack
o co
OH
H
Oxidative attack
Fig. 1" Proposed sketch of oxidized layers of dried linseed oil.
Table
Characteristic IR-vibrationai bands of different linseed oil preparations.
linseed oil,
fresh
1) rel.intensity
(cm") (%)
band type
O-H (H-bond)
2 2 C=O (overtone) 3470 (10)
3 alkenyI-H 3011 (84)
4 alkyI-H (CH=) 2926 (100)
5 2 alkyI-H (CH,) 2854 (96)
6 C=O 1745 (99)
7 C=C 1652 (24)
8 1463 (74)
9 1416 (47)
10 1377 (56)
11 1239 (71)
12 C-C 1163 (89)
13 1100 (71)
14 1029 (38)
15 969 (30)
16 915 (28)
17 867 (21)
18 794 (17)
19 cis-alken 722 (61)
20 603 (14)
linseed oil,
dried
1) rel.intensity
(cm") (%)
3452 (44)
-obscured-
2928 (99)
2855 (76)
1742 (100)
1464 (39)
1417 (30)
1378 (36)
1239 (49)
1167 (66)
1098 (47)
979 (30)
725 (13.5)
15
Vol. 2, Nos. 1-2, 2004 Alkali-Ion-Crown Ether # Art and Conservation:
The AppliedBioinorganic ChemisOy Approach
acid. Unlike fresh linseed oil which remained unaffected in the presence of NaOH marked concentrations of
carboxylic acid groups of aged linseed oil (or linoxin) have reacted with the added NaOH attributable to the
fact that 55 % ofthe sodium hydroxide solution were consumed (Fig.2).
linseed oil
i'1 r-)
IIl I1
nil E] r-I
E]E]
m
m
m
m
dried linseed oil
" '1
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14
ml H2SO4
[25mM]
Fig. 2: Titration of" saponified linoxin. Linoxin and linseed oil (84.1 mg each) were treated for hour with
10.0 ml cold, aqueous 50ram sodium hydroxide. Back titration was performed with 25ram sulfuric
acid. Linseed oil ([-_1) results in the steep curve while a more shallow curve originates from linoxin
(). The amount of sulfuric acid used to titrate linseed oil is exactly equivalent to the amount of
sodium hydroxide applied (steep drop of the pH value at the equivalence point 10.0 ml). Linseed oil
was accordingly not saponified. The titration curve of linoxin drops steeply at 4.5 ml sulfuric acid.
The difference to the theoretical amount of sulfuric acid required (10.0 ml) shows that 5.5 ml of the
50mM sodium hydroxide were consumed.
3.2. Varnish removal with lipase
In 1988 a promising new technique for the cleaning of painting surfaces was introduced employing iipase
/2,3/. This new approach was repeatedly employed/6,7/and critically examined/8,9/. By way of contrast to
the classical methods based on the use of organic solvents, the application of mild and selective biochemical
reagents was considered revolutionary. An exciting advantage over the earlier established procedures was
seen in the highly specific removal of one type of varnish among many other different varnishes/10/. This
16
Lht,e Hilfrich et al. Bio&organic Chemistry andApplications
new method was claimed to be both gentle and protective. In the initial approach aqueous gels in the
presence of lipase previously dissolved in weak buffers were applied /2,3,11/. The advantage was that
virtually insoluble oil vamishes applied over resin vamishes could be effectively removed. Pure resin based
varnishes were expected to be resistant to the lipase treatment and to act as a barrier avoiding undesired
reactions on lower layers/12/.
The efficacy of the enzymic cleaning system was examined using standardized test samples. Window
glass plates coated with linseed oil were subjected to an oxidative drying process for 3 6 months. This pre-
treatment was expected to ascertain the chemical relationship to historically aged oil varnishes in a
reproducible and controlled manner. The varnishes were aged by heating the varnished plates to 40 for 3 6
months. These sample preparations under highly reproducible laboratory conditions were preferred to older
paint and varnish layers of unknown and uncontrolled origin. A further important criterion was the use of
chemically non reactive glass as a ground material. Any undesired reactions with the applied varnish could
be excluded. For further experimental details see experimental section.
All cleaning suspensions were fleshly prepared. The cleaning suspension is composed of two
components. Component one contains aqueous 0.05 M Tris/HCl buffer at pH 7.7-8.4 into which
hydroxypropylmethylcellulose was added to obtain a gel of high viscosity. Triton X-100 was added to
improve the wetting of the surface. Prior to use, the lipase was suspended as component two in the gel and
applied onto the oil varnish. The gel was allowed to react for 12 min. The vamished surface of a glass plate
was divided into five separate tracks each ofwhich was differently pre-treated (Fig.3).
On tracks 4 a yellowish/brownish colour developed. The varnish layers became soft and gelatinous and
increased considerably in volume. They were easily removed by cotton swabs. The cotton tipped plastic rods
were gingerly hand rolled over the respective test track carefully avoiding any pressure on the tip. The
varnish on track 5 (control gel) remained intact and could not be removed by a cotton swab.
Contrary to the assumptions on which the lipase formula is based, the same cleaning effect was observed
when the lipase was omitted. Thus, the weakly alkaline Tris buffer must be assigned to be the actual reactive
component responsible for the observed activity ofthe mixture (Fig. 3).
The Tris buffer base employed in the 'enzymic cleaning experiment' is known to be a powerful chelator
of heavy metal ions. Pigments in contact with this buffer base can react to form complexes. Many of these
compounds are exceedingly reactive and can substantially affect the painting even years after the initial
treatment. When malachite oil paint (basic copper carbonate, green modification) is suspended in the Tris
buffer solution used in the enzymic cleaning protocol, blue coloured Cu (Ii) -Tris complexes are formed
(Fig.Sl). In the presence of reducing systems aggressive oxygen species are detectable/13-17/which are
known to break down many biopolymers.
17
Vol. 2, .Nos. 1-2, 2004 .Alkali,Ion-Crown Ether in Art and Conservation:
The Applied Bioinorganic Chenlistty Approach
Fig. 3: Reactivity of lipase and Tris buffers on dried linseed oil varnish. Dried linseed oil on a glass plate
after 20 minutes treatment with weakly alkaline buffer gels. The soft, deteriorated varnish can easily
be removed by a cotton swab. The addition of lipase had no effect. At pH 8.4 the reaction is stronger
than at pH 7.7.
1: buffer gel pH 7.7, omitting lipase
2: buffer gel pH 8.4, omitting lipase
3: buffer gel pH 7.7, in the presence of lipase
4: buffer gel pH 8.4, in the presence of lipase
5: control gel, omitting both buffer and lipase
3.3. The new concept: large Mr solvents strong bases large counter ions.
Taking into account the effective removal of varnish by alkali hydroxides, this long known phenomenon
was reconsidered in applying this reaction in a controlled manner. Alkaline varnish removal techniques are
occasionally applied in the cleaning of paintings, in extreme cases, alcoholic solutions of sodium hydroxide
are used to supplement the usual aqueous solutions of ammonia.
While the application of alcoholic sodium hydroxide to paintings may initially appear outrageous, the
following considerations show that very strong bases may be far less dangerous than weakly alkaline buffer
systems and may be employed in varnish removal if the following guidelines are observed:
18
Uwe HilJ?ich et al. Bioinorganic Chem&tly andApplications
Fig. SI" Copper complex formation from mineral based pigments in the presence of Tris buffer.
a) Dried linseed oil paint samples containing copper pigments (dark green -verdigris; pale green
malachite). The samples were placed in a glass dish and suspended with aqueous 0.05 M pH 8.4
Tris buffer solution. Within 20 minutes the solution is colored light blue.
b) After one day the solution is colored deep blue due to the formation of Tris copper complexes.
19
Vol. 2, Nos. 1-2, 2004 Alkali-Ion-Crown Ether in Art and Consetwation:
The Applied Bioinorganic Chemistry Approach
Rule 1" Use large relative molecular mass (Mr) solvents
Small Mr solvents (water, ethanol etc.) cause varnish layers to swell and soften. As a result, the solvent
can penetrate the varnish layer and cause severe damage to the paint layers below. Consequently, large Mr
solvents should preferably be used for restoring paintings.
Rule 2: Low concentrations ofstrong bases are safer than high concentrations ofweak bases
Very dilute solutions of strong bases are alkaline enough to remove varnish. When applied to varnish
layers, these dilute solutions react quickly and are consumed at the surface layer. They, therefore, lack the
time to penetrate into deeper layers. Strong bases also hydrolyse varnish ester groups practically
quantitatively, effectively eliminating the applied base at the same time an additional advantage.
Weak bases do not hydrolyse varnish completely. In buffered solutions, the presence of their corresponding
acids reduces their efficacy even further. Therefore, weak bases or buffers must be applied in high
concentrations to achieve comparable effects. However, varnish hydrolyses 1.nuch slower in weak alkaline
solutions than in strong alkalines, allowing the small buffer ions more time to penetrate lower layers and
cause damage. The OH ion is a very strong base. Accordingly, dilute solutions of sodium hydroxide are
perfectly suitable for the removal of aged varnish.
Rule 3: Employing large Mr cations.
The application of sodium hydroxide, or ammonia should, however, be avoided as hydroxide ions may
diffuse into lower paint and varnish layers. This diffusion of hydroxide ions is possible if they are
accompanied by small, diffusible counter ions.
Due to their permeability, varnish layers can be viewed as a 'cation sponge'. Invading hydroxide ions
hydrolyse the ester groups and the accompanying cations neutralize the resulting carboxylate groups.
Consequently, small cations should be avoided wherever possible in the restoration of paintings. This rule
should not only be observed when working with strong bases such as hydroxide ions but also in cases where
weak bases are employed to neutralize acids. As such, the damaging effect of desoxycholate/! 8/or resin
detergents/19/can be assumed to be primarily due to penetration of small cations into the binder and its
consequent hydrolysis.
Accordingly, the application of these 'mild' detergents in the conservation of paintings should be
avoided. The only exception should be cases in which neither of the layers (varnish, paint or base) contains
hydrolysable ester components. Exchanging small cations for large ones practically 'docks' the hydroxide
ions onto the surface ofthe painting.
3.4. The application of high Mr alkali crown ether
Appropriate solvents are the polar polyethylene glycol-400 (PEG-400) or the less polar polypropylene
glycol. Large Mr alcohols such as dodecanol can be employed as well. Large countercations prevent
hydroxide ions from penetrating into lower paint layers. This has the desirable effect of limiting the effect of
hydroxide ions to the surface of the varnish. In non-aqueous solvents, other anionic bases may be employed
as well. In this context our interest fell on PEG-400 and alkali hydroxides. PEG-400 is not only a large Mr
2O
Uwe ttilJkich et al. Bioinorganic Chemistry andApplications
solvent but also has excellent complexing characteristics, e.g. for alkali metal ions/20.. In this context it
should be kept in mind that in biological systems many crown ether type complexes are formed, for example,
Rb-nonactin (Fig 4)
Rb
/
Non,actin Li Na" K" Rb" Cs"
Fig. 4" The structure of Rb Nonactin, an example of a biological alkali ion crown ether type complex.
Lower right side: Stability constants of alkali-ion cryptates, redrawn after ref./24/.
In a similar way, large complexes resembling crown ethers are formed when alkali metal hydroxides,
alcoholates, etc. are dissolved in PEG-400 /21/, which encircles an alkali metal cation (Fig 5). The ionic
radius determines the resulting ring size. The most stable alkali ion crown ethers were obtained in the
presence of potassium (K+) followed by Rb+, Cs+, Na and Li+/22/(Fig 5). The ring size of the macro cyclic
metal complex is determined by the size of the alkali metal ion radius. This phenomenon is called template
effect/22,23/.
The genuine formation of a Rb-PEG-400 complex was demonstrated by passing a mixture of RbOH and
PEG-400 through a Bio-Gel P-2 column, it was clearly shown that the Rb-ions remained firmly bound in the
polyethyleneglycol fractions. The stability of the in situ generated crown ether type complex was surprisingly
high to survive such a long range gel filtration (Fig 6). The major portion appears slightly shifted directly
under the shoulder of the PEG-400 absorption at A20 nm. Absolutely no dissociated RbP-ions were detected in
front or after the PEG-400 absorption band supporting the conclusion ofa high stability.
Of special importance was the use of Rb as in a later stage the radioactive 86Rb ion was applied to study
possible migration into the lower paint layers. Thus, this cleansing regime in the presence of Rb was
documented in more detail (Fig.7).
21
Vol. 2, Nos. 1-2, 2004 Alkali-lon-C'own Ether" in Art and Conservation:
The AppliedBioinorganic Chemistry Appt'oach
0
Fig. 5: The structure ofalkali-ion (M+) polyethylene glycol-400 (PEG-400) crown ether.
50
Rb [pg]
25
0 0
0 20 40 60
Volume eluted [ml]
A21o
0.4
Fig. 6: Gel chromatography of in situ formed RbOH-PEG-400 crown ether type complex. A210 nm;
Rb(1). 10 ml of a mixture of mol/! RbOH and a 28 fold excess of PEG-400 were passed
through Bio-Gel P-2 column. No detectable dissociation of the RbOH-PEG-400 complex was seen
supporting the conclusion ofa high stability ofthis complex.
22
Uwe ttiljkich et al. Bioh,organic ChemistJ.y andApplications
Fig. 7: Detailed steps of RbOH PEG crown ether varnish removal: The test surface is a dried paint layer
consisting of lead white linseed oil. The paint layer is covered with a dried, approximately 7 years
old varnish layer of linseed stand oil. The RbOH PEG cleanser is applied by gingerly moving a
cotton swab or a polypropylene spatula over the surface. The brownish color of the RbOH PEG
crown ether is progressively intensified after an incubation of 2 minutes. The cleanser containing
dissolved varnish components is removed mechanically. The cleansed surface is subsequently
neutralized with polyacrylic acid PEG-400 and consecutively treated using large M,. solvents of
decreasing polarity. In the final step, the surface is treated with Shellsol T and allowed to evaporate.
Following the successful removal ofthe yellowed varnish, the cleansed surface is noticeably lighter.
Important notice: No detectable abrasion of the paint surface is microscopically seen after this
treatment!
Varnish removal is slower as compared to aqueous or alcoholic solutions of the same concentration.
Fortunately, this PEG-mixture is allocated to the varnish surface.
Varnish removal is especially slow if the PEG-400 solution is not disturbed once applied to the surface of
the painting. The high viscosity, as well as, the large M,. reduces diffusion and convection rates of varnish
hydrolysis products. Accordingly, the restorer can determine the rate of varnish removal by gentle movement
of the reaction solution (e.g. with a cotton swab or a polypropylene spatula). Oil varnish cleavage products
23
Vol. 2, Nos. I-2, 2004 Alkali-Ion-Crown Ether in Art and Conservation:
The Applied Bioinorganic Chemistry Approach
dissolve in PEG-400, coloring it orange-brown.
Removal of this solution terminates the reaction when the desired degree of cleansing has been achieved.
The remaining reaction solution is removed in subsequent stepwise washes. The advantage of this varnish
removal technique over conventional methods is that varnish is hydrolysed only at its surface. As such, the
effect of this technique resembles that of a 'chemical plane'. Varnish can be removed or thinned even if the
varnish and base are chemically similar (e.g. oil varnish on an oil paint). After the cleansing process no
detectable abrasion or levelling off of the paint surface was noticed both visually and after microscopic
examination. Detailed steps of varnish removal with the RbOH PEG crown ether method are depicted in
Fig.7.
3.5. Application of RbOH/PEG 400 crown ether for varnish removal on Old Master paintings
The new method was demonstrated on two fragments ofOld Master paintings.
A canvas fragment of a late 17th century oil painting was cleansed during a workshop at the Courtauld
Institute of the History of Art, London. The picture varnish was of a deep brown color. The fresh prepared
RbOH PEG-400 cleanser was applied onto the vamish surface without craquelures under slight agitation
using a polypropylene spatula.
This varnish most likely was of a polyester structure as its removal succeeded in a smooth manner. After
3-4 minutes the treatment was terminated by the removal of excessive RbOH PEG-400 employing dry
cotton swabs. The cleansed surface was subsequently neutralized with polyacrylic acid PEG-400 and
repeatedly washed with large Mr solvents of decreasing polarity. In the end the de-varnished area was of
exceptional quality (Fig 8).
The 19th century oil painting 'Die Fischhindlerin' ('pseudo Frans Hals') was treated on a small section
center left at the Institut f'tir Restaurierungs- und Konservierungs-wissenschaften, KOln. After employing the
RbOH/PEG-400 crown ether method on the aged varnish, the dark-greenish-brown colored sky of the
original painting emerged in its original bright blue color (Fig.S2). No detectable abrasion of the paint
surface was microscopically seen in either cleaned paint fragment after this treatment!
3.6. Possible absorption of RbOH/PEG-400 crown ether and polyacrylate onto the paint
surface
In order to locate possible absorption of Rb+-ions in the course of alkaline varnish removal, the cleansing
solution was enriched with 86Rb. This radioactive isotope was chosen attributable to the short half-life of 18.6
days avoiding thereby possible damage ofthe paint ground due to uncontrolled irradiation.
In order to compare the efficacy of the RbOH PEG-400 crown ether, cleansing solutions of both
ethanolic and aqueous Rb(S6Rb)OH were applied. Already mere mechanical wiping leaves only 2.5 % of 86Rb
on the paint surface. In the follow up treatment the Rb-PEG-400 cleanser a'ld its removal with oolyacrylic
acid in PEG-400 reduces the rubidium ion surface concentration to 0.8 % of its initial amount. By way of
contrast a thirty-fold higher 86Rb radioactivity (23.3 %) was seen after the ethanolic Rb(86Rb)OH-treatment.
The use of aqueous Rb(86Rb)OH resulted in an almost 40-times higher residual 86Rb radioactivity (30.1%)
24
Uwe HilJhich et al. Bio#7organic Chemistry andApplications
Fig. :8: Practical application of RbOH PEG-400 on a late 17th century oil painting. The new method was
demonstrated during a workshop at the Courtauld Institute in London
compared to the crown ether treatment (Table 2).
In the case of 14C-polyacrylic acid neutralisation experiments aiming at possible surface absorption of
4C-polyacrylate the post cleansing process was carried out as described in 2.2.3. No 4C-polyacrylate was
detected at the end of the cleansing process indicating that no absorption of this viscous poly-acid to the paint
surface was noticed.
4. CONCLUSION
4.1. The enzymic approach for varnish removal
A genuine reactivity of lipase on aged linseed oil varnish was not seen. Lipases are of large relative
molecular mass, between 40 000 and 60 000 Daltons. in the active centre which represents only 'a minor
portion of the molecule the fatty acid esters are cleaved. Lipases are insoluble in oil and are active
exclusively at the lipid/water interface. A detectable activity is seen when lipids are finely emulsified leading
to a substantial enlargement of the two adjacent surface areas. The surface of a paint film cannot be enlarged
by emulsification. The reaction is dependent on water, but excessive water cannot be used as linoxyn
25
Vol. 2, Nos. 1-2, 2004 Alkali-Ion-Crown Ether in Art and Conservation:
The Applied Bioinorganic Chemistry Approach
Fig. $2: Practical application of RbOH PEG 400 on the 19th century oil painting 'Die Fischhindlerin'.
Overpainted "pseudo Frans Hals" 1874. Workshop FH-KOln 2002.
substantially swells and deteriorates. Prolonged exposure to water can damage both the paint layers and the
ground.
A successful enzymic cleaning would lead to considerable concentrations of the reaction products
including glycerol and fatty acids, which must be removed. Oligomeric forms of fatty acids are soluble in
water at a pH range between 12-13 and virtually insoluble at lower pH values. High pH-values are too
alkaline fbr use on oil media. Thus, it is highly questionable that the enzymic cleavage of oil varnish layers
was possible under the given conditions.
in conclusion, a number of questions have been raised regarding the activity and safety of lipase mixtures
used to remove oil varnishes. According to the evidence presented here we leave it to the conservator to
decide whether or not polar aqueous media should be used for the removal of paint films. The small
molecular weight water molecules have been fbund to swell both varnish and paint layers especially when
weak alkaline buffers are carried into deeper regions where they can exert the reported activities leading to
deteriorating oxidase-mimeting transition metal complexes. It should be emphasized that lipase is not
reactive under the given conditions. All the observed reactivities are assigned to the Tris-buffer.
The challenge tbr both conservators and chemists remains. An alternative approach was the application of
alkaline crown ether for the removal of aged varnishes.
26
Uwe HilJhich et ai. Bioinorganic Chemistry andApplications
Table 2
Residual rubidium ions on paint surface
Rb(SeRb*)-applied
[2.4 gmol/cm2]
900 cpm
radioactivity Rb(Rb+)
[corn] [mol/crn1
Residual Rb(86Rb+)
Rb(eSRb/)-PEG-crownether
wiping off 23 0.06
Rb(SSRb)-PEG-crownether
post-cleansing 8 0.02
Rb(SSRb+)-ethanol
wiping off 850 2.23
Rb(SSRb+)-ethanol
post-cleansing 2t 0 0.55
94.5
23.3
aqueous Rb(SeRb+)OH
wiping off 380 0.99
aqueous Rb(eSRb/)OH
post-cleansing 280 0.73
41.9
30.9
Mere mechanical wiping already leaves only a small amount of 86Rb (2.5 %) on the paint surface. By way of
contrast, most of the alcohol-based cleanser evaporated on the varnish surface. Consequently, practically all
of the applied rubidium remains on the surface leaving (94.5 %) of residual reactivity. Still some 42 % of
86Rb were measured on the surface after a water-based cleansing process.
4.2. Application of alkali-crown ether for the removal of varnish; the applied bioinorganic
chemistry approach
The alkali-crown ether induced removal of varnishes of polyester type is a promising new method in the
conservation of cultural heritage. Nevertheless the application of this method should be performed with great
care. Alkaline removal of varnish should, consequently, be restricted to aged, oil-based varnishes and oil
paintings, in any case, preliminary tests must be conducted on an unobtrusive area to confirm applicability.
Oil varnishes covering very thin layers of oil paint or paint varnishes should not be removed completely by
this method. Varnish thinning should be preferred as the method of choice. Removal and/or thinning of later
over paint based on linseed oil may be recommended. Of course, extended microscopic and electron
micrographic controls wili be necessary. The result of the application of this new technique on genuine
paintings was promising. However, long-time observations of this cleaning process are still necessary to find
whether or not any hidden damage may emerge. The alkaline removal technique should also not be applied in
cases of deep craquelures or when the paint layer is peeling off concomitantly uncovering the ground. Thus,
alkaline solutions could creep under the surface attacking or separating the pigment containing ground.
27
Vol. 2, Nos. 1-2, 2004 Alkali-lon-Crown Ether in Art and Conserwation:
The Applied Bioinorganic C.hemistry Approach
ACKNOWLEDGEM ENTS
The generous support of the Landesbank Baden-Wtlrttemberg, Stiflung Kunst und Kultur, Germany,
'Firnisuntersuchung an Gemiden' File No." 200 1040129 is gratefully appreciated.. Dr.Aviva Burnstock,
Courtauld Institute ofthe History of Art, London, and Prof. Hans Portsteffen, Institut far Restaurierungs- und
Konservierungs-wissenschafien, FH-KOIn for kindly providing authentic fragments of 18th and 19th century
paintings. Thanks go to Dr. Raymond White, Department of Scientific Research, National Gallery London
and Dres. Hans-Jtirgen Hartmann, Albrecht Jung, Yoka Kaup and Christian-Heinrich Wunderlich,
Physiologisch-Chemisches-lnstitut, Universit,t Ttibingen, for many stimulating discussions. The generous
donation of 4C polyacrylic acid by Dr. Eugen Barbu, School of Pharmacy and Biomedical Sciences,
University of Portsmouth, Hampshire, UK is gratefilly acknowledged.
ABBREVIATIONS
PEG-400
RbOH PEG-400
Mr
polyethylene glycol 400
rubidiumium hydroxide in PEG-400
relative molecular mass
REFERENCES
1. E. Berger, Quellen und Technik der Fresko-, Oel- und Tempera-Malerei des Mittelalters, von der
byzantinischen Zeit bis einschliel31ich der Erfindung der Oelmalerei durch die Brtider van Eyck,
3.Folge, Mtinchen, 1912, pp. 15-83.
2. R. Wolbers, American Institute for Conservation preprints, 251-280 (1988).
3. R. Wolbers, Notes for a Workshop on New Methods in the Cleaning of Paintings, Getty Cons. Inst.
(1990).
4. H.P. Kaufmann, Fette, Seifen, Anstrichmittel 59, 153- 162 (1957).
5. M. Lazzari, O. Chiantare, Polym. Degr. Stab. 65, 303 313 (1999).
6. M. Hebeisen, Restauro 1, 18-25 (1991).
7. F. Hellwig, Arbeitsblgitterfir Restauratoren Gr. 12 M(Jbel 2 71-74 (1991).
8. B. von Gilsa, Zeitschriftfiir Kunsttechnologie und Konservierung 5, 48-58 (1991).
9. C.H. Wunderlich, U. Weser, Restauro 101, 22-27 (1995).
10. P. Geusau, M. Schreiner, Zeitschriftfiir Kunsttechnologie und Konservierung 6, 260-274 (1992).
11. U. Weser, C.H. Wunderlich, Zeitschri.)ctfir Kunsttechnologie und Konservierung 10, 147-152 (1996).
12. R. Wolbers, unpublished protocols, workshop KJln 1992.
13. U. Deuschle, U. Weser, Prog. Clin. Biochem. Med. 2, 97-130 (1985).
28
Uwe Hilfi'ich et al. Bioinorganic Chemistry andApplications
14. J. Mtiller, K. Felix, C. Maichle, E. Lengfelder, J.Strihle, U. Weser, Inorg. Chim. Acta 233, 11-19
(1995).
15. L.O. KIotz, J. Mtller, M. Fausel, R. Gebhard, U. Weser, Biochem. Pharmacol. 51,919-929 (1996).
16. J. Lange, H. Elias, H. Paulus, J. Mtiller, U. Weser, lnorg. Chem. 39, 3342-3349 (2000).
17. J. Mtiller, D. Schibl, C. Maichle-Mssmer, J. Str,hle, U. Weser, J. Inorg. Biochem. 75, 63-70 (1999).
18. J. Koller in: J.S. Mills, P. Smith (Eds.), Cleaning ofa Nineteenth-Century Painting with Deoxycholate
Soap: Mechanism and Residue Studies. Brussels Congress on Cleaning, Retouching and Coatings.
Technology and Practice for Easel Paintings and Polychrome Sculpture. IC preprints Brussels, 1990,
pp. 106-110.
19. B. von Gilsa, Zeitschrififiir Kunsttechnologie und Konservierung I, 184-218 (1993).
20. G. llluminati, L. Mandolini, B. Masci, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 105, 555- 563 (1983).
21. L. Mandolini, B. Masci, J. Am. Chem.Soc. 106, 168- 174 (1984).
22. C.A. Vitali, B. Masci, Tetrahedron 45 (7), 2213 2222 (1989).
23. S. Chun, S.V. Dzyuba., R.A. Bartsch, Anal. Chem. 73 (15) 3737-3741 (2001).
24. J.J.R.F. da Silva, R.J.P. Williams, The Biological Chemistry ?['the Elements, Clarendon, Oxford, 199 I,
p. 39.
29
