INTRODUCTION
Thyroxine or 3,3′,5,5′-tetraiodothyronine (T4) is the
major hormone secreted by the follicular cells of the thyroid
gland. This hormone is produced on thyroglobulin by thyroid
peroxidase (TPO)/hydrogen peroxide/iodide system. The synthesis of
 T4 by TPO involves two independent steps: iodination of
tyrosine and phenolic coupling of the resulting iodotyrosine
residues [–]. The prohormone T4 is then
converted to its biologically active form T3 by an outer
ring deiodination pathway. This particular reaction is catalyzed
by a selenocysteine-containing enzyme called iodothyronine
deiodinase (ID-I), which is present in highest amounts in liver,
kidney, thyroid, and pituitary
[–]. The thyroid gland also
produces an inactive metabolite rT3 by an inner ring
deiodination pathway. The triiodo derivatives T3 and
 rT3 are further metabolized by inner ring and outer ring
deiodination, respectively, by ID-I, ID-II, and ID-III to produce
the inactive metaboilite T2 (3,3′- T2, 3,5- T2, and 3′,5′-
T2). The outer ring 5′-deiodination catalyzed by the ID-I enzyme
is considered to be the first step in thyroid hormone action
because this is the only deiodination pathway that leads to the
formation of an active thyroid hormone. It is now widely accepted
that the deiodination catalyzed by ID-I is a ping-pong,
bisubstrate reaction in which the selenol (or selenolate) group of
the enzyme (E-SeH or E-Se−) first reacts with thyroxine (T4) to form a selenenyl iodide (E-SeI) intermediate. Subsequent reaction of the selenenyl iodide
intermediate with an as yet unidentified intracellular cofactor
completes the catalytic cycle and regenerates the enzyme active
site () [, ]. Although it is customary
to use dithiothreitol (DTT, 1,4-dithiothreitol, Cleland's
reagent) as the second substrate in in vitro experiments, the
identity of the physiological second substrate is still uncertain.
The tripeptide glutathione (GSH) can also act as a thiol
cosubstrate, but GSH is a much less potent cofactor than DTT for
ID-I [, ]. In addition to GSH, other native thiols such as
dihydrolipoic acid or dihydrolipoamide may serve as cofactors for
ID-I [, ]. Therefore,  may be an
incomplete or incorrect representation of the catalytic mechanism
of ID-I since evidence for the cofactor systems mentioned above
has only been presented for in vitro studies and not for in vivo
analysis.

Although the deiodination reactions are essential for the function
of thyroid gland, the activation of thyroid stimulating hormone
(TSH) receptor by autoantibodies leads to an overproduction of
thyroid hormones. As these antibodies are not under pituitary
feedback control system, there is no negative influence on the
thyroid activity and, therefore, the uncontrolled production of
thyroid hormones leads to a condition called “hyperthyroidism.”
The overproduction of T4 and T3 can be controlled by blocking
the thyroid hormone biosynthesis or reducing the conversion of
 T4 to T3. The thiourea drugs such as methimazole (1, MMI),
6-n-propyl-2-thiouracil (3, PTU), and 6-methyl-2-thiouracil (5,
MTU) are generally employed for this purpose
(). Despite the importance of these
antithyroid drugs in the treatment of hyperthyroidism, the
detailed mechanism of their action is still not clear. According
to the initially proposed mechanism, these drugs may divert
oxidized iodides away from thyroglobulin by forming stable
electron donor-acceptor complexes with diiodine, which can
effectively reduce the thyroid hormone biosynthesis [, ].
It has also been proposed that these drugs may block the thyroid
hormone synthesis by coordinating to the metal center of
thyroid peroxidase (TPO) []. After the discovery
that the ID-I is responsible for the activation of thyroxine, it
has been reported that PTU, but not MMI, reacts with the selenenyl
iodide intermediate (E-SeI) of ID-I to form a selenenyl
sulfide as a dead end product, thereby blocking the conversion of
T4 to T3 during the monodeiodination reaction
() [, , –]. The mechanism of
antithyroid activity is further complicated by the fact that the
gold-containing drugs such as gold thioglucose (GTG) inhibits the
deiodinases by reacting with the selenol (or selenolate) group of
the native enzyme () [, ].

In recent years, the selenium analogues 2 (MSeI), 4 (PSeU), and 6
(MSeU) attracted considerable attention because these compounds
are expected to be more nucleophilic than their sulfur analogues
and the formation of an −Se−Se− bond
may occur more readily than the formation of an
−Se−S− bond with the ID-I enzyme
[–]. However, the data derived from the
inhibition of TPO by selenium compounds show that these compounds
may inhibit the TPO activity by a different mechanism. We have
recently shown that the unexpected behavior of the selenium
compound MSeI as compared to that of its sulfur analogue may be
due to the existence of this compound in the zwitterionic form
and its facile oxidation to the corresponding diselenide (8)
[, ]. In this paper, we summarize our recent results on
the effect of antithyroid drugs on peroxide-catalyzed oxidation
and iodination reactions. In addition, we show that the
replacement of sulfur with selenium in MMI leads to an
interesting compound (MSeI) that exhibits significant glutathione
peroxidase (GPx)-like antioxidant activity.

INHIBITION OF LACTOPEROXIDASE-CATALYZED
OXIDATION BY ANTITHYROID DRUGS
The effect of antithyroid drugs on peroxidase-catalyzed oxidation
was studied in vitro by using spectroscopic techniques. The
enzyme inhibition experiments were carried out with
iron-containing lactoperoxidase (LPO) since it is readily
available in purified form. Furthermore, LPO has been shown to
behave very similarly to TPO with respect to oxidation of organic
substrates and iodination of thyroglobulin and other iodide
acceptors []. We have employed
2,2′-azio-bis-3-ethyl-benthiazoline-6-sulfonic acid (ABTS) and
H2O2 as substrates [] to determine the
half-maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) of test compounds. The IC50 values for the inhibition of LPO-catalyzed oxidation of ABTS by 1–3 and 5 are summarized in  []. The sulfur compound MMI inhibited the LPO activity with an IC50
value of 7.0 ± 1.1 μM, which is much lower than those
observed with PTU and MTU. The selenium analogue (2) also
inhibited LPO activity and the IC50 value was found to be almost 2-3 times lower than those of PTU and MTU. The higher activity of MMI as compared with those of PTU and MTU is in
agreement with the previous studies on the inhibition of TPO.
Since the activation of the iron center in TPO must proceed
through an interaction of Fe(III) with H2O2,
TPO inactivation may occur through a competitive coordination of
the drug to iron, assisted by hydrogen bonding with a histidine
residue of the TPO enzyme []. Under these conditions, MMI
might compete more successfully than PTU with H2O2
because the hydrogen-bond (hard) basicity pkHB value
of MMI (2.11) is much higher than that of PTU (∼ 1.32).
Similarly to PTU, the methyl derivative 5 is also
expected to be a weak inhibitor of TPO. On the other hand,
compound 2, which exists predominantly in the
zwitterionic form () [], probably does
not have the ability to coordinate to the iron center; therefore,
this compound may inhibit the LPO activity by a different
mechanism. Although the zwitterionic selenolate can be oxidized in
solution to give the corresponding diselenide (8), the
observed inhibitory activity must be ascribed entirely to the
presence of the reduced form (2) as the oxidized compound
(8) does not show any noticeable inhibition behavior
under identical experimental conditions.

Taurog et al have shown that MMI and related
derivatives irreversibly inhibit LPO and TPO, leading to a
complete inactivation of the enzymes [–]. Doerge
and others have shown that mammalian peroxidases including LPO may
activate the antithyroid drugs through S-oxygenation
to produce the corresponding sulfoxides or sulfinic acids
[, ]. They have also shown that the suicide inactivation
of LPO and TPO by MMI proceeds through the S-oxygenation of
the thione moiety to form a reactive sulfinic acid, which binds
covalently to the prosthetic heme and irreversibly blocks enzyme
activity [–]. Given the higher reactivity of
selenium compounds as compared with the sulfur derivatives toward
oxidation, it is possible that the facile oxidation of the
selenium compounds may lead to an efficient inhibition of LPO
activity. With this in mind, we treated MMI, PTU, MTU, and MSeI
with H2O2 before adding LPO and ABTS. The LPO
activity was measured several times by increasing the time for the
reaction of the test compounds with H2O2. Remarkably,
MSeI (2) inhibited the enzyme within few seconds even at lower
concentrations, which can be ascribed to the facile oxidation of
the reactive selenolate group in 2 (MSeI) by H2O2 or
by the oxidized enzyme. Because MMI also inhibits the enzyme very
efficiently, we have carried out further experiments to prove that
the mechanisms by which MMI and MSeI exert their inhibitory action
are different. The initial rates (v0) derived from various
concentrations of H2O2 were plotted against the
concentration of H2O2. The LPO activity was
completely inhibited by 40 μM MMI, and the enzyme's
activity could not be recovered by increasing the
H2O2 concentration 
() 
[].
The LPO activity could not be recovered even at lower
concentration of MMI (10 μM) and higher concentration of
H2O2 (230 μM). This suggests that MMI does
not act on H2O2 but acts on the enzyme itself,
leading to an irreversible inhibition as previously proposed. On
the other hand, 2 also inhibited the LPO activity as efficiently
as MMI, but in this case, the enzyme's activity could be
completely recovered by increasing H2O2 concentration
(). These observations may support the
assumption that MSeI, in contrast to MMI, does not interfere with
the native enzyme directly but it inhibits the LPO activity by
reducing the H2O2, which is required for the
oxidation of the iron center in LPO. The reduction of
H2O2 by 2 may become more efficient in the presence
of suitable thiols such as GSH because this process may constitute
a redox cycle involving a catalytic reduction of H2O2
(glutathione peroxidase (GPx) activity) []. Thus, compound
2 mimics the action of GPx, a selenoenzyme that protects the
cellular components from oxidative damage by reducing
H2O2 with the help of GSH []. Recently, the
GPx enzyme present in thyroid gland has been shown to inhibit the
iodination reactions by degrading the intracellular
H2O2 [, 
]. The high GPx activity of the key
compound 2 leads to an assumption that the antithyroid drugs may
act as antioxidants in addition to their inhibition
behavior.

INHIBITION OF LACTOPEROXIDASE-CATALYZED
IODINATION BY ANTITHYROID DRUGS
The interesting results that we obtained from the inhibition of
LPO-catalyzed oxidation reactions by MSeI (2) prompted us
to study the effect of this compound and related derivatives on
the LPO-catalyzed iodination reactions []. In addition, we
have studied the reactivity of MSeI toward iodine because the
effect of the selenium compounds on the iodination of tyrosine and
the identification of the products formed in the reactions of
these compounds with iodine are crucial in understanding the
mechanism of action in vivo of these drugs. The iodination of
tyrosine was studied by using LPO/
H2O2/I− assay
and the initial rates for the conversion of L-tyrosine to 3-iodo
L-tyrosine () were determined by an HPLC
method.

As the formation of 3,5-diiodo-L-tyrosine was also observed in the
reaction, only the initial 5%–10% of the conversion was
followed where only a trace amount of the diiodo compound was
produced. The decrease in the concentration of L-tyrosine was
followed by measuring the peak area at 277 nm and the amount
of tyrosine present in the solution at a given time was calculated
from the calibration plot obtained by injecting known
concentrations of L-tyrosine. The effect of compound 2 on the
iodination reaction was determined at various concentrations of 2
under identical experimental conditions ().
The incubation mixtures for the HPLC analysis contained 
KI,
L-tyrosine, hydrogen peroxide, and LPO enzyme. The mixture was
incubated in phosphate buffer at room temperature and aliquots
were injected onto the HPLC column and eluted with gradient
solvent system (0.1% TFA in water-MeCN). The decrease in the
amount of tyrosine (μg) was calculated from the calibration
plot. The concentration of compound 2 was varied from 6 μM to 20 μM, and a significant inhibition was observed even
at the lowest concentration of 2.

To understand the effect of peroxide substrate on the reaction
rate and the inhibition, the LPO activity was determined at
various concentrations of hydrogen peroxide. In addition, the
effect of peroxide on the inhibition of LPO-catalyzed iodination
by antithyroid drugs 1 and 2 was evaluated by
carrying out the experiments at various concentrations of
H2O2. In this HPLC assay, the incubation mixtures
containing KI, L-tyrosine, LPO enzyme, and various
concentrations of hydrogen peroxide were incubated at room
temperature. The aliquots were removed from the reaction mixture
at various time intervals, injected onto the HPLC column and
eluted with gradient solvent system (0.1% TFA in
water-MeCN). The formation of monoiodo tyrosine was
followed at 295 nm. The initial rates (v0) derived for
various concentrations of H2O2 were plotted against
the concentration of H2O2. Although the LPO activity
was inhibited by 2 at lower concentrations of
H2O2, the enzyme's activity could be completely
recovered by increasing H2O2 concentration
(). These results suggest that the
concentration of H2O2 has a dramatic effect on the
inhibition of iodination reaction by compound 2
() [].

The IC50 values for the inhibition of LPO-catalyzed
iodination of L-tyrosine by the test compounds were also
determined by following the same procedure. The initial rates for
the iodination reaction were determined at various concentrations
of inhibitors. The inhibition curves obtained by plotting the
percentage control activity against the concentration of
inhibitors are shown in  (inset). As expected, MMI exhibited a strong inhibition with an IC50
value of 5.2 μM, which is comparable with the
IC50 value obtained for the LPO-catalyzed oxidation
reaction [, ]. The selenium analogue (2) also
showed a strong inhibition with an IC50 value of
12.4 μM, which is consistent with the effect of this
compound on peroxidase-catalyzed oxidation reactions [, ].
Similarly to the LPO-catalyzed oxidation of
2,2′-azino-bis-3-ethylbenz-thiazoline sulfonic acid (ABTS), this
suggests that the selenium analogue may inhibit the LPO by a
different mechanism. The diselenide 8, on the other hand,
did not show any noticeable inhibition under identical conditions.
This confirms that the reduction of the diselenide to the
corresponding selenolate is essential for an efficient inhibition
of LPO-catalyzed oxidation or iodination reactions.

INTERACTION OF ANTITHYROID DRUGS WITH IODINE
The nature of charge-transfer complexes between heterocyclic
antithyroid drugs and diiodine is an important area of interest in
the study of hyperthyroidism [], and the electrical 
properties in general and the superconducting ability, in
particular, of sulfur-iodine complexes are also of current
interest [–]. Recently, a great deal of effort has
been devoted to the understanding of the interaction of
antithyroid drugs with iodine [–]. These
studies may provide insight into the nature of
products formed during the inhibition of thyroid hormone
synthesis. As mentioned in the introduction, it has been proposed
that these drugs may divert oxidized iodides away from
thyroglobulin by forming stable electron donor-acceptor complexes
with diiodine, which can effectively reduce the thyroid hormone
biosynthesis [, ]. Because the oxidation of MMI to the
corresponding disulfide (7) by TPO/H2O2/I− system
is associated with the reaction of MMI with I2
[–], we have investigated the interaction of 2
and 8 with iodine. It has been reported that I2
chemically oxidizes MMI to produce ionic disulfides that exist in
two different protonated forms []. It is unknown whether
the selenium analogue of MMI, in its reduced form, also undergoes
such oxidation by I2 to produce ionic species
(). Therefore, we carried out the experiments
with the reduced species (2), which exists in its zwitterionic
form [, ]. The reaction of 2 with I2 in
CH2Cl2 produced red-brown crystals. Interestingly,
the X-ray crystal structure shows the formation of compound 9,
which consists of a monocation containing a diselenide and
I3− as counterion () [].
This is in contrast to the reaction of MMI with I2 in
CH2Cl2, which afforded a disulfide-containing
dication and I8− as counterions [].

The formation of the monocationic species 9 is
interesting from a chemical point of view as only one of the
imidazole rings undergoes oxidation. It should be mentioned that
the N-methylation on MMI has been shown to abolish its TPO
inhibitory activity []. Freeman et al have shown that the
reaction of the N-methylated derivative
(1,3-dimethylimidazole-2-thione) with I2 does not
produce any disulfide, but it produces a 1 : 1 thione : I2 charge-transfer adduct []. The
N-methylated derivative of 2
(1,3-dimethylimidazole-2-selone), on the other hand, produces a
hypervalent “T-shaped” compound having I−Se−I
moiety [, ]. It should be noted that the reaction of the
methylated analogue of 2,
1,3-dimethylimidazole-2-selone, with one equivalent bromine
affords a hypervalent compound having Br−Se−Br
moiety, whereas the corresponding reaction utilizing a
half-equivalent bromine leads to the formation of a diselenide
dication having two Br− as counterions [].
Therefore, the existence of 2 in its zwitterionic (or
selenolate) form is probably responsible for its different
reactivity toward iodine. Stable open-chain cationic diselenide
species are very uncommon in the literature and to the best of our
knowledge no structural information is available for complexes
derived from the reactions of selenium analogues of antithyroid
drugs with iodine. The chemical oxidation of 2 by
I2 suggests that compound 8, which exists in
the oxidized form of 2, may not produce any ionic
species. To test this, the diselenide 8 was treated with
I2 in a 1 : 2 molar ratio in CH2Cl2.

This reaction yielded a brown solution from which dark-brown
crystals were obtained on standing at room temperature.
Surprisingly, the X-ray crystal structure shows the formation of a
monocationic species, which is identical with that obtained from
the reaction of 2 with I2 (). The
formation of a cationic species in this reaction is quite
unexpected because the reactions of iodine with diselenides
generally produce selenenyl iodide species or
charge-transfer complexes having diselenide-molecular iodine
adducts []. It is also known that some of the selenenyl
iodides may undergo disproportionation to give diselenide-iodine
complexes.

The far-IR spectrum of complex 9 shows a distinct band at
135 cm−1 for the ν(I−I) stretching vibration
mode. This is in agreement with the fact that 
I2 gives a
strong band at 180 cm−1 in the solid state, which shifts
to lower wavenumbers upon coordination to a donor atom, reflecting
a reduction in the I−I bond order []. The FT-Raman
spectrum of the complex in the ν(I−I) region shows
intense peaks at 164 cm−1, 143 cm−1, and
110 cm−1. In addition, a weak band is observed around
67 cm−1 (). The band at
110 cm−1 can be certainly assigned to the ν1 symmetric stretching of I3−, which being a
symmetrical ion normally exhibits only one Raman active band.
However, when a distortion of I3− occurs, the
antisymmetric stretching may become Raman active and additional
bands at higher (140 cm−1–130 cm−1) and at
lower frequencies (80 cm−1–70 cm−1) may be
observed [, ]. Therefore, the relatively weak bands at
143 cm−1 and 67 cm−1 can be attributed to the
antisymmetric stretching and deformation motions, respectively,
for the I3− ion ().

The single crystal X-ray studies confirm the proposed structure of
 9 (), which consists of two
independent diselenide monocations [Se−Se: 2.382 Å;
2.364 Å]. These diselenide cations interact with their
symmetry equivalents through
N−H⋯N hydrogen bonds to form
dimeric units with overall charge 2+. The charge balance in the
crystals is achieved by the presence of two I3−
anions. The two C−Se bond lengths in each subunit are
unequal due to the monoprotonation of the one of the five-membered
rings [C−Se: 1.886–1.890 Å]. The I−I bond
lengths observed also differ significantly from the corresponding
I−I bond length of I2 in the solid state
(2.715 Å). The two I−I bond lengths of the
I3− species in complex 9 range from
2.888 Å to 2.919 Å, indicating a slight distortion of
the I3− moiety. This distortion is probably
responsible for additional bands in the FT-Raman spectrum of the
complex.

In the reaction between 8 and I2 in
dichloromethane, the concentrations of 
I2 do not appear
to change the nature of products. During our attempts to oxidize
the second ring using various concentrations of 
I2 up to
an excess, only the monocation was obtained as a stable product.
However, the choice of solvent has been found to have a large
influence on the nature of products formed. The reaction of
 8 with I2 in a 1 : 2 molar ratio in water
produced a mixture containing both monocation (9) and
dication (10) as confirmed by single-crystal X-ray
studies (). In contrast to the monocation, the
charge balance in the crystal of dication is achieved by two
I− anions. In compound 10, the average
C−Se bond length of 1.895 Å is comparable with that
of the diselenide 8 (1.880 Å) 
[], but this
is significantly longer than the average C−Se bond length
(1.848 Å) found in compound 2 that exists in a
zwitterionic form []. As expected, the FT-Raman spectrum of
compound 10 shows no peaks in the region of lower
wavenumbers (), indicating the absence of any
polyiodide species in the crystals.

CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
Our recent results show that the selenium analogue of methimazole
(MSeI) exists predominantly in its zwitterionic form, in which the
selenium atom carries a negative charge and the five-membered
heterocyclic ring carries a positive charge. In contrast to the
sulfur analogue, the zwitterionic form of MSeI is unstable and
oxidizes in air to the corresponding diselenide. The resulting
diselenide can be easily reduced by reducing agents such as
NaBH4 or glutathione (GSH). In its reduced form (zwitterionic or selenolate), MSeI effectively and reversibly
inhibits the lactoperoxidase (LPO)-catalyzed oxidation reactions.
These results suggest that MSeI may not interfere with the native
enzyme directly, but it may inhibit LPO either by reducing the
H2O2 that is required for the oxidation of the iron
center in LPO or by interfering with the oxidized enzyme. In the
presence of GSH, MSeI may constitute a redox cycle involving a
catalytic reduction of H2O2 and thereby mimics the glutathione peroxidase (GPx) activity in vitro. In addition, MSeI
effectively inhibits the LPO-catalyzed iodination of L-tyrosine
and the inhibition could be completely recovered by increasing the
H2O2 concentration. These studies reveal that the
degradation of the intracellular H2O2 by the selenium
analogues of antithyroid drugs may be beneficial to the thyroid
gland as these compounds may act as antioxidants and protect
thyroid cells from oxidative damage. In addition to its
antioxidant activity, MSeI reacts with I2 to produce novel ionic diselenides containing iodide or polyiodide anions,
which might be effective intermediates in the inhibition of
thyroid hormones. However, further studies with TPO are required
to derive some firm conclusions regarding the mode of action of
the antithyroid drugs. Our future work will focus on the design
and synthesis of novel sulfur and selenium compounds and study of
their antithyroid and antioxidant activities.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This study was supported by the Department of Science and
Technology (DST), New Delhi, India.

Figures and Tables
Proposed mechanism for the deiodination of thyroxine by
ID-I and inhibition of ID-I by n-propyl-2-thiouracil
(PTU) and gold thioglucose (GTG).

Chemical structures of some commonly employed
antithyroid drugs and their selenium analogues.

The possible tautomeric structures of compound
2. The compound exists predominantly in its zwitterionic form
2c, which may have a partial C−Se double bond
character.

Plot of initial rates (vo) for the LPO-catalyzed
oxidation of ABTS versus concentration of 
H2O2: (a)
control activity; (b) 40 μM of 2; (c)
40 μM of 8; (d) 80 μM of PTU;
(e) 80 μM of MTU; (f) 40 μM of
MMI. Conditions: LPO: 6.5 nM; H2O2:
22.9 μM (see []).

Iodination of L-tyrosine by LPO/peroxide/iodide system.

Inhibition of the LPO-catalyzed iodination of L-tyrosine
by MSeI. The decrease in the amount of tyrosine with time was
followed by HPLC: (a) control; (b) 6 μM of 2; (c)
9 μM of 2; (d) 12 μM of 2; (d)
15 μM of 2; and (e) 20 μM of 2
(see []).

Inhibition of the LPO-catalyzed iodination of L-tyrosine
by MSeI. Effect of H2O2 on the inhibition by 2; (a) 0 μM; (b) 20 μM; (c)
30 μM; (d) 40 μM; 
inset: inhibition of
tyrosine iodination by (e) 1; (f) 2 at a fixed
H2O2
 concentration.

Chemical structures
of compounds 9 and 10 derived from the compound
2.

Molecular structures of (a) monocation 9 showing
the hydrogen bonding between two monocations and (b) dication
10 [].

FT-Raman spectra of the monocation 9 (a),
diselenide 8 (b), and the dication 10 (c) (see
[]).

Inhibition of LPO activity by 1–3, and 5 [].

No	Compound	IC50 (μM)	
	
1	MMI (1)	7.0 ± 1.1	
2	MSeI (2)	16.4 ± 1.5	
3	PTU (3)	45.0 ± 2.1	
4	MTU (5)	47.8 ± 0.1	
a Concentration of the compound causing 50% inhibition. Each  IC50
value was calculated from at least three independent experiments.

