INTRODUCTION
Design of sequence-specific DNA- or RNA-modifying reagents
requires conjugation of recognition and reactive groups in a
single molecule. Oligonucleotides, which are fragments of single-stranded RNA or
DNA, possess an inherent ability to anneal to the respective
complementary sequences of the nucleic acids inside cells. This
specific interaction results in the formation of double-stranded
complexes and provides a recognition mechanism necessary for
copying and correcting genetic material. Because of their unique
targeting ability, oligonucleotides are of particular interest in
chemotherapy. They can serve as specific tags for
nucleic-acid-damaging drugs. Inherently, nonspecific chemical
compounds can be converted into accurate weapons when coupled to
oligonucleotides. The reactive derivatives of oligonucleotides
represent a wide class of specific reagents proposed for
regulating gene expression (for a review, see []). This approach, relying on sequence-specific targeting of reactive
compounds, was initially called “complementary addressed
modification of nucleic acids” []. In its initial
implementation, it was suitable for the modification of single
stranded polynucleotide chains. Later, the approach was expanded
to include nonreactive oligonucleotides and their synthetic
analogs, forming the basis of the “antisense” technology
(reviewed in []). It was also shown that the same method may
be used for certain double-stranded nucleic acids capable of
forming triple-stranded complexes (“antigene” approach)
[–]. Presently, the methodology is considered universally
applicable to suppress the development of viral infections as well
as tumors induced by mutations in protooncogenes responsible for
malignant cell transformation.

Various chemical groups were studied as reactive moieties in
oligonucleotide conjugates []. Phthalocyanines have a number
of chemical properties making them effective reagents for nucleic
acid modification. They can both act as good photosensitizers,
promoting singlet molecular oxygen formation, and effectively
catalyze oxidation of organic molecules by molecular oxygen in
dark. The presence of bridging nitrogen atoms in these compounds
results in efficient absorption at 600–700 nm, making them
sensitive to the light of this wavelength, which can penetrate
deep into living tissues []. This property of
phthalocyanines is used in photodynamic therapy (PDT) of cancer
[]. Singlet molecular oxygen 1O2 is active
towards different cell components (nucleic acids, proteins,
lipids) [].

On the other hand, phthalocyanine complexes with some paramagnetic
metal ions are able to catalyze formation of reactive oxygen
species (ROS) such as superoxide radical, hydrogen peroxide, and
hydroxyl radicals via reductive-oxidative mechanism. These species
damage different biomolecules []. The complex of
phthalocyanine with Co(II) is known to be one of the most
effective catalysts in the oxidation of different substrates with
molecular oxygen and hydrogen peroxide [].

The main goal of the present work is to address the possibility of
the modification of DNA by phthalocyanines of Al(III) and
Zn(II) as sensitizers and Co(II)-phthalocyanine as a
catalytic group conjugated to oligonucleotides. The structures of
metallophthalocyanine conjugates are presented in
.

EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
Chemicals and reagents
Acrylamide, N,N′-methylene-bisacrylamide, urea, acetonitrile,
DMF (Fluka, Switzerland), 1,3-diaminopropane (Merck, Germany),
Tris-HCl, and 2-mercaptoethanol (Sigma, USA) were used. All buffer
solutions were prepared with double-distilled water using
ultrapure reagents. E coli 8-oxoguanine-DNA
glycosylase was a courtesy of Dr A A Ishchenko, (ICBFM,
Novosibirsk, Russia). All phthalocyanines investigated contained
four carboxyl groups, which were used for conjugation with amino
groups of the linkers attached to the 5′-terminal phosphate
of the octanucleotide (8-nt).

Oligonucleotides and conjugates
The 8-nt and 22-nt deoxyribonucleotides 5′-pdTCTTCCCA-3′ and
5′-dTGAATGGGAAGAGGGTCAGGTT-3′ () were synthesized on an ASM-700 automated
synthesizer (BIOSSET Ltd., Novosibirsk, Russia) from
phosphoramidites purchased from Glen Research (Sterling, Va, USA)
according to the manufacturer's protocol. The oligonucleotides
were deprotected with ammonium hydroxide and purified by ion
exchange HPLC on a Nucleosil 100-10 N(CH3)2
column followed by reverse-phase HPLC on a Nucleosil 100-7
C18 column (both 4.6 × 250 mm, purchased
from Macherey-Nagel, Düren, Germany). The purity of oligonucleotides exceeded 98%, as estimated by
electrophoresis in 20% denaturing polyacrylamide gel after
staining with Stains-All dye (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, Mo, USA).
Concentrations of oligonucleotides were determined from their
absorbance at 260 nm []. The 22-nt oligonucleotide was used as a DNA
target; the 8-nt oligonucleotide was used for the synthesis of
conjugates with phthalocyanines.

The oligonucleotide
conjugates with phthalocyanine complexes of Al(III), Zn(II), and
Co(II) were synthesized using a previously reported solid-phase
method [] with a
30–40% yield. The conjugates were isolated from the
reaction mixture and purified by HPLC in an acetonitrile/water
gradient. Reverse-phase HPLC profiles with different retention
times for the free oligonucleotide and for the
phthalocyanine-oligonucleotide conjugates provided a strong proof
that the phthalocyanine moiety was covalently attached to the
oligonucleotide [].

5′-terminal phosphorylation
The 22-nt oligonucleotide was labeled with 32P at the
5′-end in a 30 μL reaction
mixture containing 30 pmol of the oligonucleotide,
30 pmol of [γ−32P]ATP
(specific activity 3.3 ×
10−3 mCi/pmol), and 10–20 units of
T4 polynucleotide kinase (Sibenzyme, Russia) in a buffer
containing 0.05 M imidazolium chloride (pH 6.6),
0.01 M MgCl2, 5 mM dithiothreitol,
0.1 mM spermidine, 0.5 mM ADP, and 0.1 mM
EDTA. The mixture was incubated at 37°C for 30
minutes. The product was precipitated by adding 10 volumes of
2% LiClO4 in acetone, and further purified by
electrophoresis in denaturing 20% polyacrylamide gel
(PAGE). The oligonucleotide was electroeluted onto a DE-81 filter
(Whatman, Brentford, UK), stripped from the filter with
3 M LiClO4 at 56°C, and
precipitated with 2% LiClO4 in acetone. The
precipitate was washed with acetone (3 ×
200 μL), dried in vacuum, and dissolved
in double-distilled water (100 μL). The
concentration of the resulting solution of the labeled
oligonucleotide did not exceed 2.5 ×
10−7 M.

Modification
All modification was carried out in a buffer containing 0.16 M
NaCl, 0.02 M sodium phosphate (pH 7.4), and 1 mM
EDTA.

Sensitized modification
The absorption spectra of phthalocyanines contain the Soret band
at about 340 nm and two Q-bands at 630 nm and
680 nm (Figures  and
). Therefore, the reactive
moiety of the conjugates can be excited at different wavelengths
using light of a high-pressure mercury lamp
(λ;max = 365 nm) or a
helium-neon laser (λ;max =
633 nm), respectively.

Irradiation of the samples at 365 nm was carried out for
3 hours in a photochemical reactor equipped with a quartz
rectangular cell of 0.1 cm path length. This cell was
immersed in a cuvette filled with the aqueous solution and placed
in a thermostated holder at 5°C. The light source
was a 1000 W DRSh-1000 high-pressure mercury lamp
(Electromash, Chelyabinsk, Russia). The intensity of the light
entering the cuvette, I0, was measured
by ferrioxalate Hatchard-Parker actinometry [] and found to be (1.43 ± 0.07) ×
1016 photons/(s×cm2).
Selection of excitation wavelengths was performed by using a BS-4
glass filter (LZOS, Lytkarino, Russia) which cuts off the light of
wavelength lower than 340 nm. The high-pressure mercury
lamp spectra consist of separate bands, and only one band
(λ; = 365) over 340 nm can excite
reagents because of its overlap with the Soret band of
phthalocyanines. The concentration of the target in the reaction
mixtures was 1 × 10−8 M, and the
concentration of the conjugate 8.2 ×
10−5 M. Such concentrations were chosen in
order to force all oligonucleotide targets into a duplex with the
conjugate. Irradiation of the samples in the visible spectrum
region was carried out for 30 minutes in 1.5 mL tubes
(Eppendorf, Wesseling-Berzdorf, Germany) using a helium-neon laser
(633 nm, 10 mW) at 25°C. This
wavelength corresponds to a Q-band of phthalocyanine absorption
spectra.

The irradiated solutions were immediately
transferred into polypropylene tubes containing
1 μL of 1.4 mg/ml of total
E coli tRNA; 400 μL of
2% LiClO4 in acetone was then added. The
precipitate was pelleted by centrifugation, washed twice with
80% ethanol and once with acetone, and dried in vacuum.

Catalytic modification
Oxidative modification of the 22-nt oligonucleotide with the
complementary oligonucleotide carrying a Co(II)-phthalocyanine
moiety was performed at 25°C in two ways: (1) in
the presence of H2O2 and (2) in the presence
of O2 and 2-mercaptoethanol as a reducing agent. The
concentration of the target in the reaction mixtures was
10−8 M, the concentration of the conjugate
was 8.22 × 10−5 M, and the
concentrations of H2O2 and 2-mercaptoethanol
were 2.0 × 10−4 M. The concentration
of O2 in aqueous solutions at 25°C at
atmospheric pressure is 2.0 ×
10−4 M. The sample volume was
10 μL; the incubation time was 24
hours.

Identification and separation of modification products
To cleave the modified oligonucleotide at the points of
modification where it becomes labile to alkali treatment
(apurinic/apyrimidinic sites and oxidized deoxyribose), the
precipitates were dissolved in 50 μL of
1 M piperidine (pH 12) and incubated for 45 minutes at
95°C [].
The products were precipitated and washed twice with 95%
ethanol, once with acetone, and then dried in vacuum.

To digest the product oxidized at deoxyguanosine residues,
including 8-oxoguanine, which is relatively stable in alkali, the
samples were treated with 8-oxoguanine-DNA glycosylase from
E coli (Fpg protein). Prior to this treatment,
the samples were washed twice with 85% ethanol and once
with acetone to remove the buffer, and dried in vacuum. The
precipitates were dissolved in 20 μL of
a buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 50 mM
KCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 9%
glycerol, and 6.6×10−6 M Fpg.
After the reaction, the enzyme was twice extracted by the mixture
of phenol-chloroform-isoamyl alcohol (25 : 25 : 1 v/v/v).
The reaction mixtures were precipitated with 10 volumes of
2% LiClO4 in acetone, centrifuged, washed twice
with 95% ethanol, dried, and dissolved in a marker dyes
solution containing 0.1% bromophenol blue and 0.1%
xylene cyanol FF.

The products of modification were separated by 20% PAGE
in the presence of 7 M urea. After electrophoresis, the gel
was exposed to CP-BU X-ray film (Agfa-Gevaert, Mortsel, Belgium)
for 10–20 hours at −10°C.

RESULTS
The conjugates of deoxyribooligonucleotides with phthalocyanines
of Al(III) and Zn(II) I–IV were studied as
reagents for photochemical modification of nucleic acids (). The oligonucleotides
were connected to the phthalocyanine moieties through linkers with
different numbers of CH2-groups: three in conjugates
I and III and six in conjugates
II and IV. Conjugate V
containing Co(II)-phthalocyanine was used as a reagent for
catalytic modification in the presence of molecular oxygen (). The linker in this
conjugate consists of three CH2-groups. A 22-nt
oligonucleotide served as the DNA target. The structure of the
complementary duplexes formed between the DNA target and the
conjugates is presented in .

UV/Visible spectra of free phthalocyanines and conjugates
The conjugation of phthalocyanines with oligonucleotides was
confirmed by the change in the spectrum shape at
600–700 nm in comparison with the absorption spectrum
of free phthalocyanine. For free Co(II)-phthalocyanine, an
absorption band was observed at 678 nm, with a shoulder
around 630 nm. In the case of the oligonucleotide conjugate
V, a band at 631 nm with a shoulder at
680 nm was detected []. For free Al(III)-phthalocyanine, the only
absorption band in the visible region was observed at
678 nm; but for its oligonucleotide conjugates
III and IV, two bands were found at
639 nm and 678 nm (see ). The spectrum of free
Zn(II)-phthalocyanine contained a band at 643 nm with a
shoulder at 680–700 nm (). This band was broader than that for
Co(II) and Al(III) complexes. The binding of Zn(II)-phthalocyanine
with oligonucleotides I and II results
in the appearance of a second band at 688 nm. All
conjugates demonstrate absorption near 260 nm most probably
due to the contribution of the oligonucleotide part.

Sensitized modification under Hg lamp irradiation 
 (λ; = 365 nm)
Modification of the 22-nt oligonucleotide was carried out at
5°C . When the reaction products were
analyzed by electrophoresis in 20% PAAG, no direct cleavage
of the target was observed. It is known that oxidation of DNA may
lead to the appearance of alkali-labile sites []. These modifications are
detected by the treatment of the reaction mixture with 1 M
piperidine (pH 12) [].
However, other modifications, which are stable in alkali, can also
be found, for example, 8-oxoguanine. To detect this modification,
the reaction mixtures were treated with Fpg protein, a repair
enzyme from E coli that cleaves DNA at guanine
residues oxidized at C8, as well as at some others oxidized
guanosine derivatives [].

The reaction yields of target modification by
Zn(II)-phthalocyanine conjugates I and
II containing aminopropanol and aminohexanol linkers
were 18% and 14%, respectively, as detected by
piperidine treatment (). Treatment with Fpg revealed only 8% and
6% modification yield for conjugates I and
II, respectively (). A comparison of cleavage time courses
demonstrates that the modification yield in the case of conjugate
I is somewhat higher than for conjugate
II. This may be explained by an increase in the
probability of consumption of the active oxygen species in
by-processes in solution due to a longer spacer of conjugate
II. The longer spacer of conjugate II
moves the phthalocyanine moiety farther away from the
oligonucleotide target as compared with conjugate I,
resulting in an increased contribution of by-processes with the
solvent.

The target modification by both Zn(II)-phthalocyanine
conjugates I and II took place
preferentially at guanine residues in the region
G11–G20. Residues G13 and
G15 were mainly modified, as can be seen from a
histogram presented in  for conjugate I. The autoradiogram of a gel
corresponding to the time course of target modification by the
conjugate I revealed by Fpg treatment is presented in
. The same data were
obtained for conjugate II.

In the case of
Al(III)-phthalocyanine containing conjugate III (data
are not shown), the modification yield approached 12% as
detected by piperidine treatment, and was close to 5% when
Fpg protein was used to reveal modification points. The
experiments with the Al(III)-containing conjugate IV
resulted also in a rather low modification yield of
5–7% as revealed by both piperidine and Fpg protein
treatments (data are not shown).

Sensitized modification under helium-neon
 laser irradiation (λ; = 633 nm)
The reaction mixtures containing the phthalocyanine Zn(II) and
Al(III) conjugates II and IV,
respectively, were also irradiated by a helium-neon laser at a
633 nm wavelength for 30 minutes at 25°C. In
contrast to the experiments with an Hg lamp, no cleavage of
oligonucleotide target in the absence of these reagents was
observed because biopolymers do not absorb light in the red
visible range of a spectrum. The laser light was much more intense
than the Hg lamp light, as can be seen from a significant decrease
in the required irradiation time. The experiments have
demonstrated () that
the modification yield detected by piperidine treatment was higher
for Zn(II)-phthalocyanine as compared with Al(III)-phthalocyanine
and was 24% and 10%, respectively.

Distribution of modification sites for the phthalocyanine
Al(III) IV and Zn(II)-phthalocyanine II
conjugates were quite similar (). In addition to
G13–G15, noticeable cleavage takes
place at G6, G7, and G8 bands. A
comparison with the data obtained with an Hg lamp irradiation at
5°C suggests that such difference may be due to the
higher flexibility of the phthalocyanine moiety and the higher
mobility of the oxidizing species at higher temperature.

Catalytic modification
The term “catalysis” used here applies to the mechanism of
active oxygen species generation, where a metal-phthalocyanine
moiety acts as a catalyst. The nucleic acid is oxidized by
hydrogen peroxide, and metal-phthalocyanine catalyzes this process
through reversible changes in its oxidation state.

Modification of DNA in the complexes with the
Co(II)-phthalocyanine conjugate V were performed at
25°C with H2O2 and with
O2 in the presence of 2-mercaptoethanol as a reducing
compound. The PAGE separation of the reaction products has shown
no direct cleavage of the target. Modifications were detected only
after treatment of the reaction mixture either with 1 M
piperidine or with Fpg.

The modification yield in the presence of O2 and
2-mercaptoethanol after 1 M piperidine treatment was found
to be 15%, and in the presence of
H2O2 it was approximately 35%. The
highest modification yield was achieved in approximately 20 hours.
The modification yields determined by Fpg protein treatment were
significantly higher, 70% for the reaction mixture
containing hydrogen peroxide and approximately 25% for the
reaction mixture containing O2 and
2-mercaptoethanol.

The target modifications were localized mainly in the
G13–G15 sequence, similar to the
situation observed with the Al(III)- and Zn(II)-phthalocyanine
conjugates. The distribution of modifications was similar for the
systems containing O2/2-mercaptoethanol and hydrogen
peroxide (). However,
the depth of modification in the case of hydrogen peroxide was
notably higher. This is not unexpected for a replacement of the
system “O2 + reducing reagent” with
H2O2, which is a direct source of hydroxyl
radicals. Detection of modification points by Fpg protein
treatment reveals a higher modification yield than does piperidine
treatment, most probably due to a preferential modification at the
C8 position of guanine.

DISCUSSION
In the present work, we show that tetracarboxyphthalocyanines of
Al(III), Zn(II), and Co(II) modify nucleic acids when delivered to
their DNA targets by means of a complementary oligonucleotide tag,
and that the modification can be initiated either by irradiation
or in the reactions of catalytic redox cycling. Our experiments
indicate that no direct cleavage occurs in the model
oligonucleotides. Phthalocyanines presumably incur damage on
different moieties in DNA depending on whether photosensitization
or redox catalysis takes place. Apurinic/apyrimidinic sites and
deoxyribose oxidation were revealed under alkaline conditions, and
oxidized nucleotide bases like 8-oxoguanosine, by treatment of the
samples with Fpg protein. It was found that in the presence of the
Co(II)-phthalocyanine conjugate, the products of the catalytic
modification in the DNA target are mainly substrates for Fpg
protein but are poorly revealed by piperidine. When the
high-pressure Hg lamp (365 nm wavelength) or laser
irradiation (633 nm) were used, the sensitized modification
products were better revealed by piperidine treatment than by Fpg
protein. The relatively low levels of photomodification may be
explained by the large migration distance (∼ 90 nm)
of singlet molecular oxygen 1O2 along the
polynucleotide chain compared to the 0.34 nm distance
between DNA bases [] or
formation of modified bases of different structure, not revealed
by the detection methods used.

Nevertheless, our results unambiguously demonstrate that
modification of nucleic acids occurs when the target and
metallophthalocyanine group are drawn together. Similar results in
sensitized photomodification of nucleic acids were obtained
earlier with conjugates containing other reactive groups,
including porphyrins and their analogs, such as
Pd(II)-coproporphyrin I [], chlorine [], sapphyrin, and Dy(III) texaphyrin []. Using oligonucleotide tags,
it is possible to target the reagent to the required nucleic acid
sequence, thus enhancing the selectivity of the process. Our
results show that the generation of short-living oxygen species in
the case of catalytic modification in the presence of the
Co(II)-phthalocyanine reagent results in sufficiently effective
and sequence-specific modification of nucleic acids. The
reactivity of these reagents towards DNA or RNA of foreign
organisms or malignant tumor cells raises the possibility of
blocking the expression of specific genes and using phthalocyanine
conjugates as drugs.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are grateful to Dr Dmitri Pyshnyi for his help in the
synthesis of oligonucleotides. This research was made possible in
part by grants from RFBR (04-04-48171, 05-04-48447, 06-04-49263),
Presidium of the Russian Academy of Sciences (MCB Program, 10.5),
the Russian Ministry of Education and Science (02.434.11.7064,
NS-4526.2006.4), CRDF (Y1-B-08-16). Alexander A. Chernonosov is a recipient of the
Lavrentyev's Fellowship from Siberian Division of the Russian
Academy of Sciences. Vladimir V. Koval was supported by Postdoctoral
fellowship from INTAS (04-83-3849).

Figures and Tables
Structures of the phthalocyanine
conjugates.

Sequence of the
oligonucleotide duplex used for the complementary-addressed DNA
modification. Ptc, tetra-4-carboxyphtalocyanine of Co(II),
Al(III), or Zn(II), attached to the 5′-terminal
phosphate of the addressing oligonucleotide via aminopropanol or
aminohexanol linkers.

Absorption spectra of
aqueous solutions of Al(III)
tetra-[4-carboxypentenylsulfamoyl]-phthalocyanine (dashed line)
and its conjugate with d(pTCTTCCCA) (solid
line).

Absorption spectra of
aqueous solution of Zn(II)
tetra-4-carboxymethylthiophtalocyanin (dashed line) and its
conjugates with d(pTCTTCCCA) (solid
line).

Time courses of
photosensitized modification of the 22-nt oligonucleotide
target with Zn(II) phthalocyanine conjugates I
(▼, ■) and II (•,
◆) after irradiation with an Hg lamp at
365 nm. The postirradiation treatment was done using Fpg
protein (▼, ◆) and 1 M
piperidine (■, •).

Distribution of base
modifications in the 22-nt oligonucleotide target for sensitized
modification with Zn(II)-phthalocyanine conjugate
I after irradiation by an Hg lamp at 365 nm.
The modifications were revealed by treatment with Fpg protein or
1 M piperidine.

Autoradiogram of a
20% denaturing polyacrylamide gel showing a time course of
cleavage of the 22-nt oligonucleotide target at 5°C by
Zn(II)-phthalocyanine conjugate I after
irradiation by an Hg lamp at 365 nm. Time points shown
are 0 minutes (lane 1), 33.3 minutes (lane 2), 83.3 minutes (lane
3), 133.3 minutes (lane 4), and 180 minutes (lanes 5–7). The
reaction mixture in lane 6 was not irradiated. The sample in lane
7 did not contain I. Lane 8 represents a Maxam-Gilbert (A
+ G) sequencing reaction.

Distribution of base
modifications in the 22-nt oligonucleotide target for sensitized
modification with the Zn(II) and Al(III) phthalocyanines
conjugates II and IV after laser light
irradiation at 633 nm. The modifications were revealed by
treatment with 1 M piperidine.

Distribution of base
modifications in the 22-nt oligonucleotide target for catalytic
oxidation by the Co(II)-phthalocyanine conjugate V
in the presence of H2O2, after the modifications were
revealed by treatment with Fpg protein or 1 M
piperidine.

