Calixarenes and Their Biomimetic Applications
Y.K. Agrawal and Harshit Bhatt
Institute ofPharmacy and Sciences, Nirma University ofScience & Technology
Sarkhej Gandhinagar Highway, Ahmedabad 382481, India
E-mail: drykagrawal@yahoo.com
CONTENTS
Abstract
1. Introduction
2. Biomimetism based on function
2.1 Zn(II) complexes: Hydrolytic metalloenzymes
2.2 Cu(II) complexes: Hydrolytic metalloenzymes
2.3 Acyltransferase enzyme mimic
2.4 Ribonuclease enzyme mimic
2.5 ATPase enzyme mimic
2.6 Aldolase enzyme mimic
2.7 Heme mimics
2.8 Carbonic anhydrase enzyme mimic
3. Biomimetism based on structure
3.1 Importance of Cu(I) and Cu(II) in biological systems
3.2 Calixarene based Cu(I) and Cu(II) complexes as structural models
3.3 Importance of Zn(II) in biological systems
3.4 Calixarene based Zn(II) complexes as structural models
4. Biomimetism based on molecular recognition and importance of
hydrogen bonding
5. Concluding remarks
Acknowledgements
Reference
ABSTRACT
The synthetic models for the structures, spectroscopic properties and catalytic activities of metalloprotein
active sites have been reviewed. Calixarenes were used as new biomimetic catalysts because of their
advantage of providing preorganiiation of the catalytic group, which can bind the substrate dynamically that
results in fast turnover and fast release of the products. Functional and structural models based on calixarenes
are presented and in addition importance of molecular recognition and non-covalent interactions e.g.
237
VoL 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Calixarenes and Their Biomimetic Applications
hydrogen bonding and their role in biological systems are discussed with the help of synthetic systems.
1. INTRODUCTION
Supramolecular chemistry/1,2/is dominated by forces resulting from intermolecular non-bonded, non-
covalent electrostatic forces and dispersion forces, whose development requires the use of all resources of
molecular chemistry combined with a designed manipulation of noncovalent interactions so as to form
supramolecular entities. Many efforts have been made to design the appropriate model or mimic for
biological processes. Macrocyclic receptors meet some of the requirements for designing artificial receptors
like:
They possess cavities and clefts of appropriate sizes and shapes
Reactive binding sites
Branches and bridges
Connections (polycyclic) that allow the construction of a desired architecture.
One such class of compounds 'Calixarenes' was investigated which has historical roots in the 19th
century
and it has been suggested as a potential enzyme mimic/3/. The widespread research on molecular recognition
of guest by synthetic hosts has stimulated bio(in)organic chemists to design catalysts that mimic the active
sites of enzymes. This aspect of supramolecular chemistry involves the synthesis of enzyme models or
artificial enzymes that have the same catalytic function but are structurally less complex and more stable than
enzymes. Such enzyme models can provide information on mechanistic aspects of enzyme action and may
find future application as catalyst in industrial synthesis. Foremost among the compounds investigated for
this purpose are cyclodextrins whose torus shape endows them with the ability to form host-guest complexes
and in certain cases to act as powerful catalysts/4/. However, these compounds have a disadvantage of being
available in only a limited array of sizes. Therefore, calixarenes are of great interest, since they possess an
architecture similar to that of the cyclodextrins, but are amenable to greater variation and control. These are
particularly attractive components for attempting to construct in vitro systems that mimic in vivo catalytic
activity of the enzymes. They are versatile molecular scaffolds for the design of host molecules because the
functional groups are directionally preorganized. They can also create a binding site in which functional
groups can dynamically adjust to the guest by low energy conformational changes of the calixarene skeleton.
Although many calix[4]arene-based molecular receptors have been reported /5,6/,there have been few
developments with regard to calixarene enzyme-models/7-12/.
A synthetic model system possesses the following features shown by enzymes:
Fast reaction rate under mild conditions
High degree of structural and chiral recognition of their substrates
High turnover rate for a number of substrates without being destroyed.
May be inhibited by the compounds that bind to the enzyme but do not react themselves.
238
EK. Agrawal and Harshit Bhatt Bioinorganic Chem&tty andApplications
In addition to these features, enzyme mimics should be less complex, molecular weight less than natural
enzymes, stable even at high temperatures and soluble in most of the solvents. Biological reactions found in
living nature can be mimicked in purely chemical conditions, particularly with small and simple substrates.
The discovery of the biomimetic reactions may not lead to very efficient system, but then on their
development, lead to more perfect states from the knowledge of their mechanisms and using chemical means
as well as principles of biological systems with complex organization.
The following two main approaches may be adopted from several strategies to understand high-complex
biological processes, which nature has spent millions ofyears to evolve in their present forms:
I. Functional model- A system (intermolecular in general) that carries out the reaction concerned without
the binding characteristics ofthe enzyme and may perform functional aspects ofthe natural enzymes.
2. Structural model- A system that shows efficient binding characteristics of the substrate or simplified
analogue, or more properly an analogue ofthe transition state ofthe biological reaction.
2. BIOMIMETISM BASED ON FUNCTION
The functional properties of supramolecular systems are highly dependent on two major features:
(i) reactivity and (ii) catalysis. Molecular receptors bearing appropriate reactive groups in addition to binding
sites may complex a substrate (with given stability, selectivity, and kinetic features), react with it (with given
rate, selectivity, and turnover), and release the products, thus regenerating the reagent for a new cycle. The
design of efficient and selective supramolecular reagents and catalysts may give mechanistic insight into the
elementary steps of catalysis, provide new types of chemical reagents, and effect reactions that reveal factors
contributing to enzymatic catalysis. A large number of reagents based on functionalized cyclodextrins,
macrocyclic polyethers and calixarenes have been investigated.
Ester cleavage processes have been most frequently investigated in enzyme mode[ studies. In nature,
chemical transformations of phosphate esters by metalloenzymes are generally facilitated by the co-operative
action of two metal ions, e.g. in P nuclease, DNA polymerase I, phospholipase C, and alkaline phosphatase.
Zn(ll), Mg(II), Mn(ll) or Fe(lll) are usually found in such enzymes with 3-5 A distance in the active site.
The phosphate group is activated due to the Lewis acid function of these metal ions, which generate reactive
nucleophile and stabilize both the pentacoordinate phosphorous transition state and the leaving group.
Several artificial active site models have been reported in which two metal centers such as Zn(II)/7-13/,
Cu(ll)/14/, Co(Ill)/15/and lanthanides(IIl) /16/ are held apart by two ligands that are linked to a molecular
scaffold. An appropriate molecular scaffold is required for spatial organization to design an efficient enzyme
mimic. Attempts have been made in the past decades to catalyze biochemical reactions with synthetic
compounds in which appropriate catalytic groups are oriented in such a way that the transition state of the
reaction can be stabilized. However, low activity is generally observed compared to catalytic activity of
enzymes. Enzymes exhibit a certain legree of flexibility and can bind the substrate and transition state by an
induced fit mechanism, whereas biomimetic compounds are often too rigid or too flexible. Designed active
site models for dinuclear metallophosphodiesterases are often dinuclear transition metal complexes in which
239
Vol. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Calixarenes and Their Biomimetic Applications
a molecular spacer oriented two catalytic metal ions. The choice of spacer affects the catalytic properties. A
very flexible spacer may result in a lack of catalytic cooperativity between the metal centers. In contrast, very
rigid molecular scaffold might not be able to match the geometrical changes of the substrate during the
dynamic catalytic process. Thus, to be an efficient enzyme mimic, such models require molecular scaffold,
that allow both a proper organization of multiple catalytic group and a certain degree of flexibility.
Calixarenes might be suitable building blocks since multiple catalytic groups can be preorganized
dynamically, similar to the amino acid residues and cofactors in the polypeptide backbone of enzymes.
Nonenzymatic phosphate ester cleavage is effectively facilitated by the Co(lll) /15,17/ and lanthanides (Ill)
/16,17a,18/ions. However, for application as artificial nucleases, the use of Co(Ill) is not attractive since it
forms substitutional inert complexes with the products, which hamper turnover catalysis at neutral pH. The
disadvantage of lanthanide(Ill) ions is their toxicity and the laborious formation of sufficiently stable
complexes. Free lanthanide(III) ions form readily lanthanide(lll) hydroxide precipitates, and both forms are
active in phosphate ester cleavage, which makes kinetic control complicated. Although occasionally
substantial rate accelerations for phosphate ester hydrolysis have been observed, low substrate binding and
lack ofturnover are general problems encountered with simple model systems/9/.
Generally; p-nitrophenyl esters have been used as substrates, because reaction rate can be easily
determined by the measurement of the increase in absorbance at X, 400 nm due to the release of p-nitro
phenolate on hydrolysis. Mainly, two model substrates were selected to study hydrolytic reactions using
functionalized calixarenes as catalysts.
(a) 2- Hydroxy propylp-nitrophenylphosphate(HPNP)
The substrate 2- hydroxypropyl p-nitrophenyl phosphate(HPNP, Fig. l) is an RNA model substrate that
reacts via intramolecular trans-esterification by nucleophilic attack ofthe [3 hydroxy group.
(b) Ethyl-p-nitrophenylphosphate(EPNP)
Ethyl-p-nitrophenyl phosphate (EPNP, Fig. 2) can be considered as a DNA model substrate that reacts via
intermolecular nucleophilic attack ofa hydroxide ion.
HO
O
OPO
0
NO
o
II
O--P--OI
catalyst
0
Fig. 1" RNA model- HPNP
240
EK. Agrawal and Harsh# Bhatt Bioinorganic Chemistt.y andApplications
0
NO2
li
O--P--O
catalyst
O
/
0
OP--O -I-
o
/
HO'NO2
Fig. 2" DNA model- EPNP
2.1. Zn(ll) complexes" Hydrolytic metalioenzymes
Upper rim functionalized calixarenes have been reported for the complexation of zinc and copper ions.
Mono-, di- and trinuclear Zn(ll)-calixarene complexes have been discussed/7,8,12,19/as enzyme models for
hydrolytic reactions and compared with pyridine-Zn reference complex (Fig. 4).
The mononuclear calix[4]arene complex (Fig. 3) is a factor 6 more active than reference complex (Fig. 4),
which lacks the calix[4]arene backbone, indicating that the hydrophobic effect plays a role in the catalytic
process. The calix[4]arene can assist in the catalysis via its hydrophobic aromatic surface that can lower the
pK, of a nearby metal bound water molecule and can interact with the substrate. Both the binding of the
substrate and the conversion ofthe substrate were found to be far more efficient in dinuclear complex (Fig. 5)
compared to mononuclear complex (Fig. 3). The catalytic activity of mononuclear complex was found to be a
factor of 50 lower, compare to dinuclear complex. The presence of 0.48 mM induces a 23000 fold, rate
enhancement in the catalytic cyclization of the RNA-model substrate 2-hydroxy propyl p-nitrophenyl
OR OR OR OR
R CH2CH2OEt
Fig. 3: Calix[4]arene based mono-nuclear Zn(ll) models
241
VoL 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Calixarenes and Their Biomimetic Applications
N Zn2/
---N
Fig. 4: Reference pyridine complex
R CH2CH2OEt
Fig. 5: Proposed mechanism for HPNP cleavage by calix[4]arene based dinuclear Zn(ll) models
phosphate (HPNP, pH 7.0, 250 C), which is the largest catalytic rate acceleration reported for nuclease
mimics. Comparison with mono functionalized calix[4]arene (Fig. 3) and reference pyridine zinc complex
(Fig. 4) showed that the high catalytic activity can be attributed to a favourable contribution of the calixarene
moiety in substrate binding and catalytic synergic action ofthe two Zn(ll) centers.
Dinuclear Zn(ll) Model (Fig. 5) was proposed to bind HPNP by two point coordination. One Zn(ll) center
activating the phosphoryl group and the other activating I-hydroxyl group, subsequently followed by general
base promoted cyclization. The catalytic activity of dinuclear complex (Fig. 5) was compared with modified
dinuclear complex (Fig. 6), which was rigidified by modification of the calix[4]arene lower rim with a crown
242
EK. Agrawal and Harshit Bhatt Bioinorganic Chemistty andApplications
\/
N .Zn2+
//
\/
Zn2+,
/\
0 0
R n-Pr
Fig. 6: Calix[4]arene based dinuclear Zn(ll) models
bridge and it was found to be less efficient by the factor of 8, than flexible dinuclear complex in both HPNP
binding and conversion which showed the importance of flexibility in the cooperative action of Zn(ll) during
catalysis.
Phosphodiesterase enzymes such as P nuclease use three divalent metal ions [e.g. Zn(II)] in the active
site to catalyze the hydrolytic cleavage of phosphate diester bonds in nucleotides like DNA and RNA.
Synthetic catalysts that cleave RNA at specific sites are of interest for future applications in gene technology.
The dinuclear complex was enlarged with an additional Zn(ll) center to trinuclear Zn(ll) complex (Fig. 7)
mimicking the active site of trinuclear metallohydrolases/8/. The trinuclear Zn(ll) model was reported as an
efficient catalyst for the cleavage of RNA dinucleotides due to the cooperative effect of the Zn(ll) centers
with high rate enhancement and significant nucleobase specificity. The catalytic activity of this trinuclear
complex was measured for a series of RNA-dinucleotides, which exhibited a very high catalytic activity and
rate accelerations over the uncatalyzed reactions by the order of 104- 10.Large differences in rate for
different nucleobases in the dinucleotides were also observed. Thus, the three Zn(ll) ions have been found to
catalyze the hydrolytic cleavage of phosphate diester bonds in phosphatidicholine and in nucleotides such as
RNA and DNA, respectively. However, the function of a third metal ion in close proximity to a dinuclear
metal cluster in enzyme is not yet fully understood, and only one example of a biomimetic study has been
reported/13a/. Three Zn(li) centers are co-operatively involved in the catalysis. Double Lewis acid activation
occurs by two neighboring Zn(ll) centers and the third Zn(ll) center can possibly thcilitate deprotonation of
the [3-hydroxy group of HPNP, either by Lewis acid activation similar to catalysis by dinuclear complex or
via a bound hydroxide ion. These models appeared to be more efficient catalysts and the third Zn(ll) center
affects 40% higher rate enhancement in HPNP cleavage. The presence of the third Zn(ll) center in close
proximity to the dinuclear Zn(ll) cluster results in a decreased substrate affinity and an increased catalytic
243
Voi. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Calixarenes and Their Biomimetic Applications
\/
/ \ I
OR OR OR RO
\/
R CH2CH2OEt
Fig. 7: Trinuclear Zn(ll)-calix[4]arene complex as model for hydrolytic metalloenzymes
rate. This implies that trinuclear complex binds the pentacoordinate phosphorous transition state better than
dinuclear complex. The heterodinuclear complex containing two Zn(II) and one Cu(II) was tbund to be even
more active. This might be due to synergy of the favourable properties of Zn(II) in the binding and Cu(II) in
the conversion ofthe phosphate diester substrate.
2.2. Cu(ll)complexes: Hydrolytic metalloenzymes
In the phosphoesterase metailoenzymes several amino acid residues are also involved in the catalysis. In
the hydrolysis of phosphate monoesters, by alkaline phosphatase, two Zn(ll) ions and one Mg(II) ion are
assisted by a serine, a histidine and an arginine side chain. In RNase A, an ammonium group of a lysine
residue activates a phosphoryl group, while two histidines co-operate in deprotonation ofthe nucleophile and
the protonation of the leaving group/20/. The catalytic role of the amino acid residues in RNase A has been
mimicked with general acid-base systems, like bisimidazoles and aqueous solutions of imidazoles or
diamines /21/. Recently, poly(ethylene glycol)-supported Cu(II)- triazacyclononane was reported as an
efficient, recoverable and recyclable catalyst for the cleavage of the phosphodiester/22/. Cis-diaqua Cu(II)
complexes, either mononuclear /23-26/or dinuclear. /27,14/have also been reported as active artificial
catalysts tbr the cleavage of phosphate diesters. Chin has shown that the unique catalyst neocuproine-Cu(II)
and a 1,8- naphthalene substituted dinuclear[9]ane-N.-Cu(II) complex cleave RNA rapidly under mild
conditions/24-26/. An enzyme mimic, the Cu(II) complex of a cyclodextrin dimer linked by a bipyridyl unit
was reported by Breslow et al. which catalyzes the hydrolysis of an unactivated doubly-bound benzyl ester
/28/.
The synthesis, characterization and catalytic activity of the dinuclear calix[4]arene-Cu(II) complex (Fig.
8) and the mono nuclear reference complex (Fig. 9) were described/9/and shown as mimic for dinuclear
244
EK. Agrawal and Harshit Bhatt Bioinorganic C,hemistry andApplications
O O NO
OR OR OR RO
R CH2CH2OEt
Fig. 8: Proposed mechanism for HPNP cleavage by calix[4]arene-Cu(ll) complex
OEt
Fig. 9: Mononuclear reference complex
metallophosphodiesterases. This novel calix[4]arene dinuclear-Cu(II) complex binds and cleaves the
phosphate diesters HPNP (1 104 rate enhancement) and EPNP (2.7 104 rate enhancement) far more
efficiently than the mononuclear reference complex. This is due to the efficient synergic action of the two
Cu(ll) centers, which are well-preorganized on the flexible calix[4]arene scaffold. Another interesting
similiarity of this calix[4]arene based artificial metalloenzymes is the remarkably low pK, of the metal(ll)
bound water molecules, which makes the artificial enzymes active under the slightly acidic to neutral
conditions. The low pK, is the result of local hydrophobic environment in the natural enzymes, created by the
aromatic surface of the calix[4]arene moiety /7/. Bifunctional phosphodiesterase models that possess two
245
Vol. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Calixarenes and Their Biomimetic Applications
R CH2CH2OEt
(a) R'= CH2OH
(b) R'= CH2NH
H3N
NO
.-""
O--%--O-...H3N+
o
Cu2+
N N
Fig. 10: Trans-esterification of DNA by calix[4]arenes
bisimidazolyi-Cu(ll) centers and two hydroxy methyl groups at the upper rim of the calix[4]arene were
reported/10/and their synthesis and the catalysis ofthe transesterification of HPNP were also described. The
aminomethylcalix[4]arene derivative (Fig. 10, b) exhibits bifunctional catalysis in the intramolecular trans-
esterificatio of the RNA model substrate HPNP. The substrate binding is due to cooperative action of one or
both Cu(ll) centers with one or two ammonium groups. Two ammonium groups and one of the Cu(II) centers
may bind and activate the negatively charged phosphoryl group of the substrate. The remaining Cu(ll) center
can then contribute to the catalysis by the deprotonation of the substrate hydroxyl group via a bound
hydroxide ion. The ammonium groups, further, stabilize the transition state and possibly the leaving group by
electrostatic interactions and hydrogen bonding/10/. The hydroxy methyl calix[4]arene (Fig. 10, a) showed a
catalytic activity that is in the same range as for calix[4]arene-Cu(II) complex (Fig. 8), i.e., a rate acceleration
of a factor 6.9 x 103 over the uncatalyzed reaction. Dinuclear complex with two additional amino groups
exhibits at pH 7.4 a rate acceleration of 3.1 x 103, but is not an efficient catalyst at pH 6.2. Hydroxy methyl
calix[4]arene was found to be much less active at alkaline pH, indicated weak binding of the substrate to the
catalyst. This might be caused by tightly bound Cu-hydroxides and steric hindrance by the hydroxymethyl
groups.
Multinuclear metal arrays are ubiquitous components of metalloprotein active sites that participate in a
246
EK. Agrawal andHarshit Bhatt Bioinorganic Chemistry andApplications
number of important biological reactions. For example, tricopper sites have been identified in the
multicopper oxidases /29/ and in particulate methane monooxygenase (pMMO), which use 02 to couple the
four-electron reduction of O2 to H20 with the oxidation of substrate or to functionalize hydrocarbons,
respectively. A tetracopper site has also been found that features <2 N-donors per metal in an important
respiratory enzyme, nitrous oxide reductase /30/. Higher nuclearity species with three or four bound metal
ions are less common and they also feature ligands comprising bidentate donors that would be expected to
afford enhanced reactivity at the metal centers due to the greater accessibility of lower cordination numbers.
Tolman et al. /31/ developed a new set of multidentate ligands, which incorporate >3 bidentate N-donors
that are covalently linked to and preorganized by the calix[4]arene framework for metal complexation. These
ligands were synthesised with the aim of binding metal ions and exploring the chemistry of the resulting
complexes, with the ultimate objective being to understand the reactivity, structures, and spectroscopic
properties of multinuclear metal arrays found in Nature.
2.3. Acyltransferase enzyme mimic
Several binding interactions working in cooperation generate much greater flexibility and specificity in
receptors. Hence, cooperativity of functional groups is important for the catalytic properties of the
supramolecular enzyme mimic. In particular, imidazole moieties were often used as an acid-base couple or
nucleophile, which can enhance hydrolytic processes or aldol type condensation reactions. Calix[4]arenes,
which bear imidazole groups at different positions were reported recently by Schatz et al./32/as metal free
enzyme mimics with trans-acyltransferase actiwity. Attachment of one nucleophilic group onto the upper rim
resulted in an increase of the initial reaction rate. The macrocyclic skeleton improved the hydrolysis by 13%
compared with the non-macrocyclic catalyst and by 52% towards the blank hydrolysis. Diimidazole
calix[4]arene bearing the catalytic groups in a distal arrangement doubled the initial reaction rate indicating
some kind of cooperativity of the catalytic sites. At pH 6.3, 50 % of the imidazole units are protonated and
both imidazole groups can act as acid-base catalysts for the ester hydrolysis in aqueous solution.
Calix[4]arenes possess enough flexibility to adopt a conformation suitable for the productive interaction with
the substrate(p-nitrophenyl benzoate), to get it hydrolysed.
2.4 Ribonuclease enzyme mimic
The lanthanide ion based macrocyclic complexes mimic the hydrophobic nature of ribonucleases, where
the lanthanide ions induce the formation of a hydrophobic cavity for glycine based macrocyclic compound,
giving rise to a large order of magnitude enhancement in the hydrolytic cleavage of mRNA model compound
HPNP /33/. A Zn(ll) neocuproine based artificial rebonuclease has been constructed for the sequence-
selective transesterification of RNA/34/.
Shinkai et al. /35/ reported the first totally man-made mimic for the regioselective catalysis of
ribonuclease. The 2', 3'- cyclic phosphates of cytidine, uridine, adenosine and guanosine C>p, U>p, A>p &
G>p) were hydrolysed in the presence of water soluble calix[n]arene-4-sulfonates and regioselective
cleavage of ribonucleoside 2', 3' -cyclic phosphate was achieved successfully in acidic media by a non-
247
Vol. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Calixarenes and 7heir Biomimetic Applications
enzymatic system, whereas the regioselective catalysis by cyclodextrins was effective only in neutral and
alkaline media. Marginal regioselective catalysis was shown by calix[6]arene and calix[8]arene, which may
be due to rapid exchange between cone, partial-cone, alternate and other conformations, while regioselective
P O(2') cleavage of C>p to cytidine 3' phosphate was successfully achieved by calix[4]arene as catalyst.
Both the regioselectivity and the reaction rate was found to increase with increasing concentration of
calix[4]arene, exhibiting gradual saturation at large concentration of the calixarene. It was also noted that the
cyclic structure of calix[4]arene is required for the regioselective catalysis as the regioselectivity was not
increased by the monomeric analog 4-hydroxy benzenesulfonic acid. The cytosine residue of C>p is
positively charged, whereas calix[4]arene is negatively charged (one of the hydroxyl group is negatively
charged). The adenine residue of A>p and the guanine residue of G>p are also mostly protonated.
Electrostatic interaction was found between calix[4]arene and the substrate was found to be essential for the
catalysis.
2.5. ATPase enzyme mimic
Nucleotide polyphosphates, particularly adenosine tri- di- and monophosphates (ATP, ADP and AMP),
are integral parts of the energy cycle for a vast range of biological processes, such as photosynthetic
phosphorylation, oxidative phosphorylation, muscle contraction, and active transport. ATP provides the
energy needed for the maintenance of cell transmembrane electric potentials. This energy comes from a class
of enzymes termed ATPas. The function of ATPas is simply to hydrolysise the terminal phosphate residue of
the triphosphate tail of ATP to yield ADP and inorganic phosphate (H2PO4, Pi). his process releases about 35
kJ mol
-of enengy and results in temporary phosphorylation ofthe enzyme.
An example of supramolecular catalysis showed a remarkable effect of supramolecular interaction on the
catalysis of calix[4]arene (Fig. I) on hydrolysis of ATP/36/. The hydroxides at the lower rim were found to
cause strong intermolecular hydrogen bonding with guest molecules, using laser photolysis and pulse
radiolysis. This electrostatic interaction between calixarene and substrate was suggested as essentiality for the
OH OH
o
)0 0
OPOPOPOCN
,N N
NH
Fig. I: The proposed structure ofthe supramolecular complex calix[4]arene with ATP
248
Y.K. Agrawal and.Harshit Bhatt Bioinorganic Chemistry and.Applications
catalysis. The hydrolysis of ATP in pure aqueous solution was found to be slow and acceleration in the speed
was noted after the addition ofwater-soluble calix[4]arene into the solution.
2.6. Aldolase enzyme mimic
The condensation of dihydroxy acetone phosphate(DHAP) to glyceraldehyde phosphate (GAP) is
catalyzed by the aldolase enzyme to form fructose-l,6-diphosphate. A calix[4]arene derivative was proposed,
which might serve as an aldolase model which holds a molecule of metal atom co-ordinated dihydroxy
acetone phosphate in such a fashion that the keto group is proximate to amino function (reacting to Schiff
base formation) and the t-hydrogens of the hydroxy methylene group are proximate to a carboxylate
function (leading to a proton abstraction and formation of a carbanion as a charge separated enamine).
Condensation with an aldehyde (glyceraldehyde phosphate in the biological reaction) can then rapidly occur
at the exposed, unhindered face of the carbanion to yield the aldol product. In a similar way, numerous other
enzyme mimic systems can be envisaged in which appropriate functional groups are arrayed around the
cavities provided by calixarenes either in the 'cone' or 'partial cone' conformation/3/.
2.7. Heme mimics
Heme is an iron containing tetrapyrrole macrocycle. In heme proteins, the iron atom is either five or six
coordinated. The fifth position is occupied by a so-called proximal iron ligand. This ligand may be a sulfur
ion from cysteine molecule (cytochrome P-450 and chloroperoxidase) or a nitrogen atom of imidazole from
histidine molecule as in secondary amine monooxygenase, catalase, peroxidase and O2 carriers (hemoglobin
and myoglobin). The sixth (distal) ligand may be exogeneous or supplied by protein (dioxygen, water
peroxide etc.). Heme proteins carry out a number of various reactions including reversible dioxygen co-
ordination (heamoglobin and myoglobin), one electron oxidation of organic substances (peroxidases), two
electron oxidation of organic substances (cytochrome 450, secondary amine monooxygenase and diamine
oxidase) and halogination (chloroperoxidase and thyroid peroxidase). Heme mimics have been developed
and the structural and physical measurements obtained from simple model systems gave invaluable
information about the mechanism of cooperativity in the binding of small molecules to hemoglobin and other
heme containing systems such as peroxidases. The structural changes which occur at the heme center upon
the binding of dioxygen, carbon monoxide, and aikyl cynanides to hemoglobins can also be understood using
porphyrin containing models /37/. Previous studies of heme active site structures show that the primary
difference is the length of the iron proximal histidine bond, which can be controlled by the degree of
hydrogen bonding to this histidine. Great efforts to mimic these functions with synthetic analogues have been
made for more than two decades. The peroxidase models resulted in several catalytic systems capable of a
large range of oxidative transformations. Most of these model systems modified the porphyrin ring
covalently by directly binding auxiliary elements that control and facilitate reactivity; for example, electron
donating or withdrawing substituents. A biomimetic approach can be designed by attempting to keep the
porphyrin ring system unaltered, as close as possible to its native form and introducing all modifications at or
close to the axial coordination sites. Such a model system is less demanding synthetically and provides an
249
Fol. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Calixarenes and Their Biomimetic At)plications
easy way to probe the effect of a single structure modification. A two-component system (a bisimidazolyl
ligand and an iron-porphyrin) was reported. Introduction of asymmetry, by attaching different imidazoles as
head groups, led to the formation of two axial bonds of different length. Addition of hydrogen bonds to one
of the imidazoles in an advanced model increased these differentiation and expanded the porphyrin ring.
These biomimetic complexes were found to be almost identical in structure to peroxidase active sites/37/.
In the quest of developing non-porphyrin heme mimic, calixarene derived heme-mimics have been
reported. Cram's cavitand (Fig. 12)/38/showed oxygen affinity. In an effort to make another non-porphyrin
heme-mimic Gutsche and Nam investigated the metal complexation behaviour of p-(2-amino-
ethyl)calix[4]arene (Fig. 13). One of the reasons for undertaking the synthesis was to explore its complexing
abilities with metal ions such as Fe2
and its potential for acting as an oxygen carrier. The purpose was that it
would form an octahedral complex, in which the amino groups occupy four equatorial sites around a metal
0 0 X
0
0
X CH CH2CH2, CH2CH2CH2, Me2Si
Fig. 12: Cram's cavitand
H2N H2
H2N
OR OR
Fig. 13: p-(2-Aminoethyl) calix[4]arene
250
Y.K. Agrawal and ltarshit Bhatt Bioinorganic Chemistry andApplications
ion, an external ligand such as an amine occupies a fifth (apical) site leaving the sixth site (apical) pointing
into the cavity of the calixarenes and accessible only to molecules which are small enough to pass through
the annulus at the lower rim ofthe calixarene/39/.
2.8. Carbonic anhydrase enzyme mimic
Transition metal complexing agents bearing active amino acid subunits were synthesized/40/to build
lipophilic ligands containing heterocyclic chelating arm preorganized on a calix[4]arene platform, which
could mimic the activity of some metalloenzymes. Calix[4]arene podands bearing two or four histidine or
glycine groups at the upper rim were synthesized to prepare a carbonic anhydrase biomimetic model.
Complexation properties of cobalt(If) chloride were investigated and it was found that the complexation of
Co(If) with the glycyl podands was unsuccessful but histidyl analogues formed blue-colored species.
3. BIOMIMETISM BASED ON STRUCTURE
The task of mimicking the enzymatic reactions in the laboratory is difficult. The main reason was the lack
of knowledge of enzymatic mechanisms and the singularity of chemical reactions in the biological systems.
Various methods now exist to determine their functioning and it is becoming ever more clear. Because of the
high molecular weight of enzymes reaching tens and hundreds of thousands, determination of structure is far
from being a simple task. But, by structural mimics, we obtain the coordinates of all the atoms, including
those constituting an enzyme active center and its closest surrounding. From this analysis, it can be
concluded that the mechanism of enzymatic catalysis is analogous to the mechanism of the usual chemistry.
The main difference is the much more complex and perfect organization of the interacting molecules in the
enzyme active center, which leads to the qualitative difference in the chemistry of living nature, as compared
with ordinary chemistry. A key step that needs to be completed in metalloenzyme mimics is to design a
ligand that can reproduce the biocoordination sphere of the metal ion. A number of research groups have
designed models aimed at reproducing the biological coordination core ofthe metal ion.
3.1. Importance of Cu(1) and Cu(ll) in biological systems
Copper is a very important metal ion in biological systems, playing a very diverse role in living
organisms/4:2/. It is involved in biochemical oxido-reduction processes, in electron transfers, as well as in
reversible binding of small gaseous molecules such as O2 (hemocyanine) or the plant hormone ethylene.
Because the active form in these systems involves Cu(i), the co-ordinate Cu(1) compounds are essential to the
understanding of the metal reactivity. Spectroscopic probes for the Cu(1) center are lacking in native proteins
and hence it becomes important to study its coordination chemistry with small artificial ligands/43/. Binding
characterisitics of Cu(II) are equally important, as copper enzymes are involved in redox biological
processes.
251
Vol. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Calixarenes and Their Biomimetic Applications
3.2. Calixarene based Cu and Cun
complexes as structural models
Mononuclear copper enzymes constitute an important class of proteins /42,44/. Very few chemical
systems allow the specific chemistry at a monocopper site to be modelled. A supramolecular model of the
mononuclear cuprous sites was described. Advantage has been taken of the conic shape of a calix[6]arene
appropriately functionalized with three pyridine groups. The role of the pyridine group is to provide an N3
donor set for the copper ion, which allows the formation of a stable mononuclear transition metal complex
and in the construction of a receptacle, which interacts with an external molecule. This system mimics the
imidazole residues, which co-ordinate the type II cuprous ions in enzymes such as dopamine- 13- hydroxylase,
peptidyl glycine, a-amidating mono oxygenases, copper-amine oxidases and nitrate reductases/44/. The role
of the calix[6]arene is to protect any undesired interaction with another metal center to facilitate the approach
of an organic molecule and finally to operate a means of selection based on its size and nature/45/. To
evaluate the importance of the role of the cavity, a slight modification was done in iigand-a shown in Fig. 14,
where three out ofthe six calixarene t- Bu substituents were removed/46/.
RCN
N
OMe
(a)
o o o
-"----] + PFs-
Fig. 14: Calixarene based Cu(ll) complexes as models for mono copper sites in enzymes
252
E\ Agrau,al and Harshit Bhatt Bioinorganic Chemistry andAt)plications
The partially debutylated ligand-b offers a larger pocket with a wider opening than ligand -a. The
comparative binding of different nitriles to these calixarene based mono-nuclear Cu(1) centers were studied
by H NMR Spectroscopy and was found that the recognition pattern for the cuprous complexes for nitrilo
ligands was inverted as the affinity of host-b compared to that of host-a for PhCN Vs. MeCN gained 3 orders
of magnitude. Removal of three calixarene-t-Bu groups led to a 100- fold acceleration of the MeCN
exchange rate. The calixarenes have a strong tendency to adopt a conformation well suited to optimize the
interaction of their aromatic moieties with other groups. So the calixarene conformation acts as a selective
molecular funnel for neutral molecules. The biomimetic complexes derived from calixarenes maintain a high
degree of flexibility which is known to be essential in natural system, in particular for fast substrate access
and product departure. Hence, these supramolecular systems provided a rare and selective model for the
hydrophobic substrate channel giving access to metalloenzyme active site. In an another e.xample,
calix[4]arene (Fig. 15) was used as a platform for the stabilization of a two co-ordinate Cu(1) complex with
two biomimetic imidazolyi pendant arms. This complex appeared to be extremely resistant to 02 oxidation
and was stable in air for weeks, even in potentially coordinating or protic solvents/43/.
OMe 0
Fig. 15: Calix[4]arene with biomimetic pendand arms
The presence of two imidazole rings rather than two pyridine rings provided enhanced stability of the
copper(l) complex towards oxidation. This may be due to electronic factors and may be explained by an
increased orbital overlap between the imidazole-nitrogen atom and copper(1) that stabilizes the two
coordinate form for the imidazole iigated species compared to the pyridine. Indeed, the copper(1) complex
derived from the corresponding pyridine-based calix[4]arene ligand was extremely sensitive to O2 and
underwent auto-oxidation in air within seconds. This emphasizes the importance of preorganization of the
metal binding site as one of the key features that allows the control of the Cu reactivity. This may be
reminiscent of biological systems, which either utilize copper(1) to bind or activate a small molecule or
stabilize it as in copper chaperones which transport or deliver Cu to other proteins in the cells/43/.
Reinaud et al. /46/ described four novel calix[6]arene based cuprous complexes, which present a
biomimetic tris (imidazole) co-ordination core, associated with a hydrophobic cavity that wraps the apical
binding site. The strong conformational coupling .between the metal center and the host structure provides a
253
Vol. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Calixarenes and Their Biomimetic Applications
supramolecular control to the system. The vibrational spectra of biomimetic-Copper(1)- CO complexes were
revealed to be a sensitive gauge of this supramolecular behaviour, similar to the copper proteins in which
aliosteric effects are common.
The synthesis of biomimetic complexes that are soluble and stable under physiological conditions is an
important goal. In the course of modeling type II active sites of copper enzymes, the synthesis of the first
water-soluble biomimetic cuprous calix[6]arene complex (Fig. 16) was described /49/, which allows the
formation of a N3Cu(1) complex with a fourth binding site that is accessible for an exogeneous ligand, with a
strong affinity for the metal ion towards CO. The presence of CO was confirmed by an absorption peak at
2075 cm in IR spectrum.
0 o o o
-O3S SO Br Br
SO
Br
Fig. 16: Biomimetic cuprous calix[6]arene
This cuprous complex is resistant to disproportionation and to air oxidation. It also shows that the co-
ordinating environment provided by three imidazole moieties, which mimics tris(histidine) binding site in
enzymes, is indeed capable of stabilizing a cuprous center in water. Although, hexasulfonated calix[6]arene
derivatives have been described as highly flexible molecules with a preferred 1,2,3- alternate conformation
/44/, the rigidity was achieved of the hosts from the binding of a metal cation and the cone conformation is
favored by the relatively smaller electrostatic repulsion on the large rim bearing only three sulfonates/49/.
As copper enzymes are involved in redox processes, therefore it becomes very important to explore the
coordination of Cu(ll) to these calixarene-based ligands. So, the structure and host-guest behavior of the first
cupric complexes was described.
After the addition of the individual nitrile to a dichloromethane solution of complex, it was observed that
there is the distortion of the tetrahedral geometry toward trigonal bipyramidal due to an interaction between
MeCN and the metal center. The addition of propionitrile or allylnitrile also induced significant changes to
EPR and visible spectra, whereas more bulky benzylnitrile was ineffective. This suggests that the complex
possesses an .exchangable coordination site that selectively interacts with small molecules. It was concluded
that a second aquo ligand that is buried inside the hydrophobic cavity and can be selectively exchanged for
lipophilic molecules. The calixarene hydrophobic pocket protects the metal center against dimerization and
simultaneously acts as a molecular funnel for organic molecules/50/.
254
Y.K. Agrawal and ltarshit Bhatt Bioinorganic Chemistry andApplications
/NTNO-- OMe
(a)
CU(II)(OH2)6(CI04)
OH2
(b)
R =Me
(c)
Fig. 17: Cupric complex ofcalix[6]arene as a molecular funnel
3.3. Importance of Zn in biological systems
Zinc is a constituent of more than 300 enzymes. The active sites of zinc enzymes feature a zinc center
attached to the protein backbone by three or four amino acid residues, the nature of which influences the
specific function of the enzyme. Different zinc enzymes utilize different amino acid residues at the active site
and hence the chemistry of zinc is modulated by its coordination environment. Zinc(If) ion is a biologically
essential element. Recognition of its importance has been increasing as more enzymes containing zinc(ll) in
their active site have been discovered /51/. Bioinorganic chemistry of zinc enzymes that features tripodal
ligands has been described/52/. These enzymes are mainly involved in hydrolytic processes but also catalyze
the reversible oxidation of alcohols. Hence, the enzyme active center interacts with molecules with various
functionalization such as amides, carboxylic acids, amines, alcohols, aldehydes, etc. Carbonic anhydride,
matrix metalloproteases, bacillus cereus 13-1actamase I! and 6 pyruvoyl tetra hydropterin synthase all possess
a common feature in their active site: a mononuclear zinc center coordinated by three histidines and a water
molecule. Several research groups have structurally modelled the coordination environment of the zinc center
255
Vol. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Calixarenes and Their Biomimetic Applications'
using a variety of lignads/53/, such as macrocyclic triamines, tris(imidazolyl) phosphines or the anionic
tris(pyrazolyl) borates/54/. All these models focused on Zn-hydroxide complexes.
3.4. Calixarene based Zntt
complexes as structural models
Reinaud and coworkers /55/ extended their work to a supramolecular system (Fig. 18) which possesses a
tris(histidine) coordination core hereby mimicking the active center of Zinc proteins. This calix[6]arene
based system is highly versatile since it allows the tuning of both the steric hindrance and the electronic
properties due to the N donor set. Upon co-ordination to a Zn2+
ion, this ligand gave rise to a remarkable
biomimetic dicationic zinc-aqua complex. The highly acidic Zn2+
center was constrained in a tetrahedral
environment with a labile site oriented toward the inside ofthe calix[6]arene structure.
NN0 OMe
Fig. 18: Novel biomimetic calix[6]arene based Zn-complexes
The hydrophobic pocket acted as a selective molecular funnel for the neutral molecules. H-NMR
spectroscopy studies showed the easy exchange of the aqua ligand for amines, alcohols, amides or nitriles.
This very sensitive but stable receptor is selective, based on both the chemical nature of the guests and their
size and shape. With primary amines, coordination to the metal center was stoichiometric and quantitative.
For acetamide, ethanol and DMSO, the binding to Zn2
was 20-30 times stronger than for water. DMF was
also an excellent guest, that is, bound more strongly to the metal center than nitriles. Coordination to even
weaker donor molecules, such as propionaldehyde and acetic acid, could also be detected. In these cases,
however, the aqua species remained by far the dominant one. Finally, ether, THF, acetone did not yield any
detectable coordinated species. Secondary, tertiary and aromatic amines did not yield any detectable
coordinated species. Coordination of 2-propanol was 30 times weaker than that of l-propanol. However,
ethanol was more strongly coordinated than 1-propanol. Benzo- and benzyl-nitrie appeared too stericaly
encumbered to yield a stable adduct, in all these respects, this system resembles the Michaelis complex of
zinc enzymes and may lead to the design of selective chemical sensing agents/56/. The same working group
also presented two novel adducts, one with ethanol and the other with formamide. Their x-ray structures
revealed that hydrogen bonding and CH/ interactions between the calix[6]arene host and the guests play an
256
KK. Agrawal and Harshit Bhatt Bioinorganic Chemisoy andApplications
important role in stabilizing the complexes. These provide the first examples of stable four co-ordinated
Zn(ll) dicationic complexes presenting a terminal aliphatic alcohol or amide- ligand. Both compounds are
strongly relevant to the enzyme/substrate complexes, in mononuclear zinc biological systems. These adducts
are interesting structural models for the species involved in the catalytic cycle of zinc-peptidases or LADH as
these enzymes present similar stabilizing interactions. The new data also suggest that a sulfur-rich co-
ordination core as in LADH is not a specific requirement for the stabilization of tetrahedral zinc alcohol
complexes but might rather be necessary for substrate activation towards hydride transfer.
Cavity
Fig. 19: A "funnel complex" modelling the mononuclear active site of enzymes
Tridentate N ligands containing tertiary amines, pyrazoles or benzimidazole groups were synthesized
from t-Bu-calix[6]arene. The comparative ability of the whole series to stabilize a tetrahedral zinc dication
was studied in a biomimetic neutral environment. The study showed that benzimidazole and pyrazole are also
appropriate N donors for the stabilization of such complexes along with imidazole-based ligands. The
calixarene structure is constrained in a flattened cone conformation thereby providing a hydrophobic cavity,
which envelopes the exogeneous ligand, MeCN. It was found that the calixarene presenting three pyridine
groups did not give rise to a well defined complex under stoichiometric conditions. Hence, pyridine appeared
to be a N donor not good enough for the stabilization of tetrahedral dicationic zinc complexes. This is in
contrast to its good capacity at stabilizing Cu,and may be due to its softness/57/.
4. BIOMIMETISM BASED ON MOLECULAR RECOGNITION AND IMPORTANCE
OF HYDROGEN BONDING
Molecular recognition, a process involving both binding and selection of substrates by a given receptor
molecule, as well as possibly a specific function, has inspired many organic chemists to design artificial
receptors. The recognition of polar organic molecules of biological interest such as carbohydrates/58/and
amino acids /59/ is a topic of current interest in supramolecular chemistry. Macrocyclic receptors are
257
lJ2d. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Calixarenes and Their Biomimetic Applications
particularly attractive in this field, which are characterized by the simultaneous presence of different binding
groups, e.g. polar groups and hydrophobic cavities, which cooperate in recognition process. Calix[4]arenes
functionalized at the upper rim were synthesized with carbohydrates/60/, (glyco-calixarene), amino acids
/61/ (N-linked peptido calix[4]arene) and (thio) urea/62/units which represent examples of such hybrid
receptors developed for the complexation of sugars, amino acids, and anions.
Reported data reveal that the complexation of the t-amino acids occurred by insertion of the aromatic or
aliphatic apolar group(R) into the calixarene cavity. L-Alanine is not complexed by any hosts, owing to the
small size of the R methyl group; the inclusion of the L-Ala would also involve the encapsulation of the
amino acid charged species, inside the hydrophobic cavity. No inclusion is observed for L-Tyr either, very
likely owing to the polarity ofthe R group.
Calixarene (Fig. 20, c) which lacks the sulphonate groups at the upper rim, does not complex any of the
investigated amino acids, which proves the significance of charge assistance in the apolar binding of the
guests inside the cavity of calixarene/64,65/. The most efficient receptors for the amino acid studied are
compounds a and b (Fig. 20). Capabilities ofthe hosts a-e decrease from a to e, because ofthe C2v elongation
of the cavity. Host a has a more spherical cavity, whereas in host e, substituents at the lower rim are
diverging which results in the elongation of the cavity and hence less accessibility for the amino acids. In all
the cases inclusion occurs via an aliphatic or aromatic apolar residue due to CH- interactions (L-Vai and
L-Leu) or to
- interactions (L-Phe, L-His, L-Trp)/63/. These studies were extended to several small
neutral organic molecules, i.e. methanol, ethanol, n-propanol, acetone, butanone and acetonitrile as guests
using compounds a-e. The complexation of methanol by the hosts is disfavoured because inclusion of the
small methyl group inside the hydrophobic.cavity would lead to a partial inclusion of the polar OH group,
which would cause the polar hydroxyl group to be less exposed to the polar solvent. Host-e could not include
any of the guests due to the peculiar conformation of the host, which reduces the available space for
complexation. Host-b was found to be more efficient for ethanol and n-propanol, whereas conformationally
mobile compound-a showed a better binding for acetone and 2-butanone. These data showed that the
x x
x x
OR OROR R=O
(a) X SO3H, R R H
(b) X SO3H, R1 R CH2COOH
(c) X H, R R CH2COOH
(d) X SO3H, R H, R CH2CH2OCH2CH3
(e) X SO3H, R R CH2CH2OCH2CH3
H
(-)OOC NH(+) (a) R (aliphatic)
7 L-Ala, L-Val, L-Leu
(b) R (aromatic)
R L-Phe, L- Tyr, L-His, L-Trp
Fig. 20: Complexation of amino acids by calix[4]arene derivatives
258
KK. Agrawal and Harshit Bhatt Bio#7organic Chenisoy andApplications
inclusion capabilities ofthe investigated hosts are strictly correlated with their conformational properties/66/.
Recognition of carboxylate anions by natural and synthetic hosts is a topic of current interest in
bioorganic and supramolecular chemistry, because these species are involved in several molecular
recognition phenomena of biological interest. The enantioselective recognition of chiral carboxylate is also
an important goal because several pharmaceutical compounds possess this functional group. Very few
examples are known where natural amino acids are used as binding units in biomimetic receptors for
carboxylate recognition. The intrinsic lower H-bonding donor ability of peptide NH groups could be
strengthened by the cooperative action of other weak non-covalent interactions (n/ n, CH/ n, etc.) and
resulting host-guest binding could be enhanced. Several cone calix[4]arenes functionalized with L-alanine
units at the upper rim were synthesized/61a/. One of these derivatives (Fig. 21) containing four amino acid
moieties was water soluble at neutral pH.
Inclusion properties of the host (Fig. 21) with several guest molecules especially with chiral amino acids
were investigated by H NMR titration experiments/67/. It was found that the inclusion of L-phenylalanine
(L-Phe) or its methyl ester hydrochloride (L-Phe Me) does not take place into the calixarene cavity, because
of its residual conformational mobility between two C_v conformations. So, two short di(ethylene glycol)
units in proximal (1,2) positions at the lower rim of calix[4]arene to inhibit its residual conformation freedom
blocking it in a rigid cone structure/68/.
-o
-o o
,,,NH NH 0 NH
0
0
0
o o o
o
Fig. 21: Mobile calix[4]arene derivative
Complexation properties of the host (Fig. 22) towards quaternary ammonium salts, amino acids and their
methyl ester hydrochlorides were evaluated /61b/ in D20 at pD=7.3 (phosphate buffer). The values for
binding constants clearly indicated that the rigid cone peptidocalixarene (Fig. 22) was much more efficient
than the mobile cone analogue (Fig. 21), in the complexation of all guests, which suggests the importance of
the rigidity in ihe recognition process. Data also showed that amino acids are better complexed as methyl
esters, rather than as zwitter ions, because better complementarity is achieved with the tetra anionic host (Fig.
259
Vol. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Calixarenes and The#" Biomimetic Applications
-0 0 0
0-
NH NH HN
0 NH
0 0
0 0 0 0
Fig. 22: Rigid cone peptidocalix[4]arenes
22) with substrates terminating in a positive charge only. Aromatic amino acids were more strongly
complexed than the aliphatic ones and the highest association constant was observed for tryptophan. The
interaction between the indole nucleus of Trp might be stronger than for the aromatic (I1- I-I) or aliphatic
(CH- FI groups of other amino acids. Very hydrophilic glycine and its Me ester also did not form inclusion
complex with the host.
The recognition properties of C-linked peptidocalix[4]arenes (Fig. 24) were investigated in DMSO-d6 by
1H NMR titration experiments /69/. No complexation was observed for linear ammonium cations, N-
protected amino acids or carboxylic acid where the corresponding anionic forms were found to be
complexed. The binding seemed to involve only the NH groups. The recognition behavior of
peptidocalix[4]arene was reversed by changing the mode of attachment of the amino acid units to the
calixarene platform, as compared to N-linked peptidocalix[4]arenes (Fig. 23), which complex carboxylic
acids and ammonium cations but not anions in CDCI3. The difunctionalized C-linked peptidocalix[4]arenes
R
R
HNHO NH
O O O O
R OCH3, OH, NHNH2, NHCH(CH3)COOCH
Fig. 23: N-linked peptidocalix[4]arenes
260
Y.K Agrawal and Harshit Bhatt Bioinorganic Chemisoy andApplications
were found to form intramolecular hydrogen bonding, which stabilizes the pinched cone conformation with a
closed cavity, whereas the N-linked peptidocalix[4]arenes showed a preference for the other pinched cone
conformation, characterized by an open, cleft-like cavity. The tetrafunctionalized C-linked
peptidocalix[4]arenes (Fig. 24) with four terminal amino groups, protonation of which leads to positively
charged water soluble receptors, whereas the N-linked water soluble peptidocalix[4]arenes have negatively
charged carboxylate end groups. These studies gave totally different interaction modes of the two classes of
receptors with biologically important hosts such as enzymes, DNA, etc.
HN R
o< o<NH NH NH NH
HN R HN
o
o
(a) R CH, R= NHCOCH(CH)NH
(b) R Bn, R NHCOCH(Bn)NHz
HN R HN
o
(a) R CH, R CH
R NHCOCH(CH)NHCOCH
(b) R Bn, R CH
R NHCOCH(Bn)NHCOCH
(c) R CH, R Ph
R NHCOCH(CH)NHCOCH
(d) R Bn, R Ph
R NHCOCH(Bn)NHCOPh
(e) R CH, R CH, R H
(f) R=Bn, R=CH,R=H
Fig. 24: C-linked peptidocalix[4]arenes
Macrobicyclic peptidocalixarene (Fig. 25) was reported as a receptor for the D-alanyl-D-alanine terminal
part of peptidoglycans. One interesting outcome of the study was that the in vitro behavior of peptido
calixarene was similar to that of the vancomycin group antibiotics and its selective antimicrobial activity
toward gram positive bacteria was only slightly inferior to that of vancomycin/70/.
Further, the binding affinity of vancomycin mimic with several guests were studied and correlated with
observed biological activity, it was found that the host molecule being a vancomycin analogue, has a
significant affinity to the ala- ala moiety, which is believed to be the action site of the vancomycin
antibiotics/7 I/.
261
Vol. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Calixarenes and Their .Biomimetic Applications
Me" \
NH HN
0
0
",,( ,,v
Fig. 25: A vancomycin mimic
Both the N-linked and C-linked (Fig. 26. a & b) cleft like peptidocalix[4]arene are very poor receptors in
the recognition of ions and polar organic molecules, mainly because of their residual conformational
flexibility, which in the case of C-linked compounds, leads to extensive intramolecular H bonding (e.g. Fig.
26, b). To reduce the conformational flexibility, C-linked peptidocalix[4]arenes were extended with a cap
with suitable aromatic units and to explore the host properties of macrobicyclic receptors (Fig. 27), in
particular toward anionic guest species.
It was found that these new ligands form strong complexes in acetone-d6 with carboxylate anions and are
selective receptors for benzoate anion, which is able to interact with the hosts through the H-bonding and 7t-rt
stacking. It was concluded that the residual conformational mobility of cone calix[4]arenes is blocked by
bridging it with 2,6- diacylpyridine or isophthaloyl moieties, which results in more preorganized receptors
with enhanced efficiency. Selectivity toward aromatic carboxylates and especially toward benzoate is
observed due to rt-rt stacking interactions with the pyridine moiety and/or a calix[4]arene aromatic nucleus
which act in addition to H bonding with amide NH bonds/71,72/.
Amino acids exist as strongly solvated zwitter ions in neutral aqueous solutions. Their extraction and
transport through the lipophilic membranes is very difficult. Although a number of synthetic receptors
binding either ammonium or carboxylate moieties have been reported/73/, very few examples of zwitter
ionic amino acids transport are known/74,75/.
a-Amino phosphonates possess an array of potential binding sites for both ammonium (Phosphoryl
group, nitrogen lone pair) and carboxylate (N-H bond) moieties. Antipin et al. described the transport of
amino acids through a liquid membrane supported on a polymer film induced by a-Amino phosphonates/76/.
The calix[4]arene is a rigid scaffold and provides lipophilicity to the whole molecule. 1,3-
diaminocalix[4]arenes were selected as starting material because they have a tweezer like structure and are
likely to combine the appropriate binding mode with the lack of steric hindrance.
262
EK. Agrawal and ttarshit Bhatt Bioinorganic Chemistry andApplications
/
NH
0 0
0 0 0 0
(a)
'O..................H tO
HN N
0: /H
..................0
N NH
(b)
Fig. 26: Peptide calix[4]arenes
0
0 0 0
(a) X CH
(b) X N
Fig. 27: Capped calix[4]arenes as biomimetic receptors
263
Vol. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Calixarenes and Their Biomimetic Applications
HC CH
Fig. 28" Linear a-aminophosphonate
Receptors shown in Fig. 29 were used /76/ as carriers for the transport of zwitter ionic amino acids
through a supported liquid membrane composed of a porous polymeric support (Millipore Type FA)
impregnated with 10 M carrier in o-nitrophenyl -n-octyl ether (NPOE). The results showed that hosts (Fig.
29, b and d) transport the amino acids with essentially the same rate as hosts (Fig. 29, a and e), which
showed that the nature of the alkyl group does not play a significant role to the efficiency of the membrane
transport. The attachment of amino phosphonate moieties to the lower and upper rim ofthe calix[4]arene lead
to the different changes in the rate and selectivity of amino acid transport. With the exception of histidine, the
transport rate of studied amino acids with lower rim functionalized calixarene (Fig. 29, a) and linear
aminophosphonate was not having significant difference. It was suggested that the interior of the calixarene
presents a polar microenvironment complementary to the zwitter ionic form of histidine. Besides carboxylate
and ammonium groups, the imidazole side chain of histidine possess proton donor and proton acceptor center
which interacts with amino phosphonate units ofthe calixarene.
(a) R
(b)
R
OH OH O
HN
,,"
o o
o oO,,p.,, % ,.O
NH HN
0 0 0 0
(c) R CH
R
(d)
>R
Fig. 29: Calix[4]arene based a-amino phosphonates
264
EK. Agrawal and Harshit Bhatt Bioino12anic Chemistly andApplications
Unlike carrier (Fig. 29, a) the molecular cavity of upper rim substituted calixarene (Fig. 29,e) can
participate in complexation and recognize the aromatic side chains of amino acids. As a result, selective
transportation of some amino acids through membrane is enhanced. For example, carrier (Fig. 29, e)
transports phenylalanine 40 times faster than tryptophan. This proves that
1) The molecular cavity ofcalixarene is involved in complexation
2) The three points interaction of amino acid (due to carboxylate, ammonium groups and side chain) with
the carrier leads to the enhancing oftransport efficiency and selectivity.
Nishimura et al. reported/77/the synthesis of chirai calix[4]arene analog (Fig. 30) and their properties for
the chiral extraction and transport of amino acids. Glycine, L-alanine, and o- alanine were not extracted at
all. On the other hand, L-phenyl alanine and L-tryptophan were effectively extracted with all receptors.
Moreover, L-phenylalanine apparently extracted more than L-tryptophan because the indole ring was too
large to fit the cavity formed by the pendant groups of the receptors. The order of this extraction efficiency
was also explained by the hydrophobicity of amino acids Phe>Trp>Ala>Gly. The selectivity order of
transport for each amino acid is nearly equal to that of the extraction. L-Amino acids, which strongly interact
with receptors, can be enantioselectively transported more than D-ones. Receptor which had phenylglycine
group possessing the phenyl group directly to the chiral center showed the highest transport efficiency and
enantioselectivity among all receptors in order to clearly recognize the structure ofguest molecule.
OR OR
(a) R CH2CONHCHCOOMe
CH2Ph
(b) CH2CONHCHPhCOOMe
(C) CH2COOCHPh
CH
Fig. 30: Calix[4]arene derived esters
During the last decade, the synthesis of azamacrocyclic compounds has received considerable attention
because oftheir relationship to biomimetic and catalytic systems and the applications of this type of chelating
agents to biology and medicine. Complexes of macrocyclic or polydentate ligands with pendant arms were
reviewed and represented as models for biological molecules. A critical survey of molecular recognition of
DNA, RNA and related biomolecules by complexes with aza-macrocyclic ligands has also been done/78/.
The chirai calix(aza)crowns comprising a calixarene and a chiral polyamine derived from an amino acid were
synthesized and their chiral recognition abilities and applications of host (Fig. 31, a) as anion receptors were
explored/79/. The dibenzoate or racemic tartaric acid and racemic amygdalic acid were chosen as probes. H
NMR spectra indicated that the interaction of host with the L- and D- forms of the tartaric acid derivatives
are different, resulting in two singlet resonances (at 6.03 and 5.99, J 12 Hz) for CH protons of racemic
tartaric acid.
265
Vol. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Calixarenes and 7heir Biomimetic Applications
NH HN
0
OH 0
Bu
Bu Bu
(a) R (CHz)2CH, R CH
(b) R (CH3)2CH R H
Bu
Fig. 31: Calix[4](aza)crown
The interaction between the host (Fig. 31, a) and the racemic tartaric acid led to a partial cone
conformation of the host in the complex, because an appropriate environment is beneficial to the
complexation of the relatively larger molecular skeleton of tartaric acid in comparison with racemic amygdlic
acid. This conclusion was based on the appearance of two signals at 6 37.2 and 31.8 ppm in the 3C NMR
spectrum of the complex. A series of UV- absorption experiments was also undertaken. The association
constant K for the D- and L-form guests was calculated as 9.83 x 10 M"1
and 5.04 x 10 M"1, respectively.
All these results indicated that interaction between the host and guest do occur, which could be due to the
formation of H- bonds or rt- t interaction between host and guest and host (Fig. 31, a), has the ability to
recognize the D- and L- forms of a tartaric acid derivative differently and has different recognition
conformations with different guest species.
Enantioselective recognition of chiral antipodes is considered to be one of the most interesting and
challenging tasks in modern chemistry, because of many applications in bio-sciences and implications for
understanding life processes. Three novel bicyclo peptidocalix[4]arene derivatives were synthesized/79/and
used for chiral coatings for gas sensing to discriminate the enantiomers of methyl lactate. Evaluation of the
ability of these calixarene derivatives to act as chiral sensor coatings discriminating between the enantiomers
of methyl lactate was achieved using a QCM technique. At the same concentration, the (R)-enantiomer
showed significantly larger sensor responses than the (S)-enantiomer. Paritition coefficient K values (K
C/Cg, where Cg is gas concentration in the air and Cf is that in the film) were found to be larger for (R)-
enantiomers than for the (S)-enantiomers, revealed that this coatings were more sensitive for the (R)-
enantiomers. Studies on various analytes can me made in this direction/80/.
Calix[4]arenes functionalized with urea on their upper wider rims have self-complementary recognition
sites and assemble into dimeric form. The selectivity for heterodimerization is exclusive, with amino acids
that have I branched side chains such as iso-leucine and valine. This exclusive recognition is capable of
discriminating between enantiomers of guest molecules/8 I/. Ballistreri et al. synthesized ureidocalix[5]arene
and it was used as receptors for multipoint molecular recognition ofaminoacids and biogenic amines/82/.
Cyclic peptides provide useful tools for the study of protein secondary structure and of the structure-
activity relationships of bioactive peptides. They also play a significant role in ion transport across biological
266
EKI Agrawal and Harshit Bhatt Bioinorganic Chemisoy andApplications
membranes/83/, in self-assembling size adjustable nanotubes /84/ and in serving as enzyme models/85/or as
artificial receptors/86,87/. They have also reduced conformational flexibility compared to their parent linear
molecules, but stillpossess quite large conformational flexibility. Several constraints such as non-natural
amino acids/88/, S-S linkages/89,90/and semi-rigid aromatic units/89-91/have been incorporated in cyclic
backbone. Thus, the first synthesis ofthe lower rim linked calix[4]arene bearing cyclic peptides was reported
by Cheng et al./92/for reducing not only conformational freedom but also providing additional binding sites.
Binding experiments were performed with disodium 4-nitrophenyl phosphate in order to test the potential of
macrocyclic host in molecular recognition. For comparison, binding constants with three reference receptors,
i.e. cyclopeptide and two disubstituted low rim calix[4]arenes were determined. Results showed calix[4]arene
cyclopeptides as much more efficient receptors than the three reference receptors, demonstrating that the
introduction of a calix[4]arene unit substantially enhances molecular recognition for a phosphate group, and
the amide groups are mainly responsible for the recognition. Thus, the properties of cyclic peptides are
improved.
Because of the accessibility and biological relevance, amino acids and peptide moieties were incorporated
into calixarenes in order to achieve chirally modified macrocyclic ligands. Only very few multicyclic
receptor systems (mentioned above) combining with cyclopeptide and calix[4]arene have been synthesized
/61a/, characterized and presented as good candidates in future studies of chiral recognition and chiral
catalysis/93/.
Hydrogen bonding is of great importance for the stabilization of the shapes of large biological molecules,
such as cellulose, proteins and nucleic acids/94/. In biological systems the co-operative action of peptidic
hydrogen bonds plays a major role in organization, assembly and molecular recognition processes. Even self-
assembly is a powerful tool for the understanding, modelling and mimicking of biological systems. Synthetic
self assembled models were reviewed with biological functions/95/.
With the supramolecular approach to a synthetic combination of rigid molecular scaffolds that act as
topological templates with amino acids or small peptides as organizational elements, various constrained
systems such as cavitands/'96/, steroids/97/, porphyrins/98/, constrained peptides /99/ and sugars/100/have
been used. Surprisingly, calix[4]arenes /101/ have been used only infrequently as topological templates in
combination with amino acids or peptides /102/. The synthesis of calix[4]arene hybrid receptors
functionalized at the upper rim with L-alanine and dipeptide units has been reported/56a/. Very little work
has been done on the upper /61a/ or lower rim /102/ calix[4]arenes tetra-(o-amino acid or dipeptide)
derivatives that describe their organization by intramolecular hydrogen bonds. X-ray analysis of two
biomimetic complexes revealed that hydrogen bonding and CH/n interactions between the guest ligand and
the calix[6]arene host structure play a key role in their stabilization/56/.
Zinic et al. presented/103/hydrogen bonding motifs of calix[4]arene derivatives (Fig. 32) with one, two
or four stands at the lower rim and with one amino acid unit each. Intra- and interstrand hydrogen bonding
was observed for structurally related cavitands with strands at the lower rim incorporate peptidic
functionalities.
Rebek et al. reported the synthesis and association properties of a series of ureido calix[4]arenes N-linked
to or- amino acids /81,104/. In these examples, urea-urea self-assembly takes place exclusively with
isoleucine and valine, other amino acids giving rise to association only with simple
267
Vol. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Calixarenes and 7heh" Biomimetic Applications
(a) R-
HN
R
H Ph
QOMe0
(CH3)2CHCH2:"H /
(b) R :
OMe
HN
O
Fig. 32" Tetra substituted calix[4]arene amino acid derivatives
phenylureidocalix[4]arenes(heterodimers). The effect of extended peptide chains on the dimerization of
ureidocalix[4]arenes has never been investigated before. So Mendoza et al. /105/ demonstrated the
dimerization of calix[4]arene ureidopeptides for the first time. The synthesis and association behavior of
calix[4]arenes having four leucines (octylamide at the C- terminus) was linked to the urea groups at the upper
rim and having four dipeptide LLeu-Leu-OMe chain on the top ofthe ureas.
Although the dimerization phenomenon was not observed in polar solvent, the addition of only a few
percent of polar solvent would result in complete disassembly to monomers/81,106/. It was desirable to
prepare systems that might associate in polar solvent, especially for the development of compounds that
would be compatible with a biological environment and have applications in drug transport and delivery,
biocatalysis, and the binding and detection of biomolecules. So, the first calix[4]arene derivative was
reported by Brewster et al. /107/that undergoes hydrogen-bond-mediatedself-association in polar, protic
solvent. The association constant K,, for this dimerization was found to be 29000 Min 24:1 MeOH:H20,
which was higher than the Ka value that was reported for a peptidylureidocalixarene in apolar solvent. This
tetrapeptidocalix[4]arene contained amino acids attached to the upper rim through the carboxyl termini. The
dimerization and recognition properties of these new class of peptidocalixarenes were studied by NMR and
mass spectroscopy. It was found that the addition of arginine and lysine to the calixarene solution results in
the formation of 1:1 inclusion complexes of the amino acid with the calixarene and dissociation of the
calixarene dimer, rather than the encapsulation of the amino acid within the dimer. The addition of the guest
molecule resulting in the disassembly of calixarene dimers was not reported previously. This study may lead
to the use of calixarenes for molecular recognition in biologically relevant environments.
Nomura et al. /109/ synthesized calixarenes carrying amino acids at the lower rim. They studied the effect
on the binding ability of intramolecular hydrogen bonding in the hydrophilic pseudocavities of these
calixarenes towards metal ions such as Na and Ag+. The results revealed that the introduction of amino acids
such as glycine, L-alanine, L-valine and L-phenyl alanine gives stabilization to the binding sites of
calixarenes. Nomura and his coworkers /109/extended their studies on the polymorphism of p-tert-butyl
calix[4]arene derivatives having amino acid derivatives at the lower rim to stabilize their hydrophilic pseudo
cavity by circular intramolecular hydrogen bonding. Sone et a/. /I 10/ prepared chiral bishomodiaza
calix[4]arenes containing amino acid residues. Circular dichroism spectra showed that intramolecular
268
EK. Agrawal and ttarshit Bhatt Bioinorganic ChemistiT andApplications
R
(a) R LLeu-NH-C8H7
(b) R LLeu-DLeu-OMe
OPr
Fig. 33" Calix[4]arene ureidopeptides
hydrogen bonding plays an important role in the transmission of the chirality from the amino acid residues to
the cyclophane unit.
A high degree of functionality and conformational flexibility of calixarenes makes the isolation and
characterization of products a difficult task. However, the conformational freedom affords the possibility of
formation of enzyme models for mono copper sites complexes. It was shown that the rigidified preorganized
cavity structure of calix[6]arenes is imperative for guest recognition. By introduction of amino acid ester
groups onto the platform of calix[6]arene, non covalent interaction may probably contribute to the
conformational stability of calix[6]arene derivatives. In addition, chiral centers may provide an asymmetric
environment for their guests. By keeping this in view, Huang et al. achieved chiral modification of the
skeleton of 1,3,5-trimethoxy-p-tert-butyl calix[6]arene by amino acid ester residues. They also studied their
conformational behaviour and concluded that the conformations are greatly influenced by the amino acid
ester residues/111/.
5. CONCLUDING REMARKS
Calixarenes are versatile molecules and can behave as potential enzyme mimics. In the first part of this
article, functional enzyme models that mimic di- and tri- nuclear metallo phosphodiesterases have been
reviewed. However, these functional models were not proved to be efficient compared to natural enzymes but
they focus more light on to possible catalysis mechanism employed by these natural analogues. These types
of studies have provided a base or platform for the future design of a cleaving agent for RNA or other related
type of molecules. Mimics for enzymes such as transferase, ATPase, aldolase or heme mimics were also
presented and the extent oftheir potency as functional models was discussed.
In the subsequent part, a few chemical systems containing Cu(1), Cu(ll) or Zn(II) ions were presented as
models for metal active sites in enzymes. These synthetic models with a suitable design are able to provide
new insights into the structures, spectroscopic properties and activities ofmetalloprotein active site.
The last part of the review contains the discussion of molecular recognition of biorelevant species such as
amino acids and their transport studies using various calixarene derivatives, especially those with amino acid
linkages at either rim. The role and importance of hydrogen bonding to stabilize biomolecules can also be
understood by amino acid subst!tuted calixarenes.
269
Vol. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Calixarenes and Their .Biomimetie Applications
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
One of the authors (Y. K. Agrawal) is thankful for the financial assistance given by the Chemical Society,
London; DST, New Delhi; GMDC Science and Research Centre, Ahmedabad.
REFERENCES
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
I0.
11.
12.
13.
18.
F. M. Menger, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (USA), 99, 4818 (2002).
N. J. Turro, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 2002, 2279.
C. D. Gutsche, Acc. Chem. Res., 16, 161 (1983).
R. Breslow, S. D. Dong, Chem. Rev., 98, 1997 (1998).
V. Stastny, P. Lhotak, V. Michlova, I. Stibor, J. Sykora, Tetrahedron, 58, 7207 (2002).
A. Casnati, C. Massera, N. Pelizzi, I. Stibor, E. Pinkhassik, F. Ugozzoli, R. Ungaro, Tetrahedron
Lett., 43, 7311 (2002).
P. Molenveld, S. Kapsabelis, J. F. J. Engbersen, D. N. Reinhoudt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 119, 2948
(1997).
P. Molenveld, W. M. G. Stikvoort, H. Kooijman, A. L. Spek, J. F. J. Engbersen, D. N. Reinhoudt, J.
Org. Chem., 64, 3896 (1999).
P. Molenveld, J. F. J. Engbersen, H. Kooijman, A. L. Spek, D. N. Reinhoudt, J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
120, 6726 (1998).
P. Molenveld, J. F. J. Engbersen, D. N. Reinhoudt, .I. Org. Chem., 64, 6337 (1999).
P. Molenveld, J. F. J. Engbersen, D. N. Reinhoudt, J. Org. Chem., 64, 3269 (1999).
P. Molenveld, J. F. J. Engbersen, D. N. Reinhoudt, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed Engl., 38, 3189 (1999).
(a) M. Yashiro, A. lshikubo, M. Komiyama, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1997, 83.
(b) C. Bazzicalupi, A. Bencini, A. Bianchi, V. Fusi, C. Giorgi, P. Paoletti, B. Valtancoli, D. Zanchi,
Inorg. Chem., 36, 2784 (1997).
S. Liu, A. D. Hamilton, Bioorg. Meal Chem. Lett., 7, 1779 (1997).
(a) N. H. Williams, J. Chin, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 131 (1996).
(b) S. Seog, N. D. Sung, R. S. Hynes, J. Chin, lnorg. Chem., 35, 7472, (1996).
K. G. Ragunathan, H. J. Schneider, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl., 35, 1219 (1996).
(a) R. Hettich, H. J. Schneider, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 2069 (1997).
(b) R. Hettich, H. J. Schneider, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 119, 5638 (1997).
(c) M. Komiyama, J. Sumaoka, K. Yonezawa, Y. Matsumoto, M. Yashiro, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin
Trans. 2, 1997, 75.
(d) J. Rawlings, A. C. Hengge, W. W. Cleland, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 119, 75, (1997).
(a) B. F. Baker, H. Khalili, N. Wei, J. R. Morrow, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 119, 8749 (1997).
(b) K. Bracken, R. A. Moss, K. G. Ragunathan,.l. Am. Chem. Soc., 19, 9323 (1997).
(c) J. Sumaoka, A. Kajimura, M. Ohno, M. Komiyama, Chem. Lett., 507 (1997).
(d) Y. C. Bruice, A. Ysubouchi, R. O. Dempcy, L. P. Olson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 118, 9867 (1996).
270
KK. Agrawal and ttarshit Bhatt Bioinorganic ChemisOy andApplications
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
P. Molenveld, J. F. J. Engbersen, D. N. Reinhoudt, Chem. Soc. Rev., 29, 75 (2000).
D. M. Perreault, E. V. Anslyn, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed Engl., 36, 433 (1997).
M. Komiyama, K. Yoshinari, J. Org. Chem., 62, 2155 (1997).
G. M. Bonora, S. Drioli, F. Felluga, F. Mancin, P. Rossi, P. Scrimin, P. Teciila, Tetrahedron. Lett.,
44, 535, (2003).
S. Liu, A. D. Hamilton, Tetrahedron Lett., 38, 107 (1997).
B. Linkletter, J. Chin, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl., 34, 472 (1995).
E. L. Hegg, K. A. Deal, L. L. Kiessling, J. N. Burstyn, Inorg. Chem., 36, 1715 (1997).
T. Itoh, H. Hisada, T. Sumiya, M. Hosono, Y. Usui, Y. Fujii, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1997,
677.
M. J. Young, J. Chin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 117, 10577 (1993).
J. Yan, R. Breslow, Tetrahedron Lett.,.41, 2059 (2000).
(a) E. I. Solomon, P. Chen, M. Metz, S. K. Lee, A. E. Palmer, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed Engl., 40, 4570
(2001).
(b) A. Messerschmidt, Struct. Bonding, 90, 37 (1998).
(a) K. Brown, M. Tegon, M. Prudencio, A. S. Pereira, S. Besson, J. J. Moura, I. Moura, C.
Cambillau, Nat. Struct. Biol., 7, 191 (2000).
(b) M. L. Alvarez, J. Ai, W. Zumft, J. Sanders-Loehr, D. M. Dooley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 123, 576
(2001).
D. J. E. Spencer, Bryan J. Johnson, Brian. J. Johnson, W. B. Tolman, Organic Letters, 4, 139!
(2002).
G. Dospil, J. Schatz, Tetrahedron Lett., 42, 7837 (2001).
T. Gunnlaugsson; R. J. H, Davies; M. Nieuwenhuyzen; C. S. Stevenson; R. Viguier; S. Mulready,
Jo Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 2002, 2 36.
W. C. Putnam, J. K. Bashkin, J. Chem. Sot., Chem.Commun., 2000, 767.
M. Komiyama, K. lsaka, S. Shinkai, Chemistry Letters, 1991, 937.
Y. T. Ming, Y. Z. Feng, W. Li, G. J. Ying, Y. S. De, S. X. Fa, Spectrochimica Acta Part A, 58, 3033
(2002).
G. Ashkenasy, D. Margulies, C. E. Felder, A. Shanzer, L. S. Powers, Chem. Eur. J., 8, 4017 (2002).
D. J. Cram, K. D. Stewart, I. Goldberg, K. N. Trueblood, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 107, 2574 (1985).
C. D. Gutsche, M. lqbal, K. S. Nam, K. See, I. Alam, Pure & Applied Chem., 60, 483 (1988).
Y. Molard, C. Bureau, H. P. Lopez, R. Lamartine, J. B. R. de Vains, Tetrahedron Lett., 40, 6383
(1999).
Y. Molard, H. P.- Lopez, Tetrahedron Lett., 42, 4799 (2001).
W. Kaim, J. Rail, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl., 35, 43 (1996).
L. L. Clainche, M. Giorgi, O. Reinaud, Eur. J. lnorg. Chem., 1931 (2000).
J. P. Kiinman, Chem. Rev., 96, 2541 (1996).
S. Blanchard, L. L. Clainche, M. N. Rager, B. Chansou, J. P. Tuchagues, A. F. Duprat, Y. L. Mest,
O. Reinaud, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl., 37, 2732 (1998).
Y. Rondelez, M. N. Rager, A. Duprat, O. Reinaud, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 124, 1334 (2002).
271
Voi. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Calixarenes and Their Biomimetic Applications
49.
50.
51.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
Y. Rondelez, O. Seneque, M. N. Rager, A. F. Duprat, O. Reinaud, Chem. Eur. J., 6, 4218 (2000).
(a) J. L. Atwood, D. L. Clark, R. K. Juneja, G. W. On', K. D. Robinson, R. L. Vincent, .I. Am. Chem.
Soc., 4, 755 (1992).
(b) R. Castro, L. A. Godinez, C. M. Criss, S. M. Bott, A. E. Kaifer, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun.,
1997, 935.
(c) R. Castro, L. A. Godinez, C. M. Criss, A. E. Kaifer, J. Org. Chem., 62, 4928 (1997).
(d) J. Alvarez, Y. Wang, M. Gomez-Kaifer, A. E. Kaifer, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1008,
1455.
Y. Rondelez, G. Bertho, O. Reinaud, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl., 41, 1044 (2002).
L. L. Clainche, M. Giorgi, O. Reinaud, Inorg. Chem., 39, 3436 (2000).
(a) W. N. Lipscomb, N. Strater, Chem. Rev., 96, 2375 (1996).
(b) D. S. Auld, Metal Sites in Proteins and Models In Structure and Bonding, Ed. P. J. Sadler,
Springer- Verlag: Berlin- Heidelberg, 89, p. 29 (1997).
G. Parkin., J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 20, 1971 (2000).
E. Kimura, T. Koike, M. Shionoya, Metal Sites in Proteins and Models In Structure and Bonding,
Ed. P. J. Sadler, Springer- Verlag: Berlin- Heidelberg, 89, p. 1-28 (1997).
(a) M. Ruf, F. A. Schell, R. Walz, H. Vahrenkamp, Chem. Bet., Reel., 130, 101 (1997).
(b) C. Bergquist, G. Parkin, Inorg. Chem., 38, 422 (1999).
O. Seneque, M. N. Rager, M. Giorgi, O. Reinaud, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 122, 6183 (2000).
O. Seneque, M. Giorgi, O. Reinaud, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 2001, 984.
O. Seneque, Y. Rondelez, L. L. Clainche, C. lnisan, M. N. Rager, M. Giorgi, O. Reinaud, Eur. J.
lnorg. Chem., 2597 (2001 ).
A. P. Davis, R. S. Wareham, Angew. Chem. int. Ed. Engl., 38, 2978 (1999).
H. J. Schneider, E. Eblinger, M. Sirish, Adv. Supramol. Chem., 6, 185 (2000).
J. Budka, M. Tkadlecova, P. Lhotak, I. Stibor, Tetrahedron, 5;6, 1883 (2000).
(a) F. Sansone, S. Barboso, A. Casnati, M. Fabbi, A. Pochini, F. Ugozzoli, R. Ungaro, Eur..I. Org.
Chem., 897 (1998).
(b) F. Sansone, S. Barboso, A. Casnati, D. Sciotto, R. Ungaro, Tetrahedron Lett., 40, 4741 (1999).
(a) J. Scheerder, M. Fochi, J. F. J. Engbersen, D. N. Reinhoudt, ,I. Org. Chem., 5;9, 7815 (1994).
(b) J. Scheerder, J. F. J. Engbersen, A. Casnati, R. Ungaro, D.N. Reinhoudt, .I. Org. Chem., 60,
6448 (1995).
G. Arena, A. Contino, F. G. Gulino, A. Magri, F. Sansone, D. Sciotto, R. Ungaro, Tetrahedron Lett.,
40, 1597 (1999).
G. Arena, A. Casnati, L. Mirone, D. Sciotto, R. Ungaro, Tetrahedron Lett., 38, 1999 (1997).
G. Arena, A. Casnati, A. Contino, D. Sciotto, R. Ungaro, Tetrahedron Left., 38, 4685 (1997).
G. Arena, A. Contino, F. G. Gulino, A. Magri, D. Sciotto, R. Ungaro, Tetrahedron Lett., 41, 9327
(2OOO).
C. S. Wilcox, Frontiers in Supramolecular Chemistry and Photochemisoy, H. J. Schneider, H. Durr,
Eds., VCH, Weinheim, 123 (I 991).
272
EIC Agrawal and ttarshit Bhatt Bioinorganic ChemisttT andApplications
68.
69.
70.
73.
74.
75.
76.
79.
80.
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.
92.
93.
94.
A. Arduini, M. Fabbi, M. Mantovani, L. Mirone, A. Pochini, A. Secchi, R. Ungaro, J. Org. Chem.,
60, 1454 (1995).
M. Lazzarotto, F. Sansone, L. Baldini, A. Casnati, P. Cozzini, R. Ungaro, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2001,
595.
A. Casnati, M. Fabbi, N. Pellizzi, A. Pochini, F. Sansone, R. Ungaro, Biorg. Meal Chem. Lett., 6,
2699, 1996.
L. Frish, F. Sansone, A. Casnati, R. Ungaro, Y. Cohen, .I. Org. Chem., 65, 5026 (2000).
F. Sansone, L. Baldini, A. Casnati, M. Lazzarotto, F. Ugozzoli, R. Ungaro, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.,
USA, 99, 4842 (2002).
(a) K. Hiratani, T. Yamaguchi, Liquid Membrane: Chemical Applications, T. Araki, H. Tsukube
Eds. CRC Press, Inc.: Florida, 103 (1990).
(b) C. Seel, A. Galan, J. de Mendoza, Topics in Current Chemist,, Ed. Weber, E., 175, 102 (1995).
J. L. Sessler, A. Andrievsky, J. Chem. Soc.. Chem. Commun., 1996, 1119.
I. S. Antipin, I. I. Stoikov, A. R. Garifzyanov, A. 1. Konovalov, Zh. Obsch. Khim., 66, 402 (1996).
1. S. Antipin, 1. I. Stoikov, E. M. Pinkhassik, N. A. Fitseva, I. Stibor, A. I. Konovalov, Tetrahedron
Lett., 38, 5865 (1997).
Y. Okada, Y. Kasai, J. Nishimura, Tetrahedron Lett., 36, 555 (1995).
J. Costamagna, G. Ferraudi, B. Matsuhiro, M. C. Vallette, J. Canales, M. Villagran, J, Vargas, M. J.
AguiTe, Coord. Chem. Rev., 196, 125 (2000).
Y. He, Y. Xiao, L. Meng, Z. Zeng, X. Wu, C. T. Wu, Tetrahedron Lett., 43, 6249 (2002).
W. Guo, J. Wang, C. Wang, J. Q. He, .X. He, J. P. Cheng, Tetrahedron Left., 43, 5665 (2002).
R. K. Castellano, C. Nuckolls, J. Rebek Jr., J. Ant. Chem. Soc., 121, 11156 (1999).
F. P. Ballistreri, A. Notti, Org. Lett., 5, 1071 (2003).
T. J. Marrone, K. M. Merz Jr., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 114, 7542 (1992).
T. D. Clark, L. K. Buehler, M. R. Ghadiri, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 120, 615 (1998).
H. lshida, K. Donowaki, M. Suga, K. Shimose, K. Ohkubo, Tetrahedron Lett., 36, 8987 (1995).
D. Ranganathan, V. Haridas, K. P. Madhusudanan, R. Roy, R. Nagaraj, G. B. John, M. B.
Sukhaswami, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl., 35, 1105 (I 995).
(a) W. C. Still, Ace. Chem. Res., 29, 155 (1996).
(b) P. D. Bailey, D. G. W. Clarke, G. A. Crofts, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1992, 658.
M. D. Struthers, R. P. Cheng, B. Imperial, Science, 27 I, 342 (I 996).
(a) L. J. Mu, J. P. Cheng, H. Huang, J. M. Lu, X. B. Hu, Synth. Commun., 28, 3029 (1998).
(b) H. Huang, L. J. Mu, J. P. Cheng, J. M. Lu, X. B. Hu, Synth. Commun., 28, 4036 (1998).
D. Ra.nganathan, V. Haridas, !. L. Karle, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 120, 2695 (1998).
R. Haubner, W. Schmitt, G. Holzemann, S. L. Goodman, A. Jonczyk, H. Kessler, J. Am. Chem. Sot.,
18, 7881 (1996).
X. Hu, A. S. C. Chan, X. Han, J. He, J. P. Cheng, Tetrahedron Lett., 40, 7115 (1999).
X. Hu, J. He, A. S. C. Chan, J. P. Cheng, Tetraheh'on Ao'mmetry, 10, 2685 (1999).
L. Stryer, Biochemistry, 3'a
ed.; W. H. Freeman and Co.: New York (1988).
273
Vol. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Calixaremzs and Theh" Biomimetic Applications
95.
96.
97.
98.
99.
100.
101.
102.
103.
104.
105.
106.
107.
108.
109.
110.
111.
R. Fiammengo, M. C. Calana, D. N. Reinhoudt, Current Opinion in Chemical Biology, 5, 660
(2001).
C. B. Gibbs, A. R. Mezo, A. S. Canston, J. R. Fraser, F. C. S. Tsai, J. C. Sherman, Tetrahedron, 32,
8719(1995).
R. Hirschmann, P. A. Sprengler, T. Kawasaki, J. W. Leahy,. W. C. Shakespeare, A. B. Smith Ill,
Tetrahedron, 49, 3665 (1993).
K. S. Akerfeldt, R. M. Kim, D. Camac, J. T. Groves, J. D. Lear, J. W. F. DeGrado, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 114, 9656 (1992).
P. Dumy, I. M. Eggleston, S. Cervigni, U. Sila, X. Sun, M. Mutter, Tetrahedron Lett., 36, 1255
(1995).
R. Hirshmann, K. C. Nicolau, S. Pietranico, E. M. Leahy, J. Salvino, B. Arison, M. Cichy, P. G.
Spoors, W. C. Shakespeare, P. A. Sprengler, P. Hamely, A. B. Smith III, T. Beisine, K. Ray6or, L.
Maechler, C. Donaldson, W. Vale, R. M. Freidinger, R. Cascieri, C. D. Strader, J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
IIS, 12550 (1993).
(a) C. D. Gutsche, Aldrichimica Acta, 28, 3 (1995).
(b) V. Bohmer, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl., 34, 713 (1995).
M. S. Pena, Y. Zhang, S. Thibodeaux, M. L. McLaughlin, A. M. de la Pena,
I. M. Warner, Tetrahedron Lett.,37, 5841 (I 996).
L. Frkanec, A. Visnjevac, B. K. Prodic, M. Zinic, Chem. Eur. J., 6, 442, (2000).
R. K. Castellano, B. H. Kim, J. Rebek Jr., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 19, 12671, (1997).
A. M. Rincon, P. Prados, J. de Mendoza, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 123, 3493 (2001).
(a) Y. L. Cho D. M. Rudkevich, A. Shivanyuk, K. Rissanen J. Rebek, Jr., Chem. Eur. J., 6, 3788
(2000).
(b) C. A. Schalley, R. K. Castellano, M. S. Brody,D. M. Rudkevich, G. Siuzdak, J. Rebek, Jr., J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 121, 4568 (1999).
(c) O. Mogck, M. Pons, V. Bohmer, W. Vogt, J. Am. (?hem. Soc., 119, 5706 (1997).
R. E. Brewster, S. B. Shuker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 124, 7902 (2002).
E. Nomura, M. Takagaki, C. Nakaoka, M. Uchida, H. Taniguchi, J. Org. Chem., 64, 3151 (1999).
E. Nomura, M. Takagaki, C. Nakaoka, M. Uchida, H. Taniguchi, J. Org. Chem., 65, 5932 (2000).
K. Ito, T. Ohta, Y. Ohba, T. Sone, J. Hetero. Chem., 37, 79 (2000).
H. S. Yuan, Y. Zhang, Y. J. Hou, X. Y. Zhang, X. Z. Yang, Z. T. Huang, Tetrahedron, 56, 9611
(2000).
274
