1. INTRODUCTION
Nucleobases and nucleosides, the
structural particles of nucleotides, play relevant roles in several metabolic
processes. It is, therefore, not surprising that their analogs are investigated
as potential therapeutic agents [–]. Sinefungin (SFG, ), an
antifungal and antiparasitic nucleoside antibiotic, is a natural product of Streptomyces griseolus and S. incarnatus [, ]. SFG is active
against a number of protozoan [], inhibits tumor cell invasion in vitro [],
as well as virus multiplication [], and cell transformation []. Structurally,
SFG represents a wide range of compounds that combine aminoacids with
nucleobases [–].

SFG comprises ornithine and adenosine nucleoside residues. Ornithine is well known
to act as a precursor in one of the two possible routes to the biosynthesis of
putrescine [], the source of the diaminobutane residue for spermidine and
spermine [, ]. Both these biogenic amines take part in many biological
processes [–] in almost all living and even cancer cells []. The search
for ornithine analogues that inhibit polyamine biosynthesis [, ] or act as
new anticancer drugs [] as well as the continuous research on biological
activity of various derivatives of nucleosides confirm the importance of the
moieties combination in SFG.

Transition metal ions play fundamental roles in biological processes. It has been widely
accepted that copper is an essential trace element which forms an integral
component of many important enzymes and is required for growth and development
in a wide range of species, from bacteria to man [–]. However, coordination
of metal ions to bioactive ligands may also affect their toxicity. In fact,
some metal complexes (e.g., Fe(II)
and Cu(II)) of organic compounds used as drugs [–] were found to be less
toxic than the “native” forms, while maintaining the medical activity. On the
other hand, metal complexes (particularly Cu(II)) of pharmacological agents,
when compared with the free ligands, are widely reported to generate enhanced
toxic effects [, ].

Significant
amounts of free copper ions are unlikely to occur in vivo [–], what was also ratified by the
“fingerprint” of LDL oxidation products in extracts from atherosclerotic
lesions, which is not consistent with the model of induction by free metals in vitro []. However, advanced
lesions contain products consistent with free metal ion-catalyzed oxidation
[, ]. Furthermore, some reports indicate that the concentration of a mobile
fraction of copper ions in blood serum may increase as a result of a
pathological state (e.g.,
harmful oxidative stress []), cancer, and inflammation []. Extracellular
copper remains bound to a variety of low-molecular-weight ligands [, ], and
its control is not as tight as that of the intracellular one, regulated by a
series of chaperone proteins []. Cupric ions were also found in nuclei in association with chromosomal DNA
[]. It is then possible that some extracellular copper is transferred to SFG,
what prompted us to perform the present study, which continues our research
concerning the effect of Cu(II) on in
vitro toxicity of drugs [, ].

Our previous papers reported the results of NMR
investigations [] as well as the oxidative activity of copper complexes with
SFG in the presence of biologically important substances [], and now we
provide the detailed information about the coordination mode of
copper-sinefungin complexes and their structures.

2. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Adenine and the other purine nucleobases,
as well as their nucleosides and nucleotides, are known to undergo
self-aggregation through stacking of aromatic moieties [–]. However, at the
concentrations used in this work (i.e.,
0.7 MM), no self-association of the adenine ring of SFG is expected. This also
holds for measurements concerning the metal ion complexes. As a consequence,
the reported results all refer to the monomeric species.

2.1. Acid-base properties of sinefungin
SFG contains several
potential donatives sites for metal ions and/or protons. Precise potentiometric
titrations led to characterizing the
acid-base properties of SFG, which behaves as a tetraprotic species. 
shows the calculated values of the protonation constants that fit the range of
pH 3–10 and considerably differ from those of
ornithine (also reported in ).

The following
deprotonation equilibria need then to be considered (L stands for SFG): 

On the basis of
mathematical analysis of the potentiometric titrations, four  values were calculated. The exact description of the stepwise protonation constants
of the acidity of the individual groups is not fully possible. All obtained
results give, however, only the acidity sequence of particular groups in the
molecule but not the exact acidity constants due to the possibility of the
parallel overlapping of the deprotonation processes.

A constant
corresponding with the equilibrium (), the most likely, relates to the release
of proton from the carboxylic group, which is the most acidic function of SFG. The pK value of this process  is more
than one log unit higher than that found in L-ornithine [, ], most probably
due to electrostatic interaction with the solvent, with eventual formation of a
hydrogen bond between the carboxyl group and water molecules. It should be
mentioned that purine nitrogen can be involved in the formation of hydrogen
bond with carboxyl hydroxylic group (). However, this
explanation is valid in the case of anti conformation for H4L3+ species only. As a matter of fact, computational studies
concerning conformation of free-SFG indicate that, in the case of H4L3+
syn, conformation predominates (, , structure II), thus increasing the probability of occurrence of an
intramolecular hydrogen bond with the protonated N1 atom. Such situation would
have the reflection in the lower- value of either OHCOOH or N1(H+), however, is not
observed in any of these cases. Therefore, the presence of the intermolecular
hydrogen bond between solvent water molecule and −OH group is proposed.

The second  value (3.83, , equilibrium ()) belongs to N1 of the adenine moiety and
is very close to the values obtained for adenine monophosphates ( [, ]).
However, it is interestingly higher than that in the case of adenosine (3.61 []),
in spite of the presence of a bipositive charge within the ornithine residue.
Again, a macrochelate-like electrostatic interaction between the carboxyl
(deprotonated) and protonated N1 nitrogen–N1(H+) suggests that the syn conformer of SFG is preferred. Indeed, theoretical studies (see ,
structure IV, and ) indicate that, for this case (as well as for H4L3+),
the syn conformation prevails and the
stabilizing intermolecular hydrogen bonds between  and  are present. As a result, an outer-sphere macrochelate is formed
(conformation V in ), with consequent shift of N1 nitrogen pK value. Analogous phenomena involving
N7 of purine were observed during macrochelate formation in the molecules of
-ATP [] and -dGTP [].

Next
deprotonations can be attributed to the both remaining amino groups ( = 8.35 and 9.56, equilibria () and (), resp.). The first, assigned to –, is 0.4 log unit lower than the corresponding
value for ornithine [, ], again, as a consequence of the mentioned
macrochelate formation. The second, assigned to –, is significantly different from the values
reported for free ornithine. Such increase in acidity is most likely caused by
the presence of the adenine moiety. In fact, nucleobases have similar effects
in nucleotides, namely,  value of the second terminal
hydroxyl group in AMP ( [, ])
is lower than the corresponding unaffected value in ATP ( []).
Thus electron withdrawing by the adenine residue may yield the observed
decrease in  of −.

The conformational analysis performed on all the four SFG forms
demonstrates that the solvent affects the relative stability of each conformer,
thus indicating differences in polarity. The solute-solvent interaction depends
on (i) the solute and the distributions of (ii) electronic and (iii) nuclear
charge. The electrostatic free energy of solvation (see ) is
simultaneously dependent on total charge and polarity of the whole molecule,
being the energy of hydratation, larger for ionic than for neutral molecules.
The polarized solute-solvent interaction energies change from −326 kcal/mol
(for H4L3+) to −47 kcal/mol (for neutral HL±). The increase of the
total polarity of the molecule yields a corresponding decrease in the
ligand-solvent interaction energy, with consequent effects on the conformation
of the ligand. Such effects are indeed observed for two forms of SFG (i.e., HL± and L−), and were ratified by
calculating the electrostatic potentials (see supplementary data, ) of
HL± and
L− in syn and anti conformations. The
electrostatic potential of HL± is of course much more positive. In the syn conformation, there
are areas of negative electrostatic potential near the −NH2 group,
the N3 atom of adenine, and the −OH group of ribose moiety, but in the anti conformation,
the same areas are reduced and the potential is lower as a result of the
internal H-bond between N3 and OH. In the syn conformation of L−, there are
negative potentials in the vicinity of the −NH2 group and the N3 atom, which are quite close to
each other and destabilize this conformation. The calculations show that the syn conformation
displays larger electrostatic free energy of solvation than the anti one (from ca. 3 to 8 kcal/mol). It is
obvious that the equilibrium conformations of nucleotides are affected by
solvent effects and particularly by intramolecular H-bonds, as reported
previously []. In the calculations related to SFG, the syn conformation is favored in all cases, but for HL and L−,
the solvation energies indicate differences in polarity.

The
rotational barrier of adenine moiety was calculated only for H4L3+ at 1.4 kcal/mol for syn-antirotation and 2.8 kcal/mol for anti-syn rotation. This value is very close to the energy barrier
for syn-anti conformation (1.43–1.19 kcal/mol) estimated for cytidine
derivatives in aqueous solution at 25°C [, ]. The calculated anti-syn barrier for fully protonated SFG is over 1 kcal/mol larger than that measured
for cytidine derivatives.

The conformations
obtained for the diversely protonated forms of SFG are shown in . The
relative Gibbs free-energy values obtained after addition of the thermal corrections,
and the energies of solvation are collected in , together with the
dihedral angle defining the rotation of adenine (atoms defining the rotation
angle are marked with asterisks in ). Boltzmann factors (in percentage)
calculated from free energies are also shown in .

2.2. Copper(II) coordination pattern to sinefungin
The process of copper(II) binding by sinefungin as well as similar
agents representing the combination of nucleosides and aminoacids, may have
biological consequences. As we have already provided, the Cu(II)-sinefungin
complexes may be regarded as genotoxic compounds since they cleave DNA with the
hydroxyl radicals-based mechanism []. DNA degradation proceeds even in the
presence of physiologically widespread antioxidants (glutathione, ascorbate),
what additionally confirms high toxicity of the studied complexes. Moreover,
these studies presented sinefungin as a ligand able to compete for Cu(II)
coordination with cellular substances. This result prompted us to undertake
current studies aimed to resolve the complexation equilibria in
Cu(II)-sinefungin system.

The potentiometric titrations of
the Cu(II)-SFG complex allowed to calculate the stability constants of the two
mononuclear species, CuHL2+ and ,
the formation of which corresponds to equilibria () and (): 

The obtained values are reported in  and compared to the
literature data related to ornithine.

Besides the two mentioned species,
the eventual formation of CuH4L5+, CuH3L4+,
and CuH2L3+ may be discussed. In the CuH4L5+ complex, Cu(II) should bind at N7 of the adenine ring, what is quite improbable
because of the electrostatic repulsion of the positive charge at the N1(H)+ nitrogen. In the CuH3L4+ form, Cu(II) may bind to the
carboxylate, but the  of this
complex is too low to be detected by potentiometry. The case of CuH2L3+ is somehow different since Cu(II) may directly and simultaneously bind at N1
(or N7) and the carboxylate. Potentiometric data do not allow to extract the
stability constant for this complex, but the differential UV spectra ()
display a band at ca. 260 nm, which
is consistent with the interaction of the adenine ring with Cu(II) [].
Experimental data are not sufficient to demonstrate any stabilizing interaction
between the metal-coordinated exocyclic nitrogen donor atom and the COO− group. However, DFT calculations supported the occurrence of a complex, where
Cu(II) interacts with the carboxylate through one of the five metal-bounded
water molecules (outer-sphere macrochelate).
The optimized lowest energy
structure of CuH2L3+ is shown in , while bond
distances and the O–C–N–C angle defining the position of the adenine group are
collected in  (structure XII). The stability of this complex is higher
in calculations implying solvent molecules. Hence we can conclude that the
complex in this particular structure can occur in solution. The remaining
proposals for the CuH2L3+ complexes are much less stable,
and thus they are not included in  and .

(i) CuHL2+ complexes
The CuHL2+ species, which dominates between pH 5.0 and pH 6.0
(), involves Cu(II) binding at the -amino group and the carboxylate,
with consequent formation of a stable 5-membered chelate ring similar to the
Cu(II)-ornithine system [, ]. Participation of one nitrogen donor in the
metal coordination sphere is ratified by the localization of d–d bands on CD
and UV-Vis spectra (see ) as well as the values of EPR parameters  (). On the parallel part of the EPR spectrum
obtained at pH 5.6 apart from the signals corresponding to the CuHL2+ species, also signals derived from the presence of bis-complex with
stoichiometry  are observed. However,
appropriate parameters of the hyperfine splitting can be clearly attributed to
the corresponding complex species. Taking into account that, at these
conditions, not all copper(II) ions are complexed by SFG molecules, signals for
Cu(II) aqua ion are also identified (asterisk in ). EPR results in this
case well reflect the distribution of the copper(II) forms in solution, where
free metal ions coexist with both coordination species at pH 5.6 ().
These results are consistent with the 1N coordination type, although indirect outer-sphere participation of the N7
donor in the coordination process cannot be excluded [].

The optimized geometry of
the lowest-energy structure of CuHL2+ is shown in , and the
corresponding selected geometry parameters are collected in  (structure
XIII). The more extended surface of the anticonformer
accounts for larger solute-solvent interactions and such effect energetically
favors the anti conformation in
solution. In this case, the solvation energy (not shown in ) is larger
for the anticonformer. As
presented in , the axial water molecules are rather loosely bound, what
results in Cu−OH2 distance in the range 2.3–2.5 Å. The equatorial water ligands are
considerably more strongly bound (the Cu−OH2 distance is ca. 2.0 Å).

(ii)  complexes
In the  complex, two SFG
molecules are bound to the metal ion in the same way as in the previous species
(i.e., by -amino and carboxyl
groups) with formation of two stable 5-membered chelate rings. Again, this
coordination mode is ratified by spectroscopic data. EPR parameters  reveal the presence of two nitrogen donors () and the changes in CD and UV-Vis spectra (see Figures , , resp.)
indicate the  coordination
mode. Participation of N1/N7 atom in
the coordination may occur through outer-sphere interactions with axially coordinated water molecules. However, taking into
account that syn conformation of
adenine moiety dominates (see DFT results), we can suppose that N1 nitrogen
interacts indirectly with Cu(II) ion.

The proposed coordination mode, that
is, two carboxylate oxygen atoms, two α-amino group, and two axial water molecules,
leading to six-coordinated Cu(II) ion, was taken into account for calculations.
The isomers with O–Cu–O and N–Cu–N trans and cis arrangement were also
considered in the optimization with the former ones appearing to be more
stable. The geometry optimization was performed for the syn and anti conformations of the adenine group, and the stability was found somehow higher
with the syn rather than the anti conformation. The three most-stable syn conformers are reported in . The corresponding free energies, Boltzmann
factors and selected structural parameters, are collected in . The
Cu–N–C–C angle defines the conformation of the COO–CH2−NαH2 fragment coordinated to
copper(II) ion. The angles of the two HL ligands are of the same or opposite
sign, what determines the geometry around metal ion: C2 local symmetry in the case of identical
sign and Ci in the other
case. The formation of intramolecular hydrogen bonds can be noted in all
conformers: between − and carboxylate, 
− and ribose moiety (structures XIV-XVI, ),
as well as − and N3 (structure XIV, ). The
formation of a hydrogen bond between the − group and the N3
nitrogen atom of adenine moiety is only found for structure XIV. This may be a
result of different ornithine carbon chain conformation as compared with the
remaining structures. In this conformation, adenine and − are close to each other.

The syn-anti equilibrium of
adenine in both free and complexed SFG depends significantly on solvation
effects and formation of intra and intermolecular H-bonds in such a manner that
small perturbations may result in the meaningful changes. Solvent effects have
been found to stabilize the syn conformation of adenine in almost all studied systems. However, comparison of
the structures I–XVI shows that other factors, like Cu(II)
coordination mode, also influence the relative syn-anti stability. Isomerism related to the presence of
N1/N7 in the coordination sphere, in the case of both CuHL2+ and  species, results from the formation of open and close complexes divided into outer- and inner-sphere, and does not allow ascribing the
spectroscopic parameters to particular complexes.

Molecular features of the complexes that include fully deprotonated SFG
molecules in mono- and bis-complexes are difficult to be obtained due to the
Cu(OH)2 precipitation above pH 7.

3. CONCLUSIONS
Since Cu(II)
coordination may become an important factor of sinefungin-induced cellular
toxicity, the stability constants for the Cu(II)-sinefungin system were
evaluated. They were compared to the analogous values obtained for the
Cu(II)-ornithine species and appeared to be slightly lower. Despite the
decrease in stability of cupric complexes of sinefungin, this ligand offers
higher diversity of potential binding sites for copper(II) coordination
process. Since the potentiometric titrations did not yield any data above pH 7
due to precipitation, it was not possible to describe the studied system at the
physiological pH. However, we evaluated that, at pH 7, copper ions are
completely bound by sinefungin molecules. In these conditions, two kinds of
complexes coexist in water solution. They share the same coordination pattern
of sinefungin (ornithine donor atoms), but the difference is in the amount of
ligands engaged in complexation. Furthermore, DFT studies suggest that N1
nitrogen atom from adenine moiety also participates in the coordination. The
calculations results propose that this process occurs through water molecule (outer-sphere).
The syn-anti conformation equilibrium in complexed and free sinefungin depends on the
protonation state and on the number of intramolecular hydrogen bonds.

4. EXPERIMENTAL SECTION
4.1. Materials
Sinefungin and HNO3 were purchased from Sigma Chemical Co.(MO, USA). NaClO4, Cu(ClO4)2,
KNO3, and NaOH were obtained from Merck KGaA, (Darmstadt, Germany). Ethanediol was purchased
from POCH S.A. (Gliwice, Poland).

4.2. Potentiometric titrations
Potentiometric
titrations of sinefungin and its complexes with Cu(II) ions in the presence of
0.1 M KNO3 were performed at 25°C, within the pH range 2.8–10.5
(Molspin automatic titrator, Molspin Ltd, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK) with CO2-free
0.09997 M NaOH as titrant. Changes in pH were monitored with a combined
glass-Ag/AgCl electrode (Russell pH Ltd., ThermoRussell CMAW 711, Fife, UK),
calibrated daily in hydrogen ion concentrations by HNO3 titrations []. Sample volumes of 2 Ml were
used. Ligand concentration was 0.7 MM, and a metal to ligand molar ratio of 1 : 2
was used. These data were analyzed using SUPERQUAD program []. Standard
deviations computed by Superquad refer to random errors only.

4.3. Electronic absorption spectroscopy
The electronic absorption spectra were recorded
at 25°C on a Cary 50 Bio spectrophotometer (Varian
Inc., CA, USA) over the spectral range 190–900 nm, in 1 or 0.1 cm cells. The metal to
ligand molar ratio was 1 : 2, and the concentration of the former one was 1.5 MM.
The measurements were done in the presence of 0.1 M NaClO4, due
to its transparency in far UV.

4.4. Circular dichroism spectroscopy
The CD spectra were recorded at the same
conditions as UV-Vis measurements, on the Jasco J-715 spectropolarimeter
(JASCO, Japan Spectroscopic Co., Hiroshima, Japan), over the ranges 190–350 nm, using 0.1 cm cells, and 300–800 nm, using 5 cm cells. The metal-ligand
molar ratio and the concentration were the same as in UV-Vis measurements.
Spectra were expressed in terms of , where  and  are molar absorption coefficients for left and
right circularly polarized light, respectively.

4.5. Electron
paramagnetic resonance
The spectra of the Cu(II) complex with sinefungin were recorded at 77 K
on a Bruker ESP 300E spectrometer (Karlsruhe, Germany) at the
X-band frequency (9.3 GHz). Ethanediol-water (1 : 2) was used as a solvent to
obtain homogeneity of frozen samples. Samples concentrations were the same as
those applied in other spectroscopic measurements.

4.6. Molecular modeling
All calculations were performed without any
symmetry constraints with the use of Gaussian 03 program []. The density
functional theory (DFT) method was used with the B3LYP hybrid functional [–].
In the calculations, the PCM solvent model was used [], with water as the
solvent. In the first step, geometries optimization was performed in the basis
6–31 G* for C, N, O, H atoms, and 6–311 G* for copper ion. The vibrational
frequencies were calculated every time to confirm that the obtained structures
correspond to local minima on the potential energy surface. Furthermore, the
thermal corrections, for all optimized considered structures, were calculated.
The obtained structures were used as inputs, and the energies of the optimized
geometries were recalculated with the PCM model in a larger basis sets:
6–311 + G* for N, C, O, H in the case of free sinefungin molecule, 6–311 + G* for
Cu, 6–31 + G* for N, C, O, and 6–31 + G** for H in the case of copper complexes.
The data in tables contain values calculated with larger basis. The molecular
structures were depicted by the program MOLDEN [], and electrostatic
potentials were drawn by the program gOpenMol [].

Conformations of sinefungin in
various protonation states were investigated, namely, H4L3+,
H3L2+, H2L+, , and L−, where L− stands for the fully deprotonated SFG molecule. In
each case, optimization was done for the syn and anti conformations of the
adenosine moiety. In the cases of H3L2+, H2L+, and , water molecules were added in the vicinity of −COO− and neighboring − groups to prevent proton jumps
between them, whereas the calculations for H4L3+ and L− were performed without additional water molecules since the mentioned
proton jump is not observed.

Geometry optimization of CuH2L3+ was performed for the coordination modes consistent with the experimental data,
involving copper(II) coordination to the carboxylate oxygen and adenine
nitrogen. Twelve water molecules were used in the optimization. In the
considered structures, Cu(II) ion is coordinated by five or four water
molecules. Water molecules, not entering the coordination sphere, are located
around this sphere or H-bonded to polar groups in the SFG molecule. Also, the
calculations for CuHL2+ complex species were performed with twelve
water molecules. Four water molecules are directly bound to Cu(II), the
remaining ones are located around the first coordination sphere. Syn and anti conformations of adenine were considered. For the ,
eight water molecules were included around the first coordination sphere of
copper ion. Other six-coordinated complexes were also considered, in which,
copper is additionally bound by N7 or N1 of adenine, either directly (inner-sphere) or indirectly (outer-sphere) through a water molecule.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Gaussian03 calculations were carried out in
the Wrocław Center for
Networking and Supercomputing, WCSS, Wrocław, Poland, under
calculational Grant no. 51/96. This work was financially supported by the
Polish State Committee for Scientific Research (KBN), Grant no. 4 T09A 179 25.

The fully protonated molecule
of sinefungin in its two conformers, (a) anti and (b) syn.

Conformations of free SFG molecule in various protonation states. The rotation angle of adenine is marked
with asterisks.

The differential UV spectrum
for the Cu(II)-SFG system obtained by subtraction of the spectrum at pH 3.45
from the spectrum at pH 4.57.

The lowest energy structure of CuH2L3+ complex. The angle O–C–N–C defining the position of adenine group is marked with asterisks.

The pH-dependent courses of
complexes concentrations and the (a) CD and (b) UV-Vis spectra
parameters overlaid.

The EPR spectra for the
Cu(II)-SFG system at pH 5.6. Signals for complex species are indicated by
arrows and signals for Cu(II) aqua ion are depicted with asterisks.

The lowest energy structure
of CuHL2+ complex. The rotation angle of adenine is marked with asterisks.

The lowest energy structures of  in syn conformation. The angle Cu–N–C–C
defining the conformation of SFG at the copper center is marked with
asterisks.

Electrostatic potentials of HL and L− in the syn and anti conformations. The potential values are in the range from −0.012 [a.u.] (blue) to 0.05 [a.u.] (red).

The protonation constants of sinefungin (L) and
the stability constants of its Cu(II) complexes with the process
sites indicated. The analogous values for ornithine are included
for comparison.

Species			Deprotonation site	
H4L3+	24.90(1)	3.15	–COOH	
H3L2+	21.75(1)	3.83	–N1(H+)	
H2L+	17.918(9)	8.355	–	
	9.563(8)	9.563	–	
	
H3(Orn)2+	21.21a	1.98	–COOH	
21.02b	1.75	
H2(Orn)+	19.23a	8.74	–	
19.27b	8.75	
H(Orn)±	10.49a	10.49	–	
10.52b	10.52	
	
CuHL2+	15.83(2)	—	—	
	31.12(2)	—	—	
	
CuH(Orn)2+	17.8a	—	—	
17.812b	—	—	
	34.48a	8.98	—	
34.448b	—	—	
	25.50a	9.97	—	
Cu(Orn)2	15.53a	—	—	
a[],
b[].

Relative Gibbs
free energies, Boltzmann factors (in percent), energy of
solvation, and dihedral angle defining the positions of adenine
for the SFG molecules.

	G [kcal/mol]	 [kcal/mol]	%a	O–C–N–C	
H4L3+	
	
I (anti)	0.8	–322.5	20	183	
II (syn)	0.0	–325.7	80	76	
	
H3L2+	
	
III (anti)	0.8	–168.1	16	188	
IV (syn)	0.0	–170.7	56	71	
V	0.4	–170.8	28	55	
	
H2L+	
	
VI (anti)	4.0	83.0	0	170	
VII (syn)	0.0	89.7	100	68	
	
HL	
	
VIII (anti)	0.0	47.0	84	169	
IX (syn)	1.0	52.7	16	75	
	
L−	
	
X (anti)	0.0	79.7	96	174	
XI (syn)	1.9	87.4	4	76	
aValues calculated from the
Gibbs free energies.

Relative Gibbs free energies, Boltzmann
factors (in percent), and selected geometrical parameters for
Cu(II)-SFG complexes.

	G [kcal/mol]	%	r [Å] Cu–	r [Å]Cu–N	r [Å] Cu–	O–C–N–C	Cu–N–C–C	
CuH2L3+	
	
XII	—	100	—	2.02 (N1)	2.05	55	—	
1.97	
1.96	
2.48	
2.49	
	
CuHL2+	
	
XIII (anti)	—	100	1.92	2.02 (NαH2)	2.04	169	—	
1.95	
2.36	
2.47	
	
	
	
XIV (syn)	0.0	88	1.97	2.02	2.42	51	153	
1.97	2.01	2.51	52	152	
XV (syn)	3.9	0	2.01	2.02	2.46	63	155	
1.99	2.00	2.41	58	161	
XVI (syn)	1.2	12	1.95	2.02	2.52	63	173	
1.95	2.03	2.44	61	151	
