INTRODUCTION
Organotin compounds find a considerably application in industry
and agriculture and the subsequent discharge of toxic organotins
into the environment is a topic of great concern [, ]. Among the organotins RnSnX4−n trimethyltin species MenSnX4−n are of particular importance since these compounds are formed in the environment in biomethylation
processes [].

The toxicity of organotins is associated with their ability to
react with free SH-groups in proteins and glutathione and to
inhibit the activities of some enzymes.

On the other hand, it is well known that organotins induce
oxidative stress in the living organism through multiple
mechanisms including the enhancement of the intracellular
generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), H2O2, O−•2, HO• []. The involvement of RnSnX4−n in radical and redox biochemical processes is manifested in C−Sn bond homolytic cleavage that leads to the generation of reactive
C-centered organic radicals R• []. Thus a very reactive methyl radical CH•3 might be formed when methyl derivatives of tin, MenSnX4−n, participate in biochemical radical reactions. The consequences of this impact are the perturbation of the antioxidative defense system and the promotion of a cascade of radical processes. On the other hand,
the metal ions formed in the biodegradation of organotins are
promoters of radical processes.

Therefore, an intriguing aspect of the behavior of organotins
RnSnX4−n is their ability to manifest the activity of metal containing prooxidants and chain radical reactions promoters
as well.

The disruption of the oxidative status in the living
organism can be prevented or inhibited by cellular antioxidants.
Toxic doses of organotin compounds are capable of
disturbing the natural oxidation/reduction balance in cells
through various mechanisms originating from their own complex
oxidative/radical reactions with endogenous oxidants. The
consequences of these reactions produce some effects on cellular
antioxidant systems, cellular membranes, and membrane-dependent
redox sensitive enzymatic systems. This, in turn, may produce a
variety of toxic effects, including pathological processes, which
lead to the cells death.

Therefore, there is an urgent need to find new detoxification
agents to prevent or inhibit the disruption of the cellular
antioxidative system when organotins are involved.

Processes caused by active radical species are prevented or
inhibited by treating the organism with natural or synthetic
antioxidants. The application of chelating agents such as metal
scavengers seems to be important in order to exclude the impact of
the metal ion.

Lately, a new approach has been proposed [] to prevent the prooxidative activity of organotins by applying a specific
polytopic compound capable of acting as an antioxidant and a metal
ion scavenger—free base meso-tetrakis(3,5-di-tert-butyl-4-hydroxyphenyl)porphyrin,
R′4PH2. This exogenous compound acts as an inhibitor since its molecules contain the antioxidative phenol moieties, analogues of vitamins E group. The other pathway of
R′4PH2 is associated with the ability of free base porphyrins to incorporate metal ions in their core and to form
stable metal complexes.

The influence of Me2SnCl2, Et2SnCl2, and
SnCl2 upon the radical chain oxidation of Z-9-octadecenoic (oleic) acid as model substrate for lipid
peroxidation in the simultaneous presence of R′4PH2 has been studied []. The free base porphyrin R′4PH2, containing the antioxidative phenol moieties (2,6-di-tert-butylphenol), demonstrates an acute inhibitory effect upon the oleic acid's peroxidation in the
presence of organotins.

Thus we suppose that meso-tetrakis(3,5-di-tert-butyl-4-hydroxyphenyl)porphyrin can act as an antioxidant and a scavenger for metal and can be used as a new antioxidative scavenger preventing the toxic impact
of organotin compounds.

The goal of the present study is to evaluate the in vivo
protective effect of meso-tetrakis(3,5-di-tert-butyl-4-hydroxyphenyl)porphyrin against the impact of Me3SnCl upon the components of antioxidative defense system (catalase and superoxide dismutase) using rats as tested organisms. The total level of SH-groups as a
marker of Me3SnCl impact upon proteins containing thiol groups and glutathione in rats' organs has been studied as well.

EXPERIMENTAL
Materials and instruments
The following materials were obtained commercially and used as
supplied: Me3SnCl (Strem),
(NH4)6MO7O24, 5,5′-dithio-bis(2-nitrobenzoic)
acid (DTNB), nitroblue tetrazolium (NBT), EDTA (Sigma). Free base
meso-tetrakis(3,5-di-tert-butyl-4-hydroxyphenyl)porphyrin
was synthesized as previously described by the known procedure
[], purified by silica gel column chromatography using
CHCl3, 80% CHCl3 and 20% hexane as the
eluting solvents, and identified by UV-vis and IR
spectroscopy. Deionized water purified with Simplicity Proto
system (Millipore) was used. The solutions of Me3SnCl were prepared by dissolving the precise quantity of the compound
in Tween-80. The solutions of Me3SnCl were prepared directly before the analysis. Spectrophotometric study was
performed by using spectrophotometer SF-46 (LOMO, Russia) and
Varian 100S spectrophotometer. Infrared (IR) spectra were recorded
on a Perkin Elmer “Spectrum One” spectrophotometer.

Experimental animals
Adult female Wistar rats (200–220 g body wt) were used
throughout experiments. The animals were divided into 4 groups (a
control group of animals that did not receive any treatment, three
experimental groups of animals which received either
Me3SnCl or
meso-tetrakis(3,5-di-tert-butyl-4-hydroxyphenyl)porphyrin
or their combination, resp; each group contained 5 animals). The
animals were given a single oral additive's dose of
5 mg·kg body wt. This is a less amount of
Me3SnCl than the oral LD50-dose of about 9 mg·kg []. The simultaneous oral treatment of the animals with Me3SnCl and meso-tetrakis(3,5-di-tert-butyl-4-hydroxyphenyl)porphyrin
was performed in an analogous way by using the same
doses. The rats were clearly affected by the treatment (diminished
mobility, anxiety, aggression). However, none of the tested
animals died during the experiment. The animals were killed after
24 h, the livers and kidneys were immediately
removed, rinsed with ice-cold saline, homogenized in 0.05 M
phosphate buffer (pH 7.4) and 0.1 mM EDTA using a motor-driven
Teflon-glass homogenizer followed by ultrasonification as
described previously []. After centrifugation at
2000× g for 10 min, the supernatant was used for
the analysis.

Measurement of catalase and superoxide dismutase
activities and the content of glutathione
The liver and kidney tissues were used for measurement of catalase
(CAT) (EC 1.11.1.6) and superoxide dismutase (SOD) (EC 1.15.1.1)
activities as well as for measuring the content of free
sulfhydryl groups.

The assay for the determination of catalase activity was carried
out as described previously [, ] by a method based on the
disappearance of H2O2 in the reaction of hydrogen peroxide with (NH4)6MO7O24 monitored spectrophotometrically at 410 nm.

The assay for the determination of SOD activity was carried out as
described previously [] by a method using nitroblue tetrazolium (NBT) as the indicator reagent spectrophotometrically
at 560 nm [].

The content of SH-groups was measured by the reaction of free
sulfhydryl groups with 5,5′-dithio-bis(2-nitrobenzoic) acid
(DTNB) spectrophotometrically at 412 nm as described
previously []. In all the experiments, Tween-80 impact upon the activity of CAT, SOD, and the content of SH-groups has been
preliminary studied. No significant changes in the activities of
enzymes and of the content of SH-groups have been
observed.

Statistical analysis
All the data displayed in  and Figures
, , and  are presented as means
of several experiments ± standard errors (SE) and represent
treatment-induced changes. The assays of enzymes activities and
free sulfhydryl groups' content were carried out in 8 or 12
parallel experiments. The significance of differences between
experimental conditions was tested at the 5% level (P &lt; .05). The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test was used to assess the normality of
the distribution of each treatment [].

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Organic derivatives of tin (RnSnXm) are supposed to induce oxidative stress in the living organism through
multiple mechanisms including the intracellular generation
of reactive oxygen species (ROS) [, , , –], depletion
of SH-groups in proteins and glutathione, promotion of
lipid peroxidation, and perturbation of antioxidant defense system
[]. To understand the biomolecular mode of
organotin compounds action, the participation of various
RnSnXm in key biochemical processes responsible for the damage of the antioxidative defense system should be
further studied.

The involvement of RnSnXm in oxidative/free radical reactions may include the reactions of these compounds with very
reactive radical species. These processes lead to the homolytic
cleavage of C−Sn bond and result in the formation of
reactive organic radicals R• responsible for the
enhanced perturbation of the antioxidative defense
system and cell death []. Therefore, there is a need to
elaborate a new approach in order to prevent or inhibit the impact
of RnSnX4−n upon the complex antioxidative
defense system.

Methyl derivative of Sn(IV) possessing three methyl groups (Me3SnCl) was selected for the investigation since there was strong evidence that this compound is the dominant species presented in biota [, ].

A new efficient route to prevent the prooxidative activity of the
organotin compounds was proposed and based on free base porphyrin
containing antioxidative phenolic groups (meso-tetrakis(3,5-di-tert-butyl-4-hydroxyphenyl)porphyrin)
[] (see Scheme 1).

It was established that this compound acts as an effective
antioxidant inhibiting the peroxidation of oleic acid in
the presence of organotins []. Moreover, free base
porphyrins are capable of incorporating metal ions in
their core [] when these macrocyclic compounds are involved
in oxidative/radical processes.

Effect of trimethyltin chloride and
meso-tetrakis(3,5-di-tert-butyl-4-hydroxyphenyl)porphyrin
upon the activity of catalase
Both organic and inorganic tins have been found to
decrease the activity of catalase—an H2O2 scavenger [, ]. The mechanism of the enzyme inhibition is associated with the interaction of Sn center with free SH-groups in protein. Trimethyltin chloride is capable of interacting with
SH-groups according to the nucleophilic substitution reaction of
chlorine atom at metal center. On the other hand, the inorganic
tin formed in the dealkylation of Me3SnCl in radical substitution reactions may also interact readily with
SH-groups. Therefore the protective effect of R′4PH2 might be of importance since both centers in its molecule are responsible for both radical processes inhibition and metal ion scavenging.

The influence of these substances upon the enzyme activity in rat
liver and kidney was studied. The data for enzymes activity and
free sulfhydryl groups content are presented in
 and given in  as percent
of control (± SE).

It was shown that the catalytic activity of CAT significantly
decreased when the animals were treated orally with the dose of
Me3SnCl 5 mg·kg−1 wt. At the same time it was observed that the same amount of R′4PH2 had almost no effect on CAT activity, whereas Me3SnCl at the same concentration inhibited the enzyme sufficiently. The treatment of the tested animals with the combination of both additives is
manifested in the significant decrease in Me3SnCl impact upon the enzyme.

Effect of trimethyltin chloride and
meso-tetrakis(3,5-di-tert-butyl-4-hydroxyphenyl)porphyrin
upon the activity of superoxide dismutase
Superoxide dismutase (SOD) is involved in the functioning of
cellular antioxidative system and is responsible for the
dismutation of highly toxic superoxide radical anion
O2•− in cells. The inhibition of this antioxidant enzyme activity by metals is a well-known fact []. The inhibition of SOD is discussed as one of the mechanisms of organotins cytotoxicity as well [, , ].

The data are presented in  and
 for both isolated liver and kidney tissues
when rats were treated with the dose of Me3SnCl 5 mg·kg−1 wt. The results are analogous
to the previous ones presenting the effect of additives on the
CAT activity. The equal dose of R′4PH2 does not show any significant effect on SOD activity, whereas the treatment of rats with the mixture of both compounds is manifested in significant
modulation of Me3SnCl impact upon the enzymatic activity.

Effect of trimethyltin chloride and meso-tetrakis(3,5-di-tert-butyl-4-hydroxyphenyl)porphyrin upon the content of free sulfhydryl groups
In the present study the content of free SH-groups has been
examined as a biomarker of the protective effect of
R′4PH2 against the toxic impact of Me3SnCl. The
results are given in  and . The protective effect of porphyrin R′4PH2 for both experimental tissues—liver and kidney—isolated after the treatment of rats is very significant. These experimental results suggest that the interaction of Me3SnCl (or of inorganic tin as the product of Me3SnCl decomposition) may be prevented by the application of R′4PH2.

Thus, it was demonstrated that trimethyltin chloride causes the
inhibition of CAT and SOD catalytic activities that can
be explained in terms of possible coupling with SH-groups of the
enzymes. The decrease in the content of free sulfhydryl
groups in rat tissues was observed as well.

Recently, we have studied the influence of methyltins
(MeSnCl3, Me2SnCl2, and Me3SnCl), and inorganic tins (SnCl2, SnCl4) on the enzymatic activities of NAD-dependent horse liver alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) in the reaction of ethanol oxidation [] and NAD-dependent lactate dehydrogenase isolated from fish liver []. The results show that inorganic tins and organotins induce inhibition of the catalytic activity of
horse liver alcohol dehydrogenase. It also turned out that the
mechanism of methyltins action is more complex than the proposed
interaction of Sn with SH-groups of the enzyme protein. It was
clearly demonstrated that the tin compounds act as oxidative
agents towards coenzyme NADH as well.

Therefore, the results allow one to suggest that both mechanisms
(coupling with the SH-groups in proteins and involvement in
oxidative/radical processes) might be responsible for the impact
of Me3SnCl upon the cellular antioxidative enzymatic system. The decrease of Me3SnCl effect in the simultaneous presence of R′4PH2 confirms the assumption that this polytopic compound might act as a radical and metal scavenger.

CONCLUSION
In summary, the presented experimental results of this in vivo
study show that trimethyltin chloride induces the inhibition of
the catalytic activities of CAT and SOD in rat liver and kidney
and decreases the level of free SH-groups as well. It was
demonstrated that the simultaneous treatment of tested rats with
free base meso-tetrakis(3,5-di-tert-butyl-4-hydroxyphenyl)porphyrin significantly attenuates Me3SnCl toxic impact. Taken together, our results suggest that porphyrin containing antioxidative phenol fragments might act as a radical and metal
scavenger.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic
Research (Grants no. 05-03-32864, 06-03-32773, 06-03-32731) and by
the Program “Biomolecular and Medicinal Chemistry” of Russian
Academy of Sciences.

Figures and Tables
Effect of Me3SnCl, R′4PH2, and
their combination exposure on the activity of CAT in rat liver
(rat liver was isolated after 24 h after the animals were
pretreated orally with 5 mg·kg−1 wt of
Me3SnCl, R′4PH2, and their combination,
resp; P &lt; .05).

Effect of Me3SnCl, R′4PH2, and
their combination exposure on the activity of SOD in rat liver
(rat liver was isolated after 24 h after the animals were
pretreated orally with 5 mg·kg−1 wt of
Me3SnCl, R′4PH2, and their combination,
resp; P &lt; .05).

Effect of Me3SnCl, R′4PH2, and
their combination exposure on SH-groups content in rat liver (rat
liver was isolated after 24 h after the animals were
pretreated orally with 5 mg·kg−1 wt of
Me3SnCl, R′4PH2, and their combination,
resp; P &lt; .05).

Activities of catalase, superoxide dismutase, and total
content of SH-groups in rat liver and kidney.

	Enzyme activity, mmol·mg−1 · min−1	Total content of SH-groups, mmol·mg−1	
		
	CAT	SOD	
		
	Liver	Kidney	Liver	Kidney	Liver	Kidney	
	
Control	241.0 ± 11.0	157.6 ± 5.8	12.8 ± 0.5	6.7 ± 0.2	155.4 ± 6.4	136.3 ± 6.5	
Me3SnCl	136.5 ± 6.7	102.1 ± 3.8	1.0 ± 0.05	0.5 ± 0.01	9.5 ± 0.5	32.8 ± 0.8	
Me3SnCl + R′4PH2	164.8 ± 6.4	128.2 ± 1.9	3.8 ± 0.06	2.1 ± 0.1	99.4 ± 3.8	62.6 ± 3.2	
R′4PH2	224.8 ± 8.4	144.9 ± 4.3	10.8 ± 0.4	6.6 ± 0.3	139.1 ± 6.9	132.1 ± 0.5	
* After 24 h of oral treatment of rats with both
trimethyltin chloride and porphyrin R′4PH2 each alone as well as in combination (P &lt; .05 versus control). Data ± SE (n = 8 − 12); n = number of replicates of enzyme activity measurements.

