INTRODUCTION
The principles underlining
antisense and antigene strategies are conceptually very simple and
straightforward. The use of a complementary sequence can inhibit
the expression of a specific mRNA, breaking the transfer of
genetic information from DNA to protein. The development of
oligonucleotide derivatives that can bind sequence specifically to
unique sites in mRNA or genomic DNA and modify the target to a
great extent or even completely may have major implications for
the treatment of hereditary diseases, cancers, and viral
infections [–]. This approach, relying on
sequence-specific targeting of reactive compounds, was initially
called “complementary addressed modification of nucleic acids”
[]. Kinetic studies of these processes provide quantitative
estimates of the selectivity and efficiency of the modification of
nucleic acids.

Oligonucleotides derivatives carrying catalytic groups can achieve
multiple turnover and convert many target molecules. Complexes of
porphyrins and phthalocyanines with the transition metal ions (Fe,
Co, etc.) are considered among the most efficient catalytic groups
for this purpose [].

Molecular oxygen is a four-electron oxidant; its reduction to
H2O is presented in . As one-step two- or four-electron reduction of O2 is forbidden by
spin exclusion principle, direct oxidation of organic substrates
with a triplet oxygen molecule does not occur. This difficulty can
be overcome either by converting the oxygen molecule from its
ground triplet state to the excited singlet state or by sequential
one-electron reduction to H2O catalyzed by transition
metal ions. Among reactive oxygen species formed in the latter
pathway (), hydroxyl radical •OH is the strongest oxidant [, ] capable of damaging
various cell constituents including DNA [].

It was recently shown that complexes of phthalocyanines with
Co(II) and Fe(II) are very efficient catalysts of
oxidation of various organic substrates with molecular oxygen and
hydrogen peroxide []. If molecular oxygen is the oxidant, a
reducing agent is also required to convert the metal ion to a low
valent state.

The main goal of this paper was to determine the kinetic features
of the interaction of the PtcCo(II)-oligonucleotide
conjugate with single-stranded DNA. Earlier we have shown that the
system of O2, a PtcCo(II) conjugate, and a reductant can oxidize DNA [], but this reaction is very
slow. Therefore, in the present study H2O2 was taken
as an oxidant instead of molecular oxygen. In this case, the first
unfavorable step in  is left out and the
target oxidation is accelerated significantly, allowing one to
estimate the contribution of other stages to the oxidation
process. In addition to being the source of •OH radicals,
H2O2 serves as the reducer of the oxidized form of
catalyst. The structures of the metallophthalocyanine conjugate
and the target DNA are presented in .

To gain a deeper insight into the reactivity of
PtcCo(II)-group and the mechanism of the DNA target
modification by the PtcCo(II)-oligonucleotide conjugate, we
have studied separately the different stages of this process. The
first step was duplex formation between the target and the
conjugate (X) or a nonmodified oligonucleotide
(N). This equilibrium was studied by stopped-flow
kinetics and UV melting curve analysis. Degradation of the
PtcCo(II) residue in the conjugate in the presence of
H2O2 was detected by changes in the absorption
spectrum of this moiety during the reaction. The products of the
catalytic oxidative modification of the target
deoxyribooligonucleotide were registered by gel electrophoresis
after treatment with piperidine (to reveal alkali-labile sites) or
Escherichia coli Fpg protein (to reveal 8-oxoguanine
and abasic sites).

EXPERIMENTAL
Chemicals and reagents
Acrylamide, N,N′-methylene-bisacrylamide, urea, acetonitrile, DMF
(Fluka, Switzerland), Tris-HCl, and piperidine (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) were used. All solutions were prepared with double-distilled
water using ultrapure reagents. Hydrogen peroxide (stabilized, &gt; 30%) was purchased from Fluka. T4 polynucleotide kinase
was purchased from Sibenzyme (Russia). Fpg protein from E coli was overexpressed, purified, assayed, and stored as described previously []. [γ-32P]ATP
(&gt; 3000 Ci/mmol) was purchased from Biosan (Russia). All
binding and modification experiments were carried out at 25°C in a buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH = 7.5), 0.1 M NaCl, 10 mM EDTA.

Oligonucleotides and the conjugate
The 20 nt and 10 nt deoxyribonucleotides d(AATGGGAAGAGGGTCAGGTT), d(TCTTCCCATT), and pd(TCTTCCCATT) were synthesized on an ASM-700 automated
synthesizer (Biosset, Russia) from phosphoramidites purchased from
Glen Research (USA) according to the manufacturer's protocol. The
oligonucleotides were deprotected with ammonium hydroxide and
purified by ion exchange HPLC on a Nucleosil 100-10
N(CH3)2 column followed by reverse-phase HPLC on a
Nucleosil 100-10 C18 column (both
4.6 × 250 mm, purchased from Macherey-Nagel, Germany).
The purity of the oligonucleotides exceeded 98%, as estimated
by electrophoresis in 20% denaturing polyacrylamide gel and
staining with Stains-All dye (Sigma-Aldrich, USA). Concentrations
of the oligonucleotides were determined from their absorbance at
260 nm [].

The conjugate PtcCo(II)-NH-(CH2)6-O-pd(TCTTCCCATT) was synthesized using a previously reported solid-phase method
[] with 40% yield. The formation of the conjugate as
the main reaction product was confirmed by MALDI-TOF. The mass
spectrum contained the peak with m/z = 3839.52 corresponding to the mass of the molecular ion [M + H]+ (the calculated molecular mass of the conjugate is
3838.62 g/mol).

Stopped-flow experiments
Stopped-flow measurements with UV
absorbance detection were carried out using a model SX.18MV
stopped-flow spectrometer (Applied Photophysics, UK) fitted with a
150 W Xe arc lamp and a 1 cm path length cell. The
optical density of the solution was recorded at 255 nm. Solution
of the target oligonucleotide P in one syringe was
rapidly mixed with a solution of the conjugate X or
nonmodified oligonucleotide N in another syringe. The
concentration of P, X, and N were
varied between 1.0 and 7.5 μM. Concentrations of reactants
reported are those in the reaction chamber after mixing.
Typically, each trace shown is the average of four or more
individual experiments. The dead time of the instrument was 1.4 ms.

UV melting experiments
Absorbance versus temperature profiles were recorded at 260, 270,
280, and 300 nm using the optical detector of a Milikhrom
chromatograph (Russia) connected to a PC. Melting profiles were
obtained by heating at 0.5–0.9°C/min. The concentration of
each strand was 5.0 × 10–6 M and the cell volume was
2 μl. The data were analyzed taking into account the thermal
expansion coefficient of water. The differential curves were
obtained from the integral ones by calculating the increment of
the optical density per 1°C of temperature growth.
Thermodynamic parameters (ΔH0, ΔS0) were
calculated according to [].

5′-Terminal phosphorylation
The 5′-end of the oligonucleotide P was
32P-labeled using the standard procedure with
T4-polynucleotide kinase and [γ-32P]ATP (&gt; 3000 Ci/mmol)
[].

Degradation of the phthalocyanine group attached to oligonucleotide
The change of the optical density of the solution at 682 nm where only the phthalocyanine group of the conjugate absorbs was followed using a Shimadzu UV2100 spectrophotometer. The
concentrations of the conjugate and hydrogen peroxide were changed
in the ranges 8.0 × 10–6 – 12.0 × 10–6 M and
5.0 × 10–4 – 1.0 × 10–2 M, respectively.

Modification of the target oligonucleotide
Modification of the [32P]-labeled P was carried out in the
presence of hydrogen peroxide. The concentration of P
in the reaction mixture was 1.0 × 10–8 M,
concentrations of the conjugate and hydrogen peroxide were changed
in the range 0.4×10–6 –1.0×10–5 M and 1.0×10–3 –1.0×10–1 M, respectively. The
reaction was initiated by adding H2O2. Aliquots were
taken from the reaction mixture at different times and were
immediately transferred into polypropylene tubes containing
200 μl of 2% LiClO4 in acetone. The precipitate was pelleted by centrifugation, washed twice with 80% ethanol and once with acetone, and dried in vacuum. The samples were then treated with piperidine or Fpg. The products of
the modification were separated by 20% PAGE in the presence
of 7 M urea. After electrophoresis, the gel was exposed to
CP-BU X-ray film (Agfa-Gevaert, Belgium) for 10–20 h at
–10°C. The autoradiograms were scanned and quantified
using Gel-Pro Analyzer v4.0 software (Media Cybernetics, MD). The
extent of modification was calculated as the ratio of the integral
intensity of the spot corresponding to the modification product to
the sum of the intensities of the spots corresponding to the
targets and the products.

Piperidine treatment
The precipitates were dissolved in 100 μl of 1 M piperidine (pH 12) and incubated for 30 min at 95°C
[]. After that the reaction mixtures were precipitated with
10 volumes of 2% LiClO4 in acetone, washed with
80% ethanol, then with acetone, dried under vacuum, and
dissolved in 2–4 μl of the gel-loading dye containing
0.1% bromophenol blue, 0.1% xylene cyanol FF, and 7 M
urea.

Fpg treatment
The precipitates were dissolved in 2 μl of the buffer
containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7, 5),
50 mM KCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM
dithiothreitol, 9% glycerol, and 9 × 10–6 M Fpg.
After incubation of the reaction mixtures at 25°C for
2 h, 2 μl of the gel-loading dye were added to
each probe.

Analysis of the kinetic curves
Kinetic parameters were obtained by numerical fitting using Origin
v7.0 (OriginLab, USA), DynaFit (BioKin, USA) [], Scientist,
Simplex, and SigmaPlot v9.0 software.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Influence of PtcCo(II) residue on the kinetics of formation and the stability of complex between the DNA target and the oligonucleotide conjugate
Stopped-flow kinetics
The influence of PtcCo(II) residue on the duplex formation
between target P and oligonucleotide part of the
conjugate was first investigated using the conjugate X
and a nonmodified 10 nt oligonucleotide N.
Formation of PX and PN was studied by
stopped-flow kinetics with optical density detection at 255 nm.

As can be seen from Figures  and , the kinetic curves for the interaction of P with
X and N were different. In the case of
PN formation, a sharp decrease in the absorption was
observed between 0 and 1 s, followed by a plateau phase
after 1 s. When PX was formed, a slow decrease in
the optical density after 1 s was detected. It should be
noted that N caused a more pronounced change in the
optical density at 255 nm compared with X. For
example, at [P] = 7.5×10–6 M (the
concentrations of X and N were 5.0×10–6 M) the change of the absorbance was ∼0.1 in the
case of PN and ∼0.05 with PX.

The kinetic curves of PN formation were fitted to
 using DynaFit software. The theoretical
curves correlated well with the experimental data. The calculated
rate constants are presented in .

In the case of PX,  did not
describe the slight decrease of the optical density after
1 s. These data were treated using 
containing two equilibria. The calculated constants are presented
in . Accordingly, the process of the complex
formation between the conjugate and target oligonucleotide can be
described by a two-stage mechanism. The overall association
constant for the formation of PX was in a close agreement
with the overall constant for the PN formation,
indicating that the phthalocyanine residue did not influence the
complex stability. It was shown earlier [] that the association
constant for the complex formed by a conjugate of a 8 nt
oligonucleotide with Co(II)-phthalocyanine and a 12 nt
oligonucleotide target is 15-fold higher than that for the complex
formed with the nonmodified 8 nt oligonucleotide and the 12 nt
target. However, the stabilization/destabilization effects may
depend on the lengths and sequences of the oligonucleotides used.
In our case when a 20 nt oligonucleotide was used as the target,
no stabilization of its duplex with the conjugate was observed.

The process of DNA duplex formation includes two steps: nucleation
and zipping of the duplex. The first stage is rate-limiting and
proceeds with the rate constant about 1 ×  106 – 1 × 
107 (M × s)–1 []. In the case of the
conjugate containing two binding parts, their influence on the
complex formation could be rather complicated. Free porphyrins and
their analogs are known to interact with DNA through either
intercalation or outside binding [, ]. The binding mode
depends both on the nucleotide sequence and substitutions in the
porphyrin moiety. It was shown [] that Co(II)Ptc
interacts with DNA chain. Thus, both fragments of the
oligonucleotide-phthalocyanine conjugate can interact with the
target oligonucleotide. The following mechanism of PX
formation is possible. As can be seen from ,
the optical density decreased quickly until 1 s when both
X and N were binding to P. This
decrease is due to the hypochromic effect arising from the
formation of Watson-Crick base pairs between the oligonucleotides.
Thus, the slow second stage present in the case of PX
is likely caused by the phthalocyanine residue.
 shows that rate constants k1 for
PN and PX* are similar but the values
of k–1 differ twofold, suggesting that PX*
is less stable than PN. In this case the stability of the
complex depends on the number of the Watson-Crick base pairs
formed at the first moment. The smaller change in the optical
density during PX formation corroborates this conclusion
because the change in the absorbance is proportional to the number
of Watson-Crick base pairs. One can suggest that at the first
stage only a few base pairs are formed between the conjugate and
the oligonucleotide target and the phthalocyanine moiety of the
conjugate sterically hinders base pairing. This effect may be due
to the interaction of the phthalocyanine residue with 3-4
heterocyclic bases in the conjugate itself, or with bases in the
target. In any case, incompletely “zipped” duplex
PX* is likely to be formed at the first step.
The slow phthalocyanine displacement at the second step leads to a
formation of the fully complementary PX complex.

Melting curves
To determine the thermodynamic parameters of duplex stability, the
UV melting curves were examined. Single-stranded oligonucleotide
P yielded no visible transition in the differential
melting curves recorded at 26 nm, indicating that
P has no stable secondary structure. The same result
was obtained when the conjugate was heated.

The differential melting curves of the complexes PN and
PX had a single well-defined transition with
Tm = 32.6 and 32.9°C, respectively
(). Registration of melting curves at 300 nm permitted us to detect the interaction of phthalocyanine
moiety with the target. The shape of the differential melting
curve at 300 nm and the location of its maximum were
identical to the shapes of the curves recorded at 260, 270,
and 280 nm. Consequently, the melting curves at
260–280 nm and 300 nm described the same process,
showing that the “melting” of the phthalocyanine residue
occurred simultaneously with the melting of the oligonucleotide
duplex.

The thermodynamic parameters of dissociation of PN and
PX (ΔS0, ΔH0,
ΔG0298) were determined using Simplex software. The
obtained data are listed in . The association
constants were close to those obtained from the stopped-flow
experiments. Taken together, the results obtained by thermal
denaturation method were in agreement with the data obtained by
the fast kinetic method: the phthalocyanine residue does not
influence the stability of the complex between the conjugate and
the target.

Degradation of the phthalocyanine residue in the presence of
hydrogen peroxide
Treatment of the conjugate with hydrogen peroxide resulted in a
destruction of the phthalocyanine residue. This process is
accompanied by a decrease in the optical density at
650–750 nm and at 320 nm, corresponding to the
Q-bands and the Soret band, respectively. We have studied the
kinetics of the phthalocyanine destruction by recording the
absorbance at 682 nm.

The kinetic curves corresponding to different concentrations of
H2O2 are presented on . Total degradation of the PtcCo(II) group was observed for high
concentration of hydrogen peroxide (1.0 × 10–2 and
5.0 × 10–3 M). The reaction did not reach its plateau
by 24 h at low concentrations of oxidizer (1.0×10–3 and 5.0×10–4 M). The repeated
addition of H2O2 to the reaction mixture after
24 h led to a further decrease in the optical density.

The degradation of PtcCo(II) residue by H2O2 was accompanied with catalytic decomposition of hydrogen peroxide.
The experimental data were satisfactorily described assuming that
the destruction of conjugate followed second-order kinetics
(first-order with respect to both components). The catalytic
decomposition of H2O2 was described as the
third-order reaction (first-order by the conjugate and
second-order by hydrogen peroxide). The values of rate constants
kd (conjugate destruction) and kh (catalytic
decomposition of H2O2) obtained by fitting using
Scientist software were kd = (2.2 ± 0.2) × 10–2 (M × s)–1 and
kh = (2.5 ± 0.5) × 103
(M2 × s)–1.

Kremer in his work has shown [] that the catalytic
decomposition of H2O2 by hemin is also second-order with
respect to hydrogen peroxide. The process included formation of a
primary heme-H2O2 complex following by coordination of
the second H2O2 molecule and the catalytic act of
hydrogen peroxide decomposition. It is quite possible that the
catalysis of H2O2 decomposition by the phthalocyanine
Co(II) proceeds similarly.

Comparing our results with those obtained for the modification of
a target with a conjugate of a 8 nt oligonucleotide with a
Fe(III)-protoporphyrin IX (hemin) group in the presence of
H2O2 [], we conclude that the rate constant of the phthalocyanine residue destruction was ∼120-fold
lower than that of the hemin group. The destruction of
the porphyrin system was the major cause of the low extent of
target modification, which did not exceed 33%.

Modification of the target oligonucleotide
Kinetics of DNA modification within PX was studied by
following the time course of cleavage of the [32P]-labeled
target at different times. No direct cleavage of the target strand
was observed. Alkali-labile modifications (abasic sites and
oxidized deoxyribose) were revealed by piperidine treatment of the
DNA target. To digest the alkali-resistant products oxidized at
deoxyguanosine residues (eg, 8-oxoguanine), the samples were
treated with Fpg protein. Typical autoradiograms are presented in
Figures  and . The yields and
positions of the modified bases in the target were determined
(). The modification occurred
preferentially at guanine residues in the region
G9–G13, indicating that the guanine bases close to the
source of •OH radicals are the most susceptible, and
that the stretch of P forming the duplex with the
oligonucleotide part of the conjugate is protected from •OH
radicals by X. These observations suggest that the
preferential modification of P at G9–G13 is
due to the attack by •OH radicals before their diffusion in
solution. Similarly localized damage was observed for irradiated
DNA-Cu2+ molecules [].

The total modification extent of 80% was achieved with
piperidine treatment and 40% with Fpg treatment. Since some of
the modification products revealed by Fpg could be also determined
by piperidine, the total modification extent was at least 80%
and likely between 80 and 100%. The time courses of
modification are shown in .

To describe the oxidative modification of the target by the
conjugate in the presence of hydrogen peroxide,
 was proposed. The experiments were carried
out under the conditions where x0 ≫ p0. The large excess of the conjugate over the target was used in order to
obtain complete binding of P into PX and to
achieve the maximal level of target modification. In addition, as
PX ≪ X, the decomposition of H2O2
by PX was disregarded.

The kinetic curves were satisfactorily described with
. The values of rate constants
kd = 2.2 ×  10–2 (M × s)–1, kh = 2.5 × 103 (M2 × s)–1, and K = 3.0 × 10–6 M–1 determined previously (see Tables
 and ) were taken for fitting procedure using Scientist software. The rate constants of the target
modification (k0Fpg and k0Pip) were fitted in
this case. The values of k0 were found to be dependent on the
type of product analysis (). This means that
differentproducts of guanine oxidation identified by
piperidine and Fpg treatments accumulated with different
rates. The piperidine treatment gave a higher total modification
extent and k0 value than the Fpg treatment.

When the DNA target is oxidized in the presence of a catalytically
active oligonucleotide derivative and H2O2, several
competing processes take place. First of all, the target is
modified within the duplex with conjugate. Second, the catalytic
group is damaged in the side reaction with hydrogen peroxide.
Third, H2O2 is catalytically decomposed into
O2 and H2O. The simulation according to  has shown that the dependence of the product modification on the initial concentrations of H2O2 should have a maximum (), and its existence
was experimentally confirmed ().

The simulation of the dependence of the modification depth on the
initial concentration of the conjugate also resulted in the curve
with a maximum at about 30–100 μM ().
The decrease in the modification extent with the increase in the
conjugate concentration was possibly connected to the catalytic
H2O2 decomposition being the predominant process at
these concentrations of the catalyst. Experimentally we could not
achieve such high concentrations of conjugate; when they were
varied from 0 to 50 μM; a predicted hyperbolic curve was
observed ().

Our results show that the PtcCo(II) group in the
oligonucleotide conjugate is able to modify target DNA in the
presence of H2O2 as an oxidant. Since this group acts as
a catalyst of oxidation, such conjugates may be considered as artificial enzymes,
the synthetic analogs of peroxidases. Hydrogen
peroxide can be formed inside the cell in some endogenous
processes (respiratory burst in mitochondria, oxidative stress,
inflammation, etc, [, ]) and can be involved in oxidation of
target nucleic acids.

Oxidative modification of DNA with the
PtcCo(II)-oli-gonucleotide conjugate is accompanied by
destruction of the phthalocyanine macrocycle by the oxidant and
catalytic decomposition of the oxidant. The bell-shaped dependence
of the modification efficiency on the H2O2 concentration
suggests that these three processes are in competition. In
comparison with the previously studied
Fe(II)-porphyrin-oligonucleotide conjugate [], the
phthalocyanine group is more stable to degradation. This property
is useful for the design of oligonucleotides-based drugs, which
can be promising candidates for cancer therapy.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are grateful to Dr Dmitry Pyshnyi for his help in the
synthesis of the oligonucleotides and conducting UV melting
experiments and Dr Dmitry Zharkov for critical reading of the
manuscript. This research was made possible in part by Grants from
RFBR (05-04-48447) and Grants from SD RAS (51, 60, 78) and
CRDF (Y1-B-08-16). Alexander A. Chernonosov is supported by
SD RAS (114).

Figures and Tables
The reduction of O2 molecule.

(a) Structure of the phthalocyanine conjugate; (b) the sequence of oligonucleotide duplex
used for the complementary-addressed DNA modification.

The kinetic curves of the formation of complexes between the
target P and the oligonucleotide N
(a) or the conjugate X (b); (c)
the differential melting curves of the complexes PN and
PX.

The formation of the complexes between the target P
and the oligonucleotide N (a) or the conjugate X (b).

The time course of the PtcCo(II) residue
degradation; (a) x0 = 0.8 × 10–5 M, (b) x0 = 1.0 × 10–5 M.

The autoradiograms of the denatured 20% PAAG of the
[32P]-labeled target modified by the conjugate (1.0 × 10–5 M) in presence of H2O2 (1.0 × 10–2 M)
after treatment with 1 M piperidine
(a) or Fpg protein (b). The sample in lane 1 did not contain both
the conjugate and H2O2. The samples in lanes 2 and 3 did not
contain the conjugate or H2O2, respectively.
Time points shown are 0, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, and 24 hours (lanes 4–10). (c) The distribution of
the base modifications in the target.

The oxidation
modification of the target with conjugate in the presence of H2O2. (In this scheme, P is the target oligonucleotide, X is the
conjugate, R is the oxidation product of the phthalocyanine moiety
possessing the same affinity to the target as the conjugate, PZ is
the modification product, PX, PR, and PZX are respective
complexes, and K, kd, k0, and kh are respective association and
rate constants.)

The kinetic and theoretical curves of the modification
process of the target. (a) and (b) x0 = 5.6 × 10–6 M,
h0 = 1.0 × 10–1 M(×),
2.5 × 10–2 M(Δ),
1.0 × 10–2 M (■),
5.0 × 10–3 M (•),
2.0 × 10–3 M (▴),
1.0 × 10–3 M (◊).
(c) and (d) h0 = 1.0 × 10–2 M,
x0 = 1.0 × 10–5 M (∘),
5.6 × 10–6 M (■),
2.8 × 10–6 M (◊),
1.5 × 10–6 M (•),
0.7 × 10–6 M (Δ),
0.4 × 10–6 M (⧫).
The modifications were revealed by treatment
with 1 M piperidine (a) and (c) or Fpg-protein (b) and (d).

The dependence of the modification extend of target by the conjugate. (a) and (c)
The theoretical curves were obtained by simulation of the kinetic
process of the DNA modification using ; (b) and (d)
represent the experimental observed curves of the dependence of
the modification product on h0 or x0, respectively. The
modifications were revealed by treatment with 1 M piperidine
(■) or Fpg protein (•).

Rate and association constants for formation of complexes
PN and PX.

Complex	k1 ((μM × s)–1)	k−1 (s−1)	k2 (s−1)	k–2 (s−1)	K ((μM)−1)	
	
PN	(9.6 ± 0.4) × 10−1	0.4 ± 0.1	—	—	2.6 ± 0.4	
PX	(7.6 ± 0.2) × 10−1	0.8 ± 0.1	(4.0 ± 0.3) × 10−1	(2.3 ± 0.2) × 10–1	3.0 ± 0.4	
* K = ∑i=2i=1 Πj=ij=1 Kj.

The thermodynamic parameters and association constants for formation of complexes PN and PX.

Complex	Tm (°C)	–ΔS0 (cal/(mol × K))	–ΔH0 (kcal/mol)	–ΔG0298 (kcal/mol)	K ((μM)–1)	
	
PN	32.6 ± 0.2	168.8 ± 6.8	59.5 ± 2.0	9.2 ± 0.1	5.5 ± 1.1	
PX	32.9 ± 0.2	204.2 ± 12.8	70.0 ± 3.9	9.1 ± 0.1	4.7 ± 0.9	
*K = exp(–ΔG0298/RT).

The rate and association constants obtained from modification data.

	Piperidine treatment	Fpg protein treatment	
	
K ((μM)–1)	(3.0 ± 0.4)	
kd ((M × s)–1)	(2.2 ± 0.2) × 10–2	
kh ((M2 × s)–1)	(2.5 ± 0.5) × 103	
k0i ((M × s)–1)	(4.2 ± 0.6) × 10–2	(1.2 ± 0.2) × 10–2	
