Resistance to Arsenic- and Antimony-Based Drugs
Milena Salerno and Arlette Garnier-Suillerot*
Laboratoire de Physicochimie Biomoldculaire et Cellulaire (LPBC/CSSB UMR 7033)
Universitd Paris Nord, 74 rue Marcel Cachin, 93017 Bobigny, France
(Received January 13, 2003; Accepted January 22, 2003)
ABSTRACT
Organic arsenicals were the first antimicrobial agents specifically synthesized for the treatment of
infectious diseases such as syphilis and sleeping sickness. For the treatment of diseases caused by
trypanosomatid parasites, organic derivatives of arsenic and the related metalloid antimony are still the drugs
of choice. Arsenic trioxide, As203, has been used for a long time in traditional Chinese medicines for
treatment of various diseases, and it has recently been shown to be clinically active in acute promyelocytic
leukemias. Resistance to metalloid salts is found in bacteria, fungi, parasites and animals. In some organisms,
resistance involves overproduction of intracellular thiols. In many cases, resistance to arsenic salts is the
result of removal of the metalloid from the cytosol usually by extrusion from the cell. In eukaryotes
resistance to arsenic and antimony is conferred by membrane transport proteins of the MRP family. The
human MRP1, a member of this family, is frequently amplified in cancer cells and it is well-documented that
MRPl-overexpressing cells poorly accumulate arsenic and antimony because of enhanced cellular effiux
which depends on the presence of GSH.
INTRODUCTION
The introduction of antibiotics in the 1940s opened up a completely new prospect to medical science and
the treatment of infectious diseases. A broad variety of drugs active against several infectious organisms were
discovered or developed. However, the widespread, and sometimes uncontrolled, use of these drugs has led
to the emergence of defense mechanisms that, at present, are the major drawback to the drug-based treatment
of infectious diseases and cancers. Most strikingly, such resistance is not restricted to the drugs (or analogs)
used in the treatment but also involves several structurally and functionally unrelated compounds. This
Corresponding author
Telephone: 33 48 38 77 48.
Fax: 33 48 38 77 77.
E-mail: garnier@lpbc.jussieu.fr.
189
Vol. 1, No. 2, 2003 Resistance to Arsenic andAntimony-Based Drugs
phenomenon, which has been tenaaed multidrug resistance (MDR) can be caused by various mechanisms and
is known to play an important role in the drug resistance of a broad range of pathogenic bacteria, parasitic
protozoa, and tumor cells. Altogether, these diseases are responsible for millions of deaths yearly/1-4/.
Multidrug resistance (MDR) in tumour cells is often caused by the overexpression of two transporters the
P-glycoprotein (P-gp) and the multidrug resistance associated protein (MRP1). Both proteins belong to the
superfamily of the so-called ATP binding cassette transport proteins (ABC transporters), which are known to
be dependent on ATP hydrolysis for the translocation of substrate across membranes/5, 6/.
P-gp is an unusual ABC protein in that it appears to be highly promiscuous: hundreds of compounds have
been identified as substrates. The spectrum of MDR compounds includes a large number of anticancer drugs
(e.g., anthracyclines, vinca alkaloids, taxanes) as well as steroids, fluorescent dyes, rhodamine, and the
emitting radiopharmaceutical 99m'rc-MIBi /1,2/. P-gp can transport neutral and positively charged molecules
but not negatively charged ones.
MRP1 belongs to a second class of transporters whose mechanism of action differs from that of P-gp-
class transporters. MRP1 can transport a large range of drugs conjugated to negatively charged hydrophilic
ligands such as glutathione, glucuronic acid, and sulfate/7-9/. It can also transport arsenite and antirnonite
when GSH is present. MRP is also able to confer resistance to drugs that are not known to be conjugated to
any acidic ligand, such as doxorubicin or the vinca alkaloids. Such resistance seems to require the presence
of glutathione, and available evidence indicates that MRP1 can co-transport drug with glutathione and even
glutathione alone can be transported, though at a lower rate/7, 10-12/. MRPI can also transport neutral, as
well as positively negatively charged, molecules.
In summary, a clear distinction in the mechanism of translocation of substrates by MRP1 or P-gp is
indicated by the finding that, in most cases, the MRPl-mediated transport.of substrates is inhibited by
depletion of intracellular glutathione (GSH), which has no effect on their P-gp-mediated transport. In this
small review we will focus on the resistance to arsenic- and antimony-based drugs.
ARSENIC: TOXICITY AND METABOLISATION
Arsenic is synonymous with poison and geological sources of inorganic arsenic are environmental
problems worldwide. This metalloid is ubiquitously present in the environment, where it occurs mainly as
compounds of As(Ill) and As(V) ions. Its toxicity makes it a useful ingredient in herbicides and pesticides
Epidemiological studies have shown that chronic exposure to inorganic arsenic" arsenite, As(III)O33, and
arsenate, As(V)O43-, result in liver injury, peripheral neuropathy, and an increased incidence of cancer of the
lung, skin, bladder, and liver/13-16/. In addition, occupational exposure to arsenic increases the lung cancer
incidence among smokers and underground miners in a manner consistent with a synergistic interaction of
arsenic with tobacco smoke or radon found in mines.
Arsenite and arsenate are extensively metabolized by humans and many other species to yield four major
methylated metabolites, CH3As(V)O32, CH3As(III)O22, (CH3)2As(V)O2" and (CH3)2As(III)O. Hence,
humans exposed to inorganic arsenic by ingestion or inhalation excrete inorganic arsenic, methyl As and
190
M. Salerno andA. Garnier-Suillerot Bio&organic Chem&tty andApplications
dimethyl As in urine/17-19/. Cullen et al. /20/ have provided a comprehensive scheme for the metabolism of
arsenic that can be summarized as follows:
As(V)O43- + 2e + 2H+
--As(III)O33 + H20
As(IlI)O33 + CH3+
CH3As(V) 032-
CH3As(V) 032- + 2e + 2H+
--CH3As(III) 02
)"
+ H20
CH3As(III) O22"
nt- CH3+---> (CH3)2 As(V) O2-
(CH3)2As(V) 02" + 2e + 2H+--> (CH3)2 As(Ill) O+ H20
Here, the reduction of arsenic fi'om pentavalency to trivalency is a prerequisite for its oxidative
methylation, suggesting both trivalent and pentavalent metabolites to be intermediates or final products in
this metabolic pathway. Methylated arsenicals have unique biological effects. At high dose levels they are
tumor promoters and carcinogen. Most data suggest that the pathway for the methylation of arsenic, which
produces methylated arsenicals containing As(V), should be regarded as a mechanism for the activation, not
for the detoxification, of arsenic. Therefore, methyl As and dimethyl As are likely to be the metabolites of
arsenic that account for at least some of the adverse effects associated with chronic exposure to arsenic/21-
23/.
A central issue in arsenic biochemistry is the role of sulfhydryl-containing molecules and especially of
gluthathione (GSH) because the reduction of As(V) may use glutathione as a source of reducing equivalents
/24, 25/; it can also be catalyzed by As(V) reductases /26, 27/. GSH is a tripeptide, (,-L-Glutamyl-L-
Cysteinylglycine) and a potentially polydentate ligand present in many cells at millimolar concentration.
Generally it is the most abundant nonprotein thiol. GSH is known to bind a variety of essential and non-
essential metals, playing critical roles in the cellular and systemic metabolism of these metals /28/. The
formation of the As(III)-GSH complexes have been thoroughly studied/24, 25/. It has been shown that
As(GS)3 is formed and that the binding site is the cysteinyl sulfydryl. However, it must be pointed out that
these experiments have been performed at acidic pH value (-3) and that about six hours are required for the
complete formation of the complex/25, 29/. The kinetics of formation of As(GS)3 is therefore very slow at
pH 3 and even slower at pH 7.3. According to the data of Delnomdedieu et al./25/, the As(GS)3 complex,
which has been prepared at acidic pH value, is stable over the pH range from 1.5 to 7.0 7.5 and rather
unstable above pH 7.5. Thus, there is little chance to observe its major formation when As(Ill) and GSH are
mixed at pH higher than 7.
Actually, with one exception /30/, the formation of arsenic-glutathione complex has not been
demonstrated in vivo. Thus only Kala et al. /30/ have demonstrated the presence of As(lll)-glutathione
complex in the bile of rats injected with arsenic. They have observed that when rats are intravenously treated
with sodium arsenite at high doses (5mg/kg i.e.-3001aM arsenic), arsenic is recovered in the bile complexed
to GSH. However, when lower doses, that are relevant to human exposure (0.1 0.5 mg/kg i.e. 5 30 laM)
are used, arsenic complexed to GSH was almost undetectetable. According to these authors, a likely
explanation for this finding is that As(GS)3 is found only at high doses (5mg/kg) because the ability of cells
to methylate arsenic is saturated, whereas at lower doses all arsenic can be methylated. Under experimental
conditions similar to those used by Kala et al./30/, Gregus et al. /31/ have not detected As-GSH species and
191
Vol. 1, No. 2, 2003 Resistance to Arsenic andAntimony-Based Drugs
have found that monomethylarsenous acid is the major biliary.metabolite in rats. Therefore, it must be kept in
mind that the major human metabolic pathway for arsenic is methylation/30, 32/.
MECHANISM OF DETOXIFICATION IN DIFFERENT ORGANISMS.
It is likely that life evolved in waters rich in dissolved metals and metalloids, such as arsenic. Therefore
all organisms, prokaryotic, eukaryotics or archea have evolved resistance to drugs and toxic metal. Not
surprisingly, resistance to metalloid salts is found in bacteria, fungi, parasites and animals. In some
organisms, resistance involves overproduction of intracellular thiols /33/but in many cases, resistance to
arsenic salts is the result of removal of the metalloid from the cytosol usually by extrusion from the cell/34,
35/. In Escherchia coli, high level resistance to salts of the trivalent metalloids arsenite and antimonite is
conferred by the presence of plasma membrane protein ArsAB which pumps out the metalloid oxyanions.
This pump does not belong to the ABC transporter family/35/. The ArsAB pump is composed of ArsA and
ArsB. ArsB is the 45-kDa membrane sector of the pump, and has 12 membrane spanning segments. ArsA, is
a 63-kDa protein with two homologous halves and is the catalytic subunit, exhibiting As(III)/Sb(III)-
stimulated ATPase activity. Thus, the complex of ArsA and ArsB forms an anion-translocating ATPase that
calalyzes extrusion of arsenite or antimonite.
Up to now no eukariotic ArsAB orthologs have been identified. However, another two families of
membrane proteins (see below) have eukaryotic representatives that have been shown to produce arsenite and
antimonite resistance: the ACR family and the MRP family.
ORGANIC DERIVATIVES OF ARSENIC AND ANTIMONY FOR THE TREATMENT
OF DISEASES CAUSED BY PARASITES.
Organic arsenicals were the first antimicrobial agents specifically synthesized for the treatment of
infectious diseases. Paul Ehrlich won the Nobel Prize in 1908 for synthesis of the arsenical salvarsan, his
"silver bullet" developed for treatment of syphilis and sleeping sickness. For treatment of diseases caused by
trypanosomatid parasites, organic derivatives of arsenic and the related metalloid antimony are still the drugs
ofchoice/3/.
Parasites of the genus Leishmania are distributed worldwide, and 10-15 million people are estimated to be
infected with 400,000 new cases each year/36/. Leishmania are endemic from the USA-Mexico border
through all of Central America to several of the South American countries, around the Mediterranean sea, in
the North and East Africa, in Southern Russia, the Middle East, India and China. Cases of Leishmania
infections are rising even in developed countries. Increases in traveling have raised the number of
Leishmania in non-endemic areas. Incidence of leishmaniasis is rising also because of the lack of vaccines,
difficult vector control and increase in resistance to chemotherapy. Leishmania has also emerged as a serious
opportunistic pathogen in HIV-infected humans. The life cycle of the parasite is relatively simple. Flagellated
192
M. Salerno andA. Garnier-Suillerot Bioinorganic Chemistty andApplications
promastigotes are transmitted to humans by the phlebotomine female sandfly. Parasites are engulfed by
macrophages, where the promastigotes differentiate into aflagellated amastigotes within the phagolysosomes
of the host macrophages. Upon Leishmania infection, several macrophage functions are altered, allowing
parasites to replicated and escape the host defense mechanisms/37/.
The only effective way to control Leishmania infections currently is chemotherapy. The first agents with
a favorable therapeutic index, the pentavalent antimonials, were introduced in the 1940s and are still the
mainstay of therapy to all forms of leishmaniasis. Thus, the treatment of choice of human visceral
leishmaniasis is the administration of pentavalent antimony (Sb (V)) containing drugs such as sodium
stibogluconate (Pentostam; Wellcome, UK), in which antimony is complexed with gluconic acid or
meglumine antimonate (glucantime; Rhone-Poulenc France) in which antimony is complexed with the sugar
meglumine. The treatment of leishmaniasis with antimonial regimens is complicated by drug toxicity (cardiac
and renal) and by drug resistance. Despite the fact that antimony-containing drugs have been used in
antiprotozoan therapy for over half a century, little is known about its biological properties and mechanisms
of toxicity. Pentavalent antimony (Sb(V)) inhibits glucose catabolism and ATP formation via the glycolytic
pathway and fatty acid B-oxidation in Leishmania mexicana/38/. Furthermore, Sb(V) can form complexes
with various carbohydrates. Trivalent antimony/Sb(III)/appears to interact with key sulflaydryl groups of
leishmanial proteins, thereby probably causing enzyme inhibition/39/.
As seen earlier, bacteria and yeast that live in environments contaminated with arsenate reduce the
element intracellularly to arsenite as part of the mechanism that was evolved to evade the toxic effects of this
heavy metal/35/. Given that Leishmania spp. are not necessarily exposed to heavy metals in their natural
habitats (sandflies and vertebrates), they may not have developed this type of protective mechanism. In fact,
by reducing nontoxic Sb(V), Leishmania actually expose themselves to the lethal effects of Sb (III).
Actually, many patients fail to respond to the treatment of drugs containing antimony, because prasites
resistant to these drugs are now becoming widespread /40, 41/. Leishmania strains resistant not only to
pentavalent antimony but also to trivalent antimony and arsenite have been described/42/.
One mechanism of resistance recently described is the inability of the parasite to reduce Sb(V) to Sb(III)
/43/. Stage-specific intracellular Sb(V) reducing activity was apparent in amastigotes which reduced the
negligibly toxic Sb(V) to highly toxic Sb(III). This amastigote-specific reducing activity was deficient in the
pentostam-resistant mutant L. Donovani Ldl S.20. These data indicate that Sb(V) anti-leishmanial activity is
dependent on its reduction to Sb(III). The mechanism ofthis novel intracellular Sb(V) reduction has yet to be
identified, and it may or may not be enzymatic.
Amplification of the P-gp A and gshl genes is frequently observed in arsenite- and antimonite-tolerant
Leishmania cells, gshl encodes ),-glutamulysteine synthetase, an enzyme involved in the rate-limiting step in
glutathione biosynthesis. Pgp A is homologous to human MRP1 /42/and most likely confers resistance by
sequestering metal-thiol conjugates into an intracellular vesicle /44/. These studies point to a key role of
transporters and thiol levels in metal resistance in Leishmania.
193
VoL I, No. 2, 2003 Resistance to Atwenic andAntimony-Based Drugs
ARSENIC TRIOXIDE AND THE TREATMENT OF ACUTE PROMYELOCYTIC LEUKEMIA.
Cancer itself is a major worldwide health concern, with an estimated 6 millions new cases per year. Until
now, the only possible methods of curing systemic cancers, such as leukemia, lymphoma, and unifocal
tumors that have spread by metastasis, have involved systemic treatments such as chemotherapy and
immunotherapy.
Arsenic compounds have been used in the treatment of leukemia, particularly in chronic myeloid
leukemia (CML), erythremia, and Hodgkin's lymphoma since 1865 in the form of Fowler solution
(potassium arsenite, KAsOz). An arsenic compound in the Ayurvedic pharmacopeia of India /45/ was
recognized as useful to control blood cell counts in patients with CML over 100 years ago. Two arsenic
compounds have been utilized in Chinese traditional medicine for more than 500 years. One is Pishang, or
white arsenic, essentially containing arsenic trioxide (As203), which is still used clinically in the treatment of
certain skin diseases and asthma and to promote the healing of surgical wounds. The other compound is
Xiong-huang (or realgar compound), which contains arsenic disulfide and was administrated in the treatment
of CML for more than 40 years. However, Fowler solution was abandoned in the treatment of CML due to its
chronic toxicity with long-term use and the discovery of more effective chemotherapeutic agents. Arsenic
trioxide, As203, has been used for a long time in traditional Chinese medicines for treatment of various
diseases, and it has.recently been shown to be clinically active in acute promyelocytic leukemias/46/.
Now the arsenic trioxide As20 is used for the treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). This
disease is one of many subtypes of acute myelogenous leukemia, so named because the leukemic cells are
"frozen" at a stage that mimics the appearance of normal promyelocytes in the marrow. Specifically, the
AszO is used for the treatment of patients with acute APL who have not responded to, or have relapsed
following the use of all trans-retinoic acid and anthracycline-based chemotherapy, which is considered first
line therapy. Exactly how AszO mediates its clinical efficacy is not fully understood. Two main mechanisms
of action of AszO have been identified: promotion of APL cell differentiation and induction of apoptosis
/47/. At concentrations in the range 1-2 laM, AszO3 induces apoptosis and, clinically, during As20 treatment,
chromatin of leukemic cells becomes dense and coarse, and apoptotic bodies are seen. The mechanism of
apoptosis induction by AszO at high concentrations is primarily through disruption of the mitochondrial
transmembrane potential
Although AszO exhibits an anticancer effect against a broad spectrum of cancer cell lines, there have
been few reports of its efficacy in clinical trials, apart from the high remission rate achieved in APL.
Transfection of human tumor cells with a multidrug resistant-associated protein (MRP1) gene has shown
a cross-resistance to arsenite/48, 49/, which may limit the clinical use of this anticancer drug for treatment of
MRPl-positive tumors /50, 51/ and it is now well-documented that MRPl-overexpressing cells poorly
accumulate arsenic and antimony because of enhanced cellular efflux which depends on the presence of GSH
/50-52/.
The presence of glutathione is required for the MRPl-mediated efflux of arsenic and antimony, however,
different hypothesis can be made: i) the metalloid forms a complex with GSH and this complex is pumped
out by MRPI, ii) the metalloids are co-transported with GSH, as this is the case for daunorubicin/10, 12/and
194
hl. Salerno andA. Garnier-Suillerot Bioinorganic Chemistry andApplications
vincristine/53/. It follows that one ofthe questions that have to be solved here is: what is the chemical nature
ofthe arsenic and antimony species which are pumped out via MRP protein.
Based on the following observations, the formation and the transporter-mediated effiux of As-GSH
complex has often been postulated. It has been shown that either As(V) or As(III) treatment induced
increased biliary excretion of non-protein thiols in the rat/54/. An increased biliary excretion of glutathione
is also generated by the glutathione-dependent hepatobiliary transport of antimony and bismuth/55/. Because
this enhancement was not observed when the thiol groups were blocked by a firmly bound metal ion (e.g.
Hg(II)), and based on the close chemical similarity ofthe trivalent antimony, bismuth and arsenic, the authors
hypothesized that generation of biliary GSH by arsenic, antimony and bismuth is due to hepatic formation,
biliary excretion and subsequent decomposition of unstable arsenic-GSH, antimony-GSH and bismuth-GSH
complexes. Because the pH of bile is neutral or slightly alkaline, this proposition is in agreement with the
possible dissociation ofthe GSH-As complexes observed at pH>7.5/25/.
In MRPl-overexpressing cells, Zaman et al. /56/ have observed that MRPl increases the export of
glutathione from the cell and this increase is further elevated in the presence of arsenite. They subsequently
proposed that As(GS)3 complex may be the form in which arsenite is excreted. Thus, the significance of the
As(III)-glutathione complexes in transport and metabolism in vivo is still unknown and requires further
studies/24/.
To develop a better understanding of arsenic and antimony excretion by MRPl-overpressing cells, we
have recently measured the kinetic parameters for the uptake and release of these metalloids in MDR and
parental cancer cells/29/One question is: what are the arsenic and antimony species which diffuse passively
through the plasma membrane? As(Ill) and Sb(III) are semi metals that can form either oxyanions or soft
metal covalent bonds with the thiolate groups. The chemistry of arsenic in water is not simple but there is
little doubt that at pH 7, aqueous solutions ofinorganic arsenites contains As(OH)3 pK1 9.2/20/. It follows
that the uptake of arsenic in the cells occurs by passive diffusion of the neutral trihydroxide. Now, once
inside the cells, what is the evolution of As(OH)3. The data obtained with sensitive cells are very important in
answering this question. Actually, the observation that, when cells are incubated with As203, at the pseudo
steady state obtained after h, the extra-and intracellular concentrations of arsenic are the same, indicates that
there is a transmembrane equilibrium of the species that diffuses passively through the membrane; this means
that As(OH). is still present inside the cells, without undergoing a chemical transformation and is passively
effiuxed from the cells. These data are corroborated by the observations that i) at pH -7.3, the rate of
complexation of GSH to arsenic is very slow; ii) the rate of passive uptake and efflux of arsenic species in
sensitive cells does not depend on GSH level (if arsenic-GSH complex was formed one could have expected
different rates of arsenic accumulation inside the GSH-depleted or GSH-rich sensitive cells). So we
concluded that within the first 1-2 hours the amount of arsenic-glutathione complex, if any, is very low. Now
as time elapses, one observes a slow increase of the arsenic intracellular concentration which becomes higher
than the extracellular arsenic concentration. One very likely interpretation is that the arsenic accumulation is
due to the transformation of the permeant As(OH)3 species into another one which is unable to diffuse freely
through the membrane such as an As-glutathione complex or arsenic binding to thiol-containing proteins. All
this reasoning helds for antimony.
195
Vol. 1, No. 2, 2003 Resistance to Arsenic andAntimony-Based Drugs
The important point is that a negligible amount, if any, of As-GSH complex is formed during the first 1-2
hours. The arsenic concentration is lower in resistant cells than in sensitive cells, thus, the arsenic species is
pumped out by MRP1. This shows that As(OH)3 species is the substrate for MRP1.
In addition to the observation that there is no active efflux in GSH-depleted cells, we suggest that
As(OH)3 could be co-transported with GSH. In addition, 2 IaM MK571 are able to inhibit the 50% of MRPl-
mediated effiux of As(OH)3 and this is exactly the concentration required to inhibit 50% of MRPl-mediated
efflux of GSH/12/.
CONCLUSIONS
Over the past 15 years, considerable advances have been made in knowledge of multidrug effiux systems.
Exponentially growing data indicate that these systems are widespread both in prokaryotes and eukaryotes
and suggest that they have a dual physiological function, first as secretion machineries for cellular products
and, second, as defense mechanisms against harmful substances present in the environment. It is intriguing to
speculate on tlae origins ot resistance meclaanisms, lor instance, consclenng that toxic metal ions were
present in the primordial oceans, resistance to metals probably arose long before antibiotic resistances. Then,
presented with new environmental challenges, there would have been selective pressure on eukaryotes to
evolve additional mechanisms. Thus, cellular overexpression of MRPl confers a resistance phenotype mainly
restricted to antimonial and arsenical salts and not to other cytotoxic metals such as chromium, aluminium,
cobalt, platinum. Such a mechanism of resistance may be important for clinical efficiency of arsenical salts
used in the treatment of some leukemias
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. M. Gottesman, I. Pastan and S. Ambudkar, Curt. Biol. 6, 610 (1996).
2. F. Sharom, .J. Membrane Biol. 160, 161 (1997).
3. P. Borst and M. Ouellette, Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 49, 427 (1995).
4. H. Bolhuis, H. vanVeen, B. Poolman, A. Driessen and W. Konings, FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 21, 55
(1997).
5. P. Borst, R. Evers, M. Kool and J. Wijnholds, J..Nat. Cancer Inst. 92, 1295 (2000).
6. C. Higgins, Annie. Rev. Cell Biol. 8, 67 (1992).
7. D. Loe, K. Almquist, R. Deeley and S. Cole, J. Biol. Chem. 271,675 (1996).
8. I. Leier, G. Jedlitschky, U. Buchholz, S. Cole, R. Deeley and D. Keppler J. Biol. Chem. 269, 27807
(1994).
9. C. Versantvoort, H. Broxterman, T. Bagrij, R. Scheper and P. Twentyman, Br. J. Cancer 72, 82 (1995).
10. J. Renes, E. De Vries, E. Nuenhuis, P. Jansen. and M. Muller, Br. J. Pharmacol. 126, 681 (1999).
196
M. Salerno andA. Garnier-SuiHerot Bioinorganic Chemistry andApplications
11. C. Marbeuf-Gueye, H. Broxterman, F. Dubru, W. Priebe and A. Garnier-Suillerot, Mol. Pharmacol. 53,
141 (1998).
12. M. Salerno and A. Garnier-Suillerot, Eur. J. Pharmacol. 421, (2001).
13. P. Enterline, R. Day and G. Marsh, Occup. Environ. Med. 52, 28 (1995).
14. H. Chiou, W. Huang, C. Su, S. Chang, Y. Hsu and C. Chen, Stroke 28, 1717 (1997).
15. C. Hopenhayn-Rich, M. Biggs and A. Smith, Int. J. Epidemiol. 27, 561 (1998).
16. D. Lewis, J. Southwick, R. Ouellet-Hellstrom, J. Rench and R. Calderon, Environ. Health Perspect.
107, 59 (1999).
17. E. Crecelius, Environ. Health Perspect. 19, 147 (1977).
18. T. Smith, E. Crecelius and J. Reading JC. Environ. Health Perspect. 19, 89 (1977).
19. H. Yamauch and Y. Yamamura, Ind. Hyg. 17, 79 (1979)..
20. W. Cullen, B. McBride and J. Reglinskli, J. Inorg. Biochem. 21, 179 (1984).
21. W. Cullen, B. McBride, H. Manji, A. Pickett and J. Reglinsky, Appl. Organomet. Chem. 3, 71 (1989).
22. M. Mass, A.Tennant, B. Roop, W. Cullen, M. Styblo, D. Thomas and A. Kigerman, Chem. Res.
Toxicol. 14, 355 (2001).
23. M. Wei, H. Wanibuchi, S. Yamamoto, W. Li and H. Fukushima, Carcinogenesis 20, 1873 (1999).
24. N. Scott, K. Hatelid, N. MacKenzie and D. Cater, Chem. Res. Toxicol. 6, 102 (1993)..
25. M. Delnomdedieu, M. Basti, J. Otvos and J. Thomas, Chem.- Biol. Inter. 90, 139 (1994).
26. R. Zakharyan and H. Aposhian, Chem. Res. Toxicol. 12, 1278 (1999).
27. T. Radabaugh and H. Aposhian,. Chem. Res. Toxicol. 13, 26 (2000).
28. D. Rabenstein, Metal complexes of glutathione and their biological significance. In: Glutathione:
Chemical, Biochemical and Medicinal Aspects (D. Dolphin, O. Avramomic and R. Poulson eds) pp
147-186. John Wiley & Sons, New York (1998).
29. M. Salerno, M. Petroutsa and A. Garnier-Suillerot, J. Bioenerg. Biomembr. 34, 135 (2002).
30. S. Kala, M. Neely, G. Kala, C. Prater, D. Atwood, J. Rice and M. Liberman, J. Biol. Chem. 275, 33404
(2OOO).
31. Z. Gregus, A. Gyurasics and I. Csanaky, Toxicol. Sci 56, 18 (2000).
32. H. Aposhian, Pharmacol. Toxicol. 37, 397 (1997).
33. R. Mukhopadhyay, S. Dey, N. Xu, D. Gage, J. Lightbody, M. Ouellette and B. Rosen, Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 93, 10383 (1996).
34. S. Dey and B. Rosen in: Drug Transport in Antimicrobial and Anticancer Chemotherapy (N.
Georgopapadakoi, ed.) pp. 103-132, Dekker (1995).
35. B. Rosen, Trends Microbiol. 208, 207 (1999).
36. R. Ashford, P. Desjeux and P. de Raadt, Parasitol. Today 8, 104 (1992).
37. S.Reiner, R. and R. Locksley, Annu. Rev. Immunol. 13, 151 (1995).
38. J. Berman, D. Waddell and B. Hanson, Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 39, 1243 (1985).
39. W. Roberts, J. Berman and P. Rainey, Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 39, 1234 (1995).
40. B. Papadopoulou, C. Kundig, A. Singh and M. Ouellette, Drug Resistance Updates 1,266 (1998).
41. J. Jackson, J. Tally and W. Ellis, Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 43,464 (1990).
197
Vol. 1, No. 2, 2003 Resistance to Arsenic andAntimony-Based Drugs
42. M. Ouellette and B. Papadopoulou, Parasitol. Today 9, 150 (1993).
43. P. Shaked-Mishan, N. Ulrich, M. Ephros and D. Zilberstein, J. Biol. Chem. 276, 3971 (2001).
44. D. Legar, S. Cayer, A. Singh, D. Richard, B. Papadopoulou and M. Ouellette, J. Bioenerg.
Biomembrane 33, 469 (2001).
45. M. Wintrobe, Clinical Hematology, 3rd edn. Henry Kimpton, London, pp 723,866,.917 (1951).
46. Z. Shen, G. Chen, J. Ni, X. Li, S. Xion, Q. Qiu, J. Zhu, W. Tang, G. Sun, K. Yang, Y. Chen, Z. Fang, Y.
Wang, J. Ma, P. Zhang, T. Zhang, S. Chen and Z. Wang, Blood9, 3354 (1997).
47. A. Bode and Z. Dong, Drug Resistance Update 3, 21 (2000).
48. S. Cole, K. Sparks, K. Fraser, D. Loe, C. Grant, G. Wilson and R. Deeley, Cancer Res. 54, 5902 (1994).
49. B. Stride, C. Grant, D. Loe, D. Hipfner, S. Cole and R. Deeley, Mol. Pharmacol. 52, 344(1997).
50. L. Vernhet, N. Allain, C. Bardia, J.-P. Anger and O. Fardel, Toxicol.!42, 127 (2000).
51. L. Vernhet, A. Courtois, L. Payen, N. Allain, J.P. Anger, A. Guillouzou and O. Fardel, FEBS Lett. 443,
321 (1999).
52. Z. Chen, Z. Wang. and S. Chen, Pharmacol. Ther. 76, 141 (1997)..
53. D. Loe, R. Deeley and S. Cole,(1998). Cancer Res. 58, 5130 (1998).
54. Z. Gregus and A. Gyurasics, Biochem. Pharmacol. 59, 1375 (2000).
55. A. Gyurasics, L. Koszorus, F. Varga and Z. Gregus, Z., Biochem. Pharmacol. 44, 1275 (1992).
56. G. Zaman, J. Lankelma, O., Vantellingen, J. Beijnen, H. Dekker, C. Paulusma, R. Oudeelferink, F. Baas
and P. Borst, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., USA 92, 7690 (1995)
198
