One and Two Dimensional Pulsed Electron
Paramagnetic Resonance Studies of in vivo Vanadyl
Coordination in Rat Kidney
Sergei A. Dikanov,''*Barry D. Liboiron,3'+ Katherine H. Thompson, Erika Vera,4
Violet G.
Yuen,4
John H. McNeill4
and Chris Orvig''
1Illinois EPR Research Center and Department ofVeterinary Clinical Medicine, 190 MSB, 506 S.
Mathews Ave., University ofIllinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, U. S. A.
Institute ofChemical Kinetics and Combustion, Russian Academy ofSciences, Novosibirsk
6300090, Russia.
3Medicinal Inorganic Chemistry Group, Department ofChemistry, University ofBritish Columbia,
2036 Main Mall, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1, Canada.
4Faculty ofPharmaceutical Sciences, University ofBritish Columbia, 2146 East Mall, Vancouver,
BC V6T 1Z3, Canada.
+Present address: Department ofChemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, U. S. A.
(Received: November 1, 2002; Accepted: January 2, 2003)
ABSTRACT
The biological fate of a chelated vanadium source is investigated by/n vivo spectroscopic methods to
elucidate the chemical form in which the metal ion is accumulated. A pulsed electron paramagnetic
resonance study of vanadyl ions in kidney tissue, taken from rats previously treated with
bis(ethylmaltolato)oxovanadium(IV) (BEOV) in drinking water, is presented. A combined approach using
stimulated echo (3-pulse) electron spin echo envelope modulation (ESEEM) and the two dimensional 4-pulse
hyperfine sublevel correlation (HYSCORE) spectroscopies has shown that at least some of the VO2+
ions are
involved in the coordination with nitrogen-containing ligands. From the experimental spectra, a 4N hyperfine
coupling constant of 4.9 MHz and a quadrupole coupling constant of 0.6 + 0.04 MHz were determined,
consistent with amine coordination of the vanadyl ions. Study of VO-histidine model complexes allowed for
a determination of the percentage of nitrogen-coordinated VO2+
ions in the tissue sample that is found
nitrogen-coordinated. By taking into account the bidentate nature of histidine coordination to VO2+
ions, a
more accurate determination of this value is reported. The biological fate of chelated versus free (i.e. salts)
To whom correspondence should be addressed: S. A. D.: dikanov@uiuc.edu; C. O.: orvig@chem.ubc.ca.
69
l.'olume I, No. I, 2003 One and Two Dimensioml Pulsed Electron I:'aramagnetic
Resonance Studies ofin vivo Vcmadyl Coordination
vanadyl ion sources has been deduced by comparison to earlier reports. In contrast to its superior
pharmacological efficacy over VOSO4, BEOV shares a remarkably similar biological fate after uptake into
kidney tissue.
INTRODUCTION
The insulin-enhancing effects of vanadium complexes and salts have been well documented/1/. Despite a
large volume of work, the mechanism(s) of action remain(s) to be delineated. Difficulties encountered in
such studies arise from, among other factors, an incomplete understanding of the metabolism of chelated (i.e.
coordination complexes) and "free" sources of vanadium (i.e. the common V(IV) salt vanadyl sulfate,). The
uptake and storage of vanadium species within specific tissues is of considerable interest both fbr the
development of a complete metabolic model, and for detection of the putative "active species" (as yet
undetected) ultimately responsible for insulin enhancement. The biodistribution and organ accumulation of
exogenous vanadium species have been widely studied, particularly after the discovery of vanadium's
insulin-enhancing effects. Bone, kidney and liver appear to be the primary organs of vanadium accumulation,
irrespective of administered oxidation state and administration route/2-6/. Differences between organically
chelated and inorganic sources appear to be minimal; the benchmark vanadium complex
bis(maltolato)oxovanadium(IV) (BMOV, Figure 1) was preferentially accumulated in the same three tissues,
although at concentrations 2-3 times higher than the inorganic salt VOSO4/5/. These similarities are likely
due to an almost immediate dissociation of the chelating maltolato ligand in the bloodstream, as
demonstrated in a recent report fi'om our laboratories/7/. Earlier studies were limited due to the use of
radioactive labeling, insensitive to both the coordination and the oxidation state. Thus, important information
regarding the chemical form of accumulated vanadium is lacking, while such knowledge could shed some
light on the structure ofthe active species.
Spectroscopic methods, however, can be used to gain insight into solid, solution and in vivo chemical
structures. These methods must possess high selectivity to avoid saturation of the spectrum with unwanted
features. For detection of VO2+
in vivo, the, paramagne,tism of its complexes can be used to considerable
Fig. 1" Structure of bis(maltolato)oxovanadium(IV) (R CHa, BMOV) and bis(ethylmaltolato)oxo-
vanadium(IV) (R CHzCH3, BEOV) (left) and bis(picolinato)oxovanadium(IV), VO(pic)2 (right).
7O
Ser,,ei A. Dikam)v et al. Bioinorganic Chemistry andApplications
advantage. Due to the strong electron spin magnetic moment, the relative magnetic susceptibility of an
electron is 1800 times greater than that of the proton, therefore, detection limits in biological samples can
reach the micromolar range. Additionally, paramagnetic resonance methods are naturally selective for
paramagnetic species only; any interference from competing diamagnetic substances (e.g. V(V) complexes
generated from in vivo oxidation of an administered V(IV) complex) is completely obviated. Thus, it would
seem clear that EPR methods should be exceedingly useful in the study of the in vivo coordination structure
ofV(IV) species.
One of the first applications of pulsed EPR techniques to a true biological sample was reported by Fukui
et al. in 1995/8/. Wistar rats were treated by intravenous injection of VOSO4 for 4 days, after which time
they were sacrificed. Kidney and liver samples were then recovered and analyzed by continuous wave (cw)
EPR and 2-pulse ESEEM spectroscopies. For both kidney and liver tissue, peaks identified with 4N coupling
and inner sphere protons from coordinated water molecules were observed. After assigning each peak, and
processing using first order perturbation theory, the isotropic hyperfine 4N couplings were compared to
model VO(histidine) solutions, leading to the conclusion that the paramagnetic vanadyl centers had become
ligated by one or more amines in these tissues.
While previous studies of in vivo vanadium distribution have been conducted/2,3,5/, little information
was available regarding the chemical state, namely the oxidation and coordination states, of the metal ions.
The application of pulsed EPR techniques permitted the acquisition of in vivo structural data on vanadyl ions
within tissue samples, in turn potentially identifying a short-term storage form or a vanadyl-protein complex
responsible for insulin enhancement. The 48V-VOSO4 and 4V-BMOV study by our group revealed that, at
least for BMOV, orally administered, chelated vanadyl sources were preferentially accumulated in bone, liver
and kidney/5/. The Fukui et al. /8/study was limited in that it used a first-generation (i.e. inorganic) anti-
diabetic agent (VOSO) coupled with an intravenous route of administration.
We recently reported the in vivo coordination of vanadyl ions in bone mineral/9/, as well as a meticulous
spectroscopic investigation of the VOZ+:triphosphate system as a model of the in vivo complex/10/. A wide
variety of one (2, 3 and 4-pulse ESEEM) and two dimensional (HYSCORE) pulsed EPR techniques was
used. These reports provided the first detailed study ofthe biological fate of chelated vanadyl sources in bone
mineral, the primary site of vanadium accumulation. In this report, we present a spectroscopic study of
vanadyl ions in BEOV-treated rat kidney samples. While earlier work reported on VOSO4-treated rat kidney
samples/8/, the work reported herein resolves several deficiencies in the previous study in that we present
full 2 and 3-pulse one dimensional ESEEM spectra in addition to high resolution HYSCORE spectra for the
complete delineation of the in vivo coordination of vanadyl ions in tissue. Further, the in vivo and model
system spectra are presented herein as the Fourier transformation, eliminating signal distortion arising from
application of other linear prediction analysis techniques such as the maximum entropy method (MEM).
MEM processing produces very idealized, noiseless spectra from which information regarding the shape,
width and intensity of ESEEM harmonics is lost; such spectra do not give any impression about the real
quality of the frequency-domain data. Lastly, a more detailed analysis of the experimental spectra is
provided, including comparisons to pulsed EPR studies of applicable chemical systems reported in the more
recent literature.
71
ldunle I, N,'. 1. 2003 One and Two Dimensional Pulsed Electron Paramagnetic
Resonance Studies ql'in vivo Vcmadyl Coor.fination
EXPERIMENTAL
Ethylmaltol (Pfizer) and vanadyl sulfate, VOSO4"3H20 (Aldrich), were used as received. EPR tubes (4
mm o.d., clear fused quartz) were obtained from Wilmad Glass. BEOV was synthesized according to
established procedures and checked for purity by EA, MS (+LSIMS) and FT-IR/7/.
Male Wistar rats (University of British Columbia Animal Care Unit), weighing between 190 and 1220 g,
were acclimatized for 7 days, then divided into 4 groups: control (C), control-treated (CT), diabetic (D) and
diabetic-treated (DT). Rats were rendered diabetic by injection of streptozotocin via the tail vein. Animals
were kept in polycarbonate cages and allowed ad libitum access to food (Purina rat chow, Ralston Purina, St.
Louis, MO) and tap water. The'room was kept at 22 to 25 C in a 12:12 h light:dark cycle. For treated
animals (CT and DT groups), BEOV was dissolved in the drinking water, resulting in a typical dose of 0.26
0.29 mmol kg
-d-. The dosing was conducted for 6 weeks, at which time the animals were sacrificed by
pentobarbital injection (100 mg kg). Tissue samples (long bone, muscle, liver and kidney) were recovered
and frozen at -20 C.
Kidney tissue samples were cut into small pieces, quickly frozen in liquid N2 and placed into EPR tubes
previously flushed with Ar. Samples were sealed with parafilm, then re-frozen in dry ice and kept on dry ice
or at -20 C prior to spectroscopic study.
EPR spectra (both cw and pulsed) were obtained with a Bruker Elexsys E580 X-band spectrometer,
interfaced with a Bruker ER035M teslameter for field calibration and a built-in Bruker frequency counter for
microwave frequency measurement. Liquid He temperature studies were carried out using an Oxford
Instruments CF 935 cryostat and an ITC 502 temperature controller. The samples were studied by several
different ESEEM methods, the aforementioned two-pulse spin-echo sequence, a three-pulse stimulated echo
experiment, and a two-dimensional hyperfine sublevel correlation (HYSCORE) four-pulse sequence. The
three-pulse spectrum has the distinct advantage over the two-pulse spin echo experiment in that the
modulation depth is much less dependent on the phase memory time. In addition, the spectrum is simplified
due to the absence of nuclear sum and difference frequencies. The pulse sequence of rt/2<-rt/2-T-r/2-'-echo
leads to formation of a stimulated echo observed time, after the third pulse. In the HYSCORE experiment
(r/2<-rt/2-t-rt-tz-rt/2--echo)/11/, the intensity of the stimulated echo after the fourth pulse is measured with
t2 and t varied, and constant. This two-dimensional (2D) set of echo envelopes gives, after complex Fourier
transformation, a 2D spectrum with equal resolution in each direction.
The basic advantage of the HYSCORE technique is the creation in 2D spectra of off-diagonal cross-peaks
whose coordinates are nuclear frequencies from opposite electron spin manifolds. The cross-peaks
significantly simplify the analysis of congested spectra by correlating and spreading out the nuclear
frequencies /12/. In addition, the HYSCORE experiment separates overlapping peaks along a second
dimension and enhances the signal-to-noise ratio through the application of a second Fourier transform
/11,12/. Detailed consideration of the orientationally-disordered (i.e. powder or frozen solution) HYSCORE
spectra for 1/2 and nuclei is given elsewhere/13/.
72
Sergei ,4. Dikanov et al. Bioinotkganic Chemis'try andApplications
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Early in the study it was observed that no spectroscopic differences existed between the CT and DT tissue
samples, and so all further discussion refers to spectra oftissue taken from CT rats treated with BEOV.
The first derivative of the field-sweep electron spin echo (FS-ESE) spectrum of BEOV-treated rat kidney
is shown in Figure 2. The FS-ESE experiment collects echo intensity from a two-pulse sequence at various
magnetic field values and is analogous to the adsorption mode of the EPR spectrum. The spectrum is typical
for axial, magnetically dilute vanadyl ions, with spin Hamiltonian values gll 1.945 + 0.005, All 168 + x
10.4
cml, g+/- 1.98 + 0.01 and A+/- 58 + x 10.4
cm1. These values are appreciably different from those of
BEOV (gx 1.988, gy 1.976, gz 1.93-5, A -60.5, Ay -60.0, Az -170.0)/7/, suggesting strongly a
change has occurred in the coordination state of the vanadyl ions. Not surprisingly, no ligand superhyperfine
coupling is observed.
2650 2850 3050 3250 3450 3650 3850 405
Field (G)
Fig. 2: First derivative field sweep ESE spectrum of rat kidney tissue, taken from an animal previously
administered BEOV via drinking water (T 20 K, v 9.3966 GHz, 200 ns).
The ESEEM patterns were recorded on the different components of hyperfine structure. The stimulated
ESEEM spectrum of the VO2+
ions in BEOV-treated rat kidney taken at the central the mv -1/2 component
(essentially orientation non-selective) of the FS-ESE spectrum is shown in Figure 3. The spectrum contains
an intense line, at the proton Zeeman frequency of--,14 MHz, from the protons in the vicinity of the vanadyl
ions. Additionally, two other peaks at 3.7 and 7.0 MHz are visible in the spectrum. Similar spectra were
obtained at other points of the FS-ESE spectrum, corresponding to the g+/- and gll components. The variations
73
l,'olmne I, No. 1. 2003 One alut Two Dhnensionai Pulsed Electron Paramagnetic
Resonance Studies :?fin vivo Vanadyl Coordination
V
0 5 10 15 20 25 F2:[MHz]
Fig. 3: Modulus FT spectrum ofthree-pulse ESEEM of BEOV-treated rat kidney (B 333.3 mT, T 30 K,
v 9.3966 GHz).
of the frequencies ofthese two peaks at different points ofthe FS-ESE spectrum correspond well to twice the
change in the value of the calculated 14N Zeeman frequency A(2[v [), indicating that the peaks are from two
double quantum (dq) transitions of 14N nuclei from opposite electron spin manifolds/14/. In accordance with
the analytical expression for dq-transitions the frequency of one peak increases while the other decreases as
the strength ofthe magnetic field is increased (as shown in Equation 1).
Vdq+ 2 v +_ + K2
+rl
2
hyperfine coupling constant;
e2qQ/4h, the quadrupole coupling constant;
asymmetry parameter;
14N Zeeman frequency.
()
Assignment of these peaks was confirmed by the two dimensional HYSCORE experiment. The
HYSCORE spectrum (Figure 4) shows cross-peaks in the (+,-) quadrant at (+ 7.3, .-Y 3.6) MHz corresponding
to the dq-dq correlations of the transitions observed in the 1D experiments. The traces of the sq-dq and sq-sq
correlations (sq" single quantum) are also visible in the HYSCORE spectrum but are not analyzed due to their
low intensity.
Using Equation 1, the hyperfine coupling constant A and quadrupole parameter K(3+q) can be
determined from the two experimental frequencies 7.3 and 3.6 MHz/14/. Such a procedure yields A 4.9
MHz and K(3+rl) 1.24 MHz for v 1.0256 MHz. Assuming the asymmetry parameter is contained
within 0 < rl< one can obtain an estimate for K 0.6 + 0.04 MHz. The value of the hyperfine coupling
constant determined from our data corresponds well to the earlier result of 5.0-5.2 MHz reported by Fukui et
al., obtained as a result of first-order analysis/8/.
74
Sergei ,4. l)ikanov et al. Bioinorganic Chemistry and Applications
6 10 16
Fig. 4: HYSCORE spectrum of BEOV-treated rat kidney (B 333.3 mT, T 30 K, v 9.3966 GHz, x
200 ns, 256 x 256 points, step 16 ns).
The values of the hyperfine and quadrupole couplings found from the ESEEM and HYSCORE spectra of
VO2+
ions in BEOV-treated rat kidney are consistent with vanadyl coordination by an amine nitrogen, As
previously shown by Astashkin et al. /14/, and supported by later work (listed in detail in Table 1), the
hyperfine couplings for equatorially coordinated simple amines have values of 4.5-5 MHz; such valtles are
consistently smaller than those of coordinated imines. The quadrupole coupling constant of 0.6 MHz
corresponds well to those previously reported for amine nitrogens coordinated to VO2+5'16, Zn2+
or Cu2+
/17-19/.
Isotropic 14N coupling constants have been determined in a number of proteins where amine donation to
the metal ion has been confirmed by other methods. Lysine coordination to VO2+
ions has been observed in
pyruvate kinase (I Also I- 4.9 MHz)/15/, S-adenosylmethionine synthetase (I Aiso I-- 4.3-4.8 MHz) /20/ and
F1 ATPase of spinach chloroplasts (I Also 4.75 MHz)/21,22/. Lastly, direct axial coordination by N can
be ruled out, as several studies have demonstrated coupling constants in a much lower range, typically 2-3
MHz/23/.
Table 1
Magnitude ofthe isotropic 14N hyperfine coupling constants ofrat kidney samples
previously treated with vanadium(IV) compounds.
Complex
BEOV
VOSO4
VOSOn
VO(pic)2
Administration Route IAiso l, MHz Reference
oral 4.9 This work
intravenous 5.0-5.2 8
intraperitoneal 4.8 25
intraperitoneal 4.9 25
75
l"c)hme 1./V. I, 2003 One and Two Dimensional Pulsed Electron Paranlagnetic
Resonance Studies .?fin vivo Vanadyl Coordination
Table 2
Comparison ofthe isotropic coupling constant magnitudes for amine and
imine equatorial InN donors to VO2+
by ESEEM spectroscopy.
Cmplexa 14N Dn0.r..Type Aiso l, MHz Reference
VO(gly)2 Amine 5.0 5.1 15,28
VO-NH3b
Amine 4.7 29
VO(edda) Amine 4.98 28
VO(acac)2(py) lmine 5.7 14
VO(hfac)2(L) Imine 7.1 (L py) 30
7.6 (L lmH)
[VO(mim)4Cl]+
lmine 6.4a 31
VO(meox)_ mine 6.0a 32
VO(salen) Imine 5.8 28
VO(Himac)2(ImH) Imine 6.5 33
a(ema ethylmaltolate; acac acetylacetonate; py pyridine; gly glycinate; edda ethylene-
diaminediacetate; meox 2-methylquinolin-8-olate; H2salen N,N'-bis(salicylidene)ethylenediamine;
Himac 4-imidazoleacetic acid; lmH imidazole).
on silica supported vanadium oxide.
calculated by Aiso= (2A+/- + All)/3.
calculated by Aiso= (Ax + ,4y + A,)/3.
Fukui et aL used the 1:1 VO-histidine complex as a spectroscopic model of a nitrogen-coordinated VO2+
complex in liver and kidney tissue, and as a reference for the quantitative determination of the percentage of
the coordinated ions over the total VO2+
ions in the sample/8/. They did not specify the structure of the
complex and most likely assumed that the coordination of the histidine molecule occurred via the amine
group only. However, detailed 2D ESEEM study of VO-imidazole and VO-histidine complexes has
demonstrated that histidine is in fact a bidentate ligand coordinating VO2+
ions via the ct-amine and imine
nitrogens /16/. ESEEM spectra of VO-histidine complexes are composed of the contributions of the
coordinated amine nitrogen (with hyperfine coupling ,4 5.0 MHz, and a quadrupole coupling constant K
0.58 + 0.02 MHz) and the coordinated imine nitrogen of the imidazole (,4 6.3 MHz, and K 1.02 :+/- 0.07
MHz). The special peculiarity of this system is that the intensity of the lines from the amine nitrogen in two-
and three-pulse spectra is significantly larger than from the imine nitrogen/16/; these differences were not
recognized in the MEM spectra reported by Fukui et al./8/. Nevertheless, imine nitrogens observably affect
the ESEEM spectra of VO-histidine complexes and should be considered in the quantitative analysis of the
percentage ofthe nitrogen-coordinated VO2+
in the sample.
Figures 5a, 5c and 5e show time-domain two-pulse ESEEM patterns of BEOV-troated rat kidney,
VO(his)2 (his histidine) as well as the 15N-labeled (at the imine nitrogen of the imidazole moiety) complex,
VO(1-SN-his)2, respectively. It is clear that the amplitude of the low frequency signals (due to nitrogen
76
Ser,ei A. Dikanov et al. Bioinorganic Chemisto., and Applications
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
)
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000
(ns)
Fig. 5: Two-pulse time domain patterns of (a) VO(His)2 (v 9.75 GHz, B 346.8 naT), (b) previous
spectrum after filtration of high frequency contributions and fit of modulation decays, (c) VO(1-N
His)z (v 9.74 GHz, B 345.3 mY), (d) after filtration and fitting, (e) BEOV-treated rat kidney (v
9.39 GHz, B 333.3 roT) (f) after filtration and fitting.
77
l"olume 1. No. I, 2003 One and Two Dimensional Pulsed Electron Paramagnetic
Resonance Studies .?fin vivo Vanad),l Coordination
nuclei) relative to the proton frequencies is significantly smaller for the in vivo sample than for the model
complexes, thus indicating that only part of the VO2+
present in the biological sample is coordinated to
nitrogen atoms, or that only one nitrogen atom is coordinating the VO2+
in vivo instead of the two in
the model complexes. This difference is also manifested in the corresponding modulus FT plots shown in
Figure 6.
VO(his)2
VO(1 -lN-his)2
BEOV-kidney
/ X/"1
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
v (MHz)
Fig. 6" Modulus FT two-pulse spectra of (a) VO(His)2, (b) VO(1-SN-His)2 and (c) BEOV-treated rat
kidney (parameters identical to those listed in Fig. 5).
Contained within each frequency-domain spectrum in Figure 6 is a triplet of lines at frequencies <8 MHz;
each triplet includes two dq transitions and a new intense line corresponding to the combination of the sq
transitions, Vsq/
('2)
+ Vsq.(2'). The frequency of this peak, to a first-order approximation, is equal to the
nitrogen hyperfine coupling constant. Comparison of the spectra of the natural abundance and N-labeled
VO(his)2 complexes reveals clear differences between them in the relative intensity of the triplet components
as well as in the lineshapes oftwo lower intensity lines between 10 and 12 MHz. These differences reflect the
additional contribution of the 4N imine nitrogens to the ESEEM pattern. Upon SN substitution, this
contribution is eliminated, producing only very minor influences on the ESEEM spectra, but at different
frequency ranges compared to t4N.16 As a result, the VO(1-SN-his)2 complex is a more correct model for the
quantitative determination ofthe percentage ofnitrogen-coordinated VO2/
ions.
The percentage of the total VO2/
concentration involved in nitrogen coordination can be estimated from
the depth of nitrogen ESEEM in the time-domain spectra. However, the ESEEM spectra in Figure 6 show the
presence of peaks from protons with matrix fi-equencies of14 and 28 MHz, which are near exact multiples
78
Sergei A. Dikanov et al. Bioinorganic Chemistr), and Applications
of the dq frequencies of 3.7 and 7.0 MHz. Such concurrences might affect the modulation depth of the
nitrogen signals due to coincidences of the modulation minima from the two types of nuclei (InN and H),
especially at the initial part of the ESEEM patterns where the proton modulation is deep. Filtration of the
high frequencies (>12 MHz) from the two-pulse ESEEM patterns of Figures 5a, 5c and 5e yields the patterns
shown in 5b, 5d and 5f, respectively, eliminating modulation depth distortions caused by the presence of
proton signals in the ESEEM patterns. The decay of the signal in each of these patterns has been fitted with
an arbitrary exponential decay curve, for the estimation of the initial modulation depth for each sample (vide
infra).
If we define Vr(x) as the normalized ESEEM with VN(0) from one amine nitrogen, then the
experimental echo intensity is described by Equation 2.
E(x) N D(x) VN () (2)
N is the numerical coefficient determined from the real scale of the experimental echo intensity, unique for
each sample and D(x) is the function describing the relaxation decay of the echo signal. For the VO(his)2
complex, where two equivalent nitrogens contribute to the ESEEM, the equation is slightly different
(Equation 3)/24/.
E(z) N D(x) [VN ('1:)]2
(3)
One can also determine [E(x)]mi, and [E(x)]mx as envelopes drawn through the points of minimum and
maximum echo amplitude (Figure 5b, 5d and 5f, dashed lines). Then, for any x, the modulation depth in the
experimental curves from one nitrogen nucleus can by described, by the ratio in Equation 4, or, as in Equation
3, for two nitrogens (Equation 5).
Ema--x [VN(/)lmax
(4)
d2 Emin fill.N (,i;)]min
}2Ema-" [[VN()]ma (5)
If it is assumed that in the in vivo sample only part of the VO2+
ions are nitrogen-coordinated, then each
normalized intensity is described by Equation 6 (x is the percentage of the vanadyl ions in the sample which
are nitrogen-coordinated).
E(x) N D(x)[(1-x)+ XVN(Z) (6)
The modulation depth in this case is described by Equation 7.
d Emin (1 x) + x[VN (x)],nin (7)
Em,x (1- X) + x[VN ('0]max
79
lolmne I. No. 1, 2003 One and Two Dimensional Pulsed Electron Paramagnetic
Resonance Studies ofin vivo lffmadyl Coordination
Ifwe introduce the related parameter,, or modulation amplitude, we can obtain Equation 8.
A 1- d
x([V(r)]max --[Vv(r)]mn )
+ x[G
(8)
By expanding upon the binomial fraction shown above we obtain the modulation amplitude relative to dl
(Equation 9).
,: l-d:
(l_x)+X[VN(X)]max
1-
[VN(T,)]max (1-x)+X[VN(X)]max
(1-d,); '1 1-dl
By solving for x, we obtain Equation 10.
(9)
X
{'[VN(Z)]max(K1 ')} (lO)
This analysis shows that if only a percentage of the total VO2+
ions present in the sample is coordinated to
nitrogen, then the modulation amplitude , 1-d is determined by the coefficient (l-x)+xiVu(r)] .compared
to (1-d) with 100% coordination. Analysis ofthis coefficient shows that it approaches x when Vu('C)]m,x--1.
Because the exact function Vu(x)max is unknown, an estimate of the value of x using available
experimental data must be employed. Equations 1-10 detailed above provide a method by which reasonably
accurate estimates can be obtained from experimental spectra. In orientationally-disordered samples, the
modulation depth is inversely proportional to the interpulse time; the modulations decrease with increases in
the time between the two pulses ofthe ESEEM experiment. Therefore, the most accurate estimate ofx can be
obtained from d and d measured at the shortest possible times x of the experimental envelopes where
VN(X)max is close to 1.
The measurement of modulation depth was performed on two-pulse ESEEM patterns obtained (after
filtration of the proton frequencies, vide supra) for the in vivo sample and two model complexes (VO(his)2
and VO(1-15N-his)2) at the same time, as indicated in each of Figures 5b, 5d and 5f. The depths obtained
were d 0.70 (in vivo), dz 0.25 (VO(1-SN-his)2), dz 0.11 (VO(his)2). All parameters were determined
with an accuracy of + 0.02. The latter two parameters allowed for the calculation to find d 0.50 (VO(1-15N-
his)z) and d 0.33 (VO(his)2). Substitution of the d and d values into Equation 10 yields (assuming V,4')max
1) minimum x values of 0.60 and 0.45 for the labeled and unlabeled samples, respectively. The value of
0.45 is close to the previously determined value of 0.5 reported by Fukui et al. for the non-labeled sample/8/.
These values would progressively increase as the value of VN(X)max decreases. If, for instance, VN(X)max was
found to be 0.8, then the estimate for x gives 0.67 and 0.50. Thus, by using the unlabeled VO(his)2 complex
as a basis for a quantitative comparison of the nitrogen-coordinated vanadyl ions in the biological sample,
Fukui et al. underestimated this value by 10-17%. Our comparison, however, was made with BEOV-treated
tissue, obtained from rats subjected to a profoundly different dosing procedure; we discuss these differences
in the next section.
8O
5"er,ei A. Dikanov et aL Bioinorganic Chem&tO, andApplications
In Vivo Accumulation of Vanadium(IV).
This work provides intriguing comparisons to earlier reported in vivo data on the bioaccumulation of
vanadyl species. We have shown in the previous section that oral administration of BEOV and subsequent
bioaccumulation in kidney tissue results in at least partial degradation ofthe complex; as much as 67% ofthe
detected ions are found in the nitrogen-coordinated form. This percentage is in fact higher than that
previously determined for intravenously-administered VOSO4 /8/, indicating that the oral administration
pathway subjects vanadyl complexes (at least those studied to date) to significant biotransformation activities
that result in loss of ligand(s) prior to organ accumulation. This conclusion is supported by our earlier study
of vanay! ons (from BEOV) in bone mineral which also demonstrated complex degradation prior to
accumulation in the bone matrix/9/.
Fukui et al. reported 2-pulse ESEEM spectra of kidney samples, taken from rats previously treated (via
intraperitoneal injection) with bis(picolinato)oxovanadium(IV) (VO(pic))(Figure 1) and VOSO4 /2/.
Contained within the ESEEM spectra of VO(pic) samples was a weak signal corresponding to a coordinated
imine nitrogen, suggestive therefore of the presence of one of the original picolinato ligands in the first
coordination sphere of the paramagnetic ions. We do not detect imine coordination at all in our study, which
would seem to corroborate the observations of Fukui et al./25/. Their observation, however, does raise some
interesting mechanistic considerations in light of our results. In the current work, BEOV was administered
via drinking water to rats, therefore the paramagnetic vanadyl ions must have been absorbed from the.
gastrointestinal tract, transported to the kidneys via the bloodstream, and ultimately absorbed again into the
renal tissue. Administration by intraperitonea! injection, however, would serve to bypass most if not all but
the final process. The VO(pic) found in the kidney tissue would therefore bypass several potential sites of
biotransformation and hence potentially arrive in the tissue as the intact complex. Current data in our group
and others indicates that the BMOV family of complexes is susceptible to degradation via reaction with
serum proteins such as apo-transferrin and albumin/26/. Since the thermodynamic stability of VO(pic) is
actually several orders of magnitude lower than that of BEOV (log [3 11.99 for VO(pic)7 versus 16.43 for
BEOV) /7/, it is implausible that VO(pic) would survive as the intact complex in the bloodstream.
Additionally, greater than 60% of the vanadyl ions present in the kidney sample (from the original BEOV
source) is found in the amine-coordinated form; considering the greater thermodynamic stability of BEOV
over VO(pic) and the vigorous route of administration (oral versus intraperitoneal injection), it seems likely,
all conditions being equal, that an orally-administered VO(pic) sample would undergo a much greater degree
of biotransformation than that indicated in the Fukui et al. study. Thus, the possibility that the imine-.amine
coordinated vanadyl species (i.e. the original VO(pic) complex) detected in the Fukui et al. study is in some
way responsible for the augmented anti-diabetic effects is remote. Further, since the kidneys themselves have
little involvement in carbohydrate and lipid metabolism, it is in fact much more likely that the amine-
coordinated species detected in both studies is an end-product of in vivo transformation of the administered
complex, downstream ofthe anti-diabetic effect(s).
81
Volume 1. No. 1, 2003 One and Two Dinlensional Pldsed Electron Paratnag. netic
Resonance Studies qfin vivo Vanadyl Coordination
CONCLUSIONS
By utilizing pulsed EPR techniques, we have demonstrated that the biological fate of chelated vanadium
sources such as BMOV is remarkably similar to that of free sources (e.g. VOSO4) in rat kidney tissue.
Administered VO1+
from either BMOV or VOSO4 becomes nitrogen-ligated, in approximately the same
proportion. A detailed consideration of the time-domain spectra of the in vivo sample and two model
complexes shows that modulation depths can be used to obtain reasonable estimates of the percentage of the
total detected paramignetic species interacting with the nucleus of interest. Such an analysis requires,
however, isolation of the undistorted modulation depth arising from the nucleus under study. We have
presented an improved method for determining the relative proportion of a particular species, and shown that
a previously reported method underestimates this value. With the biological fate in the kidney of both
chelated and free vanadium sources remarkably similar, the superior insulin-enhancing activity of chelated
sources such as BMOV must be a result of either a key difference in some other metabolic pathway, or
merely increased gastrointestinal absorption via oral administration. Due to the predominantly excretory role
of the kidneys, it is likely that this difference(s) occurs prior to accumulation of administered vanadium in
these organs.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Kinetek Pharmaceuticals Inc., the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, the Science Council
of British Columbia (GREAT program, B.D.L.), and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council
of Canada for support of this research. This work was supported by NIH grants RR01811 to the Illinois EPR
Research Center and GM62954 to S.A.D.
REFERENCES
1. K.H. Thompson, J.H. McNeill and C. Orvig, Chem. Rev., 99, 2561 (1999).
2. M.A. Al-Bayati, O.G. Raabe, S.N. Girl and J.B. Knaak, J. Am. Coll. ToxicoL, 10, 233 (1991).
3. R.D.R. Parker and R.P. Sharma, J. Environ. Pathol. Toxicol., 2, 235 (1978).
4. E. Sabbioni, E. Marafante, L. Alantini, L. Ubertalli and C. Birattari, Bioinorg. Chem., 8, 503 (1978).
5. I.A. Steyawati, K.H. Thompson, V.G. Yuen, Y. Sun, M. Battell, D.M. Lyster, C. Vo, T.J. Ruth, S.
Zeisler, J.H. McNeill and C. Orvig, J. Appl. Physiol., 84, 569 (1998).
6. T.B. Wiegmann, H.D. Day and R.V. Patak, J. Toxicol. Environ. Health, 10, 233 (1982).
7. K.H. Thompson, B.D. Liboiron, K.D.D. Bellman, I.A. Setyawati, B.O. Patrick, V. Karunaratne, G.
Rawji, J. Wheeler, K. Sutton, S. Bhanot, C. Cassidy, J.H. McNeill, V.G. Yuen and C. Orvig, J. Biol.
Inorg. Chem., 8, 66 (2003).
8. K. Fukui, H. Ohya-Nishiguchi, M. Nakai, H. Sakurai and H. Kamada, FEBS Lett., 368, 31 (1995).
9. S.A. Dikanov, B. Liboiron, K.H. Thompson, E. Vera, V.G. Yuen, J.H. McNeill and C. Orvig, J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 121, 11004 (1999).
82
Ser,zei A. Dikcmov et al. Bioinorganic Chemistry andApplications
10. S.A. Dikanov, B.D. Liboiron and C. Orvig, J. Am. Chem. So., 124, 2969 (2002).
1. P. H6fer, A. Grupp, H. Nebenf'thr and M.M. Mehring, Chem. Phys. Lett., 132, 279 (1986).
12. S.A. Dikanov, A.M. Tyryshkin and M.K. Bowman, J. Magn. Reson., 144, 228 (2000).
13. S.A. Dikanov, in: New Advances in Analytical Chemistry, Attar-ur-Rahman (Ed.), Gordon and Breach,
Amsterdam, 2000; p. 523.
14. A.V. Astashkin, S.A. Dikanov and Y.D. Tsvetkov, J. Struct. Chem., 26, 363 (1985).
15. P.A. Yipton, J. McCracken, J.B. Cornellius and J. Peisach, Biochemistry, 28, 5720 (1988).
16. S.A. Dikanov, R.I. Samoilova, J.A. Smieja and M.K. Bowman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 11'7, 10579 (1995).
17. C.I.H. Ashbi, W.F. Paton and T. Brown, J. Am. Chem. So., 1(2, 2990 (1980).
18. C.,a,. MacDowell and A. Naito, J. Magn. Reson., 45, 205 (1981).
19. C.A. MacDowell, A. Naito, D.L. Sastry, Y.U. Cui, K. Sha and S.X. Yu, J. Mol. Struct., 195, 361 (1989).
20. C. Zhang, G.D. Markham and R. LoBrutto, Biochemistry, 32, 9866 (1993).
21. A.L.P. Houseman, L. Morgan, R. LoBrutto and W.D. Frasch, Biochemistry, 33, 4910 (1994).
22. C. Buy, T. Matsui, S. Rianambininstoa, C. Sigalat, G. Girault and J.L. Zimmerman, Biochemistry, 35,
14281 (1996).
23. Y. Deligiannakis, M. Louloudi and N. Hadjiliadis, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2D4, (2000).
24. Equation 3 assumes that ESEEM from two nuclei in a disordered sample is calculated as V2 <V>2.
This is an approximate expression. An exact formula in the case of magnetically equivalent nuclei has
the form Vz <(V)>. However, it has been shown (see for example, S.A. Dikanov and Yu.D.
Tsvetkov, Electron Spin Echo Envelope Modulation (ESEEM) Spectroscopy, CRC, Boca Raton, 1992;
p. 101-104) that both methods of calculation give practically the same result for weak anisotropic
hyperfine interactions when T/v < 0.5. This relation is well satisfied for 14N coordination to VO2+.
Therefore, we used Equation 3 to estimate the 14N modulation amplitude in the model complexes
because the expression V2 <(V)Z> does not allow such an estimate.
25. K. Fukui, Y. Fujisawa, H. Ohya-Nishiguchi, H. Kamada and H. Sakurai, J. Inorg. Biochem., 77, 215
(1999).
26. B.D. Liboiron, E. Lain, G.R. Hanson, N. Aebischer and C. Orvig (in preparation).
27. T. Duma and R. Hancock, J. Coord. Chem., 31, 135 (1994).
28. K. Fukui, H. Ohya-Nishiguchi and H. Kamada, Inorg. Chem., 36, 5518 (1997).
29. S. Cosgrove-Larsen and D.J. Singel, J. Phys. Chem., 96, 9007 (1992).
30. S.S. Eaton, J. Dubach, K.M. More, G.R. Eaton, G. Thurman and D.R. Ambruso, J. Biol. Chem., 264,
4776 (1989).
31. E.J. Reijerse, J. Shane, E. de Boer and D. Collison, in" Electron Magnetic Resonance ofDisordered
Systems, N.D. Yordanov (Ed.), World Scientific. Singapore, 1989, p. 189.
32. E.J. Reijerse, J. Shane, E. de Boer, P. H6fer and D. Collison, in" Electron Magnetic Resonance of
Disordered Systems, N.D. Yordanov (Ed.), World Scientific, Singapore, 1991; p. 253.
33. K. Fukui, H. Ohya-Nishiguchi and H. Kamada, Inorg. Chem., 38, 2326 (1998).
83
