INTRODUCTION
AIDS remains an enormous health threat, although
chemo-therapeutic agents have increased in number and
effectiveness. Both nucleoside (AZT, DDI, DDC, D4T, 3TC) and
non-nucleoside (nevirapine, delavirdine) HIV reverse transcriptase
(RT) inhibitors and HIV protease (saquinavir, indinavir,
ritonavir, nelfinavir) inhibitors have been licensed
by the US FDA. Also, combination therapy of
inhibitors of both groups results in undetectable levels of HIV in
the blood of infected patients. However, despite this success,
toxicity and, especially, drug resistance still present severe
problems.

The replicative cycle of HIV is comprised of ten steps that may be
adequate targets for chemotherapeutical intervention. Most of the
substances identified as anti-HIV agents interfere with one of
these steps of HIV replicative cycle. These steps are: (1) viral
adsorption to the cell membrane, (2) fusion between the viral
envelope and the cell membrane, (3) uncoating of the viral
nucleocapsid, (4) reverse transcription of the viral RNA to
proviral DNA, (5) integration of the proviral DNA into the
cellular genome, (6) DNA replication, (7) transcription of the
proviral DNA to RNA, (8) translation of the viral precursor mRNA
to mature mRNA, (9) maturation of the viral precursor proteins by
proteolysis, myristoylation, and glycosylation, and (10) budding,
virion assembly, and release. Step 4, a key step in the
replicative cycle of retroviruses, which makes it distinct from
the replicative cycle of other viruses, is the reverse
transcription catalyzed by reverse transcriptase. Another target
for therapeutic intervention is step 9, particularly the
proteolysis of precursor proteins by HIV protease. The majority of
chemotherapeutic strategies have, therefore, focused on the
development of retroviral enzyme inhibitors.


The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved a number of
anti-HIV drugs for clinical use. However, these medications have
limitations such as high cost, decreased sensitivity due to the
rapid emergence of drug-resistant mutants, and adverse effects
like peripheral neuropathy, bone marrow suppression, and anemia
[]. Thus, more effective and less toxic anti-HIV agents are
still needed. In addition, alternative approaches, including
herbal therapies after long-term screening of plant extracts,
particularly anti-infective or immunomodulating medicinal herbs
and the structural modification of lead compounds, have been
attempted.

Coumarins, an old class of compounds, are naturally occurring
benzopyrene derivatives. A lot of coumarins have been identified
from natural sources, especially green plants. The pharmacological
and biochemical properties and therapeutic applications of simple
coumarins depend upon the pattern of substitution. Coumarins have
attracted intense interest in recent years because of their
diverse pharmacological properties.

Coumarins comprise a group of natural compounds found in a variety
of plant sources. The very long association of plant coumarins
with various animal species and other organisms throughout
evolution may account for the extraordinary range of biochemical
and pharmacological activities of these chemicals in mammalian and
other biological systems. The coumarins that were studied have
divers biological properties and various effects on the different
cellular systems. A lot of biological parameters should be
evaluated to increase our understanding of mechanisms by which
these coumarins act. Coumarins have important effects in plant
biochemistry and physiology, acting as antioxidants, enzyme
inhibitors, and precursors of toxic substances. In addition, these
compounds are involved in the actions of plant growth hormones and
growth regulators, the control of respiration, photosynthesis, as
well as defense against infection. The coumarins have long been
recognized to possess anti-inflammatory, antioxidant,
antiallergic, hepatoprotective, antithrombotic, antiviral, and
anticarcinogenic activities. The hydroxycoumarins are typical
phenolic compounds and, therefore, act as potent metal chelators
and free radical scavengers. They are powerful chain-breaking
antioxidants. The coumarins display a remarkable array of
biochemical and pharmacological actions, some of which suggest
that certain members of this group of compounds may significantly
affect the function of various mammalian cellular systems.

The coumarins are extremely variable in structure, due to the
various types of substitutions in their basic structure, which can
influence their biological activity. A careful
structure-system-activity-relationship study of coumarins should
be conducted.

Reverse transcriptase inhibitors
Synthetic calanolides

(+)-calanolide A (),
(+)-[10R, 11S, 12S]-10,11-trans-dihydro-12-hydroxy-6,6,10,11-tetramethyl-4-propyl-2H,6H-benzo[1,2-b:3,4-b′:5,6-b″]tripyran-2-one,
is a novel non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NNRTI)
with potent activity against HIV-1 [–]. The compound was first isolated from a tropical tree (Calophyllum lanigerum) in Malaysia []. Due to low availability of
naturally occurring (+)-calanolide A, a total synthesis of this
polycyclic coumarin was developed to provide material for
preclinical and clinical research [, ]. Structural biology
studies and enzyme kinetic experiments bear out the unique
anti-HIV properties of calanolide A. In particular, calanolide A
is active against viral isolates with the Y181C amino acid
mutation in the reverse transcriptase of HIV-1. This is a commonly
observed mutation identified in both laboratory and clinical viral
isolates and is associated with high-level resistance to most
other NNRTIs. However, viral isolates that contain multiple
AZT-resistant mutations and the Y181C mutation are actually
hypersensitive to the antiviral activity of calanolide A. When
tested in vitro in combination with a range of nucleoside
analogues, protease inhibitors and NNRTIs, calanolide A
demonstrates additive to synergistic anti-HIV activity.

The anti-HIV agent (+/−)-calanolide A has been synthesized
[–] in a five-step approach starting with
phloroglucinol, which includes Pechmann reaction, Friedel-Crafts
acylation, chromenylation with 4,4-dimethoxy-2-methylbutan-2-ol,
cyclization, and Luche reduction. Cyclization of chromene to
chromanon was achieved by employing either acetaldehyde diethyl
acetal or paraldehyde in the presence of trifluoroacetic acid and
pyridine or PPTS. Luche reduction of chromanone at lower
temperature preferably yielded (+/−)-calanolide A. The synthetic
(+/−)-calanolide A has been chromatographically resolved into
its optically active forms, (+)- and (−)-calanolide A
(). The anti-HIV activities for synthetic
(+/−)-calanolide A, as well as resultant (+)- and
(−)-calanolide A, have been determined. Only (+)-calanolide A
accounted for anti-HIV activity, which was similar to the data
reported for the natural product, and (−)-calanolide A was
inactive.

In order to examine the structure-activity relationships of the
trans-10,11-dimethyldihydropyran-12-ol ring (designated
ring C), a series of structural analogues were prepared and
evaluated using cell cytopathicity assay (XTT) []. Removal
of the 10-methyl group resulted in decreased activity, with only
one epimer exhibiting anti-HIV activity. Substituting the
10-methyl group with an ethyl chain maintained anti-HIV activity,
with only a 4-fold reduction in potency relative to racemic
calanolide A. Substitution of the 10-methyl group with an
isopropyl moiety completely eliminated the anti-HIV activity.
Addition of an extra methyl group at either the 10- or 11-position
maintained the basic stereochemical features of the parent
calanolide system while removing the chirality at the respective
carbon, but resulted in decreased activity relative to calanolide
A. In the above examples, analogues containing a cis
relationship between the 10- and 11-alkyl moieties were completely
devoid of activity. Synthetic intermediates in which the
12-hydroxyl group was in the ketone oxidation state exhibited
suppressing anti-HIV activity, with EC50 values only 5-fold
less potent than that of calanolide A for both the
10,11-cis and -trans series. These ketones
represent the first derivatives in the calanolide series to
exhibit anti-HIV activity while not containing a 12-hydroxyl
group. Analogues which showed anti-HIV activity in the CEM-SS
cytoprotection assay were further confirmed to be inhibitors of
HIV-1 reverse transcriptase. The synthesis of calanolide A has
been reported in [–].

The delta 7,8 olefinic linkages within (+)-calanolide A and
(−)-calanolide B () were catalytically
reduced to determine impact on the anti-HIV activity of the parent
compounds []. In addition, a series of structure
modifications of the C-12 hydroxyl group in (−)-calanolide B was
made to investigate the importance of that substituent to the
HIV-1 inhibitory activity of these coumarins. A total of 14
analogues were isolated or prepared and compared to
(+)-calanolide A and (−)-calanolide B in the National Cancer
Institute. While none of the compounds showed activity superior to
the unmodified leads, some structure-activity requirements were
apparent from the relative anti-HIV potencies of the various
analogues [–]. The synthesis of the isomers of calanolide A has been reported in [, ].

NMR spectra of synthetic structures corresponding to those
initially reported for natural compounds calanolide C and
calanolide D showed some subtle differences from those of the
natural products. Further analysis has resulted in revision of the
structures of the natural compounds, now renamed as
pseudocalanolides C and D. The absolute stereochemistry of
pseudocalanolide C was established as [6S, 7S, 8R] using the
modified Mosher's method [].

The three chromanone derivatives (+)-, (−)-, and
(+/−)-12-oxocalanolide A () were
evaluated for in vitro antiviral activities against HIV and simian
immunodeficiency virus (SIV). The compounds were determined to be
inhibitors of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase (RT) and exhibited
activity against a variety of viruses selected for resistance to
other HIV-1 non-nucleoside RT inhibitors. They are the first
reported calanolide analogues capable of inhibiting SIV [].

Synthetic DCK analogues

Numerous plant-derived compounds have been evaluated for
inhibitory effects against HIV replication, and some coumarins
have been found to inhibit different stages in the HIV replication
cycle. The review article [] describes recent progress in
the discovery, structure modification, and structure-activity
relationship studies of potent anti-HIV coumarin derivatives. A
dicamphanoyl-khellactone (DCK) analogue, which was discovered and
developed in author's laboratory, and calanolide A are currently
in preclinical studies and clinical trials, respectively.

Through a bioactivity-directed search for plant-derived, naturally
occurring compounds, the lead compound sukudorfin was isolated
from the fruit of Lomatium suksdorfii and its structure was
identified. Sukudorfin () inhibited HIV-1
replication in H9 lymphocytes (the EC50 and the therapeutic
index—TIs for some coumarins are reviewed in
). The discovery of suksdorfin led to the
synthetic compounds and the most promising lead compound was
3,4-di-O-(s)-(−)-camphanoyl-(3′R,
4′R)-(+)-cis-khellactone (or DCK)
,  which showed extremely potent activity
[].

Forty two dihydroseselins based on the structure of suksdorfin
were synthesized in order to evaluate their anti-HIV activity
[]. These synthetic derivatives include
3′,4′-di-O-acyl- and 3′- or
4′-O-acyl-cis-dihydroseselins and
3′,4′-trans-dihydroseselins with O-acyl and/or O-alkyl groups
at the 3′ and 4′ positions. Two 4′-azido and three
4′-alkylamido derivatives were also prepared. By using optically
pure reagents, three pairs of diastereoisomers were synthesized
and separated as optically pure compounds. Together with the above
synthetic derivatives, seselin  and
(+/−)-cis-, (+)-cis-, and
(+/−)-trans-dihydroseselin-3′,4′-diol were also
tested for anti-HIV activity in vitro. An optically pure compound,
3′,4′-di-O-(−)-camphanoyl-(+)-cis-khellactone,
showed potent inhibitory activity and remarkable selectivity
against HIV replication. The EC50 value and in vitro
therapeutic index (TI) of
3′,4′-di-O-(−)-camphanoyl-(+)-cis-khellactone
are better than those shown by AZT (). In
addition, compound
3′,4′-di-O-(−)-camphanoyl-(+)-cis-khellactone
is also active against HIV replication in a monocytic cell line
and in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). In vitro assay
indicated that, like compound suksdorfin, compound
3′,4′-di-O-(−)-camphanoyl-(+)-cis-khellactone
is not an inhibitor of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase. Moreover, the
anti-HIV activity of
3′,4′-di-O-(−)-camphanoyl-(+)-cis-khellactone
is stereoselective as its three diastereoisomers are at least
10,000 times less active. Since other synthetic dihydroseselin
derivatives with different substituents or without any
substituents are inactive or are active only at much higher
concentration, the antiviral potency of
3′,4′-di-O-(−)-camphanoyl-(+)-cis-khellactone
could be associated with the camphanoyl moieties of its structure.
Therefore, compound
3′,4′-di-O-(−)-camphanoyl-(+)-cis-khellactone
represents a unique coumarin structure with promising anti-HIV
activity.

DCK lactam analogues were synthesized [] and evaluated in
H9 cells. 4-methyl-DCK lactam exhibited potent anti-HIV activity
().

A series of disubstituted 3′,4′-di-O-(S)-camphanoyl-(+)-cis-khellactone
(DCK) analogues were synthesized [] and evaluated for
inhibition of HIV-1 replication in H9 lymphocytes.
5-methoxy-4-methyl DCK was the most promising compound. As seen in
, its parameters were much better than those of
lead compound DCK. Another six disubstituted DCK analogues were
more potent than AZT but less active than DCK. Conformational
analysis suggested that resonance of the coumarin system is an
essential structural feature for potent anti-HIV activity. Steric
compression of C(4) and C(5) substituents of the coumarin moiety
can reduce the overall planarity and thus resonance of the
coumarin nucleus, resulting in a decrease or lack of anti-HIV
activity.

To explore the structural requirements of
(+)-cis-khellactone derivatives as novel anti-HIV
agents, 24 monosubstituted
3′,4′-di-O-(S)-camphanoyl-(+)-cis-khellactone
(DCK) derivatives were synthesized in enantiometrically pure form
[]. These compounds included four isomeric monomethoxy
analogues, four isomeric monomethyl analogues, four
4-alkyl/aryl-substituted analogues, and twelve
4-methyl-(+)-cis-khellactone derivatives with varying
3′,4′-substituents. These (+)-cis-khellactone
derivatives were screened in acutely infected H9 lymphocytes. The
results demonstrated that the (3′R,
4′R)-(+)-cis-khellactone skeleton, two
(S)-(−)-camphanoyl groups at the 3′- and 4′-positions, and a
methyl group on the coumarin ring, except at the 6-position, were
optimal structural moieties for anti-HIV activity. EC50 and
TI values  for 3-methyl-, 4-methyl-, and
5-methyl-3′,4′-di-O-(S)-camphanoyl-(3′R,
4′R)-(+)-cis-khellactone are shown in
. Furthermore, 4-methyl-, and
5-methyl-3′,4′-di-O-(S)-camphanoyl-(3′R,
4′R)-(+)-cis-khellactone also showed potent
inhibitory activity in CEM-SS cell line, and most monosubstituted
DCK analogues were less toxic than DCK.

Six 3-substituted
3′,4′-di-O-(S)-camphanoyl-(+)-cis-khellactone
derivatives were synthesized  from 3-methyl DCK. 3-hydroxymethyl
DCK exhibited potent anti-HIV activity in H9 lymphocytes shown in
. These values are similar to those of DCK and
better than those of AZT [].

In additional structure-activity-relationship (SAR) studies
[], the carbonyl oxygen of DCK was replaced with a sulfur
atom. This bioisostere was less potent but also less cytotoxic
than DCK. The 4-methyl, -propyl, and -benzyl analogues were also
prepared; the order of activity was methyl &gt; H &gt;
propyl &gt; benzyl. 4-methyl-3′,4′-di-O-(−)-camphonyl-(+)-cis-khelthiolactone
exhibited extremely potent anti-HIV activity
().

To enhance the water solubility and oral bioavailability of DCK
analogues, 12 new mono- and disubstituted (3′R,
4′R)-3′,4′-di-O-(S)-camphanoyl-(+)-cis-khellactone
(DCK) analogues were synthesized and evaluated for inhibition of
HIV-1 replication in H9 lymphocytes [].
3-hydroxymethyl-4-methyl-DCK exhibited significant anti-HIV
activity in H9 lymphocytes and even less in primary peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (). Although this
compound was not as potent as 4-methyl-DCK and
3-bromomethyl-4-methyl-DCK, it provides increased water solubility
and possible linkage to other moieties. Of particular note,
3-hydroxymethyl-4-methyl-DCK exhibits moderate oral
bioavailability (15%) when administered as a
carboxymethylcellulose suspension to rats, whereas 4-methyl-DCK is
not orally bioavailable in the same formulation. Further studies
on mechanism of action suggest that 3-hydroxymethyl-4-methyl-DCK
inhibits the production of double-stranded viral DNA from the
single-stranded DNA intermediate. In addition,
3-bromomethyl-4-methyl-DCK is the most potent compound in this
series of new analogues with EC50 and TI values shown in
. Thus, further modification at the 3-position
of the coumarin ring can improve the potency of new DCK analogues.

Other reverse transcriptase inhibitors
Ten different pyranone-related substituents (chromones or
coumarins) were covalently linked to the 5′ end of various
oligonucleotides (ODNs). The interaction of these compounds with
HIV-1 RT was analyzed. A different behavior was found to depend on
the structure of the oligonucleotide derivatives. Some compounds
activated the enzyme at relatively low concentrations
(0.1–0.5 μM), followed by inhibition of the activity at
higher concentrations (5–20 μM), whereas others behave
just as inhibitors. Because the presence of some coumarin or
chromone derivatives conjugated to ODNs enhanced the interaction
with RT, Martyanov et al  [] analyzed the capacity of such
ODN derivatives to be used as primers.
The introduction of a chromone derivative, the
2-[3-(aminopropyl)amino]-8-isopropyl-5-
methyl-4-oxo-4H-1-benzopyran-3-carbaldehyde],
and a coumarin derivative, the
1-(3-aminopropoxy)-2-ethyl-3H-naphto [2,1-b] pyran-3-one, into the
5′ end of a noncomplementary ODN allowed these compounds to be
used as primers. In the case of complementary primers, the
presence of conjugated derivatives enhanced the affinity with
Km values that were two to three orders of magnitude lower than that of a
complementary primer of the same length. After addition of a
ddT-unit to the 3′-terminal end of the ODN, some of these
primers became very effective inhibitors of RT with Ki values in
the nanomolar range. Martyanov et al [] have carried out a
comparison of Km and Vmax values for various
primers in the polymerization reaction catalyzed by the HIV-1 RT.
The affinity of RT for complementary d(pT)6 containing two
different 5′-end pyranone derivatives was two to three orders of
magnitude higher (Km = 3–15 nM) than that of
d(pT)6 (Km = 12.6 mM). ODNs noncomplementary to
poly(A) template were not elongated by RT. However, derivatives of
d(CAGGTG) containing the 5′-terminal chromone and coumarin
related groups were efficient primers showing Km
(30–300 nM) and Vmax (75%–93%) values comparable with
that for d(pT)10 (800 nM; 100%). The [d(CAGGTG)]ddT ODN
derivatives were effective inhibitors of RT. The primer function
of derivatives of noncomplementary ODNs appears to be due to the
additional interactions of their 5′-terminal groups with the
enzyme tRNA-binding site.

Toddacoumaquinone is a coumarin-naphthoquinone dimer, and it was
synthesized through Diels-Alder reaction between
8-(1-acetoxy-3-methyl-1, 3-butadienyl)-5, 7-dime-thoxycoumarin and
2-methoxy-1, 4-benzoquinone []. The activities of
Toddacoumaquinone against several viruses were examined. A weak
activity (EC50 = 10 μgr/mL) was observed against
Herpes simplex virus type 1 and 2 (HSV-1 and HSV-2), but
no activity was seen against HIV-1.

A new series of 3,5-bis(arylidene)-4-piperidones, as  chal- cone
analogues carrying variety of aryl and heteroaryl groups,
pyrazolo[4,3-c]pyridines, pyridolo[4,3-c]pyrimi-dines, and
pyrido[4,3-c]pyridines, carrying an arylidene moiety, and a series
of pyrano[3,2-c]pyridines, as flavone and coumarin isosteres, were
synthesized [] and screened for their in vitro antiviral and
antitumor activities at the National Cancer Institute. Several
compounds proved to be active against HSV-1, while other compounds
showed moderate activity against HIV-1. The pyrano[3,2-c]pyridines
heterocyclic system proved to be the most active antitumors among
the investigated heterocycles.

A single dose of coumarin derivatives, warfarin
(), 4-hydroxycoumarin
(), and umbelliferone
(), added at the time of inoculation
either by free virus or by contact with U1 monocytes exhibited a
dose-dependent inhibitory effect on viral replication in target
MOLT-4 lymphocytes observable even at 5 days after
infection []. In addition, marked decrease of HIV-1 p24 release
and reduction in RT activity was observed when chronically
HIV-infected ACH-2 lymphocytes were treated with coumarins
(ED50 range 10−6−10−9 mol/L). However, the
intracellular composition of HIV-1 core proteins in drug-exposed
cells was not modified. Results suggest that although no complete
inhibition of viral production has been observed in vitro, this
class of drugs may present potential interest as antiviral agents.

Integrase inhibitors
The structures of a large number of HIV-1 integrase inhibitors
have in common two aryl units separated by a central linker.
Frequently, at least one of these aryl moieties must contain
1,2-dihydroxy substituents in order to exhibit high inhibitory
potency. The ability of o-dihydroxy-containing species
to undergo in situ oxidation to reactive
quinones presents a potential limitation to the utility of such
compounds. The report of tetrameric 4-hydroxycoumarin-derived
inhibitor provided a lead example of an inhibitor which does not
contain the catechol moiety. Tetrameric 4-hydroxycoumarin-derived
inhibitor represents a large, highly complex, yet symmetrical
molecule. It was the purpose of the study [] to determine the critical components of tetrameric 4-hydroxycoumarin-derived
inhibitor, and if possible to simplify its structure while
maintaining potency. In the study, dissection of tetrameric
4-hydroxycoumarin-derived inhibitor (IC50 = 1.5 μM)
into its constituent parts showed that the minimum active
pharmacophore consisted of a coumarin dimer containing an aryl
substituent on the central linker methylene. However, in the
simplest case in which the central linker aryl unit consisted of a
phenyl ring (IC50 = 43 μM), a significant reduction in
potency resulted by removing two of the original four coumarin
units. Replacement of this central phenyl ring by more extended
aromatic systems having higher lipophilicity improved potency, as
did the addition of 7-hydroxy substituents to the coumarin rings.
Combining these latter two modifications resulted in compounds
such as 3,3′-(2-naphthalenomethylene)bis[4,7-dihydroxycoumarin]
(IC50 = 4.2 μM) which exhibited nearly the full
potency of the parent tetramer, yet were structurally much
simpler.

The most important method that can be applied to develop new
anti-AIDS compounds is computer-assisted drug design (CADD). The
used method involves traditional or classic QSAR and 3D QSAR. In
the traditional approach to QSAR, the chemical structure can be
described with experimental and theoretical steric, electronic,
and hydrophobic parameters. 3D QSAR methods were developed as an
alternative to traditional QSAR to describe molecules. The results
indicated that the flavonoids with hydroxyl groups at C-5 and C-7
in the A-ring, and with a C-2-C-3 double bond were the most potent
HIV growth inhibitors []. According to the above
information on structure-activity relationships, structure
modification methods can be also used for flavonoid lead
compounds, which are derived from plants with possible anti-HIV
activity. As a potential target, the heteroatom in position 1 of
the C-ring of the flavonoid compounds has been considered.
Therefore, similar or even new biological activities could be
anticipated when the oxygen of bioactive flavonoids is replaced by
another atom such as nitrogen or sulfur, which lines up closely
with oxygen in the periodic table. Thus, a series of
5,6,7,8-subsituted-2-phenylthio-chromen-4-ones has been
synthesized and evaluated for anti-HIV activity []. Among
them, one new compound was the most active (IC50 value of
0.65 μM) against HIV in acutely infected H9 lymphocytes,
and had a TI of approximately 5. A systematic series of chemically
modified coumarin dimers has been synthesized and tested for their
inhibitory activity against HIV-1 integrase. Mao et al []
observed that modified coumarin dimers containing hydrophobic
moiety on the linker display potent inhibitory activities.

Protease inhibitors
HIV-1 protease has been identified as a significant target
enzyme in AIDS research. While numerous peptide-derived
inhibitors have been described, the identification of a nonpeptide
inhibitor remains an important goal. Using an HIV-1 protease mass
screening technique,
4-hydroxy-3-(3-phenoxypropyl)-2H-1-benzopyran-2-one was identified
as a nonpeptide competitive inhibitor of the enzyme [].
Employing a Monte Carlo-based docking procedure, the coumarin was
docked in the active site of the enzyme, revealing a binding mode
that was later confirmed by the X-ray crystal analysis. Several
analogues were prepared to test the binding interactions and
improve the overall binding affinity. The most active compound in
the study was
4,7-dihydroxy-3-[4-(2-methoxyphenyl)butyl]-2H-1-benzo-pyran-2-one
().

The screening of the HIV-1 protease (PR) inhibitory activity
(IC50) of various substituted 3-phenyl-4-hydroxy- coumarins,
3-benzyl-4-hydroxycoumarins, 3-phenoxy-4-hy-droxy-coumarins,
3-benzenesulfonyl-4-hydroxycoumarins, and
3-(7-coumarinyloxy)-4-hydroxycoumarins was performed [].
The data indicate the importance of substituents at positions 5
and 7 of the coumarin ring on the inhibitory potency of the
HIV-1-PR.

The interaction of novel series of synthetic inhibitors with
various serine proteases (leukocyte elastase, thrombin, cathepsin
G, chymotrypsin, plasminogen activators, and plasmin) and an
aspartic protease (HIV-1 protease) were studied []. Various
aspects were analyzed: mechanism of action, structure-activity
relationships, and in some cases, molecular modeling, and
biological evaluation. Functionalized cyclopeptides and N-aryl
azetidin-2-ones behaved as suicide substrates acting specifically
on trypsin-like proteases (thrombin or urokinase) and elastases,
respectively. Novel hydrazinopeptides acted as reversible
inhibitors of elastases. Coumarin derivatives inactivated very
efficiently chymotrypsin-like proteases (k(inact)/K(I) =
760,000 M−1. s−1). Inhibitors of HIV-1
protease acting either as inactivators or dimerization inhibitors
are under investigation. The inhibitors described above are useful
for elucidating the biological roles of the target enzymes and
constitute potential drugs.

CONCLUSION
Coumarins comprise a vast array of biologically active compounds
ubiquitous in plants, many of which have been used in traditional
medicine for thousands of years. Of the many actions of coumarins,
antioxidant, antiproliferative, and anti-HIV effects stand out. A
large number of structurally novel coumarin derivatives have
ultimately been reported to show substantial anti-HIV activity.
Given that certain substituents are known to be required or
increase their actions, the therapeutic potential of select
coumarins is fairly obvious. There is considerable evidence that
coumarins are important lead compounds for the development of
antiviral and/or virucidal drugs against HIV. To describe the
recent progress of the discovery, structure modification and
structure-activity relationship of the potent anti-HIV coumarin
derivatives is not an easy task. Nevertheless, it is useful to
make some correlations of the available data which would help the
researchers in discovering and developing of new active compounds
used in drug design. The scientific society can modify the
structures of many synthetic coumarin derivatives, which are lead
compounds for anti-HIV agents, in order to design new anti-AIDS
drugs. The molecular modeling methods may be a potential tool in
the development of new anti-HIV agents. Molecular modeling systems
provide powerful tools for building, visualizing, analyzing, and
storing models of complex molecular systems (ie, inhibitor binding
with receptor) that can help interpret structure-activity
relationships.

Figures and Tables
(+)-calanolide A.

(−)-calanolide A.

(−)-calanolide B.

(+)-12-oxocalanolide.

Suksdorfin.

Dicamphanoyl-khellactone.

Seselin.

Warfarin.

4-hydroxycoumarin.

Umbelliferone.

4,7-dihydroxy-3-[4-(2-methoxyphenyl)butyl]-2H-chromen-2-one.

A review of EC50 values and TIs (defined as LD50/IC50) for some coumarins.

Compound	EC50	TI	Reference	
	
Suksdorfin	1,3 μM	&gt; 40	[]	
3′,4′-di-O-(–)-camphanoyl-	4 × 10−4μM	136,719	[]	
(+)-cis-khellactone	
4-methyl-DCK lactam	0,00024 μM	119,333	[]	
5-methoxy-4-methyl DCK	7, 21 × 10−6μM	&gt; 2, 08 × 107	[]	
3-hydroxymethyl-4-methyl-DCK	0,004 μM in H9 cells	—	[]	
0,024 μM in PBMC	
3-methyl-, 4-methyl-, and 5-methyl-	5, 25 × 10−5μM	2, 15 × 106	[]	
3′,4′-di-O-(S)-camphanoyl-	
(3′R, 4′R)-(+)-cis-khellactone	
3-hydroxymethyl DCK	1, 87 × 10−4μM	1, 89 × 105	[]	
4-methyl-3′,4′-di-O-(–)-	0,00718 μM	&gt; 21000	[]	
camphanoyl-(+)-cis-khelthiolactone	
3-bromomethyl-4-methyl-DCK	0,00011 μM	189 600	[]	
*here IC50 but not EC50 is reported

**peripheral blood mononuclear cells

