1. INTRODUCTION
Copper is essential for life. It participates in many
biological events [–]. After iron, nature has chosen this metal ion as the
second element in participating in electron transfer chains [–]. Its thermodynamics and the kinetic easiness to
oxidize/reduce itself allow copper containing proteins to play a crucial role
as electron carriers in many vital processes. Copper proteins possess
well-designed active centers that finely tune metal ion redox properties [, ]. In turn, ligands, 
geometries, and surroundings of the copper ion are a direct consequence of
protein scaffold. Therefore, protein folding stabilizes one copper oxidation
state versus the other one, resulting in a metal ion biologically active.
Protein redox potentials are a consequence of the different affinities of the
polypeptide chain for the metal ion in both redox states [, ]. It follows the relevance
of studying the formation of the functional (folded) holoprotein, in both the
reduced and the oxidized states, from the structural and functional points of
view. Taking into account that the holoprotein can be formed as an unfolded
protein prior to copper uptake inside the cell [], it also follows the
relevance of the same kind of studies with the unfolded protein. This last
point is still a subject of debate [, ].

Blue copper proteins (BCPs) are relatively small
soluble copper proteins [, , ]. Their characteristic colour arises from a charge
transfer ligand-to-metal band between a cysteinyl sulphur atom and the
copper(II) ion [, ]. All BCPs present the so-called Greek key β-barrel as a
common feature ((a)). This is a rigid structure essentially kept by an extended network of hydrogen bonds and tertiary interactions between amino acid
side chains. This rigidity is transmitted to the metal ion and is essential for
the electron transfer. The copper ion is bound to a cysteine and two histidine
residues. A fourth ligand completes the copper coordination sphere for most
BCPs []. This fourth
ligand is usually a methionine ((b)). In all BCPs, the ligands Cys,
Met, and one of the histidines (hereafter called HisC, due to its proximity to
the C-terminal end) are close among them in the primary sequence, while the
other histidine, HisN, is far away from them in the amino acid chain ((b)).

 shows the redox potentials of some representative BCPs []. They are all encompassed between 120 and 620 mV,
while that of the pair Cu(II)/Cu(I) in aqueous solution is 150 mV, substantially 
lower than most of them. Thus, these proteins considerably increase the stability
of the reduced versus the oxidized state of the copper ion. Rusticyanin (Rc)
is, by far, the BCP with the highest capability in this respect. Rc is the most
abundant soluble protein of the Gram-negative 
bacterium Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans 
(Af) [–]. This organism lives in media that are very acidic and containing high concentrations of metals. Consequently, Rc is extraordinarily stable at low pH values.

According to the well-established “rack state”
[] or “entatic”
[] mechanism,
protein folding in BCPs imposes a coordination geometry atypical to the copper(II)
ion. Oxidized copper would then be destabilized, increasing the redox potential
of the metal ion. Nevertheless, the BCP azurin presents a redox potential in
the unfolded state higher than that of the folded protein 
(450 versus 276 mV) [, ]. So, apparently, the
unfolded protein stabilizes the reduced copper in a more efficient way, and protein folding seems not to be so crucial in keeping the redox potential of this BCP.

Here we present an exhaustive study of the unfolding
process of rusticyanin by means of guanidinium chloride (GdmCl). We have previously characterized the structural facets of the Rc unfolding process [, , ]. We expose now the parallel
changes produced in the Rc redox potential (i.e., the different affinity of the
metal ion in the two redox states). Rc retains copper(I) and copper(II) in the
unfolded form. Moreover, the redox potential of this pair for the unfolded Rc
is slightly higher at low pH values than the analogous pair for the folded
form. We demonstrate that the folding scaffold not only rises the protein
affinity for the metal ion in whatever oxidation state, but also, and mainly,
hampers drastic changes in its redox properties when pH is modified.

2. EXPERIMENTAL
2.1. Protein preparation
Recombinant rusticyanin was obtained from BL21(DE3) 
Escherichia coli containing the Rc plasmid 
[]. Bacteria cultures were grown in suitably modified M9 medium []. Samples for all techniques were prepared as previously 
described []. Conditions for all
experiments (unless otherwise indicated) were formiate (pH 2.5) or phosphate (pH 7.0) buffers 10 mM, 298 K.

2.2. Uv-visible and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopies
Uv-visible data were collected in a UV-visible spectrophotometer (Shimadzu UV-1603). Copper titrations were carried out starting from the apoprotein (2–5 ×10–5 M) and adding
the corresponding aliquots of copper solutions up to protein saturation.
Buffers used were formic acid 10 mM and Tris chloride 10 mM at pH 2.5 and 7.0,
respectively. For the folded protein, copper(II) titrations were performed by
following the absorption band at 592 nm (ε =  2240 M–1 cm–1) []. For the unfolded protein,
the formation of the complex was followed by the absorbance at 270 nm (ε = 2000 M–1 cm–1) due to the copper(II)-S γ Cys-band charge
transfer band, as we have previously described []. This absorbance is added
to the intrinsic absorption of rusticyanin at 280 nm.

The affinity constants of rusticyanin for the reduced
species were deduced applying the thermodynamic cycle shown in  (see ). Throughout all the text, values of equilibria 3 and 4 are always referred to the formation of the corresponding holoforms (affinity constants)
and, consequently, they are given in units of 
M−1. All experiments were performed
at 298 K.

In nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) measurements,
eight percent of D2O was added to the samples used (phosphate buffer 10 mM, pH 5.5, 298 K). All the experiments were performed as described in [].

2.3. Cyclic voltammetry
Voltammetric experiments were carried out with an
Autolab PGSTAT30 (Echo Chemie) in a low volume (∼3mL)
electrochemical cell with a three-electrode configuration []. The working electrode was either a gold disk
modified with 4-mercaptopyridine (measurements at pH 7.0), or a carbon paste
surface modified with 4, 4′-bipyridyl
(measurements at pH 2.5). Electrolyte solutions contained 0.1 M sodium phosphate
buffer, 0.1 mM rustcyanin, and, in the studies of the unfolded protein, 8 M
guanidinium chloride. All measurements were carried out at 25 ± 0.2°C. Given
electrode potential values are referred to the normal hydrogen electrode (NHE)
scale. Signals were reversible both for folded and unfolded forms. The
estimated error of potential measurement was lower than ± 15 mV in all cases
(the errors of each measurement are specifically given in Section 3).

3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
3.1. The unfolding process: structural and dynamic characterization
We have previously characterized the chemical
unfolding process of Rc by different biophysical techniques [, , ]. NMR permits to
obtain dynamical and structural information not provided by other spectroscopies.
In fact, diffraction crystallography cannot be applied to partially or totally
protein unfolded states and then NMR becomes the most powerful structural
technique.  shows the 1H −15N HSQC spectra obtained from three
solutions containing apoRc, Cu(I)Rc, and Cu(II)Rc after adding GdmCl until
complete protein unfolding. The three spectra are nearly superimposable,
indicating that, essentially, the same species are present in the three
samples. When comparing apoRc and Cu(I)Rc (), a set of few signals
(labelled as a − i) modify their
chemical shifts. These small local changes indicate that copper(I) remains
bound to the unfolded rusticyanin. In the 1H−15N HSQC spectrum of copper(II)
rusticyanin (black line, ), the intensities of the same signals (a−i) are markedly
diminished, or they are even lost, due to the paramagnetism of copper(II)
[]. Thus, the metal
ion is bound to the unfolded polypeptide chain at the same residues in whatever
oxidation state. Unfortunately, at this stage, the low resolution of the
spectra did not allow us to unequivocally identify the specific residues bound
to the copper ion. The redox activity of the unfolded rusticyanin (see below)
also demonstrates that copper is bound to this form of the protein.

 shows the 1H−15N HSQC of Cu(I)Rc at
different guanidinium chloride concentrations. In absence of the denaturant
agent, only the folded species (characterized by a large dispersion of the
signals) is present ((a)). On the contrary, only the unfolded species
are observed at GdmCl 6M ((c)). At GdmCl 2.1M ((b)), both
species are present in different ratios (ca.  3 : 2 for the folded
versus the unfolded species, resp.). At this step, the folded species
essentially has the same chemical shifts as the completely folded species,
indicating that the tridimensional protein structure is kept. We have determined
the mobility features of this species.  displays the comparison of the
relaxation data (R1, R2, and 1H−15N NOE) for the completely folded Rc and
the species present at a GdmCl 2.1M concentration. As observed, folded Rc at
these conditions is much more mobile than the completely folded species (i.e.,
in absence of GdmCl). In other words, GdmCl induces the opening of Rc
tridimensional structure.

Two main conclusions are immediately deduced from the
relaxation data. First, with the exception of the N -terminal
domain, the largest mobile region of Cu(I)Rc at GdmCl 2.1 M is that encompassing
residues 80–120 ((b)). These residues correspond to a long loop
present not only in Rc, but also in all BCPs. It is interesting to remark that
the fist copper ligand in the primary sequence, HisN (His85 in Rc, (a)), belongs to this loop []. The dynamic properties of this ligand itself
indicate that this histidine undergoes exchange processes. Deuterium exchange
experiments also indicate that amide protons of this domain are highly exposed
to the solvent in these conditions (data not shown), corroborating that this
loop is prone to open. By resuming, HisN is more labile when the protein starts
to unfold.

On the contrary, the C -terminal
domain (amino acids 120–155, encompassing the last two β -strands) is
one of the most rigid domains of the protein even when GdmCl is added ((b)). Moreover, most of the amide protons in these regions essentially remain
unchanged upon addition of GdmCl (data not shown). Both data indicate that the
extreme C -terminal is
one of the most protected domains of Rc, even in the presence of the denaturant
agent. The three last ligands of the metal ion (Cys138, His143, and Met148, see
(b)) belong to this domain [].

In summary, when the denaturant agent is added, the
interaction of the copper ion with HisN starts to weaken, while that kept with
the other three ligands is not essentially altered. This strongly suggests that
these three ligands remain bound to the metal ion when the protein unfolds,
while HisN is lost from the copper coordination.

This conclusion is totally supported by comparison
between the present results and previous data obtained from the BCP azurin. In
fact, the unfolding process of azurin has been amply studied [, , ]. It has been demonstrated
that HisN in azurin is detached from the copper ion when protein unfolds, while
the other three ligands remain bound to it. Moreover, the redox potential of
the unfolded rusticyanin (450 mV, see below) and azurin (456 mV, []) is the same within the
experimental error, indicating that copper possesses a similar coordination
.sphere in both unfolded proteins. We can conclude that the same process occurs
for these two similar BCPs. When Rc (or azurin) unfolds, copper ion remains
bound to the three ligands close in the primary sequence (Cys, HisC, and Met),
two of which belong to defined secondary structure elements of the protein (the
last two β -strands of the β -barrel, see
). On the contrary, the first ligand (HisN), far away in the primary
sequence and located in a flexible loop of the protein, detaches from copper
upon unfolding.  displays a schematic view of copper coordination in
unfolded Rc.

3.2. Functional aspects: redox potentials, and relative copper-protein affinities
Values of redox potentials of a holoprotein reflect
the different affinity of the apoprotein for the two redox states of a metal
ion. The corresponding thermodynamic cycle applied to CuRc is shown in . We have studied the equilibria of this cycle in both folded and unfolded
forms of Rc and at two different pH values (2.5 and 7.0).

Redox potentials were measured by means of cyclic
voltametry. The cyclic voltammograms are displayed in . At pH 2.5, the
redox potential of the pair Cu(II)Rc/Cu(I)Rc (equilibrium 1) was 620 ± 10 mV, the same
within the error previously reported []. The affinity constant of Cu(II) for apoRc (equilibrium
3) was measured by visible spectroscopy, following the formation of the blue
charge transfer band characteristic of Rc at 592 nm ((a)). A value of 3500 ± 150 M−1 was obtained. Variations of
the Gibbs free energy, ΔG0, for equilibria 1, and 3 of  result then to
be −14.3 ± 1.1 and −4.8 ± 0.4 kcal/mol,
respectively. By closing the cycle, a value of −15.6 ± 1.3 kcal/mol was
obtained for ΔG04
, that is, an affinity constant of 3.11 × 1011 M−1 for apoRc for Cu(I) (the
values of the equilibrium constants of reactions 3 and 4 are always referred to
the formation of the corresponding holoforms, that is, as affinity constants,
and, consequently, they are given in units of M−1).

Cycle of  can also be applied to the unfolded
Rc at the same pH value (2.5). The redox potential of the pair Cu(II)/Cu(I)Rc
for the unfolded protein has been measured, resulting to be 630 ± 10 mV (G03 = −14.7 kcal/mol). This
value is slightly higher than that of the folded protein, indicating that, in
these conditions, protein scaffold is less efficient in stabilizing copper(I)
than the unfolded protein. The affinity constant of copper(II) for the unfolded
form of Rc was determined by following the charge transfer band that appears at ca. 270 nm [].
The obtained value was 500 ± 60 M−1 for the corresponding affinity
constant ((b)). Then the affinity constant of unfolded Rc for the
reduced (copper(I)) species (equilibrium 4) can be deduced by closing the
cycle. The resultant value was 6.55 × 1010 M−1 .  shows the relative
stabilities of the different holo species.

An analogous study was carried out at pH 7.0. The
redox potential of the folded and unfolded forms of Rc are 550 (±5) and 450 (±15)mV,
respectively. These values substantially decrease with regard to those obtained
at pH 2.5 (see above). The redox potentials of folded Rc with the pH have been
previously reported []. They are coincident with those here obtained. On the
other hand, it is interesting to remark that redox potential of the unfolded
rusticyanin at neutral pH is essentially the same to that obtained for unfolded
azurin at the same experimental conditions (456 mV, []). This also corroborates
that both azurin and rusticyanin possess the same coordination sphere in their
unfolded forms.

Applying the same cycle (), the corresponding
affinity constants can be obtained. In , these values are displayed as
well. As observed, the decrease in the redox potential at neutral pH is an
immediate consequence of the high increment in the affinity of Rc for the
copper(II) ion, from −4.8(± 0.4) to −11.4(±1.0) kcal/mol and
from −3.7(± 0.5) to −9.4(+1.0) kcal/mol, for
the folded and unfolded forms, respectively. This decrease is the result of a
protonation/deprotonation residue close or, overall in the case of the unfolded
protein, bound to the copper ion. From the copper ligands, only a histidine
residue can undergo such a process in this pH range. Then the deprotonation of
a histidine (necessarily HisC in the unfolded protein) is responsible for the
decrease of the redox potential when the pH increases. In fact, a deprotonated
histidine (with a lower positive charge) would present a higher affinity for
the copper(II) ion, decreasing the redox potential.

It is interesting to remark that the folded species
shows a manifestly higher affinity for the copper ion (in whatever oxidation
state) than the unfolded form. This is more evident at pH 7.0 (see ).
Rusticyanin is synthesized at the cytoplasm from Af at pH 6.5 and then
secreted to the periplasm (pH ca. 3.0) []. Then, the present result
can be relevant in vivo since free copper is found in an extremely low
concentration inside the cell [].

Finally, it is also noteworthy that the decrease in
the redox potential is much more acute for the unfolded than for the folded
form. This is a result of the different variation in the affinity of the
reduced copper for the folded and unfolded Rc species (see ). While
Cu(I) substantially increases its affinity for folded Rc when the pH rises, its
affinity for unfolded Rc is not substantially altered. As a result, a drastic
variation of the redox potential with the pH is observed. Then protein scaffold
is acting as a “buffer” against a change in the charges of the media (i.e.,
aminoacids coordinated to the metal ion). When undergo
protonation/deprotonation processes, the two histidines bound to the copper ion
can interact with nearby residues of the active site, decreasing their net
charge. Consequently, modifications in copper charge due to pH variations are
also diminished.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been performed with financial aid of the Spanish Ministry of Education and Science (MEC, Projects nos. CTQ2005-00360, 
CTQ2005-01184, and CTQ2004-07716/BQU).

(a) Ribbon backbone of rusticyanin. The arrangement of
the β-strands
forming the β-barrel is
common to all BCPs. (Helixes shown in the figure are exclusive of Rc.) (b)
Active site of Rc (common to most of BCPs). Ligand numeration corresponds to Rc
aminoacid sequence. HisN (His85 in Rc) is far away in the primary sequence from
the other three coordinating residues (Cys, His143(C), and Met).

Thermodynamic cycle associated to the redox potential of CuRc. Redox potentials
(equations 1 and 2) are given versus the normal pair H+, H2 in standard
conditions. Copper(II) redox potential (equation 2) is 150 mV (ΔG0= −3.45 kcal/mol). All values were determined at 298  K.

1H−15N HSQC spectrum of unfolded rusticyanin: (a)
ApoRc (black) versus Cu(I)Rc (light grey); (b) Cu(II)Rc (black) versus Cu(I)Rc
(light grey). Guanidinium chloride concentration was 6.0 M, pH 5.5, 298 K.
Signala − i change their
position and/or disappear from one species to the other, that is, they are
close to the copper ion.

1H — 15N HSQC spectra of Cu(I)Rc at three different
concentrations of GdmCl: (a) 0 M (folded protein); (b) 2.1 M; and (c) 6.0 M
(completely unfolded protein). The rest of the conditions are the same as in
. The square in (c) corresponds to the expansion shown in light grey in
Figure 2(b).

Relaxation parameters (R1, R2, and 1H−15N NOE values) for (a) the completely
folded Cu(I)Rc []
and (b) Cu(I)Rc partially unfolded at 2.1 M GdmCl. At the top of the figure, the
secondary structural elements of Rc (β -strands: β1 − β11, α -helixes:α 1 and α 2, and the long
loop L8) are indicated. The elements cited in the text are in bold.

(a) Schematic view of the unfolded Rc. White stars
show the position of Cys138, His143(C), and Met 148 (metal ligands). The shaded
star indicates the position of His85(N) (not coordinated to the metal ion in
the unfolded state). (b) Schematic view of the active site in unfolded Rc.
Ligands that remain coordintated to the copper ion are indicated (white stars
in (a)).

Cyclic voltammograms, expressed as normalized current
density versus potential, of rusticyanin at (a) pH 7 and (b) pH 2.5. In both
diagrams, solid and dashed lines correspond to the folded and unfolded forms of
the protein, respectively. Conditions: Rc 0.1 M, phosphate buffer 0.1 M, and
298 K. For the unfolded forms, 8 M GdmCl was added.

UV-visible titrations of apoRc as a function of the
copper(II) concentration at pH 2.5 (298 K): (a) titration of the folded form
(visible region); (b) titration corresponding to the unfolded form (UV region).
The insets display the corresponding molar fractions (obtained from the
absorbance at 592 and 270 nm for the folded and unfolded forms, resp.) as a
function of the total copper(II) concentration.

Gibbs free
energies (in kcal/mol) corresponding to the formation of the complexes between
copper (in both redox states) and the apoprotein (in the folded and unfolded
forms), that is, corresponding to the equilibria (3) and (4) of . Light
and dark grey bars correspond to data at pH 2.5 and pH 7.0, respectively. For
the sake of clarity, the values of ΔG0 associated to each process are explicitly
indicated at the bottom of each bar.

Molecular weight and redox potentials of some
representative BCPs [].

Protein	Origin	Molecular Weight (kDa)	Redox Potential (mV)a	
Halocyanin	Natronobacterium pharaonis	15.5	120	
Stellacyanin	Rhus vernicifera	20.0	180	
Auracyanin	Chloroflexus aurantiacus	12.8	240	
Pseudoazurin	Achromobacter cycloclastes	13.4	260	
Amycianin	Thiobacillus versutus	13.8	261	
Azurin	Alcaligenes denitrificans	14.0	276	
Umecyanin	Armoracia laphatifolia	14.6	283	
Mavicyanin	Cucurbita pepo medullosa	18.0	285	
Plantacyanin	Cucumis sativus	10.1	317	
Plastocyanin	Populus nigra	10.5	370	
Rusticyanin	Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans	16.5	620	
aElectrode potential values are referred to 
the normal hydrogen electrode (NHE) scale.

