Introduction
The small diplopod family Glomeridellidae contains only two valid genera: Glomeridella Brölemann, 1913, with 7-8 species ranging from France in the west, through the eastern Alps, to the Balkans in the east, and Typhloglomeris Verhoeff, 1898, with about 15 species, a few of which are presumed troglobites, from the Balkans, Caucasus, northwestern Iran, and Asia Minor (, ). All Glomeridella and most Typhloglomeris species show distinctive colour patterns and are known to be epigean, but even among the few colourless representatives not all are troglobites. Thus, Typhloglomeris
fiumarana Verhoeff, 1899 has been regarded as possibly a geobiont (, ) because it was found in Croatia under stones, not in a cave. Similarly, Typhloglomeris
alba (Golovatch, 1989), in which only the ocelli are pigmented, whereas the rest of the body is pallid, is clearly epigean in northwestern Anatolia, Turkey (). Only the following fully unpigmented congeners have hitherto been referred to as troglobites (, , , ): Typhloglomeris
coeca Verhoeff, 1898, from Croatia and Montenegro, Typhloglomeris
varunae Makarov, Lučić, Tomić &amp; Karaman, 2003, from Macedonia, Typhloglomeris
seuti Makarov, Lučić, Tomić &amp; Karaman, 2003, from Montenegro, and Typhloglomeris
caucasica Golovatch, 1975, from near Sochi, western Caucasus, Russia. Furthermore, based on several morphological characters,  treat Typhloglomeris
caucasica as representing a species group of its own, the caucasica-group.

Taxon treatments

Typhloglomeris
caucasica

Golovatch, 1975

Materials
Type status:
Other material. Occurrence: recordedBy: Y. A. Chumachenko; individualCount: 1; sex: male; Taxon: kingdom: Animalia; phylum: Arthropoda; class: Diplopoda; order: Glomerida; family: Glomeridellidae; genus: Typhloglomeris; specificEpithet: caucasica; scientificNameAuthorship: Golovatch, 1975; Location: country: Russia; stateProvince: Sochi; verbatimLocality: Khosta, Caucasian Biosphere Nature Reserve; Event: samplingProtocol: pitfall trapping; eventDate: 14 July - 10 August 2006; habitat: Taxus &amp; Buxus relict forest; Record Level: institutionCode: Zoological Museum, Moscow State University, Russia

Discussion
The recent discovery of Typhloglomeris
caucasica in a pitfall trap in forest near Sochi indicates that the ecological status of this species is a troglophile, not a troglobite, when it occurs in caves in the same area. This record emphasizes the need to carefully collect near and outside caves when assessing the degree of cavernicoly of endogean animals.

Supplementary Material
XML Treatment for
Typhloglomeris
caucasica

Acknowledgements
This work has been supported in part through a grant released to the first author by the Russian Ministry of Education and Science.

