Introduction
Placement and composition
For decades, Travunioidea and Triaenonychoidea have been historically regarded as a single unit, called Travunioidea (e.g., ).  resurrected the name Insidiatores Loman 1900 to collectively refer to them, but subsequent authors failed to recover the monophyly of Insidiatores () and even of the component families ().

Both morphological () and molecular (,  ) phylogenetic analyses found that the Palearctic “Triaenonychidae” group with expanded Travuniidae and Travunioidea.   following results of  fused Briggsidae and Cladonychiidae with Travuniidae, which is also supported by  and . Herein we adopt this scheme of classification, and downgrade Briggsidae and Cladonychiidae to subfamilies of Travuniidae further.  found that the Triaenonychoidea
sensu stricto are sister to Grassatores, not to Travunioidea, in contrast with Giribet and collaborators, who found Triaenonychidae as sister group of Travunioidea.  and  found Synthetonychiidae as the sister group to all other Laniatores, but this placement is not incorporated here.

The North American monotypic Fumontana Shear, 1977 is probably closely related to the southern triaenonychids, although its exact positioning in the family is still unknown (, , ). It is currently the only representative of Triaenonychoidea from the Northern Hemisphere. The only analysis with broader representation of Insidiatores () found Fumontana closer to Triaenonyx Sørensen, 1886 than to Soerensenella Pocock, 1902, Triaenobunus Sørensen, 1886 and Adaeum Karsch, 1880 hence we consider this species here as a member of the subfamily Triaenonychinae.

According to the results of , Trojanella
serbica Karaman, 2005, currently considered a Travunioidea incertae sedis (), groups with the European travunioids, forming a clade with Travunia Absolon, 1920, and based on those results we newly assign this species to Travuniidae, subfamily Travuniinae. Mendes also included Picunchenops
spelaeus Maury, 1988 in her analyses. Originally this species was placed by  in Triaenonychinae, but not to any of its tribes (which roughly corresponds to subfamilies). In her results, Mendes found that this species is closer to Triaenonyx and other triaenonychines, thus we consider herein this species as a Triaenonychidae, subfamily Triaenonychinae (or in Maury's terms, Triaenonychini).

We provide additional nomenclatural considerations in the section "Additional information".

Recent works on these groups
In the last years, some work has been done with North American Travunioidea.  synonymized a species of Cladonychiidae, Phalangomma
virginicum Roewer, 1949 (originally assigned to Phalangodidae) with the travuniid Erebomaster
weyerensis (Packard, 1888).  redefined Paranonychinae based on characters of the penis and proposed the synonymy of Kaolinonychinae as its junior synonym.   and  have been studying the sclerobunines using modern integrative taxonomy to detect morphological homogeneous undescribed species, synonymies and the evolution of troglomorphisms (, ). Most recent published work on Triaenonychoidea is only cursory and on Afrotropical taxa (e.g., ), while Australasian and Neotropical members are neglected of late.

General description
Purpose
This project is a checklist of all valid specific and subspecific names (counted together) of the arachnid order Opiliones. The project intends to deliver 12 parts for ease of handling and preparing manuscripts. This is part 1 of 12 and covers the two basal superfamilies of Laniatores – the Travunioidea and the Triaenonychoidea.

Project description
Title
World Checklist of Opiliones species (Arachnida).

Personnel
Adriano B. Kury (Author, Content Provider, Metadata Provider), Amanda C. Mendes (Author, Content Provider), Daniele R. Souza (Author, Content Provider).

Design description
This project aims to produce a general checklist of all the valid species and subspecies (which are counted together) names of harvestmen of the world (Arachnida, order Opiliones). That is, only senior homonyms and synonyms are included. Alternative unused combinations are not listed.

Given the bulk of the project, it is divided in 12 parts as follows (numbers of subsequent parts are subject to change):

Part 1. Laniatores – Travunioidea and Triaenonychoidea (571 spp)

Part 2. Laniatores – Grassatores incertae sedis, Samooidea and Zalmoxoidea (564 spp)

Part 3. Laniatores – Assamioidea (529 spp)

Part 4. Laniatores – Epedanoidea and Phalangodoidea (539 spp)

Part 5. Laniatores – lesser Gonyleptoidea (506 spp)

Part 6. Laniatores – Cosmetidae (729 spp)

Part 7. Laniatores – Gonyleptidae (760 spp)

Part 8. Cyphophthalmi and Dyspnoi (552 spp)

Part 9. Eupnoi – incertae sedis, Caddidae,  Neopilionidae and Phalangiidae (476 spp)

Part 10. Eupnoi – lesser Sclerosomatidae (289 spp)

Part 11. Eupnoi – Gagrellinae: Old World (741 spp)

Part 12. Eupnoi – Gagrellinae: New World (313 spp)

Funding
This study has been supported by grants # 562149/2010-4 (PROTAX – OPESC project), # 504327/2012-7 (Sistema de Informações sobre a Biodiversidade Brasileira (SiB-Br) - Coleções Biológicas) and scholarship # 302116/2010-9 (PQ - AMMA project) from the Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq).

Geographic coverage
Description
General spatial coverage: worldwide. The Travunioidea and Triaenonychoidea together have 307 Australasian species, 159 Afrotropical, 40 Nearctic, 38 Palearctic, 26 Neotropical and only 1 Holarctic. As Travunioidea is a typical Laurasian group, while Triaenonychoidea represents a mostly temperate Gondwana fauna, there are no records of these groups from Indo-Malaya. Promecostethus
unifalculatus Enderlein, 1909 from Crozet Island, French Subantarctic Lands is here listed as Australasian.

Taxonomic coverage
Description
This part 1 of the checklist includes the Insidiatores Loman 1900, which represent the basal Laniatores. Superfamilies Travunioidea and Triaenonychoidea. The taxonomic outline for large groups of Opiliones used here follows .

The Travunioidea have 78 valid species/subspecies, including 39 Nearctic, 38 Palearctic and 1 Holarctic taxa. Three families and 5 subfamilies are recognized here: Nippononychidae, Paranonychidae (Paranonychinae Fig. , Sclerobuninae Fig. ), Travuniidae (Briggsinae Fig. , Cladonychiinae Fig. , Travuniinae Figs , ).

The Triaenonychoidea include 493 valid species/subspecies, with 307 Australasian, 159 Afrotropical, 26 Neotropical and 1 Nearctic taxa. A single species from the Crozet Islands is listed here as Australasian. Two families and 4 subfamilies are recognized here: Synthetonychiidae Fig. , Triaenonychidae (Adaeinae Fig. , Soerensenellinae Fig. , Triaenobuninae Fig. , Triaenonychinae Fig. ).

Taxa included
Rank	Scientific Name	Common Name	
kingdom	

Animalia

	animals	
phylum	

Arthropoda

	arthropods	
class	

Arachnida

	arachnids	
order	

Opiliones

	harvestmen	
suborder	

Laniatores

		
superfamily	

Travunioidea

		
family	

Nippononychidae

		
family	

Paranonychidae

		
subfamily	

Paranonychinae

		
subfamily	

Sclerobuninae

		
family	

Travuniidae

		
subfamily	

Briggsinae

		
subfamily	

Cladonychiinae

		
subfamily	

Travuniinae

		
superfamily	

Triaenonychoidea

		
family	

Triaenonychidae

		
subfamily	

Adaeinae

		
subfamily	

Soerensenellinae

		
subfamily	

Triaenobuninae

		
subfamily	

Triaenonychinae

		
family	

Synthetonychiidae

		
Temporal coverage
Data range: 1758 1 01 – 2014 8 31.

Usage rights
Use license
Open Data Commons Attribution License

Data resources
Data package title
World Checklist of Opiliones species (Arachnida). Part 1: Laniatores – Travunioidea and Triaenonychoidea

Resource link
GBIF: http://ipt.pensoft.net/ipt/resource.do?r=opiliones1

Number of data sets
1

Data set 1.
Data set name
World Checklist of Opiliones species (Arachnida). Part 1: Laniatores – Travunioidea and Triaenonychoidea

Data format
Darwin Core Archive format

Number of columns
20

Character set
UTF-8

Download URL

http://ipt.pensoft.net/ipt/archive.do?r=opiliones1


Data format version
1.0

Description
Column label	Column description	
taxonID	unique ID for each specie/subspecies	
suborder	Laniatores, the only suborder contained in Part 1 of this project	
superfamily	name of the superfamily	
family	name of the family	
subfamily	name of the subfamily	
genus	name of the genus	
specificEpithet	species name	
infraspecificEpithet	subspecies name	
scientificNameAuthorship	authority	
scientificName	combined full name with author and date	
taxonRank	whether it is a species or subspecies	
realm	one of the 6 Zoogeographical realms of the world, also Holarctic when combined occurence in Nearctic and Palearctic	
taxonomicStatus	if valid or invalid, and in this case only valid names are included	
rightsHolder	who detains the copyright	
type	it is a checklist	
basisOfRecord	it is a dataset	
order	not of much use in the context, but important for connection with other bases.	
kingdom	not of much use in the context, but important for connection with other bases.	
phylum	not of much use in the context, but important for connection with other bases.	
class	not of much use in the context, but important for connection with other bases.	
Additional information
Nomenclatural notes
Cladonychiinae originally in Triaenonychidae (), elevated to family by  by synonymizing Cladonychiinae with Erebomastridae). Both Cladonychiidae and Briggsidae were fused with Travuniidae by  (See Introduction: Placement and composition). In this paper we downgrade them to subfamilies of Travuniidae: Briggsinae, Cladonychiinae. New familial assignment.

 synonymized Nuncia
ovata Roewer, 1915 with Triaenonyx
cockayni Hogg, 1920, which he considered as a subspecies of Nuncia
coriacea (Pocock, 1902). But he overlooked the fact that ovata is senior to cockayni (although junior of coriacea) and inverted the precedence. This is corrected here, through the new combination Nuncia
coriacea
ovata Roewer, 1915. Author name should not be within parentheses because it is combined within the same genus, although in a different subspecific arrangement.

 changed the name of Neonuncia
enderbei (Hogg, 1909) to Neonuncia
enderbyi, better to conform with the spelling of the island name. But this is an incorrect subsequent spelling according to ICZN (32.5.1. – "Incorrect transliteration or latinization, or use of an inappropriate connecting vowel, are not to be considered inadvertent errors."), and the original spelling by Hogg should be conserved.

 detected that some genera published by  did not meet ICZN conditions for availability. However, this is not true for Peltonychia. Kury &amp; Mendes saw only the heading of this genus, treated by Roewer in page 55, but they overlooked one nomenclatural act buried amidst the introductory text of Roewer, much earlier in the text. On page 12, Roewer explicitly stated: “Damit ist dieses Tier in die Familie der Travuniidae zu verweisen, und wir bezeichnen es mit Peltonychia
leprieuri (LUCAS) als Genotypus dieser Gattung...” Therefore, Scotolemon
leprieurii Lucas, 1861 was explicitly designated as type of Peltonychia and this genus was already available in  being the valid senior synonym of Hadziana, contra
. As a result, all eight species combined under Hadziana are here combined under Peltonychia, restoring the combinations used by .

ICZN article 13.3 states “To be available, every new genus-group name published after 1930 (except those proposed for collective groups or ichnotaxa) must, in addition to satisfying the provisions of Article 13.1, be accompanied by the fixation of a type species in the original publication [Art. 68] or be expressly proposed as a new replacement name (nomen novum) [Art. 67.8].” Seven generic names published by Lawrence between 1931 and 1933 include more than one species and did not originally have designation of a genus type. All of them only became available in Staręga’s catalogue (), when he designated a type species for each. They are listed below:

Larifugella Staręga, 1992

Larifugella : 226 [unavailable name, ICZN 13.3].

Larifugella
: 279 [type species: Larifugella
afra Lawrence, 1933, by original designation].

Austromontia Staręga, 1992

Austromontia : 398 [unavailable name, ICZN 13.3].

Austromontia : 282 [type species: Austromontia
silvatica Lawrence, 1931, by original designation].

Biacumontia Staręga, 1992

Biacumontia : 403 [unavailable name, ICZN 13.3].

Biacumontia
: 283 [type species: Biacumontia
paucidens Lawrence, 1931, by original designation].

Graemontia Staręga, 1992

Graemontia : 413; : 101; [unavailable name, ICZN 13.3].

Graemontia : 285; : 45 (key to species; distribution map) [type species: Graemontia
bifidens Lawrence, 1931, by original designation].

Mensamontia Staręga, 1992

Mensamontia : 381 [unavailable name, ICZN 13.3].

Mensamontia : 286 [type species: Mensamontia
morulifera Lawrence, 1931, by original designation].

Monomontia Staręga, 1992

Monomontia : 416; : 222 [unavailable name, ICZN 13.3].

Monomontia : 287 [type species: Monomontia
atra Lawrence, 1931, by original designation].

Rostromontia Staręga, 1992

Rostromontia : 388; : 100  [unavailable name, ICZN 13.3].

Rostromontia : 288 [type species: Rostromontia
truncata Lawrence, 1931, by original designation].

Supplementary Material
Darwin Core Archive: World Checklist of Opiliones species (Arachnida). Part 1: Laniatores – Travunioidea and Triaenonychoidea

Data type: occurences

Brief description: This is a local copy of the same database uploaded to GBIF IPT, but frozen in time.

File: oo_31952.txt

AB Kury &amp; DR SouzaAcknowledgements
We are thankful to Andrew Bonnitcha, Kristi Ellingsen, Gonzalo Giribet, Charles Haddad, Marshal Hedin, Ivo Karaman and Axel Schonhöfer who graciously allowed the use of their pictures to illustrate this work. Our colleagues Ivo Karaman and Axel Schönhofer called our attention to the status of Peltonychia. We are also grateful to Marshal Hedin and Stuart Longhorn for their comments that helped to improve the manuscript.

Author contributions
ABK did all previous bibliographical survey, organized and uploaded the database, detected nomenclatural problems, offered solutions for them. He also conceived and drafted the manuscript.

ACM delineated and discussed the alternative classifications of the groups, checked for inconsistencies on placement of taxa, chose and obtained most illustrations.

DRS organized the final database, saw to its upload and migrated fields to the Darwin Core Archive format.

First and second authors regret not having read page 12 of Roewer's (1935) paper seven years ago.

Paranonychidae, Paranonychinae, Paranonychus
brunneus (Banks, 1893), adult, USA. Photo, ID and copyright © by Marshal Hedin. Image online at link.

Paranonychidae, Sclerobuninae, Sclerobunus
nondimorphicus Briggs, 1971, adult, USA, WA, Pacific Co.. Photo, ID and copyright © by Marshal Hedin. Image online at link.

Travuniidae, Briggsinae,  Briggsus sp., adult, collected by C. Richart &amp; S. Derkarabetian, 3 April, 2008, USA, OR, Clatsop Co. Photographed in lab. Photo,  ID and copyright © by Marshal Hedin. Image online at link.

Travuniidae, Cladonychiinae, Cryptomaster
leviathan Briggs, 1969, teneral adult, USA, OR, Curry Co., Lobster Creek Rd. Photo, ID and copyright © Axel Schönhofer. Image online at link.

Travuniidae, Travuniinae, Peltonychia
leprieuri (Lucas, 1861), adult, Italy Roncobello. Photo, ID and copyright © Axel Schönhofer. Image online at link.

Travuniidae
Travuniinae, Trojanella
serbica Karaman, 2005, adult from Serbia, image cropped. Photo, ID and copyright © Ivo Karaman.

Synthetonychiidae, Synthetonychia sp., adult, New Zealand. Photo, ID and copyright © Gonzalo Giribet. Image online at link.

Triaenonychidae, Adaeinae, Adaeulum sp. from South Africa, Hogsback. ID by Amanda C. Mendes. Photo and copyright © by Charles Haddad.

Triaenonychidae, Soerensenellinae, Soerensenella sp., adult, New Zealand, Waikato. Photo, ID and copyright © Gonzalo Giribet. Image online at link.

Triaenonychidae, Triaenobuninae, Triaenobunus sp. adult male, Australia, Tasmania, Hobart, Tolmans Hill. ID by Adriano B. Kury. Photo and copyright © by Kristi Ellingsen. Image online at link.

Triaenonychidae, Triaenonychinae, Ankylonuncia sp. adult, Australia, Tasmania, Verona Sands, found under rock in boggy ground. ID by Amanda C. Mendes. Photo copyright © by Andrew Bonnitcha. Image online at link.

