Introduction
In 1998 the European Commission published the European Community Biodiversity Strategy, providing a framework for development of Community policies and instruments in order to comply with the Convention on Biological Diversity. The Strategy recognises the current incomplete state of knowledge at all levels concerning biodiversity, which is a constraint on the successful implementation of the Convention. Fauna Europaea contributes to this Strategy by supporting one of the main themes: to identify and catalogue the components of European biodiversity into a database to serve as a basic tool for science and conservation policies.

With regard to biodiversity in Europe, science and policies depend on knowledge of its components. The assessment of biodiversity, monitoring changes, sustainable exploitation of biodiversity, and much legislative work depend upon a validated overview of taxonomic biodiversity, in which Fauna Europaea plays a major role, providing a web-based information infrastructure with an index of scientific names (including important synonyms) of all living European land and freshwater animals, their geographical distribution at country level and some additional optional information. In this sense the Fauna Europaea database provides a unique reference for many user-groups such as scientists, governments, industries, conservation communities and educational programs.

Fauna Europaea kicked-off in 2000 as an EC-FP5 four years project, delivering its first release in 2004 (). After fourtheen years of steady progress, in order to improve the dissemination of the Fauna Europaea results and to increase the acknowledgement of the Fauna Europaea contributors, novel e-Publishing tools have been applied to prepare data papers of all major taxonomic groups (see below).

Neuropterida is a fairly small group of Insecta, with about 6,500 described species, most of which live in arboreal habitats, but many species are eremial and several live in freshwater habitats. This paper includes a complete list of European taxa of the genus- and family-groups belonging to the Raphidioptera, Megaloptera, and Neuroptera. Recent research suggests that our current appreciation of species diversity of Neuropterida in Europe is still provisional: on the one hand, cryptic, unrecognised taxa are expected to emerge; on the other, the status of some taxa currently treated as one species deserves revisiting. Moreover, a small but constant number of species new for Europe is revealing, mostly on the geographic boundaries of European territory.

Barcoding of European Neuropterida has just begun, one may assume that forthcoming barcode data may lead to various changes of the status of some taxa.

Until the middle of the 20th century the Neuropterida fauna of Europe was rather insufficiently known, and of large regions even largely unknown. The publication of a book on the Neuropterida of Europe () led to a considerable intensification of Neuropterida research in Europe (and adjacent regions) and to a steadily increasing number of publications. Twenty years later another comprehensive review (an annotated catalogue of the Neuropterida of the Western Palaearctic) appeared (), which formed the basis for the first version of the catalogue of Neuropterida in Fauna Europaea.

Data-papers &amp; gap-analysis
In order to improve the dissemination and citation of Fauna Europaea and to increase the acknowledgement of the Fauna Europaea contributors, a special Biodiversity Data Journal Series has been compiled using novel e-Publishing tools, called Contributions on Fauna Europaea, preparing data-papers of all major Fauna Europaea taxonomic groups. This work was initiated during the ViBRANT project and is further supported by the recently started EU BON project. This paper holds the first publication of the Fauna Europaea Neuropterida data sector as a BDJ data paper.

In the EU BON project also further steps will be made on implementing Fauna Europaea as a basic tool and standard reference for biodiversity research in Europe and to evaluate the status of the European taxonomic expertise. The Fauna Europaea data-papers will contribute to a quality assessement on biodiversity data by providing estimates on gaps in taxonomic information and knowledge (see Table ).

General description
Purpose
Fauna Europaea is a database of the scientific names and distribution (at national or -in same cases- regional level) of all living, currently known multicellular European land and fresh-water animal species assembled by a large network of experts, using advanced electronic tools for data collations and validation routines. An extended description of the Fauna Europaea project backgrounds, progress and functioning can be found in . A basic outline is given in the sections below.

Neuropterida is one of the 58 Fauna Europaea major taxonomic groups, covering 397 species (Fig. ). The data were collated by a network of 3 specialists (Table ).

Additional information
The Neuropterida, with about 6,500 described (and possibly 10,000 existing) species, comprise three orders: Raphidioptera, with 241 described valid species in two families; Megaloptera, with about 380 species in two families; and Neuroptera, with at least 6,000 species in 17 families. The small number of species, the heterogeneity of the taxa, the vicariant distribution patterns, and the rich fossil records suggest that the ‘golden age’ of the Neuropterida passed long ago (). There are spectacular living fossils among the recent fauna, that is the whole order Raphidioptera, which seems to have hardly changed since the Mesozoic, and, for example, the enigmatic Nevrorthidae among Neuroptera (Fig. ). Most Neuropterida have terrestrial larvae, only the larvae of Megaloptera and the larvae of neuropteran Nevrorthidae and Sisyridae are truly aquatic ().﻿

The basic reference for Neuropterida in Fauna Europaea has been the catalogue of the Western Palaearctic at the beginning of the third millennium (). Several European faunal reviews have been published in the following years at a multi-national level (eg. ), as a national checklist (eg. ), or as a macro area contribution (eg. , ), but most of the faunal data published after the above catalogue are scattered in a huge amount of publications. More than 400 papers with faunal data regarding European Neuropterida published between 2000 and 2013 have been analyzed in order to extract potential new reports (Suppl. material ).

Project description
Title
This BDJ data paper includes the taxonomic indexing efforts in Fauna Europaea on European Neuropterida covering the first two versions of Fauna Europaea worked on between 2000 and 2013 (up to version 2.6).

Personnel
The taxonomic framework of Fauna Europaea includes partner institutes, providing taxonomic expertise and information, and expert networks taking care about data collation.

Every taxonomic group is covered by at least one Group Coordinator responsible for the supervision and integrated input of taxonomic and distributional data of a particular group. For Neuropterida the responsible Group Coordinators are Profs Ulrike &amp; Horst Aspöck and Dr Agostino Letardi.

The Fauna Europaea checklist would not have reached its current level of completion without the input from several groups of specialists. The formal responsibility of collating and delivering the data of relevant families has resided with the below appointed Taxonomic Specialists (see Table ), while Associate Specialists deserve credit for their important contributions at various levels, including particular geographic regions or (across) taxonomic groups (see Table 2). Details on the Fauna Europaea expert network for Neuropterida can be found here: http://www.faunaeur.org/experts.php?id=681.

Data management tasks are taken care about by the Fauna Europaea project bureau. During the project phase (until 2004) a network of principal partners took care about diverse management tasks: Zoological Museum Amsterdam (general management &amp; system development), Zoological Museum of Copenhagen (data collation), National Museum of Natural History in Paris (data validation) and Museum and Institute of Zoology in Warsaw (NAS extension). Since the formal project ending (2004-2013) all tasks are taken over by the Zoological Museum Amsterdam.

Study area description
The area study covers the European mainland (Western Palearctic), including the Macaronesian islands, excluding the Caucasus, Turkey, Arabian Peninsula and Northern Africa (see: Geographic coverage).

Design description
Standards. Group coordinators and taxonomic specialists have to deliver the (sub)species names according to strict standards. The names provided by FaEu are scientific names. The taxonomic scope includes issues like, (1) the definition of criteria used to identify the accepted species-group taxa, (2) the hierarchy (classification scheme) for the accommodation of the all accepted species and (3), relevant synonyms, and (4) the correct nomenclature. The Fauna Europaea 'Guidelines for Group Coordinators and Taxonomic Specialists', include the standards, protocols, scope, and limits that provide the instructions for all more then 400 specialists contributing to the project.

Data management. The data records could either be entered offline into a preformatted MS-Excel worksheet or directly into the Fauna Europaea transaction database using an online browser interface (see Fig. ). Since 2013 the data servers are hosted at the Museum für Naturkunde in Berlin.

Data set. The Fauna Europaea basic data set consists of: accepted (sub)species names (including authorship), synonyms names (including authorship), taxonomic hierarchy / classification, misapplied names (including misspellings and alternative taxonomic views), homonym annotations, expert details, European distribution (at country level), Global distribution (only for European species), taxonomic reference (optional), occurrence reference (optional).

Funding
Fauna Europaea was funded by the European Commission under the Fifth Framework Programme and contributed to the Support for Research Infrastructures work programme with Thematic Priority Biodiversity (EVR1-1999-20001) for a period of four years (1 March 2000 - 1 March 2004), including a short 'NAS extension', allowing EU candidate accession countries to participate. Follow-up support was given by the EC-FP5 EuroCAT project (EVR1-CT-2002-20011), by the EC-FP6 ENBI project (EVK2-CT-2002-20020), by the EC-FP6 EDIT project (GCE 018340), by the EC-FP7 PESI project (RI-223806) and by the EC-FP7 ViBRANT project (RI-261532). Continuing management and hosting of the Fauna Europaea services was supported by the University of Amsterdam (Zoological Museum Amsterdam) and SARA/Vancis. Recently the hosting of Fauna Europaea was taken over by the Museum für Naturkunde in Berlin, supported by the EC-FP7 EU BON project (grant agreement №308454).

Sampling methods
Study extent
See spatial coverage and geographic coverage descriptions.

Sampling description
Fauna Europaea data have been assembled by principal taxonomic specialists, based on their individual expertise, Which includes studies of the literature, collection research, and field observations. In total no less than 476 experts contributed taxonomic and/or faunistic information for Fauna Europaea. The vast majority of the experts are from Europe (including EU non-member states). As a unique feature, Fauna Europaea funds were set aside for paying/compensating for the work of taxonomic specialists and group coordinators (around five Euro per species).

To facilitate data transfer and data import, sophisticated on-line (web interfaces) and off-line (spreadsheets) data-entry routines were built, well integrated within an underlying central Fauna Europaea transaction database (see Fig. ). This included advanced batch data import routines and utilities to display and monitor the data processing within the system. In retrospect, it seems that the off-line submission of data was probably the best for bulk import during the project phase, while the on-line tool was preferred to enter modifications in later versions. This data management system works well until its replacement in 2013.

A first release of the Fauna Europaea index via the web-portal has been presented at 27th of September 2004, the most recent release (version 2.6.2) was launched at 29 August 2013. An overview of Fauna Europaea releases can be found at: http://www.faunaeur.org/about_fauna_versions.php.

Quality control
Fauna Europaea data are unique in a sense that they are fully expert based. Selecting leading experts for all groups included a principal assurance of the systematic reliability and consistency of the Fauna Europaea data.

Further all Fauna Europaea data sets have been intensively reviewed at regional and thematic validation meetings, at review sessions at taxonomic symposia (for some groups), by Fauna Europaea Focal Points (during the FaEu-NAS and PESI projects) and by various end-users sending annotations using the web form at the web-portal. Additional validation on gaps and correct spelling was effected by the validation office at the MNHN in Paris.

Checks on technical and logical correctness of the data were implemented in the data entry tools, including around "Taxonomic Integrity Rules". This validation tool proved to be of huge value for both the experts and project management, and significantly contribute(d) to preparation of a remarkably clean and consistent data set.

This thorough reviewing makes Fauna Europaea the most scrutinised data sets in its domain. In general, after the initial release, we expected to get taxonomic data for 99.3% of the known European fauna, the faunistic coverage being less complete, but nevertheless holding 90-95% of the total fauna (). Recognised gaps in Neuropterida includes species of several families, but the larger estimate gaps concern Chrysopidae and Coniopterygidae in particular. To our present knowledge, the taxonomic coverage for Neuropterida is near 100% (see Table ), but the distribution by country is still largely incomplete, especially for the Coniopterygidae.

To optimise the use and implementation of a uniform and correct nomenclature, a cross-referencing of the Fauna Europaea Neuropterida data-set with relevant nomenclators and taxonomic catalogues, including Neuropterida Species of the World, is recommended, following the global efforts on establishing a so-called 'Global Names Architecture' (e.g. ).

Step description
By evaluating team structure and life cycle procedures (data-entry, validation, updating, etc.), clear definitions of roles of users and user-groups, according to the taxonomic framework were established, including ownership and read and writes privileges, and their changes during the project life-cycle. In addition, guidelines on common data exchange formats and codes have been issued (see also the 'Guidelines' document).

Geographic coverage
Description
Species and subspecies distributions in Fauna Europaea are registered at least at country level, meaning political countries. For this purpose the FaEu geographical system basically follows the TDWG standards. The covered area includes the European mainland (Western Palearctic), plus the Macaronesian islands (excl. Cape Verde Islands), Cyprus, Franz Josef Land and Novaya Zemlya. Western Kazakhstan and the Caucasus are excluded (see Fig.  and coordinates below).

The focus is on species (or subspecies) of European multicellular animals of terrestrial and freshwater environments. Species in brackish waters, occupying the marine/freshwater or marine/terrestrial transition zones, are generally excluded.

The following additional species of Neuropterida have been recorded in Europe since the last version (August 2013):

Ascalaphidae:

Ascalaphus
festivus (Rambur, 1842) has been found in Sardinia ().

Deleproctophylla
bleusei Kimmins, 1949, occurs in the southeast of Spain, has been overlooked (misidentified) so far ().

Chrysopidae:

A new species of Chrysoperla Steimann, C.
heidarii, has been described by  from Eastern Aegean islands (Samos, Greece), Lesser Caucasus Mountains (Armenia and Georgia), and northern Iran. A previous synonym of Chrysopa
pallens Rambur, 1838, has been considered as valid species as Chrysopa
gibeauxi (Leraut, 1989) by  and has been found in France, Poland, Finland and North Korea.

Coniopterygidae:

A new species of the genus Helicoconis Enderlein, H.
tatrica (emendation of H.
tatricus; Helicoconis is feminine), has been described by Vidlička () from Slovakia.

Hemerobiidae:

Hemerobius
bolivari Banks, 1910, a species, widely distributed in South America, has been introduced to Portugal (). We do not think that it is really an "invasive" species, but an introduced Neozoon.

Mantispidae:

A new species of the genus Mantispa Illiger, M.
incorrupta, has been described by Monserrat () from Central Spain.

Myrmeleontidae:

A new species of Myrmeleon Linneaus, M.
tschernovi, has been described by Krivokhatsky () from Kaliningrad Province, Russia. Nedroledon
anatolicus was found in Macedonia ().

Nevrorthidae:

A new species of Nevrorthus Costa, N.
reconditus, has been described by Monserrat &amp; Gavira () from the south of Spain.

Sialidae:

Two of the species in Fauna Europaea – Sialis
gonzalezi Vshivkova, 1985, and S.
dorochovae Vshivkova, 1985, are confirmed or at least probably synonyms (, ); two other species – S.
abhasica Vshivkova, 1985, and S.
klingstedti Vshivkova, 1985, are possibly valid. Thus, Europe may harbour 8 species of the genus Sialis Latreille.

Coordinates
Mediterranean (N 35°) and Arctic Islands (N 82°) Latitude; Atlantic Ocean (Mid-Atlantic Ridge) (W 30°) and Urals (E 60°) Longitude.

Taxonomic coverage
Description
The Fauna Europaea database contains the scientific names of all living European land and freshwater animal species, including numerous infra-groups and synonyms. More details about the conceptual background of Fauna Europaea and standards followed are described in the project description papers.

This data paper covers the Neuropterida content of Fauna Europaea, including 15 families 397 species, 21 subspecies and 12 (sub)species synonyms (see Fig. ). Higher ranks are given below, the species list can be download (see: Data resources). Some additional notes on the Taxonomic coverage of Neuroptida in Fauna Europaea:

Ascalaphidae: Presently there are 18 species in the list plus 1 subspecies (Libelloides
rhomboideus
cretensis) in addition to the species and nominate subspecies. The current number of species of Ascalaphidae recorded from Europe is (at least) 20, since Ascalaphus
festivus and Deleproctophylla
bleusei are not yet in the database.

Chrysopidae: The current in FaEu is 73, however, there is 1 additional (nominal) subspecies: Pseudomallada
flavifrons
nigropunctata.

Raphidiidae: The number of species in the database is 74, in addition there are, however, 7 subspecies (in addition to the nominate subspecies). Of these 7 subspecies 2, namely Raphidia (Raphidia) ophiopsis
alcoholica and Raphidia (Raphidia) ophiopsis
mediterranea, have received the status of species. Thus, the current number of species of Raphidiidae recorded in Europe (in the sense of FaEu) is 76 plus 5 subspecies.

Sialidae: In the database there are 8 species, 2 of which are proven (Sialis
gonzalezi) or probable (Sialis
dorochovae) synonyms. However, 2 possibly valid species (Sialis
abchasica, Sialis
klingstedti) have been recorded from European parts of Russia. Thus, the real number of species of Sialidae occurring in Europe may be 8, hardly more.

Taxa included
Rank	Scientific Name	Common Name	
kingdom	

Animalia

		
subkingdom	

Eumetazoa

		
phylum	

Arthropoda

		
subphylum	

Hexapoda

		
class	

Insecta

		
order	

Megaloptera

		
family	

Sialidae

	alderfly	
genus	Sialis Latreille, 1802		
order	

Neuroptera

	lacewing	
suborder	

Hemerobiiformia

		
family	

Berothidae

	beaded lacewing	
subfamily	

Berothinae

		
genus	Isoscelipteron Costa, 1863		
family	

Chrysopidae

	green lacewing	
subfamily	

Chrysopinae

		
tribe	

Belonopterygini

		
genus	Italochrysa Principi, 1946		
tribe	

Chrysopini

		
genus	Atlantochrysa Hölzel, 1970		
genus	Brinckochrysa Tjeder, 1966		
genus	Chrysopa Leach in Brewster, 1815		
genus	Chrysoperla Steinmann, 1964		
genus	Chrysotropia Navás, 1911		
genus	Cunctochrysa Hölzel, 1970		
genus	Nineta Navás, 1912		
genus	Peyerimhoffina Lacroix, 1920		
genus	Pseudomallada Tsukaguchi, 1995		
genus	Rexa Navás, 1919		
genus	Suarius Navás, 1914		
subfamily	

Nothochrysinae

		
genus	Hypochrysa Hagen, 1866		
genus	Nothochrysa McLachlan, 1868		
family	

Coniopterygidae

	dustywing	
subfamily	

Aleuropteryginae

		
tribe	

Aleuropterygini

		
genus	Aleuropteryx Löw, 1885		
tribe	

Conwentziini

		
genus	Conwentzia Enderlein, 1905		
genus	Hemisemidalis Meinander, 1972		
genus	Semidalis Enderlein, 1905		
tribe	

Fontenelleini

		
genus	Helicoconis Enderlein, 1905		
genus	Vartiana H. Aspöck &amp; U. Aspöck, 1965		
subfamily	

Coniopteryginae

		
tribe	

Coniopterygini

		
genus	Coniopteryx Curtis, 1834		
genus	Nimboa Navás, 1915		
genus	Parasemidalis Enderlein, 1905		
family	

Dilaridae

	pleasing lacewing	
subfamily	

Dilarinae

		
genus	Dilar Rambur, 1838		
family	

Hemerobiidae

	brown lacewing	
subfamily	

Drepanepteryginae

		
genus	Drepanepteryx Leach in Brewster, 1815		
subfamily	

Hemerobiinae

		
genus	Hemerobius Linnaeus, 1758		
genus	Wesmaelius Krüger, 1922		
subfamily	

Megalominae

		
genus	Megalomus Rambur, 1842		
subfamily	

Microminae

		
genus	Micromus Rambur, 1842		
subfamily	

Notiobiellinae

		
genus	Psectra Hagen, 1866		
subfamily	

Sympherobiinae

		
genus	Sympherobius Banks, 1904		
family	

Mantispidae

	mantisfly	
subfamily	

Mantispinae

		
genus	Mantispa Illiger in Kugelann, 1798		
genus	Nampista Navás, 1914		
family	

Osmylidae

		
subfamily	

Osmylinae

		
genus	Osmylus Latreille, 1802		
family	

Sisyridae

	spongilla fly	
genus	Sisyra Burmeister, 1839		
suborder	

Myrmeleontiformia

		
family	

Ascalaphidae

	owlfly	
subfamily	

Ascalaphinae

		
genus	Bubopsis McLachlan, 1898		
genus	Deleproctophylla Lefèbvre, 1842		
genus	Libelloides Schäffer, 1763		
genus	Puer Lefèbvre, 1842		
family	

Myrmeleontidae

	antlion	
subfamily	

Myrmeleontinae

		
tribe	

Acanthaclisini

		
genus	Acanthaclisis Rambur, 1842		
genus	Synclisis Rambur, 1842		
tribe	

Dendroleontini

		
genus	Dendroleon Brauer, 1866		
genus	Tricholeon Esben-Petersen, 1925		
tribe	

Glenurini

		
genus	Gymnocnemia Schneider, 1845		
genus	Megistopus Rambur, 1842		
genus	Nedroledon Navás, 1914		
tribe	

Myrmecaelurini

		
genus	Aspoeckiana Hölzel, 1969		
genus	Lopezus Navás, 1913		
genus	Myrmecaelurus Costa, 1855		
genus	Nohoveus Navás, 1919		
genus	Solter Navás, 1912		
tribe	

Myrmeleontini

		
genus	Euroleon Esben-Petersen, 1918		
genus	Myrmeleon Linnaeus, 1767		
tribe	

Nemoleontini

		
genus	Creoleon Tillyard, 1918		
genus	Delfimeus Navás, 1912		
genus	Deutoleon Navás, 1927		
genus	Distoleon Banks, 1810		
genus	Macronemurus Costa, 1855		
genus	Nemoleon Navás, 1909		
genus	Neuroleon Navás, 1909		
genus	Noaleon Holzel 1972		
tribe	

Nesoleontini

		
genus	Cueta Navás, 1911		
subfamily	

Palparinae

		
tribe	

Palparini

		
genus	Palpares Rambur, 1842		
family	

Nemopteridae

	spoonwing	
subfamily	

Crocinae

		
genus	Josandreva Navás, 1906		
genus	Pterocroce Withycombe, 1923		
subfamily	

Nemopterinae

		
genus	Lertha Navás, 1910		
genus	Nemoptera Latreille, 1802		
suborder	Nevrorthiformia		
family	

Nevrorthidae

		
genus	Nevrorthus Costa, 1863		
order	

Raphidioptera

	snakefly	
family	

Inocelliidae

		
genus	Fibla Navás, 1915		
genus	Inocellia Schneider, 1843		
genus	Parainocellia H. Aspöck &amp; U. Aspöck, 1968		
family	

Raphidiidae

		
genus	Atlantoraphidia H. Aspöck &amp; U. Aspöck, 1968		
genus	Calabroraphidia Rausch, H. Aspöck &amp; U. Aspöck, 2004		
genus	Dichrostigma Navás, 1909		
genus	Harraphidia Steinmann, 1963		
genus	Hispanoraphidia H. Aspöck &amp; U. Aspöck, 1968		
genus	Italoraphidia H. Aspöck &amp; U. Aspöck, 1968		
genus	Ohmella H. Aspöck &amp; U. Aspöck, 1968		
genus	Ornatoraphidia H. Aspöck &amp; U. Aspöck, 1968		
genus	Parvoraphidia H. Aspöck &amp; U. Aspöck, 1968		
genus	Phaeostigma Navás, 1909		
genus	Puncha Navás, 1915		
genus	Raphidia Linnaeus, 1758		
genus	Subilla Navás, 1916		
genus	Tjederiraphidia H. Aspöck, U. Aspöck &amp; Rausch, 1985		
genus	Turcoraphidia H. Aspöck &amp; U. Aspöck, 1968		
genus	Ulrike H. Aspöck, 1968		
genus	Venustoraphidia H. Aspöck &amp; U. Aspöck, 1968		
genus	Xanthostigma Navás, 1909		
Temporal coverage
Living time period: Currently living.

Notes
Currently living multicellular, terrestrial and freshwater animals in stable populations, largely excluding (1) rare / irregular immigrants, (2) alien / invasive species, (3) accidental or deliberate releases of exotic (pet)species, (4) domesticated animals, (5) non-native species imported and released for bio-control or (6) non-native species largely confined to hothouses.

Usage rights
Use license
Open Data Commons Attribution License

IP rights notes
Fauna Europaea data are licensed under CC BY SA version 4.0. The property rights of experts over their data is covered under the SMEBD conditions. For more copyrights and citation details see: http://www.faunaeur.org/copyright.php

Data resources
Data package title
Fauna Europaea - Neuropterida

Resource link

http://www.faunaeur.org/Data_papers/FaEu_Neuropterida_2.6.2.zip


Alternative identifiers

http://www.faunaeur.org/experts.php?referrer=experts_search&amp;id=681


Number of data sets
2

Data set 1.
Data set name
Fauna Europaea - Neuropterida version 2.6.2 - species

Data format
CSV

Number of columns
25

Character set
UTF-8

Download URL

http://www.faunaeur.org/Data_papers/FaEu_Neuropterida_2.6.2.zip


Description
Column label	Column description	
datasetName	The name identifying the data set from which the record was derived (http://rs.tdwg.org/dwc/terms/datasetName).	
version	Release version of data set	
versionIssued	Issue data of data set version.	
rights	Information about rights held in and over the resource (http://purl.org/dc/terms/rights).	
rightsHolder	A person or organization owning or managing rights over the resource (http://purl.org/dc/terms/rightsHolder).	
accessRights	Information about who can access the resource or an indication of its security status (http://purl.org/dc/terms/accessRights).	
taxonID	An identifier for the set of taxon information (http://rs.tdwg.org/dwc/terms/taxonID)	
parentNameUsageID	An identifier for the name usage of the direct parent taxon (in a classification) of the most specific element of the scientificName (http://rs.tdwg.org/dwc/terms/parentNameUsageID).	
scientificName	The full scientific name, with authorship and date information if known (http://rs.tdwg.org/dwc/terms/scientificName).	
acceptedNameUsage	The full name, with authorship and date information if known, of the currently valid (zoological) taxon (http://rs.tdwg.org/dwc/terms/acceptedNameUsage).	
originalNameUsage	The original combination (genus and species group names), as firstly established under the rules of the associated nomenclaturalCode (http://rs.tdwg.org/dwc/terms/originalNameUsage).	
family	The full scientific name of the family in which the taxon is classified (http://rs.tdwg.org/dwc/terms/family).	
familyNameId	An identifier for the family name.	
genus	The full scientific name of the genus in which the taxon is classified (http://rs.tdwg.org/dwc/terms/genus).	
subgenus	The full scientific name of the subgenus in which the taxon is classified. Values include the genus to avoid homonym confusion (http://rs.tdwg.org/dwc/terms/subgenus).	
specificEpithet	The name of the first or species epithet of the scientificName (http://rs.tdwg.org/dwc/terms/specificEpithet).	
infraspecificEpithet	The name of the lowest or terminal infraspecific epithet of the scientificName, excluding any rank designation (http://rs.tdwg.org/dwc/terms/infraspecificEpithet).	
taxonRank	The taxonomic rank of the most specific name in the scientificName (http://rs.tdwg.org/dwc/terms/infraspecificEpithet).	
scientificNameAuthorship	The authorship information for the scientificName formatted according to the conventions of the applicable nomenclaturalCode (http://rs.tdwg.org/dwc/terms/scientificNameAuthorship).	
authorName	Author name information	
namePublishedInYear	The four-digit year in which the scientificName was published (http://rs.tdwg.org/dwc/terms/namePublishedInYear).	
Brackets	Annotation if authorship should be put between parentheses.	
nomenclaturalCode	The nomenclatural code under which the scientificName is constructed (http://rs.tdwg.org/dwc/terms/nomenclaturalCode).	
taxonomicStatus	The status of the use of the scientificName as a label for a taxon (http://rs.tdwg.org/dwc/terms/taxonomicStatus).	
resourceDescription	An account of the resource, including a data-paper DOI (http://purl.org/dc/terms/description)	
Data set 2.
Data set name
Fauna Europaea - Neuropterida version 2.6.2 - hierarchy

Data format
CSV

Number of columns
12

Character set
UTF-8

Download URL

http://www.faunaeur.org/Data_papers/FaEu_Neuropterida_2.6.2.zip


Description
Column label	Column description	
datasetName	The name identifying the data set from which the record was derived (http://rs.tdwg.org/dwc/terms/datasetName).	
version	Release version of data set.	
versionIssued	Issue data of data set version.	
rights	Information about rights held in and over the resource (http://purl.org/dc/terms/rights).	
rightsHolder	A person or organization owning or managing rights over the resource (http://purl.org/dc/terms/rightsHolder).	
accessRights	Information about who can access the resource or an indication of its security status (http://purl.org/dc/terms/accessRights).	
taxonName	The full scientific name of the higher-level taxon	
scientificNameAuthorship	The authorship information for the scientificName formatted according to the conventions of the applicable nomenclaturalCode (http://rs.tdwg.org/dwc/terms/scientificNameAuthorship).	
taxonRank	The taxonomic rank of the most specific name in the scientificName (http://rs.tdwg.org/dwc/terms/infraspecificEpithet).	
taxonID	An identifier for the set of taxon information (http://rs.tdwg.org/dwc/terms/taxonID)	
parentNameUsageID	An identifier for the name usage of the direct parent taxon (in a classification) of the most specific element of the scientificName (http://rs.tdwg.org/dwc/terms/parentNameUsageID).	
resourceDescription	An account of the resource, including a data-paper DOI (http://purl.org/dc/terms/description)	
Supplementary Material
references 2000-2013

Data type: bibliography

Brief description: data base of papers used to update Neuroperida in Fauna Europaea vers. 2.6.2

File: oo_32493.doc

Letardi A.Acknowledgements
Fauna Europaea was funded by the European Commission under the Fifth Framework Programme and contributed to the Support for Research Infrastructures work programme with Thematic Priority Biodiversity (EVR1-1999-20001) for a period of four years (1 March 2000 - 1 March 2004), including a short 'NAS extension', allowing EU candidate accession countries to participate. Follow-up support was given by the EC-FP5 EuroCAT project (EVR1-CT-2002-20011), by the EC-FP6 ENBI project (EVK2-CT-2002-20020), by the ECFP6 EDIT project (GCE 018340), by the EC-FP7 PESI project (RI-223806) and by the ECFP7 ViBRANT project (RI-261532). Continuing management and hosting of the FaunaEuropaea services was supported by the University of Amsterdam (Zoological Museum Amsterdam) and SARA/Vancis. Recently the hosting of Fauna Europaea is taken over by the Museum für Naturkunde in Berlin, supported by the EC-FP7 EU BON project (grant agreement №308454).

FaEu Neuropterida species per family. See Table 1 for family statistics.

Nevrorthus
apatelios H. Aspöck, U. Aspöck &amp; Hölzel 1977, photo Peter Sehnal in .

Fauna Europaea on-line (browser interfaces) and off-line (spreadsheets) data entry tools.

Fauna Europaea geographic coverage ('minimal Europe').

Taxonomic specialists per family in Neuropterida and their responsibilities. The actual numbers of databased species are given per family. For most families is also given an indication of the actual number of known/described species (showing a potential information gap) plus an estimate of the total number of existing species (i.e., described/known plus undescribed/undiscovered) for Europe.


TAXONOMY
	
EUROPE
	

FAMILY
	
SPECIALIST(S)
	
DATABASED SPECIES (Fauna Europaea)
	
TOTAL DESCRIBED SPECIES (information-gap)
	
TOTAL ESTIMATED SPECIES (knowledge-gap)
	


Ascalaphidae

	Profs Ulrike Aspöck &amp; Horst Aspöck and Dr Agostino Letardi	18	20	~20	


Berothidae

	Profs Ulrike Aspöck &amp; Horst Aspöck and Dr Agostino Letardi	2	2	~2	


Chrysopidae

	Profs Ulrike Aspöck &amp; Horst Aspöck and Dr Agostino Letardi	73	74	~80	


Coniopterygidae

	Profs Ulrike Aspöck &amp; Horst Aspöck and Dr Agostino Letardi	59	•	~75	


Dilaridae

	Profs Ulrike Aspöck &amp; Horst Aspöck and Dr Agostino Letardi	10	•	~12	


Hemerobiidae

	Profs Ulrike Aspöck &amp; Horst Aspöck and Dr Agostino Letardi	61	62	~70	


Inocelliidae

	Profs Ulrike Aspöck &amp; Horst Aspöck and Dr Agostino Letardi	7	7	~7	


Mantispidae

	Profs Ulrike Aspöck &amp; Horst Aspöck and Dr Agostino Letardi	5	6	~6	


Myrmeleontidae

	Profs Ulrike Aspöck &amp; Horst Aspöck and Dr Agostino Letardi	58	60	~70	


Nemopteridae

	Profs Ulrike Aspöck &amp; Horst Aspöck and Dr Agostino Letardi	7	7	~7	


Nevrorthidae

	Profs Ulrike Aspöck &amp; Horst Aspöck and Dr Agostino Letardi	3	4	•	


Osmylidae

	Profs Ulrike Aspöck &amp; Horst Aspöck and Dr Agostino Letardi	3	3	~3	


Raphidiidae

	Profs Ulrike Aspöck &amp; Horst Aspöck and Dr Agostino Letardi	74	76	~80	


Sialidae

	Profs Ulrike Aspöck &amp; Horst Aspöck and Dr Agostino Letardi	10	6	~8	


Sisyridae

	Profs Ulrike Aspöck &amp; Horst Aspöck and Dr Agostino Letardi	7	7	~7	
