INTRODUCTION
Mutations that increase expression of the WNK (with no lysine kinase)
1 gene result in an inherited hypertension syndrome termed Gordon's syndrome or
PHAII (pseudohypoaldosteronism type II) []. Missense
mutations in the related WNK4 gene that alter three close-by non-catalytic residues
(Glu562, Asp564 and Gln565) also cause Gordon's syndrome []. How these mutations influence WNK4 function is unknown. Most
evidence points towards the WNK1 and WNK4 isoforms exerting their effects on blood pressure through
their ability to phosphorylate and activate two highly related protein kinases termed SPAK
[SPS1-related proline/alanine-rich kinase; also known as STK39 (serine threonine kinase 39)] and
OSR1 (oxidative stress-responsive kinase 1) [–]. SPAK and OSR1 interact with MO25 (mouse protein-25) isoform
subunits to form a maximally activated complex []. The SPAK
and OSR1 kinases, once activated by WNK kinases, phosphorylate and activate members of the
electroneutral cation-coupled chloride co-transporters [SLC12 (solute carrier family 12)], including
the NCC (Na+/Cl− co-transporter) and NKCC
(Na+/K+/2Cl− co-transporter) 1 and 2, that are targets for
the blood-pressure-lowering thiazide diuretic and loop diuretic drugs [,–].

Consistent with the critical role that the WNK1/WNK4-mediated activation of SPAK and OSR1 plays
in regulating blood pressure, knockin mice expressing a form of SPAK in which the T-loop residue is
changed to alanine to prevent activation by WNK isoforms have low blood pressure and reduced
phosphorylation of NCC in the kidney [,]. SPAK-knockout mice display a similar phenotype []. Patients with Gordon's syndrome are also highly sensitive to
thiazide diuretics that target NCC, which is consistent with the WNK signalling pathway regulating
these critical ion co-transporters []. Previous work has
revealed that a significant number of Chinese patients with a low blood pressure condition, termed
Gittleman's syndrome, possess a mutation of the major SPAK/OSR1-activating phosphorylation site on
NCC (T60M) [,].

Exciting recent research has revealed about 50 unrelated familial patients with Gordon's
syndrome, possessing no mutations in the WNK isoforms, but instead displaying mutations in either
CUL3 (Cullin-3) [] or the BTB-domain containing protein
KLHL3 (Kelch-like 3) [,]. CUL3 is the core scaffolding subunit of a subtype of the largest class of E3 ubiquitin
ligases in the cell, called CRLs (Cullin–RING E3 ligases) [,]. Like all ubiquitin E3s, CRLs transfer
ubiquitin from an E2 enzyme on to other proteins, resulting in the formation of ubiquitin chains
linked to the substrate. These chains are recognized by a large protease called the 26S proteasome,
leading to the proteolytic degradation of the ubiquitin-tagged protein []. CUL3 assembles a multi-subunit modular CRL complex by associating with the
RING-finger protein RBX1 (RING-box 1, E3 ubiquitin protein ligase) and variable BTB-containing
substrate adaptor proteins [–]. The BTB domain directly interacts with the Cullin N-terminus, whereas the
substrate is recruited through other protein-interaction domains. The best-studied CUL3 substrate
adaptor is the Kelch-like protein KEAP1 (Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1), which regulates the
proteasomal degradation of the transcription factor NRF2 {NF-E2-related factor 2; also known as
NFE2L2 [nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2]} [,]. Structural studies have revealed that NRF2
directly interacts with the Kelch-like domain of KEAP1 to position NRF2 for efficient ubiquitylation
by the CUL3–RBX1 core ubiquitin ligase complex [,]. Many other BTB proteins that are known to
assemble with CUL3 also bind their substrates through a Kelch-like domain [–].

The identification of mutations in CUL3 and KLHL3 in Gordon's syndrome patients suggests
that these two proteins may also form a CRL E3 complex that regulates blood pressure. The KLHL3
mutations found are either recessive or dominant, whereas CUL3 mutations are dominant. Dominant
KLHL3 mutations are clustered in short segments within or nearby the ‘Kelch propeller
motif’ or the ‘BTB domain’ [,], suggesting that they interfere with either substrate binding
or CUL3 binding. All of the CUL3 mutations identified result in skipping of exon 9, producing an
in-frame fusion of exon 8 and 10 [,]. As with mutations in WNK1 and WNK4, patients with CUL3 and KLHL3 mutations can
be effectively treated with thiazide diuretics, which inhibit NCC in the distal nephron of the
kidney, suggesting that these mutations activate these ion co-transporters [,]. KLHL3 is reportedly also highly
expressed in the distal convoluted tubule [,].

As a first step in exploring the role that a CUL3–KLHL3 complex may play in regulating
blood pressure, we searched for KLHL3-interacting partners. Strikingly, we found that the wild-type
KLHL3 immunoprecipitated from mammalian cell extracts indeed interacts with CUL3 and also associates
with WNK isoforms, but not other components of the pathway we have tested. We observed that most of
the disease-causing mutations in KLHL3 or CUL3 investigated impaired binding to WNK1 or CUL3. We
demonstrate that a recombinant wild-type CUL3–KLHL3, but not a disease-causing
non-WNK1-binding CUL3–KLHL3 complex, robustly ubiquitylates WNK1
in vitro and that siRNA (small interfering RNA) knockdown of CUL3 increases
expression of WNK1. We also present evidence that the two missense mutations in WNK4 that cause
Gordon's syndrome abolish its ability to interact with KLHL3. The results of the present study
demonstrate that the CUL3–KLHL3 complex may regulate blood pressure by interacting with and
modulating the ubiquitylation of WNK isoforms. Our findings highlight that disease-causing mutations
that disrupt KLHL3–WNK interactions lead to Gordon's syndrome.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
The materials used were: sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega); protease-inhibitor cocktail tablets
(Roche); Protein G–Sepharose and all chromatography media (GE Healthcare Lifesciences);
anti-GFP (green fluorescent protein)–agarose beads (Chromotek); anti-FLAG M2–agarose,
Tween 20, Colloidal Blue staining kit, precast SDS polyacrylamide BisTris gels,
Lipofectamine™, blasticidin and hygromycin (Invitrogen); Nonidet P40 (Fluka); ampicillin
(Merck); bovine ubiquitin and imidazole (Sigma); and Insect XPRESS™ Media (Lonza).

Plasmids
The full-length coding region of human KLHL3 (GenBank® accession number NM_017415.2) was
amplified by RT (reverse transcription)–PCR from skeletal muscle total RNA (Agilent,
catalogue number 540029-41) using the primers 5′-GTAGATCTATGGAGGGTGAAAGTGTCAAGCTG-3′
(forward) and 5′-GTGCGGCCGCTCACAAGGACTTGTGAATCACGGC-3′ (reverse). For mammalian
expression this was shuttled into the BamHI/NotI sites of derivatives of pCMV5 and pcDNA5FRT/TO
(Invitrogen, catalogue number V6520-20) vectors containing various N-terminal tags. For baculovirus
expression the wild-type KLHL3 gene was re-amplified to add a blunt rTEV
(recombinant tobacco etch virus) protease cleavage site to the N-terminus (such that the fusion
reads ENLYFQM where M is the initiating methionine residue of KLHL3) and subcloned into the
BamHI/NotI sites of a pFBDual vector (Invitrogen, catalogue number 10712-024) modified to include an
N-terminal Dac tag []. The corresponding KLHL3 R528H mutant
construct was obtained by site-directed mutagenesis. Baculovirus co-expression of Dac–Cullin3
and untagged Rbx1 was achieved by subcloning both human Cullin3 (GenBank® accession number
NM_003590; synthesized and codon-optimized for insect cell expression by Genscript) and human Rbx1
[GenBank® accession number NM_014248; amplified from IMAGE 3138751 with the primers
5′-GTgctagcATGGCGGCAGCGATGGATGTGGAT-3′ (forward) and
5′-GTggtaccCTAGTGCCCATACTTTTGGAATTC-3′ (reverse), NheI and KpnI sites respectively in
lower case] into the BamHI/NotI and NheI/KpnI sites respectively of pFBDual-DAC(TEV). All IMAGE
clones (I.M.A.G.E. consortium LLNL) were obtained from Source BioScience U.K. RT–PCR was
performed using Superscript III One Step RT–PCR (Invitrogen, catalogue number 12574-018) and
PCRs using KOD Hot Start DNA polymerase (Novagen) according to the manufacturers' protocols.
Point mutations were introduced using the QuikChange method (Stratagene) in conjunction with KOD
polymerase. (RT–)PCR products were subcloned into StrataClone PCR vectors (Agilent, catalogue
numbers 240207 and 240205) according to the manufacturer's instructions and fully sequenced prior to
further subcloning. DNA sequencing was performed by The Sequencing Service, College of Life
Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, Scotland (http://www.dnaseq.co.uk).

General methods
Restriction enzyme digests, DNA ligations, other recombinant DNA procedures, electrophoresis,
cell culture, transfections, recombinant protein expression in Escherichia coli or
insect cells, and protein purification were performed using standard protocols. DNA constructs used
for transfection were purified from E. coli DH5α cells using Qiagen kits
according to the manufacturer's protocol. All DNA constructs were verified by DNA sequencing, which
was performed by The Sequencing Service using DYEnamic ET terminator chemistry (GE Healthcare) on
Applied Biosystems automated DNA sequencers. WNK1 activity was assessed after its
immunoprecipitation by measuring by measuring its ability to phosphorylate kinase-inactive SPAK as
described previously [].

Antibodies
The antibodies against the following antigens were raised in sheep and affinity-purified on the
appropriate antigen by the Division of Signal Transduction Therapy Unit at the University of Dundee:
NKCC1 total antibody (residues 1–288 of NKCC1, catalogue number S022D); WNK1 total antibody
(residues 2360–2382 of human WNK1, QNFNISNLQKSISNPPGSNLRTT, catalogue number S062B); WNK2
total antibody (residues 1605–1871 of human WNK2, catalogue number S140C); WNK3 total
antibody (residues 1142–1461 of human WNK3, catalogue number S156C); SPAK total antibody
(full-length human SPAK protein, catalogue number S637B); CUL3 total antibody (residues
554–768 of human CUL3, catalogue number S067D); KLHL3 total antibody (residues 287–587
of human KLHL3, catalogue number S377D); anti-GST (glutathione transferase) antibody (catalogue
number S902A); and anti-GFP antibody (catalogue number S268B). The anti-FLAG antibody (F1804) was
purchased from Sigma–Aldrich and the anti-GAPDH (glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase)
and anti-RBX antibodies were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology. Secondary antibodies coupled
to HRP (horseradish peroxidase) used for immunoblotting were obtained from Pierce.

Buffers
Buffer A contained 50 mM Tris/HCl (pH 7.5), 0.1 mM EGTA and 1 mM DTT
(dithiothreitol). The mammalian cells lysis buffer contained 50 mM Tris/HCl (pH 7.5),
0.15 M NaCl, 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM Na3VO4,
50 mM NaF, 5 mM Na4P2O7, 0.27 M sucrose, 1%
(w/v) Nonidet P40, 1 mM benzamidine, 0.1 mM PMSF, 0.1% 2-mercaptoethanol and Roche
protease inhibitor mix (1 tablet in 50 ml). TTBS (Tris-buffered saline containing Tween 20)
was Tris/HCl (pH 7.5), 0.15 M NaCl and 0.2% Tween 20. SDS sample buffer was
1×NuPAGE LDS (lithium dodecyl sulfate) sample buffer (Invitrogen), containing 1% (v/v)
2-mercaptoethanol. The bacterial lysis buffer contained 50 mM Tris/HCl (pH 7.5),
0.15 M NaCl, 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM EDTA, 0.27 M sucrose, 1% (w/v) Triton
X-100, 0.1 mM PMSF, 1 mM benzamidine, 0.5 mg/ml lysozome and 0.015 mg/ml
DNase containing 1% (v/v) 2-mercaptoethanol.

Immunoblotting
Samples were heated in sample buffer, subjected to SDS/PAGE and transferred on to nitrocellulose
membranes. Membranes were blocked for 30 min in TBST, containing 5% (w/v) dried skimmed milk.
The membranes were then incubated overnight at 4°C in TBST containing 5% (w/v) skimmed milk
with the indicated primary antibody. Sheep antibodies were used at a concentration of
1–2 μg/ml, whereas commercial antibodies were diluted 1000–2000-fold.
The incubation with phosphospecific sheep antibodies was performed with the addition of
10 μg/ml of the dephosphopeptide antigen used to raise the antibody. The blots were
then washed three times with TTBS and incubated for 1 h at room temperature (25°C)
with secondary HRP-conjugated antibodies diluted 2500-fold in 5% (w/v) skimmed milk in TTBS. After
repeating the washing steps, the signal was detected with the enhanced chemiluminescence reagent.
Immunoblots were developed using a film automatic processor (SRX-101, Konica Minolta Medical), and
films were scanned with at 300-d.p.i. resolution on a scanner (V700 PHOTO, Epson).

Cell culture, stable cell line generation and transfections
HEK (human embryonic kidney)-293 cells were cultured on 10-cm-diameter dishes in DMEM (Dulbecco's
modified Eagle's medium) supplemented with 10% (v/v) foetal bovine serum, 2 mM
L-glutamine, 100 units/ml penicillin and 0.1 mg/ml streptomycin. HEK-293
T-REx cell lines stably overexpressing wild-type and mutant forms of KLHL3 and CUL3 were generated
using the Flp-in T-REx system from Invitrogen according to the manufacturer's instructions. These
human FLAG-tagged wild-type KLHL3, mutant-KLHL3 stable cell lines and the GFP-tagged wild-type KLHL3
were selected/cultured in the presence of 15 μg/ml blasticidin and 0.1 mg/ml
hygromycin. Protein expression was induced for 24 h with 1 μg/ml tetracycline.
The HEK-293 cells stably expressing NCC were described previously []. FLAG-tagged wild-type WNK4 or mutant WNK4 (E562K, Q565E) stably expressed in HEK-293
cell lines using the Flp-in T-REx system were used which have generated in our Unit previously
(results not shown). For transient transfection of WNK1 fragments, or other proteins,
Lipofectamine™ was used following the manufacturer's instructions. Cells were lysed in
0.3 ml of ice-cold lysis buffer per dish. Lysates were clarified by centrifugation at
26000 g for 15 min and the supernatants were frozen in
aliquots (100 μl) in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C. Protein
concentrations were determined using the Bradford method. Insect Sf21 cells employed for protein
expression were grown in Insect XPRESS™ Media at a density of between 1×106
and 6×106 cells/ml.

Immunoprecipitations
For immunoprecipitation of FLAG, GST and GFP, FLAG M2–agarose beads,
glutathione–Sepharose and anti-GFP–agarose beads were used. For other
immunoprecipitations, antibodies were covalently coupled to Protein G–Sepharose employing
dimethyl pimelimidate [], at a ratio of 1 μg
of antibody per 1 μl of beads. For immunoprecipitations, 0.2–5 mg of
lysates was incubated with 5–10 μl of antibody–resin conjugate for
1 h at 4°C with gentle agitation, and the immunoprecipitates were washed three times
with 1 ml of lysis buffer containing 0.5 M NaCl and then twice with 1 ml of
Buffer A. Proteins were eluted by resuspending the washed immunoprecipitates in
20–100 μl of 1× SDS sample buffer.

MS analysis
Lysates (5 mg) derived from HEK-293 cells stably expressing wild-type or mutant FLAG
epitope-tagged KLHL3 were subjected to immunoprecipitation with anti-FLAG antibody covalently
conjugated to agarose (5 μl). Immunoprecipitates were washed three times with lysis
buffer containing 0.5 M NaCl followed by two washes with Buffer A. Proteins were eluted from
FLAG beads by resuspending the immunoprecipitates in SDS sample buffer (30 μl). The
immunoprecipitates were subjected to electrophoresis on a precast 4–12% gradient gel
(Invitrogen) and the protein bands were visualized following Colloidal Blue staining. Proteins in
the selected gel bands were reduced and alkylated by the addition of 10 mM DTT, followed by
50 mM iodoacetamide. Identification of proteins was performed by in-gel digestion of the
proteins with 5 μg/ml trypsin and subsequent analysis of the tryptic peptides by LC
(liquid chromatography)–MS/MS (tandem MS) on a Thermo LTQ-Orbitrap system coupled to a Thermo
Easy nano-LC instrument. Excalibur RAW files were converted into peak lists by Raw2msm [] and then analysed by Mascot (http://www.matrixscience.com), utilizing the
SwissProt human database. Two missed cleavages were permitted, the significance threshold was
P&lt; 0.05.

Proteins for in vitro ubiquitylation reaction
The His–UBE2D3 (ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme E2 D3) E2 conjugating enzyme was expressed in
BL21 E. coli cells. His–UBE1 (ubiquitin-like modifier-activating enzyme 1;
E1) was expressed in insect Sf21 cells. Wild-type KLHL3 or mutant KLHL3[R528H] were expressed with
Dac tags [] in insect Sf21 cells. The CUL3-3–Rbx1
complex was expressed from a multibac vector [] with a Dac
tag on CUL3 and no tag on Rbx1 in Sf21 cells. The tags on UBE2D3, Cul3–Rbx1 as well as
wild-type or mutant KLHL3[R528H] proteins were cleaved employing the rTEV protease and the
non-tagged proteins were repurified.

In vitro ubiquitylation assays
For each ubiquitylation assay reaction 5 μl of immunoprecipitated endogenous
WNK1–protein G–Sepharose conjugate derived from 0.5 mg of HEK-293 cells was
used. All other protein components were expressed and purified as described above. The
ubiquitylation assays contained 20 mM Hepes/HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl,
2 mM DTT, 10% (w/v) glycerol, 8 μM Cul3–Rbx1 complex, 7 μM
KLHL3 (wild-type or R528H mutant), 7 μM E1 (UBE1), 60 μM E2 (UBE2D3) and
3000 μM ubiquitin. Reactions were initiated by adding ATP and MgCl2 to a
final concentration of 1 mM and samples were incubated with agitation at 30°C for
30 min. Ubiquitylation reactions were terminated by the addition of SDS sample buffer and
samples were analysed either after separation on a 6% Tris/glycine SDS polyacrylamide gel followed
by immunoblot analysis with anti-WNK1 total antibody, or following separation on a precast
4–12% gradient SDS polyacrylamide BisTris gel and immunoblot analysis with anti-KLHL3 total
antibody.

Knockdown experiment of CUL3 in HeLa cells
An siRNA (ON-TARGETplus) oligonucleotide towards human CUL3 was purchased from Thermo Scientific.
The target sequence probes used were: Probe 1, 5′-GCACAUGAAGACUAUAGUA-3′ (catalogue
number J-010224-09) and Probe 2, 5′-GAAGGAAUGUUUAGGGAUA-3′ (catalogue number
J-010224-06). For the scrambled control, negative control siRNA was purchased from Ambion.
Transfections were performed as per the manufacturer's instructions, using a concentration of
50 nM of siRNA. At 5 days post-transfection, cells were lysed with lysis buffer, then
centrifuged at 26000 g for 15 min and the supernatants
were frozen in aliquots (100 μl) in liquid nitrogen followed by immunoblotting. Quantitative
immunoblotting was performed using the LI-COR Odyssey imaging system.

qRT-PCR (real-time quantitative RT–PCR)
After transfections of CUL3 siRNA oligonucleotides for 5 days in 12-well plates, RNA was
isolated using a RNeasy micro kit (Qiagen, catalogue number 74004) and cDNA was made from
1 μg of the isolated RNA using the I-Script cDNA kit (Bio-Rad Laboratories) according
to the manufacturer's protocol. qRT-PCR was performed on triplicate samples (10 μl)
according to the manufacturer's protocol in a CFX 384 Real time System qRT-PCR machine (Bio-Rad
Laboratories). All primers were designed using PerlPrimer and purchased from Invitrogen. The primers
used were: WNK1 forward, 5′-CAGCAGGTAGAACAATCCAG-3′ and reverse,
5′-CGTCCCATCAGATAACACAG-3′; GAPDH forward, 5′-TGCACCACCAACTGCTTAGC-3′
and reverse, 5′-GGCATGGACTGTGGTCATGAG-3′; and RPL13A (ribosomal protein L13a) forward,
5′-CCTGGAGGAGAAGAGGAAAGAGA-3′ and reverse,
5′-TTGAGGACCTCTGTGTATTTGTCAA-3′. The primer efficiency was determined and taken into
account when evaluating the qRT-PCR data. The data were normalized to the geometrical mean of
housekeeping genes, GAPDH and RPL13A. The Pfaffl method was used to analyse the qRT-PCR data in
Microsoft Excel and GraphPad Prism.

RESULTS
Evidence that overexpressed KLHL3 associates with WNK1
To gain insight into how KLHL3 functions, we generated HEK-293 cells that stably overexpress low
levels of wild-type KLHL3 or two reported dominant KLHL3 mutations observed in Gordon's syndrome
patients (S432N and R528H). We immunoprecipitated KLHL3 and analysed the immunoprecipitations after
electrophoresis in a polyacrylamide gel stained with Colloidal Blue (A) and Orbitrap MS (B). This revealed
that in the wild-type and mutant purifications, KLHL3 was indeed the dominant Colloidal
Blue-staining band migrating at the expected molecular mass of ~65 kDa, and as
expected was not observed in the control immunoprecipitate from HEK-293 cells not overexpressing
KLHL3 (A). Consistent with CUL3 representing a key
binding partner for KLHL3 we observed that CUL3 migrating with a molecular mass of
~90 kDa was co-immunoprecipitated with the wild-type KLHL3 (A and B), indicating that KLHL3 can
form a CRL complex with CUL3. Interestingly, the two selected mutant KLHL3[S432N] and KLHL3[R528H]
proteins associated with CUL3 at a similar extent as the wild-type KLHL3, indicating that these
mutations do not disrupt the ability to interact with CUL3. The most striking feature of the KLHL3
immunoprecipitations was an intensely Colloidal Blue-staining band migrating at
&gt;250 kDa observed with wild-type KLHL3 whose intensity was markedly reduced in the
KLHL3[R528H] mutant and was absent from the KLHL3[S432N] mutant (A). This band was also absent from the control immunoprecipitate undertaken from
non-KLHL3-overexpressing HEK-293 cells. Strikingly, MS analysis revealed that this region of the gel
derived from wild-type KLHL3 immunoprecipitate contained significant levels of WNK1, WNK2 and WNK3
isoforms emphasized by very high Mascot scores (WNK1-3228, WNK2-842 and WNK3-463; B). WNK1 was also detected within the KLHL3[R528H] mutant
immunoprecipitate, but consistent with the reduced intensity of the &gt;250 kDa band
observed by Colloidal Blue staining, the Mascot scores for WNK1 was markedly lower (455) than
observed for the wild-type KLHL3 (B). No WNK2 or WNK3
was detected associated with the KLHL3[R528H] mutant (B). In accordance with the absence of the &gt;250 kDa Colloidal Blue-staining
band in the KLHL3[S432N] immunoprecipitate, no detectable presence of any WNK isoforms was revealed
by MS analysis of these samples.

Evidence that KLHL3 associates with WNK isoforms and interaction is impaired by Gordon's
syndrome mutations
(A) Control HEK-293 cells or HEK-293 cells stably expressing the indicated forms of
wild-type and mutant KLHL3 possessing an N-terminal FLAG tag were cultured in the presence of
1 μg/ml tetracyclin to induce expression of KLHL3. Cells were lysed and KLHL3 was
immunoprecipitated from 5 mg of extract using an anti-FLAG antibody covalently coupled to
agarose. The immunoprecipitates were electrophoresed on an SDS polyacrylamide gel and protein bands
visualized following Colloidal Blue staining. Molecular masses are shown on the left-hand side in
kDa. (B) The labelled Colloidal Blue-stained bands identified in (A) were
excised from the gel and digested with trypsin, and their identities were determined by tryptic
peptide mass-spectral fingerprinting, as described in the Materials and methods section. Accession
numbers are for the NCBI Entrez Protein database. Mascot protein scores &gt;67 were considered
significant (P&lt;0.05). N.P.D., no significant protein identity determined.
MW, molecular mass. (C) As (A), except that the immunoprecipitates were
immunoblotted with the indicated antibodies. Similar results were obtained in three separate
experiments. Molecular masses are shown on the left-hand side in kDa.

Immunoblot analysis of KLHL3 immunoprecipitates confirmed observations made by MS that
association of the KLHL3[R528H] mutant with WNK1 were significantly reduced compared with the
wild-type KLHL3 and that KLHL3[S432N] failed to interact with WNK1 (C). This analysis also established that mutant KLHL3[S432N] or KLHL3[R528H]
interacted similarly with CUL3 to the wild-type KLHL3.

Dominant disease-causing KLHL3 mutations interfere with either association to WNK1 or
CUL3
We next selected 15 different dominant Gordon's syndrome mutations located in different domains
of KLHL3 (A), generated in stable HEK-293 cell lines,
and tested how each mutation affects association with CUL3 and WNK1 (B). This strikingly revealed that 13 of the mutations tested either inhibited
binding to CUL3 or WNK1, whereas two mutations (A340V and A494T) did not markedly impair association
with either protein (B). Mutations that impaired
binding to CUL3 were located within either the BTB domain (A77E, M78V and E85A) or the adjacent BACK
domain (C164F) found in other BTB-containing Kelch proteins which have also been implicated in
mediating binding to CUL3 []. Interestingly, mutations
within the BACK domain of another Kelch-like adaptor protein, KLHL7 (Kelch-like family member 7),
cause autosomal-dominant retinitis pigmentosa []. Mutations
that inhibited KLHL3 binding to WNK1 (Q309R, R384Q, L387P, S410L, S432N, R528H, R528C and N529K)
were located in the predicted substrate-binding KLHL repeat motifs.

Evidence that dominant KLHL3 Gordon's syndrome mutations impair binding to CUL3 or
WNK
(A) Schematic representation of the domain structure of KLHL3 with the positions of
the dominant Gordon's syndrome-associated mutations illustrated. The amino acid boundaries of the
domains are indicated. PHAII, pseudohypoaldosteronism type II. (B) Control
HEK-293 cells or HEK-293 cells stably expressing the indicated forms of wild-type (WT) and mutant
KLHL3 possessing an N-terminal FLAG tag were cultured in the presence of 1 μg/ml
tetracyclin to induce expression of KLHL3. Cells were lysed and KLHL3 was immunoprecipitated (IP)
from 0.2 mg of extract using an anti-FLAG antibody covalently coupled to agarose. The
immunoprecipitates (upper panel) as well as whole-cell extracts (lysates, lower panel) were
immunoblotted with the indicated antibodies. All gels were immunoblotted in parallel. The broken
lines indicate that samples were run on separate gels. Similar results were obtained in three
separate experiments. Molecular masses are shown on the left-hand side in kDa.

Evidence that KLHL3 interacts with WNK1, but not with SPAK/OSR1 or NKCC1/NCC
To investigate whether KLHL3 might interact with other known components of the WNK signalling
pathway we transiently overexpressed wild-type KLHL3 or three disease-causing KLHL3 mutants in
HEK-293 cells. We then immunoprecipitated WNK pathway components (WNK1, SPAK/OSR1, NKCC1 and NCC)
and tested whether we could detect association of these with KLHL3 by immunoblot analysis. This
confirmed association between WNK1 and the wild-type KLHL3, but no detectable co-immunoprecipitation
was observed with SPAK/OSR1 (immunoprecipitated with an antibody that recognizes both kinases) or
NKCC1 (A). We also overexpressed KLHL3 in
HEK-293 cells that stably overexpress the NCC ion co-transporter and failed to detect association of
KLHL3 with NCC under conditions where interaction with WNK1 was readily observed (B).

Evidence that wild-type or dominant KLHL3 Gordon's syndrome mutations do not interact with
SPAK/OSR1 or NKCC1 or NCC
(A) HEK-293 stably expressing the wild-type (WT) and indicated mutants of KLHL3
possessing an N-terminal FLAG epitope were cultured in the presence of 1 μg/ml
tetracyclin to induce the expression of KLHL3. WNK1, SPAK/OSR1 and NKCC1 were separately
immunoprecipitated (IP) from 0.2 mg of extract using previously characterized
immunoprecipitating antibodies covalently coupled to Protein G–Sepharose. Whole-cell extracts
(lysates, upper panel) as well as immunoprecipitates (lower panels) were immunoblotted with the
indicated antibodies. (B) N-terminal GFP-tagged wild-type KLHL3 was transiently
transfected into previously characterized HEK-293 cells stably expressing FLAG–NCC []. At 24 h post-transfection cells were cultured for a
further 24 h with 1 μg/ml tetracyclin to induce NCC expression before lysis.
GFP–KLHL3 was immunoprecipitated from 0.2 mg of extract employing anti-GFP antibody
covalently coupled to agarose. Whole-cell extracts (lysates, left-hand panel) as well as
immunoprecipitates (right-hand panel) were immunoblotted with the indicated antibodies. Similar
results were obtained in three separate experiments. Molecular masses are shown on the left-hand
side in kDa.

WNK1 is a substrate for the CUL3–KLHL3 complex
in vitro
To investigate the ability of the CUL3–KLHL3 complex to directly ubiquitylate WNK1, we
expressed and purified the CUL3–RBX1 core complex, as well as the wild-type KLHL3 and mutant
KLHL3[R528H] (A). Wild-type KLHL3 and CUL3–RBX1
were mixed and used in in vitro ubiquitylation reactions that also contained
ubiquitin E1, ubiquitin E2 (UBE2D3) and ubiquitin. When immunoprecipitated WNK1 was added to the
reaction in the presence of magnesium and ATP, we observed extensive ubiquitylation of WNK1 (B). Moreover, we observed no WNK1 ubiquitylation when the
WNK1-binding mutant form of KLHL3[R528H] was used in the assay in place of the wild-type protein
(C). WNK1 ubiquitylation was not detected in the
absence of either CUL3 or KLHL3 or any of the proteins that function upstream of the CRL in the
ubiquitylation cascade (E1, E2D and ubiquitin; B).
These results demonstrate that CUL3–KLHL3 forms an active CRL complex that through the
binding of KLHL3 to WNK1 can target WNK1 for ubiquitylation. We furthermore detected
CUL3–RBX1-dependent ubiquitylation of KLHL3 in the in vitro
ubiquitylation reactions, indicating that CUL3–RBX1 could directly regulate KLHL3 (D). This reaction was more pronounced in the presence of WNK1
and further work is required to establish whether binding of WNK1 to the KLHL3—CUL3 complex
stimulated CRL complex activity resulting in increased ubiquitylation of KLHL3.

WNK1 is a substrate for the CUL3–KLHL3 complex
in vitro
(A) Coomassie Blue-stained SDS/PAGE gel of Cul3–Rbx1–KLHL3 wild-type,
Cul3–Rbx1–KHLH3[R528H], ubiquitin (Ub), E1 and UBE2D3 used in the
in vitro reactions in which all tags used for affinity purification of each
protein has been removed with the rTEV protease and the proteins were re-purified. The line
indicates that samples were run on separate gels. (B) Immunoprecipitated WNK1 from
HEK-293 cells was incubated at 30°C for 30 min with purified E1, E2 (UBE2D3),
Cullin3–Rbx1, KLHL3 and ubiquitin in the presence of 1 mM ATP. Control reactions were
performed whereby one of the proteins required for ubiquitylation was omitted from the reaction as
indicated. Samples were subjected to immunoblot (IB) analysis with an anti-WNK1 antibody.
(C) Ubiquitylation reactions were performed as in (B) and the ability of
KLHL3 R528H to promote WNK1 ubiquitylation was analysed. Independent duplicate reactions are shown.
(D) Ubiquitylation reactions were performed as in (B) and the
ubiquitylation of KLHL3 was analysed by immunoblot detection with anti-KLHL3 total antibody. Similar
results were obtained in three separate experiments. Molecular masses are shown on the left-hand
side in kDa.

siRNA knockdown of CUL3 increases WNK1 expression and activity in HeLa cells
We next attempted to reduce CUL3 or KLHL3 expression employing an siRNA approach to establish the
impact this had on WNK1 expression and activity. Although we were unable to reduce KLHL3 expression
robustly with any siRNA tested (results not shown), we could reduce CUL3 expression over 4-fold by
employing two different siRNA oligonucleotides purchased from Thermo Scientific ( and Supplementary Figure S1 at http://www.biochemj.org/bj/451/bj4510111add.htm). Consistent with the CUL3-dependent
ubiquitylation of KLHL3 we observed in vitro (D), the knockdown of CUL3 was associated with a marked increase in the expression
levels of KLHL3 (C and Supplementary Figure S1),
further suggesting that CUL3 directly regulates the levels of KLHL3. We also observed that CUL3
knockdown consistently increased endogenous WNK1 expression approximately 2-fold (A and D, and
Supplementary Figure S1). Using qRT-PCR we studied the relative mRNA expression of WNK1 and found
that CUL3 knockdown did not impact on WNK1 mRNA levels (E), suggesting that the up-regulation of WNK1 under these conditions is not
triggered by an elevation of gene expression. We also measured endogenous WNK1 activity after its
immunoprecipitation assessed by its ability to phosphorylate kinase-inactive SPAK expressed in
E. coli cells []. This revealed that CUL3
knockdown was accompanied by a ~1.6-fold increase in WNK1 activity (F).

Evidence that CUL3 knockdown enhances WNK1 expression and activity
HeLa cells were treated with 50 nM scrambled siRNA or CUL3-directed siRNA (probe 1) for
5 days and cells were lysed. (A) Cell lysates were subjected to immunoblotting
with the indicated antibody. Each lane contains cell extract from an independent dish of cells from
an identical experiment undertaken on the same day. (B–D)
Quantitative LI-COR immunoblot analysis was undertaken and the ratio of CUL3 (B), KLHL3
(C) and WNK1 (D) to GAPDH was quantified. Results are means±S.E.M.
for two independent samples each assayed in duplicates with P values indicated.
(E) Total mRNA was isolated from cells and WNK1 mRNA levels were
determined by qRT-PCR. Data were normalized to internal GAPDH and RPL13A controls as described in
the Materials and methods section. Results are means±S.D. for three independent samples each
assayed in triplicate. (F) WNK1 was immunoprecipitated from 0.25 mg of cell
extracts and assayed for its ability to phosphorylate kinase inactive SPAK expressed in E.
coli cells. The top panel displays activity in 32P radioactivity incorporated
into kinase inactive SPAK (c.p.m.) as mean±S.D. The lower panels display representative
immunoblot analysis of WNK1, autorad of phosphorylated SPAK and Coomassie Blue staining of
kinase-inactive SPAK employed in the kinase assay. Similar findings were made with an independent
CUL3-directed siRNA (probe 2); see data in Supplementary Figure S1 (at http://www.biochemj.org/bj/451/bj4510111add.htm). Cont, control; KD, kinase-dead; IP,
immunoprecipitation; RNAi, RNA interference.

Evidence that Gordon's syndrome WNK4 missense mutations inhibit binding to KLHL3
To map the region on WNK1 that mediates binding to KLHL3 we expressed various fragments of
GST-tagged WNK1 in HEK-293 cells stably expressing the wild-type GFP–KLHL3 and tested
which WNK1 fragments interacted. This revealed that the smallest fragment of WNK1 tested that
interacted with KLHL3 encompassed residues 479–667, a non-catalytic region immediately
C-terminal to the kinase domain that possesses a coiled-coiled domain (A and B). Interestingly, the equivalent
region in WNK4 encompasses residues Glu562, Asp564 and Gln565
located near to the coiled-coiled domain that are mutated in patients with Gordon's hypertension
syndrome (A). Transgenic and knockin mice expressing
these WNK4 mutations display marked hypertension [,], but the molecular mechanism by which these mutations disrupt
WNK4 function to cause hypertension is unclear. To test whether WNK4 missense mutations affected
interactions with KLHL3 we expressed GFP–KLHL3 in HEK-293 cells stably expressing
similar levels of the wild-type WNK4 as well as two reported disease-causing mutations (WNK4[E562K]
and WNK4[Q565E]). Immunoprecipitation studies confirmed that the wild-type WNK4 robustly bound to
KLHL3, but interaction with either disease-causing WNK4 mutant tested was strikingly impaired (C). As the residues whose mutation in WNK4 causes Gordon's
syndrome are conserved in WNK1 (A), we generated the
equivalent disease-causing mutations in the KLHL3-binding WNK1[479–667] fragment and observed
that all mutations (E633K, D635A and Q636E) ablated binding to KLHL3 (D).

Evidence that WNK4 Gordon's syndrome missense mutations impair binding to KLHL3
(A) Schematic diagram of WNK1 and WNK4 isoform structures and the relative placement
of their kinase domain, auto-inhibitory domain (AID) and predicted coiled-coiled domains (CCD). Also
highlighted in WNK4 is the location of the E562K and Q565E mutations found in Gordon's hypertension
patients. CCD, coiled-coil; CT, C-terminal. (B) HEK-293 cells stably expressing
GFP–KLHL3 were transfected with GST-tagged constructs encoding the indicated fragments of
WNK1. At 24 h post-transfection the cells were treated with tetracyclin
(1 μg/ml) to induce KLHL3 expression and cells were lysed after a further 24 h.
Cell extracts were subjected to affinity purification on glutathione–Sepharose and
immunoblotted with an anti-GFP antibody (top panel) or subjected to affinity purification with an
anti-GFP antibody and immunoblotted with an anti-GST antibody (upper middle panel). Cell lysates
were also subjected to immunoblot analysis with an anti-GST (lower middle panel) or anti-GFP (bottom
panel) antibody. Similar results were obtained in two independent experiments. (C)
HEK-293 cells stably expressing the wild-type (WT) and indicated mutant forms of FLAG-tagged WNK4
were transfected with wild-type GFP-tagged KLHL3. At 24 h post-transfection cells were
treated with tetracyclin (1 μg/ml) to induce WNK4 expression and cells were lysed
after 24 h. Extracts were subjected to affinity purification using an anti-FLAG antibody (to
immunoprecipitate WNK4; upper panels) or an anti-GFP antibody (to immunoprecipitate KLHL3; lower
panels) and immunoblotted with the indicated antibodies. Cell lysates were also immunoblotted with
the indicated antibodies. Similar results were obtained in two independent experiments.
(D) As (B) except that the wild-type and indicated mutants of the
WNK1[479–667] fragment were analysed for their ability to interact with KLHL3. IP,
immunoprecipitation. Molecular masses are shown on the left-hand side of the gels in kDa.

DISCUSSION
The identification of mutations in CUL3 and KLHL3 that cause Gordon's syndrome suggested that
this CUL3–KLHL3 ubiquitin ligase complex plays a critical role in regulating blood pressure.
We have now demonstrated that CUL3 and KLHL3 indeed interact to form a functional CRL E3 complex.
Importantly, we found that in addition to CUL3, KLHL3 also interacts with the WNK1 and WNK4 isoforms
mutated in patients with Gordon's syndrome []. Moreover, many
of the identified Gordon's disease-causing mutations (Q309R, R384Q, L387P, S410L, S432N, R528H,
R528C and N529K) located within the putative substrate-binding Kelch-like domain of KLHL3 markedly
interfere with binding to WNK1. These data, together with the fact that we were able to successfully
reconstitute the KLHL3-dependent ubiquitylation of WNK1 in vitro and to
increase WNK1 expression following CUL3 knockdown in vivo, suggest that WNK1
is a substrate for CUL3–KLHL3 and therefore defines a new substrate adaptor/substrate module
for a CUL3 complex implicated in human disease.

The results of the present study furthermore suggest that WNK1 is the critical substrate for
CUL3–KLHL3 in the control of blood pressure, as 8 out of 15 mutations that we have
tested disrupt the interaction of KLHL3 with WNK1. We have identified five other mutations that
interfere with binding to CUL3, which would also be expected to impair the ability of CUL3 to
regulate ubiquitylation of WNK1. As expected from these results, a disease-causing mutation of KLHL3
that no longer binds to WNK1 also abolished WNK1 ubiquitylation in vitro. As
hyperactive WNK1 is known to cause high blood pressure, the control of WNK1 protein abundance by
ubiquitylation through CUL3–KLHL3 may be critical for blood pressure control. Thus we propose
that a lack, or reduction, of WNK1 ubiquitylation in patients carrying mutations in CUL3 or KLHL3
may result in the observed hypertensive phenotype. Further work is required to investigate this
hypothesis.

Given that it is the role of the WNK signalling pathway in the key DCT (distal convoluted tubule)
and TAL (thick ascending limb) of the kidney that controls blood pressure, it is possible that
regulation of WNK isoforms by the CUL3–KLHL3 occurs mainly in these highly specialized cells
geared to regulate salt reabsorption. This might explain why siRNA knockdown of CUL3 in HeLa
cells only moderately affected WNK1 expression and possibly more striking effects would be observed
in DCT or TAL cells expressing mutated CUL3–KLHL3. Relating to this point it is worth
stressing that even a moderate, less than 2-fold, effect on WNK isoform expression in DCT/TAL kidney
cells could still have a sufficient impact on WNK signalling to stimulate NCC/NKCC2 inappropriately
and induce hypertension. It is likely that further analysis of this system will need to await the
availability of Gordon's disease knockin mutations in KLHL3 whose design will be facilitated by the
results of the present study. It will be fascinating to establish how mutations that impair KLHL3
binding to WNK isoforms have an impact on WNK isoform protein expression, ubiquitylation and
activity and how this affects NCC/NKCC2 ion co-transporters and hence blood pressure.

How missense mutation of three close-by non-catalytic residues on WNK4, namely Glu562,
Asp564 and Gln565, which lie immediately after the coiled-coiled domain, lead
to Gordon's hypertension syndrome was unknown. In previous work we have not observed any significant
change in the intrinsic kinase specific activity of any of the WNK4 disease-causing mutants that we
have tested (D. R. Alessi, unpublished work). The finding that disease-causing mutations of
Glu562 and Gln565 markedly impair binding to KLHL3 is very exciting, as this
suggests that loss of interaction with CUL3–KLHL3 may lie at the heart of understanding how
missense mutations in these residues of WNK4 results in Gordon's syndrome. Interestingly, we have
also found that mutating the highly conserved equivalent residues in WNK1 ablates interaction with
KLHL3 (D). These findings suggest that this region of
WNK1 and WNK4 may operate as the major recognition site for the KLHL3–CUL3 complex. In future
work it will be important to study levels of WNK4 protein in patient-derived cells (DCT and TAL if
feasible) with missense WNK4 mutations of Glu562, Asp564 and
Gln565. It would be critical to establish whether WNK4 mutations enhanced the levels of
WNK4 protein and how mutations affected the ubiquitylation of WNK4. Although WNK4[D564A] knockin
mice that develop hypertension have been described, unfortunately no direct quantitative comparison
of the relative expression levels of the wild-type and mutant WNK4 in any tissue was
presented in that study []. This will be essential to
undertake in future work.

It will also be interesting to investigate whether WNK1 ubiquitylation by CUL3–KLHL3
occurs constitutively or in response to a given environmental stimulus. It will be interesting to
establish whether binding of KLHL3–CUL3 to the WNK isoforms activates E3 ligase activity. An
important question to answer is also whether ubiquitylation of WNK targets it for proteasomal
degradation and/or is involved in regulating WNK activity in some other manner. The fact that levels
of WNK1 increase after CUL3 knockdown suggests that proteasomal degradation may play some part in
WNK regulation. The transcription factor NRF2, the best-studied substrate of CUL3, is constitutively
ubiquitylated and targeted for degradation by the ubiquitin–proteasome system and is only
stabilized when the cell encounters oxidative stress, which allows it to initiate its protective
transcriptional programme []. One could similarly imagine a
situation where WNK1 is a constitutive substrate of CUL3–KLHL3 and ubiquitylation is only
halted upon a hypotonic stimulus to allow salt retention in the kidney. However, the degradation of
other CRL substrates is not constitutive, but rather initiated by a signal, which usually results in
post-translational modification of the substrate allowing it to be recognized by the CRL []. Which of these two possibilities pertains to WNK1
ubiquitylation remains to be determined.

Online data
Supplementary data
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTION
Akihito Ohta undertook the experiments shown in –,  and
, and Supplementary Figure S1; Frances-Rose Schumacher
undertook the experiments in ; Clare Johnson and Axel
Knebel prepared and purified proteins used in the in vitro ubiquitylation
assays; Thomas Macartney and Nicola Wood undertook cloning, Youcef Mehellou undertook critical pilot
experiments; and Akihito Ohta, Frances-Rose Schumacher, Axel Knebel, Dario Alessi and Thimo Kurz
planned the experiments, analysed the experimental data and wrote the paper.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Gopal Sapkota, Lina Herhaus and Mazin Al-Salihi for assistance with qRT-PCR analysis. We
also thank the excellent technical support of the MRC-Protein Phosphorylation Unit (PPU) mass
spectrometry team (co-ordinated by David Campbell), DNA Sequencing Service (co-ordinated by Nicholas
Helps), the MRC-PPU tissue culture team (co-ordinated by Kirsten McLeod), the Division of Signal
Transduction Therapy (DSTT) protein and antibody purification teams (co-ordinated by Hilary
McLauchlan and James Hastie).

FUNDING
This work was supported by the Medical Research Council,
the Scottish Funding Council, the pharmaceutical companies
supporting the Division of Signal Transduction Therapy Unit (AstraZeneca,
Boehringer-Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, Merck KGaA, Janssen Pharmaceutica and Pfizer)
and by an ERC (European Research Council) Starting
Investigator Grant [grant number 243019 (to T.K.)].

