INTRODUCTION
The circadian clock generates oscillations in many physiological processes and behaviour, and
allows the organism to adapt to daily changes in environment. At the molecular level, the cellular
rhythms are generated and maintained through regulation of clock proteins such as BMAL1, CLOCK,
PERIOD and Cryptochrome (CRY) [,]. Circadian clock gene expression is altered in human diseases, and mutations in
clock genes disrupt diverse physiological processes such as response to genotoxic stress, cell-cycle
regulation, metabolism and aging [,].

The nuclear receptor Rev-erbα (NR1D1; nuclear receptor subfamily 1, group D, member 1) has
been shown to be a major regulator of circadian rhythm, metabolism and adipogenesis. Rev-erbα
represses transcription of several genes that control these cellular processes. For instance,
Rev-erbα is part of the core clock machinery and represses the expression of the
transcription factors BMAL1 and CLOCK [,], key components of the mammalian circadian clock, and regulators of the circadian
genes PERIOD and CRY []. In
addition, Rev-erbα shows a strong circadian pattern in many tissues, and is important in the
circadian control of metabolism []. The metabolic functions
of Rev-erbα involve regulation of glucose homoeostasis and energy metabolism through
repression of gene expression of several gluconeogenic genes such as PEPCK
(phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase), G6Pase (glucose 6-phosphatase) [] and the metabolic transcriptional regulator
PGC-1α (peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor γ co-activator
1α; also known as PPARGC1A) [].
During adipogenesis Rev-erbα has a complex role, since its expression is induced during the
early stages of adipogenesis, but its degradation is required for continued adipocyte
differentiation [].

Rev-erbα transcription repressor activity depends on a complex formed by the NCoR (nuclear
receptor co-repressor) and HDAC (histone deacetylase) 3 [].
NCoR binds to and activates the deacetylase activity of HDAC3 [], and both proteins are required for the binding of Rev-erbα to target promoters
and its repression activity [,]. Rev-erbα was considered an orphan receptor for many years, until the prosthetic
group haem was identified as the ligand for Rev-erbα [,]. Binding of haem to Rev-erbα stimulates
its interaction with the NCoR–HDAC3 complex and enhances repression of Rev-erbα target
genes [,]. It has
also been shown that Rev-erbα tightly regulates the synthesis of its own ligand []. Cellular haem levels are controlled by the enzyme Alas1
(δ-aminolaevulinic acid synthase 1), the rate-limiting enzyme in haem synthesis. Binding of
haem to Rev-erbα represses PGC-1α, a potent inducer of Alas1 and haem synthesis,
whereas depletion of Rev-erbα derepress PGC-1α, resulting in an increase in haem
levels [].

Another mechanism of regulation of Rev-erbα is phosphorylation by GSK3β (glycogen
synthase kinase 3β) []. GSK3β phosphorylates
Rev-erbα and prevents its rapid proteasomal degradation. Lithium, an inhibitor of
GSK3β, leads to degradation of Rev-erbα and activation of the clock gene
BMAL1 []. This phosphorylation and
stabilization of Rev-erbα protein levels has an important role in Rev-erbα functions,
since mutations of the GSK3β phosphorylation sites that make the protein resistant to
degradation interfere with processes such as adipogenesis and oscillations of circadian genes [,]. Owing to the
importance of regulating cellular Rev-erbα levels for many physiological processes, it is
essential to understand the molecular pathways that control Rev-erbα stability and
function.

The nuclear protein DBC1 (Deleted in Breast Cancer 1) has been shown previously to be a
co-activator for some nuclear receptors such as ER (oestrogen receptor) α and β and
the AR (androgen receptor) [–]. DBC1 binds to these receptors and modulates their transcriptional activity.
Besides modulating transcriptional activity, we [,] and others [,] have shown that DBC1 regulate the deacetylases HDAC3 and SIRT1.
DBC1 binds to both deacetylases and inhibits their deacetylase activity, regulating their functions.
Moreover, we found that DBC1 regulates lipid accumulation, and that DBC1-deficient mice are
protected from HFD (high-fat diet)-induced liver steatosis and inflammation [], indicating a role for DBC1 in metabolism.

In view of the importance of DBC1 in metabolism, and in HDAC3 and nuclear receptor
regulation, we investigated whether DBC1 regulates the transcriptional repressor Rev-erbα.
Our data reveal that DBC1 binds to Rev-erbα, and modulates its transcriptional activity
through stabilization of Rev-erbα protein levels. In addition, DBC1 regulates the circadian
expression of Rev-erbα and BMAL1. In summary, the results of the present study identified
DBC1 as a new regulator of the Rev-erbα receptor and suggests that DBC1 may be a modulator of
the circadian and metabolic functions of Rev-erbα.

EXPERIMENTAL
Cell culture
HEK (human embryonic kidney)-293T cells, MEFs (mouse embryonic fibroblasts) and NIH 3T3 cells
were maintained in high-glucose DMEM (Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium) supplemented with 10% FBS
(fetal bovine serum), 100 units/ml penicillin and 100 mg/ml streptomycin (Invitrogen). INS-1
cells were cultured as described previously [].

Reagents and antibodies
Except when specified, all reagents and chemicals were purchased from Sigma Chemicals. The
anti-Rev-erbα antibodies were from Cell Signaling Technology and Abcam.
Phospho-Rev-erbα (Ser55/Ser59) antibody and TSA (trichostatin A) were
from Cell Signaling Technology. Antibodies against SIRT1, HDAC3 and HA (haemagglutinin) were from
Abcam and the anti-DBC1 antibody was from Bethyl Laboratories. The proteasome inhibitor
carbobenzoxy-L-leucyl-L-leucyl-leucinal (MG-132) was from Enzo Life Sciences and
GSK4112 was from Calbiochem.

Plasmids and transfections
pcDNA3.1-FLAG–hRev-erbα was generously provided by Dr Mitchell Lazar (University of
Pennsylvania, PA, U.S.A.) and the mouse Bmal1-luciferase vector by Dr Masaaki Ikeda (University of
Saitama Medical School, Saitama, Japan). S55D/S59D mutation of FLAG–Rev-erbα
(S55D/S59D) was generated by site-directed mutagenesis using the QuikChange® kit
(Stratagene). DBC1 and HDAC plasmids have been described previously []. All transient transfection assays were performed using Lipofectamine™ 2000
(Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Cells were harvested after 48 h of
transfection. For experiments studying the interaction between FLAG–Rev-erbα and
HA–DBC1, cells were treated for 6 h with 10 μM MG-132 before harvesting.
When the Rev-erbα agonist GSK4112 was added, cells were treated for 16 h with
10 μM GSK4112 in the presence of 2 μM MG-132 in DMEM
supplemented with 0.5% FBS.

For repression assays, cells were grown in 24-well plates and transfected with 50 ng of
Bmal1-luciferase reporter, 5 ng of pRL-CMV Renilla luciferase reporter
(Promega), 25–100 ng of FLAG–Rev-erbα and 200–600 ng of
HA–DBC1. After 48 h, cells were lysed in passive lysis buffer (Promega) and their
luciferase activity was assayed using a dual-luciferase reporter assay kit from Promega. Luciferase
units were normalized to Renilla expression. Relative luciferase activity was
expressed as fold activity over the control group (control vector). Each experiment was performed at
least three times in triplicate.

siRNA (small interfering RNA)
siRNA against DBC1 was synthesized by Dharmacon. The siRNA duplexes were 21 bp as follows:
DBC1 siRNA sense strand, 5′-AAACGGAGCCUACUGAACAUU-3′. Non-targeting siRNA (Dharmacon)
was used as control. Transfections were performed with 150 nM siRNA using DharmaFECT reagent
according to the manufacturer's instruction. Cells were harvested 72 h after
transfection.

Immunoprecipitation and Western blot analysis
Mouse tissues and cultured cells were lysed in buffer containing 20 mM Tris/HCl
(pH 8.0), 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA and 0.5% Nonidet P40, supplemented with
5 mM NaF, 50 mM 2-glycerophosphate and a protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). All mice
in the present study were maintained in the Mayo Clinic animal facility and all experimental
protocols were approved by the institutional animal care and use committee at Mayo Clinic (protocol
A33209). All studies were performed according to the methods approved in the protocol. After
20 min of lysis, protein lysates were cleared by centrifugation at
12000 g at 4°C for 10 min. The resulting
supernatants were quantified using the Bio-Rad Laboratories protein assay and used as whole-cell
lysates or for immunoprecipitation. Immunoprecipitation was performed for 1–2 h at
4°C using 1–2 mg of protein lysates, specific antibodies and Protein
A/G–agarose beads (Santa Cruz Biotechnology). Proteins were separated by SDS/PAGE (8.5% gel)
and transferred on to Immobilon membranes (Millipore). Membranes were probed with the indicated
antibodies, followed by incubation with HRP (horseradish peroxidase)-conjugated anti-mouse or
anti-rabbit secondary antibody. Western blots were developed using SuperSignal West Pico
Chemiluminescent substrate according to the manufacturer's instructions (Thermo Scientific). Films
were scanned and protein bands were quantified by densitometry using ImageJ software. Protein levels
were normalized to actin or tubulin levels.

Serum shock and synchronization study
NIH 3T3 cells were transfected with a control and a DBC1 siRNA oligonucleotide. At 48 h
after transfection, cells were starved by incubation in 0.5% FBS-containing medium for 16 h
and then synchronized by serum shock. Serum shock treatment involves exposing the cells to 50% horse
serum diluted in DMEM for 2 h, washing cells with PBS and replacing medium with 0.5%
FBS-containing medium. Cells were collected for both protein analysis and RNA extraction at the
indicated times after serum shock. When the experiment was performed in MEFs, confluent cells were
arrested before serum shock by leaving them in the same medium for 4 days before serum
shock.

Real-time PCR
Total mRNA was prepared using the RNeasy kit (Qiagen). cDNA was synthesized using the QuantiTect
Reverse Transcription kit (Qiagen). Commercially available TaqMan gene expression probes for mouse
and human Rev-erbα, BMAL1, GAPDH (glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase) (endogenous
control) and DBC1 were obtained from Applied Biosystems. The quantitative real-time PCR was
performed in triplicate according to the manufacturer's instructions. mRNA abundance was evaluated
by the standard curve method and the value of Rev-erbα obtained was divided by the GAPDH
value to obtain a normalized value. All experiments were performed at least three times.

Statistical analysis
Data are expressed as means±S.D. from at least three independent experiments and were
analysed using unpaired t test. The significance was set at
P&lt;0.05.

RESULTS
DBC1 is a Rev-erbα-interacting protein
It has been shown previously that DBC1 binds to and regulates some nuclear receptors such as the
ERs and ARs [–]. In the present study, we explored whether DBC1 also interacts with the nuclear receptor
Rev-erbα. We performed immunoprecipitation of Rev-erbα from cell extracts of NIH 3T3
and INS-1 cells, and also from mice pancreas homogenates. After immunoblotting, we found DBC1
present in the Rev-erbα immunoprecipitates (A
and B), indicating that DBC1 interacts with Rev-erbα in
cells and in vivo. The interaction between these two proteins was also
observed when we transfected HEK-293T cells with FLAG–Rev-erbα and HA–DBC1.
FLAG–Rev-erbα was immunoprecipitated with an anti-FLAG antibody and DBC1 was detected
in the Rev-erbα immunoprecipitates (C). We also
investigated whether Rev-erbα agonists regulate the Rev-erbα–DBC1 interaction.
Haem was identified as the endogenous ligand for Rev-erbα, but some synthetic ligand agonists
such as GSK4112 have been described previously [–]. Interestingly, we found that in
HEK-293T cells transfected with FLAG–Rev-erbα and HA–DBC1, the addition of
GSK4112 further increased the interaction between DBC1 and Rev-erbα (D). Together, these data establish that DBC1 and Rev-erbα interact in
cells and in vivo, and this interaction is regulated by the addition of a
Rev-erbα agonist.

DBC1 interacts with Rev-erbα
(A) INS-1 and NIH 3T3 cell lysates were immunoprecipitated with anti-Rev-erbα
antibody and immunoblotted with anti-DBC1 and anti-Rev-erbα antibodies. (B)
Pancreas protein homogenates from two different mice (#1 and #2) were immunoprecipited with
anti-Rev-erbα antibody and immunoblotted with anti-DBC1 and anti-Rev-erbα antibodies.
(C) HEK-293T cells were transfected with FLAG–Rev-erbα and
HA–DBC1. Cell lysates were immunoprecipitated with an anti-FLAG antibody and immunoblotted
with anti-HA and anti-FLAG antibodies. (D) Representative experiment where HEK-293T
cells were transfected with HA–DBC1 in the presence of FLAG-Rev-erbα or empty
vector. At 16 h before lysis, cells were treated with vehicle or the Rev-erbα agonist
GSK4112. Rev-erbα was immunoprecipitated with an anti-FLAG antibody and immunoprecipitates
and cell lysates were immunoblotted with anti-FLAG and anti-HA antibodies. The histogram shows the
increase in the DBC1–Rev-erbα interaction upon addition of GSK4112 in four
independent experiments. Results are means±S.D. *P&lt;0.05. IP,
immunoprecipitation; wcl, whole-cell lysate.

DBC1 regulates Rev-erbα-mediated gene expression
To assess the functional significance of the DBC1–Rev-erbα interaction, we
investigated whether DBC1 regulates the transcription repression activity of Rev-erbα. One of
the genes repressed by Rev-erbα is the circadian gene BMAL1 []. Rev-erbα directly binds to the promoter of
BMAL1 and represses BMAL1 gene expression. Transfection of
different amounts of Rev-erbα plasmid in HEK-293T cells with a luciferase reporter gene under
the control of the BAML1 promoter inhibited BMAL1 expression,
confirming that Rev-erbα was repressing BMAL1 transcription (A). We also found that our levels of repression of
BMAL1 transcription by Rev-erbα were similar to the levels described
previously []. When DBC1 was transfected together with
Rev-erbα, it significantly increased the repression mediated by Rev-erbα at all of the
Rev-erbα concentrations tested (A). The effect
of DBC1 on the repression of the BMAL1-luciferase activity was also detected when DBC1 was
transfected in the absence of Rev-erbα (A),
possibly due to an effect of DBC1 in endogenous Rev-erbα.

DBC1 regulates Rev-erbα-mediated gene repression
(A) BMAL1-luciferase reporter activity was measured in HEK-293T cells transfected
with different amounts of FLAG–Rev-erbα (25–100 ng) in the presence and
absence of HA–DBC1 (400 ng). The histogram shows the means±S.D. for three
experiments. (B) BMAL1 mRNA levels in HEK-293T cells transfected with
vector (control; C), HA–DBC1 (DBC1), FLAG–Rev-erbα (Rev) or a combination of
HA–DBC1 and FLAG–Rev-erbα (Rev+DBC1). The histogram shows the means±S.D.
for three experiments. *P&lt;0.05

To confirm the effect of DBC1 in Rev-erbα function, we measured the levels of
endogenous BMAL1 mRNA when we overexpressed DBC1 in cells. When HEK-293T
cells were transfected with Rev-erbα, there was a decrease in endogenous
BMAL1 mRNA levels, consistent with an effect of Rev-erbα in repressing
BMAL1 transcription. Transfection of DBC1 together with Rev-erbα further
decreased the BMAL1 mRNA levels (B).
In contrast, when DBC1 was overexpressed alone, no significant effect was observed in endogenous
BMAL1 mRNA levels. These data indicate that DBC1 regulates the repression function
of Rev-erbα.

DBC1 regulates Rev-erbα protein levels
As a first step to understanding the molecular mechanism by which DBC1 regulates Rev-erbα
function, we examined Rev-erbα protein levels under conditions where DBC1 protein levels were
decreased. In NIH 3T3 cells treated with siRNA, we observed lower levels of the Rev-erbα
protein in DBC1 siRNA-treated cells than in control siRNA cells (A). A similar decrease in Rev-erbα levels was also observed in INS-1 cells
treated with DBC1 siRNA (Supplementary Figure S1 at http://www.biochemj.org/bj/451/bj4510453add.htm). In addition, in MEFs obtained from
DBC1-KO (knockout) mice the steady-state levels of Rev-erbα were remarkably lower than in WT
(wild-type) MEFs (Supplementary Figure S2 at http://www.biochemj.org/bj/451/bj4510453add.htm).

Rev-erbα protein levels, but not mRNA levels, are regulated by DBC1
(A) Cell lysates of NIH 3T3 cells treated with control siRNAs (Csi) and DBC1 siRNAs
(DBC1si) were analysed by immunoblotting with anti-Rev-erbα, anti-DBC1 and anti-tubulin
antibodies. The histogram shows the means±S.D. for five independent experiments.
*P&lt;0.05 (B) Rev-erbα mRNA levels were measured in
NIH 3T3 cells transfected with Csi and DBC1si. mRNA levels were quantified by real-time PCR. The
histogram shows means±S.D. for three experiments. *P&lt;0.05
(C) NIH 3T3 cells treated with control and DBC1 siRNAs were immunoblotted with
anti-Rev-erbα, anti-p-Rev-erbα, anti-DBC1 and anti-tubulin antibodies.
(D) NIH 3T3 cells treated with control and DBC1 siRNAs were immunoblotted with
anti-Alas1, anti-DBC1 and anti-tubulin antibodies. (E and F) HEK-293T
cells were transfected with FLAG–Rev-erbα (E) or
FLAG–Rev-erbα (S55D/S59D) (F) in the presence of HA–DBC1 or empty
vector. Cell lysates were immunoblotted with anti-FLAG, anti-HA and anti-tubulin antibodies. C,
control.

We next investigated whether DBC1 regulates Rev-erbα protein levels through modulation of
Rev-erbα transcription. However, we found that transfection of DBC1 siRNA did not decrease
Rev-erbα mRNA levels (B). Also, in DBC1-KO MEFs
there was no significant decrease in Rev-erbα mRNA (Supplementary Figure S2). These results
indicate that knockdown of DBC1 did not inhibit Rev-erbα gene expression. In fact, there was
a small, but significant, increase in Rev-erbα mRNA levels when we knocked down DBC1 by siRNA
(B).

Interestingly, we noticed that whereas total Rev-erbα protein levels were lower in DBC1
siRNA-treated cells than in control cells, the levels of phospho-Rev-erbα
(Ser55/Ser59) were higher (C).
Phosphorylation of Rev-erbα in these sites has been shown to be mediated by GSK3β and
to stabilize Rev-erbα []. The fact that we saw an
increase in phosphorylation of Rev-erbα when DBC1 levels were reduced indicates that
Rev-erbα phosphorylation was not inhibited in the absence of DBC1. This increase in
phosphorylation may be a compensatory mechanism to stabilize Rev-erbα in the absence of DBC1.
Additionally, when DBC1 expression was inhibited by siRNA transfection, or depleted in DBC1-KO MEFs
there was an increase in the expression of the protein Alas1 (D and Supplementary Figure S2). Alas1 expression has been reported to be repressed by
Rev-erbα, indicating that the Rev-erbα pathway is indeed compromised in the absence of
DBC1.

The effect of DBC1 on Rev-erbα protein levels was also confirmed by overexpression of
HA-DBC1 and FLAG–Rev-erbα in HEK-293T cells. Co-expression of these two proteins
increased FLAG–Rev-erbα protein levels compared with FLAG–Rev-erbα
expression alone (E). Again, we found that DBC1
overexpression did not alter the mRNA levels of endogenous or expressed Rev-erbα
(Supplementary Figure S3 at http://www.biochemj.org/bj/451/bj4510453add.htm). Moreover, when we expressed the more
stable mutant of Rev-erbα (S55D/S59D) together with DBC1, there was further stabilization of
this mutant by the presence of DBC1 (F), indicating
that DBC1 is regulating Rev-erbα through a GSK3β-independent mechanism.

To confirm the effects of DBC1 on Rev-erbα in vivo, we measured
Rev-erbα protein levels in tissue homogenates obtained from DBC1-KO mice. Rev-erbα
protein levels were measured by immunoblotting in liver and fat homogenates. Again, we detected
significantly lower levels of the Rev-erbα protein in tissues from DBC1-KO mice than in
tissues from WT mice (A and B). Together, these data indicate that DBC1 is required to maintain Rev-erbα
protein levels and that the mechanism involved is not regulation of Rev-erbα gene
expression.

Rev-erbα protein levels are lower in tissues from DBC1-KO mice than control
mice
(A) Liver homogenates from several WT and DBC1-KO mice were immunoblotted with
anti-Rev-erbα, anti-DBC1 and anti-actin antibodies. The histogram shows means±S.E.M.
(n=7 WT; n=6 DBC1-KO mice).
*P&lt;0.05. (B) Fat homogenates from DBC1-KO and WT mice
were immunoblotted with anti-Rev-erbα, anti-DBC1 and anti-actin antibodies. The histogram
shows means±S.E.M. (n=5 WT; n=6 DBC1-KO mice).
*P&lt;0.05.

DBC1 regulates Rev-erbα protein stability
Having shown that DBC1 regulates Rev-erbα protein levels, but not mRNA levels, we next
examined whether DBC1 was regulating Rev-erbα protein stability. To test this hypothesis, we
determined the effect of DBC1 overexpression on the protein half-life of Rev-erbα.
FLAG–Rev-erbα has a short half-life of approximately 30 min, but co-expression
with DBC1 markedly increased Rev-erbα protein stability and half-life to approximately
1.5 h (A).

DBC1 regulates Rev-erbα protein stability
(A) HEK-293T cells were transfected with FLAG–Rev-erbα and empty
vector or HA–DBC1. Before lysis cells were treated for different time periods with
100 μg/ml cycloheximide (chx) and for 6 h with 10 μM MG-132 (MG).
Cell lysates were immunoblotted with anti-FLAG, anti-HA and anti-tubulin antibodies. The graph shows
quantification of Rev-erbα protein levels in the immunoblots relative to tubulin levels.
(B) HEK-293T cells were transfected with FLAG–Rev-erbα and
HA–ubiquitin (Ub) in the presence of empty vector or HA–DBC1. Cell lysates were
immunoprecipitated with an anti-FLAG antibody and immunoblotted with anti-HA and anti-FLAG
antibodies.

In order to determine the molecular mechanism by which DBC1 regulates Rev-erbα stability,
we explored the possibility that DBC1 was interacting with Rev-erbα and preventing its
degradation. It has been shown previously that Rev-erbα protein levels are regulated by
ubiquitination and proteasome degradation []. When we
expressed FLAG–Rev-erbα with HA–ubiquitin in HEK-293T cells, we observed higher
levels of ubiquitinated Rev-erbα when it was expressed alone than when it was co-expressed
with DBC1 (B), implying that DBC1 is likely to be
stabilizing Rev-erbα by preventing its ubiquitination and subsequent degradation.

DBC1 N-terminal and C-terminal domains are required for the regulation of
Rev-erbα
The interaction between DBC1 and proteins such as nuclear receptors and the deacetylases SIRT1
and HDAC3 occur through the N-terminal region of DBC1 and it mostly depends on its LZ (leucine
zipper) domain [,,,]. To
map the region on DBC1 that binds to Rev-erbα, we first tested whether this interaction was
dependent on the N-terminal domain of DBC1. In HEK-293T cells transfected with
FLAG–Rev-erbα and the N-terminal deletion mutant of DBC1 (Δ1–264) or the
LZ deletion mutant of DBC1, we still observed the interaction between DBC1 and Rev-erbα,
similar to FL (full-length) DBC1 (A). Instead, it was
the deletion of the C-terminal domain of DBC1 (Δ704–923) that prevented the
association between DBC1 and Rev-erbα. This indicates that, different from other nuclear
receptors, Rev-erbα interacts with the C-terminal domain of DBC1 (A).

DBC1 N-terminal and C-terminal domains are required for the regulation of
Rev-erbα
(A) HEK-293T cells were transfected with FLAG–Rev-erbα and FL DBC1 or
the ΔLZ and ΔN deletions of HA–DBC1 (left-hand panel). In the right-hand panel,
cells were transfected with FLAG–Rev-erbα and the ΔN and ΔC deletions of
HA–DBC1. Cell lysates were immunoprecipitated with an anti-FLAG antibody and immunoblotted
with anti-HA and anti-FLAG antibodies. (B) HEK-293T cells were transfected with
FLAG–Rev-erbα and FL DBC1 or the ΔLZ and ΔN deletions of HA–DBC1
(left-hand panel). In the right-hand panel, cells were transfected with FLAG–Rev-erbα
and FL HA–DBC1 or the ΔC deletion of DBC1. Cell lysates were immunoblotted with
anti-FLAG, anti-HA and anti-tubulin antibodies. (C) BMAL1-luciferase reporter activity
was measured in HEK-293T cells transfected with FLAG–Rev-erbα (50 ng), FL
HA–DBC1 (400 ng), ΔLZ (600 ng), ΔN (300 ng) and ΔC
(400 ng) deletions of DBC1. The histogram shows means±S.D. for three experiments.
*P&lt;0.05.

To determine which domains of DBC1 are important for the regulation of Rev-erbα stability,
we transfected Rev-erbα alone and in the presence of FL DBC1, ΔN-terminal domain,
ΔLZ and ΔC-terminal domain, and measured the steady-state levels of Rev-erbα
protein. Although the N-terminal domain of DBC1 is not essential for the association between DBC1
and Rev-erbα, we found that this region is required for stabilization of Rev-erbα.
Furthermore, both the C-terminal deletion and the LZ deletion mutants did not stabilize
Rev-erbα (B), indicating that multiple regions
of DBC1 are required for regulation of Rev-erbα stability.

To confirm the importance of the different DBC1 domains in Rev-erbα function, we tested
the effect of the expression of the DBC1 mutants on BMAL1 gene expression. Unlike
FL DBC1, all mutants failed to increase repression of BMAL1 transcription by Rev-erbα (C). These results support the hypothesis that multiple
regions of DBC1 are required for the DBC1 effect on Rev-erbα stability and function. It is
possible that the N-terminal and C-terminal regions of DBC1 have different roles in Rev-erbα
regulation. Whereas the C-terminus of DBC1 is the region that interacts with Rev-erbα, the
N-terminus may bring additional proteins to Rev-erbα which may be necessary to control its
stability and function.

DBC1 regulates the circadian expression of Rev-erbα in cells after serum shock
Rev-erbα is a key regulator of the circadian clock. Rev-erbα expression is
regulated in a circadian manner that is controlled both transcriptionally and
post-transcriptionally. Furthermore, expression of several circadian genes is dependent on
Rev-erbα expression [,]. Since DBC1 modulates Rev-erbα stability and function, we explored
whether DBC1 is involved in the regulation of cellular circadian rhythm.

Studies using in vitro models have yielded evidence to indicate that
peripheral cells are capable of expressing circadian genes oscillations independent of the
12 h light/12 h dark cycle. For example, NIH 3T3 fibroblasts exposed to serum shock
show rhythmic fluctuations in mRNA abundance of circadian genes that is modulated by the
Rev-erbα protein [,]. To study the intrinsic cellular circadian regulation, we performed serum shock in NIH
3T3 cells transfected with control and DBC1 siRNA. We found that Rev-erbα, BMAL1 and DBC1
showed circadian oscillations at both the protein and mRNA level in cells transfected with control
siRNA (). In contrast, in cells transfected with DBC1
siRNA, there was a dramatic inhibition of the serum shock-induced circadian oscillations of
Rev-erbα and BMAL1 proteins compared with cells transfected with control siRNA (A–C). In the
case of Rev-erbα, the oscillations in mRNA were similar between control and DBC1
siRNA-transfected cells, with the mRNA levels of Rev-erbα being actually higher at
16 h and 24 h in DBC1 siRNA-transfected cells than in control siRNA-transfected cells
(B). These results confirm our hypothesis that DBC1
regulates Rev-erbα protein stability and not gene expression.

DBC1 regulates circadian expression of Rev-erbα
NIH 3T3 cells were transfected with control and DBC1 siRNAs for 60 h, synchronized with
serum shock, and then collected at the indicated times for protein and mRNA analysis.
(A) Representative experiment showing protein levels of Rev-erbα, DBC1, BMAL1
and actin at the indicated times after serum shock. (B) Graphs show means±S.E.M.
(n=3) of Rev-erbα protein (left-hand panel) and mRNA (right-hand panel)
levels in control and DBC1 siRNA-transfected cells. (C) Graphs show means±S.E.M.
(n=3) of BMAL1 protein (left-hand panel) and mRNA (right-hand panel) levels in
control and DBC1 siRNA-transfected cells. (D) Graphs show means±S.E.M.
(n=3) of DBC1 protein levels in control siRNA-treated cells (left-hand panel) and
mRNA levels in control and DBC1 siRNA-transfected cells (right-hand panel) collected at the
indicated times after serum shock.

In the case of BMAL1, we observed higher circadian oscillation in BMAL1 mRNA
levels in DBC1 siRNA-transfected cells than in control siRNA cells. However, at the protein level,
the BMAL1 oscillations were lost in the absence of DBC1 (C). It is possible that DBC1 regulates BMAL1 in multiple ways. The lower levels of BMAL1
protein during the circadian cycle in the absence of DBC1 suggests that DBC1 regulates other
proteins beside Rev-erbα that are responsible for maintaining BMAL1 stability. In fact, it
has been reported that BMAL1 expression is regulated by the deacetylase SIRT1 [,]. When we measured SIRT1 activity
during the circadian cycle, we observed that in DBC1-KO MEFs, SIRT1 activity is very high and did
not oscillate like in WT MEFs (Supplementary Figure S4 at http://www.biochemj.org/bj/451/bj4510453add.htm). Thus it is possible that this high
activity of SIRT1 in the absence of DBC1 contributes to the final effect in BMAL1 expression.

Furthermore, although DBC1 and Rev-erbα showed circadian oscillations at the protein
level, the pattern of oscillation is different between both proteins (A, B and D). It is possible that DBC1 oscillations do not determine the Rev-erbα
oscillations, but that the presence of DBC1 is required for the oscillations to happen. Together,
these results suggest that DBC1 is a novel regulator of Rev-erbα and the circadian pathways
in cells.

DISCUSSION
Dynamic expression of Rev-erbα is important for several physiological processes similar to
the circadian cycle [,], adipocyte differentiation [,] and regulation of liver fat metabolism [,,]. Defining the mechanisms that control Rev-erbα protein levels and turnover is
essential for our understanding of these processes and for the development of therapies. Our study
reveals a new pathway involved in Rev-erbα regulation and proposes that DBC1 is an important
modulator of the Rev-erbα functions. DBC1 controls Rev-erbα by a mechanism that
involves an increase in Rev-erbα protein stability. By preventing Rev-erbα
ubiquitination, DBC1 promotes stabilization of Rev-erbα levels and an increase in repression
activity of Rev-erbα.

The only mechanism described to date for regulation of Rev-erbα protein stability is
phosphorylation by the protein kinase GSK3β [].
GSK3β controls circadian rhythm in many organisms and phosphorylates many clock proteins
[]. GSK3β phosphorylates Rev-erbα on
Ser55 and Ser59 and this phosphorylation prevents Rev-erbα proteasomal
degradation, stabilizing Rev-erbα protein levels [].
A form of Rev-erbα that is stable and insensitive to the GSK3β inhibitor lithium
interferes with expression of circadian genes [],
indicating that GSK3β-dependent phosphorylation of Rev-erbα is important for
regulation of the peripheral clock. This degradation pathway involves the E3 ligases Arf-bp1 and
Pam, which are required for efficient ubiquitination and degradation of Rev-erbα []. Because DBC1 prevents Rev-erbα ubiquitination, it is
possible that DBC1 may interfere with the interaction between Rev-erbα and these ubiquitin
ligases. However, the effect of DBC1 appears to be independent of GSK3β phosphorylation,
since depletion of DBC1 does not prevent phosphorylation of Rev-erbα, and DBC1 can still
stabilize a form of Rev-erbα (S55D/S59D) that mimics the phosphorylated state. This suggests
that DBC1 regulates a novel pathway that controls Rev-erbα stability.

In addition to Rev-erbα, other nuclear receptors are also regulated by DBC1. However, DBC1
appears to have a complex role in nuclear receptor regulation. In the case of the AR, DBC1 functions
as a co-activator and dramatically enhances AR DNA binding and facilitates AR transcriptional
activation. In addition, binding of DBC1 to AR is ligand-dependent, involves the N-terminal region
of DBC1 and does not significantly affect AR stability [].
ERα also binds to the N-terminal domain of DBC1, but there are contradictory data on whether
DBC1 regulates ERα protein stability [,]. Whereas in an earlier report DBC1 was shown to regulate the
steady-state level of unliganded protein [], a more recent
study found that DBC1 did not affect the levels of this receptor and that it binds to ERα
both in the presence and absence of ligand []. In contrast,
the interaction between Rev-erbα and DBC1 is not mediated by the N-terminal domain of DBC1.
Still, the N-terminal region of DBC1 is clearly important to regulate the stability and function of
Rev-erbα.

DBC1 was also reported to modulate transcription activity of RARα (retinoic acid receptor
α) [], ERβ [] and BRCA1 (breast cancer early-onset 1) [],
suggesting that DBC1 could be a more general regulator of transcription. Because DBC1 also regulates
the deacetylases HDAC3 and SIRT1, it will be of interest to explore whether deacetylases are
involved in the regulation of gene transcription by DBC1. For instance, DBC1 regulation of
ERα involves inhibition of the SIRT1–ERα interaction and deacetylation of the
receptor []. Other receptors have also been shown to be
acetylated, such as the nuclear bile acid receptor (FXR) [], AR [] and LXR (liver X receptor) [], and their deacetylation is regulated by SIRT1. However, SIRT1
can function either as a co-activator or a co-repressor for these receptors, implying that
acetylation can activate or inhibit nuclear receptor function. Given that Rev-erbα interacts
with the HDAC3 deacetylase, it will be interesting to investigate whether Rev-erbα is
acetylated and whether deacetylation is a mechanism of regulation of this receptor. Furthermore, it
will be important to determine whether the DBC1 effect on Rev-erbα requires HDAC3.

The overall picture emerging is that Rev-erbα, NCoR and HDAC3 co-ordinate the circadian
regulation of liver fat metabolism and clock genes [,]. Loss of HDAC3 or Rev-erbα led to hepatosteatosis,
although it is more pronounced in mice lacking HDAC3 than Rev-erbα [,]. However, recent studies show that
mice that have both Rev-erbα and Rev-erbβ knocked out have a marked increase in
hepatosteatosis and deregulation of several metabolic and clock genes [,]. These findings establish that both
variants of Rev-erb work together to protect the organism from major alterations in circadian and
metabolic processes. Because the DBC1-KO mice are protected against HFD-induced liver steatosis
[], it is important to determine the molecular pathways
regulated by DBC1. Under normal diet conditions, DBC1-KO mice have lower levels of Rev-erbα,
but have higher HDAC3 activity. However, we still do not know how these pathways are regulated under
conditions of HFD and whether DBC1 also regulates Rev-erbβ. Elucidating the connections
between DBC1, HDAC3 and Rev-erbs may have implications for the pathogenesis and treatment of
metabolic diseases such as obesity, diabetes, liver steatosis and metabolic syndrome. The recent
development of Rev-erb agonists that alter circadian behaviour, and decrease obesity and
adipogenesis [,]
suggests that these pathways can be targeted to improve circadian rhythm and metabolism. In this
regard, it is possible that targeting the DBC1–Rev-erbα interaction may have important
implications for the treatment of metabolic diseases.

Finally, DBC1 is required for the cellular circadian oscillations of Rev-erbα and BMAL1.
This suggests that DBC1 could be an important regulator of circadian rhythms. Further studies will
be necessary to determine whether DBC1-KO animals show alterations in circadian behaviours, such as
changes in the circadian period length, or responses to 12 h light/12 h dark. On the
basis of our observations, we propose that DBC1 is a novel regulator of both circadian and metabolic
pathways.

Online data
Supplementary data
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTION
Claudia Chini designed and performed experiments, analysed data and wrote the paper. Carlos
Escande and Veronica Nin helped with experiments and analysis of the data. Eduardo Chini designed
experiments, analysed data and wrote the paper.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Dr Mitchell Lazar (University of Pennsylvania, PA, U.S.A.) for providing the
pcDNA3.1-FLAG–hRev-erbα and Dr Masaaki Ikeda (University of Saitama Medical School,
Saitama, Japan) for the mouse Bmal1-luciferase. We also thank Dr Zhenkun Lou (Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, MN, U.S.A.) for providing the DBC1 MEFs and DBC1 plasmids.

FUNDING
This work was supported by the National Institute of
Health [grant number DK-084055] from the National
Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK), the American Federation of Aging
Research, from the Mayo Foundation and Strickland Career Developmental Award.

