Metals, Health and the Environment- Emergence of
Correlations Between Speciation and Effects
David R Williams
School ofChemistry, CardiffUniversity, P 0 Box 912, Cardiff
CFIO 3TB, UK, Tel 44 (0) 29 2087 4778, Williamsd@cardiffac.uk
ABSTRACT
Over the last half-century both the identification of the causes of diseases and the use of inorganic
compounds to treat such conditions have been considerably enlightened through our emerging capabilities to
identify the pivotal chemical species involved. The 'duty of care' placed upon scientists to protect the
environment from manufactured chemicals and to limit their effects upon humans therefrom is best realised
from a speciation knowledge database. This paper discusses categorising chemicals in terms of their
persistence, bioaccumulation, and toxicities and uses speciation information to optimise desirable effects of
chemicals in several applications such as the manufacture of pulp for paper and in the foliar nutrition of
crops. Simultaneously, the chemical wasting side effects of industrial overdosing is easily avoided if
speciation approaches are used. The move towards new environmentally friendly ligand agents is described
and methods of finding substitute agents (often combinations of two or more chemicals) to replace non-
biodegradable EDTA. The geosphere migration of metals through the environment is discussed in terms of
speciation. Future objectives discussed include improved means of communicating speciation-based
recommendations to decision makers.
INTRODUCTION.
Multinational agencies such as the EU and the OECD are now focussing upon new means of chemical
analysis which identify and reduce hazards to the health of their citizens and enables risk reduction
management. Chemical speciation studies are one such promising approach/1/.
Notable successes have already been reported in linking environment with human health. From a new
awareness which commenced with the publication of 'Silent Spring' in the 1960s, there has been increasing
pressure to legislate and to enforce readily-bio-degradability criteria upon use of organic chemicals so that
they rapidly disappear after use /2/. A more cautious approach is used with inorganic agents since the
elements do not bio-degrade per se but do change their bonding, and sometimes oxidation states, to give
another species /3/. The fact that such bonding exchanges are frequently labile in the environment, in
317
Vol. 2, Nos. 3-4. 2004 Metals, Health and the Environment-Emergence ofCotv'elations
Between Speciation and Effects
humans, and in healthcare, has not been widely understood by non-chemistry scientists even though Sill6n et
al commenced this re-education process for geologists in the 1950-60s/4/.
The lability, inertness and speciation composition ground rules became encompassed into the emerging
subject of bio-inorganic chemistry which considered the influence of metal-containing chemical species upon
the environment and upon health/5,6/.
By the late 20th century strict criteria had been established (a) for the acceptance, or use subject to
specific risk management standards, of organic ligands found in these complexes /7/. However, (b) the
acceptability and disposal ofnon-biodegradable metals has yet to be fully defined and legislated.
This paper describes progress as seen from the viewpoint of chemicals in the UK which closely reflects
the EU position, and shows how chemical speciation answers many current problems/8/.
RESULTS
(a) Speciation data for organic agents.
The challenge of such agents to the environment will be discussed in part (c) under persistence, bio-
accumulation, and toxicity (PBT) criteria /8/. Considering readily-biodegradability (the converse of
persistence), this refers to aqueous reactions in the environment into which the used chemical is added.
Typically this is in rivers and drains. Thus, the OECD-definitions of this term rely upon naturally occurring
bacteria to degrade the organic agent within a specified time/7/.
This does not permit the intentional introduction of microbiologically selected bacteria having a specific
affinity for the organic substrate. Further, it must be realised that even naturally occurring ground water
bacteria require the prevailing conditions, such as temperature and light, etc, to be appropriate to their
biodegrading activities. Thus, the readily biodegradable criteria embody terms such as the percentage of
agent biodegraded within a certain time (typically 10 days) after the initiation period has ended. Further the
measurement of the extent of degradation of a living system is a serious challenge. Some definitions use
amount of carbon dioxide released, others use residual amount of organic matter remaining awaiting
degradation (see Table 1).
This realisation that degradation is dependent upon commonly occurring bacteria suggests that including
natural chemical groups within the formula of the manufactured agent will "flavour" the substrate for these
bacteria. This is reflected in decisions to use isomers having a chirality the same as those found in nature.
The same applies to the metabolic products released from the bacterial activity and which is less prone to
poisoning by naturally-occurring products. These concepts have been successful for the readily-
biodegradability of a replacement agent for EDTA. The UK designed and manufactured replacement S,S'
EDDS degrades to form aspartic acid. Not surprisingly S,S'EDDS satisfies the OECD 301E criteria and is
being successfully introduced in many areas formally employing EDTA/9,10/.
318
David R. Williams Bioinorganic Chemistry andApplications
Table
OECD tests for ready biodegradability/7/.
DOC dissolved organic carbon and BOD biological oxygen demand.
Test Number
301A
301B
301C
301D
301E
301F
Test Title
DOC Die-away
Modified Sturm Test
Modified MITI (I)
Closed Bottle
Modified
Screening
OECD
Manometric
Respirometry
Test Parameter
% DOC Removal
% CO Production
% BOD Removal
% BOD Removal
% DOC Removal
% BOD Removal
Definitions or Pass Criteria
>70% DOC removal within 28 days
and within 10-day window after 10%
DOC released
>60% of theoretical CO2 production
within 28 days and within l0 day
window after 10% CO2 has been
reached
>60% theoretical
within 28 days
BOD removal
>60% theoretical BOD removal
within 10 or 14 day window after
10% BOD has been reached
>70% DOC removal within 28 days
and within 10 day window after 10%
DOC has been released
>60% theoretical BOD removal
within 28 days and within l0 day
window after 10% BOD has been
reached
The major use of EDTA as a sequestering agent is in the pulp making industry to complex any metal ions
present which have a range of nuisance roles but most seriously at the pulp bleaching stages where metal ions
cause spotting and a less than white paper product/11/.
Over the last twenty years chlorine based bleaching has given way to more environmental friendly
processes, many of them involving oxidation using hydrogen peroxide. These stages are aggravated by the
presence of transition metal ions from the wood pulp and from the process water (in practice from large
lakes) which permits a Fenton-type reaction and this leads to spotting in the final product/12/.
Traditionally, the largest World usage of EDTA (circa 20 000 tonnes) has been to sequester these
adventitious metal ions and to produce a clear white product having no spots. Details ofthe process are given
in reference I. Additional to the clear white paper quality, smoothness of product requires the magnesium to
remain in the system in spite of a complexing ligand being introduced to complex iron, manganese, and
copper ions the worst offenders with respect to Fenton reaction initiation. Although paper is produced
world-wide, most of the fundamental chemical research occurs in Scandinavia, which means that the amount
319
Vol. ,.,9 N<. 3-4, 2004 Metals, Health and the Environment-.Emergence ofCorrelations
Between Speciation and Effects
of ligand(s) introduced has not been pulp factory site specific and so ligand overdosing frequently occurs at
other sites/11/.
Realising that doses of EDTA traditionally used had not been optimised, speciation simulation using
thousand species models focussed on the salient questions and produced site optimised formulations which
(a) fine-tuned the amount of replacement ligand substituted for EDTA (in practise S,S'EDDS), and (b)
sequestered the maximum amount of problematic transition metal ions whilst leaving the magnesium ions
uncomplexed. (c) Previously, EDTA, being such an avid complexer of Ca2+, was mainly lost to that metal ion
in the feed water (the term used is Calcium Distracted) and only a few percent were remaining for Fenton
reaction prevention. The expense of this distraction added to the price of the paper as well as Ca.EDTA
posing a serious environmental cost.
By introducing S,S'EDDS as a substitute for EDTA there was almost negligible calcium distraction and
considerably less agent to go into the environment whence it was readily-biodegradable. This effective
'tuning up' of ligand doses was called "more for less". Further, for some stages of the pulp making process,
optimisation employed blends of EDTA and S,S'EDDS mixed together in order to achieve some calcium, and
total transition metal ion, complexing 'at a reasonable price and within the degradability limits permitted by
OECD regulations. Marketers sometimes advertise their products as "inherently biodegradable" but these do
not satisfy the international standard for sustainability of our planet legislated for under their definition of
"read ly-b odegradab e".
Reference 11 reports these achievements in some detail and shows Speciation Efficiency Index and
Readily-Biodegradability Index plots understandable by plant managers without their need to master the
intricacies of labile equilibria and ofcomplex chemistry.
None of these conclusions ought to be implemented without using pilot scale lab experiments to check
that all the data have been verified and the model has been validated for each ofthe several stages ofthe pulp
making process involving complex chemistry. The price economies of modelling are obvious when one
considers the price and environmental cost ofdoing trial and error dose gradations at pilot plants.
A similar approach has been taken to the control of nutrient metal complexes used in foliar feeding of
plants. In agriculture, trace element availability is crucial to achieving higher yields and better crop quality
/13,14/. Two pivotal ingredients are ferric, Fe(Ill), and phosphate ions which, in addition to manganese,
copper, molybdenum and zinc deficiencies, cause serious growth problems/15/. Recently foliar application
of these agents by spraying onto the leaves of the plants has been shown to be far more efficient than
fertilising through soil and roots. Chelating agents such as EDTA are presently added to foliar sprays (i) to
prevent metal phosphate/oxide/hydroxide precipitation which blocks the fine spray jets and also (ii) to
prevent leaf scorching by free ions.
With the phasing out of EDTA, more environment-friendly alternatives such as S,S' EDDS are being
introduced but EDTA binds more strongly to Fe(lll) than to EDDS; also EDDS is more expensive.
Fortunately, it has been possible to use computer simulation modelling of a range of blends ofS,S'EDDS and
EDTA such that precipitation is prevented, environmental readily-biodegradability legality upheld, and
purchase cheapness optimised/13/.
320
David R. Williams Bio&organic Chemistry and.Applications
Table 2a shows the iron speciation in the presence of EDTA, or EDTA+EDDS, ligand(s) which prevent
the iron phosphate precipitate which is potentially jet blocking. However, Table 2b indicates that when
S,S'EDDS has been used as a total substitute for EDTA, there is a serious precipitate challenge. Hence, a
wide range of blends were modelled and the optimum ratios of 60:40 to 70:30 EDDS:EDTA gave essentially
the speciation data shown in Table 2a for EDTA alone and also legally satisfies the readily biodegradable
criteria of60% biodegraded within the specified number of days.
Table 2
a Speciation percentages of Fe(lll) foliar spray system in the presence ofexcesses of EDTA or the suggested
EDDS:EDTA blends when phosphate solid is not formed, b Speciation percentages showing the problem of
phosphate precipitate which is present when EDTA is totally replaced with EDDS. Total iron 15, total
chelate(s) total phosphate 100 mmol dm'. '-' signifies insignificant amount present.
a a a b b b
pH FeEDTA FeO(OH)s FePO4s FeEDDS- FeO(OH)s FePO4
3 93 100
4 98 100
5 100 100
6 100 97
7 100 100
8 37 57 100
9 100 100
Such an approach to foliar feeding using blending coupled with detailed speciation knowledge has many
advantages.-
The blend range 60:40 through to 70:30 EDDS:EDTA is as effective as the EDTA alone.
The environmental cost criteria have been satisfied within internationally specified limits.
The purchase price is cheaper than a straight-forward slot-in replacement of EDDS for EDTA (which
would have produced precipitates anyway!).
Jet blocking both by iron solids and solid EDDS.H4 or a mixture has been prevented/16/.
Unlike the majority of our speciation studies on biological fluids at the limits of laboratory analysis, the
foliar sprays are at easily analysable concentrations and so much data has been aquired to validate our
models and confirm that the jet blocking is iron phosphate rather that either oxides, hydroxides, or solid
S,S 'EDDS.
The ligand supply and agricultural spray formulation industry has confirmed the absence of solids and
field trials by the industry are in hand to assess the efficacy of plant growth fertilisation. These are
necessarily seasonal and will take more than a year to confirm. Early results are most encouraging/17/.
The possibility now arises of optimising the foliar supplies of the other micronutrients mentioned above
and also oftailoring spray formulations to the particular challenges of a specific plant and soil.
321
Vol. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Metals, ttealth and the Environment-EmetLence ofCorrelations
Between Speciation and Effects
(b)Speciation data for inorganic agents.
Chemical speciation simulation can contribute to mechanistic knowledge and lead to more accurate risk
assessments from exposure to toxic metal ions from the environment. Examples are quoted amongst 137Cs
considered to absorb from the duodenum in ionic form and from 235,238
U(VI) weakly absorbed as complex
species/18/.
Biological 'intake' becomes 'uptake' when inorganic low molecular mass (lmm) species within the
intestine are either ionic, and thus kinetically absorbed through membrane pores involving carrier molecules
having ion size specificity and appropriate stereochemistries; alternatively such uptake occurs when net-
neutral lmm forms having lipophilicity diffuse into a cell down a speCies concentration gradient. Models of
such as the 'Free Ion Activity Model' FIAM and the 'Sequential Ligand-ion Interaction Model'-SLIM and
have been used to research these respective thermodynamic (FIAM) and kinetic (SLIM) processes/19,20/.
The fluid in the duodenum influences absorption since most inorganic species are in labile equilibrium.
The ligands and inorganics in human intestinal fluid, for the purposes of modelling, were assumed to be
equal volumes ofbile and ofpancreatic juices mixed and equilibriated to form duodenal fluid/18/.
The speciation simulation uses computer programs such as JESS to establish mass balance equations of
all the species and then equilibrium formation constants for the species being formed from individual
components/21-24/. Where exactly matching formation constants are not available, the program extrapolates
the likely constant from closely related constants (for example, from a constant measured at a similar
temperature or ionic strength). These equations are then solved to indicate the species present at equilibrium.
As previously justified, and validated by several successful models correlated with analytical data on non-
radioactive material, most proteinaceous material present was not considered to equilibriate such that it
disturbed the order of lmm complexing with the metal ions concerned.
Models were created at 370 and 150 mmol dm3
to examine how speciation varied with radionuclide
concentration (5x10"15
up to 105
mol dm3), and with the influence ofpH. The reasonableness ofthe bonding
occurring for the most predominant species was checked out/18/.
More than 90% of the caesium present was ionic monovalent Cs+
as previously found by our researches
on drinks and for flesh meat.
Above neutral pH, uranium (VI) exists predominantly as UOz(CO3)58 which places a critical reliance
upon the species log K used/25/. However, a detailed analysis of log K values for the other UO2(CO3),
species compared with those of reference 25 showed consistency and so there is confidence that, provided
there is sufficient equilibrium time between intestinal contamination (intake) and absorption (uptake), this
species is the most important. In order to test the model to its limits exclusion of the uranyl pentacarbonate
was modelled and lead to tetracarbonate predominating. The U:C ratio in the tetracarbonate is 1:4 and in the
penta is 1:5. This all fits structural data showing that six planar octahedral bonds are subtended at the
equatorial UO22+ and have angles of 600 which accommodates three CO32 as four membered chelate rings;
the additional carbonate taking the axial or bridging positions.
Reassuringly, neither carbonate complex is relatively low charge density and so they are unlikely to be
absorbed (uptaken) through intestinal walls through lipophilic passive diffusion.
322
David R. Williams Bioinorganic Chem&try andApplications
Below pH=7, the predominant lmm species is UO2H2(PO4)22"
which, once again, has a relatively high
charge density and four membered uranyl phosphate planar rings. The hydrogens are assumed to be on the
non-border phosphate oxygen. Once again, lipophilic absorption is unlikely.
In summary, dose/risk calculations ought to assume that Cs+, alike to Na and K+, is extensively absorbed
as ionic species whereas UO22+
in the duodenum is poorly absorbed if at all. (Leggett and Harrison's report of
less than 5% is validation)/26/.
Future generations may be challenged by hazards of such metal ions reaching the intestine after geosphere
migration from disposal sites. The metal ion acceleration based upon co-disposed ligands and retardation
based upon arrest by geological processes such as pores or ion exchange, has been discussed and quantified
in risk assessments used in repository planning applications/3/.
Similarly, human uptake from intake of industrial metal ion through wounds has been considered with the
use of ligand impregnated wound dressings to prevent the systemic circulation of radionuclides from
contaminated wounds/28/.
All of these studies are at parts per billion levels and so beyond the reach of easy in situ analysis but,
nevertheless, are readily simulated using equilibrium-based models.
(c) Speciation links between the environment and health.
On the one hand, all of our nutrition and support comes from the environment but, on the other hand, the
environment and all industrial chemicals therein are blamed by many for causal links with diseases and other
undesirable events. Speciation chemists can help to unscramble these phenomena and to identify real tort.
Some of the public insisting on absolutely safe drugs for therapy, are also de-crying the processes which
ensure their safety. Most do not understand the meaning ofthe word "safe". The UK Chief Medical Officer's
annual report for 1995 defined "safe" as a negligible risk being quantified as less than one in one million
chance of happening per annum, there being no such thing as zero risk. Just as it is incorrect to blame all
undesirable events upon chemicals, so too, it would be equally misleading to claim that there are no
dangerous chemicals that have been, and that are still being, released upon an unsuspecting public. The
checking out of chemicals in our environment began in earnest with the publication of 'Silent Spring' by
Rachel Carson in 1962.
For many years, safety cases and licences in the nuclear industry have had to be justified on the grounds
of"worst possible case" scenarios. Risk of migration of a hazard (in this case the radioactive element) under
the speciation influences of the geochemistry of the site and of any chemicals co-disposed with the
radioactive waste material, has been a critical factor in reaching planning and development decisions.
The OECD, the EU, and the UK as members of both, have set up scientific and legislative devices to
protect the status quo and to ensure that no further damage to the environment and to health arises from
chemicals. The global production of chemicals is 400 million tonnes per annum. There are approximately
100,000 chemicals registered in the EU market and which contribute to society's lifestyle as taken for
granted today; we encounter about 1000 chemicals daily in everyday activities. It is a gigantic task to assess
323
Vol. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Metals, Health and the Env#'onment-Emet'gence ofCorrelations
Between Speciation and Effects
current, and to back assess retrospectively, hazardous substances. The largest chemical producing region in
the World is the EU, producing e 1244 billion in 1998 and having a trade surplus of41 billion/8/.
The perception of this challenge is another formidable obstacle. First, let it be recorded that since the
chemical releasing industrial revolution began to produce and to release chemicals some two centuries ago,
expected life-spans at birth have doubled from 40 years in 1850 to 80 years today. This paper is not about
this perception as the reader is referred elsewhere for improving communications/29/. Rather, this report
demonstrates how speciation is pivotal to decisions on continued safe use, to improved risk management, or,
in the extreme, to banning an agent. The UK scenario is used as an example but all other countries in the
above-mentioned EU, OECD etc h/ve taken similar lines and the legislative and policing bodies concerned
are currently harmonising their inter-state limits and criteria of concern.
Table 3
Persistent organic pollutants targeted by the POPs Convention at World environmental conferences in
Stockholm and Johannesburg.
Aldrin, Clordane, Dieldrin, Endrin, Heptachlor, Hexachlorobenzene, Mirex, Toxaphene/Camphechior,
Polychlorinated biphenyls, DDT, Dioxins/Furans.
In common with Europe, a dozen chemical agents have been banned (Table 3). Some 10 000 "high
production volume" as defined in EU Existing Chemicals Regulations- i.e. they are produced in more than
1000 tonnes per year at least once in the last three years have been examined from IUCLID data (the
European Commission International Uniform Chemical Information Database) concerning Persistence,
Bioaccumulation, and Toxicity (PBT) criteria (Table 4). The European Commission's February 2001 White
Paper for a Future Chemicals Policy sets out an approach that aims to cover both new, and existing,
substances using REACH (Registration, Evaluation, and Authorisation ofChemicals).
Table 4
PBT first tier criteria used for guidance ofthe UK expert committee on hazardous substances.
Persistence, P, tl/2 water > 2 months or t/2 soil/sediment > 6 months
Bioaccumulation, B, log Kow >5 unless Bioconcentration factor (BCF) < 5000 for "greatest concern"
or >4 and 500, respectively, for "high concern"
Toxicity, T, Acute lethal effect L(E)Cs0 <1 mg/litre
Table 5 lists known bio-active agents specifically controlled by existing legislation and which are not
included in the categorisations given in Table 4 since strict controls and licencing systems already exist for
these agents.
324
David R. Williams Bioinorganic Chem&try andApplications
Table 5
Hazardous substances already strictly controlled by specific UK legislation.
Pesticides- the Plant Protection Products Regulations 1995, Control of Pesticides Regulations 1986,
and Part Ill ofthe Food and Environmental Protection Act 1985.
Biocides- Biocidal Products Directive 2001
Food Contact- Plastics Directive 1998
Pharmaceuticals and Medicines- Medicines Act 1968
Veterinary Medicines Medicines Act 1968
Table 6 lists web sites for the various bodies involved in setting criteria for UK concern. Essentially, a
committee of experts, guided by criteria such as those given in Table 4, gives scientific advice to the UK
Chemical Stakeholder Forum. This forum takes advice from bodies having an interest in a chemical e.g. the
environmentalists, the manufacturing associations, the professional societies, the employee unions, the
consumer councils, etc and then gives considered advice to Government concerning bans, chemicals likely to
cause serious or irreversible damage to the environment, reassurances, import/export controls, the need for
new risk management measures, the necessity to generate new data concerning persistence, bio-accumulation
and toxicity, the need for research into substitute agents, and means of disposing of wastes and un-used
chemicals, etc.
This two year old campaign has already resulted in manufacturers accelerating acquisition of safety data,
their having such data independently refereed and reported, industry depositing such data with open access
bodies charged with responsibility of sharing screening and toxicity data (as part of a larger international
effort to reduce animal experiments), and manufacturers initiating research projects to find substitute agents
and to optimise (which usually means to reduce) the exposure to the PBT chemicals concerned.
All of these new regulations (a) are being integrated into EU systems which differ marginally between
countries and laws, (b) are over and above existing strict regulations for control of known hazards such as
radionuclides, pharmaceuticals, etc (see Table 5), (c) are reducing the need for some animal experiments, and
(d) bring an openness and trust to the perception that chemicals cause all the undesirable aspects of life
whereas so-called "natural" or "health" cures currently have the moral high ground. Yet to be achieved is the
suppression of cheaply-produced chemical imports from countries not having such stringent environment and
health protection regimes in force; the environment is potentially damaged just as much whether the agent is
made in a non-EU/OECD country or within those countries having modern environmental sustainability
standards. This suggests that the import of cheap non-environmental-friendly manufactured chemicals will,
eventually, become history.
Increasingly, chemical speciation data are being used to identit substitutes and to prepare safety
strategies. Further details on all these aspects can be read by dialling into the web sites listed in Table 6.
325
Vol. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Metals, Health and the Environment-Emergence ofCorrelations
Between Speciation and Effects
Table 6
Lists ofweb sites describing chemical hazard legislation.
http://www,defra,qov.uk/environmentJchemicals/ukpolic, htm
http://www,defra..qov,uklenvironmentlchemicalslcsflcriteria, htm
http:llwww.iccahpv.com/hpvchallen.cle/about.cfm
http:llwww.europa,eu. nt/comm/environment/chemicals/index, htm
http://www,defra.qov.uk/environment/chemicals/qIossarv.htm
http:llwww.environment-acl_ency.gov.uk
http://www,defra..Clov.uk/environmentlchemicalslcsflconcernlindex, htm
http://ecb.jrc.it/existinq-chemicals/
http:llwww.defra..qov, uklenvironmentlchemicalslstrateqyl03,htm#6
http://www,defra..qov, uklenvironmentlchemicalslachslindex,htm
http://www,food..qov,uklsciencelouradvisorsltoxicityl
http://ecb,eu.jrc. it
http,://ecb.jrc,it/existinq-chemicals
http:llwww.europa.eu.intJcomm.lenvironmentldocum101262 en.htm
http://www.iccahpv.com/
http://www,oecd.orq/pdf/MO0017000/MOO017224,pdf
http://www,ospar.org/eng/htmI/welcome. html
http://www, rptc. unep.ch/pops/defauIt.html
http:forum.europa,eu.int/Public/irc/env/wfd/I brary
http:llwww.defra,qov. uk/environmentJchemicals/eufuture.htm
http://www.cia.orq.uk/industry/confidence.htm
http:www.iccahpv.com/hpvchallenge/about.cfm
http://www,epa._qovlenvirolhtmllemcilchemreflindex. html
http://www,coshh-essentiaIs.orq.uk
The strongest link between environment and health is the human diet and chemical speciation factors
determine the uptake dependence upon intake. Approximately one third ofthe food that we eat is good for us,
one third has "something" good about it, and the last third is unnecessary. By "diet" we include not only solid
materials but also the drinks taken. Both may be a source ofnutritional and contaminating trace elements/3/.
In some instances the speciation may have a marked influence upon the uptake and in others the agent
may be taken-in unchanged. For example, the absorption of heme-iron from red meat is not significantly
influenced by the other ingredients of the whole meal imbibed as it generally enters mucosal cells directly as
inert heme complexes/6/. On the other hand, this dietary source differs from that of fruit and vegetable iron in
the intestinal tract. Supplements use the second pool.
326
David R. Williams Bioinorganic Chemistry andApplications
Slight ligand variations can be critical in the long term.- Many humans use yeast (saccharomyces
cerevisiae), or its extracts, as rich sources of trace elements but there are wide differences between families
ofpersons and batches ofyeast, different families having different bioavailabilities for different elements!
Our grandparents' generation advocated "eat your vegetables, go outside, play, and enjoy yourselves"-
this was another way of stating freshly harvested vegetables plus traces of soil impurities (we eat several
kilograms per lifetime), exercise, fresh air and relaxing enjoyment; all advice which is even more valuable
today. There is much scientific support for these tips. In general, in the absence of illness, therapy, weight
irregularities, and food fads, supplements are unnecessary/20,30/.
This is a complex topic that often is dependent upon ratios of different elemental species concentrations
but the primary consideration must be that competitive labile equilibria and the derived chemical speciation
determines the intake/uptake fraction.
(d)Speciation as a management tool
Powerful programs and computers from Vacca, Linder, May, and Perrin, coupled with the databases of
Martell, Smith, Pettit, Powell, and Perrin gave us the possibility of computer modelling of large equilibrium
systems /31-35/. Frausto da Silva and Williams used such speciation to explain many bioinorganic and'
evolutionary phenomena/19/. Taylor, Duffield, and Williams et al introduced and expanded the concept of
industrial and biological activities being chemical speciation dependent rather than total amount dependent/6/.
Environmental impact considerations, commencing with Carson, led to readily-biodegradable
replacement agents for powerful chelators such as EDTA, the latter persisting in the environment and
accelerating metal ion migration/2,36/. In practice, there are no direct "slot-in" ligand replacement solutions
because of the different factors which govern the complexing. Rather, all substitute ligand conditions need to
be tuned to match the desired speciation/37/.
The fact that all electron donor bio-ligands are pH-dependent in aqueous solution determines that there
will be a knock-on effect of having two or more cognate ligands present in the same solution and, usually
interacting through common pH-H+-Mn+
binary complex competition but occasionally, through mixed ligand
(ternary) complexes/38/.
This evolution of the subject has now led to the concept of blending the use of two or more ligands
being selected from speciation using modelling approaches to optimise desirable complex species, to
minimise side reactions, and to be compliant with best metal ion selectivity and environmental objectives as
described in section (a) organic ligands under foliar feeding.
Nowadays, the cost of a chemical influencing the environment is considered as seriously as purchase and
waste disposal prices. This is all reinforced by legislation insisting upon the biodegradability of organic
species and forbidding enhanced geosphere migration of metal ions in the presence of co-disposed ligands.
Often two different complexing tasks are best achieved by two different ligands and the best mixtures of
these can only be achieved by simulation rather than trial and error blending which would take an inordinate
time for testing. Without speciation simulation, value for research money is unachievable and so a long pilot-
327
VoL 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Metal.s, Health and the Envh'onment-Emergence ofCorrelations
Between Speciation and Effects
phase of expensive trial-and-error lab experiments is necessary. With simulation, just a few laboratory
experiments are needed to validate the models used.
The communication of such complex issues with decision making management has been facilitated by
introducing speciation efficiency indices (SEI) and readily biodegradability indices (RBI)/11/.
This paper has given two, from many, examples from pulp manufacture and foliar feeding of how the
chemical speciation optimisation of mixed ligand blends has revolutionised industrial/agricultural/healthcare
uses ofco-ordination chemistry.
CONCLUSIONS
Optimistically, management will become more comfortable with purchase and disposal prices and with
manufacturing and environmental costs. It has been firmly established that there are no direct 'mole for mole'
substitutes in environmental sustainability; rather, chemical speciation knowledge is required to optimise
performances and to reduce hazards. Other benefits achieved by introducing speciation simulation are listed
in Table 7.
Table 7
Some important industrial advantages ofspeciation knowledge compared with previous approaches.
Price advantages
Environmental cost benefits
Optimised chemical doses (More for less; avoiding distraction)
Improved and better-informed management decisions
Import controls ofnon-environmental friendly agents
Improvements over conditional constant data
Bespoke chelant solutions
More objective chemistry for planning applications
Chiral specificity benefits
Improvements in general education ought to include an understanding of hazard, doses and risk
relationships so that speciation data be understood, widely accepted, and used to make the best use of all our
planet's resources.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
am pleased to acknowledge the support of the Speciation Research Group in Cardiff University,
Associated Octel in Cheshire, KCL in Helsinki, ADOB in Poznam, and Procter and Gamble Technical
Centres in Egham.
328
David R. Williams Bioinorganic Chemistry andApplications
REFERENCES
1. UK Government strategy statement "Sustainable Production and Use ofChemicals", HMSO, 2001.
2. R. Carson, Silent Spring, Penguin, New York, 1962.
3. J.R. Duffield and D. R. Williams, Chemical Society Reviews, 15, 291-307 (1986).
4. L.G. Sill6n, Chemistry in Britain, 1967; p. 291-297.
5. D. R. Williams, Ed. An Introduction to Bioinorganic Chemistry, C. C, Thomas, Publishers, Springfield,
Illinois, 1976. ISBN 0-398-03422-2.
6. D. M. Taylor and D. R. Williams, Trace Element Medicine and Chelation Therapy, Royal Society of
Chemistry, Cambridge, UK, 1995.
7. OECD Report. Testing ofChemicals. Section 3. Degradation and Accumulation. OECD, Paris, 1996
8. Strategy for a Future Chemicals Policy. White Paper, Commission ofthe European Communities, COM
(2001) 88, 27 February 2001. (http://europa.eu.int/comm/environment/chemicals/O188-en.pdf)
9. C. Kezerian and W. Ramsey, US Patent 3158635, November 1964
10. D. Bassett, Octaquest E- A Biodegradable Chelating Agent, The Associated Octel Company, Patented
14th
November, 1997.
11. P.W. Jones and D. R. Williams, Inorganica Chimica Acta, 339, 41-50 (2002).
12. H.J.H. Fenton, Proc. Chem. Soc., 9, 113 (1893).
13. J. Davidge, C. P. Thomas, and D. R. Williams, Chemical Speciation and Bioavailability, 13(4), 129-134
(200).
14. M.D. Bloomberg and E. Y. Lipsitz, Agro Food Industry Hi-Tech, September/October 1999, 18-20.
15. Associated Octel, Ellesmere Port, Technical Bulletin no. 21, 1998.
16. L. Blake, Comparing the Effectiveness of the Ferric Chelates FeEDTA and FeEDDS on Maize and
Soyabeans. Report for Rothampstead Plant Laboratory, 1997.
17. T.D. Matthews and D. R. Williams, Analytica Chimica Acta, 480, 119-122 (2003).
18. P. W. Jones, D. M. Taylor, L. M. Webb, and D. R. Williams, Applied Radiation and Iso'topes, 57, 159-
165 (2002).
19. J. J. R. Frausto da Silva and R. J. P. Williams, The Biological Chemistry ofthe Elements, 2n Edition,
Oxford University Press, 2001.
20. J. Davidge and D. R. Williams, Speciation dependent intake and uptake of essential elements, in: Metal
lons in Biological Systems, A. Sigel and H. Sigel (Eds.), Vol 41, Dekker, New York, 2003, in press.
21. P.M. May and K. Murray, Talanta, 38, 1409-1418 (1991).
22. P.M. May and K. Murray, Talanta, 38, 1419-1428 (1991).
23. P.M. May and K. Murray, Talanta, 40, 819-825 (1993).
24. http://jess.murdoch.edu.au/jess/ess-home.htm
25. P. L. Brown and H. Wanner, Predicted Formation Constants using the Unified Theory of Metal lon
Complexation, OECD NEA Report, Nuclear Energy Authority, Paris, 1987.
26. R.W. Leggett and J. D. Harrison, Health Physics, 68, 484-498 (1995).
27. P.W. Jones and D. R. Williams, Applied Radiation and Isotopes, 54, 587-593 (2001).
329
Vol. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Metals, Health and the Environment-Emergence ofCorrelations
Between Speciation and lfects
28. P. W. Jones, D. M. Taylor, M. Finney, A. Iorwerth, D. Webster, K Harding, and D. R. Williams,
Journal ofWound Care, 10, 205 208 (2001).
29. D.R. Williams, What is Safe? The Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge, 1998.
30. P.W. Jones and D. R. Williams, The use and role of zinc in wound healing, in: Metal Ions in Biological
Systems, A. Sigel and H. Sigel (Eds.), Dekker, New York, 41,139-183 (2004).
31. P. Gans, A Sabatini, and A. Vacca, Inorg. Chim. Acta., 18, 237-239 (1976).
32. P.M. May, P. W. Linder and D. R. Williams, J. Chem. Soc. Dalton, 1977, 588-595.
33. R.M. Smith and A. E. Martell, Critical Stability Constants, Plenum Press, New York, 1989.
34. D.D. Perrin and B. Dempsey, BuffersforpH and Metal Ion Control, Chapman and Hall, London, 1974;
pp 176.
35. L. D. Pettit and K. J. Powell, IUPAC Stability Constant Database, www.iupac,org/projects/2000/2000-
004-2-500.html, 2000
36. D.R. Williams, Chemistry in Britain, 1998; pp. 48-50.
37. J. Davidge and D. R. Williams, Inorganica Chimica Acta, 2003, manuscript 005/FDS in press.
38. M. T. Beck and Nagypal, Chemistry of Complex Equilibria, Translation Editor D. R. Williams,
Horwood, Chichester, Ed 2, 1990.
330
