Biological and Clinical Aspects of Lanthanide
Coordination Compounds
Sudhindra N. Misra,Minaz A. Gagnani2'*, Indira Devi M. and Ram S. Shukla
Chemistry Department, Bhavnagar University, Bhavnagar 364 002, Gujarat, India
Central Salt and Marine Chemicals Research Institute, Bhavnagar 364 002, Gujarat, India
Chemistry Depatment, Nagaland University, Nagaland, India
SUMMARY
The coordinating chemistry of lanthanides, relevant to the biological, biochemical and medical aspects,
makes a significant contribution to understanding the basis of application of lanthanides, particularly in
biological and medical systems. The importance of the applications of lanthanides, as an excellent diagnostic
and prognostic probe in clinical diagnostics, and an anticancer material, is remarkably increasing. Lanthanide
complexes based X-ray contrast imaging and lanthanide chelates based contrast enhancing agents for
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are being excessively used in radiological analysis in our body systems.
The most important property of the chelating agents, in lanthanide chelate complex, is its ability to alter the
behaviour of lanthanide ion with which it binds in biological systems, and the chelation markedly modifies
the biodistribution and excretion profile of the lanthanide ions. The chelating agents, especially aminopoly
carboxylic acids, being hydrophilic, increase the proportion of their complex excreted from complexed
lanthanide ion form biological systems. Lanthanide polyamino carboxylate-chelate complexes are used as
contrast enhancing agents for Magnetic Resonance Imaging. Conjugation of antibodies and other tissue
specific molecules to lanthanide chelates has led to a new type of specific MRI contrast agents and their
conjugated MRI contrast agents with improved relaxivity, functioning in the body similar to drugs. Many
specific features of contrast agent assisted MRI make it particularly effective for musculoskeletal and
cerebrospinal imaging. Lanthanide-chelate contrast agents are effectively used in clinical diagnostic
investigations involving cerebrospinal diseases and in evaluation of central nervous system. Chelated
lanthanide complexes shift reagent aided 23Na NMR spectroscopic analysis is used in cellular, tissue and
whole organ systems.
Keywords: lanthanides, biological and chemical aspects, coordination compounds, X-ray contrast imaging,
23Na NMR spectroscopy.
To whom correspondence should be addressed.
155
l/ol. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Biological and Clinical Aspects ofLanthanide
Coordination Compounds
1. INTRODUCTION
Lanthanides, the fourteen chemically similar elements, as such occur only in traces in whole body assay
analyses. The amount of lanthanides occurring in different organs shows significant accumulation of these
metals, reported in kidney, liver, bones and spleen; however, the remaining organs contain only much smaller
concentrations of lanthanides. The amount of lanthanides in eyes has been found to vary in a wide range. The
most important and strikingly noticeable part of lanthanide biochemistry is the observation made in a number
of studies that the concentration of lanthanides accumulated in different organs varies widely with the
progress Of different stages in diseases/1/. Webster/2/reported much higher lanthanide accumulation in
infracted cardiac tissues, as compared to the normal ones, as early as in 1965. Esposito and coworkers could
locate dramatic upward changes of lanthanide level in the synovial fluid of patients suffering from
rheumatoid arthritis of the joints/3,4/. This observation led these workers to propose that lanthanides are
"excellent markers" for the "diagnosis and prognosis" of cancer in bones. The lanthanide accumulation has
been systematically examined in spleen where it is found that lanthanide level showed regular variation with
different degree of infection of the organ in alcoholic persons. Their findings were later on extended to the
investigations on liver occurrence of lanthanide, because liver is among the organs which shows great
preference for lanthanide accumulation. Their findings suggested that liver which showed great propensity
for lanthanide accumulation is damaged and hence becomes less elective in sequestering lanthanides in
humans with prolonged alcoholic addiction. This therefore led to significant spilling of lanthanide over
spleen, the organ which has a large accumulation of reticuloendothelial cells like liver and hence one could
explain higher levels of lanthanides in the spleen of alcoholic persons. The concentration of lanthanides in
malignant laryngeal tissues was found to be significantly lower than the normal ones; however, no noticeable
lanthanide could be detected in erythrocytic lysate from patients suffering from malignancy of laryngeal
tissues/3/. The concentration of lanthanide showed a dramatic spurt (up to 12 fold) in patients with laryngeal
carcinoma than that found in normal persons/5,6/.
The toxicity of a non-essential metal ion such as Ln+3
can be determined by its degree of deviation from
relevant essential metal ion, such as Ca++
as reference. The deviation spans the whole range of similarity with
respect to Ca++. Among the factors determining, how far these metal (Ln) ions deviate from Ca++, softness,
covalency and redox tendency are the most decisive. The high toxicity of other heavy metal ions or even
metals (Hg, Au, Pt, Pb etc) is due to strong deviations in these aspects. Their toxicity is therefore obvious and
cannot be avoided. Contrary to this, lanthanides are very similar to Ca in these aspects. The deviation,
however, originates due to deviation in charge, ionic radii and the presence and involvement of inner lying 4f
orbitals, and these deviations lead to minor adverse effects, which are related to the level of lanthanides in
vivo /7,8/.
2. COORDINATION CHEMISTRY OF LANTHANIDE, RELEVANT TO THE BIOLOGICAL
AND BIOCHEMICAL ASPECTS OF LANTHANIDES
Over the past ten years there has been a resurgence of interest in the coordination chemistry of lanthanide
156
Sudhindra N. Misra et al. Bio#organic Chemistry andApplications
complexes in solution in general, and in aqueous solution in particular. Enthusiasm in this work may be
related to the enhanced appreciation of rich functionality of the ground and excited states of lanthanide
complexes. The high spin paramagnetism and long electron relaxation times of Gd(llI) have made it
preeminent among the contrast enhancing agent for "Magnetic Resonance Imaging" (MRI) /7,8/. Related
complexes of Dy(III) and Tm(III) with much shorter electronic relaxation times are very effective NMR shift
reagents/9/. The controlled modulation of Lewis acidity across the lanthanide series allows the development
of the lanthanide complexes exhibiting phosphatase activity, while the redox activity of cerium, samarium,
europium and ytterbium may be expected to allow the development of selective oxidants and reductants/10/.
Lanthanide complexes in solution exhibit a well defined luminescence which is characterized by narrow
emission bands, large stokes shifts and long excited state lifetimes in aqueous solution up to 5 rains which
emit in red and green. This has been used in fluoroimmunoassays /11-14/ and shows considerable promise
for being used, in luminescence imaging and as sensors for certain bie.ctive ions/15-17/. Lanthanide(lll)
also gives characteristic 4f-4f transition bands, which are sharp, narrow and Lapporte forbidden in nature.
Under certain conditions created by coordination of certain types of chelating ligands including biomolecular
ligands, some of the 4f-4f intra configurational transitions undergo substantial intensification and high
sensitivity, towards even minor coordination changes. Such coordinational changes are the outcome of the
conformational changes or structural changes which occur during complexation with paramagnetic Ln(lll)
ions /18-20/. Comparative absorption spectroscopy like luminescence spectroscopy can also be used in
certain biological systems to probe the structural, conformational and even changes in the biological
activities of biomolecules when these are coordinatively bonded to paramagnetic lanthanides (lll) ion/19-
22/.
The complexation chemistry of ianthanide ions in solution, especially in aqueous solution, has prompted
us and others to progress from the state of getting excited in 1993/20,21/to being excited in 2002/22/. in the
past few years several excellent reviews have appeared, detailing aspects of contrast agents and solution
dynamics /7,8,23/, biomedical and NMR applications /7,8,24-26/, complex design features and
thermodynamic aspects of complex formation /7,27/, development of luminescent lanthanide complexes
operating in aqueous media /10-16, 23/, diagnostic and therapeutic use of lanthanide-texaphyrin, and
porphyrin complexes/28-31/. A comprehensive analysis of structural aspects of lanthanide-water bond has
been published on a number of lanthanide complexes with varying number of coordinated water molecules
involving nonacoordinated lanthanides possessing between one and nine coordinated water molecules
/31,32/. Much of the current research into the chemistry of lanthanide complexes has been carried out in the
solution state and rightly so. it is the properties of these coordination complexes in aqueous solution which
are of great importance not only scientifically but also biologically and medically and therefore commercially
too.
As a result of different degrees of stabilization, experienced by the 4f, 5d and 6s orbitals, occurring on
ionization of the neutral lanthanide metals (La-Lu, 57-71), lanthanide exist almost exclusively in their
trivalent state in coordination complexes and supramolecular assemblies /31,32/. Except tbr some arene
complexes involving bulky substituted benzene, or cyclooctatetrenes, covalency plays only a minor role in
Ln-Ligand dative bonds and the nature of coordination sphere is controlled by a subtle interplay between
157
Vol. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Biological and Clinical Aspects" ofLanthanide
Coordination Compounds
electrostatic interaction and interligand steric constraints/31,32/. Lanthanides, both in crystalline complexes
as well as in solutions, show variable coordination number (6_<CN<12), in which coordination number 9 is
the most predominant and several geometries are thus observed, leading to limiting success in the design of
molecular architecture with predetermined structure/32/.
For typical non-aquo complexes of lanthanides, all water ligands are not equidistant. Even for aquo ion
complex, containing given lanthanide, there is a variation in the length of Ln-OH2 bond. This is expected for
structures in which the coordination environment of water ligands are different, but the structures which have
same geometry around metal ion, (and thus the same coordination environment for ligands) have different
metal-water bond lengths. Rigid and semi rigid biomolecular receptors may help in, controlling the
coordination sphere, according to "Lock and Key" and "induced fit" complex and yielding nonacoordinated
lanthanide complexes with tricapped trigonal prism. (TTP) or distorted TTP structures. The number of
coordinated water molecules, which can be in st, 2"d
and 3'd
spheres, and the relative Ln-OH2 bond length, in
all play dominant role in the binding of lanthanide(IIl) to the biological substrate, and are decisive factors in
finding the biological chemistry and eventually their potential as drug material.
3. COORDINATION CHEMISTRY OF LANTHANIDE AND ITS BIOLOGICAL RELEVANCE
A large amount of work reported in literature has given ample proof that the primary site of lanthanide
interaction with living cell is only on the external surface, thereby the mechanism of binding of ianthanide to
cell membrane requires a closer and sincere attention. No doubt cell membranes are highly complex in
structure, the artificial membranes are generally used for understanding the interaction between the
phospholipid, the major constituent of cellular membrane with Ln(IIl) ion/33/. The steps of uptake of Ln(lIl)
involves surface absorption as the first step which can be represented by:
Ln(lll) + surface Ln(lll) surface ()
Alternatively the initial step for the biological system is to provide a chelating ligand L (phospholipid), in
case of Ln(lll) absorption by cell membrane, in order to capture the metal ion.
Ln(III)L LnL (external surface) (2)
Both steps (1) and (2) must be followed by a passage ofthe captured Ln(lll) deep into the cell:
Ln(lll) surface L-- Ln(lll) surface + L
Ln(lll) surface L Ln(III)L + surfa (3)
LnL + L -) Ln L + L (4)
158
SudhhTdra N. Misra et aL Bioinorganic Chemistry andApplications
The above changes are necessary for the entry of Ln(lII) inside the cell. The metal uptake on the cell
membrane and strong attachment to the external surface of the bilayer cell membrane can be due to
phosphate, which forms strong Ln(IIl) complex through polar phosphate end as given in Fig. 1. Lecithin
(phosphatidyl choline) being the most prominent phospholipid biomembrane, forms 1:2 complex with
Ln(III).
0
R---C----O--- CH2
R'__C--O--CH--- CH2--O
IIO
OO #(CH30---CH2"" CH- )3
Fig. I" Structure of Lecithin, R and R are long chain alkyl group.
The binding of lanthanide ion occurs at -PO2- groups, while the binding of different lanthanide ions for
vesicle bilayer is different, most probably due to the presence of interconvertible high affinity sites which are
also known as Relaxed (R) sites, low affinity sites and Tense (Y) sites. The R/T ratio is fixed and stands
around 0.14. The addition of Ln(Ill) ion increases R/T ratio significantly as a result of conversion of T sites
to R sites. This interconversion is mainly due to conformational changes induced by different Ln(lil) ion.
Paramagnetic Ln(lll), due to their NMR characteristics, help in distinguishing outer and inner polar heads of
bilayer vesicles. Bentz and coworkers /34/ have reported that in the presence of larger concentrations of
Ln(lll) ion, their role changed and this initiated the disruption of fusion of unilamellar phosphatidyl serine
liposome, most probably by altering the overall charge on the surface of the vesicle. During the process of
fusion of vesicles, a leakage of intracellular contents took place. No doubt the role of Ln(ill) is much faster
and stronger than the role played by Ca(ll) in the fusion of vesicle where the leakage of intracellular contents
took place/34/. EI-Fakahany et al. used EM (electron microscopy) EDAX (energy disperse analysis of X-
rays) studies in explaining Ln(lll) binding to biological membranes and their findings conclusively remarked
that the distribution of Ln(lli) was basically irregular and was in the form of"clusters" named as "Hot spots".
These hot spots or confined areas of lanthanide accumulation most probably play the role of Ca(il) channel
around receptor/35/.
The above findings have been found very effective in exploring lanthanide compounds (salts, complexes
as well as coordinated chelates) in drug development as well as during diagnosis and prognosis of diseases,
like multiple-sclerosis, atherosclerosis, cerebrospinal and cardiovascular, and oncological diseases/33, 34,
36, 37/. Very recently immensely useful investigations have been carried out, involving lanthanide induced
perforation of cell membrane. In gene recombination, the critical step that is necessary is to promote
transformation of plasmid in bacteria by incubation with CaCI2. The elevation in the permeability induced by
Ca(ll) was the main factor in perforation mechanism /38, 39/.Wang et al. /40,41/, reported that the
perforation of membranes was caused by Ln(lll) even when thcsc arc administcrcd in low conccntration.
159
Vol. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Biological and Clinical Aspects ofLanthanide
Coordination CompomTds
Huang et al. /42/ found Ln(lll) ions like Ca(ll), when applied Ln(lll) enhanced the transformation of plasmid
pBR 322 and PUC 18 in E.coli and highest transformation required a dose as low as 10-5
M of Ln(Ill). No
doubt higher concentration of lanthanide application inhibited plasmid transformation. Canada et al./43,a/
reported earlier that Ln(III) binding to cell surface is always accompanied by significant physiological
changes like rapid increase in membrane potential especially in Ehrlich ascite tumor cells and this type of
lanthanide (Tb3+) binding also led to substantial changes in electrophoretic behaviour. However, in their latter
publication Canada et al. /43,b/found that Tb(III) increases significantly the intracellular accumulation of
cisplatin. Their observation was soon supported, though indirectly, by permeability increase induced by
Ln(IIl) reported by Wang et al., who proposed the mechanism for perforation induced by metal ion like
Ln(III). Hence this has been used in the leaking of hemoglobin from erythrocytes by the presence of
lanthanide(III) salts or compounds/42/. Their findings/42-44/showed that lanthanide aquo complexes were
quite effective in perforation of erythrocytes. Complexation interaction is a triphasic process, with
perforation occurring in the second stage. This stage was characterized by sustainable and recoverable
hemolysis. EDTA washing could lead to resealing of the membrane of erythrocytes. These findings could
prove that Ln(lll) complexation with cell surface-active centre involves a predominantly electrostatic
interaction /43-45/. There are two types of pores, domain and crater shaped pores, which result due to
different concentrations of Ln(lll) used during investigations. Ln(lll) binding incurs conformational changes
followed by aggregation of membrane proteins/46-48/. Since lanthanide(lll) ions in aqueous medium are
always in the form of a nonacoordinated stereochemistry and in biofluids these undergo multimetal
multiligand complexation due to the presence of endogenous metal ions and physiological ligands. Therefore
even when Ln(III) ions are used, to alter .the biological properties in Ln(III) and biological substrate
interaction, complexation is undergone with the binding sites of the biological substrate by partial
substitution of coordinated water molecules surrounding tervalent lanthanide(III) in [Ln(H20)9]3+. The extent
of substitution depends on several factors like pH, composition and in vivo chemical environment. The
binding sites of the biological substrate which are preferred by Ln(III) for complexation involve donor sites
O>F>CI>N<S. The inherent strong oxyphilicity of lanthanide causes the interaction binding sites being
COOH, OH (phenolic) OH (hydroxylic), O (carbonyl), N (amino, imido, imino), S (sulphydryl). Nitrogen
sulphur donor sites of biomolecules also enter into complexation when Ln(III) undergoes chelation.
A number of techniques like Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM), H, 3C, 3p NMR, FT-IR luminescence
and absorption spectroscopy have been found very useful in such studies. Lanthanides consuming, Reactive
Oxygen Species (ROS), which are mainly the oxygen derived free radicals and peroxides, are the mediators
of a number of degenerative diseases. The 'antioxidants' are excellent substances used as drugs for the
treatment of degenerative diseases. Tocopherol, ascorbates and a number of other organic compounds are
considered as components of such drugs due to their antioxidant property shown towards ROS induced
degenerative diseases. Lanthanides are considered of high potential because of their inherent antioxidant
properties/22/. Wu et al. /49/ found LaC13 effective in inhibiting silica induced lipid peroxidation of lung
macrophagus and smaller doses of some other lanthanide chlorides inhibited lipid peroxidation in rat lung.
Wang et al. found almost all lanthanide compounds, especially chlorides, quite effective in inhibiting HzO2
mediated peroxidation of liposomes; however, when tertbutyl hydroperoxide was used to mediate the
peroxidation, lower lanthanides inhibited while the higher lanthanides promoted peroxidation. Interestingly
160
Sudhindra N. Misra et al. Bioinorganic Chemistry andApplications
Ln(lll) lost reactivity of peroxides when they were bound to membrane. The prior lanthanide(lll) became
more sensitive to oxidation attack. The lanthanide inhibiting ROS involves strong oxyphilicity inherent in
lanthanides, because of the availability of oxygen sites on these free radicals, makes them excellent targets
for Ln(III) coordination (attack). This causes lanthanide to play the role of scavenger of reactive oxygen
species, therefore presenting good potential for lanthanide as a future drug for a number of degenerative
diseases due to ROS. No doubt the involvement of lanthanide in ROS removal is quite different from the
inhibition of ROS by organic compounds like Tocopherol, Ascorbate etc. Most of the organic antioxidants
scavenge free radicals by single electron exchange with radicals and thus transform themselves into radicals,
hence acting as "pro-oxidants". Ln3+
very easily interacts with either free radicals or peroxides but is not
transformed as radicals. However the mechanistic understanding about the role of Ln(lll) as scavenger of
antioxidant is very meager.
The lability of lanthanide complexes, strong oxyphilicity, very fast water exchange reaction, non-
directionality of lanthanide ligand bond and varying coordination number, all contribute towards lanthanide
interaction with biomolecules. The ionic size of Ln(III) varies from one lanthanide to another lanthanide; in
addition, the ionic size of a particular lanthanide also varies significantly with the coordination number.
Some salient properties of calcium and lanthanide are listed in Table 1.
Smaller size of chelating biomolecular ligand can even suit larger lanthanides with lowered coordination
number. Similarly small lanthanides can expand their coordination number and can form stable chelates with
larger biomolecules. This can explain the different coordinating power (also biological behaviour) of
different lanthanides under different physiological conditions.
Table 1
Salient properties of calcium and lanthanide
Property
Coordination number
Coordination geometry
Donor atom preference
Ionic radius (A)
Type of bonding
Hydration number b
Water exchange rate constant (sl)
Diffusion coefficient (cm2/s 105)
Crystal field stabilization
Ca(II)
6-12 reported
6 or 7 favoured
Highly flexible
O>>N>>S
1.00- 1.18 (CN6- 9)
Ionic
5 x 108
1.34
None
Ln(II)
6-12 reported
8 or 9 favoured
Highly flexible
O>>N>>S
0.86- 1.22 (CN6- 9)
Ionic
8or9
5 x 107
Ln(llI), 1.30
Negligible
161
Vol. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Biological and Clinical Aspects ofLanthanide
Coordination Compounds
4. LANTHANIDE ALTERING THE STABILITY OF MICROTUBULES
Significant disorganization in cytoskeleton including microtubules and microfilaments is a phenomenon
of common occurrence in tumor cells and apopto sized cells. Microtubules undergo stabilization and repair
and this occurs during the action of some anticancer drugs like TAXOL. Depolymerization of cytoskeleton is
one of the most relevant steps in the apoptosis process. Lanthanide compounds have been shown to influence
the stability of microtubules. Xiao et al. /50/found mixed lanthanide compounds, increasing the amount of
orderliness of microtubules in PAMC82 cells. Soto et al. /51/ found different lanthanides showing different
behaviour and this was ascribed to similarity of Ln(III) predominantly with Ca++
or similarity of Ln(III) with
Mg2/, because Ca++
ion was found to destabilize microtubules contrary to the strengthening of microtubule
activity induced by Mg2/. The lower lanthanides behaved more like Ca+/, because of their larger size and
hence propensity of exhibiting relatively higher coordination number. Heavier lanthanides like Tb, Dy, Ho
being smaller in size behaved more like Mg2+
having more potential for strengthening the microtubules. Soto
et al. attributed the role of Ln(III) and different behaviour of different lanthanides to their effect of GTPase
activity of tubulin. The microtubule formation tubulin-GTP-Mg/+
system is a multiple step process, where
the role of Mg2/
is very important because it binds to tubulin and thus modulating the contbrmation to favour
self association of tubulin as shown in Fig. 2.
Fig. 2: Probable steps involved in the formation ofmicrotubule.
As we have explored the complexation of mononucleotides with paramagnetic lanthanide using
nucleotide, mono-, di- and triphosphates, in aqueous and in aquated organic mediums at pH as low as 1.00 to
as high as 6.5, using 4f-4f transition spectroscopy tH NMR and 31p NMR spectroscopy. We have found that
different lanthanides showed different stability of Ln-mononucleotide complexes. The nature of the
nucleoside moiety and the number of phosphate groups significantly affected the degree of complexation.
The size of Ln(lll) ion also played an important role.
Comparative absorption spectroscopy, involving electric dipole Lapporte forbidden 4f-4f transitions, have
shown that different mononucleotides showed different affinities towards Ln(lll). In general the binding of
Ln(lll) with nucleotides derived from pyrimidine bases is weaker than the binding of Ln(lll) with nucleotides
derived from purine bases, irrespective of the nature of the experimental conditions. We have also observed
that in aqueous medium lanthanide interaction with mononucleotides shows the presence of both syn and anti
conformation. The increase in the organic solvent percentage resulted in the shift in the equilibrium towards
162
Sndhindra N. Misra et al. Bioinorganic Chemistry andApplications
anticonformations of the Ln-nucleotide complex/52-55/.
Our studies also showed that in aqueous solutions, Ln(III) initiates the hydrolysis of NTP (nucleotide
triphosphate) and this reaction was appeared to be dependent on H+
ion concentration and the nature of
lanthanides/55-58/.
The important steps in the association of tubulin are GTP hydrolysis and tubulin binding to GTP, and
both of these activities are governed by Mg2/. With association process, setting in the size of regulatory effect
proceeds and also consequently controls the shape and size of microtubule. Ln3/
when administered in small
doses behaves like Mg2/
supporting the association of tubulin. However when administered in high doses,
Ln3/
interferes with the assembly, by distorting the protein conformation, altering crosslinking and
consequently destabilizing the polymers.
5. LANTHANIDES AS EXCELLENT DIAGNOSTIC AND PROGNOSTIC PROBES IN CLINICAL
DIAGNOSTICS AS WELL AS ANTICANCER MATERIALS
In 1931 Maxwell and coworkers /59/ used an aqueous solution of lanthanum chloride for treating cancer
by administering LaCI3 solution intraperitoneally. However, it was only the work of Anghileri and coworkers
which could successfully demonstrate the strong inhibitory effects of LAG13 and other lanthanide compounds
on the growth of sarcoma tumors in rats. Excellent work has come out of Anghileri's laboratory, on
lanthanide compounds and complexes in cancer research as a diagnostic and prognostic probe/60-63/. These
workers used Ln(III) as an adjunct to the distraction of tumors by using a combination of the complexes of
two different lanthanides specially derived form hydroxy carboxylic acids for treating animals and also in
some cases involving humans suffering from Yoshida Sarcoma. The results were. found astounding/63/.
In our preliminary studies we have used a combination of two or even three different lanthanide
complexes derived from citric and mandelic acids on rats with Yoshida Sarcoma and found encouraging
results/64, 65/. The synthesis and reactivity of these citrates, mandelates and tartarates have been reported
from our laboratories in 1966. Though our study is quite preliminary, the results are very promising.
Lanthanide citrates and mandelates, when administered along with drug hematoporphyrins, showed drastic
reduction of growth of Ehrlich ascite cells, much better than that obtained by using hematoporphyrin alone.
We attributed this to much improved absorption of the drug due to the presence of lanthanide coordination
complexes/66/.
The complexes of lanthanides are getting more and more applications in cancer therapy and the most
important of these are those derived from poly (aminocarboxylic) acids. The formation constants of the
lanthanide chelates with these acids are of the order of 1020 to 1025, which enables them to remain intact,
while diffusing into extracellular spaces with rapid clearance through kidneys. Due to the high
thermodynamic stability and extreme kinetic inertness of these poly (amino carboxylates) of Ln(lll), the
intact excretion enhances, thereby lowering considerably the body retention ofchelated Ln(lll) complexes.
These days diagnostic imaging procedures/67, 68/are a routine part of modern medicine and are useful
in performing the initial diagnosis, the planning ofthe treatment and post treatment evaluation.
163
Vol. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Biological and Clinical Aspects ofLanthanide
Coordination Compounds
6. Ln(lll)COMPLEXES BASED X-RAY CONTRAST IMAGING
Even with the recent phenomenal growth of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and ultrasound
procedures, X-ray imaging studies remain even today the workhorse of modern radiology. Currently 75-80%
ofall diagnostic imaging procedures, as listed in Table 2, are X-ray related/68-73/.
Table 2
X-ray diagnostic procedures by body system
Body System Diagnostic Procedures Share %
Vasculature
Organs
Angiography, arteriography
(arteries), venography (veins),
ventriculography and interven-
tional angiography
Brain CT, abdominal CT, liver
CT, hepatosplenography, pyelo-
graphy, cholecystography
Spinal canal
Urinary tract
and bladder
Joints
Uterine cavity
and fallopian
tubes
Technique
a) intravenous or intra-arterial
administration of soluble contrast
media during imaging
b) patient is catheterized by admin-
istering CA near the region of
interest
c) interventional procedures include
vessel remodeling procedure such
as angioplasty, atherectomy during
angiographic visualization
d) angiographic procedure
General i.v. administration of contrast
agent prior to image acquisition, often
before and after the CA administration
images are taken.
Myelography (spine) and cister- Direct injection of CA into spinal canal
nography (brain) or subarachnoid space
Retrograde pyelography
urethrography
and
Arthrography and diskography
Hysterosalpingography
Contrast administration
catheter placed in bladder
through
CA is administered directly into joints
Contrast agents administered to uterus
and/or to fallopian tubes
17%
54%
2%
3%
2%
2%
Rest 20%
To better delineate soft tissues regions, such as cardiovascular system and cerebrospinal systems, safe and
efficient X-ray contrast agents (also called radiographic contrast agents, radiopaque agents or
roentgenographic agents) were long sought after. Contrast agents are a class of pharmaceuticals that, when
administered to a patient, enter and pass through anatomic regions of interest to provide transient contrast
enhancement. These contrast enhancing agents are then completely excreted renally from patients without
being metabolized.
164
Sudhindra N. Misra et al. Bioinorganic Chemistry and Applications
A metal chelate complex is a coordination compound of metal ion with a chelating ligand. The most
important property of the chelating agent is its ability to alter the behaviour of metal ion with which it binds
in biological systems. The biodistribution and excretion profile of these metal ions will be markedly modified
on chelation, leading generally to lowering the in vivo absorption of metal ion. The chelating agents,
especially amino poly carboxylic acids, (EDTA, CDTA, HEDTA, DTPA, DCTA etc) and DOTA, HP-DO3A
etc. being hydrophilic, increase the proportion of their complex excreted from complexed metal ion from
biological systems. Conversely a lipophilic chelating agent such as EOB-DTPA (ethoxy benzyl DTPA), Fig.
3, results in its metal complexes being taken up by the liver and bile and excreted fecally.
O/R N R HO'C-"j
COH
R = OH, HsDTPA; R = NHMe, HIDTPA-BMA
HsEOB-DTPA
Fig. 3: Chelating agents DTPA and EOB-DTPA.
The first testing of (NMG).GdDTPA (NMG-N-methyl glucamine) as an X-ray contrast agent in humans
occurred serendipitously, almost paralleling the first human experience with iodinated contrast/74/. The easy
availability of (NMG)_GdDTPA for human studies /75-78/ has made additional diagnostic /79-84/
investigations possible. (NMG)2GdDTPA has found wide use in digital substraction angiography (DSA), for
diagnosing the patients suffering from renal inefficiency or allergy with iodinated contrast agents. The CA
(contrast agents) is yielding adequate diagnostic information. Renal functions remained stable. GdDTPA-
BMA (GADODIAMIDE-OMNISCAN) is an approved contrast agent prepared from a linear chelating group
DTPA-Bis (methyl) amide ligand. The ligand contains only three anionic groups and hence the CA is neutral
or nonionic in nature. The pharmaco-kinetic and biodistribution profile of Gd DTPA-BMA is similar to
(NMG)_GdDTPA. Gadodiamide, an extracellular agent, is rapidly excreted renally, with elimination half
time around 70 min. A computed tomography (CT) phantom study showed that GdDTPA-BMA produced the
same level of X-ray contrast enhancement as that of produced by (NMG)zGdDTPA. The utility of GdDTPA-
BMA as X-ray contrast enhancing agent was very effective in arterial angiography specially in the diagnosis
and treatment evaluation of renal artereostenosis in patients suffering from renal insufficiency/85-87/. The
images produced by GdDTPABMA depicted renal artery occlusions and provided far better delineation of
the renal vessel.
GdEOB-DTPA is currently in the late stages of clinical testing as an MR! agent for liver and spleen. The
addition of lipophilic ethoxy-benzyl group to the carbon backbone of DTPA profoundly altered the
165
Vol. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Biological and Clinical Aspects ofLanthanide
Coordination Compounds
pharmaco-kinetic and biodistribution properties of (NMG)2GdDTPA. Following its administration, Gd EOB-
DTPA rapidly distributes into the extracellular fluid space. However, unlike (NMG)2GdDTPA, which is
exclusively excreted through the kidneys, Gd EOB-DTPA is taken by hepatocytes (pently) during its short
plasma residence time, through the organic anion plasma membrane transport system to provide a clinically
very useful MRI and X-ray contrast enhancement of the liver and spleen before being fecally excreted
/88,89/.
GdHP-DO3A (GADOTERIDOL-or ProHance) and GdDO3A-butrol (GADOVIST-gadobutrol) are both
neutral gadolinum chelates used effectively as contrast agents in MRI as well as in CAs for CT. The low
toxicity of these CAs permits one to use even the higher doses of these CAs for much enhanced imaging
safely, which helps in imaging the abnormalities, even in their nascent stages of cancer and thus this early
detection makes planning of treatment very easy. Both of these helped in detecting brain tumors even at very
early stages using CT. The pharmaco-kinetic profile of Gd HP-DO3A and Gd DO3A- butrol are similar to
that of (NMG)2 Gd DTPA. Once injected, they rapidly distribute from vascular compartment in the extra
cellular fluid space and predominantly excreted through the renal system. Their high solubility allow even
preparation of a solution up to one molar concentration. GdDO3A butrol can also be developed as an
alternative X-ray contrast agent.
7. LANTHANIDE CHELATES WITH POLY(AMINO CARBOXYLIC) ACIDS AS "CONTRAST
ENHANCING AGENTS" FOR MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING (MRI)
Like platinum in cancer therapeutics and technetium in cardiac scanning, the unique magnetic properties
of gadolinium(Ill) ion placed it right in the middle of revolutionary development in clinical medicine
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). Up to 1987 only 39 papers were published on Gd(III)DTPA in MRI. In
the late 90's (1999) approximately 600 references appear each year on MRI using Gd chelates as contrast
enhancing agents/90/. MRI, having different properties of CA, is relied upon by neurologist, cardiologists,
urologists, ophthalmologist and even gastroenterologists world wide, in search of new ways to visualize
functional changes in the body.
Gd(III) ion is too toxic at the level used in MRI and it cannot be injected as such. DTPA is the choice of
ligand because it forms very stable chelate with Gd3+
and facilitates renal excretion. Cyclic
polyaminocarboxylates of Gd(III) like DOTA are less favoured because the preparation of 1, 4, 7, 10-tetra-
aza cyclodecane was difficult.
Macrocycles derived from DOTA and substituted in tetraaza cycle or on the acetate arms have been
prepared either by linking chelates to a macromolecule or by achieving a higher hydrophobicity. The
increased hydrophobicity favours hepatobiliary uptake and excretion and this leads to better imaging of
kidney and liver/91/. There is only one water molecule in the first coordination sphere of the complexed
Gd(lll) with tetra-acetic ligands derived from cyclen and syntheses have been done to obtain chelates with a
higher degree of hydration even if it leads to a decrease in the thermodynamic stability of the Complexes. For
that purpose, cyclen can be selectively substituted on one, two or three nitrogen atoms in nearly all possible
stereochemical arrangements. The preparation of 1,7-disubstituted cyclen is quite easy. Ligands like DO2A
166
Sudhindra N. Misra et al. Bioinorganic Chemistry and Applications
are readily obtained /92/ and the trade-off between a higher hydration number, because of a more open
structure and a lower stability, because of a smaller number of coordinating groups, which might not be too
unfavourable since DO2A has been reported to form stable lanthanide chelates/93-96/. Weisman et al./94/
obtained a more rigid chelate of DO2A type by bridging tetra-aza ring by ethylene or propylene group.
DO(EN)2A (Fig. 4) is one among many examples illustrating the remarkable flexibility that has been
achieved for modification of structure of cyclen.
Fig. 4: Synthesis of DO(EN)2A.
The kinetic inertness and thermodynamic stability of new and modified DOTA ligands are of the utmost
importance, since stability affects directly the toxicity ofthe Gd(lll) chelates. DOTA itself forms exceedingly
stable lanthanide chelates, presumably because of the tetra-aza cycle which is able to adopt its most stable
conformation, a square conformation, in which all lone electronic pairs of nitrogen are directed toward metal
ion. The kinetics, of formation and even more remarkably, of dissociation are extremely slow, which is a
unique feature in the coordination chemistry of4f elements.
Since during the progress of disease, the water contents in the tissue show remarkable variation, NMR
signals are related to the water content in the tissues when MRI is being investigated. The increased number
of coordinated water molecules found in the contrast enhancing agent makes better contribution towards
much improved delineation of tissues during imaging. A large number of Gd(III) chelates have been
synthesized and used as contrast agents in clinical trials. Fig. 5 shows some well known commercially
available contrast agents showing the coordination environment around Gd(lll).
167
I/ol. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Biological and Clinical Aspects ofLanthanide
Coordination Compound
H.O-H
H-O-H
IGIIK:)I'I"AXHIO)P(l,lulnI-bne'")
-'a Cr 0 0--"
HoO-H
lGdllII'-IX)3A}(HIO)I [Gd([X)3^-butrol)(H;D)l(Gadovist')
Fig. 5: .Coordination environment around Gd(Ill).
Gd DTPA, the most widely used contrast agent, has one coordinated water molecule present in the st
coordination shell and it is this water molecule which makes this chelate an effective CA for MRI
investigations. A number of chelating ligands have been synthesized. All structures provide a nona
coordinated environment for Gd(lll) bound with three nitrogen and five monodentate carboxylate oxygen of
DTPA ligands. The resultant Gd(lll) complexes have a structure of either distorted TTP (tricapped trigonal
prism) or CSAP (mono capped square antiprism)/97,98/.
Several structures (Fig. 6) of DTPA-bisamide complexes, [LnDTPA-BMA (H20)], [Ln(DTPA-BEA)
(H20)] and [Ln(DTPA-BBA) (HO)] have been determined. All these complexes involved nonacoordinated
amide oxygen and one coordinated water molecule. There are four possible mode of configurations for the
placement ofamide groups (syn, cis, anti and trans), which are depicted in Fig. 7.
A number of isostructural Ln(lll) complexes of 15-DTPA-EAM are crystallized as binuclear
centrosymmetric structures with two Ln(lll) ions located between two ligand molecules. The nona-
coordinated Ln(lll) were coordinated to an amide oxygen, two carboxylate oxygens and amide nitrogen
donors from one ligand, and an amide oxygen, a carboxylate oxygen and an amine nitrogen from second
ligand. The coordination sphere around Ln(lll) is completed by a water molecule /99,100/. The ring is
expanded with 16-DTPA-PAM/100/, 16 DTPA-HPAM /101/ or 17 DTPA-BAM /102/ as ligands. Several
structures of DTPA-BMA, DTPA-BBA, DTPA-BMEA are given in Fig. 8.
The ligands 16 DTPA-PAM, 16 DTPA-HPAM or 17 DTPA-BAM (Fig. 9) can wrap around the metal
center, which lead to the formation of mononuclear structure with tervalent Ln(lll). The geometry around
metal centre is TTP with amide sitting in a syn configuration.
168
Sudhindra N. Misra et al. Bioinorganic Chem&try andApplications
HO OH OH
Cy:DTPA MS-264-L
,,o 6v Yh o -',,ore, r" .o--% o.
o ,..,.o o.,.' o 0
k..fo oy) o
kL-325-L COPTA
MP-2269
BOPTA
o h,o o,/ o
EOB.-DTPA
DTPA-LI
Fig. 6: Structures for lanthanide complexes.
Fig. 7" Four possible configurations (cis, trans, syn, and anti) of DTPA bisamides in a TTP arrangement.
169
Vol. 2, Nos: 3-4, 2004 Biological and Clinical Aspects ofLanthanide
Coordination Compounds
DTPA-BMA DTPA-BBA DTPA-BMEA
o
OH HOJ OH
/ ! I"1/
vN.N'vNvN"Nv
o o
DTPA-BEA DTPA-BnpA DTPA-BPDA
DTPA-BGLUCA
. OH OHOH
H HO H
HN/"v'N'"N'Nv"N"'Nv/Nl-If"11" HOHOH OHOH
_.t o L,.O o,. o
I 1 [ 1
OH OH OH OH OH"
DTPA-BENGALAA
Fig. 8: Several structures of DTPA-bisamides.
HO' HO' HO"
HO...N..../N N..If.OH HO'"N"/"N
N"OH HO'N..."N
"'N"f'OH
o
Lo oJ o o Lyo oyJ o o L.o oyJ o
HN/''NH "2
HN......__NH
15-DTPA-EAM 16-DTPA-PAM 17-DTPA-BAM
HO..ifN..../N-...N-.'OH HOy"NN
"N'OH HO.N.-.../"N"...N.OH
o L.ro o. o o L,o o. o o L,flo o. o
HN,,/NH HN--y--NH HNNH
"3 OH
18-DTPA-PenAM 16-DTPA-HPAM 17-DTPA-cisC=CBAM
HO."..N,...."N".,/"
N"OH
HO' HO'
0
VHO O/J 0
HN,HO'N''
N "/ N"l"OH HO'N''/N"'NI'OH 'NH HN"o o o %0 o
.o. o
HN NH NO,U......N...--.... v.JL.OH
HN
,.OL__,/ "SN
H HO'o0
N'''N
21-DTPA-OAM 18-DTPA-dien 30-DTPA-en-DTPA-en
Fig. 9: Structures of ligands wrapable around the metal center.
170
Sudh#dra N. Misra et al. Bio&organic Chem&oy andApplications'
Ln(lll) complexes with 18 DTPA-dien crystallize out as M4L4 tetramers involving nona coordinated
environment around Ln(III). 18 DTPA-dien provides eight donor atom to one Ln(III) and bridging
carboxylate donor to an adjascent Ln(III).
Like the modified DTPA chelating agents discussed above the cyclic polyamino polycarboxylic acids like
DOTA, DOTA (with cyclen units), Fig. 10, have also been modified to form complexes with paramagnetic
Ln(III) like Gd(III).
O .OH
HO,,.., f...."
O .OH O ,,OH
o.
HO 0
OH 0
tx.)TA t-IP-DO3A DO3A-butrol DOTMA
Fig. 10: Structures of polyamino polycarbocylic acids with cyclen units.
Rapid exchange interconversion (Fig. 11) between wrapping isomers of Ln(DTPA) was observed to result
in a psuedo mirror plane, reducing the number of observed proton resonances by half.
Ln DOTA complexes give solution IH NMR spectra, which also depict the presence of two
interconverting diastereomers. The more predominant isomer has CSAP geometry while the minor one has
distorted CSAP structure. Thus there are four stereoisomers, two pairs of enantiomers which are
interconvertible in solution by either ring inversion (6666) and (,,,,) isomers or acetate arm rotation
(interconversion of A and A isomers). Either process alone results in exchange between CSAP and twisted
CSAP as shown in Fig. 12.
The simple equation which relates the lifetime, chemical shift and relaxation rates of the solvent
molecules in the inner sphere to NMR observable is given by/90/:
q Pm
(5)
TIIS Tim + :m
171
Vol. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Biological and Clinical Aspects ofLanthanide
Coordination Compounds
where superscript, IS, refers to inner sphere, Pm is mole fraction of the bound solvent nuclei, q is the number
of bound water (or solvent) nuclei per metal ion (i.e., hydration number), rm is the life time of the solvent
molecule in the complex and is the reciprocal of the solvent exchange rate kex. The subscript, m, refers to the
shift or relaxation rate ofthe solvent molecule in the inner sphere.
From the above equation one can easily infer that ifthe water exchange rate is fast enough such that rm <<
Tim, then the relaxation rate enhancement for the coordinated solvent molecule is (l/Tm). The above
equation clearly demonstrates that increasing the hydration number q, will increase the inner sphere
relaxivity. However the increase in q often leads to a decrease in thermodynamic stability as well as kinetic
inertness. NMRD (nuclear magnetic relaxation dispersion) or the measurement of relaxation rates as a
function of magnetic field, is widely used for characterizing contrast agent /90/. Electronic relaxation
parameters are often estimated using NMRD curves to SBM (Solomon-Bioembergen-Morgan) equation.
Coordinatively saturated Gd(III) complexes also enhance relaxivity which occurs via outer sphere
relaxation and second sphere relaxation as shown in Fig. 13.
Second sphere relaxation occurs when water molecules in the second coordination sphere (H-bonded to
lone pairs on carboxylate oxygen atoms), are relaxed via a dipolar mechanism. Outer sphere relaxation arises
from the translational diffusion of water molecules near the Gd(lIl) complex/103-105/. The water exchange
rates for Gd(Ill) chelate (CA) has been found to be significantly lower (3 to 4) orders of magnitude than that
shown by [Gd(H20)8]3+. The water exchange rate also varies from one contrast agent to another/106-107/.
Merbach and coworkers /8/ have investigated the contrast agents which are binuclear and trinuclear or
even multinuclear chelates (Fig. 14).
Fig. 11: Rapid exchange interconversion between wrapping isomers of Ln(DTPA).
172
Sudhindra N. Misra et aL Bioinorganic Chem&oy andApplications
Fig. 12:
A(&) CSAI'
Two diastereomeric conformations (CSAP and twisted CSAP) for lanthanide complexes of
DOTA. Pairs of enantiomers exist for the major isomer (A-kkk) and A(6666)) and for the minor
isomer (A(kkk) and A (&%56)) of [Ln(DOTA)].
bulk
0-Hwater 0-H H
o ..o
O-H "H \ ","" /-
H IN,:, ,,0I..:Sd inner-so,ere
Nd sphere O-H'water
Fig. 13: Inner- sphere, 2nd
sphere and bulk type.water.
173
Vol. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Biological and Clinical Aspects ofLanthanide
Coordination Compounds
0
OH
IN/OH0
(DO3A)LI
OH OH /
(DO3AIL3
o
(DO3A),,L6
H H
oy o
(DO3^)LB
(DO3A)L2
OH
HO OH OH
H HO
O-0/
(DO3A)L4 .(DO3A),L5
o
.-O-,'O",-,N
(DO3A)L70
0 (,,NyN.,/N)t,NN) 0
H H
N
H (DO3A)2L9
Fig. 14: Bi, tri and multi nuclear chelates.
There is a need to improve the relaxivity of the chelates and the obvious way to ameliorate relaxivity is to
increase xR. Rigidity obviously causes optimization of TR as a function of molecular weight, in lanthanide
complexes derived from polyamino polycarboxylic acids. Hence a lot of interest has been gathered on
conjugation of low molecular weight chelates GdDTPA, GdDOTA and GdHP-DO3A with macromolecular
ligands in order to alter remarkably the biophysical and pharmacological properties of the low molecular
weight contrast agents. This conjugation increases rotational correlation time and hence the relaxivity in
terms of per Gd(III) ion increases significantly. Combined with tissue specific targeting moieties, such
polymeric conjugates provide better (Fig. 15) MRI applicability by imaging even the low concentration
receptors. Synthetic linear polymers like commercially available polylysines with reactive epsilon amino
group of lysine backbone are modified on conjugation with linear and cyclic polyamino polycarboxylates
/108/. Polyethelene glycol PEG is another macromolecule which modulates the pharmaco-kinetic properties
CA/109/.
Dendrimer based agents of three dimensional oligomers possess highly branched structure e.g.
polyamidoamine (PAMAM) (Fig. 16) with uniform surface chemistry. These dendrimers have sufficiently
rigid structure and their rolational correlation time is the result of overall tumbling of the molecule. One such
commercially available dendrimer is Gadomer- 17 which is derived from a lysine-functionalized 1, 3, 5
benzene tricarboxylic acids/110,111/. GdDTPA-cascade-24-polymer is a PAMAM dendrimer functionalized
with 24 Gd-DTPA chelates/112-114/.
174
Sudhindra N. Misra et aL Bioinorganic CheJnL.tty andApplications
Fig. 15: Synthetic linear polymers.
Conjugation of antibodies and other tissue specific molecules to Gd(III) chelates has led to a new type of
disease specific MRI contrast agents. Curtet et al. found the conjugation of Gd(III)-polylysine chelate with
anticarcino embryonic antigen monoclonal antibodies as new contrast agent for MRI/115/.
These conjugated MRI contrast agents with improved relaxivity, function in the body similar to drugs.
Their in vivo properties like pharmacokinetics, biodistribution safety, etc. are dependent on the properties
which determine drug behaviour. The induced hydrophobicity of different degrees, in this structurally
different but functionally quite similar new generation of contrast agents, is responsible for their in vivo
characteristics.
There are several features of CA assisted MRI which make it particularly effective for musculoskeltal and
cerebrospinal imaging.
a) superior soft tissue contrast resolution of MRI relative to that of computed tomography(CT),
175
Vol. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004
neraton0
Biological and Clinical Aspects ofLanthanide
Coordination Compounds
Geniiou2
PANAM.TU.DTPA
Fig. 16: Generation 2 PAMAM thiourea DTPA dendrimer.
b) the ability of MRI to image, body directly in the sagittal and coronal planes as well as the axial plane,
c) the ability to vary the level of contrast between the tissues by manipulating the MR! pulse sequence
parameters,
d) the lack of artifacts from beam hardening effects, and
e) the capacity to image in presence ofmetallic hardware (specially effective for musculoskettal imaging)
MR! ofthe musculoskeletal system currently appears to hold the greatest promise in five major areas.
1) the noninvasive imaging of spine and disc diseases,
2) the early detection ofosteonecrosis ofthe femoral head,
3) the evaluation ofthe extent and tissue characteristics ofmusculoskeltal tumors,
4) the assessment of focal and diffuse marrow replacing processes, and
5) the depiction of articular and periarticular structures out of several imaging techniques, the spin echo (SE)
technique being most handy and prevalent worldwide. This technique yields gray scale anatomical images
in which the intensity ofa tissue is a complex function ofT, T2 and spin density ofthat tissue.
176
Sudhindra N. Misra et al. Bioinorganic Chemistry and Applications
The relative magnetic resonance Gray scale for body tissue in general is shown in Table 3. By
varying the pulse sequence, no doubt one can markedly vary the contrast between two tissues.
The brighter the image (higher proton density), the shorter is the T and/or the longer is the T2. The darker
the image (lower proton density), the longer is the T and/or the shorter is the T2.
Table 3
Magnetic resonance spin-echo gray scale in descending
order ofbrightness
Fat
Marrow and cancellous bone
Brain and spinal cord
Viscera
Muscle
Fluid filled cavities
Ligaments and tendons
Blood vessels with rapid flow
Compact bone
Air
8. SOME EXAMPLES USING GADOLINUM(III) DTPA AS CONTRAST AGENTS IN CLINICAL
DIAGNOSTIC INVESTIGATIONS INVOLVINGCEREBROSPINAL DISEASES AND IN
EVALUATION OF CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
At Vanderbilt, a good number of patients with intracranial neoplastic disease were studied on MRI, both
prior to and following intravenous injection of 0.1 mmol/kg of Gd-DTPA in phase I, phase II and phase
clinical investigations. Extensive clinical and laboratory testing were performed before and after CA
injection. Serum iron level showed upsurge transiently following injection. However, this serum iron level
later on (after 10-40 hrs) had begun to return towards normal and perhaps most noticeable was the total
absence of nausea or vomiting associated with the injection of the contrast media. The doses required for
required contrast enhancement were about twenty fold lower dose of Gd-DTPA when compared to
conventional X-ray contrast agent. No statistical ECG or EEG changes were obtained. Ring enhancement
was observed in large tumors with a necrotic centre. Meningiomas typically demonstrated excellent
enhancement, classically homogeneous throughout the lesion.
in screening for extra-axial tumors, the use of GdDTPA or other Gd(IIl) based contrast agent is
mandated. Extra-axial tumors, of which meningiomas and acoustic neuromas are common examples, display
contrast enhancement on the basis of vascularity. These contrast agents are very useful for other neural origin
177
Vol. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Biological and Clinical Aspects ofLanthanide
Coordination Compounds
tumors by remarkably increasing conspicuity. Improved depiction of intra-axial neoplasia with Gd contrast
agents, relies mainly upon identification of blood-brain-barrier (BBB) disruption. With primary tumors of
glial origin the extent of BBB (blood-brain-barrier) disruption is clearly identified on MRI. Tumor cells are
commonly demonstrated on pathology beyond the border of contrast enhancement. However in both children
and adults the contrast administration provides better identification of bulk of lesion and thus can serve as a
guide for stereotaxic biopsy. Enhancement patterns remarkably improved diagnostic specificity.
When compared with computed tomography, the ability to depict contrast enhancement is far superior on
MR. Enhancement on CT is due to increased attenuation of the x-ray beam, and thus only depends on
concentration of the reagent. With MR, enhancement depends both on concentration of the paramagnetic CA
and on intrinsic relaxation properties of the tissue. The influence of tissue parameters on enhancement
together with the absence of beam-hardening artifacts presumably account for superiority of MR over CT in
the depiction ofcontrast enhancement.
9. CHELATED Ln(lll) COMPLEXES SHIFT-REAGENTS AIDED 23Na NMR SPECTROSCOPY
IN CELLULAR, TISSUE AND WHOLE-ORGAN SYSTEMS
Non destructive observation of intracellular sodium (Na) levels is of the utmost clinical and biochemical
importance. In viable cells, a 10- to 20-fold concentration gradient between Na (intracellular sodium ion) and
extracellular sodium ion (Nao) is mentioned. Deviation from this gradient is an important indication of
detrimental processes. There it becomes a valuable parameter for assessment of cell viability and reversibility
ofnormal function following damage, e.g., an ischemic insult.
Via the various sodium transport mechanisms (Na+-H/
antiport, Na/-Ca++
exchange, Na+-K ATPase and
others), sodium levels and fluxes have an important role in the regulation of intracellular calcium levels, and
therefore of cellular function. In muscle cells, e.g. in the myocardium, changes in intracellular sodium ion
levels are coupled with contractile function. Real-time, nondestructive monitoring of Nai, therefore, proves a
powerful research tool enhancing our biochemical understanding of cellular processes in a healthy and
diseased person. Since the methodology of this technique appears to be quite safe, its clinical use definitely
would offer in vivo markers of localized variation in tissue viability.
23Na is a relatively sensitive (much more than 31p) NMR-observable nuclide, and therefore the intrinsic
noninvasive character of NMR could be utilized to achieve the goals described above. Unfortunately,
however, the frequency positions (chemical shifts) of intra-and extracellular Na are identical. Together with
the fact that total tissue quantity of Nao is much larger than Na, this precluded NMR observation of Na by
NMR. Elgavish and Degani in 1978 /I 16/found anionic chelates of paramagnetic Gd(lll) as relaxation
reagents and could differentiate the Na levels from two compartments. Gupta and Gupta /117,118/ and Pike-
and Sprniger in 1982/119/introduced paramagnetic Dy(lll) complexes as shift reagents for metal cations.
Combined with the intrinsic features of NMR spectroscopy, the ability of Ln(lll) chelate informs about an
aqueous shift reagent, to differentiate the signals from intracellular and extracellular spaces which provided a
nondestructive, continuous method to monitor intracellular Na ion concentration/I 17-124/.
23Na is a quadrupolar nuclide (spin quantum number, I=3/2) with, natural isotopic abundance of 100%,
178
Sudhindra N. Misra et al. Bioinorganic Chemistry andApplications
NMR receptivity of 9.27 relative to 100 for H, and average concentration of 44mM in the human body. For
nuclide with > 1, more than one allowed NMR transition exists. 23Na, possessing I=3/2 spin, has three
transitions, a centre line reflecting the transition between energy levels m = +1/2 and two satellite lines for
transitions m 3/2 to m 1/2 and m -1/2 to m =-3/2. In the absence of any additive effective interaction,
the energy gaps give rise to a spectrum of a single resonance with an intensity reflecting the superposition of
all three transitions/'125/.
In the solid state, the quadrupolar effect lifts the degeneracy among the three transitions and thus splits
the spectrum into three resonances and the T2 relaxation is given by equations
/20 + + (6)
'-2 10302xc
2
1 + 40302xc
2
e2
qQ /20 l+rl /3 Xc 1+ (7)
-2 11 10302"1:c2
where e2
q Q is the magnitude of the nuclear quadrupole interaction (in rad/sec), rl is dimensionless
asymmetry factor defined as (Vxx- Vxy) / V2x, the V components are the second derivatives of the electrical
potential and constitute the principal components of electric field gradient, x is the correlation time and 030 is
the Larmor frequency. (l/T2)! decay represents 40% of the signal and can be attributed to the transition
between the +1/2 and-1/2 Zeeman energy levels/126,127/. The remaining 60% decays at the rate (1/Tz)!
and can be attributed to 3/2 to 1/2 and -1/2 to -3/2 transitions.
The method of induced differentiation in NMR spectra of aqueous cationic species by paramagnetic
lanthanide chelate shift reagents was introduced by Elgavish et al. and Gupta in 1982 used shift method to
solve the problem of separation of 23Na NMR signals Nai and Nao, in cells and tissues using a Lanthanide
chelate shift reagent. These shift reagents do not cross cell membrane and thus, interacting only with
extracellular ions, they cause a paramagnetic shift in the frequency position of Nao signals away from
unshifted position of Nai. Thus the discrimination between 3Na NMR resonances in two compartments,
extracellular and intracellular, is enabled by the fact that the appropriate shift reagents are membrane
impermeable, so that only the extracellular resonance is affected by paramagnetic lanthanide chelate.
Three different types of chelating ligands (Fig. 17) which form stable complex with Dy3+
have been most
extensively used as NMR shift reagents.
Dy(lll) chelated to two equivalents of the PPP ligand and gives the largest shift known, but has a
tendency to bind Ca++. Ln(lll) complexes containing PPP can be troublesome to use in buffer solution
because they bind Ca++
and may precipitate. Some modifications are proposed, which allows the application
of Dy(PPP)2 as shift reagent for monitoring compartmentation of Na during onslaught of ischemia by 23Na
NMR spectroscopy/127/(Fig. 18).
Despite this disadvantage Dy(PPP)27 has two major advantages, (i) its large induced shift which produces
excellent spectral resolution and (ii) its simple spectrum, i.e., two resonance, a truly unshifted Nai and an
upfield shifted Nao signal.
179
Vol. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Biological and Clinical Aspects ofLanthanide
Coordination Compounds
- N N
DOT:P
tripolyphosphate tetraazacyclododecane-N, N',
N", N"'-tetramethylene
c c.,oN,,',.N,,,N,/,N
cb; -co,
TTHA triethylenetetramine
hexaacetic acid
Fig. 17: Chemical formula ofthree shift reagents PPP, DOTP and TTHA.
The shift reagent Dy (TTHA) can tolerate a large concentration of Ca+. However, Na NMR spectra in
organs in presence of Dy (TTHA) display more signals than with other shift reagents. Nao resonance spectra
of hearts perfused with Dy (TTHA) have seven to eight poorly resolved peaks. Kohler et al. performed a
series of modeling, ischemia and reflow experiments in perfused hearts of various species. Their work led to
better understanding ofthe reasons for the complexity of Dy (TTHA) aided 2Na NMR spectroscopy.
in 1987 Sherry et al. /127/ introduced the Dy3
complex of 1,4,7,10-tetraazacyclododecane, 1,4,7,10,
tetrakis (methylene phosphonate) DOTP as a SR (shift reagent) and showed that it produced a 23Na shift in
red cells compared to that induced by [Dy(PPP)2]7. The primary advantages of this S R are its
thermodynamic stability and kinetic inertness in biological tissue and its geometry. Its structure shows that
macroscopic DOTP ligand encapsulates a lanthanide(lll) ion into a symmetrical structure with four
phosphonate side arm chain ligands forming a charged surface for ion pairing with sodium ion. This position
for the Na binding sites along with 4 fold axis of symmetry of the complex optimum phosphonate surface
also provides a strong ion which is about the same as found with [Dy(PPP)2]7. Nevertheless these complexes
are very stable in vivo and paramagnetic shifts induced by Dy(DOTP)5are large in comparison to those
induced by Dy(DOTP)s-
at an equivalent concentration. Thus considerably less S R will be required to
separate intra- and extracellular 2Na resonances. Since 2Na hyperfine shifts induced by Tm(DOTP)5-
were
180
Sudhindra N. Misra et al. .Bioinorganic Chem&try andApplications
Total Tissue
Sodium
With Paramagnetic
Shift Reagent
Oy {PPP)P
Sodium
/
Fig. 18: 23Na NMR spectra of an isolated perfused rat heart in the absence (top) and presence (bottom) of
the paramagnetic shift reagent Dy(PPP)2.
equal to those induced by Tm(DOTP)5, this prompted these workers to try Tm(DOTP)5"
as 23Na SR which is
for superior in a perfused heart preparation than Dy(DOTP)3. The amount of Tm(DOTP) required for the
separation of Na+i and Nao was reported to be 3 fold lower than that typically required by Dy TTHA. This has
significant advantages in two respects. First, the 23Na line widths are substantially narrower when Tm
DOTP5
is used S R, making it easier to separate intra- and extracellular sodium resonances and second, the
bulk susceptibility gradient across the sample (i.e. a perfused heart suspended in 18-20 mm M R tube
typically has a significant volume of perfusate surrounding the organ) is substantially less with Tm3+
reagent,
Tm DOTP has been used in a number of investigation/128-133/for monitoring Na+i and Na+o in isolated,
perfused heart. The use of triple quantum filter (TQF) technique could eliminate most of the Na+o resonance
from perfused heart preparation by discriminating against 23Na undergoing mono exponential relaxation. This
reduced intensity of Nao resonance, shifted to the high frequency by Tm DOTP5, so that its intensity
181
Vol. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Biological and Clinical Aspects ofLanthanide
Coordination Compounds
becomes comparable to that ofNa+ resonance in a number of in vivo studies.
S R aided 23Na and 3PMRS has been used by Xia et al. to monitor Na+i, Mg intra free +2
signals and
intracellular pH in the in vivo rat liver after a significant surface burn injury again using Tm DOTP5-
to
resolve Na+ and Na+o signals. Such a study could show that even by using a much smaller dose of Tm
DOTP5-
there was clear cut observed separation of Na+i and Na+o signals in 24 hrs burn animals compared to
control animals. 23Na M R S examination of the in vivo kidney upon infusion of Tm DOTP5-
gave interesting
results. After 10 min of Tm DOTP5-
infusion to a dose of~0.15 m moles/kg, one broad resonance was evident
near 15 ppm which continued to shift field with time and a second resonance appeared as a high frequency
shoulder On the unshifted intracellular resonance after about 15-16 minutes. These three resonances could be
resolved nicely while Dy TTHA could not resolve these same resonances in 23Na MR spectra of in vivo
kidney. This was ascribed to two main reasons: First about 3 fold more Dy TTHA3-
was required for
producing the same peak separation as Tm DOTP5
in in vivo spectra and second, the greater bulk magnetic
susceptibility of Dy TTHA3-
induced greater T: time broadening effect in 3Na resonances. Sherry et al.
compared these in vivo spectra with 23Na spectrum of blood and urine samples, collected during infusion.
Each S R allowed an assignment of highly shifted 23Na resonance only (detected in Tm DOTP) to filtrate
Na and less highly shifted 3Na resonance to interstial and vascular Na+/7, 8, 122, 123/.
10. APPLICATION OF LANTHANIDE COMPLEXES IN AQUEOUS SOLUTION
ESPECIALLY WITH BIOLOGICAL RELEVANCE
There has been much interest in the use of lanthanide complexes as shift reagents (S R) in NMR to effect
spectral simplification and resolution enhancement. Lanthanide complexes, especially in solution, continue to
be used as paramagnetic probes in biological studies to gain structural information on proteins, nucleotides
and amino acids/134-136/. There has been an increasing interest in the application of lanthanide coordination
complexes in molecular recognition and chirality sensing of biological substrates. The chirality occupies the
nucleus in such studies of molecular basis, biological and artificial chemistry, and is manifested by natural
products: proteins, nucleic acids, sugars, polypeptides, hormones and antibiotics and also by drugs, food and
other synthetic chemicals. Since these substances often exhibit specific activity and functionality, depending
on their chirality, methods are being developed for determination of absolute configuration of chiral
substrates and separation of their enantiomers. The tris (13 diketonate) of lanthanides in particular (Pr3+
and
Eu3+) exhibited further interesting molecular recognition properties upon highly coordinated complexation
with substrates like amino acids, polypeptides and even proteins by forming ternary negatively charged
complex with anionic guest/137/(Fig. 19).
Amino acids and oligopeptides are the most fundamental substrates in biological and artificial processes.
When these are targeted, the recognition and sensing require almost neutral pH (pH 6-7.5). Lanthanide tris ([3
diketonates) have successfully been used in liquid membrane transport of amino acids/138-139/. Kojuma et
al. have synthesized two new chiral ligands (Fig. 20 a, b) for Ln(IIl) which have been found to be very
effective in neutral aqueous solutions/140-141/. Kabuto et al. reported the effectivity of Eu3+
complex of N,
N, N', N' tetra kis (2- pyridyl methyl)- (R) propylene di amine/142/(Fig. 20 c).
182
Sudhindra N. Misra et al. Bioinorganic Chemistry andApplications
R 0
R
Binding ofanionic substrate
R O
R
O- H3N
H3N
O
Ternary complex
K+
Binding ofZwitter ionic substrate
Fig. 19: Binding ofanionic and Zwitter ionic substrate.
Lanthanide knowledge of the distribution of biologically important anions and cations over intracellular
and extracellular compartments is of considerable value in cell biology and of great potential use in medical
diagnosis.
11. LUMINESCENT Ln(lll) COMPLEXES AND THEIR BIOLOGICAL RELEVANCE
Lanthanide chelates specially derived from Eu(III), Tb(III), Yb(III) and Nd(III) give characteristic
luminescence spectra, but the associated excited lifetimes extends into micro to millisecond domain which is
a crucial advantage for the design of luminescent materials with several practical applications, especially as
LUMINESCENT FLAG for
1) labeling biological materials/143-145/
2) sensing nonchiral /135,146/ and chiral analytes/147/, and
3) probing metallic environment
The lanthanides are characterized by sharp parity forbidden bands with o less than 10 M cm.However some bands shown to exhibit high sensitivity and substantial intensification are called
hypersensitive bands. These bands obey (AJ) selection rules. We have. shown that under the influence of
183
Vol. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Biological and Clhdcal Aspects ofLanthanide
Coordination Compound
HO2i,/ N,.,," CO2
CO2H
(a)
(b)
Fig. 20:
(c)
Structures ofchiral ligands.
highly chelating ligands, often the f-f bands, which otherwise were considered only negligibly sensitive, also
gain substantial sensitivity towards coordination changes and hence termed pseudohypersensitive bands. The
variation of intensities of different 4f-4f bands, when there is change in the structure and conformation of the
lanthanide-biomolecular complexes, have been found a good way to monitor some isomorphous Ca++
substitution from biomolecules by paramagnetic lanthanides/148-150/.
Another important practical consequence of the sharp, forbidden 4f-4f transitions concerns the production
of sufficient radiant power per bandwidth compatible with stimulative emission and laser functions. The
growing need for efficient laser at wave lengths in the near infrared region has recently motivated new
development of Nd(III), Er(III) and Tm(III) garnets/151,152/.
Luminescent laser sensor or probe designing requires a combination of the following factors as needed"
a) protection of included lanthanide ions from quenching by high energy vibrations (solvent molecules or
ligating groups)
b) multiple absorbing groups suitable for light harvesting and energy transfer in order to efficiently feed
metal centered excited states
184
Sudh#tdra N. Misra et al. Bioinorganic Chem&try andApplications
c) high thermodynamic stability and kinetic inertness, and
d) specific solubility and non toxicity of these sensors are used in biological media and clinical
investigations 153,154/.
Prof. Bunzli and Piguet have done extremely innovative and at the same time highly exhaustive work on
lanthanide containing polymetallic functional assemblies. The fascinating expansion of ianthanide
coordination chemistry and supramolecular chemistry has triggered practical successes in catalysis,
biomedical analysis, clinical diagnostics and also some success in therapeutic medicine. The intrinsic
chemical (Lewis acidity), magnetic and spectroscopic, mainly luminescence and to some extent 4f-4f
transition spectral properties of these Ln(lll) ions, often not matched by those of other transition metal ions,
make lanthanides privileged partner for the design of functionalized molecular species and materials
especially when lanthanides are easily available commercially in highly pure form.
12. THE PERSPECTIVE FOR INTEGRATED PHARMACOLOGICAL
ACTIVITIES OF LANTHANIDES
The cells respond to the attacking metal ions as a multiple target system, in which various reactions with
various targets are organized to a sequence of events. The ultimate biological effect is actually the integrated
effect of these events. Ji et al. /155/have given a nice account of the events that happen when Ln(Ill) ions
attack a cancer cell and induce apoptosis, and this they consider as the core of the lanthanide potential as
anticancer activity. Along with apoptosis, there are several synergic related effects, ROS scavenging, cell
protection, cytoskeleton stabilization and also immunologic enhancement. They proposed that lanthanides
role in affecting cancer involve the integrated synergic effect, as shown in Fig. 21.
However, the above scheme has not been supported by experimental evidence and hence it is risky to
draw any clear cut conclusions. No doubt the significant accumulation of Ln(llI) selectivity in tumor tissue is
well documented but it does not mean that they can selectively affect cancer cells. Nie et al./156/, Ji et al.
/155/, and Li et al./157/observed that with different cell lines, an appropriate dose may inhibit substantially
the cancer cells without significant influence on the normal cells.
CeCI and NdCI incubation decreased the level of CaM (Calmodulin) level in cancer cell K562, but
increased that in normal human cells/155/. These workers could not conclusively suggest any selectivity of
Ln(lll) for cancer cells at the same time they did not rule out any possibility of the selectivity of Ln for
cancer cells.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
SNM thanks the Department of Science and Technology, New Delhi for a research grant and Dr. P. K.
Ghosh, Director and Prof. B. N. Jha, Discipline Coordinator of Marine Algae & Marine Environment
Discipline, Central Salt and Marine Chemicals Research Institute, Bhavnagar for their encouragement.
185
Vol. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004
Ln
--increased Ca influx
Ln
ml receptors
Ln
--PI hydrolysis
inhibit CaM
promote cAMP hydrolysis
messenger system
inhibit PDE
Biological and Clinical Aspects ofLanthanide
Coordination Compounds
cAMPt
increased
(Ca)i,
-- PKA'
expression of
apoptosis-genes
endonuclease
activity]"
DNA
cleavage
apoptosis
Fig. 21" The possible pathways leading to Ln induced apoptosis.
REFERENCES
1. C.H. Evans, "Biochemistry ofLanthanides", Plenum Press, New York, Chapter 1, 2 (1990).
2. P.O. Webster, Akt. Atom Stockholm A E, ISS PP, (1965).
3. M. Esposito, M. Oddone, S. Accardo and M. Cutoto, Clin Chem., 32, 1398 (1986).
4. M. Esposito, P. Collechi, S. Brera, E. Mor, A. Mazzucotelli,. M. Cutoto and M. Oddone, Sci. Total
Environment, 50, 55 (1986).
5. E. Sabbioni, L. Goetz, G. Bignoli, Assessment of European Communities Situation Report, Eur
698/IV, (1982).
6. E. Sabbioni, R. Pietra, P. Gaglione, G. Vocaturo, P. Colombo, M. Zanoni and F. Rodi, Sci. Total
Environment, 26, 19 (1982).
7. P. Caravan, J. J. Ellison, T. J. McMurry, R. B. Lauffer, Chem. Rev., 99, 2293 (1999).
8. "The chemistry of contrast agents in medical magnetic resonance imaging", A. E. Merbach and E.
Toth (Eds.), Wiley, New York (2001).
9. J.A. Peters, J. Huskens, D. J. Raber, Prog. Nucl. Magn. Reson. Spectrosc. 28, 283 (1996).
10. M. Komiyana, N. Takeda, H. Shigekawa, J. Chem. Soc. Chem. Commun., 1443 (1999).
11. I.K. Hemmila, Applications of Fluorescence in Immunoassays, Wiley and Sons, New York (1991).
12. G. Mathis, Clin. Chem., 41, 1391 (1995).
13. I. K. Hemmila, T. Stahlberg, P. Mottvam, "Bioanalytical Applications of Labeling Technologies",
Wallac Oy., Turka (1995).
14. G. Mathis, In: "Rare Earths", R. Saez-Puche and P. Caro (Eds.), Editorial Complutence, S A, Madrid
285 (1998).
15. J.C.G. Bunzli and C. Piguet, Chem. Rev., 102, 1897 (2002).
186
Sudhindra N. Misra et aL Bioinorganic Chemistry andApplications
16. D. Parker, Coord. Chem. Rev., 205, 109 (2000).
17. J.C.G. Bunzli and C. Piguet, Chem. Soc. Rev., 28, 347 (1999).
18. C. Gorller-Walrand and K. Binnemans, In: "Handbook on physics and chemistry of rare earths",
Amsterdam, Elsevier, K. A. Gschneidner and L. Eying (Eds.), Vol. 25 (1998).
19. S.N. Misra and S. O. Sommerer, Appl. Spectrosc. Rev., 26, 152 (1991).
20. S.N. Misra and K. John, Appl. Spectrosc. Rev., 28 285 (1993).
21. S.N. Misra and S. O. Sommerer, Rev. Inorg. Chem., 12, 157 (1992).
22. S.N. Misra, G. Ramchandriah, M. A. Gagnani, M. Indiradevi and R. S. Shukla, Appl. Spectrosc. Rev.,
38, 433 (2003).
23. E. Toth, L. Burai and A. E. Merbach, Coord. Chem. Rev., 216, 363 (2001).
24. S. Aime, M. Botta, M. Fasano and E. Terrano, Chem. Soc. Rev., 27, 19 (1998).
25. E. Terrano, S. Aime, S. Barge, D. D. Castelli and F. U. Niesen, J. Inorg. Biochem., 86, 452 (2001).
26. C. F. G. C. Gereldes, In: NMR in "Supramolecular Chemistry", M. Pans, (Ed.), Kluwer Press,
Netherland 133 (1999).
27. A. Bianchi, L. Calabi, F. Corona, S. Fontana, P. Losi, A. Maiocchi, L. Paleari and B. Valtancoli,
Coord. Chem. Rev., 204, 309 (2000).
28. T. D. Mody and J. L. Sessler, In: "Supramolecular Technology", D.N. Reinhoudt (Ed.), John Wiley,
New York, Chapter 7, 245 (1999).
29. T.D. Mody and J. L. Sessler, J. Porphyrin Pathalocyanines, 5, 134 (2001).
30. F.H. Allen and O. Kennard, Cambridge Structural Database, October (2000).
31. N. Kaltsoyannis and P. Scott, "The f-Elements" ofOxford University Press, New York (1999).
32. J. C. G. Bunzli, In: "Rare Earths", R. Saez-Puche and P. Caro (Eds.), Editorial Complutence, S A,
Madrid 223 (1998).
33. S.N. Misra, Indian J. Chem., 35B, 761 (1997).
34. S. N. Misra, "Lanthanides: Chemical, Biochemical and Medical Curiosities", Monograph Published
by Bhavnagar University, UGC Project, October (1998).
35. E. E1-Fakahany, J. Lopez and E. Richelson, J. Neurochem., 40, 1687 (1983).
36. S.N. Cohen, C. T. Chang and L. Msu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 69, 2110 (1972).
37. M. Mandel and A. Higa, J. Molec. Biol., 53, 159 (1970).
38. J. Z. Ni, D. Q. Zhao, X. M. Li, In: "Ten Years Progress in Bioinorganic Chemistry in China", K.
Wang and W. S. Han (Eds.), Higher Education Press, Beijing 19 (1997).
39. J.Z. Ni, "Bioinorganic Chemistry of Lanthanides", Science Press, Beijing (1995).
40. K. Wang, R. Li, Y. Cheng and V. Zhu, Coord. Chem. Rev., 297, 190 (1999).
41. K. Wang, S. Afr. J. Chem., 50, 232 (1997).
42. D.Y. Huang, S. J. Wu, D. L. He, Z. F. Luo and L. Shi, Chinese Biochem. J., 231 (1998), Special issue
of 8th
National symposium .on Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.
43. a. R G. Canada, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 111, 135 (1983). b. R. G. Canada, P. A. Andrews,
K. M. Mack and A. Haider, Biochim. Biophys. Acta., 25, 1267 (1995).
44. X. D. Yang, X. T. Liu, B. W. Chen, R. C. Li and K. Wang, In: "Proceedings of First SinoDutch
187
Vol. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Biological and Clinical Aspects ofLanthanide
Coordination Compounds
Workshop on the environmental behaviour and ecology of rare earth", R. Bosman, J. L. M. de Boer
and P. M. van Berkel (Eds.), TNO-MEP, Netherland 205 (1997).
45. Y. Cheng, C. L. Bai and K. Wang, Biochem. Biophys. Acta., (2002) in press.
46. X.M. Li, Y. F. Zhang, J. Z. Ni, J. W. Chen and F. H. Wang, J. Inorg. Biochem., 53, 73 (1994).
47. F. Hwang, D. Zhao, J. Chen, X. Chen and J. Z. Ni, Chem. Phys. Lipids, $2, 73 (1996).
48. J. Seelig, R. Lehrmann and E. Terzi, Mol. Membr. Biol., 12, 51 (1995).
49. W.D. Wu, X. F. Qin and O. G. Jiang, J. Hug. Toxicol., 8, 201 (1994).
50. B. Xiao, J Y J "Rare earths bioinorganic chemistry", "In Reports on Basic Research on Lanthanides"
Item 8, State Commission of Science and Technology", Beijing, China 121 (1996).
51. P. Soto, H. Rodrigues and O. Monasterio, Biochemistry, 35, 6337 (1996).
52. S. N. Misra, G. Joseph, K. Anjaiah, H. C. Bajaj and K. Venkatsubramanian, Indian .J Chem., 29A,
346 (1990); S. N. Misra, G. Joseph, K. Anjaiah and S. H. R. Abdi, IndianJ. Biochem. Biophys., 29, 70
(1992).
53. S. N. Misra, Indian J. Biochem. Biophys., 27, 284 (1990); S. N. Misra and S. B. Mehta, Bull. Chem.
Soc., Japan 64, 3653 (1991).
54. G. Joseph, Ph. D. Thesis, Bhavnagar University, Bhavnagar- 364 002 (1988).
55. K. Anjaiah, Ph.D. Thesis, Bhavnagar University, Bhavnagar- 364 002 (1990).
56. S.J. Shah, Ph.D. Thesis, Bhavnagar University, Bhavnagar- 364 002 (1992).
57. M.J. Shah, Ph. D. Thesis, Bhavnagar University, Bhavnagar- 364 002 (1992).
58. C.M. Suveerkumar, Ph.D. Thesis, Bhavnagar University, Bhavnagar- 364 002 (1997).
59. L.C. Maxwell, F. Bischoff and E. M. Ottrey, J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther., 43, 61 (1931).
60. L.J. Anghileri, Eur. J. Cancer, 15, 1459 (1979).
61. L.J. Anghileri, C. Marchal, M. C. Crone-Escanye and J. Roberts, Tumor, 71, 39 (1985).
62. L.J. Anghileri, M. C. Crone-Escanye and J. Roberts, Gesch. Wuls. Forsch., 53, 338 (1983).
63. L.J. Anghileri, Recent Results Cancer Research, 11)9, 106 (1988).
64. S.N. Misra, lndianJ. Chem., 35B, 761 (1996).
65. S.N. Misra and S. Jain, Unpublished results Preliminary Findings.
66. S.N. Misra, T.N. Mishra and R.C. Mehrotra, IndianJ. Chem., 5, 372 (1967).
67. Editorial Staff, Diagnostic Imaging Industry Report, update (1996); Miller Freeman, San Franciecs,
(1996).
68. P O V Reports, "The Diagnostic Imaging", Marketplace in USA, POV Inc, Cedar Grave, New Jersey
(1998).
69. J. Jeans and Vermeeren, Eur. J. Nucl. Med., 25, 1469 (1998).
70. S.B. Yu and A. D. Watson, Chem. Rev., 99, 2353 (1999).
71. S.E. Seltzer, Invest Radiol., 14, 356 (1979); J. Comput. Assiot. Tomogr., 5, 370 (1981).
72. T. S. Curry, J. E. Downdey, R. Mury, In: CHRIsTENSENS physics of Diagnostic Radiology", 4th
edition, Lea Febiger, Philadelphia, USA (1992).
73. W. R. Hendec and R. Ritenour, "Medical Imaging Physics", Mosby- year Book, St. Louis, 3rd
edition
(1992).
188
Sudhindra N. Misra et al. Bioinorganic (.'hem&try andApplications
74. E.A. Janon, Am. J. Roentgen, 152, 1348 (1989).
75. W.H. Buch and D. P. Swanson, Am. J. Roentgen, 157, 1153 (1991).
76. R.J. Gibson, C. I. Meanock, E. P. H. Torre and T. M. Walker, Clin. Radiol., 47, 278 (1993).
77. A.D. Quinn, N. J. O'Hare, F. H. Wallis and G. F. J. Wilson, Comput. Assist. Tomogr., 18, 634 (1994).
78. M.R. Rudnick, S. Goldfarb, L. Wexler, P. A. Lud brook, M. J. Murphy, E. F. Halpern, H. A. Hill, M.
Winnifork, M. P. Cohen and D. B. Van Fossen, Kidney Int., 47, 254 (1995).
79. Y. Kinno, K. Odagiri, K. Andoh, Y. Itoh and K. Taruo, Am. J. Roentgen, lli0, 1293 (1993).
80. H.H. Schild, W. Weber, E. Boeck, P. Mildenberger, H. Strunk, Duber Ch, P. Grebe, S. Schad mand
Fischer and M. Thelen, Fortschr. Rontgen Str., Ill0, 218 (1994).
81. W.J. Matchett, D. R. Mc Fanland, D. K. Russell, D. M. Senior and M. M. Moursc, Radiology, 201,
569 (1996).
82. J.A. Kaufman, S. C. Geller and A. C. Waltman, Radiology, 198, 579 (1996).
83. T. Vehmas and T. Tervahartiala, Acta. Radiol., 37, 804 (1996).
84. T. Vhemas and T. Markkola, Acta. Radiol., 39, 223 (1998).
85. F. Fobbe, F. Wacher and S. Wagner, Eur. Radiol., 6, 224 (1996).
86. T. Stacks, G. Schuhmann-Giampieri, T. Frenzel, H. J. Weinmann, L. Longe and J. Platzek, Invest.
Radiol., 29, 709 (1994).
87. D. J. Spinosa, A. H. Matsumoto, J. F. Angle, K. D. Hagspiel, J. K. Mcgrao and C. R. Ayers,
Radiology, 209, 490 (1998).
88. T. Balzer, B. Hamm, T. Staks, H. J. Weinmann, A. Muhler, M. Taupitz and H. P. Niendorf, In: "New
Development in Contrast Agent Research", P. A. Rinck and R. N. Muller (Eds.), European Magnetic
Resonance Forum, Berlin 129 (1995)..
89. G. Schumann-Giampieri, M. Mahler, G. Roll, R. Maibencer and S. J. Schmitz, Chin. Pharmacol., 37,
587 (1997).
90. P. Caravan, J. J. Ellison, T. J. McMurry and R. B. Lauffer, Chem. Rev., 99, 2293 (1999).
91. V.M. Runge, J. W. Wells and N. M. Williams, Invest Radiol., 30, 123 (1995).
92. A. Dumont, P. Jacques, P. Qixiu and J. F. Dessreaux, Tetrahedron Lett., 35, 3707 (1994).
93. W. D. Kim, G. E. Kiefer, F. Maton, K. McMillan, R. N. Muller and A. D. Sherry, lnorg. Chem., 34,
2223 (1995).
94. G. R. Weisman, E.. H. Wong, D. C. Hill, M. E. Rogers, D. P. Reed and J. C. Calabrese, J. Chem. Soc.
Chem., Commun. 947 (1996).
95. J. Springborg, P. Kofod, C. E. Olsen, H. Toftlund and I. Sotofte, Acta. Chem. Scand., 49, 547 (1995).
96. X.Y. Wang, T. Z. Jin, V. Comblin, A. Lopez-Mut, E. Meveiny and J. F. Desreanx, Inorg. Chem., 31,
1095 (1992).
97. H. Gries and H. Miklautz, Physiol. Chem. Phys. Med., NMR, Ill, 105 (1984).
98. J.J. Stezowski and J. L. Hoard, lsr. J. Chem., 24, 323 (1984).
99. M. B. Inoue, M. Inoue and Q. Fernando, Acta. Crystallogr., Sec C, Cryst. Structure, Commun. C50,
1037(1994).
189
Vol. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Biological and Clinical Aspects ofLanthanide
Coordination Compounds
100. M. B. Inoue, M. Inoue, I. C. Munoz, M. A. Bruck and Q. Fernando, Inorg. Chim. Acta., 209, 29
(1993).
101. M.B. Inoue, R. E. Navarro, M. Inoue and Q. Fernando, Inorg. Chem., 34, 6074 (1995).
102. M.B. lnone, M. Inone, P. Oram, Q. Fernando, A. Alexander and E. C. Unger, Magn. Reson. Imaging,
12, 429 (1994).
103. E. Toth, F. Connac, L. Helm, K. Adzamli and A. E. Merbach and J. Ewo, lnorg. Chem., 37, 2017
(1998).
104. E. Toth, L. Helm, A. E. Merbach, R. Hedinger, K. Hegetschweiler and A. Janossy, Inorg. Chem., 37,
4104 (1998).
105. E. Toth, Van Leffelen, L. Helm, A. E. Marbach, D. Ladd, K. Briley-Saebo and K. E. Keller, Magn.
Reson. Chem., 36, 5125 (1998).
106. S. Aime, A. Barge, A. Borel, M. Botta, S. Chemerisov, A. E. Merbach, U. Muller and D. Pubanz,
Inorg. Chem., 36, 5104 (1997).
107. R. Ruloff, R. N. Muller, D. Pubanz and A. E. Merbach, lnorg. Chim. Acta., 15,275-276 (1998).
108. T. Desser, D. Rubin, H. Muller, F. Quing, S. Khodor, S. Zanazzi, S. Young, D. Ladd, J. Wellons, K.
Kellor, J. Toner and R. Snow, J. Magn. Reson. Imaging, 4, 467 (1994).
109. A. Bogdanov, R. Weissleder and J. Brady, J. Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 16, 335 (1995).
110. B. Raduechel, H. Schmitt-Willich, J. Platzek, W. Ebert, T. Frenzel, B. Misselwitz and H. J.
Weinmann, Book ofAbstracts, 216th
ACS National Meeting, Boston, Aug 23-27, (1998) pMSE-278.
11. Q. Dong, D. R. Hurst, H. J. Weinmann, T. L. Chenevert, F. J. Londy and M. R. Prince, Invest.. Radiol.,
33, 699 (1998).
112. J. Tacke, G. Adam, H. Claben, A. Muhler, A. Prescher and R. W. Gunther, Magn. Reson. Imaging, 7,
678 (1997).
113. H. C. Roborts, M. Saeed, T. P. L. Roberts, A. Muhler, D. M. Shames, J. S. Mann, M. Stiskal, F.
Demsar and R. C. Brasch, Magn. Reson. Imaging, 7, 331 (1997).
114. H.C. Roberts, M. Saeed, T. P. L. Roberts and R. C. Brasch, Acad. Radiol., 5, S-31 (1998).
115. C. Curtet, F. Maton, T. Havet, M. Slinkin, A. Mishra, J. F. Chatel and R.N. Muller, Invest. Radiol.,
33, 752 (1998).
116. H. Degani and G. A. Elgavish, FEBS Lett., 90, 357 (1978).
117. R.K. Gupta and P. J. Gupta, Magn. Reson., 47, 344 (1982).
118. R. K. Gupta, In: "NMR spectroscopy of Cells and Organs", Vol. 2, R. K. Gupta (ed.), CRC Press
130ca Raton, Florida, USA (1987).
19. M.M. Pike and C. S. Jr. Springer, J. Magn. Reson., 46, 348 (I 982).
120. M.M. Pike, T. W. Smith, E. T. Fossel and C. S. Jr. Springer, Am. J. Physiol. 246, C528 (1984).
121. J. Ren and A. D. Sherry, J. Magn. Reson., Ser B, I, 178 (1996).
122. V. Sheshan, M. J. Germann, P. Preisig, C. R. Malloy, A. D. Sherry and N. Bansal, Magn. Reson.
Med., 34, 153 (1995).
123. A.D. Sherry, J. Alloys and Compound, 249, 153 (1997).
124. S. K. Miller and G. A. Elgavish, In: "Biological Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy", L. J. Berliner
190
Sudhindra N. Misra et al. Bio#organic Chetnktty andApplications
and J. Renben (Eds.), Plenum Press, New York, USA 159 (1992).
125. S.C.K. Chu, Y. Xu, J. A. Balschi and C. S. Springer, Jr. Magn. Reson. Med., 13, 239 (1990).
126. G.A. Elgavish, Invest. Radiol., 24, 1028 (1989).
127. A.D. Sherry, C. F. G. C. Geraldes and W. P. Cacheris, lnorg. Chim. Acta., 139, 137 (1987).
128. D. C. Buster, M. M. C. A. Castro, C. F. G. C. Geraldes, C. R. Malloy, A. D. Sherry, T. C. Siemers,
Magn. Resort. Med., 15, (1990) 25.
129. C. R. Malloy, D. C. Buster, M. M. C. A. Castro, C. F. G. C. Geraldes, F. M. H. Jeffrey and A. Do
Sherry, Magn. Reson. Med., 15, 33 (1990).
130. C.F.G.C. Geraldes, A. D. Sherry, G. E. Kiefer, J. Magn. Reson., 97, 290 (1992).
131. B. Butwell, R. Ramasamy, J. Lazor, A. D. Sherry and C. R. Malloy, Am. J. Physiol., 264, 41814
(1993).
132. M.M. Pike, C. Su Luo, M. D. Clark, K. A. Kirk, M. Kitakaze, M. C. Madden, E. J. Gragoe and G. M.
Pohost, Am. J. Physiol., 265, 4-2017 (1993).
133. A. F. Xia, J. W. Horton, P. Y. Zhao, N. Bansal, E. E. Babcock, A. D. Sherry and C. R. Malloy, J.
Appl. Physiol., 76, 1507 (1994).
134. J.C.G. Bunzli and C. Piquet, Chem. Rev., 102, 1897 (2002).
135. D. Parker, Coord. Chem. Rev., 205, 109 (2000).
136. D. Parker, Dickins, H. Puschmann, C. Crossland and J. A. K. Howard, Chem. Rev., 102, 1997 (2002).
137. S. Aime, M. Botta, J. L. Bruce, V. Mainevo, D. Parker and E. Terreno, Chem. Commun., 115 (2001).
138. M. Tsukube, S. Shinoda, J. Uenishi, M. Shiode and O. Yonemitao, Chem. Lett., 969 (1996).
139. M. Tsukube, S. Shinoda, Tetrahedron Lett., 42, 7583 (2001).
140. Y. Kojima, M. Takemura, K. Yamato, M. Doe, M. Watanabe, H. Miyake, T. Kikunaga and N.
Yanagihara, Bull. Chem. Soc., Japan, 74, 707 (2001).
141. Y. Kojima, M. Watanabe, T. Hasegawa and H. Miyake, Chem. Lett., 4 (2001).
142. K. Kabuto, R. Hazama, K. Umakoshi, C. Kabuto and Y. Sasaki, Chem. Commun. 15 (1996).
143. I. Hemmila, T. Stahlberg and P. Mottram, "Bioanalytical Applications of Labeling Technologies",
Wallac Dy, Turku (1995).
1.44. G. Mathis, In: "Rare Earths", R. S. Puche and P. Caro (Eds.), Editorial complutense, S A, Madrid 285
(1998).
145. H. Takalo, V. M. Mukkala, L. Merio, J. C. Roderiguez-ubis, R. Sedano, O. Junnes and E. Brunet,
Helv. Chim. Acta., 80, 372 (1997).
146. J I. Bruce, R. S. Dickins, L. J. Govenlock, S. Lopinski, T. Gunnlangsson, M. P. Lowe, D. Parker, R.
D. Peacock, J. J. Perry, S. Aime and M. Botta, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 122, 9674 (2000).
147. S. I. Klink, P. Oude Alink, L. Grove, F. G. A. Peters, J. W. Hofstraat-Geurtsf and F. C. G. M. Van
Veggal, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans, 2, 363 (2001).
148. S. N. Misra and S. O. Sommerer, Appl. Spectrosc. Rev., 26, 152 (1991); Rev. lnorg. Chem., 12, 157
(1992); Can. J. Chem., 72, 42 (1992).
149. S.N. Misra and K. John, Appl. Spectrosc. Rev., 28, 285 (1993).
150. R. S. Dickins, J. A. K. Howard, C. L. Manpin, J. M. Maloney, D. Parker, R. D. Peacock, J. P. Riehl
191
Voi. 2, Nos. 3-4, 2004 Biological and Clinical Aspects ofLanthanide
Coordination Compounds
and G. Siligardi, New J. Chem., 891 (1998).
151. Y. Shen, T. Riedener and K. L. Bray, Phys. Rev., B61, 11460 (2000).
152. M.A. Shubhan, T. Suzuki and S. Kaizaki, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans, 492 (2001).
153. J.C.G. Bunzli, M. Elhobiri, R. Scopelliti and C. Piguet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 121, 10747 (1999).
154. J. C. G. Bunzli and C. Piquet, In: Encyclopedia of Materials", Science and Technology, K. H. N.
Bushow, R. W. Cahn, M. C. Flemming, B. llschner, E. J. Kramer and S. Mahajan (Eds.), Pergamon,
Elsevier Science Ltd., Oxford, (2001).
155. Y.J. Ji, Z. H. Wang, J. L. Li and S. H. Peng, J. Health Toxicol., $, 165 (1994).
156. Y. X. Nie, Y. L. Chen, P. L. Zhao, X. H. Wang, C. J. Zhang and Z. X. Li, J. Chinese Rare Earth Soc.,
8,350(1990).
157. X.M. Li, D. Q. Zhu, P..L. Zhao and J. Z. Ni, Sci. Bull. (Chinese), 40, 2044 (1995).
192
