Unusual Non-Occupational Exposure to Metals
Prof. Dr. med. Renate Wrbitzky
Departm,ent ofOccupational Medicine ofthe Medical School ofHanover
30623 Hanover, Germany
Fax: ++49 511 5329330
e-mail." wrbitz_ .renate@mh-hannover.de
(Received: October 10, 2002; Accepted: December 9, 2002)
ABSTRACT
Exposure to metals at workplaces is well known and in many cases occupational studies led to an
adoption of limit values. For airborne concentrations of substances as metals refer to the "Maximaleo
Arbeitsplatz-Konzentration" (MAK) in Germany or the "Threshold Limit Value" (TLV) in USA. Biological
monitoring consists of an assessment of overall exposure to chemicals at the workplace and in the
environment. The "Biologischer Arbeitsstoff Toleranzwert" (BAT) in Germany and the "Biological Exposure
Index" in the USA serve as reference values. Besides these occupational limit values, reference values exist
in Germany for the background exposure of the non occupationally exposed general population. In some
cases the reference values are exceeded without any occupational exposure. Several cases of unusual
environmental exposure to cobalt, mercury and manganese are reported. In such cases, it is often difficult to
evaluate the measured concentration. In Germany, therefore, the "Human-Biomonitoring-Werte" (HBM-
Values) have been adopted in order to evaluate such high background exposures. The HBM-concept is
presented. Environmental exposure to metals is usual within some limits. Reference values are helpful for an
assessment. Unusual exposure occurs and the physician should be alert to symptoms ofpoisoning.
INTRODUCTION
Exposure to metals at workplaces is well known and in many cases occupational studies have led to an
adoption of limit values. For airborne concentrations of substances as metals refer to the "Maximale-
Arbeitsplatz-Konzentration" (MAK) in Germany or the "Threshold Limit Value" (TLV) in the USA./1,2/.
Biological monitoring consists of an assessment of overall exposure to chemicals at the workplace and in the
environment. The "Biologischer Arbeitsstoff Toleranzwert" (BAT) in Germany /3/ and the "Biological
Exposure Index" in USA serve as reference values.
Besides these occupational limit values, reference values exist in Germany for the background exposure
of the non occupationally exposed general population /4,5/. These values are officially accepted and
45
I'.dme /, No. /, 2003 Unusual Non-Occupational Exposure to Metals
confirmed. However, reference values are established statistically. The reference point is the ninety fifth
percentile. Ninety-five percent of the values in a representative group of the general population have
concentrations below, while 5% exceed the reference value. These values only describe statistically the
body's chemical load, they do not distinguish between hazardous or non-hazardous. Reference values can
vary between regions and countries. They can change: The values for polychlorinated biphenyls or dioxins,
for instance, have decreased in recent years/6/.
Table summarizes the reference values for some metals, describing the background exposure of the
general population in Germany. Usually the concentrations are measured in blood or urine/4,5/.
In some cases the reference values are exceeded without any occupational exposure. In the following
several cases of unusual environmental exposure to lead, cobalt, manganese, mercury and amalgam are
reported.
Table
Reference values for metals describing the background exposure ofthe general population in Germany/4,5/
PARAMETER REFERENCE-VALUE MATRIX
aluminium
lead
cobalt
copper
manganese
mercury
< 2000 tg/g Cr.
60- 120 pg/1
< 2,0 tg/g Cr.
50 tg/g Cr.
10-12 lag/1
< 10 tg/l
urine
blood
urine
urine
blood
urine
CASE REPORTS:
Lead
In 1998 a female patient complained of dizziness, headache and abdominal pain. Environmental
investigation showed that she had bought in the previous year some items of kitchen pottery, which she used
almost daily, during her holidays in the Mediterranean area. It is well known that these articles of pottery
may have glazes containing lead. Biomonitoring revealed a lead exposure about 300 lag/1 in blood. This
concentration is much higher than the background level and reaches the BAT value at workplaces/2/. The
blood lead levels decreased after the pottery had been disposed of.
In another case of environmental lead exposure a male patient suffered a shotgun injury. The x-ray shows
the shotgun injury with deposition of several pellets containing lead (Fig. 1). The investigations ofblood lead
concentrations showed a significant increase of lead within the following 6 days. The maximum was 720 gg/1
blood. The reference value of lead for environmental exposure is between 60 and 120 lag/1 /4/. Another
marker for lead exposition is the Delta-Aminolaevulin Acid in urine, which corresponded in this case to the
increasing and decreasing lead levels and showed the dynamics of lead exposure.
46
l'ro.[.'Dr,reed Renate Wrbitzky Bioinorganic C.hemistry and,4pplications
Fig. 1" Shotgun injury with deposition of several pellets (right thorax and hip) containing lead (Out-Patient-
Clinic of Occupational-, Social- and Environmental Medicine, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg)
Cobalt
Cobalt exposure is usual at some workplaces with heavy metal processes. Cobalt is known to produce
cough, dyspnoea, wheezing, asthma or interstitial fibrosis, known as "hard metal disease". In this case,
following hip hemiarthroplasty, a patient suffered from a cardiomyopathy that was described as the effect of
cobalt. As the arthroplasty contained cobalt and other metals a metal analysis was carried out, which revealed
high cobalt and chromium levels. The level of cobalt in blood was 230.0 lag/l much higher than the actual
German BAT value of 5 g/l/2/. The blood value of chromium was 17.0 tg/l within the actual EKA value
of 35.0 g/1/2/. Evidently due to an infection, which was clinically confirmed and radiologically assessed,
the arthroplasty dissolved and caused the high internal exposure. Further investigation showed no
environmental or occupational exposure. In conclusion, if there is an infection of an arthroplasty the
physician should consider a potential release ofmetals.
Manganese
A 54-year-old woman complained of non-specific symptoms such as headache, dizziness, loss of
concentration. Organic diseases were not found. As she was convinced that she had been exposed to heavy
47
I'ohtme I, No. I. 2003 l.&t,tsual Non-Occ.tpational Extosure to Metals
metals in her drinking water, some relevant analyses were done: lead, copper and manganese in blood. The
concentrations of lead and copper were within the limits of the background level, but the manganese, at 18
lag/1 blood, was slightly above the reference value of the general population, which is about 12 lag/1 in
Germany. This value nearly reaches the German BAT value for manganese, which is determined as 20 g/l
/2/. We did not find any explanation for this unusual exposure. Drinking water was controlled and without
high concentrations ofmanganese.
Nutritional habits were normal. There was no high uptake of seaweed or algae, which are known to show
high concentrations of manganese. A repeat blood concentration half a year later was, at 16.8 lag/l, nearly
unchanged.
Even if the symptoms of the patient differ from the symptoms that are reported from higher manganese
exposure (e.g., increased tremor and decreased short-term memory) it is problematic that the German BAT
value for working places is nearly reached. This value was determined due to the above mentioned
neurological effects ofmanganese which were found in some studies/2, 7/.
Metallic Mercury
Winker et al. ofthe Division of Occupational Medicine in Vienna, Austria, reported an extraordinary case
of poisoning with metallic mercury/8/: A previously drug-addicted patient intravenously injected himself
with about 8 g (0.6 ml) of metallic mercury in an attempt at suicide and took about 100 ml orally. Iqe was
working in an incinerating plant and acquired the bottle at his workplace. Within a few days he developed
typical symptoms of acute mercury intoxication, such as gastroenteritis, colitis, stomatitis and metallic taste
in the mouth. About 2 weeks later he showed a strong tremor in the hands, exhaustion and insomnia. Six
weeks later he was examined and complained of lack ofconcentration, speech disorder and tremor.
Mercury concentration in blood was 680 lag/l as compared to the reference value of about 20 lag/l.
Mercury concentration in urine was 140 lag/I, corresponding to a reference value of 10 lag/1. The clinical
investigations showed no abnormal results (velocity of nerve conduction, electromyography,
electroencephalogram). Chelation therapy was done and mercury levels decreased to 478 lag/l.
As expected, the x-ray examination showed extensive amounts of metallic mercury droplets within the
original lesions. Three years after the suicide attempt an extirpation of residual mercury was carried out.
About 2 g of the injected mercury could be removed, and the mercury blood levels then decreased to about
250 lag/l. Further observations showed no symptoms of chronic mercury intoxication. Metallic mercury does
not have the same toxic effects as organic or inorganic mercury due to another bioavailability. Acute lethal
consequences are not expected in such cases. Long term experience however is lacking in most cases/9/.
Amalgam
Some patients argue that the release of mercury from amalgam fillings is causally connected with their
complaints and diseases. A recently published study determined the internal exposure to mercury in 2 groups
differing in their attitude towards possible health hazards by mercury /10/. Forty females suffered from
serious health damage due to amalgam fillings, 43 female control subjects did not claim any association.
48
Prq[.'Dr.med Restate Wrbitzk), Bioinorganic Chemistty andApl)lications
Median mercury blood levels were 2.35 (0.25-13.40) lag/l for the "amalgam sensitive group" and 2.40 (0.25-
4.70) gg/l for "amalgam non-sensitive group".
Mercury levels in blood and urine were within the range of background levels in the general population
including persons with amalgam fillings. No statistical difference was found between both groups with
regard to internal mercury exposure. Nevertheless amalgam sensitive patients suffer from various diseases
and are convinced that amalgam fillings have caused them.
Concept of the "Human-Biomonitoring-Values"
In such cases, even if the exposure is within the range of the background exposure, it is often difficult to
evaluate the measured concentration. In Germany, therefore, the "Human-Biomonitoring-Werte" (HBM-
Values) have been adopted in order to evaluate actual exposure and especially high background exposures.
The Human Biomonitoring Commission has defined HBM-I values and HBM-II values for different
pollutants and metals. The HBM values represent health related exposure limits.
HBM-I Value
According to the Commission the HBM-I value is a value below which a risk of adverse effects in the
general population is not to be expected according to current knowledge.
HBM-H Value
Adverse effects cannot be excluded with sufficient certainty for concentrations in the range between
HBM-I and HBM-II value. A general health risk is not expected but follow-up is suggested.
If a result exceeds the HBM-II value, there is a possibility of an increased risk of adverse health effects
with the necessity to reduce exposure. Table 2 shows the HBM-values for lead, cadmium and mercury.
For the individual risk assessment it is possible to use the German occupational limit values. These
occupational limit values are defined as exposure limits which distinguish between non hazardous and
hazardous exposure.
Table 2
Human Biomonitoring Values for selected substances/11,12,13/
lead (blood) <12y.; f <45y.
>45y.
cadmium (urine) < 25 y.
>25y.
mercury (urine)
(blood)
HBM
O0 gg/l
150 pg/l
pg/g Cr.
2 lag/g Cr.
5 pg/g Cr.
5 pg/l
HBM II
150 pg/l
250 tg/1
3 g/ Cr.
5 .pg/g Cr.
20 pg/g Cr.
15 lug/l
f females; y year; Cr. creatinine
49
l'o/ume I, No. I. 2003 Unusual Non-Occupational Exposure to Metals
CONCLUSIONS
Unusual exposure to metals occurs and the physician should be alert to symptoms of poisoning.
Reference values are helpful for an assessment of environmental exposure to metals. However, these values
only describe statistically the body's chemical load, they do not distinguish between hazardous or non-
hazardous. Therefore it is useful to evaluate HBM values, which distinguish between no risk and increased
risk of adverse health e.ffects. As the number of evaluated HBM values is small, the occupational limit values
can be used for comparison of exposure. The occupational limit values are scientifically evaluated and
defined as limits below which no health effects are expected. But it must be considered, that they relate to
healthy workers and not to the general population including children or sick and elderly people. For a risk
assessment of non occupational exposure to metals it might be helpful to consider all existing exposure
values.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT:
would like to thank Prof. Dr. Dr. h.c.G. Lehnert (em. Dir. of the Out-Patient Clinic for Occupational-,
Social- and Environmental Medicine ofthe University Erlangen-Nuremberg) for use ofthe X-ray.
REFERENCES
1. American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH). Threshold Limit Values for
Chemical Substances and Physical Agents and Biological Exposure Indices 1999/2000, Cincinnati
(2001).
2. H Greim (Hrsg.). MAK- und BAT-Werte-Liste 2002. Senatskommission zur Prtifung
gesundheitsschidlicher Arbeitsstoffe. Mitteilung 38. Wiley-VCH Verlagsgesellschaft, Weinheim.
3. H Greim and G Lehnert (Hrsg.): Biologische Arbeitsstoff-Toleranzwerte (BAT-Werte) und
ExpositionsOquivalente far krebserzeugende Arbeitsstoffe (EKA). Arbeitsgruppe Aufstellung von
Grenzwerten in biologischem Material der Senatskommission zur Prtifung gesundheitsschidlicher
Arbeitsstoffe der Deutschen Forschungsgemeinschaft. Wiley-VCH Verlagsgesellschaft, Weinheim.
4. K Becker, S Kaus, C Krause, P Lepom, C Schulz, M Seiwert and B Seifert. German Environmental
Survey 1998: environmental pollutants in blood of the German population, Int. J. Hyg. Environ. Health,
205, 297-308 (2002).
5. R Wrbitzky, T GOen, S Letzel, F Frank and J Angerer. Internal exposure of waste incineration workers
to organic and inorganic substances. Int Arch Occup Environ Health, 68, 13-21 (1995).
6. R Wrbitzky, B Flatau, B Beyer, H Thoma, M Hennig, A Weber, J Angerer and G Lehnert. Internal
exposure to polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDDs/PCDFs) of
Bavarian chimney sweeps. Arch. Environ. Contain. Toxicol., 40, 136-140 (2001).
50
ProfDr.med. Reale Wrhilzl9, Bioinorganic Chemistty andApplications
7. M Bader, MC Dietz, A lhrig and G Triebig: Biomonitoring of manganese in blood, urine and axillary
hair following low-dose exposure during the manufacture of dry cell batteries. Int-Arch Occup Environ
Health, 72(8), 521-7 (1999).
8. R Winker, AW Schaffer, C Konnaris, A Barth, P Giovanoli, HW Rtdiger and C Wolf: Health
consequences of an intravenous injection ofmetallic mercury. Int Arch Ocup Environ Health, 75, 587-
590 (2002).
9. RJ Giombetti, DH Rosen, AR Kuczmierczyk and DO Marsh: Repeated suicide attempts by the
intravenous injection ofelemental mercury. Int JPsychiatry Med, 18, 153-167 (1988).
10. H Zimmer, H Ludwig, M Bader, J Bailer, P Eickholz, HJ Staehle and G Triebig: Determination of
mercary in blood, urine and saliva for the biological monitoring of an exposure from amalgam fillings
in a group with self-reported adverse health effects. Int.J. Hyg. Environ. Health, 205, 205-211 (2002).
11. HBM/UBA (Kommission "Human-Biomonitoring des Umweltbundesamtes): Konzept der Retrenz-
und Human-Biomonitoring-Werte (HBM) in der Umweltmedizin. Bundesgesundhbl; 6, 221-24 (1996).
12. HBM-UBA (Kommission Human-Biomonitoring des Umweltbundesamtes)" Stoffmonographie
Quecksilber- Referenz- und Human-Biomonitoring-Werte (HBM). Bundesgesundhbl. 42 (6), 522-532
(1999).
13. HBM-UBA (Kommission Human-Biomonitoring des Umweltbundesamtes). Human-Biomonitoring:
Definition, Mglichkeiten und Voraussetzungen. Bundesgesundhbl 6, 213-215 (1996).
51
