Gold Binding by Native and Chemically Modified
Hops Biomasses
M. Laura Ldpez,J.L. Gardea-Torresdey ', J.R. Peralta-Vldea,G. de la Rosa, V. Arrnendiriz,I. Herrera,H. Troiani,J. Henning4
Envtronmental Science and Engineering Ph.D. Program and Chemistry Department, University
ofTexas at El Paso, 500 W. University Ave. El Paso, TX 79968; Departrnent ofChemical
Engineering, University ofTexas atAustin, Austin, TX 78712-1062
4Department ofCrop and Soil Science, United States Department ofAgriculture-Agricultural
Research Service, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 973311, USA
GRAPHICAL ABSTRACT
Traditional methods for gold recovery from wastewaters use chemical compounds that release toxic by-
products to the environment. Experiments demonstrated that hop biomass could be considered as an
environmentally friendly method for gold recovery from aqueous solutions. Almost 100% of Au(III) ions
were bound to esterified biomass at any pH studied.
100
8o
6O
40
2o
pH profile
2 3 4 5 6
pH
Native ,=,l,-Esterified Hy
Corresponding author: Phone (915) 747-5359; Fax (915) 747-5748 E-mail" jgardea@utep.edu
29
Vol. 3, Nos. 1-2, 2005 Gold Binding by Native and Chemically ModifiedHops Biomasses
ABSTRACT
Heavy metals from mining, smelting operations and other industrial processing facilities pollute
wastewaters worldwide. Extraction of metals from industrial effluents has been widely studied due to the
economic advantages and the relative ease of technical implementation. Consequently, the search for new
and improved methodologies for the recovery of gold has increased. In this particular research, the use of
cone hops biomass (Humulus lupulus) was investigated as a new option for gold recovery. The results
showed that the gold binding to native hops biomass was pH dependent from pH 2 to pH 6, with a maximum
percentage binding at pH 3. Time dependency studies demonstrated that Au(III) binding to native and
modified cone hops biomasses was found to be time independent at pH 2 while at pH 5, it was time
dependent. Capacity experiments demonstrated that at pH 2, esterified hops biomass bound 33.4 mg Au/g of
biomass, while native and hydrolyzed hops biomasses bound 28.2 and 12.0 mg Au/g of biomass,
respectively. However, at pH 5 the binding capacities were 38.9, 37.8 and 11.4 mg of Au per gram of native,
esterified and hydrolyzed hops biomasses, respectively.
Key Words: Hops, chemical modification, Au nanoparticles, metal binding, Au recovery.
INTRODUCTION
Cyanidation, smelting, ion exchange and electrolysis are different techniques widely used in mineral
industries to recover gold. However, such methods are usually expensive and generate toxic chemical
residues potentially harmful to the environment /1,2/. Therefore, it is necessary to explore new
methodologies that will allow the recovery of gold from aqueous solutions.
Biosorption uses biological materials or wastes from other industrial processes to remove heavy metals
from wastewaters/3,4/. The metal adsorbing properties depend on the type of biomass, the specific metal
present in the solution, the biomass preparation process, and the chemical environment of the solutions/5,6/.
Also, the metal concentration plays an important role in the heavy metal binding to the biomass/7/.
There are different mechanisms that have been postulated for adsorption processes such as chemisorption
(which involves an ion exchange mechanism), complexation, coordination, chelation, and precipitation,
among others/8/. Moreover, during the metal adsorption process, chemical transformation of metal ions can
occur. For example, oxidation/reduction reactions usually take place in the process/9,10/.
Metals tend to modify the configuration of biological structures to form complexes or to block functional
groups. Biomass cell walls have a high content of amino acids and polysaccharides, which have different
functional groups able to bind metal ions/11/. Proteins such as cysteine form complexes with metal ions
because they possess chemical coordination sites such as sulfhydryl, amino and carboxylate groups /12/.
Other factors such as the porosity and density of biological materials contribute to the uptake of metals/13/.
Recovery of metal ions from wastewaters using plant biomass could be considered a cost-effective technique
/14/. As for the interaction of gold nanostructures with biological systems, some investigators have
30
M. Laura Lopez et al. Biohtorganic Chemistry andApplications
demonstrated that inactivated biomass of agricultural wastes of Medicago sativa (alfalfa) was able to remove
Au(IlI) from aqueous solutions/15/. In addition, a subsequent reduction of Au(III) to Au(0) was observed.
Based on such information, this study was performed with the specific aim of exploring the ability of hops
biomass to adsorb Au(III) from aqueous solutions.
Different chemical modifications of hops biornass were perlbrmed in order to determine possible effects
in the adsorption of Au(lll). In this study, we also report on pH profile experiments as well as time
dependency and capacity studies conducted with native and chemically modified hops biomasses.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Hops collection
Hops biomass used for these experiments (from cone belt, harvested portion of the plant) was obtained
from the United States Department of Agriculture-Agricultural Research Services (USDA-ARS) Hops
Research Farm located outside Corvallis, Oregon (USA). Plants were allowed to grow to cone maturity and
then cut down. The cones were separated from the rest of the plant and washed with deionized (DI) water in
order to remove dirt and debris. Cone samples were then allowed to air dry for a week, dried in a forced air
dryer set at 65C, and ground with a Wiley-Mill miller. The resulting powder was passed through a 0.149
mm (100-mesh) sieve to achieve a uniform particle size.
pH profile studies for Au(llI) binding
Batch experiments were performed in order to determine the optimum pH at which Au(III) binds to hops
biomass. Five samples of 500 mg each of native cone hops biomass were washed twice with 0.01M HC1 in
order to remove any soluble material that might interact with Au ions. This biomass was washed three times
with DI water and centrifuged at 3000 rpm in a Marathon 6K Fisher Scientific Centrifuge. Washings were
collected in a beaker, heated to boil, dried and then weighed to account for any loss of biomass. Each
biomass sample was re-suspended in 100 mL of DI water in order to obtain a 5 mg/mL concentration. The
samples were adjusted to either pH 2, 3, 4, 5 or 6 by adding either NaOH or HC1 at different concentrations.
Aliquots of 4 mL from each pH value were transferred to clean 5 mL test tubes and centrifuged at 3000 rpm
for 5 minutes. The supernatants were separated and the pellets were saved to perform the pH profile
experiments. Five volumes of 50 mL each of a 0.1mM Au(III) solution prepared from KAuCI4 were also
adjusted to pH 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 as previously described in the literature/16/. Aliquots of 4 mL of Au(III)
solution at the different pH values were transferred to the test tubes containing the biomass pellets at the
respective pH. Samples were equilibrated for one hour on a rocker and subsequently centrifuged. The
supernatants were then transferred to clean test tubes and metal analysis for Au was performed using a flame
atomic absorption spectrometer (FAAS) (Perkin Elmer model 3110 with deuterium background subtraction).
This process was repeated for esterified and hydrolyzed hops biomasses. Each treatment was replicated three
times for Quality Control/Quality Assurance (QC/QA) purposes.
31
I/ol. 3. Nos. 1-2, 2005 Gold Binding by Native and Chemically Mod(fied Hops Biomasses
Time dependency studies for Au(lll) binding to cone hops biomass.
Time dependency experiments were performed using native, esterified and hydrolyzed cone hops
biomasses in order to determine the optimum time for Au(III) binding to the biomass. The modification
procedure will be explained in the next section. For this purpose, 500 mg of each biomass were washed as
indicated in the pH profile section. Later, each biomass was re-suspended in 100 mL of DI water in order to
obtain a concentration of 5 mg/mL. The biomass suspensions were adjusted to either pH 2 or pH 5 with HC1
and NaOH solutions at different concentrations, as previously described/16/. These pH values were studied
in order to determine any enhancement on Au(III) binding. Aliquots of 4 mL of the biomass suspension were
transferred in two batches of 18 clean test tubes each, centrifuged, and the supernatants were separated. A
solution of 0.1mM of Au(III) was prepared and adjusted to either pH 2 or pH 5. Aliquots of 4 mL were
transferred to the respective pH biomass pellets and allowed to react for 0, 5, 10, 15, 30 or 60 minutes. After
the reaction occurred at the appropriate interval of time, the test tubes were centrifuged and the supernatants
transferred to clean test tubes to determine the Au concentration using a FAAS. Studies were performed in
triplicate for each native, esterified and hydrolyzed hops biomasses.
Chemical modification of hops biomass
The chemical modification of hops biomass was performed following the same procedure previously
reported in the literature/17/. Such experiments were carefully conducted since the selective modification of
the functional groups present in the hops biomass provides information about the nature of the metal binding
sites.
Esterification
Esterification of hops biomass was performed following the same procedure previously reported /17/.
This reaction was done in order to block carboxyl groups on native hops biomass. The biomass was washed
twice with 0.01M hydrochloric acid to remove any debris and three times with deionized water. All the
supernatants were collected and dried to account for any loss of biomass during washings. After that, the
biomass was resuspended in an acidic methanol solution (in 0.1M HC1), stirred, and heated at 60C for 48
hours. Biomass pellets were made by centrifugation. The supernatants were collected and dried to account for
any loss of biomass. The biomass was washed three times with deionized water, centrifuged and lyophilized
for further metal binding experiments. The basic chemical reaction is represented below:
O O
Biomass C OH + CH3 OH Biomass C O CH3 + H20
32
M.Laura Lopez et al. Bioinorganic Chem&try andApplications
Hydrolysis
The hydrolysis of hops biomass was performed in order to increase the amount of carboxyl groups in the
biomass. The biomass was washed twice with 0.01M HC1 and three times with DI water as described before.
All supernatants were collected and dried in order to account for any biomass loss. The biomass was then
reacted with 100 mL of 0.1M NaOH as previously described/17/for one hour and was later washed three
times with DI water, centrifuged, lyophilized, and saved for subsequent metal binding experiments. The basic
reaction for hydrolysis of hops biomass is represented below:
Biomass CO0-CH3 + NaOH ,.- Biomass COO- + CH3OH + Na/
Gold binding capacity experiments
Binding capacity experiments were performed in order to determine the capability of the native and
chemically modified hops biomasses to bind Au(llI) ions from an aqueous solution. In this experiment,
samples of 150 mg of each hops biomass were washed twice with 0.01M HC1 and three times with DI water.
Each biomass sample was re-suspended in 30 mL of DI water in order to obtain a concentration of 5 mg/mL
and then adjusted to either pH 2 or pH 5. Aliquots of 4 mL from each biomass suspension were transferred to
clean test tubes, centrifuged for 5 minutes at 3000 rpm, and supernatants discarded. Aliquots of 4 mL of a 0.3
mM Au(III) solution previously adjusted to either pH 2 or pH 5 were transferred to the tubes containing the
biomass pellets at the corresponding pH. A volume of 4 mL of Au(III) was set aside as the control.
Subsequently, all the tubes were equilibrated on a rocker to allow the reaction between the biomass and the
Au(III) solution. After 15 min, the test tubes were centrifuged, the pellets saved, and the supernatants were
analyzed for Au content using FAAS. The same procedure was repeated 9 times on the previously reacted
pellets in order to obtain the biomass saturation. Each treatment was repeated three times for statistical
purposes. Standards used in the FAAS analysis were prepared by dilution of the original 1000 ppm solution
using 5% HNO3. Au-saturated biomass pellets were saved for further Au recovery experiments.
Stripping of gold
Previous reports indicated that thiourea has the ability to remove gold from the biomass/18/. Therefore,
the gold-laden biomass pellets resulting from the binding capacity experiments were reacted with different
concentrations of thiourea (in 0.2M HC1) in order to determine the best concentration of the stripping agent
needed to remove the Au bound to hop biomass. The following concentrations of thiourea were tested: 0.1,
0.2, 0.4, and 0.6 M. Each concentration was also adjusted to either pH 2 or 5. The thiourea solutions were
added to different pellets at the respective pH and allowed to react for 15 minutes under rocking before
ccntrifugation. Each treatment was repeated three times. Supernatants were transferred to clean test tubes and
diluted with 5% HNO3 for metal analysis under FAAS.
33
Vol. 3, Nos. 1-2, 2005 Gold Binding by Native and Chemically Modified Hops Biomasses
Metal Analyses
Gold content in all of the experiments was determined using FAAS. The readings were performed at a
wavelength of 242.8 nm, a lamp current of 12 mA, and a slit of 0.7 mm. An impact bead was used to improve
the instrument sensitivity. The samples were diluted with a 5% HNO3 solution. Four standards were used in
order to obtain the calibration curve and the correlation coefficient (r2) obtained was 0.99 or better. The
difference between the concentration present in the control and the concentration of Au in the samples after
reaction was assumed to be the metal bound to the hops biomass. All samples were analyzed in triplicate. The
mean values and 95% confidence intervals were calculated.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
pH profile experiments
Figure 1 shows the results for the pH profile experiments for Au(III) binding to hops biomass in a pH
range from 2 to 6. In this figure, Au(III) binding to esterified hops biomass is shown to be pH independent.
On the contrary, the metal binding to native and hydrolyzed hops biomasses showed a Gaussian curve with a
maximum at pH 3 and 4 for native and a maximum at pH 3 for hydrolyzed hops biomass. The results
reported herein were similar to those obtained by the exposure of alfalfa biomass to solutions containing
Au(III) /15/, where the authors found that Au(III) binds to native alfalfa biomass in a pH independent
manner. In those studies, they also reported that modified tissues of alfalfa biomass showed an enhancement
or a reduction of the metal binding depending on the chemical modification carried out. In the hydrolyzed
hops biomass the amount of carboxyl groups is increased and as pH increases the availability of carboxylate
moieties also increases. Since Au(III) is present as the anion tetrachloroaurate (AuCln) and because of the
repulsion between the negative charges in the carboxylate groups and the anion, Au binding decreases as the
pH increases. AuCI4 binding to carboxylate groups is expected to decrease with increasing pH. However, the
actual binding mechanism has not yet been determined and other factors might be involved. Figure 1 also
shows that the percentage of Au(IlI) bound to native hops biomass is higher than the one obtained from the
hydrolyzed hops biomass. Perhaps the amount of carboxyl groups is smaller in native than in hydrolyzed
biomass, then, Au(IIl) binds better to native hops biomass. In Figure 1, it is also apparent that at pH 2, the
percentage of Au(llI) bound to hydrolyzed biomass is much lower compared to native, and esterified
biomasses. If Au(IIl) was present as an anion, an electrostatic interaction between the protonated carboxyl
group and the Au(III) anion may lead to an increase in percentage binding, which was not observed. It is
possible that tetrachloroaurate behaves differently, depending on the pH of the solution. We propose that at
pH 2, the tetrachloroaurate anion releases chloride species faster than at pH 5, which contribute for the
reduction of Au(III) to Au(0). Thus, at pH 2, the repulsion between positively charged species (protonated
carboxylates and AuC12+) leads to a reduction in Au binding. Since native and esterified hops biomasses do
not have as many carboxylate groups as hydrolyzed biomass, the repulsion is diminished allowing for Au
binding to other centers different from carboxyl moieties. If the release of chloride ions is slower at pH 5, the
repulsion between the carboxylate species and the anion tetrachloroaurate results in a reduction of Au
34
M.Laura Lopez et al. Bioinorganic Cheml'sttT andApplications
100
90-
80-
70-
60-
50"
40"
30
20"
10-
I
2 3 4 5 6
pH
Native-,B-- Esterified-,de-Hydrolyze
Fig. 1. pH profile for Au(III) binding to native, esterified and hydrolyzed hops biomass. Biomasses were
allowed to react for 1 hour with a 0.1mM Au(III) solution.
binding. In addition, protonated amino and sulfhydryl groups may be able to interact with the Au anion
participating in the binding of the metal to the hops biomass.
Time dependency studies for Au (III) binding to hops biomass
Time dependency studies were performed at pH 2 and 5 in order to determine the optimum time for
Au(III) binding to native, esterified, and hydrolyzed cone hops biomasses. Figure 2 shows that at pH 2,
Au(III) binds very quickly to the three biomasses but in a different percentage. Au(III) bound better to the
esterified (almost 100% of the amount of gold present in the solution) than to native (65%) or hydrolyzed
(30%) biomasses. As shown in Figure 2, the binding is time independent since in every case the percentage
of Au(III) bound remained the same for up to 60 min. The results obtained are comparable to those reported
by Gamez et al./15/, who found that the binding of Au(III) to alfalfa shoots biomass at pH 2 occurs rapidly
and remains stable for up to 60 minutes.
Figure 3 shows the results for time dependency studies performed at pH 5 using native, esterified, and
hydrolyzed cone hops biomasses. Contrary to the results obtained at pH 2, Figure 3 shows that at pH 5,
Au(III) binding to the three biomasses was time dependent, showing the maximum binding at 60 min of
reaction with a 0.1mM Au(III) solution. This may be attributed to the fact that at pH 5 all the groups are
deprotonated and there are more negative charges decreasing the binding of the Au(III) anion to the hops
biomasses. However, the three biomasses behaved differently as the reaction time progressed. As one can see
in Figure 3, the maximum Au(III) binding to esterified hops biomass occurred during the first 10 minutes of
35
Vol. 3, Nos. 1-2, 2005 Gold Binding by Native and Chemically Modelled ttops Biomasses
100"
80"
60"
40"
0 5 10 15 30 60
Time (rain)
Fig. 2: Time dependence studies for native, esterified and hydrolyzed hops biomass at pH 2. Experiments
were performed using a 0.1mM Au(III) solution.
100
80-
60-
40
0 5 I0 I.5 30 60
Time (min)
""Native EsteriftedHydrol-yz-et[
Fig. 3" Time dependence studies for native, esterified and hydrolyzed hops biomass at pH 5. Experiments
were performed using a 0.1mM Au(III) solution.
36
M.Laura Lopez et al. Bioinorganic ChemisoT and Applications
the reaction. For the hydrolyzed hop biomass the binding started to occur after 15 minutes, but native hops
biomass bound Au(III) ions linearly. Presumably, this divergent behavior of the biomasses is due to the
chemical modifications, which produces different available groups for Au(III) binding. Au(III) and Au(I) are
classified as a soft acids, this implies that gold ions form complexes with soft bases as nitrogen and sulfur
(due to the lone pair of electrons). In addition, at pH 5, the amino groups of the hops biomass should be
protonated and they could be involved in an electrostatic attraction to the gold anion/18/. We hypothesize
that this could also be due to the fact that at pH 5, there is some Au(III) reduction.
Au(III) binding capacity experiments
The results for the binding capacity studies in native and chemically modified cone hops biomasses at pH
2 are given in Table 1. The saturation of the biomasses was carried out after 9 Au binding cycles with a
0.3mM Au(III) solution. This table shows that the native and esterified biomasses exhibited a binding
capacity close to 30 mg of Au per gram of biomass. On the other hand, the binding capacity of the
hydrolyzed hop biomass was about 12 mg Au per gram of biomass. Thus, at pH 2, native and esterified hops
biomasses showed a better Au(III) binding capacity as compared to the one exhibited by the hydrolyzed hops
biomass.
Table 1
Capacities for Au(III) binding to native and chemically modified hops biomasses at pH 2a.
Biomass Capacity
(mg metal/g biomass)
Native 28.24 + 1.62
Esterified 33.40 + 2.25
Hcdrolczed 12.04 + 2..17
"Experiments were performed with a 0.3mM Au(III) solution and 9 saturation cycles. Each treatment was
replicated three times for QC/QA purposes. Numbers are average + 95% confidence interval (n=3).
A decrease in negative charges due to esterification may account for the increasing of Au(III) binding to
biomass and may also suggest that sulfhydryl and amino groups are involved in the binding process as
previously described /15/. Gamez et al. /15/ reported that Au(III) binding to esterified algal biomass
increased when compared to native and hydrolyzed algae biomasses. Hydrolization of biomass involves an
increase of negative charges on binding sites and consequently, an impediment for Au(III) binding to the
biomaterial/17/. This may indicate that carboxyl groups are not mainly responsible for the binding of Au(III)
to hops biomass. The amino and sulfhydryl groups mentioned before may also be involved in Au(III) binding
to hops biomass.
In the present investigation, all biomasses presented a purple color within a period of one hour of reaction
with the 0.3mM Au(III) solution. It was also observed that the purple color on the esterified biomass was
more intense as compared to the other biomasses. The purple color has also been observed in alfalfa biomass
37
'oL 3, Nos. 1-2, 2005 Gold Binding by Native and Chemically Modified Hops Biomasses
and it is attributed to the reduction of Au(III) to Au(0)/15/. The difference in the intensity indicates the
degree of reduction and may also point out that native and esterified hops biomasses have chemical groups
more likely to react with Au(III), thus allowing for more metal adsorption and reduction.
The amounts of Au(III) bound to native and chemically modified cone hops biomasses at pH 5 are shown
in Table 2. Comparing the data of Table 1 and Table 2, it is apparent that the capacities of the hydrolyzed
hops biomass remained constant at pH 2 and 5 (around 12 mg of Au/g). However, there is a 30% increase on
the Au(III) binding to the native hops biomass and about 10% increase on the Au(III) binding to the
esterified hops biomass at pH 5. Perhaps, the increments on Au binding to native and esterified hops
biomasses at this pH conform to a .fast reduction process that facilitates more binding sites within the
biomass.
Table 2
Capacities for Au(III) binding to native and chemically modified hops biomasses at pH 5a.
Biomass Capacity
(mg metal/g biomass)
Native 38.86 _+ 2.35
Esterified 37.80
_1.55
Hcdrolczed 11.38 + 1.00
aExperiments were performed with a 0.3mM Au(III) solution and 9 saturation cycles. Each treatment was
replicated three times for QC/QA purposes. Numbers are average + 95% confidence interval (n=3).
Stripping of gold
It is important to determine if the gold bound to the hops biomass can be recovered. The stripping of gold
was performed by exposing the gold laden biomass to different concentrations of thiourea at pH 2 and pH 5
during 3 cycles, following the procedure described in the literature/17/. Thiourea has been employed as a
leaching agent (complexing agent) that forms a complex with gold. Figures 4 and 5 show the percentage of
Au(III) recovered using different solutions of thiourea at pH 2 and pH 5. The concentrations of thiourea used
in these experiments were 0.1M, 0.2M, 0.4M, and 0.6M. As shown in these figures, the highest percentage of
Au(Ill) recovered was observed at pH 5. This suggests that Au(III) could be bound more strongly to native
and modified hops biomasses at pH 2 than at pH 5, and consequently it is more difficult to be desorbed. Also,
the complcxation reaction could be pH dependent.
38
M.Laura Lopez el al. Bioinorganic Chemistry andApplications
120
. oo-
4tt-
0.1 0.2 0.4 0.6
Thiourea concentration (M)
Native Esterified.Hydrolyze
Fig. 4: Recovery of Au from native, esterified and hydrolyzed hops biomass using different concentrations
of thiourea adjusted to pH 2.
100-
80-
0.1. 0.2 0.4 0.6
Thiourea Concentration (M)
Fig. 5: Recovery of Au from native, esterified and hydrolyzed hops biomass using different concentrations
of thiourea adjusted to pH 5.
39
lt"oL 3. Nos. 1-2, 2005 Gold Binding by Native and Chemically Modified Hops Biomasses
CONCLUSIONS
In summary, our results showed that cone hops biomass was able to bind Au(III) from an aqueous
solution in a pH dependent manner. Time dependence studies demonstrated that Au(III) binding to the native
hops biomass was time independent at pH 2 while at pH 5 it was time dependent. Capacity studies for native
and esterified hops biomasses revealed a higher capacity for binding Au(llI) ions from aqueous solutions at
pH 2 and pH 5 as compared to hydrolyzed hops biomass. Also, stripping of gold was best performed using
0.2 M thiourea. The results obtained demonstrated that the cone hops biomass is effective in removing gold
from aqueous solutions and could be considered a potential cost-effective and environmentally safe method
for the recovery of gold.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors acknowledge the support of the National Institutes of Health (grant S06GM8012-33) and the
University of Texas at El Paso's Center for Environmental Resource Management (CERM) through funding
from the Office of Exploratory Research of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (cooperative
agreement CR-819849-01). The authors also thank the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Grant
DEFC0401AL67097, Southwest Border and Technology Collaboration Program, and the Materials Corridor
Initiative. We also thank the HBCU/MI Environmental Technology Consortium, that is funded by the
Department of Energy. Dr. Gardea-Torresdey acknowledges the funding from National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences (Grant ROLES11367-01).
REFERENCES
1. P. Gomes, M.F. Almeida, J.M. Loureiro, Sep. Purif. Technol, 24, 35-57 (2001).
2. G.L. Miltzarek, C.H. Sampaio, J.L. Cortina, Miner. Eng, 15, 75-82 (2002).
3. M.M. Figueira, B. Volesky, H.J. Mathieu, Environ. Sci. Technol, 33, 1840-1846 (1999).
4. M. Zhao, J.R. Duncan, Biotechnol. Lett, 19(10), 953-955 (1997).
5. H. Seki, A. Susuki, ./. Colloid Interface Sci, 249, 295-300 (2002).
6. R.S. Bai, T.E. Abraham, Water Res, 36, 1224-1236 (2002).
7. J.G. Parsons, G. Gamez, K.J. Tiemann, J.L. Gardea-Torresdey, Proceedings ofthe 2000 Conference on
Hazardous Waste Research, (2001). Edited by L.E. Erickson, M.M. Rankin, Kansas State Univ., and
Manhattan, KS. pp 2-12.
8. J.L. Gardca-Torresdey, K.J. Tiemann, G. Gamez, K. Dokken, I. Cano-Aguilera, L.R. Furenlid, M.W.
Renner, Environ. Sci. Technol, 34, 4392-4396 (2000).
9. D. Kratochvil, B. Volesky, War. Res, 34, 3186-3196 (2000).
10. D.W. Darnall, B. Greene, M.T. Henzl, J.M. Hosea, A. Robert, J. Sneddon, M.A. Dale, Environ. Sci.
Technol, 20, 206-208 (1986).
40
M.Laura Lopez et al. Bioinorganic Chem&oy andApplications
11. Y. Goksungur, S. Uren, U. Guvenc, Turk. J. Biol, 27, 23-29 (2003).
12. H. Niu, B. Volesky, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol, 75, 436-442 (2000).
13. C. Garbizu, I. Alkorta, Bioresource Technol, 77(3), 229-236 (2001).
14. J.L. Gardea-Torresdey, K.J. Tiemann, G. Gamez, K. Dokken, N.E. Pingitore, Adv. Environ. Res, 3(1),
83-93 (1999).
15. G. Gamez, J.L. Gardea-Torresdey, K.J. Tiemann, J. Parsons, K. Dokken, M. Jose-Yacaman, Adv.
Environ. Res, 7(2), 563-571 (2003).
16. J.L. Gardea-Torresdey, M.K. Becker-Hapak, J.M. Hosea, D.W. Darnall, Environ. Sci. Technol, 24(9),
1372-1378 (1990).
17. J.L. Gardea-Torresdey, K.T. Tiemann, K. Dokken, G. Gamez, Proceedings ofthe 1998 Conference on
Hazardous Waste Research 111-121 (1998).
18. J.L. Gardea-Torresdey, K.J. Tiemann, J.G. Parsons, G. Gamez, I. Herrera, M. Jose-Yacaman,
Microchem. J, 71, 193-204 (2002).
41
