INTRODUCTION
There has been considerable interest in the chemistry 
			                   of penta- and hexacoordinated
organotin(IV) complexes derived from various
organic ligands due to their structural and stereochemical aspects. In marked
contrast to the well-documented chemistry of organotin(IV)
complexes [–], 
the number of reports available in the
literature on the corresponding tin(II) [,
] complexes are
rather scanty. Organotin(IV) complexes are put to use in various
fields [–] 
and exhibit potential biological applications
[–] such as insecticidal, fungicidal, and antitumor
activities.

In view of the interesting results obtained in our
previous communication [] dealing with the toxicity of
organotin(IV) and tin(II) complexes of heterocyclic
β-diketones, it was considered relevant to screen a series
of penta- and hexacoordinated organotin(IV) complexes and
tetracoordinated tin(II) complexes for their toxicity against Musca
domestica (house fly). We now report the structure-activity
relationship of some penta- and hexacoordinated organotin(IV)
complexes and tetracoordinated tin(II) complexes of
4-acyl-2,4-dihydro-5-methyl-2-phenyl-3H-pyrazol-3-ones in detail.

EXPERIMENTS
The organotin(IV) complexes and tin(II) complexes were prepared by
the method advanced by Rai et al [, 
]. These complexes
were diluted with solvent to estimate the LC50 values
for house flies (Musca domestica). The house flies
(Musca domestica), 100 in each experimental set, were
lightly anaesthetized with carbon dioxide and were acclimatised
for 24 hours. at circa. 25°C in Fonda containers. The
house flies were fed on milk soaked cotton pads. Each fly was then
fully held with forceps and was treated with 1 μL of
preassigned dilution of the experimental compounds on the thorax.
Controls (house flies) were treated with 1 μL of acetone
using an automated microapplicator. The so-treated flies were then
returned to appropriately labelled containers, given access to
milk-soaked cotton, and again maintained at  circa. 25°C
for 25 hours. during which mortality counts were made. The
criterion for mortality was no response to probing; any movement
was taken to indicate survival for the present investigation.

After approximate LC50 range was bracketed, a new stock
solution of each experimental compound was serially diluted with
acetone to obtain six concentrations (0.25%, 0.50%, 1.0%,
1.5%, 2.0%, and 4.0% by weight). Five
replications per concentration were then tested. In each
replication, the controlled flies were treated with 1 μL
of acetone. Post-treatment handling conditions were the same (see above).

The statistical analysis system (SAS) software package was used to
estimate LC50 values and their fiducial limits (±
standard error for each regression). Slopes of the probit
regression obtained for populations of the house flies were then
analyzed by the method of Steele and Torrie []. Present
mortalities were corrected using Abbott's [] formula.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The organotin(IV) and tin(II) complexes of compositions 
 (where R = −CH3, −p−
 ClC6H4, and −C6H5), 
 (where R = −CH3 and −C6H5),
and Sn(II)
 (where R = −p−ClC6H4 
 and −C6H5) were synthesized, and
the structures of these complexes have already been reported [, 
] by us
earlier on the basis of physicochemical and spectral (1H, 13C,
and 119Sn NMR) evidences. The ligand (LH) employed for the
synthesis of these complexes was prepared by a reported method
[], where LH=, R = −CH3 (AMPPOH),
−p−ClC6H4 (CMPPOH), and −C6H5 
(BMPPOH). These ligands
(AMPPOH, CMPPOH, and BMPPOH) were found to be least active when tested
against Musca domestica (house fly), but on complexation,
the biological activity of the resulting complexes increased. The
results of the screening of pentacoordinated and hexacoordinated
organotin(IV) and tetracoordinated tin(II) complexes are listed in
 and the complexes are arranged in descending
order of biological activity.

In order to study the structure-activity relationship, some
pentacoordinated diorganotin(IV) complexes of composition
 (where R = −CH3 (complex I),
R = −p−ClC6H4 (complex II), and
R = −C6H5 (complex III)) were synthesized and their structure
was suggested previously [] on the basis of spectral studies.
119Sn NMR spectral study reveals the presence of five 
coordinations around the central tin atom in these complexes
().

In these complexes, chlorine atom is attached to the central tin
atom. The presence of chlorine atom on organotin(IV) moiety is an
important factor for imparting activity to the complexes I, II, and III. Further, among the
dimethyltin chloro complexes, some substitutions were
carried out on the ligand moiety. Complex I was more active than
complexes II and III. Complex I has alkyl substitutent
(R = −CH3) over the ligand; whereas
complexes II and III have aryl substituents
(R = −p−ClC6H4 and 
−C6H5).
Further, complex II was more active than complex III because the
former contains chlorine atom on the ligand moiety
(R = −p−ClC6H4) while the latter lacks
it (R = −C6H5).

In order to study the effect of coordination number, geometry
around the central tin atom, delocalisation, and steric
factors, some hexacoordinated organotin(IV) complexes of composition
 (where R = −CH3 (complex IV) and −C6H5 (complex
V)) were synthesized. 119Sn NMR spectral studies
[] of the complexes IV and V reveal that these complexes
possess distorted octahedral geometry around the central tin atom
with methyl groups approximately trans to each other
().

In these complexes, heterocyclic β-diketone behaves as
bidentate ligand. The geometry of complex IV is confirmed
[] with the help of single crystal X-ray analysis which
reveals C−Sn−C angle 162.1(3)°. 
Complex IV was more active than complex V. Complex IV possesses an
alkyl substituent, while complex V possesses an aryl substituent
over the ligand.

The pentacoordinated diorganotin(IV) complexes I, II, and III have
a chlorine atom which is directly attached to the central tin atom
which may be the plausible reason for enhanced activity of these
complexes. The hexacoordinated complexes IV and V contain two
heterocyclic β-diketone ligands which can be compared to
pentacoordinated complexes which contain only one heterocyclic
β-diketone ligand moiety. Hence the steric crowding due to
heterocyclic β-diketone ligand is more in hexacoordinated
complexes than in pentacoordinated complexes.

To study the effect of an organic group directly attached to tin,
the tin(II) complexes of compositions

(complex VI) and

(complex VII) were synthesized []. The structure of these
derivatives was proposed on the basis of spectral
studies []. These tin(II) complexes do not possess any
alkyl group on the tin atom. The tin(II) complexes were found to
be least active in this series. Thus the presence of an organic
group directly attached to tin is an important factor which is
responsible for enhanced activity of organotin(IV)
complexes.

In the tin(II) complexes VI and VII, the central tin atom is
surrounded by four oxygen atoms, and a lone pair of electrons is
present on the tin atom (). Complex VI was
found slightly more active than complex VII. It may be due to the
presence of chlorine atom in the ligand moiety of complex
VI.

A detailed study of structure-activity relationship of
pentacoordinated diorganotin(IV), hexacoordinated diorganotin(IV),
and tetracoordinated tin(II) complexes revealed that organotin(IV)
complexes are more active than tin(II) complexes containing the
same organic ligand. This indicates that the alkyl group directly
appended to the central tin atom is an important contributor to
the activity. Further, pentacoordinated complexes in which
chlorine atom is directly attached to the central tin atom
(complex I, II, and III) are more active than the hexacoordinated
complexes (complex IV and V) which lack chlorine atom on the
central tin atom. The complexes containing −p-chloro
phenyl (R = −p−Cl C6H4) group on the
ligand are slightly more active than the complexes containing
phenyl (R = −C6H5) group on the ligand.
Tin(II)complexes (complex VI and VII) which possess a lone pair of
electrons, but these complexes lack any organic group directly
attached to tin, were found to be least active.

Figures and Tables
Monochloro(4-acyl-2,4-dihydro-5-methyl-2-phenyl-3H-pyrazol-3-onato)
dimethyltin(IV).

Bis(4-acyl-2,4-dihydro-5-methyl-2-phenyl-3H-pyrazol-3-onato) dimethyltin(IV).

Bis(4-acyl-2,4-dihydro-5-methyl-2-phenyl-3H-pyrazol-3-onato)
tin(II).

LC50 values of organotin(IV) and tin(II)
complexes against Musca domestica (house fly).

No.	Complex	LC50 Value (in ppm)	119Sn NMR	
	
I	Me2SnCl[OPPMA]	14.50	−107.26	
II	Me2SnCl[OPPMC]	15.22 	−102.17	
III	Me2SnCl[OPPMB]	16.56	
IV	Me2Sn[OPPMA]2	18.16	−315.87	
V	Me2Sn[OPPMB]2	20.66	−318.94	
VI	Sn(II)[OPPMC]2	30.46	
VII	Sn(II)[OPPMB]2	32.26	
See [].

