INTRODUCTION
Iodine chemistry is proving to be of considerable
interest lately, in part, because of the discovery of
low-temperature, semi- and super-conducting polyiodides, which
quickly led to the deliberate doping of conjugated polymers with
elemental iodine, and ultimately resulted in the award of the 2000
Nobel Prize in Chemistry to Professor Heeger et al for their
research on these materials []. A second important field in which iodine chemistry plays a pivotal role is in the activity of
antithyroid drugs and there is now a major research effort focused
on determining structure-activity relationships of thioamides with
iodine [, ]. The antithyroid drugs that are most commonly
used today are the thioamide derivatives, 6-n-propyl-thiouracil,
N-methyl-imidazoline-2-thione (methimazole), and
3-methyl-2-thioxo-4-imidazoline-1-carboxylate (carbimazole). For
the past few years, we have been exploring the iodine chemistry of
thioamides in an effort to bring about a clearer understanding of
the interactions involved in antithyroid drug treatment. As part
of this research, we have reported the results of a fundamental
study on the effect of high external pressures (up to ∼
50 kbar) on the ambient-temperature FT-Raman spectra of four
solid, diiodine-heterocyclic thioamide compounds []. In the case of one of these compounds, [(bztzdtH)I2} · I2 (bztzdtH = benzothiazole-2-thione), we discovered that
I2 disproportionation occurs with increasing pressure and I3− ions are produced. In addition, empirical
correlations were established between the wavenumber of the
I−I stretching vibration, the I−I bond length,
and the applied external pressure. In this present paper, we have
extended these pressure-tuning Raman spectroscopic studies to an
examination of a second series of five, solid
diiodine-heterocyclic thioamide compounds: (mbztS)I2 (mbztS = N-methyl-2-mercaptobenzothiazole) (1); [(mbztS)2I]+[I7]− (2); (pySH)I2 (pySH = 2-mercaptopyridine) (3);
[(pySH)(pyS]+[I3]− (4); (thpm)(I2)2 or [(thpm)I2]+[I3]− (thpm = 2-mercapto-3,4,5,6-tertahydropyrimidine) (5). These systems are also of potential importance as model compounds for
the development of structure-activity relationships associated
with the interaction of antithyroid drugs with iodine. They
contain iodine atoms in several different structural arrangements
and three of them have already been characterized by
single-crystal X-ray diffraction, namely, compounds 1
[, ], 2 [–], and 4 [].

EXPERIMENTAL
The diiodine-heterocyclic thioamides
1–5 were prepared according to the literature
procedures [, –]. Complete details of the
pressure-tuning FT-Raman measurements, including the ruby R1
fluorescence-pressure calibration procedure, have been described
elsewhere [, ]. A diamond-anvil cell (High Pressure Diamond
Optics, Inc, Tucson, Ariz, USA) was used to generate the applied
pressures. FT-Raman spectra were recorded on a Bruker IFS-88 FT-IR
spectrometer equipped with an FRA-105 Raman module connected via
two 1 m photo-optic cables to a Nikon Optiphot-II optical
microscope using a Nikon 20X super-long-range objective. A near-IR
(Nd3+: YAG) laser, emitting at 1064.1 nm with a
power ∼ 25 mW, was used to excite the Raman spectra
and typically a 2.6 cm−1 spectral resolution was
employed while collecting 1000 scans. The band positions are
considered to be accurate to at least ±1 cm−1.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In our previous pressure-tuning FT-Raman work on
diiodine thioamide compounds [], we pointed out
that electron charge-transfer between the S atom of a thioamide
and diiodine will result in stabilization of the lone
pair of electrons on the S atom by overlapping of the S donor
orbital with the σ*-orbital of diiodine.
This situation will lead to a lengthening of the thione double
bond in the thioamide and subsequent bond formation between the S
atom and diiodine, together with a concomitant
lengthening of the I−I bond. It was also shown that there
are direct empirical correlations between the S−I,
C−S, and I−I bond distances, namely, if the
S−I distances are shorter than the C−S ones are,
then the I−I distances will be longer than normal and
there will be strong electron donation and vice versa. The
application of high external pressures to the diiodine
thioamide compounds would, therefore, be expected to produce some
significant changes in bond distances and particularly on the
positions of the low-frequency modes associated with the iodine
atoms. There have been only a few high-pressure vibrational
studies reported on diiodine systems and these have
involved chiefly oxides [, ] and sulfides []. The
interaction of polyiodides with polyvinyl alcohols has also been
investigated under high pressure []. In addition, the effect of high pressures on the Raman spectrum of solid
diiodine itself has been the subject of several
investigations [, ]. In the present work, the FT-Raman
spectra of compounds 1–5 were first recorded
under ambient conditions and then pressure-tuning FT-Raman studies
were undertaken on each of the species. An excellent review of the
Raman spectra expected for different diiodine compounds
has been published recently by Deplano et al [].

FT-Raman spectra of compound 1 in the
50–250 cm−1 region are shown in  for selected pressures up to ∼ 51.3 kbar. Initially,
there are three bands observed at 84 w, 111 mw, and
161 vs cm−1. The Raman spectrum is closely similar to
that reported for the (dtt)I2 (dtt =
1,3-ditholane-2-thione) for which the presence of a
S⋯I−I linkage has been established []. Upon increasing the pressure, the three bands for compound
1 gradually shift to higher wavenumbers, as is typically
the case []. At ∼ 35 kbar, the band
originally at 84 cm−1 vanishes and a new band develops at
∼ 150 cm−1 which, eventually at ∼
51 kbar, has a comparable intensity to that of the originally
very strong peak, which has now shifted to 171 cm−1.
These spectral changes can also be seen quite in the ν
(cm−1) versus P (pressure, kbar) plot (), which indicates that compound 1 undergoes a
pressure-induced structural change at ∼ 35 kbar.
From X-ray crystallographic data for 1 [, ], the
I−I distance is 2.7912(9) Å which, from the linear
plot of I−I bond length versus position of the
ν(I−I) mode given in [], would lead to an I−I stretching vibration being expected at
∼ 160 cm−1 at ambient pressure, just as it is
observed for this adduct. Before the phase transition for
compound 1 occurs at ∼ 35 kbar, the three
vibrations originally located at 84, 111, and 161 cm−1
are completely pressure insensitive. Following the phase
transition, however, the pressure dependences are 2.08, 1.78,
and 0.57 cm−1/kbar, respectively, which are typical of
low-energy vibrations. There are other weak Raman features
detected at ambient pressure at 255, 311, 392, 511, 539, 636, and
708 cm−1, which are presumably associated chiefly with
low-energy bending vibrations of the thioamide group. Furthermore,
it is also worthwhile pointing out that the disappearance of the
311 cm−1 band of compound 1 at ∼
35 kbar provides further evidence for the existence of the
phase transition at this pressure.

In the case of compound 2, it was initially thought that
this would prove to be compound 1 with an additional
I2 molecule attached to the S⋯I−I unit
leading to a S⋯I−I−I−I
linkage. However, X-ray crystallographic analysis has subsequently
shown that this compound is actually [(mbztS)2I]+[I7]−
[, ]. The same compound was reported earlier by Demartin
et al []. Three Raman bands are observed at ambient
pressure at 85 w, 112 mw, and 161 vs cm−1. In
addition, there are weak features at 257, 311, 391, 511, 539, and
637 cm−1. The Raman data are essentially identical
to those of compound 1. Upon application of pressure to
2, the Raman spectra continue to be closely similar to
those of 1, including the existence of a pressure-induced
structural change at ∼ 35 kbar. Therefore, from a
vibrational standpoint, compounds 1 and 2 are
essentially identical, not surprisingly since their formulations
are really S · I2 and I− · 3I2. Delplano et al [] have emphasized the experimental difficulties inherent in measuring the laser Raman spectra of polyiodides, that is, some I2 may be lost during the measurements, for example, I7− → I5− + I2; → I5− →→
I3− + I2. There was no spectroscopic evidence, however,
for the formation of any free I2 in this particular
case—a strong Raman band would have been observed at ∼
180 cm−1 [, , ].

The low-energy FT-Raman spectra of (pySH)I2 (pySH = 2-mercaptopyridine) (3)
[(pySH)(pyS]+[I3]− (4) are also 
quite similar to one another. It is possible that
compound 3 may have disproportionated to
4 upon initial pressurization in the
DAC, as has been reported previously for
[(bztzdtH)I2} · I2 (bztzdtH = benzothiazole-2-thione) []. On the basis of
X-ray crystallographic data for 4, the
I3 moiety is slightly bent. For a
linear I3− entity, only one very strong Raman band would be expected at ∼
110 cm−1 from the symmetric inphase
ν(I−I) stretching mode []. In the case of 4, however, there is an intense
doublet at 155 and 164 cm−1, and several
other weaker features are observed at 77 sh,
110 vw, 176 sh, and 234 vvw cm−1. The appearance
of this strong band at 164 cm−1, together
with the observation of the other weaker bands,
suggests that the I3 moiety in 4
is better formulated as an I− · I2 entity, containing a slightly perturbed diiodine molecule,
rather than as an I3− species. A comparable situation exists for [(EtNH2)2dt]I3, which exhibits a very strong Raman band at
167 cm−1 and is considered to have a
perturbed diiodine molecule []. The
I− · I2 formulation for 4 could also be
another reason for the similarity of the spectra
to those of 3. The second intense Raman
feature observed for 4 at 155 cm−1 may be the
result of partial decomposition to another
polyiodide species or possibly even site or
factor-group splitting of the symmetric
ν(I−I) vibrational mode. Under pressure, the doublet
at 155 and 164  cm−1 shifts gradually to
higher wavenumbers, with the higher energy
component eventually merging with the lower
energy one (). The versus P plot
in  suggests that there is a
pressure-induced structural change occurring at
∼ 25 kbar. The signals in the C−H
stretching region are much too weak to be
analytically useful at low pressures, but there
is a significant increase in intensity occurring
in this region, beginning just after the phase
transition near 30 kbar, that continues until the high
est pressure (∼ 46 kbar) is reached.
This dramatic increase in intensity may be
associated with pressure-induced fluorescence involving the
I− · I2 entity. Such pressure-induced fluores cence effects have been reported previously for
diamond anvils [], ZnS : Mn2+ nanoparticles [], and acetone []. In
addition, the acridine diiodine (2 : 3) adduct has been
shown to a yellow-green fluorescence upon
exposure to 632.8 He−Ne laser
excitation [].

Finally, a FT-Raman study was also conducted for compound
5, which it was thought could be formulated as
 either  (thpm)(I2)2 or
[(thpm)I2]+[I3]−(thpm = 2-mercapto-3,4,5,6-tertahydropyrimidine). The principal,
low-energy features appear at 91 w, 161 vvs and 197 w
cm−1 suggesting the presence of neutral
(thpm)(I2)2, containing perturbed diiodine molecules,
rather than ionic  [(thpm)I2]+[I3]− for which
the strongest Raman band would be expected at ∼
110 cm−1 and not at ∼ 160 cm−1. Under pressure, this compound also undergoes a structural change at
∼ 32 kbar (Figures  and ).

CONCLUSIONS
Raman spectroscopy continues to be an extremely useful probe for
examining the structural features of diiodine
[, , ] and interhalogen [] thioamide compounds.
In the pressure-tuning FT-Raman spectroscopic work reported here,
structural phase transitions were detected for compounds
1, 4, and 5 at ∼ 35,
∼ 25, and ∼ 32 kbar, respectively. There
was no evidence of any free I2 formation for any of the compounds examined under high pressures. The similarity of the
FT-Raman spectra of the two pairs of compounds, 1,
2, 3, and 4, may be the result of them
being closely related perturbed diiodine complexes
[]. In the case of compounds 3 and 4, it
is also possible that a pressure-induced disproportionation of
3 may have occurred leading to the formation of
4, in a similar manner to the effect of pressure on
[(bztzdtH)I2} · I2 (bztzdtH = benzothiazole-2-thione) []. Finally, the FT-Raman data show that 5 is best formulated as (thpm)(I2)2 rather than the ionic species [(thpm)I2]+[I3]−.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was generously supported by operating and equipment
grants to I. S. Butler from the NSERC (Canada) and the FQRNT
(Quebec). The award of a NATO Collaborative Research Grant to N.
Hadjiliadis, I. S. Butler, and I. Sovago (Hungary) is also
gratefully acknowledged.

Figures and Tables
Pressure-tuning FT-Raman spectra of 1
in the low-energy region.

Wavenumber versus pressure plot for the
FT-Raman spectra of 1 in the low-energy region.

Pressure-tuning FT-Raman spectra of 4 in
the low-energy region.

Wavenumber versus pressure plot for
the FT-Raman spectra of 4 in the low-energy region.

Pressure-tuning FT-Raman spectra of 5 in
the low-energy region. The unlabeled pressure value is
a repeated measurement of the experiment
at 50.33 kbar and emphasizes the reproducibility
of the pressure-tuning work.

Wavenumber versus pressure plot for the FT-Raman spectra
of 5 in the low-energy region.

