1. INTRODUCTION
The
best-known hydroxamic acids belong to the microbial siderophores []. These molecules quite generally contain three chelating functions and are responsible
for selective uptake and transport of Fe(III) into the cells in
adequate concentration. Because of the long-term usage of desferrioxamine B
(DFB), first of all for the treatment of thalassemic patients, perhaps this
compound is the most famous representative of the hydroxamate-based siderophore
family [, ]. Not only natural, but also synthetic hydroxamic acids are effective
metal binding agents and their numerous biological effects (e.g., capability for inhibition of various metalloenzymes) are strongly connected to their
metal complexation [, ]. Although their Fe(III) complexes are the most stable
nearly in all cases, they are also
capable of strong interaction with numerous other metals []. Moreover, the preference of Fe(III) over some 3d M(II)
metals, like Cu(II) or Ni(II), can decrease, or even disappear, if additional N-donor(s)
is (are) situated in the molecule with chelatable position to the hydroxamate
function [–]. This may happen, for example, with the
hydroxamic derivatives of amino acids and peptides, because they are able to form
very stable -chelated
complexes with the metal ions like Ni(II), or Cu(II) and, especially with Cu(II),
very high stability polynuclear complexes (metallacrowns) involving both
(O,O-hydroxamate and N,N-amine) types of chelates can also be formed [, ]. On
the other hand, such molecules form only hydroxamate-type (O,O)-chelates with Fe(III),
and both the electron-withdrawing effect of the amino group and electronic
repulsion between the  group and the Fe(III) ion
decrease the stability of the hydroxamate chelate []. Therefore, an
aminohydroxamic acid generally forms lower
stability Fe(III) complexes compared to a simple monohydroxamic acid []. Somewhat,
more stable mono- and biscomplexes are formed with aspartic acid-β-hydroxamic acid and glutamic acid-γ-hydroxamic acid, what was assigned to the
tridentate coordination of these ligands via their hydroxamate and carboxylate
oxygens, but the coordination of the carboxylate cannot hinder the coordination
of a third hydroxamate chelate []. Unique bonding mode []
and electrochemical behavior [] of the Fe(III)-histidinehydroxamate complexes
were found by the few previous results, because the dominant role of the imidazole-
and the amino-N donors and the less important part of the hydroxamate-type (O,O)-coordination
were suggested. In fact, the imidazole moiety is a favored coordinating site by
numerous metals [], but this suppression of the hydroxamate-type coordination
in Fe(III)complexes is quite surprising. In order to get additional
information on this problem, detailed investigation of the Fe(III) complexation
with histidinehydroxamic acid was carried out; furthermore, Fe(III) complexes
of some other imidazole containing hydroxamic acids (the formulae of the
ligands are shown in )  were studied by pH-potentiometry, UV-visible
spectrophotometry, NMR, EPR spectroscopic, and ESI-MS spectrometric methods.

2. EXPERIMENTAL
2.1. Reagents and stock solutions
L-Hisha
was of the highest purity commercially available (Sigma) and used without
further purification. Imidazole-4-acetohydroxamic acid hydrochloride, imidazole-4-carbohydroxamic
acid hydrochloride, and N-methyl-imidazole-4-carbohydroxamic
acid hydrochloride were prepared as reported previously [].
The exact concentration of the ligand stock solutions was determined by Gran's
method [].

Fe(III) stock
solution was prepared by dissolving FeCl3 (Reanal) in dilute HCl
(0.1 M). The concentration of the metal ion stock solution was determined by
gravimetry, via metal oxide.

2.2. Potentiometric and spectroscopic studies
All
the measurements were carried out at an ionic strength of 0.2 M, which was set
with KCl. The temperature was always °C. Carbonate-free
KOH solution (0.2 M) was used as titrant. HCl stock solution was prepared from
cc. HCl. The concentrations of the KOH and HCl were determined by
pH-potentiometric titrations using the Gran method [].

A
Radiometer pHM 84 with Metrohm combined electrode (type 6.0234.110) was used
for pH-potentiometric measurements with Metrohm 715 Dosimat automatic burette.
The electrode system was calibrated according to Irving et al. and the pH-metric
readings could, therefore, be converted into hydrogen concentration []. The
water ionization constant (pK W)
determined in the present work is . All the pH-potentiometric
titrations were performed over the pH range of 2 to 11, or were terminated
if precipitate was formed. The initial volume of the samples were 3.00 or 10.00 mL. The ligand concentration was 0.01–0.003 M in each system measured and the metal
ion concentration was varied in the range of 0.0002–0.003 M, in order to get
1 : 1, 1 : 2, 1 : 3, 1 : 5, and 1 : 10 metal ion to ligand ratios in the samples. The
samples were completely deoxygenated by bubbling purified argon for approximately
20 minutes before the measurements. The equilibrium calculations were performed
by the PSEQUAD computer program []. Since the measurable hydrolysis of the
Fe(III) ion starts at low pH, the hydrolytic species, with their fixed
equilibrium constants, were always included in our equilibrium models when the
experimental data for the Fe(III)-hydroxamate systems were fitted. The
hydrolysis model and the stability of the hydroxo-complexes formed were found
in the literature [].

In
addition to the generally used pH-potentiometry, the interaction between these
hydroxamate-based ligands and Fe(III) was also followed by UV-visible
spectrophotometry and the well-known characteristic charge transfer band was
evaluated. The iron (III)-monohydroxamato complexes have spectra with  at ca. 510 nm (ε°  1000 mol-1cm-1), the
bishydroxamato ones display  at ca. 470 nm (ε°  1800 mol-1cm-1), while  of the tris-complexes is at ca. 425 nm (ε°  2600 mol-1cm-1) []. Spectrophotometry
was used to clarify the complex formation below pH 2, where pH-metry could not
be used. In these cases, measurements were carried out on individual samples in
which the 0.2 MKCl was partially or completely replaced by HCl and
the pH values, varying in the range ca. 0.7–1.4, were calculated from the HCl
content.

A Perkin
Elmer Lambda 25 or an Avantes fiber optic spectrophotometer equipped with a 2 mm probe head by using 20 milliseconds integration time and an average of 25
spectra were used to record the UV-visible spectra for the Fe(III)-hydroxamate complexes in the range of 300–800 nm at all metal-to-ligand ratios studied with pH-potentiometry, in the 0.0005–0.004 M metal ion concentration region.

Magnetic
measurements were carried out by using the Evans method on a Bruker Advance II
300 MHz NMR spectrometer []. Coaxial NMR tubes were used, where the inset
contained the reference D2O solution with 2% of t-BuOH, while the paramagnetic species, dissolved in D2O
containing 2% of t-BuOH, was in the
outher tube. The concentration of the metal ion was 0.006 M at 1 : 3 metal-to-ligand
ratio. All measurements were performed without inert
salt (KCl) added. pH* values, in the range of 2–10, were set up
with D2SO4 or NaOD. The pH* value is a direct reading in
a D2O solution of the “H2O-calibrated” pH meter. The pH*
values can be converted to pH values using the following equation: pH = 0.930
pH* + 0.40 [].

Electrospray
ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometric (ESI-TOF MS) analysis was carried
out for each system on a Bruker BIOTOF II ESI-TOF instrument by using 0.006 M ligand concentration at 1 : 3 metal-to-ligand ratio. The pH values were set
at the Fe(III)-Im-4-Cha, -N-Me-Im-4-Cha,
-Im-4-Aha and -Hisha: 3.4, 6.4, 8.2, and 7.5, respectively. The solutions were
introduced directly into the ESI source by a syringe pump (Cole-Parmer Ins.
Comp. type 74900.) at a flow rate of 2 μL/min. The
temperature of drying gas (N2) was 100°C. The pressure
of the nebulizating gas (N2) was 30 psi. Voltages applied at the
capillary entrance, capillary exit and the first and the second skimmers were
−4500 V, 120 V, 40 V, and 30 V, respectively. The spectra were accumulated and
recorded by a digitizer at a sampling rate of 2 GHz. The spectrometer was
operated at unit mass resolution and was calibrated to sodium trifluoroacetate.

Anisotropic
X-band EPR spectra of frozen solutions were recorded at 77 K in 100–4500 G
region, using a Bruker EleXsys E500 spectrometer after the addition of 10%
methanol to ensuregood glass
formation. All the solutions were filtered before the measurements.

3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
3.1. Proton-dissociation equilibria of the ligands
The
totally protonated forms of the imidazole-hydroxamic acids Im-4-Cha, N-Me-Im-4-Cha, and Im-4-Aha involve two
dissociable protons each, so their general formula is H2L+.
There are clear evidences in our previous paper [] that in all of these molecules,
the dissociation of the two protons occurs in almost completely separated
processes and the lower pK belongs to the dissociation of imidazole-NH+,
while the higher to the proton release from the hydroxamic moiety. Based on the
exceptionally low  of Im-4-Cha, the existence of hydrogen bond
between the imidazole-N and hydroxamic-NH was suggested []. The dissociation
constants taken from 14 are shown in .

In contrast to the situation of the above three imidazole derivatives, the
dissociation of the protons from the completely protonated Hisha (H3L2+)
occurs in overlapping processes, what is well demonstrated by the pH-dependence of the chemical shifts of the nonlabile protons
(). As a consequence, pK values shown in  are macroconstants,
characterize the proton releasing at molecular level, but cannot be designated
to the individual moieties. However, it is clearly shown by  that out
of the three groups, the imidazole-NH+ is the most acidic.

3.2. Fe(III) complexes of the ligands
Complexes with Im-4-Cha, N-Me-Im-4-Cha, and Im-4-Aha
In
these molecules, the donor atoms are the imidazole-nitrogen, the hydroxamate
oxygens, and (except N- Me-Im-4-Cha,
where this donor is not available) the hydroxamate nitrogen. The most possible
chelation modes between these ligands and a metal ion are summarized in .

It is beyond
doubt that, most of all, the coordination mode (a) can be expected with Fe(III).
Conditional stability of (b) is much lower than (a) even with less hard metal
ions than Fe(III) [], so its formation is not probable here. The mode (d) is excluded
with N -Me-Im-4-Cha, while the mode (c) would result in the
formation of a low-stability seven-membered chelate with Im-4-Aha. It is easy
to understand that (b) and (c) cannot be formed at the same time with the same
molecule, while polynuclear complexes are expected via parallel formation of
(a) and (d). Following this theoretical speculation, the obtained results are summarized
below.

With Im-4-Cha precipitation occurred at pH 3-4
in presence of Fe(III) (this is the reason why the
titration curves are interrupted in ), therefore only a few
species could be detected before precipitation.

The
equilibrium model yielding the best fit of the titration curves together with
the overall stability constants is shown in .

A
comparison of the corresponding constants of the complexes of Im-4-Cha with
those of a simple monohydroxamic acid, such as acetohydroxamic acid, CH3CONHOH
(log βFeL = 11.09, 
log  = 20.69 []), supports the predominance of
the hydroxamate-type coordination mode in the water-soluble Fe(III)-Im-4-Cha complexes.
The same conclusion can be drawn from UV-visible spectra detected at different
ratios (some of them are presented in the inset in ). The charge
transfer band indicates appearance of (O,O)-hydroxamate-Fe(III) interaction
above ca pH 1. The formation of the monochelated complex ( = 510 nm) is completed by pH ca.
2.5 (this depends somewhat on the metal-to-ligand ratio) and bischelated
complex(es) ( = 470 nm) could also be detected before the precipitation. Due to the very low
basicity of the imidazole-N, formation of protonated complexes is not really
favored with this ligand and, as a consequence, [FeLH]3+ is the only
one, what appears in low concentration (max. 10%) at very low pH. The unexpectedly
poor solubility of the complexes formed above pH 3-4 indicates involvement of
the imidazole in the interaction (Generally, even the
neutral, tris-chelated Fe(III)-complexes of small monohydroxamic acid molecules
have good water solubility.) (one possibility for this is 
presented in , demonstrating
formation of polynuclear complexes, which might have low water solubility). Unfortunately,
we still have not been successful to get any direct information on the stoichiometry
and bonding mode of the solid-state complexes formed.

Much more
soluble complexes are formed with N-Me-Im-4-Cha as it is demonstrated
by , what, moreover, clearly shows metal-induced deprotonation of both
the hydroxamic and imidazole-NH+ protons.

Fitting
the experimental data resulted in the model in . This model involves
mono-, bis-, and tris-complexes. Out of them, the latter two were also supported
by ESI-MS at 1 : 3 ratio, at pH = 8.2 (characteristic m/z values for the sodium
salts are 359, 499). However, if the stability constants shown for the
complexes in  are analyzed, one can find them somewhat higher than
expected for simple hydroxamate-type complexes ((a)). Just for
comparison, for N-Me-acetohydroxamic
acid the pK = 8.70 and the overall stability 
constants are log βFeL = 11.85, 
log  = 21.58, while log  = 29.36 []. Also the minimum  value, what would be expected in
the range of 425–430 nm for a tris-hydroxamato complex, here is ca. 455 nm (see
inset in ). The most possible explanation for all the above findings is
that not only one type of bonding modes belongs to the complexes with the same
stoichiometry, but different bonding isomers exist. For example, [FeL]2+  may involve either hydroxamate (O,O)-type chelate ((a)) or -type
one ((c)). This situation was previously suggested between N-Me-hydroxamic acids and several metal
ions []. Existence of mixed type chelated complexes is suggested in the bis-
and tris-complexes.

 Im-4-Aha involves the imidazole moiety in β-position to the hydroxamic one. The pH-metric
titration curves for the Fe(III)-Im-4-Aha samples are presented together with
that of the free ligand in .

 shows that if there is enough ligand excess, there is no precipitation up to
pH ca. 8–10 (curves 2 and 3) in the
samples, but if not, hydroxo species precipitate at pH ca. 4, or somewhat
below. It is also clear that the imidazole-NH+, which dissociates in
the free ligand in the pH-range 5–7 (, curve 1), is released almost in
the same range from the Fe(III)-complexes (curves 2 and 3). It means that this
proton is not displaced by the metal ion, consequently, the imidazole-N of
Im-4-Aha does not coordinate to the Fe(III) ion. In accordance with these
findings, the equilibrium model involves large amount of protonated complexes,
in which the imidazole-N still contains the proton (see ) and only
hydroxamate type coordination of the ligands occurs. The UV-visible results agree
completely with this suggestion (see Inset in ), but there is some doubt
if we look at the EPR and magnetic moment results. To demonstrate this,
together with the concentration distribution curves at 1 : 3 metal-to-ligand ratio,
differences between the chemical shifts of t-BuOH
in dia- and paramagnetic surroundings as a function of pH are shown in .
(Mass magnetic susceptibilities calculated by the Evans method from these NMR
data [] show completely the same profile, therefore are not presented here.)
 shows the EPR spectra recorded at various pH.

Figures  and  show that there is some decrease both in the NMR Δδ values and in the intensity of the EPR signal within
the pH range ca. 5–7, where first of all the [FeL3H2]2+ and [FeL3H]+ complexes dominate. Possible explanation of
these results is that some intermolecular interaction (H-bond) between the
already nonprotonated and the still-protonated imidazole rings exists, resulting
in some coupling between the paramagnetic metal centers.

Complexes with Hisha
As
it is shown in , in this ligand, the RN substituent also involves
an amino moiety in addition to the imidazole function. A further difference is that
the imidazole-N is situated in γ-position
to the hydroxamic moiety (what is α in the Im-4-Cha or N-Me-Im-4-Cha and β in the Im-4-Aha). Due to these structural
differences, the Fe(III)-binding behavior of Hisha is also different from that
of the above detailed imidazole-hydroxamic acids. To demonstrate this
difference, some of the registered UV-visible spectra as a function of pH are
shown in .

As
 shows, there is some complex formation between Fe(III) and Hisha already
at pH 2, and the λmax at
ca. 500 nm suggests the presence of an Fe(III)-monohydroxamato ((a))
species, but some bishydroxamato complex can also be present. At this pH, however, and also in all
the spectra registered below ca. pH 2.5–3, the presence of some Fe(III)-chloro
complexes can be detected too (characteristic λmax ca. 340 nm) [].
With increasing the pH from 2 to ca. 4, λmax shifts from 500 nm to 470 nm and
also the molar absorptivity increases, which suggests the dominance of the bishydroxamato
complex at the latter pH. On increasing the pH further, dramatic change in the
spectrum occurs (This change
in the spectra was practically the same at all the ratios studied, except 1 : 1,
where precipitate was formed above pH 3.5.). First, a
significant decrease in the intensity can be observed, then the intensity of a
broadband (superposition of two bands with λmax values 620 and ca. 500 nm)
increases up to pH ca. 7. Above this pH, the peak at 620 nm decreases
intensively, while the other shifts to the lower wavelengths.

All
the above findings (together with the only previous results []) have been
taken into account when the pH-potentiometric titration curves were fitted. Calculations
have been done with numerous reasonable models, including tris- and dinuclear
complexes, but unambiguously, the best fitting was obtained with the model shown
in  (e.g., if tris-complexes were also involved, the fitting was 1.03  10-2 and the standard deviations were unacceptably high). As a consequence, the
equilibrium model shown in  differs from the previously published one
[]. Namely, tris-hydroxamato complexes were not found to form in measurable
concentration under our conditions even at 1 : 10 metal-to-ligand ratio
(although, the shoulder at ca. 430 nm being on the spectra from pH 5.91 in
 might indicate the presence 
of small amount of tris-complexes) (maximum 1 : 20 ratio was used in [], where
measurable formation of tris-complexes was found).

By
using the accepted model and stability constants, concentration distribution
curves were calculated and are presented in .

According
to our model (see  and ), the complex formation starts with the
appearance of [FeLH2]4+ in measurable concentration. Most probably, the hydroxamate oxygens coordinate
to the metal ion, while the amino group and the imidazole-N are still
protonated in this species. The next complex [Fe(LH2)2]5+ is
suggested to involve the two ligands in the same (hydroxamate-type) coordination
mode. The stepwise deprotonation of this latter complex starts above pH ca. 3.5–4
and, parallel, the Δδ values
(namely the magnetic susceptibility) are decreasing. If the Δδ values, obtained here, are compared to those measured
under the same condition for the Fe(III)-Im-4-Aha () and 
Fe(III)-acetohydroxamic (Aha) systems, (Δδ values registered in
this work for the Fe(III)-acetohydroxamic acid sample at 1 : 3 
ratio are  ppm in the pH-range 2–9, and intensively starts to decrease above pH
9) one
can find that much lower values belong to the Fe(III)-Hisha system than to
the Fe(III)-Im-4-Aha and especially to the Fe(III)-Aha. The UV-visible
spectra, as it was detailed above (), also show significant changes. A
comparison of Figures  and  shows that the decrease of the absorbance starts,
where the concentration of [Fe(LH2)2]5+ starts
to decrease (parallel, the concentration of [Fe(L2H3)]4+ then [Fe(LH)2]3+ increases), where, based on the
acidities, first of all the imidazole-NH+ moieties are assumed to
deprotonate. However, dramatic increase of the absorbance occurs, where the
coordinated ligands start to release their last dissociable protons from the
-NH3+ groups.

The
above findings, together with the EPR results, what showed that exclusively EPR
silent species exist in the Fe(III)-Hisha system at 1 : 3 ratio above pH 4,
indicate metal-metal coupling in this pH-region. Since stepwise deprotonation of
[Fe(LH2)2]5+ is accompanied by the above
detailed changes, this suggests the involvement of the nonprotonated side-chain
donors (imidazole-N and, at higher pH, perhaps the amino-N) in the coordination. Either coordinative or
noncovalent (H-bond, stacking) interaction of imidazole-N can be assumed, which,
at least in some extent, should be intermolecular (e.g., H-bond between
the already nonprotonated and still-protonated imidazoles, or between the
imidazole-N and ammonium- protons) resulting in some
metal-metal coupling. Most probably, these interactions are able to hinder the
acceptance of the third hydroxamate chelate by the metal ion at lower pH (below
pH ca. 7) in high extent. At higher pH, the formation of mixed hydroxo species seems
the most possible. The existence of this latter species is also supported by
the ESI- MS results. Two different iron-ligand-containing species can be
detected in the positive region in the spectrum at pH 7.5 (m/z values 394 and
435). The first can be assigned unambiguously to [FeL2]+,
while the second perhaps to [FeL(LH)(OH)]Na+.

4. CONCLUDING REMARKS
All
the above results summarized for the systems containing Fe(III) ion and
Im-4-Cha, N-Me-Im-4-Cha, Im-4-Aha, or Hisha demonstrate that the
imidazole moiety is able to play an important role very often in the
interaction with Fe(III), even if this metal ion prefers the hydroxamate
chelates very much. Moreover, each of the studied ligands forms complexes with
different bonding modes.

If
the imidazole and hydroxamic moieties are in α-position to each other 
(Im-4-Cha, or N-Me-Im-4-Cha), coordinative bonding of
the imidazole seems possible. This results in the formation of various poorly soluble
polynuclear species with Im-4-Cha, while the appearance of the interesting Nimidazole, Ohydroxamate chelate seems probable with N-Me-Im-4-Cha.

In
Im-4-Aha, the imidazole is in β-position
to the hydroxamic moiety and seems to organize the intermediate-protonated
molecules in the solution via noncovalent (first of all H-bonding) interaction.
This interaction otherwise cannot hinder the coordination of up to three hydroxamate
chelates to an Fe(III) ion, if there is enough ligand excess in the solution.

The
situation is quite different with Hisha, in which the position of the
imidazole-N is γ to the hydroxamic moiety and there is also an
amino group in the molecule. The formation of this hydroxamate-type complex was
not found in measurable concentration under the investigated conditions (up to
1 : 10 metal-to-ligand ratio). This suggests rather significant role of the
imidazole (perhaps together with ammonium) in the interaction.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Hungarian Scientific Research Fund (OTKA T 049612)
and COST D21/01. D.B. The authors thank Professor Wolfgang Haase for his help
during an STSM from Debrecen to Darmstadt supported by COST D21 program.

Formulae of the studied ligands.

pH*
dependence of the 1H NMR chemical shifts recorded for Hisha,  =
3  10-3 M.

pH-potentiometric
titration curves registered for Im-4-Cha (1) and Fe(III)–Im-4-Cha systems at metal-to-ligand
ratio
1 : 5 (2), 1 : 3 (3), 1 : 2 (4) and 1 : 1 (5);
Inset: selected UV-VIS spectra registered for the Fe(III)–Im-4-Cha as a function
of pH at 1 to 5 metal-to-ligand ratio cligand = 3  10-3 M.

pH-potentiometric titration curves registered for N-Me-Im-4-Cha (1) and Fe(III)-N-Me-Im-4-Cha systems at
metal-to-ligand ratio 1 : 5 (2), 1 : 3 (3), 1 : 2 (4) and 1 : 1 (5). Inset: selected UV-VIS spectra registered for the Fe(III)-Im-4-Cha as a function
of pH at 1 to 5 metal-to-ligand ratio cligand = 3  10-3 M.

pH-potentiometric titration curves registered for Im-4-Aha (1) and Fe(III)-Im-4-Aha systems at metal-to-ligand
ratio
1 : 5 (2), 1 : 3 (3), 1 : 2 (4) and 1 : 1 (5). Inset:
selected UV-VIS spectra registered for the Fe(III)-Im-4-Cha as a function
of pH at 1 to 5 metal-to-ligand ratio cligand = 3  10-3 M.

Representative concentration
distribution curves calculated for Fe(III)-Im-4-Aha system at 1 to 3 metal-to-ligand
ratio, showing also pH dependence of the differences between the 1H
NMR chemical shifts (Δδ values) of t-BuOH
in dia- and paramagnetic surroundings at
the same metal-to-ligand ratio (dashed line) (a), and EPR spectra
registered for Fe(III)-Im-4-Aha system at 1 to 3 metal-to-ligand
ratio at different pH values (b), T = 77 K; cligand = 3  10-3 M.

Selected
UV-VIS spectra registered in the Fe(III)-Hisha system as a function
of pH at 1 to 10 metal-to-ligand ratio; cligand = 5⋅10−3 M.

Representative concentration distribution curves calculated for Fe(III)-Hisha system at 1 to 3 metal-to-ligand
ratio, on the secondary axis, pH dependence of the differences
between the 1H NMR chemical
shifts (Δδ values) of t-BuOH in dia-
and paramagnetic surroundings for Fe(III)-Hisha (dashed line) at 1 to 3 metal-to-ligand
ratio, cligand = 3  10-3 M.

Dissociation constants (pK)(a) for the investigated imidazole-containing ligands, t = 25°C, I = 0.2
M (KCl).

Ligands	Im-4-Cha(b)	N-Me-Im-4-Cha(b)	Im-4-Aha(b)	Hisha(c)	
pK1	3.76	5.06	6.17	5.38(4)	
pK2	8.82	8.57	9.05	7.11(3)	
pK3	—	—	—	9.06(2)	
(a)Standard deviations are 
shown in parenthesis.

(b)See [].

(c)The values determined for Hisha in
the present work are in good agreement with the previously published 
data in [].

Overall stability
constants for the complexes formed in the Fe(III)-Im-4-Cha, Fe(III)-N-Me-Im-4-Cha and 
Fe(III)-Im-4-Aha systems* I = 0.2 M (KCl), t = 25°C.

Ligands	Im-4-Cha	N-Me-Im-4-Cha	Im-4-Aha	
[FeLH]3+	12.1(2)	13.95(3)	15.62(2)	
[FeL]2+	10.46(1)	11.92(4)	—	
[FeL2H2]3+	—	—	30.11(2)	
[FeL2]+	18.65(4)	23.04(4)	—	
[FeL2H−1]	—	18.8(1)	—	
[FeL3H3]3+	—	—	43.47(6)	
[FeL3H2]2+	—	—	38.17(4)	
[FeL3H]+	—	—	31.99(5)	
FeL3	—	31.3(2)	24.97(5)	
*Standard
deviations are shown in parenthesis.

Overall
stability constants for the complexes formed in the Fe(III)-Hisha system*; I = 0.2 M (KCl), t = 25°C.

Species	log β	
[FeLH2]4+	21.98(6)	
[Fe(LH2)2]5+	43.45(3)	
[FeL2H3]4+	38.11(7)	
[Fe(LH2)]3+	32.59(5)	
[FeL2H]2+	25.81(9)	
[FeL2]+	19.53(5)	
[FeL2H−1]	12.05(5)	
Number of points fitted	292	
Fitting (cm3)	8.4⋅10−3	
*Standard deviations are shown in
parenthesis.

