Changes in US patent rules affect the biotech industry
In response to two recent decisions by the US Supreme Court, the US Patent and Trademark Office issued new rules in March 2014, which were open to public comment until July 31. The guidance now states that patentable inventions must be “significantly different” from any natural product. According to a survey, the US patent office had denied 40% of the approximately 1000 applications that fall into areas covered by the guidance. Patents were rejected, for instance, for proteins intended for diagnosis, medicines extracted from marine organisms, and a test for detecting certain genetic traits in aquacultured fish.,

Approval of genetically engineered salmon is delayed
In December 2012, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) released a draft assessment of AquaBounty Technologies genetically engineered salmon, which grow faster than normal, finding them to be environmentally benign. This was followed by a 120-day public commenting period, which ended on April 26, 2013. More than 35 000 public comments were made in response to the draft assessment, delaying the market entry of the first genetically modified animal for human consumption.,

Increased yield through light resistance in tomatoes
A Dutch collaboration between industry (Monsanto) and the University of Wageninigen, the Netherlands, has discovered the genetic basis for light tolerance in tomatoes. When exposed to continous light, the leaves of modern tomato plants yellow and decay. This phenomenon does not exist in closely related species or even in wild tomato varieties: a dominant locus on chromosome 7 of wild tomato species that confers continuous light tolerance. Genetic evidence, RNaseq data, silencing experiments, and sequence analysis led to the discovery of a single gene on chromosome 7 as the major factor for the tolerance: the type III light harvesting chlorophyll a/b binding protein 13​(CAB-13). In Arabidopsis thaliana, this protein is thought to have a regulatory role balancing light harvesting by photosystems I and II. Introgressing the tolerance into modern tomato hybrid lines resulted in up to 20% yield increase.,

Ebola outbreak: WHO agrees to unproven interventions
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), West Africa is experiencing the largest, most severe, and complex outbreak of Ebola virus disease in history.

Available treatment options have not yet been evaluated for safety and efficacy in human beings, however, given the particular circumstances of this outbreak, a WHO panel reached consensus that it is ethical to offer unproven interventions.

Tekmira Pharmaceuticals’ RNA interference (RNAi)-based drug, and Mapp Biopharmaceutical’s Zmapp serum, are currently available in very limited quantities.

