Antibody-drug conjugate against breast cancer approved
Genentech has gained approval for a new therapy that combines the widely used breast cancer medicine Herceptin with a cytotoxin called DM1. The new drug will be sold under the trade name Kadcycla. The antibody latches onto the surface of HER2 breast cancer cells, where the toxin is delivered. And since the toxin is not activated until it reaches the tumor, healthy cells are spared, which means fewer side effects for the patient.

The FDA decision follows a successful Phase III trial in which Kadcyla extended the median survival time of women with advanced HER2 breast cancer, who did not respond to Herceptin and a chemotherapy drug, by almost 6 mo.

Such antibody-drug conjugates, are a hot area for cancer drug developers and there are around two dozen such drugs currently in clinical trials. Another antibody-drug conjugate, Adcetris, developed by Seattle Genetics, was approved in 2011 as a treatment for two rare types of lymphoma.

The linker and toxin used in Kadcyla were developed by ImmunoGen, based in Waltham, Mass., which will receive royalties on sales of the drug.,

GSK absorbs Sirtris
Pharma giant GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) will close Sirtris Pharmaceuticals, a firm intent on developing compounds that stave off age-related disease

GSK acquired Sirtris, based in Cambridge, Massachusetts, in 2008 for US$720 million, and had allowed it to function as a distinct unit. On 12th of March, however, GSK confirmed that the Cambridge site would be closed and the firm’s lead drug candidate — a molecule believed to activate a protein called sirtuin 1 — folded into GSK’s internal drug-development program.

GSK spokeswoman Melinda Stubbee says that GSK aims to move Sirtris’s lead compound, SRT2104, into the clinic in the next 3–4 y.,

BIOFAB: New tools for synthetic biologists
Launched in 2009 with a US$1.4-million grant from the US National Science Foundation, BIOFAB aims to advance synthetic biology by creating standard biological ‘parts’ in the form of DNA sequences that control gene expression. These standard sequences should allow biologists to engineer cells that can make medicines and perform other useful tasks simply by plugging in various sets of genes.

The BIOFAB team designed promoter and ribosomal binding site sequences for E. coli that do not interfere with downstream DNA, so that their effects are independent of the specific gene they are paired with. The sequences should provide scientists with a much tighter grip on gene expression, offering ~93% chance of hitting a desired level of expression within a factor of two. Researchers can obtain the sequences for free online (see http://www.biofab.org/data).

The BIOFAB team also devised a statistical method to measure the variability in the performance of their promoter and RBS sequences, and indeed any genetic part to be used in synthetic-biology applications. The method should allow researchers to create a kind of specification sheet for each biological part, making it easier for scientists to develop and share their work.-

AstraZeneca cuts jobs in big R&amp;D restructuring program
Drug giant AstraZeneca says that it will cut some 1,600 staff — of which 1,300 are researchers— in a restructuring plan that will see scientists concentrated at three major research sites: Cambridge, UK (which will become the firm’s new global headquarters), Gaithersburg in Maryland, and Mölndal in Sweden. The company will close down all research at Alderley Park, UK. The plan,announced on the 18th of March, will cost US$1.4 billion and will see the firm spend an additional US $500 million on the UK facility in Cambridge.,

Novartis loses landmark patent case in India
India's top court dismissed Swiss drugmaker Novartis AG's attempt to win patent protection for its cancer drug Glivec.

The decision sets a benchmark for intellectual property cases in India, where many patented drugs are financially out of reach for most of its 1.2 billion people, and does not bode well for foreign firms engaged in ongoing disputes in India, including Pfizer Inc. and Roche Holding AG, analysts said.

It cements the role of local companies as big suppliers of inexpensive generics to India's rapidly growing drug market and also across the developing world.

Healthcare activists have asked the government to make medicines cheaper in a country where many patented drugs are too costly for most people, 40 percent of whom earn less than $1.25 a day, and where patented drugs account for under 10 percent of total drug sales.

The US industry trade group Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America, or PhRMA, said the decision reflected a deteriorating environment for innovation in India.

US pharmaceutical industry analysts said the ruling was in line with lower court decisions and therefore largely expected.

The Supreme Court's decision comes after a legal battle that began when Novartis was denied a patent for Glivec in 2006.

Novartis had argued that it was entitled to a patent for the amended version of Glivec because the original patented compound was never suitable for making into a pill. Developing the final chemically stable form took years of extra work and it was this effort that marked the real breakthrough in developing Glivec as a life-saving cancer medicine, the Swiss company said.

Glivec is used to treat certain forms of leukemia and gastrointestinal cancer, as well as some other rare tumors.

Previously published online: www.landesbioscience.com/journals/bioe/article/24924

