Soon to be approved GM salmon can mate with wild trout
AquaBounty, a biotech company headquartered in Maynard, MA, is in the process of gaining FDA approval for their transgenic salmon, potentially making them the first GM animals to be approved for human consumption.

AquAdvantage® salmon include a gene from the Chinook salmon, which provides the fish with the potential to grow to market size in half the time of conventional salmon. In all other respects, AquAdvantage® Salmon are identical to other Atlantic salmon.

In a recent publication, Krista Oke and her team from the Memorial University of Newfoundland, Canada, mated GM fish with brown trout in the lab, reporting that about 40% of the hybrid offspring carried the transgene for a growth hormone engineered into AquAdvantage® Salmon.

Taking this into account, AquAdvantage® salmon are designed for contained, land-based growing facilities operated under strict FDA requirements. In addition, AquAdvantage® Salmon are sterile females, thus eliminating possibilities for cross-breeding.,

Thirty years of GM crops: Nature special issue
Thirty years after the introduction of the first transgenic plant, Nature dedicated a special issue to GM crops, their use and the polarized debate about their safety.

In “GM crops: A story in numbers,” there is a graphical representation of the share GM crops have in agriculture, as well as what types of crops and which traits are the most widespread.

Of the 1.5 billion hectares of arable land worldwide, 170 million hectares (about 12%) are planted with GM crops, mostly soybean, cotton, maize and canola. Of the ~30 different traits, herbicide tolerance and insect resistance are most popular.

In “Case studies: A hard look at GM crops,” Natasha Gilberts gives a summary of the most controversial issues surrounding GM crops: the growth of herbicide-resistant superweeds, farmers driven to commit suicide and the spread of transgenes to wild plants.

In another article, Daniel Cressey discusses a new generation of GM crops, which not only benefit farmers but have a directly positive impact on consumers, including increased nutrient levels, etc.

Court rules: Monsanto keeps rights for its seed
On May 13, 2013, the US Supreme Court ruled that Monsanto, an agricultural biotechnology company, will retain its patent rights over soybeans descended from the company’s seeds and planted by an Indiana farmer.

Farmers that buy Monsanto seeds sign a contract stating that they will not save seeds from year to year but rather will buy new ones from the company each season. In the aforementioned case, mixed seed containing GM seed from a grain elevator had been bought, selected for by applying the specific herbicide (Glyphosate) and re-planted for eight successive years.

US Supreme Court likely to rule against patents on human genes
The American Civil Liberties Union and the Public Patent Foundation filed a complaint arguing that no company should hold the rights to a part of the human body and that sequences of DNA, as a natural product, are not eligible for patenting. Many of the questions asked by the justices centered on what effect invalidating gene patents would have on the biotech industry. Myriad Genetics (which holds patents on BRCA1 and BRCA2, giving it a monopoly on testing for breast cancer) and other advocates of gene patenting claim that ruling against the practice would undermine billions of dollars of investment from biotech companies in genetic tests, drugs and DNA-based vaccines. Opponents counter that patents on individual genes actually impede medical progress and obstruct the development of new tests that focus on multiple genes.

Bioengineered kidneys
Dr Ott and his colleagues at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, MA, have made functioning rat kidneys in the lab and transplanted them into the rodents, where the bioengineered organs filtered blood and produced urine, according to a report in Nature Medicine. The replacement kidneys were made by first stripping donor kidneys of their cells to leave behind the scaffold connective tissues and blood vessels. The team then introduced kidney and blood vessel cells from newborn rats into the scaffold and cultured the organ. The resulting kidneys produced urine in vitro and when transplanted into living rats, though not as efficiently as normal kidneys. If it can be refined and scaled up to produce functional human kidneys, the technique could provide ready-made replacement kidneys for people who currently have to wait for donor organs.

Previously published online: www.landesbioscience.com/journals/bioe/article/25287

