1 INTRODUCTION
New sequencing technologies have lowered the cost of generating genomic DNA sequence to the
point where high coverage of a moderately sized animal genome (e.g. &lt;1 Gb) can be
obtained for a few thousand euros. Currently, short read lengths (i.e. 100–250 bp)
present challenges for assembling sequence into a complete genome, usually owing to an
inability of short reads to bridge repetitive sequence. This problem can be circumvented by
using paired end or mate paired reads with different insert sizes long enough to span
repetitive regions. For instance, the genome of the giant panda () and, more recently, the one of
the naked mole-rat () have been sequenced using short read sequencing technology alone and achieved
high quality. Both projects used multiple libraries; the latter used 18 paired-end
sequencing libraries with 8 different insert sizes spanning 170 bp to 20 kbp. This strategy
has the disadvantage of incurring significant extra cost, and large insert size libraries
require larger amounts of DNA that may not be readily available for some taxa.

Apart from mainstream de novo assemblers, several groups have worked on
incorporating available related assembled genomes into the assembly process (). For instance, it is
standard procedure (e.g. the orangutan genome project, ) to use whole genome
alignments to build super scaffolds by aligning the new assembly to the high quality genome
of closely related species. Many species, however, are sequenced precisely because they are
not closely related to species for which a complete genome is available.

Thus, other approaches have been adopted to increase assembly contiguity. In , for
example, researchers exploited the eukaryote exon–intron gene structure and used
RNA-seq data to scaffold contigs from a Caenorhabditis nematode genome,
increasing the initial N50 from 5.0 to 9.4 kb. This strategy obviously requires the
generation of RNA-Seq data in addition to genomic sequence, and genes that are not expressed
in the RNA-Seq library will not be available for scaffolding.

As protein sequences are generally well conserved across distant taxa (compared with
non-coding or DNA sequences), a possible way to deal with fragmented initial assemblies is
to use orthologous proteins to guide the scaffolding of contigs that encode fragments of the
same proteins. Surget-Groba and Montoya-Burgos used orthologous proteins to guide
transcriptome assembly by mapping contigs onto a related protein set and improved the N50 of
their zebrafish transcriptome assembly by up to 42% (). The presence of introns,
large intergenic regions and the much larger volume of data involved in genome assemblies,
however, make this a fundamentally more difficult problem. Salzberg et al.
introduced a ‘gene-boosting’ algorithm that used amino acid sequences from
predicted proteins to improve the scaffolding of a 6 Mb bacterial genome, although again, as
bacterial proteins lack introns, this is a somewhat easier problem to approach ().

Here, we present an algorithm that uses proteome sets from different species to guide
scaffolding of genome assemblies of various qualities (including highly fragmented ones,
e.g. N50  3 kb). In this article, we use the term
scaffolding to refer to the process of ordering and orienting contigs, although we recognize
that we do not estimate distances between contigs. We call this SWiPS (Scaffolding With
Protein Sequences). Existing algorithms and strategies, including the Ensembl genebuild
process for low-coverage assemblies, and GPIPE (), are not suited for highly fragmented assemblies where a gene
may be spread over multiple contigs. SWiPS uses orthologous proteins (possibly from
distantly related species) as guides to link exons of the same protein that may be situated
on different contigs. To our knowledge, only one other published method, ESPRIT (), does this.
ESPRIT was used to bridge 666 Callorhinchus milii contigs from a
Sanger-based assembly together and reported precision of ∼80%. ESPRIT, however,
assumes a uniform evolutionary rate over the entire length of split proteins, something that
is clearly questionable in the general case.

We present a novel score optimization framework for scaffolding contigs and a strategy to
optimize this score to improve the contiguity of novel assemblies, reduce their
fragmentation, as well as predict the content of their exomes. We tested SWiPS on a set of
genomic assemblies of simulated Ciona intestinalis next-generation
sequencing data, real sequencing data from Drosophila melanogaster, as well
as the Sanger sequenced, but low coverage (1.4×) assembly of
C.milii and a pre-assembled genome of Homo
sapiens.

2 METHODS
2.1 Outline of method
The overall method is outlined in 
and described in detail in this section. In brief, we first identify contigs that include
protein-coding exons. Next, we order and orient these contigs by mapping them to proteins,
allowing multiple contigs to map to the same protein. We compute similarity scores between
proteins and contigs according to a distance matrix. We use these scores to scaffold
contigs together greedily by iteratively picking the best scaffold model and removing
those contigs that match it. Lastly, we link scaffolds into super-scaffolds by examining
contigs with multiple proteins which, in turn, are assigned to multiple contigs. (A) Proteins in the chosen
guide proteome are mapped to contigs in the initial assembly with tblastn. All
overlapping mappings considered to be significantly worse than the best one are
removed. (B) Proteins with good mappings on contigs are re-aligned with
genewise to obtain single nucleotide resolution of exon predictions.
(C) Putative Exonic regions (PExRs) are predicted by overlapping contig
regions containing multiple homologous protein fragments. (D) PExRs
within each contig are used to establish a refined contig–protein orthology
model, only allowing contigs to map to different proteins if the associated sets of
PExRs show no overlap. Then, contig gene models are built using this mapping.
(E) A score optimization heuristic is used to scaffold contigs
together according to the total score of protein models. (F) genewise
is used once again on the protein scaffolds to predict protein fragments.
(G) A graph theoretic approach is used to find the local order of the
contigs and their strand



2.2 Determining coding contigs and exonic regions
To determine which contigs might be protein coding, proteins from user-specified guide
proteomes are mapped onto the set of all contigs using tblastn (). An initial
protein–contig mapping is obtained by assigning a contig to a protein if it (i) has
a mapping e-value below 
and (ii) that e-value is under five orders of magnitude less significant than the most
significant contig mapping to the same protein region. Proteins are allowed to map to
multiple contigs. Two contigs are considered to map to the same protein region if the
regions they map to overlap by 15 amino acids. These parameters are chosen to be relaxed
compared with similar usage in previous studies, e.g. (). However, more conservative
parameters can be chosen at the cost of sensitivity to gain running speed.

We refine the tblastn-based protein to contig mapping using genewise, to more precisely
define exon boundaries (contigs of sufficient length will contain multiple exons from the
same gene). We align the template protein to the contig using the ‘623’ model
of genewise (), successively searching the regions of contig flanking each alignment until
no more high scoring regions are found (although this is in principle possible with the
looping models of genewise, in practice these yield results that are hard to interpret).
The results from all iterations are then merged, and all mapping coordinates are corrected
to yield one or multiple protein–contig pairwise alignments.

After re-aligning with genewise, a mapping from contig intervals to protein intervals is
established. Then, for every contig, the longest contiguous regions with at least one
protein mapping to every base in each region are found and defined to be Putative Exonic
Regions (PExRs), i.e. PExRs are intervals on contigs for which every base is covered by at
least one protein mapping. This definition of PExR is useful even if we expect a single
orthologous protein region to be homologous and map to the entirety of a PExR. We found
that the mapping of orthologous proteins suffered from edge effects, i.e. orthologous
regions with little similarity can only be aligned if they are flanked by orthologous
sequences showing high similarity. Because of the lack of potential flanking region with
high similarity at the edges of orthologous regions, there is a drop in sensitivity in the
detection at the edges of these regions. Furthermore, splice variants can have exons with
alternative 3′ and 5′ splice sites. By combining all protein mappings of the
same contig region, we were able to predict regions coding for exons with higher
specificity.

2.3 Scaffolding contigs by optimization of overall protein to contig mappings
At this stage, we have a refined mapping of proteins to contigs. Using these mappings, we
compute a similarity score for each protein–contig mapping by summing the bit scores
across the aligned regions defined by genewise according to a distance matrix (BLOSUM62 in
our case). We now must order the contigs into scaffolds, by defining orthology
relationships between the template protein and contigs mapping to different regions of
that protein. In cases where there is a clear one-to-one orthologous relationship between
the guide protein and its cognate in the newly sequenced genome, this task is conceptually
straightforward. Our method, however, must allow us to disentangle orthology relationships
within gene families using fragmentary sequences. This complicates the procedure
considerably.

The protein–contig similarity scores only give us a partial picture of the
orthology relationships between proteins and contigs. The distribution of similarity
scores is strongly correlated with their lengths, and the strength of stabilizing
selection can be highly variable across loci. Therefore, orthology relationships between a
particular protein and contig cannot be called without considering all other mappings
between the contig and other proteins. In order to take into consideration all mappings at
once, we posed the problem of scaffolding contigs as an optimization problem for which we
maximize the similarity scores between contigs and guide proteins without creating
inconsistencies. That is, we assign contig gene models, i.e. regions of a contig that are
predicted to encode the exons of a single gene, to protein regions so that (i) each pair
of contig gene model and protein region is the coupling most likely to be orthologous
(according to similarity scores), (ii) there are no two contig gene models associated to
the same protein regions and (iii) we use as few proteins as possible as scaffold models.
The reasons for (i) and (ii) should be fairly obvious, as we can only scaffold contigs
together (and extend protein gene models) if they contain PExRs orthologous to different
regions of the same protein. Importantly, it can be seen that the implementation of
condition (i) in SWiPS is analogous to the best reciprocal hits approach to identifying
orthologous proteins. Condition (iii) is necessary for resolving the problem of contigs
mapping to legitimate orthologs from different proteomes. By using as few protein
scaffolds as possible, we can reduce the spread of contig mappings over multiple protein
orthologs or splice variants. In SWiPS, the implementation of these ideas is summarized by
the definition of two concepts, the scaffolding power and the maximal scaffoldable set,
which are described next.

2.4 Scaffolding power and maximal scaffoldable set
For each potential guide protein, we retrieve all refined contig mappings and define
regions of the guide protein into which the contigs cluster (). To allow for mapping edge effects, contigs cluster
together if they overlap by 15 nucleotides or more. In all contig clusters, contigs that
have a low similarity score are removed if they are lower than α times the highest
similarity score (default α = 0.75) (e.g. contig 1 in ). The mappings of multiple contigs to the guide protein
can then be viewed as a graph (). We
calculate the score of all possible paths through this graph, by exhaustively combining
all contigs from different regions, summing the individual contig–protein match
scores to get an overall score for each path. All paths having scores with at least β
(default β = 0.5) times the highest scoring path are then compared, and
contigs present in all higher scoring paths are kept and form a maximal scaffoldable set,
with a score referred to as the scaffolding power. The default values of α =
0.75 and β = 0.5 were chosen to be conservative, and make SWiPS less likely to
produce chimeric sequences from different paralogs within the target genome. These two
parameters, and how they affect the performance of SWiPS in the presence of paralogs, are
discussed next. However, we have tested several values for α and β on our
C.intestinalis runs and found that, for both,
increased values resulted in increased numbers of scaffolded contigs (and N50), but also
in increased rates of scaffolding error. (A) Although contig 1 and 2 are mapped to
protein P1, they have better mappings on protein P2 and P3, respectively. The
similarity score between contig 1 and P1 is lower than α = 0.75 times
the similarity score between contig 1 and P2, and is removed from P1. The similarity
score between contig 2 and P1 is within α of the similarity score between
contig 2 and P3, and both mappings are kept. (B) Contigs with
similarity to the P1 are clustered according to the region of similarity. Here,
contigs 3 and 4 are clustered together in contig cluster 1, contig 5 is the only
contig in contig cluster 2, and contig 2 and 6 are clustered in contig cluster
3


The scores for all possible
combinations of contigs in each region are computed (including combinations with no
contigs from clusters), and the lowest scoring paths are removed. The higher scoring
paths (with at least β times the highest scoring path) are then compared;
contigs present in the highest scoring (ambiguous) paths are kept and determine the
maximal scaffoldable set



Contigs encoding in-paralogs, i.e. genes with many-to-one or many-to-many relationships
with members of the guide proteins, cannot be reliably scaffolded because they result from
one or more duplication events subsequent to the divergence from genes in the guide
proteome. Contigs resulting from duplication events prior to the divergence from genes in
the guide proteome (out-paralogs), however, can be scaffolded. In SWiPS, α is used
to uncouple contig–protein pairings that have lower similarity scores than the one
with the highest score (e.g. contig 1 and P1 in ). For example, an α = 1 forces every contig to be coupled
unambiguously with the protein with which it shares the highest similarity score, whereas
an α = 0 implies that all contig–protein pairings are kept for
subsequent steps. Consequently, a high α can be used when a complete set of closely
related proteins is used as guide proteome, and contigs encoding out-paralogs will be
coupled unambiguously with their orthologous proteins. However, if the set of closely
related proteins is incomplete, a high α may result in erroneous
contig–protein couplings that are considered unambiguous, thereby leading to
scaffolding errors. Our choice of 0.75 as the default value for α is thus
conservative and allows the use of incomplete protein sets.

Although α takes incomplete protein sets into consideration, our maximal
scaffoldable set approach (which relies on β) takes into account contigs encoding
in-paralogs that cannot be scaffolded. If two contigs encode in-paralogous sequences
(contig 3 and 4 in B and ), they will form distinct paths that have
similar scaffolding powers (e.g. path 1 and 3 in ). Therefore, they will be excluded from the maximal scaffoldable set (). Because the number of in-paralogs are
potentially high, we chose β to be conservative.

Once the scaffolding power of each protein is computed, the protein scaffold with the
highest scaffolding power is iteratively picked, and the maximal scaffoldable sets (and
scaffolding power) of all other proteins are updated so that a contig gene model (the
contig region) is only used once. Picking the protein scaffold with highest scaffolding
power ensures that contigs mapping to multiple orthologous proteins are scaffolded
together by the ortholog that has the highest scaffolding power. After all guide proteins
above a minimum scaffolding power have been chosen, the scaffolded contigs go through
another scaffolding phase in which contigs with multiple gene models are used to merge the
scaffolds together. The relative positions of contigs are clear when a single protein maps
to them because of the linear structure of a gene. However, the loci of some proteins
overlap and inferring the relative positions of these different contigs can be
problematic. To deal with simple cases, directed graphs are constructed according to the
relative mapping position of the contigs on the proteins. The order in which the contigs
are traversed in these graphs determines the contig ordering of the scaffolds. After this
scaffolding step, SWiPS takes all scaffolded contigs and uses genewise to build the final
gene models.

2.5 Genome assembly data and guide protein sets
The C.intestinalis genome sequence, version 2.0 () was
retrieved from Ensembl (release 63). 80× coverage Illumina 50 bp paired-end reads
were simulated using simLibrary and simNGS (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/goldman-srv/simNGS/) with default parameters.
C.intestinalis was chosen owing to our underlying
interest in deuterostomes and for the pragmatic reasons that it is small and has not
undergone a whole genome duplication. SOAPdenovo was used with default parameters to
assemble the simulated C.intestinalis reads (). For
linguistic convenience, we refer to all SOAPdenovo-generated sequences as contigs, even
though these sequences include contigs that have been scaffolded together using the insert
size distributions of paired-end sequence data.

Next-generation sequencing paired-end data from
D.melanogaster DNA sequence were obtained from the
short read archives (accession SRX021790; ), and were used to build an assembly (N50
= 1441 bp) with SOAPdenovo. The human (NA18507) genome assembly (N50 = 61
980 bp), built using SOAPdenovo, was obtained from http://yh.genomics.org.cn/download.jsp.

For the comparison with ESPRIT (), we obtained the genomic assembly of
C.milii from http://esharkgenome.imcb.a-star.edu.sg. This 1.4× assembly consists of
647 131 contigs (754 MB) with an N50 of 1464 bp.

All protein sets used were retrieved from Ensembl, except for Strongylocentrotus
purpuratus and Saccoglossus kowalevskii (Genbank); and
Branchiostoma floridae, Drosophila grimshawi,
Heliconius melpomene, Culex quinquefasciatus,
Anopheles gambiae, Anopheles merus and
Anopheles quadriannulatus (Uniprot).

2.6 Estimating errors
All simulated contigs were mapped to the
C.intestinalis,
D.melanogaster or
H.sapiens reference genome (all three from Ensembl)
using blastn and assigned a reference scaffold, strand and position. SWiPS-predicted
scaffolds were considered correct if their mapped contigs are ordered correctly (within
100 kb of each other as eukaryotic introns are rarely &gt;100 kb; for human, we used 200
kb) across the reference scaffold on the same strand. Note that contigs are allowed to be
intercalated between exon-containing scaffolds without affecting the assessed accuracy. We
use two measures of accuracy: (i) the percentage of contig joins that are
correct—local link correctness, and (ii) the percentage of scaffolds (with at least
one contig link) for which all local contig links are correct.

3 RESULTS
3.1 Mapping ability with proteins from the same species
The extent to which contigs can be scaffolded by protein sequences will depend on the
amount of protein-coding content in the genome, and the ability to assign contigs to
particular protein-coding sequences. The latter will depend on the extent of similarity
between the guide proteins and the genome under consideration. To understand the best
possible outcome for the scaffolding process, we first tested SWiPS’s ability to
assemble a genome using a protein set from the same species as the genome.

We created a C.intestinalis genome assembly of the kind
that might be produced using a simple next-generation sequencing strategy, with low N50
(section 2.5), and applied SWiPS, using C.intestinalis
proteins as guides for the scaffolding process.

Our algorithm improved the N50 of our simulated assembly from 3851 bp to 6245
(62.2% increase) and reduced the number of scaffolds from 108 424 to 94 680, with
4134 out of 4510 (91.66%) scaffolding to be entirely correct (it should be noted
that the parameters used in this analysis were not optimized to take into account that the
guide proteins were of the same species).

3.2 Use of orthologous protein sequences and dependence on read depth
As a more realistic test, we scaffolded simulated
C.intestinalis assemblies using orthologous protein
sequences from Danio rerio,
S.purpuratus, Gallus gallus,
H.sapiens and
S.kowalevskii. To test the dependency on sequencing
depth, we produced assemblies based on the
C.intestinalis genome at 10×, 20×,
40× and 80× coverage (section 2.5).

Irrespective of coverage depth, SWiPS was able to produce a
20% improvement in the N50 of the
genome assembly, with a corresponding increase in the numbers of scaffolded contigs (). These numbers show that SWiPS appears
to be useful for improving assembly quality for even low coverage (by next generation
standards) datasets.  shows an example
of a scaffolded region, with two proteins, one from Sea Urchin and one from
Saccoglossus providing evidence to link five contigs from the
SOAPdenovo assembly. Example of five
contigs scaffolded using SWiPS. Protein SACC29144576 links contigs
‘scaffold23914’, ‘C5811784’ and ‘scaffold25071’
together, whereas SPUR115976525 links contigs ‘scaffold23914’,
‘C5926424’ and ‘scaffold5359’ together. The two protein
models allow SWiPS to scaffold all contigs together. Each arrow represents a region
of homology (dark grey); the intron–exon structure (light grey and dark grey)
of the orthologous proteins is clearly represented within each
scaffold


Breakdown of the scaffolding
accuracy by assembly coverage

Assembly (coverage)	N50 improvements (bp)	CEGMA improvements (complete/partial genes)	Scaffold correctness	Local link correctness	
Ciona 10×	1767–2101 (18.9%)	95–136 (41.2%)	88.3%	97.05%	
140–190 (35.7%)	
Ciona 20×	3714–4544 (22.3%)	134–166 (23.9%)	87.53%	97.42%	
175–204 (16.6%)	
Ciona 40×	3799–4790 (24.4%)	138–166 (20.3%)	85.65%	96.78%	
169–210 (24.3%)	
Ciona 80×	3851–4719 (22.5%)	139–162 (16.4%)	89.43%	97.60%	
171–210 (22.8%)	
D.melanogaster	1441–1601 (11.1%)	178–201 (12.9%)	98.9%	99.7%	
241–245 (1.7%)	
Human (NA18507)	61 980–73 255 (18.2%)	95–97 (2.1%)	85.3%	96.0%	
199–206 (3.5%)	
Elephant Shark	1464–1512 (3.3%)	7–22 (214.3%)	N/A	N/A	
49–107 (118.4%)	
					
aSince human genes are known to possess longer
introns than general eukaryotic genes, we allowed 200 kb (instead of 100 kb) to
assess the accuracy of SWiPS on the human assembly.



To test SWiPS on real next-generation data, we produced a
D.melanogaster assembly from Illumina Genome Analyzer
II sequence data. Using protein sequences from
D.grimshawi,
H.melpomene,
C.quinquefasciatus, Caenorhabditis
elegans, A.gambiae,
A.merus and
A.quadriannulatus, SWiPS produced an improvement of
11.1% on the assembly N50 and reduced the number of contigs from 130 312 to 123 309
(). We also tested SWiPS on a human
assembly using protein sequences from Canis familiaris and Mus
musculus. In this case, SWiPS produced an improvement of 18.2% on the
assembly N50 and reduced the number of contigs from 314 877 to 306 882. We also found
that, when allowing only 100 kb between scaffolded contigs (section 2.6), the assessed
scaffold correctness was 70.6% and the local scaffold correctness was 90.3%.
However, allowing 200 kb (500 kb) resulted in an assessed scaffold correctness of
85.3% (92.1%) and a local scaffold correctness of 96.0%
(98.3%).

We also tested SWiPS on low coverage Sanger sequenced data, in the form of the 1.4×
coverage genome of the elephant shark Callorhinchus milli (). We
obtained an improvement in N50 from 1464 bp (647 131 scaffolds) to 1506 bp (630 493
scaffolds), a 2.9% increase.

3.3 Comparison with other methods
To our knowledge, the only other program currently available to scaffold genomic contigs
using protein sequences is ESPRIT (). To directly compare SWiPS with ESPRIT, we
applied the CEGMA pipeline to the C.milii reference
genome. CEGMA uses a set of 248 core eukaryotic genes that are generally present in low
copy number to assess the completeness and quality of a genome assembly, and can serve as
complementary metric to the N50 length ().

In our hands, the CEGMA pipeline detected 7 complete and 47 partial genes when assessing
the initial reference genome, while Dessimoz et al. reported 14 complete
and 35 partial genes. This difference is likely due to our use of a more recent version of
CEGMA. The overall similarity of the results, however, suggests a comparison of the
performance of SWiPS and ESPRIT is valid.

To link C.milii contigs together with SWiPS, we used
the same set of proteins used by ESPRIT, which consists of human, mouse, anole lizard,
chicken, African clawed frog, zebrafish, medaka,
C.intestinalis and
B.floridae proteins. After linking 666 contig pairs
with ESPRIT, Dessimoz et al. reported an increase from 14 to 16 complete
genes and from 35 to 38 partial genes, i.e. a 14.3% and a 8.6% improvement,
respectively. In comparison, SWiPS was able to merge 27 659 contigs into 9121 scaffolds,
and increased the CEGMA gene space from 7 complete genes to 22 and 47 partial genes to
107, i.e. a 214.3% and a 118.4% improvement, respectively. Even using
Dessimoz et al. higher baseline of 14 complete genes, the new assembly
produced by SWiPS improved significantly the complete gene space when compared with ESPRIT
(8 compared to 2, i.e. a 4-fold improvement).

4 DISCUSSION
We have shown that our method is able to use protein sequences to order and orient contigs
into scaffolds, thus improving assembly contiguity and gene prediction, showing significant
improvements over the only other available tool. Although the overall improvements in N50
found by SWiPS may appear modest, they should be understood with reference to the fact that
the majority of most animal genomes is composed of non-coding sequence, and thus not
amenable to scaffolding via protein coding sequences.

To confidently scaffold exon-containing regions on different contigs, we need to be sure
that they come from the same gene. In the context of this problem, the most obvious way of
doing this is by assuming that our guide protein comes from a gene that shares a 1:1 or
many:1 orthologous relationship with the gene encoded by the exons. We thus need to test
that each exonic region on a contig is orthologous to the guide protein. Rather than
constructing a full phylogeny for each exon region, we maximize the overall similarity score
of templates to exons for all proteins that match equivalent sets of regions. As the ability
to discriminate orthologs from paralogs is fundamental to our method, we expect it to
perform best for proteins that have no similar sequences in the genome, and less well where
proteins come from gene families with multiple closely related members. Furthermore, the
more closely related the template set of proteins is to the target genome, the less likely
our method is to be confounded by gene duplication events that have occurred after the
template and target lineages have diverged.

Although inference of orthology is most obvious via overall comparisons of sequence
similarity, it is conceivable that other sources of information may be useful. For instance,
conservation of exon/intron boundaries may help to discriminate between orthologs and
paralogs in cases where orthologs share intron locations to the exclusion of paralogs. In
practice, we were able to find few examples where this provided a significant improvement on
our current results (data not shown).

For many applications, the primary interest of a genome sequence lies in its encoded
proteins. Coupled with the difficulty of de novo genome assembly and gene
prediction, this suggests that transcriptome sequencing may be a more useful strategy for
generating an initial survey of genome content. Transcriptome sequencing, however, has major
disadvantages compared with genome sequencing. Firstly, not all genes are expressed in all
developmental stages and cell types, and for many taxa, it may be difficult to sample
sufficient transcriptional libraries to obtain representation of all genes. Without this, it
is difficult to make reliable inferences of the absence of particular genes. Secondly,
genome sequence contains a wealth of information not encoded in the transcriptome, in the
form of regulatory elements, synteny information, gene structures and so on. Preliminary
genome sequence is thus likely to be of greater long-term usefulness than incomplete
transcriptome data. Although genome assemblies produced from single libraries of Illumina
data (i.e. with only one insert size) are likely to be very fragmentary (whatever the
sequencing depth), protein-coding content is likely to be depleted in the repetitive
sequence that causes assembly problems, at least at the exon level. By allowing the
scaffolding of exons on different contigs, our method allows the maximum usefulness in terms
of protein-coding content to be extracted from these preliminary assemblies.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We would like to thank Drs Wilfried Haerty, Andreas Heger and Gerton Lunter and Professor
Richard Mott for their insightful comments on SWiPS and this manuscript.

Funding: Y.L. is funded by the University of Oxford
Nuffield Department of Medicine Prize scholarship and the
Fonds de recherche du Québec. We acknowledge the
Wellcome Trust Core Award Grant Number
090532/Z/09/Z.

Conflict of Interest: none declared.

