High-throughput DNA sequencing technologies include Illumina (Solexa) (Bentley et al., ), Roche 454 (Torres et al., ) and other platforms. These technologies produce millions of DNA sequences of tens to hundreds of nucleotides each. Biological questions addressed with this data include SNP calling, ChIP-seq (Mardis, ), and RNA-seq (Mortazavi et al., ).

We introduce the ShortRead package, part of the Bioconductor (Gentleman et al., ) project. ShortRead extends Bioconductor with tools useful in the initial stages of short-read DNA sequence analysis. Main functionalities include data input, quality assessment, data transformation and access to downstream analysis opportunities. ShortRead is an important gateway to use of Bioconductor for processing high-throughput DNA sequence data.

1 AVAILABLE FUNCTIONALITY
1.1 Input and output
ShortRead provides mechanisms for input of diverse high-throughput sequence data. A major starting point is reads aligned to references, as from manufacturer software or aligners such as MAQ (Li et al., ) and Bowtie (Langmead et al., ). ShortRead parses additional formats (e.g. fasta, fastq and arbitrary column-oriented text files). Resulting R data structures allow manipulation of sequence, quality, alignment and other information. Input functions transparently parse compressed ( .gz) files; most file types can be read as ‘chunks’, to allow processing of data subsets. ShortRead inputs but does not specially represent fine-grained alignment descriptions (e.g. in Stockholm format).

Facilities for data output include fasta and fastq text formats, arbitrary column-oriented output of reads and auxiliary information, serialization of objects in native R format, and through use of additional R packages such as rtracklayer export to common genome browser formats such as wiggle, bed and gff (Kuhn et al., ).

1.2 Quality assessment
ShortRead includes facilities for assessment (QA) of read quality, sample processing and sequencing artifacts, and alignment characteristics. The QA pipeline can start with base calls and their quality scores (e.g. fastq or qseq files), as well as aligned data formats from special-purpose aligners. The result is an HTML report with embedded narrative to facilitate interpretation; a sample report is included with the package. Illustrative results are shown in . Highlights include: (i) The number of raw, filtered and aligned reads; (ii) Base call frequencies. (iii) Cycle-specific base calls and read qualities (e.g. A). (iv) Tabulation of read occurrences (how often reads are represented once, twice, …, n times). For instance, reads occurring once or a few times (to the left in B) may be unique due to base call errors, whereas reads occurring very frequently (at the extreme right in B) typically reflect PCR or resequencing issues. (v) Preliminary alignment quality score summaries. Technology-specific quality measures are also generated, especially for Illumina's Genome Analyzer (e.g. tile-specific read counts and qualities).
Quality assessment. (A) Unlikely directional nucleotide change and base calls (cycle 26) from a Short Read Archive accession. (B) Left and right ‘tails’ correspond to infrequently and highly repeated reads, respectively, in a φX174 control lane.




1.3 Transformation and downstream analysis
ShortRead provides facilities for data exploration, transformation, and down-stream analysis. For example, alphabetByCycle summarizes cycle-specific nucleotide counts (A) and base qualities. The alphabetFrequency function summarizes nucleotide use over all cycles, on a per-read basis or over the entire set of reads. The tables summarizes commonly occurring sequences, as illustrated in B. ShortRead contains facilities for sorting reads, finding duplicates, trimming left and right ends and for exploiting the extensive string pattern matching functions of Biostrings.

The features described here are generally fast, operating on tens of millions of short reads in a few seconds; input of large text files can be slow, taking 3–5 min for 50 million 36mers. Sixty-four bit platforms with 4–8 GB of memory are typically sufficient.

ShortRead provides extensible ‘filter’ functions for removing short reads satisfying predefined or ad hoc criteria. For instance, the dustyFilter identifies and removes low-complexity reads. Filters can be composed to formulate complex criteria. Additional ShortRead functionality is a starting point for downstream analysis. The function coverage summarizes [possibly ‘extended’, see Kharchenko et al. ()] alignments as vectors tallying the number of reads over each nucleotide in the reference.

ShortRead is one of several Bioconductor packages for sequence analysis. Biostrings has flexible tools for pattern matching, sequence alignment and manipulation. BSgenome provides facilities for representing and efficiently manipulating whole genomes. IRanges provides range-based and other expressive representations. rtracklayer provides an interface to genome browsers from within R sessions.

1.4 Advanced features
The ShortRead package includes advanced features for handling large resequencing data. In particular the large volume of data and generation in ‘lanes’ encourages a ‘block’ processing style. For instance much of the QA functionality of ShortRead can be conducted on a per-lane basis. The srapply function exploits this work flow. A typical use takes a list of file names and a function to be applied to the file. srapply applies the function to each file. Usually the function reduces the data volume in the file, e.g. from a large collection of reads to a compact summary of lane quality. The distinguishing feature of srapply is that the calculation is distributed across processors or nodes in a computer cluster, if such resources exist.

2 CONCLUSIONS
This note introduces the Bioconductor ShortRead package for analysis of resequencing data. The package allows input into R of diverse sequence-related files, and output of common data formats. It provides quality assessment tools and HTML-based report-generating functionality. ShortRead data structures allow convenient manipulation of data, such as filtering reads based on sequence characteristics. The package work flow represents an entry point for down-stream analysis using Bioconductor or other software. Future plans include improved support for longer and paired-end reads, and development of additional quantitative measures of quality; the challenge of incorporating the SOLiD color space model into standard work flows precludes support for this format beyond that available from data transformed to sequence and Phred-like quality scores.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to early adopters and Bioconductor course participants for their helpful input.

Funding: National Human Genome Research Institute (grant P41HG004059 R.G.); EU (Research and Training Network ‘Chromatin Plasticity’ to S.A).

Conflict of Interest: none declared.

