1 INTRODUCTION
Genome-scale metabolic networks (GSMs) consist of compartmentalized reactions that
consistently combine biochemical, genetic and genomic information. When also considering a
biomass reaction and both uptake and secretion reactions, GSMs are often used to study
genotype–phenotype relationships, to direct new discoveries and to identify targets in
metabolic engineering (). However, a major difficulty in GSM comparisons and reconstructions is to
integrate data from different resources with different nomenclatures and conventions for
both metabolites and reactions. Hence, GSM consolidation and comparison may be impossible
without detailed biological knowledge and programming skills. Therefore, community
approaches in form of jamboree meetings were introduced to collect and integrate data to
generate consensus reconstructions (). Furthermore model repositories, such as BiGG
(), MetRxn () or the Model SEED () were developed to integrate models and to allow
comparative analyses. In addition, tools like the COBRA Toolbox (), CytoSEED (), FAME () or OptFlux
() assist
in the analysis and modelling tasks. However, a tight integration of models and software is
currently only provided by the Model SEED, and most of the advanced tasks, like model
manipulations (reaction direction assignment, adding or removing candidate reactions,
modifying the objective function), are limited to experienced users with programming
skills.

2 OVERVIEW
MetaNetX.org is implemented as a user-friendly and self-explanatory website that handles
all user requests dynamically (a). It
allows a user to access a collection of hundreds of published models, browse and select
subsets for comparison and analysis, upload or modify new models and export models in
conjunction with their results. Its functionality is based on a common namespace defined by
MNXref ().
In particular, all repository or user uploaded models are automatically translated with or
without compartments into the common namespace; small deviations from the original model are
possible due to the automatic reconciliation steps implemented by . However, a user can choose
not to translate his model but still make use of the website’s functionalities.
Furthermore, it is possible to augment the given reaction set by user-defined reactions, for
example, for model augmentation. Main
features of MetaNetX.org. (a) Flowchart illustrating the structure of
MetaNetX.org: the website with its common namespace and user workspace connects the
repository of publicly available GSMs or user-defined GSMs/reaction sets with the
tools section, as well as the view and export functions that enable the users to
interactively analyse their results inside or outside of MetaNetX.org.
(b) Interactive applet viewer showing the network neighbourhood of
ethanol across several compartments in a selected Escherichia coli
model. (c) Comparison of three selected E. coli models
(top) using the MetaNetX.org workspace: present (+) or absent (−) reactions
(bottom)



Any available network or pathway can be examined at metabolite, reaction, enzyme, pathway
or compartment levels using, for example, an interactive graphical user interface [in
contrast to static KEGG maps (); b] or
information provided at UniProt/SwissProt. In addition, two or more GSMs or pathways (even
from different resources like BiGG, MetRxn or UniPathway) can be compared to determine
(un)common parts (c).

MetaNetX.org also offers an extensive tools section for analyses based on the network
structure (stoichiometric matrix) or on flux balance analysis (). Specifically, it
offers services to identify structural inconsistencies such as dead-end metabolites and
their affected (downstream) reactions and metabolites as well as zero-flux reactions and
inconsistent correlation groups (). For simulations, MetaNetX.org provides a tool set to study
reaction fluxes, in particular with respect to biomass production and biomass production
after performing single reaction or single gene knockouts, which are commonly used for model
validation.

In the context of model development, a dedicated section of MetaNetX.org allows one to
combine GSMs with respect to their reaction or protein sets or with respect to the results
of previously performed analyses. For example, it is possible to create a minimal functional
model where every reaction is able to carry a flux at steady state, i.e. a model without
zero-flux reactions.

All available and newly generated networks as well as the results of their analyses and
predictions can be exported as SBML- or flat-files for documentation and further
analyses/modifications in external tools such as the COBRA toolbox ().

We believe that MetaNetX.org could become a valuable resource for accessing, analysing and
manipulating GSMs, especially for users with limited programming skills, or as a resource
for independent validation and testing. We expect that the rigorous format requirements
enable a standardized way to define and exchange models and that they allow for an effective
and efficient benchmark process for future method development projects.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Computation and maintenance of the MetaNetX.org server are provided by the Vital-IT center
of the SIB Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (http://www.vital-it.ch). We thank Alan
Bridge, Ioannis Xenarios and Anne Morgat for support and feedback.

Funding:
Swiss Initiative for Systems Biology
(SystemsX.ch projects MetaNetX and SyBIT) evaluated by the
Swiss National Science Foundation; Swiss
Federal Government through the Federal Office of Education
and Science.

Conflict of Interest: none declared.

