1 INTRODUCTION
In recent years, modelling and inference of biological regulatory networks have become an
active area of research in large part owing to the emergence of microarray technology, which
allows for simultaneous measurement of gene expression on the genome-wide scale (; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). The vast amounts of data provided by gene
expression microarrays enable the possibility of accurate estimation of gene regulatory
network organization, which has greatly benefited a broad range of disciplines—from
basic biological sciences, to bioengineering, to medical diagnosis and treatment (; ). The goal
of inference algorithms is to discover the connectivity structure and, potentially, dynamic
characteristics of these networks based on such time- or other state-series data. Among
other things, the nature of inference algorithms varies depending on the types of biological
networks and the way they are modelled (; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). One category of models
quantizes the empirical data into binary numbers and views network structures as Boolean
constraints (; ). Although
this could be attempted in a deterministic framework, both the uncertainties introduced by
measurement errors as well as the inherent stochasticity of gene expression make any
experimental data substantially probabilistic. To impart this random nature to the Boolean
framework, the probability Boolean network models have been introduced (; ; ). However, as biological
processes are neither digital nor homogeneous, further gene regulatory modelling and
inference refinements may be achieved by using alternative probabilistic network
descriptions (; ; ), continuous-time differential equations (; ; ), stochastic differential
equations (; ), and control
theory methods (; ; ), among others. Although any of these methods offers certain advantages and
disadvantages in attempting to capture the structure and dynamics of gene regulatory
network, it should be noted that they have largely been designed toward describing gene
expression data.

Recently, however, a new type of high-throughput data has emerged and seen rapid
proliferation in empirical biosciences—the genome-wide fitness data.
At its core, this involves using latest technological advances to massively scale the
traditional gene deletion/interruption studies in order to achieve nearly genome-wide
coverage by generating knockout/knockdown mutant strain libraries for all non-essential
genes in an organism (). These libraries are then further subjected to a large number of
environmental conditions and stresses—with the observable in each of the settings
being the fitness of individual clones (collected in stationary phase). Pairing the
resulting data with an appropriate model of gene expression then allows for the inference of
the underlying gene regulatory networks through estimation of significant interaction terms,
along with those for production, degradation, expression level, etc. Although potentially
applicable to any observable type, this approach may be particularly well-suited for the use
with fitness data to help constrain any inferred gene regulatory network solutions to those
dynamic modes that are most important for a given set of biological functions and
conditions—e.g. growth on specific substrates or tolerance to certain stresses. Recent
works have indeed suggested that the use of genome-wide fitness data can provide new
perspectives on systems-level organization of cells and uncover novel gene regulatory
interactions when compared with gene expression-based analysis (, ); ). Yet, although on a limited scale the idea of
biological network characterization based on knockout data has been considered before, e.g.
, the
emergence of high-throughput genome-wide gene deletion/interruption technology along with
the use of population fitness rather than gene expression as an observable offers novel
challenges as well as benefits to the task of gene network inference. On the one hand,
microarray and other gene expression experiments typically generate high-dimensional data in
the form of a real vector that comprises expression levels of multiple genes at each sampled
time and/or condition point, whereas fitness measurements map the state of the system into a
much lower dimensional space—e.g. that of a single real variable, such as growth rate.
This inevitably leads to significant loss of information. On the other hand, deletion
experiments usually involve simply cultivating and observing cells, which could be performed
on a substantially larger scale, much more efficiently and under significantly greater range
of conditions when compared with the relatively demanding gene expression assays. The
ensuing ability to perform experiments simultaneously across the entire mutant collection
substantially increases the overall genome-wide fitness data dimensionality—often
putting it on par with available gene expression datasets. Furthermore, fitness observations
allow for the preferential selection or overweighting of clones that display a desirable
phenotype, e.g. the stronger the selection—the more significant the contribution of
surviving strains. This becomes an increasingly important factor in many biotechnological
and biomedical applications, whereby the contribution of practically irrelevant genes is
effectively being filtered out—regardless of their statistical significance or dynamic
state. Indeed, it has been shown that this type of data is very useful for the determination
of target gene functions (, ; ; ; ).

Few systematic models and/or inference algorithms have been proposed for the elucidation of
regulatory networks from fitness data. Conclusions are often being made on the basis of
visual inspections or similar relatively naive strategies. Yet, greater prominence and
availability of such data along with indications that fitness profiling might contain
information about gene regulation suggest the need for a more comprehensive and rigorous
inference approach. The analysis of ample data provided by genome-wide fitness experiments
may also be useful in complementing network inference methods based on microarray gene
expression and such other data by helping to initialize them or further refine their
results.

In this work, we propose an algorithm for inferring gene regulatory networks from
genome-wide knockout fitness data. Our approach is based on describing biological networks
via a non-linear dynamical model and then elucidating model parameters from fitness
measurements. The resulting parameter set can be used to identify the underlying regulatory
network structure as well as to make forward-looking estimates of its function under
temporal dynamics or environmental changes. In , we describe the system model and problem formulation. In , we provide a heuristic sample ordering selection
algorithm based on correlation score to cope with the order selection problem that arises
when using mutant fitness data. In , we
describe the parameter estimation algorithm based on the unscented Kalman filter (UKF)
technique. In , we use the proposed
algorithm to analyse both a synthetic example as well as experimental data from yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and bacteria Shewanella
oneidensis, which are further compared against known empirical results. We
conclude the article with a summary and remarks regarding the proposed model and inference
algorithm.

2 SYSTEM MODEL AND PROBLEM FORMULATION
2.1 System model
The outline of our approach is to describe a gene expression data model and to then
extend it towards accommodating the observables supplied in the form of a large-scale
knockout strain fitness dataset. To this end, we first introduce a basic model of gene
expression as a weighted sum of (non-linear) functions of other genes with additive noise.
We then obtain, through the removal of individual genes, the knockout strain network
models used to drive the observed fitness model, which thus contains latent variables of
our overall model, as described next in further detail.

Consider a gene regulatory network with total 
genes. Let , ,
 denote the gene expression level for the
-th gene at time
. We denote observation or measurement data,
, for  at
time  as:  where 
is the observation noise at time 
for -th gene. (Note that here the term
‘time’ is used in the generalized Bayesian inference sense and so may be
loosely viewed as a discrete index enumerating individual experiments—rather than
some continuous parameter of a kinetic biochemical system. Accordingly, the dynamic model
we use is one based on ‘discrete time’, which thus fundamentally does not
a priori assume or require continuity of states or observables.) We
denote gene expression levels within the network by vector ,
the observation vector by 
and noise vector by .
We assume that all vectors 
for  are independent and jointly Gaussian with
zero mean and variance matrix .
We approximate any multivariate gene–gene interactions by a combination of a linear
expansion around the stationary solution and univariate non-linear terms. Specifically, we
follow a discrete-time regulation model proposed in () and describe the regulatory functions among genes as:
 for
, where 
denotes the linear regulation coefficient from gene 
to gene  and ;
 denotes the non-linear regulation
coefficient from gene 
to gene  and ;
 is the non-linear function for gene
 which is given by:  where 
is the parameter to be inferred and ;
 denotes the system expression bias for
-th gene and ,
which will be inferred later. The noise vectors 
for  are assumed to be jointly Gaussian with zero
mean and variance .
We also assume that they are independent from all .
The regulatory network is realized as a state–space model, where we view gene
expression levels as states and measurements as observations. The goal of inference is to
estimate all the unknown parameters in the model. Inference results then provide estimates
for all regulatory relations across the network.

Note that  and  provide the description of the system
in a manner most commensurate with expression data. We now proceed to extend this model to
accommodate fitness data. Without loss of generality, we consider the case of a mutant
library with single gene knockout per strain (with multiple-knockout collections being
handled analogously, as discussed later) and assume that -th gene has been deleted when the system is at time
. Note that ‘time’ here
corresponds to the experiment number, with the index 
being determined as discussed in the previous paragraph. For the purposes of the
single-knockout state–space model, expressions of all genes evolve without
participation of gene .
Therefore we set all 
regulatory coefficients to zero. The states and system coefficients equations can then be
summarized as: 


The last two equations determine the current system coefficients, which will be appended
to the system state. Unlike the case of expression microarrays, here, each gene
deletion/interruption strain measurement quantifies a single system property which is a
function of all the remaining genes. In this article, we assume this measurement is a real
number, which represents the fitness of the remaining network. (The model can be easily
adapted into higher dimensional measurement case by direct extension.) Therefore, the
observation  becomes:  where 
is typically not known a priori. We denote
 as the variance of
 as before.

Various bases could be used to estimate 
and associated coefficients. For instance, one could use a simple basis such as power
series—i.e. a Taylor expansion. However, the speed of convergence for Taylor
expansion is slow, resulting in a large number of parameters to be estimated. In contrast,
the radial basis approach has been shown to be more robust and adaptive than Taylor
expansion (). Furthermore, it has been shown that with certain additional assumptions,
the approximation by radial basis will converge to the true function in
 sense (). Thus, we approximate
 as:  where 
for  and 
are the centres of the basis with ;
 is the total number of basis functions used,
which is a fixed constant; ,
 are the centre points of the waveform, which
are chosen a priori; and —the Hardy multi-quadratic function with constant
, which serves as a classical choice for
efficient radial basis expansion ().

All the coefficients 
as well as  are parameters to be inferred and so are
appended to the state variable. Therefore, the new augmented model state variable for
knockout fitness data is: 


As a summary, the dynamical model we propose for regulatory networks with gene
deletion/interruption mutant fitness data is: 
 where 
is the system function described in (4); 
is the augmented noise vector; 
is the selection matrix, i.e. ,
where the index  is determined by the time index
; 
is the Gaussian noise as assumed before.

2.2 Data feeding order score
To infer the model given in (8), one needs to specify the order in which data are
supplied to the algorithm. The question in what order data should be optimally fed into
the inference algorithm thus arises. As this problem is fundamentally associated with the
network structure itself, it can be solved exactly only if the structure of the network is
already known. (And even then, the problem typically has NP-hard complexity since one
needs to test all possible permutations.) Since the feeding order will have direct impact
on the performance of the inference result, we still need a strategy to find an
‘optimal’ feeding order without explicitly exploring all potential network
structures. In this section, we propose a heuristic strategy based on correlation score,
which is then compared against selecting the feeding order randomly and shown to be more
‘optimal’ by offering certain advantages.

The basic idea behind the proposed heuristic is that we should feed the most useful data
first. In this work, we use correlation as a measure of such ‘usefulness’. The
intuition is that for sequential inference of the model (8), the data should be fed based
on their importance in a certain sense. The reasoning for this strategy is that, in
sequential inference, a good starting point usually provides a superior opportunity to
converge to a good result and vice versa. Moreover, once we have already fallen into a
steady state or an attracting basin, subsequent data may have less influence on the final
result, since it may be difficult to jump away from the local attractor. By contrast, at
early stages, this influence may be vital to the final inference result. Heuristically,
the importance of a certain sample may be determined by the connectivity of the deleted
gene. If it has many connections to other genes, it may likely play an important role in
the network, which would be reflected in the measurement value (e.g. fitness). Based on
this approach, the feeding order for a sample is related to the importance or connectivity
of the corresponding deleted gene, which could be quantified by using correlation as a
metric.

Specifically, we consider fitness observations ,
, where 
is a positive integer representing the total rounds of experiments. Note that without loss
of generality, we can always assume that ,
, 
is the  round fitness data for gene
. The score 
for gene  is calculated as:  with gene feeding arranged in the order of
descending . The summation over
 calculates the correlation under round
. The final score is the summation over all
rounds. This approach may be compared with choosing the feeding order randomly, as will be
done later using concrete examples.

Finally, note that a similar feeding heuristic may be used to optimize the order of
individual experimental conditions as well. The utility of this additional step, however,
needs to be weight against the diminished significance of individual permutations among
observation data points as the number of conditions becomes large as well as the
increasing computational overhead this may entail. As in our applications the number of
conditions was substantially greater than either the number of genes or the number of
connections between them, we found the additional computational costs such extra step
would entail to be unwarranted.

3 THE UNSCENTED KALMAN FILTER APPROACH FOR INFERENCE
In the previous section, we proposed a system model for describing gene regulatory networks
at the state–space level. The approach now requires an algorithm for estimating the
unknown parameters of the model, from which network organization and other biological system
properties may be inferred. Here, a Kalman filter technique—a well-characterized
estimation strategy for elucidating state-space models of regulatory networks (, ), and specifically, an unscented Kalman
filter (UKF)—is used to accomplish this task. UKF is used to estimate all the
parameters in order to cope with the expected non-linearity of the model (), as it has been shown to
have superior performance when compared with traditional approaches, such as the extended
Kalman filter, especially with availability of enough data.

Classical Kalman filter technique iteratively uses innovations in state and measurement
predictions—updating the system sequentially (). The general idea of a Kalman filter can be summarized as:
 where
 is the ‘gain’ for the residue. The
original approach by Kalman is based on linear differential equation model under Gaussian
noise assumption. An extended Kalman filter (EKF) has been proposed for dealing with
non-linear models (). The idea of EKF is to linearize the non-linear function by approximating it
with the first-order Taylor expansion. However, such an approximation is quite coarse and
insufficient under general circumstances. Some approaches look to remedying the situation by
using higher-order terms Taylor expansion terms, which—while more
accurate—generally leads to dramatic increases in complexity (). Alternatively, UKF approximates the non-linear
function by viewing it as a non-linear transform and then using the so-called ‘sigma
points’ to capture the posterior mean and covariance accurately up to the third order.
Compared with EKF, UKF provides a more accurate approximation without significant increase
in complexity and has been shown superior in many practical situations (). Another advantage of
UKF is that it does not require the calculation of model’s Jacobian or Hessian, which
makes the algorithm and associated mathematical derivations less involved (see more
below).

As noted, the UKF is based on the idea of choosing sigma points from the unscented
transform. Consider a random vector 
being passed through a non-linear transform . In
order to calculate the mean and variance of , we
choose the sigma points ,
 and their weights
 as follows: 
 where
 is the variance matrix of the random variable
; 
denotes the -th column of the input matrix;
 is the scaling parameter; and
 is a parameter incorporating prior knowledge
of . Under Gaussian noise assumption, we can set
, ,
and  ().

After computing all the sigma points  and
their corresponding weights, the mean and variance of 
can be approximated as: 


In order to infer the dynamical system model described in (8), we simply concatenate the
state variable  with the noise vectors
 and  to
form a new augmented vector 


Viewing the  and  in
(8) as non-linear transforms allows us to calculate the corresponding sigma points as well
as to approximate their mean and variance for use in sequential updates.

We summarize the UKF-based algorithm for inferring model (8) from knockout fitness data in
Section S1 of the Supplementary Material.

4 RESULTS
4.1 Inference of synthetic network
In this section, we investigate the performance of the proposed algorithm for inference
of a synthetic network. The network has both linear and non-linear connections with the
graph structure specified in . The
dynamics of the network are based on the proposed model (8), with arrows denoting the
direction of regulatory interactions. The parameters of the network are given in , with the variance of the model noise
 taken as 
for , where 
is the identity matrix. We also take the variance of measurement noise (error)
 in (1) to be
. The deletion data are obtained by
sequentially removing each gene and its corresponding connections. We use 10 rounds of
sample data, i.e. .
Finally, five basis functions are included in the fitness model. (Although there is always
a trade-off between accuracy and complexity for number of basis functions to be used the
dimension of the problem is proportional to the number of basis functions. The number of
basis functions may be chosen quantitatively, if needed—e.g. by
cross-validation—but here five basis functions appears to be sufficient.) The
fitness function model 
in (5), thus becomes: 
where  with ,
, ,
, ;
and  being ,
, ,
 and .
Structure of the synthetic
network


Comparison of linear
coefficients (LCs) and non-linear coefficients (NLCs) of the inferred regulatory
network and the underlying model system

Edge	Synthetic LC	Synthetic NLC	Inferred LC	Inferred NLC	
(2,1)	0.7	0.5	0.621	0.781	
(3,1)	0.7	0.5	0.491	—	
(3,2)	0.7	0.5	1.091	—	
(3,4)	0.7	0.5	0.861	1.132	
(3,5)	0.7	0.5	0.682	0.581	
(4,2)	0.7	0.5	—	—	
(5,4)	—	—	0.981	0.852	


Following the proposed algorithm, we first determine the ‘optimal’ data
feeding order using the correlation score described in . The resulting order is 3, 2, 1, 4, 5. We can see that this ordering
generally coincides with the importance of each node in the sense of node connectivity.
This further reaffirms the validity of the proposed heuristic that the data from most
connected nodes should be fed in first.

Following subsequent steps, we infer parameters of the underlying network, which are then
filtered to remove values below noise threshold set at 40% of their maximal
variation (0.431 and 0.443 for linear and non-linear coefficients, respectively). The
resulting inferred synthetic network is shown in , with regulatory interaction parameters given in . Connection structure of the inferred synthetic network. Linear
connections are denoted by solid lines. Non-linear connections are denoted by dashed
lines



Comparing the inferred network to the true model, we can see that the elucidated results
correctly identify the presence of five out of six regulatory interactions and suggest one
non-existent one (false negative rate of 16.7% and false positive rate of
8%, respectively, accounting for the direction of regulation). If we account for
both linear and non-linear connections individually, a further two connections are not
discovered (linear 
to  and non-linear
 to ).

Finally, we have compared the effect of choosing the feeding order according to the
prescription provided in  versus
selecting it randomly. As can be seen in , using the original order 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 instead of the optimal one 3, 2, 1, 4,
5 results in a significant degradation of inference results. Connection structure of the inferred network
without using the optimal feeding order. Here, the original data order 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
is used instead of the optimal one 3, 2, 1, 4, 5 (which is used in previous
figures). Linear connections are denoted by solid lines. Non-linear connections are
denoted by dashed lines



To quantify this effect more rigorously, we define missing rate
 as the difference between
 and the ratio of the number of correctly
identified edges to the total number of edges in the synthetic network, i.e. 12 here. We
also define false rate 
as the ratio of number of incorrectly identified edges to the total number of edges not in
the synthetic network, i.e. 228 here. Then, for the inference result using the optimal
order, we have  and .
In contrast, using the original order yields, 
and .

 summarizes the results when using
the optimal order versus the average of 30 randomly chosen orders. As we can see, the
optimal order has performed better than randomly chosen orders in both the missing and
false rates. Inference
algorithm performance when using the optimal feeding order versus the average of 30
randomly chosen orders (lower is better)

Order			
Optimal order	0.333	0.00877	
Average of random chosen orders	0.753	0.0729	


4.2 Inference of S.cerevisiae GAL network
We now apply the described inference algorithm to GAL regulatory network
that controls galactose utilization in yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
GAL regulation represents one of the most historically prominent model
systems in yeast because of its importance for the studies of eukaryotic regulation and
relatively self-contained nature. 
summarizes the empirical knowledge of GAL network structure (; ; ; ; ). Structure of the empirical GAL
network



Our analysis is based on yeast deletion strains fitness data previously collected by
Giaever and co-workers (). The one-dimensional measurements were performed under
various environmental conditions—such as different concentrations of galactose,
alkali, sodium chloride, sorbitol, etc. We utilize nine sets of samples from different
environmental conditions for network inference using the described algorithm, with
40% variation threshold as before. The nine sets of samples are formed by combining
arbitrary samples from each environmental condition as representatives.  and  show the inferred network graph structures as identified by linear and
non-linear coefficients, respectively. A combined linear–non-linear network graph is
given in  (note, in the interest of
clarity, edge weight labels and lower-weight edges have been removed). Linear structure of the inferred
GAL network


Non-linear structure of the inferred
GAL network


Combined structure of the inferred
GAL network



It could be seen from  and  that GAL 1, 3,
4 and 80 have the most connections and the largest
coefficients, which is in accord with the known fact that these are the regulatory genes
in the network, with others being regarded as the structural genes. Additionally, we note
that GAL 80 has negative connections to GAL 3 and
GAL 4 as well as that GAL 4 has negative connections
to GAL 1 and 7, all of which coincides with the
empirically known fact that GAL 80 negatively regulates GAL
3, 4 and that GAL 4 leads to the repression
of transcription from GAL 1, 7. The connections between
GAL 1, 2 and GAL 3 also reflect the
fact that GAL 2 and GAL 1 regulate GAL
3 by protein utilization pathway. Finally, we see that there is no direct
connection from GAL 11 to GAL 80, which also coincides
with the fact that GAL 11 does not have direct interaction with
GAL 80. On the other hand, we find that although inference results
discover the connections between GAL 3 and GAL 80 as
well as GAL 3 and GAL 4, they may not be in the correct
orientation. Otherwise, inferred influences among regulatory genes appear to be in a
general agreement with empirical understanding of the system.

4.3 Inference of Shewanella
TyrR–LiuR network
In this section, we apply our algorithm to the
TyrR–LiuR amino acid
utilization–degradation network of S.oneidensis
strain MR-1. Its ‘true’ structure, shown in , was derived from hand-curated high-confidence
regulatory interactions catalogued at MicrobesOnline and RegPrecise (; ). Inference was
performed by using the proposed algorithm on 287 sets of fitness data (number of fitness
measurements for each of the knockout strains under different growth conditions), with
results shown in  9 and . The inference results are compared to and
seen to be in general correspondence with the true structure, . Structure of the empirical TyrR–LiuR
network


Linear structure of the inferred
TyrR–LiuR network


Non-linear structure of the
inferred TyrR–LiuR network


Comparison of Ground truth
to the Inference algorithm performance

Number of edges (Ground truth)	Number of edges (Inference)	Number of correctly identified edges	
57	69	25	


5 DISCUSSION
We have proposed a dynamical model and an algorithm for inference of gene regulatory
networks based on genome-wide knockout fitness data—an emerging data type, whose
utility in biological systems identification has not been sufficiently explored to date. The
algorithm uses a state–space model to capture the dynamical and non-linear nature of
such networks. An unscented Kalman filter is used to infer the unknown parameters in order
to cope with model non-linearity.

Although fitness data inherently suffers from loss of information caused by its reduced
dimensionality, when compared with the more widely explored gene expression data type, the
potentially larger amounts of and more contextually/phenotypically meaningful data provided
may be able to compensate for the relative lack of resolution as our work appears to
suggest. The analysis of a synthetic example as well as empirical GAL and
TyrR–LiuR network data presented
here shows that the described algorithm is able to provide satisfying inference results even
for relatively complex mechanisms.

Ultimately, the two data types—gene expression and knockout fitness—may be
expected to be most informative when used in a complementary fashion. As noted previously,
inferences generated from genome-wide knockout fitness data could be used to facilitate
network elucidation methods based on gene expression by helping initialize or further refine
their predictions. Conversely, information provided by gene expression data may be exploited
by the proposed algorithm in conjunction with knockout fitness data to synergistically
improve final inference results. For instance, gene expression data may be collected under a
more limited set of conditions, for a subset of the mutant library, or just for the
wild-type strain; and used for the initial inference of an augmented state vector
—associated only with the gene
expression part of the model, . Such
preliminary results could then be used as a prior for the subsequent network inference
round, which uses genome-wide fitness data in order to take advantage of its potentially
larger scale or more immediate availability across a range of conditions, as well as to
introduce corresponding phenotypically significant refinements (as discussed earlier).

Several other directions appear promising toward potentially further extending and
improving the inference methodology proposed here. For instance, the non-linear univariate
interaction model, , may be
augmented with explicitly multivariate terms. This should serve to enhance resolution of
non-linear interactions for a given gene across multiple reaction partners and improve
modelling accuracy, though at a cost of substantial computational overhead owing to
complications related to multiplicative noise propagation and the need to account for
intermediate molecular complexes. Perhaps a more straightforward approach involves using the
model to accommodate multiple-knockout experiments (i.e. those involving multiple
inactivated genes in each strain). This is done analogously to the way single-knockout
networks have been analyzed here by simply setting all of the corresponding interaction term
coefficients to zero for the genes in question. The reason we have focused less on such
applications in this work, however, is the present scarcity of multiple- versus
single-knockout observation data. Finally, additional constraints could be incorporated to
help account for other pre-existing sources of experimental or heuristic information. For
example, we have noted earlier the possibility of applying feed optimization schemes to
condition data ordering. One may further look at various sparseness conditions as a way of
improving computational efficiency and incorporating pre-existing knowledge about the
network during inference. [Though, care should be taken, as significant variations in
effective regulatory network topology may naturally arise across experimental conditions or
in going from one related organism to another (; )]

Overall, we believe that these questions help further support the suggestion that the
analysis of genome-wide fitness data (whether directly or in conjunction with gene
expression data) towards understanding of biological systems function and, in particular,
inference of gene regulatory network organization offers a rich new area of future
research—to which this article is seeking to make an initial contribution.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Adam Deutschbauer for contributing his insights throughout this
work. We would also like to thank the anonymous reviewers for useful comments and helpful
suggestions that have offered much help in improving this article.

Funding: This work conducted by ENIGMA-Ecosystems and
Networks Integrated with Genes and Molecular Assemblies was
supported by the Office of Science, Office of Biological and Environmental
Research, of the U. S. Department of Energy
under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231; and under U.S. National Science
Foundation (NSF) grant DBI-0850030. Partial funding
for open access charge by the Columbia Open-Access Publication (COAP)
Fund.

Conflict of Interest: none declared.

