Bayesian Networks (BNs) are robust and versatile probabilistic models applicable to many different phenomena (). In biology, the applications range from gene regulatory networks () to protein interactions () to gene expression prediction () to relationships between chromatin-associated proteins () to chromatin state prediction (). In many cases one needs to infer the structure of the network to build a BN model. While this problem is NP-hard in general (), it was shown by  that in cases where the acyclicity of the network is ensured, it is possible to find the optimal network in polynomial time.

BNFinder () is a flexible tool for network topology learning from experimental data. Originally developed for inferring gene regulatory networks from expression data (), it has been since successfully applied to linking expression data with sequence motif information (), identifying histone modifications connected to enhancer activity () and to predicting gene expression profiles of tissue-specific genes (). The last study is also an example of using BNFinder not as a standalone tool but as a software library. Thanks to the availability of the source code and documented API it was possible to use BNs as a part of a larger probabilistic model using Expectation-Maximization for parameter optimization.

BNFinder can be also used for classification tasks (). In this case the network topology is constrained to a bipartite graph between feature and class variables. The structure represents conditional dependencies of classes on selected features. This classifier model is equivalent to diagnostic BNs introduced by . The process of classification consists of several steps, carried out with dedicated BNFinder2 modules. First, to train the classifier, the optimal network structure and the conditional probability functions (CPDs) are learned with the basic bnf tool. Second, the bnc module makes predictions on new examples using the learned network and CPDs.

Additionally, the bnf-cv tool facilitates using BNFinder2 in a cross-validation framework by automatically dividing the input dataset into training and testing sets. The performance can be measured either with numerical measures such as specificity or sensitivity or by generating receiver operator characteristic (ROC) or precision-recall plots [using the Rocr package () or a pure python implementation, example plots shown in  and Supplementary Fig. S1]. All these tools, together with other BNFinder2 features, like handling mixed (both continuous and discrete) datasets, make it a complete package for easily generating classifiers for a broad range of biological datasets, as is illustrated by an application to histone modifications measurements ().
An example of a classification problem with three features (A, B, C) and two class variables (X, Y). The true dependency structure is depicted as a graph (top left). Class variables are not predictable from any single feature, but from different pairs of features. Classification of X is possible from features A and B, while classification of Y requires features A and C (scatter plots, top right, green and blue dots represent examples positive with respect to X and Y variables, respectively). Continuous feature variables have different noise/signal ratios (gray histograms, top right), but all of them are accurately described by the fitted Gaussian model (orange and red lines). The exemplary ROC curve for classification of variable X (bottom left)



Although BNFinder always finds optimal networks with respect to a given score, the reliability of learned networks may vary, depending on the input data. Therefore, BNFinder attaches a couple of statistics to returned network features. This includes relative posterior probability for each set of parents and each variable as well as weighted frequency of occurrence in (sub-)optimal regulator sets for each edge.

BNFinder2 is equipped with additional quality control mechanism, allowing the user to predetermine the specificity of optimal network. Namely, the expected proportion of pairs of unrelated variables wrongly connected by an edge may be specified. Based on this proportion and the distribution of scoring function, prior distributions of network structures are adjusted to yield networks with the user-specified error rate (Supplementary Methods and Tutorial).

After the publication of the original BNFinder method, it was shown that the polynomial algorithm introduced by  can also be applied to the Mutual Information Test (MIT), another BN scoring function based on mutual information (). The authors have shown that the MIT score gives more accurate results than the Minimal Description Length (MDL) score, while taking less time than Bayesian Dirichlet equivalence (BDe) score. As this compromise between accuracy and speed is desirable, we decided to adapt BNFinder to include the MIT score. This allows users to find networks with optimal MIT score not only in case of Dynamic BNs as presented by  but also in the case of static BNs with constrained topology. Our current implementation allows users to freely choose from all three scoring functions: MDL, BDe and MIT for static and dynamic BNs. Additionally, we provide a generalized MIT score for continuous variables (Supplementary Methods and Tutorial).

While BNFinder uses an efficient algorithm for BN structure learning, the original implementation was limited to running on a single CPU due to the limitations of the Python interpreter. Since then, multicore CPUs have become a majority and multiprocessing support was introduced into the Python language. BNFinder2 takes advantage of these developments to facilitate using multiple CPU cores for faster computation. As the learning method used in BNFinder performs parent-set optimizations independently for each variable, it can be parallelized efficiently. Supplementary Figure S2 shows that using BNFinder2 one can achieve speed-ups almost linearly scaling with the number of cores available on different hardware platforms.

In summary, BNFinder2 represents a significant improvement over the original method in several aspects. From the user perspective, it allows for using BNFinder2 in classification setting with automated cross-validation, accuracy scoring and ROC plotting. Methodologically, it also provides a more comprehensive method for inferring networks with predefined error rate and introduces the possibility of calculating the optimal networks under the MIT score adapted to handle continuous variables as well as discrete ones. Last but not least, BNFinder2 can use parallelization on muliplecore machines to greatly improve the running times of BN learning, especially in case of the BDe score.

Funding: Polish Ministry of Science and Higher Education grant [N N301 065236 to B.W. and N.D.] and Foundation for Polish Science within Homing Plus programme co-financed by the European Union—European Regional Development Fund [to A.P. and P.B.].

Conflict of Interest: none declared.

Supplementary Material
Supplementary Data
