1 INTRODUCTION
Technologies underpinning the life sciences are constantly evolving () and, at the same time, are spurring development of new methods for data analysis and interpretation (; ; ). Researchers—students and professionals alike—therefore constantly need to acquire new skills to keep abreast of the latest developments (; , ; ). Attempting to address this need, the Global Organisation for Bioinformatics Learning, Education and Training (GOBLET) has established a training portal, spanning the fields of bioinformatics, biocuration, biocomputing and computational biology. The portal provides a freely available collection of materials and courses, and a catalogue of trainers, classified by tags. The tags make it easy to find and share materials and to identify trainers with appropriate expertise. The portal inherits much of the functionality of the prototype BTN website (), extending its features to accommodate the diverse needs of global communities of life scientists: enhancements include (i) the addition of features such as the definition of fields for describing materials, to make them more discoverable, and (ii) the possibility to add course pages, linked to their associated materials, so that the portal is both a repository and a record of what is to be, and what was, taught at a given time, rather than just a bag of disconnected contents.

2 THE TRAINING PORTAL
The portal, built using the Drupal content management system, embodies three main entities: members, materials and courses. Members may be individuals representing their own interests, or they may represent particular organizations or groups (national and/or international networks and societies, research institutes, foundations, academic groups and so on).

Materials are available under a CC BY-SA 3.0 licence for download and use, but materials and courses may currently be uploaded only by registered members and/or by GOBLET-affiliated trainers—i.e. upload to the site requires registration with the GOBLET Foundation (this helps to minimize spurious entries and maintain quality standards). Materials may be presentations, tutorials, datasets, case studies, curricula, etc.; courses may be workshops, summer schools or road shows, and may be linked to their respective materials once uploaded to the repository. All contents are tagged: tags allow classification or filtering of entities by keyword, making them easy to find—the main content filters are currently ‘audience’ and ‘topic’.  shows a filtered view of courses and materials using audience tag ‘beginner bioinformatician’. Audience tags are particularly valuable because they pinpoint the level to which specific materials are geared. In addition to filtering, a star-rating scheme can be used to rank-order search results. The portal also provides a catalogue of trainers, with information describing their fields of expertise, and lists of their training materials and courses. This registry of trainers and their learning resources may prove useful for course or event organizers, wishing to identify trainers with particular skill sets, and for students and learners looking to acquire particular skills or techniques (here, the rating system may help to guide their choice of materials). To date, 83 training materials and courses have been uploaded to the portal, which also contain profile information on 66 registered trainers and course organizers; it currently receives ∼500+ hits per day.
Filtering courses and materials using the audience tag ‘beginner bioinformatician’ retrieves 11 results. On the right-hand side, all available tags are shown, with font sizes reflecting the relevance of the matched courses and materials



To augment its functionality, the portal is seamlessly integrated with the iAnn platform (), a distribution system for generic bioinformatics events around the world. Several future enhancements are planned: among these, we are devising an ontology to standardize the portal’s content tags. In developing this ontology, we are collaborating with initiatives like ELIXIR-UK to allow course providers to share information in a standard manner, facilitating the distribution of this information through third-party federated resources.

Overall, the portal offers an established, supported and sustainable infrastructure for individuals, groups, organizations, projects, etc., that are routinely producing training materials and courses, but have no framework for organizing or storing their content: e.g. the AllBio consortium recently saw the advantage of exploiting the portal, rather than creating yet another training resource that would be unsupported when project funds cease.

3 CONCLUSIONS
The GOBLET training portal is a pioneering global initiative to federate information relevant to bioinformatics, biocomputing, biocuration and computational biology trainers, courses and materials. The contents are free to download, and are catalogued according to topic and audience to enhance their discoverability. The portal is an evolving resource, whose functionality and utility will grow in harmony with the evolving needs of the global life science research communities it serves, and synergistically with bioinformatics training initiatives around the world.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of GOBLET’s member organizations.

Fudning: We are grateful to BBSRC strategic core funding from The Genome Analysis Centre (TGAC) for funding this Open Access article. We also thank European Framework 7 project AllBio (KBBE.2011.3.6-02) for supporting the portal.

Conflict of interest: none declared.

