1 INTRODUCTION
One major challenge in the analysis of high-throughput RNA sequencing data is to
disentangle relative abundances of alternatively spliced transcripts. Many existing
quantification methods do so by using considerations of likelihood, parsimony and optimality
to obtain a consolidated view of cDNA fragments that map to a given transcriptional unit
(; ; ). The
advantage of such integrative approaches is that they provide robust estimators for
transcript abundance by reducing sampling errors, as they effectively consider samples of
larger size. In contrast, because all the reads from the same transcriptional unit are
combined into one master model, there is no guarantee that the inclusion or exclusion of a
specific exon is estimated independently of co-occurring splicing events (; ).

The quantification of alternatively spliced isoforms based on the
 metric captures more accurately the local
information related to splicing of each particular exon (). We follow  in
considering only the reads that align to splice junctions () and ignoring the reads that align to exon bodies
(position-specific read counts are not considered).  is
defined as  where
the factor of two in the denominator accounts for the fact that there are twice as many
mappable positions for reads supporting exon inclusion as exon exclusion.  defines an unbiased estimator
for the fraction of mRNAs that represent the inclusion isoform under the assumption that
splice-junction reads are distributed evenly.  can
also be derived from the expression values of whole isoforms, for instance, as the abundance
of the inclusion isoform as the fraction of the total abundance. However, the non-uniform
read coverage not only between but also within transcripts makes such estimates generally
detrimental (). The percent-spliced-in
(PSI, ) metric is defined as the number of reads
supporting exon inclusion () as the fraction of the combined number of reads supporting
inclusion and exclusion (). The exon of interest is shown in gray. Only reads that span to
the adjacent exons (solid arcs) account for 



The  metric can be generalized beyond the class of
single-exon–skipping events by counting inclusion and exclusion reads regardless of
exon adjacency (, dashed arcs). Although
this definition helps to reduce the undercoverage bias by taking into account splice
junctions that are not present in the reference annotation, it often assigns misleading
values to  metric, for instance, in the case of
multiple-exon skipping, where the amount of support for exon exclusion does not reflect the
true splicing rate of each individual intron.

2 APPROACH
In this work, we change the view from exon centric to intron centric. Each intron is
defined uniquely by the combination of its 5′-splice site
(, donor) and 3′-splice site
(, acceptor). Denote by
 the number of reads aligning to the splice
junction spanning from  to
 () and define  where
 and  run
over all donor and acceptor sites, respectively, within the given genomic annotation set.
Because  could be  and
 could be ,
both  and  are
real numbers from  to .
The value of  can be regarded as an estimator for the
conditional probability of splicing from  to
, i.e. the fraction of transcripts in which the
intron  to  is
spliced, relative to the number of transcripts in which  is
used as a splice site. Similarly,  is
the relative frequency of -to-
splicing with respect to the splicing events in which  is
used. Left: the 5′-splicing
index, , is the number of reads supporting the
splicing event from  to  relative to the combined number of reads supporting splicing
from  to any acceptor site
. Right: the 3′-splicing index,
, is the number of reads supporting the
splicing event from  to  relative to the combined number of reads supporting splicing
from any donor site  to . The intron of interest is drawn thick



In the particular case of single-exon skipping (), the values of ,
 and  are
related as follows. Denote the upstream and downstream introns of the highlighted exon by
 and ,
respectively. Let  and .
Then, ,  and
, where  and
. Assuming uniform read coverage across the
gene (), we get 
and, therefore,  That
is, in the particular case of single-exon skipping, the value of
 is equal to the average of
 and 
given that the read coverage is reasonably uniform. If a and
 differ significantly, the contribution of
 and  to
 is given by the weight factors
 and .

Similarly, the completeness of splicing index () is split into two indices,
 and ,
where  and
 denotes the number of genomic reads (reads
mapped uniquely to the genomic sequence) overlapping the splice site
. Note that 
depends only on  and 
depends only on . The values of  and
 are unbiased estimators for the absolute
frequency of splice site usage, i.e. the proportion of transcripts in which
 (or ) is
used as a splice site, among all transcripts containing the splice site
 (or ).

3 METHODS
To compute , ,
 and  for
a given donor–acceptor pair, one needs to know five integers,
, ,
,  and
, of which only the first one depends on both
 and ,
while the rest have a single argument. We developed bam2ssj, a
pipeline for counting these five integers directly from BAM input.
bam2ssj is implemented in C and
depends on SAMtools (). The input consists of (i) a sorted BAM file containing reads that align
uniquely to the genome or to splice junctions and (ii) a sorted GTF file containing the
coordinates of exon boundaries. Each time the CIGAR string () contains
MNM,
, the counter corresponding to the splice
junction defined by N
is incremented. One mapped read may span several splice junctions and increment several
counters. If the CIGAR string does not contain the MNM
pattern, the read is classified as genomic and increments 
for every splice site  it
overlaps. Position-specific counts () are implemented as a stand-alone utility that is
not included in the current distribution. Importantly, bam2ssj counts
reads that align to splice junctions in a strand-specific way, i.e.
, ,
, 
and  are reported for the correct (annotated) and
incorrect (opposite to annotated) strand. We leave further processing of these counts by
 to the user.

4 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
We validated bam2ssj by counting reads aligning to splice junctions
in the whole-cell polyadenylated fraction of Cold Spring Harbor Long RNA-seq data (http://genome.ucsc.edu/ENCODE/). In
total, 8 558 231 343 mapped reads were analyzed in 404 min (350
000 reads/sec). 1 184 553 724 reads align to splice junctions, of which
1% align to the opposite strand. 1 699
718 327 reads overlap annotated splice junctions, of which 5% map to the opposite strand. The values of
 coincide with those reported by ENCODE in
98.9% of cases (1 163 251 008 reads); all discrepancies were due to the ambiguity of
CIGAR translation in the mapper’s output. Because RNA-seq data are increasingly
processed into the compact BAM form, we propose that bam2ssj be used
as a standard operating procedure for counting splice junction reads.

Funding: Grants BIO2011-26205 and
CSD2007-00050
Consolider, Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia
(Spain).

Conflict of Interest: none declared.

