1 INTRODUCTION
Liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC–MS) is a technique that combines
the physical separation capabilities of liquid chromatography with the highly sensitive mass
detection properties of mass spectrometry. Metabolomics studies use LC–MS for the
global detection and relative quantification of metabolites in complex biological samples.
Recently, LC–MS has been applied to trace the metabolism of stable isotope-labelled
metabolic precursors in biological systems as a function of time (Supplementary Fig. S1) (; ). Such experiments can provide unique insights into
the dynamics of metabolic fluxes, beyond the steady-state information gathered by routine
metabolomics.

Stable isotope-labelled metabolites possess the same chromatographic properties as their
unlabelled counterparts and can be readily identified from the MS dataset based on their
expected mass (). However, a key challenge
that metabolomics researchers face is the limited number of suitable bioinformatic solutions
for metabolome-wide isotope-labelled data analyses. Multiple MS data analysis tools are
available (),
including widely used open source software such as mzMine (mzmine.sourceforge.net), mzMatch
(mzmatch.sourceforge.net) and XCMS (metlin.scripps.edu), and commercial software such as
SIEVE (www.thermo.com), MassHunter (www.chem.agilent.com) and MarkerLynx
(www.waters.com). Although they are all capable of
identifying and quantifying metabolites of interest in unlabelled data, features that enable
the extraction and relative quantification of isotope peaks from labelled data either
require manual intervention or are non-existent. Furthermore, software that can handle
labelled MS data, such as MetExtract () and MAVEN (), lacks appropriate peak-picking algorithms
in the processing pipeline. Here, we present a novel and unique tool, mzMatch–ISO,
that circumvents these bottlenecks by performing fully automated targeted or untargeted
annotation and relative quantification of mono-isotopic and corresponding isotope-labelled
peaks of metabolites in stable isotope-labelled LC–MS data to generate plots and
tables that describe the labelling pattern in detail. A representative example of an unlabelled peak (first peak) and
its corresponding 13C-labelled peaks. These peaks elute at the same
retention time, but their masses differ by the difference in the mass of heavy and
light carbon. Filled circles show the number of labelled carbons that each peak
represent



The ability to generate a comprehensive graphical visualization of the output along with
the extensible and scriptable nature of the software itself makes mzMatch–ISO a unique
data analysis tool for isotope-labelling studies. mzMatch–ISO is an extension to
mzMatch, an open-source Java toolbox for MS data processing and visualization (). Features
of mzMatch—enabled by the R package mzMatch.R—including the new PeakML data
exchange format and the data analysis pipeline were described by . mzMatch has been applied
to many metabolomics data analyses (; ) and is the underlying platform for
software such as IDEOM (). Currently, only LC–MS data analysis is supported by mzMatch–ISO;
however, it is possible to process gas chromatography–mass spectrometry data analyses
using mzmatch.R and mzmatch–ISO with some additional scripting.

2 METHODS
Isotope profiling using mzMatch–ISO requires the LC–MS raw data (.mzXML) files
to be preprocessed by extracting the peaks using XCMS () and aligning, noise filtering
and gap-filling peaks into a combined PeakML file containing all samples using mzMatch.R. In
addition to the PeakML file, targeted profiling requires an additional tab-delimited input
text file containing the list of compounds of interest (see Supplementary Fig. S2). This list can also contain characteristic adducts or
fragments of metabolites of interest where appropriate. Automated targeted and untargeted
isotope profiling can be performed using the mzMatch–ISO functions
PeakML.Isotope.TargettedIsotopes() and PeakML.Isotope.UntargettedIsotopes(), respectively.
The latter can be used for profiling global label distribution by looking for the isotopes
of all identified peaks in a PeakML file; or all compounds in databases such as the Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) () or the Human Metabolome Database (HMDB) (); or using
common metabolic transformations recursively, as described in , ,  and . All parameters used in these functions are
described at http://mzmatch.sourceforge.net/isotopes-targetted.php.

For both targeted and untargeted analysis, mzMatch–ISO generates two outputs—a
PDF file and a tab-delimited file. The former contains one page per metabolite with various
plots that describe the pattern of labelling observed (). The page header shows compound information from the target list or the
database used for identification, and the ionisation polarity (a). In cases where more than one peakset is present within a
given mass window, each peakset is plotted on a separate page of the PDF file (b); usually the correct peakset can be
identified by considering the retention time and intensity profile. Representative example of the output PDF file
generated by mzMatch–ISO (see text for details)



Chromatograms of each unlabelled peak and its corresponding labelled isotopomers for each
sample in each condition are shown (c),
the peak area/height being stored in the accompanying tab-delimited file. The intensity and
shape of the chromatograms helps to assess the effect of noisy or incomplete peaks on the
reported pattern of labelling. Furthermore, these chromatograms can be used along with the
plot in d, showing the normalized peak
area/height of each mono-isotopic peak and its isotopomers in each replicate, to make
informed decisions on outliers by assessing the variability in labelling between replicates.
The overall trend in the labelling pattern of a metabolite, as observed between various
conditions involved in the study, is also visualized (e). This plot is especially useful in time–series analyses to rapidly
observe the dynamics of relative concentration changes. The final plot (f) not only highlights the labelling trend of an isotopomer
of choice, but, in the case of one-carbon labelling studies, it also compares observed
signals with the theoretical intensity expected based on the natural abundance of the
relevant isotope. This plot is of extreme importance in studies where natural abundance has
to be distinguished from low levels of labelling.

3 RESULTS
The automated untargeted isotope annotation and relative quantification capabilities of
mzMatch–ISO are demonstrated by the analysis of LC–MS data from procylic form
Trypanosoma brucei grown on ∼50% uniformly
13C-labelled glucose medium for 5 days. The plot in Supplementary Figure S3 generated from the tab-delimited output file (data are
provided in Supplementary file S4, and the scripts are available on the website)
highlights the capabilities of mzMatch–ISO in demonstrating a complex biological
phenomenon.

mzMatch–ISO provides an efficient and user-friendly output for the analysis and
compact visualization of isotope-labelled metabolomics datasets without the need for
specialist bioinformatics skills, allowing rapid, precise and meaningful biological
interpretation. The algorithm can be implemented directly in R, or from the IDEOM graphical
user interface, to facilitate follow-up statistical processing, analyses and re-plotting of
the results.

Funding: A.C. was funded by a Scottish Universities Life
Sciences Alliance (SULSA) grant to R.B. Funding for A.J. was provided by a
Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research NWO-Vidi
grant to R.B. D.J.C. was supported by an Australian National Health and
Medical Research Council postdoctoral training fellowship. F.A. was
supported by SysMO, NWO-Vidi and SULSA. M.P.B. was supported by the Wellcome Trust through
The Wellcome Trust Centre for Molecular Parasitology, which
is supported by core funding from the Wellcome Trust
[085349].

Conflict of Interest: none declared.

Supplementary Material
Supplementary Data
