Introduction
Involuntary re-experiencing is a hallmark symptom of posttraumatic stress disorder (e.g.
        Horowitz, ). Involuntary trauma memories are
        easily triggered by a wide range of stimuli (e.g. Ehlers, Hackmann and Michael, ; Foa and Rothbaum, ) and usually take the form of relatively brief sensory impressions
        such as images, sounds, tastes or smells (e.g. Ehlers et al., ), which are accompanied by the original emotions that the
        individual experienced at the time of the event (Foa and Rothbaum, ; Ehlers and Clark, ).
        Patients with PTSD usually have a small number of intrusive memories that can keep
        re-occurring in the same form for years (Hackmann, Ehlers, Speckens and Clark, ). These correspond closely to the most distressing
        moments of the trauma (Holmes, Grey and Young, ). There is a debate in the literature about whether and in what way intrusive
        memories in PTSD are different from other involuntary memories in everyday life. Some
        studies emphasize similarities (e.g. Kvavilashvili and Mandler, ; Ball and Little, ),
        while others emphasize differences (e.g. Peace and Porter, ; Berntsen, Willert and Rubin, ;
        Megias, Ryan, Vaquero and Frese, ).
        Nevertheless, the persistence and frequency of intrusive memories in PTSD needs explanation.

Theories of unwanted trauma memories
Why do people with PTSD keep experiencing unwanted distressing memories of the trauma?
          Theories of PTSD concur that such intrusive memories are due to the way trauma memories
          are encoded, organized in memory, and retrieved. Several theorists suggest that
          compromised cognitive processing during the trauma leads to certain deficits in
            the autobiographical memory for the event that facilitate retrieval of trauma
          memories to a wide range of stimuli. Several different hypotheses about the nature of this
          deficit have been suggested in the literature. Early theories highlighted a deficit in
          memory representations that facilitate intentional recall (Brewin, Dalgleish and Joseph,
            ) or highly fragmented memories (Foa and
          Rothbaum, ; Herman, ; van der Kolk and Fisler, ).

Empirical tests of these hypotheses in clinical populations are sparse. The fragmentation
          hypothesis has received some, albeit not always consistent, support (for reviews see
          McNally, ; Ehlers et al., ). There is evidence that trauma survivors with
          PTSD give more disorganized narratives of traumatic events than those without PTSD (e.g.
          Jones, Harvey and Brewin, ; Harvey and
          Bryant, ; Halligan et al., ). Ehlers et al. () further suggested that the proposed deficits may not apply
          equally to the whole traumatic event (see also Hellawell and Brewin, ). As only some moments of the traumatic event are later
          re-experienced, the proposed deficits may mainly apply to the memory of these moments.
          Evans, Ehlers, Mezey and Clark () indeed
          found that trauma narratives around the time of the intrusive memories were more
          disorganized than other segments of the trauma narrative.

“Nowness” and lack of context as important features of intrusive
          trauma memories
Recent cognitive theories of PTSD build on clinical observations and empirical data
          showing that survivors with and without PTSD do not only differ in the frequency of
          unwanted trauma memories, but also in their characteristics. Two aspects of intrusive
          memories in PTSD are particularly interesting from a theoretical point of view. First,
          trauma survivors with PTSD describe to a greater extent that intrusive memories appear to
          happen in the “here and now” than those without PTSD (Ehlers and
          Clark, ). This sense of
          “nowness” is more predictive of subsequent PTSD than the frequency of
          intrusive memories (Michael, Ehlers, Halligan and Clark, ). Second, Ehlers and Clark ()
          and Ehlers et al. () observed that intrusive
          memories appear disjointed from other relevant autobiographical
          information. They describe cases of patients with PTSD who (1) kept re-experiencing an
          intrusive memory of an earlier part of the trauma as well as another intrusive memory from
          another part of the trauma that contradicted the individual's impressions during the first
          memory; and (2) kept re-experiencing moments of the trauma and the corresponding emotions
          although they knew the predicted horrific outcome did not occur (e.g. they were still
          living with their children although they expected during the trauma never to see them
          again). Thus, during retrieval of the intrusive memories, the patients had difficulties
          retrieving subsequent information that corrected their original impressions and
          predictions during these moments. This relative lack of contextual information
          distinguished between the intrusive memories of trauma survivors with and without PTSD and
          predicted subsequent PTSD (Michael et al., ).

Poor integration into the autobiographical memory base as an explanation for
          intrusive memories
On the basis of these observations, Ehlers and Clark () suggested that one of the factors leading to intrusive memories in PTSD is
          that the worst moments of the trauma memory are poorly elaborated and inadequately linked
          with their context of relevant subsequent and preceding information and other
          autobiographical memories. This suggestion builds on Conway and Pleydell-Pearce's () model of autobiographical memory. Conway and
          Pleydell-Pearce proposed that autobiographical memories are transitory dynamic mental
          constructions, which are retrieved from an “autobiographical memory
          base”, where each specific memory is stored as part of a general event, which in
          turn is part of a lifetime period. One of the functions of the incorporation of memories
          into the autobiographical memory base is thought to be the inhibition of cue-driven
          unintentional memory retrieval. Poor incorporation of trauma memories would have the
          consequence that unintentional memories can be easily triggered by matching cues, and are
          experienced without a context of other information, which would give them a sense of
          “nowness”. There are several reasons for why such poor incorporation
          could occur. Ehlers and Clark () and Ehlers
          et al. () highlight the role of cognitive
          processing during the trauma, in particular data-driven processing (i.e. predominant
          processing of sensory information), dissociation and lack of binding. Conway and
          Pleydell-Pearce () suggest that during a
          traumatic experience there are no current goals and plans that may mediate integration of
          the experience, resulting in an event-specific memory representation with no
          contextualizing abstract autobiographical knowledge.

Aims of the present study
To our knowledge, no study to date has experimentally tested the hypothesis that trauma
          memories are poorly integrated with other autobiographical information. The present study
          aimed to provide such an experimental test in a sample of assault survivors. Script-driven
          imagery was used to induce memories of (a) the traumatic event and (b) an unrelated
          negative event that happened at about the same time. We used the speed with which
          participants could retrieve other autobiographical information during the imagery as an
          indirect measure of the degree of integration of a memory within the autobiographical
          memory base. If the worst moments of trauma memories are poorly integrated into the
          autobiographical memory base, this would delay the speed with which other autobiographical
          information is retrieved. We expected that participants with PTSD would take longer to
          retrieve non-trauma autobiographical information while imagining the worst moment of their
          assault (“hot spot”, Foa and Rothbaum, , Ehlers and Clark, )), when compared to (a) participants without PTSD (between-subject) and (b)
          imagining the worst moment of another negative event (within-subject). In addition, we
          expected that the delay in retrieval during trauma hot spots would be correlated with
          re-experiencing, in particular with the “nowness” of intrusive
          memories, and with cognitive processing styles that are thought to lead to poor
          integration of trauma memories (dissociation, data-driven processing, and lack of binding;
          Brewin et al., ; Ehlers and Clark, ; Ehlers et al., ).

Method
Participants
Assault survivors who had been assaulted more than 3 months ago were recruited from the
          Accident and Emergency Department of an urban teaching hospital in South London via
          invitation letter (n = 56), as well as through flyers at local news
          agents (n = 29). Of 85 assault survivors who attended the research
          session, 74 completed the experimental task described in this paper. Twenty-five of these (34%) met diagnostic criteria for PTSD according to the
          Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV (SCID, First, Spitzer, Gibbon and Williams, ). The assaults were mainly physical attacks
          (96%), and a minority (4%) were sexual assaults.  compares the demographic and clinical characteristics of PTSD and no-PTSD groups.
          The PTSD group were less likely to be Caucasian, less likely to be working, and had lower
          incomes than the no-PTSD group. As expected, the PTSD group reported more severe symptoms
          of PTSD and depression. The groups did not differ in objective assault severity, as
          measured by a composite score described below (Dunmore, Clark and Ehlers, ). Participant characteristics

Notes:
                  1combined household income; 2equivalent to 11 years of
                  education; 3equivalent to 13 years of education; 4composite
                  score scale: 0–8.



Experimental task
Generation of imagery scripts
Imagery scripts for the assault and a non-traumatic negative event that had happened at
            approximately the same time as the assault were generated following the procedure
            described by Blanchard, Hickling, Taylor, Loos and Gerardi () and Blanchard et al. (). Participants gave a detailed account of their assault. To facilitate the
            identification of a suitable negative event, participants were given a list of negative
            events (e.g. failing a test, burglary, argument with friends) and asked to choose which
            one applied to them. They then gave a detailed account of this event. Next, participants
            indicated which items from a list of bodily and emotional responses (e.g.
            “heart racing”, “breathing heavily”) applied to
            them during the assault and the negative event, respectively. They also specified the
            worst moment of the assault and the negative event, respectively (hot spot). From the
            participants' descriptions and their reported bodily reactions, imagery scripts were
            constructed and audio taped (see also Pitman, Orr and Steketee, ). These described the events in the second person and in the
            present tense (e.g. “You are going down the street when you hear footsteps
            behind you . . .”). Scripts were tape-recorded in a neutral
            tone of voice. The tapes were timed to last approximately 2 minutes, and included up to
            five of the bodily responses. All scripts were timed as precisely as possible to reach
            the worst moment of the assault/negative event after one minute.

Autobiographical memory retrieval during script-driven imagery
The experimental task tested the time it took participants to answer questions from the
            Autobiographical Memory Inventory (AMI; Kopelman, Wilson and Baddeley, ) while imagining the assault and the other
            negative event described in the scripts. Before the task, participants were instructed
            to listen carefully to the tapes with their eyes closed, and to imagine the event as
            vividly as possible, as if they were actually participating in it. The experimenter
            explained that each tape would be interrupted twice to answer some questions, and asked
            participants to answer the questions as quickly as possible. Before listening to the
            tapes, participants answered two baseline questions from the AMI (“Where did
            you spend last Christmas?” and “When you were a child, where did you
            live before you went to primary school?”)

The two imagery tapes were then played in counterbalanced order. Each tape was stopped
            at the worst moment of the assault/negative event at approximately 1 minute, and at the
            end of the script. At both time points, participants answered questions about
            autobiographical information from the AMI, such as the place where they spent their last
            birthday or the name of a teacher. Half of the questions asked about recent memories
            (e.g. questions about their last birthday or holiday), the other half asked about past
            memories (e.g. the name of the street where participants grew up, or the name of their
            primary school). The same questions were used for each participant. Questions were
            determined randomly for the trauma and negative event tapes, with the restriction that
            one past and one recent question was asked during each tape condition. Participants'
            answers were tape-recorded and memories were later transcribed. The latency to retrieve
            the (first) answer for each question was measured using a stopwatch. When an answer was
            inappropriate (e.g. no autobiographical memory, or response did not answer the specific
            question), and participants had been prompted during the task, latencies to subsequent
            responses to cues were accumulated.

Manipulation checks
Participants rated tape imageability (how much of the tape's description they could
            picture in their own mind) on a scale from 0 to 100%. For each tape, they also rated the
            perceived vividness of imagery, the degree to which they felt that the event was
            happening again, and whether there was something disturbing about the voice on the tape
            (on scales from 0 to 10). In addition, participants rated the intensity with which they
            experienced negative emotions (7 items, anxious, angry, sad, furious, hopeless, ashamed,
            guilty; α = .89 for the assault tape, α = .87 for the negative event
            tape) and dissociation (3 items, detached, numb, unreal, α = .80 assault tape,
            α = .85 negative event tape) while listening to each of the scripts, each on a
            scale from 0 to 10, where 0 = not at all, 10 = very much.

Demographic and assault characteristics
Sociodemographic information
A semistructured interview adapted from Halligan et al. () was used to obtain demographic information, and a
            comprehensive assessment of assault characteristics.

Objective assault severity
Objective assault severity was scored as a composite score from the following severity
            indices: number of assailants, assault duration, injury severity, and weapon usage
            (Dunmore et al., ).

Clinical symptoms and processing measures
PTSD diagnosis and clinical symptoms
The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV (SCID, First et al., ) was conducted by two trained masters/doctoral level
            psychologists to determine whether participants met diagnostic criteria for PTSD.
            Interrater reliability was high, κ = .82 (based on 56 interviews, 2 raters).
            PTSD symptom severity was assessed using the Posttraumatic Diagnostic Scale
              (PDS; Foa, Cashman, Jaycox and Perry, ), a validated and widely used self-report measure of PTSD
            symptom severity. The Beck Depression Inventory (BDI; Beck, Rush, Shaw and Emery, ), a standardized questionnaire of established
            reliability and validity, assessed the severity of depressive symptoms.

Nowness of intrusive memories
Participants were asked to describe their most frequent intrusion of the assault and
            rate its “nowness” (the extent to which it feels as if it was
            happening now instead of being something from the past; Hackmann et al., ) on a scale from 0 (not at all) to 100 (very
            much). The retest-reliability (1-week interval) in a sample of 44 PTSD patients was
              r = .68 (Speckens, Ehlers, Hackmann and Clark, ).

Cognitive processing during the assault
Three scales measured the extent to which participants processed the assault in a way
          that is thought to lead to disjointed memories (Brewin et al., , Ehlers and Clark, ;
          Ehlers et al., ). Participants rated how much
          each statement applied to them during the assault until help arrived, each on a scale from
          0 (not at all) to 4 (very strongly).

The Data-driven Processing Scale (Halligan et al., ) is an 8-item scale that assesses the extent to which
          participants primarily engaged in the processing of sensory as opposed to meaning
          information during the assault (data-driven processing, e.g. “It was just like a
          stream of unconnected impressions following each other”). The scale has been
          demonstrated to predict the development of analogue PTSD symptoms and disorganized
          narratives following exposure to a distressing videotape (Halligan, Clark and Ehlers,
            ), and to prospectively predict PTSD
          symptoms in trauma survivors (Halligan et al., ; Rosario, Ehlers, Williams and Glucksman, in preparation). The internal
          consistency was α = .85 in this sample.

The State Dissociation Questionnaire (SDQ; Murray, Ehlers and Mayou,
            , α = .88) is a
          9-item scale assessing different aspects of dissociation such as derealization,
          depersonalization, detachment, altered time sense, emotional numbing, and reduction of
          awareness in surroundings. The SDQ showed good reliability and validity in traumatized and
          nontraumatized samples (Halligan et al., ,
            ; Murray et al., ). It correlates strongly with the Peritraumatic Dissociation
          Scale (Marmar, Weiss and Meltzer, );
            r = .79 (Rosario et al., in preparation). The internal consistency was
          α = .92 in this sample.

The Lack of Binding Scale is a 5-item exploratory scale developed for
          the purposes of the study. It measures the extent to which the participants processed
          their different experiences during the assault as unconnected events (e.g. “I
          felt like nothing linked all that was happening together”; “Every
          moment seemed unconnected to others”). The internal consistency was α =
          .88 in this sample.

Procedure
The study was approved by the local ethics committees. Assault survivors were contacted
          by letter and telephone. The nature of the study was described on the telephone and in an
          information sheet. If interested, participants were invited to attend the research
          session. In the research session, participants gave written consent after remaining
          questions had been answered. They then filled in the questionnaires (including a number of
          questionnaires unrelated to the present study). Participants gave descriptions of their
          assault and the negative event, and completed the script-driven imagery task. The
          Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV followed. Participants were reimbursed with
          £25 for their time and travel expenses.

Data analysis
The Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS 13.0) was used for all analyses. A
          series of analyses of variance compared retrieval times for answers to AMI questions
          between the PTSD and no-PTSD groups (factor group). Seven of the participants had to be
          excluded from the data analysis of the memory task because they did not fully comply with
          task instructions (n = 4), or retrieval latencies deviated more than two
          standard deviations from the mean (n = 3). Excluded participants
            (n = 7) did not differ significantly in key demographic variables from
          those that were included (all p's &gt; .167), but reported greater
          PTSD symptom severity, F(1,71) = 5.88, p = .018. Thus,
          the final sample comprised 66 participants. A one-way ANOVA compared retrieval times for
          baseline questions. The main analysis was a repeated measures ANOVA for the imagery hot
          spots, with group (PTSD vs. no-PTSD) as the between-subject factor and imagery script
          (assault, negative event) as the within-subject factor. A similar analysis was conducted
          for retrieval latencies at the end of the tapes, and for the manipulation check variables.
          To check whether order of imagery scripts influenced the results, a further ANOVA included
          order of tapes as an additional between-subject factor. For correlational analyses, a
          difference score was computed by subtracting retrieval times during the negative event hot
          spot from the respective retrieval time during the assault hot spot. Pearson correlations
          were calculated as variables were normally distributed. Alpha was set at .05.

Results
Manipulation checks
On average, participants retrieved autobiographical information in response to baseline
          AMI questions in 3.48 s (SD = 2.28 s), which is comparable to other
          studies of autobiographical memory retrieval (e.g. Conway, ).  shows the
          manipulation check variables. There were no main effects or interactions in measures of
          how well participants could imagine the events, namely the ratings of imageability,
          vividness, nowness, and voice characteristics. The PTSD group rated more negative emotions
          for both imagery scripts than the no-PTSD group, F(1, 67) = 33.62,
            p &lt; .001, and greater dissociation, F(1, 67) =
          18.45, p &lt; .001. For dissociation, but not for negative emotions,
          there was also a main effect of script, F(1, 67) = 16.09,
          p &lt; .001. Trauma scripts led to greater dissociative symptoms in
          both groups. There were no significant group x script interactions for the emotion and
          imagery emotionality ratings. There were no main effects or interactions for time since
          the events. Results of the script-driven imagery task. Means (standard deviations) for
                autobiographical memory retrieval latencies and manipulation checks for assault and
                negative event scripts

Note: Ranges: Script imageability: 0 to 100%; Voice
                  characteristics: 0 (not disturbing) to 10 (very much disturbing); Vividness and
                  nowness during imagery, emotions during tape: 0 (not at all) to 10 (very much);
                    ηp2 effect size.



Retrieval of autobiographical information before and after the tapes
Participants with and without PTSD did not differ in the latency of retrieval of
          autobiographical memories at baseline, MPTSD = 3.51,
            SD = 2.96; MNo-PTSD = 3.48,
          SD = 2.08; F(1,62) = .01. p = .962.

Similarly, an ANOVA for retrieval latencies at the end of both tapes yielded no
          significant main effects for script, F(1, 60) = 1.54, p
          = .22, or group, F(1, 60) = .71, p = .79, and no
          significant interaction, F(1, 60) = .46, p = .50.
          Participants with and without PTSD thus did not differ in the retrieval latencies measured
          at the end of both imagery tapes.

Autobiographical memory retrieval during hot spots
The results for latency of autobiographical memory retrieval during the hot spots in the
          script-driven imagery task are shown in 
          and . The ANOVA showed a significant script
          x group interaction, F(1, 64) = 5.87, p = .018, and no
          main effects of group, F(1, 64) = .31, p = .578, and
          script, F(1, 64) = 1.30, p =.258. Participants with PTSD
          took significantly longer to retrieve autobiographical information during the assault hot
          spot than those without PTSD, F(1, 65) = 4.04, p = .049,
          but not during the worst moment of the negative event script, F(1, 65) =
          1.79, p = .181, with means pointing in the opposite direction. Estimated
          marginal means tests revealed that the difference between the two scripts was significant
          for the PTSD group (p = .043), but not for the no-PTSD group
          (p = .338) (). Order of
          imagery scripts did not have an effect on retrieval times and did not interact with the
          other factors. Mean latencies (in seconds) to retrieve autobiographical information during hot
                spots of trauma and negative event scripts for assault survivors with and without
                PTSD. Significant differences are indicated. All other differences were
                nonsignificant.



Correlations with impaired memory retrieval
Impaired accessibility of autobiographical information as measured by the difference
          between retrieval latencies for assault and negative event hot spots correlated, as
          expected, with cognitive processing during the event, namely data-driven processing,
            r = .35, p = .004, lack of binding, r
          = .30, p = .014, and dissociation, r = .29,
          p = .019. It also correlated, as expected, with the perceived nowness of
          intrusive memories, r = .35, p = .035; and with
          reexperiencing symptoms as measured by the PDS, r = .40,
          p = .001.

Further analyses explored whether the difference in retrieval latencies between trauma
          and negative event script was related to any of the demographic variables that had shown
          group differences (ethnicity, socioeconomic status, employment). There were no significant
          associations (all p values greater than .304).

Discussion
The experiment used an autobiographical memory retrieval task during script-driven imagery
        to investigate the hypothesis that the worst moments of trauma memories in PTSD are
        disjointed from other autobiographical material. As expected, participants with PTSD took
        longer to retrieve other autobiographical memories while imagining the worst moment of their
        assault than participants without PTSD, while no such group difference was found while
        participants imagined the worst moment of another negative event that had happened at a
        similar time. Retrieval time differences were unrelated to objective assault severity,
        indicating that it is not just the complexity of the event contributing to longer retrieval
        latencies. The group differences could not be attributed to general problems in
        autobiographical memory retrieval, as the PTSD group showed similar retrieval latencies as
        the no-PTSD group before and after the imagery tasks. This makes it unlikely that a general
        deficit in attentional resources was responsible for the findings (Kangas, Henry and Bryant,
          ), although we cannot completely rule out a
        possible transitory attentional deficit in participants with PTSD during the hotspot. The
        results could also not be attributed to greater emotional arousal, as there was no group x
        script interaction in negative emotions during scripts.

In line with our expectations, the PTSD group took longer to retrieve autobiographical
        memories during trauma hot spots than during negative event hot spots. This finding
        parallels Ehlers et al.'s () clinical
        observation that the worst moments of the trauma appear disjointed from subsequent
        information that updates the impressions the individual had at the time. It would be
        interesting to explore further what processes impede the integration of trauma memory hot
        spots with subsequent information.

Thus, the findings provide preliminary support for the hypothesis that trauma memories in
        PTSD may be insufficiently integrated into the autobiographical memory base, as proposed by
        Conway and Pleydell-Pearce () and Ehlers and
        Clark (). Other models of PTSD, such as Brewin
        et al.'s (1986) Dual Representation Theory, which assumes a deficit in verbally accessible
        trauma memories, also appear compatible with the findings, as one could assume that such a
        deficit may lead to slower retrieval of verbal information when the trauma memory is
        triggered.

Our results add to the growing literature on problems in autobiographical memory retrieval
        in PTSD. They extend the results of studies showing that trauma survivors with PTSD have
        problems with recalling trauma memories, in particular its worst moments, as an organized
        event with a linear temporal sequence (e.g. Evans et al., ; Halligan et al., ; Harvey and
        Bryant, ; Jones et al., ). The present data go beyond these findings of disjointedness
          within the trauma memory, in that they suggest disjointedness between the
        trauma memory and other autobiographical information. They also extend findings of an over
        general memory bias in PTSD (Moore and Zoellner, ). Trauma survivors, in particular those with PTSD, have been shown to exhibit
        problems in retrieving memories of specific autobiographical events in response to emotional
        cue words. Note that in these experiments trauma memories were not explicitly triggered. The
        present study required participants to retrieve factual (neutral) autobiographical
        information. The results for retrieval before and after the imagery tapes suggested that
        people with PTSD do not show a general impairment in retrieving autobiographical information
        to factual questions, which contrasts the pattern of group differences observed for
        generating autobiographical memories in response to emotional retrieval cues. Rather, the
        present study suggested that there was a specific deficit in accessing autobiographical
        information when people with PTSD recalled the worst moment of their traumatic event,
        supporting the disjointedness hypothesis.

The Ehlers and Clark () model further
        specifies certain processing styles that are expected to lead to such poor integration of
        the worst moments of the trauma memory with other autobiographical information, namely
        data-driven processing and dissociation. Consistent with the model, questionnaire measures
        of data-driven processing and dissociation during the assault correlated with the delayed
        retrieval of other autobiographical memories when remembering trauma hot spots, as indexed
        by the difference in retrieval times between trauma and negative events. An exploratory
        measure of the lack of binding of information during the assault (Ehlers et al., ) also correlated with delayed retrieval during the
        assault script. Lack of integration into the autobiographical memory base is thought to be
        one of the factors that explain re-experiencing in PTSD (Ehlers and Clark, ). In line with this suggestion, the
        “nowness” of intrusive memories and re-experiencing correlated with
        delayed retrieval. The pattern of correlations is in line with the theory-derived hypotheses
        and thus supports the notion that the experimental paradigm indeed assessed an index of poor
        memory integration.

The experimental task employed in this study was novel, and the results should therefore be
        interpreted with caution. A number of further limitations need to be noted. First, the study
        used a cross-sectional design that precludes causal interpretations. Second, due to the
        nature of the study, only a limited number of autobiographical memories could be elicited.
        This is likely to have increased error variance and decreased the power of the study to
        detect group differences. Third, other explanations for the patterns of findings are
        possible. The PTSD group reported greater negative emotion during both the trauma and the
        negative event script than the no-PTSD group. Although the pattern of group differences in
        the questionnaire measures did not explain the pattern of differences in retrieval
        latencies, it remains conceivable that other differences, for instance in physiological
        arousal or in transitory attention, may in part be responsible for the observed differences.
        In future experiments, it would thus be desirable to include further measures, such as
        psychophysiological measures, and other questions that do not concern autobiographical
        memories (e.g. mental arithmetic) to test whether the retrieval delays are specific to
        autobiographical material. Fourth, the no-PTSD group reported some PTSD symptoms, and
        studying extreme groups may have given clearer group differences. Fifth, we were unable to
        study whether the results are specific to PTSD as we did not include a further group of
        trauma survivors with disorders other than PTSD.

In conclusion, this experiment was to our knowledge the first to experimentally investigate
        the hypothesis that trauma memories lack integration into the autobiographical memory base
        in PTSD (Conway and Pleydell-Pearce, ; Ehlers
        and Clark, ). The results support the notion
        that the moments during the trauma that are later re-experienced are disjointed from other
        autobiographical material. This would explain the clinical phenomenon that re-experiencing
        appears to lack the context of other (often subsequent) information that corrected
        impressions the person had at the time of the event (Ehlers et al., ) and is characterized by a sense of
      “nowness”.

Acknowledgements
The study was supported by grants from the Psychiatry Research Trust and the Wellcome Trust
        (Ref. 069777). We thank Dr Edward Glucksman and the staff of King's College Hospital's
        Accident and Emergency Department for their support; and Johanna Hissbach and Sarah
        Überall for their help with recruitment and data entry.

Those who did not complete the task did not differ significantly from the rest of the
          sample in terms of demographic and clinical variables (all p's &gt;
          .206).

