

   
Biochim Biophys ActaBiochim. Biophys. ActaBiochimica et Biophysica Acta0006-3002Elsevier Pub. CoS1874-9399(11)00208-210.1016/j.bbagrm.2011.11.003ReviewOf P and Z: Mitochondrial tRNA processing enzymes☆RossmanithWalterwalter.rossmanith@meduniwien.ac.at⁎Center for Anatomy &amp; Cell Biology, Medical University of Vienna, Währinger Straße 13, 1090 Vienna, Austria⁎ Tel.: + 43 1 4277 61187; fax: + 43 1 4277 61198. walter.rossmanith@meduniwien.ac.at1920129201218199-101017102628920111111201115112011© 2012 Elsevier B.V.2011Elsevier B.V.This document may be redistributed and reused, subject to certain conditions.Mitochondrial tRNAs are generally synthesized as part of polycistronic transcripts. Release of tRNAs from these precursors is thus not only required to produce functional adaptors for translation, but also responsible for the maturation of other mitochondrial RNA species. Cleavage of mitochondrial tRNAs appears to be exclusively accomplished by endonucleases. 5′-end maturation in the mitochondria of different Eukarya is achieved by various kinds of RNase P, representing the full range of diversity found in this enzyme family. While ribonucleoprotein enzymes with RNA components of bacterial-like appearance are found in a few unrelated protists, algae, and fungi, highly degenerate RNAs of dramatic size variability are found in the mitochondria of many fungi. The majority of mitochondrial RNase P enzymes, however, appear to be pure protein enzymes. Human mitochondrial RNase P, the first to be identified and possibly the prototype of all animal mitochondrial RNases P, is composed of three proteins. Homologs of its nuclease subunit MRPP3/PRORP, are also found in plants, algae and several protists, where they are apparently responsible for RNase P activity in mitochondria (and beyond) without the help of extra subunits. The diversity of RNase P enzymes is contrasted by the uniformity of mitochondrial RNases Z, which are responsible for 3′-end processing. Only the long form of RNase Z, which is restricted to eukarya, is found in mitochondria, even when an additional short form is present in the same organism. Mitochondrial tRNA processing thus appears dominated by new, eukaryal inventions rather than bacterial heritage. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Mitochondrial Gene Expression.

Highlights
► A great diversity of RNase P enzymes is found in mitochondria of different organisms. ► The RNase P of many fungi contains a highly degenerated RNA. ► Most mitochondrial RNase P enzymes, however, are composed of protein only. ► Mitochondrial 3′-end processing seems to rely exclusively on the long, eukaryal form of RNase Z.

Keywords
RNase PRNase Ztransfer RNARNA processingMitochondria

   
1 Introduction
As the adaptors between genetic code and specific amino acids, transfer RNAs (tRNAs) are essential players in protein synthesis. Mitochondria thus require a set of tRNAs within their matrix compartment to translate the genes encoded by their genome. While in some cases these tRNAs are entirely derived from the cytosol by active transport through the two mitochondrial membranes [1], the mitochondrial genomes of many organisms encode a majority or all of the tRNAs required for mitochondrial protein synthesis.

Like those of any other genetic system, mitochondrial tRNAs are not transcribed in their mature form, but as precursors that require processing and modification for maturation [2]. Primary tRNA gene transcripts have extensions at both ends that have to be removed by specific nucleases [3]. Unlike nuclear tRNA transcripts, yet resembling their bacterial ancestors' tRNA gene expression, mitochondrial tRNAs are usually synthesized as part of polycistronic transcripts. Their 5′- and 3′-flanking sequences are thus not short non-coding sequences, but rather themselves (precursors of) mRNAs, rRNAs, or other tRNAs, and as a mitochondrial peculiarity often directly abutting the tRNA sequence, a phenomenon known as ‘tRNA punctuation’. Release of tRNAs from the polycistronic primary transcripts thus indirectly provides processed mRNAs and rRNAs as a consequence of tRNA recognition and cleavage. tRNA punctuation is widely used for transcript processing in the mitochondria of opisthokonts (fungi and animals) [4–6], and is best illustrated by the organization and processing of the human mitochondrial genome, where tRNA processing accounts for almost all primary transcript processing events [7]. Plant mitochondria do not use tRNA punctuation as the basic mechanism for transcript processing. Nevertheless, their tRNA genes are clustered and/or part of polycistronic primary transcripts [8]. Moreover, plant mitochondrial mRNA transcripts frequently contain tRNA-like structures called ‘t-elements’, which are coincident with the ends of the mature mRNA, suggesting that they too serve as recognition signals for mitochondrial tRNA processing enzymes [9].

The tRNA processing enzymes of mitochondria thus play a central role not only in the maturation of mitochondrial tRNAs, but for mitochondrial RNA maturation in general. In this review I will summarize what is currently known about the two responsible mitochondrial endonucleases RNase P and RNase Z, compare them to the respective enzymes active in the nucleus or in bacteria, and compare different eukaryal model systems to outline the differences or parallels.

Still, mitochondrial tRNA maturation is not complete after 5′- and 3′-end cleavage. Like nuclear tRNA genes, mitochondrial tRNA genes do generally not encode the CCA sequence universally found at the 3′ end of mature tRNAs. The CCA trinucleotide is added after 3′-end processing by a CCA-adding enzyme, an ATP(CTP):tRNA nucleotidyltransferase [10]. In yeast, and apparently also in humans, this enzyme is shared between compartments, i.e., derived from the same gene as that acting on nucleus-encoded tRNAs [11–14]. Mitochondrial tRNA genes lack introns and thus do not require splicing.

tRNAs are also the most extensively modified cellular RNA species, and so are mitochondrial tRNAs [15,16]. Nucleotides are modified posttranscriptionally by a variety of different modification enzymes some of which are shared and used in the modification of mitochondrial as well as cytosolic tRNAs, while others are specific for mitochondria, just as some modifications are only found in mitochondrial tRNAs [16–19]. However, due to the comparably low cellular abundance of mitochondrial tRNAs the study of their modifications and modification pathways lags far behind that of cytoplasmic or bacterial tRNAs.

Mitochondrial tRNAs of most Eukarya conform to the canonical type of tRNA structure found in Bacteria, Archaea, or the eukaryal cytosol. Metazoan mitochondrial tRNAs, however, generally deviate more or less from this structural consensus, are in general smaller, have highly reduced, or even lack, D or TΨC domains, and do not form many of the typical tertiary interactions stabilizing the tRNA L-shape; they are therefore in some cases referred to as bizarre [20–22]. These structural peculiarities appear to be reflected in the evolution of some of the enzymes interacting with animal mitochondrial tRNAs, including the enzyme involved in 5′ end processing.

2 tRNA 5′-end processing — RNase P
In all genetic systems analyzed so far 5′ extensions of tRNA precursors are removed by an endonuclease. This enzyme is called RNase P (EC 3.1.26.5); it is a metallonuclease that utilizes Mg2 + for phosphodiester hydrolysis [for review see refs. 3,23–26]. RNase P was first identified in Escherichia coli
[27], and its subsequent characterization showed that it is composed of a small protein and an RNA [28]. The RNA was shown to be the actual catalytic part of the enzyme, capable of catalysis even in the absence of the protein subunit under specific in vitro conditions [29]. Historically, the trans-acting RNase P RNA was the first true RNA enzyme (ribozyme) identified.

RNA-based RNase P enzymes were subsequently identified in various forms of life (see Section 2.1) and the apparent omnipresence of the RNase P ribozyme not only led to the concept that this RNA enzyme is a universal relic of a hypothetical ‘RNA world’, but to the (still) prevailing view that tRNA 5′-end processing is inevitably linked to the action of a catalytic RNA. However, another form of RNase P, built of protein only, has recently been disclosed. First identified in human mitochondria [30], it was subsequently also demonstrated in plant mitochondria and chloroplasts [31] (see Sections 2.3 and 2.4). This enzyme appears typically composed of a single ~ 60 kDa polypeptide, but functionally equivalent to the RNA-based enzymes. In fact, the Arabidopsis mitochondrial/chloroplast enzyme is able to substitute for E. coli RNase P in vivo [31]. Its presence in the genomes of several eukaryal groups suggests that this proteinaceous RNase P is as frequent as the RNA-based enzyme in Eukarya and not restricted to mitochondria and chloroplasts (see Section 2.1).

2.1 The RNase P family in the three domains of life — a survey
All bacterial RNase P enzymes identified so far are composed of an RNA and a small protein subunit [3,32,33]. The RNAs of different bacteria fall into two structural classes, types A and B, and a small group that seems structurally intermediate [3,25,32,33]. An exceptionally small, structurally most reduced, quasi-minimal bacterial RNase P RNA is found in Mycoplasma fermentas
[34], which lacks, e.g., the otherwise universally conserved helix P12 (Fig. 1). Despite this structural variation of the catalytic RNA moiety the protein subunits from even distant bacteria are structurally conserved and functionally exchangeable [35]. The protein is essential for RNase P function in vivo and plays an important role in substrate recognition, the stabilization of the RNA's tertiary structure, and increases the binding affinity for metal ions crucial for substrate positioning and catalysis [3,32]. Whereas structurally related RNase P RNAs are found in almost all Archaea and many Eukarya, the bacterial protein has no homologs in these two phylogenetic domains [36]. Neither a gene for RNase P RNA nor for an RNase P protein were identified in the genome of the hyperthermophilic bacterium Aquifex aeolicus, although an RNase P activity was detected in cell extracts [37–39].

Archaeal RNase P is composed of a structurally related RNA and at least four proteins [40,41]. The catalytic competence of the RNA is not only suggested by the evolutionary relationship with bacterial RNase P RNA (Fig. 1), but was also verified experimentally, although more extreme ionic conditions were required to observe RNA alone activity [42]. The hyperthermophilic crenarchaeon Pyrobaculum aerophilum has another highly reduced, minimal form of RNase P RNA, and possibly also a reduced set of associated proteins [43]; still the RNA has retained catalytic activity. The archaeon Nanoarchaeum equitans might be the sole form of life having no RNase P at all [44]. The tRNAs of this parasitic archaeon are synthesized without 5′ extensions, resulting in mature tRNAs with a 5′ triphosphate.

Eukaryal nuclear RNase P is best characterized in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae and in the human system [41,45,46]. It is composed of an RNA structurally related to that of Bacteria and Archaea (Fig. 1). Again, this RNA was shown to have some residual catalytic competence on its own [47]. The protein complement is further increased in number and mass relative to Archaea, and 9 protein subunits are found in yeast and 10 in humans, including a 100-kDa polypeptide (POP1) as the largest protein component. The majority of these proteins is also associated with the nuclear ribonucleoprotein RNase MRP [45,46]. Its RNA component is structurally related to that of RNase P, but has distinctive features too. RNase MRP does not act on the 5′ ends of tRNA precursors, but plays a role in rRNA processing and, by cleavage of cyclin B2 mRNA, in yeast cell cycle regulation [45,46].

Yeast and human nuclear RNase P are proposed to have many substrates in addition to tRNA precursors [45,48]. Moreover, human nuclear RNase P appears to play a role in nuclear transcription by RNA polymerases III and I [49]. This increased versatility is considered to have been a major evolutionary driving force for the increase in (protein) complexity of the eukaryal compared to the prokaryotic enzymes during evolution.

RNase P RNA sequences could not be identified in the genomes of major phylogenetic branches of Eukarya, such as land plants, green and red algae, and heterokonts (Stramenopiles) [50,51]. The same holds for homologs of proteins otherwise specifically associated with nuclear RNase P, although an RNase MRP RNA and its associated proteins were identified in the aforementioned groups [50,52]. Yet, neither RNase P nor RNase MRP RNA sequences, nor any of the typically associated proteins are found in the genomes of kinetoplastids (encompassing the parasitic Trypanosoma and Leishmania species) [50,52]. Interestingly, all these eukaryal groups encode one or more copies of the proteinaceous RNase P protein originally identified as the catalytic subunit of human mitochondrial RNase P [30]. Nuclear RNase P might thus be a pure protein enzyme in many Eukarya. Consistently, two of the three proteinaceous RNase P isoforms found in Arabidopsis thaliana indeed localize to the nucleus [31].

Apart from the nucleus and mitochondria, RNase P activity is also found in chloroplasts/plastids (in Eukarya). Consistent with the cyanobacterial origin, the plastid genomes of glaucophytes, red algae, and some prasinophytes (an early branching group of green algae) encode a bacterial type A RNase P RNA [53,54]. Other green algae and land plants have lost this gene from their plastid genomes. However, their nuclear genomes encode one or more proteinaceous RNase P enzymes (PRORP) [30,31]. We recently showed that A. thaliana chloroplast RNase P is indeed a protein and identical to the mitochondrial enzyme [31] (see Section 2.4). In fact, biochemical characterization of spinach chloroplast RNase P almost 25 years ago suggested that this enzyme does not contain RNA [55]. The protein, however, was identified only recently by homology to human mitochondrial RNase P (mtRNase P) [30]. Thus, chloroplasts of land plants and most green algae have apparently replaced their bacterial heritage with a protein enzyme, whereas more early branching photosynthetic Eukarya have at least partially kept the ancestral state in their plastids (the protein component(s) of these putative ribonucleoprotein RNase P enzymes have not been identified yet). It further appears that genomes of plastids originating from secondary endosymbiosis (e.g., in heterokonts, haptophytes, cryptomonads, apicomplexans, or euglenids) have generally lost their RNase P RNA gene, regardless if the plastids derived from red or green algae.

2.2 Mitochondrial RNase P in fungi
2.2.1 Yeast mitochondrial RNase P
Of all fungal mtRNases P that of the budding yeast S. cerevisiae is by far the best characterized [54]. Early genetic studies had revealed that the synthesis of yeast mitochondrial tRNAs depends on a locus mapping between the tRNAfMet and tRNAPro genes of the mitochondrial genome, which does not encode a protein [56,57]. Molecular studies of the expression of this region identified an A/U rich transcript of ~ 500 nucleotides in length [58], a mapping that was later refined to ~ 420 nucleotides [59]. This RNA cofractionated with mtRNase P activity upon purification [60], and 3′-matured tRNA with 5′ extension accumulated in deletion mutants of this mitochondrial locus [61]. Moreover, the activity was demonstrated to be sensitive to nuclease and protease treatment, indicating that it is a ribonucleoprotein that requires nucleus-encoded protein(s) for function, the latter inferred from the fact that yeast mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) deletion mutants devoid of mitochondrial protein synthesis, but retaining the RNase P RNA locus, still have RNase P activity [60]. Surprisingly, the integrity of the full-length RNA is not required and two fragments from the 5′ and 3′ end (~ 70 nucleotides each), were shown to be sufficient to support the activity in vitro [62]; thus a major part of the RNA appears to be dispensable (Fig. 1).

RNase P RNA genes (RPM1, or rnpB in analogy to the bacterial gene) were also found in the mitochondrial genomes of many other budding yeasts (Saccharomycetales) [63–65]. All these RNAs are extremely A/U rich and vary considerably in size, down to the minimal rnpB of Saccharomycopsis fibuligera of only ~ 150 nucleotides. They all deviate considerably from the general, bacterial–archaeal–eukaryal nuclear, consensus structure or the bacterial minimal consensus structure (Fig. 1). Secondary structure predictions of these RNAs are further complicated by the low degree of primary sequence conservation even among rather closely related yeasts. Only the conserved regions CR I and CR V, forming helix P4, and helix P1 appear generally retained [65]. Also CR IV is found frequently, and S. cerevisiae and its close relatives harbor a stem-loop structure that may mimic helix P18 of bacterial RNase P RNAs [65]. Not surprisingly, none of these crippled RNase P RNAs gave rise to RNase P activity without protein in vitro, and it is assumed that the protein moiety of the enzyme has a more substantial, compensatory functional role in the holoenzyme.

The mtRNase P of S. cerevisiae is the only organellar RNA-based RNase P of which a protein component has been identified. Extensive purification of the enzyme revealed a 105-kDa protein encoded by a nuclear gene termed RPM2
[66]. Antibodies against Rpm2p immunoprecipitate mtRNase P activity as well as its RNA component (Rpm1r) [67], and a gene disruption producing a C-terminally truncated protein leads to the accumulation of mitochondrial tRNA precursors with 5′ extensions [66,68], though this effect is at least in part attributable to a role of this domain in Rpm1r maturation [69] (see also below). In vitro reconstitution of yeast mtRNase P from purified components has not been achieved so far. Thus, the contribution of Rpm2p to mtRNase P activity remains vague and it cannot be excluded that other proteins are required. Rpm2p has no homology to any other known RNase P protein and its gene is not found beyond closely related budding yeasts, not even in other ascomycete fungi [24,54].

Rpm2p has further functions not directly related to mtRNase P activity and even entirely unrelated ones. Complete deletion of RPM2 is lethal, even under conditions allowing fermentative growth (yeast requires mitochondrial protein synthesis for respiration, but not for fermentative growth on, e.g., glucose) [68]. Under fermentative conditions deletion of the C-terminal domain of Rpm2p leads to deletions of the mitochondrial genome (mitochondrial protein synthesis is required to maintain an intact mitochondrial genome in yeast [70]) and to the accumulation of 5′-unprocessed mitochondrial tRNAs even in case an intact RPM1 is retained [66,68]. However, if cell growth depends on respiration because a fermentable carbon source is lacking, the same partial rpm2ΔC deletion allele supports sufficient mtRNase P activity and the strains retain an intact mitochondrial genome [69]. Under both conditions, Rpm1r is not properly processed to its mature form, and large precursors of mtRNase P RNA accumulate [59,69]. Thus the C-terminal domain of Rpm2p seems to be strictly required for Rpm1r maturation, but not for pre-tRNA 5′-end processing. Rpm1r processing is restored if the C-terminal domain is provided in trans
[69]. Yet, it is not known how Rpm2p contributes to Rpm1r precursor processing. Apparently, the Rpm1r precursor species support mtRNase P activity only insufficiently, leading to the mild accumulation of tRNA precursors under respiratory conditions. The C-terminal truncation possibly also impairs Rpm2p's functionality as an RNase P subunit and differences in rpm2ΔC expression might account for the more severe phenotype under fermentative conditions. Moreover, a fraction of Rpm2p localizes to the nucleus where it appears to upregulate the transcription of genes of the mitochondrial protein import machinery [71]. It is this role that, tied in with the protein's indirect effect on mtDNA maintenance, is believed to be essential for yeast viability [for discussion, see ref. 71]. Finally, Rpm2p seems to interact with cytoplasmic P bodies suggesting a function in mRNA metabolism [72].

Curiously, yeast mtRNase P function is impaired by disruption of the type II fatty acid synthesis (FAS II) pathway [73]. Deletion of any of the mitochondrial FAS II genes resulted in the accumulation of 5′-extended mitochondrial tRNA precursors and an Rpm1r precursor. MtRNase P itself, however, appears not modified by lipoic acid [73]. Recently, it was suggested that mtRNase P is part of a “supercomplex” together with RNase Z, the RNA degradosome, components of the mitochondrial translation machinery, the enzymes of the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA) cycle, and components of the FAS II pathway [74]. This “supercomplex” is apparently absent upon deletion of a single component of the FAS II pathway. The finding suggests physical association as the possible functional link between FAS II and mitochondrial tRNA processing. Still, it remains unclear how such apparent “supercomplex” association affects mtRNase P function. In the end, the biological rationale behind the apparent intersection of mitochondrial tRNA processing with fatty acid synthesis or the TCA cycle is currently mostly enigmatic.

2.2.2 Mitochondrial RNase P in other fungi
The occurrence of RNase P RNA genes in fungi appears highly variable. In ascomycetes, rnpB has a rather patchy distribution, being present in representatives of the different groups, but absent in other closely related members of the same groups [65]. An rnpB gene has not been identified in any of the basidiomycete and chytridiomycete mitochondrial genomes [65], but all zygomycete mitochondrial genomes sequenced so far contain an rnpB gene [75]. As in budding yeasts, length and structure variation appear to be general characteristics of fungal mtRNase P RNAs. Length variation is most extreme in the zygomycete lineage, ranging from 188 to 980 nucleotides and thereby including the longest RNase P RNA identified so far. The short mtRNase P RNA of Smittium culisetae appears structurally as reduced as the minimal yeast mtRNase P, essentially confined to the structural elements P1 and P4 [65,75]. Most of the longer zygomycete mtRNase P RNAs, however, have remained structurally close to the universal consensus [75]. Also some ascomycete mtRNase P RNAs, like that of Aspergillus nidulans, have a secondary structure similar to the universal consensus [65] (Fig. 1). A. nidulans is also the only other fungus beyond S. cerevisiae for which mtRNase P has also been studied biochemically [76]. Seven polypeptides, ranging from 16 to 55 kDa, were found in highly purified fractions, but no further characterization or identification of those has been reported. The knowledge about fungal mtRNase P proteins thus remains scarce and the identity and composition of mtRNase P in several clades, including model systems like Neurospora crassa, unknown.

2.3 Mitochondrial RNase P in animals
2.3.1 Human mitochondrial RNase P
A mtRNase P and its critical role for global mitochondrial transcript maturation were proposed when human mtDNA was first sequenced and the various encoded RNAs characterized [7,77,78]. Yet, despite early efforts to identify mitochondrial tRNA processing enzymes in human cells [79], it took almost 15 years until the processing of mitochondrial tRNA precursors by mitochondrial enzyme activities was first demonstrated [80]. The mtRNase P activity turned out to have properties that distinguished it from any other RNase P known at that time [80], including the apparent lack of an RNA component [81]. By combining classical enzyme purification with mass-spectrometry-based proteome analysis we more recently achieved to identify the components of human mtRNase P and to reconstitute its activity from three recombinantly produced proteins only, without an RNA component [30].

In 2008, an RNase P devoid of RNA was without precedent and violated the general paradigm of RNase P's ribozymal nature. Yet, despite the fundamentally different makeup of this new variant of RNase P, its basic enzymatic properties are similar to the RNA-based enzymes. Both recognize parts of the tRNA structure within the precursor, require Mg2 + for phosphodiester hydrolysis, and generate 5′-phosphate and 3′-hydroxyl products. The catalytic role of the RNA seems to be taken over by one of the three proteins, originally termed mitochondrial RNase P protein 3 (MRPP3), as it was the third component identified [30]. Homologs of MRPP3 were found in the genomes of various eukaryal lineages [30], and have meanwhile been shown to also localize to the other tRNA-coding cellular compartments, nucleus and chloroplasts, in the different eukaryal branches [ref. 31 and unpublished results]. In many cases, these MRPP3 homologs seem to be active on their own, not requiring any other proteins for RNase P activity [ref. 31 and unpublished results]. Animal mtRNase P in this regard seems to be the exception rather than the rule, and, though first identified, not the prototype of this form of protein-only RNase P. We have thus coined the more generally applicable name proteinaceous RNase P (PRORP) for this gene family, numbered only in cases of multiple isoforms in a genome [31].

So far, MRPP3/PRORP homologs have been found in the genomes of animals, plants, green and red algae, heterokonts, haptophytes, and euglenids. The gene seems to be generally absent from the fungal lineage and possibly some protist groups. It has not been found in Archaea or Bacteria. The PRORP gene family is most conserved in its C-terminal part. This domain displays all the characteristics of a metallonuclease and places PRORP in a superfamily of predicted ribonucleases defined by the so-called NYN (N4BP1, YacP-like nuclease) domain [82] (Fig. 2). NYN domain proteins are found in all three main branches of life. The domain appears to be characterized by a common fold with conserved acidic residues presumably coordinating at least one catalytic metal ion in the active site. The NYN family seems related to the PIN and FLAP nuclease families, yet PRORP is the first NYN protein with a demonstrated ribonuclease function. Eukaryal NYN domains are found linked to various RNA binding domains/motifs and/or to the UBA ubiquitin-binding domain. In PRORP, the putative catalytic NYN domain is linked to an upstream zinc-finger-like (GX)CXXC signature and two pentatricopeptide repeats (PPR; Fig. 2). PPRs are motifs of 35 amino acids generally occurring in multiple consecutive copies and suggested to mediate RNA-binding activity [83]. PPR proteins are numerous in plants, but rare in animals. However, with only two PPRs in-tandem, PRORPs are not considered typical PPR proteins. The N-terminal part of PRORP is not well conserved and no motif apart from a facultative mitochondrial matrix-targeting signal has been recognized therein so far (Fig. 2).

In contrast to, e.g., A. thaliana PRORP1 [31], human MRPP3/PRORP requires two additional proteins for mtRNase P function: MRPP1 and MRPP2 [30]. MRPP1 is one of three vertebrate homologs of yeast TRM10 and has therefore also been named RNA (guanine-9-)methyltransferase domain containing 1 (RG9MTD1). Trm10p is responsible for the methylation of the N1 of guanosine at position 9 of a subset of yeast cytoplasmic tRNAs [84]. Mitochondrial homologs of TRM10 are apparently only found in animals and other eukarya seem to have no more than one gene. More recent work showed that MRPP1 is indeed involved in the methylation of mitochondrial tRNAs (manuscript in preparation). However, methylation and cleavage are neither coupled nor interdependent. This raises the question about the role of MRPP1 for tRNA processing by human mtRNase P. It seems reasonable to postulate that MRPP1 is involved in substrate recognition, but how this is achieved and why MRPP1 is required for mtRNase P function is enigmatic at present. Still, a consequence of this type of methyltransferase's involvement in mtRNase P may be an unusual way by which the MRPP3/PRORP nuclease subunit faces its substrate. The base of position 9 is buried in the core of an L-shaped tRNA structure and thereby rather inaccessible for an enzyme. Methylation would thus have to involve the transient unfolding of this part of the tRNA as well as interaction with parts of the tRNA structure not necessarily required to be normally “seen” by an RNase P enzyme [for a more thorough discussion see ref. [85]]. Thus, MRPP3 may at least partly recognize such transiently unfolded structural elements, which might explain the unique substrate specificity of human mtRNase P, differing from that of E. coli or human nuclear RNase P on numerous accounts [80,86–89]. Possibly, the requirement of the two extra components MRPP1 and MRPP2 may thereby represent an adaptation to the non-canonical structures of animal mitochondrial tRNAs.

The moonlighting of the third component, MRPP2, in human mitochondrial tRNA 5′-end processing is even more obscure. MRPP2, hydroxysteroid (17-β) dehydrogenase 10 (HSD17B10) according to current nomenclature, belongs to the short-chain dehydrogenase/reductase (SDR) family [90]. The protein has long been known as a dehydrogenase acting on a wide spectrum of substrates in vitro [91], but its best-documented role as a dehydrogenase in vivo is in branched-chain amino and fatty acid degradation [92]. While there is currently no clue as to the mechanism by which it contributes to mtRNase P, this moonlighting activity could be a key towards understanding the pathogenetic mechanism of 2-methyl-3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase (MHBD) deficiency, a disease caused by mutations in HSD17B10
[92,93].

Human mtRNase P cleaves a wide range of mitochondrial tRNA precursors in vitro [30,80,86,89]. Its activity is readily detectable in even crude mitochondrial extracts and thereby appears to be relatively abundant [80]. Overexpression of MRPP1 boosts mtRNase P activity in mitochondrial extracts and mitochondrial tRNA precursors accumulate if the expression of any of its three components is knocked down by RNA interference [30]. These findings have firmly established the essential role of mtRNase P and its three subunits in the 5′-end maturation of mitochondrial tRNAs.

When we first identified mtRNase P activity we had also noticed the presence of small amounts of the RNA component of nuclear RNase P (H1 RNA) in mitochondrial preparations [80]. However, we were unable to detect any nuclear RNase P activity in mitochondrial extracts and H1 RNA was largely removed by applying more thorough mitochondrial purification regimens [80]. Moreover, we demonstrated that the remaining H1 RNA was neither required for nor associated with mtRNase P activity [80]. Using a bacterial tRNA precursor as a substrate (notably, a substrate not cleaved by mtRNase P [80]) others had before partially purified an RNase P activity from mitochondrial preparations [79] that later turned out to contain H1 RNA and to be apparently identical to the nuclear enzyme [94]. While the dispute about the possible identity of nuclear and mitochondrial RNase P in human cells was eventually settled after the distinct nature of human mtRNase P had been unraveled [30,88], the idea of nuclear RNase P being imported into mitochondria was recently revived. Polynucleotide phosphorylase (PNPase) was proposed to mediate the import of H1 and other RNAs into mitochondria, where H1 RNA was hypothesized to function in the processing of specific mitochondrial tRNA precursors as a quasi-additional mtRNase P [95]. Appreciation of all available data, however, gives rise to severe concerns that question the proposed scenario:(1) The number of H1 RNA molecules associated with mitochondria is extremely low, more than one order of magnitude lower than that of mtDNA [88,94]. It appears unlikely that such low amounts are sufficient to play an essential role in mitochondrial tRNA processing. Comparable or even higher amounts of other non-coding RNAs were found to be associated with mitochondria as well [88,94,96,97]. Might all these RNAs be imported into mitochondria by the PNPase-dependent import pathway? What should be the functional relevance of, e.g., spliceosomal snRNAs for mitochondrial biology?

(2) The putative mitochondrial H1 RNA pool is apparently associated with the same proteins as the nuclear one; its sedimentation behavior mimics that of nuclear RNase P [94] and the RNA can be quantitatively immunoprecipitated by antibodies against nuclear RNase P [80]. However, none of the proteins associated with nuclear RNase P has a recognized mitochondrial targeting sequence or been found in mitochondrial proteomes [see ref. 30 and refs. therein].

(3) PNPase was reported to interact with helix P9 of H1 RNA and to mediate the mitochondrial import of in vitro transcribed RNAs containing this short stem-loop structure [95]. However, in the nuclear RNase P ribonucleoprotein, P9 is covered by protein according to a recent footprinting analysis [98]. This raises the question how PNPase is able to access helix P9 in the context of the ribonucleoprotein.

(4) A structurally distinct stem-loop of RNase MRP RNA (an extension of helix P12) was reported to mediate PNPase-dependent import as well [95]. Does this imply that any short stem-loop may be capable of mediating PNPase-dependent RNA import? How is selectivity maintained in such an import system of seemingly low specificity?

(5) The localization of PNPase per se is controversial. Interaction with the mitochondrial matrix-helicase SUV3 in human cells [99,100] and the established role of PNPase in the mitochondrial RNA metabolism of plants [101] challenge the supposed localization in the mitochondrial intermembrane space and suggest a matrix localization instead.

(6) Is the observed increase of some mitochondrial tRNA precursors in PNPase knockout cells cause or effect of the observed disturbance of mitochondrial structure and function? Is it at all due to a deficiency of tRNA processing activity, or does it originate from (or reflect) a lack of RNA degradation activity? In vitro 5′-end processing of mitochondrial tRNALys in mitochondrial extracts from PNPase knockout cells was unaltered, although the tRNALys precursor appeared to be enriched in mutant cells [95]. Only for the tRNAHis-flanked tRNASer(AGY) a direct processing deficiency was observed in PNPase knockout cells [95]. However, tRNASer(AGY) was previously shown to be released by tRNA punctuation via the 5′-abutting tRNAHis, thus circumventing 5′-end maturation by mtRNase P [86]. Owing to the conserved gene arrangement, the 5′ end of tRNASer(AGY) is generated by RNase Z acting on the 3′ terminus of tRNAHis. Mitochondrial extracts are unable to support 5′-end processing of a tRNASer(AGY) that is not flanked by an intact tRNAHis
[86]. If the maturation of tRNASer(AGY) was independent of tRNAHis 3′-end processing, but instead depended on an RNase P able to process the 5′ end of tRNASer(AGY) directly, one would not expect the butt-jointed arrangement of the two tRNA genes to be conserved, but rather as variable as the boundaries of other vicinal mitochondrial tRNA genes, such as tRNASer(AGY)–tRNALeu(CUN) or tRNATyr–tRNACys, which are either found butt-jointed, separated by a spacer, or even overlapping in different mammalian mitochondrial genomes [86]. It seems possible that the apparent impairment of tRNASer(AGY) 5′ end processing in PNPase knockout cells is actually due to a reduction in RNase Z activity. Mitochondrial RNase Z seems to be regulated according to the functional status of mitochondria and its activity is virtually absent in cells lacking mitochondrial DNA due to the downregulation of its gene [81,102].



In conclusion, the concept of nuclear RNase P imported into mitochondria as a second mtRNase P activity, though not entirely excluded, appears quite speculative at present.

2.3.2 Mitochondrial RNase P in other animals
MtRNase P has not been studied in other animals. However, animal mitochondrial genomes are in general similar in organization and gene content, and all of them lack a mtDNA-encoded RNase P RNA [103,104]. Given that homologs of all three components of human mtRNase P are generally found in metazoan genomes, it is likely that a proteinaceous RNase P similar to that of human mitochondria is also active in the mitochondria of other animals. In some lineages, such as nematodes, homologs of MRPP3/PRORP and MRPP1 appear considerably more divergent [30], possibly the result of an accelerated adaptive evolution due to the bizarre mitochondrial tRNA structures found in these organisms [105].

2.4 Mitochondrial RNase P in plants and algae
A mtRNase P RNA gene has not been found in any mitochondrial genome from plants, green or red algae, with the exception of the two early branching prasinophyte algae Nephroselmis olivacea and Ostreococcus tauri
[106,107]. Despite a secondary structure resembling that of α-proteobacterial RNase P RNAs, these algal RNAs are not catalytically active in vitro [54,108]. Even supplementation with E. coli RNase P protein did not activate the RNAs and the authentic protein component(s) of these putative mtRNase P enzymes have not been identified yet.

Early biochemical studies of mtRNase P in higher plants led to conflicting results with respect to the potential involvement of an RNA, but failed to identify any kind of enzyme component [109–111]. We recently showed that one of three A. thaliana homologs of human MRPP3/PRORP, PRORP1, localizes to mitochondria as well as chloroplasts [31]. A. thaliana PRORP1 is an essential gene and the purified recombinant protein removes extensions from plant mitochondrial or chloroplast tRNA precursors. In addition, it cleaves at tRNA-like structures (‘t-elements’) found in the untranslated regions of some mitochondrial mRNAs, at a site consistent with the in vivo mapped mRNA 3′ ends [31]. A. thaliana PRORP1 cleaves the precursor of mitochondrial tRNAHis preferentially, but unlike E. coli RNase P not exclusively, one nucleotide upstream of the canonical position to include an extra 5′ G residue characteristic of tRNAsHis
[112]. The structure of A. thaliana PRORP1 is similar to human MRPP3/PRORP and has been described above (Section 2.3.1). The A. thaliana genome encodes two additional PRORP homologs that localize to the nucleus [31]. It appears as if plants have generally abandoned RNA-based RNase P and make use of the proteinaceous enzyme type in all their tRNA processing compartments (see also Section 2.1). Whereas land plant genomes encode three PRORP genes, algae seem to have only one. However, it is not unlikely that this protein acts as an RNase P in multiple compartments.

2.5 Mitochondrial RNase P in protists
Not much is known about mtRNase P in the evolutionary highly diverse “group” of protists. Genome information is still scarce and a biochemical study has only been carried out in Trypanosoma brucei
[113]. Of the currently available mitochondrial genomes only those of the jakobids, like Reclinomonas americana, encode an RNase P RNA [108,114]. Notably, mtDNA of R. americana is regarded the mitochondrial genome most closely related to the ancestral proto-mitochondrial genome. Consistently, its mtRNase P RNA resembles α-proteobacterial RNase P RNAs [114]. Nonetheless, jakobid mtRNase P RNAs are apparently not active without their as yet unknown protein component(s) [108].

Two PRORP homologs have been found in the genomes of kinetoplastids [30,31]. In T. brucei, one of them localizes to the nucleus and one to the mitochondrion, and the recombinant proteins have RNase P activity on their own in vitro (unpublished results). A previous biochemical characterization of T. brucei mtRNase P also suggested that the enzyme lacks an RNA moiety [113]. The presence of RNase P in kinetoplastid mitochondria is indeed surprising, taking into account that their mitochondrial genome does not encode any tRNAs. Instead, nuclear-encoded tRNAs are imported into the mitochondrion from the cytosol [115,116]. Although in vitro import experiments suggested that T. brucei tRNAs are imported as precursors [117], tRNA import in vivo is independent of flanking sequences [116,118], suggesting that essentially only mature tRNAs are imported into the organelle. Thus, the natural substrates of T. brucei mtRNase P remain to be identified and kinetoplastid mtRNase P might be the first example of an RNase P activity not involved in tRNA processing in vivo.

3 tRNA 3′-end processing — RNase Z
While 5′ end processing of tRNAs is strictly endonucleolytic, 3′-end processing is more variable, and endonucleolytic, exonucleolytic, as well as combined pathways, involving both types of enzymes, are found in the different genetic systems [2,3,119,120]. In mitochondria, however, tRNA 3′-end processing seems to generally rely on an endonuclease, and the widespread use of polycistronic transcription, and in particular tRNA punctuation, where 3′ trailers are functional RNA species themselves, appears to preclude any exonucleolytic mechanisms of 3′-end maturation.

In contrast to RNase P enzymes, tRNA 3′-end processing endonucleases all seem to be related, belonging to the same family [for review see refs. [2,3,120–124]]. The functional role of this gene family was identified in 2002 and the enzyme named RNase Z (now also called tRNase Z; EC 3.1.26.11) [125]. The RNase Z family (also called ‘ElaC’ family according to the gene (elaC) encoding E. coli RNase Z) belongs to the β-lactamase superfamily, a group of related metallo-hydrolases with a characteristic fold of two parallel β-sheets flanked by α-helices (α–β/β–α) and the active site metal ion-coordinating motif HXHXDH [126]; in RNases Z as well as in most other members of the superfamily this metal ion is zinc. In addition to these common structural features a protruding flexible arm, the so-called ‘exosite’, characterizes the RNase Z family [3,122–124]. It is involved in the binding of the tRNA precursor substrate. There are two forms of RNase Z, one of 280 to 360 amino acids (RNase ZS) found in archaea and many, but not all, bacteria and eukarya, and another one more than twice this length (750–930 amino acids; RNase ZL), exclusively found in eukarya. The crystal structure of three bacterial RNases ZS was elucidated [127–129]. They are all homodimers of head-to-head arranged subunits. The dimer binds two tRNAs; the individual tRNAs seem like clamped between the ‘exosite’ of one subunit and an α-helix of the other [130], resembling “a ski boot in its bindings” [122]. Consistently, there is evidence for cooperativity in the action of RNase ZS enzymes [122]. Each enzyme subunit faces the stacked helices of the acceptor stem and the TΨC domain, whereas other elements of tRNA structure appear largely dispensable for substrate recognition [131,132]. For a more detailed discussion of RNase ZS structure and its implications for substrate recognition and cleavage I would like to refer the reader to more specific reviews [3,122–124].

The primary structure of RNase ZL suggests that it evolved from RNase ZS by duplication. The C-terminal half has retained a higher sequence similarity to the short forms and contains the presumed Zn-coordinating active site. In the N-terminal half the HXHXDH motif is highly degenerated, but this half contains the ‘exosite’ that was lost from the C-terminal part. No crystal structure of an RNase ZL is currently available. While all eukarya appear to have at least one RNase ZL gene, some also have an RNase ZS gene, or even two genes for one or both RNase Z isoforms [for review see refs. 3,121–124].

All mitochondrial RNase Z (mtRNase Z) enzymes identified so far are of the long form and in many cases the enzyme is derived from the same gene as nuclear RNase Z [14,133–138]. This may not seem surprising given that many Eukarya have only one gene encoding RNase ZL, but even in the presence of an additional RNase ZS, like e.g., in humans, still RNase ZL is shared between the nucleus and mitochondria, while RNase ZS is found in the cytosol and apparently not involved in the processing of primary tRNA transcripts [14]. Just in cases where there are two RNase ZL isoforms the dual targeting to nuclei and mitochondria seems dispensable. For example, four RNase Z isoenzymes are found in A. thaliana, two RNases ZL and two RNases ZS
[135]. Interestingly, one RNase ZL is shared between the nucleus and mitochondria, whereas the other RNase ZL is confined to mitochondria. The two RNases ZS are found in the cytosol and in chloroplasts, respectively. In Schizosaccharomyces pombe, which has two RNase ZL genes, one RNase ZL isoform is found in the nucleus and the other one in mitochondria [138].

We have recently studied the mechanism underlying the dual nuclear/mitochondrial localization of human RNase ZL
[14]. The first AUG of mammalian RNases ZL is consistently found in a poor context for initiation and is apparently frequently passed by scanning ribosomes. The second AUG more closely conforms to a consensus initiation site and appears to be used preferentially. This downstream initiation results in the loss of most of the mitochondrial targeting signal, whereby the protein translated from the second AUG is no longer imported into the mitochondrial matrix, but routed to the nucleus via a nuclear localization signal. The dual targeting mechanism of RNase Z in other organisms has not been studied.

Functional studies of mitochondrial RNase Z have been carried out in human cells [133], Drosophila cells [134], A. thaliana
[135], S. pombe
[138], and to a limited extent in S. cerevisiae
[137] (in vitro studies of processing activities from crude mitochondrial extracts before the identification of the RNase Z family are not included in this list).

Recombinant human RNase ZL cleaves different mitochondrial tRNA precursors in vitro (unpublished results). In HeLa cells, silencing of ELAC2, the gene encoding human RNase ZL, by RNAi resulted in the accumulation of various 3′-unprocessed mitochondrial tRNA precursors [133]. Other processing sites, tRNA 5′ ends, tRNA antisense transcripts, or non-tRNA-abutted mRNA ends, were not effected by the RNase ZL knock-down. Nuclear-encoded, cytosolic tRNAs were not studied. In Drosophila S2 cells silencing of JhI-1 encoding RNase Z caused the accumulation of mitochondrial and nuclear tRNA precursors [134]. Consistently, the recombinant Drosophila enzyme catalyzed the 3′-end processing of tRNA precursors from both compartments in vitro [134]. All four RNases Z of A. thaliana have tRNA processing activity in vitro, and similar to mtRNase P, the two RNases ZL cleave ‘t-elements’ found in mitochondrial mRNA precursors [135]. Mutants of AthTrZL1 and AthTrZL2, encoding the two long, mitochondrial isoforms, are both viable, indicating that they functionally substitute for each other in mitochondrial tRNA 3′ end maturation [135]. The double mutant, however, seems to be lethal [135]. Taking into account that inactivation of AthTrZL1, encoding the only RNase Z isoform present in the nucleus, is not lethal, it appears that nuclear, in contrast to mitochondrial RNase Z is dispensable, most likely due to an exonucleolytic nuclear (backup) pathway similar to the one characterized in yeast [120]. In the fission yeast S. pombe the two genes encoding RNases ZL, sptrz1 and sptrz2, are both essential [139], but only the overexpression of the mitochondrial SpTrz2p resulted in as yet uncharacterized phenotypical abnormalities [138]. They both were shown to have RNase Z activity in vitro [138]. S. cerevisiae TRZ1 is an essential gene and decreasing its gene expression or a temperature sensitive allele showed mitochondrial deficiencies (petite phenotype), consistent with an essential role in mitochondrial tRNA biogenesis [137], although mitochondrial tRNAs or their precursors were not analyzed in these mutant strains.

The expression of human (mitochondrial) RNase ZL appears to be regulated in a peculiar way. In human cells lacking mitochondrial DNA (ρ0 cells) its mRNA was found down-regulated [102] and its activity, in contrast to that of mtRNase P, which was unchanged, strongly reduced in mitochondrial extracts [81]. The reasons for this apparent “adaption” in gene expression are not known.

4 Is there an “alphabetical” order in tRNA processing?
Does cleavage by mtRNase P generally precede that of mtRNase Z? Most in vitro processing studies and also some genetic data appear to favor such a scenario. In human mitochondrial extracts prepared from different types of cultured cells, cleavage by mtRNase P seems to generally occur first. The processing intermediates are 5′-matured tRNAs with 3′ extensions, and no 5′-extended, 3′-cleaved tRNAs were observed; this result was confirmed for a variety of mitochondrial tRNAs [30,81,86,87,89,140]. Consistently, knock-down of the MRPP1 subunit of human mtRNase P in HeLa cells inhibited both, 5′- and 3′-end maturation, whereas silencing of ELAC2, the gene encoding mtRNase Z, blocked 3′-end processing only [133]. Yet, based on the analysis of processing intermediates, it was also suggested that the order of processing would differ depending on the tissue: whereas a 3′-extended processing intermediate of mitochondrial tRNALeu(UUR) was reported for skeletal muscle, a 5′-extended intermediate of the same tRNA was observed in fibroblasts [141]. However, this apparent tissue specificity of the mitochondrial tRNA maturation pathway needs to be reproduced and should possibly be extended to other tRNAs and tissues to allow conclusions.

Silencing of RNase Z also provided direct evidence that 5′-end processing precedes 3′-end cleavage in Drosophila cell mitochondria [134]. No 5′-extended, 3′-processed tRNAs were detected in controls and mtRNase P continued to efficiently cleave tRNA precursors when 3′ end processing was impaired. In vitro studies in wheat mitochondrial extracts, in contrast, seemed to indicated that cleavages at the two tRNA ends are not ordered, as both possible forms of intermediates were reported [109]. Yet, processing apparently proceeded 5′ to 3′ in Oenothera mitochondrial extracts [110], and studies with partially purified potato RNase Z clearly indicated that 5′-end maturation has to occur first to allow 3′-end cleavage [142].

Mixed results were obtained for yeast mitochondrial tRNA processing. The 3′-end processing of yeast mitochondrial tRNAGlu was observed to depend on prior 5′ maturation in vitro [143], but a 5′-extended, 3′-processed tRNAfMet accumulated in deletion mutants of the mtRNase P RNA locus [61].

In summary, the order of processing seems to be flexible in some systems, and, depending on (i) the given tRNA precursor, (ii) the cell type, or (iii) possibly the relative abundance of RNase P versus RNase Z, one or the other pathway may predominate. In other systems 5′- before 3′-end processing clearly seems to be the favored, though possibly still not exclusive pathway.

Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Roland K. Hartmann for numerous detailed comments and suggestions on the manuscript, Elisa Vilardo for discussion and comments, Thomas Potuschak and Philippe Giegé for comments on the manuscript, and Christoph Weber for help with the preparation of Fig. 1. Related research in the Rossmanith lab was/is funded by the Austrian Science Fund FWF grants P17453 and I299, and the Vienna Science and Technology Fund WWTF grant LS09-032.

☆ This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Mitochondrial Gene Expression.

Fig. 1 Schematic structures of RNase P RNAs. (A) Universal consensus secondary structure of bacterial, archaeal, and eukaryal nuclear RNase P RNAs [25]. Gray indicates variable structures connecting conserved regions. Helices P1–P12 [144] and conserved sequence regions CR I–V [145] are indicated. Structural elements absent only in single, minor phylogenetic groups are included: P12, absent in M. genitalium[34]; P11, P12, CR II, and CR III, absent in P. aerophilum[43]. (B) Secondary structure of S. cerevisiae mtRNase P RNA (Rpm1r) [65].

Fig. 2 Structure of proteinaceous RNase P (PRORP). MTS, mitochondrial targeting sequence (facultative); PPR, pentatricopeptide repeat; CXXC, zinc-finger-like motif; NYN domain, N4BP1-YacP-like metallonuclease domain [82]. Sequence logos were generated using WebLogo [146] and are based on a ClustalW alignment of PRORP sequences from the following species (number of PRORPs if more than one indicated in parentheses): man, macaque, dog, cow, mouse, platypus, chicken, Xenopus tropicalis, zebrafish, Tribolium castaneum, fruit fly, Aedes aegypti, Anopheles gambiae, Culex pipiens, Nasonia vitripennis, A. thaliana (3), Oryza sativa (3), Physcomitrella patens (3), T. brucei (2), Leishmania major (2).



   
References
1 Schneider A.   Mitochondrial tRNA import and its consequences for mitochondrial translation Annu. Rev. Biochem. 80 2011 1033 1053 21417719 
2 Phizicky E.M.  Hopper A.K.   tRNA biology charges to the front Genes Dev. 24 2010 1832 1860 20810645 
3 Hartmann R.K.  Gößringer M.  Späth B.  Fischer S.  Marchfelder A.   The making of tRNAs and more — RNase P and tRNase Z Prog. Nucleic Acid Res. Mol. Biol. 85 2009 319 368 
4 Schäfer B.   RNA maturation in mitochondria of S. cerevisiae  and S. pombe  Gene 354 2005 80 85 15913924 
5 Montoya J.  López-Pérez M.J.  Ruiz-Pesini E.   Mitochondrial DNA transcription and diseases: past, present and future Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1757 2006 1179 1189 16697348 
6 Rossmanith W.  Holzmann J.   Processing mitochondrial (t)RNAs: new enzyme, old job Cell Cycle 8 2009 1650 1653 19411849 
7 Ojala D.  Montoya J.  Attardi G.   tRNA punctuation model of RNA processing in human mitochondria Nature 290 1981 470 474 7219536 
8 Unseld M.  Marienfeld J.R.  Brandt P.  Brennicke A.   The mitochondrial genome of Arabidopsis thaliana  contains 57 genes in 366,924 nucleotides Nat. Genet. 15 1997 57 61 8988169 
9 Forner J.  Weber B.  Thuss S.  Wildum S.  Binder S.   Mapping of mitochondrial mRNA termini in Arabidopsis thaliana : t-elements contribute to 5′ and 3′ end formation Nucleic Acids Res. 35 2007 3676 3692 17488843 
10 Vörtler S.  Mörl M.   tRNA-nucleotidyltransferases: highly unusual RNA polymerases with vital functions FEBS Lett. 584 2010 297 302 19883645 
11 Chen J.-Y.  Joyce P.B.M.  Wolfe C.L.  Steffen M.C.  Martin N.C.   Cytoplasmic and mitochondrial tRNA nucleotidyltransferase activities are derived from the same gene in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae  J. Biol. Chem. 267 1992 14879 14883 1634528 
12 Nagaike T.  Suzuki T.  Tomari Y.  Takemoto Hori C.  Negayama F.  Watanabe K.  Ueda T.   Identification and characterization of mammalian mitochondrial tRNA nucleotidyltransferases J. Biol. Chem. 276 2001 40041 40049 11504732 
13 Reichert A.S.  Thurlow D.L.  Mörl M.   A eubacterial origin for the human tRNA nucleotidyltransferase? Biol. Chem. 382 2001 1431 1438 11727826 
14 Rossmanith W.   Localization of human RNase Z isoforms: dual nuclear/mitochondrial targeting of the ELAC2 gene product by alternative translation initiation PLoS One 6 2011 e19152 21559454 
15 Jühling F.  Mörl M.  Hartmann R.K.  Sprinzl M.  Stadler P.F.  Pütz J.   tRNAdb 2009: compilation of tRNA sequences and tRNA genes Nucleic Acids Res. 37 2009 D159 D162 18957446 
16 Grosjean H.   DNA and RNA modification enzymes: structure, mechanism, function and evolution 2009 Landes Bioscience Austin, Texas 
17 Helm M.   Post-transcriptional nucleotide modification and alternative folding of RNA Nucleic Acids Res. 34 2006 721 733 16452298 
18 Czerwoniec A.  Dunin-Horkawicz S.  Purta E.  Kaminska K.H.  Kasprzak J.M.  Bujnicki J.M.  Grosjean H.  Rother K.   MODOMICS: a database of RNA modification pathways. 2008 update Nucleic Acids Res. 37 2009 D118 121 18854352 
19 Phizicky E.M.  Alfonzo J.D.   Do all modifications benefit all tRNAs? FEBS Lett. 584 2010 265 271 19931536 
20 Dirheimer G.  Keith G.  Dumas P.  Westhof E.   Primary, secondary, and tertiary structures of tRNAs Söll D.  RajBhandary U.L.   tRNA: Structure, Biosynthesis, and Function 1995 ASM Press Washington, D.C. 93 126 
21 Helm M.  Brulé H.  Friede D.  Giegé R.  Pütz D.  Florentz C.   Search for characteristic structural features of mammalian mitochondrial tRNAs RNA 6 2000 1356 1379 11073213 
22 Suzuki T.  Nagao A.  Suzuki T.   Human mitochondrial tRNAs: biogenesis, function, structural aspects, and diseases Annu. Rev. Genet. 45 2011 299 329 21910628 
23 Liu F.  Altman S.   Ribonuclease P 2010 Springer New York 
24 Lai L.B.  Vioque A.  Kirsebom L.A.  Gopalan V.   Unexpected diversity of RNase P, an ancient tRNA processing enzyme: challenges and prospects FEBS Lett. 584 2010 287 296 19931535 
25 Ellis J.C.  Brown J.W.   The RNase P family RNA Biol. 6 2009 362 369 19738420 
26 Evans D.  Marquez S.M.  Pace N.R.   RNase P: interface of the RNA and protein worlds Trends Biochem. Sci. 31 2006 333 341 16679018 
27 Robertson H.D.  Altman S.  Smith J.D.   Purification and properties of a specific Escherichia coli  ribonuclease which cleaves a tyrosine transfer ribonucleic acid precursor J. Biol. Chem. 247 1972 5243 5251 4560501 
28 Stark B.C.  Kole R.  Bowman E.J.  Altman S.   Ribonuclease P: an enzyme with an essential RNA component Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 75 1978 3717 3721 358197 
29 Guerrier-Takada C.  Gardiner K.  Marsh T.  Pace N.  Altman S.   The RNA moiety of ribonuclease P is the catalytic subunit of the enzyme Cell 35 1983 849 857 6197186 
30 Holzmann J.  Frank P.  Löffler E.  Bennett K.L.  Gerner C.  Rossmanith W.   RNase P without RNA: identification and functional reconstitution of the human mitochondrial tRNA processing enzyme Cell 135 2008 462 474 18984158 
31 Gobert A.  Gutmann B.  Taschner A.  Gößringer M.  Holzmann J.  Hartmann R.K.  Rossmanith W.  Giegé P.   A single Arabidopsis  organellar protein has RNase P activity Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 17 2010 740 744 20473316 
32 Ellis J.C.  Brown J.W.   The evolution of RNase P and its RNA Liu F.  Altman S.   Ribonuclease P 2010 Springer New York 17 40 
33 Kazantsev A.V.  Pace N.R.   Bacterial RNase P: a new view of an ancient enzyme Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 4 2006 729 740 16980936 
34 Siegel R.W.  Banta A.B.  Haas E.S.  Brown J.W.  Pace N.R.   Mycoplasma fermentans  simplifies our view of the catalytic core of ribonuclease P RNA RNA 2 1996 452 462 8665412 
35 Gößringer M.  Hartmann R.K.   Function of heterologous and truncated RNase P proteins in Bacillus subtilis  Mol. Microbiol. 66 2007 801 813 17919279 
36 Hartmann E.  Hartmann R.K.   The enigma of ribonuclease P evolution Trends Genet. 19 2003 561 569 14550630 
37 Swanson R.V.   Genome of Aquifex aeolicus  Methods Enzymol. 330 2001 158 169 11210496 
38 Marszalkowski M.  Willkomm D.K.  Hartmann R.K.   5′-end maturation of tRNA in aquifex aeolicus Biol. Chem. 389 2008 395 403 18208351 
39 Lombo T.B.  Kaberdin V.R.   RNA processing in Aquifex aeolicus  involves RNase E/G and an RNase P-like activity Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 366 2008 457 463 18070593 
40 Lai L.B.  Cho I.-M.  Chen W.-Y.  Gopalan V.   Archaeal RNase P: a mosaic of its bacterial and eukaryal relatives Liu F.  Altman S.   Ribonuclease P 2010 Springer New York 153 172 
41 Jarrous N.  Gopalan V.   Archaeal/eukaryal RNase P: subunits, functions and RNA diversification Nucleic Acids Res. 38 2010 7885 7894 20716516 
42 Pannucci J.A.  Haas E.S.  Hall T.A.  Harris J.K.  Brown J.W.   RNase P RNAs from some Archaea are catalytically active Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 96 1999 7803 7808 10393902 
43 Lai L.B.  Chan P.P.  Cozen A.E.  Bernick D.L.  Brown J.W.  Gopalan V.  Lowe T.M.   Discovery of a minimal form of RNase P in Pyrobaculum Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 107 2010 22493 22498 21135215 
44 Randau L.  Schröder I.  Söll D.   Life without RNase P Nature 453 2008 120 123 18451863 
45 Walker S.C.  Marvin M.C.  Engelke D.   Eukaryote RNase P and RNase MRP Liu F.  Altman S.   Ribonuclease P 2010 Springer New York 173 202 
46 Esakova O.  Krasilnikov A.S.   Of proteins and RNA: the RNase P/MRP family RNA 16 2010 1725 1747 20627997 
47 Kikovska E.  Svärd S.G.  Kirsebom L.A.   Eukaryotic RNase P RNA mediates cleavage in the absence of protein Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 104 2007 2062 2067 17284611 
48 Marvin M.C.  Clauder-Münster S.  Walker S.C.  Sarkeshik A.  Yates J.R. III  Steinmetz L.M.  Engelke D.R.   Accumulation of noncoding RNA due to an RNase P defect in Saccharomyces cerevisiae  RNA 17 2011 1441 1450 21665995 
49 Jarrous N.  Reiner R.  Dehtiar Y.   Human RNase P and transcription Liu F.  Altman S.   Ribonuclease P 2010 Springer New York 223 234 
50 Piccinelli P.  Rosenblad M.A.  Samuelsson T.   Identification and analysis of ribonuclease P and MRP RNA in a broad range of eukaryotes Nucleic Acids Res. 33 2005 4485 4495 16087735 
51 Yusuf D.  Marz M.  Stadler P.F.  Hofacker I.L.   Bcheck: a wrapper tool for detecting RNase P RNA genes BMC Genomics 11 2010 432 20626900 
52 Rosenblad M.A.  López M.D.  Piccinelli P.  Samuelsson T.   Inventory and analysis of the protein subunits of the ribonucleases P and MRP provides further evidence of homology between the yeast and human enzymes Nucleic Acids Res. 34 2006 5145 5156 16998185 
53 Li D.  Willkomm D.K.  Schön A.  Hartmann R.K.   RNase P of the Cyanophora paradoxa  cyanelle: a plastid ribozyme Biochimie 89 2007 1528 1538 17881113 
54 Vioque A.   RNase P from organelles Liu F.  Altman S.   Ribonuclease P 2010 Springer New York 203 222 
55 Wang M.J.  Davis N.W.  Gegenheimer P.   Novel mechanisms for maturation of chloroplast transfer RNA precursors EMBO J. 7 1988 1567 1574 16453848 
56 Martin N.C.  Underbrink-Lyon K.   A mitochondrial locus is necessary for the synthesis of mitochondrial tRNA in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae  Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 78 1981 4743 4747 6795621 
57 Underbrink-Lyon K.  Miller D.L.  Ross N.A.  Fukuhara H.  Martin N.C.   Characterization of a yeast mitochondrial locus necessary for tRNA biosynthesis. Deletion mapping and restriction mapping studies Mol. Gen. Genet. 191 1983 512 518 6355772 
58 Miller D.L.  Martin N.C.   Characterization of the yeast mitochondrial locus necessary for tRNA biosynthesis: DNA sequence analysis and identification of a new transcript Cell 34 1983 911 917 6313214 
59 Stribinskis V.  Gao G.-J.  Sulo P.  Dang Y.L.  Martin N.C.   Yeast mitochondrial RNase P RNA synthesis is altered in an RNase P protein subunit mutant: insights into the biogenesis of a mitochondrial RNA-processing enzyme Mol. Cell. Biol. 16 1996 3429 3436 8668158 
60 Hollingsworth M.J.  Martin N.C.   RNase P activity in the mitochondria of Saccharomyces cerevisiae  depends on both mitochondrion and nucleus-encoded components Mol. Cell. Biol. 6 1986 1058 1064 3537697 
61 Martin N.C.  Miller D.L.  Underbrink K.  Ming X.   Structure of a precursor to the yeast mitochondrial tRNAfMet . Implications for the function of the tRNA synthesis locus J. Biol. Chem. 260 1985 1479 1483 2578460 
62 Morales M.J.  Wise C.A.  Hollingsworth M.J.  Martin N.C.   Characterization of yeast mitochondrial RNase P: an intact RNA subunit is not essential for activity in vitro  Nucleic Acids Res. 17 1989 6865 6881 2476723 
63 Wise C.A.  Martin N.C.   Dramatic size variation of yeast mitochondrial RNAs suggests that RNase P RNAs can be quite small J. Biol. Chem. 266 1991 19154 19157 1918032 
64 Sbisà E.  Pesole G.  Tullo A.  Saccone C.   The evolution of the RNase P- and RNase MRP-associated RNAs: phylogenetic analysis and nucleotide substitution rate J. Mol. Evol. 43 1996 46 57 8660429 
65 Seif E.R.  Forget L.  Martin N.C.  Lang B.F.   Mitochondrial RNase P RNAs in ascomycete fungi: lineage-specific variations in RNA secondary structure RNA 9 2003 1073 1083 12923256 
66 Morales M.J.  Dang Y.L.  Lou Y.C.  Sulo P.  Martin N.C.   A 105-kDa protein is required for yeast mitochondrial RNase P activity Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 89 1992 9875 9879 1409716 
67 Dang Y.L.  Martin N.C.   Yeast mitochondrial RNase P. Sequence of the RPM2  gene and demonstration that its product is a protein subunit of the enzyme J. Biol. Chem. 268 1993 19791 19796 8366116 
68 Kassenbrock C.K.  Gao G.-J.  Groom K.R.  Sulo P.  Douglas M.G.  Martin N.C.   RPM2 , independently of its mitochondrial RNase P function, suppresses an ISP42  mutant defective in mitochondrial import and is essential for normal growth Mol. Cell. Biol. 15 1995 4763 4770 7544434 
69 Stribinskis V.  Gao G.-J.  Sulo P.  Ellis S.R.  Martin N.C.   Rpm2p: separate domains promote tRNA and Rpm1r maturation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae  mitochondria Nucleic Acids Res. 29 2001 3631 3637 11522833 
70 Myers A.M.  Pape L.K.  Tzagoloff A.   Mitochondrial protein synthesis is required for maintenance of intact mitochondrial genomes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae  EMBO J. 4 1985 2087 2092 3905388 
71 Stribinskis V.  Heyman H.-C.  Ellis S.R.  Steffen M.C.  Martin N.C.   Rpm2p, a component of yeast mitochondrial RNase P, acts as a transcriptional activator in the nucleus Mol. Cell. Biol. 25 2005 6546 6558 16024791 
72 Stribinskis V.  Ramos K.S.   Rpm2p, a protein subunit of mitochondrial RNase P, physically and genetically interacts with cytoplasmic processing bodies Nucleic Acids Res. 35 2007 1301 1311 17267405 
73 Schonauer M.S.  Kastaniotis A.J.  Hiltunen J.K.  Dieckmann C.L.   Intersection of RNA processing and the type II fatty acid synthesis pathway in yeast mitochondria Mol. Cell. Biol. 28 2008 6646 6657 18779316 
74 Daoud R.  Forget L.  Franz Lang B.   Yeast mitochondrial RNase P, RNase Z and the RNA degradosome are part of a stable supercomplex Nucleic Acids Res. 40 2012 1728 1736 22034500 
75 Seif E.  Leigh J.  Liu Y.  Roewer I.  Forget L.  Lang B.F.   Comparative mitochondrial genomics in zygomycetes: bacteria-like RNase P RNAs, mobile elements and a close source of the group I intron invasion in angiosperms Nucleic Acids Res. 33 2005 734 744 15689432 
76 Lee Y.C.  Lee B.J.  Hwang D.S.  Kang H.S.   Purification and characterization of mitochondrial ribonuclease P from Aspergillus nidulans  Eur. J. Biochem. 235 1996 289 296 8631344 
77 Anderson S.  Bankier A.T.  Barrell B.G.  de Bruijn M.H.  Coulson A.R.  Drouin J.  Eperon I.C.  Nierlich D.P.  Roe B.A.  Sanger F.  Schreier P.H.  Smith A.J.  Staden R.  Young I.G.   Sequence and organization of the human mitochondrial genome Nature 290 1981 457 465 7219534 
78 Ojala D.  Merkel C.  Gelfand R.  Attardi G.   The tRNA genes punctuate the reading of genetic information in human mitochondrial DNA Cell 22 1980 393 403 7448867 
79 Doersen C.J.  Guerrier-Takada C.  Altman S.  Attardi G.   Characterization of an RNase P activity from HeLa cell mitochondria J. Biol. Chem. 260 1985 5942 5949 2581945 
80 Rossmanith W.  Tullo A.  Potuschak T.  Karwan R.  Sbisà E.   Human mitochondrial tRNA processing J. Biol. Chem. 270 1995 12885 12891 7759547 
81 Rossmanith W.  Karwan R.M.   Characterization of human mitochondrial RNase P: novel aspects in tRNA processing Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 247 1998 234 241 9642109 
82 Anantharaman V.  Aravind L.   The NYN domains: novel predicted RNAses with a PIN domain-like fold RNA Biol. 3 2006 18 27 17114934 
83 Schmitz-Linneweber C.  Small I.   Pentatricopeptide repeat proteins: a socket set for organelle gene expression Trends Plant Sci. 13 2008 663 670 19004664 
84 Jackman J.E.  Montange R.K.  Malik H.S.  Phizicky E.M.   Identification of the yeast gene encoding the tRNA m1 G methyltransferase responsible for modification at position 9 RNA 9 2003 574 585 12702816 
85 Holzmann J.  Rossmanith W.   tRNA recognition, processing, and disease: hypotheses around an unorthodox type of RNase P in human mitochondria Mitochondrion 9 2009 284 288 19376274 
86 Rossmanith W.   Processing of human mitochondrial tRNASer(AGY) : a novel pathway in tRNA biosynthesis J. Mol. Biol. 265 1997 365 371 9034356 
87 Rossmanith W.  Karwan R.M.   Impairment of tRNA processing by point mutations in mitochondrial tRNALeu(UUR)  associated with mitochondrial diseases FEBS Lett. 433 1998 269 274 9744809 
88 Rossmanith W.  Potuschak T.   Difference between mitochondrial RNase P and nuclear RNase P Mol. Cell. Biol. 21 2001 8236 8237 11710332 
89 Rossmanith W.  Tullo A.  Imre E.-M.  Saccone C.  Sbisà E.  Karwan R.   Palmieri F.  Papa S.  Saccone C.  Gadaleta M.N.   Nuclear-mitochondrial coevolution of RNA processing enzymes and cellular function Progress in Cell Research vol. 5 1995 Elsevier Science B.V Amsterdam 143 147 
90 Jörnvall H.  Persson B.  Krook M.  Atrian S.  Gonzàlez-Duarte R.  Jeffery J.  Ghosh D.   Short-chain dehydrogenases/reductases (SDR) Biochemistry 34 1995 6003 6013 7742302 
91 Yang S.-Y.  He X.-Y.  Miller D.   Hydroxysteroid (17β) dehydrogenase X in human health and disease Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 343 2011 1 6 21708223 
92 Ofman R.  Ruiter J.P.N.  Feenstra M.  Duran M.  Poll-The B.T.  Zschocke J.  Ensenauer R.  Lehnert W.  Sass J.O.  Sperl W.  Wanders R.J.A.   2-Methyl-3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency is caused by mutations in the HADH2  gene Am. J. Hum. Genet. 72 2003 1300 1307 12696021 
93 Rauschenberger K.  Schöler K.  Sass J.O.  Sauer S.  Djuric Z.  Rumig C.  Wolf N.I.  Okun J.G.  Kölker S.  Schwarz H.  Fischer C.  Grziwa B.  Runz H.  Nümann A.  Shafqat N.  Kavanagh K.L.  Hämmerling G.  Wanders R.J.A.  Shield J.P.H.  Wendel U.  Stern D.  Nawroth P.  Hoffmann G.F.  Bartram C.R.  Arnold B.  Bierhaus A.  Oppermann U.  Steinbeisser H.  Zschocke J.   A non-enzymatic function of 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 10 is required for mitochondrial integrity and cell survival EMBO Mol. Med. 2 2010 51 62 20077426 
94 Puranam R.S.  Attardi G.   The RNase P associated with HeLa cell mitochondria contains an essential RNA component identical in sequence to that of the nuclear RNase P Mol. Cell. Biol. 21 2001 548 561 11134342 
95 Wang G.  Chen H.-W.  Oktay Y.  Zhang J.  Allen E.L.  Smith G.M.  Fan K.C.  Hong J.S.  French S.W.  McCaffery J.M.  Lightowlers R.N.  Morse H.C. III  Koehler C.M.  Teitell M.A.   PNPASE regulates RNA import into mitochondria Cell 142 2010 456 467 20691904 
96 Kiss T.  Filipowicz W.   Evidence against a mitochondrial location of the 7-2/MRP RNA in mammalian cells Cell 70 1992 11 16 1377982 
97 Mercer T.R.  Neph S.  Dinger M.E.  Crawford J.  Smith M.A.  Shearwood A.-M.J.  Haugen E.  Bracken C.P.  Rackham O.  Stamatoyannopoulos J.A.  Filipovska A.  Mattick J.S.   The human mitochondrial transcriptome Cell 146 2011 645 658 21854988 
98 Esakova O.  Perederina A.  Quan C.  Schmitt M.E.  Krasilnikov A.S.   Footprinting analysis demonstrates extensive similarity between eukaryotic RNase P and RNase MRP holoenzymes RNA 14 2008 1558 1567 18579867 
99 Wang D.D.-H.  Shu Z.  Lieser S.A.  Chen P.-L.  Lee W.-H.   Human mitochondrial SUV3 and polynucleotide phosphorylase form a 330-kDa heteropentamer to cooperatively degrade double-stranded RNA with a 3′-to-5′ directionality J. Biol. Chem. 284 2009 20812 20821 19509288 
100 Szczesny R.J.  Borowski L.S.  Brzezniak L.K.  Dmochowska A.  Gewartowski K.  Bartnik E.  Stepien P.P.   Human mitochondrial RNA turnover caught in flagranti: involvement of hSuv3p helicase in RNA surveillance Nucleic Acids Res. 38 2010 279 298 19864255 
101 Holec S.  Lange H.  Kühn K.  Alioua M.  Börner T.  Gagliardi D.   Relaxed transcription in Arabidopsis  mitochondria is counterbalanced by RNA stability control mediated by polyadenylation and polynucleotide phosphorylase Mol. Cell. Biol. 26 2006 2869 2876 16537927 
102 Mineri R.  Pavelka N.  Fernandez-Vizarra E.  Ricciardi-Castagnoli P.  Zeviani M.  Tiranti V.   How do human cells react to the absence of mitochondrial DNA? PLoS One 4 2009 e5713 19492094 
103 Boore J.L.   Animal mitochondrial genomes Nucleic Acids Res. 27 1999 1767 1780 10101183 
104 Burger G.  Lang B.F.   Parallels in genome evolution in mitochondria and bacterial symbionts IUBMB Life 55 2003 205 212 12880200 
105 Wolstenholme D.R.  Macfarlane J.L.  Okimoto R.  Clary D.O.  Wahleithner J.A.   Bizarre tRNAs inferred from DNA sequences of mitochondrial genomes of nematode worms Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 84 1987 1324 1328 3469671 
106 Turmel M.  Lemieux C.  Burger G.  Lang B.F.  Otis C.  Plante I.  Gray M.W.   The complete mitochondrial DNA sequences of Nephroselmis olivacea  and Pedinomonas minor.  Two radically different evolutionary patterns within green algae Plant Cell 11 1999 1717 1730 10488238 
107 Robbens S.  Derelle E.  Ferraz C.  Wuyts J.  Moreau H.  Van de Peer Y.   The complete chloroplast and mitochondrial DNA sequence of Ostreococcus tauri : organelle genomes of the smallest eukaryote are examples of compaction Mol. Biol. Evol. 24 2007 956 968 17251180 
108 Seif E.  Cadieux A.  Lang B.F.   Hybrid E. coli —mitochondrial ribonuclease P RNAs are catalytically active RNA 12 2006 1661 1670 16894220 
109 Hanic-Joyce P.J.  Gray M.W.   Processing of transfer RNA precursors in a wheat mitochondrial extract J. Biol. Chem. 265 1990 13782 13791 1696257 
110 Marchfelder A.  Schuster W.  Brennicke A.   In vitro  processing of mitochondrial and plastid derived tRNA precursors in a plant mitochondrial extract Nucleic Acids Res. 18 1990 1401 1406 2326185 
111 Marchfelder A.  Brennicke A.   Characterization and partial purification of tRNA processing activities from potato mitochondria Plant Physiol. 105 1994 1247 1254 7972495 
112 Placido A.  Sieber F.  Gobert A.  Gallerani R.  Giegé P.  Maréchal-Drouard L.   Plant mitochondria use two pathways for the biogenesis of tRNAHis  Nucleic Acids Res. 38 2010 7711 7717 20660484 
113 Salavati R.  Panigrahi A.K.  Stuart K.D.   Mitochondrial ribonuclease P activity of Trypanosoma brucei  Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 115 2001 109 117 11377745 
114 Lang B.F.  Burger G.  O'Kelly C.J.  Cedergren R.  Golding G.B.  Lemieux C.  Sankoff D.  Turmel M.  Gray M.W.   An ancestral mitochondrial DNA resembling a eubacterial genome in miniature Nature 387 1997 493 497 9168110 
115 Hancock K.  Hajduk S.L.   The mitochondrial tRNAs of Trypanosoma brucei  are nuclear encoded J. Biol. Chem. 265 1990 19208 19215 2229071 
116 Tan T.H.P.  Pach R.  Crausaz A.  Ivens A.  Schneider A.   tRNAs in Trypanosoma brucei : genomic organization, expression, and mitochondrial import Mol. Cell. Biol. 22 2002 3707 3717 11997507 
117 Hancock K.  LeBlanc A.J.  Donze D.  Hajduk S.L.   Identification of nuclear encoded precursor tRNAs within the mitochondrion of Trypanosoma brucei  J. Biol. Chem. 267 1992 23963 23971 1385429 
118 Hauser R.  Schneider A.   tRNAs are imported into mitochondria of Trypanosoma brucei  independently of their genomic context and genetic origin EMBO J. 14 1995 4212 4220 7556062 
119 Deutscher M.P.   tRNA processing nucleases Söll D.  RajBhandary U.L.   tRNA: Structure, Biosynthesis, and Function 1995 ASM Press Washington, D.C. 51 65 
120 Maraia R.J.  Lamichhane T.N.   3′ processing of eukaryotic precursor tRNAs WIREs RNA 2 2011 362 375 21572561 
121 Ceballos M.  Vioque A.   tRNase Z Protein Pept. Lett. 14 2007 137 145 17305600 
122 Redko Y.  Li de la Sierra-Gallay I.  Condon C.   When all's zed and done: the structure and function of RNase Z in prokaryotes Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 5 2007 278 286 17363966 
123 Späth B.  Canino G.  Marchfelder A.   tRNase Z: the end is not in sight Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 64 2007 2404 2412 17599240 
124 Vogel A.  Schilling O.  Späth B.  Marchfelder A.   The tRNase Z family of proteins: physiological functions, substrate specificity and structural properties Biol. Chem. 386 2005 1253 1264 16336119 
125 Schiffer S.  Rösch S.  Marchfelder A.   Assigning a function to a conserved group of proteins: the tRNA 3′-processing enzymes EMBO J. 21 2002 2769 2777 12032089 
126 Aravind L.   An evolutionary classification of the metallo-β-lactamase fold proteins In Silico Biol. 1 1999 69 91 11471246 
127 Ishii R.  Minagawa A.  Takaku H.  Takagi M.  Nashimoto M.  Yokoyama S.   Crystal structure of the tRNA 3′ processing endoribonuclease tRNase Z from Thermotoga maritima  J. Biol. Chem. 280 2005 14138 14144 15701599 
128 Kostelecky B.  Pohl E.  Vogel A.  Schilling O.  Meyer-Klaucke W.   The crystal structure of the zinc phosphodiesterase from Escherichia coli  provides insight into function and cooperativity of tRNase Z-family proteins J. Bacteriol. 188 2006 1607 1614 16452444 
129 Li de la Sierra-Gallay I.  Pellegrini O.  Condon C.   Structural basis for substrate binding, cleavage and allostery in the tRNA maturase RNase Z Nature 433 2005 657 661 15654328 
130 Li de la Sierra-Gallay I.  Mathy N.  Pellegrini O.  Condon C.   Structure of the ubiquitous 3′ processing enzyme RNase Z bound to transfer RNA Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 13 2006 376 377 16518398 
131 Nashimoto M.  Tamura M.  Kaspar R.L.   Minimum requirements for substrates of mammalian tRNA 3′ processing endoribonuclease Biochemistry 38 1999 12089 12096 10508413 
132 Schiffer S.  Helm M.  Théobald-Dietrich A.  Giegé R.  Marchfelder A.   The plant tRNA 3′ processing enzyme has a broad substrate spectrum Biochemistry 40 2001 8264 8272 11444972 
133 Brzezniak L.K.  Bijata M.  Szczesny R.J.  Stepien P.P.   Involvement of human ELAC2 gene product in 3′ end processing of mitochondrial tRNAs RNA Biol. 8 2011 
134 Dubrovsky E.B.  Dubrovskaya V.A.  Levinger L.  Schiffer S.  Marchfelder A.   Drosophila  RNase Z processes mitochondrial and nuclear pre-tRNA 3′ ends in vivo  Nucleic Acids Res. 32 2004 255 262 14715923 
135 Canino G.  Bocian E.  Barbezier N.  Echeverria M.  Forner J.  Binder S.  Marchfelder A.   Arabidopsis encodes four tRNase Z enzymes Plant Physiol. 150 2009 1494 1502 19411372 
136 Hazbun T.R.  Malmström L.  Anderson S.  Graczyk B.J.  Fox B.  Riffle M.  Sundin B.A.  Aranda J.D.  McDonald W.H.  Chiu C.H.  Snydsman B.E.  Bradley P.  Muller E.G.  Fields S.  Baker D.  Yates J.R. III  Davis T.N.   Assigning function to yeast proteins by integration of technologies Mol. Cell 12 2003 1353 1365 14690591 
137 Chen Y.  Beck A.  Davenport C.  Chen Y.  Shattuck D.  Tavtigian S.V.   Characterization of TRZ1 , a yeast homolog of the human candidate prostate cancer susceptibility gene ELAC2 encoding tRNase Z BMC Mol. Biol. 6 2005 12 15892892 
138 Gan X.  Yang J.  Li J.  Yu H.  Dai H.  Liu J.  Huang Y.   The fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe  has two distinct tRNase ZL s encoded by two different genes and differentially targeted to the nucleus and mitochondria Biochem. J. 435 2011 103 111 21208191 
139 Zhao Z.  Su W.  Yuan S.  Huang Y.   Functional conservation of tRNase ZL  among Saccharomyces cerevisiae , Schizosaccharomyces pombe  and humans Biochem. J. 422 2009 483 492 19555350 
140 Rossmanith W.   Mammalian mitochondrial transcript processing Institute of Microbiology and Genetics, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria 1996 145 
141 Bindoff L.A.  Howell N.  Poulton J.  McCullough D.A.  Morten K.J.  Lightowlers R.N.  Turnbull D.M.  Weber K.   Abnormal RNA processing associated with a novel tRNA mutation in mitochondrial DNA J. Biol. Chem. 268 1993 19559 19564 8366098 
142 Kunzmann A.  Brennicke A.  Marchfelder A.   5′ end maturation and RNA editing have to precede tRNA 3′ processing in plant mitochondria Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 95 1998 108 113 9419337 
143 Chen J.-Y.  Martin N.C.   Biosynthesis of tRNA in yeast mitochondria. An endonuclease is responsible for the 3′-processing of tRNA precursors J. Biol. Chem. 263 1988 13677 13682 2843529 
144 Haas E.S.  Brown J.W.  Pitulle C.  Pace N.R.   Further perspective on the catalytic core and secondary structure of ribonuclease P RNA Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 91 1994 2527 2531 7511814 
145 Chen J.L.  Pace N.R.   Identification of the universally conserved core of ribonuclease P RNA RNA 3 1997 557 560 9174091 
146 Crooks G.E.  Hon G.  Chandonia J.-M.  Brenner S.E.   WebLogo: a sequence logo generator Genome Res. 14 2004 1188 1190 15173120 



