

   
Biochim Biophys ActaBiochim. Biophys. ActaBiochimica et Biophysica Acta0006-3002Elsevier Pub. CoS1874-9399(08)00043-610.1016/j.bbagrm.2008.02.002ReviewTranslational control by cytoplasmic polyadenylation in Xenopus oocytesRadfordHelois E.MeijerHedda A.de MoorCornelia H.cornelia.demoor@nottingham.ac.uk⁎School of Pharmacy, Centre for Biomolecular Sciences, University of Nottingham, University Park, Nottingham NG7 2UH, UK⁎ Corresponding author. Fax: +44 0115 8468002. cornelia.demoor@nottingham.ac.uk142008420081779421722921920073012008422008© 2008 Elsevier B.V.2008Elsevier B.V.Open Access under CC BY 3.0 licenseElongation of the poly(A) tails of specific mRNAs in the cytoplasm is a crucial regulatory step in oogenesis and early development of many animal species. The best studied example is the regulation of translation by cytoplasmic polyadenylation elements (CPEs) in the 3′ untranslated region of mRNAs involved in Xenopus oocyte maturation. In this review we discuss the mechanism of translational control by the CPE binding protein (CPEB) in Xenopus oocytes as follows:1. The cytoplasmic polyadenylation machinery such as CPEB, the subunits of cleavage and polyadenylation specificity factor (CPSF), symplekin, Gld-2 and poly(A) polymerase (PAP).

2. The signal transduction that leads to the activation of CPE-mediated polyadenylation during oocyte maturation, including the potential roles of kinases such as MAPK, Aurora A, CamKII, cdk1/Ringo and cdk1/cyclin B.

3. The role of deadenylation and translational repression, including the potential involvement of PARN, CCR4/NOT, maskin, pumilio, Xp54 (Ddx6, Rck), other P-body components and isoforms of the cap binding initiation factor eIF4E.



Finally we discuss some of the remaining questions regarding the mechanisms of translational regulation by cytoplasmic polyadenylation and give our view on where our knowledge is likely to be expanded in the near future.

Keywords
Cytoplasmic polyadenylationOocyteMeiotic maturationTranslational controlDeadenylation

   
1 Introduction
The regulation of translation of mRNAs by cytoplasmic elongation of the poly(A) tail was discovered some twenty years ago in the oocytes and early embryos of clams, worms, frogs and mice [1–6]. These maternal mRNAs are stored in the growing oocyte with a short poly(A) tail of 20 to 40 nucleotides and are translationally repressed (masked). Upon oocyte maturation or after fertilisation, the poly(A) tail of masked mRNAs is elongated to 80–250 residues and the mRNAs are translationally activated. A long poly(A) tail is thought to be stimulatory to translation through the binding of cytoplasmic poly(A) binding proteins, which recruit initiation factors and form a closed-loop complex through their association with the translation initiation factor eIF-4G [7]. Cytoplasmic polyadenylation is essential for the meiotic maturation of the oocyte in both Xenopus and mouse, as it mediates the translational activation of the mRNAs encoding c-Mos kinase and mitotic cyclins [8]. In addition, cytoplasmic polyadenylation has been implicated in the cell cycle, in cellular senescence and in the formation of memory through synaptic plasticity [9]. In this review we will discuss the current knowledge of the mechanism of translational control by cytoplasmic polyadenylation, with an emphasis on Xenopus oocyte maturation and CPEB, the cytoplasmic polyadenylation element binding protein. A review of the role of cytoplasmic polyadenylation in mammalian gametogenesis is provided elsewhere in this volume (Tadashi Baba).

2 mRNA elements and RNA binding proteins
In order for mRNAs to be singled out for cytoplasmic polyadenylation, they have to be recognised by the polyadenylation machinery. In oocytes and early embryos of the African clawed frog, Xenopus, cytoplasmic polyadenylation can be conferred by several discrete elements in the 3′ untranslated region (3′ UTR) of the mRNA which are recognised by specific RNA binding proteins. At least 4 different cytoplasmic polyadenylation elements have been identified in Xenopus. The C-rich cytoplasmic polyadenylation element and the U-rich embryonic cytoplasmic polyadenylation element normally mediate cytoplasmic polyadenylation in the zygote and early embryo [10,11]. The putative cytoplasmic polyadenylation factors binding to these elements are poly(rC) binding protein 2 (PCBP2) and Elav related protein A, the ortholog of HuR, respectively [10,12–14]. A polyadenylation element that functions early in oocyte maturation, the polyadenylation response element (PRE), was predicted computationally [15,16]. The RNA binding protein Musashi was shown to bind to some, but not all PREs and mutating Musashi or its known consensus binding site blocked cytoplasmic polyadenylation, indicating that it is likely to be a cytoplasmic polyadenylation factor [17]. These data suggest that the collection of cytoplasmic polyadenylation elements that have been called PREs may represent a mixture of Musashi binding sites and at least one more uncharacterised cytoplasmic polyadenylation element.

By far the best characterised cytoplasmic polyadenylation element is the CPE, which is required for the cytoplasmic polyadenylation of a number of mRNAs, including cyclin B1 mRNA, during oocyte maturation and during the embryonic cell cycle [18–20]. The consensus CPE is often described as U5AU, but variations such as U4AU (c-mos), and U4–5A2U (cyclin B1) have also been shown to be active [5,6,21,22]. The CPEs in the mRNA encoding mouse c-Mos are active in mature Xenopus oocytes, but only conform to U5A [23,24]. Strongly polyadenylating mRNAs, however, generally adhere to the U5A1–2U consensus. In addition, examination of the cases in the existing literature suggests that CPEs that mediate significant polyadenylation tend to be close to the polyadenylation signal, from downstream to overlapping and up to approximately 60 nt upstream [21,25–29].

The CPE binds cytoplasmic polyadenylation element binding protein (CPEB), an RNA binding protein containing two RNA recognition motifs and a zinc finger region, all of which are required for recognition of the CPE [21,30,31]. In addition to the fact that many mRNAs bearing a CPE undergo cytoplasmic polyadenylation, a wealth of evidence indicates that CPEB is required for cytoplasmic polyadenylation. Depletion of CPEB from an egg extract abolishes polyadenylation and injection of a CPEB antibody blocks it in oocytes and embryos [20,21,31,32]. N-terminal deletions and phosphorylation site mutants of CPEB act as dominant negative blockers of cytoplasmic polyadenylation [20,21,31,32]. In mice, knock out or knock down of Cpeb1 causes poly(A) tail changes in target mRNAs in early oogenesis and oocyte maturation [33,34]. CPEB is therefore the only well-established mRNA specificity factor for cytoplasmic polyadenylation in vertebrates.

In addition to an mRNA specific element, the nuclear poly(A) signal (AAUAAA or AUUAAA) is absolutely required for cytoplasmic polyadenylation [5,6,11,22,28]. The poly(A) signal is thought to recruit a variant of the cleavage and polyadenylation specificity factor (CPSF), a four subunit complex that binds this element and mediates polyadenylation in the nucleus [35,36]. The 160 kDa subunit is the RNA binding protein that recognises the poly(A) signal [37], while the 73 kDa subunit is the endonuclease that mediates the formation of the 3′ ends of all mRNAs [38–41]. The 100 kDa subunit resembles the 73 kDa subunit but does not appear to have nuclease activity and its precise function in 3′ end processing is unknown. The 30 kDa subunit is a zinc finger protein that has been reported to have some affinity for RNA and it potentially has endonuclease activity. It was recently shown to mediate interactions between CPSF and the body of RNA polymerase II [42–45]. An additional CPSF associated factor, Fip1, has been shown to mediate the interaction with poly(A) polymerase and have U-rich RNA binding activity [46]. It has probably been present in most of the previously utilised preparations of CPSF and is thought of as a fifth subunit by many in the field [40,46].

The 100 and 30 kDa CPSF subunits are present in the Xenopus oocyte cytoplasm, and the 160 kDa subunit has been inferred to be present from its binding activity, while the 73 kDa endonuclease is absent from the cytoplasmic CPSF complex [47]. It is unknown whether Fip1 is present in the oocyte cytoplasm. Immunodepletion of the 100 kDa subunit from egg extracts or expression of a viral protein that blocks nuclear polyadenylation by binding to the 30 kDa subunit also abolishes cytoplasmic polyadenylation, demonstrating that CPSF is required for this process [47]. In addition, CPEB is coimmunoprecipitated with the 100 kDa CPSF subunit from oocyte extracts (but not with the 73 kDa subunit) and it binds to the 160 kDa subunit in reticulocyte lysate [47,48]. Whether these interactions are direct or mediated by other proteins present in both oocyte extract and reticulocyte lysate is not yet clear. Curiously, the binding of CPSF to the poly(A) signal is stimulated by a CPE even in the absence of CPEB, a phenomenon that could be mediated by the RNA binding activity of the 30 kDa subunit or by Fip1 [46,49]. However, CPEB strongly stimulates polyadenylation of a CPE containing RNA in a pure reaction system containing nuclear CPSF and poly(A) polymerase [48]. It is therefore likely that CPEB improves the recruitment of CPSF to the mRNA by binding directly to both.

3 Symplekin
Symplekin is a protein found in nuclear complexes containing CPSF and other processing factors and is thought of as a scaffold protein involved in 3′ end RNA processing [50–52]. In yeast and plants, homologues of symplekin are required for proper cleavage and polyadenylation, and this is possibly also the case in vertebrates [53–55]. In vertebrate somatic cells symplekin is predominantly nuclear and in epithelial cells also localised at tight junctions [50,56]. In the Xenopus oocyte, however, symplekin is also found in the cytoplasm in complexes with the 100 kDa subunit of CPSF [50]. A symplekin antibody also precipitates CPEB from oocyte extracts, indicating that the protein is in cytoplasmic polyadenylation complexes [57]. Moreover, the symplekin antibody inhibits cytoplasmic polyadenylation in oocytes and extracts [57]. These data strongly suggest that symplekin is involved in cytoplasmic polyadenylation.

4 The cytoplasmic poly(A) polymerase
Initially, a form of one of the classical nuclear poly(A) polymerases was thought to be responsible for cytoplasmic polyadenylation too. In vitro reconstitution experiments indicated that the poly(A) polymerase (PAP) isolated from bovine thymus can mediate CPE and poly(A) signal dependent polyadenylation [47–49]. Cytoplasmic poly(A) polymerase species were detected in Xenopus oocytes and an isoform was cloned that was 87% identical to bovine PAP but lacked the nuclear localisation signal [58,59]. Three different polyclonal antibodies against this protein inhibited polyadenylation in egg extracts [58]. However, after these findings the work on the cytoplasmic poly(A) polymerase stagnated. No native complex containing CPEB and a PAP isoform was ever reported and studies on the regulation of PAP activity indicated that the enzyme is inactivated by phosphorylation during oocyte maturation, when cytoplasmic polyadenylation is actually induced [60].

In 2002, a Caenorhabditis elegans germline determinant called gld-2 was cloned and shown to encode a cytoplasmic poly(A) polymerase that is recruited to certain mRNAs by an RNA binding protein [61]. The Gld-2 protein belongs to the same large family of DNA polymerase β nucleotidyl transferases, but only has limited additional homology to the classical poly(A) polymerases and it lacks the RNA binding domain. It soon transpired that this protein is widely conserved, having homologues in fission yeast and mammalians [62,63].

The Xenopus Gld-2 protein (xGld-2) coimmunoprecipitated very efficiently with symplekin in both mature and immature oocytes. In addition, tagged xGld-2 was shown to bind the 160 kDa CPSF subunit as well as CPEB synthesised in reticulocyte lysate [57]. This indicates that xGld-2 can form complexes with symplekin, CPSF and CPEB, although the direct interactions are as yet unclear. Gld-2 overexpressing oocytes and extracts supplemented with Gld-2 displayed an increase in their CPE-dependent polyadenylation and symplekin depleted extracts regained some polyadenylation activity if they were replenished with recombinant CPEB, symplekin and Gld-2 [57].

The less than optimal reconstitution of cytoplasmic polyadenylation by Gld-2 may indicate that cytoplasmic PAP or an unknown additional cytoplasmic polyadenylation factor is being depleted with symplekin. However, it is also very plausible that not all the supplemented proteins are completely active. Especially CPEB is notoriously difficult to obtain in a soluble form and isolation procedures usually include a denaturing step [30]. On the whole, the evidence seems to indicate that xGld-2 is an authentic cytoplasmic poly(A) polymerase in Xenopus oocytes, but involvement of the cytoplasmic PAP can as yet not be excluded. In Drosophila, PAP has been implicated in cytoplasmic polyadenylation in embryos [64], and although initial experiments implicated mouse Gld-2 in cytoplasmic polyadenylation in oocytes, polyadenylation appeared unimpaired in a knock out mouse [65,66]. The cytoplasmic polyadenylation mechanisms in mammalian germ cells are discussed in more detail by T. Baba elsewhere in this volume.

What part of the cytoplasmic polyadenylation complex recruits either PAP or Gld-2 is also still an open question. It is possible that CPEB replaces Fip1 in cytoplasmic polyadenylation, or that another specific recruitment factor exists for Gld-2. Also, the nuclear cleavage stimulation factor CstF77 has been reported to be present in the cytoplasmic polyadenylation complex in Xenopus oocytes, but appears to have an as yet undefined role in translational repression, rather than in cytoplasmic polyadenylation [67].

In nuclear polyadenylation, binding of the nuclear poly(A) binding protein, PABP2, is required to limit the length of the poly(A) tail. It has been suggested that such a function is required in cytoplasmic polyadenylation, as symplekin immunoprecipitates from polyadenylating egg extracts add abnormally long poly(A) tails [57]. It is unknown if the length of the poly(A) tail added is controlled in cytoplasmic polyadenylation, but it is worth noting in this context that the main poly(A) binding protein in oocytes is not the somatic cytoplasmic PABP, but an embryo specific protein, ePABP, which may have a specific function in this context [68,69].

Recently, it was shown that ePAB and somatic PABP both can bind to CPEB, and that this interaction is reduced by phosphorylation of CPEB during oocyte maturation [65,70]. The ePABP–CPEB interaction has been proposed to stimulate cytoplasmic polyadenylation and translational activation, as demonstrated by depletion experiments [65]. ePABP may therefore be a cytoplasmic polyadenylation factor. However, the data presented appear to show that symplekin is partially depleted with ePABP, which could explain the reduction in polyadenylation. The add-back experiment does unfortunately only show a minimal restoration of polyadenylation. Depletion of CPEB with ePABP is described for experiments described in the discussion section of this paper, adding to these concerns. In addition, because most panels in this paper do not show direct comparisons between CPE containing and CPE lacking RNA substrates, the intriguing effects of ePABP depletion could perhaps also be explained by a general effect of enhanced deadenylation and reduced translation of all polyadenylated mRNAs, which are predicted effects of low ePABP levels [68,69]. For the moment, it therefore appears prudent to reserve judgement on the function of the CPEB–ePABP interaction.

5 The activation of cytoplasmic polyadenylation
In Xenopus oocytes, meiotic maturation is induced by steroid hormones, probably through the action of both classical nuclear steroid receptors and a G protein coupled transmembrane receptor [71–73]. A rapid drop in cyclic AMP leads to the inactivation of protein kinase A, which is necessary for the induction of cytoplasmic polyadenylation. In recent years, progress has been made in various aspects of the activation mechanisms of cytoplasmic polyadenylation, although the picture is far from complete.

Tethering of mammalian Gld-2 to an mRNA using a fusion with an RNA binding domain and an mRNA with a binding site causes strong polyadenylation in immature Xenopus oocytes, indicating that the protein is constitutively active and only needs to be recruited to the mRNA to elongate the poly(A) tail [62]. However, as described above, Gld-2 is already associated with the polyadenylation factors in immature oocytes [57]. In addition, Gld-2 overexpression also leads to robust polyadenylation of CPE containing RNA in immature oocytes, which implies that the protein is probably inactivated by factors that are titrated by the overexpressed protein [57]. Since the action of Gld-2 requires recruitment to the RNA for activity, the titrated factor is unlikely to be CPEB itself. An intriguing possibility is that the protein depleted by Gld-2 is the cytoplasmic isoform of poly(A) ribonuclease (PARN). A 64 kDa catalytically active fragment of PARN has been found to coimmunoprecipitate with symplekin, CPEB and Gld-2 in immature but not in mature oocytes and binds to CPEB and Gld-2 synthesised in reticulocyte lysate [74]. The full length PARN is not abundantly found in this complex. The 64 kDa PARN isoform is thought to be responsible for the short poly(A) tails of CPE containing mRNAs, as a PARN antibody inhibited CPE-mediated deadenylation in immature oocytes [74]. In addition, catalytically inactive PARN can induce polyadenylation of CPE containing RNAs in immature oocytes and overexpression of wild type PARN represses the polyadenylation induced by Gld-2 overexpression [74]. These data indicate that PARN is the repressive factor depleted by Gld-2 injection and that it is the ejection of PARN from the polyadenylation complex that induces cytoplasmic polyadenylation [74]. There are two possibilities to explain the action of PARN on CPE containing mRNAs, either Gld-2 continuously adenylates while PARN takes these nucleotides off, or the presence of PARN blocks Gld-2 activity, for instance by preventing access to the 3′ end of the mRNA.

Since not all mRNAs are activated by cytoplasmic polyadenylation at the same time, the activation of the complexes must depend at least in part on mRNA specificity factors. In maturing Xenopus oocytes, cytoplasmic polyadenylation has been classed into 2 types, early (class I) and late (class II). Early polyadenylating mRNAs gain a poly(A) tail well before the activation of cdk1/cyclin B and the breakdown of the nuclear envelope (germinal vesicle breakdown, GVBD). Early polyadenylation is independent of the synthesis of the kinase c-Mos (which is itself encoded by a class I mRNA), while late polyadenylating mRNAs are dependent on c-Mos synthesis and the subsequent cdk1/cyclin B activation and gain their tails after GVBD [16,75,76]. The less well characterised polyadenylation response element (PRE, see above) and its binding factor Musashi have been shown to be responsible for some of the early polyadenylation events, despite the fact that these mRNAs also contain CPEs [15,17]. However, there is a clear correlation between the placement of the CPEs in an mRNA and the timing of its polyadenylation [15,77,78]. In addition, some late polyadenylating mRNAs also contain PREs/Musashi binding sites and the histone B4 mRNA, which contains both a PRE and a CPE, has been reported to be polyadenylated early, but has been shown to be Mos-dependent, indicating that the current classification in early and late perhaps oversimplifies the situation [15,17,75,78].

The evidence for which factor mediates early polyadenylation rests primarily on the use of dominant negative Musashi and CPEB mutants, which block translation and polyadenylation of c-Mos mRNA and GVBD [15,17,48]. Charlesworth et al. compared Musashi and CPEB mutants, and came to the conclusion that Musashi alone mediates the early polyadenylation, in contrast to earlier findings by Mendez et al., which implicated CPEB in the early polyadenylation [17,32]. The CPEB phosphorylation mutant used by Charlesworth et al. is a rather weak dominant negative (L.E. Hake, Boston, USA, unpublished observation), so it is possible that CPEB-dependent early polyadenylation is not completely repressed by it in all cases. Differences in expression levels and examination of endogenous or injected RNAs could also explain the discrepancies between the two studies. In addition, either or both dominant negative proteins could be titrating other cytoplasmic polyadenylation factors and inhibit polyadenylation on mRNAs to which they do not normally control, or they could fail to enter a specific mRNA–protein complex due to low exchange rates. Importantly, injection of a CPEB antibody prevented GVBD and gave strong repression of polyadenylation of injected early RNAs, including a Mos 3′ UTR construct, indicating that CPEB-mediated early polyadenylation exists [21]. In addition, interference with pathways that are known to affect CPEB phosphorylation and activation leads to a reduction in pre-GVBD c-Mos mRNA polyadenylation and a delay or block in oocyte maturation, including in those papers that claim that early polyadenylation is CPEB-independent [15,16,32,79,80]. However, there remains the possibility that the same signal transduction pathways ultimately activate Musashi and CPEB, which would make it impossible to distinguish between the effects of the two proteins in these experiments, with the possible exception of the CPEB antibody injection. With the limitations of the currently available evidence, it seems safest to assume that Musashi and CPEB both contribute to the polyadenylation of early mRNAs and that some mRNAs may be exclusively dependent on one or the other. Further work is required to resolve this issue definitively.

The induction of Xenopus oocyte maturation and early cytoplasmic polyadenylation by progesterone is dependent on a drop in cAMP levels and the resulting inhibition of protein kinase A [17,81]. Downstream of this event is the phosphorylation of CPEB on Ser174, which happens early in oogenesis. Although CPEB, CPSF and Gld-2 are already in a complex in immature oocytes, this phosphorylation appears to induce a stronger association of CPEB with CPSF and Gld-2 [32,48,82]. Importantly, Ser174 phosphorylation also induces the ejection of PARN from the polyadenylation complex [74]. Mutation of Ser174 to alanine results in a dominant negative protein that inhibits oocyte maturation and early polyadenylation partially or fully and late polyadenylation completely [15,32,83]. In addition, injection of a peptide containing the phosphorylation site delays GVBD considerably, suggesting that it is inhibiting an early polyadenylation event [32]. All evidence therefore indicates that phosphorylation of Ser174 is a crucial event in the activation of cytoplasmic polyadenylation.

There is some controversy surrounding the kinase mediating the early phosphorylation of CPEB on Ser174. Initially, it was demonstrated that Aurora A kinase (Eg2) can phosphorylate this site and that this requires the N-terminus of CPEB, in addition to the phosphorylation site itself [32]. This suggested that the N-terminally deleted CPEB may owe its dominant negative properties to the lack of a binding site for Aurora A. In addition, in vitro polyadenylation reactions containing recombinant CPEB, purified CPSF and nuclear PAP are strongly stimulated by the addition of Aurora A [48]. Glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3) is thought to negatively regulate Aurora A by phosphorylation and this block appears to be relieved during oocyte maturation [83]. Consistent with a role in early oocyte maturation, GSK3 overexpression inhibited GVBD in Xenopus oocytes [83]. However, studies from three independent groups have failed to detect Aurora A activation early in oocyte maturation [79,84–86]. In addition, Aurora A inhibitors do not affect oocyte maturation or CPEB phosphorylation and depletion of Aurora A from oocyte extracts does not inhibit early CPEB phosphorylation either [79]. There is therefore sufficient evidence to throw serious doubt on the role of Aurora A in the activation of CPE-mediated cytoplasmic polyadenylation early in oogenesis. In mouse neurons, calmodulin dependent kinase II (CamKII) can phosphorylate the corresponding site on mouse CPEB, Thr171 [87]. CamKII plays a role in the induction of mouse oocyte maturation and is known to be present in Xenopus eggs, and could therefore be an alternative candidate kinase for mediating the early phosphorylation [88–91]. Because CamKII can be activated independently of calcium, the absence of a calcium flux in early oocyte maturation is not necessarily an obstacle for this hypothesis [92]. Evidence for a requirement of CamKII activity early in oocyte maturation would be necessary to make this more than speculation. However, Aurora A is very active later in oogenesis and it is undeniably capable of activating CPEB. It therefore appears likely that at the very least the maintenance of CPEB phosphorylation on Ser174 is carried out by this kinase.

Mitogen activated protein kinase (MAP kinase) has been implicated in the activation of early CPE-mediated, but not PRE-mediated, cytoplasmic polyadenylation [16,17,79,93]. An early, c-Mos independent activation of MAP kinase has been detected during oocyte maturation and CPEB is phosphorylated by MAP kinase on multiple sites [32,79,94]. MAP kinase does not phosphorylate Ser174, but has been suggested to either prime CPEB for Ser174 phosphorylation or to activate the Ser174 kinase [79]. As the early MAPK activation is dependent on protein synthesis, translational activation of another mRNA is probably required [94]. One potential candidate is RINGO/Speedy, a Cdk1 interacting and activating protein that is transiently expressed after progesterone treatment and required for oocyte maturation and CPEB phosphorylation [65,95–98].

A guanine nucleotide exchange factor for the Rho family of GTPases was found to interact with the N-terminal half of CPEB in a yeast 2 hybrid screen and called XGef [80]. This interaction was confirmed in oocytes and has been shown to be direct [80,99]. There appear to be 2 binding sites for CPEB on XGef [99]. Antibodies against XGef block oocyte maturation and prevent the polyadenylation and translation of c-Mos mRNA [80,99]. Conversely, overexpression of XGef accelerates oocyte maturation and c-Mos polyadenylation, independent of the production of c-Mos protein, indicating that it is upstream of this kinase in the signal cascade of meiotic maturation [80]. XGef enhances the early phosphorylation of CPEB and the DH domain associated with nucleotide exchange activity is required for its effects of on cytoplasmic polyadenylation [80,99]. In addition, a mutant of XGef that retains nucleotide exchange activity but has impaired binding to CPEB reduced early CPEB phosphorylation and delayed oocyte maturation [99]. However, a broad spectrum Rho GTPase inhibitor did not affect oocyte maturation or CPEB phosphorylation, indicating that the DH domain may not function to activate a Rho family GTPase, but is required in another capacity [79]. Strikingly, XGef immunoprecipitates were found to contain MAPK in both immature and mature oocytes and it therefore may be required to bring CPEB to the signalling complexes involved in its phosphorylation [79].

In another yeast 2 hybrid study, mouse CPEB was found to bind the small intracellular domain (ICD) of the transmembrane protein amyloid precursor like protein 1 (APLP1) and its relatives [100]. In Xenopus oocytes, Gld-2, the CPSF 100 kDa subunit and symplekin were predominantly associated with the plasma membrane in the same fractions as overexpressed APLP1 and immunoprecipitation of CPEB from these fractions indicates that it can associate with APLP1 [100]. Immunogold electron microscopy confirmed that CPEB and CPE containing RNA is associated with membranes. Overexpression of full length APLP1 induced some cytoplasmic polyadenylation in untreated oocytes and enhanced the effect of low concentrations of progesterone. The ICD alone had even stronger effects, indicating that the action of APLP1 is not dependent on membrane localisation. After treatment with low concentrations of progesterone, APLP1 stimulated CPEB phosphorylation on Ser174 [100]. While the association with amyloid precursor proteins may have great significance for the role of CPEB and cytoplasmic polyadenylation in neurons, it is as yet unclear whether APLP1 or its relatives are required for cytoplasmic polyadenylation in oocytes and whether it mediates the membrane association of the cytoplasmic polyadenylation complexes.

Late cytoplasmic polyadenylation is required for progression from meiosis I to meiosis II during oocyte maturation [101]. mRNAs that undergo late polyadenylation often have a CPE overlapping with their poly(A) signal, e.g. UUUUAAUAAA [15,77,78]. The late polyadenylation during oocyte maturation is dependent on the activation of the mitotic kinase cdk1 and its regulatory cyclin subunits [16,77,78,93]. Cdk1 does phosphorylate CPEB leading to degradation of most of the oocyte CPEB via ubiquitin-mediated degradation [101–103]. This degradation is required for late polyadenylation to occur. Remarkably, symplekin bound CPEB appears to represent the stable fraction of CPEB, as symplekin immunoprecipitates do not show a difference in CPEB content between immature and mature oocytes [57]. This implicates that CPEB in polyadenylation complexes is stable during oocyte maturation, consistent with the polyadenylation activity observed. A model for late cytoplasmic polyadenylation can be devised in which the abundant ‘free’ CPEB (i.e. CPEB in a different complex than symplekin, CPSF and the poly(A) polymerase) binds to the CPE overlapping the poly(A) signal in late polyadenylating mRNAs and prevents the recruitment of CPSF and symplekin by the polyadenylation signal early in oocyte maturation. After cdk1 activation, most free CPEB is depleted and a complex containing CPEB, symplekin and CPSF binds both the CPE and the poly(A) signal [101].

A current view of CPE-mediated cytoplasmic polyadenylation in oocyte maturation is depicted in Figs. 1 and 2 and can be summarised as follows:1. The activation of CPE-mediated cytoplasmic polyadenylation during progesterone induced oocyte maturation is induced by a drop in protein kinase A activity and requires an early translation event, perhaps translation of RINGO/Speedy.

2. This induces the early activation of MAP kinase, which is associated with the polyadenylation complex through XGef and phosphorylates CPEB on multiple sites, but not on Ser174.

3. CPEB is phosphorylated on Ser174 by an as yet not fully confirmed kinase, possibly Aurora A or CamKII, which is required for the induction of CPE-mediated polyadenylation and causes an increase in the binding between Gld-2, CPSF and CPEB, causing the ejection of PARN from the complex and allowing Gld-2 to elongate the poly(A) tail of the mRNA.

4. After GVBD, CPEB is phosphorylated by cdk1 and the free CPEB is mostly degraded, allowing the CPEB in polyadenylation complexes (now probably phosphorylated on Ser174 by Aurora A) to activate cytoplasmic polyadenylation on mRNAs which contain a CPE overlapping with the poly(A) signal.



A surprising number of proteins involved in the activation of polyadenylation are themselves upregulated by this process. This should create positive feedback loops which amplify the signal and contribute to the progression of meiotic maturation. As discussed above, the mRNA for the serine/threonine kinase c-Mos is one of the early targets of cytoplasmic polyadenylation [16,75,76]. It is an activator of the MAPK kinase MEK, and its synthesis leads to further activation of MAP kinase, activation of cdk1 and phosphorylation of CPEB [71]. The mitotic cyclins, activators of cdk1, are induced by cytoplasmic polyadenylation, as is Aurora A [19,26]. Similarly, CamKII is regulated by cytoplasmic polyadenylation in neurons [104]. Finally, Gld-2 targets its own mRNA, which contains CPEs in its 3′ UTR[105]. A system with so much positive feedback will require strong brakes, and it appears that at least in some cases this is provided by deadenylation factors, as discussed below.

6 Deadenylation and translational repression
The maternal mRNAs that are stored in the oocyte in an untranslated state have short poly(A) tails, but have been reported to have normal poly(A) tail addition in the nucleus in both mouse and frog [74,106]. In both organisms, the deadenylation of RNA injected into the cytoplasm requires CPEs, indicating that the CPEB–PARN complex, discussed above, mediates this process [74,106]. However, RNA substrates containing CPEs alone have not been tested in these experiments and it is therefore not clear if a CPE is sufficient for deadenylation or if other sequence elements are required. In fact almost all CPE containing mRNAs have putative binding sites for other deadenylation factors.

Firstly, the deadenylation factor Pumilio binds directly to CPEB, and therefore could contribute to the deadenylation of all CPE containing mRNAs [107,108]. Many CPE containing mRNAs also contain Pumilio binding sites, including cyclin B1 and Gld-2 [97,107–109], indicating that the recruitment of Pumilio maybe both by protein–protein and RNA–protein associations. Pumilio is a member of a highly conserved family of RNA binding proteins called the Puf family. Members of this family can mediate translational repression and mRNA destabilisation in organisms from yeast to vertebrates [110,111]. In yeast, the Puf family protein Mpt5 interacts with the conserved deadenylase complex CCR4–Pop2–Not, by binding to Pop2/Caf1 [112–114]. This association was also confirmed for the human and worm proteins [113]. In addition, Pumilio is known to aid the recruitment of the translational repressor Nanos, both in fly and frog [107,115]. Nanos can recruit the CCR4–Pop2–Not complex by binding to Not4 and contributes to the translational repression of fly cyclin B [116]. So far, the role of the CCR4–Pop2–Not complex in poly(A) tail metabolism has not been studied in Xenopus oocytes and embryos, but the conservation of both the recruitment proteins and one of the target mRNAs (cyclin B) seems to indicate that it is very likely to play a role.

A subset of mRNAs that are activated by CPE-mediated cytoplasmic polyadenylation during oocyte maturation loose their poly(A) tails after fertilisation [19,117,118]. In most cases, this is mediated by an embryonic deadenylation element (EDEN) in the 3′ UTR of the mRNA, which binds the deadenylation factor EDEN-BP [119]. Aurora A, cyclin B1 and c-Mos encoding mRNAs all bind EDEN-BP and the 3′ UTR of Gld-2 mRNA contains good consensus binding sites, making EDEN-BP a good candidate repressor of the cytoplasmic polyadenylation-mediated positive feedback loops during early embryogenesis [105,119–121]. The mammalian ortholog of EDEN-BP, CUGBP1, can recruit PARN [122]. A similar association of EDEN-BP and PARN in the Xenopus embryo could explain its role in deadenylation, but so far this complex has not been reported. It can therefore not be excluded that EDEN-BP mediates its deadenylation activity in Xenopus embryos through another deadenylase, for instance the CCR4–Pop2–Not complex. No direct contacts between CPEB containing and EDEN containing complexes has been described so far. Because CPEs, EDEN sequences, Musashi and Pumilio binding sites often occur in the same 3′ UTR, their associated complexes can be expected to compete for the end of the mRNA to mediate deadenylation or polyadenylation.

Although a short poly(A) tail will lead to inefficient translation of an mRNA, it is not sufficient for complete translational repression, as illustrated by the partial polysomal association of histone B4 mRNA and the accumulation of B4 protein in Xenopus oocytes [78,123,124]. Many of the other stored maternal mRNAs have to be strongly translationally repressed to enable the subsequent stages of growth, maturation and fertilisation of the oocyte [71]. CPEs, Musashi and Pumilio binding sites can repress translation of specific mRNAs, often in the absence of a poly(A) tail or in the absence of deadenylation, indicating that they have an additional function in blocking translation [75,105,107–109,125–127]. Several detailed models exist to explain the translational repression by CPEs, some of which are presented in Fig. 3.

In full grown oocytes, a CPEB binding factor called maskin was found to associate with the cap binding initiation factor eIF4E in a manner that should preclude recruitment of eIF4G and thus inhibit translation [128]. Maskin is a homologue of the transforming acidic coiled-coil domain protein 3 (TACC3) and these proteins play a vital role in the formation of the mitotic spindle in multiple organisms [129–134]. The binding between maskin and eIF4E is weak but detectable and this association is abrogated by binding of PABP to the poly(A) tail elongation and by phosphorylation of maskin in both oocytes and embryos [129,135–137]. As the eIF4E binding site in maskin appears not to be present in other organisms, it is not clear how widespread this regulation is [138]. A more conserved CPEB associated eIF4E binding protein is the neuronal protein neuroguidin, which has been proposed to function in a similar manner to maskin in repressing translation in the nervous system [139].

The deadenylase PARN is a well characterised cap binding protein and a 5′ cap structure is required for deadenylation by PARN [140–142]. CPEB can recruit PARN to the mRNA, but deadenylation still requires a cap structure [74]. This leads to a conflict between the maskin model and the opposing polymerase-deadenylase model [74,128]. Either the maskin model is true and eIF4E/maskin is stably bound to the cap and PARN is not continuously active, or the opposing polymerase-deadenylase model is correct and CPEB bound PARN is stably bound to the cap and continuously active, excluding eIF4E from the cap. In fact, PARN could very well mediate both the deadenylation and the translational repression of mRNAs to which it is recruited by excluding eIF4E from the mRNA [120].

Both maskin and PARN are absent in early oocytes, so other repression mechanisms must exist to mediate translational repression in these cells. Recently, a large CPEB containing RNP complex was found in early oocytes [143]. This complex contains several proteins found in P-bodies and related RNP granules that have been implicated in both translational control and mRNA degradation [144]. In mammalian cells, CPEB can also be found in large RNP granules including P-bodies [145]. The early oocyte CPEB complex contains the eIF4E variant eIF4E1b, the eIF4E binding protein 4E-T, the RNA helicase Xp54 (Ddx6, Rck, Me31B, Dhh1) and the P-body components p100 (Pat1) and Rap55 (Scd6, CAR-1). It does not contain PARN, maskin or the canonical cap binding initiation factor eIF4E1a. Rap55 and Xp54 can mediate translational repression in Xenopus oocytes when tethered to an mRNA [146–148]. In addition, the yeast homologues of both proteins, as well as of p100, are involved in general repression of translation [149]. Strikingly, the yeast Pumilio homologue Mpt5 recruits Dhh1, a homologue of the Xp54 RNA helicase, indicating that Pumilio-mediated translational repression may involve a similar complex [113]. The mechanism of this highly conserved type of translational repression is not entirely clear, but it is likely to involve assembly of large RNP particles that exclude translation initiation factors and/or ribosomes. In addition, eIF4E1b was shown to be defective in eIF4G binding and to bind 4E-T independently of the canonical eIF4E binding site. This implies that the mRNAs in this complex are translationally repressed through sequestration of the cap by eIF4E1b, which would exclude eIF4E1a/eIF4G from the mRNA. Indeed, tethering of 4E-T causes translational repression and injection of an eIF41b antibody enhances oocyte maturation [143]. It is as yet unclear which proteins in the early complex bind directly to CPEB and therefore are likely to confer specific repression of CPE containing mRNAs. As eIF4E1b is also the predominant CPEB associated eIF4E in fully grown oocytes, this protein could in principle convey CPE-mediated translational repression throughout oogenesis [67,143].

At present it is difficult to choose amongst the multitude of models for translational repression by CPEs. Some of the complexes detected by pulldown and immunoprecipitation may not contain the majority of the repressed mRNA, even though presence of some mRNA was demonstrated by RT-PCR. Alternatively, it may well be that every one of these models is correct at a particular stage of oogenesis or embryogenesis or that the repression is different for specific mRNAs, depending on binding sites for other proteins such as Pumilio and EDEN-BP. An attractive option is that sequestration to P-body like large complexes is the result of translational repression and acts as an enhancer of translational repression, while smaller, more mRNA specific translational repression complexes are formed during the movement of mRNAs in and out of P-bodies. To distinguish between these models, it will be important to characterise the cap binding proteins and P-body components present on specific mRNAs at different developmental stages.

7 Cytoplasmic polyadenylation and translational activation
The simplest explanation for why cytoplasmic polyadenylation leads to translational activation is that the poly(A) tail recruits translation initiation factors through its association with PABP and that these mediate release of the mRNA from the repression complexes, either by exchanging the cap binding complex for eIF4E1a/eIF4G or by somehow extracting the mRNA from a P-body-like RNP complex, a function which has been ascribed to PABP in yeast [150]. In support of this hypothesis, the translational repression of the histone B4 and cyclin B1 3′ UTRs on mRNAs injected into Xenopus oocytes can be abolished by the addition of a poly(A) tail, at least until that tail is deadenylated [29,74]. However other mRNAs (G10, Cl2) appear to be still repressed even if a long poly(A) tail is added and only become translated if the mRNA is actively polyadenylated in the maturing oocyte [6,13]. In a seminal experiment, Barkoff et al. cleaved the endogenous c-Mos mRNA with an oligonucleotide, removing the polyadenylation signal and CPE. As expected, this abrogated c-Mos mRNA polyadenylation and translation in oocytes exposed to progesterone. A ‘prosthetic’ poly(A) tail was tethered to the remaining 3′ UTR using basepairing. This did not lead to c-Mos synthesis in unstimulated oocytes, but restored the synthesis of c-Mos in response to progesterone [76]. This suggests that, at least for the translation of c-Mos mRNA, both the presence of a poly(A) tail and an additional, polyadenylation independent, modification of the mRNP are required for translational activation.

8 Discussion
Since the discovery of CPEB ten years ago, our knowledge of the mechanisms of CPE-mediated cytoplasmic polyadenylation has made great strides, especially in Xenopus oocytes. However, there are still quite a few questions that need to be resolved, for instance:1. A more systematic investigation of the consensus CPE sequence and its maximum distance to the poly(A) signal would enable a more reliable bioinformatic prediction of the targets of CPE-mediated cytoplasmic polyadenylation. Are all mRNAs containing these sequences polyadenylated during oocyte maturation?

2. The relative roles of Gld-2 and PAP in cytoplasmic polyadenylation need to be further evaluated. Can they substitute for each other? What are their contact points in the cytoplasmic polyadenylation complex? A cytoplasmic polyadenylation system reconstituted from pure components would be ideal to resolve these questions.

3. The kinase(s) responsible for the early activating phosphorylation on Ser174 of CPEB should be identified unequivocally. If Aurora A is responsible, why do inhibitors of its activity not block oocyte maturation and can no early activation of this kinase be detected? Do inhibitors of CamKII affect early polyadenylation? What is the signal transduction cascade leading to induction of the activating kinase?

4. What are the relative roles of Musashi and CPEB in the polyadenylation of c-Mos mRNA and other substrates? How do dominant negative mutants of CPEB and Musashi achieve their repressive functions? May there be off target effects through titration of common polyadenylation factors or signal transduction machinery?

5. What are the direct interaction between proteins and RNA elements in the cytoplasmic polyadenylation complex? Much of the work discussed here has been performed either in oocyte or reticulocyte lysates, where other interacting proteins may be present. It appears necessary that these interactions are mapped in detail in vitro or in a 2 hybrid system, as this could lead to predictions for the functions of dominant negative mutants and potentially clarify how different complexes are assembled.

6. Are the complexes on cytoplasmic polyadenylation sequences other than the CPE similar to the CPEB associated complexes? For instance, do Gld2 or PAP associate with the RNA binding proteins that recognise them?

7. Which models for translational repression and deadenylation of CPE containing mRNAs are correct in what stage of oogenesis? Again, a more intimate knowledge of the direct interactions involved in assembling the repression complexes is likely to yield important new investigative tools for resolving this question. In addition, the study of mRNP complexes assembled in vivo could yield some more conclusive answers.

8. Are the polyadenylation and translation repression complexes identical for each CPE containing mRNA or are there mRNA specific differences in the complexes? Immunoprecipitation followed by RT-PCR and RNA affinity chromatography can partially answer this question, but affinity purification methods that target specific mRNPs are likely to be crucial to obtain a full answer.



Some of the controversies discussed here are a result of the experimental restrictions of the Xenopus oocyte and egg systems. These systems are very good for biochemical assays both in injected oocytes and egg extracts and they provide ample material for purification and identification. However, the high levels of stable maternal proteins make clean knock down or knock out experiments impossible in most cases, which has led to a heavy reliance on dominant negative approaches. To resolve some of the outstanding issues we are therefore likely to have to look to vertebrate genetic systems such as mouse and/or to develop tissue culture based cytoplasmic polyadenylation systems that are amenable to siRNA knock down, for instance using neuronal cells or cells synchronised in the cell cycle.

The advent of high throughput screens will strongly impact the field of cytoplasmic polyadenylation in the near future as the results of RNP immunoprecipitation microarray experiments and poly(A) tail profiling studies will increase our knowledge of the range of mRNA substrates [9,151–153]. Such screens may also identify new cytoplasmic polyadenylation elements as well as novel cell types and biological processes in which this form of regulation is involved. Only one cytoplasmic polyadenylation element and its binding protein have so far been studied in detail, predominantly in oocyte maturation. As outlined above, a large number of important questions are still unresolved, even in this one system. With at least three other cytoplasmic polyadenylation sequences in existence in oocytes alone and the evidence that cytoplasmic polyadenylation also is involved in neuronal events and the mitotic cell cycle [9], there appears ample scope for expansion of the field in the near future.

Acknowledgement
We would like to thank Prof. Laura Hake of Boston College for the critical reading of the manuscript and permission to cite unpublished data. This work was funded in part by the Wellcome Trust.

Fig. 1 The activation of CPE-mediated cytoplasmic polyadenylation. In immature oocytes, CPE containing mRNAs already contain all the proteins necessary for polyadenylation as well as the deadenylase PARN. During oocyte maturation, phosphorylation of CPEB causes a rearrangement of the complex that leads to the ejection of PARN and the activation of the poly(A) polymerase Gld-2. 4E: eIF4E, 4A: eIF4A. For further description of this process, see the text.

Fig. 2 The signal transduction cascade leading to cytoplasmic polyadenylation during oocyte maturation. Schematic representation of the key signalling events in oocyte maturation and the role of cytoplasmic polyadenylation in this process. For a detailed description, see the text.

Fig. 3 Four models of translation repression by CPEs. Schematic representation of some of the proposed translational repression mechanisms for CPE containing mRNAs. For a detailed description, see the text.



   
References
1 Paris J.  Osborne H.B.  Couturier A.  Le Guellec R.  Philippe M.   Changes in the polyadenylation of specific stable RNA during the early development of Xenopus laevis  Gene 72 1988 169 2468559 
2 Rosenthal E.T.  Tansey T.R.  Ruderman J.V.   Sequence-specific adenylations and deadenylations accompany changes in the translation of maternal messenger RNA after fertilization of Spisula  oocytes J. Mol. Biol. 166 1983 309 6854649 
3 Vassalli J.-D.  Huarte J.  Belin D.  Gubler P.  Vassalli A.  O'Connell M.L.  Parton L.A.  Rickles R.J.  Strickland S.   Regulated polyadenylation controls mRNA translation during meiotic maturation of mouse oocytes Genes Dev. 3 1989 2163 2483395 
4 Rosenthal E.T.  Wilt F.H.   Patterns of maternal messenger RNA accumulation and adenylation during oogenesis in Urechis caupo  Dev. Biol. 117 1986 55 3755690 
5 Fox C.A.  Sheets M.D.  Wickens M.P.   Poly(A) addition during maturation of frog oocytes: distinct nuclear and cytoplasmic activities and regulation by the sequence UUUUUAU Genes Dev. 3 1989 2151 2628165 
6 McGrew L.L.  Dworkin-Rastl E.  Dworkin M.B.  Richter J.D.   Poly (A) elongation during Xenopus  oocyte maturation is required for translational recruitment and is mediated by a short sequence element Genes Dev. 3 1989 803 2568313 
7 Gorgoni B.  Gray N.K.   The roles of cytoplasmic poly(A)-binding proteins in regulating gene expression: a developmental perspective Brief. Funct. Genomic. Proteomic. 3 2004 125 15355595 
8 Liang C.G.  Su Y.Q.  Fan H.Y.  Schatten H.  Sun Q.Y.   Mechanisms regulating oocyte meiotic resumption: roles of mitogen-activated protein kinase Mol. Endocrinol. 21 2007 2037 17536005 
9 Richter J.D.   CPEB: a life in translation Trends Biochem. Sci. 32 2007 279 17481902 
10 Paillard L.  Maniey D.  Lachaume P.  Legagneux V.  Osborne H.B.   Identification of a C-rich element as a novel cytoplasmic polyadenylation element in Xenopus  embryos Mech. Dev. 93 2000 117 10781945 
11 Simon R.  Tassan J.-P.  Richter J.D.   Translational control by poly(A) elongation during Xenopus  development: differential repression and enhancement by a novel cytoplasmic polyadenylation element Genes Dev. 6 1992 2580 1285126 
12 Wu L.  Good P.J.  Richter J.D.   The 36-kilodalton embryonic-type cytoplasmic polyadenylation element-binding protein in Xenopus laevis  is ElrA, a member of the ELAV family of RNA-binding proteins Mol. Cell. Biol. 17 1997 6402 9343402 
13 Simon R.  Richter J.D.   Further analysis of cytoplasmic polyadenylation in Xenopus  embryos and identification of embryonic cytoplasmic polyadenylation element-binding proteins Mol. Cell. Biol. 14 1994 7867 7969126 
14 Slevin M.K.  Gourronc F.  Hartley R.S.   ElrA binding to the 3′UTR of cyclin E1 mRNA requires polyadenylation elements Nucleic Acids Res. 35 2007 2167 17355986 
15 Charlesworth A.  Cox L.L.  MacNicol A.M.   Cytoplasmic polyadenylation element (CPE)- and CPE-binding protein (CPEB)-independent mechanisms regulate early class maternal mRNA translational activation in Xenopus  oocytes J. Biol. Chem. 279 2004 17650 14752101 
16 Charlesworth A.  Ridge J.A.  King L.A.  MacNicol M.C.  MacNicol A.M.   A novel regulatory element determines the timing of Mos mRNA translation during Xenopus  oocyte maturation EMBO J. 21 2002 2798 12032092 
17 Charlesworth A.  Wilczynska A.  Thampi P.  Cox L.L.  MacNicol A.M.   Musashi regulates the temporal order of mRNA translation during Xenopus  oocyte maturation EMBO J. 25 2006 801 
18 Bardwell V.J.  Wickens M.  Bienroth S.  Keller W.  Sproat B.S.  Lamond A.I.   Site-directed ribose methylation identifies 2′-OH groups in polyadenylation substrates critical for AAUAAA recognition and poly(A) addition Cell 65 1991 125 1901516 
19 Paris J.  Philippe M.   Poly(A) metabolism and polysomal recruitment of maternal mRNAs during early Xenopus  development Dev. Biol. 140 1990 221 2358121 
20 Groisman I.  Jung M.Y.  Sarkissian M.  Cao Q.  Richter J.D.   Translational control of the embryonic cell cycle Cell 109 2002 473 12086604 
21 Stebbins-Boaz B.  Hake L.E.  Richter J.D.   CPEB controls the cytoplasmic polyadenylation of cyclin, Cdk2 and c-mos mRNAs and is necessary for oocyte maturation in Xenopus  EMBO J. 15 1996 2582 8665866 
22 Fox C.A.  Sheets M.D.  Wahle E.  Wickens M.   Polyadenylation of maternal mRNA during oocyte maturation: poly(A) addition in vitro requires a regulated RNA binding activity and a poly(A) polymerase EMBO J. 11 1992 5021 1464324 
23 Gebauer F.  Richter J.D.   Mouse cytoplasmic polyadenylation element binding protein: an evolutionarily conserved protein that interacts with the cytoplasmic polyadenylation elements of c-mos mRNA Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 93 1996 14602 8962099 
24 Gebauer F.  Xu W.  Cooper G.M.  Richter J.D.   Translational control by cytoplasmic polyadenylation of c-mos mRNA is necessary for oocyte maturation in the mouse EMBO J. 13 1994 5712 7988567 
25 Charlesworth A.  Welk J.  MacNicol A.M.   The temporal control of Wee1 mRNA translation during Xenopus  oocyte maturation is regulated by cytoplasmic polyadenylation elements within the 3′-untranslated region Dev. Biol. 227 2000 706 11071785 
26 Sheets M.D.  Fox C.A.  Hunt T.  Vande Woude G.  Wickens M.   The 3′-untranslated regions of c-mos and cyclin mRNAs stimulate translation by regulating cytoplasmic polyadenylation Genes Dev. 8 1994 926 7926777 
27 Paris J.  Swenson K.  Piwnica-Worms H.  Richter J.D.   Maturation-specific polyadenylation: in vitro activation by p34cdc2 and phosphorylation of a 58-kD CPE-binding protein Genes Dev. 5 1991 1697 1653174 
28 McGrew L.L.  Richter J.D.   Translational control by cytoplasmic polyadenylation during Xenopus  oocyte maturation: characterization of cis and trans elements and regulation by cyclin/MPF EMBO J. 9 1990 3743 2145153 
29 Paris J.  Richter J.D.   Maturation-specific polyadenylation and translational control: diversity of cytoplasmic polyadenylation elements, influence of poly(A) tail size, and formation of stable polyadenylation complexes Mol. Cell. Biol. 10 1990 5634 1700272 
30 Hake L.E.  Mendez R.  Richter J.D.   Specificity of RNA binding by CPEB: requirement for RNA recognition motifs and a novel zinc finger Mol. Cell. Biol. 18 1998 685 9447964 
31 Hake L.E.  Richter J.D.   CPEB is a specificity factor that mediates cytoplasmic polyadenylation during Xenopus  oocyte maturation Cell 79 1994 617 7954828 
32 Mendez R.  Hake L.E.  Andresson T.  Littlepage L.E.  Ruderman J.V.  Richter J.D.   Phosphorylation of CPE binding factor by Eg2 regulates translation of c-mos mRNA Nature 404 2000 302 10749216 
33 Racki W.J.  Richter J.D.   CPEB controls oocyte growth and follicle development in the mouse Development 133 2006 4527 17050619 
34 Tay J.  Richter J.D.   Germ cell differentiation and synaptonemal complex formation are disrupted in CPEB knockout mice Dev. Cell 1 2001 201 11702780 
35 Proudfoot N.  O'Sullivan J.   Polyadenylation: a tail of two complexes Curr. Biol. 12 2002 R855 R857 12498707 
36 Wahle E.  Rüegsegger U.   3′ end processing of pre-mRNA in eukaryotes FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 23 1999 277 10371034 
37 Keller W.  Bienroth S.  Lang K.M.  Christofori G.   Cleavage and polyadenylation factor CPF specifically interacts with the pre-mRNA 3′ processing signal AAUAAA EMBO J. 10 1991 4241 1756731 
38 Ryan K.  Calvo O.  Manley J.L.   Evidence that polyadenylation factor CPSF-73 is the mRNA 3′ processing endonuclease RNA 10 2004 565 15037765 
39 Dominski Z.  Yang X.C.  Marzluff W.F.   The polyadenylation factor CPSF-73 is involved in histone-pre-mRNA processing Cell 123 2005 37 16213211 
40 Kolev N.G.  Steitz J.A.   Symplekin and multiple other polyadenylation factors participate in 3′-end maturation of histone mRNAs Genes Dev. 19 2005 2517 16264187 
41 Mandel C.R.  Kaneko S.  Zhang H.  Gebauer D.  Vethantham V.  Manley J.L.  Tong L.   Polyadenylation factor CPSF-73 is the pre-mRNA 3′-end-processing endonuclease Nature 444 2006 953 17128255 
42 Bai C.  Tolias P.P.   Drosophila  clipper/CPSF 30K is a post-transcriptionally regulated nuclear protein that binds RNA containing GC clusters Nucleic Acids Res. 26 1998 1597 9512528 
43 Addepalli B.  Hunt A.G.   A novel endonuclease activity associated with the Arabidopsis ortholog of the 30-kDa subunit of cleavage and polyadenylation specificity factor Nucleic Acids Res. 35 2007 4453 17576667 
44 Zhu H.  Zhou H.L.  Hasman R.A.  Lou H.   Hu proteins regulate polyadenylation by blocking sites containing U-rich sequences J. Biol. Chem. 282 2007 2203 17127772 
45 Barabino S.M.L.  Hübner W.  Jenny A.  Minvielle-Sebastia L.  Keller W.   The 30-kD subunit of mammalian cleavage and polyadenylation specificity factor and its yeast homolog are RNA-binding zinc finger proteins Genes Dev. 11 1997 1703 9224719 
46 Kaufmann I.  Martin G.  Friedlein A.  Langen H.  Keller W.   Human Fip1 is a subunit of CPSF that binds to U-rich RNA elements and stimulates poly(A) polymerase EMBO J. 23 2004 616 14749727 
47 Dickson K.S.  Bilger A.  Ballantyne S.  Wickens M.P.   The cleavage and polyadenylation specificity factor in Xenopus laevis  oocytes is a cytoplasmic factor involved in regulated polyadenylation Mol. Cell. Biol. 19 1999 5707 10409759 
48 Mendez R.  Murthy K.G.  Ryan K.  Manley J.L.  Richter J.D.   Phosphorylation of CPEB by Eg2 mediates the recruitment of CPSF into an active cytoplasmic polyadenylation complex Mol. Cell 6 2000 1253 11106762 
49 Bilger A.  Fox C.A.  Wahle E.  Wickens M.   Nuclear polyadenylation factors recognize cytoplasmic polyadenylation elements Genes Dev. 8 1994 1106 7926790 
50 Hofmann I.  Schnolzer M.  Kaufmann I.  Franke W.W.   Symplekin, a constitutive protein of karyo- and cytoplasmic particles involved in mRNA biogenesis in Xenopus laevis  oocytes Mol. Biol. Cell 13 2002 1665 12006661 
51 Xing H.  Mayhew C.N.  Cullen K.E.  Park-Sarge O.K.  Sarge K.D.   HSF1 modulation of Hsp70 mRNA polyadenylation via interaction with symplekin J. Biol. Chem. 279 2004 10551 14707147 
52 Takagaki Y.  Manley J.L.   Complex protein interactions within the human polyadenylation machinery identify a novel component Mol. Cell. Biol. 20 2000 1515 10669729 
53 Zhao J.  Kessler M.  Helmling S.  O'Connor J.P.  Moore C.   Pta1, a component of yeast CF II, is required for both cleavage and poly(A) addition of mRNA precursor Mol. Cell. Biol. 19 1999 7733 10523662 
54 Preker P.J.  Ohnacker M.  Minvielle-Sebastia L.  Keller W.   A multisubunit 3′ end processing factor from yeast containing poly(A) polymerase and homologues of the subunits of mammalian cleavage and polyadenylation specificity factor EMBO J. 16 1997 4727 9303317 
55 Herr A.J.  Molnar A.  Jones A.  Baulcombe D.C.   Defective RNA processing enhances RNA silencing and influences flowering of Arabidopsis Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 103 2006 14994 17008405 
56 Keon B.H.  Schafer S.  Kuhn C.  Grund C.  Franke W.W.   Symplekin, a novel type of tight junction plaque protein J. Cell Biol. 134 1996 1003 8769423 
57 Barnard D.C.  Ryan K.  Manley J.L.  Richter J.D.   Symplekin and xGLD-2 are required for CPEB-mediated cytoplasmic polyadenylation Cell 119 2004 641 15550246 
58 Gebauer F.  Richter J.D.   Cloning and characterization of a Xenopus  poly(A) polymerase Mol. Cell. Biol. 15 1995 1422 7862135 
59 Ballantyne S.  Bilger A.  Astrom J.  Virtanen A.  Wickens M.   Poly (A) polymerases in the nucleus and cytoplasm of frog oocytes: dynamic changes during oocyte maturation and early development RNA 1 1995 64 7489490 
60 Colgan D.F.  Murthy K.G.K.  Prives C.  Manley J.L.   Cell-cycle related regulation poly(A) polymerase by phosphorylation Nature 384 1996 282 8918882 
61 Wang L.  Eckmann C.R.  Kadyk L.C.  Wickens M.  Kimble J.   A regulatory cytoplasmic poly(A) polymerase in Caenorhabditis elegans  Nature 419 2002 312 12239571 
62 Kwak J.E.  Wang L.  Ballantyne S.  Kimble J.  Wickens M.   Mammalian GLD-2 homologs are poly(A) polymerases Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 101 2004 4407 15070731 
63 Read R.L.  Martinho R.G.  Wang S.W.  Carr A.M.  Norbury C.J.   Cytoplasmic poly(A) polymerases mediate cellular responses to S phase arrest Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 99 2002 12079 12218190 
64 Juge F.  Zaessinger S.  Temme C.  Wahle E.  Simonelig M.   Control of poly(A) polymerase level is essential to cytoplasmic polyadenylation and early development in Drosophila  EMBO J. 21 2002 6603 12456666 
65 Kim J.H.  Richter J.D.   RINGO/cdk1 and CPEB mediate poly(A) tail stabilization and translational regulation by ePAB Genes Dev. 21 2007 2571 17938241 
66 Nakanishi T.  Kubota H.  Ishibashi N.  Kumagai S.  Watanabe H.  Yamashita M.  Kashiwabara S.  Miyado K.  Baba T.   Possible role of mouse poly(A) polymerase mGLD-2 during oocyte maturation Dev. Biol. 289 2006 115 16325797 
67 Rouget C.  Papin C.  Mandart E.   Cytoplasmic CstF-77 protein belongs to a masking complex with cytoplasmic polyadenylation element-binding protein in Xenopus  oocytes J. Biol. Chem. 281 2006 28687 16882666 
68 Wilkie G.S.  Gautier P.  Lawson D.  Gray N.K.   Embryonic poly(A)-binding protein stimulates translation in germ cells Mol. Cell. Biol. 25 2005 2060 15713657 
69 Voeltz G.K.  Ongkasuwan J.  Standart N.  Steitz J.A.   A novel embryonic poly(A) binding protein, ePAB, regulates mRNA deadenylation in Xenopus  egg extracts Genes Dev. 15 2001 774 11274061 
70 Nakanishi T.  Kumagai S.  Kimura M.  Watanabe H.  Sakurai T.  Kimura M.  Kashiwabara S.  Baba T.   Disruption of mouse poly(A) polymerase mGLD-2 does not alter polyadenylation status in oocytes and somatic cells Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 364 2007 14 17927953 
71 Haccard O.  Jessus C.   Oocyte maturation, Mos and cyclins—a matter of synthesis: two functionally redundant ways to induce meiotic maturation Cell Cycle 5 2006 1152 16760654 
72 Gill A.  Hammes S.R.   G beta gamma signaling reduces intracellular cAMP to promote meiotic progression in mouse oocytes Steroids 72 2007 117 17178138 
73 Jamnongjit M.  Hammes S.R.   Oocyte maturation: the coming of age of a germ cell Semin. Reprod. Med. 23 2005 234 16059829 
74 Kim J.H.  Richter J.D.   Opposing polymerase-deadenylase activities regulate cytoplasmic polyadenylation Mol. Cell 24 2006 173 17052452 
75 De Moor C.H.  Richter J.D.   Cytoplasmic polyadenylation elements mediate masking and unmasking of cyclin B1 mRNA EMBO J. 18 1999 2294 10205182 
76 Barkoff A.  Ballantyne S.  Wickens M.   Meiotic maturation in Xenopus  requires polyadenylation of multiple mRNAs EMBO J. 17 1998 3168 9606198 
77 Ballantyne S.  Daniel D.L. Jr.  Wickens M.   A dependent pathway of cytoplasmic polyadenylation reactions linked to cell cycle control by c-mos and CDK1 activation Mol. Biol. Cell 8 1997 1633 9285830 
78 De Moor C.H.  Richter J.D.   The Mos pathway regulates cytoplasmic polyadenylation in Xenopus  oocytes Mol. Cell. Biol. 17 1997 6419 9343404 
79 Keady B.T.  Kuo P.  Martinez S.E.  Yuan L.  Hake L.E.   MAPK interacts with XGef and is required for CPEB activation during meiosis in Xenopus  oocytes J. Cell Sci. 120 2007 1093 17344432 
80 Reverte C.G.  Yuan L.  Keady B.T.  Lacza C.  Attfield K.R.  Mahon G.M.  Freeman B.  Whitehead I.P.  Hake L.E.   XGef is a CPEB-interacting protein involved in Xenopus  oocyte maturation Dev. Biol. 255 2003 383 12648498 
81 Eyers P.A.  Liu J.  Hayashi N.R.  Lewellyn A.L.  Gautier J.  Maller J.L.   Regulation of the G(2)/M transition in Xenopus  oocytes by the cAMP-dependent protein kinase J. Biol. Chem. 280 2005 24339 15860459 
82 Barnard D.C.  Cao Q.  Richter J.D.   Differential phosphorylation controls Maskin association with eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E and localization on the mitotic apparatus Mol. Cell. Biol. 25 2005 7605 16107707 
83 Sarkissian M.  Mendez R.  Richter J.D.   Progesterone and insulin stimulation of CPEB-dependent polyadenylation is regulated by Aurora A and glycogen synthase kinase-3 Genes Dev. 18 2004 48 14724178 
84 Maton G.  Thibier C.  Castro A.  Lorca T.  Prigent C.  Jessus C.   Cdc2-cyclin B triggers H3 kinase activation of Aurora-A in Xenopus  oocytes J. Biol. Chem. 278 2003 21439 12670933 
85 Frank-Vaillant M.  Haccard O.  Thibier C.  Ozon R.  Arlot-Bonnemains Y.  Prigent C.  Jessus C.   Progesterone regulates the accumulation and the activation of Eg2 kinase in Xenopus  oocytes J. Cell Sci. 113 2000 1127 10704364 
86 Ma C.  Cummings C.  Liu X.J.   Biphasic activation of Aurora-A kinase during the meiosis I–meiosis II transition in Xenopus  oocytes Mol. Cell. Biol. 23 2003 1703 12588989 
87 Atkins C.M.  Nozaki N.  Shigeri Y.  Soderling T.R.   Cytoplasmic polyadenylation element binding protein-dependent protein synthesis is regulated by calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II J. Neurosci. 24 2004 5193 15175389 
88 Liu J.  Maller J.L.   Calcium elevation at fertilization coordinates phosphorylation of XErp1/Emi2 by Plx1 and CaMK II to release metaphase arrest by cytostatic factor Curr. Biol. 15 2005 1458 16040245 
89 Horner K.  Livera G.  Hinckley M.  Trinh K.  Storm D.  Conti M.   Rodent oocytes express an active adenylyl cyclase required for meiotic arrest Dev. Biol. 258 2003 385 12798295 
90 Matsumoto Y.  Maller J.L.   Calcium, calmodulin, and CaMKII requirement for initiation of centrosome duplication in Xenopus  egg extracts Science 295 2002 499 11799245 
91 Su Y.Q.  Eppig J.J.   Evidence that multifunctional calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaM KII) participates in the meiotic maturation of mouse oocytes Mol. Reprod. Dev. 61 2002 560 11891928 
92 Griffith L.C.   Regulation of calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II activation by intramolecular and intermolecular interactions J. Neurosci. 24 2004 8394 15456810 
93 Howard E.L.  Charlesworth A.  Welk J.  MacNicol A.M.   The mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathway stimulates mos mRNA cytoplasmic polyadenylation during Xenopus  oocyte maturation Mol. Cell. Biol. 19 1999 1990 10022886 
94 Fisher D.L.  Mandart E.  Doree M.   Hsp90 is required for c-Mos activation and biphasic MAP kinase activation in Xenopus  oocytes EMBO J. 19 2000 1516 10747020 
95 Ferby I.  Blazquez M.  Palmer A.  Eritja R.  Nebreda A.R.   A novel p34(cdc2)-binding and activating protein that is necessary and sufficient to trigger G(2)/M progression in Xenopus  oocytes Genes Dev. 13 1999 2177 10465793 
96 Gutierrez G.J.  Vogtlin A.  Castro A.  Ferby I.  Salvagiotto G.  Ronai Z.  Lorca T.  Nebreda A.R.   Meiotic regulation of the CDK activator RINGO/Speedy by ubiquitin-proteasome-mediated processing and degradation Nat. Cell Biol. 8 2006 1084 16964245 
97 Padmanabhan K.  Richter J.D.   Regulated Pumilio-2 binding controls RINGO/Spy mRNA translation and CPEB activation Genes Dev. 20 2006 199 16418484 
98 Lenormand J.L.  Dellinger R.W.  Knudsen K.E.  Subramani S.  Donoghue D.J.   Speedy: a novel cell cycle regulator of the G2/M transition EMBO J. 18 1999 1869 10202150 
99 Martinez S.E.  Yuan L.  Lacza C.  Ransom H.  Mahon G.M.  Whitehead I.P.  Hake L.E.   XGef mediates early CPEB phosphorylation during Xenopus  oocyte meiotic maturation Mol. Biol. Cell 16 2005 1152 15635100 
100 Cao Q.  Huang Y.S.  Kan M.C.  Richter J.D.   Amyloid precursor proteins anchor CPEB to membranes and promote polyadenylation-induced translation Mol. Cell. Biol. 25 2005 10930 16314516 
101 Mendez R.  Barnard D.  Richter J.D.   Differential mRNA translation and meiotic progression require Cdc2-mediated CPEB destruction EMBO J. 21 2002 1833 11927567 
102 Reverte C.G.  Ahearn M.D.  Hake L.E.   CPEB degradation during Xenopus  oocyte maturation requires a PEST domain and the 26S proteasome Dev. Biol. 231 2001 447 11237472 
103 Setoyama D.  Yamashita M.  Sagata N.   Mechanism of degradation of CPEB during Xenopus  oocyte maturation Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 104 2007 18001 17986610 
104 Wu L.  Wells D.  Tay J.  Mendis D.  Abbott M.A.  Barnitt A.  Quinlan E.  Heynen A.  Fallon J.R.  Richter J.D.   CPEB-mediated cytoplasmic polyadenylation and the regulation of experience-dependent translation of alpha-CaMKII mRNA at synapses Neuron 21 1998 1129 9856468 
105 Rouhana L.  Wickens M.   Autoregulation of GLD-2 cytoplasmic poly(A) polymerase RNA 13 2007 188 17164476 
106 Huarte J.  Stutz A.  O'Connell M.L.  Gubler P.  Belin D.  Darrow A.L.  Strickland S.  Vassalli J.-D.   Transient translational silencing by reversible mRNA deadenylation Cell 69 1992 1021 1606611 
107 Nakahata S.  Katsu Y.  Mita K.  Inoue K.  Nagahama Y.  Yamashita M.   Biochemical identification of Xenopus  Pumilio as a sequence-specific Cyclin B1 mRNA-binding protein that physically interacts with a Nanos homolog (Xcat-2) and a cytoplasmic polyadenylation element-binding Protein (CPEB) J. Biol. Chem. 276 2001 20945 11283000 
108 Nakahata S.  Kotani T.  Mita K.  Kawasaki T.  Katsu Y.  Nagahama Y.  Yamashita M.   Involvement of Xenopus  Pumilio in the translational regulation that is specific to cyclin B1 mRNA during oocyte maturation Mech. Dev. 120 2003 865 12963108 
109 Rouhana L.  Wang L.  Buter N.  Kwak J.E.  Schiltz C.A.  Gonzalez T.  Kelley A.E.  Landry C.F.  Wickens M.   Vertebrate GLD2 poly(A) polymerases in the germline and the brain RNA 11 2005 1117 15987818 
110 Wharton R.P.  Aggarwal A.K.   mRNA regulation by Puf domain proteins Sci. STKE 2006 2006 e37 
111 Wickens M.  Bernstein D.S.  Kimble J.  Parker R.   A PUF family portrait: 3′UTR regulation as a way of life Trends Genet. 18 2002 150 11858839 
112 Goldstrohm A.C.  Seay D.J.  Hook B.A.  Wickens M.   PUF protein-mediated deadenylation is catalyzed by Ccr4p J. Biol. Chem. 282 2007 109 17090538 
113 Goldstrohm A.C.  Hook B.A.  Seay D.J.  Wickens M.   PUF proteins bind Pop2p to regulate messenger RNAs Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 13 2006 533 16715093 
114 Tucker M.  Staples R.R.  Valencia-Sanchez M.A.  Muhlrad D.  Parker R.   Ccr4p is the catalytic subunit of a Ccr4p/Pop2p/Notp mRNA deadenylase complex in Saccharomyces cerevisiae  EMBO J. 21 2002 1427 11889048 
115 Sonoda J.  Wharton R.P.   Recruitment of Nanos to hunchback mRNA by Pumilio Genes Dev. 13 1999 2704 10541556 
116 Kadyrova L.Y.  Habara Y.  Lee T.H.  Wharton R.P.   Translational control of maternal Cyclin B mRNA by Nanos in the Drosophila  germline Development 134 2007 1519 17360772 
117 Legagneux V.  Bouvet P.  Omilli F.  Chevalier S.  Osborne H.B.   Identification of RNA-binding proteins specific to Xenopus  Eg maternal mRNAs: association with the portion of Eg2 mRNA that promotes deadenylation in embryos Development 116 1992 1193 1295736 
118 Paris J.  Le Guellec R.  Couturier A.  Le Guellec K.  Omilli F.  Camonis J.  MacNeill S.  Philippe M.   Cloning by differential screening of a Xenopus  cDNA coding for a protein highly homologous to cdc2 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 88 1991 1039 1704128 
119 Paillard L.  Omilli F.  Legagneux V.  Bassez T.  Maniey D.  Osborne H.B.   EDEN and EDEN-BP, a cis element and an associated factor that mediate sequence-specific mRNA deadenylation in Xenopus  embryos EMBO J. 17 1998 278 9427761 
120 Meijer H.A.  Radford H.E.  Wilson L.S.  Lissenden S.  De Moor C.H.   Translational control of maskin mRNA by its 3′ untranslated region Biol. Cell 99 2007 239 17241108 
121 Marquis J.  Paillard L.  Audic Y.  Cosson B.  Danos O.  Le B.C.  Osborne H.B.   CUG-BP1/CELF1 requires UGU-rich sequences for high affinity binding Biochem. J. 400 2006 291 16938098 
122 Moraes K.C.  Wilusz C.J.  Wilusz J.   CUG-BP binds to RNA substrates and recruits PARN deadenylase RNA 12 2006 1810 16912217 
123 Smith R.C.  Dworkin-Rastl E.  Dworkin M.B.   Expression of a histone H1-like protein is restricted to early Xenopus  development Genes Dev. 2 1988 1284 3060404 
124 Dworkin M.B.  Shrutkovski A.  Dworkin-Rastl E.   Mobilization of specific maternal RNA species into polysomes after fertilization in Xenopus laevis  Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 82 1985 7636 2415967 
125 Barkoff A.F.  Dickson K.S.  Gray N.K.  Wickens M.   Translational control of cyclin B1 mRNA during meiotic maturation: coordinated repression and cytoplasmic polyadenylation Dev. Biol. 220 2000 97 10720434 
126 Imai T.  Tokunaga A.  Yoshida T.  Hashimoto M.  Mikoshiba K.  Weinmaster G.  Nakafuku M.  Okano H.   The neural RNA-binding protein Musashi1 translationally regulates mammalian numb gene expression by interacting with its mRNA Mol. Cell. Biol. 21 2001 3888 11359897 
127 Okano H.  Kawahara H.  Toriya M.  Nakao K.  Shibata S.  Imai T.   Function of RNA-binding protein Musashi-1 in stem cells Exp. Cell Res. 306 2005 349 15925591 
128 Stebbins-Boaz B.  Cao Q.  De Moor C.H.  Mendez R.  Richter J.D.   Maskin is a CPEB associated factor that transiently interacts with eIF-4E Mol. Cell 4 1999 1017 10635326 
129 Bellanger J.M.  Carter J.C.  Phillips J.B.  Canard C.  Bowerman B.  Gonczy P.   ZYG-9, TAC-1 and ZYG-8 together ensure correct microtubule function throughout the cell cycle of C. elegans  embryos J. Cell Sci. 120 2007 2963 17666432 
130 Yao R.  Natsume Y.  Noda T.   TACC3 is required for the proper mitosis of sclerotome mesenchymal cells during formation of the axial skeleton Cancer Sci. 98 2007 555 17359303 
131 Barros T.P.  Kinoshita K.  Hyman A.A.  Raff J.W.   Aurora A activates D-TACC–Msps complexes exclusively at centrosomes to stabilize centrosomal microtubules J. Cell Biol. 170 2005 1039 16186253 
132 O'Brien L.L.  Albee A.J.  Liu L.  Tao W.  Dobrzyn P.  Lizarraga S.B.  Wiese C.   The Xenopus  TACC homologue, maskin, functions in mitotic spindle assembly Mol. Biol. Cell 16 2005 2836 15788567 
133 Peset I.  Seiler J.  Sardon T.  Bejarano L.A.  Rybina S.  Vernos I.   Function and regulation of Maskin, a TACC family protein, in microtubule growth during mitosis J. Cell Biol. 170 2005 1057 16172207 
134 Gergely F.  Draviam V.M.  Raff J.W.   The ch-TOG/XMAP215 protein is essential for spindle pole organization in human somatic cells Genes Dev. 17 2003 336 12569123 
135 Cao Q.  Kim J.H.  Richter J.D.   CDK1 and calcineurin regulate Maskin association with eIF4E and translational control of cell cycle progression Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 13 2006 1128 17086181 
136 Pascreau G.  Delcros J.G.  Cremet J.Y.  Prigent C.  Arlot-Bonnemains Y.   Phosphorylation of maskin by Aurora-A participates in the control of sequential protein synthesis during Xenopus laevis  oocyte maturation J. Biol. Chem. 280 2005 13415 15687499 
137 Cao Q.  Richter J.D.   Dissolution of the maskin–eIF4E complex by cytoplasmic polyadenylation and poly(A)-binding protein controls cyclin B1 mRNA translation and oocyte maturation EMBO J. 21 2002 3852 12110596 
138 De Moor C.H.  Meijer H.A.  Lissenden S.   Mechanisms of translational control by the 3′ UTR in development and differentiation Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 16 2005 49 15659339 
139 Jung M.Y.  Lorenz L.  Richter J.D.   Translational control by neuroguidin, a eukaryotic initiation factor 4E and CPEB binding protein Mol. Cell. Biol. 26 2006 4277 16705177 
140 Balatsos N.A.  Nilsson P.  Mazza C.  Cusack S.  Virtanen A.   Inhibition of mRNA deadenylation by the nuclear cap binding complex (CBC) J. Biol. Chem. 281 2006 4517 16317009 
141 Copeland P.R.  Wormington M.   The mechanism and regulation of deadenylation: identification and characterization of Xenopus  PARN RNA 7 2001 875 11424938 
142 Gao M.  Fritz D.T.  Ford L.P.  Wilusz J.   Interaction between a poly(A)-specific ribonuclease and the 5′ cap influences mRNA deadenylation rates in vitro Mol. Cell 5 2000 479 10882133 
143 Minshall N.  Reiter M.H.  Weil D.  Standart N.   CPEB interacts with an ovary-specific eIF4E and 4E-T in early oocytes J. Biol. Chem. 282 2007 37389 17942399 
144 Parker R.  Sheth U.   P bodies and the control of mRNA translation and degradation Mol. Cell 25 2007 635 17349952 
145 Wilczynska A.  Aigueperse C.  Kress M.  Dautry F.  Weil D.   The translational regulator CPEB1 provides a link between dcp1 bodies and stress granules J. Cell Sci. 118 2005 981 15731006 
146 Tanaka K.J.  Ogawa K.  Takagi M.  Imamoto N.  Matsumoto K.  Tsujimoto M.   RAP55, a cytoplasmic mRNP component, represses translation in Xenopus  oocytes J. Biol. Chem. 281 2006 40096 17074753 
147 Minshall N.  Standart N.   The active form of Xp54 RNA helicase in translational repression is an RNA-mediated oligomer Nucleic Acids Res. 32 2004 1325 14982957 
148 Minshall N.  Thom G.  Standart N.   A conserved role of a DEAD box helicase in mRNA masking RNA 7 2001 1728 11780630 
149 Coller J.  Parker R.   General translational repression by activators of mRNA decapping Cell 122 2005 875 16179257 
150 Brengues M.  Parker R.   Accumulation of polyadenylated mRNA, Pab1p, eIF4E, and eIF4G with P-bodies in Saccharomyces cerevisiae  Mol. Biol. Cell 18 2007 2592 17475768 
151 Beilharz T.H.  Preiss T.   Widespread use of poly(A) tail length control to accentuate expression of the yeast transcriptome RNA 13 2007 982 17586758 
152 Meijer H.A.  Bushell M.  Hill K.  Gant T.W.  Willis A.E.  Jones P.  De Moor C.H.   A novel method for poly(A) fractionation reveals a large population of mRNAs with a short poly(A) tail in mammalian cells Nucleic Acids Res. 35 2007 e132 17933768 
153 Graindorge A.  Thuret R.  Pollet N.  Osborne H.B.  Audic Y.   Identification of post-transcriptionally regulated Xenopus tropicalis  maternal mRNAs by microarray Nucleic Acids Res. 34 2006 986 16464828 



