Introduction
Functional glycomics,
as the systematic study of structures and
functions of the glycome, has seen great progress in the past decade.− This is largely due to increasing interest in glycans related to
various biological pathways and diseases. Glycans play important roles
in protein folding, cell–cell adhesion, host–pathogen
interactions, and cell signaling. The
study of glycans/carbohydrates is inherently more complicated than
nucleic acids and proteins, due to their more complicated structure. Unlike the situation for nucleic acids and proteins,
there is neither practical automatic synthesis nor high throughput
sequencing techniques available for glycans, despite the great efforts
and advances made in synthetic/analytical chemistry of glycans. While
the prototype glycan synthesizer has been reported, the limitation of its applicability to larger glycans and
the lack of monosaccharide building blocks prevent it from being employed
widely in the near future. The sequencing of glycan structures has
been focused on high resolution mass spectrometry (MS), which has
produced an enormous amount of information on glycomics.− However, due to limited material, the structural information is
often partial and detailed analysis requires significant instrumentation
and expertise.

In recent years, glycan microarrays have emerged
as a powerful
tool to study functions of glycans by facilitating studies on protein–glycan
interactions in a high throughput fashion. A library of glycans, with
either defined or unknown structures, can be printed on a single glass
slide and interrogated for protein binding using antibodies and lectins,
generally defined as glycan-binding proteins (GBPs). Despite the great
success of glycan microarrays using synthetic glycans with defined
structures, the bottleneck is the unavailability of more complex glycans.
We and others have been seeking alternative ways to prepare glycan
libraries from natural glycans for microarray by developing fluorescent
bifunctional linkers, which greatly facilitate the detection, monitoring,
quantification, and immobilization of natural glycans.− While techniques including multidimensional HPLC separation can
be used successfully to isolate individual natural glycans, the large-scale
release of glycans from various natural sources is expensive and not
easy.

N-Glycans can be released from glycoproteins either enzymatically
or chemically.− Peptide:N-glycanases (PNGase F) have been widely
used to remove N-glycans from glycoproteins and have contributed enormously
to the development of the glycosciences. However, these specialty
enzymes are often too expensive to be applied at a preparative scale.
The use of these enzymes often involves a complex denaturing procedure,
including reduction/alkylation and trypsin digestion. The specificity
of PNGase F also raises questions about the completeness of the prepared
glycome, especially from nonmammalian systems, since unusual modification
of the core structures of N-glycans can adversely affect PNGase F
recognition. The only validated chemical method to quantitatively
release N-glycans is hydrazinolysis at elevated temperature. This
is seriously detrimental to many labile groups and the reagent is
highly toxic and dangerous to handle, especially at larger scales.
Both of these methods release glycans in free reducing form that can
be easily labeled with a fluorescent tag by reductive amination, but
the reducing end structural features are lost.

In this manuscript,
we describe the development of a general method
to release and tag N-glycans from all natural sources using mild conditions
that retain the reducing end linkages and common, inexpensive, and
easy-to-handle reagents. This new approach, which is directed to glycoproteins,
is termed “threshing and trimming” (TaT), and is schematically
represented in Figure . Glycoproteins in complex
samples including cells, tissues, or organs are digested with Pronase
(“threshed”) to remove most of the aglycon components.
The threshed glycoconjugates are then “trimmed” by reaction
with N-bromosuccinimide (NBS) to form homogeneous aglycons, which
can be specifically tagged and separated for functional analysis.
This manuscript describes the application of this strategy to N-glycans,
perhaps the most studied class of glycans, and demonstrates a simple
and inexpensive process to prepare fluorescently tagged N-glycans
under mild conditions for functional studies.

Strategy of “threshing
and trimming” (TaT) of glycoconjugates
for Functional Glycomics.

Results
Combination of Pronase Digestion and N-Bromosuccinimide (NBS)
Treatment Releases Glycans with Homogeneous Aglycon from Glycoproteins
Pronase can nonspecifically digest proteins to small peptides and
single amino acids without altering any glycans. In our previous work, we applied N-fluorenylmethyloxycarbonyl
(Fmoc) protection as a reversible fluorescent tag to these glycopeptides
to facilitate their separation and use of the glycans for microarray
preparations. However, the resulting
glycopeptides from most glycoproteins are heterogeneous on the peptide
components. This heterogeneity coupled with the inherent heterogeneity
of the glycans makes it extremely difficult to practically separate
and characterize these glycopeptides for preparation of a glycan library.
We therefore sought a chemical treatment that can remove the heterogeneous
peptide component yet preserve the glycan linkage to Asn. N-Bromosuccinimide
(NBS) is a widely used oxidant in synthetic carbohydrate chemistry
for protecting group manipulation/activation., It has also been used for decarboxylation of amino acids to prepare
corresponding nitriles., We reasoned that NBS
could be used to trim the peptide/amino acid components of glycopeptides
without affecting glycans. We found that NBS treatment of a Pronase
digest of glycoproteins under different conditions gave either the
expected nitriles or free reducing glycans, as schematically shown
in Figure a and . We analyzed the MALDI-TOF profiles of
the dialyzed Pronase digest from ovalbumin before and after NBS treatment
(Figure b). Exhaustive Pronase digestion removes
most of the peptide components to generate glycoamino acids (Figure b, top panel). Upon NBS treatment at room temperature
in phosphate buffer (pH 6–8), glycan nitriles were formed nearly
quantitatively (Figure b, middle panel). When
NBS treatment was carried out in the same buffer at elevated temperature
(65 °C), free reducing glycans, including a small component of
glycans lacking the reducing terminal GlcNAc, i.e., the one linked
to Asn, were observed as the products (Figure b, bottom panel). This latter minor component likely arises from
a “peeling” reaction by an unknown mechanism that must
be different from β-elimination, as it is not pH dependent and
no further “peeling” was observed with prolonged reaction
time. While free reducing glycans have been commonly used for structural
characterization and fluorescent tagging, we focused on the relatively
stable glycan nitriles, since they are generated under mild conditions
and retain the reducing end linkage to the aglycone. In addition,
the nitrile functional group can be specifically derivatized if desired.

NBS treatment
of Pronase digested glycopeptides generates glycan
nitriles or reducing sugars. (a) Reaction scheme of Pronase digest
and NBS treatment. (b) MALDI-TOF profiles of Pronase digested ovalbumin
glycoamino acids (top panel), after NBS treatment under room temperature
(middle panel) or 65 °C (bottom panel). (c,d) MALDI-TOF profiles
of Pronase glycopeptides from bovine IgG (c) and horseradish peroxidase
(d) before (top panels) and after (bottom panels) NBS treatment.

Unexpectedly, we found that not
only glycoamino acids, but also
glycopeptides with short peptides could be trimmed by NBS treatment
to nitriles (Figure c,d). Bovine immunoglobulin
G (IgG) and horseradish peroxidase (HRP) were treated with Pronase
and mixtures of glycoamino acids/glycopeptides were obtained (Figure c,d, top panels). When these mixtures were treated
with NBS, glycan nitriles were obtained as the major products (Figure c,d, bottom panels), suggesting that glycopeptides
with short peptide chains can also be trimmed down to nitriles. The
proposed mechanism is shown in , route a. It is also noteworthy that the major HRP
N-glycan is resistant to PNGase F digestion due to its unusual core
α3-fucosylation on the innermost GlcNAc, which does not interfere
with the trimming by the NBS reaction in this novel approach.

Released
N-Glycans from Glycoproteins Can Be Labeled with 2-Aminobenzamide
(2-AB) by Palladium/Carbon Catalyzed N-Alkylation
Nitriles
are usually considered chemically inert, yet there are specific chemical
transformations to activate nitriles to a more active functional group,
such as aldehydes and amines,,, which are highly useful for further functionalization. In our ongoing
efforts to utilize natural glycans for protein–glycan interaction
studies, we found that fluorescent tagging is often essential for
detection, characterization, and quantification of minor amounts of
glycans. Therefore, we developed a simple method to fluorescently
tag these glycan nitriles. Recently, nitriles have been used in the
catalytic N-alkylation of amine and nitro groups, although often excess
nitriles are used to drive the N-alkylation to completion.− We reasoned that by using an excess of fluorescent amine, we should
be able to directly tag the glycan nitriles (Figure a) for subsequent profiling and functional study. This was
confirmed by NBS treatment of Pronase-digested bovine fetuin followed
by palladium/carbon (Pd/C) catalyzed reaction with 2-aminobenzamide
(2-AB) (Figure b,c). When Pronase-derived
glycopeptides of fetuin were treated with NBS followed by permethylation,
we clearly observed N-glycan peaks corresponding to the expected permethylated
nitrile (Figure b, top panel). Interestingly,
O-glycans were observed as permethylated reducing glycans, as shown
in the full spectrum in . It is known that permethylation of Pronase digest
of glycoproteins yield permethylated reducing O-glycans. It is possible that O-glycans inhibit Pronase
so that only O-glycopeptides with longer peptide chains are formed,
which cannot be trimmed efficiently by NBS, but will release O-glycans
during the permethylation. Therefore, our new approach is specific
to N-glycan preparation. When the glycan nitriles were treated with
2-AB under catalysis with Pd/C, the nitriles were efficiently conjugated
with 2-AB as shown by analysis of the permethylated products (Figure b, bottom panel). The 2-AB tagged fetuin N-glycans
showed a very similar pattern when compared with the AEAB conjugates
of PNGase F digested N-glycans from fetuin, suggesting an efficient
and specific derivatization of N-glycans (Figure c). Similar to 2-AB, the glycan-nitriles from fetuin can also
be conjugated with 2,6-diaminopyridine (DAP) (), suggesting
that the tagging method is general for fluorescent amines.

Glycan nitriles
from NBS treatment can be fluorescently tagged
by Pd/C catalyzed conjugation. (a) Reaction scheme of release and
tagging of bovine fetuin N-glycans. (b) MALDI-TOF profiles of permethylated
fetuin glycan nitriles (top panel) and Pd/C catalyzed conjugation
product (bottom panel). (c) Comparison of HPLC profiles of AEAB conjugated
PNGase F digested N-glycans (top panel) and 2-AB conjugated product
from glycan nitriles from fetuin (bottom panel). (d) MALDI-TOF MS
profile of permethylated pig liver glycans prepared by NBS treatment.
(e) HPLC profile of pig liver glycans prepared by NBS treatment and
Pd/C catalyzed 2-AB conjugation.

Since the reagents used in this new approach are inexpensive,
it
can possibly be used for functional glycomic analyses on a large scale,
which is not practical using enzyme-based methods to release N-glycans.
To test the potential of TaT for large-scale preparations, 700 g (wet
weight) of pig liver were homogenized, digested with Pronase, and
dialyzed. The Pronase digest and dialysis was repeated once to ensure
complete digestion. The glycopeptides were then treated with NBS followed
by further dialysis to remove salt and small molecules. After lyophilization,
the dialysate yielded 0.9 g crude glycan nitrile derivatives. The
MALDI-TOF spectrum of permethylated glycan nitriles (Figure d and ) and fluorescent HPLC profile of 2-AB labeled glycans
(Figure e) were obtained, which showed successful
N-glycan release/tagging. Interestingly, the glycans obtained are
mostly neutral and monosialylated glycans, different from profiles
that have been observed for mouse and human liver N-glycans previously
(http://www.functionalglycomics.org/).

Glycan-Aldehyde
Can Be Released from Pronase Digested Glycoproteins
and Tagged with Bifunctional Fluorescent 2-Amino-N-(2-aminoethyl)benzamide
(AEAB)
The generation of nitriles from amino acids by NBS
treatment is likely through an intermediate of imine, which is less
stable under acidic conditions. Thus, as an alternative route, we
explored the NBS treatment of Pronase glycopeptides in 0.1% TFA, which
is mild but acidic enough to hydrolyze imines to aldehydes. As expected,
the aldehyde product was observed, which can be directly conjugated
with AEAB using common reductive amination conditions (Figure a). Egg yolk glycopeptide (EYG), ribonuclease B (RNaseB), and HRP were treated with Pronase,
followed by NBS under acidic conditions, and directly conjugated with
AEAB by reductive amination. The HPLC profiles (Figure b) and MALDI-TOF profiles (Figure c) indicate that the conjugation occurred smoothly and efficiently.
As reported previously, the AEAB conjugated
glycans, after separation, characterization, and quantification, can
be successfully used in the preparation of glycan microarray.

N-Glycan aldehyde
can be prepared by NBS treatment of Pronase glycopeptides
under acidic conditions and conjugated with AEAB. (a) Reaction scheme.
(b) HPLC profiles. (c) MALDI-TOF MS of conjugates of glycan aldehyde
with AEAB from egg yolk glycopeptide (top panels), ribonuclease B
(middle panels), and horseradish peroxidase (bottom panels).

Discussion
Here
we proposed a novel strategy termed “threshing and
trimming” (TaT) for the preparation of glycans from glycoproteins.
TaT is designed to eliminate the use of specialty enzymes, hazardous
chemical reagents, and harsh reaction conditions, and to maintain
as much structural integrity of N-glycans as possible. Using a combination
of inexpensive reagents, we successfully developed two routes to prepare
fluorescently tagged N-glycans from glycoproteins or from complex
mixtures of glycoprotein in large samples of cells, tissues, or organs.
These procedures overcome many of the major obstacles limiting large-scale
functional glycomics studies.

Pronase, a bacterial product that
lacks glycan components, is a
broad spectrum protease commonly used to digest most peptide components.
Considering the size and hydrophilicity of N-glycans, glycopeptides
generated by Pronase digestion can be separated from most amino acids
and small peptides. We found that a simple dialysis step using MWCO
500–1000 enriched the desired glycopeptides for subsequent
chemical treatment. When Pronase treatment is applied to cells, tissues,
or organs, it also facilitates the homogenization, potentially increasing
the yield of the glycome preparation.

We then investigated the
utility of NBS for trimming the aglycon
moiety of N-glycopeptides by simply varying the reaction pH and temperature.
Importantly, we were able to isolate N-glycans as nitriles, reducing
sugars, or aldehydes, based on the reaction conditions applied. When
glycopeptides were treated with NBS in phosphate buffer at room temperature
for several hours, the short peptides are transformed to nitriles
through oxidative decarboxylation. Due to its triple bond nature,
the formation of nitriles demonstrates the removal of both the N-terminal
and C-terminal aspects of the peptides. Thus, the glycan-nitriles
formed in this procedure are homogeneous in the aglycon moiety () and are reasonably
stable by themselves. However, with prolonged reaction with NBS at
room temperature or 2 h under heating at 65 °C in neutral buffers,
the aglycon was removed to form reducing sugars as the only products.
Meanwhile, in this later reaction, some reducing N-glycans lost their
reducing terminal GlcNAc. Although not fully understood, the mechanism
is unlikely β-elimination, as it is not dependent on pH. When
we changed the pH of the NBS treatment by using 0.1% TFA instead of
phosphate buffer, the products are glycan-aldehydes. This is likely
due to the hijacking of the imine intermediates by acidic hydrolysis
(, route
c) to the glycan-aldehydes before further NBS bromination of the glycan-imines
and HBr elimination to form glycan-nitriles (, route a). The generation of free reducing
sugars under heated condition was rather unexpected. It could be through
the bromination of the reducing end amide bond, which alters its stability
toward hydrolysis (, route b).

The ability to fully control the outcome
of products generated
by NBS treatment under different reaction conditions provides versatility
in this reaction scheme that can be used to great advantage. For example,
the free reducing sugars have been commonly used in permethylation
analysis and fluorescent tagging, while the glycan-nitriles are rather
chemically inert under normal physiological conditions, so they can
be directly used in some biological assays if desired. The glycan-nitriles
can also be specifically tagged through robust Pd/C mediated N-alkylation
of fluorescent amines, which will facilitate separation and characterization.
The glycan-aldehydes, on the other hand, are chemically active, and
besides the reductive amination with AEAB to prepare natural glycans
for glycan microarray, these glycan-aldehydes are expected to directly
conjugate with hydrazide and hydroxyamines easily for bioconjugation
with other biomolecules.

We focused on using only mild reaction
conditions, which were not
likely to affect any known labile groups on glycans, such as sialic
acids, phosphoesters, sulfate, etc. NBS was selected because it is
a widely used chemical in glycan synthesis with mild and specific
oxidation power that we felt might be utilized for a novel approach
to preparing glycans from complex mixtures of glycoconjugates. Since
the NBS oxidation only occurs on the peptide moiety, it does not interfere
with the glycan structure and shows no specificity for different classes
of N-glycans. For example, the strategy works not only on glycans
with a core α1–6-linked fucose, but also on N-glycans
with a core α1–3-linked fucose, which are resistant to
PNGase F digestion. This approach will presumably also work on other
special classes of N-glycans from other natural sources making it
useful for the functional glycomic analyses of bacteria and other
microorganisms.

To utilize the N-glycans prepared from a natural
source, fluorescent
and functional tagging is often essential. The glycan nitriles and
aldehydes prepared using NBS treatment can be easily tagged with fluorescent
compounds such as 2-AB and AEAB for functional study. Pd/C catalyzed
N-alkylation of 2-AB has been applied to the nitriles successfully
under very mild conditions. The resulting 2-AB conjugates can be used
either simply for profiling or for printing of glycan microarrays
as reported before. Alternatively, glycan aldehydes prepared by NBS
treatment under acidic condition can be directly conjugated with AEAB
by reductive amination. The resulting AEAB conjugates provide better
immobilization efficiency compared to 2-AB conjugates on NHS-activated
glass slides for preparation of glycan microarrays.

TaT has
the potential to be the method of choice for generation
of glycans in preparative scale from large amounts of cells and tissues
or organs and may replace the use of PNGase F and hydrazinolysis in
many analytical applications. Of course, PNGase F will remain an important
reagent for applications where peptide sequences are of interest.
By avoiding specialty enzymes, hazardous chemical reagents, and harsh
reaction conditions and by preserving glycan structural integrity,
TaT will significantly facilitate the study of functional glycomics,
especially when the glycome is studied on a large scale. On an analytical
scale, the TaT process is about 50% as efficient as PNGase F for glycan
release. However, unlike PNGase F digestion, TaT, which is a chemical
method, can be applied to large quantities of tissues. For example,
our preliminary study on pig liver has demonstrated the ability to
efficiently generate N-glycans from kilograms of tissue. We anticipate
that when applied on a large scale TaT will be used to mine milligram
to gram quantities of glycans from abundant natural sources and complement
synthetic approaches to greatly facilitate the structural and functional
analysis of glycome. While only N-glycans are targeted in this study,
efforts to extend this new strategy to other classes of glycoconjugates
are underway.

Experimental Procedures
Materials
All
chemicals and HPLC solvents were purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO and Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh,
PA. Milli-Q water was used to prepare all aqueous buffers. Pronase
was purchased from Calbiochem.

High Performance Liquid
Chromatography (HPLC) Analyses
A Shimadzu HPLC CBM-20A system
with UV detector SPD-20A and fluorescence
detector RF-10Axl was used for HPLC analysis. UV absorption at 330
nm or fluorescence at 330 nm excitation (Ex) and 420 nm emission (Em)
was used for detection of both 2-aminobenzamide (2-AB) and 2-amino-N-(2-aminoethyl)benzamide (AEAB) tag. A Restek Pinnacle
II Amino Column (5 μm, 250 mm × 4.6 mm) was used for normal
phase HPLC. The mobile phases were acetonitrile, water, and aqueous
ammonium acetate buffer at pH 4.5. A linear gradient from 20 mM ammonium
acetate in 80% acetonitrile to 200 mM ammonium acetate in 10% acetonitrile
in either 25 or 50 min was used.

Mass Spectrometry (MS)
A Bruker Daltonics Ultraflex-II
MALDI-TOF/TOF system and an anchorchip target plate were used for
MS analysis. Reflective positive mode was used for glycans before
and after permethylation. 2,5-Dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHB) (5 mg/mL
in 50% acetonitrile with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid) was used as matrix.

Release of N-Glycan Nitriles and Aldehydes from Glycoproteins
or Tissues
Glycoproteins were dissolved in water (or 0.1
M Tris buffer, pH 8.0, 0.1% sodium azide) to 10 mg/mL and Pronase
was added to 0.2 mg/mL. The mixture was digested at 55 °C in
a dialysis bag with MWCO 1000 for 24 h. Another batch of Pronase (0.1
mg/mL by calculation based on the volume) was added and the digestion/dialysis
was repeated for 24 h at 55 °C. The dialysate was buffered with
0.25–0.5 M phosphate to pH 6–8 or processed under acidic
conditions using 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) depending on the
outcome desired as discussed below. NBS was added to 15 mg/mL and
the solution was stirred at room temperature for 4 h to release glycan
nitriles or aldehydes. The reaction mixture was quenched by addition
of sodium sulfite to 15 mg/mL, dialyzed, and the glycan nitriles or
aldehydes were directly lyophilized for MS analysis or fluorescent
tagging. As an example, bovine fetuin (120 mg) was treated with Pronase
digestion/dialysis for 2 × 24 h. The dialysate was lyophilized
to give 19.1 mg glycoamino acids/glycopeptides. Twelve milligrams
of this mixture was treated with NBS in phosphate buffer (0.5 M, pH
7.2) and dialyzed against water after quenching with sodium sulfite.
After lyophilization, 10.3 mg crude glycan nitrile product was yielded
(14% by weight from glycoprotein), which can be directly labeled with
2-AB under Pd/C catalysis to obtain the fluorescent derivatives. In
another example, bovine IgG (310 mg) was treated with Pronase digestion/dialysis
and yielded 15.1 mg glycoamino acids/glycopeptides. 9.2 mg of this
product was treated with NBS and yielded 6.7 mg crude glycan nitrile
product (3.5% by weight from glycoprotein).

The release of glycan
nitriles and aldehydes from N-glycans contained in more complex samples
such as cells, tissues, and organs follows essentially the same procedure
except that Pronase digestion was repeated once. Tissue was homogenized
by blending with water (3 mL/g) and digested with Pronase for 48 h
and centrifuged. The supernatant was concentrated using a rotary evaporator,
dialyzed, and digested with Pronase again. The digest was passed through
a C18 Sep-Pak to remove lipid-linked glycans, and the flow-through
solution was processed as described above for glycoproteins.

Permethylation
Analysis
Permethylation of glycan samples
was carried out according to reported procedures to increase the sensitivity of MS analysis. Briefly, a
lyophilized sample was treated with DMSO/NaOH slurry (100–200
μL) and methyl iodide (25–50 μL) for 10–30
min. The supernatant was then partitioned between water (500 μL)
and chloroform (500 μL). The organic layer was washed with 500
μL water, dried, and redissolved in 50% methanol for MS analysis.

Fluorescent Tagging of Glycan-Nitriles with 2-Aminobenzamide
(2-AB) by Pd/C Mediated N-Alkylation
In a typical procedure,
desalted glycan nitriles were mixed with 2-AB (50–100 mM),
ammonium formate (0.5–1 M) in 75% methanol. Then, palladium
10% on carbon (Pd/C) was added (2–5 mg/mL). The mixture was
rotated at room temperature for 4 h, then filtered and dried in a
Speed-vac to remove methanol. The resulting tagged glycans can be
dialyzed or passed over Carbograph to remove byproducts and desalt
the sample prior to MS and HPLC analysis.

Fluorescent Tagging of
Reducing Glycans and Glycan Aldehydes
by Reductive Amination
Free reducing glycans from PNGase
F digestion and glycan aldehyde prepared by NBS treatment of glycopeptides
were conjugated with 2-AB or AEAB using essentially the same reductive
amination procedure. Briefly, to a dried
sample, equal volumes (10–50 μL) of 2-AB or AEAB (0.35 M) and sodium cyanoborohydride
(1 M) in DMSO/AcOH (7/3 v/v) was added. The mixture was heated at
65 °C for 2 h and the glycan derivatives were precipitated by
addition of 10 volumes of acetonitrile. The precipitates were collected
by centrifugation for MS and HPLC analysis.

Supporting Information Available
Four supplementary figures.
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc500366v_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a EUREKA Grant (GM085448), a Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency Grant HR0011-10-00 and P41 BTRC
grant (P41GM10369). We thank Drs. Richard D. Cummings, David F. Smith,
and Jamie Heimburg-Molinaro for help in scientific discussion and
preparing and editing the manuscript.

