Introduction
Chitin, the second most plenteous polysaccharide
after cellulose,
is a linear polysaccharide containing β-(1→4)-2-acetamido-2-deoxy-d-glucopyranose repeating units.− Chitin is becoming an increasingly important material due to its
abundance in nature, as well as its unique properties such as low
density, biodegradability, and biocompatibility. However, chitin is
insoluble in common solvents, which makes the material difficult to
process and limits its uses in practical applications. To overcome
this challenge for broader applications, methods have been developed
to isolate nanoparticles from chitin. For
example, when water-insoluble chitin is subjected to treatment with
TEMPO/NaBr/NaClO at pH 10 followed by mechanical disintegration, a
stable colloidal aqueous suspension of chitin nanocrystals is produced
owing to selective oxidation of the C6 primary hydroxyl groups.

The nanoscale dimension, in the case of
chitin characterized by
high surface area, unique morphology, and mechanical strength, makes these materials highly attractive as fiber
reinforcement agents in tissue engineering and in nanocomposites with
natural and synthetic polymers. As a
nanomaterial derived from abundant natural sources, chitin nanocrystals
would make an excellent platform for biomedical applications, for
example, in imaging, sensing, and theranostics. This has been addressed in this study, where TCNs were simultaneously
labeled with a fluorescent dye and conjugated with specific carbohydrate
ligands. The biorecognition
properties of the resulting dually functionalized TCNs were subsequently
studied by evaluating the binding of the fluorescent TCNs with cognate
lectins and bacteria. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
report on fluorescent chitin nanocrystals for imaging and bioanalysis.

Results
and Discussion
TCNs were prepared from α-chitin of
shrimp shells following
a previously reported protocol with slight modifications (Scheme ; see  for experimental details),, yielding individual
nanocrystals having a coniferous shape of 6 ± 2 nm in width and
250 ± 110 nm in length (Figure a,b).

Chitin Nanocrystal Formation via TEMPO-Mediated Oxidation of Chitin
The X-ray diffraction spectrum
of the TCNs showed peaks at 9.2°,
19.3°, 20.9°, and 23.3°, a typical diffraction pattern
for TEMPO-oxidized chitins ().
The total carboxylate content of the TCNs samples was 0.57 mmol/g
as determined by conductometric titrations (), corresponding to a degree of carboxylation of 0.16.

(a) AFM and
(b) scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM)
images of TCNs.

The TCNs were subsequently
labeled with a fluorescent dye (2) and a carbohydrate
ligand (5), an α-d-mannopyranoside (Man)
carrying a 2-(2-(2-aminoethoxy)ethoxy)ethanol
aglycon chain. The dye, 4-(2-aminoethylamino)-7H-benz[de]imidazo[2,1-a]isoquinolin-7-one (2), gives greenish yellow fluorescence () and was chosen due to its fastness properties and
high relative fluorescence intensity., Activation
of the carboxyl groups in TCNs with EDC and NHS followed by conjugation
with the dye 2 and Man derivative 5 yielded
the dually functionalized nanocrystal TCN-dye-Man (Scheme ; see  for experimental details). The carboxyl groups in TCN were functionalized
in high yield, as evidenced by the disappearance of the carboxyl absorption
band around 1740 cm–1 in the FTIR spectrum ().

Synthesis of Dually Functionalized
TCNs
The bioactivity of TCN-dye-Man was subsequently tested
by treating the nanocrystals with the lectin concanavalin A (Con A),
a carbohydrate-binding protein that has specific affinity toward α-d-mannopyranosides,− and, to a lesser extent, to α-d-glucopyranoside-containing
ligands (see  for
experimental details).− Con A exists as a tetramer at pH 7.2, thus enabling
potential cross-linking of the multivalent TCN-dye-Man and causing aggregation of the nanocrystals. Indeed, when Con A
was added to TCN-dye-Man, aggregates were observed in
less than 5 min (Figure a II), whereas without
Con A, the nanocrystals stayed suspended in the solution (Figure a I). This was further confirmed by STEM where the
aggregation was visible in the TCN-dye-Man sample treated
with Con A (Figure a) as compared to the sample
without Con A (Figure b). In a control experiment, TCN-dye-Man was incubated with soybean agglutinin (SBA),− a lectin that primarily binds to 2-acetamido-2-deoxy-β-d-galactopyranosides, and to a lesser extent to β-d-galactopyranoside-containing carbohydrates. No precipitation was observed and the nanocrystal solution
remained homogeneous for over 40 min (Figure a III). The fluorescence spectrum of the TCN-dye-Man solution after treating with Con A for one hour showed a significantly
reduced emission intensity, while only a slight decrease was observed
when TCN-dye-Man was treated with SBA (Figure c), likely due to nonspecific adsorption of SBA
to the nanocrystals.,

TCN-dye-Man and TCN-dye-Gal in HEPES
buffer (pH 7.2) under (a) visible light and (b) UV illumination: TCN-dye-Man (I), TCN-dye-Man incubated with Con
A (II), TCN-dye-Man incubated with SBA (III), TCN-dye-Gal (IV), TCN-dye-Gal incubated with Con A (V), and TCN-dye-Gal incubated with SBA (VI). (c) Emission spectra
of TCN-dye-Man (■), TCN-dye-Man with
SBA (▲), and TCN-dye-Man with Con A (•).
(d) Emission spectra of TCN-dye-Gal (□), TCN-dye-Gal with SBA (○) and TCN-dye-Gal with Con A (Δ). λex = 450 nm, λem = 512 nm.

To further confirm the
binding affinity and specificity of glycan-functionalized
TCNs, β-d-galactopyranoside (8), was conjugated to TCNs following the same procedure as for mannoside 5 to yield TCN-dye-Gal (Scheme ; see  for
experimental details). The biorecognition properties of the resulting
nanocrystals were then evaluated using Con A and SBA, respectively.
Agglomeration was observed in the sample incubated with SBA (Figure a VI). Compared to the case where TCN-dye-Man was treated with Con A, the formation of agglomerates was in this
case less obvious. This is likely due to the weaker binding affinity
between SBA and β-d-galactopyranosides (Ka for methyl β-d-galactopyranoside = 5.5
× 102 M–1) than that between Con A and α-d-mannopyranosides
(Ka for methyl α-d-mannopyranoside
is 8.2 × 103 M–1)., This was further supported by STEM, which showed stacked chitin
nanocrystals (Figure b) instead of the dense
agglomeration in the case of TCN-dye-Man/Con A. On the
other hand, the samples remained homogeneous in the absence of SBA
(Figure a IV), or when incubated with Con
A (Figure a V). Similar to TCN-dye-Man, a drastic decrease in the fluorescence intensity occurred after
treatment of the TCN-dye-Gal solution with SBA for one
hour (Figure d). The sample treated with Con
A showed a slight intensity decrease during the same time (Figure d), likely due to nonspecific protein adsorption
on the nanocrystals.

STEM images of (a) TCN-dye-Man after treating
with
Con A and (b) TCN-dye-Gal after treating with SBA.

The biorecognition properties
of the dually functionalized chitin
nanocrystals were further investigated in bacteria binding studies
(see  for experimental
details). Two strains of E. coli were
probed: ORN 178 and ORN 208, the first of which expressing the α-d-mannoside selective FimH lectin on type 1 pili, whereas the
second is devoid of this expression.− When TCN-dye-Man was treated with ORN 178, binding of nanocrystals was observed at
the surface of the ORN 178 cells as shown in both the TEM image (Figure a) and the confocal fluorescence image (Figure c), indicating the interactions between the mannose
ligands of TCN-dye-Man and the FimH lectin on ORN 178.
In contrast, almost no nanocrystals were detected at the surface of
ORN 208 cells after treating with TCN-dye-Man (Figure b,d).

TEM images of TCN-dye-Man incubated with E. coli strains (a) ORN 178 and (b) ORN 208. (c,d)
Corresponding confocal
fluorescence microscopy images. The insets in (a) and (b) are the
enlarged images of the corresponding samples.

In summary, we have developed a simple protocol for the synthesis
of chitin nanocrystals conjugated with both a fluorescent dye and
carbohydrate ligand. To demonstrate the utility of these dually functionalized
chitin nanocrystals, the bioaffinity of the resulting functionalized
nanocrystals were confirmed by their interactions with the corresponding
cognate proteins. The fluorescent label facilitates the observation
of these interactions by either fluorescence imaging or even with
the naked eye. Furthermore, the functionalized chitin nanocrystals
were successfully applied to image E. coli by taking advantage of the affinity of the glyconanocrystals with
the lectin receptor on the bacteria surface. Owing to the unique properties
of chitin, such as biodegradability, biocompatibility, and nontoxicity,
in comparison to many other nanomaterials, the new platform developed
here may reveal opportunities for chitin-based nanomaterials in a
wide range of bioanalytical and theranostic applications.

Supporting Information Available
Synthesis, experimental
details,
and additional characterization data. This material is available free
of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc500004c_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
The
manuscript
was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have
given approval to the final version of the manuscript. Juan Zhou and
Núria Butchosa contributed equally.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The study
was in part supported by the Royal Institute of
Technology, the National Institutes of Health (R01GM080295), National
Science Foundation (CHE-1112436), and the Swedish Research Council
Formas (CarboMat, 2009-1687). J.Z. thanks the China Scholarship Council
for a special scholarship award. The authors thank Professor Paul
E. Orndorff (North Carolina State University) for providing E. coli strains ORN178 and ORN208.

