Introduction
HIV ranks as one of the deadliest infectious
diseases among adults
and is the fourth leading cause of death worldwide. Globally, acquired
immune deficiency syndrome induced by HIV infection has killed more
than 25 million people (http://www.unaids.org). UNAIDS
estimates that there are about 33 million people living with HIV/AIDS
worldwide, including approximately 1.1 million people in the U.S.
alone. Despite the availability of potent antiretroviral drug regimens, these staggering statistics show that the epidemic
continues unabated, underscoring the need for a potent and efficacious
vaccine. Immunization strategies that elicit antibodies capable of
neutralizing diverse strains of the virus will be an important part
of a successful vaccine against HIV.

The HIV envelope glycoprotein
trimer, Env, mediates virus attachment
and fusion to host cells and consists of 2 subunits—the docking
portion, gp120, and the transmembrane portion required for fusion,
gp41., Env is the only neutralizing target on the
virus,, but current vaccine strategies have failed
to elicit the type of durable, high avidity, broadly neutralizing
humoral responses that can confer sterilizing protection against diverse
circulating strains of HIV. Most vaccine candidates targeting the
envelope glycoprotein have used the monomer form of the docking subunit.
Such monomeric gp120 vaccines have failed to induce broadly neutralizing
antibodies in preclinical studies and clinical trials. Further, antibodies elicited by monomeric gp120 bind epitopes
that are poor neutralization targets and are potentially occluded
on primary HIV isolates., Several conserved targets
for antibodies against the Env proteins are quaternary epitopes present
only in the trimeric, glycosylated native form of the envelope spike.,, Strategies to promote durable,
high avidity antibody responses against the native intact trimer structure
are lacking, and the production of stable gp120/gp41 trimers has proven
difficult. However, the ectodomain protein, gp140, has been used as
an Env surrogate, and use of soluble trimeric
gp120 or trimeric gp140 in vaccines has shown better promise at inducing
neutralizing antibodies relative to monomeric immunogens.,− Recently, we described the preparation of stable and high-quality
gp140 trimers (gp140T), which elicited higher titers of potent cross-clade
neutralizing antibody responses compared to corresponding gp120 monomers
for a diverse set of tier 1 and tier 2 viruses.

Although soluble proteins mixed with adjuvants are
most commonly
used in vaccination, delivery of antigens arrayed on synthetic micro-
and nanoparticles has shown clear advantages over immunization with
soluble immunogens in preclinical animal models.− Particulate
delivery promotes antigen uptake by antigen presenting cells (APCs),
allows for physiological display of antigens on membranes, and provides
multivalency, promoting B-cell triggering.− In addition, this approach allows
for the simultaneous codelivery of antigens and adjuvants to B-cells
and APCs, which can enhance vaccine efficacy even at low antigen doses,
as compared to soluble antigens.−

We recently described the production of chemically
cross-linked
lipid nanocapsules termed ICMVs (interbilayer-cross-linked multilamellar
vesicles) as carriers of molecular adjuvants and encapsulated or surface-displayed
antigens, which promoted follicular helper T-cell responses and elicited
high-avidity, durable antibody responses to a candidate Plasmodium vivax malaria antigen., Here, we utilize this nanocapsule system to display membrane-anchored
trimeric HIV Clade A gp140, mimicking native viral display of the
envelope glycoprotein in a format where molecular adjuvants could
be readily coloaded in the capsule walls or entrapped in the aqueous
core. To stably anchor gp140T to the surfaces of these particles under
conditions preserving the antigenic integrity of the trimers, we utilized
noncovalent binding of polyhistidine-tagged proteins to nitrilotri-acetic
acid (NTA)-headgroup lipids.− Because NTA-Ni(II)-His binding
is site specific, the physical orientation of the protein on the nanoparticle
surface is controlled. Compositions of ICMV capsules capable of stably
anchoring the heavily glycosylated, half-megadalton trimers were determined,
and the immunogenicity of trimer-conjugated nanocapsules compared
to soluble trimers adjuvanted with a very strong oil-in-water emulsion
was determined in mice. Importantly, nanocapsules elicited strong
class-switched antibody responses to a larger range of epitopes with
a steadily increasing avidity of trimer-binding antibody over 90 days,
which was not replicated by soluble protein vaccines. These results
suggest that nanoparticles can be formulated to display large HIV
Env trimers in an oriented, multivalent presentation, and can promote
a durable and broad immune response against Env immunogens.

Results
and Discussion
Binding of High Molecular Weight gp140T-his
to Low Tm-Lipid Nanocapsules
Generating a durable, potent
broadly neutralizing antibody (BNAb) response is the ultimate goal
of HIV vaccines targeting humoral immunity., Potent circulating BNAbs could potentially prevent the initial binding
of HIV to its host cell, thereby ensuring sterilizing immunity. Early
efforts at development of HIV vaccines exclusively employed monomeric
forms of the envelope proteins gp120 (there is no stable monomeric
form of gp41 available),, but such antigens lack
quaternary epitopes found only in the trimeric form of the envelope
spike, and further expose faces of the envelope proteins that are
irrelevant to the intact native trimer., Generation
of stable trimers of Env for use as immunogens has proven challenging,
but several groups have recently made progress in this area.,−,, We recently successfully synthesized trimeric forms of the ectodomain
of gp140 from sequences obtained from an array of primary isolates, enabling the testing of such an antigen for vaccination.
Initial immunization studies using soluble protein in adjuvant suggested
an ability of these trimeric proteins to elicit broader HIV-neutralizing
antibody responses compared to monomeric gp120 proteins.,

Nanoparticles have been shown to enhance humoral vaccine responses
as compared to their soluble counterparts, in terms of quantity, quality,
and breadth of response.,, For lipid-enveloped pathogens, the use of lipid-based nanoparticles
further provides the ability to mimic antigen display on the lipid
membrane of the target virus. To this end, we utilized lipid nanocapsules
we recently described, ICMVs, where the capsule walls are composed
of stacked lipid bilayers chemically “stapled” bilayer-to-bilayer
via covalent cross-links between lipid headgroups of adjacent bilayers. We hypothesized that the enhanced stability
of ICMVs relative to traditional liposomes would make them more effective
for delivery of surface-displayed trimer antigens, and additionally
could provide the option of incorporating high levels of molecular
adjuvants in the capsule walls or aqueous particle cores. To provide
oriented display of gp140 trimers on the surface of these lipid nanocapsules,
we took advantage of the 6 histidine residues at the base of each
“leg” of the trimer (originally incorporated to facilitate
purification of the protein), and utilized these to multivalently
anchor gp140T to Ni-NTA-functionalized lipids incorporated in the
particle bilayers (Figure ). Based on our
previous successful nanocapsule vaccines carrying malaria antigens
or ovalbumin we first prepared ICMVs
comprising the low-Tm lipids DOPC, MPB
(maleimide-headgroup lipid for interbilayer cross-links), and Ni-NTA-DGS
(Ni-NTA-headgroup lipids for histidine-protein capture) in a 4:5:1
mol ratio (Figure  step 1). Lipid capsules
were formed by fusing small unilamellar DOPC/MPB/Ni-NTA-DGS vesicles
via addition of calcium (step 2), followed by addition of DTT as a
membrane-permeable dithiol to introduce interbilayer cross-links at
37 °C (step 3). Ni-NTA-ICMVs containing 5% Ni-NTA-DGS were synthesized
with yields similar to DOPC/MPB-only capsules, and had a mean size
of 374 ± 27 nm diameter by dynamic light scattering. To anchor
protein to the nanocapsules, fluorescently tagged gp140 trimer with
histags (gp140T-his) was incubated with Ni-NTA-ICMVs at 4 °C
for 18 h (step 4), followed by a final PEGylation step using thiol-terminated
PEG to cap any remaining maleimide groups at the surfaces of the particles
(step 5). As controls, ICMVs loaded with his-tagged GFP were constructed
in parallel. Although ICMVs showed effective binding of his-tagged
GFP, the high molecular weight trimer molecules showed a low efficiency
of binding to the particles at any protein/nanocapsule ratio tested
(Table ). This low level of binding was observed
despite calculations of available NTA groups and capsule surface area
suggesting that these ∼375-nm-diameter capsules should be capable
of accommodating ∼570 trimers per particle, and therefore have
a maximal capacity of ∼250 μg trimer, a 1.7-fold excess
of theoretical capacity over the total amount of trimer added. ICMVs
lacking Ni-NTA lipid showed low GFP-his binding (&lt;5% protein binding),
indicating his-tag specificity of the protein capture by the particles.
The effective binding of his-GFP confirmed the functionality of Ni-NTA
groups displayed at the surfaces of ICMVs.

Synthesis of ICMV lipid
nanocapsules loaded with HIV env trimers.
(1) Anionic maleimide-functionalized liposomes, including Ni-NTA-DGS
are prepared from dried lipid films, (2) divalent cations are added
to induce fusion of liposomes and the formation of MLVs, (3) membrane-permeable
DTT is added, which cross-links maleimide lipids on apposed lipid
bilayers in the vesicle walls at 37 °C, (4) post-vesicle recharging
with NiCl2, followed by addition of gp140T-his, and (5)
resulting lipid particles are PEGylated with thiol-terminated PEG.

Binding of GFP-his
and gp140T-his
to Low-Tm Lipid ICMV Nanocapsules
 	HIV gp140 trimer
- his	GFP-his	
molecular weight	408
kDaA	28 kDaA	
conc. of protein
added (ug/mL)	50	75	150	150	
%
protein bound to particle	6.5 ± 1.8	6.0 ± 2.7	7.3 ± 1.5	54 ± 5	
The efficiency of gp140T-his protein binding was only modestly
increased by post-insertion of additional Ni-NTA-DGS into the capsule
surfaces (Figure A). The low concentration
of DTT used to cross-link the lipid nanocapsule bilayers induced some
reduction of NTA-bound Ni (evidenced by a change in color of the particle
pellets from blue toward brown), but this mild reduction did not affect
his-GFP binding and recharging of nickel on the chelator groups of
the particles just prior to protein addition failed to improve trimer
loading (Figure A). Notably, we also found
that attempting to load trimers via an alternative noncovalent strategy,
such as using an anti-histag Ab to capture the trimers or using electrostatic
adsorption of trimers to cationic ICMVs formed with DOTAP lipids (and
thus sacrificing control over protein orientation), also failed to
give yields of more than 20% of added trimer bound to the capsules
(Figure A).

HIV gp140T-his trimer binding to low-Tm lipid ICMVs. (A) Percentages of gp140T-his
bound by ICMVs prepared
from distinct compositions chosen to enhance trimer loading. Various
formulations to stabilize the protein on the nanoparticle vesicle
(B) Accessibility of trimer histags following incubation of gp140T-his
with Ni-NTA-ICMVs was assessed by measuring the concentration of histags
by ELISA.

To understand the relative failure
of trimer loading we examined
the state of the histidine tags on Alexafluor-labeled gp140T-his proteins
before and after attempted ICMV loading, to rule out possible proteolytic
cleavage of the anchoring residues. Alexafluor-labeled gp140T-his
was added to Ni-NTA-ICMVs and incubated for 8 h, then particles were
centrifuged and separated from the supernatant. ELISA detection of
the histidine tags on the protein was performed on the supernatants,
protein recovered from detergent-lysed ICMV capsules, and control
neat gp140T-his protein. As shown in Figure B, histidines were detected on the control protein as expected. In
addition, low binding of the trimer to particles yielded low levels
of histag detection following pelleting and lysis of the particles
with Triton (DOPC-gp140T-his pellet). Unexpectedly, however, trimer
histags also failed to be detected in the particle/trimer supernatants
(∼4.42 ng/mL, Figure B), despite the
presence of substantial amounts of trimer protein in these sups as
detected by fluorescence from the Alexafluor label. However, when
imidazole, which competes with histidine for Ni-NTA binding, was added
to the supernatants, histags of the trimer protein were again detected
by ELISA (Figure B “+ imidazole”).
This result suggested that trimer protein in the supernatant had extracted
Ni-NTA lipids from the nanocapsules into solution, and these lipids
remained bound to the trimer and blocked access of the his-tags to
detection antibodies in the ELISA measurements.

Anchoring of
gp140T-his to High-Tm Lipid Capsules
The use of noncovalent chemical conjugation
methods to display antigen on particles has been shown previously
to enhance T-cell and antibody responses to subunit vaccines.,, Of note, such binding of proteins
to the surface of liposomes has typically involved proteins of substantially
lower molecular weight than the env trimer. The synthetic gp140 trimer
has a molecular weight of 409 kDa; we hypothesized that this large
molecular weight combined with the heavy glycosylation of the protein
trimer was responsible for extraction of bound Ni-NTA lipids from
the fluid phase bilayer of the capsule surfaces. In order to increase
the conjugation efficiency of the large trimer to the particles while
continuing to use the site-specific Ni-NTA metal chelation method,
we tested stabilizing lipid anchorage in low-Tm DOPC-containing ICMVs by addition of cholesterol, or alternatively
exchanged DOPC for a higher Tm lipid,
DMPC (Tm 23 °C). As shown in Figure A, incorporation of cholesterol into DOPC nanocapsules
failed to stabilize trimer anchoring. However, DMPC lipid nanocapsules
showed a substantial increase in gp140T-his binding, with a 9-fold
increase in stable trimer binding over DOPC capsules (Figure A). Following incubation with Ni-NTA-bearing DMPC
capsules, unbound trimer protein remaining in the supernatant retained
accessible his-tags by ELISA analysis, consistent with the idea that
lipid was not being extracted from the higher-Tm lipid particles by the trimers (Figure B). Despite the modest total binding efficiency of 35%, this degree
of protein loading translates to approximately 160 trimers per nanocapsule,
giving a mean spacing between trimers on the particle surfaces of
33 nm. To determine the stability of multivalent Ni-NTA anchoring
of trimers to the DMPC particles, we measured trimer release from
ICMVs over 7 days at 37 °C. The protein bound stably to ICMVs
and was released slowly over a period of 7 days in the presence of
10% serum (Figure ). Given their successful
anchoring of Env trimers, we focused on DMPC lipid nanocapsules for
subsequent in vivo immunization studies.

HIV env trimer
conjugation to ICMVs stabilized by incorporation
of cholesterol or high-Tm lipids. (A)
Percentage of added gp140T-his bound to ICMVs of different compositions.
(B) Histag ELISA to determine the availability of histidine residues
following attachment to high Tm lipid
vesicles.

Stability of HIV env trimer anchoring on Ni-NTA-ICMV
lipid nanocapsules.
Trimer release from ICMVs over time in the presence of medium with
10% serum at 37 °C was measured by spectrofluorimetry.

Humoral Response to gp140T-ICMV
Vaccines
To determine
the humoral response generated by the gp140T-his proteins displayed
on ICMV lipid nanocapsules (gp140T-ICMVs), in pilot studies we compared
ICMVs to soluble trimer. C57Bl/6 mice were immunized with various
doses of gp140T-ICMVs admixed with 5 μg of the Toll-like receptor-4
agonist MPLA, a clinically relevant molecular adjuvant., Although MPLA can be readily loaded in the membranes of the ICMV
capsules,, we previously found that simply admixing
this adjuvant with ICMVs gave strong humoral responses, and thus we used this approach of simply admixing
MPLA and ICMVs to keep the formulations as simple as possible. For
comparison to a strong experimental adjuvant for mouse humoral responses,
soluble trimer was admixed with SAS (Sigma Adjuvant System) adjuvant,
an oil-in-water adjuvant containing MPLA and trehalose-6,6′-dimycolate
that elicits extremely strong antibody responses in small-animal models
but is too toxic for human use. Sera were collected from vaccinated
mice over time for analysis of titer and avidity of gp140T-specific
antibodies. As shown in Figure A, soluble
trimer elicited much weaker humoral responses than gp140T-ICMVs or
gp140T mixed with SAS, even when adjuvanted by multiple TLR agonists
(MPLA alone as adjuvant elicited even weaker responses, not shown).
We thus focused on comparing ICMVs to the strong oil-in-water emulsion
adjuvant. Both soluble trimer in SAS and ICMV vaccinations were capable
of eliciting robust trimer-specific antibody responses at antigen
doses ≥1 μg (Figure B). However,
gp140T-ICMVs appeared to elicit a more potent response despite the
use of a less inflammatory adjuvant, as evidenced by readily detectable
anti-gp140T antibody after a single priming injection with 1 μg
of antigen on ICMVs (day 14) compared to no response detected for
the soluble antigen/SAS group until post-boost (day 35). Further,
ICMV vaccines at all 3 doses tested eventually achieved essentially
identical titers by 3 months post-priming, while soluble trimer in
SAS showed a 67-fold decrease in titer as the antigen dose was reduced
from 5 μg to 0.1 μg (p = 0.025, Figure B). Thus, 1 μg of gp140T in SAS elicited the
same IgG titer as a 10-fold lower dose of the antigen bound to ICMVs
at 3 months. Similarly, the avidity of anti-gp140T sera decayed more
quickly as a function of antigen dose for soluble trimer in SAS compared
to the nanocapsule vaccines (Figure C). At
higher antigen doses, both SAS and ICMVs showed similar titers at
day 90, but we did not follow these responses longer to determine
if the long-term durability of responses was comparable.

Humoral immune
responses elicited by gp140T-ICMVs. (A) C57Bl/6
mice (n = 3/group) were immunized subcutaneously
at day 0 with 5 μg gp140T-his either in soluble form mixed with
SAS or in soluble form mixed with MPLA (5 μg) and CpG (10 μg),
or bound to ICMVs mixed with 5 μg MPLA. Shown are total gp140-specific
IgG titers at day 14. (B–E) C57Bl/6 mice (n = 3/group) were immunized subcutaneously at day 0 and day 21 with
5 μg, 1 μg, or 0.1 μg gp140T-his either in soluble
form mixed with 5 μL of SAS or bound to ICMVs mixed with 5 μg
of MPLA. ELISA analysis of sera was carried out over time to assess
total gp140T-specific IgG (B), avidity (C), IgG2c (D),
and IgG1 (E). *, P &lt; 0.05. All values
are reported as mean ± s.e.m.

Analysis of IgG isotypes revealed that the ICMV vaccines
elicited
a more Th1/Th2-balanced humoral response, with both IgG2c and IgG1 env-specific antibodies elicited earlier and
to higher titers at the 1 or 0.1 μg antigen doses compared to
antigen in SAS (Figure D, E). Thus, ICMV delivery
of oriented, membrane-bound trimers enabled strong, Th1/Th2-balanced
humoral responses to be achieved at low antigen doses where a highly
inflammatory oil-in-water adjuvant was ineffective.

Immune Sera
Recognition of gp140T Epitopes Following Nanocapsule
Vaccination
We hypothesized that presentation of HIV envelope
trimers presented in a physiological orientation on the surface of
lipid nanocapsules might promote breadth of the humoral response,
by enabling a more diverse pool of B-cells to be recruited into the
immune response via multivalent engagement of particle-bound trimers.
Following immunization, we tested the presence of binding antibodies
to several conserved linear peptide epitopes of the trimer—the
variable loops V1, V2, V3, and the conserved Membrane-Proximal External
Region (MPER). As shown in Figure A–D,
soluble trimer in SAS elicited responses against the V3 peptide and
these sera bound the V1 epitope at the highest (5 μg) immunization
dose, but no binding was detected to V2 or the MPER sequence. By contrast,
ICMVs elicited responses not only against V3 and V1, but also against
the V2 peptide and a weak response against the MPER segment at the
highest antigen dose (Figure A–D).
Thus, nanocapsule delivery of the trimer increased the breadth of
responses elicited against this key target of the humoral response
against HIV.

Nanocapsule-delivered trimer increases the breadth of
the env-specific
humoral response. ELISA analysis of sera was carried out over time
to assess titers of IgG reactive with linear peptide epitopes derived
from gp140: shown are IgG responses against the V1 (A), V2 (B), and
V3 (C) loops, or the MPER (D). All values are reported as mean ±
s.e.m.

Conclusions
In
conclusion, we have shown that particle display of a large,
complex HIV trimer, gp140, required the use of high-Tm lipids to enable stable tethering to lipid nanocapsules.
Importantly, immunization with trimers anchored to ICMV lipid nanocapsules
elicited a significantly stronger humoral response compared to soluble
protein in a strong oil-in-water emulsion adjuvant, with a balanced
production of multiple isotypes of env-specific antibodies. Importantly,
we have shown that the use of the particulate vaccine increased the
breadth of the antibody response, as evidenced by binding antibodies
produced to several conserved targets on the envelope structure, including
the MPER seqeuence of gp41. Induction of virus-neutralizing antibodies
was not assessed here due to the high background of mouse serum in
standard neutralizing assays, but future work will assess neutralizing
titers in other small animal models (e.g., guinea pigs). Nanoparticles
can thus be used to display large HIV trimers in an oriented, multivalent
presentation and can promote key aspects of the humoral response against
Env immunogens.

Experimental Section
Recombinant Gp140T-his
Trimer Production
Expression
of the subtype A 92UG037.8 gp140 trimer was previously described., Briefly, a stably transfected 293T cell line was expanded to confluence
in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and subsequently media exchanged
to Freestyle 293 expression media (Invitrogen). Cell supernatants
were collected 96 h after media exchange and subjected to standard
Ni-NTA (Qiagen) affinity chromatography followed by Superose 6 (GE
Healthcare) size exclusion chromatography in 25 mM TRIS (pH 7.5) plus
150 mM NaCl. Fractions containing the purified protein were subjected
to SDS-PAGE electrophoresis in order to monitor purity before fractions
were pooled, concentrated, and flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and
stored at −80 °C.

Synthesis of ICMVs
Interbilayer cross-linked multilamilar
vesicles (ICMVs) have been previously described., Here, modifications were made to the procedure used by Moon et al.
to accommodate conjugation of the large molecular weight gp140 trimers.
All lipids were obtained from Avanti Polar Lipids (Alabaster, AL)
and used as received. Briefly, low-Tm lipids
(1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DOPC):
1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-[(N-(5-amino-1-carboxypentyl)iminodiacetic
acid)succinyl] nickel salt (Ni-NTA-DGS): 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-[4-(p-maleimidophenyl) butyramide] (MPB) in a 4:1:5 molar ratio), or high-Tm lipids (1,2-dimyristoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DMPC):Ni-NTA-DGS:MPB 4:1:5 molar ratio)
in chloroform were dried into a thin film (total 1.26 μmol lipid)
in glass vials by evaporating the organic solvent under vacuum overnight.
In some experiments, cationic low-Tm ICMVs
were prepared using 1,2-dioleoyl-3-trimethylammonium-propane (DOTAP):DOPC:MPB
at an 4:1:5 mol ratio. For the formation of low-Tm ICMVs, lipid films were rehydrated in 10 mM bis–tris
propane pH 7.0 for 1 h at 25 °C, followed by sonication at a
constant power of 5 W for 5 min on ice (Misonix Microson XL probe
tip sonicator, Farmingdale, NY). For high-Tm ICMVs, liposome formation was carried out at a constant temperature
of 30 °C (DMPC Tm = 23 °C) with
rigorous vortexing every 10 min, and then sonicated at a constant
power of 5 W for 5 min at 30 °C. Next, CaCl2 (final
conc. of 10 mM) was added to induce fusion of the liposomes to form
multilamellar vesicles (MLV), followed by 1.5 mM DTT (maleimide/DTT
molar ratio of 2:1) and incubation of the vesicles for 1 h at 37 °C
for lipid cross-linking. The resulting ICMV lipid nanocapsules were
recovered by centrifugation at 14 000 × g for 4 min, and washed twice with deionized water. Since DTT is known
to reduce metal ions, the ICMVs were incubated for 5 min with 100
mM NiCl2 at 25 °C to recharge the Ni-NTA groups, followed
by washing. In some of the low-Tm preparations,
5 mol % cholesterol was included to enhance bilayer stability, or
additional Ni-NTA-DGS lipids were post-inserted by incubation of ICMVs
(1.26 μmol lipids) with 300 nM Ni-NTA-DGS in PBS at 25 °C
for 10 min.

In Vitro Protein Attachment
and Assessment
of Trimer Stability
HIV env proteins were anchored to low-Tm ICMV capsules by incubating Ni-NTA-bearing
ICMVs (1.26 μmol lipids) with gp140T-his (200 μg/mL) in
PBS at 25 °C for 8 h. To anchor to high-Tm ICMVs, gp140T-his was incubated with DMPC-containing ICMVs
at 4 °C to ensure binding while DMPC remained in the gel state.
In some experiments, ICMVs were loaded with GFP-his (Invitrogen, Carlsbad,
CA) as an irrelevant antigen control. Following incubation, ICMVs
were washed 3× with deionized water to remove unbound trimer
protein, then PEGylated by incubation with 2 kDa PEG-SH (Laysan Bio,
Arab, AL) in a 1.5-fold molar excess of PEG-SH to maleimide groups
for 1 h at 37 °C. The resulting particles were washed 3×
with deionized water, then stored in PBS at 4 °C until use. As
an alternative strategy for gp140T-his protein binding, electrostatic
adsorption of trimers to cationic ICMVs formed with DOTAP lipids was
also tested; DOTAP-containing ICMVs were incubated with gp140T-his
as described above for 4 h at 25 °C, followed by washing to remove
unbound protein. As a final alternative, the gp140T protein was instead
bound to ICMV capsules using an anti-histag Ab (GenScript, Piscataway,
NJ) anchored to the ICMV lipids through hinge thiols: Briefly, anti-histag
antibody with exposed free hinge region thiols was prepared by mixing
anti-histag (12–15 mg/mL) with a 25× molar excess of DTT
for 20 min at 25 °C in the presence of 10 mM EDTA in PBS. The
mildly reduced anti-histag was passed through a desalting column to
remove DTT, and then immediately mixed with maleimide-functionalized
ICMV capsules at a ratio of 1 mg Ab:2.5 mmol nanocapsules for covalent
coupling in the presence of 10 mM EDTA. The maleimide–thiol
reaction was allowed to proceed for at least 10 h at 25 °C, followed
by multiple washes with PBS, to remove unbound antibody.

To
assess efficiency of gp140T-his protein attachment to the surface
of ICMVs, gp140T-his was labeled with Alexa-Fluor 647 (AF647) (Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA) for direct fluorometric quantification of bound protein.
Release of gp140T-his labeled with AF647 from ICMVs was quantified
in PBS supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum at 37 °C. At regular
intervals, supernatants were removed for quantification of fluorescence,
and an equal volume of fresh medium was replaced for continued monitoring
of protein release. Residual gp140T-his remaining at the end of the
time-course was determined by disruption of the ICMV particles with
1% Triton X-100 treatment and measuring released protein by fluorescence
spectrophotometry.

Anti-histag ELISA
To qualify the
presence of the histidine
residue tag on gp140T-his proteins, an enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (Cell Biolabs, Inc., San Diego, CA) analysis of the concentration
of histags was performed on solutions of neat AF647-labeled gp140T-his
or Alexafluor-labeled protein recovered from ICMVs. Total protein
concentration was measured in parallel via AF647 fluorescence, for
concurrent protein and histidine tag detection.

Vaccination
Studies
Animals were cared for following
National Institutes of Health, state, and local guidelines following
an MIT IACUC-approved protocol. Groups of 6–8-week old C57Bl/6
mice (Jackson Laboratories, Bar Harbor, ME) were immunized subcutaneously
at the tail base with the various indicated doses of gp140T-his (either
soluble form or loaded on ICMVs) mixed with the TLR4 agonist monophosphoryl
lipid A (MPLA, Invivogen, San Diego, CA), or in some cases CpG 1826
DNA (10 μg, Invivogen). As a standard, mice were immunized with
soluble gp140T-his mixed with SAS adjuvant (Sigma, St. Louis, MO),
a strong experimental adjuvant. Mice were immunized twice, 3 weeks
apart, and anti-gp140T-his IgG titers, defined as the dilution of
sera at which the 450 nm OD reading was 0.5, were determined by ELISA
analysis of sera from immunized mice. For antibody avidity analysis,
low-affinity antibodies were eluted by the addition of 6 M urea for
10 min at 25 °C following serum incubation. The antibody titers
(450 nm OD reading) obtained with and without addition of urea were
then used to calculate the IgG avidity values.

Statistics
Statistical
analysis was performed with
Graphpad Prism (La Jolla, CA). Data sets were analyzed using one-way
analysis of variance (ANOVA). p-Values less than
0.05 were considered statistically significant. All values are reported
as mean ± s.e.m.

The authors
declare the following competing financial interest(s): DJI is an inventor
on patents related to ICMV lipid capsules and is a co-founder of a
company developing the ICMV technology for vaccines.

Acknowledgments
This work
was funded by the NIH (AI095109 and AI104715) and
the Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT, and Harvard. D.J.I. is an investigator
of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute.

