Introduction
The integrin family
is a group of transmembrane glycoproteins comprised
of 19 α- and 8 β-subunits that are expressed in 25 different
α/β heterodimeric combinations on the cell surface.− Integrins are critically important in many physiological processes,
including cell attachment, proliferation, bone remodeling, and wound
healing., Integrins also contribute to pathological
events such as thrombosis, atherosclerosis, tumor invasion, angiogenesis,
and metastasis, infection by pathogenic microorganisms, and immune
dysfunction.− Among 25 members of the integrin family, integrin αvβ3 is studied most extensively for its role in tumor
growth, progression, and angiogenesis.

Integrin αvβ3 is a receptor for
extracellular matrix proteins (vitronectin, fibronectin, fibrinogen,
laminin, collagen, Von Willebrand’s factor, and osteoponin)
with the exposed arginine-glycine-aspartic (RGD) tripeptide sequence., Changes in the integrin αvβ3 expression
levels and activation state have been well documented during tumor
growth and metastasis.,, Integrin
αvβ3 is expressed in low levels
on the epithelial cells and mature endothelial cells, but it is highly
expressed in many tumors, including osteosarcomas, glioblastomas,
melanomas, and carcinomas of lung and breast.− Studies show that integrin αvβ3 is overexpressed on both tumor cells and activated endothelial cells
of neovasculature.

Integrin αvβ3 on endothelial
cells modulate cellular adhesion
during angiogenesis, while the integrin αvβ3 on tumor cells potentiate metastasis by facilitating invasion
of tumor cells across the blood vessels.− It has been shown that integrin αvβ3 expression levels correlate well with the potential for metastasis
and aggressiveness of tumors, including glioma, melanoma, and carcinomas
of the breast and lungs.− Integrin αvβ3 has been considered
an interesting biological target for development of therapeutic pharmaceuticals
for cancer treatment,,− and molecular imaging probes for diagnosis of rapidly
growing and highly metastatic tumors.−

Only two integrin family members (αvβ3 and αIIBβ3) contain the
β3 chain. Since integrin αIIBβ3 is expressed exclusively on the activated platelets,,, the integrin β3 expression level on tumor cells or in tumor tissues should be the
same as that of integrin αvβ3. Western
blotting has been used to determine the integrin αvβ3 concentration in tumor tissues,− but the percentage of integrin αvβ3 recovery from tumor tissues and its activation state remained unknown.
We have been using immunohistochemical (IHC) staining with anti-integrin
αvβ3 monoclonal antibodies to determine
the integrin αvβ3 expression levels
on tumor cells (acetone-fixed or living) and in tumor tissues (acetone
or methanol-fixed)., It was found that the IHC staining
is an excellent technique to reflect the activation state of integrin
αvβ3 because only the activated
endothelial cells and some tumor cells are able to bind to the integrin
αvβ3 monoclonal antibody. However,
the procedures for cellular and tissue staining with fluorescence-labeled
anti-integrin αvβ3 antibodies are
often complicated and time-consuming because they involve the blocking
of nonspecific binding and the use of secondary polyclonal antibody
for the fluorescence detection. In addition, integrin αvβ3 antibodies have limited stability in aqueous
solution.

To overcome these shortcomings, we prepared three
FITC conjugated
dimeric cyclic RGD peptides (Figure ): FITC-RGD2 (RGD2 = Glu[cyclo(Arg-Gly-Asp-d-Phe-Lys)]2), FITC-3P-RGD2 (3P-RGD2 = PEG4-Glu[cyclo[Arg-Gly-Asp-d-Phe-Lys(PEG4)]]2 (PEG4 = 15-amino-4,7,10,13-tetraoxapentadecanoic
acid) and FITC-Galacto-RGD2 (Galacto-RGD2 =
Glu[cyclo[Arg-Gly-Asp-d-Phe-Lys(SAA-PEG2-(1,2,3-triazole)-1-yl-4-methylamide)]]2, SAA = 7-amino-l-glycero-l-galacto-2,6-anhydro-7-deoxyheptanamide,
and PEG2 = 3,6-dioxaoctanoic acid). Since the cyclic RGD
peptides, such as c(RGDfK), are antagonists for αvβ3 and αvβ5 integrins,,−, it is reasonable to believe that
bioconjugates FITC-RGD2, FITC-3P-RGD2, and FITC-Galacto-RGD2 will target both integrin αvβ3 and integrin αvβ5. We were
interested in dimeric cyclic RGD peptides because they have significantly
higher integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 binding affinity than their monomeric
analogs.

ChemDraw structures of
FITC-conjugated cyclic
peptide dimers (RGD2, 3P-RGD2, 3P-RGK2, and Galacto-RGD2).

In this report, we present the evaluations of FITC-RGD2, FITC-3P-RGD2, and FITC-Galacto-RGD2 as fluorescent
probes to assay integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 expression levels in tumor tissues. Their
integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 binding affinity was determined in a displacement
assay against 125I-echistatin bound to U87MG glioma cells.
To demonstrate their RGD-specificity, we have also prepared FITC-3P-RGK2 (3P-RGK2 = PEG4-E[PEG4-c(RGKfD)]2 = PEG4-Glu[cyclo[Arg-Gly-Lys(PEG4)-d-Phe-Asp]]2), which has the identical chemical composition
to that of FITC-3P-RGD2 but with low integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 binding affinity due to the RGK tripeptide sequence. Even though
the fluorescence-labeled cyclic RGD peptides have been reported as
optical imaging probes, very little information
is available on their validity for in vitro assays of integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 expression. The objective of this study is to validate the utility
of FITC-RGD2, FITC-3P-RGD2, and FITC-Galacto-RGD2 for determination of relative integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 expression
levels in both the xenografted tumors and human carcinoma tissues
in comparison with commercially available integrin αvβ3 monoclonal antibodies.

Results
Synthesis of
FITC–Peptide Conjugates
FITC-conjugated
peptides (FITC-RGD2, FITC-3P-RGD2, FITC-3P-RGK2, and FITC-Galacto-RGD2) were prepared by reacting
FITC with the corresponding cyclic peptides under basic conditions
in the presence of excess DIEA. All new FITC–peptide conjugates
were purified by HPLC. MALDI-MS data were completely consistent with
the composition proposed for FITC-RGD2, FITC-3P-RGD2, FITC-3P-RGK2, and FITC-Galacto-RGD2. Their HPLC purity was &gt;95% before being used for the integrin
αvβ3 binding assays and staining
studies.

Integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 Binding Affinity
The whole-cell
assay was used to determine integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 binding affinity of
FITC-conjugated cyclic RGD peptides. Figure  shows the displacement curves of 125I-echistatin bound
to U87MG glioma cells in the presence of FITC-conjugated peptides.
IC50 values were calculated to be 28 ± 8, 32 ±
7, 89 ± 17, and 589 ± 73 nM for FITC-Galacto-RGD2, FITC-3P-RGD2, FITC-RGD2, and FITC-3P-RGK2, respectively. The IC50 value of c(RGDfK) (414
± 36 nM) was close to that from our previous report.− The integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 binding affinity followed a general trend:
FITC-3P-RGD2 ∼ FITC-Galacto-RGD2 &gt;
FITC-RGD2 ≫ c(RGDfK) &gt; FITC-3P-RGK2, which was consistent
with the results for their DOTA (1,4,7,10-tetraazacyclododecane-1,4,7,10-tetracetic
acid) and HYNIC (6-(2-(2-sulfonatobenzaldehyde)hydrazono)nicotinyl)
derivatives.,− The lower binding affinity of FITC-3P-RGK2 (IC50 = 589 ± 73 nM) than that of FITC-3P-RGD2 (IC50 = 32 ± 7 nM) clearly demonstrated the RGD-specificity
of the FITC-conjugated cyclic RGD peptides.

Competitive displacement
curves of 125I-echistatin bound
to U87MG human glioma cells in the presence of FITC-conjugated cyclic
RGD peptides. Their IC50 values were obtained from curve
fitting and were calculated to be 28 ± 8, 32 ± 7, 89 ±
17, 589 ± 73, and 414 ± 36 nM for FITC-Galacto-RGD2, FITC-3P-RGD2, FITC-RGD2, FITC-3P-RGK2 and c(RGDfK), respectively. c(RGDfK) was used as a standard.
3P-RGK2 was the dimeric nonsense peptide to demonstrate
the RGD-specificity of FITC-conjugated cyclic RGD peptides.

Optimal Concentration for
Tumor Tissue Staining
The
concentration-dependence experiments were performed using the xenografted
U87MG glioma and human carcinoma tissues. Figure  displays microscopic images of the xenografted U87MG glioma
tissues stained with FITC-Galacto-RGD2 at 0.1, 1, 10, 20,
50, and 100 μM, along with semiquantification of fluorescence
intensity. The relative integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 expression in the U87MG glioma
tumor was quantified as the percentage of green-colored (FITC-Galacto-RGD2) or red-colored (anti-integrin β3 antibody)
area over the total area of each image. We found that all U87MG glioma
tissues, which have high integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 expression on both tumor
cells and neovasculature,− were well stained with FITC-Galacto-RGD2 in the range
of 10–100 μM. Very similar results were obtained with
human carcinoma tissues (colon cancer, squamous cell lung cancer,
and gastric cancer) stained with FITC-Galacto-RGD2 (). The minimal
concentration for positive staining of colon carcinoma was ∼5
μM. For squamous cell lung cancer tissues, a higher concentration
(&gt;25 μM) was needed in order to achieve adequate fluorescence
staining. There was little staining in gastric carcinoma tissue, likely
due to its low integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 expression. Since the higher concentrations
were required for the tumor tissues with lower integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 expression, we used 100 μM of FITC-conjugated cyclic RGD peptides
for most of the staining studies in xenografted tumor tissues, and
50 μM of FITC-labeled cyclic RGD peptides for the staining of
human carcinoma tissues.

Microscopic images (Magnification: 200×)
of the xenografted
U87MG glioma tissues, and quantification of fluorescence intensity
on tumor slice stained with FITC-Galacto-RGD2 at 0.1, 1,
10, 20, 50, and 100 μM. Tumor tissues could be well-stained
in the range of 10–100 μM.

Tissue Staining Kinetics for Tumor Tissues
We explored
the impact of incubation time on the fluorescent intensity of U87MG
glioma and human carcinoma tissues stained with FITC-Galacto-RGD2 (100 μM). We also performed IHC staining with anti-integrin
β3 antibody using the same tumor slice in order to
compare their staining kinetics (time-dependence) under identical
experimental conditions. It was found that U87MG glioma tissues could
achieve maximal fluorescent intensity with FITC-Galacto- RGD2 within 30 min while it took &gt;60 min for the same tumor tissue
using
the anti-integrin β3 antibody (Figure ). Similar results were obtained with human carcinoma tissues
stained with FITC-Galacto-RGD2 (). The colon cancer tissues were positively
stained within 15 min of incubation. The faster staining kinetics
of FITC-Galacto-RGD2 might explain the fact that the same
tumor slice could be labeled with both FITC-Galacto-RGD2 and anti-integrin β3 monoclonal antibody. Considering
the tumor tissues with lower integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 expression than that
in U87MG glioma and colon cancer, the 60 min incubation time was used
for most of the tumor tissue staining studies.

Microscopic images (Magnification:
200×) of the xenografted
U87MG glioma tissues stained with FITC-Galacto-RGD2 (green)
and rabbit anti-human integrin β3 antibody (red),
and tissue staining kinetics as indicated by fluorescence intensity
at different incubation times (5–120 min).

Co-Localization of FITC-Conjugated Cyclic RGD Peptides with
Integrin αvβ3 Antibody in Tumor
Tissues
The overlay experiments were performed using the
xenografted U87MG glioma (Figure ) and human
colon cancer (Figure ) tissues to show the
co-localization of FITC-conjugated cyclic RGD peptides and rabbit
anti-integrin β3 antibody. We found that the tumor
tissues stained with FITC-3P-RGD2 or FITC-Galacto-RGD2 showed more fluorescence intensity than that with FITC-RGD2. In all cases, they were able to co-localize with anti-integrin
β3 antibody, as evidenced by the orange and yellow
colors (red integrin β3 antibody merged with green
FITC-labeled cyclic RGD peptide) in overlay images. FITC-3P-RGD2 and FITC-Galacto-RGD2 were as effective for staining
integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 expression as the anti-integrin β3 antibody for integrin αvβ3 in
U87MG glioma and human carcinoma tissues. The same conclusion could
be made for cellular staining integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 ().

Microscopic
images (200×) of the xenografted U87MG glioma
tissues stained with FITC-conjugated cyclic RGD peptide (green) and
rabbit anti-human integrin β3 antibody detected with
Cy3 conjugated goat anti-rabbit antibody (red). Blue color indicates
the presence of nuclei stained with DAPI. In overlay images, the orange
and/or yellow color indicates co-localization of FITC-conjugated cyclic
RGD peptides (FITC-RGD2, FITC-3P-RGD2, and FITC-Galacto-RGD2) with rabbit anti-human integrin β3 antibody.

Selected microscopic images (200× magnification)
of colon
carcinoma tissues stained with FITC-conjugated cyclic RGD peptide
(green) and rabbit anti-human integrin β3 antibody
detected with TR conjugated goat anti-rabbit antibody (red). Blue
color indicates the presence of nuclei stained with DAPI. In overlay
images, the orange and yellow colors (red integrin β3 merged with green cyclic RGD peptide) indicate co-localization of
FITC-labeled cyclic RGD peptides (FITC-RGD2, FITC-3P-RGD2, and FITC-Galacto-RGD2) with anti-integrin β3 antibody.

Integrin αvβ3/αvβ3 Specificity
Blocking experiments
were performed using the xenografted U87MG glioma and human colon
cancer to demonstrate the integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 specificity of the
FITC-conjugated cyclic RGD peptides. It was found that the xenografted
U87MG glioma tissues were successfully stained with FITC-Galacto-RGD2, but not in the presence of excess RGD2 (Figure A) due to blockage of integrin αvβ3/αvβ5. The same
results were obtained with the human colon carcinoma tissues (Figure B). Figure C shows microscopic
images of the tumor slice obtained from a U87MG-bearing mouse injected
with ∼300 μg of FITC-Galacto-RGD2. The fluorescence
intensity and distribution patterns in the xenografted U87MG glioma
tissue (Figure C: left) were almost identical
to those stained with FITC-Galacto-RGD2 (Figure B: left). Further staining with the hamster anti-mouse
integrin β3 antibody (Figure C: right) was not successful since all integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 binding
sites on tumor tissues had already been occupied by FITC-Galacto-RGD2. The results from these blocking studies clearly showed that
the tumor localization of FITC-RGD2, FITC-3P-RGD2, and FITC-Galacto-RGD2 are integrin αvβ3/αvβ5-specific.

(A) Selected
microscopic images (Magnification: 400×) of living
U87MG glioma cells stained with FITC-Galacto-RGD2 in the
absence (left) and presence (right) of excess RGD2. (B)
Microscopic images (Magnification: 200×) of a tumor slice stained
with FITC-Galacto-RGD2 in the absence (left) and presence
(right) of excess RGD2. (C) Microscopic images (Magnification:
200×) of the tumor slice (left), which was obtained from a tumor-bearing
mouse administered with FITC-Galacto-RGD2 at a dose of
300 μg. Staining with hamster anti-mouse integrin β3 antibody (right) detected with Cy3 conjugated goat anti-hamster
antibody (red) was not successful due to blockage of integrin αvβ3 by administration of excess FITC-Galacto-RGD2. (D) Microscopic images (Magnification: 200×) of human
colon cancer slice stained with FITC-Galacto-RGD2 in the
absence (left) and presence (right) of excess RGD2. Blue
color indicates the nuclei stained with DAPI.

RGD Specificity
To demonstrate the RGD specificity
of FITC-labeled cyclic RGD peptides, we used 3P-RGK2 as
a “nonsense” peptide. Due to the RGK tripeptide sequence,
FITC-3P-RGK2 had much lower integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 binding
affinity than FITC-3P-RGD2 (Figure ). Figure  shows microscopic images of the
xenografted U87MG glioma tissues (top four panels) and the colon cancer
tissues (bottom four panels) stained with FITC-RGD2, FITC-Galacto-RGD2, FITC-3P-RGD2, or FITC-3P-RGK2. Apparently,
the xenografted U87MG glioma and human colon cancer tissues were all
positively stained with FITC-RGD2, FITC-3P-RGD2, and FITC-Galacto-RGD2, but not with FITC-3P-RGK2 under the same conditions. Thus, the tumor-binding of FITC-RGD2, FITC-3P-RGD2, and FITC-Galacto-RGD2 is RGD-specific.

(Top four images) Representative microscopic images of
human colon
cancer tissues (magnification: 200×) stained with FITC-RGD2, FITC-Galacto-RGD2, FITC-3P-RGD2, and
FITC-3P-RGK2. (Bottom four images) Selected microscopic
images of U87MG glioma tumor tissues (magnification: 200×) stained
with FITC-RGD2, FITC-Galacto-RGD2, FITC-3P-RGD2, and FITC-3P-RGK2. Blue color indicates the presence
of nuclei stained with DAPI.

Quantification of Integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 Expression Xenografted Tumor
Tissues
Quantification of the relative integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 expression levels was performed using five xenografted tumors (U87MG,
MDA-MB-435, A549, HT29, and PC-3). Figure  compares microscopic images of the xenografted tumors stained with
FITC-Galacto-RGD2 and anti-integrin β3 antibody. In overlay images, orange and yellow colors indicate co-localization
of FITC-Galacto-RGD2 and anti-integrin β3 antibody. Figure  summarizes the quantification
data of relative integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 expression levels in the xenografted U87MG,
MDA-MB-435, A549, HT29, and PC-3 tumor tissues. The fluorescent intensity
(integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 density) on the tumor cells and tumor neovasculature
was represented by the percentage of green (FITC-Galacto-RGD2) or red (anti-integrin β3 antibody) area over the
total area in each image. We found that the integrin β3 (anti-integrin β3 antibody) and integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 (FITC-Galacto-RGD2) expression levels followed a general
order of U87MG &gt; HT29 ≈ MDA-MB-435 ≈ A549 ≫
PC-3
(Figure A,B). There was an excellent linear
relationship (Figure C,D) between the relative
integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 expression levels determined with FITC-Galacto-RGD2 and the relative integrin αvβ3 expression levels obtained from the anti-integrin β3 antibody.

Representative fluorescence microscopic images (Magnification:
200×) of selected tumor slices from five xenografted tumors stained
with FITC-Galacto-RGD2 (green) and rabbit anti-human integrin
β3 antibody detected with Cy3 conjugated goat anti-rabbit
antibody (red). Orange or yellow in overlay image indicates co-localization
of FITC-Galacto-RGD2 (green) and integrin β3 antibody for tumor tissue staining of integrin avβ3.

(A) Quantitative analysis of integrin
αvβ3 density for five xenografted
tumor tissues (U87MG, MDAMB-435,
A549, HT29, and PC-3) stained with FITC-Galacto-RGD2 (green).
Integrin αvβ3 density on tumor cells
and neovasculature is represented by the percentage of green area
over the total area in each tumor slice. (B) Quantitative analysis
of integrin β3 density for five different xenografted
tumor tissues (U87MG, MDAMB-435, A549, HT29, and PC-3) stained with
rabbit anti-human integrin β3 antibody detected with
the Cy3-conjugated goat anti-rat antibody (red). Integrin αvβ3 density on tumor cells and neovasculature
is represented by the percentage of red area over the total area in
each slice of tumor tissue. (C) (average data) and (D) (single data):
Linear relationship between the relative integrin αvβ3 expression levels (fluorescence density) determined
with FITC-Galacto-RGD2 and those obtained with rabbit anti-human
integrin β3 antibody in five xenografted tumors (U87MG,
MDA-MB-435, A549, HT29, and PC-3). Each data point was derived from
15 different areas of the same tumor slice. Experiments were repeated
three times independently with very similar results. All experimental
values are reported as the average plus/minus standard deviation.
*: p &lt; 0.01, significantly different from all
other groups; †: p &lt; 0.01, significantly
different from the U87MG group; #: p &lt; 0.01, significantly
different from the PC-3 group. (E) (FITC-Galacto-RGD2)
and (F) (rabbit anti-human integrin β3 antibody):
Linear relationship between the relative integrin αvβ3 expression levels (fluorescence density) determined
with FITC-Galacto-RGD2 or rabbit anti-human integrin β3 antibody and the tumor uptake values of 99mTc-3P-RGD2 in five xenografted tumors (U87MG, MDA-MB-435, A549, HT29,
and PC-3). The tumor uptake values of 99 mTc-3P-RGD2 were
obtained from our previous studies.

Linear Relationship between
Tumor Uptake of 99mTc-3P-RGD2 and Relative Integrin
αvβ3/αvβ5 Expression Level
99mTc-3P-RGD2 is an integrin αvβ3/αvβ5-targeted
SPECT radiotracer under clinical evaluations for tumor imaging., Figure E,F shows the plots of its %ID/g
tumor uptake (radioactivity density) and the relative integrin β3 expression levels (fluorescence density) determined with
FITC-Galacto-RGD2 or the integrin β3 antibody
in five different xenografted tumors (U87MG, MDA-MB-435, A549, HT29,
and PC-3). It was found that there was an excellent linear relationship
between the %ID/g tumor uptake of 99mTc-3P-RGD2 and relative integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 expression levels with R2 being 0.89 for FITC-Galacto-RGD2, and the
relative integrin αvβ3 expression
levels with R2 being 0.86 for the anti-integrin
β3 antibody. Therefore, the relative tumor integrin
αvβ3/αvβ5 expression levels can be reflected by both %ID/g tumor uptake
of 99mTc-3P-RGD2 and the fluorescence density
determined by tissue staining with FITC-Galacto-RGD2.

Integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 Expression on Tumor Neovasculature
It
is well-established that the integrins αvβ3/αvβ5 are overexpressed
on tumor cells and tumor neovasculature.−,− The overlay experiments between FITC-Galacto-RGD2 (green color) and CD31 antibody (red color) were performed
using five different xenografted tumors (U87MG, MDA-MB-435, A549,
HT29, and PC-3). CD31 is a biomarker for endothelial cells on blood
vessels. In the overlay images (Figure ),
orange and yellow colors indicated the presence of integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 on neovasculature. Even though it was difficult to quantify the
relative tumor vasculature integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 expression levels,
the results from the overlay images clearly showed that the FITC-conjugated
cyclic RGD peptides (e.g., FITC-Galacto-RGD2) were indeed
able to bind to integrins αvβ3/αvβ5 on the tumor neovasculature. Similar results
were reported in the overlay experiments using fluorescence-labeled
integrin αvβ3 and CD31 antibodies., If there were no yellow or orange color (as in the case of the PC3
prostate model), there would be very little integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 expression
on the tumor vasculature.

Representative fluorescence microscopic images
(Magnification:
200×) of selected tumor slices stained with FITC-Galacto-RGD2 (green) and rat anti-mouse CD31 antibody detected with Cy3
conjugated goat anti-rat antibody (red). Orange or yellow color in
overlay images indicates co-localization of FITC-Galacto-RGD2 (green) and CD31 antibody in tumor tissues.

Quantification of Integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 Expression Levels in Human
Carcinoma Tissues
Because of the vasculature difference between
the xenografted tumors and human carcinoma tissues, we also evaluated
FITC-Galacto-RGD2 for its utility as a fluorescent probe
to quantify the relative integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 expression levels in human
carcinoma tissues. Figure  compares macroscopic
images of six human carcinoma tissues (colon cancer, pancreatic cancer,
lung adenocarcinoma, squamous cell lung cancer, gastric cancer, and
esophageal cancer) stained with both FITC-Galacto-RGD2 and
rabbit anti-human integrin β3 antibody. The quantitative
analysis data were summarized in Figure  for
human cancer tissues stained with FITC-Galacto-RGD2 (green
for integrin αvβ3/αvβ5) and rabbit anti-integrin β3 antibody (red for integrin αvβ3). It was found that the integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 expression levels
followed a general order: colon cancer &gt; pancreatic cancer &gt;
lung
adenocarcinoma ≈ squamous cell lung cancer ≫ gastric
cancer ≈ esophageal cancer. There was an excellent linear relationship
between the fluorescence density determined with FITC-Galacto-RGD2 (relative integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 expression levels) and that
with anti-human integrin β3 antibody (integrin αvβ3 expression levels). The FITC-conjugated
cyclic RGD peptides (e.g., FITC-3P-RGD2 and FITC-Galacto-RGD2) are useful for semiquantification of relative integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 expression levels in human carcinoma tissues.

Representative fluorescence
microscopic images (Magnification:
200×) of selected tumor slices from six different human tumors
(colon cancer, pancreatic cancer, lung cancer, squamous cell lung
cancer, gastric cancer, and esophageal cancer) stained with FITC-Galacto-RGD2 (green) and rabbit anti-human integrin β3 antibody detected with Cy3 conjugated goat anti-rabbit antibody
(red). Orange or yellow in overlay image indicates co-localization
of FITC-Galacto-RGD2 (green) and integrin β3 antibody for tumor tissue staining of integrin avβ3. H&amp;E staining data were used for pathological characterization
of human carcinoma tissues.

(A) Quantitative analysis of integrin αvβ3 density for six different human cancer tissues (colon cancer,
pancreatic cancer, lung adenocarcinoma, squamous cell lung cancer,
gastric cancer, and esophageal cancer) stained with FITC-Galacto-RGD2 (green). Integrin αvβ3 density
on tumor cells and neovasculature is represented by the percentage
of green area over the total area in each tumor slice. (B) Quantitative
analysis of integrin β3 density for six human cancer
tissues (colon cancer, pancreatic cancer, lung adenocarcinoma, squamous
cell lung cancer, gastric cancer, and esophageal cancer) stained with
rabbit anti-human integrin β3 antibody detected with
the TR-conjugated goat anti-rat antibody (red). Integrin αvβ3 density on tumor cells and neovasculature
is represented by the percentage of red area over the total area in
each slice of tumor tissue. (C) (average data) and (D) (single data):
Linear relationship between the relative integrin αvβ3 expression levels (fluorescence density) determined
with FITC-Galacto-RGD2 and those obtained with rabbit anti-human
integrin β3 antibody in six human tumors (colon cancer,
pancreatic cancer, lung adenocarcinoma, squamous cell lung cancer,
gastric cancer, and esophageal cancer). Each data point was derived
from 15 different areas of the same tumor slice. Experiments were
repeated three times independently with very similar results. All
values were reported as the average plus/minus standard deviation.
†: p &lt; 0.01, significantly different from
the colon cancer group; #: p &lt; 0.01, significantly
different from the gastric cancer group.

Discussion
In this study, we found that FITC-3P-RGD2 and FITC-Galacto-RGD2 are excellent fluorescent
probes for staining integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 in tumor tissues. The FITC-conjugated
cyclic RGD peptides are as
effective as the fluorescence-labeled anti-integrin β3 antibody despite the fact that cyclic RGD peptides target both integrin
αvβ3 and integrin αvβ5. The integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 specificity was demonstrated
by the blocking experiments (Figure ) and
the RGD-specificity with the use of “nonsense” peptide
conjugate FITC-3P-RGK2 (Figure ). There is also an excellent linear relationship between the relative
integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 expression levels determined with FITC-Galacto-RGD2 and the relative integrin αvβ3 expression levels obtained with anti-integrin β3 antibody in the xenografted tumor tissues (U87MG, MDA-MB-435,
A549, HT29, and PC-3) (Figure C,D) and in
the human carcinoma tissues (Figure C,D).
There are three possible explanations for this linear relationship.
First, the anti-human integrin β3 antibody can bind
to both αvβ3 and αvβ5 integrins. This explanation seems unlikely because
the rabbit anti-human integrin β3 antibody (sc-14009)
has been validated to be specific to integrin β3.
The second possibility is that the integrin αvβ5 expression correlates linearly with the integrin αvβ3 expression levels. This explanation is
problematic since integrins αvβ3 and αvβ5 are expressed at different
levels on various tumor cells and tumor vasculature. Finally, the
contribution from integrin αvβ5 is
much smaller as compared to that of integrin αvβ3. This explanation is supported by careful examination of
the slopes for the lines in Figure D (slope
= 0.96 for five different xenografted tumor tissues) and Figure D (slope = 0.97 for six human carcinoma tissues).
If both FITC-Galacto-RGD2 and the anti-human integrin β3 antibody (sc-14009) target only integrin αvβ3, the slope of these two lines is expected to
be 1.0. Obviously, the binding of FITC-Galacto-RGD2 to
integrin αvβ5 makes the slopes smaller
than 1.0. The slight deviation suggests that only 3–4% of the
fluorescent signals are from the integrin αvβ5. If the slope of these lines were to be 1.0, there would
have been no contribution from integrin αvβ5 and other integrins. One might argue that integrin αvβ5 is highly expressed on HT29 cells, and U87MG human glioma cells have high expression
of both integrin αvβ3 and integrin
αvβ5.− It is important to note that fluorescent intensity
represents the total contribution from both tumor cells and neovasculature.
It has been estimated that the % contribution from the tumor neovasculature
to the total integrin αvβ3/avβ3 expression and tumor uptake of 99mTc-3P-RGD2 is ∼60% in the xenografted U87MG glioma
model. In the case of xenografted HT29
tumors, the main contribution to the total fluorescent intensity or
the tumor uptake of 99mTc-3P-RGD2 is actually
from the integrin αvβ3 on new blood
vessels.,

There is always a debate regarding
whether one should separate
αvβ3 from αvβ5. Integrins αvβ3 and αvβ5 both play a significant role in tumor
angiogenesis,,,− and often co-localize despite their different biological functions.,, Several integrin family members
(including, but not limited to, αvβ3, αvβ5, αvβ6, and α5β1) are receptors
of the RGD-containing extracellular matrix proteins (e.g., vitronectin,
fibronectin, fibrinogen, laminin, collagen, and osteoponin).− As long as the biomolecule contains one or more RGD tripeptide sequences,
it will target integrins αvβ3, αvβ5, αvβ6, and α5β1 regardless of its multiplicity.
From this point of view, there is no need to differentiate them for
the development of radiotracers and fluorescent probes. This is the
exact reason we use the whole-cell displacement assay with U87MG glioma
cells (high expression of integrin αvβ3 and integrin αvβ5) as the
host cells and 125I-echistatin, which is a 125I-labeled family member of disintegrins, as the radioligand in this
study. Another important finding from this study is the linear relationship
(Figure E,F) between the %ID/g tumor uptake
of 99mTc-3P-RGD2 and the fluorescence density
from the integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 staining with FITC-Galacto-RGD2. Visualization of integrins αvβ3/αvβ5 with FITC-Galacto-RGD2 makes it easier to correlate the in vitro tumor tissue staining
data with the in vivo findings with the integrin αvβ3/αvβ5-targeted
radiotracers, such as 99mTc-3P-RGD2 and [18F]Galacto-RGD (2-[18F]fluoropropanamide-c(RGDfK(SAA);
SAA = 7-amino-l-glyero-l-galacto-2,6-anhydro-7-deoxyheptanamide).− Such a combination of differently labeled analogs of the same cyclic
peptide will improve the integration of both in vitro and in vivo
diagnostics.

The tissue staining kinetics of the xenografted
U87MG tumor and
human colon cancer tissues with FITC-Galacto-RGD2 (&lt;30
min) is faster than that with anti-human integrin β3 antibody (&gt;90 min required for blocking nonspecific binding,
tissue
staining, and attachment of secondary polyclonal antibody). This difference
might be caused by the smaller size of FITC-Galacto-RGD2. Alternatively, this difference may also be caused by higher concentration
of FITC-Galacto-RGD2 (&gt;5 μM) than that of integrin
β3 antibody (2.5 μg/mL or ∼12 nM), as
illustrated by the concentration dependence of staining kinetics for
human cancer tissues (). It is important to note that the staining kinetics of
colon cancer tissue is faster than that of the xenografted U87MG tissues
using the same fluorescent probe FITC-Galacto-RGD2 under
similar conditions. We believe that this difference might be related
to the total integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 expression levels because the tumor tissues
with higher integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 expression tend to have a significantly
faster tissue staining kinetics () at a much lower concentration ().

There are several
advantages in using FITC-conjugated cyclic RGD
peptides over the fluorescence-labeled integrin αvβ3 antibodies. The staining procedures with FITC-conjugated
cyclic RGD peptides are much simpler than those with fluorescence-labeled
integrin αvβ3 antibodies since the
latter involves the blocking of nonspecific binding and the use of
secondary antibody. There is a significant variability in the performance
of fluorescence-labeled integrin αvβ3 antibodies, depending on their origin (human, mouse, hamster, rabbit,
or goat). In some cases, the results from tumor tissue staining may
vary using different batches of antibodies from the same commercial
source. In contrast, FITC-conjugated cyclic RGD peptides have high
solution stability, and can be stored for a long time. They are useful
for the integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 staining in tumor tissues regardless of
their origin (human vs murine). There is no need to block the nonspecific
binding because they are integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 and RGD-specific. There is
no need to use secondary antibody as fluorescence label because FITC
can provide sufficient fluorescence signal to obtain excellent macroscopic
images of integrin αvβ3/αvβ5-positive tumor tissues. There is also
a significant disadvantage associated with FITC-conjugated cyclic
RGD peptides since they bind several integrin family members (αvβ3, αvβ5, αvβ6, and α5β1). However, the tumor staining data with FITC-Galacto-RGD2 can be used to reflect the relative integrin αvβ3 expression levels because of the linear
relationship between the fluorescent intensity with FITC-Galacto-RGD2 and the integrin αvβ3 expression
levels determined with anti-integrin β3 antibody
in the xenografted tumor tissues (Figure C,D) and in the human carcinoma tissues (Figure C,D).

The heterogeneity in fluorescence distribution
is characteristic
of the xenografted tumors (U87MG, MDA-MB-435, A549, and HT29). In
general, larger tumors (&gt;0.5 g) tend to have more necrosis. In
necrotic
regions, there is little integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 expression, as indicted by
lack of fluorescence in the area., It is not
surprising that the human carcinoma tissues showed little integrin
αvβ3 staining with the fluorescence-labeled
integrin αvβ3 monoclonal antibodies
even though the PET imaging data clearly showed high tumor uptake
of [18F]Galacto-RGD in cancer patients.− Thus, the selection of tumor biopsy samples becomes
important for IHC staining of human carcinoma tissues with the FITC-conjugated
cyclic RGD peptides or fluorescence-labeled integrin αvβ3 antibodies. Since the human carcinoma tissues
were only small parts of the whole tumor mass from cancer patients,
caution must be taken when interpreting the quantification data in
human carcinoma tissues stained with a FITC-conjugated cyclic RGD
peptide or fluorescence-labeled integrin αvβ3 antibody. The integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 expression levels only represent
the status of that specific tissue (not whole humor mass). In contrast,
the integrin αvβ3/αvβ5-targeted PET and SPECT radiotracers (e.g., 99mTc-3P-RGD2 and [18F]Galacto-RGD) are
better suited for determination and visualization of the tumor integrin
αvβ3/αvβ5 heterogeneity due to the capability of PET and SPECT for
in vivo imaging of entire tumor in cancer patients. Such a combination
use of differently labeled (FITC vs 99mTc or 18F) derivatives of the same cyclic RGD peptide would improve the integration
in assessment of integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 expression levels. This statement is completely
consistent with the linear relationship (Figure E) between the %ID/g tumor uptake of 99mTc-3P-RGD2 in the xenografted tumors (U87MG, MDA-MB-435, A549, HT29,
and PC-3) and the fluorescent intensity obtained from semiquantification
of the same five xenografted tumor tissues stained with FITC-Galacto-RGD2. It must be noted that quantification of absolute fluorescence
intensity is operator-dependent. The relative integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 expression levels only represent the status under specific experimental
conditions (animal species and sexes, inoculation location, tumor
cell types, tumor growth time, and tumor sizes).

Theoretically,
FITC-Galacto-RGD2 would predominantly
localize in the areas rich in blood vessels when it is injected intravenously.
However, our results show that FITC-Galacto-RGD2 distributes
in the whole tumor tissue in a relatively homogeneous fashion (Figure C). This might be caused by the leaky nature of
microvessels and its long tumor retention time, during which FITC-Galacto-RGD2 could easily diffuse through the vessel walls and bind to
all integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 sites in the whole tumor. This finding is important
because it shows that FITC-conjugated cyclic RGD peptides might be
useful as fluorescent probes to correlate the in vitro findings with
those in vivo data using the integrin αvβ3/αvβ5-targeted PET or SPECT
radiotracers. This statement is supported by the linear relationship
(Figure E) between the radioactivity density
(%ID/g tumor uptake of 99mTc-3P-RGD2) and the
integrin αvβ3 density obtained from
fluorescent signal quantification of tumor tissues stained with FITC-Galacto-RGD2.

The results from this study also show that FITC-Galacto-RGD2 is able to stain integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 on tumor neovasculature
despite the difficulty for quantitative analysis. It is important
to note that the quantification of fluorescent signals in each tumor
slice reflects the total integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 expression on both tumor
cells and neovasculature, and not all tumor blood vessels express
integrin αvβ3/αvβ5. In fact, some tumor blood vessels have little
integrin β3 expression in the xenografted U87MG glioma
tissues as indicated by the red-color in the overlay images (Figure ). Since the integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 is overexpressed only
on tumor microvessels (not mature vessels), caution must be taken
when correlating the radiotracer tumor uptake and blood vessel density
(CD31 as a biomarker).

In this study, the FITC-conjugated cyclic
RGD peptides (e.g., FITC-Galacto-RGD2) are used only as
examples to demonstrate proof-of-concept
for the general approach to stain tumor tissues with small peptide-based
fluorescent probes. Theoretically, this approach applies to any receptor-based
fluorescent probe, as long as the targeting biomolecule has sufficient
receptor binding affinity and specificity. Many radiolabeled peptides
have been evaluated as target-specific radiotracers for molecular
imaging of tumors by SPECT or PET.− These peptides could be readily conjugated to a fluorescent label
to produce the corresponding fluorescent probes. In addition, FITC
could be easily replaced by other fluorescent dyes (such as red-colored
cyanine derivatives) if needed.

Conclusion
The
results from this study clearly illustrate the value of the
FITC-conjugated cyclic RGD peptides (particularly FITC-3P-RGD2 and FITC-Galacto-RGD2) for the in vitro assays
of integrins αvβ3/αvβ5. They have very high solution stability and faster
integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 binding kinetics. FITC-3P-RGD2 and
FITC-Galacto-RGD2 are excellent fluorescent probes for
assaying relative integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 expression levels in tumor tissues.

Experimental
Section
Materials and Instruments
Common chemicals and solvents
were purchased from Sigma/Aldrich (St. Louis, MO), and were used without
further purification. Fluorescein isothiocyanate isomer I (FITC) was
purchased from AnaSpec, Inc. (Fremont, CA). Cyclic peptides E[c(RGDfK)]2 (RGD2), PEG4-E[PEG4-c(RGDfK)]2 (3P-RGD2), and PEG4-E[PEG4-c(RGKfD)]2 (3P-RGK2) were purchased from Peptides
International, Inc. (Louisville, KY). Glu[cyclo[Arg-Gly-Asp-d-Phe-Lys(SAA-PEG2-(1,2,3-triazole)-1-yl-4-methylamide)]]2 (Galacto-RGD2) was prepared according to the procedures
described in our previous report. The
MALDI (matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization) mass spectral
data were collected on an Applied Biosystems Voyager DE PRO mass spectrometer
(Framingham, MA), in the Department of Chemistry, Purdue University.

HPLC Methods
The HPLC method used a LabAlliance HPLC
system (Scientific Systems, Inc., State College, PA) equipped with
a UV/vis detector (λ = 220 nm) and Zorbax C18 column
(9.4 mm × 250 mm, 100 Å pore size; Agilent Technologies,
Santa Clara, CA). The flow rate was 2.5 mL/min with a mobile phase
being 90% A (0.05% TFA in water) and 10% B (0.05% TFA in acetonitrile)
at 0 min to 85% A and 15% B at 5 min, and to 75% A and 25% B at 20
min.

FITC-E[c(RGDfK)]2 (FITC-RGD2)
RGD2 (3.1 mg, 2.35 μmol) and FITC (1.2 mg, 3.08
μmol) were dissolved in anhydrous DMF (1.5 mL). Upon addition
of triethylamine (10 μL, 71 μmol), the reaction mixture
was stirred for 12 h at room temperature. After completion of conjugation,
2 mL of water was added to the reaction mixture. The pH value was
then adjusted to 3–4 using neat TFA. The resulting solution
was subjected to HPLC purification. Fractions at 16 min were collected,
combined, and lyophilized to yield FITC-RGD2 as a yellow
powder (2.5 mg, ∼60%). MALDI-MS: m/z = 1707.4 for [M + H]+ (MW = 1706.69 calcd.
for [C80H98N20O21S]).

FITC-PEG4-E[PEG4-c(RGDfK)]2 (FITC-3P-RGD2)
3P-RGD2 (4.15 mg,
2 μmol) and FITC (2.5 mg, 6.4 μmol) were dissolved in
2 mL of DMF. After addition of excess diisopropylethylamine (DIEA:
50 μmol), the reaction mixture was stirred for 2 days at room
temperature. Upon completion of conjugation, 2 mL of water was added
to the mixture above. The pH value was adjusted to 3–4 using
neat TFA. The resulting solution was subjected to HPLC-purification.
The fraction at ∼18 min was collected. Lyophilization of collected
fractions afforded FITC-3P-RGD2 as a yellow powder (3.1
mg, ∼63%). MALDI-MS: m/z =
2450.55 for [M + H]+ (MW = 2449.68 calcd. for [C113H161N23O36S]).

PEG4-E[PEG4-c(RGKfD)]2 (FITC-3P-RGK2)
FITC-3P-RGK2 (4.15 mg, 2 μmol)
was prepared and purified according to the same procedures for used
for FITC-3P-RGD2. The fractions at ∼18 min were
collected, combined, and lyophilized to afford FITC-3P-RGK2 as a yellow powder (2.3 mg, ∼47%). MALDI-MS: m/z = 2450.35 for [M + H]+ (MW = 2449.68
calcd. for [C113H161N23O36S]).

FITC-Glu[cyclo[Arg-Gly-Asp-d-Phe-Lys(SAA-PEG2-(1,2,3-triazole)-1-yl-4-methylamide)]]2 (FITC-Galacto-RGD2)
Galacto-RGD2 (6.5 mg, 3.02 μmol)
and FITC (2.4 mg, 6.15 μmol) were dissolved in 2 mL of anhydrous
DMF. After addition of excess DIEA (50 μmol), the reaction mixture
was stirred for 5 days at room temperature. The reaction was terminated
by adding 0.5 mL of 25 mM NH4OAC solution. The pH value
was then adjusted to 3–4 using neat TFA. The resulting solution
was subjected to HPLC-purification. The fraction at ∼16 min
was collected. Lyophilization of the collected fractions afforded
FITC-Galactor-RGD2 as a yellow powder (4.1 mg, ∼54%).
MALDI-MS: m/z = 2538.85 for [M +
H]+ (MW = 2538.62 calcd. for [C112H148N30O37S]).

Cellular Culture
All human tumor cell lines (U87MG,
MDA-MB-435, A549, HT29, and PC-3) were obtained from American Type
Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA). U87MG glioma cells were cultured
in the Minimum Essential Medium, Eagle with Earle’s Balanced
Salt Solution (nonessential amino acids sodium pyruvate, Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA). PC-3 and A549 cells were cultured in the F-12 medium
(GIBCO, Grand Island, NY). MDA-MB-435 and HT29 cells were grown in
the RPMI Medium 1640 with l-Glutamine (GIBCO, Grand Island,
NY). All human tumor cell lines were supplemented with 10% fetal bovine
serum (FBS from Sigma/Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) and 1% penicillin and
streptomycin solution (GIBCO, Grand Island, NY), and grown at 37 °C
in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2 in air. All tumor
cells were grown as monolayers and were harvested or split when they
reached 90% confluence to maintain exponential growth.

Whole-Cell
Integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 Binding Assay
The integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 binding affinity was assessed via a cellular competitive displacement
assay using 125I-echistatin (PerkinElmer, Branford, CT)
as integrin-specific radioligand. Experiments were performed using
the integrin αvβ3/αvβ3-positive U87MG glioma cells by slight modification
of the literature method.− Briefly, the filter multiscreen DV plates (Millipore, Billerica,
MA) were seeded with 1 × 105 U87MG cells in the binding
buffer (20 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM CaCl2, 1 mM MnCl2, 1 mM MgCl2, 0.1% bovine serum albumin (BSA);
and pH 7.4) and were incubated with 125I-echistatin (0.75–1.0
kBq) for 2 h at room temperature in the presence of increasing concentrations
of the FITC-conjugated peptides. After removing the unbound 125I-echistatin, the hydrophilic PVDF filters were washed three times
with the binding buffer, and were then collected. Radioactivity was
determined using a PerkinElmer Wizard −1480 γ-counter
(Shelton, CT). All experiments were carried out at least twice with
triplicate samples. IC50 values were calculated by fitting
experimental data with nonlinear regression using GraphPad Prim 5.0
(GraphPad Software, Inc., San Diego, CA), and were reported as an
average plus/minus standard deviation. Comparison between two FITC-conjugated
cyclic RGD peptides was made using the one-way ANOVA test (GraphPad
Prim 5.0, San Diego, CA). The level of significance was set at p &lt; 0.05.

Animal Model
Animal studies were
performed in compliance
with the NIH animal experiment guidelines (Principles of Laboratory
Animal Care, NIH Publication No. 86–23, revised 1985). The
protocol for animal studies was approved by the Purdue University
Animal Care and Use Committee (PACUC). Female athymic nu/nu mice (4–5 weeks) were purchased from
Harlan (Indianapolis, IN), and were implanted subcutaneously with
5 × 106 human tumor cells in 0.1 mL of saline into
shoulder flanks (U87MG, A549, HT29, and PC-3) or mammary fat pads
(MDA-MB-435). Four to six weeks after inoculation, the tumor size
was 0.1–0.3 g. The tumors were then harvested for IHC and hematoxylin
and eosin (H&amp;E) staining.

Human Carcinoma Tissues
Six human carcinoma tissues
(colon cancer, pancreatic cancer, lung adenocarcinoma, squamous cell
lung cancer, gastric cancer, and esophageal cancer) were obtained
from the cancer patients with consent. Paraffin blocks of tumor tissues
were obtained from the Department of Pathology, the China-Japan Friendship
Hospital (Beijing, P. R. China). Original diagnoses were made between
January 2011 and October 2012. All histological specimens were fixed
for 12–24 h in neutrally buffered formaldehyde. The use of
anonymous or coded leftover material for scientific purposes was part
of the standard treatment contract with patients in the China-Japan
Friendship Hospital (Beijing, P. R. China). For each case, hematoxylin-eosin
(H&amp;E) stained slides of the paraffin blocks were reviewed by pathologists
to confirm the malignancy in tumor tissues. Histological type was
assessed according to the WHO classification of tumors. The protocol
for use of human cancer tissues was approved by the Purdue University
Animal Care and Use Committee (PACUC).

Tumor Tissue Staining
U87MG, MDA-MB-435, A549, HT29,
and PC-3 tumors were harvested from the tumor-bearing mice, and were
immediately snap-frozen in OCT (optical cutting temperature) solution,
and then cut into slices (5 μm). After thorough drying at room
temperature, slices were fixed with ice-cold acetone for 10 min, and
dried in the air at the room temperature for 20 min. The tumor sections
were incubated with 10% goat serum for 30 min at 37 °C
to block nonspecific binding. In overlay experiments, the tumor sections
were incubated with a FITC-conjugated cyclic RGD peptide (100 μM)
and the rabbit antihuman β3 antibody (sc-14009, 2.5
μg/mL, BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) for 1 h at room temperature.
After washing with PBS buffer, the tumor slides were incubated for
1 h with the Cy3-conjugated goat anti-rabbit antibodies (1:100, V/V
Jackson Immuno-Research Inc., West Grove, PA). Negative controls were
incubated only with secondary antibody. In blocking experiments, tumor
slides were incubated with 10% goat serum, and then with 100 μM
FITC-Galacto-RGD2 in the presence of 10 mM c(RGDfK)2 for 1 h at room temperature. After washing with PBS three
times, the tumor slides were mounted with Dapi Fluormount G and cover
glass. To demonstrate the RGD specificity, FITC-3P-RGK2 (100 μM) was used as the nonsense peptide. For human carcinoma
tissues (colon cancer, pancreatic cancer, lung adenocarcinoma, squamous
cell lung cancer, gastric cancer, and esophageal cancer), the tumor
slides were deparaffinized in xylene, rehydrated with alcohols, and
then stained for integrin αvβ3 using
the same procedure. All pictures were taken under 200× magnification
with the same exposure time. Brightness and contrast adjustments were
made equally to all images. The overlay images were obtained using
Olympus MetaMorph software. Quantitative analysis of integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 expression was performed using ImageJ Software (the National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, MD). The fluorescence intensity within images
was quantified by assigning every pixel a gray scale intensity value,
which ranged from 0 (black) to 255 (white). For quantification, the
green (FITC-Galacto-RGD2) and red (rabbit anti-human integrin
β3 antibody) channels in each image was exported
into the software program. After calibrating optical density and adjusting
threshold, the area of interest was measured as the percentage of
total area. The area percentage of nucleus defined by DAPI staining
was subtracted from the area percentage of cytoplasmic to compare
the intensity of FITC-Galacto-RGD2 and anti-human integrin
β3 antibody. At least 15 randomly selected fields
of every section were used to assess relative fluorescent intensity.
The fluorescence density was expressed as a percentage (%) of total
area, and presented as an average plus/minus standard deviation.

Tumor Tissue Staining Kinetics: Concentration Dependence
U87MG tumor slices were fixed with ice-cold acetone for 10 min, and
dried in the air for 20 min. The tumor sections were incubated for
1 h with FITC-Galacto-RGD2 (0.1, 1.0, 10, 20, 50, and 100
μM). After washing with PBS buffer three times, tumor slides
were mounted with Dapi Fluormount G and cover glass. The same procedure
was used for human carcinoma tissues (colon cancer with high integrin
αvβ3 expression, squamous cell lung
cancer with moderate integrin αvβ3 expression, and gastric cancer with low integrin αvβ3 expression) after being cut into slices (5 μm),
deparaffinized in xylene, and rehydrated with degraded alcohols. Pictures
were taken under 200× magnification with the same exposure time.
Brightness and contrast adjustments were made equally to all images.
The intensity was analyzed for the integrin αvβ3/αvβ5-positive staining
areas as a percentage of the total area. The concentration-dependence
histogram was generated by plotting fluorescent density against the
concentration of FITC-Galacto-RGD2.

Tumor Tissue
Staining Kinetics: Time Dependence
U87MG
tumor slices (5 μm) were fixed with ice-cold acetone for 10
min, and dried in the air at room temperature. The tumor slices were
then incubated with FITC-Galacto-RGD2 (100 μM) at
room temperature for different times (5, 15, 30, 60, 90, and 120 min).
After washing with PBS buffer three times, the tumor slices were mounted
with Dapi Fluormount G and cover glass. For tissue staining with integrin
β3 antibody, tumor slices were first incubated with
10% goat serum for 30 min at 37 °C to block the nonspecific binding,
and then incubated with rabbit anti-integrin β3 antibody
(sc-14009, 2.5 μg/mL) for different incubation times (5, 15,
30, 60, 90, and 120 min). The slides were then incubated with Cy3-conjugated
goat anti-rabbit secondary antibodies (1:100, V/V) for another 1 h
before being mounted with Dapi Fluormount G and cover glass. Human
carcinoma tissues (colon cancer, lung squamous cell cancer, and gastric
cancer) were cut into slices (5 μm), deparaffinized in xylene,
and rehydrated with degraded alcohols. The same procedure was performed
for integrin αvβ3/αvβ5 staining. All pictures were taken under 200×
magnification with the same exposure time. Brightness and contrast
adjustments were made equally to all images. The fluorescent intensity
was analyzed for the areas with integrin β3-positive
staining after staining of tumor tissues according to the procedure
above. The time-dependence histogram was generated by plotting fluorescent
density against incubation time.

Blocking Experiment with
Intravenous Injection of FITC-Galacto-RGD2
The
athymic nude mice (n = 3) bearing
U87MG glioma xenografts were intravenously injected with FITC-Galacto-RGD2 (300 μg per animal). The animals were sacrificed at
24 h postinjection. Tumors were excised, immediately snap-frozen in
the OCT solution, and cut into slices (5 μm). The tumor slices
were dried at room temperature, fixed with ice-cold acetone for 15
min, and then dried in the air for 20 min at room temperature. After
washing with PBS buffer three times, microscopic images were obtained
using the same procedure above. For the overlay experiments, the tumor
sections were incubated for 1 h at room temperature with the hamster
anti-mouse integrin β3 antibody (2.5 μg/mL,
BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA). After washing with PBS three times,
the tumor slides were incubated with the Cy3-conjugated goat anti-hamster
secondary antibody (1:100, V/V, Jackson Immuno-Research Inc., West
Grove, PA) for another 1 h at room temperature. Upon washing with
PBS buffer, the tumor slides were then mounted with Dapi Fluormount
G and cover glass.

Overlay Experiment with FITC-Galacto-RGD2 and CD31
Monoclonal Antibody
The tumor slices (5 μm) were fixed
with ice-cold acetone for 10 min, and dried in air for 20 min at room
temperature. The tumor sections were blocked with 10% goat serum for
30 min, and then were incubated with 100 μM FITC-Galacto-RGD2 and the rat anti-mouse CD31 antibody (1:100, BD Biosciences,
San Jose, CA) for 1 h at room temperature. After incubating with the
Cy3-conjugated goat anti-rat secondary antibody (1:100, Jackson ImmunoResearch
Inc., West Grove, PA) and washing with PBS buffer three times, the
tumor slides were mounted with Dapi Fluormount G and cover glass.
The fluorescence was visualized with an Olympic BX51 microscope (Olympus
America Inc., Center Valley, PA).

Histopathological H&amp;E
Staining
Histological analysis
of the tumor tissues was performed according to literature methods., All tumor tissues were fixed in 10% neutrally buffered formalin
and embedded in paraffin. The 4 μm sections were deparaffinized
and rehydrated through degraded ethanol. Tumor sections were stained
for H&amp;E to evaluate the morphology. Aperio’s ImageScope
Viewer (Vista, CA) was used to visualize the whole-slide digital scans
and capture images.

Data and Statistical Analysis
The
relative integrin
αvβ3/αvβ5 expression level was derived from at least 15 different regions,
and expressed as means plus/minus standard deviation. Statistical
analysis was performed by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed
by the Newman-Keuls test for multiple comparisons. The level of significance
was set at p &lt; 0.05.

Supporting Information Available
Detailed protocols for cellular
staining of tumor cells, the concentration-dependence curve (Figure
SI1), the incubation time-dependence curve (Figure SI2), microscopic
images (Figure SI3) of U87MG human glioma cells stained with FITC-conjugated
cyclic RGD peptides (Green) and mouse anti-human integrin αvβ3 antibody (sc-7312), microscopic images
(Figure SI4) of acetone-fixed human cancer cells stained with FITC-Galacto-RGD2 (green) and mouse anti-human αvβ3 monoclonal antibody (sc-7312) detected with Cy3-conjugated
goat anti-mouse antibody (red), and microscopic images (Figure SI5)
of living tumor cells stained with FITC-Galacto-RGD2 (green)
and mouse anti-human αvβ3 monoclonal
antibody (sc-7312) detected with Cy3-conjugated goat anti-mouse antibody
(red). This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc500452y_si_001.pdf

The
authors
declare the following competing financial interest(s): Andrzej Czerwinski,
Francisco Valenzuela and Michael Pennington are from Peptides International,
Inc. (Louisville, KY 40299), a commercial provider of biologically
active peptides. There are no known conflicts of interest associated
with this publication and there has been no significant financial
support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. Yumin
Zheng, Shundong Ji, and Shuang Liu declare that they have no conflicts
of interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported, in part, by Purdue University, the
Challenge Research Award from Purdue Cancer Center, the Indiana Clinical
and Translational Sciences Institute funded in part by grant Number
TR000006 (Clinical and Translational Award) from the National Institutes
of Health, the National Center for advancing Translational Science,
R21 EB017237-01 (S.L.) from the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging
and Bioengineering (NIBIB), and grant number 81401446 from the National
Nature Science Foundation of China (Y.Z.).

Abbreviations
DAPI4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole

FITCFluorescein isothiocyanate
isomer I

Galacto-RGD2Glu[cyclo[Arg-Gly-Asp-d-Phe-Lys(SAA-PEG2-(1,2,3-triazole)-1-yl-4-methylamide)]]2 (SAA =
7-amino-l-glycero-l-galacto-2,6-anhydro-7-deoxyheptanamide,
and PEG2 = 3,6-dioxaoctanoic acid)

IHCimmunohistochemistry

MALDImatrix-assisted laser
desorption ionization

3P-RGD2PEG4-E[PEG4-c(RGKfD)]2 = PEG4-Glu[cyclo[Arg-Gly-Asp-d-Phe-Lys(PEG4)]]2 (PEG4 = 15-amino-4,7,10,13-tetraoxapentadecanoic
acid)

3P-RGK2PEG4-E[PEG4-c(RGKfD)]2 = PEG4-Glu[cyclo[Arg-Gly-Lys(PEG4)-d-Phe-Asp]]2)

RGD2E[c(RGDfK)]2 = Glu[cyclo(Arg-Gly-Asp-d-Phe-Lys)]2

99mTc-3P-RGD2[99mTc(HYNIC-3P-RGD2)(tricine)(TPPTS)] (HYNIC = 6-hydrazinonicotinyl, and TPPTS
= trisodium triphenylphosphine-3,3′,3″-trisulfonate)

WHOWorld Health Organization

