Introduction
Proteins that regulate
cellular apoptotic machinery are critical
mediators of cell fate. Overexpression of anti-apoptotic proteins,
particularly the B-cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2) family of proteins, is
one mechanism by which cancer cells evade cell death and become resistant
to chemotherapeutic agents. A set of new drug candidates, known as
BH3 mimetics, have been developed to target these proteins; several
of these candidates are currently undergoing clinical trials. To date,
clinical trials have focused mostly on hematopoietic cancers whereas
application of these drugs in solid tumors both as single agents and
as cotherapeutics is an emerging strategy. Unfortunately, it has not
been possible to visualize the distribution of such inhibitors in
tumor cells in vivo, making it challenging to determine how effects
might vary as a function of tumor type, location, dosing, and other
variables. In short, it would be desirable to have a fluorescent companion
imaging drug (CID) to explore the spatiotemporal kinetics in vivo.

Bcl-2 plays a fundamental role in cell biology via interactions
with a number of other critical proteins, including the pro-apoptotic
Bcl-2 family members Bcl-2-associated death promoter (BAD), Bcl-2-antagonist/killer
1 (BAK), Bcl-2 interacting mediator of cell death (BIM), and Bcl-2
associated protein X (BAX).− Other closely related family members with an anti-apoptotic
role exist (Bcl-xL, Bcl2A1, Bcl-w, and Mcl-1), which interact with
pro-apoptotic proteins., In normal cells, following receipt
of a death signal, pro-apoptotic proteins function to permeabilize
the outer mitochondrial membrane in order to initiate release of cytochrome
c, which combines with apoptosis activating factor (APAF-1) to form
apoptosomes, ultimately resulting in apoptosis., Anti-apoptotic
proteins inhibit this initiation by a range of interactions with pro-apoptotic
proteins. For example, Bcl-2 plays a critical role in this process
by preventing cytochrome c release via interactions with BAK/BAX,
inhibiting pore formation in the outer mitochondrial membrane., The balance of pro- and anti-apoptotic proteins therefore determines
overall cell susceptibility to normal apoptotic signaling.

Several pan-Bcl-2 family protein inhibitors,
including obatoclax
(GX15–070), gossypol/levo-gossypol
(AT-101), ABT-737, and its orally bioavailable successor Navitoclax (ABT-263)
(Figure A), have been
developed; all of these inhibitors have strong interactions with a
range of anti-apoptotic proteins. For example, ABT-263 has high affinity
for almost all Bcl-2 family anti-apoptotic proteins (Ki &lt;550 nM for Bcl-2, Bcl-xL, Mcl-1, Bcl-w, and Bcl2A1). Despite the initial promise of ABT-263, dose-limiting
toxicities were observed from induction of thrombocytopenia, likely
due to inhibition of Bcl-xL in platelets. Through rational modification of the ABT-263 scaffold, ABT-199 was
developed to selectively target Bcl-2 (Figure B)., This selectivity makes ABT-199 an attractive
candidate for development of a CID. The ABT-199 scaffold lends itself
to analog generation via a convergent synthetic approach that involves
the exchange of a moiety in ABT-199 that is not critical for Bcl-2
affinity. Specifically, the tetrahydropyranyl substituent was exchanged
for a piperidine bearing an aminoethyl-linker for conjugation to fluorophores
(e.g., BODIPY-FL). We demonstrate that the described CID maintains
affinity for Bcl-2 both in vitro and in cellular assays. Furthermore,
we show that this agent has high localization to mitochondria (a primary
location of Bcl-2 proteins) in cancer cell lines and has shown excellent
uptake across a range of tumor lines. Because there is increasing
interest in translating ABT-199 into solid tumor therapies in both
mono and dual treatment modalities, this CID may be a useful tool
for understanding inter- and intracellular localization and heterogeneity
of the distribution of Bcl-2 inhibitors.

Design of ABT-199-BODIPY.
(A,B) Chemical structures of BH3-mimetics
ABT-263 (Navitoclax) and ABT-199, (C) Crystal structure of an ABT-199
analog bound to Bcl-2 (PDB 4MAN), generated using The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System,
v 1.5.0.4 Schrödinger, LLC. (D) Structure of the fluorescent
companion imaging drug (CID) based on the structure of ABT-199.

Results
We used both the published
crystal structure of Bcl-2 bound to
an ABT-199/ABT-263 analog (PDB 4MAN) (Figure C) and
relevant details related to the BH3-mimetic design to determine available
modification sites of ABT-199. From both NMR structural analysis and crystal structure data, it has been established
that pro-apoptotic proteins (i.e., BH3 proteins) bind to a groove
(approximately 20 Å long), that is composed of two main hydrophobic
bonding pockets termed P2 and P4 (Figure C).,− As described by Souers et al., the structure of ABT-199 was developed by reverse-engineering
of ABT-263 based on slight structural differences in the P4 binding
pockets of Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL, namely, the presence of Asp103 in Bcl-2
versus Glu96 in Bcl-xL. Notably, removal of the thiophenolic ether
of ABT-263 and incorporation of a 7-azaindole moiety imparted the
desired selectivity. The importance of the P2 and P4 binding sites
as well as the azaindole moiety in ABT-199 prompted us to modify a
portion of the molecule that only occupies the edge of the P4 binding
site. We substituted the tetrahydropyranyl moiety of ABT-199 with
a piperidine; the piperidine was elaborated with an aminoethyl- linker
for facile attachment of fluorophores.

The de novo synthesis
(Figure ) of ABT-199-BODIPY
(Figure D) was accomplished in 17 steps (11
in the longest linear sequence). The complete synthetic schemes and
procedures are provided in the . Starting from known acid 1, ABT-199 analog 3 was generated after coupling with aryl sulfonamide 2. Sulfonamide 2 was synthesized via nucleophilic aromatic
substitution of commercially available 4-fluoro-3-nitrobenzenesulfonamide
with tert-butyl 4-(aminomethyl)piperidine-1-carboxylate 6. Removal of the Boc protecting group with HCl in dioxane
followed by alkylation with 1-N-(2-bromoethyl)carbamate
afforded 2. Following the EDCI-mediated coupling of 1 and 2 to generate 3, the Boc protecting
group was removed using trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and Et3SiH (as a scavenger) followed by reaction with the N-hydroxysuccinimidyl ester of BODIPY FL to afford ABT-199-BODIPY 8. The synthesis of ABT-199-BODIPY is convergent; it would
be possible to test other modifications by generating libraries of
aryl sulfonamides (accessible in 2–3 steps from commercially
available materials) and coupling to intermediate acid 1. ABT-199-BODIPY was obtained in ca. 9% overall yield over the longest
linear sequence. The purity was &gt;95% based on LC-MS analysis (using
both evaporative light scattering detection (ELSD) and UV/vis detection
for determining purity).

Synthesis of ABT-199-BODIPY.

To validate that ABT-199-BODIPY maintains efficacy
against Bcl-2,
we first performed a competitive binding experiment (Figure A). This experiment was carried out by incubating
purified Bcl-2 protein with either ABT-199-BODIPY, the piperidine-substituted
analog 3, or ABT-199 (Figure A). The binding was assessed using an ELISA-type format wherein the
protein/inhibitor complexes were applied to a surface of immobilized
BIM peptide. We found that substituting
the ABT-199 tetrahydropyran for the N-aminoethylpiperidine
(compound 3) resulted in a 2-fold loss in activity; further
elaboration with the BODIPY subsituent resulted in a 4-fold loss of
activity; still, the modified ABT-199 scaffolds show excellent inhibitory
activity for disruption of the Bcl-2/BIM protein–protein interaction.

Efficacy
of ABT-199-BODIPY. (A) Data from an ELISA-based in vitro
competitive binding experiment. Varying concentrations of inhibitors
were incubated with purified His-tagged Bcl-2 protein (20 nM) for
2 h, then applied to a BIM-coated surface (biotinylated BIM peptide
was covalently bound to a Streptavidin-coated plate). The amount of
protein bound was quantified after incubation with anti-His_HRP antibody
and spectrophotochemical measurement using ortho-phenylenediamine
as a substrate. (B) Viability of RL cells after incubating with BH3-mimetics
for 48 h.

We next determined the effects
of ABT-199-BODIPY on the viability
of RL cells (a human non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma derived cell line)
which have been shown to have high levels of Bcl-2 and are therefore
selectively sensitive to treatment with BH3 mimetics (Figure B). ABT-199-BODIPY
is ∼12 times less effective toward inducing cell death in the
RL cell lines, but it is still equipotent with ABT-263, an agent currently
in phase II clinical trials. The slight decrease in activity may stem
from decreased solubility of ABT-199-BODIPY or reduced affinity of
ABT-199-BODIPY due to the addition of the bulkier fluorophore substituent.
ABT-199, ABT-263, and ABT-199-BODIPY were ineffective at inducing
cell death in cell lines that do not overexpress Bcl-2, including
OVCA-429 and MDA-MB-231 (EC50 &gt; 10 μM, ).

We next
examined the intracellular distribution of ABT-199-BODIPY
and its colocalization with apoptosis specific cell components. We
first incubated OVCA-429 cells with ABT-199-BODIPY (1 μM, overnight
incubation, a concentration shown to be nontoxic to cell lines without
specific Bcl-2 dependency; see ). We observed localization of the imaging drug to
mitochondria (Figure ) as determined by immunocytochemistry.
We next imaged the intracellular distribution of ABT-199-BODIPY in
live cells. MDA-MB-231 cells transfected with a Bcl-2-RFP reporter
were treated with ABT-199-BODIPY (5 μM 1 h before imaging (Figure )). In this cell line, Bcl-2 was observed in the
mitochondria in addition to the endoplasmic reticulum and as a cytosolic
protein. Addition of ABT-199-BODIPY showed excellent colocalization
of the compound with areas of Bcl-2-RFP fusion protein. We similarly
assessed whether ABT-199-BODIPY would show similar uptake and localization
across a panel of cancer cell lines. Common cell lines (OVCA-429,
Panc-1, MDA-MB-231, MCF-7, 4T1, A431, and HT-1080) were incubated
with ABT-199-BODIPY (1 μM) overnight, fixed, counterstained
with DAPI, and observed (Figure ). Across
all cell lines we noted excellent uptake of the CID and colocalization
with mitochondria-like structures () in addition to more limited cytosolic
and other organelle staining consistent with known localizations of
Bcl-2 (Figure ).

Immunocytochemistry illustrating
mitochondrial colocalization of
ABT-199-BODIPY in a single OVCA-429 cell. (A) DAPI, (B) ABT-199-BODIPY,
(C) TOMM-20 antibody (Mitochondria), (D) Merged imaged (DAPI, blue;
ABT-199, green; Mitochondria, red). Scale bar is 5 μm.

Live cell imaging of ABT-199-BODIPY and Bcl-2
in MDA-MB-231 cells.
(A) ABT-199-BODIPY, (B) Bcl-2-RFP, (C) Colocalization of ABT-199-BODIPY (green) and Bcl-2 (red),
(D) Colocalization scatter plot of ABT-199-BODIPY and Bcl-2. The Pearson
coefficient was 0.9899 and Manders I &amp;II were &gt;0.99. Scale
bar
is 10 μm.

ABT-199-BODIPY localization
across a panel of cancer cell lines
(DAPI, blue; ABT-199-BODIPY; green). (A) OVCA-429, (B) MCF-7, (C)
4T1, (D) A431, (E) HT-1080, (F) Panc-1, (G) MDA-MB-231. Scale Bar
is 50 μm.

Discussion
The
regulation of intrinsic apoptosis events by Bcl-2 family proteins
plays a key role in cell fate. Overexpression of Bcl-2 proteins is
a common cancer cell survival mechanism. Furthermore, increased expression
of Bcl-2 family proteins is a cause of acquired resistance to chemotherapeutic
agents. Recently, cancer therapies that target Bcl-2 proteins have
shown promise in clinical trials, but
little is known regarding the single cell pharmacokinetics, intracellular
dynamics, and heterogeneity of distribution of these inhibitors as
well as their protein-specific responses.

Current approaches
for probing the cellular response of Bcl-2 protein
mediated interactions include BH3 profiling, which measures mitochondrial
response to BH3-only peptides and is thus predictive of Bcl-2 targeted
probes such as ABT-199., To understand protein
specific dynamics, fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy (FLIM)
using fluorescent proteins (e.g., Venus-Bcl-xL and mCherry-BAD) has
also been used to study real-time protein/protein interactions after
treatment with inhibitors, but this method does not address the intra-
and intercellular distribution of inhibitor., To date it has not been possible to directly visualize Bcl-2 inhibitor
distribution in live cells.

The increasing interest in targeting
Bcl-2 family proteins in nonhematological
cancers and solid tumors underscores the need for agents that monitor
the distribution and heterogeneity of drug distribution. In this work,
we designed and synthesized a structurally matched companion imaging
drug (CID) for ABT-199 that can be used as a tool for studying the
subcellular localization and pharmacokinetics of Bcl-2 inhibitors.
We anticipate that the CID will enable inhibitor localization studies
as well as spatiotemporal studies in live cells and tumors. Although
we have demonstrated that this CID can be utilized in a range of cancer
cells, further testing will be required to move this CID into animal
models. The use of such a tool compound could provide compelling insight
toward developing appropriate dual therapy treatment regimens and
understanding how cell physiology affects the uptake, localization,
and cellular response of BH3-mimetics.

Supporting Information Available
Procedures
for chemical synthesis
and associated spectra, cell culture and in vitro assays, cell imaging
as well as descriptions of all materials and instrumentation. This
material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc500433k_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
Randy J.
Giedt and Melissa M. Sprachman contributed equally to this work.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
R.J.G. and M.M.S. were supported by an NIH grant T32CA79443,
and this project was funded via 1R01CA164448 and P01-CA139980. We
are grateful to Dr. Rainer Kohler for imaging assistance and Dr. Thomas
Reiner, Dr. Bjorn Askevold, and Dr. Eunha Kim for many helpful discussions.
The crystal structure graphic of Bcl-2 used in the TOC graphic was
generated using CCP4 mg Molecular Graphics Software.

Abbreviations
EDCI1-ethyl-3-(3-(dimethylamino)propyl)carbodiimide

DMAP4-dimethylaminopyridine

TFAtrifluoroacetic
acid

THFtetrahydrofuran

DMFN,N-dimethylformamide

BODIPY FL, SE7-(2-carboxyethyl)-5,5-difluoro-1,3-dimethyl-5H-dipyrrolo[1,2-c:2′,1′-f][1,3,2]diazaborinin-4-ium-5-uide, N-hydroxysuccinimidyl
ester

Boctert-butyloxycarbonyl

