Introduction
The dry antibacterial
drug development pipeline has driven the
revival of polymyxin B and E (also known as colistin) as a last line
of defense against infections caused by multidrug-resistant (MDR)
Gram-negative ‘superbugs’, Acinetobacter
baumannii, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Klebsiella pneumoniae. These microorganisms are among the 6 top-priority
dangerous ‘superbugs’ identified by Infectious Diseases
Society of America as requiring the most urgent attention for discovery
of novel antibiotics. The emergence of
pandrug-resistant (PDR) strains which are even resistant to polymyxins
has prompted fears that life-threatening infections will soon become
untreatable. Investigations into the mechanisms
of polymyxin action and resistance are warranted in order to provide
a platform for the development of next-generation superior polymyxin
lipopeptides with efficacy against these PDR strains. Unfortunately,
the unavailability of polymyxin imaging probes with native activities
is a significant barrier.

The initial
cellular target of polymyxins is the lipopolysaccharide
(LPS) component of the bacterial outer membrane. The binding of polymyxin
to LPS involves an initial electrostatic interaction of the cationic
Dab side-chains with the phosphate groups of the lipid A component
of LPS, displacing divalent cations (Ca2+ and Mg2+) that bridge adjacent LPS molecules.− Hydrophobic interactions
take place between the N-terminal fatty acyl tail
of the polymyxin molecule and the lipid A fatty acyl chains. The fatty
acyl tail of polymyxins is crucial for their antibacterial activity,
as polymyxin nonapeptide (derived by proteolytic cleavage of the fatty
acyl-Dab1 from the N-terminus of the polymyxin) is
devoid of antibacterial activity. Our
structure–activity relationship (SAR) model of the interaction
of polymyxin B with lipid A indicated a key role for the diaminobutyric
acid (Dab) side chains for binding to the lipid A phosphate groups. We have previously highlighted the deficiencies
of directly amine-coupling dansyl groups onto the Dab side chains
in semisynthetic preparations of dansyl-polymyxin B. Analysis of these semisynthetic dansyl-polymyxin B preparations
revealed the existence of mono-, di-, tri-, and tetra-dansyl substituted
species. Furthermore, as polymyxin B is
composed of two major components (B1 and B2),
the potential for either of these components to be substituted at
any of the five Dab side chains with up to four dansyl molecules results
in a highly variable mixture of dansylated derivatives. There is little value in using these semisynthetic
preparations as imaging probes since they lack native antibacterial
activity.

Here we have designed and synthesized a fluorescent
dansyl-polymyxin
lipopeptide probe which retains the native antibacterial activity
of the polymyxin B parent structure; and demonstrated its considerable
utility for imaging polymyxin penetration and localization in Gram-negative
bacterial cells. The availability of this probe will greatly facilitate
molecular imaging studies on both the mode of action and the pharmacokinetics;
and contribute toward the development of a new generation of polymyxin
lipopeptides with superior activity against polymyxin-resistant Gram-negative
‘superbugs’.

Results
Probe Design and Synthesis
The design and synthesis
of a dansyl molecular probe through regioselective modification of
the polymyxin B core structure was undertaken with the aforementioned
lipid A interaction principles in mind, in order to mimic the polymyxin
B structure as closely as possible and to maintain its native antibacterial
activity. The dansyl group was utilized for the fluorescent probe
as it has suitable spectral properties and its relatively small size
would reduce the chance of steric effects. The dansyl moiety incorporates
a natpthyl structure, together with a sulfonamide group which conveys
electron withdrawing properties. We reasoned that the best point for
the attachment of the dansyl group to the polymyxin core structure
would be at the N-terminal fatty acyl region (Figure ). Therefore, the strategy we employed was to replace
the N-terminal fatty acyl group of polymyxin B with
the amino acid l-octylglycine, where the eight carbon fatty
acyl chain emulated the N-terminal fatty acyl chain
of polymyxin B, while the Nα-amino
group would provide a convenient point of attachment for the dansyl
group (eliminating the need for additional orthogonal protection during
the synthesis). Antimicrobial activity was screened against a panel
of ATCC and recent clinical isolates of polymyxin-susceptible and
-resistant strains of P. aeruginosa, A. baumannii, and K. pneumoniae (Table ). The
probe showed very promising activity against the polymyxin-susceptible
strains. The static time-kill kinetic experiments showed that at 0.5×
and 5× MIC probe (1) achieved a ∼3-log reduction
of the viable cell count at 1 h which is comparable to colistin at
an initial inoculum of ∼106 cfu/mL (), whereas with an initial inoculum
of ∼108cfu/mL, both probe (1) and colistin
were inactive at 0.5× MIC and only showed killing effect at 5×
MIC (). We have previously observed
this inoculum effect with colistin treatment of this strain. Regrowth of bacteria in both probe (1) and colistin treated cells was observed possibly due to the emergence
of the polymyxin-resistant subpopulation.

Comparison of the Antimicrobial Activity
of the Dansyl-Polymyxin Probe (1) with Polymyxin B and
Colistin
 	 	minimum inhibitory concentration (mg/L)	
bacteria	strain	polymyxin B	colistin	probe (1)	
K. pneumoniae	ATCC 13883	1	1	8	
FADDI-03	&lt;0.125	1	8	
FADDI-04
Col R	128	&gt;128	&gt;32	
FADDI-05 Col
R	&gt;32	128	&gt;32	
A. baumannii	ATCC 19606	1	1	4	
FADDI-06	0.5	0.5	8	
ATCC
19606 Col R	128	128	8	
FADDI-07	8	16	16	
P. aeruginosa	ATCC 27853	1	1	4	
FADDI-08	1	1	4	
FADDI-09	1	2	4	
FADDI-10
Col R	&gt;32	&gt;128	4	
FADDI-11 Col R	&gt;32	&gt;128	4	
Col R refers to
polymyxin resistant
strains.

(A) Chemical structures
of polymyxin B and dansyl polymyxin B probe
(1). (B) SAR model of the polymyxin B core scaffold showing
regions that can be modified with the dansyl fluorophore. The green
shaded regions can tolerate modification without much activity loss,
whereas substitution of the red shaded regions results in the loss
of activity.

Transmission Electron Microscopy
(TEM)
TEM imaging
of K. pneumoniae ATCC 13883 cells treated
with probe (1) at 0.5× MIC revealed the formation
of numerous protrusions or blebs extending from the outer membrane
of the cells that possibly represent outer membrane fragments (Figure A). Notably, a similar blebbing effect was observed
with Gram-negative bacterial cells treated with polymyxin B and colistin. The ability of probe (1) to disrupt
the other membrane of K. pneumoniae ATCC 13883 appeared comparable to that of polymyxin B and colistin.

Transmission electron microcopy of (A) untreated K. pneumoniae ATCC 13883 cells. (B) K. pneumoniae ATCC 13883 cells treated with probe
(1) (0.5× MIC). The box shows a magnified region
of the outer membrane.

NMR Structure Determination in Dodecylphosphocholine (DPC) Micelles
Probe (1) was first examined by recording a series
of two-dimensional NMR experiments in an acetate buffer at pH 4.5.
The signals in the spectra were assigned using the standard sequential
assignment procedure from analysis of 2D NOESY and TOCSY NMR spectra
combined with the 2D 13C HSQC and 13C H2BC spectra
to facilitate the assignment the side chains, particularly the overlapped
protons of the lipid tail. The 2D NOESY spectra () yielded few small NOEs with the same sign as the
diagonal (spin diffusion regime) that were insufficient to determine
a structure consistent with that reported previously for polymyxin
B in water. Moreover, the NOEs involving
the aromatic resonances of the dansyl were of opposite sign (extreme
narrowing condition) which shows that the dansyl group tumbles faster
and independently of the rest of the peptide. The assignments are
similar to that reported for the parent peptide at pH 4.0; however, Dab9 was not observed at 25 °C
but the broadened amide and side chain signals were assigned from
spectra recorded at 10 °C. The 1H and 13C assignments are reported in . Addition of substoichiometric quantities of LPS to a sample of
probe (1) resulted in immediate precipitation and a concomitant
signal decrease in the 1D 1H NMR spectra without chemical
shift change (data not shown) indicating the formation of an insoluble
probe (1)-LPS aggregate. These observations are in contrast
to the addition of LPS to the polymyxin B peptide where moderate signal
broadening and efficient transferred NOE effects to the LPS aggregate
were observed that were sufficient to determine the LPS bound structure. This is potentially due to an increased avidity
of probe (1) for the LPS aggregates due to the dansyl-substituent.
LPS is found in Gram-negative bacteria embedded in a phospholipid
bilayer. We thus recorded NMR data on probe (1) in the
presence of an excess of deuterated n-dodecylphosphocholine
(DPC) micelles as a model membrane mimetic to better reflect the functional
environment of probe (1). Broader signals were observed
in the 1D spectrum and an increase in the number and size of the cross
peaks in the 2D NOESY spectra indicated binding to the micelle (). Assignments of the broader signals
(), were carried out as before
(vide supra) and partly facilitated by comparing
the 2D 13C HSQC spectrum to that from the peptide dissolved
in water. Given the high quality of the NMR spectra (), we then determined the structure of probe (1) in DPC micelles using a total of 253 distance restraints
derived from the 2D NOESY spectra in conjunction with restrained simulated
annealing using the program CYANA 2.1. Superposition of the best CYANA
20 structures, ranked according to the lowest overall target function,
reveals a well converged ensemble with an overall backbone root-mean-square
distance (r.m.s.d.) of 0.34 Å (Figure A). Statistics are shown in .
The three-dimensional structure of probe (1) in DPC micelles
essentially resembles that reported for polymyxin B, indicating that
introduction of the dansyl group does not markedly perturb the native
structure. Similar to the polymyxin B
NMR structure, the side chains of Dab1, Dab5, and Dab8 project to
one side of the structure forming a line of positive charge. Interestingly,
18 NOEs were observed between the lipid OctylGly side chain and the
side chain of d-Phe6 that directs the OctylGly side chain
and the hydrophobic side chains of d-Phe6 and Leu7 downward,
presumably into the membraneous environment of the micelle. The protons
of the napthalene side chain showed numerous NOEs to the octyl lipid
side chain and two long-range NOEs to the aromatic ring of d-Phe6. These position the dansyl group also downward, increasing
the hydrophobic face that projects into the micelle. To investigate
the interaction with LPS, we titrated in aliquots of LPS to a final
probe (1)/LPS w/w ratio of 0.75:1.0 without precipitation
(vide supra) and noted several small amide shifts
in fast exchange for Dab1, Thr2, Dab9, Thr12, and Leu7. While more
extensive data is required to investigate the probe (1)/LPS interface, no additional NOE cross-peaks were observed in the
2D NOESY spectra suggesting that the structure of probe (1) does not change substantially upon transient binding to the LPS
aggregate or LPS bound micelle. DPC and 1,2-dicaproyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DHPC) micelles have been previously used
as membrane mimetics to investigate the NMR structure of monomeric
LPS and the interaction of LPS with polymyxin
peptides by NMR. To access whether the
structure of probe (1) in DPC is a plausible model for
a LPS bound complex we took our NMR structure as a starting model
and docked it into the LPS structure from E. coli LPS. The docking model revealed that most of the interactions seen
with the polymyxin B-LPS complex are also evident with LPS bound to
the DPC structure of probe (1) (Figure B). The molecular model indicates that electrostatic interactions
with the 1-phosphorester group on lipid A are not hampered by the
dansyl group. The model further suggests that the hydrophobic dansyl
group interacts with the apolar environment formed by the fatty acyl
chains of lipid A. This would suggest that probe (1)
potentially binds to LPS in a similar configuration as polymyxin B,
which is coincident with its comparable antibacterial activity.

(A) Stereo
view of a superposition of the top 20 lowest energy
CYANA conformers of of probe (1). The backbone is shown
in red and the side chains are displayed as heavy atom representation.
The bridging side chain of Dab4 is shown in yellow. (B) Molecular
model of the probe (1)-LPS complex.

Imaging of Lipopeptide Probe Penetration into Gram-Negative
Bacteria
The penetration of probe (1) into K. pneumoniae ATCC 13883 cells was monitored by CLSM.
The membrane selective dye FM4–64 and the nucleic acid selective
dye SYTOX green were employed to visualize the outer membrane and
intracellular nucleic acid of the bacterial cells, respectively. The
time-lapse imaging studies revealed that probe (1) initially
accumulated in the outer membrane, penetrated the cell, and then became
homogenously distributed into the cytoplasm (Figures  and ; ). Notably, FM4–64 emission decreased after 14 min, suggesting
probe (1) disrupted the outer membrane integrity over
this time period (Figure ). Intriguingly,
confocal imaging and spectrophotometric lysis assay experiments with
spheroplasts isolated from K. pneumoniae ATCC 13883 revealed that probe (1) also accumulated
within and disrupted the inner membrane structure (). In order to observe any concentration-dependent
effects, the probe treated cells were visualized after treatment with
a low 0.5× MIC or high 5× MIC concentration (). The imaging results demonstrated
that at the lower sub-MIC concentration probe (1) tended
to accumulate on the surface of the bacterial cell and partly penetrated
into the outer membrane (), whereas at the high 5× MIC concentration, probe (1) accumulated on the surface of the bacterial cell and entered into
the cytoplasm ().

Confocal
laser scanning microscopy time-lapse imaging of K.
pneumoniae ATCC 13883 cells treated with probe
(1) at 5× MIC.

Laser scanning confocal microscopy time-lapse imaging of K. pneumoniae ATCC 13883 cells treated with probe
(1) at 5× MIC, the membrane probe FM4–64
and the nucleic acid selective probe SYTOX green.

Discussion
In recent times the world has seen the emergence
of bacterial pathogens
that are resistant to almost all available antibiotics.− Over the last 30 years only 2 novel antibiotic classes have been
introduced into the clinic (linezolid and daptomycin), illustrating
that the post-antibiotic era is fast approaching. Many pharmaceutical companies have lost interest in producing
new antibiotics, preferring to focus on the development of products
for the treatment of more profitable areas such as chronic conditions
and lifestyle issues. Consequently, there
has been a decline in the discovery and development of novel antibiotics,
and as a result we have seen the increasing emergence of MDR ‘superbugs’:
this dire situation has been dubbed the ‘perfect storm’. Currently, polymyxin B and colistin are being
used as the last-line therapy against life-threatening infections
caused by MDR Gram-negative bacterial infections.− Resistance to polymyxins can
rapidly emerge in vitro to P. aeruginosa, A. baumannii, and K. pneumoniae.−, Moreover, polymyxin
resistance in community and hospital acquired infections is being
increasingly reported.,− Unfortunately, polymyxin resistance indicates a total
lack of treatment options for these problematic Gram-negative infections.
Therefore, there is an urgent unmet medical need to develop new and
safer polymyxin lipopeptide antibiotics to combat the increasing incidence
of MDR pathogens, especially in the hospital setting. The time has
come for a global commitment to develop new antibiotics. This study
focuses on the development of fluorescent polymyxin probe with native
antibacterial activities, which may prove to be of considerable utility
for elucidating the penetration of polymyxins into the outer and inner
membranes of the Gram-negative bacterial cell.

This is the first
report of a polymyxin probe which maintains the
pharmacological properties of the parent compound polymyxin B. Previous
reports of polymyxin probes employed either inactive nonapeptide derivatives
or dansylated polymyxin B, which was derived by nonspecifically reacting
polymyxin B with dansyl-chloride.− Commercial preparations of 4-bora-3a,4a-diaza-s-indacene
(BODIPY) labeled polymyxin B displayed markedly reduced antibacterial
activity compared to polymyxin B. Moreover,
our group previously reported a fully synthetic [dansyl-Lys]1polymyxin B3 probe that was devoid of antibacterial activity. These findings are consistent with our understanding
of polymyxin SAR wherein the dansyl modification of the Dab side chains
inactivates antibacterial activity (Figure B). Here we present data that supports
our design strategy to employ total synthesis for the regioselective
incorporation of the dansyl group into the hydrophobic N-terminal center of the polymyxin B core scaffold, which has a minimal
impact on the native antibacterial activity of polymyxin B. The probe
we designed and synthesized displayed antibacterial and pharmacological
activity comparable to that of polymyxin B and colistin. Notably,
probe (1) displayed activity against polymyxin-resistant P. aeruginosa and A. baumannii strains (Table ). It is understood that
Gram-negative pathogens resist the action of polymyxins by introducing
cationic modifications onto the phosphate groups on the lipid A component
of LPS.− The most common mechanism involves esterification of lipid A phosphates
with aminoarabinose or ethanolamine.− This molecular tailoring serves to reduce the net negative charge
of the outer membrane surface, thereby repelling the electrostatic
attraction with positively charged polymyxin molecules. The molecular model of the probe (1)-LPS complex implies that the combination of the l-octylglycine
and the dansyl substituent at the N-terminus provides
additional hydrophobic interactive forces that compensate for the
electrostatic repulsion of the aminoarabinose phosphate modifications
(Figure B).

The key role of the outer
membrane of Gram-negative bacteria is
to act as a permeability barrier (Figure ,
step 1). Polymyxins are believed to exert
their primary antimicrobial mode of action by permeabilizing the Gram-negative
bacterial outer membrane via a direct interaction with the lipid A
component of the LPS. The disruptive effect of polymyxins on the outer
membrane is thought to involve a two-stage interaction mechanism.
In stage one, it is purported that the cationic side-chains of the
five Dab residues on the polymyxin molecule electrostatically bind
to the anionic phosphate groups on the lipid A core, thereby displacing
the divalent cations that normally bridge adjacent lipid A molecules
that serve to maintain membrane integrity (Figure , step 2).,− This initial electrostatic interaction allows the N-terminal fatty acyl chain of the polymyxin molecule to
insert into the fatty acyl chain layer of the lipid A molecules. This
‘self-promoted’ uptake mechanism is believed to produce
disruption of the outer membrane structures, which leads to bacterial
cell death (Figure , step 3).,− Subsequent events remain unclear; however, our group has recently
shown that polymyxin B and colistin inhibit the NDH-2 oxidoreductase
inner membrane respiratory enzyme, which also may contribute toward
their bactericidal effect (Figure , step 4). The CLSM time-lapse imaging results with probe
(1) help validate this mechanistic model. Based on the
imaging data, it is evident that polymyxins initially accumulate in
the outer membrane, followed by a gradual penetration into the inner
membrane and finally entering the cytoplasm in K. pneumoniae. These findings are consistent with the secondary mode of action
of polymyxin B which involves inhibitory activity against the inner
membrane NDH-2 enzyme. It will be most
interesting to elucidate the intracellular target(s) for the polymyxins,
which to date remain uncharacterized.

Schematic diagram depicting the putative
mode of action of polymyxins
at the levels of the outer and inner membranes of the Gram-negative
bacterial cell. Step 1: Polymyxins target the outer membrane
of Gram-negative bacteria. Step 2: The positively charged
polymyxins displace divalent cations that bridge adjacent LPS molecules.
Step 3: The electrostatic interactions weaken the stability
of the outer membrane and the hydrophobic insertion destabilizes the
outer membrane through hydrophobic expansion producing damage to the
outer membrane. Step 4: Polymyxins penetrate into the
inner membrane and inhibit the respiratory enzyme NDH-2.

In summary, for the first time we have designed and synthesized
a regioselectively modified dansyl polymyxin probe, which maintains
the pharmacological properties of the parent compound polymyxin B.
Our CLSM imaging data garnered with the novel polymyxin probe helps
confirm our mechanistic insights into the penetration of polymyxins
into the outer and inner membrane barriers of the Gram-negative bacterial
cell. These fundamental insights will help seed the foundations that
enable rational drug development around this important class of lipopeptide
antibiotics, which may be the answer to MDR ‘superbugs’.

Experimental
Procedures
Chemicals
Polymyxin B (sulfate), colistin (sulfate),
lipopolysaccharides (LPS), dansylglycine, triisopropylsilane (TIPS),
diphenylphosphorylazide (DPPA), and diisopropylethylamine (DIPEA)
were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (Sydney, NSW, Australia). All other
reagents were of the highest purity and commercially available. Stock
solutions of polymyxin B and colistin were prepared in Milli-Q water
(Millipore, North Ryde, NSW, Australia) and filtered through 0.22-μm
syringe filters (Sartorius, Melbourne, Vic, Australia). Solutions
were stored at 4 °C for up to one month. Piperidine, diisopropylethylamine (DIPEA), trifluoroacetic acid
(TFA), and 1H-benzotriazolium-1-[bis(dimethylamino)methylene]-5-chloro-hexafluorophosphate-(1)-3-oxide
(HCTU) were purchased from Auspep (Melbourne, Australia). Fmoc-Dab(Boc)-OH
and Fmoc-Dab(ivDde)-OH were obtained from Chem-Impex International
(USA). Fmoc-Thr(tBu)-OH was from Mimotopes (Melbourne, Australia).
Fmoc-OctGly-OH was obtained from Try-lead Chem (China). Dimethylformamide
(DMF), methanol (MeOH), diethyl ether, dichloromethane (DCM), hydrochloric
acid, and acetonitrile were obtained from Merck (Melbourne, VIC, Australia),
and Fmoc-Thr(tBu)-TCP-Resin from Intavis Bioanyltical Instruments,
Germany. Dodecylphosphocholine (purity &gt;99%) was purchased from
Avanti
Polar Lipids (USA, Alabama).

Synthesis of Polymyxin Probe (1)
Synthesis
of the protected linear peptide (residues 1–10 and N-terminal octylglycine) was carried out on a CEM Liberty
Microwave automated peptide synthesizer using standard Fmoc solid
phase peptide chemistry (). Specifically,
synthesis was undertaken using TCP-Resin, preloaded with Fmoc-Thr(tBu)-OH
(loading 0.78 mmol/g), 0.1 mmol scale (128 mg of resin). Coupling
of the Fmoc-amino acids was performed using the default instrument
protocol: 5 equiv (relative to resin loading) of Fmoc amino acid and
HCTU in DMF with activation in situ, using 10 equiv
of DIPEA. This was carried out for 2 min at room temperature, then
for 4 min at 50 °C (25W microwave power). Fmoc deprotection was
performed using the default instrument protocol: 20% piperidine in
dimethylformamide (1 × 30 s, 1 × 3 min) at 75 °C (35W
microwave power). The resin was then removed from the instrument and
transferred to a synthesis syringe for manual coupling of the dansylglycine.
This was carried out using 2 equiv (relative to the loading of the
resin) of dansylglycine, DIC, and HOBt, preactivated in 50% DCM/DMF
for 10 min followed by reaction for 1 h. The resin was washed with
DMF (4 × 2 min) then treated with 2% hydrazine in DMF (4 ×
15 min) to remove the ivDde group. The resin was washed with MeOH
(2 × 2 min) and diethyl ether (1 × 2 min), then air-dried
under vacuum suction. The protected linear peptide was then cleaved
from the resin by washing the resin with 1% TFA in DCM (1 × 5
min, 3 × 10 min). The resulting residue was dissolved in 50%
acetonitrile/water and freeze-dried overnight. The crude protected
linear peptide obtained was used in the next step without further
workup. The protected linear peptide was dissolved in DMF (10 mL)
to which DPPA, 0.3 mmol, 0.65 μL (3 equiv relative to the loading
of the resin), and DIPEA, 0.6 mmol, 104 μL (6 mol equiv relative
to the loading of the resin), were added. This solution was stirred
at room temperature overnight. The reaction solution was then concentrated
under vacuum overnight. The resulting residue was taken up in a solution
of 5% TIPS in TFA and stirred at room temperature for 1.5 h. The TFA
was removed under a stream of nitrogen and the crude cyclic peptide
precipitated with cold diethyl ether. The resulting precipitate was
collected by centrifugation and air-dried in a fume hood to give the
crude cyclic peptide as a residue. The resulting residue was taken
up in Milli-Q water and desalted using a Vari-Pure IPE SAX column.
The crude cyclic peptide was subjected to reversed-phase (RP) HPLC
purification. Fractions collected were analyzed by LC-MS performed
on a Shimadzu 2020 LCMS system, incorporating a photodiode array detector
(214 nm) coupled directly to an electrospray ionization source and
a single quadrupole mass analyzer. RP-HPLC was carried out employing
a Phenomenex column (Luna C8(2), 100 × 2.0 mm ID) eluting with
a gradient of 80% acetonitrile in 0.05% aqueous TFA, over 10 min at
a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min. Mass spectra were acquired in positive
ion mode with a scan range of 200–2000 m/z. Crude cyclic peptides were purified by RP-HPLC on a Agilent
1200 quaternary pump system, photodiode array detector (214 nm), employing
a Phenomenex Axia column (Luna C8(2), 50 × 21.3 mm ID) eluting
with a gradient of 60% acetonitrile in 0.1% aqueous TFA, over 60 min
at a flow rate of 5 mL/min. The combined fractions were freeze-dried
for two days to give the dansyl-polymyxin TFA salt as a white solid
in a yield of 19.0 mg. The purity was &gt;95% as estimated by RP-HPLC
at 214 nm. The identity of probe (1) was confirmed as
having the correct molecular weight by ESI-MS analysis: m/z (monoisotopic) calculated; C71H116N19O16S [M+H]+ 1523.86,
[M+2H]2+ 762.43, [M+3H]3+ 508.62. Observed:
[M+H]+ 1523.20, [M+2H]2+ 762.45, [M+3H]3+ 508.70.

Bacterial Strains and Growth Conditions
Bacterial strains
were purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas,
VA, USA). K. pneumonia ATCC 13883 was
used as a reference strain (colistin minimum inhibitory concentration
(MIC) 0.5 μg/mL). A paired colistin-resistant strain (colistin
MIC &gt; 128 μg/mL) was selected from this reference strain
in
the presence of 10 mg/L colistin. All bacteria were stored at −80
°C in tryptone soya broth (TSB, Oxoid Australia). Prior to experiments,
parent strains were subcultured onto nutrient agar plates (Medium
Preparation Unit, University of Melbourne, VIC, Australia). Overnight
broth cultures were subsequently grown in 5 mL of cation-adjusted
Mueller-Hinton broth (CaMHB, Oxoid, Adelaide, SA, Australia), from
which a 1 in 100 dilution was performed in fresh broth to prepare
mid-logarithmic cultures according to the optical density at 500 nm
(OD500 nm = 0.4 to 0.6). All broth cultures were incubated
at 37 °C in a shaking incubator (180 rpm).

Determination
of MICs and Static Killing Kinetics
The
MICs against K. pneumoniae, A. baumannii, and P. aeruginosa strains were determined by the broth microdilution method. Experiments were performed with CaMHB in 96-well
polypropylene microtiter plates. Wells were inoculated with 100 μL
of bacterial suspension prepared in CaMHB (containing ∼106 colony forming units (cfu) per mL) and 100 μL of CaMHB
containing increasing concentrations of polymyxins (0 to 128 mg/L).
The MICs were defined as the lowest concentration at which visible
growth was inhibited following 18 h incubation at 37 °C. To determine
the killing kinetics by probe (1), time-kill experiments
of K. pneumoniae ATCC 13883 at initial
inoculum ∼106 and ∼108 cfu/mL
were performed as previously described. Briefly, samples were treated with 0.5 × and 5 × MIC as
indicated and incubated in a shaking water bath at 37 °C. Viable
counting was performed on samples (50 μL) collected at 1, 2,
4, 8, and 24 h. Colistin treatment was used as control. At the indicated
time points, aliquots of treated cells were harvested, suitable dilutions
were performed, and then the cells were plated onto nutrient agar
plates by a WASP2 spiral plater (Don Whitley Scientific Ltd., United
Kingdom). After overnight incubation of the plates at 35 °C,
cfu values were enumerated by a ProtoCOL colony counter (Don Whitley
Scientific Ltd., United Kingdom). The limit of detection was 20 cfu/mL
(equivalent to 1 colony per plate), whereas the limit of quantification
was 400 cfu/mL (equivalent to 20 colonies per plate).

NMR Solution-State
Structure Determination in Dodecylphosphocholine
(DPC) Micelles and Modeling of the Probe-LPS Complex
NMR Spectroscopy
All NMR experiments were conducted
on a Bruker AVANCE NMR spectrometer operating at a field strength
of 14.1 T equipped with a cryoprobe and a Z axis gradient. For experiments
recorded in water, 1–3 mM probe (1) was dissolved
into 330 μL of 50 mM acetate buffer, pH 4.5, containing 90%
H2O/10% D2O and placed in a Shigemi microcell.
2D TOCSY (mixing time 30 and 80 ms), 2D 13C HSQC, 2D multiplicity
edited 13C HSQC, 2D 13C H2BC, and 2D NOESY (mixing
times 200 - 400 ms) were recorded at 25 °C. A 3–9–19 WATERGATE sequence was used for
solvent suppression in the homonuclear experiments and gradients were
used to select coherences in the heteronuclear experiments. For experiments recorded in n-dodecylphosphocholine (DPC) micelles, 1–2 mM probe (1) was dissolved in the same buffer as previously and included
150 mM deuterated DPC (d38-DPC) (Novachem, VIC, Australia).
Chemical shifts were referenced to 2,2-dimethyl-2-silapentane-5-sulfonic
acid. Samples were vortexed prior to acquisition and the following
experiments recorded at 20 °C; 2D TOCSY (mixing time 50 ms),
2D 13C HSQC, 2D multiplicity edited 13C HSQC,
and 2D NOESY (mixing times 50 - 200 ms). NMR data was processed using
NMRPipe and anaylsed using SPARKY (http://www.cgl.ucsf.edu/home/sparky/) or XEASY., LPS from E. coli 0111:B4 Sigma-Aldrich (Sydney, NSW, Australia) was titrated into
NMR samples by the addition of small volumes from a freshly vortexed
stock solution containing 4.4 mg LPS dissolved in 50 μL acetate
buffer, pH 4.5. Samples were vortexed prior to NMR acquisition and
signal perturbations followed by recording 1D 1H spectra
with WATERGATE for solvent suppression.

Structure Calculations
Structure calculations were
performed using restrained simulated annealing in torsion angle space
using the program CYANA 2.1. NOEs in
the 2D NOESY data (150 ms mixing time) were assigned using the automated
assignment protocol NOEASSIGN. Nonstandard residues were built and
minimized using MAESTRO (http://www.schröinger.com) and new library entries written for the dansyl, Dab, and octylglycine
residues. The sign of the y coordinate was swapped
for residues with inverted (D) chirality at the CA position. 200 structures
were calculated in each of the seven cycles and the top 20 selected
based on lowest overall target function. No ’rama’ potential
was included in the structure calculations. Structures were visualized
using MOLMOL.

Modeling of the Probe (1)-LPS Complex
The model of probe (1) in complex with LPS was constructed
using Accelrys Discovery Studio v 2.1 (Accelrys, San Diego, CA). The
coordinates of the NMR solution structure of PmB when bound to E. coli LPS were obtained from Pristovsek and Kidric and the dansyl-group was modeled onto the structure.
The coordinates of E. coli LPS were
derived from the crystal structure of FhuA, the receptor for ferrichrome-iron
in E. coli with bound LPS (PDB code:1QFF)., The
modeled probe structure was manually docked onto the LPS molecule
and the complex was energy minimized in vacuum. The modeling process
took into account the electrostatic interactions between the positively
charged Dab amine groups on polymyxin scaffold and the negatively
charged phosphoester groups on the lipid A, and in addition maximized
the reduction of solvent-exposed hydrophobic area on all molecules.
Molecular representations were rendered using the POVRAY software
package Persistence of Vision Raytracer (Version 3.6; http://www.povray.org).

Confocal Laser Scanning Microscopy (CLSM)
CLSM was
performed using a LSM 780, Carl Zeiss Microscope (Jena, Germany).
The bacterial cells were washed and reconstituted with 10 mM Tris-HCl
(pH 7.5) to make suspension of ∼108cfu/mL. The cells
were stained with FM4–64 (1.26 μM) and SYTOX green (2.5
μM) (Invitrogen, Life Technologies, Mulgrave, VIC, Australia)
for 5 min as suggested by the manufacturer, and probe (1) for 1 h. There was no deleterious effect
on growth of the organisms at these concentrations of FM4–64
or SYTOX green (data not shown). The cells were fixed with 3.5% paraformaldehyde
and kept at 4 °C until microscopic examination. Fluorophore excitations
were induced with 405, 488, and 561 nm wavelength lasers for probe
(1), SYTOX green, and FM4–64, respectively; and
images were collected at 455–490 nm, 516–551 nm, and
647–690 nm correspondingly. There was no autofluorescence detected,
nor cross detection of the probes with these collection parameters.
The uptake of probe (1) was studied in a time-lapse experiment
using a DeltaVision Elite System (GE Healthcare Company, Washington,
US) in a heated chamber at 35 °C. The cells were pretreated with
FM4–64 and SYTOX green, and then embedded on a 1% agarose pad
containing 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5. The probe (1) was delivered
at the edge of gel and the images were taken within ∼5 mm of
the edge. Images were collected every 1 min. Three standard filter
sets were employed: the 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole filter (for detection
of probe (1), 360–400 nm excitation and 457–507
nm emission), the A594 filter (for detection of FM4–64, 575–600
nm excitation and 632–692 nm emission), and the fluorescein
isothiocyanate filter (for detection of SYTOX green, 461–489
nm excitation and 501–549 nm emission). These filters were chosen to avoid cross detection between
the probes.

Cell Lysis Assay
To study the activity
of probe (1) on the inner membrane a spectrophotometric
spheroplast
lysis assay was employed as previously described with minor modifications. Briefly, spheroplasts were prepared from midlogarithmic
phase K. pneumoniae ATCC 13883 cells
using the lysozyme-EDTA method, and resuspended
in 100 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7.5) containing 20% sucrose to an OD500 nm of ∼1. Following lipopeptide treatment,
spheroplast lysis was followed by monitoring the decrease in absorbance
at 500 nm every 15 s for 1 h. Taurocholic acid treatment was employed
as a control.

Electron Microscopy
Approximately
108 cfu/mL
of K. pneumoniae ATCC 13883 midlog
phase culture were treated with probe (1) at 0.5×
and 5× MIC for 1 h. For transmission electron microscopy, the
cells were fixed in 1% osmium tetroxide in 100 mM phosphate buffer
(pH 7.5) for 1 h. The cells were rinsed three times in 100 mM phosphate
buffer (pH 7.5) for 10 min, and then dehydrated in increasing concentrations
of ethanol. The cells were infiltrated with increasing concentrations
of LR white resin in ethanol consisting of 25, 50, 75, and 100% (w/v)
resin for 6 h per step. After a second change of 100% (w/v) resin,
cells were embedded in fresh resin in gelatin capsules and allowed
to gently sink to the bottom to form a loose pellet. The gelatin capsules
were capped to exclude air and the resin polymerized in an oven at
60 °C for 24 h. The embedded cells in blocks were sectioned using
a diamond knife on a Leica Ultracut R microtome and ultrathin sections
of 90 nm were collected onto pioloform-coated 100 mesh hexagonal copper
grids. Grid sections were sequentially stained with saturated uranyl
acetate for 10 min and Triple Lead Stain for 5 min. Cells were viewed in a Phillips CM120 Biotwin transmission
electron microscope at 120 kV. Images were captured with a GatanMultiskan
600 CW digital camera at a resolution of 1024 × 1024 pixels.

Supporting Information Available
Figure S1 shows the general
scheme for the solid-phase synthesis of the dansyl-polymyxin probe
(1). Figure S2 shows the static time-kill kinetics of
probe (1) and colistin against K. pneumoniae ATCC 13883. Figure S3 shows the 2D NOESY spectrum of proble (1) in water and DPC micelles. Figure S4 shows laser scanning
confocal microscopy imaging of K. pneumoniae ATCC 13883 cells following treatment with probe (1),
SYTOX green, and FM4–64. Figure S5 shows spectrophotmetric
and CLSM imaging of spheroplastlysis of K. pneumoniae ATCC 13883 following treatment with probe (1). Movie
S1 shows the time-lapse confocal imaging of the penetration of probe
(1) into K. pneumoniae ATCC 13883 cells. Tables S1 and S2 document 1H and 13C observed chemical shifts for probe (1) in
buffer and when bound to DPC micelles. Table S3 documents NMR statistics.
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc500094d_si_001.avi

bc500094d_si_002.pdf

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
J.L.,
T.V., R.L.N., P.E.T., and K.D.R. are supported by a
research grant from the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases of the National Institutes of Health (R01AI098771). J.L.,
T.V., R.L.N., and P.E.T. are also supported by the Australian National
Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC). The content is solely
the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent
the official views of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases or the National Institutes of Health. J.L. is an Australian
NHMRC Senior Research Fellow. T.V. is an Australian NHMRC Industry
Career Development Level 1 Research Fellow.

Abbreviations
BODIPY4-bora-3a,4a-diaza-s-indacene

cfucolony forming units

CaMHBcation-adjusted Mueller-Hinton
broth

DMFdimethylformamide

DPPAdiphenylphosphorylazide

DIPEAdiisopropylethylamine

DCMdichloromethane

Dabdiaminobutyric
acid

HSQCheteronuclear
single quantum coherence

LPSlipopolysaccharide

MeOHmethanol

MICminimum inhibitory concentration

MDRmultidrug resistant

NOESYnuclear Overhauser effect spectroscopy

TFAtrifluoroacetic
acid

TIPStriisopropylsilane

TOCSYtotal correlation
spectroscopy

WATERGATEwater suppression by gradient tailored excitation

