Introduction
Doxorubicin (Dox) is
widely used for treating breast cancer and
other malignancies; however, serious toxicities, including an occasionally
lethal cardiotoxicity, counter the therapeutic benefit of Dox, resulting
in a search for chemical modifications that attenuate systemic toxicities
while maintaining strong antitumor activity. The principal cytotoxic mechanism of Dox is poisoning of DNA topoisomerase
2 (Top2) which results in generation of lethal DNA double strand breaks
(DSBs). Dox also undergoes REDOX cycling
and increases oxidative stress following cell uptake. Recent studies
have indicated that Dox cardiotoxicity results from an on-target effect,
the poisoning of Top 2 in cardiomyocytes. Hence, strategies to improve the therapeutic index of Dox require
prolonged sequestration of Dox while in circulation and efficient
Dox release following selective uptake into targeted cancer cells.
We describe here a new approach for Dox delivery to cancer cells that
takes advantage of the selective chemical reactivity of a single-site
in a DNA hairpin to create a novel Dox-conjugated DNA hairpin (DCH)
with favorable Dox retention and release properties and that is targeted
to breast cancer cells via folic acid conjugation.

DNA is central
to biological function as the repository of genetic
information, but DNA also has tremendous potential as a material with
diverse potential functions, including drug delivery. Our laboratory
has demonstrated the utility of DNA for delivery of cytotoxic nucleotide
analogs with F10, a polymer of the thymidylate synthase (TS) inhibitory
nucleotide 5-fluoro-2′-deoxyuridine-5′-O-monophosphate (FdUMP) displaying enhanced antileukemic activity
and reduced systemic toxicity relative to conventional fluoropyrimidine
drugs such as 5-fluorouracil (5-FU)., We recently
demonstrated the potential for DNA hairpins to be useful for drug
delivery with involvement of both the major and minor grooves as well
as the duplex region of the hairpin. We have shown that cytotoxicity
can be modulated by inclusion of minor groove binding ligands, such
as netropsin or distamycin, while Zn2+, a metal ion that
displays anticancer activity, can occupy the major groove in DNA hairpins
appropriately substituted with FdU nucleotides in the stem., Hence, not only are the chemical properties of DNA of potential
use for drug delivery, but its structural diversity may also be utilized
for drug delivery applications.

Dox interacts with DNA via intercalation
of the tetracene ring
system between the planar base pairs of duplex DNA and occupation
of the minor groove by the daunosamine sugar moiety. Noncovalent binding of Dox to DNA is, however, readily
reversible, and noncovalent complexes have relatively short half-lives
(t1/2 ∼ minutes). Nonetheless,
in clinical trials noncovalent association of Dox with calf-thymus
DNA reduced Dox cardiotoxicity and improved the therapeutic index. Dox also forms covalent adducts with DNA that
are more stable but require an aldehyde precursor to link the daunosamine
sugar of Dox to the exocyclic amine of guanine with the reaction proceeding
via a Schiff base intermediate., Dox–DNA covalent
adducts are more cyotoxic than noncovalent complexes, and covalent
adducts have been synthesized and used as end-points in studies of
anthracycline cytotoxicity. Formaldehyde
is used in the formation of Dox–DNA adducts, and exogenous
formaldehyde promotes Dox covalent adduct formation to genomic DNA.
Dox–formaldehyde conjugates have been prepared and used for
delivery of an activated form of Dox that favors covalent adduct formation
to genomic DNA.

We describe here
the synthesis of a covalent conjugate of Dox to
a single site of a DNA hairpin and demonstrate that this conjugate
can be targeted to breast cancer cells. Dox covalent binding to DNA
occurs primarily at N2 of guanines with sequence specificity for 5′-dGpC
sites, suggesting a 3D conformation that facilitates covalent binding. Our studies utilized a 25mer DNA hairpin that
included a GAA hairpin-promoting sequence closed by a CG base pair
with the stem consisting of 10 dA-dT base pairs (Figure 1). Although
the hairpin included two dG sites, using 2D NMR in conjunction with
site-specific labeling we determined only G15 in the GAA hairpin promoting
motif formed a covalent adduct with Dox (Figure 2). Molecular modeling
suggested that G15 N2 was not engaged in alternative interactions
stabilizing the hairpin and that the tetracene ring system intercalated
between the CG and first AT base pairs (Figure 3). The Dox-conjugated
hairpin was exceedingly stable with a half-life of ∼30 h at
physiological pH while the noncovalent complex had a half-life of
minutes (Figure 4). Dox was however efficiently released at the acidic
pH of endosomes following cell uptake (Figure 5). Folic acid conjugation
of the hairpin resulted in cell-specific uptake into breast cancer
cells and selective cytotoxicity toward targeted cells (Figure 6).
These results demonstrate the utility of DNA hairpin conjugates for
the improved delivery of Dox and other anticancer drugs.

Reversible
reaction between Doxorubicin and the exocyclic amino
of Guanine in DNA mediated through formaldehyde. Red “G”
in the secondary structure of the hairpin denotes potential sites
of Dox reactivity.

(A) UV–vis absorbance
spectra for equmiolar amounts of Dox
and DCH. Equal absorbance at 480 nm is consistent with the DCH complex
being of 1:1 stoichiometry. (B) M-Dox peak of MW 7727 corresponds
to the unreacted parent DNA, while the M+ peak of MW 8283 is obtained
by the addition of Dox (MW 543) and CH2 (MW 14) −2H
lost as water. (C) Overlay of 1H–15N
HSQC displaying the N2 of G12 and G15 from two independent singly
labeled samples. Blue and green peaks represent the G12 amino before
and after reaction with Dox, respectively. Black and red peaks represent
the G15 amino before and after reaction, respectively.

Secondary structure and molecular model of the DCH. Dox
is bound
to N2 of G12 and intercalated between the G15:C11 and A10:T16 base
pairs. The lower 9 AT base pairs of the stem have been truncated for
simplicity. Structures are colored as follows: guanine, green; adenine,
red; thymine, yellow; cytosine, blue; Dox, light blue; methylene linker,
white; DNA backbone, brown. (A–C) 3D modeling of the DCH structure.
(D) 3D model of the unreacted hairpin.

Fluorescence quenching of DCH displays a ∼50% reduction
in fluorescence after 30 h, while noncovalent complexes display greater
than 50% reduction in fluorescence within 1 h (data not shown). Error
bars represent standard deviation of the mean of three measurements.
Assuming zero-order kinetics, the rate constant is k = 1.15 × 10–11 M/s.

(A) Fluorescence microscopy of 4T1 cells treated with either untargeted
or folate-targeted DCH. (B) Quantification of Dox fluorescence from
4T1 cells. Error bars represent standard deviation from the mean of
at least 30 measurements. A Student’s two-tailed t test was used to determine significance.

Targeting DCH with folic acid (DCH-FA) significantly increases
the cytotoxicity of the DCH construct toward 4T1 breast cancer cells.
Error bars represent standard deviation from the mean with four replicates
of each condition. A Student’s two-tailed t test was used to determine significance (i.e., p &lt; 0.05)— *significantly different from control; Δsignificantly different from DCH-FA.

Experimental Section
Materials
All nonlabeled hairpin
DNA sequences were
synthesized by IDT (Coralville, Iowa, USA). Isotopically labeled hairpins
were synthesized by the DNA core lab at Wake Forest University. Clinical
samples of doxorubicin (Dox) used for cell assays and DCH synthesis
were obtained from the Wake Forest Baptist hospital pharmacy. Cu2+-Tris[(1-benzyl-1H-1,2,3-triazol-4-yl)methyl]amine
(Cu2+-TBTA) was obtained from Lumiprobe (Hallandale Beach,
Florida, USA). All media for cell culture was obtained from the Wake
Forest University Cell and Viral Vector Core Lab. All other chemicals
were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich and used as received.

Synthesis of
DCH
A 0.37% (by weight) solution of formaldehyde
was prepared by dissolving paraformaldehyde in Dulbecco’s Phosphate
Buffered Saline without calcium or magnesium (PBS) pH 7.4. Doxorubicin
was added to 4 °C formaldehyde–PBS to obtain a final doxorubicin
concentration of 250 μM. DNA hairpin loops were prepared as
previously reported by heating and flash-cooling
of the DNA to favor intramolecular hairpin formation over dimerization.
Hairpins were added to the Dox–formaldehyde solution to obtain
a final hairpin concentration of 100 μM. Reactions were allowed
to proceed at 10 °C in the dark for 48 h. DCHs were purified
by extracting twice with phenol/chloroform and twice with chloroform.
This extraction removes unreacted dox from the solution. After extraction,
DCHs were ethanol-precipitated and recovered by centrifugation. Pellets
were rinsed twice with 70% ethanol and 100% ethanol to remove any
residual formaldehyde. Pellets were then evaporated to dryness under
reduced pressure. The red–pink pellets were then resuspended
in water. A Beckman Coulter DU 800 was used to measure absorption
at 260 nm. Yields were typically 70–80% for the conjugate as
measured by UV absorbance at 260 nm. All products were stored at −20
°C.

Synthesis of Alkyne Functionalized Folic Acid
Alkyne
functionalized folic acid was synthesized similarly to previously
reported methods., Briefly, folic acid (100 mg,
0.227 mmol) was dissolved into 10 mL of DMF and stirred with a magnetic
stirrer and cooled in an ice bath for 30 min before proceeding. 1-Ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide
HCl (EDC) (38.7 mg, 0.249 mmol) was added to the stirred solution
and allowed to react for 30 min. N-Hydroxysuccinimide
(NHS) (31.4, 0.272 mmol) was then added to the reaction vessel and
stirred for an additional 30 min. Propargyl amine (25 mg, 0.454 mmol)
was then added to the reaction, which was warmed to room temperature
and allowed to react for 24 h. 10 mL of 1:1 diethyl ether/chloroform
was added to the reaction vessel, which precipitated the yellow–orange
product. This was collected and washed three times with chloroform,
diethyl ether, and water. The product was dried under vacuum overnight.
Yield 69 mg (64%). 1H NMR (DMSO-d6, ppm): 11.06 (−OH), 8.64 (PteridineC7H), 8.29–8.24 (−CONH-CH2C≡CH), 8.04 (−CONHCHCO2H), 7.67–7.65 (Ph–C2H and Ph–C6H), 6.94 (−NH2), 6.64 (Ph–C3H and Ph–C5H), 4.48 (PteridineC6–CH2NH-Ph), 4.31 (−CONHCHCO2H), 3.81 (−CONH-CH2C≡CH), 3.08 (−CONH–CH2C≡CH), 1.98–1.96
(−CHCH2CH2), 1.87–1.85 (−CHCH2CH2, 2H).

Synthesis of FA-DCH
Hairpin with
a 5′ terminal
azide was used for the synthesis of FA-DCH. 45 μL of a 100 μM
solution of the hairpin was added to a 500 μL centrifuge tube.
To this 10 μL (pH = 7, 2 M) of triethylamine/acetic acid buffer
was added and mixed. 45 μL DMSO was then added to the solution
and mixed well. 4.5 μL of a 10 mM solution of alkyne functionalized
folic acid was added to the solution, mixed, and bubbled with Ar for
15 min. 10 μL of 5 mM ascorbic acid in water was added to the
solution followed by 5 μL of Cu2+-TBTA. The reaction
was mixed and bubbled with Ar for 15 min before sealing the tube and
being placed in the dark at room temperature for 24 h. FA-DCH was
purified similarly to DCH. The hairpin was precipitated using 4×
volume ethanol and 25 μL PBS and was cooled at −20 °C
for 30 min. The hairpin was recovered by centrifugation at 13 000
× g for 30 min. The pellet was rinsed 2×
with 70% EtOH and 2× with 100% EtOH and dried under reduced pressure.
The pellet was resuspended with 500 μL PBS and was dialyzed
against PBS using a Slide-a-Lyzer 2 kDa MW cutoff dialysis cassette
(Pierce) for 6 h to remove unreacted propargyl-folate. The retained
solution was collected and quantified via UV–vis spectroscopy,
with a final yield of 53%.

Doxorubicin–DNA Conjugate Ratio Measurements
DNA samples were prepared to 10 μM in dH2O and
absorbencies
were measured from 200 to 800 nm using a Beckman Coulter DU800 spectrophotometer.
A standard curve of Dox was established between 1 μM and 10
μM by using absorbance at 494 nm. To assess the amount of Dox
covalently bound to DNA, the samples were heated to 85 °C before
measuring the absorbance at 494 nm. The 260 nm wavelength was used
to determine the DNA content in the sample and to determine the Dox:DNA
ratio.

Mass Spectrometry
Negative ion mass spectra were acquired
using a Waters Q-TOF API-US mass spectrometer equipped with an Advion
Nanomate source. Samples were diluted to about 5 μM with methanol/water/2-propanol
(49:49:2, v:v:v). Backing pressure and sprayer voltage were optimized
for each analysis, but were usually about 0.8 psi and 1.2 kV, respectively.
The cone voltage was 35 V. The scan range from 525 m/z to 1600 m/z with an acquisition time of 1.2 s. Spectra were summed for 0.5 min
for MaxEnt transform. The nucleotide GCATCCTGGAAAGCTACCTT, M–
= 6366.1, at 0.6 μM was used to monitor instrument performance.
Spectra were analyzed using MassLynx 4.0.

NMR Spectroscopy
NMR samples were prepared in 50 mM
sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.0, with 10% D2O, and a final
volume of 250 μL. All NMR spectra were acquired using a Bruker
Avance 600 MHz spectrometer at 10 °C using a TXI Cryoprobe. NOESY
spectra were acquired with a 100 ms mixing time and 3–9–19
Watergate water suppression with a 220 μs interpulse delay.
HSQC spectra were acquired using a 110 μs 3–9–19
interpulse delay and the 15N transmitter set to 150 ppm
for imino groups and to 75 ppm for amino groups (indirectly referenced
to water at 4.7 ppm). Data were processed using NMRPipe and analyzed using NMRView.

3D Modeling of DCH
A PDB file of
the hairpin molecule
was obtained from the Protein Data Base under entry 1JVE. A PDB file of Dox was obtained from the Protein Data Base
under entry DM2. Files were loaded into Pymol, and
the hairpin was modified to contain only 5′-ACGAAGT-3′.
The models were then manipulated spatially to allow for a covalent
bond to form between the N2 amino of G12 and the daunosamine of Dox.
Hydrogens were added to the entire model using the Molefacture plugin
vmd. The doxorubicin was then geometry
optimized in the presence of the DNA using PM6 as implemented in Gaussian 09.

Dox Transfer from DCH
Samples of 2.5 μM (approximately
2 μg in 100uL) DCH, doxorubicin, or hairpin+doxorubicin were
prepared in DPBS with or without a 100-fold by weight (200 μg)
excess of Salmon Sperm DNA and incubated at 37 °C. Fluorescence
intensity was determined by Typhoon-9210 variable mode imager with
excitation set to 532 nm and the emission filter at 610 nm.

Acid
Dissociation of Dox from DCH
DCH was suspended
in either pH 7.4 PBS or pH 4 PBS buffer and incubated at 37 °C
for 1 h. After incubation, the solutions were extracted with 2×
volume phenol/chloroform and twice with 2× volume chloroform.
The absorbance of the aqueous phase at 498 nm was measured. The experiment
was repeated in triplicate. The results were normalized to the pH
7.4 sample with error bars representing the standard deviation of
the mean of the three replicates.

Microscopy
4T1
cells were seeded at 20 000 cells/well
in 8-well Lab-Tek II chambered #1.5 German Coverglass System (Thermo
Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA), and incubated at 37 °C under
5% CO2 for 24 h prior to treatment. Cells were incubated
with 1 μM of DCH, FA-DCH, or Dox in DMEM medium with 10% dialyzed
fetal bovine serum for either 1 or 4 h at 37 °C. Cells were then
washed with fresh media and Dulbecco’s PBS. Cells were visualized
using a Zeiss LSM510 confocal microscope (Carl Zeiss, Oberkochen,
Germany) using Dox as the fluorescent probe. Internalization of Dox
was quantified using ImageJ software with at least 30 observations
per treatment. Fluorescence intensity values were then converted to
% controls using nontreated cells. The mean of the intensities was
found and standard deviation was determined. Significance was determined
using a two-tailed Student’s t test.

Cytotoxicity
4T1 cells were grown in DMEM media containing
10% dialyzed FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin, at 37 °C and
5% CO2. 4T1 cells were plated at 5000 cell per well in
96 well plates in 100 μL media and incubated for 24 h. Cells
were treated with 200 nM of either DCH, Dox, or FA-DCH for 72 h with
4 replicates of each treatment used to determine means and standard
deviation. CellTiter-Glo luminescent cell viability assay (Promega)
was implemented according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Significance
was determined using a two-tailed Student’s t test.

Results
Site-Specific Dox Conjugation
of a DNA Hairpin
The
DNA hairpin used for these studies includes two guanines (Figure ) either of which may in principle be a site for
Dox conjugation. Dox conjugates have been previously described for
guanines engaged in GC base pairs; however, the chemical reactivity
of the GAA sequence motif used to promote intramolecular hairpin formation
has not been previously investigated. UV spectroscopy studies (Figure A) revealed that Dox conjugation occurred with 1:1
stoichiometry even in cases where reaction conditions permitted formation
of conjugates of 2:1 or higher stoichiometry. The 1:1 stoichiometry
of the conjugates was further demonstrated using ESI-QTOF mass spectrometry
(Figure B). Mass spectrometry analysis also
confirmed that the conjugation occurred via a methylene bridge derived
from formaldehyde consistent with reaction proceeding via a Schiff
base intermediate. To determine to what extent each of the two guanines
in the hairpin were adducted in the conjugate, we synthesized the
hairpin site-specifically 15N-labeled at either G12 or
G15 and formed Dox conjugates with both species and analyzed each
for chemical adduction based on chemical shift changes in 2D [1H–15N] NMR spectra (Figure C). Substantial 15N chemical shift changes were
only detected for the hairpin labeled at G12 (72.6 → 84.5 ppm),
consistent with this site selectively undergoing chemical modification
upon adduct formation. This represents the first time that we are
aware of that Dox covalent bonding has been observed in a hairpin
loop region of DNA. G15, which is engaged in a GC base pair that closes
the loop, underwent substantial change in 1H (5.8 →
9.7 ppm) but not 15N chemical shift (72.8 → 75.0
ppm) consistent with this site undergoing changes in chemical environment,
but not chemical structure, upon Dox conjugation. Subsequent molecular
modeling studies revealed the CG based pair was stacked with the tetracene
ring system of Dox in the resulting conjugate (vide infra).

Molecular
Model of Dox-Conjugated Hairpin
We then sought
to create a working model for the structure of the Dox-conjugated
hairpin (Figure ) using the data collected
from the 15N-edited 2D NMR and using a NMR structure of
the hairpin loop characterized by Ulyanov et al. as the starting point for model development. The hydrogen
shifts of G15 could be caused by intercalation of Dox in the covalent
complex, as shifts of amino protons to ∼10 ppm have been attributed
to increased hydrogen bonding in quadruplex DNA. Preliminary data also showed that the amino of G15 displayed
several NOEs consistent with Dox localizing in the stem region of
the hairpin (). Pymol was used to edit
the DNA from the previous NMR structure to contain only the loop region
and the first AT base pair. We then manipulated a model of Dox into
a position that brought the amino hydrogens of G12 and Dox into close
proximity, allowing for the formation of a methylene bridge between
the amino nitrogens. This placement also allowed Dox to intercalate
between the C11-G15 base pair and the first AT base pair in the stem
of the DNA (Figure A,B). Modeling revealed
that the simultaneous covalent binding at G12 and intercalation of
Dox between the A10:T16 and C11:G15 occurred with minimal distortion
to the structure of the hairpin loop (Figure C,D). The daunosamine sugar is of appropriate dimensions to span
the distance between the sites of covalent binding and intercalation
and the amino group of G12 is not engaged in hydrogen bonding interactions
that contribute significantly to the structure and stability of the
hairpin loop. Intercalation of the tetracene ring alters local base
stacking for the proximal base pairs but does not disrupt hydrogen
bonding interactions (Figure D).

Stability of
Dox–Hairpin Conjugate
We hypothesized
that covalent binding of Dox would allow for the Dox-conjugated hairpin
to serve as a delivery vehicle with improved pharmacological properties
and reduced systemic toxicities relative to conventional Dox. In order
for the hairpin to act as an efficient delivery vehicle, Dox must
remain stably bound under physiological conditions, but also undergo
intracellular release and transfer to genomic DNA. Interestingly,
Dox retains most of its fluorescent activity in the hairpin, but not
in larger DNA molecules which are known to quench the fluorescence
of the drug (). We hypothesized that as the Dox–hairpin bond is hydrolyzed,
the free Dox could intercalate into larger DNA molecules, quenching
the fluorescence. Using the difference in fluorescence between hairpin
bound Dox and Dox intercalated into DNA, we can measure the half-life
of the Dox–hairpin bond. We developed an assay to quantify
the transfer of Dox from the hairpin to genomic DNA under physiologic
conditions. This assay is based on the difference in fluorescence
of Dox in the context of the hairpin conjugate relative to genomic
DNA. The hairpin conjugate, free-Dox, or the noncovalent complex (e.g.,
hairpin+Dox) were mixed with 100-fold excess of salmon sperm DNA (spDNA;
w/w) to simulate genomic DNA. Reactions were incubated at 37 °C
with fluorescence quenching measured over 48 h. No fluorescence loss
was observed in samples that lacked spDNA, while fluorescence was
fully quenched within one hour following addition of spDNA for both
free Dox and the noncovalent complex. The rate of loss of fluorescence
quenching was, however, significantly reduced for the hairpin conjugate
with 50% quenching occurring at 30.4 h (Figure ). Using t1/2 of 30.4 h and assuming
zero-order kinetics, the rate constant is 1.15–11 M/s. Given that the noncovalent hairpin+Dox complex undergoes rapid
quenching, intercalation into the hairpin cannot be solely responsible
for the increased chemical stability of the hairpin conjugate. Covalent
Dox dimers formed using formaldehyde have been shown to be readily
hydrolyzable under physiological conditions, resulting in complete
disassociation of Dox and formaldehyde release within ∼15 min. Thus, it is likely that a combination of both
intercalation and covalent bonding is responsible for the substantially
increased stability for the Dox-conjugated hairpin relative to the
noncovalent complex and alternative Dox covalent complexes. We hypothesize
that the covalent linkage acts as a tether between the Dox and DNA,
and that when the bond is hydrolyzed, intercalation holds the resulting
amine and Schiff-base in close proximity allowing for them to reform
the covalent linkage. At physiological pH, equilibrium favors reforming
the covalent complex, while at acidic pH, for example, in endosomes,
equilibrium disfavors reforming the covalent linkage and instead results
in release of Dox from the intercalated complex.

Targeted Uptake
and Enhanced Cytotoxicity to Breast Cancer Cells
Cellular
uptake of exogenous DNA can be highly efficient if uptake
occurs via receptor-mediated processes. Our initial studies with the
Dox-conjugated hairpin indicated uptake into breast cancer cells was
less efficient than for F10, a single-stranded DNA investigated in
our previous studies. As our previous studies demonstrated that conjugation
with folic acid improved F10 uptake into drug-resistant colon cancer
cells, we investigated whether conjugating
the Dox-hairpin at the 5′-terminus with folic acid would improve
uptake into 4T1 breast cancer cells. Folic acid conjugation of the
hairpin resulted in significantly increased cellular uptake relative
to the nonconjugated hairpin based upon increased Dox fluorescence
into 4T1 breast cancer cells (Figure ). Dox
fluorescence was initially localized in endosomes () consistent with cellular internalization via an endocytic
process and with release of Dox at the acidic pH of endosomes. Folic
acid conjugation also increased the cytotoxicity of the Dox-conjugated
hairpin toward 4T1 cells consistent with both improved cell uptake
and efficient Dox release (Figure ). The results
demonstrate that, while the Dox-conjugated hairpin has markedly improved
stability at physiological pH relative to the corresponding noncovalent
complex, the conjugate is highly effective at the intracellular release
of Dox following cell uptake.

Discussion
DNA
is central to biology as the predominant carrier of genetic
information; however, the physical and chemical properties of DNA
make it highly useful as a material for numerous applications including
use for drug delivery. These studies have demonstrated that a simple
DNA hairpin that includes a “GAA” hairpin-promoting
sequence provides a unique site for conjugation with the Top2-poisoning
anticancer drug Dox. Conjugation occurs without disrupting stabilizing
hydrogen bonding or base stacking interactions in the hairpin loop
and allows for facile intercalation of the tetracene ring system of
Dox between the first and second base pairs of the hairpin stem. The
concurrent covalent linkage and intercalation of Dox in the hairpin
results in formation of a complex that is highly stable at physiological
pH. As noncovalent Dox–DNA complexes, presumably of greatly
reduced chemical stability relative to the Dox-conjugated DNA hairpin
described here have shown decreased toxicity relative to free Dox
in human clinical trials, hairpin conjugates
may represent an improved approach for limiting Dox toxicity while
preserving Dox efficacy.

A number of approaches have been described
for improved Dox delivery
while limiting systemic toxicities. The liposomal formulation Doxil,
for example, has demonstrated clinical utility. A variety of other nanoparticle-mediated drug delivery
approaches have also been explored for improved Dox delivery.− DNA offers many advantages relative to alternative strategies. DNA
is readily biodegradable and can be used for in vivo applications
without activating an immune response. Further, the use of DNA for
drug delivery allows for natural combination of diverse anticancer
drugs of different classes. For example, our laboratory has pioneered
the inclusion of cytotoxic nucleotide analogs into ssDNA, and more recently into DNA hairpins., We have also
shown that duplex or hairpin DNA can be used for delivery of minor
groove binding ligands., The present studies have extended
this work to include covalent modification of DNA hairpins with simultaneous
intercalation by DNA-targeting drugs, such as the Top2 poison Dox.
Our studies have also shown that the major groove of DNA can be used
for improved drug delivery as our studies have shown that Zn2+ complexation occurs in the major groove of FdU-substituted DNA hairpins.

Drug delivery is a multifaceted process that involves not only
improved stability in circulation, but also specific uptake into targeted
cells and ultimately release of drug following cell uptake. Our studies
show that, as with previous studies with the single-stranded DNA F10,
conjugation with folic acid improves uptake into targeted cancer cells. Many cancer cells overexpress folate receptor
as a consequence of increased nutrient requirements to support an
elevated growth rate for the malignant phenotype. These studies show cell uptake of a 25 nucleotide DNA hairpin
can be significantly enhanced into 4T1 breast cancer cells through
folic acid conjugation. Importantly, while the Dox-conjugated hairpin
is highly stable at physiological pH, Dox release is favored at the
acidic pH of endosomes following cell uptake. Dox is efficiently released
from the hairpin following cell uptake and Dox retains potency as
an anticancer drug. The results demonstrate that the DNA-conjugation
strategy developed has the requisite components to be useful for Dox
delivery in a clinical setting.

To our knowledge, this is the
first report of the use of a Dox–DNA
covalent conjugate to transfer Dox to DNA for potential therapeutic
applications. The approach adopted has potential for greatly expanded
drug delivery applications. For example, we have previously shown
that FdU nucleotides can be embedded within this hairpin sequence
and that the resulting hairpin is cytotoxic to prostate cancer cells., As DNA polymers containing FdU nucleotides are Top1 poisons, the
present system allows for creating complexes that deliver both FdU
and Dox and that will simultaneously target Top1 and Top2. Simultaneous
targeting of Top1 and Top2 has shown promise for clinical management
of cancer, although this combination displays systemic toxicities., Our studies show that folic acid conjugation can be used to improve
uptake for DNA hairpin conjugates into breast cancer cells, and this
is expected to concomitantly reduce systemic toxicities. Studies are
underway to evaluate these promising concepts in drug delivery. Future
studies will focus on demonstrating advantages in cellular and animal
models of cancer.

Conclusions
The “GAA”
sequence motif that promotes intramolecular
DNA hairpin formation can be selectively conjugated to the Top2-poisoning
anticancer drug Dox. The resulting conjugate is highly stable at physiological
pH as a consequence of both covalent modification and intercalation
of the tetracene ring system of Dox into the hairpin stem. Folic acid
conjugation of the Dox-conjugated hairpin enhances uptake by 4T1 breast
cancer cells. Dox is efficiently released at the acidic pH of endosomes
following cell uptake demonstrating that the Dox-conjugated hairpin
has both appropriate extracellular stability and intracellular lability
well-suited for drug delivery applications. The DNA hairpin structural
motif permits further development by inclusion of additional or alternative
cytotoxic drugs, such as FdU or other cytotoxic nucleotide analogs
demonstrating the multifunctional properties of DNA as a material
for drug delivery science.

Supporting Information Available
NOESY NMR spectra of DCH, absorbance
of DCH after acid extractions, and fluorescence microscopy of Dox
endosomal uptake by 4T1 cells. This material is available free of
charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org/.

Supplementary Material
bc4005427_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
⊥ David
A. Horita, University of North Carolina
Nutrition Research Institute, Kannapolis, NC 28081.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors
would like to thank Michael Samuel from the Wake
Forest University Mass Spectrometry Core Lab for his help in obtaining
all of the mass spectrometry data used in this research. Oligonucleotide
syntheses were performed in the DNA Synthesis Core Laboratory at Wake
Forest University School of Medicine. The DNA Synthesis and the Mass
Spectrometry Cores are part of the Bioanalytical Core Laboratory supported
in part by the Comprehensive Cancer Center of Wake Forest University.
Funding was provided by Department of Defense Prostate Cancer Research
Program (093606 to W.H.G.) and the Comprehensive Cancer Center of
Wake Forest University Cancer Center Support Grant P30 CA012197 supporting
the Bioanalytical Core Laboratory. The Waters Q-TOF mass spectrometer
was purchased with funds from NIH Shared Instrumentation Grant 1S10RR17846.
MS analyses were performed in the Mass Spectrometer Facility of the
Comprehensive Cancer Center of Wake Forest University School of Medicine
supported in part by NCI center grant 5P30CA12197.

