Introduction
Direct targeting of
monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) conjugated with
radioisotopes or drugs to cell surface biomarkers is currently under
development in preclinical animal models and under evaluation in clinical
studies., Therefore, improving tumor-to-background
ratio in targeted drug delivery still remains an important goal to
obtain high tumor specific signals and therapeutic efficacy. The relatively
large size (∼150 kDa) and long serum half-life of intact antibodies
have been problematic in terms of deep tumor penetration and high
radiation doses to radio-sensitive tissues, such as bone marrow. Tumor
visualization with molecular imaging requires several days after the
administration of the radiolabeled mAb due to the slow blood clearance
of the antibody. Several strategies have been developed to take advantage
of the high affinity and selectivity of mAbs and reduce the serum
half-life, such as the utilization of mAb fragments. Pretargeting
strategies have been employed to circumvent the shortcomings of antibody
direct targeting; it allows localization of a bispecific protein that
can simultaneously bind the targeted receptor and subsequently bind
a labeled and rapidly clearing smaller molecule. Tumor pretargeting
has solved the problems associated with slow clearing mAbs and has
enabled high target tissue uptake with minimal nontarget accumulation.,

Pretargeting strategies have been developed utilizing receptor–ligand
pairs with streptavidin (SA)/avidin–biotin or with bispecific
antibodies.− Streptavidin (SA)–biotin has been employed
in in vivo systems, and multistep labeling using
streptavidin or biotin-labeled proteins has been shown to increase
target specificity., Because of the high binding affinity
between SA and biotin (KD ∼10–15 M), their binding is considered to be equivalent
to a covalent chemical bond in biological systems, showing high target
specificity in tumor imaging and therapeutic efficacy. However, SA/avidin is immunogenic, and endogenous
biotin levels (10–8–10–7 M) can affect the efficacy of SA binding, which is not favorable
for clinical use., Therefore, employing bispecific
antibodies consisting of humanized antibody fragments and a nonimmunogenic
reporter probe instead is advantageous in preclinical and clinical
applications, as they retain high specificity with subnanomolar affinity. A nonimmunogenic hapten is useful due to its
specific recognition of the anti-hapten antibody in noninvasive imaging
and drug delivery applications. Herein, we report on a novel binding
pair based on a single chain fragment variable antibody, scFv, with
nanomolar affinity to a hapten, where the scFv is fused to a tumor-targeting
affibody.

The single chain variable fragment (scFv) is the smallest
functional
binding unit (220 amino acids) of an antibody retaining high molecular
specificity and consists of the variable heavy (VH) and
variable light (VL) chains ligated with a short peptide
linker. Because of its low molecular
weight (∼25 kDa), an scFv is amenable to fusion with other
proteins for a variety of purposes. In
this study, we hypothesized that an scFv isolated by affinity selection
from a phage library can be effectively isolated with high affinity
toward a hapten. Second, we hypothesized that an scFv can be fused
to a protein with specific binding toward a cell surface marker to
generate a heterobivalent molecule such that the binding of both is
retained. In this way, the scFv and hapten, labeled with fluorescence
optical dyes, radio-metals, or therapeutic molecules, could serve
as a robust imaging reporter system as well as an effective drug delivery
system. The hapten consists of histamine conjugated to succinic acid
(Him-Suc), which is in turn coupled to the backbone peptide sequence
GSYK. The hapten-peptide, Him-Suc-GSYK, can incorporate chelators
for radiometals or near-infrared dyes through conjugation to Lys or
radiohalogenation on the Tyr residue to generate a multimodal imaging
probe for optical, SPECT, or PET imaging. Here, we report the novel
Him-Suc-GSYK specific anti-hapten scFv and its fusion with an anti-HER2
affibody as a model heterobivalent fusion protein for pretargeted
imaging of HER2-expressed tumors using modular hapten probes.

The human epidermal growth factor receptor type 2 (HER2) is a transmembrane
tyrosine kinase receptor and is a member of the endothelial growth
factor receptor (EGFR) family, which is expressed in a wide range
of tumors. Particularly, HER2 overexpression
is found in ∼30% of human breast cancer, and increased HER2
expression is known to correlate with a poor prognosis and resistance
to a number of cancer therapies. Currently,
anti-HER2 mAb (trastuzumab, herceptin) labeled with PET tracers, such
as 64Cu, 89Zr, etc., has been used for HER2
immunoPET/CT scanning in clinical applications., In this study, we designed and evaluated an HER2-targeted bispecific
fusion protein as a model for HER2 imaging to demonstrate the functionality
and specificity of the novel hapten and anti-hapten antibody reporter
system.

Results
Synthesis of Hapten Peptide for Biopanning
and NIR Dye Labeling
Biotinylated hapten (Him-Suc-GSYK-Bt)
was synthesized by solid
phase peptide synthesis (Figures S1–3, ). The peptide without the histamine-succinyl
group, GSYK-Bt, was obtained separately for background subtraction
of phage libraries. For fluorescence optical imaging, the hapten peptide
without biotin (Him-Suc-GSYK, Him) was synthesized and conjugated
to the near-infrared (NIR) fluorescent dye, cypate, and sulfo-Cy5-NHS
via an amide coupling reaction. Monoconjugated
cypate-hapten (Cy-Him) and sulfo-Cy5-coupled hapten (Cy5-Him) were
isolated by HPLC purification (Figures S4 and S5, ). The stock solutions of Cy-Him and
Cy5-Him were prepared in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and diluted with
aqueous media for in vitro and in vivo evaluations.

Phage Library Screening
The high
hapten binders were
selected from phage libraries, specifically the human single fold
scFv libraries I + J (Tomlinson I + J). To deplete the library phages
that bind nonspecifically, the library was negatively selected with
GSYK-Bt. Then, selections for antibodies that bind the hapten were
performed with the biotinylated hapten peptide, Him-Suc-GSYK-Bt (Figure
S2, ). The decline
of phage titers confirmed that most of the hapten binding phages with
low affinities were removed during the initial selection steps (Table
S1, ). After each
round of panning, the extensive course of washing excluded fast off-rate
phage antibodies. Thus, phages with strong affinities and slow off-rates
could remain on the magnetic bead surface during the washing process.
Hapten-specific scFvs with high affinity (KD &lt; 4 nM) with slow off-rate (∼10–4 s–1) were successfully obtained (Table  and Figure ).

Amino Acid Sequences of Anti-hapten
scFvs from Phage Libraries (Tomlinson Library I + J)
 	sequence	
 	 	H-CDR1	H-CDR2	H-CDR3	L-CDR1	L-CDR2	L-CDR3	 	
scFv	1	31	50	95	162	184	225	239	
J42 (32/48)	MAE	··SYAMS	··GISGGGSDTNYADSVKG	··YAASFDY	··SISSYLN	··GASYLQ	··TATSPD	··KR	
I22 (2/48)	MAE	··SYAMS	··GIGAVGYYTAYADSVKG	···YTNTFDY	··SISSYLN	··DASNLQ	··SSSGPD	··KR	
I21 (3/48)	MAE	··SYAMS	··GISNYGDTTS YADSVKG	··YYSTF DY	··SISSYLN	··AASSLQ	··DTTSPY	··KR	
I4 (3/48)	MAE	··SYAMS	··GISSYGGTTG YADSVKG	··YSTAFDY	··SISSYLN	··DASSLQ	··SASSPD	··KR	
Surface plasmon resonance (SPR) sensorgrams of (A) four anti-hapten
scFvs and (B) fusion protein (scFv-L-Aff) to the hapten-immobilized
sensor chip. (C) Binding kinetic information (kon and koff) and equilibrium constant
(KD) from the Langmuir 1:1 binding model.

The monomeric phage antibodies
were isolated efficiently using
biotinylated hapten in solution with subsequent capture on the streptavidin
magnetic beads. To obtain high binders on the basis of affinity, the
concentration of soluble hapten was gradually decreased each round
of stringent selection. That is, for the initial rounds of selection,
high micromolar concentrations of hapten were used to capture poorly
expressed phage antibodies that could evolve into high affinity binders.
In later rounds of panning, the antigen concentration was reduced
to increase stringency and select for the highest affinity antibodies.
In round 3 panning using 100 nM of hapten, a significantly higher
ratio of output to input phage titers was observed compared to that
in the earlier panning, presenting the highest enrichment (Table S1, ). Additional panning was
conducted using 50 nM hapten in round 4, showing slightly lower phage
antibody recovery than round 3 with reduced enrichment, which was
more distinctively shown in Library I.

Discovery of Anti-Hapten
scFv
Phage-infected clones
were randomly picked from Library I and J for sequencing after the
fourth round of panning, and 56 phagemids were isolated from TG1 bacteria.
From DNA plasmid sequencing, 48/56 phagemids were successfully sequenced,
and 7 unique sequences were discovered from the 48 clones. Eight of
the clones had two UAG amber stop codons, which are not suitable for
antibody production in HB2151, and these were not further examined.
The four remaining sequences that produce full length scFv were found
in 21 and 19 phagemids from Library J and I, respectively. Clone J42
dominated the population of recovered clones (32/48 clones). The other
three sequences appeared at lower frequencies of 3/48, 3/48, and 2/48,
for I4, I21, and I22, respectively (Table ).

The four scFvs corresponding to clones J42, I4, I21, and
I22 were produced and purified from HB2151 bacteria. The binding affinities
of the four anti-hapten scFvs were evaluated by SPR against the biotinylated
hapten-captured surface (Figure ). The KD values of the four scFvs showed high binding
affinities in the nanomolar range (KD &lt;
4 nM). Among them, the slowest off-rate was observed in the scFv from
clone J42, and this unique sequence was used for fusion protein plasmid
construction with anti-HER2 affibody (ZHER2:477) for HER2
membrane receptor target imaging using a hapten imaging reporter.

Production and Binding Study of Fusion Protein scFv-L-Aff
scFv-L-Aff, a novel heterobivalent fusion protein, was recombinantly
constructed with anti-HER2 affibody (ZHER2:477) and anti-hapten
scFv (clone J42) to generate a hapten reporter modular system. The
two proteins were assembled via a 15 amino acid linker, (G4S)3, for a flexible ligation of the two proteins (Figure
S6, )., In the HER2 affibody (ZHER2:477), a His6-tag was attached
at the C-terminus for affinity protein purification
and immunofluorescence microscopy. The plasmid sequence of scFv-L-Aff
was confirmed by DNA sequencing and transformed into BL21 E. coli for protein expression. After IPTG-induced expression
and His-tag affinity purification, a scFv-L-Aff protein band appeared
at a molecular weight of ∼35 kDa (calculated 37 kDa), which
was confirmed by sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)-gel and Western blotting
(Figure ).

Characterization of the fusion protein
(scFv-L-Aff) by (A) SDS-gel
and (B) Western blotting using anti-His tag mAb. (C) SPR binding study.

The bispecific binding kinetics
of the purified fusion protein
scFv-L-Aff was measured by SPR. Five concentrations were independently
injected over the hapten-captured and HER2-immobilized chips, and
this was duplicated with a different set of concentrations. The heterobivalent
fusion protein bound to the HER2 and to hapten with KD values of 185 pM and 2.52 nM, respectively (Figures  and ). The KD of the parent HER2 affibody (ZHER2:477) is
32 pM with kon = 4.3 × 106 M–1 s–1 and koff = 1.4 × 10–4 s–1 against the extracellular domain of HER2. The slower association (kon = 2.13 ×
106 M–1 s–1) and faster
dissociation (koff = 3.95 × 10–4 s–1) rates of the fusion protein
to the HER2-Fc resulted in a 5.8-fold decreased binding affinity (Figure ). The equilibrium dissociation constant to hapten
(KD = 2.30 nM, J42) was preserved in the
fusion protein; the faster off-rate was offset by a faster on-rate
(Figure ).

The hapten specificity of
scFv-L-Aff was further verified by an
inhibition SPR assay. Four small probes including Him-Suc-GSYK were
preincubated with the fusion protein and injected over the hapten-captured
surface in SPR (Figure ). Free histamine and dl-histidine showed similar weak inhibitory effects (∼20%)
in hapten binding at the highest concentration (1 mM). The HS pretreated
fusion protein significantly reduced hapten binding by 47% at a concentration
of 1 mM compared to the untreated fusion protein. This Him-Suc-mediated inhibition was greatly increased
in the hapten-treated sample by 84% (Figure A). These results indicate that the epitope for J42 comprised largely
the histamine-succinyl headgroup.

Hapten inhibitory effect in scFv-L-Aff
binding using SPR. scFv-L-Aff
(100 nM) was incubated with (A) Him-Suc-GSYK, (B) HS, (C) histamine,
and (D) dl-histidine and injected over the hapten-immobilized
sensor chip.

Activity of scFv-L-Aff
on Whole Cells
The functionality
of the HER2-targeted heterobivalent fusion protein scFv-L-Aff and
the hapten imaging reporter Cy-Him was validated by confocal fluorescence
microscopy with breast carcinoma cells, which overexpress HER2., SK-BR3 cells were fixed and incubated with the fusion protein scFv-L-Aff.
The HER2 localization of the fusion protein was visualized using an
fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-labeled anti-His6 tag antibody (FITC-anti-His
tag mAb). The FITC fluorescence signal was detected at the cell surface
from the His-tag FITC labeling of the fusion protein (Figure A-b), confirming successful membrane HER2 localization
of the fusion protein. Consecutive Cy-Him treatment showed colocalized
NIR fluorescence merging with the green FITC signal on the cellular
membrane (Figure A-c and A-d). The specificity
of scFv-L-Aff to the labeled hapten was tested with hapten blocking
while the fusion protein was bound to SK-BR3 cells. In fixed cells,
the hapten binding sites were blocked using preincubation with unlabeled
hapten on the fusion-protein-treated cells prior to Cy-Him labeling,
producing decreased NIR fluorescence (Figure S8, ). Moreover, weak NIR fluorescence from
nonspecific binding was observed from Cy-Him only incubation from
both fixed and live cells, reflecting the specificity of the hapten
probe to the fusion protein (Figure S10, ).

Confocal fluorescence microscope images of HER2 labeling
in HER2-positive
SK-BR3 and HER2-negative MDA-MB-231 cells. Fixed cells were incubated
with scFv-L-Aff (7 μg/mL) for 1 h at room temperature, followed
by consecutive incubations with FITC–anti-His tag mAb and Cy-Him
(1 μM) for 30 min each at room temperature. Live cells were
treated with scFv-L-Aff and Cy-Him consecutively. After fixation,
scFv-L-Aff was stained with FITC-anti-His tag mAb. The nucleus was
counterstained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (scale
bar = 10 μm).

To investigate the possible
internalization of the fusion protein,
live cells were tested. Membrane and cytosolic localization of Cy-Him
was observed after 30 min of incubation, presumably by HER2-mediated
endocytosis (Figure B-b and B-c). Internalization
of HER2 ligands such as trastuzumab and other affibody conjugates
has been previously observed.,, Excess amounts of anti-HER2 affibody inhibited binding of the fusion
protein, indicating that binding of the fusion protein is mediated
by the specific interactions with HER2 receptors (Figure S9, ). HER2-negative breast
cancer cell line (MDA-MB-231) was tested using the same labeling conditions.
No binding of scFv-L-Aff and Cy-Him was detected in both live and
fixed cell incubation (Figure C and D). These
confocal microscopy data indicate that scFv-L-Aff was fully functional
and mediated the visualization of HER2 receptors by specific affibody
binding of HER2 and scFv binding of Cy-Him.

The binding specificity
of the fusion protein and hapten probe
was further tested using quantitative flow cytometry analysis. Fusion
protein binding was evaluated by FITC-anti-His-mAb labeling, and hapten
binding was quantified from Cy5-Him. The fold increase was calculated
from the mean fluorescence intensity of the untreated cells in FITC
and Cy5 channels. Preincubating cells with the fusion protein blocked
the FITC-labeled anti-HER2 affibody binding, resulting in 88% suppression
of fluorescent intensity in comparison to the unblocked cells (Figure A and B). HER2 inhibition and decreased FITC intensity
indicate the binding specificity of the fusion protein to the HER2
membrane receptors. In live cell incubation, the fusion-protein-bound
cells showed a 1.6-fold increase in FITC mean fluorescence (P &lt; 0.01 to the untreated cells, Figure C), while Cy5 fluorescence was enhanced 1.2- fold compared
to that of the controls (P &lt; 0.03 to the untreated
cells; Figure D). Live cell incubation did
not now show statistical difference between the control and stepwise
labeling. However, fixed cell labeling showed 3.8-fold and 3.4-fold
increases in FITC and Cy5 fluorescence, respectively, compared to
those of the nonspecific binding controls (P &lt;
0.01, Figure E and F). The decreased fluorescent
signals from the live cell incubation reflect that the fusion proteins
most likely internalized resulting in reduced binding sites for both
FITC-anti-His tag mAb and Cy5-Him.

Flow cytometry analysis with SK-BR3 cells.
(A and B) Live cells
were pretreated with scFv-L-Aff and subsequently incubated with the
FITC-anti-HER2 affibody. Live and fixed cells were preincubated with
scFv-L-Aff followed by (C and E) FITC-anti-His tag mAb and (D and
F) Cy5-Him, independently. Each bar represents the mean ± SEM
of three separate experiments with triplicates (n.s.; no significant
difference was observed. * P &lt; 0.03; ** P &lt; 0.01; *** P &lt; 0.03; % P &lt; 0.05 to the untreated cells).

In Vivo NIR Fluorescence Tomography and Ex Vivo Tissue Staining
Pretargeting of the fusion
protein scFv-L-Aff to HER2 expressed tumors and subsequent hapten
labeling were investigated in SK-BR3 tumor-bearing mice using in vivo NIR fluorescence molecular tomographic imaging (FMT).
As a control group, Cy-Him (3 nmol, i.v.) without the fusion protein
was injected intravenously to mice via tail vein injections. The other
group of mice was treated with the fusion protein (2.5 nmol, i.p.)
followed by intravenous Cy-Him (3 nmol, i.v.) injection ∼5
h after the fusion protein. The NIR signals from tumors appeared at
∼5 h and disappeared at 24 h post-Cy-Him injection in FMT.
The Cy-Him tumor uptake was measured from both treatments at 5 h post-injection
(Figure A). There was no significant enhancement
of Cy-Him tumor uptake observed in the fusion protein pretargeted
group versus the Cy-Him only control group. Early time points imaging
at 30 min, 60 min, 1.5 h, and 3 h were tried but did not show significant
differences (data not shown). Besides 3 nmol, 1.5 and 2 nmol of Cy-Him
were tested. However, no significant differences were observed from
the tested concentrations. In order to deliver more scFv-L-Aff for
enhancing the efficiency of pretargeting, the fusion protein was concentrated
using centrifugal concentration. However, the fusion protein was prone
to aggregate during concentration, which limited the amount that could
be administered.

(A) In vivo FMT images of SK-BR3 tumor-bearing
mice (n = 3). (A-a) scFv-L-Aff (2.5 nmol) was administered
i.p. to mice, and Cy-Him (3 nmol) was injected i.v. ∼5 h post-injection
of scFv-L-Aff. (A-b) Cy-Him (3 nmol) only was administered. NIR fluorescent
tomographic signals were measured at 5 h post-Cy-Him administration.
(B) Immunofluorescent ex vivo tumor tissue staining.
The tissues were first incubated with scFv-L-Aff followed by (a) Cy-Him
and (b) FITC-anti-His tag mAb consecutively. (c) DAPI was used for
nucleus counter staining. (d) Merged image (scale bar = 10 μm).

Ex vivo imaging
of excised organs and tumors showed
similar biodistribution and tumor accumulation, consistent with the in vivo imaging results (Figure S11, ). The dissected and fixed tumor tissues
were incubated with the fusion protein and Cy-Him, generating colocalized
FITC and NIR signals on the cellular membrane, whereas the tumor tissues
treated with only Cy-Him showed weak fluorescence in confocal microscopy
(Figures  and S12, ). This ex vivo tissue staining
confirmed that there was no loss of HER2 in the xenograft.

Discussion
A hapten is a small molecule (M.W. &lt; 1000 Da) and is nonimmunogenic
unless conjugated to a large carrier protein. As hapten molecules
have many properties which make them attractive as reporter probes,
they have been developed for a wide range of biological applications,
specifically in molecular imaging by indirect targeting.− For example, histamine-succinyl-glycine (HSG)-bivalent constructs
have been developed for in vivo tumor pretargeting
and have demonstrated good target antibody binding and low nontarget
accumulations.− In this study, a histamine-succinyl (Him-Suc)-conjugated
peptide, Him-Suc-GSYK, was designed for biopanning with phage libraries
to select for a Him-Suc hapten-specific scFv (Figure S2, ). Moreover, the design incorporated a variety of functional groups
in the amino acid side chains amenable to coupling with reporter molecules
to allow molecular imaging. By incorporating a Lys residue within
the hapten construct, the hapten could be conjugated via coupling
reactions to a variety of dyes, chelators, or drugs that bear carboxylic
acid functional groups. A second Lys residue could be added to the
hapten construct to allow for dual modality imaging with an optical
dye and a radiometal chelator by manipulation of orthogonal Lys protecting
groups. Finally, the Tyr residue served not only as a chromophore
for convenient quantification of the hapten but as a site for radiohalogenation,
enabling multimodal imaging. In this work, cypate, a cyanine dye with
absorption and emission in the near-infrared (NIR) region, was used
as a label to follow Him-Suc-GSYK when conjugated to the ε-amino
group of Lys for in vivo optical NIR imaging.

The hapten reporter binding partner, an anti-hapten scFv, was isolated
from the human single fold scFv phage libraries (Tomlinson I + J).
High affinity hapten binders were effectively obtained after background
subtraction and four-round panning by indirect affinity selections.
Increasing stringency in each successive round of panning with extensive
washing resulted in selection for high affinity antibodies to the
hapten with slow off rates (Table S1, , and Figure ). The Tomlinson
library has been used in the past for antigens and has contained antibodies
with both strong and modest affinities for the targets. However, to our knowledge, this is the first
investigation of the Tomlinson library regarding the discovery of
antibodies for a hapten. The paratope of antibodies for haptens generally
incorporate a cavity-like structure, and it is not clear whether this
design feature is incorporated into the Tomlinson library.

Screening the library against the hapten
resulted in the discovery
of four high affinity antibodies from 48 clones with KD values less than 4 nM (Figure ) and with relatively slow off-rates (∼10–4 s–1), which is an excellent result for a library
with a diversity of ∼1.4 × 108 (Figure ). To achieve significant
tumor retention in vivo, slow off-rates between the
target and labeled ligand are desired. Therefore, in this study, an
scFv from clone J42 that exhibited a slow dissociation rate (koff ∼10–4 s–1) and a high binding affinity was chosen for fusion with an affibody
to generate a heterobivalent receptor molecule to test the efficacy
of the scFv-hapten molecular imaging reporter system.

An affibody
is designed to have high target specificity to its
binding molecules that is comparable to the antibody, and its small
size (∼7 kDa) is also beneficial for excellent tumor penetration
and faster renal clearance than antibodies (∼150 kDa) while
producing high tumor to normal tissue ratios. Currently, a few HER2-targeting fusion proteins from antibody fragments
for direct imaging are in preclinical and clinical trials., The novel heterobivalent fusion protein scFv-L-Aff, consisting of
anti-hapten scFv and an anti-HER2 affibody (ZHER2:477)
with a linker, (G4S)3, was successfully produced
and confirmed by SDS-gel and Western blotting (Figures  and S6, ). Size exclusion chromatography indicates that the fusion protein
is stable mostly in a monomeric state, although there was some dimerization
during storage (Figure S7, ). The SPR binding study showed a dual binding specificity to both
hapten and HER2, with 2.52 nM and 185 pM affinities, respectively
(Figures  and ). For
efficient tumor targeting, high affinity is desired, and the affinity
of the fusion protein is 27-fold higher than that of the monoclonal
antibody trastuzumab (KD ∼5 nM)
against HER2. We conjugated the affibody at its N-terminus in anticipation of minimal disruption of binding affinity
and found a 5.8-fold drop in affinity compared to that of the parent
affibody. The reason for this may be
destabilization of the three-helix bundle, which has been previously
observed in a heterobivalent bis-affibody fusion and was shown to
be dependent on which terminus bore the linker., Moreover, the 3.95 × 10–4 s–1 off rate of the fusion protein is favorable for in vivo HER2-tumor targeting, with a 29 min half-life that is advantageous
for effective tumor accumulation. Conjugation of the C-terminus of the scFv had no effect on hapten binding affinity.

To elucidate the epitope of J42 scFv, SPR experiments between scFv-L-Aff
and the immobilized hapten were performed with the addition of competitive
ligands (Figure ). Histamine, the major mediator
of acute inflammatory responses, was
tested to verify whether free histamine affects the binding ability;
racemic dl-histidine was also selected due to its structural
similarity to histamine. Neither dl-histidine nor histamine
suppressed the binding of Him-Suc-GSYK. HS containing probes showed
high inhibitory capacity, indicating that the histamine-succinyl moiety
is an essential recognition element in the J42 epitope.

The
small peptide sequence GSYK appears in the LGSYKPS peptide,
which is found in β-amyloid proteins, the pathological hallmark
in Alzheimer’s disease (AD). In
addition to AD, significant expression levels of amyloid proteins
and its assemblies have been discovered in neurodegenerative brain
diseases such as Parkinson’s disease or after traumatic brain
injuries., Therefore, there would be a possibility
of nonspecific binding of anti-hapten scFv to similar peptides or
derivatives, such as β-amyloid proteins or its aggregates expressed
in brain diseases. However, scFv-expressed phages binding to GSYK
were initially removed by a background subtraction prior to the sequential
panning with Him-Suc-GSYK. Additionally, the inhibition SPR study
indicates the important role of Him-Suc in binding specificity (Figure ). Therefore, cross-reactivity of J42 to amyloid
proteins is not anticipated to be an interfering factor in this hapten
reporter system.

To demonstrate the functionality of scFv-L-Aff,
confocal microscopy
and flow cytometric analysis were performed to verify the HER2-mediated
binding of scFv-L-Aff and subsequent binding of the fluorescently
labeled Him-Suc analogues Cy-Him and Cy5-Him on the HER2 positive
human breast cancer cell line SK-BR3. There was considerable, but
not complete, HER2-mediated endocytosis of scFv-L-Aff, indicated by
immunofluorescence microcopy. Internalization of the fusion protein
was further confirmed by flow cytometric analysis; both mean fluorescence
intensity and fold increase were decreased in live cell labeling,
demonstrating that ∼42% and ∼35.3% of the fusion proteins
were available on the cell surface for labeling with FITC anti-His
mAb and Cy5-Him, respectively (Figures ).
Although, the in vitro live cell imaging and flow
cytometric analysis indicate HER2 receptor-mediated endocytosis, significant
amounts of the scFv-L-Aff persisted on the cellular membrane after
internalization. The efficiency and rate of internalization including
pharmacokinetics involves complex mechanisms in vivo. Therefore, we attempted an in vivo study to validate
HER2 pretargeting using a novel reporter system.

It was hypothesized
that utilization of a pretargeted approach
with bispecific anti-HER2 affibody fusion and cypate-labeled Him-Suc-GSYK
would enable the detection of HER2-positive tumors and metastases
and demonstrate the utility of the scFv and labeled hapten. However,
the relatively rapid rate of HER-2-mediated internalization apparently
resulted in no significant difference in tumor uptake between the
pretargeted group and the control (Figure A). HER2-mediated endocytosis has been observed in other HER2 affibodies,
which is beneficial in direct targeting for maximum cellular uptake
by recycling and transmembrane relocation of HER2 receptors after
internalization., However, internalization of the
first targeting molecules decreases uptake of the second labeled probe
in a pretargeted strategy. Therefore, controlling internalization
and the pharmacokinetic profile by structural optimization of the
fusion protein can enhance specific tumor uptake in stepwise targeting.
Moreover, multivalent imaging probes fashioned from the hapten Him-Suc
could be also designed to increase the binding affinity via the avidity
effect in tumor targeting.

In conclusion,
a hapten-specific antibody fragment (scFv J42) exhibiting
high affinity and slow dissociation rate was isolated from a phage
display. J42 was recombinantly fused with anti-HER2 affibody (ZHER2:477) via a short peptide (G4S)3 linker
for HER2 imaging to assess the efficacy of a universal imaging reporter
system based on an scFv and hapten labeled with an NIR dye for molecular
imaging. The binding affinity of anti-hapten scFv in the heterobivalent
fusion protein scFv-L-Aff was largely preserved, confirming the stability
of the scFv toward conjugation. The in vitro evaluation
demonstrated that the novel fusion protein retained high affinity
to both HER2 and hapten and was fully functional, enabling HER2 receptor
labeling with the labeled hapten. The in vivo evaluation
failed to demonstrate HER2-mediated uptake in the target tissues,
most likely due to rapid internalization of the fusion protein. This
is a first report of a unique hapten-specific scFv sequence which
showed promising potential as a receptor–ligand pair that could
play myriad roles in a universal hapten reporter system in molecular
imaging and therapeutic applications.

Materials and Methods
All chemical reagents were purchased from commercial sources and
used without further purification, unless otherwise stated. These
include biotin-PEG NovaTag resin (Novabiochem), Rink Amide AM resin
(Novabiochem), Pyclock (Novabiochem), and Dynabeads M-280 streptavidin
(Invitrogen). Mass spectrometry was performed using ESI/MS (Waters
2998 photodiode array detector, Waters LCT premier XE mass spectrometry).
Absorbance and fluorescence spectra were obtained using quartz fluorometer
cuvettes (Starna cells, Inc., Atascadero, CA) at room temperature
by a Cary 100 Bio UV/vis spectrophotometer and a Cary Eclipse fluorescence
spectrophotometer, respectively.

Peptide Synthesis
Peptides were
synthesized using a
standard fluorenylmethyl (Fmoc) procedure on solid support, as previously
described. Briefly, biotinylated hapten
peptide (histamine-succinyl-GSYK-Bt, Him-Suc-GSYK-Bt) was synthesized
on Biotin-PEG NovaTag resin using a microwave synthesizer (CEM Discover
Liberty 1), and histamine-succinyl capping was manually performed
on the resin (Figure S1, ). After precipitation in cold diethyl ether, the obtained white
solid was purified by C18 reversed-phase HPLC (Proto 200,
150 × 20 mm; flow rate, 10 mL/min) using a gradient method: 80%
A for 10 min and 65% A for 40 min (solvent A, 0.1% trifluoroacetic
acid in water, and solvent B, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in acetonitrile).
UV absorption was monitored at 230 and 270 nm, and the collected peptide
obtained with &gt;95% purity: GSYK-Bt, [M]+m/z, found m/z [M
+ H]+ 882.3, [M + 2H]2+ 442.2; Him-Suc-GSYK-Bt
[M]+m/z 1074.6, found m/z [M + H]+ 1075.4, [M + 2H]2+ 538.2. The peptide without biotin was synthesized for further
conjugation using Rink Amide AM resin using the same method and purified
by C18 reversed-phase HPLC (Proto 300, 150 × 20 mm;
flow rate, 7 mL/min) using an isocratic method (95% of solvent A);
in 30 min &gt;95% pure peptide was obtained: Him-Suc-GSYK m/z [M]+ 645.3, found m/z [M + H]+ 646.8, [M + 2H]2+ 323.4.

Optical Imaging Probe Synthesis
Cypate and the cypate
conjugates were synthesized as previously described. To conjugate cypate to the hapten peptide, EDC-HCl (1.5
mg, 8.0 μmol) was added to the cypate (5 mg, 8.0 μmol)
in DMF (100 μL). After 30 min, HOBt (1.1 mg, 8.0 μmol)
and hapten peptide (4.3 mg, 6.7 μmol) in DMF (400 μL)
were added. The reaction mixture was stirred overnight at room temperature
and precipitated in cold diethyl ether to give a green powder. The
mixture was purified by C18 reversed-phase HPLC (Proto
300, 150 × 4.6 mm; flow rate, 1 mL/min) using a gradient method
from 40% B to 50% B for 30 min (solvent A, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid
in water, and solvent B, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in acetonitrile).
UV absorption was monitored at 778 nm, and the cypate-conjugated hapten
(Cy-Him) was obtained with &gt;95% purity and 18% yield: Cy-Him m/z [M]+ 1252.62, found m/z [M + 2H]2+ 627.3, [M + H]+ 1252.7. Sulfo-Cy5-NHS (Luminoprobe) was conjugated to the
ε-amine of Lys of the hapten. The mixture was purified by reversed-phase
HPLC using a gradient method from 30% B to 60% B for 30 min. UV absorption
was monitored at 645 nm, and the collected sulfo-Cy5-conjugated hapten
(Cy5-Him) showed &gt;95% purity: Cy5-Him (C61H78N11O15S2) m/z [M]+ 1269.47, found m/z [M + 2H]2+ 635.75, [M + H]+ 1270.49.
The lyophilized hapten–dye conjugates were dissolved in DMSO
and kept at −20 °C.

Phage Selections of Monoclonal
Phage Libraries
The
anti-hapten scFv was selected by a phage display technique and modified
biopanning.− Human single fold scFv libraries I + J (Tomlinson I + J, LifeSciences)
phage stocks (1.2 × 1012 and 1.5 × 1012 phages in 150 μL, respectively) were diluted to 1 mL of MPBST
[phosphate buffered saline (PBS) with 4% dried skimmed milk (Marvel)
and 0.05% Tween-20] and incubated on a rotor for 1 h at room temperature
prior to adding the biotinylated peptide (GSYK-Bt) for background
subtraction. Streptavidin-coated magnetic beads (1 mg, (6–7)
× 107 beads, Dynabeads M280, Invitrogen) were preblocked
by incubation with MPBST (1 mL) for 1 h at room temperature and washed
with MPBST, PBST (PBS with 0.05% Tween-20), and PBS three times for
each solution. The washed Dynabeads were then added to the phage solution
incubated with GSYK-Bt (253 μM) in MPBST and incubated on a
rotor for 15 min at room temperature. Phages binding to GSYK-Bt was
captured to the Dynabeads on a magnetic rack. The supernatant containing
unbound phages from the background subtraction was transferred to
a new tube and incubated with biotinylated hapten (Him-Suc-GSYK-Bt,
228 μM for the first round panning) for 1 h at room temperature.
The hapten-bound phages were collected on the magnet, and the phage-bound
magnetic beads were washed a total of 9 times with 1 mL each of MPBST,
PBST, and PBS, 3 times for 5 min each for off-rate selection. The
washed magnetic beads were transferred to a new tube between different
washing solutions. The hapten-bound phages were eluted with 400 μL
of triethylamine (100 mM) for 5 min of incubation followed by neutralization
with 200 μL of Tris-HCl (1 M, pH 7.4). The selected phages were
kept at 4 °C for amplification and the next round of biopanning.
The E. coli bacteria strain TG1 was used as the host
for phage amplification as described in previous studies., For the subsequent rounds of panning, the indirect selection method
was repeated with the hapten at reduced concentrations (156 μM,
100 nM, and 50 nM of Him-Suc-GSYK-Bt for second, third, and fourth
round pannings) to select high affinity binders.

Preparation
of Anti-Hapten scFv
After the affinity
selections and panning, phage-infected clones were randomly selected
and amplified in TG1 bacteria. A total of 56 phagemids were isolated
using the QIAprep Spin Miniprep Kit (Qiagen) for sequencing (Genewiz
Inc.), and the data were analyzed by the software VectorNTI (Invitrogen).
The four scFv variants from clone J42, I4, I21, and I22 were expressed
in HB2151 bacteria as described previously. Briefly, the phage–infected cells were grown overnight in
2YTGA containing 1% glucose and 100 μg/mL of ampicillin. The
overnight culture was used for inoculation of fresh 2YTGA at 37 °C
until OD600 ∼ 0.9. After the cells were harvested
by centrifugation, the cell pellets were grown overnight in 2YT supplemented
with 100 mM sucrose, 10% potassium phosphate buffer (v/v), 100 μM
isopropyl-l-thio-β-d-galactopyranoside (IPTG),
and 100 μg/mL of ampicillin at 30 °C. The supernatant containing the scFv was purified by protein-L
affinity chromatography. The isolated scFv was quantified by BCA protein
assay and characterized by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE) and Coomassie blue staining.
The binding kinetics was determined by SPR.

Plasmid Construction and
Fusion Protein Expression (HER2 Affibody
× Anti-Hapten scFv)
To construct an affibody and scFv
fusion protein with specificities to both the extracellular domain
of HER2 and the hapten, a DNA plasmid of the monomeric HER2 affibody
(ZHER2:477) with the His6-tag at the C-terminus and linker (G4S)3 was first custom
synthesized (GenScript). Then, the scFv (clone J42) was recombinantly
inserted into the pIT2 vector by double digestion of plasmids with SalI and NotI enzymes according to the
directional plasmid cloning method. After
transformation to the E. coli strain BL21 competent
cells, the synthesized plasmids were confirmed by PCR and DNA sequencing
(Genewiz Inc.). The transformed cells were grown overnight in 2YTGA
at 37 °C. The next day, the overnight bacteria culture was inoculated
in fresh 2YTGA until OD600 ∼0.6. Bacterial pellets
were harvested and after centrifugation were resuspended with 2YTA
containing 1 mM IPTG and cultured overnight at 30 °C. His6-tagged
fusion protein in the medium was purified by a QIAexpress Ni-NTA Fast
Start kit (Qiagen) under denaturing conditions, and protein concentration
was measured by a BCA protein assay (Pierce).

SDS–PAGE and Western
Blotting Analysis
Protein
samples were loaded onto 4–15% Mini-protein TGX precast gel
(Biorad) in Tris/glycine buffer. After migration, protein bands were
visualized by Coomassie blue staining (Biorad). For Western blotting,
the proteins in the SDS–PAGE gel were transferred onto nitrocellulose
membranes (Biorad) using a Trans-Blot Turbo Transfer system (Biorad).
Membranes were blocked with 3% bovine serum albumin (BSA) in TBS for
1 h at room temperature and incubated with anti His-tag antibody (1:2000,
Qiagen) for 1 h. The membranes were washed and incubated with an HRP-conjugated
anti-mouse secondary antibody (1:2000, Invitrogen) in 10% nonfat dried
milk. After washing, the protein bands were imaged with the ChemiDoc
MP system (Biorad) after incubation with Immobilion Western HRP Chemiluminescent
Substrates (Millipore).

Measurement of Affinity and Kinetics Using
SPR
A Biacore
X100 (GE Healthcare) was used for studying the binding of the purified
anti-hapten scFv and the heterobivalent fusion protein. Biotinylated
hapten peptide (Him-Suc-GSYK-Bt) was captured on the streptavidin-immobilized
SA sensor chip (GE Healthcare). The purified scFvs and fusion protein,
scFv-L-Aff, were diluted in HBS-EP buffer (10 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl,
3 mM EDTA, and 0.005% surfactant P20, pH 7.4) and injected over a
hapten-immobilized surface (∼230 RU) for 180 s at a rate of
10 μL/min, followed by dissociation for 800 s. After each sample
injection, the surface was regenerated with an injection of 2.5 μL
of 1 M NaCl solution.

To evaluate the binding affinity of the
heterobivalent fusion protein scFv-L-Aff to HER2, recombinant Human
ErbB2/HER2 Fc Chimera (96.8 kDa, R&amp;D Systems) was immobilized
via amine coupling (∼3000 RU) on a CM5 sensor chip (GE Healthcare).
Serial dilutions of fusion proteins were flowed for 180 s at a rate
of 10 μL/min followed by dissociation for 600 s. For surface
regeneration, 0.33% SDS solution (30 μL) was used.

A competitive
SPR binding study was performed to verify the hapten
specificity of the fusion protein. First, scFv-L-Aff (final concentration:
100 nM) was mixed with serial dilutions of succinyl histamine (HS),
hapten (Him-Suc-GSYK, Him), histamine dichloride, and dl-histidine;
the mixture was then injected over the biotinylated hapten-captured
SA chip under the same SPR condition that was used for the hapten
binding study. After each sample injection, the surface was regenerated
with 2.5 μL of 1 M NaCl solution. All sensorgrams were double
referenced by subtracting the surface effect from the control flow
cell and the buffer effect from the blank buffer. The kinetic values kon, koff, and KD were obtained using Biacore X100 Evaluation
Software (GE Healthcare) assuming the Langmuir 1:1 binding model.

In Vitro Cell Labeling and Confocal Microscopy
The SK-BR3 human breast carcinoma cell line was purchased from
ATCC (American Type Culture Collection) and cultured in McCoy’s
complete medium (ATCC) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS,
Invitrogen), penicillin (100 IU/mL), and streptomycin (100 μg/mL,
Lonza) at 37 °C with 5% CO2. HER2-negative breast
cancer cells (MDA-MB-23) were cultured in RPMI medium containing the
same supplements as those in the McCoy’s complete medium. Cells
were plated onto poly-L-Lysine (PLL)-coated coverslips (BD Biocoat
cellware) and incubated overnight. The medium was gently removed,
and 3% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in PBS was added for fixation. After
washing with PBS, cells were incubated with scFv-L-Aff fusion protein
(7 μg/mL) for 1 h at room temperature. After washing with PBS,
a saturated labeling condition was used for labeling: FITC-anti-His6
tag mAb (33 μg/mL, abcam) and cypate-conjugated hapten (Cy-Him,
1 μM) were added for His6-tag and anti-hapten scFv labeling,
respectively, and incubated for 30 min at room temperature. An FITC-labeled
anti-HER2 affibody (2 μg/mL, abcam) was used to visualize the
membrane HER2 as a control. Nuclei were counterstained with DAPI followed
by washing with excess PBS. Coverslips were mounted on slides using
ProLong Gold antifade reagent (Invitrogen) and kept at 4 °C.
The same procedure was used for live cell labeling; after sequential
incubation and labeling, cells were fixed with 3% PFA, and nuclei
were counterstained with DAPI. Fluorescence microscopic images were
taken with a Zeiss Observer.Z1/Apotome 2 microscope (Carl Zeiss) equipped
with a QuantEM 512SC camera, and the images were analyzed using ZEN
2011 software.

Flow Cytometry
SK-BR3 cells were
fixed with 4% PFA,
and 5 × 104 cells were used for HER2 labeling (n ≥ 3). Cells were preincubated with scFv-L-Aff (10
μg) in PBS (120 μL) containing 3% BSA for 30 min at room
temperature. After washing and centrifugation, the cell pellets were
resuspended and incubated with Cy5-Him (1–2 μM) and an
FITC-anti-His6 tag mAb (abcam, 2 μg) in a total volume of 120
μL for 30 min at room temperature. FITC-conjugated anti-HER2
affibody (abcam, 1.5 μg) was used as a positive control. The
same labeling conditions were performed for live cell incubation without
fixation. Flow cytometry analysis was performed on a FACS LSR Fortessa
flow cytometer (BD) using FACSDiva software, and the data were analyzed
using VenturiOne software (Applied Cytometry).

Small Animal
Imaging Using Fluorescent Molecular Tomography
(FMT)
The experimental protocols were approved by the Animal
Care and Use Committee at the University of Pittsburgh. SK-BR3 xenografts
were established on female Balb/c nude mice (4–5 weeks of age)
from Taconic Lab Animals and Services. HER2 overexpressing breast
carcinoma cells, SK-BR3 (7–10 × 106), in 0.2
mL of matrigel (BD Biosciences) were injected subcutaneously onto
the right shoulders of the mice. Tumors were allowed to grow to 5–7
mm in diameter for the in vivo imaging study. For
HER2 pretargeting, scFv-L-Aff (2.5 nmol) was given to the mice via
intraperitoneal injections, and Cy-Him (3 nmol) was administered intravenously
to the mice 5 h post-fusion protein injection. NIR tomographic imaging
was conducted by a VISEN FMT 2500 in vivo imaging
system (PerkinElmer Inc., Boston, MA) while the mice were anesthetized
with isoflurane. Three-dimensional region of interests (ROIs) were
drawn around the tumors, and the images were analyzed by TrueQuant
3.0 software.

Preparation of Frozen Tissue Sections and
Immunofluorescence
Staining
The tumors from the SK-BR3 xenograft mice were dissected
after sacrificing occurred by carbon dioxide asphyxiation. The tumors
were quickly frozen in cold hexane at −60 °C and embedded
in Tissue-Tek optimal cutting temperature (OCT) compound (Andwin Scientific).
The frozen tissue was cut into 10 μM thickness sections on a
cryostat (Microm HM 500OM Cryostat). Tissue sections on the glass
slides were kept at −80 °C and hydrolyzed in PBS before
staining followed by fixation in acetone at −20 °C. The
sections were incubated with 3% horse serum blocking solution in PBS
for 1 h at room temperature and washed with PBST (0.1% Tween in PBS).
For tissue staining, 100 μg/mL of scFv-L-Aff in the incubation
solution (3% BSA, 0.01% sodium azide, and 0.3% Tween in PBS) was applied
onto the tissue slides and incubated overnight at 4 °C. After
washing, the FITC-labeled anti-HER2 affibody (abcam, 50 μg/mL),
anti-His6 tag antibody FITC (abcam, 50 μg/mL), and cypate-conjugated
hapten (Cy-Him, 300 μM) were incubated for 3 h at 4 °C
in the dark. Nuclei were counterstained with DAPI, and excess PBS
was used for washing. Stained sections were mounted with coverslips
using ProLong Gold antifade reagent (Invitrogen). Fluorescence microscopic
images were taken with a Zeiss Observer.Z1/Apotome 2 microscope (Carl
Zeiss) equipped with an EMCCD camera (Evolve 512 Delta, Photometrics,
Tuscon, AZ). Fluorescence signals from DAPI, FITC, and Cy-Him were
acquired at an excitation of 350, 490, and 745 nm respectively, and
the images were analyzed with ZEN 2011 software.

Data Analysis
All numeric data are presented as the
mean ± SEM. Statistical analysis was carried out using paired
Student’s t-test.

Supporting Information Available
Synthetic scheme and characterization
of haptens, SEC chromatography, fluorescence labeling images, phage
titration, and ex vivo data. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc500173f_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was funded by an award from the NCI (1R21CA15902,
to W.B.E.). This project used the UPCI FACS LSR Fortessa flow cytometer
(BD) that is supported in part by award P30CA047904.

Abbreviations
HER2human epidermal growth factor 2

EGFRendothelial growth
factor receptor

scFvsingle chain variable fragment

NIRnear-infrared

