Introduction
Spherical nucleic acids—composed
of a nanoparticle scaffold conjugated with a DNA shell—are
currently being investigated as functional nanomaterials in applications
ranging from in vitro biosensors to in vivo transfection, diagnostic, and theranostic agents.− The reason these hybrid materials are considered for use in such
technologies is that they not only possess the unique biomolecular
recognition properties of oligonucleotides (ODNs), but often have emergent properties that are not present
in free ODNs, such as increased binding affinity to target sequences, enhanced nuclease resistance,, and entrance into cells without the need for ancilliary transfectants. In terms of the core nanomaterial scaffold,
a variety of heavy metal inorganic nanoparticles (e.g., Au, Ag, CdSe,
Fe3O4)− have been explored with the goal of imparting additional
physiochemical properties to the system (such as plasmonics, photoluminescence,
scattering, and catalysis). Although these cores have shown demonstrated
use in spherical nucleic acid systems, the potential toxicity and
biodegradability issues of heavy metal inorganic particles remain
a concern− and judicious passivation techniques are required. In this regard, the construction of water-soluble, heavy-metal
free, silicon nanoparticles (SiNPs) conjugated with DNA is highly
attractive since silicon is well-established to be biocompatible,− biodegradable,, and earth-abundant, and can exhibit
photoluminescence.

A number of
synthetic methods (including electrostatic interactions,
postsynthesis linking, and automated solid-phase synthesis) have been
explored to functionalize ODNs onto bulk silicon substrates.− In addition, methods have been established to obtain SiNPs., However, the effective and site-selective conjugation of SiNPs with
ODNs remains a formidable challenge since typical hydrogen- or halogen-terminated
SiNPs are readily oxidized and are also prone toward nonselective
nucleophilic attack. In fact, literature
on SiNP ODN conjugates is rare and the reported syntheses have involved
either multiple synthetic steps, and/or harsh conditions
(such as the use of high concentrations of HF, bromine, or laser ablation). In addition to the paucity of synthetic methods
to obtain SiNP based spherical nucleic acids, to the best of our knowledge,
there has been no report on utilizing DNA conjugated SiNPs as functional
systems. With this Communication, we first disclose a mild, two-step
method, featuring reactive high-energy ball milling (RHEBM) followed by thiol–ene click chemistry, to prepare SiNP DNA conjugates from readily
available silicon wafers. These silicon-based spherical nucleic acids
have been characterized via a combination of microscopy (TEM and AFM),
spectroscopy (UV–vis and fluorescence), and gel electrophoresis.
Furthermore, we demonstrate the utility of these SiNP ODN conjugates
by illustrating how these particles can be utilized to detect oncogenic
microRNA-21 (miR-21) via a fluorescence ON strategy.

Straightforward Two-Step Synthesis for the Production
of SiNP ODN
Conjugates
The preparation of
the SiNP ODN conjugates is illustrated in Scheme . First, RHEBM of silicon wafers in the presence
of 1-hexene and 1,7-octadiene (∼3:2 v/v) generated alkene terminated
SiNPs. After removal of insoluble sediments via centrifugation, the
resultant SiNPs were covalently functionalized with DNA by reacting
an excess (110 equiv) of 3′-thiol modified 27mer ODN (5′-TCAACATCAGTCTGATAAGCT–FlAAAAAA-SH-3′)—that also contains a
fluorescein (FL) unit as a spectroscopic handle—to the surface
alkene moieties through the thiol–ene click reaction (initiated
by 365 nm light in the presence of DMPA). The resultant SiNP ODN conjugates
were purified via a 30k Amicon centrifugal filter to remove unreacted
ODNs.

Results and Discussion
The successful coupling of the
ODNs to the SiNP was first inferred
from UV–vis spectroscopy. As shown in Figure a, the purified SiNP ODN conjugate clearly shows absorption
bands for both the ODN unit (λmax = 260 nm) as well
as the fluorescein reporter group (λmax = 490 nm).
Although the core SiNP does absorb in the 200–400 nm region
(Figure a, inset), the extinction coefficient
of the ODN is significantly higher (e.g., at 260 nm the free ODN has
an ε of 3.33 × 105 L·mole−1·cm−1 which is ca. 5.5-fold higher than that
of the SiNP). Thus, using
the absorption of the DNA at 260 nm in conjunction with the calculated
concentration of the core SiNP, we estimated that 4–5 ODN strands
are loaded onto each SiNP core.

(a) Absorption spectra in H2O of purified SiNP ODN conjugate
(inset: Absorption in CH2Cl2 of SiNPs before
bioconjugation). (b) PAGE of unconjugated ODN (Lane 1) and DNA-SiNP
conjugates (Lane 2). The gel was run in 1 × TBE buffer and visualized
via excitation (λexc = 254 nm) of the fluorescein
unit on the ODNs.

A polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis (PAGE) study was performed
to further confirm the production of SiNP ODN conjugates. As can be
observed from Figure b, the major band in
Lane 2 is a distinct green band (due to the emission from the fluorescein
unit of the ODN) that runs slower than the unconjugated ODN (Lane
1), as would be expected for a nanoparticle containing multiple ODN
conjugates.

Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was first
applied to characterize
the morphology and size of the SiNP ODN conjugates. Shown in Figure  are images of SiNPs that are unconjugated (a: after
step 1 of synthesis) and ODN conjugated (b: after step 2). The unconjugated
SiNPs display spheroid particles with an average diameter of 3 nm.
In contrast, the ODN conjugated SiNPs exhibit a significantly larger
diameter (10 nm). The increase in nanoparticle size provides further
evidence for the successful conjugation reaction. AFM measurements
(Figure c,d), performed under tapping mode,
gave additional information about the size and distribution of the
SiNPs. These measurements are consistent with the TEM data and display
an average height of 3 nm for the unconjugated SiNPs and 10 nm for
the spherical nucleic acids.

TEM and AFM images of the unconjugated (a and
c, respectively)
and the ODN conjugated (b and d, respectively) SiNPs. The inset within
panels c and d display the height histogram from the AFM images.

With evidence in hand for the
formation of SiNP ODN conjugates,
we were keen on exploring the capacity of these silicon based spherical
nucleic acids as sensing agents for biologically relevant RNA. As
a proof-of concept, we focused on detecting miR-21 since this noncoding
RNA is overexpressed in a variety of cancers, as it downregulates
the production of tumor suppressor proteins., In fact, due to its integral nature in cancer, sensing agents for
miR-21 are an important are of research interest.,

Our miR-21 detection scheme is shown in Figure  and relies on a fluorescence ON strategy. While the core
SiNP does fluoresce, the quantum yield of fluorescence is not substantial
(2%) and thus we chose to use the fluorescein moiety on the conjugated
ODNs as the reporter group. In stage 1, a 15-mer quencher strand (5′-Dabcyl-TAGCTTATCAGACTG-3′)
hybridizes with the ODNs conjugated to the SiNP. Since the fluorophore
and dark quencher are in proximity, a significant decrease in the
fluorescence intensity is observed with a plateau at 1 equiv of the
quencher strand (Figure b). This OFF state,
which contains a 7 base toe-hold on the 5′ terminus of the
SiNP ODN conjugate, transitions to a fluorescence ON state upon introduction
of miR-21 which displaces the quencher strand (Figure c) since the conjugated ODN forms a more stable DNA:RNA duplex
with miR-21. In contrast to the clear binding of the SiNP ODN conjugate
to miR-21, which displays saturation behavior, when a negative control
(miR-155) is added, the silicon based spherical nucleic acid system
does not turn ON as the conjugated ODN on the SiNP is not complementary
to miR-155.

(a) Schematic illustrating the use of SiNP ODN conjugates to detect
miR-21. (i) The quencher strand hybridizes with the SiNP ODN conjugate
leading to a fluorescence OFF state. (ii) miR-21 binds to the SiNP
ODN conjugate leading to displacement of the quencher strand, resulting
in a fluorescence ON state. (b) Quenching of SiNP ODN conjugate upon
addition of increasing equivalents of the quencher ODN. Inset: Fluorescence
quenching profile with increasing equiv of quencher ODN, followed
at 520 nm. (c) Fluorescence enhancement profile in the presence of
increasing amounts of miR-21 (black) and control miR-155 (red). Note:
For these fluorescence experiments the fluorescein unit on the SiNP
ODN conjugates were excited at 490 nm and the concentration of conjugated
ODNs was 500 nM.

Conclusion
In
summary, we have disclosed a facile two-step synthesis—from
bulk silicon wafer—to prepare SiNP ODN conjugates, by performing
tandem RHEBM and thiol–ene click chemistry. In addition to
characterizing the SiNP ODN conjugates by a series of spectroscopic
and microscopic studies, we have for the first time demonstrated that
SiNP DNA conjugates can serve as fluorescence ON sensors that detect
oncogenic miR-21. Given that (a) SiNP cores have been found to have
minimal toxicity and favorable biodegradable characteristics,, (b) these SiNPs are attached to ODNs via nonlabile thioether bonds,
and (c) spherical nucleic acids with a variety of cores are known
to transfect into cells,,,, we envision that these silicon
based spherical nucleic acids may serve as potential diagnostic and/or
therapeutic agents that can be used in cellular environments. We are
currently exploring these possibilities. It is also important to note
that, in general, many biological molecules can be functionalized
with thiols (e.g., cysteine linked peptides and thiol terminated glycosides)
and thus this simple two-step strategy may pave the way for the rapid
investigation of a variety of SiNP bioconjugates for biomedical applications.

Supporting Information Available
Detailed description of the
experimental procedures and calculations. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc5004026_si_001.pdf

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was partly funded by the NIH
(R01GM097571 to J.J.)
and the NSF (CMMI-0726943 to M.J.F. and B.S.M.).

