The progesterone receptor (PR)
is a ligand-activated steroid receptor that belongs to the nuclear
receptor superfamily of transcription factors., PR
is expressed at low levels in most physiological systems but peaks
in the female reproductive system and in the central nervous system. Thus, it plays a central role in reproductive
events and sexual behavior. PR dysfunction has been indicated in multiple
disorders including reproductive conditions, neurological syndromes, and cancer (breast, ovarian, endometrial). As such, considerable effort has been focused
on understanding PR functions and their underlying mechanisms in normal
and pathological conditions. The human PR is encoded by a single gene
that is expressed as two isoforms, PR-A and PR-B, which share most
of the functional elements but have distinct functions. While PR-A
remains predominantly in the nucleus, PR-B resides mostly in the cytosol
as part of a multiprotein complex, which modulates its activity. According
to current understanding, upon ligand binding PR-B dissociates from
at least part of the complex, dimerizes, and translocates to the nucleus,
where it recruits coregulating proteins and binds specific DNA sequences
to exert its transcriptional effect. Recently, fusions of fluorescent
protein tags to PR and its regulators have enabled their imaging with
high spatial and temporal resolution, significantly improving understanding
of dynamic processes such as localization, cell cycle dependence,
and recycling.− However, this approach requires genetic manipulation,
expression of non-native PR, and often the use of cells that do not
express PR endogenously. Complementary to receptor labeling, fluorescent
ligands offer advantages such as receptor imaging in endogenously
expressing cells, quantification of ligand–receptor interactions,
and measurement of receptor–ligand complex diffusion rates. While biologically functional fluorescent ligands
for many G protein-coupled receptors, retinoic acid receptor, and estrogen
receptor have been reported, efforts
to develop fluorescent ligands for PR were either unsuccessful or have not been applied to receptor imaging., The only functional fluorescent PR-ligand in mammalian cells was
reported almost a decade ago, when fluorescein labeled RU486 (Mifepristone),
a PR antagonist, was demonstrated to concentrate in the nuclei of
PR expressing cells. However, it required
prolonged incubation time and cells had to be fixed prior to imaging.
Recently, an elegant procedure for fluorine displacement in boron-dipyrromethene
(BODIPY) dyes has been described which
was later used to introduce a 18F radioisotope into a BODIPY
scaffold to generate a dual fluorescence/positron emission tomography
(PET) imaging reagent. Other chemistries
for rapid incorporation of a PET isotope into a strong fluorophore
exist, e.g., a near-infrared-absorbing cyanine dye with a pendant
fluoborate, but the size of that dye
and its polar substituents would probably prevent membrane permeation.
With this in mind, we sought to develop a PR fluorescent ligand based
on a BODIPY dye that could be used for fluorescent imaging of PR in vitro and potentially be translated into a PET tracer
for PR imaging in vivo, without modifying the original
structure.

RU486 is a synthetic 19-nor steroid that acts as
a competitive
antagonist to PR (Figure ). It has high affinity
for PR (∼5 times lower Kd compared
to the natural agonist progesterone),
and upon binding to PR, it preserves many of the processes initiated
by progesterone binding, i.e., dissociation of PR from the multiprotein
complex, dimerization, translocation to the nucleus, and DNA binding.
The main functional difference is the inability of the receptor to
recruit coactivators required for transcriptional activation when
bound to RU486. These attributes make
RU486 an attractive PR ligand for fluorescence labeling. Additionally,
RU486 can tolerate various modifications of the dimethylamino group
without significantly compromising its binding affinity and biological
activity. This property has been recently
exploited to develop an RU486-based MRI contrast agent. Therefore, we designed a BODIPY-labeled RU486,
where the dye is separated from the ligand by a linker, intended to
decrease both steric hindrance from the bulky dye as well as hydrophobicity
of the conjugate (RU486-BODIPY, Figure a).
For labeling, we chose a BODIPY structure that was demonstrated to
be amenable to 18F introduction. Molecular docking of BODIPY-labeled RU486 with human PR showed that
the labeled ligand is oriented similarly to unlabeled RU486 inside
the binding pocket and that the linker extends outward through the
binding pocket access channel (Figure b).
Important contacts between the ligand and key amino acids are maintained
for the labeled ligand ( Figure S1).
The model also predicted that the linker is sufficiently long (16
atoms from the aniline nitrogen to the BODIPY attachment point) to
place the bulky BODIPY well outside the protein, minimizing its steric
hindrance (Figure c). To test whether this
labeling strategy might be extended to other dyes and bulky groups,
we labeled RU486 with 5-carboxytetramethylrhodamine (RU486-TAMRA,
Figure a) in a similar design. The conjugates
were prepared by first oxidative N-demethylation of RU486, followed
by alkylation with 6-bromohexanoic acid. Then, N-Boc-2,2′-(ethylenedioxy)diethylamine
was conjugated to the carboxylic acid, followed by TFA-mediated Boc-deprotection
and conjugation to the respective dye (6% and 7% overall yields for
RU486-BODIPY and RU486-TAMRA, respectively;  Scheme S1).

Fluorescent ligands of progesterone receptor. (a) Chemical
structures
of RU486 and its fluorescently labeled derivatives RU486-BODIPY and
RU486-TAMRA. Molecular modeling of RU486-BODIPY (green) bound to human
PR showing (b) orientation inside the ligand binding pocket compared
to RU486 (orange) (amino acids 712–720 have been removed for
clarity) and (c) the linker extends out of the binding pocket, placing
the BODIPY dye well outside the protein shell.

The antagonistic activity of the ligands was assessed by
their
ability to inhibit progesterone-induced increase in alkaline phosphatase
activity in intact T47D cells. T47D are
human hormone-dependent epithelial cells isolated from ductal carcinoma
of the breast, which naturally express high level of PR. While the
potency of RU486-TAMRA was ∼5-fold lower than RU486, that of
RU486-BODIPY was ∼1.5-fold higher (Table  and  Figure S2). The difference in
potency between the two fluorescent ligands might arise from their
distinct hydrophobic/hydrophilic nature (Table ). The higher polarity of RU486-TAMRA could hinder its membrane permeability,
leading to lower intracellular effective concentration. Conversely,
the BODIPY dye could be engaged in additional hydrophobic interactions
with the receptor, slightly increasing its affinity. The labeled ligands
showed spectroscopic properties characteristic of their respective
dyes (Table  and  Figure S3a,b). Interestingly, the quantum yield of both compounds
increased in a dose-dependent manner when bovine serum albumin (BSA)
was added to the measurement buffer (0.04 up to 0.29 and 0.04 up to
0.08 for RU486-BODIPY and RU486-TAMRA, respectively;  Figure S3c), suggesting that the ligand’s brightness
might also increase when bound to the receptor. Based on this BSA-dependent
increase in quantum yield, the binding constants of the ligands to
BSA were measured to be K = 6349 ± 544 and 31 348
± 2063 M–1 (RU486-BPDIPY and RU486-TAMRA, respectively;  Figure S3d). Taken together, these results
show that RU486-BODIPY and RU486-TAMRA can bind PR as high affinity
antagonists with spectroscopic properties suitable for fluorescence
imaging.

Antagonistic and Spectroscopic Properties
of RU486 and Its Fluorescent Derivatives
 	IC50	RBA	log P	λex	λem	Φfl	
RU486	1.70 ± 0.24	1	(4.72)	 	 	 	
RU486-BODIPY	1.10 ± 0.22	1.5	3.51 ± 0.24	495	505	0.04–0.29	
RU486-TAMRA	7.55 ± 1.34	0.2	0.95 ± 0.14	550	578	0.04–0.08	
Determined from
dose–response
curve of progesterone-induced alkaline phosphatase activity inhibition.
Units are in nM.

Relative
biological activity as
determined by ratio of IC50(RU486) to IC50 of
tested compound.

Measured
using shake flask method.
In parentheses: from DrugBank [DB00834].

Units are in nm.

Next, we evaluated the fluorescent ligands for imaging endogenously
expressed PR in live cells. In T47D cells incubated with 5 nM RU486-BODIPY,
fluorescence was almost entirely confined to the nuclei and excluded
from the nucleoli (Figure a). Low levels of
fluorescence were also detectable in the cytoplasm. Interestingly,
the nuclear distribution of the fluorescent ligand was retained even
24 h after a brief incubation ( Figure
S4). This nuclear accumulation can be reversed by applying unlabeled
RU486 ( Figure 5), thus representing
specific binding, whose persistence may be a result of the inhibitory
effect of antagonist binding on PR processing. Staining with anti-human PR antibody revealed colocalization
of RU486-BODIPY and PR, along with a positive correlation between
the fluorescent ligand accumulation level and the antibody labeling
intensity ( Figure S6). Incubation with
increasing concentrations of RU486-BODIPY revealed that above 5 nM,
nonspecific accumulation starts to appear, eventually surpassing the
nuclear signal ( Figure S7). When MDA-MB-231,
an epithelial breast cancer cell line that does not express PR, was
similarly treated with RU486-BODIPY, fluorescence was completely excluded
from the nuclei but was observed in the cytoplasm (Figure a). The cytoplasmic retention of RU486-BODIPY in
the absence of its target binding site (i.e., PR) represents nonspecific
binding which is probably a result of the molecule’s hydrophobicity
(log P = 3.5). Another possible consequence of the
hydrophobicity of RU486-BODIPY is the extended time required for PR
nuclear translocation process to complete (∼1 h). Antiprogestins,
such as RU486, have been found to bind to both the PR and the glucocorticoid
receptor (GR) with high affinity. We therefore tested the specificity
of RU486-BODIPY nuclear accumulation in T47D cells by competing it
with 20-fold excess of either progesterone (PR selective) or dexamethasone
(GR selective). While excess progesterone completely inhibited accumulation
of fluorescence in the nuclei, dexamethasone had no observable effect
(Figure b), demonstrating the specificity
of the fluorescent ligand to PR in this experimental setting. In addition,
this result establishes that RU486-BODIPY binds PR through the ligand
binding domain (LBD) and not through allosteric sites.

RU486-BODIPY nuclear
accumulation is PR dependent. (a) RU486-BODIPY
accumulates in the nuclei of PR positive cells but not PR negative
cells. T47D (PR positive) or MDA-MB-231 (PR negative) cells were incubated
with 5 nM RU486-BODIPY for 15 min, washed, and imaged after 45 min.
(b) Nuclear accumulation of RU486-TAMRA in T47D cells can be competed
off with PR agonist but not with GR agonist. T47D cells were coincubated
with 5 nM RU486-BODIPY and 100 nM progesterone (PR agonist) or dexamethasone
(GR agonist) for 15 min, washed, and imaged after 45 min. Scale bar
20 μm.

RU486-TAMRA showed similar
accumulation patterns as RU486-BODIPY,
concentrating in the nuclei of T47D cells but not in MDA-MB-231 cells.
Nuclear localization was similarly specific to PR and persisted for
at least 24 h ( Figure S8a–c).
In contrast to RU486-BODIPY’s tendency to accumulate in membranes
in the absence of PR, RU486-TAMRA was easily washed out, maintaining
a high ratio of nuclear-to-cytosol fluorescence even at high concentrations
( Figure S9), probably due to its higher
hydrophilicity. In addition, it accumulated in the nucleus at a much
faster rate than RU486-BODIPY (∼18 min,  Figure S10). However, a higher concentration was required
to observe its effect ( Figure S9). Altogether,
these results demonstrate that the fluorescent ligands specifically
bind human PR in T47D cells, causing PR to translocate to the nucleus
and slow down the receptor’s recycling process, thus mimicking
the biological effects of unlabeled RU486.

After establishing
that the fluorescent ligands retain many of
the biological properties of RU486, we applied RU486-BODIPY to study
the dependency of PR nuclear translocation process on proteins involved
in its complex. In vitro assembly studies established
the identity of the proteins required for a functional PR complex
as well as the order and stoichiometry of their assembly. Heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) is a molecular
chaperone involved in many cellular processes and is a key component
in PR complexes. In addition to stabilizing PR in the cytoplasm, HSP90
potentiates PR’s hormone-dependent response by binding to its
LBD, causing it to adopt an open conformation that allows the hormone
to enter and bind. This process is ATP-dependent and was demonstrated in binding assays to be
inhibited by geldanamycin, a specific
inhibitor of HSP90 ATPase domain. Therefore, we first tested whether
17-AAG (17-N-allylamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin), a less toxic synthetic
derivative of geldanamycin, interferes with RU486-BODIPY nuclear accumulation.
Indeed, in T47D cells treated with 17-AAG for one hour prior to RU486-BODIPY
application, nuclear fluorescence accumulation was inhibited in a
dose-dependent manner (Figure a,b). The half-maximal
effective concentration (EC50) of 17-AAG for PR nuclear
translocation inhibition in this experimental setting was 76 ±
11 nM, much lower than its reported IC50 in T47D cells
(3.82 ± 0.97 μM upon 24 h treatment). Inhibition of histone deacetylases (HDAC) by broad spectrum
inhibitors such as vorinostat (SAHA) and panobinostat (LBH-589), which
leads to HSP90 hyper-acetylation and dysfunction, also resulted in a marked decrease of nuclear fluorescence
accumulation (Figure c and  Figure S11). Together, these results reinforce the importance
of a functional HSP90 to PR translocation and demonstrate that RU486-BODIPY
is effective in sensing perturbations to this process. HSP70 is another
chaperone involved in the early steps of PR complex assembly. VER155008, a recently reported specific HSP70
inhibitor, failed to disrupt PR translocation
even after 12 h of treatment. On the other hand, methylene blue, also
reported to inhibit HSP70, significantly
decreased the rate of PR translocation. However, methylene blue is
not HSP70-specific; hence its effect on PR cannot be solely attributed
to HSP70 inhibition. FKBP52 (FK506-binding protein 4) is an immunophilin
thought to act in steroid-receptor complexes, including PR, as an
adapter to the motor protein dynein to facilitate receptor shuttling
along cytoskeletal tracks. Inhibition
of FKBP52 PPIase activity (peptidylprolyl isomerase) by FK506 has
been demonstrated to block PR hormone-dependent transcription activation. We therefore tested the effect of FKBP52-dynein
inhibition on PR trafficking. Pretreatment of T47D cells with FK506
(10 μM, 12 h) had no effect on RU486-BODIPY nuclear accumulation.
In addition, inhibition of dynein by erythro-9-amino-β-hexyl-α-methyl-9H-purine-9-ethanol (EHNA, 500 μM, 1 h) also failed
to affect PR translocation. In combination, while these observations
do not rule out PR trafficking along cytoskeletal tracks, they imply
that nuclear translocation does not exclusively rely on active cytoskeletal
transport and highlight the need to clarify the role of active movement
machinery in PR complex shuttling. In addition, they also suggest
that the requirement for FKBP52 activity in PR transcriptional activity
is downstream of the nuclear translocation process.

Effect of PR-multiprotein-complex
modulators on RU486-BODIPY mediated
PR nuclear translocation. (a) Dose–response curve of PR nuclear
translocation in T47D cells treated with HSP90 inhibitor 17-AAG. Cells
were incubated with 17-AAG at indicated concentrations for 1 h before
treated with 5 nM RU486-BODIPY. Each data point represents mean nuclear
(●) or cytoplasmic (▲) fluorescence intensity of 30
cells. Error bars represent ± SD. (b) Effect of 17-AAG on PR
nuclear translocation at 0.1 and 10 μM. Scale bar 20 μm.
(c) Cellular distribution of 5 nM RU486-BODIPY in T47D cells pretreated
with: 0.1% v/v DMSO for 12 h (control), 10 μM 17-AAG or 500
μM EHNA for 1 h, 10 μM FK506 for 2 h, 10 μM vorinostat,
panobinostat, VER-155008, or methylene blue for 12 h. Each bar represents
the ratio of mean nucleus-to-cytoplasm fluorescence of 30 cells. Error
bars represent ± SD. * p &lt; 0.01 (two-tail t-test). (d) Tissue distribution of RU486-BODIPY in FVB/N
female mice 4 h post I.V. injection (n = 4). Error
bars represent ± SD. * p &lt; 0.05 (one-tail t-test).

Finally, we tested whether
RU486-BODIPY will accumulate preferentially
in tissues that naturally express high levels of progesterone receptor in vivo. We first evaluated
the detectable dose by intravenous injection of either 1 or 10 nmol
RU-486-BODIPY into FBV/N female mice (one mouse each) and analyzing
tissue uptake by HPLC/MS/MS 4 h postinjection. While the lower dose
was hardly detectable in any tissue (data not shown), at the higher
dose, RU486-BODIPY was detected in most analyzed tissues. Therefore,
we used the high-dose conditions (10 nmol) to similarly treat and
analyze three more mice (Figure d). At 4 h
post injection, no probe was detected in the blood or the brain. Although
RU486 has a very long half-life in human, in rodents it is considerably
reduced (30 vs 1 h, respectively). The
highest uptake of RU486-BODIPY was observed in the liver, suggestive
of its role in metabolism and excretion of the probe, and also in
accordance with RU486 biodistribution in rodents. Importantly, RU486 BODIPY accumulation in uterus was consistently
and significantly higher than in muscle (∼3.5-fold on average).
The ovaries also showed a consistently higher uptake than muscle (∼1.2-fold),
but this difference was not statistically significant.

In conclusion,
we have designed and synthesized two fluorescent
ligands for the human progesterone receptor. The ligands show antagonistic
potency comparable to their parent RU486 in live cells and have spectroscopic
properties suitable for fluorescence imaging. Both ligands triggered
PR nuclear translocation in a receptor-dependent and specific manner
in endogenously expressing cells. RU486-BODIPY was used to study the
effect of PR complex components inhibition on its nuclear translocation
process. Our results reinforce the importance of functional HSP90
in this process as both inhibition of its ATPase activity and its
hyperacetylation, led to impaired PR shuttling. In addition, we found
that FKBP52 activity is not essential for PR nuclear translocation,
suggesting that FKBP52 plays a role in PR activation after the nuclear
accumulation process. Finally, RU486-BODIPY preferentially accumulated
in tissues that express high levels of PR in vivo. Thus, RU486-BODIPY’s design and properties make it a potential
candidate for in vivo imaging of PR by PET through
incorporation of 18F into the BODIPY fragment. Noninvasive
whole-body imaging of steroid receptors could be of considerable value
in classifying and staging many cancers of the endocrine and reproductive
systems.

Supporting Information Available
Synthetic procedures,
chemical
and spectral characterization, cell culture and imaging methods, alkaline
phosphatase assay details, additional figures as described in the
text. This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc3006418_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
R.W. is supported by R25T CRIN training
grant 5R25CA153915-03.
R.Y.T. is supported by HHMI, NIH CA158448, and DOD W81XWH-09-1-0699.

