Introduction
Osteosarcoma is a cancer
of the bone that
primarily affects adolescents.
While improvements in treatment have increased the 5-year survival
rate to 65%, it still lags behind overall cancer survival rates for
that age group. Furthermore, the metastatic
or recurring disease 5-year survival rate is still at a meager 20%. Current osteosarcoma therapies include surgical
resection followed by chemotherapy regimens of doxorubicin (DOX),
high-dose methotrexate with leucovorin rescue, cisplatin, and ifosfimide. However, therapeutic indexes of these drugs are
limited by severe toxicities; DOX, for instance, has well-documented
cardiotoxicity.

Several groups have
attempted to reduce this cardiotoxicity and
enhance pharmacokinetics via large-molecule conjugation or nanoparticle
entrapment. For example, Susa et al. increased intracellular drug
accumulation by loading lipid-modified dextran nanoparticles with
DOX, effectively overcoming multidrug resistance in vitro. Other groups targeted drugs with molecules such
as bisphosphonates and acidic oligopeptides, which have a strong affinity
to bone. Utilizing this targeting methodology,
Salerno et al. demonstrated reduction in bone metastases in mouse
metastatic breast cancer models. Hrubý
et al. used bisphosphonate targeting ligands on linear HPMA copolymers
containing DOX bound via pH-sensitive hydrazone bonds. They demonstrated in vitro HAp binding as well as pH-dependent
DOX release, due to the reduced pH associated with the interstitial
space in some tumors.

In contrast to their small molecule counterparts,
these delivery
systems have enhanced anti-neoplastic properties by improving pharmacokinetics
and reducing unwanted side effects. Improvements, however, can be
made in these complex systems as entrapped drugs may have the potential
for premature release, and those with covalently bound drug yield
drug-to-polymer weight percentages below 10%. Fundamentally, these
are valid systems that exhibit the important elements of having a
bone-targeting ligand, drug, degradable linker, and large molecules
with favorable pharmacokinetics.

Conjugating a targeting ligand
modeled after bone sialoprotein,
such as an aspartic acid oligopeptide to DOX via a hydrazone bond,
would yield a practical, simple drug that might improve drug accumulation
in bone. However, it would lack the pharmacokinetics
that are associated with larger molecules., A
modest design modification can change this. DOX is a hydrophobic drug,
but more importantly it has the tendency toward π–π
stacking. Furthermore, the aspartic acid
oligopeptide-targeting moiety is very hydrophilic. By inserting aliphatic
hydrocarbon chains and a flexible miniPEG spacer between DOX and the
aspartic acid octapeptide a novel micelle-forming unimer could be
assembled (Scheme ). This design exhibits
high drug loading while retaining covalent bonds between the targeting
ligand and the drug. The micellar self-assembly increases the size
of the targeted delivery system, extending circulation and exposure
to the tumor by reducing glomerular filtration. Additionally, the
sequestration of DOX to the center of the micelle is designed to reduce
metabolism by the myocardium and thus reduce cardiotoxicity.

Illustration
of Micelle Formation from Amphiphilic Unimer Consisting
of d-Aspartic Acid Octapeptide (d-Asp8), miniPEG
Spacer, Hydrophobic Tail Based on 11-Aminoundecanoic Acid, and Doxorubicin
Bound via an Acid-Sensitive Hydrazone Bond
In order to test the viability of the proposed micellar
delivery
system as well as the relationship between structure and properties,
four novel DOX-containing unimers with varying hydrophobicity as well
as architecture have been synthesized. Each unimer has been analyzed
regarding its ability to form micelles, its size, and its adsorption
to hydroxyapatite. In addition, drug release and in vitro osteosarcoma
toxicity have been analyzed.

Results and Discussion
Drug carriers
are often employed to increase solubility of hydrophobic
drugs as well as boost their pharmacokinetics. In designing a new
carrier effective against osteosarcoma it is important to produce
a molecule that has a defined structure, produces micelles with reproducible
polydispersity, and is stable. Rather than focusing on increasing
solubility, we decided to utilize the hydrophobic nature of chemotherapeutics
to stabilize a micellar delivery system. The targeting moiety, d-aspartic acid octapeptide (d-Asp8), was selected
for its optimized targeting potential, its stability toward protease degradation associated with d-peptides, as well as its hydrophilic nature., The addition of 11-aminoundecanoic acid (AUA) resulted in increased
hydrophobicity. 8-Amino-3,6-dioxaoctanoic acid (miniPEG) was placed
between the AUA and the d-Asp8 for additional flexibility
of the backbone. An acid-sensitive hydrazone bond was incorporated
at the unimer’s C-terminus to bind DOX, a model drug selected
for its hydrophobic nature as well as an ability to π–π
stack with itself., As such, the prototype unimer
DOX-A1-D8 was formed (Scheme ).

Synthesis
of Amphiphilic Unimers with Linear and Branched Architecture
Thermodynamic stability of
micelles increases as the hydrophilic/lipophilic
balance (HLB) is lowered, e.g., by increasing the weight percent of
the hydrophobic moiety. In order to verify
this theory regarding stability in our micelles, an additional AUA
moiety was added to DOX-A1-D8 to form DOX-A2-D8. Continually adding
hydrophobic AUA to the micelle has its potential drawbacks; if the
hydrophobic portions far exceed the hydrophilic portions in a linear
unimer the conical shape of a single unimer may be lost and the risk
of an inverse micelle or other undesirable structures increases. To counteract this effect, yet retain the ability
to increase stability by adding hydrophobic moieties, a modification
was needed. Branched head groups will in theory increase the lateral
area of the headgroup, thereby retaining the conical structure of
the micelle. DOX-A2-K-D4 demonstrates a simple addition of this branched
headgroup (when compared to DOX-A2-D8), while DOX-A4-K-D4 doubles
the number of hydrophobic AUAs (Scheme ).

Assessment
of Micelle Formation and Hydrodynamic Diameter via
Dynamic Light Scattering
Verification of unimer self-assembly
was determined by DLS. Scattered light count rates exponentially increase
as nucleation and assembly of micelles occur. Therefore, plotting
the normalized light-scattering count rate (counts per second) vs
concentration (LOG-LOG) graph (Figure ) made
the point of nucleation of the micelles readily apparent. Micelle
thermodynamic stability increased as expected when the number of AUA
moieties was increased from two to four: DOX-A2-K-D4 0.0027 mg/mL
to DOX-A4-K-D4 0.00036 mg/mL. By contrast very little difference in
thermodynamic stability was observed between branched and nonbranched
micelles DOX-A2-D8, 0.0035 mg/mL vs DOX-A2-K-D4, 0.0027 mg/mL. Of
note, by comparing documented blood volume (&lt;100 mL/kg of mouse)
with standard in vivo DOX dosages (3 mg/kg/dose) even the least stable
micelle DOX-A1-D8 at 0.0053 mg/mL is expected to remain above its
critical micelle concentration after dilution during dosing.−

Determination
of the critical micellar concentration (CMC) of DOX-containing
unimers. A logarithmic plot of the intensity ratio in counts per second
(CPS) vs the logarithm of the unimer concentration. The figure demonstrates
the increased thermodynamic stability of more hydrophobic micelles.

The architecture, branched vs
linear, had a profound effect on
the size of the micelles. The higher degree of conicality created
as head groups are branched should reduce the diameter of the micelle. Indeed, the diameters of both branched unimers,
DOX-A2-K-D4 and DOX-A4-K-D4, were 28.4 and 28.0 nm, respectively,
smaller than their linear counterparts, DOX-A1-D8, DOX-A2-D8, which
were 53.3 and 50.4 nm. All four micelles had polydispersities below
0.1 as determined by DLS (Figure ).

Size distribution
of micelles as determined by dynamic light scattering
in 0.01 M HEPES (pH 7.4; 1 mg·mL–1). A clear
division between linear and branched unimers was observed: linear
unimers form larger micelles than do branched unimers.

Cryo-Electron Microscopy (CryoEM)
In addition to DLS,
the size of the micelles was confirmed via CryoEM. The shape was regular
and spherical (Figure ). One anomaly that
was observed in both DLS and CryoEM, however, was the surprisingly
large size of the micelles. Each unimer length is far shorter than
the radius of an individual micelle. Due to the discrepancy in expected
size vs what was experimentally observed, the self-assembly into a
liposomal structure rather than a micelle was hypothesized. Further
analysis of the cryoEM images did not reveal an evident bilayer; thus,
we believe that the structures are still micelles. Also of note, the
overall size of the micelles is above the renal threshold, but the
size of the unimers is under the renal threshold. Although blood vessel
shear forces and protein–micelle interactions drastically complicate
predictions, it is feasible that under ideal conditions micelles could
circulate above their critical micelle concentration; their size,
above the renal threshold, could extend circulation time., Over time, the micelles could extravasate from the bloodstream as
they bind to the bone at the tumor site and eventually the blood concentration
would dip below the critical micelle concentration; micelles then
destabilize into unimers, which are readily cleared as is the covalently
bound DOX.

TEM image of micelles in 0.01 M HEPES (1 mg·mL–1) at room temperature. The images confirm the sizes observed in the
DLS studies as well as demonstrate the spherical nature of the micelles.

HAp Binding
Bone
is a complex weave of organic fibers
and inorganic mineral giving it rigidity as well as some elasticity.
The inorganic portion, hydroxyapatite HAp, composed of Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2, increases in crystallinity
over time. It is this higher crystalline state that aspartic acid
oligopeptides (AO) preferentially bind to., In osteosarcoma patients, highly active osteoclasts produce extensive
resorption surfaces by exposing highly crystalline HAp surfaces which
AO is able to target., This specificity of AO for highly
crystalline HAp additionally may reduce nonspecific binding to the
majority of the noncancerous bone.

In an attempt to simulate
bone binding, a HAp binding assay was carried out. A low ratio of
HAp to unimers was selected where saturation of the HAp occurred and
an excess of all four unimers was present in measurable amounts, demonstrating
the difference in binding between the four micelles. Slight increases
in HAp concentration yielded complete binding nearly immediately,
reducing the discrepancy between each of the micelles (data not shown).
Still, each micelle reached their respective binding maximum (Bmax) nearly immediately, as previously noted., Differences were observed in the amount of unimer needed to saturate
the given HAp although the rate of binding was nearly identical. A
general trend of lower saturation levels was observed for larger molecules.
The largest unimer, DOX-A4-K-D4, reached Bmax at 55 ± 3.0%, whereas the lowest MW unimer, DOX-A1-D8, reached Bmax at 91 ± 3.1% (Figure ) and as others have noted may be due to steric hindrance. An alternative explanation is that due to the
high surface energy of HAp, more hydrophobic molecules have reduced
binding. This hypothesis is unlikely
as it would predict that slight variations in HAp concentration would
have little effect on Bmax. There was
very little difference between branched and linear unimers of close
molecular weights, DOX-A2-D8 and DOX-A2-K-D4, reaching Bmax at 78 ± 4.6% and 83 ± 6.4%, respectively.

In vitro
adsorption of DOX-containing micelles (52.5 μM)
to HAp at subsaturation levels of HAp (7.5 mg·mL–1).

Release Kinetics
Osteosarcoma provides a unique microenvironment,
which can be exploited by a pH-sensitive hydrazone bond. The hydrazone
bond is stable at pH 7.4 but labile at acidic pHs. Therefore, it would
be cleaved in endosomal compartments (assuming cell internalization). Supposing strong adsorption of micelles with
HAp occurs, an osteoclast-assisted release mechanism in the interstitial
space is hypothesized. Osteoclasts, as stated previously, are highly
active in osteosarcoma. The micelles that preferentially bind to resorption
surfaces will be covered by osteoclasts. The osteoclasts then produce
a sealing zone or strong bond to the bone. A resorption lacuna will
be formed underneath the osteoclasts as these osteoclasts release
cathepsin K, degrading the collagen fiber network, as well as protons,
reducing the pH and degrading the HAp. The reduced pH could cleave hydrazone bond and release the DOX from
the unimers. Incidentally, other bone metastases also recruit osteoclasts.
In turn, the osteoclasts, during resorption, release essential growth
factors trapped in bone. These micelles
utilize osteoclast-assisted release, and therefore might have the
potential to treat bone metastases.

Though lacunae have a pH
of around 4–4.5, other groups measure hydrazone release kinetics
at pH of 5.5 mimicking conditions in an endosome., By using a pH of 5.5 for our studies we are able to compare to what
others have observed while gaining insight into what we might expect
with lacunae release. Trends in release seem to mirror the micellar
thermodynamic stability established in the CMC experiments. As stability
of micelles increases, the rate of DOX release decreases (Figure ).

In vitro release profiles of DOX from DOX-containing micelles
(at
pH 5.5 and pH 7.4 at 37 °C) measured by HPLC. Of note, all of
the pH 7.4 data are on the baseline due to lack of detectable DOX
release.

We see a sigmoidal curve that
may indicate a certain degree of
destabilization is necessary in order to achieve rapid release. Ultimately,
pH 5.5 release kinetics falls in the normal range of what is observed
in the literature.,,, However, at pH 7.4 we observed no detectable
release, which appears to be slightly lower than what others have
reported.,,,

A lower than expected release of DOX from DOX-A4-K-D4
micelles
was observed. This is most probably connected to increased thermodynamic
stability of the micelles. We hypothesize that more thermodynamically
stable secondary packing is responsible for the low release rate of
DOX from DOX-A4-K-D4 micelles. Before self-assembly into micelles,
the unimers were eluted at higher elution time (12.5 min) indicating
hydrophobic character. However, after extended incubation (48 h, 37
°C) the peak moved to 3.6 min, indicating a very hydrophilic
molecule such as an intact micelle. Release kinetics of the DOX-A4-K-D4
following incubation at 37 °C was consistent with the HPLC observations.

Cytotoxicity
IC50 values of DOX-containing
micelles were determined and correlated with the drug release data.
Free DOX had a lower IC50 value of 0.077 ± 0.009 μM
than the micelles (p &lt; 0.01) (Figure ). Three of the micelles (DOX-A1-D8 0.39 ±
0.012 μM, DOX-A2-D8 0.39 ± 0.021 μM, and DOX-A4-K-D4
0.45 ± 0.026 μM) did not differ significantly from each
other (p &gt; 0.05). However, DOX-A2-K-D4 consistently
produced slightly higher mean IC50 values (0.61 ±
0.086 μM) than the linear micelles (p &lt;
0.05), it was not statistically different from DOX-A4-K-D4 (p &gt; 0.05), its most similar compound. Both DOX-A2-K-D4
and
DOX-A4-K-D4 demonstrated slower release kinetics that may have reduced
the IC50 slightly for the test. Most importantly, each
unimer delivered its payload and demonstrated that it is pharmacologically
active and has potential for future in vivo studies. DOX-A4-K-D4 ended
up being the most interesting because it forms the most stable micelle,
yet retains nearly all the activity of the others. In addition, the
cytotoxicity of A1-D8 (control; unimer without DOX) was minimal (94
± 5.2% cell viability at 1000 μM).

Cytotoxicity of free
DOX and micelles with variable structure toward
human osteosarcoma Saos-2 cells following 72 h incubation.

Conclusions
The premise of this
study was to design, characterize, and optimize
unimers for the treatment of osteosarcoma. Each unimer component has
one or more purposes for being included. Most importantly, the targeting
ligand provided both hydrophilicity to the amphiphile as well as targeting
to HAp. The drug, being covalently bound to the unimers via hydrazone
bond, provided hydrophobic stability in addition to its therapeutic
properties. DOX-A1-D8 is the simplest unimer containing drug, degradable
hydrazone bond, a single AUA, miniPEG, and a d-Asp8 targeting
ligand. By adding an additional AUA to DOX-A1-D8 we increased hydrophobicity
(DOX-A2-D8) as well as the thermodynamic stability of the micelles.
Branched unimers incorporating longer hydrophobic chains were synthesized;
DOX conjugates of branched unimers (DOX-A2-K-D4 and DOX-A4-K-D4) possessed
higher stability and smaller size of the micelles when compared to
linear architectures. Each unimer maintained its affinity to hydroxyapatite
adsorption when in a micellar assembly. In addition, at reduced pH
(5.5) the hydrazone bond hydrolyzed and released unaltered DOX. The
rate of DOX release can be extended by increasing the stability of
the micelles. Ultimately, each micelle was able to release unmodified
drug in vitro.

Future studies may benefit from several of the
micelle’s
characteristics. The sizes of the assembled micelles are above the
renal threshold and we expect to see increased circulation and improved
pharmacokinetics as compared to a targeted small molecule. Other key
aspects of this delivery system include its potential for diverse
applications. For example, this construct might be used to target
a variety of bone maladies with other hydrophobic drugs that contain
ketone or aldehyde groups in their structures. Additional imaging
moieties may be introduced and coassembled into micelles providing
location and biodistribution information about the drug delivery system.

Experimental
Procedures
Materials
Solvents, dimethylformamide (DMF), dichloromethane
(DCM), methanol (MeOH), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), ethyl acetate,
ether, and acetonitrile (ACN) were purchased from VWR, Fisher Scientific
or Sigma-Aldrich and were reagent grade or better. Piperidine, diisopropyl
ethylamine (DIPEA), trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), triisoproyl silane
(TIS), 11-aminoundecanoic acid (AUA), hydrazine, sodium carbonate
(Na2CO3), and Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle
Medium F-12 (DMEM) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Magnesium sulfate
and sodium sulfate were purchased from Fisher Scientific and Macron
Chemicals, respectively. 1-(9-Fluorenyl)methylchloroformate (Fmoc-Cl),
Fmoc N-hydroxysuccinimide ester (Fmoc-OSu), and 2-[4-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazin-1-yl]ethanesulfonic
acid (HEPES) were purchased from AKsci. 1-[Bis(dimethylamino)methylene]-1H-1,2,3-triazolo[4,5-b]pyridinium 3-oxide
hexafluorophosphate (HATU), chloro-trityl resin, hydroxybenzotriazole
(HOBt), and N-9-fuorenylmethoxycarbonyl-d-aspartic acid (Fmoc-d-Asp-OH) were purchased from P3Biosystems.
Diisopropylcarbodiimide (DIC) was purchased from Research Chemicals. N-2-N-6-Bis(9-fluorenylmethyloxycarbonyl)-l-lysine (Fmoc-Lys(Fmoc)-OH) was purchased from Aapptec and
9-fluorenylmethoxycarbonyl-8-amino-3,6-dioxaoctanoic acid (Fmoc-miniPEG)
was purchased from BioBlocks. CAPTAL S hydroxyapatite (HAp) was purchased
from Plasma Biotal Ltd. Holey carbon grids were purchased from Electron
Microscopy Sciences. Sephadex LH20 beads were purchased from Amersham
Pharmacia Biotech AM. Doxorubicin (DOX) was a generous gift from Meiji
Seika Kaisha, Tokyo, Japan. 2-(2-Methoxy-4-nitrophenyl)-3-(4-nitrophenyl)-5-(2,4-disulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium monosodium salt (CCK-8) was purchased from
Dojindo. Human osteosarcoma Saos-2 cells were purchased from ATTC.
Fetal bovine serum (FBS) was purchased from Hyclone.

Fmoc-Hydrazine
(9-Fluorenylmethyl carbazate)
Fmoc-hydrazine
was synthesized as previously described with modifications. Briefly, 1 g Fmoc-Cl was dissolved in 20 mL
of precooled ether, and this solution was added dropwise to 5×
excess hydrazine suspension in ether over 1 h, immediately producing
a white precipitate. The reaction was stirred overnight and then added
to 200 mL ethyl acetate under strong stirring. Water was slowly added
and the organic solution was washed twice. The organic layer was transferred
to a flask, and dried with anhydrous Na2SO4.
Removal of ethyl acetate was performed by evaporation under vacuum
to get a white flurry product. Yield: 75%, mp 169.2–170.8 °C.

1H NMR (DMSO-d6) δ
8.36 (s, 1H, CONH), 7.31–7.90 (m, 8H, Ar), 4.28
(m, 2H, CHCH2), 4.23 (m, 1H, CHCH2), 4.12 (br, s, 2H, NH2).

Fmoc-11-aminoundecanoic Acid
(11-(9-Fluorenylmethoxycarbonylamino)undecanoic
acid)) (Fmoc-AUA) was synthesized as previously described with slight modification. 11-Aminoundecanoic
acid (1 g, 5 mmol) was suspended in 50 mL of H2O–dioxane
(v/v 4:1). The pH of the suspension was adjusted to 9 using 10% Na2CO3. After the mixture became a clear solution
under reflux, Fmoc N-hydroxysuccinimide ester (Fmoc-OSu;
1.68 g, 5 mmol) in dioxane (50 mL) was added dropwise over 20 min.
The reflux was kept overnight. Then, the cloudy mixture was diluted
with H2O and acidified with 1 N HCl to pH 3. Dichloromethane
(2 × 200 mL) was added to extract the product. The organic phase
was washed with brine twice, dried with anhydrous magnesium sulfate,
and then concentrated by rotary evaporation under reduced pressure.
A white powder (1.83 g) was obtained with yield 86%; mp 127.8–128.5
°C.

1H NMR (DMSO-d6) δ 7.30–7.90 (m, 8H, Ar), 7.25 (t, 1H, CONH), 4.28 (m, 2H, CHCH2), 4.18 (m, 1H, CHCH2), 2.95 (m, 2H, NHCH2), 2.17 (m, 2H, CH2CO), 1.47 (2H, NHCH2CH2). 1.38 (2H, CH2CH2CO), 1.24 (12H, (CH2)6).

Solid Phase Peptide Synthesis
Synthesis
of unimers
was performed by standard Fmoc solid phase peptide synthesis. 2-Chlorotrityl
chloride resin (1.11 mmol/g) was loaded with 0.4 mmol/g Fmoc-hydrazine
in DCM (a small amount of DMF was added due to solubility) overnight.
A 4-fold excess of DIPEA was added as a base. The resin was then capped
with mixture of DCM:MeOH:DIPEA 17:2:1 (20 mL × 4) followed by
washing three times with DCM and DMF, consecutively. After removal
of Fmoc-group with 20% (v/v) piperidine in DMF, a 2.5-fold excess
of Fmoc-AUA was added using DIC/HOBt as coupling agents. The completion
of each coupling step was verified by Kaiser test. To prepare branched
unimers, Fmoc-Lys(Fmoc)-OH was added following AUA. The branched unimers
have 4 aspartic acids on each branch with a total of eight instead
of eight consecutive aspartic acids on the linear unimers (Scheme ). Upon completion the resin was washed with DMF,
DCM, and MeOH and dried in a desiccator. Unimers were then cleaved
using 95:2.5:2.5 TFA:TIS:H2O and precipitated in diethyl
ether. Precipitated product was dried and purified on a preparative
HPLC column (Agilent Zorbax 300SB-C18) using water with 0.1% trifluoroacetic
acid (TFA) as the aqueous phase and ACN with 0.1% TFA as the organic
phase. Purified fractions had their volume reduced under low-pressure
rotoevaporation followed by freeze–drying. Purity was confirmed
using HPLC (see ).
Molecular weight for each unimer was confirmed using positive mode
MALDI-ToF mass spectrometry (see ). Linear unimers are abbreviated A1-D8 and A2-D8 indicating that
they have eight consecutive aspartic acids (D8) and delineating whether
they have one (A1) or two (A2) AUA moieties, respectively. The branched
unimers are labeled A2-K-D4 and A4-K-D4 indicating their lysine branch
(K) and the four consecutive aspartic acids (D4), as well as two (A2)
or four (A4) AUAs, respectively. Both linear and branched unimers
contain 8-amino-3,6-dioxaoctanoic acid (miniPEG) between the aspartic
acids and the rest of the sequence.

Conjugation to DOX
Purified unimers were conjugated
to DOX via hydrazone bond using a 1:2 unimer to DOX molar ratio. Dry
DMSO was added to the dry ingredients until the mixture fully dissolved
and mixed freely (approximately 10 μL DMSO to 1 mg DOX/unimer).
The solution was mixed in the dark at room temperature for 3 days
and the progression of the reaction was tracked by HPLC (data not
shown). Following the reaction, free DOX was removed using an LH20
column. The DMSO reaction solution was diluted 5-fold in methanol
and added to an LH20 column. Methanol was used as an eluent and collected
fractions were dried under nitrogen yielding DOX-A1-D8, DOX-A2-D8,
DOX-A1-K-D4, and DOX-A4-K-D4. The final DOX content in micelles was
determined using UV–vis spectrophotometry by measuring the
methanol solution absorbance at 495 nm. Purity was confirmed using
HPLC (see ).

Dynamic
Light Scattering (DLS)
Size, polydispersity,
and critical micelle concentration (CMC) measurements were all taken
using a Wyatt DynaPro Plate Reader II and analyzed using Dynamics
7 software. Each DOX-bound unimer was dissolved in 0.01 M HEPES, pH
7.4. For CMC measurement, dilutions were made in triplicate from 5
mg/mL down to 0.01 μg/mL on 96-well plates (NUNC optical bottom
black polystyrene plates), final volumes per well being 200 μL.
Plates were then sealed and refrigerated overnight prior to running
DLS at 20 °C. For size/polydispersity measurements, samples with
concentration of 1 mg/mL were selected to coincide with cryoEM measurements
(see below).

Cryo-Electron Microscopy (CryoEM)
CryoEM (FEI Tecnai
12) was used to confirm the size of the micelles as well as observe
their shape. Samples were prepared at room temperature at 1 mg/mL
DOX-bound unimers in 0.01 M HEPES. The samples were then manually
added to holey-carbon-coated copper grids. A FEI Vitrobot then blotted
and plunged the samples into liquid ethane. The samples were transferred
to liquid nitrogen until imaged.

Hydroxyapatite Adsorption
Assay
Hydroxyapatite (HAp)
adsorption was assessed for each DOX-bound unimer. HAp was added to
microcentrifuge tubes (3 mg/50 μL HEPES vehicle) followed by
350 μL of 60 μM DOX-bound unimer solution. The centrifuge
tube was then vortexed for the allotted time and centrifuged at 7000
rpm for 1 min. The supernatant was measured at 480 nm on a Cary 400Bio
UV-Spectrophotometer. Data points measured in triplicates included
times 0, 15 s, 30 s, 1 min, and 2 min.

DOX Release Kinetics
DOX release kinetics was measured
using an Agilent 1100 HPLC with heated autosampler plate. Samples
were prepared in triplicate at 0.1 mg/mL DOX-bound unimer in pH 5.5
and 7.4 in 1 M HEPES solutions. Samples were placed in the HPLC autosampler,
which retained a temperature of 37 °C over the course of the
experiment. Samples were run at 0, 1, 2, 3, 5, 10, and 24 h. pH dependent
DOX release was measured using HPLC UV absorption and calculated using
the following equation:

Cytotoxicity
Cytotoxicity
of DOX
bound unimers and
free DOX toward human osteosarcoma Saos-2 cells was assessed using
the CCK-8 bioassay. Saos-2 cells were maintained in DMEM/F12 medium
supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum. Plates (CELLSTAR TC 96-well)
were seeded at a cell density of 4000 cells/well and were administered
dilutions of each unimer in triplicates. Concentrations administered
reflected hydrazone bound DOX content in each micelle and was confirmed
using spectrophotometer measurements in MeOH. Following a 72 h treatment
with drug, cytotoxicity was measured using CCK-8 per manufacturers
instructions. Each assay was repeated 3 times, IC50 values
were expressed as the mean ± SEM of three experiments. The data
were analyzed using one-way analysis of variance to compare more than
two groups, with p-values &lt;0.05 considered to
be significant.

Supporting Information Available
Physicochemical characterization
of compounds, unimers, and micelles (HPLC, MALDI-ToF MS, NMR). This
material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc500392x_si_001.pdf

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank
Dr. David Belnap for his help with cryogenic electron
microscopy. We are grateful to Dr. Huaizhong Pan for his help advising
the preliminary research. The research was supported in part by NIH
grant RO1 GM69847 (to J.K.).

Abbreviations
ACNacetonitrile

AUA11-aminoundecanoic acid

CCK-82-(2-methoxy-4-nitrophenyl)-3-(4-nitrophenyl)-5-(2,4-disulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium monosodium salt

d-Asp8d-aspartic
acid octapeptide

DIPEAdiisopropyl ethylamine

DMEM/F12Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium F-12

DMFdimethylformamide

DMSOdimethyl sulfoxide

DOXDoxorubicin

FBSfetal bovine serum

Fmoc-Cl1-(9-fluorenyl)methylchloroformate

Fmoc-d-Asp-OHN-9-fuorenylmethoxycarbonyl-d-aspartic
acid

Fmoc-Lys(Fmoc)-OHN-2-N-6-bis(9-fluorenylmethyloxycarbonyl)-l-lysine

HAphydroxyapatite

HATU1-[bis(dimethylamino)methylene]-1H-1,2,3-triazolo[4,5-b]pyridinium 3-oxid hexafluorophosphate

HEPES2-[4-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazin-1-yl]ethanesulfonic
acid

MeOHmethanol

miniPEG8-amino-3,6-dioxaoctanoic
acid

Saos-2human
osteosarcoma

SEMstandard error of the mean

TFAtrifluoroacetic acid

TIStriisoproyl silane

