Introduction
Direct drug conjugates
generally consist of three distinct parts:
the targeting ligand, the linker region, and the drug. The idea, simply put, is to conjugate a highly toxic and
nonspecific drug to a cell-specific targeting ligand using a chemical
linker region. This process has the potential to alter the pharmacodynamics
and kinetics of the original drug with the goal to enhance therapeutic
efficacy while minimizing adverse event associated with the treatment. In terms of cancer therapies, the goal is to
enhance accumulation or internalization of the conjugate within the
tumor while minimizing toxic, nonspecific interactions with healthy
cells and clearance organs.,

One of the major
hurdles in developing efficacious direct drug
conjugates is releasing active drug from the targeting agent. Most
drug conjugates are inactive, existing as pro-drugs. Thus, the conjugate
must be designed to be stable while traveling in the blood system
but able to release active drug within the tumor or directly within
cancer cells. Typically this is performed using physiological properties
associated with either the tumor environment or endocytic pathways. Endocytic pathways are particularly advantageous
as the drug is released intracellularly to directly exert cytotoxic
effects and is not free to circulate through the bloodstream in an
active form.,

Many endocytic release strategies
focus on internalization via
the canonical clathrin-mediated endocytic pathway that includes internalization
into coated pits that mature into endosomes, and eventually the ligand
accumulates in low pH lysosomes. This
well-defined pathway has multiple physical properties which can be
used for releasing the drug including decreasing pH as the ligand
progresses from endosomal to lysosomal compartments as well as lysosomal
specific proteases, such as the cathespins., However,
recent advances from studying endocytosis have highlighted that this
pathway is one of many endocytic pathways that cells utilize to internalize
extracellular ligands including raft-mediated, Arf6, Clic Geek, and
macropinocytosis, to mention a few., Many of these
internalization pathways do not share the same trafficking route as
the canonical clathrin-mediated pathway and can result in delivery
of the cargo through different physiological environments and alternative
subcellular locations. As such, release of free drug from the conjugate
may be suboptimal. For example, certain raft-mediated endocytic mechanisms
do not proceed through low pH endosomes, thus impairing release by
pH sensitive linkers.− However, this type of trafficking pattern may be
useful for delivering pH sensitive cargo such as nucleic acids or
protein toxins., Thus, knowledge of endocytic
trafficking patterns has the potential to allow for better pairing
of both linkers and cargo with a given targeting ligand.

This
study sought to develop a method that identifies cell-targeting
ligands that are specifically internalized by cancer cells and utilize
a defined endocytic pathway using phage display biopanning. Current
phage biopanning methods focus on identifying peptides that bind to
and/or mediate cellular uptake. Little attention has been given to
identifying peptides that have the added level of specificity for
delivery to a subcellular location. Understanding the mechanism of
endocytosis may allow for better pairing of a targeting ligand with
a linker that is cleavable based on the anticipated subcellular trafficking
which is associated with a given mechanism of endocytosis.,

This proof of concept study utilizes phage display biopanning
coupled
with specific inhibitors of endocytosis to identify peptides that
both selectively accumulate in cancer cells and are bias toward the
noninhibited mechanism of endocytosis. H1299 nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells were treated with
chlorpromazine to inhibit clathrin-mediated endocytosis, then subjected to side-by-side phage display
biopanning on cells in the presence and absence of the inhibitor allowing
us to identify phage clones that are group specific and clones that
are enriched in both conditions. Using this method, we identified
two potential targeting peptides. The first peptide (ATEPRKQYATPRVFWTDAPG,
named 15.1) appeared in both the chlorpromazine treated and nontreated
group. Our group previously identified this peptide from a panning
on HCC15 NSCLC cells and demonstrated that this peptide accumulates
in a peri-nuclear subcellular location in H1299 cells. This study demonstrates that HCC15.1 primarily
internalizes via a cholesterol dependent mechanism of endocytosis.
The second peptide is a novel peptide here termed H1299.3 (LQWRRDDNVHNFGVWARYRL).
It was present only in the nonchlorpromazine treated group, and appears
to internalize primarily through a clathrin-dependent mechanism of
endocytosis. Further, the peptide demonstrates selective accumulation
in cancers cells and colocalizes with Lamp-1, a marker for lysosomes,
indicating that H1299.3 may utilize the canonical clathrin-mediated
endocytic pathway to selectively accumulate in cancer cells. Thus,
we present a proof of concept phage display method that may allow
for identification of cancer specific peptides that internalize via
a known mechanism of endocytosis. This method may facilitate rapid
discovery of efficacious direct drug conjugates by allowing informed
selection of linkers and cargo based on endocytic trafficking.

Results
Novel
Panning Scheme
We developed the phage display
scheme outlined in Figure  to select peptides
that both accumulate specifically in a given cell type and internalize
via a known mechanism of endocytosis. Phage display biopanning in
Round 1 is performed using established protocols with cell binding
and internalization as the selection criteria. The amplified phage
recovered from Round 1 is then split into two groups. One group is
treated with a specific inhibitor of endocytosis and one group remains
untreated. The remaining rounds of panning are then carried out in
parallel with each group, sequencing selected clones at each round.
Clones enriched in one or both groups are then further characterized
as targeting ligands for drug conjugates.

Phage display biopanning
selection to identify cancer specific
peptides that accumulate via known mechanism of endocytosis. (A) In
this scheme phage display biopanning techniques are used to isolate
peptides that are specific for cancer cells as well as internalize
via a known mechanism of endocytosis. Round 1 of panning is performed
according to standard protocols. The output of round 1 is then split
into two groups. One group is treated with a specific inhibitor of
endocytosis while the second group remains untreated. Panning proceeds
in parallel between both groups. Phage clones are sequenced in both
groups starting in round 3 to identify potential hits between groups.
(B) Results from H1299 biopanning experiment using chlorpromazine
as endocytic inhibitor. One clone, HCC15.1 is present in both the
treated and nontreated groups, while H1299.3 is present only in the
nontreated group. HCC15.1 and H1299.3 selectively internalize into
H1299 cells 18- and 11-fold greater than control phage, respectively.

Paramount to this protocol is
utilizing inhibitors that are specific
to a mechanism of endocytosis. Chlorpromazine at 125 μM specifically
inhibited 63% of clathrin-mediated endocytosis in H1299 cells as determined
by reduction of transferrin uptake. At this concentration minimal
cytotoxicity and no effect on raft-mediated endocytosis was observed
(, data
not shown). Unfortunately, consistent inhibition of raft-mediated
endocytosis in H1299 cells using pharmacological inhibitors proved
difficult in our hands. Therefore, it was necessary to compare between
the chlorpromazine-treated and nontreated cells to identify clones
that internalize via clathrin-mediated endocytosis.

After verifying
inhibition of clathrin-mediated endocytosis, biopanning
was performed on H1299 cells according to the scheme outlined in Figure  using chlorpromazine as the endocytic inhibitor.
Starting at Round 3, 6–12 phage clones per group were sequenced
(). We
identified a novel phage clone LQWRRDDNVHNFGVWARYRL,
termed H1299.3 by observing repeat sequences in the nontreated group
(Figure b, ). H1299.3 phage clone was observed twice
in round 3 and again in round 4. This clone was not observed the chlorpromazine
treated cells. Further, the peptide was not listed in existing peptide
databases, and blast searches indicated the peptide did not align
to a known protein or contain punitive domains/motifs.

However,
at later rounds of biopanning both the chlorpromazine
and nontreated groups converged on the phage clone ATEPRKQYATPRVFWTDAPG
previously identified in our lab as HCC15.1 (6 for 6 clones in round
5 for both groups). This phage clone was selected on the HCC15 NSCLC
cell line and has affinity for H1299 cells as reported. As such, it is not surprising that this clone
was isolated again. No other repeat sequences were observed in this
panning experiment, nor were consensus sequences observed among phage
clones ().

Both phage clones accumulate in H1299 cells above the background
internalization of the library. The selectivity values of each clone
were calculated by measured the difference in accumulation between
the selected phage and a control, random phage, in H1299 cells using
the following formula [(Phage Clone[Output Titer/Input Titer])/(Control
Phage[Output Titer/Input Titer])]. HCC15.1 and H1299.3 accumlated
18- and 11-fold above control phage in H1299 cells (Figure ). Thus, both HCC15.1 and H1299.3 phage clones accumulate
in H1299 cells and the binding is mediated by the displayed peptide.
However, HCC15.1 was the convergent clone probably due to both slightly
higher internalization as well as unintended selection pressures which
are inherent to all phage panning protocols. Early sequencing, starting in round 3, allowed for partial mitigation
of amplification bias and other unintended selection pressure by allowing
the observation of enriched clones that accumulate in H1299 cells
that might be lost in later rounds. It is important to note that these
clones were isolated without a negative selection step. Thus, highly
selective clone can be identified using this technique without the
use of a negative selection step.

Free Peptides Mediate Cellular
Internalization
Previous
studies by our group demonstrated that multimeric presentation of
peptides on lysine cores is an effective method for retaining specificity
and affinity of peptides selected from pIII displayed libraries. We therefore synthesized dimeric and tetrameric
H1299.3 peptide with a PEG10 spacer on each peptide monomer
between a biotinylated mono- or trilysine core, respectively. The
peptides are conjugated to streptavidin-Phycoerythrin (SA-PE) and
incubated with cells of interest. Surface bound extracellular peptide
was removed using an acid wash prior to flow cytometry analysis allowing
for measurement of internalized peptide. As shown in Figure , the free peptides are able to bind and internalize
into H1299 cells, again indicating that this process is peptide mediated
and not dependent on the phage particle. A negligible difference in
internalization was observed between dimeric and tetrameric forms
of H1299.3 by flow cytometry (Figure ). Thus,
increasing valency past the dimeric format does not improve cell binding
or internalization. This is particularly fortunate as the tetrameric
peptide has limited solubility in aqueous solution. Monomeric peptide
was not tested in this study. Uptake of the H1299.3 dimeric peptide
is concentration dependent over a 10–50 nM range as predicted
for a peptide that internalizes via receptor-mediated endocytosis.
Similar to the selectivity data, H1299.3 accumulated less than tetrameric
HCC15.1 in H1299 cells (mean afu H1299.3 = 138.3 ± 33.7, and
HCC15.1 = 844.9 ± 50.8).

H1299.3 peptide mediates cellular internalization.
(A) Representative
histogram generated from treating H1299 cells with 50 nM of dimeric
and tetrameric forms H1299.3 conjugated to PE (green and red traces,
respectively). The black trace is H1299 cells not treated with peptide.
(B) H1299.3 dimeric peptide titration demonstrates dose dependent
internalization. (C) Time course of H1299.3 dimeric peptide accumulation
in H1299 cells. (D) Internalization of H1299.3 in a panel of NSCLC
cell lines. Internalization values ranged from 8.6 ± 1.9 to 303.3
±72.2 mean A.F.U. Importantly, H1299.3 demonstrated minimal accumulation
in HBEC3 cells, a model of normal lung epithelial cells, compared
to all NSCLC cell excluding H460 (p &lt; 0.01).

In addition, we also performed
a time course to monitor H1299.3
accumulation in H1299 cells (Figure c). Dimeric
H1299.3 internalized in an exponential fashion, with significant uptake
observed as early as 5 min and saturating after 30 min. This is consistent
with peptide internalization via receptor mediated endocytosis.

H1299.3 Differentially Accumulates in NSCLC Cell Lines
Internalization
of H1299.3 was determined on a panel of NSCLC cell
lines (Figure d). H1299.3 displays significantly
lower internalization in Human Bronchial Epithelial Cells (HBEC3)
a model for normal lung epithelium compared to most NSCLC cell lines.
Thus, the peptide has a window for selective accumulation into lung
cancer cells. In addition, H1299.3 internalized into multiple histological
subtypes of NSCLC including Large Cell (H1299 mean afu = 138.3 ±
33.8) and Adenocarcinoma (H2009 mean afu = 104.9 ± 15.5 and A549,
mean afu = 303.3 ± 72.2). However, the peptide does not accumulate
in all NSCLC cells; no significant uptake is seen in the large cell
line, H460 (mean afu = 8.6 ± 1.9). Our previous studies demonstrate
that HCC15.1 differentially accumulates in these cell lines. However, H1299.3 and HCC15.1 display differential
pattern of accumulation across NSCLC lines. Most striking is HCC15.1
has no affinity for A549 cells. The differential cell-specificity
may indicate that these peptides internalize via different mechanisms
and/or bind to different cellular receptors.

H1299.3 and HCC15.1 Utilize
Different Types of Receptor-Mediated
Endocytosis
We sought to determine the primary mechanism
of endocytosis of H1299.3 and HCC15.1 peptides in H1299 cells. H1299
cells were preincubated with pharmacological inhibitors before addition
of the H1299.3 dimer and internalization of the peptide was quantitated.
A significant 83% (p &lt; 0.01) reduction in H1299.3
internalization is observed in the presence of chlorpromazine, while
treatment with nystatin to block raft mediated endocytosis resulted
in only an 18% reduction in internalization (N.S.) compared to nontreated
H1299 cells (Figure a). Incubation of H1299.3
with H1299 cells at 4 °C also resulted in a significant loss
of peptide internalization (p &lt; 0.01). Finally,
a 76% and 77% reduction in internalization is observed in H1299 cells
treated with either of two different siRNA oligos targeting clathrin
heavy chain (CHC) (p &lt; 0.01). Minimal perturbation
is observed in H1299.3 uptake in H1299 cells treated with control
siRNA (7% reduction, N.S.). CHC protein knockdown in H1299 cells treated
with siRNA oligos was confirmed using Western blot to measure relative
CHC protein levels (Figure c,d). The 78% and
86% reduction in CHC protein levels in H1299 cells treated with one
of two siRNA oligos against CHC, respectively, is consistent with
the decrease in peptide uptake. In comparison, treatment with control
siRNA oligo resulted in a 17% decrease in CHC expression levels compared
to control. In sum, these data support that the H1299.3 peptide undergoes
clathrin-mediated endocytosis.

Peptides H1299.3 and HCC15.1 primarily
internalize via different
mechanisms. (A) Internalization of H1299.3 in H1299 cells treated
with selective inhibitors of endocytosis. Treatment of H1299 cells
with inhibitors to clathrin-mediated endocytosis including chlorpromazine
and siRNA toward CHC significantly reduced internalization (p &lt; 0.01). Membrane fluidity was also a significant factor
for internalization (p &lt; 0.01). (B) Internalization
of HCC15.1 in H1299 cells treated with selective inhibitor of endocytosis.
Only treatment with Nystatin and 4 °C resulted in significant
reduction in HCC15.1 internalization (p &lt; 0.01)
indicating the necessity of cholesterol and membrane fluidity for
internalization of HCC15.1. (C) Western blot demonstrating clathrin
heavy chain (CHC) knockdown using targeted siRNA in H1299 cells. (D)
Quantification of CHC knockdown in H1299 cells, normalized for loading,
using β-actin as loading control.

The mechanism of endocytosis of HCC15.1 in H1299 cells was
determined
by repeating the above assays (Figure b).
Nystatin treatment significantly decreased HCC15.1 internalization
(82%, p &lt; 0.01) while chlorpromazine treatment
had minimal effect on internalization of HCC15.1 (2% reduction, N.S.).
Incubating HCC15.1 with H1299 cells at 4 °C resulted in loss
of peptide internalization (p &lt; 0.01). Finally,
treatment with either of two siRNAs targeting CHC or a control siRNA
had minimal effect on HCC15.1 internalization (12%, 1%, and 4% reduction,
respectively, N.S.). Unlike the H1299.3 peptide, HCC15.1 does not
utilize a clathrin-mediated pathway for internalization but most likely
utilizes a raft-dependent mechanism.

H1299.3 Colocalizes with
Lamp-1
Live cell, confocal
fluorescent microscopy was used to determine subcellular accumulation
of these peptides. H1299.3 subcellular localization was determined
by conjugating the H1299.3 dimeric peptide directly to AF546 using
cysteine maleimide chemistry., A549 cells, transfected
with GFP-fusion constructs to mark organelles using the Bacmam 2.0
system purchased from Life Technologies,, were treated with H1299.3-AF546 (Figure ). A549 cells were used because they internalize the most H1299.3
peptide of the cell lines assayed, thus allowing for the greatest
observable signal with the lowest concentration of H1299.3 to avoid
false positive data. H1299.3 appears subcellularly as multiple distinguished
puncti. The puncti colocalized well with Lamp 1-GFP fusion and localized
poorly with both endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi markers. The Mander’s
coefficient for these groups are 0.608, 0.368, and 0.107 for Lamp
1, ER, and Golgi, respectively, indicating that strongest colocation
is with lysosomes. In addition, the matching puntci shape further
supports colocalization with lysosomes rather than ER. These data
further support the model that the H1299.3 peptide binds to an extracellular
receptor and is internalized by a conical clathrin-mediated process
which results in accumulation of ligand in a lysosome. By comparison,
previous studies demonstrated that HCC15.1 accumulates in a perinuclear
location and results in a distinctively different staining pattern
than the H1299.3 peptide.

H1299.3 colocalizes with
Lamp-1 in A549 cells. A549 cells treated
with H1299.3 peptide and an organelle tracking GFP fusion construct.
The top three panels are A549 cells treated with 100 nM of H1299.3
dimer conjugated to AF546, while the bottom three panels are negative
control A549 cells not treated with peptide but imaged in the red
channel. H1299.3 displays a distinct puncti type staining in all treated
wells, while no red signal is observed in control groups. A549 cells
were treated 24 h prior to imaging with BacMam 2.0 live imaging constructs
to stain organelles with GFP. A549 cells were stained from left to
right with Lamp 1-GFP as a lysosomal marker, KDEL-GFP as endoplasmic
reticulum marker, and N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase
2-GFP as Golgi marker. White arrows indicate costaining between Lamp-1-GFP
and H1299.3 peptide. Minimal colocalization is observed with other
organelle markers. Scale bar = 10 μm.

Discussion
Phage biopanning has proven to be an effective
method for identifying
cell-targeting ligands. However, little emphasis has been placed on
identifying cell-specific ligands which not only internalize into
a specific cell type but can also deliver cargo to a desired subcellular
location. Furthermore, only a few studies have actually determined
the subcellular localization of cell-targeting peptides after they
have been isolated from a combinatorial library., This study sought to develop a method that can identify targeting
peptides that both accumulate significantly in cancer cells and internalize
via a known mechanism of endocytosis. The overall goal is to enhance
selection of peptides that traffic to a desirable subcellular localization
of ligand accumulation. Recent literature has highlighted the need
for matching subcellular localization with drug release strategies
for both drug conjugate as well as nanoparticle platforms.−, Phage display techniques are
well suited to perform this task, as it is a nonbiased technique to
identifying targeting ligands and allows for wide versatility of selection
pressures to tune the output ligand to the desired specifications.

In addition, facilitating the ability to match a targeting ligand
with a linker understanding primary endocytic mechanism of a targeting
ligand may also guide cargo attachment. For example, small molecule
drugs may be delivered through the lysosomal pathway; however, trafficking
nucleic acid for RNAi therapies or protein toxins through a lysosomal
compartment is demonstrated to degrade cargo resulting in suboptimal
delivery., Thus, utilizing protocols that allow for
selection of major endocytic mechanisms and subsequent subcellular
localization have the potential to guide selection of both linker
and cargo resulting in more rapid creation of effective drug conjugates
of multiple subclasses.

This study capitalized on the multitude
of endocytic pathways and
the differential subcellular accumulation of ligands known to traffic
through these endocytic methods. Here we utilized chlorpromazine to
specifically inhibit clathrin-mediated endocytosis as a model to demonstrate
proof of principle. Our model relies on the specificity of endocytic
inhibition as well as consistency of inhibition across panning rounds.
As demonstrated in , chlorpromazine specifically inhibits clathrin-mediated
endocytosis. In our hands we could not specifically and consistently
knock down raft-mediated endocytosis using pharmacological inhibitors
in H1299 cells. Thus, this study used a comparison between chlorpromazine
treated and nontreated cells to identify peptides internalized via
clathrin-mediated endocytosis. By comparing side-by-side biopanning
experiments and sequencing clones at early rounds of enrichment, peptides
specific for raft-mediated and clathrin-mediated endocytosis were
identified.

During the panning, it was necessary to perform
one round of panning
before splitting the output into two groups to achieve consistency
in convergent sequences (data not shown). This step is probably necessary
due to the large loss of clonal diversity that occurs during the first
round of selection. Interestingly both
groups converged on a single phage clone HCC15.1. However, both HCC15.1
and H1299.3 had high selectivity values on H1299 cells. This result
may be due in part to amplification bias, which is known to occur
during phage selections. Additionally,
phage amplification is inherently dependent on the ability to isolate
viable phage clones able to infect bacteria. It is possible that phage
clones localized within particular subcellular compartments are more
difficult to identify, as they are degraded or difficult to isolate
from the cells. Early sequencing, starting in round 3, appears to
partially mitigate this problem by identifying clones enriched in
the selection population but which are not the convergent sequence
due to amplification bias and other factors that influence clonal
selection outside of the desired selection pressure. Interestingly,
both isolated clones exhibited high selectivity for H1299 cells without
using a negative selection step. Thus, this protocol generates highly
selective phage clones for the target cells without the need for an
additional negative selection step.

This panning scheme does
not allow for determining if a phage can
undergo endosomal escape after internalization, and our data do not
address the ability of the peptide to be eventually released into
the cytoplasm. Endosomal escape is considered an important step in
delivery biologically active cargo to cells. This scheme is focused on initial internalization of the phage and
selection of the internalization pathway. This may limit the applications
of phage/peptide selected using this protocol. However, layering of
addition selection criteria may be possible to select for phage that
internalize a defined mechanism and escape from endosomes. Additionally,
many endosomal escape agents have been reported to improve endosomal
release of biologics and can be incorporated into the targeting peptide
if necessary.

The data from the panning experiments indicate
that HCC15.1 and
H1299.3 may use different mechanisms of endocytosis because H1299.3
is present only in the nontreated group, whereas HCC15.1 was present
in both the nontreated and chlorpromazine treated groups. Subsequent
studies to confirm this observation indicated that HCC15.1 primarily
uses a cholesterol dependent mechanism of endocytosis implying a raft-mediated
mechanism of endocytosis (Figure b). On the
other hand H1299.3 is dependent on clathrin for endocytosis (Figure ). In addition, HCC15.1 accumulates in a perinuclear
location whereas H1299.3 accumulation
colocalizes with Lamp-1 in the periphery of the cell. Therefore, only
H1299.3 is internalized via clathrin-mediated mechanism and subsequently
is trafficked into lysosomes.

This study outlines a selection
scheme that is fundamentally different
than the recent papers published by Pasqualini et al. which also describe
a technique to identify peptides which accumulate in organelles., Pasqualini et al. selections rely on penetrin to mediate receptor-independent
internalization of the phage prior to accumulation in a given organelle.
Our technique differs in that internalization is driven by the receptor-mediated
internalization process, then the phage accumulates in an organelle
via intracellular trafficking pathways. This important difference
allows selection of ligands that maintain specificity for cancer cells
by preventing nonselective membrane penetration. This difference may
enhance the therapeutic window of drug conjugates targeted using peptides
selected by the method presented in this study by reducing off-target
effects resulting from cytotoxicity of nontargeted, healthy cells.

Both peptides identified from this panning scheme internalize into
NSCLC cell lines (Figure ). Also, both HCC15.1 and H1299.3 demonstrate minimal internalization
into a normal bronchial epithelial cells line, HBEC3 implying a potential
therapeutic window for both peptides to be used as targeting ligands.
However, despite both HCC15.1 and H1299.3 internalizing into a similar
panel of NSCLC cell lines, the peptides differentially accumulate
into these lines (Figure ). For example, minimal HCC15.1 accumulation is observed in
A549 while these cells internalized the greatest amount of H1299.3.
These data imply that these peptides may use different forms of endocytosis,
as predicted by the phage panning protocol, and/or the peptides may
bind to different receptors to mediate internalization. Currently,
the identities of receptors that bind HCC15.1 or H1299.3 are unknown.
Further, BLAST searches of H1299.3 did not reveal any strong leads
as to the receptor(s) that mediate binding and subsequent internalization
into cells. Despite lacking this data, these ligands still exhibit
differential trafficking patterns that may be beneficial for designing
drug conjugates. For example, HCC15.1 is potentially better suited
to delivering sensitive cargo as it appears to avoid organelles known
to degrade biologic molecules, whereas H1299.3 is possibly better
suited to delivering toxic chemotherapeutic pro-drugs due to the availability
of multiple lysosomal cleavable linkers that will release active drug
only intracellularly.

In conclusion, we developed a phage display
biopanning scheme to
identify peptides that both accumulate specifically in cancer cells
and internalize via a defined mechanism of endocytosis. We demonstrate
proof of principle for this approach by identifying two peptides that
were both specific for cancer cells but internalized via different
mechanisms of endocytosis. In the future we plan to expand the phage
display biopanning methodology to additional cell lines as well as
endocytic inhibitors in order to identify additional targeting ligands
and expand the utility of the method. Clearly, other specific inhibitors,
such as nystatin, filipin, or siRNA toward endocytic machinery, for
example, could be readily applied into the panning scheme potentially
resulting in the ability to tune this method to select peptides specific
for any type of endocytosis., Future studies using
H1299.3 as a targeting ligand in direct drug conjugate constructs
will determine the efficacy of H1299.3 as a targeting ligand. Finally,
further characterizing the details of H1299.3 subcellular trafficking
and identify the receptor H1299.3 uses for internalization may enhance
the utility of H1299.3 as a targeting ligand.

Methods
Cell Culture
Nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell
lines were graciously provided by the Hamon Center for Therapeutic
Research (UT Southwestern) and cultured according to previously reported
conditions. All cell lines were DNA fingerprinted
and routinely tested for Mycoplasma contamination.

Phage Display Biopanning
Phage display
was performed
with slight modification from established protocols.,, The library for this study consisted
of an M13 phage displaying a random 20-mer peptide fused to the pIII
protein., Phage display was performed using established
protocols with the exception of adding a 15 min preincubation period
with 100 μM chloroquine prior to addition of library. Chloroquine is used to neutralize lysosomal
pH with the assumption that neutralizing the low pH environment of
the lysosome will enhance recovery of intact phage which traffic to
the lysosome. As outlined in Figure , the
phage output from round 1 was split and side-by-side biopanning was
performed in the presence of 125 μM chlorpromazine or without
inhibitor. In round 1, 1 × 1010 phage articles were
added to H1299 cells. The library has an approximate diversity of
1 × 108 unique phage clones; thus, this represents
100 library equivalents, i.e., 100 copies of every unique phage present
in the library. For rounds 2–5 chlorpromazine was preincubated
with H1299 cells for 15 min prior to addition of phage. The cells
from each group were then incubated with phage for 1 h, then washed
2× with PBS++0.1%BSA (10 min total), washed 3×
with acid wash pH = 2.2 (10 min total) to remove extracellular bound
phage, and finally washed 2× with PBS++0.1%BSA (2
min total). Cells from each group were lysed using 30 mM Tris +0.05%
Triton-X-100, pH = 8, according to standard protocol. Lysates were mixed with K91 E. coli to amplify internalized phage after each round. A total of 6–12
phage clones were sequenced from the output of each group in rounds
3–5 using established colony PCR-based protocol. Phage selectivity was measured by calculating
the fold increase in internalization of the selected phage compared
to a control phage in H1299 cells using previously established methods.

Peptide Synthesis
All peptides were
synthesized using
standard FMOC solid phase synthesis techniques and purified to &gt;95%
purity using reverse phase HPLC as previously reported.,, Peptides were synthesized on
NovaPeg Rink amide resin (NovaBiochem) and had a polyethylene glycol
(PEG10) spacer (Polypure) between the c-terminus of the
peptide identified from the phage and the cysteine used to multimerize
the peptides (HCC15.1 – ATEPRKQYATPRVFWTDAPG-(PEG10)-C-NH2, H1299.3 – LQWRRDDNVHNFGVWARYRL-(PEG10)-C-NH2). The expected/observed mass for HCC15.1
and H1299.3 is 2991.52/2991.32 and 3305.06/3305.07, respectively.
The peptides were multimerized using tri and monolysine cores functionalized with maleimide, as previously
described, to create tetrameric and dimeric presented peptides, respectively., Biotinylated-glutamate or cysteine (NovaBioChem) was synthesized
into the core in order to conjugate dyes and cargos to the peptides
using streptavidin or cysteine-maleimide chemistry, respectively as
previously reported., H1299.3 dimeric peptide was conjugated
to C5-maleimide AF546 for imaging studies. H1299.3 and C5-maleimide
AF546 were dissolved in phosphate buffer (13 mM KH2PO4, 54 mM NaHPO4, pH 7.4. 9), then shaken for 1 h
at RT. The precipitate was washed 3 times in phosphate buffer then
dried in a desiccator O.N. The purity of the dimeric dye labeled peptide
was &gt;95% as measured by rpHPLC with the expected/observed mass
found
to be 8265.68/8265.12. The peptide was suspended in DMSO then culture
media for imaging studies. H1299.3 peptide solutions were made fresh
from lyophilized, stock stored at −20 °C, for each assay
due to poor stability in neutral pH solutions.

Flow Cytometry Assays
Established flow cytometry protocols
were used to determine the specificity of endocytic pathway inhibition,
demonstrate peptide internalization, and determine primary mechanism
of endocytosis. To determine specificity
of endocytosis, human Transferrin-AF488 (Life Technologies) was used
to measure clathrin-mediated endocytosis according to manufacturer’s
protocol and LacCer-BODIPY (Life Technologies) to monitor raft-mediated
endocytosis as previously reported., Nysatin (10–50
nM) and Chlorpromazine (50–150 μM) was titrated on H1299
cells and internalization of fluorescent markers of endocytosis were
used to determine selective inhibition of endocytosis. Inhibitors
were preincubated with cells for 15 min at 37 °C, 5% CO2, then fluorescent markers were added in the presence of inhibitor
and incubated for 30 min at 37 °C, 5% CO2. Cells were
washed 2× in PBS++0.1% BSA then fluorescent markers
were removed from the cell surface using acid wash (3× 10 min,
pH = 2.2) or washing with defatted BSA (Sigma) as previously described., Internalization was detected using flow cytometry to measure the
level of florescence in a single cell. Treatment with 125 μM
chlorpromazine resulted in 63% reduction in clathrin specific internalization
with minimal cytotoxicity (, data not shown).

For peptide internalization
assays, peptides were conjugated to streptavidin-phycoerythrin (SA-PE)
via the multimerization core using previously established protocols. For assays using HCC15.1, 10 nM of tetrameric
peptide was incubated with 1:1 molar ratio SA-PE for 30 min in PBS
with gentle agitation. Excess streptavidin binding sites were quenched
by the addition of RPMI 1640 which contains 0.2 mg/L d-biotin.
For assay using H1299.3, 10–50 nM of dimeric or tetrameric
peptide was incubated at 1:1 molar ratio of SA-PE for 30 min in phosphate
buffer (13 mM KH2PO4, 54 mM NaHPO4, pH 7.4) with gentle agitation and then quenched with RPMI 1640.
Peptide SA-PE conjugates were incubated with cells for 60 min at 37
°C, 5% CO2 to allow for peptide internalization. Surface
bound extracellular peptide was removed using acid wash (pH = 2.2),
then cell fluorescence was analyzed via flow cytometry. As determined
by titration of peptide, 50 nM of H1299.3 fluorescence conjugate resulted
in sufficient signal-to-noise ratio for detecting internalization
by the flow cytometry assay and thus this concentration is used for
subsequent internalization assays.

For inhibitor studies cells
were preincubated with 125 μM
chlorpromazine or 30 nM nystatin for 15 or 60 min, respectively, as
previously described, then treated with
either 10 nM of HCC15.1 or 50 nM of H1299.3 peptide SA-PE conjugate
in the presence of inhibitor for 30 min at 37 °C, 5% CO2. Surface bound extracellular peptide was removed using either acid
wash (pH = 2.2) or trypsinization (0.25% Trypsin with 2.21 mM EDTA,
Corning), then cells were analyzed for internal fluorescence using
flow cytometry.

Time Course Study
To measure internalization
of H1299.3
over time, the H1299.3 dimer was conjugated to IRDye800CW (Li-Cor)
using cysteine–maleimide chemistry as outlined above. The purity
of the dimeric dye labeled peptide was &gt;95% as measured by rpHPLC
with the expected/observed mass found to be 8422.31/8421.12. H1299-dye
conjugate (50 nM) was incubated with cells in black-walled, clear
bottom 96 well plate for the indicated time; surface bound conjugate
was removed using an acid wash. Fluorescence was read using an Odyssey
CLx imager (Li-Cor).

Clathrin siRNA Assays
H1299 cells
were treated with
siRNA oligos against clathrin heavy chain (CHC) or control siRNA oligo
using previously established protocols.− Briefly, H1299 cells
were seeded in 12 well plate at a density that allowed &gt;72 h of
growth
before confluence. Cells were treated with 5.5 μL of 20 μM
oligo solution and 6.5 μL of RNAiMax (Invitrogen) in total of
200 μL of RPMI 1640. Cells were washed with RPMI 1640 then treated
with 100 μL of siRNA oligo solution for 4 h at 37 °C, 5%
CO2. Cells were washed once, then placed back in complete
media. This procedure was repeated again the following day. At 72
h post initial treatment with siRNA oligos, cells were treated with
peptide SA-PE conjugates, described above, to measure peptide internalization
or utilized for Western blot assays to measure relative protein levels.
CHC knock down was confirmed by Western blot using monoclonal antibody
against CHC (TD.1, Santa Cruz-12734) as primary and goat anti-mouse-HRP
secondary antibody using established protocols.

Fluorescent Confocal Microscopy
Laser scanning confocal
microscopy was used to monitor live cell accumulation of peptide as
well as identify subcellular localization of peptide accumulation
using established protocols. A549 cells
were transfected with Golgi, ER, or Lysotracker GFP fusion constructs
using Bacman 2.0 (Life Technologies) system, according to manufacturer’s
protocol. Briefly 200 μL of trypsinized and washed A549 were
incubated with 1:10 dilution of baculovirus encoding for the fusion
protein at 37 °C 5% CO2 for 10 min with gentle mixing.
The cell/virus mixture was plated in polylysine coated glass bottom
dishes containing 1 mL of complete media. A549 cells were incubated
overnight at 37 °C, 5% CO2 to allow for cells to adhere
to the dish. The next day cells were washed and treated with 100 nM
of H1299.3 dimeric peptide, directly conjugated to Alexa Fluor 546
(Life Technologies) via cysteine-maleimide chemistry according to
manufacturer’s protocol, for 1 h at 37 °C, 5% CO2. Cells were washed 2× with complete media, then stained for
10 min with Hoechst 33342 (Molecular Probes) according to manufacturer’s
protocol. Live cells were imaged using a Nikon TE200-E laser scanning
confocal microscope, through a 30 μm pinhole visualizing the
blue, green, and red channels using 408, 488, and 543 nm lasers for
excitation, respectively.

Statistics
Statistical analysis
were performed using
GraphPad Prism software or Microsoft Excel. Flow cytometry values
are presented as mean with standard deviation or as percentage of
mean with standard deviation. In vitro experiments were performed
a minimum of 3 independent times using multiple replicates per experiment.
Reported p-values are paired or unpaired, two tailed t tests (where appropriate). A p-value
≤0.05 was considered statistically significant. Nonsignificant
results are indicated throughout the text as N.S. Colocalization studies
were analyzed for Mander’s coefficient using ImageJ software
with the JaCoP plugin

Supporting Information Available
Figures quantifying specificity
of clathrin inhibition in H1299 cells using pharmacological inhibitors,
and a complete list of phage clones sequenced in this study. This
material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc500326x_si_001.pdf

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work
was supported by the Welch Foundation (I-1622) and
the NIH/NCI (R01 CA164447). B.J.U. was supported by a National Science
Foundation Graduate Fellowship (146339). We thank Sandra Schmid for
her gracious help with clathrin siRNA experiments. The content is
solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily
represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.

Abbreviations
NSCLCnon
small cell lung cancer

SA-PEstreptavidin-phycoerythrin

PEGpolyethylene glycol

PBSphosphate buffered
saline

CHCclathrin
heavy chain

GFPgreen fluorescent protein

AFUarbitrary fluorescence unit

