Introduction
Protein glycosylation
on serine/threonine residues with N-acetylglucosamine
(O-GlcNAcylation) is
an abundant post-translational modification that occurs in the nucleocytoplasm. O-GlcNAc is critical for many important cellular processes
and has an extensive and dynamic interplay with phosphorylation.− Consequently, dysregulation of the balance between these two modifications
has been implicated in cancer,− diabetes,, and
neurodegenerative disease., Control of nuclear
and cytoplasmic protein O-GlcNAcylation provides
a means to influence numerous cellular events and the potential for
management of various human diseases. Our understanding of O-GlcNAc’s biological roles and cellular signaling
has rapidly expanded over the past several years due to an increasing
number of chemical tools.−

Only two enzymes are involved
in the regulation of O-GlcNAc cycling in humans:
the glycosyltransferase O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT)− and the glycoside hydrolase O-GlcNAcase (OGA)., OGT installs the sugar
moiety (GlcNAc) on target proteins using uridine 5′-diphosphate
(UDP)-GlcNAc as a substrate and OGA removes O-GlcNAc
from the same proteins. Therefore, changes in cellular O-GlcNAc levels can be achieved by manipulating the activities of
OGT and OGA. Aided by several high-throughput enzymatic assays, as
well as mechanistic and structural insights,, numerous potent and selective OGA inhibitors have been developed.− Indeed, the use of small-molecule OGA inhibitors has greatly assisted
in the evolution of our understanding of O-GlcNAc’s
cellular roles.

While there are several specific OGA inhibitors,
the complexity,
high cost, and limited versatility of classical OGT assays, in addition
to the enzyme’s instability during purification, have been
major obstacles in developing potent and selective OGT inhibitors.
The conventional in vitro OGT activity assay utilizes a radiolabeled sugar substrate, such
as UDP-[14C] GlcNAc or UDP-[3H] GlcNAc. This
method measures OGT activity by quantifying radiolabeled GlcNAc incorporation
into a protein substrate, but is high in cost and produces radiochemical
waste. As an alternative to using radiochemicals, the Walker group
introduced a ligand displacement OGT assay and a protease-protection assay. The
former method exploits fluorescence polarization using a fluorophore-containing
UDP-GlcNAc analogue. The latter protease-protection assay exploits
the fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) phenomenon using
specially designed, protease-specific peptide substrates. However,
both assays indirectly measure the glycosyltransferase activity of
OGT, requiring a second OGT activity assay to validate positive hit
compounds. Finally, Leavy et al. introduced an azido-enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (azido-ELISA) method using the unnatural sugar
donor, UDP-N-azidoacetyl glucosamine (UDP-GlcNAz, 1, Figure ) and biotinylated peptide
substrates. In this method, a solution-phase
enzymatic reaction is transferred into a microplate for subsequent
solid-phase reactions, reducing the method’s efficiency.

Structures
of chemical compounds used in Ni-NTA Plate OGT Assays:
UDP-GlcNAz (1), TAMRA-Alkyne (2), Biotin-Phosphine
(3), and OGT inhibitors (4–6).

In this Communication,
we present a direct and efficient OGT microplate
assay in which purification of the enzyme is unnecessary: both bacterial
and eukaryotic cell extracts can be readily used as sources of OGT.
In addition, because bacterial extracts expressing recombinant OGT
isoforms can be employed, the method is applicable to identifying
new enzyme variants. This method exploits one of the most widely used
affinity tags, a six consecutive histidine (6 × His) tag, and
nickel ions immobilized on a chelating microplate. The 6 × His-tag
can be genetically engineered at either the amino- or carboxy-terminus
of recombinant proteins. The method we developed here uses UDP-GlcNAz
(1, Figure ) as a sugar donor
and 6 × His-tagged protein substrates as the sugar acceptors.
All reactions are carried out in a microplate coated with Ni2+ ions through coupling with the chelating moiety of nitrilotriacetic
acid (NTA). As depicted in Figure , the strategy
of our OGT assay involves five steps starting with attachment of the
6 × His-tagged OGT substrate to the plate through Ni-NTA chelation,
followed by the blocking of unoccupied nickel ion. Protein substrate
bound to the plate is then subjected to OGT enzymatic catalysis using
UDP-GlcNAz as the sugar donor. Next, a chemoselective reaction, such
as the copper-catalyzed “click” reaction, or Staudinger
ligation, is performed to label the azido-functionality. Finally,
an immunoassay is used to detect the labeled proteins.

Strategy for Ni-NTA Plate
OGT Assay. The high-throughput Ni-NTA
OGT assay described herein consists of simple steps as indicated.

All previously published methods
for measuring OGT activity, as
described above, require high-cost reagents or involve components
that necessitate de novo synthesis, increasing both the cost and the
time required for these assays. Importantly, the assay described herein
is rapid and straightforward, and all components are commercially
or readily available. Moreover, our Ni-NTA Plate OGT Assay does not
require the purification of the enzyme. This not only is advantageous
because OGT is temperamental and does not withstand stringent washes
without loss of activity, but also allows for easier characterization
of enzyme variants. Beyond directly measuring OGT’s glycosyltransferase
activity and rapidly screening chemical libraries to discover OGT
inhibitors, our Ni-NTA Plate OGT Assay allows for the study of substrate
specificity for each OGT isoform from various organisms.

Results
For our initial studies, we used the 6 × His-tagged, recombinant
human nuclear pore protein, Nup62, which is a well-defined OGT substrate
that can be heavily modified with GlcNAc. UDP-GlcNAz (1, Figure ) was
used as a sugar donor and the TAMRA-conjugated terminal alkyne compound
(TAMRA-Alkyne, 2, Figure ) or
biotinylated triarylphosphine compound (Biotin-Phosphine, 3, Figure ) were used as reagents to selectively
react with the azido-functionality. Mammalian OGT has three isoforms:
nuclear cytoplasmic OGT (ncOGT), mitochondrial OGT (mOGT), and short
OGT (sOGT)., In this study, we used bacterially
expressed recombinant human ncOGT in
both unpurified and partially purified forms.

First, 6 ×
His-tagged Nup62 was attached to an 8-well strip
coated with Ni-NTA by incubating Nup62 dissolved in PBS at room temperature
for 1 h. Because the ncOGT construct we used for our assay also has
a 6 × His-tag, we wanted to ensure that the ncOGT itself would
not bind to the plate during the reaction. As shown in , treatment
of each well with blocking reagents including 6 × His oligopeptide
(6 × His-Pep), commercially available Odyssey blocking buffer
(Ody. Buffer), 5% BSA, and 5% milk abrogated binding of 6 × His-tagged
ncOGT to the plate. In our hands, Odyssey blocking buffer is the ideal
blocking reagent to consistently minimize background.

Next,
the OGT enzymatic reaction was initiated by adding bacterial
lysate containing ncOGT or partially purified ncOGT, UDP-GlcNAz, and
OGT assay buffer to the bound Nup62. Following the OGT reaction, two
azido-selective chemical reactions were carried out to determine the
level of OGT glycosyltransferase activity. The copper-catalyzed “click”
reaction was carried out using commercially available TAMRA-Alkyne
(2, Figure ) and copper catalyst.
Alternatively, the Staudinger ligation reaction was performed by adding
Biotin-Phosphine (3, Figure )
in PBS. Chemoselective reactions were quenched by removing the reaction
mixtures and washing the wells several times with PBST (PBS containing
0.1% Tween 20) followed by an immunoassay to probe for bound Biotin-
or TAMRA-tags followed by an appropriately conjugated IRDye800CW.
After several washes with PBST, each well was filled with PBS, imaged,
and the signal quantified. For detailed experimental procedures, see
the .

As shown
in Figure , OGT enzymatic reactions
were efficiently detected using an anti-TAMRA antibody, indicating
nickel ion precoated on the strip does not interfere with the copper-catalyzed
“click” reaction. In addition, the RL2 antibody, which
recognizes a number of O-GlcNAc-modified nuclear
pore complex proteins, was successfully used to determine OGT activity
(see ). These data indicate
that, while convenient, a chemoselective reaction to detect O-GlcNAzylated Nup62 is not required when Nup62 is used
as the OGT substrate. Importantly, results of OGT assays using partially
purified ncOGT (lower panel in Figure ) were
similar to those obtained with bacterial lysate containing ncOGT (upper
panel in Figure ), indicating that OGT purification
is not necessary in the Ni-NTA Plate OGT Assay.

Determination of ncOGT
activity. Four concentrations of the 6 ×
His-tagged Nup62 substrate (as indicated) were used to detect activity
of either unpurified or partially purified (p-ncOGT) enzyme as indicated.
Glycosyltransferase activity was detected using copper-catalyzed “click”
reaction with TAMRA-Alkyne.

Next, we evaluated the minimal amount of Nup62 necessary
in order
to obtain the maximal IR-signal intensity for this assay. Here, Biotin-Phosphine
(3, Figure ) was chemoselectively
reacted with the incorporated azido-moiety and relative IR-signal
intensity was determined, which reflects the enzymatic activity of
the ncOGT. As shown in Figure , IR-signal
intensity reached the maximum (wells 4 and 5) when the amount of Nup62
was over 0.14 μg.

ncOGT activity is linearly dependent on the
concentration of Nup62.
Increasing amounts of the 6 × His-tagged Nup62 substrate were
used as indicated. ncOGT containing lysates were used for these experiments.
Glycosyltransferase activity was detected using Staudinger ligation
with Biotin-Phosphine reagent. Experiments were performed in duplicate
and quantified using the Odyssey Infrared Imaging System at 800 nm.
Values were normalized such that no substrate was set to 0. Error
bars represent range.

To demonstrate the flexibility of our assay, another well-described
OGT substrate, 6 × His-tagged recombinant Casein Kinase 2 alpha
protein (CKII-α) was tested. Like Nup62, CKII-α was attached
to the well, GlcNAz-labeled by the enzymatic reaction of ncOGT using
UDP-GlcNAz, subjected to copper-catalyzed “click” reaction
using TAMRA-Alkyne (2, Figure ) reagent, and immunoassayed with an anti-TAMRA antibody. Resulting
IR-signal intensity increased as the amount of incubated CKII-α
protein increased until 0.13 μg of the substrate was used (see ). Furthermore, the versatility of
our Ni-NTA Plate OGT Assay was demonstrated with OGT from eukaryotic
cell lysates as the enzyme source. In the presence of UDP-GlcNAz and
Nup62, endogenous OGT glycosyltransferase activity from rabbit reticulocytes
was detected (see ), supporting
that the activity of OGT enzymes from various organisms can be assayed.

To validate the assay’s ability to identify known inhibitors
of OGT, we tested OGT inhibitors (4) and (5), which were reported to have IC50 values of 53 μM
(±7 μM) and 10 μM (±1 μM), respectively. Prior to the inhibition assays,
we examined the amount of OGT-containing lysate and reaction time
required for linear enzyme activity [1.4 μL (equivalent to 56
μg of a total protein) of ncOGT-containing lysate and 25 min
of reaction time; see ] when
40 μM of UDP-GlcNAz and 0.15 μg of Nup62 were used. 20
mM OGT inhibitors 4 and 5 were prepared
in DMSO and serially diluted, and equal volumes were added to each
reaction well containing bound Nup62 and UDP-GlcNAz. Enzymatic reactions
were initiated by adding 1.4 μL of ncOGT-containing lysate and
incubated at 37 °C with gentle shaking for 25 min, followed by
quenching by removal of reaction mixtures and PBST washes. Enzyme
activity was normalized to a well containing only DMSO but no inhibitor.
As shown in Figure , compounds 4 and 5 inhibited ncOGT glycosyltransferase activity
with IC50 values for 4 and 5 to
be 19.7 (±1.4) μM and 6.0 (±0.8) μM, respectively
(Figure B). Although our results differ from
those previously reported, these values
are well within the expected range. Variations may be caused by differences
in the relative sensitivity of methods used for quantification (radiometric
assay vs Ni-NTA OGT Assay) and in the choice of OGT substrates (UDP-GlcNAc
vs UDP-GlcNAz and peptide vs Nup62).

Inhibition of ncOGT activity by compounds 4 and 5. Increasing amounts of inhibitors 4 (A) and 5 (B) were added to the Ni-NTA Plate
OGT Assay (as indicated).
Glycosyltransferase activity was detected using Staudinger ligation
with Biotin-Phosphine reagent. Experiments were performed in triplicate
(n = 3) and quantified using the Odyssey Infrared
Imagining System at 800 nm. IC50 values were calculated
using SigmaPlot 12.5 software employing “Four parameter logistic
equation in the standard curve analysis”. Error bars represent
standard deviations.

Discussion
As OGT is a key regulator of diverse cellular
processes whose deregulation
has been associated with several diseases, understanding its activity
will have major impacts on human health. Indeed, identification of
pharmacological inhibitors of OGT has great therapeutic potential.
Recent structural and chemical analysis has given us insights into
mechanisms of OGT inhibition. OGT consists of two distinct domains:
the N-terminal domain containing tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR) motifs,
and the C-terminal catalytic domain. Based on a crystal structure
of the TPR domain of ncOGT reported in 2004, the TPR domain is believed to interact with other proteins and determine
substrate specificity. The crystal structure of a human OGT construct
containing 4.5 TPR units and the C-terminal domain revealed a unique fold of the intervening region between
the N-terminal catalytic domain and the C-terminal catalytic domain,
and provided clues to the enzyme’s catalytic, and inhibiting mechanisms. Additionally,
recent studies have uncovered compounds that inhibit OGT. A compound
containing a benzoxazolinone (BZX) core structure (5,
Figure ) was reported to inhibit OGT in cells; and a nucleotide sugar analogue, UDP-2-acetamido-2-deoxy-5-thio-d-glucopyranoside (UDP-5SGlcNAc, 6, Figure ) biosynthesized from a synthetic carbohydrate precursor,
2-acetamido-2-deoxy-5-thio-d-glucopyranoside (5SGlcNAc) via
the cells’ hexosamine biosynthetic machinery, was also identified
as an OGT inhibitor, thus lowering O-GlcNAc levels
in cells.

Because OGT has three
isoforms, a layer of complexity is added
to understanding mechanisms of inhibition. While all isoforms share
the same catalytic domain, they differ in the number of TPR motifs.
Interestingly, expression of each OGT isoform varies in different
cell types, suggesting that each isoform may have distinct functions
that respond differently to cellular signaling depending on its tissue
distribution.,, Therefore, it will be necessary to dissect the functions of each
OGT isoform and develop isoform-specific inhibitors.

The high-throughput
enzymatic OGT assay described here allows for
easy testing of a variety of inhibitors on many substrates. Because
this assay does not require OGT purification or the use of radiolabeled
substrates, it can be performed more efficiently and cost-effectively
than the conventional OGT enzymatic assays. Importantly, our methodology
directly measures glycosyltransferase activity, which will decrease
the number of false-positive hits as seen with other nonradiometric
OGT assays., Overall, this simple and easy
method for continuously monitoring OGT activity will help to discover
potent OGT-specific inhibitors, thus advancing our understanding of
the functional roles of OGT and O-GlcNAc cycling.

Supporting Information Available
Detailed experimental procedures.
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc5001774_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NIDDK intramural
funds (NIH) and
the National Research Foundation of Korea (2011-0027257).

Abbreviations
UDPuridine diphosphate

GlcNAcN-acetylglucosamine

GlcNAzN-azidoacetylglucosamine

O-GlcNAcaseOGA

O-GlcNAc transferaseOGT

