Introduction
Less than a decade after the first reports
of the advantages of
coupling proteins to the “non-immunogenic” polymer,
poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG),− Richter and Åkerblom provided
evidence for the induction of anti-PEG antibodies in rabbits exposed
to methoxyPEG (mPEG) conjugates of proteins and for the presence of anti-PEG antibodies in the sera of a small
percentage of healthy blood donors. Nevertheless,
during more than three decades of research and the approval for clinical
use of numerous PEGylated proteins and other PEGylated therapeutic
agents, relatively few research groups have focused on the immunogenicity
and antigenicity of the polymer component of PEGylated drugs (reviewed
by Armstrong and by Su et al.). Since all of the approved PEGylated drugs,
including proteins,− an aptamer, and “stealth”
liposomes, contain mPEG, the role of
the methoxy group of mPEG in the immune responses to PEGylated drugs
and the potential advantages of using hydroxyPEG (HO-PEG), rather
than mPEG, have been of particular interest in our research, (see Figure ).

Partial structures of
methoxyPEG, hydroxyPEG, and t-butoxyPEG and structures
of Tween 20 and Tween 80. In the structures
of the PEGs, R designates the rest of the polymer, including the proximal
terminal group that reacts with the protein to form PEG conjugates;
the domains that may serve as epitopes for the formation of anti-PEG
antibodies, namely, the distal terminal groups (in shaded ovals) and
the PEG backbone, are indicated. In the structures of Tween 20 and
Tween 80, R designates the alkyl groups of the fatty acids that distinguish
these two detergents from each other (lauric and oleic acids, respectively);
8Z designates the configuration around the double bond in the heptadecenyl
chain.

In a series of research reports and patents that
have been published
since 1999, Roffler, Cheng, and their colleagues described the development
of a series of mouse monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) directed against
the backbone of PEG.,− They demonstrated the utility of such mAbs for the sensitive detection
and quantitation of PEGylated drugs, and for the
removal of potentially toxic PEGylated drugs from the circulation.,− Several of these mAbs are available commercially from Abnova (Taipei
City, Taiwan). Murine and rabbit anti-PEG mAbs and assay kits incorporating
anti-PEG mAbs are now available from several other companies (e.g.,
ANP Technologies, Newark, DE; Epitomics, Burlingame, CA; Life Diagnostics,
Inc., West Chester, PA; Meridian Life Science, Inc., Saco, ME; Silver
Lake Research Corp., Monrovia, CA). The majority of these mAbs are
directed against the PEG backbone, but at least one of them is directed
against the methoxy group of mPEG (Epitomics, Clone PEG-B-47).

Other research groups have investigated the roles of polyclonal
anti-PEG antibodies elicited in experimental animals and patients
in altering the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of PEGylated
agents that have been approved for clinical use or are in development.
These include PEGylated red blood cells, and PEGylated
liposomes,− as well as PEGylated proteins (reviewed by Armstrong). Various techniques have been used to detect and characterize
such antibodies, but the most widely used methods are enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assays (ELISAs). These are used in various formats,
including direct ELISAs and competitive ELISAs (see Scheme ). In direct ELISAs, the independent variable is
the dilution of immune serum. In competitive ELISAs, a single dilution
of serum is tested in the presence of increasing concentrations of
competitors, such as unconjugated PEGs or PEG-protein conjugates.
In many publications and patents in which anti-PEG antibodies are
measured by ELISAs, at least some of the washes of the assay plates
contain Tween 20 or Tween 80 (polyoxyethylene sorbitan monolaurate
or polyoxyethylene sorbitan monooleate, respectively).,−,− Therefore, we investigated the effects of these PEG-containing detergents
on the titers of anti-PEG antibodies detected by direct ELISAs (see
Figures  and ).

Schematic of Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent
Assays (ELISAs) for Determining
the Titer of Anti-PEG Antibodies by Direct ELISAs, Using Serial Dilutions
of Serum from Immunized Rabbits, or for Determining the Relative Affinities
of Binding to Various Competitors, Such as Free PEGs or PEG-Protein
Conjugates, Using a Constant Dilution of Serum and Increasing Concentrations
of the Competitors
Linkage of the secondary
antibody
(goat-anti-rabbit IgG) to horseradish peroxidase (HRP) enables colorimetric
quantitation of the binding of the primary antibody to the assay plate.

Since the terms antigenicity and immunogenicity
are sometimes used
imprecisely, it seems useful to specify that, in this report, immunogenicity
refers to the ability of substances, e.g., protein conjugates of mPEG,
HO-PEG, or t-butoxyPEG (t-BuO-PEG),
to induce the production of antibodies in experimental animals or
in humans. In contrast, antigenicity refers to the abilities of various
substances, e.g., unconjugated PEGs or PEG-protein conjugates, to
bind to anti-PEG antibodies to which they are exposed in vitro (see
Scheme ). In this research, the immunogens
were conjugates of recombinant human interferon-α (IFN-α),
porcine uricase, or human serum albumin (albumin), which contained
between 1 and 17 molecules of PEG per protein molecule or subunit.
The antigens used to coat the assay plates were conjugates of an unrelated
protein, porcine Cu–Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD), to which
the same small number of molecules of mPEG, HO-PEG, or t-BuO-PEG of the same size (10 kDa) were coupled using the same activation
chemistry. In competitive ELISAs, the competitors were free mPEG,
HO-PEG, or t-BuO-PEG or conjugates of albumin containing
an average of c. 20 molecules of mPEG or HO-PEG per
molecule of albumin.

Finally, since the results of the immunologic
studies described
herein are consistent with the hypothesis that PEG-protein conjugates
synthesized with monofunctionally activated HO-PEG might be less antigenic
and/or less immunogenic than the analogous mPEG conjugates, we performed
experiments to compare the potencies in cell culture of analogous
mPEG and HO-PEG conjugates of two recombinant human cytokines.

Experimental Procedures
Reagents and Supplies
Reagents were from Sigma-Aldrich
Chemical Co. (St. Louis, MO) unless otherwise noted. PEG molecular
weight standards and 10 kDa mono-t-butoxyPEG were
from Polymer Laboratories (Shropshire, UK, now part of Agilent Technologies,
Santa Clara, CA). Other PEGs were from NOF Corporation (Tokyo, Japan),
Shearwater Polymers (Huntsville, AL, now part of Nektar Therapeutics,
San Francisco, CA) or SunBio (Anyang City, South Korea), as indicated.
Human interferon-α-2b (IFN-α) was from Tianjin Hualida
Bioengineering Co. (Tianjin, China). Erythropoietin BRP European Pharmacopoeia
Reference Standard (35 280 IU/0.25 mg) and Mircera (100 μg/0.3
mL, Roche) were obtained from Bioassay GmbH (Heidelberg, Germany).
Recombinant human erythropoietin-α (EPO, CYT-201) that was used
for the synthesis of PEG conjugates was from ProSpec (Rehovot, Israel).
Recombinant porcine uricase was from Bio-Technology General Ltd. (Rehovot,
Israel, now part of Ferring S.A., Saint-Prex, Switzerland). Recombinant
human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) was
obtained from Berlex Biosciences (Richmond, CA). Plasbumin25 from
Bayer Biological Products (Elkhart, IN) was used as human serum albumin.
Daudi cells and TF-1 cells were from ATCC (Manassas, VA). Goat serum
and most reagents used for cell culture were from GIBCO (now part
of Invitrogen/Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA). Alamar Blue, used
for cell culture assays, Novex NuPAGE gels and Sypro Ruby were also
from Invitrogen. Microplates used for fluorometric assays of cell
growth were from Greiner Bio-One North America, Inc. (Monroe, NC).
Immulon 2 HB microplates used for ELISAs were from Thermo Scientific
(Rochester, NY). Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was from Supelco (Bellefonte,
PA). Nonfat dry milk solids were from Western Family (Portland, OR).
Spectra/Por 1 dialysis tubing was from Spectrum Laboratories (Rancho
Dominguez, CA).

PEGylation Reagents and PEG-Protein Conjugates Used as Immunogens,
Antigens, and Competitors in Immunologic Assays and in Cell Culture
Assays
Table  summarizes the reagents
used to immunize the rabbits and as antigens or competitors in the
ELISAs. Details about the synthesis, purification, and physicochemical
analyses of (1) the activated HO-PEGs and t-BuO-PEG;
(2) the PEG-protein conjugates listed in Table , and (3) the HO-PEG conjugate of erythropoietin used in the cell
culture assays are provided in the , which includes seven figures, numbered S1 through
S7.

Reagents Used as Immunogens and as
Antigens and Competitors in ELISAs
Immunogens	
 	polymer component	
protein component	end group	PEG M.W.	# of PEGs	
human interferon-α	methoxy	20 kDa	1	
20 kDa	2	
hydroxy	20 kDa	1	
20 kDa	2	
porcine uricase	methoxy	10 kDa	2.3	
hydroxy	10 kDa	2.3	
human serum
albumin	methoxy	10 kDa	17	
t-butoxy	10 kDa	17	
Antigens	
 	polymer component	
protein component	end group	PEG M.W.	# of PEGs	
porcine superoxide
dismutase (SOD)	methoxy	10 kDa	2.5	
hydroxy	10 kDa	2.5	
t-butoxy	10 kDa	2.5	
human interferon-α	(No PEG)	 	 	
Competitors	
free polymers	mPEG	10 kDa	
20 kDa	
PEG Diol	10 kDa	
20 kDa	
 	polymer component	
PEG-albumin
conjugates	end group	PEG M.W.	# of PEGs	
 	methoxy	10 kDa	17–19	
hydroxy	10 kDa	17–22	
Number of PEGs per uricase subunit.

Number of PEGs per SOD subunit.

Determination of the Number of PEG Molecules Coupled per Protein
Molecule
Size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) was performed
on Superdex 200 or TSK G-5000PWXL columns from which the
eluates were monitored by both UV absorbance and refractive index
(RI). Peaks containing PEG-protein conjugates were analyzed by the
method of Kunitani et al. This method
was used to characterize PEG conjugates of SOD, IFN-α, EPO,
recombinant porcine uricase, and human serum albumin (albumin). These
conjugates contained between 1 and 22 molecules of PEG per protein
molecule or subunit. For conjugates of SOD, IFN-α, EPO, and
uricase coupled to fewer than c. 5 molecules of PEG
per protein subunit, the results for the PEG-to-protein ratio calculated
from the SEC elution profiles were confirmed by polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis in the presence of sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS-PAGE)
on Novex NuPAGE gels. Replicate gels were stained for protein with
Coomassie blue R-250 or Sypro Ruby and for PEG with a solution of
KI and I2 mixed with BaCl2, by an adaptation
of the method of Skoog.

Animals and Immunizations
Eight groups of three rabbits
were immunized with a PEG conjugate of one of the following proteins:
IFN-α, porcine uricase, or human serum albumin. Specific pathogen-free
New Zealand white rabbits were injected with PEGylated immunogens
on days 0, 7, 14, 28, 56, and 84. The first immunization was in complete
Freund’s adjuvant. Subsequent immunizations were in incomplete
Freund’s adjuvant. Blood was collected prior to immunization
(prebleed) and 6, 10, and 14 weeks after the first immunization (Bleeds
1, 2, and 3). Serum was prepared from each bleed by centrifugation
and was kept frozen at −40 °C until use. All rabbit procedures
were performed at Lampire Biological Laboratories (Pipersville, PA)
by AAALAC-certified technicians in accordance with IACUC-approved
protocols.

Direct Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assays (Direct ELISAs)
The PEGylated antigens used in direct ELISAs consisted of conjugates
of SOD with 10 kDa mPEG, 10 kDa HO-PEG, or 10 kDa t-BuO-PEG that were synthesized, purified, and analyzed as described
in the . The conjugates
contained an average of c. 2–3 molecules of
PEG per 16 kDa subunit of SOD. Concentrations of PEGylated antigens
are expressed as protein concentrations (μg/mL). For most experiments,
100 μL of a solution of PEGylated SOD (10 μg/mL) prepared
in 0.1 M sodium carbonate buffer, pH 10.3, was used to coat each well
of the 96-well plates. When IFN-α was used as the antigen, 100
μL of a solution of 10 μg/mL of IFN-α in sodium
carbonate buffer was placed in the wells, corresponding to 1 μg/well.

Immulon 2 HB 96-well microplates were coated with IFN-α or
PEG-SOD by incubation overnight at 4 °C. Removal of unbound antigen
and all washes of the plates were performed with a Denley Wellwash
4 plate washer (Needham Heights, MA). After removal of unbound antigen,
the wells were washed three times with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)
and then incubated for 1 h at room temperature with 300 μL/well
of Blocking Buffer (5% (w/v) nonfat dry milk solids in PBS). After
removal of the Blocking Buffer, the plates were washed three times
with PBS. Serial dilutions of rabbit sera in PBS containing 2% (v/v)
goat serum (PBS-G) were added to the plates (100 μL/well), which
were incubated for 1 h at 37 °C. The plates were then washed
three times with PBS. No detergents such as Tween 20 or Tween 80 were
included in the wash buffers except as indicated in Figure .

Goat anti-rabbit IgG (H &amp; L chain specific)
(1 mg/mL) conjugated
to horseradish peroxidase (HRP) was used as the secondary antibody
(Sigma) (see Scheme ). For most assays, the
secondary antibody was diluted 1/10 000 in PBS-G, so that 100
μL/well contained 0.01 μg of antibody protein. If the
peroxidase activity detected under the conditions described below
was too high to obtain a linear increase in absorbance for at least
4 min, the secondary antibody was diluted 1/15 000 or 1/20 000
in PBS-G in subsequent experiments. After addition of the secondary
antibody, the plates were incubated for 45 min at 37 °C. The
plates were washed three times with PBS before the addition of 200
μL/well of peroxidase substrate, which was o-phenylenediamine dihydrochloride (OPD),
purchased as SIGMAFAST OPD. The substrate solution
was prepared as close as possible to the time of use and stored briefly
at room temperature, shielded from light. The substrate consists of
two tablets (one OPD tablet and one urea hydrogen peroxide/buffer
tablet), which were dissolved in 21 mL of water. This solution was
filtered through a 0.2 μm syringe filter (Acrodisc 25 mm Syringe
Filter, Pall Corporation, Ann Arbor, MI). The absorbance at 440 nm
of the colored conjugate formed with peroxide was measured in a SpectraMax
250 microplate reader (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA) in kinetic
mode for 6 min at 12 s intervals. The assay plate was shaken in the
plate reader for 15 s before the first reading and for 3 s before
each subsequent reading of the plate (see Scheme ).

Competitive ELISAs
As in the direct ELISAs, Immulon
2 HB 96-well microplates were coated with mPEG-SOD, HO-PEG-SOD, or t-BuO-PEG-SOD by incubation overnight at 4 °C with
100 μL/well of antigens at 10 μg/mL in 0.1 M sodium carbonate
buffer, pH 10.3. After removal of unbound antigen and three washes
with PBS, the plates were blocked for 1 h at room temperature with
300 μL/well of Blocking Buffer. The plates were washed three
times with PBS. Serial dilutions of the competitors in PBS-G (50 μL/well)
were added to the wells, followed by 50 μL/well of diluted rabbit
serum in PBS-G. Dilutions of sera used for competitive ELISAs were
calculated to correspond to the highest dilution factor that provided
maximal binding in direct ELISAs. Therefore, for competitive ELISAs,
sera with higher titers were diluted more extensively than sera with
lower titers. The dilution factors, which are indicated in the legends
of Figures – and Figure B, ranged from 1/320 to 1/10 000. Samples
were mixed by shaking the plate in the plate reader for 10 s before
it was incubated for 1 h at 37 °C. After removal of unbound reactants,
the plates were washed three times with PBS. The addition of secondary
antibody, washing of plates, addition of HRP substrate, and monitoring
of absorbance of the colored product were performed as described above
for direct ELISAs.

Analysis of Data from ELISAs
The rates of increase
in absorbance at 440 nm during the period of measurement were exported
from the SpectraMax plate reader into Microsoft Excel. Usually, the increase in absorbance was linear during the first
4 min of measurements, with a correlation coefficient (R2) greater than 0.98. For direct ELISAs, the rates (in
milli-absorbance units/min) were graphed against the log10 of the serum dilution. For competitive ELISAs, the rates were graphed
against the log10 of the final concentration of each competitor,
in units of micromolar PEG.

Data in colorimetric assay units
(mAU/min) were first analyzed as a function of the log10 of the serum dilution (direct ELISAs) or the log10 of
the competitor concentration (competitive ELISAs) using DPlot software (HydeSoft Computing, LLC, Vicksburg, MS) to obtain the
best fit to a sigmoid curve, using the equationThe results in colorimetric assay units were
converted to percent of the maximal binding by subtracting A (the minimal value), dividing by B (the
range of values), and multiplying by 100. The resultant values of
the percent of the maximal binding in direct and competitive ELISAs
were plotted against the log10 of serum dilution or the
log10 of competitor concentration, respectively.

For direct ELISAs, the values of the parameters C and D from DPlot were used to
calculate the dilution of serum corresponding to half-maximal binding
of the antibodies to the assay plate (D50), using the equationThe ratio of the values of D50 obtained when the same antiserum was tested against
mPEG-SOD and against HO-PEG-SOD (at the same antigen concentration)
was used as a measure of the relative titer against the two types
of PEG (see Figures – and Table ).

Titers of antibodies to HO-PEG, mPEG, and interferon-α
were
determined by direct ELISAs of sera prepared from each of three monthly
bleeds of rabbits immunized with either mPEG1-IFN-α
(A) or HO-PEG1-IFN-α (B). (A) Anti-PEG antibodies
were measured on assay plates coated with 2 μg/well of superoxide
dismutase (SOD) coupled to either 10 kDa HO-PEG (red symbols) or 10
kDa mPEG (black symbols). Anti-IFN-α antibodies were measured
on assay plates coated with 1 μg/well of recombinant human IFN-α
(blue symbols). Mean values in sera from Bleeds 1, 2, and 3 were calculated
from results obtained with HO-PEG-SOD (red dashed line), mPEG-SOD
(black solid line), or IFN-α (blue
solid line) as the antigen. Black arrows indicate the ratios of titers
detected against the various antigens. (B) Sera from Bleeds 1, 2,
and 3 of a rabbit immunized with HO-PEG1-IFN-α were
analyzed in the same way as described for (A).

Titers of antibodies against mPEG and against HO-PEG were
determined
by direct ELISAs of sera from groups of three rabbits immunized with
either mPEG1-IFN-α (A) or HO-PEG1-IFN-α
(B). (A) Percentages of maximal binding to mPEG-SOD (filled symbols,
solid curves) and to HO-PEG-SOD (open symbols, dashed curves) and
the ratio of titers on mPEG/HO-PEG (“relative titers”)
are indicated for three rabbits immunized with mPEG1-IFN-α.
Data for each of rabbits R8990, R9002, and R9003 are shown in green,
black, and orange, respectively. (B) Percentages of maximal binding
to mPEG-SOD (filled symbols, solid curves) and to HO-PEG-SOD (open
symbols, dashed curves) and the ratio of titers on mPEG/HO-PEG are
indicated for three rabbits immunized with HO-PEG1-IFN-α.
Data for each of rabbits R8991, R8995, and R8997 are shown in blue,
red, and gray, respectively.

Titers of antibodies against mPEG and HO-PEG in sera from
groups
of three rabbits immunized with mPEG-uricase (A) or HO-PEG-uricase
(B) were determined by direct ELISAs. PEG-uricase conjugates used
as immunogens contained an average of 2.3 molecules of 10 kDa mPEG
or HO-PEG per uricase subunit. (A) Percentages of maximal binding
to mPEG-SOD (filled symbols, solid curves) and to HO-PEG-SOD (open
symbols, dashed curves) and the relative titers on mPEG/HO-PEG are
indicated for three rabbits immunized with mPEG-uricase. Data for
each of rabbits R579, R580, and R581 are shown in orange, black, and
green, respectively. (B) Percentages of maximal binding to mPEG-SOD
(filled symbols, solid curves) and to HO-PEG-SOD (open symbols, dashed
curves) and the relative titers on mPEG/HO-PEG are indicated for three
rabbits immunized with HO-PEG-uricase. Data for each of rabbits R582,
R583, and R584 are shown in red, blue, and gray, respectively.

Relative Titers of Antibodies Detected
with mPEG-SOD/HO-PEG-SOD as the Antigen in Sera from Bleeds 2 and/or
3 of 23 Rabbits Immunized with Eight PEGylated Protein Immunogens
 	 	 	relative titer	 	 	relative titer	
protein of
immunogen	mPEG/protein
(PEG M.W.)	rabbit #	mean	s.d.	n	HO-PEG/protein
(PEG M.W.)	rabbit #	mean	s.d.	n	
Human Interferon-α	1 (20 kDa)	R8990	3.0	0.8	4	1 (20 kDa)	R8991	1.1	0.1	2	
R9002	3.0	0.3	4	R8995	1.0	0.03	2	
R9003	4.8	0.9	5	R8997	0.9	0.2	4	
Human Interferon-α	2 (20 kDa)	R8993	2.7	0.5	4	2 (20 kDa)	R8992	0.9	0.2	2	
R9001	5.5	1.0	4	R8994	1.1	0.2	2	
R9004	 	 	 	R9000	0.9	0.1	2	
Porcine Uricase	2.3/subunit (10 kDa)	R579	20	4.8	4	2.3/subunit (10 kDa)	R582	1.3	0.2	3	
R580	3.1	0.6	3	R583	1.1	0.2	3	
R581	18	4.8	5	R584	1.5	0.1	3	
Human Serum
Albumin	17 (10 kDa)	R12056	3.0	0.5	4	 	 	 	 	 	
R12057	1.1	0.1	3	
R12058	2.6	0.6	3	
 	 	Median 	3.0	 	Median 	1.1	
 	 	Range	1.1–20	 	Range	0.9–1.5	
 	t-BuO-PEG/protein
(PEG M.W.)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
Human Serum
Albumin	17 (10 kDa)	R12059	1.8	0.5	2	 	 	 	 	 	
R12060	1.2	0.2	2	
R12061	1.7	0.3	2	
Rabbit R9004 died before Bleed 2.

For competitive ELISAs, the values of the parameters C and D from DPlot were
used to
calculate the competitor concentration that inhibited 50% of the binding
of the antibodies to the antigen on the plate (IC50), using
the equationThe ratio of the values of IC50 for two competitors assayed at the same dilution of a particular
serum provides a measure of the relative affinities of the antibodies
being tested for those competitors (see Figures – and B).

Cell Culture Assay of the Potencies of Interferon-α and
PEG Conjugates
Interferon-α and four PEG-IFN-α
conjugates were assayed for their abilities to inhibit the proliferation
of Daudi cells, measured by a fluorometric assay with Alamar Blue
as the indicator., Daudi cells are human
lymphoblastic B cells derived from a male patient with Burkitt’s
lymphoma. The growth medium was RPMI 1640 with 2 mM l-glutamine containing 10% fetal bovine serum, 10 mM HEPES buffer,
1.5 g/L sodium bicarbonate, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, 1% (v/v) Pen/Strep.
and 5.4 g/L d-(+)-glucose. All components of the medium were
from GIBCO except for glucose, which was from Sigma-Aldrich. The cells
were grown at 37 °C in humidified air containing 5% CO2, with twice-weekly passages.

Cells in the log-phase of growth
(150 μL of a suspension in growth medium of 250 000 cells/mL)
were incubated for 4 h at 37 °C in humidified air containing
5% CO2 in 96-well, flat, clear-bottom, black microplates.
Serial dilutions in growth medium (50 μL) of IFN-α or
mPEG-IFN-α or HO-PEG-IFN-α were added to the cells in
the assay plates, which were incubated for 72 h under the same conditions
as for growth. Alamar Blue (20 μL) was then added, and the incubation
was continued for 4 h. The assay plates were shaken for 30 s on a
JitterBug orbital shaker (Boekel Scientific, Feasterville, PA) both
after the addition of the serial dilutions of IFN-α or the PEG
conjugates and after the addition of Alamar Blue. The fluorescent
signal was measured at excitation and emission wavelengths of 544
and 589 nm, respectively, in a fluorescence plate reader (Fluoroskan
Ascent Model with Ascent software, Thermo Labsystems,
Waltham, MA).

As in the analysis of data from ELISAs, data for
cell growth in
relative fluorescence units as a function of the concentration of
IFN-α or PEG-IFN-α were analyzed using DPlot software to fit the equationUsing the minimal value (A) and the range of values (B) from the initial DPlot, the data were converted to Percent of Inhibitable
Cell Growth, as shown in Figure A.

Cell Culture Assay of the Potencies of Erythropoietin and PEG
Conjugates
The effects of EPO and of mPEG and HO-PEG conjugates
of EPO on the proliferation of TF-1 cells were assessed using a fluorometric
assay with Alamar Blue, as described above for the assay of IFN-α
and its PEG conjugates using Daudi cells. TF-1 cells are factor-dependent
erythroblastic cells derived from the bone marrow of a male patient
with erythroleukemia., Cells were cultured at 37 °C
in humidified air containing 5% CO2 in the same growth
medium as used for Daudi cells, except that the growth medium for
TF-1 cells was supplemented with 2.4 ng/mL GM-CSF.

TF-1 cells
were collected in the log phase of growth and were centrifuged for
10 min at 1000 rpm at 4 °C. The supernatant was removed and the
pellet was resuspended twice in 10 mL of assay medium, which is growth
medium without added GM-CSF, to minimize the residual concentration
of GM-CSF. Cells (100 μL of a suspension in assay medium of
100 000 cells/mL) were mixed with 100 μL of serial dilutions
of growth factors (EPO or PEG-EPO conjugates) in assay medium in the
wells of a 96-well, flat, clear-bottomed, black microplate. The cells
were cultured for 72 h at 37 °C in humidified air containing
5% CO2. Alamar Blue (25 μL) was then added and the
incubation was continued for 6 h. The plates were shaken for 30 s
on a JitterBug orbital shaker after the addition of the cell suspension
to the growth factor dilutions and after the addition of Alamar Blue.
The fluorescent signal was measured in a fluorescence plate reader,
as described above for the Daudi cell assay. Data in relative fluorescence
units were analyzed using DPlot software and the
same equation shown above for the analysis of data from the Daudi
cell assay. Using the minimal value (A) and range
of values (B) from the initial DPlot, the data were converted to Percent of Maximal Cell Growth, as shown
in Figure B.

Results
Immune Responses to MonoPEG Conjugates of mPEG-Interferon-α
and HO-PEG-Interferon-α Differ throughout Immunization
Direct ELISAs were performed on sera from three successive monthly
bleeds of two rabbits immunized with either mPEG1-IFN-α
(Figure A) or HO-PEG1-IFN-α
(Figure B), using assay plates coated with
mPEG-SOD, HO-PEG-SOD, or IFN-α (see Scheme ). Chromatographic analyses of the PEG conjugates of SOD and
IFN-α are provided in Figures S3 and S4 of the , respectively.

The titers of
antibodies detected after immunization with IFN-α coupled to
one molecule of 20 kDa mPEG (mPEG1-IFN-α) were highest
with IFN-α as the antigen, somewhat lower with mPEG-SOD, and
lowest for HO-PEG-SOD as the antigen (Figure A). There were no significant differences among the results obtained
with sera from Bleeds 1, 2, and 3 of this rabbit (represented by triangles,
circles, and squares, respectively). Analogous data for sera from
three bleeds of a rabbit immunized with IFN-α coupled to one
molecule of 20 kDa HO-PEG (HO-PEG1-IFN-α) are shown
in Figure B. In this case, the titers of anti-PEG
antibodies detected with mPEG-SOD and HO-PEG-SOD as the antigens were
indistinguishable from each other and were about 20 times lower than
the titer of antibodies detected against IFN-α. As in Figure A, there were no significant differences among the
results obtained with sera prepared from Bleeds 1, 2, or 3 of this
rabbit, which was immunized with HO-PEG1-IFN-α.

In contrast with the results in Figure ,
for 1 of the 23 rabbits used in this research (R9003, which was
immunized with mPEG1-IFN-α), the titers of anti-PEG
antibodies detected in serum from Bleed 1 were lower than those detected
in sera from subsequent bleeds (data not shown). Therefore, all subsequent
experiments were performed on sera from Bleed 2 and/or Bleed 3 of
each rabbit, which gave similar results for all tested parameters.

Rabbits Immunized with mPEG1-Interferon-α,
but not with HO-PEG1-Interferon-α, Have Higher Titers
of Anti-PEG Antibodies Detected with mPEG-SOD than with HO-PEG-SOD
In the sera of three rabbits immunized with mPEG1-IFN-α,
a relatively narrow range of titers of antibodies was detected with
mPEG-SOD as the antigen (solid curves in Figure A) and a slightly wider range of lower titers of antibodies was detected
with HO-PEG-SOD (dashed curves in Figure A).
The highest titer of anti-PEG antibodies detected with mPEG-SOD (in
serum from rabbit R9002) was c. 7 times higher than
the lowest titer (in serum from rabbit R8990). For each serum sample,
the ratio of the titers detected with mPEG-SOD to those detected with
HO-PEG-SOD is referred to in this report as the “relative titer”.
Among the three rabbits in this experiment, the relative titers varied
from 3 to 6 (indicated as 3× and 6×, respectively, in Figure A).

In sera from each of three rabbits immunized
with HO-PEG1-IFN-α, the titers of anti-PEG antibodies
detected with mPEG-SOD as the antigen (solid curves in Figure B) and with HO-PEG-SOD as the antigen (dashed curves
in Figure B) were indistinguishable from each
other. This was true although the absolute titers of anti-PEG antibodies
in the serum with the highest titer (from rabbit R8995) were c. 20 times those in the serum with the lowest titer (from
rabbit R8997).

Rabbits Immunized with Multiply-PEGylated mPEG-Uricase, but
not HO-PEG-Uricase, Have Higher Titers of Anti-PEG Antibodies Detected
with mPEG-SOD than with HO-PEG-SOD
Direct ELISAs similar
to those shown in Figure  were performed on
sera from groups of three rabbits immunized with mPEG or HO-PEG conjugates
of porcine uricase in which an average of 2.3 molecules of 10 kDa
PEG were coupled per uricase subunit (see ). This extent of PEGylation corresponds to an average of
about nine molecules of PEG per uricase tetramer, which is the active
form of the enzyme. The titers of anti-PEG
antibodies for all three rabbits immunized with this mPEG-uricase
conjugate were indistinguishable when tested on assay plates coated
with mPEG-SOD (note the superposition of the three solid curves in
Figure A). However, there were differences
among the titers of antibodies detected in the same sera with HO-PEG-SOD
as the antigen (dashed curves). The relative titers of antibodies
against mPEG/HO-PEG varied from c. 4-fold for rabbit R580 to &gt;20-fold
for rabbits R579 and R581.

In sera from three rabbits immunized
with HO-PEG-uricase, the titers of antibodies detected against either
mPEG or HO-PEG were nearly indistinguishable (Figure B). The relative titers of antibodies against mPEG/HO-PEG
varied only from about 1.3 to 1.5 in this experiment, in contrast
with the much higher relative titers shown in Figure A.

Most Rabbits Immunized with mPEG Conjugates of Three Proteins
Have Higher Titers of Anti-PEG Antibodies Detected with mPEG-SOD than
with HO-PEG-SOD, Unlike Those Immunized with HO-PEG-Proteins
The results obtained in replicate analyses (between 2 and 5), similar
to those shown in Figures –, of sera from 23 of the 24 rabbits
immunized for this study are summarized in Table . Since rabbit R9004 died before Bleed 2, no data for that
rabbit are included in the table.

On the basis of the mean values
of the relative titers for all 11 rabbits immunized with mPEG conjugates
of three proteins, the median value of the relative titer was 3.0,
with a range of 1.1–20. In contrast, each of nine rabbits immunized
with HO-PEG conjugates of IFN-α or uricase had similar titers
of anti-PEG antibodies detected on mPEG and HO-PEG antigens.

Sensitivity of Detection of Anti-PEG Antibodies Is Decreased
by Tween 20 or Tween 80
Many procedures commonly used for
the performance of direct or competitive ELISAs include the use of
the detergents Tween 20,−,, or Tween 80 in the solutions with which the assay plates
are washed one or more times. The structures of these detergents are
shown in Figure . Two of the experiments performed
to assess the effects of Tween 20 or Tween 80 on the titers of anti-PEG
antibodies detected by direct ELISAs are shown in Figure . Sera from two rabbits
immunized with either mPEG-uricase or HO-PEG-uricase were tested in
direct ELISAs on replicate assay plates coated with mPEG-SOD. In each
experiment, one of the assay plates was washed without any detergent,
as was done in all of the other ELISAs described in this report. The
other assay plate was washed before and after the addition of the
secondary antibody with PBS containing either 0.05% (v/v) Tween 20
(Figure A) or 0.1% (v/v) Tween 80 (Figure B).

Washing the assay plate with Tween 20 or Tween 80, detergents
that
contain HO-PEG, decreased the titers detected by direct ELISAs of
sera from rabbits immunized with HO-PEG-uricase (○, ●)
or mPEG-uricase (Δ, ▲) and amplified the differences
between the titers of anti-PEG antibodies detected in sera from these
two rabbits. Direct ELISAs with mPEG-SOD as the antigen were performed
as described in , except
that the PBS used to wash one of the replicate assay plates before
and after the addition of the enzyme-linked secondary antibody contained
either 0.05% (v/v) Tween 20 (A) or 0.1% (v/v) Tween 80 (B). Higher
titers were detected in the absence of detergent (filled symbols,
solid curves) than in the presence of Tween (open symbols, dashed
curves). The effects of each type of Tween on the results for the
individual rabbits immunized with either HO-PEG-uricase or mPEG-uricase
are shown by red arrows and black arrows, respectively. The ratios
of titers detected in sera from these two rabbits in the presence
or absence of Tween are shown by blue arrows.

When the assays were performed without the use
of Tween in the
washes (solid curves), the titer of anti-PEG antibodies detected in
the serum of the rabbit immunized with mPEG-uricase was only 2–2.5
higher than that of the rabbit immunized with HO-PEG-uricase. In contrast,
the titer of anti-PEG antibodies in serum from the same rabbit that
was immunized with mPEG-uricase appeared to be higher by a factor
of c. 70 or c. 80 when Tween 20
or Tween 80, respectively, was used in the washes before and after
the addition of the secondary antibody (dashed curves). Figure  also shows that the apparent titers of anti-PEG
antibodies detected, on plates coated with mPEG-SOD, in the serum
of a rabbit immunized with HO-PEG-uricase were decreased c. 300-fold or c. 100-fold (red arrows)
when the plates were washed with buffers containing Tween 20 or Tween
80, respectively. In contrast, washing the assay plates with Tween
20 or Tween 80 decreased the apparent titers in serum from the rabbit
immunized with mPEG-uricase only c. 8-fold or c. 5-fold, respectively (black arrows).

MethoxyPEG Binds More Tightly than PEG Diol to Antibodies Raised
against mPEG-Interferon-α and mPEG-Uricase, but not to Antibodies
Raised against HO-PEG-Uricase
The results of competitive
ELISAs with 10 kDa mPEG (filled circles) and 10 kDa PEG diol (open
circles) of three dilutions of serum from a rabbit immunized with
mPEG2-IFN-α are compared in Figure A. For all of the tested
dilutions of serum (1/500, 1/1000, and 1/2000), the ratios of affinities
for mPEG/PEG diol were between 30 and 40. On the other hand, the values
of IC50 for each of the competitors varied in a nonlinear
fashion with the dilution of the serum. Thus, a 4-fold decrease in
the antibody concentration (from 1/500 to 1/2000) resulted in a 2-fold
decrease in the values of IC50.

Competitive ELISAs were
used to compare the inhibition by mPEG
and by PEG diol (HO-PEG-OH) of the binding to mPEG-SOD of antibodies
raised against mPEG2-IFN-α (A), against mPEG-uricase
(B), and against HO-PEG-uricase (C). Concentrations of competitors
are expressed as micromolar PEG in the serum-containing assay mixtures.
(A) Anti-PEG antibodies in serum from a rabbit immunized with mPEG2-IFN-α bound 10 kDa mPEG (filled circles) 30-fold to
40-fold more tightly than 10 kDa PEG diol (open circles), regardless
of the serum dilution in the range of 1/500 to 1/2000. (B) Anti-PEG
antibodies in serum from a rabbit immunizedwith mPEG-uricase bound
10 kDa mPEG (●) c. 70 times more tightly than
10 kDa PEG diol (○). The serum was diluted 1/1000. (C) Competitive
ELISAs of anti-PEG antibodies in serum from a rabbit immunized with
HO-PEG-uricase revealed no preferential binding of 10 kDa mPEG (●)
compared to 10 kDa PEG diol (○), although the slopes of the
competition curves differed. The serum was diluted 1/500.

In Figure B, the potency
of 10 kDa mPEG
(black symbols) is compared to that of 10 kDa PEG diol (red symbols)
as competitors for the binding to mPEG-SOD of antibodies elicited
by mPEG-uricase. The anti-PEG antibodies in the serum tested in Figure B exhibited c. 70-fold higher affinity
for mPEG than for PEG diol of the same molecular weight. Similar results
were obtained with sera from the other two rabbits immunized with
mPEG-uricase (data not shown). In contrast, no significant difference
was detected between the affinities of antibodies raised against HO-PEG-uricase
for 10 kDa mPEG vs 10 kDa PEG diol, when tested on the same antigen
(Figure C) or on HO-PEG-SOD as the antigen
(data not shown). These results indicate that anti-PEG antibodies
raised against mPEG conjugates have much higher affinities for mPEG
than for PEG diol, while anti-PEG antibodies elicited by HO-PEG conjugates
show no selectivity for the end-group of the polymer.

Although
competitive ELISAs on a single dilution of a single serum
sample provide information about the relative affinities of those
antibodies for various competitors (e.g., 10 kDa mPEG vs 10 kDa PEG
diol, as shown in Figure B), comparisons of
the values of IC50 for different serum samples do not provide
a valid comparison of affinities, because the values of IC50 do not vary linearly with the concentration of antibodies in each
sample, as shown in Figure A.

Anti-PEG Antibodies against mPEG-Interferon-α or mPEG-Uricase
Bind Cooperatively to Multiply-PEGylated mPEG-Albumin; Antibodies
against HO-PEG-Uricase Bind Similarly to PEG Diol and to HO-PEG-Albumin
An albumin conjugate containing an average of 19 molecules of 10
kDa mPEG (mPEG19-albumin) and free 10 kDa mPEG were tested
as competitors for the binding to mPEG-SOD of antibodies raised against
mPEG2-IFN-α (Figure A). At the highest tested concentrations (c. 0.1–1 mM PEG), both competitors blocked the binding
to the assay plate completely. In a range of lower concentrations,
however, the multiply-PEGylated albumin conjugate was much more potent
as a competitor than free mPEG. The molar concentration of free mPEG
that inhibited 50% of the binding (IC50) was c. 12 times higher than the concentration of mPEG in the albumin conjugate
that was similarly inhibitory.

Competitive ELISAs with mPEG-SOD as the
antigen were used to assess
the cooperativity of binding by antibodies raised against either mPEG2-IFN-α (A) or mPEG-uricase (B) to mPEG in conjugates
with human serum albumin. Competitive ELISAs with HO-PEG-SOD as the
antigen showed similar binding of antibodies raised against HO-PEG-uricase
to free PEG diol and to HO-PEG in an albumin conjugate (C). Concentrations
of all competitors are expressed as micromolar PEG in the serum-containing
assay mixtures. (A) For anti-PEG antibodies raised against mPEG2-IFN-α, the concentration of free 10 kDa mPEG (●)
that inhibited 50% of the binding to mPEG-SOD (IC50) was
12 times higher than the IC50 for mPEG in an mPEG19-albumin conjugate (△). The serum was diluted 1/1000. (B)
For anti-PEG antibodies raised against mPEG-uricase, the IC50 of free 10 kDa mPEG (●) was 16 times higher than the IC50 of mPEG in an mPEG19-albumin conjugate (△).
The serum was diluted 1/1000. (C) Binding of antibodies raised against
HO-PEG-uricase to HO-PEG-SOD was inhibited to a similar extent by
free 10 kDa PEG diol (●) and by a conjugate of albumin with
17 molecules of 10 kDa HO-PEG (□). Because of the low titer
of antibodies detected by direct ELISAs (see Figure B), this serum was diluted only 1/320.

Experiments analogous to those in Figure A were performed on antiserum raised against mPEG-uricase
containing
an average of nine molecules of mPEG per uricase tetramer (Figure B). Again, the multiply-PEGylated albumin conjugate
was more potent than free 10 kDa mPEG as an inhibitor of the binding
of anti-PEG antibodies to mPEG-SOD. In this antiserum, the IC50 of free mPEG was c. 16 times higher than
the IC50 of mPEG in the mPEG19-albumin conjugate.

In contrast with the results for rabbits immunized with mPEG conjugates,
the binding to HO-PEG-SOD of antibodies raised against HO-PEG-uricase
is inhibited to a similar extent by 10 kDa PEG diol and by a HO-PEG
conjugate of albumin (HO-PEG17-albumin) at all tested competitor
concentrations (Figure C).

Antibodies Raised against mPEG Conjugates of Three Proteins
Have Much Higher Affinities for Multiply-PEGylated mPEG-Albumin than
for HO-PEG-Albumin of Similar Composition
As shown in Figure A, an mPEG conjugate
of albumin was much more potent than HO-PEG-albumin as a competitor
for the binding to mPEG-SOD of antibodies raised against mPEG-uricase.
The potencies of these competitors, each of which contained an average
of c. 20 molecules of PEG per albumin molecule, differed
by a factor of c. 1300. Indeed, the affinity of the
HO-PEG-albumin conjugate was so low that the binding of the anti-PEG
antibodies to the assay plate was incompletely inhibited by the highest
available concentration of this competitor. Figure B illustrates analogous results obtained in a comparison of
the potencies ofmPEG17-albumin vs HO-PEG17-albumin
as competitors for the binding to mPEG-SOD of anti-PEG antibodies
raised against mPEG17-albumin. In this experiment, the
highest available concentration of HO-PEG17-albumin inhibited
only c. 50% of the binding, and the affinity for
mPEG17-albumin was estimated to be c. 1600
times higher than the affinity for HO-PEG17-albumin.

Affinities
of antibodies in sera from rabbits immunized with multiply-PEGylated
mPEG conjugates of porcine uricase (A), human serum albumin (B), or
human interferon-α (C) for multiply-PEGylated conjugates of
albumin with mPEG vs HO-PEG were compared in competitive ELISAs with
mPEG-SOD as the antigen. Concentrations of all competitors are expressed
as micromolar concentrations of PEG in the serum-containing assay
mixtures. All of the sera used for these experiments were diluted
1/1000. (A) Increasing concentrations of conjugates of albumin containing
c. 20 molecules of either 10 kDa mPEG (△)
or 10 kDa HO-PEG (□) were used as competitors for anti-PEG
antibodies raised against mPEG-uricase. The c. 1300-fold
ratio of the values of IC50 for the HO-PEG and mPEG conjugates
of albumin is indicated. (B) Increasing concentrations of conjugates
of human serum albumin with 17 molecules of either 10 kDa mPEG (△)
or 10 kDa HO-PEG (□) were used as competitors for anti-PEG
antibodies raised against mPEG17-albumin. The c. 1600-fold
ratio of the values of IC50 for the HO-PEG and mPEG conjugates
of albumin is indicated. (C) Increasing concentrations of mPEG17-albumin gave a sigmoid competition curve (△) with
an IC50 of c. 1 μM mPEG and complete
inhibition at &lt;1 mM mPEG. Since the highest available concentration
of HO-PEG17-albumin (corresponding to c. 1 mM HO-PEG) inhibited only c. 13% of the binding
(□), the data for HO-PEG17-albumin were extrapolated
(dashed curve) to provide an estimate of the relative affinities of
the two competitors.

In analogous experiments performed with antiserum
raised against
mPEG2-IFN-α, the affinity of the mPEG-albumin conjugate
was estimated to be c. 8000 times that of the HO-PEG-albumin
conjugate (Figure C). Since the highest available
concentration of the HO-PEG-albumin conjugate inhibited only c. 13% of the binding, the data were extrapolated to obtain
a rough estimate of IC50 of the HO-PEG-albumin conjugate
(see dashed curve). Thus, anti-PEG antibodies elicited by conjugates
of three proteins containing between 2 and 17 molecules of mPEG per
protein molecule have affinities for multiply-PEGylated conjugates
of albumin with mPEG that are at least 1000-fold higher than their
affinities for HO-PEG albumin with a similar PEG-to-protein ratio.

Antibodies Raised against t-BuO-PEG-Albumin
Have Higher Titers Detected on t-BuO-PEG than on
mPEG or HO-PEG Antigens in Direct ELISAs and Higher Affinities for t-BuO-PEG than for mPEG or PEG Diol in Competitive ELISAs
Although the focus of this research is the role of the methoxy
group of mPEG in the immune responses to mPEG-protein conjugates,
a few experiments were performed to quantify and characterize the
immune responses to a different alkoxy group at the distal terminus
of an alkoxyPEG-protein conjugate. Three rabbits were immunized with
a human serum albumin conjugate of 10 kDa t-BuO-PEG
containing an average of 17 molecules of PEG per molecule of albumin
(see Figures  and ). The results of direct ELISAs of serum from one of these rabbits,
in which the assay plates were coated with SOD conjugates of t-BuO-PEG, mPEG, or HO-PEG, are shown in Figure A. The anti-PEG antibodies
generated against t-BuO-PEG17-albumin
show significant cross-reactivity with mPEG-SOD and slightly less
cross-reactivity with HO-PEG-SOD. The mean titer of antibodies in
the sera of these three rabbits detected with t-BuO-PEG-SOD
as the antigen (39 000 ± 8000) was higher than the highest
titers of anti-PEG antibodies detected with mPEG-SOD as the antigen
for the groups of rabbits immunized with mPEG1-IFN-α
(see Figure A) or mPEG-uricase (see Figure A). As shown in Table ,
the antibodies raised against t-BuO-PEG17-albumin have slightly higher titers detected in direct ELISAs with
mPEG-SOD than with HO-PEG-SOD as the antigen, but the relative titers
(detected on mPEG-SOD/HO-PEG-SOD) for all three rabbits immunized
with t-BuO-PEG17-albumin were lower than
those of 10 of 11 rabbits immunized with mPEG-protein conjugates from
which sera from Bleeds 2 and 3 were available.

Selectivity of antibodies
raised against a t-BuO-PEG
conjugate of human serum albumin (t-BuO-PEG17-albumin) was assessed by direct ELISAs (A) and by competitive ELISAs
(B). (A) Direct ELISAs were performed on assay plates coated with
SOD coupled to 10 kDa HO-PEG (red ◆), to 10 kDa mPEG (black
◆), or to 10 kDa t-BuO-PEG (green ◆)
. In this serum, from rabbit R12059, higher titers were detected with t-BuO-PEG-SOD than with mPEG-SOD or with HO-PEG-SOD. (B)
Competitive ELISAs were performed on a 1/10 000 dilution of
the same serum for which direct ELISA data are shown in (A) (rabbit
R12059; filled symbols, solid curves) and on the same dilution of
serum from a similarly immunized rabbit (R12060; open symbols, dashed
curves). The results revealed a high degree of selectivity of these
antisera for 10 kDa t-BuO-PEG (△, ▲)
compared to 10 kDa mPEG (◇, ◆) or to 10 kDa PEG diol
(○, ●).

Figure B shows the results
of competitive
ELISAs of sera from two rabbits that were immunized with t-BuO-PEG17-albumin, including the rabbit for which the
results of direct ELISAs are shown in Figure A. About 40-fold higher selectivity of the antibodies raised against t-BuO-PEG17-albumin for t-BuO-PEG
compared to mPEG is revealed by the results of the competitive ELISAs
for both rabbits (200× in Figure B) than
by the direct ELISAs (5× in Figure A).

MethoxyPEG and HO-PEG Conjugates of Two Cytokines Have Equivalent
Potencies in Cell Culture
To complement our studies of the
immunologic properties of mPEG and HO-PEG conjugates of various proteins
(see Figures –), experiments were performed to determine whether the distal
terminal group of the polymer affects the biological activities of
PEG conjugates of two cytokines measured in vitro. Human IFN-α
and human EPO were selected as examples of cytokines for which reliable
cell culture assays of potency were available. MethoxyPEG and HO-PEG
conjugates of IFN-α were tested on human Burkitt’s lymphoma
cells (Daudi cells), the proliferation of which is profoundly inhibited
by IFN-α., MethoxyPEG and HO-PEG conjugates
of EPO were tested on human erythroleukemic cells (TF-1 cells), the
proliferation of which is stimulated by EPO and certain other cytokines.,

MonoPEGylated conjugates of IFN-α, synthesized by reductive
alkylation with 20 kDa mPEG aldehyde or 20 kDa HO-PEG aldehyde (see ), were indistinguishable in
their potencies as inhibitors of Daudi cell proliferation (Figure A). Both conjugates
displayed c. 6% of the potency of unPEGylated IFN-α.
Similarly, diPEGylated conjugates of IFN-α, synthesized using
20 kDa mPEG aldehyde or 20 kDa HO-PEG aldehyde, were indistinguishable
in their potencies as inhibitors of the proliferation of Daudi cells,
although both were c. 0.4% as potent as unPEGylated
IFN-α and c. 7% as potent as the monoPEGylated
conjugates.

Cell culture assays responsive to human interferon-α
(IFN-α;
A) or human erythropoietin (EPO; B) were used to compare the potencies
in vitro of analogous conjugates of these cytokines with HO-PEG and
mPEG. A: Human lymphoma cells (Daudi cells) were treated for 3 days
with serial dilutions of IFN-α (◆), with monoPEGylated
conjugates of IFN-α made with 20 kDa mPEG (▲; mPEG1-IFN-α) or 20 kDa HO-PEG (△; HO-PEG1-IFN-α), or with diPEGylated conjugates of IFN-α made
with 20 kDa mPEG (■) or with 20 kDa HO-PEG (□). After
incubation of the cells with Alamar Blue, the fluorescent signal was
measured to quantify cell growth, from which the percent of inhibitable
cell growth was calculated. (B) Human erythroleukemic cells (TF-1
cells) were treated for 3 days with serial dilutions of EPO (◆),
with a monoPEGylated conjugate with 30 kDa mPEG (▲; mPEG1-EPO; Mircera), or with a monoPEGylated conjugate with 30
kDa HO-PEG (△; HO-PEG1-EPO). After incubation of
the cells with Alamar Blue, the fluorescent signal was measured to
quantify cell growth, from which the percent of maximal cell growth
was calculated.

The effects on TF-1 cell proliferation of a standard
solution of
EPO, a monoPEGylated conjugate of EPO
synthesized by reductive alkylation with 30 kDa HO-PEG aldehyde (see ), and a monoPEGylated conjugate of
EPO containing 30 kDa mPEG, which is commercially available from Roche
as Mircera,, were compared (Figure B). The potencies of the HO-PEG and mPEG conjugates
of EPO were indistinguishable in this assay, although both conjugates
were only c. 2% as potent as the EPO standard. Thus,
for both IFN-α and EPO, conjugates with HO-PEG and mPEG had
equivalent potencies in cell culture.

Discussion
The goal of this research was to assess
the role of the methoxy
group of mPEG in the immunogenicity and antigenicity of mPEG-protein
conjugates and the potential advantages of replacing mPEG with hydroxyPEG
(HO-PEG) in the synthesis of PEG conjugates of proteins and other
therapeutic agents. The results demonstrate that the methoxy groups
of mPEG-protein conjugates contribute significantly to the titers
of anti-PEG antibodies detected in the sera of rabbits immunized with
mPEG conjugates of human interferon-α, human serum albumin,
or porcine uricase (see Figures – and Table ). Anti-PEG antibodies raised
against mPEG conjugates of these proteins exhibit much higher affinities
for multiply-PEGylated conjugates of albumin synthesized with mPEG
than with HO-PEG (Figure ). Additional results
include the demonstration that (1) the use of the PEG-containing detergents
Tween 20 and Tween 80 decreases the sensitivity of detection of anti-PEG
antibodies by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) (Figure ); (2) the titers of anti-PEG antibodies formed
against t-BuO-PEG conjugates of albumin were higher
than those elicited by mPEG-albumin conjugates, and (3) analogous
HO-PEG and mPEG conjugates of two cytokines have indistinguishable
biological activities in cell culture assays (Figure ). While the immunologic data were obtained in experiments
on groups of only three rabbits each immunized with an mPEG, a HO-PEG,
or a t-BuO-PEG conjugate of one of three proteins,
the results have intriguing implications for potential improvements
in the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of a wide range of PEGylated
drugs by avoiding the use of activated mPEG or other alkoxy PEGs in
synthesizing the next generation of such drugs.

Development of Antibodies against PEGylated Therapeutic Enzymes
Can Limit Their Efficacy
In 2000, Müller et al. reported the accelerated clearance of an mPEG
conjugate of asparaginase (Oncaspar) in a subset of pediatric leukemia
patients who had no clinical evidence of an allergic reaction. Although
there was no mention of anti-PEG antibodies in that report, subsequent
analyses of stored sera from some of the patients in that study provided
clear evidence of anti-PEG antibodies that were detected both by serological
techniques and by flow cytometry. Oncaspar
is synthesized by coupling multiple strands of 5 kDa mPEG to l-asparaginase using the succinimidyl succinate derivative of mPEG.

In 2006, Ganson et al. reported that a subset of patients with refractory chronic
gout who had received a single subcutaneous injection of an mPEG conjugate
of a recombinant mammalian uricase cleared the conjugate exceptionally
rapidly and that low titers of anti-PEG antibodies (IgG) were detected
in the sera of some of these patients by about one week after the
injection. In a subsequent Phase 1 trial in which the same mPEG-uricase
was administered intravenously to subjects with refractory chronic
gout, antibodies to PEG-uricase, described as “mostly IgG2
and specific for PEG”, developed in 9 of 24 patients, in some
of whom the enzyme was cleared rapidly without evidence of allergic
reactions. The results of a Phase 2 randomized
study of this mPEG-uricase (now called pegloticase) were published
in 2008, and the results of two 6-month,
randomized, controlled Phase 3 trials were published in 2011. In the Phase 2 and Phase 3 trials, the absence
of high titers of anti-pegloticase antibodies was correlated with persistent
efficacy of the drug in lowering plasma uric acid concentrations.
In the Phase 3 trials, a subset of the patients lost responsiveness
within 3–4 months of treatment and this loss was associated
with high titers of anti-pegloticase antibodies. However, the specificities
of the antibodies for the enzyme vs the polymer component of the
drug were not reported., Pegloticase is synthesized
by coupling an average of ten molecules of 10 kDa mPEG per subunit
of recombinant mammalian uricase (resembling porcine uricase) using
a p-nitrophenylcarbonate derivative of mPEG.,

These examples of the loss of responsiveness to mPEG conjugates
of two therapeutic enzymes (asparaginase and uricase) that were synthesized
using two different coupling chemistries suggest the possible clinical
relevance of the present studies of the immunologic responses to mPEG-protein
conjugates in experimental animals. The immunogenicity of the polymer
component of two mPEG-protein conjugates suggests that patients who
have been treated previously with one PEGylated drug may be at increased
risk of adverse immunologic responses to a second PEGylated drug.
Since the asparaginase sequence in Oncaspar is bacterial and the uricase sequence in pegloticase is a
mutein of porcine uricase, we cannot
extrapolate from the cited results with conjugates of foreign proteins
in humans and rabbits to predict the relative immunogenicities in
humans of mPEG vs HO-PEG conjugates of human proteins.

Anti-PEG Antibodies Formed against HO-PEG-Proteins Have the
Same Titers on mPEG and HO-PEG Antigens and the Same Mean Affinities
for mPEG and PEG Diol
In contrast with the results obtained
for rabbits immunized with mPEG-proteins, direct ELISAs of sera from
each of nine rabbits immunized with HO-PEG conjugates of IFN-α
or uricase had indistinguishable titers of anti-PEG antibodies detected
on mPEG-SOD and HO-PEG-SOD (see Table  and
Figures B, B, and B). Similarly, competitive ELISAs show that anti-PEG
antibodies elicited by HO-PEG-uricase do not bind preferentially to
10 kDa mPEG or 10 kDa PEG diol (see Figure C). These results imply that the anti-PEG antibodies elicited by
HO-PEG-proteins are directed against the backbone of the polymer (see
Figure ) and that competition for their binding
to a PEG-protein antigen is neither enhanced nor inhibited by the
presence of a methoxy group in a competitor.

It should be noted
that the titers of anti-PEG antibodies elicited by HO-PEG conjugates
of uricase tended to be lower than the titers elicited by the corresponding
mPEG conjugates (Figure ). Therefore, sera
from the rabbits immunized with HO-PEG-uricase were diluted less extensively
than sera from rabbits immunized with mPEG-uricase for competitive
ELISAs, e.g., the sera in Figure B and C were
diluted 1/1000 and 1/500, respectively. Similarly, the sera in Figure B and C were diluted 1/1000 and 1/320, respectively.
Under these conditions, the values of IC50 are not directly
proportional to the affinities of the tested antibodies for the various
competitors.

Anti-PEG Antibodies Formed against mPEG-Proteins Vary in Their
Selectivities for the PEG Backbone and the Methoxy Group
In sera from 10 of 11 rabbits immunized with mPEG conjugates of three
unrelated proteins (human IFN-α, porcine uricase and human serum
albumin), the titers of anti-PEG antibodies detected by direct ELISAs
on assay plates coated with mPEG conjugates of another unrelated protein,
SOD, were higher than the titers detected in the same sera on assay
plates coated with HO-PEG-SOD (see Table  and
Figures A, A, and A]. The unusually high degree of selectivity for
mPEG of the anti-PEG antibodies detected in sera from two of three
rabbits immunized with mPEG-uricase suggests that the immunogenicity
of this porcine enzyme to which the PEG is coupled may influence the
impact of the terminal methoxy groups on the specificity of the antigen-binding
sites of the anti-PEG antibodies (see Figure ).

There were noteworthy differences within the two groups
of rabbits immunized with mPEG conjugates of porcine uricase and human
serum albumin, respectively. Among those immunized with mPEG-uricase,
rabbit R580 had a mean relative titer of only 3.1 ± 0.6, while
rabbits R579 and R581 had mean relative titers of 20 ± 4.8 and
18 ± 4.8, respectively. Within the group of rabbits immunized
with mPEG17-albumin, the mean relative titers of rabbits
R12056 and R12058 were 3.0 ± 0.5 and 2.6 ± 0.6, respectively.
Surprisingly, rabbit R12057 had indistinguishable titers on mPEG-SOD
and HO-PEG-SOD in triplicate assays (mean relative titer = 1.1 ±
0.1). Rabbit R12057 was the only 1 of 11 rabbits immunized with mPEG
conjugates of any of three different proteins in which the titer detected
on mPEG-SOD was not at least twice that detected on HO-PEG-SOD. Competitive
ELISAs of sera from that rabbit also showed no selectivity for mPEG
vs PEG diol (data not shown). The results for this anomalous rabbit
do not negate the overall conclusion about the importance of the methoxy
group in the immune responses of most rabbits to
mPEG-protein conjugates, but they signal the potential role of individual
variation that might impact population studies in humans.

Antibodies against the Terminal Methoxy Group Dominate the Immune
Responses to mPEG-Uricase
Figure B illustrates data from one rabbit immunized with mPEG-uricase in
which the affinity for 10 kDa mPEG was 70 times higher than for 10
kDa PEG diol. Similar results were obtained when the same serum was
tested with 20 kDa mPEG and 20 kDa PEG diol, as well as when sera
from the other two rabbits immunized with mPEG-uricase were similarly
tested (data not shown). The molecular weight of the methyl group
that differentiates mPEG from HO-PEG is only 15 Da, which represents
only 0.15% of the molecular weight of the 10 kDa competitors tested
in these experiments. Therefore, it may seem surprising that the anti-PEG
antibodies display so much higher affinities for the small group at
the end of the polymer than for the large number of oxyethylene units
(CH2–CH2–O) within the polymer
backbone (c. 227 for 10 kDa PEGs). On the other hand,
the ends of linear or branched polymers, especially the hydrophobic
end containing a methoxy group (as in Figure A or B) or a t-butoxy group (as in Figure B), are more likely than the polymer backbone to
be accessible to the antigen-binding sites of the antibodies (see
Figure ). The lack of absolute specificity
of these antibodies for the terminal alkoxy groups is demonstrated
by the observation that a sufficiently high concentration of PEG diol
can completely inhibit the binding to mPEG-SOD of anti-PEG antibodies
raised against mPEG-IFN-α or mPEG-uricase (see Figure A and B).

Multiple PEGylation Amplifies the Detectable Selectivity for
mPEG vs HO-PEG of Anti-PEG Antibodies Formed against mPEG-Proteins
While several FDA-approved PEGylated therapeutic proteins in clinical
use contain a single strand of mPEG (e.g., PegIntron,, Neulasta,, and Mircera,,), several others contain derivatives of diPEG-lysine,
which have two methoxy groups (e.g., Pegasys,, Macugen, and Cimzia,,), and others contain multiple strands of “linear”
mPEG (e.g., Adagen,, Oncaspar,, Somavert,, and KRYSTEXXA,,,). Our data suggest the potential clinical
relevance of the present studies of the impact of multiple PEGylation
on the antigenicity of mPEG-protein conjugates.

In contrast
with the 12-fold and 16-fold differences between the affinities of
anti-PEG antibodies elicited by two mPEG-protein conjugates for free
10 kDa mPEG vs an mPEG-albumin conjugate (see Figure A and B), no significant
differences were detected between the affinities or the shapes of
the competition curves obtained with free 10 kDa PEG diol and a HO-PEG-albumin
conjugate as competitors for the binding to HO-PEG-SOD of antibodies
raised against HO-PEG-uricase (see Figure C). A plausible interpretation is that anti-PEG antibodies directed
against the backbone of the polymer can bind cooperatively to at least
two sites within the backbone of a polymer as large as 10 kDa PEG
diol. In that case, the presence of multiple strands of HO-PEG within
the albumin conjugate would not further enhance the cooperativity
of the binding. The absence of enhanced cooperativity in binding multiply-PEGylated
protein conjugates distinguishes anti-PEG antibodies directed against
the polymer backbone from those directed against the methoxy group(s)
at the distal terminus or termini.

Anti-PEG Antibodies Raised against mPEG-Protein Conjugates Bind
Multiply-PEGylated mPEG-Albumin Conjugates &gt;1000-fold More Tightly
than HO-PEG-Albumin Conjugates
In sera from rabbits immunized
with mPEG conjugates of uricase, albumin or IFN-α, the affinities
of anti-PEG antibodies for mPEG-albumin conjugates were about 3 orders
of magnitude higher than for HO-PEG conjugates of albumin (Figure ). Precise estimates of the relative affinities
could not be obtained, since the highest available concentrations
of the HO-PEG-albumin conjugates used as competitors inhibited only
a fraction of the binding of the antibodies to mPEG-SOD on the assay
plate. Su et al. previously reported that
anti-PEG antibodies bind best when PEG is linked to a protein or liposome
or adsorbed on a surface. They also reported that the binding of their
monoclonal antibodies to the PEG backbone was not influenced by the
nature of the terminal groups of the PEG, which included HO-PEG and
mPEG.

The Methoxy Group is Not Unique in Eliciting Anti-PEG Antibodies
Directed against the Terminal Group of AlkoxyPEG-Protein Conjugates
In sera from three rabbits immunized with t-BuO-PEG17-albumin (see Figure A), the mean
titer detected with t-BuO-PEG-SOD as the antigen
was about 7–10 times higher than the titers detected in sera
of rabbits immunized with mPEG1-IFN-α (see Figure A), mPEG-uricase (see Figure A), or mPEG-albumin (data not shown).

The immunogenicity of
the t-butoxy group shown in Figure is relevant to the potential use of this group as a removable
blocking group in the synthesis of monofunctionally activated HO-PEG
conjugates. The use of t-BuO-PEG as an intermediate in the synthesis of the p-nitrophenylcarbonate derivative of HO-PEG (HO-PEG-NPC) is illustrated
below:The failure to remove even a small fraction
of the t-butoxy groups in step [2] of the above reaction
sequence would result in a preparation of HO-PEG-NPC in which traces
of t-BuO-PEG-NPC could form highly immunogenic protein
conjugates.

Buffers Containing Tween-Type Non-Ionic Detergents Interfere
with Detection of Anti-PEG Antibodies by ELISAs
A few previous
investigators have recognized the inhibitory effects of Tween on the
detection and quantitation of anti-PEG antibodies, and
a few companies that sell anti-PEG mAbs warn their customers to avoid
the use of Tween (e.g., Silver Lake Research). The dramatic effects of Tween 20 and Tween 80, illustrated in Figure , have clear implications
for clinical studies that include attempts to quantify anti-PEG antibodies.,,, The data in Figure  and similar results
on sera from other rabbits immunized with mPEG- or HO-PEG-uricase
(results not shown) illustrate the distortion of the results of direct
ELISAs of anti-PEG antibodies resulting from the use of the detergents
Tween 20 and Tween 80, which contain short strands of PEG within their
structures (see Figure ).

Therapeutic Proteins Coupled to mPEG and HO-PEG Have Equivalent
Potencies in Cell Culture
The in vitro biological activities
of two PEGylated cytokines, one of which inhibits proliferation (interferon-α)
and the other of which stimulates proliferation (erythropoietin) of
the cells on which each was tested were unaffected by the substitution
of HO-PEG for mPEG of the same molecular weight in their synthesis
(see Figure ). These results provide support
for the proposal that conjugates synthesized with HO-PEG instead of
mPEG will retain the desirable attributes of PEGylated therapeutic
agents, even if they provoke fewer undesirable immune responses than
those observed with mPEG conjugates.

Implications of These Results for Future Research and the Future
Design and Development of PEGylated Proteins and Other Therapeutic
Agents
Our demonstration that mPEG conjugates of three dissimilar
proteins containing as few as 1 or as many as 17 molecules of mPEG
elicit anti-PEG antibodies that are directed against the methoxy group
has important implications for the clinical use of mPEG conjugates
of enzymes, cytokines, and other therapeutic proteins. Armstrong et
al. recognized that anti-PEG antibodies
were involved in the accelerated clearance of mPEG conjugates of asparaginase
in a subset of patients treated with Oncaspar, and Ganson, Sundy,
and their colleagues recognized that anti-PEG antibodies were correlated
with the accelerated clearance of pegloticase in a subset of patients., However, those reports did not evaluate the role of the methoxy
groups of the mPEGs in the conjugates being studied.

The results
presented above are consistent with the hypothesis that the accelerated
clearance and the consequent loss of efficacy of mPEG conjugates of
therapeutic agents might be decreased by synthesizing next-generation
versions of these drugs with monofunctionally activated derivatives
of hydroxyPEG, instead of mPEG. The potential advantages of HO-PEG
conjugates have been suggested in previous publications by several
of the present authors., Despite the convenience
inherent in the use of mPEG for the synthesis of monofunctionally
activated PEGylation reagents, the extra effort entailed in the use
of monofunctionally activated HO-PEG may be justified by the decreased
risk of treatment-limiting immune responses to the resultant HO-PEG
conjugates (see ).

The caveats on extrapolating from the present results to clinical
situations include the facts that (1) all immunogens administered
to rabbits in this study were emulsified in complete or incomplete
Freund’s adjuvant, (2) the clearance rates of the various PEG
conjugates could not be measured in these hyperimmune rabbits, and
(3) antibody isotyping was not possible in this study because the
secondary antibody used for all of the reported ELISAs was specific
for the H and L chains of rabbit IgG, which can cross-react with the
L chains of rabbit IgM. All of these factors are worthy subjects of
future research. Finally, although all of the data in this report
were obtained with PEG conjugates of proteins, the potential advantages
of replacing activated mPEG with monofunctionally activated HO-PEG
for synthesizing polymer conjugates of liposomes, viruses, red blood
cells, aptamers, and other types of therapeutic agents also merit
investigation.

Supporting Information Available
Descriptions of the synthesis, purification
and physicochemical analyses of (1) the activated HO-PEGs and t-BuO-PEG; (2) the PEG-protein conjugates listed in Table , and (3) the HO-PEG conjugate of erythropoietin
used in the cell culture assays. This material is available free
of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc200551b_si_001.pdf

The authors declare the
following competing financial interest(s): All of the authors are
employees of Mountain View Pharmaceuticals, Inc.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by a Qualifying Therapeutic
Discovery Project grant from the U.S. government under the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act (P.L. 111-148). We are grateful
to John A. French for his contributions throughout this research,
particularly with respect to the computer-assisted analysis of the
data, and to Alexa L. Martinez for her participation in the early
stages of this research. Dr. John A. Katzenellenbogen and Dr. Ralph
W. Niven provided many insightful suggestions regarding the manuscript.

Abbreviations
AAALACAssociation
for the Assessment
and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care

ACNacetonitrile

Albuminhuman serum albumin

Blocking Buffer5% (w/v)
nonfat dry milk solids in PBS

ELISAenzyme-linked immunosorbent assay

EPOrecombinant human erythropoietin

GM-CSFrecombinant
human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor

HO-PEGhydroxyPEG

HRPhorseradish peroxidase

IACUCInstitutional
Animal Care and Use Committee

IFN-αrecombinant human interferon-α

mAU/minmilli-absorbance
units/min

mAbsmonoclonal
antibodies

mPEGmonomethoxypoly(ethylene glycol)

NPCp-nitrophenylcarbonate

OPDo-phenylenediamine
dihydrochloride

PBS-Gphosphate-buffered saline, pH 7.4, containing 2% (v/v) goat serum

PEGpoly(ethylene glycol)

pNP-COClp-nitrophenylchloroformate

RIrefractive index

RP chromatographyreversed-phase chromatography

SECsize-exclusion chromatography

SODporcine Cu–Zn
superoxide dismutase

t-BuO-PEGt-butoxyPEG

TFAtrifluoroacetic acid.

