Introduction
The ability to chemoselectively
ligate
a range of biomolecules, polymers, nanoparticles, and nanomaterials
is fundamental to current chemistry research and is crucial for a
wide range of applications from protein conjugation, pharmaceutical
therapies, molecular electronics, polymer synthesis, drug delivery,
and tissue engineering. The most used
methods rely on click chemistry type reactions that span Diels–Alder,
Michael additions, thiol–ene reactions, Staudinger reactions,
nucleophilic ring-opening reactions, 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition, oxime/hydrazone
formation reactions, and native chemical ligations. Although several conjugation methods exist and have been
used for many applications, the use of these methods for in
vitro/in vivo biological studies and applications
has been severely limited due to the special nature of the biological
environment that limits the scope of reactions that may be employed. This subset of conjugation reactions for in vitro/in vivo studies and applications
ideally, at physiological conditions, require kinetically well-behaved
reactions that are bio-orthogonal, stable (covalent bonds), and modular
to conjugate a diverse range of molecules and noncytotoxic compounds. Moreover,
a conjugation strategy that can be (1) monitored and characterized
with simple nonintrusive analytical methods, and (2) turned on or
off for conjugation, and can (3) release molecules and be inexpensive
would complement and expand the scope of existing conjugation/release
methods for a range of new applications.

It is well known that
aminooxy groups (R-ONH2) selectively react with carbonyl
groups to form stable oxime products, which have been used as a popular
bioconjugation methodology for the preparation of ligand microarrays
and cell arrays,− therapeutics, () fluorescent
labeling, () combinatorial libraries, () artificial proteins, () glycoprotein mimetics, chemically tunable
polymers, and biosensors. Oxime formation is chemoselective and stable
at physiological conditions.− There are many types of oximes
reported and characterized, and each have unique characteristics including
the quinone oxime; having an oxime moiety (R1R2C=N-O-R3) directly adjacent to the aromatic ring. Among them, the quinone oxime ether (QO) and
ester have been studied in the field of stereoelectronic control in
organic chemistry and applied to cytotoxin
molecules, therapeutics, and photoinduced iminyl radical generation. We have extensively studied and employed the
quinone oxime ether (QO) as a quantitative immobilization strategy
on gold and indium tin oxide (ITO) surfaces for a range of biotechnological
and cell behavior studies.− However, until now, the QO with its interesting aromatic structure
and redox properties has not been explored as a solution based conjugation
or cleavage strategy.

The ability to cleave specific chemical
linkages with mild stimuli is a powerful tool in designing small molecule
drugs, in vivo biosensors, drug delivery methods,
solid phase synthesis, and protein–protein interactions.− There are several popular classes of cleavable linkers for these
applications: cleavage by reduction (sulfhydryl and diazobenzene),
oxidation (periodate), nucleophilic substitution, and base labile
sulfones. Among them, reduction induced
cleavage is attractive due to its relatively mild induction which
can be performed at physiological conditions. For example, N-succinimidyl 3-(2-pyridyldithio)-propionate (SPDP) and
succinimidyl oxycarbonyl-α-methyl-α-(2-pyridyldithio)-toluene
(SMPT) are often used for the preparation of immunotoxin conjugates
that contain a monoclonal antibody which is cross-linked to a protein
toxin molecules, the antibody directed against tumor-associated antigens.
Lambert et al. showed that a disulfide linkage between the antibody
and toxin molecules results in a potent toxicity when compared to
that of noncleavable linkages.

In this article, we develop a general methodology termed chemoselective
redox-responsive ligation (CRRL) and release strategy for molecular
conjugation and cleavage of a range of molecules in solution. This
methodology relies on the redox controlled activation, conjugation,
release, and regeneration of a series of electroactive hydroquinone
derived molecules. The strategy is based on the reaction of aminooxy-tethered
ligands with a redox controlled benzoquionone group for subsequent
oxime formation and release. We believe, this CRRL strategy is dynamic,
switchable, kinetically well behaved, stable, inexpensive, synthetically
flexible, and can be regenerated for subsequent rounds of conjugation
and release. Furthermore, the CRRL reactions can be monitored by simple
UV–vis spectroscopy methods and controlled by electrochemistry
(either chemical redox reagents or applied potentials). We characterize
the CRRL chemical sequence and then demonstrate the utility of the
CRRL strategy in two ways: (1) by generating dynamic peptides for
cell inhibition assays and (2) as a redox based system to deliver
cargoes specifically to the interior of cells.

Materials and Methods
Spectroscopy
Spectra were obtained using a diode-array spectrophotometer for
both standard and kinetics measurements. All of the measurements were
performed using quartz spectrophotometer cells in Dulbecco’s
PBS (used as received) at room temperature. All measurements were
initiated immediately after sample preparation.

Chromatography
and Mass Spectrometry
Analytical HPLC was performed on a
diode array detector and an automated sampler. The samples were eluted
through an Atlantis analytical column (C18, 5 μm, 6 × 150
mm) with a binary solvent system (solvent A, optima grade water with
5% optima grade acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA; solvent B, acetonitrile
with 5% water and 0.1% TFA) with a gradient of 0–100% solvent
B over 50 min (1 mL/min). For the LC-MS data for intra-CRRL RGD (6) and inter-CRRL RGD (9) peptides, samples were
run on a UPLC system coupled to a mass spectrometer (scanning 300–1600 m/z) using a UPLC column (BEH C18 1.7 μm,
2.1 × 150 mm, 30 °C). The elution occurred in a gradient
of binary solvents (solvent A, optima grade water with 0.2% formic
acid; solvent B, Optima grade acetonitrile with 0.2% formic acid),
where solvent B increased from 1% to 40% over 20 min.

CRRL Activation,
Conjugation, Release, and Regeneration
Activation: the hydroquinone
(HQ) can be oxidized to the benzoquinone (BQ) via chemical or electrochemical
methods. Addition of Cu2+ (2 equivalents) in pH 7.4 PBS
instantly oxidizes HQ to BQ quantitatively. The HQ can also be oxidized
to BQ in solution via electrochemical methods (potentiostat) by application
of an oxidative potential (+750 mV, 1 min, versus a Ag/AgCl reference
electrode) to a stirring solution of HQ (0.1 mM, pH 7.4, PBS) in an
electrochemical cell containing a gold working electrode. Conjugation:
the benzoquinone (BQ) can form a stable quinone oxime ether (QO) when
reacted with aminooxy-containing ligands (R-ONH2) in a
range of pH conditions (pH 1.0 to 10). Release: the quinone oxime
ether (QO) can be chemically or electrochemically cleaved to release
the aminooxy ligand (R-ONH2) as a primary alcohol (R-OH)
with the generation of aminophenol (AP). Addition of either a soluble
reducing agent (DTT, 5 mM, pH 7.4, PBS, 10 h) or electrochemical reduction
(−100 mV, 1 min, pH 7.4, PBS) causes the efficient cleavage
of QO to AP with high yield (&gt;95%). Regeneration: the aminophenol
(AP) can be oxidized to the quinoneimine, which rapidly hydrolyzes
to generate the benzoquinone (BQ) with the release of ammonia. The
BQ is then reduced to generate the HQ via a classic electrode chemical
(EC) process.

Fibroblast (Fb) Culture
Swiss 3T3 albino mouse fibroblasts were cultured in Dulbecco’s
modified Eagle’s medium (Gibco) containing 10% calf bovine
serum (CBS) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin at 37 °C in 5% CO2.

Cell Adhesion Inhibition Assay
3T3 Swiss Albino mouse
fibroblasts were pretreated with peptides (6–11) at varying concentrations and seeded onto a RGD-presenting
SAM gold substrate. We have previously reported and described these
types of surfaces for a range of cell behavior studies. Briefly, gold substrates were immersed in a
1 mM ethanolic solution of alkanethiolates (1:99 HQ/TEG) for 12 h.
The hydroquinone-containing surfaces were oxidized by applying a potential
of 750 mV (vs Ag/AgCl) for 15 s in a 1 M solution of HClO4 using a BAS 100B/W electrochemical analyzer (Bioanalytical Systems,
Inc., West Lafayette, IN). Then, aminooxy acetic acid-Gly-Arg-Gly-Asp-Ser-amidated
was added (10 mM in PBS) for 3 h to install the peptide onto the surface.
The fibroblasts were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s
medium with 10% bovine calf serum and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (37
°C in a humidified 5% CO2 atmosphere). In order to
plate cells onto the SAM substrates, cells were removed from the culture
flask with a solution of 0.05% trypsin/0.53 mM EDTA and resuspended
in serum-free culture medium (5,000–10,000 cells/mL). The 0.3
mL of aliquots are treated with peptides in various concentrations
for 5 min and seeded and incubated for 30 min and gently rinsed with
PBS. Adhered cells were counted at random locations on the substrates
(n = 129). The ratio (%) of adhered cells to the
nonpretreated cell control experiments were plotted.

Cell Treatment
with Cell-Permeable Redox-Responsive Calcein Dye (CPRRC, 12)
Two microliters of 40 mM CPRRC was added to 4 mL of culture
media for a final concentration of 10 μM. This mixture was added
to fibroblasts in culture for 1 h. The medium was removed, and 4 mL
of fresh medium was added. After 1 h, the cells were imaged in PBS
with a Nikon TE2000.

Fluorometry
Ten micromolar CPRRC
was prepared in 5 mM glutathione at pH 7. To measure the initial fluorescence,
the fluorescence was scanned from 515 to 600 nm with 495 nm excitation
on a Biocore 765 fluorometer. For the recovery studies, 525 nm was
monitored over 3 h every 2 min. After the recovery was complete, 515
to 600 nm was scanned again.

Results and Disscussion
Figure  shows the cartoon scheme and molecular
structures of the solution based CRRL conjugation and release strategy.
A CRRL receptor can be switched between the off state and on state
by mild chemical or electrochemical redox changes. Only when the CRRL
receptor is turned on can it react chemoselectively with a CRRL ligand
to generate a stable covalent conjugated pair. The covalent ligation
product is stable but can be selectively released by a mild chemical
or electrochemical reductant. The CRRL cleavage reaction regenerates
the receptor group, while the released ligand is irreversibly altered
at the ligation site. Subsequent rounds of conjugation and cleavage
at physiological conditions (pH 7.4 and 37 °C) can be performed.
The reaction is bio-orthogonal, chemoselective, and may be done in
complex protein mixtures and cell culture.,

Cartoon
scheme and molecular cycle of the chemoselective redox-responsive
ligation (CRRL) and release strategy. (Top) A CRRL receptor tethered
to molecule 1 can be switched between the “off” state
(complete circle) and “on” state (incomplete circle)
by mild chemical or electrochemical oxidation and reduction. Only
when the receptor is turned “on” can the CRRL ligand
(red arrow) react chemoselectively to form a conjugated molecule pair.
The covalent ligation product is stable but can be selectively released
by a mild chemical or electrochemical reduction. The CRRL cleavage
reaction regenerates the receptor group while the ligand is irreversibly
altered. Conjugation between the receptor and the ligand, as well
as the cleavage reaction, are fast, mild, clean (no need for catalyst),
bio-orthogonal, and chemoselective in physiological conditions (pH
of 7.4 and 37 °C) and complex protein mixtures (cell lysates),
which are essential characteristics for biological applications. (Bottom)
A hydroquinone (HQ) is the “off” CRRL receptor and can
be converted to the benzoquinone (BQ) (“on” CRRL receptor)
by mild chemical or electrochemical oxidation. This activation interconversion
process is chemically and electrochemically reversible, which enables
switching between the active and inactive forms for chemoselective
conjugation. An aminooxy-tethered molecule (R-ONH2; the
CRRL ligand) can conjugate selectively to the BQ form generating a
covalent and stable quinone oxime ether (QO) as a ligation product.
The QO is reduced in mild conditions to yield the aminophenol (AP)
with release of the ligand as a hydroxyl-terminated molecule (R–OH).
The activation, conjugation, and release steps all occur at physiological
conditions (pH 7.4, 37 °C). The HQ can then be regenerated from
AP by a subsequent oxidation in low pH followed by hydrolysis of the
imine and reduction by a classic electrode–chemical (EC) mechanism.

A hydroquinone (HQ) is the off CRRL receptor and can be converted
to the benzoquinone (BQ) (on CRRL receptor) by mild chemical oxidants
or electrochemical oxidation. This interconversion process is chemically
and electrochemically reversible, which enables switching between
the active and inactive forms for chemoselective conjugation. An aminooxy-tethered
molecule (R-ONH2; the CRRL ligand) can conjugate selectively
to the BQ form generating a covalent and stable quinone oxime ether
(QO) as a ligation product. The QO can then be reduced by mild chemical
reductants or electrochemical reduction to yield the aminophenol (AP)
with release of the ligand as a hydroxyl-terminated molecule (R-OH).
The HQ can then be regenerated from aminophenol (AP) by subsequent
steps of oxidation, followed by the hydrolysis of imine to generate
BQ with the liberation of ammonia and then further reduction of BQ
to HQ through a classic EC (electrode and chemical) mechanism.

To monitor and characterize the kinetics
of the stable intermediate products of the CRRL conjugation and cleavage
strategy, we used standard UV–vis spectroscopy (Figure ). Upon oxidation of hydroquinone (HQ), benzoquinone
(BQ) is formed, which can react with aminooxy groups (R-ONH2) to form the quinone oxime ether (QO). The QO can then be cleaved
to generate the aminophenol (AP) with all species having diagnostic
absorbances (HQ, 288 nm, ε = 2,520 M–1cm–1; BQ, 248 nm, ε = 20,300 M–1cm–1; QO, 320 nm, ε = 18,163 M–1cm–1; AP, 297 nm, ε = 2,150 M–1cm–1; Figure S1, ). Figure a, left shows
the conjugation reaction between BQ and methoxyamine (CH3ONH2) characterized by UV–vis spectroscopy. To
the solution of BQ (PBS, 200 μM), a solution of methoxyamine
(PBS, 100 mM) was added immediately after the initial measurement
(0 min). The visible isosbestic point demonstrates that BQ and QO
are linearly related by stoichiometry, supporting that the reaction
is coupled by the formation of QO and decay of BQ.

Kinetics of CRRL conjugation
between BQ (200 μM) and methoxyamine (100 mM), and cleavage
of QO (200 μM) with dithiothreitol (DTT) (100 mM), determined
by UV–vis spectroscopy. (Left) (a) UV–vis spectra showing
the conversion from BQ (248 nm) to QO (320 nm) with a clear isosbestic
point. (b) A plot of absorbance maxima versus time for BQ and QO.
An exponential increase of QO and decay of BQ are fitted to pseudo-first-order
kinetics to obtain k′ (4.2 × 10–3 s–1). (c) A plot of k′
versus varying [CH3–ONH2] to determine
the second-order rate constant k for the reaction
of BQ with CH3ONH2 to generate QO. The rate
constant for CRRL conjugation is 3.4 × 10–2 (±6.5 × 10–4) M–1s–1. (Right) (a) UV–vis spectra characterization
for the cleavage reaction versus time (QO, 320 nm; AP, 292 nm). (b)
A plot of QO (200 μM) absorbance (320 nm) versus time in the
presence of the reductant DTT (10 mM) follows a pseudo-first-order
exponential decay (k′ = 7.3 × 10–2 s–1). (c) A plot of k′ versus varying [DTT] to determine the second-order rate
constant k for the cleavage of QO to generate AP.
The CRRL cleavage rate constant k = 6.5 × 10–1 (±3.0 × 10–2) M–1s–1.

The absorbances at 248 and 320 nm were plotted against time
in an exponential plot (Figure b, left). The
exponential graph was fitted to pseudo-first-order reaction kinetics
in order to obtain k′. After solving for a
series of k’s from different reaction conditions
with excess methoxyamine, the k′ values can
be plotted against [methoxyamine] (Figure c, left) to obtain the second-order rate constant for CRRL conjugation, k = 3.41 × 10–2 (±6.5 ×
10–4) M–1s–1 (PBS, room temperature).

The same experiments and calculations
were performed for the CRRL cleavage reaction. To a solution of QO
(PBS, 200 μM), dithiothreitol (DTT) (PBS, 100 mM) was added
(Figure a, right). Although DTT masks the
spectrum that is lower than 260 nm, the decrease of QO absorbance
at 320 nm and the appearance of AP at 292 nm could be observed. The
absorbance peak is shifted from 297 to 292 nm for AP because of the
high concentration of DTT. For the case of reduction in low glutathione
(GSH) concentration, AP has an absorbance peak at 297 nm (Figure S2, ). Commercial AP (200 μM)
in 10 mM DTT and PBS also shows the same absorbance shift. The isosbestic
point was not observed for the conversion of QO to AP due to a peak
absorbance overlap. The rate constant for the CRRL cleavage reaction
was determined to be 6.5 × 10–1 (3.0 ×
10–2) M–1s–1 (Figure c, right). The reaction products
from both CRRL conjugation (QO) and cleavage reactions (AP) were characterized
by NMR and mass spectrometry (Figures S3 and S4, ). These UV characterizations clearly
show that the CRRL conjugation and cleavage reactions are well behaved
and clean at pH 7.4. We found that the key CRRL conjugation product
(QO) is stable at room temperature in PBS for several weeks and could
be stored for very long periods (&gt;6 months) at 0 °C (Figure
S5, ).

To conjugate
a range of biomolecules using the CRRL strategy, we used standard
solid phase peptide synthesis (SPPS) to generate dynamic peptides
containing the hydroquinone group at various locations (Figure ). We first synthesized a protected hydroquinone-tethered
Fmoc amino acid (HQAA; 1) that could easily be incorporated
into a standard solid phase peptide synthesizer for site-specific
CRRL chemistry (Figure a). A tetrahydro-2H-pyran (THP)-protected HQ-tethered alkyl azide (5) was synthesized and conjugated to an Fmoc-protected propargyl glycine
by 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition. The HQAA (1) can be incorporated
into any position in a peptide sequence, enabling control of the conjugation
site with routine Fmoc SPPS (Figure b). The
THP group can then be deprotected yielding the HQ using the standard
trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) cleavage step for peptide release from
a resin with ∼60% yield (0.1 mmol scale; Figure S6, ). CRRL’s compatibility
with facile SPPS is an important feature for generating a range of
biomolecules including carbohydrates, polymers, nucleic acids, proteins,
and small molecule ligands and nanomaterials that contain the hydroquinone
group for a broad range of applications in material science and biology.

(a) Synthesis
of a protected hydroquinone tethered Fmoc amino acid (HQAA; 1) for use in solid phase peptide synthesis to generate peptides
containing the hydroquinone group for site-specific CRRL chemistry.
(b) Scheme showing how HQAA (1) can be added to any site
within a peptide by applying standard solid phase peptide synthesis
technology. This strategy allows for the CRRL method to be incorporated
into a variety of biomolecules.

In order to demonstrate the utility of the CRRL strategy,
we used the well known cell adhesion peptides discovered by Pierschbather
and Ruoslahti as a model system. They reported the short peptide sequence
Gly-Arg-Gly-Asp-Ser (GRGDS) found in the extracellular matrix protein
fibronectin to be a minimum cell adhesion ligand for integrin receptors
on cell surfaces. Although GRGDS alone
can result in cell adhesion, several other peptide sequences including
PHSRN (found in fibronectin within the FIII9 domain) have been shown
to have a synergistic or competitive adhesion effect., Furthermore, it has been shown that cyclic-RGD has a higher activity
toward cell binding than linear-RGD (Kd of nanomolar versus micromolar, respectively) due to the structural
similarity between the cyclic form and the natural RGD loop in the
FIII10 domain. We chose to focus on the
RGD cell adhesive peptide to demonstrate the generation of a dynamic
biomolecule using CRRL, which can modulate its biological activity
by inducing structural changes upon sensing different redox environments.
Two proof-of-concept peptides, intra-CRRL RGD (6) and
inter-CRRL RGD (9), were synthesized to demonstrate the
utility of the CRRL methodology (Figure ).

(Left)
Intramolecular CRRL. A peptide (intra-CRRL RGD, (6))
containing the HQAA (1) and a terminal aminooxy group
was synthesized using standard solid phase peptide synthesis. The
CRRL strategy was used to generate a cyclic peptide characterized
by liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry. (a) Structure of the
intra-CRRL RGD (6) peptide. (b) A mild oxidant Cu2+ was added in order to oxidize the HQ to BQ followed by rapid
intramolecular oxime formation to generate a cyclic peptide (7). (c) A mild reductant DTT was added to the solution of
cyclized RGD peptide (7) to reduce and therefore cleave
the oxime bond to generate the linear peptide (8). Mass
spectrometry characterization of each product in the intramolecular
CRRL strategy are shown. All of the reactions were performed at physiological
conditions (PBS, pH 7.4, 37.0 °C). (Right) Intermolecular CRRL
demonstrating the conjugation of two different peptides. One peptide
(inter-CRRL RGD (9)) contains the HQ group, while the
other (PREDRVPHSRN) has an oxyamine group. Each are easily synthesized
using standard solid phase peptide technology. (a) Inter-CRRL RGD
(9) peptide in PBS before reaction. (b) A mild oxidant
Cu2+ and oxyamine-PREDRVPHSRN were added to the PBS solution
of inter-CRRL RGD (9) peptide to enable rapid intermolecular
CRRL conjugation of the two peptides (10) (PBS, 37.0
°C). (c) The CRRL product peptide (10) was then
selectively cleaved upon treatment of the reductant DTT to yield the
linear-RGD peptide (11). (Bottom) Mass spectrometry characterization
of each product in the intermolecular CRRL strategy. All of the reactions
were performed at physiological conditions (PBS, pH 7.4, 37.0 °C).

The intra-CRRL RGD peptide (6) has the HQAA (1) at the C-terminus and an
aminooxy group at the N-terminus (Figure a).
An added feature of the CRRL strategy is the ease of incorporation
of an aminooxy group into a peptide by using a commercially available
(Boc-aminooxy)acetic acid, a CRRL ligand, during standard solid phase
peptide synthesis. In a reducing environment (1 mM DTT in PBS), the
intra-CRRL RGD (6) remains in the linear form for more
than 4 days (PBS, 25 °C). When molecule 6 (100 μM)
encounters oxidative conditions (10 mM of copper(II) sulfate pentahydrate
in PBS), the HQ is immediately oxidized to the BQ form, which reacts
rapidly with the aminooxy-functionalized N-terminus to generate a
cyclized RGD peptide (7) (Figure b). The cyclized intra-CRRL RGD peptide (7) is stable
for weeks in PBS and room temperature (25 °C). To regenerate
the linearized RGD peptide, the addition of a reductant (10 mM DTT
in PBS, 37 °C) to the purified 7 results in instant
cleavage of the oxime bond to generate the AP group and a hydroxyl-functionalized
N-terminus (8) (Figure c). As
this intra-CRRL peptide has both a CRRL receptor and a ligand, characterization
of each state of the peptide was determined by mass spectrometry.
This allows for facile monitoring of the chemical changes occurring
during the CRRL cyclization and cleavage steps of each species (HQ,
oxyamine, QO, AP, and the corresponding hydroxyl terminated group
in a single peptide) during the course of the CRRL conjugation and
release steps.

Similarly, inter-CRRL formation and cleavage
between RGD and PHSRN were characterized by mass spectrometry, as
shown in Figure  (right). The inter-CRRL RGD
peptide (9) has a HQAA at the N-terminus for the conjugation
of an aminooxy-tethered PREDRVPHSRN peptide. Oxidative conditions
(1 mM Cu2+, PBS, 37 °C) immediately yielded the large
hybrid peptide (10) having a molecular mass of 2479.25,
which can then be dissociated by DTT, yielding the corresponding AP-RGD
(11).

UV–vis spectroscopy also confirmed
that the HQ-peptides (9) behave similarly to the parent
molecules (without peptides attached) (Figure S8, ). Intra-CRRL RGD (6, Figure
S8a, ) and inter-CRRL
RGD (9, Figure S8b, ) showed the same HQ absorption spectra associated with each CRRL
step. The reduced form of the CRRL peptide (HQ-peptide (6, 9)) was dissolved in H2O (100 μM)
and oxidized by the addition of 2 equivalents of Cu2+ to
generate QO-peptide (7, 10). For the inter-CRRL
peptide, methoxyamine (100 mM, ddH2O) was added and oxime
formation occurred instantly (QO-peptide). The QO-peptide was converted
to the AP-peptide (9, 11) by treatment with
GSH (5 mM) or DTT (100 mM). The reduced form of the inter-CRRL RGD
(HQ-peptide (9)) was dissolved in H2O and
oxidized by the addition of 2 equivalents of Cu2+ to generate
the oxidized BQ-peptide. When methoxyamine (100 mM, ddH2O) was added, oxime formation occurred instantly (QO-peptide). The
QO-peptide was converted to the AP-peptide by treatment with DTT (10
mM). Taken together, these results show that the CRRL strategy can
be used to cyclize molecules, conjugate to other molecules, and release
molecules responding to environmental redox stimuli with real-time
characterization by a noninvasive straightforward UV–vis absorption
spectroscopy technique. This facile characterization is important
not only for identifying species but for also determining actual amounts
of the CRRL species and for monitoring the kinetics and therefore
degree of conjugation.

As further chemical characterization,
a selected ion chromatogram was performed to demonstrate that each
intra-CRRL peptide species behaves similarly to the corresponding
parent molecule without the peptide (Figure ), in terms of the elution durations from a C18 column (Figure S7, ).

As a demonstration
to show the utility of the inter- and intra-CRRL-generated peptides
(6–11), we performed a standard competitive
inhibition assay for cell adhesion., This assay
involves the pretreatment of cells suspended in solution with soluble
inhibitors and then seeding the cells to a tailored and biospecific
ligand surface to evaluate the ability of the soluble inhibitors on
cell adhesion (Figure ).

Cell adhesion inhibition
assay for inter- and intra-CRRL peptides (6–11). Swiss Albino 3T3 fibroblasts were suspended in serum-free
media and incubated with peptides 6–8 (a) and 9–11 (b) at various concentrations
(10 nM to 1 mM for 5 min at 37 °C). The pretreated cells were
then seeded and incubated onto a biospecific cell adhesive RGD presenting
self-assembled monolayer surface. The
cells that adhered were counted, and the ratios (%) of adhered cells
to the nonpretreated cell control were tabulated. (a) Cyclic form
of intra-CRRL RGD (cyclic RGD (7) open triangle) shows
higher cell inhibition than the two linear forms of RGD for the intra-CRRL
RGD (6 and 8, circle and square). (b) PHSRN
conjugated inter-CRRL RGD (dual ligand hybrid (10) open
triangle) shows higher cell inhibition activity than the single ligand
nonconjugated forms (9 and 11, circle and
square).

Each of the peptides was incubated
(pretreated) with Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts in solution at varying concentrations,
and then the cells were seeded to self-assembled monolayer (SAM) surfaces
presenting an immobilized linear-RGD peptide. It has been shown previously that these surfaces are ideal for evaluating
small molecules that perturb cell adhesion. Without pretreatment with the peptides (6–11), the cells efficiently attached to the RGD surfaces through
integrin receptors via biospecific interactions.

Figure  shows the cell adhesion inhibition assay as a percent
ratio of each peptide with the nonpretreated cells. As expected, the
cyclic intra-CRRL peptide (cyclic RGD, 7) and the inter-CRRL
hybrid peptide that contains RGD and PHSRN ligands (10) were the best inhibitors for cell adhesion due to their higher
affinity for integrin receptors than molecules 8, 9, and 11, which are linear forms of the lower
affinity RGD peptide for integrin receptors., Additionally, QO offers an alternative to disulfide bonds as a cleavable
linker between two target biomolecules. We determined that CRRL cleavage
takes 10 h for reaction completion in the presence of 5 mM glutathione
(GSH) in PBS (Figure S2, ).

As a second demonstration, we utilized the CRRL methodology
to deliver cargoes to cells via an intracellular redox cleavage (Figure ). We took advantage of the reducing environment
found within a cell’s cytoplasm to perform a selective in vivo CRRL cleavage. In order to show this in
vivo application, we first synthesized a FRET redox-responsive
probe molecule (Figure A). This cell-permeable
redox-responsive molecule has three components: (1) a calcein dye
that is fluorescent; (2) a redox center/cleavage site based upon the
quinone group; and (3) a dabcyl group that efficiently quenches fluorescence.
The cell-permeable redox-responsive calcein dye (CPRRC) molecule is
initially not fluorescent but becomes fluorescent upon reductive cleavage
and release of the dabcyl quenching group. It is important to note
that the CRRL methodology works for either oxime or hydrazone linkages
to quinone groups.

CRRL strategy to release cargo in cells via an intracellular
redox trigger. (A) Structure of a cell-permeable redox-responsive
calcein dye (CPRRC). The molecule has three distinct parts. The calcein
dye is capped to allow the highly charged dye to cross the cell membrane.
The quinone redox center is stable but is cleaved upon encountering
the reducing conditions within a cell. The dabcyl group quenches the
calcein fluorescence via FRET until it is released by the redox center
in the cell cytoplasm. (B) A fluorescence intensity vs wavelength
plot for CPRRC before (black line) and after (green line) exposure
to 5 mM glutathione solution for 2 h. (C) A fluorescence intensity
vs time plot for CPRRC dissolved in 5 mM glutathione solution. Upon
release of the dabcyl quencher, the fluorescence intensity increases.
(D) Cartoon describing the delivery and cleavage of CPRRC. (E) Fluorescent
image of cells before CPRRC exposure (no fluorescence). (F) Image
of cells after 1 h of 10 μM CPRRC exposure shows bright fluorescence
indicating that CPRRC is cleaved within cells in a redox-responsive
manner.

Many commercially available ligands
have oxyamine or hydrazine tethers, and this provides tremendous synthetic
flexibility for the CRRL methodology when conjugating and cleaving
a variety of ligands in a redox manner. Figure B shows the difference in fluorescence for the CPRRC molecule before
and after (the dabcyl quenching group is redox released) exposure
to cell cytoplasm-reducing conditions (5 mM of glutathione) for 2
h. Figure C shows the CPRRC fluorescence intensity
profile versus time in the presence of 5 mM glutathione and indicates
that the quinone redox center is cleaved causing the release of the
FRET quenching dabcyl group, which in turn leads to an increase in
fluorescence due to the unquenched calcein dye.

To test whether
the CRRL methodology can selectively work inside cells, we added the
CPRRC molecule to cells in culture (Figure D). Untreated cells showed no fluorescence, while treated cells (10
μM CPRRC in cell culture media, 1 h) showed bright fluorescence.
As a control, a calcein–dabcyl conjugate that does not contain
the redox center showed no fluorescence in the same conditions for
the cell culture experiments (data not shown). Taken together, these
results show that the CPRRC molecule is efficiently cleaved in the
cell cytoplasm reductive environment. By incorporating a range of
molecules that are tethered through the quinone redox center, many
biomolecules, imaging agents, and nanoparticles may be selectively
released within a cell. Furthermore since the CRRL methodology is
bio-orthogonal, ligations and cleavage reactions may be performed
within cells or complex protein mixtures. Finally, the in
vivo CRRL strategy may also act as a redox probe to evaluate
the cell’s response to changing stimuli, which may elicit changes
in the local redox environment.

Conclusions
In
summary, we introduce a chemoselective redox-responsive ligation and
release strategy. The CRRL strategy is a new class of conjugation
chemistry in that it allows chemoselective conjugation and cleavage
that is responsive to specific redox stimuli. CRRL is based on the
ability of a hydroquinone to oxidize to a benzoquinone for subsequent
reaction with oxyamine-tethered ligands to generate a stable oxime
product. The oxime can then undergo irreversible cleavage in a reductive
environment to generate an aminophenol and a primary hydroxyl-terminated
ligand. The aminophenol is stable and can be brought back to the original
hydroquinone with mild redox chemistry for subsequent rounds of conjugation
and release. The CRRL strategy can be monitored in real-time by standard
UV–vis absorption spectroscopy and modulated by chemical or
electrochemical methods. A non-natural amino acid containing the hydroquinone
group was synthesized and shown to incorporate at selective positions
within a peptide by using standard solid phase peptide synthesis.
As a demonstration, intermolecular and intramolecular CRRL strategies
were used to generate dynamic cyclic peptides and two tethered peptides
that could be conjugated and cleaved. This hydroquinone amino acid
can easily be incorporated to generate redox-responsive peptide and
polymers. As a second demonstration, a FRET redox-responsive probe
was synthesized and shown to undergo selective redox cleavage upon
intracellular uptake. This strategy may provide new ways to deliver
and monitor biomolecules and cellular events based on the redox environment.
The CRRL methodology not only shares all of the advantages of traditional
oxime chemistry (bio-orthogonal, high-yield, and chemoselective) but
also has a dynamic attribute associated with conjugation and cleavability.
CRRL conjugation and cleavage occurs quantitatively and in physiological
conditions without the need for a traditional catalyst. Furthermore,
the CRRL strategy is synthetically flexible and can also be used with
hydrazine type molecules instead of aminooxy groups to generate conjugated
hydrazones, which also undergo the CRRL cycle. CRRL is a general methodology for conjugation and release
and will be a useful tool for scientists and engineers in various
fields aiming to design smart molecules and materials, which alter
their biological activities according to specific changes in their
physiological environments, or for material science applications. The CRRL strategy is inexpensive,
dynamic, kinetically well behaved, synthetically modular, and straightforward
to monitor and control. To our knowledge, the CRRL strategy is the
only single method that is able to chemoselectively ligate molecules
and to then release the molecules under redox control with regeneration
for potential multiple subsequent rounds of conjugation and release.
Future research will explore how the CRRL strategy may be used to
release or conjugate molecules to generate dynamic/smart polymers
for material science, nanoscience, and tissue engineering applications.
For more biological applications, dynamic carbohydrates and mixed
CRRL biomolecules (peptides, nucleic acid, and lipids) may be synthesized
and selectively released in vitro and in vivo for
a range of diagnostic/imaging or direct delivery of therapeutics.− We believe, the ease of the CRRL strategy should find wide use in
a range of applications in biology, tissue engineering, nanoscience,
and material science and will expand the suite of current conjugation
and release strategies.

Supporting Information Available
Experimental details, synthetic schemes, and procedures. This material
is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc400565y_si_001.pdf

The authors declare
no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Brian
Matthew, Jim Jorgenson, Hal Kohn, David Lawrence (UNC Chapel Hill),
and Phil Baran (Scripps) for helpful discussions. This work was supported
by the Carolina Center for Cancer Nanotechnology Excellence (NCI),
The Burroughs Wellcome Foundation (Interface Career Award), The National
Science Foundation (Career Award), National Science and Engineering
Research Council of Canada (NSERC), and The Canadian Foundation for
Innovation (CFI).

