Introduction
Nonviral carriers for
gene delivery are generally considered safer
and better-controlled alternatives compared to viral vectors., Numerous carriers have shown success in compacting therapeutic DNA
or other types of nucleic acids into nanosized particles and mediating
transfection in target cells or tissues both in vitro and in vivo. These include cationic lipids and
polymers such as DOTAP, poly(l-lysine) (PLL), poly(amido
amine)s (PAMAM), poly(ethylene imine) (PEI), poly(propyleneimine)
(PPI), or triazine dendrimers.− However, low delivery efficiency of these nonviral carriers remains
a major hurdle for progression into clinical applications.

Multiple
attempts have been made to overcome the limitations of
nonviral carriers. A recent concept suggests that therapeutic outcome
of nonviral gene delivery can be enhanced by designing dual-function
systems that not only deliver nucleic acids, but also function as
pharmacologically active agents. The synergistic effect produced by
combining pharmacological activity of the carrier and the therapeutic
nucleic acids in one formulation can greatly enhance the overall therapeutic
outcome. For example, Huang and colleagues developed a cationic lipid
capable of delivering siRNA to knock down epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) while down-regulating the phosphorylated extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (pERK) simultaneously to enhance anticancer
activity. Rice and colleagues have designed
a cationic polypeptide with intrinsic proteasome inhibitory function
to enhance transfection activity of delivered plasmid DNA. We recently reported a novel type of bioreducible
poly(amido amine)s that deliver plasmid DNA and inhibit chemokine
receptor CXCR4.,

Chemokines, a family of
48 signaling proteins, control through
chemotaxis the migration of cells that express the appropriate chemokine
receptor. In tumors, a complex network of chemokines and chemokine
receptors controls cell trafficking into and out of the tumor microenvironment. Importantly with respect to the present study,
chemokines and chemokine receptors are directly involved in the molecular
control of cancer metastasis and governing organ-specific homing of
metastatic cancer cells. Although malignant cells from different types
of cancer have different expression profiles of chemokine receptors,
CXC receptor 4 (CXCR4) is the most widely expressed chemokine receptor
in human cancers.

CXCR4 is a highly conserved transmembrane
G protein-coupled receptor
that exclusively binds its ligand SDF-1 (also named CXCL12). SDF-1,
on the other hand, is known to bind also the CXCR7 receptor. While
CXCR7 acts in part as a scavenger of SDF-1, recent reports suggest additional functions for the receptor in
cancer progression. Binding of SDF-1
to CXCR4 activates several intracellular signaling transduction pathways
that regulate proliferation, adhesion, and invasion of cancer cells
and affect cell survival and migration.− Over 25 different types
of human cancer overexpress CXCR4, making it and the CXCR4/SDF-1 axis
a promising target within the chemokine network for novel therapies. Evidence supporting the exploration of CXCR4
as a therapeutic target in cancer stems from experimental in vitro and in vivo studies as well as
retrospective clinical studies.− The studies have documented increased
invasive and metastatic potential in CXCR4-expressing tumor cells.
Furthermore, the CXCR4/SDF-1 axis in the tumor microenvironment appears
to nurture local tumor growth.− The following two mechanisms
are distinct ways through which the CXCR4/SDF-1 axis promotes cancer
progression: (i) CXCR4 facilitates the metastatic spread of the disease
to sites where SDF-1 is highly expressed (e.g., lung, liver, bone
marrow, and brain) and (ii) high expression of SDF-1 in the primary
tumor enhances growth and inflammation of the tumor via local autocrine
and paracrine mechanisms.− In addition to its role in cancer,
CXCR4 also functions as a co-receptor for HIV-1 entry into the host
CD4+ T-cells, and its potential as a therapeutic target
has been highlighted in many studies., CXCR4 also
regulates the recruitment and invasion of immune cells like T-cells,
macrophages, and neutrophils in multiple inflammatory conditions such
as inflammatory bowel disease and lung inflammation.−

Inhibition of CXCR4 activity, whether by using small molecule
antagonists,
anti-CXCR4 antibodies, or anti-CXCR4 siRNA has already shown success
in improving the treatment of multiple disease conditions.− The first CXCR4 antagonist AMD3100 (Plerixafor) received FDA approval
in 2008. Multiple other CXCR4 inhibitors
are at various stages of preclinical and clinical development. Interestingly,
dendrimers based on viologen (dialkylated 4,4′-bipyridinium
salts) have been found to exhibit potent antagonistic activity against
CXCR4. Previous studies systematically
explored the structure–activity relationships of these viologen-based
dendrimers (VGD) as HIV inhibitors. It was found that the HIV inhibition
by VGD was controlled by the molecular architecture and number of
positive charges in the dendrimer molecule. In addition, capping with
thymine groups increased the binding affinity of VGD with the carboxylate
residues in the binding site of the CXCR4 receptor by promoting formation
of hydrogen bonds.

In this study,
we tested the hypothesis that, due to their polycationic
nature, the VGD will be able to form complexes with plasmid DNA and
mediate DNA transfection, while at the same time retaining their CXCR4
inhibiting activity. To test the hypothesis, we have examined the
ability of a library of VGD with differences in molecular architecture,
number of positive charges, and type of capping group to condense
DNA and form VGD/DNA polyplexes. Transfection activity, cytotoxicity,
and CXCR4 antagonism of the polycations and polyplexes were evaluated.
The ability of the best performing VGD to simultaneously deliver therapeutic
TNFα gene and inhibit invasion of cancer cells was then tested
to establish their dual-function capability.

Results
Synthesis and
Categorization of VGD
We have synthesized
a series of 13 different VGD by conjugating different dendrons with
various capping groups (methyl, ethyl, thymine) to two types of dendrimer
cores to obtain different generations of comb-branched and spheroidal
dendrimer architectures. These VGD were categorized into three groups
based on their architecture and molecular weight (Scheme ). The main characteristic features and properties
are detailed in Table . Precursors VGD1–3
represent the main building blocks used in the synthesis of higher
generation VGD and contain only 2 positive charges per molecule. Comb-branched
VGD4–6 consist of generation 1 (G1) and 2 (G2) dendrimers with
different capping groups and 10 or 26 positive charges. Spheroidal
VGD consist of generation 0–3 dendrimers and carry 6, 18, 42,
and 90 positive charges and are capped with different capping groups.

Building Blocks and Design of Viologen Dendrimers (VGD)
The numbers in the pink circles
indicate total numbers of capping groups in a dendrimer generation.

Properties of VGD
VGD	generation	capping group	number of
charges	molecular
weight	mass/charge	equivalent
N/P ratio	
VGD Precursor	
VGD1	n/a	adenine	2	640.3	320	n/a	
VGD2	n/a	adenine and thymine	2	645.3	323	n/a	
VGD3	n/a	thymine	2	780.5	390	n/a	
Comb-Branched
VGD	
VGD4	G1	ethyl	10	2553	255	0.5	
VGD5	G1	thymine	10	3105	311	1.0	
VGD6	G2	thymine	26	7812	301	1.2	
Spheroidal VGD	
VGD7	G0	Methyl	6	1501	250	0.6	
VGD8	G0	thymine	6	1300	217	0.7	
VGD9	G1	ethyl	18	2687	149	1.0	
VGD10	G1	thymine	18	4316	240	1.3	
VGD11	G2	thymine	42	7947	189	1.0	
VGD12	G3	ethyl	90	23 350	259	1.1	
VGD13	G3	thymine	90	26 679	296	1.1	
Control	
PEI	 	 	 	25 000
(Mw)	43.0	2.4	
Minimum N/P ratio required to condense
plasmid DNA.

DNA Condensation
DNA condensation capability of VGD
was determined by EtBr exclusion assay (Figure ). All comb-branched and spheroidal VGD were able to fully condense
DNA in 10 mM HEPES buffer (pH 7.4). Equivalent N/P ratios required
to fully condense DNA are summarized in Table . All these VGD displayed similar DNA condensation curves with a
typical sigmoidal shape. DNA condensation was also confirmed by agarose
gel electrophoresis. Absence of free DNA bands on the gel indicated
complete DNA condensation and formation of stable polyplexes with
all comb-branched and spheroidal VGD/DNA polyplexes prepared at N/P
4. VGD precursors (VGD1, VGD2, VGD3), however, failed to condense
DNA into polyplexes even at N/P ratios as high as 20 (Figure S1 in ).

DNA condensation by VGD.
DNA condensation ability of VGD was evaluated
by EtBr exclusion assay in 10 mM HEPES buffer. Gel electrophoresis
was conducted to confirm the condensed DNA and formation of VGD/DNA
polyplexes (N/P 4).

Physicochemical Characterization
of VGD/DNA Polyplexes
Hydrodynamic size and ζ-potential
of all VGD/DNA polyplexes
prepared at N/P 4 were measured by DLS (Figure ). Consistent with their limited DNA condensing ability, the use
of VGD precursors resulted in extensive aggregation of DNA and a negative
surface charge of the aggregated particles (). Polyplexes formed with the comb-branched VGD were positively
charged with sizes ranging from 124 to 165 nm. In particular, generation
2 VGD6 formed significantly smaller polyplexes than generation 1 VGD4
and VGD5. Among the spheroidal VGD, the generation 0 VGD7 formed aggregated
polyplexes with particle size &gt;1 μm and a nearly neutral
surface
charge. Interestingly, VGD8 of the same generation formed polyplexes
with smaller size of 320 nm and positive surface charge of 18 mV,
suggesting better DNA condensation. Generation 1 dendrimers VGD9 and
VGD10 formed DNA polyplexes which displayed small sizes around 50
nm and positive surface charge. Similarly, the sizes of the polyplexes
formed using higher generations of dendrimers fell into a narrow range
from 55 to 59 nm, with highly positively charged surfaces with ζ-potentials
ranging from 20 to 25 mV.

Size and ζ-potential of VGD/DNA polyplexes
prepared at N/P
4 in 10 mM HEPES buffer (pH 7.4) and measured by DLS.

Cytotoxicity of VGD/DNA Polyplexes
Cytotoxicity of
VGD/DNA polyplexes was first evaluated by MTS assay in U2OS cells
(Figure ). Cells were treated with polyplexes
at different N/P ratios ranging from 4 to 40 for 4 h in the presence
or absence of 10% FBS, followed by incubation in complete medium for
another 24 h before measuring cell viability. In the presence of 10%
FBS, polyplexes prepared with comb-branched VGD or VGD precursors
showed no significant cytotoxicity. Polyplexes prepared with spheroidal
VGD exhibited markedly higher cytotoxicity, except for generation
0 VGD7 and VGD8. VGD9 and VGD10 polyplexes showed toxicity at the
highest N/P ratio (N/P 40) tested. Significant cytotoxicity was observed
in VGD11–13 at N/P ratios above 15. In the absence of serum,
the cytotoxicity of high-generation VGD polyplexes, both comb-branched
VGD6 and spheroidal VGD9–13, increased significantly. For VGD11–13,
only polyplexes prepared at N/P 4 showed acceptable cytotoxicity.

Cytotoxicity
of VGD/DNA polyplexes in U2OS and HepG2 cells. Cells
seeded in 96-well plates were treated with polyplexes in medium (±10%
FBS) followed by another 24 h incubation in complete culture medium
before measuring cell viability using MTS assay.

The cytotoxicity of VGD/DNA polyplexes was then tested also
in
human liver hepatocellular carcinoma HepG2 cells. In general, all
VGD/DNA polyplexes exhibited lower cytotoxicity in HepG2 cells than
in U2OS cells. In the presence of serum, VGD9 and VGD10, which showed
high cytotoxicity at N/P 40 in U2OS cells, did not show any significant
cytotoxicity in HepG2 cells. Although the cytotoxicity profile of
high-generation spheroidal VGD/DNA (VGD11–13) polyplexes was
greatly improved in HepG2 cells, decreased cell viability at N/P 40
was still observed. In the absence of serum, cells treated with all
the VGD/DNA polyplexes except for VGD11–13 maintained nearly
100% viability compared to untreated cells. VGD11–13 polyplexes
displayed high cytotoxicity at N/P ratio above 15 in a dose-dependent
manner. Cytotoxicity of the control polycation PEI exhibited similar
cell line dependence as the VGD.

Transfection Efficiency
of VGD/DNA Polyplexes
In vitro transfection
activity of VGD/DNA polyplexes at
different N/P ratios was evaluated in U2OS cells using luciferase
plasmid DNA. Using the cytotoxicity data in Figure , only polyplex formulations that showed cell viability above
60% were tested for transfection. PEI/DNA polyplexes were used as
the positive control (Figure ). As expected,
higher transfection efficiency was observed in serum-free conditions
compared to conditions with 10% FBS. Using higher N/P ratios compromised
the transfection efficiency in serum-free conditions due to increasing
cytotoxicity. Polyplexes formed with the VGD precursors exhibited
negligible transfection at all N/P ratios tested due to their poor
ability to condense DNA. For comb-branched VGD polyplexes, VGD6 (G2)
with higher molecular weight and more charges showed higher transfection
efficiency in the presence of serum compared to VGD4 and VGD5 (G1).
Likewise, the generation 0 VGD7 polyplexes exhibited marginal transfection
efficiency that was similar to that of the VGD precursors. An exception
was VGD8, which despite being a G0 dendrimer exhibited considerably
higher transfection, especially at N/P &gt; 8. Following a similar
trend,
VGD9 and VGD10 (G1) with higher molecular weight and more charges
performed better than G0 VGD. Due to the high cytotoxicity of high-generation
VGD (VGD11–13), only polyplexes prepared at N/P 4 were tested
in serum-free conditions and only N/P 4, 8, and 15 were used in serum-containing
conditions. Despite the cytotoxicity-imposed limit on the maximum
dose, VGD11–13 polyplexes exhibited high transfection activity
when compared with the other groups, especially at lower N/P ratios.
Overall, comb-branched VGD6, spheroidal VGD8–13 exhibited high
transfection activity that was in many cases comparable to the control
PEI.

Luciferase transfection of VGD/DNA polyplexes in U2OS cells. Transfection
experiments were conducted in the presence or absence of 10% FBS.
Transfection efficiency was expressed as RLU/mg protein ± SD
(n = 3).

CXCR4 Antagonism of VGD/DNA Polyplexes
To examine the
ability of VGD/DNA polyplexes to antagonize CXCR4, high-content analysis
of receptor redistribution was performed. The analysis used U2OS cells
stably expressing human CXCR4 receptor fused to the N-terminus of
EGFP. During the analysis, cellular translocation of EGFP-CXCR4 upon
stimulation with SDF-1 was monitored. As shown in Figure , we observed internalization of the CXCR4 receptor
into endosomes in SDF-1-treated cells, as suggested by the punctate
pattern of fluorescence distribution. Small-molecule CXCR4 antagonist
AMD3100 (300 nM) inhibited the SDF-1-triggered receptor internalization,
which was indicated by the diffuse pattern of the EGFP-CXCR4 fluorescence
indicative of the presence of the receptor on the cell membrane surface.
CXCR4 antagonistic activity was quantified by high-content analysis
based on the number of fluorescent spots (i.e., endosomes) per cell
using AMD3100 as a positive (100%) and SDF-1 only as a negative control
(0%). Except for VGD precursors and generation 0 comb-branched VGD7,
all VGD/DNA polyplexes inhibited SDF-1-triggered receptor internalization
in a dose-dependent manner. Complete CXCR4 inhibition comparable to
AMD3100 was observed in spheroidal VGD9 polyplexes at N/P 4, 8, and
15 and in VGD10 polyplexes at N/P 8 and 15. Among other dendrimers,
comb-branched VGD6 polyplexes at N/P 8 and 15 showed &gt;88% CXCR4
inhibition
and VGD4 polyplexes exhibited 77% CXCR4 inhibition at N/P 20. High-generation
spheroidal VGD11–13 polyplexes exhibited partial CXCR4 inhibition
at lower N/P ratios. PEI/DNA polyplexes were used as negative control
and showed no CXCR4 antagonism.

CXCR4 antagonism of VGD/DNA polyplexes
at different N/P ratios.
The extent of CXCR4 antagonism was quantitated by high-content analysis
of internalized receptors and compared with a positive (AMD3100, 100%)
and a negative (SDF-1 only, 0%) control (scale bar = 200 μm).

Dual Functionality of VGD/DNA
Polyplexes
The above
screening results revealed that VGD6, VGD9, and VGD10 exhibit both
high CXCR4 antagonism and high transfection activity. We have used
these three dendrimers to evaluate the potential of VGD/DNA polyplexes
as dual-function delivery systems with combined antimetastatic and
antitumor activity. The potential for antimetastatic activity was
evaluated by determining the ability of the polyplexes to inhibit
CXCR4-mediated invasion of cancer cells. The antitumor (i.e., cell
killing) activity was tested using TNFα as a therapeutic gene.
Figure  (left) shows images of cells that
migrated across the layer of extracellular matrix (Matrigel). In untreated
cells without the SDF-1 chemokine gradient, only a small number of
cells invaded through Matrigel, but the addition of SDF-1 triggered
invasion of a large number of cells. Treatment with small molecule
CXCR4 antagonist AMD3100 decreased the cell invasion to the background
levels. All three VGD polyplexes displayed similar activity at inhibiting
invasion of U2OS cancer cells when prepared at N/P ratio at which
they exhibited full CXCR4 antagonism (see Figure ), and under such conditions, the inhibitory activity was
fully comparable to that of AMD3100. The VGD polyplexes were capable
of delivering therapeutic TNFα plasmid (Figure  right). Depending on the type of VGD and N/P ratio, the treatment
with the TNFα polyplexes resulted in 7% to 22% of TNFα-induced
cell death 48 h after transfection.

Simultaneous inhibition of cancer cell
invasion (left) and TNFα
gene delivery (right) by VGD polyplexes in U2OS cells. U2OS cells
were treated with VGD/DNA polyplexes prepared with TNFα plasmid
DNA. The VGD6 and VGD10 polyplexes were prepared at N/P 8 and VGD8
polyplexes were prepared at N/P 4. The cells were allowed to invade
through a layer of Matrigel upon stimulation with SDF-1 for 16 h.
AMD3100 (300 nM) was used as a positive control. TNFα gene delivery
efficiency of VGD was determined from cell viability measured by MTS
assay; normalized to cell viability observed with polyplexes formed
with luciferase DNA.

Discussion
The main goal of this study was to synthesize
viologen dendrimers
capable of simultaneously functioning as gene delivery vectors and
CXCR4 antagonists. In order to achieve the goal, we have used VGD
that have been previously shown to prevent HIV infection by their
inhibitory activity against CXCR4 receptor. The VGD dendrimers were
expected to form polyplexes by electrostatic interactions between
the polycationic scaffold of VGD and negatively charged DNA, while
maintaining their CXCR4 antagonistic activity. Using different capping
groups allowed us to adjust VGD binding to DNA. For example, using
thymine capping group was expected to increase the binding affinity
of VGD with DNA due to the complementary adenine-thymine base pair
interactions. Multistep organic synthesis allowed us to obtain well-defined
dendrimer structures needed to conduct the structure–activity
relationship study. We have focused our attention on determining the
influence of dendrimer molecular architecture, number of charges,
and the type of capping group on DNA condensation ability, transfection
activity, cytotoxicity, and CXCR4 antagonism.

Effective gene
delivery carrier has to be able to condense DNA
into nanosized polyplexes in order to facilitate cellular delivery
of the DNA. The quantification of DNA condensation properties of VGD
was performed using EtBr assay, which monitors the fraction of uncomplexed
DNA that is accessible for intercalation with EtBr at a given N/P
ratio. VGD precursors with the lowest
number of positive charges were unable to condense DNA as indicated
by the nonsigmoidal shape of the condensation curves and the presence
of free DNA band in agarose gel electrophoresis. All the other VGD
exhibited complete condensation of DNA, as suggested by results of
both EtBr exclusion assay and agarose gel electrophoresis. These results
reinforce previous findings with other cationic dendrimers and polymers
that there is a minimum number of positive charges needed to achieve
full condensation of large plasmid DNA molecules.

Physicochemical
properties of polyplexes are critical for cell
uptake and transfection activity. Thus, we analyzed the particle size
and surface charge of the VGD/DNA polyplexes. We found that the total
number of positive charges in VGD is overall the major factor that
determines the physicochemical properties of the polyplexes. As suggested
by the DNA condensation results, most generation 0 VGD failed to provide
enough positive charges to condense DNA into nanosized particles.
Interestingly, however, we found that a proper selection of a VGD
capping group can compensate for the lack of positive charges and
lead to DNA condensation. This phenomenon is well illustrated when
comparing VGD7 with VGD8, which are both G0 VGD with six positive
charges and similar molecular weight. We found that VGD8 was able
to form polyplexes with small particle size and positive ζ-potential
while VGD7 failed to do so. This could be explained by the thymine
capping groups on VGD8, which provide additional hydrogen bond interactions
with DNA due to the complementary A-T base pairing. In the case of
VGD with more positive charges, the effect of thymine modification
and hydrogen bond interactions on particle size and ζ-potential
is not significant because of the dominant influence of cooperative
electrostatic interactions.

Before testing transfection efficiency
and CXCR4 inhibitory activity
of VGD/DNA polyplexes, the cytotoxicity in U2OS and HepG2 cells was
evaluated. HepG2 is a widely used and well-accepted in vitro model to predict liver toxicity. Although the mechanism of cytotoxicity
caused by polyplexes is not fully understood, it is believed that
interaction between the positively charged polyplexes and the negatively
charged cell membrane is the initiating trigger.− The interactions
between polyplexes and cell membrane proteins and phospholipids disrupt
the bilayer architecture and induce the formation of nanoscale holes. Once the polyplex concentration is above its
toxic threshold, the membrane damage will eventually lead to cell
death. Our results show that VGD/DNA polyplexes displayed a typical
dose-dependent polyplex-caused cytotoxicity in cell culture. The cytotoxicity
is highly correlated with the molecular weight and the cationic charge
density of VGD, which are all well-recognized key parameters that
determine the interaction with cell membranes. Low-molecular-weight
VGD precursors (&lt;2000) did not show any cytotoxicity under the
conditions tested, while high-molecular-weight VGD (&gt;7500) showed
significant cytotoxicity, especially in U2OS cells. When comparing
VGD with similar molecular weight, we found that the spheroidal VGD
were considerably more toxic than the comb-branched type. This is
most likely due to their higher charge density. Unlike the DNA condensation
and particle size, no significant effect of the capping group on cytotoxicity
was observed.

Based on the cytotoxicity results, we conducted
a detailed evaluation
of the dual functionality of VGD polyplexes by first studying gene
delivery (Figure ) and CXCR4 antagonism activity
(Figure ). The polyplexes were prepared at
N/P ratios ranging from 4 to 20 and the transfection was conducted
in conditions with or without serum. Results showed that transfection
efficiency of VGD is strongly dependent on the molecular weight as
well as the dendrimer architecture. VGD with higher molecular weight
exhibit higher transfection activity than low-molecular-weight VGD.
When using nontoxic doses (N/P 4), high-generation spheroidal VGD
showed the highest transfection efficiency among all. The effect of
N/P ratio on transfection activity was also observed. In general,
VGD with low molecular weight exhibited significant dependence on
the N/P ratio and their transfection activity increased with increasing
N/P ratio. On the other hand, rising N/P ratio had a relatively minor
effect on transfection activity of VGD with high molecular weight.
Spheroidal VGD were likely to have better transfection ability than
comb-branched VGD. As above, the type of capping group was important
only in the case of VGD8 with small number of positive charges. The
presence of a thymine capping group substantially increased transfection
in comparison with VGD with a methyl capping group. VGD8 demonstrated
4- to 1000-fold higher transfection efficiency than VGD7 at various
N/P ratios, suggesting that the contribution of extra hydrogen bond
interactions with DNA leads to enhanced biological activity of the
polyplexes. However, for high-molecular-weight VGD, the effect of
thymine modification was insignificant, as the electrostatic interactions
dominated the polyplex properties.

To evaluate the capability
of VGD/DNA polyplexes to function as
CXCR4 antagonists, we used a commercially available CXCR4-redistribution
assay designed for screening CXCR4 antagonists (Figure ). CXCR4 antagonists like AMD3100 competitively bind with
the receptor and prevent SDF-1 binding, receptor endocytosis, and
downstream signaling events induced by SDF-1. We used U2OS cells that
stably express EGFP-tagged CXCR4. The extent of CXCR4 inhibition could
be quantified by analyzing the fluorescent signal of the internalized
EGFR-CXCR4 receptors into the endosomes. We found that CXCR4 antagonism
of VGD also showed strong dependence on molecular weight. Unfortunately,
the high cytotoxicity of the high-molecular-weight VGD restricted
their use to low doses. Overall, after taking into account the cytotoxicity,
spheroidal VGD with moderate molecular weight (VGD9 and VGD10) exhibited
the highest potency among the tested formulations. These VGD showed
activity fully comparable to the commercial small molecule CXCR4 antagonist
AMD3100. Comb-branched VGD6 with higher molecular weight exhibited
stronger CXCR4 antagonism than VGD4 and VGD5 with lower molecular
weight. Interestingly, here we also found a noticeable difference
between thymine-capped VGD8 and methyl-capped VGD7. VGD8 was able
to achieve 50% CXCR4 antagonism, while VGD7 was nearly inactive at
all the doses tested. We postulated in our previous study that this
might be attributed to enhanced affinity with CXCR4 receptor due to
the extra hydrogen bond interactions.

The CXCR4/SDF-1 axis is
involved in migration and metastasis of
multiple types of cancers, and CXCR4 antagonists like AMD3100 are
known to inhibit invasion of CXCR4-expressing cancer cells. TNFα
is a major inflammatory cytokine that has been used clinically for
local treatment of several types of cancer, including locally advanced
soft tissue sarcomas and metastatic melanomas. However, the mechanism of activity of TNFα is complex
and it has become apparent that, under some conditions, TNFα
can also have strong tumor-promoting effect that originates from its
role in promoting cancer cell survival, migration and metastasis,
and angiogenesis. Growing evidence indicates
that of the factors involved in the tumor-promoting effect of TNFα
is its ability to upregulate expression of CXCR4 in various cancers.− We hypothesized that combining TNFα cancer gene therapy with
simultaneous CXCR4 antagonism of VGD will improve the therapeutic
outcome of TNFα monotherapy. We have evaluated the potential
of VGD polyplexes to exert such combined effect by determining their
ability to simultaneously inhibit cancer cell invasion and mediate
TNFα transfection. We have selected the best-performing VGD
based on their transfection activity and CXCR4 antagonism. All three
tested VGD were capable of achieving cancer cell killing and blocking
cancer cell invasion comparable to AMD3100. By combining the TNFα
antitumor and CXCR4 antimetastatic functions in a single formulation,
the VGD polyplexes represent promising delivery systems that can improve
outcomes of TNFα-based anticancer treatments.

Conclusions
We have carried out a structure–activity relationship study
of VGD. A series of VGD was synthesized and screened for the best
candidates capable of fulfilling a dual function as CXCR4 antagonists
and gene delivery vectors. VGD behavior strongly depends on the molecular
weight, architecture, number of positive charges, and charge density.
End group modification of low-molecular-weight VGD with thymine provides
extra hydrogen bond interactions with DNA and CXCR4 receptor, which
contributes to improved DNA condensation, transfection, and CXCR4
antagonism. Increasing the molecular weight and the number of positive
charges improves transfection activity and CXCR4 antagonism; however,
this is achieved at the expense of increased cytotoxicity. Hence,
there is a fine balance between the desired biological activity and
cytotoxicity. Comb-branched VGD6 (G2 with 26 positive charges) and
spheroidal VGD9 and VGD10 (G1 with 18 positive charges) showed both
high potency to antagonize CXCR4 and high transfection activity in vitro. Using TNFα plasmid, we have demonstrated
that VGD simultaneously prevent CXCR4-mediated cancer cell invasion
and facilitate TNFα-mediated cancer cell killing. Such dual-function
carriers have potential to enhance the overall therapeutic outcomes
of gene therapy for multiple diseases in which CXCR4 plays a prominent
role, including cancer metastasis, HIV infection, and multiple inflammatory
diseases.

Experimental Procedures
Materials
All chemicals used for
VGD synthesis were
of analytical grade and purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO)
or Merck (Whitehouse Station, NJ). Ethyl acetate, diethyl ether, tetrahydrofuran
(THF), methanol, and petroleum ether were distilled before use. Organic
solutions were dried over anhydrous Na2SO4 or
MgSO4 and concentrated with a rotary evaporator at reduced
pressure. Reported yields are of purified products and were not optimized.
Octahydrochloride of AMD3100 and 25 kDa branched poly(ethylene imine)
(PEI) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Plasmid DNA, gWiz high-expression
luciferase (gWiz-Luc) containing luciferase reporter gene was from
Aldevron (Fargo, ND). Plasmid DNA containing human TNFα gene
was obtained from InvivoGen (San Diego, CA). Human stromal cell-derived
factor 1 (SDF-1) was from Shenandoah Biotechnology, Inc. (Warwick,
PA). Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM), Dulbecco’s
Phosphate Buffered Saline (PBS), Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS), l-glutamine, and penicillin-streptomycin (Pen-Strep) solution were
from Thermo Scientific (Waltham, MA). G418 sulfate and Minimum Essential
Medium (MEM) were from Mediatech, Inc. (Manassas, VA). Cell culture
inserts for 24-well plates (8.0 μm pores, Translucent PET Membrane)
and BD Matrigel Basement Membrane Matrix were purchased from BD Biosciences
(Franklin Lakes, NJ). All other reagents and chemicals were obtained
from Fisher Scientific or VWR International unless otherwise noted.

VGD Synthesis
The synthesis of VGD followed previously
published procedures and detailed description is provided in the .,− Briefly, the VGD precursors dialkylated 4,4′-bipyridinium
units with nucleobases were synthesized by substitution reaction of
alkylated N-heterocycle derivatives with the 4,4′-bipyridinium. VGD with polycationic
scaffold carrying 6, 10, 18, 26, 42, and 90 positive charges per molecule
(Scheme ) were synthesized via a divergent
strategy originated from the corresponding initiator core. To obtain
the comb-branched dendrimers, VGD4 and VGD5 were synthesized by reacting
a conjugated 4-fold nucleophilic core 1,1′-bis[3,5-bis(bromomethyl)phenyl]-4,4′-bipyridinium
dihexafluorophosphate with monoalkylated 4,4′-bipyridinium
unit with ethyl or thymine as capping group. The second-generation
VGD6 was obtained from a 4-fold nucleophilic core by reaction with N-(3,5-di(hydroxymethyl)-benzyl)-4,4′-bipyridinium
hexafluorophosphate followed by substitution of −OH by −Br
with HBr/acetic acid at room temperature. The spheroidal VGD were
synthesized from a trifunctional 1,3,5-tris[(-4,4′-bipyridinium)methyl]benzene
trihexafluorophosphate core consisting of a mesityl derivative, linked
to three 4,4′-bipyridine units.

Ethidium Bromide (EtBr)
Exclusion Assay
The ability
of VGD to condense DNA was determined by EtBr exclusion assay by measuring
the changes in EtBr/DNA fluorescence. Luciferase plasmid DNA solution
at a concentration of 20 μg/mL was prepared in 10 mM HEPES buffer
(pH 7.4) and mixed with EtBr (1 μg/mL). Fluorescence intensity
was measured and set to 100% (Ex 540 nm/Em 590 nm). Fluorescence readings
were taken following a stepwise addition of VGD solutions. Condensation
curve for each dendrimer was constructed and the equivalent nitrogen/phosphate
(N/P) ratio for complete DNA condensation was established using the
intersection point of the steepest tangent and the flattest tangent
to the condensation curve.

Preparation and Physicochemical Characterization
of VGD/DNA
Polyplexes
DNA solution at a final concentration 20 μg/mL
was prepared in 10 mM HEPES buffer (pH 7.4). VGD/DNA polyplexes were
formed by adding predetermined volume of VGD to achieve the desired
N/P ratio and mixed by vigorous vortexing for 10 s. Polyplexes were
further allowed to stand at room temperature for 30 min prior to use.
Hydrodynamic diameter and ζ-potential of VGD/DNA polyplexes
were determined by dynamic light scattering (DLS) using a ZEN3600
Zetasizer Nano-ZS (Malvern Instruments Ltd., Worcestershire, UK).
Results were expressed as mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM)
of 3–10 experimental runs.

Agarose Gel Electrophoresis
DNA condensation by VGD
was confirmed using agarose gel electrophoresis. VGD/DNA polyplexes
(20 μL) prepared at N/P 4 were loaded onto a 0.8% agarose gel
containing 0.5 μg/mL EtBr and run for 60 min at 120 V in 0.5×
Tris/Borate/EDTA (TBE) buffer. The gel was then imaged under UV.

Cell Culture
Human hepatocellular carcinoma cell line
HepG2 (ATCC 77400) was purchased from ATCC (Manassas, VA) and maintained
in MEM supplemented with 10% FBS. Human epithelial osteosarcoma U2OS
cells stably expressing human CXCR4 receptor fused to the N-terminus
of enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) (EGFP-CXCR4+ U2OS) were
purchased form Fisher Scientific. The cells were cultured in DMEM
supplemented with 2 mM l-glutamine, 10% FBS, 1% Pen-Strep,
and 0.5 mg/mL G418.

Cytotoxicity of VGD/DNA Polyplexes
Cytotoxicity of
VGD/DNA polyplexes was evaluated by MTS assay in both U2OS cells and
HepG2 cells. The cells were seeded in 96-well microplates at a density
of 6000 cells/well (U2OS) or 8000 cells/well (HepG2). After 24 h,
culture medium in each well was replaced by 75 μL of antibiotic-free
medium (±FBS) before adding 10 μL of VGD/DNA polyplexes
prepared at different N/P ratios. After 4 h incubation, medium containing
polyplexes was removed and the cells were incubated in complete culture
medium for another 24 h. To measure cell viability, culture medium
was aspirated and replaced with a mixture of 100 μL serum-free
medium and 20 μL MTS reagent (CellTiter 96 AQueous Non-Radioactive
Cell Proliferation Assay, Promega). After 1.5 h incubation, the absorbance
was measured using SpectraMax M5e Multi-Mode Microplate Reader (Molecular
Devices, CA) at λ = 490 nm. The relative cell viability (%)
was calculated as [A]sample/[A]untreated ×
100%.

Transfection Efficiency of VGD/DNA Polyplexes
Luciferase
DNA transfections were conducted in 48-well microplates following
previously published protocol. U2OS cells were seeded at a density
of 20 000 cells/well 24 h prior to transfection. Culture medium
in each well was removed and replaced with 150 μL of antibiotic-free
medium (±10% FBS) before adding 20 μL of VGD/DNA polyplexes
prepared at different N/P ratios (DNA dose 0.4 μg/well). After
4 h incubation, polyplexes were completely removed and the cells were
cultured in complete culture medium for another 24 h prior to measuring
luciferase expression. The medium was then discarded and the cells
were lysed in 100 μL of 0.5× cell culture lysis reagent
buffer (Promega, Madison, WI) for 30 min. To measure the luciferase
content, 100 μL of 0.5 mM luciferin solution was automatically
injected into each well containing 20 μL of cell lysate and
the luminescence was integrated over 10 s using GloMax 96 Microplate
Luminometer (Promega). Total cellular protein concentration in the
cell lysate was determined by the Bicinchoninic acid protein assay
using calibration curve constructed with standard bovine serum albumin
solutions (Pierce, Rockford, IL). Transfection activity was expressed
as RLU/mg cellular protein ± SD of triplicate samples.

Transfections with TNFα DNA were conducted in 96-well microplates.
U2OS cells were seeded at a density of 3000 cells/well 24 h prior
to transfection. Culture medium in each well was removed and replaced
with 75 μL of antibiotic- and serum-free medium containing 25
μM chloroquine before adding 10 μL of polyplexes containing
either luciferase or TNFα plasmid DNA prepared at different
N/P ratios (DNA dose 0.2 μg/well). After 4 h incubation, polyplexes
were completely removed and the cells were cultured in complete culture
medium for another 48 h prior to measuring cell viability using MTS
assay. The relative cell killing mediated by TNFα expression
was determined by the following formula and expressed as mean ±
SD of triplicate samples:

CXCR4
Antagonism of VGD/DNA Polyplexes
The CXCR4 antagonism
of VGD/DNA polyplexes was evaluated by CXCR4 redistribution assay
using high-content analysis. U2OS cells expressing functional EGFP-CXCR4
fusion protein were plated in black 96-well plates with optical bottom
18–24 h before the experiment at a seeding density of 8000
cells per well. The cells were washed twice with 100 μL assay
buffer (DMEM supplemented with 2 mM l-glutamine, 1% FBS,
1% Pen-Strep, and 10 mM HEPES) and then incubated with different concentrations
of VGD/DNA polyplexes or positive control AMD3100 (300 nM) in assay
buffer containing 0.25% DMSO at 37 °C for 30 min. All the N/P
ratios and final concentrations of VGD/DNA polyplexes were the same
as in the luciferase transfection experiments. Human SDF-1 (SDF-1)
was then added to each well to reach final concentration of 10 nM.
Cells treated with SDF-1 alone were used as negative control. After
1 h incubation at 37 °C, the cells were fixed with 4% formaldehyde
at room temperature for 20 min and washed 4 times with PBS. The cell
nuclei were stained with 1 μM Hoechst in PBS containing 0.5%
Triton X-100. Images were taken by EVOS fl microscope at 20×.
For high-content analysis, internalization of the EGFP-tagged CXCR4
receptor was measured using Cellomics ArrayScan VT1 Reader
and analyzed using SpotDetectorV3 BioApplication software. Percent
CXCR4 internalization was calculated relative to the positive (AMD3100,
100%) and negative (SDF-1 only, 0%) controls. Image analysis algorithm
was validated by dose–response curve of AMD3100.

Cancer Cell
Invasion Assay
Modified Boyden chamber
assay was used to determine the ability of VGD to inhibit invasion
of cancer cells through a layer of extracellular matrix. Transwell
inserts were coated with 40 μL Matrigel diluted 1:3 (v/v) with
serum-free medium. The 24-well plates with coated inserts were then
placed in 37 °C incubator for 2 h. CXCR4+ U2OS cells
were trypsinized and resuspended with VGD polyplexes in serum-free
medium for 30 min before adding to the inserts at a final concentration
of 25 000 cells in 300 μL medium per insert. SDF-1 (20
nM in serum-free medium) was added as the chemoattractant to the wells
in the companion plate. After 16 h, the noninvaded cells on the upper
surface of the inserts were removed with a cotton swab. The invaded
cells were then fixed by anhydrous methanol, stained by crystal violet
dye, and visualized by EVOS xl inverted microscope.

Supporting Information Available
Detailed description of VGD
synthesis and results of agarose gel electrophoresis for VGD/DNA polyplexes
prepared at N/P 20. This material is available free of charge via
the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc500191q_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. David Kelly in Molecular Biology
Core Lab of
Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer for the kind help with establishing
a method for high-content analysis of CXCR4 redistribution assay.
NIH support by a grant EB014570 is also acknowledged.

