siRNA mediated gene silencing continues to hold
great potential
as a therapeutic. Despite impressive advances in this field, new methodologies
for the cytosolic delivery of siRNA are still needed. The central challenge that remains is the need to translocate
either the cellular or the endolysosomal membrane in a safe and efficient
manner. One attractive approach is the use of “siRNA–conjugates”,
i.e., conjugation of a well-defined single molecule to siRNA in which
the conjugated fragment has properties that overcome this delivery
challenge. Such designs include lipid (cholesterol, stearyl) and peptide
conjugates (R9, Tat). In general, such
conjugates improve either membrane solubility or solubility in the
hydrophilic environment of the intra/extracellular compartments. However,
these conjugates do not possess properties that facilitate the interaction
with both hydrophilic and hydrophobic domains. Consequently, most
conjugates are “trapped” in either the lipophilic or
aqueous compartment of the cell thereby limiting their transfection
efficiency. An improved design would rely
upon a conjugate having significant affinity toward both polar extremes.

Molecular umbrella conjugates are a unique class of amphiphilic
molecules that have potential for the in vivo delivery
of biologically active agents in general. These molecules are composed of two or more facial amphiphiles (i.e.,
“walls”) that are attached to a central scaffold. When
immersed in a hydrophilic environment, molecular umbrellas create
a hydrophilic exterior. Conversely, when immersed in a hydrophobic
environment, these same molecules create a hydrophobic exterior. Such
“amphomorphism” behavior is illustrated in Figure A. For convenience, only a diwalled molecular umbrella
is shown.

Stylized illustrations showing (A) a diwalled molecular umbrella
exhibiting molecular amphomorphism and a molecular umbrella–polar
drug conjugate in an exposed and shielded conformation in an aqueous
and lipophilic environment, respectively, and (B) a hypothetical “needle
and thread” transport mechanism. In these illustrations, the
filled and unfilled rectangles that are directly attached to each
other are the hydrophobic and hydrophilic faces of an amphiphilic
wall, respectively. For this work, the polar drug will be a siRNA.

Previously, we have demonstrated
that molecular umbrellas are capable
of crossing liposomal membranes, even when they are relatively large
in size and high in hydrophilicity. Remarkably, passive transport
rates were found to increase on going from diwalled to tetrawalled
to octawalled molecular umbrellas. We
have also shown that certain molecular umbrellas can transport hydrophilic
agents across liposomal membranes despite the fact that they are capable
of shielding only a small segment of the agent. For example, a small
diwalled molecular umbrella was found capable of transporting a 16-mer
oligonucleotide (S-dT16) across liposomal membranes. We and others have also demonstrated that molecular umbrellas
can enter cells, in vitro, and that passive transport
appears to play a significant role., Most recently,
we have found that the covalent attachment of octaarginine to the
“handle” of a molecular umbrella can be used to deliver
siRNA to HeLa cells, as judged by the knockdown of enhanced green
fluorescent protein expression. Although
the precise mechanism by which a molecular umbrella transports partially
shielded hydrophilic agents across lipid membranes remains to be established,
one plausible model involves a “needle and thread” pathway,
that is, where the umbrella molecule (i.e., the “needle”)
inserts into the bilayer with partial coverage of
the attached agent (i.e., the thread), allowing both to cross the
membrane (Figure B).

Encouraged by these positive results, we were strongly motivated
to test the feasibility of using a molecular umbrella–siRNA
conjugate for the in vivo transport of siRNA. In
the work that is reported herein, we have focused on local delivery
by intravitreal injection in the eye.− In addition to therapeutic opportunities,
we chose to focus on ocular delivery because it minimizes many of
the hurdles associated with systemic delivery including serum nuclease
exposure, biodistribution, and specific tissue targeting. We also
chose to use a large octawalled umbrella to maximize coverage of an
attached siRNA and because our past studies have shown that larger
molecular umbrellas can cross lipid bilayers by passive transport
faster than smaller analogs due to greater partitioning into the membrane.

The molecular design strategy that we have
employed is illustrated
in Figure . Thus, an oligonucleotide that
can form a duplex with an siRNA is covalently attached to the handle
of an activated molecular umbrella via thiolate–disulfide exchange.
The umbrella-bound oligonucleotide is then used as a “passenger”
strand to anneal with the complementary “guide” strand
to give the biologically active siRNA. The specific activated molecular
umbrella that we have used in this work is shown in Figure . In Figure  is shown the
method that was used to prepare 1. Thus, acylation of l-lysine with N1,N2-diBoc-l-lysine-N-(O-succinimidyl ester) to produce 2, followed
by deprotection to give 3, and acylation with an activated
form of cholic acid afforded 4. Finally, activation of 4, followed by condensation with spermidine-N2-trifluoroacetamide, deprotection and acylation with N-[O-1,2,3-benzotriazin-4(3H)one-yl]-3,(2-pyridyldithio)propionate (BPDP) afforded 1. Covalent attachment of a given passenger strand to a molecular
umbrella framework, illustrated in Figure  and detailed in the , was then accomplished via thiolate disulfide exchange by reacting 1 with the thiol form of an oligonucleotide at room temperature.
The latter was generated in situ by reducing a disulfide
protected form of the oligonucleotide with dithiothreitol in aqueous
PBS (pH 7.4). All molecular umbrella–siRNA conjugates that
were investigated in vitro and in vivo were purified by reverse phase HPLC. The purified single strand
molecular umbrella conjugates were then duplexed to the corresponding
guide strand to yield 1b and 5 (Figure ). Analytical purity and confirmation of duplex
formation, as detailed in the , were performed with high resolution mass spectrometry and capillary
electrophoresis. For these studies, siRNA
against Sjögren syndrome type B antigen (SSB) was used to prepare
conjugate 1b, and a control sequence was used to prepare
conjugate 5. The specific siRNA duplex oligonucleotide
sequences used are described in the  (S7). The gene target SSB is expressed in all cell
types allowing for a general understanding of mRNA knockdown. The
control sequence, which does not target SSB mRNA, gives confidence
that the effects observed with SSB siRNA are not due to off-target
effects. Additional information on SSB si RNA can be found in ref ().

Stylized illustration
of an activated molecular umbrellas being
covalently coupled to a passenger strand, which is then used to form
a duplex with the complementary guide strand of siRNA, that is, the
active agent for mRNA knockdown.

Structure of an activated molecular umbrella used for coupling
to a guide strand.

Synthetic scheme used
to prepare 1.

Attachment of molecular umbrella 1 to the siRNA passenger
strand and subsequent duplex formation to duplexes 1b and 5. Here, the 1b duplex contains SSB
siRNA and duplex 5 contains a control siRNA sequence
that does not have sequence homology with SSB mRNA.

To date, molecular modeling on siRNA conjugates
has been limited.
Furthermore, conjugates 1b and 5 represent
the first examples of molecular umbrella–siRNA conjugates.
Thus, we saw this as an opportunity to gain insight into the interactions
between the umbrella, siRNA, and an aqueous environment. To better
understand the intramolecular interactions, classical molecular dynamics
(MD) simulations were performed. The AMBER force field was selected
for approximating the atomic interactions. This force field is particularly appropriate for modeling interactions
between nucleic acids and small molecules especially where covalent
bonds are involved. For this hybrid system
we also employed the AM1 bond charge corrected version for which we
have extensive experience and confidence. Sodium chloride (NaCl) was added at a physiciological concentration
of 150 mM. In addition sodium ions (Na+) were added to
ensure charge neutrality. The initial conformation of the double strand
nucleic acids was placed in the A-form, while the umbrella assumed
a more extended form to minimize any preference for the intramolecular
umbrella–siRNA interaction. This initial configuration of the
umbrella–siRNA conjugate, explicit water, and ions was minimized
before slowly heating to ∼310 K. After reaching constant pressure
equilibrium, a 40 ns MD simulation was performed using a 0.001 ps
time step. Figure  shows a snapshot of the
final conformation of the conjugate resulting from these calculations.
As predicted, the hydrophobic faces of six of the cholic acids condense
upon themselves and the hydroxyl moieties interact with the aqueous
environment. Encouragingly, two of the cholic acid hydrophobic faces
interact with the hydrophobic wedge of the siRNA, lending support
to the amphiphilic nature of the umbrella conjugate.

Molecular dynamic simulation
of conjugate 1b. Simulation
details and additional graphical representations can be found in the .

For our in vitro and in vivo experiments,
we opted to focus resources on conjugate 1b and the conjugate
containing a control sequence (5) as an initial test
of this approach. To confirm that siRNA conjugation to the umbrella
does not negatively impact RNAi activity, the conjugate 1b was transfected in HEK293 cells using lipofectamine. As shown in
Figure a, robust silencing activity with an
IC50 of ∼20 pM was observed. After confirming the
intrinsic potency, we next tested if the conjugates have cell uptake
properties that results in silencing in vitro in
the absence of lipofectamine. As shown in Figure b, conjugate 1b displays dose-dependent target
knockdown while the control siRNA conjugate 5 does not
show activity. Although 1b exhibited substantially lower
activity than that found in the presence of lipofectamine, its ability
to knockdown mRNA in vitro renders such duplexes
worthy of in vivo testing.

(a) In vitro RNAi activity of molecular umbrella–siRNA
conjugate 1b in the presence of transfection reagent.
The HEK293 cells stably transfected with firefly and renilla luciferase
containing the siRNA target sequence in the 3′UTR of renilla
were used for evaluating knockdown. The cells were treated for 24
h and the luciferase levels were determined to evaluate knockdown.
(b) In vitro RNAi activity of molecular umbrella–siRNA
conjugates 1b and 5 in the absence of transfection
reagent. The HEK293 cells were treated for 72 h and target mRNA levels
were analyzed by b-DNA assay.

To determine if these results could be extended in
vivo, the molecular umbrella conjugates were assessed for
mRNA knockdown
in rat retina after intravitreal injection. As shown in Figure , modest but statistically significant mRNA knockdown
(32%) was observed by the umbrella–siRNA conjugate at 100 μg/eye
dose. In sharp contrast, no activity was observed with the nontarget
umbrella conjugate. It should be noted that, for ocular animal studies,
accurate dosing of compounds (5 μL) by intravitreal injection
in the relatively small space of the eye is challenging. We attribute
the scatter seen in these data to such dosing and, in the case of
the conjugate 1b, to modest knockdown levels. For this
reason, a larger sample size (n = 8 eyes/treatment)
was used for the in vivo studies as compared with
triplicate measurements that were made in the cell culture studies.
Finally, an ophthalmic examination of eye revealed no signs of obvious
toxicity as evidenced by dilation of the pupil and biomicroscopy of
the anterior segment and indirect ophthalmicroscopy of the posterior
segment. This provides further evidence that mRNA reduction was specific
to the siRNA mechanism.

In vivo activity of molecular
umbrella conjugate
in rat retina delivered by intravitreal injection (dose = 100 μg/eye,
based on historical in-house data with different siRNA conjugates
that demonstrated activity at this dose). Higher doses were not evaluated
due to solubility limitations. Vehicle refers to the dosing solution
alone; i.e., only water was administered in this case.

In summary, the first molecular umbrella–siRNA
conjugates
were prepared and found to exhibit in vitro activity
in the absence of lipofectamine and modest ocular in vivo activity. Having demonstrated proof of concept, future work will
now focus on elucidating structure–activity relationships,
expanding the modeling work to look at conjugate–membrane interactions,
tracking metabolic fate, and determining specific cellular localization
within the retina to identify therapeutic applicability.

Supporting Information Available
Experimental procedures, computer
modeling details and supplementary data. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc400506m_si_001.pdf

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was funded in part by the Institutes of Health
(PHS
GM51814 and PHS GM100962).

