Introduction
Protein delivery has important applications
both in vitro and in vivo. In vitro, delivery
of proteins into cells provides a potentially game-changing approach
to manipulate signaling pathways, stimulate
potent antitumor immune cells, and induce
pluripotency for tissue engineering and wound healing. Effective in vivo protein delivery would
provide therapeutic replacement of missing, dysfunctional, or poorly
expressed proteins. Delivery of key functional proteins provides strategies
to agonize or antagonize key intracellular pathways for both chronic
and acute conditions, such as cancer, inflammatory diseases, oxidative
stress-related disorders, diabetes, and brain injury. To date, around
100 proteins with different functions have been transported into cells
in various animal models, with some protein systems making it to clinical
trials.,

Protein delivery into cells has two
major challenges. First, the
protein must be transported into the cell. Proteins can be modified
or conjugated to take advantage of normal cell uptake processes including
endocytosis and phagocytosis. Once inside
the cell, however, there is a more vexing problem: delivered proteins
are trapped in vesicular structures (e.g., endosomes) after internalization,
which prevents their access to the cytosol. The encapsulated proteins therefore do not achieve their desired
biological activity because they do not reach their cytosolic targets.
While progress has been made on both delivery and endosomal escape,
effective delivery of proteins to the cytosol remains a challenge.
In this Topical Review we will highlight current approaches to protein
delivery, focusing on the strengths and challenges of three broad
categories: mechanical methods, covalent protein modification, and
supramolecular delivery systems.

Strategies of Current Protein
Delivery
Mechanical Delivery Methods
Mechanical/physical methods
such as microinjection and electroporation are the most traditional
methods for protein delivery. These approaches provide the delivered
proteins with direct access to the cytosol, which makes them very
useful for in vitro investigations. These methods,
however, are low-throughput, invasive, and require specialized equipment
to mechanically/physically puncture membranes: important issues for in vitro applications.,In vivo use of these methods is complicated by the need for direct physical
access to the targeted cells, which limits the volume of tissue that
can be locally treated. Additionally, the transient cell permeablization
provided by these approaches allows influx of other proteins and biomolecules
into the cell, generating potential side effects.

Carrier-Based Delivery
The inherent
advantages of carrier-based
delivery systems makes them attractive alternatives to mechanical
methods for transporting proteins into cells. There are two categories
of delivery strategies that have been broadly employed: covalent protein
modifications and supramolecular delivery systems. These categories
can be further divided into several subgroups, including cell-penetrating
peptides (CPPs), virus-like particles, supercharged proteins, nanocarriers,
supramolecular carrier-based delivery systems, and nanoparticle-stabilized
nanocapsules (Figure ).

Schematic illustration
of protein delivery systems. (A) cell-penetrating
peptides, (B) supercharged proteins, (C) virus-like particle, (D)
nanocarrier, (E) liposomes, (F) polymer, and (G) nanoparticle-stabilized
nanocapsule.

Covalent Protein Modifications
Cell-Penetrating
Peptides
Protein modification with
cell-penetrating peptides (CPPs) and other modifying group proteins
provide promising vectors for protein delivery. While these functionalization
strategies commonly use proteins modified with short cationic peptides
at one of their termini during expression, postmodification of the
protein provides a complementary means of accessing proteins that
are functionalized at other positions (Figure ). CPPs have been quite effective at
bringing a wide range of synthetic and biological components into
cells, including enzymes, cytokines, apoptotic molecules, protein
hormones, molecular chaperones, and cell-signaling proteins. There
is, however, some controversy as to the mechanism of cell uptake of
CPP-tagged materials.− The original hypothesis was that CPPs worked by penetrating
the cell membrane through a translocation or transduction process,
which would provide cytosolic access. Further research indicates that uptake often occurs through endocytic
mechanisms that result in endocytic entrapment.−

Protein delivery into
cells by using a CPP (R7). (A) Schematic
diagrams of recombinant proteins with or without the CPP (R7)-conjugated
vectors. (B) Comparison of the efficiency of two different protein-delivery
systems (CPP- and Streptolysin O-mediated). Transduction of GFP and
R7-GFP was detected by confocal microscopy. GFP or R7-GFP is visualized
in green. Nuclei were counter-stained with DAPI and the images were
merged (the top three rows show 400× magnification and the bottom
two rows show 1000× magnification plus 3× zoom). Scale bars
represent 20 μm. GFP, green fluorescent protein; DAPI, 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole.
Reprinted with permission from ref (). Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group.

Regardless of mechanism, there
have been numerous examples of CPP-mediated
delivery of proteins in vitro.− CPPs used in
these studies have ranged from classical ones, such as TAT peptide,
polyarginine peptide, Pep-1, and penetratin, to newly discovered ones.
However, the efficiency of cytosolic access of these protein conjugates
is debatable. It is reported that CPPs enter cells by an endocytic
mechanism, and the proteins linked with the CPP tend to rapidly concentrate
inside the endocytic organelles.− To address this issue,
several methods have been developed to improve endosomal escape, including
pH- and temperature-induced modulators, synthetic endosomal lysis
agents, and photoinduced physical disruption.,

In vivo delivery features substantial additional
challenges beyond cellular uptake, including biodistribution, pharmacokinetics,
and immune response. CPPs have been used in vivo to
address these issues, with recent results including the inhibition
of tumor growth by TAT fused with the C-terminal domain of c-FLIP, and the cardioprotective function of TAT-Ndi1
in treatment of the animal model of lethal myocardial ischemia-reperfusion
(I/R) injury. Despite these positive
results from rodent models, clinical trials indicate that challenges
still remain. For example, delcasertib (also known as KAI-9803), a
selective α-PKC inhibitor composed of a fragment of the α-PKC
C2 domain (dV1–1), where TAT peptide did not show significant
decrease in heart tissue damage from artery-opening surgery in a phase
IIb clinical trial, although KAI-9803 reduced cardiac damage in a
rat model of acute myocardial infarction caused by ischemia-reperfusion.

Virus-Like Particles
Virus-like
particles (VLPs) are
another emerging category of protein delivery vehicle. VLPs are formed
by self-assembly of virus capsid proteins, which are similar in size
and conformation to intact infectious virions, but possess nonviral
properties, including being nonreplicating, nonpathogenic, and genomeless. Recent reports show that VLPs can be used to
deliver biologically active proteins into cultured cells as heterologous
protein fused with the anchoring protein of VLPs., However, the intercellular location of proteins that results from
VLPs delivery requires evaluation of the efficiency of cytosolic access, and the
immunogenicity and safety of viral proteins in VLPs needs to be further
determined by in vivo studies.

Supercharged
Proteins
Supercharged proteins are a class
of engineered or naturally occurring proteins with unusually high
positive or negative net theoretical charge (typically &gt;1 net charge
unit per kilo-Dalton of molecular weight). Previous reports suggest
that engineered GFP variants with very high net positive charge can
penetrate and deliver other macromolecules into mammalian cells. Recent studies indicate that a large, diverse
class of naturally occurring human proteins with unusually high net
positive charge (possibly &gt;2% of the human proteome) have the ability
to deliver functional proteins into mammalian cells both in
vitro and in retinal, pancreatic, and white adipose tissues in vivo. However, the internalization
mechanism of naturally occurring proteins with high net positive charge
for protein delivery remains unclear, and supercharged modification
of proteins may alter the protein properties and activity. Nevertheless,
there are examples of local protein delivery by using supercharged
proteins, including intramuscular injection of Cre fused to a supercharged
protein, which leads to functional delivery only near the injection
site, as most of the protein fusion precipitated.

Covalent Nanoconjugates
Nanocarriers
provide an alternative
strategy to direct protein delivery, offering increased options for
control of size and surface properties., Two strategies
have been used for nanocarrier-based protein delivery. Covalent attachment provides a stable linkage
between carrier and protein, an important issue for in vivo applications. These covalent conjugates can, however, interfere
in protein folding and function. One successful application of a covalent
bioconjugate is the use of magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) as nanocarriers
for delivery of serratiopeptidase to targeted cells, in which chitosan
amino-functionalized MNPs conjugated to serratiopeptidase through
a glutaraldehyde linker increased the anti-inflammatory activity of
the therapeutic protein in vitro and in vivo. Another example of nanocarrier-mediated
protein delivery is the covalent conjugation of mesoporous silica
nanoparticles (MSN) to a small mitochondrial heme protein, cytochrome
C (Cyt C), for induction of cancer cell death (Figure ).

MNPs deliver serratiopeptidase
into cells. (A) Scheme of the immobilization
of Cytc-Lac into MSN-SH via redox-sensitive smart bonds followed by
its intracellular delivery into cancer cells. (B) Internalization
of the MSN-SPDP-Cyt c-Lac bioconjugate by HeLa cells observed by confocal
microscopy. The left image is the autofluorescence image of the cells,
the lower left shows the FITC labeled MSN internalized by the cells,
the lower right shows the FM4-64 labeled endosomes, and the upper
right micrograph is the merged image. FITC, fluorescein isothiocyanate.
Reprinted with permission from ref (). Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.

Supramolecular Delivery
Systems
Carrier Based Delivery Systems
Supramolecular carrier-based
delivery systems are modular and operate through reversible associations
with target proteins. In noncovalent strategies, proteins and delivery
vectors self-assemble, which allows the transport of unmodified proteins
into the cell. These strategies can use native protein, and overcome
some of the limitations of covalent protein modification strategies,
including protein misfolding and denaturation. One example of protein
delivery is by Kim and co-workers, in which self-assembled nanoparticles
composed of glycol chitosan (GC)-bearing β-cyclodextrin (GC-βCD)
were used as a protein carrier to deliver human growth hormone (hGH)
into cells; as a result hGH was released from the nanoparticles in
a sustained manner for 9 days. Another
example is the targeted delivery of proteins into the brain by using
a chitosan and rabies virus glycoprotein (RVG) peptide-conjugated,
pluronic-based complex nanocarrier.

Liposomes
Liposomes are one of the more traditional
nanocarriers, with strengths that include modularity and ease of preparation.
Liposomal carriers have been used to effectively deliver a wide variety
of proteins into cells, including albumin, antibodies, enzymes, and
cytokines., For example, lysine-based cationic
liposomes effectively delivered albumin and antibodies into cytoplasm
via caveolae-mediated endocytosis, and the delivery efficiency of
the liposome/albumin complexes can reach 99% at 37 °C. Although encapsulation of protein in liposomes
has high celluar transport efficiency, the amount of encapsulated
protein remains a challenge. A recent report showed that a freeze–thaw
cycling process can be used to encapsulate a large amount of hydrophilic
proteins into unilamellar liposomes. However,
it is risky with regard to loss of protein activity during the freeze–thaw
process.

Lipoplexes
Lipoplexes
are composed of surfactants,
proteins, lipids, polymers, or a combination of these materials, and
include solid lipid particles, oily suspensions, submicron lipid emulsions,
lipid implants, lipid microbubbles, inverse lipid micelles, lipid
microtubules, lipospheres, and lipid microcylinders. One of the examples for lipoplex-mediated protein delivery
is to use a mixture of a Wr-T peptide and a commercially available
cationic lipid reagent (BioPORTER) to efficiently deliver a variety
of proteins into the cytoplasm of living cells. Additionally, the advantage of lipoplex-mediated delivery
is the flexibility to produce different types of protein delivery
vehicles based upon the molecular structure of the lipids used in
the composition. For example, solid lipid
particles composed of four different types of lipids and two triglycerides
with different chain-lengths of fatty acyl groups can be used as efficient
vehicles for oral delivery of peptide and protein drugs, and the drug
release mechanism (lipase-mediated degradation-based release or, alternatively,
lipase-degradation-independent release) from solid lipid particles
is dependent on the selection of lipid, which can be used in the design
of lipid excipients for oral delivery of protein drugs.

Polymers
Polymers have the advantage
of controllable
multivalency, providing the capability to tune both the strength and
structure of polyplexes that result from supramolecular co-ordination
of the polymer to the protein. Polyethylenimine (PEI) has been widely
used for nucleic acid delivery, providing
a cationic carrier to facilitate endocytosis and the capability to
disrupt endosomes through the “proton sponge” effect. PEI is somewhat toxic, so a variety of other
polymer backbones including linear, branched, and dendritic architectures
have been also tested. A particularly interesting example of dendrimer-based
delivery was shown by Yao and colleagues, who used carboxymethyl (CM)
chitosan-poly(amidoamine) dendrimer core–shell nanoparticles
to load and release lysozyme. These new
dendrimer nanoparticles had better loading capacity and pH sensitivity
than previously generated CM-chitosan polyion micelles. Examples of
linear and branched polymer-based protein delivery include delivery
of bovine serum albumin (BSA) and lysozyme to human breast carcinoma
cells through complexation to polymer polyelectrolytes produced from
PEI (Figure ). Many more examples of different polymer structures have been used
for protein delivery.−

PEI-based
polyelectrolytes deliver protein into MCF7 cells. (A)
Confocal images for intracellular tracking of the cationic polyelectrolyte/BSA
complexes (WR1) and BSA (10 μg/mL) and (B) the intracellular
endolysosome amount of the BSA- and polycation/BSA-treated cells.
Free BSA was labeled with RITC (red). Acidic compartments and nuclei
were stained with LysoTracker Green (green) and Hoechst 33342 (blue),
respectively. RITC, Rhodamine Bisothiocyanate. Reprinted with permission
from ref (). Copyright
2013 American Chemical Society.

Nanoplexes
Nanoplexes exploit the structural diversity
of nanoparticles, which is composed of chemically modified nanoparticle,
proteins, polymer, or other components that can incorporate unique
imaging properties from the core in nanosize scale. One of the simplest
examples of protein delivery through a nanoplex was by Rotello and
co-workers,, in which a cationic nanoparticle
transported a large anionic protein β-galactosidase (473 kDa)
into cells. The delivered protein retained activity inside the cell.
When fluorescently tagged protein was used, punctate florescence was
observed, indicative of vesicular localization. This fluorescence
did not colocalize with endosomal tracking agents, which suggests
post-uptake release (Figure ). Another example
of nanoplex-based delivery was by Palivan and colleagues, in which self-assembled polyethylene glycol
(PEG) modified chitosan Bombyxmori nanoparticles
(PEG-O-ChsBm) were used to deliver BSA into HeLa and THP-1 cells.
More examples of nanoplex structures were also reported for protein
delivery.,

Nanoplex delivery of a large anionic protein
β-galactosidase
(473 kDa) into cells. (A) Intracellular delivery of functional protein
using gold nanoparticles. (B) Co-localization study using confocal
microscopy after protein transfection (NP_Pep/FITC-gal: 100 nM/50
nM) of HeLa cells in the presence of FM4-64: (a) green fluorescence
from FITC-gal, (b) red fluorescence from FM4-64, an endosome-specific
marker, and (c) overlap of the green and the red channels. In the
merged image, green spots (shown with green arrowheads) indicate proteins
outside endosomes, while entrapped proteins inside endosomes appear
as yellow dots (shown with yellow arrowheads). Reprinted with permission
from ref (). Copyright
2010 American Chemical Society.

Nanoparticle-Stabilized Nanocapsules
As mentioned above,
direct transport through the cell membrane is an ideal mechanism for
protein delivery, providing direct access of proteins to the cytosol.
In recent studies, Rotello and co-workers used nanoparticle-stabilized
nanocapsules (NPSCs) to directly deliver proteins to the cytosol (Figure )., GFP was used to determine the
intracellular distribution of delivered proteins. The delivered GFP
was distributed throughout the cell with identical cellular distribution
to that of endogenously expressed red fluorescent protein (RFP). Further
proof of cytosolic access was demonstrated through efficient intracellular
targeting of a GFP fusion protein to the peroxisome. Caspase-3 (CASP3)
was chosen to demonstrate therapeutic delivery of an active, biomedically
important enzyme. Delivery of CASP3 is
a particularly stringent test of the efficacy of this approach, as
caspases are delicate enzymes that would be susceptible to inactivation
during the delivery process. CASP3 was efficiently delivered into
cells, resulting in effective induction of apoptosis. NPSCs are promising
vehicles for in vitro applications; however, their
usefulness in vivo has not been demonstrated.

Intracellular
protein delivery by NPSCs. (A) Schematic showing
the preparation of the protein NPSC complex containing caspase-3 or
GFP and proposed delivery mechanism. (B) Live cell imaging of rapid
GFP release into the cytosol of HeLa cell by NPSCs. Scale bar: 20
μm. Reprinted with permission from ref (). Copyright 2013 American
Chemical Society.

Conclusions
Protein delivery has the potential to revolutionize therapeutics,
allowing us to treat currently untreatable diseases and minimize side
effects from off-target interactions. Tremendous progress has been
made, and there are many promising leads in the effort to deliver
proteins. All of the strategies described in this Topical Review have
successful applications, and many are working their way toward translation.
Each of these approaches, however, currently has limitations and challenges
that will need to be overcome for optimal application. There are many
ways in which these roadblocks can be addressed both synthetically
and biologically through engineering of either protein or delivery
vehicle. Perhaps the most promising route, however, would be the synergistic
coengineering of proteins and carriers to provide integrated vectors
to provide enhanced delivery of active proteins to their desired intracellular
locations.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The support of the NIH (EB
B014277) is gratefully acknowledged.
A.F. also acknowledges the support from Natural Science Foundation
of China (81273416) and the Scientific Research Foundation for Returned
Scholars, Ministry of Education of China (2012-940).

