Introduction
Many cancers are resistant
to or ultimately develop resistance
to chemotherapeutic agents. One molecular mechanism of resistance
is up-regulation of the membrane transporter multidrug resistance
protein 1 (MDR1), also known as P-glycoprotein (permeability glycoprotein,
P-gp), ATP-binding cassette subfamily B member 1 (ABCB1), or cluster
of differentiation 243 (CD243)., During normal development,
MDR1 plays a critical role in exporting xenobiotics from human tissues,
particularly in the gut, liver, kidneys, and blood-brain barrier., Many chemotherapeutics including taxanes, anthracyclines, and vinca
alkaloids are substrates for MDR1,− and MDR1-induced multidrug
resistance is a major cause of treatment failure in metastatic lung,
breast, ovarian, cervical, and kidney cancers.,−

One strategy for overcoming multidrug resistance
is coadministration
of an MDR1 inhibitor together with the primary chemotherapeutic agent.
At least three generations of MDR1 inhibitors have been developed
and tested clinically, with variable results.− First and second generation inhibitors
such as verapamil, cyclosporin A, and valspodar failed in clinical
trials due to dose-limiting toxicities and off-target effects.− A third generation of rationally designed inhibitors includes elacridar,
zosuquidar, tariquidar, and HM30181 (Hanmi Pharmaceuticals); these agents have been evaluated in clinical
trials, but the results have been complex to interpret. In some cases,
favorable safety profiles and encouraging patient responses were observed,
but patient response rates have been unpredictable, conceivably due
to heterogeneous MDR1 expression, coexpression of other efflux drug
transporters (e.g., breast cancer resistance protein, BCRP) and other
complicating factors. Additionally, patient
plasma concentrations of inhibitors often reach toxic levels before
effective inhibitor concentrations are achieved at the tumor site.

We argue that there is a need for structurally matched imaging
agents capable of real-time imaging of MDR1 expression and inhibition
in single cells in vivo. Such an approach would shed
light not only on the distribution of new inhibitors, but also their
cellular effects over time. There is little knowledge regarding whether
MDR1 inhibitors reach cells of interest and, if they do, over what
time frame and with what level of heterogeneity. Similarly, there
is limited in vivo knowledge regarding inhibitor
activity and efficacy. Efficient strategies for cellular imaging of
synthetic MDR1 inhibitors would elucidate all of these pharmacological
parameters and be a useful tool for co-clinical trials. Whereas some fluorescent substrates of MDR1
act as MDR1 inhibitors in a concentration-dependent manner (e.g., 99mTc-sestamibi, rhodamine 123), they generally have different
chemical structures and in vivo behaviors compared
to third generation MDR1 modulators, complicating
analysis. We therefore developed new
fluorescent versions of a third generation MDR1 inhibitor to probe
the intracellular behavior of the MDR1 inhibitor at the single cell
level. Herein, we describe the synthesis of fluorescent analogues
of anthranilamide-based third generation MDR1 modulators and disclose
their photophysical properties and in vitro activities
in a functional model of MDR1-induced paclitaxel resistance.

Results
and Discussion
We sought to develop companion imaging agents
for MDR1 inhibitors
by making minor modifications to a parent third generation MDR1 inhibitor
scaffold. Our lab has synthesized several companion imaging agents
for subcellular applications including kinase inhibitors− and the poly(ADP-ribose)polymerase inhibitor (PARPi) olaparib (AZD-2281). In these cases, the parent inhibitors contained
solvent-exposed auxiliary moieties, and the general strategy has involved
converting a solvent-exposed group to a bioorthogonal handle (typically trans-cyclooctene) or appending a fluorophore (typically
BODIPY, boron dipyrromethene). This strategy would be difficult to
translate to the third generation acridine (e.g., elacridar)- or anthranilamide-based
MDR1 inhibitors (Figure A); although the binding
modes of these inhibitors are still unresolved, it is hypothesized
that many third generation modulators bind to the same site as the
MDR1 substrate Hoechst33342. This binding
site has no solvent-exposed sites, and several structure activity
relationship (SAR) studies have revealed that addition of a large,
hydrophobic substituent would cause a severe loss of function. Moreover, appending a large moiety would increase
the lipophilicity and molecular weight, which could not only reduce
the inhibitory activity, but also render the molecule a substrate for MDR1. This problem was observed
when the MDR1 modulator verapamil was modified with a BODIPY substituent,
making verapamil-BODIPY an ineffective probe for studying MDR1 inhibitor dynamics.

(A) Representative
third generation MDR1 inhibitors. (B) Flexible
overlay of tariquidar and HM30181 (generated using Forge software
package, Cresset, United Kingdom). (C) General strategy for introduction
of fluorophores to the HM30181 scaffold.

Tariquidar and its tetrazole-containing analogue, HM30181,, were chosen as representative third generation modulators due to
the presence of an anthranilic acid portion that could be derivatized
from a common aniline intermediate. The compounds also share a common
pharmacophore (Figure B) in their native configuration.
We chose the HM30181 scaffold because this inhibitor has a chromone
at the proposed amide modification site. Some chromone (4H-chromen-4-one) derivatives are fluorescent (e.g., flavones), but
HM30181 exhibits little to no fluorescence when excited in the UV–vis
range. Given that exchanging a chromone (4H-chromen-4-one)
for a fluorescent coumarin (2H-chromen-2-one) would
incur little change in terms of molecular weight and overall structure,
we generated a small library of derivatives based on this exchange
(Figure C).

Synthesis of analogues 2–6 was
accomplished with standard amide-bond forming reactions using known
aniline 1 as a starting material (Scheme ). For the synthesis of 7-hydroxycoumarins 4 and 6, the requisite carboxylic acids were first converted to
the corresponding acetates prior to coupling. In these cases, mixtures
of both acetylated and deacetylated coumarin products were obtained
(as evidenced by LCMS analysis of the crude mixtures), and the deacetylated
coumarins (i.e., 4 and 6) were isolated
for further study.

(A) Synthesis of HM30181 Analogues via a Chromone
to Coumarin Substitution.
(B) Synthesis of BODIPY-Analogue 7. (C) Synthesis of
Negative Control 8
The analogues were evaluated for inhibitory efficacy using
a parent
HT1080 cell line that is highly sensitive to taxanes; its resistant
analogue (MDR1++) was generated via stable transfection of the MDR1 gene using a Lentiviral expression
system. Inhibitory efficacy was determined by resensitization of MDR1++
cells to paclitaxel (Table  and Figure ). As expected, HM30181 reversed the multidrug resistant
phenotype, making the MDR1++ cell line sensitive, akin to the parent
line, at concentrations between 100 nM and 500 nM (). Higher concentrations of the fluorescent
analogues were necessary to recover sensitivity. HM30181 analogues
were compared according to the EC50 values of paclitaxel
when coadministered with 5 μM concentrations of inhibitor analogues
(Table ). We also studied the photophysical
properties of the new compounds to choose the best candidate for intracellular
imaging.

Compounds wherein the chromone moiety was exchanged
for a coumarin
exhibited varying levels of inhibitory activity (Table ). We used 7-diethylaminocoumarin derivative 2 as a starting structure because it showed promising inhibitory activity
at 5 μM concentrations; however, 2 also exhibited
limited aqueous solubility, a low quantum yield (Table , entry 2), and a red-shifted emission spectrum (), which could complicate
multichannel imaging analyses. By changing the substitution at the
7-position from the diethylamino- group to a hydroxy- group, we generated
derivative 4, which was more soluble in PBS, had an improved
quantum yield (Table ), and still maintained
potency for reversing taxol resistance. Moreover, the inhibitory activity
was maintained at lower inhibitor concentrations (Figure ). We reasoned that introduction of a chloro-substituent
adjacent to the hydroxy-group (i.e., compound 6) would
further improve fluorescence properties (e.g., quantum yield) while
maintaining inhibitor potency; yet, surprisingly, a significant drop
in inhibitory activity was observed (Table ). It should be noted that these inhibitor analogues do not induce
cell death in either paclitaxel-sensitive or -resistant cell lines
in the absence of paclitaxel ().

In Vitro Activity Profiles and Photophysical
Properties of HM30181 and Fluorescent Analogues
compound	EC50[paclitaxel], nM (95% CI)	surviving
fraction	λ (nm)
Abs/Em	ϕ	
HM30 181	2.3 (1.6–3.4)	5%	NA	NA	
2	13.5 (10.0–18.4)	10%	435/486	0.027	
4	18.6 (9.0–38.3)	10%	427/454	0.090	
6	353 (192–941)	48%	432/456	ND	
7	66.5 (46.2–95.5)	24%	509/517	ND	
8	&gt;1000	NA	416/447	ND	
EC50 values represent
the concentration of paclitaxel required to induce cell death in paclitaxel-
resistant HT1080 cells when used in combination with 5 μM HM30181
or HM30181 analogues. See the  for dose–response plots showing inhibitor efficacy against
both the paclitaxel-sensitive and -resistant cell lines.

Percentage of the cell population
surviving at the maximum dose of paclitaxel (1 μM).

Wavelength at maximal (relative)
absorbance and fluorescence emission in PBS (pH 7.4) using compound
concentrations of 10 μM.

Quantum yields were determined for
the test compounds in PBS (pH 7.4) using coumarin-153 in EtOH as a
standard (λ Ex = 410 for 2 and 405 for 4, respectively). All measurements were performed in triplicate.

HM30181 induces reversal of
paclitaxel
resistance at much lower concentrations than 5 μM. The EC50 values for paclitaxel were 4.4 and 5.4 nM at 1 μM
and 500 nM concentrations of HM30181, respectively.

HM30181 has absorbance bands ranging
from 290 to 450 nm, but no fluorescence was observed when solutions
of HM30181 were excited at these wavelengths.

Representative data from a paclitaxel resensitization assay: cellular
activity profile of analogue 4 in (A) paclitaxel-resistant
and (B) paclitaxel-sensitive HT1080 cell lines.

The BODIPY-FL derivative 7 was synthesized to
ascertain
whether we could, in fact, make a brighter imaging agent while maintaining
potency (Scheme B). Surprisingly, the BODIPY
FL-substituted derivative still showed modest activity when applied
at 5 μM concentrations; however, analogue 7 exhibited
poor aqueous solubility, limiting its use in cellular imaging applications.
As a negative control for the paclitaxel resensitization assay, we
synthesized analogue 8 (Scheme C). It has been established that a hydrogen-bonding accepting moiety
such as the amide ortho- to the tetrazole in HM30181
is essential for maintaining MDR1 inhibitory activity. Consistent with established pharmacophore models
of third generation MDR1 modulators, this derivative was not active
for reversing the phenotype of the paclitaxel-resistant cell lines
(Table ). It is also possible that the more
acidic Pacific Blue coumarin renders this compound impermeable to
cell membranes at physiological pH; the lack of inhibitory activity
exhibited by compound 8 indicates either the importance
of pharmacophore, importance of membrane permeability, or a combination
of the two factors.

Based on the collective data regarding inhibitory
activities and
photophysical properties, the 7-hydroxycoumarin derivative 4 was chosen for use in cellular imaging experiments. The probe was
applied to a mixed population of parent (paclitaxel-sensitive) and
MDR1++ (paclitaxel-resistant) HT1080 cells expressing fluorescent
histone markers (Figure ). Accumulation of
HM30181–7HC in MDR1++ cells was consistent with that in the
parent HT1080 cells, indicating that derivative 4 is
not a substrate (i.e., does not get effluxed) of the MDR1 membrane
transport protein. Probe 4 showed colocalization with
MDR1 in MDR1++ cells, but 4 was also observed in the
endoplasmic reticulum and the perinuclear space.

Cellular localization
of analogue 4 in a mixed population
of paclitaxel-sensitive and paclitaxel-resistant cell lines. (A) MDR1-apple
(red) and histone-H2B-iRFP (blue). (B) Compound 4 (green)
and histone-H2B-iRFP (blue).

To visualize the function of compound 4, we
studied
the cellular uptake of the Poly-ADP ribose polymerase inhibitor olaparib-BFL
(olaparib modified with a BODIPY substituent). Olaparib is a known
MDR1 substrate, and olaparib-BFL has
been validated as a viable companion imaging agent for studying cellular
distribution of this inhibitor., Mixed populations of
parent and MDR1++ HT1080 cells were treated with olaparib-BFL in the
absence of inhibitor; as depicted in Figure , olaparib-BFL accumulates in the nucleus of the parent cells but
is not present in the MDR1++ cells. When cells were treated with 4, cellular uptake of Olaparib-BFL was observed in both the
parent and MDR1++ cells. Beyond excellent colocalization (Figure ), and demonstration of drug efflux reversal (Figure ), the specificity of this analogue was demonstrated
by competition of 4 with surplus HM30181; preincubation
with HM30181 blocked uptake of compound 4 by approximately
80% (Figure ).

Cellular uptake of olaparib-BFL
in paclitaxel-sensitive and paclitaxel-resistant
cell lines (A) in the absence of analogue 4 and (B) after
coincubation of olabarib-BFL with analogue 4. MDR1 (white);
histone-H2B-iRFP (blue); compound 4 (green); olaparib-BFL
(red).

Multidrug resistance, whereby
patients become refractory to a broad
spectrum of structurally unrelated compounds, is often implicated
in the failure of chemotherapy regimens and eventual tumor progression.
The rationale for developing MDR1 inhibitors is thus sound, but unfortunately,
several classes of compounds have repeatedly failed in clinical trials.
The specific reasons for these failures remain unclear; therefore,
tools for quantifying the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties
of new MDR1 inhibitors are necessary.

Inhibition of cellular uptake of analogue 4 via preincubation
with HM30181. (A) A mixed population of paclitaxel-sensitive and -resistant
cell lines was preincubated with media only, and the media was replaced
with media containing analogue 4 (3 μM) (control).
(B) The mixed population was pretreated with HM30181 (30 μM)
prior to exchanging the media for media with analogue 4 (3 μM) (pretreated). (C) Fluorescence intensity from probe 4 observed over time in control and pretreated cell populations.
(D) Averaged relative fluorescence intensity of control and pretreated
cell populations.

Clinical imaging agents
used to measure MDR1 activity have been
difficult to interpret and do not provide single cell resolution.
One of the more commonly used agents, 99mTc sestamibi,
originally developed for other applications but subsequently shown
to be an MDR1 substrate, is detected
by nuclear imaging technologies that are limited in resolution by
volume averaging and ratio imaging. At the cellular level, other fluorochromes
are commonly used as substrates to estimate MDR1 activity.− These probes, however, have different structural compositions compared
to third generation MDR1 inhibitors and are not specific transport
modulators. In contrast, the system described herein demonstrates
quantification of MDR1 substrate and modulator activity in parallel
and at single cell resolution. Exquisite channel separation was achieved
for simultaneous visualization of multiple components of a complex
system; the real-time distribution of two small molecules (MDR1 substrate,
MDR1 inhibitor) in conjunction with visualization of the target protein
(via fluorescent expression of MDR1) and the cell nucleus (histone
markers) was demonstrated.

Derivative 4 should
prove to be a useful tool for
in vivo real-time monitoring of MDR1 modulators in tandem with a suitable
MDR1 substrate and, potentially, for assessing efficacy of vehicles
for delivery of MDR1 modulators. These projected studies will provide
insight into the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of MDR1 inhibitors
in vivo and allow for optimization of combination therapies (strategy
for dual administration of MDR1i with primary chemotherapeutic). Use
of probe 4 or a related companion imaging agent could
have broad implications for the design of future MDR1 inhibitors.

Supporting Information Available
Procedures
for chemical synthesis,
compound characterization data, fluorescence spectra, procedures for
quantum yield determinations, procedures for cell line construction,
Western blot, and cell viability assays, in vitro activity toward
BCRP modulation, and additional imaging data. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc500154c_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
Melissa M.
Sprachman and Ashley M. Laughney contributed equally to this work.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
M.M.S. and A.M.L. were supported by a NIH grant T32-CA079443.
We are grateful to Dr. Sarit Agasti for helpful discussions and the
kind gift of 6-chloro-7-hydroxycoumarin-3-carboxylic acid; Dr. Ralph
Mazitschek for computational modeling of the tariquidar and HM30181
structure overlays; and Dr. Jonathan Carlson, Dr. Labros Meimitis,
and Dr. Eunha Kim for many helpful discussions.

Abbreviations
EDCI1-ethyl-3-(3-(dimethylamino)propyl)carbodiimide

HOBTN-hydroxybenzotriazole

DMAP4-dimethylaminopyridine

DMFN,N-dimethylformamide

BODIPY FL7-(2-carboxyethyl)-5,5-difluoro-1,3-dimethyl-5H-dipyrrolo[1,2-c:2′,1′-f][1,3,2]diazaborinin-4-ium-5-uide

T3Ppropylphosphonic anhydride

Boctert-butyloxycarbonyl

TFAtrifluoroacetic acid

Pacific
Blue, SE6,8-difluoro-7-hydroxy-2-oxo-2H-chromene-3-carboxylic acid, succinimidyl ester

DIPEAN,N-diisopropylethylamine

