Introduction
Biosensors or protein
chips used in analytical and diagnostic devices
are powerful tools for detection of biomolecular interactions and
are becoming increasingly important in the field of biotechnology,
where immobilized protein microarrays facilitate high-throughput analysis
of protein–protein, protein–antibody, and protein–small
molecule interactions.− Typically, biomolecules such as antibodies or antigens deposited
on a biosensing surface are used to capture and detect target molecules.
For maximum sensitivity and reproducibility, the mobilized proteins
should retain full activity and be oriented with exposed binding sites.

Proteins adsorb to gold surfaces through electrostatic and hydrophobic
interactions in random orientations that are not sufficiently stable
for many applications., Functionalization of the surface,
most easily accomplished by chemisorption of alkanethiols, is a necessary
step for covalent regioselective attachment of a protein of interest. Alkanethiol self-assembled monolayers (SAMs)
are widely used to functionalize gold surfaces, including those of
nanoparticles, with a highly organized and densely packed surface
layer.− However, thiol SAMs can be desorpted thermally, by
other thiols, oxidation, and ultraviolet light.− Dithiocarbamate (DTC) SAMs have
recently provided an alternative to thiol SAMs for gold surface modification
because the DTC–gold linkage has superior chemisorption properties
and is more resistant to oxidation and displacement from a gold surface
by polar thiols.− DTC-SAMs are deposited by treating a gold surface with a solution
of a primary or secondary amine and carbon disulfide., The DTC–gold interaction produces stable and densely packed
monolayers with fundamentally different physical and chemical properties
than thiol-gold SAMs.

The site-specific attachment of a biomolecule
to a surface by a
covalent bond is more robust than its noncovalent interaction.− Proteins, including antibodies, can be covalently attached to a
gold surface through functional groups in the side chains of exposed
amino acids. However, this method often produces a mixture of orientations
with a reduction in binding capacity. Thus,
efficient regio- and chemoselective immobilization of proteins to
minimize nonspecific binding in random orientations is important for
developing sensitive high performance biosensors. Typically, native proteins are not optimal for covalent
and regioselective immobilization. The most attractive alternative
involves a recombinant protein bearing a single exposed functional
group that is biocompatible, whose reactivity is bioorthogonal to
naturally occurring functional groups, and whose binding properties
are suitable for a wide variety of applications. In addition, the functionalized protein should be easy
to prepare with minimal purification.

A technique initially
described by Gauchet et al. fulfills
these criteria for soluble proteins by introducing
a bioorthogonal azide or alkyne moiety that can be coupled to a complementary
alkyne or azide on the surface by a Huigsen [3 + 2] cycloaddition
reaction. In this approach, a farnesyl diphosphate derivative bearing
an ω-alkyne or ω-azide moiety is attached to the sulfhydryl
moiety of the cysteine residue in a C-terminal ‘CaaX’
recognition motif by protein farnesyltransferase (PFTase). The CaaX tetrapeptide, where “C”
is cysteine, “a” is a small hydrophobic amino acid,
and “X” is alanine, serine, methionine, or asparagine, can easily be appended by genetic engineering.
Gauchet et al. demonstrated this immobilization strategy on glass
surfaces for the Cu+ catalyzed Huisgen [3 + 2] cycloaddition
and Staudinger reactions. This paper
reports the adaptation of this approach for regioselective attachment
of proteins to self-assembled monolayers on gold surfaces, which can
be used in a variety of analyses, including surface plasmon resonance
(SPR) and electrochemical applications.

Experimental Procedure
Preparation of ω-Azide SAMs
ω-Azide alkanethiol
SAMs were prepared on gold slides by swirling the slides at 100 rpm
in ethanol containing 2 mM (total concentration) thiols 1 and 2 (see ) for
44–48 h at rt. The coated slides were swirled three times,
15 min each, with ethanol, and dried with a gentle stream of N2.

ω-Azide dithiocarbamate SAMs were prepared on
gold slides by swirling the slides at 100 rpm in ethanol containing
2 mM (total concentration) amines,3 and 4 (see Scheme ) and 2 mM
carbon disulfide for 44–48 h at rt. The coated slides were
swirled three times, 15 min each, with ethanol and dried with a gentle
stream of N2.

Covalent Attachment of Modified Proteins
to SAMs on Gold Slides
A silicon mat was attached to a SAM-coated
gold slide. A solution
of GFP-CVIA, GST-CVIA, or proG-CVIA modified at the C-terminal cysteine
with farnesyl (GFP-CVIAf and GST-CVIAf) or propargylfarnesyl (GFP-CVIApf,
GST-CVIApf, and proG-CVIApf) moieties was added to individual wells,
followed by 0.5 mM CuSO4, 50 μM TBTA, and 0.5 mM
TCEP (final volume 10 μL). The slide was swirled at 80 rpm for
4 h at rt. The mat was removed, and the slide was swirled overnight
in PBST, pH 7.2, containing 1% BSA and 0.1% Tween 20 at 4 °C.
The slide was washed twice with PBST buffer for 30 min. The slide
was stored in PBS (pH 7.4) at 4 °C before use.

Antibody Conjugation
Slides in a nitrogen-filled chamber
were swirled at 100 rpm with 4 mL of an antibody solution (Alexa Fluor
488-conjugated antiGFP, Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated antiGST, DyLight
680-conjugated anti-GFP, or Alexa Fluor 680-labeled goat anti-rabbit
IgG, 0.5–2 μg/mL) in PBS buffer at 4 °C for 18 h
or at rt for 2 h. The slides were washed with PBST buffer 3 times
for 30 min and scanned with a Typhoon 8600 Variable Mode Imager.

Preparation of DTC-SAM Gold Slides Coated with ProG-CVIApf
Gold slides modified with DTC-SAMs were prepared as described above.
Whole surface-coated slides with proG-CVIApf were prepared according
a method previously described. A slide
was covered with an mSeries LifterSlip coverslip, and 60 μL
of a solution containing 0.5 mM CuSO4, 50 μM TBTA,
0.5 mM TCEP, and 50 μM proG-CVIApf was inserted at the edge
of the coverslip. The slide was shaken at 70 rpm for 4 h at rt. After
three 1 h washes with PBST buffer, the slide was dried under N2 and a silicon mat was attached. Ten microliter portions of
a series of concentrations of anti-GST rabbit IgG in PBS buffer were
added to the wells and the slide was incubated for 2 h at rt. The
silicon mat was removed, the slide was washed with PBST buffer three
times for 1 h at rt, and the slide was visualized.

Results and Discussion
PEG-Alkane
Spacers and Linkers
PEG-alkane derivatives
were prepared with azide groups attached to the PEG end of the molecules
and hydroxyl (spacer), thiol (linker), or amine (linker) groups on
the hydrocarbon end (see Scheme  for structures).
Thiols 1 (spacer) and 2 (linker) were prepared
by the general protocol reported by Pale-Grosdemange et al. (). Spacer 1 has a hydrophobic undecamethylene chain at the thiol end
and a triethylene glycol chain at the hydroxyl terminus. The thiol
end of linker 2 is similar, while the azide end of the
molecule contains a tetraethylene glycol unit. Amine 3 (spacer) has a hexamethylene unit at the amino end and a triethylene
glycol unit at the hydroxyl terminus. Amine 4 (linker)
has a hexamethylene unit (amine end) attached to a PEG8 azide (azide end) through amide linkages to a diglycolic acid spacer.,

Preparation of SAMs on Gold Slides and Modified Proteins
SAMs were prepared from ethanol solutions of a mixture of the thiol
spacer and linker (thiol SAMs) or a mixture of amine spacer, amine
linker, and carbon disulfide for dithiocarbamate (DTC) SAMs. The gold
slides were imaged before and after SAM formation. N-terminal His6-tagged GFP-CVIA and GST-CVIA were expressed and purified
as previously described., Incubation of the proteins
with FPP (control) or ω-propargylFPP (Figure ) with PFTase as described by Gauchet et al. gives GFP-CVIAf,
GFP-CVIApf, GST-CVIAf, and GST-CVIApf, respectively. The modifications were confirmed by ESI MS. Modified GFP retained its native fluorescence
properties, and modified GST retained its catalytic activity. The regio- and chemoselective immobilization
of GFP-CVIApf and GST-CVIApf on SAM-coated gold slides was carried
out as described by Seo et al. for silica surfaces.

FPP and ω-propargylFPP.

Covalent Immobilization on Thiol SAMs
The thiol SAM
technique has been widely used to attach biological molecules, including
antibodies and enzymes, to gold surfaces., Regioselective
covalent immobilization of proteins on SAMs can be accomplished without
denaturation, resulting in an increased binding capacity and sufficient
exposure of functional domains. The alkanethiol assembly on gold was
used for site-specific immobilization of GFP-CVIApf and GST-CVIApf
shown in Scheme . Part A of Figure  shows images of wells where GFP-CVIApf in PBS buffer
was attached to SAMs containing different ratios of spacer 1 and linker 2. Lane a is a copper-free control; lane
b has CuSO4, TCEP, and TBTA; lane c contains CuSO4; and lane d has CuSO4 and TCEP. A 9:1 ratio of 1:2 gave optimal performance (i.e., high sensitivity
and low background). Immobilizations with higher concentrations of
GFP-CVIApf (20 and 80 μM) on thio-SAMs containing different
ratios of spacer 1 and linker 2 were examined,
confirming that a 9:1 ratio of 1:2 was optimal
(). As expected, GFP-CVIApf was
not efficiently immobilized in wells without Cu(I) or with CuSO4 and no TCEP reductant, although a small amount of immobilization,
presumably nonspecific, was observed in wells containing CuSO4, apparently promoted by the presence of Cu(II). This amount
increases in the wells containing CuSO4 and TCEP, a phenomenon
previously reported by Speers and Cravatt. Under our conditions, Cu2+ does not promote significant
nonspecific binding of GFP-CVIApf.

Preparation of Thiol-SAMs on Gold
Surfaces and Immobilization of
GST-CVIApf by a Huisgen [3 + 2] Cycloaddition
Visualization of GFP immobilized on spacer 1/linker 2 thiol-SAMs. (A) Immobilization of 5 μM GFP-CVIApf:
(a) PBS; (b) with 1 mM CuSO4, 1 mM TCEP, 100 μM TBTA;
(c) with 1 mM CuSO4; (d) with 1 mM CuSO4 and
1 mM TCEP. (B) Immobilization of various concentrations of GFP-CVIApf:
(a) PBS without protein; (b) with protein, 0.5 mM CuSO4, 0.5 mM TCEP; (c) and (d) with protein, 0.5 mM CuSO4,
0.5 mM TCEP, 50 μM TBTA. First slide in each set was coated
with a 9:1 molar ratio of spacer 1 and linker 2; second slide was coated with spacer 1. Fluorescence
intensity was measured at λEx = 532/λEm = 526 nm for the detection of GFP and at λEx = 633/λEm = 670 nm for antiGFP680.

Part B of Figure  shows fluorescence intensities
for pairs of slides with SAMs consisting of 9:1/spacer 1:linker 2 (left) or only spacer (right). Individual
wells contained 1–10 μM GFP-CVIApf and CuSO4/TCEP/TBTA in PBS buffer. The slides coated with spacer 1:linker 2 (9:1) showed a concentration-dependent increase
in fluorescence intensity for GFP. Detection of GFP fluorescence established
that the native protein remained folded after immobilization. As expected,
no fluorescence was observed in control wells without protein. Very
weak spots of fluorescence for GFP-CVIApf detected on the spacer-only
slides indicated that a small amount of the protein remained on the
SAM after washing. Similar patterns were observed after an additional
16 h wash when the slides were imaged at higher sensitivity with fluorescent
antiGPF680. Significant levels of fluorescence were observed in those
wells treated with 4–10 μM of GFP-CVIApf, indicating
that a ∼5 μM concentration of the alkyne-modified protein
was sufficient for detection.

In a second set of experiments
(Figure ), fluorescence intensity was measured
in wells of slides coated
with spacer 1:linker 2 (9:1) containing
varying concentrations of GFP-CVIApf or GFP-CVIAf. Lane A contained
50 μM CuSO4, 50 μM TCEP, and 50 μM TBTA,
while lane B contained 500 μM CuSO4, 500 μM
TCEP, and 50 μM TBTA. The wells in lane A for GFP-CVIApf did
not fluoresce, while those in lane B gave a concentration-dependent
pattern with strong fluorescent intensities at the higher concentrations,
as expected for attachment of the protein to linker 2 (). The difference between lanes
A and B indicated that 50 μM concentrations of CuSO4 and TCEP in the copper catalyst mixture were not sufficient to efficiently
couple the protein with the SAM linker. For GFP-CVIAf, which is not
a substrate for the Huisgen [3 + 2] cycloaddition, no signals were
observed in lane A and a weak signal was detected in lane B for the
well containing 80 μM protein. The fluorescence observed in
lane B for 80 μM GFP-CVIAf suggests a low level of copper-catalyzed
attachment of the protein to the SAM. The intensity of the signals
increased substantially when the slides were incubated with strongly
fluorescent antiGFP680.

Visualization of GFP-CVIApf and GFP-CVIAf on
1:9 spacer 1:linker 2 thiol-SAMs. Lane A:
50 μM CuSO4, 50 μM TCEP, 50 μM TBTA.
Lane B: 0.5 mM CuSO4, 0.5 mM TCEP, 50 μM TBTA. Fluorescence
intensity was measured
at λEx = 532/λEm = 526 nm for the
detection of GFP and at λEx = 633/λEm = 670 nm for antiGFP680.

Protein Immobilization on DTC-SAMs
The most commonly
used procedure for preparing SAMs on gold surfaces is by chemisorption
of thiols. However, surface-bound thiols chemisorped by a single sulfur–gold
bond can leach from the gold surfaces, and care must be taken during
synthesis and storage of thiols to prevent oxidation. Recently, Zhao
and co-workers reported formation of SAMs with dithiocarbamate (DTC)
linkages to gold surfaces by treatment with a mixture of an amine
and carbon disulfide (CS2). The enhanced stability of the DTC-SAMs in acidic and basic conditions
was attributed to superior chemisorption properties due to the formation
of two sulfur–gold bonds.,

We prepared
DTC-SAMs by shaking gold-coated slides in an ethanol solution of CS2 and primary amines, spacer 3 and linker 4, which we previously attached to silica surfaces through
urea linkages (Scheme ). Unlike thiol-SAMs,
there was no significant difference in the fluorescence intensities
of GFP-CVIApf on SAMs prepared with different molar ratios of spacer 3 and linker 4 (Figure A) when measured directly or after incubation with fluorescent antiGFP680.
As observed for the thiol SAMs, wells without Cu(I) did not fluoresce
(lane a, Figure A); those containing CuSO4 were weakly fluorescent, while those containing CuSO4 and a mixture of TCEP and TBTA or TCEP alone gave strong
signals. These trends were observed for direct visualization of GFP
or indirect detection with fluorescent antiGFP680.

Preparation of DTC-SAMs
on Gold Surfaces and Immobilization of GST-CVIApf
by a Huisgen Cycloaddition
Visualization of GFP-CVIApf immobilized on different molar ratios
of spacer 3/linker 4 DTC-SAMs. (A) 5 μM
GFP-CVIApf: (a) PBS; (b) 1 mM CuSO4, 1 mM TCEP, 100 μM
TBTA in PBS; (c) 1 mM CuSO4 in PBS; (d) 1 mM CuSO4 and 1 mM TCEP in PBS. (B) Varied concentrations of GFP-CVIApf; 0.5
mM CuSO4 (+) and without CuSO4 (−), 0.5
mM TCEP and 50 μM TBTA in PBS; slide was coated with a 9:1 molar
ratio of spacer 3 and linker 4. Fluorescence
intensity was measured at λEx = 532/λEm = 526 nm for the detection of GFP and at λEx = 633/λEm = 670 nm for antiGFP680.

GFP-CVIApf (1 to 81 μM)
was immobilized using 0.5 mM CuSO4, 0.5 mM, and 50 μM
TBTA. A concentration-dependent
pattern of emission at 526 nm for the GFP fluorophore was observed
in the wells treated with 1–9 μM GFP-CVIApf (left slide,
Figure B). The slide was then washed PBST
buffer containing 1% BSA for 16 h. Visualization of GFP fluorescence,
monitored at 526 nm following excitation at 532 nm, gave a similar
pattern, while visualization of the antiGFP680 fluorophore at 670
nm (excitation at 633 nm) gave intense spots at all concentrations
of immobilized GFP-CVIApf.

The experiments described in Figure  were
repeated for gold slides coated with DTC-SAMs formed from spacer 3 and linker 4 (9:1) with similar results (Figure ). GFP fluorescence was observed in wells treated
with 500 μM CuSO4, 500 μM TCEP, 50 μM
TBTA, and 20–80 μM GFP-CVIApf; and very weak signals
were detected in wells treated with 500 μM CuSO4,
500 μM TCEP, 50 μM TBTA, or those treated with 500 μM
CuSO4, 500 μM TCEP, 50 μM TBTA, and 80 μM
GFP-CVIAf. The intensity of the spots increased when visualized with
antiGFP680.

Visualization of GFP-CVIApf and GFP-CVIAf on 1:9 spacer 3:linker 4 DTC-SAMs. (A) 50 μM CuSO4, 50 μM TCEP, 50 μM TBTA. (B) 0.5 mM CuSO4, 0.5 mM TCEP, 50 μM TBTA. The slide was incubated with AntiGFP680
(2 μg/mL). Fluorescence intensity was measured at λEx = 532/λEm = 526 nm for the detection of
GFP and at λEx = 633/λEm = 670 nm
for antiGFP680.

The selectivity for detection
of immobilized proteins by fluorescent
antibodies was determined with a gold slide coated with DTC SAMs.
GST-CVIApf and GFP-CVIApf were immobilized in wells on the top and
bottom halves of the slide, respectively, washed and imaged. Fluorescence
was observed for the GFP fluorophore (Figure ). The slide was washed again and incubated with a mixture of antiGST488
and antiGFP680. When the slide was imaged, fluorescence was detected
at 526 nm (excitation 532) nm for wells containing GST-CVIApf and
at 670 nm (excitation at 633 nm) for wells containing GFP-CVIApf.
When the slide was imaged at 532/526 nm, fluorescence was detected
in wells immobilized with GFP-CVIApf along with wells containing antiGST488.
However, fluorescence intensity of GFP-CVIApf at 532/526 nm is weak
compared to that of antiGST488, and only antiGST488 was visualized
when their fluorescence intensities were measured together.

Selective detection
of GST and GFP with fluorescent antibodies.
GST-CVIApf and GFP-CVIApf (80 μM) were immobilized on the same
slide (1:9 spacer 3:linker 4 DTC-SAMs),
and then incubated with a mixture of antiGST488 (2 μg/mL) and
antiGFP680 (2 μg/mL). Well treated with (+) and without (−)
Cu+. Fluorescence intensity was measured at λEx = 532/λEm = 526 nm for detection of antiGST
and at λEx = 633/λEm = 670 nm for
antiGFP.

Quantitation of Immobilized
proG-CVIApf on Thiol and DTC-SAM
Coated Slides
Different concentrations of proG-CVIApf were
spotted into wells of a matted slide coated with thiol- and DTC-SAMs.
The mat was removed before the slide was washed and incubated with
Alexa680 goat anti-rabbit IgG. Plots of fluorescence intensity as
a function of proG-CVIApf concentration showed that the increase in
fluorescence reached a plateau when 10 μL of a ∼1.6 μM
solution of proG-CVIApf (5.1 pmol/mm2) was used for immobilization
to the thiol SAM (Figures  and ). For the DTC-SAM surface, the plateau was
reached when 10 μL of a ∼16 μM proG-CVIApf solution
(51 pmol/mm2) was applied.

A surface coated DTC-proG-CVIApf
slide was prepared by treatment with 30 μL of a solution containing
100 μM proG-CVIApf (2.3 pmol/mm2) and 30 μL
of Cu(I) buffer. A silicon mat was attached and 10 μL samples
of a series of concentrations of Alexa488 anti-GST rabbit IgG (MW
∼150K) were spotted into the wells. A plot of fluorescence
intensity versus concentration indicates that 10 μL of a 20
μg/μL solution (0.42 pmol/mm2) of the antibody
saturates the binding sites of immobilized proG-CVIApf (Figures  and ).

Plots of fluorescence
intensities vs varied concentrations of protein
G. ProG-CVIApf was immobilized on 9:1 molar ratio of spacer/linker
(A) thiol-SAMs or (B) DTC-SAMs by Cu(I) catalyzed cycloaddtion (0.5
mM CuSO4, 0.5 mM TCEP, 0.05 mM TBTA). The slides were incubated
with Alexa 680 labeled goat anti-rabbit IgG (1 μg/mL). Well
treated with (+) and without (−) Cu+. Fluorescence
intensity was measured at λEx = 633/λEm = 670 nm for the detection.

Plot of fluorescence intensity vs varied concentration of anti-GST
rabbit IgG. ProG-CVIApf (50 μM) was immobilized on a slide with
9:1 molar ratio of spacer/linker DTC-SAM by Cu(I) catalyzed cycloaddition
(0.5 mM CuSO4, 0.5 mM TCEP, 0.05 mM TBTA). A series of
10 μL samples of different concentrations of anti-GST rabbit
IgG (Alexa Fluor 488 conjugate) were spotted in the wells. Fluorescence
intensity was measured at λEx = 532/λEm = 526 nm.

Displacement of Immobilized
Proteins in Thiol- and DTC-SAMs
by β-Mercaptoethanol
The relative ease of displacing
immobilized proteins from thiol and DTC SAMs on gold slides was examined
with a solution of β-mecaptoethanol (BME) in ethanol. Slides
with GFP-CVIApf immobilized on thiol and DTC-SAMs were incubated in
a solution of BME in ethanol and imaged with antiGFP680. The intensity
of the fluorescent signals of wells on thiol-SAMs decreased by approximately
94% when incubated in 50 mM BME for 24 h (Figure A). A slightly less intense signal was observed after incubation
for an additional 24 h in 100 mM BME. After 46 h, the signal had decreased
by 99% from its original intensity. In contrast, displacement was
much slower for GFP-CVIApf immobilized on DTC SAMs. Under similar
conditions, the signal intensity decreased by only 13% after 48 h
and 27% after 72 h (Figure B). It is evident
that the sulfur–gold linkages in DTC-SAMs are substantially
more robust than those in thiol SAMs.

Displacement of SAMs by β-mercaptoethanol:
(A) thiol-SAMs;
the slide was treated with β-mercaptoethanol after immobilization
of GFP (green); (B) DTC-SAMs; the slide was treated with β-mercaptoethanol
after incubation with antiGFP680 (red). GFP-CVIApf was immobilized
on 9:1 molar ratio of spacer/linker thiol-SAMs or DTC-SAMs by Cu(I)
catalyzed cycloaddtion (0.5 mM CuSO4, 0.5 mM TCEP, 0.05
mM TBTA). Fluorescence intensity was measured at λEx = 532/λEm = 526 nm for the detection of GFP and
at λEx = 633/λEm = 670 nm for antiGFP680.

Conclusion
There
are many different approaches for immobilizing proteins to
create biochips. The technique described here involving SAM-coated
gold surfaces provides a relatively simple general procedure to covalently
immobilize proteins regio- and chemoselectively using a bioorthogonal
Huisgen [3 + 2] cycloaddition. The immobilized proteins, in this work,
GFP, GST, and proG, were immobilized directly from cell-free homogenates
chemoselectively and visualized with fluorescent antibodies. While
the proteins can be immobilized on either thiol- or DTC-coated gold
surfaces, DTC SAMs are more stable and amine-terminated linkers used
to construct the SAMs are easier to handle and store than their thiol-terminated
linkers. When used to immobilize antibody-binding proteins, this technique
can be extended to detect a wide variety of molecules.

Supporting Information Available
NMR and MS related to the synthesis
are available. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc400413d_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
Seoung-ryoung
Choi and Jin-soo Seo contributed equally.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This
work was supported by NIH grant GM 21328.

