Introduction
Antibody–drug
conjugates (ADCs) enable the delivery of cytotoxic
payloads to tumors.− A significant advantage of ADCs over traditional
chemotherapeutic agents is that ADCs impart specificity for drug delivery
by selectively recognizing cancer cell antigens while avoiding normal
tissues. For instance, ADCs bearing anti-mitotic drugs have demonstrated
increased therapeutic efficacy. Nonetheless,
developing successful ADCs requires many considerations including
antigen target, antibody, linker design, and payload.− Additionally, conjugation strategies, which dictate factors such
as drug loading and stability, can greatly influence therapeutic outcomes.
In particular, ADCs synthesized by conjugation to reduced interchain
cysteine (Cys) sulfhydryl groups or lysine side-chain amines yield
heterogeneous conjugates that have been associated with aggregation,
inconsistent pharmacokinetic profiles, and toxicity.− One approach that can potentially overcome many of these limitations
is the site-specific conjugation of antibodies that have been engineered
to contain Cys residues within the heavy or light chains (THIOMABs). These THIOMABs can be labeled to homogeneity
without disruption of the immunoglobulin architecture.,−

Antibody engineering methods have been required to identify
suitable
maleimide–thiol linkage sites because local structural and
chemical environments dictate reactivity and conjugate stability.,, Further, maleimide–thiol
linkages are susceptible to hydrolysis and the retro-Michael reaction
which can lead to thioether exchange with free Cys, glutathione, and
the serum protein albumin.,,− For example, conjugation of monomethyl auristatin E (MMAE) to anti-HER2
(trastuzumab) THIOMABs has illustrated the importance of the relationship
between conjugation site and therapeutic efficacy (Figure A). These studies showed
that THIOMAB conjugate stability was inversely correlated with predicted
fractional solvent accessibility, as THIOMABs labeled in regions with
high-predicted fractional solvent accessibility (Fc-S396C) demonstrated
poor pharmacokinetics, with most MMAE conjugates being removed within
24 h. In contrast, residues with low-predicated fractional solvent
accessibility (LC-V205C and HC-A114C) were stable for several weeks
and exhibited improved in vivo efficacies.

(A) Single
Cys substitutions were introduced into the trastuzumab
light or heavy chains providing THIOMABs LC-V205C, Fc-S396C, and HC-A114C.
(B–C) Structures of the maleimide and phenyloxadiazole sulfone
fluorescein compounds.

We recently synthesized a panel of heteroaryl methylsulfone
derivatives
to compare their thiol reactivity and conjugate stability with standard
maleimide conjugation. Methylsulfonyl
phenyloxadiazole compounds proved to be highly reactive with Cys residues
under a variety of conditions allowing for conjugation with proteins.
Sulfone modification of the maltose-binding protein containing a C-terminal
Cys residue (MBP-Cys) was shown to be resistant to thioether exchange
with albumin in human plasma, whereas MBP-Cys labeled with a maleimide
compound readily underwent thioether exchange. Moreover, the half-life
of the phenyloxadiazole sulfone conjugate was doubled relative to
the maleimide conjugate in human plasma. The application of our sulfone
labeling chemistry for synthesizing ADCs thus seemed a viable route
for making conjugates with improved serum stability. Here, we report
the use of a phenyloxadiazole sulfone linker for preparing trastuzumab
conjugates at engineered Cys residues as well as a ROR1-specific scFv-Fc
conjugate at an engineered selenocysteine (Sec) residue. We show that
this sulfone linker site-specifically labels engineered Cys and Sec
residues and improves antibody conjugate stability in human plasma
at sites known to be labile for maleimide conjugates.

Results and Discussion
We began by synthesizing fluorescein derivatives with maleimide
(Figure B) or phenyloxadiazole (ODA) sulfone
(Figure C) linker functionalities for THIOMAB
labeling, as benzothiazole (BTZ) and phenyltetrazole (PTZ) sulfone
compounds were determined to have poor reactivity with THIOMABs (). To assess optimal reaction conditions and confirm
antibody labeling, we performed a time course study. Neither the maleimide
nor sulfone linkers conjugated to trastuzumab during the 8 h incubation
period (Figure A). Hence, the sulfone linker
maintains chemoselectivity, unlike vinyl sulfone compounds that have
been reported to conjugate with lysine, histidine, and cysteine in
proteins. Rapid conjugation was observed
between the maleimide compound and the light chain of LC-V205C, whereas
the sulfone conjugate was not extensively formed until 4 or 8 h (Figure B). However, we observed that increasing the reaction
temperature from room temperature to 37 °C for 1 to 2 h increased
labeling with the sulfone compound (data not shown). Both the maleimide
and sulfone compounds labeled Fc-S396C within 1 h (Figure C). The sulfone linker was thus determined to be
capable of producing site-specifically conjugated THIOMABs ().

Site-specific conjugation of THIOMABs
using maleimide or phenyloxadiazole
sulfone fluorescent compounds. (A–C) SDS-PAGE analysis of labeled
conjugates. Reactions progressed for 1, 2, 4, and 8 h at room temperature.
Fluorescent (top) and Coomassie stained (bottom) gels are shown. Heavy
chains (HC) and light chains (LC) are indicated. (D–E) Trastuzumab
and THIOMAB conjugate binding to HER2 on BT-474 cells by flow cytometry.

HER2 antigen recognition on BT-474
cells was examined by flow cytometry
to ensure high-affinity binding by the THIOMAB sulfone conjugates.
Subsaturating (50 ng/mL) and saturating (1 μg/mL) concentrations
of antibody were used for this analysis (). Each conjugate bound HER2 with affinity similar to that
of trastuzumab (Figure D,E), and comparable
binding was also seen by ELISA (). Hence, no impairment in HER2 binding was observed due to conjugation
site (LC-V205C and Fc-S396C) or linker chemistry (maleimide and sulfone).
These data are consistent with previous results that showed trastuzumab
and trastuzumab THIOMABs bound MCF-7 cells and inhibited SK-BR-3 cell
proliferation with similar affinities and potencies, respectively. In addition, THIOMABs were shown to retain internalization
properties, suggesting that antibody–sulfone
conjugates should also be suitable for ADC applications.

We
next evaluated THIOMAB conjugate stability in human plasma.
Maleimide labeling of LC-V205C led to improved conjugate stability
in comparison to Fc-S396C (Figure ). In particular, the LC-V205C maleimide conjugate
maintained ∼80% of fluorescent label after incubation at 37
°C for 72 h (Figure A). In contrast,
∼20% of the Fc-S396C conjugate remained intact after incubation
for 72 h (Figure B). Notably, thioether exchange
with albumin was evident at least 24 h after conjugation. Sulfone
conjugate stability was less dependent on the conjugation site. While
similar plasma stability was observed between LC-V205C (Figure A) and Fc-S396C (Figure B) after 24 h with the phenyloxadiazole sulfone fluorescein compound,
we found that approximately two-thirds of the Fc-S396C sulfone conjugate
was intact compared to the LC-V205C sulfone conjugate by 72 h. Additionally,
thioether exchange with albumin was not observed. It is likely that
the heteroaromatic structure of the sulfone linker as well as the
methyl sulfone acting as leaving group contributes to this enhanced
stability, especially considering that deprotonation at the α
carbon in the succinimide ring of the maleimide conjugate greatly
increases instability of the thioether bond.

Antibody conjugate stability
in human plasma at 0, 24, 48, and
72 h for maleimide and phenyloxadiazole sulfone conjugates. (A–B)
Fluorescent (top) and Coomassie stained (bottom) SDS-PAGE gels are
shown for LC-V205C and Fc-S396C conjugates. Albumin and the respective
fluorescently labeled antibody chains are denoted. (C) Conjugate stability
in human plasma.

Incorporation of the
highly nucleophilic Sec residue through genetic
engineering also allows site-specific conjugation of antibodies (SELENOMABs),
further providing alternative strategies for producing ADCs.− Co-translational Sec insertion at the C-terminus of anti-ROR1 R11-scFv-Fc
enabled conjugation at pH 5.2 with either maleimide or sulfone compounds
without conjugation to hinge Cys residues (Figure A). Interestingly, the increased
reactivity of Sec compared to Cys greatly enhanced labeling with the
fluorescent benzothiazole and phenyltetrazole sulfone compounds to
similar levels as maleimide and phenyloxadiazole sulfone (Figure A and ).
R11-scFv-Fc-Sec conjugation was well tolerated as conjugates maintained
binding to ROR1 expressed on HBL-2 cells (Figure B). SELENOMAB conjugate stability was evaluated over 72 h
in human plasma revealing the strong propensity of maleimide conjugates
to rapidly undergo exchange with albumin, with the majority of maleimide
conjugate being transferred within 4 h (). However, exchange between the sulfone conjugate and albumin
was not evident, and sulfone conjugate stability extended out to 24
h.

Site-specific conjugation of antibody via Sec using maleimide or
sulfone fluorescein compounds. (A) SDS-PAGE analysis of labeled conjugates.
Fluorescent (top) and Coomassie stained (bottom) gels are shown. Antibody
R11-scFv-Fc-stop (Stop) and R11-scFv-Fc-Sec (Sec) are indicated. (B)
Binding of fluorescent R11-scFv-Fc-Sec conjugates to ROR1-positive
cell line HBL-2 but not ROR1-negative cell line MEC-1 by flow cytometry.

The enhanced stability of the
sulfone conjugates at Fc-S396C and
R11-scFv-Fc-Sec encouraged us to explore HC-A114C, which was reported
to have intermediate maleimide conjugate stability. HC-A114C, much like LC-V205C, resides within a partially
buried cleft. However, unlike LC-V205C, HC-A114C does not feature
a local basic environment that promotes succinimide ring hydrolysis
to prevent retro-Michael elimination of conjugate. Conjugation of
HC-A114C with both maleimide and sulfone linkers went to completion
within 1 h (),
with HER2 antigen recognition being maintained (). Conjugate stability was then assessed over
a 1 month period in human plasma at 37 °C. The HC-A114C maleimide
conjugate retained slightly greater than half its label (Figure ). However, sulfone conjugation led to a substantial
improvement in HC-A114C stability, as conjugate was retained for 1
month with ∼90% remaining (Figure ).
These results indicate that the phenyloxadiazole sulfone linker enables
conjugation at THIOMAB sites with intermediate maleimide stability.
Furthermore, such sites can be used for engineering bispecific antibody
constructs to optimize binding for multiple targets simultaneously.−

HC-A114C
maleimide and phenyloxadiazole sulfone conjugate stability
in human plasma. (A) SDS-PAGE of labeled conjugates at 0, 7, 14, and
28 d. Fluorescent (top) and Coomassie stained (bottom) gels are shown
with albumin and the heavy chain indicated. (B) Stability of HC-A114C
conjugates in human plasma.

Finally, the ability to increase antibody valency enables
expanded
recognition of tumor antigens. We previously accomplished this task
by chemically programming the monoclonal antibody 38C2 with a bifunctional
linker that combined targeting of the ανβ3/ανβ5
integrins with the luteinizing hormone releasing hormone receptor
as well as by trastuzumab conjugation through tyrosine-selective modification.− Given the observation that the sulfone linker labeled LC-V205C and
Fc-S396C at different rates, we speculated that kinetically controlled
dual labeling of a LC-V205C/Fc-S396C THIOMAB could be performed. To
test this hypothesis, LC-V205C/Fc-S396C THIOMAB was labeled in two
steps. First, the Fc-S396C site was conjugated with the sulfone linker
for 1 h, and second, the LC-V205C site was labeled with either the
maleimide or sulfone linkers for 1 or 8 h, respectively (). Treatment of LC-V205C/Fc-S396C
with the maleimide compound led to labeling at both sites, indicating
heterogeneous conjugation. Conjugation with sulfone compound first,
however, induced biased labeling for Fc-S396C and enabled subsequent
labeling of LC-V205C with either maleimide or sulfone compounds, without
impairing HER2 binding ().
Such kinetically controlled dual labeling should allow conjugation
of additional targeting moieties or cytotoxic payloads.

Conclusions
We have improved antibody conjugate stability by employing a sulfone
linker for site-specific modification rather than conventional maleimide
chemistry. Labeling of engineered Cys and Sec residues in anti-HER2
THIOMABs and an anti-ROR1 SELENOMAB, respectively, was achieved using
a phenyloxadiazole sulfone fluorescein compound. Neither chemoselective conjugation nor antigen binding
was impaired with the sulfone linker. Studies utilizing cytotoxic
payloads will be essential for validating the use of sulfone linkers
in preparing ADCs. Conjugation of cytotoxic agents increases the local
hydrophobic character at the site(s) of labeling which can lead to aggregation, particularly for ADCs
with high drug-to-antibody ratios., However, ADCs
site-specifically labeled at engineered cysteine residues have shown
much improved physical stability.

The stability of antibody conjugates was also evaluated in human
plasma. In general, LC-V205C conjugates were more stable compared
to Fc-S396C conjugates. However, the Fc-S396C sulfone conjugate was
much more stable than the corresponding maleimide conjugate. We suspect
that further enhancements in stability are possible via conjugation
at sites with intermediate conjugate stability, such as HC-A114C.
Moreover, the kinetics of sulfone labeling can be exploited to generate
conjugates with expanded valency, which may prove to be valuable in
gaining selective tumor targeting, increased internalization, or more
potent cytotoxicity. These results indicate that sulfone linker chemistry
provides a new synthetic route for developing antibody conjugates
with improved serum stability.

Supporting Information Available
Experimental procedures; comparison
of THIOMAB labeling using phenyloxadiazole, benzothiazole, and phenyltetrazole
fluorescein-linked compounds; flow cytometry histogram of the dose-dependence
for HER2 antigen binding by trastuzumab on BT-474 cells; trastuzumab
and THIOMAB conjugate binding to HER2-Fc by ELISA; R11-scFv-Fc-Sec
conjugate stability in human plasma; time course for HC-A114C labeling
with maleimide or sulfone fluorescent compound; kinetically controlled
dual labeling of LC-V205C/Fc-S396C THIOMAB; dye-to-antibody ratios.
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc500276m_si_001.pdf

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work
was supported by the National Institutes of Health
(DP1CA174426). C.R. acknowledges support by the Lymphoma Research
Foundation and the Klorfine Foundation. We thank Yoshihiro Ishihara
and Thomas Gaj for comments on the manuscript. Narihiro Toda and Lee
Pedzisa provided insightful discussion on sulfone conjugate stability.
Shannon Sirk kindly cloned the LC-V205C expression vector.

