Introduction
The avidin–biotin
system is one of the strongest noncovalent
interactions known in nature. Each 66
kDa avidin protein can bind up to four biotin molecules with a Kd of ∼10–15 M, an interaction
that is 1,000–1,000,000 times stronger than the association
of an antibody with its specific ligand. The near irreversible maintenance
of biotin’s association with avidin under a range of physiological
temperatures and pH makes this system a particularly attractive candidate
for noncovalent labeling where stability is desired. Not surprisingly,
the avidin–biotin interaction remains a powerful tool in biological
research applications that include protein detection (Western blot,
enzyme linked immune sorbent assay), protein enrichment (immunoprecipitation,
coimmunoprecipitation), and tissue staining (immunofluorescence).

The avidin–biotin interaction has been used previously for
surface modification of polymer nanoparticles for drug delivery.− In one strategy, avidin is covalently linked to a lipid moiety such
as palmitic acid, which is then incorporated into the oil phase of
an emulsion to form solid polymer nanoparticles. This approach has been employed for the surface modification
of nanoparticles with biotinylated polymers or ligands to mediate
nanoparticle distribution in the body. For example, nanoparticles
composed of poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA)
and avidin–lipid conjugates have been surface modified with
poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) to improve tissue penetration, or with
peptide and antibody ligands to enhance uptake and intracellular release
of drug payload.,, A
range of therapeutic agents can be encapsulated within PLGA nanoparticles,
including small molecules, proteins, and oligonucleotides. Encapsulated
agents are protected from clearance and degradation in biological
environments, allowing agents to be released slowly by diffusion and
as the polymer degrades by hydrolysis. Thus, when delivered directly
to a tissue site, nanoparticles are capable of improving drug potency
while reducing systemic exposure.

Drug-releasing nanoparticles
have the potential to improve the
treatment of diseases where prolonged drug action is required. For
example, in prior work, we engineered PLGA nanoparticles to improve
their penetration through brain extracellular matrix and delivered
them directly to the brain via convection enhanced delivery (CED). Nanoparticles that traveled farther were better
able to improve the action of a novel chemotherapeutic agent, presumably
because brain-penetrating nanoparticles enable the drug to reach a
greater fraction of tumor cells. Direct injection methods such as
CED are highly relevant to the development of new nanoparticle-based
therapies to treat disease in the CNS, and PLGA is a particularly interesting material candidate for the
development of clinically relevant drug delivery systems, due to its
long track record of safety in humans. To this end, PLGA microparticle
formulations are clinically approved for use in humans for direct
injection (e.g., Lupron Depot). Nanoparticles composed of PLGA have
also been the focus of phase II clinical trials for targeted delivery
of docetaxel in metastatic prostate cancer and nonsmall cell lung
carcinoma (NCT01812746 and NCT01792479).,

The goal of this work was to develop a biotinylated radioligand
to facilitate detection of avidin-modified polymer nanoparticles in
tissue. Biotin has been labeled previously with radioactive isotopes
such as Y-90, Ga-68, In-111, and Tc-99m.− Long-lived isotopes may be useful
for measurements of nanoparticles with long bioavailability. However,
since the kinetics of nanoparticle distribution in tissue is often
rapid, on the order of minutes to hours, shorter-lived isotopes pose
the advantage of lower total exposure to radiation. F-18 is likely
to be a highly useful isotope for labeling agents intended for use
in humans: its half-life of 110 min and decay by positron emission
allow detection by positron emission tomography (PET), an imaging
modality that possesses higher sensitivity and resolution than single
photon emission computed tomography (SPECT).

Here, we describe
a facile synthesis method for radiolabeling biotin
derivatives to enable detection of polymer nanoparticles in intact
tissue with PET. Using a well-developed F-18 labeled prosthetic group,
[18F]4-fluorobenzylamine, and commercially available biotin
derivatives, NHS-PEGn-Biotin (n = 4, 12, etc.), radiolabeled
PEGylated biotin, [18F]-fluorobenzylamide-poly(ethylene
glycol)4-biotin ([18F]NPB4) was prepared with
high purity and specific activity. These labeling methods are modular
and could be used to modify PEG derivatives of varying length or with
different end groups. [18F]NPB4 was linked to avidin-modified
PLGA nanoparticles to measure nanoparticle delivery in the intact
brain of rats with PET.

Results
Synthesis of [18F]NPB4 and Its Conjugation with Avidin
We used a well-developed
prosthetic group, [18F]4-fluorobenzylamine
([18F]1),− and a commercially available biotin derivate, NHS-PEG4-Biotin, to prepare F-18 labeled PEGylated biotin ([18F]3, i.e., [18F]NPB4). The synthesis of NPB4
(3) and [18F]NPB4 ([18F]3) is shown in Figure . Total synthesis time
for [18F]NPB4 was 90 min, with a decay uncorrected overall
radiochemical yield of 10 ± 8% (based on trapped [18F]fluoride). The radiochemical purity of [18F]NPB4 was
98.5 ± 1.2%, with specific activity of 3.5 ± 1.2 mCi/nmol
(n = 10 batches, Figure A).
To confirm the identity of the labeled compound, [18F]NPB4
was coinjected with the nonradioactive reference compound NPB4 on
an analytical HPLC system (Figure B). To confirm the integrity and the binding ability to avidin of the
radiolabeled product, avidin was added to [18F]NPB4 in
an equimolar ratio of biotin in PBS solution and incubated for 5 min
at room temperature. This solution was injected into a size-exclusion
column; UV and radio-HPLC chromatography demonstrated a shift in peak
retention time from 37 to 22 min, which matched the retention time
of the unlabeled NPB4-avidin standard (Figure ). The recovery of radioactivity from the HPLC was 98%. The shoulder
peak observed in the analytical HPLC profile is most likely due to
dimer formation, as reported by others.

Synthesis
of NPB4 (A) and [18F]NPB4 (B).

Analytical HPLC profile for [18F]NPB4 solution. In (A),
radiochemical purity of [18F]NPB4 was 98.5 ± 1.2%
(n = 10). In (B), the identity of [18F]NPB4
was confirmed by its coelution with NPB4. Conditions: Phenomenex Luna
C18 column (5 μm, 4.6 × 250 mm) eluted with 25:75 (v/v)
acetonitrile/0.1 M ammonium formate with 0.5% acetic acid at a flow
rate of 2 mL/min, wavelength set at 264 nm. Gamma (red) and UV (black)
traces are shown. X-axis is time (min).

Analytical HPLC profile for the [18F]NPB4-avidin complex.
Near complete conjugation of [18F]NPB4 to avidin was observed.
Conditions: Superose 12, 10/300 GL column (10 ± 2 μm) eluted
with 10% MeCN and 90% 0.1 M tris-HCl with 1 M NaCl at a flow rate
of 0.8 mL/min, wavelength set at 254 nm. Gamma (red) and UV (black)
traces are shown.

Avidin-modified PLGA
nanoparticles were prepared by single emulsion
and size-fractionated via sequential centrifugation. The “large”
fraction had an average diameter of 147 nm (±27 nm), whereas
the “small” fraction had an average diameter of 71 nm
(±13 nm) (Figure A, B), as measured by
scanning electron microscopy. To confirm stable attachment of the
radiolabeled biotin to avidinated nanoparticles, 5 mCi of [18F]NPB4 was added to 20 mg/mL of large nanoparticles, sonicated for
30 min, and subjected to centrifugation (10,000 g for 10 min). No
detectable amount of radioactivity remained in the supernatant, indicating
complete attachment of [18F]NPB4 to the nanoparticles.

PLGA nanoparticles
were prepared for delivery to the rat striatum.
SEM images of small and large nanoparticle fractions are shown in
(A) and (B), respectively. (C) A guide cannula was implanted to enable
insertion of an internal injector for imaging while the infusion was
ongoing. The injection location for each rat was verified by comparing
the location of the surface of the skull (identified in the transmission
image) with the center of the infusion (identified in the first several
frames of the emission image). Scale bars: 500 nm (A,B), 5 mm (C).

We previously reported methods
for using positron emission tomography
(PET) to measure the distribution of radiotracers that were directly
delivered to the rat brain or brain phantom. Here, similar methods were applied to monitor the delivery and elimination
of radiolabeled nanoparticles in the rat brain. Rats received a guide
cannula, within which an internal injector was threaded to target
infusions to the striatum. This enabled continuous imaging while nanoparticle
infusions were ongoing. The infusion location was confirmed for each
rat by identifying the surface of the skull in the PET transmission
image and comparing to the location of the center of the nanoparticle
infusion in the first or second frame (Figure C).

Nanoparticles were delivered to the striatum via convection
enhanced
delivery (CED), a method that generates a positive pressure gradient
to infuse fluid directly into the brain. The goal of CED is to generate
convective forces to facilitate flow of drugs, drug carriers, or tracers
(in this case, radiolabeled nanoparticles) through the relatively
tight extracellular space of the brain. Nanoparticle distributions
measured by PET were generally spherical (Figure A), with a spatial volume of distribution that increased throughout
the infusion period (Figure B). As previously
reported, small nanoparticles achieved
a greater Vd/Vi than large nanoparticles (5.50 ± 0.403, n =
3, and 2.83 ± 1.57, n = 2, for small and large
nanoparticles, respectively; p = 0.0284, Student’s
one tailed t test). The spatial volume of distribution
increased evenly with time for 2 of the 3 small nanoparticle infusions.
In the third infusion, nanoparticles were not observed to distribute
in the brain until 8 min after the infusion was initiated, after which
the spatial volume of distribution increased evenly. The resultant
profile was still spherical (data not shown). The final volume of
distribution was similar for each of the 3 small nanoparticle infusions,
whereas the spatial volume of distribution for large nanoparticles
increased unevenly for both subjects, with large variability observed
in the final volume of distribution (Figure B).

Spatial distribution of nanoparticles delivered to the brain via
CED was measured with PET. An infusion volume of 20 μL was delivered
over 30 min to the striatum. In (A), the spatial volume of distribution
(Vd) of labeled nanoparticles is shown
for a single subject that received small nanoparticles. Coronal images
are shown in the direction parallel to the infusion track, and the
scale bar is 5 mm. In (B), the ratio of Vd to the infusion volume (Vi) is plotted
for 5 representative infusions.

We quantified delivery kinetics by tracking the total radioactivity
in the brain. Total signal in the brain increased during the infusion
(Figure A). After the infusion was complete,
total radioactivity decreased with time (Figure B). Elimination rates were estimated by fitting the data for radioactivity
decrease over time to a first-order elimination model, yielding early
tissue half-lives of 102 ± 6 min and 258 ± 66 min for small
(n = 4) and large (n = 2) nanoparticle
fractions, respectively (p = 0.0029 Student’s
one-tailed t test). Fitting the data to a two-phase
model of elimination yields a tissue half-life for each phase (slow
and fast): t1/2,slow = 36 min and t1/2,fast = 22 min. The two-phase model did not
improve the absolute sum of squares compared to the one-phase model
(6.1 × 10–5 versus 3.3 × 10–4, respectively). It is important to note that half-lives calculated
here represent early clearance rates, and there may be a fraction
of nanoparticles bound to or internalized by cells that will be cleared
at different rates over longer time periods.

Kinetics of nanoparticle
delivery and subsequent clearance were
measured by PET. In (A), the total fraction of nanoparticles delivered
to the brain was measured over 30 min. Small nanoparticles were delivered
steadily, with total activity that increased smoothly and reproducibly
over time. However, large nanoparticles were not delivered smoothly.
Noncontinuous jumps in the total delivered fraction were observed
at various points during the infusion. Once the infusion was complete,
total radioactivity decreased. Representative data for a small nanoparticle
infusion are shown in (B). Clearance half-life of the radioactive
signal was calculated by fitting these data to a first order elimination
model (111 min in this example).

Discussion
The goal of this work was to develop methods
for labeling polymeric
nanoparticles with an F-18-biotin derivative to enable imaging of
their delivery to intact tissue with PET. The first F-18 labeled biotin,
reported in 1993, was produced by the reaction of [18F]fluorobenzyl
bromide and biotin-LC-hydrazide, a commercially available biotin derivative. After radiolabeling with F-18, the amide-derivative
of biotin maintained its binding affinity with avidin, highlighting
its potential use for imaging of avidin–biotin linked agents.
No further application of this compound in animal studies was reported,
possibly due to its low labeling yield (5–10%) before HPLC
purification. Shoup et al. modified the carboxylic acid chain on the
biotin with an alkyl group for subsequent labeling with F-18. However, this modification severely reduced
the binding affinity of the modified biotin for avidin. Simplification
of the synthesis route was achieved by Ting’s group, using
aryltrifluoroborate modified biotin derivatives. Radiofluorination was achieved by F-18 for F-19 exchange
in only one step, which is an advantage over the prior multistep approach,
although the specific activity of the final product is expected to
be low. Our synthesis method offers several advantages over prior
approaches. First, the synthesis achieved high purity (98.5 ±
1.2%) and high specific activity (3.5 ± 1.2 mCi/nmol, n = 10 syntheses). Second, by attaching the radiolabel to
a short biotin-PEG linker, additional modification of biotin is avoided,
thus preserving functionality for its attachment to avidin. Third,
the PEG linker facilitates modular chemistry, with varying lengths
of the PEG unit between biotin and the prosthetic group. This scheme
could also be adapted to modify PEG linkers with nonbiotin end groups.

Avidin-modified nanoparticles were labeled with [18F]NPB4
and delivered to the rat brain for imaging with PET. We have explored
the functional ligand-binding efficiency of avidin-modified nanoparticles
in other work. Assuming a PLGA density
of 1.25 mg/cm3 and complete incorporation of avidin, and
calculating across the range of specific activities and delivered
doses presented for these in vivo experiments, we estimate that each
small nanoparticle binds at least 5 and up to 80 [18F]NPB4
molecules. For a typical experiment (e.g., 0.1 mCi delivered with
a specific activity of 5 mCi/nmol), [18F]NPB4 molecules
would occupy 1.3% of biotin-binding sites that are available for each
nanoparticle. Radiolabeled nanoparticles were delivered effectively
to the brain with CED, as evidenced by an increase in the spatial
volume of distribution of the signal over time. Nanoparticles reached
a final Vd/Vi that was a function of nanoparticle size and consistent with prior
measurements made by fluorescence imaging.

CED of nanoparticles
was well-tolerated by all experimental subjects,
and we observed no reactions to the nanoparticles in these or other
studies. However, one concern regarding application of these methods
in human subjects is the potential for avidin to be immunogenic. Although
avidin is capable of generating an immune response in humans, interestingly,
the presence of antiavidin antibodies does not interfere with the
therapeutic use of avidin protein. For
example, Grana et al. observed that although patients developed anti-avidin
antibodies while undergoing radioimmunotherapy, the treatment was
reported to be well-tolerated with no acute or subacute side effects. Similarly, Petronzelli et al. examined the avidin-induced
immunological response of human oncology patients and mice with high
anti-avidin antibody levels and determined that the anti-avidin antibodies
did not affect the safety or efficacy of avidin formulations. Lastly, we note that alternative biotin-binding
proteins with reduced immunogenic potential (e.g., streptavidin) could
also be used to modify the surface of nanoparticles.

The delivery
of nanoparticles was tracked in real time by monitoring
total activity in the brain, which increased during the first 30 min,
as nanoparticles were infused, and decreased thereafter. Small nanoparticles
were infused smoothly once they entered the brain, and the total delivered
fraction increased to achieve a final volume of distribution that
was similar in each of the three subjects tested. However, when large
nanoparticles were delivered by the same protocol, the spatial volume
of distribution and total delivered radioactivity increased unevenly
as a function of time to achieve a variable final volume of distribution.

Noncontinuous jumps in the volume of distribution and total delivered
activity were observed for nanoparticles (Figures  and ); this pattern in the infusion
data was not observed in any of our prior studies involving infusion
of free and bound radiotracer solutions (including free fluoride ion,
[18F]NPB4 and [18F]NPB4-avidin) into the brain
with the same cannulation and CED protocol. There are several possible
explanations for the lack of continuity observed for these nanoparticle
infusions. Nanoparticles could exit the infusion needle unevenly,
tissue could enter the needle during its placement so that nanoparticles
are not able to circumnavigate the plug, or the extracellular space
of the brain could become crowded with nanoparticles in a manner that
halts additional fluid entry into the brain. These observations, which
reflect potential delivery barriers that are apparently unique to
the nanoparticle infusions, could not have been made using conventional
fluorescence-based imaging techniques, and thus highlight the utility
of PET imaging for monitoring drug delivery effectiveness.

The
total decay-corrected activity in the brain increased during
the infusion period and decreased once the infusion was complete.
Early tissue clearance half-life of total radioactivity in the brain
was estimated from the elimination data and found to be a function
of the size of nanoparticles that were infused (102 and 258 min for
small and large nanoparticles, respectively). In prior work, [18F]fluoride ion and [18F]NPB4 were delivered to
the brain by similar methods, yielding tissue clearance half-lives
of 41 and 19 min for free [18F]fluoride ion and [18F]NPB4, respectively. Loss of radiotracer
was therefore a function of both the attachment of the tracer to the
nanoparticle as well as the size of the nanoparticle itself.

Total radioactivity in the brain decreased after the infusion was
halted (30% loss after approximately 1 h for small nanoparticles).
Loss of radioactivity from the brain could represent one of two phenomena:
either radioligand (in the form of free fluoride ion, intact [18F]NPB4, or the [18F]NPB4-avidin complex) is liberated
from the surface of the nanoparticle and this free tracer is subsequently
cleared from the brain, or the intact nanoparticle exits the brain
with the radiolabel attached. In our prior work, [18F]NPB4
and [18F]NPB4-avidin were also infused into agarose gels,
and the diffusion of radiotracers was observed by PET imaging over
several hours. The data were analyzed
by quantitative modeling, and a significant reduction in the diffusion
coefficient was found after conjugation to avidin, from 0.022 ±
0.003 to 0.004 ± 0.002 mm2/min; this reduction in
diffusion coefficient is consistent with an increase in molecular
weight resulting from attachment of the [18F]NPB4 (0.5
kDa) radiolabel on avidin (66 kDa). Given these prior data, as well
as the extremely high affinity of avidin for biotin (10–15 M), we expect that biotinylated tracer will not be released from
avidin, even in vivo. Such an expectation is supported by experimental
data from the literature. For example, it was reported that replacement
of fluorescently labeled biotin from avidin by unlabeled biotin was
extremely slow, occurring over a time scale of days. In other studies, incubation of streptavidin attached to
a biotinylated peptide with ∼50 mM of d-biotin for
1 h failed to dissociate the biotinylated peptide. Since endogenous biotin levels are low (∼10 nM in
mouse), it is unlikely that substantial
displacement of [18F]NPB4 from avidin by endogenous biotin
would occur in vivo over the time scale of interest for our experiments.

The association of the [18F]NPB4-avidin palmitate complex
with nanoparticle is noncovalent, and so one important question is
whether the intact radioligand remains securely attached to the nanoparticle.
In this study, the attachment of radioligand to nanoparticles was
highly stable in aqueous conditions over the course of an hour, which
confirms prior work demonstrating 2–6% loss of avidin conjugate
or biotinylated ligand from the surface of PLGA nanoparticles in 1
h under physiological conditions. We also
observed dramatically different elimination half-lives for free versus
nanoparticle-bound radioligand (19 min versus 102 and 258 min for
small and large nanoparticles, respectively). If the loss of radioactivity reflected unstable attachment of
radiolabel to nanoparticles in vivo, we would expect the elimination
curves to be governed by two kinetic processes (first, liberation
of the radiolabel, and, second, brain clearance of the liberated radiolabel).
However, a two-phase decay model did not improve the quality of data
fit over a one-phase model. The kinetic data therefore provides no
suggestion of radiolabel detachment from the nanoparticle. We speculate
that the different early tissue half-lives measured for small and
large nanoparticles reflect underlying differences in the residence
of these nanoparticles in tissue.

In this work, we present a
novel method for radiolabeling PLGA
nanoparticles with a biotinylated F-18 prosthetic group. [18F]NPB4 was prepared with high purity and high specific activity.
Radiolabeled nanoparticles were delivered to the brain by CED and
imaged with PET. The final spatial volume of distribution measured
by PET is in accordance with prior work measuring nanoparticle distributions
by fluorescence. Dynamic measurement of spatial volume of distribution
and total radioactivity in the brain revealed transient discontinuities
in the rate that nanoparticles reached the brain. Once the infusion
was complete, total radioactivity in the brain decreased as a function
of nanoparticle size. These data suggest that nanoparticles may encounter
additional barriers to direct delivery to the brain by CED that are
not encountered by free molecules, and further motivate the use of
quantitative imaging techniques in the development of novel drug delivery
systems.

Experimental Procedures (Materials and Methods)
Reagents
All reagents used were commercial products
purchased from Sigma-Aldrich or Fluka and were used without further
purification, unless otherwise indicated. O-18 water (98% pure) was
purchased from Huayi Isotopes Co. (Toronto, Canada). EZ-link NHS-PEGn-Biotin (n = 4 (2) or 12) was
purchased from Thermo Scientific. Avidin was purchased from Fisher
Scientific Company LLC. A Superose 12 column (10/300 GL) was purchased
from GE Healthcare Life Sciences. Chromafix 30-PS-HCO3 was
purchased from Macherey-Nagel. Flash chromatography was carried out
with silica gel 60 (200–400 mesh). 1H spectra were
recorded on a Bruker spectrometer at 500 MHz. Chemical shifts are
reported in parts per million (ppm). Coupling constants are reported
in hertz (Hz). High resolution mass spectroscopy (HRMS) was carried
out on a Bruker 9.4T FT-ICR MS spectrometer. Purification of [18F]NPB4 was done by reverse phase semipreparative HPLC using
a Phenomenex Luna C18(2) ODS(3) column (10 μm, 10 × 250
mm), eluting at a flow rate of 5 mL/min under isocratic conditions
with a mobile phase composed of 24:76 (v/v) acetonitrile/0.1 M ammonium
formate solution with 0.5% acetic acid (pH = 4.2). Quality control
analyses were carried out using a Shimadzu LC-20AT Prominence HPLC
system equipped with an SPD-M20A photo diode array detector or an
SPD-20A UV/vis detector (264 nm) operating in series with a Bioscan
Flow-Count gamma detector (HPLC column: Phenomenex Luna C18, 5 μm,
4.6 × 250 mm; mobile phase: 25:75 (v/v) acetonitrile/0.1 M ammonium
formate with 0.5% acetic acid (pH = 4.2); flow rate: 2 mL/min).

Synthesis of 4-Cyano-N,N,N-trimethylanilinium
Trifluoromethanesulfonate (4)
4-(Dimethylamino)benzonitrile
(5 g, 34 mmol) and methyl trifluoromethanesulfonate (10 g, 60.9 mmol)
were dissolved in CH2Cl2 (100 mL) and the reaction
mixture stirred at room temperature under argon overnight. The resulting
precipitate was filtered and washed with EtOAc. The solid was then
redissolved in MeOH (10 mL) while heating and EtOAC was added to crystallize.
The crystal was collected and recrystallized in MeOH (4 mL) and EtOAc
to give compound 4 as yellow flakes (6.4 g, 60.7%), mp
156–158 °C (lit. 156–158 °C.1H NMR (500 MHz, DMSO-d6): δ 8.21 (b, 4H), 3.65 (s, 9H).

Synthesis of Fluorobenzylamide-poly(ethylene
glycol)4-biotin (3, NPB4)
4-Fluorobenzylamine
(200
μL, 125 μmol) was dissolved in CH3CN (5 mL)
and mixed with EZ-link NHS-PEG4-biotin (205.5 mg, 0.35
μmol). The reaction mixture was stirred for 5 min at room temperature.
The precipitate was removed by filtration and the filtrate concentrated
with rotary vacuum evaporator. The residue was dissolved in MeOH (1
mL) and purified by flash chromatography on silica gel (0% to 50%
MeOH in CH2Cl2) to give 3 as colorless
oil (54 mg, 25.7%). 1H NMR (500 MHz, DMSO-d6): δ 8.33 (m, 1H), 7.80 (m, 1H), 7.30–7.15
(m, 2H), 7.09 (t, J = 8.8, 2H), 6.40–6.30
(m, 2H), 4.21 (m, 2H), 4.20 (m, 2H), 4.07 (m, 1H), 3.58 (t, J = 6.3, 2H), 3.50–3.45 (m, 12H), 3.16–3.11
(m, 3H), 2.88–2.66 (m, 2H), 2.33 (m, 3H), 2.01 (t, J = 7.4, 2H), 1.62–1.20 (m, 6H). HRMS: calculated
for C28H43FN4O7S [M+1]+: 599.2909; found 599.2896. The purity of NPB4 was greater
than 98% based on the analysis with HPLC.

Synthesis and Characterization
of [18F]fluorobenzylamide-PEG4-Biotin ([18F]3, [18F]NPB4)
No-carrier-added aqueous [18F]fluoride
was produced in a GE PETtrace cyclotron via 18O(p, n)18F nuclear reaction and transferred to a lead-shielded
hot cell. The [18F]fluoride ion was trapped on a Chromafix
30-PS-HCO3 cartridge, and then eluted to a V-vial (2 mL)
with a solution of Kryptofix −222 (10 mg) and K2CO3 (1.04 mg) in 1.4 mL of MeCN/H2O (1:0.4,
v/v). The solvent is subsequently evaporated at 105 °C under
a stream of inert gas, and followed by addition of two portions of
MeCN (0.4 mL each) for azeotropic removal of water under the same
inert gas flow. 4-N,N,N-Trimethylammonium benzonitrile
triflate 4 (7 mg) in anhydrous DMSO (0.2 mL) was then
added to the above vial containing dried [18F]fluoride.
The mixture was heated at 120 °C for 10 min. After cooling down,
a solution of 1 N borane-dimethylsulfide complex in THF (0.2 mL) was
added to the vial and the reaction mixture kept at room temperature
for 5 min to generate the radioactive intermediate, [18F]4-fluorobenzylamine ([18F]1). The solvent was removed at 60 °C and the reaction
quenched with addition of 5 N HCl solution (2 mL). The solution was
transferred to a bottle with deionized (DI) water (5 mL) and 1 N NaOH
(12 mL) and the mixture passed through two Waters Classic C18 SepPak
cartridges in series. The cartridges were washed with DI water (10
mL). The intermediate was then eluted off with 1 mL of MeCN into a
vial preloaded with the NHS-PEG4-Biotin powder (3–5
mg) and mixed for 3 min to yield the product [18F]3 ([18F]NPB4). The volume in the vial was reduced
to ∼0.5 mL by heating at 80 °C under a stream of nitrogen,
diluted with DI water (1.5 mL), then loaded onto the semipreparative
HPLC system for further purification. The fraction corresponding to
the product (retention time of ∼18 min) was collected in a
dilution bottle containing 50 mL of DI water, and the solution passed
through a Waters Classic C18 SepPak cartridge. The SepPak was rinsed
with 0.001 N HCl (10 mL) and dried with air. The product was then
eluted off the SepPak with 1 mL of MeOH. The solvent was evaporated
at 80 °C under a stream of nitrogen and the residue was redissolved
in an appropriate amount of phosphate buffer solution (PBS, pH = 7.4)
for use in conjugation with nanoparticles. A sample of the product
in PBS was injected to the analytical HPLC system to determine the
radiochemical purity and specific activity of the product. Specific
activity was determined by counting an aliquot of the product in a
dose calibrator for radioactivity amount and performing HPLC analysis
of the aliquot. The mass of NPB4 associated with the injection was
measured by comparing the corresponding UV area with a standard curve
relating UV area with mass.

Synthesis and Characterization of [18F]NPB4-avidin
Avidin (0.66 mg, 10 nmol) was added to the
solution of [18F]NPB4 in PBS (3–4 mCi, 1 mL, ∼1
nmol) and the solution
incubated for 5 min at room temperature. A small sample of [18F]NPB4 PBS solution (free [18F]NPB4) and the mixture of
[18F]NPB4-avidin were coinjected to the size-exclusion
column (Superose 12, 10/300 GL column, 10 ± 2 μm) eluting
with a mobile phase of 10% MeCN and 90% 0.1 M tris-HCl with 1 M NaCl
at a flow rate of 0.8 mL/min. The retention times were 22 and 37 min,
respectively, for [18F]NPB4-avidin conjugate and free [18F]NPB4. HPLC eluent was collected in fractions. Radioactivity
in the fractions was measured and decay-corrected to the injection
time. The recovery of radioactivity from HPLC was 98%, indicating
the elution of all injected radioactivity from the column. A separate
injection of the reaction solution detected no presence of the free
[18F]NPB4 peak on the chromatogram, demonstrating complete
conjugation of [18F]NPB4 with avidin.

Nanoparticles
Avidin-palmitate was prepared by reacting
avidin protein (25 mg) with palmitic acid N-hydroxysuccinimide
ester (1 mg) in 2% sodium deoxycholate buffer (NaDC, 5 mL) at 37 °C
overnight. The resulting product was dialyzed against 0.3% NaDC to
remove unreacted products. Nanoparticles encapsulating the hydrophobic
dye coumarin-6 (C6) were prepared by single emulsion. Briefly, 100 mg of PLGA (Durect, Lactel) was dissolved
with 1 mg C6 in 2 mL ethyl acetate. The organic phase was added dropwise
to 4 mL of water containing the stabilizer poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA,
2.5 wt %) and the fatty acid conjugate avidin-palmitate (5 mg) while
vortexing. This mixture was held on ice and further emulsified with
an immersion probe sonicator (TMX 400, Tekmar, Cincinnati, OH) with
three, 15 s duration pulses at 40% amplitude. Nanoparticles were added
to 100 mL of dilute PVA (0.3%) to allow the solvent to evaporate.
Hardened nanoparticles were collected by centrifugation, washed, size-fractionated
by centrifugation, and lyophilized with a cryoprotectant (0.5 mg trehalose
per 1 mg PLGA). Nanoparticle size and morphology were assessed with
scanning electron microscopy (SEM).

Synthesis and Characterization
of [18F]NPB4 Labeled
Nanoparticles
Conjugation of [18F]NPB4 with avidin
surface coated PLGA nanoparticles followed procedure similar to that
described above for the reaction of [18F]NPB4 with avidin.
In brief, 20 mg of small (∼70 nm) or large size (∼150
nm) PLGA nanoparticles was added to approximately 1 mCi of [18F]NPB4 in 0.5 mL of PBS. The resulted suspension was incubated for
30 min at room temperature and sonicated for 5 min before injection
to animals.

To test the efficiency of [18F]NPB4 conjugation
to nanoparticles, the radiolabel was incubated with large nanoparticles
for 30 min followed by centrifugation for 10 min at 10 000 g. The supernatant was removed, and the precipitate was
washed and the solution was combined with the supernatant. Radioactivity
in the supernatant and precipitate was measured, and compared to the
total radioactivity added. Supernatant radioactivity was no higher
than background levels.

Imaging
All animal procedures were
carried out under
a protocol approved by the Yale University Institutional Animal Care
and Use Committee. Male Sprague–Dawley rats (250–350
g, Charles River Laboratory) were anesthetized for surgery with an
intraperitoneal injection of ketamine/xylazine (90/10 mg/kg, Henry
Schein). A 26 G guide cannula (Plastics One, Roanoke, VA) was lowered
onto the top of the skull to target the striatum (3.8 mm posterior,
2.1 mm lateral, and 4.0 mm ventral from bregma). Three stainless steel
cranial screws were placed within 1 cm of the guide cannula and cemented
into place with a fast curing resin (Perm Reline, Henry Schein). Imaging
sessions began approximately 1–2 h after initial anesthesia
induction, and rats were maintained on 2% isoflurane for the scan
duration. Polyethylene tubing attached to a 28 G injector (Plastics One) with a projection
to target −6.0 mm DV was primed with nanoparticle solution
and attached to a 50 μL Hamilton syringe containing saline.
Injections were performed with the aid of an automated syringe pump
(Harvard PHD 22/2000 Advance Syringe Pump, Harvard Apparatus, Holliston,
MA).

Data were acquired with a FOCUS 220 small animal PET scanner
(Siemens Medical Solutions, Knoxville, TN). A 9 min transmission scan
(57Co source) was acquired to correct for attenuation.
List mode data were collected during the infusion and for up to 2
h thereafter. Data were binned into 0.5 to 10 min frames, which were
reconstructed with the ordered subset expectation maximization (OSEM,
4 iterations with 16 subsets) algorithms with corrections for decay,
attenuation, randoms, and scatter. Image resolution was ∼1.5
mm, with a pixel size of 0.949 × 0.949 × 0.796 mm3.

Data Analysis
The center of the infusion was identified
on coronal sections of each time series at the beginning and end of
each infusion. These coordinates were compared to the transmission
image to ensure the injector reached the target location of ∼6
mm ventral to bregma. Three-dimensional data were cropped to ±10
pixels from the center of the infusion, yielding a total volume of
21 × 21 × 21 pixels for each time frame. Total radioactivity
delivered was measured by summing pixel values across this volume.
The fraction of the total radioactivity delivered was calculated by
dividing the total radioactivity signal in that frame by the total
radioactivity signal at the end of the 30 min infusion. These data
are expressed as “delivered fraction” with a maximum
value of 1. To measure a spatial volume of distribution, pixel values
were compared to a threshold value (1%, 2%, 3%, 5%, or 10% of the
maximum concentration in the frame), and the total volume above threshold
was calculated by converting the number of voxels to cm3. A threshold value of 2% was observed to produce the most consistent
volume measurements (judging by the lowest variation in final volume
of distribution measured for different subjects) and thus was chosen
as the threshold value for the data shown here. Data were collected
for 6 nanoparticle infusions (n = 4 for small nanoparticles,
and n = 2 for large nanoparticles). One of the small
nanoparticle infusions experienced backflow, where some of the infusate
was driven back up along the catheter track. These data were excluded
from the spatial volume of distribution analysis. Since clearance
rates, measured from the region directly surrounding the catheter
tip, are unaffected by backflow, these data were included in the nanoparticle
clearance calculation.

Author Contributions
Rachael W.
Sirianni and Ming-Qiang Zheng contributed equally to this work.

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors
gratefully acknowledge the contributions of the
staff of the Yale PET Center, including Maria Corsi, Krista Fowles,
Jim Ropchan, Patrick Ouellette, and Nancy Nishimura for their technical
assistance. The authors also acknowledge Songye Li, Justin Sciuto
for the melting point and 1H NMR analysis, and Edward Voss
for the HRMS analysis. This work was supported by National Institutes
of Health grants, T32DA022975 (“Neuroimaging Sciences Training
Program”) and CA149128, and was also made possible by CTSA
Grant Number UL1RR024139 from the National Center for Research Resources
(NCRR) and the National Center for Advancing Translational Science
(NCATS), components of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), and
NIH roadmap for Medical Research. Its contents are solely the responsibility
of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official view
of NIH.

Abbreviations
CEDconvection
enhanced delivery

ECMextracellular matrix

NPB4Fluorobenzylamide-poly(ethylene
glycol)4-biotin

PBSphosphate buffered saline

PEGpoly(ethylene glycol)

PETpositron emission tomography

PLGApoly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)

SPECTsingle photon emission computed tomography

