Introduction
Metals are extremely
useful tools for clinical and biotechnology
applications. Metal-based diagnostic imaging is common and its applications
include molecular targeting to identify specific cell populations., Addition of metal-binding modalities to proteins has been accomplished
primarily through chemical conjugation. Attaching a chelating agent requires use of a secondary chemistry,
which leads to a heterogeneous mixture of products and requires optimization
of the reaction conditions and additional purification steps to recover
the desired product.− These reactions are inefficient, utilizing significant excesses
of materials, and significantly increase the time needed to obtain
a purified final product.

Incorporation of a peptide-based metal-binding
tag into a protein
during expression to generate an inline carrier eliminates the need
for subsequent modification, greatly simplifying the production of
metal-based conjugates. Inline lanthanide-binding peptide tags (LBTs)
have been developed for binding to larger metal ions, such as gadolinium,
demonstrating the validity of this principle.− They are large (∼14–20
amino acids) because they must contain six residues positioned appropriately
to enable binding to lanthanide ions (Tb(III), Gd(III), Dy(III)) using eight oxygen ligands. The presence of a
ninth exchangeable water ligand allows for the application of LBTs
as MRI contrast agents., In the laboratory, LBTs are used
in luminescence energy transfer studies and for luminescence-based detection on gels. In addition, paramagnetic lanthanide ions are incorporated
into LBTs for use as magnetic-field relaxation and alignment agents
in NMR spectroscopy for evaluating protein structure., Lanthanide binding tags have found large utility as imaging agents;
however, lanthanides are reported to induce significant adverse effects
in some patient populations,− indicating additional approaches
are needed. Utilization of more biologically compatible transition
metals is desirable, but the inability to achieve appropriate binding
to these smaller metal ions by traditional chelators has hindered
their use in the clinic.− Nature typically accomplishes
tight binding and control of transition metals using sophisticated
protein scaffolds in which the metal is well protected from facile
exchange. These highly structured environments are absent in small
peptides, which typically results in weaker binding and easier release
of the metal to high affinity chelators, such as EDTA. Thus, a tag
capable of sequestering smaller metals would enable new tools and
provide opportunity to expand therapeutic and diagnostic applications.

Our lab discovered the metal abstraction peptide (MAP) and its
novel chemistry that binds transition metals and develops a uniquely
structured product with compatible properties for use in clinical
applications. The structure is extremely
stable under basic conditions, resisting metal release and loss to
high affinity chelators in competition experiments, but undergoes
rearrangement upon acidification, permitting rapid exchange or release
of the metal (manuscript in preparation). MAP is composed of a three
amino acid sequence (Asn-Cys-Cys; NCC), and when positioned inline,
the metal is coordinated in a square planar organization by two thiolate
ligands and two deprotonated amide nitrogens from the peptide backbone. Because the sequence is composed of natural
amino acids, it can be engineered as a tag into a genetic construct.
The desired protein product encodes the inline metal carrier, which
we refer to as the claMP Tag. In order to generate
the specific metal-bound peptide structure having these unique properties,
the claMP Tag must be reacted with a metal ion that
is partially coordinated by a chelator (Figure ), such as those used in immobilized metal affinity chromatography
(IMAC), e.g., nitrilotriacetic acid (NTA). The peptide abstracts the
metal ion from the high-affinity chelator; this reaction is extremely
efficient and yields a highly stable, single product.−

Schematic
that illustrates the unique method by which metal is
inserted into the claMP Tag. The claMP Tag is reacted with a chelated metal ion (i.e., Ni-NTA), which
leads to metal insertion into the tag. A metal ion with a 2+ charge, such as Ni(II), reacted with the net neutral claMP Tag sequence generates a single product with a charge of 2–. EGF has a 4– charge, resulting
in a net charge of 6– for the inline claMP Tag conjugate.

Here, epidermal growth
factor (EGF) was used as a model system
to demonstrate that the claMP sequence can be used
effectively as a tag. EGF contains six cysteine residues, which comprise
three disulfide bonds, and its expression is known to require the
assistance of disulfide modulating enzymes to fold correctly.− Because the claMP Tag itself contains two cysteine
residues, these additional thiols could complicate the folding process
by increasing the number of possible folded states. EGF was chosen
because it exemplifies the extremes of protein systems to which the claMP Tag may be applied. Production of EGF as a thioredoxin-fusion
protein was performed to assess the ability to include the claMP Tag in a thiol- and disulfide-containing fusion protein.
Because the Ni-MAP complex has catalytic superoxide dismutase activity, SOD activity of Ni-claMP EGF
can be used to cross-validate formation of the desired product. Here,
the effects of the tag and its placement within EGF on expression,
structure, and native function of EGF are presented to demonstrate
the compatibility and versatility of the claMP Tag
for use as an inline metal carrier.

Results
claMP Tag Addition Does Not Impair EGF Expression
Because native
EGF contains three disulfide bonds, it was important
to determine the extent to which addition of the two cysteine residues
in the claMP Tag might affect protein expression
or lead to non-native disulfide bond formation and misfolding in an E. coli system. Native EGF, like many disulfide-containing
proteins, accumulates in inclusion bodies when expressed into the
reducing cytosolic environment of E. coli,, and addition of the claMP Tag did not affect this outcome (unpublished data). By expressing
EGF in an engineered strain that contains a more oxidizing cytoplasmic
environment, proper folding is achieved (Figure )., Using this approach, EGF and claMP-Tagged EGF variants were produced in the soluble fraction of the
cell lysate.

Cartoon of pET-32 expression construct of recombinant claMP-Tagged EGF.

SDS-PAGE was used to verify the claMP Tag
did
not adversely affect expression of claMP-Tagged EGF;
all EGF variants showed excellent expression and reasonably similar
expression levels (Figure a). The molecular
weight of each fusion protein was expected to be approximately 24
kDa. As shown in Figure a, no band is present
at this size in the preinduction samples (lanes 2, 4, and 6), but
a band appears in the postinduction sample for each of the various
constructs (lanes 3, 5, and 7), confirming successful expression.
Native EGF was used as a standard to establish relative expression
of the claMP-Tagged forms. N-terminal and C-terminal
placement led to a 14% and 29% decrease in EGF expression yield, respectively.
Differences in expression among the variants were on the same order
as batch-to-batch variation among replicates of the same protein.
Therefore, insertion of the claMP Tag into the protein
sequence has a negligible effect on protein expression, as determined
by densitometric analysis of whole cell lysates.

Addition of claMP Tag to EGF did not significantly
hinder expression or purification of desired product. Coomassie stained
18% tris-tricine gels illustrating the expression of pET-32-EGF, pET-32-claMP-EGF, and pET-32-EGF-claMP and final
purified EGF products. (a) (Lane 1) molecular weight standard, (lanes
2, 4, 6) E. coli lysate of pET-32-EGF,
pET-32-claMP-EGF, and pET-32-EGF-claMP before IPTG induction, (lanes 3, 5, 7) E. coli lysate of pET-32-EGF, pET-32-claMP-EGF, and pET-32-EGF-claMP 16 h after IPTG induction. (b) (Lane 1) molecular
weight standard, (lane 2) purified EGF-Ni-claMP,
(lane 3) purified EGF, and (lane 4) purified Ni-claMP-EGF.

claMP-Tagged
EGF Is Soluble
The EGF
variants accumulated in the soluble fraction of the cell lysate, as
determined by SDS-PAGE analysis of the supernatant and pellet from
each sample following centrifugation of the lysate (data not shown).
Following individual processing and purification steps, the yield
of each protein variant was determined (Table ). SDS-PAGE was performed to examine the purity and amount of protein
present at each step, and the pure final product is shown in Figure b. Cleavage of the fusion tags from EGF-claMP worked as expected, completely cleaving the fusion
protein and yielding the expected amount of each product. During Factor
Xa cleavage, a 30% lower yield was observed with the N-terminally
tagged construct in comparison to EGF-Ni-claMP (Table ). The claMP Tag abuts the Factor
Xa recognition sequence, and therefore, it is hypothesized that cleavage
efficiency is reduced because the Ni-claMP complex
kinks the protein conformation near the site, limiting access by the
protease to the cleavage site. Sample purity of the final EGF proteins
also was assessed using size exclusion chromatography (Figure ). As a control, native EGF was examined, and it
elutes at 12 min. EGF-Ni-claMP elutes earlier than
EGF at 10 min, which is expected because it is slightly larger than
EGF.

Relative Yields of EGF Constructs
conjugate	Trx-EGF (mg)	EGF mass
equivalents (mg)	EGF mass
before final cleavage (mg)	final product
(mg)	% yield	average percent
yield	
EGF	11.8	3.1	2.6	1.2	46%	53 ± 7%	
 	7.6	2.0	1.3	0.7	60%	
EGF-Ni-claMP	6.9	1.9	2.3	1.1	45%	 	
 	15.1	4.2	4.8	1.6	34%	43 ± 7%	
 	12	3.3	3.0	1.5	50%	
Ni-claMP-EGF	8.2	2.3	3.2	0.5	14%	12 ± 3%	
 	7.2	2.0	1.7	0.1	9%	
The mass of EGF within the fusion
protein was determined by taking into account the molecular weight
of the fusion protein and EGF in the construct.

The mass of EGF within the fusion
protein was determined by taking into account the molecular weight
of the remaining portion of the fusion tags and EGF in the construct.

Percent yield was determined
by
comparing the final yield to the theoretical amount of EGF before
the final cleavage step. The second cleavage step was used to determine
the percent yield.

Size-exclusion chromatography
verifies that one main species is
present in the sample. EGF-Ni-claMP elutes slightly
earlier than EGF.

claMP-Tagged
EGF Is Correctly Folded
The three disulfide bonds present
in EGF are the primary contributing
factors to the protein structure. As such, conservation of the native
disulfide bonds is essential to preserve protein structure and maintain
biological function. Formation of the native disulfide bonds in EGF
occurs through multiple iterations of incorrect cysteine pairs until
the correct disulfide network is achieved, and addition of the claMP Tag introduces two additional
non-native cysteine residues into EGF, which could interfere with
the native disulfide network. To validate that addition of the claMP Tag to EGF did not affect protein structure, two-dimensional
heteronuclear NMR was used to compare the variants to native EGF (Figure ). A 1H–15N HSQC spectrum provides a fingerprint of the protein; each
amide from the backbone generates one peak, which reflects the unique
conformation of the corresponding residue within the structured protein. 1H–15N HSQC spectra obtained for EGF and
EGF-Ni-claMP are highly similar and have specific,
localized differences. The spectra show that the native fold of the
protein is maintained in the presence of the claMP
Tag, as the majority of the residues in both spectra overlay. The
disulfide network is also maintained; the chemical shift positions
of the five assigned cysteine residues remain unperturbed. The data
show that the tertiary structure is not altered by the addition of
the claMP Tag. In the EGF-Ni-claMP spectrum, a few notable differences from native EGF are observed;
residues near the C-terminus of the protein (K48, W49/50, L52, and
R53) are shifted. There also are differences in peak intensity observed
between the variants for M21, G36, and L47. Because NMR is exquisitely
sensitive to small changes in local environment, the presence of the
metal-bound claMP Tag would be expected to influence
the chemical shift of neighboring residues. The chemical shift positions
of EGF with and without the tag were compared and the differences
mapped onto the structure of EGF to show the residues affected by
the tag. The structure reveals that the negatively charged Ni-claMP module likely associates with a neighboring patch
of positive charge (Figure ).

Higher order protein
structure is maintained in the presence of claMP
Tag. 1H–15N HSQC spectra
of EGF (red) and EGF-Ni-claMP (blue) at 0.1 mM and
0.08 mM, respectively. Peaks from native EGF that decrease in intensity
when the tag is present are labeled with their corresponding residues.
Shifted peaks corresponding to C-terminal residues are circled. New
peaks 1, 2a, and 2b appear due to the addition of the claMP Tag. Peak 1 corresponds to a glycine residue and Peaks 2a and
2b correspond to the asparagine side chain amide.

Illustration of the potential location of Ni-claMP within the EGF molecule. (a) Schematic of EGF molecule; residues
affected by addition of the claMP Tag on the C-terminus
are shown in gray. (b) Electrostatic surface map of EGF with the Ni-claMP Tag added onto the C-terminus. The negatively charged
Ni-claMP complex is hypothesized to associate with
the positively charged pocket shown in blue.

In addition, three peaks emerge in the EGF-Ni-claMP spectrum, which may be due to the addition of residues composing
the tag. We expect Peak 1 to correspond to the amide backbone of one
of the glycine residues because it appears in the glycine region. The backbone of the asparagine and first cysteine
residues do not generate peaks because the claMP
Tag binds to the metal via these nitrogens, deprotonating them. The
other two residues do not generate observable peaks in the HSQC. The
asparagine side chain from the tag is visible in the spectrum, and
it appears as a new pair of peaks with unique 1H values
and the same 15N chemical shift (Peaks 2a, 2b).

Ni(II)
Is Selectively Inserted into claMP Tag
in the Presence of EGF
For the initial analytical development,
Ni(II) was used to occupy the claMP Tag because this
is a well understood system in our lab.− Insertion of Ni(II)
into the claMP Tag can be accomplished using Ni(II)-charged
IMAC resin or via solution transfer using aqueous Ni-NTA,− both resulting in formation of the desired Ni-claMP complex. The claMP-Tagged EGF was produced as
a His-tagged fusion protein, which accomplished affinity purification
and facilitated complete Ni(II) transfer into the claMP Tag during the purification process. Use of IMAC resin for transfer
very efficiently limits nonspecific binding of Ni(II) to proteins.
EGF has previously been purified using Ni(II)-based affinity chromatography,
and Ni(II) was not reported to nonspecifically bind to EGF. Control reactions performed with native protein
in this study confirm this result.

The Ni-claMP complex of the correct structure has a rusty orange color, allowing
incorporation in the context of the protein to be confirmed with absorption
spectroscopy, as established with the peptide system. In the EGF-Ni-claMP spectrum, there are
broad features present in the visible region that reflect the structure
of the unique metal complex, as seen in Figure a. These features are absent from the control spectrum of native
EGF, which confirms they are due to correct Ni-claMP formation and not nonspecific binding of Ni(II) to EGF.

AEC also was used to verify that proper formation of the Ni-claMP complex was achieved. Correct incorporation of Ni(II)
into the claMP Tag creates a net charge of 2–. Native and metal-free claMP-Tagged
EGF each have an overall charge of 4–, but proper
nickel insertion into claMP-Tagged EGF develops an
overall charge of 6–. This difference in charge
results in unique AEC elution profiles for the two species. As shown
in Figure b, EGF elutes at 35 min, whereas
EGF-Ni-claMP elutes at 75 min. The greater negative
charge of EGF-Ni-claMP causes it to bind more strongly
to the cationic resin allowing AEC to be utilized to confirm metal
binding and to separate the two distinct charge species.

Ni(II) is successfully
incorporated into the claMP Tag in the presence of
EGF. (a) Absorption spectroscopy validates
Ni(II) incorporation into the claMP Tag. In comparison
to EGF, EGF-Ni-claMP contains distinct features in
the visible region, which confirm Ni(II) incorporation. (b) Anion
exchange chromatography demonstrates the difference in net charge
between EGF and EGF-Ni-claMP due to the addition
of Ni-claMP.

As it has been shown that the Ni-claMP complex
acts as a superoxide mimic, verification
of complex formation in the presence of EGF can be confirmed using
a standard SOD activity assay. The IC50 values for the
Ni-MAP module and EGF-Ni-claMP are 35 ± 8 μM
and 44 ± 4 μM, respectively, which are comparable within
experimental error for the xanthine/xanthine oxidase assay. This confirms
that the Ni-claMP Tag specifically and efficiently
forms the unique structure determined for the original Ni-MAP module
and this module maintains comparable SOD-like activity in the context
of the protein.

EGF Remains Functional with Addition of claMP Tag
In order to be used successfully as an
inline metal
carrier, the claMP Tag cannot be deleterious to the
function of the protein. A standard cell viability assay using the
A431 cell strain was completed to assess the impact of the claMP Tag on EGF function. This strain is known for its
overexpression of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) on the
cell surface. Overexpression of EGFR
leads to the unexpected outcome of growth inhibition upon stimulation
with EGF. The N- and C-termini of EGF
are not responsible for high-affinity binding to the receptor, so placement of the claMP Tag
on either terminus would not be expected to diminish EGF activity,
and indeed it does not. EGF or either claMP-Tagged
variant of EGF elicits a similar cytostatic response (Figure ). At nanomolar concentrations, addition of EGF
or either Ni-claMP-EGF protein results in a 50% loss
in cell viability in the A431 cell line, confirming EGF remains active
in the presence of the tag at either position.

Addition of the claMP Tag to either the N- or
C-terminus of EGF has little to no effect on the function of the protein.
The decrease in cell viability of A431 cells caused by addition of
EGF is comparable to that of both Ni-claMP-EGF and
EGF-Ni-claMP.

Discussion
Metal-binding agents enable a wide range
of biotechnology, healthcare,
and research applications. Peptide tags and organic molecules capable
of binding metal ions can be combined with the appropriate protein
to allow for targeted delivery of metal ions for imaging and therapeutic
applications and for use as analytical research tools.,,,− Incorporation of a metal-binding tag into a protein
can be accomplished using either chemical conjugation or inline addition.
Conjugation is typically performed using chemical means, primarily
conjugation to lysine or cysteine residues using moiety specific chemistry,−,, which can have adverse effects on protein structure due to the heterogeneity
associated with this type of conjugation.− With chemical
conjugation, protein function may also be altered because the exact
attachment site cannot be controlled, and lysine residues are often present in receptor recognition sites
of many proteins, including antibodies., In addition,
in vivo PK may be affected. For example,
modification of the Fc region can alter binding to FcRn, resulting
in changes in biodistribution, endosomal recycling, and PK. The claMP Tag is similar in
size to small chelating agents, but it bears the added advantage that
it can be inserted inline with the protein sequence using standard
cloning methodologies, allowing precise control of its placement.
Site-specific placement of the claMP Tag within EGF
allows for correct folding and disulfide-bond formation, confirming
that precise placement of the claMP Tag can be used
to generate a bioconjugate that retains native structural elements
and, importantly, its functionality. The claMP Tag
is advantageous in that its location can be specifically modulated,
allowing for the generation of an inline metal carrier that can be
precisely positioned to avoid disrupting protein properties.

While chelators have been developed that bind transition metals,
their properties are often incompatible with clinical use. Tight binding
chelators to copper have been developed, but those with sufficiently
slow off rates for in vivo use require very high temperature and long
incubation times to accomplish binding. SarAr technology is an exception,
which achieves tight binding under reasonable conditions for use with
proteins, but this chelator is selective
for and only used with copper. The claMP Tag is capable of binding a wide range of transition
metals, including many species that are used to enable imaging and
therapeutic applications, under conditions amenable to retention of
higher-order protein structure. Cytotoxic metal ions, such as Pt or
Pd, can be loaded into the claMP Tag and have the
potential to be used in targeted oncology applications (manuscripts
in preparation). Radioactive tracer metals, such as 99mTc, 55Co, 64/67Cu, or 212Pb, also
can be incorporated into the tag (manuscripts in preparation), and
these isotopes have proven utility in diagnostic imaging.− As shown here, Ni(II) can be selectively inserted into the tag even
when placed in a protein sequence, and though not currently in wide
usage, 57Ni could be substituted and monitored based on
its positron or X-ray emission., Ni-claMP has been shown to act as catalytic antioxidant,− and the Ni-claMP complex retains that activity in the context of a
protein system. This catalytic activity of a Ni(II)-claMP Tag conjugate may be useful in the generation of a targeted anti-inflammatory
agent or as a biotechnology reagent for selective detection of tagged
proteins.

Conclusion
In order to investigate the potential of
using the claMP Tag as an inline metal carrier, its
effects on the expression,
structure, and function of a thiol- and disulfide-containing protein
and metal insertion into the tag were analyzed. The spectroscopic
and chromatographic data verify that incorporation of Ni(II) into
the claMP Tag is not affected when the tag is placed
inline with a protein sequence. The overall structure of claMP-Tagged EGF is also maintained, as the chemical shift positions
of the native cysteine residues remain unaltered. In addition, native
function is maintained with claMP Tag inclusion at
either terminus. The study described here demonstrates successful
inline incorporation of the claMP Tag into a protein,
illustrating that this tag provides opportunity to expand the range
of applications in which metals may be used in biotechnology and healthcare.

Materials
and Methods
Cloning and Construction of the Expression Plasmid
Three DNA sequences were prepared to generate EGF variants: control
EGF and two individually tagged variants containing the claMP Tag at either the N-terminus (GNCCG-EGF) or C-terminus (EGF-GNCCG)
of the native sequence. A plasmid containing human EGF was obtained
(Origene, #RC210817), and the EGF sequence was amplified using PCR
and subcloned into the pET-32Xa/LIC vector. GNCCG was added to either
the N-terminus or C-terminus of EGF and amplified using PCR for insertion
into a LIC plasmid using the primers below (IDT). In each primer,
the LIC sequence is underlined and the portion corresponding to EGF
and the claMP Tag are not. 5′-GGTATTGAGGGTCGCGGAAACTGCTGCGGCAATAGTGACTCTGAATGTCCC-3′
(forward primer with tag on the N-terminus), 5′-AGAGGAGAGTTAGAGCCGTCAGCGCAGTTCCCACCACTTCAG-3′
(reverse primer for N-terminally tagged construct), 5′-GGTATTGAGGGTCGCAATAGTGACTCTGAATGTCCCCTGTCCCACGATGGG
(forward primer for C-terminal tagged construct), and 5′-AGAGGAGAGTTAGAGCCGTCAGCCGCAGCAGTTTCCGCGCAGTTCCCACCACTTCAGGTC-3′
(reverse primer with tag on the C-terminus). The amplification reactions
were purified using the QIAquick PCR Purification Kit (Qiagen). The
fragments were inserted into the vector using the manufacturer’s
protocol from the Xa/LIC cloning kit (Novagen). These plasmids contain
a Thioredoxin tag, a His6 tag, thrombin cleavage site, S-tag, and
Factor Xa site, which are all positioned on the N-terminal side of
each EGF variant (Figure ). The ligation product
was transformed into the DH5α Escherichia coli cell strain using the standard heat shock method, and the DNA was
harvested after selection and growth on LB containing 100 μg/mL
ampicillin. Plasmid DNA was purified using a miniprep kit (Qiagen),
and the intended product was verified by DNA sequencing (UC Berkeley
DNA Sequencing Facility).

Protein Expression
Expression and
purification of the
protein from these plasmids was completed in a similar manner to that
previously reported for EGF. Each plasmid
was transformed into the Origami B (DE3) E. coli strain (Novagen) using the standard heat shock protocol. Colonies
were grown for ∼24 h at 37 °C on LB agar plates with 100
μg/mL ampicillin, 30 μg/mL kanamycin, and 12.5 μg/mL
tetracycline. To prepare 15N-labeled cultures, individual
colonies were selected to inoculate 175 mL M9ZB media supplemented
with 0.4% glucose, 1 mM MgSO4, and 100 μg/mL ampicillin.
These starter cultures were grown for 16 h at 37 °C, 250 rpm.
Fifty milliliters of starter culture was used to inoculate 1 L minimal
media containing minimal salts and trace minerals. To prepare nonlabeled cultures, individual colonies were
selected to inoculate 50 mL LB media containing 100 μg/mL ampicillin.
Again, starter cultures were grown for 16 h at 37 °C, 250 rpm.
Twenty milliliter starter culture was used to inoculate 1 L LB supplemented
with 100 μg/mL ampicillin. Cultures of 15N-labeled
media and nonlabeled media were allowed to incubate at 200 rpm and
37 °C until an OD600 of 0.7 was met. At this point,
protein expression was induced through the addition of 1 mM isopropyl
β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG). The cultures were
allowed to incubate for an additional 16 h at 25 °C, 200 rpm,
and then they were harvested by ultracentrifugation. Cell pellets
were stored at −80 °C until use.

Protein Purification
Each pellet (1 L of culture) was
resuspended in 25 mL 50 mM Tris-Cl, 20 mM imidazole, pH 7.9, and lysed
using a French Press at 21 000 psi. The cellular debris was
removed by centrifugation at 21 000g for 1
h at 4 °C. The supernatant, which contained the protein, was
filtered through a 0.45 μm filter and applied to a 5 mL Hi-Trap
Chelating HP column charged with nickel (GE Lifesciences). EGF constructs
containing the claMP Tag were allowed to incubate
on the column for 1 h to facilitate metal transfer to the tag. Cellular
proteins were removed by washing the column with six column volumes
(CV) of 50 mM Tris-Cl, 40 mM imidazole, 500 mM NaCl, pH 7.9. The protein
was eluted from the column using a linear gradient from 0% to 100%
20 mM sodium phosphate (NaPi), 500 mM NaCl, 500 mM imidazole, pH 9.5
over 12 CV. The thioredoxin tag was cleaved using 10 units thrombin
(FisherScientific) per mg of protein at 16 °C for 9.5 h, and
the two cleavage fragments were separated on a Superdex75 column (GE
Lifesciences). The remaining tags were cleaved using 9 units Factor
Xa (Novagen) per mg of protein at 25 °C for 16 h, and the two
cleavage fragments were separated on a Superdex75 column. Samples
were concentrated using an Amicon Ultra 3 kDa MWCO concentrator (Millipore)
to a final concentration of approximately 0.15 mM. The purity of the
protein was confirmed with SDS-PAGE and size exclusion chromatography
(TSKgel G3000SW, 7.8 mm × 30 cm, 5 μm particle size, Fisher
Scientific) and the molecular weight was validated with ESI-MS. Samples
were quantified using a Bradford assay.

SDS-PAGE Analysis
Tris-tricine gels were prepared as
reported. EGF constructs were separated
using a discontinuous system consisting of a 4% (v/v) stacking gel
and a 18% (v/v) resolving gel. The samples were prepared in nonreducing
Laemmli buffer and heated for 10 min at 90 °C before being loaded
onto the gel. A prestained, dual-color molecular weight marker was
used for reference (BioRad, #161–0374). Gels were stained using
Coomassie (R-250).

Densitometry analysis was performed on Coomassie-stained
tris-tricine gels using the Typhoon TRIO Variable Mode Imager (Amersham
Biosciences). Relative quantitation was performed using the ImageQuantTL
software (Amersham Biosciences). The amount of claMP-Tagged EGF was determined based upon the intensity observed for
native EGF.

Absorption Analysis
After purification,
samples were
diluted and analyzed using absorption spectroscopy to confirm Ni(II)
incorporation. Samples were placed in a cuvette with a 1 cm path length
and spectra were acquired from 200 to 800 nm using a Carey 100 Bio
UV–visible spectrophotometer (Varian).

HPLC Analysis
Anion exchange chromatography (AEC) was
performed on a 4 × 250 mm BioLC ProPac Wax10 column (Dionex).
The column was equilibrated with 20 mM Tris-Cl, 10 mM KCl, pH 7.5
before injection of the sample. A linear gradient from 0% to 100%
20 mM Tris-Cl, 500 mM KCl, pH 7.5 over 70 mL with a constant flow
rate of 1 mL/min was used to elute the protein from the column and
detected by absorbance at 220 nm. The sample volume used for all injections
was 20 μL, and each sample was run in duplicate.

1H–15N HSQC Analysis
Two-dimensional 1H–15N heteronuclear single quantum coherence
(HSQC) spectra were obtained at 25 °C using a 600 MHz Bruker
Avance NMR spectrometer with a cryogenic, triple resonance probe. 15N-labeled protein was prepared in 50 mM KPi, 10 mM NaCl,
pH 7.3, with 6% D2O. A Bradford assay was used to determine
the concentration of the samples. Data were obtained with 177 and
217 scans for EGF and EGF-Ni-claMP, respectively.
A different number of scans were used to account for variations in
sample concentrations and achieve a similar signal-to-noise ratio
for each 2D spectrum. Analysis of the data was performed using NMRPipe and the NMR assignment program Sparky.

Xanthine/Xanthine Oxidase SOD Activity Assay
This assay
was performed as previously described.,, Briefly, 600 μM cytochrome c from bovine heart
and 300 μM xanthine were added to 50 mM potassium phosphate
with 100 μM EDTA, pH 7.8 to yield final concentrations of 10
μM cytochrome c and 50 μM xanthine. Enough xanthine oxidase
was added to cause a change in absorbance at 550 nm of 0.02 to 0.04
AU/min. Several concentrations were analyzed to develop an IC50 curve.

Cell Culture
Human epidermoid carcinoma
cells (A431,
ATCC CRL-1555) were purchased from American Type Culture Collection
(ATCC) and grown in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium
(DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin
and streptomycin. Cells were cultured in an incubator at a constant
temperature of 37 °C and 5% CO2.

EGF Cell Viability
Assay
A431 cells were seeded in
a 96-well clear bottom black plate at a density of 10 000 cells
per well and incubated overnight in the growth conditions described
above. The following day, the media was replaced with media containing
the test samples and controls. Test samples were diluted into media
at the appropriate concentrations and then transferred onto the cells.
Nine different concentrations were used, and each sample was run in
triplicate. The cells were incubated with EGF variants for 72 h, when
the control cells reached confluency. Cell viability was measured
using the CellTiter-Blue assay (Promega) following manufacturer’s
protocol. Briefly, the media was replaced with cell culture medium
containing reagent and allowed to incubate for 30 min. Following this
incubation period, a microplate reader (SpectraMax GeminiXS) was used
to determine the fluorescence intensity of the dye (560ex/590em). The fluorescence intensity was compared to control
wells to determine percent viability.

The authors declare the
following competing financial interest(s): J.S.L. is co-owner of Echogen
Inc., which has licensed the
patent-protected MAP Tag technology from the University of Kansas.

Acknowledgments
Funding was provided by Wallace H. Coulter Foundation (CTRA)
and KU Cancer Center Pilot Award. NIGMS Biotechnology Predoctoral
Training Grant (T32 GM-08359) provided support for B.J.M. M.E.K. was
supported by a PhRMA Foundation Postdoctoral Fellowship. The authors
thank Heather Shinogle at KU Microscopy and Imaging Laboratory for
use of equipment and assistance with densitometry analysis and the
KU Mass Spectrometry lab for running the mass spectrometry samples
and assistance with data analysis.

Abbreviations
MAPmetal
abstraction peptide

EGFepidermal growth factor

LBTslanthanide-binding
tags

EDTAethylenediaminetetraacetic
acid

IMACimmobilized
metal affinity chromatography

NTAnitrilotriacetic acid

SODsuperoxide dismutase

E. coliEscherichia
coli

HSQCheteronuclear single quantum correlation

AECanion exchange chromatography

NaPisodium phosphate

SECsize exclusion chromatography

EGFRepidermal growth
factor receptor

PKpharmacokinetics

NMRnuclear magnetic resonance

LICligation independent cloning

IPTGIsopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside

CVcolumn volumes

SDS-PAGEsodium dodecyl
sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis

KPipotassium phosphate

