Introduction
In recent years optical
molecular imaging technology has gained
remarkable attention for cancer visualization, characterization, and
localization. Optical imaging is not only a real-time modality that
is nonionizing and highly sensitive; it is also cost-effective with
considerable ease in preparation of molecular imaging agents. Its
potential application for use in image-guided surgery has also been
successfully demonstrated.− Due to significant attenuation
of the visible light spectrum in tissues, near-infrared fluorescence
(NIRF) is frequently used in optical imaging and can detect signals
as deep as 7–14 cm. Indocyanine
green (IC-Green) is the only NIRF dye approved for clinical use, most
commonly for medical diagnosis, with a penetration depth of 0.55–5
cm depending on the tissue properties., The specificity
of IC-Green depends highly on application, e.g., intravenous injection
for angiography or local injection for sentinel node identification.
Although it has been used for real-time fluorescence imaging to guide
surgical resection of tumor,, it is not specific to
cancer targets and as such may generate false positive results. This dye is attractive to researchers for the
development of targeted optical imaging agents upon modification and
conjugation to antibodies (Abs) or their fragments.− Target-specific IC-Green bioconjugates are expected
to result in more accurate and reliable results. For example, linking
with an Ab after assembly with phospholipid-polyethylene glycol (PL–PEG)
to form a nanostructure has successfully demonstrated the potential
for targeted optical imaging and photothermal therapy in cancer cells. These studies provide significant encouragement
for future applications of IC-Green and its derivative-conjugated
Abs for targeted optical imaging of cancer.

IC-Green, however,
is an amphiphilic molecule capable of self-organization
to form highly ordered aggregates via van der Waals forces and hydrophobic
interactions. Although this behavior
has been noted to be dependent on dye concentration, solvent, ionic
strength, pH, and temperature, the size profile of the aggregates
has not been analyzed by size-exclusion HPLC (SE-HPLC) or other modalities. Importantly, this behavior contributes to the
formation of high molecular weight (HMW) aggregates (&gt;150 kDa)
during
protein conjugation reactions that are
not reasonably removed by dialysis or PD-10 filtration. This problem
seems to be frequently overlooked by researchers.− As a result IC-Green-related
conjugation products in previously published reports appear not to
have been well examined for these complications potentially compromising
prior reported results. If the undesired aggregates are not removed,
they may lead to significant changes in the optical properties of
the desired conjugate products, as well
as impact an accurate measurement of the amount of dye conjugated
to protein, and other characterization criteria, and compromise in vivo applications.

Previous studies from this laboratory
demonstrated specific, high
efficiency targeting of panitumumab in HER1-positive tumors in multiple
xenograft models., ICG-N-hydroxysulfosuccinimide
ester (abbreviated as ICG-sOSu here) (Scheme ), commonly used in literature publications for antibody conjugation,
was employed in this study because it provides an established starting
material amenable to aqueous conjugation reactions.− In fact, this project began with
the intent of generating ICG-sOSu-panitumumab to serve as a reference
and control for subsequent studies. To characterize and purify ICG-sOSu-panitumumab
conjugates, SE-HPLC was used to define conjugation reaction conditions
that might provide a balance between high quality functional conjugation
product(s) versus aggregation products. This was prompted by initial
observations of the formation of HMW aggregates (&gt;150 kDa) by SE-HPLC. The conjugation reaction products were examined
further by SDS and native PAGE. In this study, evidence of significant
amounts of noncovalently bound ICG-sOSu in the SE-HPLC-purified conjugation
products was observed, a result not addressed in prior literature,
and the abrogation of this complication is reported. Herein, the characterization
and validation of purified ICG-sOSu-panitumumab conjugates suitable
for imaging HER1-positive tumors is reported.

Schematic Conjugation
of mAb Panitumumab to ICG-sulfo-OSu at Dye:Protein
Molar Ratios of 5, 10, or 20
SE-HPLC was first applied
to purify conjugation products and yield products 1, 2, and 3, respectively. Thereafter, the SE-HPLC
purified products were extracted with ethyl acetate to yield products 4, 5, and 6, respectively.

Results
Preparation and Characterization of ICG-sOSu-Panitumumab
Conjugates
Panitumumab was reacted with the amine-reactive
ICG-sOSu at dye:
mAb molar ratios of 5, 10, or 20 (5×, 10×, or 20×)
to yield three ICG-sOSu-panitumumab conjugates, 1, 2, and 3, respectively (Scheme ). After the reaction, the three conjugate solutions were
first analyzed and then purified by SE-HPLC. In all cases, undesired
HMW aggregates (&gt;150 kDa) were observed with retention times (RTs)
of 11.5–18 min (Figure ). Noticeably,
as higher amounts of ICG-sOSu were reacted with panitumumab, correspondingly
greater amounts of aggregates (∼14%, 30%, and 51% for 5×,
10×, and 20×, respectively) (Table ) were generated. The percentages of isolable ICG-sOSu-panitumumab
conjugates (1, 2, 3) produced
correspondingly decreased and were ∼52%, 28%, and 9% for 5×,
10×, and 20×, respectively, as determined by SE-HPLC. In
addition, the peak at 12.5 min dramatically increased with increased
ratios of ICG-sOSu in the conjugation reaction. Collection and inspection
of the late peak at 27.2 min revealed that no ICG-sOSu dye was present
as measured by spectrophotometer from 600 to 900 nm, in contrast to
the visible green color in the samples collected for the peaks corresponding
to either aggregate or desired conjugate. This lack of absorbance
suggests all excess ICG-sOSu in the reaction to be associated with
either the aggregate species or desired conjugation product, with
this late peak primarily composed of impurities originating from the
commercial ICG-sOSu (). If this low molecular weight species (LMW) is excluded
from the data analysis, when the SE-HPLC profiles are reintegrated,
the purified ICG-sOSu-panitumumab conjugates represent 61%, 36%, and
17% for 5×, 10×, and 20×, respectively. Initially,
the desired ICG-sOSu-panitumumab conjugates were each purified by
SE-HPLC, resulting in a final purity of &gt;99% (Figure ). As a control reference, a CD33-specific antibody HuM195
was also conjugated with ICG-sOSu at an ICG-sOSu: mAb molar ratio
of 10 (10×). Aggregate species were also observed and subsequently
removed by SE-HPLC (Table , ).

SE-HPLC profiles of conjugation
reaction mixtures (5×, 10×,
and 20×) and the representative purified bioconjugate. High molecular
weight aggregates were observed with retention times at 11.5–18
min. Molecular weight standards: 670 kDa (14.3 min), 158 kDa (19.2
min), and 1.35 kDa (27.1 min).

Summary Data of ICG-sOSu-Panitumumab
(5×, 10×, and 20× Reaction) and ICG-sOSu-HuM195 (10×
Reaction) Bioconjugates
reaction	retention
time	aggregates%
(before purification)	conjugates%
(before purification)	conjugates%
(after purification)	yield (%)	# of ICG-sOSu
conjugated to panitumumab	
ICG-sOSu-panitumumab	
5×	19.2 min	14	52	99	72	1	
10×	19.2 min	30	28	99	53	2	
20×	19.2 min	51	9	99	19	5	
ICG-sOSu-HuM195	
10×	18.6 min	17	45	99	80	1	
All three HPLC-purified ICG-sOSu-panitumumab
conjugates (1, 2, and 3) exhibited
two absorbance
peaks at 720 and 800 nm; the intensity ratio between the two absorbance
peaks, 720 nm relative to 800 nm, increased with increasing equivalents
of ICG-sOSu (Figure A). The average number
of ICG-sOSu conjugated to panitumumab was determined to be ∼1,
2, and 5 for 1, 2, and 3, respectively,
while that of ICG-sOSu-HuM195 was calculated to be ∼1 (Table ). Additionally, molecular weights of the HMW aggregates
were calculated from the linear plot of protein standards with the
highest being ≥2000 kDa. Because the peak (RT = 12.5 min) was
large and comprised significant amounts of mAb in the reaction with
20× ICG-sOSu dye, the percent yield of the desired ICG-sOSu-panitumumab
product in this reaction was low (∼19%). Positively, the competition
assay demonstrated that the immunoreactivity was retained for all
three of the HPLC-isolated ICG-sOSu-panitumumab conjugates for HER-1,
with IC50 values of 0.67 ± 0.07 nM, 0.82 ± 0.08
nM, and 0.53 ± 0.13 nM, for 1, 2, and 3, respectively, compared with the IC50 value of
0.67 ± 0.07 nM for intact native panitumumab (Figure B).

(A) Absorption spectra of SE-HPLC-purified ICG-sOSu-panitumumab
(1, 2, and 3) from 600 to 900
nm. (B) Competition radioimmunoassay of SE-HPLC-purified ICG-sOSu-panitumumab
(1, 2, and 3) with 125I-panitumumab. ICG-sOSu-HuM195 and HuM195 served as negative controls
while unmodified panitumumab served as a positive control.

In Vitro and In
Vivo Studies
of SE-HPLC-Isolated ICG-sOSu-Panitumumab
The potential for
optical imaging was examined for all three SE-HPLC-purified ICG-sOSu-panitumumab
conjugates (1, 2, and 3) in vitro using HER1-expressing human epidermoid carcinoma
A431 cancer cells. ICG-sOSu-panitumumab (3) possessed
the highest fluorescence intensity staining of A431 cells (), followed by 2 and 1. In contrast, no fluorescence signal
was obtained with the A431 cells after incubation with ICG-sOSu-HuM195.

For in vivo imaging studies, ICG-sOSu-panitumumab
conjugates (1 and 2) were administered to
athymic nude mice bearing HER1-positive s.c. LS-174T xenografts. Due
to the low product yield from the 20× reaction with ICG-sOSu,
conjugate 3 was not carried forward. Tumors were clearly
visualized 24 h after intravenous injection of ICG-sOSu-panitumumab
conjugate (2, 20 μg) through day 7, during which
the background fluorescence gradually diminished (Figure A). Upon excision of tissue at day 3 postinjection
of the conjugation products, the tumor showed the highest fluorescence
signal followed by the liver with the second highest intensity (Figure B). To demonstrate the specificity of the bioconjugates,
excess panitumumab injected 1 h prior to administration of ICG-sOSu-panitumumab
successfully blocked tumor uptake (Figure C). No localization to tumor (Figure C) was
observed in the mice injected with the CD33-specific ICG-sOSu-HuM195
control, further demonstrating the specificity of ICG-sOSu-panitumumab.
Quantitative analysis indicated a superior tumor-to-background ratio
with product 2 over that of 1 at days 3
and 7 with doses of 10 μg and 20 μg (p &lt; 0.01); however, there was no significant difference at days
1 and 2 (p &gt; 0.05) (Figure D). Ex vivo imaging studies were also performed
in mice bearing HER1-positive peritoneal LS-174T tumor xenografts.
Similar to the previous study, the highest fluorescence intensity
was obtained in the tumor followed by the liver ().

(A) Representative in vivo NIR fluorescence imaging
of athymic mice bearing HER1-positive s.c. LS-174T xenografts at days
1, 2, 3, and 7 after i.v. injection of SE-HPLC-purified ICG-sOSu-panitumumab
(2, 20 μg). (B) Representative ex vivo NIR fluorescence image (right) of the dissected organs at day 3.
Labels: 1, heart; 2, lung; 3, liver; 4, spleen; 5, tumor; 6, kidney;
7, intestine. Note: The white light image in (B) indicates the order
of the organs shown in (B) and (C). (C) Representative in
vivo and ex vivo fluorescence images of
HER1-positive s.c. LS-174T tumor-bearing mice with excess antibody
blocking or with ICG-sOSu-HuM195 (negative control). (D) Comparison
of tumor-to-background ratio with injection of various doses of SE-HPLC-purified
ICG-sOSu-panitumumab (1, 2) in athymic mice
bearing HER1-positive s.c. LS-174T xenografts (n =
5). *, significantly different from 2 - 5 μg group
(day 3) (P &lt; 0.001); #, significantly different
from 2 - 5 μg group (day 7) (P &lt; 0.01).

ICG-sOSu Covalently and
Noncovalently Bound to Panitumumab
Because it is well-known
that IC-Green may bind to proteins via
noncovalent interaction,, it would be important
to determine whether ICG-sOSu bound to panitumumab covalently or noncovalently.
The SE-HPLC-purified ICG-sOSu-panitumumab was also evaluated by SDS-PAGE
and visualized using Colloidal Blue stain for protein staining and
optical imaging to detect the presence of ICG-sOSu. Under nonreducing
conditions, protein staining of the three conjugated products (1, 2, and 3) exhibited bands similar
to the unmodified panitumumab (Figure A).
Two distinct bands were evident at ∼170 and 200 kDa which increased
in intensity corresponding with the increasing ICG-sOSu used in the
reaction. These bands were the predominant components in the collected
fractions corresponding to the HMW species noted in the SE-HPLC profile.
The molecular weights of the components were significantly lower than
that seen by SE-HPLC (MW ≥ 2000 kDa), suggesting that the noncovalent
bonds in the aggregates were disrupted by SDS. The number of ICG-sOSu
molecules covalently linked to aggregated panitumumab in the lower
and upper band species was determined to be ∼30–50 calculated
from the linear plot of log MW of protein markers vs relative migration
distance; however, the majority of the ICG-sOSu in the aggregates
was noncovalently associated as evidenced by the corresponding optically
active LMW entity on the gel (blue arrow, Figure A). This LMW band is also present, with increasing intensity,
in the three preparations of the ICG-sOSu-panitumumab conjugate. This
result highlights some of the differences between running a native
versus an SDS modified gel assay. In the absence of SDS, the protein
stained gel reveals HMW aggregates were mostly retained at the well
of the stacking gel (Figure A); interestingly,
broad smearing of the HMW aggregates is apparent when visualized by
the NIRF.

SDS-PAGE of (A) SE-HPLC-isolated ICG-sOSu-panitumumab conjugates
and aggregates, and (B) reaction mixture, under nonreducing and reducing
conditions with β-mercaptoethanol. Panitumumab served as a reference.
Colloidal blue protein staining and optical imaging were performed:
M, marker; 1, intact panitumumab antibody; 2, 1; 3, 2; 4, 3; 5, ICG-sOSu aggregates (from 20×
reaction, peak with RT = 12.5 min); 6, ICG-sOSu aggregates (from 20×
reaction, peak with RT = 14.5 min); 7, ICG-sOSu-panitumumab reaction
mixture (10×, without purification); 8, ICG-sOSu alone incubated
in conjugation buffer for 1 h at 37 °C as a control. White arrow:
heavy chain; yellow arrow: light chain; blue arrow: free dye.

Although the above-mentioned data
suggest that the mAb panitumumab
was a component of the HMW aggregates, it is equally important to
establish whether ICG-sOSu itself can also form HMW aggregates. To
address this point, SDS- and native PAGE were performed using samples
of ICG-sOSu-panitumumab reaction mixture (without purification) and
ICG-sOSu alone after incubation in conjugation buffer for 1 h at 37
°C. Optical imaging of the gel indicated that the reaction mixture
(Figure B) contains a distinct band at ∼150
kD, consistent with the expected molecular weight of panitumumab.
There is also a broad band from 64 to 98 kDa. This broad band appears
as a single band in the presence of SDS (Figure B) as determined by optical imaging. The colloidal blue staining
for protein, meanwhile, indicated a range of molecular weights from
98 kDa to 250 kDa. These HMW entities are also evidenced by a broad
band of fluorescence, while the SDS-PAGE showed one fluorescent LMW
band for the ICG-sOSu sample (blue arrow, Figure B), whereas the sample from the ICG-sOSu-panitumumab conjugation
reaction mixture showed multiple HMW entities under nonreducing conditions
(Figure B).

Native gel of (A) SE-HPLC-isolated ICG-sOSu-panitumumab
conjugates
and aggregates, and (B) reaction mixture. Panitumumab served as a
reference. Colloidal blue protein staining and optical imaging were
performed: M, marker; 1, intact panitumumab antibody; 2, 1; 3, 2; 4, 3; 5, ICG-sOSu aggregates (from
20× reaction, peak with RT = 12.5 min); 6, ICG-sOSu aggregates
(from 20× reaction, peak with RT = 14.5 min); 7, ICG-sOSu-panitumumab
reaction mixture (10×, without purification); 8, ICG-sOSu alone
incubated in conjugation buffer for 1 h at 37 °C as a control.

Under reducing conditions, the
pattern of protein bands was again
similar for the bioconjugates (1, 2, and 3) compared to unmodified panitumumab (Figure A). HMW species were present, seen as a smear of staining
above the heavy chain ranging in Mr from ∼64 to
100. The staining intensity increases with the increasing amount of
dye used in the reaction. These same patterns are evident when developed
for the NIRF. The majority of the ICG-sOSu appears to be linked to
the heavy chain (&gt;80%) as illustrated by the optical imaging in
Figure A (white arrow). The LMW species was
also evident
under optical imaging in the SE-HPLC-purified conjugation products,
particularly so in product 3. The presence of this LMW
band suggests two scenarios: (1) there is either unreacted or hydrolyzed
ICG-sOSu dye, or (2) there is ICG-sOSu noncovalently bound to the
panitumumab. To examine these possibilities, a peak portion of the
conjugation products was collected by SE-HPLC with the retention time
19–20 min, in contrast to 18.5–20.5 min (Figure ). Results showed that the LMW species were retained
(Figure A), thus excluding the possibility
of unreacted or hydrolyzed ICG-sOSu dye. Optical imaging of the native
gel showed only one band for all the SE-HPLC-purified bioconjugates
further confirming the origin of the LMW bands to be noncovalently
associated ICG-sOSu dissociated by the SDS (Figure A). To further investigate this observation, ethyl acetate was used to extract the noncovalently bound
ICG-sOSu from the ICG-sOSu-panitumumab conjugates (1, 2, and 3), and produce three new products, 4, 5, and 6, respectively. As seen
from SDS-PAGE of the extracted conjugate, the LMW entity appears to
be totally eliminated by this step (Figure B–C). The percentages of the covalent interaction in these
conjugated products were calculated to be ∼75%, 61%, and 46%
for the thus treated 1, 2, and 3, respectively (Figure A).

(A) SDS-PAGE of the SE-HPLC-isolated
ICG-sOSu-panitumumab (1, 2, and 3). a: samples collected
from SE-HPLC RT 18.5 to 20.5 min. b: samples collected from HPLC RT
19–20 min. (B–C) SDS-PAGE of SE-HPLC-isolated ICG-sOSu-panitumumab
before (c, 2) and after (d, 5) extraction
by ethyl acetate under (B) nonreducing and (C) reducing condition.
Samples were loaded with the same protein level (p) or equal amount
of fluorophore (f). Colloidal blue protein staining and optical imaging
were performed after development. Black arrow, heavy chain; brown
arrow, light chain; blue arrow, free dye; red arrow, desired conjugation
product.

(A) Percentages of covalent interaction in the
SE-HPLC-isolated
ICG-sOSu-panitumumab conjugates (1, 2, 3). Ethyl acetate was used to remove noncovalently bound ICG-sOSu.
(B) Competition radioimmunoassay, with 125I-panitumumab,
of SE-HPLC-isolated ICG-sOSu-panitumumab before (2) and
after (5) extraction by ethyl acetate. Unmodified panitumumab
monoclonal antibody served as a positive control. In addition, unmodified
panitumumab after ethyl acetate extraction (panitumumab-e) was also
examined. HuM195 served as a negative control.

In Vitro and In Vivo Characterization
of Doubly Purified ICG-sOSu-Panitumumab
To determine if the
doubly purified ICG-sOSu-panitumumab, by both SE-HPLC and ethyl acetate
extraction (see  for SE-HPLC of the doubly purified conjugate), retained
its potential for optical imaging, product 2 was selected.
A competition radioimmunoassay was performed to demonstrate that the
immunoreactivity against HER-1 was conserved in the ICG-sOSu-panitumumab
even after extraction with ethyl acetate (Figure B). For the animal study, doses administered to athymic nude
mice bearing HER1-positive s.c. LS-174T xenografts were normalized
to match the amounts in the initial imaging study by either equal
protein (20 μg) or same amount of fluorophore because the amount
of ICG-sOSu conjugated to panitumumab was reduced to 1.2 from 2.1
after ethyl acetate extraction. Optical imaging was carried out up
to 7 days postinjection of the new product 5. With equivalent
dye, comparable tumor-to-background ratios were observed for the SE-HPLC-isolated
products prior to and post extraction with ethyl acetate (Figure A). When compared on the basis of equivalent protein,
the tumor-to-background ratio of the doubly purified 5 seemed to be lower as compared with that of the bioconjugate prior
to extraction, but this difference was not significant (p &gt; 0.05) (Figure A). However, and importantly,
there was an improvement in the liver clearance, with significantly
reduced fluorescence intensity noted (p &lt; 0.01)
(Figure B). The tumor-to-liver ratio was significantly
increased after ethyl acetate extraction confirming advantages of
using the doubly purified conjugation product (Figure C).

(A) Comparison of tumor-to-background ratio with injection of SE-HPLC
isolated 2 and after extraction by ethyl acetate 5 in athymic mice bearing HER1-positive s.c. LS-174T xenografts
(n = 5). The dose of 5 was administered
after normalization by the same protein (5-p, 20 mg)
or fluorophore (5-f). (B) Representative ex vivo NIR fluorescence image of the dissected organs from mice above at
day 3 after i.v. injection of doses. Labels: 1, heart; 2, lung; 3,
liver; 4, spleen; 5, tumor; 6, kidney; 7, intestine. (C) Tumor-to-liver
and tumor-to-kidney ratios obtained from the ex vivo imaging. *, significantly different from product 2 (P &lt; 0.01).

Discussion
This report, for the first time, provides
a detailed description
of the full purification, characterization, and validation of an ICG-sOSu-conjugated
mAb, and proposes a clinically applicable strategy to produce and
purify covalently bound dye conjugation products. Analysis of the
conjugation reaction between ICG-sOSu dye and a mAb (panitumumab)
revealed that there is formation of a considerable amount of HMW aggregates
(&gt;150 kDa) in the reaction mixtures that are apparently overlooked
in the literature.− The amounts of aggregation product are clearly directly influenced
by the amounts of dye in the reaction, which also decreases the amounts
of isolable conjugation products. However, these aggregates could
clearly be removed by SE-HPLC or other size-exclusion separation methodologies.
More importantly, the interaction between ICG-sOSu and panitumumab
in the SE-HPLC isolated conjugation reaction product was found to
be both covalent and noncovalent in nature and would posit that the
use of other size-exclusion separation methodologies would provide
the same conclusion. Accordingly, a further purification step was
performed, namely, ethyl acetate extraction, to abrogate noncovalently
bound ICG-sOSu. This step was in fact reported in one of the earlier
publications regarding the development of bifunctional ICG-sOSu that
also provided an impetus for a closer investigation of possible noncovalent
interactions that should have been noted by others seeking to use
ICG-sOSu-mAb conjugates for imaging. Importantly,
the doubly purified bioconjugate exhibited conservation of immunoreactivity
contrary to the generally held conventional wisdom that this step
would simply denature the protein or compromise the structure of the
mAb eliminating any possibility of reacting with the cognate antigen,
HER1. In vivo re-evaluation of the ICG-sOSu-panitumumab
revealed excellent target-specific uptake with minimal liver uptake
in athymic nude mice bearing HER1-positive s.c. LS-174T xenografts.

One of the important confirmatory findings in this study was that
despite the use of the improved aqueous solubility properties of ICG-sOSu,
the formation of HMW aggregates of panitumumab during the conjugation
reaction occurred. This conclusion was supported by the strong absorbance
at 280 nm, and the staining pattern (&gt;150 kDa) shown on the colloidal
blue-stained SDS and native gels in the collected samples of aggregates.
Because the HMW aggregates are composed of mAb, the yields of the
desired products were affected. For example, the yield of the desired
ICG-sOSu-panitumumab product in the 20× ICG-sOSu dye reaction
was ∼19%, and significant amounts of the mAb were consumed
in the creation of the HMW aggregates as seen from the large peak
at RT = 12.5 min (Figure ). In contrast, the
product yield was much higher (∼72%) from the 5× ICG-sOSu
dye reaction with a smaller amount of the HMW entity being generated.
However, the higher yield with the lower ICG-sOSu:mAb molar reaction
ratio then is at the cost of the number of ICG-sOSu molecules conjugated
to the antibody. Thus, one should exercise caution in optimization
of the ICG-related conjugation reactions.

All three purified
ICG-sOSu-panitumumab conjugates (1, 2, and 3) exhibited two absorbance peaks
at 720 and 800 nm. Both of the absorption maxima were red-shifted
as compared with 715 and 780 nm for ICG-sOSu, which is in agreement
with previous publications where dye was bound to a large molecule. In addition, as was observed from the absorption
spectra data of the study described herein, the intensity ratio between
the two absorbance peaks, 720 nm relative to 800 nm, increased with
increasing equivalents of ICG-sOSu (Figure A). This might be caused by the increased number of ICG-sOSu conjugated
to panitumumab (∼1, 2, and 5 for 1, 2, and 3, respectively). Similar phenomenon was observed
in previous studies., With the increasing ICG concentration
in aqueous solution, the absorption peak shifts from 780 nm to the
wavelength of 695 nm as a result of aggregation of ICG molecules from
monomer to oligomer.

Dialysis or
PD-10 filtration has been commonly performed after
conjugation to remove excess dye. While
convenient, unfortunately, neither is well suited for removing aggregates
larger than 150 kDa, nor effective at removing noncovalently bound
ICG-sOSu. After purification by SE-HPLC and subsequent ethyl acetate
extraction, a pure covalently linked conjugation product was obtained.
The advantage of using purified and thus validated ICG-sOSu conjugation
products is multifold. First, elimination of the noncovalently bound
dye reduces nonspecific liver retention and thus allows for high fidelity
imaging of the targeted organs. As observed from our previous studies,
the uptake in tumor is the highest at day 3 postinjection of the radiolabeled
panitumumab (Y-86 or Zr-89), while all other organs have low uptake
in the same animal model., Differently, the fluorescence
intensity in liver was also observed in this study, in addition to
tumor, using the SE-HPLC purified conjugation products. Actually,
high liver uptake has been observed in previous studies with ICG-sOSu
conjugates,, which might be directly related
to the presence of aggregate products and/or noncovalently bound ICG-sOSu.
The liver retention was greatly diminished with the doubly purified
conjugation product. These findings could open a new avenue for the
development of targeted imaging agents for liver disease using ICG-sOSu
conjugates and quite possibly other structurally related NIR dyes
useful for noninvasive optical imaging. The second advantage is that
this methodology is more accurate for determining the number of dye
molecules conjugated to a mAb in an actual covalently linked conjugate
and thus translates forward as an agent suitable for monitoring antigen
(e.g., HER1) expression in tumor. For example, the calculated number
of ICG-sOSu conjugated to mAb was ∼2 after SE-HPLC purification
(product 2). After elimination of the noncovalently bound
ICG-sOSu, the number of ICG-sOSu conjugated to mAb dropped to ∼1.2
for product 5. In addition, false positive results, due
to noncovalently bound ICG-sOSu, could be generated for antigen expression
since part of the released ICG-sOSu might localize in tumor due to
its leaky vasculature or be released from the mAb postinternalization
in the lysozomal compartment. Lastly, pure products are favorable
for clinical application and Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval.
PEGylation of bioconjugates has been reported to prevent aggregation
of ICG-sOSu in aqueous solution, as well
as to reduce immunogenicity and improve imaging performance. The synthesis and characterization of PEGylated
ICG-sOSu conjugation products are currently being pursued for future
studies to increase product yields as well as for the reasons just
cited.

There were some limits on instrumentation in this study.
The UV
detector used for the SE-HPLC was limited in wavelengths to 280 nm,
which is not optimal for detection the ICG-sOSu. Detection of ICG-sOSu
would better be performed at longer wavelengths, e.g., 700–800
nm. Therefore, the in-line analysis of the SE-HPLC with our UV detector
might not be the most accurate for the multicomponent mixture. However,
this did not pose a significant obstacle since collection of the individual
peaks and analysis by a spectrophotometer provided confirmatory information
on the samples from the SE-HPLC. For example, a peak was observed
at 27.2 min, which was the same RT of free ICG-sOSu, yet this was
demonstrated to be impurities from the starting material (purity of
the commercial ICG-sOSu was ∼80%; see ) since there was no absorbance at 700–800
nm seen in the spectrophotometer profile for this peak.

In conclusion,
ICG-sOSu-panitumumab conjugation products in this
study were purified and characterized for their optical, chemical,
and biological properties. Double purification was performed first
by SE-HPLC to remove the HMW aggregates and LMW impurities, and second
by ethyl acetate extraction to abrogate noncovalently bound ICG-sOSu.
The validated ICG-sOSu-panitumumab was successfully applied in tumor
localization with minimal liver uptake in athymic nude mice bearing
HER1-positive LS-174T tumor xenografts. Further studies will, however,
be necessary to explore the new strategies of reducing the formation
of HMW aggregates and better define the potential applications in
the clinical settings. The covalently linked conjugation products
herein provide promise in the development of clinically viable and
reproducible dye-conjugated mAb for optical imaging applications.

Experimental
Procedures
Materials
ICG-N-hydroxysulfosuccinimide
ester (ICG-sulfo-OSu, 2-[7-[1,3-Dihydro-1,1-dimethyl-3-(4-sulfobutyl)-2H-benzo[e]indol-2-ylidene]-1,3,5-heptatrienyl]-1,1-dimethyl-3-[5-(3-sulfosuccinimidyl)oxycarbonylpentyl]-1H-benzo[e]indolium) was purchased from AAT Bioquest (Sunnyvale,
CA). Panitumumab (Amgen, Thousand Oaks, CA) was obtained from the
NIH Veterinary Resources Pharmacy. HuM195, an anti-CD33 mAb, was generously
provided by Dr. McDevitt from Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center.

Antibody Conjugation
The amine-reactive dye ICG-sOSu
was first dissolved in anhydrous DMSO (Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis,
MO). Solutions of panitumumab (5 mg, 33 nmol) were incubated with
ICG-sOSu at molar ratios of ICG-sOSu: mAb of 5, 10, and 20 (5×,
10×, and 20×) in conjugation buffer (0.002 M NaHCO3 + 0.048 M Na2CO3 + 0.15 M NaCl, pH 8.5) for
1 h in the dark at 37 °C with gentle mixing at 750 rpm. Total
volume (250 μL) and DMSO percentage (16%) were constant for
all reactions. After incubation, the three reaction solutions were
analyzed, respectively, with the same loading volume by SE-HPLC on
a Beckman System Gold HPLC (1 mL/min flow rate) fitted with a tandem-column
of a TSK gel G3000SW linked to a TSK gel G4000SW (TOSOH Bioscience,
LLC) using phosphate buffer (67 mM NaPO4 + 100 mM KCl,
pH 6.8) as eluent. And then, each solution was purified by SE-HPLC
at the same condition. The % conjugation products in the reaction
solution is defined as derived from the SE-HPLC profile using Beckman
Coulter’s 32 Karat software and is equal to the peak area for
the desired products/total area of all peaks ×100. “All
peaks” include that for HMW entities, desired products, as
well as free dye. Similar procedures were applied to conjugate ICG-sOSu
to the negative control mAb, HuM195, at a 10:1 reaction molar ratio.
Identical conditions and columns were used for purification of the
ICG-sOSu-HuM195 conjugated product. MW standards (Bio-Rad Laboratories,
Hercules, CA) were used to calibrate the HPLC methods. Absorbance
spectra were recorded using an Agilent 8453 spectrophotometer (Santa
Clara, CA) for the isolated products.

Calculation
The
amount of dye conjugated to panitumumab
was calculated as previously described. Calculations were performed based on the following equation:where ADye = absorbance
of ICG-sOSu at the peak wavelength; εMDye = the molar extinction coefficient of ICG-sOSu at the same wavelength
as ADye; εM280 = the molar extinction coefficient of panitumumab at 280 nm; CF
(correction factor) = A280-dye/ADye. Accordingly, the % yield of the conjugation
product is calculated that is equal to the obtained moles of conjugation
products/total moles of panitumumab in the reaction ×100.

Competition
Assay
The immunoreactivity of the conjugation
products was evaluated based on a previously published competition
radioimmunoassay. Briefly, serial dilutions
of the test solutions were performed to allow 0.02–1000 ng
of each sample to be added in triplicate to wells of 96-well plates
coated with 50 ng human epidermal growth factor receptor (hEGFR). 125I-panitumumab (∼50 000
cpm) was then added and incubated for 4 h at 37 °C. After washing
the wells three times with PBS containing 1% bovine serum albumin
(BSA), 0.2 M NaOH was added to mobilize the bound radioactivity followed
by collection of the activity using cotton filters. Activity was measured
in a 1480 WIZARD 3″ automatic γ-counter (PerkinElmer,
Shelton, CT). Results were plotted as percent inhibition vs concentration
of the samples. The purified ICG-sOSu-HuM195 conjugated product served
as a negative control.

In Vivo and Ex Vivo Optical
Imaging
Animal studies were performed in female athymic (nu/nu)
mice (Charles River Laboratories, Wilmington, MA). All animal protocols
were approved by the National Cancer Institute Animal Care and Use
Committee. HER-1 positive human colorectal carcinoma LS-174T cells
(American Type Culture Collection (ATCC)) were cultured in Dulbecco’s
Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM) containing 10% FetalPLEX (Gemini
Bio-Products, West Sacramento, CA) and 10 mM glutamine. Mice were
injected subcutaneously in the right shoulder with 1 × 106 LS-174T cells in 200 μL saline. When tumors were ∼400
mm3, mice (n = 5) were injected intravenously
with 1 or 2 at indicated doses, or ICG-sOSu-HuM195
(negative control, 20 μg). Optical imaging was performed on
days 1, 2, 3, and 7 postinjection of the ICG-sOSu-panitumumab using
a Maestro in vivo Fluorescence Imaging System equipped
with the following filters: excitation wavelength 700 to 770 nm, emission
wavelength 790 nm (Cambridge Research &amp; Instrumentation, Woburn,
MA). Ketamine/Xylazine (100/10 mg/kg, respectively) was used to anesthetize
animals throughout the imaging process. For blocking studies, excess
panitumumab (1 mg) was injected to block the receptor sites 1 h prior
to injection of the ICG-sOSu-panitumumab. For quantitative analysis,
regions of interest (ROI) were drawn over tumors and thigh muscles
(as background). The average fluorescence signal of each ROI was measured
and recorded. Results were expressed as tumor-to-background ratio.
To evaluate the biodistribution of the conjugation products in mice,
organs (heart, lung, liver, spleen, kidney, intestine, tumor) were
harvested from mice at day 3 postinjection of agents (n = 3) and imaged. Imaging was repeated as described above to evaluate
the qualities of the ethyl acetate extracted ICG-sOSu-panitumumab
conjugate.

Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis
SDS polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) was performed as previously described. Briefly, samples (2 μg), with or without
β-mercaptoethanol, were loaded into each lane of 4–20%
precast tris-glycine polyacrylamide gels (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA).
Panitumumab (2 μg) served as a reference material and resolved
at 120 V. Protein was visualized by colloidal blue staining; NIR light
was captured by the Maestro Fluorescence Imaging System. Samples were
also analyzed by nondenaturing (native) electrophoresis to further
investigate the interaction of ICG-sOSu and panitumumab in the conjugation
products. Native sample buffer and native running buffer were used
for nondenaturing electrophoresis.

Chemical Purification of
Covalently Conjugated Products
Extraction of HPLC-purified
ICG-sOSu-panitumumab was performed using
conditions described elsewhere. In brief,
products were subjected to ethyl acetate extraction (1:1) by vigorous
shaking for 30 min. The separated aqueous layer was then immediately
treated to buffer exchange in PBS using a Centriprep centrifugal filter
device (Millipore, Bedford, MA) to remove trace residual ethyl acetate.
The number of ICG-sOSu conjugated to panitumumab was calculated again
as described above. This new number was used to revise the number
obtained from just SE-HPLC purification to get the percentage of covalently
bound dye in the SE-HPLC purified products.

Statistical Analysis
Quantitative data are expressed
as the mean plus/minus standard error of mean (SEM). One-way ANOVA
was used to determine the statistical significance for the tumor-to-background
or tumor-to-organ ratio in different treatment groups. Significant
difference was considered when p &lt; 0.05.

Supporting Information Available
RP-HPLC
profile of ICG-sulfo-OSu
(Figure S1); SE-HPLC data of ICG-sOSu-HuM195 (Figure S2); in vitro fluorescence microscopy images (Figure S3); ex vivo NIR fluorescence image of the dissected organs from
athymic mice bearing HER1-positive peritoneal LS-174T tumor xenografts
(Figure S4); SE-HPLC profile of the doubly purified ICG-sOSu-panitumumab
(5) (Figure S5). This material is available free of charge
via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc500312w_si_001.pdf

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Intramural
Research Program
of the NIH, National Cancer Institute, Center for Cancer Research.
We would like to thank the EIB Microscopy and Digital Imaging Facility
and Dr. Michael Kruhlak for the technical assistance in fluorescence
microscopy.

Abbreviations
NIRFnear-infrared
fluorescence

mAbmonoclonal antibody

SE-HPLCsize-exclusion
high-performance liquid chromatography

PEGpolyethylene glycol

HMWhigh molecular weight

LMWlow molecular weight

ICG-sOSuICG-sulfo-OSu,
ICG-N-hydroxysulfosuccinimide ester

RTretention time

SDS-PAGEsodium dodecyl sulfate
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis

