Introduction
Fluorescent labeling of protein molecules
is the cornerstone of
modern biological detection and analysis. Proteins can be labeled
fluorescently either through direct conjugation of small organic fluorophores
to the protein of interest or genetic addition of fluorescent proteins
to the protein of interest. Antibodies in particular are often labeled
with small fluorophores instead of genetic tags due to the complexity
of adding fluorescent proteins to the multichain immunoglobin molecule.
Due to the specific and selective binding of antibodies to their antigens,
they are extremely useful in biological research as labeling agents.
One of the most commonly used and widely available fluorescent molecules
conjugated to antibodies is fluorescein and/or the similar fluorescein
isothiocyanate (FITC). Both are bright green dyes easily excited and
detected by most commercial fluorescence measurement techniques and
instruments such as microscopy and flow cytometry.

While fluorescein
is bright, inexpensive, and relatively easy to
conjugate to protein or other biological molecules, it suffers from
poor photostability and fluoresces in
a region of high cellular autofluoresecence. Fluorescein-conjugated antibodies, lipids, polymers, and proteins
have been used in imaging and biological research for many years due
to the availability of fluorescein conjugated probes and the fluorescein
excitation and emission spectrum, which is compatible with most commercially
available fluorescence measurement systems using the widely available
488 nm excitation laser. Antibodies and single chain variable fragment
antibodies (scFvs) that bind and quench FITC fluorescence have been
developed for a variety of uses including antibody and scFv crystal
structure analysis, mutational and folding
analysis,, and as a protein targeting mechanism. In particular, the FITC binding scFv FITC-E2
binds and quenches FITC and other fluorescein derivatives with a Kd of 2.4 nM.

Recently discovered and characterized fluorogen activating proteins
(FAPs) are based on scFvs, selected for activation of otherwise nonfluorescent
dyes from a yeast surface display library and subsequently affinity
matured for tighter binding. FAPs differ
from most fluorescent dyes and proteins in that the fluorogen is exogenous,
can be added at any time, and is virtually nonfluorescent until bound
to the FAP. Malachite green derivatives are useful fluorogens, excited
with a 633 nm excitation source and emitting at 670 nm. Chemical modification to the base malachite green
molecule, specifically addition of 2 or 11 polyethelyene glycol repeats
to the fluorogen, lead to cell impermeant versions which bind FAPs
with high affinity and exhibit low background binding or fluorescence. FAPs have been applied in a variety of biological
studies including membrane receptor internalization studies, signal amplification studies, CFTR trafficking studies,− targeted pH sensors, incorporation into peptide-based membranes for
use in animal studies, STED nanoscopy
studies, and secondary labeling reagents. The affinity matured light chain homodimer of
L5 (E52D L91S in ref (), L5** or L89S E50D in Kabat nomenclature, in ref ()), referred to as dL5 in
this study, binds MG tightly with a Kd of 18 pM.

Secondary labeling
of probes and proteins is a common factor in
many fluorescence-based biological assays such as immunofluorescence,
flow cytometry, ELISA, and live cell microscopy. Typically, secondary
labeling is performed to boost the signal of primary labeling agents
that directly bind the protein or biomolecule under investigation.
A secondary reagent has affinity to the primary reagent, often a monoclonal
antibody, and contains multiple brightly fluorescing molecules in
order to aid in detection. Some primary antibodies are directly labeled
themselves with fluorophores to eliminate this step. Most commercially
available antibodies are available as a FITC or carboxyfluorescein-labeled
conjugate in order to use primary labeling instead of secondary labeling.
To overcome the poor photostability and high autofluorescence that
limits sensitivity in the green fluorescence region, we have developed
a straightforward FITC/fluorescein converter reagent which shifts
the fluorescence excitation and emission into the red region of the
visible spectrum to reduce cellular autofluorescence and to overcome
rapid FITC/fluorescein photobleaching. The recombinant bifunctional
protein, FITC-E2–dL5, binds FITC or fluorescein on target molecules
and binds to the fluorogen MG-2p to shift the fluorescence spectra
∼150 nm to the red (Figure ). It is
important to note that this fluorescence shift is not based on fluorescence
resonance energy transfer (FRET) as the FITC/fluorescein emission
wavelength (peak maximum of 521 or 519) does not overlap with the
MG-2p peak excitation region at 633 nm. The protein domains act independently
of one another relying on the established fluorescein binding and
quenching properties of FITC-E2 and the fluorogen activation of the
dL5 FAP domain, respectively. Excitation of MG-2p is performed at
different wavelengths than that of fluorescein in this system for
optimal fluorescence emission, although MG itself can be directly
partially excited at 488 nm, due to a small secondary excitation peak. This reagent can be used to increase the signal-to-noise
ratio of FITC-labeled probes, and can be used against many FITC or
fluorescein-labeled molecules. FITC-E2–dL5 binds fluorescein-labeled
molecules in a 1:1 ratio of fluorescein to MG-2p and binds in a non-cross-linking
manner. (Figure )

Conceptual schematic
of the FITC-E2–dL5 protein binding
to a fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-labeled target, in this case
an antibody. Green FITC fluorescence is quenched by binding of the
FITC-E2 single chain fragment variable antibody (scFv) and replaced
with red fluorescence via the dL5/MG-2p fluorogen activating protein
(FAP) fluoromodule. The two protein domains (FITC-E2 and dL5) act
independently of one another in binding their respective targets.
FITC quenching is entirely achieved by the FITC-E2 domain (black)
binding, and MG activation is achieved by binding to the fluorogen
activating protein domain dL5 (red). No FRET signal is observed between
the fluorophores, and independent excitation and emission of each
fluorophore is measured.

Results
In Vitro FITC-Labeled Antibody and Biotin–PEG–Fluorescein
Binding
To demonstrate that the FITC-E2–dL5 protein
both binds and quenches FITC fluorescence while activating MG-2p fluorescence,
experiments were performed in a fluorescence plate reader using a
constant amount of fluorescein-labeled molecule and MG-2p fluorogen
with an increasing titration of FITC-E2–dL5 protein. These
experiments showed a concentration-dependent quenching of FITC fluorescence
and activation of MG fluorescence (Figure A). For the FITC-labeled antibody, fluorescence decreases to approximately
35% of the starting value at a concentration of 1 μM FITC-E2–dL5,
although higher quenching was seen with a different antibody conjugate
(&gt;90%, data not shown). Malachite green fluorescence emissions
increased
in a linear fashion with increasing FITC-E2–dL5 protein concentration
as expected (Figure A inset). Titration of
a fluorescein-conjugated PEG–biotin (200 nM) with increasing
amounts of FITC-E2–dL5 demonstrated that the FITC-E2–dL5
is capable of binding carboxyfluorescein as well as FITC. Approximately
95% of the fluorescein fluorescence in this experiment was quenched
at FITC-E2–dL5 concentrations above 200 nM (Figure B), while MG fluorescence increased in the same
linear manner as in the FITC-conjugated antibody experiment (Figure B inset). The difference in quenching, approximately
65% on FITC-conjugated antibody vs 95% for fluorescein PEG–biotin
is most likely due to accessibility of antibody conjugated FITC to
FITC-E2–dL5 relative to soluble fluorescein in solution on
the fluorescein PEG–biotin. The short conjugation linker on
FITC ensures that the fluorophore remains close to the protein surface
and potentially inaccessible to the larger FITC-E2–dL5 protein.
These experiments show this protein is functional in binding both
FITC or carboxyfluorescein on one end and MG-2p on the other end,
leading to decreased green fluorescence and increased red fluorescence
in a concentration-dependent manner.

In vitro binding of FITC-E2–dL5
to 0.5
μg FITC-labeled CD11c monoclonal antibody or 200 nM biotin–PEG–fluorescein.
Error bars are 1 standard deviation from three replicate samples.
(A) FITC fluorescence measured using 495 nm excitation and 519 nm
±10 nm emission with an increasing concentration of FITC-E2–dL5
and 2.5 μM MG-2p. (B) 200 nM biotin–polyethelyne glycol
(PEG)–carboxyfluorescein fluorescence measured the same as
in A. Insets are of corresponding MG-2p fluorescence from the same
samples.

Flow Cytometry Analysis
of Cells with Antibody-Bound FITC-E2–dL5
Shifting
the spectrum from the green region with high autofluorescence
to the red, with low, is expected to improve the signal to background
ratio. Comparisons of the signal-to-noise ratio of FITC-E2–dL5
bound to FITC-labeled antibodies and FITC-labeled antibodies alone
for cell surface staining was performed by flow cytometry. A CHO cell
line stably expressing a nine amino acid (sequence YPYDVPDYA) influenza
hemaglutinin epitope (HA) tagged OPRM1 receptor was bound with a FITC-labeled
monoclonal anti-HA antibody followed by FITC-E2–dL5. Flow cytometric
analysis of these samples relative to unstained cells shows that the
FITC-labeled anti-HA antibody yielded a median green fluorescence
signal to background ratio of 7.62 (Figure A). Binding FITC-E2–dL5 to cells with FITC-labeled HA antibodies
and incubation with 250 nM MG in both samples gave a median signal
to background ratio of 51.8 (Figure B). FITC
fluorescence quenching upon addition of FITC-E2–dL5 to cells
bound with FITC-labeled anti-HA antibody lowered the green fluorescence
by approximately 35% of the starting FITC fluorescence (Figure A). Nonspecific binding of FITC-E2–dL5 to
cells without FITC-labeled antibody gave approximately a doubling
over the red autofluorescence signal, indicating relatively low levels
of nonspecific binding, or sample fluid fluorescence associated with
FITC-E2–dL5 around the cells (Figure B). These data show that FITC-E2–dL5 specifically binds FITC
on anti-HA monoclonal antibodies bound to cells and generates fluorescent
signal in the far-red region of the visible spectrum. The signal to
background ratio of FITC-labeled antibody alone in the green region
vs the signal to background ratio of MG fluorescence in the red region
improves 6-fold using this protein as a secondary binding reagent.

Flow cytometry
fluorescence analysis of FITC-labeled HA11 antibody
(antibody which binds to the HA epitope) bound to CHO cells expressing
an HA-tagged OPRM1 receptor using FITC-E2–dL5 as a secondary
labeling agent. (A) FL1 green channel fluorescence gives an antibody
signal to cells only background signal ratio of 7.62 with 35% quenching
of FITC fluorescence by FITC-E2–dL5. (B) FL4 far-red channel
fluorescence gives MG-2p signal to cells only background signal ratio
of 51.8 and approximately 2× background signal from nonspecific
staining.

Microscopy Analysis Demonstrates
Colocalization of FITC-Labeled
HA11 Antibody and FITC-E2–dL5/MG Fluorescence
FITC-labeled
primary antibodies can be useful imaging targets on living cells.
To determine whether the bifunctional FITC-E2–dL5 and MG-2p
labeling system was practical for imaging live cells, HEK cells expressing
a dopamine transporter with an N-terminal CFP tag and extracellular
HA epitope were visualized with primary
anti-HA antibody and the converter construct. The dopamine transporter
is trafficked to the plasma membrane, and addition of HA antibodies
to the culture medium results in robust staining of plasma membrane
localized transporter. Addition of unlabeled
monoclonal HA antibodies to living HEK cells followed by incubation
with FITC-E2–dL5 and MG-2p resulted in low signals for both
488 nm channel green fluorescence (attributable to some crossover
from CFP fluorescence) and for 640 nm channel red fluorescence (Figure A–C), indicating low nonspecific labeling
with the FITC-E2–dL5 construct. Use of FITC-labeled anti-HA
antibodies substantially increased plasma membrane 488 nm channel
green fluorescence compared to samples incubated with unlabeled anti-HA
(Figure D and E, note that crossover from
CFP is still visible). Importantly, incubation of these FITC-anti-HA-labeled
cells with the FITC-E2–dL5 and MG-2p produced robust far-red
fluorescence of the plasma membrane that was highly colocalized with
the FITC fluorescence from the HA antibodies and CFP fluorescence
(Figure F and G). It is important to note
that less than 10% of the FITC fluorescence was quenched in these
experiments as subsaturating concentrations of FITC-E2–dL5
was used. The purpose of these experiments was to show colocalization
of FITC and MG-2p fluorescence and demonstrate the low background
of MG-2p fluorescence when FITC-conjugated antibody is not present.
These data indicate that the FITC-E2–dL5 and MG-2p labeling
system can be used to specifically label proteins of interest and
analyze their dynamics on living cells.

Live HEK cells expressing
dopamine transporter with cyan fluorescent
protein and HA epitope (CFP-HA-DAT) were incubated with unlabeled
(A–C) or FITC-conjugated (D–G) anti-HA antibodies prior
to incubation with FITC-E2–dL5 and MG-2p and imaging as described
in . (A and D) CFP
fluorescence representing total transporter. (B and E) FITC fluorescence,
which includes background crossover from CFP. (C and F) Fluorescence
from MG-2p. (G) Merged image from E and F showing colocalization of
signals from anti-HA-FITC and MG-2p. Images for each channel were
acquired and displayed using identical settings.

Fluorescence Correlation Spectroscopy of FITC-E2–dL5
with FITC-Labeled Dextran
To demonstrate that FITC-E2–dL5
can bind FITC-labeled biomolecules other than antibodies, FITC-labeled
dextran was bound by FITC-E2–dL5 in solution-based fluorescence
correlation spectroscopy experiments. A relatively large FITC-labeled
dextran with an average polymer MW of 150,000 with an average labeling
rate of 0.004 FITC molecules per dextran residue was used to measure
fluorescence correlation with FITC-E2–dL5. A ratio of 20.25
nM FITC dextran (effective FITC concentration of 75 nM) with 50 nM
FITC-E2–dL5 was used to ensure most or all FITC-E2–dL5
protein would be bound to FITC dextran. MG-2p fluorescence was measured
in these experiments rather than FITC fluorescence as the size change
and diffusion rates are larger for FITC-E2–dL5 (54 kDa) alone
vs FITC-E2–dL5 bound to FITC dextran (approximately 250–300
kDa, depending on how many protein molecules bind) than for FITC dextran
alone (150 kDa) vs FAP-bound FITC dextran (250–300 kDa). FITC
dextran size also varies considerably in the preparation with an average
MW of 150,000, leading to a wider variety of FITC dextran diffusion
times vs FITC-E2–dL5 diffusion times, as the latter is of a
uniform size. Ten FCS spectra per experiment were averaged to give
an averaged diffusion time, then converted to a diffusion rate as
described in the  for
three experiments each for FITC-E2–dL5 alone and FITC-E2–dL5
with FITC dextran. The averaged diffusion rate for FITC-E2–dL5
alone is 100.3 μm2/s with a standard deviation of
2.1 μm2/s, while the averaged diffusion rate of FITC
dextran with FITC-E2–dL5 is 50.2 μm2/s with
a standard deviation of 2.1 μm2/s. The diffusion
rate constant of FITC-E2–dL5 alone is nearly double that of
the FITC dextran-bound sample, indicating that the protein is binding
to and diffusing with the larger dextran molecule. These values are
consistent with a simple model for differences in hydrodynamic diameter
of the protein alone and complexed with the dextran based on molecular
weight (Rh ≈ M1/3, and D ≈ 1/Rh), which would predict a Dbound/Dfree ratio of ∼0.55 (using MW
of 54,000 and 312,000 for free and bound fluorophore, respectively,
assuming each 150,000 MW dextran binds three FITC-E2–dL5 molecules),
compared to the observed Dbound/Dfree ratio of ∼0.50, measured.

Photobleaching
of Immobilized Fluorescein vs FAP-Bound MG
Photostability
experiments on avidin agarose particles to determine
the relative photobleaching rates of immobilized biotin–PEG–fluorescein
and FITC-E2–dL5/MG bound biotin–PEG–fluorescein
were performed by taking 3000 continuous 200 ms exposure images using
appropriate excitation sources and emission filters for each fluorophore.
Laser output power was determined to be equivalent for both 488 and
640 nm lasers used in these experiments. Mean fluorescence analysis
of these images were calculated, normalized and averaged as described
in the  section. Background
green fluorescence of control avidin agarose particles alone and red
fluorescence background of particles with 500 nm MG-2p were negligent
compared to signal from fluorescein or FITC-E2–dL5/MG bound
particles (data not shown). This eliminates complications with background
fluorescence seen in cellular experiments to better measure fluorophore
photobleaching. Averaged normalized fluorescence from fluorescein
was seen to decrease by 38% (±1.7% standard deviation) over the
course of 3000 frames of 200 ms exposure (approximately 10.5 min)
while FAP-bound MG fluorescence decreased by 4.5% (±3.5% standard
deviation) (Figure ). These experiments show
that immobilized fluorescein is photobleached at a faster rate than
MG is when bound to fluorescein by the FITC-E2–dL5 protein.
This improved photostability could help with experiments where fast
fluorescein/FITC photobleaching is a concern and demonstrates the
improved photostability of using FITC-E2–dL5 as a secondary
labeling reagent.

Photobleaching comparison of immobilized biotin–PEG–fluorescein
on avidin agarose particles vs biotin–PEG–fluorescein
with FITC-E2–dL5 and MG-2p bound afterward. (A) Green fluorescein
fluorescence on representative paticles excited at 488 nm measuring
fluorescein emission. (B) Red MG fluorescence on representative particles
excited at 640 nm measuring MG emission. Scale bar is the same for
both photos. (C) Normalized fluorescence from 3000 exposures of 200
ms at equivalent laser power output from three sample areas of both
fluorescein bound particles and FITC-E2–dL5/MG-2p bound particles.
Fluorescein was photobleached by approximately 38%, while MG photobleached
by approximately 4.5% over the course of 3000 exposure frames.

Discussion
We
have shown that the bifunctional FITC-E2–dL5 converter
protein specifically binds fluorescein on monoclonal antibodies and
polymers, and simultaneously binds and activates malachite green fluorogens in vitro and on the surface of cells. The fact that FITC-labeled
monoclonal antibodies are available against many protein targets allows
rapid fluorogen-based visualization by microscopy or flow cytometry
on cells with simple and straightforward antibody binding protocols.
The pH sensitive nature of FITC, its high photobleaching, and the
background autofluorescence associated with the blue excitation region
often complicates these measurements using direct antibody conjugates.
Use of the bifunctional FITC-E2–dL5 protein described here
can convert any fluorescein-conjugated molecule to a readily detectable
far-red (e.g., Cy5 channel) construct. This fluorescence conversion
is not FRET based, and a different MG excitation source in the 630–640
nm range must be used than would be used to excite fluorescein or
FITC in the 480–490 nm range. FAP-bound MG is also less pH
sensitive and more photostable than solution-exposed FITC. Continued work within the Carnegie Mellon University
Molecular Biosensor and Imaging Center (MBIC) is focused heavily on
use and development of additional fluorogen-based sensors which also
bind the dL5 protein. Dyes that amplify signal have been developed
and used and could be used with FITC-E2–dL5
to amplify the signal from low copy proteins on the cell surface.
Many of these applications can be adapted to work directly with the
FITC-E2–dL5 system, using antibodies to target them and the
dL5/fluorogen system as a reporter.

This approach also differs
from direct genetic addition of GFP
or other fluorescent proteins, as it does not change the nature, size,
or sequence of the protein under study. Due to the relatively large
size of fluorescent proteins and potential complications of protein
folding, sorting, and function sometimes observed when adding a large
protein tag to a target, genetic addition of fluorescent proteins
is often not viable for studying protein biology in cells. Furthermore,
genetic modifications must be made separately for each protein or
variant under study, requiring time-consuming genetic manipulation
and transfection steps for each protein studied. Use of FITC-labeled
targeting agents for native proteins with the FITC-E2–dL5 protein
alleviates these concerns.

Secondary labeling is commonly used
in immunofluorescence and cytometry
experiments (e.g., fluorescently labeled secondary antibodies) to
bind the Fc region of primary antibodies. These secondary antibodies
are specific to the source species of the primary antibody and do
not cross-react with antibodies produced in different species. FITC-E2–dL5
will bind to FITC or fluorescein on any primary antibody, thus eliminating
the need for species-specific secondary labeling antibodies when direct
FITC conjugates are available. For living cells, the multivalency
of secondary antibodies allows binding and bridging of multiple targets,
potentially cross-linking primary antibodies, causing aggregation
or stimulating biological responses.

Alternate approaches to
secondary labeling systems involving fluorogens
include genetic addition of fluorogen activating protein directly
to protein G or streptavidin to label primary antibodies or biotinylated
proteins with fluorogens. Compared to
these approaches, an advantage of the FITC-E2–dL5 converter
is that FITC-labeled antibodies are typically conjugated with multiple
FITC molecules per protein, allowing more monovalent FITC-E2–dL5
and fluorogen molecules to bind without promoting cross-linking or
aggregation (e.g., streptavidin or bivalent antibodies). This is an
approach to increase the signal beyond that seen with a one MG to
one protein approach in a FAP-fused protein. Due to the incomplete
quenching of FITC on primary antibodies when bound (Figures  and C), colocalization
of primary antibodies and FITC-E2–dL5 can be shown by microscopy
with both green and red fluorescence. The tight Kd values of both FITC-E2 to fluorescein (2.4 nM) and dL5 to MG (18 pM) suggest that the bifunctional protein will stay bound to both target
dyes for long periods of time at low concentrations of both target
and fluorogen.

Use of FITC-E2–dL5 as a secondary reagent
shifts the fluorescence
to the far red and consequently enhances the signal-to-background
ratio of stained cells relative to fluorescein-labeled antibodies
alone (Figure ). This signal to background
increase is of particular advantage when a low copy number target
protein is detected by a fluorescein-labeled antibody. Separating
signal from noise, or finding rare cells expressing low-abundance
antigens in such experiments may be difficult when a signal to background
ratio of less than 10 is observed in cells expressing moderate receptor
copy numbers as seen in these experiments (Figure A). By simple direct addition of FITC-E2–dL5 and the
fluorogen MG-2p, a nearly 7-fold signal-to-background ratio improvement
is seen (Figure B) Such improved signal-to-background
may improve sensitivity for detection of low-abundance antigen on
cells.

Fluorescein is a versatile, small organic fluorescent
molecule
and is conjugated to protein, lipid, and sugar molecules with relative
ease. The photostability and photobleaching of FITC happens in a short
time frame and is completely irreversible. One additional advantage
of using this FITC-binding fluorogen activating protein is that the
MG-2p–fluorogen FAP complex is highly photostable. As described above, the use of this protein as
a secondary labeling reagent for immunoassays eliminates the need
for multiple secondary antibodies for different species-specific antibodies,
and the cost and straightforward ease of growing and purifying a recombinant
protein from E. coli may be lower than purchasing
a secondary labeling agent. As shown in these studies, this labeling
reagent can bind FITC or fluorescein (Figure B) on molecules other than protein, and therefore could be used as
a labeling agent for a wide variety of biomolecules. The related dye
Oregon Green is a carboxyfluorescein derivative and has been previously
shown to bind to FITC-E2. As all of these
fluorescein derivatives excite and emit in the same spectral region,
the FITC-E2–dL5 protein can be used as a secondary reagent
to increase the signal-to-noise ratio for biomolecules labeled with
any of the three related fluorophores. This secondary FITC/fluorescein
binding FAP also eliminates the need for any genetic manipulation
of target proteins, making it a quick, easy to use, and cost-effective
approach as a way to shift the fluorescence spectrum and reduce background
for any FITC or fluorescein-labeled target.

Experimental Procedures
Fluorogen
and FITC-E2–dL5 production
Malachite
Green with an O-aminoethlydiethelyene glycol 2 PEG
modification (MG-2p) was obtained from the Carnegie-Mellon Molecular
Imaging and Biosensor Center. The molecule was prepared by previously
published methods. All restriction enzymes,
Phusion DNA polymerase, and T4 ligase were obtained from New England
Biolabs (Ipswich, MA). The FITC-E2 scFv encoding DNA was amplified
by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) from the plasmid pPNL6 FITC-E2
(obtained from the laboratory of Dr. Peter Berget) with DNA primers
containing HindIII and NcoI restriction sites, respectively,
and complementary to the 5′ and 3′ ends of the FITC-E2
encoding DNA. Amplicon was isolated and treated with HindIII and NcoI restriction enzymes and ligated into a previously described
modified pET21 expression plasmid digested with the same enzymes. A previously described synthetic DNA insert
encoding a glycine-serine linker region (G4S)4 was ligated into the NcoI/BamHI cut plasmid. DNA encoding the fluorogen-activating protein
(FAP) dL5** was amplified with PCR primers
containing the restriction sites BamHI and NotI and
ligated in frame with the FITC-E2 coding region into the FITC-E2-(G4S)4 plasmid digested with the same enzymes. DNA
sequencing was performed at each subcloning step to ensure accurate
in-frame insertion of scFv, linker, and FAP. pET21 FITC-E2–dL5
plasmid was transformed into calcium-competent Rosetta-Gami 2 (DE3) E. coli cells (Novagen, Madison, WI). Bacteria were grown,
induced, centrifuged and lysed, with scFv-FAP protein purified in
a previously described manner. Briefly
described, 3 mL starter cultures of transformed E. coli were transferred to 500 mL of LB + (LB media (Difco, Detroit, MI)
with 100 mM phosphate, 20 mM succinic acid, and 0.4% glycerol) and
grown for 5–6 h at 37 °C until the OD600 of the culture
was at 0.6. Cultures were then moved to 20 °C shaking incubators
for 1 h and induced using 500 μM IPTG (Research Products International
Corp., Mount Prospect, IL) and 0.4% glucose (Fisher Scientific, Hampton,
NH) and grown overnight in 20 °C shaking incubators. Bacteria
were lysed using an EmulsiFlex-C3 Homogenizer (Avestin, Ottawa, ON,
Canada), and protein was purified on Ni-NTA agarose (Qiagen, Hilden,
Germany) and eluted with HRV3C protease in a previously described
manner. Protein concentration was determined
using absorbance at 280 nm and a calculated extinction coefficient
of 87,300 M–1 cm–1 based on protein
sequence. Typical protein yields were 0.5–1 mg/mL and could
be stored stably at 4 °C for several months with no significant
protein deterioration. For more concentrated protein preparations
and long-term storage several 500 mL preparations were grown, purified,
and concentrated to 2 mg/mL using a 10,000 Mw cutoff Amicon Ultra
centrifugal filter (Millipore, Billerice, MA)

In Vitro Fluorescence Measurements
Fluorescence measurements
were acquired in top-read mode on a Tecan Safire 2 fluorescence plate
reader in a black Nunc round-bottom 96 well plate (U96 PP 0.5 mL,
Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). FITC-labeled hamster anti-mouse CD11c
antibody (0.5 μg) (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) or 200 nM biotin–PEG–fluorescein
(MW 3400, NANOCS, New York, NY) and 2.5 μM MG-2p fluorogen were
used per well with increasing amounts of FITC-E2–dL5 protein
in 200 μL volumes of PBS + 0.1% Pluronic F-127 (Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA). Samples were incubated for 1 h prior to fluorescence
measurements. FITC fluorescence measurements were taken using 495
± 10 nm excitation and 519 ± 10 nm emission wavelengths
with gain and Z position optimized for the well with no FITC-E2–dL5.
Biotin-PEG-fluorescein measurements were taken using the same settings
as FITC with a gain of 92. MG-2p fluorescence measurements were taken
using 636 ± 10 nm excitation and 686 ± 10 nm emission wavelength.
Instrument gain and Z positions were autocalculated by the TECAN Safire
2 instrument, usually on the highest intensity well. Each well was
measured 25 times. Samples were set up independently in triplicate
for measurements.

Flow Cytometry of CHO Cells with HA Antibody
Binding
CHO cells expressing HA tagged OPRM1 receptor were
created by transduction
of CHO cells with the retroviral vector pBABEHL1.0.1 OPRM1 in a manner
previously described. pBABEHL1.0.1 OPRM1
was created by digestion of a previously described plasmid, pBABEHL1.0.1
ADBR2Lac2, with SfiI (New England Biolabs,
Ipswich, MA) and ligation of DNA encoding the OPRM1 receptor with
flanking SfiI restriction sites synthesized by Genscript (Piscataway
Township, NJ). CHO cells stably expressing an HA tagged OPRM1 receptor
were grown in F-12K media with l-glutamine (Life Technologies,
Carlsbad, CA) and 10% Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) (Life Technologies,
Carlsbad, CA), passaged using Cellstripper (Life Technologies, Carlsbad,
CA), and spun for 5 min at 804 rpm in an Eppendorf 5810R centrifuge.
Cells were resuspended in 0.5 mL of F-12K media with FBS and FITC-labeled
HA 11 antibody (Covance, Princeton, NJ) at a dilution of 1:250 at
37 °C for 30 min. Cells were recentrifuged as described above,
media and antibody were removed, and cells were resuspended in 0.5
mL of media with 1 μM FITC-E2–dL5 and incubated for 30
min at 37 °C. Cells were then centrifuged and washed twice with
PBSCM (PBS supplemented with 0.1 mM CaCl2 and 1 mM MgCl2) and finally suspended in 0.5 mL PBSCM. Control samples with
HA11 antibody only and FITC-E2–dL5 protein only at the same
concentrations or no added reagents were prepared alongside these
samples. MG-2p was added at 250 nM to all samples and incubated for
15 min prior to flow cytometry analysis. An Accuri C6 flow cytometer
was used to analyze cells with both 488 and 640 nm excitation and
FL1 (533/30 nm) and FL4 (670 nm LP) emission filters. Ten thousand total events per sample were collected with cells gated
by forward and side scatter. Fluorescence analysis was performed using
FloJo flow cytometry analysis software.

Microscopy of Cells with
FITC-Labeled HA Antibodies and FITC-E2–dL5/MG
Human
HEK 293T cells were purchased from American Type Culture
Collections, Inc. (Manassas, VA) and maintained according to ATCC
instructions. A previously described N-terminally CFP-tagged dopamine
transporter that contains an HA epitope in the second extracellular
loop (CFP-HA-DAT) was transfected at
the time of seeding onto coverslips using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Two days following transfection, cells were incubated with 4 μg/mL
of either unlabeled or FITC-conjugated anti-HA antibodies (Covance,
Princeton, NJ) for 1 h at 37 °C. Subsequently, cells were washed
three times in ice-cold PBSCM (PBS supplemented with 0.1 mM CaCl2 and 1 mM MgCl2) and incubated for 1 h on ice with
1 μM of FITC-E2–dL5 in PBSCM. After 3 washes in ice-cold
PBSCM, coverslips were moved to Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s
medium (DMEM) (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) with 10% FBS in the imaging
cassette in an environmentally controlled microscope chamber. After
equilibrating for 5 min MG-2p was added to a final concentration of
500 nM, and was not subsequently removed. Images were acquired at
37 °C in the presence of 5% CO2 using a spinning disc
confocal imaging system based on a Zeiss Axio Observer Z1 inverted
fluorescence microscope (with 63× Plan Apo PH NA 1.4), equipped
with a computer-controlled Spherical Aberration Correction unit, Yokogawa
CSU-X1, Vector photomanipulation module, Photometrics Evolve 16-bit
EMCCD camera, environmental chamber and piezo stage controller and
lasers (405, 445, 488, 515, 561, and 640 nm) (Intelligent Imaging
Innovations, Inc.), all controlled by SLIDEBOOK5 software (Intelligent
Imaging Innovations, Inc.). Images of FITC and MG-2p fluorescence
were acquired using 405/488/561/640 Quad dichroic with individual
bandpass emitters for CSU-X (525/50 nm and 700/25 nm for FITC and
MG-2p, respectively). CFP images were taken using 445/515/640 Triple
Dichroic for CSU-X and a bandpass emitter 482/35 nm. All imaging acquisition
settings were identical in each experiment.

Fluorescence Correlation
Spectroscopy of FITC Dextran with FITC-E2–dL5
FITC
DEAE dextran of an average MW of 150,000 and average FITC
to dextran labeling rate of 0.004 (product number 75005, Sigma-Aldrich,
St. Louis, MO) was mixed to an FITC dextran concentration of 20.25
nM (effective calculated FITC concentration of 75 nM) in phosphate-buffered
saline (PBS) with 50 nM of FITC-E2–dL5 and 125 nM MG-2p and
incubated at room temperature for 1 h. A control sample of 50 nM FITC-E2–dL5
and 125 nM MG-2p was also prepared. Samples were spun for 10 min at
maximum speed in an Eppendorf 5417C centrifuge after 10 min of incubation
at room temperature and transferred to a Tek II bottom-glass (No 1.5)
8-well dish (Mat-Tek, Ashland, MA). A Zeiss LSM 510 Meta NLO Confocor
3 microscope was used for
fluorescence correlation spectroscopy (FCS). All measurements were
acquired with an LD C-Apochromat 40×/1.1 NA water-immersion objective.
A 633 nm HeNe laser with 3% laser power was reflected via a dichroic
beam splitter to excite MG-2p. Fluorescent emission passes a 655–710
nm band-pass filter. Fluorescent signals that pass a 90-μm pinhole
were collected with an avalanche photodiode detector (APD). Measurement
time was set for 10 s, repeated 10 times to produce a measurement
series for an experiment run. Each sample was run 3 times. Using Zeiss
ZEN-2008 software, the autocorrelation of the data was obtained, and
the resulting curve was fitted with a model for one component 3D free
translational diffusion. An average diffusion time (τD) from each experiment run was used for calculation of the diffusion
coefficient (D, D = ω02/4τD), where ω0 is the waist radius of a laser beam obtained from instrument calibration
(0.337 μm used).

Photostability of Fluorescein vs FAP-Bound
MG on Agarose Particles
Biotinylated PEG–fluorescein
(MW 3,400, NANOCS, New York,
NY) was bound to monomeric avidin agarose (product # 20228 Thermo
Scientific, Waltham, MA) by mixing 500 nM biotin–PEG–fluorescein
with 5 μL avidin agarose in 500 μL of PBS + and incubation
at 4 °C on a rotating device for 30 min. Bound agarose was then
spun in an Eppendorf 5417C centrifuge (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany)
at 16,100 rcf for 1 min. Liquid was removed from pelleted particles,and
particles were resuspended in 500 μL of PBS +. This process
was repeated twice to remove unbound biotin–PEG–fluorescein.
A duplicate sample of biotin–PEG–FITC was then incubated
with 500 nM FITC-E2–dL5 and 500 nM MG-2p for 30 min at 4 °C
on a rotating device along with a control sample of avidin agarose
particles and 500 nM MG-2p. Three centrifuge spin and wash steps were
performed on these samples as described above. All samples along with
an avidin agarose only control sample were transferred to 35 mm glass
bottom culture dishes (MatTek, Ashland, MA) and allowed to settle
for 15 min prior to imaging. Imaging and photobleaching were performed
using an Andor Revolution XD spinning disc microscope (Andor, Belfast,
Ireland) with a Nikon CFI Plan Apo VC 20X objective lens (Nikon, Tokyo
Japan) Three regions of each sample preparation (biotin–PEG–fluorescein
and biotin–PEG–fluorescein with FITC-E2–dL5/MG
were measured for 200 ms for 3000 continuous frames (approximately
10.5 min) focused on settled agarose particles. Fluorescein was measured
using 10% laser power on a 488 nm solid state laser and a 525/50 nm
emission filter while FITC-E2–dL5/MG fluorescence was measured
using 24.3% laser power on a 640 nm solid state laser and a 685/70
nm emission filter. Laser power was chosen to correspond to 0.00742
mW to have equal output power for both. Fluorescence quantification
of images was performed using FIJI Bioformats import (ImageJ plugin)
with freehand drawing of analysis regions around particles and mean
fluorescence multimeasurement on all 3000 images for each measurement.
Fluorescence was normalized for each measurement by dividing the mean
fluorescence value for each frame by the starting (frame 1) mean fluorescence
value, and triplicate measurements were averaged with standard deviations
calculated after normalization for each frame.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NIH TCNP Grant U54GM103529
(A.W.)
and NIH/NIDA grants DA014204 (A.S.) and F32DA034408 (E. B.). The authors
would like to thank Sally Adler and Margaret Fuhrman in the laboratory
of Dr. Jonathan Jarvik for providing stable HA-OPRM1 tagged CHO cells
for use in flow cytometry experiments, Brigitte Schmidt for synthesis
of the fluorogen MG-2p, Haibing Teng for assistance and expertise
in fluorescence correlation spectroscopy and data analysis, and Lauren
Ernst and Fred Lanni for recommending useful experiments and providing
FITC and fluorescein-labeled targets. DNA encoding the FITC-E2 scFv
was generously provided by the laboratory of Dr. Peter Berget.

