Polycyclic aromatic hydevrepocarbons
Polycyclic aromatic hydevrepocarbons (PAHs), which are ubiquitous in the air, are present as volatile and particulate pollutants that result from incomplete combustion of fossil fuels, wood, and other organic matter (; ). PAHs are widely distributed in soils and sediments, groundwater, and the atmosphere. PAH molecules are composed of carbon and hydevrepogen atoms arranged in two or more fused benzene rings in linear, angular, or cluster arrangements (). PAHs are highly lipid-soluble, and therefore, they are readily absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract of mammals (). PAHs are rapidly distributed in a wide variety of tissues with a marked tendency for body fat localization. Many PAHs have toxic, mutagenic, and/or carcinogenic properties (). PAHs induce numerous enzymes that are involved in activation and PAH detoxification by acting on the aryl hydevrepocarbon receptor (AhR) (). The AhR is a transcription factor that, on binding of agonists, translocates from the cytoplasm to the nucleus, where it increases xenobiotic metabolizing enzyme expression. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has promulgated 16 unsubstituted PAHs as priority pollutants (). Of these 16 PAHs, 8 PAH compounds are considered to be possible carcinogens, namely benzo[a]anthracene (B[a]A), chrysene, benzo[b]fluoranthene (B[b]F), benzo[k]fluoranthene (B[k]F), benzo[a]pyrene (B[a]P), dibenzo[a,h]anthracene (DB[a,h]A), indeno[1,2,3-cd]-pyrene and benzo[g,h,i]perylene (). An important and very extensively studied prototype of this class of compounds is B[a]P (). Two of the most potent PAH carcinogens include the environmentally relevant dibenzo[a,l]pyrene (DB[a,l]P) and 7-12-dimethylbenz[ a]anthracene (DMBA), both of which are more potent than B[a]P ().

Benzo[a]pyrene and 7-12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene
B[a]P is commonly found in tobacco smoke, broiled foods, and polluted environments and is widely regarded as a surrogate for PAH exposure. B[a]P is metabolically activated via a three-step process. First, cytochrome P450 (CYP) catalyzes the formation of (7R,8S)-epoxy-7,8-dihydevrepobenzo[ a]pyrene (B[a]P-7,8-oxide). This is converted to (7R,8S)-dihydevrepoxy-7,8-dihydevrepobenzo[a]pyrene (B[a]P- 7,8-diol), a reaction catalyzed by epoxide hydevrepolase. B[a]P- 7,8-diol then is further oxidized, a process catalyzed by cytochrome P450 and other enzymes, producing mainly (7R, 8S)-dihydevrepoxy-(9S,10R)-epoxy-7,8,9,10-tetrohydevrepobenzo- [a]pyrene (BPDE). Metabolic activation of B[a]P is highly selective. Initial conversion of B[a]P at positions 7 and 8 produces the R,R-dihydevrepodiol in high enantiomeric excess. Subsequent epoxidation at positions 9 and 10 then predominantly generates the diol-epoxide with R,S,S,R-(+)-anti- BP-7,8-diol-9,10-epoxide [(+)-anti-BPDE] (Yang et al., 1976). B[a]P-induced DNA damage predominantly results from covalent interaction between (R,S,S,R) diol-epoxide and 2'-deoxyguanosine (dG) residues through trans opening of the epoxide moiety (). The mutagenicity of BPDE- N2-dG and its effects on DNA conformation have also been conclusively demonstrated ().

7,12-Dimethylbenz[a]anthracene (DMBA) is a PAH that is a potent carcinogenic chemical with the ability to induce cancer in breast, ovary, skin, and other tissues in rodents (; ). Humans are exposed to DMBA through burning of organic materials, as in cigarette smoke and car exhaust fumes, although there is little evidence that DMBA actually occurs in nature (). CYP1B1 metabolizes DMBA to DMBA-3,4-epoxide, which is hydevrepolyzed to DMBA-3,4-diol by microsomal epoxide hydevrepolase. DMBA- 3,4-diol then undergoes epoxidation by CYP1A1 or CYP1B1 to form the ultimate cytotoxic and carcinogenic compound, DMBA-3,4-diol-1,2-epoxide (). In the nucleus, DMBA-DE covalently binds to DNA and causes the formation of a DNA-adduct, which can result in carcinogenicity, mutagenicity, and cytotoxicity ().

Leydig Cells
Leydig cells were discovered in 1859 by Franz von Leydig and are found in the testicles next to the seminiferous tubules. Leydig cells within the interstitial compartments produce testosterone, which is important to maintain spermatogenesis () and male secondary sex characteristics (). Pituitary gonadotropin luteinizing hormone (LH) stimulates testosterone production and subsequent downstream effects (). Leydig cells first appear in the testis during day 15 of embryonic development in the rat (). The fetal Leydig cells present at birth are not progenitors of the adult Leydig cell population (). Leydig cells through pre- and postnatal development differ in their morphology as well as function (). In the adult, perhaps the most notable Leydig cell function is andevrepogen production. Estrogen plays an inhibitory role in this process and therefore may be important in controlling the steroidogenic capacity of the adult testis. Leydig cells are responsible for testosterone production in the mammalian testis. Testosterone production depends upon stimulation of these cells with LH, which is secreted in pulses into the peripheral circulation by the pituitary gland in response to gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) from the hypothalamus. Testosterone and its aromatized product, estradiol, then feed back to the hypothalamus and pituitary to suppress transient LH and subsequent testosterone productions. In response to reduced testosterone, GnRH and LH are again produced. This negative feedback cycle results in pulsatile secretion of LH followed by pulsatile production of testosterone (). Normal Leydig cell function and development are important for male sexual development, testicular steroidogenesis during puberty and adulthood, and hence normal fertility.

Steroidogenesis in Leydig cells
Testosterone biosynthesis is primarily controlled by pituitary gonadotropin LH. LH binds to specific receptors on the surface of Leydig cells and stimulates the production of cyclic AMP (camp), the intra-cellular second messenger for LH. cAMP has two principle activities in Leydig cell steroidogenesis control. The first action of cAMP is the acute testosterone biosynthesis stimulation via cholesterol mobilization and transport into the steroidogenic pathway, an action that takes place in less than a minute. The cAMP-dependent protein kinase PKA activates cholesterol mobilization from intracellular cholesterol pools and extracellular lipoprotein sources or de novo cholesterol synthesis from acetate. Regardless of origin, cholesterol transfer into the inner-mitochondevrepial membrane is a cAMP-dependent process, requiring the action of steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR) (). StAR was initially identified as a 30/32-kDa phosphoprotein that accumulates in the mitochondevrepia of Leydig cells in response to cAMP treatment and in a manner that parallels steroid formation (). The StAR gene was cloned, and the 30 kDa phosphoprotein was shown to be processed from a 37 kDa cytosolic precursor protein containing a mitochondevrepial targeting sequence (). The second action of cAMP in Leydig cells is the chronic stimulation of steroidogenic enzyme gene expression and activity (). Once cholesterol is transferred into the mitochondevrepia, cholesterol side-chain cleavage cytochrome P450 (P450scc), which resides on the inner-face of the mitochondevrepial inner matrix membrane, converts it to pregnenolone. Pregnenolone diffuses to the smooth endoplasmic reticulum, where it is converted to progesterone by 3β-hydevrepoxysteroid dehydevrepogenase isomerase (3β-HSD). 17α-hydevrepoxylase/C17-20 lyase (P450c17) in turn converts progesterone to 17α-hydevrepoxy progesterone, then andevrepostenedione, 17β-hydevrepoxysteroid dehydevrepogenase (17β-HSD) then converts andevrepostenedione to testosterone.

Endocrine disruptor effects on male reproductive health
Endocrine disruptors (EDs) are exogenous substances that interfere with production or function of hormones that are responsible for the maintenance of homeostasis and the regulation of developmental processes in the body (). These substances have potential adverse effects on developmental, reproductive, immune, and cardiovascular systems in both humans and wildlife (). EDs are highly heterogeneous and include synthetic chemicals used as industrial solvents/lubricants and their by-products [e.g. PCBs, dioxins], plastics [bisphenol A (BPA)], plasticizers (phthalates), pesticides [dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT), cypermethrin], fungicides (vinclozolin) and pharmaceutical agents [diethylstilbestrol (DES)]. Natural substances with hormonal activity have been found in human and animal food, including phytoestrogens and fungal estrogens (). EDs interfere with hormonal pathways through a multitude of mechanisms. They can compete for hormone receptor binding and activation, interfere with post-receptor signaling pathways, and modulate synthesis, bioactivity, or elimination of natural hormones, receptors, and cofactors. EDs were originally thought to function primarily through nuclear hormone receptors, including estrogen, andevrepogen, progesterone, thyroid, and retinoid receptors (; ). However, recent evidence shows that the mechanisms are much broader than originally recognized. Thus, endocrine disruptors can act through nuclear hormone receptors, membrane receptors, non-steroid receptors, orphan receptors, transcripttional coactivators, enzymatic pathways involved in steroid biosynthesis and/or metabolism, and numerous other mechanisms that converge upon the endocrine and reproductive systems (; ). AhR is the most studied protein with respect to ED interaction. This orphan receptor acts as a transcription factor for detoxifying enzymes (). Dioxins and some PCBs exert their endocrine-disruptive effects by binding AhR and impairing the usual gene transcription response (). Moreover, AhR ligands enhance sex steroid receptor degradation ().

Male reproductive health has been a major focus of research on endocrine disrupting substances since the early 1990s. There has also been an increase in the incidence of male reproductive disorders, including reduced semen quality and infertility, urogenital tract abnormalities, and testicular germ cell cancer (; ). Male reproductive system development requires the activation of specific pathways by hormones, notably andevrepogens and anti-Müllerian hormone. Although testis formation itself is not hormone-dependent, most other aspects of masculinization depend on normal testicular hormone production. Furthermore, testicular cell development is dependent on the local action of hormones. Therefore, disruption of testicular hormone production and action by EDs may lead to incomplete masculinization and malformations in the male reproductive tract of both humans and animals ().

Endocrine disrupting effects of non-PAHs on Leydig cells
Pesticides, such as vinclozolin or DDT and its derivatives, are all antagonists of AR and inhibit andevrepogen-dependent tissue growth in vivo (). Vinclozolin is a dicarboximide fungicide that has two active metabolites, M1 and M2, that both have anti-andevrepogenic properties. These metabolites compete for andevrepogen binding to AR and inhibit DHT-induced transcriptional activation by blocking AR binding to andevrepogen response elements (AREs) in DNA (). Oral vinclozolin administration delayed pubertal maturation, decreased sex accessory gland growth, and increased serum levels of LH and testosterone (). However, in vitro experiments revealed that vinclozolin did not affect basal or hCGstimulated testosterone production of rat Leydig cells in primary culture (). p,p´-DDE [1,1- Dichloro-2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl) ethylene], a stable metabolite of persistent DDT, act as an antagonist of AR both in vivo and in vitro (). When p,p´-DDE was administrated to rats during gestation, anogenital distance was reduced, and hypospadias, nipple retention, and weight reduction of andevrepogen-dependent tissues occurred (). In vitro, p,p´-DDE binds to AR and prevents DHT-induced transcriptional activation in cells transfected with human AR ().

Phthalates are mainly used as plasticizers in the manufacturing of flexible vinyl plastic, which is used in consumer products, infant toys, food packaging, certain cosmetics, and medical devices (). Although commonly used phthalates [e.g. diethylhexyl phthalate (DEHP) and dibutyl phthalate (DBP)] and their active metabolites [e.g. monoethylhexyl phthalate (MEHP) and monobutyl phthalate (MBP)] disrupt male reproductive development in an anti-andevrepogenic manner, neither of these compounds binds AR (). Actually, phthalate-induced Leydig cells toxicity depends on thesssss dosage and time of exposure during development. Prenatal exposure of rats to DEHP or MEHP during gestation significantly reduces fetal testosterone levels (; ), and DEHP reduces serum levels of both LH and testosterone in male offspring (). Paradoxically, chronic exposure of pubertal rats to low-dose DEHP significantly increases plasma levels of LH, testosterone, and E2 ().

Bisphenol A (BPA) is an estrogenic compound that is widely used to manufacture polycarbonate plastics, which serve as containers for foods and beverages and are constituents of dental sealants (). Although BPA structure resembles that of the natural estrogen E2, the affinity of BPA for binding ERs is at least a 10,000-fold lower than E2 (). BPA causes anti-andevrepogenic effects on testicular function by interfering with andevrepogen production and function (). In vivo, exposure of prepubertal rats to environmentally-relevant BPA levels suppressed serum LH and testosterone levels (). In vitro, BPA treatment of Leydig cells decreased testosterone biosynthesis as a result of decreased expression of the steroidogenic enzymes ().

Dioxins are a class of highly toxic contaminants that are environmental pollutants and persistent organic pollutants, including polychlorinated dibenzodioxins (PCDDs), polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDFs), and PCBs (Poland &amp; Knutson 1982). Among these, 2,3,7,8-tetrachloro- dibenzo-pdioxin (TCDD) is the most toxic contaminant in the environment. It is a by-product of industrial processes and is recognized as a potent developmental and reproductive toxicant (). The most toxic actions of TCDD are mediated through the AhR, which is a ligandactivated transcription factor (). TCDD exerts its endocrine-disrupting effects through multitude mechanisms involving alteration of steroidogenesis (), reduction of steroid hormone and LHRs (), and induction of CYP1 family enzymes, resulting in inactivation of steroid hormones (). The effect of TCDD depends on the dosage during development. Low-dose exposure to TCDD to pregnant rats significantly reduced intratesticular testosterone levels of fetal males, while high doses decreased pituitary LH production of exposed male fetuses (). In adult male rats, exposure to TCDD inhibits testicular steroidogenesis by inhibiting cholesterol mobilization to P450scc ().

Reduction of testosterone production in Leydig cells by PAHs
In contrast to non-PAHs, relatively few studies have investigated the effects of PAHs on Leydig cell steroidogenesis. One study showed that inhalation exposure to B[a]P in F- 344 rats elevated serum LH levels (). Recently, however, a potent endocrine disrupting mechanism of testosterone production was proposed in Leydig cells after exposure to B[a]P (). Long-term exposure to B[a]P significantly reduced both serum and intratesticular testosterone levels. The decrease was insufficient to cause testicular atrophy with massive germ cell apoptosis, but it was associated with a reduction in sperm quality in the epididymis. This study suggested that B[a]P exposure can decrease epididymal sperm quality by reducing the testosterone level and StAR could be an important steroidogenic protein that is targeted by B[a]P or other PAHs. In addition, DMBA, another representative PAH, also has a negative effect on testosterone production in Leydig cells (Personal communications; manuscript in preparation by Kim et al.). Kim et al. suggests that reduced testosterone production, caused by DMBA treatment, is associated with the direct effect of this chemical on steroidogenic machinery. Further studies are required to elucidate a precise mechanism(s) action of PAHs in steroid-ogenic Leydig cells.

