Introduction
The heritable temperament trait ‘Harm Avoidance’ (HA) from the
psychobiological model of personality [-] describes an individuals susceptibility to the feelings of fear and
anxiety and his/her tendency to exhibit inhibition behavior []. The HA dimension ranges from neurotic introversion (high HA) to stable
extraversion (low HA) []. It shows a strong positive correlation with neuroticism, a strong
negative correlation with extraversion and a weak negative correlation with openness
and conscientiousness [], from the Big Five personality model. A high HA individual is
characterized by an enhanced fear of uncertainty, by pessimism, extensive worries,
shyness and proneness to fatigue. The HA trait has been demonstrated to be useful in
the epidemiology and detection of depressions and anxiety disorders and to be
predictive for their severity and treatment outcome [-]. Individuals prone to anxiety disorders or depressive states have been
found to be more attentive to negative stimuli (attentional bias) and to rate
positive and neutral stimuli as less positive (emotional bias) [-].

The left and right amygdalae are known to be key nodes in the processing of affective
stimuli. Both amygdalae are subdivided into 3 subregions: the laterobasal (LB)
amygdala mainly involved in determining the valence (positive or negative) and
arousal (strength) of the observed emotion, the superficial (SF) amygdala mainly
recruited in directing attention towards affective stimuli and finally the
centromedial (CM) amygdala mainly involved in initiating behavioral responses [-]. The induced emotional responses are down regulated by cognitive
processes in the prefrontal cortex by reappraisal of the stimuli and limiting the
attention given to the stimuli [-].

The personality traits ‘trait anxiety’, ‘neuroticism’ [,-] and HA [] were found to correlate positively with the left and right amygdalae
responses to fearful stimuli. These studies used a functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) task in which the emotional stimuli were processed implicitly. More
specifically, the volunteers were instructed to focus on the non-emotional stimuli
presented following an emotional stimulus [] or on a non-emotional feature in the presented facial expressions (e.g.,
color, age or gender) [,-]. Ball et al. [] asked their subjects to match faces by their facial expressions. These
tasks mainly related individual differences in the attentional bias to amygdalae
activation as that the presented emotional information was processed automatically
and attracted the attention while it had to be ignored to perform the required
task.

In a previous study [] when trying to relate emotion induced amygdalae activity to the
personality trait HA beyond the attentional modulation, the participants were
instructed to simply observe attentively positive, negative and neutral stimuli
without, performing any emotional or cognitive task. This study was based on an
earlier study [] in which differences in the lateralization of the amygdalae responses to
affective stimuli were studied in low, average and high HA females. The volunteers
were asked to focus on their emotions elicited while passively viewing the stimuli.
This study revealed an increased left lateralized amygdala response to the negative
stimuli in the high HA participants while no lateralization of the amygdalae
response was observed in the low and average HA participants. Contrary to this, the [] study revealed a negative correlation between the left amygdala
activation and HA during the sustained processing of negative stimuli, probably due
to an increased tendency in the high HA participants to shift attention away from
the negative stimuli in an attempt to control the induced emotional reaction.

Compared to implicitly processed emotional stimuli, explicitly processed stimuli were
found to evoke an increased response in the visual processing areas (the visual
cortex, the fusiform gyrus and the associated temporal gyrus) due to the increased
attentional load and a more detailed analysis of the stimuli and in the prefrontal
cortex due to the increased cognitive control needed to perform the task [,-]. As a result of these differences in visual processing and cognitive
control during the explicit processing of affective stimuli, increased amygdalae
responses were observed by some researchers [] while others observed decreased amygdalae responses [,]. The amygdalae responses were found to be less active during an explicit
valence rating task than in a passive viewing task [,] due to an increased top-down control from the prefrontal cortex.

An extension of the correlations between amygdalae activity and HA reported using
implicit processing and passive viewing tasks could be hypothesized for explicit
processing tasks. However, contrary to the attentional bias which has been
consistently revealed in patients with affective disorders and is related to
affective personality traits in healthy individuals, the emotional bias during
facial recognition has only been reported in patients [-] but not in healthy individuals [,,]. The observed bias in patients was found to be accompanied by an
hyperactivation of both amygdalae while subjects rated negative expressions and an
hypoactivation while they rated positive expressions.

In the current study, using fMRI we have tried to relate the activation of the
different subregions of the amygdalae during the explicit processing of emotional
stimuli to HA. We expected the activation in the LB amygdalae to increase with HA
due to an increased sensory input from the visual processing areas while we did not
expect to find such a correlation in the SF amygdalae and the CM amygdalae due to
the increased cognitive control from the prefrontal and cingulate cortex.

Materials and methods
Participants
To exclude effects from gender, age and disease state [,], the study cohort was restricted to healthy young female Belgian
natives (34 volunteers, age range: 19–27 years) recruited by local
advertising among staff members and students at our hospital and the
participating universities: Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB) and Ghent
University. All volunteers were Caucasian and two participants were mothers.
Each participant was required to be medication-free (except for birth control
medication), right-handed (as assessed with the Van Strien questionnaire []), free of any anxiety or depressive disorder (as assessed with the
Dutch version of the Mini-International Neuropsychiatric Interview (Mini) []), without any personal psychiatric disorder history and non-depressed
(defined as having a score lower than 9 on the 21 item Beck Depression Inventory
(BDI-II) []). All volunteers gave their written informed consent and were
financially compensated. The study was approved by the Institutional Ethical
Board of the University Hospital of the Vrije Universiteit Brussel (UZ Brussel)
and in accordance with the guidelines laid down in the declaration of Helsinki [].

TCI questionnaire
All participants completed the Dutch version of the Temperament and Character
Inventory (TCI) questionnaire [] by answering “True” or “False” to 240
statements. Based on this questionnaire a HA score on a scale from 0 to 40 was
determined for each participant.

MRI imaging
All scans were performed on a 1.5 T Philips Intera MRI system (Philips,
Best, The Netherlands) with a six-channel SENSE head coil. For anatomical
reference, a 3D T1-TFE MRI scan (TI/TR/TE = 1501/16/4.6 ms,
flip angle = 30°,
FOV = 240 × 240 × 200 mm,
resolution = 1 × 1 × 2 mm and
100 axial slices) was measured. The fMRI scans were obtained using an FFE-EPI
sequence (TR/TE = 3000/35 ms, flip
angle = 90°, FOV = 240×240 mm,
resolution = 3.75×3.75 mm, slice
thickness/gap = 5.0/1.0 mm, 18 slices) with 2 dummy scans and
168 dynamics.

fMRI paradigm
The emotional stimuli consisted of a set of 26 pictures of smiling baby faces
(positive stimuli) and 25 pictures showing crying baby faces with severe
dermatological ailments (negative stimuli). These pictures were similar to the
stimuli used in our previous studies [,]. The pictures for the positive stimuli were collected from family
photos from staff members and from the Internet, while those for the negative
stimuli originated from the dermatological literature. All babies were Caucasian
and their estimated mean age was 5.5 months
(SD = 4.0 months). All pictures showed a single male or female
baby face (depicting only the facial expressions with the eyes, nose and mouth)
directly looking at the camera (Figure ). All were
rendered at the same resolution (275×360), matched for color and luminosity
and presented on a white background. Each picture was used 2 to 3 times to yield
a total of 68 positive and 68 negative stimuli.

Example of a positive (left) and a negative (right) stimulus.

The choice of stimuli was motivated by the fact that earlier reports had shown
baby faces to engage attention in young females and to induce spontaneous
emotional reactions [,,]. The reason for selecting crying baby faces with a severe
dermatological condition for the negative stimuli, was to avoid emotional
ambiguity and to make sure they elicited an unequivocally negative, aversive
reaction rather than sympathy and the desire to console. The subjects were
familiar with the stimuli, as they had also participated in an earlier fMRI
study [] using a different, but similar set of stimuli.

Valence and arousal ratings for all pictures were collected in an independent but
similar group of females prior to this study. The negative stimuli were found to
have a mean valence score of 1.50 (SD = 0.34) and a mean arousal
score of 7.79 (SD = 0.49). The positive stimuli were found to have a
mean valence score of 7.02 (SD = 0.47) and a mean arousal score of
5.65 (SD = 0.49). Independent samples T-tests revealed a significant
difference in valence (positive versus negative: t(49) = 47.49,
p &lt; 0.01) and a significant difference in arousal
(positive versus negative: t(48) = -15.41,
p &lt; 0.01).

The pictures were projected through the window of the MRI room onto the back of a
tracing-paper screen. This screen, placed at 2 m from the magnet center,
was observed by the volunteers via a mirror fixed on top of the head coil. The
Presentation software [] was used for presenting the stimuli, separated by a fixation-cross
picture in a randomized order following a jittered inter-stimulus timing (range
2026–13186 ms) for a duration of 1000 ms. The optimal timing and
order of the stimuli were determined in advance using the Matlab toolbox
‘OptimizeDesign’ []. The participants were instructed to rate the valence of the facial
expressions as fast as possible by pressing buttons on a pair of MRI compatible
response boxes (Current Designs, Philadelphia, USA) by their left (negative) or
right (positive) thumb.

Analysis
Preprocessing and analysis of the fMRI data were performed in SPM8 (Statistical
Parametric Mapping, Wellcome Department of Imaging Neuroscience, London, UK)
running in Matlab (R2010a).

Preprocessing and processing of the individual scans
The fMRI volumes were realigned to the first volume to correct for residual
motion, slice-time corrected to correct for time shifts between the
measurement of consecutive slices, normalized to the EPI MNI template
(Montreal Neurologic Institute) and smoothed with an isotropic 8 mm
FWHM Gaussian filter. The 3D anatomical images were normalized to the T1 MNI
template.

For each volunteer a design matrix with eleven regressors was constructed on
the basis of the timings of the picture presentations for each emotional
condition, convolved with the canonical hemodynamic response function (HRF)
and its time derivative, six motion regressors (3 translation, 3 rotation)
to take residual motion into account and a constant to model the activation
onset. This model was fitted to the measured data using the generalized
linear model (GLM) approach.

As we expected to encounter brain areas processing the emotional stimuli both
dependent and independent of the stimulus valence, the response to the
positive and the negative stimuli was calculated separately. These responses
were derived from the fitted parameters (betas) as the magnitude of the HRF
based on [] and using the Matlab scripts from []. The baseline with respect to which these responses were
calculated was the mean of all activity going on locally during the
experiment and not explained by the model. This approach is similar to
measuring the mean neural activity in identical experimental conditions but
with only a fixation-cross present and omitting the emotional stimuli. The
resulting neural responses to the positive and the negative stimuli were
correlated separately to trait HA (see section 2.5.3).

We did not study the difference between the response to the positive stimuli
and the response to the negative stimuli as is regularly done in emotional
fMRI studies. This approach was motivated by the fact that subtracting the
positive and the negative neural responses (contrast ‘positive –
negative’ or ‘negative - positive’) cancels common neural
activity related to the perception and the basic analysis of the stimuli
that is independent of the stimulus valence. This common activity could be
of interest since the amygdalae are known to be activated by positive,
negative and neutral facial stimuli []. If the amygdalae responses to the positive stimuli and to the
negative stimuli would exhibit a similar dependence on HA, the subtraction
of positive and negative neural activations would not depend on HA as this
difference would be constant. To test for differences in amygdalae responses
between the low and high HA participants dependent and independent of the
stimulus valence, an analysis of variance (ANOVA) with group and valence as
factors was performed in addition to the correlation analyses (see section
2.5.4).

Significance tests for the responses to the stimuli
To test whether our paradigm succeeded in generating a significant response
in all brain areas involved in facial recognition, generating an emotional
response and cognitive control, we performed separate 1-sample T-tests for
the response to the positive and to the negative stimuli. In these analyses
HA was not taken into account.

Correlation between the neural responses and HA
To study the correlation between HA and the neural responses to the positive
and the negative stimuli, we performed regression analyses based on the
individual response maps. In these regression analyses the HA scores were
used as covariate of interest. A constant was included in the regression to
model the mean neural response.

ANOVA comparing the low and high HA participants
Since correlation analyses have the inherent drawback that they only test for
a linear relationship between neural activity and HA, a 2×2 ANOVA was
performed to test for differences in neural activity between the low and
high HA participants without this linear assumption. For this analysis the
subject sample was subdivided into low and high HA subgroups based on the
median HA score. Group was used as a between-subjects factor and valence as
a within-subjects factor. To test for differences between both groups
independent of the stimulus valence, the main effect of group was
determined. To test for differences between both groups related to the
stimulus valence, the interaction effect ‘group × valence’
was determined. We did not investigate for the main effect of valence since
that is similar to the contrast ‘positive versus negative’
averaged over the whole subject group.

Whole brain analyses restricted to the amygdala
In order to focus on the left and right amygdalae we defined a mask in the
WFU-Pickatlas toolbox [-] masking the whole brain except for the amygdalae as defined in
the AAL atlas. Using this mask, we repeated the 1-sample T-tests, the
regression analyses and the ANOVA. We used the probabilistic
cytoarchitectonic maps of [], as freely available in the SPM anatomy toolbox v1.7 [], to assign the results to the corresponding amygdalae
subregions.

Correction for multiple comparisons
A general problem in neuroimaging studies is the risk for type I and II
errors, since each statistical test is performed on each unmasked image
voxel separately. To take care of this problem, a multiple-comparison
correction was performed. As the classical Bonferroni correction is known to
be too conservative for use in fMRI studies, we applied a cluster-extent
threshold in addition to the voxel significance threshold
(p ≤ 0.005 (1-tailed)), taking into account that
the chance of finding a whole cluster by chance drops when the cluster size
increases []. To determine this cluster-extent threshold, we performed 1000
Monte Carlo simulations using AlphaSim [,] to obtain a final corrected significance
p ≤ 0.05 (1-tailed). As the result of these
simulations depends on the average correlations between neighboring voxels
derived from the statistical map given as input to AlphaSim, we performed
these simulations separately for each statistical test. Since all analyses
were performed twice (once with a mask masking the background and leaving
the whole brain unmasked and once with all image voxels masked except for
those in the left and right amygdalae) and the cluster-extent threshold
depends on the mask, the simulations were also performed twice.

Results
Personality assessment
The measured TCI scores fell in a range of 2–25 for HA with 13 as median
score. To perform the ANOVA, the subjects were subdivided into a low HA group
(16 participants) having a HA score less than the median and a high HA group (17
participants) with a HA score equal to or above the median.

Behavioral results
Due to a technical problem, only 26 response files could be recovered and used
for the behavioral analyses. The mean response time for the positive stimuli was
633 ms (SD = 79 ms) while the mean response time for the
negative stimuli was 691 ms (SD = 129 ms). A maximum of 12
stimuli were rated erroneously. Maximal 8 positive stimuli have been rated as
negative and 10 negative stimuli as positive. Paired T-tests revealed a
significantly increased response time for the negative compared to the positive
stimuli (t(25) = 3.03, p = 0.01) but failed to
reveal a significant difference between the number of negative stimuli rated as
positive and the number of positive stimuli rated as negative
(t(25) = 0.61, p = 0.55).

Correlation analyses for response times, the number of misjudged valences, age
and HA revealed a significant correlation between the response time for the
positive stimuli and the response time for the negative stimuli
(R = 0.65, p &lt; 0.01), between the response
time for the positive stimuli and age (R = -0.42,
p = 0.03), between the response time for the negative
stimuli and the number of negative stimuli rated as positive
(R = 0.46, p = 0.02), between the response time
for the negative stimuli and age (R = -0.61,
p &lt; 0.01), between the number of positive stimuli rated
as negative and age (R = -0.43, p = 0.03) and
between the total number of misjudged stimulus valences and age
(R = -0.50, p = 0.01). No significant
correlations were found between the response times and HA (positive:
R = -0.13, p = 0.52; negative:
R = -0.23, p = 0.25) nor between the number of
valence misjudgments and HA (positive: R = 0.24,
p = 0.25; negative: R = -0.08,
p = 0.69; total: R = 0.07,
p = 0.72). None of these correlations survived Bonferroni
correction for multiple comparisons.

Fourteen of the recovered files corresponded to participants from the low HA
group and 12 to participants from the high HA group. For the low HA
participants, the mean response time for the positive stimuli was 645 ms
(SD = 71 ms) while the mean response time for the negative
stimuli was 680 ms (SD = 148 ms). For the high HA
participants, these same response times were 654 ms
(SD = 86 ms) and 705 ms (SD = 107 ms)
respectively. The low HA participants rated on average 1 (SD = 1)
positive stimulus as negative and 2 (SD = 2) negative stimuli as
positive, while the high HA participants rated on average 3 (SD = 2)
positive stimuli as negative and 2 (SD = 3) negative stimuli as
positive. The 2-sample T-tests performed on the behavioral data failed to reveal
a significant difference between the low and high HA group for the response time
for the positive stimuli (p = 0.21), the response time for
the negative stimuli (p = 0.22), the number of positive
stimuli rated as negative (p = 0.08), the number of
negative stimuli rated as positive (p = 0.86) and the total
number of misjudgments of the valences (p = 0.26). As none
of these results were significant, no Bonferroni correction was applied.

All behavioral analyses were conducted in PSPP 0.7.9 [].

Image analyses
Due to the limited spatial resolution of the fMRI images, large clusters spanning
several brain areas resulted from the analyses. For each cluster all brain areas
covered were reported. The anatomical labels were determined using the Automatic
Anatomical Labeling toolbox (AAL) [].

Significant responses to the positive stimuli
The Monte Carlo simulations using the background-only mask delivered a
cluster-extent threshold of 767 voxels for the response to the positive
stimuli. This threshold applied in combination with a voxel significance
threshold p &lt; 0.005 revealed an activation of the
neural response in the left and right visual cortex, the left sensorimotor
cortex, the right ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC) and in the left
limbic cortex. A deactivation was observed in the left and right association
cortex, the ventral visual processing system, the sensorimotor cortex, the
medial frontal cortex and the right temporal cortex. A more detailed summary
of the results of this analysis can be found in Additional file .

The Monte Carlo simulations using the brain mask masking the whole image
except for the amygdalae, revealed a minimum cluster-extent threshold of
3 voxels. This threshold applied in combination with a voxel
significance threshold p &lt; 0.005 did not reveal any
activation or deactivation in the left or right amygdala.

Significant responses to the negative stimuli
The Monte Carlo simulations using the background mask, delivered a
cluster-extent threshold of 762 voxels for the response to the negative
stimuli. This threshold applied in combination with a voxel significance
threshold p &lt; 0.005 revealed an activation in a
large cluster covering the visual cortex, the sensorimotor cortex, the
prefrontal cortex and the limbic cortex and in a cluster located in the left
prefrontal cortex. The brain deactivated in response to the negative stimuli
in the left association cortex, the sensorimotor cortex, the ventral visual
processing system, the left visual eye field, the right association cortex
and in the medial frontal cortex. A more detailed summary of the results can
be found in Additional file .

The Monte Carlo simulations using the mask masking everything except the
amygdalae, led to a minimum cluster-extent threshold of only 1 voxel.
This threshold applied in combination with a voxel significance threshold
p &lt; 0.005 uncovered an activation in the left
amygdala (cluster size = 36 voxels, mean
t(32) = 3.42 (SD = 0.40), cluster peak at
(-20,-4,-16)) and in the right amygdala (cluster
size = 36 voxels, mean t(32) = 3.22
(SD = 0.34), cluster peak at (20,-4,-16)). The anatomy toolbox
revealed that 85.4% of the activation observed in the left amygdala was
located in the SF amygdala and 9.7% in the LB amygdala. The activation
observed in the right amygdala, was located for 76.0% in the SF amygdala and
for 1.0% in the LB amygdala. Figure A presents
the observed activation clusters overlaid on an anatomical template.

The cluster results observed in the amygdalae, overlaid on an
anatomical template. The figures present the observed
responses to the negative stimuli (A), the observed
correlation between the response to the negative stimuli and HA
(B) and between the response to the positive stimuli and
HA (C) as well as the observed main effect of group
(D).

Correlations between the neural response to the positive stimuli and
HA
The Monte Carlo simulations with only the background masked, produced a
cluster-extent threshold of 492 voxels for the regression analysis
between the response to the positive stimuli and HA. Applying this threshold
in combination with a voxel significance threshold
p &lt; 0.005 revealed a positive correlation in the
left and right orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
(DLPFC) and in the right visual cortex but failed to show any negative
correlation. A more detailed summary of these results is presented in
Table .

Correlations between the neural response to the positive stimuli
and HA

Correlations between the neural response to the
positive stimuli and HA	
Positive correlation	
Cluster size (voxels)	Position cluster peak (mm)	Mean t (SD)	Anatomical labels	
2841	(28,42,30)	3.38 (0.60)	Right middle and superior frontal cortex	
Right triangular and opercular inferior frontal gyri	
Right medial superior frontal cortex	
Right inferior, middle and superior orbitofrontal
cortex	
Right medial orbitofrontal cortex	
Right caudate nucleus	
Right putamen	
Right insular cortex	
1026	(-22,64,10)	3.29 (0.51)	Left middle and superior frontal cortex	
Left triangular inferior frontal gyrus	
Left medial superior frontal cortex	
Left inferior, middle and superior OFC	
Left medial OFC	
552	(32,-74,-6)	2.32 (0.46)	Right middle and superior occipital cortex	
Right calcarine gyrus	
Right fusiform gyrus	
These results were found after applying a voxel significance
threshold p &lt; 0.005 and a cluster-extent
threshold Ke &gt; 492 voxels.

The Monte Carlo simulations using the brain mask masking everything except
the amygdalae, produced a minimum cluster-extent threshold of only
1 voxel. Applying this threshold in combination with a voxel
significance threshold p &lt; 0.005 revealed a positive
correlation between the neural response to the positive stimuli and HA in
the left amygdala (cluster size = 9 voxels; mean
t(31) = 3.22 (SD = 0.33); cluster peak at
(-28,-4,-24)). No correlation between the right amygdala response to the
positive stimuli and HA was found. Using the probabilistic cytoarchitectonic
maps, 100.0% of the correlation observed in the left amygdala was assigned
to the LB amygdala. Figure B presents the
observed correlation cluster overlaid on an anatomical template. The right
plot in Figure  presents the observed
correlation.

Correlation and box plots presenting the observed correlations and
main effect in the left amygdala. The plots show the
observed correlation between the left amygdala response to the
negative stimuli and HA (A) and between the left amygdala
response to the positive stimuli and HA (B). The box plots
exhibit the left amygdala response to the negative stimuli
(C) and the response to the positive stimuli (D)
in the low and high HA group. The whisker bars from the box plots
presents the minimal and maximal neural response measured. The
asterisks indicates significant group differences.

Correlations between the neural response to the negative stimuli and
HA
The Monte Carlo simulations using the background mask, produced a
cluster-extent threshold of 205 voxels for the regression analysis
between the response to the negative stimuli and HA. The application of this
threshold in combination with a cluster significance threshold
p &lt; 0.005 only revealed a positive correlation in
the left middle cingulate cortex (MCC) (cluster
size = 247 voxels; mean t(31) = 3.24
(SD = 0.38)).

The Monte Carlo simulations masking everything except the amygdalae, led to a
minimum cluster-extent threshold of only 1 voxel. This threshold in
combination with a voxel significance p &lt; 0.005
revealed a positive correlation between the neural response to the negative
stimuli and HA in the left amygdala (cluster
size = 11 voxels; mean t(31) = 3.02
(SD = 0.17); cluster peak at (-28,-6,-18)). In the right
amygdala, no correlations between the neural response to the negative
stimuli and HA were observed. Using the probabilistic cytoarchitectonic
maps, 83.0% of the cluster observed in the left amygdala was assigned to the
LB amygdala and 17.0% to the SF amygdala. Figure C presents the observed correlation cluster overlaid on an
anatomical template. The left plot in Figure 
presents the observed correlation.

ANOVA: main effect of group
The Monte Carlo simulations using the background mask, resulted in a
cluster-extent threshold of 58 voxels for the main effect of group.
Using a maximal voxel significance of 0.005 significant main effects of
group were observed in the left and right frontal cortex, the middle
cingulate cortex and in the right visual cortex. In all these regions,
post-hoc tests revealed a higher neural activity in response to the positive
and the negative stimuli in the high HA participants than in the low HA
subjects. A more detailed summary of these results is presented in
Table .

Main effects of group presenting activation differences
independent of the stimulus valence

ANOVA analysis: main effect of group	
Cluster size (voxels)	Position cluster peak (mm)	Peak F	Anatomical labels	Post-hoc tests	
P: High – Low mean t (SD)	N: High – Low mean t (SD)	
135	(-32,22,36)	23.03	Left middle frontal cortex	3.01 (0.41)	2.82 (0.40)	
Left precentral gyrus	
186	(24,48,30)	23.00	Right middle and superior frontal corte	3.18 (0.34)	2.86 (0.57)	
98	(22,22,4)	18.36	Right caudate nucleus	3.38 (0.44)	2.44 (0.47)	
Right putamen	
157	(42,50,2)	17.83	Right middle frontal cortex	3.07 (0.28)	2.68 (0.31)	
Right orbital middle and ingerior frontal cortex	
141	(-4,-14,32)	17.09	Bilateral middle cingulate cortex	3.51 (0.41)	2.40 (0.39)	
118	(32,-74,14)	16.48	Right middle and superior occipital cortex	3.54 (0.33)	2.04 (0.26)	
These results were found after applying a voxel significance
threshold p &lt; 0.005 and a cluster-extent
threshold Ke &gt; 58 voxels.

The Monte Carlo simulations masking everything except the amygdalae, yielded
a minimum cluster-extent threshold of only 1 voxel. Applying this
threshold in combination with a voxel significance threshold
p &lt; 0.005 only produced a main effect of group in
the left amygdala (cluster size = 10 voxels, peak
F(1,62) = 16.69, cluster peak at (-28,-6,-18)). Post-hoc tests
revealed a higher neural activity in this cluster in response to the
positive and the negative stimuli in the high HA participants. Based on the
probabilistic cytoarchitectonic maps, 97.5% of this cluster was assigned to
the LB amygdala and 2.5% to the SF amygdala.

ANOVA: interaction ‘group x valence’
The Monte Carlo simulations using the background mask, led to a
cluster-extent threshold of 39 voxels for the interaction effect of
group and valence. Significant interaction effects were observed in the left
medial frontal cortex and the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), in the left
middle frontal cortex, the left orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) and in the right
precentral and postcentral gyri. Post-hoc tests revealed a higher neural
activity in the high HA participants in response to the positive stimuli but
a lower neural activity in response to the negative stimuli in all these
regions. A more detailed summary of these results is presented in
Table .

Interaction effects ‘group x valence’ presenting
activation differences dependent on the stimulus valence

ANOVA analysis: interaction ‘group ×
valence’	
Cluster size (voxels)	Position cluster peak (mm)	Peak F	Anatomical labels	Post-hoc tests	
P: High – Low mean t (SD)	N: High – Low mean t (SD)	
118	(-8,26,36)	19.56	Left medial superior frontal cortex	2.06 (0.42)	-1.15 (0.50)	
Left anterior and middle cingulate cortex	
47	(-22,38,10)	19.35	Left middle frontal cortex	1.64 (0.49)	-1.49 (0.59)	
61	(-34,48,-2)	16.28	Left orbital middle frontal cortex	2.73 (0.26)	-0.41 (0.28)	
Left middle frontal cortex	
41	(38,-22,42)	13.92	Right postcentral gyrus	1.62 (0.34)	-1.44 (0.31)	
Right precentral gyrus	
These results were found after applying a voxel significance
threshold p &lt; 0.005 and a cluster-extent
threshold Ke &gt; 58 voxels.

The Monte Carlo simulations masking everything except the amygdalae, yielded
a minimum cluster-extent threshold of only 1 voxel. However, no
interaction effects were observed in the amygdalae.

The amygdala responses related to the behavioral results and the personality
traits
For completeness we also analyzed the correlation between the amygdalae responses
to the positive and negative stimuli and age, the measured response times and
the number of misjudgments of the valences. These analyses revealed a negative
correlation between the left amygdala response to the positive stimuli and the
number of negative stimuli rated as positive (cluster
size = 2 voxels; mean t(25) = 3.03
(SD = 0.04); cluster peak at (-16,-4,-16)) assigned to the SF
amygdala (100%).

Discussion
In this study, we hypothesized individual differences, dependent on the participants
HA scores in the amygdalae activations observed during the explicit evaluation of
emotional stimuli. In the high HA participants, the correlation analyses and the
ANOVA revealed an enhanced response to the positive and to the negative stimuli in
the left LB amygdala. The LB amygdala is known to be involved in processing of the
sensory input coming from the visual cortex and the fusiform gyrus []. In high HA individuals, the increased visual input was hypothesized to
result from an enhanced attentional bias. It has been shown that an enhanced
attention towards facial expressions increases the response in the neural system
responsible for the perception and the analysis of stimuli [-]. More specifically, an increased attentional load will boost the neural
activity in the occipital cortex, the temporal cortex and the fusiform gyrus. In
line with the hypothesized attentional bias, our whole-brain correlation analyses
revealed a positive correlation between the response to the positive stimuli in the
visual cortex and the fusiform gyrus and HA. Moreover, a significantly higher neural
activation was observed in the high compared to the low HA participants in the right
visual cortex independently of the stimulus valence. These observed differences are
in agreement with the results of [], who reported enhanced visual processing in anxious individuals related
to their increased attentional bias as revealed by their eye-tracking results.
Supplementary to our results [], reported individual differences, dependent on the subjects HA scores, in
the LB amygdalae connectivity with the visual cortex and fusiform gyrus. These
differences in connectivity were most clearly observed in their female subjects.

The ANOVA and correlation analyses failed to reveal any activation difference in the
CM and SF amygdalae between the low and high HA participants. The CM amygdalae are
involved in the generation of the emotional output while the SF amygdalae are an
intermediate station between the input from the visual processing areas and the
prefrontal cortex []. Both subregions have connections with the prefrontal cortex which were
found to correlate with HA []. However, these correlations were mainly observed in males. Through these
connections, the prefrontal cortex is able to inhibit the neural activity in the CM
amygdalae. Current theories hypothesize that emotion regulation and the inhibition
of the amygdalae responses to affective stimuli are initiated in the VLPFC and
continues over a neural network including the DLPFC, the MCC, the ACC, the insular
cortex and the superior temporal cortex []. It has been shown that explicitly processing affective stimuli requires
an increased cognitive control of the induced emotional responses from these areas [,-]. Our whole brain results revealed that the neural activity in the
prefrontal cortex and the cingulate gyrus differs between the low and high HA
participants. In general, the neural activity in the prefrontal cortex was found to
be higher in the high HA participants. These findings indicate that these
participants had to make more efforts to regulate the induced emotional responses
during explicit processing of the affective stimuli. We hypothesized that these
increased efforts provided an explanation for the absence of any difference in the
behavioral responses between the low and high HA participants. The behavioral
results were in line with the behavioral results reported in []. In agreement with our whole-brain findings [], reported increased neural correlates of the inhibition of negative
emotional information in subjects at family risk to develop a major depressive
disorder.

In clinical populations with an anxiety or depressive disorder, response differences
while evaluating emotional stimuli were reported in the insular cortex, ACC, MCC,
VLPFC and DLPFC in addition to increased amygdalae activations [,]. Unfortunately, these studies did not assign their findings to the
amygdalae subregions. These results suggest that depressive patients or patients
with an anxiety disorder do not only have impairments in their emotional responses
but also in the cognitive and attentional regulation of these induced responses.
Functional connectivity studies revealed that impairments in the down-regulation of
the amygdalae responses from the prefrontal cortex could be causal for affective
disorders [-]. Interestingly [], was able to show this in females with a major depressive disorder while
they where processing negative stimuli as well as positive stimuli. As we excluded
subjects with symptoms of an affective disorder or a BDI above 9, it was not
possible to relate our findings to clinical symptoms.

The results of the current study are in line with our previous papers [,]. In these papers we reported left lateralized amygdala responses to
negative stimuli in high HA females [] and a correlation between the left amygdala activation while passively
watching negative stimuli and HA []. Others also reported differences between anxious and non-anxious
individuals in their left amygdala responses to negative stimuli [] or correlations between bilateral amygdalae responses to negative stimuli
and HA [] or anxiety []. Etkin et al. [] revealed a positive correlation between the right amygdala activity and
trait anxiety. Unfortunately, these previous studies did not assign their findings
to the amygdalae subregions. Although it has been shown that the amygdalae respond
to positive stimuli as well [], most of these studies did not include positive stimuli in their
paradigm. The current study seems to indicate similar differences related to trait
HA in amygdalae responses in response to positive stimuli as to negative
stimuli.

In general, these findings imply that individual differences in the neural responses
induced by affective stimuli can be partly explained by individual differences in
the personality trait HA. The current study extends these findings to the situation
in which the participants had to evaluate the affective stimuli explicitly. While
during implicit processing or passive viewing of affective stimuli an enhanced
emotional response and attentional control has been observed [,], our new results point at differences in the cognitive control needed to
perform the explicit task. In healthy females, this enhanced cognitive processing
seems to be sufficient to inhibit increased emotional response. Unfortunately, our
subject group did not include healthy females with a very high HA score (above 25).
This limited range of HA scores limits the interpretation of our results to low,
moderate and high HA females and the findings cannot be extended to healthy females
with a very high HA score.

Although lateralization studies revealed that both amygdalae respond to emotional
stimuli, the left and right amygdalae are found to be involved in different ways in
emotional processing. The left amygdala is hypothesized to be involved in processing
the emotional valence and arousal of the stimuli while the right amygdala is
involved in the fast detection of emotional content in a stimulus [,]. Given that only the left amygdala response correlated with HA in the
current and previous studies [,], our findings seem to indicate that only the processing of the valence
and arousal of the affective stimuli is related to HA but not the fast detection of
these stimuli.

Remarkably, although the neural response in the left LB amygdala correlated
significantly with HA, the underlying response was found to be non-significant. As
presented in the plots in Figure , an explanation for
this is that the left LB amygdala deactivated in the low HA participants while it
activated in the high HA participants. The performed T-test evaluated whether the
mean response from all participants, independent of their HA score, was
significantly different from 0.

The only significant amygdalae response observed was an activation of the left and
right SF amygdalae, induced by the negative stimuli. This response did not correlate
with HA or differ between the low and high HA participants. The SF amygdala is known
to be sub-specialized into directing the attention towards socially relevant stimuli
and processing the basic emotion of disgust []. We hypothesized these observed responses to be indicative for an
increased feeling of disgust induced by the negative stimuli due to the
dermatological ailments present in the baby faces, in all participants independent
of their HA score. These increased feelings of disgust resulted in an increased
response time after viewing a negative stimulus. In line with this interpretation,
in [] we had already reported a significant increase in the feelings of disgust
(t(19) = 5.69, p &lt; 0.01) in a similar group of
healthy females after viewing the negative stimuli outside the MRI environment.

Some final remark should be made regarding the assignment of the findings to the
amygdalae subregions. In the current study, this assignment was done using the
probabilistic cytoarchitectonic maps of []. Although, these probabilistic maps were specifically designed for use in
fMRI studies, some caution should exercised regarding the obtained results. Due to
the limited spatial resolution of fMRI images, the performed smoothing step and the
correlations between neighboring voxels, the accuracy of the assignment of the
clusters observed in the amygydalae to the small subregions is rather limited.
However, it would be of interest for studies of the relations between amygdalae
activations and personality traits or affective disease states to assign their
results to the amygdalae subregions given their different roles in affective
processing.

Limitations of the study
A major limitation of the current study is the limited sample size. The sample size
was similar to that used by others in similar studies (e.g., []: 17 participants, []: 45 participants, []: 29 participants and []: 20 participants). This limited sample size could have resulted in a lack
of power, increasing the chance of reporting false negative results (type II errors)
aand false positive results (type I errors) []. To make an acceptable balance between the chances for reporting type I
and type II errors, we performed Monte Carlo simulations in AlphaSim [,] for each analysis. These simulations revealed rather conservative
cluster-extent thresholds in combination with the voxel significance threshold of
p ≤ 0.005 selected to look at the whole brain
results.

The setup of this study implies some limitations on the scope of our results and
conclusions. First of all, the study was exclusively carried out on young, healthy
females. An extension of our results and conclusions to younger, older or male
subjects is not possible without evidence from further research. Secondly, stimuli
similar to the ones in our previous studies were used. These stimuli were adapted to
our subject group of young females. Although we have shown in earlier publications
that these stimuli elicited the desired emotional responses, further evidence is
needed to generalize our conclusions to other types of stimuli (e.g., facial
expressions of healthy adults and non-facial stimuli) and other emotions (e.g.,
anger and anxiety). Thirdly, we were not able to incorporate eye tracking in this
study. Due to the absence of such a device, we were not able to check whether all
volunteers remained focused on the stimulus presentation.

Conclusion
In this study, we have extended the previously reported relationship between the
personality trait HA and the neural activity generated while passively viewing or
implicitly processing affective stimuli, to the situation where these stimuli are
processed explicitly. The results obtained, pointed in the high HA participants to a
higher activity in the visual cortex and facial processing areas and in the
prefrontal cortex. The enhanced facial processing boosts the activity in the left LB
amygdala, while the increased cognitive control successfully inhibits any increased
emotional response in the CM amygdalae in high HA females.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the participating volunteers for the
publication of this report and any accompanying images.

Abbreviations
ANOVA: Analysis of variance; ACC: Anterior cingulate cortex; CM: Centromedial; DLPFC:
Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; fMRI: Functional magnetic resonance imaging; GLM:
General linear model; HA: Harm avoidance; HRF: Hemodynamic response function; LB:
Laterobasal; MCC: Middle cingulate cortex; OFC: Orbitofrontal cortex; SF:
Superfisial; TCI: Temperament and character inventory; VLPFC: Ventrolateral
prefrontal cortex.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
Design of the study: PV, CB. Acquisition of data: PV, CB. Analysis and interpretation
of data: PV, CB. Writing the manuscript: PV. Revising the manuscript critically: CB,
RD, RL, JD. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Supplementary Material
Additional file 1
Significant responses to the positive stimuli. These results
were found after applying a voxel significance threshold
p &lt; 0.005 and a cluster-extent threshold
Ke &gt; 767 voxels.

Click here for file

Additional file 2
Significant responses to the negative stimuli. These results
were found after applying a voxel significance threshold
p &lt; 0.005 and a cluster-extent threshold
Ke &gt; 762 voxels.

Click here for file

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant from the Scientific Fund W. Gepts UZ
Brussel.

