Introduction

The networks consist of individual sensors that are able to interact with human body. These sensors could operate through exchanging information, which is impossible by a single sensor. The application systems receive the results and send the necessary feedbacks to physicians. In most cases, application systems need real-time and high-resolution data. These demand shorter transference delay and higher sampling rate. The main problem is the limitation of band width of wireless channel and contention and collision among the data sent from sensors to the base station. In order to solve these problems, data compression technique is used to reduce the transfer rate. A QoS framework similar to IEEE 802.16 has been suggested by Zhou et al for body sensor networks through which band width could be allocated to the sensor nodes. Jea et al prepared a method in which sensors with higher priority are allowed to transfer their data with high exactness. Baheti et al analyzed the scattered data resources and declared that if data sources are scattered, compressed sensing technique would be used to reduce the necessary sampling rate. Chang et al studied the function of some compression lossy and lossless algorithm on motions that exhibit repetitive patterns such as running. In other research, Zarei et al presented the compression method using principal component analysis for optimization of energy consumption in body sensor networks in which compression is carried out in two stages. Compression method based on the theory of multiple principal component analysis theory for compression of data in wireless sensor network has been presented by Chen et al that principal component analysis theory has been used in different layers to omit the coherence between the measured raw data. For slow changing environments, model-driven data acquisition models have been suggested by Deshpande et al and Silberstein et al., However, the mentioned compression methods only have considered data compression by one sensor. By considering this correlation among the data received by different sensors, compression method based on overhearing and using temporal-spatial correlation has been suggested by Li et al and Tseng et al for wireless sensor networks and body sensor network.,



In this research, Tseng algorithm is developed through principal component analysis and wavelet transform. The principal component analysis theory is used for increasing the correlation among the received data from different sensor nodes and reduction of sent data to base station and optimum use of the band width. Wavelet transform is used for the reduction of noise and collision among received raw data from sensors. Here, the sensors are used to collect the motional data to better diagnosis and treatment.


Materials and methods

Tseng algorithm


Tseng et al represented a method for data compression using temporal and spatial correlation in 2011 in which temporal and spatial correlation was used to optimum use of band width of connective wireless channel restrictions and reduction of conflict among the sensors transfer. In the present research, a network of body wireless sensor network with n sensor nodes has been considered in which every sensor node is equipped with m axis. Considering that in the present research, tri-axial accelerometers have been used, m is regarded 3. The mentioned algorithm has two offline and online phases. In offline phase, received data from the sensors in body sensor network are collected and sent for processing to a fusion center analyser. The main aim of the present phase is to achieve suitable order of the sensor node prediction. Block diagram of  shows the details of offline phase.



Offline phase of Tseng algorithm.



Online phase: the main aim of this phase is data compression according to produced compression tree in offline stage. There are two cases for each sensor. 1. Vi node which is the first level sensor node. 2. Vi node which is not first level sensor node. The stages shown in () and () are performed for case 1 and 2.



Online phase of Tseng algorithm: Vi is a level-1 node.



Online phase of Tseng algorithm: Vi is non-level-1 node.



Since physiological signals studied in physical engineering are often weak, they are always exposed to noise and interference. In this paper, in order to increase compression rate, two methods of signal processing as principal component analysis and wavelet transform have been used. Principal component analysis is used for separating blind signals and increasing correlation among the received data from sensors. In addition, wavelet transform is also used to reduce noise and interference, increasing the compression rate and reducing the error between the real and predicted amounts. As a result, prediction error between the real amount and prediction amount decreases and compression rate increases in comparison with Tseng method.



Proposed algorithm


Proposed algorithm diagram block is depicted in  and . As it is shown in  and , after data collection, principal component analysis is performed on the data. Then, the obtained result of this stage is sent to online and offline stages with applying wavelet transform (as , , and ).



Offline phase of the proposed algorithm.



Online phase of the proposed algorithm.



Principal components analysis


In principal component analysis stage shown in  and , the raw data that have been collected and processed in data collection stage, would be saved in Ri(1:m) column vectors for each i=1,2,…,n. In this analysis, processed data should be normalized and their average should be zero. Thus, according to  the average of all numbers of column vector Ri(q) would be calculated for each i=1,2,...,n and q=1,2,...,m. This obtained average is subtracted from all numbers on the vector (Ri(q)) and it is saved in MRi(q) column vector, as follows:







In this equation, n displays the number of digits on column vector, i displays the number of considered node and q displays the studied node’s axis.



All the amounts (in all three dimensions of the node) in this analysis are placed in X group. Covariance matrix is calculated through  and through singular value decomposition would be factorized to eigenvalues and eigenvectors:







In , matrix D is a diagonal matrix and λi is the eigenvalue of covariance matrix Cxx and ei is the eigenvector corresponding to eigenvalue λi. Columns of matrix E is formed by eigenvectors. E is an orthogonal matrix. ki Vectors are orthogonal, thus:







Where, δij is unit impulse response.



According to , the matrix E of eigenvectors are multiplied to Ri(q) and the data is saved in PXi(q):







The theory of principal component analysis increases the correlation between the sensors. Therefore, it causes an increase in compression rate. According to , eigenvector (ei) forms a space with m dimensions. Therefore, a second space is produced that is dimensionally smaller. Then, matrix of Es is defined as follows. The principal component analysis is defined as :







Wavelet transform


Fourier transform is extracting oscillatory components of frequency signals in time domain. The aim of wavelet transform is calculating components of signal that there are locally, like sudden changes of a noisy signal in a limited time frame. Wavelet transform could be stated as a number of mother wavelet transform functions. Using acts of contraction, expansion and translation in time domain, a family of wavelets based on mother wavelet could be created. Wavelet transform of one signal such as x(t) could be written as . In the present equation, function Ψ(t) is the mother wavelet and plays the role of ejwt function in Fourier transform‏:







In order to reduce the complexity, the mentioned transform is calculated in discrete form for each amount of a and b. Discrete wavelet transform is written according to :



Where, φ(t) is called scale function or father wavelet and Ck and dj,k parameters are considered as approximation coefficient and detail respectively that could be calculated as a set of low-pass and high-pass filters. These filters could be calculated according to functions of mother and father wavelet like :







Where h0(k) and h1(k) are the impulse responses of high-pass and low-pass filter (). depicts decomposition in one level.



Decomposition of wavelet signal in one level.



In the wavelet transform block ( and ) removing the noise from received data of the sensors are eliminated. Since these data have noise and interference, in the proposed method Dabuchi 4 wavelet transform is used for removing the noise, signal compression and reduction of the interferences. Dabuchi 4 wavelet is suitable for multi resolution analysis of wavelet; moreover orthogonality is the other advantage of this wavelet. Some wavelets are without orthogonal property and there are problems of signal energy reduction and frequency leakage. Transformed PXi(q) data in previous block is given as entering signals to Dabuchi 4 wavelet transform, then wavelet transform decomposes base signal to two signal levels according to high-pass and low-pass filters like . As, it is shown in , high-pass signal is the noisy signal that is put aside. Low-pass signals in every dimension of each sensor are saved in WXi(1:m) for each i=1,2,…n. The remaining process continues over the low-pass signal whose noises are reduced.



A sample of decomposition of the collected data: According to discrete wavelet transform: (A) displays the collected raw data; (B) displays the low-pass part of the decomposed signal; and (C) displays the high-pass part of the signal.


Results

Simulation process


A wireless body sensor network of two nodes, in which, each node is equipped with three axes, is considered. Twelve different test conditions for patients with low back pain (LBP, test.a), weak muscles (test.b), calf strain (test.c), chondromalacia of patella (test.d), disc herniation (test.e), spinal canal stenosis (test.f), DJD of spine (test.g), hamstring shortness (test.h), medial meniscal tearing (test.i), DJD of knee (test.j), DJD of hip (test.k) and anterior collateral ligament tearing (test.m) are considered. As an example,  shows seven models of these tests. Both of the sensor nodes are installed on the body of the patients in order to receive and monitor the movements. Each sensor is equipped with a LPC1768 Cortex-M3 microprocessor, one RFM70 module and an ADXL335 tri-axial accelerometer. In order to make a comparison between Tseng algorithm and proposed method, the data are collected from sensors. Then, collected data is processed in base station and two considered compression methods are applied on the processed data in the base station. Every test is carried out on the considered patient and the saved results in the nodes are transferred to base station through a trustable mechanism. Some parts of the processed data are considered as a set of learning sequence and remaining part is considered as test data.



For every test case, two methods of data compression are compared:



Data compression method using the temporal-spatial correlation (Tseng algorithm): in this method only temporal-spatial correlation is used to compress received data.



Compression method using wavelet transform, principal component analysis and temporal-spatial correlation: in the proposed method, in addition to temporal-spatial correlation, wavelet transform and principal component analysis are also used to increase the compression rate and reduce the error between the real amount and the prediction amount.


Discussion

Evaluation of results


For each compression method, a compression model would be created using the learning sequence in offline phase and then online compression rate would be measured using the data test set. For each method, the obtained results from offline phase include transference order tree, αs and βs correlation coefficient and Huffman code word for each sensor.  shows a sample of prediction result. Where the black signal represents the raw collected data and the signals with dotted line displays the predicted data. As, it is shown in the figure, the presented prediction method, creates a prediction data which is much closer to the raw data with a low error. This has leaded the reduction of prediction error; therefore the proposed method increases the compression rate and optimized bandwidth usage.



A sample of real and predicted data.



 shows the compression rate for both methods (proposed and Tseng methods). Compression rate is defined as the ratio of the size of compressed data to that of the non-compressed data, and it is used as main criterion of the evaluation. In fact, size of the compressed data is always smaller than size of the non-compressed data. Therefore, by decreasing compression rate, data would be more compressed. In fact, non-compressed data is the same with obtained data in diff-coding stage. Compressed data is amount of the obtained error in online stage. As it was mentioned in the online section, the stages of obtaining prediction error depend on the level of considering node. In , it is observed that compression rate in the proposed method (gray column) has been increased and it has led to optimum use of the band width and reduction of the conflict between the sent data by the sensors.



The diagram of comparing compression rate between two proposed method and Tseng algorithm in all twelve tests.



 shows the examples of error between the real and predicted amounts. The error between the real and predicted amount is achieved through the subtraction of real data from the predicted one. In order to increase the correlation among the received data from the nodes and reduce the noise, the theory of principal component analysis and wavelet transform is used. As it was observed in , error in the proposed method in each axis node is close to zero and shows more reduction because of using the analysis of principal components and wavelet transform (part B, ) relative to Tseng algorithm (part A, ).



The examples of error between the real and predicted amounts in testes g, h, i, j, k and m in both compression methods: part (A)
displays the error in Tseng method and part; and part (B) displays the error in proposed method.



Since produced error is a datum that should be sent to the base station instead of raw data, reducing the error improves the band width that is considered as the main aim of the present research.  shows the restored data that is calculated from the sum of predicted amount with the produced error according to .



An example of the restored data that displays a good coincidence between the raw data and predicted one.







In this figure signals are displayed with black colour which shows the principle data, and signals displayed with dotted line shows restored data obtained by the proposed method. From  it could be clearly observed that the restored data coincides with raw data. It demonstrates the correctness of data prediction method. Vertical lines in ,  and  separate offline and online stages. The signal in the right side of the dotted line shows the produced signal in offline stage and right side represents the produced signal in online stage.


Conclusion

A compression method based on the theory of principal component analysis, wavelet transform and temporal-spatial correlation is presented. The theory of principal component analysis has been used to increase compression rate and the correlation among the received data from different nodes. Wavelet transform is also used for better reduction of the noise and interferences in raw data received from sensors. The proposed method reduces: 1- the data volume sent by the sensors to the base station 2- interference and conflict among the sent data and 3- error between the real amount and predicted amount in comparison with the method available in the literature. Furthermore, it leads to the optimum use of wireless channel’s band width. Since transference of one bit data is equal to executing 1000 code in CPU order, thus this reduction in volume of sent data through data compression causes the optimum use of energy in sensor batteries and increase battery life. The importance of this problem could be observed clearly where body wireless sensor network especially planted ones, are needed to be used for a long time like diabetic patients. The amount of compression rate in tests a to m for 30000 data using Tseng method is 0.8256, 0.9315, 0.9340, 0.9509, 0.8998, 0.9556, 0.9732, 0.9580, 0.8046, 0.9448, 0.9573, 0.9440 and for proposed method is 0.7210, 0.8898, 0.6548, 0.6765, 0.6009, 0.7435, 0.7651, 0.7623, 0.7736, 0.8596, 0.8856 and 0.7102 which shows an increase in compression rate in proportion to Tseng method (see ). The results display the usefulness of proposed algorithm in comparison to Tseng algorithm. The proposed method makes it possible to receive correct data by physicians and physiotherapists from the body sensor networks for better treatment and diagnosis of illness.


Acknowledgments

We thank Abdolvahab Moghadamm, specialist in physical medicine and rehabilitation, because of patient referral for experimental exercises, and vibration and modal analysis, laboratory of Mechanical Engineering Department, University of Tabriz for their sincere collaboration.


Ethical issues

There is none to be declared.


Competing interests

The authors declare no conflict of interests.


Supplementary materials
Supplementary file contains the supplementary 1.

Click here for additional data file.


Research Highlights

 What is current knowledge?

√ The rapid growth in physiological sensors, low-power
integrated circuits, and wireless communication has enabled
a new generation of wireless sensor networks, now used for
purposes such as monitoring health.



√ Such applications may require real-time and high-resolution
sensing data for various purposes, such as visualizing motions,
recognizing body conditions, and diagnosing diseases. These
requirements imply shorter transmission delays and higher
sampling rates.



√ The main problem in this regard is the limitation of band
width of wireless channel and connection and collision
between the data sent from sensors to the base station.
√ In order to solve these problems data compression
technique is used to reduce the transference rate.


 What is new here?

√ In this research a model of compression based on the theory
of principal component analysis and wavelet transform is
presented.



√ The proposed method reduces: 1- the data volume sent by
the sensors to the base station 2- interference and conflict
among the sent data 3- error between the real amount and
predicted amount in comparison with the method available
in the literature.



√ This method leads to optimum use of wireless channel’s
band width.


