Findings
Ontogenesis of cytochrome P450 aromatase expression in the mouse testis
during fetal development
C57BL/6 mice bred in our animal facility were housed under controlled photoperiod
conditions (lights from 08:00 to 20:00 h) with commercial food and tap
water supplied ad libitum, as previously described [, ]. The day after overnight mating was counted as 0.5 day
post-coitum (dpc). The animal facility is licensed by the French Ministry of
Agriculture (agreement N°B92-032-02). All animal experiments were
supervised by Pr. René Habert (agreement delivered by the French Ministry
of Agriculture for animal experimentation N°92-191) in compliance with the
NIH Guide for Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.

In this paper, we focussed on the ontogenesis of cytochrome P450 aromatase
(accession # NP_031836 for protein and NM_007810.3 for mRNA), and named
“aromatase” thereafter. To characterize aromatase expression during
mouse testis development, its mRNA level was analyzed by RT-PCR from 12.5 dpc to
birth. Three transcript variants, called T1, T2 and T3, were detected
(Figure A-B). T1 and T2 were observed as early
as 12.5 dpc. Sequencing confirmed that they were bona fide aromatase variants
and showed that they corresponded to full-length aromatase (T1) and to the
splicing variants without exon 3 (T2) and without exons 3 and 4 (T3) (see
Additional file ).
Aromatase expression in mouse fetal testis. A. Scheme
showing the different testis aromatase variants (T1, T2 and T3).
Aromatase exons from exon 2 to exon 10 are represented (gray boxes) for
each transcript variant T1, T2 and T3. For each variant the relative
position of the RT-PCR primers (red arrows), quantitative qRT-PCR (black
arrows) and internal probes (blacks lines) used are represented.
B. Expression of different aromatase transcript
variants (T1, T2 and T3) during mouse testis development. Products were
generated by RT-PCR with the primer combinations E2-E9/10 (see
Table ) and visualized on 2% agarose
gel. NC: 3 negative control (PCR master mix without template). M: DNA
ladder; dpc: days post-coitum; dpp: days post-partum.
C. Absolute quantitative expression of aromatase
transcripts during mouse testis development. Total mRNA was isolated
from fetal testes at the indicated stages of development, reverse
transcribed and aromatase expression was quantified by real-time PCR
using the TaqMan method. This method allows the identification of each
isoform by using a specific internal probe (see Figure 1A for position and Table  for sequences). In order to calculate precisely the copy
number of each transcript, each transcript was isolated on gel,
re-amplified and quantified. For each experiment a standard curve was
constructed using the isolated transcript as template with their
corresponding qRT-PCR primers. Data shown are the
mean ± SEM (n = 4-6).
*
P &lt; 0.05 (Student’s
t-test; compared to the mRNA copy number at 13.5 dpc).
D. Aromatase protein expression during mouse testis
development. On western blots, three protein isoforms were recognized by
the anti-aromatase antibody (MCA2077T, Serotec, France). Lane A, ovary
from a pregnant mouse: only one band that corresponds to the aromatase
full-length protein. Lane B, 2 dpp mouse testis; lane C and D, extracts
from 15.5 and 13.5 dpc mouse testes, respectively.



In order to quantify these variants during embryogenesis, we performed
quantitative real-time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) using the TaqMan method which allows the
detection of each isoform using three different internal probes each one
specific for one isoform (Figure A and
Table  for sequences and conditions). We showed
that T1 and T2 expression in the testis increased by around 20-fold between 13.5
and 17.5 dpc and thereafter started to progressively decrease (Figure C).
Sequences of aromatase primers used in RT-PCR and qRT-PCR


	Sequence 5′-3′	Tm	
RT-PCR all transcripts	forward	AACCCCATGCAGTATAATGTC	55°C	
reverse	CATTCTTCTCAAAGTTTTCA	
T1 qRT-PCR	forward	GCCTCCTTCTCCTGATTTGGA	60°C	
reverse	CTGCCATGGGAAATGAGGG	
internal probe	TACCAGGTCCTGGCTACT	
T2 qRT-PCR	forward	GCCTCCTTCTCCTGAATTTGGA	60°C	
reverse	CCGAATCGGGAGATGTAGTGA	
internal probe	TCAATACCAGGTCCTCAAGC	
T3 qRT-PCR	forward	CCATGCCACTCCTGCTGAT	60°C	
reverse	CCACCATTCGAACAAGACCAG	
internal probe	TCTTCAATACCAGCTCTGACGGGCC	


To determine if aromatase is translated in mouse testis, western blot analysis
was performed using a specific anti-aromatase antibody (MCA2077T, Serotec,
France) (Figure D). Two proteins around 54 kDa
and one around 27 kDa were detected. The protein of 54 kDa was also
present in the ovary extract and it approximately corresponds to the aromatase
expected size. We thus suppose that the two heaviest proteins derived from the
full-length form of aromatase (T1) with the highest form corresponding to a
testis-specific post-translational modification that remains to be identified.
In order to understand the origin of the 27 kDa protein, we analysed
sequences of the T2 and T3 variants. It revealed that the splicing of exon 3 in
T2 would change the ORF and create a precocious codon stop leading to a probably
not detected protein of 6 kDa. Splicing of exons 3 and 4 in T3 would not
change the ORF allowing in theory the synthesis of a truncated protein of
46 kDa. No protein at this expected size was detected in the western blot
(Figure D). However, the use of an alternative
start codon located later in T2 and T3 sequences may lead to a protein of
27 kDa containing the C-terminal part of aromatase.

These findings are different from those of the only previously published paper on
this topic showing that, in the mouse, aromatase expression starts at 17.5 dpc
and reaches the highest level at day 1 post-partum []. In our study, we detected aromatase expression as early as 12.5 dpc.
This discrepancy probably results from the improvement of the methods of
detection made since 1994. This is an important point because it shows that
estrogens can be produced by mouse fetal testes very early and throughout
development.

Our findings indicate that different aromatase transcripts are generated in fetal
mouse testes. Previous studies in different mammalian species (including the
mouse) reported that tissue-specific aromatase expression is driven by specific
promoters [–]. Each tissue-specific promoter is associated with a specific
untranslated first exon. In mice testis Golovine et al. have shown that
aromatase transcripts may emerge from a specific promoter called Ptes []. Our study showed that aromatase expression is also regulated at a
second transcriptional level generating two additional truncated variants T2 and
T3 by mRNA splicing. Our results suggest that there are several forms of
aromatase protein however the nature and the physiological function of these
isoforms remain to be investigated.

Aromatase cell localization in mouse fetal testes
Immunohistochemical analysis of aromatase localization in 17.5 dpc mouse testes
using a specific anti-aromatase antibody (MCA2077T, Serotec, France) showed a
strong staining in Leydig cells. Importantly, there was no detectable staining
in Sertoli cells (Figure A). Conversely, previous
studies in fetal and neonatal testes showed that aromatase was expressed in both
Leydig cells and Sertoli cells in the rat [, ]. This and other previous reports indicate that aromatase cell
localization in fetal testis is quite variable in mammalian species. Indeed,
aromatase is expressed in Leydig cells and not in Sertoli cells in the fetal
testis of the Plains Vizcacha rodent [], is totally absent in the deer [], and is detected in both Sertoli cells and Leydig cells in fetal
baboon and human testes [, ].
Aromatase cell localization in mouse fetal testis. A. Aromatase
immunodetection in 17.5 dpc testes. Immunostaining was performed using
an anti-aromatase antibody (MCA2077T, Serotec, France), followed by a
biotin-conjugated secondary antibody and streptavidin-peroxidase
visualization with DAB (Vector Laboratories). (a) A strong
specific immunoreactivity was observed in Leydig cells within the
interstitial tissue (arrows) and to a lesser extent in gonocytes
(arrowheads). Inset is a higher magnification to show that aromatase is
localized only in the cytoplasm of Leydig cells (arrows) and gonocytes
(arrowheads) and is absent or not detectable in the Sertoli cells
(asterisks). (b) Control section (ovary from adult pregnant rat):
positive staining is observed in the corpora lutea (CL) but not in the
pre-antral follicle (F), as previously described []. Scale
bars = 5 μm. B. Double immunofluorescence
staining for aromatase, 3βHSD (Leydig cell marker) and VASA (germ
cell marker) in enriched gonocyte cultures. Immunostaining was performed
using anti-aromatase (MCA2077T, Serotec, France) (green),
anti-3βHSD (generous gift by J.I Mason) (red) and anti-VASA
antibodies (ab13840, Abcam, France) (red). Aromatase expression was
detected both in 3βHSD-positive cells and in VASA-positive cells.
Nuclei were visualized with 4′-6 diaminido-2-phenylindole (DAPI)
(blue). Scale bars = 10 μm.



In addition, our immunohistochemical analysis showed that aromatase was also
expressed in gonocytes, but the intensity of the signal was not uniform: in some
cells the signal was very strong, whereas in others it was faint or undetectable
(Figure A, arrowheads). Similar results were
previously described for Retinoic Acid Receptor alpha []. As aromatase localization in germ cells was quite unexpected,
aromatase immunostaining was also performed in enriched gonocyte cultures that
were prepared from 17.5 dpc mouse testes as previously described []. Similarly, aromatase was detected in some germ cell VASA-positive
cells, a germ cell-specific marker (Figure B). This
result identifies a sub-population of gonocytes with endocrine function.
Aromatase expression was previously reported in adult rat and human germ cells [, ] and in pig gonocytes during development []. Aromatase expression was also detected in gonocytes of human fetal
testes [].

In conclusion, aromatase cell localization in fetal testis appears to differ from
one species to another and as consequence also the intracellular estrogen
concentration. These differences should be taken into account to explain the
variations in the susceptibility of fetal testis to estrogenic and
anti-androgenic endocrine disruptors in different mammalian species that has
been recently lightened [].

Electronic supplementary material
Additional file 1: Sequencing results of T1, T2 and T3. The three different
transcripts were isolated on gel and sequenced with the following
primers: forward 5′-AACCCCATGCAGTATAATGTC-3′ (located in
exon II); reverse 5′-CACAATAGCACTTTCGTCCA-3′ (located in
exon V). Each different exon is highlighted in a
different color (red exon II, black exon III, and blue exon IV and green
exon V. In addition, sequencing from exons VI to X were performed using
other primers and showed no difference in T1, T2 and T3 (data not
shown). (DOC 24 KB)

Competing interests

All authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions

Conceived the study: RH. Conceived and designed the experiments: RH, CR. Performed
the experiments: CB, JM, CR. Analyzed the data: CB, JM, RH, CR. Contributed
reagents, materials, analysis tools and financial supports: RH. Wrote the paper: RH,
CR. Improved the redaction: CB, JM. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.

Acknowledgements
We thank Véronique Neuville for animal care, Evelyne Moreau and Sebastien
Messiaen for technical assistance, Aurélie Gouret for secretarial help and
E. Andermarcher for editing the English manuscript.

Funding

This work was supported by Université Paris Diderot-Paris 7, CEA and INSERM.
J.M. was supported by a fellowship from the Ministère de l’Education
Nationale de la Recherche et de la Technologie. CB holds a position as Temporary
Attached for Teaching and Research (ATER) at the Diderot-Paris 7 University.

