Botulinum
neurotoxins (BoNTs)
are a family of proteins produced by the bacterium Clostridium
botulinum and are among the most lethal toxins known to man. There are eight serotypes (A–H), with the serotype A (BoNT/A) being the most potent
with a lethal dose of less than 1 μg for a 70 kg person. Upon
absorption, the toxin is internalized by endocytosis wherein the light
chain (LC), a zinc metalloprotease, is released into the neuronal
cytoplasm. BoNT/A LC cleaves SNAP-25, the key protein for membrane
fusion, which is responsible for bringing the synaptic vesicle and
plasma membrane together and controlling neuronal transmitter release. The toxicity of BoNT/A is characterized by not
only its potent lethal dose but also its long duration of action.
Indeed, BoNT/A paralysis can last for months. It has been nearly a century since BoNT was first purified in 1928; however, there is still no satisfactory therapeutics
available and the detailed mechanism of BoNT activity is still not
entirely understood.

The SNARE protein, SNAP-25, as presented
to the BoNT/A LC is a
daunting substrate characterized by multiple binding regions and a
very large binding surface that engages over 60 amino acids. Foremost to our understanding of these protein–protein
interactions between the BoNT/A LC and SNAP-25 has been the use of
a series of truncated substrates., These structural
studies have revealed the importance of a helical motif approximately
30–50 amino acids away from the cleavage site of SNAP-25, which
is interfaced with four light-chain α-helices (102–113,
310–321, 335–348, and 351–358) referred to as
the α-exosite. Of additional significance,
a β-sheet region close to the active site was also found to
interact with SNAP-25 and has been referred to as the β-exosite., The dissection of SNAP-25 binding interactions and catalytic competence
have marshalled a 66-amino acid (141–206) fragment to prominence.
Indeed, it has been shown that this substrate interacts with all three
critical regions, two exosites and the active site. We highlight that
the use of the 66-mer fragment is a testimony to the importance of
the α-exosite, because when the α-exosite-binding residues
were omitted poor substrate turnover was observed. Similarly, mutations
in the β-exosite caused reduction in catalytic activity (kcat) of 40–80-fold. Thus, exosites play an essential role in BoNT/A LC–SNAP-25
interactions.

In seeking to develop therapeutics for the reversal
of BoNT/A intoxication,
the design of inhibitors against the protease has become a centerpiece
of research efforts. Indeed, several
nonpeptide active site ligands,, as well as compounds
binding to LC exosites, such as caftaric acid, chicoric acid, and
lomofungin,, have been shown to possess excellent
protease inhibitory activity. The active site of BoNT/A LC is governed
by zinc and while metalloprotease inhibitors are plentiful, their
liabilities are well-documented., Hence, exosite
targeting is warranted, including clarifying the role of these exosites,
which could provide a linchpin to further our understanding on the
mechanism of BoNT/LC toxicity and thus the design of new inhibitors.

To explore how α-exosite binding influences the activity
of BoNT/A LC, a probe was designed based on the published crystal
structure of BoNT/A LC complexed with SNAP-25 (Figure , PDB 1XTG). The probe consisted of the helical
portion of SNAP-25 that binds to the α-exosite, spanning 24
amino acids, which we term BAP-24 (BoNT/A LC α-exosite probe
24). Additionally, within BAP-24, we highlight that the C-terminal
alanine was replaced by aminoisobutyric acid, a well studied effective
inducer of α-helical structure, which assists BAP-24 to adopt a helical structure (Figure ). As anticipated, BAP-24 on it own is not a substrate
for the BoNT/A LC because it does not contain the sequence recognized
by the active site. Accordingly no cleavage product was detected in
any of our experiments.

Structure of BoNT/A-LC (424 a.a. resolved, green)
and SNAP-25 fragment
(64 a.a. C-terminal, 59 a.a. resolved). BAP-24 region is shown in
red, while the remaining SNAP-25 residues are shown in cyan and the
α-exosite in blue (PDB 1XTG).

Sequence of BAP-24. It
is important to note that the C-terminal
alanine is replaced by α-aminoisobutyric acid (Aib) for α-helix
induction.

Materials and Methods
Synthesis of BAP-24
BAP-24 was synthesized on PL-AMS
resin with Rink Amide linker by means of the standard Fmoc strategy
and N,N′-diisopropylcarbodiimide/hydroxybenzotriazole
(DIC/HOBT) protocol. The N-terminus was acetylated with 50% acetic
anhydride in dichloromethane (DCM) for 15 min. The peptide itself
and all protecting groups were cleaved from the resin with trifluoroacetic
acid (TFA) containing ethanedithiol (2.5%), triisopropylsilane (1%),
and water (2.5%) for 3 h. Upon deprotection, the peptide was precipitated
using diethyl ether and centrifuged at 700 rpm for 15 min. This crude
peptide was dissolved in TFA with 20 equiv of ammonium iodide and
20 equiv of dimethylsulfide to reduce the partially oxidized product.
The final product (BAP-24) was purified by HPLC (see ) and its mass was confirmed by LC-MS.

The 66-mer and truncated peptides including 50-, 45-, and 40-mers
were synthesized on an automatic peptide synthesizer (C S Bio. Co.,
USA). The approach employed to make each of these peptides was predicated
upon the principles of peptide synthesis using Boc-protecting strategy,
and the final materials were cleaved with HF, as described previously.

α-Exosite Binding Assays
The
66-mer (5.0 μM)
was mixed with 0, 5.0, 25, 50, 75, 100, or 125 μM BAP-24; 0.2
nM BoNT/A LC was added, and the mixture was incubated for 20 min.
The reaction was terminated with 20% TFA, and then 1 μM C-13
labeled cleavage product was added as internal standard. Samples were
analyzed using LC-MS.

To confirm
α-exosite binding, a series of truncated C-terminal 66-mers
(40-mer, 45-mer, or 50-mer) were used in tandem with BAP-24 in the
assay described, vide supra. For the 40-mer, typical
assay conditions did not allow reliable quantification; in that case,
concentrations of 50 μM 40-mer and 10 nM BoNT/A LC were used
in the assay.

Effect of α-Exosite Binding on BoNT/A
LC Activity
SNAPtide (5.0 μM) was mixed with 100 μM
BAP-24, then
10 nM BoNT/A LC was added, and fluorescence at 523 nm was measured
continuously for 4 h with the excitation wavelength of 490 nm. Collected
data were fitted with a one-phase association equation
in Prism 6.0 with R2 &gt; 0.99. The first
derivative of the fitted curve was plotted as the rate of cleavage.

BAP-24 as a Probe for α-Exosite Binding Determination
The 66-mer cleavage assay was run in the presence of a series of
concentrations of BAP-24 combined with chicoric acid or lomofungin;
1/v0 versus chicoric acid or lomofungin
concentration was plotted with linear fitting. Sets of parallel curves
indicate mutually exclusive inhibition, while intersecting curves
indicate nonmutually exclusive inhibition.

Results and Discussion
Kinetic
Studies Delineating BAP-24 and Its α-Exosite Interactions
The truncated C-terminal 66-mer fragment of SNAP-25 is an excellent
substrate for the BoNT/A LC, making it a widely used substrate for in vitro investigations. Although,
BAP-24 is not a substrate for the BoNT/A LC, the binding of BAP-24
to the light chain was evidenced by a competition experiment between
BAP-24 and the 66-mer substrate. As shown in Figure a, a decrease in the 66-mer cleavage rate was observed as
a function of BAP-24 concentration. A similar but less pronounced
effect was also observed with a truncated subset of the 66-mer, 45-
and 50-mer substrates, which bear a smaller overlap (3 and 8 residues,
respectively) with the sequence of BAP-24 (Figure b).

α-Exosite kinetic analysis. (a) The 66-mer cleavage rate
examined with 0, 25, 50, 75, or 125 μM BAP-24. (b) The 45-mer
and 50-mer cleavage rate tested with 0, 25, 50, 100, or 200 μM
BAP-24. The results were normalized by setting the rates without BAP-24
at 100%. (c) The 40-mer cleavage rate examined with 0, 25, 50, 100,
or 200 μM BAP-24.

To confirm that BAP-24 is a unique exosite probe, we examined
a
40-mer substrate that contains the BoNT/A cleavage site but does not
overlap with the sequence of BAP-24, which makes the two sequences
complementary rather than competing. In this case, a synergistic effect
and an increase in cleavage of the 40-mer was discovered to be dependent
on the concentration of BAP-24 (Figure c).
Taken together, these results strongly suggested that BAP-24 binds
at the α-exosite in situ.

Mechanistic
Studies of α-Exosite Binding and Consequences
of the Catalytic Activity
BAP-24 can both promote and inhibit
BoNT/A LC catalysis. However, the exact mechanism of this increase
in catalytic activity was unclear. The 40-mer was a relatively poor
substrate even in the presence of BAP-24; thus, to further investigate
the effect of this α-exosite binding and catalysis, we examined
another short but highly active substrate, SNAPtide. SNAPtide is a commercial substrate of the BoNT/A LC, a
short 13-residue peptidomimetic comprising FITC and DABCYL fluorophores
as the FRET system. BAP-24 should have no direct contact with SNAPtide
because this FRET peptide resides exclusively within catalytic core
of the protease; hence, results here would shine additional light
upon BAP-24 exosite interactions and how these influence BoNT activity.
The BoNT/A LC activity was measured by fluorescence for 4 h in the
presence and in the absence of BAP-24 (Figure a). In the presence of BAP-24, the fluorescence intensity increased
quickly, confirming its ability to accelerate substrate cleavage.
To better define this increase in catalysis, the generated intensity
curves were fitted with a one-phase association model and the first
derivatives were calculated as a function of cleavage velocity (Figure b). In presence of BAP-24, the initial cleavage
rate increased about 2 fold indicating an activation of the catalytic
machinery.

SNAPtide assay as conducted in the presence or absence of 100 μM
BAP-24. (a) Fluorescence intensity over time was fit to a one-phase
association equation. (b) The first derivative of the curves in panel
a were calculated to yield the velocity of SNAPtide cleavage. The
half-lives observed are based upon the velocity.

A known phenomenon with the BoNT/A protease in vitro is the loss of catalytic activity over time. Remarkably, while catalysis decreased, it did so more slowly
in the presence of BAP-24 than without, indicating that BoNT/A LC
was stabilized by the BAP-24 (Figure b). Impressively,
the half-life of the BoNT/A LC was increased from 1 h to more than
3 h. Finally, the effect of BAP-24 activation and stabilization was
also found to be sequence specific. Thus, a scrambled BAP-24 peptide
containing the same set of amino acids but now randomized was found
to be inactive in this SNAPtide assay (see ). These results suggest that α-exosite binding
can both enhance catalysis and stabilize BoNT/A protease.

Use of BAP-24
as a Probe for α-Exosite Kinetic Analysis
BAP-24 was
confirmed to bind to the α-exosite, yet we wanted
to further examine its value through kinetic testing in the form of
mutually or nonmutually exclusive binding between BAP-24 and nonpeptidic
inhibitors. Here we examined two inhibitors of BoNT/A LC, chicoric
acid and lomofungin, which are known to bind α-exosite and β-exosite,
respectively., Curve fitting to a combination
of BAP-24 and chicoric acid demonstrated mutually exclusive binding
as evidenced from the observed parallel lines (Figure a and Scheme ). However, BAP-24 and
lomofungin in tandem gave a pattern of intersecting lines demonstrating
nonmutually exclusive binding (Figure b and
Scheme ). These
data provide further worth of our BAP-24 probe because it can be used
to validate the binding of small molecules to the α- or β-exosite
of BoNT/A protease.

Mechanism of Mutually Exclusive Inhibition
I1 and I2 are the concentrations
of two inhibitors; KI1 and KI2 are KI of I1 and I2 separately;
S, KM, kcat, and vmax have their usual definitions. As shown in eq 1, at
various concentrations of I2, curves of 1/v versus
I1 have the same slope, giving parallel curves.

Mechanism of Nonmutually Exclusive Inhibition
Here
α is a synergistic
parameter reflecting the difference in affinity for I1 binding in
the presence of I2; the other parameters have the same connotation
as in Scheme . In eq 2, the slopes of the
curves of 1/v versus I1 are function of I2, which
gives sets of intersecting curves.

Inhibition experiments wherein BAP-24 was examined in
the presence
of chicoric acid or lomofungin to determine binding exclusivity. 1/v0 was plotted using a series of concentrations
of chicoric acid or lomofungin in conjunction with gradient concentrations
of BAP-24. BAP-24 displayed mutually exclusive binding with chicoric
acid as shown in panel (a) and nonmutually exclusive binding with
lomofungin as viewed in panel (b).

Conclusion
Based on the cocrystal structure of BoNT/A
LC complexed with SNAP-25,
we designed a peptide probe for α-exosite binding. With this
probe, new data was acquired further defining the α-exosite’s
role in both catalysis and protein stability. In sum, α-exosite
binding can be used to both increase LC catalytic activity and greatly
extend the half-life of the protease. Engaging the α-exosite,
we surmise, causes the protease tertiary structure to undergo a subtle
conformational change resulting in a reorganization of the active
site with the net result of increased catalysis. In addition, this
allosteric binding may also “anchor” the enzyme in a
state preventing destabilization or degradation. This finding may
shed additional light on the protease’s cryptic extended lifetime in vivo. Thus, we posit that if upon SNAP-25 cleavage the
truncated SNARE complex remains intimately associated with the BoNT/A
LC then its degradation would be retarded.

Finally, using the
BAP-24 probe has also allowed further insights
into the mechanism of α-exosite inhibition by a small molecule.
In previous work from our group, we noted that chicoric acid granted
a hybrid inhibition profile, both competitive and noncompetitive. Based on data uncovered in the current study,
α-exosite interactions of chicoric acid may not only deter substrate
binding but also prevent realignment of the protease active site required
for optimal catalysis. Further study on the dynamic changes of BoNT/A
LC structure may give confirmation of this dual hypothesis.

Supporting Information Available
Supplementary
data, experimental
procedures, and compound characterization. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500950x_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
BoNT/Abotulinum neurotoxin serotype
A

LClight chain

SNAP-25synaptosomal-associated
protein 25

FITCfluorescein isothiocyanate

DABCYL4-(4-dimethylaminophenylazo)benzoic acid

FRETfluorescence resonance energy transfer

DICN,N′-diisopropylcarbodiimide

HOBThydroxybenzotriazole

DCMdichloromethane

TFAtrifluoroacetic
acid

HPLChigh-performance
liquid chromatography

LC-MSliquid chromatography–mass spectrometry

