Epoxide hydrolases (EHs) make
up an important family of enzymes that catalyze the hydrolysis of
epoxides to their corresponding diols. Epoxides can be generated via endogenous biochemical pathways or,
e.g., via oxidation of xenobiotics, for example, by cytochrome P450.− This reaction is important in drug metabolism, as epoxides formed
during the oxidation of drug molecules can react with proteins and
DNA, causing damage to cells. There are five known mammalian epoxide
hydrolases: microsomal and soluble epoxide hydrolases (mEH and sEH,
respectively), leukotriene A4 hydrolase, cholesterol epoxide hydrolase,
and hepoxilin epoxide hydrolase. Although
found throughout the body, sEH is highly concentrated in the kidneys
and, in addition to detoxification, is involved in the metabolism
of epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (EETs).,, Inhibition of sEH is a potential treatment for many
diseases, including kidney failure, high blood pressure, and atherosclerosis.,− sEH has a broad substrate range, and because of its role in detoxification
and biochemical modification of drugs, or their metabolites, the regioselectivity
of the epoxide ring-opening reaction has important medical relevance,
because of possible differences in activity between products. EHs
are also used in the preparation and refinement of enantiopure diols
and epoxides, which are important synthons in organic synthesis. Engineered EHs with designed specificities would
expand their range of application considerably.

sEH is a member of the α/β-hydrolase
family. This hydrolase family shares a common catalytic triad (nucleophile-histidine-acid)
and two-step mechanism, which involves the formation of a covalent
ester intermediate (Scheme )., The hydrolase activity of the enzyme is performed in the C-terminal
domain, while the N-terminal domain has phosphatase activity.− Previously proposed mechanisms for sEH suggested direct attack on
the epoxide by an activated water molecule, but the mechanism involving the ester intermediate is now widely
accepted.− sEH can distinguish between two chemically similar epoxide carbon
atoms, but the determinants of this regioselectivity
are not known. Murine sEH preferentially attacks the intrinsically
more reactive phenyl carbon of a range of aromatic substituted epoxides,
including trans-diphenylpropene oxide (t-DPPO),[i.e., C(1) in Figure ], whereas murine mEH
attacks preferentially at the less hindered benzylic epoxide carbon. In Solanum tuberosum epoxide
hydrolase 1 (StEH1), attack at the benzylic carbon occurs exclusively
for (S,S)-trans-methylstyrene oxide (t-MSO), but for (R,R)-t-MSO, the epoxide is attacked at either position, with
a slight preference for the benzylic carbon. A temperature and pH dependence has been observed for the regioselectivity
of nucleophilic attack of (R,R)-t-MSO
in StEH1, revealing interconversion between two different Michaelis
complexes for this particular EH. Engineered
mutations in StEH1 have also been used to alter the regioselectivity
for nucleophilic attack by this enzyme., Understanding
the causes of regioselectivity in sEH is potentially important in
drug development as well as for the application of EH enzymes in biocatalysis.

Proposed Mechanism, for Hydrolysis of Epoxide RCHOCHR′
by sEH
Two tyrosine residues (Tyr381 and Tyr465 in
murine sEH) are found in the active site of all known EH enyzmes and
are believed to be important in catalysis.− One of these tyrosine residues
has been proposed to act as a general acid catalyst in the ring-opening
reaction, while the other forms a hydrogen bond to the epoxide oxygen
atom in the substrate.− Mutation of both of these tyrosine residues to phenylalanine leads
to a 90% loss of reactivity. Mutation
studies of EH from Agrobacterium radiobacter AD1 suggest that the residue equivalent to Tyr465
is important for the regioselectivity of the ring-opening reaction.
MD simulations of sEH suggested that a so-called “near-attack
conformation” (NAC, involving the nucleophilic Asp333 carboylate
oxygen atom and the benzylic carbon atom of t-MSO) is populated 4
times more frequently when the epoxide oxygen atom forms a hydrogen
bond to the Tyr465 side chain. While
superficially attractive, the NAC idea suffers from problems such
as the lack of a unique definition; also,
studying reactant complexes alone can lead to misleading conclusions
about enzyme reactivity. In general,
it is important to study reactions to draw reliable conclusions. An
experimental study of the hydrolysis of trans-stilbene
oxide by S. tuberosum epoxide hydrolase 1 (StEH1)
suggested that Tyr381 and Tyr465 act as electrophilic catalysts and
do not provide a proton to the epoxide oxyanion. A similar role has been observed for Tyr115 in the epoxide
ring-opening
step in glutathione S-transferase M1-1. Regardless of whether they act as proton donors,
it is widely accepted that Tyr381 and Tyr465 play an important role
in the stabilization of the transition state and ring-opened intermediate.

In general, reliable conclusions about determinants of selectivity
will require the calculation of activation energy barriers for enzyme-catalyzed
reactions, including thorough consideration of conformational sampling
and reliable quantum chemical (or empirical valence bond) methods., Possible causes of
regioselectivity in an enzyme include intrinsic reactivity, binding
mode, and specific stabilization of key species in the enzyme. QM/MM
modeling is well-suited to the analysis of factors involved in regio-
and stereoselectivity in enzymes, as demonstrated in a recent study
of a cytochrome P450 enzyme; in that work,
conformational sampling was found to be important in making accurate
predictions of selectivity. QM/MM methods have also been used to identify
a single amino acid as the likely key determinant of selectivity observed
in the epoxide ring opening of phenanthrene 9,10-oxide by a glutathione S-transferase (GST). As with
EH, the ring-opening reaction catalyzed by GST involves initial nucleophilic
attack at one of the epoxide carbon atoms. In contrast to EH, in which
an aspartate carboxylate oxygen atom performs this attack, in GST
enzymes the nucleophilic attack is conducted by the negatively charged
sulfur atom of the glutathione anion. In the case of transition metal-containing enzymes, such as the
cytochrome P450 enzymes, consideration of conformational sampling
is limited to calculating a few adiabatic mapping pathways, starting
from different snapshots taken from molecular dynamics simulations. This is due to the poor treatment of transition
metals by most semiempirical methods. For enzymes such as sEH, with
no active site transition metal, semiempirical QM methods can be used
to model the active site chemistry, allowing the use of sampling methods,
such as MD, for generation of free energy barriers.

An important
question relating to the mechanism of sEH, which has yet to be answered
conclusively, is whether the Nε atom of His523 (corresponding
to the residue numbering in murine sEH) is protonated or unprotonated
in the resting state of the enzyme, under normal conditions. This
residue forms part of the catalytic triad that is mentioned above,
and mutagenesis studies of both murine sEH and potato StEH1 have revealed that
mutation of this residue results in a drastic loss of catalytic activity.
The pKa of a typical imidazole side chain
of a histidine residue is 6.0, whereas the estimated pKa of this residue in the murine sEH crystal structure
[Protein Data Bank (PDB) entry 1CQZ] is 8.4 (calculated with PROPKA). Microscopic and semimacroscopic methods are
available for the calculation of pKa values
of titratable amino acid residues in proteins; however (to the best of our knowledge), these have not
been applied to sEH. The optimal pH range from 6.5 to 7.4 for sEH
has been measured experimentally. It
is therefore possible that His523 may be either neutral (unprotonated)
or ionized (protonated) in the active site of murine sEH. The protonation
state of His523 has mechanistic implications because this residue
is thought to be involved in the activation (deprotonation) of a water
molecule prior to the hydrolysis step, which would require the Nε
atom to be deprotonated. It has been suggested that His523 is deprotonated
after the ring-opening reaction via a “proton shuttle”,
in which the Nε proton is transferred to the deprotonated oxygen
atom of Tyr465, but this mechanism has
not yet been confirmed. As mentioned above, it has also been suggested
that the hydroxyl groups of Tyr381 and Tyr465 do not lose their protons
during the catalytic cycle, in which
case the Nε proton could be transferred instead to the oxyanion
formed upon ring opening.

In the crystal structures that have
been obtained for various forms of EH,,, the proximity of the Nε atom of His523 to the
Asp333 side chain suggests that the Nε atom is protonated prior
to the ring-opening reaction and donates a hydrogen bond to one of
the Asp333 side chain oxygen atoms. In a MD study by Schiott et al., it was found that NACs corresponding to nucleophilic
attack of t-MSO by murine sEH were observed more frequently in a model
with His523 protonated than in a neutral His model. The authors observed
that protonation of His523 prevents Asp333 from forming H-bonds to
other H-bond donors that otherwise would prevent nucleophilic attack
of the epoxide. Hopmann et al. modeled the ring opening of t-MSO in
a small model of sEH using density functional theory (DFT), with the
His523 Nε atom being treated as neutral. This static model does not allow for the formation of hydrogen
bonds between Asp333 and surrounding amino acid residues, as found
in the MD study by Schiott et al. Hopmann
et al. observed the transfer of a proton from the Tyr465 side chain
to the epoxide oxygen, following the ring-opening step. A lower barrier
(by 3.2 kcal/mol) was observed for nucleophilic attack at the epoxide
carbon with the less-hindered methyl substituent, compared to that
with a phenyl substituent. Hopmann et al. also modeled the hydrolysis
of the ester intermediate and observed a barrier higher than that
calculated for the ring-opening reaction, consistent with hydrolysis
being the rate-limiting step in experimental studies. Despite the agreement between experimental observations
and the calculations of Hopmann et al., their study does not conclusively
identify the correct protonation state of His523.

The effects
of the protein environment are a key factor in the reactivity of sEH,
and hence, a modeling method that takes these into account, such as
QM/MM, is well-suited to this type of problem. In this study, the
ring-opening reaction of two epoxide substrates in murine sEH is modeled.
The substrates are trans-stilbene oxide (t-SO) and trans-diphenylpropene oxide (t-DPPO) (Figure ). The regioselectivity of nucleophilic attack in t-DPPO has
been determined experimentally, using 18O-labeled substrate,
and found to occur preferentially (97%) at the phenyl carbon atom
[i.e.,
C(1) in Figure ]. The two epoxide carbon atoms in t-SO are chemically equivalent,
and hence, modeling the reaction with this substrate allows for determinants
other than the relative reactivity of the two epoxide carbon atoms
to be probed. The substrates chosen here allow us to test the ability
of these QM/MM methods to predict regioselectivity and also investigate
possible factors that control the regioselectivity of the ring-opening
process.

Here we model the nucleophilic attack by Asp333 at
each of the two epoxide carbon atoms in t-SO and t-DPPO in multiple
QM/MM (AM1/CHARMM22) umbrella sampling MD simulations. Extensive sampling,
such as that used here, is very important when modeling selectivity
in enzymes, as has been shown in recent studies., Relative
barrier heights to nucleophilic attack at the two epoxide carbon atoms
in t-DPPO are compared and found to be consistent with the experimentally
observed regioselectivity. A large difference
in the free energy barriers to nucleophilic attack for the two epoxide
carbons atoms in t-SO is observed, despite the chemical equivalence
of the two atoms. High-level ab initio QM calculations are used to
correct the AM1 energies, yielding barriers that are in quantitative
agreement with barriers derived from experimentally determined rate
constants for similar reactions. The results are analyzed to identify
the causes of this selectivity in the active site. Our QM/MM calculations
reveal important interactions that influence the selectivity of ring
opening, including the proximity of the epoxide carbon atoms to the
nucleophile, the chemical environment of the epoxide carbon, and the
hydrogen bonding interactions between the epoxide oxygen atom and
the Tyr381 and Tyr465 side chains. These calculations provide insight
into the factors that control stereoselectivity in epoxide hydrolase
and may be of use in the design of novel catalysts.

Computational Methods
Model Setup
The crystal structure of murine sEH without
substrate (PDB entry 1CQZ) was obtained from the Protein Data
Bank., In murine sEH, the epoxide hydrolase activity
is conducted in the C-terminal catalytic domain (Val235–Ala544);
hence, only this region is modeled. The coordinates of an inhibitor, N-cyclohexyl-N′-(3-phenyl)propylurea,
from another sEH structure (PDB entry 1EK1) were docked
into the active site of the catalytic domain of strand A. The inhibitor
was modified to the required substrate, t-SO or t-DPPO (Figure ). The S,S enantiomer
of each substrate was modeled, as these have been shown experimentally
in murine sEH to be turned over (slightly) faster than the corresponding R,Renantiomer. There are two possible orientations for t-DPPO in the active site,
because of asymmetry about the epoxide ring, so simulations were performed
for both of these orientations (Figure ).
Hence, three enzyme–substrate complexes,termed t-SO, t-DPPO(1),
and t-DPPO(2), are modeled. Similar approaches have been applied successfully
in modeling other enzymes.,,− Further details of the setup of each model system,
including addition of hydrogen atoms, solvation, minimization, and
stochastic boundary conditions, are provided in the .

Chemical structures of (S,S)-trans-stilbene oxide (t-SO)
and (S,S)-trans-diphenylpropene oxide (t-DPPO), the substrates modeled here. The
numerals 1 and 2 represent the two epoxide carbon atoms on each substrate
at which nucleophilic ring opening by Asp333 can be initiated.

Two different binding orientations of t-DPPO modeled in
this study. The t-DPPO(1) and t-DPPO(2) orientations are colored blue
and orange, respectively. The structures were obtained from unrestrained
QM/MM MD simulations.

Initial QM/MM MD Simulations
Starting structures for
the QM/MM umbrella sampling MD simulations were generated by performing
ten 14 ps stochastic boundary QM(AM1)/MM(CHARMM22) MD simulations
on the same starting structure, for each enzyme–substrate complex.
Each simulation was given a different set of initial velocities by
supplying a different seed value to the random number generator, to
generate different starting conformations for the umbrella sampling
MD simulations. For each enzyme–substrate complex, the substrate
and nucleophilic Asp333 side chain were treated quantum mechanically
at the AM1 level of theory. The rest
of the enzyme and solvent were treated with the CHARMM22 MM force
field. A hydrogen link atom was used to partition the covalent bond between
the QM and MM regions, placed between the Cβ and Cα atoms
of the Asp333 residue.

QM/MM Umbrella Sampling MD Simulations
Ten simulations
of the nucleophilic attack at C(1) or C(2) of the epoxide ring were
conducted for each substrate (defined in Figure ) using QM(AM1)/MM(CHARMM22) umbrella sampling MD. The coordinates
of the final structures from the unrestrained simulations described
above were used as the initial structures. Multiple starting geometries
were used to enhance the amount of conformational sampling, which
has been found to be important in other enzyme studies. On the basis of each starting geometry,
the reaction was modeled using umbrella sampling with conditions and
protocols similar to those developed and tested for QM/MM simulations
of other enzymes.,,, The reaction coordinate (denoted herein
as r) was defined as the difference between two interatomic
differences: the epoxide O–C(1) or −C(2) distance minus
the Oδ2 (Asp333)–C(1) or −C(2) distance, corresponding
to the bonds being broken or formed, respectively. Similar reaction
coordinates have been used in previous studies of other enzymes.,, The Oδ1 atom of Asp333
is not in a position to favor nucleophilic attack at either epoxide
carbon atom; hence, only nucleophilic attack by Oδ2 is considered.
Series of simulations were performed with the reaction coordinate
harmonically restrained at values between −2.0 and 0.5 Å
in 0.05 Å steps, using a force constant of 100 kcal mol–1 Å–2. All other aspects of the umbrella sampling
MD simulations were identical to those used for the unrestrained MD
simulations, described above. Each simulation consisted of 5 ps of
equilibration dynamics and 25 ps of sampling dynamics, initiated by
using the end point of the first 5 ps from the previous simulation., The weighted histogram analysis method (WHAM)was used to combine the reaction coordinate statistics
of the simulations along the reaction coordinate. Multiple umbrella
sampling MD runs were performed, to test the validity and reproducibility
of the results. The free energy barriers were calculated by combining
the statistics from all of the simulations performed for each reaction
in the WHAM unbiasing calculation. Such approaches have been applied
successfully in previous work for other enzymes.,,

Preliminary umbrella sampling simulations
were performed with the His523 Nε atom either protonated or
unprotonated, to identify the most likely protonation state of this
residue. In these simulations, five different simulations were run
using the same setup and QM/MM methodology described above, but with
the following exceptions: r was varied in steps of
0.1 Å, and the simulations consisted of 1 ps of equilibration
dynamics and 9 ps of sampling dynamics.

Higher-Level QM/MM Calculations and Energy Corrections
AM1, like other semiempirical QM methods, often overestimates activation
barriers for chemical reactions (by ≥10 kcal/mol)., Higher-level QM methods provide more accurate calculations of activation
barriers, but their computational cost prohibits MD sampling. Instead,
the AM1-based free energy barriers were corrected afterward using
the following (previously used) protocol. The end point of the umbrella sampling simulation with the value
of r corresponding to the highest point on each free
energy surface (i.e., corresponding to the transition state) was used
as the initial geometry for AM1/CHARMM22 potential energy calculations.
Potential energy surfaces (PESs) were calculated in CHARMM: a series
of geometry optimizations was performed, with the reaction coordinate
(r) fixed successively to a range of values. These
PESs were initiated at an r of −0.2 Å
(transition state) and followed downhill in energy to r values of −2.0 and 0.5 Å, corresponding to the reactant
complex and covalent ester intermediate, respectively (details in
the ). As with all
other energy barriers calculated in this work, energy barriers were
calculated as the difference in energy between the transition state
and reactant complex. An activation entropy was calculated by computing the difference between the free energy
barrier mentioned above and the Boltzmann-weighted average of the
AM1/CHARMM22 potential energy barriers (ΔEave⧧) for
the same process, using the expression in eq .The activation entropy was added to the B3LYP/CHARMM22
and SCS-MP2//B3LYP/CHARMM22 barriers (detailed below) to yield approximate
free energy barriers. This approach gives only an approximate estimate
of the activation entropy but has been shown to be reasonable for
other enzymes. Composite calculations of this sort have previously
given activation free energies in “quantitative” agreement
with experiment for other enzymes, such as chorismate mutase and p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase., The activation
entropy is small for sEH and is not expected to differ significantly
between different substrates; hence, the same average entropy correction
is applied in all models. Entropic contributions to activation free
energy barriers have been calculated for the enzyme subtilisin in
a more rigorous manner by Warshel et al. and were shown to be small (∼2.5 kcal/mol at 300 K).

PESs were
calculated with (DFT)QM/MM methods using QoMMMa, which uses Tinker with the
CHARMM22 force field for the MM part
of the calculation and Jaguar for the
QM part. PESs for all systems were calculated at the B3LYP/6-31G(d)/CHARMM22
level using the transition state structures from the corresponding
AM1/CHARMM22 PESs as initial geometries. The reaction coordinate used
in the AM1/CHARMM22calculations was also used for the DFT/MM calculations.
Structures were fully optimized at the DFT level, subject to reaction
coordinate constraints. All atoms located more than 20 Å from
the center of the system (Oδ2 of Asp333) were held fixed. Two
PESs for t-SO were also optimized at the BP86/6-31G(d)/CHARMM22 and
BHandHLYP/6-31G(d)/CHARMM22 levelsof theory, to test the dependence
of the barriers on the density functional. The basis set dependence
of the B3LYP/CHARMM22 energies was investigated by performing single-point
energy calculations at the B3LYP/6-311+G(d,p) level on the B3LYP/6-31G(d)/CHARMM22
geometries. Ab initio QM/MM potential energy profiles were calculated
using MOLPRO, by performing single-point
energy calculations on the QM region taken from the B3LYP/CHARMM22
geometries and including the point charges from the MM region in the
QM Hamiltonian. B3LYP/CHARMM22 geometries have been used previously
for higher-level single-point energies and were found to perform well
at predicting geometries in other systems. Ab initio QM energies were
obtained using spin-component-scaled second-order Møller–Plesset
perturbation theory (SCS-MP2), with the
correlation-consistent polarized valence triple-ζ basis set
(cc-pVTZ) developed by Dunning and co-workers.− Additional
diffuse functions were included on the epoxide oxygen atom (aug-cc-pVTZ).
When a small basis set is employed, SCS-MP2 calculationscan be less
accurate than B3LYP calculations with the same basisset. However,
SCS-MP2 is usually more accurate than B3LYP when a larger basis set
is used, such as the one used in this work., SCS-MP2 is a correlated ab initio method and hence the most accurate
QM method of those used here and has been shown to calculate values
of energy barriers within 0.5 kcal/mol of those calculated with the
LCCSD(T) coupled cluster method (with the same basis set). LCCSD(T) QM/MM calculations have been shown
to give energy barriers that approach chemical accuracy (1 kcal/mol).
Only one SCS-MP2//B3LYP/CHARMM22 barrier was computed for C(1) and
C(2) attack in each substrate model, because of the computational
cost.

Results and Discussion
Unrestrained QM/MM MD Simulations
The active site structures
from the 15 ps unrestrained QM/MM MD simulations performed prior to
umbrella sampling simulations were very similar (in terms of interatomic
distances, hydrogen bonding, etc.) for each enzyme–substrate
model system. A representative structure from the t-DPPO(1) simulation
is shown in Figure . The Nε atom of
His523 is protonated in this structure (also see below). There are
several important interactions common to all three enzyme–substrate
model systems. These include hydrogen bonds between the epoxide oxygen
atom of each substrate and the hydroxyl groups of Tyr381 and Tyr465
and a hydrogen bond between the Nε hydrogen of His523 and the
Oδ2
atom of Asp333. The latter interaction is absent in the enzyme–substrate
models in which the His523 Nε atom is not protonated. The values
of the interatomic distances involved in the definition of the reaction
coordinate, averaged over the 10 starting structures for each model
system, are listed in Table . The substrate
orientation in the active site appears to favor nucleophilic attack
by the Oδ2 atom of Asp333 at C(1) for both the t-SO and t-DPPO(2)
models, as the Oδ2–C(1) distances are significantly shorter
than the Oδ2–C(2) distances (by &gt;0.6 Å). The
C(1) atom in t-DPPO corresponds to the phenyl epoxide carbon (as shown
in Figure ). The distinction is less clear
for the t-DPPO(1) model; the orientation of the substrate does not
suggest a preference in the regioselectivity of nucleophilic attack,
as the difference between the Oδ2–C(1) and Oδ2–C(2)
distances is small (∼0.1 Å).

Representative structure
from an AM1/CHARMM22 umbrella sampling MD simulation (at r = −2.0 Å) of the t-DPPO(1) system, showing important
residues. The His523 residue is protonated at the Nε atom in
the model shown here and forms a hydrogen bond with the Oδ2
atom of Asp333.

Protonation State of His523
As mentioned in the introductory
section, the protonation state of His523 responsible for activity
remains a subject of debate., Free energy profiles
were obtained from preliminary AM1/CHARMM22 umbrella sampling MD simulations,
in which 10 ps of MD was performed at each value of the reaction coordinate
(r). The free energy barriers for the reaction, calculated
by combining the trajectories from the five simulations for each system,
are listed in Table . The barriers to nucleophilic
attack at C(1) in all three sEH models studied [t-SO, t-DPPO(1), and
t-DPPO(2)] are significantly higher when His523 is neutral (N) than when it is protonated (P). The barriers
for attack at C(2) are largely unaffected by the protonation state
of His523. Consequently, the regioselectivity of the ring-opening
reaction is significantly affected by the protonation state of His523;
the relative barriers suggest a preference for attack at C(1) in the
protonated models and at C(2) in the neutral models, albeit to a lesser
extent for the latter. The higher barriers for attack at C(1) in the
neutral His523 models could be due to the lack of a hydrogen bonding
interaction between the Tyr465 side chain and epoxide oxygen atom,
which has been suggested to be important in stabilizing the TS. In the unprotonated models, the Tyr465 side
chain donates a hydrogen bond to the Asp333 Oδ2 carboxylate
atom in the substrate complex. In contrast, the Tyr465 side chain
donates a hydrogen bond with the epoxide oxygen atom in the protonated
models (Figure ). As the nucleophilic attack
progresses [at either C(1) or C(2)] and the TS is formed, this hydrogen
bond to the Asp333 Oδ2 atom is lost, but the Tyr465 hydroxyl
group remains unable to donate a hydrogen bond to the epoxide oxygen
atom. The presence of a hydrogen bond from Tyr465 to the epoxide oxygen
not only stabilizes the covalent ring-opened intermediate but also lowers
the barrier to its formation, because of stabilization of the transition
state, as is discussed below. The protonated Nδ atom of His523
donates a hydrogen bond to the Oδ2 atom of Asp495, another member
of the catalytic triad, for all simulations of all models (according
to the hydrogen bond definitions detailed below). Asp495 has been
postulated to be involved in a “charge-relay” mechanism
during the hydrolysis step. Given the
proximity of the His523 Nε and Asp333 Oδ2 atoms in the
crystal structure (2.41 Å) and the
fact that the experimentally observed regioselectivity for the ring-opening
reaction in t-DPPO is only correctly predicted in the simulations
in which the Nε atom is protonated, it seems most likely that
the His523 side chain is protonated at both the Nδ and Nε
positions during the initial stages of the sEH-catalyzed reaction.
For this reason, only the simulations in which the His523 Nε
atom is protonated (i.e., positively charged) are discussed further.

Average Oδ2–C(x) Distances (in angstroms) Calculated from the Structures
from the End of Each of Ten 15 ps Unrestrained QM/MM MD Simulations
Performed for the t-SO, t-DPPO(1), and t-DPPO(2) Systems
model system	Oδ2–C(1)	Oδ2–C(2)	
t-SO	2.91 ± 0.27	3.77 ± 0.44	
t-DPPO(1)	3.21 ± 0.38	3.32 ± 0.24	
t-DPPO(2)	2.76 ± 0.17	3.40 ± 0.25	
Activation Free Energies, ΔG⧧ (in kilocalories per mole) for the
Nucleophilic Ring-Opening Reaction at the C(1) and C(2) Atoms of the
Epoxide Substrate in the Enzyme–Substrate Models t-SO, t-DPPO(1),
and t-DPPO(2)
 	ΔG⧧(P)	ΔG⧧(N)	
model system	C(1)	C(2)	C(1)	C(2)	
t-SO	21.8	33.2	32.1	31.8	
t-DPPO(1)	23.5	24.5	29.3	26.5	
t-DPPO(2)	18.4	27.6	28.9	27.0	
All energies were calculated
by combining the trajectories of five preliminary AM1/CHARMM22 umbrella
sampling MD simulations, with 10 ps of dynamics simulated at each
value of r. P denotes the enzyme model in which the
His523 Nε atom is protonated (and His523 is positively charged). N denotes the enzyme model in which the His523 Nε atom
is not protonated (and His523 is neutral).

Free Energy Barriers
To increase the amount of conformational
sampling for the free energy profiles, additional AM1/CHARMM22 umbrella
sampling calculations were performed on the t-SO, t-DPPO(1), and t-DPPO(2)
model systems. The barriers obtained from these simulations (given
in Table ) indicate the same predicted regioselectivity
as the free energy barriers from the shorter simulations shown in
Table , but the barriers differ by up to 5
kcal/mol. Combining the two sets of simulations (preliminary and additional)
in the WHAM calculation of the free energy barriers gave barriers
identical to those obtained for the additional simulations alone,
suggesting that adequate sampling has been performed in the latter
simulations. Individual barriers for each simulation were also calculated,
and these are provided in the .The individual barriers correspond to different starting geometries,
taken from the unrestrained QM/MM MD simulations. The barriers calculated
from different simulations differ significantly in some cases: the
highest and lowest barriers for the same process differ by as much
as 10 kcal/mol and correspond to different conformational minima on
the free energy surface of the protein. These findings highlight the
need for adequate conformational sampling in simulations of this type,
as shown previously.

Active site structures
from AM1/CHARMM22 umbrella sampling MD simulations of sEH complexed
with t-SO for two systems differing in the protonation state of His523:
one in which His523 is protonated at the Nε atom and positively
charged (green) and one in which His523 is not protonated at the Nε
atom and is neutral (purple). The structures correspond to the reactant
complexes, in which r = −2.0 Å. In the
former, a hydrogen bond is observed between the His523 Nε proton
and Oδ2 atom of Asp333. In the latter, a hydrogen bond is
observed between the Oδ2 atom of Asp333 and the phenol hydrogen
of Tyr465. Important hydrogen bonds are shown by dotted lines.

QM/MM calculations with higher levels of QM theory
gave barriers that were considerably lower than those calculated at
the AM1/CHARMM22 level. For example, the B3LYP/CHARMM22 potential
energy barriers were generally 10–15 kcal/mol lower than the
corresponding AM1/CHARMM22 potential energy barriers (given in the ). However, the same reactivity
trends are predicted with all levels of QM theory tested here.

The free energy barriers are discussed below in two parts. First,
the relative free energy barriers and experimental regioselectivity
observations are compared, and second, the free energy barriers are
compared with experimentally determined reaction rates for a range
of EH substrates.

Comparison with Experiment
Regioselectivity
The free energy barriers to nucleophilic
attack on t-DPPO in the protonated model, from the preliminary and
extended umbrella sampling simulations (Tables  and ), show a preference for attack at C(1)
over C(2). This is in qualitative agreement with the experimentally
determined regioselectivity for murine sEH reported by Borhan et al.,
who measured a 97:3 ratio of attack at C(1) to the less-hindered C(2). This ratio corresponds to a difference in the
barrier of ∼2 kcal/mol. This selectivity is in contrast to
that observed for microsomal EH, where attack at the less hindered
C(2) is preferred. It is encouraging
to note that the regioselectivity predictions are broadly the same,
regardless of the QM method used, as lower barriers for C(1) attack
are observed for all of the QM methods used (see below). The preference
for attack at C(1) over C(2) is observed for both orientations of
t-DPPO (1 and 2); i.e., there is a lower barrier to attack, regardless
of which carbon atom is closer to the nucleophilic Asp333 oxygen atom
in the reactant complex. The barrier to nucleophilic attack is lower
for C(1) attack than for C(2) attack, because the transition state
to attack at both C(1) and C(2) requires partial sp2 hybridization
of the carbon atom undergoing attack. When nucleophilic attack occurs
at C(1), the proximal phenyl ring stabilizes this sp2 hybrid carbon to a larger extent than in the case of C(2) attack. This is an intrinsic
electronic effect present in the substrate and is not due to the enzyme.

The binding mode of t-DPPO in the t-DPPO(1) model is likely to
be more catalytically relevant in the enzyme than the binding mode
in the t-DPPO(2) model, because lower free energy barriers are observed
for the former than for the latter. Additionally, similar distances
are observed between the Asp333 Oδ2 atom and C(1) and C(2) in
the unrestrained MD simulations of t-DPPO(1), whereas C(1) is significantly
closer to the Asp333 Oδ2 atom in the t-DPPO(2) simulations (Table ). For t-SO, the calculated free energy barriers
suggest a large preference for nucleophilic attack at C(1) over C(2).
Such a large effect is surprising, given that the two carbon atoms
are chemically equivalent. However, C(1) is much closer to the Oδ2
atom of Asp333 than C(2) in the unrestrained MD simulations and hence
is in a more favorable position for nucleophilic attack at C(1) than
at C(2) (see Table ).

The quantitative
agreement between the experimental and theoretical values for the
relative barriers to C(1) and C(2) nucleophilic attack in t-DPPO (ΔΔG⧧) is summarized in Table . It is clear that although AM1 shows the correct selectivity
preference, this is significantly overestimated. A difference in the
barrier of 6 kcal/mol would result in exclusive attack at C(1), whereas
the experimental observation is a 97:3 preference. A much better agreement is found in the B3LYP and SCS-MP2
values (1.7 and 3.0 kcal/mol, respectively). As discussed below, this
is because the agreement between theory and experiment for the absolute
values of the barriers calculated with B3LYP and SCS-MP2 is greatly
superior to that in AM1.

Reaction Rate
The potential energy barriers calculated
at the AM1/CHARMM22, B3LYP/CHARMM22, and SCS-MP2//B3LYP/CHARMM22 levels
of theory are given in the. The average activation entropy correction (at 300 K) is 1.8 kcal/mol. This value is small and is
comparable to the calculated and experimental values of entropic contribution (TΔS⧧) for the conversion
of chorismate to prephenate in chorismate mutase at 300 K (2.5 and 2.7 kcal/mol,
respectively).

As mentioned above, the B3LYP/CHARMM22 potential
energy barriers are significantly lower than the corresponding AM1/CHARMM22
potential energy barriers, but the optimized geometries and hydrogen
bonding environments are very similar (bond lengths and bond angles
are provided in the ). As found for the AM1/CHARMM22 free energy and potential energy
barriers, the B3LYP potential energy barriers span a wide range of
values [e.g., 4.7–11.2 kcal/mol for attack at C(1) of t-SO
(see the )] over
the 10 profiles obtained for each of the three model systems. This
variation is due to differences in the conformation of the enzyme,
and the orientation of the substrate, in the initial structures. The
effect of basis set size was explored by calculating B3LYP/6-311+G(d,p)
single-point energies for the B3LYP/6-31G(d) geometries and yielded
energy barriers within 0.1 kcal mol–1 of the B3LYP/6-31G(d)
energy barriers. The average B3LYP/CHARMM22 potential energy barrier
for nucleophilic attack at C(1) of t-SO (7.9 kcal/mol) is in good
agreement with the barrier of 7.8 kcal/mol reported for the nucleophilic
ring opening of t-MSO by human sEH in a DFT study on an active site
model by Hopmann et al.

We are
not aware of any published experimental rate constant values for the
nucleophilic ring opening in murine sEH with the substrates used in
this study. However, for S. tuberosum epoxide hydrolase
1 (StEH1) reacting with t-SO, rate constants corresponding to formation
of the covalent ester intermediate of 18 and 100 s–1 have been measured., The formation of an ester intermediate
between EH isolated from A. radiobacter and (R)-styrene oxide was found to have a rate constant of 1100
s–1. Additionally,
a rate constant of 330 s–1 has been measured for
microsomal EH with the substrate glycidyl-4-nitrobenzoate. These rate constants correspond to a range of
activation free energies of 13–16 kcal/mol. Hence, the B3LYP/CHARMM22
calculated free energy barrier of 7.3 kcal/mol for nucleophilic attack
at C(1) of t-SO is rather low compared to the value calculated from
experiment. Likewise, the free energy barrier of 6.8 kcal/mol for
attack at C(1) in the t-DPPO(2) model is lower than expected.

It is a common tendency for B3LYP to under- or overestimate reaction
barriers for some systems. The neglect
of dispersion in B3LYP is one cause of inaccuracies in the calculation
of barriers. For example, a significant improvement in the relative
barriers calculated for epoxidation and hydroxylation reactions catalyzed
by cytochrome P450 is observed when an empirical dispersion correction
is applied to the B3LYP functional. The
missing dispersion interaction in B3LYP is unlikely to be important
here, as including an empirical dispersion correction would be expected
to lower the barriers even further. Testing different density functionals
is generally a good idea, as different potential energy barriers are
often observed when calculated for the same reaction with different
functionals. As mentioned in , several adiabatic mapping
energy profiles were calculated using the BP86 and BHandHLYP functionals.
The potential energy barriers obtained with these functionals are
detailed in the .
It should be noted that both of these functionals share the same lack
of dispersion as B3LYP. The BP86 barriers were found to be typically
2–3 kcal/mol lower than the same barriers calculated with B3LYP.
In contrast, the BHandHLYP barriers were found to be 5–7
kcal/mol higher than the corresponding B3LYP barriers. The optimized
geometries calculated with all three density functionals were almost
indistinguishable. As mentioned above, the functional dependence of
calculated energy barriers is not uncommon and has been observed previously. The exchange correlation functional, which varies
between different density functionals, is not systematically improvable.
It is therefore important to compare the values of energy barriers
calculated with DFT to those obtained with high-level correlated ab
initio methods, such as coupled cluster and SCS-MP2.

QM/MM Free Energy Barriers (in kilocalories
per mole) for the Nucleophilic Attack at Each of the Epoxide Carbons,
C(1) and C(2), from the Extended Umbrella Sampling MD Simulations
of the t-SO, t-DPPO(1), and t-DPPO(2) Model Systems
 	ΔG⧧(P)	
 	t-SO	t-DPPO(1)	t-DPPO(2)	
QM method	C(1)	C(2)	C(1)	C(2)	C(1)	C(2)	
AM1	22.7	30.1	19.0	25.0	23.4	30.7	
B3LYP/6-31G(d)	7.3	16.6	9.7	11.0	6.8	13.9	
SCS-MP2/(aug)-cc-pVTZ	12.3	19.9	12.8	15.8	13.2	21.8	
Energy barriers calculated from
extended umbrella sampling simulations with His523 protonated at the
Nε position.

The small number of QM atoms required to model the
reaction in the active site of sEH allows the use of correlated ab
initio quantum chemical methods, such as SCS-MP2, in QM/MM calculations,
which are of a higher level of accuracy and able to include the effects
of dispersion in a nonempirical manner. The SCS-MP2 potential energy
barriers are higher (by ∼4 kcal/mol) than the corresponding
B3LYP barriers. The barriers calculated with the BHandHLYP functional
are closest in energy to those calculated with SCS-MP2. This has been found previously in similar calculations on citrate synthase. B3LYP has been found to perform reasonably well
in the calculation of activation energy barriers for chorismate mutase
and p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase. For chorismate mutase, the authors reported barriers calculated
with B3LYP that were lower than those calculated with local coupled
cluster theory, LCCSD(T0) (of very high accuracy), by ∼5 kcal/mol.

The SCS-MP2//B3LYP/CHARMM22 potential energy barriers (given in
the ) were used to
calculate the corresponding free energy barriers that are listed in
Table . The SCS-MP2//B3LYP/CHARMM22 free energy
barrier for attack at C(1) in t-SO is 5.0 kcal/mol higher than the
value calculated with B3LYP/CHARMM22. The SCS-MP2//B3LYP/CHARMM22
barrier of 12.3 kcal/mol for t-SO is in good agreement with the 13–15
kcal/mol range, derived from experiment. The SCS//B3LYP/CHARMM22 barrier
calculated for C(1) attack in t-DPPO(1) (12.8 kcal/mol) is also in
good agreement with the experimentally derived range of values. In
fact, all of the SCS-MP2//B3LYP/CHARMM22 free energy barriers for
attack at the preferred carbon atom are within 1 kcal/mol of the estimated
experimental barriers. However, it should be emphasized that the quoted
range of experimental values is for different substrates in different
EH enzymes, and hence, perfect agreement should not be expected. A
summary ofthe agreement between experiment and theory for the t-DPPO(1)
model is shown in Table . It should be emphasized
also that the excellent agreement between calculations and experiment
is only observed in this work where the highest level of QM theory
(SCS-MP2) is used. Despite this, B3LYP (and AM1) do predict the correct
regioselectivity and are hence suitable for qualitative predictions
of reactivity. This has also been found to be true for
other enzymes. While B3LYP underestimates
barrier heights in this example, in calculations for citrate synthase,
it was found to overestimate barriers.

Summary of the Agreement between Experiment
and QM/MM Calculations for the t-DPPO(1) Model
 	experiment	AM1	B3LYP	SCS-MP2//B3LYP	
ΔG⧧[C(1)]	13–16	19.0	9.7	12.8	
ΔΔG⧧[C(2)–C(1)]	2.1	6.0	1.3	3.0	
selectivity [C(1):C(2)]	32:1	23755:1	9:1	154:1	
ΔG⧧[C(1)] and ΔΔG⧧[C(2)–C(1)] are the activation free energy for nucleophilic
attack at C(1) and the difference between the C(1) and C(2) barriers
(in kilocalories per mole), respectively. Selectivity [C(1):C(2)]
refers to the ratio of products, predicted by the ratio of the calculated
rate constants from ΔΔG⧧[C(2)–C(1)].

Estimated
from rate constants obtained for similar epoxide hydrolases and substrates.,,,

From the 97:3 ratio observed
by Borhan et al. for the reaction of t-DPPO in murine sEH.

Hydrogen Bonding Analysis
As mentioned above, there
are several important hydrogen bonding interactions present in the
active site of sEH. Hydrogen bonding analysis was performed on all
umbrella sampling MD simulations (using CHARMM), to gain insight into
the lifetimes of these interactions and how they vary during the nucleophilic
attack and to assess their effect on the calculated reaction barriers.
A hydrogen bond was defined as being present when the distance between
the donor (D) and acceptor (A) heavy atoms was less than 2.8 Å
and the A–H–D angle was greater than 90°. This
definition has been used in previous work. Detailed data are given in the , and the most interesting features are described below.

In
all of the MD simulations in which the His523 residue is protonated
at the Nε position, the Nε proton is involved in a hydrogen
bond with the Asp333 Oδ2 atom, which is conserved throughout
the simulations. The Asp333 Oδ1 atom (the carboxylate oxygen
atom that does not act as the nucleophile) accepts hydrogen bonds
from the backbone NH groups of Phe265 and Trp334. These hydrogen bonds
have been identified as being important in stabilizing the negative
charge that accumulates on the Asp333 Oδ1 atom upon formation
of the ester intermediate., A hydrogen bond is
formed between the epoxide oxygen atom and the hydroxyl group of Tyr381
for the entire duration of all umbrella sampling MD simulations, in
the ring-opened and closed forms of the substrate. This hydrogen bond
becomes stronger as the reaction progresses, as signified by a decrease
in the distance between the epoxide oxygen atom and hydroxyl proton
of Tyr381 of ∼0.2 Å. The hydrogen bond between the epoxide
oxygen and the Tyr465 hydroxyl group shows more variance, as is discussed
below.

Tyr381 and Tyr465 have both been identified as being
involved in the catalytic mechanism of sEH, by stabilization of the
oxyanion hole formed after nucleophilic attack.− It has not been conclusively
established whether these residues are directly involved in any bond-breaking
or -forming processes. As Tyr381 and Tyr465 were not included in the
QM region in this work, it was not possible to observe protonation
of the ring-opened epoxide by either of these residues. However, the
excellent agreement between our high-level (SCS-MP2) free energy barriers
and those derived from experimental rate constants supports a mechanism
in which neither of the active site tyrosine residues is deprotonated.
Instead, it is believed that the tyrosine residues act as hydrogen
bond donors, as found with glutathione S-transferase
M1-1.

In the t-SO umbrella sampling
MD simulations
of nucleophilic attack at C(2), a hydrogen bond is not observed between
the Tyr465 hydroxyl group and the epoxide oxygen in the TS for the
majority of the simulations (Figure ). This
hydrogen bond is present in the simulations of C(1) attack that gave
the lowest barriers, but it is not present in those with higher energy
barriers (details in the ). When not donating a hydrogen bond to the epoxide oxygen atom,
the hydroxyl group of Tyr465 in the protonated His523 model points
toward
the phenyl group of Phe265 and is not involved in any hydrogen bonding.
The Tyr465–epoxide oxygen hydrogen bond does not form in any
of the simulations with the neutral His523 model, because the hydroxyl
group of Tyr465 instead donates a hydrogen bond to the Asp333 Oδ2
atom, as shown in Figure . The ability of
Tyr465 to form a hydrogen bond to the Asp333 Oδ2 atom (when
His523 is neutral) may be significant for the proton shuttle step
during hydrolysis. In the simulations of nucleophilic attack at C(2)
of t-SO, the hydrogen bond between the backbone NH group of Phe265
and Oδ1 of Asp333 is only present for 50% of the simulation
time, after r = −0.2 Å (corresponding
to the TS).

Active site structures taken from AM1/CHARMM22 umbrella sampling
MD simulations, corresponding to the transition states for the reaction
of t-SO. The blue and orange structures correspond to nucleophilic
attack at C(1) and C(2), respectively.

In all of the t-DPPO(1) simulations in which His523
is protonated, a hydrogen bond is present between the hydroxyl group
of Tyr465 and the epoxide oxygen for most of the time, throughout
the reaction, for nucleophilic attack at C(1) and C(2). This explains
the lower barriers that are observed for the t-DPPO(1) simulations,
compared to those of t-SO (Table ), where
this interaction is only present for a fraction of the simulation
time. In gas phase single-point B3LYP/6-31G(d) energy calculations
(details below), the “intrinsic” barriers to C(1) attack
in t-SO and t-DPPO were found to be similar. The hydrogen bond between
Tyr465 and the epoxide oxygen is not always present in the t-DPPO(2)
simulations, for attack at C(1) or C(2), as shown in Figure . The transition state (free energy maximum) is
located at r = −0.2 Å in both cases.

Hydrogen
bonding to the epoxide oxygen atom during nucleophilic attack at (a)
C(1) of t-SO, (b) C(2) of t-SO, (c) C(1) of t-DPPO(1), (d) C(2) of
t-DPPO(1), (e) C(1) of t-DPPO(2), and (f) C(2) of t-DPPO(2). The height
of the graph corresponds to the total number of hydrogen bonds to
the epoxide oxygen, n(HB), at each value of r, during the extended AM1/CHARMM22 umbrella sampling MD
simulations, averaged over all profiles. The contributions from Tyr381,
Tyr465, and Trp334 are colored blue, red, and green, respectively.
The reactant complex is at r = −2.0 Å;
the alkyl–enzyme intermediate is at r = 0.5
Å,
and the transition state is around r = −0.2
Å
(see the text for the definition of r).

The hydrogen bond analysis, together with the free
energy barriers in Table , indicates that
the hydrogen bond between the hydroxyl group of Tyr465 and the epoxide
oxygen atom plays a significant role in lowering the barrier to nucleophilic
attack in t-SO: higher barriers for nucleophilic attack at C(1) were
observed when this interaction was not present in the TS (see the  for details). This interaction
was not observed during attack at C(2) for t-SO, which is likely to
explain the difference between the barrier for attack at C(1) and
C(2). The binding mode of t-SO in murine sEH may be an additional
factor contributing to the lower barrier for attack at C(1). The O–C(1)
distance is 0.86 Å shorter than the O–C(2) distance, on
average, at the end of unrestrained simulations of t-SO (Table ). Considering that the two carbon atoms are chemically
equivalent, this is likely to be responsible for the preference for
attack at C(1).

To analyze the effect of the enzyme environment
on the barriers, we calculated B3LYP/6-31G(d) single-point energies
for the QM atoms in the absence of the MM region. This was performed
on structures corresponding to the highest and lowest points on the
B3LYP/CHARMM22 PESs for C(1) and C(2) nucleophilic attack for the
t-SO, t-DPPO(1), and t-DPPO(2) models (with His523 protonated). The
gas phase barriers were higher than those calculated in the enzyme
by 3–10 kcal/mol (Table ). This represents
a rate acceleration of 102–105-fold in
the enzyme, compared with that in the gas phase.

To make the
most meaningful analysis of the rate acceleration achieved by an enzyme,
the activation barrier of the reaction in the enzyme should be compared
to that of the same reaction in solution. B3LYP/6-31G(d) single-point energies were also calculated for the
QM atoms in the absence of the MM region for the structures detailed
above, including the Poisson–Boltzmann solvation model in Jaguar
(with a dielectric constant of 80.37 and a probe radius of 1.40 Å). All of the barriers calculated with solvation
are higher than their corresponding QM/MM barriers, by 4.8–9
kcal/mol (Table ). For t-SO, the solvent-corrected
barriers are ∼2 kcal/mol higher than the corresponding gas
phase barriers, indicating a rate acceleration by the enzyme even
greater than that predicted by the gas phase calculations. For t-DPPO(1)
and -(2), the barriers calculated with solvation are lower than their
gas phase counterparts by approximately the same amount. This might
suggest that the nucleophilic attack of t-SO is more favored kinetically
in a hydrophobic environment and that the reverse is true for t-DPPO.
However, it is possible that the solvation effect is not significant,
given the small difference in energy, which is within the expected
error margins of B3LYP and continuum solvent models. There are no water molecules present in the
active site in the enzyme–substrate complexes in any of the
QM/MM calculations, as there is insufficient space. As a water molecule
is required for the hydrolysis step, it is possible that the enzyme
undergoes a structural rearrangement, with the corresponding entrance
of water, prior to the hydrolysis step.

Activation Barriers (in kilocalories
per mole) Calculated for Nucleophilic Attack at C(1) and C(2) in t-SO,
t-DPPO(1), and t-DPPO(2) for the Protonated His523 Model with B3LYP/6-31G(d)/CHARMM22
(ΔEQM/MM⧧) and from Single-Point [B3LYP/6-31G(d)]
Energy Calculations on the
QM Atoms of the B3LYP/6-31G(d)/CHARMM22 Structures in the Gas Phase
(ΔEgas⧧) and with Continuum Solvation (ΔEgas+solv⧧)
 	 	ΔEQM/MM⧧	ΔEgas⧧	ΔEgas+solv⧧	
t-SO	C(1)	6.9	14.7	15.6	
 	C(2)	14.8	17.8	20.5	
t-DPPO(1)	C(1)	6.7	14.9	13.0	
 	C(2)	10.5	20.2	19.2	
t-DPPO(2)	C(1)	9.2	14.3	14.0	
 	C(2)	11.3	17.8	20.2	
There are several discrepancies between the work presented
here and the DFT study by Hopmann et al. First, our calculations indicate that the most likely protonation
state of His523 is the positively charged species, whereas Hopmann
et al. modeled the neutral species and
do not appear to have considered the protonated model in their study.
Also, their work is based on a small static structure
of the enzyme taken from a crystal structure, whereas our modeling
consists of a larger enzyme model and molecular dynamics simulations,
where the mobility of amino acid residues is included. Second, Hopmann
et al. suggest that the oxyanion formed after the nucleophilic attack
is protonated by Tyr465. While we do not model the protonation by
Tyr465 in this study, it seems unlikely to us that this step is necessary.
Tyrosine is not a very strong acid, and it is likely that the proton
would more readily come from the protonated His523, mediated by a
water molecule. This would then leave His523 in a neutral state and
allow it to activate the water molecule responsible for the hydrolysis
step. This would be an interesting route for further investigation.

Conclusions
Epoxide hydrolases have the potential to
act as highly selective biocatalysts in the large-scale production
of enantiopure compounds.
Understanding the nature of the chemical transformations taking place
in the enzyme, together with the factors that dictate the stereochemistry
of the products, will lead to a better realization of their power
for synthetic purposes.

The nucleophilic epoxide ring opening
by Asp333 has been studied here for two different epoxides: t-SO and t-DPPO.
These similar epoxides differ in that the two epoxide carbon atoms
are equivalent in t-SO but are not in t-DPPO. A combination of QM(AM1)/MM(CHARMM)
umbrella sampling MD simulations, B3LYP/CHARMM22, and SCS-MP2 potential energy calculations has been used to obtain free
energy barriers to nucleophilic attack at both epoxide carbon atoms
in the two substrates.

For t-DPPO, the nucleophilic attack was
modeled for two binding orientations, placing one of the two epoxide
carbon atoms closer to the nucleophile. In both cases, the nucleophilic
attack at the phenyl epoxide carbon atom was found to be preferred
over attack at the benzylic carbon atom. This observation is in agreement
with experimental studies. Our AM1/CHARMM22
umbrella sampling MD simulations give relative free energy barriers
that are in good agreement with experimental regioselectivity data
for t-DPPO. While the difference between barriers is in good agreement,
the absolute values of the free energy barriers calculated at this
level of theory are too high, because of the limitations of the AM1
method. Corrections from potential energy barriers calculated with
higher levels of QM theory give free energy barriers that are closer to experiment. While the barriers
calculated at the B3LYP/CHARMM22 QM/MM level are somewhat too low, correction
with SCS-MP2 results in free energy barriers that quantitatively agree
with the range of values derived from experimental rate constants.

Our work suggests that the regioselectivity of nucleophilic attack
for t-DPPO in sEH is mostly due to the relative electrophilicity of
the two epoxide carbon atoms. In the t-SO calculations, despite the
chemical equivalence of the two epoxide carbon atoms, a preference
for attack at the carbon atom closer to the nucleophile in the enzyme–substrate
complex was observed. In the case of t-DPPO, the proximity of the
nucleophile appears to have a weaker effect on the predicted regioselectivity,
compared with electronic factors. This observation may be important
in the design of epoxide hydrolase enzymes for the catalysis of specific
transformations. The results indicate that simple models based purely
on geometric factors are unlikely to
be generally successful in predicting regioselectivity.

Analysis
of the hydrogen bonding to the epoxide oxygen atom during the ring-opening
reaction revealed that lower barriers were observed when a hydrogen
bond was present between the epoxide oxygen atom and the hydroxyl
group of Tyr465 in the transition state. The hydrogen bond between the Tyr381 hydroxyl group and the epoxide oxygen was found to always be present during all simulations. The results also support
the roles of the active site tyrosine residues as being electrophilic
catalysts, rather than performing general acid catalysis, in agreement
with experimental proposals.

The
calculations presented here support the protonated
form of His523 to be present during the nucleophilic ring-opening step. Evidence of
this involvement includes correct prediction of regioselectivity,
lower activation free energies, and increased hydrogen bond stabilization
of transition states. These features are exclusive to this protonation
state (i.e., are not found when it is modeled as neutral).

This work provides a further example of a case in which
QM/MM modeling can provide useful insight into the mechanism of an
enzyme-catalyzed
reaction, highlighting important interactions involved in the stabilization
of key reacting species. Consideration of possible protonation states
of active site residues, and where necessary, alternative binding poses,
may be necessary. We demonstrate that, as long as adequate conformational
sampling is performed, reliable predictions of selectivity can be
made with relatively low levels of QM theory. However, to obtain absolute
values of free energy barriers to near-chemical accuracy, corrections
with higher-level correlated ab initio methods are required.

Supporting Information Available
Details of the system setup, free energy barriers, potential energy
barriers, atomic charges, absolute energies, some bond lengths, coordinates
of selected species, and hydrogen bonding information. This material
is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi201722j_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no competing
financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Christopher Woods for advising in the preparation
of the revised manuscript, Prof. Fahmi Himo for useful discussions, and the referees for useful comments.

