Nitrile hydratases
(NHases)
catalyze the industrially important conversion of nitriles to amides
under mild conditions and are a rare example of metalloenzymes that
ligate trivalent cobalt or iron in noncorrin or nonheme environments., The active site complexes of both metal forms are similar in many
respects: they are low spin with low redox potentials, and they share
the same set of ligands, including three cysteine sulfurs, two of
which are post-translationally oxidized, one to cysteine sulfenic
acid and the other to cysteine sulfinic acid. The modified cysteine
residues are necessary for activity. Along
with the closely related thiocyanate hydrolase, NHases are the only
known enzymes to employ these unusual modifications in metal binding
and possibly catalysis.

The mechanisms
of post-translational cysteine modification and
nitrile hydration remain unknown, but the importance of the β-subunit
in each of these processes is implied by the fact that all known NHases
possess a β-subunit or homologous subunits that are intimately
involved with the active site complex. A highly conserved hydrogen
bonding network links the two subunits, including bonds between the modified cysteine residues in the active
site of the α-subunit and two β arginine residues, which
when mutated drastically reduce activity or abolish it altogether.

Uematsu and Suhadolnik first described
the enzymatic activity of
toyocamycin nitrile hydratase (TNHase) in Streptomyces rimosus, where it is involved in catalyzing the conversion of the nucleoside
antibiotic toyocamycin to sangivamycin. We cloned this NHase in the course of studies involving the biosynthesis
of pyrrolopyrimidine nucleoside antibiotics. Sequence comparisons revealed that the TNHase encoded by the toyJ, toyK, and toyL genes
is homologous to the family of nitrile hydratases. ToyJ is homologous
to the α-subunit of NHase and ToyK and ToyL to the C- and N-terminal
halves, respectively, of the β-subunit of NHase. However, unlike
all previously reported NHase proteins that have two subunits, the Streptomyces protein is heterotrimeric (see Figure ). ToyJKL is also homologous
to thiocyanate hydrolase, which shares with ToyJKL a composition of
three different subunits.

Structure of the two-subunit
cobalt nitrile hydratase from Pseudonocardia thermophila (PDB 1IRE) showing
the active site metal closely associated with both subunits. The single
β-subunit is depicted in both red and green showing where it
is homologous to ToyK and ToyL.

Herein we report the expression and purification of recombinant
ToyJKL and ToyJ and demonstrate that ToyJ alone is sufficient for
the formation of the post-translationally modified, catalytically
active NHase.

Experimental Procedures
Cloning of ToyJ and ToyJKL
Plasmids containing all
three subunits were prepared from those constructed and described
previously. For expression of His6-ToyJ, toyJ was cloned into the NdeI and XhoI sites of pET28a. ToyJKL, where ToyL was
His6-tagged was prepared by coexpression of toyJ, toyK, and toyL in Escherichia
coli as follows. ToyJ was expressed by cloning toyJ into the NdeI/XhoI sites of pACYCDuet-1.
ToyK was expressed by introducing toyK into the NdeI/XhoI sites of pCDFDuet-1. ToyL was
expressed from a plasmid containing toyL in the NdeI/XhoI sites of pET28a.

Growth and
Expression of ToyJ and ToyJKL
Expression
plasmids were introduced into E. coli BL21(DE3) by
electroporation and plated on Lennox broth (LB) agar containing 34
μg/mL kanamycin for ToyJ alone or 34 μg/mL kanamycin,
34 μg/mL streptomycin, and 34 μg/mL chloramphenicol for
expression of ToyJKL. All fermentations contained these same concentrations
of antibiotics. A single colony was used to inoculate 0.1 L LB medium
which was grown overnight at 37 °C. The overnight culture was
distributed evenly among six Fernbach flasks containing 1 L LB medium
and grown to an OD600 nm ≈ 0.5 at which point
the temperature was lowered to 30 °C, and protein expression
was induced by addition of isopropyl-β-d-thiogalactopyranoside
to a final concentration of 0.1 mM. The cultures were supplemented
at the time of induction to 0.05 mM CoCl2. Cells were pelleted
at 5000g after 8 h. The pellets were frozen in liquid
nitrogen and stored at −80 °C.

Purification of ToyJ and
ToyJKL
All steps were carried
out at 4 °C. Cell paste (∼15 g) was resuspended in 0.05
M potassium phosphate buffer containing 0.05 M imidazole and 1 mM
phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride at pH 7.4. Cells were lysed with a Branson
sonifier for a total of 15 min with 3 s bursts at 50% amplitude interspersed
with 6 s pauses to equilibrate temperature. Insoluble components were
removed by centrifugation at 18000g. Clarified lysate
was loaded onto a 5 mL HisTrapHP column (GE Healthcare). Protein was
eluted with a linear gradient from 0.05 M potassium phosphate buffer
containing 0.05 M imidazole at pH 7.4 to one containing 0.5 M imidazole
over 25 mL. Fractions containing TNHase were identified by an orange
color and by SDS-PAGE, pooled, and concentrated using an Amicon Vivaspin
Turbo centrifugal concentrator (PES 10K membrane). The protein was
exchanged into 0.05 M HEPES·NaOH (pH 7.5) using a Bio-Rad 10DG
column. Protein aliquots were frozen in liquid N2 and stored
at −80 °C.

Determination of Protein Concentration and
Metal Content
Protein concentration was determined using
the Bradford method (BioRad)
with BSA as a standard. Garratt Callahan (Burlingame, CA) performed
ICP-OES to determine metal content. Amino acid analysis was conducted
by the Molecular Structure Facility at the University of California,
Davis. Empirically determined correction factors of 0.3 for ToyJ and
0.55 for ToyJKL were found to correlate the Bradford assay results
to the amino acid analysis.

Activity Assays
The concentration
of active enzyme
was estimated to be that of cobalt content of the sample as determined
by ICP-OES. Reactions to determine protein activity contained 0.05
M potassium phosphate (pH 6.5), varying concentrations of toyocamycin
(Berry and Associates) from 0.1 to 2.5 mM and varying concentrations
of 3-cyanopyridine from 0.05 to 0.75 M. The reactions were initiated
by addition of 10 μM ToyJ or 10 nM ToyJKL and quenched at various
times by addition of 30% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid to a final concentration
of 5% (w/v). The products sangivamycin or nicotinamide and residual
toyocamycin or 3-cyanopyridine were quantified by HPLC using an Agilent
Zorbax Eclipse XDB-C-18 (4.6 × 50 mm) with an isocratic elution
of 80% 0.1 M triethylammonium acetate (pH 6.8) and 20% methanol at
a flow rate of 0.75 mL/min. Sangivamycin elutes at 2.3 min, and toyocamycin
elutes at 3.4 min. Nicotinamide elutes at 1.3 min, and 3-cyanopyridine
eluted at 2.3 min.

Thiocyanate degradation was assayed using
the colorimetric method of Bowler modified as follows. Potassium thiocyanate (1.5 mM) in 0.05 M HEPES·NaOH
pH 7.0 was incubated with 0.25 mM ToyJ or 0.25 mM ToyJKL for 24 h.
Control reactions contained buffer only. Samples were quenched by
diluting 10 μL of the reaction mixture into 90 μL of 0.5
M FeNO3 and 0.5 M HNO3. Precipitated protein
was removed by centrifugation. Residual thiocyanate concentration
in the ± enzyme was compared using the absorbance of the iron
thiocyanate complex at 455 nm. Solutions of potassium thiocyanate
were used as a calibration standard. To ensure that the protein had
not lost activity over the course of the reaction, an aliquot of the
overnight mixture containing enzyme was also assayed with toyocamycin,
and the rate of formation of sangivamycin was compared to an aliquot
of freshly thawed enzyme to ensure that the protein was active.

UV–Vis Spectroscopy
UV–visible spectra
were obtained using an Agilent 8453 UV–visible system.

Mass Spectrometry
of ToyJ
Mass spectra were obtained
using an LTQ Velos Orbitrap in the positive mode. ToyJ was prepared
by exchanging 0.1 mL aliquots into deionized water using a nick column
(GE Healthcare). This was lyophilized and resuspended in a 7:3 (v/v)
solution of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and methanol to a final concentration
of 0.1 mM. The solution was infused directly using an Advion Nanomate
in LC Coupler at a flow rate of 200 nL/min with an applied voltage
of 2.0 kV. Resolution was set to 100000 from 400 to 1800 m/z with 4.361 ms ion injection time with two microscans.

Chemical Reduction and EPR of ToyJKL and ToyJ
ToyJKL
in 0.05 M potassium phosphate (pH 7.4) was lyophilized and resuspended
in anaerobic water and 20% glycerol in a Coy anaerobic chamber. It
was reduced by addition of sodium dithionite to a final concentration
of 10 mM; the final concentration of cobalt was 0.5 mM as determined
by ICP-OES. EPR samples of this were frozen in liquid nitrogen anaerobically.

Controls containing as isolated enzyme contained 0.15 mM ToyJ or
0.22 mM ToyJKL in 0.05 M HEPES·NaOH (pH 7.4) with 20% glycerol
(v/v).

EPR spectra were obtained using a Bruker Elexsys E500
spectrometer
at the microwave frequency of 9.335 GHz, microwave power of 2 mW,
and the magnetic field modulation amplitude of 0.5 mT. The measurement
temperature was 30 K.

Determination of Oligomeric State with Size
Exclusion Chromatography
The oligomeric states of ToyJ and
ToyJKL were determined using
analytical size exclusion chromatography with a HiPrep 16/60 Sephacryl
S200 column (GE Healthcare) and gel filtration protein standard (BioRad
#151-1901) as indicated in . The enzymes and standards were injected into the column pre-equilibrated
with 0.02 M HEPES·NaOH (pH 7.4) and 0.15 M NaCl and eluted over
0.15 L at 0.1 mL/min. Elution volumes were determined using UV traces
and SDS-PAGE analysis.

Results and Discussion
Recombinant
ToyJKL with ToyL N-terminally His6-tagged
was purified from E. coli grown in LB medium supplemented
with CoCl2 (50 μM). Purified ToyJKL is orange and
has a UV–visible spectrum that is typical of other cobalt-containing
nitrile hydratases, which also exhibit low intensity shoulders at
314 and 429 nm (blue trace in Figure ). The protein concentration and metal content
of several preparations were determined by amino acid analysis and
by ICP-OES, the results of which revealed there are 0.6 ± 0.2
cobalt atoms per heterotrimer () in the recombinant heterologously
expressed protein.

Comparison of UV–visible spectra of ToyJ and ToyJKL.

To delineate the role of each
subunit in metal insertion, cysteine
oxidation, and nitrile hydration, we explored if the α-subunit,
which is the site of cobalt insertion and post-translational modification,
could be expressed in a soluble and active form in the absence of
the ToyK and ToyL subunits. Indeed, N-terminal His6-tagged
α-subunit, ToyJ, was readily expressed in the absence of the
other two subunits. Gel filtration chromatography shows that ToyJ
is monomeric (). The UV–visible spectrum of purified ToyJ
is very similar to that of holo ToyJKL (orange trace in Figure ). Amino acid analysis and ICP-OES revealed that
the protein contains 1.1 ± 0.1 equiv of cobalt per monomer. Iron
was not detected in any of the preparations. In the context of the
cobalt content of ToyJKL, we propose that the metal preference of
ToyJKL, ToyJ, and possibly the other homologous NHases derives solely
from interactions with the α-subunit.

To our knowledge,
this is the first report of successful expression
and purification of a holo α-subunit of a nitrile hydratase.
Therefore, ESI-MS was used to further confirm the presence of the
post-translational modification, which was inferred from the similarities
between the UV–visible spectra of ToyJ and ToyJKL. An Orbitrap
Velos mass spectrometer was used because it affords the sensitivity
and resolution to clearly differentiate between protein that is fully
or partially modified. Deconvolution of the mass envelope ()
shows that the most abundant species is consistent with the mass of
ToyJ that lacks the starting methionine, as expected for a bacterial
recombinant protein. Remarkably, the protein contains three additional
oxygens and a cobalt. The mass of the most abundant species obtained
from global deconvolution of the m/z envelope shown is 23353.086 amu for [M + H+]. The theoretical
mass corresponding to fully modified ToyJKL is 23352.9724 for [M +
H+] as predicted using the QualBrowser Xtract program that
is part of the Xcalibur 2.1.0 SP1.1160 operating software for the
Orbitrap instrument. We note the molecular formula used to calculate
the theoretical mass of modified ToyJ is that of the neutral molecule
wherein three protons have been removed to accommodate the charge
of the trivalent cobalt atom. The difference between the observed
and calculated values is 0.114 amu, which is within the 10 ppm error
of the instrument. The mass spectra of some preparations of ToyJ occasionally
exhibit an additional m/z envelope
corresponding to ToyJ with only two oxygens (see Figure ). This is consistent with partial modification or loss of
the sulfenic acid oxygen.

MS of ToyJ. The +25 charge
state was selected and isolated in an
Orbitrap Velos with a mass width of 1.6 and resolution of 100000.

Since several residues in the
β-subunit of NHases have been
previously shown to be intimately involved with the active site complex, we used electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR)
to explore whether the absence of the β-subunit could affect
the charge and spin state of the active site cobalt. EPR of ToyJKL
and ToyJ as purified did not show any paramagnetic species (red trace
in Figure ), which suggests that the cobalt
in each protein is in the low spin trivalent state. ToyJKL chemically
reduced with dithionite (black trace in Figure ) exhibits an EPR spectrum consistent with a low spin Co(II) center.
The EPR spectrum of the reduced protein bears a striking similarity
to that of Co(II) in corrin complexes, revealing the remarkable ability
of the unique noncorrin set of ligands in NHases to enforce a low
spin state. It was not possible to reduce
ToyJ to obtain the corresponding spectra for comparison as the protein
quickly precipitated upon the addition of dithionite, presumably as
a result of degradation of the active site complex, and only high
spin Co(II) was detected in such samples.

EPR of ToyJKL. EPR of
ToyJKL. The EPR spectrum of ToyJKL (0.5 mM)
chemically with sodium dithionite (10 mM) to the Co(II) state is shown
in black. By comparison, no EPR signal is observed in the absence
of dithionite as shown in the red trace with 0.22 mM ToyJKL. Experimental
conditions: microwave frequency, 9.335 GHz; microwave power, 2 mW;
magnetic field modulation amplitude, 0.5 mT; temperature, 30 K.

Having established that ToyJ is
sufficient for the biogenesis of
the active site complex, we tested whether it is active against the
natural substrate, toyocamycin. ToyJ catalyzes the time- and enzyme-dependent
conversion of toyocamycin to the amide sangivamycin, which are readily
separated via HPLC (). We carried out a steady-state
kinetic comparison of ToyJ and ToyJKL with toyocamycin as substrate
(shown in Figure  and summarized in Table ). Maximal activity of ToyJ with toyocamycin is
360-fold lower than the wild type, and the KM for the substrate is increased at least 500-fold. Since ToyJ
does not saturate under the conditions of the assay, the fit provides
a lower limit for this value. Nevertheless the data clearly show that
the ToyK and ToyL subunits impart ≥105 to the overall
catalytic efficiency. Control experiments demonstrate that the activity
of ToyJ requires intact protein, as boiled ToyJ is inactive ().
At high substrate concentrations, the activity of ToyJKL deviates
from the ideal Michaelis–Menten fit (). Controls show that this
is not the result of DMSO used to solubilize the substrate. At this
point we cannot rule out that the deviation results from other factors.
The three-dimensional structure of ToyJKL is not known, but all published
NHase homologues are dimeric, and one cannot exclude the potential
for cooperativity.

Michaelis–Menten plots of ToyJKL- and ToyJ-catalyzed
conversion
of toyocamycin to sangivamycin.

Kinetic Parameters of ToyJKL and ToyJ
Catalyzed Hydrations of Toyocamycin and 3-Cyanopyridine
protein	substrate	kcat (s–1)	KM (mM)	kcat/KM (mM–1 s–1)	
ToyJKL	toyocamycin	159 ± 2	2.8 × 10–2 ± 1 × 10–3	5.7 × 103	
ToyJ	toyocamycin	0.44 ± 0.04	15 ± 2	3.0 × 10–2	
ToyJKL	3-cyanopyridine	79 ± 5	99 ± 2	8.0 × 10–1	
ToyJ	3-cyanopyridine	35 ± 3	1.1 × 103 ± 0.1 × 103	3.2 × 10–2	
All reported activities are corrected
for the cobalt content of the protein as determined by ICP-OES.

To determine if TNHase is a promiscuous
enzyme as with other nitrile
hydratases, we compared the turnover of ToyJ and ToyJKL with 3-cyanopyridine,
which is a common substrate and is turned over to nicotinamide. Both ToyJKL and ToyJ accept 3-cyanopyridine
as substrate, the difference in kcat/Km values being only 25-fold (, and
Table ). This difference is orders of magnitude
smaller than that with toyocamycin, which supports the notion that
the ToyKL subunits are responsible for substrate specificity.

Yamanaka et al. recently reported that the closely related thiocyanate
hydrolase could be engineered to hydrate nitriles by mutating arginine
residues in the γ- and β-subunits to phenylalanine and
tryptophan, respectively. We tested ToyJ
alone for activity with thiocyanate. Even in the presence of substantial
concentrations of enzyme and thiocyanate (0.25 mM ToyJ or ToyJKL and
1.5 mM thiocyanate), we were unable to detect any thiocyanate degradation
after 24 h (). We note that under these conditions, the protein retained 80–90%
of the starting activity with toyocamycin, indicating that absence
of activity was not due to protein denaturation. This observation
suggests that the substrate preference of TNHase for nitriles derives
at least in part from the α-subunit

The activity of the
α-subunit of a nitrile hydratase distinguishes
among possible mechanisms of nitrile hydration by adding significant
weight to those that rely solely on residues derived from the α-subunit.
The mechanisms proposed by Hashimoto et al. and Martinez et al. involve mainly
α-subunit residues and particularly the cysteine-sulfenate oxygen,
known to be necessary for activity, to act as a general base in activating
a water molecule to attack the metal bound nitrile or as the nucleophile
itself, respectively.

This study provides insight into the vast
differences in the catalytic
efficiency between model complexes and NHases. The activity of ToyJ
demonstrates what is possible in a single molecule with a significantly
truncated hydrogen bonding network relative to the complete enzyme.
Further studies on the contributions of each subunit will help to
elucidate and model the significant catalytic efficiency found in
NHases.

Supporting Information Available
Figures of analytical size
exclusion with ToyJKL and ToyJ; ESI-MS of ToyJ; HPLC trace of sangivamycin
and toyocamycin; ToyJ activity at various enzyme concentrations; comparison
of activity with ToyJ and boiled ToyJ; ToyJKL activity in hydrating
toyocamycin and in hydrating 3-cyanopyridine and ToyJ activity in
hydrating 3-cyanopyridine. Table of turnover of ToyJ and ToyJKL with
thiocyanate. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500260j_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
† (R.M.M.)
College of Pharmacy, and Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry,
University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

