Peptidoglycan is the major component
of cell walls in bacteria. The chemical structure of peptidoglycan
varies from one bacterium to another, but all peptidoglycan repeat
units consist of a disaccharide of N-acetylglucosamine
(NAG) and N-acetylmuramic acid (NAM), a peptide stem,
and a cross-linking bridge connecting adjacent stems. In Staphylococcus
aureus, the stem is a pentapeptide with the amino acid sequence, l-alanine-d-iso-glutamine-l-lysine-d-alanine-d-alanine, and the bridge is a pentaglycyl peptide. In the FemA mutant (UK17) of methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA), the bridge is a single glycyl peptide. We have shown recently by rotational-echo double-resonance
(REDOR) NMR spectroscopy that the peptidoglycan lattice of S. aureus with pentaglycyl bridges has a repeating structural
motif with a local, tightly packed parallel-stem architecture. This sort of lattice is unlikely for FemA because
the short bridge would result in parallel stems that were only 5 Å
apart, less than half the separation of stems in wild-type S. aureus. Moreover, all the
glycyl bridge methylene carbons would be less than about 5 Å
from l-alanyl methyl carbons, which is inconsistent with
measured distances (cf. below).

In this report, we describe
the REDOR NMR analysis of FemA cell
walls into which four specific labels were incorporated: d-[1-13C]alanine, l-[3-13C]alanine,
[2-13C]glycine, and l-[5-19F]lysine.
The three carbon labels have chemical-shift resolution. Distances
from the 19F label to 13C labels preselected
by carbon–carbon spin diffusion reveal that the peptidoglycan
structural motif in the FemA cell wall is a hybrid of tightly packed
parallel and perpendicular stems. In addition, we establish orientation
of this structural motif relative to the membrane bilayer by stable-isotope
pulse labeling of FemA whole cells, followed by liquid chromatography–mass
spectrometric (LC–MS) detection of peptidoglycan digestion
fragments. We connect the origin of the FemA peptidoglycan architecture
to a template model of peptidoglycan lattice assembly which is consistent with high levels of cross-linking.
We believe the mixed geometry of the FemA peptidoglycan lattice may
be applicable to the cell-wall architecture of other short-bridged
Gram-positive bacteria.

Materials and Methods
Growth and Labeling of
FemA Whole Cells
Starter culture
of the FemA mutant of S. aureus (UK17), grown overnight
in 5 mL of trypticase soy broth at 37 °C with shaking at 250
rpm in an Environ-Shaker (Lab-Lines Instruments, Inc., Melrose Park,
IL) was added (1% final volume) to two 1-L flasks each containing
250 mL of sterile defined media. The medium
was modified by replacement of the natural abundance amino acid l-alanine by a combination of l-[3-13C]alanine
and d-[1-13C]alanine (each, 0.1 g/L), the natural
abundance glycine by [2-13C]glycine, and the natural-abundance
lysine by l-[5-19F]lysine. (The latter was prepared
in a custom synthesis by Okeanos Technical Company, 103 Beiqing Road,
Beijing, China, with labeled lysine purity confirmed by thin-layer
chromatography and structure by mass spectrometry. Incorporation into
cell walls was established directly by 13C{19F} REDOR NMR, as described below.) This combination resulted in specific 13C and 19F labels in the pentapeptide stems of
the peptidoglycan of S. aureus (Figure ). To prevent the scrambling of l-[3-13C]alanine and d-[1-13C]alanine through alanine
racemase, alaphosphin (l-alanyl-l-1-aminoethylphosphonic
acid), an alanine-racemase inhibitor, was added to a final concentration
of 10 μg/mL in two steps.

C{F} and C{P}
REDOR spectra of intact cell walls of the FemA mutant
of S. aureus grown on media containing d-[1-13C]alanine, l-[3-13C]alanine,
[2-13C]glycine, and l-[5-19F]lysine
with the alanine racemase inhibitor, alaphosphin. The full-echo spectrum
is at the bottom of the figure, and various REDOR differences are
above. The shifted-pulse evolution time (second from top) was much
less than two rotor periods. In this experiment, the separation of
the two 19F π pulses was changed from the normal
140 μs (one rotor period) to 220 μs so that the effective
recoupling time was only 30 μs per rotor period over the two
rotor periods of REDOR dephasing. The inset shows the location of
the labels (red, 13C; green, 19F) of peptidoglycan
and (red, 13C; yellow, 31P) wall teichoic acid.
All other carbons are at natural abundance. Spinning sidebands are
designated by “ssb”.

The FemA whole cells were harvested after 6 h of growth by
centrifugation
at 8000g for 10 min at 4 °C in a Sorvall GS-3
rotor. The cells were washed twice in 50 mL of ice-cold 40 mM triethanolamine
buffer, pH 7.0 and then resuspended in 10 mL of 40 mM triethanolamine
buffer and lyophilized. Cell walls were isolated as described in detail
previously.

Dipolar Recoupling
REDOR is a solid-state NMR method
that recouples heteronuclear dipolar interactions under magic-angle
spinning and so can be used to determine
internuclear distances. REDOR is a difference experiment in which
two spectra are collected, one in the absence of heteronuclear dipolar
coupling (full echo, S0 spectrum), and
the other in the presence of the coupling (dephased echo, S spectrum). In the S0 spectrum,
dipolar dephasing is refocused due to spatial averaging resulting
from motion of the rotor in magic-angle spinning. In the S spectrum, the spin part of the dipolar interaction is manipulated
by the application of rotor-synchronized dephasing π-pulses
to prevent full refocusing. The extent of the dephasing is related
to the spin-pair dipolar coupling and hence the internuclear separation.

Solid-State NMR Spectrometer and REDOR Pulse
Sequence
Experiments were performed at 12 T with a six-frequency
transmission-line
probe having a 12-mm long, 6-mm inner diameter analytical coil and
a Chemagnetics/Varian ceramic spinning module. Samples were spun using
a thin-wall Chemagnetics/Varian (Fort Collins, CO/Palo Alto, CA) 5-mm
outer diameter-zirconia rotor at 7143 Hz, with the speed under active
control and maintained to within ±2 Hz. A Tecmag Libra pulse
programmer (Houston, TX) controlled the spectrometer. A 2-kW American
Microwave Technology (AMT) power amplifier was used to produce radio
frequency pulses for 13C (125 MHz) and a 1-kW AMT amplifier
for 31P (202 MHz). The 1H (500 MHz) and 19F (470 MHz) radio frequency pulses were generated by a 2-kW
Creative Electronics tube amplifiers driven by 50-W AMT amplifiers.
All final-stage amplifiers were under active control. The π-pulse lengths were 9 μs for 13C and 1H, 6 μs for 31P, and 5 μs
for 19F. Proton-carbon-matched cross-polarization transfers
were made in 2 ms at 56 kHz. Proton dipolar decoupling was 100 kHz
during data acquisition. The S and S0 alternate-scan strategy compensated for short-term drifts
in REDOR experiments. Standard XY-8 phase cycling was used for all refocusing observe-channel π pulses
(inserted at the end of each rotor period during dipolar evolution)
and dephasing π pulses (inserted in the middle of each rotor
period) to compensate for pulse imperfections. Frequency-specific 13C chemical shifts were selected prior to 13C{19F} REDOR experiments using rotor-asynchronous Dante irradiation, z-axis storage, and mixing times between 200 and 1200 ms
with no 1H decoupling., Typically,
spectra from 100-mg cell-wall samples were the result of the accumulation
of 16 384 scans at room temperature.

Calculated REDOR Dephasing
REDOR dephasing was calculated
using the modified Bessel function expressions given by Mueller et
al. and de la Caillerie and Fretigny for a spin-1/2 pair. A
plot of ΔS/S0 with respect to time
(t = NTr), yields the dipolar coupling
constant and hence the internuclear distance (rIS). The distance and spin-pair concentration (asymptotic dephasing
maximum) were allowed to vary to minimize the root-mean-square deviation
between the experimental and calculated dephasing.

LC–MS
Cells grown in unlabeled
SASM were digested
into muropeptides with lysozyme and mutanolysin as previously described.− Briefly, cells were incubated for 4 h at 37 °C with mutanolysin
(1 μg/μL, from Streptomyces globisporus ATCC 21553, lyophilized powder, 5 KU, Sigma-Aldrich) and lysozyme
(1 μg/μL, from chicken egg white, Sigma-Aldrich). The
suspension was boiled for 5 min, and the supernatant was collected
by centrifugation at 10000g for 5 min.

LC–MS
and MS–MS were performed by using a PicoView PV-500 (New Objective,
Woburn, MA) nanospray stage attached to either an LTQ-FT mass spectrometer
or an LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA).

Muropeptide samples were loaded into an uncoated 75-μm inner
diameter fused-silica capillary column with a 15-μm picofrit
tip (New Objectives, Woburn, MA), packed with C18 reverse-phase material
(3 μm, 100 Å; Phenomenex, Torrance, CA) for 15 cm. The
column was eluted at a flow rate of 250 nL/min for 10 min with 0.1%
(v/v) formic acid in water and subsequently with a 60-min linear acetonitrile
gradient (0–40%) with 0.1% formic acid. The samples, as they
emerged from the column, were sprayed into a 209 LTQ-FT mass spectrometer.
Full mass spectra were recorded in the FT component of the instrument
at 100 000 resolving power (at m/z = 400).

Accurate mass product-ion spectra of muropeptides
were acquired
by introducing the samples by nanospray as they eluted from the LC
to an LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. To obtain major-component product-ion
spectra, cycles consisting of one full FT-scan mass spectrum and five
ensuing data-dependent MS-MS scans acquired by the Orbitrap (with
a normalized collision energy setting of 35%) were repeated continuously
throughout the elution with the following dynamic exclusion settings:
repeat count, 3; repeat duration, 15 s; exclusion duration, 30 s.

Results
Incorporation of l-[19F]Lysine in the Cell-Wall
Peptidoglycan
The full-echo C{F} spectrum of isolated cell
walls of FemA allows an unambiguous assignment of peaks arising from
the three 13C labels (Figure ,
bottom, and insets). The 2-rotor-period REDOR difference shows qualitatively
the proximity of the fluorine label to the three 13C labels
(Figure , second from bottom). In addition,
a major difference peak appears around 95 ppm, the chemical-shift
range for fluorine-substituted sp3 carbons. This assignment is confirmed by the results
of a shifted-pulse C{F} REDOR experiment, which shows diminution of the dephasing of the peaks due to the 13C labels but no diminution of the 95-ppm difference peak
(Figure , second from top). The one-bond 12-kHz 13C–19F dipolar coupling is sufficient to
produce full dephasing for dipolar evolution equal to only a fraction
of a rotor period (see caption to Figure )
with magic-angle spinning at 7143 Hz. The strong C–F coupling verifies that large-amplitude motions
(and motional averaging of dipolar couplings) are absent for lyophilized
peptidoglycan.

We estimated the extent of the incorporation
of the 19F-labeled lysine by comparison of the integrated
intensity of the −CHF– peak at 95 ppm (Figure , second from bottom) to that of the 13C-labeled glycyl peak at 42 ppm (Figure ,
bottom), a ratio of 2:1. These two peaks both arise from methylene
carbons with similar echo-refocusing lifetimes. The glycyl carbon
is 73% enriched, and the isotopic enrichment
of the glycine in the media was 99%. This means that the 19F incorporation is {(2)(99)(0.73)}/{(128)(1.1)} = 1.0, taking into
account the vertical scale factors of the two spectra (1:128) and
the 1.1% natural abundance of 13C in the −CHF–
unit. The full use by FemA of the fluoro-lysine during growth establishes
that fluorine substitution at the 5-carbon position has no significant
effect on −NH2 chemistry at the 6-carbon position.

Dante Frequency Selection
Significant improvement in
resolution of the one-dimensional cell-wall spectrum is possible by
utilization of one of 13C-labels as a filter. For example,
Dante irradiation, at the center of the 42-ppm glycyl
peak, followed by magnetization storage along the z-axis static-field direction for 200 ms, results in the selectively
inverted S-spectrum shown in Figure  (middle). About half of the glycyl-peak intensity has been
inverted resulting in close to zero integrated intensity at 42 ppm.
The Dante difference spectrum (Figure , top)
is obtained by subtracting the S-spectrum from a
full-echo S0 spectrum (Figure , bottom). For the latter, only the Dante irradiating
radio frequency pulse amplitudes have been reduced to zero; both the
Dante evolution period and the 200-ms mixing time are maintained.,

Dante
frequency selection for the cell-wall sample of Figure . A train of 1-μs 13C radio frequency
pulses separated by 5 μs, with the carrier frequency centered
at the glycyl-carbon resonance, and followed by z-axis storage for 200 ms, partially inverted the peak at 42 ppm (middle).
The Dante difference spectrum (top) shows 13C–13C spin diffusion from the glycyl label to the d-alanyl
label (175 and 178 ppm) and the l-alanyl label (15 ppm).
The dotted lines above the peaks of the middle spectrum show their
heights in the bottom spectrum. Spinning sidebands are designated
by “ssb”.

The Dante frequency selection results in a carbonyl-carbon
region
(170–180 ppm) arising only from 13C’s that
are strongly dipolar coupled to the glycyl 13C label. This
selection removes contributions from the natural-abundance background
and from 13C label in wall teichoic acid (see Figure , bottom inset). Two peaks are resolved in the carbonyl-carbon
region, one arising from the peptide cross-link between the glycyl
bridge nitrogen and the d-Ala-4 carbonyl label (see Figure , top inset) at 175 ppm, and the other arising from the terminal carboxyl carbon of d-Ala-5 of uncross-linked stems at 178 ppm. The total carbonyl-carbon region has an intensity that is about
one-fourth that of the glycyl-carbon peak. Ignoring relaxation effects,
this suggests equilibration of spin populations within the spin-up-spin-down
half of all glycyl-d-alanyl 13C–13C pairs (1/2 times 1/2 = 1/4), the only pairs for which flip-flop
transitions are energy conserving and therefore likely to occur. The
observed ratio of intensities associated with cross-linked sites to
un-cross-linked sites is about 2:1, which suggests 67% cross-linking,
consistent with the previously measured level of cross-linking for
FemA peptidoglycan of 62%.

A minor
Dante difference peak is observed at 15 ppm (Figure , top), indicating that a few methyl-carbon 13C
labels of l-alanine are not far removed from the
glycyl-carbon label.

Dante-Selected REDOR
Dante selection
was used as the
front end of C{F} and C{P} REDOR experiments resulting in the spectra
shown in Figure . The REDOR difference is
now a ΔΔS double difference. REDOR C{F}
dephasing (ΔΔS/ΔS) for the four carbon-label peaks (178, 175, 42, and 15 ppm) are
plotted as a function of dipolar evolution in Figure . Distributions of CF distances between about 5 and 7 Å
result in agreement between calculated and observed dephasing. Typical
error bars (based on signal-to-noise ratios) are shown for two of
the panels (Figure , top left and right).
In general, the scatter of the observed dephasing about the calculated
dephasing can be taken as an indication of the quality of the data.

Dante-selected
C{F} (left) and C{P} (right) REDOR of the cell-wall
sample of Figure . The Dante differencing
of Figure  preceded REDOR dephasing. Four
data blocks were collected resulting in spectra with and without Dante
irradiation, each with and without 19F (or 31P) dephasing. The Dante differences (ΔS) are
shown at the bottom of the figure and are the reference spectra for
REDOR dephasing (ΔΔS) shown above. The
terminal carboxyl of the d-alanyl label (178 ppm) has a much
larger C{P} REDOR difference than does the peptide d-alanyl
label (175 ppm), indicating preferred proximity of un-cross-linked d-alanyl units to wall teichoic acid.

Dante-selected C{F} REDOR dephasing (ΔΔS/ΔS) as a function of dipolar evolution time
for the four resolved peaks of Figure  (top).
The Dante selection was the glycyl 13C label at 42 ppm
(Figure ). The experimental dephasing (solid
circles) is matched by the calculated dephasing (black line) which
is a sum of two single-distance components (blue and red lines).

The high degree of dephasing (70%
in about 10 ms) confirms the
spin-count result of Figure  that all of the
lysines in the stems are fluorine labeled.

The C{F} dephasing
behavior does not change substantively when
the Dante mixing time is increased from 200 to 1200 ms (Figure ), although the Dante difference (ΔS) for the methyl-carbon peak at 15 ppm is increased. The
latter indicates some glycyl label to l-alanyl label 13C–13C distances greater than 6 Å. This result rules out the all-parallel stem
model for FemA (as mentioned in the introduction) in which all glycyl-bridge
labels are within 5 Å of an l-alanyl methyl-carbon label.

Dante-selected
C{F} REDOR of the cell-wall sample of Figure . The Dante differencing of Figure  preceded
REDOR dephasing but with a mixing time of 1200 ms.
Even though the l-alanyl methyl-label peak at 15 ppm has
a reduced S0 intensity relative to that
in Figure  (bottom) because of a short T1(C), the ΔS/S0 for that peak has increased to approximately 15%.

The un-cross-linked d-alanine carboxyl
carbons are relatively
closer to the 31P of wall teichoic acid than are the cross-linked d-alanine peptide carbonyl carbons (Figure , right). However, none of the three peptidoglycan 13C labels is less than 5 Å to phosphorus, based on the standard
C{P} REDOR results shown in Figure  (ΔS, top; S0, bottom), where the
dominant dephasing belongs to the natural-abundance sugar carbons.

Pulse-Chase Labeling with LC–MS Detection
Time-dependent
isotopic labeling of bacterial cells (Figure ) quantified by LC-accurate-mass-MS was
used to decide for FemA between the two major proposed models for
peptidoglycan biosynthesis by either (i) strands or (ii) layers. In the strand
model, growth is perpendicular to the surface of the membrane, while
in the layer model each glycan backbone is extended parallel to the
surface of the membrane. In growth by strands, cross-linking is made
to neighboring growing strands (Figure , left);
that is, new units are cross-linked only to new units. Thus, dimers
and trimers of muramidase-digested peptidoglycan fragments with a
mix of heavy and light lysine are only possible to the extent that
the isotopic composition of the free lysine pool is mixed. However,
for the dimers and trimers of Figure , mixtures
of heavy and light lysines are observed after 2 h, when the isotopic
composition of the free lysine pool has long been saturated. This
timing is consistent with growth by layers (Figure , right) where newly synthesized (nascent) layers are cross-linked
to previously synthesized (template) layers; that is, new units cross-link
to old units. The generation of dimers and trimers with a mixture
of heavy and light lysine is extensive in the peptidoglycan of FemA,
and such layers persist until they migrate to the surface of the cell
and are degraded by normal turnover.

(Left) Time course of the pulse labeling
of FemA whole cells with
uniformly 13C,15N-lysine. After the switch to
labeled lysine in the media, the cells doubled in about 2 h. (Right)
Peptidoglycan digest fragment containing a single labeled lysine.

Muramidase digestion fragments (blue) of pulse
labeling of FemA
whole cells with l-[13C6,15N2]-lysine (red circles) for the strand model (left),
and layer model (right) of peptidoglycan biosynthesis. The fragments
with a mixture of heavy and light lysines are only observed in the
layer model.

Accurate-mass spectra
of dimers and trimers from digestion of the
peptidoglycan of FemA cells grown in the pulse-labeling experiment
of Figure . The dimers contain 0, 1, or 2
labeled lysines (increasing m/z,
left to right), and the trimers, 0, 1, 2, or 3 labeled lysines (left
to right), respectively. Each labeled lysine results in a m/z mass shift of 8/2 = 4 units for dimers,
and 8/3 = 2.67 units for trimers.

Discussion
Homogeneous Lattice Models
The lattice
architecture
proposed for wild-type S. aureus() is shown in Figure  (left). A 4
× 4 array of glycan chains perpendicular to the plane of the
paper is in gray, with the peptide stems in green and the pentaglycyl
bridges in red. All peptide stems are parallel. Panels 9a through
9d are slices transverse to the glycan chain direction and separated
from one another by a single NAG-NAM repeat unit. This corresponds
to a 90° clockwise rotation about each 4-fold-symmetric helical
glycan-chain axis. Cross-linking of 100%
is theoretically possible with each stem acting as both a bridge donor
and acceptor. Cross-linking as high as
85% has been reported for the peptidoglycan of wild-type S.
aureus.

Lattice models for the
peptidoglycan of long-bridged wild-type S. aureus (left) and its short-bridged FemA mutant (middle
and right). A 4 × 4 array of glycan chains perpendicular to the
plane of the paper is in gray, with the peptide stems in green and
the pentaglycyl bridges in red. Panels a through d for each model
are slices transverse to the glycan chain direction and separated
from one another by a single glycan repeat unit. The model on the
left has all nearest-neighbor stems parallel; that in the middle,
perpendicular; and that on the right, a mixed geometry. The expanded
insets on the far right identify structural components (arrows and
color highlights) for the mixed geometry of the FemA hybrid model.
The two red arrows (inset, upper right) identify strands that are
color highlighted in Figure . Alternate rows
of the mixed-geometry model have stems that are perpendicular to one
another. Thus, the stems of rows 1 and 3 are parallel, and those of
rows 2 and 4 are parallel. Counts for the central four strands of
the unit cells indicate that ideal cross-linking is 100% for the wild-type
lattice (each stem is a cross-link donor and acceptor) and 50% for
each of the two FemA models.

An all-parallel-stem lattice is impossible for FemA because
the
monoglycyl bridge is too short (see above). An alternative all-perpendicular-stem
arrangement is shown in Figure  (middle).
However, this scheme can also be excluded because (i) there are no
bridge-to-l-alanyl proximities to account for the Dante differences
of Figures , , and , and (ii) the cross-links would result exclusively
in stem-bridge monomers and tetramers (Figure ) after digestion, whereas dimers and trimers are abundant (Figure ).

Hybrid Lattice Model
A possible
mixed-geometry lattice
for FemA which accounts for experimental results is shown in Figure  (right). Nearest-neighbor stems in adjacent rows
are perpendicular differing by a 90° clockwise rotation, while
all stems in the same row, and next-nearest-neighbor stems in alternate
rows, are parallel. We anticipate that the differences in chemical
shifts due to this mixed geometry are minor. Implementation of this
geometry fits into the template model for peptidoglycan assembly. The chains of row 2 (Figure , top inset), for example, can be imagined as the template
layer parallel to the S. aureus membrane
surface (Figure , right). The chains of row
3 would then be nascent chains which are undergoing extension by transglycosylation
synchronized with transpeptidase bridge-stem cross-linking. The entering
glycan repeat unit would necessarily have its stem perpendicular to
the template stem to form a cross-link. Other schemes for generating
hybrid lattices are possible, but their prescriptions for covalent
bond formation are more involved and so are not easily adapted to
the uniformity of a simple template.

The hybrid lattice has 50% cross-linking which can be increased (with
minor conformational distortions, Figure ) because of the numerous
bridge-stem proximities. These additional cross-links account for
the observed digestion trimers (Figure ).
In fact, every bridge has a d-alanyl near neighbor, consistent
with the spin-diffusion proximities of Figure  (top). In addition, the bridge-l-alanyl proximities (Figure , blue highlight; Figure , left foreground) within 6 Å account for the observed spin
diffusion from the glycyl label to the l-alanyl methyl-carbon
label (Figure , ΔS).

Three-dimensional
representation of the hybrid model for the peptidoglycan
lattice of FemA. Two of the glycan chains, peptide stems and glycyl
side chains of the central units of the expanded inset (top) of Figure  (see red arrows) are highlighted by darker colors.
The view is looking from row 3 to row 2 (see Figure  for numbering scheme). A cross-linked red glycyl unit is
in the foreground (just left of and below the center) as well as an
un-cross-linked red glycyl unit (to the right). The steric conflict
of the two highlighted green stems in the foreground is represented
by an upward curvature of one of the stems.

Peptidoglycan within the Cell Wall
A 3D representation
of the hybrid architecture proposed for FemA peptidoglycan is shown
in Figure . Two of the glycan chains of Figure  (top inset), along with their stems and bridges,
have been highlighted. The view is looking from row 3 to row 2 (see
Figure , top inset, red arrows). A cross-linked
red glycyl unit is in the foreground as well as an uncross-linked
red glycyl unit (to the right). The steric conflict of the two highlighted
green stems in the foreground is represented by an upward curvature
of one of the stems. Interunit proximities of glycyl (and lysyl) labels
(red) with both l-alanyl (green, glycan junction) and d-alanyl (green, end of stem) labels are evident in the highlighted
foreground of this view.

Because S. aureus glycan
chain lengths are relatively short, there
are frequent breaks. We interpret the compact lattice of Figure  as a structural motif that can
be adapted to a variety of layers, turns, and vaults () thereby creating both hydrophobic and hydrophilic domains
in the cell wall (Figure ). This partitioning
accounts for (i) the preferred contact of the 31P of hydrophilic
wall teichoic acid with the uncross-linked surface stems of the FemA
peptidoglycan structural motifs (Figure ,
right), and (ii) the location of the hydrophobic tails of cell-wall
bound glycopeptide antibiotics near the interior bridges of the structural
motifs.

Schematic representation of the cell
wall of the FemA mutant of S. aureus as a multilayered
brick wall. Each brick is the
peptidoglycan structural motif (bottom right) shown in expanded view
in Figure . The interior of the structural
motif is hydrophobic and the potential binding site of glycopeptide
drugs with hydrophobic tails. Spaces and gaps are hydrophilic and
accommodate wall teichoic acid (yellow chains). This arrangement brings
the 31P of phosphate groups close to the surfaces of bricks,
which are necessarily rich in un-cross-linked d-alanyl carboxyl
groups, consistent with the results of Figure  (right). Bricks are placed around membrane-bound proteins creating
portals to the cell surface. The membrane bilayer is envisioned parallel
to the back surface of the wall which is built one layer at a time
with the glycan chains of the structural motif parallel to the bilayer
surface, consistent with the results of Figures –.

We conclude that the incorporation of specific 13C and 19F labels within intact peptidoglycan followed
by frequency-selected,
one-dimensional, solid-state NMR detection has led to unambiguous
insights into the complex structure of the short-bridged Gram-positive
bacterial cell wall. Future experiments and molecular modeling can
build on these quantitative results.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
13C{19F} or C{F}carbon-channel observation with fluorine
dephasing

13C{31P} or C{P}carbon-channel observation with
phosphorus dephasing

NAGN-acetylglucosamine

NAMN-acetylmuramic acid

REDORrotational-echo double
resonance

