DNA methylation is a reversible epigenetic determinant
regulating
cellular differentiation. The effect of
DNA methylation on gene expression is realized through specific regulators
termed “methyl-CpG binding proteins” (MBPs). The three
structural families that comprise the MBP are the MBDs, the zinc finger,
and SRA. Disruption of the proteins that
specifically recognize epigenetic methylation marks can cause disease.
In Rett Syndrome, complex phenotypes, including language
and motor skills, are caused by mutations in a MBD family member,
methyl-CpG binding protein 2 (MeCP2). MeCP2
is a multifunctional protein localized to the cell nucleus that regulates
gene expression, chromatin structure, and RNA splicing processes that
together direct brain development.− Common MeCP2 Rett Syndrome-associated mutations are missense localized in its DNA binding domain,
the MBD. These Rett Syndrome mutations alter the ability of the MBD to bind DNA bearing the methyl-CpG
(mCpG) modification.−

MeCP2 is highly expressed in neuronal tissues. In addition to its binding of mCpG islands, MeCP2
and linker
histone H1 compete for DNA binding between nucleosomes. The mechanism of exchange between DNA-bound
MeCP2 (whether mCpG, CpG, or random sequence) and histone H1 is undefined.
The MBD is critical for the proper interaction of MeCP2 with chromatin,, although other domains contribute to DNA binding and chromatin restructuring., The models of MeCP2 modulation of human and mouse BDNF gene expression
considered here (activation, repression, or “dual” model)
assume recognition of mCpG as the first step. Because discrimination of mCpG in genomic DNA is at the heart of
the mechanism(s) by which MeCP2 exerts its epigenetic function, it
is important to understand the physical basis of MBD binding and specificity
to fully understand how the epigenetic signal propagates to biological
regulation.

Because of its high level of expression, specific
and nonspecific
MeCP2 DNA binding must balance for the protein to exert its biological
function. The classic conundrum of proteins that bind to DNA-specific
sequences is that if the level of DNA sequence nonspecific binding
is too high, the protein is sequestered “off target”
and thus functionally impaired. This state of affairs may occur because
of low specificity for the target site. Understanding specificity
is particularly important for understanding the biology of MeCP2 because
it is very highly expressed in neuronal tissues, bringing both specific and nonspecific interactions into
play.

“Binding specificity”
is formally defined as Ks/Kn, the ratio
of the affinity of a protein for a specific sequence (Ks) relative to its affinity for generic DNA (Kn) determined under common solution conditions. Variable binding affinities and stoichiometries
have been reported for MeCP2 and its fragments in studies conducted
under disparate solution conditions.,− Specificity values of 3 and 12–18 have been reported for
human and Xenopus MeCP2, respectively., In contrast, protein–DNA regulators of cellular metabolism
are typically specific for their target sites by multiple orders of
magnitude. Explanations for the effect
of the naturally occurring mutations responsible for Rett syndrome
and other neurological disorders have been based upon binding studies
conducted under a variety of solution conditions.,,,, In addition, MeCP2 domains C-terminal to the MBD
are extensively disordered, and restructure upon
the protein binding mCpG sites.,, These conformational changes are postulated to allosterically influence
interaction of MeCP2 with other regulatory proteins., Delineation of mCpG binding specificity will allow further insight
into the molecular dysfunction caused by disease mutations and whether
allosteric transitions are linked to the precise nature of the bound
DNA.

In our studies, we explore discrimination of mCpG from
CpG by MeCP2
by dissecting the balance of forces underlying these reversible association
reactions. Our initial studies focus on the MBD because this domain
mediates MeCP2 recognition of mCpG.,, A structure of the MBD bound to methylated DNA, provides insight into methyl-specific binding; the degree to which
hydration is reported to contribute to discrimination of the methylated
residue in the structure is highly unusual. To our surprise, salt
uptake rather than hydration appears to play a dominant role in the
specificity of mCpG discrimination, electrostatics play an outsized
role in binding to modified nucleotides, and the domain can assemble
on DNA to form a discrete dimer. The implications of these findings
for the function of full-length MeCP2 during neuronal activity and
development are discussed.

Experimental Procedures
Protein, DNA, and Other
Reagents
The DNA binding domain
of MeCP2 (MBD, residues 76–167; Uniprot entry P51608) was inserted
into a PET21 derivative by the Einstein Protein Production Facility
to yield pMCSG7. Following transformation into Rosetta (DE3) cells, the protein was expressed following standard procedures
in media containing 0.4% sorbitol. The MBD was purified as previously
described except that HEPES buffer was
used throughout and the His tag was cleaved by recombinant Tev protease
as described by the manufacturer (Invitrogen). A molar extinction
coefficient (εM) of 11460 M−1cm−1 was used to determine the MBD concentration from
their 280 nm absorption spectra.

All buffer solution solutes
were purchased from Sigma. Labeled and unlabeled DNA oligonucleotides
were purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies, Inc. (Coralville,
IA), and their concentration was optically determined using extinction
coefficients calculated from sequence. The extinction was corrected
for the fluorescein absorption at 260 nm when appropriate. The 20
bp oligonucleotide 5′-TCTGGAACGGAATTCTTCTA-3′,
with C methylated or unmethylated,
was used in our study. This sequence is taken from promoter III of
the mouse BDNF gene and is the DNA present in the MBD cocrystal structure. A random sequence 20 bp oligonucleotide not bearing
the CpG site (5′-TCTGGTATGAACTTCTA-3′)
was also analyzed. The top strands of each duplex were 5′-labeled
with fluorescein or unlabeled. The duplexes used in our studies have
stabilities of −35.9 and −26.5 kcal/mol corresponding
to melting temperatures of 40.7 and 32.5 °C, respectively, under
our experimental conditions, resulting in an undetectable single-strand
oligonucleotide at the lowest concentration used in binding assays
(5 nM).

Fluorescence, Absorption, and Light Scattering Measurements
All experiments were performed in buffer containing 25 mM Tris-HCl,
6% glycerol, 0.1 mM EDTA, 0.1 mM TCEP, and either 25 or 150 mM KCI
(pH 7.6) at 22 °C except for the salt-induced dissociation experiments
for which the KCl concentration is specified. The presence or absence
of 10 μg/mL nonspecific competitor poly(dA-dT) is noted in the
figure and table legends. Absorption measurements were taken with
a NanoDrop 2000 UV–vis spectrophotometer. Fluorescence measurements
were taken with a Jobin Yvon (Edison, NJ) Fluoromax-3 spectrofluorometer.
The intensity of the Raman scattering band of water was used as the
internal standard of fluorometer sensitivity. Elastic light scattering
(ELS) was also recorded using the Fluoromax-3 spectrofluorometer as
a control for protein aggregation. The scattered 350 nm light was
collected at an angle of 90° to the incident illumination.

Analytical Ultracentrifuge
Sedimentation equilibrium
experiments were performed using the absorption optics of a Beckman
XL-I analytical ultracentrifuge with six-channel centerpieces in the
Ti-60 rotor. Three concentrations of the MBD in buffer were equilibrated
at 20 °C for 24 h each at 10000, 20000 and 30000 rpm. The absorbance
scans obtained at 280 nm were globally analyzed using HeteroAnalysis
version 1.0.114 (J. L. Cole and J. W. Lary, Analytical Ultracentrifugation
Facility, Biotechnology Services Center, University of Connecticut,
Storrs, CT) for the weight-average molecular weight. The resolved
molecular weight and the 95% joint confidence intervals are reported.
The values of ν̅ (from the amino acid composition), density,
and viscosity were calculated using Sednterp version 1.06 (B. Hayes,
T. Laue, and J. Philo, Sedimentation Interpretation Program, 2003,
University of New Hampshire, Durham, NH).

Equilibrium Binding
MBD binding isotherms were calculated
and analyzed as described below. Fractional saturation (Y̅) is calculated for equilibrium titrations bywhere Aobs, Amin, and Amax are
the observed, minimum, and maximum values of the measured fluorescence
anisotropy, respectively. For the equilibrium PfnH + Of ↔ POnH, where Pf and Of are the free concentrations of protein and DNA, respectively,
PO is the protein–DNA complex, and nH is the Hill coefficient, fractional saturation is related to the
binding polynomial bywhere PO and Otot are
the protein–DNA complex and total DNA concentrations,
respectively. Substitution and transformation yieldwhere kd is the equilibrium dissociation constant and Ptot is the total protein concentration. Equation  can be transformed into a convenient form in which Ptot is substituted with the ratio PtotnH/Otot as the independent variable to yieldEquation  reduces
to
the single-site (Langmuir) binding model with modifications explicitly
considering the total DNA concentration where nH = 1. Fitting eq  against Y̅ obtained from the experimental data accurately yields kd even when the concentration of the DNA is comparable
to kd.

Two-Site Binding Model
If a molecule has two binding
sites with different affinities for the same ligand, then eq  can be rewritten aswhere Y̅ is the total
saturation of the two sites (Y̅1 and Y̅2) and PO1, PO2, and Otot are the protein–DNA
complex and total DNA concentrations, respectively. At low concentrations
of the DNA target where Ptot ≈ Pfree, eq  can be transformed
into the sum of two isothermswhere kd1 and kd2 are the dissociation constants for the first
and second binding sites, respectively, and Ptot is the total protein concentration. Because the total anisotropy
change is the sum of the change for the two binding events (Aobs = Aobs1 + Aobs2), eq  can be transformed
intowhere Aobs, Aobs1, Aobs2, Amin, and Amax are
defined for two binding sites as in eq . A0 is the initial value of Aobs. If the measured parameter Aobs is a relative quantity, then A0 is equal to 0 and eq  is transformed intoWe used the relative value
of anisotropy Arel = (Aobs – ADNA)/ADNA as a binding parameter, where Aobs is as in eqs  and  and ADNA is the value of the
anisotropy of the DNA in the absence of the MBD. Nonlinear least-squares
fitting of eq  yields values of kd1, kd2, Amax1, and Amax2.

We
have used oligonucleotides end labeled with fluorescein as in many
other studies of protein–DNA complexes.,, In those studies and this study, we measure
no significant change in the fluorescence intensity of the fluorescein
probe upon protein binding under a given solution condition. In this
study, we conducted control experiments in which labeled DNA was present
in “tracer amounts” to which was added unlabeled DNA.
Isotherms identical to those obtained using only the labeled DNA were
obtained (data not shown).

Salt-Induced Dissociation Titrations
The electrostatic
contribution to formation of the MBD–DNA complex was determined
from the net number of ions (cations, m+, and anions, x-) releasedwhere kd is the
experimentally determined equilibrium dissociation constant, (kd)0 is the value of kd extrapolated to 1 M salt, and m+ is the cation concentration. Usually, m+ ≫ x– because of
the polyanionic nature of DNA and the polyampholyte nature of proteins.
Because the influence of water is negligible at high salt concentrations,
SK reflects the net cation release or uptake upon formation of a protein–DNA
complex.

SK can be conveniently obtained from salt displacement
isotherms in which a protein–DNA complex is dissociated by
titration with increasing salt concentrations. In these experimentswherewith (kd)0 transformed into
mp, the salt
concentration at which half
of the initial protein–DNA complex is dissociated. The nonelectrostatic
portion of ΔG is calculated from (kd)0 (eq ) by ΔGnel = −RT ln[1/(Kd)0].

Because the affinity of the protein for the different sequences
analyzed differs, Y̅ for the complexes differs
under the initial condition of the experiment. An impact of different Y̅ values on the resolved values of SK and mp is circumvented
by setting the initial condition of the salt dissociation experiments
at Pt = Ot. As was shown previously, there is
no dependence on the concentrations of the reactants, Pt and Ot, under that condition.
Thus, eq  can be used to measure relative
rather than absolute values of Y̅.

Equimolar
concentrations of the MBD and the unlabeled duplex (0.5–1.0
uM) along with the labeled oligonucleotide at 15 nM were mixed and
incubated for 1 h. KCl was then added at the specified concentration
and the solution incubated for 1 h prior to measurements. Because
the fluorescence of fluorescein is sensitive to high salt concentrations,
dissociation of the MBD from DNA was followed by measurement of the
anisotropy of the intrinsic protein fluorescence at 330 nm and excitation
of 280 nm. Anorml = (Aobs – A0)/(Amax – A0),
where Aobs, A0, and Amax are the observed and fitted
initial and final values of anisotropy, respectively, and Anorml is a measured parameter. The relative
values of Y̅ analyzed range from unity to zero
for each salt displacement isotherm (Figure B). Nonlinear least-squares fitting of salt displacement isotherms
to eqs – yields
values of (kd)0, mp, and SK
at any macromolecule concentration.

Isotherms
determined by fluorescence anisotropy (ex490 and em520) for the binding of the MBD to the fluorescein-labeled
duplex 5′-TCTGGAACGGAATTCTTCTA-3′
with C symmetrically methylated
(●) or unmethylated (○) and fluorescein-labeled duplex
5′-TCTGGTATGAACTTCTTCTA-3′
lacking any MBD binding determinants (“random”, ∗)
determined in the standard buffer solution containing 25 mM Tris,
6% glycerol, 0.1 mM EDTA, 100 μg/mL BSA, 0.1 mM TCEP (pH 7.6),
and either 25 (A) or 150 mM KCl (B). The DNA concentration is 5 nM.
The solid lines depict global fits to the Langmuir model (Table ).

Comparison of the Goodness of Fit of Alternative Binding Models
Comparison of the performance of models is typically characterized
by the root-mean-square deviations (rmsds) between the theoretical
and experimental estimates of the datawhere Xi and Yi are the
theoretical and experimental estimates, i, respectively,
in N experimental points. The normalized rmsd (nrmsd)
or error (nrmse) is the rmsd divided by the range of observed values
of a variable being predictedThe quality of the fit of a model to the data
is reflected in the rmsd and nrmsd values. Smaller values indicate
a closer relationship between theory and experiment.

Results
MBD Binding
Specificity
Key characteristics of a protein–DNA
interaction that drive its biological function are its specificity
for its target site and its stoichiometry. Our studies compare the
binding of the MBD to the DNA duplex present in the MBD cocrystal
structure bearing the CpG site with C either methylated or unmethylated
and a “random” sequence oligonucleotide lacking any
known determinant for MBD affinity. Figures  and  summarize the dramatic effect of salt
concentration on the discrimination of mCpG from CpG. As noted previously, the MBD lacks specificity for mCpG at low salt
concentrations. Consistent with this finding, we find that the MBD
binds in a low-salt solution mCpG, CpG, and random sequence with comparable
affinity within experimental error (Figure A and Table ). Increasing the salt concentration
to an approximately physiological concentration (150 mM KCl) slightly
increases the affinity of the MBD for mCpG while dramatically weakening
its binding to CpG and the random sequence (Figures B and Table ). The observed increase
in binding affinity for mCpG with an increasing salt concentration
is very unusual for a protein–DNA interaction. In contrast,
the suppression of CpG and random sequence binding by salt is canonical
protein–DNA binding behavior.

Isotherms
determined by fluorescence anisotropy (ex490 and em520) for the binding of the MBD to different DNAs
at 150 mM KCl over a range of MBD concentrations broader than that
shown in Figure . The reaction conditions
and symbol designations are the same as in Figure .

MBD Binding to mCpG,
CpG, and Random
Sequence DNA Oligonucleotides at Low and High Salt Concentrations
[KCl] (mM)	sequence	one-site
analysis KD (μM)	two-site
analysis KD1 and KD2 (μM)	nrmsd, one-
vs two-site analysis	
25	mCpG-mCpG	0.15 ± 0.08	0.007 ± 0.003	0.085 vs 0.022	
 	 	 	1.46 ± 0.57	 	
 	CpG-CpG	0.19 ± 0.09	0.011 ± 0.004	0.088 vs 0.022	
 	 	 	1.56 ± 0.64	 	
 	random	0.32 ± 0.08	0.07 ± 0.02	0.054 vs 0.019	
 	 	 	3.7 ± 2.5	 	
150	mCpG-mCpG	0.12 ± 0.01	0.075 ± 0.01	0.054 vs 0.019	
 	 	 	3.7 ± 2.6	 	
 	hmCpG-hmCpG	2.1 ± 1.5	na	na	
 	CpG-CpG	≥10.3	na	na	
 	random	≥17.7	na	na	
25
(+)	mCpG-mCpG	0.028 ± 0.015	na	na	
 	CpG-CpG	na	–	–	
 	random	na	–	–	
150 (+)	mCpG-mCpG	0.19 ± 0.01	0.14 ± 0.04	0.014 vs 0.016	
 	 	 	1.7 ± 2.8	 	
 	CpG-CpG	ND	–	–	
 	random	ND	–	–	
Binding isotherms were determined
and analyzed as described in  in solutions containing either 25 or 150 mM KCl. KD, KD1, and KD2 denote the equilibrium binding constants determined
from the indicated model. The modified oligonucleotide was symmetrically
methylated. (+) denotes the presence of poly(dA-dT). na denotes not
applicable. ND denotes not determined.

The 150 mM KCl binding isotherms shown in Figure B were extended to higher MBD concentrations in
an attempt
to define their upper plateaus (Figure ).
Even so, an upper plateau could not be determined, allowing calculation
of only lower limits for these binding affinities, ≥10.3 and
17.7 μM, respectively (Table ). The
mCpG isotherm encompasses both specific and nonspecific binding, an
observation consistent with the literature. Under these conditions, the MBD displays ≥86-fold specificity
for mCpG over CpG and ≥147-fold specificity over random sequence
DNA (Table ).

MBD Binding Stoichiometry
We routinely conduct titrations
at DNA concentrations greater than the KD of the reaction to determine the stoichiometry of a binding reaction., In light of the structures of the 1:1 MBD–mCpG complexes
determined by NMR and crystallography from equimolar mixtures of protein
and DNA,, we were quite surprised to measure a 2:1
stoichiometry for the MBD–mCpG complex (Figure ). This result was confirmed using analytical ultracentrifugation
by monitoring the dye absorption of the fluorescein-labeled mCpG oligonucleotide
(Figure ). The sedimentation equilibrium analysis
yielded Mw values for the free DNA, and
complexes assembled from 1:1 and 2:1 molar ratios of the MBD and DNA
are within error of the values calculated from sequence (square brackets):
12.6 (12.1, 13.0), [12.8]; 24.3 (23.1, 25.4), [23.2]; and 33.1 (31.1,
35.3), [33.6] kDa, respectively. Each of the data sets is described
as a single species with no evidence of heterogeneity or active self-association.
The homogeneity of the 1:1 and 2:1 complexes was further confirmed
by sedimentation velocity analysis (data not shown). Together, stoichiometric
titration and analytical ultracentrifugation results make an unassailable
case that the MBD binds as a dimer to mCpG-bearing DNA.

Stoichiometric
titrations of the binding of the MBD to the mCpG
oligonucleotide duplex followed by anisotropy of the DNA-coupled probe
in standard buffer and 150 mM KCl. The total DNA concentration is
0.5 μM using 5 nM labeled DNA as a tracer.

Sedimentation equilibrium analysis of fluorescein end-labeled mCpG
oligonucleotide (lower) and 1:1 (middle) and 2:1 (top) molar ratios
of MBD:mCpG oligonucleotide-F by the 490 nm absorbance of the fluorescein
label. The solid lines are the global fits to the model of a single
monodisperse particle. The residuals for the fits to each channel
are shown below the concentration distributions.

A Two-Site “Sequential” Binding Mechanism
How can the 2:1 stoichiometry be reconciled with the published monomeric
structures and our binding analyses? To answer this question, we conducted
data-dense titrations at 150 mM KCl so that the shape of the isotherms
could be precisely determined. It is readily apparent in these isotherms
that the Langmuir binding model inadequately describes the binding
of the MBD to mCpG (Figure , dotted line).
Without sufficient data density and careful analysis, this poor fit
is easy to either miss or ascribe to experimental error (e.g., Figure B; analysis not shown). Indeed, the initial portion
of the isotherm (&lt;1 μM) is perfectly described by the Langmuir
binding model (Figure , inset). [In retrospect,
a clue that the binding was more complex than Langmuir was that fits
of the Hill equation (eq ) to isotherms such
as that shown in Figure  were typically described
with coefficients below unity. Such behavior can indicate anticooperativity
or heterogeneity.] Thus, the complexity of MBD–mCpG binding
is not evident if either the number of data points is too small or
the MBD concentration range is too narrow.

Isotherms of the binding
of the MBD to methylated DNA in standard
buffer at 150 mM KCl as determined by fluorescence anisotropy (ex490 and em520) fit to the two-site (—) or
single-site (---) models as described in . The bottom panel represents the residuals with
respect to the fitting models [two-site (●) and single-site
(∗)]. The DNA duplex analyzed is the same as that in Figure . The inset shows the same data truncated at 1 μM
that were independently fit to the single-site model.

The simplest binding model that describes these
isotherms is a
noninteracting two-site model (Figure , solid
line). The MBD binds tightly to the first site (KD1 = 75 ± 10 nM) and 50-fold less so (KD2 = 3.7 ± 2.6 μM) to the second site (Table ). Random residuals and lower nrmsd values demonstrate
the superiority of the two-site model for formation of the MBD–mCpG
complex (Figure  and Table ). Because KD2 is 1 order of magnitude
tighter than nonspecific binding, the second binding event is a distinct
and unique molecular interaction.

Because of the wide separation
of the resolved affinities, the
two binding events occur in sequence. Only after the first site is
almost fully occupied does the second site become bound. This conclusion
is supported by three independent observations. First, we observe
that the MBD is monomeric in solution [Mw = 10.6 (9.8, 11.2), [10.4] kDa] as assayed by sedimentation equilibrium
and velocity analysis consistent with literature observations. Second, each of the two binding events is separately
well described by the Langmuir polynomial. Third, the 1:1 complex
is unequivocally monodisperse as assayed by sedimentation equilibrium
and velocity analysis. If the binding were at all cooperative or the
two binding events were closer in affinity, a mixture of 1:1 and 2:1
complexes would be observed at substoichiometric protein concentrations.
It is the last observation that rationalizes the existence of the
published 1:1 MBD–mCpG structures., A
1:1 protein:DNA ratio was used to form the complexes that were structurally
analyzed. Because binding of the second monomer follows complete occupancy
of the first, the 1:1 complex is observed to be homogeneous (Figure , middle panel).

To test whether dimeric binding
of the MBD was unique to modified
DNA, we determined “data-dense” isotherms at 25 mM KCl,
conditions under which the binding affinity of the MBD for mCpG, CpG,
and random sequence DNA is comparably high. The two-site binding model
better fits all three isotherms (Figure ).
Again, the values of KD1 and KD2 determined are readily distinguishable (Table ). From these results, we conclude that the assembly
of MBD monomers to form a discrete DNA-bound dimer is not unique to
its interaction with modified DNA.

Isotherms of the binding of the MBD to
methylated (A), unmethylated
(B), and random (C) DNA obtained in standard buffer at 25 mM KCl as
determined by fluorescence anisotropy (ex490 and em520). The isotherms were fit to the two-site (—) or
single-site (---) models as described in . The bottom panels show the residuals with respect
to the fitting models [two-site (●) and single-site (∗)].

A Complementary Probe of
mCpG Binding Specificity
The
addition of competitor DNA to “soak up” nonspecifically
bound protein is also used to distinguish specific binding. When we added the poly(dA-dT) oligonucleotide
to 25 mM KCl MBD binding titrations, the affinity of the MBD for mCpG
increases several-fold and dramatically decreases for CpG and random
sequence oligonucleotides to undetectable (Figure A and Table ). This behavior is comparable
to that observed at 150 mM KCl (Figure B and
Table ). The presence of poly(dA-dT) has little
effect at 150 mM KCl on either binding affinity or dimer formation
(Figure  and Table ).

(A) Isotherms determined by fluorescence anisotropy (ex490 and em520) of the binding of the MBD to the mCpG (●),
CpG (○), and random sequence (∗) oligonucleotides (Figure  legend) in standard buffer at 150 mM KCl and 10
μg/mL poly(dA-dT) competitor. (B) Isotherms of the binding of
the MBD to single-stranded oligonucleotides in standard buffer at
25 mM KCl (designated as in panel A) or to mCpG at 150 mM KCl (◑).
No competitor DNA is present. The solid lines depict the best fit
to the Langmuir binding model in both panels.

The dependence of mCpG binding specificity on either salt
or the
presence of competitor shows that suppression of nonspecific binding
underlies the ability of the MBD to discriminate sites of modified
nucleotides at physiological salt concentrations. The fact that the
poly(dA-dT) competitor obliterates binding of the MBD to CpG and random
DNA at 25 mM KCl shows that these reactions are entirely electrostatic
in nature. However, one aspect of the binding of the MBD to mCpG suggests
additional complexity to its binding mechanism. That aspect is the
increase in binding affinity when the KCl concentration is increased
from 25 to 150 mM. The canonical behavior of DNA binding proteins
is for the affinity to decrease with an increasing counterion concentration;
this is true for both specific and nonspecific interactions, albeit
with different magnitudes for the dependencies. We will return to this issue following the presentation
of two other unexpected binding behaviors.

The MBD Binds Tightly to
Single-Stranded DNA (ssDNA)
The MBD binds with high affinity
to single strands of the duplexes
discussed above, methylated, unmethylated, and random (Figure B and Table ). The binding
of the MBD to ssDNA is mostly electrostatic and can be detected only
at low salt concentrations and independent of CpG methylation. Remarkably,
the MBD binds ssDNA more tightly than the corresponding duplex DNA
sequence (Tables  and ). The binding isotherms are perfectly fit to the Langmuir equation,
suggesting that these reactions also lack cooperativity.

MBD Binding to mCpG, CpG, and Random
Sequence Single-Stranded DNA Oligonucleotides at Low and High Salt
Concentrations
[KCl] (mM)	sequence	KD (μM)	nrmsd	
25	mCpG	0.03 ± 0.004	0.033	
 	CpG	0.038 ± 0.009	0.06	
 	random	0.066 ± 0.016	0.053	
150	mCpG	6.4 ± 0.3	0.006	
 	CpG	nd	–	
 	random	nd	–	
Binding isotherms
were determined
and analyzed as described in  in solutions containing either 25 or 150 mM KCl. KD denotes the equilibrium binding constants determined
for the single-site Langmuir model. nd denotes not detectable.

The MBD Binds Poorly to Hydroxymethylated
CpG
The discovery
of high levels of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (hmC) in neuronal genomes
suggests that this epigenetic mark plays a cell-type-specific role
in gene regulation. Published in vitro studies of MeCP2 and the binding of the MBD to
hmCpG provide contradictory results; both high-affinity binding and low-affinity binding, to hmCpG have been reported. In light of the salt dependence of
the specificity of the MBD for mCpG discussed above, we determined
isotherms for the binding of the MBD to both symmetrically and hemimodified
hydroxymethylated oligonucleotides under both conditions.

At
150 mM KCl, the MBD binds 5hmCpG-containing DNA 20-fold less tightly
than mCpG and only several-fold tighter than CpG (Table ). Because the affinity of the MBD for hmCpG is so low at
high salt concentrations, it was convenient to explore the binding
of the MBD to symmetric and hemimodified targets at 100 mM KCl. The
relative affinity of the MBD for mCpG and hmCpG is comparable to that
at 150 mM KCl (Figure ). The MBD binds hmCpG
much less tightly than mCpG; there is a slight preference for the
binding of symmetric hmCpG over CpG (0.5-fold) and random sequence
(2-fold). The binding of the MBD to symmetric hmCpG and hemimodified
(hmCpG/CpG) is the same within experimental error. Interestingly,
the MBD binds the asymmetrically modified hmCpG/mCpG with greater
affinity, although still weaker than symmetric mCpG. These data suggest
that the asymmetrically modified hmCpG/mCpG may represent a distinct
epigenetic state with regard to MeCP2 binding.

Equilibrium dissociation
constants (Kd, micromolar) determined
in standard buffer and 100 mM KCl to the
indicated symmetrically or asymmetrically modified DNA duplexes designated
mCpG (methylated), CpG (unmethylated), and hmCpG (5-hydroxymethylated).

Quantitation of MBD Binding
Electrostatics
Although
nonelectrostatic interactions typically dominate DNA sequence-specific
binding, electrostatics also plays an essential role in specific protein–DNA
interactions.,, Thus, it is unsurprising that cations are required to neutralize
some of this charge during the formation of a specific complex. A
standard tool for partitioning a reaction into its electrostatic and
nonelectrostatic components is the measurement of binding affinity
as a function of salt concentration (linkage analysis). A typical
protein–DNA interaction displays linear log–log dependence
with the steeper slope of nonspecific binding resulting in intersection
with the specific binding curve at low salt concentrations.

The MBD is atypical
of protein–DNA interactions in that it displays nonlinear linkage
(Figure A). Formation
of the MBD–mCpG complex is minimally salt-dependent from 25
to 150 mM. We interpret this observation to reflect a net cation uptake
that offsets the displacement of condensed counterions typically observed
when proteins bind to DNA. At ∼150 mM, the uptake reaction
saturates in mCpG binding and the canonical cation displacement is
observed. The binding of the MBD to CpG- and random sequence-containing
DNA shows a similar salt dependence except that the inflection points
are shifted to lower KCl concentrations (Figure A). Thus, cation uptake is not restricted to mCpG binding.

(A) Wyman linkage
analysis of the binding of the MBD to mCpG-bearing
(●, —), CpG-bearing (○, ---), and random sequence
(∗, −·−) oligonucleotides in standard buffer
as a function of KCl concentration. Each value of the association
constant (Ka) was determined from a binding
isotherm such as shown in Figure  obtained
at the indicated KCl concentration. (B) Salt-induced dissociation
isotherms of complexes of the MBD with the mCpG, CpG, and random sequence
oligonucleotides in standard buffer as a function of KCl concentration.
The intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence of the MBD (ex280 and em330) was monitored as described in . The lines depict the fit to eqs  and  (Table ). All designations are the same as in panel A.

A complementary approach to partitioning the electrostatic
and
nonelectrostatic contributions of protein–DNA interactions
is the salt displacement isotherm. Salt
displacement isotherms for MBD complexes with mCpG-, CpG-, and random
sequence-containing DNA are shown in Figure B. Because this assay is conducted at stoichiometric concentrations
of the protein and DNA, it is minimally sensitive to the enhanced
protein binding at low cation concentrations where the rate of dissociation
of the complex is low. A slight plateau in the isotherm with an increased
salt concentration is observed at low KCl concentrations for mCpG.
Plateaus for CpG and random DNA could not be resolved in these salt
displacement isotherms.

The energetic portioning calculated
from these data is summarized
in Table . The binding of the MBD to mCpG
DNA displaces an average of six cations with an unusually large electrostatic
component of binding of 73%. As expected, the binding of the MBD to
random sequence DNA is completely electrostatic and accompanied by
displacement of a slightly larger number of cations. Although the
binding of the MBD to CpG is slightly favored over that to random
sequence DNA, a nonelectrostatic component to its binding was not
resolved. The energetics of the binding of the MBD to mCpG DNA is
minimally affected by the presence of poly(dA-dT).

Thermodynamic Parameters Derived from
the Salt Displacement Isotherms for Association of the MBD with Duplex
DNA
 	mCpG	CpG	random	mCpG (+)	
mp	0.19 ± 0.008	0.1 ± 0.003	0.09 ± 0.004	0.2 ± 0.005	
n	6.1 ± 1.1	10.0 ± 2.0	8.2 ± 2.0	5.4 ± 0.5	
–ΔGtot (kcal mol–1 K–1)	9.3 ± 0.05	6.7 ± 0.08	6.4 ± 0.09	9.1 ± 0.03	
–ΔGnel (kcal mol–1 K–1)	2.6 ± 0.6	nd	nd	3.4 ± 0.3	
Salt displacement
isotherms (Figure B) were determined and analyzed
as described in  for
the MBD complexed to
oligonucleotides bearing mCpG, CpG, or random sequence. The plus sign
indicates the presence of 10 μg/mL poly(dA-dT). nd denotes not
detectable.

The midpoint
of a salt displacement
isotherm.

The thermodynamic
average number
of ions released upon protein binding the DNA.

The Gibbs free energy of binding
calculated from the KD values calculated
from the binding isotherms determined at 150 mM KCl (Figure B and Table ).

The nonelectrostatic component of
the Gibbs free energy of binding.

Discussion
MeCP2 is a member of
the MBD family of proteins whose biological
function is to bind to sites of methylation in the genome., MeCP2-mediated epigenetic regulation starts with recognition of
mCpG by its DNA binding domain, the MBD, and continues with multiple processes involving the other domains
of the protein. However, many questions
remain concerning the mechanism of mCpG binding specificity.

We explore in this paper a series of related questions concerning
DNA binding by the MBD. (i) How well can the MBD discriminate mCpG
from CpG or random sequence DNA? (ii) What is the thermodynamic driving
force behind mCpG-specific binding? (iii) Does the published MBD–DNA
crystal structure provide a complete and correct correlate for structure–function
comparisons? (iv) Does the MBD specifically bind hmCpG? The answers
to these questions are related and shed light on the mechanism by
which MeCP2 exerts its biological function.

(i) Proteins that
regulate cellular metabolism by recognizing and
binding specific sequences of DNA typically display specificity of
multiple orders of magnitude for their targets. Well-studied examples
include gene regulatory proteins such as lac repressor, RNA polymerase, restriction endonucleases such as EcoRI, and general transcription factors such as the TATA binding protein. Our demonstration that at physiological salt
concentrations the MBD binds mCpG with 100-fold specificity places
MeCP2 within the established paradigm for regulatory proteins that
bind or process genomic DNA (Figures  and  and Table ). Clearly, the
full-length protein is not required for mCpG recognition and specific
binding, although the other domains of MeCP2 may attenuate and/or
regulate the protein’s DNA binding.

“Specificity”
as opposed to affinity is the determinant
of the biological function of a DNA binding protein as it reflects
the protein’s ability to discriminate its target within the
genomic context. The observation that the MBD displays no specificity
for mCpG over CpG at low salt concentrations in the absence of a competitor
is not surprising. DNA site-specific protein binding and nonspecific
protein binding typically have comparable sign dependence on salt
concentration, albeit with different magnitudes; nonelectrostatic
contributions weaken the salt dependence of site-specific binding.
Thus, the specific binding affinity and nonspecific binding affinity
by a protein typically converge at very low salt concentrations and
diverge at high salt concentrations as we observe for the MBD (Table ).

(ii) However, the convergence of the MBD’s
specific and
nonspecific binding affinity occurs by an atypical mechanism. The
direct titration and salt displacement approaches that we have used
share the theoretical foundation that the favorable entropy from counterion
release drives the formation of complexes between proteins and DNA., Electrostatics contributes the lion’s share of the Gibbs
free energy of formation of the MBD–mCpG complex (Figure B and Table ). Specificity
for mCpG emerges only when salt dampens the electrostatic contribution
to DNA binding by the MBD.

The importance of electrostatics
in MBD binding is confirmed by
the ability of the poly(dA-dT) competitor to ameliorate the influence
of salt. The nonspecific DNA competitor
is an alternate probe of electrostatic interactions. The finding that
DNA competitor influences the binding of the MBD to all three sequences
at low salt concentrations is unsurprising (Table ). However, the magnitude of the effect is unusual. Nonspecific
binding is completely suppressed, highlighting the dominant electrostatic
contribution to MBD binding revealed by the salt displacement analysis
(Table ). Nonspecific electrostatic interaction
of the MBD with the DNA backbone phosphates constitutes a significant
portion of the total MBD interactions even for DNA containing mCpG.,

Thus, the relative affinity of the MBD for methyl, sequence,
and
nonspecific DNA is critically dependent on the electrostatic binding
contribution. This property of the MBD makes binding of the protein
potentially very sensitive to subtle local changes in the cellular
milieu that in turn may modulate the binding of MeCP2 to sites within
chromatin.

The salt dependence of MBD binding is atypical. The
MBD binding
affinity for mCpG increases slightly as the salt concentration increases
from 25 to 150 mM, in contrast to the expected decrease reflecting
a net uptake of cations for DNA binding by the MBD below physiological
salt concentrations (Figure  and Table ). Cation uptake has been documented for only a
few protein–DNA interactions, the TATA binding protein (TBP)
from the hyperthermophilic archaeal organism Pyrococcus woesei() and for the papillomavirus E2 protein. In the first case, cation uptake is linked to
the protein itself. In the second case, cation uptake is linked to
a specific sequence of “linker DNA” that is not contacted
by the protein. Charge neutralization is clearly one contribution
of cations to the mCpG binding specificity of the MBD. We discuss
a second alternative in the next section within the context of the
determined MBD–mCpG crystal structure.

The MBD displays
a small but detectable preference for CpG-containing
DNA over random sequence DNA at 150 mM KCl. In contrast to the dramatic
salt sensitivity of the specificity between mCpG and CpG binding,
the salt sensitivity of CpG binding relative to random sequence is
minimal, indicative of only a small nonelectrostatic contribution
to CpG recognition (Table ). Thus, CpG binding
may result from the subtle sequence-dependent differences in the conformation
of the phosphodiester backbone rather than direct interactions between
the protein and the bases. Base sequence recognition via local changes
in backbone conformation is not unprecedented but is unusual as the
sole mechanism of specificity. Minimal CpG affinity is important in
epigenetic regulation. If the MBD bound CpG tightly, it would compete
with binding to mCpG marks, thus diminishing the amplitude of the
epigenetic signal.

While it is unsurprising that the MBD binds
ssDNA at low salt concentrations,
the MBD’s higher affinity for ssDNA than for duplex DNA is
surprising (Tables  and ). This behavior likely reflects the large electrostatic contribution
to binding as well as the fact that the binding of symmetrically methylated
DNA is not highly cooperative, i.e., not “all or none”.
Because MeCP2 is abundantly expressed, the protein may bind to ssDNA or RNA in neuronal cells, thereby
stabilizing alternative chromatin structures, and perhaps be involved
(as other SSB proteins) in telomere end maintenance, DNA replication,
recombination, and repair. Such novel
roles for MeCP2 function deserve further exploration.

(iii)
Monovalent cations condensed to DNA are not immobile; they
readily exchange with solution, and thus, any particular DNA site
is only partially occupied at a given time. A coalition of partially
occupied sites is thermodynamically indistinguishable from a single
fully occupied site., Linkage and salt displacement
analysis report the thermodynamic average of the number of ions released
or taken up upon formation of protein–DNA complexes. Monovalent
ions in general cannot be readily identified or distinguished from
water molecules in crystal structures, a generalization that can be
applied to the MBD–DNA complex.

While the mechanism of cation uptake for the binding of mCpG
by
the MBD remains obscure, inferences can be made on the basis of the
complex structures, and the thermodynamic principles
of cation binding to DNA. In the determined crystal structure, the
interface between the MBD and mCpG DNA is reported to be highly hydrophilic.
Its few classically hydrophobic contacts are offset by a larger than
average number of hydrogen bonds. Twenty-three of the 25 “specific”
MBD–DNA interactions noted in the determined structure are
hydrogen bonds between the protein and DNA. The sole determinant of
specific recognition of the methyl group observed in the crystal structure
is hydrogen bonds mediated by five water molecules.

It is difficult to distinguish monovalent cations
from water molecules
in protein and nucleic acid X-ray crystal structures. This is especially true for Na+ as it has the
same number of electrons as water and, therefore, an equivalent scattering
cross section. Thus, it is possible that
one or more sites of the five methyl group-coordinating water molecules
observed in the crystal structure are in fact partly or fully occupied
by monovalent cations that directly mediate the MBD–mCpG-specific
interaction. Another possible mechanism of mCpG-specific recognition
is cation−π interaction. Cation−π interactions
between the aromatic ring and a positive charge are commonly observed
in protein–DNA complexes and strongly depend on the type of
base and the position of the monovalent cations. The mCpG dinucleotide is recognized at the MBD–DNA
interface by two arginine residues through hydrogen bonding and cation−π
interactions.

Alternative indirect
mechanisms would affect the MBD–mCpG
interface but not direct contacts with the methyl group. Cations rather
than water within the interface would suppress the strong nonspecific
electrostatic potential and thereby nonspecific binding. Another possibility
is that although hydrogen bonds themselves are not salt-dependent,
they are highly sensitive to the orientation of the constituent atoms.
For instance, symmetrical hydrogen bonds are formed between the arginine
“fingers” (R111 and R133) and the guanine bases of the
mCpG duplex; the arginine fingers lie in a plane with the guanine
bases and are locked in position by salt bridges with the carboxylates
of D121 and E137. E137 is the only one
of the four residues locked by salt bridges that is not perturbed
by the binding of DNA and is the only
glutamic acid residue among the 22 documented Rett syndrome-linked
mutations located within the MBD.

The aforementioned P. woesei TATA binding protein
(TBP) shows that glutamic acid side chains can mediate cation uptake;
mutation of glutamic acid residues converted ion uptake to ion release
upon formation of this protein–DNA complex. Because the stability of glutamic acid-mediated electrostatic
bridges will be sensitive to competition by cations, recognition of
mCpG by the MBD might be indirectly salt-dependent, even though binding
the neutral methyl group is itself not electrostatic in nature. Further
study is required to distinguish the mechanism that accounts for the
cation uptake that profoundly affects formation of the MBD–mCpG
and thereby recognition of epigenetic marks.

All of the MBD–mCpG
complexes that have been determined
have been assembled from 1:1 ratios of protein to DNA.,, Despite the MBD being steadfastly
monomeric in solution, we had decided to take a fresh look at this
stoichiometry in light of a report that MeCP2 binds DNA as a cooperative
dimer. Three independent analyses unequivocally
confirm that the MBD binds to DNA as a dimer; stoichiometric titration
(Figure ), analytical sedimentation equilibrium
(Figure ), and binding isotherm analysis (Figure ). The MBD is unusual among DNA binding proteins
in that most others that bind their target sites as dimers detectably
form dimers in solution. Proteins that we have studied with this characteristic
include the cI, Gal, and Lac repressors and papillomavirus E2 protein.,− If a protein dimerizes in solution and the dimer binds to DNA, a
Langmuir isotherm is observed if self-association is tight or a sigmoidal
isotherm is observed if dimerization is weak. This binding mechanism clearly does not apply to the MBD. Rather,
MBD binding is reminiscent of that of the steroid receptors whose
solution dimerization is inversely coupled to the cooperativity of
their binding on the DNA.

The homogeneity
of the 1:1 complex in the sedimentation analysis
(Figure ) was an important clue in understanding
the MBD binding mechanism; cooperative binding of MBD monomers would
yield a mixture of free DNA and 1:1 and 2:1 complexes, not the observed
monodisperse 1:1 complex. This observation reconciles the measured
2:1 stoichiometry with the 1:1 determined structure because the complex
was formed from equimolar protein and DNA. Analysis of the MBD–DNA binding isotherms clearly shows two
binding events in sequence. Dimer formation is not linked to mCpG
recognition (Figures  and ). Although energetically coupling between the two binding
events could not be resolved (analysis not shown), it is likely that
it does exist because the second binding event is 1 order of magnitude
tighter than nonspecific binding.

The structure of the MBD–mCpG
complex clearly rationalizes
some MBD point mutations linked to the dysfunctions that characterize
Rett syndrome.,, These
rationalized mutations diminish the stability of the domain or interfere
with its DNA binding. However, the mechanisms by which other mutations
cause pathology are unexplained by the complex structure. It is possible
that some mutations within the bound dimer disrupt biologically important
protein–protein interactions. Structural and mutagenesis studies
are underway to test this hypothesis.

(iv) The MBD binds hmCpG
with minimal specificity relative to CpG
at salt concentrations where the protein differentiates mCpG by 100-fold.
The effect of hemi (hmCpG-mCpG) versus symmetrically (hmCpG-hmCpG)
modified DNA on the MBD is roughly additive. Similar discrimination of hemimodified DNA has been shown for DNA
restriction endonuclease. This discrimination
of hemimodification has likely regulatory consequences. Binding of
MeCP2 to hemimodified hmCpG/mCpG compared to either symmetrically
modified DNA is a distinct state of MeCP2 binding that in turn may
differentially modulate the establishment and/or maintenance of repressive
chromatin structures. Given the weak
binding of the protein to symmetrically modified hmCpG, it likely
that much of the reported in vivo MeCP2 binding is
to hemimodified DNA.

What Are the Biological Implications of These
Results?
The studies presented here demonstrate that the
MBD alone is necessary
and sufficient for MeCP2 to discriminate mCpG sites in genomic DNA.
Because MeCP2 is strongly expressed in neuronal tissues, its binding
to modified, unmodified, and random sequence DNA may all contribute
to biological function, perhaps in different ways. Salt plays a critical
and unprecedented role in mediating binding. A striking aspect of
the salt dependence of MBD specificity for binding to mCpG is its
invariance up to ion concentrations that are considered physiological.
Thus, the salt independence of binding of MeCP2 to DNA at low salt
concentrations may reflect a buffer against these fluctuations or
provide a specific response to them. In addition, the MBD binds to
DNA as a dimer. Thus, the published structural studies do not provide
a complete description of this protein–DNA interaction. Because
MeCP2 is present at high concentrations in neuronal tissues and the full-length protein is reported to cooperatively
bind DNA in chromatin as a dimer, it
is possible that some of the structurally or thermodynamically unannotated
Rett syndrome-linked mutations impact the dimer interface.

The
authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
mCpG5-methylcytosine-guanine dinucleotide

MeCP2methyl-CpG binding
protein

MBDmethyl
binding domain.

