GTPases are molecular switches that contribute
to a wide variety
of critical cellular processes ranging from ribosomal protein synthesis
to the cell cycle.− The majority of GTPases are members of the phosphate-binding
loop (P-loop) NTPase class that share a mononucleotide-binding fold
composed of conserved nucleotide-binding motifs and a central, mostly
parallel, β-sheet surrounded by α-helices., All P-loop NTPases contain conserved structural elements, including
the P-loop (Walker A motif), the Walker B motif, and the switch I
region, which are essential for binding and hydrolysis of GTP as well
as for the ensuing conformational changes that trigger the downstream
effects., The P-loop NTPases can be phylogenetically
sorted into several families based on shared structural and sequence
features. One such family is composed
of the G3E NTPases, which possess a glutamate residue in place of
the conserved aspartate in the Walker B motif, responsible for coordinating
the catalytically essential magnesium ion. The G3E family features four main subfamilies, three of which (HypB,
UreG, and MeaB/ArgK) are based on prototypical proteins with established
roles in the assembly of metalloenzyme active sites. The fourth subfamily, COG0523, is a more diverse and ubiquitous
group of proteins with mostly unknown functions and a distribution
across all three domains of life.,

A recent
phylogenetic study, which suggested that the COG0523 subfamily
of P-loop GTPases can be separated into at least 15 subgroups, predicted
that some members of this subfamily function in metal metabolism. For example, several subgroups were linked to
zinc homeostasis because of promoters containing the DNA recognition
sequence of Zur, a zinc-responsive transcription factor, consistent
with the zinc-dependent regulation observed for COG0523 members from
several organisms.− In addition, there are a few reports about individual COG0523 proteins
that support specific roles in transition metal pathways. The first
member of this subfamily identified was Pseudomonas denitrificans CobW, a protein essential for cobalamin biosynthesis. The function of CobW is ambiguous, but it has
been suggested that it is responsible for the delivery of cobalt to
the cobaltochelatase during assembly of the metallocofactor.− Another COG0523 member is the nitrile hydratase activator protein
Nha3, which is involved in the biosynthesis of the iron-dependent
nitrile hydratase in Rhodococcus sp. N-771 and is
proposed to be responsible for trafficking the proper metal to the
enzyme precursor. A third described COG0523
factor is Bacillus subtilis YciC. Originally designated
as a low-affinity zinc transporter, YciC
has since been proposed to serve as a metallochaperone for delivery
of the metal cofactor into YciA, a backup enzyme involved in folate
biosynthesis. Both YciC in B.
subtilis() and the more recently
reported YeiR from Escherichia coli() help their host bacteria survive under zinc-limited growth
conditions. Furthermore, in vitro analysis of YeiR revealed a link
between metal binding and the protein’s oligomerization state
and GTPase activity.

Despite the
large size of this subfamily and its connection with
metal homeostasis, very little is known about the biochemical properties
of the COG0523 constituents. The only high-resolution structural information
about this subfamily is provided by the crystal structure of apo-YjiA
from E. coli, making
this protein an attractive target for structure–activity analysis.
To garner further information about the metal binding activities of
the COG0523 proteins and to better understand the possible connection
with metal homeostasis, we conducted a bioinorganic characterization
of YjiA. Metal binding studies demonstrate that YjiA can bind stoichiometric
cobalt, 2 equiv of nickel, or four zinc ions in solution, and loading
the protein with metal inhibits the GTPase activity. Using X-ray crystallography
and spectroscopy, we identified a unique metal-binding site that,
unlike those found in the UreG or HypB subfamilies,, is located in a solvent-accessible pocket formed by a cysteine and
two glutamate residues. This metal-binding site is adjacent to the
nucleotide-binding site and is likely responsible for the observed
effects of metal on GTP hydrolysis by YjiA. This report improves our
understanding of this large class of proteins, supporting a role for
metal-dependent regulation, and will be useful in dissecting the function
of the uncharacterized COG0523 proteins.

Materials and Methods
Materials
Restriction endonucleases and T4 DNA ligase
were obtained from New England Biolabs. Primers (Table S1 of the ) were purchased from Sigma
Genosys. All chromatography media were from GE Healthcare. Kanamycin,
tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride
(PMSF), and isopropyl β-d-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG)
were purchased from BioShop (Toronto, ON). Nickel chloride, zinc sulfate,
and cobalt sulfate salts (as a minimum, 99.9% pure) were purchased
from Aldrich. All other metal stocks were atomic absorption standard
solutions. All other reagents were analytical or molecular biology
grade from Sigma-Aldrich. The buffers for all metal assays were treated
with Chelex-100 (Bio-Rad) to minimize trace metal contamination. All
samples were prepared with Milli-Q water, with an 18.2 MΩ cm
resistance (Millipore).

WT and Mutant YjiA Expression Vector Construction
The yjiA gene was amplified from genomic E. coli (DH5α) DNA using primers (Table S1 of the ) designed with restriction
sites for NdeI (YjiA forward) and XhoI (YjiA reverse).
The digested polymerase chain reaction (PCR) product was ligated with
T4 DNA ligase into the pET24b vector (Novagen) digested with NdeI and XhoI and dephosphorylated with
calf intestinal phosphatase (New England Biolabs). The mutations were
introduced into the YjiA-pET24b vector using QuikChange PCR mutagenesis
(Stratagene) with Pfu Turbo DNA polymerase and the
primers listed in Table S1 of the . The template was subsequently digested with DpnI. The E42A/C66A/C67A and E37A/C66A/C67A triple mutants were constructed
by using the C66A/C67A YjiA-pET24b vector as a template and the E42A
and E37A primers, respectively. For production of large amounts of
the WT and mutant plasmids, the plasmids were transformed into XL-2
Blue E. coli (Stratagene) and isolated using the
Fermentas GeneJET plasmid miniprep kit. All plasmids were sequenced
(ACGT, Toronto, ON) in the forward and reverse directions.

Protein
Expression and Purification
For expression
of WT and mutant YjiA, the plasmids were transformed into BL21 Star(DE3) E. coli cells (Novagen). Overnight cultures were grown,
and 25 mL was used to inoculate 1.5 L of LB medium supplemented with
50 μg/mL kanamycin. The cells were grown aerobically at 37 °C
until the OD600 reached 0.6, at which point they were induced
with 1 mM IPTG. After incubation at 37 °C for 5 h, the cells
were harvested by centrifugation and resuspended in 20 mM Tris (pH
7.5) and 100 mM NaCl supplemented with 4 mM TCEP and 200 μM
PMSF. For each preparation of purified protein, a total of 9 L of
cell culture was used. All subsequent steps were performed at 4 °C
or on ice. The resuspended cells were sonicated and centrifuged at
25000g for 40 min. The supernatant was passed through
a 0.45 μm syringe filter and then loaded onto a DEAE-Sepharose
anion-exchange column (GE Healthcare) equilibrated with buffer A [20
mM Tris (pH 7.5) and 1 mM TCEP]. Fractions from a NaCl gradient were
screened by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(SDS–PAGE) using 12.5% gels. WT and mutant YjiA eluted at approximately
250 mM NaCl. Fractions containing the protein of interest were pooled
and dialyzed against buffer A. The sample was then loaded onto a HiTrapQ
anion-exchange column (GE Healthcare) equilibrated with buffer A.
Once again, fractions from a NaCl gradient were screened by SDS–PAGE,
and fractions containing the protein of interest (eluted at approximately
150 mM NaCl) were pooled. Following concentration of the pooled fractions
to 1 mL using Amicon Ultra 3K molecular weight cutoff centrifuge concentrators
(Millipore), the protein was loaded onto a Superdex 200 gel filtration
column (GE Healthcare) equilibrated with 25 mM HEPES (pH 7.6), 200
mM NaCl, and 1 mM TCEP. Fractions containing the protein of interest
were pooled, concentrated such that the final concentration was in
the range of 250–500 μM, and stored at −80 °C.
The protein concentrations were calculated by using an extinction
coefficient of 26930 M–1 cm–1 at
280 nm for both YjiA and the YjiA mutants in 25 mM EDTA and 4 M guanidinium
hydrochloride (GuHCl). Unless otherwise
noted, electronic absorption measurements were taken on an Agilent
8453 spectrophotometer with a 1 cm path length cuvette. Each protein
was analyzed by electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (ESI-MS)
(Department of Chemistry, University of Toronto), and the observed
molecular masses of the proteins are listed in Table S2 of the . All proteins were &gt;90%
pure as estimated by Coomassie-stained SDS–PAGE quantified
by using ImageJ [National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD (http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/)].

Preparation of Proteins
The reduced apoprotein was
produced by incubating the protein with 10 mM EDTA and 20 mM TCEP
in a Coy anaerobic glovebox at 4 °C for 48 h. The TCEP and EDTA
were removed by exhaustive dialysis into protein buffer [25 mM HEPES
and 100 mM NaCl (pH 7.6)]. The absence of any metal bound to the protein
was confirmed by a 4-(2-pyridylazo)resorcinol (PAR) assay, in which the protein was denatured with 4 M
GuHCl and 50 μM PAR was added to the sample. The absorbance
at 500 nm, due to the formation of the (PAR)2Me(II) complex,
was monitored and compared to a standard curve prepared with 50 μM
PAR in 4 M GuHCl and known metal concentrations. The free thiol content
of the proteins was quantified via reaction with 5,5′-dithiobis(2-nitrobenzoic
acid) (DTNB) in the presence of 6 M GuHCl and 1 mM EDTA. β-Mercaptoethanol
was used as a standard, and the absorbance of the 5-mercapto-2-nitrobenzoic
acid product was measured at 412 nm. Protein samples were &gt;95%
reduced
after they had been treated with TCEP.

Metal Binding and Stoichiometry
For the difference
spectra, individual samples containing 20 μM apo-YjiA in protein
buffer and either 20 μM NiCl2 or 20 μM CoSO4 were prepared in the glovebox and incubated overnight at
4 °C. The electronic absorption spectrum was monitored between
250 and 500 nm and corrected by background subtraction at 600 nm.
The difference spectrum for each metal was generated by subtracting
the apo-YjiA spectrum from that of the metal-loaded protein.

Metal stoichiometry experiments were conducted by incubating 120
μM WT or mutant apo-YjiA with either 480 μM NiCl2, 360 μM CoSO4, or 600 μM ZnSO4 overnight at 4 °C in the glovebox. Samples containing mixtures
of metal were similarly prepared with 120 μM WT apo-YjiA and
either 360 μM NiCl2 and 360 μM CoSO4, 600 μM ZnSO4 and 480 μM NiCl2, or 600 μM ZnSO4 and 360 μM CoSO4. Samples with GDP contained 1.5 mM GDP and 5 mM MgCl2. Excess metal was removed by passing the protein through a PD10
gel filtration column (GE Healthcare) equilibrated with protein buffer
in the glovebox. The protein concentration was subsequently measured
in GuHCl and EDTA, as described above, and the metal content was determined
via a PAR assay. In the case of the YjiA samples containing a mixture
of metals, a high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC)-based method
for the detection and identification of metal ions in solution was
utilized. For HPLC analysis, at least
50 μg of protein was dried by centrifugation under vacuum, reconstituted
with metal-free concentrated HCl (SeaStar Chemicals), and incubated
overnight at 95 °C for protein hydrolysis. The sample was once
again dried to remove HCl and reconstituted in 80 μL of Milli-Q
water. This sample was injected onto a Dionex IonPak CS5A column,
equilibrated with 7 mM pyridine-2,6-dicarboxylic acid, 66 mM KOH,
5.6 mM K2SO4, and 74 mM HCOOH, attached to a
metal-free Dionex BioLC HPLC system. The metals were detected at 500
nm following postcolumn mixing with PAR.

ESI-MS Measurements
Before mass spectrometry experiments,
120 μM WT apo-YjiA was incubated with 600 μM ZnSO4 overnight at 4 °C in the glovebox and then buffer exchanged
into 10 mM ammonium acetate (pH 7.5) using two consecutive PD10 columns.
Mass spectra were recorded on an AB/Sciex QStarXL mass spectrometer
equipped with an ion spray source in the positive mode and a hot source-induced
desolvation interface. Ions were scanned in the m/z 1000–2000 range with accumulation times
of 1 s per spectrum, with no interscan time delay. The instrument
parameters were as follows: ion source temperature, 200 °C; ion
source gas, 50.0 psi; curtain gas, 50.0 psi; ion spray voltage, 5000
V; declustering potential, 60.0 V; focusing potential, 60.0 V; MCP
(detector), 2200 V. The spectra were deconvoluted using the Bayesian
protein reconstruction program included with Analyst QS (AB/Sciex)
over a mass range of 30000–40000 Da, with a mass step of 1
Da.

YjiA Metal Affinities
To determine the affinity of
YjiA for Ni(II), 250 nM YjiA in protein buffer was titrated with a
nickel atomic absorption standard solution and the absorbance at 340
nm was monitored using a 10 cm path length cuvette and a GBC Cintra
404 spectrophotometer. The apparent Kd was calculated by determining the fractional saturation, r, and free nickel concentration, [Ni(II)]free, by using eqs  and , respectively:where [YjiA–Ni(II)] is the concentration
of the protein bound to Ni(II), [YjiA]total is the total
protein concentration, A340 is the absorbance
at 340 nm for a given Ni(II) concentration, Amin is the absorbance at 340 nm for apo-YjiA, Amax is the absorbance at 340 nm upon saturation, and [Ni(II)]total is the total Ni(II) concentration added to the sample.
The resulting values were plotted as r versus [Ni(II)]free, and the data were fit to the Hill equation (eq ):where n is
the Hill coefficient.

To determine the affinity of YjiA for
Co(II), 5 μM apo-YjiA was titrated with CoSO4 and
the absorbance at 350 nm was monitored. The Co(II) Kd was calculated in the same manner as for Ni(II), except
that eqs  and  were
adjusted to solve for a single metal site instead of two.

YjiA Zincon
Zn(II) Competitions
To estimate the Zn(II) Kd of YjiA, the competitor zincon was selected
because of its ability to form a 1:1 complex with Zn(II) with a reported Kd of 12.7 μM., Stocks of zincon were prepared in Milli-Q water. The affinity of
zincon for Zn(II) was verified under our experimental conditions by
titrating 400 nM zincon in protein buffer with increasing amounts
of ZnSO4. The absorbance at 620 nm was monitored using
a 10 cm path length cuvette and a GBC Cintra 404 spectrophotometer.
The Kd was calculated by using the same
method that was used for the Ni(II)– and Co(II)–YjiA
titrations, where n = 1. Competition experiments
were conducted by incubating 10 μM apo-WT or E37A/C66A/C67A
YjiA with 140 μM zincon and various amounts of Zn(II). The samples
were incubated overnight at 4 °C in the glovebox. The absorbance
of zincon at 620 nm was monitored using a 2 mm path length cuvette.

Analytical Gel Filtration Chromatography
Samples containing
60 μM YjiA were incubated with the desired metal, GDP, or GTP
at the indicated concentrations (Tables S3 and S4 of the ) overnight at 4 °C
in the glovebox. For samples containing GTP, the protein was preincubated
with GTP for at least 2 h at 4 °C in the glovebox prior to injection
onto the gel filtration column. All samples contained 25 mM HEPES
(pH 7.6), 100 mM NaCl, and 5 mM MgCl2. Apoprotein- and
metal-containing samples were loaded onto a Superdex 200 10/300 analytical
gel filtration column (GE Healthcare), pre-equilibrated with chelexed
and filtered 25 mM HEPES (pH 7.6), 200 mM NaCl, and 5 mM MgCl2. The column was calibrated with thyroglobulin (670 kDa),
γ-globulin (158 kDa), ovalbumin (44 kDa), myoglobin (17 kDa),
and vitamin B12 (1.4 kDa) from Bio-Rad. The inclusion of
metal in the standards did not affect their elution profiles (data
not shown). Molecular masses were determined by plotting the log molecular
masses of the standards versus the partition coefficient (Kav), where Kav =
(Ve – Vo)/(Vt – Vo) (Ve represents the elution volume, Vo the void volume, and Vt the total column volume).

Circular Dichroism (CD)
Spectroscopy
WT and mutant
YjiA samples were prepared for CD spectroscopy by diluting the protein
in Milli-Q water to a final concentration of approximately 10–20
μM in the glovebox. For metal titrations, ZnSO4,
CoSO4, or NiCl2 was added to the diluted samples
and allowed to equilibrate overnight at 4 °C in the glovebox.
All samples were analyzed on an Olis RSM 1000 spectropolarimeter with
a capped 1 mm path length cuvette to minimize exposure to the air.
Spectra were collected at 1 nm intervals over a spectral range of
200–260 nm with an integration time of 2 s and 2400 grating
lines/nm. The final spectra obtained are averages of three scans.
The observed ellipticity was converted into mean residue ellipticity
([θ]mre, in degrees square centimeters per decimole)
using the following formula:where MW is the molecular mass of the protein
in daltons, N is the number of amino acids, θ
is the observed ellipticity in degrees, [protein] is the protein concentration
in grams per milliliter, and l is the path length.
The secondary structure content was quantitated in the 200–240
nm range using K2D3. The CD spectra of
the mutants were similar to that of the WT protein, demonstrating
that these mutations do not affect the secondary structure of the
protein (data not shown).

GTPase Assay
GTPase activity was
determined by the
Malachite Green assay for free phosphate adapted from Lanzetta et
al. A series of 400 μL samples
containing 0.5–2 μM WT or E37A/C66A/C67A YjiA in protein
buffer supplemented with 5 mM Mg(II) and concentrations of GTP between
5 and 950 μM were incubated at 37 °C in the glovebox for
2.5–5 h. Controls without protein were prepared alongside the
protein samples and received the same treatment. After incubation,
100 μL of the phosphate detection reagent (2.6 mM Malachite
Green, 1.5% ammonium molybdate, and 0.2% Tween 20) was added to each
sample. The samples were then mixed by being vortexed and incubated
at room temperature for 3 min, after which sodium citrate was added
to a final concentration of 3.5%. The samples were vortexed again
and incubated at room temperature for 30 min prior to being plated
on a 96-well plate, and the absorbance at 630 nm was measured with
a Tecan Safire2 microplate reader. The amount of phosphate released
was determined via a standard curve based on a phosphate standard
(Molecular Probes). The data were analyzed by fitting to the Michaelis–Menten
equation using OriginPro version 7.5. Samples containing metal were
preincubated with the metal overnight prior to the assay [prepared
as a stock of 10–40 μM protein with 100 μM Zn(II),
100 μM NiCl2, or 250 μM CoSO4 for
WT or 225 μM Zn(II), 400 μM NiCl2, or 800 μM
CoSO4 for the E37A/C66A/C67A triple mutant]. These stocks
were then diluted to the final protein concentration of 0.5–2
μM for the assay in a buffer that contained 100 μM Zn(II),
100 μM NiCl2, or 250 μM CoSO4 for
WT or 225 μM Zn(II), 400 μM NiCl2, or 800 μM
CoSO4 for the E37A/C66A/C67A triple mutant.

Crystallization
and Zn(II) Soaks
WT YjiA and E37A/C66A/C67A
YjiA were crystallized at 25 °C by the hanging drop vapor diffusion
technique. For WT YjiA, 1.5 μL of a protein solution [13.2 mg/mL
in 100 mM NaCl and 25 mM HEPES (pH 7.6)] was mixed with 0.3 μL
of 100 mM CaCl2 and 1.5 μL of a precipitant solution
[1.55 M (NH4)2SO4 and 0.1 M HEPES
(pH 6.9)] on a glass coverslip. The coverslip was sealed with grease
over a reservoir containing 500 μL of the precipitant solution.
Crystals appeared overnight and grew to maximal dimensions of ∼300
μm × 50 μm × 50 μm after 3 days. Crystals
of E37A/C66A/C67A YjiA were grown in the same fashion with the following
modifications: the precipitant solution consisted of 1.3–1.35
M (NH4)2SO4 and 0.1 M HEPES (pH 7.5–7.7),
the protein concentration was 12.4 mg/mL, and the protein solution
contained 1 mM TCEP in addition to the other components.

Because
cocrystallization of WT YjiA with Zn(II) was unsuccessful, Zn(II)-soaked
WT YjiA crystals were generated by incubating apo-WT crystals in the
precipitant solution supplemented with 3 mM ZnSO4 and 1
mM TCEP at 25 °C for 16 h. The crystals were then directly transferred
to a cryogenic solution [1.5 M (NH4)2SO4, 0.1 M HEPES (pH 6.9), 3 mM ZnSO4, 1 mM TCEP,
and 20% (v/v) glycerol], incubated for 5 s, and flash-frozen in liquid
nitrogen. Zn(II)-soaked E37A/C66A/C67A YjiA crystals were generated
in a similar fashion with the following modifications: the soaking
solution contained an additional 20 mM CaCl2 to better
stabilize the crystals, the cryogenic solution consisted of 1.35 M
(NH4)2SO4, 0.1 M HEPES (pH 7.7),
20 mM CaCl2, 3 mM ZnSO4, 1 mM TCEP, and 20%
(v/v) glycerol, and the crystals were transferred into the cryogenic
solution in three steps at increasing glycerol concentrations and
incubated in that solution for 20 s.

Data Collection
All Zn(II)-soaked YjiA crystals belong
to space group P21 (a ≈ 56 Å, b ≈ 69 Å, c ≈ 78 Å, and β ≈ 104°) and
contain two protomers in the asymmetric unit. All diffraction data
were collected at 100 K.

Diffraction data for Zn(II)-soaked
WT YjiA were collected at Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory
beamline 9-2 in Portola Valley, CA, using a MARmosaic 325 CCD detector.
An initial Zn(II)-soaked WT YjiA crystal was used for an X-ray fluorescence
scan to verify the presence of bound Zn(II). On the basis of the fluorescence
scan, a peak wavelength of 1.2827 Å (9665.5 eV) was determined
using CHOOCH. A wavelength
of 1.1808 Å (10500.0 eV) was chosen for the remote data set.
Remote and peak data sets were collected on the same crystal in wedges
of 30° in 1° oscillation steps. For each wedge, the corresponding
images related by a 180° crystal rotation were collected immediately
after completion of the wedge. An inflection data set was also collected
on the same crystal, but not used for this study. Bijvoet mates were
treated as separate reflections for both the remote and the peak data
set.

Diffraction data for Zn(II)-soaked E37A/C66A/C67A YjiA
were collected
at Advanced Photon Source beamline 24ID-C in Argonne, IL, using a
Pilatus 6M pixel detector. The crystal was annealed for 5 s prior
to data collection. Then, a single data
set was collected at a wavelength of 0.9795 Å (12658.0 eV) in
1° oscillation steps. For structure solution, Bijvoet mates were
treated as symmetry-related reflections. For calculation of Zn anomalous
difference Fourier maps of Zn(II)-soaked E37A/C66A/C67A YjiA, Bijvoet
mates were treated as separate reflections.

All data were integrated
using HKL2000 and scaled using Scalepack. The same reflections were marked for the free
set of reflections for Zn(II)-soaked WT YjiA and for Zn(II)-soaked
E37A/C66A/C67A YjiA. In addition, 5% of the reflections in the resolution
ranges of 75–30 and 2.57–2.05 Å were included in
the free set for the data of the triple mutant. All data collection
statistics are summarized in Table S5 of the .

Structure Building and Refinement
The crystal structure
of Zn(II)-soaked WT YjiA was determined at 2.57 Å resolution
by molecular replacement with the crystal structure of native WT YjiA
without water molecules [Protein Data Bank (PDB) entry 1NIJ()] in PHASER, which yielded
a single solution. The output model was subjected to 20 cycles of
simulated annealing in PHENIX to reduce
model bias. The model was adjusted for any changes that had occurred
through a cycle of model building in COOT followed by refinement in PHENIX. Initial
difference electron density maps revealed the presence of five Zn(II)
ions in the asymmetric unit. Zn(II) ions and water molecules were
inserted in subsequent rounds of refinement.

The intermediate
model of Zn(II)-soaked WT YjiA without water molecules or Zn(II) was
used to determine the crystal structure of Zn(II)-soaked E37A/C66A/C67A
YjiA to 2.05 Å resolution. The structure was determined by rigid
body refinement in PHENIX followed by automated rebuilding of the
structure using phenix.autobuild to reduce
model bias. Initial difference electron density maps revealed the
presence of all three mutations as well as the presence of three Zn(II)
ions in the asymmetric unit. Subsequently, Zn(II) ions and water molecules
were inserted, and the model was adjusted to account for the mutations
as well as other changes through iterative cycles of model building
in COOT and refinement in PHENIX.

Because of the superior quality of the
Zn(II)-soaked E37A/C66A/C67A
YjiA data set (Table S5 of the ), the model derived from this data set was then used to finalize
the structure of Zn(II)-soaked WT YjiA. Following rigid body refinement
of the mutant structure into the WT YjiA data in PHENIX, additional Zn(II) ions were inserted and the
structure was completed through iterative cycles of model building
in COOT and refinement in PHENIX.

For both structures, the two protomers
in the asymmetric unit were
initially restrained by strict non-crystallographic symmetry (NCS)
parameters. In advanced stages of refinement, NCS restraints were
loosened for all residues and removed for residues involved in crystal
contacts or Zn(II) binding. Side chains with limited electron density
were truncated at the last atom with visible electron density. Zn(II)
coordination was loosely restrained to average bond lengths observed
in previously determined structures of proteins with Zn(II) ions bound. The final stages of refinement for both structures
involved TLS parametrization using two
TLS groups per protomer, as determined by the TLSMD server. The locations of Zn(II) ions were verified by
Zn anomalous difference Fourier maps calculated from the peak data
set (WT YjiA) or the remote data set (E37A/C66A/C67A YjiA) using FFT,
which is part of the CCP4 program suite.

Crystallographic refinement of both structures yielded models
that
possess excellent stereochemistry and small root-mean-square deviations
from ideal values for bond lengths and bond angles. Because of the
presence of pseudo-translational symmetry in the data, the crystallographic R factors are relatively high, but within an acceptable
range. Refinement statistics are summarized in Table S5 of the . The final model of WT
YjiA contains all 318 residues of YjiA in protomer A and residues
2–318 in protomer B. The final model of E37A/C66A/C67A YjiA
contains all 318 residues in both protomers. The models were validated
using simulated annealing composite omit maps calculated in CNS. The geometries of the final models were analyzed
with Molprobity. Figures were generated
using Pymol.

Results
YjiA Binds
Zn(II), Ni(II), and Co(II) with Micromolar Affinities
The
presence of a CXCC motif in YjiA, conserved in all COG0523
proteins, led to the proposal that the
protein can bind metals, but experimental
evidence was lacking. Because of the homology of YjiA to G3E NTPases
known to be involved in Zn(II) (YeiR and
YciC), Ni(II) (UreG− and HypB,), or Co(II) (CobW) homeostasis, these
three metals were the focus of this investigation. To determine whether
YjiA can bind these metals and, if so, how much, 120 μM apo-YjiA
was incubated with either 480 μM NiCl2, 360 μM
CoSO4, or 600 μM ZnSO4, and excess metal
was removed by gel filtration chromatography. Subsequent metal analysis
via a PAR assay revealed roughly stoichiometric cobalt, two Ni(II)
ions, or four Zn(II) ions bound per monomer (Table ).

Stoichiometry of Binding of Metal
to WT and Mutant YjiA
 	Ni(II) bound	Co(II) bound	Zn(II)
bound	
WT	2.2 ± 0.2	1.2 ± 0.2	3.8 ± 0.3	
WT with GDP	1.3 ± 0.1	0.6 ± 0.2	3.2 ± 0.2	
E37A/C66A/C67A	0.5 ± 0.2	0.1 ± 0.1	3.9 ± 0.5	
E42A/C66A/C67A	1.2 ± 0.2	0.2 ± 0.1	4.2 ± 0.3	
Apo-YjiA (120 μM)
was incubated
with either 480 μM NiCl2, 360 μM CoSO4, or 600 μM ZnSO4 overnight at 4 °C in an anaerobic
glovebox. Excess metal was removed by passing the proteins over a
PD10 gel filtration column, and the bound metal was detected via a
PAR assay. In samples containing GDP, 1.5 mM GDP and 5 mM MgCl2 were included. The data listed are average values and standard
deviations of the number of metal ions bound per protein monomer from
at least three independent experiments.

After incubation of YjiA with 1 equiv of nickel or
cobalt, broad
charge-transfer bands appear in the electronic absorption spectrum
region of 250–400 nm (Figure A). The
difference spectra, obtained by subtracting the signal of apo-YjiA
from that of the protein loaded with 1 equiv of Ni(II) or Co(II) (Figure A), reveal a peak maximum at 280 nm and a broad
shoulder around 340 or 350 nm for nickel and cobalt, respectively.
The 280 nm and shoulder absorptions for both metals can be attributed
to Cys-S– → Ni(II)/Co(II) ligand-to-metal
charge transfer (LMCT),− indicating the presence of at least one thiolate
in the coordination sphere of both metals.

Cobalt and nickel binding
to WT YjiA. (A) The difference spectra
of 20 μM YjiA incubated with 20 μM NiCl2 (—)
or 20 μM CoSO4 (---) display ligand-to-metal charge-transfer
(LMCT) signals in the region of 250–400 nm. The extinction
coefficient was calculated on the basis of the protein concentration.
(B) To determine the affinity of apo-WT YjiA for Ni(II), the metal
was titrated into a sample of 250 nM YjiA and the increase in absorption
at 340 nm was used to calculate the fractional saturation of the protein
(●). Data like those shown were fit to the Hill equation to
yield an apparent Kd of (3.7 ± 0.3)
× 10–6 M [n = 1.2 ± 0.3
(—)] (see the text). Likewise, binding of Co(II) to 5 μM
YjiA can be monitored at 350 nm (■) and fit to yield an apparent Kd of (2.0 ± 0.1) × 10–5 M [n = 1.7 ± 0.2 (---)].

The LMCTs for Ni(II) and Co(II) can be used to monitor metal
binding
by YjiA. A titration of 5 μM apo-YjiA with CoSO4 yields
an apparent Kd of (2.0 ± 0.1) ×
10–5 M and a Hill coefficient n of 1.7 ± 0.2 (Figure B). This Hill
coefficient suggests cooperativity in cobalt binding to YjiA, a surprising
result given that the protein binds only 1 equiv of cobalt. This discrepancy
may be explained by the ability of cobalt to induce oligomerization
in the protein (see below). The titration of YjiA with Ni(II) is more
complicated because of the 2:1 Ni(II):YjiA stoichiometry as the titration
may be monitoring either a single site or both Ni(II) sites simultaneously.
The electronic absorption spectrum demonstrates that at least one
site is spectroscopically active, but the mutants described below
suggest that the second Ni(II) site does not yield a discernible electronic
absorption signal. The appearance of a LMCT upon the addition of substoichiometric
amounts of nickel to YjiA indicates that the second site is not significantly
tighter than the spectroscopically active site. Thus, the second nickel
site has either a similar or a lower affinity than the spectroscopically
active site. If this site is much weaker, then the nickel titration
in Figure B represents only the spectroscopically
active site and yields an apparent Kd of
(3.9 ± 0.3) × 10–6 M with a Hill coefficient n of 1.2 ± 0.2 for this one site. If the two sites
have similar affinities, an apparent average Kd for the two sites can be calculated from the Ni(II) titration
to be (3.7 ± 0.3) × 10–6 M (n = 1.2 ± 0.3).

Because of the spectroscopically quiet
nature of Zn(II), a metallochromic
indicator, zincon, was used to estimate the affinity of Zn(II) for
YjiA. The Kd of zincon for Zn(II) was
determined to be 10 ± 1 μM under our buffer conditions
(data not shown), in agreement with the reported Kd of 12.7 μM., In the absence of protein,
metal loading of 140 μM zincon is complete upon addition of
140 μM Zn(II) (Figure ). Upon the inclusion
of 10 μM YjiA, 180 μM Zn(II) is required to observe saturation
of the zincon (Figure ), demonstrating competition
by YjiA for Zn(II) and consistent with the measured Zn(II) stoichiometry
of four ions per monomer. Furthermore, binding of Zn(II) to zincon
is not observed until more than 20 μM metal has been added,
suggesting that YjiA has two Zn(II) sites with a Kd significantly tighter than that of zincon (Kd &lt; 10 μM), and that the remaining two Zn(II)
sites have affinities comparable to that of zincon (Kd ∼ 10 μM). Finally, to confirm the Zn(II)
stoichiometry, ESI-MS of YjiA incubated with excess Zn(II) was performed
(Figure S1 of the ). The mass spectrum revealed up to four Zn(II) ions bound to the
protein, with two sites completely filled and two partially filled,
consistent with the affinities of the sites estimated in the competition
experiment.

Zinc binding to YjiA. Once Zn(II) binds, the maximal absorption
of zincon shifts from 488 to 620 nm. It takes 140 μM ZnSO4 to saturate 140 μM zincon (●), consistent with
a 1:1 stoichiometry. In a competition between 140 μM zincon
and 10 μM apo-YjiA (■), the spectrum of zincon does not
change until after the addition of 20 μM ZnSO4, suggesting
that there are two Zn(II) sites on YjiA that can outcompete zincon.
It takes an additional 160 μM ZnSO4 to saturate the
620 nm signal, suggesting that there are two additional sites in YjiA
capable of competing with zincon for Zn(II). In the case of the E37A/C66A/C67A
mutant (▼), the initial plateau region is not observed, but
180 μM ZnSO4 is still required to saturate zincon,
suggesting that the mutant YjiA can still bind four Zn(II) ions but
with affinities weaker than that of the WT protein.

Ni(II), Co(II), and Zn(II) Share a Common
Site
To determine
if the binding sites of the different transition metals overlap, apo-YjiA
was incubated simultaneously with two types of metal, followed by
HPLC metal analysis to identify which metals are bound. When YjiA
was incubated with both CoSO4 and NiCl2, 1.9
± 0.3 Ni(II) ions and 0.15 ± 0.01 Co(II) ion were detected
bound to the protein, suggesting that Co(II) shares a site with Ni(II)
and that Ni(II) can outcompete Co(II) for this site. Similar experiments
conducted with ZnSO4 and either NiCl2 or CoSO4 demonstrate a selectivity for Zn(II) as 3.6 ± 0.3 Zn(II)
ions and 4.0 ± 0.4 Zn(II) ions per YjiA were detected, respectively,
with no detectable Ni(II) or Co(II).

The GTPase Domain Contains
the Common Metal-Binding Site
A sequence alignment of YjiA
with other G3E GTPases demonstrates
the presence of conserved putative metal-binding residues between
the Walker A and Walker B motifs (Figure A).
In the COG0523 subfamily, this conserved sequence corresponds to C64XCC67 of YjiA. Furthermore, examination of the
published crystal structure of apo-YjiA revealed two nearby glutamates, Glu37 and Glu42, which could also
serve as metal-binding residues (Figure B).
To investigate the role of these glutamates as well as the CXCC motif
in metal binding, we generated the E37A/C66A/C67A and E42A/C66A/C67A
triple mutants of YjiA and characterized their metal binding capabilities.
Upon addition of Ni(II) or Co(II) to either triple mutant, the absorbance
spectra lacked the LMCTs at 340 or 350 nm, respectively, suggesting
that Cys66 and/or Cys67 are the source of these signals (data not
shown). Furthermore, both triple mutants exhibited weakened Co(II)
and Ni(II) binding, but the Zn(II) stoichiometry was unchanged (Table ). However, the previous observation that Zn(II)
competes with the other metals (see above), suggesting overlapping
sites, led us to investigate further the Zn(II) coordination of E37A/C66A/C67A
YjiA by using a zincon competition. Unlike the WT protein, no initial
plateau region was observed when the triple mutant was included in
the zincon titration, yet 180 μM Zn(II) was still required to
saturate 140 μM zincon (Figure ). This
result is consistent with the maintained Zn(II) stoichiometry of the
mutant protein but indicates that the mutations have significantly
weakened the affinities of two of the metal ions and suggests that
there is at least one Zn(II)-binding site involving some combination
of E37, C66, and C67 that has a Kd of
&lt;10 μM. Unlike WT YjiA (Figure S1 of the ), the metalation state of the zinc-loaded
mutant protein could not be observed by mass spectrometry, because
of poor signal quality. Upon addition of zinc to the mutant protein,
the decrease in signal was greater than that observed for WT, suggesting
that it cannot just be attributed to ion suppression and is likely
due to changes in the charge state of the mutant protein. Altogether,
these experiments indicate that the Ni(II) and Co(II) sites and at
least one Zn(II) site contain some combination of E37, E42, C66, and
C67 as ligands.

Structure of WT YjiA and location of the metal-binding
site in
the primary structure of the GTPase domain. (A) Sequence alignment
of the GTPase domain regions between the Walker A and Walker B motifs
of representative G3E GTPases generated by the COBALT sequence alignment
program (available online at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/tools/cobalt/). Located between the Walker A and
B motifs is a putative metal-binding motif, the location of which
is common among the G3E GTPases. The two glutamates mutated in this
study are highlighted by orange boxes. The species from which the
protein sequences were derived and the starting sequence positions
(in brackets) are as follows: YjiA, E. coli (11);
YeiR, E. coli (9); CobW, P. denitrificans (18); YciC, B. subtilis (11); Nha3, Rhodococcus sp. N-771 (13); UreG, Klebsiella aerogenes (14);
EcHypB, E. coli (111); HpHypB, Helicobacter
pylori (53). (B) The structure of apo-YjiA (PDB entry 1NIJ), previously published, features two domains. The N-terminal GTPase
domain possesses a typical G3E GTPase fold with a central β-sheet
core surrounded by α-helices. Located on one of the central
β-strands is the conserved C64XCC67 motif.
Glu37 and Glu42 are near this motif (inset).

Metal Binding Induces Oligomerization of YjiA with No Major
Secondary Structure Changes
The CD spectrum of apo-WT YjiA
(Figure S2 of the ) is indicative of a mixed αβ protein, in close agreement
with the published crystal structure. Upon addition of Co(II), Zn(II), or Ni(II), minor changes in the
CD spectrum were detected, but the calculated percentage of secondary
structure content was unchanged (Figure S2 of the ), indicating that YjiA does not undergo
any dramatic secondary structure changes upon binding metal.

Analytical gel filtration chromatography was used to probe the oligomeric
state of apo-YjiA, as well as the metal- and nucleotide-bound species.
In the apo form, the protein elutes from the column as a monomer (Figure  and Table S3 of the ). The calculated molecular mass of the monomeric
apo-YjiA species from the gel filtration experiments (30.0 ±
1.5 kDa) is smaller than the predicted molecular mass of 35.7 kDa,
suggesting a compact protein structure. Upon the addition of 2 equiv
of Ni(II), Co(II), or Zn(II), the protein oligomerizes, forming a
small amount of dimer as well as a larger oligomeric species (Figure ). The protein also dimerizes in the presence of
GDP or GTP, but to a lesser degree than with metal (Figure ). Some oligomerization was also observed upon adding
metal to the E37A/C66A/C67A and E42A/C66A/C67A mutants, although the
impact on quaternary structure is diminished compared to the impact
in the WT protein (Table S4 of the ).

Effect of metal on the quaternary structure of YjiA. In
the absence
of metal, 60 μM YjiA elutes at a volume corresponding to a monomer
(solid black line). The addition of 2 equiv of NiCl2 (solid
red line), CoSO4 (dashed black line), or ZnSO4 (solid blue line) results in the formation of dimeric and oligomeric
species. Incubation of YjiA with 2 equiv of GDP (dashed red line)
or GTP (dashed blue line) followed by chromatography with 400 μM
nucleotide in the running buffer resulted in only a small portion
of dimeric protein. The chromatographic traces (monitored at 280 nm)
are representative data sets from experiments with a Superdex 200
10/300 analytical column equilibrated with 25 mM HEPES (pH 7.6), 200
mM NaCl, and 5 mM MgCl2. The ticks at the top of the graph
denote the elution volumes of the protein standards. From left to
right, the identities of the standards (and their molecular masses)
are thyroglobulin (670 kDa), γ-globulin (158 kDa), ovalbumin
(44 kDa), myoglobin (17 kDa), and vitamin B12 (1.4 kDa),
respectively.

Metal Binding Affects YjiA
GTPase Activity
YjiA was
previously shown to bind GTP and, on the basis of its GTPase motifs,
is predicted to possess GTP hydrolysis (GTPase) activity. In agreement with this prediction, the apo-WT
protein has low GTPase activity, with a kcat/Km of 14 ± 9 M–1 s–1 (Table ). To determine
whether metal binding modulates the GTPase activity, we incubated
apo-YjiA with Ni(II), Co(II), or Zn(II) prior to analysis. The addition
of Co(II) slightly disrupts GTPase activity, reducing the kcat/Km to 2.3 ±
0.8 M–1 s–1. The presence of Ni(II)
significantly diminishes the GTPase activity of YjiA, such that substrate
saturation was not observed with up to 950 μM GTP, indicating
a significantly weaker Km versus that
of the apoprotein. Attempts to use higher GTP concentrations were
unsuccessful because of the departure from the the linear response
region of the assay (data not shown). Zn(II) also inhibits the enzyme,
and in this case, no activity was detectable in the presence of 100
μM ZnSO4 (Table ). The results
of these GTPase assays prompted experiments that aimed to examine
if there was a connection between GDP binding and metal binding to
YjiA. Inclusion of 1.5 mM GDP in the protein buffer lowered the metal
stoichiometry of all three metals (Table ).

Kinetics of GTP Hydrolysis by WT and
E37A/C66A/C67A YjiA
 	metal bound	kcat (s–1)	Km (M)	kcat/Km(M–1 s–1)	
WT	apo	(6 ± 2) × 10–3	(5 ± 3) × 10–5	14 ± 9	
 	Co(II)	(5 ± 2) × 10–4	(2.3 ± 0.7) × 10–4	2.3 ± 0.8	
 	Ni(II)	WH	
 	Zn(II)	NH	
E37A/C66A/C67A	apo	(5 ± 1) × 10–4	(1.0 ± 0.7) × 10–4	6 ± 3	
 	Co(II)	(1.1 ± 0.1) × 10–3	(1.7 ± 0.1) × 10–5	78 ± 9	
 	Ni(II)	(6 ± 1) × 10–4	(3 ± 1) × 10–4	2 ± 1	
 	Zn(II)	NH	
All GTPase assays
were conducted
with 0.5–2 μM WT or E37A/C66A/C67A YjiA in protein buffer
supplemented with 5 mM MgCl2. Samples containing metal
were preincubated with either zinc, cobalt, or nickel overnight at
4 °C in an anaerobic glovebox. The amount of released phosphate
was detected using a modified Malachite Green assay. The data listed
are average values from at least three independent experiments.

Weak hydrolysis (see the text
for details).

No measurable
hydrolysis (see
the text for details).

The
GTPase activity of the apo form of the E37A/C66A/C67A mutant
is comparable to that of the WT protein, with a kcat/Km of 6 ± 3 M–1 s–1 (Table ); however, unlike WT YjiA, the mutant protein was not inhibited
by Ni(II), and Co(II) increased the overall catalytic efficiency of
the enzyme to a kcat/Km of 78 ± 9 M–1 s–1 (Table ). In contrast, addition of Zn(II)
to the triple mutant still inhibited GTPase activity, even though
it was added at lower concentrations than Co(II) and Ni(II). While
the E37A/C66A/C67A triple mutant has reduced affinity for all three
metals (see above), it appears that Zn(II) binds to at least some
sites in YjiA with higher affinity than Co(II) and Ni(II) do, and
that this affinity remains sufficiently high to cause inhibition at
the concentrations used. To probe whether this inhibition of GTPase
activity occurs by direct Zn(II) binding to the active site or in
an allosteric fashion by Zn(II) binding to other metal sites on YjiA,
we conducted a structural analysis of Zn(II)-bound YjiA.

Zn(II) Binding
Induces a Space Group Transition in YjiA Crystals
We determined
the crystal structure of Zn(II)-bound WT YjiA to
2.57 Å resolution after soaking apo-WT YjiA crystals with ZnSO4 (Figure ). Surprisingly, the crystals
underwent a space group transition upon soaking. While unsoaked (apo)
WT YjiA crystals belong to space group C2 with one
protomer in the asymmetric unit, the
space group is P21 after soaking and features
two protomers in the asymmetric unit (for a more detailed discussion
of space group assignment, see the ). The arrangement of molecules in the crystal lattices
of Zn(II)-soaked WT YjiA and apo-WT YjiA, however, is nearly identical
despite the different space groups (Figure S3 of the ). It seems that Zn(II) soaking induced
a small shift in the crystal lattice, causing a reduction in symmetry
from C2 to P21 while
leaving the overall crystal lattice intact.

Crystal structure of
Zn(II)-bound WT YjiA. (A) Overall structure
of the two YjiA protomers in the asymmetric unit (yellow and green
ribbons). Symmetry-related molecules involved in Zn(II) binding are
shown as gray ribbons. Four types of Zn(II)-binding sites are observed
in the structure: a bridging site (labeled B), an internal site (labeled
C), and two types of surface sites (labeled D and E). Bound Zn(II)
ions are shown as purple spheres and coordinating residues as sticks.
A Zn anomalous difference Fourier map is contoured around bound Zn(II)
ions at 5σ. (B) Close-up view of the bridging Zn(II)-binding
site, located on a 2-fold axis between the two protomers in the asymmetric
unit. Zn(II) is coordinated by E74 and H114 from both protomers. (C)
Close-up view of the internal Zn(II)-binding site. The side chains
of E37, E42, and C66 (green carbons) coordinate the Zn(II), with an
open coordination sphere probably occupied by a water molecule. The
structure of apo-WT YjiA (PDB entry 2NIJ()) is superimposed
and shown with magenta carbons. The region around the Zn(II)-binding
site undergoes conformational changes upon Zn(II) binding, as indicated
by the arrows. The Zn(II)-binding site is also located in the proximity
of the nucleotide binding site, as demonstrated by modeling studies
with a GTP analogue-bound HypB structure [PDB entry 2HF8, GTPγS shown with cyan carbons and Mg(II) shown as
an orange sphere]. (D and E) Close-up views of the two types of surface
sites, located at crystal contacts between YjiA protomers in the asymmetric
unit and crystallographically related molecules. Zn(II) is coordinated
by the side chains of E167 and/or H170 from one molecule and H187
from the other molecule.

Unfortunately, we have not been able to generate nucleotide-bound
structures of YjiA itself. While YjiA exhibits the canonical GTPase
motifs, these motifs are not well-ordered in the structure and the
phosphate-binding Walker A motif in particular seems to exhibit multiple
conformations (Figure S4 of the ). Likely, nucleotide binding will result in a conformational change
and depend on the presence of an effector protein, consistent with
our unsuccessful attempts to generate nucleotide-bound structures.

YjiA Binds Zn(II) in Four Distinct Sites
Analysis of
the electron density and of Zn anomalous difference Fourier maps revealed
the presence of Zn(II) ions in four distinct types of sites: a “bridging
site” that is located at the interface of the two YjiA protomers
in the asymmetric unit (site B in Figure A),
an “internal site” (site C in Figure A), and two types of “surface sites” (sites
D and E in Figure A). In total, the two YjiA
protomers in the asymmetric unit could bind seven Zn(II) ions: two
in the internal sites, one in the bridging site, and four in surface
sites (Figure A). The asymmetric unit, however,
contains only five Zn(II) ions because all four surface sites are
involved in crystal lattice contacts and each of those bound Zn(II)
ions is shared with a neighboring asymmetric unit molecule.

The Internal
Site Is Located near the GTPase Active Site
The internal
site is located in the N-terminal region of a YjiA protomer,
with the side chains of E37, E42, and C66 coordinating Zn(II) (Figure C). Although hard to resolve in the electron density
at this resolution, a fourth coordination site on Zn(II) could be
occupied by a water molecule, which would give rise to a tetrahedral
coordination geometry. E37 and E42 are located in a loop region that
undergoes a conformational change upon Zn(II) binding to bring the
side chain of E42 into the proximity of the bound Zn(II) (Figure C). Furthermore, the region around C66 undergoes
a slight shift, bringing C66 closer to the Zn(II) ion and rearranging
the subsequent loop region significantly (Figure C).

It is clear that the internal Zn(II)-binding site
is in the neighborhood of the nucleotide-binding site (Figure C), as demonstrated by a structural alignment with
the GTP analogue-bound structure of Methanocaldococcus jannaschii HypB (PDB entry 2HF8()), which has the highest degree of structural
homology with YjiA of the proteins in the PDB [Cα root-mean-square deviation (rmsd) of 3.1 Å over 209 residues,
determined by DaliLite]. In this model,
the nucleotide-associated Mg(II) is within 5.4 Å of the side
chain carboxylate of E37 and within 5.3 Å of the Cβ atom of E39 (Figure ), which has a disordered
side chain. These observations raise the possibility that E37 or E39
are involved in Mg(II) coordination upon nucleotide binding. Notably,
E39 is the first residue of the switch I motif of YjiA, a common NTPase
motif known to undergo conformational changes during NTPase activity,
as indicated by structural and sequence alignment (Figure A). In M. jannaschii HypB, the
first residue of the switch I motif, D75, is one of the ligands to
the nucleotide-associated Mg(II) (Figure ). In our structural alignment, D75 of M. jannaschii HypB aligns with E39 of YjiA (Figure ), further suggesting that E39 could be involved
in Mg(II) coordination.

E37 or E39 of YjiA could coordinate nucleotide-associated
Mg(II).
GTP analogue-bound HypB (cyan carbons, PDB entry 2HF8()) is superimposed onto the structure of Zn(II)-bound WT
YjiA (green carbons). Bound GTPγS is shown with cyan carbons,
and GTPγS-associated Mg(II) is shown as an orange sphere. D75
of HypB is involved in Mg(II) coordination. Both E37 and E39 of YjiA
are in the proximity of the modeled Mg(II), as indicated by the purple
dashed lines, raising the possibility that these residues are involved
in Mg(II) coordination in YjiA. Notably, E37 is also involved in binding
Zn(II) (purple sphere). E39 was truncated to the Cβ atom because of a lack of electron density for the side chain.

The structure of this internal
site is consistent with the solution
studies of metal binding to WT and mutant YjiA. Given that mutagenesis
of some of these ligands disrupts Co(II) and Ni(II) binding, it is
likely that a variation of this internal site also binds these other
metals in addition to Zn(II), with the coordination by C66 producing
the LMCT absorption features observed for the Co(II)- or Ni(II)-loaded
protein. Furthermore, the observation that Zn(II) can outcompete both
Ni(II) and Co(II) for binding suggests that this site is one of the
higher-affinity sites observed in the zincon competition assay, in
agreement with the weakened affinity of the E37A/C66A/C67A mutant.
As the internal site is in the proximity of the GTPase active site
and involves the GTPase switch I motif, it is conceivable that the
metal-induced inhibition of GTPase activity is due to metal binding
at this site. Taken together, these data indicate that the internal
site can be occupied by different metals with low micromolar affinity,
causing subtle conformational changes that modulate the function of
YjiA.

To further probe metal binding to the internal site, we
determined
the crystal structure of Zn(II)-bound E37A/C66A/C67A YjiA to 2.05
Å resolution. The overall structures of WT YjiA and E37A/C66A/C67A
YjiA are nearly identical, with a Cα rmsd of 0.450
Å between the two structures (Figure S5A of the ). While the bridging site and the surface
sites are still occupied with Zn(II), the internal site lacks bound
Zn(II) as indicated by both the electron density and the Zn anomalous
difference Fourier map (Figure S5B–E of the ). Instead, it appears that the side
chain of F40 has moved into the space previously occupied by the side
chains of C66 and E37 as well as the Zn(II) ion (Figure S5C of the ).

The Bridging Site and the
Surface Site Connect YjiA Protomers
As mentioned briefly
above, the bridging site is located between
two YjiA protomers on a noncrystallographic 2-fold symmetry axis,
with Zn(II) coordinated by the side chains of E74 and H114 from both
protomers in an approximate tetrahedral geometry (Figure B). Binding to this site likely disrupted the C2 symmetry of apo-WT YjiA crystals, as the bridging site
would be located on a crystallographic axis in the C2 lattice. Analysis of the resulting dimer interface with the PISA
server indicates that this interface
alone is not as extensive as is typically observed in physiologically
relevant dimers, with an average buried surface area of 1244 Å2 and a low complex formation significance score of 0.132 (on
a scale of 0–1 with increasing relevance to complex formation
in solution), not including the contributions from Zn(II). Thus, it
seems unlikely that apo-YjiA would be a dimer in solution, in agreement
with our analytical gel filtration chromatography results. Zn(II)
binding, however, could strengthen this interface and thereby induce
dimerization and oligomerization of YjiA.

All four surface Zn(II)
sites are located at crystal contacts at the interfaces of YjiA protomers
(Figure D,E). The Zn(II) ions in these sites
are coordinated by H170 and/or E167 from one protomer and H187 from
a protomer in the neighboring asymmetric unit, or vice versa. These
sites exhibit a significant amount of disorder and high crystallographic B factors, indicating that the Zn(II) ions are not bound
at high occupancy within the crystal lattice. There are also some
differences in the exact coordination spheres of the surface sites,
providing a further rationale for the asymmetry that led to the space
group transition upon Zn(II) binding. Most likely, Zn(II) binding
affects the individual protomers in a slightly different manner, thus
causing breakdown of the crystallographic symmetry. It is unclear
whether these sites would be occupied by Zn(II) ions in solution or
whether binding to these sites occurred adventitiously, after the
protein ligands were brought into proximity by crystallization. These
sites, however, provide an additional explanation for the observed
metal-induced oligomerization of YjiA, as they could stabilize higher-order
oligomers.

Discussion
The mechanisms through
which cells ensure the proper allocation
and trafficking of metal ions are not well understood. The COG0523
subfamily of GTPases represents a large and diverse group of proteins,
and on the basis of homology to known metallochaperones in the other
G3E subfamilies and comparative genomics analysis, it was suggested
that they play a role in metal trafficking or some other metal homeostasis
process., This study of YjiA lends credence to this
proposal. In particular, we demonstrate that YjiA can bind transition
metals and provide biochemical and structural details about this interaction.
Furthermore, the impact of metal binding on the GTPase activity of
YjiA suggests that metal ions play a regulatory function.

YjiA
belongs to subgroup 9 of the COG0523 subfamily and was predicted
to bind metals via a conserved CXCC motif. As with the other members of this subgroup, YjiA does not have an
assigned function, but there is a growing body of evidence that suggests
a role for YjiA in the cellular response to carbon starvation.,− Within the genomic context, yjiA is found downstream of yjiY, a homologue of carbon
starvation protein CstA, and yjiX, a small cytosolic
protein of unknown function. These three
genes are transcribed as a single transcript, which is believed to be under the control of one of the central
regulators in the carbon catabolism pathway, cyclic AMP receptor protein
(CRP). Furthermore, yjiA is downregulated by the noncoding RNA molecule Spot 42 that participates
in a feed-forward loop to help enact catabolite repression in E. coli. Further studies will
be needed to establish what role YjiA plays in the carbon starvation
response and the function of metals in this pathway.

Here, we
present a characterization of the metal binding capabilities
of YjiA. In particular, our data identify a Zn(II)-binding site created
by the side chains of E37, E42, and C66, the latter from the predicted
C64XCC67 metal-binding motif., Solution
studies of WT and mutant proteins suggest that Ni(II) and Co(II) also
bind to at least a subset of the same ligands, although the coordination
is likely to be different. Whether the other conserved cysteines in
this motif have a functional role in binding metals or performing
downstream effects remains to be determined. The relative metal affinities
mirror the Irving–Williams series of small-molecule chelators
for divalent metal ions, suggesting that
the protein structure is not enforcing strong metal selectivity. Furthermore,
at this time, it is not clear which metals are physiologically relevant
for YjiA function. Many of the COG0523 subfamilies were linked to
zinc pathways because of the presence of zinc-regulated genetic elements,, and deletions of B. subtilis yeiR or E.
coli yjiA sensitize the bacteria to zinc-deficient conditions., However, a similar phenotype was not observed in a ΔyjiA strain of E. coli, and binding sites
for zinc metalloregulators were not detected in the genetic neighborhoods
of subgroup 9., On the other hand, although nickel
is required in E. coli as a cofactor for several
[NiFe]-hydrogenase isoforms, the uptake
of this metal is restricted to anaerobic growth and there is no evidence that expression of yjiA is similarly controlled. Finally, a requirement for cobalt ions
has not been identified in E. coli, and this organism
does not make its own cobalamin. It is
possible, however, that the metal binding capabilities of YjiA are
only called upon to meet the challenges of unusual growth conditions.

The internal metal-binding site is adjacent to the GTPase active
site, as predicted by our nucleotide modeling studies (Figures C and ). Most notably, the
region involved in metal binding contains the switch I motif (Figure A), raising the possibility that metal binding restricts
the conformational changes of this motif, an essential part of the
GTPase cycle. In addition, structural homology suggests that E39 and
E37 are candidates for Mg(II) coordination, and the ability to coordinate
Mg(II) could be affected by the presence of metals in the internal
site. Indeed, we observe that the presence of metals affects the GTPase
activity of YjiA, with Zn(II), Co(II), and Ni(II) suppressing GTPase
activity to different extents, and that GDP can modulate metal binding.
Given that the CXCC motif is conserved in the COG0523 subfamily, it is likely that metal-dependent regulation
of activity is also conserved. This hypothesis is consistent with
a recent study of E. coli YeiR, although in this latter case the GTP hydrolysis was accelerated
in the presence of metals. Perhaps structural differences in the GTPase
domain metal-binding sites are responsible for the variations on this
theme. YjiA and YeiR are highly homologous and are well conserved
within the GTPase domain, including the CXCC motif and Glu42 (YjiA
numbering), but Glu37 is not conserved (Figure A). Metal-responsive GTP hydrolysis was also observed for proteins
from the HypB G3E subfamily,− with the most dramatic impact
observed with Zn(II). While these proteins are structurally similar
to YjiA in their GTPase domain and also have a GTPase domain metal-binding
site, there are some clear architectural differences. The YjiA internal
metal-binding site is located in a small “pocket” of
the enzyme with a solvent-exposed opening, whereas in the M. jannaschii HypB structure, the metal-binding site is
located on the surface of the protein (Figure S6 of the ).

The GTPase activity of YjiA is comparable to those of other
G3E
GTPases such as E. coli HypB,,H. pylori HypB, and E. coli YeiR, none of which
features a particularly high hydrolysis rate, suggesting that their
in vivo rates may be different from the rates determined in vitro.
In vitro, the isolated GTPases lack additional partner proteins and
cofactors that may stimulate GTPase activity in vivo. For example, the addition of SlyD, a protein involved in
the nickel insertion stage of [NiFe]-hydrogenase biosynthesis,, enhances the GTPase activity of E. coli HypB. By analogy, it is possible that YjiA requires
an additional factor to maximally activate GTP hydrolysis. A possible
candidate is the small cytosolic protein YjiX that is cotranscribed
with YjiA.,

In addition to the internal
metal site, YjiA also binds multiple
Zn(II) ions at interface sites between separate YjiA molecules, which
may provide an explanation for the metal-induced oligomerization observed
by analytical gel filtration chromatography. It is also possible,
however, that rearrangements around the internal metal site could
create interfaces for oligomerization. Large-scale metal-induced rearrangements
would be masked in our crystal soaking experiments because the interfaces
between YjiA molecules are already preformed in the crystal lattice.
This scenario would explain how Co(II) can mediate changes in quaternary
structure, given that the solution analysis indicates that only a
single Co(II) ion binds to YjiA at the internal site. Furthermore,
this model is consistent with the observation that mutation of two
of the internal site ligands diminishes oligomerization induced by
Ni(II) and Zn(II). Finally, there may be other metal sites on YjiA
not identified by crystallography. A recent bioinformatics analysis
of the apo-YjiA crystal structure suggested two surface-exposed sites
with potential for metal binding, composed of H23, E27, and H29 as
well as D52, D79, and D82, respectively. We do not observe bound metal in either of these two sites, and
E27 and D52 do not appear to be in the correct positions for metal
binding. We note, however, that binding to these sites could rely
on structural rearrangements that are prohibited by the crystal lattice.
Further studies will be necessary to probe the contribution of these
residues to metal binding as well as the functional relevance of metal
ions bound on the surface of YjiA.

Although characterization
of the E37A/C66A/C67A mutant provides
information about the structure and impact of the internal Zn(II)
site, several observations require additional explanation. The ability
of this triple mutant to bind four Zn(II) ions and to oligomerize
in the presence of Zn(II), albeit to a lesser degree than WT YjiA,
suggests that mutation of these residues is not sufficient to completely
disrupt Zn(II) binding. This conclusion, supported by the zincon competition
illustrating a decreased affinity for Zn(II), is surprising because
the crystal structure depicts a Zn(II) coordination sphere comprised
of E37, E42, and C66, such that mutation of two of these three protein
ligands should be sufficient to stop metal binding. Structural rearrangement
of this site to incorporate other residues as ligands, such as the
nearby E39, could serve as a possible explanation. Such a rearrangement
may not be observed in the E37A/C66A/C67A YjiA crystal structure because
of the aforementioned preformed interfaces in the crystal prior to
Zn(II) binding. Possible binding to a rearranged site in the E37A/C66A/C67A
mutant may also explain the GTPase inhibition in the presence of Zn(II).
An alternative explanation for the inhibition of the GTPase activity
by Zn(II) is the involvement of additional allosteric sites, but evidence
to support this latter explanation is needed.

Altogether, the
results presented here provide a detailed biochemical
and structural picture of the metal binding properties of a COG0523
GTPase. A connection between members of this subfamily of GTPases
and intracellular metal pathways is emerging. This study supports
the model in which metals play a role in regulating the proteins’
enzymatic activities and presents a glimpse into how this metal-mediated
regulation may occur. Furthermore, as noted earlier, subgroup 9 of
the COG0523 GTPases is hypothesized to be involved in carbon starvation,
and the metal binding activities of YjiA offer a tantalizing hint
about the interplay of metal homeostasis with other cellular processes.

Supporting Information Available
A discussion of the space group
transition in the YjiA crystals upon Zn(II) binding, tables with primer
sequences, representative reconstructive ESI-MS results, summary of
gel filtration chromatography results, crystallographic data collection
and refinement statistics, circular dichroism spectra, and figures
of the crystal structure of WT and mutant YjiA with Zn(II). This material
is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi301600z_si_001.pdf

Accession Codes
The atomic coordinates
for Zn(II)-soaked WT YjiA and Zn(II)-soaked E37A/C66A/C67A YjiA have
been deposited in the PDB as entries 4IXM and 4IXN, respectively.

Author Present Address
⊥ K.S.R.:
Department of Chemistry, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada V6T 1Z1.

This work was
supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council
of Canada (to D.B.Z.), National Institutes of Health Grant GM69857
(to C.L.D.), a Massachusetts Institute of Technology Poitras predoctoral
fellowship (to M.J.), a Douglass College Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Math Summer Research Experience Grant from Rutgers University,
and HHMI-MIT Summer Research Experience in Chemical Biology Grant
52005719 (both to K.E.T.). C.L.D. is a Howard Hughes Medical Institute
Investigator.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Andrew van Benschoten and Christine
Phillips-Piro
for their efforts toward a nucleotide-bound structure of YjiA, Prof.
Andrew Woolley for the use of his spectropolarimeter, and Prof. Cynthia
Goh for the use of her microplate reader. Use of the Advanced Photon
Source was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science,
Office of Basic Energy Sciences, under Contract DE-AC02-06CH11357.
Portions of this research were conducted at the Stanford Synchrotron
Radiation Lightsource, a Directorate of SLAC National Accelerator
Laboratory and an Office of Science User Facility operated for the
U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science by Stanford University.
The SSRL Structural Molecular Biology Program is supported by the
U.S. Department of Energy Office of Biological and Environmental Research,
and by the National Institutes of Health, National Institute of General
Medical Sciences (including Grant P41GM103393) and the National Center
for Research Resources (Grant P41RR001209).

Abbreviations
CDcircular dichroism

DTNB5,5′-dithiobis(2-nitrobenzoic
acid)

ESI-MSelectrospray
ionization mass spectrometry

EDTAethylenediaminetetraacetic acid

GuHClguanidinium hydrochloride

HPLChigh-pressure liquid chromatography

IPTGisopropyl β-d-thiogalactopyranoside

LMCTligand-to-metal charge transfer

P-loopphosphate-binding loop

PAR4-(2-pyridylazo)resorcinol

PMSFphenylmethanesulfonyl
fluoride

rmsdroot-mean-square
deviation

TCEPtris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine

WTwild type.

