Mammalian
xanthine dehydrogenase
(XDH) is a dimeric protein with a molecular mass of 290 kDa that is
composed of two identical independent subunits. Each subunit contains
an N-terminal 20 kDa domain with two 2Fe–2S centers, a central
40 kDa flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) domain, and a C-terminal
85 kDa molybdopterin binding domain., Mammalian XDH
can be readily converted to xanthine oxidase (XO) by oxidation of
sulfhydryl residues or by proteolysis during extraction or purification
procedures., Classically, XDH is considered to be NAD+-dependent, catalyzing the oxidative reaction of xanthine
to urate with reduction of NAD+ to NADH, while XO also
catalyzes urate formation but in a manner independent of NAD+, using O2 as an electron acceptor from the flavin site
(Scheme ). Therefore, XDH activity is considered
primarily dependent on xanthine and NAD+, while XO is dependent
on xanthine and O2.

Over the past several decades, XO has been proposed to
play a central
role in the pathogenesis of oxidative injury in postischemic cells
and tissues.− In his seminal report, McCord proposed that ischemia activates free
radical generation via a two-step process: (1) the requisite conversion
of XDH to XO via a calcium-dependent protease and (2) the formation
of the XO substrates hypoxanthine and xanthine secondary to the catabolism
of ATP. This report triggered myriad biomedical
studies in a variety of organ systems, including heart, lung, kidney,
liver, and gastrointestinal tract, that have confirmed that XO plays
an important role in the injury that occurs upon reperfusion of ischemic
tissues. In this original report and all
of the many biological and biomedical studies that have followed,
the conversion of XDH to XO has been considered to be a requisite
step for activation of oxygen free radical generation in postischemic
tissues., Most of the xanthine oxidoreductase in mammalian
cells is present in the form of XDH. Therefore,
much attention has focused on the conversion of XDH to XO, because this was considered as the critical first step leading to
the formation of oxygen radicals.

In a series of studies applying
EPR techniques to directly measure
oxygen radical generation in reoxygenated endothelial cells and in
cardiac models, it was observed that the process of radical generation
was triggered primarily via the formation of the XO substrates hypoxanthine
and xanthine due to ischemia-induced degradation of ATP.− Little, if any, increase in the levels of XO occurred, and the magnitude
and time course of radical generation precisely followed the cellular
levels of XO substrates. Thus, it was reported that the levels of
the substrates xanthine and hypoxanthine, not the formation of XO,
are the key triggers activating postischemic radical generation.

In contrast to the hypothesis that conversion
of XDH to XO is essential
for oxygen radical formation, other researchers reported that XDH
itself can reduce O2 with production of •O2– accompanying
oxidation of xanthine.− It was also reported that this oxygen-dependent XDH
activity is influenced by NADH and NAD+., In
addition, oxidation of NADH by XDH also may produce •O2–.,,− Thus, controversy
remains regarding whether XDH produces significant amounts of •O2– or whether the enzyme must first be converted to the oxidase
form for this to occur.

XDH from chicken liver is locked in
the dehydrogenase form and
is not converted to XO; however, the enzyme is otherwise very similar
to the mammalian form in that it also contains two subunits, including
two Fe–S centers, FAD, and molybdopterin., EPR
spectroscopy with the use of spin traps allows measurement and quantitation
of •O2– production in enzyme and cellular systems,− and this has
been facilitated by the development of the phosphorus-containing nitrone
spin trap 5-(diethoxyphosphoryl)-5-methyl-1-pyrroline-N-oxide (DEPMPO) that forms long-lived •O2– adducts. The reaction
of •O2– with DEPMPO has been shown to proceed at a rate of ∼90
M–1 s–1 at pH 7 and room temperature
with a decay half-life of 890 s., In another
study using both the riboflavin–light and xanthine–xanthine
oxidase superoxide-generating systems, the DEPMPO trapping efficiency
was shown to be ∼65% with 40-fold more sensitivity than the
commonly used cytochrome c reduction method of superoxide
detection. The cytochrome c reduction method has also been shown to be nonspecific in that cytochrome c can be reduced directly by reactive cysteines and by direct
electron transfer from the redox-active centers of XDH and XO., Cytochrome c may also bind to XDH, slowing the
rate of •O2– production. Thus, measurement
of •O2– by DEPMPO spin trapping has the advantage of greater specificity
and a lack of perturbation of XDH or XO. The unique stability and
specificity of the DEPMPO •O2– spin trapping method makes it applicable
to complex biochemical systems such as XO and XDH.

We performed
a series of studies to definitively determine the
presence and magnitude of the production of •O2– from purified
chicken liver XDH in the presence of xanthine using EPR spin trapping.
These measurements of •O2– production are correlated with spectrophotometric
measurements of urate production. The concentration-dependent effects
of NAD+ and NADH on this process are determined. Finally,
measurements are performed to determine if the amount of •O2– production from tissue levels of XDH and xanthine is sufficient
to induce oxidative injury of the critical Ca2+-regulating
ATPase pump of cardiac muscle, thus contributing to ischemia-reperfusion
injury.

Materials and Methods
Materials
XDH was purified as reported
previously by
homogenization of fresh chicken livers in liquid nitrogen, followed
by centrifugation, ammonium sulfate and butanol fractionation, and
sequential chromatography on hydroxyapatite, Sephacryl S-300, and
a folate affinity column. This procedure avoids the use of acetone
extraction, thereby minimizing damage to the Mo center of this enzyme., XO [grade III, from buttermilk, chromatographically purified, in
2.3 M (NH4)2SO4 and 10 mM sodium
phosphate buffer (pH 7.8) containing 1 mM EDTA and 1 mM sodium salicylate]
was obtained from Sigma. The salicylate was removed chromatographically
with Sephadex G-25 prior to use. Xanthine, NAD+, and NADH
were also obtained from Sigma. The spin trap 5-(diethoxyphosphoryl)-5-methyl-1-pyrroline-N-oxide (DEPMPO) was purchased from Oxis.

Spectrophotometric
Measurements
UV–visible absorption
spectra of either XDH or XO and enzyme assays were performed with
a Varian Cary 300 UV–visible spectrophotometer equipped with
a temperature-controlled circulator. Xanthine-O2 activity
was assayed in air-equilibrated PBS (pH 7.4) solutions at 25 °C
after addition of xanthine (360 μM) by measurement of the production
of uric acid from the change in absorbance at 295 nm (ε = 9500
M–1 cm–1). Xanthine-NAD+ activity was measured at 25 °C in PBS (pH 7.4) after addition
of xanthine (360 μM) and NAD+ by measurement of the
production of uric acid.

EPR Measurements
All EPR measurements
were performed
using Bruker ER 300 or ESP 300E spectrometers operating at X-band
with TM110 cavity resonators. The microwave frequency was
measured with an EIP model 575 microwave counter (EIP Microwave, Inc.,
San Jose, CA). To assess •O2– generation, EPR spin trapping studies
were performed using the spin trap DEPMPO., The following instrument settings were used in the spin trapping
experiments: modulation amplitude, 0.32 G; time constant, 0.16 s;
scan time, 60 s; modulation frequency, 100 kHz; microwave power, 20
mW; microwave frequency, 9.76 GHz. The samples were placed in a quartz
EPR flat cell, and spectra were recorded at ambient temperature (25
°C). The collection of EPR data was started 2 min after the addition
of xanthine. The component signals observed in these spectra were
identified and quantified as reported. The double integrals of DEPMPO-OOH
experimental spectra were compared with those of a 1 μM TEMPO
sample measured under identical settings to estimate the concentration
of the •O2– adduct.,

Sarcoplasmic Reticulum
Preparation
Cardiac sarcoplasmic
reticulum (SR) vesicles were isolated from the left ventricle of healthy,
filarial free beagle dogs as follows.− Dogs were anesthetized
with sodium pentobarbital (25 mg/kg), and the heart was excised rapidly
and placed in an ice-cold saline solution. Muscle (50 g) was minced
and homogenized in imidazole buffer (pH 7) at 4 °C in an Excel
autohomogenizer (DX-8, Nihon Seiki, Tokyo, Japan). The homogenate
was centrifuged at 4000g for 20 min. The supernatant
was saved, and the pellet was again homogenized and centrifuged. The
combined supernatants were filtered through four layers of cheesecloth
and centrifuged at 10000g for 15 min. The supernatant
was then filtered through eight layers of cheesecloth and centrifuged
at 31000g for 1 h. The pellets were rehomogenized
in 1 M KCl, 10 mM imidazole buffer by use of a teflon pestle and then
centrifuged at 145000g for 1 h. The final pellet
was resusupended in 30% sucrose and 10 mM imidazole (pH 7.0) to a
final concentration as determined by the method of Lowry et al. The
isolated SR was stored at −80 °C until it was used.

Measurement of Ca2+-ATPase Activity
The
Ca2+-ATPase activity of cardiac SR was determined as the
rate at which inorganic phosphate (Pi) was liberated during
the incubation. The incubation bath (5 mL) was kept at 37 °C
and contained 100 mM KCl, 20 mM imidazole buffer (pH 7.0), 10 mM NaN3, 10 mM potassium oxalate, 5 mM Na2ATP, 5 mM MgCl2, and 200 μM CaCl2. The released phosphate
in the filtrate was assayed by a colorimetric method. The Ca2+-ATPase activity was calculated as the
difference in ATPase rate in a bath containing 200 μM Ca2+ compared to one containing 0.02 M EGTA.−,,

Statistical Analysis
All experiments were performed
in triplicate and repeated at least three times. Results are expressed
as means ± the standard error of the mean (SEM). Statistical
analysis was performed by a Student’s t-test
or a one-way analysis of variance. Significance was defined at the p &lt; 0.05 level.

Results
Generation
of •O2– from XDH Compared to XO
Initial experiments were
performed to measure the magnitude of generation of •O2– from XDH in the
presence of xanthine and to compare this to that from similar amounts
of XO. Experiments were performed using the spin trap DEPMPO that
provides a stable •O2– adduct. The
DEPMPO was free of any background signal, and in the presence of XO
or XDH alone, no signal was seen (Figure A,B,
traces a and b). However, upon addition of xanthine to XO, a characteristic
DEPMPO-OOH adduct spectrum was seen with hyperfine splitting giving
rise to 12 resolved peaks (Figure A, trace
c). In addition to the large signal of DEPMPO-OOH, a small signal
of DEPMPO-OH was observed as reported previously., The •O2–-derived DEPMPO-OOH adduct comprised 92% of the total intensity
and the DEPMPO-OH adduct 8%. Upon addition of xanthine to XDH, a similar
DEPMPO-OOH signal was observed; however, the intensity of this signal
was approximately 40–50% lower than that seen with identical
amounts of XO (Figure B, trace c). A large
signal of DEPMPO-OOH comprising 80% of the total intensity and a small
DEPMPO-OH component of 20% was observed. With both XO and XDH, these
signals were quenched by SOD (150 units/mL), confirming that they
were derived from •O2– (Figure A,B,
trace d). The time course of •O2– generation was measured,
and it was observed that over a period of 30 min both enzymes support
a similar sustained process of •O2– generation (Figure A). In a series of repeat experiments, a similar
process of •O2– generation was seen with the magnitude of generation
by XDH being 55% of that of XO (Figure B).
These data suggest that XDH can generate •O2– in the presence
of xanthine in a manner similar to that with XO, although the magnitude
is somewhat lower. A simulation of a representative EPR spectrum resulting
from the xanthine oxidase–xanthine reaction in the presence
of DEPMPO is provided in Figure S1 of the .

EPR spectra of the DEPMPO-OOH adduct in phosphate-buffered
saline.
The superoxide radicals were generated from XO or XDH using xanthine.
(A) EPR spin trapping measurement of generation of •O2– from XO (0.1
μM) with the addition of xanthine (360 μM) in 0.1 M PBS
(pH 7.4): (a) incubation of DEPMPO (10 mM) without XO and xanthine,
(b) incubation of DEPMPO (10 mM) and XO without xanthine, (c) incubation
of DEPMPO (10 mM) and XO with the addition of xanthine (a prominent
spectrum of DEPMPO-OOH with only a small signal of DEPMPO-OH is seen
with relative intensities of 92 and 8%, respectively), and (d) incubation
of DEPMPO (10 mM), XO, and xanthine in the presence of SOD (150 units/mL)
(the intensity of the DEPMPO-OOH signal was greatly diminished). (B)
EPR spin trapping measurement of generation of •O2– from XDH (0.1
μM) with the addition of xanthine (360 μM) in 0.1 M PBS
(pH 7.4): (a) incubation of DEPMPO (10 mM) without XDH and xanthine,
(b) incubation of DEPMPO and XDH without xanthine, (c) incubation
of DEPMPO (10 mM) and XDH with the addition of xanthine (a prominent
spectrum of DEPMPO-OH is seen with relative intensities of 80 and
20%), and (d) incubation of DEPMPO (10 mM), XDH, and xanthine in the
presence of SOD (150 units/mL) (the intensity of the DEPMPO-OOH signal
was greatly diminished).

Time course of generation of •O2– from XO or XDH. (A) Time
courses of generation of •O2– from XO (0.1 μM) and XDH (0.1
μM) and pretreatment of XO or XDH with SOD (150 units/mL) measured
by EPR spin trapping following the addition of xanthine (360 μM).
The reaction mixture was incubated for 2 min for each time course.
(B) DEPMPO spin concentration of generation of •O2– from XO (0.1
μM) or XDH (0.1 μM) measured by EPR spin trapping following
the addition of xanthine. Data are presented as means ± the standard
error of triplicate experiments. *Significant (p &lt;
0.01) difference from the corresponding value of the XO–xanthine
system.

Effects of NADH or NAD+ on Generation of •O2– from XDH and XO
Experiments
were performed to investigate
the effects of NADH and NAD+ on this XDH-mediated •O2– generation. During ischemia, tissue xanthine and NADH levels are markedly
increased compared to those in normally perfused tissues. Oxidation
of NADH by XDH also could produce a significant amount of •O2–.,− We examined the effects
of NADH on the generation of •O2– by XDH or XO. When NADH (0.1–1
mM) was added to XDH and this was immediately followed by addition
of xanthine, a dose-dependent inhibition of •O2– generation was
observed (Figures A and A). Approximately 50 or 75% inhibition was seen with 0.1 or 0.5 mM
NADH, respectively. In experiments when NAD+ (0.1–1
mM) was added to XDH immediately followed by addition of xanthine,
a dose-dependent inhibition of •O2– generation was observed (Figures B and B). Approximately
70 or 90% inhibition was seen with 0.1 or 0.5 mM NAD+,
respectively.

Dose-dependent effects of NADH or NAD+ on the
generation
of •O2– from XDH. (A) EPR spectra of the DEPMPO-OOH adduct in 0.1
M PBS (pH 7.4). EPR spin trapping measurements of •O2– generation from
XDH (0.1 μM) and various concentrations of NADH (0–1
mM) with the addition of xanthine (360 μM) were taken in the
presence of DEPMPO (10 mM): (a) 0, (b) 0.1, (c) 0.5, and (d) 1.0 mM
NADH. (B) EPR spin trapping measurements of •O2– generation from
XDH (0.1 μM) and various concentrations of NAD+ (0–1
mM) with the addition of xanthine (360 μM) were taken in the
presence of DEPMPO (10 mM): (a) 0, (b) 0.1, (c) 0.5, and (d) 1.0 mM
NAD+.

Dose-dependent effects
of NADH or NAD+ on the generation
of •O2– from XDH. (A) XDH (0.1 μM) was pretreated with NADH
(0–1 mM) as described in the legend of Figure . (B) XDH (0.1 μM) was pretreated with NAD+ (0–1 mM) as described in the legend of Figure . Data are presented as means ± the standard error of
triplicate experiments.

We also measured the dose-dependent effects of NADH on the
generation
of •O2– from XO. NADH clearly decreased the rate of •O2– generation in
a dose-dependent manner, but much higher levels were required with
50% inhibition seen only above 1 mM NADH (Table ). The dose-dependent effects of NAD+ on the generation
of •O2– from XO were also measured, and it was observed that NAD+ did not inhibit the generation of •O2– from XO (data
not shown).

Dose-Dependent Effects of NADH on •O2– Generation and Xanthine-O2 Activity of Xanthine
Oxidase (XO)
[NADH] (mM)	•O2– generation (% of control)	% of
initial xanthine-O2 activity	
0.1	96.09 ± 3.91	103.62 ± 3.26	
0.5	82.79 ± 2.61	90.85 ± 8.89	
1.0	66.20 ± 2.04	83.45 ± 4.47	
2.0	43.92 ± 2.14	53.83 ± 3.45	
3.0	25.49 ± 2.36	33.34 ± 5.92	
NADH (0–3 mM) was added to
XO (0.1 μM) as described in the legend of Figure . •O2– generation was measured by EPR spin trapping
using DEPMPO, and xanthine-O2 activity was measured via
a spectrophotometric assay of urate production monitored at 295 nm.
Both were performed with addition of xanthine (360 μM) to the
reaction mixture. Data are presented as means ± the standard
error of triplicate experiments.

Significantly different (p &lt; 0.05) from the
corresponding control value.

Thus, both NADH and NAD+ inhibit the generation of •O2– from XDH in the presence of xanthine, but NAD+ exhibits
stronger inhibition at low (0.1–0.5 mM) physiological concentrations.
With XO, however, NAD+ did not inhibit •O2– generation even
at &gt;2 mM, while 2 mM NADH was required to reach just &gt;50% inhibition.

Effects of NADH on Xanthine-O2 Activity
To determine
if NADH inhibits not only •O2– generation but
also the conversion of xanthine to urate, we examined the effects
of NADH on xanthine-O2 activity of XDH and XO. When NADH
(0.1–3 mM) was added to XDH and this was immediately followed
by the addition of xanthine, a dose-dependent inhibition of xanthine-O2 activity was observed (Table ). With
NADH concentrations of 2 mM, more than 50% inhibition was seen. The
dose-dependent effects of NADH on the xanthine-O2 activity
of XO were also measured, and it was seen that NADH decreased xanthine-O2 activity in a dose-dependent manner; however, much like the
measurements of •O2– generation, higher NADH levels were required
to inhibit the activity of XO versus XDH (Table ). Thus, these data demonstrate that NADH significantly depressed
XDH- or XO-mediated •O2– generation because of the inhibition
of xanthine-O2 activity.

Dose-Dependent Effects
of NADH on
the Activity of Xanthine Dehydrogenase (XDH)
[NADH] (mM)	% of initial xanthine-O2 activity	% of initial xanthine-NAD+ activity	
0.1	75.3 ± 1.1	–	
0.5	59.7 ± 0.8	71.4 ± 3.6	
1.0	51.2 ± 0.7	51.0 ± 3.4	
2.0	44.9 ± 1.1	37.6 ± 4.8	
3.0	23.8 ± 4.2	22.3 ± 3.5	
NADH (0–3
mM) was added to
XDH (0.1 μM) as described in the text. Xanthine-O2 activity was measured from a spectrophotometric assay of urate production
monitored at 295 nm. Xanthine-NAD+ activity, in the presence
of NAD+ 0.5 mM, was measured by urate formation. Measurements
were performed with addition of xanthine (360 μM) to the reaction
mixture. Data are presented as means ± the standard error of
triplicate experiments.

Significantly different (p &lt; 0.05) from the corresponding
control value.

Significantly
different (p &lt; 0.05) from the corresponding control
value of the
treated XDH–xanthine system (0.5 mM NAD+).

Effects of NADH on Xanthine-NAD+ Activity
To further determine the dose-dependent effects
of NADH on the conversion
of xanthine to urate mediated by XDH in the presence of NAD+, the xanthine-NAD+ activity of XDH was measured. When
NADH was added to XDH in the presence of NAD+ and this
was immediately followed by the addition of xanthine, a dose-dependent
inhibition of urate formation was observed (Table ). These observations indicate that NADH inhibits XDH-mediated
reduction of NAD+.

Effects of NAD+ on Xanthine-NAD+ Activity
of XDH and XO
To correlate the effects of NAD+ on •O2– generation with that on enzyme activity measured from the
conversion of xanthine to urate, we examined the effects of NAD+ on the activity of XO and XDH. With XO, NAD+ levels
of up to 2 mM did not alter XO activity as measured by urate formation.
This is consistent with the role of O2 as the requisite
electron acceptor. With XDH, however, because NAD+ is the
preferred substrate in the oxidative half-reaction, an increased level
of uric acid formation was observed in accordance with the NAD+ concentration (Table ).

Dose-Dependent Effects of NAD+ on the Activity of Xanthine
Dehydrogenase (XDH)
[NAD+] (mM)	% of the maximal
xanthine-NAD+ activity	
0.0	13.0 ± 0.5	
0.1	39.3 ± 2.8	
0.3	83.9 ± 6.1	
0.5	91.0 ± 3.5	
1.0	99.1 ± 5.3	
2.0	100 ± 7.0	
NAD+ (0–2 mM)
was added to XDH (0.1 μM) as described in the text. Xanthine-NAD+ activity was measured from a spectrophotometric assay of
urate production monitored at 295 nm. Measurements were performed
with addition of xanthine (360 μM) to the reaction mixture.
Data are presented as means ± the standard error of triplicate
experiments.

Significantly
different (p &lt; 0.05) from the value in the absence
of NAD+.

Effects of
Oxygen Radicals Generated by the XDH–Xanthine
System on Ca2+-ATPase Activity of Cardiac SR
We
and others have shown that the Ca2+-ATPase of SR is highly
sensitive to oxidative damage.−,, To determine if the process of XDH-mediated
radical generation can be physiologically significant and to compare
this to that from XO, we examined the effects of oxygen radicals generated
from XDH or XO on Ca2+-ATPase activity of isolated SR from
canine cardiac muscle. XO and XDH were used at a concentration of
0.1 μM, comparable to that measured in cardiac tissue, with
xanthine levels of 360 μM similar to those formed in ischemic
myocardium., Significant inhibition of Ca2+-ATPase activity was seen in both the XDH–xanthine
system and the XO–xanthine system (Figure ). We also measured the effects of NADH or NAD+ on XDH–xanthine-mediated inhibition of Ca2+-ATPase
activity. In the presence of either NADH or NAD+, only
a modest decrease in the loss of Ca2+-ATPase activity was
seen relative to that seen after adding only xanthine with significant
inhibition in activity still remaining (Figure ). These observations clearly suggested that oxygen radicals generated
from XDH could cause the disruption of Ca2+-ATPase activity
of cardiac SR in a manner similar to that seen with XO.

Effects of
XO or XDH with xanthine, NAD+, and NADH on
Ca2+-ATPase activity of cardiac sarcoplasmic reticulum
(SR). Cardiac SR (50 μg/mL) was incubated with XO (0.1 μM)
or XDH (0.1 μM) alone and with xanthine (X) (360 μM) for
30 min before the reaction was begun with Ca2+, Mg2+, and ATP in the presence or absence of NADH (0.5 mM) or
NAD+ (0.5 mM). Ca2+-ATPase activity measured
as described in . Control
reaction denoted by C. Data are presented as means ± the standard
error of triplicate experiments. *Significantly different (p &lt; 0.01) from the corresponding control value.

Discussion
Xanthine
oxidoreductase (XOR) is a critical source of oxygen free
radicals in biological cells and tissues and plays an important role
in oxygen radical generation and the pathogenesis of injury following
postischemic reperfusion.,, It has been demonstrated that XO is critically important in the
mechanism of postischemic radical generation; however, it was previously
assumed that all radical generation from (XOR) was solely derived
from the oxidase form with none arising from the dehydrogenase, which
is typically more than 90% of the total XOR pool., This extends from the original proposal of McCord that the conversion
of XDH to XO was required for oxygen radical generation. On this basis, attention over the last two decades
has focused largely on conditions that convert XDH to XO,,,, as the critical trigger of radical generation.

We have previously studied and characterized the process and mechanism
of postischemic radical generation in isolated hearts.,, In the isolated rat heart model,
we have observed, using EPR spin trapping, that there is a burst of
radical generation occurring over the early minutes of reperfusion
and that most of this can be inhibited by XOR inhibitors such as allopurinol
or oxypurinol. The time course of this
radical generation paralleled that of XOR substrate levels in the
heart that increase during ischemia and then decline upon reflow. Only modest conversion of XDH to XO was observed,
and the process of radical generation was clearly seen to be linked
to that of the XOR substrates xanthine and hypoxanthine. It was further
observed that inhibitors of adenosine deaminase that blocked this
substrate formation also ameliorated radical generation and injury. However, in prior studies in the biomedical
literature, it was assumed that XO was absolutely required for this
radical generation with no contribution from the predominant dehydrogenase
form.

Mammalian XDH can be readily converted to XO by oxidation
of cysteine
sulfhydryl residues or by proteolysis during extraction or purification
procedures., Therefore, these studies utilized XDH isolated
from chicken liver that has the unique property of being locked in
the dehydrogenase form while retaining enzymatic properties comparable
to those of mammalian XDH., Detailed in
vitro studies of chicken liver XDH have demonstrated that
the FAD center is the site of the oxidative half-reaction, with both
NAD+ and O2 functioning as electron acceptors., It was also demonstrated that, as with the oxidase form of the enzyme, •O2– is generated only in the slower steps of the reaction between
the FAD semiquinone and O2 at a second-order reaction rate
of ∼260 M–1 s–1 (pH 7.8
and 4 °C). For the XDH form of the enzyme, NAD+ is
a much more effective oxidant than O2 and outcompetes the
O2 for the reducing equivalents in the enzyme. NAD+ reoxidizes reduced chicken liver XDH at a kox of ∼27 s–1 and a Kd of ∼80 μM. Very little •O2– is generated because very little O2 is reduced because of the much slower rate of reaction. In addition
to NAD+ limiting •O2– generation by reacting with
the reduced enzyme faster than O2, binding of NAD+ (and NADH) to the XDH form of the enzyme is expected to block the
access of O2 to the FAD center based on the known protein
crystal structure., On the basis of these insights,
we performed experiments to directly monitor •O2– generation from
both XDH and XO using EPR spin trapping. Our studies provide direct
evidence that XDH in the presence of xanthine can produce a large
amount of •O2– in a manner similar to that of XO (Figures  and ) and that this •O2– generation can be modulated by the levels of NAD+ and NADH (Figures  and ).

In this study, EPR spin trapping measurements with
the use of DEPMPO
demonstrated the formation of the DEPMPO-OOH adduct that is specific
for •O2–. We assessed the quantity and
time course of the production of •O2– from XDH by comparing the
relative rate of •O2– production from XDH to that from XO,
and we observed that the rate of •O2– production from XDH was 55%
of that from XO for the xanthine-O2 reaction.

We
observed that the production of •O2– from XDH in the presence
of xanthine was modulated by both NAD+ and NADH, which
exerted prominent concentration-dependent inhibition of •O2– production. NAD+, however, exerted stronger inhibition
at lower concentrations than that of NADH, as expected because of
its effectiveness as an oxidant for XDH. Approximately 70 or 90% inhibition
was seen with 0.1 or 0.5 mM NAD+, respectively, while approximately
50 or 75% inhibition was seen with 0.1 or 0.5 mM NADH, respectively.
This is in contrast to the inhibition seen with XO in the presence
of xanthine that was affected by only NADH and not by NAD+ (Table ). Even with 1 mM NADH, only approximately
30% inhibition of XO-derived •O2– generation occurred. With
XDH, however, 1 mM NADH or NAD+ induced &gt;90 or &gt;95%
inhibition,
respectively. Thus, for cellular levels of the NAD+/NADH
pool that are typically in the range of 0.1–0.5 mM, prominent dose-dependent inhibition of production
of •O2– from XDH was greater with NAD+ than NADH, while
for XO, only modest inhibition was seen with only NADH and not with
NAD+. The turnover numbers for the various reactivities
of chicken liver XDH have been determined to be 102 min–1 for the xanthine–NAD+ reductase reaction, 43 min–1 for the xanthine–O2 reductase reaction,
and 2 min–1 for the NADH–O2 reductase
reaction (pH 7.8 and 4 °C), which suggested that NADH or NAD+ binds near the reduced flavin, blocking access and thereby
slowing its reactivity with O2.

It was also observed that NADH inhibited the activity of XDH
measured
from urate production in the presence of the substrate xanthine. This
was true in the presence or absence of NAD+. This inhibition
paralleled the observed decrease in •O2– production. Similarly,
higher levels of NADH inhibited the activity of XO. This suggests
that NADH associates with the FAD site of XDH or XO and competes with
either NAD+ or O2 for binding at this site,
thus impeding electron transfer. While the inhibition observed in
urate formation was also dose-dependent and largely paralleled that
seen for •O2– production, in general this inhibition of activity was somewhat
lower than that of •O2– production. Because XO or XDH can reduce
O2 to either •O2– or H2O2, this
may suggest that NADH induces a shift to the two-electron reduction
of O2 to H2O2. It should also be noted that both XDH and XO have a NADH–O2 reductase activity in which there is an obligatory two-electron
reduction of the FAD center by NADH to give FADH2.

The physiological or pathophysiological relevance of the modulation
of •O2– generation and XDH function by NADH or NAD+ can
be considered in view of the levels of NADH or NAD+ required
to regulate the generation of •O2– from XDH. In normal tissues,
the cellular concentrations of the NADH and NAD+ pool have
been measured to be in the range of 0.25–0.5 mM. In normal oxygenated myocardium, most of the
pool would be in the oxidized form as NAD+.,, However, with the marked hypoxia
and reduced state during ischemia, the pool would be almost totally
reduced. During ischemia, ATP is degraded
to form the XO substrates hypoxanthine and xanthine. It has also been observed that the levels of the NADH and
NAD+ pool are decreased by a factor of more than 2 over
the first 40 min after reperfusion, and this has been attributed to
the activation of the enzyme poly-ADPribose polymerase. Overall, the lower levels of the total pool
and NAD+ in particular would enhance the production of •O2– from XDH. During ischemia, this would be limited by the O2 levels in the myocardium, and •O2– generation would then
be further stimulated with a prominent increase in the level of O2 upon reperfusion.

In the
heart after ischemia for 30 min, intracellular concentrations
of xanthine and hypoxanthine have been observed to increase from preischemic
levels of &lt;0.5 to 500–600 μM., The activity of XO in the ischemic heart has been measured to be
∼10 milliunits/g of protein and that of XDH to be ∼130
milliunits/g of protein., Thus, most of the XOR
is in the reductase form. While after reperfusion we have previously
observed a doubling in the levels of XO, still almost 90% of the enzyme
remains in the form of XDH. The levels of XOR reported in the heart
correspond to concentrations of ∼0.1 μM.

We considered
whether the levels of XDH and its substrates in the
postischemic heart could result in sufficient radical generation to
be functionally significant in the pathogenesis of myocardial injury.
A hallmark of postischemic myocardial injury is an alteration in Ca2+ regulation due to oxidant-induced dysfunction of sarcoplasmic
reticulum Ca2+-ATPase. We used this phenomenon to determine
the effects of tissue levels of XDH in the presence of xanthine levels
formed during myocardial ischemia. It was observed that the XDH-mediated
oxygen radical generation markedly depressed Ca2+-ATPase
activity (Figure ). Furthermore, while 0.5
mM levels of either NAD+ or NADH lessened the degree of
Ca2+-ATPase impairment, depressed activity was still apparent
(Figure ). This suggests that XDH-mediated
oxidant injury of cardiac muscle does occur in postischemic tissues
and that this process is modulated by the tissue levels of NADH and
NAD+.

One can consider the effect of cellular redox
state on the production
of radicals from XOR. Overall, it was observed that the levels of
NADH and NAD+ as well as their relative amount profoundly
modulated the generation of •O2– from XDH (Figure ). The production of •O2– by XDH was found to
be redox-regulated with more production under reduced conditions with
a higher proportion of the NAD(H) pool in the reduced state. An oxidant
shift in the redox state with elevated NAD+ levels would
decrease the level of generation of •O2– from XDH and perhaps
serve as a feedback mechanism or brake to prevent oxidative injury
from XDH. However, major oxidant stress would induce the conversion
of the reductase to the oxidase, which is unaffected by NAD+ and only modestly inhibited by higher levels of NADH. This may indicate
that XDH, with its lower level and strongly NAD+-regulated •O2– generation, normally serves a signaling role that is tightly
redox controlled, while under conditions of major oxidant stress conversion
to XO removes this regulation, triggering higher levels of radical
generation leading to cellular injury and death. Indeed, in postischemic
myocardium, it is anticipated that the initial production of •O2– from XDH, which is enhanced by the reduced state of the myocardium
and NAD+ depletion, could then trigger its subsequent partial
conversion to XO.

In conclusion, our results indicate that XDH
can be an important
source of •O2– generation in cells and tissues. Its xanthine-mediated •O2– generation is regulated by the cellular levels of NAD(H) and
the cellular redox state. Under normal conditions, XDH-mediated oxygen
radical generation is redox-regulated and can serve a homeostatic
role in cell signaling; however, under conditions of ischemia and
reperfusion, this pathway is greatly enhanced and can lead to oxidative
cellular injury with impaired calcium regulation. Because XDH is the
predominant form of XOR in normal tissues, XDH-mediated •O2– generation can play an important role in cellular signaling and
injury.

Supporting Information Available
A simulation of a representative
EPR spectrum resulting from the xanthine oxidase–xanthine reaction
in the presence of DEPMPO (Figure S1) and all the experimental and
simulation parameters (figure legend). This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500582r_si_001.pdf

This work was
supported by National Institutes of Health Grants HL63744, HL65608,
HL38324 (J.L.Z.), and GM 075036 (R.H.). The part of this work performed
at the Research Center of Advanced Technology for Craniomandibular
Function of the Kanagawa Dental University was also supported by grants-in-aid
for Bioventure Research from the Japanese Ministry of Education, Science,
and Culture.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Dedication
We acknowledge and
dedicate this work to Dr. Vincent Massey who encouraged us to undertake
these studies to clarify the role of xanthine dehydrogenase in oxidant
production.

Abbreviations
XDHxanthine dehydrogenase

Fe–Siron–sulfur

FADflavin adenine
dinucleotide

XOxanthine oxidase

•O2–superoxide

EPRelectron paramagnetic
resonance

DEPMPO5-(diethoxyphosphoryl)-5-methyl-1-pyrroline-N-oxide

SRsarcoplasmic reticulum.

