Thioredoxin reductases (TRs) are
homodimeric flavin-containing oxidoreductases
that reduce the macromolecular substrate thioredoxin (Trx), thereby
serving an important line of antioxidant defense in the cell. Two major classes of TRs are known: (i) low-molecular
mass (Mr) TRs (∼35 kDa per monomer)
found in Escherichia coli and other lower prokaryotes
and (ii) high-Mr TRs (55–60 kDa
per monomer) found in higher eukaryotes and Plasmodium
falciparum as discussed in this report. Both types of TRs
contain a tightly bound FAD and an N-terminal redox center with a
CVNVGC sequence; however, high-Mr TRs
contain a third redox center housed on a C-terminal extension of the
enzyme, not present in low-Mr TRs., Because of these structural differences, high- and low-Mr TRs have evolved dissimilar catalytic mechanisms for
the reduction of Trx.,

High-Mr TRs can be classified into
two groups based upon different substrate utilization patterns., Type I TRs contain a C-terminal redox center that uses either a
cysteine-selenocysteine
(Cys–Sec) redox dyad (type Ia) or a Cys–Cys redox dyad
(type Ib). The TR from P. falciparum (PfTR) represents
a distinct type of high-Mr TR (type II)
because instead of using a vicinal arrangement of redox active residues
(Cys-Sec or Cys-Cys), it uses a spacer of four residues to separate
the two redox active Cys residues for a sequence of G534C1GGGKC2G541. To the best of our knowledge, type II TRs have been identified only
in apicomplexan protists, including P. falciparum,,Cryptosporidium parvum, and Toxoplasma gondii.

PfTR
is a validated antimalarial drug target because of its requirement
for the parasite’s survival during the erythrocytic stage of
its life cycle. This observation and
the importance of PfTR to the overall
redox biology of the organism have spurred structural and mechanistic
investigations into PfTR, with the goal of developing PfTR-targeted
antimalarial inhibitors
and/or drugs.,− These studies have shown that the type II PfTR has the same general
protein architecture as type I TRs, including (i) a head-to-tail arrangement
of the homodimer, (ii) a NADPH binding site, (iii) a conserved Rossman
fold that binds FAD, (iv) the same N-terminal redox center CCTVNVGCIC, (v) a general acid–base
His–Glu dyad, (vi) a C-terminal redox center that uses two
redox active residues, Cys1 and Cys2,, and (vii) a mechanism of Trx reduction analogous to that of its
type
I homologues. The flow of electrons in both types of high-Mr TRs proceeds from NADPH to FAD, then to the
N-terminal redox
center, followed by transfer to the C-terminal redox center of the
opposite subunit of the homodimeric enzyme, and finally to the substrate,
Trx. Both Cys residues of the C-terminal redox center are required
for effective Trx reduction. A truncated
PfTR missing this C-terminal redox center
is still capable of reducing small substrates such as DTNB, in a manner
analogous to that of truncated TRs from mouse mitochondria, Drosophila melanogaster, and Caenorhabditis elegans.,

Recently, Becker and co-workers determined
the crystal structure of the PfTR–PfTrx complex,
providing an insightful glimpse of the structure adopted by the type
II C-terminal redox motif. The C-terminal
redox motif of PfTR forms an antiparallel
β–turn−β motif that is stabilized by (i)
intramolecular hydrogen bonds with His438′, (ii) intrastrand
interactions, and (iii) intermolecular hydrogen bonds with PfTrx in
the PfTR–PfTrx complex (Figure A).
The structure of the complex shows that a mixed disulfide bond is
formed between Cys540′ of PfTR and Cys30
of PfTrx, providing solid evidence that the C-terminal Cys2 residue is the nucleophile that attacks PfTrx. This is analogous
to human TR in which the Sec residue of the Cys–Sec dyad attacks
the disulfide bond of human Trx. While
the overall mechanism of PfTR is highly similar
to that of type I TRs, little is known about possible catalytic roles
served by the bridging (underlined) and flanking amino acids of the
C-terminal redox motif (G534C1GGGKC2G541) of PfTR and how this motif functionally
differs from the vicinal Cys-Sec and Cys-Cys motif found in type I
TRs.

(A) C-Terminal redox center of PfTR in complex with PfTrx. This
figure is adapted from Figure 2 of ref (). The β–turn−β motif
is shown with carbonyl oxygen atoms colored red and amide nitrogen
atoms blue. Residues from PfTrx are colored green. Hydrogen bonds
are shown as dashed lines (magenta). A key stabilizing intrastrand
interaction is the hydrogen bond between the NH group of Gly541′
and the carbonyl of Gly534′. The sulfur atoms of Cys535′
and Cys540′ are labeled as S1 and S2,
respectively (bold black). In this “out” position of
the β–turn−β motif, Cys540′ is involved
in a mixed disulfide bond with Cys30 of PfTrx in the complex. The His438′–water dyad is proposed
to act as an acid–base catalyst to deprotonate S1 of Cys535′ so that this thiolate can resolve the mixed disulfide
bond of the complex. This interaction
is shown here as a hydrogen bond between S1 and His438′.
(B) Here the β–turn−β motif is shown in
the “in” position. After Cys535′ resolves the
mixed disulfide bond of the complex, a disulfide bond is formed between
Cys535′ and Cys540′. The β–turn−β
motif then moves 20 Å toward the interior of the enzyme so that
this C-terminal redox center can be reduced by the N-terminal redox
center. Shown here are the interchange Cys residue (CysIC) and the His509′–Glu514′ dyad that is known
to be the general acid–base catalyst for this thiol–disulfide
exchange reaction. His509′ is important for our proposed electrophilic
activation mechanism.

Explanation of the high activity with Sec that is observed in chimeric
PfTR 12. (A) The chimeric PfTR enzyme 12, containing a type I C-terminal redox center with a Cys1–Sec2 dyad, has high activity because (i) it can
attack the disulfide bond of Trx efficiently because the selenolate
is a good nucleophile and (ii) the selenium atom of the selenosulfide
bond is a good electrophile and accelerates the flow of electrons
from the N-terminal redox center to the C-terminal redox center. (B)
When the selenium atom is replaced with sulfur as in chimeric enzyme 11, there is little activity for the opposite reasons stated
above: the thiolate is a weaker nucleophile, and the Cys1–Cys2 disulfide bond of the mutant C-terminal redox
center is a weaker electrophile (in this context), and this inhibits
the flow of electrons from the N-terminal redox center to the C-terminal
disulfide. As depicted here, this is because the disulfide bond is
not polarized (even sharing of electrons) as much as the S–Se
bond.

For example, it has been shown
that serine (Ser) residues adjacent
to the Cys–Cys dyad in the TR from D. melanogaster (DmTR) help make the attacking thiolate more nucleophilic by helping
to stabilize the negative charge. It
is thought that these adjacent Ser residues help
DmTR compensate for the absence of the chemically more reactive Sec
residue of the mammalian enzyme. As PfTR lacks Ser residues in its
C-terminal redox center, we investigated the hypothesis that the bridging
lysine (Lys) residue of the PfTR C-terminal redox center performs
a similar function. Another feature of the C-terminal redox center
of PfTR is that it will form a 20-membered ring in the oxidized state
because of the presence of the four bridging residues between the
redox active Cys residues. This redox center differs from the type
I TRs that form an eight-membered ring between either adjacent Cys–Sec
residues (mammalian TR) or adjacent Cys–Cys residues found
in insect TRs from D. melanogaster and Anopheles
gambiae.

Interestingly,
PfTR can reduce PfTrx with an efficiency nearly
the same as that with which human TR reduces human Trx, yet its C-terminal redox center is unique and
distinct
in comparison. Here, we investigate the features of the C-terminal
redox center that allow it to perform efficient catalysis, including
(i) the bridging distance between the two redox active Cys residues,
(ii) the role of an intrastrand hydrogen bond in stabilizing the β–turn−β
motif, and (iii) the precise shape of the 20-membered ring by the
use of homocysteine (hCys) for Cys substitution. In addition, we show
that PfTR can still function after its type II redox center has been
replaced with a type I motif if the nucleophilic Cys2 residue
is replaced with Sec. The findings presented in this report reveal
novel mechanistic and functional characteristics of PfTR’s
C-terminal redox center that demonstrate the dependence on the native
type II C-terminal redox motif in conducting the reduction of Trx,
but not other small molecule substrates such as selenocystine and
lipoic acid.

Materials and
Methods
Materials
All mutagenic polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
primers utilized in the construction of PfTR mutants were purchased
from Integrated DNA Technologies (Coralville, IA). The Quickchange
site-directed mutagenesis kit was purchased from Agilent Technologies
(Santa Clara, CA). Vent DNA polymerase, NdeI, SapI, T4 DNA ligase, E. coli ER2566 competent cells, and chitin-agarose beads
were purchased from New England Biolabs (Ipswich, MA). GSH-sepharose
4 Fast Flow, benzamidine sepharose, and 2′-4′-ADP-sepharose
resins were obtained from GE Healthcare (Waukesha, WI). Sephacryl
S-200 resin was purchased from Amersham Pharmacia (Uppsala, Sweden).
NADPH was obtained from AppliChem (Darmstadt, Germany). N-(Methyl)mercaptoacetamide, βME, and dl-α-lipoic
were from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Bovine thrombin was purchased
from BioPharm Laboratories (Bluffdale, UT). l-Selenocystine
was from Acros Organics (Morris Plains, NJ). Hydrogen peroxide (30%
solution) and EDTA were purchased from Fisher Scientific (Fair Lawn,
NJ). All enzyme kinetic assays were performed on a Cary50 UV–vis
spectrophotometer (Cary, Walnut Creek, CA) and were conducted at
room temperature.

Site-Directed Mutagenesis To Generate Fully
Recombinant PfTR
Mutants
All enzymes in this study are numbered 1–13
as described in Tables –. Wild-type (WT) PfTR (enzyme 1) was
a gift from F. Angellucci of the University of Rome (Rome, Italy)
and is produced as a glutathione S-transferase fusion
protein (GST fusion) from a pGEX-4T-1 plasmid as described in the
next section. Enzymes 3–8 and 11 were
generated via site-directed
mutagenesis of the plasmid bearing the WT coding sequence utilizing
the Quickchange II kit from Agilent Technologies. The plasmids containing
the desired mutations were constructed by PCR amplification using
an Eppendorf Mastercycler PCR system. Mutagenesis was conducted with
the Pfu Ultra DNA polymerase (Agilent Technologies)
using 18 cycles under the following parameters: 95 °C for 50
s,
60 °C for 60 s, and 68 °C for 14 min. The remainder of the
site-directed mutagenesis
procedure was followed as per the manufacturer’s instructions.
All of the mutants were sequenced by the University of Vermont DNA
Sequencing Facility (Burlington, VT) using an ABI 3100-Avant genetic
analyzer.

Activities of WT PfTR and Mutant Enzymes
of the C-Terminal β–Turn−β Motif with Various
Substrates
 	 	mol of NADPH min–1 (mol of TR)−1	
enzyme	PfTR	90 μM
Trx	300 μM
selenocystine	5 mM lipoic
acid	
PfTR-GC1GGGKC2G	1	500 ± 20	410 ± 30	90 ± 10	
PfTRΔ7	2	ND	3 ± 0.2	140 ± 1	
PfTR-GC1GGGAC2G	3	375 ± 20	350 ± 15	65 ± 5	
PfTR-GC1GGGKC2	4	7 ± 0.5	185 ± 10	70 ± 3	
PfTR-GC1GGGKC2GG	5	290 ± 10	400 ± 20	90 ± 2	
In Tables –, the main body
of the enzyme is
abbreviated as PfTR. The amino acid sequence of the C-terminal redox
center is abbreviated with the one-letter amino acid codes representing
the final seven C-terminal amino acids. Thus, the WT enzyme is abbreviated
as PfTR-GC1GGGKC2G. Each of the mutants is denoted
similarly with the mutant sequence of amino acids of the C-terminal
redox center abbreviated with one-letter codes after the abbreviation
PfTR.

Recombinant protein
produced as
a GST fusion.

Recombinant
protein produced as
an intein fusion.

No detectable
activity.

Purification of PfTRs Expressed
as GST Fusion Constructs
Enzymes 1, 3–8, and 11 were expressed in ER2566 E. coli cells (New England Biolabs) and grown in Terrific
broth medium with supplementation with riboflavin, niacinamide, and
pyridoxine (20 mg/L each). The cell culture, containing 0.2 μg/mL
ampicillin, was grown at 37 °C until the OD600 reached
∼0.6.
The cells were then cooled to 20 °C, and expression was induced
by the addition of IPTG to a final concentration of 0.5 mM with subsequent
incubation overnight at 20 °C with shaking. After overnight incubation,
the cells were harvested by centrifugation (9000 rpm in a Beckman
J2-21
preparatory centrifuge for 10 min at 4 °C) and either used immediately
or frozen at −20 °C for later use. The harvested cell
pellet was homogenized
in buffer A [50 mM Tris-HCl, 200 mM NaCl, and 2 mM β-mercaptoethanol
(βME) (pH 7.4)] with the inclusion of 1 mg/mL chicken egg lysozyme
to aid in the lysis of bacterial cell walls. The homogenized cells
were further lysed by probe sonication, and the solution was cleared
by centrifugation at 12000 rpm in a Beckman J2-21 preparatory centrifuge
for 1 h at 4 °C. The cleared lysate was loaded by gravity onto
a column packed with
glutathione sepharose 4 fast flow resin (GE Healthcare) that had been
pre-equilibrated with buffer A. The loaded column was washed extensively
with buffer A followed by additional washing with buffer B [50 mM
Tris-HCl, 500 mM NaCl, and 2 mM βME (pH 7.4)]. After being washed,
the column was rendered as a slurry mix and transferred to two 50
mL conical tubes. Cleavage of the fusion protein was initiated by
addition of 500 U.S. units of bovine thrombin supplemented with 5
mM CaCl2 to the resin/protein slurry. The thrombin-mediated
cleavage of PfTR from the GST fusion protein proceeded overnight at
room temperature with constant agitation. After overnight incubation,
the protein/resin slurry was returned to the column and the liberated
PfTR enzyme was eluted off the resin by washing with buffer B. Fractions
were analyzed by UV–vis and sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis
(SDS–PAGE), and positive fractions were pooled and loaded onto
a benzamidine sepharose column (GE Healthcare) that had been pre-equilibrated
with 50 mM Tris-HCl, 500 mM NaCl buffer (pH 8.0). Under these conditions,
benzamidine sepharose binds thrombin with high affinity but does not
bind PfTR. This chromatographic step eliminates residual thrombin
from the sample. Following elution off the benzamidine column, fractions
containing PfTR were pooled and dialyzed overnight against a final
storage buffer [50 mM potassium phosphate, 500 mM NaCl, and 1 mM EDTA
(pH 8.0)]. The PfTR enzyme was judged to be pure and free of thrombin
by SDS–PAGE analysis (shown in Figure S1 of the ).

Production and Purification
of Semisynthetic PfTR Mutants
The production of semisynthetic
PfTR mutant constructs 9, 10, 12, and 13 was achieved
via intein-mediated peptide ligation in
a manner analogous to that previously described in our work with semisynthetic
TRs from mouse mitochondria and D. melanogaster., A truncated construct lacking the final seven C-terminal amino acids
(PfTRΔ7) was fused to the Sce VMA intein as
provided by New England Biolabs to produce a PfTRΔ7–intein
fusion protein. The PfTRΔ7 construct was generated through deletion
of the final seven C-terminal amino acids via PCR amplification of
the full length WT PfTR plasmid DNA template. The following primers
were used: upstream primer 5′-AACAGACATATGGGATCCTGCAAA-3′,
which introduced a NdeI restriction site, and downstream primer 5′-ACAGCCGCTCTTCAGCAACCACCTTT-3′,
which contained the seven-amino acid deletion, the insertion of a
Cys residue (required for thiol-mediated liberation from the intein),
and a SapI endonuclease restriction site. PCR was performed on an
Eppendorf Mastercycler using Vent DNA polymerase. The amplified DNA
was then digested with NdeI and SapI and shuttled into the pTYB1 expression
vector (New England Biolabs) with subsequent ligation conducted by
T4 DNA ligase. Sequencing of the PfTRΔ7 mutant was performed
at the University of Vermont DNA Sequencing Facility using an ABI
3100-Avant genetic analyzer.

The semisynthetic PfTR enzymes
were produced via ligation of desired synthetic peptides to the truncated
PfTRΔ7 containing a C-terminal thioester reactive group. Peptides
containing an N-terminal Cys residue can be ligated (to form an amide
bond) to peptides containing a C-terminal thioester. The thioester-tagged PfTRΔ7 protein is produced
initially as a PfTRΔ7–intein fusion protein expressed
as a recombinant protein in ER2566 E. coli cells
using growth conditions identical to those described above for the
PfTR–GST fusion protein. The harvested bacterial cell pellet
was homogenized in chitin buffer A [50 mM MOPS and 150 mM NaCl (pH
7.0)] followed by cell lysis via pulse sonication. The lysed cell
slurry was pelleted via centrifugation (12000 rpm in a Beckman J2-21
preparatory centrifuge for 1 h at 4 °C), and the cleared lysate
was loaded onto a chitin–agarose
column pre-equilibrated with chitin buffer A. The loaded PfTR protein
was further washed with 0.5 L of chitin buffer A followed by additional
washing with 0.5 L of high-salt chitin buffer B [50 mM MOPS and 500
mM NaCl (pH 7.0)]. The resin containing the bound protein was then
converted to a slurry by the addition of chitin buffer B and then
transferred to two 50 mL conical tubes. Simultaneous cleavage of the
fusion protein and ligation with synthetic peptide were achieved by
addition of a cleavage cocktail consisting of 120 mM N-methyl mercaptoacetamide (NMA) and the desired synthetic peptide
in chitin buffer B (pH 8.0–8.5). The cleavage and ligation
reaction proceeded overnight at room temperature
with constant agitation. Following overnight incubation, the chitin/resin
slurry was returned to the column and the liberated semisynthetic
enzyme was eluted via gravity flow by further washing of the resin
with chitin buffer B. The semisynthetic enzyme was concentrated and
buffer exchanged with buffer C [10 mM Tris-EDTA, 10 mM NaCl, and 20
mM βME (pH 8.0)] via ultrafiltration (Amicon Ultracel 30 kDa
cutoff filters). The semisynthetic enzyme was then loaded by gravity
onto a pre-equilibrated 2′,4′-ADP-sepharose column (20
mL). After the sample had been extensively washed with buffer C, the
semisynthetic PfTR enzyme was eluted off the 2′,4′-ADP-sepharose
column with high-salt buffer [10 mM Tris-EDTA, 1 M NaCl, and 20 mM
βME (pH 8.0)]. The PfTR-positive fractions were confirmed by
spectrophotometric and SDS–PAGE analyses, pooled, and then
extensively buffer exchanged by ultrafiltration with storage buffer
[50 mM potassium phosphate, 500 mM NaCl, and 1 mM EDTA (pH 8.0)].
The concentration of each PfTR semisynthetic enzyme was determined
spectrophotometrically via the absorbance maximum of the flavin at
460 nm (ε = 22.6 mM–1 cm–1, representing the dimer).

The truncated enzyme (enzyme 2) was produced for use
in kinetic studies by cleaving the PfTRΔ7–intein fusion
protein in the presence of NMA and the absence of peptide. After cleavage
from the chitin–agarose column, pooled fractions of enzyme 2 were concentrated by ultrafiltration and loaded onto a Sephacryl-S200
column (size exclusion) that had been pre-equilibrated with 50 mM
potassium phosphate, 500 mM NaCl, and 1 mM EDTA (pH 8.0). TR-positive
fractions eluted off the Sephacryl-S200 column and were then pooled
and concentrated.

Peptides with amino acid sequences of H-hCGGGKCG-OH
and H-CGGGKhCG-OH were used in the construction
of enzymes 9 and 10, respectively. These
peptides were produced by standard
Fmoc solid phase synthesis protocols as described by us previously. Peptides with amino acid sequences of H-CUG-OH
and H-CGGGKUG-OH were used to construct enzymes 12 and 13, respectively (U is the one-letter abbreviation for selenocysteine).
The protected amino acid precursor Fmoc-Sec(Mob)-OH was used for the
syntheses of these
selenium-containing peptides also using standard Fmoc protocols as
described by us previously. The Mob (4-methoxybenzyl)
group was removed by using
an innovative protocol using dithionitropyridine as a deprotection
reagent described by us for the simultaneous cleavage from solid phase
supports and removal of the protecting Mob group.,

Activity Assays with Thioredoxin as the Substrate
All
PfTR enzymes except the truncated enzyme were assayed for their ability
to reduce E. coli Trx as previously described. Briefly, the 0.5 mL reaction mixture contained
150 μM
NADPH, 1 mM EDTA, 90 μM E. coli Trx, and 0.16
mM bovine pancreas insulin in 50 mM potassium phosphate buffer (pH
7.0). The reaction was initiated by the addition of PfTR, and the
activity was monitored by the decrease in absorbance at 340 nm (A340) attributed to the consumption of NADPH.
The concentration of each respective PfTR construct in the Trx reductase
assay is listed in Table S1 of the . Enzymes 1, 12, and 13 were also assayed under conditions identical to those described
above, but using varying concentrations of Trx to determine the kinetic
parameters kcat and Km. All kinetic assays (with Trx, selenocystine, and lipoic
acid as substrates) were conducted at room temperature. For this assay
and all similar enzyme assays, we corrected for background NADPH consumption
by subtracting the activity of control experiments in which either
TR or the substrate was omitted from the reaction mixture. The assays
were repeated in triplicate for each enzyme.

Activity Assays with Selenocystine
as the Substrate
All PfTR enzymes in this study were also
assayed for their ability
to catalyze the reduction of the small molecule diselenide, selenocystine,
as previously described. The 1 mL reaction
mixture contained 10 mM EDTA, 200
μM NADPH, and 300 μM selenocystine in 500 mM potassium
phosphate (pH 7.0). The reaction was initiated by the addition of
the PfTR enzyme, and the activity was monitored by following the decrease
in A340. The concentration of each PfTR
construct in the selenocystine reductase assay is listed in Table
S2 of the .

Activity
Assays with Lipoic Acid as the Substrate
All
PfTR enzymes in this study were also assayed for their ability to
reduce the small molecule substrate lipoic acid. The 0.5 mL reaction
mixture contained 1 mM EDTA, 150 μM NADPH, 5 mM α-dl-lipoic acid substrate, and 50 nM TR enzyme in 500 mM potassium
phosphate buffer (pH 7.0). The reaction was initiated by the addition
of TR, and the activity was monitored by the decrease in A340.

Activity Assays with Hydrogen Peroxide as
the Substrate
Enzymes 1, 12, and 13 were
assayed for their abilities to catalyze the reduction of H2O2, as previously described. Stock solutions of H2O2 were freshly prepared
before each experiment with the concentration of H2O2 determined spectrophotometrically using an extinction coefficient
of 43.6 M–1 cm–1 at 240 nm. The 0.5 mL reaction mixture consisted of 200
μM
NADPH, 2 mM EDTA, and 50 mM H2O2 in 100 mM potassium
phosphate buffer (pH 7.0). The concentrations of TR in the peroxidase
assays were as follows: 400 nM for enzyme 1, 30 nM for
enzyme 12, and 30 nM for enzyme 13. The
activity was measured by monitoring the decrease in A340.

Results and
Discussion
Features of the β–Turn−β Motif That
Contribute to Catalysis
We initially explored the hypothesis
that Lys539′ acted as a type of acid–base catalyst to
help increase the nucleophilic character of Cys540′. Our activity
assays depicted in Table  show that the enzyme loses only a small amount of activity
toward
both E. coli Trx and small molecule substrates
when this Lys residue is mutated to Ala (enzyme 3), eliminating
any important acid–base catalysis role of Lys539′. The
crystal structure of the PfTR–PfTrx complex shows the Lys539′
ε-amino group interacting with Ser71 of PfTrx, but this interaction
must make only a very small contribution to substrate binding based
on our data.

Next, we investigated the role of the C-terminal
Gly541′ residue in catalysis. Structural studies of other high-Mr TRs suggested that a salt bridge between the
carboxylate of Gly541′ and Lys58 serves as an anchor for reduction
of the C-terminal disulfide., In PfTR, it was proposed
that a salt bridge between the carboxylate
of Gly541′ and Lys58 serves as this anchor function. The crystal structure of the PfTR–PfTrx
complex
also shows that there is a hydrogen bond between the amide NH group
of Gly541′ and the carbonyl of Gly534′ as highlighted
in Figure A. Deletion
of this C-terminal Gly residue (enzyme 4) has a very
large effect on Trx reductase activity, but only a small effect on
the selenocystine reductase activity or on the reduction of lipoic
acid. Addition of an extra Gly residue to the β–turn−β
motif (enzyme 5), which would eliminate the proposed
salt bridge (see above), yields almost the same activity as WT. We
interpret this to mean that the hydrogen bond between the amide of
Gly541′ and the carbonyl of Gly534′ is more important
for stabilizing this β–turn−β motif relative
to the proposed anchor function of Gly541′. The stabilization
via the hydrogen bond between Gly541′ and Gly534′ is
most likely important both for the reduction of Trx and for the reduction
of the disulfide of the C-terminal redox center.

Assessing the
Importance of Disulfide Ring Size of the β–Turn−β
Motif to Catalysis
The type II C-terminal redox center differs
from type I redox centers in both total length and size of the disulfide
ring formed upon oxidation of the two C-terminal Cys residues. Type
I TRs form a disulfide bond between adjacent residues, which is a
rare occurrence for proteins listed in the Protein Data Bank. The C-terminal redox center of PfTR forms a
much more
commonly used 20-membered ring, just as is found in the N-terminal
redox center of the enzyme. It is likely that the bridging distance
between the two redox active Cys residues and optimal tail flexibility
favor catalytically productive binding and orientation of PfTrx. The
presence of three consecutive Gly residues, which contain a high degree
of conformational freedom, lends support to this hypothesis. In addition,
the C-terminal disulfide bond of PfTR that results from the reduction
of PfTrx is itself a substrate for the N-terminal redox center. The
precise geometry of this 20-membered disulfide most likely causes
it to be a reactive disulfide, making it easier to be reduced by the
N-terminal redox center.

Mutant enzymes 6–8 were constructed to investigate these ideas. The data
in Table  show that decreasing the ring size
to 17 atoms in enzymes 6 and 7 greatly impacts
the reduction of Trx, while the reduction of both selenocystine and
lipoic acid is much less effected. While both mutants are deletions
of one residue between the two redox active Cys residues, the Trx
reductase activity of enzyme 6 (deletion of Lys) is more
significant, being reduced by ∼1000-fold versus a 6-fold smaller
activity for the loss of one glycine.

Activities
of PfTR Mutant Enzymes
That Have C-Terminal Disulfide Ring Sizes with Various Substrates
 	 	 	mol of NADPH min–1 (mol of TR)−1	
enzyme	PfTR	ring size	90 μM
Trx	300 μM
selenocystine	5 mM lipoic
acid	
PfTR-GC1GGGKC2G	1	20	500 ± 20	410 ± 30	90 ± 10	
PfTR-GC1GGGC2G	6	17	0.4 ± 0.3	60 ± 3	75 ± 5	
PfTR-GC1GGKC2G	7	17	8 ± 1	190 ± 10	125 ± 5	
PfTR-GC1GGGGKC2G	8	23	10 ± 1	340 ± 20	100 ± 5	
PfTR-GhC1GGGKC2G	9	21	20 ± 1	190 ± 10	100 ± 5	
PfTR-GC1GGGKhC2G	10	21	3 ± 0.3	150 ± 6	140 ± 6.5	
Recombinant protein
produced as
a GST fusion.

Recombinant
protein produced as
an intein fusion via semisynthesis.

The addition of one residue between Cys535′
and Cys540′ would potentially result in a disulfide ring of
23 atoms (enzyme 8), assuming the ring actually forms
in the mutant. This addition results in a 50-fold decrease in Trx
reductase activity. Even very subtle changes in disulfide ring size
result in a large loss of activity as shown by the substitution of
homocysteine (hCys) for Cys in mutant enzymes 9 and 10. The side chain of hCys is one methylene unit longer (3
Å)
than Cys; either this extra length must affect the nucleophilic
attack of thiolate on the disulfide bond of Trx, or the resulting
21-membered disulfide ring is a poor substrate for the N-terminal
redox center (in comparison to the 20-membered disulfide ring in the
WT enzyme). The low Trx reductase activities of enzymes 9 and 10 cannot be due to poor ligation of the synthetic
peptide to PfTRΔ7, as evidenced by the fact these mutants possess
significant selenocystine reductase activity. We have proven the selenocystine
substrate cannot be efficiently reduced by TRs lacking an intact C-terminal
redox center (see truncated enzyme 2 in Table ); thus, the selenocystine reductase assay can be
used as a functional assay to conduct a semiquantitative assessment
of ligation efficiency., If the peptide were not ligated
to the enzyme, the mutants would
have selenocystine reductase activity similar to that of the truncated
enzyme (enzyme 2).

For all of the mutants listed
in Tables  and , there
is very little effect on the
reduction of lipoic acid because, as we have previously shown, the
N-terminal redox center of PfTR is sufficient to reduce this disulfide. High-Mr TRs are structurally
related to both glutathione reductase and lipoamide dehydrogenase, but high-Mr TRs have
a C-terminal
extension containing the C-terminal redox center that is functionally
equivalent to oxidized glutathione and lipoic acid. Thus, the truncated
PfTR can be considered a “mutant” lipoamide dehydrogenase
capable of reducing lipoic acid. We note that while the truncated
PfTR will reduce lipoic acid, it will not reduce oxidized glutathione.
The disulfide bond of lipoic acid is much more strained (electrophilic)
in comparison to the disulfide bond of oxidized glutathione, and this
supports our proposed “electrophilic activation” mechanism
discussed below. In the case of selenocystine as the substrate, the
enzyme does not need to use both Cys535′ and Cys540′
to reduce the diselenide and can use a mechanism in which only one
of these residues is present. This means
that the thiolate of either Cys535′
or Cys540′ is capable of attacking the substrate diselenide,
and that a mixed selenosulfide between PfTR and Sec is capable of
being reduced by the N-terminal redox center. In other words, the
PfTR can use a mechanism that does not involve formation of a disulfide
between Cys535′ and Cys540′ to reduce the diselenide
of selenocystine.

Effect of Sec Substitution
on Mutant PfTR Chimeric Enzymes
The results given above showed
that tail length and disulfide ring
geometry are unique features of the type II C-terminal redox center.
However, the results did not provide much insight into how PfTR can
catalyze the reduction of E. coli Trx with a high kcat value (∼2100 min–1) without the need for Sec in comparison to the Sec-dependent
mammalian enzyme, which catalyzes the reduction of E. coli Trx with a kcat of 3300 min–1.

To address this question,
we constructed a chimeric enzyme in which we replaced the type II
C-terminal redox center of PfTR with that of a type I redox center
(enzyme 11) like that found in the mitochondrial TR from C. elegans. Not surprisingly,
this chimeric enzyme had very little
Trx reductase activity but was still able to reduce both selenocystine
and lipoic acid efficiently (Table ). However,
the Trx reductase activity of enzyme 12, which has Sec
in place of Cys in the second position of the redox center, had activities
with all three substrates higher than that of the WT enzyme.

Activities of the PfTR Chimeric Mutants
with Trx, Selenocystine, and Lipoic Acid
 	 	mol of NADPH min–1 (mol of TR)−1	
enzyme	PfTR	90 μM
Trx	300 μM
selenocystine	5 mM lipoic
acid	50 mM H2O2	
PfTR-GC1GGGKC2G	1	500 ± 20	410 ± 30	90 ± 10	9 ± 0.2	
PfTR-GC1C2G	11	1.3 ± 0.6	280 ± 15	70 ± 2	ND	
PfTR-GC1U2G	12	1160 ± 20	2130 ± 60	255 ± 10	330 ± 3	
PfTR-GC1GGGKU2G	13	85 ± 5	260 ± 15	145 ± 5	60 ± 3	
Recombinant protein
produced as
a GST fusion.

Recombinant
protein produced as
an intein fusion via semisynthesis.

No activity detectable.

Kinetic Constants of the Trx Reductase
Activity of WT PfTR and Mutant Enzymes
enzyme	PfTR	kcat (min–1)	Km (μM)	
PfTR-GC1GGGKC2G	1	2120 ± 110	330 ± 25	
PfTR-GC1U2G	12	1440 ± 50	20 ± 3	
PfTR-GC1GGGKU2G	13	120 ± 8	20 ± 5	
E. coli Trx was
used as the substrate.

Recombinant
protein produced as
a GST fusion.

Recombinant
protein produced as
an intein fusion via semisynthesis.

Here is an apparent example of the “catalytic
superiority”
of Sec compared to Cys as has been previously demonstrated by others. Given this superiority, why did PfTR not evolve
the
use of Sec in its C-terminus? P. falciparum has four
selenoproteins and thus contains all of the necessary components of
the Sec insertion machinery needed to accomplish this change in PfTR., We suggest three reasons. First, as shown in Table , the Sec for Cys substitution (enzyme 12) results
in a hydrogen peroxidase activity ∼33-fold higher than that
of the WT enzyme. This gain of function might negatively affect the
redox biology of P. falciparum in some way. Second,
the unique type II C-terminal redox motif may provide PfTR with a
means of discriminating between its cognate PfTrx substrates and those
found in the vector (A. gambiae Trx) or human (hTrx)
hosts encountered throughout its life cycle. Third, the type II motif
may increase catalytic efficiency with its cognate PfTrx substrate
without using Sec. Indeed, the PfTR enzyme displays increased catalytic
efficiency with PfTrx (Km = 2.1 μM; kcat = 1674 min–1; kcat/Km = 791) compared
to that of E. coli Trx (Km = 500 μM; kcat = 1688 min–1; kcat/Km = 3), a relationship also
observed with high-Mr TR orthologs from
other species.

Support for this
last idea is given by the data presented in Table , which lists the kinetic
constants kcat and Km with E. coli Trx as the substrate for the
WT and Sec-containing mutants. The use of Sec in both mutant enzymes
has the effect of significantly decreasing the Km for E. coli Trx. The dramatic decrease of
the Km means a higher affinity for E. coli Trx, as can be visually seen in the Michaelis–Menten
plots for these assays (displayed in Figure S2 of the ).

We also made the
same Sec for Cys substitution using semisynthesis
in the context of the native type II motif (enzyme 13). The results show that it has Trx reductase activity lower than
that of the WT enzyme (Table ). The low activity
may be due to incomplete ligation of the peptide to the truncated
enzyme. We base this conclusion on the rather low selenocystine reductase
activity of enzyme 13 compared to that of enzyme 12 (Table ). We would expect that
both PfTR Sec enzymes would have similar selenocysteine reductase
activity because of the presence of both Sec and a C-terminal Cys
residue in each construct. Thus, this discrepancy in selenocystine
reductase activities leads us to assume enzyme 13 would
have Trx reductase activity very similar to (or higher than) that
of the WT enzyme.

Catalytic Effect of Insertion of Sec into
PfTR and Implications
for the Catalytic Mechanism of PfTR
What is the chemical
basis for the high activity seen in the Sec-containing chimeric mutant
(enzyme 12), and what does that mean for the catalytic
mechanism of PfTR? We can conclude that the use of Sec in the chimeric
enzyme permits electrons to flow efficiently from the N-terminal redox
center to the Sec-containing redox center, and then finally to Trx.
This same flow of electrons is obviously impaired in the Cys-containing
chimera (enzyme 11). The high activity seen in enzyme 12 could be due to the ability of Sec to more efficiently
attack the disulfide bond of Trx (Sec as a good nucleophile), or it could be that the selenium atom of a selenosulfide
is a better acceptor of electrons from CysIC than is the
sulfur atom of a disulfide (selenide as a good electrophile) in the context of the same C-terminal redox
motif (Gly-Cys1-Sec2-Gly vs Gly-Cys1-Cys2-Gly). Please see panels A and
B of Figure  for
a comparison and further explanation.

Analyses of the mutants
containing hCys in place of Cys (enzymes 9 and 10) are useful for clarifying the two roles just mentioned.
Both of these mutants have activity much lower than that of the WT
enzyme. It seems reasonable to assume that the sulfur atoms of Cys2 and hCys2 have the same nucleophilic reactivity,
and thus, enzymes 1 and 10 are expected
to be able to attack the disulfide bond of Trx equally well. However,
we cannot exclude the possibility that the pKa of the hCys residue at position 540′ is greatly perturbed
relative to that of Cys at the same position, and the loss of nucleophilic
character of this thiolate in the ES complex greatly reduces the rate.

An alternative possibility that we have recently come to favor
is that reduction of the C-terminal Cys-hCys disulfide in the mutant
is impaired and this results in the observed low rate of Trx reduction.
This interpretation means that the observed difference in activity
between enzymes 1 and 10 is due to the inability
of the C-terminal redox center of enzyme 10 (containing
hCys2) to accept electrons from CysIC. This
would be due to a lack of electrophilic activation of the disulfide
bond. Similarly, we recently proposed that the C-terminal redox center
of DmTR containing a C-terminal Ser-Cys1-Cys2-Ser disulfide bond is positioned optimally to be activated for thiol–disulfide
exchange because of polarization of the disulfide bond by His464′
(equivalent to His509′), as explained in the legend of Figure A. We therefore hypothesize
that PfTR uses a similar electrophilic
activation mechanism for efficient reduction of its type II C-terminal
disulfide as explained in the legend of Figure B.

Explanation of the proposed electrophilic activation mechanism
for Cys TR enzymes. (A) In DmTR, a type I insect TR that naturally
contains a Cys1–Cys2 dyad, we have proposed
that the reason that electrons can be easily transferred to the C-terminal
disulfide is due to a high degree of polarization in the disulfide
bond by an adjacent HisH+ residue (electrophilic activation
mechanism). (B) The flow of electrons
from the N-terminal redox center of PfTR could also be facilitated
by a similar electrophilic activation mechanism. His509′ could
serve to polarize the disulfide bond of the GC1GGGKC2G redox motif as shown here.

This putative activation interaction described
above would occur in the so-called “in” conformation,
when the C-terminal tail is closest to the N-terminal redox center
and neighboring His509′–Glu514′ dyad (shown in
Figure B), as described by McMillan and colleagues. Unfortunately, this conformation was not captured
in
the PfTR–PfTrx cocrystal structure, which instead featured
the mixed disulfide between PfTR
and PfTrx that occurs in the “out” conformation, with
the type II C-terminal redox center being ∼20 Å from the
N-terminal redox center, so that the C-terminal redox center
is now positioned close to the His438′–water dyad as
shown in Figure A.

The C-terminal disulfide could be activated (made more electrophilic)
in a manner different from our proposed electrophilic activation mechanism.
An alternative is that the 20-membered disulfide ring is strained
in the “in” conformation and the relief of strain drives the thiol–disulfide
exchange reaction that occurs between the N- and C-terminal redox
centers. We suggest that the hydrogen bond between the amide of Gly541′
and the carbonyl of Gly534′ in the β–turn−β
motif could help to stabilize the C-terminal disulfide bond in a strained
conformation. This would also explain why deletion of Gly541′
results in a large loss of Trx reductase activity.

In contrast
to the nucleophile–electrophile rationales presented
above, an alternative explanation for the low Trx reductase activity
of the mutants containing hCys could be the disruption of the hydrogen
bonding network between the His438′–water dyad and Cys535′,
an interaction proposed by Becker and colleagues to aid in deprotonating
the resolving Cys residue for the subsequent resolution of the mixed
disulfide between PfTR and PfTrx in the “out” conformation. Substituting Cys535′ with hCys might disrupt
optimal hydrogen bond distances and result in low activity. However,
the low Trx reductase activity of enzyme 10 cannot be
due to a disruption of the interaction between Cys535′ and
the His438′–water dyad, as this interaction is preserved
in this mutant. Our proposed electrophilic activation mechanism may
explain the low activity observed in enzyme 10. The fact
that mutation of His438′ to Ala results in a 50% decrease in Vmax() while the replacement
of Cys535′ or Cys540′ with hCys
results in a more severe (&gt;95%) activity is consistent with our
electrophilic
activation model. We caution the reader not to confuse His438′
with His509′. As noted by Becker and co-workers, His438′
is unique to PfTR and absent in other high-Mr TRs.

Conclusions
We
have investigated the unique C-terminal redox center of PfTR
through mutagenesis and semisynthesis. Our results demonstrate the
importance of a hydrogen bond between the amide NH group of Gly541′
and the carbonyl of Gly534′ in the β–turn−β
motif to catalysis and the importance of disulfide ring size in the
catalytic mechanism. We hypothesize that PfTR uses an electrophilic
activation mechanism to help make the C-terminal disulfide reactive
for thiol–disulfide exchange, but more work needs to be done
to test our proposal. The results for the Sec for Cys substitution
experiment suggest that PfTR evolved a unique C-terminal redox center,
distinct from that found in humans and A. gambiae, so that PfTR could preferentially recognize its cognate substrate,
PfTrx, relative to human Trx and A. gambiae Trx.

Supporting Information Available
Concentrations of PfTR
constructs in the Trx reductase activity assays (Table S1), PfTR enzyme
concentrations in the selenocystine reductase assays (Table S2), gels
of the fractions of the purification process from PfTR–thrombin
constructs analyzed by SDS–PAGE (Figure S1), and Michaelis–Menten
plots for enzymes 1, 12, and 13 (Figure S2). This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi400931k_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no competing
financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank the University of Vermont DNA
Sequencing Facility
for their services.

Abbreviations
A340absorbance
at 340 nm

Alaalanine

βMEβ-mercaptoethanol

Cyscysteine

CysICinterchange
cysteine

CysCTcharge-transfer cysteine

DTNB5,5′-dithiobis(2-nitrobenzoic acid)

DmTRD. melanogaster thioredoxin reductase

EDTAethylenediaminetetraacetic acid

FADflavin adenine dinucleotide

Fmocfluorenylmethyloxycarbonyl

Gluglutamic acid

Glyglycine

GSTglutathione S-transferase

Hishistidine

H2O2hydrogen peroxide

IPTGisopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside

Lyslysine

MOPS3-(N-morpholino)propanesulfonic acid

NMAN-(methyl)mercaptoacetamide

Mrmolecular ratio

NADPHreduced β-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate

PfTRP. falciparum thioredoxin reductase

Secselenocysteine

Serserine

Trxthioredoxin

TRthioredoxin reductase

Uone-letter code for Sec

WTwild type.

We use subscripted
numbers 1 and 2
to designate each of the two Cys residues of the C-terminal redox
center. The N-terminal Cys residue is designated as Cys1, while the C-terminal Cys residue is designated as Cys2.

We refer to the N-terminal
redox center
by the amino acid sequence CCTVNVGCIC, where
CysCT denotes the Cys residue that forms a thiolate charge-transfer
complex with the flavin and CysIC denotes the interchange
Cys thiolate that attacks the disulfide bond of the C-terminal redox
center as is depicted in Figure .

The prime designation denotes amino
acid residues on the opposite subunit of the PfTR homodimer.

