The Ub system is a highly conserved
enzymatic network for post-translationally
modifying proteins. This conservation encompasses the functions of
the system as well as many of its enzymatic components. The conjugation
of Ub to substrates is mediated by a hierarchical enzyme cascade minimally
composed
of a Ub-activating enzyme (E1), a Ub-conjugating enzyme (E2), and
a Ub protein ligase (E3). E1 activates Ub and transfers it to the
active site cysteine of E2. Ub-charged
E2s partner with specific E3s to transfer Ub onto substrates. E3s
can be single proteins or multisubunit complexes, and their primary
function is to recruit and facilitate
the transfer of Ub to substrates. It is estimated that humans have
at least two E1s, 38 E2s, and 600–1000 E3s (reviewed in ref ()).

Target proteins
can be modified on one or more lysine residues
with either a single Ub (i.e., monoUb) or polymers of Ub (i.e., polyUb).
Ub has seven lysines, and each can function as an acceptor during
polyUb chain synthesis. As a result, polyUb chains can be homogeneous
or heterogeneous. Homogeneous polyUb chains are synthesized utilizing
a common acceptor lysine on the proximal Ub of the growing chain.
For example, polyUb chains in which the Ub–Ub linkages are
exclusively through K48 typically target substrates to the 26S proteasome
for degradation.− Alternatively, heterogeneous chains are composed
of a composite of Ub–Ub linkages with different lysine residues
serving as acceptor sites on the proximal Ub. Goldberg and colleagues
have shown that two adjacent lysines on a single Ub can simultaneously
serve as acceptors, giving rise to forked polyUb configurations., Similar findings have been reported for proteins isolated from growing
yeast.

Efforts to define the molecular
mechanisms governing polyUb chain
synthesis have provided insights into the fundamental relationships
by which E2s and E3s cooperate (e.g., refs () and (−)). Recent insights have principally come from biochemical and structural
studies that have elucidated how really interesting new gene (RING)/U-box
E3 ligases stimulate Ub-charged E2s. Two primary mechanisms are now
apparent. RING/U-box E3s function (1) to bring charged E2s into the
proximity of the amino group of substrate lysine residues (e.g., ref ()) and (2) to allosterically
activate charged E2s by promoting catalytically favorable “closed”
conformations in which Ub directly contacts helix 2 of the enzyme.− This configuration optimally
positions the thioester bond of the E2–Ub conjugate for nucleophilic
attack. Additional characterization of
E2–E3 component interactions using the ERAD E3 facilitator,
Cue1p, and its partner E2, Ubc7p, has revealed that the Ubc7p binding
region of Cue1p stimulates charging of the active site of Ubc7p by
E1 as well as Ub discharge of the E2. The CUE domain of Cue1p further stimulates ERAD substrate turnover
by binding to and stabilizing growing, K48-linked, polyUb chains.

The type of Ub–Ub linkage synthesized
during polyUb chain
construction is governed both by the specific E2 involved and by whether
this E2 partners with a RING/U-box E3 or with a homologous to E6-AP
carboxyl-terminal (HECT) E3. When the pairing involves a RING/U-box
E3, the E2 primarily dictates the specific Ub–Ub linkage. However,
the E3 can impose limits on whether a given substrate is mono- or
polyubiquitylated
and on which type of Ub–Ub linkage within the given repertoire
of an E2 is utilized. In contrast, a
HECT E3 has an active site cysteine, accepts Ub from the E2 via transthiolation,
and then transfers the Ub directly to the substrate. Thus, irrespective of the partnering E2, the HECT E3 primarily
dictates the Ub–Ub linkage. Additional
factors can also influence polyUb chain configuration. S5a/Rpn10 blocks
the synthesis of forked chains that are produced by UbcH5 in cooperation
with particular RING/U-box E3s. These forked chains are resistant
to deubiquitylation and degradation by the proteasome, and by blocking
their synthesis,
S5a/Rpn10 effectively promotes the degradation of particular substrates.

In this work, we investigated the molecular
determinants governing
the ubiquitylation capacity of UbcM2, a highly conserved metazoan
enzyme of the class III E2s. UbcM2 possesses the conserved catalytic
core domain characteristic of E2s (also known as the Ubc domain) as
well as a unique 58-amino acid, N-terminal extension. Functionally, UbcM2 has been linked to cell cycle progression,, development, turnover of damaged and
misfolded proteins, and regulation of
Nrf2, an antioxidant transcription factor, yet in
vivo substrates remain to be identified; moreover, several in vitro studies have produced varied evidence with regard
to whether UbcM2 is restricted to conjugating monoUb onto targets
or can efficiently build polyUb chains. For example, mass spectrometry
studies that aimed to analyze autoubiquitylation reactions and red
fluorescent protein
(RFP)–E3 fusion protein ubiquitylation showed that UbcM2 can
synthesize polyUb chains composed of K11, K48, and K63 Ub–Ub
linkages using wt Ub., Other studies, however, have
shown that UbcM2 primarily attaches
monoUb in reactions with E3 partners that function as proxy substrates in vitro (e.g., ref ()). Consistent with this monoubiquitylating behavior, Day
and co-workers recently reported that the N-terminal extensions of
UbcM2 and two related enzymes (collectively known as the UBE2E enzymes
or class III E2s) function to limit polyUb chain synthesis. Notably, all of these studies used different
E3 ligase partners as proxy substrates, underscoring the fact that
the capacity of UbcM2 to conjugate monoUb or polyUb may in part be
dictated by its cognate E3 partner.

Although the Ubc domains
of UbcH5 family members (hereafter termed
UbcH5) are 66% identical and 78% similar to the Ubc domain of UbcM2,
UbcH5 processively constructs polyUb chains (e.g., refs () and ()). This polyUb synthesizing
behavior requires Ub-charged UbcH5 to self-associate via a noncovalent
interaction between Ub and several residues on the so-called “backside”
(i.e., opposite the catalytic pocket) of the enzyme. The high level of conservation between the Ubc domains
of UbcM2 and UbcH5 but dramatically different Ub conjugating profiles
offered the opportunity to identify residues within the Ubc domain
that govern the intrinsic Ub transferring properties and linkage preferences
of UbcM2. We report here that UbcM2 can synthesize K63-linked, and
to a lesser extent K6- and K48-linked, polyUb chains but that this
activity is largely suppressed, in the context of wt Ub. The suppression
is mediated by multiple Ubc residues, antipodally situated from the
active site of UbcM2, and
by one or more lysines of Ub. Further, we have identified an additional
residue distant from the catalytic pocket that is critical for the
monoubiquitylating activity of UbcM2. Our data also reveal that the
binding affinity of UbcM2 for its cognate E3 ligase can impact ubiquitylation
capacity as tighter binding under particular reaction conditions can
promote polyUb chain formation. Together, these findings highlight
new mechanistic details by which E2 polyUb chain building activity
can be mitigated to accommodate specialized roles in ubiquitylation
cascades such as the attachment of a priming monoubiquitylation, which
serves to limit “unintended” chain building on their
substrates.

Experimental Procedures
Plasmids and Recombinant Protein Expression
and Purification
Wild-type (wt) His6-T7-tagged
UbcM2 and UbcH5b
were cloned into pET28a (Novagen EMD Biosciences) for expression in
BL21-star (DE3) Escherichia coli. UbcM2 point mutants
were introduced using the QuikChange site-directed mutagenesis kit
(Stratagene, Inc.) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
For recombinant
expression, cultures were grown in Terrific Broth supplemented with
2% ethanol and 10 μg/mL kanamycin at 37 °C to an OD600 of ∼0.8, induced with 0.4 mM isopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG), and
grown overnight at 22 °C. Bacteria were pelleted and lysed with
an Emulsiflex C5 homogenizer
(Avestin, Inc.), and lysates were rocked overnight with Ni-NTA His
Bind Resin (Novagen EMD Biosciences) to purify the His6-T7-tagged E2s. The recombinant E2s were eluted from the resin with
200 mM imidazole, exchanged into 10 mM NaPO4, 70 mM KCl,
and 1 mM MgCl2 (pH 7.2), aliquoted, and snap-frozen in
liquid N2.

Ubiquitylation Assays
Fully recombinant
ubiquitylation
assays contained either AO7T or BD/BC 100/300 (residues 26–126
of BARD1 fused to residues 1–304 of BRCA1) synthesized in a
coupled in vitro transcription/translation
bacterial lysate system (PURExpress, New England Biolabs, Inc.) with
or without 35S-labeled amino acids. These E3s/proxy substrates
were then combined with recombinant E1 (62.5 nM), His6-T7-E2
(5 μM), an energy-regenerating system [100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4),
0.4 mM MgATP, 1 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM DTT, 2 mM phosphocreatine,
0.2% Tween 20, and 0.5 mg of creatine phosphokinase],
and the indicated variant of Ub (50 μM). Reaction mixtures were
incubated at 37 °C for 90 min (unless otherwise indicated) and
reactions terminated
by the addition of 1 volume of 2× concentrated Laemmli solubilizing
buffer (2XSB). Reaction products were resolved by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE), and ubiquitylation of the 35S-labeled E3 ligases was visualized by fluorography. Reaction
mixtures containing nonradiolabeled AO7T were analyzed by Western
blotting with anti-K48-linked Ab (Cell Signaling Technology, Inc.;
diluted 1:1000 in a 5% BSA/TBST mixture), anti-K63-linked Ab (Cell
Signaling Technology, Inc.; diluted 1:1000 in a 5% BSA/TBST mixture),
anti-Ub Ab (Santa Cruz
Biotechnology; diluted 1:200 in a 5% BSA/TBST mixture), or anti-HA
Ab (diluted 1:1000 in a 5% milk/TBST mixture). HRP-conjugated goat
anti-rabbit
secondary antibodies were diluted to a 1:2000 ratio to detect the
K48 and K63 linkage-specific Abs, and HRP-conjugated goat anti-mouse
secondary antibodies were diluted to a 1:10000 ratio to detect the
anti-Ub and anti-HA Abs. In-house enhanced chemiluminescent reagents
were used as substrates for the HRP. Blots were exposed to X-OMAT
film or to an imager and figures prepared in Photoshop (version 8).

Lysine Reactivity Assays
In step 1 (E2 active site
charging), recombinant E1 (200 nM), UbcM2 (2.2 μM), Ub (20 μM),
an ATP-regenerating system, and buffer [25 mM NaPO4 and
150 mM NaCl (pH 7.0)] were incubated for 45
min at 37 °C. The charging reaction was terminated by the addition
of 20 mM EDTA.
In step 2 (lysine reactivity), reaction mixtures were supplemented
with 0.5 M lysine, and at the indicated time points, aliquots were
removed
and solubilized with nonreducing buffer [50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 6.8),
4 M urea, 2% SDS, 10% glycerol,
and 0.001% bromophenol blue] in preparation for SDS–PAGE and
α-UbcM2 Western blotting to assess the amount of Ub-charged
enzyme remaining. A
second aliquot from the 15 min time point sample was solubilized with
nonreducing
buffer supplemented with β-mercaptoethanol and then heated
to determine the level of autoubiquitylated enzyme.

GST Pull-Down
Assay
35S-labeled AO7T and BD/BC 100/300 were
expressed
in a coupled in vitro transcription/translation bacterial
lysate system and then combined with 10 μM GST-UbcM2 or 20 μM
GST and glutathione (GSH)-Sepharose beads. Reaction mixtures were
incubated in a 4 °C thermomixer at 900 rpm for 90 min in 1×
binding buffer [10
mM HEPES-KOH (pH 7.4), 55 mM potassium acetate, 1 mM magnesium acetate,
0.1 mM EGTA, 0.25% Tween 20, and 150 mM NaCl], after which the bead-associated
proteins (bound) were pelleted for 1 min at 13000 rpm. The unbound
fraction was collected and solubilized in 2XSB. The bound fraction
was washed three times with ice-cold 1× binding buffer and then
solubilized in 2XSB; 75% of the bound and 37.5% of the unbound proteins
were resolved by SDS–PAGE. GST-bound proteins were visualized
by Coomassie Brilliant Blue (CBB) staining and the 35S-labeled
proteins by fluorography.

Results
To characterize
the Ub conjugating properties of UbcM2, we implemented
a fully recombinant assay to compare the E3-dependent ubiquitylation
kinetics of UbcM2 and UbcH5b, a UbcH5 family member. In this assay,
the E3 ligase serves as a proxy substrate. Because all reaction components
are expressed in bacteria or bacterial lysates, changes in migration
of the proxy substrate during SDS–PAGE can be attributed specifically
to the attachment of Ub, ruling out all other post-translational modifications.
The ligase used in these assays is AO7 (RNF25), a RING finger domain-containing
E3 that binds both UbcM2 and UbcH5. Because
of the limited expression and solubility of full length AO7, we used
AO7T, a truncation mutant spanning residues 1–360 and containing
the RING finger domain. Hemaglutinin
(HA)-tagged, 35S-labeled AO7T (HA-AO7T)
was synthesized in a coupled in vitro transcription/translation
bacterial lysate system and combined with recombinant E1, His6-T7-tagged UbcM2 (H6T-UbcM2) or H6T-UbcH5b,
an energy-regenerating system, and wt Ub. Reactions were conducted
at pH 7.4, and [35S]AO7T ubiquitylation was followed over
time by SDS–PAGE and fluorography. UbcM2 conjugated Ub to AO7T
such that distinct band shifts were produced, consistent with the
attachment of monoUb(s) (Figure A, lanes 2–7).
At the 60 and 90 min time points, a small amount of smeared density
at the high-molecular weight end of the pattern is observed, consistent
with polyUb chain synthesis on AO7T (Figure A, lanes 8 and 9). This limited polyUb chain
synthesis occurred nonprocessively; i.e., reaction products appear
in stepwise order and subsequently
disappear in conjunction with the appearance of the next slower-migrating
band (Figure A, lanes 8 and 9). By contrast,
UbcH5b constructed
polyUb chains processively on AO7T, i.e., following initial priming
reactions in which monoUb(s) is added (Figure B, lanes 2–4), products with distinct chain lengths are not
observed, and only
high-molecular weight end products are detected (Figure B, lanes 6–9).

UbcM2 has a severely limited capacity to synthesize
polyUb chains
on AO7T with wt Ub. (A) Fully recombinant in vitro ubiquitylation assays containing recombinant E1, H6T-UbcM2,
wt Ub, energy, and [35S]AO7T (produced in a bacterial TNT
expression system) were incubated at 37 °C for the indicated
times. Reaction mixtures were solubilized and processed for SDS–PAGE
and fluorography. (B) Same as panel A except testing H6T-UbcH5b. For panels A and B, [35S]AO7T input was loaded
to the left of lane 1 and the migration of molecular weight markers
is denoted on the left. Unmodified [35S]AO7T is marked
on the right of each fluorograph with a hashmark and Ub-modified [35S]AO7T [[35S]AO7T-(Ub)n] with a vertical line. (C) Assay similar to that in panel A except
wt Ub has been replaced with lysine-less Ub (UbK0). Distinct
bands representing the attachment of one, two, three, or four monoUbK0 molecules to AO7T are denoted with asterisks between lanes
2 and 3 and lanes 3 and 4. (D) Assay similar to that in panel C except
that HA-AO7T is not radiolabeled with [35S]Met/Cys but
rather reaction products are visualized by either anti-Ub (top) or
anti-HA Western blotting (bottom). The number of UbK0 molecules
conjugated to HA-AO7T is indicated to the right of each blot. The
sensitivity of the anti-Ub antibody is such that only HA-AO7T modified
with either three or four UbK0 molecules is detected. All
experiments were repeated at least three independent times.

To corroborate the monoubiquitylation
pattern observed with UbcM2
using wt Ub, we repeated the time course experiments with lysine-less
Ub (UbK0), a variant that can be conjugated to a substrate
but cannot support polyUb chain extension. The results from these
assays define four bands corresponding to four monoubiquitylation
events (Figure C, asterisks between lanes
2 and 3 and lanes
3 and 4). By the 40 min time point, fully monoubiquitylated AO7T accumulates
(Figure C, lane 7). To further validate that
the
slower-migrating AO7T bands represent ubiquitylated forms of the proxy
substrate, we repeated the UbK0 time course using nonradiolabeled
HA-AO7T and performed Western blot analyses using an anti-Ub antibody
and an anti-HA antibody.
These data clearly illustrate the four monoubiquitylations (Figure D, bottom blot, asterisks between lanes 2
and 3, lanes 3 and 4, lanes 4 and 5, and lanes 5 and 6) and stepwise,
nonprocessive
product formation. Furthermore, the anti-Ub blot revealed that a
minimum of three UbK0 molecules on AO7T was required for
detection by the pan Ub antibody (Figure D,
top blot, lanes 4 and 5).

The limited polyUb chain building
capacity of UbcM2 prompted us
to investigate the Ub–Ub linkage preference of the enzyme.
UbcM2 was incubated with either wt Ub, UbK0, or variants
having only a single intact lysine, and identical reactions were conducted
with UbcH5b for comparison. With regard to the nomenclature used to
designate these Ub mutants, variants containing only a single intact
lysine with the other six lysines mutated are named to indicate the
intact lysine. For example, the mutant in which only K48 is present
but the remaining six lysines have been mutated to arginines is termed
“K48 Ub” in figures, whereas the mutant in which only
K6 is present but the other six lysines have been mutated to arginines
is termed “K6 Ub”. Likewise, Ub mutants in which a specific
lysine(s) has been replaced with an arginine are given the name and
number of the substituted lysine. For example, “K48R Ub”
has a single substitution of K48 with arginine, but the six remaining
lysines (K6, K11, K27, K29, K33, and K63) are present. Interestingly,
these experiments showed that the polyUb chain building capacity of
UbcM2 was enhanced by particular Ub variants. Specifically, polyUb
chain synthesis was markedly augmented in reaction mixtures exclusively
containing K63 Ub (Figure A, lane 11) and
to a lesser extent in reaction
mixtures using K6 Ub and K48 Ub (Figure A,
lanes 5 and 10, respectively). In contrast,
the products formed with the Ub variants containing only a single
Lys residue (K11, K27, K29, or K33) appeared to be identical to the
products formed with UbK0, confirming these as monoubiquitylated
species. The preference for synthesizing K63-linked chains was corroborated
by a failure of the enzyme to construct polyUb chains with K63R Ub
(Figure A, lane 13). Notably, UbcM2 displayed
modest
chain building capacity with K48R Ub (Figure A, lane 12), implying that, in the context
of wt Ub, K48 suppresses chain synthesis by the enzyme. Chain extension
was more readily visualized at pH 8.5, especially with wt Ub, presumably
because of the increased nucleophilicity of the ε-amino group
on the attacking lysine of Ub (Figure B, lane
2). By comparison, UbcH5b extensively
polyubiquitylated AO7T with wt Ub, K6 Ub, K11 Ub, K48 Ub, and K63
Ub at pH 7.4 (Figure C, lanes 3, 5, 6, 10,
and 11, respectively)
but did not synthesize polyUb chains with K27 Ub, K29 Ub, and K33
Ub (Figure C, lanes 7–9, respectively).

UbcM2
can synthesize K63-linked polyUb chains. (A) H6T-UbcM2 in vitro ubiquitylation assays conducted
at pH 7.4 with either no Ub (lane 2), wt Ub (lane 3), lysine-less
Ub (UbK0, lane 4), Ub variants in which only the indicated
lysine is intact and the six other lysines have been mutated to arginine
(lanes 5–11), or variants in which only the indicated lysine
has been mutated to arginine (lanes 12–14). Unmodified [35S]AO7T is marked on the right with a hashmark, and Ub-modified
[35S]AO7 [[35S]AO7T-(Ub)n] is marked with a vertical line. The migration of molecular
weight markers is denoted at the left. (B) Same as panel A except
reactions were conducted at pH 8.5 and samples were run in parallel
on two gels. (C) Same as panel A except testing H6T-UbcH5b.
(D) Recombinant ubiquitylation assays using nonradiolabeled HA-AO7T
were incubated for 90 min with the indicated variants of Ub. Reaction
products were analyzed by Western blotting with the antibody listed
to the left of each blot. As a positive control for the synthesis
of K48- and K63-linked polyUb chains, UbcM2 was replaced with UbcH5b
(lane 8, Pos Ctrl). All experiments were repeated a minimum of three
independent times.

To firmly establish that
the UbcM2-mediated changes in AO7T migration
correspond to the attachment of polyUb chains, we conducted recombinant
assays with nonradiolabeled AO7T. Reaction products were resolved
by SDS–PAGE and subjected
to Western blotting with antibodies specific for (1) K48-linked polyUb
chains,
(2) K63-linked polyUb chains, (3) pan Ub, and (4) the HA tag appended
to the amino terminus of AO7T. These experiments validated that UbcM2
can modestly synthesize K48-linked chains using K48 Ub and robustly
synthesize K63-linked chains using K63 Ub (Figure D, lane 4, anti-K48 chain blot, and lane
5, anti-K63 chain blot, respectively). The generation of K63-linked
chains in reaction mixtures containing K48R Ub was also confirmed
(Figure D, lane 6, anti-K63 chain blot), consistent
with the preference of UbcM2 for synthesizing K63 linkages and for
doing so with an increased capacity in the absence of Ub Lys48. These
data also highlight the preference of UbcM2 for synthesizing K63-linked
polyUb chains by showing that Ub immunoreactivity was not detected
in reaction mixtures containing K63R Ub despite the accumulation of
monoubiquitylated forms of AO7T (Figure D,
lane 7, anti-Ub and anti-HA blots, respectively).
Notably, fully monoubiquitylated AO7T from the UbK0 reaction
could be detected with the Ub antibody but, as expected, not the linkage-specific
antibodies (Figure D, lane 3, anti-Ub blot).
Similarly, in reaction
mixtures containing wt Ub, the Ub antibody detected a signal at and
above the migration of fully monoubiquitylated AO7T (Figure D, lane 2, anti-Ub blot) but did not detect
a signal corresponding to the partially monoubiquitylated species
that migrated below the 80 kDa marker. In complementary time course
experiments with wt Ub, we
first detected polyUb chain synthesis at 40 min and the K48- and K63-linked
chains were synthesized more robustly by the 60 and 90 min time points
(Figure , lanes 7–9, anti-K48 and anti-K63
chain
blots).

UbcM2 can synthesize K48- and K63-linked polyUb chains on AO7T.
Recombinant ubiquitylation assays using nonradiolabeled HA-AO7T and
wt Ub were incubated for the indicated times and solubilized, and
the reaction products were analyzed by Western blotting. Unmodified
AO7T is marked to the right of the anti-HA blot with a hashmark, and
Ub-modified AO7T [AO7T-(Ub)n] is marked
with a vertical line to the right of each blot. The migration of molecular
weight markers and the antibodies used are denoted at the left. The
asterisk denotes a nonspecific band detected by the anti-K48 linkage
antibody. This band is derived from either a protein present in the
energy-regenerating system or the PUREXPRESS bacterial lysate used
to synthesize HA-AO7T. This band is detected at the 40, 60, and 90
min time points when AO7T is absent (i.e., unprogrammed PUREXPRESS
bacterial lysate is used in the ubiquitylation reaction) (data not
shown). Experiments were repeated a minimum of three independent times.

We next tested the capacity of
UbcM2 to polyubiquitylate BD/BC
100/300, an established proxy substrate consisting of residues 26–126 of BARD1 and residues 1–304
of BRCA1, the heterodimeric E3 ligase (Figure A, lanes 2 and 3). UbcM2 only weakly monoubiquitylated
BD/BC 100/300 and, furthermore, failed to construct K63-linked polyUb
chains or to display enhanced ubiquitylating activity with K48R Ub
(Figure A, lanes 4 and 5, respectively). As
previously reported, UbcH5b synthesized
polyUb chains on BD/BC 100/300
with
wt Ub (Figure A, lane 6). The failure of UbcM2
to synthesize
polyUb chains on BD/BC 100/300 correlated with a failure of the E2
to coprecipitate the proxy substrate. GST-UbcM2 did not precipitate 35S-labeled BD/BC 100/300, whereas GST-UbcM2 stably associated
with 35S-labeled AO7T (Figure B,
lane 4 vs lane 2).

Affinity of UbcM2 for a proxy substrate that correlates
with the
capacity to attach polyUb chains. (A) In vitro ubiquitylation
assay with H6T-UbcM2 and a 35S-labeled fusion
of BARD1/BRCA1 100/300 (BD/BC 100/300) consisting of residues 26–126
of BARD1 fused to residues 1–304 of BRCA1. The Ub variant used
in each reaction is indicated at the top of the fluorograph. In lane
6, H6T-UbcH5b was used in place of H6T-UbcM2.
The migrations of unmodified BD/BC 100/300 and the Ub-modified fusion
protein [BD/BC 100/300-(Ub)n] are indicated
at the right, and the migration of molecular weight markers is denoted
at the left. (B) Parallel GST fusion protein pull downs of 35S-labeled AO7T or 35S-labeled BD/BC 100/300. Fractions
of bead-bound (75% of total) and unbound (37.5% of total) proteins
were resolved by SDS–PAGE. 35S-labeled proteins
were visualized by fluorography (top) and GST proteins by CBB staining
(bottom). Assays were repeated a minimum of three independent times.

Together, the results shown in
Figures – provide
five important insights into UbcM2 function. First, UbcM2 has a restricted
ability to synthesize polyUb chains and is largely limited to monoubiquitylating
AO7T. Second, UbcM2 has a latent capacity to generate polyUb chains,
with a preference for K63-linked chains. Third, the polyubiquitylating
activity requires extended reaction times, even at 37 °C, and
is therefore unlikely to be physiologically relevant under most
conditions. Fourth, the (latent) polyubiquitylating activity is partially
suppressed by Ub residue Lys48, as chain building activity is partially
recovered in reactions using K48R Ub. Fifth, tight binding to its
cognate E3 can facilitate polyUb chain synthesis by UbcM2.

To
determine if UbcM2 preferentially synthesizes polyUb chains
with K63 Ub and K48R Ub because of an enhanced capacity to be loaded
with or to discharge these Ub variants, we performed lysine reactivity
assays. The premise of this assay is that some E2s, such as UbcM2,
can transfer Ub from their active sites to free lysine in the absence
of an E3 ligase., In step 1 of the assay, the E2
is charged with Ub. The charging reaction is then terminated by adding
EDTA. For step 2, reaction mixtures are supplemented with free lysine,
and at different time points, aliquots are removed, solubilized, and
analyzed by nonreducing SDS–PAGE and anti-UbcM2 Western blotting.
Nonreducing
SDS–PAGE allows tracking of the UbcM2–Ub species as
a function of time exposed to free lysine. These experiments
showed that UbcM2 is comparably charged with each Ub variant (Figure
1A,B of the , lanes
2 and 5) and that the extent and kinetics of Ub discharge
by free lysine are comparable among wt Ub, K63 Ub, and K48R Ub (Figure
1A,B of the ). To
see if the observed chain building activity with K63
Ub or K48R Ub is due to the Ub variants being better acceptor Ubs,
we also monitored the discharge of UbK0 from the active
site of UbcM2 in the presence of a 5-fold molar excess of either Ub
variant. No differences were detected (data not shown). These findings
indicate that the differences in polyUb chain synthesis observed with
the variant forms of Ub are not due to differences in the intrinsic
aminolysis activity of the UbcM2–Ub conjugates or to differences
in the properties of the donor Ubs.
Consistent with this conclusion, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
experiments demonstrated that neither the Ubc domain nor full length
UbcM2 displayed preferential binding affinity for K63 Ub (M. Cook,
E. Duncan, and R. Klevit, unpublished results).

The disparity
in polyUb capacity between UbcM2 and UbcH5b suggests
that residues differing between the two enzymes govern the Ub conjugating
behavior of UbcM2. We initially tested whether the unique 58-residue
N-terminal extension of UbcM2 plays a role, as reported for reactions
of UbcM2 with several RING E3s (e.g., CIAP2, Mdm2, and CARP2). A His6-T7-tagged mutant of UbcM2
lacking the N-terminal extension (i.e., ΔN-UbcM2) was analyzed
side by side with the wt enzyme. In all cases, the ubiquitylating
activity (mono and poly) and linkage preference of ΔN-UbcM2
were indistinguishable from those of the wt enzyme, indicating that
the N-terminal extension neither represses UbcM2 polyUb chain synthesis
nor dictates the types of chains built when UbcM2 partners with AO7T
(Figure ).

Unique amino-terminal extension of UbcM2
does not dictate
the in vitro Ub conjugating behavior of the enzyme
when it is
partnered with AO7T. In vitro ubiquitylation assays
comparing the polyUb chain building capacity of wt and ΔN-UbcM2,
a mutant lacking the N-terminal 58-amino acid extension. Ub variants
included in each 90 min reaction are indicated above the panels. The
migrations of unmodified ([35S]AO7T) and ubiquitylated
AO7T [[35S]AO7T-(Ub)n] are
marked at the right and molecular weight markers at the left. The
assay was repeated a minimum of three independent times.

We next analyzed the contribution of a patch of
residues on the
backside of UbcM2 (i.e., antipodal from the active site) where the
corresponding residues of UbcH5b form a noncovalent interaction with
Ub. This backside binding to Ub is essential for
UbcH5 family members to processively synthesize polyUb chains. Only six of the 12 residues comprising this
patch are conserved in UbcM2. We simultaneously mutated the six nonconserved
residues to the corresponding UbcH5b residues. Using the residue
numbering for UbcM2, the substitutions were P79A, N80Q, K86V, R94Q,
L98M, and T207M, and we refer to this mutant as “AQVQMM”.
We predicted that this mutant might mimic UbcH5 with respect to
processive chain building. Instead, AQVQMM was modestly impaired in
its ability to ubiquitylate [35S]AO7T (Figure A, lane 2 vs lane 3), and this difference
was exacerbated at pH 8.5 because of the increased polyUb synthesizing
capacity of the wt enzyme at the higher pH (Figure A, lane 5 vs lane 6). To further study these
backside mutations, a panel of single and double mutations were analyzed
by Western blotting with the linkage-specific and pan Ub antibodies.
This analysis
revealed that several backside residues differentially affect UbcM2
ubiquitylation capacity. Notably, the P79A mutation reduced the efficiency
of AO7T monoubiquitylation by UbcM2 (Figure B, anti-Ub and anti-HA blots, lane 4 vs the
wt enzyme in lane 3). This decrease in activity was not due to a deficiency
in being charged with Ub by E1 or to discharge capacity, as loading
of the mutant enzyme and transfer of Ub to an acceptor lysine occurred
at levels comparable to those seen for wt UbcM2 (Figure 1C of the ). Surprisingly,
P79A UbcM2 largely retained its capacity to polyubiquitylate AO7T
using K63 Ub (Figure 2A of the ), indicating
that the mutant does not exhibit gross conformational defects or a
reduced capacity to engage AO7T. The recovery of polyubiquitylating
activity in reaction mixtures containing K63 Ub indicates that one
or more lysines of Ub (other than K63) negatively impacts the P79A
substitution and that mutation of this lysine(s) to an arginine relieves
the inhibitory effect. K48 of Ub does not appear to be the primary
lysine exerting an inhibitory effect on P79A as reactions using K48R
Ub showed only a slight increase in activity (Figure 2B of the ).

Select noncatalytic backside
residues influence the capacity of
UbcM2 to synthesize polyUb chains. (A) In vitro ubiquitylation
assays conducted at pH 7.4 (left) or pH 8.5 (right) to compare the
patterns of [35S]AO7T ubiquitylation between wt UbcM2 and
AQVQMM, a six-residue substitution mutant of UbcM2. Reaction mixtures
contained either no Ub (lanes 1 and 4) or wt Ub (lanes 2, 3, 5, and
6). (B) Recombinant ubiquitylation assays using nonradiolabeled HA-AO7T
were incubated for 90 min and contained either no Ub (lane 1), UbK0 (lane 2), or wt Ub (lanes 3–7), and the indicated
forms of UbcM2 (listed above blots). Reaction products were analyzed
by Western blotting with the antibody listed at the left of each blot.
The migrations of unmodified AO7T and ubiquitylated AO7T [AO7T-(Ub)n] are shown to the right of the blots. The
migration of molecular weight markers is indicated to the left of
each blot. All assays were repeated a minimum of three independent
times.

Remarkably, when the residue adjacent
to P79 was mutated from an
asparagine to a glutamine (N80Q), the chain building capacity of UbcM2
was enhanced compared to that of the wt enzyme (Figure B, lane 5 vs lane 3 of the anti-Ub blot).
Similarly, the R94Q/L98M double mutant enhanced UbcM2 ubiquitylating
capacity (Figure B, lane 7 vs lane 3 of the
anti-Ub blot),
whereas the K86V mutant had no obvious effect (Figure B, lane 6 vs lane 3). N80Q UbcM2 and, to
a lesser extent, the R94Q/L98M mutant displayed increased K48- and
K63-linked polyUb chain building capacity compared to that of the
wt enzyme (Figure B, lanes 5 and 7 vs lane
3 of K48 and K63
chain blots). In contrast, P79A UbcM2 showed a much reduced capacity
to ubiquitylate AO7T, and the modified AO7T was below the detection
level of the pan Ub antibody (Figure B, lane
4, anti-Ub blot), whereas fully UbK0-monoubiquitylated
AO7T was readily detectable (Figure B, lane
2, anti-Ub blot). It should be appreciated
that while the signal intensity from each linkage-specific antibody
can be compared among samples on a given blot, signal intensities
cannot be compared between blots probed with the different antibodies
as each antibody has a distinct affinity for its cognate antigen.
Thus, a more intense signal on the K48 linkage blot for N80Q UbcM2
as compared to the K63 linkage blot does not indicate that this mutant
is better at building K48-linked chains than K63-linked chains. Together,
the results demonstrate that residues on the backside of UbcM2 (i.e.,
antipodal from the catalytic pocket) have opposing effects on the
ubiquitylating capacity of the enzyme and that the negative effect
of the P79A mutation is dominant over the enhancing effects of the
N80Q, R94Q, and L98M substitutions in the context of the AQVQMM mutant.
Importantly,
these findings also show that the suppressive effects of Ub lysines
on UbcM2 activity are at least partially mediated by three backside
residues (N80, R94, and L98) as mutation of these residues relieves
this inhibition and enhances the ubiquitylating capacity of the enzyme.

Structural studies with UbcH5 have demonstrated that processive
polyUb chain construction is promoted by the noncovalent interaction
of Ub with the backside of the E2. Relevant to our discussion
here, two Ub lysine side chains (K6 and K48) contact four backside
residues of UbcH5 (P17, A19, V26, and Q34; corresponding to UbcM2
residues P77, P79, K76, and R84, respectively). We therefore tested how these two Ub lysines impact UbcM2
activity. Wild-type UbcM2 and all of the backside mutants displayed
a modest reduction in ubiquitylating activity using K6R Ub (Figure A, lanes 4–9). Conversely, wt UbcM2 and all
of the mutants except P79A UbcM2 showed
increased polyUb chain building activity with K48R Ub (Figure B, compare lanes 4, 5, and 7–9 to
lane 3). Time course analysis of K48R Ub reactions revealed that although
UbcM2 chain synthesizing activity is enhanced by mutation of K48 (Figure C), the pattern of chain growth is more consistent
with a distributive mechanism in which chain lengths grow gradually
over time, rather than the processive pattern observed for UbcH5 family
members (e.g., Figure B). Western blot analyses
of AO7T ubiquitylation
by UbcM2 using K48R Ub reinforced this conclusion (Figure D, anti-HA blot). The increased UbcM2 activity
with K48R Ub underscores the notion that in the context of wt Ub,
K48 suppresses the polyubiquitylating activity of the enzyme. Importantly,
the differences in polyUb chain synthesis observed with K6R Ub and
K48R Ub are not a consequence of differences in UbcM2 loading with
the Ub variants or in the intrinsic aminolysis activity of the UbcM2–Ub
conjugates (Figure 1B,D of the ).
Thus, unlike UbcH5 family members, which interact with K6 and K48
of Ub to processively construct polyUb chains, UbcM2 activity is slightly
enhanced by K6 but inhibited by K48.

K6 and K48 of Ub differentially influence
the ubiquitylating activity
of UbcM2. (A and B) The wild type or the indicated substitution mutants
of UbcM2 were incubated with K6R Ub (A) or K48R Ub (B) for 90 min
at pH 7.4 (lanes 4–9). Control reaction mixtures contained
either no Ub (lane 1), UbK0 (lane 2), or wt Ub (lane 3)
for comparison. Ubiquitylation of [35S]AO7T was analyzed
by SDS–PAGE and fluorography. (C) Kinetic assay analyzing the
ubiquitylation activity of wt UbcM2 using K48R Ub at pH 7.4. Samples
were incubated at 37 °C for the indicated times, solubilized,
and processed for SDS–PAGE and fluorography. For panels A–C,
the migrations of unmodified ([35S]AO7T) and ubiquitylated
AO7T [[35S]AO7T-(Ub)n] are
marked on the right and molecular weight markers on the left. (D)
Similar to panel C using nonradiolabeled HA-AO7T and analyzing reaction
products by Western blotting with the indicated antibodies.

Discussion
The conjugation of Ub
to a target protein is accomplished by an
enzyme cascade minimally consisting of an E1, an E2, and an E3. Extensive
biochemical and biophysical experimentation has elaborated the general
mechanism by which E1, E2, and E3 cooperate to ubiquitylate substrates
(reviewed in refs () and ()), yet what
appears to be a relatively straightforward enzymatic cascade is in
fact replete with nuance and complexities. Arguably, the greatest
of these complexities is based on the recognition that substrates
can be modified with Ub in a multitude of ways. These include single
and multiple sites of monoUb, single and multiple sites of polyUb,
and putative combinations thereof. Recent efforts to understand this
panoply of Ub decorations have revealed distinct yet interconnected
aspects of substrate ubiquitylation. One theme is that individual
E2s can govern the topology of polyUb chains conjugated to substrates.
The underlying premise is that each E2 has an intrinsic preference(s)
for synthesizing a specific Ub–Ub linkage(s) and this preference
is conferred by particular residues within the enzyme, often with
a contribution from residues of Ub and/or
the partner E3., A second theme is that a subset
of E2s have been consigned to conjugate monoUb(s) to substrates and
other E2s may then be recruited to extend polyUb chains from these
primed sites. While recent studies have defined some of the unique
mechanisms governing the polyubiquitylating properties of particular
E2s (e.g., refs () and ()), understanding
how other E2s are restricted to attaching monoUb is limited.,,

Our biochemical characterization
of UbcM2, a highly conserved E2
associated with numerous cellular processes, reveals that although
UbcM2 is largely restricted to modifying a proxy substrate with monoUb,
it possesses an intrinsic capacity to construct polyUb chains. In
particular, UbcM2 can synthesize K63-linked and, to a lesser extent,
K6- and K48-linked chains. This latent capacity was uncovered in reaction
mixtures incubated for extended times and was further highlighted
when single-lysine Ub variants were used in place of wt Ub (Figure ). Notably, these data indicate that one
or more Ub lysines actively suppress the polyUb capacity of UbcM2.
Mutation of the suppressive lysine(s) relieves the suppression, and
polyUb chains are synthesized, albeit nonprocessively. Lys48 of Ub
is the major suppressive
lysine as UbcM2 shows enhanced polyUb synthesizing activity in reaction
mixtures containing K48R Ub (e.g., Figure B–D). In contrast, reaction mixtures
containing K6R Ub showed a mild suppression of UbcM2 activity (Figure A), indicating that K6 of Ub promotes ubiquitylation
by the enzyme.

Our findings highlight key distinctions between
UbcM2 and the closely related UbcH5 family of E2s. Although the Ubc
domain of UbcM2 is 66% identical
and 78% similar to the UbcH5 Ubc domain, UbcM2 is a monoubiquitylating
enzyme, and under conditions that permit polyUb construction, chain
formation occurs in a stepwise fashion indicative of a distributive
mechanism (e.g., Figure C). In contrast, UbcH5
family members processively
synthesize polyUb chains once the priming mono-Ub transfers have occurred
(e.g., Figure B). This processivity requires
a patch of
backside residues that cooperate to bind Ub and promote multimerization
of the Ub-charged enzyme. Interestingly,
the counterparts of several of these residues in UbcM2 differentially
impact activity (Figure B). In UbcM2, P79
promotes activity whereas
N80, R94, and L98 restrict it. The underlying mechanism for these
opposing effects is not clear, although one possibility is that the
substitution mutants increase the affinity of a noncovalent interaction
between UbcM2 and Ub. NMR experiments show that wt UbcM2
displays very weak backside binding to wt Ub (R. Klevit, unpublished
data), and via the incorporation of substitutions that make UbcM2
more “UbcH5-like”, the backside binding of Ub to UbcM2
becomes stronger, albeit very modestly. However, this increase does
not translate into an increase in UbcM2 activity in our assays. In
fact, when all six substitutions are incorporated into a single molecule,
as in the AQVQMM mutant of UbcM2, the ubiquitylating capacity of UbcM2
is suppressed and this suppression is specifically attributable to
the P79A substitution (Figure ). These data
imply that depending on the
particular E2, noncovalent backside binding to Ub can stimulate polyUb
chain synthesis, as
in the case of UbcH5, or relegate an enzyme to monoubiquitylation,
as in the case of UbcM2.

We favor the idea that strengthened
backside binding of Ub negatively
impacts UbcM2 activity by enhancing the suppressive effect of Ub Lys48
and possibly other Ub lysines. Support for this comes from the observation
that the activities of AQVQMM and the individual UbcM2 mutants were
increased in assays containing K48R Ub (Figure B). Although the enhancement for P79A UbcM2
was rather modest (Figure B, lane 6), it was
confirmed in time course
assays (Figure 2B of the ). Lys48
likely does not act alone; an additional lysine(s) of Ub contributes
to the suppression of UbcM2 because both the AQVQMM mutant and P79A
UbcM2 exhibited robust polyUb chain building in reaction mixtures
containing K63 Ub (Figure 2A of the ), a
variant in which all lysines of Ub except K63 have been mutated to
arginine.

An additional feature revealed by these studies is
that the ability
of UbcM2 to synthesize polyUb chains appears to correlate with how
tightly the enzyme binds to the E3/substrate/proxy substrate. For
example, UbcM2 readily builds K63-linked polyUb chains on AO7T using
K63 Ub but still only monoubiquitylates BRCA1-BARD1 with this Ub variant
(Figure A). Accordingly, GST-UbcM2 coprecipitates
AO7T but
not BRCA1-BARD1 (Figure B). One explanation
for these findings is
that the tighter binding of AO7T to UbcM2 better promotes the “closed”
conformation of the UbcM2–Ub conjugate and thereby enhances
the reactivity of the thioester bond
for nucleophilic attack by Ub lysines. This in turn promotes polyUb
chain synthesis. In contrast, the closed conformation is not promoted
by relatively weak binding E3 ligases such as BRCA1-BARD1, and as
a consequence, UbcM2 transfers only monoUb. A second but not mutually
exclusive possibility is that tight binding of AO7T to UbcM2 may limit
the inhibitory Ub interaction that restricts UbcM2 activity whereas
weak BRCA1-BARD1 binding is more permissive for Ub Lys48 inhibition.
A third possibility is that relatively weak binding of UbcM2 to particular
E3 ligases corresponds to a short residency time of docking of the
E2–Ub
conjugate to the E3 and that this is conducive to a single Ub transfer
followed by E3 dissociation. Statistically, an unmodified E3 is more
likely to bind to the reloaded E2–Ub
conjugate, again producing a mono-Ub product prior to
dissociation. In pairings in which UbcM2 binds more tightly to its
partner E3, even weak self-association of the UbcM2–Ubs conjugate
with itself would increase
the local concentration of the charged enzyme, perhaps allowing for
chain formation.

An additional finding from this work is that
the N-terminal extension
of UbcM2 is not responsible for the inhibition of polyUb chain extension
in reactions with AO7T (Figure ), in contrast
to results for several other
RING E3 ligases, including CIAP2, Mdm2, and CARD2. As our reaction conditions differed from those of the published
study, we repeated the experiments with CIAP2 and confirmed that the
N-terminal extension of UbcM2 inhibits polyubiquitylation of the CIAP2
RING under both sets of reaction conditions (data not shown). We also
compared the binding of UbcM2 to AO7 versus CIAP2 and found that the
enzyme forms a stable complex with AO7 but not with CIAP2 (Figure
3 of the ). These
observations support a model in which the N-terminal extension represses
the polyubiquitylating capacity of UbcM2 when the enzyme partners
with E3 ligases to which it binds relatively weakly. In contrast,
when UbcM2 engages an E3 ligase in a more stable complex, the effect
of the N-terminal extension is neutralized. Tight binding may restrict
access or flexibility of the N-terminal extension such that it cannot
exert its inhibitory effect on catalysis. These conclusions further
support the emerging model in which the ubiquitylating capacity of
E2s is dictated both by specific residues within the enzyme and by
interactions with specific E3 ligase partners (e.g., refs () and ()).

In summary, this
work advances our understanding of the highly
conserved E2, UbcM2, by identifying multiple noncatalytic residues
of the Ubc domain, antipodally situated from the active site, that
impact
the ubiquitylating activity of the enzyme. We have also uncovered
a novel role for Lys48 of Ub as a modulator of E2 activity. Collectively,
these findings provide additional mechanisms by which an E2 can be
primarily relegated to monoubiquitylating its cognate targets despite
possessing the inherent capacity to
synthesize polyUb chains. Such a limitation provides a guarantee that
the monoubiquitylating E2 is kept from generating even small amounts
of the polyUb chain
on its AO7-targeted substrates.

Supporting Information Available
Lysine reactivity
assays demonstrating that wt UbcM2 is similarly
charged with the indicated variants of Ub and that each variant is
comparably discharged from the E2 (Figure 1A,B,D), evidence that wt
and P79A UbcM2 behave comparably with respect to
Ub loading and discharge (Figure 1C), evidence that the two backside
mutants, AQVQMM and
P79A UbcM2, both retain the capacity to synthesize K63-linked chains
using K63 Ub despite having reduced ubiquitylating activity in reaction
mixtures containing wt Ub (Figure 2A), evidence that P79A UbcM2 has
a modest increase in
ubiquitylating activity when using K48R Ub as compared to wt Ub (Figure
2B), and evidence that UbcM2 can form a stable complex with AO7 but
not with
the RING finger-containing protein CIAP2 (Figure 3). This material
is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500072v_si_001.pdf

bi500072v_si_002.pdf

The authors declare no competing
financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank
Emily Duncan for preparation of proteins for NMR
binding experiments and members of the Plafker laboratory for helpful
discussions and encouragement.

Abbreviations
Klysine

Ububiquitin

E1ubiquitin-activating
enzyme

E2ubiquitin-conjugating
enzyme

E3ubiquitin
protein ligase

polyUbpolymers of
ubiquitin

RINGreally
interesting new gene

HECThomologous to E6-AP carboxyl-terminal domain

Ubccatalytic core domain

RFPred fluorescent
protein

wtwild
type

IPTGisopropyl
β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside

BD/BCBARD/BRCA1

SDS–PAGEsodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis

GSTglutathione S-transferase

GSHglutathione

CBBCoomassie Brilliant Blue

HAhemaglutinin

H6T-UbcM2His6-T7-tagged UbcM2

UbK0lysine-less ubiquitin.

