The clostridial neurotoxins
(CNTs), which include seven BoNT serotypes (A–G) and tetanus
neurotoxin (TeNT), have been integral for studying neuroexocytosis.() Intoxication by BoNTs causes flaccid paralysis,
whereas TeNT causes rigid paralysis. Currently, most, if not all,
therapeutic applications of the BoNTs involve the inhibition of the
release of neurotransmitters from neurons.() The targets for these toxins are neuronal SNARE proteins. SNAREs,
which include syntaxin and SNAP-25 on the target membrane and synaptobrevin
on vesicles, form the core of a conserved membrane fusion machine
that mediates neuronal exocytosis.,

However,
it is well established that SNARE proteins are ubiquitously
expressed and are important for secretion in many other cell types,
which include immune cells, including eosinophils, neutrophils, MΦs,
and mast cells., Inhibition of secretion from these
cells, using CNTs, could revolutionize treatment options for allergies
(mast cells) and chronic inflammation (MΦs). However, the full
therapeutic potential of these toxins has not been fulfilled because
of the lack of toxin receptors on nonneuronal cells.

To target
the toxins to nonneuronal cells, it was important to
first investigate whether they were functionally active in the absence
of their native receptors. HEK-293 cells were used as a model system
to study alternative entry methods because of their lack of native
toxin receptors. However, because most of the CNTs enter neurons via
recycling synaptic vesicles,, it was important to
retarget the toxins to an alternative vesicular compartment that is
more commonly found in nonneuronal cell types.

Our strategy
for redirecting the CNTs was to utilize the low-density
lipoprotein receptor (LDLR), which is recycled through endosomes in
virtually all cell types.() We transfected
HEK-293 cells with an avidin-LDLR (AvLDLR) construct (Figure S1a of
the ) and then incubated
the cells with biotinylated CNTs (Figure S1b of the ). HEK-293 cells that were transfected
with AvLDLR exhibited robust entry of several CNTs, as evidenced by
significant cleavage of exogenously introduced SNAP-25 by biotinylated
BoNT/A (biotin-BoNT/A) and biotin-BoNT/E (Figure S2a of the ), and cleavage of transfected
synaptobrevin II (syb II) by biotin-BoNT/B, biotin-BoNT/F, and biotin-TeNT
(Figure S2b of the ). Collectively, these results clearly demonstrate that the CNTs
are active when retargeted to an alternative organelle lacking native
toxin receptors, as suggested by a previous study.()

The fact that many primary cells are resistant to
genetic modification() makes it difficult
to introduce the CNTs via
chimeric receptors. To overcome this obstacle, we used avidin to tether
biotin-toxin to biotin-transferrin (Tr) or to a biotin-antibody directed
against the extracellular domain of the LDLR to target recycling endosomes
(Figure 3a of the ). Indeed, when biotin-BoNT/A or biotin-BoNT/E was linked to the
antibody or Tr through avidin, there was significant cleavage of SNAP-25
(Figure S3b,c of the ). In addition, when biotin-BoNT/B, biotin-BoNT/F, or biotin-TeNT
was attached to Tr, the toxins were able to enter cells and cleave
their substrate, syb II (Figure S3d of the ).

The next goal was to determine whether
these toxins could be retargeted
to MΦs, which are phagocytes that participate in various defense
mechanisms in immune responses. They also play a maladaptive role
in diseases, including sepsis, atherosclerosis, cancer, and chronic
inflammatory disorders, including rheumatoid arthritis and Crohn’s
disease.()

To retarget BoNT/B to RAW
264.7 cells, a mouse MΦ cell line,
and cleave SNAREs, we modified the antibody-mediated delivery method
and targeted the toxin to the Fc and complement receptor-mediated
endocytosis pathway. Cellubrevin (ceb) levels in cells incubated with
BoNT/B alone and BoNT/B with an anti-BoNT/A antibody (αA) were
unaffected. With BoNT/B and αB (anti-BoNT/B), the toxin was
able to enter cells and cleave ceb (Figure a). None of these treatments significantly affected cell viability
(Figure b).

BoNT/B incubated with a serotype-specific
antibody enters RAW 264.7
cells to cleave ceb. (a) BoNT/B (50 nM) and αB (combined at
a 1:1 molar ratio) were combined and incubated with RAW 264.7 cells
for 48 h, resulting in cleavage of 68% of ceb. ceb levels were unaffected
in cells incubated with BoNT/B alone or BoNT/B incubated with αA.
(b) MTS assay indicating no significant decrease in metabolic activity
in response to toxin treatment vs the control. Error bars represent
the standard error of the mean (SEM) (n = 3).

In addition to their ability to phagocytose and
degrade microbes,
MΦs also release a variety of cytokines that regulate inflammation
and the recruitment of other immune cells. To determine the effect
of SNARE cleavage by retargeted BoNT/B, we measured the release of
cytokines and other factors from human BMDMs. Cells treated with BoNT/B,
in conjunction with αB, exhibited an ∼50% decrease in
interferon-γ and lipopolysaccharide (IFNγ/LPS)-induced
TNFα release, without significantly affecting cell viability
(Figure a and Figure S4a of the ). We did not observe a
reduction in the release of other cytokines and factors from these
cells (Figure S5 of the ).

The secretion of TNFα, a potent pro-inflammatory cytokine
secreted primarily by MΦs and monocytes,() is thought to play a critical role in many diseases.,− A dose–response study revealed that the IC50 of retargeted BoNT/B on TNFα release was ∼6
nM (Figure b). This effect was specific; the
release of matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9), monitored as a control,
was not reduced by the retargeted toxin, demonstrating that this enzyme
is secreted through a distinct, BoNT/B-insensitive pathway (Figure
S4b of the ). Furthermore,
the decrease in TNFα release was not associated with cytotoxicity
(Figure S4c of the ). We note that the increases in metabolic activity at higher doses
of retargeted toxin might potentially explain the concomitant increase
in MMP-9 release over this concentration range. The donor pool mainly
consisted of two groups: clinically diagnosed allergic asthmatics
and allergic patients without asthma. Human BMDMs from both groups
exhibited significant decreases in TNFα release (Figure c,d).

Retargeted BoNT/B reduces the secretion of TNFα
from primary
human BMDMs. (a) Release of TNFα from human BMDMs monitored
by ELISA. When BoNT/B (6 nM) and αB (combined at a 1:1 molar
ratio) were incubated with BMDMs for 48 h, the release of TNFα
was reduced by 45%. The trial with antibody and BoNT/B alone was not
significantly different from the control. Error bars represent SEM
(n = 7; p ≤ 0.01). (b) Dose
response of retargeted BoNT/B on the release of TNFα from human
BMDMs (fitted line colored gray). The concentrations indicated are
for BoNT/B, which was preincubated with αB. Error bars represent
SEM (n ≥ 3; R2 = 0.65; IC50 = 6.1 nM). (c and d) The release of TNFα
from human BMDMs from allergic asthmatic patients (c) was reduced
by 50%, while BMDMs from allergic patients with no diagnosis of asthma
(d) exhibited a 39% reduction when incubated with 6 nM retargeted
BoNT/B. Error bars represent SEM (n ≥ 5; p ≤ 0.01).

The antibody-mediated delivery method illustrates
the effectiveness
in retargeting BoNT/B to human BMDMs; however, use of the intact toxin
can potentially result in the intoxication of neuronal cells. Therefore,
further experiments were performed utilizing a truncated toxin, BoNT/BΔHC,
which lacks the HC domain that mediates interactions with native receptors
on neurons.()

To produce BoNT/BΔHC,
we took advantage of a hypersensitive
chymotrypsin site that lies between the translocation (HN) and HC
domain of the protein (Figure S6a of the ).() Toxin that was treated
with chymotrypsin resulted in an ∼113 kDa fragment, which could
be reduced by β-mercaptoethanol (BME) into two fragments corresponding
to the HN domain and L chain (Figure S6b,c of the ). To confirm the removal of the neurospecific
binding domain, we tested whether BoNT/BΔHC could enter and
intoxicate hippocampal neurons. As expected, BoNT/BΔHC had no
detectable activity as demonstrated by the lack of syb II cleavage
(Figure S6d of the ). Thus, BoNT/BΔHC, preincubated with the antibody, is not
targeted to neurons.

Next, primary human BMDMs treated with
BoNT/BΔHC and αB
led to a ∼25% decrease in TNFα release (Figure a), indicating that the HC domain is dispensable
for targeted entry into human BMDMs. Finally, when BoNT/BΔHC
and αB were administrated in mice with thioglycollate-induced
inflammation, FACS (fluorescence-activated cell sorting) analysis
revealed an ∼35% decrease in the extent of MΦ recruitment
versus the control, implicating an overall reduced state of inflammation
(Figure b,c). These data further confirm that
BoNT/BΔHC is effective at suppressing selective inflammatory
responses both in vitro and in vivo.

Retargeting of BoNT/BΔHC to MΦs.
Injection into mice
reduces the extent of MΦ recruitment in vivo. (a) The release
of TNFα was assessed after treatment
with BoNT/BΔHC (1 nM) and αB for 48 h and reduced by 23%
vs the control. Error bars represent SEM (n = 3; p ≤ 0.05). (b) FACS analysis of intraperitoneal cells,
isolated from mice treated with the indicated agents, exhibited a
significant decrease in the CD-115-positive MΦ population (red
line) in the presence of BoNT/BΔHC and αB. Cells incubated
with a control antibody are represented by the dark gray area. (c)
Mice treated with a mixture of BoNT/BΔHC (25 ng) and αB
(42 ng) exhibited an ∼35% decrease in the extent of MΦ
recruitment 4 h post-treatment, while neither protein alone exhibited
a decrease vs the control. Error bars represent SEM (n ≥ 8; p ≤ 0.05).

To further investigate the effects of BoNT/B on
MΦ recruitment,
we investigated whether retargeted toxins affected integrin trafficking
in RAW 264.7 cells. Adhesion through β1 integrins and activation
of CD11b are thought to be critical for differentiation of monocytes
to MΦs., We observed no significant differences
in adhesion between treated and untreated cells (Figure S7a of the ) or in CD11b surface expression
(Figure S7b of the ). Thus, we believe the reduction in the level of intraperitoneal
MΦs is largely due to the reduced extent of recruitment of monocytes
and leukocytes because of decreased levels of TNFα.()

The CNTs are powerful therapeutic agents
that reduce the symptoms
of many profound diseases, including cervical dystonia and migraine
headaches.() The findings reported here
demonstrate that these toxins can be engineered to target cells other
than neurons.() In particular, targeting
the CNTs to human MΦs can help alleviate symptoms in many diseases
such as rheumatoid arthritis, Crohn’s disease, psoriasis, and
refractory asthma.() Blocking the effects
of TNFα has also been shown to inhibit tumor vascularization() and the progression of atherosclerosis.() With the added benefit of the prolonged effects
of BoNT/B,() this strategy introduces a
powerful new class of therapeutics.

Acknowledgments
We thank M. Karta and members of the Chapman and Bertics labs
for assistance and critical reading of the manuscript.

Supporting Information Available
Detailed methods, Figures S1–S7,
and supporting text and references. This material is available free
of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi201490t_si_001.pdf

