Introduction
Long noncoding (lnc)RNAs
are defined as RNA molecules over 200
nt in length which do not encode for a protein. Once considered to
be transcriptional noise, lncRNAs have now been shown to regulate
many key biological processes, including nuclear transport, microRNA activity, and epigenetic regulation., One significant role
of lncRNAs is the regulation of gene expression via a mechanism involving
interaction with the epigenetic silencing complex Polycomb Repressive
Complex 2 (PRC2), with ∼20% of all lncRNA transcripts estimated
to bind PRC2.

The PRC2 complex contains
the three core protein subunits EZH2,
EED, and SUZ12. EZH2 contains a SET domain which catalyzes trimethylation
of histone H3 at lysine 27 (H3K27 → H3K27Me3), a mark associated
with transcriptional repression; SUZ12 and EED are also required for
this EZH2 methyltransferase activity to occur. The core PRC2 complex is unable to target and silence genomic regions
by itself. Instead, many of the lncRNAs associated with PRC2 have
been shown to act as cellular ‘address codes’, which
guide PRC2 silencing to target specific regions of the genome where
the lncRNA associates. Given these lncRNAs
direct epigenetic silencing via association with PRC2, their overexpression
can lead to aberrant silencing of tumor suppressor genes, resulting
in malignant cancerous phenotypes.

HOX Transcript Antisense RNA (HOTAIR) is one of
the most well-studied PRC2 interacting lncRNAs, first established
as a regulator of HOX gene expression. HOTAIR overexpression is associated with widespread gene expression
changes and aggressive metastatic phenotypes in many cancers, including
breast, colorectal, and hepatocellular carcinomas. These aggressive phenotype changes are recapitulated in vitro for
cells with enforced HOTAIR overexpression,, suggesting that HOTAIR is responsible for driving these malignant
characteristics.

Although the effects of HOTAIR overexpression
have been well-characterized
functionally,, the molecular details of its
interaction with PRC2 are in need of further elucidation. EZH2 has
been shown to interact with an in vitro transcribed HOTAIR RNA probe,
suggesting it is involved in direct binding to HOTAIR. However, the affinity of this interaction and
possible contributions of other PRC2 subunits to HOTAIR binding were
not established. For HOTAIR, a 300-mer domain at the 5′ terminus
has been found to be necessary and sufficient for interaction with
PRC2. However, the minimal HOTAIR domain
required for PRC2 binding has yet to be defined.

Further knowledge
of the molecular basis of HOTAIR-PRC2 binding
will be important for understanding how HOTAIR overexpression can
drive malignancy in cancers through PRC2. Moreover, a deeper understanding
of the details of HOTAIR-PRC2 binding may provide a useful foundation
for exploring this interaction as a target for small molecule intervention.
Herein we describe a systematic investigation of the binding interaction
between subunits of the PRC2 core catalytic heterotrimer (EZH2-EED-SUZ12,
hereafter referred to as PRC2 3m) and the lncRNA HOTAIR. As part of
this investigation, we report a minimal HOTAIR sequence responsible
for PRC2 3m interaction, as well as a secondary structure for this
domain derived from nuclease mapping. Collectively, these data give
insight into the details of the epigenetically important interaction
between HOTAIR and PRC2.

Materials and Methods
Preparation of Radiolabeled
ncRNAs
DNA templates for
in vitro transcription were prepared by PCR amplification from a HOTAIR
containing plasmid (a generous gift from Dr. Howard Chang - Stanford
University) using primers listed in . RNAs were transcribed using the MEGAShortScript kit (Ambion) according
to manufacturers protocol, followed by dephosphorylation with Antarctic
Phosphatase (New England Biolabs). Dephosphorylated RNAs were 5′
radiolabeled using T4 PNK (New England Biolabs) in the presence of
[γ-32P]ATP (PerkinElmer). In all cases, radiolabeled
RNAs were purified by gel extraction. RNA sequences used in this study
are listed in .

Generation
of Recombinant Proteins
Baculovirus for
6xHIS-EED and SUZ12 were a generous gift from Prof. Kristian Helin,
University of Copenhagen. Transfer plasmid pFastBac-FLAG-EZH2 was
a generous gift from Prof. Robert Kingston, Harvard Medical School.
Proteins were expressed in High Five insect cells using baculoviral
expression vectors. For dimers and trimers, the complexes were expressed
by coinfection and purified together as a single unit, rather than
mixing prepurified monomers. High Five cells were harvested 48 h after
infection and purified according to tag. For FLAG tagged proteins
(FLAG-EZH2 and FLAG-EZH2-SUZ12), pellets were resuspended in BC300
buffer (20 mM HEPES [pH 7.9], 300 mM KCl, 0.2 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol,
1 mM DTT, 0.2 mM PMSF, and complete protease inhibitors (Roche)),
lysed using sonication, and extracts cleared by centrifugation. Cleared
extracts were incubated with prewashed M2 beads (Sigma) for 4 h at
4 °C. Beads were then pelleted, briefly washed 3× with BC2000
(as above, but 2 M KCl), and once with BC300. Beads were eluted with
0.2 mg/mL 3xFLAG peptide (Sigma), and desalted using Zeba spin desalting
columns (Pierce). Where necessary, proteins were further purified
by gel filtration using a HiLoad 16/600 Superdex 200 column (GE healthcare),
followed by concentration using Amicon ultra 10 kDa MWCO spin concentrators
(Millipore). For 6×His-EED, pellets were resuspended in Histrap
buffer (as for BC300, but including 50 mM imidazole), lysed by sonication,
and extracts cleared by centrifugation. Cleared extracts were loaded
onto a Histrap FF column (GE Healthcare) and eluted with a 50–500
mM imidazole gradient. Combined peak fractions were further purified
by gel filtration followed by spin concentration. For dual tagged
complexes (FLAG-EZH2–6×HIS-EED and PRC2 3m), purification
initially followed the procedure for 6×His tag purification.
Combined Histrap fractions were then incubated with prewashed M2 beads,
and further purified following the procedure for FLAG purification.
Protein purity was assessed by SDS-PAGE and Western blotting (; antibodies listed in Table S3).
Recombinant LSD1 (ab80379) was purchased from AbCam.

Electrophoretic
Mobility Shift Assays (EMSAs)
Protein-RNA
binding was carried out with indicated amounts of protein and 5′ 32P labeled RNA in binding buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.4],
100 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM β-ME, 0.1% IGEPAL CA-630),
with yeast tRNA (Roche) at a concentration of 1.25 μg/μL.
Radiolabeled RNAs were annealed by heating to 95 °C, snap cooling
to 4 °C, addition of binding buffer, followed by equilibration
to rt over at least 20 min. Comparison with a slow-cooling annealing
procedure produced no difference in protein affinity. Binding reactions
were incubated at rt for 45 min, then loaded onto a nondenaturing
6% (200-mers or smaller) or 3% (300-mers) 75:1 acrylamide:bisacrylamide
gel. Gels were visualized using storage phosphor, and quantified using
ImageQuant (GE Healthcare). Where multiple upper bands were present,
all were quantified together as the ‘bound’ fraction
unless specified otherwise. Dissociation constants (Kd) were derived from data point fitting with Prism (Graphpad)
according to the function for specific binding with hill slope: B = Bmax*[X]h/(Kdh + [X]h) – where [X] is the concentration of protein X, h is the Hill coefficient, B is the fraction
of shifted complex, and Bmax is the maximal amount
of complex formed.

Nondenaturing Nanoelectrospray Ionization
Mass Spectrometry
(Native Mass Spectrometry)
Intact EED-EZH2 complexes were
prepared for native mass spectrometry experiment by buffer exchange
to 500 mM ammonium acetate [pH 7.0] using Micro Bio-Spin 6 Chromatography
Columns (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc.). Prior to the buffer exchange,
protein complex solution was 161 μM. The optimal concentration
was experimentally determined using the mass spectrometer, giving
a final concentration of ∼15–25 μM. Mass spectra
were recorded on a Synapt HDMS instrument (Waters, Manchester, UK),
and calibrated using cesium iodide (100 mg/mL). In all cases 2.5 μL
of sample solution was loaded into capillary with tips that were cut
to give an inner diameter of 1–5 μm, as previously described. Typical values for MS parameters were: capillary
voltage 1.9 kV, cone voltage 100 V, cone gas 40 L/h, extractor 1.9
V, ion transfer stage pressure 3.66 mbar, trap collision energy 15–35
V, transfer collision energy 14–19 V, trap 4.23 × 10–2 mbar, IMS pressure (5.01–5.02) × 10–1 mbar, TOF analyzer pressure 9.71 × 10–7 mbar. Micromass MassLynx 4.1 was used for data acquisition and processing.

Native Gel Electrophoresis
Native gels were run using
the NativeBlue system (Invitrogen) following the manufacturers protocols.
Gels were visualized by fixing in 40% MeOH/8% AcOH solution, followed
by destaining in 10% AcOH for 5 h.

Enzymatic Mapping and Footprinting
5′ 32P labeled RNA was digested with RNase I
or V1 in the presence or
absence of EZH2-EED. For mapping experiments, labeled RNA was mixed
with 0.1 U RNase I, or 0.01 U RNase V1, and 1 μg yeast tRNA
in binding buffer (see EMSA protocol) and incubated at RT for 15 min.
Cleavage reactions were stopped by ethanol precipitation. Footprinting
experiments were carried out in the same way, except mixtures also
contained 200 nM or 2 μM EZH2-EED and 0.001 U RNase V1 was used.
For alkaline hydrolysis ladder, 5′ 32P labeled RNA
and 1 μg yeast tRNA were hydrolyzed in 20 μL alkaline
solution (50 mM Na3PO4) by heating at 65 °C
for 2 min. Hydrolysis was stopped by quenching in 0.5 M Tris-HCl [pH
7.4], and RNA was purified by ethanol precipitation. For RNase T1
ladder, 5′ 32P labeled RNA was heated at 50 °C
for 5 min in denaturing buffer [20 mM sodium citrate (pH 5), 1 mM
EDTA, and 7 M urea]. 0.1 U RNase T1 was added and the mixture incubated
for 15 min at rt. Digested products were resuspended in TBE-Urea sample
buffer (Invitrogen) and resolved by 20% denaturing (8 M urea) PAGE.
Gels were visualized by autoradiography. Cleavage bands were quantified
using ImageQuant and normalized against total lane radioactivity.

Results and Discussion
EZH2-EED is the Minimal HOTAIR Interacting
Unit of PRC2
We began by measuring binding affinities between
HOTAIR and defined
subunit permutations of PRC2 3m to determine which subunits were required
for binding. A quantitative Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assay (EMSA)
was used to determine the extent of protein-RNA complex formed for
each subunit permutation over a range of protein concentrations.

Five permutations of the PRC2 3m complex were produced using baculovirus
infection of insect cells (Figure a). The
various combinations of PRC2 3m subunits were each affinity purified
using either an N-Terminal FLAG tag present on EZH2 or an N-terminal
6×His tag on EED. Correct expression and purification of PRC2
3m permutations was checked by SDS-PAGE and Western blotting (). Dimer and trimer complexes were
produced by coexpression and purified together, rather than mixing
of constituent monomers after purification. Phosphorylation at T345/T350
of EZH2 (in mouse/human respectively) has been reported to enhance
affinity of this subunit for lncRNA binding. Western blotting indicated this modification was not present in
the PRC2 3m permutations used in our studies (). For the RNA binding partner we used the 300-mer
5′ domain of HOTAIR previously established to be necessary
and sufficient to bind PRC2 3m, as the
size of the full HOTAIR lncRNA (2.2 kb) rendered it intractable to
study by EMSA.

Quantitative EMSA analysis showed robust binding
between EZH2 alone
and the HOTAIR 5′ domain with Kd = 755 ± 43 nM, in agreement with previous reports suggesting
EZH2 to be a subunit responsible for lncRNA interaction (although
these studies did not report a binding affinity)., EZH2-SUZ12 was found to bind the HOTAIR 300-mer with comparable
affinity to EZH2 alone (Kd = 755 ±
43 nM for EZH2 vs 700 ± 158 nM for EZH-SUZ12), indicating that
the SUZ12 subunit does not significantly contribute to PRC2 3m interaction
with the HOTAIR 5′ 300-mer.

We observed a ∼5-fold
increase in HOTAIR affinity for the
PRC2 3m complex (Kd = 165 ± 16 nM)
compared to EZH2 alone or EZH2-SUZ12, suggesting that the EED subunit
is required to stabilize the interaction between lncRNA and protein.
Of all subunit permutations tested, only EZH2-EED showed a comparable
strength of interaction for HOTAIR as PRC2 3m (Kd = 165 ± 16 nM for PRC2 vs 147 ± 9 nM for EZH2-EED).
These data show that the EZH2-EED heterodimer represents the minimal
component of PRC2 necessary for HOTAIR binding (Figure b,c). Because EZH2 alone binds to HOTAIR with a much greater
affinity than EED alone (Kd = 755 ±
43 nM for EZH2 vs &gt;5 μM for EED), these data also suggest
that
EZH2 is likely to be the main HOTAIR binding component within the
EZH2-EED heterodimer. EED may also play a direct role in HOTAIR binding,
or alternatively, act by modulating EZH2 to increase its affinity
for the RNA.

PRC2 subunit permutations and their affinities for HOTAIR.
(a)
Schematic of subunit permutations tested in this study. In all cases
EZH2 is N-FLAG tagged and EED is N-6×His tagged. (b) Representative
gel showing EMSAs for EZH2-EED and PRC2 3m. (c) Binding curves as
determined by quantitative EMSA. EZH2-EED exhibits a very similar
affinity for HOTAIR as PRC2 3m. Error bars represent the standard
error of the mean (S.E.M.) calculated from three replicates.

An 89-mer Section of HOTAIR
is the Minimal PRC2 Interacting
Domain
We next investigated the contribution of the RNA partner
in the HOTAIR-PRC2 interaction, and minimization of the previously
reported 300-mer domain. Using a deletional approach, we tested progressively
shorter sections of the HOTAIR RNA for their ability to bind EZH2-EED
using EMSA. We reasoned that a minimal RNA domain that interacted
with PRC2 3m in the same fashion as the previously reported 300-mer
should display the same affinity for EZH2-EED or PRC2 as the longer
RNA.

In vitro transcription was used to generate oligonucleotides
corresponding to different sections of HOTAIR (Figure a and ), which were
then assessed for their ability to bind the EZH2-EED heterodimer via
EMSA. We found that the 200-mer 101–300 show
a similar affinity for EZH2-EED as the full 300-mer 5′ domain
(Kd = 119 ± 18 nM for 101–300 vs 147 ± 9 nM for the 300-mer). The 200-mer 1–200 showed only weak affinity for EZH2-EED, with binding not saturating
even up to 5 μM protein, implying that the EZH2-EED binding
domain resided partially or completely within 201–300 (Figure b).

A second round of minimization
using 100-mer RNA sections found 101–200 to
possess only very weak EZH2-EED binding
capability (no saturation up to 5 μM), whereas 201–300 retained full affinity for EZH2-EED (Kd = 157 ± 12 nM), strongly suggesting the protein binding domain
resided within this final 100 nt of the HOTAIR 5′ 300-mer domain.
As expected from the 200-mer EMSAs, 1–100 showed
no affinity for EZH2-EED.

Further deletion of 201–300 gave the 89-mer 212–300 as the shortest
section of HOTAIR which could
bind EZH2-EED with the same affinity as the full 300-mer (Figure c – Kd = 135
± 20 nM for 212–300 vs 147 ± 9 nM
for the 300-mer). EMSA using 212–300 and the
PRC2 3m complex showed a similar affinity to that found for EZH2-EED
binding (Kd = 111 ± 10 nM for PRC2
vs 135 ± 20 nM for EZH2-EED), indicating that the binding interaction
was not an artifact arising from the more minimal EZH2-EED heterodimer.
The very similar EZH2-EED/PRC2 3m affinity observed between 212–300 and longer oligomers suggests that this domain
is readily available in the context of longer RNA sequences. As a
negative binding control, the histone demethylase LSD1, known to interact
with the full HOTAIR lncRNA at a 600-nt 3′ domain, showed no interaction with 212–300, suggesting that this 89-mer RNA is specific for PRC2 proteins.
Deletion of further nucleotides either at the 5′ or 3′
ends of 212–300 significantly reduced affinity
for EZH2-EED, thus showing that this 89-mer (hereafter referred to
as minHOTAIR) represents the minimal PRC2 interacting domain of HOTAIR.

HOTAIR
minimization and its effects on EZH2-EED binding. (a) Schematic
of HOTAIR sections used in the initial part of deletional study. (b)
Binding curves as determined by quantitative EMSA. 201–300 exhibits the same affinity for EZH2-EED as the 5′ 300-mer,
suggesting this RNA contains a minimal PRC2 interacting domain. (c)
Further deletion gives 212–300 as the minimal
PRC2 interacting domain of HOTAIR. 212–300/minHOTAIR binds with near identical affinity to EZH2-EED and PRC2
3m, while showing no affinity for LSD1. Further deletion of sections
at the 5′ or 3′ end of minHOTAIR results in loss of
affinity for EZH2-EED. Error bars represent the SEM calculated from
three replicates.

EZH2-EED Forms Discrete
Oligomers
Reducing the length
of lncRNA allowed us to use higher percentage gels for EMSA, giving
increased resolution and allowing mobility differences between different
protein-RNA stoichiometric species to be seen. This was not possible
using the large 300 nt HOTAIR 5′ domain RNA. We observed multiple
upper bands in all EMSAs with either 201–300 or minHOTAIR along with EZH2-EED or PRC2 3m (Figure a and ). The design
of our EMSA experiments, with the RNA component held at a very low
concentration (∼1 nM) compared to protein, suggested that these
higher order species most likely corresponded to multiple proteins
to RNA, rather than multiple RNA molecules associated with a single
protein. In all EMSAs, the lowest mobility protein bound band appears
to predominate among shifted complexes, suggesting a strong preference
for formation of higher oligomers. In contrast, the fraction of the
highest mobility shifted band was found to decrease at higher concentrations
of protein (Figure a, Band D), consistent
with a concentration dependent effect on the extent of oligomerization.

Because higher order complexes were visible for both EZH2-EED and
PRC2 3m EMSAs, these results indicate that this oligomerization property
arises from the EZH2-EED heterodimer, or one of its constituent subunits.
To test for the presence of higher order complexes, we performed native
protein gel electrophoresis on EZH2-EED, as well as EZH2 alone, EED
alone, and a 1:1 stoichiometric mixture of the two monomers (Figure b). Native gels were carried out in the absence
of minHOTAIR, in order to assess whether oligomerization was dependent
on the presence of an RNA binding partner.

Using native gel
electrophoresis, we observed the presence of higher
order EZH2-EED complexes, with oligomers up to (EZH2-EED)4 visible on the gel. Oligomers formed in the absence of minHOTAIR,
suggesting this property is mediated by protein–protein interactions.
Both EZH2 alone and EED alone appear on the gel as single main bands,
with weaker minor bands at higher mass likely corresponding to impurities.
Notably, the mixture of EZH2 and EED monomers did not show the same
pattern of bands as observed for EZH2-EED, indicating that oligo-EZH2-EED
formation cannot be recapitulated by simple mixing ex vivo, as might
be expected for random aggregation, but is dependent on correct coexpression
of the two proteins. Addition of minHOTAIR to EZH2-EED caused a small
but reproducible upshift in all EZH2-EED bands on the native gel,
but did not alter the proportion of bands, suggesting the RNA is able
to bind all oligomeric states of the complex but does not affect the
extent of oligomerization ().

In order to confirm observations from native gels, we also carried
out native mass spectrometry on EZH2-EED. The mild electrospray ionization
used in this technique allows for large protein complexes to be detected
without fragmentation. We were able to detect several oligomeric species
for EZH2-EED: the heterodimer (EZH2-EED)1 was observed
as the main component under native mass spectrometry conditions, with
progressive decrease in signal intensity for (EZH2-EED)2 and (EZH2-EED)3 higher order complexes (Figure c). Native mass spectrometry of the EED subunit
alone did not show any oligomerization, further indicating oligomerization
is specific to the EZH2-EED heterodimer (). Oligo-EZH2-EED complexes were always observed as multiples
of a 1:1 heterodimer, further suggesting these oligomeric species
are likely to be functional, rather than simply aggregates of EZH2
and EED which may form in any ratio.

Altogether, our data show
that oligomerization is intrinsic to
EZH2-EED, and is likely to be a functional property of the heterodimer,
rather than the result of nonspecific aggregation. Interestingly,
there are many well-documented examples of PcG proteins clustering
as a mechanism for spreading chromatin silencing. One important example
found in many cell types is the formation polycomb bodies, large, dense regions rich in PcG proteins, which
act as silencing domains catalyzing heterochromatin formation along
large portions of the genome. X-chromosome inactivation, which begins
with initial recruitment of PRC2 by lncRNA Xist,
also involves clustering of PRC2 to create a PcG rich silent X-chromosome. More recently, a study mapping lncRNA binding
sites across the genome found HOTAIR to nucleate PRC2 binding on chromatin:
HOTAIR peaks on chromatin appear as sharp foci, around which PRC2
spreads to form wider polycomb domains. Our observation that EZH2-EED can form higher order oligomers is
in good agreement with all of these previous findings.

EZH2-EED forms discrete
oligomers. (a) Representative gel of minHOTAIR
and EZH2-EED. Multiple EMSA bands are indicative of multiple stoichiometry
of binding, including higher order complexes which are too large to
enter the gel matrix. The fraction of highest mobility shifted band
D (green line) increases initially, but then decreases at high protein
concentrations, indicating higher order complex formation is dependent
on protein concentration. (b) Native gel of EED, EZH2, EZH2 + EED
mixture, and EZH2-EED heterodimer. Multiple bands are observed for
EZH2-EED, which are not present in the mixture of monomers. Deviation
from expected mass for EZH2-EED compared to ladder is likely due to
deviation from globularity for the protein shape, or nonideal binding
of the G-250 charge shift reagent used for native gel electrophoresis.
(c) Mass spectra for intact EZH2-EED showing presence of discrete
oligomeric EZH2-EED complexes. The main species is heterodimeric (EZH2-EED)1, which appears at 5300–6700 m/z region with charges 22+–26+. Higher oligomers (EZH2-EED)2 and (EZH2-EED)3 appear above 7500 m/z. Some dissociation
of EZH2-EED into constituent EZH2 and EED monomers is also observed,
as well as some fragmentation of the EZH2 subunit (also observed in ). Under the native mass spectrometry
conditions, (EZH2-EED)1 appears to be the main heterodimer
component of the mixture.

Minimal PRC2 Binding Element of HOTAIR is Highly Structured
We next carried out nuclease mapping experiments to determine the
secondary structure of minHOTAIR. Nuclease digestion can be used to
determine RNA 2D structure by identifying single and double stranded
regions of a folded RNA molecule. Nuclease mapping has previously
been used as part of a strategy to map the Xist RepA
lncRNA, suggesting a complex 2D structure distinct from the dual hairpin
loops which had previously been suggested for Xist RepA. We have also previously reported
a similar approach used to probe the structure of the miRNA precursor
pre-Let-7g. For mapping experiments on
minHOTAIR we utilized two nucleases with contrasting specificities:
RNase I, which cleaves ssRNA nucleotides regardless of base, and RNase
V1, which is specific for duplex RNA.

Nuclease mapping of minHOTAIR
revealed several regions protected from RNase I, and strongly cleaved
by RNase V1, implying minHOTAIR to be a highly structured domain of
the HOTAIR lncRNA (Figure a). Inputting these
nuclease mapping patterns as constraints into the structure prediction
program RNAfold− produced a 2D structure comprising two duplex containing
regions (G1-U39 and G51-G89), connected by a 10 nt ssRNA linker (G40-A50)
(Figure b). This structure was in good agreement
with both RNase I and V1 digest patterns, with the exception of strong
RNase I cleavage observed at the H2 helix, and V1 cleavage in some
predicted ssRNA regions (L3 and part of L4). Notably, this proposed
structure is distinct from the small dual-hairpin structures previously
predicted by folding algorithms for some PRC2 interacting ncRNAs,, demonstrating the value of experimental mapping for RNA secondary
structure determination.

RNase I cleavage at H2 may be due to
conformational flexibility
of the RNA, resulting in a dynamic equilibrium between the predicted
duplex structure and one where the bases are single stranded. We note
that RNase V1 also cleaves strongly at H2, consistent with the predicted
duplex at this region, and supporting the hypothesis that bases in
H2 can interconvert between ssRNA and duplex conformations. V1 cleavage
observed in predicted single stranded regions may also be the result
of a dynamic conformational equilibrium, or alternatively may indicate
the presence of tertiary interactions between predicted ssRNA bases
and other regions of minHOTAIR.

Alongside the structural mapping,
we also carried out 1H NMR spectroscopic analysis of minHOTAIR,
to study conformational
heterogeneity within the RNA structure. Interestingly, we observed
a small degree of K+ dependent Hoogsteen interaction within
the 1H NMR spectrum of minHOTAIR indicating a possible
alternative G-quadruplex structure (). In the absence of K+, the 1H NMR
spectrum displayed well-resolved peaks indicative of a predominant
single species in solution. G-quadruplexes are noncanonical nucleic
acid structures which can form in G-rich nucleic acids. A quadruplex
comprises two or more stacked G-tetrads: planar arragements of four
Hoogsteen hydrogen bonded guanine bases, which are further stabilized
by coordination to a central monovalent cation. The sequence of minHOTAIR contains a G-rich region which
closely resembles a putative quadruplex forming sequence (G26-G49), although one of the G tracts is interrupted,
which would create a bulge in any resulting quadruplex.

Because G-quadruplexes are stabilized
by monovalent cations (usually
K+), increased Hoogsteen interactions resulting from addition
of K+ is strongly indicative of formation of this noncanonical
structure. Comparison of peaks in the
NMR titration spectra suggests that only a very small proportion of
minHOTAIR bases are involved in K+ dependent Hoogsteen
interactions, implying the quadruplex is in equilibrium with a more
favored duplex structure ().
Because of this, we suggest that a quadruplex is not likely to be
significant for interaction between minHOTAIR and EZH2-EED. However,
transient formation of a quadruplex provides additional explanation
for the strong RNase I digestion at H2 due to loss of the corresponding
duplex.

Lastly, we carried out nuclease footprinting experiments
to determine
if EZH2-EED interacted with specific sites on the predicted minHOTAIR
secondary structure. Nuclease footprinting is carried out in a similar
fashion to the mapping experiments described previously, but digests
are carried out in the presence of the RNA binding partner. Changes
in the nuclease digest pattern resulting from addition of the binding
partner are indicative of sites involved in the binding interaction.
A decrease in digestion at a region of the RNA indicates the protein
binds to this site, or alternatively that the RNA conformation changes
so that it is no longer recognized by the nuclease. Similarly, sites
of increased digestion suggest a change in RNA conformation upon protein
binding, rendering the bases more susceptible to nuclease. Footprinting
was carried out using the same nucleases as for the mapping experiments
(RNase I and RNase V1), in the presence of 200 nM (∼Kd as determined by EMSA) or 2 μM (∼10
× Kd) EZH2-EED, as well as a no protein
control.

Initial footprinting was carried out using the ssRNA
specific nuclease
RNase I. No changes were observed in the digestion pattern with RNase
I, either at 200 nM or 2 μM concentrations of EZH2-EED (). This suggested that EZH2-EED may
bind to regions of minHOTAIR which are already structured, and therefore
resistant to RNase I even without protein present.

Using RNase
V1, we detected protection from nuclease in two duplex
regions of minHOTAIR—most strongly at the H4-L4 junction, but
also around the hairpin loop L3 (Figure a,b).
Because these two sites do not share any sequence or predicted structural
homology, it is unlikely they correspond to two equivalent binding
sites for the protein. These two protected regions may correspond
to binding sites for the EZH2 and EED subunits which interact at different
sites on the RNA. Alternatively, further tertiary interactions in
the minHOTAIR RNA may bring these domains together to form a unified
binding site for the EZH2-EED protein. Although the exact protein
binding sites on minHOTAIR remain to be elucidated, these well-defined
footprinting patterns we have observed indicate that EZH2-EED binding
to minHOTAIR is likely to be mediated by a specific RNA motif, rather
than the result of binding by nonspecific interactions.

RNase I and
V1 structural probing minHOTAIR. (a) Representative
autoradiogram of RNase I and V1 mapping for minHOTAIR. Colored circles
represent extent of nuclease cleavage for RNase I. Colored diamonds
represent extent of nuclease cleavage for RNase V1. Because the RNA
is 5′ radiolabeled, only the 5′ cleavage point for a
RNase V1 cleaved duplex will be visualized on the sequencing gel.
Note that PNK treatment of RNase T1 digest (lane 5) results in appearance
of several spurious bands which do not correspond a G in minHOTAIR.
(b) RNAfold predicted structure of minHOTAIR with RNase I and V1 digestion
pattern overlaid. Helices and Loops are annotated on the left diagram:
H - Helix, L- Loop.

RNase V1 footprinting
of minHOTAIR interaction sites with EZH2-EED.
(a) Representative autoradiograms of EZH2-EED footprinting with minHOTAIR.
Gels were run for either 4 h (left) or 7 h to resolve relevant area
of sequence. Stars represent sites of V1 protection upon binding of
EZH2-EED to minHOTAIR. (b) Predicted structure of minHOTAIR with footprinted
nucleotides (stars) overlaid.

Conclusions
Herein, we have described the first systematic
study of the minimal
elements required for the interaction between lncRNA HOTAIR and the
PRC2 3m complex. These results provide insight into the details of
a highly important pathway involved in regulation of epigenetic silencing,
which has been implicated in driving aggression in a wide range of
cancers.−

We have shown that the heterodimer EZH2-EED
exhibits the same binding
affinity for HOTAIR as the core PRC2 3m complex, and that the 89 nt
minHOTAIR RNA shows the same binding affinity to PRC2 3m as a previously
reported 300 nt PRC2 binding RNA domain. Nuclease mapping and footprinting
experiments revealed that the minHOTAIR RNA is highly structured,
and that protein binding causes protection from RNase V1 at two separate
regions of a predicted minHOTAIR secondary structure.

Previous
PRC2 RNA immunoprecipitation studies have suggested ∼20%
of the lncRNA transcriptome is able to bind PRC2. However, the molecular basis of these interactions is not
well understood. Interestingly, the minHOTAIR motif we have presented
here differs significantly from the tandem dual hairpin motif first
established in Xist RepA, which has been suggested to be necessary
for lncRNA interaction with the PRC2 complex., This lack of consensus may reflect the existence of several lncRNA-PRC2
binding modes, which may each correspond to distinct functions of
the PRC2 complex. Experimentally verified minimal PRC2 binding motifs
such as minHOTAIR provide a useful starting point for addressing such
issues of interaction diversity. By using the proposed minHOTAIR secondary
structure as a reference point in homology searches with other PRC2
interacting lncRNAs, it may be possible to identify the extent of
RNA species that bind PRC2 in a ‘HOTAIR-like’ fashion.
In this way, a comprehensive profile can gradually be established
for the RNA binding capabilities of a key epigenetic regulator.

In this study, we also observed the presence of multiple stoichiometric
protein:RNA species in EMSAs for both PRC2 3m and EZH2-EED with smaller
sections of HOTAIR. This was shown to be a consequence of the EZH2-EED
heterodimer clustering to form discrete higher order oligomers. These
observations correspond well to numerous literature reports of clustering
behaviors in PcG mediated silencing.− An interesting hypothesis
may be that the clustering often seen in PcG silencing systems is
(in part) facilitated by an intrinsic ability of the EZH2-EED heterodimer
to oligomerize. An intrinsic oligomerization activity would allow
PRC2 complexes to rapidly spread from their initial recruitment sites
on chromatin, and may be a mechanism for the cell to rapidly establish
de novo epigenetic silencing via a protein based positive-feedback
clustering mechanism.

To summarize, we have elucidated new details
of the molecular interaction
between lncRNA HOTAIR and the PRC2 complex. Given that HOTAIR is known
to drive metastasis in a range of cancers by redirecting PRC2 silencing,
this vital interaction may in due course prove to be a worthy target
for intervention, with a view to reversing the malignant effects of
HOTAIR overexpression. Further knowledge of the details of HOTAIR-PRC2
binding may help facilitate such efforts to target this RNA–protein
interaction. Insights into the structural basis of HOTAIR-PRC2 binding
may also be applicable to many other PRC2 interacting lncRNAs, helping
to shed light on the interactions and mechanisms of an important class
of epigenetic regulators.

Supporting Information Available
Supporting
Information and
methods, Supplementary Figures S1–S6, and Supplementary Tables
S1, S2, and S3. This material is available free of charge via the
Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi401085h_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Dr. Lovorka
Stojic for helpful advice and comments throughout the course of this
project.

