Radiolytic
cryoreduction and
cryooxidation in combination with various spectroscopic techniques
have found widespread application in the study of metalloprotein intermediates
and the mechanisms of their reactions. In particular, application of this approach has led to important
advances in our understanding of the catalytic mechanisms of heme
monooxygenases− such as cytochromes P450,,− which catalyze the reductive activation of dioxygen and are involved
in biological processes such as the biosynthesis of biologically active
compounds such as steroids and detoxification of xenobiotics,− of nitric oxide synthase (NOS),, which generates
NO as a signaling molecule,, and of heme oxygenases,, whose role in the oxidative breakdown of heme itself is of great
medical interest.,, The combination electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) and electron-nuclear
double resonance (ENDOR) spectroscopies with 77 K cryoreduction techniques
has shown that the primary cryotrapped products of one-electron reduction
of oxyferrous cytochrome P450cam, heme oxygenase, and oxyferrous NOS
are peroxoferric or hydroperoxoferric heme intermediates or both (Fe(III)–O22–/Fe(III)–OOH–), Scheme , which exhibit characteristic
EPR and ENDOR spectra. These products
of 77 K cryoreduction are trapped in the conformation(s) of the parent
oxy-ferrous state and provide sensitive EPR/ENDOR probes for studying
structural features of the parent state.

In the case of heme
oxygenase, the hydroperoxo intermediate was
shown to carry out the first step of heme biodegradation, namely,
conversion of the heme into α-meso-hydroxyheme.,, Peroxo/hydroperoxo intermediates
were shown to participate in the conversion of N-hydroxyarginine
(NOHA) into NO and citrulline catalyzed by nitric oxide synthase (NOS). In contrast, compound I (Cpd I), arising from
proton-assisted heterolytic cleavage of the O–O
bond of the ligand in hydroperoxoferric intermediates, is the catalytically
active oxygenating species in the monooxygenase cycles catalyzed by
cytochromes P450 and in argininine hydroxylation by NOS.,

Despite the central role of Cpd I in the enzymatic mechanism
of
cytochromes P450, NOS, and peroxidases, Cpd I is not spectroscopically
detected during the relaxation of the cryogenerated hydroperoxo-ferriheme
state in frozen solutions of the oxy complexes of a majority of hemoproteins,
including cytochromes P450, NOS, horseradish peroxidase (HRP), and Caldariomyces fumago chloroperoxidase (CPO).,,,,,, This is surprising because Cpds I of HRP and CPO
are relatively stable in fluid solution at subzero temperatures;, a P450 Cpd I has been trapped and characterized.− In addition,
Cpds I were observed recently during decay of cryogenerated substrate-free hydroperoxoferric dehaloperoxidase (DHP) and in crystals of oxy-Hrp radiolytically reduced
at 77 K.

Three possible explanations
have been proposed for the failure
to observe Cpd I during cryoreduction/annealing of oxy-hemoproteins:
(i) Cpd I does not form during relaxation of the hydroperoxoferric
state because, as suggested by Denisov et al. and Symons and co-workers, the cryogenerated
hydroperoxyferriheme intermediates decay via dissociation of H2O2 at low temperatures; (ii) the highly reactive
ferryl centers in Cpd I are reduced at low temperatures by redox-active
radical products of the cryoradiolysis; and (iii) as in reactions
with organic peroxides, the oxo-Fe(IV) porphyrin π-cation radical
centers in NOS and cytochrome P450cam Cpds I oxidize nearby amino
acid residues at high rates, to form EPR-silent
(S = 1) oxo-Fe(IV)porphyrin

Herein, we report
cryoannealing investigations of the mechanism
of decay of hydroperoxoferric hemoproteins formed through 77 K radiolytic
cryoreduction, which uses EPR/ENDOR spectroscopy at liquid He temperatures
as the probe, as applied to a suite of oxy-hemoproteins: HRP and CPO,
both of which form quasi-stable Cpd I, along with isolated hemoglobin
(Hb) chains, α and β. Examinations of the trapped primary
products of 77 K cryoreduction provide insight into structural features
of the parent oxy complexes in the solution state and highlight discrepancies
between the actual structures of solution oxy-complexes and the structures
that are visualized in crystals. Whether the primary product is the
peroxo or hydroperoxoferric state, during annealing all proteins relax to a hydroperoxo form, which converts to Cpd I. In
the case of β chains at high pH, Cpd I accumulates and is directly
characterized by the spectroscopic tools employed. In all other cases,
Cpd I forms but does not accumulate. A follow-up cryoreduction instead
shows that when this state does not accumulate or is not captured
by reaction with a bound substrate, it is reduced by redox-active
products of cryoradiolysis to EPR-silent (S = 1)
Cpd II, which does accumulate.

Materials and Methods
Horseradish
peroxidase (type XII, RZ 3.4), glycerol, d3-glycerol, D2O, and dithionate were purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich. Oxy-α- and -β-chains of human hemoglobin
were isolated as described previously. Chloroperoxidase from the fungi Caldariomyces fumago (CPO) was prepared as described. Complexes
of ferrous horseradish peroxidase and ferrous CPO with O2 were prepared as previously described.− Cpd II of horseradish
peroxidase and CPO were prepared as described previously. All protein samples were prepared in 20%–50%
glycerol/buffer mixtures. Protein concentrations in the samples varied
from 0.5 mM (Hrp and CPO) to 1–2 mM (globins).

γ-Irradiation
of the frozen hemoprotein solutions at 77 K
was performed typically for 16–20 h (dose rate of 0.15 Mrad/h,
total dose 3 Mrad) using a Gamma cell 220 60Co irradiator.
Annealing at multiple temperatures over the range 77–270 K
was performed by placing the EPR sample in the appropriate bath (n-pentane or methanol cooled with liquid nitrogen) and then
refreezing in liquid nitrogen. γ-Irradiation at 77 K yields
an intense EPR signal at g = 2.0 from radiolytically
generated organic radicals; such signals are truncated in the reported
spectra. In addition, γ-irradiation produces hydrogen atoms
within the fused silica tubes, and these give a characteristic hyperfine
doublet with A(1H) ≈ 507 G. As
seen in all cases, as the annealing temperature is raised, radical
recombination occurs and both the radical and H atom signals decrease.

EPR/ENDOR
Spectroscopy
Continuous wave (CW) EPR and
ENDOR spectra were collected at Q-band (35 GHz; 2 K); X-band (variable
temperature) CW EPR spectra were also collected. X-band CW EPR spectra
were recorded on a Bruker ESP 300 spectrometer equipped with an Oxford
Instruments ESR 910 continuous He flow cryostat. CW 35 GHz (Q-band)
EPR/ENDOR spectra were recorded on a modified Varian E-109 spectrometer
described previously.,−,,, All CW 35 GHz EPR/ENDOR spectra were recorded at 2 K in dispersion
mode, under “rapid passage” conditions, which gives
absorption line shape. Derivative spectra
were obtained numerically using the program LabCalc. The Q-band measurements
yield better signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) and a better dispersion of g values for characterization of EPR-active centers. The
X-band were optimal for cryoannealing measurements. Asymmetry in the 1H ENDOR spectra commonly seen in the ENDOR spectra of cryoreduced
oxyferrous hemoproteins is due to the effects of spin relaxation.

The EPR signals of cryogenerated Fe(III)
species were quantitated using the corresponding resting ferric hemoproteins
as standards. For spin quantitation of low-spin ferric heme species,
0.5 mM solutions of low spin myoglobin (Mb) at pH 9 and 1 mM Cu(NO3)2 were used. A solution of high-spin metMb (1
mM) in 0.1 M potassium phosphate (KPi, pH 6) or 0.5 mM ferric HRP
(pH 7.0) were applied as standards for quantitation of EPR signals
from high-spin ferric heme species. For determination of the amounts
of Cpd II formed during decay of hydroperoxoferric intermediates,
0.5 mM solutions of corresponding compound II irradiated with the
same dose were used.

Results
Horseradish
Peroxidase
Figure  and Figure S1, , present EPR spectra of
oxyferrous HRP in 50% glycerol/buffer (pH
7), taken directly upon radiolytic cryoreduction at 77 K and after
progressive annealing at temperatures above 77 K. The initial EPR
spectrum after cryoreduction exhibits two EPR signals, with g = [2.32, 2.18, 1.94] (signal A) and [2.28, 2.16, ∼1.96]
(signal B) as reported previously (Table ).,,, The relative intensities of the signals change in the presence of
thioanisole (Figure S2, ) but are independent of pH within the range employed, 7–8.5,
and of solvent deuteration (not shown).

EPR spectra (2 K, 35
GHz) of cryoreduced oxy-HRP in 50% glycerol/0.1
mM KPi buffer, pH 7.4, and after annealing at 160 K for 1 min and
at 200 K for 12 min. Instrumental conditions: T =
2 K; modulation amplitude, 2 G; microwave frequency, 34.95 GHz.

EPR Paramaters of
Cryoreduced Oxyperoxidases
and Oxyglobins
protein	Tan (K)	g1	g2	g3	
oxy-HRP A	77	2.32	2.18	1.94	
oxyHrp B	77	2.28	2.16	1.96	
oxyCPO A	77	2.27	2.166		
oxyCPO B	77	2.28	2.176	1.945	
oxy β-chain (pH 8.2)	77	2.253	2.148	1.965	
 	190	2.31	2.19	1.946	
Cpd I	215	3.24	3.24	∼1.99	
oxy
α-chain (pH 8.2)	 	 	 	 	
A	77	2.26	2.157	∼1.97	
B	77	2.226	2.135		
 	200	2.32	2.19	1.95	
oxy Mb (pH 8.2) (ref ())	77	2.26	2.12	1.967	
 	190	2.31	2.185	1.93	
Not determined.

The generation of two spectroscopically
distinct products from
cryoreduction of oxy-HRP is indicative that the oxyferrous precursor
exists in two major conformational substates. Progressive stepwise
annealing up to 170 K results in conversion of B to A, as evidenced
by a decay of the B signal and increase in that of A. (Figure ; Figure S1, ). Species A is assigned to the hydroperoxo feriheme state− from its characteristic g-tensor. However, the gmax of species B falls between the expected
maximum g-value for peroxo (g1max = 2.27) and minimal value for hydroperoxo (2.28) ferriheme
centers, preventing a simple assignment of this center.

To assign
species B, we employed 35 GHz 1H ENDOR spectroscopy.
It was previously shown that the proton of a ferriheme hydroperoxo
ligand exhibits an exchangeable 1H ENDOR signal with maximum
hyperfine coupling Amax ≤ 12 MHz, aiso ≈ 0.5–4 MHz,,, whereas 1H ENDOR spectra
of a peroxo species frequently exhibit more strongly coupled signals
from an H-bond to the peroxo ligand, Amax ≈ 14–18 MHz, aiso ≈
8–11 MHz., Species A was isolated for study
by annealing the cryoreduced samples at 170 K, and a 2D field–frequency
pattern of 1H ENDOR spectra collected across its EPR envelope
was prepared. The most strongly coupled 1H ENDOR signal
of species A was an exchangeable proton with Amax ≅ 8 MHz (Figure ); simulations
of the 2D pattern were best fit with a nearly axial hyperfine tensor, aiso ≅ 0.4 MHz and 2T ≅ 8.8 MHz, (Figure S3, ) characteristic of a hydroperoxo ferriheme, as expected. The 1H ENDOR pattern of species B could then be visualized through
spectroscopic differences when both were present. This 2D “sum”
pattern with A and B present does not show 1H ENDOR intensity, Amax, larger than that of species A, as required
if species B were a peroxoferric form, and the difference between 1H ENDOR spectra of cryoreduced oxyferrous HRP containing both
species A and B and those with species A only (Figure S4, ) was similar to the pattern
for species A. We thus conclude that species B also is a hydroperoxoferric
heme center. The conversion of B into A during annealing then indicates
that B is generated in a conformation of the hydroperoxoferriheme
that is metastable in its protein environment and that this conformation
relaxes to the more stable A form at temperatures as low as ∼160
K.

Two-dimensional frequency/field 35 GHz 1H CW ENDOR spectra
of cryoreduced oxy-HRP in 50% glycerol/H2O buffer, pH 7.4
(red), and in 50% d3-glycerol/D2O buffer, pH 7 (black), annealed at 170 K for 1 min (species A).
Instrumental conditions: T = 2 K, modulation amplitude,
2 G; rf power, 5 W; scan rate, 1 MHz/s; frequency bandwidth, 60 kHz;
average of 20 scans; microwave frequency, 34.99 GHz.

Upon further annealing, species A completely decays
after being
held at 210 K for 1 min (Figure S1, ), but this process is accompanied by the appearance
of a weak high-spin (S = 5/2) EPR signal from ferric
HRP with (g-values of 6.27, 5.02) that is shown by spin
quantitation versus ferric HRP to account for less than 30% of the
hydroperoxoferric intermediate A, suggesting that species A primarily
converts into an EPR-silent heme form. This is confirmed by the observation
that a followup cryoreduction of the EPR-silent product that forms
by decay of the hydroperoxy species A generates a new EPR-active center
with gmax = 2.63, characteristic of cryoreduced
HRP Cpd II. (Figure ). Spin quantitation of this gmax = 2.63 signal versus that for 0.5 mM HRP Cpd II irradiated with
the same dose showed that approximately 70% of species A converted
into Cpd II. That Cpd II is formed from species A and not by a side
reaction of ferric HRP with radiolytically generated H2O2 is established by the finding that Cpd II is not produced
by a second irradiation of cryoreduced ferric HRP annealed at 210
K.

EPR spectra of cryoreduced oxy-HRP annealed at 210 K (complete
decay of species A) (A) and 0.5 mM Cpd II of HRP (B) exposed to γ-irradiation
at 77 K with dose of 4 Mr. Instrumental conditions: T = 77 K; microwave power, 20 mW; modulation amplitude, 10 G; microwave
frequency, 9.092 GHz.

Formation of Cpd II as a main product during decay of hydroperoxo
species A can be accounted for either by homolytic cleavage of the
O–O bond of the hydroperoxo ligand or by proton-assisted heterolytic
cleavage of this bond with formation of Cpd I, followed by its reduction
with redox-active products of radiolysis. The decay of species A shows
a strong solvent kinetic isotope effect (sKIE), slowing in D2O/d3-glycerol at 200 K by a factor of
∼3.5 (Figure S5, ), which support the latter idea, with Cpd I as the primary product
of proton-assisted heterolytic cleavage of the hydroperoxoferric HRP
intermediate, in agreement with the known formation of this intermediate
during pulsed radiolysis of oxy-HRP at room temperatures and subsequent
to radiolytic cryoreduction of crystals of oxy-HRP at low temperatures.,

Formation of small amounts of high-spin ferric HRP during
relaxation
of the hydroperoxy intermediate may be explained either by subsequent
reduction of Cpd II by products of radiolysis, or by proton-assisted
dissociation of the Fe(III)–OOH species; the available data
do not distinguish between these mechanisms. Regardless, the results
thus suggest that the main pathway for decay of the hydroperoxoferric
HRP at low temperatures, 180–200 K, proceeds through heterolytic
cleavage of the O–O bond of heme-bound hydroperoxide, to form
Cpd I.

CPO
UV–visible (UV–vis) absorption spectra
of oxyferrous CPO radiolytically reduced in frozen solution at 77
K and in crystal at 90 K were reported previously but could not unambiguously establish
the nature of the primary product because the absorption spectra of
peroxo and hydroperoxo species are similar; however, they did not detect accumulation of the relatively stable
ferryl intermediates during annealing of cryoreduced oxyferrous CPO. The crystal structure of cryoreduced oxy-CPO
indicated that the primary species trapped at 90 K is a hydroperoxy
rather than peroxy ferriheme intermediate. We have used cryoreduction EPR/ENDOR spectroscopic methods to check
for the primary product of reduction of oxyferrous CPO in frozen solution
to reveal the mechanism of reaction of this primary product during
annealing, comparing these results to the comparable ones for HRP.

The EPR spectrum of 77 K cryoreduced oxyferrous CPO (Figure ; Figure S6, ) again gives evidence of being an overlap of two signals, but in
contrast to HRP, they are barely resolved, with both having g1 ≈ 2.27 (Table ); stepwise annealing up to 190 K results in decay of one signal
(A) with a concomitant increase in the intensity of the second (B)
(Figure ; Figure S6, ). The g-tensors of A and B lie on
the boundary between those for the peroxoferric and hydroperoxoferric
states, but the distinction between the two can be made with 1H ENDOR measurements. Figures  and  present 1H ENDOR spectra of cryoreduced
oxy-CPO containing species A and B and a sample annealed at 170 K,
which contains only species B. Species B shows an exchangeable proton
signal with Amax = 13 MHz (Figure ). Simulations of the 2D field-frequency pattern
of ENDOR spectra collected across the EPR envelope of species B lead
to the best fit that employed a nearly axial hyperfine tensor with aiso ≅ 0.4 MHz and T ≅
4.4 MHz (not shown), characteristic of a hydroperoxo ligand proton.,1H ENDOR spectra of cryoreduced oxyferrous CPO consisting
of species A and B are a superposition of the 1H signal
from species B, plus the signal from an additional, more strongly
coupled exchangeable proton from species A with larger Amax ≈ 15 MHz (Figure ),
characteristic of a hydrogen bond to a peroxo ligand., Species A and B thus can be assigned to peroxo and hydroperoxoferric
intermediates, respectively; during annealing at 140–170 K,
the peroxo intermediate A is protonated to form the hydroperoxo species
B.

EPR spectra (2 K, 35 GHz) of cryoreduced oxyferrous CPO in 50%
ethylene glycol/0.1 M KPi buffer, pH 4.6, and after annealing at 190
and 230 K for 1 min Instrumental conditions: as in Figure except microwave frequency, 35.226 GHz.

Two-dimensional frequency/field 35 GHz 1H CW
ENDOR spectra
of cryoreduced ferrous oxy complex of CPO in 50% ethylene glycol/0.1
M KPi (pH 4.6) (red) and in d2-ethylene
glycol/D2O buffer (pH 4.2) (black) annealed at 170 K for
1 min (species B). Instrumental conditions: as in Figure.

Two-dimensional frequency/field 35 GHz 1H CW ENDOR spectra
of cryoreduced ferrous oxy complex of CPO in 50% ethylene glycol/0.1
M KPi (species A + B; pH 4.6) (red) and in d2-ethylene glycol/D2O buffer (pH 4.2) (black). Instrumental
conditions as in Figure.

These results indicate that there are two conformers of the
oxy-heme
in the oxyferrous CPO parent, as is the case for oxyferrous HRP, but
that with CPO, 77 K cryoreduction of one conformer generates a peroxoferriheme
species that accepts a proton at 77 K to form a hydroperoxy ferriheme
species B, whereas the peroxoferric species A in the second conformer
remains unprotonated. Only through cryoannealing at T &gt; 140 K does the CPO heme center relax so that the peroxoferric
conformer A can acquire a proton and convert to the hydroperoxoferric
state. In contrast, both conformers in oxy-HRP acquire a proton at
77 K upon cryoreduction.

The hydroperoxoferric CPO intermediate
B completely decays after
further annealing at 200 K for 10 min (Figure ). This process occurs without accumulation of Cpd I and with only
∼30% converting to low-spin ferric CPO, (species with g = [2.66, 2.26, 1.80] and [2.60,
2.26, 1.84]). Instead the majority of B converts to an EPR-silent
product state. Cryoreduction of this EPR-silent product creates the
EPR-active center with gmax = 2.42, characteristic
of cryoreduced CPO Cpd II (Figure S7, ). Thus, as above for
hydroperoxyferric HRP, Cpd II is the main product of annealing of
cryogenerated hydroperoxyferric CPO.

Oxy-α- and -β-Chains
of HbA
It was previously
shown that multiple peroxoferric species are produced during 77 K
radiolytic reduction of oxy-α- and oxy-β-chains,,, and we reported detailed EPR
and ENDOR analysis of these species. The
cryogenerated peroxoferric species convert into hydroperoxy ferric
intermediates upon annealing at temperatures above 170 K, and these
in turn decay completely at temperatures within the range of 200–230
K.,, We recently showed
that during annealing of cryoreduced oxyferrous Mb, EPR silent (S = 1) Cpd II is formed, as detected by Mossbauer spectroscopy, thus correcting the early suggestion that the
decay of the hydroperoxoferric intermediate forming during annealing
of cryoreduced oxy ferrous α- and β-chains and oxyferrous
Mb proceeds via dissociation of the hydroperoxo ligand., Because the Cpd II is presumably formed by conversion of the hydroperoxoferric
state to Cpd I, which then is reduced by radicals formed by the cryoradiolysis,
we have reexamined the annealing of cryoreduced oxyferrous α-
and β-chains to see if the Cpd I state could be observed directly.

As shown in Figure , cryoreduction of oxyferrous
β-chains produces as primary product the peroxoferric state;
annealing at 165 K converts this to two new peroxo intermediates;
further annealing at 180–190 K converts the peroxo intermediates
to a hydroperoxo ferriheme state with characteristic g = [2.303, 2.18, 1.946]. This assignment is supported by 1H ENDOR data, presented in Figure S8, , which exhibits a strongly coupled doublet, exchangeable
in D2O, with Amax = 12 MHz,
characteristic of the hydroperoxy ligand.− The maximum
accumulation of the hydroperoxy intermediate during annealing of cryoreduced
oxyferrous β-chains was noticeably higher at pH 8 than at pH
7 (Figure S9, ),
and this species is almost undetectable at pH 6 (Figure S10, ). This decrease in accumulation
is caused by an increased rate of proton-assisted decay of the hydroperoxo
species at low pH, as seen during annealing of cryoreduced oxy ferrous
DHP and during the reaction of metMb with H2O2 at ambient temperature.,

CW EPR (77 K) spectra
of cryoreduced 1 mM oxy-β-chain HbA
in 16% glycerol/buffer, pH 8.2, annealed at indicated conditions.
Instrumental conditions: t = 28 K, modulation amplitude,
5 G; microwave frequency, 9.101 GHz.

In contrast to the behavior of HRP and CPO, the hydroperoxy
intermediate
of β-chain formed at pH 8.2 decays upon annealing at temperatures
above 200 K to a new EPR-active state that can be assigned to Cpd
I. It exhibits an axial EPR signal that can be detected without noticeable
broadening only at temperatures below 16 K (Figure ), with g⊥ = 3.24, g|| ≈ 2. This species exhibits 1H ENDOR signals from two nonexchangeable, strongly coupled protons,
with maximum effective hyperfine couplings of 22 and 10 MHz at g-3.24, corresponding to intrinsic couplings of 13.6 and
6.2 MHz (Figure S11, ). Comparison of the g-values and 1H ENDOR
data with properties of other Cpds I show that the g-3.24 signal arises from an S = 3/2 Cpd I in which
the porphyrin π-cation radical is ferromagnetically coupled
with the Fe(IV) (S = 1) heme center, as first observed
with Cpd I of catalase and as observed
during cryoreduction/annealing experiments with the structurally similar
oxyferrous DHP and in clear distinction
with the Cpds I of CPO and P450cam.

X-band EPR spectra of cryoreduced oxy
complex of β chains
(16% glycerol/0.05 M Tris buffer, pH 8.2) annealed at indicated conditions.
Instrumental conditions: T = 8 K; modulation amplitude,
10 G; microwave power, 10 mW; microwave frequency, 9.378 GHz.

The kinetics of the appearance
of this β-chain Cpd I (pH
8.2) measured during cryoannealing at 205 K match well with the decay
of the hydroperoxoferric intermediate (Figure ), confirming that this state is kinetically competent to directly
form Cpd I. The observation of a large sKIE in the formation of Cpd
I (effective solvent KIE &gt; 6) (Figure )
confirms
that this conversion involves proton delivery to the hydroperoxoferric
moiety and its subsequent heterolytic cleavage. The resulting Cpd
I is less stable at low pH, with a decrease in its accumulation by
almost 3-fold at pH 7 (not shown), and the stability is further decreased
at pH 6 (Figure S10, ).

Kinetics of decay of hydroperoxoferric intermediate of β-chain
in 16% glycerol/buffer, pH 8.13 (red), and in 16% d3-glycerol/D2O buffer, pH 7.73 (blue), and
appearance of Cpd I (g = 3.24) in 16% glycerol/buffer,
pH 8.13 (green), at 205 K.

At pH 8.2, the β-chain Cpd I EPR signal disappears
completely
upon annealing at 240 K for 1 min (Figure  and Figure S12, ). This decay is accompanied by less than 25% conversion to a low-spin
ferric state. Instead, the chief product again is a Cpd II intermediate
formed by reduction of Cpd I during annealing, as confirmed by a second
cryoreduction of the cryoannealed proteins (Figure S13, ). The intensity of the resulting cryogenerated ferriheme signal is
almost independent of pH, which indicates that the yield of Cpd II
is independent of pH.

Similar cryoreduction/annealing experiments
carried out with oxyferrous
α-chains do not yield detectable signals from a Cpd I intermediate
even at pH &gt; 8 (Figure ; Figure S14, ). At high pH, the final
product of decay of the hydroperoxy ferric intermediate of the α-chains
detected by EPR is a low-spin ferric state, which accounts for only
∼20% of cryogenerated hydroperoxy ferric intermediate. Subsequent
reirradiation of the sample annealed at 230 K (Figure ) generates a ferriheme EPR signal with gmax = 2.43 characteristic of cryoreduced Cpd II (Figure
S13, ). Spin quantitation
of the signal shows that ∼80% of the hydroperoxy ferric intermediate
converted into compound II during annealing.

CW EPR spectra (2 K,
35 GHz) of cryoreduced oxy-α-chains
(16% glycerol/0.05 M Tris buffer, pH 8.2) and after annealing at indicated
temperatures for 1 min. Instrumental conditions: T = 2 K; amplitude modulation, 4 G; microwave frequency, 35.155 GHz.

Discussion
The
present study has suggested that Cpd I is produced by the relaxation
of the hydroperoxo ferriheme intermediate generated through 77 K cryoreduction
of a variety of hemoproteins and explains why Cpd I nonetheless is
seldom seen to accumulate in these experiments. The present studies
further provide insight into the active-site structure of oxyferrous
HRP and oxyferrous CPO in frozen solution.

Structural Features of
Ferrous Oxy-HRP and -CPO Complexes in
Frozen Solution
Cryoreduced species trapped at 77 K preserve
the structure of the parent diamagnetic precursor,,,, and therefore can provide sensitive EPR/ENDOR probes
for studying structural features of the precursor oxyferrous heme
moiety. Previously this approach was successfully applied to oxyferrous
α- and β-chains of HbA, oxyferrous
gsNOS, oxyferrous DHP,and oxyferrous indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO).

The EPR and 1H ENDOR data presented herein show that
77 K cryoreduction of oxyferrous HRP yields two conformers of the
hydroperoxoferric species, A and B, an indication that the oxy precursor
in solution exists in two conformational substates. These substate
populations are independent of pH within the studied range of pH 7–8.5
and only slightly change in the presence of thioanisole. Correspondingly,
two conformational substates were also reported for Cpd II of HRP. In contrast, the crystal structure of oxyferrous
HRP obtained at 100 K does not exhibit two conformational substates. Presumably, crystallization stabilizes a single
conformation of the oxy complex, as occurs during crystallization
of oxyferrous Hb.

Cryoreduction
injects an electron to an oxy-heme, generating the
peroxoferriheme moiety, yet the 77 K cryoreduction of oxyferrous HRP
yields the hydroperoxoferric species, the result of electron and proton addition. Previous cryoreduction studies with
a variety of oxy-hemoproteins, including P450, NOS, and heme oxygenase
(HO), have shown that proton delivery to the reduced dioxygen formed
at 77 K or below requires the presence in the parent oxy-complex of
an H-bonded proton delivery network ending in an ordered water molecule
that is hydrogen-bonded to the terminal oxygen of the dioxygen ligand.−,,, This water mediates the proton transfer
to the peroxo ligand at 77 K or below by lowering the barrier for
proton transfer.,− For example,
the crystal structure of oxyferrous HRP obtained at 100 K showed that
the distal oxygen is within H-bond distances to the Nε2 atom of His42 (2.9 Å), the Nε atom of Arg38
(2.9 Å), and a water molecule (2.9 Å). In this case, both these residues may serve as proton donors,
although the water molecule does not have optimal geometry to mediate
proton transfer from the proton donors to the distal oxygen of cryogenerated
peroxo ligand.

In this context, it is noteworthy that the ferryl
oxygen of Cpd
II of HRP becomes protonated upon cryoreduction at 77 K. The crystal structure of Cpd II showed that
in this case, the proton can be transferred to the reduced ferryl
moiety from His42 via the intervening water molecule, which links
the proton donor and acceptor by H-bonds. This correspondingly suggests that unlike in the crystal, in solution
an ordered molecule of water can optimize the coupling between the
hydrogen bonding network and the peroxo ligand, cryogenerated in frozen
solution, enabling proton transfer from the proton donor residue.

Another important distinction between cryoreduced oxyferrous HRP
in frozen solution and in the crystal is that the hydroperoxy ferric
intermediate (sometimes denoted, Cpd 0) does not form as one of the
products of cryoreduction of oxyferrous HRP in the crystalline state, even though this intermediate was trapped and
characterized during cryoreduction of the crystal of oxyferrous CPO and oxyferrous heme oxygenase. This difference between solution and crystal HRP likely
indicates that the proton delivery networks in crystal and in solution
differ (see below). Finally the fact that species B of HRP trapped
at 77 K converted into species A, both of which are shown above to
contain a hydroperoxo ferriheme, at a relatively low annealing temperature
indicates that this conversion is due to reorientation of the cryogenerated
hydroperoxy ligand rather than protonation of the cryogenerated peroxo
ligand as had been suggested previously.

Cryoreduced oxyferrous CPO also exhibits two spectroscopically
distinct species, denoted A and B (Table ,
Figure , and Figure S6, ), but in this case, the ENDOR data
shows that A is a peroxo ferriheme and B is a hydroperoxo ferriheme
intermediate; progressive annealing at 130–160 K results in
protonation of the peroxo ligand of A and its conversion to the hydroperoxy
ferriheme form B (Figure S6, ). These species and such transformations are not effectively distinguished
with optical spectroscopy because they exhibit essentially indistinguishable
optical spectra. The presence of two
distinct products of cryoreduction indicates the presence of two conformational
substates in the oxyferrous CPO parent, which correlates with the
observation of two conformers in CPO Cpd II.

Interestingly, during radiolytic cryoreduction of oxyferrous
CPO
in the crystal at 100 K, only the hydroperoxy ferric heme species
accumulates, even though the structure
does not show an ordered water molecule H-bonded to the distal oxygen
that could mediate proton transfer from Glu183 to the cryogenerated
peroxo ligand. Instead, the crystal structure shows that the carboxylate
side chain of Glu183 is located 2.7 Å from the distal oxygen,
poised to serve as the proton donor. However,
proton transfer only occurs at 77 K in conformer B of the ferrous
oxy complex (B). In the alternative conformer, A, the geometry of
hydrogen bonding interaction between Glu183 and distal oxygen of peroxo
ligands is likely unfavorable for the proton transfer, and the peroxo-ferriheme
accumulates at 77 K. Presumably, during annealing of the cryoreduced
oxyferrous CPO in frozen solution at higher temperatures, small mutual
reorientations of residue Glu183 and the peroxy ligand enable protonation
of the latter.

As noted above, the primary products trapped
during cryoreduction
of crystal and frozen solution are frequently not the same, presumably
because of differences in structural details of the oxyheme site in
the crystalline form and in frozen solution. For instance, hydroperoxy
intermediates were trapped during cryoreduction of oxy-P450 and oxy-HRP
in solution, while these intermediates were not detected in crystals.,, Instead, in a crystal of cryoreduced
oxyferrous HRP, only the products of heterolytic cleavage of the O–O
bond were detected, namely, Cpd I and H2O, products that
require the transfer of two protons to the cryogenerated peroxo ligand. Our results show that this could not happen
in the protein in frozen solution at temperatures of 100 K. Also cryoreduction
of Mb Cpd II in solution and in a crystal produced different primary
products., To our knowledge, only oxyferrous Mb in
crystal and frozen solution shows similar spectroscopic and relaxation
properties upon cryoreduction., The differences in
the behavior of the solution and crystal upon cryoreduction are likely
a consequence of structural changes in the oxyferous protein parent
complexes induced by crystallization. The presence of both hydroperoxoferric and peroxoferric states in
cryoreduced oxyferrous CPO in frozen solution but only the hydroperoxoferric
state in the crystal in part may be also due to different conditions
used for preparation of oxy complexes in crystal and solution or to
a relatively low resolution of the crystal structure that does not
allow resolution of both conformers.

Reaction Pathways of Decay
of Hydroperoxo Ferriheme Intermediates
The data presented
herein show that the hydroperoxo ferriheme intermediate
generated through cryoreduction/annealing of oxyferrous β chains
undergoes proton-assisted conversion to Cpd I. At high pH, Cpd I accumulates
and was characterized by EPR/ENDOR. Cpd I did not accumulate sufficiently
to be observed by EPR during decay of the β-chain hydroperoxo
ferric intermediate at lower pH, and under no conditions was Cpd I
observed for HRP, CPO, α-chains, or Mb, even though Cpd I of HRP and CPO are relatively stable at 200 K,
the temperature at which decay of the hydroperoxy intermediates is
complete. One might imagine a trivial explanation for failures to
see Cpd I: proton-assisted decay of the hydroperoxoferric state occurs
by protonation of the OOH- ligand and loss of H2O2, leaving a ferriheme product state. However, that cannot be a major
reason: over 70% of the cryogenerated hydroperoxo intermediate in
these proteins converted to Cpd II during this cryoannealing even
without accumulation of Cpd I, and this could not happen by this mechanism.

Cpd II can instead form from the hydroperoxo ferriheme intermediate
in two alternative ways: (i) by homolytic cleavage of the O–O
bond of the hydroperoxo ligand, which is not a proton dependent process,
(ii) by rapid reduction either of the hydroperoxo ferriheme species,
or (iii) by rapid reduction of the Cpd I formed by proton-assisted
heterolytic cleavage of the O–OH bond of the hydroperoxo ferriheme.
Reduction of a Cpd I thus formed can involve redox-active (radical)
products of radiolysis or, in the case of α-chains and Mb, which
do not form a stable Cpd I, reduction by a nearby amino acid residue. The present experiments do not distinguish among
these alternatives.

Decay of the hydroperoxyferric intermediates
for all the hemoproteins studied showed a strong
solvent KIE, indicative
of a proton-dependent decay via heterolytic cleavage of the O–O
bond or dissociation of hydrogen peroxide, and this excludes mechanism
i, cleavage of the O–O bond. Mechanism ii, formation of Cpd
II by direct reduction of the hydroperoxo ferriheme, is unlikely,
because previous studies have shown that this state is a poor oxidant., In support of this conclusion, Cpd II was not detected during decay
of the cryogenerated hydroperoxo ferric intermediate of HO, which
does not form Cpd I, in contrast to Cpd I formation during annealing
of hydroperoxoferric myoglobin. Accordingly,
the evidence indicates that mechanism iii is operative, that Cpd II
forms via reduction of Cpd I; because Cpd I is stable in HRP and CPO,
this reduction must involve redox-active products of radiolysis, not
protein residues.

Formation of redox-active species during radiolysis
was demonstrated
by Denisov et al., and the EPR spectra
of radical species, many of which must be redox-active, is seen for
all proteins subjected to 77 K cryoreduction. These radicals disappear
through recombination/electron transfer upon annealing and typically
are gone after annealing for ∼1 min at ∼230 K. Thus,
effective reduction of Cpd I to Cpd II is to be expected if formation
of Cpd I is completed by annealing at temperatures below 200 K, since
concentrations of the radiolytically generated redox-active products
are still high. If conversion of the hydroperoxo ferriheme species
to Cpd I does not occur until higher temperatures, then it is possible
for Cpd I to accumulate, as seen for Cpd I of β-chains. In this
case, at pH above 8, Cpd I forms at relatively high temperatures (&gt;200
K, Figure ), that is, under conditions where
the concentration of radiolytically generated redox-active species
is relatively low. At lower pH, proton-assisted decay of the hydroperoxo
ferriheme speeds up and occurs at lower temperatures, where the redox-active
radical species remain in high concentration. The decreased yield
of Cpd I at low pH thus may be attributed to more effective reduction
of Cpd I, possibly along with its lower intrinsic stability. Interestingly,
the only Cpds I that have been trapped in this way are ferromagnetically
coupled, with S = 3/2. It may be that the S = 1/2 Cpd I seen for HRP and CPO (and possibly Mb and
α-chains) has higher reactivity with radiolytically generated
redox-active radicals.

The above presentation shows that during
cryoannealing the majority
of the hydroperoxy ferric intermediate converts to Cpd I, which in
general is reduced to Cpd II by radiolytically generated radicals.
Although Cpd II is stable at 200 K, at this annealing temperature,
we also see the formation of small amounts of ferriheme states. Most
likely these are formed through reduction of Cpd II by radicals, but
it is also possible that there is a contribution from a small amount
of dissociation of HOOH.

Summary
(i) The data presented here
suggest that the hydroperoxoferric
intermediates formed subsequent to 77 K radiolytic cryoreduction of
oxyferrous hemoproteins in general relax to Cpd I during cryoannealing,
unless this state first reacts with substrate. This finding, based
on EPR/ENDOR analysis, revises current views about the mechanism of
decay of the hydroperoxoferric state at low temperature via dissociation
of H2O2. (ii) We further show that when Cpd
I is not captured by substrate, in general it does not accumulate
in cryoreduction experiments because it is reduced to Cpd II by redox-active
products of radiolysis. (iii) Comparative analysis of cryoreduced
ferryl and oxyferrous hemoproteins in crystal form and in frozen solution
indicates that crystallization can often cause structural changes
in the active site.

Supporting Information Available
EPR and ENDOR spectra and KIE
analysis. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500296d_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Prof. Lowell
P. Hager (deceased) for providing the C. fumago chloroperoxidase.
We acknowledge Prof. H. Halpern
for access to the Gammacell 220 irradiator.

Abbreviations
HRPhorseradish peroxidase

CPOchloroperoxidase

DHPdehaloperoxidase

NOHANω-hydroxy-l-arginine

CWcontinuous wave

