Transporters for biogenic monoamines
in the neurotransmitter:sodium symporter (NSS, SLC6) family are responsible
for the uptake of the neurotransmitters serotonin, dopamine, and norepinephrine
into the presynaptic neuron, for the termination of synaptic transmission. The transport process is thought to require conformational
changes between outward-open states for binding synaptic transmitters
and inward-open states for delivering them to the cytoplasm., The major conformational change appears to involve “rocking”
of a bundle of four transmembrane helices relative to a scaffold
region, with additional gating of the pathways by individual half-helices
from both the bundle and the scaffold., Uptake of neurotransmitters
by NSS proteins is inhibited by therapeutic
agents used to treat major depression, schizophrenia, attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder, and anxiety and by recreational drugs such
as amphetamines.

Substantial efforts
have been made to understand the regulation
of monoamine transport at the levels of synthesis, assembly, targeting,
trafficking, function, and degradation. For SERT, regulation involves
neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS), SNARE protein syntaxin 1A,
protein kinase C (PKC), and scaffolding proteins involved in localization
(Hic-5) and trafficking (Sec24C). The
primary targets of these protein–protein interactions and modifications
are the cytoplasmic terminal segments
of the transporters.

As an example,
nNOS, which contains a PDZ domain, has been proposed
to interact with SERT via its three C-terminal residues [NAV (Figure a)]. Sec24C also binds
to the C-terminal domain of SERT,
and replacement of residues 607 and 608 (RI) with alanine renders
the transporter insensitive to Sec24C downregulation., By contrast, syntaxin 1A most likely interacts, via its so-called
H3 SNARE motif, with the N-terminal domains of SERT, dopamine transporter
(DAT), and norepinephrine transporter (NET).− More specifically,
mutation or deletion of residues 1–33 in DAT, or of carboxylic
residues between positions 11 and 33 in
SERT, alters their interaction with syntaxin 1A.− The N-terminal domain
may also participate in conformational rearrangements required to
support the transport cycle, because amphetamine-induced substrate
efflux is impeded when the N-terminus of SERT is tethered to the membrane. The latter results imply some degree of conformational
flexibility in the N-terminal domain and imply that this flexibility
may be required during the conformational cycling of the transport
domain.

SERT terminal domain sequences and secondary structure. (a) A selection
of SERT sequences alongside secondary structure predictions by PSIPRED,
which indicate random coil (C), α-helix (H), or β-strand
(E), which were obtained using either the full SERT sequence as the
query for the PSIBLAST search (SSP-full-SERT) or only the terminal
domain sequence shown (SSP-PSIPRED). The probability that each residue
adopts the secondary structure predicted is shown above the corresponding
majority prediction (labeled prob). (b) Predicted secondary structure
(top) and compactness (bottom) according to the meta-structure-based
approach are shown as a function of residue position in the N-terminal
domain of SERT. Large compactness values indicate residue positions
typically buried in the interior of the three-dimensional structure,
whereas small values are found for residues exposed to the solvent.
For reference, the average residue exposure (compactness) of proteins
in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) is 300, compared to, for example, 160
for StpA (PDB entry 2LRX), considered to be an intrinsically disordered protein. For the
secondary structure prediction, positive values are indicative of
α-helical segments, whereas continuous negative values are typical
for extended or β-strand regions, in analogy to the well-established
nuclear magnetic resonance 13C chemical shift index.

It is important to consider the
terminal domains in a structural
context to understand their role in neurotransmitter uptake and in
forming multiple distinct interactions during regulation. There are
two possible alternatives for the nature of the N- and C-terminal
domains. (i) They adopt a stable rigid fold, allowing binding partners
to be engaged in a sequential and compartmentalized fashion, or (ii)
they are intrinsically unstructured, plastic segments that sample
the environment allowing for transient interactions. These two possibilities
are not mutually exclusive, because portions of the N- and/or C-termini
may adopt a well-defined structure, with other regions being intrinsically
unstructured.

Currently, no structural information is available
for SERT. A recent
structure of the homologous Drosophila melanogaster DAT (dDAT) elucidated important structural details for the transmembrane
segments and a small segment of the C-terminus. In addition, the DAT N-terminal domain has been structurally
modeled
to identify the locations of positively charged patches that interact
with negatively
charged signaling lipids [phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate
(PIP2)]. However, because
of differences in sequence, and difficulties
in the expression and crystallization of flexible domains, neither
the dDAT structure nor the model provides information about the long
N-terminal domain of SERT or the region proposed to interact with
nNOS at the C-terminus
of SERT. Here, we used a combination of
computational and experimental techniques
to address the structure of the N- and C-terminal domains of SERT.
Specifically, de novo and homology-based modeling
were combined in an iterative manner with one-dimensional 1H nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy,
mutagenesis, biochemical measurements, and FRET microscopy. Together,
the results identify the specific locations of secondary structure
elements and indicate that they are interspersed with intrinsically
unstructured regions. The resultant models therefore allow prediction
of modes of regulatory interactions, for example, the mechanism by
which SERT engages syntaxin 1A.

Experimental Procedures
Computational
Methods
Models of SERT, including the
terminal domains, were generated by combining template-based and fragment-based
modeling
methodologies. The modeling process was conducted in three stages:
(a) separately modeling cytoplasmic N-terminal residues 1–83
and C-terminal residues 600–630 of SERT using a de
novo (fragment-based) folding
approach called Rosetta,, (b) modeling of the
transmembrane (TM) segment of SERT based on a structure of
dDAT, and (c) combining these elements. Steps a and c involved extensive
conformational sampling to ensure that nativelike states were modeled.

Predicting
Secondary Structure and Structural Compactness in
the Terminal Domains
Secondary structure propensities for
each residue were obtained using PSIPRED version 2.5 (ref ()), by searching
against the Uniref90 database with the terminal domain sequence rather
than the full-length SERT sequence. This step excludes DAT and NET
sequences from the PSI-BLAST hits and thereby prevents contamination
of the prediction. PSIPRED predictions are based on neural networks
trained with one-dimensional secondary structure data. We also predicted
the structural compactness and the local secondary structure using
a recent approach based on the so-called “meta-structure”
of known structures as
described by Konrat and as exemplified
by several examples in the literature.− In brief, the meta-structure
approach describes proteins
as networks in which individual amino acids represent nodes whereas
edges connecting two nodes indicate spatial proximity in three-dimensional
(3D) structures. The mutual topological relationship between residues
is quantified using the shortest path length (θ) connecting
two residues in the network. The shortest path length (θ) between
residues A and B is characteristic of amino acid types A and B and
their separation in the primary sequence (lAB). These characteristics were evaluated using a subset of the Protein
Data Bank (PDB) structural database and stored as pairwise statistical
distribution functions r(θ,A,B,lAB) from which so-called meta-structure parameters can
be calculated as follows. For each possible amino acid pair (A,B)
in the primary sequence (separated by lAB) in the protein and using the appropriate r(θ,A,B,lAB), an average topology parameter dAB is calculated. Subsequent summation (over all residue
pairs) provides the residue-specific compactness value CA. For the prediction of local secondary structure elements,
only next-neighbor distribution functions (restricted to primary sequence
differences
between residue pairs of ≤4) are used.

The residue compactness
value, CA, therefore quantifies the spatial
environment of individual residues within 3D protein structures. While
residues deeply buried in the interior of a protein structure display
large CA values, surface-exposed residues
are characterized by small (even negative in the case of conformationally
highly flexible segments) CA values. A
large-scale comparison of calculated CA values of intrinsically
disordered proteins (taken from the DisProt database)
and of well-folded proteins deposited in the PDB database showed that
intrinsically
disordered proteins display CA values
(∼230) significantly smaller than those of their well-folded
counterparts (∼330), indicating that CA values are valuable quantitative probes for analyzing the
foldedness of proteins.

The meta-structure-derived secondary
structure parameter is defined
using the well-established NMR 13Cα chemical shift
index (positive values for α-helices and negative values in
the case of extended or β-stranded conformations). These values
can therefore be used to infer secondary structures of proteins exclusively
on the basis of primary sequence information.

Folding of the Individual Terminal Domains
Structural
models of the SERT cytoplasmic terminal domains were generated using
Rosetta, which combines short fragments of known protein structures
to yield a 3D model of a query from its sequence. A goal of our strategy
(Figure a–f) was to identify as many
distinct folds
per domain as possible; accordingly, we conducted an extensive conformational
search to ensure that the native conformation of each terminal domain
was sampled.

SERT modeling protocol, and helical component of terminal
domain
models. (a) Schematic of the procedure followed to obtain a set of
unique folds for the N- or C-terminal domains of SERT. See the text
for details. With regard to nomenclature, sets of 1 million structures
were named Nall and Call, sets of 200000 structures
were named NEfilt and CEfilt, and sets of representatives
obtained after clustering stages 1 and 2 were named Nclust1 and Cclust1 or Nclust2 and Cclust2, respectively. (b) All conformations belonging to an example cluster.
Each structure is rainbow-colored (from blue at the N-terminus to
red at the C-terminus), showing that all conformations in that cluster
adopt the same overall fold, as required. (c and d) Example final
configurations obtained for the N-terminal and C-terminal domains,
respectively, shown as rainbow-colored ribbons. (e) Procedure for
combining the N- and C-terminal domain models with the model of the
TM domain of SERT, using the outward-facing conformation of the TM
region. With regard to nomenclature, F refers to a full-length model
of SERT, the set of 28182 models is named Fall, the set
of 1724 models that agree with cysteine accessibility data is named
F1724, and the set of 100 structures that best agree with
the experimental data for the V71E mutant is named Fout100. (f) Fraction of the set
of 1821 N-terminal or 231 C-terminal domain models (Nclust2 or Cclust2, respectively) that contain a helix, β-strand,
or turn at a given residue.

In the standard Rosetta protocol, applied successfully
in several critical assessment of protein structure prediction (CASP)
experiments, sets of 300000 structures were typically generated for
each globular protein, with lengths of
&lt;221 residues. In brief, for each
candidate conformation, this protocol involves 40000 substitutions
of fragment structures, and these substitutions are accepted according
to the Metropolis criteria. The resulting structures are subsequently
“relaxed”
to improve the local backbone and side-chain orientations and to
minimize side-chain clashes. For each terminal domain, we repeated
this procedure 1 million times, because terminal domains are potentially
less compact than globular domains; the resultant sets of 1 million
atomistic models are termed Nall and Call for
the N- and C-terminal domains, respectively.

Filtering and Clustering
the Individual Terminal Domains
The 200000 conformations
of each domain with the lowest (best) Rosetta
scores were selected from the 1 million initial models as being the
most physically reasonable; these sets are termed NEfilt and CEfilt. These models were then clustered to identify
distinct folds, in a two-step procedure (Figure a) using the simple exclusive clustering algorithm of Daura et al.
implemented in Gromacs version 3.0., The root-mean-square
deviation
(rmsd) cutoff values of 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 Å were tested to minimize
the number of clusters while ensuring that
each cluster represented one folded state (Figure b). In the case of the N-terminal domain models, only residues
predicted not to belong to the central random coil segment (residues
1–30
and 60–83) were used for calculating the rmsd. The selected
rmsd cutoff values
were 5 Å for the N-terminal domain and 3 Å for the C-terminal
domain.

The two-step clustering procedure
was as follows. In clustering step 1 (Figure a), it was necessary, because of computational memory limitations,
to initially divide the 200000 structures into five groups of 40000
models. Models in each group were clustered, and the structure with
the lowest Rosetta score in each cluster was chosen as the representative
of that cluster. After the representatives identified for each of
the five groups had been combined, a total of n representatives
were obtained; this set of n representative models
is termed Nclust1 or Cclust1. In clustering
step 2 (Figure a), all the representatives
(Nclust1 or Cclust1) were clustered together
to obtain m clusters and a representative was selected,
as described above, for each of the m clusters, resulting
in sets Nclust2 and Cclust2. These sets contain
1821 and 231 distinct predicted folds for the N- and C-terminal domains,
respectively. Example putative folds are shown in panels c and d of
Figure .

For each of the N-terminal
domain models, the secondary structure
was assigned according to DSSP, using Gromacs version
3.0, and used to design structure-disrupting
mutations. The Nclust2 set was then filtered according
to the secondary structure indicated
by FRET measurements (see ), after
which 122 models remained, in a set called Nclust2*.

Homology Modeling of the Outward-Facing TM Domain
Residues
76–602
in the TM domain of SERT in an outward-facing (inhibited) state
were modeled using an X-ray crystal structure of dDAT as a template (PDB entry 4M48) using Modeller 9v2, based on a sequence alignment generated
using AlignMe version 1.1 in P mode, (Figure S1
of the ). Residues
203–218 of EL2 were not modeled because of the lack of a template.
The sequence identity between hSERT and the dDAT template is 52%.

Combining Models of the Three Domains
Complete models
of the protein (except part of EL2) in an outward-facing conformation
were generated using Modeller 9v2, by joining every possible combination
of N- and C-terminal
domain models with the transmembrane (TM) segments of the protein
(Figure e). First, the 122 filtered N-terminal
domain models [Nclust2* (see )] were individually added to the model of the TM segment and oriented
by structurally aligning residues R79, W82, and G83 of the TM models
with the same residues in the N-terminal domain models. We used 25
Modeller
iterations per N+TM combination, from which the model with the lowest
Rosetta score was selected. Each of these 122 “N+TM”
models was then combined with each of the 231 C-terminal domain (Cclust2) configurations, which were oriented by structurally
aligning residues T600, P601, and G602 from each model. For each combination,
five iterations of the default Modeller optimization were conducted.
A single model was selected from the
five N+TM+C combinations, on the basis of the Rosetta score, while
excluding models in which one or more atoms in the SERT terminal domains
were &lt;3 Å from a 30 Å thick layer of pseudoatoms representing
the membrane. To orient each SERT model relative to
the membrane plane, the scaffold transmembrane helices (TM3–5
and TM8–12) were structurally superimposed onto
a structure of LeuT aligned according to the Orientations of Proteins
in the Membrane (OPM) database. This
procedure resulted in 28182 full-length models
of SERT (except for part of EL2) in an outward-facing state (the so-called
Fall set).

Filtering Full-Length Models
Experimental
constraints
were then used to identify reasonable models. First, of the 28182
full-length models (Fall), we selected those consistent
with published Cys accessibility data, so that C15
and C622 were accessible to the solvent [percent solvent accessible
surface area (SASA) of &gt;40%], while C21 was inaccessible to the
solvent
(SASA of &lt;40%). This filtering step resulted in 1724 models (F1724). Second, the results of the FRET analysis indicated that
the V71E mutation does not have any structural effect (see ). We therefore used this mutant for further
filtering; we modeled the V71E mutant of each model in F1724, performing 500 Modeller iterations per V71E side-chain replacement.
The V71E mutant model
with the lowest Rosetta score was selected from those 500 candidates,
resulting in a set of 1724 mutant models. We then selected the 100
models from F1724 that are most consistent with the lack
of a structural effect of this mutant, i.e., for which the difference
between the WT and V71E Rosetta score was closest to zero (Figure e). These 100 WT models constitute set Fout100, which is
used for analysis.

Modeling Inward-Facing SERT
An inward-facing
model
of SERT TM1–10 (residues 76–532) was built using the
structure of an antibody fragment (Fab)-bound
inward-facing conformation of a LeuT mutant (PDB entry 3TT3) as a template (Figure S2 of the ; the sequence identity in TM1–10 is 22%).
The N-terminal segment of SERT, including TM1a, was modeled
in two alternative ways (see below). Each model of SERT TM1–10
was then used as a template, alongside the model of SERT TM11 and
TM12 (residues 533–601) from the dDAT-based outward-facing
SERT model described above, for
constructing an inward-facing model of SERT TM1–12. Additional
restraints were imposed between TM11 (residues 536–558) and
TM12 (residues 572–599) and between TM3 (residues 159–192)
and TM10 (residues 488–516) to maintain the orientation of
TM11 and TM12 observed in dDAT. Distance restraints were generated
for atom pairs
defined as (i,j) where atom i is in TM11 (residues 536–558) or TM12 (residues
572–599)
and atom j is in TM3 (residues 159–192) or
TM10 (residues 488–516). The distance between atoms i and j was obtained from the SERT outward-facing
model for all pairs of
atoms &lt;5 Å apart. The distance restraints were defined as
single Gaussian forms
with a cutoff of 0.1 Å.

To model TM1a within the context
of the inward-facing conformation
of TM1–10, as mentioned above, two different approaches were
followed to sample
the range of expected tilts of that half-helix. In the first approach,
the orientation was taken from the inward-facing LeuT structure (PDB
entry 3TT3),
with residues
5–10 appended and adopting the same internal conformation as
in the LeuT outward-facing structure (PDB
entry 2A65).
Thus, in the resultant homology model of SERT TM1–10, TM1a
adopts an angle of ∼73° with respect to the membrane
normal, an increase of ∼40° compared to that of the outward-open
state. While this structure is clearly open to the cytoplasm, the
orientation of TM1a places charged residues of the SERT N-terminal
domain (e.g., K84, K85, and D87) into the presumed hydrophobic core
of the membrane. Therefore, the possibility that the Fab-bound LeuT
mutant structure may be an inappropriate template in this regard cannot
be ruled out, implying an overly extreme movement of TM1a. Therefore,
in a second approach, we predicted the most conservative tilt of TM1a,
while still opening an intracellular vestibule, by assuming helix
packing between TM1a and the other bundle helices was similar to that
in the outward-facing conformation. Thus, a hybrid LeuT template was
obtained from the outward-facing conformation of LeuT (PDB entry 2A65) after superimposing
TM2, TM6, and TM7 onto the equivalent helices in the LeuT inward-facing
conformation. Distance restraints between SERT TM1a (residues 7–18)
and TM2 (residues 37–67), TM6 (residues 238–264), and
TM7 (residues 272–302), defined as described above for TM11
and TM12, were added to retain their relative positions. In this second
SERT inward-facing model, TM1a adopts an angle of ∼46°
with respect to the membrane normal and therefore changes ∼10°
with respect to that of the outward-facing state. In this model, a
cytoplasmic vestibule is present, but the state could be categorized
as “inward-occluded”. The true free energy minimum for
SERT likely consists of an ensemble occupying a region somewhere between
these two “extreme” models.

Full-length models
of the more conservative inward-facing conformation
of SERT (set Fin100) were built using Modeller by appending the same N- and C-terminal
pairs as in set Fout100 onto the template-based
model of the TM domain. For each of the 100 full-length inward-facing
models, 1000 iterations of Modeller optimization were performed and
the most likely model was selected
using the Rosetta score.

Other Computational Analysis
The
conformational flexibility
of the linkers connecting the N-terminal domain to TM1a (either residues
Q76–E78 or residues Q76–T81) was assessed by generating
2000 conformations of a model of outward-facing SERT using Modeller,
in which the residue after the linker was modeled using the equivalent
residue in dDAT as a template. The linker sequence was modeled without
a template. The center of mass coordinates of the first residue in
the linker (the least constrained residue) were then projected onto
the x–y plane, and the positional variability
was computed as the standard deviation of the x and y coordinates.

Putative phosphorylation motifs were
identified in SERT sequences using NetPhos, NetPhosK, and Phosida., The solvent accessible surface area (in square angstroms) of the
residues in a given
model was calculated using surfv(,) and converted to a percentage by comparison to the maximal values
obtained for each amino acid type (X) in the context of a GXG tripeptide.
The radius of the probe used to define the surface was 1.4 Å.
The remaining analysis was conducted using VMD, SigmaPlot (SPSS Inc.), and xmgrace.

Experimental
Methods
Subcloning, Expression, and Purification of SERT-Nter
Nucleotides encoding amino acids 1–83 of the human serotonin
transporter (SERT-Nter) and an N-terminal
TEV cleavage site were subcloned into pRSFDuet-1 (Novagen) to create
a coding region for an N-terminally His-tagged SERT-Nter fusion protein
for overexpression in Escherichia coli Rosetta-gami
(DE3) (Merck) cells. Freshly transformed cells were grown in Luria–Bertani
medium at 37 °C to an OD595 of 0.4, at which point
gene expression was
induced with 0.4 mM isopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside
(IPTG). Cells were then allowed to grow for an additional 4 h at 30
°C, centrifuged at 3000g for 15 min at 4 °C,
resuspended in buffer A [20 mM Tris (pH 7.7), 500 mM NaCl, and
5 mM β-mercaptoethanol (β-ME)] supplemented with 20 mM
imidazole, lysozyme (10 mg/mL), and protease inhibitors (1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl
difluoride,
1 μM leupeptin, 1 μg/mL aprotinin, and 1 μg/mL pepstatin
A), lysed using an Avestin EmulsiFlex-C3, and centrifuged
at 100000g for 1 h to remove cell debris. His-tagged
SERT-Nter was purified from the
supernatant via immobilized metal affinity and gel filtration chromatography.
Briefly, the lysate was passed over a 20 mL HisPrep FF 16/10 column
(GE Healthcare), washed with 10 column volumes of buffer A containing
40 mM imidazole, and eluted with buffer A containing 500 mM imidazole.
The N-terminal histidine tag was removed by adding His-tagged TEV
protease at a 1:500 (w/w) ratio and incubating the sample overnight
at 4 °C. The digested sample was loaded onto the HisPrep column
to remove
His-TEV, the polyhistidine tag, and any uncleaved SERT-Nter. The resulting
construct comprises the first 83 amino acids of hSERT with a glycine
before the N-terminal methionine. The flow-through was concentrated
and further purified on a size exclusion column (HiLoad 16/60 Superdex
75 PG, GE Healthcare) pre-equilibrated with buffer B [20 mM Tris (pH
8), 200 mM NaCl, and 5 mM β-ME]. SERT-Nter peak fractions were
pooled and applied to the HisPrep column once more in buffer B to
remove any remaining His-tagged contaminants. The sample purity was
assessed via sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(Figure S3a of the ) and electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (Figure S3b of the ).

We also tested
a construct with a C-terminal histidine tag, designated SERT-Nter-H8. DNA encoding the 87 N-terminal amino acids (M1–D87)
of human SERT was amplified by polymerase chain reaction and cloned
into bacterial expression vector pET16b using standard methods. An
eight-residue histidine tag (H8) was added in frame 3′
of this DNA. The peptide was heterologously expressed using the E. coli BL21 (DE3) strain. Once the bacterial culture had
reached an optical density of 0.6 at 660 nm, protein expression was
induced by 1 mM isopropyl 1-thio-β-d-galactopyranoside
(IPTG) for 8 h at 30 °C. Bacteria were harvested by centrifugation,
and the pellet was resuspended
in lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, 300 mM NaCl, and 10 mM imidazole)
in the presence of complete protease inhibitor (Roche). The cells
were lysed with a French press, and the lysate
was cleared by centrifugation. Proteins in the supernatant were bound
to nickel-Sepharose (IMAC column) overnight at 4 °C. After binding
had occurred, the column was washed extensively with
lysis buffer containing 30 and 60 mM imidazole. SERT-Nter-H8 peptides were finally eluted with lysis
buffer containing 500 mM imidazole.

NMR
For all NMR
measurements, SERT-Nter-H8 was dialyzed into 20 mM phosphate
(pH 7.4) and 100 mM NaCl. Protein concentrations
were estimated from absorption at 280 nm. NMR spectra were recorded
on Varian Direct Drive 600 MHz and Varian Inova 800 MHz spectrometers
with 10% D2O as the lock solvent. Spectra were processed
using NMRPipe.

The one-dimensional
(1D) proton spectrum of SERT-Nter-H8 was recorded at 800
MHz using two WATERGATE elements for
water suppression. Using a recovery delay
of 1.5 s over 512 scans at a temperature of 15 °C,
the 1D spectrum was recoded with a sample concentration of 15 μM.
Hydrodynamic radii (Rh) were determined
from pulse field gradient NMR diffusion measurements performed at
600 MHz using the PG-SLED (pulse gradient-stimulated echo longitudinal
encode-decode) sequence to which a final
WATERGATE module was added. Dioxane was
used at a concentration of 0.1% as an internal reference. Spectra
were recoded with an echo time of 100 ms and a diffusion gradient
time of 4.5 ms. A series of 50 experiments with varying gradient strengths
were recorded. The decay of peaks along the gradient strength was
fit to a single Gaussian using the diffusion-ordered spectroscopy
(DOSY) module of NMRPipe. This allowed
us to determine the diffusion constant
of the protein and the reference compound dioxane. The Rh was then calculated from the relationship of the diffusion
constants and the known Rh of dioxane
(2.12 Å).

CD
Two independent CD data sets
were recorded in independent laboratories, with two slightly different
constructs, one with (SERT-Nter-H8) and one without a histidine
tag (SERT-Nter). For SERT-Nter-H8, the sample buffer was
exchanged with 20 mM phosphate (pH 7.4) and 100 mM NaCl by repeated
cycles of concentration and dilution on a centricon with a 3 kDa cutoff.
The concentration was reduced to 27.0 μM for optimal signal
quality. The spectrum was recorded between 195
and 260 nm on a Chirascan-plus spectrometer (Applied Photophysics)
using a path length of 0.5 mm. Three scans of sample and buffer were
averaged before
subtracting the buffer baseline. Independent CD experiments with SERT-Nter
were conducted with protein exchanged into 20 mM phosphate (pH 7.4)
and 20 mM NaCl (see Figure S3 of the  for more details) in an Amicon Ultra-15 concentrator
(3.5 kDa molecular weight cutoff), at four different SERT-Nter concentrations
(25.0, 12.5, 6.3, and 3.1 μM). The protein concentration was
measured spectrophotometrically at
280 nm employing a theoretical extinction coefficient of 0.79 mL mg–1 cm–1. The DICHROWEB Web server− was used to estimate secondary
structure content.

Molecular Biology
Mutagenesis of
a construct of SERT
tagged with CFP and YFP at the N- and C-termini, respectively (C-SERT-Y),
was performed using the QuikChange lightning kit (Agilent Technologies,
Santa Clara, CA), and mutagenesis
primers were designed according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
Mutations were confirmed by sequencing (LGC genomics, Berlin, Germany).
Primer sequences are listed in Table S1 of the .

Uptake and Binding Assays
Transiently transfected HEK-293 cells expressing C-hSERT-Y
or mutants thereof were seeded on 48-well plates precoated with poly-d-lysine (0.5 ×
105 cells/well) 24 h prior to the experiment. Each well
was washed with 0.5 mL of Krebs-HEPES buffer (KHP) [10 mM HEPES, 130
mM NaCl, 1.3 mM KH2PO4, 1.5 mM CaCl2, and 0.5 mM MgSO4 (pH 7.4, adjusted with NaOH)]. The
cells were incubated in
0.2 mL of KHB containing 0.1 μM [3H]-5-HT. Unlabeled
5-HT was added at the indicated
final concentration (0.3–30
μM); the incubation time was 1 min. Nonspecific
uptake was estimated by blocking the transporters with the specific
inhibitor 5 min prior to and during incubation (paroxetine, 10 μM).
After
being incubated at room temperature, the cells were washed with 0.5
mL
of ice-cold KHP buffer. Finally, cells were lysed with 0.5 mL of 1%
sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and transferred into 2 mL of scintillation
cocktail (Rotiszint eco plus LSC, Art. 0016.3)
and counted in a Packard 2300TR TriCarb Liquid Scintillation Analyzer.
All experiments were performed on three experimental days (i.e., three
independent transfections) in triplicate determinations; because of
differing expression levels, all values were normalized to the mean
value of the C-SERT-Y-WT uptake and fit to Michaelis–Menten
kinetics.

Binding of the
high-affinity cocaine analogue 2β-carbomethoxy-3β-(4-[125I]iodophenyl)tropane (β-CIT) was measured as described
previously using SERT X5C/S277C. The
sensitivity of C277 in the cytoplasmic permeation pathway was
determined by incubating membranes prepared from HeLa cells with the
indicated concentrations of MTSEA in either 150 mM NaCl and 10 mM
HEPES adjusted to pH 8.0 with N-methyl-d-glucamine (NMDG, free base) or 150
mM NMDG-Cl and 10 mM HEPES (pH 8.0) for 15 min and subsequently assayed
for residual binding activity as described previously.

Confocal Imaging
Confocal microscopy
was performed
using a Zeiss LSM780 confocal microscope (core facility of the Medical
University of Vienna) using a Plan-apochromat 63× NA
1.4 oil DIC M27 objective. CFP and YFP images were captured
in multitrack mode using a blue diode laser (405 nm, 1.5%), an argon
laser (514 nm, 1%), and the appropriate beamsplitter; images were
captured in line mode, averaging four consecutive captures. The image
size was 1024 ×
1024 pixels. CFP was detected with a band-pass 447–500 nm filter
and YFP with a band-pass 522–621 nm filter. Imaging was performed
with a pinhole size of 1 mm.

Fluorescence Resonance
Energy Transfer
FRET was measured
with a Carl Zeiss Axiovert 200
epifluorescence microscope. We used HEK-293 cells transiently transfected
with plasmid cDNA (1.7 μg) by means of the calcium phosphate
coprecipitation
method as described previously. Cells
were transfected directly in ibidi (Martinsried,
Germany) eight-well μ-Slide chambered coverslips. Directly before
each FRET microscopy experiment,
every well was washed with 300 μL of Krebs-HEPES buffer [10
mM HEPES, 130 mM NaCl, 1.3 mM KH2PO4, 1.5 mM
CaCl2, and 0.5 mM MgSO4 (pH 7.4, adjusted with
NaOH)] and incubated in 150 μL of KHB. The “three-filter
method” was performed as previously described. Images were acquired using a 63× oil immersion
objective under continuous usage of a gray filter (20% density). LUDL
filter wheels allowed for a rapid excitation
and emission filter exchange. The LUDL filter wheels were configured
as follows: CFP (IDonor; excitation at
436 nm, emission at 480 nm, and dichroic mirror at 455 nm), YFP (IAcceptor; excitation at 500 nm, emission at
535 nm, and dichroic mirror at 515 nm), and FRET (IFRET; excitation at 436 nm, emission at 535 nm, and dichroic
mirror at 455 nm). Images were acquired with a CCD camera (Coolsnap fx, Roper Scientific) using the MetaMorph of MetaSeries
software package (release 4.6, Universal Imaging Corp., Downingtown,
PA). Pixelshift was corrected whenever necessary by using the following
combination of ImageJ plugins: TurboReg and StackReg. Background fluorescence was subtracted from all images.
We analyzed the images pixel by pixel using ImageJ (W. Rassband, National
Institutes of Health, version 1.43b) and the ImageJ plugin PixFRET
(pixel by pixel analysis of FRET with ImageJ, version 1.6.0_10); spectral bleed-through (SBT) parameters
were determined for the donor bleed-through (BT) and the acceptor
BT. Next, the FRET efficiency (E) was computed. The
mean FRET efficiency was measured at the plasma membrane (predefined
as the region of interest) using the computed FRET efficiency image.
The regions of interest were selected in the CFP (donor) or YFP (acceptor)
image (to avoid bleaching-associated bias) and transmitted to the
FRET image (equivalent to the Youvan image, FRETc) by the ImageJ Multi Measure Tool. All experiments were
conducted for individual transfections; five to seven wide-field images
were captured during each experiment and one to seven transfected
cells per image included in the study. Distances (r) were calculated on the basis of the Förster equation using
the value of 4.92 nm as R0 for the CFP–YFP
FRET pair according to ref ()

Statistical Analysis
All values are given as means ±
the standard error of the mean (SEM) if not stated otherwise.
Statistical analysis was performed with GraphPad Prism version 5.0d
for Mac OSX (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA). The statistical significance
of differences between groups was analyzed using one-way analysis
of variance (ANOVA) applying Bonferroni’s post hoc test. p values of &lt;0.05 were considered
to indicate statistical significance.

Results
Secondary Structure
and Compactness Predictions
A useful
first step in modeling a protein structure is to predict the propensity
for each residue to exist in and contribute to a secondary structure
element. Modern secondary structure prediction algorithms, such as
PSIPRED, gain improved accuracy by considering sequence homologues, identified using, e.g., a PSI-BLAST search.
For the
full-length sequence of SERT, PSIPRED predicted only one secondary
structure element in the N-terminal domain and one in the C-terminal
domain (Figure a, SSP-full-SERT). This result,
however, reflected the fact that the PSI-BLAST step collected numerous
sequences of, e.g., DAT and NET, which, despite being related to SERT
in their TM regions, are entirely different at their termini and therefore
contaminate the predictions for the SERT terminal regions. Searching
PSI-BLAST using only the individual terminal domains as queries identified
exclusively SERT orthologs. This approach dramatically increased the
proportion of secondary structure elements predicted with &gt;50%
confidence,
i.e., six elements in the N-terminal domain and two elements in the
C-terminal domain (Figure a, SSP-PSIPRED and
SSP-prob).

PSIPRED predicts that there are two regions of the
N-terminal domain, residues 10–23 and 68–80, in which
the residues are likely to be helical. Nevertheless, the overall fraction
of predicted secondary structure elements in the N-terminal domain
is low (∼35% of the residues), and therefore, an alternative
predictive approach was also used for that region. The approach used
is based on the so-called meta-structure concept, which was recently
introduced as a theoretical framework for protein sequence analysis
and provides quantitative parameters for compactness and local secondary
structure. The residue-specific compactness
value predicts
the
structural complexity of an individual residue in the context of the
3D protein fold; large compactness values are assigned to residues
that are buried deep in the interior of a structure. The meta-structure-derived
secondary structure parameter is defined in analogy to the well-established
NMR 13C chemical shift index, with positive values for
an α-helix and negative values indicating the presence of β-strands
or an extended conformation. In agreement with the PSIPRED predictions,
the meta-structure predictions for the N-terminal domain of SERT (Figure b) indicate two regions likely to contain helical
elements, separated by a long loosely compacted, extended region.
The overall compactness
of the N-terminal domain is therefore likely to be low.

Modeling of
the Terminal Domains
We assessed whether
the predicted helical elements were energetically favored within the
context of a large unfolded N-terminal domain, and examined the fold
of the smaller C-terminal domains, by de novo structure
prediction using Rosetta. A very large number (1 million per domain)
of candidate folds were generated to increase the likelihood that
physically realistic folds were sampled (Figure a). The energetically most probable models, according to the Rosetta
energy function, were then identified, reducing the set to 200000
models per domain (Figure a). From here, redundancy
in the obtained folds was further decreased by clustering according
to the rmsd of the structures; only the predicted structured elements
were used in the fitting and calculation of the rmsd to reduce noise
from the coiled regions. The clustering procedure required two stages
because of the computational requirements for clustering such a large
number of folds. The general properties of the models, according to
the calculated radius of gyration (Rg),
were similar during the energy filtering and clustering stages (Figure
S4a,b of the ), and
more physically reasonable folds, as measured using the Rosetta score
(ERosetta), were retained (Figure S4d,e
of the ).

Models
of SERT Terminal Domains Contained Secondary Structure
After
filtering by energy and clustering by structural similarity,
we were left with 1821 N-terminal domain and 231 C-terminal domain
models (in sets Nclust2 and Cclust2, respectively).
These distinct low-energy models contain significant amounts of secondary
structure (Figure f), consistent with the
sequence-based predictions (Figure a,b). Specifically,
within the N-terminal domain, three main helical segments were identified
in a majority (&gt;75%) of the models; these helices comprise residues
10–14,
18–24, and 68–75, with a total of 20 residues or ∼25%
of the domain. In the
C-terminal domain, helical domains were also found (Figure f). As the secondary structure prediction is one
of the input parameters for the de novo modeling,
we conducted a set of control modeling calculations, in which minimal
secondary structure was provided (see the SSP-full-SERT prediction
in Figure a). The models produced using this
approach had higher Rosetta energy scores; i.e., they were energetically
less favorable (Figure S4d of the ), suggesting
that, for the SERT terminal domains, some folded elements are indeed
energetically favorable.

NMR Measurements on the Isolated SERT N-Terminal
Domain
To assess experimentally the predicted secondary structure
in the
N-terminal domain of SERT, a construct of a His-tagged N-terminal
domain (83 amino acids) (SERT-Nter-H8) was obtained. The
1D proton NMR spectrum of SERT-Nter-H8 showed limited dispersion
of the amide proton signals (Figure a), indicating
that the protein did not contain significant amounts of stable β-sheets
or tertiary contacts. However, as proton amides point toward the solvent
in α-helices, stably formed helical elements that
are loosely packed cannot be excluded on the basis of this spectrum.

Structural
analysis of the isolated N-terminal domain of SERT.
(a) One-dimensional proton NMR spectrum of SERT-Nter-H8. The narrow shift dispersion (6.8–8.8 ppm) of the amide protons
indicates significant conformational flexibility of the N-terminal
domain of SERT. Several regions of the spectrum are marked. Signals
at 0.9 ppm were cut for better visibility of the tryptophan signal.
(b) CD spectra of SERT-Nter at varied protein concentrations (blue)
and SERT-Nter-H8 (solid black line) constructs, compared
to the spectrum computed on the basis of the percentages of helix
in models of the isolated N-terminal domain (red). For reference,
the ideal curves for α-helix (dotted line), β-sheet (dashed
line), and random coil (dotted–dashed line) are also shown.
The computed curve is a linear combination of these curves, weighted
according to the percentages of each secondary structure, which is
known to be a reasonable first approximation.

DOSY measurements were then performed
in the
same buffer as that used to record the 1D spectrum, at a protein
concentration of 100 μM. Fits of the decay were performed at
two positions of the spectrum
and at two temperatures. We calculated the hydrodynamic radius, Rh, for these four fits yielding values between
24.2 and 25.0 Å. Using an experimentally derived relationship
between Rh values for native and denatured
proteins, the expected
values for a globular or unfolded SERT-Nter-H8 (95 amino
acids) would be 17.8 or 29.6 Å, respectively. These results support the notion that the N-terminal domain
contains
a significant fraction of intrinsically disordered residues, alongside
structured elements that are not likely to be stable β-sheets.

CD of the Isolated SERT N-Terminal Domain
As an alternative
approach, the secondary structure of SERT was analyzed by measuring
the CD spectrum of the isolated His-tagged SERT-Nter-H8 as well as of a construct lacking the histidine tag (SERT-Nter).
The CD spectra of the two constructs were similar, largely independent
of protein concentration (Figure b, blue lines),
and demonstrated clear features of high “random-coil”
content, consistent with
the structure predictions (Figures  and ) and NMR (Figure a) measurements.
Quantification of the curves using DichroWeb (see ) produced results consistent with
a significant proportion of random coil
(e.g., ∼35%), as well as “turn”
(e.g., ∼17–24%). Nevertheless, the quantitation
was highly sensitive to the choice of software and reference set,
with large variations in the expected proportion of helix. Moreover,
most of the estimates contained significant fractions of strand (not
shown). Given that β-stranded elements can be clearly ruled
out by the 1D NMR data (Figure a), we instead
opted for a more direct comparison with the structural models. Specifically,
we calculated a theoretical CD spectrum for a linear combination of
“ideal”
spectra weighted according to the percentages of secondary structure
found in the models of the isolated N-terminal domain. These percentages
were 29 ± 6% helix, 1.0 ± 0.2% strand, 39 ± 7% turn,
and 31 ± 6% unstructured (Figure f; turn
and unstructured residues are both assigned to the random-coil component).
Reassuringly,
this model-based predicted CD spectrum (Figure b, red line) overlays well with the experimental spectra (Figure b, blue lines), indicating that the extent of secondary
structure in the models is consistent with the CD measurement. Altogether,
these results are consistent with the prediction that the N-terminal
domain contains unstructured elements separated by two or more helices.

Modification of Sec24C Binding by Disruption of a C-Terminal
Domain Helix
One of the most reliable predictions of the
computational models is that the C-terminal domain contains a helical
element immediately after the last TM helix, i.e., at residues 599–611.
A similar helical segment is observed in residues 585–595 of
dDAT at the beginning of the C-terminal domain, even though there is significant sequence divergence
between dDAT and SERT (Figure S5 of the ), particularly after the helix. This helix in SERT
is of particular interest because it contains the motif RI, which
upon being mutated to AA abolishes interaction with the COPII component
Sec24C., Moreover, mutation of the subsequent residue
K610
to tyrosine switches the specificity to Sec24D, whereas alanine is
tolerated., Accordingly, we introduced a proline residue
after the RI motif
at
position K610, whose presence should break the predicted helix and
thereby disrupt its interaction with Sec24C. Proline residues lack
an amide hydrogen atom and are thus unable to hydrogen bond to the
residue located four positions upstream (N-terminal). This means that
proline cannot be tolerated after the first three residues of a helix. The K610P mutant was introduced into a construct
of
SERT tagged with CFP and YFP at the N- and C-termini, respectively
(C-SERT-Y) and transiently expressed
in HEK-293 cells. As predicted, the K610P mutant did not reach the
cell surface and remained confined to the ER (Figure ). In contrast, and as expected, the control modification
(K610A) resulted in protein exclusively localized to the cell surface
(Figure ) similar to wild-type protein. Furthermore,
consistent with the observed localization, [3H]-5-HT transport
was undetectable for SERT-K610P, whereas SERT-K610A took up 5-HT at
rates similar to those of the wild type (Table ). These results are consistent with the presence of a helical segment
in the C-terminal domain between residues 599 and 611, providing confidence
in the predicted secondary structures.

Intracellular retention
of C-SERT-Y K610P, but not of WT C-SERT-Y
or C-SERT-Y K610A. Confocal images show the lack of surface expression
of C-SERT-Y K610P expressed in HEK293 cells. In contrast, C-SERT-Y
K610A is transported readily to the cell surface and C-SERT-Y K610A
and WT C-SERT-Y are both found at the cell surface. Shown are representative
images, of three independent transfections with identical results.

Kinetic Parameters
for the Uptake
of [3H]-5-HT into Cells
 	Vmax (% of control)	KM (μM)	
WT C-SERT-Y	106.4 ± 0.5	3.4 ± 0.1	
A14P	173 ± 2.5	3.2 ± 0.2	
Q22P	52.7 ± 0.6	2.1 ± 0.1	
Q22A	252.0 ± 7.9	3.9 ± 0.4	
N24P	222.7 ± 5.1	3.4 ± 0.3	
N24A	294.9 ± 23.1	6.4 ± 1.4	
T69Y	51.3 ± 1.6	2.3 ± 0.3	
L70P	88.5 ± 1.4	2.9 ± 0.2	
V71P	83.9 ± 1.4	3.9 ± 0.2	
V71E	54.9 ± 0.5	1.6 ± 0.1	
L74P	249.2 ± 16.6	6.4 ± 1.1	
L74A	121.9 ± 11.1	4.8 ± 1.3	
K610A	70.0 ± 8.4	7.8 ± 2.4	
K610P	&lt;20% of
WT	not detected	
Uptake experiments employing [3H]-5-HT in cells transiently
expressing WT C-SERT-Y and the
indicated mutants (using C-SERT-Y as the basis; CaPO4 transfection
method). Vmax values are expressed as
a percent of control, i.e., the mean of all WT C-SERT-Y uptake values,
to take differing expression levels into account. All experiments
were performed in triplicate determinations (n =
3). Statistical differences were not observed between C-SERT-Y and
mutants after the application of one-way ANOVA followed by a Bonferroni
post hoc test. We did not include SERT-K610P in our statistical analysis
because the level of uptake was exceedingly low and no reliable KM value could be detected.

Alteration of FRET by Mutation in Predicted
N-Terminal Domain
Helices
We tested the prediction that the N-terminal domain
contains helical segments by taking advantage of the strong resonance
energy transfer between the terminal fluorescent tags in C-SERT-Y.
This FRET is sensitive to conformational changes in the protein. Accordingly, we introduced helix-breaking mutations
within the predicted helices, expecting that these mutations would
translate into changes in the N-terminus–C-terminus distance.
Substrate translocation involves conformational changes that affect
the FRET, so we eliminated these effects by recording FRET in a physiological
extracellular sodium concentration, which is believed to bias C-SERT-Y
toward
the outward-open conformation. A number
of experiments verify this assumption that
the sodium-loaded state of C-SERT-Y is predominantly outward-open.
(i) The reactivity of a cysteine introduced into the cytoplasmic permeation
pathway (here measured as inhibition of β-CIT binding by the
cysteine reactive reagent MTSEA) decreased markedly (requiring higher
MTSEA concentrations) in the presence of sodium, compared to that
under control conditions (Figure a), indicating
that the cytoplasmic pathway of C-SERT-Y is significantly less accessible
in the presence of sodium. Similar observations have been made previously
for the conformational preference of LeuT., (ii) By contrast, saturating concentrations of 5-HT or ibogaine
have
been shown to shift the conformational equilibrium of C-SERT-Y to
an inward-open state, as measured by FRET between the CFP and YFP
probes and cytoplasmic pathway accessibility., (iii) Importantly, however, the addition of 10 μM paroxetine,
which binds to the outward-open state of SERT, was shown
to reveal no additional change in FRET relative to that with sodium
alone.

Conformational behavior of C-SERT-Y and
mutants thereof.
(a) β-CIT
binding to SERT after treatment with the indicated concentration of
MTSEA, in the presence (○) or absence (●) of sodium,
expressed as a percentage of binding without MTSEA treatment. Sodium
was replaced by NMDG+. (b) FRET imaging and pixel by pixel
analysis of the resulting images performed in transiently transfected
HEK-293 cells as described in . The bar graph shows the means ± SEM of the measured FRET efficiencies
for the WT (red) and mutants thereof (the abbreviations on the y axis denote the amino acids before and after mutation
in the single-letter code and its position in the SERT amino terminus).
The number of experiments is provided on the right of the y-axis; the total number of cells that were evaluated is
given in the . Statistical
significance was tested by one-way ANOVA followed by a Bonferroni
post hoc test (***p &lt; 0.001; ****p &lt; 0.0001 compared to WT C-SERT-Y).

We therefore proceeded to assess whether helix-breaking
mutations in the N-terminal domain affect the distance between the
two fluorophores by recording FRET efficiencies and comparing them
to results obtained for unmodified C-SERT-Y. All constructs were transiently
expressed in HEK-293 cells and observed to reach the cell surface,
albeit to differing extents (Figure S6 of the ). Likewise, although the transport
characteristics were similar to those of WT C-SERT-Y with respect
to the substrate affinity (i.e., Km value),
any changes in the Vmax value that were
observed reflected the changes in the expression level (Table ). In spite of these functional similarities, statistically
significant changes in FRET efficiency were measurable for several
of the site-specific mutants (Figure b and
Figure S7 of the ).

In the N-terminal domain, helices were predicted for residues
∼9–16
(hI), ∼8–24 (hII), ∼40–47 (hIII), and
∼68–76
(hIV). The three most confidently predicted helix conformations
(hI, hII, and hIV) were tested using proline mutations A14P, Q22P,
N24P, L70P, V71P, and L74P, as follows. The first helix of the N-terminal
domain (hI) was predicted by PSIPRED to comprise residues Q11–E16
(Figure a), and we observed a high frequency
of helical structure between residues Q9 and A14 (Figure b). Insertion of a proline should not be tolerated
at position 14 within this helix. However, we observed no change in
FRET for the A14P mutation (Figure b), suggesting
that either hI is not present or that the helix starts after the 10th
residue. In addition, this helix might be poorly constrained because
of its location at the beginning of the N-terminal domain, so it is
possible that disruptions in this region do not translate into detectable
changes in average relative distance and hence in resonance energy
transfer. We note that this helix was predicted with the lowest level
of confidence of the three main helices in the N-terminal domain of
SERT and has the weakest sequence conservation and, therefore, may
be present in some species and not in others.

A second helix
at the N-terminus of SERT (hII) is predicted to
include residues G18–E23 [according to PSIPRED (Figure a)] or to extend to N24 [in the models (Figure b)], though this region has a poor helical propensity
according to the meta-structure prediction (Figure b). Interestingly, the average local secondary values in the
latter prediction are close to zero, suggesting equivalent propensities
for α-helical and unstructured/extended conformations (Figure b). We introduced mutation Q22P or N24P to destabilize
a putative helix in this region and observed in each case a significant
increase in the distance between the N- and C-termini, detected by
changes in FRET efficiency (Figure b). By
contrast, replacement with alanine, which should favor helix formation,
caused no statistically significant changes in FRET efficiency in
Q22A or N24A (Figure b), consistent with the
predictions. These findings are consistent with a helix in this region
being disrupted by the proline mutations and unaffected by alanine
mutations.

The last predicted helix of the N-terminal domain
(hIV), which
immediately precedes the TM segments of SERT, begins around residues
T68–L70 and ends after Q76 (Figures  and ). Statistical analysis also predicts
with a high probability that T69 is the so-called helix capping (i.e.,
first) residue. Specifically, within
the 68-TTLVA-72 sequence, the residues
have the following likelihoods of being a capping residue, normalized
to amino acid occurrence: 1.13 for T68, 1.41 for T69, 0.84 for L70,
0.70 for V71, and 1.43 for A72. FRET
measurements indicated that proline is tolerated
in L70P and V71P (Figure b), suggesting that
the amino acid located four residues N-terminal to V71 (position 67)
is not in a helix. To test this prediction further, we replaced position
69 with tyrosine, which has only an average frequency (0.88) at helix-capping
sites, compared to 1.41 for threonine, which is the second most abundant
residue at N-terminal helix caps. The
observed change in FRET efficiency upon introduction
of the T69Y mutation (Figure b) is therefore
consistent with the notion that T69 caps the beginning of the helix.
Substituting proline, but not alanine, for L74 also altered the C-SERT-Y
resonance energy transfer (Figure b). This
provides further support for the presence of a helix that starts at
least at residue 70. Finally, the sequence at the C-terminal end of
this helix is 73-ELHQGE-78, with G77 being the first residue after
the C-terminal helix cap (i.e., Q76), resembling an αL-type capping motif, a common helix termination motif., Indeed, G77 is not helical in a high percentage of our models (Figure b).

In summary, the FRET results are consistent
with the prediction
of the second (hII) and the last (hIV) helices of the N-terminal domain;
the lack of an effect for the first putative helix (hI) in the N-terminus,
however, cannot conclusively rule out a helix at this position as
described above.

Filtering Terminal Domain and Full-Length
Models Using FRET
Data
Using the FRET results, we designed filters that allowed
us to further narrow the 1821 energetically reasonable and distinct
N-terminal folds
to a smaller set of plausible models. Specifically, the N-terminal
domain structures obtained after clustering (1821 Nclust2 models) were reduced to a subset of 122 models (Nclust2*). This was achieved by assuming that G18, D20, Q22, N24, T69, L70,
and L74 are α-helical, whereas nonhelicity was imposed for A65
(four residues upstream from T69) and T68 (because
T69 appears to cap the helix). Given the uncertainty in the result
for the first N-terminal helix, we chose to neither exclude nor select
for models with helices in that region.

This filtered, FRET
consistent Nclust2* set of N-terminal domain models was
used to construct full-length models of SERT, by first joining them
to the model of the TM domain and then combining them with the C-terminal
domain models from set Cclust2 (Figure e), resulting in a set of 28182 full-length models (Fall). These full-length models were then further filtered using
experimental data that could be applied to only the full-length protein.
Specifically, cysteine reactivity measurements indicate that C15 and
C622 are exposed to the solvent, whereas C21 is not., Although we cannot rule out the possibility that C21 was masked
by
interacting proteins during the aforementioned experiments, we assumed
that the conformation of SERT itself dictates its lack of reactivity.
These criteria reduced the number of full-length models to 1724 (in
set F1724), without biasing toward high-energy models (Figure
S2e of the ; Fall vs F1724) or significantly
altering the properties of the folds, as measured by compactness (Figure
S4c of the ; Fall vs F1724).

Further Filtering the Full-Length
Models
One conclusion
from the modeling of the isolated terminal domains that was supported
by the FRET measurements was that residues T69–Q76 of SERT
form a helix (hIV). To identify an additional filter to use with our
full-length models, we introduced a mutation into C-SERT-Y that might
destabilize tertiary packing at a position in the center of this helix
in the full-length models. In particular, residue V71 is in a hydrophobic
stretch in this helix (Figure a) in a region
that is predicted to be relatively compact (Figure b), so that any hydrophobic packing interactions might be
disrupted by mutation to glutamate. However, no change in FRET efficiency
was observed for V71E (Figure b), from which
we concluded that position 71 is sufficiently solvent-exposed that
the protein can tolerate a charged side chain without a significant
energy cost. Accordingly, we reasoned that a full-length model containing
the V71E mutation in silico should have a Rosetta
energy similar to that of the corresponding WT model, i.e., ΔERosetta ∼ 0 arbitrary unit. Thus, from
the full-length SERT models in F1724, we selected the 100
models that best met this criterion [Fout100 (Figure e)].
The outward-open model with the lowest Rosetta score of those 100
models that also contains a β-strand in at least two residues
of the putative PDZ binding motif (see below) was chosen as an example
full-length SERT model for visualization (Figure ). While it should be noted that the relative orientations
of the secondary structure elements within each terminal domain vary
in the different Fout100 models, this figure at least provides a sense of the volume
and relative locations of the N- and C-terminal domains relative to
the transmembrane segment, as well as of the relative sizes of the
secondary structure elements.

Selected model of full-length SERT, out of 100
models of an outward-open
state. The TM domain is shown as cartoon helices (gray), while the
N- and C-terminal domains (light blue and pink, respectively) are
represented by both cartoons and van der Waals surfaces. The approximate
membrane region is represented as beige spheres, while ions (cyan
spheres) and substrate (green sticks) are shown bound in the central
binding sites. The Cα atoms of specific residues are highlighted,
namely, residues predicted to bind syntaxin 1A (purple sticks) and
nNOS (dark blue spheres); solvent accessible residues C15 and C622
(orange spheres) and inaccessible residue C21 (light orange spheres);
residues predicted to form PKC phosphorylation sites (light green
spheres) or to bind Sec24C (pale blue spheres); residue P601, which
breaks the TM12 helix (teal); and residues Q22, N24, T69, and L74
that are α-helical (red spheres) and residue T68 that is not
α-helical (yellow spheres) according to the FRET measurements.
Note that the distance between the closest atoms in the terminal domains
is ≥9 Å and the apparent closeness is a consequence of
the viewing angle.

Further filtering of
the models using conservation
analysis was considered but found not to be reliable for the SERT
terminal domains. Conservation analysis (used in, e.g., ProQ2 or ConQuass model
quality assessment functions) assigns a model a higher score if the
variable residues are exposed and conserved residues are buried. However,
we estimate that 60% of the residues in the N- and C-terminal domains
contribute to either known or predicted regulatory binding sites or
post-translational modification sites. These sites tend to be conserved
but exposed, breaking the typical pattern. Thus, although we provide
ProQ2 scores of the Fout100 models in the , we have not used them
for filtering at this stage.

Analysis of the Terminal
Domain Positions
Instead of
further filtering, we analyzed all the best models of SERT to assess
the positional variability of the SERT terminal domains in the context
of the full-length protein (Figure ). The
N- and C-termini did not randomly explore all of the available conformational
space but instead were predicted to occupy two specific loci, both
before [Fall (Figure a)] and after
filtering out less likely models [F1724, Fout100 (Figure b,c)]. These loci appear even smaller upon comparison of the
center of mass of the domain (Figure ), rather
than the three terminal residues (Figure ),
because in different folds the terminal residues are found in different
locations.

SERT termini are predicted to be limited to specific loci. Projections
onto the x–y plane of the center of mass of
the first or last three Cα atoms of the N-terminus (blue) and
C-terminus (red) of outward-facing models of SERT. Coordinates are
plotted for each model in sets Fall (a), F1724 (b), and Fout100 (c). Models were structurally aligned to one another by superimposing
the backbone atoms of the scaffold domain (TM3–5 and TM8-12). The membrane plane is coincident with the x–y plane.

Arrangement of terminal domains in SERT comparing inward- and outward-facing
models. (a) Projection onto the x–y plane of the center of
mass of all Cα atoms in the N- and C-terminal domains for each
model in the sets Fout100 and Fin100, after superposition on the scaffold region. The coordinates
of the termini in the outward-facing models, Fout100(N) and Fout100(C), are colored blue and
red, respectively, showing little difference between the two states.
The coordinates of the C-terminal domain of the inward-facing models
Fin100(C) are
colored brown. After the change to the inward-facing conformation,
the N-terminal domain [Fin100(N)] moves away from the C-terminal domain,
although the extent of the change could be minimal [purple, Fin100(N)] or more
extreme [cyan, Fin100(N)*], depending on the degree of change in TM1a relative
to the rest of the protein. The latter coordinates were determined
by identifying the change in the position of the backbone nitrogen
atom of K84 from TM1a when comparing the models of SERT with two alternate
positions of TM1a (see the text). The surface of the TM region in
the outward-facing conformation is shown (gray), highlighting residues
from TM1 (green) and TM12 (orange). (b) Example full-length outward-open
(blue, green, gray, and red) and inward-open (cyan, light green, light
gray, and brown) models are represented as cartoons and viewed from
the cytoplasm. The Cα atoms of the first and last residues are
highlighted (spheres). The inward-open model (cyan, light green, light
gray, and brown) is that obtained by using TM1a from the Fab-bound
structure of LeuT (PDB entry 3TT3) as a template, i.e., indicating the most extreme
expected conformational change. (c and d) Interactions between N-terminal
domain residues [R79 and W82 (blue sticks and surface)] and those
belonging to the TM region [F88, F347, Y350, and D452 (green sticks
and surface)] in an outward-open (c) or inward-open (d) conformation.
TM1a is colored dark blue. The approximate membrane region is represented
as beige spheres.

We then assessed the
effect of the transport-related
transition on the position of the terminal domains by comparing outward-
and inward-facing models and assuming that the scaffold region (TM3–5
and TM8–12) is essentially static. In this analysis, the locus
of the C-terminal
domain did not change significantly (Figure a,b), whereas the SERT N-terminal domain locus shifted significantly.
These changes reflected differences in the position of TM1a and caused
an increase in the distance between the N- and C-terminal domains,
consistent with the observed decrease in the FRET efficiency in C-SERT-Y
upon addition of substrate.

We
assessed the probable extent of this N-terminal domain movement
by comparing SERT models that were open to differing degrees (see ). Assuming a very conservative
model, the intracellular R79–D452 salt bridge that stabilizes
the outward-facing state in, e.g., DAT (see Figure c) can still be formed, and the outward to inward change is
∼6 Å (Figure a, blue vs purple).
Importantly, this shift was larger than the
conformational flexibility (∼3 Å) of the three-residue
Q76-G77-E78 linker that tethers the N-terminal
domain in the outward-facing models (see ). Moreover, if we assume that a greater conformational
change in TM1a was necessary to fully open the pathway (see ), the R79–D452
salt bridge was broken as expected (Figure d), and the movement of the end of TM1a was ∼17 Å (Figure a, blue vs cyan). We note that the N-terminal domain
has greater
conformational freedom in inward-facing states (∼9 Å more
diversity in the y-dimension than in outward-facing
states) because of residues R79–T81 no longer interacting with
the transmembrane domain (Figure d), though
this flexibility is not sufficient to allow those residues reach across
and re-form the R79–D452 salt bridge unless TM1a or the bundle
also moves.
In summary, even allowing for flexible linker segments, the modeling
suggests a net increase in the distance between the terminal domains
upon the substrate-induced conformational change.

Predicted
Domain–Domain
Contacts and Accessibility
To identify whether the terminal
domains contact each other in any of the models, we calculated the
minimal distance between any pair of residues in each model. In outward-open
models, the minimal distance was sometimes as small as 5 Å (Figure
S8b of the ), suggesting
that interactions might form between the two domains
in this state of the transport cycle. By contrast, in the inward-open
models, the minimal distance between domains was shifted to larger
values with a broad peak at 25–30
Å, and thus, direct interactions are significantly
less likely in this state.

The predicted change in the relative
positions of the SERT terminal domains during the transport-associated
conformational change indicates that some residues become more or
less exposed during the transport cycle. Given that this might influence
the accessibility to regulatory proteins, we therefore calculated
the solvent accessible surface area (SASA) for each residue in models
from sets Fout100 and Fin100 (Figure S9 of the ). However, no consistent pattern of interactions involving direct
contact between the terminal domains was detected for these models.
The only changes in solvent accessibility were found for the intracellular
interaction network (Figure c,d) or were due
to the proximity of residues to the membrane mimetic used during the
SASA calculation (Figure , beige spheres).

Discussion
Because of their inherent flexibility, it has
been notoriously
difficult to characterize the structure of intracellular N- and/or
C-terminal domains of polytopic membrane proteins. In SERT, however,
it is evident that these segments serve important roles in folding, ER export,, and aspects of transport. In addition, they receive regulatory stimuli
via kinases− and other proteins. Analogous observations
have been made for other NSS members. The
landmark publication of a eukaryotic NSS structure
(dDAT) has contributed enormously to our understanding of the transmembrane
segments of this transporter family. However,
the difficulty of crystallizing proteins with
flexible segments is underscored by the requirement that the dDAT
construct be truncated by the first 20 residues as well as by residues
in an extracellular loop. Moreover, even
when present within the protein construct
in the crystal, flexible elements often cannot be resolved. Thus,
aspects of membrane protein regulation often remain obscured even
after their core structures have been reported.

Given these
difficulties, alternative approaches to gaining additional
insights become necessary. Here, we combined bioinformatics, computational
modeling, NMR, CD, and FRET measurements to identify structural features
of the terminal domains of SERT. The NMR, CD, and FRET measurements
are consistent with the prediction of structured (helical) elements,
both in isolated N-terminal domain constructs and in the context of
the full-length protein. Moreover, the FRET measurements provide support
for the specific location of two helices in the N-terminal domain,
and a third in the C-terminal domain. The modeling illustrates that
such structured domains are located in both ends of SERT but are interspersed
with unstructured regions. It is of particular interest to note that
several regulatory interaction sites identified for SERT appear to
lie within these structured regions (see below).

The full-length
models of SERT identify common features reflecting
the location and separation of the domains, even without requiring
a detailed analysis that would be otherwise beyond the resolution
and confidence level of the de novo modeling. For
example, analyzing the candidate full-length models (in sets Fall and F1724), as well as the conformations most
consistent with experimental data (in set Fout100), revealed that the domains occupy
relatively well-defined loci. This localization reflects their length
and partially folded nature, as well as interactions with the transmembrane
region, particularly
in the outward-open state.

It should be mentioned that the terminal
domain models may well
be overly compact, because of the energetic term in the Rosetta force
field that favors compactness. While
the compactness term is unlikely to force the
formation of α-helices, it may compress the unstructured regions
to some degree. Another concern could be that the Rosetta energy function
is constructed to reflect well-structured proteins in the PDB. Indeed,
models of the N-terminal domain based on a secondary structure prediction
containing a much smaller fraction of structured residues [SSP-full-SERT
(Figure a)] had poorer Rosetta energies [NEfilt* (Figure S4e of the )], consistent with the energy function favoring more structured
domains. However, the fact that the proportions of helix and strand
in the Fout100 selected models are not greater than those in the input predictions
is suggestive that the Rosetta energy function does not excessively
bias toward structured elements. Of course, the selection of fragments
during
the Rosetta model building is also organized to ensure that the percentages
of coil, sheet, and helix match that of the secondary structure prediction,
at least initially. Nevertheless, because Rosetta allows changes in
torsion angles of the backbone of the flanking residues subsequent
to fragment selection, there is at least the potential for sampling
of more or less structured segments. In the end, the agreement between
the NMR and CD spectra and the models provides the strongest support
for the proportions of secondary structure predicted in the models.
Thus, the full-length models of SERT, despite their limited resolution,
allow a general analysis of available experimental data relating to
regulation within a structural context. In the following, we discuss
the implications for four regulatory factors: nNOS, misfolding, kinases,
and syntaxin 1A.

nNOS
The last few residues (with
the sequence NAV)
of the C-terminal domain of SERT have been proposed to adopt a noncanonical
PDZ binding motif that may interact with nNOS. The extended conformation required for such an interaction was observed in a fraction (6%) of the full-length
models (see Figure ), suggesting that this
interaction is possible, although not very probable, and that if such
a “noncanonical” PDZ binding domain does bind, then
the NAV segment might alternate
between two different folds to achieve the interaction.

Misfolding
Residues P601 and G602 are required for the correct folding
of SERT. Specifically, mutation of both
residues to alanine results
in SERT retention in the ER, aggregation, and association with calnexin
chaperones. Proline and glycine residues
tend to break α-helices,
and consequently, the helix in TM12 is terminated before P601/G602
in all 100 selected models (e.g., Figure ),
in accordance with the template structure, dDAT, which is also broken
in this region. Because alanine residues have a higher α-helical
propensity, we hypothesize that the double alanine mutation causes TM12 to become continuous with the first
helix of the C-terminal domain. Indeed, the predicted secondary structure
according to PSIPRED after replacing these two positions in the sequence
was helical, with confidence levels of 55 and 81% for positions 601
and 602, respectively. Such a structural change is likely to significantly
alter the position of the C-terminal domain, explaining the observed
misfolding of the double alanine SERT mutant.

Kinases
Phosphorylation
levels of SERT are increased upon PKC activation,− although it is not yet clear
whether this phosphorylation is direct
or instead induced by PKC. After reproducing predictions that any direct PKC phosphorylation would occur
at S8, S13, S40, S62, T81, T603, and/or T613 (see ), we analyzed the solvent accessibility
of these residues in the Fout100 set of structural models, assuming access
as a requirement for phosphorylation. Most of the seven predicted
PKC sites (including both the R/K and the S/T of the motif) are exposed
in some fraction of these models (Figure S9 of the ), and most appear to be exposed independent
of the conformation of the protein. Thus, unfortunately, these models
cannot yet discriminate between putative phosphorylation sites.

Syntaxin 1A
SERT is known to interact with syntaxin 1A on
the basis
of pull-down assays, which showed syntaxin 1A coprecipitation with
the N-terminal domain of SERT, but not with other regions of SERT. Specifically, residues E16, D17, E19, D20, and
E23 of
human SERT were proposed to be syntaxin 1A binding residues, because
the SERT mutant in which these five residues are mutated to alanine
no longer associates with syntaxin 1A.
Of these five carboxylic residues, four are conserved in rat SERT
but E16 is replaced with alanine and thus may not be essential (Figure a). All four residues are exposed in &gt;40% of
the
100 best models of full-length SERT (Figure S9 of the ), of which E19 and E23
are consistently the most accessible.

Interestingly, all four
syntaxin 1A binding residues are predicted to be located in helix
hII, both by PSIPRED (Figure a) and by the
modeling (Figure f), though not by meta-structure-based
prediction (Figure b), and supported by observed
FRET changes in Q22P and N24P (Figure b).
We therefore propose that the binding of the α-helical H3 domain
of syntaxin 1A with the N-terminal domain of SERT involves helix–helix
packing, as found in other interactions involving H3 of syntaxin
1A (e.g., ref ()).

Finally, an important consideration that may be relevant for any
regulatory mechanism is the increase in distance between the domains
upon the substrate-driven transition from outward- to inward-facing
states. This increase reflects the separation of transmembrane helices
in the bundle relative to the scaffold, with any further outward motion
of TM1a likely to amplify this effect. In general, the predicted change
in distance is in agreement with the observed decrease in FRET efficiency
in C-SERT-Y upon addition of substrate. This conformational change may allow specific regulatory protein–protein
interactions to occur only in particular conformational states of
the transporter, e.g., the inward-open state. Higher-resolution structural
data for the domains and their interaction partners will be required
to address this intriguing notion in more detail.

In conclusion,
although of limited resolution, our hybrid de novo/homology models provide the first structure-based
insights into the tertiary arrangement of the SERT terminal domains,
which is extremely difficult to access using crystallography. The
full-length models of SERT provide a hypothesis for the interaction
mode of syntaxin 1A and may be useful for identifying further specific
interaction sites. This work should therefore be useful for designing
further experiments to understand the regulation of serotonin uptake.

Supporting Information Available
Nine figures, one table,
and the selected 100 SERT
models in inward-facing (Fin100) and outward-facing (Fout100) conformations, containing
ProQ2 and Rosetta scores (in the headers). This material is available
free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500637f_si_001.pdf

bi500637f_si_002.zip

Author Present Address
L.R.F and C.F.-F.:
Computational Structural Biology Section, National Institutes of Neurological
Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20824.

Author Contributions
L.R.F., H.H.S., R.K.,
G.R., and S.K.S. designed research. C.F.-F. and R.K. ran computational
predictions. C.F.-F. and A.R.M. modeled structures. A.P., S.A., and
T.C.S. measured CD spectra. T.C.S. measured NMR data. O.K., J.G.,
T.H., and S.T. conducted mutagenesis. A.P., S.T., and K.J. designed
constructs and expressed and purified protein. S.T., J.G., and T.H.
measured uptake or binding. L.R.F., T.S., and C.F.-F. analyzed computational
data. S.K.S., S.A., C.F.-F., and R.K. analyzed CD data. H.H.S. measured
and analyzed FRET data. L.R.F., S.K.S., R.K., and H.H.S. wrote the
manuscript. All authors reviewed
and commented on the manuscript.

This work was supported by
grants to H.H.S. from the Austrian Science Fund/FWF (F35 and W1232),
to R.K. (Grant W-1221-B03), to S.K.S. from the Goodman Gilman Yale
Scholar Award, the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, and the National Institutes
of Health (R00MH083050 and R21MH098180), and to L.R.F. from the Max
Planck Society and the Division of Intramural Research of the National
Institute of Neurological Disorder and Stroke, at the National Institutes
of Health.

The authors declare
no competing
financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank José Faraldo-Gómez,
Claudio Anselmi,
Lee Whitmore, and Johannes A. Schmid for fruitful discussions and
technical assistance and Michael Freissmuth and José Faraldo-Gómez
for suggestions about the manuscript.

Abbreviations
SERTserotonin transporter

dDATD. melanogaster dopamine transporter

CDcircular dichroism

NSSneurotransmitter:sodium
symporter

FRETfluorescence
resonance energy transfer

nNOSneuronal nitric
oxide synthase

PKCprotein kinase C

DOSYdiffusion-ordered spectroscopy

CFPcyan fluorescent protein

YFPyellow fluorescent protein

C-SERT-YCFP-SERT-YFP construct

SASAsolvent accessible
surface area.

