Many enzymes
exhibit the ability
to catalyze, at a low level, the native reactions of related enzymes.
This catalytic promiscuity likely played a role in the evolution of
new enzymes, and comparisons of promiscuous activities within a set
of related enzymes provides an opportunity to learn about the enzymatic
features and properties used to optimize catalysis of the cognate
reaction.−

Members of the alkaline phosphatase superfamily catalyze both
phosphoryl
and sulfuryl transfer reactions but with substantially different catalytic
preferences (Table S1, ).− While these two reactions proceed through similar, negatively charged,
trigonal bipyramidal transition states (Figure ), alkaline phosphatase (AP) from Escherichiacoli, the superfamily’s namesake, has a 1010-fold preference for hydrolyzing p-nitrophenyl phosphate
(pNPP) over p-nitrophenyl sulfate
(pNPS) (Table ). In contrast, an aryl sulfatase in the AP superfamily
has the opposite preference, catalyzing pNPS hydrolysis
with a ∼106-fold preference over pNPP hydrolysis. Thus, the specificity
differential of AP and aryl sulfatase is ∼1016-fold,
but the origins of the extensive differential specificity in the AP
superfamily are not understood.

Phosphate and sulfate monoesters and their
transition states. (A)
Comparison of phosphate and sulfate monoesters. Bond lengths are for
ethyl phosphate and ethyl sulfate.− (A comparison of bond
lengths for the p-nitrophenyl esters is not possible
because no structure is available for pNPS.) The
apparent ground state negative charge reported for each nonbridging
oxygen atom was calculated by dividing the total charge of the molecule
by the number of nonbridging oxygen atoms. (B) The solution hydrolysis
reactions of pNPP and pNPS both
involve nucleophilic attack by water and loose transition state structures
in which there is little bond formation with the incoming nucleophile
and extensive bond cleavage of the leaving group.,− The size of the “δ−” symbols is meant
to qualitatively reflect the relative charge distribution in the transition
states.

Phosphatase and Sulfatase
Activity
of AP Mutants and PTPs
 	kcat/KM (M–1 s–1)	rate enhancement	 	
 	pNPP	pNPS	pNPP	pNPS	discrimination	
AP	
WT	3.3 × 107 (5.8 × 108)	2.8 × 10–3	≥7 × 1017 (1 × 1019)	3 × 108	≥2 × 109 (3 × 1010)	
R166S	1.0 × 105	6.8 × 10–5	2 × 1015	8 × 106	3 × 108	
PTP	
Stp1	2.6 × 104	5.3 × 10–5	2 × 1014	3 × 106	7 × 107	
PTP1B	9.3 × 104	1.1 × 10–3	8 × 1014	6 × 107	1 × 107	
Yop51*Δ162	1.6 × 105	3.2 × 10–3	1 × 1015	2 × 108	5 × 106	
See  for kinetic assay conditions.

Rate enhancement = (kcat/KM)/kw; kw is the second-order
rate constant for attack of water on the monoester. The kw value for pNPP hydrolysis was determined at 39 °C and corrected to 25 °C (5
× 10–11 M–1 s–1), the temperature at which the AP assays were conducted, and 30
°C (1.2 × 10–10 M–1 s–1), the temperature at which the PTP assays were conducted,
using the reported temperature dependence. The kw value for pNPS
hydrolysis at 25 °C (9 × 10–12 M–1 s–1) and 30 °C (1.7 × 10–11 M–1 s–1) was corrected from
the value at 35 °C by using the
reported temperature dependence.

Discrimination = (rate enhancement pNPP)/(rate enhancement pNPS).

The rate constant for pNPP hydrolysis by WT and mutant AP was used to estimate the expected
second-order rate constant shown in parentheses for the enzymatic
reaction with the chemical step rather than diffusion rate limiting,
as described in Text S1, . The rate constant for WT AP pNPS hydrolysis was measured here using a discontinuous
assay (see ) and agrees
well with the previously published value.

Values are from a literature
source.

Within error of the previously reported
value of 3.0 × 104 M–1 s–1.

Within error of the previously reported
value of 1.0 × 105.

Within error of the previously
reported
value of 1.3 × 105 M–1 s–1.

A simple model for how AP achieves preferential stabilization of
the phosphoryl group transition state over the sulfuryl group transition
state is that the preponderance of formal positive charge from three
metal ions and Arg166 in the AP active site (Figure A) is well suited to distinguish differences in negative charge
between the phosphoryl group and sulfuryl group transition states. As shown in Figure A,
a phosphate monoester substrate carries a −2 charge while a
sulfate monoester ester substrate carries only a −1 charge.
The additional negative charge on the phosphate monoester substrate
presumably results in more negative charge on the nonbridging oxygen
atoms of the phosphoryl group transition state compared with the sulfuryl
group transition state (Figure B). The greater
negative charge on the phosphoryl group transition state could therefore
lead to stronger electrostatic interactions with the positively charged
groups in the AP active site, compared with the corresponding weaker
electrostatic interactions with the sulfuryl group. Such preferential
electrostatic interactions would lead to greater stabilization and
preferential catalysis of the more negatively charged phosphoryl group
transition state. Consistent with this model, a previous study with
AP demonstrated that catalytic activity increases sharply for a series
of substrates with increasing negative charge on the nonbridging oxygen
atom situated between the Zn2+ ions of the bimetallo cluster.

Active site schematic for AP (A) and Stp1 (B) with the
expected
interactions (dark blue dashes) in the transition state for phosphoryl
or sulfuryl transfer from a monoester. The central phosphorus or sulfur
atom is denoted by an X. Positively charged active site groups are
shaded. The schematic for AP is based on the X-ray structure in ref () (PDB code 3TG0). The schematic
for Stp1 is based on the X-ray structure of low-molecular weight bovine
PTP in ref () (PDB
code 1Z12).
The bovine PTP is highly homologous to Stp1 (47% identity) and shares
identical active site residues.

To test whether extensive positive charge, particularly from
metal
ions as found in the AP active site, is necessary to achieve a strong
preference for catalyzing phosphate monoester over sulfate monoester,
we turned to a different family of phosphatases. Protein tyrosine
phosphatases (PTPs) lack positively charged metal ions in their active
sites (cf. to AP in Figure ), but their preference
for phosphate monoester over sulfate monoester catalysis is unknown.
A prediction from the above model of substrate discrimination is that
the PTPs would have much less of a preference for phosphate monoester
hydrolysis, given the paucity of positively charged groups in their
active sites. Contrary to this prediction, our results show that PTPs
provide robust discrimination. These and additional results suggest
that positively charged metal ions or a high formal positively charged
active site is not needed to achieve a high degree of discrimination.

Materials
and Methods
Materials
All chemicals including substrates, buffers,
and salts were obtained from commercial sources and were reagent grade.
Site-directed mutants were prepared using a QuikChange site-directed
mutagenesis kit (Stratagene).

Protein Expression and
Purification
The expression
and purification of Stp1 was conducted based on a previous protocol. Briefly, E. coli BL21(DE3)
cells containing plasmid pT7–7 with the Stp1 sequence were
grown to OD600 0.6–0.9 in 2×YT media (5 g of
NaCl, 16 g of tryptone, 10 g of yeast extract per liter) and induced
with 0.4 mM IPTG for 4–5 h. Cells were pelleted, resuspended
in buffer A (20 mM Na acetate, pH 5.1, 100 mM NaCl, and 1 mM EDTA),
and lysed by passage through a French press or high-pressure homogenizer.
Following centrifugation, the supernatant was filtered through a 0.2
μM membrane (Nalgene) and subjected to FPLC ion exchange chromatography
(HiPrep 16/10 CM Sepharose, 20 mL column, flow rate 5 mL/min, at 4 °C),
washed with 200 mL of buffer A, and eluted by flowing a gradient from
100% buffer A to 100% buffer B (20 mM Na acetate, pH 5.1, 500 mM NaCl,
and 1 mM EDTA) over 200 mL. Fractions containing protein, as determined
by absorbance at 280 nm, were pooled, concentrated to ∼1 mL,
and passed through (at 0.9 mL/min) a gel filtration column (Suparose-12
column, 100 mL column). Typical protein yields were &gt;15 mg/L. Purity
was estimated to be &gt;95% from band intensities of Coomassie Blue-stained
SDS-polyacrylamide gels. Protein concentration was determined by absorbance
at 280 nm in 6 M guanidine hydrochloride and 20 mM sodium phosphate,
pH 6.5, using a calculated extinction coefficient of 12110 M–1 cm–1.

Human PTP1B contained in the pT7-plasmid
was overexpressed and purified according to a previously published
protocol. Purity was estimated to be
&gt;95% by SDS-PAGE, and the concentration was determined as above
using
a calculated extinction coefficient of 59560 M–1 cm–1.

Yop51*Δ162, a PTP
from Yersinia pestis having a C235R point mutation
and lacking the N-terminal 162 amino
acids that is catalytically equivalent to the full length protein,
was overexpressed and purified as described previously. Purity was estimated to be &gt;95% by SDS-PAGE,
and the concentration was determined as above using a calculated extinction
coefficient of 15965 M–1 cm–1.

The R166S mutant of AP was purified as described previously. Purity was estimated to be &gt;95% by SDS-PAGE,
and the concentration was determined by absorbance at 280 nm in 6
M guanidine hydrochloride and 20 mM sodium phosphate, pH 6.5, using
a calculated extinction coefficient of 31390 M–1 cm–1. The concentration of R166S AP was also confirmed
by activity assays using 1 mM pNPP and agreed with
previously reported kcat values within
20%.

Kinetic Methods
Standard reaction conditions for the
PTPs (WT and C11G Stp1, PTP1B, and Yop51*Δ162) were
20 mM Na maleate, pH 6.0, 0.15 M NaCl, 0.1 mM EDTA, and 30 °C.
Phosphatase activity toward pNPP was followed in
quartz cuvettes (1 mL) by measuring the appearance of the p-nitrophenolate product (extinction coefficient of 1635
M–1 cm–1 at pH 6.0) using a Uvikon
9310 or PerkinElmer λ-25 UV–vis spectrophotometer. Rate
constants were obtained from initial rates (typically ≤5% reaction).
Reactions were shown to be first order in substrate and enzyme by
varying substrate and enzyme over a &gt;10-fold range. Replicate measurements
gave rate constants that varied by ≤10%.

Sulfatase activity
toward pNPS was followed by the appearance of the p-nitrophenolate product using a discontinuous assay. Appearance of the phenolate was monitored by
removing aliquots from the reaction, quenching in a relatively small
volume of 1 M NaOH, and measuring the absorbance at 400 nm (with background
subtraction at 500 nm to control for instrument drift over the long
time periods required to measure the sulfatase activity). The example
sulfatase assay results for Stp1 in Figure S1, , were also repeated using ∼2-fold
lower enzyme concentration (Figure S1, ) to demonstrate that the reaction velocity was
proportional to the concentration of enzyme as expected. Replicate
measurements with Stp1 gave rate constants that varied by ≤25%.
This discontinuous assay approach was also validated by using it to
follow the phosphatase activity of Stp1 to reproduce the kinetic parameters
obtained from the standard assay in which product generation is followed
continuously.

The measurement of the R166S AP phosphatase and
sulfatase activities
was conducted as reported previously, in the standard
reaction conditions of 100 mM NaMOPS, pH 8.0, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 100 μM ZnCl2, and 30 °C.

Inhibition
Measurements
To test whether the observed
sulfatase activity was due to Stp1 and not contamination by a small
quantity of a proficient sulfatase enzyme, the inhibition constant
for Pi was measured by varying the inhibitor concentration
at least 10-fold below and above the observed Ki at constant enzyme concentrations and constant, subsaturating
concentrations of either pNPP or pNPS in the standard reaction conditions listed above. For inhibition
of the phosphatase activity reactions contained 20 nM Stp1 and 50
μM pNPP. For inhibition of the sulfatase activity
reactions contained 390 μM WT Stp1 and 1 mM pNPS. Initial velocities for both activities at each concentration
of Pi were determined by linear least-squares fits. The
inhibition constant was determined by nonlinear least-squares fits
using the appropriate equation for competitive inhibition.

The
inhibition data for PTP1B and Yop51*Δ162 are shown
in Figure S3, . For
these enzymes, the inhibitor, inorganic arsenate, was used instead
of Pi because the Pi inhibition of these enzymes
is weak (&gt;10 mM) and difficult to measure accurately for both phosphatase
and sulfatase activities. For inhibition of the PTP1B phosphatase
activity, reactions contained 10 nM PTP1B and 100 μM pNPP. For inhibition of the PTP1B sulfatase activity reactions
contained 20 μM PTP1B and 5 mM pNPS. For inhibition
of the Yop51*Δ162 phosphatase activity reactions
contained 20 nM Yop51*Δ162 and 300 μM pNPP. For inhibition of the Yop51*Δ162
sulfatase activity reactions contained 30 μM Yop51*Δ162 and 2 mM pNPS. Initial velocities at
each concentration of arsenate were determined by linear least-squares
fits. The inhibition constants were determined by nonlinear least-squares
fits using the equation for competitive inhibition (see Figure S3, , legend).

Ionic Strength
Dependencies
Assays for pNPP and pNPS hydrolysis by R166S AP were conducted
in 5 mM NaMOPS, pH 8.0, at 30 °C with 0–800 mM NaCl, except
for controls with alternative salts (see ). Assays for Stp1 were conducted in 5 mM Na
maleate, pH 6.0, at 30 °C with the same NaCl concentrations and
alternative salts.

The observed ionic strength dependencies
were insensitive to the concentration of substrate when the substrate
concentration was maintained at least 2-fold below the expected KM value. With substrate concentrations significantly
above the KM, the substrate-binding step
no longer contributes to the observed activity. Under such conditions,
electrostatic forces subject to electrostatic screening from increasing
ionic strength are not expected to contribute to the observed activity.
Consistent with this expectation, the observed activity for pNPP hydrolysis by R166S AP and Stp1 did not change with
ionic strength when the pNPP concentration was well
above the expected KM (Figure S7, ).

The ionic strength
of the assay solutions includes contributions
from the buffer and was computed using I = 0.5∑cizi2, where I is the ionic strength, ci is the ion molarity of ion i, and zi is
the charge number of that ion.

Results and Discussion
Catalytic
Discrimination by Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases (PTPs)
between Phosphate and Sulfate Monoester Hydrolysis
To determine
the catalytic discrimination of a PTP, we first measured the phosphatase
activity of the PTP Stp1. Our value for kcat/KM for the hydrolysis of the phosphate
monoester, pNPP, of 2.6 × 104 M–1 s–1 (Table ), agrees with previous measurements with this substrate., This value corresponds to a rate enhancement over the uncatalyzed
reaction rate constant, kw, of (2.2 ×
1014)-fold [= (kcat/KM)/kw] (Table ). Our Stp1 preparation also exhibited pNPS hydrolysis activity, with kcat/KM = 5.3 × 10–5 M–1 s–1 (Figure S1, ; Table ). Although
this kcat/KM value is very low compared with physiological activities, even with
the activated p-nitrophenolate leaving group, it
nonetheless would correspond to a substantial rate enhancement above
the uncatalyzed reaction of more than a million-fold (Table ).

Low observed promiscuity, however, raises
the concern that the observed activity could be due to a very low
concentration of a contaminating enzyme with a high activity for the
promiscuous reaction, in this case, sulfate monoester hydrolysis.
As carried out previously for AP and its mutants,,, several controls can be used to test whether
Stp1 is responsible for the observed sulfatase activity and whether
the reaction occurs in the Stp1 active site. First, we showed that
multiple Stp1 preparations had the same activity, within error (Figure
S1, ). Thus, any
potential contamination would have to be constant between protein
preparations. Second, we showed that inorganic phosphate (Pi), a competitive inhibitor of Stp1, inhibits the phosphatase and
sulfatase activities with the same inhibition constant (Figure A), suggesting that both activities arise from a
common active site. Further, because the sulfatase activity is several
orders of magnitude lower than the phosphatase activity, the pNPS substrate does not react significantly on the time
scale of the phosphatase reaction. We could therefore determine whether pNPS inhibits pNPP activity with a Ki value corresponding to the KM value observed for pNPS hydrolysis
(Table S1, ), as
would be expected for reaction from the same enzyme and active site.
The inhibition constant for pNPS inhibition was within
error of the observed KM value for pNPS hydrolysis (Figure S2 and Table S2, ). Finally, we showed that mutation
of the active site nucleophile from cysteine to glycine substantially
decreases both the phosphatase and sulfatase activities (Figure B), providing strong evidence that both reactions
are catalyzed by Stp1 and occur within the same active site.

Evidence that
the observed promiscuous sulfatase activity arises
from PTP. (A) Coincident inhibition of phosphatase (pNPP hydrolysis, filled circles) and sulfatase (pNPS hydrolysis, open circles) activities by inorganic phosphate (Pi) (see  for assay
conditions). For comparison, activity was normalized by dividing the
observed rate constant in the presence of inhibitor by the rate constant
in the absence of inhibitor. The line represents a nonlinear least-squares
fit to the combined data for competitive inhibition of both activities
and gave an inhibition constant of Ki =
11.0 ± 0.3 mM. Individual fits to the phosphatase and sulfatase
data gave values of Ki that are the same
within error (10.9 ± 0.6 and 11.1 ± 0.2, respectively).
(B) Phosphatase and sulfatase activity of Stp1 with and without the
intact Cys11 nucleophile. Assay conditions are described in the . The dotted line shows the
detection limit for sulfatase activity. The sulfatase activity of
C11G Stp1 is below this detection limit. Also, there is no evidence
that the remaining very low activities arise from the mutated Stp1
as opposed to contaminating activities present at extremely low levels.

These results strongly suggest
that the observed sulfatase activity
arises from the Stp1 active site. Comparison of the Stp1 phosphatase
and sulfatase activities gives a discrimination of 7 × 107-fold (determined as the ratio of rate enhancements for the pNPP and pNPS hydrolysis reactions; Table ).

To determine whether the extent of discrimination
by Stp1 generalizes
to other PTPs, we measured the pNPS activity of PTP1B
and Yop51*Δ162, which have conserved active site
features that are found in Stp1: a cysteine nucleophile, an arginine
in position to contact the nonbridging oxygen atoms of the substrate,
and a general acid that protonates the monoester leaving group (Figure B)., The catalytic domains of these
PTPs also share significant overall sequence identity.,−

Sulfatase activity was detected for both PTPs
(Table ). The phosphatase and sulfatase activities
of each of the
two PTPs were inhibited equally by inorganic arsenate, providing evidence
that both activities are catalyzed by the PTPs and take place in the
same active site (Figure S3, ). As shown in Table , these PTPs exhibit
discrimination within ∼10-fold of Stp1, suggesting that the
conserved features of the PTP active site are responsible for the
similar catalytic preferences for phosphate over sulfate ester hydrolysis.

Comparison of the Catalytic Discrimination of AP and PTPs
The three PTPs tested preferentially catalyze phosphate ester over
sulfate ester hydrolysis by (0.5–7) × 107-fold
(Table ). This discrimination is ∼100-fold
less than the discrimination of 2 × 109 observed for
AP (Table ), and the AP value is an underestimate
of the discrimination in the chemical transition state, because substrate
binding is rate-limiting for pNPP reacting with wild-type
AP.− Several comparisons suggest that the actual discrimination between
the chemical transition states for the AP phosphatase and sulfatase
reactions is ∼3 × 1010 (Table ; Text S1, ), which corresponds to an overall ∼1000-fold greater discrimination
by AP than by the PTPs.

On the surface, these results might
suggest a considerable contribution to discrimination from the AP
metal ions. However, the PTP active sites that lack metal ions provide
∼107-fold discrimination, and mutation of AP to
remove its active site arginine residue (R166) leaves all three active
site metal ions unafffected but reduces
the phosphatase/sulfatase discrimination to 3 × 108, within 10-fold of the discrimination achieved by a metal-free PTP
(Table ).

Testing Possible Origins
of the Observed Catalytic Discrimination
by AP and PTPs
The results above indicate that substantial
discrimination between phosphate and sulfate esters of greater than
a million fold can be achieved without the involvement of metal ion
interactions and in active sites with little formal positive charge.
To test whether there might nevertheless be a similar overall electrostatic
component to discrimination by AP and the PTPs such that a strong
long-range electrostatic attraction was felt for more highly charged
substrates to both AP and PTP active sites, we compared the ionic
strength dependences of each enzyme with the phosphate monoester dianion
and sulfate monoester monoanion substrates.

Calculation of the
surface electrostatic potentials for AP and Stp1 using a Poisson–Boltzmann
equation solver reveal positive potentials near the active sites (Figure ) that could contribute to discrimination by preferentially
attracting more negatively charged substrates into the active site
and thereby favor formation of the enzyme and substrate complex for
the more highly charged substrate. If a long-range attractive electrostatic
potential contributes to the AP and Stp1 catalyzed reactions, the
presence of counterions would be expected to decrease this attraction
so that the catalytic activity would decrease as the ionic strength
of the reaction solution is raised and decrease more for a more highly
charged enzyme. Because increased ionic strength will screen long-range
charge–charge interactions and not local interactions, this
experiment cannot probe local electrostatic and dipolar interactions
that are within the active site and involved in the progression from
the enzyme/substrate to the enzyme/transition state complex. In addition,
because nonideal effects of ions on enzymes are common, comparison
of the ionic strength dependence of reactions of the (phosphate ester)
dianion versus (sulfate ester) monoanion substrates for each enzyme
is important in controlling for such effects.

Models of the electrostatic
surface potential for WT AP (A) and
Stp1 (B) with arrows pointing to the active site nucleophile. For
modeling AP, the X-ray structure from ref () was used (PDB code 3TG0). For modeling Stp1, the X-ray structure
of low-molecular weight bovine PTP in ref () (PDB code 1Z12) was used to generate a structural homology
model of Stp1 using the program Modeller. The protein surface is colored according to electrostatic potential
(positive, blue; negative, red; ±6kT/e). For the electrostatic calculation, the active site nucleophiles
of AP and Stp1 were deprotonated, and for Stp1, the Asp28 general
acid was protonated. Created with AMBER/ABPS in MacPyMOL.,

The ionic strength dependencies
of activity for AP and Stp1 are
shown in Figure A,B, respectively. The pNPP hydrolysis activity of WT AP is limited by diffusion
rather than the chemical step.− To allow for a consistent comparison of ionic strength
dependent activity, R166S AP was used in Figure A because neither its pNPP nor its pNPS reaction is diffusion-limited, so that the
binding and hydrolysis steps contribute to the observed hydrolysis
activities for both substrates. Although R166S AP contains one less
active site positive charge than WT AP, the active site of R166S AP
still contains five more formal positive charges than the Stp1 active
site and its calculated electrostatic surface potential map also suggests
significant positive potential near the surface of the active site
entrance (Figure S4D, ).

Ionic strength dependencies for the hydrolysis of pNPP (circles) and pNPS (triangles) by R166S AP (A)
and Stp1 (B). See  for
assay conditions. For comparison, fraction activity was calculated
by dividing each observed rate constant by the rate constant measured
at the lowest ionic strength measured. The slope [log(fraction activity)/(ionic
strength)1/2] provides an estimate for the product of the
interacting charges of substrate (Z0)
and the enzyme (Zenz) according to the
Debye–Hückel equation log(fraction activity) = 2AZ0Zenz(ionic strength)1/2 + C, where A is 0.516
at 30 °C, C is the fraction activity as the
ionic strength approaches zero (C = 1.30 and 1.01
for pNPP and pNPS in panel A and
1.23 and 0.85 for these two substrates in panel B); and Z0 is fixed at −2 for the pNPP
data and at −1 for the pNPS data. Solid lines
show global best fits, and dashed lines show individual best fits
and yield Zenz values reported in Table . (C) The discrimination of pNPP
hydrolysis activity over pNPS hydrolysis activity
for R166S AP (filled diamonds) and Stp1 (open diamonds). Solid lines
show the best fits to the linear Debye–Hückel model
treating the value of the slope as a variable. The y-axis is on a logarithmic scale.

Ionic strength dependencies can also be complicated by direct
binding
of ions to the active site or by ionic-strength dependent changes
in active site conformations of the enzyme. Control reactions, using
KCl or NaBr to test for ion-specific effects, gave essentially the
same dependencies as that with NaCl for both AP and Stp1 (Figure S5, ), as expected for effects
arising from electrostatic screening in the absence of specific binding.
In addition, if the ionic strength dependence were due to the screening
of electrostatic potential between the substrate and active site,
the steepness of the dependence would be predicted to be proportional
to the formal charge of the reactants, that is, the absolute charge
of the substrate and the enzyme. Fitting the ionic strength dependent
data gives a slope for the pNPP hydrolysis activity
that is two times greater than the corresponding slope of the pNPS activity for both R166S AP (Figure A) and Stp1 (Figure B), as expected
from the charge differential of the two substrates. This differential
dependence of pNPP and pNPS hydrolysis
strongly suggests that the ionic strength dependences reflect screening
of electrostatic potential between the active site and substrate.

With these controls in hand, we set out to assess potential electrostatic
differences between the enzymes that could contribute to reactions
starting from free enzyme and free substrate. Because the R166S AP
active site contains six formal positive charges, compared with the
Stp1 active site’s single formal positive charge, it might
have been expected that the decrease in activity for a given change
in ionic strength would be much greater for the R166S AP-catalyzed
reactions. However, this was not the case. Indeed, the dependence
for Stp1 with each substrate was steeper than that for R166S AP (Figure ; cf. parts A and B). These slopes can be converted,
according to a simple Debye–Hückel formalism, into apparent
overall charges of the enzyme, which give, as expected based on the
differential steepness, a larger value for Stp1 than for R166S AP
(Table ).

Effective Enzyme
Charge for R166S
AP and Stp1 Determined by the Ionic Strength Dependence of Activity
 	Zenz	
 	pNPP (Z0 = −2)	pNPS (Z0 = −1)	global fit	
R166S AP	+0.49 ± 0.03	+0.43 ± 0.03	+0.48 ± 0.02	
Stp1	+0.75 ± 0.02	+0.92 ± 0.12	+0.78 ± 0.08	
Values of the effective
ionic charge
of the enzyme, Zenz, were determined from
fits to the Debye–Hückel equation to the ionic strength
dependent data in Figure A,B.

We next wanted to calculate the
ionic strength dependence for the
discrimination by each enzyme and to compare them. Because no significant
ionic strength dependence is observed for the uncatalyzed rates of
hydrolysis of pNPP or pNPS (Figure
S6, ), the catalytic
discrimination at each ionic strength can be determined from the ratios
of rate constants in Figure A,B for R166S
AP and Stp1, respectively. This discrimination, shown in Figure C, is only modestly affected, and the effect is
nearly the same for the two enzymes: for a change in ionic strength
from 0.004 to 0.8 M, the discrimination changes only ∼3-fold
for both enzymes (2.8- and 3.5-fold for R166S AP and Stp1, respectively).
At the highest ionic strength shown in Figure C (0.8 M), 108.1-fold discrimination remains for R166S
AP and 107.4-fold discrimination remains for Stp1.

Conclusions
and Implications
The discrimination of AP between its cognate
phosphate monoester
dianion and noncognate sulfate monoester monoanion reactions is very
high, ≥2 × 109-fold, and estimated to be ∼3
× 1010 (Table ; Text S1, ). We have shown that this
discrimination is not uniquely a function of the high formal charge
density of its active site, because the PTPs tested, which have only
one positively charged active site group instead of the +7 formal
positive charges in the AP active site, also exhibited high levels
of discrimination, (0.5–7) × 107-fold (Table ; Figure ). Removal of the
single nonmetal ion positive charge from AP, to give the R166S mutant,
reduced discrimination to 3 × 108, similar to that
for the PTPs, despite the remaining six positive charges from AP’s
three active site divalent metal ions.

Increasing the concentration
of ions in solution had only modest
effects on the discrimination between the dianionic and monoanionic
substrates. Thus, the formal charges of the AP metal ions are apparently
sufficiently balanced by the anionic metal ion ligands and other negatively
charged groups such that there is no large global electrostatic attraction
between free enzyme and free substrate that accounts for the bulk
of the observed discrimination for AP.

The factor or factors
involved in discrimination by AP and by PTPs
remain to be elucidated. We briefly note potential factors and then
close by noting a striking correlation between discrimination and
overall rate enhancement.

Differential catalysis via differential
nucleophile activation
and leaving group stabilization could contribute to greater phosphatase
than sulfatase activity. However, the transition states for phosphoryl
and sulfuryl transfer are indistinguishable, both in solution,− and at the AP active site, as assessed by leaving group 18O isotope effects, (see also ref ()), so that differential
catalysis via nucleophile activation and leaving group stabilization
would not be expected. Given the larger charge density on the phosphoryl
oxygen atoms, relative to the sulfuryl oxygen atoms, stronger hydrogen
bond and other local electrostatic interactions, which were not assessed
in our experiments, could provide all or some of the observed discrimination.
It is also possible that precise arrangement of groups within the
AP and PTP active sites allow discrimination despite the very modest
geometrical differences of only ∼0.1 Å (Figure ).− Finally, the hydrolysis of phosphate monoester dianions
is greatly accelerated in largely organic solvents in the presence
of very little water, whereas sulfate monoester monoanion hydrolysis
is much less affected so that differential solvation energetics of
the ground and transition states in solution and in the enzyme active
site need to be considered and may contribute to phosphate ester versus
sulfate ester specificity., Conversely, we do not
understand how sulfatases, which also have a preponderance of charged
and polar active site groups, discriminate in favor of sulfate ester
hydrolysis over phosphate ester hydrolysis. These observations of reversed discrimination indicate that features
beyond simple accounting of potential active site electrostatic interaction
energies need to be invoked and dissected in order to understand the
observed discriminations and, ultimately, to predict and design binding
and catalytic specificity.

An Intriguing Correlation of Catalytic Efficiency
and Discrimination
Figure A shows
the phosphate/sulfate monoester
discrimination as a function of the catalytic efficiency for hydrolysis
of phosphate monoester dianions for all enzymes for which these parameters
have been measured of which we are aware. Based on this limited sample
set, there is a strong correlation, but it appears that sulfatase
activity remains at a similar level (Figure B) so that the correlation is driven by increased phosphatase activity;
that is, as phosphatase activity is increased, sulfatase activity
does not increase commensurately (Figure B).
Active site features that provide optimal phosphatase catalysis may
affect only or predominantly this reaction, or increased catalytic
power toward phosphate esters may be accompanied by selective pressure
against also increasing activity for sulfatase side reactions.

Analysis of
relative rate enhancements for cognate reactions with
their ability to discriminate between phosphate and sulfate ester
substrates. (A) Correlation of the enzymatic rate enhancement of pNPP hydrolysis with the extent of catalytic discrimination
between pNPP and pNPS hydrolysis
by AP superfamily members and PTPs. Data are from results herein and
prior studies and are summarized in Table S1, . The linear least-squares fit has a
slope of 0.9 log units (R2 = 0.74). Key:
circles for AP and mutants thereof; diamond for PafA; squares for
PTPs; triangle for PAc; inverted triangle for NPP; right angle triangle
for PMH; open circle for PAS. See Table S1, , for enzyme abbreviations. The data point for PAS
was not included in the fit because this enzyme prefers to hydrolyze pNPS over pNPP. (B) Plot of the enzymatic
rate enhancement of pNPP hydrolysis with the enzymatic
rate enhancement of pNPS hydrolysis by AP superfamily
members and PTPs (excluding the AP superfamily member PAS). Key: same
as in panel A). The data point for PAS is omitted to allow better
visualization of the other data points but is included in an analogous
plot in the  (Figure
S8).

A grand challenge will be to reach
a sufficient level of understanding
to allow enzymes to be designed with catalytic power rivaling those
of natural enzymes and with specificity and promiscuity that can be
dialed up or down by following a set of engineering principles grounded
in physical and chemical understanding.

Supporting Information Available
A table of kinetic parameters
for PTPs, AP superfamily member enzymes, and mutants thereof, plots
of reaction progress curves, Michaelis–Menten curves, and inhibition
curves, a discussion of the rate-limiting step for AP hydrolysis of pNPP, a table of PTP kinetic parameters, two-dimensional
active site schematics and electrostatic surface potential representations
of wild type AP, R166S AP, and wild type PTP, plots of ionic strength
dependencies, and a plot of pNPP and pNPS rate enhancements for AP superfamily members and PTPs. This material
is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500765p_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Professor Zhong-Yin Zhang for generously providing
PTP expression plasmids. We also thank members of the Herschlag lab
for comments on the manuscript.

Abbreviations
APE. coli alkaline
phosphatase

PTPprotein tyrosine phosphatase

pNPPp-nitrophenyl
phosphate

pNPSp-nitrophenyl sulfate

KIEkinetic isotope effect

The value of the 18O isotope
effect for the leaving group oxygen atom is identical, within error,
for the solution phosphoryl and sulfuryl transfer reactions [KIE for
solution reactions of pNPP2– and pNPS1– is 1.0189 and 1.0210, respectively]., The KIE’s measured for AP are also identical, as follows.
The 18O IE for R166S AP with pNPP is 1.0091
± 0.0006. (The value for WT AP cannot
be used because the chemical step is not rate limiting for this reaction.)
This IE is the same as that for the pNPS (sulfatase)
reaction with WT AP, 1.0084 ± 0.001. [Here WT AP is used because the R166S AP/pNPS reaction
is too slow to get accurate IEs; We can directly compare WT AP and
R166S AP because the presence or absence of R166 does not change the
IE, as demonstrated with the substrate pNPPS (the
phosphorothioate substrate) where the IEs are 1.0094 ± 0.0004
(WT) and 1.0098 ± 0.0003 (R166S).]

