Variation
in the site of oxidation
of polyunsaturated fatty acids by lipoxygenases is important in the
physiology of plants and humans because the hydroperoxide products
(ROOH) are the starting points in a variety of lipid mediator pathways.− Lipoxygenase structures share a common fold, but the determinants
of specificity in the oxidation reaction remain elusive. The current
state of understanding is that a helix toward the N-terminus of lipoxygenases
(helix 2) contains elements of an entrance to the substrate channel.
Indeed, lipid binding near helix 2 has been demonstrated by spectroscopy and by crystallography., There
are substantial structural differences in helices 2, but fewer elsewhere,
in the cases where there are both ligand-free and ligand-bound crystal
structures of lipoxygenases. Here, we examine dynamics of helix 2
in solutions of spin-labeled soybean lipoxygenase-1 (SBL1) in an effort
to reveal fluctuations that could facilitate entry of a lipid into
the substrate channel. Measurements using electron paramagnetic resonance
(EPR) with spin-labels report on lifetimes of motional states that
are in the range of ∼0.1–100 ns, times characteristic
of backbone and side chain fluctuations of proteins in solution.

Lipoxygenases require acyl chains with
one or more pentadienyl
moieties as substrates, as in linoleic acid or arachidonic acid. Substrate
preferences may include free or esterified fatty acids. The lipoxygenase
catalytic cycle involves both oxidation states of a metal ion (generally
iron or manganese) in a proton-coupled electron transfer reaction.− The metal is
located centrally in these largely helical proteins of ∼70–100
kDa. Known lipoxygenases are highly specific in product formation,
for instance, in leading to 5S-, 8R-, 12S-, or 15S-hydroperoxides
of arachidonate. An idea that has guided studies of lipoxygenase specificity
for many years is that if the positions of the carboxy (polar) and
methyl ends of the acyl chain within the substrate channel were reversed,
then a 5S- or a 15S-lipoxygenase
product of arachidonic acid could result from minor adjustments of
a conserved protein fold. This concept
apparently is confirmed by the finding that human 5S-lipoxygenase switches to yield 15S-products when
it is pseudophosphorylated by a Ser to Asp mutation or when the cavity volume is reduced by mutation. Unresolved is how substrate acyl chains, in
either configuration, enter lipid binding sites of various lipoxygenases.
Helices 2, 11, and 12 in several animal lipoxygenases are displaced
from native configurations when substrate or inhibitors bind,,, and a bacterial lipoxygenase
has an elongated helix 2 with α2A and α2B inserts forming
a lid over a bound phospholipid. These
observations focus attention particularly on helices 2 across the
entire lipoxygenase family.

Lipoxygenases from soybean have
served as models for the structure
and function of the entire family., Four soybean
isoforms, differing in specificity with respect to converting linoleate
lipids to 13S-hydroperoxides (equivalent to 15S-hydroperoxide from arachidonate), have highly similar
overall structures, but they differ in the shapes of their putative
entrances to the active site channel. In the major isoform, SBL1, the substrate channel is lined primarily
with hydrophobic side chains of residues in helix 11 (SBL1 residues
535–545). A third helix, helix 21, lies parallel to helix 11
and contributes S747 and L754 to the channel. Access to the binding
site appears to be blocked at the surface by L541 and T259 (in helix
2). Although an opening to the channel
could easily be made by rotation of these side chains, extended rearrangement
seems to be more suitable for admitting a long acyl chain. In all
four crystal structures of ligand-free soybean isoforms,− helices 2 have one turn of π-helix toward the middle (S261–Q267
in SBL1), covering the seven residues preceding a proline. This region
contains two (i + 5, i) π-helical
hydrogen bonds [266–261 (also bifurcated H-bond from residue
265) and 267–262]. The result is a bend of ∼27°
between the axes of the two ends of the helix.

Helix 2 in soybean lipoxygenase-1
(SBL1). The solvent-accessible
surface of the large domain in the SBL1 structure (PDB entry 1YGE, residues 170–841),
with the N-terminal domain as a cartoon for reference, was rendered
with PyMol (Schrödinger). In the large domain, residues 255–275
constitute helix 2 and are illustrated as a cartoon (blue). Iron and
associated water in the catalytic center can be seen through the semitransparent
surface. The sequences of helices 2 in the four isoforms of soybean
lipoxygenases for which structures are available are given below as
a WebLogo (redrawn from http://weblogo.berkely.edu). The
residue numbering refers to the SBL1 sequence, and the letters below
the sequence numbers refer to the SBL1 sequence. The names of other
isoforms are lipoxygenase-3 (PDB entry 1RRL), VLXB (PDB entry 2IUJ), and VLXD (PDB
entry 2IUK).
The lowered letter “I” between residues 273 and 274
indicates the insertion of isoleucine into VLXD at this point.

The importance of helix 2 in SBL1
was highlighted by our recent
study that defined the location of the polar end of a bound paramagnetic
lysolipid, using site-directed spin labeling and pulsed dipolar EPR. Residues in helix 2, the loop preceding it, and
helix 11 are close to the headgroup of that lipid. Now, we substituted
a spin-labeled cysteine for 18 of 21 residues in the helix to examine
the dynamic state of helix 2. Site-directed spin labeling opens a
unique window on nanosecond dynamics of macromolecules in solution. For residues buried in a structure, EPR spectra
of spin-labels reflect primarily overall rotational correlation times.
In contrast, spin labeling peripheral helices provides information
about side chain packing, backbone dynamics, surface exposure, and
changes thereof. The peripheral nature of helix 2 in SBL1 is illustrated
in Figure . We examined the effects of the
nonreactive diamagnetic substrate analogue, lyso-oleoylphosphatidylcholine
(LOPC), on each SBL1 mutant. The SBL1 isoform has an activity optimum
at pH 8–9 and little activity at pH 6; crystal structures were
determined at pH 7.0 and ∼5.6., Thus, pH-dependent
dynamics of the spin-label signals were characterized to connect the
enzymology to the structure. These and EPR power saturation experiments
show that the π-helical segment of helix 2 is most sensitive
to the presence of a substrate analogue. This suggests a model in
which an acyl chain gains access to the substrate cavity by extended
interactions with helix 2 residues, rather than by entering through
small rearrangements of selected side chains that block access to
the active site.

Experimental Procedures
Materials
The
spin-label reagent, (1-oxyl-2,2,5,5-tetramethyl-Δ3-pyrroline-3-methyl)
methanethiosulfonate (MTSL), was from Toronto Chemical. The substrate
analogue, 1-oleoyl-2-hydroxy-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine,
“lyso-oleoyl-phosphatidylcholine” (LOPC), was from Avanti
Polar Lipids.

Protein Mutagenesis and Preparation for EPR
Proteins
with single-cysteine replacements of native side chains in helix 2
were expressed in CodonPlus-RILP(DE-3) cells (Agilent) using a cysteine-free
SBL1 construct previously reported. The
construct appends a (His)6 N-terminal tail. Spin labeling
and purification were performed according to the previous report.

EPR samples were prepared by buffer exchange in a centrifugal concentrator.
Protein, at 0.15 mM (15 mg/mL) for frozen samples and at least 0.2
mM for solution samples, in 0.02 M tris (pH 7.2), was diluted with
an equal part of selected 0.18 M buffer containing 60% (w/v) sucrose,
giving final protein concentrations of 0.075 mM (frozen) or 0.1 mM
(solution) in 0.1 M buffer and 30% sucrose. The pH values of buffers
used for samples were determined at 21 °C. Sample buffers for
solution EPR were tris (pH 7.2 or 9.0), and for frozen samples, at
room temperature they were bis-tris (pH 6.4) and tricine (pH 8.4)
with 30% sucrose. The thermal coefficients of pKa’s for bis-tris and tricine are similar, resulting
in more basic pH values at the freezing temperature. Thus, the pH
values of frozen samples were estimated to be ∼7 and ∼9,
respectively.

Samples were aerobic in both solution and frozen
states. Oxygen
is a secondary substrate that diffuses to a lipoxygenase substrate
radical after the rate-limiting step of the reaction. Whether protein radical relaxation by oxygen is significant
depends on the radical spin–lattice relaxation rate and will be examined separately for the spin-labeled
SBL1 cases.

EPR Spectroscopy
Room-temperature
(21–22 °C)
EPR spectroscopy was performed with an E600 Bruker spectrometer, equipped
with an SHQE_R2 high-sensitivity resonator, operating at X-band frequencies
(9.375–9.409 GHz) with the quartz dewar of a cryostat in place.
Magnetic field values at the sample were calibrated with a DPPH (2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl)
standard. Instrument settings for solution samples were 0.1 mT for
the modulation amplitude (100 kHz) and 2 mW for the power. For comparative
displays, solution spectra were normalized to the same second integral
and adjusted to equivalent frequencies by adding a small constant
magnetic field value to the recorded values, as needed. Simulations
of some spectra were made with EasySpin (http://www.easyspin.org).

Power saturation experiments
were generally conducted at 60 K, using a helium-flow ESR 9/10 cryostat
(Oxford Instruments), an ITC503 controller (Oxford), and a CERNOX
sensor (Lakeshore Cryotronics) under the sample. Sample volumes of
∼200 μL were contained in 4 mm quartz tubes. The SHQE_R2
resonator was used for most power saturation runs, but selected experiments
with a DM2 resonator were conducted at the EPR Center of the Medical
College of Wisconsin (Milwaukee, WI). Automated power saturation settings
were 4 mT scans (encompassing the center of the spin-label spectrum),
a sweep of 0.05 mT/s, a modulation amplitude of 0.2 mT (100 kHz),
and a delay between power steps of 10 s. Reported values of power
included the separate calibration constants of the different resonators
(Bruker Biospin), and saturation of a representative sample occurred
at essentially identical powers in both resonators. An additional
calibration for the quatrz inserts was not conducted. The extent to
which using 100 kHz ωm is bordering (differently
among mutants) on violation of the slow passage requirement will be
examined in further studies.

The hyperfine value, as 2Azz, of spectra recorded at
60 K and at X-band was measured from
spectra recorded under nonsaturating conditions (0.2 μW) in
20 mT sweeps.

Analysis of Power Saturation EPR Data
The peak-to-peak
intensity, I, of the derivative signal in the mI = 0 region in EPR spectra
of frozen samples was measured. From the Bloch equations, the absorption
amplitude, Abs, of a magnetic resonance signal depends on the rotating B1 field and relaxation times, T1 and T2, as in eq .Characteristic values of P50 can be extracted from I versus √P plots, as the power at which the derivative signal intensity
has fallen to half the value predicted by the linear region, or fits
to the data can be used to obtain an optimized value of P50. The appropriate function for fits of I versus √P depends on whether the signal
is homogeneously or inhomogeneously broadened (or between homogeneously
and inhomogeneously).− We find, for our samples at 60 K, the inhomogeneous
case applies (Figure S1 of the ), so that data fits following eq  also yield P50. Deviations of fits when P50 is larger arise when dipolar interaction with a fast-relaxing
metal is significant or when the sample
is heterogeneous.where c is a scaling factor
and the square root of the microwave power, √P, is proportional to B1.

Optimized
values of P50 were obtained by least-squares
fitting data for powers from 0.1 μW to 1.0 mW to eq . Experimental log(I/√P) versus log(P) plots deviate from prediction:
residuals in fitting the data with eq  increased
to as much as 12% of P50 in samples with
larger values of P50. Although the fits
can be improved using a stretched exponent (b/2 instead
of 1/2 in eq ), the exponent differed from mutant to mutant and is of questionable
significance, so only b = 1 is used in the evaluations
presented here.

Enzyme Kinetics
Helix 2 mutants
I257R1,
T259R1/I265R1, Q267R1, and F274R1 were selected for analysis of enzyme kinetics. Solutions
of linoleic acid substrate (4–80 μM) were usually prepared
in sodium borate (0.2 M, pH 9.2) with 20 μg/mL Tween 20. When
inhibition by LOPC was examined, the buffer substrate was prepared
in 0.8% methanol with no Tween 20. Equal
volumes of enzyme (20 nM) and substrate solutions were rapidly mixed
and monitored optically for product formation as described previously. The enzymatic rate for each substrate solution
was measured five times. Kinetic constants (kcat and Km) were obtained by nonlinear
fits to the Michaelis–Menten equation (using KaleidaGraph,
Synergy Software). Each effective substrate concentration was measured
by completely oxidizing the substrate with a small amount of lipoxygenase.

Results
Side Chain Dynamics of Helix 2 for SBL1 in Solution
Helices 2 in crystal structures of four soybean isoforms−, have 21 or 22 residues and are
divided into two axis directions by a stretch of π-helix (SBL1,
S261–Q267). The π-helix precedes a conserved proline
(P268 in SBL1). Eighteen of the native amino acids in helix 2 of cysteine-free
SBL1 were mutated to cysteine and spin labeled with the MTSL reagent.
The resulting spin-labeled side chain was designated R1 by convention. The potential mutants
not included in this study are V266R1 (had a tendency to
precipitate), P268C (did not express well), and A269R1 (not
tried). Some data for mutant E256R1 are included here,
but the native Glu at this position is unique among isoforms of soybean
lipoxygenase and is part of a salt bridge connecting helices 2 and
11. This salt bridge contributes to the
unusually high pH optimum of SBL1 enzymatic activity.

Each spin-labeled mutant (0.1 mM) was examined by
EPR at ambient temperature and under three solvent conditions, in
the order pH 7.2, 9.0, and 9.0 with the lipid LOPC (0.2 mM). This
choice was made because of the difference between the optimal pH for
SBL1 activity (pH 8–9) and pH values at which crystal structures
of SBL1 were obtained (pH ≤7)., The pH-induced
changes in the spectra were reversible within the time (1–2
h) required to prepare and measure EPR samples.

Residues in
the middle of helix 2, the π-helical region,
had the greatest sensitivity of EPR spectra to changes in pH or LOPC
addition. The spectra of S261R1–Q267R1 are shown in Figure , with separate columns
for the three solvent and ligand conditions. Remarkable differences
are evident when spectra of samples at pH 7.2 (left column) are compared
with those at pH 9.0 (middle column). At pH 7.2, the spectra of residues
S261R1–Q267R1 show variation in side
chain mobility that repeats in ≥i + 4 residues,
consistent with one side of a surface helix interacting closely with
neighboring residues in other elements of the structure while the
other side is solvent-exposed. The bars on the left of the figure
illustrate this point by showing the magnitude of the magnetic field
shift of the first low-field maximum in pH 7.2 spectra, relative to
that value for the very mobile residue, I265R1. In contrast,
spectra at pH 9.0 (middle column) have largely lost evidence of this
helical variation. Instead, all of the pH 9.0 spectra of the middle
part of helix 2 are quite similar to each other and reflect a degree
of motion that is intermediate between the extremes of the spectra
of pH 7.2 samples. Most strikingly when the pH is increased from 7.2
to 9.0, side chains of S263R1 and Q267R1 become
more mobile while those of S261R1, Q264R1, and
I265R1 become less so. Residue I265R1 is particularly
mobile at pH 7.2, consistent with the natural side chain, I265, being
surface-exposed in the crystal structure. Estimates of rotational
times corresponding to the spectra at pH 7.2 could be as varied as
∼45 ns (overall protein rotation, plus an order parameter of
0.75, and hydrated radius of 3.4 nm)
for S263R1 to ∼2.5 ns for I265R1 (assuming
isotropic motion). The presence of several coexisting EPR subspectra
is most apparent after LOPC is added to samples at pH 9.0 (right column,
Figure ). A highly mobile component increases
upon addition of LOPC, as discussed further in the following section.

Dynamic
changes in middle portion of helix 2 in response to pH
and lipid. The low-field region (in the box of the full spectrum at
the top) of X-band EPR spectra (9.404 GHz) for spin-label residues
261–267 (100 mM) in SBL1 helix 2 is shown. Spectra were recorded
at 295 K. The three columns show EPR spectra for samples prepared
at pH 7.2 (first column of spectra), pH 9.0 (middle column), and pH
9.0 with addition of lyso-oleoylphosphatidylcholine (LOPC, 200 mM).
The bars, left of the spectra, indicate the magnetic field shift of
the first maximum in the EPR spectra of the pH 7.2 samples compared
to that of I265R1. The dashed line is a visual guide to
illustrate the range in magnitude of these shifts in pH 7.2 samples.

The solvent conditions have a
much smaller influence on the EPR
spectra of spin-labels at the N- and C-terminal portions of helix
2 (Figure ). Except for I257R1,
neither variation of pH nor addition of LOPC substantially influences
the degree of immobilization of the spin-labels at the N-terminal
end of helix 2 (residues 255R1–260R1),
indicating that this end of the helix has a relatively stable structure
under the conditions examined. Spectra of mutant I257R1 do change significantly with pH, likely because residue 257 is preceded
by a glutamic acid, E256. The C-terminal end of the helix (residues
F270R1–D275R1) appears to be generally
more mobile than the N-terminal portion (compare the first two columns
with the second two in Figure ). The EPR spectra
are multicomponent, with variable amounts of a sharp mobile component
for some C-terminal mutants. Some variations that are seen with solvent
conditions may be related to the fact that natural residues E271 and
D275 are likely ionized. The first and last entries in Figure  show EPR data for two residues outside of helix
2. Residue V237R1 (top, first column) is in a loop preceding
helix 2 and was found near the polar end of a bound lysolecithin in
a previous study. Its motional state does
not change upon addition of LOPC (Figure ).
However, spin-labeled L541R1 (bottom, fourth column) does
respond to addition of LOPC, as might be expected for its role in
forming one end of the substrate channel near the surface. Note, though, that the close neighbor of L541,
T259R1, responds little to addition of LOPC.

Response of
N-terminal and C-terminal regions of helix 2 to changes
in pH and addition of lipid. Solution X-band EPR spectra are shown
for spin-labeled residues at the N-terminal (residues 255–260)
and C-terminal (residues 270–275) ends of SBL1 helix 2. Spectra
with solid lines are from samples at pH 9.0. For the effect of pH,
dotted lines are results for samples at pH 7.2; for the effect of
addition of LOPC, dotted lines are results for LOPC addition at pH
9.0. Other experimental conditions are the same as those given in
the legend of Figure . Data for two spin-labeled
mutants outside of helix 2, V237R1 (top left) and L541R1 (bottom right), are also included.

In contrast to the high variability in side chain motion
in helix
2, the room-temperature EPR spectra of several mutants spin-labeled
at selected positions in other helices of SBL1, residues L480R1 (helix 9), A569R1 (helix 13), A619R1 (helix 15), and F782R1 (helix 23), studied previously, have solution EPR spectra much less sensitive
to pH or addition of LOPC, although they do reflect changes in protein
rotational correlation time with and without 30% sucrose. These results
make global unfolding at higher pH unlikely to be the origin of changes
in EPR spectra with pH (Figure ).

In
summary, Figures  and  show that side chains in the π-helical middle segment
of SBL1 helix 2 have unique motional properties compared with those
at the ends of the same helix. The change in pH from 7.2 to 9.0 alters
the side chain states from ones in which motional freedom is related
to the surface or buried nature of the side chain (pH 7.2) to one
in which all the π-helix side chains have almost the same motional
properties (pH 9.0). We interpret this to mean that backbone fluctuations
have increased at pH 9.0 as a result of nanosecond processes that
influence all residues in the π-helix almost equally. One likely
mechanism for this process might include π- to α-helical
transitions, proceeding in reversible steps, in which π-hydrogen bonds (i + 5 → i) break and re-form as α-hydrogen bonds (i + 4 → i). We further speculate
that the sharp component of the EPR signal, the magnitude of which
increases upon substrate binding (Figure ),
may arise from single-residue displacements from the helical structure.
In that view, deformations of the π-helix might also include
steps variously described as propagating “α-aneurisms”
or “loop-outs”.,

A sequence of
the same length as helix 2 in SBL1 is found in many
plant lipoxygenase sequences. Sequence equivalents of SBL1 residues
L255, K260, P268, and D275 are uniformly conserved, and the N- and
C-terminal regions have a high degree of sequence similarity; however,
residues 262–267 (the π-helical region) are more variable.
All four structures of soybean lipoxygenases have one π-helical
turn in the equivalent position. Sequence alignment suggests that
all plant lipoxygenases have a bent helix 2 with a π-helical
turn, as well. Animal lipoxygenases have different strategies by which
helix 2 may adapt to binding substrate.

Effect of a Lipid Substrate
Analogue on Helix 2 of SBL1
Lysolecithins are known substrates
of lipoxygenases, and a spin-labeled
lysolecithin with an oleoyl chain is
an inhibitor of SBL1. In the study presented
here, unlabeled, monounsaturated 1-oleoyl-2-hydroxy-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine
(LOPC) is chosen as a nonreactive substrate analogue for data shown
in Figures –. The EPR spectra from
R1 mutations in the midsection of helix 2 were examined
after addition, at pH 9.0, of 2 equiv of LOPC (Figure , right column). An overview of the effect of adding LOPC
to the spin-labeled mutants at residues 263–265 and 267 is
that the fraction of a mobile component increases after LOPC is added.
In separate experiments, the concentration of LOPC was varied from
20 to 1000 μM with mutant Q264R1 (100 μM),
and the resulting changes in the spectra suggested a binding constant
in the tens of micromolar range. Reversibility in the influence of
LOPC on spectra was demonstrated for mutant I265R1 by reversing
the effect with repeated centrifugal concentrator exchanges with pH
7.2 buffer, and re-recording of EPR spectra.

Because the affinity
of LOPC for SBL1 might vary among the R1 mutants, kinetic
data for representative mutants were obtained (Table S1 of the ). Km values with the linoleic acid substrate at pH 9.0 varied
from 5 to 20 μM, values similar to those of other spin-labeled
mutants of SBL1 studied previously. The
inhibition constant (Ki) for addition
of LOPC to S263R1 was determined to be ∼35 μM
using a competitive inhibition model.

Influence of Catalytic
Iron on Power Saturation of R1 Side Chains
In
an effort to determine how adding the substrate
analogue LOPC to SBL1 might change the average structure of helix
2, frozen samples were examined at 60 K. EPR spectra of 60 K samples
should provide structural information about changes in the polarity
of spin-label environments, and also about changes in the distance
of spin-labels from iron if there are significant dipolar interactions
between these spins. In power saturation comparisons, polarity effects
may contribute to the intrinsic relaxation times T1 and T2, while dipolar interactions
make a distance-dependent magnetic contribution to relaxation. Although
a diamagnetic state suitable for comparison with the high-spin ferrous
state of spin-labeled SBL1 presently is not available, the scan of
spin-label substitutions across helix 2, and other locations, provides
a distance-dependent framework for understanding and separating intrinsic
from magnetic components of relaxation rates. The buffers were different
from those used for room-temperature EPR, but they were chosen so
that the estimated pH values for 60 K samples were comparable to those
of the solution samples. All samples contained 30% sucrose.

In proteins, the local polar and/or protic environment of introduced
spin-labels is manifest in the correlation of a decreasing gxx and an increasing Azz as the polarity or proticity
of the environment increases., The outer hyperfine
separation, 2Azz, was
determined for samples of each spin-labeled mutant in helix 2. Values
of Azz for frozen samples
at pH 7.0 correlate well with differences in the surface exposure
of side chains (Table ). For instance, residues 259, 262, and 270 are not surface-exposed
and, when spin-labeled, had Azz values 3.31–3.47 mT, while the other helix 2 residues
are surface-exposed and had higher Azz values (3.61–3.77 mT). The switch to pH
9 leads generally to less distinction in, and lower values of, Azz (3.58 mT average), for the
side chains that have solvent exposure in the crystal structures obtained
at pH ≤7. The change in Azz is evidently a consequence of a lower solvent “protonicity”
when the pH is increased, meaning primarily that there was a decrease
in the average number of H-bonds between water and nitroxide. After
the addition of LOPC, there were very small further changes in the
EPR parameters characterizing frozen samples (Azz = 3.60 mT on average). These observations
led to an expectation of some variations in the intrinsic relaxation
times (T1 and T2) across the helix 2 mutants when the pH of the sample is changed
from 7 to 9 (see the discussion below of Figure B, middle panel).

Spin-labeled mutants in helix 2 were examined by continuous wave
(CW) power saturation at 60 K (Figure ). A previous study yielded coordinates for the
spins of F270R1 and F782R1, from which the calculated distances to iron are ∼20.9
and ∼26.5 Å, respectively. Distances from iron of natural
helix 2 side chain ultimate atoms are generally ≤22 Å,
with the hydroxyl of T259 only 10.5 Å from iron. Representative
power saturation plots are compared in Figure A for F782R1 and S263R1 under the same sets
of conditions (pH ∼9) with LOPC present (squares) or absent
(circles). Values of P50 for F782R1 are near the lower limit we detected either with (24 μW)
or without (38 μW) lipid. Close interaction of LOPC with residue
782 is not expected, and little effect of its addition was observed
(Figure A, bottom curve). In contrast, it
is more difficult to saturate the spins of S263R1 (in helix
2) when LOPC is absent (P50 of 240 μW)
than when it is present (P50 of 74 μW).
The lines in Figure A are least-squares fits
(eq ) for a single relaxation rate. The deviation
of the fit to the S263R1 data is typical of cases in which
angle-dependent magnetic relaxation terms are significant but can also indicate sample heterogeneity.

Comparison of Hyperfine Splittings
(Azz) at 60 K for Spin-Labeled SBL1 with
Variations in pH and Lipid (LOPC) and Predicted Water Exposure
residue	Azz at pH 7	Azz at pH 9	Azz with LOPC	water exposure	
I257R1	3.74	3.73	3.61	58	
T259R1	3.47	3.47	3.61	6	
K260R1	3.72	3.51	3.58	57	
S261R1	3.64	3.57	3.56	20	
L262R1	3.43	3.43	3.54	0	
S263R1	3.77	3.53	3.61	20	
Q264R1	3.75	3.55	3.64	94	
I265R1	3.74	3.56	3.60	68	
Q267R1	3.61	3.54	3.61	18	
F270R1	3.31	3.60	3.61	1	
F274R1	ND	3.65	3.66	10	
L541R1	ND	3.54	3.66	27	
Values of Azz are given in millitesla.

Residues 257–274 are on helix
2, and residue 541 is on helix 11.

Values of water exposure are given
in square angstroms and were determined using the DSSP software package with the crystal structure of PDB entry 1YGE.

Measurements of F274R1 and
L541R1 at pH 7 were not determined.

Summary of power saturation data at 60 K for
R1 mutants
in helix 2. (A) Representative power saturation plots for two spin-labeled
mutants near (S263R1) and farther (F782R1) from
the expected LOPC binding site. Results from samples at pH 9.0 with
LOPC [(□) 75 μM protein and 150 μM lipid] and without
[(○) 85 μM protein] are compared. (B) Graphical summary
of saturation results for spin-labeled SBL1 helix 2 at pH 7 (top)
and at pH 9, without (middle) and with addition of LOPC (bottom).
Values of log(P50) (units of microwatts,
left ordinate) are compared across the spin-labeled residues in helix
2. For comparison, in the top panel, pH 7 data are compared with log(r)−1 (r units in angstroms,
right ordinate), where r is the distance from iron
of the final atom of the natural side chain in the 1YGE structure.

The variation in power saturation
with residue position in helix
2 is summarized in Figure B for the solvent
conditions at pH 7.0, pH 9.0 without LOPC, and pH 9.0 with LOPC added
(top, middle, and bottom panels, respectively). Here, the power at
which the peak-to-peak derivative amplitude falls to half the value
expected for a linear response, P50, is
the value reported. In the top panel, experimental log(P50) values (left ordinate) are compared with distances,
as log(1/r) (right ordinate), between iron and the
final atom in the natural side chain, from the crystal structure (■). Generally, the saturation results
at pH 7.0 are consistent with increasing distance of spin-labeled
side chains from iron, progressing from the N- to C-terminal ends
of helix 2. Of course, an exact correspondence of nitroxide spin–iron
distances with natural side chain–iron distances is not expected.
However, the slope, approximately 4–5 for the left ordinate/right
ordinate, suggests there is a substantial dipolar component to relaxation
under these conditions. (Dipolar relaxation has r–6 dependence.)

The three panels of Figure B are quite
different from each other in the sequence variation of P50 values and evidently include changes in both intrinsic
and magnetic spin relaxation. In the switch to pH 9 (middle panel),
compared with pH 7 samples (top panel), the P50 values of some residues are little changed (residues 259,
261, and 270), while major changes are evident in values of P50 for residues 260 and 262–267. With
the exception of residue 262, residues with large increases in P50 values at pH 9 are those with Azz values suggesting less H-bonding by
water to the nitroxide at the higher pH (Table ). Measured values of T1 at 60 K generally
are smaller when the spin is in nonpolar solvents than in polar and/or
protic ones. It seems likely then that
change in buffer pH from 7 to 9 (reduction in proticity) does lead
to decreased values of T1, making it harder
to saturate (increased P50 values) exposed
residues (at pH 7.0) than buried ones.

The bottom panel of Figure B shows uniformly
reduced P50 values when LOPC is added
to SBL1 at pH 9.0. Known magnetic properties of iron in lipoxygenase
may offer an explanation. The structure of the ferrous iron in resting
lipoxygenase is similar to that of the iron center in bacterial reaction
centers, and adding a spin-label to lipoxygenase may provide an analogue
of the quinones in the reaction centers.,, Previous studies of SBL1 in ferrous states
establish that there are two interconvertible symmetries at the iron
center, summarized as five-coordinate and six-coordinate, as shown
by magnetic circular dichroism. Resting
ferrous SBL1 is high-spin and has a mixture of five- and six-coordinate
states, with zero-field splittings (D) of 10 cm–1 (five-coordinate) and 13 cm–1 (six-coordinate),
respectively, and an E/D of ∼0.1
for either geometry. Adding a lipid under nonreacting conditions to
ferrous SBL1 changes the population of the two iron species in the
five- and six-coordinate mix to mostly six-coordinate, resulting in only the D = 13
cm–1 levels contributing to relaxation. For comparison,
the zero-field splittings of ferrous iron in bacterial reaction centers
are D ∼ 5.2 cm–1 and E/D ∼ 0.25. Although the energies of the effective excited state levels of iron
in SBL1 are somewhat higher than those in the reaction centers, we
suggest that the across-the-board reduction in P50 values when LOPC is added (Figure B, bottom panel) results because now only the 13 cm–1 (six-coordinate) excited energy levels are available to contribute
to relaxation. Because we find no loss of specific activity for samples
after LOPC treatment, it is unlikely that reduced P50 values seen in the bottom panel of Figure B result from a loss of iron.

The relaxation
properties of spin-labels on helix 2, summarized
in Figure B, are a combination of effects
from distance-dependent dipolar relaxation by iron, the polarity and
proticity of the spin-label environment, changes in energy levels
of the iron center, and other intrinsic relaxation contributions.
Of interest is making a connection between the dramatic changes in
side chain motion in solution (Figure ) and
changes in structure of the bend in helix 2. In spite of uncertainties
in extracting the distance component from complex relaxation data,
responses of π-helical residues 262R1–264R1 to a change in pH (Figure B) are
dramatic and do suggest that the spin-label side chains have a distribution
of locations that is, on average, closer to iron at the higher pH.
The r–6 dependence of dipolar relaxation
will magnify small shifts toward iron. At pH 9, the structure of the
middle of helix 2 is more flexible and R1 side chains may
be redistributed away from the surface exposure seen in crystal structures.
The addition of the LOPC substrate analogue reverses that trend (bottom
panel of Figure B). Thus, solution EPR spectra
and relaxation studies both provide evidence that the middle of helix
2 senses the presence of bound lipid in SBL1.

Conclusions
In conclusion, the single turn of π-helix in the second helix
of SBL1 has changes in dynamics and in relaxation by iron in response
to changes in pH and lipid binding. These results speak to two subjects,
structural transitions involving π-helices and the mechanism(s)
by which the substrate accesses the lipoxygenase active site cavity.
These insights result from a site-directed spin-label scan over the
full length of helix 2, so that the special nature of the π-helical
region (residues S261–Q267) is distinguished from other parts
of helix 2.

The minimal π-helix structure has two consecutive
(i + 5 → i) H-bonds in a
six-amino
acid sequence. The insertion of a single amino acid into an α-helix
is suggested as the evolutionary origin of π-helices, so that
α-helical bulges (“aneurisms”) and loop-outs may
be included in the same category. An
estimated 15% of proteins contain qualifying insertions in α-helices,
and these are often associated with functionality., Indeed, another π-helical segment (in helix 9) in lipoxygenases
is well-known for the role of contributing side chains that coordinate
the catalytic metal.,, The four isoforms of soybean lipoxygenase for which crystal structures
exist all have π-helical inserts in helix 2, as well, and an
associated bend in the helix direction. In SBL1, we found dramatic
changes in the spin-label mobility of the helix 2 π-helical
residues when the sample pH was increased from 7 to 9, but minimal
pH-dependent changes occurred in the neighboring α-helical segments.
At the higher pH, spin-labeled residues in the π-helix all had
very similar EPR spectra that are characteristic of nanosecond motional
averaging. These results suggest that the backbone H-bonds in the
π-helices are sufficiently weaker than those in the α-helices
that base-catalyzed breaking and re-forming of amide H-bonds occur
in nanoseconds rather than microseconds. The site-directed spin-label
approach, at conventional EPR frequencies, appears to be ideally suited
for studying the dynamics of π-helices in proteins.

An
entrance large enough to permit entry of a fatty acid is not
evident in the SBL1 crystal structures, although side chain rotation
of residues in helices 2 (T259) and 11 (L541) may provide one. While only helix 2 residues L255, G258, T259,
and K260 contribute to forming the mouth of the substrate channel
in SBL1, we found that the π-helical
part of helix 2, particularly residues 263–267, underwent increases
in nanosecond dynamics, at room temperature, associated with substrate
binding (Figure , right column). The π-helix
part of helix 2 lies adjacent to a reverse turn in helix 11, residues
547–551, and helix 11 contributes numerous side chains to the
substrate cavity. Our data led to a model in which an acyl chain makes
extended initial contact with helix 2, and this contact makes use
of the inherent flexibility in the π-helical region to allow
an acyl chain to pass between helices 2 and 11 as it enters the substrate
cavity. This model might be called a “middle-first”
entry mode for substrate, in contrast to historical discussions couched in terms of “head-first”
and “tail-first” entry through a localized site. The
middle-first entry would permit different orientations of the chain
within the cavity and hence different stereochemical outcomes. Factors
favoring docking of the polar end of lipid substrates, by their bulk
or by charge, at the mouth of the cavity likely determine the actual
stereochemical specificity in product formation.

Structural
studies of other lipoxygenases have provided end points
that suggest rearrangement of a helix 2 when substrate or inhibitors
are present.,,, Implicit in a rearrangement is motion. Our
study sheds light on the details of helix 2 dynamics in SBL1. At the
pH optimum of the enzymatic reaction (pH 9), the middle section of
helix 2 has robust nanosecond backbone fluctuations (Figure ). At lower pH, the middle portion has a defined
helical structure, corresponding to the substrate-free crystal structures,
with side chain motion reflecting surface exposure. The observed motion
at pH 9 is accentuated when a lipid is present. We interpret these
results to mean that residues, including 261–267, in SBL1 are
the point of entry and exit of the binding of the acyl chain to SBL1.

Supporting Information Available
Representative X-band EPR spectra
of S263R1 at 60 K and a simulation (Figure S1) and steady
state enzyme kinetic constants of spin-labeled mutants of SBL1 (Table
S1). This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500768c_si_001.pdf

Supported by
National Institutes of Health Grant GM06528 to B.J.G. and, in part,
by National Institutes of Health Grant EB001980 that supports the
National Biomedical EPR Center of the Medical College of Wisconsin.

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Professor Brian Bennett and Candice
Klug (National
Biomedical EPR Center of the Medical College of Wisconsin) for valuable
discussion and assistance in data acquisition using the DM2 X-band
resonator. We also thank Xianfang Wu and Fayi Wu for discussion and
assistance with cloning and mutagenesis.

Abbreviations
CWcontinuous wave

DPPH2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl

EPRelectron paramagnetic
resonance

LOPC1-oleoyl-2-hydroxy-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine

MTSL1-oxyl-2,2,5,5-tetramethyl-Δ3-pyrroline-3-methylmethanethiosulfonate

PDBProtein Data Bank

P50microwave power at which the signal amplitude is half the
unsaturated value

ROOHlipid hydroperoxide products of lipoxygenase

SBL1soybean lipoxygenase-1

T1 and T2spin–lattice and spin–spin
relaxation times, respectively.

