The Fas death receptor is a
member of the tumor necrosis factor family, and formation of the Fas
death receptor-mediated death-inducing signaling complex (DISC) regulates
cell death in a variety of normal and cancer cells., Binding
of Fas ligand to the Fas receptor leads to oligomerization of the
Fas receptor into homotrimers. Oligomerized Fas recruits the adaptor
protein Fas-associated death domain protein (FADD) via its death domain
(DD), which in turn recruits procaspase-8 to form the DISC. The intracellular protein calmodulin (CaM) functions
as a mediator of Ca2+ signals, and an increased level of
expression of CaM is associated with cancer. Immunoprecipitation experiments show CaM binds to Fas in cholangiocarcinoma, Jurkat, and osteoclast cells. CaM is recruited into the Fas-mediated
DISC after Fas activation; furthermore, EGTA, a Ca2+ chelator,
and trifluoperazine (TFP), a CaM antagonist, inhibit the recruitment
of CaM into the Fas-mediated DISC. TFP
was shown to decrease the level of Fas-mediated DISC-induced cleavage
of caspase-8.

Qualitative experiments
demonstrate that CaM binds to the Fas death
domain (Fas DD) in a calcium-dependent manner. A fragment containing helices 1–3 of the Fas DD associates
with CaM. The structures of Ca2+-bound CaM [Protein Data Bank (PDB) entry 3cln] and the
Fas death domain (PDB entry 1ddf) with the binding region for CaM colored blue, are shown in Figure S1 of the . Dysregulation of the Fas receptor and mediators of its signaling
pathways have been associated with diseases in humans and mice such
as the autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS) in humans.− The expression of mutant Fas with impaired function has been observed
in numerous types of cancers.− Fas mutations that cause an alteration
of the structure and function of Fas have been detected in many cancers., Lymphoproliferation complementing Gld (lpr-cg) mice have a mutation
in Fas causing defective Fas signaling. The valine 254 to asparagine (V254N) mutation of the Fas DD is analogous
to the mutant allele of Fas in lpr-cg mice. The lpr-cg mice Fas mutant reduces the level of binding to FADD,
which could be due to an altered structure. Qualitative experiments show that the Fas DD V254N mutation reduced
the level of CaM–Fas DD binding.

Our lab has previously investigated the binding thermodynamics
and conformation of CaM–Fas DD complexes using explicit solvent
molecular dynamics simulations and implicit solvent binding free energy
calculations, presenting structural evidence of CaM–Fas DD
binding and the effect of the Fas DD V254N mutation on CaM–Fas
DD interaction. Furthermore, our lab
has shown, using molecular dynamics simulations, the structural and
molecular mechanisms whereby the CaM antagonist, TFP, regulates CaM–Fas
binding, indicating that the number of TFP molecules bound to CaM
directly contributed to conformational changes in CaM and these changes
affected the binding of CaM to Fas DD. These computational results provided insight into the structural
and molecular mechanisms of the CaM–Fas DD interaction that
regulate Fas-mediated DISC formation and the mechanism by which TFP
affects the CaM–Fas interaction and modulates Fas-mediated
DISC formation.

Understanding the protein interactions underlying
Fas-mediated
cell death pathways is potentially important for identifying novel
targets and agents for the effective initiation of cancer cell death.
Therefore, a quantitative characterization of the CaM–Fas interaction
is important for designing optimized antagonists for CaM or Fas that
regulate CaM–Fas interaction, thus modulating Fas-mediated
DISC formation and apoptosis. In this study, the interactions of CaM
with wild-type Fas DD (Fas DD WT) and the Fas DD V254N mutant were
characterized using isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC), circular
dichroism spectroscopy (CD), and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations.
The results provide structural and thermodynamic evidence to understand
the role of Fas DD V254N in CaM and Fas DD interaction.

Materials and
Methods
We characterized the interactions of CaM with the
Fas DD wild type
(Fas DD WT) and the Fas DD V254N mutant using sedimentation velocity
experiment, isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC), circular dichroism
spectroscopy (CD) and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. The sedimentation
velocity experiment, ITC, and CD experiments were performed at 37
°C with the same buffer that consisted of 50 mM sodium acetate
(pH 5), 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM CaCl2, and 0.5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine
(TCEP).

Recombinant Protein Expression and Purification
Escherichia coli BL21(DE3) (pLysS) strain cells containing
6xHis-SUMO-calmodulin or 6xHis-SUMO-Fas(191–335) genes cloned
into pET28 vectors were kindly provided by J. M. McDonald (Department
of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham). Fas DD V245N was
created by site-directed mutagenesis of pET28 6xHis-SUMO-Fas(191–335)
using the QuikChange II site-directed mutagenesis kit (Agilent Technologies).
The procedure for the expression and purification of recombinant 6xHis-SUMO
fusion proteins was performed as follows. Transformed E. coli cells were incubated in LB medium with 50 μg/mL kanamycin
and 10 μg/mL chloramphenicol (Fisher Scientific) on a shaking
incubator at 30 °C. E. coli cell population
growth was monitored hourly by measuring the optical density of the E. coli culture at 600 nm. Recombinant protein expression
was induced by the addition of 0.1 mM isopropyl β-d-thiogalactopyranoside (Promega). The culture was then incubated
for an additional 4 h at 30 °C, and expression of the 6xHis-SUMO
fusion protein was evaluated by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE). After protein expression, E. coli cultures were pelleted by centrifugation and stored
at −80 °C until they were lysed. Cells were lysed using
an EmulsiFlex-C3 French press (Avestin); lysates were centrifuged,
and the supernatant was collected. The 6xHis-SUMO fusion proteins
were purified by nickel ion affinity chromatography according to the
manufacturer’s direction for the 6xHis-SUMO fusion protein
purification system (Qiagen). The 6xHis-SUMO tag was cleaved off by
overnight incubation with the SUMO tag protease (Ulp), and the 6xHis-SUMO
tag and SUMO protease were removed by nickel ion affinity chromatography.
Recombinant CaM, Fas DD WT, and Fas DD V254N were further purified
by size exclusion chromatography using a HiLoad 16/600 Superdex 75
prepgrade column on an AKTA purifier (GE life sciences) with a final
purity evaluated by SDS–PAGE. CaM, Fas DD WT, and Fas DD V254N
concentrations were measured by UV absorbance at 280 nm using a Cary
300 UV–vis spectrophotometer (Varain Inc., Palo Alto, CA).
The calculated extinction coefficients of 8480 M–1 cm–1 for Fas DD WT and Fas DD V254N and 2980 M–1 cm–1 for CaM were determined from
their primary residue sequence using the edelhoch method, adjusted with the extinction coefficients determined
by Pace et al. in Protpram (ExPASy SIB
Bioinformatics Recourse Portal).

Sedimentation Velocity
Experiments
Sedimentation velocity
experiments were performed using a Beckman Proteome Lab XL-I analytical
ultracentrifuge to assess the oligomeric state of the protein used
for ITC and CD experiments. Sedimentation velocity experiments, using
absorbance optics, were conducted by loading 10 μM Fas DD WT
or 10 μM Fas DD V254N mutant samples (380 μL) and the
protein dialysate (400 μL) into a double-sector Epon charcoal-filled
centerpiece. Samples were subjected to an angular velocity of 50000
rpm at 37 °C. Absorbance scans as a function of radial position
were collected by scanning the sample cells at a wavelength of 280
nm, as indicated in the text, per a distance of 0.003 cm. Scans were
collected every 1 min. Sedimentation velocity boundaries were analyzed
using SedFit, where sedimentation coefficient
distributions [c(s)] and differential
molar mass distribution [c(M)] analyses
were applied by modeling the sedimentation boundaries as solutions
of the Lamm equation for noninteracting species. All sedimentation
coefficients reported in the text were corrected to 20 °C and
water, i.e., s20,w. The partial specific
volume of Fas DD WT and Fas DD V254N and the density and viscosity
of the 50 mM sodium acetate (pH 5)/150 mM NaCl/20 mM CaCl2/0.5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) buffer at 37 °C
were calculated using sednterp and subjected
to c(s) analysis and c(M) analysis. The weighted average molecular weight
was obtained by integrating the peak area of the c(M) distribution.

Isothermal Titration Calorimetry
Calorimetric titrations
were performed using an Auto-ITC200 microcalorimeter from
MicroCal (Northampton, MA). The acquisition and analysis of data were
performed using the Origin software supplied by MicroCal. CaM, Fas
DD WT, and Fas DD V254N were dialyzed into a 50 mM sodium acetate
(pH 5)/150 mM NaCl/20 mM CaCl2/0.5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine
(TCEP) buffer for isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) experiments.
A typical titration was performed by injections of 400 μM CaM
into the calorimeter cell containing a 10 μM Fas DD WT or 10
μM Fas DD V254N solution. Successive injections were separated
by 210 s intervals to allow the endothermic peak resulting from the
reaction to return to the baseline. A constant stirring speed of 500
rpm and a temperature of 37 °C were maintained throughout the
titration. Dilution heats of CaM were measured by titrating 400 μM
CaM from the syringe into the cell containing only buffer. The resulting
CaM dilution heat changes were subtracted from the measured heats
of CaM–Fas DD binding.

Circular Dichroism Spectroscopy
Circular dichroism
spectroscopy (CD) studies were performed using a JASCO J-810 spectropolorimeter
(JASCO Corp.) fitted with a thermostatic cell holder and a thermostatic
water bath. Fas DD WT and Fas DD V245N were dialyzed into the same
buffer that was used for ITC experiments. The observed ellipticities
were recorded as a function of wavelength every 1 nm using a 0.1 mm
path length quartz cell at 37 °C, and each spectrum is reported
as an average of four scans.

Molecular Dynamics Simulations
We
performed 80 ns molecular
dynamics (MD) simulations for Fas DD WT and Fas DD V254N using the
AMBER 10 MD package. The conformational
and structural changes of Fas DD and Fas DD V254N were analyzed to
elucidate the structural basis and molecular mechanisms for the effect
of the Fas DD V254N mutation on CaM–Fas DD binding as observed
via ITC. The initial protein structure of the Fas death domain (PDB
entry 1ddf) was obtained from the Protein Data Bank as shown
in Figure S1 of the . The Fas DD V254N mutation was performed with the mutagenesis function
of PyMol. The “parm99”
parameters of the AMBER force field were assigned to the atoms in
the simulated system, and a standard MD simulation protocol as used
in our previous studies,− was performed for the simulated systems. The protein was first minimized
and then solvated in a TIP3P water box
with a physiological salt concentration of 150 mM NaCl. A buffer of
10 Å was set between the protein and the box boundaries to reduce
potential artifacts arising from periodicity. Additional ions were
added to each system to neutralize the charge of the protein. The
solvent was then minimized and equilibrated for 10 ps, while the proteins
and ions were constrained. The solvent was further equilibrated with
the protein and ions restrained at a constant number–pressure–temperature
(NpT) at 50 K and 1 atm for 20 ps. The simulated
system was warmed via constant number–volume–temperature
(NVT) MD simulations to 310 K by steps of 50 K lasting
10 ps each, with SHAKE constraints and
a 2 fs time step. A production MD simulation of 80 ns at NpT of 310 K and 1 atm was performed for the simulated systems. The
temperature of 310 K for MD simulations was the same as that used
in ITC and CD experiments. The SHAKE constraints were applied to all
hydrogen heavy bonds to permit a dynamics time step of 2 fs. Electrostatic
interactions were calculated with the particle mesh Ewald method (PME). Both the direct space PME and Lennard-Jones
cutoffs were set at 10 Å. The data for the MD simulations were
collected every 2 ps. The simulations were performed on a local AMD
Opteron cluster and on the AMD Opterons cluster in the Alabama Supercomputer
Center.

Conformational and Structural Analyses
With the MD
simulation trajectories after equilibration, we performed secondary
structure analysis, conformational analysis, and dynamical motion
analysis to better understand the conformational, structural, and
motion characteristics of the Fas DD and its mutants. Root-mean-square
deviations (rmsds) of protein backbone atoms were analyzed to determine
the system’s equilibration tendencies and its convergence.
We calculated the changes of the residues of α-helix occupancy
for the Fas DD and Fas DD mutant to evaluate secondary structural
changes of the protein caused by the Fas V254N mutation. An α-helix
was defined to be at least five residues long in a coiled or spiral
conformation. Whether an amino acid belonged to the α-helix
was determined with the DSSP method by Kabsch and Sander implemented in the AMBER10 MD program. The occupancy
of each residue in an α-helix was determined on the basis of
the percentage of time that the residue existed in the α-helix
over the simulation. The percentage helix for the Fas DD was calculated
from the overall helicity divided by the total number of Fas residues.
Root-mean-square fluctuations (rmsfs) of the proteins were calculated
on a residue-by-residue basis and averaged over the production simulation
trajectories for the observation of the conformational fluctuation
of protein domains. Dynamical cross-correlation maps (normalized covariance
matrices) between residues provided insight into which residues have
general movements correlating with the motions of other residues and
the degree of this correlation.,−, These analyses were performed
with the MD simulation trajectories obtained after the initial equilibration
using the ptraj program of AMBER, and Matlab was used to generate the cross-correlation plots. We also analyzed
hydrogen bond formation within the CaM binding region, the contact
numbers of each residue, and the electrostatic potential for the CaM
binding region for both the Fas DD and the Fas DD V254N mutant. A
hydrogen bond was determined when the distance between the hydrogen
and acceptor was &lt;3.5 Å and the hydrogen–donor–acceptor
angle was &gt;150°. The number of hydrogen bonds between residues
within the CaM binding region was calculated by summing all the hydrogen
bonds within the regions and was averaged over the production simulations.
A contact was identified if the atoms were within 5 Å of the
specific residue. Then contact numbers for each residue were calculated
by averaging each residue’s contact numbers over the production
run. The electrostatic potential for the CaM binding region in the
Fas DD was calculated by APBS. To calculate
the electrostatic potential, dielectric constants of 1 and 78.54 were
used separately for the protein and solvent, respectively. An ion
concentration of 150 mM was used in the APBS calculation. The electrostatic
potential was mapped onto the molecular surface of the Fas DD using
VMD.

Results and Discussion
Sedimentation
Velocity Results for 10 μM Fas DD WT and
10 μM Fas DD V254N
The Fas DD WT protein tends to self-associate
and is present predominately in a monomeric form in a low-pH buffer. Sedimentation velocity experiments were performed
with 10 μM Fas DD WT and 10 μM Fas DD V254N in the same
buffer that was used for the ITC and CD experiments at 37 °C
to assess the oligomeric state of the protein. An example of raw sedimentation
velocity data for Fas DD WT is shown in Figure S2 of the . Sedimentation coefficient
distributions [c(s)] show that under
the conditions used for upcoming ITC and CD experiments, the monomer
is largely populated in these solution conditions for both 10 μM
Fas DD WT and 10 μM Fas DD V254N (Figure A,B). From the c(s) analysis, the
weighted average sedimentation coefficients (s20,w) for Fas DD WT and Fas DD V254N were determined to be
1.5 ± 0.3 and 1.6 ± 0.4 S, respectively, where the standard
deviation describes the broadness of the peak. For both proteins,
the weighted average sedimentation coefficient is consistent with
a monomer. To further examine this, we examined the data by the molecular
weight probability distributions [c(M)]. The molecular weight probability distributions [c(M)] of 10 μM Fas DD WT and 10 μM Fas
DD V254N are shown in panels C and D of Figure , respectively, with weighted average molecular weights of 20 ±
5 and 18 ± 3 kDa, respectively. This result is consistent with
a monomer molecular weight of 17 kDa for the Fas DD, indicating that
under the experimental conditions used for the upcoming ITC and CD
experiments, the monomers are largely populated for both 10 μM
Fas DD WT and 10 μM Fas DD V254N.

Sedimentation coefficient
distribution [c(s)] as a function
of s20,w for
10 μM Fas DD WT (A) and 10 μM Fas DD V254N (B). Molecular
weight probability distribution [c(M)] as a function of molecular weight for 10 μM Fas DD WT (C)
and 10 μM Fas DD V254N (D).

CaM with Fas DD Binding Assessed by Isothermal Titration Calorimetry
The thermodynamics of CaM and Fas DD WT binding was investigated
using ITC. The calorimetric isotherm of binding of CaM to Fas DD WT
illustrates an endothermic binding characteristic between CaM and
Fas DD WT at 37 °C (Figure , top panel).
The heat absorbed per injection of CaM into Fas DD WT was highest
at low molar ratios of CaM to Fas DD WT. The heat absorbed decreased
as the molar ratio of CaM to Fas DD WT increased until only the CaM
dilution enthalpy was observed. The CaM dilution enthalpy was measured
by titrating CaM from the syringe into the cell containing buffer.
The CaM dilution enthalpy was subtracted from the CaM–Fas DD
WT isotherm. The resulting CaM–Fas DD WT isotherms (Figure , bottom panel) were fit using the one-site model
in Origin (MicroCal). The enthalpy change (ΔH°), association constant (Ka), and
stoichiometry (n) and the standard error for each
variable were derived on the basis of the one-site model fit of the
CaM–Fas DD WT isotherm (Figure ). The
enthalpy change (ΔH°), association constant
(Ka), and stoichiometry (n) listed in Table  are the error-weighted
mean values and the standard error of the mean for each variable from
three repeated experiments calculated as described in the previous
study. The Gibbs free energy (ΔG°) was calculated on the basis of the Ka with eq .where R is the gas constant
(1.9872041 × 10–3 kcal mol–1 deg–1) and T is the absolute
temperature of 310.15 K in this study. The entropy of binding (−TΔS°) was calculated using Ka and ΔH° via eq .

CaM–Fas DD WT isotherm. Thermogram of 400 μM
CaM titrated
into the calorimeter cell containing 10 μM Fas DD WT.

Thermodynamic Parameters
of CaM–Fas
DD Binding Determined by ITC at 37 °C and pH 5
 	Ka (M–1)	ΔG° (kcal/mol)	ΔH° (kcal/mol)	–TΔS° (kcal/mol)	n	
CaM–Fas DD WT	(1.79 ± 0.20) × 106	–8.87 ± 0.07	6.00 ± 0.09	–14.87 ± 0.12	1.03 ± 0.01	
CaM–Fas
DD V254N	(0.88 ± 0.14) × 106	–8.43 ± 0.10	7.40 ± 0.27	–15.84 ± 0.28	1.09 ± 0.02	
Differences are statistically significant
between CaM–Fas DD WT and CaM–Fas DD V254N mutant complexes
(Student’s t test; p &lt;
0.05).

The standard errors
of the mean for ΔG°
and −TΔS° in Table  were estimated on the basis of the standard error
of the mean of Ka and ΔH° using the statistical error propagation method. With an enthalpy (ΔH°)
of 6.00 ± 0.09 kcal/mol and an association constant (Ka) of (1.79 ± 0.20) × 106 M–1 for CaM–Fas DD binding, the entropy
(−TΔS°) for CaM–Fas
DD binding was calculated to be −14.87 ± 0.12 kcal/mol
and the Gibbs free energy (ΔG°) for CaM–Fas
DD binding to be −8.87 ± 0.07 kcal/mol.

The entropy-driven
CaM–Fas DD WT binding could be due to
the removal of aqueous solvent from the hydrophobic surface areas
on Ca2+-bound CaM and Fas DD WT upon binding, resulting
in a favorable −TΔS° being the dominant contribution to an overall favorable ΔG°. This phenomenon is the hydrophobic effect, which
is the energetics involved in transferring nonpolar compounds from
a liquid organic phase to an aqueous phase. When considering protein–protein interaction, the interactions
of nonpolar residues in the interior of a protein or at a protein–protein
interface, such as during binding, could be considered to be bsimilar
to the interactions of compounds undergoing the organic to aqueous
phase transfer. Binding of Ca2+ to CaM regulates CaM’s binding activity by modulating the
amount of exposed apolar surface area available to interact with various
CaM binding substrates. Binding of Ca2+ to CaM induces conformational changes that result in the
exposure of the hydrophobic surface area to the aqueous solvent., During CaM–Fas DD WT binding, the burial of the apolar surface
area of CaM to the apolar CaM binding site on Fas DD WT, seven nonpolar
residues in the binding region, could
result in a hydrophobic effect that would drive CaM–Fas DD
WT binding and would explain the favorable −TΔS value of CaM–Fas DD WT binding at
37 °C observed via ITC.

The Fas DD V254N mutation is analogous
to the mutant allele of
Fas in lpr-cg mice. In lpr-cg mice, the
mutant Fas has a reduced level of binding to Fas-associated death
domain protein, which could be due to an altered structure and conformation. To evaluate the effect of the V254N mutation
of the Fas DD on CaM–Fas DD binding, the interaction between
CaM and Fas DD V254N was characterized using ITC experiments. Binding
of CaM to Fas DD V254N resulted in an endothermic isotherm (Figure , top panel) similar to that for binding of CaM
to Fas DD WT. The CaM dilution enthalpy was subtracted from the CaM–Fas
DD V254N isotherms to obtain the resulting isotherms (Figure , bottom panel). The resulting CaM–Fas DD
V254N isotherms were fit to a one-site model in Origin (MicroCal)
to derive ΔH°, Ka, and n. Using the same method as described
above to obtain the mean values and the standard errors of the mean
from three repeated experiments for ΔH°, Ka, n, −TΔS°, and ΔG°
for CaM–Fas DD WT binding, the thermodynamic parameters for
CaM–Fas DD V254N binding were determined as shown in Table . The CaM–Fas DD V254N isotherm yielded the
following binding parameters: an association constant (Ka) of (0.88 ± 0.14) × 106 M–1, an enthalpy (ΔH°) of 7.40 ± 0.27
kcal/mol, with a calculated entropy (−TΔS°) of −15.84 ± 0.28 kcal/mol, and a Gibbs
free energy (ΔG°) of −8.43 ±
0.1 kcal/mol. Similar to CaM–Fas WT binding, CaM–Fas
V254N binding was an entropy-driven interaction at 37 °C, which
could be due to the interaction of hydrophobic residues at the Fas
binding site.

CaM–Fas DD V254N isotherm. Thermogram of 400 μM
CaM
titrated into the calorimeter cell containing 10 μM Fas DD V254N.

The Fas DD V254N mutation resulted
in an association constant (Ka) for CaM–Fas
DD binding that was decreased
from (1.79 ± 0.20) × 106 to (0.88 ± 0.14)
× 106 M–1 (Student’s t test; p &lt; 0.05). The enthalpy (ΔH°) of CaM–Fas DD binding was increased from
6.00 ± 0.09 to 7.40 ± 0.27 kcal/mol (Student’s t test; p &lt; 0.05). The standard state
Gibbs free energy (ΔG°) for CaM–Fas
DD binding was slightly increased from −8.87 ± 0.07 to
−8.43 ± 0.10 kcal/mol, and the entropy (−TΔS°) for CaM–Fas DD
binding was decreased from −14.87 ± 0.12 to −15.84
± 0.28 kcal/mol (Student’s t test; p &lt; 0.05).

Circular Dichroism Analysis of the Fas DD
Secondary Structure
The V254N mutation of the Fas DD is analogous
to the mutant allele
of Fas in lpr-cg mice. The mutant Fas
in lpr-cg mice may have an altered structure resulting in a reduced
level of binding to Fas-associated death domain protein. To examine a possible structural basis for the
decreased binding affinity of CaM for Fas DD V254N, we used far-UV
CD to assess the secondary structure content of Fas DD WT and Fas
DD V254N. Figure  shows the Fas CD spectra
of Fas DD WT and Fas DD V254N. The far-UV CD spectrum of Fas DD WT
shows a baseline signal at &gt;245 nm and exhibits two negative peak
minima at 222 and 208 nm and a positive CD signal trend toward 198
nm, which is consistent with a protein containing a majority α-helical
content.− The Fas DD V254N mutation is located in the CaM binding
site in the Fas DD on the loop between helices α1 and α2. The V254N mutation could alter the proper formation
of the structure of the turn or adjacent helices 2 and 3, resulting
in a change in the α-helical secondary structure of Fas DD V254N.
The far-UV CD spectrum of Fas DD V254N revealed the magnitude of the
negative peak at 222 nm decreased by −2154 deg cm2 dmol–1, and there was a noticeable difference
in the CD signal from 232 to 215 nm and from 205 to 198 nm for Fas
DD V254N compared to that of Fas DD WT. The dynode voltage from far-UV
CD spectra of Fas DD WT and Fas DD V254N shows that differences in
Fas DD WT and Fas V254N CD spectra were not due to differences in
Fas DD WT and Fas DD V254N concentrations (Figure S3 of the ). The decrease in the
magnitude of the negative peak at 222 nm and differences in the CD
signal suggest a subtle decrease in α-helical content in the
secondary structure of the Fas DD caused by the V254N mutation.

Far-UV CD spectra of Fas DD WT and Fas DD V254N at 37
°C and
pH 5 (blue for Fas DD WT and red for Fas DD V254N).

Fas DD WT and Fas DD V254N secondary structure
contents were estimated
from their respective far-UV CD spectra using SELCON 3. SELCON 3 estimated Fas DD WT to have 62% α-helical,
0% β-sheet, 14% turn, and 24% random secondary structure content.
SELCON 3 estimated Fas DD V254N to have 51% α-helical, 9% β-sheet,
21% turn, and 28% random secondary structure content. The Fas DD V254N
mutation appears to produce a subtle decrease in α-helical content,
but no significant changes in β-sheet, turn, or random secondary
structure content estimated by SELCON 3 compared to Fas DD WT. The
noticeable difference in the CD signal was not sufficiently significant
to conclude that the Fas DD V254N mutation resulted in a significant
change in the Fas DD secondary structure. The overall secondary structure
of Fas DD V254N was similar to that of Fas DD WT; however, the orientation
of secondary structure elements in the tertiary structure of the Fas
DD could differ for Fas DD V254N compared to that of Fas DD WT, which
could alter CaM–Fas DD interactions.

Conformational and Structural
Changes in the Fas DD Caused by
the Fas DD V254N Mutation from MD Simulations
We investigated
the effect of the Fas DD V254N mutation on CaM–Fas DD binding
from structural and conformational perspectives based on equilibrated
MD simulation trajectories. The rmsds of Fas DD WT and Fas DD V254N
over 80 ns MD simulations (Figure S4 of the ) showed the systems reached equilibration after
40 ns. The last 40 ns MD simulation trajectories were used for the
analyses of the structural and conformational changes of Fas DD WT
and Fas DD V254N. We examined Fas DD secondary structural changes
by analyzing the α-helix formation, evaluated the conformational
stability of the Fas DD via rmsf analyses, and assessed the motion
of the Fas DD with dynamical cross-correlation map analyses.

The structure of the Fas DD is primarily composed of six α-helices, and the CaM binding region is located within
helices α1 and α2 of the Fas DD. To investigate the effect of the V254N mutation on the secondary
structure change of Fas, α-helix formation analysis was performed
and is shown in Figure . The helix percentages
for Fas DD WT and Fas DD V254N were calculated from the overall helicity
divided by the total number of Fas residues. The helix percentage
was 41.3% for Fas DD WT and 40.0% for Fas DD V254N. The overall helicity
of Fas DD WT was very similar to that of Fas DD V254N. The results
were consistent with the observation from CD experiments that the
overall secondary structure of Fas DD V254N is similar to that of
Fas DD WT (Figure ). The rmsf comparison of
Fas DD WT and Fas DD V254N showed that the Fas DD V254N mutation resulted
in the changes in the conformational flexibility of the Fas DD, including
the conformational flexibility changes of the CaM binding site in
the Fas DD (Figure ).

Residues of α-helix
occupancy of Fas DD WT and Fas DD V254N.
The overall percentage helix was calculated from the overall helicity
divided by the total number of Fas residues (black for Fas DD WT and
blue for Fas DD V254N).

Root-mean-square fluctuation comparison of Fas DD WT and Fas DD
V254N (black for Fas DD WT and blue for Fas DD V254N), calculated
from the MD simulation trajectories after equilibration.

Dynamical cross-correlation maps that represent
the degree of correlated
motion between the residues in the protein provided further insight
into the effect of the Fas DD V254N mutation on Fas DD conformational
and structural changes (Figure ). The bottom
left half of Figure  is the cross-correlation
map for Fas DD WT, while the top right half of Figure  is the cross-correlation map for Fas DD V254N. In Figure , the black boxes represent the changed regions
of positive correlation, whereas the red boxes represent the changed
regions of anticorrelation. Figure  shows
that the V254N mutation of the Fas DD resulted in an increased degree
of correlated motion (red color) between residues 227–240 (α1
and N-terminus of α2) and residues 276–316 (α4−α6)
(region I) compared to those of Fas DD WT. The Fas DD V254N mutation
also resulted in an increased degree of anticorrelated motion (blue
color) between residues 227–240 (α1 and N-terminus of
α2) and residues 320–340 (loop after α6) (region
II), between residues 290–316 (α5 and α6) and residues
326–340 (loop after α6) (region III), between residues
256–270 (α3 and loop between α3 and α4) and
residues 290–316 (α6) (region IV), and between residues
256–270 (α3 and loop between α3 and α4) and
residues 220–240 (α1) (region V). In addition, Leu 242,
Val 245, Gly 247, Phe 248, Val 249, Gly 253, and Val 254 of the Fas
DD are seven nonpolar residues in the Fas DD binding region for CaM., The Fas DD V254N mutation changed the correlation motion patterns
of the seven nonpolar residues relative to other residues (shown as
the dotted boxes in Figure ). The Fas DD V254N
mutation increased the degree of correlated motion for these seven
nonpolar residues in the CaM binding region relative to residues 290–316
(α5 and α6) (region VI) and the degree of anticorrelated
motions relative to residues 256–280 (α3 and α4)
(region VII). The degree of correlated motion change of these nonpolar
residues relative to other residues in the Fas DD caused by the V254N
mutation could cause the conformational change in the Fas DD binding
region for CaM and further affect the van der Waals and electrostatic
interactions between CaM and the Fas DD. In summary, the Fas DD V254N
mutation resulted in a changed degree of correlated (red) and anticorrelated
motion (blue) between residues in the Fas DD (boxed regions) and those
in Fas DD WT, which could affect the binding of CaM to Fas DD.

Dynamical cross-correlation
maps for the comparison of the degree
of correlated motion of the residues in Fas DD WT (bottom left) and
Fas DD V254N (top right) (red for correlation between residues and
blue for anticorrelation between residues). The black boxes represent
the changed regions of positive correlation, whereas the red boxex
represent the change regions of anticorrelation.

To investigate the potential effect of the Fas DD V254N mutation
on the van der Waals and electrostatic interactions of the Fas DD
with CaM, we analyzed hydrogen bond formation within the CaM binding
region (Figure S5 of the ), the contact numbers of each residue (Figure S6 of the ), and the electrostatic
potential for the CaM binding region (Figure S7 of the ) for both the Fas DD and
the Fas DD V254N mutant. The Fas DD V254N mutation resulted in changed
hydrogen bond formation within the CaM binding region (Figure S5 of
the ) and the changed
contact numbers of each residue, including the seven nonpolar residues
in the binding site for CaM (Figure S6 of the ). These changes could potentially affect
van der Waals interactions between the Fas DD and CaM. The different
electrostatic potential distribution for the CaM binding region in
the Fas DD was observed between the Fas DD and the Fas DD V254N mutant
(Figure S7 of the ), which could affect the electrostatic interactions between the
Fas DD and CaM.

Finally, the Fas DD V254N mutation did not significantly
affect
the Fas DD secondary structure as observed in CD experiments (Figure ) and α-helix formation analyses (Figure ). The altered conformational flexibility (Figure ), the degree of correlated motion between residues
in the Fas DD (Figure ), hydrogen bond formation
within the CaM binding region (Figure S5 of the ), the contact number of each residue
(Figure S6 of the ), and the electrostatic potential for the CaM binding region (Figure
S7 of the ) caused
by the Fas DD V254N mutation could influence the van der Waals interactions
and electrostatic interactions between CaM and the Fas DD. Therefore,
the Fas DD V254N mutation affected the CaM–Fas DD interactions
and resulted in the decreased affinity of CaM for the Fas DD as observed
in ITC experiments.

Conclusion
In this study, we characterize
the interactions of CaM with Fas
DD WT and Fas DD V254N using ITC, CD, and MD simulations. ITC results
illustrate an endothermic binding characteristic and an entropy-driven
interaction between CaM and the Fas DD or Fas DD V254N. ITC results
showed that the Fas DD V254N mutation resulted in an association constant
(Ka) for CaM–Fas DD binding that
decreased from (1.79 ± 0.20) × 106 to (0.88 ±
0.14) × 106 M–1 and a standard state
Gibbs free energy (ΔG°) for CaM–Fas
DD binding that slightly increased from −8.87 ± 0.07 to
−8.43 ± 0.10 kcal/mol. Both CD experiments and secondary
structural analyses from MD simulations showed no significant secondary
structural changes of the Fas DD by the V254N mutation. The conformational
and dynamical motion analyses, hydrogen bond formation within the
CaM binding region, the contact number of each residue, and the electrostatic
potential for the CaM binding region based on MD simulations demonstrated
the changes caused by the Fas DD V254N mutation. These changes caused
by the Fas DD V254N mutation could affect the van der Waals interactions
and electrostatic interactions between CaM and the Fas DD, thereby
affecting CaM–Fas DD interactions and resulting in the decreased
affinity of CaM for the Fas DD.

The results from the integrated
computational and experimental
studies quantitatively characterized CaM–Fas DD interactions
and provided structural and thermodynamic evidence of the role of
the V254N mutation of the Fas DD in altering CaM–Fas DD interaction.
The results suggested that the biological effect of the Fas DD V254N
mutation could be due to a change in the affinity of CaM for the Fas
DD and the conformational changes in the Fas DD caused by the V254N
mutation. Further, the results could help identify novel strategies
for regulating CaM–Fas DD interactions and the Fas DD conformation
to further modulate Fas-mediated DISC formation and apoptosis.

Supporting Information Available
Structure of Ca2+-bound CaM and structure
of the Fas DD (Figure S1), raw sedimentation
velocity data for 10 μM Fas DD WT (Figure S2), a plot of dynode
voltage from far-UV CD spectra of Fas DD WT and Fas DD V254N (Figure
S3), rmsds for Fas DD WT, Fas DD V254N, and the Fas DD protein core
(residues 225–318) over the 80 ns MD simulations (Figure S4),
a comparison of the number of H-bonds formed between the CaM binding
region in the Fas DD and the other part of the Fas DD (Figure S5),
contact numbers for residues of the Fas DD (Figure S6), and an electrostatic
potential map for the CaM binding site in Fas DD WT and Fas DD V254N
(Figure S7). This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500228h_si_001.pdf

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We acknowledge Dr. Donald Muccio of the Department
of Chemistry
for his assistance during CD experiments and CD data analysis, Dr.
Christie G. Brouillette for her assistance during ITC experiments
and ITC data analyses, and Dr. David Graves of the Department of Chemistry
and Drs. Scott Wilson and David Sweatt of the Department of Neurobiology
for allowing us access to their equipment for experiments. We also
acknowledge the technical assistance received from Mr. Lei Ding, Mrs.
Katherine Hayden, Mr. David McPherson, Dr. Michael Jablonsky, and
Dr. Zhengrong Yang. Access to the Auto-ITC200 was provided by the
Biocalorimetry Lab supported by National Institutes of Health Shared
Instrumentation Grant 1S10RR026478 and the Shared Facility Program
of the UAB Comprehensive Cancer Center (Grant 316851). Finally, we
acknowledge the UAB VP Office for Equity and Diversity and ALSAMP
Bridge to the Doctorate Fellowship Program.

Abbreviations
CaMcalmodulin

Fas DDFas death domain

DISCdeath-inducing signaling
complex

WTwild
type

CDcircular
dichroism spectroscopy

ITCisothermal titration calorimetry

MDmolecular dynamics

V254Nsubstitution of valine 254 with asparagine.

