Disorders
in the regulation
of iron homeostasis constitute an important class of human genetic
diseases. Specifically, patients with the iron overload disorder,
hereditary hemochromatosis (HH), have excess iron that accumulates
in the body that can lead to liver cirrhosis, diabetes, arthritis,
and heart failure. One form, HH type 3,
is caused by mutations in the TfR2 gene., Transferrin receptor 2 (TfR2) is a member of the transferrin receptor-like
family of proteins. It is strongly expressed
in hepatocytes, which are the primary site of iron accumulation in
HH. The precise role of TfR2 in establishing iron homeostasis is not
known, although TfR2 has been postulated to sense the level of iron-loaded
Tf (holo-Tf) in the blood. High levels of holo-Tf induce the transcription
of hepcidin, a hormone secreted by hepatocytes, which limits the uptake
of iron into the body as well as the recycling of iron., Determining the structural features of proteins is essential to
understanding the basis of how they function. As an important aspect
of this structural analysis, the role of glycosylation in the function
of TfR2 was investigated.

Asn-linked glycosylation (N-linked)
is a common modification of
membrane proteins. It occurs cotranslationally with the transfer of
a presynthesized high-mannose oligosaccharide chain from a lipid precursor
to an Asn residue. The canonical motif for N-linked glycosylation
is Asn-X-Ser/Thr and in some cases Asn-X-Cys, where X is any amino
acid except Pro., Addition of oligosaccharide side
chains adds branched and mobile polar domains, generating proteins
of greater complexity. N-Linked oligosaccharides
can serve as a signal for intracellular sorting and cell–cell
interactions, participate in protein folding and trafficking, promote
resistance to proteases, prevent protein aggregation, and/or maintain
protein stability. Thus, removal of the consensus glycosylation sequence
or inhibition of glycosylation often results in misfolding or aggregation. Aggregated proteins either are rapidly degraded
or remain as large complexes that disrupt cell function and decrease
cell viability.

TfR2 is a paralog
of the well-characterized Tf receptor, TfR1.
The ectodomain of TfR2 is 55% identical and 65% similar to the ubiquitous
TfR1. The N-linked oligosaccharides of TfR1 play an essential role
in TfR1 folding and trafficking to the cell surface. Without N-linked
oligosaccharides, TfR1 shows a reduced level of iron-bound transferrin
(holo-Tf) binding and a decreased level of cell surface expression.− Like TfR1, TfR2 is a type II membrane protein with a single-pass
transmembrane domain and a short N-terminal cytoplasmic domain. The
large extracellular region of human TfR2 (hTfR2) has four potential
consensus sequences for N-linked glycosylation. However, neither the
actual glycosylation sites nor the functional consequences of glycosylation
of hTfR2 have been investigated. In this study, we first identified
which glycosylation sites were utilized and then used site-directed
mutagenesis to delete each individually and in combination. We found
that N-linked oligosaccharides are not required for the binding of
holo-Tf to hTfR2 or for the trafficking of hTfR2 to the cell surface,
but they are required for efficient disulfide bond formation and holo-Tf-induced
stabilization of hTfR2.

Experimental Procedures
Construction of Mutant
TfR2 Plasmids
The four predicted
N-linked glycosylation sites of hTfR2 are at Asn 240, 339, 540, and
754. The codons for each Asn (N) were mutated individually or in combination
to Ala (A) (Table ). Site-directed mutagenesis
was performed by using the QuikChange Lightning Kit (Stratagene).
In brief, 100 ng of double-stranded DNA template (pcDNA3-hTFR2 with
a FLAG tag at the N-terminus) was mixed with the primers [forward
and reverse primers, 125 ng each (Table 1 of the )], 10 mM dNTPs, 1× reaction buffer,
and Pfu DNA polymerase. The mixture was amplified by polymerase chain
reaction (PCR). Initially, the reaction mix was incubated at 95 °C
for 30 s. The following cycles were used: denaturation for 30 s at
95 °C, annealing for 1 min at 55 °C, and extension synthesis
at 68 °C for 7 min for 18 cycles. PCR products were digested
with the DpnI enzyme to remove the parental strands. The digested
DNA mixture was transformed into Escherichia coli XL1-blue cells by heat shock at 42 °C. Mutagenesis products
were all verified by DNA sequencing.

Mutants
of hTfR2
 	residues	motifs	mutant name	
single-asparagine mutants	N240	NVT	N240A	
 	N339	NQT	N339A	
 	N540	NHS	N540A	
 	N554	NPS	N554A	
 	N754	NSS	N754A	
triple-asparagine
mutants	N240/339/754	NVT/NQT/NSS	3-Mut	
quadruple-asparagine mutants	N240/339/540/754	NVT/NQT/NHS/NSS	4-Mut	
Cell Culture,
Transfection, and Stable Cell Lines
All
cells were maintained in an incubator at 37 °C and 5% CO2. HEK 293 cells were grown in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s
medium (DMEM, Sigma) with 4.5 g/L glucose, 4 mM l-glutamine,
1 mM sodium pyruvate, and 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Atlanta Biologicals).
HepG2 and Hep3B cells were maintained in Minimum Essential Medium
(MEM, Sigma) with 1× nonessential amino acids (NEAA) and 10%
FBS. Effectene transfection reagent (Qiagen) was used for transient
transfection. Briefly, cells were seeded at 40% confluency in six-well
plates or 100 mm culture dishes. Transfection began 24 h after the
plates had been seeded with 0.4 or 2 μg of plasmid DNA, 3.2
or 16 μL of enhancer, and 10 or 50 μL of Effectene reagent.
Transfection was conducted for 48 h before further analysis. For establishing
stable cell lines, Hep3B cells were transfected on day 1 by using
Fugene HD transfection reagent (Roche), and on day 3, cells were selected
with MEM containing 600 μg/mL G418 (Geneticin). Selected clones
were screened by Western blot analysis with the M2 anti-FLAG antibody.
Postselection cells were maintained in MEM supplemented with 10% FBS,
1× NEAA, and 400 μg/mL G418.

Enzymatic Digestion and
Transferrin Binding Assay
For
deglycosylation, HEK 293 cells were transiently transfected with pcDNA3/hTfR2-FLAG
and harvested 48 h after transfection. Solubilized cell lysates were
used for enzymatic digestions. Five micrograms of lysate was incubated
with PNGase F or Endo Hf (New England Biolabs) according to the manufacturer’s
protocol before Western analysis. The same volume of buffer without
the enzyme was added to the control samples. To examine the binding
of iron-loaded Tf (holo-Tf) to hTfR2, Hep3B cells were transiently
transfected with wild-type or mutant hTfR2. After 24 h, cells were
solubilized in NETT buffer [150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 10 mM Tris, 1%
Triton X-100, and 1× Complete Mini protease inhibitor Mixture
(Roche) (pH 7.4)], and the lysates were cleared by centrifugation
at 10000g for 10 min. Cleared cell lysates were then
incubated with 1 μM NHS-SS-biotin-labeled holo-Tf at 4 °C
for 1 h prior to incubation with NeutrAvidin gel (Sigma) for an additional
hour. Proteins bound to the NeutrAvidin gel were eluted with 50 mM
DTT in water. Eluted fractions together with 10% of the input (lysates)
were analyzed by Western blotting for hTfR2. To compare the binding
affinity, Hep3B/WT hTfR2 or Hep3B/3-Mut hTfR2 stable cells were lysed
in NETT buffer. Cleared cell lysates were then incubated with 10,
30, or 100 nM holo-Tf at 4 °C for 1 h prior to incubation with
M2-FLAG gel (Sigma) for an additional hour. Bound proteins were eluted
under native conditions by using 100 μg/mL 3× FLAG peptide
(Sigma-Aldrich) in TBS.

Western Blot Analysis and Immunoprecipitation
Cells
were washed with cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) twice and lysed
in NETT buffer. Protein concentrations of the cell lysates were measured
by using the RC DC Protein Assay (Bio-Rad). Samples
were mixed with 1× Laemmli buffer and incubated for 30 min at
37 °C. Proteins were separated electrophoretically on an SDS–10%
polyacrylamide gel, transferred to nitrocellulose, and incubated for
1 h in blocking buffer [5% nonfat dry milk in Tris-buffered saline
with Tween 20 (TBST)]. Blots were incubated for 1 h at room temperature
in blocking buffer containing mouse anti-FLAG, M2 (1:10000, Sigma),
mouse anti-TfR2 (9F81C11, 1:5000), or mouse anti-TfR1 (Thermo Scientific,
1:5000). After four washes with TBST, blots were incubated with a
1:5000 goat anti-mouse secondary antibody conjugated to horseradish
peroxidase (HRP, Millipore). To confirm equivalent loading, blots
were stripped for 15 min in Restore PLUS Western Blot Stripping Buffer
(Thermo Scientific), blocked for 1 h in blocking buffer, and reprobed
with mouse anti-actin (Millipore, 1:10000) or rabbit anti-tubulin
(Rockland, 1:5000) followed by HRP-conjugated goat anti-mouse (Millipore)
or donkey anti-rabbit (GE Healthcare) secondary antibody. After two
washes with TBST and TBS, bands were visualized by using enhanced
chemiluminescence (SuperSignal West Pico, Thermo Scientific) and X-ray
film. To immunoprecipitate FLAG-tagged hTfR2s, supernatants from Hep3B/WT
hTfR2 or Hep3B/3-Mut hTfR2 stable cells were incubated for 1 h at
4 °C with M2-FLAG gel. The immunoprecipitated materials were
washed three times with cold NETT buffer and eluted with TBS containing
100 μg/mL 3× FLAG peptide. Eluted fractions together with
20% of the input (lysates) were analyzed by Western blotting for hTfR2s
and Tf with the addition of goat anti-Tf (1:10000) and HRP-conjugated
donkey anti-goat (Millipore) antibodies.

Isolation of Plasma Membrane
Proteins by Cell Surface Biotinylation
Wild-type hTfR2 and
the nonglycosylated mutant (3-Mut) constructs
were expressed in HEK 293 cells by transient transfection as described
above. Twenty-four hours after transfection, the medium was removed,
and the cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS. Plasma membrane
proteins were labeled by using the membrane-impermeant cleavable biotinylation
reagent, NHS-SS-biotin (Thermo Scientific). The culture dishes were
kept on ice, and all solutions were ice-cold. Briefly, each dish of
cells was incubated with 10 mL of the NHS-SS-biotin solution (0.25
mg/mL in PBS) for 30 min while being gently shaken. After biotinylation,
500 μL of quenching solution was added to each dish to block
the unreacted NHS-SS-biotin. Cells were collected and lysed in 500
μL of NETT lysis buffer with 1× protease inhibitors followed
by centrifugation at 10000g for 10 min at 4 °C.
The clarified supernatant was added to a spin column containing prewashed
immobilized NeutrAvidin gel and incubated for 60 min at room temperature.
After four washes, biotinylated samples were incubated with 50 mM
DTT in 1× sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(SDS–PAGE) sample buffer for 60 min at room temperature to
cleave the disulfide bond and release biotinylated proteins. Western
analysis was used to detect cell surface TfR2 and Na+,K+-ATPase with mouse anti-FLAG, M2 antibody and mouse anti-Na+,K+-ATPase antibody (Santa Cruz, 1:2000), followed
by HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies.

Immunofluorescence
Immunofluorescence microscopy was
used to determine if WT hTfR2 and 3-Mut hTfR2 were on the plasma membrane.
The constructs were expressed in HEK 293 cells. Cells seeded on poly-l-lysine (Sigma)-coated coverslips were washed twice with PBS+/+ (PBS with 1 mM MgCl2 and 0.1 mM CaCl2) and fixed with 2% paraformaldehyde for 15 min at room temperature.
After being fixed, cells were washed three times with PBS and blocked
with 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA) for 30 min. For TfR2 labeling,
cells were incubated with mouse anti-TfR2 (9F81C11, 1:500) primary
antibody for 30 min at room temperature. The secondary antibody was
donkey anti-mouse IgG Alexa Fluor-594 (Invitrogen, 1:500). To compare
the response of cells to holo-Tf, Hep3B cells were transiently transfected
with WT or 3-Mut hTfR2 for 24 h, followed by treatment with 10 μM
holo-Tf or PBS for 12 h. Fixed cells were washed three times with
PBS, permeabilized with 0.1% saponin for 10 min, and washed three
times with PBS before being blocked in 1% BSA for 30 min. TfR2 was
detected with mouse anti-FLAG, M2 (Sigma, 1:500) primary antibody
and Alexa Fluor-594-conjugated donkey anti-mouse IgG secondary antibody.
Lysosomes were visualized with rabbit polyclonal anti-lysosome-associated
membrane protein 1 (LAMP1, 1:500, Santa Cruz), followed by goat anti-rabbit
IgG Alexa Fluor-488 secondary antibody (Invitrogen, 1:500). To stain
the nuclei, cells were washed three times with PBS and incubated for
5 min with 10 μg/mL 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI).
After three washes with PBS, coverslips were mounted on microscope
slides with mounting medium (Invitrogen) and sealed with nail polish.
Images were captured with a Zeiss LSM 710 confocal microscope with
a 63× oil objective (Oregon Health &amp; Science University core
facility).

Statistical Analysis
Data were analyzed
by an unpaired
Student’s t test with GraphPad Prism, version
5. P values of &lt;0.05 were considered to be statistically
significant.

Results
Analysis of the Glycosylation
Pattern of hTfR2 by Deglycosylation
Enzymes
We initially wanted to determine the extent of high-mannose
and complex oligosaccharides on TfR2 by digesting TfR2 with either
of the endoglycosidases, endoglycosidase H (Endo Hf), which cleaves
high-mannose and hybrid oligosaccharides, or peptide N-glycosidase
F (PNGase F), which cleaves all forms of N-linked oligosaccharides.
To accomplish this, a FLAG epitope was inserted at the N-terminus
of TfR2, because we were not sure whether our monoclonal antibody
to TfR2 would recognize deglycosylated TfR2 and for ease of isolation
using anti-FLAG-coupled agarose. Previous studies demonstrated that
the FLAG epitope does not interfere with proper functions of TfR2
in terms of Tf binding and iron delivery., To analyze the glycosylation status and to determine the extent
of high-mannose and complex N-linked oligosaccharides in hTfR2, HEK
293 cells were transiently transfected with N-terminally FLAG-tagged
hTfR2 for 24 h. Cell lysates were incubated with Endo Hf or PNGase
F. Cell lysates from both HEK 293 cells transiently expressing hTfR2
(Figure A) and HepG2 cells that endogenously
express hTfR2 were analyzed (Figure B). The
upper hTfR2 band was completely shifted to a nonglycosylated form
after treatment with PNGase F, indicating that the mature form of
hTfR2 contains N-linked oligosaccharides as previously shown in SK-Hep1
cells. Only a small amount of hTfR2 is
sensitive to Endo Hf digestion, suggesting that majority of TfR2 is
composed of complex oligosaccharides in both cell types. Unlike that
of TfR1, which contains two complex oligosaccharides and one high-mannose
oligosaccharide, digestion of hTfR2 with
Endo Hf showed no intermediate migrating bands, indicating that the
majority of TfR2 contains all complex oligosaccharides with a small
amount of TfR2 that has only high-mannose oligosaccharides.

Enzymatic deglycosylation of hTfR2. (A) HEK 293 cells
were transiently
transfected with pcDNA3/hTfR2-FLAG. Cells were harvested 48 h after
transfection. (B) HepG2 cells were harvested, and lysates were used
for enzymatic digestion. Five micrograms of protein was incubated
with or without PNGase F or Endo Hf before Western analysis. Overexpression
of hTfR2 in HEK 293 cells results in two bands by Western blotting.
The upper band shifts down with both PNGase F and Endo Hf treatments.
Endogenous TfR2 in HepG2 cells is also glycosylated as the TfR2 band
shifted down with deglycosylation enzyme treatments.

Identification of the Utilized N-Linked Glycosylation
Sites
in hTfR2
We employed both bioinformatic prediction and experimental
validation approaches to examine the glycosylation sites on hTfR2.
NetNGlyc 1.0 and NetOGlyc 3.1 were initially used to predict the existence
of N-linked and O-linked glycosylation sites. Human TfR2 is predicted to be glycosylated at four potential Asn
sites at amino acids 240, 339, 540, and 754. It has no predicted O-linked
glycosylation sites. Asn 554 served as a negative control; as part
of a NPS motif, it is predicted not to be utilized for glycosylation
(Figure A). To identify which predicted Asn
is indeed glycosylated, the four potential Asn (N) residues as well
as Asn 554 were replaced with Ala (A) individually. The effect of
these mutations on the electrophoretic mobility of hTfR2 was examined
by transiently expressing the wild type (WT) or mutants in HEK 293
cells, followed by Western analysis of the collected cell lysates.
We observed that single replacements of Asn with Ala at positions
240, 339, and 754 all led to decreases in the molecular mass of the
hTfR2 band, suggesting that each site is glycosylated, whereas mutation
of Asn540 did not affect the migration of TfR2 N540A via SDS–PAGE
compared with the WT or TfR2 N554A (Figure B). With deletion of all four N-linked glycosylation sites (240,
339, 540, and 754) or three N-linked glycosylation sites (240, 339,
and 754), migration of the triple and quadruple TfR2 mutations on
SDS–PAGE gels was the same, indicating that Asn 240, Asn 339,
and Asn 754 are glycosylated whereas Asn 540 is not (Figure C). We further confirmed that Asn 540 is not utilized
for glycosylation by digesting the WT and 3-Mut (with Asn 240, Asn
339, and Asn 754 mutated to Ala) with PNGase F. The results indicate
that there is no additional molecular mass shift of 3-Mut after PNGase
F treatment and that 3-Mut migrates like WT hTfR2 digested with PNGase
F on SDS–PAGE gels (Figure D).

Identification
of N-linked glycosylation sites in hTfR2. (A) Schematic
representation of the N-linked glycosylation sites on hTfR2 protein
sequence. Asn 240, 339, 540, and 754 are predicted to be glycosylated
(underlined). Asn 554 (bold) has an NPS/T motif and was used as a
negative control because this Asn could not be glycosylated. (B) Western
blot analysis of cell lysates from HEK 293 cells transiently transfected
with empty vector (pcDNA3, Con) or hTfR2-FLAG expression vectors encoding
either the wild type (WT) or N-glycosylation site mutants (N240A,
N339A, N540A, and N754A). Positions 240, 339, and 754 are identified
as being glycosylated, but position 540 is not. N554A was used as
a negative control. (C) Western blot analysis of cell lysates from
HEK 293 cells transiently transfected with empty vector (pcDNA3, Con),
WT hTfR2 (WT), the hTfR2 nonglycosylated triple mutant (N240/339/754A,
3-Mut), or the quadruple mutant (N240/339/540/754A, 4-Mut). (D) HEK
293 cells transfected with empty vector (pcDNA3, Con), WT hTfR2 (WT),
or the hTfR2 nonglycosylated mutant (N240/339/754A, 3-Mut) were harvested,
and cell lysates were incubated with or without PNGase F before Western
blotting. The samples were electrophoresed on a 12 cm 10% polyacrylamide
gel for 24 h to ensure greater separation, transferred to nitrocellulose,
and probed with anti-Flag antibody for TfR2. The data represent three
independent experiments.

N-Linked Glycosylation Does Not Affect Plasma Membrane Localization
of hTfR2
The ability of the glycosylation mutant TfR2 to
fold correctly and move to the plasma membrane was detected by cell
surface biotinylation and by fluorescence microscopy. Previous studies
indicated that WT TfR2 is both present on the plasma membrane and
in endosomal compartments., To determine the role
of N-linked glycosylation on the localization of hTfR2, HEK 293 cells
were transiently transfected with wild-type hTfR2 (WT) or the triple
mutant (3-Mut, which has all three glycosylated Asn residues mutated
to Ala). Total cell lysates and cell surface proteins biotinylated
with a membrane-impermeable reagent, NHS-SS-biotin, were analyzed
on Western blots. Similar to WT hTfR2, a strong signal for the nonglycosylated
mutant could be detected on the cell surface (Figure A). The cell surface localization of WT hTfR2 and 3-Mut hTfR2
was also examined by confocal microscopy using the antibody against
the ectodomain of TfR2 under nonpermeabilized conditions. Both WT
and 3-Mut hTfR2 could be detected on the plasma membrane (Figure B). These results indicate that N-linked glycosylation
of hTfR2 is not required for the efficient movement of the protein
to the cell surface.

N-Linked glycosylation does not affect plasma membrane
localization
of hTfR2. (A) HEK 293 cells were transiently transfected with empty
pcDNA3 vector (Con), wild-type hTfR2-FLAG (WT), or its mutant with
all three glycosylated Asn residues replaced with alanines (3-Mut).
After 24 h, total cell lysates were harvested by using NETT cell lysis
buffer, while cell surface proteins were labeled with cell membrane-impermeable
NHS-SS-biotin. Samples were analyzed by Western blotting for TfR2.
After being stripped, blots were reprobed for Na+,K+-ATPase as a marker for plasma membrane proteins. (B) For
immunofluorescence, HEK 293 cells were transiently transfected with
WT or 3-Mut hTfR2-FLAG. Twenty-four hours after transfection, WT or
3-Mut TfR2 was detected by using mouse anti-TfR2 antibody followed
by Alexa Fluor-594-conjugated secondary antibody. Images show that
both WT hTfR2 and the nonglycosylated form of hTfR2 (3-Mut) were detected
at the plasma membrane. DAPI was used to stain nuclei. Data are representative
of one of three independent experiments.

N-Linked Glycosylation Is Required for Holo-Tf-Induced Stabilization
of hTfR2
In the presence of an elevated level of holo-Tf,
TfR2 becomes more stable., Presumably, this stabilization
increases the level of signaling by TfR2. However, the binding of
holo-Tf to TfR2 is not adequate for TfR2 to be stabilized, as supported
by observations that only hepatoma or primary hepatic cells respond
to the Tf stimulus.,,− To test whether the N-linked glycosylation is required,
Hep3B cells, a hepatoma cell line, were transiently transfected with
WT or 3-Mut hTfR2. Hep3B cells do not express detectable TfR2. Cells
were then treated with PBS (Con) or 30 μM holo-Tf (+Tf) for
12 h before Western blotting analysis. The level of WT hTfR2 approximately
doubled after holo-Tf treatment, whereas the level of nonglycosylated
hTfR2 did not change (Figure A–D).
Thus, N-linked glycosylation is required for holo-Tf-induced stabilization
of hTfR2. To determine the role of each glycosylation site in holo-Tf-induced
stabilization, Hep3B cells were first transfected with single-Asn
hTfR2 mutants (N240A, N339A, and N754A) and then treated with holo-Tf.
Western analysis indicated that TfR2 expressing a single mutation
in N-linked glycosylation could be stabilized by holo-Tf, showing
that the ablation of a single glycosylation site does not affect the
holo-Tf-induced stabilization of hTfR2 (Figure E). The observed effect was not due to differences in transient transfection
efficiency. Hep3B cells stably transfected with WT or 3-Mut hTfR2
(Figure F,G) showed similar results. These
findings indicate that N-linked oligosaccharides are required for
holo-Tf-induced stabilization of hTfR2 and that no single N-linked
site is responsible for the loss of responsiveness to Tf. Only removal
of multiple glycosylation sites has functional consequences.

N-Linked glycosylation
is required for holo-Tf-induced stabilization
of hTfR2. Hep3B cells were transiently transfected with WT or 3-Mut
hTfR2 in 100 mm dishes. Twenty-four hours later, cells from each transfection
were split into a six-well plate and cultured for an additional 1
day. Then cells were treated with PBS (Con) or 10 μM holo-Tf
(+Tf) for 12 h before being harvested and analyzed by Western blotting.
(A and C) Western blotting results indicate that WT hTfR2 could be
stabilized by holo-Tf, while 3-Mut hTfR2, which lacks N-linked glycosylation,
could not be stabilized by holo-Tf. (B and D) Quantification of band
densities (***, p &lt; 0.0001; ns, not statistically
significant). (E) Hep3B cells were transiently transfected with single-Asn
mutants (N240A, N339A, N540A, and N754A) in 60 mm dishes. Twenty-four
hours later, cells from each transfection were split into a six-well
plate and cultured for an additional 1 day. Cells were then treated
with PBS or 10 μM holo-Tf (+Tf) for 12 h before being harvested
and analyzed by Western blotting. (F and G) Hep3B/WT hTfR2 or Hep3B/3-Mut
hTfR2 stable cells were cultured for 24 h, and then cells were treated
with PBS (Con) or 10 μM holo-Tf (+Tf) for 12 h before Western
analysis. The data represent three independent experiments.

N-Linked Glycosylation
Does Not Affect the Binding of Holo-Tf
to hTfR2
N-Linked glycosylation affects the ligand affinity
of some receptors.− To examine whether glycosylation of hTfR2 is required
for its binding to holo-Tf, Hep3B cells were transiently transfected
with empty pcDNA3 vector (Con), WT hTfR2 (WT), or the nonglycosylated
triple mutant (3-Mut). Biotin-labeled holo-Tf was capable of pulling
down both WT and nonglycosylated forms of hTfR2, indicating that hTfR2
does not need N-linked oligosaccharides for holo-Tf binding (Figure A,B). The lack of biotinylated actin indicates that
the cells remained intact during the labeling. To compare the relative
binding affinities of holo-Tf for hTfR2, cell lysates from Hep3B cells
that stably express WT or 3-Mut hTfR2 were used. Incubation of cell
lysates with 10–100 nM holo-Tf, followed by isolation of hTfR2s
with FLAG resin, demonstrated that the affinity of nonglycosylated
hTfR2 for holo-Tf was not lower than that of WT hTfR2 (Figure C). In fact, we observed a slightly higher binding
affinity of the unglycosylated TfR2 for holo-Tf. This may be due to
steric hindrance induced by glycosylation, because other studies have
also observed that glycosylation can decrease the affinity of the
receptor for its ligand., Therefore, the loss
of holo-Tf sensitivity associated with nonglycosylated hTfR2 is not
due to defects in ligand binding.

N-Linked glycosylation is not required
for Tf binding of hTfR2.
(A and B) Hep3B cells were transiently transfected with WT or 3-Mut
hTfR2. After 24 h, total cell lysates were harvested by using NETT
cell lysis buffer, and then cell lysates were incubated with 1 μM
biotin-labeled holo-Tf at 4 °C for 1 h. The lysates were incubated
with NeutrAvidin gel for an additional 1 h and eluted with 50 mM DTT
in water. WT or 3-mut hTfR2-transfected cell lysates without giving
biotin-labeled holo-Tf were used as a control to eliminate the possibility
that TfR2 itself binds to the NeutrAvidin gel. Bound fractions together
with 10% of the input (lysates) were analyzed by Western blotting
for TfR2. After being stripped, blots were reprobed for actin to demonstrate
the absence of proteins that could bind nonspecifically to the NeutrAvidin
gel. (C) Hep3B/WT hTfR2 or Hep3B/3-Mut hTfR2 stable cells were lysed
in NETT buffer. Equal amounts of lysates were incubated with 10, 30,
or 100 nM holo-Tf for 1 h and then incubated with FLAG gel for an
additional 1 h. Bound proteins were eluted from the gel by incubation
with 100 μg/mL 3× FLAG peptide in TBS. Eluted fractions
together with 20% of the input (lysates) were analyzed by Western
blotting for hTfR2. After being stripped, blots were reprobed for
Tf and tubulin. Data are representative of one of three independent
experiments.

N-Linked Glycosylation
Affects Dimerization of hTfR2
Many transmembrane receptors
function as dimers., Dimerization of TfR2 was described
more than 10 years ago by the
ability of TfR2 to form intersubunit disulfide bonds. However, the possibility that N-glycosylation might regulate
receptor dimerization has not yet been explored for hTfR2. Cell lysates
from the cells stably transfected with the FLAG-tagged WT and 3-Mut
hTfR2 were subjected to nonreducing SDS gel electrophoresis to detect
intersubunit disulfide bonds. An ∼200 kDa protein was detected
for both WT and 3-Mut hTfR2, indicating the formation of intersubunit
disulfide bonds. In 3-Mut hTfR2-transfected cells, a band with a similar
intensity around 97 kDa was seen under nonreducing conditions, indicating
that 3-Mut hTfR2 was inefficient in forming intersubunit disulfide
bonds (Figure A,B). To test whether Tf stabilized
the fraction of unglycosylated hTfR2 that formed intersubunit disulfide
bonds, cells were incubated with holo-Tf before being subjected to
solubilization and nonreducing SDS–PAGE. Without N-linked glycosylation,
neither the hTfR2 dimer nor the monomer could be stabilized by holo-Tf
(Figure C), even though both WT and 3-Mut
hTfR2 dimer forms were present at the cell surface (Figure D). The lack of intersubunit disulfide bond formation
of the unglycosylated hTfR2 therefore does not account for its lack
of holo-Tf sensitivity.

N-Linked glycosylation affects dimerization
of hTfR2. (A) Hep3B/WT
hTfR2 or Hep3B/3-Mut hTfR2 stable cells were harvested and solubilized
with NETT lysis buffer, and protein concentrations were measured before
Western analysis. (B) Band intensities were expressed as percentages
of total levels (D, dimer; M, monomer). (C) Hep3B/3-Mut hTfR2 stable
cells were treated with PBS or 10 μM holo-Tf (+Tf) for 12 h
before being harvested. Equal amounts of proteins were incubated with
sample loading buffer, which does not contain dithiothreitol (DTT),
before being analyzed by Western blotting. (D) Cell surface proteins
from Hep3B/WT hTfR2 or Hep3B/3-Mut hTfR2 stable cells were labeled
with cell membrane-impermeable NHS-SS-biotin at 4 °C for 1 h,
and then cell lysates were incubated with FLAG beads for an additional
1 h. Bound proteins were eluted with 100 μg/mL 3× FLAG
peptide in TBS. Half of the eluted fraction together with 10% of the
input (lysates) was analyzed by Western blotting for hTfR2s, and the
other half was probed with Avidin-HRP to detect cell surface hTfR2s
under nonreducing conditions. The data represent three independent
experiments.

N-Linked Glycosylation
Affects Tf-Induced Redirection of hTfR2
Subcellular Localization
To gain further mechanistic insight,
we performed immunofluorescence experiments. Holo-Tf delivered through
TfR2 was initially observed at the plasma membrane and in early endosomes,
and then at a later stage in multivesicular bodies (MVB), suggesting that, unlike TfR1, which recycles
back to the plasma membrane after internalization, TfR2 could be targeted
to lysosomes for degradation. This hypothesis is supported by the
observation that TfR2 moves through endocytic, recycling, and degradative
pathways, as TfR2 partially colocalized with early, recycling, and
late endosomal markers. Indeed, other studies show that holo-Tf stabilizes
TfR2 by redirecting it from a degradative pathway to a recycling pathway,
because when treated with holo-Tf, less TfR2 colocalizes with a lysosomal
marker, LAMP1., Consistent with previous results,
immunofluorescence data from the study show less colocalization of
WT hTfR2 with LAMP1 after holo-Tf incubation, indicating that less
WT hTfR2 exploits the degradation pathway with holo-Tf stimulation
(Figure A). In contrast, incubation of Tf
with the 3-Mut hTfR2-transfected cells does not affect the colocalization
of this nonglycosylated hTfR2 with LAMP1, suggesting that the unglycosylated
hTfR2 is still targeted to lysosomes for degradation upon holo-Tf
treatment (Figure B).

Subcellular distribution
of hTfR2 and 3-Mut hTfR2 in the presence
and absence of Tf. (A and B) Hep3B cells were transiently transfected
with WT or 3-Mut hTfR2 in 100 mm dishes. After 24 h, each set of transfected
cells was split into a six-well plate containing poly-l-lysine-coated
coverslips and cultured for 1 day. Cells were then treated with PBS
(Con) or 10 μM holo-Tf (+Tf) for 12 h before being fixed. Fixed
and permeabilized cells were analyzed for TfR2 by using the mouse
anti-FLAG antibody followed by the Alexa Fluor-594-conjugated secondary
antibody (red). Colocalization of WT or 3-Mut hTfR2 with LAMP1 was
assessed by using rabbit anti-LAMP1 primary antibodies followed by
the Alexa Fluor-488-labeled secondary antibody (green). Merged images
show the colocalization (yellow) of either WT or hTfR2 with LAMP1.
The lower image in each row shows an enlarged detail of the white
boxed area of each merged picture. All images were obtained by using
a Zeiss laser scanning LSM 710 confocal microscope. Colocalization
(designated by white) was determined by using the colocalization tool
provided with the Zeiss software.

Discussion
TfR2 is strongly expressed in hepatocytes,
the primary site of
iron accumulation in hemochromatosis. A variety of mutations in the TfR2 gene result in type 3 HH, which is a genetic iron overload
disease. The function of TfR2 in iron metabolism is not clear. The
majority of hepatic Tf-mediated iron uptake under normal conditions
occurs through TfR1. TfR1 expression
is downregulated with increased cellular iron levels. As a result, TfR1 expression in the liver is not detectable
in HH patients. In contrast, TfR2 is
stabilized by holo-Tf, and its level of expression increases in the
liver of hemojuvelin knockout mice, a mouse model of juvenile hemochromatosis
(unpublished data). In addition, TfR2 is capable of binding and internalizing
holo-Tf in vitro., However, cellular iron uptake
may not be the major function of TfR2, because both human and mouse
mutations in TfR2 as well as the mouse knockout lead to increased
rather than decreased levels of liver iron deposition., Moreover, in mice lacking functional TfR2, the rate of Tf-mediated
iron uptake by hepatocytes was only slightly decreased compared to
that of wild-type mice with a similar amount of iron loading.

TfR2 is more likely to be a modulator
of hepcidin expression rather
than playing a role in cellular iron uptake. The iron regulatory hormone, hepcidin, is synthesized mainly by
hepatocytes. Hepcidin levels in mice lacking functional Tfr2 remain
lower than those of wild-type mice with comparable iron loads, resulting
in constantly increased levels of absorption of iron from the intestine
and elevated levels of release of iron from macrophages., How TfR2 senses iron levels and regulates hepcidin expression remains
elusive. In contrast to TfR1, TfR2 does not vary in response to changes
in intracellular iron levels. TfR2 levels rise in response to an increased
level of Tf saturation, which is usually a consequence of an increased
level of iron in the body. This response is proposed to increase the
rate of hepcidin synthesis, which in turn decreases further the rate
of iron uptake.

Since the discovery of TfR2 in 1999, much effort
has been focused
on examining the proteins that interact with it. Few studies have
investigated the structural features of TfR2 involved in establishing
its proper function. Co- and post-translational modifications are
often essential for protein function. These modifications regulate
the trafficking of proteins within the cell, interaction with other
cellular molecules such as proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids, and
protein stability. Glycosylation of membrane proteins is by far the
most abundant modification. More than half of the proteins in humans
possess oligosaccharides., Glycoproteins are components
of extracellular matrices and cellular surfaces where the carbohydrate
side chains are implicated in cell–cell and cell–matrix
recognition events. N-Linked oligosaccharides
can affect protein trafficking and/or proper function., For example, the lutropin receptor and the norepinephrine transporter
require N-linked oligosaccharides for cell surface localization, but
not for the high-affinity ligand binding or substrate transport activity., In some cases, N-linked oligosaccharides appear to be dispensable
for proper cell surface localization. The organic solute transporter
subunit α and the breast cancer resistance protein can still
travel to the plasma membrane and be fully functional in the absence
of N-linked oligosaccharides.,

Potential N-linked
glycosylation sites can be identified by the
presence of the Asn-X-Ser/Thr consensus sequence; however, not all
such motifs are glycosylated, and the glycosylated sites for some
proteins vary by tissue. In the study
presented here, the gel electrophoresis data in combination with PNGase
F treatment indicate that only three of the four potential N-linked
glycosylation sites in the ectodomain of hTfR2 are glycosylated. We
further showed that mutation of all three glycosylation sites does
not block the plasma membrane trafficking or the binding of holo-Tf
to hTfR2 in contrast to TfR1 where elimination of the N-linked glycosylation
sites prevented the movement of TfR1 to the cell surface or secretion
of a truncated version of TfR1., However, removing all
of the N-linked oligosaccharides from hTfR2 has functional consequences.
Without N-linked glycosylation, TfR2 is no longer sensitive to holo-Tf-induced
stabilization and has a decreased level of intersubunit disulfide
bond formation. The latter could indicate a weaker interaction along
the TfR2 dimer interface.

Holo-Tf binds to TfR2, but binding
alone is not sufficient to stabilize
TfR2. TfR2 is stabilized by holo-Tf in a tissue- and cell-type-specific
manner. In hepatic cell lines (HepG2, Huh7, and Hep3B cells transfected
with TfR2), holo-Tf does stabilize TfR2.,, Consistent with the in vitro results,
mice with higher levels of Tf saturation also have increased hepatic
TfR2 levels. However, in K562 cells, an
erythroleukemia cell line, which endogenously expresses TfR2 or non-hepatic
cell lines transfected with TfR2, TfR2 cannot be stabilized by holo-Tf. These results suggest that the stabilization
of TfR2 by Tf is hepatocyte-specific and may involve hepatocyte-specific
protein interactions. The mechanism by which an elevated level of
holo-Tf stabilizes TfR2 is not well understood except that the cytoplasmic
domain of TfR2 is responsible for its stabilization by holo-Tf. In the study presented here, our data indicate
that N-linked oligosaccharides are essential for the stabilization
of hTfR2 by holo-Tf. We found that mutation of individual glycosylation
sites at N240, N339, or N754 does not affect holo-Tf sensitivity.
However, the steady state levels of cells expressing 3-Mut hTfR2,
which lacks N-linked glycosylation, do not increase with holo-Tf treatment.
A change in the subcellular localization of proteins usually involves
alterations in protein–protein, protein–lipid, or protein–carbohydrate
interactions. The removal of N-linked
oligosaccharides could disturb the interaction between hTfR2 and a
carbohydrate binding protein, which is required for conveying hTfR2
from a degradative to a recycling pathway after holo-Tf treatment.
Further research is needed to test this hypothesis.

TfR2 is
proposed to be an iron sensor, and the response of TfR2
to holo-Tf could play a role in signaling to increase the level of
transcription of hepcidin.,, Loss of functional TfR2 leads to a decreased level of hepcidin and
iron overload in the body.,, A TfR2 lacking N-linked glycosylation may fail to sense increased
holo-Tf levels, providing a possible explanation for iron overload
seen in patients with genetic disorders of glycosylation. Congenital
disorders of glycosylation are rare, but the biological processes
involved are widespread. Defects could involve the activation, appearance,
and transport of carbohydrate precursors, the glycosidases and glycosyltransferases
for synthesizing glycans, the proteins that control the glycosylation
machinery. Hovinga et al. reported two
cases of severe hepatic iron overload in patients with congenital
dyserythropoietic anemia (CDA) (a disease with N-linked glycosylation
synthesis defects). In fact, hepatic
iron overload is a frequent complication in CDA patients. Abnormal glycosylation of proteins involved
in iron homeostasis is likely to be a contributing factor for the
excess iron loading in the liver.

Our results highlight the
importance of N-linked oligosaccharides
in the function of hTfR2 protein. Studies have shown that N-linked
glycosylation can generate various tissue-specific glycoforms, contributing
to the structural or functional diversity of certain proteins., Whether different tissues generate different glycoforms of TfR2
is unknown. In different tissues, whether varied numbers of N-glycosylation
sites are used or N-linked oligosaccharides are processed differently
for TfR2 remains to be investigated.

Supporting Information Available
Table S1. This material is
available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi4000063_si_001.pdf

This work was
supported by National Institutes of Health Grants DK072166 and DK054488
(C.A.E.), an Oregon Health &amp; Science University Tartar Trust Award
(N.Z.), and a Collins Medical Trust Award (N.Z.).

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. An-Sheng Zhang and Dr. Anne B. Mason for critical
reading of the manuscript and helpful comments.

