Enzyme regulation
is not only
about facilitating target reactions but also about preventing those
that are undesired. The idea that enzymes lower the activation energy
of a chemical transformation is central to the understanding of how
enzymes catalyze reactions at astounding rates, relative to the uncatalyzed
process in solution. However, reactions that involve highly reactive
and unstable intermediates, such as a radical species, present an
entirely new set of catalytic challenges. Under these circumstances,
the challenge of attaining reaction selectivity requires stabilizing
and prolonging the lifetime of the reactive intermediates to ensure
proper product formation. For this task, it has been suggested that
certain enzymes resort to using a tactic that prevents reactive intermediates
from undergoing spontaneous and erroneous side reactions in an effort
to stabilize themselves. Potentially threatening
side reactions can encumber specificity by competing with the native
radical transfer mechanism by having lower kinetic barriers and forming
products that are more stable.

Naturally, the long list of complications
that could potentially
annihilate radical chemistry raises the question: what is the payoff
in dealing with such highly reactive species? In the case of vitamin
B12, nature has found an elegant way to employ a radical
species with exceptional prowess in order to catalyze some of the
most chemically challenging, thermodynamically unfavorable reactions.
For 5′-deoxyadenosyl-cobalamin (AdoCbl) dependent isomerases,
homolysis of the carbon–cobalt bond (Co–C), the so-called
“radical reservoir”, generates
a highly reactive, primary carbon radical species (designated Ado·
in Figure a), which has the capability of
abstracting a primary hydrogen atom from an unactivated carbon atom
of the substrate. Thus, accomplishing the feat of Co–C bond
homolysis provides a very useful tool for enzymes to meet the demands
of particularly challenging chemical tasks, such as, in the case of
methyl malonyl-CoA mutase (MCM) and glutamate mutase (GM), carbon
skeleton rearrangements.

Adenosylcobalamin cofactor. In (a), the B12 cofactor,
doubly coordinated with a histidine residue (DMB-off conformation)
and the 5′-deoxyadenosyl moiety (Ado). In (b) and (c), the
crystal structures of bound (pdb entry 3REQ) and unbound Ado (pdb entry 4REQ), respectively,
demonstrate the change in conformation of the adenine base relative
to the B12 corrinoid ring.

However, enzymes pay a high price to make use of the potency
of
such a radical reservoir. The cost of using this tool is manifested
in two ways: (i) the energy required to form the radical intermediate
and (ii) the energy required to control it. For the first point, breaking
the Co–C bond requires overcoming an energetic barrier of 31.0
± 1.5 kcal mol–1 in solution or 15–17 kcal mol–1 in an enzyme
environment. It has been suggested that
AdoCbl bond labilization may, in part, be achieved by steric crowding,
through local interactions with the 5′-deoxyadenosyl radical
moiety, angular distortions in the corrinoid ring, or encumbrance
by an active site residue. Additionally,
substrate-induced, large-scale domain motions appear to be coupled
to the activation of the AdoCbl bond in certain AdoCbl-dependent enzymes. However, once homolysis has been accomplished,
the enzyme’s work is not yet finished; the radical site must
be transferred to the substrate to initiate the rearrangement reaction.
To this end, migration of Ado· takes place over several angstroms,, in certain cases as far as 10 Å from its original position, proximal to co(II)balamin. This leads to the
second point: stabilizing Ado· during this translocation is of
the utmost importance to ensure that the radical reacts with the proper
atom on the substrate for the desired transformation.

To avoid
factors that jeopardize selectivity, a radical intermediate
must be protected predominantly from potential threats of the solvent,
the protein environment, and itself. Protection from these agents
may take place in the form of sequestration from groups that might
react with it and/or steric tuning to avoid conformations from which
undesired reactions are likely to occur. It has been suggested that
protection of the radical species from solvent is achieved through
a common architecture, found in numerous AdoCbl-dependent enzymes,
that is, the (β/α)8-TIM-barrel structural motif.
This fold is typically characterized by a central barrel formed by
parallel beta-strands surrounded by seven or eight alpha helices,
which isolates the highly reactive radical species in a deep hydrophobic
cleft at the center of the protein, reducing the occurrence of unwanted
side reactions with solvent. However, an equally important task requires
the enzyme to assume strict control over the radical intermediates themselves, to suppress side reactions and protect the interior
of the protein from damage.

Understanding how AdoCbl-dependent
enzymes control and manipulate
transient radical species with high fidelity is a subject that has
received less attention when compared to other aspects of the catalytic
reaction, such as the origin of the &gt;1010-fold rate
enhancement
of Co–C bond homolysis or the extent to which homolysis is
coupled to hydrogen abstraction. Nevertheless, various contributions
from both experiment,− and computation−, have provided valuable insights
that help to better understand the elusive nature of the 5′-deoxyadenosyl
radical moiety (for a review, see ref ()) and its journey to the substrate. Of relevance
to these issues are studies that describe various conformations of
Ado· that may be important to catalysis as well as the roles
of nearby amino acids with which it may interact. For example, potentially
important conformational changes include a pseudorotation of the glycosyl
moiety, reported in diol dehydratase, a
puckering of the ribose moiety, seen in GM, and an adenine-ribose rotation about the glycosidic bond in MCM., Previous theoretical studies on certain conformational changes in
the adenosyl moiety, such as ribose puckering, attribute the changes
in geometry to strain induced from the bound configuration. Other findings from the crystallographic structure of MCM suggest that Ado· adopts the syn conformation (in the Pullman notation), when bound to cobalamin and the anti conformation, when the AdoCbl bond has ruptured. Consistent with this finding is the 8,5′-cyclic
structure, formed via the intramolecular
interactions of the C5′ atom with position 8 of adenine. This
conformation was inferred from previous experiments of tritium labeled
H2O which exchanges with the H8 atom of adenosine (see Figure a), whereas
stabilizing intermolecular interactions may involve co(II)balamin, acting as the “conductor” to lower
the transition-state energy barrier for radical formation and rearrangement,
B12:C19–H, interacting with the O3′ of the ribose moiety of Ado·,, or a conserved
glutamate residue (E370 in MCM, E330
in GM, and E338 in ornithine 4,5-aminomutase
(OAM)).

However, despite the many
valuable contributions, piecing the various
findings together to formulate a clear picture that establishes the
key factors responsible for reaction selectivity of the radical intermediates
has not been possible. Ultimately, utilizing the AdoCbl cofactor requires
finding a delicate balance between stabilizing Ado· while still
preserving its reactive nature. Missing from the current understanding
are the inner workings of the enzymatic reaction mechanism that achieve
such a balance, and, in particular the role the enzyme environment
plays in asserting strict control over Ado· during catalysis.
In particular, understanding how and why the enzyme manipulates conformations
of Ado· during the catalytic cycle as a possible mechanism to
ensure selectivity deserves further attention. This contribution addresses
not only the initial generation of the radical species but especially
the further fate of the 5′-deoxyadenosyl radical moiety throughout
its journey prior to hydrogen abstraction from the substrate. Studying
the catalytic mechanism of MCM, we find that the enzyme acts as a
mechanochemical switch to manage conformational changes in Ado·
by imposing or releasing strain at distinct stages of the catalytic
cycle to effectively channel the reaction in a desired direction.
Interestingly, this switch can either be deactivated through homolysis
or activated through intermolecular interactions between the 5′-deoxyadenosyl
radical moiety and the protein. Using key conformational changes of
Ado· as a transformational trigger suggests that such a mechanism
may be inherent in other AdoCbl-dependent enzymes.

Computational
Methods
All classical molecular dynamics (MD) simulations
were carried
out using the AMBER suite of programs. Starting from a model made from two crystal structures of MCM (pdb
entries 1E1C and 3REQ),
modifications, such as the mutation A244H, were made to recover the
wild-type sequence of MCM. Nonstandard residues (B12, Ado,
His610 and the substrate, methyl malonyl-CoA and lactoyl-CoA) were
parametrized using the AMBER 99sb force field by following the modeling of cobalt corrinoids from previous studies. The particle mesh Ewald (PME) method, with a
nonbonded cutoff of 12 Å, was used with periodic boundary conditions
and the Langevin piston Nosé–Hoover method, to ensure constant pressure and temperature conditions. Classical
MD trajectories were performed for 100 ns before the structures were
used to initialize the QM/MM simulations. For the QM/MM simulations,
we used an extension of Car–Parrinello molecular dynamics (CPMD
3.13), to run Born–Oppenheimer molecular
dynamics (BOMD) using a time step of 10 au and a fictitious electron
mass of 400 au. We described the QM atoms by the DFT/BLYP functional, and norm-conserving Martins-Trouiller pseudopotentials with dispersion-corrected atom-centered potentials. The accuracy of BLYP to describe the structural
and electronic properties of cobalamins has been previously reported. Moreover, the electronic structure and mechanism
of cobalamin and adenosylcobalamin-dependent enzymes has been extensively
studied using similar methods.− We included 123 atoms in the
QM subset, which consists of the coordinating histidine residue (H610),
capped with a monovalent pseudopotential at the beta carbon, the entire 5′-deoxyadenosyl radical moiety
(Ado), the cobalt corrin ring, capped at the COMe and NHMe side chains,
and the substrate, in which the CoA tail has been capped at the second
carbon after the sulfur atom. The wave functions were expanded in
a plane wave basis set with a 70 Ry cutoff inside a orthorhombic quantum
box with dimensions 23.2 × 29.5 × 21.6 Å3. This cutoff has been shown to achieve a good convergence of energies
and structural properties of cobalt complexes in previous studies
on vitamin B12., In addition, we found
that increasing the cutoff to 95 Ry does not result in significant
changes in relative energy (see ). Long-range interactions of the QM part were decoupled using the
Martyna-Tuckerman scheme. The MM subset
was characterized by a classical AMBER 99sb force field and contained
the rest of the protein and explicit solvent water molecules and 20
Na+ counterions for system neutrality. The QM/MM simulations
were performed at constant pressure and temperature, using the Nosé–Hoover
thermostat. The system was equilibrated for 20 ps before performing
thermodynamic integration. Using constrained
BOMD, the reaction coordinate was fixed in increments of 0.1 Å
from 2.1 to 3.6 Å to cleave the Co–C bond over a period
of 30 ps. Upon cleavage of the Co–C bond, the system was further
equilibrated for 15 ps before the hydrogen abstraction reaction took
place, using a similar protocol. The second step is characterized
by a reaction coordinate that describes the distance between the C5′ atom on Ado· and the primary hydrogen atom on
the substrate, spanning distances of 4–1.1 Å in increments
of 0.1 Å. Another reaction coordinate used to characterize hydrogen
abstraction was the distance between the C5′ atom of adenosyl
and the tertiary hydrogen on the subsequent carbon atom (H3°). Additionally, we explored the rotation of the adenine base about
the glycosidic bond (ϕ = O4′–C1′–N9–C8, Figure b), increasing the reaction coordinate (ϕ)
from ∼50 to 100° in five windows with increments of ∼10°.
Hysteresis was evaluated by performing the back reaction for both
homolysis and abstraction steps. Gas phase calculations were performed
using Gaussian ‘09 (G09). Optimizations
and relaxed scans were performed at different levels of theory, including
DFT and MP2 and with various basis sets. For more details see the .

Preparation of MCM Active Enzyme
Propionibacterium
shermanii mutB and mutA genes
which code for the α subunit and β subunit, respectively,
were codon-optimized for expression in Esherichia coli and synthesized using standard algorithms (Life Technologies/Thermo
Scientific/Fisher). The genes were ligated into pETDuet-1 (Novagen)
and with an N-terminal His-tag on the mutA product. Purified and sequenced
construct was transformed into BL21 DE3 chemically competent cells
and expressed using approaches from previous standard procedures, with minor alterations, such as the addition of a 10 min, 42 °C
heat shock step prior to induction. The cells were pelleted and lysed
using known procedures, except that an additional cell lysis step
was performed on the initially retrieved cell pellet. Appreciable
amounts of soluble protein were detected in both cell lysate solutions
(from first and second pelleting), and thus the lysate was pooled
and exchanged with dialysis into 50 mM potassium phosphate buffer,
pH 7.5, overnight at 4 °C. The protein was purified with 6x-His
affinity Ni(II) binding resin (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Protein was
then reconstituted overnight with 5′-deoxyadenosyl-cobalamin
(Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) under reduced ambient light. Excess
cofactor was removed with a P-30 spin column (BioRad, Hercules, CA).

Assay
of MCM Activity
MCM was assayed by Accurate-Mass Q-TOF LC/MS
(Agilent) using adaptations
of published methods to analyze the presence of CoA esters. Purified
protein (5 μg), previously reconstituted with cofactor, was
inoculated with substrate (methylmalonyl-CoA, 0.1 mg) and run for
several time points as well as overnight at 37 °C and in the
dark. Ten microliters of each reaction was injected for analysis,
and the mass spectrometry peaks for methylmalonyl-CoA were integrated
and analyzed against a standard curve constructed of five different
substrate concentrations (software Agilent Mass Hunter Acquisition
and Q-TOF Quantitative Analysis). For more details, see the .

Results and Discussion
Conformational
Changes That Accompany Cleavage
Homolysis
demands the scission of the kinetically inert AdoCbl bond to initiate
radical chemistry. One of the main challenges at this step in the
catalytic cycle is to prevent recombination from occurring in order
to transfer the radical to the substrate. To probe the functional
relationship between cofactor, enzyme and substrate during the homolytic
cleavage reaction, we studied the catalytic cycle of MCM using both
classical and quantum mechanical/molecular mechanical (QM/MM) Car–Parrinello molecular dynamics (CPMD) simulations.

The choice of starting structure for the classical MD simulations
was selected to embody the characteristics of the AdoCbl cofactor
before homolysis. Various crystallographic structures of MCM reveal
different orientations of the 5′-deoxyadenosyl radical moiety,
which appear to differ based on whether the Co–C bond is formed
or broken. When AdoCbl is in the bound state (Co–C &lt; 2.5
Å), such as for pdb entry 3REQ, the enzyme
is referred to as the open and unreactive state, and the conformation
of the adenine ring is said to be syn. In this state, the adenosine base is in a position
that is parallel to the corrinoid ring, typically constrained by two
side chains of the B12 pyrrole ring B. Characteristic of
this conformation is a value for the glycosidic dihedral angle (ϕ
= O4′–C1′–N9–C8, Figure b) greater
than ∼90°. In contrast, in the unbound state of AdoCbl
(Co–C &gt;3.5 Å), such as for pdb entries 4REQ() and 2XIQ, Ado· adopts the anti conformation in which the adenosine base is perpendicular to the
corrin ring (Figure c and ). The value
of ϕ in this conformation is in the range of 45–55°.
These distinct conformations of Ado· are consistently observed
in crystallographic structures of other AdoCbl-dependent enzymes (), such as GM (pdb entry 1I9C()) and OAM (pdb entry 3KOZ()).

It has been previously suggested that the AdoCbl-dependent
proteins
undergo large-scale conformational rearrangements upon binding to
the substrate, which signals the importance
of selecting a starting structure in complex with a substrate. Taking
these observations into consideration, we began the MD simulations
using a structure in the closed (reactive) state and with an intact
AdoCbl bond. Insertion of the 5′-deoxyadenosyl moiety from
3REQ into pdb entry 1E1C() gave a model with MCM in the closed
state (in complex with a desulfo coenzyme A ester, in which the terminal
acyl and sulfur groups have been removed) and a final representation
of AdoCbl in a “base-off”, hexa-coordinated, “bound”
co(III)balamin state (a Co–C bond length of 2.1 Å) with
the adenosyl group in the syn conformation and the
ribose moiety adopting a C3′-endo conformation. Our QM/MM model shows good agreement with the open
(reactive) state of the enzyme, and a comparison can be found online
in . Starting the QM/MM simulations from
the classically equilibrated structure, we chose to describe homolytic
cleavage with the C5′···Co distance
as the designated reaction coordinate. The free energy barrier determined
from thermodynamic integration (TI) was
12.4 ± 1.9 kcal mol–1, in good agreement with
estimates from kinetic experiments as well as computational simulations
(13.1–15.3 kcal mol–1).,,,

Cleavage
of the glycosidic bond induces a significant molecular
event as a result of the formation of the radical intermediate, Ado·.
After removing the constraint on the reaction coordinate at 3.6 Å,
Ado· diffuses 3 Å from its original binding position, out
of the cavity proximal to the B12 pyrrole ring B. This
relieves the adenosine base from a previous, sterically confined configuration
(syn) and allows for its rotation of nearly 100°
about the glycosidic bond ( and Figure ), which orients the base orthogonal to the corrinoid ring (1a versus
1b in Figure ). Our findings
indicate that Ado· adopts this anti conformation
(ϕ = 47° ± 23.5), within 5 ps after homolysis at a
Co–C bond length of 4.6 Å. This state is stable during
10 ps and is consistent with crystal structures in which AdoCbl is
in the unbound state, (see ).

Mechanochemical
switch. Upon homolysis, illustrated by the stages
1a to 1b,
Ado· diffuses out of its cavity and undergoes a spontaneous conformational
change in which the adenine base rotates by 100° to an orientation
perpendicular to the corrinoid ring. The hydrophobic and nonpolar
residues lining the cavity around the adenine base allow for this
rotation to be diffusion controlled. The panel on the upper right
displays the free energy profile for Co···C5′ bond cleavage. In contrast, during the hydrogen abstraction reaction,
illustrated by the stages 2a to 2b, the enzyme mediates the conformational
change in Ado· from C3′-endo to C2′-endo via nearby charged
and polar residues which exchange hydrogen bonds with axial O3′ and equatorial O3′. The panel on
the lower right displays the free energy profile for hydrogen abstraction.
The maximum error obtained along the profiles are indicated by the
error bars.

Different conformations of Ado· in other B12-dependent
enzymes. In (a), the results of a relaxed scan in gas phase along
glycosidic bond, the O4′–C1′–N9–C8 dihedral angle, of an
isolated Ado· moiety. The scan uncovers several free energy minimum
structures: ϕ of 48, −11, and −110°. All
energies (M06/6-31G(d)) are relative to an arbitrarily chosen origin,
an orientation of Ado· taken from the QM/MM simulations following
AdoCbl bond cleavage (an averaged value of ϕ of 115° ±
8.9). Performing a geometry optimization of Ado· from this bound
state gains nearly 5 kcal mol–1 of energy via the
rotation of ϕ from 115° to 48° (indicated by the dashed
gray line connecting these two points). In (b), the ϕ values
taken from various B12-dependent enzymes, plotted as a
function of AdoCbl bond length. The gray points represent the average
dihedral value for each cluster. When bound to Co(III), the value
of ϕ is 50–80° larger than it is in the unbound
state. As previously suggested, the global
minimum structure in the gas phase (ϕ = −11°) is
stabilized by an intramolecular hydrogen bond between H–O2′ and N3, which is not observed in the condensed
phase.

Intramolecular Stabilization
Mechanism of 5′-Deoxyadenosyl
Radical
Our findings suggest that the rotation of ϕ
from &gt;90° to ∼47° fulfills two distinct purposes,
which we describe below: (i) it stabilizes the radical intermediate
and thereby prevents deleterious side reactions from occurring, and
(ii) it is one of the factors shifting equilibrium in favor of radical
propagation instead of recombination. To address the first point,
this conformational change brings the C5′ radical
center within 3 Å of the hydrogen atom (H8) on the
C8 atom. This stable conformer supports the previous suggestion
that intramolecular stabilization of Ado· yields a configuration
similar to the 8,5′-cyclic structure. The formation of the 8,5′-cyclic structure is reported to
be strongly exothermic (by 10–20 kcal mol–1) with the lowest transition state lying
at about 10 kcal mol–1. We find the barrier for
abstraction of the H8 atom to be kinetically noncompetitive
to the native reaction (4.0 ± 0.5 kcal mol–1 higher than the native hydrogen abstraction reaction, see ). Thus, rotation of ϕ leads to a stable conformation of Ado·,
which secures its reactivity during its journey to the substrate.
These findings naturally lead to the question: does the enzyme guide
this conformational change or simply host it?

To answer this
question, we carried out gas phase calculations to discern whether
or not the rotation of ϕ is favored in the absence of the protein
environment. Starting configurations of Ado· were taken from
the QM/MM simulations and from various crystal structures in both
the “bound” (ϕ &gt; 90°) and “unbound”
(ϕ = 45–55°) states. Geometry optimizations converge
to a single, stationary minimum (ϕ = 48°) with the adenosine
base in a similar orientation (anti) to that of the
“unbound” Ado· in the protein environment. A scan
of ϕ reveals additional minimum energy conformers, consistent
with those found in a previous computational study, corresponding to stationary minima with ϕ angles
of 48°, −11°, and −110° (−4.8,
−13.6, and −7.0 kcal mol–1 lower in
energy than ϕ &gt; 90°; see Figure a and ). Our findings are consistent
with those from another study, which
suggest that the rotation of ϕ from its original position (ϕ
&gt; 90° and parallel to the corrinoid), stabilizes Ado·
by
nearly 5 kcal mol–1 (see Figure a). These findings are in agreement with Ado· conformational
changes in other AdoCbl-dependent isomerases, which may accompany and possibly facilitate the scission of the
AdoCbl bond. In comparison to these gas phase calculations, we computed
a free energy estimate for the syn to anti transition (ϕ from
∼47° to 90°) in the unbound state and in the enzyme
environment to be 8 kcal mol–1.

Therefore,
the results from gas phase calculations indicate that
this conformational change is intrinsic to Ado· and independent
of the enzyme environment. Indeed, a chain of mostly small and hydrophobic
residues (L374, P375, Y89, A90, G91, V115, and A116) lines the cavity
surrounding the adenosine base to allocate enough space for this rotation
of ϕ to occur. Hydrogen bonding with the base occurs only with
the backbone atoms of the protein and is readily transferred from
G91 in the syn configuration to A116 in the anti configuration. Evidence from crystal structures of
various other B12-dependent enzymes lends further support
to the idea that the family provides an environment that allows for
unobstructed rotation of ϕ to occur. Within the B12-dependent family of enzymes, the value of ϕ in different crystal
structures corresponds to the values of “bound” and
“unbound” Ado· that we observe in MCM (ϕ
≥ 90°, ∼47°, and −110 to −150°
in Figure b). Looking at the active sites
among this family of enzymes, we find that many are lined with small,
hydrophobic residues similar to those found in the vicinity of the
adenine base in MCM (1b in Figure ). Having
available space in the active site as well as nonpolar and uncharged
residues in the vicinity of Ado· may be two important factors
enabling this conformational change.

Apart from these hydrophobic
interactions, a polar contact stabilizes
Ado· in the form of hydrogen bonding interactions between the
O4′ atom of Ado· and a nearby residue, Y89.
This so-called “aromatic wedge” residue is ascribed
to accelerate AdoCbl bond homolysis and has been proposed to directly
influence the formation of the radical species., Our
simulations reveal that a flexible movement of Y89 accommodates the
rotation of ϕ from &gt;90° to 48° and then allows
for
a strong hydrogen bond to form with Ado· (1.6 Å, see ). This observed interaction between Y89 and Ado· may also explain
why recombination of the AdoCbl bond is favored in the Y89F mutant
despite minimal differences in structure between mutant and wild-type
enzyme.

Conformational Changes
That Accompany Hydrogen Abstraction
After cleavage of the
Co–C bond has taken place, the diffusion
of Ado· from the cavity together with the rotation of ϕ
(&gt;90° to 17–47°) guides the C5′ radical center to a location within 4 Å of the substrate—an
ideal starting platform to initiate the hydrogen abstraction reaction.
At this site, Ado· is positioned among several charged and polar
amino acids situated 7–10 Å from cobalamin center (E247,
Y243, Q330, and N366). Hydrogen bonding interactions between these
residues and the O2′, O3′ atoms
and their respective hydrogen atoms of the ribose moiety secure its
positioning at this site in the protein. These findings are consistent
with crystallographic structures that capture AdoCbl in the “unbound”
state (4REQ). However, the proper positioning
of Ado· alone does not prevent the radical intermediate from
undergoing deleterious side reactions with the substrate. Because
hydrogen abstraction from an unactivated primary carbon atom requires
a high level of specificity, side reactions with lower energy barriers
and/or products that are thermodynamically favored are highly competitive.
For example, Ado· must be selective enough to discern a primary
hydrogen atom (H1°) from the tertiary hydrogen atom
(H3°) bound to the subsequent carbon atom on the substrate
(Figure a). The latter leads to a more thermodynamically
stable radical intermediate and would not induce a 1,2-rearrangement
reaction.

Preventing unproductive side reactions. Using QM/MM simulations,
the free energy profiles for the native hydrogen (H1°) abstraction and a deleterious side reaction, the abstraction of
the tertiary hydrogen atom (H3°) on the subsequent
carbon atom, are shown at the top. In the native reaction mechanism,
shown in green and labeled b, the shift in ribose puckering
of the Ado· moiety from C3′-endo to C2′-endo occurs spontaneously
during the hydrogen abstraction step and is accommodated by MCM via
a nearby glutamate residue, E370. In the absence of this conformational
change, the Ado· remains in the C3′-endo conformation, and the abstraction of the “wrong”
hydrogen atom (in this case, H3°) is thermodynamically
and kinetically favored over the native reaction (see purple curve,
labeled a). In contrast, abstraction of the same hydrogen,
H3°, is no longer favored if Ado· adopts the
C2′-endo conformation (see orange
curve labeled c).

How the enzyme manipulates and controls the transient Ado·
moiety was investigated using QM/MM simulations. Starting from the
cleaved structure, we investigated the hydrogen abstraction reaction
using the distance between the C5′ atom and the
nearest H1° atom on the substrate as reaction coordinate.
The free energy barrier for abstraction is 11.3 ± 0.3 kcal mol–1, in agreement with other computational studies., However, the rate of the hydrogen transfer can be expected to increase
by at least 1 or 2 orders of magnitude due to quantum tunneling effects., We also investigated the barrier of abstraction in the absence of
the rotation of ϕ in Ado· and found that, without this
conformational change, the barrier increases by 6.0 ± 1.0 kcal
mol–1 (see ). These findings further suggest
that the intramolecular stabilization mechanism of Ado· is a
required transformation that procedes hydrogen abstraction and apparently
sets the stage for other crucial conformational changes to take place.

During hydrogen abstraction, a second, key conformational change
in Ado· preempts the transfer of the radical to the substrate.
At a C5′···H1° bond
distance of 1.9 Å, we observe a spontaneous change in the puckering
of the ribose moiety from C3′-endo (2a in Figure ) to C2′-endo (2b in Figure  and ). At this point in the reaction, the C5′ atom
and the H8 atom approach an interatomic distance of 2.7
Å before the conformational change to C2′-endo occurs. Just before this transition takes place, the
adenosine base toggles between H1° and the C5′ atom (see 2b in Figure ), which brings the
C5′ radical center into a position that is equidistant
from both the H1° and the H8 atoms (Figure b and ). The transition to the C2′-endo conformer radically manipulates
and constrains the geometry of Ado·, forcing the C5′ atom to orient away from the H8 atom and toward H1°. This spontaneous transitioning between states is consistent
with gas phase calculations, which indicate that the C2′-endo conformer is only slightly lower in energy
than its counterpart (1.5 kcal mol–1). These two
distinct conformations of the ribose moiety of Ado· are also
in agreement with the experimentally observed “ribose pseudorotation”
in the crystallographic structure of glutamate mutase.

A Mechanism to Control the Selectivity of
5′-Deoxyadenosyl
Radical
Previous findings suggest that the C2′-endo conformer rigidly confines the trajectory
of the C5′ atom and directs the radical center toward
the hydrogen atom to be abstracted. Our
QM/MM simulations provide further evidence of this proposal and present
additional details that clarify why this conformational change is
crucial in upholding the selectivity of Ado·. We find that specific
enzymatic interventions have evolved to prevent certain configurations
of Ado· that might lead to erroneous side reactions with the
substrate. One such configuration that is blocked by the enzyme during
hydrogen abstraction is that of the C3′-endo conformer of Ado·. Without the change in ribose
puckering to the C2′-endo conformer,
the abstraction of the H3° atom from the substrate
is found to be strongly competitive with a barrier for abstraction
of 9.0 ± 0.2 kcal mol–1 (Figure a). This unproductive alternative would be both kinetically
and thermodynamically favored over the native abstraction reaction.

Fortunately, the enzyme is actively involved at this point in the
reaction to prevent such mistakes from occurring. Evidently, the enzyme
is “spring-loaded” in a conformation in which functional
groups are positioned to accommodate one particular conformer, depending
on the distinct stage of the catalytic cycle. For the initial C3′-endo geometry, Y243 and Q330 hydrogen
bond to the H–O3′ and O3′ atoms of the ribose moiety. Upon transitioning to C2′-endo geometry, the enzyme provides the H–O3′ atom with a substitute hydrogen bonding partner,
E370, capable of accommodating its newly equatorial position (Figure b, ). This change
effectively constrains the C5′ radical center and
reduces the likelihood of Ado· abstracting the “wrong”
hydrogen atom. By reinforcing the conformational switch of C3′-endo to C2′-endo, the barrier of abstraction of the H3° atom increases
by 4 kcal mol–1 (to 14.0 ± 0.8 kcal mol –1) and is no longer competitive to the native abstraction
of the H1° atom (Figure c).

It has recently been shown that mutation of this conserved glutamate
residue, denoted E370 in P. shermanii, to aspartate
in OAM (E338D) and human MCM protein (E338D) generates mutants with
380- and 60-fold reductions in catalytic turnover (see  for a comparison of active site residues). To be
sure that the same behavior is also observed for the system studied
in this contribution, site-directed mutagenesis experiments were carried
out for the enzyme present in P. shermanii. We find
that the mutation E370D reduces the catalytic activity by 50-fold
relative to the wild-type MCM activity, which is in good agreement
to the above studies (see ). Taken together, these findings
indicate that the mutation of this conserved residue drastically reduces
catalytic turnover in the mutant enzyme. It has been proposed that
the glutamate residue plays a role in controlling the initial generation
of the radical species. However, on the
basis of our computational findings for this mutant () as well as
a detailed comparison of various crystallographic structures (), it seems more likely that, in the case of MCM, the main role of
this residue is in the control of the hydrogen abstraction step.

Activating and Deactivating the Mechanochemical Switch
Our
findings suggest that a mechanochemical switch is activated or
deactivated at distinct stages of the catalytic cycle to control the
highly reactive nature of Ado·. During the first catalytic step,
spontaneous changes in the conformation of Ado· accompany cleavage
via a rotation of ϕ from &gt;90° to 47°. We suggest
that
this conformational change favors the forward propagation of radical
species in two distinct ways: (i) the stability of Ado· increases
by means of favorable intramolecular interactions, and the formation
of a strong hydrogen bond between Ado·:O4′ and
Y89 and (ii) sets the stage for other crucial conformational changes
in Ado to take place during the hydrogen abstraction step. Thus, at
this stage in the catalytic cycle, the enzyme is an exemplar of a
passive control element (i.e., the switch is turned “off”)
and provides a conducive environment for the intramolecular stabilization
of Ado· to take place. The fact that the enzyme uses a “preprogrammed”
technique to control Ado· is evidenced by the spacious hydrophobic
cavity available to Ado· upon diffusion out from its binding
site. This hydrophobic cavity permits the radical to adopt an unreactive
conformation while it diffuses through the protein.

In contrast,
during the second step of the catalytic cycle, the enzyme acts as
an active control element, in which the mechanochemical switch is
turned “on”. At this point in the cycle, the control
of Ado· involves direct manipulation of the ribose geometry.
Changes in puckering from C3′-endo to C2′-endo are induced by nearby
polar and charged residues, which effectively transfer hydrogen bonding
interactions from the H–O3′ atom in an axial
position to its equatorial counterpart. Unlike the first step, the
function of this second conformational change is less about the stabilization
of Ado· and more about manipulating the orientation and steric
properties of the radical species to prevent deleterious side reactions.
We have shown that the abstraction of a tertiary hydrogen atom (rather
than the proper primary hydrogen atom) of the substrate can be avoided
via this conformational change.

Conclusions
Dealing
with radical intermediates is an extremely demanding task,
requiring the assemblage of different control tactics. In the case
of AdoCbl-dependent enzymes, nature has found a way to utilize an
exceptionally effective mechanochemical switch, which is activated
and deactivated at specific stages during the catalytic cycle to gain
control of reactive intermediates. Depending on the intrinsic or extrinsic
factors during the catalytic cycle, the switch can either be turned
“off” to utilize internal strain and stored energy via
spontaneous conformational changes in Ado· or “on”
to utilize the enzyme environment as the driving force for propelling
forward a desired chemical task. This mechanochemical switch illustrates
one way in which enzymes attain selectivity of extremely chemically
challenging reactions.

Supporting Information Available
Further details of the procedures
used to model MCM, perform CPMD simulations, and the experimental
details. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org/.

Supplementary Material
bi500050k_si_001.pdf

bi500050k_si_002.mpg

bi500050k_si_003.mpg

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully
acknowledge support from the Swiss
National Science Foundation award 200020-146645, the IT domain (DIT)
of EPFL, the Swiss National Computing Center (CSCS), and BlueGene
for computing resources. In addition, the authors thank Helena Martin
for contributing artwork for the graphical abstract and Professor
Hatzimanikatis for early support on this project.

Abbreviations Used
B12vitamin B12

Ado·5′-deoxyadenosyl
radical

MCMmethyl
malonyl-CoA mutase

QMMMquantum mechanical/molecular mechanical

AdoCbl5′-deoxyadenosyl-cobalamin

AdoB12adenosyl-B12

GMglutamate
mutase

OAMornithine
4,5-aminomutase

MDmolecular dynamics

CPMDCar–Parrinello molecular dynamics

BOMDBorn–Oppenheimer molecular
dynamics

DFTdensity
functional theory

