Feedback allosteric inhibition
of metabolic enzymes is one of the most efficient mechanisms maintained
through evolution for control of flux through biochemical pathways.− Efficiency comes from a direct, specific, and nearly instantaneous
effect, which permits dynamic control of the flux through biochemical
pathways. In addition, feedback inhibition is independent of transcription,
translation, and intricate signal transduction cascades.

Natural
feedback inhibitors can also serve as templates for chemically
diverse, allosteric small molecule inhibitors, which are currently
intensely sought as probes for chemical biology and chemical genetics,
as regulators for synthetic biology, and as therapeutics for several
diseases. In addition to the qualities described above, allosteric
inhibitors might display other appealing features as small molecule
therapeutics. For instance, allosteric inhibitors have the potential
to be noncompetitive or uncompetitive versus a particular substrate and time-dependent, and to target
sites in the enzyme other than the active site. For these reasons,
allosteric inhibitors that target the feedback site might become compounds
of choice when the active site of an enzyme is deemed “not
targetable” or of poor “ligandability”., A few examples of important enzymes that have been successfully
targeted at an allosteric site are pyruvate kinase (as a potential
antihyperglycemic therapy), mitotic kinesin
(involved in centrosome separation and formation of the bipolar mitotic
spindle),Staphylococcus aureusd-alanine:d-alanine ligase (involved in peptidoglycan
biosynthesis), the Cdc34 ubiquitin-conjugatin
enzyme (active against certain prostate and colorectal cancer cell
lines), and the Haemophilus influenzae HslUV protease (a bacterial version of the proteosome).

A remarkable example of an allosterically
regulated enzyme is ATP
phosphoribosyltransferase (ATP-PRT), encoded by the hisG gene in Mycobacterium tuberculosis. MtATP-PRT catalyzes
the first committed step in l-histidine biosynthesis (Scheme ) and is therefore inhibited by the end product
of the pathway, l-histidine., In M. tuberculosis, the hisG gene is predicted
to share an operon with the next enzyme on the pathway, encoded by
the hisE gene. MtATP-PRT has been proposed as a potential
target for the development of novel anti-TB agents., Target validation, i.e., the essentiality of the reaction and the
pathway for M. tuberculosis, has been confirmed by
high-resolution transposon mutagenesis and clean genetic knockouts of other enzymes in the pathway. In addition, this pathway is absent in humans,
which suggests no a priori toxicity associated with potential inhibitors.

ATP-PRTs (EC 2.4.2.17) catalyze the reversible,
Mg2+-dependent formation of 1-(5-phospho-α-d-ribosyl)-ATP
(PR-ATP) and inorganic pyrophosphate (PPi) from ATP and
5-phospho-α-d-ribosyl pyrophosphate (PRPP) (Scheme ). Some ATP-PRTs are also activated by K+. This reaction was shown to proceed
directly, without the generation of a covalent intermediate, and to follow a sequential ordered kinetic mechanism
with ATP as the first substrate to bind and PR-ATP the last product
to dissociate. Interestingly, ATP-PRT
and anthranilate-PRT are the only phosphoribosyltransferases (PRTs)
described to this day that are not involved in nucleoside or NAD+/NADP+ metabolism. Common ribosyl acceptors used
by other PRTs are orotate, nicotinamide/nicotinate, adenine, and hypoxanthine/guanine.

With regard to tertiary and quaternary structure,
there are two
types of ATP-PRTs. They are the more widespread homohexameric form,
encountered in bacteria, fungi, and plants, and the hetero-octameric
form, restricted to some bacteria. MtATP-PRT belongs to the homohexameric
class, which is also found in Salmonella enterica and Escherichia coli., Crystallographic data suggested that MtATP-PRT
is an active dimer that associates into an inactive hexamer, upon l-histidine binding. In addition,
the l-histidine-bound hexameric form displays a major conformational
change, a twist of domain III relative to domains I and II. Crystallographic
studies also revealed that l-histidine binds at a site ∼30
Å from the active site, confirming that inhibition is allosteric
in nature. Finally, it was shown that l-histidine is held
at the allosteric site by interactions with the carboxyl group from
Asp218, the hydroxyl from Thr238, and the backbone amide oxygen from
Ala273.

Because l-histidine’s
imidazole group displays
a pKa near neutrality (∼6.0), it
is of interest to define which ionic form binds to and inhibits MtATP-PRT.
This question has been partially answered for the homologous enzymes
from S. enterica (SeATP-PRT) and Corynebacterium
glutamicum (CgATP-PRT)., With SeATP-PRT, l-histidine was shown to inhibit better at higher pH values,
indicating that the imidazole ring is deprotonated. In contrast, with
CgATP-PRT, lower pH values increased potency, suggesting that a protonated
imidazole form inhibits better. Unfortunately, both studies used “IC50” or “% activity” as surrogates of affinity,
instead of Ki or Kd values, making the interpretation of the results difficult.
Currently, no information about the ionic state of l-histidine
inhibition of MtATP-PRT is available.

In this work, we describe
a detailed characterization of the mechanism
of allosteric inhibition of MtATP-PRT by l-histidine. We
use a combination of steady-state and pre-steady-state kinetics, pH
studies, 1H NMR spectroscopy, and gel filtration experiments
to characterize how l-histidine allosterically controls MtATP-PRT.
Our results are combined with the structural data available to generate
a new model that accounts for the inhibition.

Materials and Methods
Materials
Buffers were purchased from Fisher Scientific.
Unless otherwise stated, all other chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.
Baker’s yeast inorganic pyrophosphatase was purchased from
Sigma-Aldrich. M. tuberculosis inorganic pyrophosphatase
(Rv3628) was produced in the laboratory (L. P. Carvalho, unpublished
results). Chromatographic columns were purchased from GE, and Ni-NTA
resin was purchased from EMD. Complete EDTA-Free protease inhibitor
was purchased from Roche. BL21(DE3)pLysS was from EMD.

General Methods and Equipment
The protein concentration
was measured using the BCA assay from Pierce, using bovine serum albumin
as a standard. Protein purification was performed using an AKTA purifier
10 (GE Healthcare). SDS–PAGE was performed on a PhastSystem
(GE Healthcare). Spectrophotometry was conducted with a Shimadzu UV-2550
spectrophotometer equipped with dual-beam optics and a Peltier system
for temperature control. Stopped-flow absorbance spectroscopy was
conducted on an Applied Photophysics SX-20 stopped-flow spectrophotometer,
equipped with a circulating water bath. Under these conditions, the
dead time was estimated to be 3 ms. Experiments were conducted by
mixing equal volumes of two solutions, one containing enzyme and the
other the variable substrate with or without l-histidine.
NMR experiments were conducted using a Varian Inova spectrometer at
14.4 T. All assays were conducted at 25 °C. All concentrations
of MtATP-PRT reported are the final concentrations used, for the monomer.

Plasmid Preparation, Protein Expression, and Purification
The Rv2121c gene sequence from M. tuberculosis H37Rv was codon adapted to E. coli, and its nucleotide
sequence was synthetically prepared and ligated into the pJ411 plasmid (DNA 2.0). DNA sequence was confirmed by sequencing. This
construct contained a noncleavable N-terminal hexahistidine tag to
facilitate purification. The N-terminal hexahistidine tag was shown
not to affect the structure or activity of MtATP-PRT.

During MtATP-PRT purification, all steps were performed
at 4 °C. Frozen BL21(DE3)pLysS (pJ411::hisG) cells were thawed on ice, and lysed by sonication,
in the presence of buffer A [20 mM triethanolamine (TEA) (pH 7.8),
300 mM NaCl, and 50 mM imidazole] containing lysozyme and Complete
EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail. Soluble protein was obtained
by centrifugation at 25000g for 30 min. The soluble
fraction was loaded into a 50 mL Ni-NTA column and the protein separated
by a gradient using buffer B [20 mM TEA (pH 7.8), 300 mM NaCl, and
500 mM imidazole]. Peak fractions were analyzed by SDS–PAGE.
Fractions containing only MtATP-PRT were pooled together, concentrated,
dialyzed in 20 mM TEA (pH 7.8), and stored in 50% glycerol at −20
°C or, alternatively, stored at −80 °C after being
flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen. This protocol allowed the purification
to homogeneity of 114 mg of MtATP-PRT from 15 g of wet cell pellet.
Purified ATP-PRT was analyzed by electrospray ionization mass spectrometry
(ESI-MS) to confirm protein identity (NIMR Mass Spectrometry Facility).

For pre-steady-state kinetic experiments, in which larger amounts
of inorganic pyrophosphatase were required, we used recombinant inorganic
pyrophosphatase from M. tuberculosis produced in
our laboratory (L. P. Carvalho, unpublished results).

Gel Filtration
The solution oligomeric state of MtATP-PRT
was determined using a Sephacryl S-200 column and molecular weight
standards (Bio-Rad). Typically, 100 μL of MtATP-PRT at concentrations
ranging from 0.1 to 10 mg/mL was injected. Protein was eluted isocratically
for 1.5 column volumes, at a rate of 0.5 mL/min. The buffer was 20
mM Tris-HCl (pH 8) containing 100 mM NaCl, with or without 2 mM l-histidine.

Measurement of Enzymatic Activity
Initial velocities
for the forward reaction of MtATP-PRT were measured by following the
formation of PR-ATP (ε290 = 3600 M–1 cm–1), in the presence
of inorganic pyrophosphatase. Pyrophosphatase is essential for this
assay, as the equilibrium constant lies toward formation of ATP and
PRPP. A typical reaction mixture contained 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5),
7 mM MgCl2, 200 mM KCl, 800 μM ATP, 400 μM
PRPP, 3 milliunits of pyrophosphatase, and 150 nM MtATP-PRT. All activity
assays were performed at 25 ± 0.2 °C.

1H NMR Spectroscopy
One-dimensional spectra
of l-histidine as a function of pH were recorded using excitation
sculpting for water suppression. STD
spectra were recorded in an interleaved manner with a range of saturation
times (0.2–2.0 s in 0.2 s intervals) with on-resonance presaturation
of the enzyme at 0.8 ppm. A single off-resonance control spectrum
was recorded with a saturation time of 2 s. Water suppression was
achieved by excitation sculpting. Data processing, spectral subtractions,
and quantitation were performed using VNMRJ 1.1D. The physical basis
for saturation transfer difference NMR is described elsewhere.,

Inhibition Studies
To determine inhibition constants
and inhibition patterns associated with l-histidine, MtATP-PRT
activity was studied in the presence of variable concentrations of
one substrate, fixed saturating concentrations of the other substrate
and metals, and several fixed concentrations of l-histidine.

pH Studies
To determine the effect of pH on the inhibitory
activity of l-histidine, MtATP-PRT activity was studied in
the presence of variable concentrations of ATP, fixed saturating concentrations
of PRPP and metals, and several fixed concentrations of l-histidine, at different pHs ranging from 6.5 to 9.5 (in HEPES, PIPES,
TAPS, and CHES buffers). Because of the narrow pH range of MtATP-PRT,
only the inhibition data from pH 8 to 9.25 were analyzed (TAPS from
pH 8.0 to 8.75 and CHES from pH 9.0 to 9.25). Between pH 8 and 9.25,
PRPP concentrations were tested and shown to be saturating.

Pre-Steady-State Kinetics
Photomultiplier voltage was
zeroed with buffer. A cell with a 10 mm path length was used for all
experiments. All experiments were performed at 25 °C in 50 mM
Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) containing 150 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 1.5
mM PRPP, 60 μM pyrophosphatase, and 10 μM MtATP-PRT. Higher
concentrations of substrates and metals were not used, because of
precipitation. Typically, 10 progress curves with 1000 points each
were averaged before data were fit. Rates and amplitudes were obtained
by fitting the average to the burst equation (eq ). Mixing was achieved by rapid combination of 60 μL from each
syringe. The effect of increasing concentrations of ATP (from 0.025
to 4 mM) and l-histidine (from 5 to 80 μM) on the rate
of the reaction was measured by monitoring the conversion of ATP to
PR-ATP, by observing the increase in absorbance at 290 nm.

Data Analysis
Steady-state and NMR data were fit using
the nonlinear, least-squares, curve-fitting programs of SigmaPlot
for Windows, version 11.0. Pre-steady-state data were fit using KinTek
Global Kinetic Explorer,, version 3.0. Individual
saturation curves were fit to eq where V is the maximal velocity, A is the substrate or metal concentration, and K is the Michaelis constant for the substrate (Km) or constant for the metal (Kact). Individual saturation curves showing substrate inhibition pattern
were fit to eq where Kiapp is the apparent inhibition
constant for A. Inhibition data, recorded under saturating
concentrations of ATP, PRPP, Mg2+, and K+ and
variable concentration of l-histidine, were fit to eq where v0 is the uninhibited velocity, I is the l-histidine concentration, IC50 is the concentration
of l-histidine necessary to give 50% inhibition, and nH is the Hill number. Inhibition data showing
linear, noncompetitive, or uncompetitive patterns in double-reciprocal
plots were fit to eqs  and where Kis and Kii are the slope and intercept inhibition constants,
respectively. NMR chemical shift data showing a single titration event
were fit to a variation of the Henderson–Hasselbalch equationwhere δ is the instantaneous
chemical shift in parts per million, δacid is the
chemical shift of the protonated form, δbase is the
chemical shift of the deprotonated form, pH is the antilogarithm of
the concentration of protons, and pKa is
the acid dissociation constant for the group being titrated. Pre-steady-state
burst kinetic data were fit to eq where Yt is the observed signal at time t, A is the amplitude of the transient, kobs is the observed burst rate for the transient, v is the linear rate, and C is the offset of the
linear phase. The dependence of the burst amplitude on ATP concentration
under conditions where substrate and enzyme concentration were comparable
is described by eq ()where Amax is
the amplitude maximum, E is the concentration of
the enzyme, S is the total concentration of ATP,
and Kdapp is the apparent dissociation constant for ATP. Similarly,
the dependence of the kobs on ATP concentration
under conditions where substrate and enzyme concentrations are comparable
was fit to eq where kburst is
the maximal burst rate. The dependence of the burst amplitude on l-histidine concentration was fit towhere A0 is the
maximal amplitude (in the absence of l-histidine) and [I]
is the concentration of l-histidine. The dependence of the kobs on the concentration of l-histidine
was described by a one-step binding mechanism, according to eq where kon is the
second-order association rate constant and koff is the unimolecular dissociation rate constant.

Results
MtATP-PRT Purification
The hisG (rv2121) gene sequence from M. tuberculosis H37Rv was codon-adapted to E. coli and then chemically
synthesized and ligated into pJ411, and the nucleotide
sequence was confirmed (DNA 2.0); 7.6 mg of MtATP-PRT were purified
per gram of BL21(DE3)pLysS (pJ411::hisG), using a
single Ni-NTA chromatographic step. Purified MtATP-PRT was subjected
to ESI-MS for identification. The purified protein exhibited a molecular
mass of 31,515.1 Da, which is within experimental error of the calculated
molecular mass of 31515.6 Da. This result confirms the identity of
the enzyme used in the following experiments.

Oligomeric State of MtATP-PRT
We next determined the
apparent solution molecular mass of MtATP-PRT using gel filtration,
on a Sephadex S200 column. Figure  depicts
representative chromatograms obtained, showing that the mycobacterial
enzyme behaves as a single species in solution, with an apparent molecular
mass of ∼180 kDa. This molecular mass is consistent with a
hexameric form. The repetition of this experiment at lower concentrations
of protein yields the same result, indicating that MtATP-PRT does
not display a concentration-dependent change in the oligomeric state
at protein concentrations ranging from 0.1 to 10 mg/mL. Repetition
of this experiment in the presence of 2 mM l-histidine (Figure ) showed the same overall result. Repetition of
the experiment in the presence of ATP (the first substrate to bind
to ATP-PRTs) did not yield an observable change in the apparent molecular
mass (data not shown). These results indicate that MtATP-PRT is a
hexamer in solution and this oligomeric state is not influenced by
the allosteric inhibitor or by ATP, the first substrate.

MtATP-PRT is
hexameric in solution in the presence and absence
of l-histidine. Gel filtration experiment illustrating the
lack of change in the oligomeric state of MtATP-PRT. Solid and dashed
lines are representative chromatographic traces of MtATP-PRT (100
μg) analyzed with a Sephacryl S200 in the absence and presence
of 2 mM l-histidine, respectively. These experiments were
performed in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8) containing 100 mM NaCl. Results
are representative of four independent experiments.

Steady-State Kinetics and Inhibition Studies
MtATP-PRT
displays Michaelis–Menten kinetics with both substrates (Figure ). Time courses are only linear for a few minutes
(data not shown), which is consistent with previous observations that
the product, PR-ATP, is a potent inhibitor of ATP-PRTs. Interestingly, MtATP-PRT displays very low activity
at neutral and acidic pH. Therefore, the lowest pH used in our kinetic
studies was 8.0. No activity is observed in the presence of metal-chelating
agent EDTA, indicating that Mg2+ is essential for activity
and is rapidly dissociating from the enzyme (data not shown). Addition
of the thiol reducing agent DTT did not alter the time course (data
not shown), indicating that this enzyme preparation did not contain
oxidized cysteine residues or disulfide bonds that could inhibit activity.

Steady-state
kinetics of MtATP-PRT and its inhibition by l-histidine.
The top and middle panels show the saturation curves
for ATP (●) and PRPP (○), respectively. These experiments
were performed at 25 °C, in 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) containing
7 mM MgCl2 and 200 mM KCl. When the ATP concentration was
varied, the PRPP concentration was 0.8 mM. When the PRPP concentration
was varied, the ATP concentration was 1.6 mM. The bottom panel shows
the inhibition (at a single substrate concentration) of MtATP-PRT
by l-histidine (●). This experiment was performed
at 25 °C, in 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) containing 7 mM MgCl2, 200 mM KCl, 1.6 mM ATP, and 0.8 mM PRPP. Points are data
and lines best fit to eq  (top and middle panels)
and eq  (bottom panel). Results are representative
of two independent experiments.

Apparent Km values
were obtained for
ATP (263 ± 63 μM) in the presence of saturating concentrations
of PRPP and MgCl2 and 200 mM KCl (Figure , top panel) and for PRPP (49 ± 6 μM) in the presence
of saturating levels of ATP, MgCl2, and KCl (Figure , middle panel). As observed with SeATP-PRT, high concentrations of MgCl2 led
to inhibition of MtATP-PRT. Apparent Kact and Ki values were obtained for MgCl2 (1.9 ± 0.6 and 23.3 ± 8.6 mM, respectively) in
the presence of saturating concentrations of both substrates and 200
mM KCl (data not shown). The effect of K+ on the rate of
MtATP-PRT was not saturable; therefore, we performed all the experiments
at 200 mM KCl (data not shown). Steady-state data are summarized in
Table .

Steady-State and Pre-Steady-State
Kinetic Parameters for MtATP-PRT
parameter	best fit	equation	
Vmax (s–1)	0.31 ± 0.01		
Km,ATP (μM)	263 ± 63		
Km,PRPP (μM)	49 ± 6		
Kact,Mg2+ (μM)	1900 ± 600		
Ki,Mg2+ (μM)	23000 ± 900		
IC50,l-histidine (μM)	33 ± 3		
Amax (μM)	7.8 ± 0.3		
Kd,ATPapp (μM)	47.2 ± 10.3		
Kburst (s–1)	0.67 ± 0.02		
Kd,l-histidine (μM)	27.9 ± 3.2		
kon,l-histidine(M–1 s–1)	4885 ± 717		
koff,l-histidine (s–1)	0.95 ± 0.03		
Assays performed in 50 mM buffer,
containing MgCl2 and KCl, at the specified values, and
25 °C. See  for
the buffers and concentrations of substrates, metals, and l-histidine.

We then confirmed the inhibition of MtATP-PRT by l-histidine
by determining its IC50. As can be seen in Figure  (bottom panel), our preparation of MtATP-PRT was
readily inhibited by l-histidine. Under our experimental
conditions, the IC50 obtained for l-histidine
is 33.3 ± 3.5 μM and the Hill number is 1.5 (Table ). To obtain inhibition constants (Ki), which are independent of the concentration of enzyme,
substrates, and metal ions used, and
to define the nature of inhibition, we performed single inhibition
studies at a fixed saturating concentration of one substrate and fixed
variable concentrations of the second substrate. Inhibition of l-histidine versus PRPP was linear and noncompetitive (Figure ), with a set of lines intersecting on the left
of the Y-axis in a double-reciprocal plot, with a Kii value of 23.5 ± 6.5 μM and a Kis value of 25.7 ± 12.8 μM. As the Kii and Kis values
are identical within experimental error, l-histidine appears
to have the same affinity for the enzyme in the presence and absence
of PRPP. When the ATP concentration was varied, l-histidine
inhibition was linear and uncompetitive (Figure ), with a set of parallel lines in a double-reciprocal plot, with
a Kii value of 27.9 ± 1.9 μM.
This result indicates that binding of ATP is essential for inhibition
by l-histidine. Inhibition data are summarized in Table .

Inhibition of MtATP-PRT by l-histidine vs PRPP.
(A) Double-reciprocal
plot illustrating the linear noncompetitive inhibition pattern obtained
when varying the concentration of l-histidine at fixed variable
concentrations of PRPP and fixed saturating concentrations of ATP,
Mg2+, and K+. Data were obtained with 50 mM
Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) at 25 °C. Results are representative of two
independent experiments. Points are data obtained with 0 (●),
15 (○), 30 (■), and 45 μM l-histidine
(□), and error bars indicate the standard deviation. Lines
are the best fit of the entire data set to eq . (B) Replot of the intercept of the data shown in panel A (top),
showing the linear dependence on inhibitor concentration. Replot of
the slope of the data shown in panel A (bottom), showing the linear
dependence on inhibitor concentration. Points are data, and the line
is the linear regression of the data.

Inhibition of MtATP-PRT by l-histidine vs ATP.
(A) Double-reciprocal
plot illustrating the linear uncompetitive inhibition pattern obtained
when varying the concentration of l-histidine at fixed variable
concentrations of ATP and fixed saturating concentrations of PRPP,
Mg2+, and K+. Data were obtained with 50 mM
Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) at 25 °C. This result is representative of
two independent experiments. Points are data obtained with 0 (●),
15 (○), 30 (■), and 45 μM l-histidine
(□), and error bars indicate the standard deviation. Lines
are the best fit of the entire data set to eq . (B) Replot of the intercept of the data shown in panel A, showing
the linear dependence on inhibitor concentration. Points are data,
and the line is the linear regression of the data.

Steady-State Inhibition Constants
for MtATP-PRT and l-Histidine
pH	varied substrate	inhibition
pattern	Kii (μM)	Kis (μM)	
8.50	PRPP	NC	23.5 ± 6.5	25.7 ± 12.8	
8.50	ATP	UC	27.9 ± 1.9	–	
8.00	ATP	UC	4.0 ± 0.4	–	
8.25	ATP	UC	7.9 ± 1.5	–	
8.50	ATP	UC	28.3 ± 2.1	–	
8.75	ATP	UC	26.8 ± 1.5	–	
9.00	ATP	UC	50.4 ± 5.5	–	
9.25	ATP	UC	109.4 ± 6.8	–	
Assays performed in 50 mM buffer
containing 7 mM MgCl2 and 200 mM KCl, at the specified
pH values, and 25 °C. See  for the buffers for each pH.

The concentrations of cosubstrates
were held fixed (0.8 mM PRPP and 1.6 mM ATP).

NC, noncompetitive; UC, uncompetitive.

Ionic States of l-Histidine and Interaction with MtATP-PRT
To define the ionic state of l-histidine bound to MtATP-PRT,
we first employed equilibrium fluorescence measurements. Unfortunately,
binding of l-histidine only modestly alters the intrinsic
tryptophan fluorescence spectrum of MtATP-PRT (data not shown), precluding
quantitative analysis. As an alternative to fluorescence, we employed 1H NMR to characterize this interaction. We reasoned that STD-NMR could constitute a simple and efficient way of monitoring
ligand binding at different pH values. Before the STD experiments,
we recorded spectra of l-histidine as a function of pH to
determine the ionization states under our experimental conditions
and the pH-dependent changes in the chemical shifts of the four sets
of protons from l-histidine (Figure A). The chemical shift of these protons is influenced by pH as shown
in Figure B. Taken together, these results
indicate that under these experimental conditions protons Cδ2-H,
Cε1-H, and Cα-H are coupled to and therefore report on
the ionization of the imidazole ring. On the other hand, protons Cβ-H2 inform on the ionization of the α-amino group. Data
shown in Figure C and Table  indicate that l-histidine bound to MtATP-PRT is
subjected to saturation transfer, and as expected, this process is
influenced by pH. Specifically, saturation transfer is neglible at
lower pH values (&lt;7.5) and maximal at high pH values (∼9),
indicating that a neutral imidazole and deprotonated α-amino
group favor binding. The aliphatic protons do not appear to pick up
saturation (Table ), indicating a looser contact
with the protein, compared with that of the imidazole protons.

Ionic states
and STD-NMR spectroscopy studies of l-histidine
binding to MtATP-PRT. (A) 1H NMR spectrum of l-histidine at 10 mM, in 50 mM KPi (pH 8). The asterisk
indicates the water signal. (B) Chemical shift dependence of pH for l-histidine. The top panel shows data for ring protons, Cδ2-H
(○) and Cε1-H (●). The bottom panel shows data
for aliphatic protons, Cα-H (□) and Cβ-H (■).
Experiments were performed in 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer at the
indicated pH values, in the presence 0.4 mM l-histidine.
Symbols are data, and solid lines are the fits to eq . (C) pH dependence of STD-NMR of l-histidine with
30 μM MtATP-PRT. Aromatic resonances (Cδ2 and Cε1)
are shown.

Saturation Transfer Data for l-Histidine and MtATP-PRT
 	% saturation
transfer to l-histidine protons	
pH	Cα-H	Cβ-H2	Cδ2-H	Cε1-H	
5.5	0	0	0	0	
6.0	0	0	0	0	
6.5	0	0	0	0	
7.5	0	0	0	0	
8.0	0	0	36.9	40.4	
8.5	0	0	81.6	88.2	
9.0	0	0	100	100	
Assays performed in 50 mM sodium
phosphate buffer at the specified pH values at 25 °C, containing
0.6 mM l-histidine and 30 μM HisG.

pH–Rate Studies
To investigate the effect of
pH on the allosteric inhibition, we determined the Kii values for l-histidine, varying the ATP concentration
at a fixed saturating concentration of PRPP, at various pH values.
As one can see in Figure  and Table , l-histidine inhibition is dependent on
pH, but surprisingly, the pH dependence of inhibition is the opposite
of what was observed for binding (inhibition is weaker at higher pH
values). In the pH range of 8–9.25, the group being titrated
is the α-amino group of l-histidine, and therefore,
we are most likely observing a direct effect of its protonation state
on inhibition. Unfortunately, because of the low activity of MtATP-PRT
at neutral and acidic pH values, we could not determine any Kii values below pH 8.0. Also, no pKa values could be derived from the analysis, even though
a slope of 1 was obtained. This result suggests that deprotonation
of the α-amino group decreases inhibition potency.

pH dependence
of MtATP-PRT inhibition by l-histidine. Kii values obtained by varying the l-histidine
concentration at various fixed concentrations of ATP and
fixed saturating concentrations of PRPP, MgCl2, and KCl.
All experiments were performed at 25 °C. Symbols are values obtained
at the specified pH values by fitting data to eq ; error bars represent the standard error obtained from the fit to
eq , and the solid line is the linear regression
of the data.

Pre-Steady-State Inhibition Studies
To investigate
which elementary steps of the catalytic cycle are directly affected
by l-histidine, we studied inhibition of MtATP-PRT using
pre-steady-state kinetics (Table ). First,
we characterized the kinetics in the absence of inhibitor, to determine
whether chemistry is rate-limiting. As one can see in Figure , under multiple-turnover conditions the progress
curve of MtATP-PRT displays burst kinetics. It is described by a single-exponential
increase followed by a steady-state phase (eq ). Burst kinetics is diagnostic of chemistry being faster than subsequent
steps., In this particular case, product (PR-ATP)
formation is directly observed, and therefore, a buildup of product
indicates slower steps after the chemical step. Burst kinetics was
studied by varying the concentration of ATP. As one can see in Figure , there is a quadratic dependence of the burst amplitude
on ATP concentration under these experimental conditions (Figure B, top panel) with an amplitude maximum of 7.8 ±
0.3 μM (Table ). This value is very
close to the actual concentration of active sites used (10 μM),
suggesting that most MtATP-PRT is active during catalysis. The observed dependence of kobs on ATP concentration could also be fit by a quadratic equation (Figure B, bottom panel), giving a maximal kburst of 0.67 ± 0.02 s–1 (Table ). It is worth mentioning that, under these conditions,
the Y intercept for the plot of burst dependence
on ATP concentration is zero, indicating very slow ATP dissociation.

Stopped-flow
absorbance time course of the MtATP-PRT reaction.
Representative trace of the MtATP-PRT progress curve (10 μM
enzyme), under multiple-turnover conditions, obtained at saturating
concentrations of ATP and PRPP, in 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) at 25 °C.
The gray line shows data, and the black line represents the best fit
to the burst equation (eq ). The inset shows
the residuals from the fit to the burst equation.

Pre-steady-state kinetics of MtATP-PRT with a varying
ATP concentration.
(A) Representative traces of the MtATP-PRT reaction under multiple-turnover
conditions obtained at different concentrations of ATP and fixed saturating
concentrations of PRPP and metals. Gray thick lines represent data
and black lines the best fit to eq . Data are
averages of 10 traces. (B) Plot of the burst amplitude vs ATP concentration
(top) and plot of kobs vs ATP concentration
(bottom). Symbols represent data and solid lines the best fit to eqs  and  for burst amplitude
and burst rate dependencies, respectively. Reactions were conducted
in 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), 150 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 1.5
mM PRPP, and 10 μM MtATP-PRT, at 25 °C. Results are representative
of two independent experiments.

We next probed the effect of l-histidine,
at a fixed saturating
ATP concentration. Two different effects were observed under multiple-turnover
conditions. A marked effect on burst amplitude is apparent with increasing
concentrations of l-histidine (Figure A,B). A decrease in the burst amplitude indicates that l-histidine affects MtATP-PRT largely by trapping it in an inactive
complex. Slower product release or chemical steps would be characterized
by a decrease in the steady-state rate or the burst rate, respectively.
A Kd value of 27.9 ± 3.2 μM
was obtained by fitting the data to eq , which
is in good agreement with the Ki value
obtained by steady-state kinetics. In addition, a linear decrease
in kobs is observed (Figure C,D).

Pre-steady-state kinetics of MtATP-PRT inhibition by l-histidine. (A) Representative traces of the MtATP-PRT reaction
under
pre-steady-state conditions at various l-histidine concentrations,
and fixed saturating concentrations of ATP, PRPP, and metals. Gray
thick lines represent data and black lines the best fits to eq . Data are averages of 10 traces. (B) Plot of the
burst amplitude vs l-histidine concentration (top) and plot
of kobs vs l-histidine concentration
(bottom). Symbols represent data and solid lines best fits to eqs  and  for burst amplitude
and burst rate dependencies, respectively. Reactions were conducted
in 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), 150 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 1.5
mM PRPP, 4 mM ATP, and 10 μM MtATP-PRT, at 25 °C. Results
are representative of two independent experiments.

Discussion
Oligomeric State of MtATP-PRT
Our gel filtration experiments
indicate that MtATP-PRT is mainly hexameric in the absence of ligands
or in the presence of l-histidine or ATP, at pH 8. Although
this result appears to contrast with the results obtained by Cho and
colleagues, a dimer–hexamer equilibrium,
we believe this can be explained by the experimental conditions used.
It is worth mentioning that no shift in the oligomeric state was observed
for the hexameric homologous enzyme from S. enterica., Our interpretation of these results is that
lower pH values can lead to dissociation of MtATP-PRT into dimers,
as observed by Cho et al. However, there is no evidence that the dimer
represents a kinetically competent form of MtATP-PRT, as activity
decreases drastically as the pH drops below 8. Similar results have
been recently reported for ATP-PRT from C. glutamicum. Although there is some dimer present during gel filtration (at
pH 7.2), CgATP-PRT loses most of it activity below pH 8.

If the dimer–hexamer equilibrium
does not account for the allosteric inhibition, another mechanism
has to be envisioned. It is noteworthy to mention that Cho and colleagues observed a large domain shift, on domain III,
in the dimeric form compared with the hexameric form. Although this
dimeric form is not present under our experimental conditions, the
domain shift could still take place, generating an alternative hexamer,
which could be inhibited. Regardless of whether this conformational
change is the one responsible for l-histidine inhibition,
we propose that MtATP-PRT is a functional hexamer and conformational
changes have to be invoked to explain the allosteric inhibition.

Inhibition of MtATP-PRT by l-Histidine
Steady-state
kinetic analysis indicates that l-histidine inhibition versus
PRPP is linear and noncompetitive, where Kis = Kii. The equality of these two inhibition
constants indicates that l-histidine has the same affinity
for ATP-bound and ATP-PRPP-bound enzyme forms. l-Histidine
inhibition versus ATP was linear and uncompetitive, indicating that l-histidine binds to MtATP-PRT only when ATP is present at the
enzyme active site. These results are fully consistent with the allosteric
inhibition proposed on the basis of the structure. In addition, uncompetitive
inhibition versus ATP is in agreement with the l-histidine–AMP
ternary complex structure determined by X-ray crystallography.

Pre-steady-state kinetic analysis of enzyme
inhibition is a powerful approach for determining which step or steps
are affected by a given inhibitor, and it has been applied to study
a number of systems, including DNA polymerase γ, HIV-1 reverse transcriptase,d-3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase, and BACE. To gather further
information about how l-histidine inhibits MtATP-PRT, we
performed pre-steady-state kinetic studies, using stopped-flow absorbance,
monitoring PR-ATP formation. l-Histidine inhibition under
pre-steady-state conditions is complex, affecting multiple steps.
The dominant effect observed is a decrease in the amplitude of the
burst, rather than a decrease in the burst or steady-state rates.
A decrease in burst amplitude indicates that l-histidine
inhibits MtATP-PRT by trapping it on a form that is catalytic and
inactive, and not by severely slowing chemistry or product release.
On the basis of our results and the sequential ordered kinetic mechanism previously proposed for ATP-PRTs, we can describe
the inhibition using Scheme . Burton et al.
elegantly demonstrated a similar mechanism for feedback allosteric
inhibition of E. colid-3-phosphoglycerate
dehydrogenase (PGDH) by l-serine. It is important to stress that MtATP-PRT and PGDH are structurally
unrelated enzymes, which catalyze very different types of chemistry
with distinct substrates. However, the conservation of the allosteric
mechanism, e.g., sequestration of the enzyme–substrate–inhibitor
complex into a nonproductive form, appears to be a successful case
of convergent evolution.

On the basis of our steady-state data, the extent
of l-histidine inhibition is maximal at saturating ATP concentrations
(uncompetitive kinetic pattern) and is independent of the concentration
of PRPP [noncompetitive kinetic pattern (Kii = Kis)]. Taken together, results from
steady-state and pre-steady-state experiments indicate that the k–6/k6 and k–7/k7 ratios
(Scheme ) must be very similar, and that both
E–ATP–histidine and E–ATP–PRPP–histidine
complexes must be inactive forms of MtATP-PRT. The structural basis
for this effect cannot yet be defined because of the lack of structural
information regarding complexes of MtATP-PRT and the two substrates
or products, with and without l-histidine.

Ionic States of l-Histidine Bound to ATP-PRT
The definition of the ionic state of l-histidine that best
binds to and best inhibits MtATP-PRT is an essential step toward the
molecular description of its inhibition, and it paves the way for
any rational approach to target this site. We first analyzed binding,
using STD-NMR. The pH dependence of the STD-NMR clearly demonstrates
that l-histidine binds better to MtATP-PRT at higher pH values.
More specifically, deprotonation of the α-amino group of l-histidine increases the extent of saturation transfer, which
correlates with an increased level of binding. On the basis of the
identity of the residues involved in l-histidine binding,
Asp218, Thr238, and Ala273, we tentatively assign this effect to titration
of the α-amino group of l-histidine (pKa ∼ 9). Although this result most likely has no
physiological importance, as the cytoplasm will not reach pH 9, it
hints about a potential mechanism for preparing l-histidine
analogues that bind tightly to MtATP-PRT.

Our kinetic results
demonstrate that l-histidine inhibition is stronger (lower Ki values) near pH 8. This is the opposite result
obtained with binding and indicates that the form of l-histidine
that best inhibits MtATP-PRT is different from the form of l-histidine that best binds it. Although IC50 measurements
of l-histidine inhibition at different pH values have been
performed with other ATP-PRTs, this is the first report of the pH
dependence of Ki for l-histidine
and ATP-PRT. Bearing in mind that IC50 values could be
misleading as they do not take into account the concentration of the
enzyme, substrates and their saturation, inhibition type, etc., we
note that the inhibitory behavior seen with MtATP-PRT appears to follow
the same trend observed with the homologous enzymes from S.
enterica and C. glutamicum., Specifically, higher pH values decrease the inhibitory effect of l-histidine, and it appears that this correlates with the pKa of the α-amino group. We emphasize that
other ionizable groups responsible for the transmission of the inhibitory
signal from the allosteric site to the active site are certainly also
important, but unfortunately, they were not observed because of the
narrow pH range that could be employed to study catalysis and inhibition.

Finally, it is important to explain that this “reverse protonation”
behavior is most likely not unique to l-histidine and MtATP-PRT.
Usually, allosteric regulation of enzymes is studied by either analysis
of binding or inhibition, and rarely is the pH dependence of either
or both investigated. The assumption that the dissociation constant
(Kd) and inhibition constant (Ki) for allosteric inhibitors are identical might
be an oversimplification. This is likely to be the case when dealing
with inhibitors and allosteric sites that contain several groups with
ionization constants near neutrality. As more allosteric inhibitors
are discovered and characterized, more examples such as this are likely
to be found.

l-Histidine Biosynthesis in M. tuberculosis
Two conclusions regarding l-histidine levels can
be drawn from our studies. Assuming that ATP is at saturating concentration
in the cell, we would have half-maximal inhibition
with 4 μM l-histidine, at pH 8. This indicates that
physiological concentrations of l-histidine must be varying
around this value to be able to feedback control the pathway. Specifically,
concentrations of ≤0.4 μM would make MtATP-PRT mostly
active, and conversely, concentrations of l-histidine of
≥40 μM would inhibit MtATP-PRT and therefore shut down l-histidine biosynthesis in M. tuberculosis. Therefore, this range, between 0.4 and 40 μM, should correlate
with the maximal variation expected for l-histidine in M. tuberculosis.

Only one other ATP-PRT has been characterized
with regard to inhibition constants. Comparison of the value reported
for Lactococcus lactis ATP-PRT indicates that l-histidine levels might fluctuate at least 10-fold across bacteria,
as a Ki of 81 μM was determined,
at pH 8. In S. enterica serovar Typhimurium, the intracellular concentration
of l-histidine was shown to vary between 15 and 100 μM,
depending on the growth conditions. On
the basis of these values, the concentration of l-histidine
in M. tuberculosis might be in the same range as
in Salmonella and Lactococcus.

Chemical Mechanism
A few observations were made regarding
the chemical mechanism of MtATP-PRT. First, MtATP-PRT displays an
unusual pH dependence, which has been observed with other homologous
enzymes. MtATP-PRT is inactive at pH
≤7, but active at neutral and alkaline pH values up to 9.5.
The basis for this alkaline pH dependence is unknown, but it could
be caused by a highly basic active site, which has to bind six phosphates
from the two substrates, or by a missing protein partner, which could
alter this toward more acidic pH.

Second, multiple-turnover
experiments showed a burst of product formation, indicating that a
step after chemistry is partially rate-limiting for MtATP-PRT. Unfortunately,
there are no studies of other ATP-PRTs under pre-steady-state conditions,
and slow product release has been shown not to be a ubiquitous trait
among other phosphoribosyltransferases. For example, quinolinate phosphoribosyltransferase
has been shown not to display burst kinetics, indicating that chemistry
is rate-limiting and relatively slow (kobs = kcat = 0.4 s–1). In contrast, nicotinate phosphoribosyltransferase
displayed burst kinetics, indicating fast chemistry (kobs ≥ 500 s–1) and slow product
release (kcat = 1.2 s–1).

Summary
Results presented here indicate that active
and l-histidine-inhibited MtATP-PRT are hexameric in solution. l-Histidine inhibition is noncompetitive versus PRPP and uncompetitive
versus ATP. Inhibition of MtATP-PRT by l-histidine is strongly
influenced by pH, reaching higher potency closer to physiological
pH. Binding of l-histidine displays the opposite pH dependence
observed for inhibition, indicating that deprotonation of the α-amino
group increases the level of binding but decreases the level of inhibition.
Therefore, l-histidine binds and inhibits MtATP-PRT with
a neutral imidazole and ionized α-amino and α-carboxyl
groups. Pre-steady-state kinetic studies revealed that a step after
chemistry is partially rate-limiting and that l-histidine
exerts its inhibition by decreasing the amount of catalytically active
MtATP-PRT (Scheme ).

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Steve Howell for ESI-MS analysis of MtATP-PRT
and NIMR’s Large Scale Laboratory for E. coli growth. We thank Drs. Clarissa M. Czekster and Rafael G. da Silva
for thoughtful discussions. All NMR spectra were recorded at the MRC
Biomedical NMR Centre, NIMR, Mill Hill (funded by MRC Grant-in-Aid
U117533887).

Abbreviations
ATP-PRTATP phosphoribosyltransferase

PR-ATP1-(5-phospho-α-d-ribosyl)-ATP

PPiinorganic
pyrophosphate

PRPP5-phospho-α-d-ribosyl pyrophosphate

SDS–PAGEsodium
dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis

TEAtriethanolamine

BCAbicinchoninic acid

BSAbovine serum albumin

Tristris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane

ESI-MSelectrospray
ionization mass spectrometry

HEPES4-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazine-1-ethanesulfonic acid

NMRnuclear magnetic resonance

STDsaturation transfer
difference

PIPES1,4-piperazinediethanesulfonic acid

TAPSN-[tris(hydroxymethyl)methyl]-3-aminopropanesulfonic
acid

CHES2-(cyclohexylamino)ethanesulfonic
acid.

Saturation transfer difference NMR
(STD-NMR) is a 1H NMR method developed for monitoring the
interaction of small molecules with proteins, without the resonance
assignments of the protein being necessary., In this method, a first spectrum of protein with ligand is obtained,
followed by a second spectrum where a radiofrequency has ablated all
resonances from the protein and by spin diffusion of any bound ligand
(saturation transfer). As the ligand is in equilibrium between the
bound and free states, all signals are perturbed, not only the ones
from the bound ligand. Once these spectra are obtained, they are subtracted,
and the resulting difference spectrum reveals which resonances of
the ligand are affected, indicating a direct contact with protein.

The amplitude of the burst observed
under pre-steady-state multiple-turnover conditions is a function
of three factors: (i) the rate of the chemical step relative to the
rate of product release, (ii) the internal equilibrium constant for
the chemical step, at the active site, and (iii) the fraction of active
enzyme. As the goal of these studies
was not to describe the complete kinetic mechanism of MtATP-PRT, we
did not attempt to determine why the amplitude of the burst is lower
than the concentration of MtATP-PRT.

Scheme  shows
the sequential ordered kinetic mechanism, with binding of ATP followed
by binding of PRPP. Product release is also shown as ordered, with
PPi dissociating first followed by PR-ATP. This kinetic
mechanism was observed with SeATP-PRT.

The concentration of ATP
in M. tuberculosis is unknown, but cells typically
contain
between 1 and 10 mM ATP. This range corresponds to roughly 5–50
times the Km for ATP.

