Botulinum neurotoxins (BoNTs,
serotypes A–G) are the most potent toxins known. They target presynaptic nerve terminals with high specificity,
causing a severe disease termed botulism. These toxins are produced
as 150 kDa proteins by bacteria belonging to the genus Clostridium. Each toxin consists of a heavy chain (HC, 100 kDa) and a light
chain (LC, 50 kDa). The HC binds to receptors on the neuronal surface
and mediates toxin uptake. Recent studies indicate that the BoNTs
utilize synaptic vesicle (SV) recycling as their major endocytic pathway,− with the exception of BoNT/C. The HC
also mediates the translocation of the LC from the SV/endosomal lumen
into the cytosol. The LC then acts as
a specific protease that cleaves SNARE (soluble NSF attachment protein
receptor) proteins, thereby inhibiting neurotransmitter release. Such
blockade results in flaccid paralysis at the neuromuscular junction
and can result in respiratory failure and death. Because of their extreme potency (lethal dose ranging from
0.1 to 1 ng/kg), BoNTs are listed as Category A bioterrorism agents
by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)., Paradoxically, BoNTs are also widely used to treat a variety of
diseases and are also used cosmetically to treat wrinkles.

The mechanism by which BoNTs translocate
their LCs from the SV/endosome
lumen into the cytosol remains the least understood step in intoxication. Previous studies indicate that low pH in the
endosomal lumen is required for the translocation step: neutralizing
the pH with chloroquine, ammonium chloride, or methylamine hydrochloride
or blocking endosomal acidification by specific vacuolar H+-ATPase inhibitors antagonized the action of all of the BoNTs.− Electrophysiological studies revealed that addition of BoNTs to
the low-pH, oxidizing side of a membrane resulted in single-channel
formation in vitro; the channel activity was restricted to the HC.,− These data led to the hypothesis that low endosomal
pH triggers the HC to form a membrane channel that mediates LC translocation.
Because BoNTs are synthesized as soluble proteins, transforming them
into membrane channels must involve major structural rearrangements;
however, low pH alone failed to trigger any structural changes in
BoNT/B, and this serotype was structurally stable from pH 7 to 4.

Recent studies have shed new light on
this apparent paradox. It was found that
BoNT/B is a coincidence detector:
binding to the coreceptor molecule, the ganglioside GT1b, allows the
toxin to sense low pH and transform into oligomeric hydrophobic membrane-associated
channels. This form of coincidence detection, i.e., the simultaneous
requirement for both receptor binding and low pH, ensures that translocation
occurs at the right time and place. GT1b-dependent oligomerization
of BoNT/B in solution requires a pH of ≤5; at pH 5, the BoNT/B
HC self-assembles into membrane-bound double- and triple-doughnut
structures that resemble other protein translocation complexes. However, whether the concept of coincidence
detection applies to any other BoNT serotype has yet to be determined:
the underlying mechanisms that mediate their conversion into membrane
channels remain elusive, and whether receptor molecules play a role
in shaping the behavior of these toxins for translocation has not
been addressed.

To begin to address these questions, we studied
how BoNT/E senses
low pH to transform into a hydrophobic protein. In contrast to the
case for BoNT/B, which has a slow onset (e.g., 27% of subjects exhibit
symptoms in ≤1 day), BoNT/E causes human botulism rapidly and
has the shortest onset time (97% of subjects exhibit symptoms in ≤1
day).− In this study, we have compared these two serotypes
with the goal of gaining novel insights into the means by which translocation,
one of the major steps that underlies intoxication by BoNTs, is triggered.
The ganglioside GT1b serves as a coreceptor (in conjunction with protein
receptors) for both BoNT/B and -E.,− We found that while both toxins act as coincidence detectors for
receptor (GT1b) and low pH, they also exhibit striking differences
with regard to how they respond to each of these signals. We speculate
that these differences might underlie the distinct kinetics of translocation
of these two toxin serotypes to affect the time course of intoxication.

Experimental Procedures
Toxins and Antibodies
BoNT/E and -B and rabbit polyclonal
anti-BoNT/E and anti-BoNT/B antibodies were prepared as described
previously.,, Monoclonal
antibodies against SNAP-25 (71.1), syntaxin (HPC-1), and synaptobrevin
II (syb, 69.1) were kindly provided by R. Jahn (Max Planck Institute
for Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany).

Concanamycin A (con A) Assay
All procedures involving
animals were conducted according to National Institutes of Health
guidelines, as approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of the
University of Wisconsin. Cultures of rat embryonic (E17-18) hippocampal
neurons were prepared as previously described. Experiments were performed on neurons that were 15–20
days old. Neurons were treated with BoNT/E or -B (10 nM) in high-K+ buffer [85 mM NaCl, 60 mM KCl, 2 mM CaCl2, 2 mM
MgCl2, 5.5 mM glucose, 10 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic
acid (HEPES), 10 mM sodium 2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonate
(NaMES) (pH 7.4)] for 5 min. Toxins were washed off using low-K+ buffer [140 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 2 mM CaCl2, 2 mM
MgCl2, 5.5 mM glucose, 10 mM HEPES, and 10 mM NaMES (pH
7.4)]. Where appropriate, con A (0.05 μM, Sigma-Aldrich) was
added to the culture media before, with, or after toxin exposure at
the indicated time. Neurons were incubated for 12 h, and cells were
lysed as described previously. Cleavage
of SNAP-25 by BoNT/E, or syb by BoNT/B, was monitored via immunoblot
analysis. Syntaxin served as an internal loading control. Cleavage
of SNAP-25 or syb was quantified using data obtained from at least
eight independent trials.

Blue Native-PAGE (BN-PAGE) Assay
BN-PAGE assays were
performed as previously described, using
the Native-PAGE Novex Bis-Tris gel system (Invitrogen). BoNT/E or
-B (100 nM) was incubated in the absence or presence of ganglioside
GT1b (10 μM) at the indicated pH and 37 °C for 2 h. Samples
were analyzed by BN-PAGE followed by either silver staining (Figure ) or immunoblot using anti-BoNT/E antibodies (Figure
S1 of the ).

Circular Dichroism (CD) Spectroscopy
CD experiments
were performed using an Aviv model 202SF spectrometer as described
previously. Far-ultraviolet (UV) CD spectra
(from 197 to 260 nm) of BoNT/E (0.67 μM) were obtained at the
indicated pH and 37 °C using 1 mm path length quartz cuvettes.
GT1b (30 μM) was then directly added to samples, and spectra
were measured again. All spectra were corrected by subtracting spectra
of the buffer alone. Helical content was estimated on the basis of
the molar ellipticity value at 222 nm as described previously.

Triton X-114 Partitioning Assay
Triton X-114 partitioning
assays were performed as described previously., BoNT/E or -B (0.045 mg/mL, 300 nM) was incubated with or without
GT1b (90 μM) at the indicated pH for 1 h at 37 °C before
Triton X-114 partitioning assays were performed. The buffer consisted
of 10 mM HEPES, 10 mM NaMES, 10 mM sodium acetate, and 150 mM NaCl,
with the pH adjusted to the desired values. Triton X-114 was added
to samples to a final concentration of 1% (v/v), and samples were
vortexed for 15 min at 4 °C and centrifuged at 3000 g for 5 min to remove insoluble material. The supernatants were collected,
incubated at 30 °C for 5 min, laid on top of a sucrose cushion
[containing 6% (w/v) sucrose and 0.06% Triton X-114 in the above buffer,
at the indicated pH], and centrifuged at 830 g for
3 min at room temperature. The detergent phase and aqueous phase were
separated, and the aqueous phase was re-extracted with Triton X-114
as detailed above. The detergent phases were combined, and all samples
were precipitated with 4 volumes of acetone overnight at −30
°C. The pellets were dissolved in SDS sample buffer and subjected
to immunoblot analysis using anti-BoNT/E or anti-BoNT/B antibodies.
The fraction of each protein in the detergent phase was quantified
using data obtained from three independent trials.

Off-Pathway Assay
Off-pathway assays were performed
as described previously. Briefly, BoNT/E
(concentration as indicated) was incubated in high-K+ buffer
at pH 7.4 or 4.4 for 2 h at 37 °C. Where appropriate, the pH
of samples containing BoNT/E at pH 4.4 was reversed to 7.4, and BoNT/E
was incubated at 37 °C for the indicated time. Toxins were then
incubated with cultured rat hippocampal neurons for 5 min. Neurons
were washed and incubated in neuronal media at 37 °C for 20 h.
Off-pathway assays of BoNT/B (10 nM) were also performed as controls.
Cells were harvested, and cleavage of SNAP-25 by BoNT/E, or cleavage
of syb by BoNT/B, was monitored via immunoblot analysis using anti-SNAP-25
or anti-syb antibodies. The cleavage of SNAP-25 was quantified using
data obtained from at least three independent trials.

Results
Time Courses for Blocking the Action of BoNT/E and -B in Neurons
by con A
Translocation is a key step during BoNT intoxication, and the kinetics of this step can potentially
impact the time course for the onset of botulism in host organisms.
Current evidence indicates that BoNT/E translocates faster than BoNT/A
in neurons,, but we still lack a general understanding
of the translocation rates for other BoNT serotypes. Specifically,
BoNT/B is also a common cause of human botulism and is used clinically, but
the time course for translocation of this serotype remains completely
unknown.

To estimate the rate of BoNT/B translocation, we used
con A, a specific inhibitor of vacuolar H+-ATPase, in rat hippocampal neurons. BoNT LC translocation
requires low endosomal pH;, after toxins are internalized
into SVs/endosomes via endocytosis, blockade of acidification at different
time points by con A traps the remaining LCs within the SVs/endosomes,
thereby preventing SNARE cleavage by LCs in the cytosol. Thus, assaying
for SNARE cleavage under these conditions provides a straightforward
way to estimate BoNT translocation rates., Experiments utilizing BoNT/E were performed as controls.

Without
con A, treating neurons with 10 nM BoNT/E or -B in high-K+ buffer (to stimulate SV recycling) for 5 min resulted in
approximately 75–80% substrate cleavage during a subsequent
12 h incubation. Substrate cleavage was monitored by immunoblot analysis
using antibodies against SNAP-25 (cleaved by BoNT/E) or syb (cleaved
by BoNT/B) (Figure ). Cleavage was completely
blocked when con A was added to cells 10 min before toxin treatment.
When con A was applied 10 min after BoNT/E, ∼50% cleavage of
SNAP-25 was observed; BoNT/E became completely insensitive to con
A when con A was added 1 h after toxin internalization (Figure A,B). In accordance with previous studies, these
data suggest that BoNT/E completes translocation within 1 h of toxin
internalization., In contrast, application of con
A 1 h after BoNT/B addition severely hindered BoNT/B translocation,
as less than ∼25% cleavage of syb was observed, and BoNT/B
did not become completely insensitive to con A until con A was added
more than 6 h after toxin treatment (Figure C,D). These results are unlikely due to slow cell surface binding
and internalization of BoNT/B into SV/endosomes; as for BoNT/E,, the majority of BoNT/B was already internalized into SVs/endosomes
during the 5 min high-K+ buffer stimulation, and remaining
toxin molecules on the cell surface after high-K+ buffer
treatment were removed by extensive washing., As
con A affects only translocation, our data suggest that BoNT/B translocates
much more slowly than BoNT/E.

Time courses for blocking the action of BoNT/E
and -B in neurons
by con A. Immunoblot analysis of SNAP-25 cleavage by BoNT/E (A, quantified
in panel B) or syb cleavage by BoNT/B (C, quantified in panel D) in
cultured rat hippocampal neurons. con A was added to neurons at the
indicated time, either before, during, or after toxin exposure. SNARE
cleavage was assayed 12 h after toxin exposure. The arrow indicates
the cleaved form of SNAP-25. Syntaxin served as an internal loading
control. The black line indicates lanes, from the same blot, that
were juxtaposed. Data are means ± SEM (n = 8
in panel B; n = 9 in panel D).

Binding to GT1b Allows BoNT/E To Form Oligomers at Neutral pH
We then investigated the prerequisite factors for BoNT/E and -B
translocation, which might underlie different translocation rates.
As noted above, previous studies revealed that BoNT/B is a coincidence
detector for low pH and the coreceptor GT1b; both are simultaneously
required for BoNT/B to transform into an oligomeric membrane-bound
channel-like structure. Moreover, low
pH and GT1b also drive the oligomerization of BoNT/B, and this oligomerization
step might contribute to efficient translocation, as suggested by
studies of other bacterial toxins., To address
whether BoNT/E also responds to low pH and GT1b by forming oligomers,
we subjected this serotype to BN-PAGE under a variety of conditions.
Oligomerization of BoNT/B was monitored as a control. In the absence
of GT1b, BoNT/E, similar to BoNT/B, remained monomeric at pH 7.4 and
4.4 (Figure A and
Figure S1 of the ; note that the toxin did not stain well with silver staining at
pH 4.4, but immunoblot analysis revealed that the toxin remained monomeric
at this pH value). In the presence of GT1b, BoNT/B assembled into
oligomers when the pH was &lt;5.4 (Figure B; see also ref ()). Surprisingly, binding of GT1b allowed BoNT/E to efficiently form
oligomers at all pH values examined, even at pH 8 (Figure A). These data indicate that while the oligomerization
of BoNT/B can occur only in acidic SVs/endosomes after internalization,
BoNT/E may already undergo oligomerization upon binding to GT1b on
the cell surface, potentially contributing to fast translocation.

GT1b allows
oligomerization of BoNT/E at neutral pH. (A) BN-PAGE
analysis of BoNT/E at the indicated pH in the absence and presence
of GT1b. (B) BN-PAGE analysis of BoNT/B is included as a control.
Representative gels, from three independent trials, are shown.

BoNT/E Changes Conformation and Becomes Hydrophobic in the Presence
of GT1b at Low pH
BoNTs have the remarkable ability to transform
from soluble proteins into membrane-bound channels that mediate translocation., We reiterate that for BoNT/B, both oligomerization and transformation
into a membrane protein require the presence of GT1b and low pH. However,
this question has not been addressed for BoNT/E or any other serotype.
We therefore conducted CD spectroscopy measurements, to probe structural
changes in BoNT/E, at different pH values in the presence and absence
of GT1b. Far-UV CD spectra were collected from 197 to 260 nm (Figure ), and the helical content was estimated on the
basis of the molar ellipticity at 222 nm. BoNT/E alone at pH 7.4 had a helical content of ∼27.5% (Figure A), consistent with a value of ∼26% as determined
via crystallography. Lowering the pH
from 7.4 to 5.4 did not significantly affect the shape of the spectra
(Figure B,C), and the helical contents of
BoNT/E at pH 6.4 and 5.4 were ∼27.3 and ∼29.9%, respectively.
However, at pH 4.4, the peak of the BoNT/E spectrum was slightly shifted
to the right (Figure D), but the helical content
remained ∼27.6%. At pH ≥5.4, addition of GT1b did not
significantly change the spectra of BoNT/E (Figure A–C); the helical content was ∼28.1% at pH 7.4,
∼28.9% at pH 6.4, and ∼28.8% at pH 5.4. However, as
for BoNT/B, addition of GT1b to BoNT/E
samples at pH 4.4 resulted in a major change in the shape of the spectrum
(Figure D) that was associated with a reduction
in helical content to ∼11.7%.

GT1b triggers major conformational changes
in BoNT/E at low pH.
Far-UV CD spectra of BoNT/E in the absence (dashed lines) and presence
(solid lines) of GT1b at pH 7.4 (A), 6.4 (B), 5.4 (C), and 4.4 (D).
CD spectra of GT1b alone were included as controls (dotted lines).

To further test whether the observed structural
changes in BoNT/E
triggered by GT1b at low pH were associated with its conversion into
a hydrophobic protein, we performed Triton X-114 partitioning assays.
The detergent Triton X-114 remains homogeneous in solution at low
temperature but partitions into aqueous and detergent phases at room
temperature. This provides a convenient way to distinguish integral
or lipid-anchored proteins (partitioning in the detergent phase) from
soluble or peripheral proteins (partitioning in the aqueous phase)., Parallel experiments using BoNT/B were included as controls (Figure A, bottom panel, and Figure B; see also ref ()). Similar to BoNT/B, BoNT/E partitioned largely in the aqueous phase
at both pH 7.4 and 4.4 in the absence of GT1b (Figure A, top panel, and Figure B). Binding
to GT1b at pH 7.4 did not cause a significant increase in the level
of partitioning of BoNT/E into the detergent phase. However, when
the pH was lowered to 4.4, in the presence of GT1b, ∼80% of
BoNT/E partitioned into the detergent phase. This was not due to tighter
binding of BoNT/E at lower pH, because BoNT/E binds GT1b much less
avidly at acidic pH than neutral pH. Overall,
the data reported in this section indicate that BoNT/E requires a
change in pH similar to that of BoNT/B to undergo the GT1b-dependent
conversion into a hydrophobic protein.

BoNT/E becomes hydrophobic at low pH only
in the presence of GT1b.
(A) Triton X-114 partitioning assays were conducted at the indicated
pH in the absence or presence of GT1b, and BoNT/E in the total input
(T), aqueous (A), and detergent (D) phases was detected by immunoblot
analysis. (B) Partitioning of BoNT/E was quantified. Triton X-114
partitioning assays using BoNT/B were performed as controls. Data are means ± SEM (n = 3).

BoNT/E Enters an Off Pathway at Low pH
As shown in
the preceding section, in the absence of GT1b, BoNT/E exhibited a
slight right shift in its CD spectra when the pH was lowered from
7.4 to 4.4 (Figure D). This behavior is clearly
different from that of BoNT/B, which is structurally stable from pH
7.4 to 4.4., It appears that low pH may be
able to alter the structure of isolated BoNT/E in solution to some
degree, even in the absence of GT1b.

To assess the functional
impact of the low-pH-induced structural changes in BoNT/E, we conducted
an “off-pathway” assay, again using cultured neurons
as the target. This assay was devised
to determine whether incubating the toxin, free in solution, at low
pH, would result in premature conformational changes that result in
unfolding and inactivation (i.e., entry into an “off pathway”).
Such pathways exist for some bacterial toxins, including anthrax toxin, but not for BoNT/B (Figure A; see also ref ()). In sharp contrast to BoNT/B, preincubation of BoNT/E
at pH 4.4 for 2 h abolished its ability to enter neurons and cleave
SNAP-25 (Figure A,B). We also reversed the
preincubation pH back to 7.4, after a 2 h incubation at pH 4.4, before
applying toxins to neurons and found that the cleavage of SNAP-25
was only partially recovered (∼40%) (Figure C,D), so the off pathway appears to be largely irreversible.
These data indicate that unlike that of BoNT/B, low pH alone disrupts
the structure of BoNT/E, leading it to enter an off pathway.

Low-pH pretreatment
inactivates BoNT/E. (A and B) BoNT/E was incubated
at the indicated pH for 2 h at 37 °C, before being added to rat
hippocampal neurons. Neurons were lysed after 20 h, and cleavage of
SNAP-25 by BoNT/E was monitored by immunoblot analysis (A, quantified
in panel B). Cleavage of syb by BoNT/B, under the same conditions,
was measured as a control. Syntaxin served as an internal loading
control. (C and D) BoNT/E was incubated at pH 4.4 for 2 h, before
the pH of the samples was reversed back to 7.4 for the indicated period
of time. BoNT/E was then incubated with neurons, and cleavage of SNAP-25
was monitored by immunoblot analysis (C, quantified in panel D). The
effect of BoNT/E, which had not been pretreated with low-pH buffer,
was analyzed as a control. Arrows indicate the cleaved form of SNAP-25.
Data are means ± SEM from at least three independent trials.

Discussion
Many pathogenic bacteria produce protein
toxins that alter the
function of host cells. Among these toxins, BoNTs are the most deadly. BoNTs act by targeting presynaptic nerve terminals;
however, the mechanism by which these agents translocate into the
cytosol of host cells to exert their effects remains elusive. This study is focused on the translocation of
BoNT/E, the serotype with the fastest onset for causing human botulism.−

Recent studies have provided new insights into the factors
the
trigger translocation of BoNT/B and revealed that this serotype requires
both binding to the coreceptor molecule GT1b and low pH to transform
into an oligomeric membrane protein. In
this study, we found that oligomerization of BoNT/E is dependent only
on GT1b and does not require low pH. In addition, oligomerization
of BoNT/E was not associated with significant changes in secondary
structure (Figures  and ) and was not blocked by toosendanin
(data not shown), a BoNT translocation inhibitor that hinders BoNT/B
oligomerization. These findings indicate
that while BoNT/B can only oligomerize after internalization and acidification
of the organelle that mediated uptake, BoNT/E might undergo oligomerization
on the cell surface, possibly contributing to its fast translocation.
This is reminiscent of other bacterial toxins, such as anthrax toxin,
whereby oligomerization occurs upon receptor binding on the cell surface,
and the soluble oligomer is further converted into a membrane channel
by low endosomal pH.,

Structural studies revealed
that the domain arrangement of BoNT/E
at neutral pH is different from that of BoNT/A and -B.,− In BoNT/E, the receptor-binding domain is on the
same side of the translocation domain of the HC as the LC, and all
three domains have mutual interfaces. This is different from the case
for BoNT/A and -B, in which the LC and receptor-binding domain are
on opposite sides of the translocation domain. The unique domain arrangement
within BoNT/E has been proposed to contribute to the rapid kinetics
of translocation of this serotype. Thus,
it will be interesting to determine whether the unique domain arrangement
with BoNT/E underlies its ability to oligomerize in a pH-independent
manner upon binding GT1b.

In addition, it has been hypothesized
that BoNT/E might have a
less stringent requirement at low pH, and that this might also contribute
to fast translocation. However, we found
that BoNT/E has a pH dependence for transforming into a hydrophobic
protein, in the presence of GT1b, similar to that of BoNT/B, a serotype
that translocates with relatively slow kinetics. Hence, the rapid
translocation of the BoNT/E LC does not appear to be due to a greater
sensitivity of this serotype to low pH.

For bacterial toxins
that require low pH for translocation, such
as diphtheria toxin, histidine residues
within the translocation domain serve as pH sensors: protonation of
histidines at low pH triggers conformational changes that result in
channel formation.− While histidines serve as common low-pH sensors for
a number of processes involving protein–membrane interactions,, and/or molten globule formation,, BoNT/E has only one histidine within the translocation domain, and
there are no histidines in the translocation domain of BoNT/B. These
findings indicate that either BoNTs use different sensors within the
translocation domain or pH sensing is mediated by other regions of
these proteins. Moreover, recent studies revealed that deletion of
the receptor-binding domain of BoNT/A alone (or together with the
LC) disrupted low-pH sensing activity and the mutant (composed of
the translocation domain and the LC or the translocation domain alone)
was constitutively active for channel formation, even at neutral pH., These findings, in conjunction with our observations that BoNT/B
and -E require binding to GT1b to transform into hydrophobic proteins
at low pH, indicate that the receptor-binding domain somehow plays
a crucial role in sensing low pH for translocation. In this regard,
it is notable that the receptor binding domains of both serotypes
contain histidines: two in BoNT/B and five in BoNT/E.

In summary,
this work suggests that BoNT/E, similar to BoNT/B,
is a coincidence detector for the coreceptor GT1b and low pH for translocation,
and that the receptor-binding domain within these toxins may play
a crucial role in sensing the low pH for translocation. Nonetheless,
BoNT/E exhibited some striking differences from BoNT/B. (1) It translocates
much more rapidly than BoNT/B in cultured hippocampal neurons. (2)
Low pH alone disrupts the structure of BoNT/E to some degree and drives
the toxin into an off pathway. (3) GT1b triggered BoNT/E oligomerization
even at neutral pH. Therefore, though these toxins operate in similar
ways, comparison of two serotypes has revealed marked differences
in their responses to the factors that trigger translocation, raising
the possibility that these differences contribute to the distinct
translocation rates of different serotypes.

We note that motor
neurons exhibit somewhat different expression
patterns regarding protein receptors for BoNTs, and gangliosides,
as compared to the cultured central nervous system neurons used for
our studies, and it has been proposed that these differences may explain
the higher apparent sensitivities of motor neuron terminals to the
toxins. This view is supported by the
finding that gangliosides serve as critical cofactors for toxin translocation
(the current study and see also ref ()). Future studies, monitoring BoNT translocation
directly at the terminals of different classes of neurons, especially
at the neuromuscular junction, will shed light on this issue.

Supporting Information Available
BN-PAGE followed
by silver
staining or immunoblot analysis of BoNT/E (Figure S1). This material
is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi3004928_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank A. Figueroa Bernier for helping to prepare rat hippocampal
neurons.

Abbreviations
BN-PAGEblue native-PAGE

BoNTbotulinum neurotoxin

BoNT/Bbotulinum neurotoxin
type B

BoNT/Cbotulinum
neurotoxin type C

BoNT/Ebotulinum neurotoxin type E

CDcircular dichroism

CDCCenters for Disease Control and Prevention

con Aconcanamycin
A

HEPES4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic
acid

HCheavy chain

LClight chain

NaMESsodium 2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonate

SEMstandard error of the mean

SNAREsoluble NSF attachment protein receptor

SVsynaptic vesicle

sybsynaptobrevin II

UVultraviolet.

