The cancer/testis antigens (CTAs),
especially those encoded by the X chromosome (CT-X antigens), are
a group of proteins that are typically restricted to the testicular
germ cells in the adult human but are aberrantly expressed in several
types of cancer., The CT-X antigens generally lack
orthologues in lower vertebrates, with the possible exception of the
MAGE family,, suggesting that these proteins
have evolved quite recently. Because of the lack of phylogenetic conservation,
the functions of most, if not all, CT-X antigens, both in gametogenesis
and tumorigenesis, remain poorly understood. However, emerging evidence suggests that they may be stress-response
proteins.−

Interestingly, a majority of the CTAs, particularly the CT-X
antigens,
are predicted to be intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs). IDPs are proteins that lack tertiary structure
in physiological conditions in vitro. They are highly
abundant in nature and possess a number of unique structural properties
such as high stability when exposed to low pH and high temperature,
and structural indifference toward unfolding by strong denaturants. Despite the lack of structure, IDPs play important
biological roles such as transcriptional regulation and signaling
via protein–protein interaction networks (PINs)., Comprehensive studies of PINs from yeast to humans have revealed
that proteins that constitute hubs in a PIN are significantly more
disordered than proteins that constitute edges,, underscoring their role in signaling. Consistent with the preference
for IDPs to occupy hub positions in PINs, many IDPs undergo disorder-to-order
transitions upon binding to their biological target, a phenomenon
referred to as coupled folding and binding, in order to perform their
function. Thus, the conformational dynamics
of IDPs is believed to represent a major functional advantage for
these proteins, enabling them to interact with a broad range of biological
targets under normal physiological conditions where their levels are
tightly regulated from transcript synthesis to protein degradation.,

For the past several years, our laboratory has focused on
prostate-associated
gene 4 (PAGE4), a member of the PAGE4 family of CT-X antigens and
a remarkably prostate-specific CT-X antigen. In addition to the testicular germ cells, PAGE4 is also expressed
in a healthy adult human male in the prostate, albeit at low levels;
however, it is significantly upregulated in the developing human fetal
prostate as well as in the benign and malignant diseases of the adult
gland.− Previously, we had shown that PAGE4 is an IDP that is highly disordered and is upregulated in response to several stress
inducers including inflammation. Indeed,
we and others observed that in the malignant prostate, PAGE4 is highly upregulated
in lesions that are thought to result from inflammatory stress and
represent tumorigenic precursors. Using a cell-based reporter assay,
we recently demonstrated that PAGE4 interacts with the proto-oncogene
c-Jun and dramatically potentiates its transactivation. Interestingly, c-Jun is also upregulated in the
fetal prostate, and the diseased prostate− underscoring the importance of the observed interaction between
PAGE4 and c-Jun.

c-Jun heterodimerizes with c-Fos to form AP-1,
a family of early
response transcription factors that represents a paradigm for signal-responsive
factors with important roles in the control of cell growth, apoptosis,
and stress response. Phosphorylation
of c-Jun at specific N-terminal residues is critical for its transactivation
function and is mediated by c-Jun N-terminal kinase 1 (JNK1). JNK1 is a serine/threonine-protein kinase involved
in various processes such as cell proliferation, differentiation,
migration, transformation, and programmed cell death. Furthermore,
JNK1 is also a stress-activated protein kinase that is activated in
response to extracellular stimuli such as proinflammatory cytokines
or physical stress. Indeed, several reports in the literature strongly
suggest that stress-associated activation of the JNK-1/c-Jun pathway
plays an important role in prostate cancer (PCa) initiation.,,,,− Thus, in light of the association
between inflammatory stress and development of PCa, and the correlation
between phosphorylation and intrinsic disorder among the CT-X antigens, our main goal was to elucidate whether any of
the stress-activated protein kinases that are critical to the stress-response
pathway phosphorylate PAGE4 and whether phosphorylation affects its
affinity for c-Jun and hence, its ability to potentiate c-Jun transactivation.

Here we show that, indeed, PAGE4 is phosphorylated in PCa cells.
Furthermore, by screening a panel of 190 S/T kinases, we have identified
homeodomain-interacting protein kinase 1 (HIPK1), a component of the
stress-response pathway, as a kinase that phosphorylates PAGE4 at
T51. We show that PAGE4 phosphorylation is critical for its ability
to potentiate c-Jun transcriptional activity. Interestingly, however,
employing single molecule Förster resonance energy transfer
(smFRET), we demonstrate that phosphorylation of PAGE4 causes compaction
of its native configuration and weakens its affinity for c-Jun in vitro. These results suggest that conformational changes
in the PAGE4 molecule induced by phosphorylation at T51 result in
the disassociation of PAGE4 from c-Jun to either promote the interaction
of c-Jun with another unidentified partner or induce the expression
of the unidentified partner and thereby potentiate c-Jun transactivation.

Materials
and Methods
DNA Expression Plasmid Constructs
6His-PAGE4 was constructed
by cloning the PCR product into pET28a (Novagen Darmstadt, Germany).
T51A, A18C, and P102C 6His-PAGE4 were created in pET28A using the
QuikChange site-directed mutagenesis kit (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA)
with 6His-PAGE4 as the template as described previously. nV5-PAGE4 WT/T51A was amplified from 6His-PAGE4,
cloned into the pENTR, and then recombined into pcDNA3.1/nV5-DEST (Life Technologies, Frederick, MD) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. 6Myc-PAGE4 was constructed by cloning PAGE4 WT and T51A
into the pCS3-6Myc vector, and PAGE4-Myc-FLAG was purchased (Origene,
Rockville, MD).

Recombinant Proteins
WT/T51A/A18C/P102C
PAGE4 or c-Jun
were cloned into pET28A and subsequently transformed into E. coli (BL21DE3pLySs, Invitrogen, Life Technologies, Frederick,
MD). Cultures were induced with 0.5 mM isopropyl 1-thio-β-d-galactopyranoside (IPTG) overnight at room temperature. Bacterial cell lysates were prepared using denaturing
conditions (6 M guanidine hydrochloride). 6His protein was bound to
the ProBond Purification System (Invitrogen, Life Technologies, Frederick,
MD) column. The column was washed with denaturing buffer, subsequently
washed with native wash buffer containing 20 mM imidazole, and then
eluted with high imidazole concentration. Eluted protein was concentrated
using polyvinyl pyrollidone (PVP) and dialyzed against 1× phosphate
buffered saline (PBS).

For in vitro experiments
using phosphorylated PAGE4, both GST-HIPK1 and 6His-PAGE4, which have
ampicillin and kanamycin resistance, respectively, were expressed
in E. coli. Expression and purification was identical
to 6His-PAGE4 alone except that both antibiotics were used during
the induction phase. Mass spectrometry confirmed that &gt;50% of PAGE4
was phosphorylated at the major phosphor-acceptor site (T51).

S/T Kinase
Screen for Phosphorylation of PAGE4
To identify
the kinase(s) that may phosphorylate PAGE4, we used a commercial service
to screen for modification by 190 S/T protein kinases that were expressed
in Sf9 cells as human recombinant GST-fusion proteins or His-tagged
proteins by means of the baculovirus expression system (ProQuinase,
GmbH). This company purified the kinases by affinity chromatography
using either glutathione-agarose (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) or Ni-agarose
(Qiagen, Venlo, Limburg). The purity and identity of each kinase were
verified by SDS–PAGE followed by Coomassie staining and immunobloting.
A kinase assay using 33P-ATP was utilized to assess the
recombinant enzyme’s ability to phosphorylate bacterially expressed
6His-PAGE4.

Single Molecule FRET Studies
Cysteine
mutants of PAGE4
were labeled with Alexa Fluor 555 and Alexa Fluor 647 (Molecular Probes/Life
Technologies, Frederick, MD), and 6xHis tags were not removed from
the proteins used in this study. Single molecule FRET was measured
from surface immobilized proteins. Briefly,
6xHis tagged proteins were bound on quartz surfaces by direct immobilization
to surface adhered 6-histidine antibodies or by liposome encapsulation
as described in the text and elsewhere., The consistency
of FRET measurements with the 6xHis tag free in solution (PAGE4 freely
diffusing in solution inside liposomes) or with the 6xHis tag ordered
due to specific interactions (PAGE4 surface immobilized on the 6-histidine
antibodies) indicates that the presence of the tag did not change
the conformations to a degree we can detect by FRET. Single molecule
FRET signals were recorded using a prism-type, total internal reflection,
single molecule FRET microscope (10 Hz frame rate). The observation buffer for all smFRET experiments was 20
mM Tris, 100 mM NaOAc, and 5 mM MgCl2 at pH 7.8 augmented with oxygen
scavenger/antiblinking agents (1% glucose, 20 units/mL glucose oxidase,
1000 units/mL catalase, and 100 μm cyclooctatetraene). Experiments
with c-Jun used the same buffer with 1 μm c-Jun (full-length
human gene expressed in E. coli). As in our previous
publication, FRET efficiency was calculated
from the intensities as E = IA/(IA + ID) (using γ = 1 for global correction) for all data points from molecules during FRET emitting
intervals with active donor and acceptor dyes. More than 500 molecules
were included in each experiment. FRET histograms were fit with Gaussian
functions. In the event that widths exceeded the expected widths,
sums of 2 Gaussian histograms were used for fitting. In fitting phosphorylated
PAGE4 or c-Jun exposed PAGE4 FRET histograms, one Gaussian was held
at the center and width values derived from fits of the unphosphorlyated,
isolated PAGE4 samples to account for incomplete kinase activity or
unsaturated c-Jun binding.

Luciferase Reporter Assays
Luciferase
assays were identical
to the assays described previously. Briefly,
approximately 20,000 PC3 cells per well were seeded in a 24 well plate
and were transiently transfected using X-tremeGENE HP DNA Transfection
Reagent (Roche Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN) with the PathDetect
Trans-reporting System (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). Various
concentrations of nV5-PAGE4 WT/T51A allowed for the determination
of the dosage effect on c-Jun transactivation. Cells were lysed 48
h after transfection using luciferase lysis buffer (25 mM. Tris base,
2 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, and 1% Triton X100, pH adjusted to 7.8 using
phosphoric acid). Dual-luciferase reporter (DLR) assay system reagent
(Promega, Madison, WI) was added to the cell lysate, and a microplate
reader recorded luciferase activity.

Immunoblotting
PC3 cells were lysed with Frackelton
buffer and centrifuged to extract proteins. Ten micrograms of protein were separated on 4–15% SDS–PAGE
and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane using TransBlot (BioRad,
Hercules, CA). The membranes were blocked with 1× blocking buffer
(Sigma, St. Louis, MO) for 1 h. The membranes were then incubated
with V5 antibodies (Life Technologies, Frederick, MD) at 4 °C
overnight followed by 1 h with secondary (1:20,000) IRDye IgG antibody
(Li-Cor Biosciences). The Odyssey infrared imaging system (Li-Cor)
was used to detect protein expression.

Half-Life Determination
PC3 cells were grown in 10-cm
dishes and transiently transfected using Fugene 6 (Promega, Madison,
WI) with 6Myc-PAGE4 WT or T51A expression vectors. Twenty-four hours
after transfection, cells were pulsed for 4 h with 300 μCi of 35S-methionine followed by a chase with nonradioactive
methionine. At various time points, cells were harvested, and immunoprecipitations
with c-Myc 9E10 monoclonal antibody (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) were performed.
Immunoprecipitates were subjected to SDS–PAGE, and radioactivity
incorporated into 6Myc-PAGE4 was quantitated with an X-ray film.

Clinical Samples
Prostate tissue specimens from 27
clinically localized PCa cases were collected and frozen at the time
of radical prostatectomy, from 1993 to 2007, at the Johns Hopkins
Hospital. The tissue specimens were processed as described previously
before RNA extraction. OCT-embedded frozen
tissue blocks were manually trimmed to enrich the content of cancer
lesions prior to sectioning and RNA extraction. For tumor samples,
tumor cells made up more than 70% of the tissue content (calculated
by averaging the % tumor content in the first and last sections) in
all cases. Metastatic PCa tissues (n = 7) were collected from soft tissue metastasis of patients
who died from PCa, as part of the Johns Hopkins Autopsy Study of lethal
PCa. Autopsy RNA specimens were of high
quality as assessed by the RNA index number (RIN), and were prepared
and processed as previously described. The use of surgical specimens for molecular analysis was approved
by the Johns Hopkins Medicine Institutional Review Boards.

RNA Extraction
and Quantitative Real-Time PCR
First
strand cDNA was made from 1 μg of RNA using iScript cDNA Synthesis
Kit (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc., Hercules, CA) following the manufacturer’s
protocol in a total volume of 20 μL. Quantitative real-time
PCR (Q-PCR) was carried out as previously described., Briefly, the PCR reactions contained 0.2 μL of cDNA template
in 25 μL of reaction mixture with 12.5 μL of iQ SYBR Green
Supermix (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc.) and 0.25 μmol/L of each
primer. PCR reactions were hot started at 95 °C for 3 min followed
by 45 cycles of 10 s denaturation at 95 °C, 30 s annealing at
60 °C, and 30 s extension at 72 °C using the CFX96 Real-Time
PCR Detection System (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc.). PCR primers were
5′-CGTAAAGTAGAAGGTGATTG-3′ (forward)
and 5′-ATGCTTAGGATTAGGTGGAG-3′ (reverse)
for PAGE4, 5′-TAACAGTGGGTGCCAACTCA-3′
(forward) and 5′-TTTTTCTCTCCGTCGCAACT-3′
(reverse) for c-Jun, and 5′-GAATATAATCCCAAGCGGTTTG-3′
(forward) and 5′-ACTTCACATCACAGCTCCCC-3′
(reverse) for TATA binding protein (TBP). TBP served as an internal
control. The comparative threshold cycle method was used for analysis
and to determine fold differences.

Results
PAGE4 Is Predominantly Phosphorylated at T51 in Prostate Cancer
Cells
To determine the phosphorylated residues in PAGE4 in
PCa, PAGE4-Myc-FLAG was expressed in the prostate cancer cell line,
PC3, immunoprecipitated using the FLAG-tag antibody, cleaved with
trypsin, and subjected to mass spectrometry. Interestingly, despite
repeated attempts, only ∼60% coverage of the molecule was achievable
(residues 11–72). Fortuitously, of the 4 S/T residues covered
by this region, the mass spectrometry data indicate that T51 is the
major phospho-acceptor (Figure ). Coomassie
blue staining of the SDS–PAGE gel revealed two distinct bands,
an upper band that migrated at ∼60 kDa and a lower that was
∼30 kDa. Mass spectrometry revealed no apparent difference
between the upper and lower bands in terms of coverage or phosphorylation;
in fact, the upper band was easily disassociated by reducing reagents
such as β-mercaptoethanol indicating that it is likely that
the upper band is a dimer formed through the one C residue (not shown).

PAGE4
is phosphorylated at threonine 51 in vivo. (A) Coomassie
stained SDS–PAGE after immunoprecipitation
of PC3 extracts with FLAG M2 antibodies. (B) The coverage of trypsin
cleaved samples cut out of the gel in panel A. (C) Representative
mass spectrometry data of the peptide encompassing T51.

Phosphorylation of PAGE4 at T51 Is Critical
for Its Function
To discern the functional significance of
the phosphorylation of
PAGE4 at T51, the T residue was mutated to an A residue (T51A) by
site-directed mutagenesis of the PAGE4 cDNA. Following mutagenesis,
plasmid constructs containing either the mutant or the WT V5-tagged
PAGE4, driven by the CMV promoter, were transiently transfected into
PC3 cells and assayed for their ability to potentiate GAL4-c-Jun1–231 transactivation on a UAS driven luciferase vector,
as described previously. As shown in Figure A, while the WT PAGE4 is able to potentiate GAL4-c-Jun1–231 transactivation in the cell-based luciferase reporter
assay in a dose-dependent manner, mutating T51 to an A residue in
order to abolish phosphorylation results in loss of PAGE4 activity.
That is, the T51A mutant fails to transactivate c-Jun. To rule out
the possibility that the mutant protein is not expressed or is unstable,
we probed the cell lysates with the PAGE4 antibody. As shown in Figure B, immunoblotting confirmed that the T51A mutant
is indeed expressed and to the same extent as the WT PAGE4. Together,
these data indicate that phosphorylation of PAGE4 at T51 is important
for its transcriptional regulatory function.

PAGE4/c-Jun transactivation
requires T51. (A) Luciferase assay
of nV5-PAGE4 WT/T51A with GAL4-c-Jun1–231 in PC3
cells. (B) Representative V5-PAGE4 Western blot of the respective
wells in the luciferase assay.

Phosphorylation Affects PAGE4 Protein Stability
As
mentioned earlier, phosphorylation of IDPs often plays an important
role in the subcellular distribution and availability of these proteins
to perform their function. To determine the effect of phosphorylation
on the subcellular localization and stability of the PAGE4 protein,
we determined its half-life using a 35S-methionine pulse–chase. Protein half-life was calculated
using the following equation,where N0 is the
initial quantity, Nt is the quantity that
still remains after time t, and λ is the decay
constant. As shown in Figure A, subcellular
fractionation revealed a similar nuclear/cytoplasmic distribution
of the WT and T51A species. However, the more intense bands for the
T51A mutant (which cannot be phosphorylated) compared to those of
the wild-type protein suggest that phosphorylation may decrease PAGE4
stability. This was confirmed by pulse–chase studies of PAGE4
phosphorylation (Figure B) where the half-life
of T51A was found to be significantly greater than that of WT PAGE4
(WT, 61 h ± 7.6; T51A, 154 h ± 8.0h). In total, these observations
suggest that while phosphorylation of PAGE4 at T51 may not alter its
subcellular distribution, it appears to play a significant role in
its turnover.

PAGE4 half-life is diminished by phosphorylation. (A)
A Western
blot of PC3 cellular extracts overexpressing either V5-PAGE4 WT or
T51A. Lamin A/C, a marker of the nuclear membrane, and tubulin, a
cytoplasmic marker, were used to verify the efficiency of fractionation.
(B) Total protein (cytoplasmic and nuclear) data from a total of 3
pulse–chase experiments using PC3 cells transiently expressing
6myc-PAGE4 WT or T51A.

PAGE4 Is Phosphorylated by HIPK1
Next, we sought to
identify the kinase that phosphorylates PAGE4 at T51. Since there
is a complete lack of Y residues, we focused only on the S/T kinases.
To this end, using the bacterially expressed and purified full-length
recombinant PAGE4 protein as a substrate, we surveyed a panel of 190
S/T kinases available commercially and identified HIPK1 as a putative
kinase that phosphorylates PAGE4 (Figure A).
To discern the role of T51 as a phospho-acceptor, we incubated the
full-length recombinant WT PAGE4-6His tagged or the T51-6His tagged
mutant protein with a truncated version of HIPK1 that contained only
its kinase domain (HIPK1155–558), which was purchased
commercially as a baculovirus/Sf21 expressed recombinant protein and 33P-labeled γATP. As shown in Figure B, only the WT PAGE4 protein was robustly labeled with radioactivity,
while the mutant protein showed only a trace amount of the 33P-label suggesting that T51 is the predominant HIPK1 mediated phosphorylation
site in PAGE4. Coomassie staining of an SDS gel (Figure C) confirmed that indeed, equal amounts of the substrate were
present in the two reactions. Furthermore, mass spectrometry on these
reactions confirmed T51 as the major phosphor-acceptor site (not shown).

PAGE4
is phosphorylated on T51 by HIPK1. (A) Quantification of
an autoradiogram (B) of various in vitro reaction
using 6His-HIPK1155–558 and 6His-PAGE4 WT/T51A after
electrophoresis on SDS–PAGE. (C) A Coomassie-stained gel of
the same extracts used in B. (D) Coexpression of HIPK1 and PAGE4 in E. coli also results in phosphorylation of PAGE4 at T51
as demonstrated by mass spectrometry data (representative scan) of
the proteolysis peptide encompassing T51.

Phosphorylation of PAGE4 Changes the Interaction with c-Jun
We previously reported single molecule FRET measurements that confirmed
an intrinsically disordered conformation for PAGE4 using constructs
that included the incorporation of cysteine residues for site-specific
attachment of donor and acceptor fluorophores. One construct with C residues at amino acids 18 and 63 (PAGE4 A18C)
is sensitive to N-terminal conformation, and the other construct with
C residues at amino acid position 63 and 102 (PAGE4 P102C) is sensitive
to C-terminal conformation. Here, we first examined the effect of
phosphorylation on these FRET signals using recombinant PAGE4 coexpressed
with HIPK1 and then purified. Mass spectrometry verified the phosphorylation
of PAGE4 coexpressed with HIPK1 in bacterial cells (Figure D). FRET measured from purified PAGE4 A18C encapsulated
inside liposomes that were surface immobilized (Figure A) was shifted to FRET 0.72, compared to 0.55 for PAGE4 not
coexpressed with HIPK1 (Figure B). This increase
in FRET efficiency suggests that phosphorylation causes compaction
of the N-terminal region of PAGE4. In contrast, essentially no change
in FRET (from 0.69 to 0.71) was observed in the C-terminal pair of
labels in PAGE4 P102C due to phosphorylation (Figure C).

Phosphorylation changes FRET efficiency for isolated PAGE4. (A)
Single PAGE4 molecules were encapsulated in liposomes to be held near
a surface for FRET measurements. The FRET histogram for the A18C label
pair (B) without phosphorylation was fit with a single Gaussian of
FRET 0.55 (width 0.16), while the kinase treated was fit with a double
Gaussian where 54% of the population had FRET 0.55 (width 0.16) and
46% has FRET 0.72 (width 0.17). The single Gaussian fits for the unphosphorylated
P102C label pair (C) were FRET 0.69 (width 0.12) and for the kinase
treated was FRET 0.71 (width 0.13).

Direct immobilization of 6-His tagged PAGE4 on a surface
coated
with 6-His antibodies (Figure A) allowed c-Jun
to be added to the solution around the protein and possible conformational
changes to be observed. Without kinase exposure, FRET from PAGE4 A18C
increased from 0.56 to 0.72 upon exposure to full length c-Jun (Figure B), while FRET from PAGE4 P102C decreased from 0.69
to 0.37 in the same condition (Figure D) as
we had observed previously. The A18C PAGE4
construct is not ideal for testing the interaction of c-Jun with kinase
exposed PAGE4 because both individually cause similar shifts in FRET
to nearly 0.7 from the isolated wild-type protein with FRET around
0.55 (Figure C). In contrast, c-Jun binding
to nonphosphorylated P102C PAGE4 caused a large decrease in FRET efficiency
that is very distinct from the nearly undetectable FRET change resulting
solely from kinase action. Therefore, we used P102C PAGE4 to determine
the interaction between c-Jun and PAGE4. When exposed to c-Jun, only
17% of kinase-co-expressed P102C PAGE4 had low FRET efficiency (Figure E) similar in value to that of c-Jun interacting
with nonphosphorylated PAGE4. In comparison, 70% of the population
of nonphosphorylated P102C PAGE4 shifted to low FRET upon exposure
to c-Jun (Figure D). The absence of the large
change in FRET for the C-terminal PAGE4 fluorophore pair suggests
either that phosphorylation weakens the ability of PAGE4 to interact
with c-Jun or that if it binds c-Jun, the induced conformational changes
are substantially different from those in the case of nonphosphorylated
PAGE4.

FRET from phosphorylated PAGE4 is minimally altered by exposure
to c-Jun. (A) Single PAGE4 molecules were tethered directly to a surface
bound antibody to the 6His tag. Gaussian fits of the FRET histograms
show c-Jun causes larger FRET changes in nonphosphorylated PAGE4 than
kinase-treated PAGE4. Details of the fits are as follows. For the
A18C nonphosphorylated (B) without c-Jun, FRET = 0.56 (width 0.15),
and with c-Jun, 65% molecules are FRET = 0.56 (width 0.15), while
35% are FRET = 0.72 (width 0.12). For A18C kinase-treated PAGE4 (C),
without c-Jun 58% have FRET = 0.56 (width 0.15), while 42% have FRET
= 0.72 (width 0.13), whereas with c-Jun, fits used only single peak
of FRET = 0.61 (width 0.16). FRET was 0.69 (width 0.16) for P102C
PAGE4 nonphosphorylated (D) without c-Jun but dramatically changed
to a double Gaussian with 70% having FRET 0.37 (width 0.16) and 30%
having FRET 0.69 (width 0.16) when c-Jun was added. Kinase-treated
P102C PAGE4 (E) samples were dominated by a FRET population &gt;80%
at
FRET 0.71 (width 0.15) both with and without c-Jun.

Both PAGE4 and c-Jun Are Coexpressed in Organ-Confined
but Not
Metastatic Prostate Cancer
As discussed in the introduction
section, several studies have reported that both PAGE4 and c-Jun are
upregulated in the diseased prostate. However, it is important to
discern the relative expression of the two genes in the same tissue
sample as well as in various stages of PCa and under the same experimental
conditions if the interaction between the two proteins that we demonstrate
here is of any biological relevance. To our knowledge, this has not
been explored thus far. We therefore determined the relative expression
of the two genes by real time quantitative PCR. As shown in Figure , the mRNAs encoding both PAGE4 and c-Jun were highly
expressed in organ-confined prostate cancer. However, while the c-Jun
transcript was also expressed in metastatic disease, albeit at lower
levels, the PAGE4 mRNA was undetectable.

Expression of c-Jun and
PAGE4 in clinically localized and metastatic
prostate cancer specimens. Messenger RNA (mRNA) levels of PAGE4 (A)
and c-Jun (B) were determined in clinically localized prostate cancer
(L-PCa) (n = 27) and metastatic prostate cancer (M-PCa)
(n = 7) by Q-PCR. PAGE4 and c-Jun mRNA expressions
were normalized by TATA binding protein (TBP). The horizontal bar
represented the average.

Discussion
The overexpression of PAGE4 in both benign
and malignant prostates
has been well documented over the past decade.− Furthermore, work from our laboratory has also demonstrated
that PAGE4 is upregulated in the fetal prostate., However,
the functions of this IDP during prostate development and disease
have remained poorly understood.

The present work provides additional
insight into the role of PAGE4
in prostate pathophysiology. Our most significant findings are that
(i) PAGE4, a stress-response protein, is phosphorylated predominantly
at T51 in PCa cells, (ii) HIPK1 phosphorylates PAGE4 at T51 and is
a component of the stress-response pathway, underscoring the link
between PAGE4 and the stress-response, (iii) this dynamic covalent
modification, while critical for its transcriptional regulatory function,
alters the intracellular stability of PAGE4, and that (iv) phosphorylation
induces conformational changes in PAGE4 that weaken its affinity for
c-Jun and thus affects potentiating its transactivation of target
genes.

As mentioned earlier, the overwhelming majority of CTAs
are predicted
to be intrinsically disordered as well as extensively modified by
phosphorylation. In fact, the same is
also true for IDPs in general− suggesting that this covalent
modification plays an important role in the function of these proteins
that typically transition from disorder to order when they interact
with a target, or by altering spontaneous conformational
behaviors., However, in some IDPs, disorder
may play an important functional role without evident disorder to
order transition,− and in others, ordered regions within proteins that are not completely
intrinsically disordered can also undergo regulated unfolding (transition
to disorder)., Finally, disordered regions also
have regulatory roles such as an ability to induce local unfolding
within adjacent structured domains and hence facilitate allosteric
communication between structured domains. In terms of structural consequences of site-specific phosphorylation,
both disorder-to-order and order-to-disorder conformational transitions
have been observed to follow phosphorylation., However, the contribution of phosphorylation of disordered regions
in IDP dynamics has not been critically evaluated in the majority
of cases. Thus, while there are examples of increased affinity of
IDPs for interacting partners,, growing evidence− also suggests a decrease in interaction affinity upon phosphorylation,
especially of S/T residues as is observed in the case of PAGE4/c-Jun
interaction in the present study.

The present results demonstrating
that phosphorylation of PAGE4
at T51 is critical for its ability to potentiate transactivation by
c-Jun but weaken its affinity for c-Jun appear to be counterintuitive.
Perhaps, the scenarios described in Figure  could help clarify the confusion. By binding to c-Jun in its nonphosphorylated
form, PAGE4 may preclude c-Jun from interacting with yet an unidentified
partner (Factor X, in Figure ) that is critical
for its activation of target genes. Upon phosphorylation, the affinity
of PAGE4 for c-Jun is weakened, and hence, it either fails to associate
or actively dissociates itself from c-Jun and binds to Factor X, and
the PAGE4/Factor-X complex can now interact with c-Jun and potentiate
its transactivation of the relevant target genes (Figure A). Of note, c-Jun is known to heterodimerize not
only with c-Fos but also to interact with several other partners that
cause binding to the AP-1 site with varying affinities. The interaction of c-Jun with a gamut of partners
that bind to phosphorylated PAGE4 could introduce an additional layer
of regulation of c-Jun transcriptional activity by fine-tuning its
affinity for a given site. Thus, such a mechanism could serve to act
as a molecular rheostat with varying affinities rather than a simple
on/off toggle switch in the signal-dependent transcriptional regulation
of c-Jun. Alternatively, c-Jun could target a different set of genes
independent of PAGE4 in a context-dependent manner. The differential
expression of the two genes suggests that PAGE4 may play an important
role in disease initiation rather than disease progression by modulating
the transcriptional activity of c-Jun.

Possible mechanisms by
which phosphorylation of PAGE4 at T51 could
potentiate the transactivation of c-Jun but weaken its affinity for
c-Jun. (A) By binding to c-Jun in its nonphosphorylated form, PAGE4
may preclude c-Jun from interacting with an unidentified partner (Factor
X) that is critical for its activation of target genes. However, upon
phosphorylation, PAGE4 dissociates itself or fails to associate with
c-Jun and binds to Factor X, and the PAGE4/Factor-X complex can now
interact with c-Jun and potentiate its transactivation of the relevant
target genes. (B) Alternatively, upon phosphorylation, PAGE4 can dissociate
or fail to associate itself with c-Jun and thereby facilitate a direct
interaction between Factor-X and c-Jun to promote the transactivation
of target genes. (C) It is also possible that phosphorylated PAGE4
facilitates the synthesis of Factor-X, which then interacts with c-Jun
to facilitate the activation of c-Jun targets. TXN: transcription
apparatus.

Finally, upon phosphorylation,
another possibility is that PAGE4
can dissociate itself or fail to associate with c-Jun and thereby
facilitate a direct interaction between Factor-X and c-Jun to promote
transactivation of target genes (Figure B).
It is also possible that upon dissociation or failure to associate,
phosphorylated PAGE4 facilitates the synthesis of Factor-X, which
then interacts with c-Jun to facilitate the activation of c-Jun targets
(Figure C). The fact that PAGE4 translocates
to the nucleus and binds DNA, whether
directly or indirectly, makes the latter proposition quite tenable.

Regardless, the present study provides new evidence linking PAGE4
to the stress pathway. Cellular stress leads to upregulation of both
PAGE4 and HIPK1 (at least in DU145 prostate cancer cells). Within this context,
our finding that HIPK1 phosphorylates PAGE4 to alter its interaction
with c-Jun suggests a novel mechanism by which the stress-response
pathway could directly cause altered transcriptional activity within
diseased cells. Given that stress, particularly inflammatory stress,
plays a significant role in cancer,, we believe
our findings make significant inroads in understanding the significance
of PAGE4 overexpression and phosphorylation by HIPK1. Additional studies
that are currently underway in our laboratory should help discern
the role of phosphorylation in PAGE4 conformational dynamics and the
mechanism by which PAGE4 contributes to prostatic development and
disease.

Author Present Address
# (J.J.K.) Department of Bioengineering, University of California,
Berkeley, CA 94720.

Author Present Address
▽ (K.R.)
Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University,
New York, NY 10027.

Author Present Address
○ (P.K.)
Institute for Bioscience &amp; Biotechnology Research, University
of Maryland, Rockville, MD 20850.

This work was
supported by the NIH NCI (CA181730) and a gift from the David Koch
Fund (to P.K.). K.R.W. is supported by the American Cancer Society
(ACS) Research Scholar Grant (RSG-10-048).

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
PAGE4prostate-associated gene 4

HIPK1homeodomain-interacting
protein kinase 1

CTAscancer/testis antigens

CT-X antigensX chromosome encoded CTAs

IDPintrinsically disordered protein

PINprotein–protein interaction
network

JNK1c-Jun
N-terminal kinase 1

PCaprostate cancer

smFRETsingle molecule Förster (or fluorescence) resonance
energy transfer

IPTGisopropyl 1-thio-β-D-galactopyranoside

Hishistidine

PVPpolyvinyl pyrollidone

PBSphosphate buffered
saline

TBPTATA
binding protein

