The inner leaflet of the plasma
membrane serves as a central assembly and diffusion platform on which
multiple signaling networks form and conduct their functions as needed.
The master kinase protein kinase C-α (PKCα) is targeted
by Ca2+ to the plasma membrane where it is activated by
a specialized set of lipids and second messengers, thereby triggering
its essential functions in an array of signaling pathways.− For example, a local Ca2+ signal at the leading edge
of polarized macrophages recruits PKCα to the plasma membrane
where it is an essential element of the positive feedback loop that
maintains leading edge stability. Because
PKCα is central to the function of this and many other pathways,
its dysfunction or excess activity can trigger diverse pathologies,
including inflammation, cancer, diabetes, cardiovascular anomalies,
and autoimmune disease.,−

PKCα is a member of the conventional
subfamily of protein
kinase C isoforms [cPKCs (α, β, and γ)] as reviewed
by leading investigators in the field.,,− Each cPKC enzyme features an N-terminal pseudosubstrate peptide,
two C1 inhibitory domains (C1A and C1B), a C2 targeting domain, and
a C-terminal catalytic domain, as illustrated in Figure . The individual cPKCs, including PKCα, undergo a maturation
process that includes phosphorylation by an upstream kinase (PDK-1)
leading to cPKC autophosphorylation, activation, and stabilization.−

Conventional
protein kinase C domain structure and simple activation
model. (A) Modular domain organization of conventional protein kinase
C isoforms α, β, and γ (cPKCs), consisting of an
N-terminal inhibitory pseudosubstrate peptide (P), two inhibitory
C1 domains (C1A and C1B), a plasma membrane-targeting C2 domain, and
the C-terminal Ser/Thr kinase domain. (B) Simple cPKC activation model
based on extensive current data in the field,,,,,,,− and recent, seminal structural studies., In response to a Ca2+ signal, the mature but inactive
cytoplasmic cPKC (i) docks to plasma membrane PS via its C2 domain,
yielding the (PS)2 state (ii). The C2 domain rapidly replaces
one PS lipid with the less prevalent but higher-affinity PIP2, triggering a change in the membrane docking geometry because of
the large PIP2 headgroup, yielding the (PS-PIP2) state (iii). Later, during a DAG lipid signal the protein, still
inhibited by interactions of the kinase domain with the inhibitory
elements, encounters and binds two DAG molecules that recruit C1A
and C1B to the membrane, thereby relieving inhibition and activating
the kinase in state (iv). The indicated protein structures are based
on crystal structures of PDB entries 3PFQ() and 1PTQ. The complex structure is based on ref (). The lipid binding stoichiometries
are from refs (−), (), and (). The membrane docking
geometries are based on refs (), (), and ().

Mature, catalytically competent cPKC resides in the cytoplasm
but
is held in its inactive state by at least two inhibitory mechanisms.
First, the kinase active site is competitively inhibited by the N-terminal
region of the protein comprising the pseudosubstrate peptide and the
C1A domain.− Second, the C1B domain docks to the kinase domain surface distant
from the active site, yielding allosteric inhibition.,, Kinase activation cannot occur
until both parallel types of inhibition are relieved.

Cellular
signals can remove these inhibitory constraints, thus
switching the cPKC kinase “on” via several routes.− Often, activation begins with a Ca2+ signal that loads
the Ca2+ binding site of the C2 domain and triggers targeting
to plasma membrane PS and PIP2 lipids. However, the kinase
domain remains “off” until both types of inhibition
are relieved. Kinase activation is triggered by the appearance of
an activating lipid, either diacylglycerol (DAG) or phorbol ester.− The resulting membrane deployment of the C1A and/or C1B domains
removes both the competitive and allosteric restraints and thereby
activates the enzyme. Figure  presents a working
activation model based on elegant studies by several laboratories.,,,,,,− In this model, both the C1A and C1B domains bind DAG in the final,
active state (iv), as suggested by binding of DAG to both isolated
domains, and by the importance of both domains in the targeting of
PKCα to the plasma membrane when activating lipid is present.,,,−

To test the predictions of the working model,
we have employed
single-molecule methods to analyze the membrane binding and surface
diffusion of full-length PKCα and truncation constructs lacking
one or more domains. Single-molecule TIRF microscopy was used to visualize
the two-dimensional diffusion tracks of single protein molecules on
supported bilayers as previously described.− This approach
has been shown to provide extensive information about both tightly
bound individual lipids and global protein–bilayer contacts.− Thus, as a protein binds additional lipids or penetrates more deeply
into the membrane, the additional frictional drag against the highly
viscous bilayer measurably slows its diffusion.− Here such diffusional
slowing is used to detect and identify the activation intermediates
of PKCα.

The single-molecule studies presented below confirm
key features
of the working activation model (Figure )
and also reveal a previously unknown, major pre-DAG intermediate in
the PKCα activation reaction. This newly discovered intermediate
is the predominant state of the inactive, plasma membrane-bound enzyme
as it awaits the appearance of the activating DAG lipid. Furthermore,
the molecular features of this predominant intermediate enhance the
efficiency of the DAG and phorbol ester activation reactions. The
findings yield new insights into the PKCα activation mechanism
and show the power of the single-molecule approach as a tool in probing
the signaling states of membrane-bound proteins.

Materials and Methods
Reagents
Synthetic dioleolyl phospholipids PC (phosphatidylcholine;
1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine), PS (phosphatidylserine;
1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-l-serine),
PIP2 (1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoinositol
4,5-bisphosphate), DAG (diacylglycerol; 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycerol), and LRB-PE [1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-(lissamine rhodamine B sulfonyl)] were from Avanti Polar
Lipids (Alabaster, AL). Alexa Fluor 555 (AF555) C2-maleimide, Lipofectamine
2000, and CoverWell perfusion chambers were from Invitrogen (Carlsbad,
CA). Cover glass was from Ted Pella, Inc. (Redding, CA). 2-Mercaptoethanol
was from Fluka (Buchs, Germany). CoA trilithium salt and ultrapure
(&gt;99%) BSA and PMA (phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate) were from
Sigma-Aldrich
(St. Louis, MO). Anti-HA agarose affinity resin and HA peptide were
from Thermo Scientific (Rockford, IL). Amylose affinity resin was
from New England Biolabs (Ipswich, MA). Glutathione Sepharose 4B was
from GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences (Piscataway, NJ).

Protein Cloning,
Expression, and AF555 Labeling
To
generate bacterial expression constructs of human PKCα regulatory
domains, DNA sequences encoding the C1A domain (residues 26–100),
the C1B domain (residues 90–165), the C1 construct (C1A–C1B,
residues 26–165), the C2 domain (residues 157–294),
C1BC2 (residues 90–294), and the C1C2 construct (C1A–C1B–C2,
residues 26–294) were inserted into both pGEX-4T1 and pMAL-c2G
bacterial expression vectors. Then, the 11-amino acid recognition
sequence for Sfp phospho-pantethienyl-transferase was inserted to allow sequence-specific enzymatic labeling
with a CoA-linked fluorophore. For each construct, a 5′-term
polymerase chain reaction amplification oligonucleotide was synthesized
(Integrated DNA Technologies, Coralville, IA) to introduce the labeling
tag between the affinity tag and the protein N-terminal sequence.
DNA sequencing confirmed the correct full sequence of all final constructs.

To generate a mammalian tissue culture expression construct of
full-length, human PKCα, a pair of complementary oligonucleotides
encoding the Sfp recognition sequence and flanked by EcoRI restriction
sites were digested and ligated into EcoRI sites upstream and downstream
of the full-length PKCα sequence in the pHACE plasmid. In the former construct, the labeling tag was
placed before the N-terminus of the protein; in the latter construct,
the labeling tag was placed between the HA affinity tag and the C-terminus
of the protein. DNA sequencing confirmed the correct full sequence
of all final constructs.

PKCα regulatory domain constructs
were expressed in Escherichia coli Rosetta 2(DE3)
cells (Novagen). Protein
expression of PKCα C2 constructs was induced at 37 °C for
3 h, while the yield and solubility of constructs containing C1 proteins
were enhanced by protein induction at 20 °C overnight. GST fusion
proteins were retained on glutathione resin and eluted with excess
reduced glutathione, except for the C2 domain construct that was released
by thrombin cleavage. All MBP fusion proteins were retained on amylose
resin and eluted with excess maltose. Each purified domain was ≥90%
of the total eluted protein.

Full-length PKCα constructs
possessing either the N-terminal
or the C-terminal Sfp labeling tag were expressed in HEK 293 mammalian
tissue culture cells. After three rounds of passaging, cells were
transiently transfected with the appropriate plasmid using lipofectamine.
Seventy-two hours after transfection, the cells were scraped and suspended
in lysis buffer containing 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 1% Tween
20, 1 mM EDTA, 2.5 mM EGTA, 10% glycerol, 10 μg/mL aprotinin,
10 μg/mL leupeptin, 0.1 mM PMSF, 1 mM NaF, and 0.1 mM Na3VO4. Cells were homogenized; the cleared lysate
was applied to HA resin and washed, and full-length PKCα constructs
were eluted with HA peptide. These constructs were found to be fully
active (see ). Using the same approach,
we attempted to generate a truncated construct (C1B–C2–kinase)
that failed to generate active kinase, presumably because it did not
undergo the processing steps essential for intracellular cPKC stability
and activity.

The labeling tag
of each construct was covalently modified with
AF555 by the Sfp enzyme using a published protocol., Briefly, ∼2 μM target protein was incubated with 2.5
μM Alexa Fluor 555–CoA conjugate and 0.5 μM Sfp
at room temperature for 30 min. Excess fluorophore was removed by
buffer exchange using Vivaspin concentrators (Sartorius Stedim, Göttingen,
Germany) until the flow-through was not visibly colored by the AF555
fluorophore, and the final flow-through was checked for absorbance
at 555 nm to ensure the complete removal of the free label. The concentration
of labeled protein and labeling efficiency were determined from the
measured absorbances of AF555 and intrinsic aromatic residues.

Supported
Lipid Bilayer Preparation
Supported lipid
bilayers were prepared from sonicated unilamellar vesicles (SUVs)
as described previously,, including a BSA step
to block bilayer imperfections., Control experiments
using fluorescent lipid and a lipid-binding protein tested and confirmed
this blocking step did not detectably alter the bilayer fluidity or
protein–membrane interactions.

Protein Kinase C Assay
Kinase assays were performed
at 22 ± 0.5 °C using the PepTag Non-Radioactive Protein
Kinase C system (Promega Corp., Madison, WI). The manufacturer’s
protocol was followed, except the PKC lipid activator was replaced
with the same SUV preparations used to make supported bilayers as
described above. Here the total lipid concentration was 200 μg/mL
in kinase assay buffer [10 mM MgCl, 26 μM CaCl2,
20 μM EGTA, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM ATP, and 20 mM HEPES (pH 7.4)].

TIRFM Measurements
TIRFM experiments were conducted
at 22 ± 0.5 °C on a Nikon A1R TIRF instrument and a home-built,
objective-based TIRFM instrument as described previously.− Supported lipid bilayers in physiological buffer [140 mM KCl, 15
mM NaCl, 0.5 mM MgCl, 26 μM CaCl2, 20 μM EGTA,
5 mM reduced l-glutathione, and 25 mM HEPES (pH 7.4)] were
imaged before and after sequential additions of buffer, BSA, and fluorescent
protein. Typically, only a few dim, rapidly dissociating fluorescent
contaminants were observed on the bilayer prior to the addition of
protein. After protein addition, samples were allowed to equilibrate
for 5 min. Then, to minimize contributions from small numbers of immobile
fluorescent particles (presumably inactive protein aggregates), a
bleach pulse power ∼30-fold higher than that used for imaging
was applied for ∼5 s, and the fluorescence was allowed to recover
for 60 s before data were acquired. For each sample, a set of three
or four movie streams were acquired at a frame rate of 20 frames/s,
and a spatial resolution of 6.3 pixels/μm on the Nikon A1R instrument
or 4.2 pixels/μm on the home-built instrument, using NIS Elements
Basic Research (Nikon). Subsequent particle tracking analysis was
conducted using ImageJ, and data processing
and fitting were conducted using Mathematica (Wolfram Research) and
GraphPad Prism 5 (GraphPad Software, Inc.).

Single-Particle Tracking
As with our previous studies,− diffusion trajectories
of single fluorescent lipid and protein molecules
were tracked and measured using the Particle Tracker plugin for ImageJ, yielding a per-frame quantitation of particle
position and brightness. Then resulting data were then imported into
Mathematica for further analysis. Only particles possessing fluorescence
intensities within a defined range were included in the analysis,
thereby eliminating bright protein aggregates and dim, nonprotein
contaminants. Additional exclusions removed immobile particles, rapidly
dissociating particles, and overlapping tracks for which particle
identity is lost. All exclusions were described and validated previously.−

Determination of Diffusion Coefficients from Single-Molecule
Trajectories
Each data set was analyzed with (i) a one-component
fit, (ii) a two-component fit, and (iii) a three-component fit, as
described previously. Briefly, all trajectories
were disassembled into individual steps with a duration of 0.16 s
(Δt = 8 frames); the length of each step was
calculated, and finally, all step lengths were binned to yield a probability
distribution histogram. The histogram was fit either by a linear mean
square displacement versus step time function or by a single Rayleigh
distribution function,, and for single-component populations,
both methods converged and gave the same diffusion constant within
error. For heterogeneous populations, the sum of multiple Rayleigh
distributions was required for convergence, but in all cases, a two-component fit was sufficient and yielded
a pair of best-fit diffusion constants.

All-Atom Molecular Dynamics
Simulations
Aligned with
the C1B nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) structure (PDB entry 2ELI), the C1A model
was generated by the Swiss-Model server. This homology model was embedded in a PC/PS bilayer model (120 DOPC
and 40 DOPS) in an explicit TIP3P water box with 140 mM NaCl and 10
mM KCl. The membrane model was placed in the X–Y plane. The simulation box had dimensions of ∼80 Å ×
80 Å × 80 Å with ∼50000 atoms. All-atom simulations
were conducted with the CHARMM force field in Desmond version 3.1 (Maestro-Desmond Interoperability Tools,
version 3.1, Schrödinger) known to be effective in membrane
protein simulations. After a 5 ns restrained
equilibrium, two semi-isotropic simulations were performed at a constant
temperature (296 K) and pressure (1 bar) for 160 and 300 ns. The C1A–C1B–C2
simulation box had dimensions of ∼90 Å × 90 Å
× 140 Å with ∼140000 atoms. Embedded in one leaflet
of a PC/PS bilayer, each C1A or C1B domain was contacting PS and DAG,
while the C2 domain was contacting Ca2+, PS, and PIP2. The C1A–C1B–C2 model was equilibrated for
5 ns and simulated for 10 ns under conditions similar to those used
for C1A simulations (above). Data analysis and structure visualization
were performed with VMD or PyMOL (Schrödinger
LLC).

Statistics
Error bars are standard errors of the mean
(n = 3–19) except where indicated otherwise.
Statistical significance was examined using the appropriate test;
most commonly, the single-tailed t test was used
to determine whether a given membrane interaction significantly slowed
diffusion.

Results
Strategy of Identifying
PKCα Activation Intermediates
via Single-Molecule Analysis of Two-Dimensional Diffusion Rates
The overall strategy investigates the protein–bilayer contacts
formed during the stepwise activation of PKCα on a target membrane,
where each activation intermediate is detected and identified by its
signature two-dimensional (2D) diffusion kinetics on the bilayer surface.
The 2D diffusion constant of a given membrane-contacting domain is
inversely proportional to the total frictional drag of its membrane-penetrating
surfaces and tightly bound lipids against the highly viscous bilayer;− by contrast, the frictional drag of its aqueous surfaces is negligible
because the viscosity of the aqueous phase is ∼100-fold lower., To a first approximation, when a multidomain protein docks to a
supported lipid bilayer,, the frictional drags
of the individual domains contribute additively to the total friction,
such that the overall diffusion coefficient (DT) of the full protein is−,where the frictional drag of each domain against
the bilayer (frictioni) is operationally
defined by the inverse diffusion constant of that isolated domain
(1/Di) and is proportional
to the coefficient of friction (fi):−It follows that the membrane contacts of PKCα
activation intermediates can be probed by quantifying the 2D diffusion
properties of the full-length protein and its individual domains,
or groups of domains on supported lipid bilayers. The supported bilayer
system offers several advantages for such measurements: (i) the ability
to utilize controlled lipid mixtures to analyze specific lipid interactions,
(ii) approximately 2-fold slower diffusion than free-standing bilayers,
allowing more accurate measurement of the fastest-diffusing species, and (iii) the convenient additivity of frictional
drags on supported bilayers.−, (Note such additivity
may well be a special feature of supported bilayers not shared by
free-standing bilayers that are subject to Saffman–Delbruck
effects.,)

Protein Constructs Employed To Investigate
the PKCα Activation
Mechanism
The PKCα constructs employed in this analysis
are schematically summarized in Figure . The
single-domain constructs sampled each of the individual PKCα
regulatory domains (C1A, C1B, and C2). The multidomain constructs
(C1A–C1B, C1A–C1B–C2, and C1B–C2) possessed
two or more domains connected by the native interdomain linkers, because
they were constructed by truncating the full-length protein from one
end or both. Full-length constructs (C1A–C1B–C2–kinase)
contained the entire PKCα protein.

Engineered full-length
PKCα and truncation constructs used
in this study. Shown are the domain layouts of the human PKCα
constructs engineered for this study, and WT PKCα for comparison
(native domains defined in Figure A). Each
engineered construct contained both a fluorescent labeling tag (the
11-residue ybbr target peptide to which the Sfp enzyme covalently
couples the fluor) and an affinity tag [the 9-residue HA peptide or
the maltose-binding protein (MBP)]. Truncation borders were as follows:
C1A–C1B–C2 (residues 26–294), C1B–C2 (residues
90–294), C2 (residues 157–294), C1A–C1B (residues
26–165), C1A (residues 26–100), and C1B (residues 90–165).

Each construct included an N-
or C-terminal affinity tag for purification.
Because the C1A and C1B domains are notoriously unstable,, maltose-binding protein (MBP) was routinely used as an affinity
tag and was retained after purification, because of its ability to
enhance the solubility of unstable proteins., The intrinsically stable PKCα C2 domain was expressed and
purified as a GST fusion, and then the GST tag was removed by thrombin
cleavage. Full-length PKCα was
expressed and purified with a C-terminal HA affinity tag (YPYDVPDYA).

All constructs also possessed an N- or
C-terminal, 11-residue labeling
tag (DSLEFIASKLA)
that was covalently modified with AlexaFluor 555 by a standard enzymatic
procedure. The resulting fluor-tagged
constructs all retained normal membrane binding and, in the case of
full-length PKCα, normal Ca2+- and lipid-regulated
membrane binding and enzyme regulation (Figure  and Figure S1 of the ). Notably, full-length constructs labeled at the N- or C-terminus
with fluor were indistinguishable from each other and from a corresponding
unlabeled construct in four different activity assays, indicating
the fluor is unperturbing (Figure S1 of the ). For all subsequent studies, the full-length construct
labeled at the C-terminus was employed to maintain the native N-terminal
regulatory region.

Dependence of PKCα membrane binding and kinase activation,
and domain membrane binding, on lipid composition. (A and D–F)
Single-molecule TIRF quantitation of binding of constructs to supported
lipid bilayers, normalized to the same total protein concentration
(1 pM). A given construct was added to the imaging chamber containing
the indicated supported bilayer (Table ),
and then the density of fluorescent protein binding per unit area
was quantitated. Each average was determined from 20 temporally isolated
frames from three separate movie streams in at least five separate
experiments (n ≥ 15). The free Ca2+ concentration was 6 μM in a physiological buffer (). (B) Total kinase activity
of fluorescently labeled PKCα measured by a modified PepTag
(Promega) assay (). The
enzyme was activated by membranes containing the same lipid compositions
as the binding density measurements, and PKC-specific phosphorylation
of the PepTag target peptide was quantitated by electrophoresis. Each
condition was repeated twice in duplicate (n = 4)
and separate experiments using varying PKCα and/or lipid concentrations
confirmed that enzyme saturation did not occur. (C) Specific activity
of PKCα determined by the ratio of kinase activity to binding
density under each bilayer condition. In all experiments, T = 22 ± 0.5 °C. In this and subsequent figures,
an average parameter determined from purely single molecule data is
indicated by &lt; parameter &gt;.

Of all the constructs, the full-length PKCα, C1B, C2,
and
C1B–C2 fluor-tagged constructs were the most stable, as evidenced
by the low levels of immobile misfolded or aggregated protein [&lt;10%
of the total membrane-bound single particles (see below)]. The C1A,
C1A–C1B, and C1A–C1B–C2 constructs exhibited
adequate stability but higher levels of immobile particles (&lt;20–30%
of the membrane-bound particles), consistent with the tendency of
C1 domains to aggregate., The ability of single-molecule
data analysis to filter out immobile and excessively bright particles
ensured that misfolded and aggregated proteins were excluded from
the study.−

Lipid Bilayer Compositions Employed To Investigate the PKCα
Activation Mechanism
Table  summarizes
the lipid compositions of the supported bilayers employed to mimic
the native sequence of the acquisition of lipids by PKCα on
a target membrane surface (Figure B). (i)
Following binding of Ca2+ to the C2 domain, the enzyme
will typically first associate with PS, which is the major anionic
phospholipid (∼25 mol %,) of the plasma membrane
inner leaflet and thus would virtually always be found in the initial
docking footprint (∼14–18 lipids). To analyze the predominant PS-bound intermediate(s),
PKCα and the other constructs were analyzed on PC/PS bilayers.
(ii) Next, the membrane-bound enzyme will typically bind PIP2, which is present at ∼10-fold lower densities than PS (∼2
mol %) and thus will often be absent in the initial footprint,, but binds more tightly.,,, This PIP2 binding is rapid: a collision rate calculation based on the 2D diffusion constants of individual
lipids and the PS-bound C2 domain (Table )
indicates that a PIP2 collision will occur approximately
once per microsecond. The resulting intermediates were investigated
on PC/PS/PIP2 bilayers. (iii) Finally, the membrane-bound,
inactive enzyme will eventually bind the activating lipid diacylglycerol
(DAG) during a transient DAG signaling event when this rare lipid
appears at low levels (typically ≪2 mol %). The resulting activated
states were studied on PC/PS/PIP2/DAG bilayers. For the
sake of symmetry, the PC/PS/DAG lipid mixture was also included (Table ); in theory, this mixture could be a physiologically
relevant mimic for an extreme DAG signal generated by locally high
levels of phospholipase C activity that fully hydrolyze local PIP2 to DAG and IP3.,

Lipid Compositions of Synthetic Bilayers
lipid mixture	lipid mol %	
PC/PS	75:25	
PC/PS with LRB-PE	75:25 with 200 ppb	
PC/PS/PIP2	74:24:2	
PC/PS/PIP2 with LRB-PE	74:24:2 with 200 ppb	
PC/PS/DAG	74:24:2	
PC/PS/DAG with LRB-PE	74:24:2 with 200 ppb	
PC/PS/PIP2/DAG	73:23:2:2	
PC/PS/PIP2/DAG with LRB-PE	73:23:2:2 with 200 ppb	
Abbreviations:
PC, 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine; PS,
1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-l-serine;
PIP2, 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoinositol
4,5-bisphosphate; DAG, diacylglycerol
or 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycerol; LRB-PE, 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-(lissamine
rhodamine B sulfonyl).

Measured Average Single-Molecule Diffusion
Constants
 	population-weighted
average diffusion constant	
 	PC/PS	PC/PS/PIP2	PC/PS/DAG	PC/PS/PIP2/DAG	
lipid	2.58 ± 0.11	2.81 ± 0.12	2.63 ± 0.03	2.56 ± 0.10	
C1A	0.58 ± 0.07	0.73 ± 0.18	0.52 ± 0.03	0.47 ± 0.10	
C1B	0.48 ± 0.11	0.32 ± 0.07	0.59 ± 0.18	0.41 ± 0.10	
C2	1.45 ± 0.06	1.07 ± 0.02	1.41 ± 0.09	1.00 ± 0.12	
C1A–-C1B	0.26 ± 0.04	0.18 ± 0.03	0.21 ± 0.05	0.07 ± 0.01	
C1A–C1B–C2	0.46 ± 0.06	0.18 ± 0.03	0.21 ± 0.04	0.22 ± 0.04	
C1B–C2	1.02 ± 0.10	0.81 ± 0.09	1.04 ± 0.04	0.50 ± 0.09	
FL PKCα	0.44 ± 0.04	0.38 ± 0.07	0.41 ± 0.02	0.22 ± 0.04	
Average measured
diffusion constants
(square micrometers per second) of all constructs except for the lipid
and C2 domain were determined by calculating the population-weighted
average of single molecule diffusion constants from a two-component
Rayleigh best fit of each protein–lipid data set (see Table
S2 of the ). In the
cases of the lipid and C2 domain, a one-component best fit was sufficient
(Table S2 of the ). Each measurement analyzed at least 2500 diffusion tracks from
five experiments (n ≥ 5). In all experiments,
the free Ca2+ concentration was 6 μM in a physiological
buffer at 22 ± 0.5 °C.

Figure  shows that, as predicted by the
working PKC activation model (Figure B) and
its proposed sequence of lipid binding events, the membrane affinity
and specific kinase activity of full-length PKCα increased as
the bilayer lipid composition was changed from PC/PS to PC/PS/PIP2 to PC/PS/PIP2/DAG. Similarly, on a qualitative
level, the engineered fragments displayed the predicted (Figure B) relative affinities for their effector lipids;
for example, C1A and C1B preferred PS and DAG, while C2 preferred
PS and PIP2. In the absence of DAG, addition of PIP2 (2 mol %, the average PIP2 density in the plasma
membrane inner leaflet) yielded a small but highly significant (p &lt; 0.001) increase in total PKCα kinase activity,
while subsequent addition of DAG generated a much larger increase
(Figure B). Mass spectrometry studies of the lipid mixtures confirmed that
no contaminating DAG was present, so the former activity increase
was a true PIP2 effect (Table S1 of the ). PIP2-triggered kinase
activation in the absence of DAG was first described in a previous
study utilizing a higher PIP2 density (5 mol %) that fully
activated the kinase, suggesting that high PIP2 densities
may obviate DAG regulation.,

Membrane Binding and Diffusion
of Full-Length PKCα and
Engineered Constructs
PC/PS Bilayers
When Ca2+-activated PKCα
first binds to the target membrane, the working model predicts that
the Ca2+-occupied C2 domain will dominate the membrane
contacts (Figure ). As predicted, both full-length
PKCα and its isolated C2 domain exhibited stable binding to
PC/PS supported bilayers (Figure ). Notably,
however, the equilibrium affinity of full-length PKCα for these
bilayers is 2.5-fold higher than that observed for the isolated C2
domain, suggesting that the full-length protein has additional membrane
contacts. Furthermore, titration of the PS mole density (Figure ) yielded sigmoidal binding curves for both full-length
PKCα and C2 domain binding, consistent with the cooperative
binding of multiple PS lipids, but full-length PKCα exhibited
a significantly larger (p &lt; 0.05) Hill coefficient
(H values of 4.3 ± 0.2 and 3.5 ± 0.1 for
full-length PKCα and the C2 domain, respectively). These Hill
coefficients are determined in part by the number of cooperative PS
binding sites and in part by the increasing negative charge density
of the bilayer surface as the level of PS increases. The larger Hill
coefficient observed for full-length PKCα relative to that of
its isolated C2 domain is consistent with the binding of at least
one additional PS molecule to the full-length protein, or with electrostatic
interactions involving additional protein positive charges. Overall,
the equilibrium binding data support a model in which full-length
PKCα docks to the PC/PS bilayer via its C2 domain, and additional
membrane contacts provided by unknown domain(s).

Dependence of PKCα and C2 domain membrane binding
on PS mole
density. Membrane binding density was quantified by single-molecule
TIRF as described in the legend of Figure . A fixed concentration of full-length PKCα or C2 domain (5
pM) was added to supported PC bilayers containing increasing mole
fractions of PS, and the density of fluorescent, membrane-bound proteins
was measured for 20 temporally isolated frames from three separate
movie streams in three separate titration experiments (n = 9). The best fit of the Hill equation yielded the indicated values
of K1/2 and the Hill coefficient. In both
experiments, the free Ca2+ concentration was 6 μM
in a physiological buffer () at 22 ± 0.5 °C.

Analysis of the 2D diffusion of full-length PKCα and
the
isolated C2 domain on PC/PS bilayers provides direct evidence of such
additional membrane contacts. The single-molecule, 2D diffusion rates
of both constructs on PC/PS supported bilayers were measured by TIRF
imaging and quantitation of hundreds of single-particle diffusion
tracks as previously described., Focusing on the initial
20 ms diffusion step of each track (simply the step length in the
first full 20 ms frame of that trajectory) revealed that, within error,
full-length PKCα and its isolated C2 domain exhibited the same
average initial step length, as shown in Figure A. This observation fully supported the prediction of the working
model that the Ca2+-activated C2 domain of the full-length
protein first binds the bilayer surface, yielding a kinase-inactive,
membrane-bound intermediate prior to the appearance of the DAG signal.,,

Single-particle step lengths for freely
diffusing full-length PKCα
and the C2 domain bound to pre-DAG bilayers. Step sizes were quantitated
by TIRF for single-particle tracks on supported bilayers of the indicated
lipid composition. (A) Comparison of the average initial step lengths
of PKCα and the C2 domain on PC/PS bilayers. The initial step
length is the distance traveled per 20 ms frame at the beginning of
a single-particle diffusion track (the second frame of the track is
quantitated because the first frame often captures a partial step
following particle binding), as determined by averaging the initial
steps of at least 200 particle tracks (≥30000 steps) per experiment
in three separate experiments (n ≥ 600). Data
were normalized to the initial step length of FL PKCα (0.40
± 0.04 μm). (B and C) Time dependence of step length for
successive steps during the first 320 ms after the particle had bound
to the indicated bilayer. With the second 20 ms step of the diffusion
track as a starting point (see the legend of panel A), the length
of the indicated step was determined for each diffusion track, and
the lengths of corresponding steps were averaged over at least 200
particle tracks in three separate experiments (n ≥
600) to yield the indicated time courses. Finally, the two time courses
in each box were normalized to the initial step length of FL PKC.
In all experiments, the free Ca2+ concentration was 6 μM
in a physiological buffer () at 22 ± 0.5 °C.

After the initial step, the C2 domain retained its original
diffusion
speed in subsequent steps as would be expected, but surprisingly,
the full-length protein slowed dramatically over a period of ∼200
ms as shown in Figure B. The exponential decay
constant of this slowing on PC/PS bilayers was 54 ± 9 ms. Thus,
following binding of the C2 domain to the membrane, the full-length
protein formed additional bilayer contacts in a second binding step.
These additional contacts increased the membrane residence time of
full-length PKCα 3.4-fold relative to that of C2, as determined
by their average diffusion track lifetimes (11.8 ± 2.5 and 3.5
± 0.1 s for PKCα and the C2 domain, respectively). Overall,
the average diffusion speed of full-length PKCα was 3.3-fold
slower (0.44 ± 0.04 μm2/s) than that of its
C2 domain on PC/PS bilayers (1.45 ± 0.06 μm2/s) (Table  and Figure A). These findings show that after C2 domain docking, full-length
PKCα forms a previously unknown, stable, membrane-bound activation
intermediate that is not predicted by the working model (Figure ). Activity measurements found this pre-DAG intermediate
possessed little or no kinase activity (Figure C).

Measured and calculated diffusion constants of full-length and
truncated PKCα constructs on bilayers mimicking sequential lipid
binding and kinase activation. On the plasma membrane, a PKCα
molecule will typically encounter and bind PS, then PIP2, and then DAG based on the decreasing mole densities of these lipids
(see the text). The indicated supported bilayer compositions (mole
percents in Table ) simulate this sequential
binding by allowing protein equilibration first with PS (A), then
with PS and PIP2 (B), and then with PS, PIP2, and DAG (C). Black bars are the average experimental diffusion
constants of each construct on the indicated bilayer (Table  and Table S2 of the ), determined by single-molecule TIRF analysis of
at least 2500 diffusion tracks in at least five experiments (n ≥ 5). White bars are diffusion constants predicted
by the new model (Figures  and A) for each multidomain construct on the indicated bilayer
composition, calculated by combining the experimental diffusion constants
of the domains proposed to contact the bilayer (eqs  and  and Table S2 of the ). For contacts involving
the C1A and/or C1B domain, calculations included a weighted average
over the observed multiple states for these domains (Table S2 of the ). Gray bars are diffusion
constants predicted by replacing the C1A–bilayer friction of
the new model (white bars) with pseudosubstrate peptide–bilayer
friction, using the known friction of the tighter binding, more deeply
penetrating MARCKS peptide as an upper
limit on the friction expected for the N-terminal pseudosubstrate
region. On each membrane type, this peptide hypothesis could not explain
the observed diffusion constant, confirming that a C1 domain–membrane
contact is necessary to explain the observed total friction. In all
experiments, the free Ca2+ concentration was 6 μM
in a physiological buffer at 22 ± 0.5 °C.

Comparison of the diffusion speeds of full-length
PKCα and
truncation constructs on PC/PS bilayers identified C1A as the domain
responsible for the additional membrane contacts in the newly discovered
pre-DAG intermediate. Table  and Figure A show that the isolated C1A and C1B domains each
diffused much more slowly than the isolated C2 domain, consistent
with their deeper penetration into the bilayer.,,,, Thus, bilayer binding and penetration by either C1A
or C1B could, in principle, account for the observed slowing of full-length
PKCα following the initial binding of the C2 domain to the PC/PS
bilayer (Figure B). In contrast, the kinase
domain does not contact the membrane and would not be expected to
contribute to frictional drag,,,, as confirmed by the observation
that kinase domain truncation to yield the C1A–C1B–C2
construct had little or no effect on diffusion speed (Figure A and Table ). Strikingly,
however, removal of the C1A domain from the C1A–C1B–C2
construct to generate the C1B–C2 construct yielded a dramatic
increase in the average diffusion speed to a C2-like level (Figure A and Table ). The simplest
interpretation is that the C1A domain is responsible for the extra
membrane contacts and frictional drag of full-length PKCα and
the C1A–C1B–C2 construct on PC/PS bilayers relative
to the isolated C2 domain (Figures B and A). Consistent with these conclusions, a predicted
diffusion constant based on the additive frictional drags of the C1A
and C2 domains closely matches the observed diffusion constants of
both full-length PKCα and the C1A–C1B–C2 construct
(in Figure A, compare white and black bars).
In this picture, the C1B domain stays bound to the catalytic domain
and helps maintain the kinase off state, with no significant membrane
contacts.

Further evidence supporting the proposed deployment
of C1A, not
C1B, to the bilayer after C2 docking was provided by the observation
that isolated C1A bound more tightly than C1B to PC/PS bilayers (Figure ). In addition, previous studies have suggested
that C1B of the closely related PKCβ enzyme binds stably to
the C2 and kinase domain, while C1A is more mobile
and thus should be more available for membrane deployment. The new evidence reinforces this picture. Thus,
the C1B–C2 construct diffused much like an isolated C2 domain
and lacked the large frictional drag observed for the isolated C1B
domain (Figure A and Table ), consistent with a C1B–C2 interaction that largely
prevented binding of C1B to the bilayer. In contrast, the C1A–C1B
construct lacked both the C2 and kinase domains and thus provided
no binding partners for C1B, allowing both C1 domains to be embedded
in the bilayer. MD simulations (Figure ) and
experimental studies indicate that C1 domains penetrate more deeply
than the C2 domain;,,,, thus, the
C1A–C1B construct diffused more slowly than full-length PKCα
or the C1A–C1B–C2 construct that deployed only C1A and
C2 domains on PC/PS bilayers (Figure A, Table , and eq ).

The N-terminal
region of PKCα containing the pseudosubstrate
region is known to bind anionic membranes (ΔG = −7 kcal/mol) and is likely
to be membrane-bound when not occupying the kinase active site; thus, the possibility this region contributed
significantly to the frictional drag was investigated in two ways.
First, the C1A–C1B–C2 construct lacking the region (Figure ) exhibited the same slow diffusion speed, within
error, as full-length PKCα, indicating the pseudosubstrate region
made no detectable contribution to the total frictional drag of the
full-length enzyme (Figure A and Table ). Second, the known frictional drag of the MARCKS
peptide was used to estimate the maximal
frictional drag that could be expected for the pseudosubstrate region.
MARCKS binds anionic membranes with a higher affinity (ΔG = −9 kcal/mol,) and possesses
more aromatic side chains that penetrate into the bilayer;− thus, MARCKS is expected to generate considerably more bilayer friction
than the pseudosubstrate. However, the MARCKS friction is too small
(3-fold lower than that of C1A) to account for the observed slowing
of PKCα following C2 domain docking (Figures B and A and eq ), confirming that C1A must dominate the slowing. This analysis shows
that frictional slowing due to pseudosubstrate–bilayer contact
would likely be difficult to detect; thus, the approach does not ascertain
whether the pseudosubstrate of the new pre-DAG intermediate remains
bound in the kinase active site or membrane-deployed.

Schematic model of the
PKCα activation reaction showing interdomain
and membrane contacts. Four of the indicated states [(II), (III),
(V), and (VI)] are similar to those of a previous model, while a new, pre-DAG intermediate [(IV)] is
proposed on the basis of new data. The new intermediate (IV) has been
directly detected in single-molecule diffusion studies (see ) and is the predominant intermediate awaiting
the appearance of the activating DAG signal. The slow 2D diffusion
of this intermediate arises from deployment of its C1A domain to the
bilayer as indicated. Binding of DAG to this membrane-deployed C1A
domain (IV) is proposed to trigger the formation of a transient state
(V), not yet detected, in which binding of DAG to C1A may send a signal
through the C1A–C1B linker to help dislodge the inhibitory
C1B domain from the kinase domain and/or help guide C1B to the membrane.
The resulting kinase on state is stabilized by the binding of a DAG
molecule to C1B, thereby trapping its membrane-embedded state (VI).
Lines between domains indicate inhibitory contacts (with a crossbar)
or other protein–protein contacts; question marks indicate
possible but not fully confirmed contacts. Gray contacts indicate
a potential weakening of the interaction. A horizontal line represents
a bilayer surface.

Overall, the findings
provide multiple, strong lines of evidence
indicating that the predominant PKCα intermediate formed on
PC/PS bilayers possesses membrane-deployed C1A and C2 domains, while
C1B does not contact the bilayer but instead helps maintain the observed
inhibition of the kinase domain.

PC/PS/PIP2 Bilayers
The equilibrium binding
of full-length PKCα and the other constructs was compared on
PC/PS and PC/PS/PIP2 bilayers (Figure ). The results showed that, as expected,,− the membrane affinities of PKCα and the C2
domain were significantly increased by binding of PIP2 to
the C2 domain, while the C1A and C1B domains exhibited no detectable
PIP2 affinity (Figure ). Because
PIP2 binding occurs on the microsecond time scale (see
above), it was too fast to detect (20 ms per TIRF frame). Thus, as
previous models have proposed, most Ca2+-activated PKCα
molecules will dock to the target membrane via binding of their C2
domain to PS and then will rapidly bind PIP2 (Figure B).− The newly discovered insertion of C1A into the bilayer exhibits
a time constant of 43 ± 9 ms on the PC/PS/PIP2 bilayer
(Figure C) and will generally occur after
C2 acquires both its PS and PIP2 target lipids.

Comparing
the average 2D diffusion speeds on PC/PS and PC/PS/PIP2 bilayers revealed that the C2 domain exhibited modest slowing when
it was bound to PIP2 as previously observed. On PC/PS bilayers, this domain is known to bind
PS molecules at both its Ca2+ and PIP2 binding
sites, while on PC/PS/PIP2 bilayers, the latter PS is replaced
with PIP2.,, Thus, the C2 domain binds the same total number of lipids on the
two types of membranes, but electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR)
studies of bilayers have shown the larger PIP2 headgroup
significantly alters its tilt angle and membrane docking geometry,
yielding slightly deeper penetration of the protein into the bilayer., We have previously shown this deeper penetration and its additional
frictional drag can quantitatively account for the observed diffusional
slowing of the isolated C2 domain on PC/PS/PIP2 bilayers
relative to PC/PS bilayers. (Two alternative
models of C2 docking geometry based on ATR-IR studies of dehydrated,
then rehydrated, C2–lipid multilayers or X-ray reflectivity measurements on lipid monolayers have been described, but only the EPR studies
of bilayers have been confirmed by independent MD simulations., Moreover, these EPR measurements and MD simulations yield protein
penetration depths on membranes lacking and containing PIP2, and thus are most useful in analyzing protein diffusion speed which
is highly sensitive to penetration depth.) Herein, both the isolated C2 domain and the C1B–C2 construct,
which diffused much like the C2 domain that dominates its membrane
contacts, exhibited significant (p &lt; 0.10 for
the C1B–C2 construct, and p &lt; 0.005 for
C2) slowing in the PIP2-bound state (Figure A,B).

In broader terms, the PIP2-triggered
slowing of the
C2 domain contributed to a modest slowing of all the multidomain constructs
containing the C2 domain on PC/PS/PIP2 bilayers relative
to PC/PS bilayers (Figure A,B). As anticipated,
the effects of PIP2 on the 2D diffusion constant of the
C1A–C1B–C2 construct and full-length PKCα were
more difficult to quantitate because of (i) the relatively small magnitude
of the PIP2-triggered frictional drag and (ii) the inverse
relationship between the diffusion constant and the frictional drag,
as observed in an extensive study of 17 protein–lipid complexes
diffusing on supported bilayers that were well described by eqs  and . At the high-friction limit, this inverse relationship means
that additional friction yields monotonically decreasing effects on
the diffusion constant as the diffusion speed asymptotically approaches
zero. For the C1A–C1B–C2 construct or full-length PKCα
bound to PS, the combined membrane insertion of the C1A and C2 domains
placed the system near the high-friction limit such that the additional
frictional drag triggered by the PIP2-induced tilting of
the C2 domain was a small component of the total drag. Thus, the mean
diffusion constant of full-length PKCα was reproducibly slower
on the PIP2-containing membranes, but the slowing was at
the edge of statistical significance (p = 0.20).

These findings provide new insights into the previous observation
that binding of PIP2 to the C2 domain increases PKCα
kinase activity. At 2 mol % PIP2, most of the effect on kinase activity arose from an increased level
of membrane binding (Figure A,B), though there
was also a small increase in the average specific activity of the
membrane-bound protein (Figure C). At 5 mol
% PIP2, near-maximal specific kinase activity is observed
even in the absence of DAG. Other studies
have shown that at sufficiently high PIP2 densities the
C2 domain binds two PIP2 molecules and generates a larger
domain tilt than one PIP2. A simple hypothesis for the PIP2-induced kinase activation
proposes that the binding of two successive PIP2 molecules,
and the accompanying C2 domain tilt, weakens the C1B–C2 interaction,
which could in turn weaken the inhibitory C1B–kinase interaction
and facilitate kinase activation. In constructs lacking the kinase
domain, the PIP2-induced C1B–bilayer interactions
would be amplified because the C1B–kinase interaction is missing.
Consistent with this prediction, the C1A–C1B–C2 construct
is considerably slower than full-length PKCα on PC/PS/PIP2 bilayers. Moreover, inclusion of weak C1B–bilayer
interactions is necessary for the accurate prediction of the diffusion
constants of C1B–C2 and C1A–C1B–C2 constructs,
while the corresponding prediction for full-length PKCα requires
only C1A– and C2–bilayer interactions (Figure B, Table S2 of the , and eq ).

Another
interaction that could contribute to PIP2-triggered
kinase activation is direct binding of the pseudosubstrate to PIP2 (Figure S2 of the ), but as noted for diffusion on PC/PS bilayers (see above), such
an interaction would provide too little friction to account for the
observed PKCα slowing following docking of the C2 domain to
PC/PS/PIP2 bilayers that requires C1A insertion for a quantitative
explanation (Figures C and B). Moreover, pseudosubstrate–bilayer friction would
likely be too small to detectably alter total PKCα friction
(see above); thus, it is unclear whether the pseudosubstrate is membrane-bound
on PC/PS/PIP2 bilayers. If PIP2 does recruit
the pseudosubstrate, it would still have to recruit C1B to produce
full kinase activation.

Overall, the findings reveal a previously
unknown PKCα pre-DAG
intermediate on PC/PS/PIP2 bilayers, analogous to the newly
discovered intermediate on PC/PS bilayers (Figure ). This new state is expected to be the predominant intermediate
on unstimulated plasma membranes containing constitutive PS and PIP2, prior to the appearance of a DAG signal. The new intermediate
possesses a C2 domain bound to PS and PIP2, as well as
a membrane-embedded C1A domain bound to PS (Figures , A). At moderate PIP2 levels, the C1B domain remains bound to the catalytic domain and
helps maintain the kinase off state, but high PIP2 levels
are proposed to facilitate binding of C1B and/or the pseudosubstrate
to the bilayer.

PC/PS/PIP2/DAG Bilayers
The equilibrium
binding of full-length PKCα and its isolated regulatory domains
was also measured on PC/PS/PIP2/DAG bilayers. The results
showed that, as previously reported,,,,, the membrane affinities of the full-length enzyme and the isolated
C1A and C1B domains were significantly increased by the presence of
DAG, while the isolated C2 domain was unaffected (Figure ). Moreover, the specific kinase activity of full-length
PKCα was greatly increased by the activating DAG lipid as expected
(Figure ). These findings support a model
for the active state (Figure B) in which DAG
stabilizes both C1 domains in the bilayer, thereby removing kinase
inhibition.

While early studies supported a 1:1 stoichiometry
for the binding of DAG to full-length PKCα,,, more recent studies in cells and in vitro, including this study, support a model in which
C1A and C1B each deploy to the bilayer and bind one DAG in full-length
PKCα as observed for the isolated domains, yielding a 2:1 DAG:protein
stoichiometry in DAG-activated PKCα.,,,, The new working model (Figures , A) proposes that in this DAG-activated
state, both C1A and C1B are inserted into the bilayer where their
membrane contacts are stabilized by DAG, such that both C1 domains
contribute to the observed DAG-triggered increase in membrane affinity
(Figure ). Consistent with this picture, the
frictional drags of both C1A and C1B, as well as C2, were needed to
quantitatively account for the diffusional slowing of full-length
PKCα and the C1A–C1B–C2 construct on PC/PS/PIP2/DAG bilayers (Figure C, Table S2
of the , and eq ). Because of the inverse dependence between the
diffusion constant and frictional drag (see above), DAG-triggered
slowing of PKCα appears to be relatively small in magnitude
but is highly reproducible and significant (p &lt;
0.06). The additional DAG-induced frictional drag was quantitatively
consistent with the additive contribution expected for the C1B domain
(Figure C, Table S2 of the , and eqs  and ). Significant DAG-triggered slowing was also observed
for the C1A–C1B (p &lt; 0.05) and C1B–C2
(p &lt; 0.05) constructs. However, quantitative analysis
showed the contribution of C1B to this slowing was smaller for the
C1B–C2 construct (Figure C and Table
S2 of the ), suggesting
that a membrane-anchored C1A domain may assist in C1B membrane association.

The findings identify the PKCα domain that is primarily responsible
for triggering kinase activation on a bilayer surface possessing average
plasma membrane PS and PIP2 densities (approximately 25
and 2 mol %, respectively). Given the diffusion results described
above showing that C1A is already bilayer-associated before addition
of DAG (Figure A,B), it follows that kinase
activation is triggered by the DAG recruitment of C1B to the bilayer
where it joins membrane-bound C1A to help generate the large frictional
drag observed for the active state (Figures C and ). An alternative possibility, that
the active state possesses only one membrane-bound C1 domain (C1A
or C1B) together with a membrane-bound pseudosubstrate peptide on
the bilayer surface, cannot account for the observed large frictional
drag of active PKCα given the small friction expected for a
surface-bound peptide [&gt;3-fold less friction than a C1 domain (see
above and Figure C)].

Testing the
New PKCα Activation Model by Comparing the
Kinase Activation Efficacies of Diacylglycerol and Phorbol Ester
Previous studies have indicated that the C1A and C1B domains possess
contrasting affinities for DAG and phorbol esters such as phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA).−,,, Specifically,
these studies showed that C1A prefers DAG over PMA while C1B prefers
PMA over DAG. Given these preferences, the new model (Figure ) predicted that PMA would be a significantly better
kinase activator than DAG, because PMA would recruit C1B to the membrane
and release kinase inhibition more efficiently. When the kinase activating
effects of equal bilayer densities (each at 2 mol %) of PMA and DAG
were compared, PMA was found to be the superior activator (p &lt; 0.005) as shown in Figure , which supports the new model.

Comparison of the effects of DAG and PMA
on the PKCα kinase
specific activity. The total PKCα kinase activity and the bound
density of PKCα on the bilayer were measured as described in
the legend of Figure  for membranes containing
3:1 PC/PS bilayers and the indicated levels of activating diacylglycerol
and/or phorbol ester PMA (an activating lipid concentration of 48
or 360 nM corresponded to 2.0 or 7.5 mol % in the bilayer, respectively).
Specific activity was calculated as the ratio of kinase activity to
membrane-bound enzyme density under each bilayer condition. Each bar
was calculated from two duplicates for each kinase and binding assay
(n = 4). In all experiments, the free Ca2+ concentration was 6 μM in kinase assay buffer () at 22 ± 0.5 °C.

Detection of Membrane-Bound Substates for
Certain PKCα
Activation Intermediates by Diffusional Analysis and Molecular Dynamics
Each experimental diffusion constant presented in Figure  was the population average for a given pairing
of a protein construct and bilayer composition. When the step size
distribution of each construct–bilayer pairing was examined
for multiple states, two distinct subpopulations with different diffusion
constants were detected for certain pairings, although no third subpopulation
of mobile proteins was detected for any case (Table S2 of the ). For dominant intermediate
(IV) (Figures , A)
and final, fully deployed active kinase (VI), two substates were required
to achieve convergence of the Rayleigh best fit in the absence and
presence of DAG, respectively (Table S2 of the ). The most likely source of this two-state
behavior is the membrane-embedded C1A domain, which as an isolated
domain possesses two diffusional states on each bilayer type (Table
S2 of the ).

All-atom MD
simulations of the isolated C1A domain and the C1A–C1B–C2
construct bound to a PC/PS bilayer. (A) Membrane insertion [measured
every 0.54 ns as the distance from the center of mass (COM) of the
protein to the bilayer PC average N plane] over time observed in two
production runs. (B) Cartoon representation of the C1A domain (cyan)
showing the zinc ions (silver spheres), the protein center of mass
(COM, red sphere), and the bilayer N plane as a blue line. At the
left is a snapshot of the shallow state (8.7 Å) at 59 ns of run
2 and at the right a snapshot of the C1A deep state (0.3 Å) at
245 ns of run 1. A detailed conformational analysis shows that three
lysines (K45, K62, and K76) and two arginines (R42 and R77) are the
major residues involved in the electrostatic interactions between
the C1A domain and the PC/PS headgroups in the shallow state. Four
of these residues (R42, K62, K76, and R77) were observed to form a
charged “semicircle” around the middle of the C1A domain
to stabilize the deep insertion state. It is noteworthy that in the
deep state, a stable hydrogen bond is formed between K45 and the backbone
oxygen atom of F43 to stabilize the buried charge, while cation−π
interactions between side chains of K45 and F43 or F44 may also contribute
to the stability of K45 in the deep state. In addition, &gt;60% of
the
C1A conformers in the deep state were associated with PS, while no
shallow state conformers were observed to bind PS. (C) View down the
membrane normal toward the bilayer surface of a C1A–C1B–C2
construct (surface representation) on the bilayer (gray) after a 10
ns all-atom MD simulation. The simulation was initiated with the preferred
membrane docking geometry of each individual domain (Figure B and ref ()), and with the interdomain linkers (red sticks, H and side-chain
atoms hidden) extended with no steric clash. The resulting model was
stable in the membrane during the entire simulation. N′ and
C′ represent the truncated N- and C-terminal ends of the fragments
employed in both experimental studies (Figure ) and MD simulations.

All-atom MD simulations of the C1A domain bound to a PC/PS
bilayer
provided a molecular explanation for the two observed C1A diffusional
states, as summarized in Figure . Specifically, the MD simulations showed that C1A
could exist not only in its deeply membrane-embedded state but also
in a previously undescribed shallow docking geometry. This shallow
docking state is mainly associated with the headgroup layer and is
stabilized by a set of basic residues on one face of C1A that interact
with PC and PS acidic moieties, indicating the interaction is largely
electrostatic and likely serves as an intermediate in the membrane
association and dissociation reactions of C1A. Analysis of the deep
state yielded an equilibrium membrane docking geometry consistent
with previous models based on NMR and single-molecule diffusion results
indicating this state penetrates deeply, up to 6 Å into the hydrocarbon
region (using the Nagle convention defining the hydrocarbon core boundary
as the plane of average atom positions for carbon 2 of the phospholipid
acyl chains) into the bilayer hydrocarbon core.,,

Quantitatively Testing the New PKCα
Activation Model by
Comparing Calculated and Measured Average Diffusion Constants
Finally, the proposed membrane contacts in the new activation model
(Figures , A) were
tested by asking whether calculated diffusion constants based on this
model would yield reasonable agreement with the observed diffusion
constants. Modeling of membrane-bound full-length PKCα confirms
that the interdomain linkers are sufficiently long to prevent steric
clashes between the individual domains in their normal membrane docking
geometries (Figure C). Thus, the calculated
diffusion constants utilized the frictional drags measured for the
individual, isolated regulatory domains (C1A, C1B, and C2) on each
membrane type, and the additivity of frictional drags on supported
bilayers (eq ), to calculate the total frictional drag and average diffusion constant
for each multidomain construct. For cases in which two diffusional
substates were observed, both substates were used to calculate the
appropriate population-weighted average (Figure  and Table S2 of the ). Notably, the calculated and measured average diffusion constants
were in excellent global agreement (compare white and black bars in
Figure ), providing strong support for the
proposed membrane contacts in the new PKCα activation model
(Figures , A).

Discussion
These studies of PKCα directly detect and
verify each of
the pre-DAG intermediates proposed to occur in the activation reaction
that converts inactive, mature cPKC in the cytoplasm into active kinase
on the plasma membrane surface (Figure B).,,,,,,− In addition, the findings reveal a major new pre-DAG intermediate
in the activation reaction. As the now expanded cPKC activation sequence
in Figure  illustrates, and as shown in the
molecular model of Figure A, the activation
reaction begins with the rapid binding of the C2 domain to two PS
molecules at its Ca2+ binding site and basic cluster, respectively.
Such rapid PS binding is ensured by the high physiological PS mole
density (∼25 mol % in the plasma membrane,), such that on average, approximately 4 of the 14–18 lipids
in the C2 domain footprint as it docks to the membrane would be PS
molecules. As confirmation of this picture,
full-length PKCα and its isolated C2 domain exhibit the same
average diffusion speed when they first bind to the membrane [Figure A and (II) in Figures  and ].

Expanded PKC activation
model and subpopulations of two PKCα
activation states detected by single-molecule diffusion studies. (A)
Expanded structural model of PKC activation showing the newly discovered,
predominant, pre-DAG intermediate (IV) in which both the C1A and C2
domains contact the bilayer. Four of the indicated states [(II), (III),
(V), and (VI)] are similar to those of a previous model, while pre-DAG intermediate (IV) is novel. The
indicated structures are supported by available evidence, but current
data do not rule out alternative structures (Figure S2 of the ). (B) Single-molecule
TIRF analysis of PKCα single-molecule diffusion shows that states
(IV) and (VI) in the expanded activation reaction (see also Figure ) are each comprised of two major subpopulations
as indicated. The relative population sizes were determined by multistate
fits of the single-molecule diffusion data on each type of supported
bilayer (Table S2 of the ). Domain subscripts indicate the relative degree of insertion of
the protein into the membrane (s for shallow and d for deep). Question
marks indicate that the status of the N-terminal pseudosubstrate region
is unresolved in the inactive, pre-DAG intermediate (IV): because
the friction of the peptide–bilayer contact is expected to
be negligible, the diffusion analysis does not ascertain whether the
peptide remains bound to the kinase active site or binds to the bilayer
as proposed for the active state.,

Subsequently, the (PS)2 intermediate
encounters a PIP2 molecule (∼2 mol % in the plasma
membrane) on the
microsecond time scale that would rapidly replace PS bound in the
C2 domain basic cluster because of its higher PIP2 affinity,
generating the (PS-PIP2) intermediate.− PIP2 binding increases membrane affinity, and the resulting change in
the membrane docking angle, yields slightly more
protein penetration and frictional drag, and modest diffusional slowing
[Figures  and  and
(III) in Figures  and ].

After the C2 domain docks to the membrane, the C1A domain
inserts
into the bilayer with a time constant of ∼50 ms (Figure B,C). The deeply penetrating substate of the C1A
domain is proposed to bind one or more PS molecules,,, to account
both for the PS requirement in stable binding of the isolated C1A
to the bilayer (Figure ) and for the higher
sensitivity of full-length PKC to the PS density relative to the isolated
C2 domain (Figure ). If C1A is stably contacting
the C2 and/or kinase domain in the inactive cPKC, as suggested by
some studies,,, C1A must dissociate from other domain(s) to insert its hydrophobic
residues into the bilayer. The resulting, newly discovered pre-DAG
intermediate with C1A and C2 contacting the bilayer, and with C1B
helping inhibit the catalytic domain [(IV) in Figures  and ], is the predominant inactive
intermediate awaiting the appearance of a DAG lipid signal. The membrane-associated
C1A domain greatly increases the frictional drag because this domain
is embedded more deeply than the C2 domain in the membrane,,,,, thereby slowing the diffusion of the newly
discovered intermediate (IV) while increasing its membrane affinity
and bound state lifetime, and thus increasing the probability it will
remain on the membrane until a DAG signal appears. Moreover, the membrane-bound
state of the C1A domain will bind DAG more rapidly and with higher
affinity than the aqueous state of C1A, which has no opportunity to
collide with the membrane-embedded activating lipid. Finally, the
association of C1A with the bilayer is proposed to help guide C1B
to the bilayer after the appearance of the DAG signal. It is not yet
clear whether the N-terminal pseudosubstrate region of the pre-DAG
intermediate remains bound in the kinase active site or deploys to
the membrane, because the frictional drag of the resulting peptide–bilayer
interaction would likely be negligible relative to the drags of the
C1A and C2 domains. Thus, the pre-DAG intermediate could be inhibited
either by C1B alone or by both the pseudosubstrate and C1B [compare
(IVa,b,c) in Figure S2 of the ].

The findings identify the final, essential step in kinase
activation.
During a DAG signaling event, one DAG molecule is proposed to rapidly
occupy the membrane-embedded C1A domain, which is known to bind DAG.,,,,, This step
may also help deploy the pseudosubstrate to the membrane and/or may
help dissociate C1B from the kinase domain and if so would contribute
to kinase activation [(V) in Figures  and A]. The transmission of information from C1A to
C1B is supported by the highly conserved nature of the 15-residue
C1A–C1B linker, which is identical in cow, rat, mouse, and
human PKCα or PKCβ and differs at only two positions between
the PKCα and PKCβ isoforms. Subsequently, in the final
kinase activation step [transition from (V) to (VI) in Figures  and A], the C1B domain
is recruited into the bilayer by PS and DAG, which it is known to
bind,,,, thereby stabilizing the fully activated kinase (Figures  and ). In the resulting,
kinase active state all three regulatory domains, C1A, C1B, and C2,
are membrane-associated and all the inhibitory contacts with the kinase
domain have been released. The extensive bilayer contacts of the active
kinase increase its lifetime on the membrane as it diffuses in two
dimensions on the membrane surface, encountering and phosphorylating
its substrate receptors and signaling proteins. The diffusion of this
active enzyme is ∼10-fold slower than that of a single lipid
in the bilayer (Table ); however, it remains
quite mobile, and the 10-fold slowing observed on supported bilayers
may overestimate the extent of slowing on the plasma membrane where
frictional drag may be less additive., The recruitment
of C1B to the membrane is driven even more strongly by phorbol ester
(PMA) than by DAG, because of the known higher affinity of C1B for
PMA.−,,,,,− Thus, the model simply explains the known propensity of phorbol
esters to activate cPKCs more strongly than DAG, as well as the ability
of these plant toxins to stimulate tumor growth.,,,,− Eventually, unless it is trapped in a complex
that maintains its activated state,, the active
enzyme will leave the membrane and return to its inactive cytoplasmic
state as the Ca2+ and DAG signals return to baseline.

In a population of PKCα molecules, each of the five individual
membrane-bound intermediates in the new model (Figures  and A) can be considered a distinct
ensemble. Multistate analysis,, of the isolated C2 domain on each type of bilayer suggests that
the initial intermediates in which membrane contacts are dominated
by the C2 domain [(II) and (III)] can be represented as simple, homogeneous
populations displaying a single diffusion constant. However, intermediates
possessing a membrane-contacting C1A or C1B domain [(IV) and (VI)
have been directly observed in this study] can switch between a shallow
or deep membrane-penetrating state, yielding ensembles that display
multiple diffusion constants: fast and slow arising from shallow and
deep penetration of the C1 domain into the bilayer, respectively (Figure B and Table S2 of the ). Where multiple substates are present, all contribute
to the average diffusion constant (Figure  and Table ) with weightings proportional
to their population sizes (Table S2 of the ).

The molecular model proposed in Figure A is based on a SAXS study suggesting the mature,
inactive PKCα
molecule adopts the indicated compact structure in the cytoplasm,
which then docks to the bilayer via its C2 domain during a Ca2+ signal. However, it is possible
that the membrane-bound enzyme adopts a more extended structure (see
multiple possibilities in Figure S2 of the ). While further studies are needed to establish
the detailed molecular picture of the membrane-bound states, our single-molecule
diffusion results firmly define the existence and the domain–bilayer
contacts of the observed intermediates [(II), (III), (IV), and (VI)].

In summary, these findings show that the typical activation sequence
of a conventional PKC enzyme bound to the plasma membrane involves
the previously described rapid acquisition of PS and PIP2 by the C2 domain, followed by a newly observed penetration of C1A
into the bilayer that stabilizes the membrane-bound enzyme as it awaits
the DAG lipid signal. This C1A-embedded state is the predominant intermediate
on the plasma membrane until the DAG signal appears and recruits C1B
into the bilayer, thereby releasing the C1B inhibition of the kinase
domain and generating the active enzyme [conversion of (IV) to (VI)
in Figures  and A].
Because C1B recruitment by activating lipid is the final trigger for
kinase activation, and because C1B binds phorbol esters more tightly
than DAG while the reverse is true for C1A, the model explains the
superiority of phorbol esters over DAG as lipid activators. Moreover,
the findings illustrate the power of single-molecule binding and diffusion
studies, in concert with activity studies, to reveal the hidden steps
in the activation mechanisms of membrane-bound signaling proteins.

Supporting Information Available
SI content includes:
Ca2+ and lipid regulation of the full-length PKCα
constructs
employed here (Figure S1), plausible alternative structural models
for the dominant, pre-DAG intermediate (IV) (Figure S2), liquid chromatography–tandem
mass spectrometry data showing our lipid mixtures are free of contaminating
DAG (Table S1), and the tabulated multistate diffusion analyses carried
out for all constructs (Table S2). This material is available free
of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi4016082_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
§ K.E.L.:
AvidBiotics Corp., 100 Kimball Way, South San Francisco,
CA 94080.

Author Present Address
∥ J.D.K.:
Department of Chemistry, University of Colorado, Denver,
CO 80217-3364.

Support provided
by National Institutes of Health Grants R01 GM-063235 (to J.J.F.)
and R01 GM-063796 (to G.A.V.).

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We sincerely thank Dr. Thomas Leiker and
Prof. Robert C. Murphy
(University of Colorado, Denver, CO; support provided by National
Institutes of Health Grant U54-GM69338 to Robert C. Murphy) for mass
spectrometry analysis of the DAG content of lipid mixtures, Teresa
Stines Narheini (University of Colorado Tissue Culture Facility) for
training in cell culture, and Profs. James Hurley (University of California
at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA) and Alexandra Newton (University of California
at San Diego, La Jolla, CA) for helpful discussions and suggestions.

Abbreviations
C1A and C1Bfirst conserved domains
of classical protein kinase C

C2second conserved domain of classical protein kinase
C

PKCαprotein
kinase C isoform α

Sfpphosphopantethienyltransferase

AF555Alexa Fluor 555

PCphosphatidylcholine or 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine

PDBProtein Data Bank

PSphosphatidylserine or 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-l-serine

PI(4,5)P2 or PIP21,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoinositol 4,5-bisphosphate

diacylglycerol or DAG1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycerol

LRB-PE1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-(lissamine rhodamine
B sulfonyl)

SUVsonicated unilamellar vesicle

DTTdithiothreitol

EDTAethylenediaminetetraacetic acid

TIRFMtotal internal reflection fluorescence
microscopy

GSTglutathione S-transferase

MBPmaltose-binding protein

HAhemagglutinin

PMAphorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate.

