Biofilm formation
is an important
phenotype in bacteria, where cells switch
from a motile, free-swimming, single-cell growth mode to a surface-attached,
sessile, community of cells encapsulated in a matrix consisting of
exopolysaccharide,
protein, and DNA., Bacteria within biofilms are extremely
resistant to antibiotics and
are thought to be responsible for several drug-resistant infectious
diseases. Biofilm development is poorly understood in general, but
the intracellular concentration of bis-(3′–5′)-cyclic
dimeric guanosine monophosphate (cyclic-di-GMP or c-di-GMP) has been
shown to be important for the regulation of motility and biofilm formation,, in addition to many other important signaling processes, including
cell division, transcriptional regulation, and virulence.−

In bacteria, two classes of enzymes maintain the intracellular
pool of cyclic-di-GMP. Cyclic-di-GMP is synthesized from two molecules
of GTP by GGDEF domain-containing diguanylate cyclases (DGCs).− Cyclic-di-GMP is hydrolyzed by ExL domain-containing
phosphodiesterases (PDEs)− to form the linear metabolite
5′-phosphoguanylyl-(3′→5′)-guanosine (pGpG).
Because cyclic-di-GMP signaling and bacterial biofilms are central
to many infectious diseases, the pathways that contribute to the regulation
of intracellular cyclic-di-GMP concentrations are potentially important
antibiotic drug targets.

Nitric oxide (NO) is a well-established
and important signaling
molecule in mammals that regulates a variety of physiological processes,
including vasodilation and neurotransmission. The enzyme soluble guanylate cyclase (sGC) acts as an
NO sensor via its N-terminal heme-nitric oxide/oxygen binding domain. Interestingly, several different groups have
recently
observed that low concentrations of NO induce biofilm dispersal in
a variety of bacterial species.− In bacteria, H-NOX domains typically
exist as stand-alone
proteins that regulate cocistronic histidine kinase [H-NOX-associated
histidine kinase (HahK)] or c-di-GMP
synthase and/or phosphodiesterase [H-NOX-associated cyclic-di-GMP
processing enzyme (HaCE)] proteins., In general,
the biophysical characterization of these H-NOX/enzyme
complexes is lacking.

H-NOX signaling in Legionella
pneumophila and Shewanella woodyi, both
of which encode a diguanylate cyclase/phosphodiesterase
protein in the same operon as an H-NOX domain, has been characterized. It is reported that the H-NOX-associated protein
Lpg1057
(LpHaCE) from L. pneumophila has in vitro diguanylate cyclase activity that is inhibited
by NO-bound H-NOX. The phosphodiesterase
domain was found to be inactive.
In S. woodyi, H-NOX regulates the DGC and PDE activities
of SwHaCE (Swoo_2750), previously termed SwDGC. In the absence of NO, SwH-NOX stimulates
diguanylate cyclase activity while the phosphodiesterase activity
remains at basal levels. In the presence of NO-bound H-NOX, however,
this pattern is reversed. SwHaCE displays basal level
cyclase activity, whereas the phosphodiesterase activity is upregulated.
These results underlie the additional finding that nanomolar NO leads
to less biofilm and a decreased level of cyclic-di-GMP in S. woodyi. These data are consistent with H-NOX acting as
an NO sensor that regulates biofilm formation by modulating the intracellular
level of cyclic-di-GMP in bacteria.

Therefore, the H-NOX/HaCE
protein–protein
interaction is important for regulating the biofilm formation pathway
in some bacteria. Here we use a combination of techniques to study
how HaCE proteins are regulated by H-NOX. We employ NMR chemical shift
perturbation experiments to identify the residues of SwH-NOX that interact with SwHaCE. The role of these
residues was confirmed by enzyme activity assays as well as fluorescence
binding studies with mutant proteins. Sedimentation equilibrium studies
were used to assess the stoichiometry of the SwH-NOX/SwHaCE complex. The data were used to generate a model for
H-NOX regulation of HaCE activity.

Experimental Procedures
Materials
and General Methods
All reagents were obtained
at their highest available purity and used as received. All enzymes
were purchased from New England Biolabs.

Protein Expression and
Purification
SwH-NOX and SwHaCE were expressed and purified as
described previously., In brief, the plasmid containing
the SwH-NOX gene
was transformed into Escherichia coli Tuner(DE3)pLysS
cells for protein expression. The cells were grown in yeast extract
medium containing a final sodium phosphate concentration of 100 mM.
The protein expression was induced with 10 μM IPTG (final concentration)
at 18 °C overnight. The pellet was
harvested and stored at −80 °C until it was purified.
For purification, the pellet was
thawed on ice and resuspended in H-NOX A buffer [50 mM sodium phosphate
and 300 mM sodium chloride
(NaCl) (pH 8.0)]. After sonication, the lysate was spun at 18000 rpm
(39200g) for 1 h. The cleared supernatant was loaded
on a nickel-NTA (GE) column, and the protein was eluted using an imidazole
gradient of H-NOX B buffer [50 mM sodium phosphate, 300 mM NaCl, and
250 mM imidazole (pH 8.0)]. The plasmid encoding SwHaCE was transformed into E.
coli BL21(DE3)pLysS cells for protein expression. The cells
were grown in 2XYT medium containing 16 g of tryptone, 10 g of yeast
extract, and 5 g of NaCl per liter. Protein expression was induced
with 100 μM IPTG (final concentration) at 16 °C overnight.
The pellet was resuspended in lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris base,
10 mM magnesium chloride
(MgCl2), 25 mM potassium chloride (KCl), 300 mM NaCl, 10%
glycerol, and 2 mM βME (β-mercaptoethanol) (pH 8.0). Phenylmethanesulfonyl
fluoride (PMSF) dissolved in methanol was added to a final concentration
of 1 mM to the resuspended pellet prior to lysis to inhibit protease
activity. After sonication,
the lysate was spun at 18500 rpm (41400g) for 1 h.
The cleared supernatant was loaded on a nickel-NTA column (GE), and
the protein was eluted using an imidazole gradient in lysis buffer.
After elution off the Ni column, the protein was loaded on Superdex-200
(GE) equilibrated in lysis buffer without glycerol and PMSF to obtain
&gt;95% pure protein.

To produce 13C- and 15N-labeled protein, E. coli Tuner(DE3)pLysS cells
transformed with the SwH-NOX plasmid were grown in
M9 minimal medium supplemented with 15NH4Cl
and 13C-labeled glucose (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories,
Inc.) as the sole sources of 15N and 13C, respectively.
Protein expression was induced by adding 10 μM IPTG (final concentration)
at 25 °C and allowing cultures to
grow overnight. Then the protein was purified by nickel-NTA affinity
chromatography followed by gel filtration using Superdex 200. The
yield of the isotope-labeled protein was ∼10 mg/L. For all
protein-based assays described below, the protein concentrations were
determined using the Bradford Protein Assay (Thermo Scientific, Pierce). The standard curve for the assay was prepared
using
BSA (Thermo Scientific, Pierce).

Site-Directed Mutagenesis
The Stratagene QuikChange
protocol was used to introduce several SwH-NOX point
mutations. The following complementary primers were used to make the
E16K, F17A, and E20K SwH-NOX mutants: E16K, 5′-GGAG
TTG ATT GAA GAT AAA TTC GGA TAT GAA ACC-3′;
F17A, 5′-GAG TTG ATT GAA GAT GAG GCT GGA TAT GAA ACC-3′; and E20K, 5′-GAG TTC GGA TAT AAA ACC TTA GAT ACT TTA CTT G-3′ (the underlined
portions are the mutated codons). Phusion polymerase was purchased
from New England Biolabs. The mutagenesis products were transformed
into E. coli Dh5α cells for propagation. The
mutations were confirmed using DNA sequencing results obtained from
the DNA sequencing facility at Stony Brook University. The expression
and purification of SwH-NOX surface mutants were
conducted using the same protocols as described above for the wild-type SwH-NOX protein.

NMR and Data Analysis
The SwH-NOX
Fe(II)–CO complex was used in the NMR studies to avoid paramagnetic
effects resulting from the unpaired electron in the Fe(II)–NO
and Fe(II)–unligated SwH-NOX complexes. The
Fe(II)–CO complex was prepared in an anaerobic glovebag as
previously described. The SwH-NOX concentration was 400 μM,
dissolved in 50 mM sodium phosphate, 50 mM NaCl, and 10 mM sodium
dithionite (pH 7.6). Triple-resonance NMR experiments for the backbone
assignments of SwH-NOX (HNCO, HNCACB, CBCACONH, and
HNCA) were performed at 25 °C on a Bruker 900 MHz spectrometer
equipped with a cryoprobe at the
New York Structural Biology Center (New York, NY). Data were processed
using NMRPipe followed by analysis using
Sparky; 75% of the backbone resonances
were assigned.

Transverse relaxation-optimized spectroscopy
(TROSY)-edited 15N–1H HSQC experiments
were performed on
the same spectrometer
at 25 °C for the following samples: (1) the 15N-labeled
Fe(II)–CO SwH-NOX complex and (2) the 15N-labeled Fe(II)–CO SwH-NOX complex
and the nonisotopically labeled binding partner SwHaCE, at a ratio of 1:1.25. The buffer used was the same as that
used in the three-dimensional (3D) NMR experiments. Then, the weighted
average chemical shift difference (Δ in parts per million) was
calculated using the equation

Tryptophan Fluorescence
Quenching
Intrinsic fluorescence
experiments were conducted on a PTI spectrofluorometer. SwHaCE (1 μM) was placed in a cuvette, and the SwH-NOX Fe(II)–NO complex (WT and mutants E16K, F17A, and E20K,
separately) was titrated serially into the protein while being stirred
constantly at 25 °C. SwHaCE was diluted to 10%
of the starting volume (2000 μL) . Titration was continued until
the maximal change in fluorescence
had been achieved. The data were fit to a first-order binding equation
in Origin:

Sedimentation Velocity and Sedimentation
Equilibrium
Experiments were conducted at 4 °C on a
Beckman Optima XL-Analytical
ultracentrifuge using an An-60 Ti rotor. For sedimentation velocity
experiments, SwHaCE was incubated with the SwH-NOX Fe(II)–NO complex (WT and mutant E16K, separately),
and the protein complex was centrifuged at 50000 rpm (201240g) for 24 h with 60 scans at 280 nm. The protein concentration
was adjusted
so that the absorbance was 0.8 at 280 nm. The data were analyzed using
SEDFIT. The buffer consisted of 50 mM
Tris-HCl, 250
mM NaCl,
25 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, and 2 mM βME (pH 8.0).

For the equilibrium experiments with SwHaCE alone, SwHaCE was analyzed at three rotor speeds (9000, 14000,
and 18000 rpm, which are equal to 6500g, 15800g, and 26100g, respectively), which were
calculated using the molecular mass of SwHaCE (74.5
kDa). Two scans were collected at the end of each speed. The protein
absorbance was followed at 280 and 260 nm. The data were analyzed
using HeteroAnalysis
(University of Connecticut Analytical Ultracentrifugation Facility)
to determine the molecular mass for SwHaCE alone
in solution. The data were fit globally across samples and speeds
to yield the apparent molar mass.

For the equilibrium experiments
with the SwH-NOX/SwHaCE complex, SwHaCE, either the WT or
the E16K mutant, was incubated with WT SwH-NOX, as
either the Fe(II)-unligated or SwH-NOX Fe(II)–NO
complex, in 1:1, 1:2, and 1:5 molar ratios, and analyzed at three
rotor speeds (9000, 14000, and 18000 rpm, which are equal to 6500g, 15800g, and 26100g,
respectively) with two scans at the end of each speed. The scans were
collected at an absorbance of 400 nm for experiments with the Fe(II)–NO
complex or 430 nm for experiments with the Fe(II)-unligated complex
to follow the heme absorbance of SwH-NOX. The protein
concentration was adjusted so that the absorbance was 0.5 at 430 nm.
For the equilibrium experiments with SwH-NOX alone, SwH-NOX was analyzed at three rotor speeds (17000, 27000,
and 34000 rpm, which are equal to 23300g, 58700g, and 93000g, respectively), which were
calculated using the molecular mass of SwH-NOX (22.5
kDa).

Enzyme Activity Measurements Using the Malachite Green Assay
The SensoLyte MG phosphate assay kit was purchased from AnaSpec.
For the diguanylate
cyclase enzyme assays, SwHaCE by itself (1 μM),
or in the presence of the SwH-NOX Fe(II)-unligated
complex (WT, E16K, F17A, or E20K in a 1:20 concentration ratio), was
incubated on ice for 10 min to allow the proteins to form a complex.
The protein mixtures (20 μL) were then added to 180 μL
a prepared solution containing 200 μM GTP (substrate), 5 mM
MgCl2, and 1× buffer [50 mM Tris base and 10 mM MgCl2 (pH 7.5)]. The reaction mixture was incubated for 10 min
at 25 °C followed by boiling at 100 °C to quench the reaction.
After being cooled, the mixture was spun at 14000 rpm (16900g) for 5 min to remove any precipitate; 70 μL of the
supernatant was mixed with 10 μL of 3 units/mL IPP [inorganic
pyrophosphatase (NEB)] in a 96-well plate and incubated at 25 °C
for 10 min to hydrolyze the inorganic pyrophosphate (PPi) produced during the reaction. Then, 20 μL of Malachite green
reagent was added and the solution mixed, and the plate was read at
610 nm using a Perkin-Elmer Viktor X5 microplate reader. The absorbance
readings were corrected
for protein only and GTP only background. This experiment measured
the initial velocity for the diguanylate cyclase activity for SwHaCE and SwHaCE in complex with SwH-NOX. This experiment was repeated in at least three
fully independent experiments.

NO Dissociation Kinetics
NO dissociation kinetics of SwH-NOX mutants E16K,
F17A, and E20K were conducted as previously described.

Results
Despite the importance of
biofilms in infectious diseases, the
mechanisms that regulate biofilm formation and dispersal are poorly
understood. In this study, we have characterized the H-NOX/HaCE protein
complex from S. woodyi to improve our understanding
of how NO causes biofilm dispersal in this bacterium.

Chemical Shift
Perturbation Assays Reveal the Binding Interface
for SwHaCE
We collected HNCO, HNCACB, CBCACONH,
and HNCA spectra to assign the backbone resonances of SwH-NOX. Using standard methods, resonances from 75% of the SwH-NOX residues (∼140 residues) could be assigned,
and these assignments were used to probe the binding of SwHaCE (Figure ). HSQC NMR spectra of the 15N-labeled SwH-NOX Fe(II)–CO complex
were compared to the spectra
of the 1:1.25 complex of the 15N-labeled SwH-NOX Fe(II)–CO complex in the presence of SwHaCE. In the presence of SwHaCE, there was a significant
loss of signal in the SwH-NOX HSQC spectrum because
of peak broadening, presumably because the total size of the SwH-NOX/SwHaCE complex is expected to be
at least 100 kDa (74.5 kDa for SwHaCE and 22.5 kDa
for SwH-NOX). Hence, TROSY spectra were recorded
for SwH-NOX alone (Figure , red) and in complex with SwHaCE (Figure , blue). No line broadening effects were
observed, and the TROSY spectrum for the complex showed only one set
of peaks, indicating fast exchange on the NMR time scale.

Backbone assignment
for SwH-NOX [as the Fe(II)–CO
complex]. Approximately 75% of the peaks were assigned using extensive
3D experiments. The x-axis represents the chemical
shift in 1H, and the y-axis represents
the chemical shift in 15N.

Chemical shift mapping for SwHaCE and SwH-NOX complex formation. The 15N–1H
HSQC spectrum (red) was recorded for a sample containing
uniformly 15N-labeled 50 μM SwH-NOX
[as the Fe(II)–CO complex]. The blue spectrum was recorded
for a 1:1.25 ratio of 15N-labeled SwH-NOX
[as the Fe(II)–CO complex] to unlabeled SwHaCE. An overlay of these spectra indicates that peaks for some residues
are shifted, indicating a change in their chemical environment in
the presence of SwHaCE.

The chemical shifts of some residues shifted
significantly for the protein/protein complex (Figure , blue), compared to the spectrum of SwH-NOX
alone (Figure , red). To correlate the changes
in chemical
shift with structure, a homology model of SwH-NOX
was generated (Figure A). The change in chemical
shift for each
assigned residue of SwH-NOX (with and without SwHaCE) was plotted (Figure B).
Assuming a ratio of 0.02 to be a significant
change, there are ∼11 SwH-NOX residues that
shift upon exposure to SwHaCE.

(A) Ribbon structure
of the SwH-NOX protein from S. woodyi. This figure is a homology model generated in
PyMOL using the solution-state NMR structure of Shewanella
oneidensis() (So2144, Protein
Data Bank entry 2KII, chain A). The heme is shown as red sticks. The N- and C-termini
of the protein are denoted. The seven different helices are depicted
in different colors: blue for helix αA, red for helix αB,
hot pink for helix αC, orange for helix αD, gray for helix
αE, purple for helix αF, and chocolate brown for helix
αG. (B) Chemical shift changes for SwH-NOX
upon addition of SwHaCE. The shifts (SwH-NOX to SwH-NOX/SwHaCE), calculated
as {[(ΔN/5)2 + (ΔH)2]/2}1/2, are plotted against the primary
sequence residue number. The cutoff shift was kept at 0.02, and shifts
above 0.02 (dashed line) were considered significant. The secondary
structure of SwH-NOX is shown as a cartoon in which
the rectangles represent α-helices and the solid arrows represent
β-strands. The color code corresponds to the ribbon diagram
in panel A.

We were particularly
interested in a set of five
residues (amino acids 16–20) in the N-terminal helices of SwH-NOX that displayed
the maximal shift. These residues form a cluster in N-terminal helices
αB and αC on the surface of SwH-NOX,
suggesting this contributes to the binding site for SwHaCE. To test this hypothesis, we constructed three SwH-NOX point mutants (highlighted in Figure ), E16K, E20K, and F17A. We reasoned that
charge reversal mutants (E16K and E20K) would be expected to significantly
perturb binding if these residues play a key role and that reducing
the bulk of F17 might weaken hydrophobic interactions during binding.

SwH-NOX surface residues identified from chemical
shift mapping. The SwH-NOX residues with the maximal
perturbation (E16, F17, and E20) upon incubation with SwHaCE are colored red. The heme cofactor is also colored red. These
residues likely represent the binding patch for SwHaCE.

Characterization of ligand binding
(binding of
CO and NO to ferrous SwH-NOX and binding of CN– to ferric SwH-NOX) and NO dissociation
kinetics were conducted for the WT and the surface mutants of SwH-NOX. The Soret values and koff(NO) calculated for H-NOX surface mutants were similar to those of
WT H-NOX (Table S1 of the ), confirming that mutating these surface residues does not affect
the overall structure or heme properties of the SwH-NOX protein.

Fluorescence Quenching Assays Indicate That
Binding of SwHaCE Is Significantly Weaker for Surface
Mutants E16K,
F17A, and E20K Than for WT SwH-NOX
SwHaCE has seven Trp residues, while SwH-NOX has none; thus, we reasoned that binding of SwH-NOX to SwHaCE might perturb the Trp fluorescence
intensity of SwHaCE. Therefore, the steady-state
fluorescence of 1 μM SwHaCE was followed at
370 nm in the presence of increasing concentrations of NO-bound H-NOX
to assess SwH-NOX/SwHaCE binding.
The SwH-NOX Fe(II)–NO complex (WT or mutant,
separately; ∼1–10
μM) was titrated into the SwHaCE
solution while it was being stirred constantly until the maximal change
in fluorescence had been achieved. We observed a quenching of the
fluorescence signal as a function of an increasing concentration of
the SwH-NOX Fe(II)–NO complex in solution
(Figure ). Here, to have positive numbers,
the difference
(F0 – F) is plotted
as a function of the concentration
of NO-bound H-NOX in solution for each SwH-NOX construct.
The data were corrected for dilution and inner filter effects and
plotted against SwH-NOX Fe(II)–NO complex
concentration. The apparent dissociation constant (KD,app) for the complex was determined to be 2.5–3
μM from three independent runs. This likely overestimates the
true KD, as the concentrations used were
high and not under pseudo-first-order conditions, to account for the
sensitivity of the detector. Nonetheless, the effect of SwH-NOX surface mutations on binding to SwHaCE could
be easily determined in this assay.

Tryptophan fluorescence quenching experiments
for assessing SwH-NOX/SwHaCE binding.
The Fe(II)–NO
complex of SwH-NOX [WT (blue diamonds), E16K (red
squares), F17A (green triangles), and E20K (yellow circles)] was titrated
into a SwHaCE solution (1 μM) to determine
the amount of SwHaCE Trp quenching. The difference
in fluorescence (F0 – F) with and without SwH-NOX is plotted as a function
of SwH-NOX Fe(II)–NO complex concentration.
WT SwH-NOX caused significant quenching of SwHaCE fluorescence. In general, the SwH-NOX mutants do not quench SwHaCE fluorescence,
indicating a loss of binding. From these data, the apparent equilibrium
dissociation constant for the SwH-NOX/SwHaCE complex was determined to be ∼2.5 μM (the gray
line shows the fit used to determine KD,app). Each titration was conducted in triplicate.

For the titrations with the Fe(II)–NO
complex of the E16K mutant of SwH-NOX, the fluorescence
signal for SwHaCE did not decrease over time and
actually increased slightly (Figure ). This
indicates that the E16K mutation
abolished binding of SwH-NOX to SwHaCE. The slight increase in the magnitude of the fluorescence signal
toward
the end of the titration could be due to conformational changes
resulting from interactions of the SwH-NOX E16K mutant
with other regions of SwHaCE at high H-NOX concentrations.
For the SwH-NOX F17A and E20K mutants, we observed
significantly less quenching of the SwHaCE signal
than for the WT, suggesting a reduced binding affinity for each of
these mutants for SwHaCE (Figure ). These results confirm that surface residues
E16, F17, and E20 in N-terminal helices αB and αC
of SwH-NOX each contribute to SwHaCE binding and likely are part of a binding surface for interaction
with SwHaCE.

Sedimentation Equilibrium
Indicates That SwHaCE Forms a Dimer in Solution and
the SwH-NOX/SwHaCE Complex Forms
a Heterotetramer
On the basis
of the NMR and fluorescence titration experiments described above,
we concluded that SwH-NOX and SwHaCE form a protein/protein complex. We used sedimentation equilibrium
measurements to determine the stoichiometry of this complex. Sedimentation
equilibrium experiments are extensively used to determine the molecular
masses of proteins and protein complexes in solution. On the basis of previously characterized diguanylate
cyclases, it is expected that active diguanylate cyclases exist as
dimers in solution.− Because SwHaCE is an active cyclase
enzyme, we wanted to determine if SwHaCE also
forms oligomers (dimers) in solution, and we wanted to determine if
the oligomerization state changes upon formation of a complex with SwH-NOX.

Sedimentation equilibrium experiments were
conducted with SwHaCE alone, SwH-NOX [as the Fe(II)–NO or Fe(II)-unligated
complex, separately] alone, and a mixture of SwHaCE
and SwH-NOX [as the Fe(II)–NO or Fe(II)-unligated
complex, separately] at a ratio of 1:1.5. These data are summarized
in Table . For SwHaCE, HeteroAnalysis
indicates a molecular mass of 144.3 kDa, which is close to the theoretical
molecular mass expected for a dimer, 149 kDa (Figure A and Table ). For
WT SwH-NOX, as either the Fe(II)-unligated or Fe(II)–NO
complex, our analysis indicated a molecular mass of 23 kDa, which
is close to the theoretical molecular mass of 22.5 kDa (Figure S1
of the  and
Table ). Thus, WT SwH-NOX
alone exists as a monomer and SwHaCE as a dimer.

(A) Sedimentation
equilibrium experiments with SwHaCE in solution.
Using rotor speeds of 9000, 14000, and 18000 rpm
(which are equal to 6500g, 15800g, and 26100g, respectively), and following protein
at 280 nm, the calculated molecular mass of SwHaCE
is 144.3 kDa, indicating a dimer in solution at equilibrium. (B) Sedimentation
equilibrium experiment for SwHaCE in solution with
the SwH-NOX Fe(II)–NO complex. Using rotor
speeds of 9000, 14000, and 18000 rpm (which are equal to 6500g, 15800g, and 26100g,
respectively), and following protein complexes at 400 nm, the calculated
molecular mass for the complex is 197.2 kDa at equilibrium. This matches
the molecular mass expected for a heterotetramer of two SwH-NOX proteins and two SwHaCE proteins. Each experiment
was conducted in triplicate.

Summary of Sedimentation Equilibrium
Results and Controls
protein/protein
complex	calculated
molecular mass (theoretical molecular mass) (kDa)	
HaCE by itself,	144.3 (149.0, dimer)	
HaCE with WT H-NOX Fe(II)–NO,	197.2 (193.0, 2+2
heterotetramer)	
HaCE with WT H-NOX Fe(II),	198.0 (193.0, 2+2 heterotetramer)	
HaCE with
E16K H-NOX Fe(II)–NO,	76.0 (−)	
WT H-NOX Fe(II)–NO,	75.0 (−)	
WT H-NOX Fe(II)–NO,	23.3 (22.5, monomer)	
WT H-NOX Fe(II),	23.0 (22.5, monomer)	
E16K H-NOX Fe(II)–NO,	23.8 (22.5, monomer)	
The sedimentation equilibrium run
was conducted at three rotor speeds calculated for the molecular mass
of SwHaCE (74.5 kDa): 9000 rpm (6520g), 14000 rpm (15800g), and 18000 rpm (26100g).

The scans
for the sedimentation
equilibrium runs were collected at 280 nm.

The scans for the sedimentation
equilibrium runs were collected at 400 nm.

The scans for the sedimentation
equilibrium runs were collected at 430 nm.

The sedimentation equilibrium run
was conducted at three rotor speeds calculated for the molecular mass
of SwH-NOX (22.5 kDa): 17000 rpm (23300g), 27000 rpm (58700g), and 34000 rpm (93100g).

HeteroAnalysis
and Sednterp were
used to calculate the molecular mass.

The molecular mass for the SwH-NOX/SwHaCE complex, which was monitored at 400
nm (to follow heme absorbance), was calculated to be 197.2 kDa when SwH-NOX was run as the Fe(II)–NO complex (Figure B and Table ) and
198.0 kDa when SwH-NOX was run as the Fe(II)-unligated
complex (monitored at 430 nm to follow heme absorbance) (Figure S2
of the  and
Table ), both of which are close to the theoretical
molecular mass of 193 kDa for a heterotetrameric complex of four molecules
comprised of two SwHaCE monomers and two SwH-NOX monomers. All of the molecular masses computed from
the AUC experiments are within 3% of the theoretical value, which
is within the experimental error of the instrument. Therefore, we
conclude that SwHaCE and SwH-NOX
form a 2:2 heterotetrameric protein complex in solution, regardless
of whether NO is bound to SwH-NOX. Because SwH-NOX and SwHaCE are cocistronic, these
data support our model in which H-NOX and HaCE likely form
a complex upon production in bacterial cells. This is the first H-NOX/HaCE protein complex stoichiometry
to have been determined.

The E16K SwH-NOX mutant
[as the Fe(II)–NO
complex] was analyzed both by itself and as a complex with SwHaCE. The mutant was determined to be a monomer by itself
[calculated molecular mass of 23 kDa (Figure S1 of the  and
Table )], similar to WT SwH-NOX. The E16K SwH-NOX/SwHaCE
protein mixture, followed at the heme absorbance, did not form a complex,
as suggested by the calculated molecular mass of 76.5 kDa (Figure
S2 of the  and
Table ). In support of this, when SwH-NOX was run without SwHaCE at the optimal
rotor speeds to analyze the 193 kDa SwH-NOX/SwHaCE complex, rather than the 22.5 kDa SwH-NOX species alone, we obtained a calculated molecular mass of 75
kDa (Figure S2 of the  and
Table ). The molecular mass of SwH-NOX is not accurately calculated at the rotor speeds used to analyze
the SwH-NOX/SwHaCE complex because
higher angular velocities are required for lower-molecular mass solutes
to balance the sedimentation and diffusion forces within the radius
of the centrifuge cell. This result again suggests a loss of SwH-NOX/SwHaCE binding due to this SwH-NOX surface mutation.

Enzyme Assays Confirm the SwH-NOX/SwHaCE Binding Interface
Next we tested the effect of SwH-NOX and SwH-NOX surface mutants on
the regulation of SwHaCE activity. We have previously
reported that the diguanylate cyclase activity for SwHaCE increases in the presence of the WT SwH-NOX
Fe(II)-unligated complex, whereas the phosphodiesterase activity is
enhanced in the presence of the WT SwH-NOX Fe(II)–NO
complex. In these studies, we used a
new reaction end
point assay
for cyclase activity, based on the detection of phosphate (Pi) in solution with the dye Malachite green.

In a diguanylate
cyclase-catalyzed reaction, two molecules of GTP are condensed to
generate PPi (inorganic pyrophosphate) as a byproduct along
with cyclic-di-GMP (2GTP → cyclic-di-GMP + 2PPi). In the presence of the enzyme inorganic pyrophosphatase
(IPP), PPi is hydrolyzed to Pi (inorganic phosphate)
in solution (2PPi → 2Pi). Malachite green is a commercially available
reagent,
which is used to determine the concentration of free Pi in solution. This end point assay can
be used to quantify diguanylate
cyclase activity by measuring the amount of Pi generated
from PPi produced during the reaction. Because this is
an end point assay, the SwHaCE enzyme was boiled
before IPP was added to the solution to ensure that IPP does not interfere
with the activity of the enzyme. To confirm that IPP is not the rate-limiting
enzyme in the reaction, the concentration of IPP was doubled to confirm
that the same amount of Pi was generated (Table S2 of the ). Because we are detecting
the amount of PPi produced in the reaction, the turnover
of cyclic-di-GMP into pGpG by the phosphodiesterase domain of SwHaCE does not affect the measurement. As a control, the
amount of Pi generated was determined at various concentrations
of SwHaCE (Figure S3 of the ). A
linear correlation was observed between the enzyme concentration and
the amount of Pi produced, confirming that only SwHaCE is the rate-limiting enzyme in the reaction.

This assay was used to determine the concentration of Pi generated during the reaction of SwHaCE with GTP
in the presence of the WT, E16K, F17A, and E20K SwH-NOX Fe(II)-unligated complexes. The specific activity values are
reported in Figure  as concentrations of Pi (micromolar
per minute per milligram). It was observed that the WT SwH-NOX Fe(II)-unligated complex (20 μM) increased the initial
velocity of the cyclase activity of SwHaCE (1 μM)
by 2-fold in the presence of 200 μM GTP, as expected from our
previous work (Figure ). In general, addition of the SwH-NOX mutants
led to a loss of this enhanced effect, indicating a
loss of SwH-NOX binding and regulation of SwHaCE cyclase activity. For the E16K and E20K SwH-NOX mutants, the observed initial velocity was lower than that
of SwHaCE with WT SwH-NOX but slightly
higher than that of the enzyme by itself, indicating some residual
binding and regulation by SwH-NOX, but significantly
less than that observed with WT SwH-NOX. For F17A SwH-NOX, we observed the same initial velocity as SwHaCE without SwH-NOX. These data, like
all of the experiments described above, also indicate that SwH-NOX/SwHaCE binding has been disrupted
by the surface mutations and support our conclusion that SwH-NOX binds to SwHaCE, at least in part, using the
N-terminal helical region of H-NOX.

Regulation of SwHaCE
diguanylate cyclase activity
by SwH-NOX. Addition of 20 μM Fe(II)-unligated
complex of SwH-NOX to SwHaCE causes
a significant increase in the specific activity of SwHaCE. Addition of any of the Fe(II)-unligated SwH-NOX surface mutants (E16K, F17A, and E20K, all at 20 μM),
however, had a weaker effect or no effect on SwHaCE
activity, indicating weakened binding to SwHaCE.
All assays contained 1 μM SwHaCE and 200 μM
GTP as substrate. Error bars represent three independent trials on
different days. A Student’s p test was conducted
to determine significance. Asterisks indicate p ≤
0.006. Each data set was compared to the activity of SwHaCE with WT SwH-NOX Fe(II).

Discussion
The spatiotemporal regulation of intracellular
cyclic-di-GMP is central to many important
cellular processes like virulence, biofilm formation, quorum sensing,
motility, and cell division., Diguanylate cyclase
and phosphodiesterase enzymes, which maintain
the intracellular pool of cyclic-di-GMP, are usually found to be associated
with regulatory domains and/or proteins that modulate their activity.
However, very few of these enzymes have been characterized with their
regulatory partner protein.

NO has been shown to play an important
role in bacterial signaling,
and recent studies have indicated that low concentrations of NO disperse
biofilms in bacteria through the regulation of cyclic-di-GMP concentrations. We have previously reported that NO disperses
biofilms
in the marine, bioluminescent, biofilm-dwelling bacterium S. woodyi through H-NOX by regulating the production of
cyclic-di-GMP by HaCE. It was shown that SwH-NOX and NO differentially
modulate the enzymatic activities of both the diguanylate cyclase
and phosphodiesterase domains of SwHaCE. These results
necessitate a model in which H-NOX and HaCE are associated in a manner
that is independent of the ligation state of H-NOX. Data presented
in this study confirm that SwH-NOX and SwHaCE form a complex independent of the ligation state of H-NOX.

This study investigates the structural and biophysical details
of the association between SwH-NOX and SwHaCE. We have used NMR chemical shift perturbation analysis along
with peak assignments for SwH-NOX to identify the
critical H-NOX surface residues that are involved in binding to SwHaCE. The tremendous change in the chemical environment
of a patch of N-terminal residues, including residues E16, F17, and
E20, indicates a binding region for SwHaCE on SwH-NOX (Figure A,B). We also identified
other residues (approximately
six or seven) with significant chemical shift perturbations
upon binding to SwHaCE that are spread out on other
parts of SwH-NOX. These chemical shift perturbations
may indicate additional binding surface area or, alternatively, a
conformational rearrangement of SwH-NOX that is triggered
upon binding to SwHaCE.

To determine the role
of identified SwH-NOX N-terminal
amino acids (E16, F17, and E20) in binding SwHaCE,
we made mutants of each and investigated the effect of mutation in
several binding and enzymatic assays. Fluorescence binding assays
indicate a significant loss of binding (Figure ) and alteration of enzyme regulation (Figure ) for individual mutants of these surface
residues (E16, F17, and E20). Hence, we can conclude that these residues
mediate interaction of SwH-NOX with SwHaCE. Sedimentation equilibrium experiments reveal the WT SwH-NOX/SwHaCE protein complex to be a
heterotetramer (Figure B), in both the Fe(II)-unligated
and Fe(II)–NO-bound
states, whereas SwH-NOX alone and all the surface
mutants in the presence of SwHaCE were determined
to be monomeric in solution.

On the basis of our results, we
developed a model for the SwH-NOX/SwHaCE protein complex. Because SwH-NOX and SwHaCE are cocistronic, we
hypothesize that they are expressed together in the
cell and always associate to form this heterotetrameric complex. This
association likely occurs via dimerization of SwHaCE,
followed by binding of two molecules of SwH-NOX to
the SwHaCE dimer, as illustrated in Figure . Upon expression, presumably, SwH-NOX is in the Fe(II)-unligated state, and hence, the cyclase activity
of SwHaCE is enhanced to generate more cyclic-di-GMP.
When the signal (NO) binds, there must be a change in the conformation
of the heterotetrameric protein complex, leading to a change in the
activity of SwHaCE that results in less cyclic-di-GMP
produced, ultimately causing biofilm dispersal. If monomeric SwHaCE also binds SwH-NOX, there may be
a complex equilibrium involving dimerization of SwHaCE, monomeric association of the SwH-NOX/SwHaCE complex, and two monomers of SwH-NOX
binding to the SwHaCE dimer to form the final heterotetrameric
species. However, sedimentation equilibrium cannot be used to determine
the ratio of these species in solution.

Possible mechanism of
formation of the complex between SwHaCE and SwH-NOX. Monomeric SwHaCE is likely in
equilibrium with dimeric SwHaCE,
with the equilibrium lying toward the dimer. Monomeric or dimeric SwHaCE may associate with one or two molecules of SwH-NOX, respectively. The most abundant species at equilibrium
is the heterotetrameric complex (2:2), containing two molecules each
of SwHaCE and SwH-NOX.

Furthermore, the data presented here indicate that
N-terminal helices
αA−αC mediate binding to SwHaCE.
This result is supported by several previous studies that also point
to the role of the N-terminal helices in transmitting the signal of
NO binding to H-NOX partner proteins. In crystal structures of the
H-NOX domain from Nostoc punctiforme, the N-terminal helices have been shown to be
maximally
displaced upon binding of the signaling ligands NO and CO, suggesting
that movement in helices αA−αC constitutes part
of the signal transfer mechanism. Furthermore, a recent study from
the Marletta lab describes the important higher-order interactions
in sGC, elucidating the mechanism of NO-regulated stimulation of activity. They found that in the N-terminal region of
sGC, H-NOX
participates in the signal transfer mechanism by binding to the PAS
domain. Mutational studies confirm that NO binding triggers these
local interactions, leading to global conformational changes, ultimately
increasing activity.

Further evidence that the N-terminal helices
of H-NOX are important
for interaction with partner proteins and signal propagation comes
from studies of the structure of the heme cofactor of H-NOX. The heme
unit in H-NOX is highly distorted from planarity, but structural studies have indicated that mutation
of a conserved proline residue in the proximal heme pocket causes
substantial heme flattening. The conformational
change caused by heme flattening
propagates to the surface of H-NOX, causing a shift in the position
of the N-terminal helices. We have shown in SwH-NOX
that the heme-flattened mutant affects SwHaCE activity
exactly the same as binding of NO to WT SwH-NOX, indicating heme flattening causes a structural
change
similar to that of binding of the SwH-NOX/SwHaCE complex to NO. These data suggest that transmission
of the NO signal involves the N-terminal helices, which is highly
supportive of our results reported here, indicating the N-terminal
helices are involved in binding HaCE, which is required for translation
of NO binding to the enzymatic active sites.

Taken together,
there is strong evidence that ligand binding events
in bacterial H-NOX domains cause conformational changes that are relayed
to the N-terminal helices, which serve as a binding site for interaction
with partner enzymes such as HaCEs or HahKs (H-NOX-associated histidine
kinases), ultimately resulting in functional changes within the cell.

In conclusion, NO and cyclic-di-GMP are becoming increasingly important
as signaling molecules that direct bacteria on how to make the choice
between motile and sessile lifestyles. This study is the first of
its kind that provides a structural understanding of how a bacterial
NO-sensing protein, H-NOX, can regulate its associated enzyme activity
(HaCE and HahK), to control the downstream functions such as biofilm
formation. Such studies improve our understanding of how small molecule
signaling regulates downstream functions and how enzymes that regulate
the cyclic-di-GMP concentration in the cell are functionally regulated
by a signal-sensing protein.

Supporting Information Available
Soret band maxima and
NO dissociation rate constants for Fe(II), Fe(II)–NO, and Fe(II)–CO
species for WT, E16K, F17A, and E20K SwH-NOX; a standard
curve for PPi concentration; data showing that generation
of Pi from PPi by IPP is not the rate-limiting
step in our kinetic assays; a plot of the amount of Pi generated
during the diguanylate cyclase reaction of SwHaCE
using GTP as a substrate at different SwHaCE concentrations;
and sedimentation equilibrium experiments with WT SwH-NOX, E16K SwH-NOX, and the E16K SwH-NOX/SwHaCE mixture at different speeds. This material
is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi401597m_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no competing
financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank
the staff of the New York Structural Biology Center
(NYSBC) for help with the NMR experiments. We also thank Prof. Roger
Johnson and members of the Boon group for useful comments and advice.

Abbreviations
NOnitric oxide

H-NOXheme-nitric oxide/oxygen-binding

HaCEH-NOX-associated
cyclic-di-GMP processing enzyme

DGCdiguanylate cyclase

PDEphosphodiesterase

GTPguanosine triphosphate

c-di-GMP or cyclic-di-GMPbis-(3′–5′)-cyclic
dimeric guanosine monophosphate

pGpG5′-phosphoguanylyl-(3′–5′)-guanosine

SwS. woodyi

GGDEFconserved amino acids in the catalytic sites of diguanylate
cyclases (the domain containing these conserved residues is often
termed a GGDEF domain)

EALconserved amino acids in the catalytic site of phosphodiesterases
(the domain containing these conserved residues is often termed an
EAL domain)

sGCsoluble guanylate cyclase (a eukaryotic H-NOX domain-containing protein)

SwHaCEwild-type S. woodyi diguanylate cyclase/phosphodiesterase
protein used in this study

SwH-NOXwild-type H-NOX protein used in this
study

IPTGisopropyl
β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside

ODoptical density

Tristris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane

PMSFphenylmethanesulfonyl
fluoride

BMEβ-mercaptoethanol

NMRnuclear paramagnetic
resonance spectroscopy

BSAbovine serum albumin

TROSYtransverse relaxation-optimized spectroscopy

HSQCheteronuclear single-quantum
coherence

HNCO, HNCACB, CBCACONH,
and HNCAtriple-resonance nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy to assign protein backbone atoms

AUCanalytical ultracentrifugation

MGMalachite green

IPPinorganic pyrophosphatase

PPiinorganic
pyrophosphate.

