G protein-coupled receptors
(GPCRs) are the largest group of cell surface proteins, which translate
chemical information of various extracellular stimuli to a specific
biological response in cells. Clinically, GPCR ligands regulate many
physiological and pathological conditions and represent a remarkable
class of pharmaceutical agents, with 26.8% of FDA-approved drugs targeting
group A of GPCRs.

Classically, the
binding of an agonist to an inactive state of
a GPCR causes conformational changes that lead to an active state
of a GPCR, which is capable of activating a heterotrimeric G protein., The G protein, in turn, promotes signaling by modulating the activity
of effector enzymes, leading to the generation of second messengers.
Termination of the signal, which is known as receptor desensitization,
results in uncoupling of the receptor from the G protein through phosphorylation
of the receptor C terminus and recruitment of β-arrestin to
the phosphorylated C terminus of GPCRs, where β-arrestin binding
stimulates receptor endocytosis.,

Recent pharmacological
studies on a large number of GPCRs have
shown that agonist-bound GPCRs promote signaling mechanisms in cells
independent of G protein.− Thus, it has been found that β-arrestin, in addition to receptor
desensitization, transmits unique signals to catalytically active
proteins.− The biased receptor signaling phenomenon, also known
as functional selectivity, has classified GPCRs binders into biased
and unbiased agonists or antagonists. A biased ligand is capable of
activating or deactivating one specific signaling pathway, whereas
an unbiased ligand has relatively equal impact on multiple signaling
pathways. β-Arrestin and G protein-biased signaling has been
linked to side effects of several GPCR drugs. For example, tachyphylaxis and drug tolerance of GPCR agonists are
thought to be due to β-arrestin stimulation. The design of biased agonists may therefore be a novel
strategy to improve the efficacy of GPCR agonists in clinics.

Structurally, GPCRs are composed of seven transmembrane spanning
helices along with connecting loops. Recently, the β2 adrenergic receptor (β2AR) has been crystallized
in both inactive and active states.− The crystal structures of the
active state were first produced in complex with the G protein-like
antibody and subsequently in complex
with the Gs protein. Both of these structures
represent the active state of the receptor stimulating G protein-dependent
signaling. Comparison of structures of the active and inactive states
shows small changes within the ligand binding site and more profound
changes on the intracellular side of the receptor, including the exterior
movement of helix 6 and rearrangement of helices 5 and 7.,

The ability of GPCRs to initiate pharmacologically distinct
signaling
pathways raises the hypothesis of the existence of distinct active
conformations of the receptor. Kinetics measurements of several labeled
lysines and cysteines of β2AR in the presence of
the agonist (THRX-144877) with high equal stimulation of β-arrestin
and G protein showed higher reactivity of Lys3057.32 (the
Ballesteros–Weinstein nomenclature in subscription, where the most conserved residue in a given helix,
X, is assigned the index X.50 and the other residues of the helix
are numbered relative to the 50 position) than in the presence of
the agonists with domination of G protein activation. This suggests a different role of helix 7 in the active
receptor state for stimulating G protein and β-arrestin. Furthermore, 19F NMR studies of β2AR in complex with various ligands has indicated that ligands
with β-arrestin bias affect helix 7 to a greater extent than
they do helix 6. Fluorescence spectroscopy
studies in the arginine–vasopressin type 2 receptor have shown
opposite effects in tryptophan fluorescence, with fluorophores introduced
in helices 6, 7, and 8, in the presence of G-protein and β-arrestin-biased
agonists. These indirect experiments
provide evidence that the active state recruiting β-arrestin
is structurally distinct from the active state activating G-protein.
However, they cannot reveal what the specific changes in the receptor
domains are that are caused by a biased agonist recruiting β-arrestin.
Recent work involving mutagenesis and molecular modeling has provided
the first attempt in finding such changes. In particular, a sulfur–aromatic
interaction between M1343.32 and Y3807.43 has
been proposed to stabilize the active state of the cholecystokinin
2 receptor recruiting β-arrestin.

In this study we probe and compare receptor conformational
changes
caused by biased agonists binding using molecular dynamics (MD) simulations
on the example of the available crystal structure of the β2AR active state. Exploration of the β2AR
conformational ensemble has been initiated with various MD simulation
protocols, involving a combination of coarse-grained and all-atom
simulations, adiabatic biased and metadynamics simulations, and microsecond
conventional MD simulations.− Simulations from the inactive-to-active
state of the β2AR, using the available crystal structures,
in the presence of agonists, partial agonists, and neutral antagonists
have demonstrated the different abilities of the ligands to stabilize
the active state activating G-protein., The active-to-inactive
state microsecond simulations have provided details of the β2AR activation mechanism stimulating the G protein. Hereby, we extend the simulations of β2AR in the empty form and bound to biased agonists by employing
intensive conventional and accelerated MD simulations (cMD and aMD,
respectively) to initiate understanding of functional selectivity
at the molecular level.

Salbutamol (Sal) was chosen as an agonist
biased to the G-protein
and N-cyclopentylbutanepherine (CPB) as an agonist
with the domination of β-arrestin bias. Both ligands are partial agonists compared to isoproterenol. Interestingly, the β2AR agonists
used in the treatment of asthma cause tachyphylaxis, which is linked
to β-arrestin recruitment.

The aMD simulations, in which an external potential is applied
to dihedral angles of a protein to overcome energetic barriers, has
been recently successfully applied to study large conformational changes
of soluble proteins in a shorter time.− Unlike many other computational
methods for enhanced sampling, aMD increases sampling without the
use of end states or a predefined “reaction coordinates”
and, therefore, allows for greater freedom in sampling diverse reaction
pathways., In our study we applied aMD simulations
to the membrane protein for the first time to compare the dynamics
of the β2AR bound to biased agonists and identified
conformational changes that lead to activation of distinct signaling
pathways in GPCRs.

Application of aMD has allowed the observation
of global and local
changes during the active-to-inactive state transition of the empty
receptor and bound to Sal or CPB within the nanosecond time scale.
In addition, aMD has identified distinct conformational ensembles
stabilized by the two agonists and highlighted specific changes caused
by CPB. The generated receptor conformational ensembles can be helpful
in the development of structure-based drug design methodologies to
design novel efficient and selective drugs.

Methods
System Preparation
The crystal structure of the active
state of the human β2AR (3P0G) was
used for molecular docking and simulations. The G protein-like antibody,
T4-lysozyme, in the crystal structure was removed, and the intracellular
loops were joined together using the Prime 2.2 program (Schrödinger,
LLC, New York, NY, USA; Prime., 2008). The receptor structure and
ligands (Sal and CPB) for molecular docking and simulations were prepared
using the Schrodinger suite with the OPLS2005 force field., The agonists were docked to the receptor with the Glide 5.6 program
(Schrödinger, LLC; Glide 5.6, 2009), using the extra-precision
scoring setting. The docking pose of Sal was selected after comparison
with the available crystal structure of the Sal−β1AR complex (PDB code 2Y04). This pose was also the top scored pose in the docking
studies. The docking pose of CPB with top scoring was selected for
the simulations. In fact, in all poses CPB had contacts with two Ser,
providing similar orientations of the catecholamine group and none
of CPB docking orientation allows a hydrogen bond with N293. Note,
we observed the hydrogen bond interactions with N293 during the MD
simulations (, Figure
3S). System Builder of Maestro GUI 9.0 (Schrodinger, LLC; 2010) was
used to embed the agonist–receptor complexes in a water–lipid
box with dimension 83 × 90 × 106 Å and neutralized
with sodium and chloride ions. The resulting systems had 154 lipid
molecules, 52 chloride ions, and 40 sodium ions. All atom 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoylphosphatidylcholine
bilayer (POPC) and SPC water were used for the lipid and water models,
respectively. The average size of simulations systems was 70 000
atoms.

Conventional and Accelerated Molecular Dynamics
All
MD simulations were performed using Desmond 2.2 with the OPLS2005 force field, and full particle mesh Ewald electrostatics. Operational parameters have included a 2 fs time step and
a 9 Å cutoff for the truncation of nonbonded interactions. The
prepared complexes in the hydrated phospholipid bilayer were first
minimized with the fixed receptor–ligand complex, applying
the conjugate gradient algorithm up to a convergence threshold of
0.5 kcal/mol/Å. In the next step, the systems with the fixed
receptor–ligand complexes were heated to 300 K in the NVT ensemble,
where each 10 K increase was during 12 ps. Lipids and water were equilibrated
over 8 ns at 300 K, followed by 2 ns of equilibration with the restrained
protein backbone and 2 ns of equilibration with the fully released
system. The equilibrated biomolecular systems were subjected to constant
temperature (300 K) and pressure (1 atm) production molecular dynamics
with cMD and aMD protocols. Three simulation runs for cMD and aMD
protocols were performed, and each run had a random initial velocity
assignment (Table ). The SHAKE algorithm was
used to constrain all covalent bonds involving hydrogen atoms.

Summary of Conventional
MD (cMD) and
Accelerated MD (aMD) Simulations
biosystem	length, ns	no. of simulations	av Cα rmsd, Å	av ligand rmsd, Å	av helical content, %	area per
lipid headgroup, Å2	lipid bilayer thickness, Å	transition
time, ns	
cMD	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
empty β2AR	∼91	3	2.9 ± 0.1	 	86 ± 2	51.2 ± 11	45.7 ± 3	41 ± 7	
β2AR- CPB	∼220	3	3 ± 0.2	0.6 ± 0.4	89 ± 2	50.2 ± 9	43 ± 3	 	
β2AR- Sal	∼300	3	2.7 ± 0.3	0.7 ± 0.3	82 ± 4	55.4 ± 11	43.4 ± 2	 	
aMD	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
empty β2AR	∼122	3	3.2 ± 0.2	 	85 ± 4	60.8 ± 9	43 ± 6	17 ± 4	
β2AR- CPB	∼213	3	2.7 ± 0.2	0.5 ± 0.2	87 ± 2	56.5 ± 7	44.4 ± 8	156 ± 7	
β2AR- Sal	∼370	3	2.9 ± 0.3	0.7 ± 0.2	86 ± 5	57.4 ± 13	42 ± 6	274 ± 8	
The transition
time indicates
the transition from the active-like conformation to the inactive-like
conformation.

The aMD protocol, with the alteration of the potential
energy surface of the biomolecular system was applied to enhance conformational
sampling of the systems and, therefore, to enlarge the accessible
time scale of cMD. Acceleration comes from a “boost potential”,
ΔV(r), which is added to the
original dihedral potential, V(r), that increases the energy to V*(r) within basins, using the equationsandwhere E is the threshold
dihedral energy specified by the user, which controls the level of
the potential surface affected by bias, and α is the acceleration
parameter establishing the shape of the modified potential.

Thus, a transition from one state to another occurs with an accelerated
rate as a result of propagation of a trajectory on this modified energy
surface. The boost dihedral potential was applied on the receptor
alone as well as the receptor and lipids together. The average dihedral
energy of the system during cMD simulations was used as a reference
for computing E and α applying the following
equations: E = Vav + Vav × c and α = E/5, where Vav is the average
dihedral energy of the system in the initial 5 ns of the cMD and c is constant (0.2, 0.3, 0.4, and 0.5). Several acceleration E and α values were probed (, Table 1S), and E0.3 = Vav + Vav × 0.3 and α = E0.3/5 were
chosen for protein and lipids to conduct multiple runs with random
velocities for production simulations in all biosystems.

Principal Component
Analysis (PCA)
The calculation
of the covariance matrix and its diagonalization to get the associated
principal components describing the direction and amplitude of receptor
motions was performed with Gromacs 4.5.5 employing the g_covar module. The principal components (PC) obtained
from mapping the receptor Cα atoms of all the simulated trajectories
were used to project the trajectories of a particular receptor system.
This has allowed comparison of simulation data within a common subspace.
To compare cMD and aMD simulations, equal length of the simulations
was used for the PCA. The length of the simulated trajectories for
the PCA analysis was defined by the active-to-inactive transition
time. The sampling frequency of these trajectories was 30 ps. The
principal components, PC1 and PC2, provide a distinct separation of
the receptor active and inactive states. The two first principal components,
representing the largest contribution to the overall fluctuation of
the receptor (60–70%), were used to project the simulated ensemble
of receptor conformations from all simulated trajectories to visualize
the receptor essential motions. The projection of the simulated structures
was conducted on individual trajectories using the same Cα atoms.
The g_anaeig module of Gromacs 4.5.5 was used for the projection.
To avoid general translation and rotation of the receptor, the trajectories
were aligned on the basis of the Cα atoms. The available crystal
structures of the β2AR with PDB codes 2RH1, 3D4S, 3NY8, 3NY9, 3NYA, 3PDS, 3P0G, and 3SN6 were used to monitor
whether the simulated conformational space samples the projection
of available experimental structures. The porcupine plot was built
on the basis of the extreme conformations derived from the first principal
component using the g_anaeig module. The porcupine plot was constructed
using the most stable ensemble of the receptor conformations (the
third ensemble of conformations was used for the receptor complexes)
obtained from the sampling probabilities studies. The porcupine plot
was plotted using the VMD script.

Sampling Probabilities
We used the g_sham module of
Gromacs 4.5.5 to compute probability sampling (υ) landscape
in the PC1–PC2 conformational space from the simulated trajectories
identified by g_anaeig. The probability sampling landscape was calculated
using the equationwhere kb is the
Boltzmann constant, T is 300 K, P(xi) is an estimate of the probability density function
obtained from a histogram of the MD data (eigenvalues and eigenvectors,
in our case), and Pmax(x) is the probability of the most probable state.

Other Analyses
Most of the trajectory analysis was
performed with VMD 1.9.1. The distance
and angle cutoffs of 3 Å and 35°, respectively, were used
for hydrogen bonds. The helix bending was calculated and plotted using
the Bendix application in VMD 1.9.1.
Images were captured with VMD 1.9.1, Maestro GUI 9.0, and PYMOL 0.99
(DeLano WL, 2002).

Results
Conventional and Accelerated
Molecular Dynamics Simulations
Agonists stabilize the active
state of GPCRs. The activated form
of GPCRs is then phosphorylated by kinases at the intracellular side
of receptors. In turn, the active phosphorylated GPCRs are capable
of binding to β-arrestin, which
sterically blocks interactions with the G protein and thus suppresses
classical G- protein-mediated signaling. In parallel, the receptor
in the complex with β-arrestin is active to interact with various
signaling proteins, leading to G protein-independent signaling.,, It is likely that the G-protein
active state of GPCRs transforms to the β-arrestin active state
for initiating of G protein-independent signaling rather than the
inactive state of the receptor converting directly to the β-arrestin
active state. We, therefore, study the
dynamics of the available active state of β2AR in
the empty form and in the presence of the biased agonists, hoping
to capture characteristics of the β-arrestin active state. To
initiate our study, we have docked Sal and CPB to the crystal structure
of the active state that was available at the time (PDB 3P0G, see details under ) and used the obtained complexes for the
MD simulations in the water–lipid bilayer. Figure  shows the binding mode of Sal and CPB in the β2AR from the docking studies. The nanobody, T4-lysozyme, in
the crystal structure was removed, and the intracellular loops were
joined together.

Binding mode of salbutamol (Sal) and N-cyclopentylbutanepherine
(CPB) in the β2 adrenergic receptor (β2AR).

Conformational dynamics
of the β2AR active state
in the empty form and bound to the agonists were explored using intensive
cMD and aMD simulations, which are summarized in Table . aMD simulations with an external potential applied to the
dihedral angles of the receptor and lipid atoms (see ) were used to enhance conformational changes., Wang et al. have shown that aMD simulations
reproduce the structural and dynamic properties of lipids and accelerate
the equilibration of various membrane bilayers, indicating the applicability
of the external potential to the dihedral angles of lipids, in addition
to a protein, in the simulations of membrane proteins. To identify
a suitable threshold dihedral energy (E) and acceleration
parameter (α) for the protein and lipids in the aMD simulations,
several E and α values were tested (, Table 1S) and those that
reproduced the known conformational changes (see below and the next
section), while retaining the receptor fold, were chosen (see ).

Biomolecular systems were stable
in the cMD and aMD simulations
with the chosen E and α as shown by the average
root-mean-square deviation of the Cα atoms of the protein and
heavy atoms of ligands, as well as the average helical content of
the helices during the simulations (Table ). Notably, the chosen boost potential (see  and Table 1S in the ) in the aMD did not cause any loss of the secondary structure, suggesting
that the conformational changes in the receptor structure discussed
below are the result of intrinsic receptor mobility. The area per
lipid headgroup and lipid bilayer thickness were stable in the cMD
and aMD simulations but were underestimated relative to the experimental
values for POPC, that is, 62.7 ± 1.3 Å2 and 39.8
± 0.8 Å. This could be due
to the measurements in an inhomogeneous system containing protein.

To compare the conformational sampling of cMD and aMD simulations,
we conducted a PCA by projecting the
simulated trajectories of each receptor system onto the plane defined
by the two lowest PCs obtained from mapping all of the simulated trajectories
of β2AR (See ). The
available crystal structures were also projected onto the simulated
space to compare the performance of cMD and aMD methods in sampling
of crystal structure projections. The motions along these two lowest
PCs separate the receptor crystal structures of the active state from
the inactive state as shown in Figure . In
particular, the major change between the inactive and active states,
which is the outward movement of helix 6, is captured by both PCs.
The PC plots indicate that all aMD simulations sample the projections
of the crystal structures, unlike cMD simulations. Thus, the active
state of the receptor in the empty form and bound with the agonists
reaches the projections of the crystal structures of the inactive
state along aMD simulations trajectories. In particular, the transition
of the active to inactive conformation requires 17 ± 4 ns in
the receptor empty form, whereas the transition occurs in a longer
time in the complexed receptor, that is, 156 ± 7 and 274 ±
8 ns bound to CPB and Sal, respectively. The absence of a signaling
protein at the intracellular side of the receptor that stabilizes
the conformational changes during activation led to a spontaneous
transition of the agonist–receptor complexes from the active
to inactive-like state., Nevertheless, we hope
to capture conformational changes in the receptor bound to CPB that
might lead to the active state signaling through β-arrestin.
Interestingly, the receptor bound to Sal sampled the displacement
defined by the crystal structure of the active state bound to the
G protein in cMD and aMD simulations.

Projection of the receptor conformational
space simulated by cMD
and aMD onto the two lowest principal components produced from the
analysis of all simulated trajectories. The projection of the crystal
structures is in black. The two black dots with positive values along
PC1 correspond to the projections of the active states (the β2AR crystal structures with the G protein-like antibody and
the Gs protein).

In our cMD simulations,
the active-to-inactive state transition
was monitored only in the empty receptor, where the transition time
was 41 ns. Dror et al. have shown that
the active state of the β2AR bound to the full agonist
requires a substantially longer time (&gt;6 μs) to move to the
inactive state in the cMD simulations.

Overall, PCA shows enhanced
sampling in aMD simulations compared
to cMD simulations and relevance of aMD for investigating conformational
changes in the empty receptor and bound to different agonists. We
thus use aMD trajectories for further analysis of the receptor conformational
changes.

aMD Simulations Capture the Inactive-like State Characteristics
To further characterize the aMD simulated conformational ensembles
of β2AR in the empty form and bound to biased agonists
in a detail, we focus on the appearance or disappearance of interhelical
interactions and water clusters in the simulation trajectories, which
are distinctive for the crystal structures of the receptor in the
inactive and active states. Furthermore, the study of these receptor
local changes is a way to validate the performance of aMD, whether
aMD simulations reproduce specific contacts, in addition to helix
movements captured by the PCA.

Y2195.58 forms a hydrogen
bond with Y3267.53 of the highly conserved NPxxY motif
in the crystal structures of the active state, holding helix 6 in
the outward position., In the representative trajectory
of our aMD simulations, this hydrogen bond was broken at 20, 32, and
97 ns in the empty receptor and bound to CPB and Sal, respectively,
followed by the movement of Y3267.53 to a position similar
to one in the inactive state position (Figure A). The breakage is accompanied by the movement of helix 6 into the
helical bundle. A similar pattern of the hydrogen bond breakage was
observed in other simulated replicates.

Evolution of the structural
characteristics of the β2AR inactive state: (A) breakage
of the Y2195.58–Y3267.53 hydrogen bond
monitored in the form of
the distance between oxygen atoms of the hydroxyl group and the number
of hydrogen bonds; (B) inward movement of the F2826.44 side
chain monitored as a distance between the center of mass of the aromatic
ring (carbon atoms) and the Cα of I1213.40; (C) formation
of the salt bridge between R1313.50 and E2686.30 (known as an ionic lock) monitored as the distance between the CZ
atom of R1313.50 and CD atom of E2686.30 and
the appearance of the salt bridge. The evolution of distances and
hydrogen bonds is shown with solid and dashed lines, respectively.
MD analyses for Sal, CPB bound, and receptor in the empty form are
shown in black, red, and green, respectively.

The movement of helix 6 in simulations is accompanied by
the movement
of F2826.44 into the region that this residue occupies
in the inactive state. The movement is shown by measuring the distance
between the center of mass of the aromatic atoms of F2826.44 and the Cα atoms of I1213.40 over the simulations
(Figure B). Thus, F2826.44 faces
the membrane in the active state and is buried back into the helical
bundle by passing I1213.40 to reach the inactive state
in our simulations. The movement of F2826.44 to the inactive
state requires 44, 112, and 216 ns in the empty receptor and bound
to CPB and Sal, respectively.

The key interaction that characterizes
the inactive state of the
receptor is the salt bridge (known as an “ionic lock”)
between R1313.50 of the E(D)RY motif and E2686.30. During the activation this interaction breaks, leading to the outward
movement of helix 6. We have observed
in our simulations the formation of this interaction within 32, 54,
and 290 ns in the empty and CPB- and Sal-bound receptors, respectively.
Formation of these interactions locks helices 6 and 3 back to the
inactive state (Figure C). A movie of the
transition from the active to inactive states for the empty receptor
is available in the . In cMD simulations, the formation of this ionic lock during the
transition from the active to inactive state required ∼6 μs.

We further examined the distribution of
water molecules in the
helical bundle during the simulations. Because the crystal structures
of the active state contain no water molecules in the interhelical
cavity, the simulations were initiated with the empty cavity. Notably,
we found that few water molecules entered the interhelical cavity
from the intracellular side during the equilibration period of the
simulations, but none of them formed stable hydrogen bond contacts.
However, in the long production period of the simulations we identified
three stable water clusters with a significant residence time, which
are summarized in Table  for the representative
trajectories and shown in Figure . These clusters
resemble the water clusters found in the crystal structure of the
inactive state of β2AR and other GPCRs (, Figure 1S).

Three stable water clusters identified in the aMD simulations.
The snapshot was made from the simulations of the empty form. Cluster
1 involves up to five water molecules, which are localized within
helices 1, 2, and 7, shown in yellow. Cluster 2 includes one water
molecule in the water binding site formed by the backbone of C285,
F289, and L311, shown in purple. Cluster 3 contains one water molecule
forming the hydrogen bonds with the backbone of A46, G50, and G326
shown in pink. The identified clusters correspond to the water clusters
found in the crystal structure of GPCRs in the inactive form.

Water Binding Sites
during the Active-to-Inactive
State Transition of the β2AR Empty Form and Bound
to CPB or Sal in aMD Simulations
water cluster	water
binding
site residues	Nwat (X-ray)	Nwat/τo /τr (empty), ns	Nwat/τo/τr (CPB), ns	Nwat/τo/τr (Sal), ns	
1	N511.50 D792.50 I2776.39	6	5/51/161	4/101/111	5/28/272	
 	T2816.43 W2866.48 G3157.42	 	 	 	 	
 	N3187.45 S3197.46 N3227.49	 	 	 	 	
2	C2856.47 F2896.51 L3117.38	1	1/3/119	1/43/169	1/130/225	
3	A461.45 G501.49 G3267.47	1	1/1/17	 	1/20/50	
 	 	 	 	 	1/301/25	
Nwat is
the number of water molecules in the X-ray structure of the β2AR inactive state, in the aMD simulations of the β2AR empty form and bound to CPB or Sal. τo is the occupancy time that the water molecule needs to occupy the
water binding site. τr is the residence time that
the water molecule spends within the water binding site.

Several water molecules, mainly
from the intracellular side, entered
the space between helices 1, 2, and 7 in the agonist-bound receptor
and formed hydrogen bond interactions with W286, D79, and N51 of the
NPxxY motif (Figure ) with residence times
of &gt;100 ns (cluster 1, in yellow, Table ).
The water molecules filled the interhelical cavity in the empty receptor
from both extracellular and intracellular sides. This network of interactions
and its rearrangement involving the NPxxY motif are known to be important
in the GPCR activation and desensitization processes.,

Furthermore, we found a stable water molecule in the site
formed
by the backbone of C2856.47, F2896.51, and L3117.38 (cluster 2, in purple) as shown in Figure . The water molecule at this position is found in the crystal
structure of the β2AR inactive state, where this
water stabilizes the proline kink of the WxPF/Y motif, preventing
the outward movement of W2866.48. The G protein active state of the receptor likely does not have
this water binding site, as the helical turn
after Pro has a little unwinding such that the distance between the
residues in the inactive sate increases, making it difficult to form
several hydrogen bonds with a water molecule at the same time to keep
the water molecule around these residues.

We observed a stable
water molecule in the site formed by the carbonyl
group of the backbone of A461.45, G501.49, and
G3267.47 (cluster 3, in pink) in the empty form and Sal-bound
receptor (Figure ). The CPB-bound receptor
does not have this water site in the simulated replicates. This is
because of an increase of distance between helices 1 and 7 (see the
last section) that brings A461.45 and G501.49 away from G3267.47; thus, the water molecule cannot be
held by these residues anymore.

In addition, in our simulations
we have monitored the water molecules
in the positions of other structural water clusters (, Figure 1S) found in the crystal structure
of the β2AR inactive state, but these water molecules
had a short residence time (&lt;1 ns). Interestingly, in our 50 ns
simulations of the empty or ligand-bound β2AR inactive
state with crystal water molecules, the water molecules in these positions
were not stable either.

In summary,
our aMD simulations show that the receptor empty form
and bound to two agonists converts to the inactive-like state with
recovery of known microscopic interactions of the inactive state in
the nanosecond time scale within three conducted replicates of simulations,
indicating the relevance of aMD simulations in the active-to-inactive
state transition.

aMD Simulations Show Stabilization of Distinct
Ensembles of
Transient Conformations
To examine the receptor conformational
space stabilized by the biased agonists and to characterize stable
transient conformations in the simulations, we further use PC1 and
PC2 to calculate the probability sampling landscape from the probability
of occurrence of a transient conformation within the PC1–PC2
space, as shown Figure . The plot also shows
the projection of the available crystal structures (black dots).

Sampling
probabilities from simulations indicate differences in
occupancies of three major stable conformational ensembles stabilized
by agonists. The sampling probability landscapes are calculated from
the probability of occurrence of a transient conformation within the
conformational space simulated by aMD. The conformational sampling
is shown by the two lowest principal components calculated from the
principal component analysis of all the simulated trajectories. The
projection of the crystal structures is in black dots.

From the constructed sampling probability plot,
we identified one
and the most populated transient ensemble of conformations in the
simulations of the receptor empty form. This ensemble is in the center
of the plot with the conformations being close to the inactive state
(the helix Cα rmsd is 1.9 Å) (Table ). It is characterized by the breakage of the Y2195.58–Y3267.53 hydrogen bond and the intermediate position
of F2826.44 (discussed above), which brings helix 6 to
the semi-inward state. Further formation of the R1313.50–E2686.30 salt bridge in this ensemble leads to
pulling helix 6 to the fully inward state, forming the inactive state.

Root-Mean-Square Deviation of the
β2AR Helix Cα Atoms of the Stable Ensembles
Identified in the aMD Simulations of the Receptor Empty Form and Bound
to Sal and CPB
stable ensemble	Cα
rmsd from the active state X-ray, Å	Cα
rmsd from the inactive state X-ray, Å	ensemble 1 (Sal), Å	ensemble 2 (Sal), Å	ensemble 3 (Sal), Å	
1, empty	2.7	1.9	2.2	2.1	2.1	
1, CPB	1.6	2.9	2.0	2.5	3.4	
2, CPB	2.8	1.5	2.8	1.8	2.3	
3, CPB	3.1	1.5	3.2	2.8	2.5	
1, Sal	1.4	2.8	 	 	 	
2, Sal	1.7	2.5	 	 	 	
3, Sal	3.0	1.5	 	 	 	
In contrast, the receptor in the
presence of the biased agonists
has three major ensembles of the stable transient conformations. However,
localization and population of these ensembles are different, suggesting
that the ligands stabilize distinct ensembles of conformations. Thus,
in the receptor conformational space stabilized by CPB, the first
ensemble, which is located closer to the active state, is highly populated
with a helix Cα rmsd of 1.6 Å (Table ) from the initial state and is characterized by the broken Y2195.58–Y3267.53 hydrogen bond. The second ensemble,
where F2826.44 occupies the inactive position and helix
6 has the inward position, is close to the inactive state (1.5 Å).
The third ensemble is characterized by the formation of the ionic
lock with an rmsd of 1.5 Å from the inactive structure.

The receptor conformational space stabilized by Sal involves two
ensembles with the Cα rmsd close to the active state (1.4 and
1.7 Å, respectively), whereas the last and more populated ensemble
is closer to the inactive state (1.5 Å) (Table ). The first ensemble of the conformations is characterized
by the broken Y2195.58–Y3267.53 hydrogen
bond, the second ensemble has, in addition, F2826.44 at
the position of the inactive state, and the third ensemble has the
fully inward position of helix 6.

We have also calculated the
Cα rmsd between the stable ensembles
of the receptor conformations bound to Sal and CPB (Table ) and found a notable deviation between the structures,
supporting the transient stable ensembles stabilized by the agonists
being structurally different.

The porcupine plots calculated
for the last stable ensembles of
the biosystems using the PC1 show notable variation in directions
and amplitudes of harmonic motions of atoms in the region of helices
2, 7, and 8 (, Figure
2S), indicating differences in the dynamic properties of complexes
stabilized by the agonists that might reflect different pharmacological
properties of CPB and Sal. We therefore further explore the structural
changes in the β2AR caused by the agonists.

Effect
of the Cyclopentyl Group on the Interhelical Network
of Interactions
Whereas the catecholamine groups of CPB and
Sal keep similar contacts with the Ser2035.42, S2075.46, and N2936.55 along the simulations (, Figure 3S), the cyclopentyl
ring of CPB provides a major difference in binding by forming additional
contacts with helices 2, 3, and 7. The involvement of these helices
in binding of the biased agonists has been demonstrated in the recent
crystal structures of β1AR in a complex with bucindolol
or carvedilol.

The immediate effect
of the cyclopentyl group within the binding site is measured by the
time series of the radius of gyration of the cyclopentyl group binding
pocket composed by W1093.28, G902.61, and I3097.36 in Figure . The radius of gyration
of the pocket is smaller than in the Sal complex or the empty form
of the receptor, suggesting that the pocket shrinks as a result of
hydrophobic interactions of the cyclopentyl ring with these residues.
This pattern in the simulated system has been observed in the other
two simulation replicates.

Dynamics of the cyclopentyl group binding pocket
in the empty form
of β2AR and bound to CPB and Sal. The fluctuation
of the size of the pocket is calculated via the radius of gyration
created by G902.61, W1093.28, and I3097.36.

To further observe the impact
of the cyclopentyl group on the receptor
dynamics, we calculated the distortion of helices 2 and 7 in the most
populated transient ensembles of the receptor conformations identified
in the PC1–PC2 conformational space, in particular, ensemble
1 of the empty state and ensemble 3 of the Sal- and CPB-bound receptor.
To perform this task, we computed the angle variation along the helix
length as shown in Figure . Thus, the distinct
angle changes in the helix residues indicate different dynamics of
helices in three systems. Helices 2 and 7, colored on the basis of
the angle variation, are shown in Figure C.
Among the ligand-bound receptor states, the notable angle variation
is observed at the region of residues 314–321 in helix 7 involving
the functional NPxxY motif and the region of residues 74–84
in helix 2. Both regions face each other and are likely involved in
ligand-specific side-chain reorganization.

Helix angle profile for
helices 2 and 7. The angle is calculated
along the length of the helix using the Bendix program. The representative
conformations of the last most populated ensembles are shown with
enlarged helices 2 and 7 colored on the basis of the angle value.

Table  summarizes hydrogen bond occupancy
within the network of the NPxxY motif and helix 2 in the simulations,
and Figure  shows this network in the stable
final ensembles of the receptor conformations. In general, we have
observed different direct and water-mediated hydrogen bonding involving
N511.50, D792.50, D1133.32, S1203.39, Y3167.43, and N3187.45 in three
receptor systems. Thus, we noted tightening of interactions between
helices 1 and 2 as well as between helices 3 and 7 in the CPB-bound
receptor, between helices 6 and 7 in the Sal-bound receptor, and between
helices 2 and 7 in the empty form of the receptor (highlighted in
bold in Table ). Although the specific impact
of these residues in the stabilization of the β-arrestin conformation
of β2AR must be proved experimentally, the importance
of the network involving the NPxxY motif has been shown for receptor
activation and internalization., The importance of residues
at positions 3.32 and 7.43 in the stabilization of the CCK2R conformation
recruiting β-arrestin has been recently demonstrated in mutagenesis
studies. Notably, rearrangement of the
NPxxY motif network of interactions changes the position of helices,
which can explain the loss of the water binding site between helices
7 and 1 (cluster 3 in Table ).

NPxxY network of interactions
in the characteristic receptor conformations
of the last stable ensemble of conformations. In addition, we visualized
C3277.54 and the salt bridge between K305 and D195, which
are known to provide different dynamics in the presence of biased
agonists from the 19F NMR and mass spectrometry studies,
respectively.

Hydrogen
Bond Occupancy in the Distinct
Network of Interactions Involving Helices 1–3, 6, and 7
 	occupancy,
%	
hydrogen
bonds	empty	CPB-bound	Sal-bound	
N511.50side chain–D792.50side chain	0	81	6	
N3227.49side chain–D792.50side chain	82	47	38	
Y3267.53side chain–D792.50side chain	63	0	0	
N3227.49side chain–S1203.39side chain	0	0	23	
W2866.48side chain–N3187.45side chain	15	4	1	
Y3087.33side chain–N2936.55side chain	13	51	84	
Y3167.43side chain–D1133.32side chain	36	64	42	
N3187.45side chain–S1203.39side chain	3	39	0	
T2816.43side chain–N3187.45side chain	31	5	5	
In addition, we noted different dynamics of the extracellular salt
bridge involving D192el2 and K3057.32 (Figure ) in the presence of two distinct ligands; in particular,
we found that residues have higher fluctuation in the presence of
CPB than in the presence of Sal as the rmsf values of the side-chain
heavy atoms are 2.9 ± 0.6 and 1.4 ± 0.3 Å, respectively.
As expected, the highest fluctuation of the residues is in the empty
form (3.4 ± 0.4 Å). The observed ligand-dependent fluctuation
of the residues is consistent with the interpretation of the spectroscopic
data, which suggests distinct conformational coupling of the salt
bridge in the presence of various ligands.,

We have also examined the dynamics of C3277.54 (Figure ) as 19F NMR studies have suggested a
different mobility of this residue in the presence of biased and unbiased
ligands. We found that C3277.54 has a more solvent-exposed conformation in the receptor bound to
Sal compared to the receptor bound to CPB, which correlates with the
experimental data.

Our aMD simulations further suggest the different
perturbations
of helices 2 and 7 in the presence of the biased agonist recruiting
β-arrestin compared to the biased agonist activating the G protein.

Discussion
Functional selectivity or ligand-biased signaling
in which certain
ligands can differentially activate signaling pathways is a new concept
in molecular pharmacology developed in the past decade. Although functionally
selective ligands and mutations have been described for many receptors,
the molecular basis of how changes of functional groups in a ligand
affect functional properties of the ligand remains to be elucidated.
The recent data from mass and NMR spectroscopies, as well as mutagenesis
studies, has started to provide first insights into differences in
helix perturbations caused by G protein- and β-arrestin-biased
ligands.,,

In this
work, we have applied the enhanced sampling method of aMD
in atomic scale simulations to compare the dynamics of the biased
agonists, Sal and CPB, and link them with the tendencies of these
ligands to stabilize distinct functional states of the receptor. aMD
simulations have been shown to reproduce many structural and dynamics
properties of soluble proteins.− Here, we used aMD simulations in the study of the
membrane receptor for the first time and monitored the receptor conformational
changes from the active to inactive state on the nanosecond time scale.
Because agonists stabilize the active state of the receptor and the
phosphorylated active state is recognized by β-arrestin, we have started our simulations with the agonist-bound
active state of the receptor using the X-ray structure of the receptor
in the complex with the G protein-like antibody, which was available at the initiation of this study. In
the absence of the antibody, all complexes were shifted to the inactive-like
conformation of the receptor, restoring the known contacts of the
inactive state, that is, the inward position of F2826.44, the ionic interaction between R1313.50 and E2686.30, and the water clusters. In addition, we have observed
distinct dynamics in the receptor when bound to two different partial
agonists, Sal and CPB, notably in the network of interactions involving
helix 7. The distinct perturbation of helix 7 in the presence of the
β-arrestin-biased ligand compared to the G protein-biased ligand
is in good agreement with recent experiential studies.,,

A theoretical background
of receptor structural plasticity in the
form of the energy landscape has been recently illustrated by Deupi
and Kobilka. The energy landscape was
used in interpretation of the ligand efficacy and the ability of the
ligand to trigger a particular signalling mechanism. In addition,
the energy landscape was used in understanding the single molecule
force spectroscopy experiments, where the effect of ligands with different
efficacy on dynamics of β2AR has been investigated. Here,
we have explored the sampling probability landscape resembling the
energy landscape in the presence of two biased agonists and shown
distinct stable ensembles of receptor conformations stabilized by
the agonists, which feature different behaviors of helix 7.

Although the specific network of interactions that is responsible
for the stabilization of the receptor conformation recruiting the
β-arrestin state is yet to be confirmed experimentally, we have
attempted to further characterize the different dynamics of two biased
ligands that lead to specific receptor conformations triggering distinct
signaling pathways. Understanding the network of interactions induced
by the biased ligand and the receptor conformational shifts under
the biased ligand binding might stimulate the development of more
efficient drugs.

Supporting Information Available
Table of the detailed summary
of aMD protocols, figure of water clusters in the crystal structure
of the β2AR inactive state, movie of active-to-inactive
transition, porcupine plot built from the PC1 extreme structures,
and figure of the binding mode of Sal and CPB in the β2 adrenergic receptor from simulations. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi400499n_si_001.pdf

bi400499n_si_002.avi

The research
in the group of I.G.T. is supported by the Royal Society (RG2010/R2)
and the John King foundation. Work at UCSD is supported in part by
NSF, NIH, HHMI, NBCR, and CTBP.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We appreciate the computational
resources provided by NSF
Supercomputer Centers and the high-performance computational facilities
of Queen’s University Belfast. We thank Prof. Daniel Fourmy,
Dr. Yinglong Miao and Dr. Sara Nichols for helpful discussion.

