d-Galacturonate, the
primary constituent of pectin, is
an abundant polymer found in plant cell walls. Following hydrolysis
by pectinases, d-galacturonate can be utilized as a sole
carbon source by many soil bacteria. Several pathways are known for
catabolism of d-galacturonate, including the oxidative pathway
shown in Figure A. Our attention was drawn to this pathway in Agrobacterium
tumefaciens strain C58 because it includes a reaction catalyzed
by a member of the functionally diverse enolase superfamily. This enzyme, designated d-galactarolactone
cycloisomerase (Gci, Atu3139), catalyzes the ring opening of d-galactaro-1,4-lactone to yield 2-keto-3-deoxy-l-threo-hexarate [hereafter designated 5-keto-4-deoxy-d-galactarate or 5-keto-4-deoxy-d-glucarate (KDG)]
via a β-elimination reaction that is initiated by abstraction
of the proton adjacent to the carboxylate group.

In this pathway, an NAD+-dependent uronate
dehydrogenase
(Udh, Atu3143) oxidizes the β-pyranose form of d-galacturonate
to d-galactaro-1,5-lactone (δ-lactone). The assumption
has been that the δ-lactone nonenzymatically isomerizes to d-galactaro-1,4-lactone (γ-lactone). Following this isomerization,
Gci catalyzes the ring opening reaction of the γ-lactone to
produce KDG that undergoes dehydration and decarboxylation to form
α-ketoglutarate semialdehyde, which is oxidized to α-ketoglutarate,
an intermediate in the citric acid cycle.−

Atu3139 is located in a
gene cluster that includes Atu3138 and
Atu3140 (Figure B); the transcription of the
genes in this cluster is upregulated when d-galacturonate
is the carbon source (unpublished results). This gene cluster also
encodes orthologues of KduI and KduD that are involved in an alternate d-galacturonate utilization pathway that involves isomerization
and reduction to produce 2-keto-3-deoxy-d-gluconate. On the basis of the sequence similarity, the
closest functionally characterized homologue of the protein encoded
by Atu3140 is a KDG dehydratase/decarboxylase (KdgD). Because KDG
is the product of the reaction catalyzed by Gci, the proximity of
these genes is not surprising. However, the function of the protein
encoded by Atu3138 was unknown.

(A) d-Galacturonate oxidative
catabolic pathway. (B) Gene
cluster.

The protein encoded by Atu3138
(UniProt accession number A9CEQ7)
is a member of the amidohydrolase superfamily (AHS), a very large
functionally diverse enzyme superfamily. A9CEQ7 is a member of Pfam PF04909 (6287 sequences in release 27)
and InterPro IPR006992 (11876 sequences in release 45.0). 2-Pyrone-4,6-dicarboxylate
lactonase (PDC lactonase or LigI) is a structurally and mechanistically
characterized member of these families.

PDC, the substrate for LigI, is structurally similar to d-galactaro-δ-lactone: both are carboxy-substituted δ-lactones.
In the pathway shown in Figure A, d-galactaro-δ-lactone has been proposed to isomerize to d-galactaro-γ-lactone nonenzymatically. However, on the
basis of the proximity of the genes encoding A9CEQ7 and Gci and the
structural similarity between PDC and d-galactaro-δ-lactone,
we hypothesized that A9CEQ7 catalyzes the δ- to γ-lactone
isomerization and therefore is a “missing” enzyme in
this pathway. At neutral pH, the nonenzymatic isomerization is fast,
so previous investigators may have assumed there would be no need
for a catalyst. Also, because Gci catalyzes the ring opening reaction
of d-galactaro-γ-lactone to KDG, no need for a lactonase
is apparent, i.e., a reaction similar to that catalyzed by LigI. Here
we report that A9CEQ7 is a galactaro δ-lactone isomerase (GLI),
a novel activity for the AHS.

d-Galactaro-δ-lactone
was prepared in D2O via bromine oxidation of d-galacturonate. This material could not
be distinguished by 1H nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy from the product
obtained by the NAD+-dependent Udh (Atu3143). The synthetic
δ-lactone is stable indefinitely at pD 4.8 and −80 °C.

1H NMR spectra of the isomerase substrate and product.
(A) Synthetic δ-lactone immediately after the pD had been adjusted
from 4.8 to 6.4. (B) Time course of the reaction. (C) Reaction after
1 h. Resonances are color-coded to match the peaks associated with
the structures in Figure A.

The progress of the A9CEQ7-catalyzed reaction was
monitored by 1H NMR spectroscopy (Figure ). The 1H NMR spectrum of the synthetic δ-lactone
at pD 6.4
is shown in Figure A; the red bars indicate
the δ-lactone, the green bars the γ-lactone, and the blue
bars the residual d-galacturonate from the synthesis. The
spectra in Figure B (recorded at 2 min intervals)
show the progress of the reaction. As the reaction proceeds, the intensities
of the resonances associated with the δ-lactone decrease as
the intensities of the resonances associated with the γ-lactone
increase. After 1 h (Figure C), the only resonances
(in addition to those associated with the residual d-galacturonate)
are those associated with the γ-lactone. No meso-galactarate is detected by hydrolysis of either lactone.

The
reaction progress was monitored with a polarimeter. In Figure , the black line shows the change in the optical
rotation during the nonenzymatic isomerization at pD 6.4; the red
line shows the change in the optical rotation during the reaction
in the presence of A9CEQ7. The kinetic parameters were measured for
the A9CEQ7-catalyzed reaction: kcat =
440 s–1, and kcat/Km = 8.3 × 104 M–1 s–1. The rate enhancement is 6.8 × 105. The rate of the nonenzymatic reaction is dependent on pH,
with a pD of 6.4 providing sufficient kinetic stability of the δ-lactone
to allow confident rate measurements.

We also investigated the
specificity of Gci for the γ- and
δ-lactones. In Figure , the green line
shows the progress of the reaction when Gci is added to γ-lactone
produced in the absence of A9CEQ7; the blue line shows the progress
of the reaction when Gci is added to a reaction mixture containing
the δ-lactone. These reactions reach the same final optical
rotation. The rate constants for the nonenzymatic isomerization of
the δ-lactone to the γ-lactone (black line) and the Gci-catalyzed
production of KDG in the absence of A9CEQ7 (blue line) are the same,
establishing that Gci does not catalyze the ring opening of the δ-lactone.

On the basis of these results, we assign the d-galactarolactone
isomerase (GLI) function to A9CEQ7. Although several lactonases have
been identified in the AHS, this is the first lactone isomerase reaction.

Polarimetric
profiles of 5.5 mM d-galactaro-δ-lactone
without enzyme (black diamonds), with A9CEQ7 (red squares), and with
Gci (blue circles). Profile of 5.5 mM d-galactaro-γ-lactone
with Gci (green triangles).

The structure of GLI was determined in the absence of a ligand
to 1.6 Å by molecular replacement using an ensemble model of
structural homologues from IPR006992. GLI has a typical amidohydrolase
fold with a distorted (β/α)8-TIM barrel. The
closest structural homologue as determined with PDBeFold is LigI from Sphingomonas paucimobilius (Protein Data Bank entry 4DI8) with a root-mean-square deviation (rmsd) of 2.10
Å and a sequence identity of 27% over 253 Cα atoms. Despite
the low level of sequence identity and the high rmsd values, LigI
and GLI have very similar core TIM-barrel structures (Figure A). As expected by the differences in their substrates,
LigI is a flat planar dicarboxylate lactone and GLI is a monocarboxylate
sugar lactone; most of their differences are localized to the loops
at the N-terminal end of the barrel that play a role in substrate
recognition. For example, Arg 130 in LigI, which coordinates the distal
carboxylate of its substrate, is a proline in GLI (Pro 123).

Structure of
A9CEQ7. (A) Distorted (β/α)8-TIM barrel. A9CEQ7
(cyan) with supposed catalytic resides (yellow).
LigI (4d8L) is colored magenta. (B) Superimposition of catalytic residues
with those of LigI and the δ-lactone with PDC. Note an asparagine
(N240) has replaced an aspartate involved in activating a water at
the end of β-strand 8.

Unlike many members of the amidohydrolase superfamily, LigI
does
not require a divalent metal for its lactonase activity. The presence
of Ca2+, Co2+, Mg2+, Mn2+, Ni2+, or Zn2+ does not increase the rate
of the GLI reaction. These results suggest GLI also does not require
a metal for catalytic activity.

In LigI, Asp 248 is the general
base that activates a water molecule
for nucleophilic attack on the lactone carbonyl group. A superposition of the active sites of GLI and the PDC-liganded
D248A mutant of LigI at pH 8.5 is shown in Figure B. The active sites are essentially identical, with the notable
exception that in GLI Asn 240 is the structural homologue of Asp 248
in LigI. The N240D substitution produced a 28-fold decrease in activity
(kcat = 16 s–1, and kcat/Km = 3.6 ×
103 M–1 s–1); no hydrolysis
of the δ- or γ-lactone was observed in the presence of
the D240N mutant.

Thus, the lactone isomerization reaction catalyzed
by GLI can be
explained by the lack of a general base for lactone hydrolysis. Inspection
of the active site of GLI does not reveal either a general base that
would activate the 4-OH group of the δ-lactone for intramolecular
attack on the lactone carbonyl group or a nucleophile that would allow
the formation of an acyl–enzyme intermediate that would partition
between the δ- and γ-lactones. Therefore, in analogy to
the proposed mechanism for the nonenzymatic reaction, we assume the
modest rate enhancement results from preferential binding of the boat
conformer of the δ-lactone to enforce the proximity of the 4-OH
group and the lactone carbonyl group (Figure ).

Proposed mechanism for A9CEQ7.

Supporting Information Available
A description
of the experimental
procedures. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5000492_si_001.pdf

Accession Codes
The atomic
coordinates
and structure factors for GLI have been deposited as Protein Data
Bank entry 4MUP.

Use of the Advanced
Photon Source, an Office of Science User Facility operated for the
U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Science by Argonne National
Laboratory, was supported by the DOE under Contract DE-AC02-06CH11357.
Use of the Lilly Research Laboratories Collaborative Access Team (LRL-CAT)
beamline at Sector 31 of the Advanced Photon Source was provided by
Eli Lilly Co., which operates the facility. This research was supported
by National Institutes of Health Grants P01GM071790 and U54GM093342
to J.A.G.

The authors
declare no competing financial interests.

