More than 50 years ago, electron
micrographs of the plasma membrane of cells revealed dense invaginations
of 50–100 nm that were named caveolae (little caves). Caveolae
were found to be present in almost all differentiated mammalian cells
and are composed of the proteins Caveolin-1 (Cav1) or the muscle specific
Caveolin-3 (Cav3), Caveolin-2 (Cav2), and numerous other proteins
(see refs (−)). Many proteins that reside in
caveolae are involved in cell signaling, which has led to the speculation
that caveolae may be involved in the organization of signaling domains
(see refs (−)). If related signaling proteins localize in caveolae, then these
domains could facilitate rapid and directed signals. However, it is
unclear whether various signaling proteins localize in caveolae domains
because results from immunofluorescence and fractionation studies
appear to be contradictory.

An important class of signaling
proteins that may target caveolae
consists of G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs). GPCR signaling occurs through a series of sequential molecular
interactions that begin with the binding of an extracellular agonist.
This binding is transmitted to downstream effectors in the cytoplasm
through activation of heterotrimeric G-proteins. Many GPCRs and G-protein subunits appear to localize to
caveolae domains (see refs (), (), and ()). Some recent studies
of live cells have indicated that components involved in G-protein
signaling reside in preformed signaling complexes (e.g., refs () and ()) and that Cav1 can alter
their interactions by specifically binding to one or more components. Thus, caveolae domains may play a necessary
and significant part in GPCR signaling by mediating GPCR oligomerization,
their association with agonists, and their interaction with intracellular
G-proteins.

Previous studies have suggested that Gαq subunits
reside in caveolae domains whereas Gαo, Gαi, and Gβγ subunits prefer non-caveolae domains. Our laboratory used live cell fluorescence imaging
and correlation spectroscopy to show that in the basal state Gαq and Gβγ localize to caveolae domains. Activation of Gαq strengthens
its interaction with Cav1, promoting the release of Gβγ
subunits from caveolae domains and extending the time of Gαq activation., This stabilization of activated
Gαq through its interaction with Cav1 is seen by
a prolonged calcium response that is thought to be due to a combination
of stabilization of the activated state of Gαq by
Cav1 and the extended time for Gβγ recombination. This
change in the duration of Gαq-mediated signals does
not appear to be the case for other Gα families.

In this
study, we determined whether the presence of caveolae can
alter the function and dynamics of two class A GPCRs, the μ-opioid
receptor (μOR), which is coupled to Gαi subunits,
and the bradykinin type 2 receptor (B2R), which is coupled
to Gαq subunits. Both receptors have been reported
to localize in caveolae (see below). We studied these receptors mainly
in Fisher rat thyroid (FRTwt) cells, which do not express detectable
levels of Cav1, and a sister cell line that is stably transfected
with canine Cav1 (FRTcav+) and displays caveolae domains., Additionally, FRT cells do not have endogenous μOR or B2R receptors, the contribution of which could complicate the
analysis of FRET measurements and functional assays.

μOR
binds morphine and is a target of many analgesics, including
opiates (see ref ()). μOR activates Gαi, resulting in inhibition
of adenylate cyclase and a decrease in the level of cellular cAMP.
Co-immunoprecipitation studies suggest that μOR localizes to
lipid rafts, and has been shown to localize
in Cav3 microdomains in adult cardiomyocytes. Although caveolin expression has not been fully elucidated in the
nervous system where μOR is most abundant, it is upregulated in aging brains and its downregulation induces demyelination of neurons. These observations imply that Cav1 may be indirectly
involved in promoting changes in plasticity, neuroprotection, neurodegeneration,
and aging.

B2R is a key mediator of the inflammation
response.
B2R signals through Gαq, resulting in
the activation of phospholipase Cβ (PLCβ) resulting in
an increase in the level of intracellular calcium and activation of
protein kinase C. Unlike B1R, which is expressed only during
inflammation, B2R is expressed continuously, although its
tissue expression is limited. We have
previously found that in the presence of caveolae, activation of Gαq by muscarinic receptors results in prolonged calcium responses
due to sustained activation of Gαq by Cav1. Thus, caveolae may promote inflammatory responses
through sustained and synergistic B2R signaling.

Here, we have used fluorescence methods to study μOR and
B2R. The use of fluorescence methods allows us to conduct
real-time measurements of receptor localization and dynamics in intact
cells, thereby eliminating problems associated with cell disruption.
We find that the function and localization of μOR are largely
unaffected by caveolae. Alternately, B2R–Gαq signaling is impacted by caveolae, even though the receptors
do not appear to significantly penetrate into these domains. Our FRET
studies suggest that receptors do not directly localize to caveolae
but require Gαq to scaffold them to these domains.

Materials and Methods
Materials
FRTwt and FRTcav+ cells and canine Caveolin-1-eGFP
DNA were gifts from D. Brown (Stony Brook University). μOR-eYFP,
μOR-eCFP, and Gαi-eYFP were from L. Devi (Mount
Sinai Medical Center, New York, NY). Gαq-eYFP and
Gαq-eGFP were from C. Berlot (Geisinger Research).
B2R and B2R-GFP were from F. Leeb-Lundberg (University
of Texas Health Science Center). The plasmid of eCFP and eYFP linked
by a 12-amino acid peptide chain as a positive control for FRET experiments
was from J. Pessin (Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY).
mCherry-Cav1, eYFP-Cav1, and eCFP-Cav1 were constructed as described
from canine Cav1-eGFP by excising it as a XhoI and BamHI fragment
and subcloning it into the same sites in pmcherry-C1, pEYFP-C1, and
pECFP-C1 (Clontech). Sequencing of all these plasmids showed an in-frame
fusion of mcherry, eYFP, or eCFP at the N-terminus of Cav1 and a six-amino
acid linker (SGSRAA) between the Cav1 and fluorophore constructs.

Cell Culture and Transfection
FRTwt and FRTcav+ cells
have been described previously as were rat aortic smooth muscle cells
(A10 cells). Expression of Cav1 in A10
cells was downregulated by treating the cells with siRNA (Cav1) from
Dharmacon, Inc., according to the manufacturer's instructions. The
efficiency of downregulation was determined by immunofluorescence
using the anti-Cav1 antibody bound to Alexa 647-conjugated secondary
antibody in which the fluorescence intensities per cell of wild-type
A10 cells (n = 11; 43 ± 13%) versus the Cav1
knockdown (n = 17; 21 ± 7%) cells were obtained
and compared. These measurements showed a Cav1 knockdown efficiency
of approximately 51%. Western blot analyses were performed to compare
receptor expression levels and were conducted using the reagents and
antibodies described in refs () and ().

The levels of expression of Cav1 in FRTcav cells and in transfected
HEK293 cells were found to be similar to the endogenous level of expression
of Cav1 in NIH3T3, A10, and MDA MB-231 cells by Western blotting.
Additionally, B2R expression levels in transfected FRT
cells were found to be similar to endogenous levels in NIH3T3 cells
and A10 cells. Similar expression levels of cells transiently transfected
with B2R and cells endogenously expressing B2R (NIH3T3 and A10 cells) correlate with the comparable extents of
calcium release upon stimulation with bradykinin.

FRET Spectroscopy of Membrane Fractions
Approximately
3 × 107 cells expressing B2R-eYFP, μOR-eYFP,
or eCFP-Cav1 were homogenized in ice-cold lysis buffer [250 mM sucrose,
20 mM HEPES (pH 7.4), 1.5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA,
protease inhibitor cocktail, 1% Triton X, 0.5% NP-40, and 1 mM DTT].
The membrane fractions were collected by centrifugation at 50000g for 1 h at 4 °C. The concentrations of B2R-eYFP and eCFP-Cav1 were found to be 0.12 and 0.30 μM, respectively,
by Western blot analysis. Expression and purification of recombinant
Gαq and Gαi through baculovirus
infections of Sf9 cells have been described previously. Gαq and Gαi were activated by incubation in 1 mM GTPγS in 50 mM HEPES,
100 mM NaCl, 4 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, and 50 mM (NH4)2SO4 for 1 h at 30 °C. B2R-eYFP
(5 nM) and eCFP-Cav1 (10 nM) were titrated with purified Gαq and Gαi. FRET measurements between B2R-eYFP or μOR-eYFP and eCFP-Cav1 were performed by monitoring
the increase in the emission of eYFP (560 nm) upon excitation of eCFP
(450 nm) and normalized using the intensities of eYFP emission upon
eYFP excitation.

Ca2+ Measurements
Intracellular Ca2+ levels in cells transiently transfected with B2R or μOR
were harvested and incubated with 1 μM Fura 2-AM in Hanks Balanced
Salt Solution (HBSS, Gibco) with 1% BSA. Cells (1 × 107) were incubated with 1 μM Fura 2-AM for 30 min, pelleted,
washed twice with HBSS, and incubated for an additional 15 min for
de-esterification of Fura 2-AM. Fluorescence measurements were taken
as described in ref ().

Calcium changes in adherent cells were measured using 5 μM
Calcium Green, or Calcium Orange if the cells were already expressing
a GFP-labeled receptor, on a Zeiss Confocor II instrument as previously
described.

Intracellular cAMP Measurements
μOR-expressing
cells were serum-starved and pretreated with 1 mM 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine
(IBMX) and stimulated with morphine in the presence of 10 μM
forskolin. The assay was stopped with 1% perchloric acid and incubated
for 1 h. Cyclic AMP was measured from the supernatant using a [3H]cAMP assay kit (GE Healthcare) following the manufacturer’s
instructions. Inhibition of cAMP by morphine is expressed as the percent
forskolin activation in the absence of agonist.

Colocalization Studies
FRTcav+ cells transfected with
μOR-eGFP or B2R-eYFP were seeded onto glass bottom
dishes (MatTek Corp.). Forty-eight hours post-transfection, cells
were washed and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 1 h and permeabilized
with 0.2% NP-40. Cells were incubated with rabbit polyclonal anti-Cav1
antibody (N20) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and then incubated with
AlexaFluor secondary antibodies. Fixed cells were imaged with an Olympus
Fluoview laser scanning microscope equipped with a 488 nm argon ion
laser for excitation of eGFP, a 534 nm HeNe laser for Alexa 594, or
a 633 nm HeNe laser for Alexa 647. No significant bleedthrough was
observed from the eGFP or eYFP channel to the Alexa 647 channel. Colocalization
analysis was performed using the MacBiophotonics version of ImageJ.

FRET Imaging
Sensitized emission FRET was performed
with an Olympus Fluoview1000 instrument on HEK293 cells co-expressing
eCFP- or eYFP-tagged proteins. eCFP and eYFP were excited using 458
and 515 nm argon ion laser lines, respectively, and 480–495
and 535–565 nm bandpass filters to collect emission images,
respectively. The FRET efficiency was calculated by the method used
by Chen and co-workers. Using this algorithm,
FRET images are corrected for spectral bleedthrough by analyzing images
of control cells expressing donor proteins alone or acceptor proteins
alone with the same intensity distributions as the sample. Using controls
with the same intensity distributions as the samples, we found that
FRET efficiency values did not change significantly over a 10-fold
range of acceptor:donor intensity ratios (e.g., Figure b). Background FRET values were obtained by imaging cells
co-expressing eCFP and eYFP. Positive control values were obtained
using a dodecapeptide labeled with eCFP and eYFP on both ends (i.e.,
eCFP-X12-eYFP).

Results
Distribution of Caveolae Domains in Cells
Before characterizing
the effect of caveolae on the properties of B2R and μOR,
we determined the cellular distribution of Cav1 in FRTcav+ cells by
immunofluorescence (Figure a). FRT cells are
polarized epithelial cells that exhibit basolateral and apical membranes.
We find that Cav1 is mainly localized to the basolateral membrane
and is sporadically distributed on the apical membrane. This is in
agreement with the work of Mora and others, who found that more than
∼99% of Cav1 in transfected FRT cells preferentially goes to
the basolateral membrane. Additionally,
Cav1 is localized in regions of cell–cell contact. The observation
that Cav1 is concentrated in cell contact regions correlates well
with the observation that they may organize proteins involved in intercellular
signaling, such as connexins.

(a) Immunofluorescence image of FRTcav+ cells
showing the distribution
of Cav1 as viewed from the top of the cells. The right panel is a
side view of cells showing that Cav1 is mainly distributed on the
basolateral region of the plasma membrane. (b) Distribution of μOR
and B2R in FRT cells. μOR-eGFP in FRTcav+ cells shows
a uniform distribution on the apical and basolateral membranes, while
the majority of B2R-GFP localizes to the basolateral region
of FRTcav+ cells, which is similar to the Cav1 distribution. This
preferential localization of B2R to the basolateral membrane
is not seen when it is expressed in FRTwt cells.

We wanted to determine whether the presence of
caveolae impacts
the plasma membrane distribution of B2R and μOR.
We looked at the z distribution of B2R-GFP
and μOR-eGFP in FRTcav+ cells to see whether they would have
a basolateral distribution similar to that of Cav1. We found that
μOR has a uniform plasma membrane distribution on both the basolateral
and apical membranes (Figure b). Alternately,
B2R largely resides on the basolateral membrane, paralleling
the distribution of Cav1 in contrast to μOR. To verify whether
the distribution of B2R is caused by the presence of Cav1,
we checked the z distribution of B2R in
FRTwt cells, which do not have caveolae. In FRTwt cells, B2R did not exhibit a preferential localization on the basolateral
membrane. These observations suggest that Cav1 is responsible for
its basolateral localization.

Caveolae Affect Signals from B2R but Not from μOR
We determined whether the presence of caveolae alters the ability
of μOR and B2R to generate second messengers. Stimulation
of μOR by morphine activates Gαi, which inhibits
adenylyl cyclase, resulting in a decrease in the level of cellular
cAMP. We assessed the decrease in cAMP levels in FRTwt and FRTcav+
cells transfected with μOR using a standard radiometric method
(see ). We first verified
that the receptor is expressed at similar levels in both cell types
by visualizing the fluorescently tagged receptors in live cells. The
results of these studies (Figure a) demonstrate
that caveolae do not affect the cAMP response generated through μOR
and Gαi. For these cell types, stimulation of μOR
and Gαi did not increase the level of intracellular
Ca2+ even at saturating morphine concentrations (0.1–50
μM).

(a) Functional studies of suspensions of FRTwt and FRTcav+ cells
transfected with μOR, at identical μOR expression levels,
showing the differences in cAMP levels stimulated at four different
morphine concentrations (see ) where n = 3 independent experiments. The mean
± the standard error of the mean (SEM) is shown. (b) Determination
of Ca2+ release in cell suspensions upon the addition of
10 μM bradykinin, as measured using Fura-2, of FRTwt and FRTcav+
cells transfected with B2R where the expression levels
of the receptor were similar in both cell types as determined by Western
blot analysis, where n = 3 independent experiments.
The mean ± SEM is shown. (c) Single-cell measurements of release
of Ca2+ from FRTwt cells transfected with B2R-GFP and stimulated with 5 μM bradykinin where the curves
are an average of responses of eight cells, and the standard deviation
is shown. The inset shows the level of B2R-GFP intensity
(y-axis) in arbitrary units of the measured cells.

We have previously found that the affinity between
Cav1 and Gαq is strengthened when Gαq is activated through
muscarinic receptors, resulting in a prolonged Ca2+ signal. Here, we tested whether a similar increase in
the level of calcium is seen for B2R-mediated Gαq activation. To this end, we measured the change in Ca2+ levels with bradykinin stimulation in FRTwt and FRTcav+
cells expressing B2R. Again, similar B2R expression
levels in the two cell lines were verified by fluorescence imaging
of the tagged receptor (see the inset in Figure c). It is notable that the duration of the signal increased ∼2.5-fold
in the presence of caveolae in addition to the increase in signal
magnitude. We determined changes in the Ca2+ response of
single cells (Figure c) as well as cell suspensions
(Figure b). We find that the presence of caveolae
significantly increases the amount of Ca2+ released upon
the addition of bradykinin in both calcium assays for cells in suspension
(t test; p = 0.007) and single-cell
measurements (Mann–Whitney test; p = 0.008).

Caveolae Affect B2R-Mediated Ca2+ Signaling
in A10 Cells
To support the idea that B2R signaling
can be affected by caveolae in cells that endogenously express both
Cav1 and B2R, we carried out studies using rat aortic smooth
muscle cells (A10). In these studies, we compared intracellular Ca2+ release in wild-type cells and cells where expression of
Cav1 was downregulated by ∼50% [as estimated by Western blotting
(see )] through treatment
with siRNA(Cav1). In wild-type cells, we find that at least one-third
of the cells show a prolonged Ca2+ signal (i.e., &gt;200
s)
upon bradykinin stimulation that is similar to the behavior observed
for carbachol stimulation of FRTcav+ cell suspensions. In the case of the Cav1 knockdown cells, none of the ∼50
siRNA(Cav1) cells showed this prolonged Ca2+ recovery.
In Figure , we show data extracted for several
cells, although many more were viewed.

Single-cell measurements of Ca2+, as determined by Calcium
Green (see ) for wild-type
A10 cells and cells treated with siRNA(Cav1). Two wild-type traces
are shown with empty symbols: (○) average of eight traces for
the cell population (∼70%) that displayed a short recovery
and (□) a sample trace of cells in the 30% population that
showed a prolonged recovery (∼30%). (●) Average of seven
traces for cells that have been treated with siRNA(Cav1). The SEM,
which is not shown for the sake of clarity, ranged between 0.6 and
2.5% from the beginning to the recovery period for both types of circles
and between 2.4 and 5.7% for the recovery. The error for the prolonged
Ca2+ signal was large in the recovery period and at least
40% higher than that for the short duration cells.

Colocalization of B2R and μOR with Cav1
The preferential basolateral localization of B2R (Figure b) and strengthened Ca2+ signals generated
with B2R–Gαq activation (Figure b,c) in FRTcav+ cells suggest that B2R, but not μOR, interacts with caveolae domains. As a first
step in determining whether this is the case, we measured the amount
of colocalization between the receptors and Cav1, using the anti-Cav1
antibody. The results, summarized in Figure , show a significant colocalization between B2R-eYFP and
Cav1 as seen (0.76 ± 0.01; n = 7) on the lateral
membrane compared to a positive control consisting of Cav1-eGFP labeled
with anti-Cav1 labeled with Alexa 647 in FRTwt cells (0.93 ±
0.01; n = 9) and a negative control consisting of
Cav1-eGFP stained with secondary antibody (Alexa 647) alone (0.17
± 0.02; n = 7). In contrast, a smaller amount
of colocalization is seen between μOR-eGFP and Cav1 (0.51 ±
0.01; n = 9).

(a) Summary of colocalization of Cav1
with μOR and B2R as compared to negative and positive
controls, where n = 7 for the negative control [Cav1-eGFP
and secondary
antibody (Alexa 647) alone], n = 9 for μOR-eGFP, n = 7 for unstimulated B2R-eYFP, n = 6 for B2R-eYFP stimulated with 1 μM bradykinin
for 5 min, and n = 9 for the positive control (Cav1-eGFP
and Cav1 antibody labeled with the Alexa 647-conjugated secondary
antibody). Asterisks indicate significant differences from the negative
control, while crosses indicate significant differences from μOR-eGFP–Cav1
colocalization values (ANOVA; p &lt; 0.001). (b)
Sample images of some of the cells that were used in the data presented
in Figure a.

B2R and μOR Interact Differently with Cav1
As Determined by Förster Resonance Energy Transfer
Concern with colocalization measurements are the low spatial resolution
and the dependence on the strength and specificity of the antibodies,
as well as the exposure of the epitope that may be a problem with
integral membrane proteins. To gain more sensitive localization information,
we used FRET. Cav1 was tagged with an enhanced cyan fluorescent protein
(eCFP) on its N-terminus, and B2R and μOR were tagged
with an enhanced yellow fluorescent protein (eYFP) tag on their C-termini.
HEK293 cells were chosen for their high transfection efficiency and
the exclusive plasma membrane distribution of the receptors. Moreover,
the usage of nonpolarized HEK293 cells removes artifacts that could
arise from using FRT cells whose polarity might influence FRET results.
Cells expressing eCFP-Cav1 and B2R-eYFP at similar levels
were selected. The increase in eYFP emission in the presence of eCFP
was then measured (see ). For the eCFP/eYFP pair, the distance at which 50% donor fluorescence
is lost to transfer is 30 Å, and on the basis of the estimated
size of the proteins, the presence of FRET should indicate physical
association. FRET values for each sample were compared to a positive
control consisting of eCFP-X12-eYFP and a negative control
consisting of free eCFP and eYFP expressed in the same cells (see
refs () and ()). Additionally, we verified
that a high level of FRET occurs between Cav1-eGFP and mcherry-Cav1,
showing that the tagged Cav1 proteins can still oligomerize and form
caveolae domains (data not shown). FRET results are summarized in
Figure . Despite
previous data suggesting that μOR localizes in caveolae domains,
we could not detect significant FRET between Cav1 and μOR. In
contrast, B2R and Cav1 display a weak but significant and
reproducible FRET, suggesting that a population of receptor localizes
to these domains.

(a) Normalized % FRET efficiencies (see ) of eCFP-Cav1 with μOR-eYFP (n = 9), eCFP-Cav1 with B2R-eYFP (n = 15),
and eCFP-Cav1 with Gαq-eYFP (n =
7). Asterisks indicate significant differences from the negative control,
while a cross indicates a significant difference from values for eCFP-Cav1
with B2R-eYFP (ANOVA; p &lt; 0.001). Sample
raw images of a cell expressing eCFP-Cav1 and μOR-eYFP acceptors
and raw FRET (left) and a cell expressing eCFP-Cav1 and B2R-eYFP and raw FRET (right). We note that previous studies of eCFP-Cav1
and Gαi-eYFP expressed in FRTwt cells gave a FRET
efficiency of 4 ± 6% (n = 3). (b) Plot showing
that the FRET efficiency between B2R-eYFP and eCFP-Cav1
(box plot, inset) does not change significantly over a 10-fold range
of donor:acceptor intensity ratios with the FRET algorithm used.

We find the value of Gαq–Cav1
FRET is 2-fold
higher than the value of B2R–Cav1 FRET (Figure ). Although other interpretations are possible,
these results might suggest that Gαq has a higher
degree of caveolae association than B2R. We note that the
higher level of FRET between Gαq and Cav1 than between
B2R and Cav1 is unexpected because we have found a relatively
high level of normalized FRET for B2R-eYFP and Gαq-eCFP (i.e., 24.7 ± 1.8 for FRTwt and 29.1 ± 3.3
for FRTcav+). Moreover, we have previously found that B2R forms a complex with GαqGβγ in the
basal state of HEK293 cells. Nevertheless,
the presence of FRET suggests close localization among B2R, Gαq, and Cav1.

Role of Gαq–Cav1 Interactions in B2R–Cav1 Interactions
Our FRET studies suggest
that Gαq–Cav1 interactions are stronger than
B2R–Cav1 interactions, and it is possible that Gαq is responsible for promoting B2R–Cav1 interactions.
If this is the case, then disrupting Gαq–Cav1
interactions would eliminate B2R–Cav1 FRET. Thus,
we measured the amount of FRET between B2R-eYFP and eCFP-Cav1
in the absence and presence of a microinjected caveolin peptide (DGIWKASFTTFTVTKYWFYRC),
which interferes with the association between purified Gαq and partially purified membrane fractions containing overexpressed
Cav1. This peptide, but not a control
peptide with the same length and charge, also disrupts Gαq–Cav1 colocalization in cultured cells and cardiomyocytes,
although there is a possibility that the peptide might disrupt other
Cav1 interactions.

HEK293 cells expressing B2R-eYFP
and eCFP-Cav1 at similar levels were microinjected with 200 nM peptide,
and changes in B2R–Cav1 FRET were determined (e.g.,
Figure a). By comparing the amount of FRET
from microinjected versus uninjected cells to that in cells injected
with 200 nM control peptide, we found that cells injected with caveolin
peptide had significantly lower FRET values (Figure b). It is worth noting that the FRET values between B2R-eYFP and eCFP-Cav1 in microinjected cells were similar to
those of negative controls, suggesting that the amount of caveolin
peptide microinjected is enough to disrupt the entire population of
the B2R-eYFP associated with Cav1. This study suggests
that the population of B2R-eYFP that participates in the
transfer of energy from eCFP-Cav1 is mediated by interactions between
Gαq and Cav1.

(a) Raw images showing the change in FRET
between eCFP-Cav1 and
B2R-eYFP before and after injection with a 200 nM solution
of a peptide that disrupts Gαq–Cav1 association
(Cav1 peptide). We note that the injected cell presented was one that
gave a FRET value in the upper range for the purposes of display.
(b) Summary of the change in eCFP-Cav1–B2R-eYFP
FRET in cells that were not injected (n = 15), cells
injected with the Cav1 peptide (n = 9), or a control
peptide (n = 8). ANOVA calculations show significant
differences (p &lt; 0.001) between uninjected and
Cav1 peptide samples and between Cav1 peptide and control peptide
data. (c) Study similar to that shown in Figure b except that in this study, Gαq was downregulated
using siRNA (see the text). (d) FRET between B2R-eYFP and
eCFP-cav1 in HEK293 membrane fractions mixed with activated (30 nM)
(Gαq* or Gαi*) or inactivated Gαq or Gαi (30 nM) in the absence and presence
of 200 nM Cav1 peptide (+pep) or 200 nM control peptide (+ctr). FRET
efficiencies were calculated from the increase in eYFP emission upon
eCFP excitation. Data are means ± SEM, where n = 3 independent experiments.

We further tested this idea by transfecting HEK293
cells with eCFP-Cav1
and B2R-eYFP and measuring the decrease in the level of
FRET with decreased levels of Gαq using siRNA-mediated
downregulation. Gαq was downregulated by ∼39
± 11%, as estimated by Western blotting. We note that downregulation
of Gαq did not affect the expression levels or cellular
localization of eCFP-Cav1 and B2R-eYFP. Our results (Figure c) show that reducing the level of Gαq decreases the amount of FRET between B2R and Cav1.

To support the hypothesis that Gαq is directing
B2R–Cav1 interactions, we performed spectroscopic
FRET of purified membrane fractions from HEK293 cells overexpressing
either B2R-eYFP or eCFP-Cav1. We then mixed B2R-eYFP and eCFP-Cav1 membrane fractions and measured the ability
of Gαq to promote association. Addition of 30 nM
activated Gαq in the absence or presence of a control
peptide (see above) resulted in a substantial increase in the level
of FRET indicative of B2R–Cav1 association (Figure d). This increase was reduced in the presence of
the caveolin-1 peptide or deactivated Gαq(GDP). Addition
of activated or deactivated Gαi had no measurable
effect on the level of FRET. Keeping in mind that the affinity of
Gαq(GTPγS) for B2R is still high
under conditions where downregulation does not occur (see ref ()), as is the case here,
and that the affinity between Cav1 and activated Gαq is very high, this result shows that Gαq promotes
association between B2R and Cav1 and that the
affinity between Cav1 and Gαq(GDP) is not sufficiently
high to displace endogenous proteins from Cav1.

Discussion
In this study, we have determined the influence
of caveolae on
the properties of two GPCRs. The impetus for this work grew out of
observations that certain signaling proteins, such as Gαq, partition into caveolae domains and this partitioning alters
the properties of Gαq-generated signals (e.g., ref ()). Because many GPCRs that
are coupled to Gαi as well as Gαq have been reported to reside in caveolae, we wanted to determine
the influence of this domain on GPCR signaling. We used fluorescence
measurements on intact living cells to avoid some of the problems
in interpreting results using methods that involve cell disruption.
It is arguable that the fluorescent labels used in live cell studies
may influence our results. However, the subcellular localization of
these proteins and functional studies argue against this possibility.

We first found that Cav1, and presumably caveolae, are not evenly
distributed in FRT cells. It is important to note that the localization
of caveolae may differ depending on a variety of factors, including
the cell type, the confluency, the migration
state, or its stage in the mitotic cycle. In FRTcav+ cells, we observe Cav1 mainly on
the basolateral membrane and in areas of cell–cell contact,
supporting the idea that they may play a role in sensing contact inhibition
or cell communication by organizing proteins such as connexins.,, It is notable that in muscle
tissue in which cells are arranged in arrays, such as cardiomyocytes,
caveolae have a dense and fairly uniform membrane distribution along
actin lines (e.g., refs () and ()). In fluid cells, transformed cells, or immortalized cells, caveolae
are absent or their level is greatly diminished., We also observed that the basolateral distribution of B2R mirrors that of Cav1 in these cells while the distribution of μOR
does not.

We studied the effect of caveolae on the functional
and physical
properties of two types of GPCRs, B2R and μOR, which
have both been found to localize in caveolae domains.,− μOR and B2R are coupled to two different families
of G-proteins, Gαi and Gαq, respectively.
Cav1 expression does not appear to affect cAMP signals generated through
μOR and Gαi. It is noteworthy that stimulation
of the μOR–Gαi pathway may also increase
the level of intracellular Ca2+, possibly through coactivation
of a Gαq-coupled receptor or by the release of Gβγ
subunits that can then activate PLCβ2 or PLCβ3. However, in our hands, FRTwt and FRTcav+ cells
expressing μOR did not exhibit intracellular Ca2+ release. In contrast, Ca2+ signaling through the B2R pathways is clearly affected by the presence of caveolae
as seen in both single-cell and cell suspension measurements similar
to the behavior seen for muscarinic receptors. It is important to note that the effect of caveolae on
Ca2+ release is seen immediately after stimulation and
before detachment of B2R from Gαq and
the subsequent sequestration because Gαq–B2R FRET is constant for the first 2 min after stimulation.
This effect of caveolae on Ca2+ signals is interpreted
to be due to stabilization of the activated state of Gαq by strong Cav1 binding and release of Gβγ from
caveolae domains, which lengthens the time for recombination of the
heterotrimer. These studies and our findings
presented here suggest that both B2R and muscarinic receptors
may reside in or close to caveolae.

We find both receptors colocalize
with Cav1. It is notable that
Head and co-workers found that μOR and Cav3 colocalize to a
higher degree in adult cardiomyocytes, although direct comparison between their studies and ours is difficult
because Cav3 shows a much higher level of expression and is uniformly
distributed throughout cardiomyocytes as opposed to FRT cells. Additionally,
the C-terminus of Cav3 is significantly different from Cav1, which
may allow direct or indirect μOR binding. It is notable that
the resolution of colocalization measurements is quite low compared
to that of FRET, and we could not detect a significant amount of FRET
between μOR and Cav1 but did find a small (∼20%) amount
FRET between B2R and Cav1. Additionally, we observed a
larger amount of FRET between Gαq and Cav1, implying
that Gαq is localized within caveolae domains. We
also observe an equally large amount of FRET between Gαq and B2R (Figure  and ref ()). Together with our functional
results, these data show that Gαq can interact with
Cav1 and change its signaling properties while being in the proximity
of B2R. The lower level of FRET observed between B2R and Cav1 compared to that between Gαq and
Cav1 might be correlated to a weaker interaction, although it could
also be traced to orientations of eCFP and eYFP that make transfer
less favorable.

Our data show that Cav1 stabilizes Gαq-mediated
Ca2+ signals generated through bradykinin in B2R-transfected cells. This receptor population is large enough to
undergo FRET with Cav1 on the nanosecond time scale and to influence
Gαq signaling. The level of Gαq–Cav1
FRET is 2-fold higher than the level of B2R–Cav1
FRET, despite the high FRET values between B2R and Gαq. One explanation of this result is that GPCRs do not significantly
penetrate into Cav1 domains and their association depends on the strength
of their attached Gα family. Gαq, which interacts
strongly with Cav1, promotes caveolae localization of its coupled
receptors, while Gαi-coupled receptors, such as μOR,
have little interaction with these domains, although they might incorporate
into non-caveolae cholesterol-rich domains. Our fluorescence and functional
studies suggest that the interaction between B2R and Cav1
could be mediated through Gαq. We find a loss of
B2R–Cav1 FRET when Gαq is downregulated
or displaced from caveolae, and we find that Gαq but
not Gαi increases the level of FRET between B2R and Cav1. These results also suggest that GPCRs that do
not couple to Gαq, such as μOR would not localize
to caveolae with the overexpression of Gαq. The idea
that G-proteins mediate receptor association with caveolae is also
supported by observations that μOR and B2R can be
preassembled with their G-protein subunits, and that Gαq, but not other G-proteins, interacts with Cav1., Additionally, previous FRET studies suggest that Gαq can interact simultaneously with Gβγ, B2R,
and Cav1.,

Even though FRT cells have been used
extensively to study caveolae,
we tested the effects of caveolae on Ca2+ signals mediated
through bradykinin in A10 cells that endogenously express B2R and Cav1. Single-cell measurements show two distinct Ca2+ responses that we interpret to be due to caveolae and non-caveole
localized Gαq. The basis for these two populations
is uncertain. It is possible that only ∼30% of A10 cells have
fully formed caveolae domains where Gαq can properly
localize and impact the signaling. On the basis of the localization
of caveolae on plasma membranes, we suggest that the caveolae-localized
Gαq population is in regions of cell–cell
contact. This idea leads to the hypothesis that signaling in intercellular
regions differs from that in other regions of the cell.

It is
possible that instead of stabilizing the activated state
of Gαq, Cav1 mediates a step downstream of Gαq that is coupled to B2R and to muscarinic receptors.
We have previously found that PLCβ associates strongly in a
manner similar to that of Gαq in FRTwt and FRTcav+
cells, and because the activity of PLCβ is low in the basal
state, its activity mirrors the activation state of Gαq, which has been observed to be prolonged in the presence of caveolae. It is also possible that specific partitioning
of PIP2 in caveolae contributes to the observed changes
in Ca2+ release, although preferential localization of
PIP2 in caveolae domains is controversial (see ref ()). Interestingly, PIP2 was shown to localize to the periphery of caveolae, where we suggest that Gαq receptors
localize. Partitioning of PIP2 in the neck of caveolae
would be expected to impact the magnitude of calcium release, which
we see in FRTcav+ cells when they are stimulated with bradykinin,
but we find that caveolae impact the duration of the signal rather
than the extent (Figures b and ).

Support for the idea
that GPCRs coupled to Gαq interact more extensively
with caveolae than receptors coupled to
other G-protein families comes from several reports. Many receptors
that are reported to be localized and/or internalized via caveolae
are coupled to Gαq (i.e., B2R,,− endothelin Etb,, GnRH,, serotonin 5HT2, TRH, and muscarinic receptor M3). With the exception of somastostatin SST2,, which was shown by electron microscopy to go to caveolae domains
upon agonist stimulation, the two Gαi-coupled GPCRs
that have been reported to be in caveolae have been studied using
methods that require cellular disruption (sphingosine EDG-1 and muscarinic M2,). Additionally,
these receptors may be coupled to Gαq as well as
Gαi and form heterodimers with Gαq-coupled GPCRs. It is also notable that disruption of caveolae domains
by methyl-β-cyclodextrin attenuated the Ca2+ response
of the Gαq-coupled 5HTA receptor but did not affect
the release of Ca2+ from the Gαq-coupled
α1-adrenergic receptor. However,
it is possible that methyl-β-cyclodextrin treatment does not
completely disrupt the strong Cav1–Gαq association
that results in dissociation of Gβγ subunits resulting
in prolonged Ca2+ signals.

Localization of signaling
proteins in caveolae would be expected
to impact their signaling properties if this sequestration prevented
or promoted access to proteins in their pathway. The studies here
suggest that caveolae may impact Gαq signaling without
a direct incorporation of GPCRs into the domain. This idea might explain
many of the controversial reports pertaining to GPCR–caveolae
associations. Super-resolution studies will aim to improve our understanding
of the organization of these domains.

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Drs. Deborah Brown, Yuanjian Guo, Urszula Golebiewska,
and Finly Philip for their helpful comments throughout this work.

Abbreviations
A10 cellsrat aortic smooth muscle cells

B2Rbradykinin
type 2 receptor

Cav1caveolein-1

eGFP, eCFP, and eYFPenhanced green, cyano, and yellow fluorescent proteins, respectively

FRETFörster
resonance energy transfer

FRT
cellsFischer rat thyroid cells

GPCRG-protein-coupled receptor

μORμ-opioid
receptor

PIP2phosphoinositol 4,5-bisphosphate

PLCβinositol specific mammalian phospholipase
Cβ.

