A high human plasma low-density
lipoprotein cholesterol concentration is a risk factor for cardiovascular
disease (CVD), which causes ∼400000 deaths per year in the
United States, and its lowering by the
statin class of hypolipidemic drugs reduces the number of CVD events.
In contrast, the plasma concentration of high-density lipoprotein
cholesterol (HDL-C) is negatively correlated with the number of CVD
events. However, this correlation is imperfect because the number
of CVD events is also determined by HDL functionality. Thus, the mechanisms by which various HDL subclasses are
formed are important in identifying their functional determinants.

Apo A-I and apo A-II, the most abundant HDL apolipoproteins (∼50
and ∼25 μM, respectively, in human plasma), microsolubilize
macrophage phospholipids (PL) and free cholesterol (FC) via ABCA1,
giving nascent HDL., FC loading of macrophages increases
the rate of efflux of FC to apo A-I (∼5-fold), the size of
the resulting nascent HDL, their FC/PL ratio, and the fraction of
apo A-I on large particles. Various nascent
HDL are also formed from apolipoproteins by their intrahepatic ABCA1-independent
lipidation in the endoplasmic reticulum followed by ABCA1-dependent
lipidation in Golgi and at the plasma membrane. Half of apo A-I is secreted lipid-free and later remodeled
by lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT), which mediates the
transition from discoidal to spherical HDL., Human
apo A-II, unlike most mammalian apo A-IIs, contains Cys6 and in plasma
is present primarily as the homodimer. In contrast to apo A-I, apo
A-II is fully lipidated and dimeric early during its intrahepatic
processing on particles without apo A-I or apo E, and only after secretion
does discoidal apo A-II HDL fuse with apo A-I- and apo E-containing
particles.,

In vitro microsolubilization of dimyristoylphosphatidylcholine
(DMPC) multilamellar vesicles (MLV) by apo A-I produces rHDL, the
in vitro analogue of cellular apo lipidation. This mechanism has been
verified in other systems in which DMPC was replaced by more physiological
lipids representative of the plasma membrane. FC has a profound effect on the dynamics of formation of rHDL from
DMPC and apo A-I. The kinetics of rHDL formation is fastest at ∼12.5
mol % cholesterol, a composition that
produces the maximal number of defects between lipid clusters where
apo A-I inserts. As with ABCA1-mediated
apo A-I lipidation, FC increases the size
and number of rHDL species formed from apo A-I and DMPC. The formation of rHDL from DMPC and apo A-I
is rapid up to 20 mol % FC, above which the rate decreases to nil.

Less is known about the effects of FC
on the formation of rHDL
from apo A-II. Ample data show that apo A-II is more lipophilic than
apo A-I. Prolonged centrifugation of HDL sheds apo A-I but not apo
A-II; apo A-II displaces apo A-I from
HDL, and denaturants or heat disrupts
HDL structure with the release of lipid-free apo A-I but not apo A-II. Many proteins that target HDL (LCAT, hepatic
lipase, lipid transfer proteins,− and streptococcal serum opacity factor) disrupt HDL with the concomitant release of
lipid-free apo A-I but not apo A-II. Given its greater lipophilicity
versus that of apo A-I, we hypothesized apo A-II would form rHDL from
MLV with &gt;20 mol % FC, and given its smaller size, the rate of
association
of rcm apo A-II would be faster than that of apo A-II at all FC mole
percentages in DMPC. We addressed these hypotheses by studying the
kinetics of rHDL formation and measuring the compositions of rHDL
formed from monomeric and dimeric apo A-II as a function of the initial
FC mole percentage in DMPC.

Materials and Methods
Multilamellar Vesicle Preparation and Labeling
Multilamellar
vesicles (MLV) were prepared from [3H]DMPC synthesized
as described previously and [14C]FC (Perkin-Elmer, Inc.). The specific activity of DMPC was 0.110
± 0.001 μCi/mg. Undiluted [14C]FC, i.e., negligible
FC mass, was added to the stock solution of [3H]DMPC so
that the activity of [3H]DMPC was 12 times that of [14C]FC and 14C spillover into the 3H
channel of the scintillation counter was minimized. This solution
was combined with various amounts of cold FC to give various FC mole
percentages. DMPC and FC were dissolved in a chloroform/methanol mixture
(2/1, v/v); the solvent was evaporated under nitrogen and the residue
dried in vacuo for &gt;30 min. The dried lipids were dispersed into
Tris-buffered
saline [TBS (10 mM Tris, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM azide, and 1 mM EDTA)]
by being vortexed, after which the lipids were subjected to more than
three cycles of warming to &gt;37 °C with vortexing and freezing
to −20 °C. Radiochemical data were corrected for 14C spillover into 3H counts.

Determinations of rHDL Stoichiometry
rHDL containing
apo A-II were prepared by several methods. DMPC was the phospholipid
of choice because at its transition temperature it spontaneously forms
rHDL, which can be easily separated from the MLV by centrifugation.
rHDL are optically transparent at 325 nm, whereas DMPC MLV are turbid.
Thus, turbidimetric titration of apo A-II with DMPC MLV was used to
determine the rHDL stoichiometry, the point at which additional MLV
are in stoichiometric excess over apo A-II and turbidity appears and
increases. Apo A-II aliquots were stirred for &gt;18 h with various
amounts
of DMPC MLV at the DMPC transition temperature of 24 °C, after
which each mixture was analyzed for turbidity by right angle light
scattering (325 nm) using a Jobin Yvon (Edison, NJ) Spex Fluorolog-3
FL3–22 spectrofluorimeter equipped with a Peltier heating–cooling
device. The DMPC/apo A-II molar ratios in rHDL were determined by
extrapolation.

Preparation and Analysis of rHDL Formed from DMPC and Apo-II
Apo A-II was isolated as described previously. Reduced and carboxymethylated (rcm) apo A-II was prepared
by reducing dimeric apo A-II with dithiothreitol and treating the
monomeric product apo A-II with excess iodoacetic acid. Apo A-II and rcm apo A-II concentrations were
determined spectrophotometrically. rHDL
were prepared from apo A-II and DMPC (1—5 mg in 1 mL) containing
0–30 mol % FC under three conditions: spontaneous association
of apolipoprotein with excess lipid (10 mg of DMPC and 1 mg of apo
A-II, corresponding to a 256/1 molar ratio), with stoichiometric amounts
of DMPC (65/1 molar ratio), or by dialysis of stoichiometric amounts
of apolipoprotein and mixed DMPC/cholate micelles, a method that “catalyzes”
apolipoprotein–lipid association., For spontaneous
rHDL formation with stoichiometric or excess DMPC (10/1, w/w), the
apolipoprotein and [3H]DMPC MLV containing 0–30
mol % [14C]FC were mixed and incubated for &gt;18 h at
24
°C, and the unbound DMPC sedimented at 16000g for 30 min in an Eppendorf 5415 C centrifuge at 4 °C. The rHDL
in the supernatant were collected and separated by size exclusion
chromatography (SEC) over tandem columns of Superose HR6 (GE Healthcare)
and the collected fractions β-counted. The sedimented DMPC was
solubilized in 0.5 mL of ethanol, and an aliquot thereof was β-counted.
SEC analysis showed no MLV in the void volume, from which we conclude
that MLV sedimentation is quantitative. In the third method, DMPC
(2.5 mg) and various amounts of FC were reduced to dryness as described
above, resolubilized in 9.5 mg of cholate in 0.5 mL of TBS to which
1 mg of apo A-II in 0.5 mL of TBS was added, and incubated while being
stirred for &gt;18 h at 24 °C. After exhaustive dialysis versus
TBS, excess lipid, if any, was sedimented and the supernatant analyzed
by SEC as described above.

Kinetics of rHDL Formation
The MLV were preincubated
at the DMPC transition temperature, 24 °C, for 10 min, after
which apo A-II was added to final concentrations of 0.83 mg of DMPC/mL
and 0.33 mg of apo A-II/mL (65/1 DMPC/apo A-II molar ratio) in a final
volume of 3 mL. The kinetics of rHDL formation were determined while
the mixture was being stirred according to the change in turbidity
(T) measured as above. The data were fit to the three-parameter
exponential function T = T0 + ae–kt, where k is the rate constant.

Cross-Linking
rHDL particles (∼1 mg/mL) were
cross-linked with BS3 [bis(sulfosuccinimidyl) suberate]
at 4 °C in 10 mM HEPES and 100 mM NaCl (pH 7.4) at a BS3/apo A-II molar ratio of 100/1 for 24 h as previously described. The reactions were terminated by adding 1 M
Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) at a final concentration of 100 mM. The rHDL samples
were analyzed on 4 to 20% gradient sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE) gels and stained to visualize
the apo A-II bands. The sizes of apo A-II oligomers were determined
by comparison with standards of known molecular masses (Precision
Plus Protein Standards, Bio-Rad) and imaged with the Gel Doc EZ System
(Bio-Rad).

Results
The stoichiometry of apo A-II–DMPC association
was determined
by incubating various concentrations of DMPC MLV with a fixed concentration
of apo A-II for &gt;18 h and measuring the turbidity of the samples
by
right angle light scattering at 325 nm (Figure A). At low DMPC/apo A-II ratios, the light scattering was low and
decreased up to a molar ratio of 65/1, above which the turbidity increased.
From the increased light scattering due to excess DMPC MLV, we inferred
a maximal stoichiometry for rHDL formation from DMPC and apo A-II
at 24 °C of ∼65/1. The kinetics of microsolubilization
determined under similar conditions (Figure B) showed a decrease in the microsolubilization rate from 17.0 to
5.5 × 10–3 s–1 with an increase
in the DMPC/apo A-II molar ratio from 20/1 to 70/1. The rate constants
at 60/1 and 70/1 DMPC/apo A-II ratios were similar, 5.6 and 5.5 ×
10–3 s–1, respectively.

Apo A-II concentration
dependence of rHDL formation. (A) Determination
of the DMPC/apo A-II stoichiometry according to the increase in turbidity
produced by excess MLV. The inset shows the maximal stoichiometry
of 65/1 for solubilization of DMPC by apo A-II was determined by extrapolation.
(B) Kinetics of formation of rHDL from DMPC as a function of added
apo A-II according to the disappearance of MLV turbidity. The DMPC/apo
A-II molar ratios for the top (70/1) to bottom (20/1) curves are given.
The black and gray curves are the data and the fit of the data, respectively.
The inset shows the first-order rate constant calculated from curve
fits of Figure B as a function
of DMPC/apo A-II molar ratio.

Differential Effects of FC Mole Percentage on the Partitioning
of FC into rHDL and MLV
To investigate the effect of FC on
the formation of rHDL from DMPC MLV, we conducted kinetic studies
at stoichiometries of 65/1 for apo A-II and 32.5/1 for rcm apo A-II,
reasoning the latter gives the same number of DMPC per helical regions
as 65/1 for apo A-II. For both apo A-II and rcm apo A-II, the decay
curves for 0–15 mol % FC are similar and clustered, and distinct
from the curves at 20 and 30 mol % FC, at which solubilization essentially
stops (Figure A,B). The rate constants for
rHDL formation increase by 40% for rcm apo A-II and 15% for apo A-II
as the starting MLV FC mole percentage increases from 0 to 15% (Figure C). The effects of FC mole percentage on the association
of DMPC with apo A-II and rcm apo A-II were followed under three conditions:
excess lipid, a stoichiometric lipid/apo A-II ratio (65/1 and 32.5/1
for dimeric and rcm apo A-II, respectively), and cholate dialysis
of a stoichiometric lipid/apo A-II ratio. In the latter, cholate is
a well-known “catalyst” of apolipoprotein–lipid
association. The dependence of incorporation of DMPC into rHDL was
a function of method but similar for apo A-II and rcm apo A-II (Figure A–C). Under stoichiometric conditions, with
or without cholate dialysis (Figure A,B),
the percent of the starting DMPC incorporated into rHDL was nearly
quantitative at low FC mole percentages but decreased rapidly between
15 and 30 mol %. Under conditions of excess DMPC without FC, ∼50%
of the starting DMPC was incorporated into rHDL (Figure C). With increasing amounts of FC, up to 15 mol %, the amount
of DMPC incorporated into rHDL increased to &gt;85% and then declined
at higher FC mol percentages, falling to just under 50% at 30 mol
% FC in the initial MLV. Interestingly, the FC mole percentages in
the supernatant (rHDL) and the pellet (unreacted DMPC MLV) were different,
likely reflecting the preference of the apolipoprotein for domains
with a specific FC mole percentage (Figure D,E). For both apo A-II and rcm apo A-II, the FC mole percentages
in the supernatant (rHDL) were similar to that of the starting MLV
up to 10 and 15 mol % for rHDL formed from stoichiometric (Figure D) and excess (Figure E)
amounts of DMPC. However, above 10 and 15 mol %, respectively, the
FC mole percentage in the products diverged to be higher for the MLV
pellet and lower for the rHDL supernatant than the initial FC mole
percentage. The product rHDL FC mole percentage plateaued at ∼15
mol %. These effects were the same for apo A-II and rcm apo A-II.

Kinetics
of solubilization of DMPC MLV by apolipoproteins according
to the reduction in MLV turbidity at 24 °C as a function of FC
mole percentage. Experiments were conducted with stoichiometric amounts
of DMPC and apo A-II, i.e., 65/1 molar ratio: (A) apo A-II and (B)
rcm apo A-II. For both apolipoproteins, decay curves for 0–15
mol % FC are closely spaced and are distinct from curves at 20 and
30 mol % FC. (C) Plots of the rate constants for the solubilization
by apo A-II (●) and rcm apo A-II (○) vs FC mole percentage.

Distribution of FC between rHDL (supernatant) and MLV
(pellet).
(A–C) Fraction of DMPC incorporated into rHDL, calculated as
the total counts in the sample minus the counts in the MLV pellet
obtained by centrifugation. (A) rHDL formation with stoichiometric
amounts of DMPC and apolipoproteins. (B) Cholate-catalyzed rHDL formation
of stoichiometric amounts of DMPC and apolipoproteins. (C) rHDL formation
in the presence of excess DMPC: (●) apo A-II and (○)
rcm apo A-II. (D) Stoichiometric DMPC/apolipoprotein ratio and (E)
excess DMPC. Both panels show the FC mole percentage in the supernatant
(rHDL) and pellet (residual MLV), calculated from the ratio of 14C to 3H radioactivity in the supernatant and pellet,
as a function of FC mole percentage in the starting MLV, as labeled
in panel D. The dashed gray lines in D and E represent the expected
FC mole percentage in rHDL if FC were incorporated in proportion to
the initial FC mole percentage.

Differential Effects of FC Mole Percentage on the Size of rHDL
SEC was used to determine the size and FC mole percentage of rHDL
formed from DMPC and apo A-II as a function of the initial FC mole
percentage. To increase the detection sensitivity for minor peaks,
starting MLV were radiolabeled with [3H]DMPC and [14C]FC, and SEC elution profiles for absorbance at 280 nm, 3H, and 14C were determined. rHDL prepared from
stoichiometric amounts of DMPC and apo A-II with 0 and 5 mol % FC
eluted as a single SEC peak (Figure A,B).
At 10 mol % FC, a second peak with a smaller elution volume (i.e.,
larger size) appeared (Figure C), and at 15
and 20 mol % FC, yet a third earlier eluting (still larger size) peak
appeared (Figure D,E). The co-elution of radioactivity
and absorbance at 15 and 20 mol % FC indicates rHDL is formed. At
30 mol % FC, very little rHDL was formed. As the FC mole percentage
is increased, the amount of lipid-free apo A-II, which elutes at 36
mL, also increases. Strikingly, as shown by the increase in the 14C/3H ratio, the larger rHDL have larger amounts
of FC.

SEC analysis of the effect of FC on the formation of rHDL from
apo A-II with DMPC. (A–F) Data collected with stoichiometric
amounts of DMPC and apo A-II. (G–L) Data collected with an
excess of DMPC. (M–R) Data collected using the cholate dialysis
method. Panel A contains the legend for all plots. The inset above
each panel is the 14C/3H ratio; the dashed line
denotes the starting 14C/3H ratio.

The effect of FC on the size and composition of
rHDL prepared from
excess DMPC was distinct from that prepared under stoichiometric conditions,
with relatively more of the larger rHDL formed at each FC mole percentage.
While at 0 mol % FC the rHDL eluted as a single SEC peak (Figure G), at 5 mol % a second peak appeared (Figure H), which was the dominant peak at 10 mol % FC (Figure I). At 15 mol %, the next larger peak predominated
(Figure J), and at 20 mol % FC, this peak
and a yet larger peak were detected (Figure K). With excess DMPC, these two larger peaks were also detected at
30 mol %, although much of the apo A-II was lipid-free (Figure K,L). The co-elution of radioactivity and absorbance
at 15 and 20 mol % FC indicates rHDL is formed. At 30 mol %, very
little rHDL was formed, as indicated by the amount of lipid-free apo
A-II, which elutes at 36 mL. Under conditions of excess DMPC, relatively
larger amounts of the larger rHDL products were formed at a given
FC mole percentage compared to stoichiometric amounts of DMPC. With
both stoichiometric and excess DMPC, increasing the level of FC to
15 mol % resulted in larger rHDL, enriched in FC. However, additional
FC in the starting MLV (20–30 mol %) resulted in a decreased
level of rHDL formation.

Finally, the effect of cholesterol
on rHDL formation by cholate
dialysis was determined. In contrast to spontaneous rHDL formation
by the first two methods, which gave larger particles as a function
of increasing FC level, the cholate method gave only one particle
size irrespective of the initial FC mole percentage (Figure M–R). In addition, our data showed that the
FC mole percentage incorporated into rHDL was lower than in the starting
MLV. We conducted a control experiment with DMPC/apo A-II rHDL assembly
at 10 mol % FC to address the possibility that FC escaped during dialysis.
The resulting rHDL was centrifuged to pellet unreacted material. Our
data showed that 96.5 ± 7.5% of the [3H]DMPC remained
in the supernatant, whereas a smaller amount of [14C]FC,
85.7 ± 7.6%, was recovered. Moreover, the 3H/14C ratios of the predialysis sample, supernatant, and pellet
were 12.6 ± 0.5, 11.7 ± 0.8, and 4.0 ± 0.4, respectively.
Thus, FC-rich lipid domains are partially excluded from the (small)
rHDL product obtained by the cholate dialysis method. The amount of
rHDL formed was constant up to 15 mol % and then declined thereafter,
while the amount of lipid-free apo A-II increased. Finally, as the
FC in the initial mixture increased from 5 to 30 mol %, the fraction
of initial cholesterol in the MLV that appeared in the product rHDL
decreased. As in Figures  and , the SEC data of the rHDL formed from DMPC and rcm apo A-II
were similar to those of apo A-II (Figure 1 of the ).

The effects of FC mole percentage
on rHDL formation are summarized
in Figure , which shows the following. The
FC mole percentage in the smallest rHDL (peak I) is similar to that
of the starting mixture at 5 mol % FC and increases linearly with
respect to the initial FC mole percentage with values that are lower
than that in the respective starting MLV (Figure A, gray dashed line). In contrast, the FC mole percentage
in the larger rHDL (peaks II and III) is greater than that of the
initial mixture and increases linearly with an increasing initial
FC mole percentage. The slopes of the lines for peaks I–III
in Figure A are similar. FC preferentially
associates with larger rHDL (peaks II and III). The relationship between
initial FC mole percentages and FC compositions of the four different
rHDL formed from excess lipid (Figure B) is
qualitatively similar, i.e., parallel lines, to what was observed
with stoichiometric amounts of DMPC (Figure A). However, at a given initial FC mole percentage, the compositions
of rHDL in peaks I–III were more similar to each other when
formed from excess versus stoichiometric amounts of lipid. At a given
initial FC mole percentage, the FC mole percentages in rHDL formed
from stoichiometric amounts of lipid were higher than that formed
from excess lipid.

FC mole percentage in rHDL of various sizes as a function
of initial
FC mole percentage in MLV. rHDL were formed from stoichiometric ratios
of DMPC and apo A-II (A) and excess DMPC (B). Compositions were calculated
from the data depicted in Figure . The dashed
gray line is a plot of the expected rHDL FC mole percentage vs the
initial FC mole percentage if FC and DMPC were incorporated into rHDL
at the ratio in the starting MLV.

Free Energy of Transfer of FC among Various rHDL Species
Given that the various rHDL formed under each condition are at equilibrium,
one can calculate a free energy of transfer of cholesterol from one
rHDLi to another rHDLj as ΔG = −RT ln(mol % FCi/mol % FCj), where mol % FCi and mol % FCj are the mole percentages for cholesterol
in two differently sized rHDL formed concurrently at a given FC mole
percentage. According to this calculation, differences in the free
energies of transfer of FC between coexisting rHDL are small, with
the greatest differences existing for the transfer from the smallest
to the largest rHDL; e.g., at 20 mol % FC, the free energy of transfer
of FC from the smallest to the largest particle is approximately −1.2
kJ. Given that the curves are nearly parallel, at any given initial
MLV FC mole percentage, the differences in the free energies of transfer
of FC between peaks are similar.

Cross-Linking rHDL
Cross-linking studies were conducted
to determine the number of apo A-II molecules per rHDL particle as
a function of size. rHDL were cross-linked with BS3 and
separated into fractions [peaks I–III (Figure A–D)], which were pooled, collected, and analyzed by
native PAGE and SDS–PAGE. According to native PAGE, each peak
comprises a homogeneous species (Figure E)
with respective Stokes diameters of ∼11, 13, and 17 nm. After
delipidation, SDS–PAGE (Figure F) showed
that each rHDL peak contained two major cross-linked species as follows.
Peak I had molecular masses of ∼60 and 71 kDa (3.5 and 4 apo
A-II dimers, respectively) and peaks II and III had molecular masses
of 97 and 124 kDa (∼6 and 7 apo A-II dimers, respectively)
and 130 and 151 kDa (7 and 9 apo A-II dimers, respectively), respectively.
The relationship between particle circumference, calculated from the
Stokes diameter, and the number of apo A-II per rHDL is shown in Figure G.

Analysis of cross-linked rHDL. rHDL were prepared from
apo A-II
and DMPC containing various FC mole percentages as labeled (A–D)
and peaks I–III isolated by SEC. (E) Native gel of pooled fractions
for each peak and standards for calculation of the Stokes diameter.
(F) Scan of a 4 to 20% gradient SDS–PAGE gel of cross-linked
delipidated proteins in each peak along with molecular mass standards.
(G) From the Stokes diameters, the circumference of the rHDL in each
peak was calculated and plotted vs the number of apo A-II per particle.

Discussion
Kinetics of rHDL Formation
Although microsolubilization
of DMPC by apolipoproteins has been used as a model of HDL assembly
via ABCA1, few studies have been conducted in the presence of FC,
the lipid most central to reverse cholesterol transport (RCT). In
a recent study, we showed the size of apo A-I rHDL increased as a
function of FC mole percentage in MLV and at high FC mole percentages,
the reaction was incomplete. Given apo
A-II is more lipophilic than apo A-I, we hypothesized apo A-II would
associate efficiently even at high FC mole percentages and tested
the effects of FC on the microsolubilization of DMPC by apo A-II and
rcm apo A-II.

Although, as our SEC data show (Figure  and Figure 1 of the ), the reaction products of apo A-II and rcm apo
A-II with DMPC are remarkably similar at each FC mole percentage,
there are differences in reaction kinetics. In the absence of FC,
the rate of solubilization of rcm apo A-II with DMPC was ∼2
times faster than that of apo A-II (Figure C). In the context of the cluster model of lipid–apolipoprotein
association, this is likely due to the size distribution of defects
in the DMPC surface; all defects that can accommodate the insertion
of apo A-II can also accommodate rcm apo A-II. However, rcm apo A-II
can fit into smaller surface defects that exclude 2-fold larger apo
A-II molecule. The rate of rHDL formation increases linearly with
the addition of up to 20 mol % FC, an increase that is greater for
rcm apo A-II (+40%) than for apo A-II (+15%), suggesting that added
cholesterol induces the formation of more small defects that accommodate
rcm apo A-II than large ones that accommodate both apolipoproteins.

Kinetic measurements at each FC mole percentage between 15 and
20 mol % revealed a change in the “quality” of the DMPC
interface exactly at 20 mol %, at and above which the reaction was
slow and incomplete; i.e., unreacted apo A-II and rcm apo A-II remained
at the end of the reaction. This was observed for apo A-II and rcm
apo A-II, and similar studies of apo A-I also showed a decrease in
the level of rHDL formation at 20 mol %, although a percent-by-percent
titration was not performed. The rates
of association of apolipoproteins with DMPC decrease dramatically
at 20 mol % FC for apo A-I, apo A-II, and rcm apo A-II, which have
different sizes and lipophilicities, suggesting that the effect is
intrinsic to the properties of DMPC at 20 mol % FC and independent
of the properties of the apolipoproteins. There is some other evidence
for this. The rate of penetration of a small fluorescent dye into
DMPC peaks at 20 mol % FC and decreases ∼200-fold between 20
and 30 mol % FC. According to differential
scanning calorimetry, as the FC mole percentage in DPPC is increased
to 20 mol %, a mix of pure phospholipid and cholesterol-rich phases
is replaced by a single FC–DPPC phase., The rate of rHDL formation at 24 °C increases up to 20 mol
% FC but above this drops precipitously (Figure ). We propose that this effect is due to an increase in the number
of defects with an increasing FC mole percentage at the DMPC surface
(Figure A) until at 20 mol % FC the reaction
does not occur. This FC mole percentage corresponds to a DMPC/FC ratio
of 4/1. We propose that at this composition the failure of rHDL to
form is due to close packing of the lipids and the near total loss
of surface defects needed for the insertion of apo A-II; this is illustrated
in Figure B, in which the relative surface
areas of DMPC and FC are 7 and 4 nm2, respectively. Thus,
despite its greater lipophilicity, and contrary to our initial hypothesis,
apo A-II cannot penetrate the lipid surface at 20 mol % FC because
of the absence of defects, which are required for insertion of apolipoproteins.
Even rcm apo A-II, which is half the molecular mass of apo A-II, does
not penetrate the lipid efficiently, so defects, if present, must
be small.

Models of lipid packing of FC in DMPC and rHDL formation. (A) Packing
at ∼15 mol % FC showing defects as white space, which permit
insertion of apo A-II leading to rHDL formation. (B) Close packing
at 20 mol % FC (4/1 DMPC/FC), showing the absence of major defects
and no reaction with apo A-II.

Apo A-II and rcm ApoA-II Select FC-Poor Domains for rHDL Formation
Comparison of the FC mole percentage in unreacted MLV and rHDL
showed apolipoproteins preferentially associate with FC-poor domains
for formation of small rHDL (peak I) and increasing FC mole percentages
in larger rHDL (peaks II and III). At all initial FC mole percentages
tested, the FC mole percentage in unreacted MLV in the sedimented
pellet was always equal to or greater than that of the starting mixture;
the opposite was true for rHDL found in the supernatant (Figure D,E). On the basis of the FC mole percentage in
the rHDL isolated by SEC, we observed parallel increases in FC mole
percentage in each rHDL (peaks I–III) with the FC mole percentage
in the two or three rHDL formed at a given initial FC mole percentage
increasing with rHDL size (in Figure A, compare
●, ○, and ▼ at a given FC mole percentage). These
data show that large rHDL accommodate more FC than small rHDL. The
simultaneous formation of rHDL of different sizes from the same reaction
mixture likely begins in the context of coexisting large cholesterol-rich
and smaller cholesterol-poor domains within the MLV. Those apolipoproteins
that circumscribe cholesterol-rich and cholesterol-poor domains are
destined to form large cholesterol-rich and small cholesterol-poor
rHDL, respectively. In contrast, under stoichiometric conditions in
which rHDL formation is catalyzed by cholate, only small rHDL form
irrespective of the initial FC mole percentage and very little FC
is incorporated into the rHDL, even at high FC mole percentages. According
to differential scanning calorimetry, mixed DMPC/Na cholate SUV exhibit
sharp low-temperature and broad high-temperature endotherms consistent
with two coexisting immiscible phases. The sharp transition corresponds
to a relatively pure PC phase, whereas the other, which like FC/DMPC
MLV exhibits a broad endotherm, is a cholate/DMPC phase. Thus, on the basis of our data, in the presence
of cholate the apolipoproteins preferentially associate with the relatively
pure DMPC phase that gives rise to the sharp transition and from which
most FC is excluded.

Given that apolipoproteins associate with
pure phospholipids and not directly with FC, under stoichiometric
conditions, FC and apolipoproteins compete for binding to DMPC, a
competition that is expected to be on the side of FC because of its
much lower aqueous solubility. Thus, even at 5 mol % FC, a small amount
of apo A-II is lipid-free, and this amount increases with an increasing
FC mole percentage in the starting mixture (Figure B–F). In contrast, under conditions of excess DMPC
(∼260/1), there is no lipid-free apo A-II until FC in the initial
mixture reaches 20 mol %. Thus, with excess DMPC present, competition
between FC and apo A-II for binding sites on the MLV is not apparent
until very high FC mole percentages are reached.

FC Modifies the Stoichiometry of Apo A-II in rHDL
In
the absence of FC, the major rHDL peak appears to contain 3.5 and
4 dimers of apo A-II per particle. In their studies of the configuration
of apo A-II in rHDL containing an unsaturated PC, Silva et al. observed
a stoichiometry of 4 apo A-II per rHDL. Given the unlikely occurrence of a monomer of apo A-II, we opine
that cross-linking causes abnormal migration of one of the species
and that the actual stoichiometry of both is 4/1. Similarly, the likely
stoichiometries for peaks II and III are 6 and 8, respectively, as
suggested by a plot of measured stoichiometry versus rHDL circumference
(Figure G). Thus, as with apo A-I, as the FC mole percentage in the initial incubation
is increased, the size of rHDL increases in a nearly quantized way,
which accommodates dimers of 4, 6, and 8 apo A-II molecules per rHDL.
As such, the even-numbered stoichiometry permits similar associations
between each of the dimers so the simple model of cross-links reported
by Silva et al. would be preserved.

Physiological Relevance
Most studies indicate that
the exchangeable apolipoproteins form similar structures with DMPC
and unsaturated phospholipids that are found in vivo. Thus, the FC
content of plasma membranes is likely to control nascent HDL size
in vivo. Although most of the exchangeable apolipoproteins tested
elicit FC efflux from macrophages via ABCA1, this process is likely
not relevant to human apo A-II because unlike apo A-I, there have
been no verified examples of lipid-free apo A-II being formed in plasma
in response to physicochemical or biological perturbations. Intrahepatically,
however, apo A-II forms HDL particles that contain no apo A-I or apo
E. In studies with HepG2 cells, we found that the HepG2 cell lysate
consists of lipoproteins containing apo A-II with no apo A-I or E,
and according to their elution SEC volumes, these particles are larger
than the intracellular lipid-poor apo A-I nascent HDL. Larger HDL in media of HepG2 cells contain apo E. This
suggests, but does not prove, that early intracellular forms of apo
A-II-containing lipoproteins are FC-rich compared to nascent apo A-I
HDL and convert to spherical HDL found in plasma after secretion and
undergoing LCAT-mediated fusion with apo A-I-containing HDL.

Two competing forces determine the size
of sterol-containing rHDL. The first is domain size, and this is a
function of the type of sterol, the kind of sterol–PC association,
and the sterol concentration; the higher the free energy of association
of the lipids, i.e., PL and sterol, the larger the domains. The second
is the energy derived from the transfer of apolipoprotein helical
and nonhelical segments to the surface of the bilayer where many of
the nonhelical segments adopt a helical conformation. The observation
of two or three different sizes of rHDL from a given apolipoprotein/sterol/PL
mixture illustrates small differences in the energy of formation of
different rHDL and argues for the coexistence of different size domains.
If our model is correct, the size of rHDL is an indication of the
size of the domains from which it formed. Apolipoproteins do not remove
domains with different sizes and/or compositions preferentially. If
this were the case, one would expect that the composition of products
when the lipids are in great excess would reflect the most “reactive”
domains and differ from the product mixture obtained when the lipids
are mixed at their stoichiometric ratios. Our previous studies with
apo A-I demonstrated that apo A-I formed a series of rHDL of discrete
sizes from both model DMPC/FC MLV and macrophage cell membranes. This study indicates apo A-II is capable of
forming a similar series of nascent discoidal HDL from interations
with membranes. The striking observation that rHDL formation abruptly
stops above 20 mol % FC in our model MLV system suggests a similar
limit in vivo in macrophage intracellular or plasma membranes may
preclude the export of FC from cholesterol-overloaded foam cells.

Supporting Information Available
SEC analysis of the effect
of FC on rHDL formation from rcm apo A-II with DMPC (Figure 1). This
material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi3011994_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

