Quantitative measurement of proteins
is one of the most commonly performed analyses in biochemistry. These
measurements indicate changes in protein expression and posttranslational
modifications that help explain the functional states of enzymes,
pathways, and networks. For almost 40 years, the mainstay of protein
quantitation has been the Western blot, which employs antibodies to
detect proteins transferred from polyacrylamide gels to nitrocellulose
or polyvinylidene fluoride membranes., Western blotting
has limitations, mainly related to the performance of the antibodies.
Most antibodies used for immunoblotting detect multiple bands in complex
protein mixtures, but analysts typically ignore these and focus on
the “correct” molecular weight range of the protein.
Antibodies also may not distinguish highly similar homologues and
sequence variants arising from polymorphisms and mutations. Finally,
some antibodies can detect specific modifications (e.g., phosphotyrosine),
but few can reliably distinguish between different specific modification
sites on proteins.

Mass spectrometry (MS) provides a next-generation
platform that overcomes many of the limitations of Western blotting
and provides new capabilities for protein analysis. The field of MS-based
proteomics has grown tremendously over the past 15 years and has had
a broad impact in biochemistry and cell biology (for recent reviews,
see refs () and ()). Perhaps the most important
advance over the past 5 years is the growth of MS-based, targeted
protein measurement. A key distinction in proteome analysis platforms
is between global profiling and targeted quantitation methods. Global
profiling methods employ nondirected analyses (e.g., shotgun proteomics)
that yield protein inventories accompanied by quantitative measurements
of varying precision. Quantitative estimates in global profiling analyses
are achieved through isotope labeling strategies, such as iTRAQ or SILAC, or by label-free
strategies, such as spectral counting, and provide a basis for relative quantitative comparisons between
samples. The limitations of these strategies arise directly from the
semirandom
sampling methods used to acquire tandem mass spectra (MS/MS spectra)
for peptides in complex proteome digests. Higher-abundance peptides
are sampled frequently and yield more precise measurements, whereas
lower-abundance peptides are sampled less frequently and yield less
precise measurements. Moreover, lower-abundance peptides may be sampled
in some global analyses, but not in others, thus creating a “missing
data” problem that complicates statistical analyses.

In contrast to global profiling, targeted
analyses measure specific peptides. This approach originated with
work by Desiderio and colleagues, who used stable isotope-labeled
standards to measure peptide hormones by field desorption MS. The application of newer-generation electrospray
liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS)
instruments allowed the development of targeted peptide quantitation
over the past decade. The underlying concept is that proteins may
be quantified by measuring their specific constituent peptides following
proteolytic digestion. The acquisition of data only for the selected
peptides allows measurements with higher precision, sensitivity, and
throughput. Protein quantitation by selected measurement of surrogate
peptides is the most rapidly growing application of MS in proteome
analyses. MS-based targeted protein assays offer two compelling advantages
over immunoassays, the first being the ability to systematically configure
a specific assay for essentially any protein or posttranslationally
modified protein form, without the requirement for an antibody. The
second is the ability of targeted MS assays to perform multiplexed
analysis of many peptides in a single analysis. Targeted peptide-based
protein assays allow large-scale, quantitative proteomic analysis
projects and have found widespread application in the systematic development
of assays for protein biomarker validation studies. The rapid maturation
of analysis methods and software for targeted quantitation, together
with the widespread accessibility of applicable MS instruments, offers
biochemists a transformative platform for systematic, reliable, and
essentially universal protein quantitation. Accordingly, our focus
in this review is on the application of targeted protein quantitation
in biochemistry.

Protein Quantitation by Targeted Analysis
of Peptides
The concept underlying targeted protein measurements
via peptide quantitation is illustrated in Figure . Peptides with sequences unique to the target protein are
selected as surrogates for the parent protein. Although tryptic peptides
typically are selected and offer key advantages (see below), other
sequence-specific digestions may be employed. In a tandem MS instrument,
each peptide ion undergoes fragmentation to produce characteristic
b- and y-ions, which are fragments containing the N- and C-termini
of the peptide ions, respectively. Combinations of intact peptide
ions (precursors) and resulting specific fragment ions (products)
comprise transitions that are specific for the monitored peptide sequences.
Although any particular precursor–product transition can map
to multiple peptide sequences, the co-occurrence of multiple such
transitions indicates the targeted peptide sequence with high specificity.
The detection of peptides through the signals created by these transitions
is called either selected reaction monitoring (SRM) or multiple-reaction
monitoring (MRM). Both terms are used interchangeably in the literature;
we will use MRM here to describe the process and method. The peak
areas for MRM transitions are integrated as measures of peptide abundance
and serve as the basis for quantitative comparisons.

Overview of targeted
protein quantitation by MRM. (A) Selection of peptides specific for
the target protein. (B) MRM analysis monitors sequence-specific transitions
derived from intense product ions in the MS/MS spectrum. (C) Integrated
peak areas from the signal corresponding to transitions allow quantitative
comparisons. Peak areas for target peptides are compared to peak areas
for stable isotope-labeled reference peptide standards.

MRM assays can monitor multiple transitions, which
allows multiplexed analyses of hundreds of peptides in a single LC–MS
run. The numbers of peptides and proteins that can be analyzed in
a single run depend on the MS instrument used, the numbers of transitions
monitored for each peptide, and the number of peptides monitored for
each protein. With LC–MS methods in which MRM transitions are
monitored during specific elution time windows for specific peptides,
hundreds of peptides representing dozens of proteins can be measured
in a single analysis. This capability for multiplexed analyses allows
systematic measurement of multiprotein networks and pathways, a task
that would be prohibitively expensive and cumbersome with Western
blotting.

MS Instrumentation for MRM Assays
Although essentially
any tandem MS instrument can be used for targeted quantitation, triple
quadrupole and quadrupole-ion trap (Q-Trap) MS instruments are most
widely used. Both use the first quadrupole component of the mass analyzer
to select targeted peptide precursor ions for fragmentation in a collision
cell. Specified fragment ions then are detected either by the third
quadrupole or by the linear ion trap. Although both instruments can
execute full scan detection of all product ions, the most sensitive
and repeatable measurements are achieved when the second mass analyzer
targets selected product ions, as in MRM. Because only the specified
transitions are recorded, other product ions are not detected. Triple
quadrupole and quadrupole-ion trap mass spectrometers provide measurements
of a wide dynamic range (&gt;105), high sensitivity, and
low measurement variation for measurement of MRM transitions. A limitation
of triple quadrupole instruments is the relatively low resolution
of precursor m/z measurements, which
may allow interference from nominally isobaric background contaminants
in complex mixtures. Triple quadrupole instruments are also limited
by their duty cycle, the rate at which transitions can be sampled
with an acceptable signal-to-noise ratio. The hydrid configuration
of the quadrupole-time-of-flight (QqTOF) instrument can also be used
for quantitative applications. This mass spectrometer contains a mass-resolving
quadrupole (Q) and a collision cell (q) similar to a triple quadrupole;
however, the third quadrupole (Q3) is replaced with a time-of-flight
(TOF) mass analyzer offering high sensitivity, mass resolution, and
mass accuracy for both precursor and product ion spectra. The ability of both the Q-Trap and QqTOF instruments
to acquire full scan product ion data with high mass accuracy allows
these platforms to be alternative instrumentation for performing quantitation,
in addition to the more traditionally used triple quadrupole mass
spectrometer.Variants of MRM can be achieved on ion trap instruments,
in which an inclusion (target) list of peptide precursor m/z values is used to direct data acquisition. Instead
of monitoring only specified product ions from MS/MS of selected precursors,
the process allows the acquisition of full scan MS/MS spectra, from
which product ion signals can be extracted during data analysis. The
resulting extracted ion chromatograms are used to generate peak areas
for transitions of interest and are used for quantitation. This approach
has been employed with low-resolution linear ion traps, and termed pseudoselected reaction monitoring (pSRM) but has been
recently demonstrated as a particularly powerful approach on a newer
quadrupole-Orbitrap hybrid (Thermo Q-Exactive) instrument. This instrument
combines a quadrupole analyzer with the Orbitrap, which actually contains
a C-trap, which serves to store and shuttle ions between a high-energy
collision-induced dissociation (HCD) cell and the Orbitrap analyzer,
which performs high-resolution m/z analysis. Recent preliminary reports
describe several modes of operation for targeted peptide analysis,
the most powerful of which is termed parallel reaction monitoring
(PRM), which generates high-resolution, full scan MS/MS data, from
which transitions can be extracted as described above., A key feature of this approach of fast scanning, high-resolution
analyzers is the highly specific extraction of signals for target
peptides of interest, thus restricting interference from nominally
isobaric contaminants. Preliminary reports suggest that PRM analyses
exhibit performance characteristics (dynamic range and measurement
variation) comparable to those of MRM analyses performed on triple
quadrupole instruments,, and it appears likely
that further development will expand the scope of targeted peptide
and protein quantitation.

Selection of Target Peptides for MRM Assays
Key steps in the workflow for configuring MRM assays for proteins
are summarized in Figure . The process begins
with a list of target proteins inferred from previous experiments
or the scientific literature. The first step is to select peptides
from the target proteins that will be measured using MRM analysis.
The specificity of the assay requires selection of proteotypic peptides,
whose sequences are unique to each parent protein. Although essentially
any reproducible digestion method can be used, MRM assays most frequently
are based on tryptic peptides, which typically range from 5 to 25
amino acids in length and usually form multiply charged positive ions,
which provide useful sequence information through MS/MS fragmentation.
In addition, selection criteria for proteotypic peptides consider
other key characteristics to enhance the specificity of the assay
and to minimize interference (for recent reviews, see refs (−)). One important criterion is selection of peptides
that are unique to the target protein and, where necessary, to specific
protein isoforms or variants. Tryptic peptides with fewer than eight
residues are typically avoided, as these sequences are unlikely to
be unique. Sites of known posttranslational modifications (e.g., phosphorylation
and acetylation) on peptides are avoided unless the assay is specifically
targeted to the modified form.

Workflow for the design of an MRM assay.
See the text for discussion.

To reduce potential sources of variability, peptides for
MRM are selected for optimal stability. Peptides containing residues
susceptible to artifactual modifications during sample preparation,
such as methionine (oxidation) and cysteine (carbamidomethylation
and oxidation), aspartic acid-glycine pairs (deamidation), and N-terminal
glutamine (pyroglutamic acid formation) and asparagine (deamidation),
may be avoided. Peptides containing sequences that commonly result
in missed cleavages (e.g., Lys-Lys and Arg-Arg) may display variable
digestion yields. Ideally, proteotypic peptides are taken from across
the full protein sequence. Despite these considerations, peptide selection
is an empirical exercise that balances ideal characteristics with
practical limitations. Long proteins yield more potential proteotypic
peptides than short proteins, and sequence features can greatly constrain
peptide selection. In some instances, proteins of interest may have
significant sequence homology, making it difficult to adhere to the
peptide selection criteria described above. Modification of the inclusion
criteria thus may be necessary to define the MRM assay.

An important
aspect of peptide selection is identification of peptides that have
been previously observed in MS/MS analyses and thus are known to be
detectable. Such data are found in online repositories such as PeptideAtlas, the Global Proteome Machine Database, and PRIDE, which
contain peptide sequences and spectra. For proteins not found in a
database, computational software tools that predict the most likely
MS-observable peptides have been developed. Such prediction tools,
which include ESP predictor, PeptideSieve, PepFly, and others,, are trained with MS/MS data sets and fragmentation models to link
physicochemical properties of peptides to the likelihood of peptide
formation and detection.

Optimizing Peptide Detection
Because
MRM measurements are based upon the signal from precursor–fragment
ion transitions, selection of transitions that optimize selectivity
and sensitivity is critical for assay performance. Transitions should
be selected to provide a maximal signal while establishing sequence
specificity of detection. Transitions can be selected from (1) libraries
of previously collected MS/MS spectra in online repositories (see
above), (2) computational tools that predict fragmentation, (3) inference
from ion trap or Orbitrap CID or HCD spectra, or (4) analysis of synthetic
peptide standards. Just as criteria for selecting target peptides
exist, characteristic peptide fragmentations empirically found to
provide a high signal intensity have been described. Several software
tools, such as MRMaid, SRMAtlas, MRMer, and MaRiMba, for facilitating transition selection have been
described. Because MRM assays are largely conducted with triple quadrupole
instruments (see below), optimization has been directed to this type
of mass analyzer. On the other hand, peptide MS/MS spectra in online
repositories have been acquired mainly with ion trap, Orbitrap, and
tandem time-of-flight (TOF) mass analyzers, all of which produce spectra
with somewhat different characteristics. Previous work has systematically
explored the inference of triple quadrupole MS/MS fragmentation from
ion trap MS/MS data and from HCD data. For analyses
on triple quadrupole instruments, y-ions having m/z values larger than that of the precursor and
high signal intensities are generally favored, as noise (and potential
interference) is increased below the precursor.

To ensure the
highest selectivity and sensitivity, a systematic refinement of the
selected peptides and transitions can be employed., Not surprisingly, there is a direct trade-off between the specificity
of peptide detection in MRM and the number of transitions monitored
per peptide. Assays that monitor a single transition typically detect
many signals and have the highest propensity for “false positive”
quantitation. Requiring at least three transitions per peptide target
to be monitored dramatically decreases the number of detected peptides
and increases the level of confidence in assay specificity. Transitions
can be optimized and validated experimentally by using synthetic reference
peptide standards. This can be done with high-purity, isotope-labeled
standards, which are used for stable isotope dilution (SID) analyses.
However, libraries of moderately pure (∼85%) standards can
be generated at a modest cost for high-throughput validation of MRM
assays. An alternate approach is the
expression and
digestion of the target proteins to generate libraries of their constituent
peptides. These reference peptides can
be used to confirm
the selected transitions and relative fragment ion intensity and to
determine chromatographic retention times. The use of synthetic standard
peptides in assay development provides the highest degree of assurance
that measured transitions truly represent the target peptides and
proteins.

In a typical MRM analysis, a small set of proteins
(typically fewer than five) and their peptides are measured and the
corresponding transitions are monitored continuously throughout the
entire chromatographic elution program. This approach is relatively
inefficient, because the peptide targets each elute during a brief
elution window. The signal acquired outside each window is essentially
wasted analyzer time. Because the duty cycle of the MS instrument
is limited, this inefficiency also limits the number of transitions
that can be measured. To increase the efficiency of MRM analyses,
a timed acquisition mode, termed scheduled MRM analysis, can be used
to increase the number of peptides monitored in a single chromatographic
run, while maintaining the highest possible MRM transition duty cycle
and degree of sensitivity. In a scheduled
MRM analysis, the transitions of a peptide are acquired only during
a defined elution time window. To perform a scheduled MRM experiment,
the retention times of the target peptides must be known and chromatography
must be stable and reproducible. Any shifts in retention time due
to instability in the chromatographic performance may cause peptides
to elute outside the specific retention time window, resulting in
“missed” quantitation events.

Skyline: A Powerful Tool
for MRM Assay Design and Data Analysis
One of the most important
developments in the field of targeted MS assays for peptides and proteins
is Skyline, an open-source software platform that provides support
not only for experimental design (selecting peptides and optimization
of transitions) but also for downstream data analysis (https://brendanx-uw1.gs.washington.edu/labkey/project/home/software/Skyline). Skyline utilizes the ProteoWizard libraries to allow analysis of data from all MS instrument platforms,
thus providing a vendor-neutral resource for sharing and creation
of both methods and results across instrument platforms. Skyline facilitates
the generation and refinement of proteomic peptide lists from protein
sequences or database entries, both by utilizing online MS/MS spectral
repositories and by supporting the generation of custom-built libraries
based upon sets of locally acquired tandem spectral data.

Skyline
creates transition lists and vendor-specific instrument methods that
can be imported directly into instrument control software for MS instruments
from several vendors. Skyline also provides a platform for standardized
analysis of MRM result files for peak integration and visualization
and data quality assessment across multiple analyses. Finally, Skyline
allows the export of processed data in custom report formats compatible
with subsequent statistical analyses, publication, and database deposition.

Beyond the capabilities and performance features of the software,
Skyline represents an important innovation in proteomics by providing
a widely used (&gt;14000 downloads since the initial release in May
2009), community-supported, open-source platform for MRM analyses.
Skyline thus helps the analytical community avoid the fragmentation
of bioinformatics methods and tools that has hampered standardization
of shotgun proteomics and many genomic analyses. This interesting
experiment in community-supported software is itself one of the most
important innovations in the field of proteomics.

Measurement Normalization
and Quantitative Comparisons
The gold standard method for
comparison of peptide abundances in MRM measurements is stable isotope
dilution (SID), in which a stable isotope-labeled synthetic peptide
analogue is used as an internal standard for each target peptide (Figure ). Typically, standard peptides are labeled by incorporation
of [13C615N2]lysine or
[13C615N4]arginine. Peptide
standards for SID should be of high chemical and isotopic purity (&gt;95%)
and should be quantitatively standardized by amino acid analysis.
The standards usually are spiked into samples immediately after digestion
and thus serve to correct for subsequent analytical steps. The heavy-labeled
peptide standards co-elute with unlabeled isotopomers in liquid chromatography
separations and display identical MS/MS fragmentation patterns but
differ only in mass due to the isotope labeling. This resulting mass
shift in both precursor and product ions allows the mass spectrometer
to differentiate the unlabeled and labeled peptides. Because complex
peptide digests often contain multiple sets of co-eluting transitions
that may be mistaken for the target peptide, co-elution of the isotopically
labeled standard identifies the correct signal and provides the best
protection against false positive quantitation.

Quantitative comparison
by stable isotope dilution (SID) and labeled reference peptide (LRP)
methods. In SID, a separate isotope-labeled peptide standard is used
for each target peptide. In LRP, a single stable isotope-labeled peptide
is used as the reference for all target peptides.

SID–MRM analyses exhibit the best performance characteristics
of all targeted peptide measurements, with typical linearity over
4–5
orders of magnitude, measurement coefficients that typically vary
by &lt;10%, and limits of detection in cell and tissue lysates in
the range of femtomoles per milligram of protein.− The one disadvantage of SID assays
is the high cost of isotope-labeled standards, which range from $700
to $1000 for ∼1 mg of high-purity isotope-labeled peptides
with concentration certification by amino acid analysis. For the development
of small numbers of assays, this is a reasonable investment, when
compared with the costs of many antibodies.

SID is frequently
used to generate a calibration curve from samples containing a fixed
amount of labeled standard and varying amounts of unlabeled target
peptide. In principle, this approach allows quantitation of absolute
protein amounts. However, “absolute quantitation” by
SID–MRM with a labeled peptide standard is based on the assumption
that enzymatic digestion of the target protein proceeds to completion,
which is generally not verified.

The need for a more cost-effective
normalization strategy for studies involving larger numbers of proteins
and peptides led us to develop a labeled reference peptide (LRP) method,
in which a single isotope-labeled peptide standard is used as the
reference for all target peptides in an analysis. An isotope-labeled peptide standard is not absolutely required
but does reduce the level of interference from any endogenous, unlabeled
isotopomer. We have described the use of a human actin peptide, as
well as bacterial β-galactosidase and alkaline phosphatase.
An advantage of the actin standard peptide is that it allows an SID-based
normalization of sample load based on the endogenous actin. The LRP approach does not provide co-elution
of a labeled peptide standard with each target peptide but otherwise
confers many of the benefits of SID-based quantitation. Measurement
CVs with the LRP method range from 10 to 25%, and the linearity is
similar to that for SID.

The simplest
MRM method is “label-free” quantitative comparison without
any reference standard or normalization of the target peptide signal.
This approach is subject to higher measurement variation, because
of undetected or uncorrected variations in differences in peptide
recovery, MS instrument performance, and other factors. The label-free
approach has been compared to the SID and LRP methods and actually
performs surprisingly well, with measurement CVs ranging from 20 to
30%.

Sensitivity and Dynamic
Range of MRM Assays
The level of sensitivity that can be
achieved using MRM depends
on several factors, which include the type of sample being analyzed
(e.g., biofluids, tissue, cell lysates, and immunoprecipitates) and
whether enrichment or fractionation techniques are incorporated prior
to analysis. Proteins that are present in unfractionated plasma in
the 0.1–10 μg/mL (fmol/μL) concentration range
usually can be detected readily and measured with MRM. The addition of a high-abundance protein immunoaffinity
depletion step coupled with peptide fractionation by strong cation
exchange chromatography can increase the limits of detection and quantitation
of a MRM analysis to low nanogram per milliliter levels in plasma., MRM can achieve a broad dynamic range in comparison to global profiling
analyses, where peptides from high-abundance proteins directly compete
for detection with peptides for low-abundance proteins. In shotgun
proteomic analyses of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteome, shotgun proteome analyses in unfractionated samples can
detect proteins over 2–3 orders of magnitude, whereas in fractionated peptide mixtures from S.
cerevisiae, this range is extended to &gt;4 orders of magnitude. In MRM analyses, abundant peptides do not directly
interfere with the selection of lower-abundance peptides, but complex
mixtures nevertheless are likely to have co-eluting contaminants with
similar precursor m/z values that
may interfere with some MRM transitions for a targeted peptide. Nevertheless,
MRM analyses can display a much greater dynamic range than global
profiling in complex mixtures. Indeed, Picotti et al. described quantitation
of S. cerevisiae proteins over the entire protein
expression range, including measurements at single-digit copy number
levels. The same group reported a limit
of quantitation
of approximately 7500 copies in human cells. Recently, a large-scale study conducted by the Clinical Proteomic
Technology Assessment for Cancer network of the National Cancer Institute
(NCI-CPTAC) assessed the reproducibility, transferability, and performance
characteristics of SID–MRM–MS measurements in plasma
performed across multiple laboratories and instrument platforms. With standardized protocols for sample preparation,
data acquisition, and analysis, these studies demonstrated that multiplexed
MRM-based assays are highly reproducible within and across laboratories,
achieving intra- and interlaboratory CV’s in the range of 10–25%.
LOD and LOQ values observed in unfractionated plasma were in the high
hundreds of nanograms per milliliter to low micrograms per milliliter
concentration ranges for target proteins and had a linear dynamic
range spanning 3 orders of magnitude.

Quantitation of the human
epidermal growth factor receptor 2 protein (HER2) was recently demonstrated
in fresh and formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue by MRM
with SID, achieving limits of quantitation within a biologically relevant
range of 0.1–0.33 fmol/μg of protein. A similar study, which employed a peptide immunoaffinity
enrichment strategy, measured both estrogen receptor (ER) and HER2
in breast cancer tissue and cell lines and demonstrated linear ranges
covering approximately 4 orders of magnitude and limits of detection
in the low-femtomole per milligram of protein range.

Selection of Quantitative Approaches and Assay Fitness for a
Purpose
The choice of an MS-based approach to protein quantitation
should be based on fitness for purpose and cost. The most common use
context for protein quantitation is the estimation of expression or
posttranslational modification differences for a few proteins in a
small number of samples. The LRP method is the best choice in such
situations, as these assays can be configured quickly without the
cost and delays involved in obtaining labeled peptide standards for
SID. MRM analyses easily exceed the performance of typical Western
blotting measurements, which yield CVs ranging from 20 to 40%., Although the label-free approach mentioned briefly above might be
considered, there is little justification for using this approach,
when the LRP method shares essentially all of the advantages (ease
and speed of configuring assays) and reduces the disadvantages (no
means of assessing sample loss or system drift) through the use of
reference peptide standards. The LRP method also is ideally suited
to multiplexed MRM assay panels for dozens to hundreds of proteins,
mainly because of the cost savings associated with the use of a singly
labeled peptide standard.

SID is the most appropriate choice
for MRM analyses that require the highest analytical precision and
in which the analyses will be conducted over an extended period of
time or across multiple laboratories. SID provides the greatest protection
against system drift and chromatographic instability, which are major
contributors to measurement variation in interlaboratory studies.

Application of MRM to Quantitative Protein
Measurements in Biochemistry and Cell Biology
As noted above,
MRM assays for protein quantitation originated with the SID measurements
of peptide hormones by Desiderio and colleagues. Gerber et al. first demonstrated in 2003 the versatile
application of SID-based MRM analyses to protein quantitation, referring
to the method as AQUA (absolute quantification), and quantified low-abundance yeast proteins involved in
gene silencing. The literature published over the ensuing decade describes
dozens of applications of SID-based MRM for protein quantitation.
The following representative examples illustrate the diversity of
application of this method.

(1) MRM measurements of Argonaute
(Ago) proteins allowed precise measurements of the stoichiometry and
dynamics of miRNA–mRNA complexes.

(2) Bennet et al. systematically applied MRM measurements
to quantify the stoichiometries of cullin proteins and their associated
adaptors to architecture of the cullin–RING ligase network.

(3) Menentret et al. combined MRM measurements
with structure analysis by cryo-electron microscopy to define the
stoichiometry of Escherichia coli ribosomes binding
to the SecY protein to form membrane translocation complexes.

(4) Tomazela et al. applied in vivo metabolic
labeling and MRM to measure the turnover of human surfactant-B protein
in tracheal aspirates from newborn infants.

Targeted Quantitation of Posttranslational Protein Modifications
Quantitation of specific posttranslational modifications on individual
proteins presents a formidable analytical challenge, as development
of site-selective antibodies is typically arduous and reagent specificity
is difficult to verify. MS/MS-based analyses offer the most specific
means of site-specific quantitation of protein posttranslational modifications.
MS/MS provides unambiguous detection through specific fragment ions
that indicate the sequence position of the modified residue and MS/MS
can distinguish sequence isomers, such as phosphorylation at different
residues in Ser/Thr-rich sequences. Most reported proteomic analyses
of posttranslationally modified proteins involve global profiling
of phosphorylation dynamics and other protein modifications by shotgun
proteomics, with quantitation by metabolic labeling (e.g., SILAC,) or isotope tagging (e.g., iTRAQ−).

MRM assays employing
SID with a labeled, modified peptide standard offer the most specific,
sensitive, and precise quantitative analyses of modified protein forms.
In their seminal paper, Gerber et al. described quantification of
cell cycle-dependent phosphorylation of Ser1126 in human seprase,
as well as specific phosphorylations generated in vitro in kinase
assays. The following representative
examples illustrate
the utility of MRM for the quantitation of posttranslational modifications.

(1) MRM has been used to observe the dynamics of tyrosine phosphorylation
in the epidermal growth factor-regulated signaling network on glioblastoma
cells.

(2) MRM with quantitation
by stable isotope dilution was used to quantify kinase activity in
vivo of leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2). Coding sequence mutations are the most common cause of familial
Parkinson’s disease, and these investigators were able to directly
measure the effect of mutations on the kinetics of autophosphorylation
at Ser1292, which reflects the activity of the wild-type and mutant
kinase forms in vivo.

(3) Modification by ubiquitin can be detected
by MRM analysis of Gly-Gly modifications on ubiquitinated Lys residues
(accompanied by missed tryptic cleavage) following tryptic digestion.
This approach has been extended to quantify the stoichiometry of different
poly-ubiquitin chain modifications by MRM analysis of the corresponding
Gly-Gly-modified Lys residues on distinct ubiquitin peptides containing
chain branch sites (e.g., Lys11, Lys48, and Lys63).,

Analysis of protein posttranslational modifications is often
complicated by the low stoichiometry of the modifications, which is
further complicated by the low abundance of many target proteins.
A common solution to this problem for global proteomic analysis is
enrichment of the modified peptides by chemistry-based affinity capture,
such as immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) and related
affinity chromatography methods for phosphopeptides, or by immunoaffinity capture of Lys-N-acetylated peptides
or phosphotyrosine peptides., When affinity capture
steps are introduced, measurement error due to variation in capture
or immunoprecipitation efficiency should be considered. Spiked, modified
peptide standards can be used to assess the efficiency and consistency
of recovery, although differences in recovery can be anticipated for
different sequences. Differences in measured levels of protein modifications
may be due to changes in both the modification stoichiometry and expression
levels of the modified protein. Accurate interpretation of modification
data thus requires estimates of both protein expression and levels
of specific modifications.

A useful
strategy for quantitative analysis of protein posttranslational modifications
employs internal reference peptides (IRPs) from the target protein
for signal normalization without the need for isotope labeling (Figure ). Ion trap mass spectrometry
and pSRM are used to acquire full MS/MS and MS3 spectra
from target peptides. Transitions are extracted from the full MS/MS
or MS3 spectrum, and peak areas for transitions are summed
and normalized to areas for a reference standard. In the IRP method,
one or more unmodified proteotypic peptides from the target protein
serve as the reference standard for the modified peptides in the analysis.
Because the target modified peptides and the reference standard are
present in the same protein, the IRP method corrects for variations
in the recovery of the protein during immunoprecipitation or during
other stages of the analysis. Normalized signals thus reflect an increase
or a decrease in the stoichiometry of the modification. Equivalent
responses were observed with both IRP and SID methods for quantitation
of six site-specific phosphorylations in the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) in epidermal growth factor-stimulated A431 cells. Although pSRM was used in this study, the IRP
approach could also be used with MRM or PRM in triple quadrupole,
quadrupole-ion trap, or quadrupole-Orbitrap instruments. Analyses
using the IRP method typically had higher median CVs (22–31%)
than SID (10–20%). The key advantage of the IRP method is the
ease of configuring assays for routine quantitation of protein modifications
in a biochemistry laboratory setting.

Schematic representation of quantitation
of protein modifications with the internal reference peptide (IRP)
method. Transitions are monitored for both the peptide bearing the
modification and other, unmodified IRPs in the same protein. The signal
from the modified peptide is normalized to the signals from one or
more of the IRPs.

A Targeted Protein Quantitation
Resource:
What Might It Look Like?
Many pharmaceutical companies employ
clusters of automated NMR and MS instruments immediately adjacent
to synthetic medicinal chemistry laboratories. These instruments allow
routine analyses of reaction products or quantitative monitoring of
product yields. The relative simplicity of routine quantitation by
MRM and related methods, together with the robust performance of newer
MS instruments, suggest that an analogous automated protein quantitation
resource built around MS methods could be implemented. The simplest
variation would employ a triple quadrupole or quadrupole-Orbitrap
MS instrument performing MRM or PRM analyses, coupled to a microcapillary
LC system and autosampler. Users would digest protein samples according
to a standard protocol, introduce a LRP peptide standard, and then
analyze it using standardized, automated programs. A triple quadrupole
instrument is robust in a multiuser setting with appropriate oversight.
If the goal of most analyses was routine quantitation of a few proteins,
optimization of peptide selection or MRM transitions would be largely
unnecessary and automated experimental design (peptide and transition
selection) could be done with Skyline or similar utilities and would
allow quantitation of most protein targets. The comparison of protein
levels between samples would be based on integrated peak areas for
the target peptides and the LRP peptide standard. This basic MS analysis
capability could be combined with an automated protein digestion station,
which can be purchased or built with a programmable sample handling
robot.

Conclusion
Targeted protein quantitation by MRM and
related methods has emerged rapidly over the past 10 years and has
many advantages over immunochemical methods. MRM provides a means
of systematically configuring sensitive and specific assays for any
protein and an efficient platform for multiplexed assays. The rapid
evolution of MS instruments and software for targeted peptide measurement
is expected to transform protein measurement in biochemistry.

The
authors’ work in this area has been supported by National Institutes
of Health Grants U01CA152647, U24CA159988, and U24CA126479.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

