The formation
of the mollusk shell nacre layer is believed to be under
the control of two protein families. The nacre intracrystalline proteome− is a family of proteins that are occluded within the nacre tablets
themselves. In contrast, the framework proteome, is
a subset of proteins associated with the macromolecular silk−β-chitin
exterior gel-like phase that coats the exterior of
the nacre tablets. Together, both proteomes participate in aragonite
tablet formation and contribute to the fracture toughening properties
of the nacre.− Unfortunately, there is very little information available regarding
either proteome or their participation in the nacre mineralization
process. Thus, our present understanding of mollusk shell biomineralization
is limited, and this in turn prevents us from understanding the shell
engineering process.

Recent studies reveal that certain members
of the nacre intracrystalline
proteome, such as the intrinsically disordered C-RING protein, AP7
(Aragonite Protein-7, 66 amino acids, 7.5 kDa, Haliotis rufescens),− self-assemble to form protein phases that
gather amorphous calcium carbonate (ACC) nanoparticles together into
hybrid protein–mineral supramolecular networks in solution. However, it is not known whether these same protein
phases can modify
calcium carbonate crystals themselves and, if so, what modifications
are introduced into these crystals. Establishing this dual capability
of protein phases is an important step in understanding the mollusk
shell formation process as well as variations in C-RING functionality.

(A) Representative
calcite crystals obtained from protein-deficient
controls. (B and C) Representative nanoparticle assemblies generated
by AP7 in 1 h, revealing three-dimensional nanopatterning and building
block construction.
Note the occurrence of gaps or spaces between nanoparticles in panel
C.

In this work, we describe the
additional ability of C-RING AP7
protein phases to modify calcite crystals in two dramatic ways. First,
these protein phases direct the nucleation of highly oriented calcite
nanoparticles on calcite crystals formed in standard calcium carbonate
mineralization assays (Figure ). The formation
of these nanoparticles mimics the findings obtained in polymer phase-based and gel-based mineralization
systems. Second, these surface nanoparticle assemblies and associated
gap regions become incorporated into the bulk crystal during overgrowth,
leading to the introduction of nanoporosities within the bulk crystal
(Figure ). Thus, intracrystalline protein
phases, such as those generated by C-RING AP7, not only induce mineral
assembly in solution but also can introduce
new physical properties (i.e., nanopatterning and nanoporosities)
into crystals.

For the purposes of this study, we utilized sealed
carbonate/bicarbonate
mineralization assays () that predominantly generate calcite (&gt;90%) with well-defined
{104} surfaces for electron microscopy examination
and thus avoid imaging complications arising from vaterite and aragonite.
We observe that the AP7 protein directs the nucleation of intricate
three-dimensional mineralized structures (Figure ). These structures consist of highly arranged mineral deposits
that are approximately 30–300 nm in size and resemble building
blocks. Many of these nanoparticles
are separated by gaps or spaces. These novel three-dimensional mineralized
structures represent &gt;90% of the total crystals produced by AP7
under these assay conditions
and thus represent a dominant in vitro protein-mediated
process.

Representative scanning electron microscopy images of focused-ion
beam-sectioned Ir-coated crystals obtained from protein-deficient
and AP7-containing assays. White arrows denote locations of subsurface
voids. Scale bars are 200 nm. Note that the nanopatterning on the
control crystal surfaces
is generated by bombardment of the sample with a Ga ion beam. Additional
images that document subsurface porosities can be found in the .

Physical characterization methods revealed that the nanoparticles
are single-crystal calcite with some evidence of a polycrystalline
calcite component being present (Figures S1–S3 and Table S1
of the ). This polycrystalline
component may arise from the underlying calcite
crystal foundation or may originate from a true polycrystalline component
promoted by the protein phase. Using focused-ion beam sectioning,
we confirmed that these mineralized structures (Figure ) possess very interesting interior features (Figure  and Figure S4 of the ). First, in peripheral regions, we can detect distinct
layers of nanoparticles. Second, relative to controls, we note a larger
number of subsurface nanometer-sized porosities or voids randomly
distributed within the peripheral regions of AP7-treated crystals
(Figure S4 of the ). We conclude that the AP7 protein phases are responsible for creating
both the nanometer-sized calcite crystal clusters at the surface and
the subsurface nanoporosities.

We suspected that the nanoparticle
assemblies and subsurface modifications
were created by AP7 protein phases that were deposited onto calcite
crystal surfaces during the assay. Because the AP7 C-RING domain includes
four Cys residues,− we employed X-ray microanalyses and confirmed
S content at crystal surfaces where protein phases were noted, thus
verifying the presence of AP7 (Figures S5 and S6 of the ). Similar X-ray microanalyses
were performed on subsurface porosities, but because of the low levels
of protein and small scanned areas, we were unable to detect evidence
of AP7 at this time (data not shown). Nonetheless, the presence of
surface-associated AP7 protein phases correlates with the nanoparticle
structures that form during the assays.

A further confirmation
of the deposition of the AP7 protein onto
calcite crystals was obtained using time-resolved assays (Figure ). At 1 min, typical rhombohedral calcite crystals
are observed along with AP7 protein phases that were deposited onto
the surfaces of the Si wafers and calcite crystals. Nanoparticle formation
is initiated on surface regions where the protein phase has coated
or migrated over the calcite crystal. After 5 min, we observe ordered
nanoparticles coating the exposed surfaces of calcite (Figure ) and the continued deposition of AP7 protein phases
on the Si wafer background and on exposed calcite surfaces. By 15
min, these crystal assemblies are largely complete and exhibit the
familiar three-dimensional surface topographies, gaps, and crystal
orientations that we observed at 1 h (Figure ). Thus, these mineral assemblies
result from the repetitive deposition of AP7 phases onto a calcite
“core”, with each wave of AP7 deposition directing additional
nucleation of single-crystal calcite nanoparticles on exposed surfaces.

Thus, Nature has “tweaked” the intracellular protein–protein
and signaling C-RING− sequence of intrinsically disordered AP7
to form phases that serve two purposes: (a) to gather mineral nanoparticles
in solution and (b) to guide nanoparticle
formation on crystal surfaces (Figures  and ). On the basis of available evidence, we conclude
that AP7 protein phases allow calcite crystals to initially form,
and then in a repetitive cycle, these phases are deposited onto these
crystals and dimensionally limit and organize the mineral overgrowth
that nucleates on the calcite crystals. We believe that it is the
underlying thermodynamically stable calcite mineral phase that dictates
the lattice structure of the nucleating nanoparticles (i.e., calcite),
and thus, the relatively unstable aragonite phase cannot form, even
in the presence of nacre-specific AP7 (Figure ). This protein-guided nucleation process
is relevant not only for understanding how proteins organize single-crystal
mineral assemblies that support and protect a variety of organisms
in Nature but also for developing material-based approaches that utilize
organic phases to generate single-crystal nanoparticle coatings for
devices and sensors.

Scanning electron microscopy
images of mineral deposits and AP7
phases that form in time-resolved mineralization assays. Images in
the bottom row represent higher magnifications of important features
for each time point. At 1 min, note the resemblance between the crystal-bound
protein
phases and those deposited on SI wafers (Figure S5 of the ). White arrows denote
the location of AP7 protein phases captured on crystal surfaces.

The repetitive deposition of AP7
phases onto crystal surfaces
also
leads to another phenomenon: the creation of subsurface nanoporosities
(Figure  and Figure S4 of the ). Similar intracrystalline
features (termed “nanopatches”) were observed within
prismatic calcite crystals in the shell of the mollusk Atrina
rigida. In general, porous materials
exhibit interesting properties, because porosities with controllable
dimensions modulate material strength and allow materials to discriminate
and interact with molecules and clusters. Hence, the AP7-induced nanoporosity phenomenon represents an intriguing
model system for understanding the creation and impact of nanoporosities
on the physical properties of both biological and synthetic materials.
With respect to the process of porosity formation in our systems,
we believe that the nanoporosities originate from the spaces or gaps
that exist in the peripheral regions (Figures  and ). Normally, as nucleation proceeds,
these spaces or gaps would be eliminated as mineral overgrowth overtakes
these areas, but if remnant AP7 protein phases were present in these
gap regions, then these phases might prevent overgrowth from fully
occupying these regions, leading to the formation of nanoporosities
that potentially contain the protein phase. Obviously, this is speculative,
and additional experimentation will be required to establish this
phenomenon more precisely.

Supporting Information Available
Details of
all mineral characterization methods and
data (Figures S1–S6 and Table S1) and protein preparation and
mineralization assay conditions.
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500664w_si_001.pdf

This research was supported
by the U.S. Department
of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Materials
Sciences and Engineering, via Grant DE-FG02-03ER46099 to J.S.E. L.A.E.
acknowledges support
from National Cancer Institute Grant R01 CA173083. The micro Raman
studies made use of the Cornell Center for Materials Research Shared
Facilities (National Science Foundation MRSEC Program DMR-1120296).

The
authors
declare no competing financial interests.

Acknowledgments
This paper represents
contribution 76 from the Laboratory
for Chemical Physics, New York University.

