

   
BiochemistryBiochemistrybibichawBiochemistry0006-29601520-4995American
Chemical Society 10.1021/bi5013222Current TopicTuning of Peroxiredoxin Catalysis for Various Physiological
Roles Perkins Arden †Poole Leslie
B. ‡Karplus P. Andrew *†† Department
of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Oregon State
University, Corvallis, Oregon 97331, United
States‡ Department
of Biochemistry, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina 27157, United States* E-mail: karplusp@science.oregonstate.edu. Phone: (541) 737-3200. Fax: (541) 737-0481.17 11 2015 17 11 2014 16 12 2014 53 49 7693 7705 23 10 2014 12 11 2014 Copyright © 2014 American Chemical
Society2014American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Peroxiredoxins (Prxs) make up an
ancient family of enzymes that
are the predominant peroxidases for nearly all organisms and play
essential roles in reducing hydrogen peroxide, organic hydroperoxides,
and peroxynitrite. Even between distantly related organisms, the core
protein fold and key catalytic residues related to its cysteine-based
catalytic mechanism have been retained. Given that these enzymes appeared
early in biology, Prxs have experienced more than 1 billion years
of optimization for specific ecological niches. Although their basic
enzymatic function remains the same, Prxs have diversified and are
involved in roles such as protecting DNA against mutation, defending
pathogens against host immune responses, suppressing tumor formation,
and—for eukaryotes—helping regulate peroxide signaling
via hyperoxidation of their catalytic Cys residues. Here, we review
the current understanding of the physiological roles of Prxs by analyzing
knockout and knockdown studies from ∼25 different species.
We also review what is known about the structural basis for the sensitivity
of some eukaryotic Prxs to inactivation by hyperoxidation. In considering
the physiological relevance of hyperoxidation, we explore the distribution
across species of sulfiredoxin (Srx), the enzyme responsible for rescuing
hyperoxidized Prxs. We unexpectedly find that among eukaryotes appearing
to have a “sensitive” Prx isoform, some do not contain
Srx. Also, as Prxs are suggested to be promising targets for drug
design, we discuss the rationale behind recently proposed strategies
for their selective inhibition.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9bi5013222document-id-new-14bi-2014-013222ccc-price

   
Introduction to Peroxiredoxins and Scope
of This Review
Peroxiredoxins (Prxs) are nature’s
dominant peroxidases.
From archaea to humans, they are widely expressed and possess the
same catalytic components.3 Prxs serve
to protect cells from oxidative stress and prevent damage to DNA,
lipids, and other proteins by reducing hydroperoxides and peroxynitrite.4 With catalytic rates of ∼107 M–1 s–1 and an abundance that
implies that they account for the reduction of more than 90% of cytosolic
peroxide, they are crucial for regulating intracellular peroxide levels
in most organisms.5 Cells encounter peroxides
in a variety of ways—as a byproduct of cellular processes,
as a consequence of environmental conditions, or even as a result
of deliberate attacks by other cells6—and
Prxs have been finely tuned to address the needs of their respective
organisms. Given the ubiquity of Prxs, it is presumed that they make
up an ancient enzyme family that arose at the time of the great Oxidation
Event, some 2.4 billion years ago, to aid cells in coping with increased
oxygen levels and to facilitate aerobic metabolism.7 Because of their retention over the millennia, with no
major alterations in the protein fold or catalytic mechanism, Prxs
can be seen as being integral to the existence of life on Earth.

We have come to understand that Prxs serve a function much more
complex than simply purging cells of a toxic molecule. This is in
part due to the discovery that peroxide not only creates oxidative
stress and participates in stress-related signaling, such as activating
the bacterial transcription regulator OxyR,8 but also in eukaryotes is an integral part of normal, “non-oxidative-stress-related”a cell regulation events.1 Such non-stress-related peroxide signaling is now known to be an
important factor involved in cell proliferation, angiogenesis, senescence,
and apoptosis.6,9,10 Non-oxidative-stress-related
peroxide signaling occurs, for instance, as a part of insulin-stimulated
activation of NADPH-oxidases (NOXs),11 or
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)-stimulated activation of a cytochrome
P450 that contributes to peroxide buildup (Figure 1). The peroxide bolus produced by such enzymes becomes a chemical
signal that leads to changes in protein activities through the reversible
oxidation of protein residues, like an active site cysteine of protein
tyrosine phosphatases.4 Other phospho-regulatory
enzymes, such as kinases CAMKII, PKA, and PKG, are oxidant-sensing
and also can be regulated by hydrogen peroxide (recently reviewed
by Burgoyne et al.11). Thus, a complex
interplay exists between Prxs and transcription factors, phosphatases,
kinases, and any cellular molecule capable of being modified by peroxide
(Figure 1). The important influence of Prxs
in cell homeostasis is supported by the observations that Prxs are
overexpressed in some human breast,12 lung,13 and thymic14 cancers,
and that when the most abundant Prx isoform is knocked out in mice
the animals develop malignant tumors and hemolytic anemia and die
prematurely.15

Figure 1 Examples of non-stress-related
peroxide signaling. The white panel
(left) shows a general scheme of growth factor-triggered peroxide
signaling.6 Binding of growth factor to
receptors (green) leads to the activation of oxidases (orange) and
the production of superoxide that is subsequently converted to peroxide.
Certain aquaporins (dark red) facilitate the entry of peroxide into
the cell137 where kinases (light purple),
phosphatases (dark purple), and transcription factors6,100 (dark blue) can be oxidatively activated or deactivated.137 Active Prxs (cyan toroid) degrade peroxides
but also can be inactivated by hyperoxidation (dark toroid); Srx (light
red) reactivates hyperoxidized Prxs. The magenta and purple panels
convey other examples of peroxide signaling highlighted in the text.
In LPA-mediated signaling104 (magenta,
bottom), binding of LPA to its receptor (green) activates NADPH oxidase
(NOX, orange), and through endocytosis, a “redoxosome”
is formed. Superoxide/peroxide accumulates in the redoxosome, and
it serves as a hub for modifying regulatory factors. In murine adrenal
corticosteroid production108 (purple, top
right), binding of ACTH to its receptor (green) leads to the activation
of the cAMP-PKA pathway (the transcription factor cAMP response element-binding
protein is denoted with an asterisk) and then phosphorylation and
activation of steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR); StAR
makes cholesterol available for CYP11A1- and CYP11B1-catalyzed conversion
via 11-deoxycorticosterone (DOC) to corticosterone (CS) and also produces
superoxide from which superoxide dismutase (SOD) produces peroxide.
The peroxide increasingly inactivates PrxIII and after further buildup
initiates a negative feedback loop by activating p38, which in turn
suppresses the synthesis of StAR.

There have been a number of recent reviews of Prxs that have
highlighted
structure–function relations,1,5 enzymology,16,17 and their roles in signaling.18 Here,
we seek to complement these reviews by organizing current knowledge
of the physiological roles of Prxs, exploring how evolution has optimized
Prx dynamics and thermodynamics to modulate their sensitivity to hyperoxidation,
assessing the distribution of its partner enzyme sulfiredoxin (Srx),19 and describing how drug design might take advantage
of the conformational changes that Prxs undergo.20−22 At present,
there are ∼120 Prx structures in the Protein Data Bank (PDB)
and more than 15000 annotated Prx genes,23 so a wealth of data is available.

Peroxidase Function of
Prxs
Catalytic Cycle
Prxs have been classified into subgroups
on the basis of functional site sequence similarity.3 These are Prx1, Prx5, Prx6, Tpx, AhpE, and PrxQ [proposed
recently24 to replace the uninformative
name of BCP (bacterioferritin comigratory protein) that has been used
for some members of this group]. These subgroups have variations in
their oligomerization, conformation, and some secondary structure
elements, and most organisms possess multiple isoforms5 (for example, humans contain four Prx1 subtypes, one Prx5
subtype, and one Prx6 subtype, whereas Escherichia coli has one Prx1, one Tpx, and one PrxQ). For all Prxs, however, catalysis
is facilitated by a peroxidatic Cys (CP) contained within
a universally conserved Pxxx(T/S)xxC active site motif3 (Figure 2). The active
site lowers the CP side chain pKa from ∼8.4 to ∼6 or even lower so that it is kept predominantly
in a nucleophilic, thiolate state.25−27

Figure 2 Catalysis by peroxiredoxins.
(A) Michaelis complex of peroxide
(green) bound to the FF active site of ApTpx (PDB
entry 3a2v)
with atom coloring (gray carbons, white hydrogens, yellow sulfurs,
red oxygens, and blue nitrogens) showing key hydrogen bonds (dashed
lines). (B) The normal Prx catalytic cycle (black) is shown along
with the hyperoxidation shunt (gray). To illustrate the change in
conformation necessary for Prx catalysis, the center shows a morph
between FF and LU conformations for the Prx1 subfamily member StAhpC; the CP- and CR-containing
chains are colored white and dark gray, respectively, and the C-terminal
region beyond CR is not shown. (C) An organic peroxide
and peroxynitrous acid are shown bound to the active site in ways
that mimic the interactions made by peroxide in panel A. “BB”
refers to a backbone NH hydrogen bond donor. The placement of the
hydrophobic collar seen in some organic peroxide selective Prxs is
noted by orange circles. (D) Chemical structures of some other molecules
recently reported to react with Prxs (see the text).

The conformation of the enzyme that possesses a
substrate-ready
active site pocket (Figure 2A) is termed “fully
folded” (FF). In the catalytic cycle (Figure 2B), the peroxide substrate binds to the FF active site where
it is attacked by the nucleophilic CP in an SN2-type reaction to form Cys-sulfenic acid (CP-SOH) and
water or alcohol. Subsequently, the active site locally unfolds, an
event that for some Prxs involves the rearrangement of as many as
∼35 residues20 (Figure 2B, center). As discussed later in more detail, a
second peroxide can react with CP-SOH to hyperoxidize the
enzyme to a dead-end CP-SO2–. Some organisms, mainly eukaryotes, contain Srx, which converts
the hyperoxidized form back to CP-SOH in an ATP-dependent
reaction.28 For a minority of Prxs, termed
“1-Cys” Prxs, the CP-SOH form is reduced
directly by an intracellular reductant such as glutathione or ascorbate.29 The majority of Prxs, called “2-Cys”
Prxs, have a second resolving Cys (CR) that forms a disulfide
bond with CP.5 Depending on
the Prx, the CR may be contained within the same chain
or, for some oligomeric Prxs, in the chain of another subunit. The
formation of the CP–CR disulfide requires
the active site to locally unfold, i.e., adopting a “locally
unfolded” (LU) conformation, that often involves substantial
rearrangements of both the CP and CR regions
(Figure 2B).5

To complete the catalytic cycle, the disulfide is commonly reduced
by thioredoxin (Trx), or a thioredoxin-like protein,30 and the Prx is returned to the FF conformation. Recently,
the first structure of a Prx–Trx complex was obtained, showing
one Trx on each side of a Prx dimer trapped in a mixed disulfide with
CR.31 However, given that this
particular yeast Prx possesses an unconventional N-terminal CR, it is unclear how representative the details of this interaction
may be for Prxs in general.

Reactivity toward Various Substrates
Structural work
has greatly elucidated the features important for substrate interactions,
with a peroxide-bound complex of Aeropyrum pernix thiol peroxidase32 providing a view of
a true Prx Michaelis complex (Figure 2A). Other
ligands bound at the active sites of Prx crystal structures include
molecules such as oxidized dithiothreitol (DTT),24,33 benzoate,34 acetate,32 formate,35 and glycerol,32 with the oxygens of these molecules mimicking
those of a peroxide. Analysis of these complexes led to a proposal
that the roughly 105-fold rate increase of the enzyme over
that of free cysteine is largely due to an extensive set of hydrogen
bonds that stabilize the transition state of the reaction,33 and this was supported by recently determined
experimental thermodynamic activation energies as well as quantum
mechanics/molecular mechanics simulations.36,37

Interestingly, though Prxs share a universal catalytic cycle
and active site, some are observed to have relatively broad substrate
specificity, while others are more selective.38 For instance, Salmonella typhimurium alkyl hydroperoxide
reductase C (StAhpC) is ∼100-fold more reactive
with hydrogen peroxide than with organic peroxides primarily because
of differences in Km.39 In contrast, human PrxV26 and E. coli thiol peroxidase (EcTpx)38 are ∼100- and ∼200-fold, respectively,
more reactive with organic peroxides. The preference of some Prxs
for organic peroxides has been attributed to a “hydrophobic
collar” of apolar side chains around their active site that
can make favorable hydrophobic interactions with the hydrocarbon part
of the substrate (Figure 2C). Such a conserved
hydrophobic collar was first observed in the Tpx subfamily,38 but other Prxs that efficiently reduce organic
peroxides, such as human PrxV,33 also possess
analogous collars. One commonality among various hydrophobic collars
is that a dimer partner is frequently seen to contribute a bulky hydrophobic
side chain to the collar across the dimer interface.24,31,33,38 The significance of this interaction is not fully understood but
may be related to a positive cooperativity seen for one Prx when consuming
organic peroxides.31 Another possible contributor
to substrate specificity proposed for a PrxQ from Xanthomonas
campestris is for an extended β-strand to fold down
and cap the active site after binding an organic peroxide.35

The ability of Prxs to reduce peroxynitrite
is also well-established.40 AhpCs from
the genera Salmonella, Mycobacterium, and Helicobacter were shown to efficiently reduce
peroxynitrite,41 as were Prxs from other
organisms such as Trypanosoma
cruzi tryparedoxin peroxidase42 and human PrxV.26,43 Experiments indicate that the
CP thiolate reacts with peroxynitrous acid44 (i.e., the protonated form that is readily formed at physiological
pHs45), and this is consistent with the
protonated form being better able to mimic peroxide binding in the
Prx active site (Figure 2C). Additionally,
lowering the pH from 7.8 to 7.4 (and increasing the fraction of peroxynitrous
acid present) increased the rate of peroxynitrite reduction by human
PrxV26 from ∼107 to ∼108 M–1 s–1.

Hypochlorous
acid (HOCl) is among the reactive oxygen species released
extracellularly by neutrophils to overwhelm pathogen redox systems,46 and HOCl can also lead to generation of chloramines
via spontaneous HOCl-amino reactions47,48 (Figure 2D). HOCl and chloramines readily oxidize thiol groups,
and recent studies indicate Prxs are targets of these chemical species.47,48 Human PrxIII did become oxidized when cells were treated with micromolar
levels (thought to be representative of in vivo concentrations)
of NH2Cl and HOCl, but reported rates are similar to that
of free thiols, suggesting the reaction is not substantially facilitated
by the enzyme.47,48 Given the prevalence of glutathione
and other cellular thiols, Prxs are not thought to be major sinks
for HOCl or chloramines.47 Nevertheless,
it can be seen that a major evolutionary advantage conferred by Prxs
is the ability to eliminate many forms of peroxide and apparently
even some other reactive species.

Knockdown and Knockout
Studies as Probes of the Physiological
Roles of Prxs
Prxs influence a variety of cellular processes,
and one approach
to discern their various physiological roles is to observe the phenotypes
that arise when cells or whole organisms are made deficient in terms
of these enzymes. Summarized here are the results of extensive knockdown
studies in cells from humans and in other organisms (Table S1 of the Supporting Information) and of knockout studies
for vertebrates (Table 1), other eukaryotes
(Table S2 of the Supporting Information), and prokaryotes (Table S3 of the Supporting
Information).

Table 1 Summary of Prx Knockout
Studies in
Vertebrates
organism/enzyme	ref	brief phenotypic
observations	
Mus musculus-PrxI	(66)	malignant cancers,
hemolytic
anemia, premature death	
M. musculus-PrxI	(58)	increased DNA oxidation,
increased c-Myc activation in embryonic fibroblasts	
M. musculus-PrxI	(65)	increased susceptibility
to Ras-induced breast cancer	
M. musculus-PrxII	(59)	increased protein oxidation
in red blood cells, hemolytic anemia	
M. musculus-PrxII	(67)	increased plaque formation,
predisposition to develop atherosclerosis	
M. musculus-PrxII	(69)	enlarged thymus, increased
T cell proliferation	
M. musculus-PrxII	(68)	increased splenocytes, bone
marrow differentiation	
M. musculus-PrxII	(71)	increased p21 and p53 levels,
increased cellular senescence	
M. musculus-PrxII	(60)	increased protein cysteine
oxidation in red blood cell fractions	
M. musculus-PrxIII	(61)	increased lung
damage from
inflammation, increased DNA damage	
M. musculus-PrxIII	(62)	increased fat mass,
increased
protein carbonylation in adipose tissue	
M. musculus-PrxIII	(72)	reduced litter
size, increased
oxidative stress in placenta tissue	
M. musculus-PrxIII	(73)	increased macrophage
apoptosis
by lipopolysaccharide treatment	
M. musculus-PrxIV	(74)	testicular atrophy, reduced
sperm viability in oxidative stress	
M. musculus-PrxVI	(134)	increased lung damage, decreased
animal survival due to hyperoxia	
M. musculus-PrxVI	(131)	increased ischemic reperfusion
injury, increased cardiomyocyte apoptosis	
M. musculus-PrxVI	(135)	decreased lung surfactant
degradation	
M. musculus-PrxVI	(64)	increased LDL oxidation
by macrophages, increased plasma lipid H2O2 levels	
M. musculus-PrxVI	(136)	increased UPR, increased
apoptosis in lens epithelial and aging cells	
Prx Deficiency in Eukaryotes
Humans
have six Prx isoforms,
which are localized in discrete parts of the cell. PrxI, PrxII, and
PrxVI are primarily cytosolic. PrxIII is mitochondrial. PrxIV is in
the endoplasmic reticulum and PrxV is in the cytosol as well as the
mitochondria and peroxisomes.4 The effects
of Prx knockdowns have been
characterized in at least one cell line for each isoform (Table S1
of the Supporting Information). One commonality
of these studies is an increase in the level of oxidative damage to
cellular components such as increases in levels of protein carbonylation49 and DNA oxidation.50 These effects are typically accompanied by reduced rates of growth
and survival and an increased rate of apoptotic cell death, especially
under conditions of oxidative stress.49,51−56 It is perhaps not surprising, therefore, that Prx deficiency also
contributes to cellular degeneration and decreases the viability of
cancer cells. For example, PrxI was designated as a tumor suppressor
upon the discovery that a histone deacetylase exerted its antitumor
properties by increasing the level of PrxI expression in cancerous
esophageal cells.57 Additionally, knockdowns
of PrxII51 and PrxVI55 in breast cancer cells were found to inhibit metastases.

Further elucidating the protective role of Prxs in mammals are
knockout analyses conducted on the homologous mouse enzymes (Table 1). As was seen in the human cell knockdowns, Prx
knockout mice show increased levels of oxidative damage to proteins,
lipids, and DNA that detrimentally affect a host of cellular processes
and often result in abnormal cellular regulation and growth.58−64 Mouse PrxI knockouts exhibit the most severe phenotype in which
c-Myc levels increase,58 Akt kinase levels
are elevated in fibroblasts and mammary epithelial cells,65 and death occurs by 9 months because of the
development of malignant tumors.66 PrxII-knockout
animals showed an increased level of atherosclerosis,67 an increased number of splenocytes, bone marrow differentiation,
and peripheral blood mononuclear cells,68 an enlarged thymus, an increased rate of T-cell proliferation,69,70 and elevation of p21 and p53 levels and increased cell senescence.71 PrxIII-null mice exhibited alterations in fat
metabolism, with increased fat mass, downregulation of adiponectin,
impaired glucose tolerance and insulin resistance,62 and a reduced litter size and general sensitivity to oxidative
stress as observed in placenta,72 macrophage,73 and lung cells.61 PrxIV was also found to influence reproductive success, as PrxIV-knockout
mice displayed testicular atrophy and reduced sperm viability under
conditions of oxidative stress.74

Prxs are further seen to be important for the viability of less
complex eukaryotes (Tables 1 and 2 of the Supporting
Information). Caenorhabditis elegans Prx knockdowns
show a 70% reduction in brood size, and individual growth is retarded.75,76 Also, studies of Prx-deficient disease-causing eukaryotes have implicated
Prxs as pathogenicity factors for a number of organisms, with Schistosoma showing decreased rates of survival and larval
size,77−79Trypanosoma brucei exhibiting a
16-fold increase in sensitivity to peroxide-induced death,80 and Leishmania infantum having
decreased infectivity in mice.81 In addition,
Tpx1 knockouts of Plasmodia have increased sensitivity
to paraquat and nitroprusside,82 produce
60% fewer gametes, exhibit delayed gaetocytemia,83 grow fewer sporozoites in mosquitoes, and are less effective
at infecting mice.84 Thus, these results
are consistent with Prxs being crucial components of pathogen redox
defenses.

Several studies have utilized fungal model organisms
to analyze
the effects of Prx knockouts (Table S2 of the Supporting Information). In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which has multiple Prx and glutathione peroxidase (Gpx) isoforms,
the knockout of individual Prxs resulted in increased sensitivity
to reactive oxygen and nitrogen species as well as an increased number
of DNA mutations.85 Not surprisingly, these
effects were magnified when all Prx isoforms were knocked out,85 and dual Prx/Gpx-null strains exhibited a ∼50%
shorter life span.86 The less extensively
studied Neurospora crassa showed altered circadian
periods and phases when a Prx was knocked out and peroxide-dependent
transcriptional responses were lost.87 Alterations
to circadian rhythms were also seen for Arabidopsis thaliana, the only plant for which a Prx deficiency has been well-characterized.87 Interestingly, Prx knockdowns in this model
plant impacted several plant-specific processes, such as an increased
level of foliar ascorbate oxidation,88 altered
gene expression in the chloroplast, and reduction of photosystem II
and cytochrome b6 content89 (Table S1 of the Supporting Information).

These studies demonstrate that Prxs in eukaryotes are essential
to normal function, as their absence results in damage to cell components
and promotes deterioration of cell cycle regulation; the latter especially
emphasizes that a vital role is played by Prxs in non-oxidative-stress-related
peroxide signaling. An interesting observation that arises from the
different effects seen in the knockout or knockdown of single Prxs
is that, despite their high level of sequence similarity and shared
peroxidase functionality, Prx isoforms do not have fully overlapping
functions. This is illustrated especially well for humans and mice,
for which the deficiency in each isoform resulted in distinct, deleterious
phenotypes (Tables 1 and Table S1 of the Supporting Information). One obvious contributor
to this lack of compensation is the discrete tissue expression profiles
and cellular locations of eukaryotic Prx isoforms.53 Besides the restrictions imposed by localization, the cytosol,
nucleus, ER, and mitochondria all have distinct redox environments90,91 (for a recent review, see ref (92)), and therefore, Prx isoforms have been specifically
tuned for optimal function in only certain cellular compartments.

Prx Deficiency in Bacteria
Unlike their eukaryotic
counterparts, bacteria are not known to utilize non-oxidative-stress-related
peroxide signaling. Thus, the lack of an evolutionary pressure to
allow for the localized buildup of peroxide constitutes a major difference
in the functional optimization of bacterial Prxs. As a consequence,
many bacterial Prxs have evolved to be highly “robust”
against inactivation by hyperoxidation, even at millimolar peroxide
concentrations.93 The advantage of this
robustness is especially apparent for pathogenic bacteria as Prxs
are utilized to defend against the reactive oxygen species employed
by attacking macrophages.94 Investigations
into the role of bacterial Prxs, therefore, have been largely focused
on disease-causing species (Table S3 of the Supporting
Information).

The most extreme dependence on Prxs so
far observed for a bacterial species is that of Helicobacter, for which knockouts displayed no growth under microaerobic conditions,95 were more susceptible to killing by macrophages,
and nearly lost their ability to colonize mouse stomachs.96 Likewise, for Staphylococcus aureus(97)and Mycobacterium bovis,98 Prx-deficient strains were shown to
have reduced infectivity. In general, minimal effects of some Prx
knockouts may be due to compensation by other redox defense enzymes.
Some support for this is found in that more adverse phenotypes are
observed for Vibrio parahemolyticus(99) and Brucella abortus(94) when two enzymes are knocked out at once. As discussed
above, substrate specificity may influence the essentiality of a certain
isoform or set of isoforms, and for Prxs specific for organic peroxides,
like E. coli Tpx, it is important to note that the
impact of the loss of its activity may be underestimated by challenges
with H2O2 alone.

Prx Hyperoxidation
Potential
Physiological Value of Prx Hyperoxidation
As noted above,
the CP-SOH state of a Prx can react with
a second peroxide and become hyperoxidized to a Cys-sulfinate (CP-SO2–), which inactivates the
enzyme’s peroxidase function (Figure 2B). Prokaryotic Prxs typically are rather resistant to hyperoxidation,
requiring millimolar concentrations of substrate, and have been termed
robust isoforms.100 In contrast, many eukaryotic
Prxs are quite readily hyperoxidized even though this makes them worse
peroxidases. For example, human PrxII is converted almost entirely
to the hyperoxidized state in the presence of only 40 μM peroxide
(with no reducing agent present), with a kSOH → kSO2 rate on the
order of ∼1.0 × 103 M–1 s–1 or higher.101,102 Such isoforms are
termed “sensitive”, because even at low peroxide levels
they are sensitive to being inactivated through hyperoxidation.100 To facilitate comparisons of sensitivity between
Prxs, the quantity Chyp1% was recently
introduced as a normalized way to quantify this property;93Chyp1% defines the
peroxide concentration at which 1% of Prx molecules become hyperoxidized
during each turnover. Using this terminology, it is apparent that
human PrxI (Chyp1% = 62 μM), human
PrxII (Chyp1% ∼ 1.5 μM),
and human PrxIII (Chyp1% ∼ 18 μM)
are much more sensitive than StAhpC (Chyp1% = ∼10000 μM).93,102

When Prx hyperoxidation was first discovered, its physiological
relevance was questioned, as in vivo peroxide concentrations
in healthy cells are thought to rarely exceed 1–15 μM.103 It has since been hypothesized that peroxide
levels may locally reach concentrations at which hyperoxidation can
occur,4 such as in the vicinity of peroxide-producing
enzymes such as NOXs (Figure 1). Recently,
the growth factor lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) was shown to stimulate
cellular internalization of NOX components into early endosomes, termed
“redoxosomes”, to serve as hubs for oxidative regulation104 (Figure 1). Strong support
for the existence of local peroxide buildup is an elegant study proving
that protein tyrosine phosphatases, which are not highly reactive
with peroxide, actually do become oxidized in vivo.105 Further, Prx hyperoxidation is observed in vivo in a variety of organisms and has been discussed
as a marker of ancient circadian rhythms,87,106 though the meaning or relevance of this latter observation is not
yet clear.

In terms of what evolutionary advantages could be
conferred to
the many eukaryotes that contain sensitive Prxs, there is as of yet
no final consensus. One explanation, termed the “floodgate
hypothesis”, proposes that Prx hyperoxidation is important
for enabling non-stress-related peroxide signaling in eukaryotes.100 In this model, low peroxide concentrations
are reduced efficiently, but when levels spike locally because of
the purposeful production of H2O2 by enzymes
such as NOX during signaling events,6 Prxs
are inactivated to allow the H2O2 to build up
sufficiently in a local area to oxidize downstream target proteins
(Figure 1). The dysregulation of this signaling
pathway provides an explanation for how knockouts of sensitive isoforms
in mammals (PrxI–IV) could result in the development of cancers,66 increased cell senescence,71 and malformed tissue and organs72,74 (Table 1 and Table S1 of the Supporting Information). As noted above, the
downstream targets that have been most extensively studied are the
protein tyrosine phosphatases that become inactivated through the
oxidation of a catalytic Cys residue (reviewed by Frijhoff et al.107). Nevertheless, the best documented example
of such a floodgate-style function of a Prx is in fact the role of
PrxIII in the negative feedback control of mammalian corticosteroid
production (Figure 1). As this process occurs
in adrenal gland mitochondria as a circadian cycle, an ACTH-activated
cytochrome P450 produces H2O2 as a byproduct
of making corticosteroids, and the inactivation of PrxIII allows peroxide
to build up sufficiently to lead to p38 activation and a shutting
down of the synthesis of the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein108 (Figure 1).

Additional
proposals that have been put forth for the possible
benefits of Prx hyperoxidation include their serving as chaperones,81,109,110 regulating senescence through
protein–protein interactions with p38MAPKα,111 and peroxide exposure dosimeters.2 Also, most recently, Day et al.112 showed that under extreme oxidative conditions the inactivation
of Prxs can serve to preserve the Trx pool for use by more essential
cellular systems.2 In that study, the survival
of Schizosaccharomyces pombe was greatly diminished
when its single Prx was not inactivated by millimolar
levels of peroxide.112 The authors showed
the Prx inactivation allowed the reduced Trx pool to be retained for
use by Trx-dependent repair enzymes such as methionine sulfoxide reductase.112 Though S. pombe in nature
would not normally encounter such high peroxide levels, these results
provide a valuable insight into the importance of maintaining a reduced
Trx pool. In relation to this, it was proposed that the eukaryotic
pathogen Schistosoma might possess both sensitive
and robust isoforms because it allows for the switching between reduction
sources; because the latter enzyme is preferentially reduced by the
glutathione/glutathione reductase system,113 the organism does not exclusively rely on Trx when enduring a peroxide
burst from a macrophage. It is also noteworthy that although Schistosoma do not possess catalase, peroxide disproportionation
by catalases, present in most cells, is in principle an alternative
approach by which cells can prevent the depletion of their reduced
Trx.2

Structural Features Influencing
the Sensitivity of Prx to Hyperoxidation
So what are the
structural features that give rise to sensitivity
to hyperoxidation? It was discovered that many Prx1 subfamily sensitive
Prxs contain two motifs that pack against the FF active site, a “GGLG”
and a C-terminal extension with a “YF”, which are not
present in most robust isoforms100 (Figure 3). By inhibiting the local unfolding of the active
site, these motifs serve to rigidify and stabilize the FF active site
and make the enzyme more susceptible to hyperoxidation.100 This mode of action and the greater importance
of the C-terminal YF motif to sensitivity were proven shortly thereafter
by a study showing that C-terminal swapping between sensitive and
robust isoforms from the eukaryotic parasite Schistosoma resulted in variants with reversed sensitivity.113 Likewise, a truncation of the C-terminal YF motif in human
PrxIV greatly diminished the enzyme’s sensitivity.114 On the basis of such results, it has sometimes
been generalized that only eukaryotes possess sensitive isoforms and
that sensitive and robust Prxs can be reliably distinguished by the
presence or absence of the GGLG and YF motifs, but these are both
oversimplifications.

Figure 3 Studies probing the structural basis for Prx hyperoxidation.
The
active site and C-terminal region are shown for HsPrxII (PDB entry 1qmv), with the GGLG and YF regions colored yellow. Sites where mutations
have been introduced as a means to explore the impact on hyperoxidation
for PrxI subfamily enzymes are colored pink.101 Elimination of the YF motif by C-terminal truncation (indicated
by Δ) has also been conducted.114

With regard to the first point,
some prokaryotes do possess sensitive
Prxs. A number of bacterial Prx isoforms have the GG(L/V/I)G and YF
(or YL or FL) motifs, and some have been shown to be sensitive,110,115,116 although they appear to be used
for antioxidant defense rather than regulating peroxide signaling.
Examples of this are two cyanobacterial species, Anabaena and Synechocystis, that both have sensitive Prxs.115Anabaena expresses its sensitive
isoform abundantly and utilizes an Srx to rescue any hyperoxidized
forms, while Synechocystis (which has no Srx) expresses
its moderately sensitive Prx only at low levels to mop up endogenous
peroxide and rapidly produces catalase to defend against higher peroxide
levels.115 Similarly, the bacterium Vibrio vulnificus was shown to possess both a sensitive
and a robust Prx,116 with trace amounts
of peroxide inducing the expression of the sensitive isoform, whereas
only high levels of peroxide induced the robust isoform, suggesting
that the two Prxs are utilized for discrete levels of oxidative stress.

With regard to the second point, a recent study of human PrxII
and PrxIII explored through mutagenesis the importance of secondary
features associated with the two regions101 (Figure 3). Both PrxII and PrxIII contain
the GGLG and YF motifs, but nevertheless, PrxIII is ∼10-fold
more robust. Swapping the identities of nearby residues between these
two isoforms generated more robust PrxII variants and also more sensitive
PrxIII variants, although again it was the presence of the C-terminal
YF positions that was most critical to promoting sensitivity.101 This proves that positions other than the GGLG
and YF motifs can also contribute to sensitivity or robustness. This
is especially exemplified by E. coli Tpx, which is
a fairly sensitive Prx (Chyp1% of 156
μM for cumene hydroperoxide93) even
though it does not contain either motif and is actually in a different
Prx subfamily. Also, Perkins et al.20 showed
that even conservative mutations such as CR → Ser
or Ala, commonly used to study the properties of Prxs, can actually
perturb the C-terminal packing sufficiently to shift the FF ↔
LU equilibrium toward LU and make the enzyme less sensitive. Such
modulations of sensitivity have been recently shown to occur physiologically,
as the C-terminal lysine acetylation of human PrxI117 and N-terminal acetylation of human PrxII118 led the enzymes to become robust. Further, nitration of
human PrxII Tyr193 (in the YF motif), detected in Alzheimer patient
brains, converted the enzyme to being robust and may play a role in
the development of the disease.119 Thus,
a small alteration to even one residue can potentially reduce the
fraction of the active FF population by orders of magnitude and thereby
inhibit hyperoxidation.

These complexities reinforce the point
that various Prxs have been
optimized to suit diverse needs, and although trends do exist, caution
must be employed when attempting to draw firm conclusions about Prx
sensitivity solely from a sequence fingerprint. In general, enzymatic
characterization is necessary to be certain, and there remains much
to learn about the occurrence and roles of sensitive versus robust
Prxs.

Distribution of Sulfiredoxin among Eukaryotes
Sulfiredoxin
(Srx) catalyzes the ATP-driven rescue of CP-SO2– back to CP-SOH19 and is present in many eukaryotes and a few cyanobacteria.115 Upon its discovery,120 Srx provided an explanation for how eukaryotes could allow sensitive
Prxs to be hyperoxidized without being wastefully irreversibly inactivated.
A crystal structure of a Prx–Srx complex140 revealed that the two enzymes embrace with the locally
unfolded Prx C-terminus wrapping around the backside of Srx, and the
Prx CP being placed into the Srx Gly-Cys-His-Arg (GCHR)
active site pocket near the bound ATP (Figure 4).28

Figure 4 Prx–Srx embrace. Shown is a crystal
structure of a human
PrxI dimer (light and dark gray) in complex with two Srx chains (green,
PDB entry 3hy2). Highlighted are the Prx CP (yellow), the GGLG motif
(red), the Srx active site (purple), and its bound ATP (sticks). The
Prx C-terminal YF motif is disordered and not shown.

Srx appears to be remarkably important for organisms
that express
it. Knockouts of Srx cope poorly with oxidative stress,121 with cells showing dramatically increased levels
of Prx hyperoxidation, apoptosis, and mitochondrial membrane potential
collapse.122 Conversely, the overexpression
of Srx has been observed to influence cell proliferation and pro-cancerous
activity, including altering the states of p21, p23, and p53.123 In yeast, the overexpression of Srx was shown
to increase the replicative life span by 20%.124 We expect that these phenotypes are largely due to altered
Prx regulation, but Srx has also been reported to possess deglutathionylation
activity.125 Two recent reviews provide
further details about the structure, function, and physiology of Srx.125,126 Here, assuming that the presence of Srx in an organism would suggest
a signaling-related physiological role for Prx hyperoxidation, we
have investigated the distribution of Srx in nature to seek insight
into the occurrence, and evolutionary roots, of peroxide signaling
pathways.

To perform an updated analysis of the distribution
of Srx, we used
BLAST127 to retrieve 335 Srx sequences
from the nonredundant protein database. Only sequences containing
the “GCHR” Srx active site fingerprint121 were included as a way to filter out proteins such as the
functionally unrelated bacterial chromosomal partition protein B (ParB),
which is a known homologue.128 An evolutionary
tree (Figure 5) reveals that Srx is present
and clusters distinctly in animals, fungi, plants, and some protists,
and as reported in a 2005 Srx evolution study,128 some cyanobacteria are the only prokaryotes to contain
an srx gene. This apparent wide distribution of Srx
among eukaryotes implies a relatively ancient existence of functional
Prx hyperoxidation.

Figure 5 Relatedness tree for Srx sequences. An unrooted phylogenetic
tree
of 335 Srx sequences is shown. Select organisms or groups of organisms
are noted. Sequences were retrieved from the nonredundant protein
database by BLAST127 on January 31, 2014,
with an expect threshold of 100 using the human Srx1 sequence, and
additional searches using distantly related Srx sequences did not
identify further homologues. Sequences were aligned with MUSCLE,138 and evolutionary distances were calculated
using PhyML.139

As a next step, we analyzed the 220 available sequenced eukaryotic
genomes and surprisingly found that only 56% of them contained an srx gene: fungi and protists quite commonly lack Srx, and
while most animals and plants contain Srx, a few animal exceptions
seem to exist (Table 2). For example, Xenopus apparently does not have Srx, and subsequent searches
for an amphibian srx gene did not yield any examples.
Also, especially noteworthy is the fact that many organisms causing
human disease, some of which had been mentioned in the 2005 study,128 do not possess Srx (Table 2). These include Entamoeba, apicomplexans
(such as Plasmodia species and Toxoplasma
gondii), the Diplomonad Giardia lamblia,
the parabasalid Trichomonas vaginalis, euglenozoa
(Trypanosoma and Leishmania species),
the nematodes Loa loa (eye worm) and Brugia
malayi (causes elephantitis), and the flatworm Schistosoma
mansoni.

Table 2 Presence of Sulfiredoxin in Eukaryotesa
animals	fungi	protists	plants	
vertebrates	ascomycetes	choanoflagellates (0/1)	eudicots (11/11)	
mammals (24/24)	saccharomycetes (25/25)	amoebozoa	monocots (6/6)	
birds (9/9)	sordariomycetes (0/9)	dictyostelium (3/3)	ferns (1/1)	
reptiles (1/2)b	leotiomycetes (0/2)	entamoeba (0/2)	mosses (1/1)	
amphibians (0/2)c	eurotiomycetes (0/15)	acanthamoeba (1/1)	green
algae (6/8)	
fish (6/6)	dothideomycetes (0/3)	alveolates	red algae (0/3)	
lancelets (1/1)	pezizomycetes (0/1)	apicomplexans (0/16)	 	
ascidians (1/1)	schizosaccharomycetes (1/1)	ciliates (0/2)	 	
echinoderms (1/1)	basidiomycetes (3/11)	stramenopiles	 	
arthropods	microsporidians (0/4)	diatoms (0/2)	 	
insects (19/20)d	 	oomycetes (0/1)	 	
mites/ticks (1/1)	 	eustigmatophytes (0/1)	 	
nematodes (1/5)	 	cryptomonads (0/1)	 	
flatworms (0/1)	 	haptophyta (0/1)	 	
cnidarians (1/2)	 	euglenozoa (0/7)	 	
placozoans (0/1)	 	heterolobosea (1/1)	 	
poriferans (0/1)	 	parabasalids (0/1)	 	
 	 	diplomonads (0/1)	 	
a Across 220 organisms
with sequenced
genomes, the fractions of the total found to possess an Srx are given
in parentheses. Groups containing any members with an Srx-encoding
gene are highlighted in bold.

b Searches of the Anolis carolinensis genome did not
yield an Srx sequence, but that of Ophiophagus
hannah (king cobra) did.

c Frogs from the genus Xenopus. Additional searches
yielded no amphibian Srx-possessing representatives.

d The mosquito Anopheles gambiae had no Srx, but two other mosquitos, Aedes aegypti and Culex quinquefasciatus, possessed an Srx gene.

The fact that Srx is present
in a diverse range of eukaryotes yet
is apparently absent from certain groups seems to be an important
observation. For those eukaryotes lacking Srx, some possibilities
for how they differ are that the Prx repair function is performed
by a different enzyme, that hyperoxidized Prxs are not rescued, and/or
that non-stress-related peroxide signaling is either not as important
or not similarly regulated by Prx hyperoxidation. In Sc. mansoni, which does not possess Srx but does have a sensitive Prx isoform,113 it has been shown that Prxs that become hyperoxidized
are not repaired.77 Whether they use peroxide
in non-stress-related signaling is unknown. Like Schistosoma, many of the eukaryotes that do not contain Srx do have at least one Prx isoform that contains the GGLG and YF motifs
(Table S4 of the Supporting Information). As discussed earlier, the presence of the GGLG and YF motifs does
not necessarily prove that a Prx is sensitive, but as is seen for
the Schistosoma enzyme, some may indeed be sensitive.

From these analyses, the additional question of why organisms that
seem to lack the ability to rescue hyperoxidized Prxs would retain
sensitive isoforms arises. Perhaps some of these organisms, such as
was seen for Vibrio,116 minimize waste by tightly regulating their sensitive Prxs to be
expressed only at basal levels of peroxide. A further consideration
is that because of cellular compartmentalization, even organisms that
do contain Srx may not necessarily efficiently rescue all hyperoxidized
Prxs. This is illustrated by a recent study showing that in human
fibrosarcoma cells, when ER-localized human PrxIV hyperoxidation is
induced through ER stress-generating agents, no rescue was observed,
leading the authors to conclude that no ER-localized Srx exists.129 We propose that the distribution pattern of
Srx in eukaryotes holds important clues about the physiological roles
of facile Prx hyperoxidation and that it is worthy of further study.

Efficacy of Targeting Prxs for Drug Design
From the wealth
of studies summarized above, we can conclude that
Prxs play prominent roles in protecting DNA and other cellular components
from oxidative damage, as well as influencing cell signaling, regulation,
and proliferation in multicellular eukaryotes. So what rationale is
there for the development of Prx-based therapeutics? A particularly
interesting development for mammalian Prxs is the recent proposal
that certain isoforms, especially PrxV and PrxVI, are danger signals
associated with ischemic brain injury.130,131 These enzymes
are released poststroke by necrotic brain cells and are specifically
detected by toll-like receptors of infiltrating macrophages, stimulating
inflammatory cytokine production and promoting ischemic brain damage.130 Antibodies against these Prxs were able to
attenuate injury, providing evidence that implicates them as viable
targets for future stroke therapeutics.130 Also, given that some cancers overexpressing Prxs are resistant
to radiation or other therapies,12−14 it is tempting to envision
that inhibiting human Prxs could have therapeutic value in some circumstances.
For Prxs from pathogens, however, the case that they are drug targets
seems very clear as Prx deficiencies in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic
pathogens are linked to viability and infectivity.

The oft-noted
challenge with regard to Prxs as drug targets is
that the Prx active site is highly conserved, making it very challenging
to make selective inhibitors targeting the active site. As an idea
for designing inhibitors that would not target the active site, Perkins
et al.20 proposed that the delicately balanced
FF ↔ LU equilibrium could be shifted by a small molecule to
stabilize a single conformation (either the FF or the LU), thereby
preventing the structural changes required for Prx catalysis. Surface
regions of the protein that are involved in the FF ↔ LU transition
are rather divergent in sequence and structure and can therefore be
targeted. One such example is the C-terminal region of the Prx1 subfamily.
If the LU form were stabilized, it would directly result in the loss
of peroxidase activity. Alternatively, if the FF form were stabilized,
and the CP was blocked from resolving with the CR, this would directly enhance activity but would
indirectly lead to inhibition by promoting hyperoxidation.20 Because most pathogens do not possess an Srx
to rescue the hyperoxidized form (e.g., Table 2), these Prxs would be permanently inactivated. Further, the affinity
of such an inhibitor could perhaps even be tuned so that it would
dissociate and go on to inactivate other Prxs, thereby leading to
an increased potency beyond a 1:1 ratio. Structures of many pathogenic
Prxs are available (for detailed reviews, see refs (5) and (132))—including bacterial
isoforms StAhpC, HpAhpC, Haemophilus influenza Tpx, MtAhpC, and MtTpx and eukaryotic isoforms132Plasmodium yoelii PrxI, Plasmodium vivax 2-Cys, and  Plasmodium falciparum Trx-Px2—so
rational drug design techniques such as virtual ligand screening133 could be applied to identify leads. These approaches
for Prx-targeted therapeutics warrant investigation, because two decades
of Prx research can now be used for guidance, and if the effort is
successful, it could provide novel antibiotics for some of the most
virulent modern diseases.

Supporting Information Available
Summary of Prx knockdown studies
(Table S1), summary of Prx knockout studies in various eukaryotes
(Table S2), summary of Prx knockout studies in prokaryotes (Table
S3), and a list of representative eukaryotes that lack Srx but have
Prxs with GGLG/YF motifs (Table S4). This material is available free
of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5013222_si_001.pdf

 This study was
supported in part by National Institutes of Health Grant R01 GM050389
to L.B.P. and P.A.K.

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
Prxperoxiredoxin

Srxsulfiredoxin

NOXNADPH oxidase

ACTHadrenocorticotropic hormone

PDBProtein Data Bank

CPperoxidatic
cysteine

CRresolving cysteine

FFfully folded

LUlocally unfolded

DTTdithiothreitol

HOClhypochlorous acid

Gpxglutathione peroxidase

LPAlysophosphatidic acid

ParBchromosomal partitioning protein B.

a Although the term “peroxide
signaling” can refer to both stress- and non-stress-related
signaling,1,2 here we exclusively use this term in reference
to non-stress-related signaling.



   
References
Hall A. ; Karplus P. A. ; Poole L. B.  (2009 ) Typical
2-Cys peroxiredoxins: Structures,
mechanisms and functions . FEBS J. 
276 , 2469 –2477 .19476488 
Karplus P. A. ; Poole L. B.  (2012 ) Peroxiredoxins as
Molecular Triage Agents, Sacrificing
Themselves to Enhance Cell Survival During a Peroxide Attack . Mol. Cell 
45 , 275 –278 .22325349 
Nelson K. J. ; Knutson S. T. ; Soito L. ; Klomsiri C. ; Poole L. B. ; Fetrow J. S.  (2010 ) Analysis of the peroxiredoxin family: Using active-site
structure and sequence information for global classification and residue
analysis . Proteins: Struct., Funct., Bioinf. 
79 , 947 –964 .
Rhee S. G. ; Woo H. A. ; Kil I. S. ; Bae S. H.  (2012 ) Peroxiredoxin Functions
as a Peroxidase and a Regulator and Sensor of Local Peroxides . J. Biol. Chem. 
287 , 4403 –4410 .22147704 
Hall A. ; Nelson K. ; Poole L. B. ; Karplus P. A.  (2011 ) Structure-based
Insights into the Catalytic Power and Conformational Dexterity of
Peroxiredoxins . Antioxid. Redox Signaling 
15 , 795 –815 .
Giorgio M. ; Trinei M. ; Migliaccio E. ; Pelicci P. G.  (2007 ) Hydrogen peroxide:
A metabolic by-product or a common mediator of ageing signals? . Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 
8 , 722 –728 .17700625 
Copley S. D. ; Novak W. R. P. ; Babbitt P. C.  (2004 ) Divergence of Function in the Thioredoxin
Fold Suprafamily: Evidence for Evolution of Peroxiredoxins from a
Thioredoxin-like Ancestor . Biochemistry 
43 , 13981 –13995 .15518547 
Zheng M. ; Åslund F. ; Storz G.  (1998 ) Activation of the OxyR Transcription
Factor by Reversible Disulfide Bond Formation . Science 
279 , 1718 –1722 .9497290 
Frey R. S. ; Ushio-Fukai M. ; Malik A. B.  (2009 ) NADPH Oxidase-Dependent Signaling
in Endothelial Cells: Role in Physiology and Pathophysiology . Antioxid. Redox Signaling 
11 , 791 –810 .
Antico
Arciuch V. G. ; Elguero M. E. ; Poderoso J. J. ; Carreras M. C.  (2011 ) Mitochondrial
Regulation of Cell Cycle and Proliferation . Antioxid. Redox Signaling 
16 , 1150 –1180 .
Burgoyne J. R. ; Oka S. ; Ale-Agha N. ; Eaton P.  (2013 ) Hydrogen Peroxide Sensing and Signaling
by Protein Kinases in the Cardiovascular System . Antioxid. Redox Signaling 
18 , 1042 –1052 .
Dy N. ; Sj A. ; Ra L. ; Sw K. ; Ia P. ; Hz C.  (2000 ) Overexpression
of peroxiredoxin in human breast cancer . Anticancer
Res. 
21 , 2085 –2090 .
Chang J. W. ; Jeon H. B. ; Lee J. H. ; Yoo J. S. ; Chun J. S. ; Kim J. H. ; Yoo Y. J.  (2001 ) Augmented
Expression of Peroxiredoxin
I in Lung Cancer . Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 
289 , 507 –512 .11716502 
Nonn L. ; Berggren M. ; Powis G.  (2003 ) Increased
Expression of Mitochondrial
Peroxiredoxin-3 (Thioredoxin Peroxidase-2) Protects Cancer Cells Against
Hypoxia and Drug-Induced Hydrogen Peroxide-Dependent Apoptosis . Mol. Cancer Res. 
1 , 682 –689 .12861054 
Neumann C. A. ; Krause D. S. ; Carman C. V. ; Das S. ; Dubey D. P. ; Abraham J. L. ; Bronson R. T. ; Fujiwara Y. ; Orkin S. H. ; Van Etten R. A.  (2003 ) Essential role for the peroxiredoxin Prdx1 in erythrocyte
antioxidant defence and tumour suppression . Nature 
424 , 561 –565 .12891360 
Rhee S. G. ; Chae H. Z. ; Kim K.  (2005 ) Peroxiredoxins:
A historical overview
and speculative preview of novel mechanisms and emerging concepts
in cell signaling . Free Radical Biol. Med. 
38 , 1543 –1552 .15917183 
Barranco-Medina S. ; Lázaro J.-J. ; Dietz K.-J.  (2009 ) The oligomeric conformation of peroxiredoxins
links redox state to function . FEBS Lett. 
583 , 1809 –1816 .19464293 
Rhee S. G. ; Yang K.-S. ; Kang S. W. ; Woo H. A. ; Chang T.-S.  (2005 ) Controlled
Elimination of Intracellular H2O2: Regulation
of Peroxiredoxin, Catalase, and Glutathione Peroxidase via Post-translational
Modification . Antioxid. Redox Signaling 
7 , 619 –626 .
Rhee S. G. ; Jeong W. ; Chang T.-S. ; Woo H. A.  (2007 ) Sulfiredoxin, the
cysteine sulfinic acid reductase specific to 2-Cys peroxiredoxin:
Its discovery, mechanism of action, and biological significance . Kidney Int. 
72 , S3 –S8 .
Perkins A. ; Nelson K. J. ; Williams J. R. ; Parsonage D. ; Poole L. B. ; Karplus P. A.  (2013 ) The Sensitive Balance between the
Fully Folded and Locally Unfolded Conformations of a Model Peroxiredoxin . Biochemistry 
52 , 8708 –8721 .24175952 
Cioli D. ; Valle C. ; Angelucci F. ; Miele A. E.  (2008 ) Will new antischistosomal
drugs finally emerge? . Trends Parasitol. 
24 , 379 –382 .18675590 
Piñeyro M. D. ; Parodi-Talice A. ; Arcari T. ; Robello C.  (2008 ) Peroxiredoxins from Trypanosoma cruzi: Virulence factors and drug targets
for treatment of Chagas disease? . Gene 
408 , 45 –50 .18022330 
Maglott D. ; Ostell J. ; Pruitt K. D. ; Tatusova T.  (2005 ) Entrez Gene: Gene-centered
information at NCBI . Nucleic Acids Res. 
33 , D54 –D58 .15608257 
Perkins A. ; Gretes M. C. ; Nelson K. J. ; Poole L. B. ; Karplus P. A.  (2012 ) Mapping
the Active Site Helix-to-Strand Conversion of CxxxxC Peroxiredoxin
Q Enzymes . Biochemistry 
51 , 7638 –7650 .22928725 
Nelson K. J. ; Parsonage D. ; Hall A. ; Karplus P. A. ; Poole L. B.  (2008 ) Cysteine
pKa Values for the Bacterial Peroxiredoxin AhpC . Biochemistry 
47 , 12860 –12868 .18986167 
Trujillo M. ; Clippe A. ; Manta B. ; Ferrer-Sueta G. ; Smeets A. ; Declercq J.-P. ; Knoops B. ; Radi R.  (2007 ) Pre-steady
state kinetic characterization of human peroxiredoxin 5: Taking advantage
of Trp84 fluorescence increase upon oxidation . Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 
467 , 95 –106 .17892856 
Ferrer-Sueta G. ; Manta B. ; Botti H. ; Radi R. ; Trujillo M. ; Denicola A.  (2011 ) Factors affecting protein thiol reactivity and specificity
in peroxide reduction . Chem. Res. Toxicol. 
24 , 434 –450 .21391663 
Jeong W. ; Park S. J. ; Chang T.-S. ; Lee D.-Y. ; Rhee S. G.  (2006 ) Molecular
Mechanism of the Reduction of Cysteine Sulfinic Acid of Peroxiredoxin
to Cysteine by Mammalian Sulfiredoxin . J. Biol.
Chem. 
281 , 14400 –14407 .16565085 
Monteiro G. ; Horta B. B. ; Pimenta D. C. ; Augusto O. ; Netto L. E. S.  (2007 ) Reduction
of 1-Cys peroxiredoxins by ascorbate changes the thiol-specific antioxidant
paradigm, revealing another function of vitamin C . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
104 , 4886 –4891 .17360337 
Jönsson T. J. ; Ellis H. R. ; Poole L. B.  (2007 ) Cysteine Reactivity and Thiol–Disulfide
Interchange Pathways in AhpF and AhpC of the Bacterial Alkyl Hydroperoxide
Reductase System . Biochemistry 
46 , 5709 –5721 .17441733 
Lian F.-M. ; Yu J. ; Ma X.-X. ; Yu X.-J. ; Chen Y. ; Zhou C.-Z.  (2012 ) Structural
Snapshots of Yeast Alkyl Hydroperoxide Reductase Ahp1 Peroxiredoxin
Reveal a Novel Two-cysteine Mechanism of Electron Transfer to Eliminate
Reactive Oxygen Species . J. Biol. Chem. 
287 , 17077 –17087 .22474296 
Nakamura T. ; Kado Y. ; Yamaguchi T. ; Matsumura H. ; Ishikawa K. ; Inoue T.  (2010 ) Crystal Structure of
Peroxiredoxin
from Aeropyrum pernix K1 Complexed
with Its Substrate, Hydrogen Peroxide . J. Biochem. 
147 , 109 –115 .19819903 
Hall A. ; Parsonage D. ; Poole L. B. ; Karplus P. A.  (2010 ) Structural Evidence
that Peroxiredoxin Catalytic Power Is Based on Transition-State Stabilization . J. Mol. Biol. 
402 , 194 –209 .20643143 
Evrard C. ; Capron A. ; Marchand C. ; Clippe A. ; Wattiez R. ; Soumillion P. ; Knoops B. ; Declercq J.-P.  (2004 ) Crystal Structure
of a Dimeric Oxidized form of Human Peroxiredoxin 5 . J. Mol. Biol. 
337 , 1079 –1090 .15046979 
Liao S.-J. ; Yang C.-Y. ; Chin K.-H. ; Wang A. H.-J. ; Chou S.-H.  (2009 ) Insights
into the Alkyl Peroxide Reduction Pathway of Xanthomonas
campestris Bacterioferritin Comigratory Protein from
the Trapped Intermediate–Ligand Complex Structures . J. Mol. Biol. 
390 , 951 –966 .19477183 
Portillo-Ledesma S. ; Sardi F. ; Manta B. ; Tourn M. V. ; Clippe A. ; Knoops B. ; Alvarez B. ; Coitino E. L. ; Ferrer-Sueta G.  (2014 ) Deconstructing
the catalytic efficiency of peroxiredoxin-5 peroxidatic cysteine . Biochemistry 
53 , 6113 –6125 .25184942 
Zeida A. ; Reyes A. M. ; Lebrero M. C. G. ; Radi R. ; Trujillo M. ; Estrin D. A.  (2014 ) The extraordinary catalytic ability of peroxiredoxins:
A combined experimental and QM/MM study on the fast thiol oxidation
step . Chem. Commun. 
50 , 10070 –10073 .
Hall A. ; Sankaran B. ; Poole L. B. ; Karplus P. A.  (2009 ) Structural
Changes
Common to Catalysis in the Tpx Peroxiredoxin Subfamily . J. Mol. Biol. 
393 , 867 –881 .19699750 
Parsonage D. ; Karplus P. A. ; Poole L. B.  (2008 ) Substrate specificity and redox potential
of AhpC, a bacterial peroxiredoxin . Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
105 , 8209 –8214 .18165315 
Trujillo M. , Ferrer-Sueta G. , Thomson L. , Flohé L. , and Radi R.   (2007 ) in Peroxiredoxin Systems  (Flohé L. , and Harris J. R.  , Eds.) Vol. 44 , pp 83 –113 , Springer , Dordrecht, The Netherlands .
Bryk R. ; Griffin P. ; Nathan C.  (2000 ) Peroxynitrite
reductase activity
of bacterial peroxiredoxins . Nature 
407 , 211 –215 .11001062 
Piacenza L. ; Peluffo G. ; Alvarez M. N. ; Kelly J. M. ; Wilkinson S. R. ; Radi R.  (2008 ) Peroxiredoxins play
a major role in protecting Trypanosoma
cruzi against macrophage- and endogenously-derived
peroxynitrite . Biochem. J. 
410 , 359 .17973627 
Dubuisson M. ; Vander Stricht D. ; Clippe A. ; Etienne F. ; Nauser T. ; Kissner R. ; Koppenol W. H. ; Rees J.-F. ; Knoops B.  (2004 ) Human peroxiredoxin
5 is a peroxynitrite reductase . FEBS Lett. 
571 , 161 –165 .15280035 
Trujillo M. ; Radi R.  (2002 ) Peroxynitrite Reaction
with the Reduced and the Oxidized Forms of
Lipoic Acid: New Insights into the Reaction of Peroxynitrite with
Thiols . Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 
397 , 91 –98 .11747314 
Beckman J. S. ; Beckman T. W. ; Chen J. ; Marshall P. A. ; Freeman B. A.  (1990 ) Apparent
hydroxyl radical production by peroxynitrite: Implications for endothelial
injury from nitric oxide and superoxide . Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
87 , 1620 –1624 .2154753 
Hampton M. B. ; Kettle A. J. ; Winterbourn C. C.  (1998 ) Inside the Neutrophil Phagosome:
Oxidants, Myeloperoxidase, and Bacterial Killing . Blood 
92 , 3007 –3017 .9787133 
Stacey M.
M. ; Peskin A. V. ; Vissers M. C. ; Winterbourn C. C.  (2009 ) Chloramines
and hypochlorous acid oxidize erythrocyte peroxiredoxin 2 . Free Radical Biol. Med. 
47 , 1468 –1476 .19716412 
Stacey M. M. ; Vissers M. C. ; Winterbourn C. C.  (2012 ) Oxidation of 2-Cys Peroxiredoxins
in Human Endothelial Cells by Hydrogen Peroxide, Hypochlorous Acid,
and Chloramines . Antioxid. Redox Signaling 
17 , 411 –421 .
De
Simoni S. ; Goemaere J. ; Knoops B.  (2008 ) Silencing of peroxiredoxin
3 and peroxiredoxin 5 reveals the role of mitochondrial peroxiredoxins
in the protection of human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells toward MPP+ . Neurosci. Lett. 
433 , 219 –224 .18262354 
Kropotov A. ; Serikov V. ; Suh J. ; Smirnova A. ; Bashkirov V. ; Zhivotovsky B. ; Tomilin N.  (2006 ) Constitutive expression of the human
peroxiredoxin V gene contributes to protection of the genome from
oxidative DNA lesions and to suppression of transcription of noncoding
DNA . FEBS J. 
273 , 2607 –2617 .16817890 
Stresing V. ; Baltziskueta E. ; Rubio N. ; Blanco J. ; Arriba M. ; Valls J. ; Janier M. ; Clézardin P. ; Sanz-Pamplona R. ; Nieva C. ; Marro M. ; Dmitri P. ; Sierra A.  (2013 ) Peroxiredoxin 2 specifically regulates the oxidative
and metabolic stress response of human metastatic breast cancer cells
in lungs . Oncogene 
32 , 724 –735 .22430214 
Mukhopadhyay S. S. ; Leung K. S. ; Hicks M. J. ; Hastings P. J. ; Youssoufian H. ; Plon S. E.  (2006 ) Defective mitochondrial peroxiredoxin-3
results in
sensitivity to oxidative stress in Fanconi anemia . J. Cell Biol. 
175 , 225 –235 .17060495 
Tavender T. J. ; Bulleid N. J.  (2010 ) Peroxiredoxin IV protects cells from oxidative stress
by removing H2O2 produced during disulphide
formation . J. Cell Sci. 
123 , 2672 –2679 .20627953 
Tavender T. J. ; Sheppard A. M. ; Bulleid N. J.  (2008 ) Peroxiredoxin IV
is an endoplasmic
reticulum-localized enzyme forming oligomeric complexes in human cells . Biochem. J. 
411 , 191 .18052930 
Chang X.-Z. ; Li D.-Q. ; Hou Y.-F. ; Wu J. ; Lu J.-S. ; Di G.-H. ; Jin W. ; Ou Z.-L. ; Shen Z.-Z. ; Shao Z.-M.  (2007 ) Identification of the functional
role of peroxiredoxin
6 in the progression of breast cancer . Breast
Cancer Res. 
9 , R76 .17980029 
Kim S. Y. ; Chun E. ; Lee K.-Y.  (2011 ) Phospholipase
A2 of peroxiredoxin
6 has a critical role in tumor necrosis factor-induced apoptosis . Cell Death Differ. 
18 , 1573 –1583 .21415860 
Hoshino I. ; Matsubara H. ; Hanari N. ; Mori M. ; Nishimori T. ; Yoneyama Y. ; Akutsu Y. ; Sakata H. ; Matsushita K. ; Seki N. ; Ochiai T.  (2005 ) Histone Deacetylase Inhibitor FK228
Activates Tumor Suppressor Prdx1 with Apoptosis Induction in Esophageal
Cancer Cells . Clin. Cancer Res. 
11 , 7945 –7952 .16278420 
Egler R. A. ; Fernandes E. ; Rothermund K. ; Sereika S. ; de Souza-Pinto N. ; Jaruga P. ; Dizdaroglu M. ; Prochownik E. V.  (2005 ) Regulation
of reactive oxygen species, DNA damage, and c-Myc function by peroxiredoxin
1 . Oncogene 
24 , 8038 –8050 .16170382 
Lee T.-H. ; Kim S.-U. ; Yu S.-L. ; Kim S. H. ; Park D. S. ; Moon H.-B. ; Dho S. H. ; Kwon K.-S. ; Kwon H. J. ; Han Y.-H. ; Jeong S. ; Kang S. W. ; Shin H.-S. ; Lee K.-K. ; Rhee S. G. ; Yu D.-Y.  (2003 ) Peroxiredoxin II
is essential for sustaining life span of erythrocytes in mice . Blood 
101 , 5033 –5038 .12586629 
Yang H.-Y. ; Kwon J. ; Choi H.-I. ; Park S. H. ; Yang U. ; Park H.-R. ; Ren L. ; Chung K.-J. ; Kim Y. U. ; Park B.-J. ; Jeong S.-H. ; Lee T.-H.  (2012 ) In-depth analysis
of cysteine oxidation by the RBC proteome: Advantage of peroxiredoxin
II knockout mice . Proteomics 
12 , 101 –112 .22113967 
Li L. ; Shoji W. ; Takano H. ; Nishimura N. ; Aoki Y. ; Takahashi R. ; Goto S. ; Kaifu T. ; Takai T. ; Obinata M.  (2007 ) Increased susceptibility of MER5
(peroxiredoxin III) knockout mice to LPS-induced oxidative stress . Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 
355 , 715 –721 .17316558 
Huh J. Y. ; Kim Y. ; Jeong J. ; Park J. ; Kim I. ; Huh K. H. ; Kim Y. S. ; Woo H. A. ; Rhee S. G. ; Lee K.-J. ; Ha H.  (2012 ) Peroxiredoxin 3 Is a Key Molecule Regulating Adipocyte Oxidative
Stress, Mitochondrial Biogenesis, and Adipokine Expression . Antioxid. Redox Signaling 
16 , 229 –243 .
Manevich Y. ; Fisher A. B.  (2005 ) Peroxiredoxin 6, a 1-Cys peroxiredoxin, functions in
antioxidant defense and lung phospholipid metabolism . Free Radical Biol. Med. 
38 , 1422 –1432 .15890616 
Wang X. ; Phelan S. A. ; Petros C. ; Taylor E. F. ; Ledinski G. ; Jürgens G. ; Forsman-Semb K. ; Paigen B.  (2004 ) Peroxiredoxin 6 deficiency
and atherosclerosis susceptibility in mice: Significance of genetic
background for assessing atherosclerosis . Atherosclerosis 
177 , 61 –70 .15488866 
Cao J. ; Schulte J. ; Knight A. ; Leslie N. R. ; Zagozdzon A. ; Bronson R. ; Manevich Y. ; Beeson C. ; Neumann C. A.  (2009 ) Prdx1 inhibits
tumorigenesis via regulating PTEN/AKT activity . EMBO J. 
28 , 1505 –1517 .19369943 
Neumann C.
A. ; Krause D. S. ; Carman C. V. ; Das S. ; Dubey D. P. ; Abraham J. L. ; Bronson R. T. ; Fujiwara Y. ; Orkin S. H. ; Van Etten R. A.  (2003 ) Essential
role for the peroxiredoxin Prdx1 in erythrocyte
antioxidant defence and tumour suppression . Nature 
424 , 561 –565 .12891360 
Park J.-G. ; Yoo J.-Y. ; Jeong S.-J. ; Choi J.-H. ; Lee M.-R. ; Lee M.-N. ; Lee J. H. ; Kim H. C. ; Jo H. ; Yu D.-Y. ; Kang S. W. ; Rhee S. G. ; Lee M.-H. ; Oh G. T.  (2011 ) Peroxiredoxin 2
Deficiency Exacerbates Atherosclerosis in Apolipoprotein
E-Deficient Mice . Circ. Res. 
109 , 739 –749 .21835911 
Moon E.-Y. ; Noh Y.-W. ; Han Y.-H. ; Kim S.-U. ; Kim J.-M. ; Yu D.-Y. ; Lim J.-S.  (2006 ) T lymphocytes and
dendritic cells
are activated by the deletion of peroxiredoxin II (Prx II) gene . Immunol. Lett. 
102 , 184 –190 .16290204 
Moon E.-Y. ; Han Y. H. ; Lee D.-S. ; Han Y.-M. ; Yu D.-Y.  (2004 ) Reactive
oxygen species induced by the deletion of peroxiredoxin II (PrxII)
increases the number of thymocytes resulting in the enlargement of
PrxII-null thymus . Eur. J. Immunol. 
34 , 2119 –2128 .15259009 
Michalek R. D. ; Crump K. E. ; Weant A. E. ; Hiltbold E. M. ; Juneau D. G. ; Moon E.-Y. ; Yu D.-Y. ; Poole L. B. ; Grayson J. M.  (2012 ) Peroxiredoxin
II Regulates Effector and Secondary Memory CD8+ T Cell Responses . J. Virol. 
86 , 13629 –13641 .23055551 
Han Y.-H. ; Kim H.-S. ; Kim J.-M. ; Kim S.-K. ; Yu D.-Y. ; Moon E.-Y.  (2005 ) Inhibitory
role of peroxiredoxin II (Prx II) on cellular
senescence . FEBS Lett. 
579 , 4897 –4902 .16109412 
Li L. ; Shoji W. ; Oshima H. ; Obinata M. ; Fukumoto M. ; Kanno N.  (2008 ) Crucial role of peroxiredoxin III in placental antioxidant defense
of mice . FEBS Lett. 
582 , 2431 –2434 .18544346 
Li L. ; Kaifu T. ; Obinata M. ; Takai T.  (2009 ) Peroxiredoxin III-deficiency
Sensitizes Macrophages to Oxidative Stress . J. Biochem. 
145 , 425 –427 .19155266 
Iuchi Y. ; Okada F. ; Tsunoda S. ; Kibe N. ; Shirasawa N. ; Ikawa M. ; Okabe M. ; Ikeda Y. ; Fujii J.  (2009 ) Peroxiredoxin
4 knockout results in elevated spermatogenic cell death via oxidative
stress . Biochem. J. 
419 , 149 .19105792 
Isermann K. ; Liebau E. ; Roeder T. ; Bruchhaus I.  (2004 ) A Peroxiredoxin
Specifically Expressed in Two Types of Pharyngeal Neurons is Required
for Normal Growth and Egg Production in Caenorhabditis
elegans . J. Mol. Biol. 
338 , 745 –755 .15099742 
Ranjan M. ; Gruber J. ; Ng L. F. ; Halliwell B.  (2013 ) Repression
of the mitochondrial peroxiredoxin antioxidant system does not shorten
life span but causes reduced fitness in Caenorhabditis
elegans . Free Radical Biol.
Med. 
63 , 381 –389 .23722165 
Sayed A. A. ; Cook S. K. ; Williams D. L.  (2006 ) Redox Balance
Mechanisms in Schistosoma mansoni Rely
on Peroxiredoxins and Albumin
and Implicate Peroxiredoxins as Novel Drug Targets . J. Biol. Chem. 
281 , 17001 –17010 .16606626 
de
Moraes Mourão M. ; Dinguirard N. ; Franco G. R. ; Yoshino T. P.  (2009 ) Phenotypic
Screen of Early-Developing Larvae of the Blood Fluke, Schistosoma mansoni, using RNA Interference . PLoS Neglected Trop. Dis. 
3 , e502 .
Kumagai T. ; Osada Y. ; Ohta N. ; Kanazawa T.  (2009 ) Peroxiredoxin-1 from Schistosoma japonicum functions as a scavenger against
hydrogen peroxide but not nitric oxide . Mol.
Biochem. Parasitol. 
164 , 26 –31 .19041905 
Wilkinson S. R. ; Horn D. ; Prathalingam S. R. ; Kelly J. M.  (2003 ) RNA Interference
Identifies Two Hydroperoxide Metabolizing Enzymes That Are Essential
to the Bloodstream Form of the African Trypanosome . J. Biol. Chem. 
278 , 31640 –31646 .12791697 
Castro H. ; Teixeira F. ; Romao S. ; Santos M. ; Cruz T. ; Flórido M. ; Appelberg R. ; Oliveira P. ; Ferreira-da-Silva F. ; Tomás A. M.  (2011 ) Leishmania Mitochondrial
Peroxiredoxin Plays a Crucial Peroxidase-Unrelated Role during Infection:
Insight into Its Novel Chaperone Activity . PLoS
Pathog. 
7 , e1002325 .22046130 
Komaki-Yasuda K. ; Kawazu S. ; Kano S.  (2003 ) Disruption
of the Plasmodium falciparum 2-Cys
peroxiredoxin gene renders
parasites hypersensitive to reactive oxygen and nitrogen species . FEBS Lett. 
547 , 140 –144 .12860402 
Yano K. ; Komaki-Yasuda K. ; Tsuboi T. ; Torii M. ; Kano S. ; Kawazu S.  (2006 ) 2-Cys Peroxiredoxin TPx-1 is involved in gametocyte
development in Plasmodium berghei . Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 
148 , 44 –51 .16597467 
Yano K. ; Otsuki H. ; Arai M. ; Komaki-Yasuda K. ; Tsuboi T. ; Torii M. ; Kano S. ; Kawazu S.-I.  (2008 ) Disruption
of the Plasmodium berghei 2-Cys peroxiredoxin
TPx-1 gene hinders the sporozoite development in the vector mosquito . Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 
159 , 142 –145 .18417228 
Wong C.-M. ; Siu K.-L. ; Jin D.-Y.  (2004 ) Peroxiredoxin-null yeast cells are
hypersensitive to oxidative stress and are genomically unstable . J. Biol. Chem. 
279 , 23207 –23213 .15051715 
Fomenko D. E. ; Koc A. ; Agisheva N. ; Jacobsen M. ; Kaya A. ; Malinouski M. ; Rutherford J. C. ; Siu K.-L. ; Jin D.-Y. ; Winge D. R. ; Gladyshev V. N.  (2011 ) Thiol peroxidases mediate specific genome-wide regulation
of gene expression in response to hydrogen peroxide . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
108 , 2729 –2734 .21282621 
Edgar R. S. ; Green E. W. ; Zhao Y. ; van Ooijen G. ; Olmedo M. ; Qin X. ; Xu Y. ; Pan M. ; Valekunja U. K. ; Feeney K. A. ; Maywood E. S. ; Hastings M. H. ; Baliga N. S. ; Merrow M. ; Millar A. J. ; Johnson C. H. ; Kyriacou C. P. ; O’Neill J. S. ; Reddy A. B.  (2012 ) Peroxiredoxins are
conserved markers of circadian rhythms . Nature 
485 , 459 –464 .22622569 
Baier M. ; Noctor G. ; Foyer C. H. ; Dietz K.-J.  (2000 ) Antisense Suppression
of 2-Cysteine Peroxiredoxin in Arabidopsis Specifically Enhances the Activities and Expression of Enzymes Associated
with Ascorbate Metabolism But Not Glutathione Metabolism . Plant Physiol. 
124 , 823 –832 .11027730 
Lamkemeyer P. ; Laxa M. ; Collin V. ; Li W. ; Finkemeier I. ; Schöttler M. A. ; Holtkamp V. ; Tognetti V. B. ; Issakidis-Bourguet E. ; Kandlbinder A. ; Weis E. ; Miginiac-Maslow M. ; Dietz K.-J.  (2006 ) Peroxiredoxin Q of Arabidopsis thaliana is attached to the thylakoids and functions in context of photosynthesis . Plant J. 
45 , 968 –981 .16507087 
Schafer F. Q. ; Buettner G. R.  (2001 ) Redox environment of the cell as viewed through the
redox state of the glutathione disulfide/glutathione couple . Free Radical Biol. Med. 
30 , 1191 –1212 .11368918 
Go Y.-M. ; Jones D. P.  (1780 ) Redox compartmentalization
in eukaryotic cells . Biochim. Biophys. Acta 
2008 , 1273 –1290 .
Banach-Latapy A. ; He T. ; Dardalhon M. ; Vernis L. ; Chanet R. ; Huang M.-E.  (2013 ) Redox-sensitive
YFP sensors for monitoring dynamic compartment-specific glutathione
redox state . Free Radical Biol. Med. 
65 , 436 –445 .23891676 
Nelson K. J. ; Parsonage D. ; Karplus P. A. ; Poole L. B.  (2013 ) Evaluating peroxiredoxin
sensitivity toward inactivation by peroxide substrates . Methods Enzymol. 
527 , 21 –40 .23830624 
Steele K. H. ; Baumgartner J. E. ; Valderas M. W. ; Roop R. M.  (2010 ) Comparative Study
of the Roles of AhpC and KatE as Respiratory Antioxidants in Brucella abortus 2308 . J. Bacteriol. 
192 , 4912 –4922 .20675478 
Baker L. M. S. ; Raudonikiene A. ; Hoffman P. S. ; Poole L. B.  (2001 ) Essential Thioredoxin-Dependent
Peroxiredoxin System from Helicobacter pylori: Genetic and Kinetic Characterization . J.
Bacteriol. 
183 , 1961 –1973 .11222594 
Olczak A.
A. ; Richard W.
Seyler J. ; Olson J. W. ; Maier R. J.  (2003 ) Association of Helicobacter pylori Antioxidant Activities with Host
Colonization Proficiency . Infect. Immun. 
71 , 580 –583 .12496216 
Cosgrove K. ; Coutts G. ; Jonsson I.-M. ; Tarkowski A. ; Kokai-Kun J. F. ; Mond J. J. ; Foster S. J.  (2007 ) Catalase
(KatA)
and Alkyl Hydroperoxide Reductase (AhpC) Have Compensatory Roles in
Peroxide Stress Resistance and Are Required for Survival, Persistence,
and Nasal Colonization in Staphylococcus aureus . J. Bacteriol. 
189 , 1025 –1035 .17114262 
Wilson T. ; Lisle G. W. ; de Marcinkeviciene J.
A. ; Blanchardand J. S. ; Collins D. M.  (1998 ) Antisense RNA to ahpC, an oxidative stress defence
gene involved in isoniazid resistance, indicates that AhpC of Mycobacterium bovis has virulence properties . Microbiology 
144 , 2687 –2695 .9802010 
Wang H.-W. ; Chung C.-H. ; Ma T.-Y. ; Wong H.  (2013 ) Roles of Alkyl Hydroperoxide
Reductase Subunit C (AhpC) in Viable but Nonculturable Vibrio parahaemolyticus . Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 
79 , 3734 –3743 .23563952 
Wood Z. A. ; Poole L. B. ; Karplus P. A.  (2003 ) Peroxiredoxin Evolution
and the Regulation of Hydrogen Peroxide Signaling . Science 
300 , 650 –653 .12714747 
Haynes A. C. ; Qian J. ; Reisz J. A. ; Furdui C. M. ; Lowther W. T.  (2013 ) Molecular
Basis for the Resistance of Human Mitochondrial
2-Cys Peroxiredoxin 3 to Hyperoxidation . J.
Biol. Chem. 
288 , 29714 –29723 .24003226 
Peskin A.
V. ; Dickerhof N. ; Poynton R. A. ; Paton L. N. ; Pace P. E. ; Hampton M. B. ; Winterbourn C. C.  (2013 ) Hyperoxidation
of Peroxiredoxins 2 and 3 . J. Biol. Chem. 
288 , 14170 –14177 .23543738 
Schröder E. ; Eaton P.  (2008 ) Hydrogen peroxide as
an endogenous
mediator and exogenous tool in cardiovascular research: Issues and
considerations . Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 
8 , 153 –159 .18243791 
Klomsiri C. ; Rogers L. C. ; Soito L. ; McCauley A. K. ; King S. B. ; Nelson K. J. ; Poole L. B. ; Daniel L. W.  (2014 ) Endosomal
H2O2 production leads to localized cysteine
sulfenic acid formation on proteins during lysophosphatidic acid-mediated
cell signaling . Free Radical Biol. Med. 
71 , 49 –60 .24657741 
Haque A. ; Andersen J. N. ; Salmeen A. ; Barford D. ; Tonks N. K.  (2011 ) Conformation-Sensing Antibodies Stabilize
the Oxidized
Form of PTP1B and Inhibit Its Phosphatase Activity . Cell 
147 , 185 –198 .21962515 
O’Neill J. S. ; Reddy A. B.  (2011 ) Circadian
clocks in human red blood
cells . Nature 
469 , 498 –503 .21270888 
Frijhoff J. ; Dagnell M. ; Godfrey R. ; Östman A.  (2014 ) Regulation
of Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase Oxidation in Cell Adhesion and Migration . Antioxid. Redox Signaling 
20 , 1994 –2010 .
Kil I. S. ; Lee S. K. ; Ryu K. W. ; Woo H. A. ; Hu M.-C. ; Bae S. H. ; Rhee S. G.  (2012 ) Feedback Control
of Adrenal Steroidogenesis via H2O2-Dependent,
Reversible Inactivation of Peroxiredoxin III in Mitochondria . Mol. Cell 
46 , 584 –594 .22681886 
Angelucci F. ; Saccoccia F. ; Ardini M. ; Boumis G. ; Brunori M. ; Di Leandro L. ; Ippoliti R. ; Miele A. E. ; Natoli G. ; Scotti S. ; Bellelli A.  (2013 ) Switching between the
Alternative Structures and Functions of a 2-Cys Peroxiredoxin, by
Site-Directed Mutagenesis . J. Mol. Biol. 
425 , 4556 –4568 .24021815 
Chuang M.-H. ; Wu M.-S. ; Lo W.-L. ; Lin J.-T. ; Wong C.-H. ; Chiou S.-H.  (2006 ) The antioxidant
protein alkylhydroperoxide
reductase of Helicobacter pylori switches
from a peroxide reductase to a molecular chaperone function . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
103 , 2552 –2557 .16481626 
Turner-Ivey B. ; Manevich Y. ; Schulte J. ; Kistner-Griffin E. ; Jezierska-Drutel A. ; Liu Y. ; Neumann C. A.  (2013 ) Role for Prdx1 as
a specific sensor in redox-regulated senescence in breast cancer . Oncogene 
32 , 5302 –5314 .23334324 
Day A. M. ; Brown J. D. ; Taylor S. R. ; Rand J. D. ; Morgan B. A. ; Veal E. A.  (2012 ) Inactivation of a Peroxiredoxin by
Hydrogen Peroxide Is Critical for Thioredoxin-Mediated Repair of Oxidized
Proteins and Cell Survival . Mol. Cell 
45 , 398 –408 .22245228 
Sayed A. A. ; Williams D. L.  (2004 ) Biochemical Characterization
of 2-Cys
Peroxiredoxins from Schistosoma mansoni . J. Biol. Chem. 
279 , 26159 –26166 .15075328 
Wang X. ; Wang L. ; Wang X. ; Sun F. ; Wang C.  (2012 ) Structural insights into the peroxidase activity and
inactivation
of human peroxiredoxin 4 . Biochem. J. 
441 , 113 –118 .21916849 
Pascual M. B. ; Mata-Cabana A. ; Florencio F. J. ; Lindahl M. ; Cejudo F. J.  (2010 ) Overoxidation of
2-Cys Peroxiredoxin
in Prokaryotes Cyanobacterial 2-Cys Peroxiredoxins Sensitive to Oxidative
Stress . J. Biol. Chem. 
285 , 34485 –34492 .20736168 
Bang Y.-J. ; Oh M. H. ; Choi S. H.  (2012 ) Distinct
Characteristics
of Two 2-Cys Peroxiredoxins of Vibrio vulnificus Suggesting Differential Roles in Detoxifying Oxidative Stress . J. Biol. Chem. 
287 , 42516 –42524 .23095744 
Parmigiani R. B. ; Xu W. S. ; Venta-Perez G. ; Erdjument-Bromage H. ; Yaneva M. ; Tempst P. ; Marks P. A.  (2008 ) HDAC6 is
a specific deacetylase of peroxiredoxins and is involved in redox
regulation . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
105 , 9633 –9638 .18606987 
Seo J. H. ; Lim J. C. ; Lee D.-Y. ; Kim K. S. ; Piszczek G. ; Nam H. W. ; Kim Y. S. ; Ahn T. ; Yun C.-H. ; Kim K. ; Chock P. B. ; Chae H. Z.  (2009 ) Novel Protective
Mechanism against Irreversible Hyperoxidation of Peroxiredoxin Nα-terminal
Acetylation of Human Peroxiredoxin II . J. Biol.
Chem. 
284 , 13455 –13465 .19286652 
Randall L.
M. ; Manta B. ; Hugo M. ; Gil M. ; Batthyany C. ; Trujillo M. ; Poole L. B. ; Denicola A.  (2014 ) Nitration
transforms a sensitive peroxiredoxin 2 into a more active and robust
peroxidase . J. Biol. Chem. 
289 , 15536 –15543 .24719319 
Biteau B. ; Labarre J. ; Toledano M. B.  (2003 ) ATP-dependent
reduction
of cysteine-sulphinic acid by S. cerevisiae sulphiredoxin . Nature 
425 , 980 –984 .14586471 
Liu X. P. ; Liu X. Y. ; Zhang J. ; Xia Z. L. ; Liu X. ; Qin H. J. ; Wang D. W.  (2006 ) Molecular and functional characterization
of sulfiredoxin homologs from higher plants . Cell Res. 
16 , 287 –296 .16541127 
Baek J. Y. ; Han S. H. ; Sung S. H. ; Lee H. E. ; Kim Y. ; Noh Y. H. ; Bae S. H. ; Rhee S. G. ; Chang T.-S.  (2012 ) Sulfiredoxin
Protein Is Critical for Redox Balance and Survival of Cells Exposed
to Low Steady-state Levels of H2O2 . J. Biol. Chem. 
287 , 81 –89 .22086924 
Lei K. ; Townsend D. M. ; Tew K. D.  (2008 ) Protein cysteine sulfinic acid reductase
(sulfiredoxin) as a regulator of cell proliferation and drug response . Oncogene 
27 , 4877 –4887 .18454177 
Molin M. ; Yang J. ; Hanzén S. ; Toledano M. B. ; Labarre J. ; Nyström T.  (2011 ) Life Span
Extension and H2O2 Resistance Elicited by Caloric
Restriction Require the Peroxiredoxin Tsa1 in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae . Mol. Cell 
43 , 823 –833 .21884982 
Lowther W. T. ; Haynes A. C.  (2010 ) Reduction of Cysteine
Sulfinic Acid
in Eukaryotic, Typical 2-Cys Peroxiredoxins by Sulfiredoxin . Antioxid. Redox Signaling 
15 , 99 –109 .
Jeong W. ; Bae S. H. ; Toledano M. B. ; Rhee S. G.  (2012 ) Role of
sulfiredoxin as a regulator of peroxiredoxin function and regulation
of its expression . Free Radical Biol. Med. 
53 , 447 –456 .22634055 
Altschul S. F. ; Madden T. L. ; Schäffer A. A. ; Zhang J. ; Zhang Z. ; Miller W. ; Lipman D. J.  (1997 ) Gapped
BLAST and PSI-BLAST: A new generation of protein database search programs . Nucleic Acids Res. 
25 , 3389 –3402 .9254694 
Basu M. K. ; Koonin E. V.  (2005 ) Evolution of Eukaryotic Cysteine
Sulfinic Acid Reductase, Sulfiredoxin (Srx), from Bacterial Chromosome
Partitioning Protein ParB . Cell Cycle 
4 , 947 –952 .15917647 
Cao Z. ; Subramaniam S. ; Bulleid N. J.  (2014 ) Lack of an Efficient Endoplasmic
Reticulum-localized Recycling System Protects Peroxiredoxin IV from
Hyperoxidation . J. Biol. Chem. 
289 , 5490 –5498 .24403061 
Shichita T. ; Hasegawa E. ; Kimura A. ; Morita R. ; Sakaguchi R. ; Takada I. ; Sekiya T. ; Ooboshi H. ; Kitazono T. ; Yanagawa T. ; Ishii T. ; Takahashi H. ; Mori S. ; Nishibori M. ; Kuroda K. ; Akira S. ; Miyake K. ; Yoshimura A.  (2012 ) Peroxiredoxin
family proteins are
key initiators of post-ischemic inflammation in the brain . Nat. Med. 
18 , 911 –917 .22610280 
Nagy N. ; Malik G. ; Fisher A. B. ; Das D. K.  (2006 ) Targeted
disruption of peroxiredoxin 6 gene renders the heart vulnerable to
ischemia-reperfusion injury . Am. J. Physiol. 
291 , H2636 –H2640 .
Gretes M. C. ; Poole L. B. ; Karplus P. A.  (2012 ) Peroxiredoxins
in
Parasites . Antioxid. Redox Signaling 
17 , 608 –633 .
Fischer M. ; Coleman R. G. ; Fraser J. S. ; Shoichet B. K.  (2014 ) Incorporation
of protein flexibility and conformational energy penalties in docking
screens to improve ligand discovery . Nat. Chem. 
6 , 575 –583 .24950326 
Wang Y. ; Feinstein S. I. ; Manevich Y. ; Ho Y.-S. ; Fisher A. B.  (2004 ) Lung injury and
mortality with hyperoxia are increased
in peroxiredoxin 6 gene-targeted mice . Free
Radical Biol. Med. 
37 , 1736 –1743 .15528033 
Fisher A. B. ; Dodia C. ; Feinstein S. I. ; Ho Y.-S.  (2005 ) Altered lung phospholipid
metabolism in mice with targeted deletion
of lysosomal-type phospholipase A2 . J. Lipid
Res. 
46 , 1248 –1256 .15772425 
Fatma N. ; Singh P. ; Chhunchha B. ; Kubo E. ; Shinohara T. ; Bhargavan B. ; Singh D. P.  (2011 ) Deficiency of Prdx6 in lens epithelial cells induces
ER stress response-mediated impaired homeostasis and apoptosis . Am. J. Physiol. 
301 , C954 –C967 .
Sies H.  (2014 ) Role of Metabolic
H2O2 Generation: Redox Signalling
and Oxidative Stress . J. Biol. Chem. 
289 , 8735 .24515117 
Edgar R. C.  (2004 ) MUSCLE: Multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy
and high throughput . Nucleic Acids Res. 
32 , 1792 –1797 .15034147 
Guindon S. ; Lethiec F. ; Duroux P. ; Gascuel O.  (2005 ) PHYML Online:
A web server for fast maximum likelihood-based phylogenetic inference . Nucleic Acids Res. 
33 , W557 –W559 .15980534 
Jönsson T. J. ; Johnson L. C. ; Lowther W. T.  (2009 ) Protein Engineering of the Quaternary
Sulfiredoxin Peroxiredoxin Enzyme Substrate Complex Reveals the Molecular
Basis for Cysteine Sulfinic Acid Phosphorylation . J. Biol. Chem. 
284 , 33305 –33310 .19812042 



