Fatty acid
binding protein (FABP),
a family of proteins that reversibly bind with fatty acids and other
lipids with high affinity, is indispensable for intracellular transport,
storage, and metabolism of lipids. They
also play a central role in lipid-mediated biological processes and
metabolic and immune response pathways. In spite of diverse sequence similarity (22–73%), the whole
FABP family shares a very similar tertiary structure consisting of
10 antiparallel β-strands organized into two nearly orthogonal
β-sheet and two α-helices linking the first two β-strands
(Figure A). The
binding site for ligands is buried in an interior cavity and surrounded
by β-strands.

Crystal structures of FABP4. (A) Solvated FABP4. Sodium
(Na+) is shown as a purple sphere. Chlorine (Cl–) is shown as a green sphere. Waters are shown as lines, and oxygen
is red. (B) Closed conformation of FABP4 (PDB entry 2QM9). (C) Open conformation
of FABP4 (PDB entry 3HK1). Carbon atoms of the ligands are white, carbon atoms of the protein
are green, oxygen is red, nitrogen is blue, and sulfur is yellow.

Among nine FABP family members,
FABP4 (also known as adipocyte
FABP, AFABP, or aP2) has been recognized as a potential target for
the treatment of type 2 diabetes, atherosclerosis, and ovarian cancer., FABP4 delivers hydrophobic ligands from the cytoplasm to the nucleus,
and directly channels them to peroxisome proliferator activated receptor
gamma (PPARγ), thereby regulating its transcriptional activity., Thus, opening and closing of the binding cavity are vital for the
shuttling function of FABP4, which controls access and egress of ligands
and water molecules. On the basis of crystallography and mutation
studies, it has been proposed that a ligand enters and exits the binding
cavity through the portal region consisting of helix αII and
loops between βC−βD and βE−βF
(Figure ).− The kinetics study of fatty acid binding to different FABPs indicates
that the rate-limiting step in the binding process is the entry or
release of ligand through the portal. Phe57, located at the mouth of the portal, has long been recognized
as the key residue that serves as the gate keeper in FABP4 opening/closing.
In other FABPs, the residue homologous to Phe57 of FABP4 also plays
the same role. Although FABP4 can bind
a variety of compounds with high affinity, only some of them can activate the nuclear translocation of FABP4. Comparison of different FABP4–ligand crystal
structures suggests that FABP4 activation coincides with closure of
the portal region.

Previously,
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations have been performed
to investigate the structure and dynamics of FABP4 and other FABPs.− However, the conformational transition between the open and closed
forms has not been investigated, which is directly related with ligand
binding and activity. In addition, such conformational changes need
to be considered in the development of potent FABP4 inhibitors. Dynamic
information about conformational changes is hardly obtained from static
structures. Additionally, incorporation of protein dynamics may be
helpful in computer-aided discovery of novel FABP4 inhibitors. To
explicitly account for protein flexibility in virtual screening, multiple
protein conformations have been employed for improving docking accuracy,− which has been reviewed. The performance
of protein structures extracted from MD simulations in virtual screening
has been assessed. Moreover, a recent
study indicates that sampling multiple binding modes of the ligand
is required to correctly predict binding affinities. Therefore, sampling binding-relevant conformations by MD
simulations is helpful for accurately calculating binding affinities
and developing potent FABP4 inhibitors, which may be used in therapy
of associated disorders such as diabetes and cancers.

MD simulations
on the microsecond time scale have been recently
employed for studies of protein–ligand interactions.− Long MD simulations that directly describe the dynamics of protein–ligand
complexes are expected to provide mechanistic insight with atomic
detail. Here, we present multiple 1.2
μs MD simulations of FABP4 in the absence and presence of a
ligand. Dynamics of five FABP4 structures, one apo form and four holo
forms with distinct ligands, is compared. For each structure, two
independent 1.2 μs all-atom MD simulations with explicit solvent
have been carried out, and, in total, 12 μs MD trajectories
are analyzed. Backbone dynamics of FABP4 in its apo and holo forms
are examined and compared with experimental results. The effect of
ligand binding on the opening and closing of FABP4 is investigated.
In our simulations, opening and closing of the portal region are repeatedly
observed, and ligand binding induces a population redistribution of
FABP4 conformations. We also find that the opening/closing events
are coupled with movement of the ligand. The coupling effect of protein
dynamics and ligand dynamics is consistent with recent crystallography
and NMR studies,− which indicate that different protein conformations
prefer distinct binding orientations of the ligand. To our knowledge,
this is the first report of the concerted dynamics of the protein
and its ligand through MD simulations. Thus, our work provides details
about how ligand binding affects the conformational preference of
the protein and how ligand binding is coupled with the conformational
change of the protein at an atomic level.

Materials and Methods
FABP4
and Ligands
The PDB entries used in this study
are 1ALB (apo-FABP4),1ADL (FABP4–ACD),2ANS (FABP4–ANS),2QM9 (FABP4–TGZ), and 3HK1 (FABP4–AOB).1ALB is the apo form of FABP4 and adopts the closed conformation. 1ADL is the complex form
of FABP4 and arachidonic acid (ACD). 2ANS is the complex form of FABP4 and 2-anilino-8-naphthalenesulfonate
(ANS). 2QM9 is
the bound state of FABP4 and troglitazone (TGZ). 3HK1 is the bound state
of FABP4 and 4-((2-(methoxycarbonyl)-5-(2-thienyl)-3-thienyl)amino)-4-oxo-2-butenoic
acid (AOB). The four ligands (Figure ) were
extracted from the PDB files and geometry-optimized using Jaguar v7.9
with the B3LYP functional and the 6-31G* basis set. An electrostatic
potential (ESP) for each ligand was generated by Jaguar. The atomic
RESP charges were then determined by fitting with the RESP procedure
implemented in Antechamber.

Chemical structures of four FABP4 ligands: ACD,
arachidonic acid
(PDB entry 1ADL); ANS, 2-anilino-8-naphthalenesulfonate (PDB entry 2ANS); TGZ, troglitazone
(PDB entry 2QM9); and AOB, 4-((2-(methoxycarbonyl)-5-(2-thienyl)-3-thienyl)amino)-4-oxo-2-butenoic
acid (PDB entry 3HK1).

Molecular Dynamics Simulations
All MD simulations were
carried out with Amber11. The equations
of motion were solved with the leapfrog integration algorithm with
a time step of 2 fs. The lengths of all bonds involving hydrogen atoms
were kept constrained with the SHAKE algorithm. The particle mesh
Ewald (PME) method was applied for treating long-range electrostatic
interactions. Periodic boundary conditions were used in all simulations.
A random seed was generated based on the current date and time for
every run to assign initial velocities.

The protein was modeled
using the Amber ff03 force field, and
the ligands were modeled using the general Amber force field (GAFF). The starting structure was explicitly solvated
in a rectangular box of TIP3P water molecules with a minimal distance
of 10 Å from the protein/complex to the edges of the box. Chloride
ions were added to neutralize uncompensated charges, and further salt
(NaCl) was added to represent 0.15 M ionic concentration and thus
to mimic the physiological environment. After the whole system was
set up, a series of energy minimizations and equilibrations was performed.
First, the water molecules, hydrogen atoms, and salt ions were subjected
to 3000 steps of steepest descent minimization followed by 12 000
steps of conjugate gradient minimization, whereas other heavy atoms
were constrained with the harmonic force of 2 kcal mol–1 Å–2. Next, the whole system was energy-minimized
with 20 000 steps of the L-BFGS algorithm without any harmonic
restraint. Then, coupled to a Langevin thermostat, the system was
heated from 10 K to 300 K by increments of 100 K in 20 ps and continued
to run for 40 ps at 300 K at constant volume. Finally, the system
was equilibrated for 200 ps in the NPT ensemble with the Langevin
thermostat and isotropic position scaling, at 300 K and 1 bar. The
production run for each protein/complex was carried out for 1.2 μs
in the NVT ensemble with the Langevin thermostat at 300 K using the
parallel CUDA version of PMEMD on 2 GPUs. The trajectories were sampled
at a time interval of 10 ps. All simulations were performed on our
Linux cluster with 2 GPUs and 12 CPUs on each node. The analysis of
trajectories was performed using PTRAJ. Time evolution of system energy
and temperature during MD simulations is plotted in the  (Figure S1).

Free Energy
Surface (FES)
The calculation of the FES
is given by Boltzmann weighting the free energy valueswhere W0 is the
minimum of the FES, P is the probability distribution, kB is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the temperature. For 1D FES, r is the distance
between the center of mass (COM) of Thr29 and Phe57, describing the
opening and closing of FABP4. The distribution function is calculated
with the histogram analysis method HIST implemented in R v3.0. The
bin width is set to 0.1 Å using the Freedman–Diaconis
algorithm. The optimal bin width is determined on the basis of . For 2D FES, r = (r1, r2). r1 is the distance
between the COM of Thr29 and Phe57. r2 is the distance
between the COM of Cys117 and the ligand, describing the movement
of the ligand in the binding cavity. The 2D distribution function
is computed using 2D histogram analysis method HIST2D implemented
in the package of GPLOTS with a bin area of 0.3 × 0.3 Å2. The effect of bin area on FES is shown in . For each FABP4 structure, the aggregate
simulation time is 2.4 μs, and 240 000 snapshot structures
are included in the FES calculation. The convergence of 1D free energy
surfaces is presented in the  (Figure S7), which is calculated over the distance of Thr29–Phe57/Cys117–ligand
at an interval of 200 ns of simulation time. The error on the calculation
of free energy (1D and 2D FES) is estimated by the variation observed
in the last 200 ns MD simulations. On the basis of the analysis in , the error is estimated to
be 0.6 kcal mol–1.

Results and Discussion
Structures
of FABP4 and Ligands
Currently, more than
30 crystal structures of FABP4 have been deposited in Protein Data
Bank. Among these structures, two distinct FABP4 forms are available,
in which Phe57, located at the entrance of the binding cavity, adopts
completely different conformations. In the closed form (Figure B), Phe57 points inwardly and blocks access to the
cavity inside. In the open form (Figure C),
Phe57 projects outwardly away from the cavity and exposes the ligand
to the solvent.

To investigate the effect of ligand binding
on the conformational preference of the protein, four FABP4–ligand
complexes with distinct compounds have been selected (Figure ). Among these ligands, ACD is a fatty acid and
has a Kd value of 4.4 μM. The other three are different small-molecule
compounds. ANS and TGZ have a similar Kd value in the nanomolar range (31.5 and 17.0 nM, respectively). The experimental Kd value of AOB is not available, and the Ki value is 670 nM. Two ligands (ACD and
AOB) are bound to the open form of FABP4, and the other two (ANS and
TGZ) are bound with the closed form in the crystal structures. It
has been reported that ACD cannot induce FABP4 nuclear accumulation,
whereas ANS and TGZ can. It is unknown
if AOB can activate FABP4 nuclear translocation.

FABP4 Backbone
Dynamics
FABP4 dynamics in the absence
and presence of a ligand is evaluated by calculating the root-mean-squared
deviation (RMSD) of backbone atoms (Figure A and Table ). The average RMSD fluctuates
between 1.7 and 2.7 Å in all simulations (Table ). Examination of RMSD plots (Figure A) shows that ligand-free FABP4 varies widely during 1.2 μs
simulations. The standard deviations in two trajectories of apo-FABP4
are a little higher than those of the others (Table ). The one-sample t-test results, calculated
by the T.TEST procedure implemented in R v3.0, show that the difference
in the standard deviations with and without ligand is statistically
significant (t = −7.90 and p-value = 0.004). After ligand binding, the standard deviation decreases
0.34 in average (95% confidence interval: 0.28–0.55). By contrast,
RMSD plots for ligand-bound FABP4s (Figure A) are very stable during the simulation, such as for FABP4–ACD,
or become very steady after a few hundred nanoseconds, such as for
FABP4–TGZ. The simulation results are consistent with the experimental
finding that ligand binding reduces backbone flexibility of FABPs.− Moreover, we examined the atomic fluctuation of each residue by
calculating the root-mean-squared fluctuation (RMSF) of backbone atoms
(Figure B and Table ). For ligand-free FABP4, the portal region is subject to great fluctuation
(Figure B) owing to the flexibility of helix
αII (residues 27–34), the βC−βD loop
(residues 55–58), and the βE−βF loop (residues
74–78). The average RMSF of the three parts is around 3.0 Å
(Table ). This agrees well with experimental
results demonstrating that the portal region is highly flexible in
apo-FABPs.− After ligand binding, RMSF values of helix αII,
the βC−βD loop, and the βE−βF
loop are all reduced (Table ), suggesting
that ligand binding stabilizes the portal region in the complex forms.
Among them, the βC−βD loop slightly decreases in
average RMSF values, whereas helix αII and the βE−βF
loop have significant decreases (Table ).
Therefore, our results indicate that ligand binding stabilizes the
backbone conformation of FABP4, largely due to restraining the mobility
of the portal region, especially helix αII and the βE−βF
loop.

Dynamic properties of five FABP4 structures in 1.2 μs MD
simulations. For each structure, two MD trajectories are presented.
The upper row is denoted as trajectory 1, and the lower row is trajectory
2, in accordance with Tables  and . (A) Time evolution of backbone RMSD with respect
to the crystal structure. RMSD values of sampled structures are shown
in gray. The smoothed line, computed with LOESS implemented in R v3.0,
is shown in black. (B) Backbone RMSF per residue. RMSF values are
calculated using PTRAJ implemented in Amber 11. All backbone heavy
atoms in a residue are considered.

Mean Values of Backbone RMSD of FABP4s
in MD Simulations with Standard Deviation
 	backbone
RMSD (Å)	
apo-FABP4	FABP4–ACD	FABP4–ANS	FABP4–TGZ	FABP4–AOB	
trajectory 1	2.5 ± 0.7	1.9 ± 0.3	2.5 ± 0.5	2.1 ± 0.4	1.7 ± 0.3	
trajectory 2	2.4 ± 0.8	2.3 ± 0.3	1.8 ± 0.4	2.7 ± 0.6	2.7 ± 0.5	
Mean Values of Backbone
RMSF of the
Portal Region in MD Simulations with Standard Deviation
 	backbone
RMSF (Å)	
apo-FABP4	FABP4–ACD	FABP4–ANS	FABP4–TGZ	FABP4–AOB	
trajectory 1	Helix αII	3.1 ± 0.6	1.8 ± 0.2	1.7 ± 0.2	2.3 ± 0.2	1.5 ± 0.2	
βC−βD loop	3.0 ± 0.5	2.4 ± 0.3	1.5 ± 0.2	2.8 ± 0.5	2.6 ± 0.6	
βE−βF loop	3.7 ± 0.6	1.7 ± 0.2	2.3 ± 0.3	2.9 ± 0.3	1.9 ± 0.2	
trajectory 2	Helix αII	3.2 ± 0.8	1.5 ± 0.2	1.7 ± 0.2	1.7 ± 0.2	1.8 ± 0.2	
βC−βD loop	2.5 ± 0.3	2.3 ± 0.4	2.0 ± 0.3	2.7 ± 0.1	1.9 ± 0.2	
βE−βF loop	2.9 ± 0.3	1.8 ± 0.3	2.2 ± 0.2	1.8 ± 0.3	2.0 ± 0.2	
The RMSF values
for helix αII,
βC−βD loop, and βE−βF loop are
computed with residues 27–34, 55–58, and 74–78,
respectively.

Opening/Closing
of FABP4
Opening/closing of the portal
is controlled by relative movements of helix αII and loops between
βC−βD and βE−βF. It can be well-described
by the distance between the COM of Thr29 and Phe57, sitting on opposite
sides of the cavity mouth. Thr29 is located in helix αII, and
Phe57 is located in loop βC−βD (Figure B,C). In the closed form, Thr29 and Phe57 are directly
in contact, and the distance between them is about 7 Å. In the
open form, Phe57 points outwardly away from Thr29, and the distance
between them is about 10 Å.

Time-dependence plots of the
Thr29–Phe57 distance (Figure A) show
that the protein interconverts repeatedly between the open and closed
forms in all MD simulations, suggesting that FABP4 is in a dynamic
equilibrium and undergoes rapid fluctuation with or without a ligand.
On calculated 1D free energy surfaces (Figure B), a handful of energy wells are observable. For apo-FABP4, the
deepest basin appears at 7.7 Å, suggesting that the closed form
is preferred. A shallow basin positioned at 10.3 Å corresponds
to the open form. For FABP4–ACD, one deep basin is observable
at 10.3 Å with an energy barrier of 1.0 kcal mol–1 between the open and closed forms, indicating that the open form
is the most populated ensemble (Figure ).
For the other three complexes (FABP4–ANS, FABP4–TGZ,
and FABP4–AOB), two deep basins, corresponding to the open
and closed forms, are observable, indicating that both of them are
thermodynamically stable. The curves in Figure B are plotted with a bin width of 0.1 Å. FES curves with various
bin sizes are shown in . We find
that the bin width has little effect on the 1D FES when it is between
0.1 and 0.5 Å. The energy difference between the basins is less
than 1.0 kcal mol–1, suggesting that the transition
between the open and closed forms may occur easily with little energy
cost.

Opening and closing of FABP4 in MD simulations. (A) Time evolution
of the distance between Thr29 and Phe57. The distance is shown in
gray. Two black lines denote distances of 7 and 10 Å, respectively.
Fluctuation of Thr29–Phe57 distance in all 10 MD simulations
is shown. (B) One-dimensional free energy surface. For each structure,
the free energy surface is computed by combining two MD trajectories.
The free energy values are calculated using the histogram analysis
method implemented in R v3.0 with a bin width of 0.1 Å. The opening/closing
of FABP4 is measured by the distance between the center of mass of
Thr29 and Phe57. On the basis of crystal structures, the distance
between them is about 10 Å in the open form, whereas in the closed
form, the distance is about 7 Å.

Population of the closed state in the absence and presence of a
ligand. Population of the closed state is obtained by integration
of the population distribution along the Thr29–Phe57 distance
coordinate between 0 and 8.5 Å.

To investigate the effect of ligand binding on population
distribution
of FABP4 different states, we define the closed state to be all conformations
with a Thr29–Phe57 distance less than 8.5 Å. Population
of the closed state in each simulation (Figure ) is computed by integration of the population distribution over
the Thr29–Phe57 distance. For apo-FABP4, the average population
of the closed state is 0.62. After ligand binding, the average population
decreases to 0.15 (FABP4–ACD), 0.46 (FABP4–ANS), 0.22
(FABP4–TGZ), and 0.31 (FABP4–AOB). The one-sample t-test results, calculated with the T.TEST procedure implemented
in R v3.0, show that the population difference before and after ligand
binding is statistically significant (t = −5.01
and p-value = 0.015). After ligand binding, the population
of the closed conformation decreases 0.34 in average (95% confidence
interval: 0.07–0.50). Our results indicate that FABP4 shifts
from the closed state to the open state upon ligand binding. Two mechanisms,
induced fit and conformational selection, have been proposed to describe
the conformational transition in biomolecular recognition. Our results support the hybrid view that the
open state is already reachable in ligand-free FABP4 as a minor event
and that ligand binding induces a population redistribution between
the open and closed states.

Concerted Dynamics of FABP4 and Ligands
To monitor
dynamics of FABP4 and ligands, we have identified a two-dimensional
order parameter (r1, r2): r1 describes the distance between the COM of Thr29 and Phe57,
as illustrated in the previous section; r2 describes
the distance between the COM of Cys117 and the ligand, which measures
the movement of ligands within FABP4. Cys117 is located at the bottom
of the FABP4 binding pocket and is in direct contact with ligands
in the crystal structures (Figure B,C). Therefore,
the distance between Cys117 and the ligand indicates how far the ligand
moves toward the portal.

With the order parameters, two-dimensional
FESs of FABP4–ligand complexes were calculated. On the surfaces,
we found a handful of well-defined basins, suggesting multiple binding
modes between the protein and ligands (Figure ). Snapshot structures in each energy well were collected and compared.
One representative structure for each basin was selected with the
script of average_structure implemented in Maestro v9.3. The representative
structures were then compared with crystal structures. In Figure , the populated ensemble X corresponds to the crystal
structure. The heavy-atom RMSD of ligand in X with respect to the
crystal structure is 2.0, 1.3, 0.7, and 1.0 Å, respectively,
for FABP4–ACD, FABP4–ANS, FABP4–TGZ, and FABP4–AOB
after alignment of protein structures (Figure A), indicating the successful reproduction of the binding mode that
was experimentally determined.

Two-dimensional free energy surfaces of
four FABP4–ligand
complexes. For each structure, two MD simulations are employed in
calculation of the free energy surface. The free energy values are
computed using 2D histogram analysis method HIST2D implemented in
the package of GPLOTS with a bin area of 0.3 × 0.3 Å2. X corresponds to the X-ray crystal structure. S1 and S2
denote the two most populated basins, and S3 denotes a less populated
basin.

Representative structures of populated ensembles
on 2D free energy
surfaces. (A) Superposition of ligands in the crystal structure and
state X in Figure . Carbons in the crystal
structure are white, and carbons in X are green. (B) Representative
structure of S3 for the FABP4–ACD complex. In S3, FABP4 adopts
the closed form and ACD stretches out of the binding cavity from the
aperture enclosed by Val80 and Trp97. (C) Representative structures
of S1 and S2 for FABP4–ANS. (D) Representative structures of
S1 and S2 for FABP4–TGZ. (E) Representative structures of S1
and S2 for FABP4–AOB. Carbons of ligands are green, carbons
of residues are cyan, oxygen is red, nitrogen is blue, and sulfur
is yellow.

Moreover, other binding modes
are observable, which have not been
solved experimentally. For the FABP4–ACD complex, a shallow
basin is located at S3 (Figure ). Unlike in
the crystal structure, in S3 FABP4 adopts the closed conformation
and ACD is near the portal. As shown in Figure B, ACD stretches out of the binding cavity from the orifice enclosed
by loops βE−βF and βG−βH. It
does not interact with Arg106 and Cys117, which are conserved in the
crystal structures, but makes contacts with Phe57, Val80 on strand
βF, and Trp97 on loop βG−βH. For the FABP4–ANS
complex, two most populated ensembles are observable: S1 is in the
closed state and S2 is in the open state (Figures  and C). In S1, the sulfonate group
of ANS moves close to strands βC/βD, and the interaction
with the triad of Arg106/Arg126/Tyr128 is lost. In S2, ANS makes a
more hydrophobic interaction with helix αII, and the sulfonate
moiety is exposed to water because of the opening of the portal. For
the FABP4–TGZ complex, two most populated basins (S1 and S2)
are available (Figures  and D). Both of them adopt the open conformation. In S1, TGZ protrudes
from the binding cavity through the aperture formed by rotation of
Phe57. TGZ does not interact with Arg106, Cys117, or Tyr128, but it
is in contact with Phe57, even if Phe57 points outwardly. In contrast,
S2 displays a similar binding mode with that from the crystal structure,
and TGZ is in contact with Arg106, C117, R126, and Y128, not Phe57.
For the FABP4–AOB complex, two most populated ensembles are
observable with distinct protein conformations (Figures  and E). S1 adopts the closed conformation,
and AOB moves close to helix αII. In S2, AOB sticks out of the
binding cavity through the open portal and does not interact with
Cys117.

Coupled with opening and closing of FABP4, the ligand
may exist
in two different binding modes: close to the bottom of the cavity
or close to the portal. When the ligand stays close to the bottom,
it forms polar contacts with Arg106 and Arg126 and extensive hydrophobic
contacts with the binding cavity including Phe16, Cys117, and Tyr128.
When the ligand moves close to the portal, most of the above contacts
are lost except for Phe16. The interaction between the ligand and
Phe16 is highly conserved and appears in all populated conformations.
In contrast, the interaction between the ligand and Arg106/Cys117
completely disappears when the ligand is close to the portal. As the
gate keeper, Phe57 is always in contact with the ligand when FABP4
is closed, and this interaction can also be observed in FABP4–TGZ
(S1) and FABP4–AOB (S2) complexes when the ligand protrudes
from the open portal. Our results are well-supported by experimental
data. Mutation of R126L/Y128F does not affect the binding of oleic
acid to FABP4, although the interaction between ligands and the reactive
triad of Arg106/Arg126/Tyr128 is highly conserved in crystal structures,
suggesting that there may exist an alternative binding mode., In the study of the FABP4–ANS reaction, two ligand-dependent
relaxation times are available from the stopped-flow data, suggesting
that ANS may have two binding sites.

Interestingly, a high energy barrier (about 3.5 kcal mol–1) is observable between state X and S3 for FABP4–TGZ (Figure ). The energetically favorable pathway for the FABP4–TGZ
transition (X → S2 → S1 → S3) is coupled with
FABP4 opening and closing. This suggests that the transition between
different states is energetically unfavorable when FABP4 is closed.
In contrast, for FABP4–ANS and FABP4–AOB, the energy
barrier is about 1.0 kcal mol–1 between different
states. This difference may be caused by the size of ligands. The
volume of ANS, TGZ, and AOB, calculated within Maestro v9.3, is 230.0,
343.0, and 241.0 Å3, respectively. TGZ is much bigger
than the other two ligands. Although FABP4 has a large binding cavity,
there may be not enough room left for TGZ to move freely when the
protein is closed.

An Alternative Opening Site
Although
significant evidence
supports the hypothesis that ligands enter and exit the binding cavity
of FABP4 through the portal region, a computer simulation suggests that there may exist another entrance
near the N-terminus. In our simulations, a new opening site is observable
besides the portal region. Opening of the cavity allows direct access
of the ligand to the solvent, providing a possible channel for the
ligand to leave the internal cavity. In MD simulations of FABP4–ACD,
an opening between loops βE−βF and βG−βH
is observed in the less populated ensemble S3. As shown in Figure B, helix αII and loops between βC−βD
and βE−βF move together, and the portal is fully
closed. This movement leaves a gap enclosed by Val80 on strand βF
and Trp97 on the βG−βH loop. The carboxyl group
of ACD sticks out of the binding cavity through this orifice, suggesting
another possible route for release of ligands. However, this opening
is not observed in simulations of the other three complexes. On the
contrary, TGZ and AOB both protrude from the binding cavity through
the portal (S1 in Figure D and S2 in Figure E). The aperture between loops βE−βF
and βG−βH is measured by the distance between Val80
and Trp97. In the open state, the distance between Val80 and Trp97
is about 6 Å. It is sufficient for water molecules to pass through,
but it may not be for bulky ligands such as TGZ and AOB.

Conclusions
In this work, we compared dynamic properties of ligand-free and
ligand-bound FABP4s. Although the open and closed conformation was
observed for all FABP4s in our simulations, the population of the
closed form decreased after ligand binding, suggesting that ligand
binding stabilizes the open state. Furthermore, we investigated the
concerted dynamics of FABP4–ligand complexes and found that,
coupled with opening and closing of FABP4, the ligand could adopt
distinct binding modes. Although our findings have not been directly
verified in experiments, a series of experimental data suggests that
there may exist different binding orientations.

Mounting evidence,− suggests that
the protein and ligand may adopt multiple binding modes due to the
inherent flexibility of the protein and ligand. A simple inspection
of FABP4 ligands shows that three ligands, ANS, TGZ, and AOB, who
have a Kd or Ki value in the nanomolar range, adopt more binding modes than does
ACD, which has a Kd value in the micromolar
range. It is still not clear how these different binding conformations
make contributions to binding affinities. Understanding of the interaction
between FABP4 and inhibitors will be helpful in developing potent
FABP4 inhibitors for cancer therapy.

Supporting Information Available
Additional information on the
MD simulations and the convergence of free energy calculations. This
material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500374t_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
§ Y.L. and X.L. contributed equally to this work. Y.L. and X.L. performed
the experiments and analyzed the data. Y.L., X.L., and Z.D. wrote
the manuscript.

This work was
supported by The Hormel Foundation and National Institutes of Health
grant nos. CA172457, CA166011, and R37 CA081064.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
ACDarachidonic acid

ANS2-anilino-8-naphthalenesulfonate

TGZtroglitazone

AOB4-((2-(methoxycarbonyl)-5-(2-thienyl)-3-thienyl)amino)-4-oxo-2-butenoic
acid

FABP4fatty
acid binding protein 4

