Obtaining information about
specific interatomic distances during the process of protein folding
is challenging. Although nuclear Overhauser effects can potentially
provide a great deal of distance information, the nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) technique is inherently slow and cannot directly probe
distance changes on the microsecond to millisecond time scales relevant
to most kinetic protein folding processes. Indirect NMR methods using
rapid mixing quench-flow hydrogen–deuterium exchange, or chemically induced dynamic nuclear polarization, and real-time NMR experiments have been successfully used
to probe slow protein folding pathways.− Fluorescence spectroscopy
is inherently a faster technique and has been extensively used for
studies of folding processes, utilizing stopped-flow methods, but
has a disadvantage in that it gives information about only a limited
set of distances near tryptophan side chains. The information available
from fluorescence experiments can be amplified by the introduction
of other fluorogenic probes into the molecule, which can then be used
in concert with natural or engineered tryptophan residues to provide
distance information through Förster resonance energy transfer
(FRET).

We have used a variety of biophysical techniques, including
quench-flow
hydrogen−deuterium exchange detected by NMR and mass spectrometry,
stopped-flow kinetics detected by CD and fluorescence, small-angle
X-ray scattering, and equilibrium NMR, fluorescence, and CD measurements,
to study the equilibrium and kinetic folding intermediates of wild-type
sperm whale apomyoglobin and various designed mutants.− Apomyoglobin folds via two sequential on-pathway intermediates (Ia or I1 and Ib or I2) that
are formed within a few milliseconds of initiation of refolding, followed
by a slower folding phase to the native state.− The structure of the burst phase
kinetic intermediate Ib formed after 5 ms has been found
to be very similar, but not identical, to that of an equilibrium intermediate
formed at pH 4.,, Important insights into the structure of the apomyoglobin folding
intermediate were provided by studies of a series of mutants, that suggested that the helices that form the core of the kinetic
intermediate dock in a nativelike topology. These studies also revealed
non-native interactions between helices G and H that arise from translocation
of the H helix by approximately one helical turn toward its N-terminus. Resolution of these non-native contacts would
therefore be required before the protein molecule could proceed to
form the native folded structure. We hypothesize that both the kinetic
and equilibrium intermediates contain the A and G helices docked securely
in a nativelike topology, with the H helix also docked to this core,
but translocated by one helical turn relative to the G helix. To test
this hypothesis, we have designed mutants of apomyoglobin, replacing
selected residues in the G and H helices with cysteine, which causes
distance-dependent quenching of the fluorescence of the tryptophan
at position 14 in the A helix of apomyoglobin, giving insights into
the distances among the A, G, and H helices under various solution
conditions. Following attachment of the fluorescence acceptor AEDANS
to selected single-cysteine mutants, we have used FRET from the native
tryptophan at position 14 to probe for the presence of non-native
structure in the equilibrium apomyoglobin intermediate at intermediate
pH values. A double-cysteine mutant containing a disulfide bond between
the G and H helices was also examined to determine the effects on
the folding pathway, and particularly on the rate-determining step
(correct docking of the E helix), of constraining the G and H helices
into a nativelike packing topology in the earliest stages of folding.
The results confirm the presence of a translocation in the H helix
in the apomyoglobin kinetic folding intermediate and provide new insights
into the role of energetic frustration in facilitating progression
to the native state by preventing excessive stabilization of non-native
contacts within the compact folding intermediates.

Materials and
Methods
Preparation of Protein
Sperm whale apoMb was overexpressed
in Escherichia coli BL21-DE3 cells with a pET17b
vector containing the Mb gene as previously described. Site-directed mutagenesis to obtain the mutant
genes (W7F for all single-cysteine mutants, followed by replacement
of K77, K102, Y103, E105, F106, I111, M131, L135, F138, R139, K140,
Y146, or K147 with cysteine, or S108C/L135C for the double-cysteine
mutant) was conducted using the QuikChange Site-Directed Mutagenesis
Kit (Stratagene). Isotopically labeled and unlabeled mutant proteins
were produced in M9 minimal medium and purified as previously described. Minimal medium is preferred even for unlabeled
samples, because the protein yield is sufficiently high (∼70
mg/L) and the purification procedure is easier than for protein derived
from growth in rich medium such as LB.

Incorporation of the Fluorescence
Acceptor
Chemical
modification at the single cysteine in the Cys-incorporated mutants
was performed by reaction with the thiol-specific probe 5-({2-[(iodoacetyl)amino]ethyl}amino)naphthalene-1-sulfonic
acid (IAEDANS) (Molecular Probes) in 100 mM Tris-HCl buffer at pH
8.5 after reducing any possible intermolecular disulfide bonds of
the cysteine-incorporated mutants with 10 mM DTT. The reaction was
performed at 4 °C for 16 h, yielding a protein with the 5-({2-[(acetyl)amino]ethyl}amino)naphthalene-1-sulfonic
acid group (AEDANS) covalently attached to the cysteine thiol. The
AEDANS-labeled protein was purified by using a Sephadex G15 column
(Pharmacia) to remove the free IAEDANS. The protein solution was concentrated
and buffer-exchanged to water by using a Centriprep 10 cartridge (Amicon).

The extinction coefficient used to obtain the protein concentration
of the W7F single-cysteine mutant (10400 M–1 cm–1 at 280 nm) was calculated from the extinction coefficient
of the wild-type (W7 and W14) protein (15900 M–1 cm–1 at 280 nm and pH 6.1). The efficiency of labeling was determined spectrophotometrically
by comparing the absorbance at 336 nm (extinction coefficient of AEDANS of 6160 M–1 cm–1) with the absorbance at 280 nm (extinction coefficients of 10400
M–1 cm–1 for protein and 1310
M–1 cm–1 for AEDANS). A 1:1 AEDANS:protein
stoichiometry was confirmed for all proteins, using the 336 nm/280
nm absorbance ratio.

Oxidation of the Two-Cysteine Mutant
An intramolecular
disulfide bond was formed between S108C and L135C by incubating 20
μM refolded two-cysteine mutant in 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.7),
1 mM EDTA, 0.01 mM DTT, and 5 mM oxidized glutathione at 4 °C
overnight. The progress of oxidation was monitored by analytical high-performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC). The oxidized (disulfide) two-cysteine
mutant was diluted into a 0.1% TFA/water mixture and purified from
reduced (dithiol) and intermolecular disulfide forms by reverse phase
HPLC with a linear gradient of 100% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA. Lyophilized
protein was checked for the absence of reduced and oligomeric forms
by analytical HPLC and matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization
time-of-flight mass spectrometry. The fully reduced form of the two-cysteine
mutant was purified in the presence of 5 mM DTT.

Circular Dichroism
(CD) Spectroscopy
CD spectra were
recorded on an Aviv 62DS spectrometer at 25 °C. The ellipticity
of the proteins (10 μM for all single- and double-cysteine mutants)
in 10 mM sodium acetate buffer was monitored at 222 nm as a function
of pH from pH 6 to 2 or of added urea up to 8.5 M.

NMR Spectroscopy
Multidimensional NMR experiments were
performed on Bruker Avance 500, DRX600, and DRX800 spectrometers equipped
with cryogenic probes, and Avance 750 and Avance 900 spectrometers
with room-temperature probes. All NMR data were collected with 1H- and 15N-labeled protein in 10 mM sodium acetate
buffer, 0.01% (v/v) NaN3, and 10% (v/v) D2O
at pH 6.1 and 30 °C or at pH 4.1 and 46 °C with 10% (v/v)
ethanol. Spectra of the reduced form of the two-cysteine mutant were
recorded in the presence of 1 mM DTT. Doubly labeled (13C and 15N) protein samples were used for backbone resonance
assignment.

1H–15N HSQC spectra
of oxidized and reduced forms of the two-cysteine mutant and wild-type
apomyoglobin were recorded at pH 6.1 and 4.1 using the States–TPPI
method for data acquisition in the indirect
dimension. Backbone resonance assignments for the two-cysteine mutant
were made using constant-time three-dimensional (3D) HNCA, 3D HNCOCA, and
3D 15N NOESY-HSQC (nuclear Overhauser enhancement spectroscopy)
spectra at pH 6.1 and 4.1. Steady state
{1H}–15N heteronuclear NOE data were collected in triplicate at pH 4.1
for the oxidized two-cysteine mutant and for wild-type apomyoglobin
with a NOE buildup time of 3 s and a recycle delay of 3.5 s.

NMR data were processed with NMRPipe and analyzed with NMRView. Sequence-specific
secondary chemical shifts were determined as previously described.

Fluorescence Spectroscopy
All fluorescence
spectra
were recorded on a Fluorolog-3 fluorescence spectrometer (Jobin Yvon-Horiba)
at 25 °C. Fluorescence emission spectra of the W7F, W7F/I111C,
W7F/M131C, and W7F/L135C mutants were recorded at a concentration
of 2 μM in 10 mM sodium acetate buffer containing 0.5 mM DTT.
Emission spectra of the S108C/L135C mutant protein in the oxidized
form were obtained at a concentration of 5 μM in 10 mM sodium
acetate buffer, with excitation at 288 nm. The excitation and emission
bandwidths were set at 2 nm, and the emission spectra were scanned
from 300 to 400 nm for each sample. Acid unfolding curves were measured
by monitoring the intensity at the emission maximum as a function
of pH. Individual samples were prepared for each pH data point.

Stopped-Flow Kinetics
The kinetics of refolding of
the W7F, W7F/M131C, and W7F/L135C mutants and the oxidized S108C/L135C
mutant were measured at 8 °C using a DX-17MV Applied Photophysics
stopped-flow instrument. The excitation wavelength was 288 nm with
an excitation slit width of 1 nm. The fluorescence signal was recorded
with a 320 nm cutoff filter. Refolding of the W7F, W7F/M131C, and
W7F/L135C mutants was monitored by measuring the change in fluorescence
emission following a pH jump from pH 2.2 to 6.0 by a 1:5 dilution
with 30 mM sodium acetate buffer containing 0.5 mM DTT. The final
protein concentration was 2 μM after mixing. The refolding kinetics
of the disulfide-bridged mutant were measured using both pH jump and
urea dilution methods. S108C/L135C apomyoglobin (30 μM), in
both the oxidized and reduced forms, was unfolded in a solution containing
8 M urea in refolding buffer [10 mM sodium acetate (pH 6.1)] and refolded
by 6-fold dilution in the stopped-flow apparatus to a final urea concentration
of 1.3 M. Refolding of the oxidized double-cysteine mutant by a pH
jump from pH 2.5 to 6.0 was performed with a 1:5 dilution of 30 μM
apomyoglobin into 30 mM sodium acetate buffer.

Refolding kinetics
of the W7F/M131C and W7F/L135C mutants were also measured at 8 °C
by stopped-flow CD. The ellipticity at 225 nm was measured with a
slit width of 2 nm. Refolding was initiated by a pH jump from pH 2.2
to 6.0 by a 1:5 dilution with 30 mM sodium acetate buffer. The final
concentration of protein was 10 μM after mixing. The dead time
of the instrument for CD measurements is ∼10 ms.

Förster
Resonance Energy Transfer (FRET)
Emission
spectra derived from the fluorescence of tryptophan at position 14
were recorded. The emission spectra of the W7F, single-cysteine mutant
proteins and their corresponding AEDANS adducts (2 μM) in 10
mM sodium acetate buffer were recorded from 300 to 500 nm. The excitation
wavelength was set at 280 nm with the bandwidth of both excitation
and emission set at 2 nm. The maximal intensities of the Trp fluorescence
or AEDANS emission were plotted as a function of pH. In both studies,
separate samples were prepared for each data point.

Analysis of
FRET Data
Comparison of the fluorescence
intensity between each AEDANS-labeled protein and the corresponding
unlabeled cysteine mutant (transfer efficiency E =
1 – F/F0, where F0 is the emission intensity of the donor alone
and F is the measured emission intensity of the donor
tryptophan in the presence of the acceptor) allows estimation of the
donor–acceptor distance. Energy transfer by the dipolar interaction
is described by the Förster equation:where E is the energy transfer
efficiency, R0 is the Förster distance,
at which the energy transfer rate is equal to the decay rate, i.e.,
50% fluorescence energy transfer efficiency, and r is the donor–acceptor distance.

The magnitude of R0 is dependent on the spectral properties of
the donor and acceptor groups:where κ2 is the dipole orientation
factor (range of 0–4; κ2 = 2/3 for randomly oriented donors and acceptors), ϕD is the fluorescence quantum yield of the donor in the absence
of the acceptor, n is the refractive index, and J(λ) is the spectral overlap integralwhere εA is the extinction
coefficient of the acceptor and FD is
the fluorescence emission intensity of the donor as a fraction of
the total integrated intensity.

In the case of the AEDANS/Trp
pair, the value of R0 is assumed to be
22 Å. On the basis of this value,
the value of r (distance
between W14 and incorporated AEDANS) was estimated for the mutant
proteins under different conditions.

Results
Design of Mutant
Proteins
The locations of the various
mutation sites are mapped onto the three-dimensional structure of
sperm whale holomyoglobin in Figure . The
structure of apomyoglobin is very similar to that of the holoprotein
except that residues in helix F, the E–F and F–G loops,
and the C-terminal region of helix H are dynamically disordered in
the apo form., The tryptophan side chain has
an absorbance maximum at 280 nm and a fluorescence emission maximum
at ∼336 nm; tryptophan can be used as a fluorescence donor
with excitation at 280 nm. The two tryptophan residues in sperm whale
myoglobin, W7 and W14, are both located in the A helix. Of the two,
W14 is preferred for use as a fluorescence donor for probing the folding
intermediates because of its location in the center of the A helix
(Figure ). To simplify the data analysis,
W7 was substituted with phenylalanine in all of the mutant proteins
prepared for study by fluorescence or FRET, so that the fluorescence
quenching or FRET signals would arise from the proximity of W14 to
the cysteine quenching group or the AEDANS fluorescence acceptor coupled
at various sites in the E, G, and H helices. Because there is no native
cysteine in sperm whale myoglobin, it was a relatively simple matter
to change the residues of interest to cysteine.

Backbone chain trace
of holomyoglobin. (A) Location of the
residues, S108 and L135 (spheres), mutated to
form the disulfide mutant. The S108–L135 Cα–Cα
distance is shown. (B) Sites of the mutations used for fluorescence
quenching and FRET studies and location of the two tryptophan residues.
W7 (gray) was mutated to Phe for all of the FRET and fluorescence
quenching experiments. The Cα positions of residues mutated
in the FRET experiments are colored pink. The Cα positions of
residues mutated in the cysteine fluorescence quenching experiments
are colored yellow.

The design of suitable
double-cysteine mutants for the introduction
of a disulfide between the G and H helices was complicated by the
need to avoid structural strain as a consequence of formation of the
disulfide. A number of double-cysteine mutations were introduced,
including some designed to lock the G and H helices into the putative
“translocated” conformation in the intermediate (Table
S1 of the ). For
all mutants in which the disulfide bond was not carefully designed
to mimic the native folded structure, i.e., with nativelike G–H
helix packing, we had difficulties either in the expression of the
protein in E. coli or in the formation of the disulfide
bond. For some mutants, formation of the disulfide bond caused irreversible
aggregation and precipitation of the protein. However, the S108C/L135C
double mutant proved to be well behaved in the reduced and oxidized
states in solution, likely because of the similarity of the Cα–Cα
distance (6.4 Å) between S108 and L135 in the wild-type protein
(Figure B) and the Cα–Cα
distance in a disulfide bond (4.4–6.8 Å,).

Spectroscopic Characterization of the One- and Two-Cys Mutants
Site-directed mutagenesis of apomyoglobin generally results in
the formation of proteins that strongly resemble the wild-type protein
in structure and are generally well-behaved in solution.,,,,, The integrity
of the folded state of each mutant was checked carefully, using CD
and in some cases NMR spectroscopy. The spectra of the mutant proteins
are all very similar to that of the wild-type protein, indicating
that they adopt similar folded states (Figures S1 and S2 of the ).

The oxidized S108C/L135C
mutant was subjected to detailed NMR analysis to confirm that formation
of the disulfide did not perturb the structure. HSQC spectra at pH
6.1 are well dispersed and confirm that the mutant protein is fully
folded (Figure S2A of the ). Backbone amide assignments and 13Cα resonances
were assigned for 117 residues in the oxidized protein for the pH
6.1 native state. As for WT apomyoglobin, the backbone resonances of residues 82–106, in the F helix,
F–G loop, and N-terminal region of the G helix, and residues
139–141 and 146–148 in the C-terminal region of the
H helix are broadened beyond detection by conformational fluctuations. Analysis of the 15N, 1HN, and 13Cα chemical shifts using Talos+ indicates that the helical secondary structure
of the oxidized S108C/L135C double mutant is identical to that of
WT. The HSQC spectra of the WT and oxidized and reduced mutants at
pH 4.1 are poorly dispersed with differentially broadened cross peaks,
as expected for the disordered molten globular intermediate (Figure S2B of the ). Assignments could be made for 126 of a possible
148 amide cross peaks, excluding the N-terminus and Pro residues,
and 13Cα resonances could be assigned for 135 and
140 residues for oxidized S108C/L135C and WT protein, respectively.
The amide chemical shift differences between the disulfide-bridged
mutant and the wild-type protein are shown in Figure A at pH 6.1 and in Figure B at pH
4.1. The secondary 13Cα chemical shifts, i.e., the
deviation of observed chemical shifts from sequence-corrected random
coil values, for the oxidized mutant and wild-type proteins are shown
in Figure A. The backbone amide and 13Cα chemical shifts of the WT and mutant proteins are very similar,
with differences mostly localized to the sites of mutation and the
G–H helix region. The NMR data show that the overall structure
of the molten globule state formed by the disulfide-bridged mutant
is very similar to that of WT. However, small changes in 13Cα chemical shifts (Figure B) and increases
in the heteronuclear NOE (Figure C) indicate
small localized differences in secondary structure and dynamics. Most
notably, the 13Cα shift changes are consistent with
an increase in helical content for H116 and S117, near the C-terminus
of helix G, and for A125, D126, and Q128 in the first turn of the
H helix. This stabilization of helical structure is accompanied by
an increase in the heteronuclear NOE, consistent with decreased backbone
flexibility due to enhanced packing onto the molten globule core.
At the same time, there appears to be a slight decrease in helicity
at the C-terminal end of the H helix, as indicated by a decrease in
the secondary chemical shift of residues D141, I142, and Y146. The
observed structural and dynamic changes suggest that the constraints
imposed by the S108C/L135C disulfide bridge prevent translocation
of the H helix, allowing better packing of the N-terminal region of
helix H and an accompanying increase in helicity, while destabilizing
the C-terminal end of helix H. It is of interest that small 13Cα chemical shift perturbations are observed for V13 and V17,
residues in the A helix region that would contact the C-terminal end
of helix G and the F–G turn in the native myoglobin topology.
Small 13Cα chemical shift changes also occur in the
middle of the E helix (T67 and T70), a region that shows increased
heteronuclear NOEs that suggest enhanced packing into the molten globule
core.

Comparison of chemical shifts of wild-type apomyoglobin and the
oxidized S108C/L135C mutant. (A) Difference in the weighted average
backbone HN and 15N chemical shifts {⟨Δδ⟩
= 1/2[(ΔδHN)2 + (ΔδN/5)2]1/2} between
the wild type and oxidized two-cysteine mutant at pH 6.1. The location
of the mutations is indicated by arrows. Horizontal lines represent
the mean and (mean + 1 standard deviation) of the ⟨Δδ⟩
values. The inset shows major chemical shift changes at pH 6.1 mapped
onto the structure of Mb. Positions of
helices A–H are indicated by colored bars. Spheres colored
according to the helix location represent the backbone N atoms of
residues where the composite Δδ &gt; (mean + 1 standard
deviation).
Yellow spheres show the positions of the mutated residues. (B) Difference
in the weighted average backbone HN and 15N chemical shifts
(⟨Δδ⟩) between the wild type and oxidized
two-cysteine mutant at pH 4.1. The location of the mutations is indicated
by arrows. Horizontal lines represent the mean and (mean + 1 standard
deviation) of the ⟨Δδ⟩ values. The inset
shows major chemical shift changes at pH 4.1 mapped onto the structure
of Mb. Colored spheres represent the
backbone N atoms of residues where the composite Δδ &gt;
(mean + 1 standard deviation).

(A) Secondary 13Cα chemical shifts (observed chemical
shift minus the sequence-corrected random coil shift) for the wild
type (black) and oxidized two-cysteine mutant (red) at pH 4.1. (B)
Difference [ΔδCα = δCα(mutant) – δCα(WT)] between the 13Cα chemical shifts in panel A. (C) Heteronuclear {1H}–15N NOE at pH 4.1 for the wild type (black)
and oxidized two-cysteine mutant (red).

Equilibrium Unfolding Experiments
The unfolding behavior
of apomyoglobin upon addition of denaturant or a decrease in pH is
well-documented.,, By performing such denaturation experiments on the mutant proteins,
we obtain valuable insights into local and global effects of the mutations
and their influence on equilibrium unfolding processes. Apomyoglobin
undergoes unfolding transitions as the pH is lowered from 6 to 2,
or upon addition of high concentrations of urea or guanidine hydrochloride. These unfolding transitions can be monitored
by CD, following the loss of helical structure, or by tryptophan fluorescence,
which is differentially quenched in the folded (pH 6), intermediate
(pH 4), and acid-unfolded (pH 2) states. The signature of the molten
globule equilibrium intermediate formed at pH 4 is a maximum in fluorescence
intensity, where the tryptophan fluorescence
(primarily W14) is quenched neither by the proximity to the sulfur
of M131 (as in the native state at pH 6) nor by contact with the solvent
in the unfolded states formed at more acidic pH.

The CD and
fluorescence spectra of the S108C/L135C double mutant and wild-type
proteins as a function of pH or of added denaturant are shown in Figure . The oxidized S108C/L135C mutant forms a partly
folded intermediate near pH 4, with a helical content comparable to
that of the molten globule intermediate formed by the WT protein (Figure A). At more acidic pH, however, the mutant exhibits
greater ellipticity than the WT. Urea denaturation curves (Figure C) show that the native state (pH 6.1) of the S108C/L135C
mutant is cooperatively folded in both the oxidized and reduced states.
Introduction of the two cysteines slightly destabilizes the apomyoglobin
toward urea denaturation, but formation of the disulfide increases
the stability by 1.7 kcal/mol and shifts the denaturation curve to
higher urea concentrations than for the WT. Thermodynamic parameters
for urea denaturation of the native state and the pH 4.1 intermediate
are summarized in Table .

Variation in CD and fluorescence
signals with pH and urea. (A)
pH dependence of the mean residue ellipticity at 222 nm for wild-type
apomyoglobin (black) and the oxidized two-cysteine mutant (red). Solid
curves are fit to the data using the method of least squares to a
three-state unfolding model. (B) pH dependence of the fluorescence
signal at the emission maximum upon excitation at 288 nm for wild-type
apomyoglobin (black) and the oxidized two-cysteine mutant (red). Solid
curves are fit to the data using the method of damped least squares
to a three-state unfolding model. (C) Urea dependence of the mean
residue ellipticity at 222 nm for wild-type apomyoglobin (black) at
pH 6.1 (filled squares) and pH 4.1 (empty squares), the oxidized two-cysteine
mutant (red) at pH 6.1 (filled circles) and pH 4.1 (empty circles),
and the reduced two-cysteine mutant (blue) at pH 6.1 (filled triangles).
Data were fit by the method of least squares to a two-state unfolding
model.

Thermodynamic Parameters
for the Disulfide-Bonded
Mutant
 	wild type	108–135 ox	108–135 red	
Urea Titration at pH 6.1	
ΔG(H2O) (kcal mol–1)	–5.1 ± 0.2	–4.8 ± 0.1	–3.1 ± 0.2	
m (kcal mol–1)	1.42 ± 0.05	1.16 ± 0.03	1.12 ± 0.06	
Cm (M)	3.6	4.1	2.8	
Urea
Titration at pH 4.1	
ΔG(H2O) (kcal mol–1)	–1.4 ± 0.2	–1.3 ± 0.1	–	
m (kcal mol–1)	1.02 ± 0.08	0.79 ± 0.03	–	
Cm (M)	1.4	1.6	–	
Probing the Structure of
the Equilibrium Intermediate by Fluorescence
Quenching
Cysteine is a highly efficient intramolecular quencher
of tryptophan fluorescence; quenching occurs at a very short range
through direct contact between the Trp and Cys side chains., We utilized this property to probe contacts between W14 in the A
helix and Cys probes introduced at specific sites in the G helix (I111C)
and H helix (M131C and L135C). To simplify the analysis, W7 was substituted
with phenylalanine in all of the mutant constructs. Quenching of the
fluorescence of the remaining tryptophan residue by the incorporated
Cys therefore reflects static or dynamic contacts between the Cys
side chain and the W14 indole. W7F is a conservative mutation, found
in many myoglobin sequences; this mutation
does not perturb the secondary or tertiary structure of apomyoglobin.,

The pH dependence of the W14 fluorescence emission intensity
in the W7F, W7F/I111C, W7F/M131C, and W7F/L135C mutants is shown in
Figure . The emission maximum for W7F, corresponding
to the pH at which the population of the molten globule intermediate
is maximal, occurs at higher pH (4.4) than for wild-type apomyoglobin
(pH 4.0) (Figure B), reflecting destabilization
of both the native state and the intermediate by the W7F mutation. The pH-induced unfolding curve for W7F/I111C
is very similar to that of W7F except for a slight increase in the
level of fluorescence quenching in the pH 4.4 intermediate, suggesting
a slight decrease in the distance between these side chains in the
intermediate relative to the native state. By contrast, the titration
curve of W7F/M131C is significantly different from that of W7F. At
pH 6, the intensity is much lower than that of W7F, which we attribute
to an increased level of W14 fluorescence quenching because of the
proximity of the W14 and C131 side chains in the native structure
(the Met131 side chain makes direct contact with the indole ring in
the X-ray structure of holomyoglobin). However, the W14 fluorescence
intensity for W7F/M131C in the pH ∼4.5 intermediate is the
same as that for W7F, indicating no quenching by the Cys at position
131 in the molten globule state. For W7F/L135C, the cysteine at 135
is distant from the indole ring of W14 in the native state (∼7
Å in the X-ray structure of holomyoglobin) and fails to quench
the W14 fluorescence at pH 6. However, C135 strongly quenches the
tryptophan fluorescence in the intermediate formed at pH ∼4.5
(Figure ), indicating close, non-native contact
between the cysteine and tryptophan side chains in the equilibrium
molten globule state. Taken together, the fluorescence quenching data
for this set of mutants provide strong support for a structural model
in which the H helix is displaced in an N-terminal direction in the
equilibrium molten globule, bringing the side chain of residue 135
into non-native contact with W14.

pH dependence of the quenching of the
fluorescence of W14 induced
by the presence of cysteine at positions 111, 131, and 135. All proteins
contained the W7F mutation: W7F (filled black circles, black line),
W7F/M131C (filled blue circles, blue line), W7F/L135C (filled orange
triangles, orange line), and W7F/I111C (filled magenta squares, magenta
line). The maximal intensity of the fluorescence emission was recorded
with an excitation wavelength of 288 nm.

Translocation of the H Helix in the Kinetic Intermediate
Kinetic refolding of apomyoglobin, as measured by stopped-flow CD
or fluorescence spectroscopy, occurs in two phases, an initial “burst”
phase that is complete within the dead time of the apparatus and a
slower (approximately milliseconds) phase that can be monitored directly.
The refolding kinetics of the W7F, W7F/M131C, and W7F/L135C mutants
were monitored using stopped-flow fluorescence and CD measurements.
The changes in W14 fluorescence emission during kinetic refolding
are shown in Figure . The kinetic traces for
W7F and W7F/M131C are biphasic, reporting on the rates of the Ia → Ib and Ib → N folding
processes, and were fit to double-exponential
decays. For W7F/L135C, the change in fluorescence emission during
the slow phase (Ib → N) is of extremely small amplitude,
because there is little change in fluorescence intensity between the
molten globule and native state (Figure ),
and the fast phase dominates the stopped-flow trace (Figure ). The fitted kinetic parameters are summarized
in Table .

Fluorescence decay after a pH jump from
pH 2.2 to 6.0 for W7F (black),
W7F/M131C (blue), and W7F/L135C (orange). The stopped-flow traces
show total fluorescence with a 320 nm cutoff filter. The excitation
wavelength was 288 nm.

Kinetic Parameters for Folding of
the Cysteine Mutants
 	W7F	W7F/M131C	W7F/L135C	
Stopped-Flow Refolding pH Jump
(2.2 → 6.0)
Two-Exponential Fit (fluorescence)	
k1 (s–1)	30 ± 2	46 ± 1	37 ± 1	
k2 (s–1)	1.87 ± 0.03	2.62 ± 0.02	(0.34 ± 0.25)	
Stopped-Flow Refolding pH Jump
(2.2 → 6.0)
Two-Exponential Fit (CD)	
k (s–1)	 	2.5 ± 0.2	2.2 ± 0.1	
 	wild type	108SH–135SH	108–135 SS	
Stopped-Flow Refolding Urea Jump (8 → 1.3
M)	
k (s–1)	2.20 ± 0.02	3.05 ± 0.02	5.38 ± 0.02	
Stopped-Flow Refolding pH Jump (2.5 → 6.0)
Two-Exponential Fit	
k1 (s–1)	22.9 ± 0.7	 	27.7 ± 0.6	
k2 (s–1)	3.43 ± 0.03	 	4.42 ± 0.03	
This rate was derived
from the biexponential
fit; however, the amplitude of the fluorescence change is close to
zero, so it is likely that this does not represent a folding transition.

The overall rate of refolding
of the W7F/M131C and W7F/L135C mutants
to the fully helical native structure was measured by stopped-flow
CD. The Ia → Ib transition is not resolved
by conventional stopped-flow CD refolding measurements in which folding
is initiated by a pH jump to pH 6.0., Under these
conditions, stopped-flow CD monitors the stabilization of helical
structure that occurs during the Ib → N transition.
The stopped-flow CD traces for W7F/M131C and W7F/L135C were fit to
single-exponential curves with rates of 2.5 ± 0.2 and 2.2 ±
0.1 s–1, respectively. The rate for W7F/M131C is
in excellent agreement with the k2 (Ib → N) obtained from the biphasic fits of the fluorescence
refolding curves (Table ). The stopped-flow
CD measurements yield the rate of the Ib → N transition
for W7F/L135C (2.2 s–1), which could not be resolved
by stopped-flow fluorescence.

The stopped-flow experiments also
provide new insights into the
structure of the apoMb kinetic folding intermediates. The Ia intermediates of the W7F, W7F/M131C, and W7F/L135C mutants, which
are formed within the burst phase, all have high fluorescence intensity
(Figure ). The Ib intermediates
of W7F and W7F/M131C, which are fully formed within 100 ms, are also
highly fluorescent, and this fluorescence decays during the slower
Ib → N transition because of quenching in the native
state (Figure ). In contrast, the fluorescence
of the W7F/L135C mutant reaches that of the native state within 100
ms, even though stopped-flow CD shows that refolding to the native
state occurs more slowly, at a rate of 2.2 s–1.
These results indicate that, similar to the equilibrium molten globule
formed at pH 4.5 (Figure ), the fluorescence
of W14 is quenched in the kinetic Ib intermediate, as would
be expected if the H helix were shifted toward its N-terminus to bring
the side chain of C135 into non-native contact with W14. Thus, fluorescence
quenching provides strong evidence of non-native H helix translocation
in both the kinetic and equilibrium intermediates of apomyoglobin
(apoMb).

Given the evidence of non-native G/H helix packing
in the Ib intermediate, we then asked what effect the S108C/L135C
disulfide
constraint would have on folding kinetics. Stopped-flow traces for
refolding of wild-type, reduced, and oxidized (disulfide-bridged)
S108C/L135C mutant apomyoglobin were measured by monitoring the change
in fluorescence of the two tryptophans following dilution from 8 to
1.3 M urea (Figure A). Under these conditions,
with a final urea concentration of 1.3 M, Ib is unstable
and the kinetics reflect folding of Ia to the native state. Formation of the disulfide increases the overall
folding rate nearly 2-fold (Table ). To examine
the effects of the disulfide on the rates of formation and decay of
the Ib intermediate, refolding rates were also measured
for WT apoMb and the oxidized S108C/L135C mutant by monitoring the
change in tryptophan fluorescence following a pH jump from pH 2.5
to 6 (Figure B). The data were fit to double-exponential
decays, as described above. The rates of both the Ia →
Ib and Ib → N steps were increased 20–30%
by the disulfide (Table ).

Stopped-flow fluorescence
data. (A) Intensity decay curves for
wild-type apomyoglobin (black), the oxidized two-cysteine mutant (red),
and the reduced two-cysteine mutant (blue) from a urea jump experiment
(8 M → 1.3 M). Curves have been scaled to give a similar final
value of fluorescence intensity, to allow visual comparison of the
relative rates. Estimates of burst phase amplitudes cannot be obtained
from these data. (B) Fluorescence decay for wild-type apomyoglobin
and the oxidized two-cysteine mutant following a pH jump (from pH
2.5 to 6.0).

Selection of Suitable Fluorescence
Acceptor Sites for FRET
Having established that the H helix
is translocated toward its
N-terminus in both the kinetic and equilibrium intermediates of apoMb,
we turned to FRET experiments to obtain an estimate of the magnitude
of helix movement. For FRET experiments, the fluorescence acceptor
AEDANS was covalently attached at single cysteine residues introduced
by mutagenesis at selected sites into the W7F mutant protein. The
remaining tryptophan, W14, acts as the fluorescence donor.

A
total of 10 fluorescence acceptor sites were evaluated by recording
the emission of the incorporated AEDANS at 477 nm (with excitation
at 338 nm) as a function of pH. The results (Figure ) show that the AEDANS-derivatized mutants fall into two groups.
All of the mutants exhibit a monotonic increase in fluorescence emission
intensity from pH 2 to 4, attributed to a decrease in the extent of
solvent exposure of the probe between the acid-unfolded and the molten
globule intermediate states. Between pH 4 and 6, one group of mutants
(Y103C-A, F106C-A, F138C-A, Y146C-A, and K147C-A, where the A denotes
coupling of AEDANS to the introduced Cys residue) shows a further
increase in emission intensity, because of further desolvation of
the AEDANS probe as the protein folds to the native state. Indeed,
with the exception of K147, these residues are all fully or partly
buried in the native myoglobin structure. Residues in the second group (K77C-A, K102C-A, E105C-A, R139C-A,
and K140C-A) show only a small change in the AEDANS fluorescence intensity
between pH 4 and 6, suggesting solvent exposure of the incorporated
AEDANS probe as the protein folds from the intermediate to the native
state.

Direct emission from the incorporated IAEDANS as a function of
pH for the mutants indicated. A set of mutants that showed no additional
AEDANS fluorescence increase between pH 4 and 6 are bracketed. The
excitation wavelength was set at 338 nm, and the fluorescence emission
was observed at the emission maximum close to 480 nm.

Fluorescence and FRET of Apomyoglobin
Fluorescence
emission spectra of several of the AEDANS-derivatized W7F mutants
were recorded in 6 M urea, in the acid-denatured state at pH 2, and
in the molten globule and native states at pH 4 and 6, respectively.
Representative spectra for the AEDANS-coupled K77C-A and K140C-A mutants
are shown in Figure . The fluorescence spectra
in 6 M urea (black trace) show two maxima, corresponding to fluorescence
emission by W14 (at ∼350 nm) and AEDANS (at ∼490 nm).
Even when the protein is unfolded in 6 M urea, a basal level of resonance
energy transfer occurs from W14 to AEDANS. This energy transfer is
relatively independent of the location of the AEDANS acceptor and
arises through transient sampling of partially collapsed states within
the unfolded conformational ensemble. Energy transfer also occurs
in the acid-unfolded state at pH 2 (red traces), but its efficiency
is strongly dependent upon the location of the AEDANS probe. For K77C-A,
there is very little difference between the spectra in 6 M urea and
in the absence of urea at pH 2, but at pH 4 (blue trace) and pH 6
(green trace), the emission at ∼480 nm is greatly increased
and that at ∼330 nm decreased, because of efficient energy
transfer in the collapsed molten globule and native states. By contrast,
the spectrum of K140C-A at pH 2 in the absence of urea is markedly
different from that of the urea-denatured form, with a greater emission
at ∼480 nm due to FRET arising from transiently collapsed states
in which there are contacts between the A and H helix regions. These
interactions have been described previously on the basis of paramagnetic
broadening effects of nitroxide spin-label probes. The 480 nm emission at pH 4 is greater than that at pH
6, showing that the W14 donor and AEDANS acceptor are closer in the
molten globule state than in the native state. These observations
provide important clues about the structure of the intermediate as
well as the presence of long-range contacts involving W14 even in
the pH 2 unfolded state.

Fluorescence spectra of the AEDANS-substituted
mutants under various
conditions of pH and presence of denaturant: (A) K77C-A and (B) K140C-A.

pH Dependence of FRET
FRET measurements were performed
as a function of pH for all of the AEDANS-derivatized W7F apoMb mutants.
The W14 fluorescence emission intensity at 336 nm (with excitation
at 280 nm) was measured for each cysteine mutant in the absence (intensity
= F0) and presence of the coupled AEDANS
acceptor (intensity = F). The FRET efficiency, E, was calculated from the ratio of these values (E = 1 – F/F0). The variation of F/F0 with pH is shown for the complete set of mutants in Figure
S3 of the , and the
variation in FRET efficiency E is shown for a subset
of mutants in Figure A. For all AEDANS derivatives,
the FRET efficiency increases (F/F0 decreases) as the pH is increased from 2 to ∼4,
accompanying the transition from the acid-unfolded state to the molten
globule state. There is a distinct maximum at ∼pH 4 in the
FRET efficiency versus pH profile for R139C-A and K140C-A (Figure ), showing clearly that the W14 donor–AEDANS
acceptor distance is shorter in the molten globule state than it is
in the native state. While probes at some other locations also exhibit
maximal FRET around pH 4–4.5, the maximum is far less pronounced,
showing that the structural changes between the molten globule and
native states are far smaller than those experienced by probes in
the middle of the H helix.

(A) pH dependence of FRET from W14 (A helix)
to the AEDANS fluorescence
acceptor covalently attached at the mutated cysteine residue for mutants
K102C-A (red), E105C-A (green), F106C-A (black), R139C-A (orange),
and K140C-A (blue). The FRET efficiency is given by E = 1 – F/F0,
where F and F0 are the
W14 emission intensities, measured at the fluorescence maximum close
to 338 nm, in the presence and absence of the coupled AEDANS acceptor,
respectively. (B) Distances derived from fluorescence energy transfer.
The excitation wavelength was 280 nm. Distances were calculated from
the FRET efficiencies in panel A using the Förster equation
with an R0 of 22 Å and a κ2 of 0.67.

To obtain an estimate
of the magnitude of the structural changes,
we calculated the donor–acceptor distance in the molten globule
and native states using the Förster equation with the R0 value set at 22 Å for the Trp-AEDANS
FRET pair and assuming a dipole orientation factor κ2 of 2/3. The results
are summarized in Table . Clearly, the assumption
that the AEDANS acceptor is randomly oriented (κ2 = 2/3) is unlikely to be appropriate for all
locations of the probe, as discussed in detail below. However, the
overall result is clear: there is a substantial movement of the central
region of the H helix away from the W14 indole ring on progressing
from the molten globule to the native state.

Donor–Acceptor
Distances Calculated from FRET Efficiencies
residue	MG (Å)	native (Å)	Δr (Å)	
K77	19.2	17.6	–1.6	
K102	18.4	19.2	0.8	
Y103	18.2	19.6	1.4	
E105	19.2	19.4	0.2	
F106	18.0	18.9	0.9	
R139	17.2	19.1	1.9	
K140	17.7	20.4	2.7	
Y146	18.1	19.4	1.3	
K147	19.2	20.2	1.0	
Distances were calculated assuming
a κ2 of 2/3 and an R0 of 22 Å for the Trp-AEDANS pair.

Δr is the
change in distance between the molten globule and native states.

This structural change is most
obvious from the FRET data for residues
located in the central regions of the G and H helices. Chemical shifts
and {1H}–15N heteronuclear NOEs show
that residues 104–114 (G), 132–143 (H), and 5–15
(A helix region) are nearly fully helical and are packed to form the
molten globule core.,, During the transition from the molten globule to the native state,
energy transfer from W14 to the AEDANS probes coupled at E105C and
F106C changes very little (Figure ). Thus,
these probes remain relatively fixed distances from the tryptophan
ring, moving only 0.2 and 0.9 Å, respectively (Table ). In marked contrast, the FRET efficiency decreases
substantially for K140C-A and R139C-A, corresponding to movement of
the probe away from W14 by 2.7 and 1.9 Å, respectively. The FRET
data for these residues thus provide strong evidence of the movement
of the H helix relative to the G helix, which itself maintains a fixed
position with respect to W14, during the transition from the molten
globule to the native state. The side chain of R139 is partially buried
in the cleft between the G and H helices, and the assumption that
κ2 = 2/3 is unlikely to be
valid for the AEDANS probe coupled at R139C; the FRET data for R139C-A
are therefore only useful as a qualitative indicator of conformational
change. In contrast, the AEDANS group coupled at K140C is highly likely
to be randomly oriented on the protein surface, and the assumption
that κ2 = 2/3 is expected to
be valid. The X-ray structure shows that the K140 side chain extends
away from the protein surface and into the solvent, where it can undergo
unimpeded conformational averaging. We therefore used the FRET data
for the K140C-A derivative to estimate the magnitude of the helix
movement. If we assume that this movement involves sliding of the
H helix along its axis, as suggested by previous mutagenesis data and the fluorescence quenching experiments described
above, we can estimate an approximate distance through which the H
helix must slide to satisfy the FRET constraints. Basic trigonometry
indicates that sliding of the H helix toward its N-terminus by one
helical turn (5.4 Å) from its position in the native myoglobin
structure would shorten the distance between the edge of the W14 ring
and the Cα atom of residue 140 by 2.6 Å, in remarkable
agreement with the change in distance (2.7 Å) between the native
and molten globule states determined from FRET to the K140C-A probe.
Obviously, the actual distances measured in the FRET experiments are
to the chromophore of the AEDANS acceptor, which is expected to project
into the solvent in a direction that is, on average, approximately
orthogonal to the helix axis. However, simple geometric considerations
indicate that the change in distance reported by the chromophores
will be similar to that calculated for the Cα atoms. We thus
conclude that the FRET measurements with AEDANS coupled at K140C are
consistent with sliding of the central region of the H helix in an
N-terminal direction by approximately one helical turn in the molten
globule state.

The AEDANS probes at K77C, K102C, Y103C, F146C,
and K147C also
reflect conformational changes between the molten globule and native
states (Figure S3 of the ) but likely do not report on H helix translocation. K102 and Y103
are located in the dynamically frayed N-terminal region of helix G, which is only ∼50% helical in the molten
globule, averages over both helical and more extended states in the
conformational ensemble, and exhibits enhanced amide proton exchange.,, Similarly, in the molten globule
state, residues Y146 and K147 are located C-terminal to the well-folded
helical core of helix H, in a region that is strongly frayed and highly
dynamic. The distance changes reported by FRET probes at K102C, Y103C,
F146C, and K147C are thus more likely to reflect stabilization of
structure at the ends of the G and H helices upon folding to the native
state, rather than H helix translocation. Finally, the AEDANS probe
at K77C is located near the C-terminal end of helix E, in a region
that is partially compacted but highly disordered in the molten globule., The distance between K77C-A and W14 decreases further at pH 6, showing
that the structure in this region becomes more compact in the native
state.

Discussion
Folding Pathway of Apomyoglobin
The kinetic folding
pathway of apomyoglobin has been studied extensively by stopped-flow
and quench-flow methods.,,,−,−,− Following the pH jump to pH 6, acid-unfolded apomyoglobin refolds
via two sequential kinetic intermediates that, following Jamin and
Baldwin, we herein designate Ia and Ib.− Intermediate Ia accumulates within the burst phase of
a conventional stopped-flow instrument, as used in this work, but
its formation can be observed directly using submillisecond continuous-flow
mixing devices.,,, Recent studies have revealed an additional
intermediate, formed 30–40 μs after initiation of refolding,
between the unfolded state and Ia. Because this intermediate is too transient to be observed in our
experiments, we analyze our data using a simplified folding pathway:
U ↔ Ia ↔ Ib ↔ N.

Ultrafast hydrogen–deuterium exchange pulse labeling experiments
revealed an ensemble of intermediate states that interconvert in a
hierarchical manner as apomyoglobin folds. A compact intermediate formed within 400 μs of refolding,
corresponding to Ia, contains helical structure in the
A, G, and H regions. After 6 ms, additional structure is stabilized
in parts of the B, C, and E helix regions as intermediate Ib becomes populated. This latter intermediate is a heterogeneous,
kinetically trapped state in which folding is impeded by energetic
frustration in the B–G and G–H helix interfaces, which
affects docking and stabilization of the E helix., On the basis of mutagenesis of core hydrophobic residues, it has
been suggested that the H helix is translocated, relative to G, by
approximately one helical turn toward its N-terminus to maximize burial
of hydrophobic residues. Ib is also formed transiently during unfolding and refolding under
equilibrium conditions at pH 4.8–5.0.

The molten globule state that is populated at equilibrium
under
mildly acidic conditions (pH ∼4) shares structural similarity
with intermediates formed during kinetic refolding.−,, Direct NMR and hydrogen
exchange experiments show that the equilibrium molten globule contains
a large population of helical structure in the A, B, G, and H helix
regions, with the remainder of the polypeptide chain being highly
dynamic.,,, The pH 4 intermediate is structurally heterogeneous
and consists of an equilibrium mixture of intermediates Ia and Ib that are observed in kinetic experiments;, pressure causes a shift in the equilibrium to favor the Ia state.

Although the translocation
of the H helix in the intermediate folded
state was inferred from previous data, there was no prima facie evidence
of it. The fluorescence quenching experiments reported in this work
provide direct evidence of this process, which leads to non-native
contacts between the A and H helix regions in both the equilibrium
molten globule and Ib kinetic intermediate. Incorporation
of a cysteine quencher in adjacent turns of the H helix reveals close,
non-native contacts between residue 135 and W14 in the equilibrium
molten globule that are relaxed in the native state (Figure ). In the stopped-flow fluorescence experiments
shown in Figures  and , an increase in fluorescence intensity occurs within the dead time
(∼5 ms), due to formation of intermediate Ia. The
fluorescence then decreases during a fast kinetic phase as Ia progresses to Ib, with a further decrease as Ib folds to the native state (N) during the slow refolding phase. For
the W7F/L135C mutant, the W14 fluorescence is strongly quenched in
the Ib intermediate, showing that the non-native interactions
observed in the equilibrium molten globule are also present in the
kinetic Ib intermediate. In contrast, the Ia intermediate of W7F/L135C exhibits fluorescence comparable to that
of the W7F or W7F/M131C mutant, indicating that the close contacts
between residue 135 and W14 have not yet formed in Ia.
This may reflect fluctuations within the A–G–H core
of Ia that decrease the probability of C135–W14
contacts, or packing of the helices in a non-native topology. Enhanced
opening rates to amide exchange-competent states are observed for
the central residues of the H helix in the Ia intermediate,
confirming the presence of conformational fluctuations.

The fluorescence quenching experiments
provide unequivocal evidence
of translocation of the H helix toward its N-terminus in both the
pH 4.1 molten globule and the kinetic Ib intermediate but
do not provide a direct measure of the magnitude of the helix movement.
To address this question, we turned to FRET experiments with W7F apomyoglobin,
using probes located in regions of the G and H helices that are highly
helical and packed against the compact hydrophobic core of the equilibrium
molten globule. The efficiency of energy transfer from W14 to AEDANS
probes coupled at R139C and K140C, within the H helix, is maximal
over the pH range at which the equilibrium molten globule is populated
and decreases upon folding to the native state (Figure A). In contrast, probes in the central, folded region of the
G helix do not change position relative to W14 over this pH range,
suggesting that the packing between the core regions of the A and
G helices remains relatively fixed in the molten globule and native
states. Quantitative analysis of the FRET data for AEDANS coupled
at the fully solvent exposed K140C, for which the assumption of random
AEDANS orientation is expected to be valid, shows that the probe is
2.7 Å closer to W14 in the molten globule than in native apomyoglobin
(Table  and Figure B). Assuming a model in which the H helix slides along its axis,
as illustrated in Figure , this decrease
in distance is consistent with movement of the H helix by approximately
one helical turn (5.4 Å) toward its N-terminus. A movement of
this magnitude would bring the L135C side chain close to the indole
ring of W14, consistent with the enhanced fluorescence quenching observed
for the equilibrium molten globule and Ib intermediate
of the W7F/L135C mutant.

Schematic diagram illustrating how a translocation
of the H helix
toward the N-terminus by approximately one helical turn decreases
the distance between a fluorescence acceptor at position 140 and the
donor W14 in the molten globule intermediate compared to the folded
state. The backbone structure of myoglobin is colored to show the regions of the protein that are folded and
protect amides from exchange in the burst phase intermediate.,, Helix colors correspond to those
in Figure . The distances between the Cα
atom of residue 140 in the “native” and “translocated”
forms of the H helix are shown schematically as green and yellow lines,
respectively. The position of K140 in the translocated H helix is
modeled by the Cα atom of L137 for illustrative purposes.

Effect of the G–H
Disulfide Bridge on Backbone Structure
and Dynamics
To explore the role of H helix translocation
in the folding pathway of apomyoglobin, we designed and characterized
a double-cysteine mutant for which the oxidized disulfide form would
lock the register of the G and H helices into the “nativelike”
state present in the fully folded protein.

The overall folded
structure and backbone flexibility of the oxidized S108C–L135C
mutant are similar to those of the wild-type protein at pH 6.1, and
the residual helical structure and overall level of folded structure
remain similar at pH 4.1 (Figures  and  and Figures S1 and S2 of the ). The 1H and 15N chemical shifts for the wild-type and disulfide-bridged proteins
are very similar, and differences in shifts are small and mainly localized
to the G and H helices surrounding the mutation sites (Figure ). Perturbed chemical shifts are observed at pH
4.1 at sites in the N- and C-terminal ends of both the G and H helices
(Figure B). The juxtaposition of these sites
in the H helix onto those that show shift perturbations in helix G
provides evidence that the H helix is in a nativelike position in
the equilibrium intermediate of the oxidized disulfide mutant protein.
We conclude that the disulfide bond fixes the register of the G and
H helices relative to each other into the position that they take
up in the fully folded apoprotein.

Local deviation of 13Cα chemical shifts from random
coil values (termed secondary shift) gives information about the secondary
structure propensity of the backbone. Downfield shifts, which yield
positive values for the quantity δobs – δrc, are characteristic of helical structure., The secondary 13Cα chemical shifts at pH 6.1 are
very similar to those of the WT, indicating a high degree of similarity
in helical content between the disulfide mutant and the wild-type
protein; this agrees well with the CD data at pH 6.1 (Figure A). The 13Cα secondary chemical
shifts for the disulfide mutant at pH 4.1 (Figure A) have a pattern similar to that of the chemical shifts of
the WT with some exceptions localized to the G and H helices. Under
these conditions, where formation of the equilibrium folding intermediate
is maximal,13Cα shift
changes (Figure B) indicate an increase in
helicity at the N-terminus of the H helix (residues 125–129)
and at the C-terminus of the G helix, in residues that contact the
N-terminus of helix H in the native fold. In contrast, the C-terminal
region of the H helix shows somewhat lower helicity in the disulfide-bridged
mutant protein at pH 4.1.

Changes in backbone dynamics as a
consequence of the formation
of the disulfide bond were investigated by measuring {1H}–15N heteronuclear NOEs, which provide information
about the amplitudes of local picosecond to nanosecond motions of
the amide bond. Large positive NOEs indicate areas of the protein
with restricted motions on this time scale, while lower values indicate
more flexible regions of the backbone. Restriction of local motion
can be caused by polypeptide chain collapse and packing interactions
within the compact core of the molten globule. The pattern of heteronuclear NOEs for the disulfide-bonded mutant
protein is similar to that of the WT at pH 4.1, but for many residues,
the values observed for the mutant are higher than for the WT (Figure C). Significantly increased NOEs are found in the
C-terminal half of the G helix, the G–H turn, and the N-terminal
half of the H helix, corresponding to a restriction of motion resulting
from the stabilization of helical structure in this region through
formation of the disulfide bond. A small but significant increase
in the NOE values is also observed for several residues in the N-terminus
and in helix A, in a region that contacts the N-terminus of helix
H and the G–H turn in the native myoglobin fold.

Interestingly,
the largest increase in the extent of motional restriction
is observed for several E helix residues (Figure C). The heteronuclear NOEs observed for E helix residues in
the WT equilibrium intermediate are negative or only weakly positive,
suggesting that the E helix is highly dynamic and makes only transient
interactions with the compact molten globule core, (Figure C, black line). By contrast, there is a marked increase
in the heteronuclear NOEs for several residues in the E helix region
of the disulfide mutant (Figure C, red line),
to values that approach the magnitude of the NOEs observed for many
residues in the A, G, and H helices. In particular, large increases
in the NOE are observed for L72, I75, and L76. In the native myoglobin
fold, these side chains anchor the C-terminus of helix E to helix
H through hydrophobic contacts with the side chains of M131, L135,
and F138. Translocation of the H helix by one turn toward its N-terminus
in the wild-type molten globule would cause a steric clash between
F138 and the E helix side chains, destabilizing E–H helix packing
and frustrating the folding process. By constraining the H helix in
its native position, the S108C/L135C disulfide bond promotes nativelike
docking of the C-terminal hydrophobic residues of helix E. Residues
T67 and V68 in the middle of the E helix also exhibit more restricted
motions in the disulfide-bridged molten globule, as does a cluster
of residues in helix F that contact the C-terminal ends of the E and
H helices in the native fold.

Although the nativelike G–H
helix topology facilitates packing
of the E helix onto the hydrophobic core, the secondary 13Cα chemical shifts do not increase significantly, indicating
that helical structure in E is not increased. The E helix region remains
highly dynamic in the mutant, and docking to the ABGH core appears
to be driven largely by hydrophobic contacts. Quench-flow experiments
on hydrophobic core mutants of apomyoglobin revealed considerable
heterogeneity in packing of the E helix against the ABGH core in the
burst phase intermediate, with L69 and L72 making both native and
non-native contacts. Heterogeneity in
the B–E, E–G, and E–H helix contacts in the acid
molten globule has recently been confirmed by direct measurement of
distances between spin-label probes.

The formation of a disulfide bond between the side chains at positions
108 and 135 facilitates interactions between the G and H helix regions
even in the acid-unfolded states of the mutant protein, causing an
increase in the level of residual helical structure observed at pH
2 (Figure A). There is a slight destabilization
of the native folded state when the pH is decreased from 6.1 to 4.1
(Figure A), resulting in an increased pH range
over which the equilibrium (pH 4.1) intermediate is present. Nevertheless,
the amount of residual helical structure at pH 4.1 is identical for
mutant and wild-type proteins, as indicated by the similarity of the
ellipticity at this pH. By contrast, the fluorescence intensity of
the two proteins differs markedly at pH 4.1 and 6.1 (Figure B), reflecting differences in the quenching of the
fluorescence of W7 and W14 by the presence of the disulfide bond in
both the molten globule and native states.

Effect of the 108–135
Disulfide on Apomyoglobin Folding
Kinetics
The NMR and CD data indicate clearly that the S108C–L135C
disulfide facilitates interactions between the G and H helix regions
in the acid-unfolded state and prevents H helix translocation in the
pH 4 molten globule, resulting in nativelike G–H helix packing.
Naively, one might expect that the relief of energetic frustration
in the G–H interface of the disulfide-bonded molten globule
would lead to faster folding. Indeed, folding of the disulfide-bridged
apomyoglobin is faster, but only slightly (Table ). The overall refolding rate following urea dilution is increased
2.5-fold over that of the wild-type protein, and the rates of the
individual Ia → Ib and Ib →
N steps, observed in pH jump experiments, are each increased 20–30%
by the disulfide. This modest increase in rate upon relief of the
non-native G–H helix packing points to additional sources of
energetic frustration that slow the folding process. Previous work
has shown that correct packing and folding of the E helix is required
before the folding transition state can be reached. While constraining the H helix in a native position in
the molten globule by the S108C–L135C disulfide facilitates
E helix docking, it does not by itself promote E helix folding (there
is no increase in helicity), and the E helix residues remain dynamically
disordered. Clearly, additional sites of energetic frustration must
be relieved before the E helix can properly dock and fold to allow
progression to the transition state.

Previous mutagenesis experiments
provide insights into additional interactions that frustrate apomyoglobin
folding. The intermediates observed during kinetic refolding of apomyoglobin
constitute heterogeneous ensembles of compact, kinetically trapped
states in which the helix packing appears to be topologically correct
but in which there are local non-native interactions that must be
resolved before the protein can fold to the native structure.,, Three sites of energetic frustration
have thus far been identified that impede native docking interactions
of helix E and progression to the transition state: non-native G–H
helix packing, instability at the N-terminus
of helix B, and burial of the distal
His64. Relief of all three sources of
frustration is required before folding can be completed; mutations
that resolve the frustration at only one of the sites result in at
best an only ∼2-fold increase in the folding rate. Conversely,
mutations in the F helix region that stabilize the misfolded AGH intermediate
and inhibit translocation of the H helix to its native position decrease
the overall folding rate by up to 6-fold.

Stable docking of the E helix is a pivotal step in the apomyoglobin
folding pathway, and mutations that impede this process slow the overall
folding rate. Ultrafast quench-flow H–D
exchange measurements show that amides at the N- and C-terminal regions
of the E helix become protected at different rates during refolding. The C-terminal residues, which contact helix
H in the native structure, fold more rapidly than the N-terminal part
of helix E, which appears to fold concomitantly with the N-terminus
of the B helix with which it is in direct contact in the native folded
state. Mutations that stabilize the N-terminus of helix B, namely,
G23A/G25A and H24L/H119F, promote nativelike interactions with the
C-terminus of helix G and the N-terminal region of E, leading to propagation
and stabilization of helical structure throughout helix E. Thus, docking and folding of helix E is a cooperative
process, in which nativelike interactions must be formed in both the
B–E–G and E–G–H interfaces before stable
helical structure can form. This is seen clearly in our current data,
where resolution of non-native structure in the G–H interface
leads only to enhancement of hydrophobic contacts with residues in
the C-terminus of helix E, with no stabilization of helical structure.
We conclude that progression to the rate-determining step for apomyoglobin
folding cannot be associated exclusively either with overcoming non-native
H helix interactions or with correct docking of the E helix onto the
folded B–G helix interface. Instead, the folding transition
state is likely reached via multiple pathways, providing further evidence
that the apomyoglobin folding landscape is highly rugged and involves
much energetic frustration.

The results of this study are consistent
with a mechanism in which
the collapsing polypeptide chain maximizes burial of hydrophobic residues
in the A–G–H helix interface, resulting in a compact
state in which the H helix is translocated relative to the G and A
helices. This constitutes a kinetic trap, which is likely resolved
by localized unfolding that allows the helix to slide to its native
position, rather than through a global unfolding process. Such a model
is consistent with the increased H helix opening rates, relative to
the core regions of the A and G helices, revealed by quenched-flow
hydrogen–deuterium exchange.

The translocation of the helix in the equilibrium molten globule
and the kinetic Ib intermediate appears to promote disorder
in the E and F helices. Movement of the H helix into its native docking
site on helix G relieves the energetic frustration in the E–H
helix interface and promotes docking of hydrophobic residues at the
C-terminal end of helix E and in helix F. However, as discussed above,
this in itself is insufficient for proper docking and stabilization
of helical structure in helix E.

The results reported here,
in conjunction with a wealth of published
data, greatly advance our understanding of apomyoglobin folding pathways
and the consequences of energetic frustration. The folding landscape
is highly rugged, with several energetic bottlenecks that frustrate
the folding process. Relief of any one of the major identified bottlenecks,
in the E–G–H and B–E–G helix interfaces,
is insufficient to speed progression to the transition state. It is
also notable that when frustration is relieved at either of these
sites by introduction of a disulfide, as in the work presented here,
or by mutagenesis in the B–G helix interface, it does not lead to excessive stabilization of the frustrated
E helix. Rather, the resulting stabilization of E helix contacts is
incremental, and the polypeptide chain in this region remains dynamically
disordered, allowing it to search conformational space efficiently
until additional sources of frustration are relieved and E helix folding
can be completed. This progressive decrease in chain flexibility,
accompanied by the progressive accumulation of secondary structure,
likely facilitates folding by preventing excessive stabilization of
non-native contacts within the ensemble of compact folding intermediates.

Supporting Information Available
A table showing expression
behavior of double-cysteine mutants and supplementary figures. This
material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500478m_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
P.C.A. and
C.N. contributed equally to this work.

This work was
supported by National Institutes of Health Grant DK34909.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Gerard Kroon for his assistance
with NMR experiments
and Maria Martinez-Yamout and Euvel Manlapaz for helpful discussion
and assistance in sample preparation.

Abbreviations
Mbmyoglobin

apoMbapomyoglobin

FRETFörster resonance energy
transfer

CDcircular
dichroism

AEDANS5-({2-[(acetyl)amino]ethyl}amino)naphthalene-1-sulfonic acid

NOEnuclear Overhauser enhancement.

