As the protein
databases continue
to expand (release 2014_07 of UniProt contains 80370243 nonredundant
sequences) and, in parallel, the homologous families identified by
Pfam increase in size and functional diversity (Pfam release 27.0
describes 14831 families and 515 clans), the problem of assigning
function on the basis of sequence identity and similarity is becoming
increasingly more challenging. For the past 25 years, we have developed
the enolase superfamily (ENS) as a paradigm to characterize and understand
the structural bases for divergence of function in functionally diverse
superfamilies.− The members of the ENS share not only a conserved structure, an
(α+β) capping domain that determines substrate specificity
and a modified TIM-barrel domain [(β/α)7β-barrel]
that contains the acid/base residues that determine the reaction mechanism,
but also a conserved mechanism that is initiated by abstraction of
a proton from the carbon adjacent to a carboxylate group to generate
a Mg2+-stabilized enolate anion intermediate., Our recent studies have focused on studying how function diverges
as sequence diverges in homologous subgroups.

The d-mannonate dehydratase subgroup (ManD) of the
ENS
recently was found to include members that dehydrate d-mannonate
and/or d-gluconate to 2-keto-3-deoxy-d-gluconate
(equivalently, 2-keto-3-deoxy-d-mannonate)., [The subgroup was named by the function of the first member that
was functionally and structurally characterized, when (2007) the protein
sequence databases were considerably smaller than they are today.] Also, the members of the ManD subgroup display
varying catalytic efficiencies: high-efficiency (specific for d-mannonate with a kcat/KM of 103–104 M–1 s–1), low-efficiency (d-mannonate and/or d-gluconate with a kcat/KM of 10–102 M–1 s–1), and no activity. Although we recently reported the physiological
role of the high-efficiency ManDs, dehydration
of d-mannonate in the d-glucuronate catabolic pathway
in organisms that lack UxuA, the roles of the low-efficiency members
of the ManD subgroup have not been determined.

In this article,
we describe in vitro characterization
of two metabolic pathways that are encoded by the genes that are proximal
to those that encode low-efficiency members of the ManD subgroup.
The pathways utilize two successive dehydrogenase reactions (oxidation
followed by reduction) to catalyze epimerization of carbon 5 of a
six-carbon acid sugar, one for conversion of l-gulonate to d-mannonate (Escherichia coli CFT073 and Chromohalobacter salexigens DSM3043) and the second for
conversion of l-idonate to d-gluconate (Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar Enteritidis str. P125109). In vivo studies
using genetic deletions (knockouts) and transcriptomics established
that the l-gulonate pathway in C. salexigens DSM3043 allows growth on l-gulonate as a carbon source.
However, we were unable to demonstrate a physiological requirement
for the ManD (Uniprot entry Q1QT89; CsManD) that catalyzes the dehydration of d-mannonate (kcat/KM = 5 M–1 s–1) and d-gluconate (kcat/KM = 40 M–1 s–1). We also describe cryptic pathways for the catabolism
of l-gulonate and l-idonate in E. coli CFT073 and S. enterica subsp. enterica serovar Enteritidis str. P125109, respectively,
that are encoded by the same genome neighborhoods that encode the
low-efficiency ManD and GlcD, respectively, that could participate
in the pathways.

Materials and Methods
Cloning, Expression, and
Purification
The genes encoding
the l-gulonate 5-dehydrogenase from Halomonas elongata DSM 2581 (HeGulDH, Uniprot entry E1V4Y1, an orthologue
of the l-gulonate 5-dehydrogenase from C. salexigens DSM3043, CsGulDH), the l-idonate dehydrogenase
from Salmonella enteriditis (SeIdoDH,
Uniprot entry B5R538), and the d-gluconate dehydrogenase
from S. enteriditis (SeGlucDH, Uniprot
entry B5R540) were synthesized (Genscript) and codon-optimized for
expression in E. coli; the genes were synthesized
with 5′-NdeI and 3′-BamHI restriction sites and were
received in vector pUC57. The pUC57 constructs were transformed into E. coli XLI Blue for subcloning and storage. Purified vector
was digested with NdeI/BamHI (New England Biolabs) and ligated into
NdeI/BamHI-digested pET15b (Novagen). The pET15b constructs were transformed
into E. coli BL21(DE3) cells for expression. The
proteins were purified from 1 L cultures using a chelating Sepharose
Fast Flow (Amersham Biosciences) column charged with Ni2+ as previously described, concentrated
(HeGulDH to 15 mg/mL, SeIdoDH to
8.1 mg/mL, and SeGlcDH to 4.7 mg/mL), flash-frozen
using liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80 °C prior to use.

The gene encoding RspB, the l-idonate 5-dehydrogenase
from E. coli CFT073 (Uniprot entry Q8FHC8), was amplified
from E. coli CFT073 genomic DNA (ATCC 700928) using
RspB_FOR and RspB_REV primers (Table S1 of the ). The mixture for the polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) (30 μL) contained 50 ng of template, 1 mM MgCl2, 1× Pfx Amp Buffer, 0.33 mM dNTP, primers (0.33 μM
each), and 1.25 units of Pfx polymerase (Invitrogen Platinum Pfx DNA
Polymerase kit). Amplifications were performed according to the manufacturer’s
guidelines. The amplified product was digested with NdeI/BamHI (New
England Biolabs) and ligated into NdeI/BamHI-digested pET15b (Novagen).
The pET15b RspB construct was transformed into E. coli BL21(DE3) cells for expression. RspB was purified
from a 1 L culture using a chelating Sepharose Fast Flow (Amersham
Biosciences) column charged with Ni2+ as previously described. The protein was concentrated to 4.2 mg/mL, flash-frozen
using liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80 °C prior to use.

The gene encoding RspD, the d-mannonate 5-dehydrogenase
from E. coli CFT073 (Uniprot entry Q8FHD0), was amplified
from E. coli CFT073 genomic DNA (ATCC 700928) using
RspD_FOR and RspD_REV primers (Table S1 of the ). The mixture for the PCR (30 μL)
contained 50 ng of template, 1 mM MgCl2, 1× Pfx Amp
Buffer, 0.33 mM dNTP, primers (0.33 μM each), and 1.25 units
of Pfx polymerase (Invitrogen Platinum Pfx DNA Polymerase kit). Amplifications
were performed according to the manufacturer’s guidelines.
The amplified product was digested with SacI/BamHI (New England Biolabs)
and ligated into SacI/BamHI-digested pET17b (Novagen). The pET17b RspD construct was transformed into E. coli BL21(DE3) cells for expression. RspD was purified from a 1 L culture
using DEAE Sepharose, Q-Sepharose, and phenyl Sepharose columns (all
from Amersham Biosciences) as previously described. The protein was concentrated to 13 mg/mL, flash-frozen
using liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80 °C prior to use.

The gene encoding CsGntR, the GntR transcriptional
factor in the genome neighborhood of CsManD (Uniprot
entry Q1QT90), was amplified from C. salexigens DSM3043
genomic DNA (ATCC BAA-138) using CsGntR_FOR and CsGntR_REV primers
(Table S1 of the ). The PCR was the same as that for RspD described above but with
the CsGntR primers. The amplified product was digested
with NdeI and BamHI (New England Biolabs) and ligated into similarly
digested pET15b. The pET15b CsGntR construct was
transformed into E. coli BL21(DE3) cells for expression. CsGntR was purified from a 1 L culture using a chelating
Sepharose Fast Flow (Amersham Biosciences) column charged with Ni2+ as previously described. The
protein was concentrated to 12 mg/mL, flash-frozen using liquid nitrogen,
and stored at −80 °C prior to use.

CsUxuA was obtained from the Albert Einstein College
of Medicine as previously described.

Screen for Oxidation Activity of HeGulDH, SeGlcDH, SeIdoDH, RspB, and RspD
Reactions to test for oxidation activity were performed in acrylic,
UV transparent 96-well plates (Corning Inc.) using a library of 72
acid sugars (Figure S1 of the ). Reaction mixtures (60 μL) contained 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.9),
10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM NAD+, 1 μM enzyme, and
1 mM acid sugar substrate (blanks without enzyme). The plates were
incubated at 30 °C for 16 h. The absorbancies were measured at
340 nm (ε = 6220 M–1 cm–1) using a Tecan Infinite M200PRO plate reader. Products were verified
via 1H nuclear magnetic resonance.

Screen for the Dehydration
Activity of CsUxuA
Reactions to test for
dehydration activity were performed in acrylic,
UV transparent 96-well plates (Corning Inc.) using a library of 72
acid sugars (Figure S1 of the ) as previously described.

Kinetic Assays
for HeGulDH, SeIdoDH, RspB, and
RspD
Oxidation of l-gulonate, l-idonate,
or d-mannonate was monitored using a continuous
spectrophotometric assay. For HeGulDH, the assays
(200 μL), at 25 °C, contained 50 mM potassium HEPES (pH
7.9), 5 mM MnSO4, 3 mM NAD+, and 200 nM HeGulDH. For the remaining enzymes, the assays (200 μL),
at 25 °C, contained 50 mM potassium HEPES (pH 7.9), 5 mM MgCl2, 3 mM NAD+, and either 200 nM RspB, 200 nM SeIdoDH, or 20 nM RspD (lower concentration because of the
greater catalytic efficiency). Substrate concentrations varied from
12.5 μM to 30 mM depending on the KM values of the enzymes. Oxidation was quantitated by measuring the
decrease in absorbance at 340 nm (ε = 6220 M–1 cm–1).

Kinetic Assays for SeGlcDH
Reduction
of 5-keto-d-gluconate (fructuronate) was monitored using
a continuous spectrophotometric assay. The assay (200 μL), at
25 °C, contained 50 mM potassium HEPES (pH 7.9), 5 mM MgCl2, 200 μM NADH, and 200 nM SeGlcDH.
The substrate concentration varied from 50 μM to 30 mM. Oxidation
was quantitated by measuring the decrease in absorbance at 340 nm
(ε = 6220 M–1 cm–1).

Kinetic
Assay of CsUxuA
Dehydration
of d-mannonate was monitiored using a continuous, coupled-enzyme
spectrophotometric assay as previously described.

Quantitative RT-PCR of CsManD, RspABCD, and SeGlcD Genome Neighborhoods
C. salexigens DSM3043 was grown to an optical
density (absorbance at 600 nm) of
0.4–0.5 in M9 minimal salts medium with additional NaCl (1.7
M NaCl, 6.1 mM Na2HPO4, 3.9 mM KH2PO4, 9.3 mM NH4Cl, 0.5 mM MgSO4,
and 0.5 mM CaCl2) and 10 mM d-mannonate, 10 mM l-gulonate, 10 mM d-glucuronate, or 10 mM d-glucose. Cells were pelleted at 15000 rpm, and the supernatant was
removed. mRNA was purified from the cells using an RNeasy Mini Kit
(Qiagen). The RNA was further purified using RNase-free DNase (Qiagen)
following the manufacturer’s protocol. The purity was verified
using 30 μL PCR mixtures consisting of 50 ng of mRNA, 1 mM MgCl2, 1× Pfx Amp Buffer, 2× PCR enhancer, 0.33 mM dNTP,
0.33 μM primers [CsRpoD_RTPCR_FOR and CsRpoD_RTPCR_REV (Table
S1 of the )], and
1.25 units of Pfx polymerase (Invitrogen Platinum Pfx DNA Polymerase
kit). The PCR mixtures were electrophoresed on an agarose gel to check
for amplification. cDNA was prepared using Protoscript First Strand
(New England Biolabs) and 1 μg of mRNA; the manufacturer’s
protocol was followed. The qRT-PCR was performed using the Light Cycler
480 SYBR Green I Master Kit (Roche) and a Light Cycler 480 II (Roche)
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The qRT-PCR primers
are listed in Table S1 of the . Cp values were analyzed
using the Light Cycler 480 application and fold changes calculated
in Microsoft Excel.

Salmonella enterica
 serovar Enteritidis str. P125109 was grown was grown to an optical
density (absorbance
at 600 nm) of 0.4–0.5 in M2 minimal salts medium (6.1 mM Na2HPO4, 3.9 mM KH2PO4, 9.3
mM NH4Cl, 0.5 mM MgSO4, 0.5 mM CaCl2, and 10 μM FeSO4) and either 10 mM l-gulonate
or d-glucose or 1–100 mM l-idonate, d-gluconate, or d-glucose. The following steps are identical
to those taken with C. salexigens. The primers for SeRspABCD and SeGlcD qRT-PCR are listed
in Table S1 of the .

Knockout Construction in C. salexigens DSM3043
The knockouts of genes in C. salexigens DSM3043 were constructed using overlap extension and a suicide vector
(pK19mobsacB, ATCC 87097). The DNA ∼600
bp upstream and downstream of the gene of interest (GOI) was cloned
using overlap extension to create a single linear product that perfectly
excises the GOI as previously described (primers listed in Table S1
of the ). This PCR product was digested with either EcoRI
and HindIII or BamHI and HindIII (New England Biolabs) and ligated
into similarly digested pK19mobsacB. The ligation products with confirmed
sequences were transformed into E. coli WM6029 (obtained
from W. Metcalf at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign)
for conjugation. E. coli WM6029 plus pK19mobsacB
containing the GOI and C. salexigens DSM3043 were
grown to an optical density (absorbance at 600 nm) of 0.4–0.5
in 3 mL of PYE medium containing 500
mM NaCl and 50 μg/mL diaminopimelic acid (conjugation medium).
The cells were pelleted at 4500 rpm for 5 min; the supernatant was
removed, and the cells were resuspended in 3 mL of conjugation medium.
Aliquots (250 μL) of both E. coli WM6029 and
pK19mobsacB containing the GOI and C. salexigens DSM3043
were mixed in a 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube and pelleted at 4500 rpm for
5 min. The supernatant was removed, and the cells were resuspended
in 100 μL of conjugation medium. The resuspended cells were
inoculated onto a nitrocellulose filter, placed on a plate of conjugation
medium with 1.2% agar, and incubated overnight at 30 °C. The
overnight conjugation was resuspended in 1 mL of PYE medium containing
500 mM NaCl. An aliquot (40 μL) was plated onto PYE medium containing
500 mM NaCl, 4× Kn (200 μg/mL), and 1.2% agar for selection
of single-crossover events. Single-crossover events were verified
by colony PCR. Colonies with successful single-crossover events were
subcultured onto a plate of PYE medium containing 500 mM NaCl and
1.2% agar. Single colonies were plated onto PYE medium containing
500 mM NaCl, 20% sucrose, and 1.2% agar. Colonies were probed for
double-crossover events via colony PCR. Successful double-crossover
events were verified by isolating the genomic DNA (Qiagen DNeasy Blood
and Tissue Kit) and sequencing the knockout region.

Knockout Construction
in Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis str. P125109
All knockouts
were performed via the method described by Datsenko and Wanner for E. coli. Primers are listed
in Table S2 of the .

Growth Curves of Wild-Type (WT) and Knockout Strains in C. salexigens DSM3043
All strains were grown
to an optical density (absorbance at 600 nm) of 0.4–0.5 in
3 mL of PYE medium containing 1.7 M NaCl (50 μg/mL streptomycin
for conjugations). The cells were pelleted at 5000 rpm for 5 min and
resuspended in 3 mL of M9 minimal salts medium containing 1.7 M NaCl.
The cells were inoculated into triplicate 300 μL cultures of
M9 minimal salts medium containing 1.7 M NaCl and 10 mM d-mannonate or l-gulonate. Growth curves were recorded using
a Bioscreen C instrument (Growth Curves USA). Cells were grown at
37 °C for 120 h while being continuously shaken.

Fluorescence-Based
Thermal Shift Assay for CsGntR (ThermoFluor)
The library for screening the specificity
of CsGntR contained 188 ligands in duplicate wells
plus eight control wells (protein without compound) (Figure S2 of
the ). The assays
were performed as previously described. A hit is considered significant if the ΔTM is ≥4 °C or 3 times the standard deviation
of the TM values for the control wells.

Results and Discussion
In Vitro Pathway for CsManD
The genome neighborhood for CsManD suggests a
pathway for d-glucuronate metabolism that involves dehydration
of D-mannonate (Figure ). Specifically, the genome proximal fructuronate reductase
that reduces fructuronate to d-mannonate and UxuA that dehydrates d-mannonate to 2-keto-3-deoxy-d-mannonate (not a member of the ENS) are involved in d-glucuronate metabolism in many eubacteria. However, C. salexigens DSM3043 uses an alternate
pathway for d-glucuronate metabolism initiated by oxidation
of d-glucuronate to d-glucaro-1,5-lactone− (Figure ). The genome neighborhood encoding
the predicted uronate dehydrogenase (Udh, Uniprot entry Q1QUN7) also
encodes d-glucarolactone cycloisomerase (Gci, Uniprot entry
Q1QUN5), a member of the amidohydrolase superfamily (presumably d-galactarolactone isomerase, Uniprot entry Q1QUN6), d-glucarate dehydratase (GlucD, Uniprot entry Q1QUM5), and 5-dehydro-4-deoxy-d-glucarate dehydratase/decarboxylase (Uniprot entry Q1QUM4)
(Figure S3 of the ). These enzymes are involved in an alternate pathway for d-glucuronate degradation.,

Genome neighborhood for CsManD in C. salexigens DSM3043. Carbohydrate
metabolism genes are colored green. TRAP transporters
are colored red. The GntR transcriptional regulator is colored orange.

Catabolic pathways for d-glucuronate
in eubacteria. The
pathway hypothesized for degradation of l-gulonate in C. salexigens has red arrows: CsGulDH (alcohol
dehydrogenase), CsFR (fructuronate reductase), CsManD (d-mannonate dehydratase), and UxuA (d-mannonate dehydratase). Starting compounds are labeled in
blue (d-glucuronate and l-gulonate).

The physiological relevance of these enzymes and
genes was probed
using RT-PCR, comparing growth on d-glucuronate to that on d-glucose. The genes encoding all of these enzymes are upregulated;
however, the genome neighborhood encoding CsManD
is not upregulated (Figure S4 of the ). Further studies are needed to determine whether C. salexigens DSM3043 utilizes the newly discovered Gci-based
catabolic pathway, to metabolize d-glucuronate
or the previously described pathway in which d-glucarolactone
is hydrolyzed to d-glucarate that is dehydrated by GlucD;− the Gci and “amidohydrolase” in C. salexigens DSM3043 are members of the same Pfam families as those characterized
by Bouvier and co-workers, PF02746 and
PF01979, respectively. Irrespective of the precise pathway, we conclude
that C. salexigens DSM3043 metabolizes d-glucuronate via conversion to d-glucarolactone/d-glucarate and not d-mannonate.

In addition to fructuronate
reductase, a second alcohol dehydrogenase
is encoded by the CsManD genome neighborhood. Its
presence suggested that the genome neighborhood allows another acid
sugar to be utilized as a carbon source, with the oxidation product
an intermediate in the ManD-utilizing d-glucuronate catabolic
pathway; e.g., oxidation at carbon 5 of l-gulonate produces
fructuronate (Figure ). Therefore, we hypothesized
that the genome neighborhood of CsManD is responsible
for l-gulonate metabolism. A pathway for l-gulonate
catabolism in E. coli K-12 was suggested by Cooper
in 1980, but the gene or enzyme responsible for oxidation of l-gulonate was not identified. Furthermore,
Cooper was able to see growth of E. coli K-12 only
after spontaneous mutations had occurred.

Functional Assignment within the CsManD Genome
Neighborhood: CsUxuA
The functions of the
proteins encoded by the genome neighborhood must be determined to
assign a physiological role to CsManD. CsUxuA (Uniprot entry Q1QT83) was screened for dehydration activity
using a library of 72 acid sugars (Figure S1 of the ). The only hit was d-mannonate
that was dehydrated to 2-keto-3-deoxy-d-mannonate with a
catalytic efficiency of 1.5 × 103 M–1 s–1 (Table ). Therefore,
it was unclear whether UxuA, CsManD, or both were
responsible for d-mannonate dehydration in this pathway.

Kinetics of Enzymes Encoded by the CsManD Operon
protein	substrate	kcat (s–1)	kcat/KM (M–1 s–1)	
CsManD	d-mannonate	0.02 ± 0.0005	5.0 × 100	
CsUxuA	d-mannonate	1.6 ± 0.1	1.5 × 103	
HeGulDH (CsGulDH)	l-gulonate	1.8 ± 0.13	6.0 × 102	
RspD (CsFR)	d-mannonate	30 ± 1.8	2.8 × 105	
Functional Assignment within the CsManD Genome
Neighborhood: CsGulDH
The alcohol dehydrogenase
(CsGulDH, Uniprot entry Q1QT88) in the CsManD genome neighborhood was not amenable to purification, despite
several cloning strategies. A presumably orthologous alcohol dehydrogenase
from the closely related H. elongata DSM 2581 (HeGulDH, Uniprot entry E1V4Y1) is 76% identical and 86%
similar to CsGulDH. Additionally, the genome neighborhood
of HeGulDH is identical to the CsGulDH neighborhood. The purified HeGulDH was screened
for oxidation activity using the library of acid sugars (Figure S1
of the ). Multiple
hits were observed, with l-gulonate exhibiting the most efficient
oxidation [kcat/KM = 6 × 102 M–1 s–1 (Table )]. All three l-gulonate
dehydrogenases discussed herein (CsGulDH, HeGulDH, and RspB) are in Pfam family PF08240.

Functional
Assignment within the CsManD Genome
Neighborhood: CsFR
The fructuronate reductase
(CsFR, Uniprot entry Q1QT84) in the CsManD genome neighborhood also was not amenable to purification. CsFR is 43% identical and 59% similar to a d-mannonate
oxidoreductase in E. coli CFT073 (RspD, Uniprot entry
Q8FHD0); both proteins belong to Pfam PF01232. RspD was purified and
screened for oxidation activity with the acid sugar library described
previously (Figure S1 of the ). RspD exhibited specific oxidation of d-mannonate to fructuronate
with a catalytic efficiency of 3 × 105 M–1 s–1 (Tables  and ). Although the level of sequence similarity is
not high, the similar genome contexts (vide infra) and enzymatic activities of CsGulDH and CsFR, and HeGulDH and RspD, allow confident
transfer of function between the two proteins, respectively. Considering
their in vitro activities, these proteins provide
support for the l-gulonate catabolic pathway proposed by
Cooper. Therefore, we pursued in vivo validation to corroborate the in vitro data and confirm the pathway.

Kinetics of Enzymes
Encoded by the
RspABD Operon
protein	substrate	kcat (s-1)	kcat/KM (M–1 s–1)	
RspA	d-mannonate	0.02 ± 0.001	1.0 × 10	
RspB	l-gulonate	3.9 ± 0.5	1.4 × 103	
RspD	5-keto-d-mannonate	30 ± 1.8	2.8 × 105	
Transcript Analysis of the CsManD Genome Neighborhood
Transcript analysis via qRT-PCR of mRNA revealed that all of genes
in the neighborhood of CsManD (Figure ) were upregulated ∼20–300-fold during growth
on both d-mannonate and l-gulonate relative to that
on d-glucose (Figure ). Mutual upregulation
in combination with the proximity and identical orientation implies
these genes are in an operon, but Northern blots were not performed
for confirmation. These findings support the claim that the CsManD gene cluster is responsible for l-gulonate
metabolism via d-mannonate.

qRT-PCR data for genes in the CsManD operon for
cells grown on l-gulonate (top) or d-mannonate (bottom)
vs growth on d-glucose. Cells were grown as described in  to an optical density of 0.4–0.5
at 600 nm (early log phase). Upregulation is observed for all genes
on both l-gulonate and d-mannonate.

ThermoFluor for CsGntR
The GntR transcriptional
regulator for the l-gulonate utilization operon (CsGntR, Uniprot entry Q1QT90) was expressed, purified, and
analyzed by ThermoFluor using a library of 188 ligands (sugars, amino
acids, and various metabolites) (Figure S2 of the ). Both d-mannonate (ΔTm of 7 °C) and l-gulonate (ΔTm of 2 °C) were among the top 10 hits (Table
S2 of the ). The
ligand specificity of the GntR provides further support of the involvement
of the operon in growth on l-gulonate and d-mannonate.

Knockout Studies in the CsManD Genome Neighborhood
Gene deletions or knockouts (KOs) were constructed to further probe
the proposed l-gulonate pathway. The following KO strains
were constructed: ΔCsGulDH, ΔCsFR, ΔCs, ΔCsManD, Δ(CsManD,CsUxuA), and
Δ(CsFR,CsUxuA). All of the
genes were removed from the genome via homologous recombination. Their
growth phenotypes using either d-mannonate or l-gulonate
as the sole carbon source were recorded (Figure ).

Growth curves for wild-type C. salexigens DSM3043
and various knockout strains. Growth was recorded in M9 minimal medium
with 1.7 M NaCl and either l-gulonate (A) or d-mannonate
(B) as the sole carbon source. The cultures were grown in triplicate.

For both d-mannonate
and l-gulonate, the wild-type
strain and the ΔCsManD KO had identical growth
curves, indicating CsManD is not required for the
catabolism of either carbon source. In contrast, the ΔCsUxuA KO resulted in slower growth with both carbon sources,
suggesting CsUxuA is the predominant ManD for both l-gulonate and d-mannonate catabolism. That the Δ(CsManD,CsUxuA) double KO was able to grow
on d-mannonate and l-gulonate implicates a slower,
as yet unidentified pathway for d-mannonate catabolism. Interestingly,
the Δ(CsManD,CsUxuA) double
KO exhibited growth retardation (relative to either single KO) when
the species was grown on l-gulonate, suggesting that CsManD plays a role in the alternate d-mannonate
metabolic pathway when l-gulonate is the carbon source.

Most importantly, the ΔCsGulDH, ΔCsFR, and Δ(CsFR,CsUxuA) knockout strains did not grow on l-gulonate. This
provides convincing evidence that CsGulDH, CsFR, and CsUxuA are responsible for the
catabolism of l-gulonate. For d-mannonate, the growth
rates for ΔCsFR are very similar to that for
ΔCsUxuA, which likely indicates a polar effect
on CsUxuA when CsFR is knocked out
(the genes encoding CsFR and CsUxuA
are separated by 9 bp). Furthermore, the growth of the Δ(CsFR,CsUxuA) double KO on d-mannonate
confirms that the CsUxuA deletion strain does not
grow by conversion of d-mannonate to fructuronate/l-gulonate and then funneling into an undiscovered catabolic pathway.
The unidentified pathway utilizes genes not included in the CsManD genome neighborhood.

Other in Vitro Pathways Implicated by Low-Efficiency
ManDs: RspA
An in vitro pathway for the
catabolism of l-gulonate was derived from the genome neighborhood
of a low-efficiency ManD discovered in E. coli CFT073.
This pathway is encoded by four genes: RspA, a low-efficiency ManD (Uniprot entry Q8FHC7); RspB, annotated as an alcohol dehydrogenase (Uniprot entry
Q8FHC8); RspC, annotated as a hypothetical metabolite
transporter (Uniprot entry Q8FHC9); and RspD, annotated
as an oxidoreductase (Uniprot entry Q8FHD0) (Figure ). The genome neighborhood does not encode a UxuA, although
one is encoded elsewhere in the genome. RspA (ManD), RspB (l-gulonate 5-dehydrogenase), and RspD (d-mannonate 5-dehydrogenase)
were found to catalyze the in vitro conversion of l-gulonate to 2-keto-3-deoxy-d-gluconate (Table ). Although RspA, RspB, and RspD convert l-gulonate to 2-keto-3-deoxy-d-mannonate/2-keto-3-deoxy-d-gluconate in vitro, no upregulation or KO
phenotype for growth on l-gulonate was observed in either E. coli K-12 or S. enterica serovar Enteritidis str. P125109 where identical gene clusters are
found: E. coli K-12 does not grow on l-gulonate
until spontaneous mutations occur, and
while the RspABCD gene cluster in S. enterica serovar Enteritidis str. P125109 is negligibly
upregulated (Figure S5 of the ), knockouts of RspA and RspB grow
to turbidity overnight on l-gulonate.

Genome neighborhood of
the gene cluster in E. coli CFT073. RspA (low-efficiency d-mannonate dehydratase, Uniprot
entry Q8FHC7), RspB (l-gulonate dehydrogenase, Uniprot entry
Q8FHC8), and RspD (fructuronate reductase, Uniprot entry Q8FHD0) are
colored green. The hypothetical metabolite transporter (RspC, Uniprot
entry Q8FHC9) is colored red. Hypothetical genes of unknown function
are colored orange.

Other in Vitro Pathways Implicated by Low-Efficiency
ManDs: SeGlcD
Bausch and co-workers discovered
a novel pathway for l-idonate metabolism in E. coli K-12 in which l-idonate is converted to d-gluconate
via oxidation and subsequent reduction of the C5 hydroxyl group.d-Gluconate is then phosphorylated
and dehydrated to form 2-keto-3-deoxy-d-gluconate 6-phosphate,
which is cleaved by an aldolase to pyruvate and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate.
Interestingly, S. enterica subsp. enterica serovar Enteritidis str. P125109 encodes this l-idonate catabolic pathway as well as a similar pathway that
is encoded by genes proximal to that encoding a low-efficiency GlcD
(Uniprot entry B5R541, SeGlcD; kcat/KM = 80 M–1 s–1) (Figures  and ).

Genome neighborhoods
of the previously described l-idonate
catabolic pathway and the low-efficiency ManD-containing l-idonate catabolic pathway present in S. enterica subsp. enterica serovar Enteritidis str. P125109.

In vitro catabolic pathway for the consumption
of l-idonate present in S. enterica subsp. enterica serovar Enteritidis str. P125109.

In the latter pathway, l-idonate is converted to d-gluconate via two dehydrogenases
as previously described (SeIdoDH and SeGlcDH, Uniprot entries B5R538
and B5R540, respectively), but the subsequent steps of phosphorylation
and dehydration apparently have shifted order: d-gluconate
is dehydrated by SeGlcD to 2-keto-3-deoxy-d-gluconate, which can be catabolized by either the nonphosphorylated
or phosphorylated Entner–Doudoroff pathway (Table ). We have been unable to determine a physiological
role for this pathway; it is a cryptic pathway, i.e., growth on l-idonate or d-gluconate at concentrations as high
as 100 mM did not result in upregulation of the genes (Figures S6
and S7 of the ).

Kinetics of Enzymes Encoded by the SeGlucD Operon
protein	substrate	kcat (s–1)	kcat/KM (M–1 s–1)	
SeIdoDH	l-idonate	1.2 ± 0.09	4.8 × 102	
SeGlcDH	5-keto-d-gluconate	3.4 ± 0.5	3.8 × 103	
SeGlcD	d-gluconate	0.05 ± 0.003	8.0 × 10	
As for the pathways for catabolism of l-gulonate
using
(1) CsGulDH, CsFR, CsUxuA, and CsManD or (2) RspA, RspB, and RspD, the
pathway for catabolism of l-idonate using SeIdoDH, SeGlcDH, and SeGlcD demonstrates
the successive use of two dehydrogenases to epimerize the configuration
of carbon 5. Although all three pathways are found via genome neighorhoods
involving the low-efficiency ManDs, the physiological purposes, if
any, of these dehydratases have yet to be discovered.

Conclusion
Our investigations into the role of the
low-efficiency CsManD discovered a novel pathway
for the catabolism of l-gulonate in C. salexigens DSM3043 via oxidation or reduction of carbon 5 (Figure ). This pathway was proposed more than 30 years
ago for E. coli K-12 when it was observed that spontaneous
mutations allowed growth on l-gulonate, although the enzyme
or gene for l-gulonate oxidation was not identified. On the basis of sequence homology to CsGulDH, HeGulDH, and RspB, we propose
that the likely l-gulonate 5-dehydrogenase in E.
coli K-12 for which Cooper described the activity is Uniprot
entry P38105 (44% identical to CsGulDH, 46% identical
to HeGulDH, and 98% identical to RspB).

We
have determined that low-efficiency d-gluconate and d-mannonate dehydratases need not be required for growth, although
their genome neighborhoods encode enzymes sufficient to constitute
catabolic pathways for l-idonate and l-gulonate,
respectively. Perhaps, these “cryptic” pathways have
been silenced as a result of the lack of selective pressure or, alternatively,
are evolving to meet new metabolic needs. Enzyme promiscuity has long
been hypothesized to be the starting point of evolution. A similar view, which is supported by laboratory
evolution, is that the emergence of new functions is a gradual process
in which the evolution of a low-efficiency, promiscuous activity is
the most favored option rather than starting “from scratch”. This ideology supports the proposal that low-efficiency
GlcDs are in evolutionary flux toward a new function if one assumes
that the high-efficiency ManD activity is the progenitor function
in the ManD subgroup. These hypotheses imply that low-efficiency ManDs
are such because they are under no selective pressure: they may be
derived from high-efficiency ManDs and are becoming less efficient,
or they are relics that have not yet evolved to high-efficiency forms
because of a lack of selective pressure. It is possible that we have
not yet discovered the true physiological role of the low-efficiency
ManDs and GlcDs. Finally, assessing the physiological roles of these
pathways also may be complicated because in Nature E. coli and S. enteriditis are members of bacterial communities;
i.e., these pathways may be activated by unknown metabolites produced
by other members of the community.

Supporting Information Available
Acid sugar library, ThermoFluor
library, and the ThermoFluor hit list for CsGntR.
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500837w_si_001.pdf

Accession Codes
This work describes
characterization of in vitro enzymatic activities
of proteins that have been deposited as UniProt entries E1V4Y1, Q1QT83,
and Q8FHD0. Proteins deposited as UniProt entries Q1QT84 and Q1QT88
are also characterized by homology and conserved genome context.

This
research
was supported by a program project grant and three cooperative agreements
from the National Institutes of Health (P01GM071790, U54GM093342,
U54GM074945, and U54GM094662).

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Drs. Katie
Whalen and Brian San Francisco for assistance
with manuscript preparation.

Abbreviations
CsGntRGntR from C. salexigens DSM3043

CsGulDH5-dehydrogenase from C. salexigens DSM3043

CsFRfructuronate reductase from C. salexigens DSM3043

CsManDmannonate dehydratase from C. salexigens DSM3043

CsUxuAUxuA from C. salexigens DSM3043

ENSenolase
superfamily

Gcid-galactarolactone cycloisomerase

GlcDd-gluconate dehydratase

GlucDglucarate dehydratase

HeGulDHl-gulonate 5-dehydrogenase from H. elongata DSM 2581 l-gulonate

KOknockout

ManDd-mannonate dehydratase

SeIdoDHl-idonate dehydrogenase
from S. enteriditis

SeGlucDHd-gluconate
dehydrogenase from S. enteriditis

TRAPtripartite ATP-independent periplasmic
transporter

Udhuronate dehydrogenase.

