The accuracy
of protein synthesis
relies on the capacity of aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (aaRS) to couple
cognate amino acids and tRNAs in a two-step reaction that defines
the genetic code (reviewed in refs () and ()). In the first step, the amino acid is activated by condensation
with ATP to form an enzyme-bound aminoacyl-adenylate (aa-AMP) intermediate
with release of pyrophosphate. The second step comprises attack by
the terminal 2′- or 3′-OH group of tRNA on the carbonyl
carbon atom of aa-AMP, followed by transfer of the aminoacyl moiety
to tRNA and release of AMP (Figure ). The
amino acid activation and transfer steps occur within the synthetic
active site located in the catalytic domain. The aaRS are divided
into two classes based on differences in the topologies of the catalytic
domain and some aspects of the reaction mechanism.,

Schematic
presentation of enzymatic reactions catalyzed by IleRS.
The central pathway represents amino acid activation, tRNA binding,
aminoacyl transfer, and dissociation of aminoacylated tRNA from the
enzyme. The synthetic pathway may occur with both cognate and noncognate
amino acids. Editing pathways are shown to the left and to the right.
Pretransfer editing may proceed through enhanced dissociation of noncognate
aminoacyl-AMP (1) or through its enzymatic hydrolysis, which may be
tRNA-independent (2) or tRNA-dependent (3). Misacylated tRNA is deacylated
through post-transfer editing (4).

Specific recognition of tRNAs by cognate aaRSs is ensured
by a
network of interactions, based on direct and indirect recognition
elements that are embedded in all levels of tRNA structure., However, noncognate amino acids that structurally and chemically
resemble the cognate substrates are often not well-distinguished in
the synthetic reactions alone, so that discrimination is based in
part on inherent aaRS-based hydrolytic editing (Figure ; reviewed in refs () and ()).
Selective release of noncognate aa-AMP into solution, where it undergoes
nonenzymatic hydrolysis, may also weakly contribute to an enzyme’s
specificity (Figure , path 1). Post-transfer editing represents a dominant editing pathway
(Figure , path 4). In this reaction, the noncognate
amino acid attached to the 3′-end of misacylated tRNA is translocated
to the specialized post-transfer editing domain prior to the hydrolytic
reaction that regenerates the free amino acid and tRNA.− In contrast, the pretransfer editing reaction comprises hydrolysis
of noncognate aa-AMP (Figure , path 2) that,
in some cases, may be stimulated by tRNA (Figure , path 3). It was recently shown that both tRNA-dependent
and tRNA-independent pretransfer editing reactions are localized within
the confines of the synthetic site.,− This contradicts the previous model that located all editing pathways
in the separate editing domain. The synthetic
site-based pretransfer editing model is supported in part by the findings
that a number of aaRSs of both classes, including those that naturally
lack editing domains, display weak tRNA-independent editing.,, This activity may represent a
relic of editing exhibited by a primordial aaRS consisting solely
of the catalytic module.

IleRS is a class I aaRS responsible
for formation of Ile-tRNAIle. It was recognized long ago, that the difference
in binding energies between cognate isoleucine and the structurally
similar noncognate valine could not provide more than 102-fold specificity in Ile-tRNAIle synthesis, substantially
lower than the overall translational fidelity (one mistake per 103–104 incorporated amino acids). The origin of the increased specificity was
established as hydrolytic editing in Escherichia coli IleRS (EcIleRS). Early work further
indicated that IleRS displays substantial tRNA-dependent pretransfer
editing., We recently confirmed this view by showing
that IleRS retains significant capacity for editing even when the
post-transfer pathway is fully deactivated. Interestingly, this phenomenon was not observed for the homologous
class I valyl- and leucyl-tRNA synthetases (ValRS and LeuRS, respectively),, which retained only a low residual editing activity upon mutation
of a key catalytic amino acid in the post-transfer editing domain.

How the class I IleRS Rossmann fold accommodates both synthetic
and tRNA-dependent pretransfer hydrolysis pathways within the synthetic
site is still unknown. Mapping of the hydrolytic and synthetic subsites
and elucidation of the mechanisms that ensure substrate specificity
of each subsite pose substantial challenges, because the determinants
may be overlapping. Here we report a novel kinetic approach that allows
quantitation of the AMP product that originates specifically from
pretransfer editing, separating the portion of AMP that arises from
the competing aminoacylation reaction. With this improved methodology,
we demonstrate that tRNA-dependent pretransfer editing contributes
up to 30% of the overall IleRS editing. Importantly, this approach
also further allowed the first quantitative analysis of the synthetic
site-based pretransfer editing determinants.

We focused on the
role of a conserved tyrosine [Y59 in EcIleRS
(Figure )] in modulating the competing synthetic
and editing pathways in the synthetic site of EcIleRS. Structural
studies of the homologous class I methionyl-tRNA synthetase (MetRS)
and LeuRS suggest that this tyrosine adopts several distinct conformations., In a closed orientation, the tyrosine packs on the amino acid substrate,
possibly protecting aa-AMP from premature hydrolysis. By contrast,
in a more open conformation that is associated with the aminoacyl
transfer step, the tyrosine facilitates catalytically productive binding
of the 3′-A76 of tRNA. Here we find that Y59 is important for
assembling the EcIleRS synthetic active site for both pathways, indicating
that the hydrolytic and synthetic subsites overlap to some extent.
Substitution of this tyrosine with threonine diminished tRNA-dependent
pretransfer editing, demonstrating for the first time that an amino
acid located in the synthetic site is a key determinant of tRNA-dependent
pretransfer editing. This finding substantiates our model in which
the synthetic site hosts the pretransfer editing reactions,, while the spatially separate editing domain is dedicated to post-transfer
editing alone. The limitations of an evolutionary design whereby two
opposing activities are hosted by the same active site are recognized,
providing an explanation for the predominance of the post-transfer
editing pathway in contemporary editing aaRSs.

Sequence alignment of
a Rossmann fold peptide directly N-terminal
to the strictly conserved HIGH motif, in various MetRS, LeuRS, and
IleRS enzymes. In the case of MetRS and LeuRS, the alignment contains
sequences from prokaryotes (E. coli, Staphylococcus
aureus, and Bacillus subtilis), archaea
(Pyrococcus horikoshii), and eukaryotes (Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Homo sapiens). The alignment additionally contains the sequence of the second
IleRS from S. aureus and further sequences from prokaryotes Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Streptomyces griseus. The residue mutated in this work is marked with an asterisk.

Materials and Methods
Enzymes and tRNAs
The IleRS vector for protein expression
in E. coli DE3 cells was used as a template for site-directed
mutagenesis using QuikChange (Stratagene). The introduced mutations were confirmed by DNA sequencing. Wild-type
and mutant enzymes were expressed in E. coli BL21(DE3)
with addition of 1 mM ZnCl2 to the culture at an OD600 of approximately 0.1, to ensure formation of the proper
zinc-bound IleRS conformation. All enzymes were purified employing
affinity chromatography on Ni-NTA resin, as reported previously. The concentrations of all proteins were determined
by absorption at 280 nm using theoretical extinction coefficients.
Determination of zinc content was done by a 4-(2-pyridylazo)-resorcinol
(PAR)/p-hydroxymercuribenzoate (PMB) assay as described
previously. All wild-type and mutant
enzymes contained approximately 2 mol of Zn2+/mol of enzyme.

tRNAGAUIle (with G1–C72 instead of the wild-type A1–U72 sequence) was overexpressed in E. coli BL21(DE3),
isolated, and purified by reverse phase chromatography essentially
as described previously. The G1-C72 mutation
has no effect on kinetic parameters for aminoacylation. This procedure yielded tRNAIle capable
of 90% aminoacylation. tRNA was radiolabeled by exchange of endogenous
A76 with [α-32P]ATP using tRNA-nucleotidyltransferase,
as follows. tRNAIle (5 μM)
was incubated with 5 μM tRNA-nucleotidyltransferase, 1 μM
[α-32P]ATP (specific activity of 3000 Ci/mmol), and
5 mM Na-PPi in a buffer containing 50 mM glycine-NaOH (pH
9.0), 20 mM MgCl2, and 0.5 mM DTT at 37 °C. After
1 min, 0.1 unit/μL thermostable inorganic pyrophosphatase
was added to enhance [α-32P]ATP incorporation, and
the mixture was incubated at 37 °C for an additional 2 min followed
by phenol/chloroform extraction. The sample was passed through two
consecutive Bio-Spin P-30 columns (Bio-Rad) and dialyzed against water.

The wild-type and deacylation defective mutant D286A ValRS and
tRNAVal were purified as previously described.

ATP-PPi Exchange
ATP-PPi exchange
was measured at 37 °C in 50 mM Hepes (pH 7.5), 20 mM MgCl2, 0.1 μg/μL BSA, 5 mM DTT, 4 mM ATP, and 1 mM
[32P]PPi (0.2–0.4 Ci/mol). The enzymes
were present at a concentration of 25 nM, and the concentration
of amino acids was varied between 0.1Km and 10Km. The reactions were stopped
with sodium acetate (pH 5.0) and sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) (final
concentrations of 333 mM and 0.067%, respectively). Separation of
[32P]ATP from the remaining [32P]PPi by thin layer chromatography (TLC) on polyethylenimine plates (PEI,
Fluka) was conducted as described previously. Visualization and quantitation of the signal were performed on a
Typhoon PhosphorImager, using ImageQuant. Kinetic parameters were
determined by fitting the data directly to the Michaelis–Menten
equation using GraphPad Prism. The parameters were obtained from at
least three independent measurements for the single mutants and two
independent measurements for the double mutants.

Aminoacylation
Assay
Aminoacylation reactions were
performed at 37 °C in a reaction mixture containing 20 mM Hepes
(pH 7.5), 100 μM EDTA, 150 mM NH4Cl, 10 μg/mL
bovine serum albumin, 10 mM MgCl2, 2 mM ATP, and 1 mM isoleucine.
In all reactions, tRNAIle was present at a concentration
of 10 μM (of which approximately 20 nM was 32P-labeled
tRNAIle). The enzymes were present in the reaction mixture
at the following concentrations: 200 nM Y59T IleRS and 400 nM Y59F
IleRS. Reactions were stopped with sodium acetate (pH 5.0) and SDS
(final concentrations of 0.4 M and 0.1%, respectively). tRNA was degraded
using P1 nuclease, and aa-AMP was separated from AMP by TLC on PEI
cellulose plates. TLC plates were developed
in a solution containing 100 mM ammonium acetate and 5% acetic acid.
The ratio of aa-AMP to AMP is equivalent
to the ratio of aminoacylated to nonaminoacylated tRNA in the reaction
mixture. Visualization and quantization of the signal were performed
on a Typhoon PhosphorImager, using ImageQuant.

Transfer of an Amino Acid
to tRNAIle
The
transfer step was measured by rapidly mixing the enzyme:aa-AMP complex
with [32P]tRNA. aa-AMP was synthesized in situ() by incubation of 20 μM IleRS
variant with either 1 mM Ile or 10 mM Val, in a buffer containing
10 mM ATP, 20 mM Hepes (pH 7.5), 100 μM EDTA, 150 mM NH4Cl, 10 μg/mL bovine serum albumin, 10 mM MgCl2, and 0.008 unit/μL inorganic pyrophosphatase at 37 °C
for 30 min. The final concentration of tRNAIle in the reaction
mixture was 1 μM.

Reactions with Y59 mutants proceeded
on the multisecond time scale and were therefore manually sampled.
Reactions were started by mixing equal volumes of the IleRS:aa-AMP
complex with 32P-labeled tRNAIle and stopped
with sodium acetate (pH 5.0) and SDS (final concentrations of 0.4
M and 0.1%, respectively). tRNA was degraded using P1 nuclease, and
aa-AMP was separated from AMP by TLC as described above. The amount
of aminoacylated tRNA was plotted versus time and fit to the first-order
exponential equation y = Y0 + A × exp(−ktranst), where Y0 is the y intercept, A is a scaling constant, ktrans is the apparent transfer rate constant,
and t is time.

Parallel Formation of AMP
and aa-tRNAIle
The reactions were conducted at
37 °C in a buffer containing
50 mM Hepes (pH 7.5), 20 mM MgCl2, 5 mM DTT, 0.1 mg/mL
bovine serum albumin, 0.004 unit/μL inorganic pyrophosphatase,
and 200 μM ATP. For better sensitivity, the concentration of
ATP was 200 μM instead of the 500 μM usually used in AMP
formation assays. Independent measurement of Km for ATP under these conditions returned a value of 100 μM,
showing that ATP was present at concentrations above its Km value. The reaction mixture further contained 15 μM
tRNAIle and either 2 mM isoleucine or 20 mM valine. The
enzyme concentrations were as follows: 20 nM wild-type enzyme in the
reaction with Ile and 100 nM in the reaction with Val, 60 nM D342A
IleRS in reactions with both Val and Ile, 0.2 μM Y59T in the
reaction with Ile and 0.6 μM Y59T in the reaction with Val,
0.6 μM Y59T/D342A in reactions with both Val and Ile, and 0.2
μM Y59F in the reaction with Ile and 0.4 μM Y59F in the
reaction with Val. In the reaction with ValRS, the reaction mixture
contained 15 μM tRNAVal and either 5 mM valine or
50 mM threonine. The enzyme concentrations were 2 nM for wild-type
ValRS in the reaction with Val and 10 nM in the reaction with Thr
and 5 nM for deacylation defective mutant D286A ValRS in reactions
with both Val and Thr.

Reactions were initiated by addition
of enzyme to the reaction mixture and were stopped and further treated
depending on whether they contained 32P-labeled tRNAIle or [α-32P]ATP. The reactions with labeled
[32P]ATP, which allowed monitoring of AMP formation, were
stopped by quenching 1.5 μL of the reaction mixture in 3 μL
of 1.5 M formic acid. The separation of aa-[32P]AMP, [32P]AMP, and [32P]ATP was then performed by TLC
on PEI cellulose plates in 100 mM ammonium acetate and 5% acetic acid.
Visualization and quantization of the signal were performed on a Typhoon
PhosphorImager, using ImageQuant.

The reactions with 32P-labeled tRNAIle, which
allowed monitoring of aa-tRNA formation, were stopped and further
treated as described in the preceding subsections.

Kinetic analysis
of Y59F/D342A IleRS did not provide reliable results
because of the very slow aminoacylation/misacylation. Previously,
we observed that the D342A variant exhibits aminoacylation slightly
slower than that of the wt enzyme. We
note that the effect is more pronounced under conditions employed
in this assay [i.e., at low ATP concentrations (see Table )]. It further appears that the phenomenon contributes
most to the Y59F/D342A variant, precluding its utilization in the
kinetic analysis.

Results
tRNA-Dependent Pretransfer
Editing Accounts for Nearly One-Third
of the Total Proofreading by EcIleRS
The coexistence of editing
and synthetic pathways effectively consumes ATP and converts it to
AMP and PPi, while regenerating amino acid and tRNA substrates
for the subsequent turnovers (Figure ). Hence,
AMP formation above stoichiometric amounts in aminoacylation is diagnostic
of hydrolytic editing and is generally observed in the presence of
noncognate amino acids. Two competing reactions, both localized within
the synthetic site, may directly contribute to AMP formation: (i)
pretransfer editing and (ii) tRNA aminoacylation. AMP arises from
each of these two reactions in direct proportion to the kinetic partitioning
of the aa-AMP between amino acid transfer to water and amino acid
transfer to tRNA.

Recently, we
isolated the tRNA-dependent pretransfer editing step in EcIleRS by
disabling the post-transfer pathway with substitution of the essential
aspartate (D342) in the CP1 post-transfer editing domain.,, The D342A variant still allowed
robust AMP formation, thus supporting the conclusion that the IleRS
synthetic site hosts substantial tRNA-dependent pretransfer editing. To provide more quantitative insight into the
mechanism and determinants of pretransfer editing, we now describe
an improved methodology that distinguishes the relative amounts of
AMP that arise from tRNA-dependent hydrolysis of Val-AMP versus tRNA
misacylation in post-transfer editing defective enzymes. To accomplish
this, the initial rates of AMP formation [kAMP (Table )] and tRNA misacylation [kVal-tRNA (Table )] were followed in parallel assays relying on [α-32P]ATP and [32P]tRNA, respectively., The post-transfer editing deficient D342A IleRS accumulates AMP
by pretransfer editing and by tRNA misacylation when the noncognate
aa-AMP evades this hydrolytic reaction. Both of these events contribute
to determining the value of kAMP in the
AMP formation assay. The rate of misacylation is determined separately
using [32P]tRNA to quantitate the fraction of AMP arising
from aminoacylation alone. The rate constant representing solely tRNA-dependent
pretransfer editing [ked (Table )] is then isolated by subtracting kVal-tRNA from kAMP.
When this methodology is applied to IleRS with active post-transfer
editing, kAMP instead reflects pretransfer
editing, misacylation, and post-transfer editing, because misacylated
tRNA can also be hydrolyzed leading to repetitive misacylation/deacylation
cycles. In this case, subtraction of the independently determined kVal-tRNA from kAMP again yields ked (Table ), which now represents a rate constant associated
with tRNA-dependent editing by both hydrolytic reactions. The kAMP/kVal-tRNA ratio (Table ) indicates the amount of proofreading
(the number of correction cycles per misacylated tRNA that evades
editing). In addition, the ratio of the rate constants for tRNA-dependent
editing (ked) and tRNA-independent editing
[ked,-tRNA (Table )] measured under the same experimental conditions defines
the extent to which tRNA stimulates the editing reaction [ked/ked,-tRNA (Table )].

Parallel
Formation of AMP and Val-tRNAIle by Wild-Type and Mutant
IleRS Enzymes
 	kAMP (s–1)	kVal-tRNA (s–1)	kAMP/kVal-tRNA	ked– (s–1)	ked,-tRNA (s–1)	ked/ked,-tRNA	
wt	0.97 ± 0.02	0.06 ± 0.003	16 ± 1	0.91 ± 0.06	0.028 ± 0.003	32.5	
D342A	0.40 ± 0.006	0.13 ± 0.006	3.1 ± 0.4	0.28 ± 0.02	0.026 ± 0.003	10.7	
Y59T	0.106 ± 0.004	0.007 ± 0.001	17 ± 3	0.099 ± 0.005	0.014 ± 0.003	7	
Y59T/D342A	0.046 ± 0.002	0.015 ± 0.001	3.1 ± 0.01	0.031 ± 0.001	0.021 ± 0.001	1.5	
Y59F	0.16 ± 0.003	0.008 ± 0.001	19 ± 4	0.152 ± 0.011	0.012 ± 0.001	12.7	
The values represent the mean ±
the SEM of at least three independent experiments.

kAMP and ked,-tRNA represent measured
rate constants for formation of AMP in the presence and absence of
tRNAIle, respectively. kVal-tRNA represents the rate constant for formation of Val-tRNAIle measured under the same conditions that were used for kAMP.

ked represents
the rate constant for tRNA-dependent editing and is calculated as
the difference between the rate constant for AMP formation in the
presence of tRNAIle and the rate constant for Val-tRNAIle formation.

In
D342A, ked arises solely from the tRNA-dependent
pretransfer hydrolysis
of misactivated Val-AMP, while ked in
wild-type enzyme reflects both editing reactions.

ΔΔGcoupling = ΔΔGWT-Y59T – ΔΔGD345A-D345A/Y59T, where ΔΔGA-B = −RT ln(ked,A/ked,B).

These measurements reveal that wt
IleRS consumes 16 molecules of
ATP per molecule of Val-tRNAIle that accumulates (Table ). AMP accumulates in excess of Val-tRNAIle based on the operation of both pre- and post-transfer editing. In
contrast, approximately three molecules of ATP were consumed per molecule
of Val-tRNAIle synthesized by D342A IleRS, which is fully
disabled in post-transfer editing (kAMP/kVal-tRNAIle = 3). The remaining
excess ATP consumption by D342A IleRS affirms the tRNA-dependent pretransfer
editing and shows its relevance in IleRS quality control. However,
the decreased level of ATP consumption in the absence of active deacylation,
together with the accumulation of misacylated Val-tRNAIle in the reactions catalyzed by the D342A enzyme, clearly demonstrates
the necessity for post-transfer editing in establishing accurate Ile-tRNAIle synthesis. It is important to note that post-transfer editing
defective variants of the homologous class I LeuRS and ValRS editing
enzymes, which do not exhibit tRNA enhancement of their low tRNA-independent
pretransfer editing activities, instead possess kAMP/kmisacyl-tRNA ratios
close to 1 when post-transfer editing is disabled (Table S1 of the ). These data illustrate the clear distinctiveness of IleRS as the
sole class I editing enzyme for which the pretransfer reaction is
important.

The rate constants for tRNA-dependent editing (ked) calculated for wt and D342A IleRS are 0.91
and 0.28
s–1, respectively (Table ). Importantly, in D342A, ked arises
solely from the tRNA-dependent pretransfer hydrolysis of misactivated
Val-AMP, while ked in the wild-type enzyme
reflects both editing reactions. The ratio of these ked values indicates that tRNA-dependent pretransfer editing
contributes approximately 30% to overall editing, and the remaining
70% can be assigned to the post-transfer reaction. Finally, the extent
to which tRNA stimulates editing was established by comparing the ked and ked,-tRNA values (Table ). As expected, tRNA participation
is more pronounced in the case of the wt enzyme (32.5-fold), reflecting
the role of tRNA in both pre- and post-transfer editing. However,
D342A IleRS exhibits a ked/ked,-tRNA ratio of approximately 11, demonstrating
significant stimulation of valyl-AMP hydrolysis by tRNA even when
post-transfer editing is disabled. In
sharp contrast, D286A ValRS, which is similarly disabled in post-transfer
editing, exhibits a ked/ked,-tRNA ratio of nearly 1.0 (Table S1 of the ). This demonstrates that
tRNA-stimulated pretransfer editing is negligible in this enzyme,
consistent with our previous findings. A similar result was observed for LeuRS.

Tyrosine 59 Participates in the Synthetic Reaction of E.
coli IleRS
Tyr59 is a conserved residue located
within the active site of bacterial IleRS, directly adjacent to the
binding site for the 3′-terminal hydroxyl group of tRNA (Figures  and ). To evaluate the
role of Y59 in the synthetic and editing pathways, the tyrosine was
substituted with threonine and phenylalanine (Y59T and Y59F IleRSs,
respectively), as these residues were found at the equivalent position
in IleRS enzymes of eukaryotic origin (Figure , and see ). We first used the recombinantly expressed and highly purified
mutant enzymes to measure activation of cognate isoleucine and noncognate
valine with the ATP-PPi exchange assay. Neither of these
Y59 substitutions significantly influenced the discrimination against
valine in the activation step (Table ). The
observed changes in Km and kcat for isoleucine and valine activation are quite small
for the Y59F variant, demonstrating that the phenolic hydroxyl group
of tyrosine does not play a significant role in the amino acid activation
step. However, the Km and kcat values measured for Y59T are increased by 10-fold
and decreased by 5-fold, respectively, for both isoleucine and valine
substrates (Table ). The increase in amino
acid Km observed for the Y59T variant,
which lacks the aromatic ring and consequently may be less able to
pack against the amino acid substrate, suggests that Y59 acts as a
gatekeeper of the IleRS synthetic site. This is consistent with the
proposed role for the homologous tyrosines found at the equivalent
positions in MetRS and LeuRS.,

Steady-State Parameters for Activation
of Cognate and Noncognate Amino Acids by Y59 IleRS Variants
 	Km(Ile) (μM)	kcat(Ile) (s–1)	kcat/Km(Ile) (s–1 μM)	Km(Val) (mM)	kcat(Val) (s–1)	kcat/Km(Val) (s–1 mM)	discrimination
factor	
wt IleRS	4.6 ± 0.5	55 ± 9	12	0.47 ± 0.03	35 ± 6	75	150	
D342A	5.2 ± 0.6	47 ± 6	9.04 (1.3)	0.56 ± 0.08	33 ± 2	59 (1.3)	153	
Y59T	41.5 ± 0.1	11.4 ± 0.5	0.27 (44)	5.7 ± 0.2	9.8 ± 0.4	1.7 (44)	157	
Y59T/D342A	38.3 ± 3	10.7 ± 0.4	0.28 (43)	5.3 ± 0.6	8.2 ± 0.2	1.5 (50)	187	
Y59F	2.6 ± 0.6	21 ± 1	8.1 (1.5)	0.20 ± 0.05	16 ± 1	80 (0.9)	98.7	
Y59F/D342A	1.9 ± 0.6	23 ± 2	12.1 (1)	0.20 ± 0.04	15 ± 0.8	75 (1)	161	
Activity is measured
by ATP-PPi exchange. The values represent the best fit
value ±
the SEM of at least two independent measurements.

The numbers in parentheses represent
the ratio of kcat/Km values with respect to the wild-type enzyme. Note that the
units for Km and kcat/Km differ for Ile and Val reactions.

The discrimination factor is
defined
as [kcat/Km(Ile)]/[kcat/Km(Val)].

Data taken ref ().

Overlapped structures of E. coli LeuRS in complex
with 5′-O-[N-(l-leucyl)sulfamoyl]adenosine
(Leu-AMS) and tRNALeu (Protein Data Bank entry 4AQ7, colored green)
and S. aureus IleRS in complex with mupirocin and
tRNAIle (Protein Data Bank entry 1FFY, colored blue).
Leu-AMS is colored yellow, the tRNALeu backbone orange,
and its last nucleotide (A76) purple. tRNAIle and mupirocin
are not visible. Tyrosine residues (Y43 of E. coli LeuRS and Y58 of S. aureus IleRS, both homologous
to Y59 of E. coli IleRS) are shown as sticks. Superposition
was done on the polypeptide backbone of parts of Rossmann folds (residues
34–94 and 619–666 in LeuRS and residues 44–104
and 600–647 in IleRS). The root-mean-square deviation was 0.885
Å.

Next, we followed the two-step
formation of Ile-tRNAIle under multiple-turnover reaction
conditions by using 32P-labeled tRNA. Both substitutions significantly
reduced the rate of aminoacylation (Table ), with the more pronounced effect observed with Y59F. The observed
decrease is not primarily associated with the activation step, because
the ATP-PPi exchange measurements
showed that the kcat values for both variants
were still significantly faster than the observed rate of aminoacylation
(Tables  and ). Therefore,
it appears that Y59 participates significantly in the second step
of aminoacylation. To investigate this further, we isolated the transfer
step by mixing [32P]tRNAIle with the preformed
IleRS:Ile-AMP complex under single-turnover conditions. Both Y59 variants
had significantly reduced isoleucyl transfer rates compared with that
of the wt enzyme [60–180-fold (Table )], clearly showing that Y59 facilitates the transfer of the isoleucyl
moiety to tRNA.

Steady-State Rates of Aminoacylation
by Y59 IleRS Variants
 	kobs (s–1)	
wt IleRS	0.86 ± 0.2	
Y59T	0.074 ± 0.003	
Y59F	0.024 ± 0.001	
All substrate concentrations
are
verified to be saturating; therefore, kobs approaches kcat. The values represent
the mean ± the SEM of at least three independent experiments.

Transfer of Cognate
and Noncognate
Amino Acids to tRNA by Y59 IleRS Variants
 	ktrans (s–1)	
 	Ile	Val	
wt IleRS	3.6 ± 0.3	nd	
Y59T	0.06 ± 0.01	nd	
Y59T/D342A	0.04 ± 0.01	0.03 ± 0.01	
Y59F	0.024 ± 0.004	nd	
Y59F/D342A	0.012 ± 0.006	0.012 ± 0.004	
The values represent
the mean ±
the SEM of at least three independent experiments.

Not determined because of active
post-transfer editing.

Recently,
we established that IleRS does not discriminate against
valine at the aminoacyl transfer step. To test if substitutions at Y59 influence specificity at the transfer
step, we introduced the D342A substitutions into the CP1 editing domains
of both Y59 variants. This eliminates post-transfer editing and permits
isolation of the transfer step for the noncognate amino acid. Transfers
of the isoleucyl and valyl moieties to tRNAIle were then
measured with Y59T/D342A and Y59F/D342A IleRS, as described for the
single-residue variants (Table ). The rate
constants for isoleucyl and valyl transfer were each decreased by
100–300-fold; therefore, it appears that Tyr59 does not significantly
affect specificity at this step. The independent steady-state deacylation
experiments confirmed that Y59T/D342A and Y59F/D342A IleRS were indeed
disabled in Val-tRNAIle hydrolysis (kobs was determined to be 0.003 s–1 in each
case). Introduction of the D342A substitution into the editing domain
of IleRS did not influence the kinetic parameters for activation of
cognate isoleucine and noncognate valine (Table ).

Parallel Formation of AMP and Ile-tRNAIle by Wild-Type and Mutant IleRS Enzymes
 	kAMP (s–1)	kIle-tRNA (s–1)	kAMP/kIle-tRNA	
wt	0.92 ± 0.04	0.58 ± 0.04	1.6	
D342A	0.29 ± 0.01	0.20 ± 0.01	1.5	
The values represent the mean ±
the SEM of at least three independent experiments.

The Y59T Substitution Diminishes tRNA-Dependent
Pretransfer
Editing
A possible role for Y59 in tRNA-dependent pretransfer
editing was investigated by the approach taken for wild-type and D342A
IleRS (see above). Remarkably, kinetic analysis of Y59T/D342A IleRS
shows that for this variant editing operates at quantitatively comparable
rates in the presence (0.031 s–1) or absence of
tRNA (0.021 s–1) (Table ). Because post-transfer editing is disabled by the D342A substitution
in this variant, these data demonstrate unambiguously that the Y59T
substitution in the synthetic site abolishes stimulation of pretransfer
editing by tRNAIle. It thus appears that Y59 represents
a key determinant for synthetic site-based tRNA-dependent pretransfer
editing in IleRS. However, substitution of the phenolic hydroxyl group
with hydrogen in the Y59F variant does not abolish tRNA stimulation
of the pretransfer editing activity (see below).

Kinetic analyses
performed on the Y59 variants link the amino acid at this position
with partitioning of tRNA-dependent editing between the pre- and post-transfer
pathways. Both Y59 substitutions decreased the overall level of tRNA-dependent
editing: the calculated rate constant for this process (ked) is decreased by approximately 10-fold compared to
that of wt IleRS [0.099 s–1 for Y59T and 0.152 s–1 for Y59F vs 0.91 s–1 for wt IleRS
(Table )]. However, the origin of this decrease
seems to substantially differ among the variants. Single-turnover
analysis of the synthetic pathway reveals that Y59T and Y59F IleRS
differ in the rate of the aminoacyl transfer step and consequently
in the capacity to employ post-transfer editing (Table ). The equivalencies of the single-turnover ktrans and steady-state kobs values for Y59F and Y59T show that the aminoacyl transfer step represents
the slowest step in the reaction pathway for each mutant (Tables  and ). Therefore, the rate
of aminoacyl transfer also limits the steady-state rate of post-transfer
editing followed in cis. The rate of the aminoacyl
transfer step in Y59T IleRS is fast enough [0.06 s–1 (Table )] to support AMP formation in editing
through the post-transfer pathway [ked = 0.099 s–1 (Table )].
Accordingly, the further introduction of the D342A substitution into
the CP1 editing domain of Y59T reduced the tRNA-dependent editing
rate (ked, 0.031 s–1) relative to that of Y59T (0.099 s–1) (Table ). The extent by which tRNA stimulates editing also
dropped from 7 to 1.5 (Table ), indicating
that tRNA enhancement of the Y59T editing activity originates from
the active post-transfer pathway. Interestingly, the calculated ΔΔG values for the Y59T or D342A substitution within the wild
type and the opposing single-variant framework were highly similar,
showing a lack of coupling energy, between these
two residues in establishing the pre- and post-transfer editing activities
in IleRS (Table ).

In contrast, comparison
of the rates of valyl transfer [0.012 s–1 (Table )] and tRNA-dependent
editing by Y59F [0.152 s–1 (Table )] revealed that editing is 12-fold faster. These
data thus strongly argue against a significant contribution of post-transfer
editing to ked in this variant, leading
to the conclusion that tRNA-dependent editing by Y59F IleRS preferentially
originates from the pretransfer step. Unfortunately, Y59F/D342A IleRS
did not provide reliable kinetic data because of very slow rates of
aminoacylation and misacylation in this variant (see ). This precludes investigation of the
effects of the Y59F substitution at the same level of detail. Because
the ked (0.152 s–1)
is 10-fold faster than the rate for tRNA-independent editing by Y59F
(0.012 s–1) (Table ), however, it appears that the Y59F mutant is capable of significant
tRNA-dependent pretransfer editing. No accumulation of Val-[32P]AMP was observed for either variant, regardless of whether tRNA
was present. This is in agreement with the finding that ked and ked,-tRNA are
at least 10-fold higher than kobs for
nonenzymatic hydrolysis of Val-AMP. This
strongly indicates that Y59 substitutions do not stimulate Val-AMP
dissociation, clearly associating the Y59 determinant with synthetic
site hydrolytic editing.

Substitutions of Tyr59 affect tRNA-independent
editing much less
significantly (2-fold) than tRNA-dependent editing (10-fold) (Table ). As a consequence, stimulation of editing by tRNA
drops from 32-fold (wt) to 7-fold (Y59T) and 12.7-fold (Y59F) (Table ). As both enzymes exhibit
approximately 10-fold slower rates of AMP and Val-tRNAIle formation compared with that of the wt enzyme, the kAMP/kVal-tRNA ratio,
reporting the extent of excess ATP consumption, remains unaffected
by the introduced substitutions (Table ).

Despite the significantly diminished tRNA-dependent editing, Y59T/D342A
IleRS still consumes more than one ATP per molecule of synthesized
Val-tRNAIle. In this enzyme, the valyl transfer step and
tRNA-independent pretransfer editing operate at quantitatively comparable
rates [0.03 and 0.021 s–1, respectively (Tables  and , respectively)], allowing
valyl-AMP hydrolysis to contribute to editing. This is in agreement
with our model by which kinetic partitioning
of aa-AMP between transfer and hydrolysis dictates the choice between
synthetic and editing pathways within the synthetic site.

tRNA-Dependent
Hydrolysis of Cognate Isoleucyl-AMP
To explore specificity
against cognate isoleucine in tRNA-dependent
pretransfer editing by IleRS, the initial rates of AMP and Ile-tRNAIle formation were followed in parallel to extract the kAMP/kIle-tRNA ratio. Wild-type IleRS consumed 1.6 molecules of ATP per Ile-tRNAIle synthesis (Table ), higher than the value of 1.0 that would be obtained without
any editing. The same ratio was obtained with D342A IleRS, indicating
that this enhanced ATP consumption reflects hydrolysis of Ile-AMP
and not of Ile-tRNAIle. This is further supported by an
independent experiment showing that neither wild-type nor D342A IleRS
significantly deacylates Ile-tRNAIle under steady-state
conditions (data not shown). It thus appears that, perhaps because
of the overlapping synthetic and pretransfer editing subsites, IleRS
also hydrolyzes cognate isoleucyl-AMP to some extent in a tRNA-dependent
pathway. In contrast, the homologous LeuRS and ValRS editing enzymes
lack tRNA-dependent pretransfer editing and display a stoichiometric kAMP/kaa-tRNA ratio of 1.0 in their respective reactions with cognate amino acids, (Table S1 of the ).

Discussion
The location of pretransfer hydrolysis in
editing aaRS has been
the subject of considerable debate. In an early model, aa-AMP was
proposed to be translocated from the synthetic to the editing site
at the CP1 domain prior to hydrolysis at that site., However, claims that such transfer occurs have not been substantiated
by detailed mechanistic studies, and a sequestered tunnel between
the synthetic and editing active sites to allow the translocation
has not been found in any crystal structure., We have elaborated a different model, which in contrast locates
both tRNA-independent and tRNA-dependent pretransfer editing activities
within the synthetic site. The model is supported by detailed kinetic
analysis of IleRS variants disabled in post-transfer editing (by substitution
of the essential Asp342 in the CP1 editing domain). The model was further supported by the finding that aaRSs
from both classes exhibit tRNA-independent pretransfer editing within
their respective catalytic domains.,,,,,−

Details
of the mechanism that allows competing pretransfer hydrolysis
and tRNA transfer reactions to occupy the same active site had been
unknown. To uncover the synthetic site determinants for tRNA-dependent
pretransfer editing, we applied here a novel methodology that extends
beyond the approaches that we previously took. This approach allows quantitation of the AMP fraction that
arises particularly from tRNA-dependent aa-AMP hydrolysis. To accomplish
this, the fraction of AMP that arises from tRNA aminoacylation is
measured separately and subtracted from the overall amount of AMP
that is generated by deacylation defective enzymes. By this approach,
we then further demonstrated that substitution of the conserved Tyr59
in the synthetic site with threonine abolishes stimulation of the
pretransfer editing activity by tRNA. Therefore, a key amino acid
determinant for tRNA-dependent pretransfer editing in IleRS is located
within the synthetic site. The data thus provide substantial further
evidence that the synthetic site indeed hosts tRNA-dependent pretransfer
editing. The comparison of editing rates for wt and deacylation defective
enzymes in the presence of tRNA shows that approximately 30% of overall
editing originates from tRNA-dependent pretransfer editing. Thus,
tRNA-dependent pretransfer editing represents a significant editing
pathway in IleRS, although a greater contribution is made in the post-transfer
step. These findings are in agreement with our previous demonstration
that post-transfer editing is essential for accurate Ile-tRNAIle synthesis.

Structural
data in other homologous class I aaRS indicated that
Tyr59 also influences the tRNA-dependent step of aminoacylation. The
structure of E. coli LeuRS bound to the leucyl-adenylate
analogue Leu-AMS, and with the tRNA 3′-acceptor stem bound
in the synthetic active site, shows that the homologous Y43 in that
enzyme participates in the positioning of Leu-AMP via main chain interactions.
Additionally, the hydroxyl group of Y43 anchors the tyrosine side
chain in the more open aminoacylation-ready position via hydrogen
bonding with the main chain amino group of alanine 86. Adoption of
this open position is essential for aminoacylation as it precludes
a steric clash between Y43 and 3′-A76 of the tRNA when the
2′-hydroxyl moiety is poised for the transfer step. We superimposed the structure of S.
aureus IleRS bound to the active site inhibitor mupirocin
and tRNAIle with the ternary
LeuRS:tRNALeu:Leu-AMS complex in which the tRNA 3′-acceptor
end is oriented into the synthetic active site. This comparison reveals
that the equivalent tyrosines (Y43 of LeuRS and Y58 of S.
aureus IleRS) adopt highly similar conformations (Figure ), thus indicating the potential for analogous functions
in the respective aminoacylation reactions. Accordingly, a substantial
decrease in the rate of aminoacyl transfer by both Y59T and Y59F substitutions
(Table ) confirms the relevance of this residue
in mediating the second step of aminoacylation.

Because Tyr59
is important to both pretransfer editing and aminoacylation,
these data show that the synthetic and editing subsites substantially
overlap within the IleRS Rossmann fold catalytic domain. We hypothesize
that the active site for the tRNA-dependent hydrolysis of valyl-AMP
assembles by opening of the Y59 side chain induced by tRNA binding.
The Y59T substitution prevents proper assembly of the catalytically
productive editing site, perhaps because the smaller threonine cannot
adopt the distinctive aminoacylation-like open position observed for
tyrosine. Inspection of the LeuRS structure bound to a Leu-AMP analogue
and with the tRNA 3′-acceptor stem oriented into the synthetic
active site shows that the phenyl ring
of Tyr43 may be further stabilized in the open conformation also by
hydrophobic interaction with the C4 and C5 atoms of the terminal adenosine
of the tRNA. It is plausible to speculate that these interactions
contribute to stabilization of the phenylalanine side chain in the open position in the Y59F variant,
as well, providing a rationale for its activity in tRNA-dependent
pretransfer editing. The data on Y59F IleRS further indicate that
tRNA-dependent pretransfer editing is not necessarily linked with
the enzyme/tRNA conformation that is productive in the aminoacyl transfer
step. Interestingly, in the related class I MetRS, a homologous tyrosine
establishes amino acid specificity by acting as an antideterminant
for (i) activation of noncognate homocysteine in the synthetic pathway
and (ii) elimination of methionine in a distinctive synthetic site
editing pathway that proceeds via a cyclization mechanism. Our data show that Y59 does not modulate amino
acid specificity in the IleRS synthetic reaction (Table ) but instead contributes to the accuracy of Ile-tRNAIle formation via its participation in proofreading.

tRNA-dependent pretransfer editing has been clearly demonstrated
thus far only in IleRS. Early work proposed utilization of this pathway
by yeast phenylalanyl-tRNA synthetase (PheRS), but no detailed kinetic
analysis in support of the conjecture has been performed. The data presented here provide the first insights
indicating why tRNA-dependent pretransfer editing had not been eligible
for the main editing pathway. Cohabitation of synthetic and editing
reactions within the same active site and close interweaving of their
respective pathways could have precluded evolution of both activities
toward higher rates and improved specificity. To participate in editing,
pretransfer hydrolysis had to operate at a rate comparable to the
transfer rate. Interestingly, the great majority of aaRSs display
transfer rates significantly faster than those of IleRS, indicating
that participation of pretransfer editing as a main editing pathway
in these cases would have required evolution of aa-AMP hydrolysis
toward such a considerably faster activity. However, we show here
that the synthetic and hydrolytic activities are coupled by the same
active site determinants, suggesting that their independent evolution
would have been substantially restricted on that basis. Thus, it is
more likely that the synthetic pathway had an evolutionary advantage
over pretransfer editing to respond to cellular requirements for rapid
protein synthesis. Indeed, the synthetic site may have evolved toward
a faster transfer step at the cost of its editing capacity.

Pretransfer editing in the synthetic site exhibits impaired specificity
against cognate aa-AMP. This is shown by the nonstoichiometric use
of ATP in Ile-tRNAIle formation (Table ), as previously demonstrated. This may provide an additional rationale against evolution of the
tRNA-dependent pretransfer editing pathway toward higher efficacy
and prevalence in editing. Because of the inherent limitations of
tRNA-dependent pretransfer editing, and the need for error correction
to maintain genetic code fidelity, evolution toward the faster transfer
step may then have triggered co-evolution of the capacity to hydrolyze
misacylated tRNA. This feature was acquired by aaRSs through recruitment
of specific domains dedicated to this post-transfer editing reaction.
More selective and catalytically superior post-transfer editing then
may have made pretransfer editing largely superfluous, because there
no longer existed a trade-off requiring slower aminoacyl transfer
rates to maintain specificity. It is further possible that the exemption
from the requirement to host both pre- and post-transfer editing activities
allowed evolution of such powerful deacylation machinery within the
editing domain.,, The important consequence is that kinetic partitioning of misacylated
tRNA between dissociation and editing strongly favors hydrolytic correction,
thus preventing errors in aminoacylation.

IleRS exhibits a significantly
lower AMP/aa-tRNA ratio [16 (Table )] compared
with those of LeuRS (100) and ValRS [149
(Table S1 of the )], indicating that it
is more prone to misacylation errors. In spite of this, the observed
misacylation rates exhibited by IleRS, ValRS, and LeuRS [0.06, 0.05,
and 0.03 s–1, respectively (Table  and Table S1 of the ())] are relatively similar. It thus appears
that IleRS, presumably as a consequence of the significantly slower
transfer rates, produces misacylated tRNA with a similar frequency
as do the more accurate LeuRS and ValRS in spite of its higher error
rate. If so, evolution of IleRS toward the faster transfer step would
have required more proficient editing at the expense of ATP. The question
of why this scenario (a slow transfer step) is apparently confined
only to IleRS among the homologous class I enzymes that perform editing
then arises. Class I aaRSs exhibit a burst of aa-tRNA in aminoacylation. The rapid chemical step in these enzymes may
be beneficial as it allows control of the aminoacylation rate by modulating
the product release step. This may be accomplished by interaction
with elongation factor Tu, which represents
an elegant mechanism for providing flexibility in the rate of aminoacylation
to support the needs for protein synthesis. Still, our data clearly
suggest that evolution toward a faster transfer step in editing aaRSs
also demands a higher rate of ATP consumption. In general, this may
be less problematic for editing class I aaRSs, as noncognate amino
acids that threaten the accuracy of protein synthesis are present
in the cell at concentrations significantly lower than their respective Km values (Figure S1 of the ). Intriguingly, however, IleRS is notable
in that the noncognate amino acid valine is present at a high concentration
in the cell. Indeed, valine is among the most abundant amino acids
in E. coli, and its predicted concentration is very similar to the Km value for valine by IleRS (Figure S1 of the  and unpublished results of N. Cvetesic
and I. Gruic-Sovulj). Therefore, evolution of IleRS toward the faster
transfer step may have been restricted because it would impose a large
energetic burden on the cell.

Y59 is highly conserved among
IleRSs of prokaryotic origin, in
agreement with its important role in the aminoacyl transfer step.
Its substitution with phenylalanine or threonine in enzymes of eukaryotic
origin is thus intriguing (Figure ). Phylogenetic
analyses revealed that some prokaryotes acquired a eukaryote-like
IleRS gene by horizontal transfer. These
IleRSs are significantly more resistant to the antibiotic mupirocin,
rationalizing the spread of their genes among prokaryotes. The synthetic
sites of eukaryotic and eukaryotic-like IleRS display novel sequence
motifs and lack some sequence motifs present in the prokaryotic enzymes.
These distinctions contribute to the different sensitivities to mupirocin. The lack of a Y59 homologue in eukaryotic IleRS
indicates that the synthetic site may operate differently. Whether
eukaryotic IleRSs acquired distinctive kinetic properties together
with the development of mupirocin resistance is a relevant topic for
future research.

Supporting Information Available
Parallel formation of AMP and
aa-tRNAVal by wild-type and mutant E. coli ValRS and comparison of the Km values
in the activation of noncognate amino acids with their concentration
in the cell. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5007699_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Mario Cindrić
(Intitute Rudjer Boskovic) for
access to chromatographic equipment, Nevena Cvetesic for careful reading
of the manuscript, and Nina Franicevic for experimental help.

Dedication
This paper is dedicated
to the memory of Ivana Weygand-Durasevic.

Abbreviations
aa-AMPaminoacyl-adenylate

aaRSaminoacyl-tRNA
synthetase

AMPadenosine
monophosphate

EcIleRSEscherichia
coli isoleucyl-tRNA synthetase

IleRSisoleucyl-tRNA synthetase

Leu-AMS5′-O-[N-(l-leucyl)sulfamoyl]
adenosine

LeuRSleucyl-tRNA synthetase

MetRSmethionyl-tRNA synthetase

PEIpolyethylenimine plates

PheRSphenylalanyl-tRNA synthetase

SEMstandard error
of the mean

TLCthin layer chromatography

ValRSvalyl-tRNA synthetase

wtwild-type.

