

   
BiochemistryBiochemistrybibichawBiochemistry0006-29601520-4995American
Chemical Society 10.1021/bi500922qCurrent TopicCircadian Clock and Photoperiodic Response in Arabidopsis: From Seasonal Flowering to Redox Homeostasis Shim Jae Sung Imaizumi Takato *Department
of Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195-1800, United States* Department of Biology, University
of Washington, 24 Kincaid Hall, Box 351800, Seattle, WA 98195-1800.
E-mail: takato@u.washington.edu. Phone: (206)
543-8709.26 10 2015 26 10 2014 20 01 2015 54 2 157 170 28 07 2014 25 10 2014 Copyright © 2014 American
Chemical Society2014American
Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Many of the developmental responses
and behaviors in plants that
occur throughout the year are controlled by photoperiod; among these,
seasonal flowering is the most characterized. Molecular genetic and
biochemical analyses have revealed the mechanisms by which plants
sense changes in day length to regulate seasonal flowering. In Arabidopsis thaliana, induction of the expression of a florigen,
FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT) protein, is a major output of the photoperiodic
flowering pathway. The circadian clock coordinates the expression
profiles and activities of the components in this pathway. Light-dependent
control of CONSTANS (CO) transcription factor activity is a crucial
part of the induction of the photoperiodic expression of FT. CO protein is stabilized only in the long day afternoon, which
is when FT is induced. In this review, we summarize
recent progress in the determination of the molecular architecture
of the circadian clock and mechanisms underlying photoperiodic flowering.
In addition, we introduce the molecular mechanisms of other biological
processes, such as hypocotyl growth and reactive oxygen species production,
which are also controlled by alterations in photoperiod.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9bi500922qdocument-id-new-14bi-2014-00922qccc-price

   
There are
seasonal latitude-dependent
fluctuations in photoperiod due to the rotation of the earth on its
tilted axis and its revolution around the sun. Because the degree
of day length change increases as one moves away from the equator
toward the poles, photoperiod correlates with and can serve as an
indicator of seasonal change.

Plants use photoperiodic information
to predict environmental change
and to regulate their developmental processes so that they occur under
favorable conditions. To maximize reproductive success, molecular
mechanisms that are regulated through the integration of environmental
and endogenous cues to control the timing of flowering have evolved.
Plants measure changes in day length using their circadian clocks
and by sensing the surrounding light environment.1−3 Circadian clock-controlled
transcription and light perception by the photoreceptor must coincide
to allow photoperiodic responses.1,3 Here we summarize
recent advances regarding the molecular mechanisms of the circadian
clock and photoperiodic responses such as flowering time and hypocotyl
elongation. Lastly, we introduce recent findings that reactive oxygen
species (ROS) homeostasis is also modulated by photoperiod.

Molecular
Mechanisms of the Circadian Clock in Arabidopsis
The circadian clock is an endogenous molecular oscillator with
period of approximately 24 h. There are a wide range of processes
in plants that show circadian rhythms, including the movement of leaves,
stomatal opening, stem elongation, metabolic processes, such as photorespiration
and photosynthesis, and the expression of a large set of genes.1,3−5 Thus, the circadian clock plays an important role
as a pacemaker for various physiological events that occur throughout
the day. Plants also use their circadian clocks to pace changes that
occur throughout the year and to regulate developmental transitions,
such as flowering and dormancy.1,6 Initially, the circadian
clock was described as a single loop comprising CIRCADIAN
CLOCK ASSOCIATED 1 (CCA1), LATE
ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL (LHY), and TIMING
OF CAB EXPRESSION 1 (TOC1).7−10 The current view of the Arabidopsis clock is more
complex. The original loop is one part of interconnected multiple
feedback loops that contain the morning- and evening-expressed clock
proteins. Our view of the clock architecture is also constantly improving.
For instance, recent identification of transcriptional activators/coactivators
for the evening element (EE)-regulated genes, REVEILLE8 (RVE8), NIGHT
LIGHT-INDUCIBLE AND CLOCK-REGULATED GENES 1 (LNK1), and LNK2, has
helped us to create a more accurate explanation of the induction of
evening-expressed clock genes.11−14 Here, we describe our current understanding of the
complex transcriptional, posttranscriptional, and posttranslational
regulatory mechanisms that make up the circadian clock in Arabidopsis.

Transcriptional Regulation of the Circadian
Clock
Similar
to biological clocks in other organisms, the Arabidopsis circadian clock consists of multiple interlocking feedback loops.1,4,5 The first characterized feedback
loop, which connects morning clock components with evening ones, consists
of two related morning MYB transcription factors, CCA1 and LHY, and
evening-expressed TOC1 proteins (Figure 1).
During the daytime, CCA1 and LHY form a negative-feedback loop with PSEUDO-RESPONSE REGULATOR 7 (PRR7) and PRR9.15,16 CCA1 and LHY directly induce
the expression of PRR7 and PRR9 genes. PRR7 and PRR9 encode proteins that directly
repress CCA1 and LHY expression
during the daytime, although the timing of the peak expression of
PRR7 and PRR9 proteins differs (Figure 1A,B).
CCA1 and LHY also act as transcriptional repressors. During the morning,
they concomitantly suppress the expression of afternoon- and evening-phased
circadian clock genes, such as PRR5, TOC1, GIGANTEA (GI), LUX ARRHYTHMO (LUX), and EARLY FLOWERING 4 (ELF4)10,17−19 (Figure 1B). To repress the expression of TOC1, GI, and most likely other evening genes, CCA1
and LHY bind to the CONSTITUTIVE PHOTOMORPHOGENIC 10 (COP10)–DE-ETIOLATED
1 (DET1)–DAMAGED DNA BINDING 1 (DDB1) complex (the CDD complex).
DET1 serves as a transcriptional corepressor necessary for CCA1 and
LHY to inhibit TOC1 and GI expression,
and the recruitment of DET1 to the TOC1 promoter
is dependent on the presence of CCA1 and LHY20 (Figure 1B). As DET1 is a part of the CCA1/LHY
repressor complex, the det1 mutant demonstrates a
short period phenotype similar to that of cca1 or lhy mutants. Although CCA1 and LHY likely confer repressive
activity through interaction with the CDD complex, an understanding
of how CCA1 and LHY act as transcriptional activators (for PRR9, PRR7, and other genes) at the molecular
level remains elusive.

Figure 1 Expression of circadian clock proteins and the architecture
of
the clock in Arabidopsis thaliana. (A) Daily protein
expression profiles of circadian clock components. The expression
profiles of the clock proteins are based on the following: CCA1,8 RVE8,32 PRR9,21 PRR7,21ZTL,55 PRR5,21 Evening Complex
(ELF4–ELF3–LUX),28 and TOC1.57 The peak expression levels of these proteins
were set to 100%, and the rest of the expression levels were calculated
against the peak levels. The levels of expression are plotted at 2
h intervals throughout the day. (B) Molecular events occurring from
morning to afternoon in the circadian clock. The interactions of clock
components and their transcriptional targets, which mainly happen
from morning to afternoon, are depicted. In the morning, CIRCADIAN
CLOCK ASSOCIATED 1 (CCA1) and LATE ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL (LHY) activate
the expression of PSEUDO-RESPONSE REGULATOR 9 (PRR9) and PRR7 and suppress the expression
of most evening phase genes such as PRR5, TIMING OF CAB EXPRESSION 1 (TOC1), LUX ARRHYTHMO (LUX), and EARLY
FLOWERING 4 (ELF4). CCA1 and LHY form a
repressor complex with the CONSTITUTIVE PHOTOMORPHOGENIC 10 (COP10)–DE-ETIOLATED
1 (DET1)–DAMAGED DNA BINDING 1 (DDB1) complex (CDD) to suppress
the expression of the evening genes. CCA1 and LHY also suppress their
own expression. In the early afternoon, PRR9 and PRR7 suppress the
expression of CCA1 and LHY using
TOPLESS (TPL) as a corepressor. Downregulation of CCA1 and LHY expression results in derepression of evening
phase genes. RVE8, together with NIGHT LIGHT-INDUCIBLE AND CLOCK-REGULATED
GENES 1 and 2 (LNK1/2) as coactivators, directly activates expression
of evening phase genes, such as PRR5, TOC1, ELF4, and LUX. (C) Molecular
events occurring from evening to night in the circadian clock. The
interactions of clock components and their transcriptional targets,
which mainly happen from evening to the end of the night, are depicted.
PRR5 protein continuously suppresses the expression of CCA1 and LHY. PRR5 also represses its own expression.
TOC1 suppresses the expression of CCA1 and LHY by itself or interacting with CCA1 HIKING EXPEDITION
(CHE). TOC1 also suppresses the expression of other clock components, PRR9, PRR7, TOC1, GI, LUX, and ELF4. ZTL
interacts with PRR5 and TOC1 to degrade them in the dark. The Evening
Complex (ELF4–ELF3–LUX) suppresses the expression of PRR9 to complete the cycle by induction of CCA1 and LHY. The positions of the circles in panels
B and C indicate the timing of peak protein accumulation (based on
panel A) of each component.

Throughout the day, the sequential expression of PRR9, PRR7,
and
PRR5 reciprocally contributes to the regulation of CCA1 and LHY expression (Figure 1A,B). PRR9, PRR7, and PRR5 physically associate with the promoters
of CCA1 and LHY to repress their
expression.21 PRR9, PRR7, and PRR5 also
repress their own expression and that of each other by directly binding
to their promoters.21 This repression occurs
through the direct interaction of these PRRs with TOPLESS/TOPLESS-RELATED
(TPL/TPR) corepressors22 (Figure 1B,C). As a consequence, PRR-dependent
suppression of CCA1 and LHY during
the day results in the derepression of the evening phase genes. Once
TOC1, a founding member of the PRRs, can be expressed during the night,
TOC1 physically associates with the promoters of CCA1 and LHY to suppress their expression23 (Figure 1A,C). TOC1 binds
to the TOC1 morning element (TIME) present in the CCA1 and LHY promoter.23 TOC1
also physically associates with the CCA1 promoter
by interacting with CCA1 HIKING EXPEDITION (CHE), the TCP transcription
factor that represses the expression of CCA1 and LHY (Figure 1C). Similar to TOC1, the expression of CHE is also directly
repressed by CCA1 and LHY during the morning.24 Recently, a genomic-scale chromatin immunoprecipitation assay revealed
that TOC1 binds to and represses not only CCA1 and LHY but also many other clock genes, such as PRR9, PRR7, TOC1, GI, LUX, and ELF4(25) (Figure 1C). This clearly shows
that TOC1 forms an important hub structure in the clock from evening
to night.

In addition to TOC1, the Evening Complex (EC, ELF4–ELF3–LUX)
also indirectly contributes to the dawn expression of CCA1 and LHY during the night.26 The Evening Complex is formed using ELF3 as an adaptor protein between
ELF4 and LUX whenever these three components are expressed. The LUX
transcription factor contains the GARP domain that binds to the GATWCG
site in the PRR9 promoter and recruits the Evening
Complex to the promoter region. The Evening Complex suppresses the
expression of PRR9, which in turn activates expression
of CCA1 and LHY(26−29) (Figure 1B,C). Expression of LUX and ELF4 is also under the control of CCA1 and LHY, as CCA1 and LHY directly
bind to the promoters of LUX and ELF4 to suppress their expression18,30 (Figure 1B). In addition, the self-negative-feedback regulation of
LUX forms an additional loop of the Evening Complex29 (Figure 1C).

As discussed
above, multiple intertwined negative-feedback loops
exist in the architecture of the circadian clock. Several positive
regulators of the clock have been identified, and the characterization
of these factors has provided a better understanding of the molecular
architecture of the circadian clock. LIGHT REGULATED WD1 (LWD1) and LWD2 genetically function
as activators in the light input pathway as well as in the central
oscillator.14,31 In the lwd1 lwd2 mutant, the amplitudes of the daily PRR9, PRR7, and PRR5 oscillations are reduced
and the period length is shorter than that of the wild-type plants.
LWD1, a nuclear localized WD repeat protein, directly binds to the
promoters of PRR9, PRR5, and TOC1 and positively regulates their expression. In addition,
PRR9 and PRR7 positively regulate the expression levels of LWD1 and LWD2.14 Therefore, LWDs and PRRs form
a positive-feedback loop in the regulation of the circadian clock.
Interestingly, in the lwd1 lwd2 double mutant, the
expression of CCA1 and LHY also
shows a reduced degree of oscillation under continuous light conditions
and an arrhythmic expression pattern under constant dark conditions.
It seems as though LWDs affect the expression of CCA1 and LHY through a PRR-independent
mechanism.14RVE8 has
been identified as an EE binding transcriptional activator that functions
as a positive regulator13,32 (Figure 1A,B). The RVE genes belong to the MYB transcription
factor gene family that includes CCA1 and LHY genes.32 Even though the
EE is regarded as the CCA1 and LHY binding site for negative-feedback
regulation of the circadian clock, it was suggested that an unknown
transcriptional activator(s) could also bind to the EE to activate
the afternoon- and evening-phased gene expression.33RVE8 mRNA peaks at the subjective dawn,
similar to CCA1 and LHY, but RVE8
protein accumulates 3–6 h after the subjective dawn, which
is later than the CCA1 and LHY peak32 (Figure 1A). RVE8 induces the expression of afternoon- and
evening-phased genes, such as PRR5, TOC1, GI, ELF4, and LUX. The expression of RVE8 is reciprocally controlled
by PRR5, as PRR5 suppresses the expression of RVE8(32) (Figure 1B).
Similar to RVE8, LNK1 and LNK2 also contribute
to the activation of afternoon- and evening-phased genes, such as PRR5, ELF4, and FKF1(12) (Figure 1B). Both rve4 rve6 rve8 and lnk1 lnk2 mutants shows
similar long period phenotypes with a lower amplitude of PRR5 and TOC1 oscillations.12,13 In addition, recent work revealed that LNK1 and LNK2 form complexes
with RVE8, RVE4, CCA1, and LHY in vivo.11 Together with RVE8, LNK1 and LNK2 directly contribute
to the regulation of PRR5 and TOC1 expression as transcriptional coactivators (Figure 1B). Interestingly, LNK1 and LNK2 also interact with CCA1 and
LHY. It will be of interest to know the function of the LNK1/2–CCA1/LHY
complexes. PRR5 and TOC1 form negative-feedback loops with LNK1/2.
PRR5 and TOC1 (as well as PRR9 and PRR7) bind to the LNK promoters to repress the expression of LNKs.12,34 Therefore, PRRs and TOC1 regulate the expression patterns of both
positive and negative factors, both of which reciprocally control
their expression. As the Arabidopsis circadian clock
is operated by multiple negative and positive-feedback loops throughout
the day, it is important to study the kinetic changes of their interactions
as well as to integrate more precise spatial (tissue-specific) and
temporal expression profiles of these factors.

Alternative
Splicing Regulation of the Circadian Clock Transcripts
Although
the transcriptional network of the Arabidopsis clock
is complicated, posttranscriptional and posttranslational
regulation in the system provides additional complexity and contributes
to the precision and robustness of the circadian clock.35 One type of posttranscriptional regulation,
alternative splicing, operates widely in eukaryotic organisms and
greatly increases both transcriptional and translational diversity.
In the transcription process, precursor mRNAs undergo splicing events
to remove the introns and join exons to generate mature mRNAs. Through
alternative splicing, different mRNA variants can be produced from
the same gene. These mRNA variants can give rise to protein variants,
which may have different functions by altering protein activity, cellular
localization, and posttranslational modification.36

Alternative splicing modulates the function of the
circadian clock components.35,37 The Arabidopsis
PROTEIN ARGININE METHYL TRANSFERASE 5 (AtPRMT5) gene encodes a type II protein, arginine methyltransferase, that
mediates the methylation of diverse substrates, including components
of the spliceosome. Defects in the spliceosome caused by the atprmt5 mutation result in splicing defects in PRR7 and PRR9 transcripts and alter the output of the
circadian clock.38−40 Two other splicing factors, SNW/SKI-INTERACTING
PROTEIN (SKIP) and SPLICEOSOMAL
TIMEKEEPER LOCUS 1 (STIPL1), also affect
the regulation of the circadian clock in Arabidopsis.41,42 The level of alternative splicing of PRR7 and PRR9 transcripts is reduced in
the skip mutant, and the expression of CCA1, LHY, PRR9, GI, and TOC1 is altered in this mutant. In the skip mutant, longer period length changes were observed
when the surrounding temperature was reduced.35 This indicates that alternative splicing may contribute to the temperature
compensation function of the clock. Other results also indicate the
presence of this mechanism. The CCA1 locus generates
two alternative splicing isoforms, CCA1α and CCA1β. CCA1β encodes a protein
that has a dimerization domain with CCA1 and LHY but lacks the DNA
binding domain. The abundance of the CCA1β variant
increases with heat (37 °C) exposure but decreases with cold
(4 °C) treatment under continuous light conditions.43 The protein translated from the CCA1β transcript competes with the one derived from CCA1α to form a CCA1α–CCA1β homodimer
and CCA1α–LHY heterodimer. The formation
of the CCA1β–CCA1α and CCA1β–LHY dimers
weakens their DNA binding affinity, thus affecting the activity of
the dimer, and subsequently changing the pace of the clock. The alternative
splicing variants derived from the LHY, PRR7, PRR5, and TOC1 loci also affect
the overall transcripts or protein levels.44 Some splice variants of these genes are targeted for the nonsense-mediated
mRNA decay (NMD) pathway.44 These findings
suggest that alternative splicing gives an additional regulatory mechanism
in the circadian clock and is likely involved in attaining the temperature
compensation characteristic of the clock.

Phosphorylation and Degradation
of the Circadian Clock Proteins
In addition to the complex
transcriptional and posttranscriptional
regulation, posttranslational regulation also plays an important role
in the clock mechanism by changing the stability, activity, and cellular
localization of clock components.45−47 One typical protein
modification is phosphorylation. Within the plant clock, CCA1 is phosphorylated
by CASEIN KINASE 2 (CK2). CCA1 phosphorylation affects its DNA binding
activity.45,48 The CK2-dependent phosphorylation of CCA1
interferes with the binding of CCA1 to its target gene promoter.49 Overexpression of CK2 β-subunit
3 (CKB3) or CKB4 leads
to a short period phenotype similar to that of the cca1 mutant.50 Phosphorylation of clock components
by CK seems to be a conserved mechanism in both the animal and plant
clocks. In both cases, this regulation influences the period length
of the clock.

Another important posttranslational regulation
is protein stability regulation. The regulation of clock protein stability
is an essential part of proper clock progress. For instance, the single-cell
green alga Ostreococcus tauri possesses a clock simpler
than that in Arabidopsis in which CCA1 and TOC1 homologues
form a single negative-feedback loop,51 and thus, it became the model for analyzing the minimal requirements
for circadian oscillation. Pharmacological inhibition of proteasomal
function stopped circadian oscillation, suggesting that proteolysis
of clock components is required to maintain the function of the biological
clock.47

In Arabidopsis, ZEITLUPE (ZTL) protein plays an
important role in the regulation of period length.52−54 ZTL is a blue
light photoreceptor F-box protein that is unique to plants, and blue
light regulates ZTL stability throughout the day.53 Even though ZTL mRNA is constitutively
expressed, the amount of ZTL protein oscillates with the peak at the
end of the day46 (Figure 1A). This daily oscillation of ZTL abundance is regulated by
the blue light-dependent interaction with GI.55 ZTL absorbs blue light with its LOV (light, oxygen, or voltage)
domain, and absorbing blue light triggers the interaction with GI
though the LOV domain. The ZTL–GI complex stabilizes ZTL by
protecting it from proteasome-dependent degradation. This interaction
also helps to keep GI in the cytosol.56 The daily ZTL stability change controls the abundance of clock components
that are degraded by ZTL.52−54,57 ZTL physically interacts with the pseudoreceiver domains of TOC1
and PRR5 through its LOV domain and degrades these proteins in the
dark52−54 (Figure 1C). This light-dependent
posttranslational regulation controls the period length and amplitude
of the circadian clock gene expression.52−54

In addition to
ZTL, its homologues, FLAVIN-BINDING, KELCH REPEAT,
F-BOX1 (FKF1), and LOV KELCH RPOTEIN2 (LKP2), also participate in
this posttranslational regulation by directly interacting with both
TOC1 and PRR5.57 In the ztl fkf1 and ztl fkf1 lkp2 mutants, TOC1 and PRR5 proteins
are more stable than in the ztl single mutant. Moreover,
both the ztl fkf1 and ztl fkf1 lkp2 mutants show a period phenotype longer than that of the ztl single mutant, indicating that both FKF1 and LKP2 contribute
to regulate the stability of TOC1 and PRR5.57 Thus, ZTL, FKF1, and LKP2 regulate TOC1 and PRR5 degradation to
determine the period length of circadian oscillation. Phosphorylation
of TOC1 and PRRs also affects their interactions with ZTL.58 Phosphorylation of TOC1 leads to its nuclear
localization.58 As ZTL exists in the cytosol,
this regulation prevents ZTL-mediated degradation of TOC1.58 The direct interaction of TOC1 with PRR3 and/or
PRR5 also stabilizes TOC1.59,60 Interaction of TOC1
with PRR5 also enhances the nuclear localization of TOC1.60 Light and the circadian clock regulate ZTL protein
abundance, which in turn regulates the stability of TOC1 and PRR5
and controls the periodicity and robustness of the clock.

In
addition to the ZTL group proteins, several other E3 ubiquitin
ligases also participate in the regulation of circadian clock protein
stability. CONSTITUTIVE PHOTOMORPHOGENIC 1 (COP1) physically interacts
with ELF3 to degrade it.61 This degradation
allows the recruitment of newly synthesized ELF3 into the COP1–ELF3
complex. Formation of the COP1–ELF3–GI complex at night
leads to the destabilization of GI. Another E3 ligase, SINAT5, participates
in the regulation of LHY protein stability.61 SINAT5, an Arabidopsis homologue of the Drosophila SINA ring-finger protein, physically interacts
with LHY. Ubiquitination of LHY by SINAT5 is suppressed by nuclear
protein DET1.62 In addition to ubiquitination,
the deubiquitination enzymes UBP12 and UBP13 also affect clock progression.
Expression of UBP12 and UBP13 is
under the control of the circadian clock, and the ubp12 ubp13 double mutant shows a short period phenotype, indicating that the
deubiquitination process of clock proteins may fine-tune the degradation
kinetics.63 As described in this section,
the proper dynamics of posttranslational regulation of the clock proteins
determine the proper pace of the circadian oscillation.

Photoperiodic
Flowering in Arabidopsis
The intricate networks
of the circadian clock allow plants to regulate
diverse diurnal and seasonal physiological and developmental events.
Within the circadian clock-regulated responses, one of the most characterized
is the photoperiodic flowering response. Arabidopsis is a facultative long-day (LD) plant, in which flowering is accelerated
under LD conditions through the function of FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT)
protein.64,65 FT is a small mobile protein regarded as
a florigen (flowering hormone).66 It is
synthesized from the leaf vasculature and transported to the shoot
apical meristem through the phloem.67 The
amount of FT transcript influences the floral induction
of Arabidopsis thaliana.68 Induction of FT transcription occurs under LD conditions,
and this induction is regulated by the CONSTANS (CO) transcriptional
activator.65 The circadian clock and light
signaling tightly regulate the timing of CO transcript
expression and CO protein activity in LD.69,70 In this section, we summarize recent advances in the mechanisms
by which photoperiodic information regulates expression of CO and FT. Many recent reviews cover the
floral induction initiated by FT at the shoot apical
meristem in detail;66,71,72 therefore, we will not discuss those mechanisms here.

Transcriptional
Regulation of the CO Gene
Similar to circadian
clock regulation, both transcriptional and
posttranslational regulation of CO are crucial for plants to measure
changes in day length for photoperiodic flowering. To regulate daily CO expression patterns, the circadian clock-regulated FKF1,
GI, and CYCLING DOF FACTORs (CDFs) play major roles73−76 (Figure 2). CO expression profiles are at trough level in
the morning and then show a daytime peak in the late afternoon, with
the highest peak at night under LD conditions. This rhythmic expression
pattern of CO is regulated by time-dependent expression
and degradation of CDF (CDF1–CDF3 and CDF5) transcriptional
repressors. CDF1 protein directly binds to the CO promoter to repress the expression of CO and contributes
to reducing the level of expression in the early part of the day.74,77 Expression of the CDF1 transcript is under control
of the circadian clock. CCA1 and LHY positively regulate the expression
of CDF1 at dawn,16 and
in the afternoon, PRR9, PRR7, and PRR5 negatively regulate expression
of CDF1, CDF2, CDF3, and CDF5.16,34 Consequently, circadian
clock-dependent transcriptional regulation of CDFs consists of a basal regulatory loop to determine the timing of CO expression.

Figure 2 Photoperiodic regulation of FLOWERING
LOCUS T (FT) expression. In LD, FLAVIN-BINDING,
KELCH REPEAT, F-BOX1
(FKF1), and GIGANTEA (GI) form a complex, when their expression patterns
coincide and FKF1 absorbs blue light. The FKF1–GI complex degrades
CYCLING DOF FACTOR (CDF) proteins on the CONSTANS (CO) promoter in the afternoon. FKF1–GI-dependent
degradation of CDFs results in derepression of CONSTANS (CO) expression. The same mechanism of degradation
of CDFs by the FKF1–GI complex also exists on the FT promoter. FKF1 physically interacts with CO protein to stabilize
it. Far-red light-absorbed PHYTOCHROME A (PHYA) also stabilizes CO
protein. Stabilized CO protein binds to the FT promoter
to activate FT expression. The NUCLEAR FACTOR-Y (NF-Y)
complex enhances the binding of CO protein to the FT promoter. CO protein antagonizes the function of the EMBRYONIC FLOWERING
1 complex (EMF1c) and the FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC) complex that suppresses
the expression of FT. CRYPTOCHROME-INTERACTING BASIC
HELIX–LOOP–HELIX 1 (CIB1) is activated by blue light
absorbed by CRYPTOCHROME 2 (CRY2) and stabilized by blue light absorbed
by ZEITLUPE (ZTL). CIB1 directly activates the expression of FT in the afternoon. In the morning, PHYB that has absorbed
red light and HIGH EXPRESSION OF OSMOTICALLY RESPONSIVE GENE 1 (HOS1)
degrade CO protein. At night, the CONSTITUTIVE PHOTOMORPHOGENIC 1
(COP1)–SUPPRESSOR OF PHYA-105s (SPAs) complex degrades CO protein.
They prevent flowering under unfavorable conditions, such as SD. In
SD, the expression peaks of FKF1 and GI do not coincide. Without the
FKF–GI complex, CO expression is continuously
suppressed by CDF proteins during the daytime.

Expression of CO in the afternoon is important
for inducing FT expression and is induced by an interaction
between FKF1 and GI.75 GI is a plant-specific
large nuclear protein without any known functional domains.78 FKF1 interacts with GI in a blue light-dependent
manner in the LD afternoon, and the FKF1–GI complex degrades
CDF proteins in the afternoon, resulting in the derepression of the CO promoter under LD conditions (Figure 2). Under short day (SD) conditions, the expression peaks of
FKF1 and GI do not coincide, and the FKF1 peak occurs at night. Without
forming the light-dependent FKF1–GI complex during the daytime,
CDF proteins continuously repress CO expression during
the day in SD75 (Figure 2). ZTL and LKP2, which interact with FKF1 and GI, are involved
in the destabilization of the CDF2 protein.77 Once CDF repressors are removed by the FKF1–GI complex, the
bHLH (basic helix–loop–helix) transcription factors,
FLOWERING BHLH1 (FBH1), FBH2, FBH3, and FBH4, activate the transcription
of CO. These FBH proteins bind to the E-box elements
located in the CO promoter. Chemically induced expression
of FBH1 and FBH2 leads to an increased
amount of CO transcript in the late afternoon and
the dark under both LD and SD.79

Other components also participate in the regulation of CO expression. RED AND FAR-RED INSENSITIVE 2 (RFI2) is a
nuclear protein that possesses a C3H2C3-type zinc finger and RING domains. RFI2 might work together with
GI to negatively regulate the evening and night expression of CO.80 LONG VEGETATIVE PHASE1
(LOV1) is a NAC domain protein. Its mutation affects flowering time
under LD. LOV1 represses the expression of CO at
the end of day and during the night.81 FIONA1
also represses the expression of CO in both LD and
SD.82 DAY NEUTRAL FLOWERING (DNF) is a
membrane-bound E3 ligase that represses CO expression
in morning and early afternoon in SD.83 The chromatin remodeling component MULTICOPY SUPPRESSOR
OF IRA 1 (MSI1) also participates in the
regulation of CO expression. MSI1 is a component
of the Polycomb Group Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) and also interacts
with LIKE HETEROCHROMATIN PROTEIN 1 (LHP1) and FVE, all of which participate
in chromatin remodeling. MSI1 positively regulates expression of CO and GI in response to photoperiod.84CO-EXPRESSED WITH CLOCK GENES LHY AND
CCA1 1 (CEC1) (also known as LNK2) and CEC2/LNK3 negatively regulate expression of CO and FT. This is interesting because
LNK1 and LNK2 were originally characterized as activators of the evening
clock genes as well as FT, as the level of FT expression is diminished in the lnk1-1 lnk2-1 allele.12 On the other hand, in the cec1 (=lnk2-2) and cec2 (lnk3) single mutants, the level of CO and FT expression in the afternoon and night is
elevated.85 Some of the difference in CO and FT expression may be caused by a lnk2 allele difference. These results indicate that LNKs
may function as activators (LNK1 and LNK2) and repressors (LNK3, and
potentially LNK4). Taken together, CO expression
throughout the day is tightly controlled by complex transcriptional
regulation.

Posttranslational Regulation of CO Protein
Posttranslational
regulation of CO protein is crucial for photoperiod-dependent activation
of FT.2,70,76 Even though the CO transcript is strongly expressed
at night in both LD and SD, the induction of FT expression
occurs only at dusk in LD. At night, CO protein is actively degraded
by COP1 and the SUPPRESSOR OF PHYA-105 1 (SPA1) complex86−88 (Figure 2). HIGH EXPRESSION OF OSMOTICALLY
RESPONSIVE GENE 1 (HOS1) encodes a RING
finger containing E3 ubiquitin ligase. Similar to COP1 and SPA1, HOS1
binds to the CO CCT motif to degrade CO protein during the early hours
of the day89 (Figure 2). Two red/far-red light photoreceptors, phytochrome A (PHYA) and
PHYB, antagonistically regulate the stability of CO protein.90 CO protein is degraded in the morning and stabilized
in the late afternoon. PHYB mediates the degradation of CO in the
morning, whereas PHYA stabilizes CO protein in the afternoon90 (Figure 2). Recently, PHYTOCHROME-DEPENDENT LATE FLOWERING (PHL) was characterized as an interacting partner of PHYB and CO. PHL
accumulates in the nucleus in the afternoon to suppress PHYB-mediated
degradation of CO protein.91 Two blue light
photoreceptors, cryptochrome 1 (CRY1) and CRY2, also participate in
the regulation of CO protein stability.92−94 CRY1 physically interacts
with SPA1 to interrupt the formation of the COP1–SPA1 complex93,94 (Figure 2). CRY2 also interacts with SPA1
in response to blue light. Light-dependent CRY2–SPA1 interaction
enhances the CRY2–COP1 interaction to suppress the function
of COP1 in CO degradation92 (Figure 2). Several photoreceptors and E3 ubiquitin ligases
control the stability of CO protein. However, the molecular mechanism
of late afternoon-specific stabilization of CO protein is not clearly
understood, because those regulators are constitutively expressed
throughout the day.

The daytime-specific stabilization of CO
protein is regulated by the blue light photoreceptor FKF1.73−76 FKF1 protein accumulates from the afternoon to the end of the day.
FKF1 interacts with CO protein through its LOV domain to stabilize
CO protein in a blue light-dependent manner. Both FKF1 and CO exist
on the FT promoter region where the CORE sequences
are located. Therefore, FKF1 and light determine the timing of accumulation
of CO protein within a day, and this is crucial for the induction
of FT(76) (Figure 2).

Transcriptional Regulation of the FT Gene
The circadian clock and light signaling
coordinate to control CO
protein activity and FT expression.2,70,76 Several classes of transcriptional
repressors participate in the regulation of FT expression.
MADS-box proteins, FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC) and SHORT VEGETATIVE PHASE
(SVP), form a heterodimer. The FLC–SVP complex directly suppresses
the expression of FT and another flowering gene, SUPPRESSOR OF OVEREXPRESSION OF CO 1 (SOC1).95 FLC also forms a nuclear protein
complex with its homologue FLOWERING LOCUS M (FLM) and MADS AFFECTING
FLOWERINGs (MAFs) to suppress the expression of FT.96 The Polycomb group (PcG) complex also
participates in FLC clade-mediated repression of FT expression. EMBRYONIC FLOWER1 (EMF1), LHP1, and histone H3 lysine-4
demethylase form a distinct Polycomb group complex (PRC1-like complex)
and act as a transcriptional repressor complex. The EMF1 complex physically
associates with FT chromatin and represses the expression
of FT.97 EMF1 directly
interacts with FLC and FLM.97 Thus, even
though the EMF complex lacks a DNA binding protein, FLC and FLM may
recruit the PcG complex to the FT promoter. FLC clade-
and PcG-mediated repression prevents the induction of FT under noninductive SD conditions. The binding of EMF1 to the FT promoter is disrupted in the afternoon by CO overexpression. Thus, daytime-specific stabilization of CO may antagonize
the binding of the EMF complex to the FT chromatin
at dusk, leading to proper activation of FT(97) (Figure 2).

TEMPRANILLO1
(TEM1) and TEM2 belong to the RAV subfamily of transcription factors
and bind to the FT promoter and negatively regulate
its expression.98SCHLAFMÜTZE (SMZ) encodes the APETALA 2 (AP2)-related transcription
factor. SMZ directly binds to the FT promoter and
represses its expression.99 The microRNAs,
miR156 and miR172, participate in the control of SMZ expression to determine the timing of FT expression.100 miR156 is expressed strongly in early developmental
stages and weakly in late developmental stages. miR156 targets SQUAMOSA
PROMOTER BINDING PROTEIN-LIKE (SPL) transcription factors, suppressing
their expression by transcriptional cleavage. Thus, the age-dependent
decrease in miR156 is accompanied by an increase in the level of SPL expression. SPL9 and SPL10 directly activate the expression
of miR172 in an age-dependent manner. miR172 accumulates to high levels
in the leaves and floral buds.101 The amount
of miR172 is more abundant in LD than in SD. In addition, GI promotes
the accumulation of miRNA172 under LD conditions.102 miR172 suppresses the expression of AP2-type floral repressor
transcripts, such as AP2, TARGET OF EAT 1 (TOE1), TOE2, TOE3, SMZ, and SCHNARCHZAPFEN (SNZ).100,102 CDF1, a transcriptional repressor
of CO, also associates with the promoter of FT and
represses the expression of FT in the morning. Repression
of FT by CDF1 is removed by the blue light-dependent
FKF–GI complex in the afternoon under LD conditions.76 Thus, FKF1 determines the daytime-specific expression
of FT by removing the CDF transcriptional repressors
and stabilizing the CO transcriptional activator
(Figure 2).

In the activation of FT expression, two transcriptional
activators, CO and CRYPTOCHROME-INTERACTING BASIC HELIX–LOOP–HELIX
1 (CIB1), play major roles.90,103−105 CO directly binds to the CONSTANS responsive element (CORE) in the FT promoter but its binding activity to the FT promoter
is weak in vitro.106 It is suggested that
CO interacts with other proteins and this interaction increases the
binding affinity of CO for the FT promoter. CO and
CO-like protein physically associate with NUCLEAR FACTOR-Y (NF-Y)/HEME
ACTIVATOR PROTEIN (HAP).107 The NF-Y/HAP
complex consists of NF-YA, NF-YB, and NF-YC and binds to the CCAAT
site located in the FT promoter. Chromatin looping
of the FT promoter is accelerated in the late afternoon
and keeps the NF-Y complex very close to the CORE. The NF-Y complex
physically interacts with CO protein to stabilize the binding of CO
protein to the CORE in the FT promoter108 (Figure 2).

CIB1,
together with CIB2, CIB4, and CIB5, is also involved in FT induction.104 CIB1 directly
binds to the promoter of FT and activates its expression
(Figure 2). CIB proteins form heterodimer complexes,
and the heterodimerization increases the DNA binding activity of CIBs
with the FT promoter. The function of CIB1 is restricted
from the afternoon to early night. CIB1 protein forms a complex with
CRY2 in a blue light-dependent manner; CIB protein accumulates only
in the presence of blue light, whereas it is actively degraded without
blue light. Interestingly, blue light-dependent stabilization of CIB1
is mediated by ZTL and LKP2, not CRY2. ZTL and LKP2 stabilize CIB1
under blue light. Therefore, CIB1 is activated by CRY2 and stabilized
by ZTL and LKP2 under blue light to promote FT expression103 (Figure 2). In summary,
information about changing photoperiods in growing conditions is monitored
using large numbers of components, many of which are regulated by
the circadian clock. The information is utilized by plants to precisely
determine the expression of FT protein, which consequently determines
the timing of flowering.

Photoperiodic Regulation
of Hypocotyl Growth
In addition to the timing of flowering,
the growth rates of hypocotyls
and petioles also differ depending on photoperiod. LD-grown seedlings
show hypocotyls and petioles much shorter than those of SD-grown seedlings.109 To regulate day length-dependent differences
in hypocotyl growth rates, plants also use the circadian clock to
sense photoperiod changes. In Arabidopsis, phytochromes
and their downstream components PHYTOCHROME-INTERACTING FACTOR
4 (PIF4) and its homologue PIF5 play prominent roles in determining the timing of hypocotyl growth
within a day.110−112 PIF4 and PIF5 are bHLH transcription factors
that promote elongation of the hypocotyl. PIF4 and PIF5 proteins are
stable in the dark and destabilized under light mainly by PHYB. SD-induced
elongation of the hypocotyl is diminished in the pif4 pif5 double mutants, indicating that photoperiodic information is transmitted
through PIF4 and PIF5 function to regulate hypocotyl length. PIF4
and PIF5 induce the expression of ARABIDOPSIS THALIANA HOMEOBOX
PROTEIN 2 (ATHB2) and other genes that are
involved in hypocotyl elongation.113 PHYB
acts as a repressor of hypocotyl elongation by degrading PIF4 protein
under light.114 Therefore, the hypocotyl
length of the phyB mutant in LD and SD is always
longer than that of wild-type plants, regardless of photoperiod.109

The circadian clock contributes to photoperiodic
hypocotyl growth
regulation in part by regulating the timing of the expression of PIF4 and PIF5. The expression patterns
of both PIF4 and PIF5 transcripts
show diurnal oscillation with peaks in the daytime.109 During the evening, the Evening Complex (ELF4–ELF3–LUX)
directly represses the expression of PIF4 and PIF5 transcription28 (Figure 3). Following the changes in mRNA expression levels,
PIF4 protein accumulates at a high level at the end of the night in
SD, while the PIF4 protein level is low at night in LD.115 As elongation occurs around dusk,110 this may cause the difference in growth.

Figure 3 Photoperiodic
regulation of hypocotyl elongation. The hypocotyl
elongation rate of plants is determined by a combination of the internal
circadian clock and external photoperiodic information. Expression
of PHYTOCHROME-INTERACTING FACTOR 4 (PIF4) is controlled by the circadian clock. The Evening Complex (ELF4–ELF3–LUX)
directly suppresses the expression of PIF4. Under
LD conditions, both transcription and translation of PIF4 occur during the day. PIF4 that accumulates during the daytime is
inactivated by PHYB and DELLA protein. PHYB interacts with PIF4 to
degrade it, and DELLAs interact with residual PIF4 to inactivate it
by interrupting its DNA binding activity. Under SD conditions, PIF4 transcription and translation occur during day and
night. PIF4 that accumulates during the nighttime activates its downstream
target genes, which regulate hormonal responses that trigger hypocotyl
elongation. We used the experimental data of DELLA protein expression
under SD conditions117 to illustrate DELLA
protein expression in both LD and SD.

Phytohormone gibberellin (GA) signaling regulates the activity
of PIF proteins. DELLA proteins, repressors of GA signaling, bind
to PIF4 to interrupt its DNA binding activity.116 The expression of DELLA proteins is also regulated by the
circadian clock and peaks at the end of the day.117 This expression pattern contributes to the weakening of
the DNA binding ability of PIF4 during the daytime116,117 (Figure 3). Therefore, the mechanism governing
photoperiodic hypocotyl growth also can be explained by the coincidence
between the interaction of internal clock components and external
light cues.

Photoperiodic Regulation of ROS Homeostasis
Daily environmental changes regulate not only plant development
but also cellular homeostasis, such as metabolism. In the final section,
we introduce recent advances in circadian clock-regulated redox homeostasis
and the effect of photoperiod changes on this regulation, as an example
of photoperiodic regulation of cellular homeostasis. Reactive oxygen
species (ROS), which include hydroxyl radical (HO–), superoxide (O2–), and hydrogen peroxide
(H2O2), are oxygen-containing molecules that
have chemical reactivity higher than that of molecular oxygen (O2). ROS is a byproduct of many cellular metabolic processes,
such as photosynthesis and respiration. Recent evidence suggests that
ROS are not only byproducts but also signaling molecules in various
biological processes, including biotic and abiotic stress responses,
stomatal movement, development, and cell expansion.118−120 Inside cells, ROS are generated in chloroplasts, peroxisomes, and
mitochondria.119 Despite their importance
as signaling molecules, the ways in which plants regulate the status
of cellular ROS throughout the day remain elusive.

Circadian Regulation of
ROS Homeostasis and Their Roles in Plant
Development
Cellular ROS homeostasis is tightly regulated
by several antioxidant systems for protecting cell function. Failure
to regulate cellular ROS levels results in severe cellular damage,
such as excessive oxidative stresses.121 There is emerging evidence that the circadian clock contributes
to cellular processes that maintain ROS at physiological levels in
diverse organisms. Peroxiredoxins (PRXs) are highly conserved antioxidant
proteins that contain Cys residues, which can be oxidized by peroxide.
PRX oxidation patterns show circadian oscillation from bacteria to
mammals.122,123 Oxidation patterns of other
antioxidants, such as glutathione and ascorbic acid, also show circadian
oscillation and contribute to the determination of the excitability
of neurons in the mouse suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN).124 Transcriptional regulation of nuclear factor
erythroid-derived 2-like 2 (NRF2) is another example of circadian
clock-dependent regulation of cellular ROS homeostasis.121 Disruption of NRF2 expression
by mutations in ClockΔ19 results in decreasing levels
of cellular reduced glutathione as well as increasing levels of protein
oxidative damage.121 In the case of zebrafish,
cellular ROS act as input signals for the circadian clock.125 Light-dependent accumulation of hydrogen peroxide,
which is controlled by a diurnal change in catalase activity, induces
the expression of zebrafish Cryptochrome 1a (zCry1a) and Period (zPer2).125 This mechanism is part of the light-dependent
induction of zCry1a and zPer2 that
entrains the circadian clock.125 As the
enzymatic activity of the catalase involved in this regulation diurnally
oscillates, the circadian clock and ROS homeostasis regulate each
other through complicated feedback mechanisms under daily light–dark
cycles.

The plant circadian clock also regulates ROS homeostasis.
In the case of Arabidopsis, hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) levels diurnally oscillate and this oscillation
is sustained under constant light conditions,126 indicating the involvement of the circadian clock in this
regulation. In constant light, H2O2 production
peaks during the afternoon following the peak expression of photosynthesis
genes and reaches trough level at midnight. The mutation or overexpression
of the CCA1 gene abolishes the rhythmicity of endogenous
H2O2 levels, catalase activity, and ROS-related
gene expression. Mutations in other circadian clock components, such
as ELF3, LUX, and TOC1, also disrupt the rhythmic expression patterns of CAT genes and ROS-related genes.126

The oscillation of cellular H2O2 levels is
closely linked to the antioxidant enzyme catalase. Diurnal catalase
activity patterns are similar to the patterns of cellular H2O2 levels126 (Figure 4A). Hydrogen peroxide is generated in peroxisomes
via enzymatic reactions catalyzed by glycolate oxidase and/or superoxide
dismutase. Catalase is the first peroxisomal antioxidant enzyme that
detoxifies cellular hydrogen peroxide to be characterized.119 There are three catalase genes (CAT1, CAT2, and CAT3) in Arabidopsis.127 Expression of all three is controlled
by the circadian clock.126 Circadian oscillation
of catalase expression is diminished in the CCA1 overexpressor
and the cca1 lhy double mutant.126 The daily production of H2O2 also
becomes constant in these plants. In addition, the expression patterns
of multiple ROS responsive genes are also regulated by CCA1, indicating
that the circadian clock gates the sensitivity of ROS signaling through
CCA1 function in Arabidopsis.

Figure 4 Circadian regulation
of ROS homeostasis. (A) Circadian regulation
of ROS homeostasis. The circadian clock regulates the daily expression
patterns of three catalase genes (CAT1–CAT3) and their activities to maintain cellular hydrogen
peroxide (H2O2) levels. (B) Day length-dependent
phenotype of the cat2 mutant. The cat2 mutant shows the lesion (cell death) phenotype when it is grown
only under LD conditions.

Circadian clock-dependent apoplastic ROS homeostasis also
regulates
leaf growth.128,129 Leaves show diurnal growth patterns
with maximal expansion in the morning.130 One circadian clock-regulated mechanism of leaf growth is associated
with the function of the MYB-like transcriptional regulator KUODA1
(KUA1).128,129 The diurnal expression pattern of the KUA1 gene shows a morning peak. The morning expression of KUA1 is directly controlled by CCA1 and LHY,128,129 both of which affect the leaf growth rate.130 Leaf size is reduced in the kua1 mutant, and this
is due to the reduction of the cell expansion rate. The KUA1 protein
directly binds to the promoters of seven apoplastic peroxidase genes
to repress their expression. Consequently, the level of H2O2 in the kua1 mutant is higher than
that in the wild-type plant. In addition, the small leaf size phenotype
of the kua1 mutant is rescued by exogenous application
of either the peroxidase inhibitor or the hydrogen peroxide scavenger,
indicating that the basal cellular H2O2 levels
that are controlled by the circadian clock influence the cell expansion
rate during leaf development. In the roots, the regulation of apoplastic
ROS homeostasis controlled by the UPBEAT1 (UPB1) bHLH transcription
factor is the most important mechanism for modulating the balance
between cell proliferation and differentiation.131 Although it is still underexplored, the findings introduced
here imply that the circadian clock regulates various plant developmental
processes in part by modulating H2O2 levels.
As H2O2 mediates plant development, defense
responses, and abiotic stress responses,129,132 the circadian regulation of H2O2 production
described above could contribute to the appropriate time-of-day production
of ROS signals in these biological responses.

Photoperiodic
Regulation of Hydrogen Peroxide Levels
Although oscillation
of hydrogen peroxide levels and catalase activity
are regulated by the circadian clock,126 differences in photoperiod also affect these levels. In the presence
of light, the inactivation of antioxidant enzyme (catalase) activity
enhances hydrogen peroxide accumulation and increases the level of
expression of ROS-regulated genes in green algae.133 In rye leaves, light accelerates the inactivation of catalase.134 Catalase is degraded under light, and the degradation
is clearly observed from 16 h after the onset of light.134 These examples suggest that the duration of
light within a day can be an important factor that affects the activity
of catalase. In addition, prior to the exposure of ROS-inductive conditions,
growing plants under different day length conditions (LD vs SD) changes
how plants deal with new ROS-inductive conditions by changing both
leaf catalase activity and antioxidant content.135 In plants that were previously grown in LD but not in SD,
the activity of catalase is increased to cope with the increase in
the level of ROS. This indicates that, between LD and SD conditions,
different mechanisms are utilized to regulate daily ROS homeostasis.
As expected, the catalase activity in LD is higher than that in SD.

Among the three Arabidopsis catalases, CAT2 is
the major one that deals with LD-dependent oxidative stresses.136 The leaves of cat2 mutants
show lesions (H2O2-induced cell death) when
they are grown in LD, but the phenotype is not visible in SD (Figure 4B), indicating that the H2O2 level in cat2 increases in LD. In addition, this
phenotype is also regulated by light intensity, as higher light levels
during the first half of the day enhance the phenotype. Similar to
the day length-specific lesion formation observed in the cat2 mutant, pathogenesis-related genes such as PR1 and
camalexin, both of which are induced by increasing H2O2 levels, are induced only in LD.137 Another lesion formation mutant, lesion simulating disease
1 (lsd1), also shows a similar photoperiod-dependent
phenotype. LSD1 encodes a novel zinc finger protein.
Under LD conditions, low light intensity is enough to develop lesions
in lsd1 mutant leaves.138 In contrast, under SD conditions, lesion formation is not observed
even under high-light conditions. Interestingly, LSD1 interacts with
catalases through its zinc finger domain. In the lsd1 mutant, catalase activity is lower than that in wild-type plants,139 indicating that LSD1 enhances the activity
of catalases. These observations suggest that photoperiod information
can affect cellular ROS signal generation in part through the day
length-specific regulation of catalase activity.

Conclusion
In this review, we discuss recent advances in our understanding
of the molecular mechanisms of the circadian clock and photoperiodic
response in Arabidopsis. Within the last several
years, identification of positive regulators (RVE8 and LNK1/2) for
EE-regulated genes, as well as comprehensive genome-scale analyses
of the DNA binding sites of PRRs and TOC1 proteins, has drastically
changed our view of the molecular architecture of the circadian clock.
Additionally, characterizing new posttranscriptional regulatory mechanisms,
such as alternative splicing of clock gene transcripts, has allowed
us to understand that the circadian clock is composed of many layers
of regulation. Although our knowledge regarding the molecular clock
is improving rapidly, unidentified mechanisms and regulators within
the circadian clock still exist. For instance, we do not know the
identities of the positive regulator(s) that induce the expression
of morning components such as CCA1, LHY, and RVE8. In addition, PRR7, PRR5, and TOC1 repress
the gene expression of many clock components simultaneously around
the end of the day and the beginning of the night. We are not yet
sure if they act additively, repressing the same targets, or if any
synergistic functional interactions exist (in addition to the PRR5-dependent
TOC1 activity regulation described here). It is of great interest
to us to perform more quantitative analyses of spatial and temporal
expression patterns of the clock components and the interactions among
them. Currently, both phosphorylation of CCA1 protein and alternative
splicing of CCA1 transcripts are implicated in the
temperature compensation mechanism of the circadian clock.43,49 Are these mechanisms equally important for temperature compensation?
A more comprehensive understanding of the timing of each modification
would be helpful to help us develop an entire view of how the clock
times its 24 h rhythms regardless of ambient temperature changes.
Moreover, insights into molecular clock structures and mechanisms
in plants other than Arabidopsis are still lacking.
Studying the circadian clock in other plants at molecular levels will
facilitate the determination of the similarities and differences in
clocks among plant species. It will also help us to understand how
plants regulate the timing of various species-specific responses and/or
development, which do not exist in Arabidopsis.

Our current understanding of the molecular mechanisms of photoperiodic
flowering and hypocotyl growth regulation has given us seminal examples
of how environmental (photoperiodic) information is integrated into
internal regulatory networks (which are regulated by the circadian
clock). These coordinate the timing of crucial developmental processes
that occur over longer time scales. In the regulatory pathway of photoperiodic
flowering, the presence of circadian clock-controlled components and
light at the same time are critical to induce the expression of CO and FT. Recent findings in photoperiod-dependent
activation and stabilization of CO protein and in the alteration of
the chromatin structure of the FT promoter suggest
that multilayers of regulatory mechanisms concomitantly control the
timing of flowering to make it occur under the most favorable conditions.
One of the next challenges will be investigating the combinational
effects of various environmental stimuli, such as light, temperature,
nutrient availability, humidity, and pathogen attacks.

In addition
to flowering and growth rate regulation, there is a
growing body of evidence that metabolic pathways, such as carbon allocation,
starch metabolism, and cellular ROS homeostasis, could also be under
the control of photoperiod differences.137,140,141 Currently, we have little understanding
of the molecular mechanisms underlying these responses. Unveiling
the mechanisms of the photoperiodic regulation of metabolic pathways
will provide new insights into the physiological strategies of plants
as they adapt to seasonal environmental changes. Some of the known
components in photoperiodic responses may also function in the metabolic
pathways. For instance, LD-specific activation of CO protein contributes
to photoperiodic starch accumulation through direct induction of GRANULE BOUND STARCH SYNTHASE gene expression.140 In addition, differences in photoperiod affect
the generation of ROS signals that regulate several biological processes
under control of the circadian clock. Therefore, we are likely to
be able to apply our current knowledge of the circadian clock and
photoperiodic flowering to further understand how other biological
processes could be regulated under different photoperiods.

Adapting
to seasonal environmental change must have been a challenge
for land plants. Many plants, including major crops, possess similar
molecular mechanisms that allow them to determine the timing of flowering
using photoperiod as an indicator of seasonal change.1,2,142 In addition, similar mechanisms
are utilized to control seasonal responses in tree species. In poplar,
for example, FT homologues regulate not only the
timing of flowering but also that of growth cessation.143

We do not know when the photoperiodic
time measurement mechanism
was generated during the history of land plant evolution. Interestingly,
a recent report demonstrated that FKF1 and GI are conserved in not only angiosperm species but also
nonvascular bryophyte species.144 The FKF1–GI
complex controls the photoperiodic growth phase transition in the
liverwort Marchantia polymorpha.144 This suggests that this photoperiod-sensing module developed
in the early lineage of land plants. Together with comparative genomic
analyses, this type of analysis will help us speculate how plants
have obtained the ability to use photoperiodic differences as seasonal
cues for adjusting their developmental programs to fit their surrounding
environments.

In summary, we are in the middle of a very exciting
time in which
we are able to understand the complex but sophisticated molecular
mechanisms by which plants adapt to dynamic changes that occur daily
and seasonally, using their time-keeping mechanisms, the circadian
clocks.

This work was
supported by National Institutes of Health Grant GM079712 to T.I.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Greg Golembeski and
Hannah Kinmonth-Schultz for critical
reading of the manuscript.



   
References
Song Y. H. ; Ito S. ; Imaizumi T.  (2010 ) Similarities in the circadian clock and photoperiodism
in plants . Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 
13 , 594 –603 .20620097 
Andres F. ; Coupland G.  (2012 ) The genetic basis of
flowering responses to seasonal
cues . Nat. Rev. Genet. 
13 , 627 –639 .22898651 
Kinmonth-Schultz H. A. ; Golembeski G. S. ; Imaizumi T.  (2013 ) Circadian clock-regulated
physiological
outputs: Dynamic responses in nature . Semin.
Cell Dev. Biol. 
24 , 407 –413 .23435352 
Nagel D. H. ; Kay S. A.  (2012 ) Complexity in the wiring and regulation of plant circadian
networks . Curr. Biol. 
22 , R648 –R657 .22917516 
Henriques R. ; Mas P.  (2013 ) Chromatin remodeling and alternative
splicing: Pre- and post-transcriptional
regulation of the Arabidopsis circadian clock . Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 
24 , 399 –406 .23499867 
Penfield S. ; Hall A.  (2009 ) A role for multiple circadian clock genes in the response to signals
that break seed dormancy in Arabidopsis . Plant
Cell 
21 , 1722 –1732 .19542296 
Schaffer R. ; Ramsay N. ; Samach A. ; Corden S. ; Putterill J. ; Carre I. A. ; Coupland G.  (1998 ) The late elongated hypocotyl mutation of Arabidopsis disrupts circadian rhythms
and the photoperiodic control of flowering . Cell 
93 , 1219 –1229 .9657154 
Wang Z. Y. ; Tobin E. M.  (1998 ) Constitutive expression
of the CIRCADIAN CLOCK
ASSOCIATED 1 (CCA1) gene disrupts circadian
rhythms and suppresses its own expression . Cell 
93 , 1207 –1217 .9657153 
Strayer C. ; Oyama T. ; Schultz T. F. ; Raman R. ; Somers D. E. ; Mas P. ; Panda S. ; Kreps J. A. ; Kay S. A.  (2000 ) Cloning of the Arabidopsis clock gene TOC1, an autoregulatory
response regulator homolog . Science 
289 , 768 –771 .10926537 
Alabadi D. ; Oyama T. ; Yanovsky M. J. ; Harmon F. G. ; Mas P. ; Kay S. A.  (2001 ) Reciprocal regulation
between TOC1 and LHY/CCA1 within the Arabidopsis circadian clock . Science 
293 , 880 –883 .11486091 
Xie Q. ; Wang P. ; Liu X. ; Yuan L. ; Wang L. ; Zhang C. ; Li Y. ; Xing H. ; Zhi L. ; Yue Z. ; Zhao C. ; McClung C. R. ; Xu X.  (2014 ) LNK1 and LNK2 are transcriptional
coactivators in the Arabidopsis circadian oscillator . Plant Cell 
26 , 2843 –2857 .25012192 
Rugnone M. L. ; Faigon Soverna A. ; Sanchez S. E. ; Schlaen R. G. ; Hernando C. E. ; Seymour D. K. ; Mancini E. ; Chernomoretz A. ; Weigel D. ; Mas P. ; Yanovsky M. J.  (2013 ) LNK genes integrate light and clock signaling networks at the core of
the Arabidopsis oscillator . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
110 , 12120 –12125 .23818596 
Hsu P. Y. ; Devisetty U. K. ; Harmer S. L.  (2013 ) Accurate timekeeping is controlled
by a cycling activator in Arabidopsis . Elife 
2 , e00473 .23638299 
Wang Y. ; Wu J. F. ; Nakamichi N. ; Sakakibara H. ; Nam H. G. ; Wu S. H.  (2011 ) LIGHT-REGULATED
WD1 and PSEUDO-RESPONSE
REGULATOR9 form a positive feedback regulatory loop in the Arabidopsis circadian clock . Plant
Cell 
23 , 486 –498 .21357491 
Farré E. M. ; Harmer S. L. ; Harmon F. G. ; Yanovsky M. J. ; Kay S. A.  (2005 ) Overlapping
and distinct roles of PRR7 and PRR9 in the Arabidopsis circadian clock . Curr. Biol. 
15 , 47 –54 .15649364 
Nakamichi N. ; Kita M. ; Niinuma K. ; Ito S. ; Yamashino T. ; Mizoguchi T. ; Mizuno T.  (2007 ) Arabidopsis clock-associated pseudo-response regulators PRR9, PRR7 and PRR5
coordinately and positively regulate flowering time through the canonical
CONSTANS-dependent photoperiodic pathway . Plant
Cell Physiol. 
48 , 822 –832 .17504813 
Doyle M. R. ; Davis S. J. ; Bastow R. M. ; McWatters H. G. ; Kozma-Bognar L. ; Nagy F. ; Millar A. J. ; Amasino R. M.  (2002 ) The ELF4
gene controls circadian rhythms and flowering time in Arabidopsis
thaliana . Nature 
419 , 74 –77 .12214234 
Hazen S. P. ; Schultz T. F. ; Pruneda-Paz J. L. ; Borevitz J. O. ; Ecker J. R. ; Kay S. A.  (2005 ) LUX ARRHYTHMO encodes a Myb domain
protein essential for circadian rhythms . Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
102 , 10387 –10392 .16006522 
Mizoguchi T. ; Wright L. ; Fujiwara S. ; Cremer F. ; Lee K. ; Onouchi H. ; Mouradov A. ; Fowler S. ; Kamada H. ; Putterill J. ; Coupland G.  (2005 ) Distinct roles of GIGANTEA in promoting flowering and regulating circadian rhythms in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 
17 , 2255 –2270 .16006578 
Lau O. S. ; Huang X. ; Charron J. B. ; Lee J. H. ; Li G. ; Deng X. W.  (2011 ) Interaction
of Arabidopsis DET1 with
CCA1 and LHY in mediating transcriptional repression in the plant
circadian clock . Mol. Cell 
43 , 703 –712 .21884973 
Nakamichi N. ; Kiba T. ; Henriques R. ; Mizuno T. ; Chua N.-H. ; Sakakibara H.  (2010 ) PSEUDO-RESPONSE
REGULATORS 9, 7, and 5 are transcriptional
repressors in the Arabidopsis circadian clock . Plant Cell 
22 , 594 –605 .20233950 
Wang L. ; Kim J. ; Somers D. E.  (2013 ) Transcriptional corepressor TOPLESS complexes with
pseudoresponse regulator proteins and histone deacetylases to regulate
circadian transcription . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 
110 , 761 –766 .23267111 
Gendron J.
M. ; Pruneda-Paz J. L. ; Doherty C. J. ; Gross A. M. ; Kang S. E. ; Kay S. A.  (2012 ) Arabidopsis circadian clock protein,
TOC1, is a DNA-binding transcription factor . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
109 , 3167 –3172 .22315425 
Pruneda-Paz J. L. ; Breton G. ; Para A. ; Kay S. A.  (2009 ) A functional genomics
approach reveals CHE as a component of the Arabidopsis circadian clock . Science 
323 , 1481 –1485 .19286557 
Huang W. ; Perez-Garcia P. ; Pokhilko A. ; Millar A. J. ; Antoshechkin I. ; Riechmann J. L. ; Mas P.  (2012 ) Mapping the core of
the Arabidopsis circadian clock defines the network
structure of the oscillator . Science 
336 , 75 –79 .22403178 
Herrero E. ; Kolmos E. ; Bujdoso N. ; Yuan Y. ; Wang M. ; Berns M. C. ; Uhlworm H. ; Coupland G. ; Saini R. ; Jaskolski M. ; Webb A. ; Goncalves J. ; Davis S. J.  (2012 ) EARLY FLOWERING4
recruitment of EARLY FLOWERING3 in
the nucleus sustains the Arabidopsis circadian clock . Plant Cell 
24 , 428 –443 .22327739 
Helfer A. ; Nusinow D. A. ; Chow B. Y. ; Gehrke A. R. ; Bulyk M. L. ; Kay S. A.  (2011 ) LUX ARRHYTHMO encodes a nighttime
repressor of circadian gene expression in the Arabidopsis core clock . Curr. Biol. 
21 , 126 –133 .21236673 
Nusinow D. A. ; Helfer A. ; Hamilton E. E. ; King J. J. ; Imaizumi T. ; Schultz T. F. ; Farre E. M. ; Kay S. A.  (2011 ) The ELF4-ELF3-LUX
complex links the circadian clock to diurnal control of hypocotyl
growth . Nature 
475 , 398 –402 .21753751 
Chow B. Y. ; Helfer A. ; Nusinow D. A. ; Kay S. A.  (2012 ) ELF3 recruitment
to the PRR9 promoter requires other evening complex
members in the Arabidopsis circadian clock . Plant Signaling Behav. 
7 , 170 –173 .
Li G. ; Siddiqui H. ; Teng Y. ; Lin R. ; Wan X. Y. ; Li J. ; Lau O. S. ; Ouyang X. ; Dai M. ; Wan J. ; Devlin P. F. ; Deng X. W. ; Wang H.  (2011 ) Coordinated transcriptional
regulation underlying the circadian clock in Arabidopsis . Nat. Cell Biol. 
13 , 616 –622 .21499259 
Wu J. F. ; Wang Y. ; Wu S. H.  (2008 ) Two new clock proteins,
LWD1 and
LWD2, regulate Arabidopsis photoperiodic flowering . Plant Physiol. 
148 , 948 –959 .18676661 
Rawat R. ; Takahashi N. ; Hsu P. Y. ; Jones M. A. ; Schwartz J. ; Salemi M. R. ; Phinney B. S. ; Harmer S. L.  (2011 ) REVEILLE8 and PSEUDO-REPONSE
REGULATOR5 form a negative feedback loop within the Arabidopsis circadian
clock . PLoS Genet. 
7 , e1001350 .21483796 
Harmer S. L. ; Kay S. A.  (2005 ) Positive and negative factors confer phase-specific
circadian regulation of transcription in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 
17 , 1926 –1940 .15923346 
Nakamichi N. ; Kiba T. ; Kamioka M. ; Suzuki T. ; Yamashino T. ; Higashiyama T. ; Sakakibara H. ; Mizuno T.  (2012 ) Transcriptional repressor
PRR5 directly regulates clock-output pathways . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
109 , 17123 –17128 .23027938 
Cui Z. ; Xu Q. ; Wang X.  (2014 ) Regulation of the circadian clock through pre-mRNA
splicing in Arabidopsis . J.
Exp. Bot. 
65 , 1973 –1980 .24604736 
Wahl M. C. ; Will C. L. ; Luhrmann R.  (2009 ) The spliceosome:
Design principles
of a dynamic RNP machine . Cell 
136 , 701 –718 .19239890 
Petrillo E. ; Sanchez S. E. ; Kornblihtt A. R. ; Yanovsky M. J.  (2011 ) Alternative splicing
adds a new loop to the circadian clock . Commun.
Integr. Biol. 
4 , 284 –286 .21980559 
Sanchez S.
E. ; Petrillo E. ; Beckwith E. J. ; Zhang X. ; Rugnone M. L. ; Hernando C. E. ; Cuevas J. C. ; Godoy Herz M. A. ; Depetris-Chauvin A. ; Simpson C. G. ; Brown J. W. ; Cerdan P. D. ; Borevitz J. O. ; Mas P. ; Ceriani M. F. ; Kornblihtt A. R. ; Yanovsky M. J.  (2010 ) A methyl transferase
links the circadian clock to the
regulation of alternative splicing . Nature 
468 , 112 –116 .20962777 
Deng X. ; Gu L. ; Liu C. ; Lu T. ; Lu F. ; Lu Z. ; Cui P. ; Pei Y. ; Wang B. ; Hu S. ; Cao X.  (2010 ) Arginine methylation
mediated by the Arabidopsis homolog of PRMT5 is essential
for proper pre-mRNA splicing . Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 
107 , 19114 –19119 .20956294 
Hong S. ; Song H. R. ; Lutz K. ; Kerstetter R. A. ; Michael T. P. ; McClung C. R.  (2010 ) Type II protein
arginine methyltransferase
5 (PRMT5) is required for circadian period determination in Arabidopsis thaliana . Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
107 , 21211 –21216 .21097700 
Wang X. ; Wu F. ; Xie Q. ; Wang H. ; Wang Y. ; Yue Y. ; Gahura O. ; Ma S. ; Liu L. ; Cao Y. ; Jiao Y. ; Puta F. ; McClung C. R. ; Xu X. ; Ma L.  (2012 ) SKIP is a component of the spliceosome linking alternative splicing
and the circadian clock in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 
24 , 3278 –3295 .22942380 
Jones M. A. ; Williams B. A. ; McNicol J. ; Simpson C. G. ; Brown J. W. ; Harmer S. L.  (2012 ) Mutation of Arabidopsis spliceosomal
timekeeper locus1 causes circadian clock defects . Plant Cell 
24 , 4066 –4082 .23110899 
Seo P. J. ; Park M. J. ; Lim M. H. ; Kim S. G. ; Lee M. ; Baldwin I. T. ; Park C. M.  (2012 ) A self-regulatory
circuit of CIRCADIAN
CLOCK-ASSOCIATED1 underlies the circadian clock regulation of temperature
responses in Arabidopsis . Plant
Cell 
24 , 2427 –2442 .22715042 
James A. B. ; Syed N. H. ; Bordage S. ; Marshall J. ; Nimmo G. A. ; Jenkins G. I. ; Herzyk P. ; Brown J. W. S. ; Nimmo H. G.  (2012 ) Alternative
splicing mediates responses of the Arabidopsis circadian
clock to temperature changes . Plant Cell 
24 , 961 –981 .22408072 
Seo P. J. ; Mas P.  (2014 ) Multiple layers of
posttranslational regulation refine circadian
clock activity in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 
26 , 79 –87 .24481076 
Kim W. Y. ; Geng R. ; Somers D. E.  (2003 ) Circadian
phase-specific degradation
of the F-box protein ZTL is mediated by the proteasome . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
100 , 4933 –4938 .12665620 
van
Ooijen G. ; Dixon L. E. ; Troein C. ; Millar A. J.  (2011 ) Proteasome
function is required for biological timing throughout the twenty-four
hour cycle . Curr. Biol. 
21 , 869 –875 .21530263 
Sugano S. ; Andronis C. ; Green R. M. ; Wang Z. Y. ; Tobin E. M.  (1998 ) Protein
kinase CK2 interacts with and phosphorylates the Arabidopsis circadian clock-associated 1 protein . Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
95 , 11020 –11025 .9724822 
Portoles S. ; Mas P.  (2010 ) The functional interplay between protein kinase CK2 and CCA1 transcriptional
activity is essential for clock temperature compensation in Arabidopsis . PLoS Genet. 
6 , e1001201 .21079791 
Perales M. ; Portoles S. ; Mas P.  (2006 ) The proteasome-dependent
degradation
of CKB4 is regulated by the Arabidopsis biological clock . Plant J. 
46 , 849 –860 .16709199 
O’Neill J. S. ; van Ooijen G. ; Dixon L. E. ; Troein C. ; Corellou F. ; Bouget F. Y. ; Reddy A. B. ; Millar A. J.  (2011 ) Circadian rhythms
persist without transcription in a eukaryote . Nature 
469 , 554 –558 .21270895 
Mas P. ; Kim W. Y. ; Somers D. E. ; Kay S. A.  (2003 ) Targeted degradation
of TOC1 by ZTL modulates circadian function in Arabidopsis
thaliana . Nature 
426 , 567 –570 .14654842 
Ito S. ; Song Y. H. ; Imaizumi T.  (2012 ) LOV domain-containing F-box proteins:
Light-dependent protein degradation modules in Arabidopsis . Mol. Plant 
5 , 573 –582 .22402262 
Kiba T. ; Henriques R. ; Sakakibara H. ; Chua N. H.  (2007 ) Targeted degradation
of PSEUDO-RESPONSE REGULATOR5 by an SCFZTL complex regulates
clock function and photomorphogenesis in Arabidopsis thaliana . Plant Cell 
19 , 2516 –2530 .17693530 
Kim W. Y. ; Fujiwara S. ; Suh S. S. ; Kim J. ; Kim Y. ; Han L. ; David K. ; Putterill J. ; Nam H. G. ; Somers D. E.  (2007 ) ZEITLUPE
is a circadian photoreceptor stabilized by GIGANTEA in blue light . Nature 
449 , 356 –360 .17704763 
Kim J. ; Geng R. ; Gallenstein R. A. ; Somers D. E.  (2013 ) The F-box protein
ZEITLUPE controls stability and nucleocytoplasmic partitioning of
GIGANTEA . Development 
140 , 4060 –4069 .24004949 
Baudry A. ; Ito S. ; Song Y. H. ; Strait A. A. ; Kiba T. ; Lu S. ; Henriques R. ; Pruneda-Paz J. L. ; Chua N. H. ; Tobin E. M. ; Kay S. A. ; Imaizumi T.  (2010 ) F-box proteins FKF1 and LKP2 act
in concert with ZEITLUPE to control Arabidopsis clock
progression . Plant Cell 
22 , 606 –622 .20354196 
Fujiwara S. ; Wang L. ; Han L. ; Suh S. S. ; Salome P. A. ; McClung C. R. ; Somers D. E.  (2008 ) Post-translational
regulation of
the Arabidopsis circadian clock through selective
proteolysis and phosphorylation of pseudo-response regulator proteins . J. Biol. Chem. 
283 , 23073 –23083 .18562312 
Para A. ; Farre E. M. ; Imaizumi T. ; Pruneda-Paz J. L. ; Harmon F. G. ; Kay S. A.  (2007 ) PRR3 is a vascular regulator of TOC1
stability in the Arabidopsis circadian clock . Plant Cell 
19 , 3462 –3473 .18055606 
Wang L. ; Fujiwara S. ; Somers D. E.  (2010 ) PRR5 regulates phosphorylation, nuclear
import and subnuclear localization of TOC1 in the Arabidopsis circadian
clock . EMBO J. 
29 , 1903 –1915 .20407420 
Yu J. W. ; Rubio V. ; Lee N. Y. ; Bai S. ; Lee S. Y. ; Kim S. S. ; Liu L. ; Zhang Y. ; Irigoyen M. L. ; Sullivan J. A. ; Zhang Y. ; Lee I. ; Xie Q. ; Paek N. C. ; Deng X. W.  (2008 ) COP1 and ELF3 control circadian function
and photoperiodic flowering by regulating GI stability . Mol. Cell 
32 , 617 –630 .19061637 
Park B. S. ; Eo H. J. ; Jang I.-C. ; Kang H.-G. ; Song J. T. ; Seo H. S.  (2010 ) Ubiquitination of LHY by SINAT5 regulates flowering
time and is inhibited by DET1 . Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 
398 , 242 –246 .20599732 
Cui X. ; Lu F. ; Li Y. ; Xue Y. ; Kang Y. ; Zhang S. ; Qiu Q. ; Cui X. ; Zheng S. ; Liu B. ; Xu X. ; Cao X.  (2013 ) Ubiquitin-specific
proteases UBP12 and UBP13 act in circadian clock
and photoperiodic flowering regulation in Arabidopsis . Plant Physiol. 
162 , 897 –906 .23645632 
Wigge P. A.  (2011 ) FT, a mobile
developmental signal in plants . Curr. Biol. 
21 , R374 –R378 .21549960 
Song Y. H. ; Ito S. ; Imaizumi T.  (2013 ) Flowering
time regulation: Photoperiod- and temperature-sensing
in leaves . Trends Plant Sci. 
18 , 575 –583 .23790253 
Liu L. ; Zhu Y. ; Shen L. ; Yu H.  (2013 ) Emerging insights into
florigen transport . Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 
16 , 607 –613 .23810436 
Corbesier L. ; Vincent C. ; Jang S. ; Fornara F. ; Fan Q. ; Searle I. ; Giakountis A. ; Farrona S. ; Gissot L. ; Turnbull C. ; Coupland G.  (2007 ) FT protein
movement contributes to
long-distance signaling in floral induction of Arabidopsis . Science 
316 , 1030 –1033 .17446353 
Pin P. A. ; Nilsson O.  (2012 ) The multifaceted roles of FLOWERING LOCUS T in plant
development . Plant, Cell Environ. 
35 , 1742 –1755 .22697796 
Suarez-Lopez P. ; Wheatley K. ; Robson F. ; Onouchi H. ; Valverde F. ; Coupland G.  (2001 ) CONSTANS mediates between the circadian
clock and the control of flowering in Arabidopsis . Nature 
410 , 1116 –1120 .11323677 
Song Y. H. ; Ito S. ; Imaizumi T.  (2013 ) Flowering time regulation: Photoperiod- and temperature-sensing
in leaves . Trends Plant Sci. 
18 , 575 –583 .23790253 
Giakountis A. ; Coupland G.  (2008 ) Phloem transport of flowering signals . Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 
11 , 687 –694 .18977685 
Pin P. A. ; Nilsson O.  (2012 ) The multifaceted
roles of FLOWERING LOCUS T in plant
development . Plant, Cell Environ. 
35 , 1742 –1755 .22697796 
Imaizumi T. ; Tran H. G. ; Swartz T. E. ; Briggs W. R. ; Kay S. A.  (2003 ) FKF1 is
essential for photoperiodic-specific light signalling in Arabidopsis . Nature 
426 , 302 –306 .14628054 
Imaizumi T. ; Schultz T. F. ; Harmon F. G. ; Ho L. A. ; Kay S. A.  (2005 ) FKF1 F-box
protein mediates cyclic degradation of a repressor of CONSTANS in Arabidopsis . Science 
309 , 293 –297 .16002617 
Sawa M. ; Nusinow D. A. ; Kay S. A. ; Imaizumi T.  (2007 ) FKF1 and GIGANTEA complex
formation is required for day-length measurement in Arabidopsis . Science 
318 , 261 –265 .17872410 
Song Y. H. ; Smith R. W. ; To B. J. ; Millar A. J. ; Imaizumi T.  (2012 ) FKF1 conveys
timing information for CONSTANS stabilization in photoperiodic flowering . Science 
336 , 1045 –1049 .22628657 
Fornara F. ; Panigrahi K. C. S. ; Gissot L. ; Sauerbrunn N. ; Rühl M. ; Jarillo J. A. ; Coupland G.  (2009 ) Arabidopsis DOF transcription factors act redundantly to reduce CONSTANS expression
and are essential for a photoperiodic flowering response . Dev. Cell 
17 , 75 –86 .19619493 
Mizoguchi T. ; Wright L. ; Fujiwara S. ; Cremer F. ; Lee K. ; Onouchi H. ; Mouradov A. ; Fowler S. ; Kamada H. ; Putterill J. ; Coupland G.  (2005 ) Distinct roles of GIGANTEA in promoting flowering and regulating circadian rhythms in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 
17 , 2255 –2270 .16006578 
Ito S. ; Song Y. H. ; Josephson-Day A. R. ; Miller R. J. ; Breton G. ; Olmstead R. G. ; Imaizumi T.  (2012 ) FLOWERING BHLH transcriptional activators
control expression of the photoperiodic flowering regulator CONSTANS in Arabidopsis . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
109 , 3582 –3587 .22334645 
Chen M. ; Ni M.  (2006 ) RFI2, a RING-domain zinc finger protein, negatively regulates CONSTANS
expression and photoperiodic flowering . Plant
J. 
46 , 823 –833 .16709197 
Yoo S. Y. ; Kim Y. ; Kim S. Y. ; Lee J. S. ; Ahn J. H.  (2007 ) Control of flowering
time and cold response by a NAC-domain protein in Arabidopsis . PLoS One 
2 , e642 .17653269 
Kim J. ; Kim Y. ; Yeom M. ; Kim J.-H. ; Nam H. G.  (2008 ) FIONA1 is essential
for regulating period length in the Arabidopsis circadian
clock . Plant Cell 
20 , 307 –319 .18281507 
Morris K. ; Thornber S. ; Codrai L. ; Richardson C. ; Craig A. ; Sadanandom A. ; Thomas B. ; Jackson S.  (2010 ) DAY
NEUTRAL FLOWERING represses CONSTANS to
prevent Arabidopsis flowering early in short days . Plant Cell 
22 , 1118 –1128 .20435904 
Steinbach Y. ; Hennig L.  (2014 ) Arabidopsis MSI1 functions in photoperiodic flowering
time control . Front. Plant Sci. 
5 , 77 .24639681 
Hara M. ; Kamada H. ; Mizoguchi T.  (2014 ) CO-EXPRESSED WITH CLOCK GENES
LHY AND CCA1 1 (CEC1) is regulated by LHY
and CCA1 and plays a key role in phase setting of GI in Arabidopsis thaliana . Plant Biotechnol. 
31 , 35 –41 .
Laubinger S. ; Marchal V. ; Le Gourrierec J. ; Wenkel S. ; Adrian J. ; Jang S. ; Kulajta C. ; Braun H. ; Coupland G. ; Hoecker U.  (2006 ) Arabidopsis SPA proteins regulate
photoperiodic flowering and interact with the floral inducer CONSTANS
to regulate its stability . Development 
133 , 3213 –3222 .16854975 
Jang S. ; Marchal V. ; Panigrahi K. C. ; Wenkel S. ; Soppe W. ; Deng X. W. ; Valverde F. ; Coupland G.  (2008 ) Arabidopsis COP1 shapes the temporal
pattern of CO accumulation conferring a
photoperiodic flowering response . EMBO J. 
27 , 1277 –1288 .18388858 
Liu L.-J. ; Zhang Y.-C. ; Li Q.-H. ; Sang Y. ; Mao J. ; Lian H.-L. ; Wang L. ; Yang H.-Q.  (2008 ) COP1-mediated ubiquitination
of CONSTANS is implicated in cryptochrome regulation of flowering
in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 
20 , 292 –306 .18296627 
Lazaro A. ; Valverde F. ; Pineiro M. ; Jarillo J. A.  (2012 ) The Arabidopsis E3 ubiquitin ligase
HOS1 negatively regulates CONSTANS abundance
in the photoperiodic control of flowering . Plant
Cell 
24 , 982 –999 .22408073 
Valverde F. ; Mouradov A. ; Soppe W. ; Ravenscroft D. ; Samach A. ; Coupland G.  (2004 ) Photoreceptor regulation
of CONSTANS
protein in photoperiodic flowering . Science 
303 , 1003 –1006 .14963328 
Endo M. ; Tanigawa Y. ; Murakami T. ; Araki T. ; Nagatani A.  (2013 ) PHYTOCHROME-DEPENDENT
LATE-FLOWERING accelerates flowering through physical interactions
with phytochrome B and CONSTANS . Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
110 , 18017 –18022 .24127609 
Zuo Z. ; Liu H. ; Liu B. ; Liu X. ; Lin C.  (2011 ) Blue light-dependent
interaction of CRY2 with SPA1 regulates COP1 activity and floral initiation
in Arabidopsis . Curr. Biol. 
21 , 841 –847 .21514160 
Lian H. L. ; He S. B. ; Zhang Y. C. ; Zhu D. M. ; Zhang J. Y. ; Jia K. P. ; Sun S. X. ; Li L. ; Yang H. Q.  (2011 ) Blue-light-dependent
interaction of cryptochrome 1 with SPA1 defines a dynamic signaling
mechanism . Genes Dev. 
25 , 1023 –1028 .21511872 
Liu B. ; Zuo Z. ; Liu H. ; Liu X. ; Lin C.  (2011 ) Arabidopsis cryptochrome 1 interacts with SPA1 to suppress COP1 activity in
response to blue light . Genes Dev. 
25 , 1029 –1034 .21511871 
Li D. ; Liu C. ; Shen L. ; Wu Y. ; Chen H. ; Robertson M. ; Helliwell C. A. ; Ito T. ; Meyerowitz E. ; Yu H.  (2008 ) A repressor complex governs the integration
of flowering signals
in Arabidopsis . Dev. Cell 
15 , 110 –120 .18606145 
Gu X. ; Le C. ; Wang Y. ; Li Z. ; Jiang D. ; Wang Y. ; He Y.  (2013 ) Arabidopsis FLC clade members form flowering-repressor
complexes coordinating responses to endogenous and environmental cues . Nat. Commun. 
4 , 1947 .23770815 
Wang Y. ; Gu X. ; Yuan W. ; Schmitz R. J. ; He Y.  (2014 ) Photoperiodic control
of the floral transition through a distinct polycomb repressive complex . Dev. Cell 
28 , 727 –736 .24613395 
Castillejo C. ; Pelaz S.  (2008 ) The balance between CONSTANS and TEMPRANILLO activities determines FT expression to trigger flowering . Curr. Biol. 
18 , 1338 –1343 .18718758 
Mathieu J. ; Yant L. J. ; Murdter F. ; Kuttner F. ; Schmid M.  (2009 ) Repression
of flowering by the miR172 target SMZ . PLoS
Biol. 
7 , e1000148 .19582143 
Spanudakis E. ; Jackson S.  (2014 ) The role of microRNAs
in the control
of flowering time . J. Exp. Bot. 
65 , 365 –380 .24474808 
Wu G. ; Park M. Y. ; Conway S. R. ; Wang J. W. ; Weigel D. ; Poethig R. S.  (2009 ) The sequential action
of miR156 and miR172 regulates
developmental timing in Arabidopsis . Cell 
138 , 750 –759 .19703400 
Jung J. H. ; Seo Y. H. ; Seo P. J. ; Reyes J. L. ; Yun J. ; Chua N. H. ; Park C. M.  (2007 ) The GIGANTEA-regulated
microRNA172 mediates photoperiodic flowering independent of CONSTANS in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 
19 , 2736 –2748 .17890372 
Liu H. ; Wang Q. ; Liu Y. ; Zhao X. ; Imaizumi T. ; Somers D. E. ; Tobin E. M. ; Lin C.  (2013 ) Arabidopsis CRY2 and ZTL mediate blue-light regulation of the transcription
factor CIB1 by distinct mechanisms . Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
110 , 17582 –17587 .24101505 
Liu H. ; Yu X. ; Li K. ; Klejnot J. ; Yang H. ; Lisiero D. ; Lin C.  (2008 ) Photoexcited CRY2 interacts with
CIB1 to regulate transcription and floral initiation in Arabidopsis . Science 
322 , 1535 –1539 .18988809 
Putterill J. ; Robson F. ; Lee K. ; Simon R. ; Coupland G.  (1995 ) The CONSTANS gene of Arabidopsis promotes flowering
and encodes a protein showing similarities to zinc finger transcription
factors . Cell 
80 , 847 –857 .7697715 
Tiwari S. B. ; Shen Y. ; Chang H. C. ; Hou Y. ; Harris A. ; Ma S. F. ; McPartland M. ; Hymus G. J. ; Adam L. ; Marion C. ; Belachew A. ; Repetti P. P. ; Reuber T. L. ; Ratcliffe O. J.  (2010 ) The flowering
time regulator CONSTANS is recruited to the FLOWERING LOCUS T promoter
via a unique cis-element . New Phytol. 
187 , 57 –66 .20406410 
Wenkel S. ; Turck F. ; Singer K. ; Gissot L. ; Le Gourrierec J. ; Samach A. ; Coupland G.  (2006 ) CONSTANS and
the CCAAT
box binding complex share a functionally important domain and interact
to regulate flowering of Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 
18 , 2971 –2984 .17138697 
Cao S. ; Kumimoto R. W. ; Gnesutta N. ; Calogero A. M. ; Mantovani R. ; Holt B. F. III (2014 ) A distal CCAAT/NUCLEAR FACTOR Y complex
promotes chromatin looping at the FLOWERING LOCUS T promoter and regulates the timing of flowering in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 
26 , 1009 –1017 .24610724 
Niwa Y. ; Yamashino T. ; Mizuno T.  (2009 ) The circadian clock
regulates the photoperiodic response of hypocotyl elongation through
a coincidence mechanism in Arabidopsis thaliana . Plant Cell Physiol. 
50 , 838 –854 .19233867 
Nozue K. ; Covington M. F. ; Duek P. D. ; Lorrain S. ; Fankhauser C. ; Harmer S. L. ; Maloof J. N.  (2007 ) Rhythmic growth
explained by coincidence between internal and external cues . Nature 
448 , 358 –361 .17589502 
Nomoto Y. ; Kubozono S. ; Yamashino T. ; Nakamichi N. ; Mizuno T.  (2012 ) Circadian clock- and PIF4-controlled
plant growth: A coincidence mechanism directly integrates a hormone
signaling network into the photoperiodic control of plant architectures
in Arabidopsis thaliana . Plant
Cell Physiol. 
53 , 1950 –1964 .23037003 
de Lucas M. ; Prat S.  (2014 ) PIFs get BRright:
PHYTOCHROME INTERACTING
FACTORs as integrators of light and hormonal signals . New Phytol. 
202 , 1126 –1141 .24571056 
Kunihiro A. ; Yamashino T. ; Nakamichi N. ; Niwa Y. ; Nakanishi H. ; Mizuno T.  (2011 ) Phytochrome-interacting
factor 4 and 5 (PIF4 and PIF5) activate the homeobox ATHB2 and auxin-inducible IAA29 genes in the coincidence
mechanism underlying photoperiodic control of plant growth of Arabidopsis thaliana . Plant Cell Physiol. 
52 , 1315 –1329 .21666227 
Lorrain S. ; Allen T. ; Duek P. D. ; Whitelam G. C. ; Fankhauser C.  (2008 ) Phytochrome-mediated inhibition of
shade avoidance
involves degradation of growth-promoting bHLH transcription factors . Plant J. 
53 , 312 –323 .18047474 
Yamashino T. ; Nomoto Y. ; Lorrain S. ; Miyachi M. ; Ito S. ; Nakamichi N. ; Fankhauser C. ; Mizuno T.  (2013 ) Verification at the
protein level of the PIF4-mediated external coincidence model for
the temperature-adaptive photoperiodic control of plant growth in Arabidopsis thaliana . Plant Signaling
Behav. 
8 , e23390 .
de Lucas M. ; Daviere J. M. ; Rodriguez-Falcon M. ; Pontin M. ; Iglesias-Pedraz J. M. ; Lorrain S. ; Fankhauser C. ; Blazquez M. A. ; Titarenko E. ; Prat S.  (2008 ) A molecular framework
for light and gibberellin control of cell elongation . Nature 
451 , 480 –484 .18216857 
Arana M. V. ; Marín-de la Rosa N. ; Maloof J. N. ; Blázquez M. A. ; Alabadí D.  (2011 ) Circadian oscillation of gibberellin
signaling in Arabidopsis . Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
108 , 9292 –9297 .21576475 
Gapper C. ; Dolan L.  (2006 ) Control of plant development by reactive
oxygen species . Plant Physiol. 
141 , 341 –345 .16760485 
Mhamdi A. ; Queval G. ; Chaouch S. ; Vanderauwera S. ; Van Breusegem F. ; Noctor G.  (2010 ) Catalase function in
plants: A focus
on Arabidopsis mutants as stress-mimic models . J. Exp. Bot. 
61 , 4197 –4220 .20876333 
Baxter A. ; Mittler R. ; Suzuki N.  (2014 ) ROS as key players
in plant stress signalling . J. Exp. Bot. 
65 , 1229 –1240 .24253197 
Pekovic-Vaughan V. ; Gibbs J. ; Yoshitane H. ; Yang N. ; Pathiranage D. ; Guo B. ; Sagami A. ; Taguchi K. ; Bechtold D. ; Loudon A. ; Yamamoto M. ; Chan J. ; van der Horst G. T. J. ; Fukada Y. ; Meng Q.-J.  (2014 ) The circadian
clock regulates rhythmic activation of the NRF2/glutathione-mediated
antioxidant defense pathway to modulate pulmonary fibrosis . Genes Dev. 
28 , 548 –560 .24637114 
O’Neill J. S. ; Reddy A. B.  (2011 ) Circadian clocks in human red blood
cells . Nature 
469 , 498 –503 .21270888 
Edgar R. S. ; Green E. W. ; Zhao Y. ; van Ooijen G. ; Olmedo M. ; Qin X. ; Xu Y. ; Pan M. ; Valekunja U. K. ; Feeney K. A. ; Maywood E. S. ; Hastings M. H. ; Baliga N. S. ; Merrow M. ; Millar A. J. ; Johnson C. H. ; Kyriacou C. P. ; O’Neill J. S. ; Reddy A. B.  (2012 ) Peroxiredoxins are
conserved markers of circadian rhythms . Nature 
485 , 459 –464 .22622569 
Wang T. A. ; Yu Y. V. ; Govindaiah G. ; Ye X. ; Artinian L. ; Coleman T. P. ; Sweedler J. V. ; Cox C. L. ; Gillette M. U.  (2012 ) Circadian rhythm of redox state regulates excitability
in suprachiasmatic nucleus neurons . Science 
337 , 839 –842 .22859819 
Hirayama J. ; Cho S. ; Sassone-Corsi P.  (2007 ) Circadian
control by the reduction/oxidation pathway: Catalase represses light-dependent
clock gene expression in the zebrafish . Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
104 , 15747 –15752 .17898172 
Lai A. G. ; Doherty C. J. ; Mueller-Roeber B. ; Kay S. A. ; Schippers J. H. ; Dijkwel P. P.  (2012 ) CIRCADIAN
CLOCK-ASSOCIATED 1 regulates ROS homeostasis and oxidative
stress responses . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
109 , 17129 –17134 .23027948 
Frugoli J. A. ; Zhong H. H. ; Nuccio M. L. ; McCourt P. ; McPeek M. A. ; Thomas T. L. ; McClung C. R.  (1996 ) Catalase
Is Encoded
by a Multigene Family in Arabidopsis thaliana (L.)
Heynh . Plant Physiol. 
112 , 327 –336 .8819328 
Loudet O. ; Michael T. P. ; Burger B. T. ; Le Metté C. ; Mockler T. C. ; Weigel D. ; Chory J.  (2008 ) A zinc knuckle protein
that negatively controls morning-specific growth in Arabidopsis
thaliana . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
105 , 17193 –17198 .18971337 
Lu D. ; Wang T. ; Persson S. ; Mueller-Roeber B. ; Schippers J. H.  (2014 ) Transcriptional control of ROS homeostasis
by KUODA1
regulates cell expansion during leaf development . Nat. Commun. 
5 , 3767 .24806884 
Ruts T. ; Matsubara S. ; Wiese-Klinkenberg A. ; Walter A.  (2012 ) Diel patterns of leaf and root growth:
Endogenous rhythmicity
or environmental response? . J. Exp. Bot. 
63 , 3339 –3351 .22223810 
Tsukagoshi H. ; Busch W. ; Benfey P. N.  (2010 ) Transcriptional
regulation of ROS controls transition from proliferation to differentiation
in the root . Cell 
143 , 606 –616 .21074051 
Spoel S. H. ; van Ooijen G.  (2014 ) Circadian redox signaling in plant
immunity and abiotic stress . Antioxid. Redox
Signaling 
20 , 3024 –3039 .
Shao N. ; Beck C. F. ; Lemaire S. D. ; Krieger-Liszkay A.  (2008 ) Photosynthetic
electron flow affects H2O2 signaling by inactivation
of catalase in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii . Planta 
228 , 1055 –1066 .18781324 
Hertwig B. ; Streb P. ; Feierabend J.  (1992 ) Light dependence
of catalase synthesis and degradation in leaves and the influence
of interfering stress conditions . Plant Physiol. 
100 , 1547 –1553 .16653156 
Becker B. ; Holtgrefe S. ; Jung S. ; Wunrau C. ; Kandlbinder A. ; Baier M. ; Dietz K. J. ; Backhausen J. E. ; Scheibe R.  (2006 ) Influence of the photoperiod on redox regulation and
stress responses in Arabidopsis thaliana L. (Heynh.)
plants under long- and short-day conditions . Planta 
224 , 380 –393 .16435132 
Queval G. ; Issakidis-Bourguet E. ; Hoeberichts F. A. ; Vandorpe M. ; Gakière B. ; Vanacker H. ; Miginiac-Maslow M. ; Van Breusegem F. ; Noctor G.  (2007 ) Conditional oxidative stress responses
in the Arabidopsis photorespiratory mutant cat2 demonstrate that redox state is a key modulator of
daylength-dependent gene expression, and define photoperiod as a crucial
factor in the regulation of H2O2-induced cell
death . Plant J. 
52 , 640 –657 .17877712 
Chaouch S. ; Queval G. ; Vanderauwera S. ; Mhamdi A. ; Vandorpe M. ; Langlois-Meurinne M. ; Van Breusegem F. ; Saindrenan P. ; Noctor G.  (2010 ) Peroxisomal hydrogen
peroxide is coupled to biotic defense responses by ISOCHORISMATE SYNTHASE1
in a daylength-related manner . Plant Physiol. 
153 , 1692 –1705 .20543092 
Mateo A. ; Muhlenbock P. ; Rusterucci C. ; Chang C. C. ; Miszalski Z. ; Karpinska B. ; Parker J. E. ; Mullineaux P. M. ; Karpinski S.  (2004 ) LESION
SIMULATING DISEASE 1 is required for acclimation to conditions
that promote excess excitation energy . Plant
Physiol. 
136 , 2818 –2830 .15347794 
Li Y. ; Chen L. ; Mu J. ; Zuo J.  (2013 ) LESION SIMULATING DISEASE1
interacts with catalases to regulate hypersensitive cell death in
Arabidopsis . Plant Physiol. 
163 , 1059 –1070 .23958864 
Ortiz-Marchena M. I. ; Albi T. ; Lucas-Reina E. ; Said F. E. ; Romero-Campero F. J. ; Cano B. ; Ruiz M. T. ; Romero J. M. ; Valverde F.  (2014 ) Photoperiodic control of carbon distribution
during the floral transition in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 
26 , 565 –584 .24563199 
Lu Y. ; Gehan J. P. ; Sharkey T. D.  (2005 ) Daylength and circadian effects on
starch degradation and maltose metabolism . Plant
Physiol. 
138 , 2280 –2291 .16055686 
Shrestha R. ; Gómez-Ariza J. ; Brambilla V. ; Fornara F.  (2014 ) Molecular control of seasonal flowering
in rice, arabidopsis
and temperate cereals . Ann. Bot. 
114 , 1445 –1458 .24651369 
Bohlenius H. ; Huang T. ; Charbonnel-Campaa L. ; Brunner A. M. ; Jansson S. ; Strauss S. H. ; Nilsson O.  (2006 ) CO/FT regulatory
module controls timing of flowering and seasonal growth cessation
in trees . Science 
312 , 1040 –1043 .16675663 
Kubota A. ; Kita S. ; Ishizaki K. ; Nishihama R. ; Yamato K. T. ; Kohchi T.  (2014 ) Co-option of a photoperiodic growth-phase
transition system during land plant evolution . Nat. Commun. 
5 , 3668 .24752248 



