The enzyme
isopropylmalate synthase
(IPMS) catalyzes the first step in the biosynthesis of l-leucine
in bacteria, archaea, and some eukaryotes. This pathway is absent
in mammals, making IPMS a possible target for the development of novel
antibiotic and antifungal therapeutics. IPMS also serves as a model system for the study of allosteric mechanisms,
as it is subject to allosteric feedback inhibition by l-leucine. The enzyme catalyzes a Claisen-like condensation
between α-ketoisovalerate (KIV) and acetyl-CoA (AcCoA) forming
α-isopropylmalate and CoA (Scheme ).
Structural studies show that IPMS utilizes a distinct active site
architecture to accomplish this type of chemistry when compared with
malate synthase and citrate synthase, which catalyze similar reactions. In fact, the
active site architecture exhibited by IPMS is more similar to a collection
of enzymes catalyzing a diverse set of reactions including 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA
(HMG-CoA) lyase, 2-hydroxy-4-ketovalerate aldolase, and pyruvate carboxylase
(Scheme ). It has been proposed that these
enzymes belong to a mechanistically diverse group known as the DRE-TIM
metallolyase superfamily, a group of evolutionarily related enzymes
that catalyze different reactions using distinct mechanisms.

Despite this diversity in function,
enzymes in a superfamily share
a common mechanistic aspect in the stabilization of an intermediate
mediated through a set of conserved residues. Members of the DRE-TIM metallolyase superfamily share a TIM-barrel
fold (Figure A), a D-R-E active site motif,
and rely on a divalent cation for activity. Catalytically, members
of this superfamily are hypothesized to stabilize an enolate intermediate
in their respective reactions using the conserved arginine in the
DRE motif (Scheme ). Additionally, several
characterized members of the superfamily respond to allosteric regulation., The active site architecture for the DRE-TIM metallolyase superfamily
is highlighted by a D-R-E motif composed of a well-conserved active
site α-helix containing the R and D residues adjacent to one
another (Figure B). The conserved glutamate
residue is found on an adjacent β sheet and is proposed to orient
the arginine residue. The aspartate acts as a ligand to a required
divalent cation along with two well-conserved histidine residues in
a HXH motif. At least one additional metal ligand in each enzyme is
provided by a substrate; however, the nature of the substrate–metal
interaction is not conserved.

(A) Ribbon diagram of the DRE-TIM metallolyase
catalytic domain
from MtIPMS (1pdb id: 1sr9()). Conserved active site
residues are shown as sticks. (B) Conserved active site architecture
of the DRE-TIM metallolyase superfamily. The superposition was created
using the Matchmaker algorithm in Chimera with the following pdb files: 1sr9, IPMS (tan); 1ydo, HMG-CoA lyase (blue); 2qf7, pyruvate carboxylase (pink); 1nvm, 4-hydroxy-2-ketovalerate
aldolase (green). Labels designate the residues of the DRE-motif,
the differentially conserved Q/X residue, and the HXH motif. The divalent
metal is also indicated.

While the aspartate and arginine residues have been subjected
to
site-directed mutagenesis in several DRE-TIM metallolyase superfamily
members,− they have not been investigated in IPMS. Recently, the active site
helix containing the conserved aspartate and arginine was implicated
as the target of an inhibitory allosteric signal in IPMS from Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MtIPMS), raising additional
questions about the role of the helix in catalysis and regulation
in this enzyme. To address these questions,
site-directed mutagenesis has been carried out on MtIPMS, and the
effects of substitutions on catalysis and regulation have been determined.

Analysis of the effects of residue substitution with respect to
other superfamily members provides a mechanism for the identification
of conserved catalytic strategies and characterization of structure/function
relationships responsible for differences in reactivity, substrate
selectivity, and regulation. Thus, parallel to the biochemistry studies,
a bioinformatics investigation of the DRE-TIM metallolyase superfamily
has been initiated and the results illustrated using sequence similarity
networks for the DRE-TIM metallolyase superfamily. Sequence similarity
networks have been successfully used to organize functionally diverse
enzyme superfamilies into subgroups and families of sequences representing
discrete reaction specificities. The
language of superfamily hierarchies used here is as follows: superfamily,
a set of evolutionary related enzymes that share a common mechanistic
step, such as stabilization of the same type of intermediate, but
whose overall reactions may be different; subgroup, a subset of a
superfamily whose members share more similarity in sequence with one
another than they do with proteins in other subgroups; family, a subset
of a subgroup whose members catalyze the same reaction in essentially
the same way. This organization allows for the rapid detection of
conserved residues at differing hierarchies within the superfamily.
For instance, more recently evolved residues (such as those conserved
at the subgroup or family level) may be critical specificity determinants
or provide information for unique regulatory mechanisms. Applying this methodology to the DRE-TIM metallolyase
superfamily provides insight into the conservation and diversity of
residues in the DRE active site helix and aids in teasing out differentially
conserved interactions in each reaction class.

Materials and Methods
Materials
Oligonucleotides for the mutagenesis of MtIPMS
were obtained from Eurofins MWG Operon (Huntsville, AL). Acetyl CoA
(AcCoA) and ketoisovalerate (KIV) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.
4,4′-Dithiodipyridine (DTP) was purchased from Acros Organics.
All other buffers and reagents were obtained from VWR or were of the
highest quality available. The HisTrap HP column was purchased from
GE Healthcare. Competent cells (BL21(DE3)pLysS and Top 10) were obtained
from Invitrogen.

MtIPMS Variant Construction and Purification
Wild type
MtIPMS and all variants reported here were constructed and isolated
as previously described. Briefly, QuikChange
Lightning site-directed mutagenesis (Stratagene) was used to create
point mutations in the pET28a(+)::leuA plasmid. Primers
used for mutagenesis are shown in Table S1 (). BL21(DE3)pLysS cells containing the plasmids
were grown in autoinduction media. Overexpressed proteins were purified
via metal affinity chromatography using a HisTrap HP column (5 mL).
Protein expression and purity were checked by SDS–PAGE analysis.
The peak fractions were pooled and dialyzed against 1 L of 20 mM triethanolamine
(TEA) (pH 7.8) and repeated three times. The protein was stored in
10% glycerol at −20 °C.

Enzymatic Assays
A typical reaction mixture contained
50 mM potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.5), 12 mM MgCl2,
50 μM DTP, and 5–10 times the Km value for the nonvaried substrate (AcCoA or KIV). Initial
velocities were determined using DTP to detect the formation of CoA
at 324 nm (ε = 19.8 mM–1 cm–1). Kinetic constants were determined by fitting the data to the Michaelis–Menten
equation (eq ) using Kaleidagraph (Synergy
Software), where v is the velocity, [E]t is the total enzyme concentration, [S] is the concentration of the
substrate being varied, Km is the Michaelis–Menten
constant, and kcat is the maximal velocity.

Inhibition Assays
Inhibition assays were performed
using a standard reaction mixture of 50 mM potassium phosphate buffer
(pH 7.5), 12 mM MgCl2, 50 μM DTP, 5–10 times
the Km value of the nonvaried substrate
(AcCoA or KIV), and varied concentrations of leucine (0–120
μM). Reactions were initiated by the addition of MtIPMS. For
assays that displayed nonlinear (biphasic) kinetics, the steady state
and final velocities were determined using eq , where [P]t is the total product formed (CoA) at time, t, [E]t is the total enzyme concentration, vi is the initial velocity, vf is the final velocity, t is time, kb is the exponential rate constant, and C is a constant. The inhibition
parameters were then determined by replotting the velocities versus
leucine concentration and fit to eq  (for Ki values) or eq  (for Ki* values) where Ki is the dissociation constant for the initial enzyme–inhibitor
complex, Ki* is the overall dissociation
constant for the two-step slow-onset mechanism, vi and vf are the initial and
final velocity, respectively, and β is the fractional velocity
at saturating concentrations of the inhibitor, I.

Sequence Similarity Network
Data Set Sources and Curation
Four structures representing
the known reaction diversity in the
DRE-TIM metallolyase superfamily (pdb_ids:1nvm,1rqb,3hq1, and 2qf7()) were used
as a starting point for identifying new homologous sequences through
a series of BLAST searches against UniRef100
(Uniprot Release 2012_02). All hits from
an initial BLAST search with an E-value less than
1 × 10–5 were kept. This new data set of 13230
sequences was filtered using HMMER 3.0 beta such that any sequence that did not score against the Pfam HMM for PF00682: HMGL-like was dropped. This
new data set (4889 unique sequences) was then filtered to 40% identity
using CD-HIT v4.5.6, resulting in 54
sequences which were used as a query against UniRef100 again (73764
hits) and filtered in the same manner to produce the final superfamily
set (8817 unique sequences).

Generation of Sequence Similarity Networks
Sequence
similarity networks were generated using the Pythoscape program. Briefly, the final superfamily set of proteins
(8817 unique sequences) were imported into a MySQL database and defined
as nodes. All-by-all Blast2seq runs were
performed to define edges between nodes, and this information was
uploaded into the MySQL database. Additional information associated
with the proteins, such as taxonomic information and pdb structures,
was mapped to the MySQL database through the Pythoscape interface.
A Cytoscape-readable xgmml file was exported
from Pythoscape to produce networks that could be explored interactively
using Cytoscape. Mapping the network nodes with additional data, such
as kinetic characterization data, was done within the Cytoscape program.

Because of the large number of edges at the superfamily level,
representative nodes and edges were required for visualization of
the full network in Cytoscape. A representative node was defined by
CD-HIT v4.5.6 as a cluster of sequences
sharing greater than 60% identity. Representative edges, defined here
as the mean BLAST E-value between the set of sequences
contained within two connected representative nodes, are shown only
if their BLAST scores have a statistical significance value less than
(better than) a user-defined E-value cutoff. (See
network figure legends for specific cutoffs used.)

Structure-Guided
Sequence Alignments
The best aligning
chains of MtIPMS (pdb_id: 3u6w()), LiCMS (3blf), and SpHCS (2zyf) from the Claisen condensation-like
(CC-like) subgroup were aligned using the Needleman–Wunsch
algorithm as implemented in the Matchmaker
program in Chimera. A multiple sequence alignment based on the structure alignment
was created through a companion program, Match → Align. The
sequence alignment was then refined by the eye using the aligned structures
as a guide. Sequence-based alignments of each cluster were generated
based on cluster membership using MAFFT, version 6.

Results
Steady State Kinetics
In order to investigate the catalytic
role of the active site helical residues, site-directed mutagenesis
was performed. All enzyme variants were characterized using circular
dichroism spectroscopy to ensure that substitutions did not affect
the overall fold of the enzyme (Figure S1, ). The kinetic parameters determined for the enzyme
variants are listed in Table . The substitutions
made to R80 and D81 abolished IPMS activity. However, D81A MtIPMS
has the ability to catalyze the hydrolysis of AcCoA producing acetate,
KIV, and free CoA (data not shown). In the absence of KIV, kinetic
parameters for the hydrolysis of AcCoA were determined (kcat = 4.6 ± 0.3 min–1 and KAcCoA = 283 ± 54 μM). The L79A variant
displayed a 60-fold decrease in kcat/KKIV when compared to that of the wild-type enzyme.
The N83A and Q84A variants displayed a 150–250-fold decrease
in kcat/KAcCoA., while the kcat/KKIV parameters are relatively unchanged. Q84A MtIPMS also exhibits
a 30-fold decrease in kcat. N83E MtIPMS
was determined to be inactive.

Kinetic Parameters
Determined for
MtIPMS Variants
enzyme	kcat (s–1)	KAcCoA (μM)	kcat/KAcCoA (μM –1 s–1)	KKIV (μM)	kcat/KKIV (μM –1 s–1)	
WT	3.4 ± 0.3	42 ± 12	0.08 ± 0.02	6.4 ± 1.4	0.50 ± 0.13	
L79A	1.0 ± 0.1	30 ± 5	0.03 ± 0.01	120 ± 30	0.008 ± 0.002	
R80A/K	nd	nd	nd	nd	nd	
D81A/H	nd	nd	nd	nd	nd	
N83A	0.31 ± 0.04	990 ± 290	0.0003 ± 0.0001	51 ± 14	0.006 ± 0.002	
N83E	nd	nd	nd	nd	nd	
Q84A	0.10 ± 0.02	170 ± 60	0.0006 ± 0.0002	19 ± 6	0.005 ± 0.002	
Determined using 4,4-dithiodipyridine
(DTP) to detect the formation of CoA at 324 nm (ε = 19.8 mM–1 cm–1) at 25 °C. Standard reaction
conditions consisted of 50 mM potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.5),
12 mM MgCl2, 50 μM DTP, and at least 5–10
times the Km value for the nonvaried substrate
(AcCoA or KIV).

Activity
could not be determined
above the detection limit of the assay.

Determined using 1 mM AcCoA.

Effect of Mutations on l-Leucine Inhibition
Kinetic assays were performed to determine the effect of l-leucine binding on the active enzyme variants. In the presence of l-leucine, all of the enzyme variants displayed slow-onset inhibition
kinetics (nonlinear biphasic progression curves) similar to the results
seen with the wild-type enzyme. Inhibition
parameters for two-step, slow-onset inhibitors are described by two
terms, Ki, which describes the inhibition
constant for the initial enzyme–inhibitor complex, and Ki*, which describes the overall inhibition constant
for the two-step inhibition mechanism. The initial and steady state velocities were determined by varying
concentrations of leucine (as described in the ) and fit to eqs  and  to determine the inhibition parameters Ki and Ki*, respectively (Figure
S2, ). Inhibition
parameters are shown in Table . There is no
drastic change in the values for the inhibition constants Ki and Ki* relative
to those determined with the wild-type enzyme.

Leucine Inhibition Parameters
enzyme	Ki (μM)	Ki* (μM)	β	
WT	12 ± 3	2.3 ± 0.2	0.1	
L79A	19 ± 3	4.0 ± 0.5	0	
N83A	8.3 ± 2.2	3.2 ± 0.5	0.2	
Q84A	13 ± 4	4.8 ± 0.5	0.04	
Determined using a standard reaction
mixture of 50 mM potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.5), 12 mM MgCl2, 50 μM DTP, 5–10 times the Km values of AcCoA and KIV, and varied concentrations of
leucine (0–120 μM).

Determined using 750 μM AcCoA.

Sequence Similarity Network for the DRE-TIM Metallolyase Superfamily
The overall sequence similarity network for representative members
of the DRE-TIM metallolyase superfamily (1261 representative nodes
representing 8817 unique sequences) is shown in Figure . Nodes represent sets of proteins sharing greater than 60%
identity and are colored if at least one protein in the node has been
annotated in Swiss-Prot with a functional
activity. Nodes shown as diamonds contain at least one sequence for
which a three-dimensional structure has been reported in the Protein
Databank. The vast majority of proteins
have not been biochemically characterized and are thus left as proteins
of unknown function (“unknowns”, uncolored nodes). Correct
annotation of these unknowns will require identification of their
specificity determinants and is beyond the scope of this work. Four
identifiable subgroups are defined based on clustering patterns and
characterized functions: Claisen condensation-like (CC-like), carboxylase-like,
lyase-like, and aldolase-like.

Representative sequence similarity network
for the DRE-TIM metallolyase
superfamily. Each node (1261 representative nodes) represents a group
of protein sequences sharing greater than 60% identity (8817 unique
sequences). Edges are drawn if the mean similarity between a pair
of nodes is less than an E-value threshold cutoff
of 1 × 10–26 (median alignment length = 379,
and median percent identity of pairwise comparisons = 29%). The network
is displayed using the organic layout in Cytoscape. Disconnected nodes
have been moved for clarity, as the distance between disconnected
nodes has no meaning in this layout. The relative sizes of the nodes
represent the number of sequences in the representative cluster (small
nodes, 1–9 sequences; medium nodes, 10–99 sequences;
large nodes, 100–208 sequences). Colored nodes represent sets
of proteins in which at least one protein has been annotated in Swiss-Prot
with a functional activity according to the inset color key. Conversely,
nodes are left uncolored if no protein has been reported to be characterized
in Swiss-Prot. Diamond shaped nodes contain at least one protein with
a solved crystal structure in the PDB. Dotted boxes display the four subgroups of the superfamily, as defined
by clustering patterns: HMG-CoA lyase-like, CC-like (comprising proteins
of the IPMS, homocitrate synthase, and citramalate synthase families,
along with unknowns), aldolase-like, and carboxylase-like.

Sequence Similarity Network for the Claisen
Condensation-Like
Subgroup
The 583 representative nodes (representing 4298
nonidentical proteins) of the CC-like subgroup defined in Figure  were selected for the creation of a new network
that includes all of the representative nodes of the subgroup and
subjected to a more stringent E-value cutoff filter
(Figure ). The edges shown in this figure
represent a mean pairwise alignment score for all-by-all comparisons
of these 4298 sequences that is better than an E-value
cutoff of 1 × 10–80, with a median percent
identity of 43% and a median alignment length of 377 residues. Analyses
of the sequences found in this network reveal enzymes with at least
six unique substrate specificities for the Claisen condensation reaction
with AcCoA (Scheme ). Representative nodes
in Figure  are colored on the basis of having
at least one protein reported to have in vitro characterization
of enzymatic activity for IPMS,− citramalate synthase (CMS),,, homocitrate synthase (HCS),, methylthiolalkylmalate
synthase (MAM), R-citrate synthase (R-CS), and 2-phosphinomethylmalic synthase (PMMS). A full table of characterized enzymes with Uniprot
identifiers is shown in Table S2 (). Functional assignments shown in Figure  are in good agreement with reported Swiss-Prot functional annotation
(Figure S3, ). The
largest cluster contains significant functional diversity, with IPMS,
CMS, MAM, and HCS activity represented. Interestingly, reported IPMS,
CMS, and HCS activities can be found in multiple clusters. This is
consistent with a report proposing multiple origins for IPMS and could be suggestive of additional functional
promiscuity.

Representative sequence similarity network for the CC-like
subgroup.
Each node (583 representative nodes) represents a group of protein
sequences sharing greater than 60% identity (4298 unique sequences).
Edges are drawn if the similarity between a pair of nodes is better
than an E-value threshold cutoff of 1 × 10–80 (median alignment length = 377, and median percent
identity of pairwise comparisons = 43%). Colored nodes represent sets
of proteins in which at least one protein has confirmed in
vitro activity according to the inset color key. Organism
names indicate which protein within the representative node has been
characterized. Conversely, nodes are left uncolored if no protein
has been reported to be characterized in the literature. Diamond shaped
nodes contain at least one protein with a solved crystal structure
in the PDB.

Discussion
Targeting evolutionarily conserved residues
for site-directed mutagenesis
is a common approach used to investigate the chemical mechanism and
specificity determinants of an enzyme. In light of the rapid increase
in genomic sequences available, the identification of “strictly”
conserved residues in a given enzyme is complicated by misannotation
in public databases and the identification
of functionally diverse enzyme superfamilies that utilize conserved
active site architecture associated with a fundamental catalytic strategy
or partial reaction to catalyze a variety of chemical reactions. The
addition of “genomic enzymology,” describing enzyme catalysis from the context of structure–function
relationships among homologous members of enzyme superfamilies, to
the toolbox of mechanistic enzymology provides an organizational framework,
aids in our understanding of the evolution of function, and helps
interpret structure-based mechanisms studies. Here, sequence-similarity
networks have been used to summarize some of these relationships across
the entire membership of the DRE-TIM metallolyase superfamily and
assist in the interpretation of our mechanistic analysis of a conserved
active-site helix in MtIPMS.

Analysis of the DRE-TIM Metallolyase Superfamily
Network
The superfamily network shown in Figure  depicts
some of the benefits and challenges associated with a network-based
interpretation. The four enzyme activities originally proposed in
the DRE-TIM metallolyase superfamily are easily identified in the
Claisen condensation-like (CC-like), carboxylase-like, lyase-like,
and aldolase-like subgroups. Functional diversity within each subgroup
is well established for the CC-like and carboxylase-like subgroups
including the identification of two less-documented activities: 2-phosphinomethylmalic
acid synthase and α-ketoglutarate
carboxylase. Identification of reported
functional diversity provides a strong foundation for the discovery
of differentially conserved residues specific to each reported activity.
Once the roles of these residues are confirmed, sequences of unknown
function containing the confirmed residues can be annotated. Additionally,
identification of sequences containing unique residues at positions
important for substrate selectivity can offer new hypotheses for screening
for new functionalities. Functional diversity is also suggested by
inspection of the aldolase-like cluster in Figure . All of the nodes containing a Swiss-Prot reviewed sequence
for 4-OH-2-ketovalerate aldolase activity are located in a single
region, while the other half of the subgroup remains unexplored and
may contain new functionalities.

Analysis of the CC-Like
Subgroup Network
As the stringency
for drawing edges between representative nodes is increased, the CC-like
subgroup breaks into multiple clusters (Figure ). One of the more interesting results is the identification of the
main three activities (IPMS, CMS, and HCS) in multiple clusters. Results
from the analysis of other superfamilies indicate that multiple clusters
of an activity can be the result of multiple evolutions from distinct
but related progenitors described as “pseudoconvergent evolution”., In these cases, different cluster memberships correlate with differences
in substrate or stereochemical specificity and differential conservation
of residues involved in substrate selectivity. Currently, the IPMS
clusters contain the most characterized members. Despite differences
in sequence identity (&lt;20% average sequence identity between clusters
and 50% average sequence identity within a cluster), no significant
differences in function or specificity have been identified, and residues
shown to interact with KIV are conserved in both clusters. However,
membership in the two IPMS clusters is similar to that reported from
a phylogenetic analysis of IPMS sequences suggesting multiple origins
for IPMS genes, and differential conservation
of residues not directly involved in substrate selectivity can be
identified as described below. In the cases of the HCS- and CMS-containing
clusters, differential conservation of active site residues predicted
to be in contact with the α-ketoacid substrates suggests these
activities are examples of pseudoconvergent evolution, but more rigorous
phylogenetic and functional analyses are required to further support
this hypothesis.

The distribution of regulatory domains in the
CC-like subgroup also provides a framework for the identification
of boundaries within the LeuA dimer regulatory domain. Recoloring
the CC-like subgroup network on the basis of predicted domain architecture
indicates there are four main clusters which contain sequences predicted
to contain an N-terminal DRE-TIM metallolyase catalytic
domain and a C-terminal LeuA dimer regulatory domain:
IPMS1/CMS1/MAM, IPMS2, CMS2, and CMS3 (Figure S4, ). Unfortunately, only two structures
of the LeuA dimer domain have been reported (MtIPMS in IPMS2 cluster
and CMS from Leptospira interrogans in CMS3 cluster),
limiting the ability to draw structural comparisons. Phenomenological
mechanisms of allosteric regulation (i.e., V-type
or K-type) have been reported for members of the
IPMS1, IPMS2, and CMS3 clusters and suggest that multiple mechanisms
of regulation are represented within each cluster ruling out allosteric
mechanism as a characteristic driving cluster membership. The allosteric mechanism of V-type allosteric inhibition in MtIPMS is due to the perturbation
of the hydrolysis step in the reaction. Current work is focused on determining if this mechanism is conserved
in members of other clusters exhibiting V-type allosteric
regulation.

Superfamily Analysis of Helix Residues in
Catalysis
An examination of conservation patterns of residues
in the active-site
α helix found in characterized members of the superfamily indicates
the only amino acid strictly conserved is an arginine residue (Figure ), suggesting a critical role in catalysis. As described
above, substitution of R80 in MtIPMS with alanine or lysine results
in inactive enzymes. Our results are in agreement with similar studies
on substitution at the arginine position in representative members
of the carboxylase-like, aldolase-like, and lyase-like subgroups. Thus, as predicted by conservation, the active site helix
arginine is critical for activity across the superfamily. Mechanistically,
the arginine residue is predicted to assist in the stabilization of
the enolate intermediate in each of the subgroups. However, structural
comparison of four representative superfamily members indicates differences
in the location of the enolate ion stabilized by the arginine residue,
with aldolase-like enzymes having an alternate location (Figure S5, ). This suggests that despite
differences in substrates and reactions, the arginine is essential
to maintain the electronic and catalytic requirements fundamental
to catalysis in all members of the superfamily.

Hidden-Markov Model logos
for the active site helix of DRE-TIM
metallolyase superfamily members. Logos were generated from alignments
of sequences in each boxed cluster in Figure  using Web Logo. Arrows indicate the
main residues discussed in the article.

A carboxylic group is strictly conserved in the position
adjacent
to arginine in the DRE-TIM metallolyase superfamily (D81 in MtIPMS).
In HMG-CoA lyase, substitution of the aspartate with alanine, glycine,
or histidine results in a 104–105-fold
decrease in specific activity in the human enzyme, while substitution
with glutamate decreases activity 10-fold. In MtIPMS, substitution with alanine or histidine results in an
inactive enzyme; however, a 105 decrease would be at the
limit of the spectrophotometric assay for CoA detection. While the
aspartate (the “D” in the DRE motif) is favored, in
some superfamily sequences a glutamate is found adjacent to the conserved
arginine instead (Figure ). This is discussed
below with respect to epistatic interactions within the CC-like subgroup.

The other strongly conserved residue in the helix is a glutamine
residue found three positions after the aspartate (Q84 in MtIPMS)
(Figures  and ). The
role of the residue at this position appears to be a major factor
in the development of reaction diversity for the DRE-TIM metallolyase
superfamily. Members of the carboxylase-like and CC-like subgroups
both have conserved glutamine residues at this position. However,
substitutions at this position produce drastically different catalytic
outcomes. In pyruvate carboxylase from R. etli, substitution
of glutamine with alanine or asparagine inactivates pyruvate carboxylase
activity and the ability of the enzyme to enolize pyruvate. In sharp contrast to pyruvate carboxylase, substitution
of the conserved glutamine with alanine in MtIPMS and homocitrate
synthase from S. pombe results in
enzymes with only a 10- to 30-fold decrease in the value for kcat relative to the wild-type enzymes. This result suggests the residue plays unique
roles in the mechanism of each enzyme. In pyruvate carboxylase, the
glutamine is hypothesized to orient pyruvate and maintains an interaction
with the helix arginine residue even in the absence of pyruvate., In the CC-like subgroup, the glutamine residue can interact with
the carbonyl of AcCoA. AcCoA makes additional binding interactions
with the enzyme such that disruption of interaction with Q84 is well
tolerated. Additionally, reported crystal structures of MtIPMS exhibit
different conformations for Q84 (including interactions with AcCoA,
R80, R427, and E317) or are missing electron density for the side
chain suggesting flexibility at this position. Residues R427 and E317
are strictly conserved in the CC-like subgroup, and future mutagenesis
studies will investigate the importance of interactions of the glutamine
with E317 and R427 in MtIPMS.

A second piece of evidence concerning
the importance of the glutamine
position in reaction specificity is seen in the aldolase-like subgroup.
From the similarity networks, it can be seen that the aldolase-like
subgroup contains tyrosine, histidine, or leucine in place of glutamine
(Figures  and ). In
the class II pyruvate aldolase BphI (see Scheme  for the 4-OH-2-ketovalerate aldolase reaction), the histidine residue
acts as a general base to deprotonate the C-4 hydroxyl group in the
first step of the reaction as substitution with alanine decreases
the kcat value by 50-fold relative to
that of the wild-type and results in the loss of a pKa value in the pH rate profile. The unique use of histidine as the general base by the aldolase-like
subgroup is consistent with the alternate position of the enolate
ion relative to the other subgroups. Aldolase-like subgroup members
with tyrosine or leucine at this position, however, would be unable
to utilize this mechanism. This suggests that these systems utilize
architecturally distinct amino acids as the catalytic base or that
members lacking the histidine residue catalyze a different reaction.
In support of this hypothesis, a member of the aldolase-like subgroup
from M. tuberculosis (Rv3469c) containing a tyrosine
at this position was reported to lack aldolase activity. The protein did exhibit oxaloacetate decarboxylase
activity, albeit with a very low catalytic efficiency (1.6 ×
102 M–1 s–1). As a
β-keto decarboxylation, this reaction does not require a base
to generate the enolate intermediate.

The residues flanking
the arginine and aspartate on the helix are
highly similar in all of the DRE-TIM metallolyase superfamily with
a hydrophobic residue preceding the arginine residue and a glycine/alanine
following the aspartate residue. These residues are likely important
in stabilizing the overall architecture of the active site α
helix. The main effect of the L79A substitution in MtIPMS is in agreement
with this conjecture as the only significant perturbation is a 20-fold
increase in the Km value determined for
KIV. This is the only report of a substitution at this position, and
the alanine/glycine position has not previously been investigated;
therefore, limited context is available to interpret the significance
of this result with respect to other members of the superfamily.

Differential Conservation of Helix Residues in the Claisen Condensation-Like
Subgroup
Analysis of the activities reported for members
of the CC-like subgroup (Scheme ) indicate
this subgroup is specificity diverse, i.e., these enzymes catalyze
a common reaction with varying substrate specificities. The majority
of sequences are annotated as either IPMS, homocitrate synthase (HCS),
or R-citramalate synthase (CMS) (Figure S3, ). The arginine and aspartate (or glutamate) have
been previously investigated in HCS and CMS with kinetic results similar
to those reported here., This is not surprising as the
helix residues appear to be required for catalysis, while residues
involved in substrate selectivity are located elsewhere in the active
site. As noted above, each activity has been experimentally demonstrated
in multiple clusters of the network shown in Figure , suggesting differences in the evolutionary conservation
of amino acids between clusters for enzymes catalyzing identical reactions,
including possible epistatic constraints within each cluster. Analysis
of differential conservation can provide insight into strategies for
substrate selectivity or account for differences in other properties,
such as allosteric regulation. With respect to the active site helix
under investigation, two examples of differential conservation within
the CC-like subgroup can be readily identified and are described below.

While the DRE motif aspartate is commonly found as a ligand to
the metal ion, enzymes involved in fungal lysine biosynthesis (HCS
(Lys) cluster of Figure ) have a strictly
conserved glutamate residue in the analogous position (i.e., ERE-motif)
(Figure A). Structural studies indicate glutamate
acts as a ligand to the divalent cation, similar to the more common
aspartate. A comparison of structures
from HCS (Lys) and the IPMS clusters indicates that the glutamate
substitution is linked to a conserved compensatory/epistatic substitution
of an isoleucine in place of an asparagine (D81/N321 in MtIPMS and
E44/I251 in HCS from S. pombe) (Figure B). Without the N → I substitution, the glutamate residue
would cause substantial steric clashes in the active site. Moreover,
the asparagine residue is well-conserved within the CC-like and HMG-CoA
lyase-like subgroups and can act as an additional ligand to the metal
ion in IPMS and HMG-CoA lyase. Future mutagenesis studies on MtIPMS will determine
if the (D → E)/(N → I) mutations are tolerated in enzymes
from other clusters in the CC-like subgroup and explore a role for
the alternative metal architecture.

Examples of differential conservation
of helix residues in the
CC-like subgroup. (A) Alignment of helix residues generated from sequences
belonging to IPMS1, IPMS2, and HCS (Lys) clusters. Residues exhibiting
differential conservation and mentioned in the discussion are highlighted
with a diamond. (B) Superposition of MtIPMS (1sr9, brown) and HCS from S. pombe (3ivt, blue). (C) Superposition of MtIPMS (1sr9, brown) and NmIPMS
(3rmj, blue).

Comparing active site helices from the two IPMS clusters
provides
a second example of differential conservation. In IPMS enzymes, the
residue corresponding to N83 in MtIPMS is most often an asparagine
or glutamate. From the sequence similarity network, it can be concluded
that the identity of the residue at this position can be used to categorize
each sequence into either the IPMS1 (glutamate) or IPMS2 (asparagine)
cluster (Figure A). In MtIPMS, the residue
is an asparagine (N83) in agreement with its placement in the IPMS2
cluster. In MtIPMS, substitution of N83 with alanine results in a
25-fold elevation in the Km value for
AcCoA and a 10-fold decrease in the kcat value. Surprisingly, when the N83E substitution is made, no activity
is detectable. A comparison of structures from MtIPMS and IPMS from Neisseria meningitidis (NmIPMS, a member of IPMS1) fails
to identify a conserved compensating substitution in the region near
the asparagine/glutamate residue (Figure C).
In fact, in silico modeling of the substitution suggests
that the glutamate can be accommodated in the MtIPMS scaffold without
causing steric clashes. Circular dichroism studies are consistent
with a properly folded enzyme ruling out a large change in structure
in the loss of activity. One possibility for the loss of activity
in the N83E variant of MtIPMS is that this position is constrained
by long-range epistatic factors specific to each cluster.

Role of Helix
Residues in the Allosteric Mechanism of MtIPMS
Residues on
the conserved helix were recently implicated in the
allosteric mechanism of MtIPMS on the basis of l-leucine
induced changes in dynamics measured by backbone amide hydrogen/deuterium
exchange. These results suggested a plausible
mechanism for the allosteric regulation of MtIPMS involving perturbation
of the helix by l-leucine binding. However, all active variants
exhibit slow-onset inhibition in the presence of l-leucine
and give similar values for inhibition parameters relative to those
determined with the wild-type enzyme. As the slow-onset mechanism
has recently been linked to the movement of a loop in the regulatory
domain, it is not surprising that biphasic
kinetics is exhibited. However, the lack of perturbation to the inhibition
parameters suggests that residues on the helix do not directly participate
in the allosteric mechanism, although direct involvement of R80 or
D81 cannot be ruled out as substitution at these positions creates
inactive enzymes. More recently, kinetic isotope effects were used
to identify the hydrolysis step as the allosteric target of inhibition. From the integrated mutagenesis and bioinformatics
results, the main role of the conserved active site helix is stabilization
of the common enolate intermediate, suggesting that the catalytic
machinery for hydrolysis (and the target for allosteric regulation)
in the CC-like subgroup lies elsewhere in the active site.

Conclusions
This work represents the first large-scale bioinformatics analysis
of the DRE-TIM metallolyase superfamily, used here to provide enhanced
context for understanding the mechanistic contributions of residues
on an active site α helix conserved across characterized members
of the superfamily. Taken together, the experimental and bioinformatics
results indicate a critical role for the DRE motif arginine residue
for all of the different reactions currently known across the superfamily,
most likely through the stabilization of the common enolate ion. The
DRE motif aspartate is also essential for metal ion interactions,
although alternate architectures using glutamate instead of aspartate
are possible. It will be of interest to determine if evolution of
glutamate-containing helices provides unique properties to enzymes
when compared with the canonical aspartate-containing homologues.
Finally, with the similarity network in place, hypotheses concerning
mechanisms of substrate and reaction specificity can be investigated
for members of the other subgroups.

Supporting Information Available
Oligonucleotide sequences
for
site-directed mutagenesis and references for reported activities in
the CC-like subgroup; circular dichroism spectra; l-leucine
inhibition kinetics; visualizations of the CC-like subgroup indicating
Swiss-Prot reported activities and predicted domain organization;
and locations of the enolate ion predicted for each activity. This
material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500246z_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
# (M.A.H.) Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Room E17-539, Cambridge, MA
02139.

Author Contributions
⊥ A.K.C. and M.A.H. contributed equally to this study.

This work was
supported by startup funding from The University of Alabama and NSF
grant MCB-1254077 (to P.A.F.) and by R01 GM60595 (to P.C.B). J.L.J
was funded in part by an NSF-REU award (CHE-1004098) to the Department
of Chemistry at The University of Alabama.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
Molecular graphics and analyses were performed with the UCSF
Chimera package. Chimera is developed by the Resource for Biocomputing,
Visualization, and Informatics at the University of California, San
Francisco (supported by NIGMS P41-GM103311). We thank Dr. Holly Ellis
(Auburn University) for her assistance in circular dichroism spectroscopy.

Abbreviations
AcCoAacetyl-Coenzyme A

CC-likeClaisen-condensation-like

CMScitramalate synthase

DTP4–4′-dithio-dipyridine

HCShomocitrate synthase

HDXhydrogen–deuterium
exchange

HMG-CoA3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A

IPMα-isopropylmalate

IPMSisopropylmalate synthase

KIVα-ketoisovalerate

LiCMScitramalate synthase
from Leptospirra interrogans

MtIPMSα-isopropylmalate synthase
from Mycobacterium tuberculosis

NmIPMSα-isopropylmalate synthase
from Neisseria meningitidis

SpHCShomocitrate synthase from Schizosaccharomyces pombe

TEAtriethanolamine

