Transfer
of the sulfuryl group
(-SO3) to and from small-molecule metabolites switches
these compounds between distinctly different functional states. Sulfonation
of the agonists and antagonists that bind nuclear and dopamine receptors,
which regulate scores of complex cellular functions, typically decreases
but can also enhance their affinities for their targets by orders
of magnitude. The inability to maintain the requisite balance of sulfonated
and nonsulfonated forms of a particular compound(s) has been linked
to human diseases, including breast and
endometrium cancer, Parkinson’s
disease, cystic fibrosis, and hemophilia.

Small-molecule
sulfonation is catalyzed by a small, approximately
13-member, family of enzymes, the cytosolic
sulfotransferases (SULTs). The donor in these reactions is the nucleotide
PAPS (3′-phosphoadenosine 5′-phosphosulfate), also known
as activated sulfate. The remarkably high chemical potential of the
phosphoric–sulfuric acid anhydride bond in PAPS potentiates
the sulfuryl moiety for energetically favorable transfer to recipients. The acceptors are the hydroxyls and primary amines
of hundreds, if not thousands, of small molecules—endogenous
metabolites, drugs, and other xenobiotics. In addition to their roles in regulating endogenous metabolites,
SULTs provide a critical defensive function; they detoxify compounds,
particularly xenobiotics, by preventing them from binding adventitiously
to receptors and target them for degradation and elimination.,,

SULT1A1, the focus of this
study, is the predominant SULT isoform
in liver and is responsible for the majority of the sulfonation that
occurs there. Consistent with its role
in detoxifying xenobiotics—an enormous, complex category of
compounds—the substrate spectrum of SULT1A1 is the broadest
of any SULT. Recent studies of the molecular
basis of SULT substrate specificity reveal that SULTs extensively
utilize a conserved, dynamic 30-residue active-site “cap”
in selecting their substrates. In the unliganded state, the cap is
open.− As PAPS binds, the cap closes and molecular “pores”
that sterically restrict ligand access are formed at the acceptor
and donor sites. PAPS is too large to pass through the nucleotide
pore, and its entry and departure require that the cap open. Certain acceptors are small enough to pass unrestricted
through the acceptor pore; others are not, and their binding, like
that of PAPS, also requires cap opening. Here we show that opening and closing of the caps in the SULT1A1
dimer are allosterically coordinated by the binding of nucleotide.
Binding of the first and second nucleotides produces different cap
configurations, and the catalytic efficiencies of these forms differ
over a 130-fold dynamic range. For the first time, it is clear that
a nucleotide can function as an allostere in SULT systems.

Materials
and Methods
The experimental materials and their sources
are as follows. Adenosine
monophosphate (AMP), dithiothreitol (DTT), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO),
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), 1-hydroxypyrene (1-HP), 4-hydroxytamoxifen
(afimoxifene, TAM), imidazole, isopropyl thio-β-d-galactopyranoside
(IPTG), Luria broth (LB), lysozyme, β-mercaptoethanol (β-ME),
pepstatin A, Na2HPO4, and NaH2PO4 were obtained from Sigma. Ampicillin, HEPES, KCl, KOH, MgCl2, NaCl, and phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) were purchased
from Fisher Scientific. Glutathione- and nickel-chelating resins were
obtained from GE Healthcare. Competent Escherichia coli [BL21(DE3)] cells were purchased from Agilent Technologies. PAP,
PAPS, and [35S]PAPS were synthesized in house as previously
described,, and were ≥98%
pure as assessed by anion-exchange high-performance liquid chromatography.

Protein
Purification
The open reading frame of the
human SULT1A1 DNA was codon-optimized for E. coli (MR. GENE) and inserted into a pGEX6 vector containing a His/GST/MBP
triple affinity tag. The enzyme was expressed
in E. coli BL21(DE3) and purified according to a
published protocol. Briefly, enzyme expression
was induced with IPTG (0.50 mM) in LB medium at 16 °C for 14
h. The cells were pelleted, resuspended in lysis buffer, sonicated,
and centrifuged. The supernatant was loaded onto a Chelating Sepharose
Fast Flow column charged with Ni2+. The enzyme was eluted
with imidazole (10 mM) onto a Glutathione Sepharose column and then
eluted with glutathione (10 mM). The tag was cleaved from the enzyme
by precision protease, and the enzyme was separated from the tag using
a glutathione resin. Finally, the protein was concentrated using a
Millipore Ultrafiltration Disc (Ultracel 10 kDa cutoff), and the concentration
was determined spectrophotometrically (ε280 = 54
mM–1 cm–1). The enzyme was flash-frozen and stored at −80 °C.

Equilibrium Binding of PAPS to SULT1A1
Binding of PAPS
to SULT1A1 was monitored via ligand-dependent changes in intrinsic
fluorescence (λex = 290 nm; λem =
345 nm). Typically, PAPS was titrated into solutions containing SULT1A1,
MgCl2 (5.0 mM), and NaPO4 (50 mM) at pH 7.2
and 25 ± 2 °C. The PAPS concentrations used in the titration
depicted in Figure D were high enough to cause
inner-filter effects. Consequently, λex was shifted
to 297 nm to lower the PAPS absorbance (ε297 = 0.43
mM–1 cm–1). Despite the lowered
absorbance, inner-filter effects were detected at ≥60 μM
PAPS. To correct for these effects, control titrations in which AMP
(which does not bind SULT1A1) was substituted for PAPS were performed
and the PAPS titration data were corrected accordingly. All titrations
were performed in triplicate, and the averaged data were least-squares
fit using a model that assumes a single binding site per dimer.

Pre-Steady-State PAPS Binding Studies
Pre-steady-state
binding experiments were performed using an Applied Photophysics SX20
stopped-flow spectrofluorimeter. SULT1A1 fluorescence was excited
at 290 nm and detected above 330 nm using a cutoff filter. kon and koff for
binding to the high-affinity site were obtained by rapidly mixing
[1:1 (v:v)] a solution containing SULT1A1 (30 nM, dimer), MgCl2 (5.0 mM), and NaPO4 (25 mM) at pH 7.2 and 25 ±
2 °C with a solution that was identical except that it contained
PAPS and was without enzyme. kon and koff for the binding to the low-affinity site
were determined by pre-equilibrating the dimer (2.0 μM) with
PAPS (4.0 μM) and then rapidly mixing the equilibrated solution
[1:1 (v:v)] with a solution that was identical except for the PAPS
concentrations and the fact that it lacked enzyme. The reactions were
pseudo-first-order with respect to PAPS concentration. Three independently
determined progress curves (each an average of 8–10 binding
reactions) were collected at four separate PAPS concentrations. The
apparent rate constant (kobs) at a given
PAPS concentration was obtained by fitting the average of the three
curves to a single-exponential equation. kon and koff were obtained from the slopes
and intercepts, respectively, predicted by linear least-squares analysis
of four-point kobs versus PAPS concentration
plots.

Equilibrium Binding of
TAM and 1-HP to SULT1A1
Binding
of an acceptor to three different enzyme forms [E, E·PAP, and
E·(PAP)2] was monitored via ligand-induced changes
in the intrinsic fluorescence of the enzyme (λex =
290 nm; λem = 345 nm). Acceptors were titrated into
a solution containing SULT1A1 (0.05–10 μM, dimer), PAP
(0–500 μM), MgCl2 (5.0 mM), and NaPO4 (25 mM) at pH 7.2 and 25 ± 2 °C. Titrations were performed
in triplicate. Data were averaged and least-squares fit using a model
that assumes a single binding site per monomer.,

Activation of SULT1A1
The initial rate response of
SULT1A1 to nucleotide binding at the high- and low-affinity sites
was studied using 1-HP, a fluorescent acceptor. 1-HP and its sulfonated
counterpart (1-HPS) fluoresce at a λex of 320 nm,
but the intensity ratio at a λem of 380 nm is &gt;100
in favor of 1-HPS. Reaction progress was monitored via 1-HPS fluorescence
(λex = 320 nm; λem = 380 nm). Reactions
were initiated by addition of PAPS, and the conditions were as follows:
SULT1A1 (1.0 nM, dimer), 1-HP (160 μM, 20Kd), MgCl2 (5.0 mM), NaPO4 (50 mM), pH
7.2, and 25 ± 2.0 °C. The PAPS concentration was the limiting
substrate in all cases, and it was ≤5% consumed at the end
point of the reactions. The experiments were performed in duplicate.
The Km and kcat of 1-HP for the doubly occupied enzyme were determined using a saturating
PAPS concentration (2.0 μM), and a range of 1-HP concentrations
(8.0–200 nM, 0.2–5Km). The
kinetic constants for 1-HP sulfation with the singly occupied enzyme
were obtained using the same strategy except that the PAPS concentration
was sufficient to saturate only the first site (0.30 μM). Initial
rate constants were obtained using a weighted least-squares fit of
the data in double-reciprocal format.

Initial Rate Kinetics of TAM Sulfation
The initial
rate of TAM sulfation was measured using radiolabeled [35S]PAPS. Reaction conditions included SULT1A1 (10 nM, dimer), [35S]PAPS (3.0 or 250 μM, 14 nCi/reaction), TAM (0.12–70
μM, 0.20–5.0Km), MgCl2 (5.0 mM), NaPO4 (50 mM), pH 7.2, and 25 ±
2 °C. The reactions were initiated by the addition of PAPS to
a final volume of 10 μL. The reactions were quenched after 10–50
min with 1.0 μL of 0.10 M NaOH and then the mixtures neutralized
with HCl. Samples were then boiled for 1.0 min and centrifuged for
5.0 min at 12100g. The samples were spotted onto
a reverse phase thin layer chromatography plate and separated using
a running buffer containing methylene chloride, methanol, water, and
ammonium hydroxide (90:16:3.5:0.50 volume ratio). Radiolabeled products
were visualized and quantitated using a STORM imaging system.

Results
and Discussion
Biphasic Binding of PAPS to SULT1A1
The fluorescence
titrations depicted in Figure A–D present what appears to be the first
example of the biphasic binding of PAPS to SULT1A1, or any SULT. The
conditions of the titration pairs, A/B and C/D, were selected to yield
affinities and stoichiometries, respectively, of PAPS binding to the
high-affinity (A/B) and low-affinity (C/D) sites of the enzyme. The
enzyme active-site concentrations used in the “affinity-constant”
titrations (A and C) were set below (≤0.14) Kd, while those used in “stoichiometry” titrations
(B and D) were ≥15Kd.

Equilibrium
binding of PAPS to SULT1A1. (A) PAPS binding to the
high-affinity subunit. Binding was monitored via ligand-induced changes
in the intrinsic fluorescence of SULT1A1 (λex = 295
nm; λem = 345 nm). Reaction conditions included SULT1A1
(0.05 μM, dimer), MgCl2 (5.0 mM), NaPO4 (50 mM), pH 7.2, and 25 ± 2 °C. Each point is the average
of three independent determinations. The solid line through the data
represents a least-squares fit using a model that assumes a single
binding site per dimer. Kd = 0.37 ±
0.05 μM. (B) PAPS binding stoichiometry at the high-affinity
site. The conditions were identical to those in described for panel
A except that [SULT1A1] = 3.0 μM dimer (16Kd). The stoichiometry was 1.1 ± 0.2 PAPS molecules
per dimer. (C) PAPS binding at the low-affinity site. Experimental
conditions were identical to those in described for panel B. PAPS
binding is biphasic. The high- and low-affinity phases are colored
red (inset) and black, respectively. The line through the points represents
a least-squares fit to the low-affinity phase using a model that assumes
a single binding site per dimer. Kd =
30 ± 4 μM. (D) Full-site PAPS binding stoichiometry. The
reaction conditions were identical to those described for panel A
except that [SULT1A1] = 475 μM dimer (16Kd for the low-affinity site). The stoichiometry was 2.1 ±
0.2 PAPS molecules per dimer, or 1.1 ± 0.1 per subunit.

The affinity of PAPS for the high-affinity
site of SULT1A1 [Kd = 0.37 ± 0.05
μM (Table )] is virtually identical
to that for other SULTs;,, its stoichiometry, however, is
not., A second titration, at [SULT1A1] = 16Kd, reveals that the stoichiometry of PAPS binding
at the high-affinity site is 1.1 ± 0.1 per SULT1A1 dimer (Figure B). Clearly, only one subunit in each dimer exhibits
high affinity. This finding stands in contrast to the behaviors of
SULT2A1 and SULT1E1, which bind 1 equiv of PAPS with high affinity
at each dimer subunit.,

PAPS Binding
to SULT1A1
binding site	kon (μM–1 s–1)	koff (s–1)	koff/kon (μM)	Kd (μM)	
high-affinity	2.0 (0.1)	0.70 (0.05)	0.37 (0.04)	0.37 (0.05)	
low-affinity	0.96 (0.01)	29 (1)	30 (3)	30 (4)	
Values in parentheses indicate one
standard deviation.

As the
nucleotide concentration increases beyond saturation of
the first site, a second binding phase is observed (Figure C). Red dots indicate the region of the titration
in which binding occurs nearly exclusively at the high-affinity site,
and as the inset shows, that site is loaded stoichiometrically. In
the black-dotted region, a low-affinity site becomes saturated. The Kd associated with this region is 31 ± 4
μM. To confirm that this phase is associated with a single nucleotide
site, its PAPS binding stoichiometry was determined (Figure D). The low-affinity site clearly binds one nucleotide,
and thus, SULT1A1, like its siblings, binds one nucleotide at each
subunit.

Most members of the SULT family harbor a conserved
30-residue active-site
cap that covers both the nucleotide and acceptor binding pockets.,, The nucleotide is nearly completely
encapsulated when the cap is closed, and its addition and escape require
that the cap open. The cap of the ligand-free
enzyme is predominantly open (≥95%,), while that of nucleotide-bound SULT1A1 is closed ∼95% of
the time., As the cap closes at the acceptor site,
a pore forms, creating an entrance to the acceptor binding pocket.
The binding of acceptors small enough to pass through the pore is
not affected by cap closure; nucleotide binding has no discernible
effect on the kon and koff of such compounds. As acceptors become too large to
pass through the pore, nucleotide binding causes their affinities
to decrease by a factor given by the cap closure isomerization equilibrium
constant (Kiso), which equals 26 for SULT1A1. This decrease in affinity is due solely to a
decrease in kon and is caused by the nucleotide-induced
26-fold decrease in the concentration of the enzyme form to which
large compounds can bind.

The Hypothesis
Given the coupling
between PAPS binding
and cap closure, and structural data indicating that the cap must
open for PAPS to enter and depart, we reasoned that the decreased
affinity for the second nucleotide could be due to reciprocal interactions
between the open and closed forms of adjacent caps. If PAPS binding
and closure at the first subunit stabilize the adjacent cap in either
the open or closed position, the affinity of PAPS for the second site
will decrease relative to that for the first. If closure is stabilized, kon for PAPS binding will decrease, because closure
decreases the concentration of the only form to which PAPS can bind,
the cap-open form. If, on the other hand, the adjacent cap is stabilized
in the open position, the kon for binding
to the tight and weak sites will be identical, because the caps of
both the unliganded and singly liganded enzymes are fully open (≥95%).
Thus, the change in affinity will be due solely to an increase in koff that occurs because the nucleotide need
not “wait” until the cap opens to depart.

The Test
To test the coupled cap model and distinguish
between the adjacent cap open and closed mechanisms, the on and off
rate constants for binding of PAPS to SULT1A1 were determined over
a range of PAPS concentrations that probe binding to the tight and
weak sites. PAPS binding was monitored via binding-induced changes
in the intrinsic fluorescence of SULT1A1 (Figure S1 of the  shows a typical PAPS binding
reaction). The reactions were pseudo-first-order in PAPS concentration,
and kobs values were obtained by fitting
progress curves to a single-exponential model. The results are compiled
in the kobs versus PAPS concentration
plot presented in Figure A, which shows two
distinct linear phases indicative of two experimentally separable
binding sites.

Pre-steady-state binding of PAPS to SULT1A1. (A) Composite kobs vs [PAPS] plot. Two well-isolated binding
phases are observed. Binding was monitored via changes in SULT1A1
intrinsic fluorescence (λex = 290 nm; λem ≥ 330 nm). kobs values
are the average of three independent determinations. Reaction conditions
included SULT1A1 (0.050 μM, dimer), MgCl2 (5.0 mM),
NaPO4 (50 mM), pH 7.2, and 25 ± 2 °C. Red dots
indicate the kobs values predicted using
the kon and koff values obtained from the experiments associated with panels B and
C. (B) kobs vs [PAPS] for the high-affinity
subunit. Reaction conditions were identical to those described for
panel A except that [SULT1A1] = 0.030 μM (dimer). kon = 2.0 ± 0.2 μM–1 s–1; koff = 0.70 ± 0.02
s–1. (C) kobs vs [PAPS]
for the low-affinity subunit. Reaction conditions were identical to
those described for panel A except the SULT1A1 (2.0 μM, dimer)
was equilibrated with PAPS [8.0 μM, 26Kd(high affinity), 0.27Kd(low affinity)] before being mixed with PAPS at higher concentrations (20–80
μM). kon = 0.96 ± 0.01 μM
s–1; koff = 29 ±
1 s–1. All reactions were pseudo-first-order in
PAPS concentration.

The 81-fold difference
in the affinities of the two PAPS binding
sites allows them to be studied in isolation. At the PAPS concentrations
used to construct the kobs versus PAPS
concentration plot in Figure B, the percentage
of dimers with two molecules of PAPS bound at equilibrium ranges from
1.5 to 6.3%; hence, the signal from the doubly liganded species is
negligible, and kon and koff for the high-affinity site can be obtained from a
linear fit of the data. The rate constants associated with binding
at the low-affinity site can be obtained using a pre-equilibration
strategy. At 8.0 μM PAPS, the equilibrium distribution of enzyme
forms is as follows: E, 2.5%; E·PAPS, 76%; E·(PAPS)2, 21%. When this pre-equilibrated solution is mixed with PAPS
at concentrations sufficiently high to saturate the second site, one
observes conversion of the singly to doubly liganded species with
a negligible contribution from other species. The result of such an
experiment is shown in Figure C, and here
again, kon and koff are obtained from the slope and intercept, respectively. The accuracy of the four rate constants (kon and koff for
high- and low-affinity binding) was tested by using them to predict
the kobs values associated with Figure A. The predicted values are represented by red dots
and closely match the experimental constants.

The Results
The
rate constants associated with binding
at the high- and low-affinity sites are compiled in Table . As the data indicate, the Kd values predicted by these constants are indistinguishable
from those obtained from equilibrium binding studies. The off-rate
constants reveal that nucleotide escapes from the low-affinity site
41-fold faster than from the high-affinity site. If the cap at the
low-affinity site is “held” fully open (≥95%)
by binding at the tight site, and the escaping tendency of the nucleotide
from the cap-open form of the high- and low-affinity sites is the
same, the kon values for binding at the
first and second sites will be identical, because the cap in the subunit
to which the nucleotide binds is open in both the unliganded and singly
liganded enzyme forms. Thus, any fold difference in Kd will be due solely to differences in koff. The results indicate that the changes in Kd (81-fold) and koff (41-fold) differ by a factor of nearly 2 (i.e., 1.93). Within error,
this same factor is given by the ratio of the kon values for the low- and high-affinity sites, 2.08. A factor
of 2 is readily explained if both subunits of the dimer are capable
of binding the first ligand and only one can bind the second. In this
scenario, kon for the first site will
appear to be 2-fold higher than that for the second because the probability
of binding to the first site is twice that of the second, not because kon values for binding to the subunits differ.
If, as it appears, this is the case, the aggregate kon for binding to the first site, 2.0 μM–1 s–1, should be halved, to 1.0 μM–1 s–1, and thus the kon values for binding to the first and second sites are identical.
In summary, the system behaves precisely as predicted by the adjacent
cap open mechanism.

Linking to Acceptor-Site Binding
To define how cap
behavior is coordinated at the four binding pockets of the enzyme,
the PAPS dependence of the open or closed status of the acceptor binding
sites was probed using a large acceptor [4-hydroxytamoxifen (TAM)].
As discussed, such acceptors are too large to pass through the pore
that forms in response to nucleotide binding. When PAP is bound to
SULT1A1, the isomerization equilibrium constant, Kiso, is 26 in favor of pore closure, and large acceptors bind 26-fold more weakly to the nucleotide-bound
form of the enzyme. It should be noted
that Kiso values obtained with PAP and
PAPS are nearly identical.

The
affinities and stoichiometries of binding of TAM to SULT1A1 at 0 and
0.50 mM PAP (which is sufficient to saturate both nucleotide pockets)
were determined by fluorescence titration (Figure A–C). The results, compiled in Table , reveal that the TAM affinities for E·PAP and E·(PAP)2 are virtually identical (0.67 ± 0.08 and 0.65 ±
0.07 μM, respectively) and that each subunit of the dimer binds
one acceptor. In contrast, when the PAP concentration favors the singly
nucleotide-bound dimer, TAM binding is biphasic (Figure A,B). At 6.0 μM PAP, the distribution of forms is biased
toward the E·PAP complex [E·PAP, 79%; E·(PAP)2, 16%; E, 5.0%] and the affinities of the phases (0.67 ± 0.03
and 13 ± 2 μM) strongly suggest that the cap of one subunit
is open while that of the other is closed. To confirm that each dimer
contains a single high-affinity site, a “stoichiometry”
titration was performed at a dimer concentration of 9.0 μM [i.e.,
13Kd TAM, 24Kd PAP(high affinity), and 0.3Kd PAP(low affinity)]. To maximize the concentration
of singly bound species, the nucleotide concentration was set equal
to that of the dimer, 9.0 μM. Under this condition, the distribution
of forms is as follows: E·PAP, 77%; E·(PAP)2,
3.8%; E, 19%. Both high- and low-affinity sites are observed in the
titration, and the inset reveals that each dimer contains a single
high-affinity TAM binding site.

Binding of TAM to E and E·(PAP)2. (A) TAM binding
to E. Binding was monitored via changes in SULT1A1 intrinsic fluorescence
(λex = 290 nm; λem = 345 nm). Reaction
conditions included SULT1A1 (0.10 μM, dimer), MgCl2 (5.0 mM), NaPO4 (50 mM), pH 7.2, and 25 ± 2 °C.
Each point is the average of three independent determinations. The
curve is the behavior predicted by a best fit model that assumes a
single binding site per dimer. Kd = 0.67
± 0.04. (B) TAM binding to E(PAP)2. Conditions and
data analysis were identical to those described for panel A except
PAP = 0.50 mM (17Kd for PAPS binding at
its low-affinity site). The Kd for TAM
binding is 0.68 ± 0.12 μM. (C) Stoichiometry of binding
of TAM to E and E·(PAP)2. Conditions were identical
to those described for panels A and B except that [SULT1A1] = 10 μM
(dimer). Binding to E and E·(PAP)2 is shown with filled
and empty circles, respectively. The stoichiometries are 2.0 ±
0.1 TAM bound per SULT1A1 dimer.

Binding of TAM to SULT1A1. (A) TAM binding is biphasic. Binding
was monitored via changes in SULT1A1 intrinsic fluorescence (λex = 290 nm; λem = 345 nm). The titration
conditions included SULT1A1 (0.10 μM, dimer), PAP (6.0 μM),
MgCl2 (5.0 mM), NaPO4 (50 mM), pH 7.2, and 25
± 2 °C. The distribution of enzyme forms at 6.0 μM
PAP is as follows: E·PAP, 79%; E·(PAP)2, 16%;
E, 5.0%. The first phase (red dots, inset) shows binding of TAM to
the PAP-free subunit of SULT1A1 (Kd =
0.67 ± 0.05 μM). The second phase shows binding of TAM
to the nucleotide-bound subunit (Kd =
13 ± 2 μM). Each point is the average of two independent
determinations. The line through the points is the behavior predicted
by a best-fit model that assumes a single binding site per dimer.
The first and second phases were fit separately using the data indicated
by the red and black circles, respectively. (B) Semiquantitative stoichiometric
binding of TAM. The conditions of the titration included SULT1A1 (9.0
μM, dimer), PAP (9.0 μM), MgCl2 (5.0 mM), NaPO4 (50 mM), pH 7.2, and 25 ± 2 °C. At these concentrations,
the distribution of enzyme forms is as follows: E·PAP, 77%; E·(PAP)2, 3.8%; E, 19%. The binding is biphasic. The first phase (red
dots, inset) indicates a stoichiometry of approximately one TAM binding
site per dimer. A second low-affinity phase is also observed (black
dots).

TAM and 1-HP Binding
to SULT1A1
ligand	SULT1A1 species	Kd (μM)	
TAM	E	0.67 (0.08)	
TAM	E·(PAP)2	0.65 (0.07)	
TAM	E·PAP	13 (2)	
1-HP	E	8 (0.5)	
1-HP	E·(PAP)2	0.025 (0.001)	
1-HP	E·PAP	0.025 (0.0010)	
Values in parentheses
indicate one
standard deviation.

Together,
the nucleotide and TAM binding studies indicate that
binding of the first nucleotide stabilizes the cap in the adjacent
subunit in the open position, and in this configuration, only one
acceptor site is open. When the second nucleotide binds, all nucleotide
and acceptor sites open. What remains is to determine whether the
open acceptor site in the singly occupied enzyme is located on the
subunit to which PAPS is bound. This issue is addressed in the following
section.

Linking to Reactivity
To assess whether PAPS occupancy
influences SULT1A1 reactivity, the initial rate enzyme turnover was
studied under conditions in which one or both of the dimer subunits
were bound to nucleotide. The initial rate mechanism of SULT1A1 is
sequential, rapid equilibrium random; that is, a reactive ternary complex can form with either substrate
binding first, and substrate binding reactions are near equilibrium
during turnover., In such mechanisms, steady-state
affinity constants are excellent approximations of thermodynamic binding
constants. Experiments were performed with small and large acceptors
[1-hydroxypyrine (1-HP) and TAM]. [35S]PAPS was used to
monitor formation of sulfonated TAM (see  and Figure S2 of the ). 1-HP and its sulfonated counterpart, 1-HPS, are
fluorescent (Figure S3 of the ). At the wavelengths used to monitor 1-HPS formation (λex = 320 nm; λem = 380 nm), the fluorescence
intensity of 1-HP is ∼1% of that of 1-HPS. To establish experimental
benchmarks for the 1-HP studies, the affinities of 1-HP for the three
requisite forms of the enzyme [E, E·PAP, and E·(PAP)2] were determined by fluorescence titration (Figure S4A–C
of the ). The Kd values are compiled in Table  and reveal that, like other substrates,, 1-HP and nucleotide bind synergistically.

When SULT1A1 turnover
is plotted versus PAPS concentration at a saturating 1-HP concentration
(Figure ), distinct low- and high-PAPS affinity
phases are observed. To quantitate the differences in initial rate
behavior of the singly and doubly occupied enzyme, initial rate experiments
were performed at PAPS concentrations fixed in the plateau region
of each phase (see asterisks in Figure ).
Table  lists the initial rate parameters associated
with 1-HP sulfonation and the PAPS concentrations at which they were
determined. As expected for a small acceptor, Km for 1-HP is not affected by PAPS occupancy; however, kcat increases nearly 8-fold. If the increased
rate of turnover were due solely to PAPS saturation at the second
site, a 2-fold increase would have occurred. Thus, as the caps are
opened at both sites, each subunit turns over 4 times more quickly
than the subunit in the singly occupied enzyme.

SUTL1A1 turnover as a
function of PAPS occupancy. A plot of SULT1A
turnover vs [PAPS] is biphasic. The first and second phases correspond
to saturation of the high- and low-affinity PAPS binding sites, respectively.
The reaction was monitored via 1-HPS fluorescence (λex = 320 nm; λem = 380 nm). The conditions included
SULT1A1 (1.0 nM, dimer), 1-HP (160 μM, 20Kd), MgCl2 (5.0 mM), NaPO4 (50 mM), pH
7.2, and 25 ± 2.0 °C. The asterisks indicate the PAPS concentrations
(0.20 and 2.0 μM) used in initial rate studies to obtain Michaelis
parameters for the E·PAP and E·(PAPS)2 forms.

Initial Rate Parameters
for E·PAP
and E·(PAP)2 Forms of SULT1A1
substrate	SULT1A1 species	Km (μM)	kcat (s–1)	[PAPS] (μM)	
1-HP	E·PAP	0.041 (0.002)	130 (20)	0.30	
1-HP	E·(PAP)2	0.044 (0.03)	1000 (60)	2.0	
TAM	E·PAP	14 (1.0)	2.0 (0.3)	4.0	
TAM	E·(PAP)2	0.60 (0.03)	11 (1.0)	250	
Values in parentheses indicate one
standard deviation.

Equilibrium
binding constants (Table )
were used to select the PAPS concentrations, 4.0 and 250 μM,
used in the TAM initial rate studies. At 4.0 μM PAPS, the majority
of SULT1A1 has a single nucleotide bound [E·PAP, 82%; E·(PAP)2, 1.1%; E, 10%]. At 250 μM PAPS, the enzyme is primarily
in the doubly occupied form [E·(PAP)2, 89%; E·PAP,
10%; E, &lt;0.1%]. The results are listed in Table . The fact that the TAM Km values
are nearly identical to their corresponding Kd values (Table ) confirms that binding
is near equilibrium during turnover. On the basis of the TAM equilibrium
binding studies, it was not possible to determine whether, for the
singly occupied enzyme, the high-affinity TAM binding site is situated
on the subunit that is bound to PAPS. If the high-affinity site were
located on the PAPS-bound subunit, the Km would equal the high-affinity Kd; if
not, it would equal the low-affinity Kd. The TAM Km value, 14 μM, is nearly
equal to the Kd for the low-affinity site,
13 μM; hence, the high-affinity binding site is located on the
empty subunit of the singly occupied enzyme. The ratio of the TAM Km for the singly and doubly occupied enzyme
is 23. This value is nearly equal to the cap isomerization equilibrium
constant, 26, and indicates that the
cap has gone from largely closed to largely opened as the second nucleotide
binds, a finding that is completely consistent with the TAM equilibrium
binding data.

The results of the initial rate studies clearly
indicate that the
allosteric interactions that govern nucleotide binding also regulate
the reactivity of the enzyme. For small substrates, the effects are
primarily on kcat, and the catalytic efficiency
(V/K) of the enzyme increases by
a factor of ∼8. For large substrates, both kcat and Km are affected, with
the result that the efficiency for such substrates increases 130-fold
as the system moves from the singly to doubly occupied state. These
two states represent end points on a sliding scale of catalytic efficiency
whose set point is determined by the nucleotide concentration.

A Biological
Raison d’Etre
For the PAPS concentration
to be used to regulate SULT1A1 reactivity in the cell, its in vivo concentration must be sufficiently high to populate
the second nucleotide binding site. PAPS levels have been quantitated
in numerous human tissues that express SULT1A1,− and its concentrations can be
calculated using tissue-specific, weight/volume conversion factors. While these calculations are gross in that they
assume a uniform distribution of nucleotide throughout the tissue,
they nevertheless provide a likely lower limit of the cellular PAPS
concentration. These concentrations were used to calculate the fraction
of dimers that have PAPS bound at both subunits in the various tissues
(Figure ). The calculations predict that PAPS
concentrations in all tissues are sufficiently high to saturate the
first subunit, but only in certain tissues is it high enough to substantially
populate the second.

Predicted fraction of E·(PAPS)2 in human
tissues.
Fractions were calculated using reported PAPS concentrations.−

As SULT1A1 becomes doubly occupied, kcat increases 8-fold; the catalytic capacity
of the system increases
by a factor of nearly 10, and Km decreases
∼25-fold for only large substrates. This selective bias places
large and small substrates on a catalytic “par”; their kcat/Km values become
comparable at double occupancy. One of the important functions of
SULT1A1 is to detoxify xenobiotics as they pass through the liver.
While this enormous class of compounds is far from fully characterized,
many can be classified as large substrates. Thus, in tissues in which
the defensive role of SULT1A1 is particularly important, the enzyme
seems likely to operate in the double-occupancy mode, which is precisely
what the calculations predict. In liver, where the defensive function
is arguably the most important of any organ, the enzyme is predicted
to be almost entirely in the double-occupancy state. In organs like
kidney and intestine, where the demand for defensive function is weaker,
but still significant, the curve predicts that the enzyme is balanced
between single- and double-occupancy states and is thus poised to
respond to PAPS concentration and xenobiotic “load”.
Finally, in tissues like heart and brain, where the load is presumably
slight, the enzyme is nearly exclusively in its low-efficiency state.
In summary, it appears that PAPS concentrations in vivo are indeed sufficiently high to regulate SULT1A1 reactivity, and
remarkably, the enzyme’s performance with respect to turnover
and substrate specificity will be highly tissue dependent.

Conclusions
PAPS binds antisynergistically to the subunits of the SULT1A1 dimer.
Nucleotide binding at the first subunit causes an 81-fold weakening
in the affinity at the second. The decreased affinity is due solely
to an increase in the nucleotide off rate constant, which strongly
suggests that the cap at the weak affinity site is stabilized in the
open position. To determine the cap configurations at all four ligand
binding sites as a function of PAPS occupancy, cap positioning at
the acceptor pockets was determined using large and small acceptors.
PAPS binding at the first site closes both the nucleotide and acceptor
cap segments only on the subunit to which PAPS is bound; the cap on
the adjacent subunit remains open at both sites. Once the second nucleotide
adds, the caps open at all four ligand binding pockets. The coupling
of PAPS binding and cap closure is depicted in Figure . In this configuration, kcat is
increased 8-fold relative to that of the singly PAPS-bound enzyme,
and Km decreases 23-fold toward large
substrates. Finally, estimates of PAPS concentrations across a variety
of tissues suggest that SULT1A1 reactivity will be highly tissue-dependent,
and that the enzyme will function in its broadest specificity and
highest turnover mode in tissues that experience the highest levels
of xenobiotics.

Coupling of PAPS binding and cap closure in SULT1A1. The
ligand
binding sites of the unliganded enzyme are open and can receive ligands.
Binding of the first PAPS molecule closes both the PAPS and acceptor
binding sites of the subunit to which PAPS has bound. In this configuration,
PAPS cannot escape and only small acceptors can enter unless the enzyme
isomerizes to the open form (not shown), which is unfavorable (Kiso = 26 in favor of the closed state). Consequently,
the singly PAPS-bound configuration favors small acceptors. As the
second PAPS molecule binds, all of the binding sites open, thus alleviating
the catalytic bias against large substrates, and each subunit turns
over 4-fold faster.

Supporting Information Available
Pre-steady-state binding of
PAPS to SULT1A1 (Figure S1), TAM initial rate studies (Figure S2),
fluorescence spectra of 1-HP and 1-HPS (Figure S3), and 1-HP binding
to the E and E·(PAP)2 forms of SULT1A1 (Figure S4).
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi501120p_si_001.pdf

Supported by
National Institutes of Health Grant GM106158.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
HEPESN-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazine-N′-2-ethanesulfonic acid

MBPmaltose binding protein

PAP3′,5′-diphosphoadenosine.

