MauG from Paracoccus
denitrificans is a 42 kDa c-type diheme
enzyme that catalyzes the final three
two-electron oxidation reactions during the biosynthesis of the protein-derived
cofactor,, tryptophan tryptophylquinone (TTQ). TTQ is present in the enzyme methylamine dehydrogenase
(MADH). The substrate for MauG that undergoes
this posttranslational modification is a precursor protein of MADH
(preMADH). It possesses a monohydroxylated residue βTrp57, (Figure ). The reactions catalyzed by MauG
occur in the following order: covalent cross-linking of monohydroxylated
βTrp57 to βTrp108, incorporation of a second oxygen atom
into the side chain of βTrp57, and oxidation of the quinol species
to the quinone. Catalysis requires long-range
electron transfer because preMADH does not make direct contact with
either heme of MauG. The electron transfer
occurs via a hole-hopping mechanism in
which Trp residues of MauG are reversibly oxidized.−

MauG-catalyzed biosynthesis
of TTQ from preMADH. The post-translational
modifications that are catalyzed by MauG are colored red.

High-valence FeIV species are important
intermediates
in the catalytic cycles of many heme enzymes. Many O2-dependent
and H2O2-dependent oxygenation mechanisms are
believed to proceed via a ferric hydroperoxy intermediate.− This intermediate then loses water to yield Compound I, an FeIV=O species with a cation radical present on the π-porphyrin
ring, or an amino acid axial ligand. Another common high-valence Fe
species in heme proteins is Compound ES, an FeIV=O
heme and amino acid-based radical in the proximity of the heme. The
redox state of MauG that accepts electrons during the oxidation of
preMADH is bis-FeIV, with
one heme an FeIV=O moiety with a His35 axial ligand
and the other heme FeIV with axial heme ligands provided
by His205 and Tyr294 side chains. The
bis-FeIV state is stabilized by MauG despite the fact that
the two heme irons are separated by 21 Å. Several structural features of MauG contribute to the formation
and stabilization of the bis-FeIV state. Previous studies
demonstrated that the axial ligand Tyr294 plays a critical role in
stabilization of the FeIV state of the six-coordinate heme
iron.− A tightly bound Ca2+ that is positioned in the proximity
of the hemes was shown to influence the axial ligation geometry and
magnetic properties of both hemes and consequently is required for
activity., Trp93, which resides between the two hemes,
participates in an unusual charge-resonance transition that stabilizes
the bis-FeIV state. The two FeIV hemes and Trp93
share spin and charge via very rapid hopping-mediated electron transfer. In this model, the bis-FeIV state
is the dominant species, but it is in charge resonance with an ensemble
of resonance structures, including Compound ES-like and Compound I-like
species.

Amino acid residues in the distal pocket of the high-spin
heme
also influence the formation and stabilization of this high-valence
state. Mutagenesis studies of Glu113 indicated
that the carboxyl group of Glu113 is an important determinant of the
distribution of high-valence species that participate in charge-resonance
stabilization of the bis-FeIV redox state, as well as in
the maintenance of the redox cooperativity between the two hemes of
MauG. Pro107 is critical for maintaining
the proper structure of the distal pocket of the high-spin heme of
MauG, controlling the binding of exogenous ligands to the heme iron
and directing the reactivity of the heme-activated oxygen during catalysis. As a consequence of these roles, Pro107 minimizes
the oxidation of other residues of MauG. The diferrous MauG–NO structure indicated a critical role for another residue, Gln103, as this residue
interacts with the proximal nitrogen of bound NO via the donation
of a hydrogen bond. This suggested that it might play a role in oxygen
activation. Furthermore, a quantum chemical investigation of the spectroscopic
parameters of the bis-FeIV MauG suggested that Gln103 is
important in stabilizing the FeIV=O moiety by hydrogen
bonding to the oxo ligand. To determine
the importance of Gln103 in the structure and function of MauG, this
residue was converted to Ala, Leu, Glu, and Asn, and the consequences
of these mutations are described.

Experimental Procedures
Site-Directed
Mutagenesis
Gln103 of MauG was converted
to Ala, Asn, Leu, and Glu by site-directed mutagenesis of double-stranded
pMEG391, which contains mauG, using the Phusion kit
(New England Biolabs). The forward and reverse mutagenesis primers
were 5′-CTGAAGCAAGCAGCCGGC-3′
and 5′-GTCGTCCGCCCGGC-3′
(Q103A), 5′-CTGAAGCAAGAAGCCGGC-3′
and 5′-GTCGTCCGCCCGGC-3′
(Q103E), 5′-CTGAAGCAAAACGCCGGC-3′
and 5′-GTCGTCCGCCCGGC-3′
(Q103N), and 5′-CTGAAGCAACTAGCCGGC-3′
and 5′-GTCGTCCGCCCGGC-3′
(Q103L), respectively. The codon for the residue that was mutated
is underlined. The following thermal cycler conditions were employed:
a 45 s, 98 °C initial denaturation step; a 20 s, 98 °C denaturation
step; a 30 s, 68 °C primer annealing step; and a 270 s, 72 °C
primer extension step. The plasmids were amplified in 25 cycles, and
a 10 min, 72 °C final extension was performed.

Protein Expression
and Purification
Previously described
protocols were used for the purification of recombinant MauG from P. denitrificans() and preMADH
from Rhodobacter sphaeroides. Gln103 MauG variants were expressed in P. denitrificans and isolated from the periplasmic fraction as described for recombinant
wild-type (WT) MauG.

Mass Spectrometry
The Gln103 MauG variant proteins
were analyzed by whole protein mass spectrometry. Samples were prepared
and analyzed as described previously. The data were obtained with a QSTAR XL (AB Sciex) quadrupole time-of-flight
mass spectrometer with the IonSpray electrospray source, and Analyst
QS version 1.0 (AB Sciex) and BioAnalyst extensions version 1.1 (AB
Sciex) were used for the acquisition and analysis of the data.

Crystallization
and X-ray Structure Determination of the Q103N
MauG–preMADH Complex
Crystals of the Q103N MauG–preMADH
complex were obtained using conditions similar to those used for crystallization
of the WT MauG–preMADH complex. X-ray diffraction data were collected at GM/CA-CAT beamline 23-ID-D
of the Advanced Photon Source (APS) (Argonne National Laboratory,
Argonne, IL). Data were collected at 100 K using a beam size matching
the dimensions of the largest crystal face.

The diffraction
data are essentially isomorphous with data obtained previously from
crystals of the WT MauG–preMADH complex. Data were processed with HKL2000, and structure solutions were obtained by difference Fourier. The
initial model used for building was that of the WT MauG–preMADH
complex [Protein Data Bank (PDB) entry 3L4M] with solvent and ligands removed, and
Gln103 mutated to Asn. Restrained refinement with TLS was conducted
using REFMAC in the CCP4 program suite, and model building was conducted with COOT. No distance restraints were used between the
heme iron centers and their ligands. Refinement was deemed complete
when the Fo – Fc electron density contained only noise.

Redox Titrations
The Em values of Q103 MauG variant
proteins were determined by anaerobic
spectrochemical titration, as described previously for WT MauG. Data were fit by eq .
This equation describes a system with two redox-active centers, where a is the fraction of the total absorbance change that can
be attributed to one center and 1 – a is the
fraction of the total absorbance change that can be attributed to
the other.

Kinetic Studies
The steady-state
kinetic parameters
of the MauG-dependent biosynthesis of TTQ from preMADH were determined
using a spectrophotometric assay, as previously described., The data were fit by eq where S is preMADH and E
is MauG. The electron
transfer reaction from diferrous Q103N MauG to quinone MADH was studied
by single-turnover kinetics as described previously for WT MauG. Data were analyzed using eq where S is quinone MADH.

Results
Isolation and
Purification of Gln103 MauG Variant Proteins
Gln103 was converted
to Ala, Leu, Glu, and Asn by site-directed
mutagenesis. The Q103L MauG variant was not detected in the expression
system. Q103A, Q103N, and Q103E MauG variants were purified, and each
protein migrated as a single band via sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis at the same position as WT MauG. The yields of
Q103A and Q103N MauG were each comparable to that of WT MauG. The
yield of Q103E MauG was much smaller than that of WT MauG. Whole protein
electrospray ionization mass spectrometry confirmed the identity of
the isolated proteins. Q103E MauG and Q103N MauG each exhibited an
observed mass that was consistent with the calculated mass within
the resolution limit of the instrument. The Q103A MauG samples contained
three species, one with the correct calculated mass, as well as significant
proportions of +16 and +32 adducts. These same results were obtained
for Q103A MauG from two different preparations. These results suggest
that isolated Q103A MauG has undergone oxidative modification either in vivo or during the purification.

Effects of the Q103 Mutations
on the Visible Absorption Spectra
of the Diferric and Diferrous Redox States of MauG
The absorption
spectra of the diferric Q103 MauG variants were compared to those
of WT MauG. In WT MauG, the Soret peak is centered at 406 nm. The
Q103E mutation causes a 4 nm red shift of the Soret peak maximum and
a narrowing of the peak width relative to that of WT MauG (Figure A). The Q103A mutation causes a 2 nm red shift of
the maximum with a narrowing of the Soret region (Figure B). The spectrum of Q103N MauG is similar to that
of WT MauG except for a slight narrowing of the peak width (Figure C). The absorption spectra of the dithionite-reduced
forms of the proteins were also compared (Figure ). Reduction of WT MauG is characterized by an increase in
the intensity of the Soret peak, a shift in the absorbance maximum
to 418 nm, and the appearance of α and β bands at 550
and 520 nm, respectively. The spectra of the reduced Q103E and Q103N
MauG variants were similar to that of WT MauG. The spectrum of reduced
Q103A MauG was unusual. The Soret peak shifted but did not undergo
an increase in intensity, and the normally small peak at 320 nm is
greatly exaggerated.

Comparison of the absorption spectra of diferric forms
of WT with
those of variant MauGs. (A) Overlay of the spectra of 3.5 μM
diferric WT MauG (black) and Q103E MauG (blue). (B) Overlay of the
spectra of 3.1 μM diferric WT MauG (black) and diferric Q103A
MauG (green). (C) Overlay of the spectra of 3.5 μM diferric
WT MauG (black) and Q103N MauG (red).

Comparison of the absorption spectra of oxidized and reduced forms
of WT and Q103 variant MauGs. (A) Overlay of the spectra of 3.5 μM
diferric WT MauG before (—) and after (---) reduction by sodium
dithionite. (B) Overlay of the spectra of 3.5 μM diferric Q103N
MauG before (—) and after (---) reduction by sodium dithionite.
(C) Overlay of the spectra of 3.0 μM diferric Q103E MauG before
(—) and after (---) reduction by sodium dithionite. (D) Overlay
of the spectra of 3.5 μM diferric Q103A MauG before (—)
and after (---) reduction by sodium dithionite.

X-ray Crystal Structure of Q103N MauG
Attempts were
made to crystallize the Q103N, Q103A, and Q103E MauG variants, but
only the Q103N MauG–preMADH complex yielded diffraction quality
crystals. These were essentially isomorphous with the WT crystals,
and the structure of the Q103N MauG–preMADH complex was determined
to 2.6 Å (Table ). The overall structures
of WT and Q103N MauG–preMADH complexes are very similar with
a root-mean-square deviation of 0.80 Å over the entire complex.
Residual difference density in the high-spin heme distal pocket of
Q103N was observed, consistent with the introduction of a water molecule
within hydrogen bonding distance of Asn103 (Figure A). Although this hydrogen bond is shown between the water
molecule and the nitrogen atom, the resolution of the data and the
lack of definitive hydrogen bonding patterns do not preclude a 180°
flip of the Asn103 side chain, placing the oxygen atom in hydrogen
bond contact with water. Comparison of the high-spin heme environment
of Q103N to that of WT MauG shows that other distal residues are largely
unperturbed by the mutation (Figure B). The
water molecule introduced into the Q103N MauG structure adopts a position
nearly coincident (within 1 Å) with the amide N atom of the Gln103
side chain in the WT structure. As Gln103 is proposed to be an important
hydrogen bond donor stabilizing the bis-Fe(IV) state, this structure
suggests that the water molecule introduced into the distal pocket
of Q103N MauG is in a position to fulfill a similar function.

(A) Electron
density for the high-spin heme and Q103N mutation
site in MauG from the Q103N MauG–preMADH crystal structure,
showing difference density for a model without the water molecule
within hydrogen bond distance of Asn103. The 2Fo – Fc density is drawn
as blue mesh contoured at 1.0σ. Positive Fo – Fc density is drawn
as green mesh contoured at 4.0σ. (B) Comparison of the Q103N
(blue) and WT (PDB entry 3L4M, pink) MauG high-spin hemes and distal residues. This
figure was generated using Pymol (http://www.pymol.org/).

X-ray Crystallography
Data Collection
and Refinement Statistics for the Q103N MauG–preMADH Complex
Data Collection	
space group	P1	
unit cell lengths (Å)	55.90 × 86.02 ×
108.08	
unit cell angles (deg)	111.52, 91.75, 104.22	
wavelength (Å)	1.03324	
resolution (Å)	50.00–2.59 (2.63–2.59)	
no. of measured reflections	211579	
no. of unique reflections	55071	
completeness (%)	98.6 (97.6)	
Rmerge (%)	11.5 (59.9)	
I/σI	12.4 (2.1)	
multiplicity	3.8 (3.8)	
Refinement	
Rwork (%)	19.8	
Rfree (%)	25.4	
no. of protein atoms	13269	
no. of ligand atoms	222	
no. of solvent atoms	398	
Ramachandran statistics (%)	 	
allowed	98.89	
outliers	1.01	
root-mean-square deviation	 	
bond lengths (Å)	0.005	
bond angles (deg)	1.400	
average B factor (Å2)	52.60	
PDB entry	4O1Q	
Values in parentheses
are for the
highest-resolution shell.

Rmerge = ∑i|Ihkl,i – ⟨Ihkl⟩|/∑hkl∑iIhkl,i, where I is the observed
intensity and ⟨Ihkl⟩ is the average intensity of multiple measurements.

Rwork = ∑||Fo| – |Fc||/∑|Fo|, where Fo is the observed structure factor amplitude
and Fc is the calculated structure factor
amplitude.

Rfree is the R factor based on 5% of the
data excluded
from refinement.

Based on
values attained from refinement
validation options in COOT.

Effects of the Q103N Mutation on the Redox and Enzymatic Properties
of MauG
Q103A MauG was isolated as a mixed population with
a significant proportion of the protein exhibiting oxidative modification,
as evidenced by mass spectrometry. The yield of Q103E MauG was very
low, suggesting that this mutation significantly affected the biosynthesis
of the protein, its stability, or both. Neither Q103A MauG nor Q103E
MauG could be crystallized. For these reasons, the decision was made
to focus the remaining studies on the Q103N MauG variant.

WT
MauG exhibits two Em values of −158
and −246 mV. These values correspond to the addition or removal
of the first and second electrons from the diheme system. The reductive titration of the as-isolated diferric
Q103N yielded two Em values of −11.2
± 9.0 and −150.7 ± 5.9 mV (Figure ). As in the case of WT MauG, the two hemes of Q103N MauG
were reduced simultaneously despite the two Em values. Thus, the mutation did not disrupt the redox cooperativity
between hemes that has been described for WT MauG, but it did make the Em values
less negative.

Spectrochemical redox titration of Q103N MauG. The titration
was
performed anaerobically in 50 mM potassium phosphate (pH 7.5) at 25
°C. The fraction of MauG that was reduced was determined by comparison
with the spectra of the completely oxidized and reduced forms of MauG
and quantitated from the absorbance at 550 nm. The solid line is the
fit of the data to eq .

A relatively stable bis-FeIV redox state is formed
by
addition of H2O2 to WT MauG as judged by changes
in the Soret peak and near-infrared (NIR) region of the absorbance
spectrum., It exhibits a decrease in the intensity
of the Soret peak and a 2 nm red shift of the absorption maxima (Figure A), as well as the appearance of a broad absorbance
centered at 950 nm (Figure B). The latter
feature is characteristic of a charge-resonance transition that stabilizes
the bis-FeIV state. Reaction
of Q103N MauG with H2O2 caused similar but not
identical spectral changes. Whereas WT MauG displays a red shift of
both sides of the Soret peak, Q103N MauG displays a sharper peak caused
by a red shift for only the lower-wavelength side of the Soret band
(Figure C). As seen with WT MauG, a peak centered
at 950 nm also appears. The intensity of the α/β bands,
which present as two peaks in the 520–560 nm region, is decreased
in Q103N MauG, and it exhibits some weak absorbance in the 600–700
nm region (Figure D). For WT MauG, the spontaneous
return of the spectrum to that of the diferric state occurs over several
minutes, with the changes in the Soret and NIR regions occurring at
similar rates. However, the H2O2-induced spectral changes in the Soret and NIR regions
of the Q103N MauG spectrum spontaneously decayed at different rates.
The rate of change in the Soret peak of Q103N MauG [k = (1.4 ± 0.1) × 10–2 s–1] is 4.5-fold greater than for WT MauG [k = (3.1
± 0.3) × 10–3 s–1] (Figure E). In contrast, the rates of decay of the peak
at 950 nm for WT MauG [k = (1.7 ± 0.1) ×
10–3 s–1] and Q103N MauG [k = (2.5 ± 0.4) × 10–3 s–1] are similar (Figure F).

Changes
in absorption spectra of WT and Q103N MauG after addition
of H2O2. Panels A–D display overlays
of the Soret region (A) and NIR region (B) of the spectrum of 2.5
μM diferric WT MauG before (black line) and immediately after
(red line) addition of a stoichiometric amount of H2O2, and of the Soret region (C) and NIR region (D) of the spectrum
of 2.5 μM diferric Q103N MauG before (black line) and immediately
after (red line) addition of a stoichiometric amount of H2O2. (E) Time course for the return to the resting spectrum
of WT MauG (blue squares) and Q103N MauG (green circles) in the Soret
region. This describes the transition from the red spectrum back to
the black spectrum in panels A and C. The data are for the absorbance
at 405 nm for WT MauG and 403 nm for Q103N MauG. The lines are the
fits of each data set to a single-exponential transition. (F) Time
course for the return to the resting spectrum of WT MauG (blue squares)
and Q103N MauG (green circles) in the NIR region. This describes the
transition from the red spectrum back to the black spectrum in panels
B and D. The data are for the absorbance at 950 nm. The lines are
the fits of each data set to a single-exponential transition.

The steady-state kinetic parameters
of Q103N MauG-dependent TTQ
biosynthesis were determined using preMADH and H2O2 as the substrates (Figure A). WT
MauG exhibited a kcat of 0.16 ± 0.1
s–1 and a Km of 2.0
± 0.3 μM for preMADH. Q103N MauG exhibited a kcat of 0.14 ± 0.1 s–1 and a Km of 2.1 ± 0.3 μM for preMADH. In
addition to this biosynthetic reaction, a nonbiosynthetic electron
transfer reaction from diferrous MauG to quinone MADH has been characterized. This reaction does not require formation of
the bis-FeIV state. Q103N MauG was active in this electron
transfer reaction (Figure B) and exhibited
a rate constant of 0.053 ± 0.004 s–1 and a Kd of 6.2 ± 1.7 μM. WT MauG exhibited
a rate constant of 0.063 ± 0.002 s–1 and a Kd of 10.4 ± 0.8 μM. The decreased
reaction rate could be a consequence of the fact that the Q103N mutation
makes the Em values associated with the
diferric/diferrous MauG couple ∼100 mV less negative. This
would decrease the thermodynamic driving force for this electron transfer
reaction. Unfortunately, it was not possible to determine the Em values associated with the bis-FeIV/diferric couple. It should be noted that even if these Em values were affected by the mutation, an effect on the
steady-state rate of biosynthesis of TTQ from preMADH might not be
observed because the steady-state kcat is approximately 4-fold lower than the rate constant for the reduction
of bis-FeIV in WT MauG by preMADH.,

Steady-state
and single-turnover kinetic analysis. (A) Steady-state
kinetics of Q103N MauG-dependent (○) and WT MauG-dependent
(●) biosynthesis of TTQ from preMADH. MauG was mixed with preMADH
in 0.01 M potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.5) at 25 °C. Reactions
were initiated by the addition of 100 μM H2O2, and the rate of appearance of quinone MADH was monitored
at 440 nm. The lines are fits of the data to eq . (B) Single-turnover kinetics of the reaction of diferrous Q103N
MauG (○) and WT MauG (●) with quinone MADH. Reaction
mixtures contained a fixed concentration of diferrous MauG (1.25 μM)
and varied concentrations of quinone MADH. The reaction was monitored
by the decrease in absorbance at 550 nm that corresponds to the conversion
of diferrous to diferric MauG. The data for the concentration dependence
of the rate are fit to eq .

Discussion
Gln103 is one of three
residues in the distal pocket of the high-spin
heme of MauG. This residue has been implicated in catalytic activity
on the basis of crystal structures of the MauG–preMADH complex and the NO adduct of MauG. Pro107 was shown to be critical for maintaining the proper
structure around the high-spin heme, controlling O2 or
H2O2 binding, and directing the reactivity of
the resulting high-valence intermediate toward productive catalysis
rather than oxidative damage., Glu113 was shown to
be required for the formation and stabilization of both the diferrous
and bis-FeIV redox states of MauG. The results of this study provide insight into the role of Gln103,
which has been postulated to be important in stabilizing the FeIV=O moiety of the bis-FeIV intermediate
through hydrogen bonding.,

The importance
of residue Gln103 is highlighted by the observation
that nonconservative mutations at this position are not well-tolerated.
While near-WT levels of Q103N MauG could be isolated, Q103L MauG was
undetectable and Q103E MauG could be isolated in only small amounts
insufficient for detailed studies. Although sterically conservative,
these mutations alter the electrostatic environment of the heme and
adversely affect the biosynthesis of the MauG protein, its stability,
or both. The observation that isolated Q103A MauG has undergone oxidative
modification could be explained by either a decreased level of stabilization
of the bis-FeIV state or the generation of an alternative
high-valence heme species that leads to nonspecific oxidation of nearby
residues. A similar phenomenon was observed as a consequence of certain
mutations of Pro107, which is positioned near Gln103 (see Figure B).,

The Q103N mutation makes
the Em values
associated with the diferric/diferrous couple ∼100 mV less
negative. This could be due to altered hydrogen bonding networks that
stabilize the reduced state of Q103N MauG relative to WT MauG. It
was previously shown that an E113Q mutation also altered this redox
couple; however, in that case, the redox cooperativity between the
hemes was abolished, whereas the cooperativity
is retained in Q103N MauG. A notable effect of the Q103N mutation
is on the nature and stability of the high-valence species that is
formed upon reaction with H2O2. The spectral
changes that are observed initially upon reaction with H2O2 are very similar to those of WT MauG and consistent
with formation of the bis-FeIV state. However, the spontaneous
return to the resting spectrum of the Soret peak is 4.5-fold greater
than that observed for WT MauG. In contrast, the decay of the NIR
peak occurs at a rate similar to that of WT MauG.

The NIR absorbance
of the bis-FeIV state has been attributed
to an unusual charge-resonance transition in which the two FeIV hemes and Trp93 share spin and charge via very rapid hopping-mediated
electron transfer. In this model, the
bis-FeIV state is the dominant species, but it is in charge
resonance with an ensemble of resonance structures, including Compound
ES-like and Compound I-like species. It was previously shown that
E113Q MauG exhibited the NIR absorbance feature but did not exhibit
the characteristic change in the Soret peak. The explanation for those results was that the E113Q mutation altered
the distribution of resonance structures such that the bis-FeIV state was no longer the dominant species within the ensemble
and therefore existed for only a small percentage of the time. This
unfavorable resonance equilibrium for bis-FeIV stabilization
limited the availability of the bis-FeIV state, consistent
with the observed loss of activity that was caused by the E113Q mutation.
In contrast, with Q103N MauG, it appears that a bis-FeIV state with a distribution of resonance structures similar to WT
MauG initially forms. However, the subsequent more rapid change in
the Soret peak without a concomitant change in the 950 nm absorbance
suggests that one or more of the high-valence species predominantly
associated with the changes in the Soret peak, but not the NIR feature,
decay more quickly or alternatively are converted to a different high-valence
species that allows retention of the charge-resonance stabilization.
The presence of a different ensemble of resonance structures stabilizing
the bis-FeIV state in Q103N MauG could also explain the
subtle differences in absorbance features in the 520–700 nm
region of the spectrum (see Figure ). This
could be a consequence of a subtle difference in the stability of
the ferryl heme and other high-valence species because of the differential
hydrogen bonding to a water rather than the Gln103 side chain. In
contrast to what was seen with the E113Q mutation, the bis-FeIV state of Q103N is still the dominant species among the resonance
structures, and this allows normal reactivity toward preMADH.

These results are consistent with the hypothesis that Gln103 is
important in the stabilization of the FeIV=O moiety
by hydrogen bonding to the oxo. Even though Asn103 is unable to directly
form a hydrogen bond with the ferryl heme moiety in Q103N MauG, the
high-valence species is still relatively stable. The reason that its
lifetime is not more transient as a consequence of this mutation may
be explained by the crystal structure, which supports the proposal
that a water forms a bridge between the shorter Asn103 side chain
and the FeIV=O moiety through hydrogen bonding.
The hydrogen bond to the oxo iron ligand may be weaker than the direct
hydrogen bond to Gln103 observed in WT MauG. This could explain the
initial change in the Soret peak leading to a different distribution
of resonance structures that contribute to charge-resonance stabilization
of the bis-FeIV state. These results and those of previous
studies,, indicate that
multiple amino acid residues surrounding the hemes of MauG actively
participate in controlling the stabilization of the charge-resonance
stabilization of the high-valence state of MauG. The deleterious effects
of replacement of Gln103 with Leu or Glu, and the oxidative damage
observed upon replacement with Ala, coupled with an inability to crystallize
these variants, further speak to the importance of residue Gln103
in the overall stability of the MauG protein, as well as control of
the reactivity of the hemes.

Accession Codes
The coordinates
and structure factors for the Q103N MauG–preMADH complex have
been deposited in the PDB as entry 4O1Q.

Author Present Address
§ E.T.Y.:
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, New Mexico State
University, Las Cruces, NM 88003.

This research
was supported by National Institute of General Medical Sciences Grants
R37GM41574 (V.L.D.), R01GM66569 (C.M.W.), and F32GM97779 (E.T.Y.)
and Minnesota Partnership for Biotechnology and Medical Genomics Grant
SPAP-05-0013-P-FY06 (C.M.W.).

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
Computer resources
were provided by the Basic Sciences Computing
Laboratory of the University of Minnesota Supercomputing Institute,
and we thank Nancy Rowe for her support. X-ray data were collected
at the Kahlert Structural Biology Laboratory (KSBL) at The University
of Minnesota and GM/CA-CAT at the APS. GM/CA CAT has been funded with
funds from the National Cancer Institute (Y1-CO-1020) and the National
Institute of General Medical Sciences (Y1-GM-1104). Use of the APS
was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Basic Energy Sciences,
Office of Science, under Contract DE-AC02-06CH11357. We thank Ed Hoeffner
for KSBL support and the staff at Sector 23 of the APS for their support.
We also thank Yu Tang for technical assistance.

Abbreviations
TTQtryptophan tryptophylquinone

preMADHbiosynthetic precursor
protein of MADH with incompletely synthesized TTQ

bis-Fe(IV) MauGredox state of MauG
with one heme as Fe(IV)=O and the other as Fe(IV)

WTwild-type

NIRnear-infrared.

