β-2-Microglobulin (β2m) is a monomeric
protein with
99 residues and is essential for the correct folding, assembly, and
cell surface expression of the class I major histocompatibility complex
(MHC-1). During normal turnover, β2m
is released from the MHC-1 complex and transported to the kidney where
it is degraded. For patients who are suffering from kidney disease
and undergo long-term dialysis treatment, β2m forms amyloid
fibrils and deposits in the joints and connective tissues, leading
to a condition known as dialysis-related amyloidosis (DRA). The circulating concentration of β2m in
DRA patients increases up to ∼60 times above the normal level
of 0.1 μM, but elevated β2m concentrations alone are not
sufficient to
trigger fibrillogenesis., β2m amyloid formation
must therefore result from other factors related to hemodialysis,
but the exact mechanism in vivo is not known. In vitro, β2m oligomerization and fibril formation
can be generated several ways, including by incubation of the protein
under acidic conditions, by truncation
of the first six N-terminal amino acids, by mixing the protein with collagen at pH 6.4, by sonication of the protein with sodium dodecyl sulfate
at pH 7.0, and by incubation of the protein
under physiological conditions in the presence of stoichiometric amounts
of Cu(II).,

Initiation of β2m amyloid formation
by Cu(II) is particularly
interesting because clinical studies have shown that dialysis patients
treated with Cu(II)-free membranes have a &gt;50% reduced incidence
of DRA compared to patients who are exposed
to traditional Cu(II)-containing dialysis membranes., Additionally, it seems that Cu(II), more than any other, can influence
the amyloid formation of a variety of other protein systems. For example, Cu(II) binds α-synuclein
and enhances the formation of oligomers and amyloid fibrils by this
protein., In the presence of substoichiometric levels
of Cu(II), Aβ1–42, which is associated with Alzheimer’s
disease, can also assemble
into amyloid fibrils; however, excess
Cu(II) concentrations cause the formation of spherical oligomers and
amorphous aggregates that are unable to seed fibril formation of this
peptide. Cu(II) has even been implicated
in the misfolding and fibril formation of the prion protein as Cu(II)
binding causes structural changes and induces endocytosis of the protein. Cu(II) has also been shown to induce amyloid
formation of the immunoglobulin light chain as well as the Huntington protein. In
contrast, other transition metal ions can induce amyloid formation
in some cases, but more often they tend to initiate non-amyloid aggregation
or perhaps even inhibit amyloid formation. For instance,
Zn(II) can promote α-synuclein fibril formation in vitro but promotes amorphous aggregation of Aβ1–40 only on
modified surfaces while actually
inhibiting fibril formation at equivalent concentrations in solution.

In analogy with many other amyloid-forming
proteins, β2m
can be induced to form amyloids in the presence of Cu(II), whereas
other metals do not; only a few isolated experiments have been conducted
to study the effect of different metals on β2m., In this work, we describe a more detailed set of experiments to
delineate how other transition metals influence β2m oligomerization
and aggregation. Specifically, we chose Ni(II) and Zn(II) for comparison
to Cu(II) primarily because they have binding preferences (e.g., coordination
numbers and geometries) different from those of Cu(II),
while maintaining a similar ionic radius. In our experiments, we found
that Ni(II) does not induce β2m oligomerization or aggregation,
while Zn(II) facilitates oligomerization and aggregation but not amyloid
fibril formation. Using a variety of tools, we elucidate the different
ways that these metals bind β2m, thereby identifying key features
of the β2m–Cu(II) interaction that are essential for
allowing this protein to form amyloid fibrils.

Materials and
Methods
Materials
Human β2m purified from urine was purchased
from Lee Biosolutions (St. Louis, MO). Using mass spectrometry-based
sequencing experiments, we find that ∼100% of the purchased
protein has its disulfide intact. In addition, there are no modifications
to the protein, except for a small fraction (∼15–20%)
of the protein that shows oxidation
at Met99. l-Ascorbate acid, D2O, dithiothreitol
(DTT), glacial acetic acid, 3-morpholinopropanesulfonic acid (MOPS),
potassium acetate, potassium bromide, urea, and Zn(II) sulfate were
purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Acetonitrile, ammonium
acetate, sodium persulfate, Cu(II) sulfate, and Ni(II) sulfate were
purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Waltham, MA). Immobilized
trypsin and chymotrypsin (digestion buffer with triethylamine included)
were purchased from Princeton Separations (Adelphia, NJ). Amicon molecular
weight cutoff (MWCO) filters were purchased from Millipore (Burlington,
MA). Deionized water was prepared with a Millipore Simplicity 185
water purification system.

Formation of β2m Oligomers and Amyloid
Fibrils
A sample solution containing 100 μM β2m,
the metal of interest at the desired concentration, 150
mM potassium acetate, 500 mM urea, and 25 mM MOPS (pH 7.4) was incubated
at 37 °C. Control experiments without the metal were also performed
in which 1 mM EDTA was added to prevent any association between trace
metals and β2m. In these control experiments, no oligomers or
fibrils are formed under any of the conditions used; the urea concentration
of 500 mM is higher than the concentration found in uremic patients
(50 mM) undergoing dialysis, but this
relatively high concentration was used so that β2m oligomerization
and fibril formation could be seen in a reasonable time period.

Thioflavin T Fluorescence
Fluorescence experiments
for monitoring β2m amyloid formation were performed using a
QuantaMaster 4 SE spectrofluorometer (Photon Technology International,
Lawrenceville, NJ). A solution containing 100 μM β2m,
500 mM urea, 150 mM potassium acetate, and 25 mM MOPS
(pH 7.4) was initially equilibrated at 37 °C, and after the addition
of the metal of interest, the fluorescence of ThT was monitored at
an emission wavelength of 483 nm, using an excitation wavelength of
437 nm.

Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM)
TEM images were
obtained on a JEOL JEM-100CX electron microscope operated at 100 keV.
Before analysis, a solution containing β2m aggregates was centrifuged
(12500 rpm) for 5 min and decanted. The solid material was then suspended
in 1 mL of deionized water, applied to carbon-coated grids (Electron
Microscopy Sciences, Hatfield, PA), stained with 1% phosphotungstic
acid (pH 7.4), air-dried overnight, and then analyzed.

Size Exclusion
Chromatography (SEC)
Incubated solutions
of β2m were separated using a TSK-gel SuperSW2000 column (Tosoh
bioscience, King of Prussia, PA) installed on an HP1100 series high-performance
liquid chromatography system (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA). Before the
analysis of any given sample, the SEC column was first equilibrated
with a 150 mM ammonium acetate mobile phase (pH 6.8) at a flow rate
of 0.35 mL/min for 1 h. Twenty microliters of the incubated sample
or calibration standard was injected for
analysis, and the variable-wavelength detector was set at 214 nm.
A solution containing 5 μM bovine serum albumin (MW = 66000),
5 μM ovalbumin (MW = 45000), 5 μM carbonic anhydrase (MW
= 29040), and 5 μM β2m (MW = 11731) was used for molecular
weight calibration.

Metal-Catalyzed Oxidation (MCO) Reactions
The MCO reactions
for the β2m–Cu(II) complex were performed in the presence
of 5 μM β2m, 5 μM CuSO4, 0.1 mM ascorbate,
0.1 mM persulfate, 150 mM potassium
acetate, and 25 mM MOPS (pH 7.4) at room temperature for 10 min. The
MCO reactions for the β2m–Ni(II) complex were performed
in the presence of 200 μM β2m, 250 μM NiSO4, 5 mM ascorbate, 0.5 mM persulfate, 150 mM potassium
acetate, and 25 mM MOPS (pH 7.4) at room temperature for 20 min. The
MCO substitution reactions for the β2m–Cu(II)–Zn(II)
complex were performed
in the presence of 5 μM β2m, 5 μM CuSO4, 0–200
μM ZnSO4, 0.5 mM ascorbate, 25 μM persulfate,
150 mM potassium acetate, and 25 mM MOPS (pH 7.4) at
room temperature for 1 min. The reactions were initiated by the addition
of ascorbate and were quenched by the addition of 2% acetic acid.
The samples were then immediately desalted using a 10000 MWCO filter
and reconstituted in 50 mM triethylamine (pH 8.0) for proteolytic
digestion.

Hydrogen–Deuterium Exchange of the
C2 Hydrogens of Histidine
A
solution containing 100 μM β2m, 150 mM potassium acetate,
and 25 mM MOPS with and without
100 μM ZnSO4 was incubated in D2O (95%)
at pH 7.4
and 37 °C. After a given reaction time, an aliquot of the sample
was diluted 20-fold into H2O, desalted, reconcentrated,
digested by immobilized chymotrypsin, and then analyzed by liquid
chromatography and mass spectrometry (LC–MS). The total time
in H2O before analysis was kept constant at 3.5 h to ensure
back-exchange to hydrogen for the fast exchanging amide groups on
the backbone and side chains of the protein. This step was important
to ensure that deuteriums remained only at the C2 position of the
His residues. The deuterium content of each His-containing peptide,
after proteolytic digestion, was determined by calculating the weighted
average mass of its isotopic peaks. For dissociation constant (Kd) measurements of the β2m–Zn(II)
complex, 75 μM β2m was incubated with 0, 25, 50, 75, 110,
and 135 μM ZnSO4 in 150 mM potassium acetate and
25 mM MOPS in D2O at pH 7.4 and 37 °C for 3 days.
Aliquots of the samples
were analyzed by LC–MS in a manner similar to that described
above.

Hydrogen–Deuterium Exchange of the Amide Hydrogens
The β2m global exchange
experiments were conducted by taking a 750 μM solution of β2m
in buffered H2O and diluting it
20-fold into D2O that was buffered with 25 mM MOPS, 150
mM potassium acetate, and the metal of interest. The final protein
solution in D2O contained 6 mM NiSO4, 150 μM
ZnSO4, 75 μM CuSO4, or no metal. The exchange
time was varied between
10 s and 3 h. After the allotted exchange time, the reaction was quenched
by bringing the sample to pH 2.6 and 0 °C. The sample was then
immediately injected into an LC–MS instrument, where the deuterium
uptake was measured.

Proteolytic Digestion
Immobilized
trypsin and immobilized
chymotrypsin were used to proteolytically digest β2m after the
MCO and histidine-based hydrogen–deuterium exchange reactions.
An 80 μL solution of the protein was first incubated with 15
μL
of acetonitrile at 45 °C for 30 min, and then 7.5 mM DTT was
added and allowed to react with the protein at 37 °C for an additional
30 min. The immobilized enzymes were added to yield a final enzyme:substrate
ratio of 1:10. The protein samples were digested in a shaking water
bath (VWR, Radnor, PA) at 37 °C for 2 h. After the enzymes had
been inactivated via the addition of 2 μL of acetic acid, the
samples oxidized by the MCO reactions were frozen
at −10 °C and analyzed within 24 h, whereas the hydrogen–deuterium
exchange samples were analyzed immediately.

Liquid Chromatography and
Mass Spectrometry
A Bruker
(Billerica, MA) AmaZon quadrupole ion trap mass spectrometer coupled
with an HP1100 series high-performance liquid chromatography system
(Agilent) was used for all MS analyses. Typically, the electrospray
needle voltage was kept at 4–4.5 kV, and the capillary temperature
was set to 200 °C. Tandem
mass spectra were recorded using an isolation width of 2.0–4.0
Da and excitation voltages of 0.5–0.8 V. Peptide sequences
were determined from tandem MS data via de novo sequencing.

X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy
Samples of β2m
were prepared at varying concentrations (1.0–3.2 mM) in a buffer
containing 25 mM MOPS buffer and 150 mM KBr (pH
7.4). These relatively high concentrations of protein are common in
X-ray absorption experiments to obtain sufficient signal. KBr was
used in the buffer to distinguish binding of buffer anions, because
Cl– binding cannot be unambiguously distinguished
from an S donor
ligand from extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) analysis.
Such an approach has been used extensively in the past., In separate experiments, the addition of KBr had no significant
effect on the amyloid formation of β2m. Indeed, as compared
to 150 mM potassium acetate, which is typically used in our amyloid
formation reactions, KBr changes the rate of amyloid formation by
only &lt;15%, as indicated by ThT fluorescence experiments (data not
shown). Separate solutions of metal sulfates were also prepared in
the same buffer system to act as a control in the X-ray absorption
experiments. The metal solution and β2m were combined with glycerol
(final concentration of 10% by volume) and mixed thoroughly. Solutions
were run down a desalting column to remove nonspecifically bound metal
ions. The solutions were
then injected via syringe into polycarbonate holders and frozen in
liquid nitrogen. On the basis of the binding affinity of the metal
for β2m, the final concentrations of the metal and the protein
were combined such that the resulting solutions contained (1) 3.2
mM β2m and 1.0 mM NiSO4 [β2m–Ni(II)
complex], (2) 1.0 mM β2m and 1.0 mM CuSO4 [β2m–Cu(II)
complex], and (3) 2 mM β2m and 1.2 mM ZnSO4 [β2m–Zn(II)
complex]. The concentrations of the metal were determined by inductively
coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) and were found
to be stoichiometric or slightly substoichiometric (&gt;85% loadings
in each case) with respect to the protein in the sample.

Nickel
and zinc K-edge XAS data were collected as previously described under dedicated ring conditions at the National
Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS, 2.8 GeV ring, 120–300 mA) of
the Brookhaven National Laboratory on beamline X3B using a sagitally
focusing Si(111) double-crystal monochromator.
X-ray fluorescence was collected using a 30-element Ge fluorescence
detector (Canberra) on samples held at ∼14 K in a He displex
cryostat. Scattering was minimized by placing
a Z-1 element filter [Co(II) or Cu(II)] between the sample chamber
and the detector. Internal energy calibration was performed by collecting
spectra simultaneously in transition mode on the corresponding metal
foil to determine the first inflection point on the edge, which was
set to 8331.6 eV [Ni(II)] or 9660.7 eV [Zn(II)]. X-ray absorption
near-edge spectroscopy (XANES) data were collected from −200
to 200 eV relative to the metal K-edge. EXAFS was collected to 13.5–15k above the edge energy (E0),
depending on the signal:noise at high k values.

Copper K-edge X-ray fluorescence data were similarly collected at
the Stanford Synchrotron
Radiation Laboratory (SSRL) beamline 7-3 using a 30-element fluorescence
detector (Canberra) on samples held
at 10 K using a liquid helium cryostat (Oxford Instruments). Beamline
optics include a Si(220) double-crystal monochromator and a single
rhodium-coated mirror for harmonic rejection. Scattering was minimized
by placing a set of Soller slits with a Z-1 element filter (Ni) between
the sample chamber and the detector. Internal energy calibration was
performed by collecting spectra simultaneously in transition mode
on a copper metal foil to determine the first inflection point on
the edge (8980.3 eV). X-ray absorption near-edge spectroscopy (XANES)
data were collected from −200 to 200 eV relative to the metal’s
K-edge. EXAFS was collected to
15k above E0. Because
the β2m–Cu(II) sample is photoreduced in the beam, the
sample was moved after each scan such that the incident X-ray beam
irradiated a fresh section on the sample to obtain the spectrum of
the Cu(II) complex. This was done using two cuvettes, yielding six
scans, and these scans were averaged. Samples held in place for 10
scans showed edge energy shifts of as much as 3 eV. The scans used
for the average spectrum obtained by moving the sample after each
scan were essentially superimposable.

Data analysis was performed
as previously described using SIXpack and
the Horae (Artemis) software package. The data were converted to k space using the relationship k = {[2me(E – E0)]/(ℏ2)}1/2, where me is the mass of the
electron, ℏ is Plank’s constant divided by 2π,
and E0 is the threshold energy of the
absorption edge. Data were loaded, averaged after removal of bad detector
elements, background corrected, normalized, and calibrated using SIXpack.
The Artemis fitting software package, which builds on the IFEFFIT
engine, was used to fit EXAFS data during model refinement. The k3-weighted
data were fit in r space over a k range of 2–12.5 Å–1 (uncorrected for
phase shifts) using an S0 value of 0.9,
and a Kaiser–Bessel window where
dk = 1. Separate sets of Δreff and σ2 for the sulfur, nitrogen,
and bromide ligands were used,
with a universal E0 [initially set to
be 8340 eV for Ni(II), 8990 eV for Cu(II), and 9670 eV for Zn(II)].
Initial input metal–ligand distances were 2.0 Å for the
M–N(O) bond, 2.3 Å for the M–S bond, and 2.4 Å
for the M–Br bond. Single-scatter fits were generated using
an R′ space range of 1–2.5 Å, and multiple-scattering
contributions from histidines were explored
for the best single-scattering fits using a data range of 1–4.5
Å
(uncorrected for phase shifts) in r space. Single-scatter
and multiple-scatter fits were performed using the general EXAFS equation

For multiple scattering
arising from histidine imidazole ligands,
average values and bond lengths obtained from crystallographic data
were used to construct rigid imidazole rings. The distance of the five non-hydrogen atoms in the imidazole rings
from the metal center was fit in terms of a single metal–ligand
bond distance (reff) for various angles
α (0–10°), around an axis perpendicular to the plane
of the ring and going through the coordinating nitrogen.,

To assess the goodness of fit from different fitting models,
the
fit parameters reduced χ2 and Rfactor were minimized. Increasing the number of adjustable
parameters is generally expected to improve the Rfactor; however, reduced χ2 may go through
a minimum and then increase, indicating the model is overfitting the
data. These parameters are defined as follows:where Nidp is
the number of independent data points defined aswhere Δr is the fitting
range in r space, Δk is the
fitting range in k space, Npts is the number of points in the fitting range, Nvar is the number of variables floating during the fit,
ε
is the measurement of uncertainty, the Re term is the real part of
the EXAFS Fourier-transformed
data and theory functions, the Im term is the imaginary part of the
EXAFS Fourier-transformed data and
theory functions, X(Ri) is the Fourier-transformed data or theory function,
and

Single-scattering fits were calculated
for models containing an
integer number of ligands from two to seven, using all possible combinations
of N and S donors, and including Br– ligands as
needed. The best single-scattering fits were further
refined using multiple-scattering parameters to account for EXAFS
arising from the imidazole side chain of histidine ligands, by replacing
integer numbers of N/O donors in the single-scattering fits with imidazoles
(see Tables S1–S9 of the ). The best fits listed in Table  were determined
by minimizing the values of Rfactor and
reduced χ2 for fits with reasonable values of σ2.

Best Fits with Multiple Scattering
for EXAFS Fits from Cu(II)–, Ni(II)–, and Zn(II)−β2m
Complexes
 	 	radius R′
(Å)	σ2 (Å2)	E0 shift (eV)	%Rfactor	
Cu(II)	3 N/O	1.95(1)	18(5)	–2(1)	7.8	
 	1 Im	1.95(1)	2(1)	 	 	
 	1 Br	2.40(2)	12(2)	 	 	
Ni(II)	4 N/O	2.06(8)	2(1)	0(2)	6.4	
 	1 Im	2.06(8)	1(4)	 	 	
 	1 Br	2.44(3)	9(2)	 	 	
Zn(II)	2 N/O	1.99(1)	4(2)	–8(2)	6.2	
 	2 Im	1.99(1)	5(2)	 	 	
 	1 Br	2.38(1)	6(1)	 	 	
Results
Distinct Effects of Cu(II),
Ni(II), and Zn(II) on β2m
Oligomerization and Fibril Formation
To test the specificity
of Cu(II) for inducing β2m amyloid formation, we explored the
aggregation properties of β2m in the presence of Zn(II) and
Ni(II). Oligomerization and amyloid formation of β2m were monitored
by four methods: (i) thioflavin T (ThT) fluorescence, (ii) size exclusion
chromatography (SEC), (iii) sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) dissolution,
and (iv) transmission electron microscopy (TEM). An increase in ThT
fluorescence at 483 nm is a common means of monitoring the formation
of amyloid-like species in solution. When
each metal is added to a solution with β2m and ThT, we find
that Cu(II) and Zn(II) cause a change in the dye’s fluorescence,
suggesting amyloid formation, but Ni(II) does not (Figure ). Similarly, when SEC is used to follow the formation
of β2m oligomeric species, we find that no β2m oligomers
are formed in the presence of Ni(II) (Figure a). In contrast, discrete oligomeric species are formed in the presence
of Zn(II) and Cu(II) (panels b and c, respectively, of Figure ). Curiously, only dimers and hexamers are formed
in the presence of Zn(II), whereas dimers, tetramers, and hexamers
are formed when Cu(II) is present. The progression of oligomers in
the presence of Cu(II) is consistent with previous reports by our
group and others., The absence of tetramers when
Zn(II) is added clearly indicates that Zn(II) has a different effect
on β2m aggregation.

Changes in ThT fluorescence at 483 nm over time
in the absence
(black) and presence of Cu(II) (green), Zn(II) (blue), and Ni(II)
(red). Each solution contained 100 μM β2m, 150 μM
CuSO4 or ZnSO4 or 3 mM NiSO4, 500
mM urea, 150 mM potassium acetate, 25 mM MOPS (pH 7.4), and 80 μM
ThT.

SEC analyses of 100 μM β2m incubated
with (a) 4 mM
Ni(II), (b) 150 μM Zn(II), and (c) 150 μM Cu(II). In each
case, the protein and indicated metal were mixed with 500 mM urea,
150 mM potassium acetate, and 25 mM MOPS (pH 7.4) at 37 °C. The
control sample is 100 μM β2m incubated with 5 mM EDTA
in 150 mM potassium acetate and 25 mM MOPS (pH 7.4) at 37 °C.
M, M2, M4, and M6 indicate the β2m monomer, dimer, tetramer,
and hexamer, respectively.

The ability of the metals to induce the formation
of amyloid fibrils was assessed using SDS dissolution and TEM measurements
after incubation for 1.5 months with all three metals. Consistent
with the data in Figures  and , no insoluble aggregates of β2m are found in the presence
of Ni(II) for this time period. The Zn(II)- and Cu(II)-containing
samples, however, do form precipitates. We had previously found that
β2m amyloid fibrils do not dissolve after exposure to a 2% SDS
solution at 37 °C for 24 h. As we observed previously, the aggregates
in the sample incubated with Cu(II) did not dissolve. In contrast,
the insoluble aggregates formed with Zn(II) dissolve in 2% SDS within
1 h, suggesting that amyloids are formed with Cu(II) but not with
Zn(II). TEM of the aggregates is consistent with this conclusion as
amorphous aggregates are formed with Zn(II) present, while long thin
fibrils are formed with Cu(II) present (Figure ). Interestingly, the fact that the ThT fluorescence increases with
Zn(II) present, even though no β2m amyloid species are formed,
demonstrates that ThT fluorescence may be a poor indicator of the
presence of β2m amyloid-like species, an observation that has
been made previously., Taken as a whole, the ThT fluorescence,
SEC, SDS, and TEM data reveal that Cu(II) is unique in inducing the
amyloid formation of β2m. Moreover, Ni(II) and Zn(II) influence
the protein in very distinct ways. To further understand the unique
role of Cu(II), we set out to characterize the nature of binding of
Cu(II), Zn(II), and Ni(II) to β2m.

TEM images obtained after
incubation of β2m with Cu(II) (left)
and Zn(II) (right) for 1.5 months.

Binding of Cu(II) to β2m
We previously reported
that Cu(II) binds β2m via the N-terminal amine, the backbone
amide between Ile1 and Gln2, His31, and Asp59. Further insight into the structural basis of Cu(II)’s
unique effect on β2m amyloidosis comes from X-ray absorption
spectroscopy (XAS). XANES analysis provides information about the
coordination number and oxidation state of the metal ion.

The
XANES spectra of the β2m–Cu(II) samples show the development
of a peak centered around 8984 eV, intensifying with each subsequent
scan. This peak is associated with a 1s → 4p transition of
Cu(I) centers. The occurrence of Cu(I) is due to the photoreduction
caused by the incident X-ray beam. For this reason, the samples
were shifted after each scan such that a fresh spot on the sample
was being examined. These scans were averaged and showed no indications
of photoreduction (edge energy shift).

The EXAFS region of an
XAS spectrum provides information about
the metal center’s coordination environment, such as the types
of donor atoms and their bonding distance, and provides a second measure
of the coordination number. The best fit to the spectrum (Figure  and Table ) obtained for
the β2m–Cu(II) complex shows that the ligands are primarily
N/O donors with one bromide anion. The bromide is a ligand derived
from the buffer, which contained 150 mM NaBr. The spectra exhibit
an intense feature at ∼1.7 Å (without phase correction)
in the Fourier-transformed spectrum and
smaller peaks in the 2.0–4.0 Å range. The latter peaks
are consistent with the presence of ligands
that give rise to multiple scattering, which in biological samples
generally indicate the presence of histidine imidazole ligands. The
best fit for the β2m–Cu(II) complex (Figure  and Table ) is a five-coordinate
model in which the coordinating species can be best described as three
N/O donors, one imidazole donor (from histidine), and one bromide
ligand. This model is consistent with our previous measurements of
the Cu(II)–protein binding site. Prior results indicated that the metal has four protein-based ligands,
including one imidazole, which is presumably His31, as identified
previously. The other three protein-based ligands were identified
as the N-terminal amine, the backbone amide of Gln2, and Asp59. The presence of the Br– ligand
in the EXAFS analysis indicates the presence of a vacant
or labile coordination site on the Cu(II), such as an aqua ligand.

Fourier-transformed
XAS data (colored lines) and best fits (black
lines) from Table  for metal complexes of
β2m in 150 mM KBr, 25 mM MOPS (pH 7.4), and 10% glycerol in
the presence of Cu(II) (green), Ni(II) (red), or Zn (blue). Insets
are unfiltered k3-weighted EXAFS spectra
and fits. The radial distance (R′) has not
been phase-corrected.

Binding of Ni(II) to β2m
The analysis of EXAFS
spectra obtained for the β2m–Ni(II) complex shows that
the best fit is for a six-coordinate site comprised of primarily nitrogen
or oxygen donor ligands with one bromide. A comparison of the XAS
data for the β2m–Cu(II) and β2m–Ni(II) complexes
indicates that one significant difference is that Ni(II) is bound
to β2m in a hexacoordinate environment. As a result, the ligands
are further from the metal than in the case of Cu(II). The β2m–Ni(II)
XANES spectrum shows a small peak associated with the 1s →
3d transition located at ∼8333 eV (Figure S1 and Table S10
of the ). The peak
area of this transition [5.2(7) × 10–2 eV]
and the absence of a 1s → 4pz transition
reflect the coordination geometry around
the metal and are similar to those found
in pseudo-octahedral model complexes, although the 1s → 3d
peak area is larger than what is typically found (∼1.0–4.0
× 10–2 eV). This indicates a geometry that
is more distorted from
centrosymmetric in the β2m–Ni(II) complex than in the
models. The M–L distances are consistent with a high-spin, S = 1, electronic configuration for Ni(II), and thus consistent
with
a six-coordinate pseudo-octahedral geometry. Previous measurements of the β2m–Ni(II) dissociation
constant (Kd) found that this metal had
a much lower affinity for the protein than Cu(II) does (400 μM
vs 2.5
μM). The lower
affinity for Ni(II) might suggest that some of the ligands identified
as N/O donors might not arise from the protein but instead from water
molecules.

The XAS data indicate that the Ni(II) coordination
environment is different from that of Cu(II), but it does not identify
the specific amino acids bound to Ni(II). To determine the Ni(II)
binding residues, we used metal-catalyzed oxidation (MCO) reactions
along with mass spectrometry (MS) detection. In the MCO–MS
method, an oxidizing agent and a reducing agent are added to allow
the site-selective oxidation of metal-bound amino acid residues, and
MS is then used to sequence and identify the modified amino acids.
This method has been used successfully to identify Cu(II) binding
sites in proteins,,− and we have also shown that it can be used to identify metal binding
sites in Mn(II), Fe(II), Co(II), and Ni(II) binding peptides and proteins. After a 20 min MCO reaction in the presence
of ascorbate as the reducing agent and persulfate as the oxidizing
agent, the addition of up to two oxygen atoms to β2m is reproducibly
observed with a modification percent of 45–50% (Figure S2a
of the ). To pinpoint
the oxidation sites, β2m was subjected to proteolysis followed
by LC–MS/MS analyses. An example of extracted ion chromatograms
of modified and unmodified forms of a histidine-containing peptide
is shown in Figure S2b of the . The oxidized peptide fragments were sequenced by tandem MS to identify
the modified amino acids. An example of how tandem MS was used to
identify oxidation sites is illustrated in Figure S2c of the .

The results from
the MCO reactions of the β2m–Ni(II)
complex indicate that the N-terminus and His31 are part of the Ni(II)
binding site (Table ), as only these two residues
show a significant increase in their level of oxidation compared to
that from the control experiment. Oxidation of His51, Trp60, and Trp95
is measured, but their extent of oxidation is similar to that from
the control experiment. Moreover, increases in the oxidant concentration
indicate that the extents of oxidation of the N-terminus and His31
further increase whereas those of His51, W60, and W95 do not (Figure
S3 of the ). Unfortunately,
no amino acids other than the N-terminus and His31 are significantly
oxidized, making it difficult to identify any other protein-based
ligands.

Percentages of Modified Residues Observed
after a 20 min MCO Reaction of the β2m–Ni(II) Complex
 	MCO	control	
N-terminus	27.9 ± 3.6%	0 ±
0%	
His31	14.5 ± 1.9%	0.1 ±
0.2%	
His51	0.4 ± 0.2%	0.2 ± 0.2%	
Trp60	4.4 ± 2.0%	8.4 ± 3.0%	
Trp95	1.6 ± 1.2%	1.7 ± 1.5%	
β2m (200
μM) was reacted
with 250 μM NiSO4, 5 mM ascorbate, 0.5 mM persulfate
in 150 mM potassium acetate, and 25 mM MOPS (pH 7.4).

In the control experiment, 200 μM
β2m was reacted with 250 μM NiSO4 and 0.5 mM
persulfate in 150 mM potassium acetate and 25 mM MOPS (pH 7.4).

Because Cu(II) and Ni(II) have at
least
two β2m ligands in common, one might predict that high concentrations
of Ni(II) might displace Cu(II) and influence the rate of Cu(II)-induced
oligomer formation. Even though Ni(II) itself does not cause the protein
to form oligomers, if it displaces Cu(II) at higher concentrations,
it will decrease the population of Cu(II)−β2m species
in solution, thereby slowing Cu(II)-induced oligomer formation. To
test this idea, we incubated 100 μM β2m and 150 μM
Cu(II) in the absence and presence of 3 mM Ni(II). On the basis of
previous dissociation constant (Kd) measurements
of binding of β2m to Cu(II) and Ni(II) (KdCu = 2.5 μM; KdNi = 400 μM), the addition
of 3 mM Ni(II) should result in a decrease in β2m–Cu(II)
loading from 96 to 77% and a corresponding decrease in the extent
of oligomerization (see the  for details). According to SEC measurements, the amounts of dimer
and tetramer formed after 2 and 5 days decrease (Figure S4 of the ). These results confirm
our expectation, indicating that Ni(II) competes with Cu(II) for the
same binding locus.

Binding of Zn(II) to β2m
The
effect of Zn(II)
on β2m oligomerization is rather intriguing because the metal
induces the formation of dimers and hexamers but no amyloid fibrils.
Previous studies had found a β2m–Zn(II) Kd of 1.5 mM using a metal competition assay with a fluorescence
readout; however, our ThT and SEC results
are not consistent with this previously measured Kd. Considering a β2m–Zn(II) Kd of 1.5 mM and the Zn(II) and β2m concentrations
used to give the results in Figures  and , it is unlikely that Zn(II) would be able to have
such a significant effect on β2m oligomer formation with only
∼8% of the protein bound to Zn(II). One possible explanation
is that the previously measured Kd value
is incorrect. The previous measurements relied on fluorescence quenching,
presumably of Trp60, which is solvent-exposed and near the identified
Cu(II) binding site. It is possible that Zn(II) binds very distant
from Trp60 and therefore does not quench the fluorescence of this
residue at concentrations that otherwise lead to β2m–Zn(II)
binding. If so, then Zn(II) may bind the protein at a site very different
from that to which Cu(II) binds.

To test the idea that Cu(II)
and Zn(II) bind at different sites, we monitored the effect of added
Zn(II) on the Cu(II)-induced oligomerization of β2m. We incubated
100 μM β2m with 150 μM Cu(II) in the absence and
presence of 150 μM Zn(II). Unlike the comparable experiment
with Ni(II), the addition
of Zn(II) suppresses the formation of the tetramer but does not significantly
change the extent of β2m dimer formation (compare the black
and blue traces in Figure a). The absence
of any significant change in the concentration of the dimer implies
that Zn(II) does not displace Cu(II). Instead, Zn(II) suppresses the
formation of the tetramer, which implies its binding occurs at a site
that interferes with tetramer formation. Also, the presence of Cu(II)
completely prevents Zn(II)-induced hexamer formation (compare the
red and blue traces in Figure a). Adding a
similar amount of Ni(II) (i.e., 200 μM) with Zn(II) does not
disrupt Zn(II)-induced oligomer formation (compare
the black and red traces in Figure b), but
an excess of Ni(II) (i.e., 3 mM) does suppress oligomerization to
some extent (compare the
black and blue traces in Figure b). The effect
of Ni(II) on Zn(II)-induced oligomerization is not the same as the
effect of Cu(II), indicating some subtle differences between how Ni(II)
and Cu(II) bind β2m. Collectively, these data imply that Zn(II)
binds β2m at a site different from those at which Cu(II) and
Ni(II) bind.

SEC analyses of (a) 100 μM β2m incubated with
150 μM
Cu(II) (black), 150 μM Zn(II) (blue), and both 150 μM
Cu(II) and 150 μM Zn(II) (red) and (b) 100 μM β2m
incubated with 150 μM Zn(II) without (black) and with (red)
200 μM Ni(II) or (blue) with 3 mM Ni(II) in 500 mM urea, 150
mM potassium acetate, and 25 mM MOPS (pH 7.4) at 37 °C for 4
days.

Characterization of the coordination
structure
of β2m with Zn(II) is more challenging than characterization
of that with Cu(II) or Ni(II) because of Zn(II)’s electronic
structure. Zn(II) does not undergo a one-electron redox process, so
the MCO–MS method cannot be directly applied. However, the
MCO reactions of the β2m–Cu(II) complex can be performed
in the presence of increasing concentrations of Zn(II) to test if
Zn(II) competes with Cu(II) for the same binding site. If Zn(II) does
bind to β2m at a site with ligands in common with the Cu(II)
complex, the expectation would be that the level of site specific
oxidation of the Cu(II)-bound residues would decrease as Zn(II) concentrations
are increased. From Figure S5 of the , it is clear that Zn(II) does not displace Cu(II)
as the oxidation levels of the N-terminus and His31, which are two
of the Cu(II) binding residues, remain unchanged. These two residues
maintain approximately the same level of oxidation at Zn(II) concentrations
as high as 3 mM, a result that is consistent with the SEC data in
Figure .

Because Zn(II) appears to bind
to β2m at a site different
from those at which Ni(II) and Cu(II) bind, we set out to identify
the Zn(II) binding site. Given that His residues are the second most
common Zn(II) ligands in proteins, we
assumed that one or more His residues would be part of the Zn(II)
binding site, especially because the protein’s two Cys residues,
Cys
being the most common Zn ligand, form a buried disulfide bond. To
find the bound His residue(s), we measured the hydrogen–deuterium
exchange of the hydrogen on the C2 atom of the imidazole ring on each
of the four histidines (His13, His31, His51, and His84) in β2m.
This hydrogen is known to exchange with a half-life of ∼2 days,
and when His is bound to a metal, the exchange rate is even slower,− allowing Zn binding His residues
to be identified. Using the protocol
described in , but without
added urea so that oligomer formation is slowed, β2m was mixed
in D2O with and without Zn(II), and aliquots of the solution
were analyzed over the course of 4 days. The data in Table  indicate that only His51 undergoes a statistically
significant change in the extent of deuterium incorporation over the
entire course of the experiment, suggesting that this His residue
is bound to Zn(II). His31 does show a slight decrease in the level
of exchange in the presence of Zn after 4 days, but this result can
be rationalized by the formation of oligomers after 1 day under these
conditions (Figure S6 of the ). It is conceivable that His31 becomes less solvent accessible as
more oligomers are formed, thereby decreasing its extent of H–D
exchange.

Hydrogen–Deuterium Exchange
Analyses of 100 μM β2m Incubated in the Presence or Absence
of 100 μM Zn(II) in D2O Containing 150 mM Potassium
Acetate and 25 mM MOPS (pH 7.4) at 37 °C
 	 	no. of deuteriums
incorporated	
residue	Zn(II)	1 day	2 days	4 days	
His13	–	0.171 ± 0.004	0.32 ± 0.02	0.568 ± 0.005	
 	+	0.161 ± 0.009	0.31 ± 0.03	0.53 ± 0.03	
His31	–	0.104 ± 0.008	0.25 ± 0.01	0.46 ± 0.02	
 	+	0.10 ± 0.01	0.241 ± 0.001	0.41 ± 0.03	
His51	–	0.195 ± 0.007	0.33 ± 0.01	0.52 ± 0.02	
 	+	0.14 ± 0.02	0.24 ± 0.01	0.44 ± 0.03	
His84	–	&lt;0.05	&lt;0.05	0.051 ± 0.001	
 	+	&lt;0.05	&lt;0.05	0.054 ± 0.006	
Deuterium levels
in the Zn-bound
protein that are statistically different from the deuterium levels
in the Zn-free protein based on a t test (p &lt; 0.05).

Number of deuteriums incorporated
into His84 at 1 and 2 days were too low to be confidently measured.

XAS was further used to probe
the coordination
structure of Zn(II)-bound β2m (Figure  and Table ). Being a d10 metal,
Zn(II) shows no possible pre-edge transitions. One can, however, make
qualitative determinations of the coordination number based on the
intensity of the XANES spectra, where the normalized intensity increases
with coordination number: four coordinate has a normalized intensity
of ∼1.3, and five-
and six-coordinate have normalized intensities between 1.3 and 2. Because the intensity of the white line for
the β2m–Zn(II) samples is ∼1.5, a five-coordinate
arrangement would be consistent with this qualitative analysis and
the EXFAS data. It is interesting that two imidazoles (i.e., two His
residues) are found to bind Zn(II) from the best fit of
the EXAFS data. These data seem to contradict the hydrogen–deuterium
exchange data in Table , but it should be
pointed out that the EXAFS experiments were performed on solutions
that contained much higher concentrations of Zn(II) (1.2 mM) and β2m
(2 mM) to obtain a sufficient XAS signal. Thus, it is possible that
Zn(II) binding facilitates the bridging of two β2m molecules
at these high concentrations via His51, which sits on the surface
of the protein. Indeed, SEC of the sample used for the XAS experiment
shows extensive dimer formation (Figure S7 of the ). An alternate explanation is that
two His residues from the same protein molecule bind Zn(II) simultaneously,
and the slight decrease in the level of exchange seen for His31 reflects
binding of this residue. However, if this were to occur, β2m
would have to undergo a major structural change to allow these two
His residues to bind Zn(II) because these residues are ∼22
Å
from one another in the native structure. Far-UV circular dichroism
(CD) measurements, however, indicate that the β2m–Zn(II)
complex has a global structure that is very similar to the protein
with no metal bound or even with Cu(II) or Ni(II) bound (Figure S8
of the ), ruling
out such a major conformational change. Moreover, backbone amide hydrogen–deuterium
exchange experiments further indicate that the Zn(II)-bound protein
does not undergo any major structural reorganization (Table S11 of
the ), as the increase
in the level of exchange in the presence of Zn or the other metals
is modest compared to that without metal.

As a final set of
experiments, we attempted to explain the fact
that Zn(II) causes β2m oligomerization at concentrations much
lower than expected on the basis of the previously measured Kd value of 1.5 mM. The extent of hydrogen–deuterium exchange of the hydrogen
at C2 of His51 was monitored at increasing Zn(II) concentrations and
compared to the extent of exchange in the absence of Zn. The resulting
decrease in the rate of deuterium uptake as a function of Zn(II) concentration
was then fit using eq  to obtain an apparent Kd of 24 ± 11 μM (Figure ). This measured Kd value
for the β2m–Zn(II)
complex is more consistent with the ThT and SEC results (Figures  and ) than the previously
reported Kd value of 1.5 mM.

Percent
decrease in the level of deuterium incorporation, as compared
to that of the Zn(II)-free protein, fit to eq  to obtain a Kd value (error bars represent
standard errors of the mean and have considered propagations of error
in the calculated values).

Discussion
A comparison of the binding properties and
effects of Ni(II) and
Zn(II) on β2m oligomerization and amyloid formation give us
additional insight into the unique nature of Cu(II) in allowing β2m
amyloid fibril formation. We previously established that Cu(II) binds
β2m via the N-terminus, a backbone amide between IIe1 and Gln2,
His31, and Asp59. Evidence indicates
that Cu(II) binding causes the repositioning of Asp59 and Arg3 to
allow two pairs of dimer-stabilizing salt bridges to be formed between
Asp59 and Lys19 and between Arg3 and Glu16 (Figure a). Cu(II) also facilitates the cis–trans isomerization of Pro32, which in turn exposes
Phe30 to
the solvent and creates a hydrophobic patch that drives dimer assembly.,

(a)
Structural changes of β2m upon Cu(II) binding, including
repositioning of Arg3 and Asp59 and exposure of Phe30 to the solvent
followed by cis–trans isomerization of Pro32
(the β2m backbone is colored green; repositioning of the residues
is indicated from blue to magenta). (b) Proposed model for the different
effects of Cu(II), Ni(II), and Zn(II) on β2m oligomerization
and fibril formation.

The effect (or lack thereof) of Ni(II) on β2m aggregation
provides insight into the metal–protein interactions that are
essential for allowing dimer formation. In contrast to Cu(II), no
oligomers are formed with Ni(II) present, even though the MCO–MS
and SEC data (Table  and Figure ) imply that Ni(II) and Cu(II) bind to the same region of
the protein. A similar binding site was suggested previously on the
basis of intrinsic fluorescence and native MS experiments, and the data here provide stronger support for
this conclusion. Moreover, the CD and amide hydrogen–deuterium
exchange data indicate that the Cu(II)- and Ni(II)-bound forms of
the protein have similar overall global structures. The XAS and MCO–MS
data, though, do indicate some key differences between binding of
Cu(II) and Ni(II) to β2m. First, the β2m–Cu(II)
and β2m–Ni(II) complexes have different coordination
numbers and geometries. Ni(II) is hexacoordinate and presumably adopts
a pseudo-octahedral ligand arrangement, whereas Cu(II) is five-coordinate.
For Cu(II), all four protein-based ligands are known from the MCO–MS
experiments, and the fifth ligand
is an anion. The MCO–MS experiments with Ni(II) indicate only
two protein-based ligands, the N-terminus and His31. Given the higher Kd value for Ni(II)
[400 μM vs 2.5 μM for Cu(II)], it makes sense that Ni(II)
has a smaller number of
protein-based ligands than Cu(II) and has more non-protein-based ligands
in its coordination sphere. Indeed, the MCO–MS and
XAS results are truly complementary in this regard as they provide
this insight in a way that would not be possible by either method
alone. A key difference would appear to be that Ni(II) does not bind
to the backbone amide between Ile1 and Gln2, whereas Cu(II) does.
Interestingly, binding of Cu(II) to amide nitrogens is a common feature
of several amyloid-forming systems such as the prion protein and α-synuclein
as probed by circular dichroism and electron paramagnetic resonance
titrations., The apparent requirement of metal–amide
binding in the amyloid formation of β2m suggests the importance
of this interaction for inducing amyloid formation, which was suggested
previously. Another difference between
Cu(II) and Ni(II) binding is the absence of Asp59 as a ligand for
Ni(II). The unique participation of Asp59 in Cu(II) coordination and
the resulting amyloidogenicity of Cu(II) are consistent with previous
work that indicates the importance of the loop between strands D and
E that contains Asp59. Heegaard et al. found that β2m has an
increased level of amyloid formation upon being cleaved at Lys58. Presumably, cleavage of this loop at Lys58 and
binding of Cu(II) at Asp59 both reposition Asp59 in a way that allows
amyloid formation. In contrast, Ni(II) probably does not reposition
this residue to form a dimer-stabilizing salt bridge. On the basis of a comparison between Cu(II)
and Ni(II) binding, it appears that the essential features of the
β2m–Cu(II) interaction that allow dimer formation, and
eventually amyloid formation, are Ile1-Gln2 amide and/or Asp59 binding
(Figure b). It seems likely, although no evidence
is provided here, that Ni(II) also does not induce the cis–trans isomerization of Pro32, which is thought to be another
important conformational change allowing dimer assembly.,

Like the presence of Cu(II), the presence of Zn(II) causes
β2m
to form oligomers. These oligomers cause changes in ThT fluorescence
and appear as dimers and hexamers according to SEC, but the resulting
aggregates are not amyloid-like morphologically, as indicated by TEM,
or chemically, as indicated by SDS dissolution experiments. The difference
in aggregation between the two metals appears to be caused by differences
in metal–protein binding sites. Substitution MCO–MS
reaction and hydrogen–deuterium exchange of the C2 hydrogens
of imidazoles indicate that the two metals bind β2m quite differently,
with His51 serving as the main Zn(II) binding residue. Because it
is located in a region of the protein completely different than the
Cu(II) binding site, Zn(II) does not promote the repositioning of
Arg3 or Asp59, nor does it likely promote the cis–trans isomerization of Pro32 like Cu(II) does. Instead, dimer
formation by Zn(II) may be induced by the bridging of His51 residues
from two different monomers as suggested by the XAS data and consistent
with SEC showing the formation of dimers. The ability of Zn(II) to
inhibit Cu(II)-induced β2m tetramer formation (Figure a) is consistent with this binding mode based upon
the structure of the Cu(II)-induced β2m tetramer. The Cu(II)-induced tetramer is mediated by interactions
between strand D (residues 50–56) of one dimer unit and strand
G (residues 91–95) of another dimer unit. Binding of Zn(II)
to His51 along strand D
would be expected to inhibit the interactions necessary to stabilize
the Cu(II)-induced tetramer (Figure b).

Interestingly, the dimer formed in the presence of Zn(II) causes
the fluorescence maximum of ThT to shift in a manner similar to those
of other amyloid-forming proteins, even though the eventual aggregates
are not amyloid-like. While speculative, this change in fluorescence
might occur as Zn(II) bridges two monomers via His51, allowing the
formation of an extended β sheet structure mediated at the D
strands and extending over the E, B, and A strands of β2m (Figure ). This proposed dimer differs from the crystallographic
dimer of the P32A mutant of β2m, which is also mediated by the D strands, in that it has a parallel
rather than an antiparallel arrangement of the monomeric units. This
parallel arrangement would
seem to be important for orienting the two His51 in the proximity
of each other. The Zn(II)-induced dimer could eventually proceed to
a hexamer and larger aggregates, but our current data provide no insight
into how this occurs. Even so, the proposed Zn(II) dimer has an interface
very different from that of the Cu(II)-induced dimer, highlighting
the importance of the correct dimer structure in allowing eventual
amyloid formation. Again, the Cu(II) coordination site and geometry
are essential for assembling an amyloid-competent dimer, and Zn(II)
appears to be unable to adopt the correct binding motif.

Proposed Zn(II)-bridged
β2m dimer via His51.

The full β2m–Zn(II) coordination structure is
difficult
to obtain from our current data set, but our measured Kd value of ∼30 μM indicates a fairly robust
binding site. As an aside, our Kd value
is much lower than one previously reported (1.5 mM); however, we think that the competitive intrinsic fluorescence
assay used in the prior study is probably misleading given that Cu(II)
and Zn(II) bind at very different sites and the Trp60 residue that
is monitored in the fluorescence assay is &gt;20 Å from the likely
His51 binding site. Other than His51, the likely
Zn(II) binding sites could be Glu50 and/or Asp53 as Zn(II) is reasonably
capable of binding acidic residues. Glu50
and Asp53 are solvent accessible and close to His51, and their binding
along with His51 could facilitate an intermolecular complex between
two β2m monomers.

Conclusions
When compared to Ni(II)
and Zn(II), we find that Cu(II) is unique
in its ability to induce the formation of β2m oligomers that
can eventually form amyloid fibrils. Cu(II)’s ability to induce
amyloid formation arises from the nature of its coordination structure
with the protein. Specifically, cooperative binding to the N-terminal
amine, His31, the backbone amide between Ile1 and Gln2, and Asp59
appear to be essential for allowing the formation of dimers that eventually
progress to form amyloid fibrils. The essentiality of the backbone
amide is evident from a comparison of Cu(II) and Ni(II) binding. Ni(II)
appears to be unable to bind this backbone amide, and as a result,
this metal is unable to induce the formation of β2m oligomers
or amyloids. As is evident from β2m’s interactions with
Zn(II), the binding of a metal to other sites on the protein can allow
oligomers and aggregates to be formed. Unless the binding site involves
the aforementioned residues, however, the structural changes necessary
for the formation of amyloid-competent oligomers (e.g., cis–trans isomerization of Pro32 and repositioning of Arg3 and Asp59)
do not occur. In a broader context, our work helps identify some of
the key important interactions that make Cu(II) a general motif responsible
for protein amyloid formation. Future work to delineate the detailed
structural differences caused by the binding of Cu(II), Ni(II), and
Zn(II)
should reveal other
essential structural changes necessary for β2m to progress to
amyloid.

Supporting Information Available
A figure showing how
the
oxidation site is identified after MCO reactions of β2m and
Ni(II); a figure showing the modification percentages of oxidized
residues found in the MCO reaction of β2m and Ni(II) as a function
of persulfate concentration; calculations estimating the percent decrease
in β2m–Cu(II) loading in the presence and absence of
Ni(II); SEC analyses illustrating the effect of the addition of Ni(II)
on Cu(II)-induced β2m oligomerization for up to 5 days; a figure
showing the modification percentages of Ni(II) binding residues in
the substitution MCO reaction as a function of Zn(II) concentration;
SEC analysis of the sample used in the hydrogen–deuterium exchange
of the C2 hydrogens of histidine incubated for 1 day; SEC analysis
of the Zn(II) sample used in XAS experiments; CD spectra of β2m
in the absence and presence of Cu(II), Ni(II), and Zn(II); a table
containing global hydrogen–deuterium exchange rates of the
amide hydrogens for β2m incubated in
the absence and presence of Cu(II), Ni(II), and Zn(II); and EXAFS
fitting tables for Ni(II)–, Cu(II)–, and Zn(II)−β2m
complexes. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi4016583_si_001.pdf

The authors declare
no competing
financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Prof. Lila Gierasch
for access to the CD spectrometer.
We also thank Dr. Louis Raboin for help with the TEM experiments.

