Mammalian voltage-gated ion
channels function to rapidly conduct ions across membranes. In eukaryotes,
sodium channels have evolved to allow sodium flux 15–50 times
faster than potassium or calcium ion flux,() at a rate of &gt;107 ions/s, while favoring sodium flux
over that of other cations by factors of 100:1 or more., There are strong sequence and structural similarities among the
sodium-, calcium-, and potassium-specific members of the voltage-gated
ion channel family. Although most voltage-gated ion channels include
associated regulatory subunits,() the α
subunit alone is sufficient for functional expression of the channel.
Structurally, the α subunits of all voltage-gated ion channels
consist of a central pore region, which determines channel selectivity
and permeability, and four surrounding voltage sensor regions, which
include the binding sites for many of the naturally occurring toxins
that bind to sodium channels. Eukaryotic voltage-gated sodium channels
(NaVs) and voltage-gated calcium channels (CaVs) are large (∼300 kDa) heavily glycosylated, monomeric proteins
consisting of four homologous domains (designated DI–DIV),
with each domain containing six membrane-spanning helices termed S1–S6
(Figure ). The central pore region, which
conducts the ions, is formed by the association of the C-terminal
S5 and S6 helices and the intervening “P-loop” from
each of the four domains in a pseudosymmetric arrangement. The voltage
sensor (VS) subdomains (comprised of the N-terminal S1–S4 transmembrane
helices and their connecting loops from each of the domains) are located
peripherally with respect to the pore.

Schematic
diagram comparing eukaryotic and prokaryotic voltage-gated sodium
channel structures. The four homologous domains in the eukaryotic
channel are designated DI–DIV. Transmembrane helices comprising
the voltage sensor subdomains (S1–S4) are colored light blue,
and the helices (S5 and S6) that form the pore subdomains are colored
dark blue. Selectivity filter regions are colored red and interconnecting
loops black, and the inactivation gate between DIII and DIV found
in eukaryotic channels is colored green. N and C denote the N- and
C-termini, respectively.

The size and complexity of these proteins have
proven to be bottlenecks
in structural characterization. The most detailed three-dimensional
structure for a eukaryotic NaV is a low-resolution (19
Å) cryo-electron microscopy structure of a channel from the electric
eel Electrophorus electricus,() and the only structures for calcium channels are even lower-resolution
(25 and 23 Å, respectively) negatively stained electron microscopy
structures of cardiac (L-type)() and muscle
(T-type)() CaVs. The NaV channel appears to be a bell-shaped molecule ∼135 Å
long in the transmembrane (TM) direction, with an outer diameter of
100 Å at the cytoplasmic end and 65 Å at the extracellular
end.() At this resolution, it is not possible
to discern any features at even the secondary structure level, much
less at the individual atom level, which would be necessary to define
functionally important structural details.

In contrast to sodium
and calcium channels, both eukaryotic and
prokaryotic voltage-gated potassium channels (KVs) are
simpler structures, being comprised of tetramers of four identical
subunits, each of which is roughly one-quarter of the length and corresponds
to a single domain of the sodium and calcium channels. Each KV polypeptide, like each NaV domain, consists of
six transmembrane helices, of which S1–S4 comprise the voltage
sensor subdomain and S5–S6 the pore subdomain. The first crystal
structure of any ion channel determined() was that of the very simple bacterial KcsA channel, which consists
of only a pore subdomain. Four of its monomers associate to form a
homotetrameric channel. The crystal structure revealed that the organization
of the pore is an inverted “tepee”-like structure with
inner and outer helices (equivalent to S6 and S5, respectively, of
the larger 6TM voltage-gated channels), and a P-loop that provides
the ion selectivity filter. The filter is lined by the sequence motif
“TVGYG” that is highly conserved among K+ channels. A somewhat surprising finding was that the ion binding
sites involve the backbone carbonyl groups of the amino acids rather
than their side chains. Comparisons of the structures of KcsA and
another simple bacterial potassium channel, MthK from Methanobacterium
thermautotrophicum,() have suggested
they represent closed and open channel conformations, respectively.
The MthK channel has splayed bent helices rather than the tepee shape,
and it has been postulated() that pore
gating involves a molecular hinge about a conserved glycine residue.
In the case of mammalian Kv channels such as Shaker, in addition to this conserved glycine, a proline-containing sequence,
PVP, located further along the S6 helix has also been shown to be
important for gating.() KVAP
from Aeropyrum pernix was the first 6TM voltage-gated
potassium channel structure determined and contained both VS and pore
subdomains.() Later the structures of a
number of other bacterial and eukaryotic KVs, were determined that also included both subdomains. The conformations
of the voltage sensors and their positions relative to the pore differed
considerably in the different crystal structures and led to a number
of theories regarding the motions involved in the process of voltage
sensing; they also raised some questions regarding the biological
relevance of some of the structures. The determination of additional
structures of isolated voltage sensor subdomains and intact channels
has improved our understanding of the structure–function relationship
of voltage-activated ion channels and added to the ongoing debate.−

The potassium channel crystal structures have shaped our ideas
of what NaVs may look like and have led to the production
of a number of homology models for them.− As was the case for potassium channels,() the availability of simpler prokaryotic versions of sodium channels
is now proving to be important for studies of their structure and
function. The first prokaryotic NaV, NaChBac from Bacillus halodurans, was identified in 2001.() This was followed by the detection of a number of homologous
NaVs from other prokaryotic sources.− Like KVs, but unlike
eukaryotic NaVs, prokaryotic NaVs are smaller
single-domain polypeptides that associate to form tetrameric channels.
NaChBac is 274 residues long, and in parallel with other voltage-gated
ion channels, each chain (which corresponds to a single domain of
a eukaryotic NaV) consists of a voltage-sensing subdomain
(formed by helices S1–S4) and a pore subdomain (helices S5
and S6 connected by a P-loop) (Figure ). The
sequence of NaChBac is 17–23% identical to those of various
eukaryotic NaVs, 18–23% identical to those of eukaryotic
CaVs, 12–17% identical to those of KVs, and 22–69% identical− to those of other prokaryotic
NaVs that have been identified thus far. Although the levels
of identity between eukaryotic and prokaryotic NaVs are
relatively modest, the hydrophobicity profiles and topological organization
of all of them are nearly identical, suggesting that the structures
of the various channels will be very similar. In addition to the similarities
at the primary structure level and conservation of functionally critical
residues (Figure ), it has been shown that
the secondary structures of NaChBac and other prokaryotic NaVs are very similar to that of one of the eukaryotic NaVs (that of the electric eel).,, The demonstration that the simple bacterial NaChBac channel could
be overexpressed in functional form in heterologous systems has since
opened up new opportunities for structure–function studies
of voltage-gated sodium channels.

Sequence
alignments of the DIII domains of human isoforms NaV1.1
(P35498), NaV1.2 (Q99250), NaV1.3 (Q9NY46),
NaV1.4 (P35499), NaV1.5 (Q14524), NaV1.7 (NP002967.2), NaV1.8 (NP_055006.1), and NaV1.9 (Q15858.2) and NaChBac (NP242367). Identical residues are colored
black and conserved residues dark gray. The highly conserved arginine
residues in the S4 helix are shaded, as is the proposed glycine hinge
in S6. The LESWAS filter residues in NaChBac are shown in italics.
The transmembrane regions of NaChBac are indicated by the boxes. The
alignments were created with CLUSTALW() with default parameters, and the locations of the transmembrane
regions were estimated using TMHMM.()

In this review, we describe the features of NaChBac
as the exemplar
of the prokaryotic sodium channels and compare prokaryotic and eukaryotic
NaVs with respect to their structural organization and
functional characteristics in an attempt to understand how voltage-gated
ion channels have evolved to deal with the complex functional requirements
of higher organisms.

Expression of NaChBac
In Escherichia coli
NaChBac has been
successfully expressed in the heterologous bacterium E. coli. Strains XL-Gold() and
DE03 C41() support expression, the latter
at levels of up to 2 mg of purified protein/L of growth medium., Ligand binding and flux assays() indicate
that following purification in various detergents, NaChBac is correctly
folded, sodium selective, and able to bind the channel blocker mibefradil.
Thermal melt studies have demonstrated that in the presence of mibefradil,
NaChBac is stabilized,() similar to the
observation that tetrodotoxin is capable of stabilizing eel NaVs.() The high levels of expression
that have been achievable in E. coli have been important
for the structural studies conducted to date using circular dichroism
(CD),, and luminescence
resonance energy transfer (LRET) spectroscopies() and will be important for future detailed structural X-ray
crystallography studies. Furthermore, the ability to reconstitute
the detergent-isolated channels into liposomes or other membrane-mimetic
systems and the demonstration that they exhibit sodium flux blocked
by specific ligands are also important for allowing in vitro functional
studies of the isolated protein.,

In Mammalian Systems
NaChBac has proven to be a good
tool for examining NaV function because of its ability
to be expressed in a functional
form in Chinese hamster ovary cells,() African
green monkey kidney cells,() and human
embryonic kidney cells,() which are amenable
to single-channel electrophysiology studies. Even though the level
of expression in these systems is far too modest for structural studies,
they have been very useful for demonstrating structure–function
relationships of engineered and mutant proteins in in vivo systems
where the protein is not subjected to the rigors of isolation and
reconstitution. Although the slow rates of activation, inactivation,
and recovery from inactivation and the modest single-channel conductance
levels of NaChBac() have presented a challenge
for the functional characterization of NaChBac channels in reconstituted
systems, the ability to express NaChBac in mammalian cells has allowed
structure–function characterization of the roles of specific
amino acids through a combination of electrophysiology and mutagenesis
studies.

Hence, the ability to express functional NaChBac in
both prokaryotic
and eukaryotics heterologous systems provides a unique opportunity
for both structural and functional characterization of this simple
sodium channel.

Structural Organization and Topology of NaChBac
Primary Structure
Amino acid sequence analyses reveal
that NaChBac and other NaV bacterial homologues (all of
which are single-domain polypeptides)
have very high degrees of homology to each other, with levels of sequence
identity ranging from 22 to 69%.− The identity levels
with eukaryotic NaVs are considerably lower but are still
significant. Not surprisingly, NaChBac is more similar to those of
many of the lower eukaryotes (23% identical to NaV from
the hydromedusa Polyorchis penicilatus) than to those
of more highly developed eukaryotes such as electric eel and zebra
fish (with both of these, it is 18% identical). For human NaVs, NaChBac appears to share a higher level of identity with the DIII
domains than with the other domains (Figure ). In addition to these overall levels of identity, it is noteworthy
that many of the functionally critical residues (Figure , shaded residues) such as the glycine hinge in S6 and the
regularly repeating arginines in S4 are conserved across the prokaryotic–eukaryotic
boundary.

Secondary Structure
Circular dichroism spectroscopic
studies have compared the secondary
structure of NaChBac to that of the eukaryotic NaV from El. electricus., Both proteins produce
spectra indicative of predominantly α-helical proteins. Analyses
of the CD spectra of NaChBac in several different detergents,, revealed that it is ∼67%
helical, while the eel protein is only ∼50% helical. The higher
helical content of NaChBac compared to that of eel NaV is
consistent with the longer connecting loops and termini of eukaryotic
NaVs, which are predicted to be mostly nonhelical.() Other studies have specifically determined the
secondary structures of different regions of the protein: For example,
more detailed analyses() of the NaChBac
CD data have shown that the transmembrane helix content is ∼47%
(roughly 130 residues, sufficient for 6TM helices), which is consistent
with modeling studies that assign 45% of the residues to transmembrane
regions of NaChBac.() In addition, the
secondary structures of its extramembranous C-terminal domain (CTD)
residues have been elucidated on a residue-by-residue basis by synchrotron
radiation circular dichroism (SRCD) spectroscopy using truncated channel
constructs.() The 22 distal residues at
the C-terminal end of the CTD are α-helical, while the 14 residues
closest to the S6 helix do not form regular structures. These findings
are in agreement with sequence-based secondary structure predictions, that suggested that the distal C-terminal helical regions from the
four monomers in the tetramer could associate to form a coiled-coil
helical leucine zipper. Finally, the secondary structure of the pore
subdomain, which was determined in a pore-only construct (the C-terminal
region starting from the beginning of S5) of one of the NaChBac homologues,() showed it to be even more helical than the intact
channel; this is because helices S5 and S6 and the C-terminus are
highly helical, whereas the full-length channel contains the voltage
sensor that has a relatively large nonhelical region in its N-terminus
and loops. Hence, by using a combination of CD (or the more sensitive
SRCD) spectroscopy and selectively designed constructs, it has been
possible to determine in quite fine detail the secondary structures
of specific regions of the NaChBac channel, even in the absence of
a crystal structure.

Quaternary Structure
On the basis of sequence homology
to the individual domains of
the eukaryotic NaVs, it was proposed that NaChBac would
form channels by association among four individual polypeptide chains
to produce a symmetric tetramer. Its tetrameric quaternary structure
was confirmed by gel filtration, native gel electrophoresis, dynamic
light scattering, sedimentation velocity experiments, chemical cross-linking,
and electron microscopy studies.,, As expected, this is the same oligomeric organization
exhibited by the KVs. Because all four subunits have identical
sequences, NaChBac does not have the potential for separate functional
and regulatory roles for different domains, as is possible in eukaryotic
NaVs where their domain sequences are similar but not identical.
(For example, in eukaryotic NaVs, just one of the domains,
DIV, is specifically associated with certain aspects of inactivation.()) In addition, the lack of interdomain loops
in NaChBac means that functions such as inactivation by the plug formed
by the loop region between domains III and IV in eukaryotic NaVs, must be accomplished in another way in prokaryotic
NaVs.

Topology
The structural organization of NaChBac has
been investigated in
further detail using LRET spectroscopy.() Measurements of residues at the N-terminal end of the S5 helix (residue
173), in the S5–S6 connecting loop (residue 190), and at the
N-terminal end of the S6 helix (residue 208) reveal a common architecture
with the pore region of the KVAP channel and suggest that
the three-dimensional structures of the pore subdomains are highly
conserved between prokaryotic and eukaryotic members of the entire
voltage-gated channel family, not only within the NaV subfamily.
Similar conservation of the voltage sensor subdomain structures across
the ion channel family has been implied by spectroscopic() and mutagenesis studies., In addition, the spatial relationships between the pore and voltage
sensor subdomains in NaChBac appear to be similar to those of the Shaker channel structure: the S3 and S4 helices of the NaChBac
VS subdomain have been shown to be located adjacent to the pore subdomain,
while the S1 and S2 helices are at the periphery of the channel. Furthermore,
the S4 voltage-sensing helix of one NaChBac monomer is apparently
closer to the S5 helix of the neighboring monomer than it is to the
S5 helix of the same monomer, based on disulfide cross-linking studies.()

Hence, a variety of biophysical studies
of NaChBac and homology
modeling studies based on potassium channel structures have provided
much information at various levels about its structural organization.
Very recently, the crystal structure of a NaChBac homologue, NavAb
from Arcobacter butzleri, in the closed state has
been determined.() The sequence of this
channel is ∼37% identical overall to that of NaChBac, and they
are 40% identical in their pore regions. Its structure is consistent
with the structural features described above for NaChBac, with the
exception that the C-terminus is not visible in the crystal structure,
so the spectroscopic and modeling studies remain the only detailed
information about that part of the molecule.

Structure–Function Relationships of Specific Regions
of NaChBac
Voltage Sensor Subdomain
Activation of voltage-gated
ion channels occurs through charge
movements within the voltage sensor subdomain (helices S1–S4).
Similar structures, albeit with very modest levels of sequence identity,
have also been found associated with voltage-regulated phosphatases
(14% identical to NaChBac)() and voltage-activated
proton channels (12% identical to NaChBac).() These findings along with studies that report the voltage-dependent
gating of a non-voltage sensitive channel following the transfer of
the VS subdomain from the Shaker channel() and the observation that isolated VS subdomains
can be stably expressed and purified in detergent, suggest that VSs may have evolved as independent units and are most
likely phylogenetically conserved from archaebacteria to mammals.
It is these voltage sensors that couple small fluctuations in membrane
potential to conformational changes in voltage-gated ion channels,
resulting in activation and specific ion flux. It has been postulated
that this is accomplished by a positively charged gating region moving
with respect to the membrane in response to the electric field. Positively
charged amino acids located on the S4 helix (Figure ), which comprise the most conserved region throughout the
entire voltage-gated ion channel family, form four to seven repeated
motifs of (predominately) arginine residues separated by two hydrophobic
residues. This pattern places the charged residues on a spiralling
single surface of the S4 helix. Mutation of these positively charged
residues in the S4 helix of the El. electricus NaV showed direct correlation with channel activation.() Studies using KVs and NaChBac have
calculated that three or four charges per voltage-sensing subdomain
move during the channel gating cycle.,, Sequence analyses reveal that the first four arginine
residues in the S4 helix of NaChBac are in positions equivalent to
those in the mammalian NaV voltage sensor subdomains (Figure ). Mutations that change these positively charged
amino acids to neutral ones result in alterations to the kinetics
of voltage-dependent activation, observed as a shift in steady state
activation toward more depolarized voltages.() Mutational() and modeling studies() of NaChBac support the sliding helix model proposed
for the other voltage-gated ion channels, including the involvement
of negatively charged amino acid residues located in the S2 and S3
segments in the formation of ion pairs with the S4 helical residues,
whereby they stabilize and mediate transmembrane movement of the voltage
sensor during activation.() Cysteine substitutions
in the S4 and S5 helices produced intersubunit disulfide bonds, indicating
that T110 and R113 in S4 are in the proximity of residue M164 in S5.() Under nonreducing conditions, disulfide-linked
mutant channels were unable to generate currents, suggesting that
they were locked in a nonconducting state; however, upon reduction
of the disulfides, the channels were able to change conformation and
became active. Alternatively, changes in the secondary structure (an
α-helix to a 310-helix transition) of the S4 helix
have been suggested to produce transmembrane movement of the S4 helix,
resulting in the more energetically favorable positional changes of
the gating charges() in potassium channels.
Site-directed spin labeling and electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR)
spectroscopy() of NaChBac are consistent
with residues at the N-terminal end of the S4 helix (residues 110–119)
being α-helical and residues 120–128 at the C-terminal
end of the S4 helix adopting a 310 hydrogen bonding pattern,
and a modeling study() has suggested that
the N- and C-terminal ends of the S4 helix switching between α-helical
and 310-helical structures could at least partially account
for the gating transition.

Potassium channel crystal structures
have shown a wide diversity
in the juxtapositions between the pore and voltage sensor subdomains.− That observation suggested that the VS could be an integral unit,
which led to the construction of a stand-alone VS subdomain of NaChBac.() The voltage sensor construct was capable of
folding in the absence of the pore subdomain, and EPR spectroscopic
measurements confirmed that its overall fold is more tightly packed
than but similar to that of potassium channel voltage sensors.() These studies indicate that the VS subdomain
folds independently and is stable in the absence of the pore subdomain.

Pore Subdomain
Corresponding studies of a pore-only
construct (consisting of the
S5 and S6 helices linked by the interconnecting P-loop and the CTD)
of the NaChBac homologue NaVSP (39% identical) have indicated
that the pore subdomains can also assemble, fold, and function in
a manner independent of the voltage sensor.() Unlike the stand-alone voltage sensor constructs, which are monomeric,
the pore-only construct forms folded, stable tetramers, but only in
the presence of sodium ions. The pore-only construct exhibits sodium
permeability and ligand blocking characteristics comparable to those
of the full-length channel, thus confirming that the ion translocation
function resides in the pore subdomain.

Selectivity Filter
NaChBac ion selectivity is determined
by specific residues in the
P-loop of its pore subdomain, but unlike prokaryotic KVs where the main chain carbonyls determine selectivity,() it is the amino acid side chains that are postulated
to encode ion selectivity in NaVs and CaVs.− In eukaryotic NaVs, four essential residues (DEKA), one
from each domain located at equivalent positions in the P-loops, line
the pore and impart sodium selectivity. Hence, sodium selectivity
was once thought to be a consequence of asymmetry within the pore.
Mutation of these residues to an EEEE sequence, the equivalent residues
found in CaVs, confers calcium selectivity.() It was thus surprising that NaChBac, which is a homotetramer
and hence has four identical residues (also glutamates) and is highly
homologous in sequence to the signature motif (FxxxTxExW) for CaV selectivity regions, exhibits sodium selectivity. Sodium
selectivity in NaChBac could be shifted to calcium selectivity by
changing the residues in the sequences on either side of the EEEE
filter in each of the chains, located at positions 190–195
(LESWAS) (Figure ).() Each mutation would still result in a symmetric selectivity filter.
A serine-to-glycine substitution at position 192 (LESWAS to LEGWAS)
had no effect on NaChBac permeability, unlike the LESWAS to LESWAD
substitution that transformed NaChBac into a nonselective cation channel.
Increasing the amount of negative charge resulted in further increased
Ca2+ selectivity. Mutants LEDWAS and LEDWAD showed greatly
increased calcium ion selectivity, which was further increased by
the additional substitution of E191D to form LDDWAD. These studies
demonstrated that sodium selectivity could be achieved from a homotetramer
and thus does not require a four-domain asymmetric pore, as had previously
been suggested for eukaryotic NaVs. Additionally, it demonstrated
that the mere presence of negatively charged residues such as aspartic
and glutamic acids in the pore domain does not ensure calcium selectivity.

C-Terminal Domain
The CTDs of eukaryotic NaVs are large (∼105 residues)
cytoplasmic domains involved in channel inactivation through interactions
with the loop linking DIII and DIV.() Mutations
in the CTD alter inactivation kinetics and are directly linked with
channelopathies, including cardiac arrhythmia syndromes, and epilepsy.() In eukaryotes, this domain
features a calcium ion-binding paired EF hand structure and a distal
calmodulin-binding motif., In contrast, the CTDs
of NaChBac and all other prokaryotic NaVs are much shorter
(∼40 residues). Because NaChBac is a homotetramer and more
closely resembles the oligomeric assembly of potassium channels than
the monomeric organization of eukaryotic NaVs, it was postulated
that the CTD of NaChBac might be involved in channel assembly and/or
tetramerization,() as it is in potassium
channels., Synchrotron radiation circular dichroism
spectroscopy studies demonstrated that the last 22 residues of the
CTD are helical while the 14 residues preceding this region are disordered.() Hydropathy plots and sequence analyses of the
CTD revealed a repeat pattern of hydrophobic and hydrophilic residues
typically found in coiled-coil structures., Expression studies comparing full-length and CTD-truncated constructs() suggested that while the CTD has little effect
on overall expression, it influences assembly into the membrane. It
is not required for tetramer formation,() although it does contribute to stabilization of the tetramers.() Hence, the CTDs of prokaryotic and eukaryotic
NaVs have very different structures, which are reflected
in the different functional roles resulting from their different oligomeric
states.

Functional Properties of NaChBac
Activation and Inactivation Kinetics
Like other voltage-gated
ion channels, NaChBac is activated in
response to membrane depolarization and is proposed to undergo several
conformational transitions prior to channel opening and subsequent
inactivation.() However, NaChBac inactivation
kinetics do not resemble those of its eukaryotic homologues. Activation
and inactivation time constants of 12.9 and 166 ms at −10 mV,
respectively, were recorded,() which are
considerably slower compared with the range of activation and fast
inactivation kinetics of eukaryotic NaVs (&lt;2 and &lt;10
ms, respectively). Fast inactivation in eukaryotic NaVs
allows those channels to close and rapidly return to a resting state
(the onset of fast inactivation can occur within 1 ms, while return
to a resting state takes ∼10 ms for fast inactivation, in contrast
to &gt;1 s for slow inactivation); the rapid return is essential for
the high-frequency propagation of action potentials required in higher-order
organisms. Fast inactivation is attributed to the loop region connecting
DIII and DIV undergoing a conformational change.() NaChBac, as a homotetramer, does not have an equivalent
interdomain loop region. KVs that are also homotetramers
undergo fast inactivation or N-type inactivation through their N-terminal
domain that acts like a ball and chain, physically blocking the pore
from the intracellular side.() This type
of inactivation is unlikely to occur in NaChBac as the amino terminus
of NaChBac is too short to produce a “ball and chain”
structure. As a result, NaChBac has a rate of inactivation 10–100-fold
lower than the range of inactivation rates of eukaryotic NaVs, and hence, its inactivation is described as slow or C-type inactivation.
The molecular mechanism of slow inactivation is less well understood
than that of fast inactivation, but it has been ascribed to conformational
changes resulting in collapse of the selectivity filter.() Charge-altering substitutions at position 195
in its P-loop altered the rate of inactivation and voltage dependence
of NaChBac, whereas mutations in the N-terminal region showed no effect
on inactivation rates. This supports the notion that NaChBac undergoes
slow inactivation involving the pore region and not the N- or C-terminal
domains.()

Mutagenesis studies on
NaChBac have also examined the role of the
proposed glycine hinge at position 219 in S6 of the pore,, in gating. In the KcsA crystal
structure, the equivalent residue is proposed to provide flexibility
to the pore, thus allowing channel opening during activation.() In NaChBac, altering the conformationally flexible
glycine to a serine resulted in a structure more thermally stable
(and presumably rigid) than the wild-type channel;() when it was changed to an alanine,() inactivation (and, to a lesser extent, activation) was significantly
altered. It is notable, however, that the homologue NaVSheP, which does not possess any glycine residues in its S6 helix,
is capable of gating, albeit with a negatively shifted voltage dependence
and significantly faster inactivation.() Together, these results suggest the glycine is integrally involved
in, but not obligatory for, the gating process. Additionally, when
this glycine was changed to a conformationally restricted proline
residue, which introduces a permanent kink in the S6 helix (perhaps
mimicking the open state) and results in significant shifting of the
voltage dependence of its activation to more negative voltages, inactivation
rates were slowed by 3 orders of magnitude.() Thus, the absence of the glycine hinge alters gating but does not
prevent it, and the presence of a permanent kink in this position
may result in stabilization of the open state in NaChBac.

Pharmacology
Pharmacological profiling has proven to
be a powerful tool for
structure–function studies of voltage-gated ion channels. The
availability of high-affinity, highly specific neurotoxins has allowed
the mapping and localization of specific domains and the probing of
gating properties of eukaryotic NaVs. The wide range of
neurotoxins that bind to eukaryotic NaVs has been reviewed;, however, little is known about the binding of toxins to NaChBac,
and no NaChBac-specific toxins have yet been identified. Indeed, although
it is sodium selective, wild-type NaChBac is insensitive to tetrodotoxin,
a toxin known to bind to the extracellular entrance to the pore of
eukaryotic NaVs.() However,
NaChBac is inhibited by clinically relevant concentrations of the
volatile general anesthetic isoflurane in a concentration-dependent
manner like eukaryotic NaVs.() Hence, NaChBac shares some, but not all, pharmacological properties
with eukaryotic NaVs.

On the other hand, NaChBac
also exhibits some pharmacological properties
similar to those of calcium channels. Indeed, the sequence of the
NaChBac selectivity filter more closely resembles the signature filter
motif (FxxxTxExW) found in CaV pore regions,() including the conserved glutamates (EEEE), one
from each domain, that form the interdomain ring of charged residues,
rather than the DEKA ring residues of NaV pores. Furthermore,
NaChBac is specifically blocked by compounds selective for L-type
CaV channels: NaChBac is most sensitive to the dihydropyridines
such as nifedipine and nimodipine with half-inhibitory concentrations
(IC50) of 2.2 and 1 μM, respectively.() It is affected, but less so, by T-type CaV antagonists
such as mibefradil (IC50 = 22 μM).() The sensitivity of NaChBac to dihydropyridines is not obvious
from direct comparisons of its sequence with the dihydropyridine binding
sites in CaVs. Dihydropyridines are proposed to induce
allosteric inhibition of channel opening by binding to the closed
conformation of CaVs. Specifically, they are proposed to
bind to the S5 helix of DIII, the S6 regions of DIII and DIV, and
the P-loop of DIII.() On the basis of modeling
studies,() it was proposed that these hydrophobic
blockers bind to the NaChBac residues located in narrow openings from
the lipid phase between helices S5 and S6 of one NaChBac monomer and
the S6 helix of the adjacent monomer. Specifically, NaChBac residues
151 and 155 of S5, 190 and 191 of the P-loop, and 226 of S6 of one
monomer and residues 213, 216, and 224 of the S6 helix of the adjacent
monomer form part of the lining of the proposed hydrophobic niche
that forms the dihydropyridine binding site. These residues are analogous
to residues where mutations in DIII of L-type CaVs inhibit
dihydropyridine binding and as such highlight the possibility of a
similar hydrophobic niche in both CaVs and prokaryotic
NaVs.() In addition, like L-type
calcium channels, NaChBac is relatively insensitive to the N-type
CaV-binding toxins such as ω-conotoxin GVIA and the
P/Q blocker toxin ω-agatoxin.() As
those toxins have been proposed to bind to the DIII region of the
pore and the S3–S4 loop of DIV, respectively, their lack of
binding can be used to help define where NaChBac and CaV structures are similar and divergent.

It is thus clear that
for NaChBac, ion selectivity does not correlate
with the pharmacologic sensitivities of other members of the voltage-gated
ion channels.

Physiological Roles
NaVs are found ubiquitously
in eukaryotes.() Differences in NaV activation–inactivation
kinetics vary with function and localization. For example, the presence
of fast-type sodium channels in the giant axon of cephalopods reflects
the highly centralized nervous system necessary for the rapid coordination
and execution of motor outputs for high-speed behaviors such as jet-propelled
locomotion and high-frequency chromophore operation.() In contrast, action potentials in gastropods are ∼10-fold
slower than in cephalopods and are associated with slow-type sodium
channels that are thought to control pace-making properties.() In humans, different isoforms are found in many
different tissue types, ranging from skeletal muscle and cardiac myocytes
to central and peripheral neurons. They are targets for the treatment
of a number of diseases such as long QT-syndrome, and certain forms of epilepsy() and chronic
pain.() While NaVs are not present
in all prokaryotes (E. coli being a notable example),
they are found across the spectrum of both Gram-positive and Gram-negative
bacteria, including thermophiles, halophiles, and aerobic, anaerobic,
and photosynthetic bacteria.− However, because they are not ubiquitous, this indicates
that they do not perform essential roles for viability in all prokaryotes
but rather are involved in specialized functional roles in certain
prokaryotes. For example, it has been postulated that prokaryotic
NaVs may be involved in motility and chemotaxis in marine
and alkaphilic species,, although no such function
has yet been demonstrated for NaChBac. However, because B.
halodurans lives in very high salt conditions, even though
the conductance and kinetic parameters of NaChBac are relatively modest,
the influx of sodium through the channel in this environment may be
very large. As sodium is a driving force for this bacterium’s
flagellar motor, NaChBac has been proposed to have a role in the control
of flagellar activity,() obviously not
a function required by all eukaryotic cells.

Hence, despite
their structural and functional similarities, it
is clear that NaVs from prokaryotic and eukaryotic sources
have different roles in vivo. They display sufficient structural diversity
to allow them to play a range of specialized roles in different organisms
and throughout different biological niches.

Evolutionary Relationships of NaChBac and Other Voltage-Gated
Ion Channels
On the basis of levels of sequence identity
among and within the
sodium, calcium, and potassium members of the voltage-gated ion channel
family, and their electrophysiological properties and overall functional
roles, there was speculation that NaVs arose after KVs and CaVs.() Because
the four domains of the NaVs() are more identical in sequence to the corresponding domains of CaVs than to each other and have in turn the lowest levels of
identity with KVs, it was suggested that a single gene
gave rise to (first) potassium and (then) calcium channels. The latter
resulted from two gene duplications of the common single-domain ancestral
gene, and then NaVs arose directly from the multidomain
CaVs. This evolutionary pattern was supported by their
functional roles because the KVs and CaVs would
be needed for more basic signaling mechanisms, but NaVs
would be required only in organisms with developed nervous systems
allowing fast propagation of action potential in axons.() However, these evolutionary relationships were
derived prior to the availability of crystal structures of any members
of the voltage-gated ion channel family, and before any prokaryotic
sodium channels had been identified, information that now suggests
some revision to these schema may be appropriate. The presence of
single-domain sodium channels from primitive prokaryotic organisms
that are more identical in sequence to eukaryotic NaVs
than to other members of the voltage-gated ion channel family indicates
they may have diverged from KVs at an earlier stage, before
gene duplication (in eukaryotes) had taken place. Because they exhibit
sequence characteristics common to both NaVs and CaVs, this may suggest that they are ancestral to both and may
be the missing link between single-domain KVs and multidomain
CaVs or NaVs. It is at this stage that gene
duplication may have arisen.

It seems likely that the simple
two-transmembrane types of prokaryotic
potassium channels such as KcsA led to 6TM prokaryotic KVs() by combination with a separately evolved
four-transmembrane voltage sensor. The prokayotic 6TM channels then
led to 6TM single-domain eukaryotic KVs. After the emergence
of the 6TM KVs, this may have led to a single-domain 6TM
ancestral prokaryotic NaV [as of yet, no single-domain
prokaryotic CaVs have been identified, although more distantly
related single-domain eukaryotic calcium channels (CatSper and TPCs)() have been found]. It is suggested
that the single-domain 6TM NaV channels underwent gene
duplication events twice, leading to multidomain proteins that then
separately evolved into the multidomain 24-transmembrane NaVs and CaVs (Figure ). Of course,
this proposed pattern may change in the future with the identification
of new prokaryotic and eukaryotic CaVs and NaVs with different levels of sequence similarity. Nevertheless, some
conclusions can be made on the basis of the presently known channels:
it seems likely that the linked four-domain structures of NaV and CaV channels conferred an evolutionary advantage,
in the kinetics of channel activation, inactivation, or recovery from
inactivation, but it seems less likely that the four-domain structure
evolved to provide ion selectivity.

Scheme
of the proposed evolutionary relationships among members of the voltage-gated
ion channel family.

Summary
NaChBac is a well-characterized exemplar of
the class of prokaryotic
sodium channels, which are simplified versions of the ubiquitous eukaryotic
NaVs. Its small size, with relatively short loops and termini,
along with its ability to be expressed in both mammalian systems (for
functional studies) and heterologous bacterial systems (for structural
studies) has allowed mutagenesis and reconstitution studies for exploring
functional features and makes it an excellent candidate for structural
studies.

It is interesting to note that while NaChBac and other
bacterial
sodium channels exhibit some similarities to eukaryotic NaVs, they also have other structural features more in common with other
members of the voltage-gated ion channel family rather than with the
eukaryotic members of the sodium channel subfamily. Specifically,
NaChBac has an oligomeric organization that resembles that of prokaryotic
and eukaryotic KVs, a pore architecture with a selectivity
filter that is highly homologous in sequence to CaVs, and
is specifically inhibited by L-type CaV antagonists. Hence,
this primitive channel also provides the opportunity to further investigate
and compare the different molecular bases of ion selectivity and ligand
binding between and within the members of the voltage-gated ion channel
family.

In conclusion, NaChBac and the other prokaryotic NaV homologues have helped reshape our thinking about sodium
channel
structure, function, and evolution.

Acknowledgments
We thank members of the Wallace group for helpful discussions.

Abbreviations
CaVvoltage-gated calcium
channel

CDcircular
dichroism

CTDC-terminal
domain

DI–DIVdomains I–IV, respectively

KVvoltage-gated potassium channel

LRETluminescence resonance
energy transfer

NaVvoltage-gated sodium channel

NaChBacvoltage-gated sodium channel
from B. halodurans

S1–S6transmembrane segments 1–6, respectively

TMtransmembrane

6TMsix-transmembrane

VSvoltage sensor.

