Phenylalanine hydroxylase (PheH)
is an allosteric enzyme that catalyzes the hydroxylation to tyrosine
of excess phenylalanine in the diet. Incubation
with phenylalanine increases the activity up to 100-fold; this is accompanied by conformational changes
in the interface between the regulatory and catalytic domains. Phosphorylation of Ser16 decreases the concentration
of phenylalanine required to activate PheH. The present understanding of the mechanism of phenylalanine activation
is based on a crystal structure of PheH in which N-terminal residues 19–29 of the regulatory domain
lie across the active site of the catalytic domain. Binding of phenylalanine
is proposed to result in a conformational change that displaces the
N-terminus of the regulatory domain and opens the active site.

PheH belongs to the family of aromatic
amino acid hydroxylases,
along with tyrosine hydroxylase (TyrH) and tryptophan hydroxylase. The structures of the catalytic domains of all
three are very similar,,, consistent
with a common catalytic mechanism. The
regulatory domains of PheH and TyrH also have similar structures,, although they display very low levels of sequence identity. However,
the solution structure of the isolated regulatory domain of TyrH shows
that the protein forms a stable ACT domain dimer, whereas the crystal structure of the combined regulatory
and catalytic domains of PheH shows no interactions between individual
regulatory domains. Preliminary characterization
of the isolated regulatory domain of PheH, residues 1–117 (RDPheH),
revealed that the free domain has an apparent molecular weight between
that of a monomer and that of a dimer. In part on the basis of this observation, Jaffe et al. proposed that the conformational change that
occurs upon binding of phenylalanine to PheH involves dimerization
of the regulatory domains. Here we describe the use of analytical
ultracentrifugation (AUC) to analyze the oligomerization state of
RDPheH to determine whether dimerization of this domain is linked
to phenylalanine binding and phosphorylation.

Initial sedimentation
velocity (SV) experiments were performed
at two concentrations of RDPheH; the resulting van Holde–Weischet
distributions are shown in Figure A. The sedimentation distributions show a concentration
dependence, in that the sample with a loading concentration of 280
μM has an s value larger than that of the sample
with a loading concentration of 7 μM. The weight-average sedimentation
coefficients (sw) for both samples are
between those calculated for a monomer and a dimer based on the published
structures of the regulatory domains of PheH and TyrH, consistent
with a monomer–dimer equilibrium for RDPheH.

To analyze
this equilibrium more quantitatively, a series of SV
experiments were conducted at 2.5–206 μM RDPheH. The
resulting sw values are plotted in Figure B as a function
of protein concentration. These data were fit well by eq , which describes the effect of protein concentration on the
average sw value for a monomer–dimer
equilibriumwhere s1 and s2 are the sedimentation
coefficients of the monomer and dimer, respectively, K is the equilibrium constant for dimer formation, and c is the total molar concentration of the protein in terms of monomer.
The resulting values are listed in Table .

Sedimentation
velocity analyses of RDPheH. (A) van Holde–Weischet
distribution plot for 7 μM RDPheH (red), 280 μM RDPheH
(green), and 7 μM RDPheH with 1 mM phenylalanine (blue). (B)
Weight-average sedimentation coefficients (sw) as a function of the concentration of RDPheH (red squares),
phosphorylated RDPheH (blue triangles), and RDPheH25–117 (black circles). The lines are from fits of eq . (C) Effect of the concentration of phenylalanine on the sw of RDPheH25–117 (7.6 μM,
red, or 7.2 μM, blue). The line was generated using the mechanism
of Scheme  and the values listed in Table .

The structure of PheH
containing both the catalytic and regulatory
domains shows the ∼20 N-terminal
residues to be unstructured. To determine the effect of this N-terminal
region on dimerization, a series of mutants of the RDPheH lacking
∼20 N-terminal residues were constructed. The protein lacking
the 24 N-terminal residues (RDPheH25–117) was the
best-behaved in solution. The results of an SV analysis of the solution
behavior of RDPheH25–117 are shown Figure B. The dissociation constant of RDPheH25–117 obtained from this analysis is very close to that of RDPheH (Table ), establishing that the 24 N-terminal residues
have no significant effect on dimerization. The 1H–15N heteronuclear single-quantum coherence nuclear magnetic
resonance spectrum of RDPheH25–117 overlaps with
that of RDPheH (data not shown), establishing that the deletion did
not alter the structure.

Next, AUC was used to determine whether
phosphorylation alters
the monomer–dimer equilibrium. As shown in Figure B (green) and Table , the
effect of protein concentration on the sedimentation behavior of RDPheH
is unaffected by phosphorylation of the protein.

In contrast
to the lack of an effect of phosphorylation, phenylalanine
has a substantial effect on the sedimentation behavior. Addition of
1 mM phenylalanine to 7 μM RDPheH results in an increase in
the s value of the protein to a value consistent
with a dimer (Figure A). SV analyses were
conducted with a fixed concentration of RDPheH25–117 (∼7 μM total monomer) and a range of phenylalanine
concentrations (4.8–1500 μM). The resulting sw values are shown in Figure C
as a function of phenylalanine concentration. There is a clear increase
in the average sw value as the concentration
of phenylalanine increases.

Sedimentation Coefficients
and Dissociation
Constants for RDPheH
 	s1 (S)	s2 (S)	K1 (μM)	
RDPheH	1.38 ± 0.08	2.31 ± 0.13	46 ± 35	
RDPheH25–117	1.24 ± 0.05	2.17 ± 0.07	46 ± 19	
phosphorylated RDPheH	1.36 ± 0.05	2.32 ± 0.10	37 ± 18	
RDPheH25–117	1.22 (1.14–1.29)	2.11 (2.11–2.12)	34 (22–56)	
Dissociation constant
for dimerization.

Based
on eq .

From global analyses using KinTek
Explorer.

The data in panels
B and C of Figure  for
RDPheH25–117 were analyzed globally to evaluate individual dimerization models and calculate
values for the equilibrium constants for phenylalanine binding and
dimerization. The model shown in Scheme ,
which involves binding of two molecules of phenylalanine per dimer
with equal affinity, gave the best fit (χ2 = 0.339)
with a Kd value for phenylalanine of 8.3
μM (6.4–13 μM) and the values listed in Table . A model in which the affinities for the first
and second molecules of phenylalanine differ gave values for Kphe-1 and Kphe-2 of 13 and 4.6 μM, respectively, but did not yield an improvement
in the χ2 value (0.335). A model in which only one
phenylalanine binds to the dimer resulted a much higher χ2 value (0.561).

RDPheH Dimerization Model
The data presented here support a model in which
the isolated RDPheH
is present in a monomer–dimer equilibrium, with phenylalanine
binding stabilizing the dimer. The data support the model of Jaffe
et al. in which the structural change
associated with phenylalanine activation involves dimerization of
regulatory domains within the PheH tetramer. While these results do
not address the structure of the dimer, the finding that the isolated
regulatory domain of TyrH is an ACT domain dimer, and the similar structures of the regulatory domains of the two
proteins suggest that the RDPheH dimer is also an ACT domain dimer.

The lack of an effect of phosphorylation at Ser16 on dimerization
suggests that phosphorylation of this residue disrupts interactions
of the ∼20 N-terminal residues with the catalytic domain of
the enzyme. Weakening such an interaction would make formation of
the proposed regulatory domain dimer more favorable. The lack of an
effect of deleting the 24 N-terminal residues on dimerization is also
consistent with these residues interacting with the catalytic domain.

Supporting Information Available
Experimental procedures, including
details of data analyses. This material is available free of charge
via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi501109s_si_001.pdf

This work was
supported in part by National Institutes of Health Grant R01 GM098140.

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Mr. Virgil Schirf for assistance with
the AUC experiments
and Dr. Borries Demeler for helpful discussion. Support for the Center
for Macromolecular Interactions from the Office of the Vice President
for Research at University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio
is gratefully acknowledged.

