Cholesterol,
chlorophylls, hemes,
ubiquinones, natural rubbers, and archaeal membrane lipids are just
a few examples of more than 25000 biomolecules that make up the diverse
class of organic molecules called isoprenoids.− Isoprenoids
are found in all three domains of life and are involved in essential
processes such as electron transport, post-translational modification,
regulation of membrane fluidity, and cytoskeleton assembly. All isoprenoids are composed of two or more isoprene
building blocks (five-atom branched hydrocarbons) derived from isopentenyl
pyrophosphate (IPP) and its isomer, dimethylallyl pyrophosphate (DMAPP).
Plants and most eubacteria generate IPP and DMAPP from pyruvate and
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate via the deoxyxylulose 5-phosphate (DXP)
pathway. Eukaryotes and archaea use a
separate pathway called the mevalonate pathway, which relies on acetyl-CoA
as the sole carbon source. The mevalonate
pathway in archaea is especially important because IPP and DMAPP are
used to make branched lipids that are connected to glycerol through
ether linkages to form membrane lipids. These branched lipids and ether linkages are thought to promote
membrane stability at high temperatures.,

The canonical
mevalonate pathway of eukaryotes can be conceptually
separated into two parts, which we term the upper and lower stages
(Figure ). In the upper stage, three acetyl-CoAs
are condensed and reduced by NADPH to yield mevalonate. In the lower
stage, mevalonate is sequentially phosphorylated to make mevalonate
pyrophosphate and then decarboxylated to yield IPP, which can be converted
to DMAPP by an isomerase. Recent phylogenetic
analyses of archaeal genomes identified strong homologues for the
first three enzymes in the pathway leading up to mevalonate. However,
in most cases, no homologues for phosphomevalonate kinase or mevalonate
pyrophosphate decarboxylase are found. Furthermore, some archaea such as Thermoplasma, Flavobacteria, and Gramella have no detectable
mevalonate kinase (MVK) homologues.

Mevalonate
pathways. Eukaryotes use the left side of the fork after
mevalonate 5-phosphate (black), and archaea use the right side (blue).
The two enzymes identified in this study suggest an alternative pathway
branching from mevalonate (red). A predicted decarboxylase (bold arrow)
connects mevalonate 3,5-bisphosphate to isopentenyl phosphate.

While it has been hypothesized
for more than a decade that archaea
possess an alternative mevalonate pathway based on computational genomics, a complete pathway was not elucidated until
2013 in the organisms Roseiflexus castenholzii() and Haloferax volcanii. As shown by the blue arrows in Figure , instead of two phosphorylations followed by a
decarboxylation as seen in eukaryotes, some archaea phosphorylate
once, decarboxylate with mevalonate-5-phosphate decarboxylase, and
then phosphorylate again with isopentenyl phosphate kinase. The end
product is the same, IPP, but the enzymatic reactions are distinct.

We were interested in obtaining thermophilic enzymes for in vitro reconstruction of the mevalonate pathway. As part of this effort, we targeted enzymes
from an archeon, Thermoplasma acidophilum, which
is naturally found in coal refuse piles in the northeast United States,
where it grows optimally at 59 °C. One of the target enzymes from T. acidophilum,
encoded by the ta1305 gene, was annotated as a mevalonate
pyrophosphate decarboxylase in GenBank [genes in italics (e.g., ta1305) and their protein products capitalized in Roman
type (e.g., Ta1305)]. Upon characterization
of the expressed enzyme, however, we discovered that it acts on mevalonate
to generate mevalonate 3-phosphate, a previously unknown activity
(see Figure ). We were then able to identify
a second novel kinase in T. acidophilum encoded by
the ta0762 gene, which phosphorylates mevalonate
3-phosphate to form mevalonate 3,5-bisphosphate, another previously
unknown metabolite. We propose that these two new enzyme activities
are part of a novel mevalonate pathway utilized by T. acidophilum (Figure ).

Materials and Methods
Materials
Miller LB medium (BD Difco) was used for
growth of bacterial strains. Escherichia coli BL21
Gold (DE3) (Agilent) was used as the host strain for both cloning
and expression of recombinant proteins. Plasmid pET28a(+) was purchased
from Novagen. HotStart Taq Mastermix (Denville) was used for gene
amplification. Phusion DNA polymerase (Finnzymes), Taq DNA ligase
(MCLab), and T5 exonuclease (Epicenter) were purchased separately
and used to make the assembly master mix (AMM) used for cloning. Ni-NTA
resin and miniprep reagents were purchased from Qiagen. Primers were
synthesized by ValueGene. All other chemicals were purchased from
Sigma-Aldrich unless otherwise noted.

Cloning
Genes
were amplified by polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) from T. acidophilum genomic DNA (ATCC catalog
no. 25905D). A modified Gibson method was used to assemble all constructs. Primers included 15–20 bp complementary
to the ends of the target gene and 15–20 bp complementary to
the NdeI and XhoI insertion sites of pET28a(+), which allowed for
the addition of an N-terminal six-His tag. Ten nanograms of pET28a(+)
digested with NdeI and XhoI was mixed with 30 ng of PCR product and
7 μL of assembly mix [0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 0.2 mM dNTPs,
1 mM NAD+, 5% PEG 8K, 10 mM DTT, 10 mM MgCl2, 0.00375 unit/μL T5 exonuclease, 0.012 μL Phusion DNA
polymerase, and 4 units/μL TaqDNA ligase]. After incubation
at 50 °C for 2 h, 5 μL was then used to transform BL21
Gold (DE3), and transformants were selected by being plated on LB
agar containing 50 μg/mL kanamycin.

Expression and Purification
All E. coli strains were grown at 37 °C in
LB medium with 50 μg/mL
kanamycin. One liter of LB medium was inoculated with 5 mL of overnight
starter culture. Protein expression was induced during the log phase
(OD600 of 0.5–0.8) with 0.5 mM IPTG. After 20 h,
cells were pelleted, resuspended in 12 mL of buffer A [50 mM Tris-HCl
(pH 7.5) and 100 mM NaCl], and lysed by sonication, and cell debris
was removed by centrifugation at 30000g for 20 min.
The lysate was mixed with 3 mL of a Ni-NTA slurry and incubated at
4 °C while being gently mixed. After 1 h, the lysate mixture
was applied to a column and the Ni-NTA beads were washed three times
with 25 mL of buffer A containing 10 mM imidazole. Protein was then
eluted with 4 mL of buffer A containing 250 mM imidazole. For kinetic
characterization, enzymes were further purified on an AKTA FPLC system
using a Superdex S200 10/300 GL gel filtration column run with buffer
A, at a rate of 0.5 mL/min.

Enzyme Assays
Enzymes were assayed
for the ability
to hydrolyze ATP to ADP by coupling the reactions to pyruvate kinase
(PK) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) from rabbit muscle. Assays were conducted in duplicate using a 200
μL volume at 55 °C and contained 1 mM ATP, 10 mM KCl, 5
mM MgCl2, 5 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, 1 mM PEP, 0.5 mM NADH,
1.4 μg of enzyme, 1.0 μL of LDH/PK mix (Sigma), and 50
mM bis-tris propane (pH 8.5). The pH of all buffers was adjusted at
25 °C. All reagents were incubated for 10 min at the desired
temperature, and then substrate was added to a final concentration
of 1 mM. The absorbance at 340 nm was recorded over 20 min on a Spectramax
M5 microplate reader. Assays for activity with mevalonate 3-phosphate
were conducted in a sequential manner using 0.5 mM mevalonate, 3 mM
PEP, and 0.75 mM NADH. The second enzyme was added after complete
conversion of mevalonate to mevalonate 3-phosphate as monitored on
the microplate reader. All assay conditions included a control with
direct addition of 1 mM ADP to ensure PK and LDH activities were not
rate-limiting.

Free Phosphate Assays
Phosphate
assays were conducted
in a 96-well plate using reagents from a glycosyltransferase activity
kit (R&amp;D Systems). Two microliters
of an enzyme reaction mixture was combined with 48 μL of doubly
distilled water (ddH2O), followed by 30 μL of malachite
green reagent A, 100 μL of ddH2O, and 30 μL
of malachite green reagent B. After a 20 min incubation, the absorbance
at 620 nm was measured on a Spectramax M5 microplate reader alongside
five standards of 0.0–1.0 mM KH2PO4 prepared
identically. Mevalonate pyrophosphate decarboxylase from Saccharomyces
cerevisiae, prepared as described previously, served as a positive control for the release
of free phosphate through the decarboxylation of (RS)-mevalonate pyrophosphate.

Gas Chromatography
Isoprenol was
extracted from 200
μL of an enzymatic reaction mixture with 600 μL of hexanes.
Two microliters of the hexane layer was injected into the GC-FID (HP5890II)
instrument equipped with an HP-INNOWAX column (0.320 mm × 30
m, Agilent). The carrier gas was helium with a flow rate of 5 mL/min.
The oven temperature was kept at 50 °C for 2 min, increased to
100 °C at a rate of 10 °C/min, increased to 250 °C
at a rate of 25 °C/min, and finally held at 250 °C for 2
min. The inlet and detector temperatures were kept at 250 and 330
°C, respectively. The isoprenol concentration was determined
by comparison to authentic standards.

Product Identification
by NMR
Enzymatic reactions for
NMR were conducted in a 250 μL volume using 1.4 μg of
enzyme, 20 mM (R)-mevalonate, 20 mM PEP, 1 mM ATP,
1 mM MgCl2, and 10 μL of LDH/PK enzyme mix (Sigma),
which was diluted and reconcentrated to remove glycerol. The pH was
adjusted to 7.5 at 25 °C using 1.0 M KOH with 20 mM PEP serving
as a phosphate buffer in addition to being a substrate for pyruvate
kinase. The reaction mixtures were incubated for 6 h at 42 °C.
The completed 250 μL reaction mixture was diluted to 500 μL
with 99.9% D2O from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories and
aliquoted into an NMR tube. All spectra were acquired at ambient temperature
on a 500 MHz Bruker AV500 spectrometer equipped with a cryoprobe.
Data were processed using Topspin version 3.1. For the spectra of
mevalonate 3,5-bisphosphate, the PEP concentration in the enzymatic
reaction mixture was doubled to 40 mM to allow for full conversion
of 20 mM (R)-mevalonate to mevalonate 3,5-bisphosphate.

Product Identification by ESI Mass Spectrometry
Negative
ion electrospray mass spectrometry data were collected with a Waters
LCT Premier XE time-of-flight instrument controlled by MassLynx version
4.1. Samples from the NMR tubes were transferred to GC vials and injected
into the multimode ionization source with a Waters Acquity UPLC system.
The flow injection solvent was a 50/50 MeOH/MeCN mixture (LCMS grade,
VWR Scientific), and water blanks were run between all samples. The
lock mass standard for accurate mass determination was leucine enkephalin
(Sigma catalog no. L9133).

Biochemical Characterization
The
optimal pH for the
enzymes was determined by kinase assays in 0.5 pH unit increments
ranging from pH 6.5 to 9.5 using 50 mM bis-tris propane. The optimal
temperature of the enzymatic assay was determined in 5 °C increments
ranging from 25 to 60 °C. We were unable to obtain direct kinetic
measurements above 60 °C because it is the maximal temperature
of the Spectramax M5 microplate reader. To complement this data, the
temperature stability was assayed by incubating 30 μL of 0.170
mg/mL Ta1305 or 0.067 mg/mL Ta0762 for 1 h at 30–90 °C
in 4–6 °C increments using a thermocycler gradient (Eppendorf
ProS PCR machine). Kinetic measurements for Ta1305 were taken at pH
8.5 and 55 °C with 1.4 μg of enzyme over a range of 0.03–4.00
mM (R)-mevalonate. Ta0762 kinetic measurements were
performed at pH 8.0 and 60 °C with 0.5 μg of enzyme over
the range of 0.03–1.00 mM mevalonate 3-phosphate (produced
enzymatically). kcat values were not corrected
for temperature because the temperature of each experiment is indicated.

Results
Ta1305 Is Active on Mevalonate
Three genes from T. acidophilum annotated as mevalonate pyrophosphate decarboxylases
in GenBank,ta1305, ta0893, and ta0461, were cloned and expressed
in E. coli. Known mevalonate pyrophosophate decarboxylases
hydrolyze ATP to ADP as part of their mechanism and can therefore be conveniently studied using standard
kinase assays. No activity was detected
in a kinase assay using the expected substrate, 1 mM (RS)-mevalonate pyrophosphate. We therefore retested the three enzymes
with mevalonate and mevalonate 5-phosphate. To our surprise, Ta1305
showed significant ATP consumption in the presence of 1 mM (RS)-mevalonate (Figure ). No activity
was detected with any other substrate or enzyme combination.

Enzyme specificity.
The enzymes were incubated with the following
substrates each at 1.0 mM: mevalonate (MVA), mevalonate 5-phosphate
(M5P), mevalonate 5-pyrophosphate (MPP), mevalonate 3-phosphate (M3P),
and 2-phosphoglycerate (2PG). A no enzyme control (NE) was also performed.
ATP (1.0 mM) was included, and ADP production was monitored at 55
°C and pH 8.5 for Ta1305 and 60 °C and pH 8.0 for Ta0762.

Ta1305 Is Not a Mevalonate-5-kinase
The only known
enzyme to act on mevalonate is mevalonate-5-kinase, which phosphorylates
the 5-OH group. We therefore tested if Ta1305 was a mevalonate-5-kinase
using a sequential assay. Mevalonate and ATP were incubated with Ta1305,
followed by addition of phosphomevalonate kinase (PMVK), which consumes
ATP in the presence of mevalonate 5-phosphate. No activity was detected
upon addition of PMVK. When we replaced Ta1305 with an authentic mevalonate-5-kinase
from S. cerevisiae, however, robust activity was
observed. Thus, Ta1305 is not a mevalonate-5-kinase.

Ta1305 Shows
No Decarboxylase Activity As Suggested by Homology
The fact
that Ta1305 is 18% identical with mevalonate pyrophosphate
decarboxylase from S. cerevisiae() yet acts on mevalonate suggests that it might directly
decarboxylate mevalonate. The expected product of mevalonate decarboxylation
would be 3-methylbut-3-en-1-ol (isoprenol) instead of isopentenyl
pyrophosphate. To test this hypothesis, we allowed the reaction to
go to completion from 1.0 mM mevalonate and analyzed the mixture for
any isoprenol production by extracting with hexane followed by gas
chromatography. No isoprenol was detected, even after allowing the
reaction mixture to incubate for 48 h at 37 °C to promote spontaneous
decarboxylation. Positive controls made by spiking the enzymatic reaction
mixture with authentic isoprenol indicated that we would have detected
isoprenol production as low as 0.01 mM.

Ta1305 Is a Kinase
While the Ta1305 enzyme consumed
ATP in the presence of mevalonate, the fate of the phosphate remained
unclear. To confirm that this enzyme does not decarboxylate mevalonate
and release free phosphate, we assayed the reaction mixture for free
phosphate after completion of the reaction using 1 mM ATP and 1 mM
(RS)-mevalonate. We
found no detectable free phosphate, suggesting that the substrate
is phosphorylated. The same experiment utilizing authentic mevalonate
pyrophosphate decarboxylase from S. cerevisiae as
a positive control and its substrate, (RS)-mevalonate
pyrophosphate, yielded 0.57 mM free phosphate as expected for the
racemic substrate mixture.

Phosphorylation of mevalonate was
further verified by ESI mass spectrometry. High-resolution negative
ion electrospray ionization mass spectra of the reaction products
were recorded. We observed a mass of m/z 227.0313, which is within m/z 0.00008
of the mass expected for a phosphorylated mevalonate [C6H13O7P – H]− (Figure
S1 of the ). These
results suggest that Ta1305 phosphorylates mevalonate in an ATP-dependent
manner.

Ta1305 Generates Mevalonate 3-Phosphate
The results
so far indicate that Ta1305 is a mevalonate kinase, but there are
three potential sites of phosphorylation on mevalonate: the 3-OH group,
5-OH group, and the carboxylate. To identify the site of phosphorylation,
we used 13C NMR. While mevalonate alone produces six single
peaks in its 13C NMR spectrum, coupling of the carbons
to a phosphate will generate doublets for any carbon within three
bonds of a 31P atom. The three
possible phosphorylated products of Ta1305 would each generate a unique
set of doublets, which allows for positive identification of the phosphorylated
species.

To prepare samples for natural abundance NMR analysis,
we wanted to keep the ATP concentrations low to simplify the NMR spectra.
We therefore regenerated ATP in situ from PEP using
pyruvate kinase. In this manner, ATP is kept at a very low concentration
and recycled, leaving only contributions from the much simpler spectrum
of PEP. A spectrum of the no enzyme control sample [i.e., 10 mM (R)-mevalonate] showed six singlet peaks as expected (Figure A), and the carbons were assigned with the guidance
of computationally predicted spectra from the Human Metabolome Database and ChemNMR Pro version 13.0. Another control sample employing yeast mevalonate-5-kinase
showed splitting at carbons 4 and 5 as expected for mevalonate 5-phosphate
(Figure B). The product of Ta1305 activity,
however, showed splitting at carbons 2–4 and 6, which is consistent
with phosphorylation at the 3-OH position (Figure C). Thus, we can annotate Ta1305 as mevolonate-3-kinase (full 13C NMR spectra are available as Figures S2–S4 of the ).

13C NMR of
completed enzymatic reactions (10 mM products)
in 50% D2O. The chemical shifts of the six mevalonate carbons
are listed along with the J couplings from 31P (red): (A) no enzyme, (B) yeast mevalonate-5-kinase, (C) Ta1305
activity, and (D) Ta1305 and Ta0762 activity. Reactions were monitored
to &gt;96% completion before spectra were acquired. Full spectra are
shown in Figures S2–S4 and S6 of the .A doublet of
doublets was seen at a JC4–P1 of
7.1 and a JC4–P2 of 4.4. All other
splittings are simple doublets. 



Identification of an Enzyme That Acts on Mevalonate 3-Phosphate
To identify the next step in a possible new mevalonate pathway,
we screened enzymes that might further phosphorylate the newly identified
metabolite, mevalonate 3-phosphate. Seven genes annotated in GenBank
as kinases from T. acidophilum were cloned, and the
proteins were expressed and purified. We chose two putative kinase
genes found near ta1305 in the genome (ta1304 and ta1307), three genes that were homologous to
those of the mevalonate kinase family (ta0344, ta0436, and ta0546), and two additional
genes that were annotated as small molecule kinases (ta0762 and ta0364) but, to the best of our knowledge,
had not been characterized.

We screened the putative kinases
for their ability to phosphorylate mevalonate 3-phosphate using a
sequential kinase assay. We first used Ta1305 to generate mevalonate
3-phosphate from mevalonate in situ (monitored by
ADP production). After the reaction had reached completion, we added
the second test enzyme. Of the seven enzymes tested, only Ta0762 showed
activity with mevalonate 3-phosphate (Figure ). No activity was detected with mevalonate, mevalonate 5-phosphate,
or mevalonate pyrophosphate. Ta0762 had been computationally annotated
as 2-phosphoglycerate kinase, though no activity was detected with
2-phosphoglycerate (Figure ). This result
suggests Ta0762 is misannotated and acts in a pathway directly after
mevalonate-3-kinase. To determine if Ta0762 is a kinase, we conducted
a free phosphate assay with 2.0 mM ATP and 1.0 mM mevalonate in a
sequential enzymatic reaction. After monitoring the reaction until
it reached completion on the microplate reader, we detected only 0.02
mM free phosphate, suggesting mevalonate 3-phosphate is also phosphorylated.
To confirm the production of a doubly phosphorylated product, we again
employed ESI mass spectrometry. The reaction product had a mass of m/z 307.0016, which is within m/z 0.0031 of the mass expected for mevalonate diphosphate
[C6H14O10P2 – H]− (Figure S5 of the ).

Ta0762 Generates Mevalonate 3,5-Bisphosphate
13C NMR was employed to determine the position of phosphorylation by
Ta0762 using the same procedure used to identify mevalonate 3-phosphate.
Splitting was observed at carbons 2–6, which is consistent
with phosphates attached to the 3-OH and 5-OH positions simultaneously
(Figure D, full spectrum in Figure S6 of the ). In addition, carbon
4 showed a doublet of doublets pattern consistent with contributions
from 31P atoms bonded in both the 3-OH and 5-OH positions
simultaneously. The observed spectrum is consistent with the structure
of mevalonate 3,5-bisphosphate.

Biochemical Characterization
of Mevalonate-3-kinase and Mevalonate-3-phosphate-5-kinase
To characterize the kinetic parameters of the new enzymes, we first
determined the optimal pH and temperature for each enzyme. As shown
in Figure , mevalonate-3-kinase performs optimally
at pH 8.5 and 55 °C. Mevalonate-3-phosphate-5-kinase performs
optimally at 60 °C but does not demonstrate significant pH dependence
in the pH range of 6.5–9.0. Both enzymes are quite stable,
retaining more than 95% of their activity after incubation at 60 °C
for 1 h. Under optimal conditions with (R)-mevalonate
as a substrate, mevalonate-3-kinase was found to have a Km of 97 ± 6 μM and a kcat of 5.0 ± 0.1 s–1 (Figure S7 of the ), which are comparable
to those of mevalonate-5-kinase from the archeon Methanosarcina
mazei (Km of 68 ± 4 μM
and kcat of 4.3 ± 0.2 s–1). Mevalonate-3-phosphate-5-kinase is
significantly faster with a kcat of approximately
9.0 s–1. We were unable to accurately determine
the Km for mevalonate-3-phosphate-5-kinase,
however, because the substrate is not commercially available and the
detection limit of our assay is 30 μM substrate. Nevertheless,
the enzyme was still at Vmax when it was
assayed with 60 μM mevalonate 3-phosphate, indicating that the Km is well below 60 μM. For both enzymes,
ATP was confirmed to be at saturation because for both enzymes, increasing
the ATP concentration from 1 to 5 mM saw no change in the observed
rates.

Biochemical characterization of mevalonate-3-kinase (A–C)
and mevalonate-3-phosphate-5-kinase (D–F). (A) Activity at
pH 8.5 over a temperature range of 25–60 °C in 5 °C
increments. (B) Residual activity after the sample had been incubated
at the indicated temperature for 1 h and then assayed at 55 °C
and pH 8.5. (C) Activity at 25 °C over a pH range of 6.5–9.5
in pH increments of 0.5. (D) Activity at pH 8.0 over a temperature
range of 25–60 °C in 5 °C increments. (E) Residual
activity after the sample had been incubated at the indicated temperature
for 1 h and then assayed at 60 °C and pH 8.0. (F) Activity at
60 °C over a pH range of 6.5–9.5 in pH increments of 0.5.
Curve fits in panels A–F were generated by a Stineman function and included simply to highlight data trends.

Discussion
We
propose the two enzymes described here constitute part of a
novel mevalonate pathway in T. acidophilum that splits
at mevalonate and rejoins the known archaeal mevalonate pathway at
isopentenyl phosphate (Figure , red arrows).
In T. acidophilum, there is strong evidence of the
presence of acetoacetyl-CoA thiolase, HMG-CoA synthase, HMG-CoA reductase,
isopentenyl phosphate kinase, and isopentenyl pyrophosphate isomerase
based on homology and experiment., However, no homologues have been identified for mevalonate-5-kinase
or phosphomevalonate kinase in this organism. Most surprising is the
absence of mevalonate-5-kinase because it is the only enzyme previously
known to act on mevalonate. We propose that T. acidophilum contains a novel pathway in which mevalonate-3-kinase phosphorylates
mevalonate at the 3-OH position, followed by mevalonate-3-phosphate-5-kinase,
which phosphorylates the 5-OH position, and finally an unidentified
decarboxylase converts mevalonate 3,5-bisphosphate to isopentenyl
phosphate (Figure , red arrows).

The
proposed decarboxylase enzyme would conduct the same chemical
transformation as mevalonate pyrophosphate decarboxylase but in an
ATP-independent manner because the substrate is already phosphorylated
in the correct position for decarboxylation. We tested apparent mevalonate
pyrophosphate decarboxylase homologues Ta0461 and Ta0893 for activity
on mevalonate 3,5-bisphosphate, but none was detected in our hands.
Both enzymes expressed to inclusion bodies, and after many attempts,
we were unable to refold these proteins in high yield; therefore,
it remains possible that one of them is the missing decarboxylase.
We also considered the possibility of an alternative pathway in which
IP kinase acts directly on mevalonate 3,5-bisphosphate. When we incubated
mevalonate 3,5-bisphosphate with IP kinase, however, we saw no release
of phosphate (decarboxylation) or ATP consumption (kinase activity).

The observation of stable tertiary phosphorylated mevalonate is
striking because the mechanism of mevalonate pyrophosphate decarboxylase
is thought to proceed through a transient tertiary phosphorylated
intermediate., In a previous mechanistic study
of mevalonate pyrophosphate decarboxylase, a heavy oxygen atom was
incorporated into mevalonate pyrophosphate at the 3-OH position, and
then after ATP-dependent conversion to IPP, the heavy oxygen was detected
in free phosphate. This suggests a simple
mechanism in which the γ-phosphate from ATP is transferred to
the 3-OH position of mevalonate pyrophosphate, activating the substrate
for decarboxylation. The current literature predicts this tertiary
phosphorylated molecule is inherently unstable and falls apart with
concomitant decarboxylation., Our observation of
mevalonate 3-phosphate and mevalonate 3,5-bisphosphate as stable metabolites
at 55 °C suggests that the decarboxylation step requires enzyme
catalysis, however.

To shed light on the reason why mevalonate-3-kinase
does not function
as a decarboxylase, the active site residues of five bacterial mevalonate
pyrophosphate decarboxylases (MDCs) were aligned with mevalonate-3-kinase
from T. acidophilum. We focused on nine active site
residues shown to interact with mevalonate pyrophosphate in a MDC
crystal structure by Barta et al. Only
four of nine highly conserved residues are preserved in mevalonate-3-kinase
(Figure S8 of the ). It is likely that these five nonconserved residues (L19, L20,
I23, D190, and T276) contribute to the loss of decarboxylase activity.

Because of the apparently low reliability of predicting function
through sequence homology, we cannot tell which organisms have a true
copy of mevalonate-3-kinase and which have the classical mevalonate
pyrophosphate decarboxylase. Sequence homology obtained through a
protein BLAST search revealed five homologues of mevalonate-3-kinase
that were &gt;30% identical. All five are annotated as “mevalonate
pyrophosphate decarboxylase” or “hypothetical protein”
and belong to the order Thermoplasmatates: Thermoplasma volcanium (67%), Thermoplasmatales archeon (54%), Ferroplasma sp. Type II (45%), Ferroplasma acidarmanus (42%), and Picrophilus torridus (39%). For comparison,
the level of sequence identity between mevalonate-3-kinase and classical
yeast MDC is 19%.

Taken together, we have identified two novel
enzymes, mevalonate-3-kinase
and mevalonate-3-phosphate-5-kinase, which act sequentially in a putative
alternate mevalonate pathway in T. acidophilum. Full
confirmation of this pathway requires identification of a missing
mevalonate 3,5-bisphosphate decarboxylase. Our findings raise important
questions about the mechanism of mevalonate pyrophosphate decarboxylases
because tertiary phosphorylated mevalonate species clearly exist as
stable metabolites.

Supporting Information Available
Full 13C NMR spectra,
ESI mass spectroscopy data, and a Michaelis–Menten curve for
mevalonate-3-kinase (Figures S1–S7). This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500566q_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank members
of the Bowie lab for critical reading of
the manuscript and Dr. Greg Khitrov (UCLA Molecular Instrumentation
Center, Mass Spectrometry Facility, Department of Chemistry) for expertise
in the acquisition and analysis of GC–MS data.

Abbreviations
IPPisopentenyl pyrophosphate

DMAPPdimethylallyl pyrophosphate

PMVKphosphomevalonate
kinase

MDCmevalonate
pyrophosphate decarboxylase

PEPphosphoenolpyruvate

LDHlactate dehydrogenase

PKpyruvate kinase

Ni-NTAnickel-nitrilotriacetic acid

GC-FIDgas chromatography with flame
ionization detection

UPLCultra performance liquid chromatography

ESIelectrospray ionization

FPLCfast protein liquid
chromatography

NMRnuclear magnetic resonance

PCRpolymerase chain reaction

LBLuria broth

IPTGisopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside.

