Polymerases
synthesize DNA one
base at a time through a series of dynamic motions, including global
and local conformational changes and chemical reactions.− For processive DNA replication, the polymerases must slide on DNA− and the water molecules at binding interfaces should play an active
role.− From extensive analyses of many protein–DNA complexes,− the interfacial water at a large binding area seems to behave as
a molecule lubricant to increase structural flexibility and adaptability
and to lubricate protein sliding for fast translocation. Such interfacial
dynamics are difficult to study experimentally. We recently reported our direct probing of solvent accessibility
and mobility at the binding interface of a loose binding polymerase
(Dpo4)–DNA complex and observed ultrafast interfacial water
dynamics, concluding a fluid binding interface and mobile active site
and implying a lower fidelity of the polymerase. However, for a tight polymerase–DNA binding complex,− it is unknown how flexible confined water molecules are at the interface
and what their dynamic role is in DNA replication.

Here, we
choose the polymerase β (pol β)–DNA
complex to study the water dynamics at its tight binding interface.
Pol β has 335 amino acids with a molecular mass of 39 kDa and
belongs to the X-family of DNA polymerases with lyase and polymerase
domains (Figure ).− The enzyme has been extensively studied using biochemical,− nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR),− and X-ray− methods as well as molecular dynamics (MD) simulations.− The N-terminal lyase domain (8 kDa) has an enzymatic activity to
remove the 5′-deoxyribose phosphate intermediate during base
excision repair. The polymerase domain (31 kDa) is composed of three
subdomains: a double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) binding D subdomain (also
called the thumb subdomain), a nucleotidyl-transfer C subdomain (palm),
and a dNTP selection N subdomain (finger). Upon dsDNA recognition,
the polymerase wraps around the DNA substrate and forms a “donut”
shape with a compact configuration (Figure ). With an incoming nucleotide, the ternary complex further changes
its conformation from the “open” to “closed”
form to sandwich the nucleotide by moving an α-helix closer
to the nascent base pairs., Accompanying these
major structural changes are a series of local side chain conformational
changes that are also important for polymerase function.,,, For both binary and ternary structures, the active site is still
solvent accessible and water molecules were recently proposed to be
involved in the local active-site reorganization and catalytic nucleotidyl-transfer
reactions.,

Surface and ribbon representations of
pol β in apo (A and
B, Protein Data Bank entry 1BPD) and binary (C and D, Protein Data Bank entry 1BPX) states. Pol β
consists of a lyase domain (gray) and three polymerase subdomains,
thumb (green), palm (red), and finger (blue), arranged in a right-hand
configuration. The definition of the subdomains is that of Steitz
et al. The yellow patches and spheres
show the wild-type and mutant tryptophan positions. The DNA backbone
and base pairs are colored orange.

In this report, we used a methodology similar to that in our previous study of the loose binding
Dpo4–DNA
complex to characterize the water dynamics
at the binding interface for the binary and ternary complexes of pol
β with femtosecond resolution. Because the single intrinsic
W325 is located on the finger subdomain and is far from the binding
interface, it was used as a control site. Using the W325F mutant as
a template, we designed two additional mutants, F146W and S229W, at
the binding sites on the thumb and palm subdomains, respectively,
and one mutant, Y271W, near the active site on the finger subdomain.
We determined the time scales of water motion around the protein surface,
at the DNA binding interface of the complex, and in the active site
with and without binding to the incoming nucleotide. These results
were directly compared with those from the loose binding Dpo4–DNA
complex, allowing us to elucidate the
molecular mechanism of the interfacial water dynamics in different
polymerase–DNA binding complexes.

Materials and Methods
Sample
Preparation
Rat pol β, encoded in plasmid
PET17b, was overexpressed in Escherichia coli BL21(DE3),
and the protein purification followed the procedures reported previously. The protein sample was finally stored in a buffer
containing 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 150 mM KCl, 2 mM DTT, 3% glycerol,
and 1.5 mM MgCl2. All three double mutants (F146W, S299W,
and Y271W) were designed and created using site-directed mutagenesis.
They were overexpressed and purified via a similar procedure and finally
showed structures similar to that of the wild type based on their
circular dichroism (CD) spectra. We also examined their enzymatic
activities and found that all three mutants
were enzymatically active. The oligomers of the DNA substrate were
purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies (Coralville, IA) and annealed
in our lab to form two-nucleotide-gapped dsDNA. The sequences for
the oligomers are as follows: 36mer (template), 5′-TGGATTGAGGTGACTATGGTTGGACGGCTGCGAGGC-3′;
19mer (prime), 5′-GCCTCGCAGCCGTCCAACddC-3′;
15mer (downstream oligo), 5′-/5Phos/AGTCACCTCAATCCA-3′.
The mixing concentrations of the enzyme, DNA substrate, and dATP were
400 μM, 450 μM, and 1 mM, respectively. On the basis of
the known dissociation constants of binary and ternary complexes, there should be more than 98% of the enzyme
complexes in our samples.

Femtosecond Fluorescence Spectroscopy
All the femtosecond-resolved
fluorescence transients were obtained using the fluorescence upconversion
method as reported previously. Briefly,
an 800 nm pulsed laser beam was generated from a femtosecond amplifier
system with a repetition rate at 1 kHz. Then it was split into two
separated beams. One beam was used to generate the pump beam at 590
nm using an optical parametric amplifier (OPA). This beam was frequency
doubled to produce the final 295 nm pump pulse. The other 800 nm beam
was attenuated as a gating pulse. The pump–pulse energy was
∼140 nJ before the pulse was focused into the motor-controlled
rotating sample cell with a thickness of 1 mm. Using 295 nm as the
pump wavelength can minimize the tyrosine absorption in pol β.
The fluorescence emission from excited-state tryptophan was collected
by a pair of parabolic mirrors and focused into a 0.2 mm BBO crystal
to mix with the gating beam in a nonlinear configuration. The up-converted
signal ranging from 223 to 253 nm was detected with a monochromator
with a photomultiplier. The instrument response time, determined by
measuring the Raman signal of water at 327 nm, is around 450 fs under
the current nonlinear configuration. All the experiments were conducted
at the magic angle by setting the pump–pulse polarization at
54.7° relative to the acceptance axis of the mixing crystal and
the probe pulse polarization parallel to the axis. All fluorescence
transients were taken in a time window of up to 3 ns.

Results
and Discussion
Steady-State Emission, Ultrafast Fluorescence
Transients, and
Local Polarity
Figure A shows the
steady-state emission spectra of three mutants and the wild type (WT)
in the apo state. The emission peaks range from 336 to 346 nm, indicating
that S229W and W325 (WT) are solvent-exposed and F146W and Y271W are
partially buried. When DNA binds, the emission spectra for all three
mutants show noticeable changes. The emission peak shifts from 336
to 338.7 nm for F146W, from 342.7 to 339.9 nm for S229W, and from
337.6 to 340 nm for Y271W. With further binding of an incoming nucleotide,
F146W and S229W show negligible changes because both mutants are away
from the active site. For Y271W at the active site, the emission peak
shifts back to 338 nm. For the WT, because the control site W325 is
away from the binding interface, the fluorescence emission remains
the same in all three states with a peak at 346 nm. Figure B shows a comparison of the emission spectra of
Y271W at the active site with the control site W325 before and after
binding to DNA. The changes in all these emission spectra in the three
mutants reflect the local environmental variations upon binding of
DNA and incorporation of the incoming nucleotide at the active site.
We also noticed that besides the spectral shifts the emission profiles
were altered. All the emission spectra of the mutants follow a smooth
log-normal shape in the apo state but show certain structures in the
complex states (Figure B), possibly because
of a more rigid local environment after binding DNA. Compared with
the Dpo4 polymerase that shows nearly no changes in the emission spectra
at the binding interface in the complexed states, the pol β complex shows spectral changes and suggests
tighter recognition. Nevertheless, the emission peaks of all mutants
are still located at &gt;338 nm, indicating a polar binding interface
and a significant number of water molecules around the probing sites.,

(A)
Normalized steady-state fluorescence spectra of three double
mutants (F146W, Y271W, and S229W using W325F as the double-mutant
template) and WT (W325) in the apo state. The black arrows indicate
the gating wavelengths for the fluorescence transients. (B) Normalized
steady-state fluorescence spectra of Y271W and WT in the apo and binary
states. The inset is a close-up of the emission peaks. WT, far from
the binding interface, is used as a control in the experiment.

Figure  shows a series of fluorescence
transients gated from the blue to red sides of the emission spectra
for the Y271W mutant in the apo and binary states. The signals of
dsDNA alone in buffer solution, resulting from ultrafast deactivation
of the excited state via conical intersections,, are also shown in Figure . For the sake
of clarity, the contribution of DNA in the transients of the binary
Y271W mutant has been carefully subtracted. In the complex states,
the DNA signals can be obtained from the difference between the signals
with and without DNA for the control site of WT. Alternatively, we
can directly measure the fluorescence signals of the W325F mutant–DNA
complex because the mutant has no Trp residue. Also, we did not observe
the difference in the signals between dsDNA alone in buffer solution
and in the complex (Figure S1 of the ), indicating that the hydration and photophysics
of DNA were minimally perturbed in the complex states even with the
90° kink of the DNA structure upon recognition. The fluorescence
transients of Y271W in the ternary state, WT in the apo state, and
the two other mutants of F146W and S229W in the apo and binary states
are given in  (Figures
S2–S5).

Normalized fluorescence transients of Y271W in the apo
state (left),
gated from the blue to red sides of the emission spectra. Transients
of Y271W in the binary state after the DNA signals had been removed
(middle). Transients of DNA in buffer (right), showing the dominant
ultrafast decays in &lt;1 ps. The symbols are the experimental data,
and the solid lines show the best exponential fits.

All fluorescence transients show typical solvation
dynamics with
the decays at the blue side and rises at the red end as we reported
for surface hydration dynamics for many proteins.− In the apo state, the solvation process directly reflects the relaxation
of water molecules around the Trp probe within a distance of ∼10
Å., For example, the transients of the apo Y271W
mutant show three decay components (400–600 fs, 4.1–7.5
ps, and 40–59 ps) and one rise component (3.7 ps) at the blue
and red sides, respectively, similar to the pattern observed in apo
Dpo4 polymerase. The subpicosecond component represents the bulk-type
water motion at the outer hydration layers, while the component in
a few picoseconds reflects the relaxation of the local water networks
in the inner hydration layers near the protein surface.− The component in tens of picoseconds is from the water network rearrangements
coupled with protein fluctuations.,− Although certain MD simulations showed that the long component in
tens of picoseconds was mainly from local protein (or DNA) motions,− our extensive studies both in experiments and in MD simulations
showed that the long component is from water–protein coupled
motions, mainly driven by local water network relaxation.,,−,, Significantly, when DNA binds, the subpicosecond decay components
in the three mutants disappear and the other two decays on the picosecond
time scale slow down (6.2–8.4 and 62–90 ps in the Y271W
binary state). With the incoming nucleotide, the dynamics of Y271W
further slow down (6.5–11.5 and 65–105 ps). This observation
is striking. In Dpo4 polymerase, the ultrafast components are still
present, though they are strongly suppressed upon DNA recognition. In contrast, the absence of ultrafast water
motions in pol β indicates that the outer-layer mobile water
molecules have been either squeezed out or converted to “bound”
water like inner-layer water networks upon binding DNA. The slowdown
of the picosecond components reflects more rigid water networks at
the binding interface and in the active site.

Hydration Dynamics, Interfacial
Water Flexibility, and Mobile
Water Networks
Using the methodology we developed,,,, we can derive the solvation energies and corresponding time scales.
Figure  shows the constructed correlation
functions with the local apo structures within 12 Å of the Trp
probes, and Figure  gives the resulting solvation
energies, time scales, and solvation speeds (also see Table S1 of
the ). Overall, the
patterns of hydration correlation dynamics are completely consistent
with our numerous previous observations.− Among all the mutants and WT, the F146W mutant in the apo state
shows the slowest hydration dynamics with only two decay components
at 6.3 and 103 ps. The F146W mutation, located on an α-helix
in the thumb subdomain, has a local concave structure and densely
charged surrounding (Figure A) and is partially
buried in the enzyme with an emission peak at 336 nm. Thus, such a
partially buried Trp probe can sense the inner-layer hydration dynamics
and cannot detect the outer-layer mobile water motions. The observed slow hydration dynamics is consistent
with the local structural and chemical properties, as extensively
reported for apomyoglobin., All other enzymes in
the apo state show three decay components with one ultrafast dynamics
in hundreds of femtoseconds, consistent with the observation in Dpo4 and their emission peaks at &gt;336 nm with
certain
exposure to solvent. The two dynamics on the picosecond time scales
are faster than that of F146W, consistent with their local structural
and chemical properties (Figure B–D).,

Solvation
(hydration) correlation functions for apo (black), binary
(red), and ternary (blue) states with the insets shown on the short
time scale. The two binding-site mutants F146W (A) and S229W (B) show
the slower dynamics from the apo to binary states, with similar dynamics
from the binary to ternary states. The dynamics of the active-site
mutant Y271W (C) gradually slow down in the three states. The WT (D)
exhibits the same dynamics as a control. The circles are the values
derived from the experiment data, and the solid lines show the best
exponential fits. The corresponding local structures within 12 Å
of tryptophan probes (shown as the yellow spheres and patches) are
also shown in ribbon and surface representations.

Detailed analyses of the solvation dynamics of the three mutants
and WT in the apo (gray), binary (green), and ternary (red) states.
Panels A–C show the relaxation energies, relaxation times,
and solvation speeds, respectively. When the DNA and nucleotide bind,
the solvation energies are redistributed according to the local water
network change (see context). F146W and S229W, located at the DNA
binding sites, show significant slowdown in both relaxation times
and solvation speeds from the apo to binary states. The relaxation
of the active-site mutant Y271W gradually slows down from the apo
to complex states. Notice that the ultrafast components completely
disappear in the complex states of S229W and Y271W because of the
confinement of water at the interface. As a control, the WT keeps
similar solvation dynamics in all states.

The observed dynamics upon binding of DNA are striking. First,
the ultrafast components in mutants S229W and Y271W disappear (Figure B,C), and we did not detect bulk-type mobile water
molecules, indicating that such water molecules either are squeezed
out of the interface or become more rigid, sandwiched by the enzyme
and DNA surfaces. Second, the two dynamics in picoseconds significantly
slow down, especially the long component by a factor of 2, indicating
more rigid water networks at the enzyme–DNA interface. With
the incoming nucleotide (dATP), we did not observe further changes
for the two binding sites of F146W and S229W (Figure A,B), but for Y271W at the active center, the dynamics further
slow down (Figure C), clearly indicating local
environmental changes upon transitions from the apo to the binary
and to the ternary complexes. These dramatic changes in the binding
sites and at the active site were not clearly observed in Dpo4 and
reflect the nature of the binding interface in the pol β–DNA
complex. It is equally important that even though the binding site
is clearly tighter than that of the Dpo4 complex, the observed water
dynamics are still on the picosecond time scale, not nanoseconds,
which would be expected for water trapped inside proteins,− reflecting the fact that the interfacial water molecules are still
mobile and the sandwiched water networks at the interface are flexible.
Finally, for the control site of the WT, the dynamics in three states
are the same (Figure D), showing no interactions
with DNA or dATP.

We further analyzed these correlation dynamics
and ascertained
the hydration dynamics with more details (Figure  and Table S1 of the ). The simplest system is the WT with similar dynamics in the three
states and W325, mostly exposed to solvent with an emission peak at
346 nm, probes local surface hydration water motions with the largest
solvation energy of ∼1550 cm–1, consisting
of three components, E1 (41%), E2 (31%), and E3 (28%),
with the three corresponding relaxation times being τ1 (600 fs), τ2 (4.3 ps), and τ3 (∼70
ps), respectively. Such patterns were observed for the other mutants
and many other systems reported previously,−,,,, representing
the ultrafast surface hydration water motions and coupled water–protein
fluctuations. The key studies here are to observe the changes in solvation
energy and relaxation time in the binding complex. For F146W, we observed
that E2 decreases (43 cm–1) and E3 increases (144 cm–1) (Figure A), indicating that the inner-layer
water molecules become more rigid after DNA binding as reflected by
the increase in the relaxation times from 6.3 to 7.4 ps and from 103
to 192 ps (Figure B) and corresponding slower
solvation speeds (Figure C). For S299W, after
DNA recognition, the bulk-type mobile water motion vanishes but the
energies of the two components in picoseconds increase significantly
(∼200 cm–1) (Figure A), indicating that more mobile out-layer hydration water molecules
become confined at the interface, leading to greater solvation energy
release, which is also reflected by the slowdown of the relaxation
times from 5.0 to 8.5 ps and from 54 to 111 ps (Figure B) and of the corresponding solvation speeds (Figure C). For the active-site Y271W mutant, changes similar
to those of S229W were observed upon binding to DNA. Interestingly,
with the incoming nucleotide in the ternary complex, the second component, E2, decreases by 73 cm–1 after
the increase from the apo to binary states by 111 cm–1 and E3 increases again by 36 cm–1 with an addition of 61 cm–1 in
the binary state. The relaxations keep slowing down [5.1, 7.7, and
8.7 ps and 64, 111, and 113 ps (Figure B)
for the apo, binary, and ternary states, respectively], and so do
the corresponding solvation speeds (Figure C).

These observations for Y271W in the three states reflect
the active-site
environment changes upon binding of DNA and recognition of dATP. From
the binary to ternary structures, the finger domain undergoes a series
of rearrangements.,, The most critical conformational change is the α-helix N switching
from the “open” to the “closed” configuration., Meanwhile, the local residues of the finger domain also readjust
their positions ready for catalysis. One
of the obvious adjustments is that Y271 moves closer to DNA to form
a hydrogen bond with the primer terminal base instead of hydrogen
bonding with the template base facing the incoming nucleotide. Apparently, the local environment of Y271 is
different in all three states. Mutation of tyrosine to tryptophan
minimally perturbed the function of pol β as examined by its
CD spectrum and enzymatic activity. Thus, Y271W directly probed the
local solvation (hydration) dynamics and the changes upon binding
DNA and recognition of the incoming nucleotide at the active site.

On the basis of the fluorescence transients, the detailed analyses
of the solvation correlation functions, i.e., the relaxation energies
and times, and the solvation speeds, we revealed a unique picture
of the hydration dynamics at the pol β–DNA binding interface
and in the active site. On one side, the interfacial water is clearly
not of the bulk water type. The relaxation of interfacial water has
∼2-fold slower dynamics than the surface hydration water, certainly
confined by the relatively tighter binding of DNA. On the other side,
unlike any trapped water molecules inside proteins observed by X-ray
structures− or NMR studies,− these interfacial water
molecules still relax on the picosecond time scale, maintaining a
certain level of flexibility that is critical to the enzyme–DNA
interactions and pol β function.

Heterogeneous Interface
Caves, Confined Water Clusters, and
Dynamic Water Interface
X-ray structures show how pol β
interacts with DNA and the incoming nucleotide., As shown in panels C and D of Figure , the
thumb, palm, and finger subdomains hold DNA mainly by interacting
with the DNA backbone. The lyase domain not only binds downstream
of the DNA duplex but also protects the active site in the finger
subdomain. These structures are static and reveal only the binding
architecture. The interacting surfaces of the polymerase and DNA are
of a heterogeneous roughness, and at the interface, various shallow
clefts and deep caves are formed. Water molecules mediate these interactions
and also often behave as “fillers” for maintaining packing
densities. Thus, water molecules fill these interfacial holes, and
the interface is heterogeneously distributed with various confined
water clusters. These large water clusters are dynamic and mobile,
resulting in the difficulty in observing them in the X-ray structures.
MD simulations may provide insights into water motions at the interface.

Figure  shows the results from our 4 ns
MD simulations for the pol β–DNA binary complex with
a fixed DNA configuration. All MD simulation methods were the same
as before, but in the binding complex, the DNA was fixed to maintain
the reasonable recognition., The simple MD simulations
were used to estimate the number of water molecules at the interface
and around the probe. With the addition of distances to pol β
and DNA from these water molecules of &lt;10 Å, we found that
on the average, ∼270 water molecules are located at the interface
of the complex (Figure A). Apparently, the
interface of the complex is full of water molecules to “lubricate”
the interactions between pol β and DNA. Panels B–E of
Figure  show the number of water molecules
within 10 Å of the Trp probes and their distributions with distances
(Tables S2 and S3 of the ), along with the snapshots of the local structures at 4 ns. In Figure E, among 79 water molecules within 10 Å in
the WT, only 10 water molecules are in direct contact with Trp325
at 3.5 Å in the first layer but 33 water molecules are directly
bound to the enzyme; 56 water molecules were 5 Å from the enzyme
surface forming the first two hydration layers, while only 23 water
molecules in the outer hydration layers were close to bulk water.
From the apo to binary states for the three mutants, we observed that
for F146W the total number of water molecules within 10 Å is
60 and shows nearly no change, consistent with the buried and concave
location of Trp and the probing of only inner-layer hydration water.
For S229W, the number of waters significantly changes from 132 to
54, a dramatic decrease with more than half of the water molecules
squeezed out during DNA binding, consistent with recognition in the
minor groove. For Y271W, the number of waters changes from 81 to 61,
consistent with a relatively open active site. Strikingly, after DNA
recognition, nearly all interfacial water molecules are within 5 Å
of the enzyme or DNA and become the inner-layer hydration water, and
most are in the first hydration layer within 3.5 Å. Clearly,
there is no ultrafast mobile water, and all water molecules are bound
to the enzyme or DNA, consistent with our observation of the two relaxation
components for typical bound water. Careful examination of interfacial
structures shows that these water molecules are located in clefts
and caves (Figure B–D) that are connected
to outside enzyme or DNA surface, and thus, these interfacial water
clusters are not trapped in nanochannels, are mobile, and even can
exchange with bulk water on a relatively long time scale.

(A) Snapshot
of a 4 ns MD simulation with 257 water molecules at
the interface of the complex of pol β (white) and dsDNA (orange).
The yellow patches indicate the tryptophan probes. (B–E) Distributions
of water at different distances from the probe Trp and among these
water molecules the distributions to the surfaces of polymerase and
DNA. The local structures are also shown at the right. The WT represents
the typical protein surface hydration from the inner to outside layers
of water and to bulk solution.

The MD results show that the protein–DNA interface
and active
site of the pol β–DNA complex are not dry and are solvent
accessible. For a tighter binding complex of pol β with DNA,
a significant amount of water molecules remain at the complex interface.
These interfacial molecules are not completely trapped and are still
mobile in a dynamic equilibrium with bulk water. Significantly, for
the pol β–DNA complex, the interfacial water molecules
all become bound water with pol β or DNA to form one or two
layers of hydration. Such a few layers of water are probably critical
to polymerase–DNA interactions by maintaining a certain level
of flexibility for the binding interface, including helping pol β
quickly sample different dNTPs at the active site. By comparing these
findings with the observations for the loose binding Dpo4–DNA
complex (Figure ), we observed dramatically
different changes in the water–protein coupling dynamics (τ3) and related solvation speeds (S3) for the two polymerases. For Dpo4, we only observed a 15–20%
increase in the long relaxation times but also an increase in the
solvation speeds, consistent with the loose binding interface and
more interfacial water molecules. For pol β, the long relaxation
times significantly increase by a factor of 1.7–2, and all
the corresponding solvation speeds decrease by 30%, consistent with
the tight recognition and mostly bound water molecules at the interface.
Both interfaces for the two different systems, loose or tight, are
full of mobile water molecules and are dynamic in nature. Such a dynamic
interface can be general for all polymerase–DNA complexes for
their DNA replication or repair function.

Comparison of the key
third components of Dpo4 and pol β.
τ3 (top) and the corresponding S3 (bottom) are directly related to the flexibility of
the binding interface and the mobility of the interfacial water molecules.
For pol β, the relaxation significantly slows down, but for
Dpo4, it shows slight changes, reflecting the different binding properties
of the two polymerases. However, all water at the interface for the
two polymerases is still mobile.

Conclusions
We report here our systematic characterization
of the water dynamics
at several specific sites of polymerase β in its apo form, the
binary complex with DNA, and the ternary state with DNA and an incoming
nucleotide. Using tryptophan as an optical probe placed at strategic
locations through site-directed mutagenesis, we studied two binding
sites, one (F146W) near the DNA backbone in the thumb D subdomain
and the other (S229W) at the DNA minor groove in the palm C subdomain,
and the active site (Y271W) in the finger N subdomain. We used the
wild type (W325) as a control site far from the binding interface
also in the finger N subdomain. Using femtosecond fluorescence spectroscopy,
we determined all hydration (solvation) dynamics in the three states
of pol β. All the dynamics in the apo form completely reflect
hydration water motions around a protein surface, i.e., the water
relaxations from inner (a few picoseconds) and outer (subpicoseconds)
layers and the coupled inner water–protein fluctuations (tens
of picoseconds). Significantly, in the binding complexes, the dynamics
significantly slow down by a factor of nearly 2 but still occur in
picoseconds, revealing a mobile interface even for the tight binding
complex. These dynamic behaviors completely reflect bound hydration
water molecules interacting with the enzyme or DNA at the interface.

Combining these observed dynamics, our MD simulations, X-ray structures,
and our previous studies of the loose binding Dpo4 polymerase, we
can paint a general picture of polymerase–DNA binding interactions
and dynamics. The heterogeneous recognition surfaces form a binding
interface with various clefts, channels, and caves of different sizes
and shapes. These empty nanospaces are full of water molecules with
various interactions with the binding partners to mediate recognition
or simply as fillers to maintain local densities. These confined water
clusters are not static but are dynamic in nature, fluctuating with
bulk water and lubricating polymerase–DNA interactions, leading
to a dynamic interface with a different level of mobility for a loose
or tight binding interface. Such a dynamic property of the interface
should be general to all polymerase–DNA binding complexes to
ensure the biological function of DNA synthesis.

Supporting Information Available
A description of data analyses
of fluorescence transients in the complex states, the fluorescence
transients of DNA and the three mutants in the three states, and the
related fitting results. This material is available free of charge
via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500810a_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
¶ Y.Y. and Y.Q. contributed equally to this
work.

The work is
supported in part by the National Institutes of Health (Grant GM095997),
the National Science Foundation (Grant CHE0748358), the Camille Dreyfus
Teacher-Scholar, and a Guggenheim Fellowship (to D.Z.) and by funding
from Academia and MOST of Taiwan (to M.-D. T.).

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Drs. Michelle Roettger and Chih-Wei Chang for help
with the experiments. This work was supported in part by an allocation
of computing time by the Ohio Supercomputer Center.

