Nature has
employed a surprisingly
diverse array of proteins to perform the post-translational modification
process of covalently attaching heme to two cysteine side chains in c-type cytochromes. These different maturation systems,
named Systems I–VI, and their distributions have been recently
reviewed.− None of the systems are fully understood on a mechanistic level.
System I, found in many Gram-negative bacteria as well as plant and
protozoal mitochondria, is the most complex and was identified more
than 20 years ago.− It has been well established that the constituent proteins are CcmABCDEFGHI
(Cytochrome cmaturation (Ccm), shown in the top
panel of Figure ). In Gram-negative bacteria,
holocytochromes c are matured in the periplasm, and
the maturation proteins are all membranous or have periplasmically
orientated domains, with the exception of CcmA, which is located on
the cytoplasmic side of the membrane. The mechanism of how heme is
transported from its cytoplasmic site of synthesis across the inner
membrane is not known.

Scheme illustrating the main components of cytochrome c biogenesis Systems I (top) and I* (bottom). The representations
of Systems I and I* are based on the model organisms E. coli and D. alaskensis, respectively. In both cases, apocytochrome c is
synthesized in the cytoplasm and transported across the cytoplasmic
membrane by the Sec apparatus. Heme is also synthesized in the cytoplasm,
but its transport route to the point of assembly is unknown (shown
by a question mark). Proteins responsible for sourcing and providing
the heme (CcmA–D) to the heme chaperone (CcmE) are in light
blue. CcmC ligates the heme through two histidine residues (shown
in orange). The ATPase CcmA promotes the release of the heme from
CcmC via a comformational change, presumably through CcmB. CcmE (yellow
in System I and lilac in System I*) is the pivotal protein for cytochrome c biogenesis and is one of the major points of difference
between the two apparatuses. In System I, it binds heme covalently
via a histidine residue (shown in orange), whereas in System I* the
key residue is a cysteine (shown in yellow). In both cases, the covalent
bond between the heme and CcmE needs to break for the heme to covalently
attach to the CXXCH motif of the apocytochrome. CcmF and CcmI (shown
in green) are thought to facilitate the heme transfer to cytochrome c; histidine residues (shown in orange) in CcmF are involved
in heme ligation. Proteins affecting the oxidation state of the cysteines
of the apocytochrome are in dark blue. In System I, the interplay
between DsbA and DsbD/CcmG/CcmH is well studied. Oxidation of the CXXCH motif by DsbA is reversed through
the action of DsbD, CcmG, and CcmH. In System I*, the equivalents
of CcmG and CcmH are absent, and the need for reduction of the CXXCH
motif is still unclear (shown by the light-yellow box in the bottom
panel). It is not possible to eliminate the possibility of the presence
of an extracytoplasmic reductant, like CcmG, by bioinformatics methods.
In most System I-containing organisms, CcmH and CcmI are two different
membrane-anchored proteins; in E. coli, CcmH and CcmI are fused into one protein referred to as CcmH.

After the arrival of heme in the
periplasm, the proteins CcmABCDE
are involved in heme handling and delivery to the cytochrome substrate.
CcmAB has features of an ATP-binding cassette (ABC) protein and forms
a complex with the membrane protein CcmC., CcmC, with the assistance of CcmD, interacts with the heme chaperone
CcmE, a membrane-anchored globular protein, and transfers heme to
it in a process involving CcmAB; when CcmA is inactivated, heme remains
trapped in a complex with CcmC and CcmE., It was thought that CcmABC form a ATP-driven heme transporter, but this has since been disproven. CcmE was found to have the surprising property
of binding heme covalently, via a conserved histidine residue, before
transferring the heme to the apocytochrome. The large membrane protein CcmF is thought to transfer the heme
from CcmE to the apocytochrome and to be involved in the formation
of the thioether bonds between the heme and the cytochrome cysteines;− the mechanism is also not known. CcmG is proposed to provide reductant
to the apocytochrome CXXCH heme-binding motif, should the latter become oxidized to form a disulfide in what is
considered to be an oxidizing cellular compartment. In some organisms,
including Escherichia coli, the last
two proteins produced from the operon are a single polypeptide, referred
to as CcmH (as indicated in Figure ). CcmHI
contains a pair of conserved cysteines and a protein–protein
interaction domain, suggesting a chaperone-like activity and a possible
role in thiol–disulfide isomerization.

As essential roles for all of the Ccm proteins have been established, it was a surprise to find a variant system that
had significant differences. A bioinformatics analysis identified
a form of System I in the genomes of sulfate-reducing bacteria and
in several archaea. This system is known
as System I* and is illustrated for comparison in the lower panel
of Figure . (In this Article, the symbol *
is used to indicate a protein or gene from System I*, and where it
is absent the protein referred to is from System I). The Ccm operon
from Desulfovibrio alaskensis has been
used as a model for the variant System I*. Between the publication of ref () and the realization of this work, this species
has been reclassified. It was formerly Desulfovibrio
desulfuricans. The main differences compared to System
I are the absence of the protein CcmH (the N-terminal domain of the
fused protein found in E. coli), the
absence of CcmG, and a CcmE protein that binds heme covalently via
a cysteine residue rather than the histidine of System I. The overall
sequence similarity between representatives of proteins common to
the two systems (E. coli vs D. alaskensis) is about 60% (identity ∼30%).

We have demonstrated that System I* can perform cytochrome c maturation in E. coli lacking
its endogenous Ccm proteins. However,
replacement of the crucial cysteine residue of CcmE* by a histidine
within the System I* apparatus results in the absence of any c-type cytochrome. It is currently unclear how the two assembly
systems function differently, but one can assume that complementary
differences must exist to balance the replacement of a histidine with
a cysteine on the heme chaperone and the lack of any specific thiol-disulfide
oxidoreductase components in System I*. It is not axiomatic that identified
functional features of System I proteins will also be important in
System I*. Any similarities or differences between the two systems
can be expected to provide complementary clues about events that lead
to c-type cytochrome synthesis. In this work, we
have replaced amino acids in CcmA*, CcmC*, CcmE*, CcmF*, and CcmF;
the observed effects give new perspectives into the function of the
more widely distributed System I, particularly regarding how the heme
is chaperoned between the biogenesis proteins and finally to the apocytochrome.

Experimental
Procedures
Construction of Plasmids
The plasmids used in this
study are listed in Table . pCC12–15
were produced by site-directed mutagenesis (QuikChange, Stratagene)
using plasmid pEC86 as a template. pMC01–08 and pMC1/3 were
also produced by site-directed mutagenesis of plasmid pDD86. pMC12
was generated from pMC02. DNA manipulations were conducted using standard
methods. KOD Hot Start DNA polymerase (Novagen) was used for all PCRs,
and all constructs were sequenced before use.

Plasmids
Used in This Work
name	description	source	
pb562R98CY101C	E.
coli cytochrome b562 carrying
the R98C/Y101C
mutations in b562, AmpR	ref ()	
pKPD1	P. denitrificans cytochrome c550, AmpR	ref ()	
pEC86	E. coli ccmABCDEFGH, CamR	ref ()	
pDD86	D. alaskensis ccmEFABCDI, CamR	ref ()	
pCC09	pEC86 carrying the P146A
mutation in ccmF, CamR	this
work	
pCC10	pEC86 carrying the
N145A/P146A/F147A
mutations in ccmF, CamR	this work	
pCC14	pEC86 carrying
the H173A
mutation in ccmF, CamR	this
work	
pCC15	pEC86 carrying the
H261A
mutation in ccmF, CamR	this
work	
pMC01	pDD86 carrying the
H68A
mutation in ccmC, CamR	this
work	
pMC02	pDD86 carrying the
K41D
mutation in ccmA, CamR	this
work	
pMC03	pDD86 carrying the
H192A
mutation in ccmC, CamR	this
work	
pMC01/3	pDD86 carrying
the H68A/H192A
mutations in ccmC, CamR	this work	
pMC04	pDD86 carrying
the Y131A
mutation in ccmE, CamR	this
work	
pMC05	pDD86 carrying an
alanine
insertion after C127 in ccmE, CamR	this work	
pMC06	pDD86
carrying the H173A
mutation in ccmF, CamR	this
work	
pMC07	pDD86 carrying the
H263A
mutation in ccmF, CamR	this
work	
pMC08	pDD86 carrying the
P147A
mutation in ccmF, CamR	this
work	
pMC12	pDD86 carrying the
K41D
mutation in ccmA and C127H mutation in ccmE, CamR	this work	
Cell Growth
Experiments were performed
in the wild-type E. coli strain JCB387 or EC06, which
lacks the ccm operon and therefore is unable to produce
holocytochromes c. The E. coli ccm operon or its variants was constitutively expressed
from plasmid
pEC86 (or pEC78, pCC12–15) (Table ).
The D. alaskensis ccm operon or its variants was constitutively expressed from plasmid
pDD86 (or pMC01–08, pMC1/3) (Table ). A c-type cytochrome variant of E. coli cytochrome b562 bearing a CXXCH motif (c-b562) was coexpressed with the E. coli ccm operon (or its variants) from plasmid pb562R98CY101C
(Table ). Paracoccus denitrificans cytochrome c550 was coexpressed with
the D. alaskensis or the E. coli ccm operons (or their variants)
from plasmid pKPD1. Cell growth was conducted in 200 mL of 2×
TY medium (16 g L–1 of peptone, 10 g L–1 of yeast extract, and 5 g L–1 of NaCl) in 2.5-liter
flasks. Cultures were inoculated from single colonies and incubated
at 37 °C for 15–18 h with shaking at 200 rpm. 1 mM isopropyl-1-thio-β-d-galactopyranoside was added to the cultures from inoculation.
100 μg mL–1 of ampicillin and 34 μg
mL–1 of chloramphenicol were used when appropriate.

Characterization of the Cytochrome c550 Content of Periplasmic Fractions
For the extraction of
periplasmic fractions, cells were harvested and sphaeroplasted as
described. At least six replicates of
each experiment were conducted. The production of cytochrome c550 was assessed by SDS-PAGE analysis followed
by densitometry of heme-staining bands. SDS-PAGE analysis was carried
out on 10% 2-[bis(2-hydroxyethyl)amino]-2-(hydroxymethyl)propane-1,3-diol
(BisTris) NuPAGE gels (Invitrogen) with MES-SDS running buffer, prepared
according to Invitrogen specifications. Prestained protein markers
were used (Invitrogen, SeeBlue Plus 2). Samples were denatured at
100 °C for 2 min. Gels were stained for the presence of covalently
bound heme according to the method of Goodhew. Gel loadings were normalized according to wet cell-pellet
weights. Densitometry was used to quantify cytochrome c550 production (when appropriate) using GeneSnap (Syngene).
The linear relationship between the amount of mature cytochrome c present on the gel and the amount detected by densitometry
was ensured by using subsaturated loading of the gels.

Analysis of Heme Proteins in Membrane Fractions
For
the isolation of the crude membrane fractions, a French press was
used. Disruption of the cells was performed at 16 000 p.s.i.
followed by centrifugation at 257 000g for
1 h at 4 °C. The membrane fraction was resuspended in ∼25
mL of 50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl (pH 7.5) and was recentrifuged as
above. The washed crude membrane fraction was resuspended in 1 to
2 mL of 50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl (pH 7.5). At least two replicates
of each experiment were conducted. The production of holo-CcmE, holo-CcmE*,
and cytochrome c-b562 was assessed by SDS-PAGE analysis followed by densitometry of heme-staining
bands (when appropriate) as described above; in this case, samples
were denatured by incubation at 42 °C for 5 min, and gel loadings
were normalized according to the total protein content determined
using the Pierce BCA Reducing Agent Compatible Protein Assay Kit (ThermoScientific).

We expect, on the basis of the many related amino acid replacements
in the proteins of System I, that the variants studied here do not
have significantly altered expression levels and stability. For example,
the Walker A motif replacement in CcmA does not affect the stability
of the ATPase subunits., Many CcmE variants
have also been unaffected by mutation;, this is not
unexpected because the changes were made in the C-terminal domain
of the protein, a region demonstrated to be unstructured. In addition, attempts to raise antibodies against
the membrane-embedded System I proteins have failed, and the insertion
of affinity tags (e.g., Streptavidin II tag) for immunodetection has
affected the function of the proteins (unpublished data).

Results
Mutations were made in a plasmid containing the ccm operon of D. alaskensis that expresses
the proteins constitutively in E. coli lacking its ccm genes, enabling the resultant strain
to produce heterologous holocytochromes c. The functions of the variant operons were analyzed
for their content of holo-CcmE* in membrane preparations (shown in
the top gel strip of each panel in Figure ) as well as for their ability to mature a cytochrome c in the periplasmic fraction (shown in the lower gel strip in each
panel). The variant proteins are described below in the order in which
they are thought to be involved in heme handling. Heme first binds
to CcmC and is then transferred to CcmE with the aid of CcmAB and
CcmD. The heme is finally transferred from CcmE to the apocytochrome
by CcmF. Control experiments are shown in Figure E: lane 1 shows wild-type System I* producing holocytochrome c550 that reveals a heme-staining band at the
expected mass (∼ 14 kDa) and lanes 2 and 3 show that no such
band is detected when the plasmids expressing the cytochrome or the
biogenesis operon are absent. Table  summarizes
the comparative levels of heme attachment to CcmE* and cytochrome c for each System I* variant examined.

Representative SDS-PAGE
of cell membranes or periplasmic fractions
stained for proteins containing covalently bound heme. The detection
of holo-CcmE* or holo-c550 was performed
on washed cell membranes or periplasmic fractions, respectively. In
all experiments, wild-type or variants of System I* were coexpressed
with P. denitrificans cytochrome c550 in EC06 E. coli cells (cells lacking the endogenous ccm operon).
The lane order is as follows. Panel A: (M) Molecular weight marker
(as indicated, in kDa) (1) cells expressing System I* and c550 (2) cells expressing (H68A-CcmC*)-System I* and c550 (3) cells expressing
(H192A-CcmC*)-System I* and c550, and (4) cells expressing (H68A/H192A-CcmC*)-System I* and c550. Panel B: (M) Molecular
weight marker, (1) cells expressing System I* and c550, (2) cells expressing (K41D-CcmA*)-System I* and c550, and (3) cells expressing
(K41D-CcmA*/C127H-CcmE*)-System I* and c550. Panel C: (M) Molecular weight marker, (1) cells expressing
System I* and c550, (2) cells expressing
(Y131A-CcmE*)-System I* and c550, and (3) cells expressing (CAPSKY-CcmE*)-System I* and c550. Panel
D: (M) Molecular weight marker, (1) cells expressing System I* and c550, (2) cells expressing (H173A-CcmF*)-System I* and c550, (3) cells
expressing (H363A-CcmF*)-System I* and c550, and (4) cells expressing (P147A-CcmF*)-System I* and c550. Panel E: (M) Molecular
weight marker, (1) cells expressing System I* and c550, (2) cells expressing System I* with no cytochrome-expressing
plasmid, and (3) cells expressing c550 and no cytochrome c biogenesis system.

Levels of Cytochrome c550 and Holo-CcmE* Produced in E. coli EC06 Using Wild-Type or Variants of D. alaskensis System I*
 	level of maturation	
variant	holo-CcmE*	cytochrome c550	
wild type (CcmEFABCDI*)	100	100	
H68A-CcmC*	–	–	
H192A-CcmC*	–	–	
H68A/H192A-CcmC*	–	–	
K41D-CcmA*	35	–	
K41D-CcmA*/C127H-CcmE*	–	–	
CAPSKY-CcmE*	100	–	
Y131A-CcmE*	35	35	
H173A-CcmF*	55	–	
H263A-CcmF*	125	–	
P147A-CcmF*	100	90	
The levels of cytochrome c550 in periplasmic fractions and holo-CcmE*
in membrane fractions were determined by SDS-PAGE analysis followed
by densitometry on heme-stained gels. The amount of cytochrome c550 or holo-CcmE* produced by the wild-type
operon is arbitrarily set to 100. The calculation of the errors for
the data presented in this table can be found in the  ().

Insignificant levels
of maturation
as detected by densitometry.

CcmC*
CcmC has been shown to ligate a heme molecule
via two conserved histidine residues (H60 and H184 in E. coli CcmC),, which are required
for holo-CcmE formation. The two corresponding histidines are H68
and H192 in CcmC*. We have examined the effect of removal of either
(H68A and H192A) or both (H68A/H192A) of these side chains. The effects
on holo-CcmE* production and holocytochrome c formation
are shown in Figure A. Holo-CcmE was not detectable
to a significant level in the membranes for the single or the double
mutants. As expected, when there is no heme on CcmE*, no cytochrome c was detected in any of the three cases (lanes 2–4).
The wild-type levels are shown in lane 1 and they run as expected
when compared with the marker proteins indicated on the left of the
gels. Both histidine residues appear to be essential for ligating
the heme on CcmC* for it to become covalently bound to CcmE*.

CcmA*
CcmA has been shown to hydrolyze ATP, and the replacement of a lysine residue (K40
in E. coli CcmA) in the Walker A motif
abolishes its function in cytochrome c maturation., The equivalent replacement in CcmA* is K41D, and its effect was
examined here (Figure B). The loss of ATP-hydrolysis
activity, assumed to be caused by an inability to bind to the nucleotide,
abolished the formation of holocytochrome c (lane
2 lower strip; wild-type levels are shown in lane 1). Holo-CcmE* was
detected in the membrane at a reproducibly lower level (∼35%)
with the K41D CcmA variant than the wild-type (lane 2 upper strip).
A construct was also produced that expressed both the variant CcmA*
and a replacement of the heme-binding cysteine residue (C127) in CcmE*
with histidine (as found in the classical System I). No holo-CcmE*
was observed in this case (K41D-CcmA*/C127H-CcmE*; comparing lanes
2 and 3 of the top strip of Figure B), as
expected because C127H-CcmE* does not acquire heme when the rest of
the wild-type System I* proteins are present.

CcmE*
Some mutations in CcmE from E.
coli have given insight into the way in which the
protein interacts with heme. Two studies have demonstrated that the
conserved tyrosine residue four residues away from the heme-binding
histidine (i.e., H130DENY134) is involved in ligating the heme iron in isolated CcmE, although
Y134 is not essential for c-type cytochrome formation.,, We have therefore replaced the
equivalent residue in CcmE* (C127PSKY131) with alanine (Y131A). The consequence is shown in
Figure C, lane 2. A decrease in the amount
of holo-CcmE* was observed (∼35% compared with the wild-type
shown in lane 1), and an equivalent drop in cytochrome c550 maturation was also recorded (Table  and Figure C). A previous study of E. coli CcmE employed the strategy of alanine-insertion
mutagenesis to determine the importance of the relative position of
the heme-binding histidine to the other residues in the C-terminal
domain of CcmE. () In a similar experiment
in this work, an alanine was inserted into CcmE* on the C-terminal
side of the heme-binding cysteine, yielding a CAPSKY motif.
Lane 3 of Figure C (upper strip) shows that
holo-CcmE* is produced at levels equivalent to the wild-type CcmE*
(lane 1). No holocytochrome, however, was detected (lane 3, lower
strip).

CcmF*
CcmF has a WWD motif (see Figure ) that is proposed
to interact with heme, via hydrophobic interactions, on the periplasmic
side of the membrane (this heme molecule is transferred from CcmE
to the cytochrome). Histidine residues in periplasmic loops in CcmF
have also been implicated in ligating this heme. Unexpectedly, purified CcmF has been found to contain heme
bound to its transmembrane regions; this heme also has histidines
ligating it, forming a second heme-binding site. In this work, we have replaced in CcmF* one of each of
these histidine pairs with alanine and determined the effect on holo-CcmE*
formation and holocytochrome c production. In Figure D, lane 2 shows the effect of replacement of the
histidine (H173), which is thought to interact with heme in the periplasmic
loop. A decrease in the amount of holo-CcmE* was observed compared
to the wild-type in lane 1. Removal of the heme-ligating side chain
in position 263 (this corresponds to the proposed ligand for the membrane-embedded
CcmF heme) did not decrease the amount of holo-CcmE* in the membranes.
Instead, a small increase was observed. No holocytochrome c was produced when either of the histidines were absent
(lanes 2 and 3 on the lower strip of Figure D).

CcmF
We performed the corresponding mutations in CcmF
in the E. coli ccm operon for comparison and expressed constitutively the wild-type
or variant forms of System I with a c-type variant
of cytochrome b562 (c-b562). The latter has been a useful
test substrate for cytochrome c maturation and has
been shown to be processed readily by System I, expressing abundant
bona fide c-type cytochrome. The large quantities of c-b562 produced result in a significant amount of the protein
remaining bound to the membrane fraction, even after extensive washing. This procedure allowed us to detect both holo-CcmE
and the mature c-b562 in the membrane fraction by staining for covalently bound heme (Figure A) and to provide a comparison with the experiments
above with CcmF*. Replacement of H173 and H261 with alanine led to
the accumulation of holo-CcmE (at greater amounts than the wild-type
system although the holo-CcmE accumulation in the H173A variant is
much greater compared to the H261A variant) and loss of cytochrome c production.

Panel A: Representative SDS-PAGE of washed cell
membranes stained
for proteins containing covalently bound heme. In all experiments,
wild-type or variants of System I were coexpressed with E. coli variant cytochrome c-b562 in JCB387 E. coli cells. It was possible to detect holo-CcmE and holo-c-b562; although c-b562 is a soluble periplasmic protein, bands
arise from holo-c-b562 that remained bound to the membranes even after washing. The lane
order is as follows: (M) Molecular weight marker (as indicated, in
kDa), (1) cells expressing System I and c-b562, (2) cells expressing (H173A-CcmF)-System
I and c-b562, and (3)
cells expressing (H261A-CcmF)-System I and c-b562. Panel B: Representative SDS-PAGE of periplasmic
fractions stained for proteins containing covalently bound heme. In
all experiments, wild-type or variants of System I were coexpressed
with P. denitrificans cytochrome c550 in EC06 E. coli cells. The lane order is as follows: (M) Molecular weight marker,
(1) cells expressing System I and c550, (2) cells expressing (P146A-CcmF)-System I and c550, and (3) cells expressing (N145A/P146A/F147A-CcmF)-System
I and c550.

A quinone-binding site has been proposed in E. coli CcmF because
of partial sequence similarity
to a site known to interact with quinones in other proteins. It is accepted that the heme that becomes attached
to apocytochromes must be in the reduced form, whereas a CcmE heme-attachment
mechanism that would result in oxidation of the heme iron of CcmE
has been proposed. A bound quinol could
be a source of reductant for the membrane-bound heme in CcmF, which
would in turn reduce the heme bound to CcmE. The putative quinol-binding
site is N145PF, with the proline being the most highly
conserved of the residues. We replaced the proline with alanine, and
no effect on cytochrome c production was observed,
as shown in Figure B, lane 2, compared with
the wild-type level seen in lane 1. All three residues of the putative
quinol-binding site were then replaced in case the other residues
were important for the proposed interaction (N145A/P146A/F147A); these
changes also did not alter the level of holocytochrome that matured
(lane 3). Replacement of the equivalent conserved CcmF* proline was
also performed in the System I* plasmid for comparison. Figure D (lane 4) shows that holocytochrome levels are
slightly reduced (∼90% of wild-type levels) by the P147A CcmF*
replacement (compared with the wild-type level in lane 1).

Discussion
The effects of the mutations described in this work, along with
published data on System I, have allowed us to improve our understanding
of the process of heme chaperoning from the point of its delivery
to the cytochrome c assembly site to its attachment
to the substrate apocytochrome.

The Role of CcmABC in Providing Heme to CcmE
In System
I, after its transfer across the membrane, heme is first ligated by
two histidine residues (strong iron ligands) on CcmC,, as illustrated in Figure  (step 1, top panel).
The heme chaperone CcmE is able to associate with the heme, which
is fixed to CcmC, forming a tightly bound complex. The affinity of
CcmE for heme-bound CcmC does not originate from its key histidine
residue because it was shown that even when the histidine was replaced
with alanine the complex still forms. The formation of the covalent bond between the histidine of CcmE
(H130) and a vinyl group of the heme occurs while the heme is still
ligated by CcmC; Richard-Fogal et al. observed that a purified CcmC–heme–CcmE
complex stained for covalently bound heme. It has been proposed that the mechanism of formation of the covalent
heme-histidine bond could be a Michael addition or an imidazole cation
radical mechanism. In both cases, the
proximity of the attacking group (the imidazole ring of the histidine
of CcmE) to the vinyl group of the heme would be crucial. Previous
work removing one or both CcmC histidines led to a drastic decrease
in holo-CcmE formation and abolished cytochrome c maturation, demonstrating the vital role of the histidine ligands
for the acquisition and transfer of heme. The occurrence of the CcmC–heme–CcmE complex is integral
to the covalent attachment of heme to CcmE. The naturally low reactivity
of the bonding histidine toward the heme vinyl would be compensated
by fixing the heme near the site of assembly. For the next step of
the maturation process to happen (the formation of the intermediate
complex between CcmE, heme, and the apocytochrome), CcmA is essential. An ATP-driven conformational change
in CcmA, presumably via CcmB, is responsible for removing the heme
from CcmC (Figure , step 2, top panel). This
has been confirmed by the K40D mutation in the Walker A motif of CcmA
that abolishes the ATPase activity of the protein; holo-CcmE accumulates
in the membrane fraction and no cytochrome c is produced., The accumulated holo-CcmE is in complex with CcmC because the K40D-CcmA
mutation also prevents formation of the CcmE–heme–apocytochrome
complex.

Proposed mechanism of holo-CcmE formation
in Systems I (top) and
I* (bottom). Covalent bonds involving the heme moiety are displayed
by a solid line, and heme ligation is shown by dotted lines. The numbers
indicate the sequence of events. In both systems, heme is transported
across the cytoplasmic membrane and fixed at the point of cytochrome c assembly by ligation to two essential histidine residues
(shown in orange) of CcmC. At this point, the heme chaperone CcmE
of System I is able to associate with the heme and covalently bind
it via a conserved histidine, forming a stable complex (point 1 of
top panel). The ATP-fuelled action of CcmAB is required to dissociate
CcmC from the heme (point 2 of top panel) and to allow CcmE to pass
the heme to the apocytochrome. In System I*, the action of CcmA* dissociates
the heme from CcmC* (point 1 of bottom panel) before the nucleophilic
attack of the CcmE* cysteine (shown in yellow) thiol to the vinyl
group of the cofactor occurs.

In System I*, the replacement of one or both histidines of
CcmC*
had dramatic effects: no holo-CcmE* or holo-c550 were detected. Therefore, we can conclude that the role
of CcmC* in the variant maturation system is equivalent to System
I. CcmC* ligates heme via H68 and H192. However, when the K41D-CcmA*
variant was examined, a significant decrease in the level of mature
holo-CcmE* in the membrane fraction was observed (∼35% compared
to wild-type levels, Figure B), which contrasts
with the significant accumulation of holo-CcmE observed in the K40D-CcmA
variant of System I. This implies that
in System I* CcmA* is required for optimal transfer of the heme from
CcmC* before, or concomitant to, the covalent attachment of CcmE*
to the cysteine (Figure , step 1, bottom panel).
The cysteine side chain, with an ionizable thiol group close to physiological
pH, is reactive and might be expected to act on the vinyl group of
the heme via an electrophilic addition (Figure , step 2, bottom panel). In the same way as thioether bonds probably
form in cytochromes c, in System I* protonation of
the heme vinyl, with the reactive cysteine acting as the proton donor,
could initiate the attack. The requirement for association of heme-bound
CcmC to CcmE, which in System I promotes the covalent bond formation
on CcmE, is therefore not necessarily required in the case of System
I*. The decrease in the level of holo-CcmE* that is matured by the
K41D-CcmA* System I* could simply reflect the lower accessibility
of the heme vinyl by the cysteine thiol of CcmE* while it is still
in complex with CcmC*.

In general, both histidine and cysteine
side chains show nucleophilic
behavior in uncatalyzed reactions. Hemoglobin from Synechococcus normally
binds heme covalently via a histidine (we note that the histidine–heme
bond in this protein occurs between the α-carbon of the vinyl
group and the histidine side chain instead of the β-carbon that
binds to the histidine of CcmE). However, it was shown that hemoglobin
can also bind heme covalently via a cysteine using a similar reaction
mechanism. The different CcmE heme-binding
residues in Systems I and I* lead to very different reaction requirements
in vivo. The appropriate reaction conditions for heme attachment arise
from the environment created by the maturation proteins in a catalyzed
process that compensates for the different reactivity of histidine
compared to cysteine. The low reactivity of the CcmE histidine is
compensated by the high affinity of CcmE for heme-bound CcmC, leading
to bond formation before the release of heme from CcmC and only if
the CcmC–heme–CcmE complex occurs (accumulation of holo-CcmE
in the cases where CcmA is absent or is compromised is a natural consequence). However, the cysteine in CcmE*
is more reactive and initiates the covalent attachment. This is consistent
with the decrease in holo-CcmE* formation with the K41D-CcmA* variant
(the small amount of holo-CcmE* detected (lane 2, top strip of Figure B) might still be in complex with CcmC* and formed
because the cysteine can attack the heme while it is ligated to CcmC*).
A comparable result has been obtained with System I when H130 was
replaced by a cysteine. With this mutation,
one might expect that the presence of a reactive cysteine on apo-CcmE
would promote the accumulation of holo-CcmE. Instead, an insignificant
amount of holo-CcmE was detected. Thus, the chemical context for the
covalent bond between heme and CcmE must be tailored for histidine
in System I and cysteine in System I*. A double mutation in System
I* supports this hypothesis: when the K41D-CcmA*/C127H-CcmE* mutation
was examined, heme attachment to holo-CcmE* was abolished. Although
the C127H variant of CcmE* does not acquire heme, we wondered whether the lack of ATPase activity in CcmA*
might permit heme attachment to C127H-CcmE* because the putative driving
force for disrupting the CcmC–heme–CcmE complex was
absent. However, no covalently bound heme was detected on CcmE*, confirming
that the reactivity of the cysteine thiol, and not the proximity to
heme-bound CcmC*, is the driving force for the formation of holo-CcmE*.
In both variants (single and double) of System I*, no holocytochrome c was detected. In the case of the K41D-CcmA* variant, this
would be because any holo-CcmE* that formed was still trapped in complex
with CcmC*.

Heme Binding to CcmE
Mutations in
CcmE* itself support
the model in Figure . Previously, insertion
of an alanine residue into the heme-binding site of CcmE (HADENY) had detrimental effects on heme attachment: no heme-containing
CcmE was detected and as a result no cytochrome c was matured. In System I*, an equivalent
insertion (CAPSKY) did not affect the maturation level
of CcmE*. This could be because attachment of heme to CcmE* depends
on only the propensity for cysteine-heme chemistry. In System I, the
chemistry of attachment of heme to the histidine depends not only
on the ligation to CcmC but also on the formation of the CcmC–heme–CcmE
complex. As explained above, the affinity of CcmE for heme-bound CcmC
does not originate from the histidine residue but is more related to the heme-binding pocket of CcmE. Surprisingly,
the alanine insertion in CcmE* abolished cytochrome c maturation. This could be because further protein–protein
interactions (with the apocytochrome or the remaining maturation proteins)
depend on the integrity of the heme-binding site. Y134 in CcmE has
been found to be important but not essential, and a similar result was obtained in this work in System I* for
the equivalent Y131 in CcmE*. The Y131A-CcmE* mutation decreased the
level of heme attachment to CcmE* and c550 to ∼35% of wild-type levels. The decrease in the level of
holo-CcmE* is mirrored in the level of cytochrome c production. As with System I, the tyrosine might ligate the heme
in CcmE*, but because heme ligation in CcmE is known to be dynamic and can accommodate alternative ligands, removal
of the tyrosine (Y131A) does not abolish function.

CcmF Interations
with Heme
Previous work on the identified
heme-ligating histidines of CcmF did not show what effect removal
of these histidines would have on the level of holo-CcmE formation. It has been proposed that CcmF-bound heme could
provide reductant to the heme of CcmE (which was proposed to become
oxidized during the heme attachment process) that is essential for
the release of the mature holocytochrome by a reverse Michael addition.
Our results show that in both Systems I and I* the histidine involved
in binding the membrane-embedded heme of CcmF (H261 or H263, respectively)
is important in the production of holocytochrome c. Removal of this residue leads to the slight accumulation of holo-CcmE
(or holo-CcmE*) and the lack of any holocytochrome. Therefore, it
is possible that the heme of CcmF plays a role in the release of the
mature substrate. The H173A mutation gave different results in the
two systems. In System I, it caused significant holo-CcmE accumulation
and complete lack of cytochrome c, pointing once
more to a role of this residue in the release of the mature substrate.
However, the H173A-CcmF* mutation, although equally detrimental to
cytochrome c maturation, halved the level of holo-CcmE*
production. This implies that H173 of CcmF* might also be involved
in holo-CcmE* formation. It could be that H173 acts as a ligand for
the heme after its release from CcmC*, securing it for interaction
with CcmE* and putting it into place for the next step. The lack of
mature c550 (instead of a ∼50%
level that would be consistent with the level of holo-CcmE) implies
an important role for the ligation of the heme of CcmE by CcmF but
also for release of holocytochrome.

Previous work proposed a
putative quinone-binding site in CcmF as part of a mechanism for acquiring
electrons that would be then transferred to the heme bound to CcmE
and allow the release of holocytochrome. In this work, we replaced conserved amino acids in the putative
binding sites (NPF) in CcmF proteins in Systems I and I*. In neither
case was cytochrome c production abolished, suggesting
that interaction with quinols/quinones at this site is not essential
for the function of CcmF. If the membrane-embedded heme of CcmF does
provide electrons to CcmE, then it would have to have other ways of
obtaining reducing power from the cytoplasm. However, we note that
although there are suggestions in the literature that the heme cofactor
could become oxidized as a result of the heme attachment process,,,, the only experimental demonstration for this is that purified CcmC–heme–CcmE
complex or holo-CcmE are 50% oxidized. Heme-containing species, such as holo-CcmE and cytochromes c, are readily oxidized. Holo-CcmE with a measured midpoint
reduction potential of −121 mV would be rapidly oxidized by atmospheric oxygen during purification.

Conclusions
By examining a naturally occurring variant of
a well-studied but
cryptic cytochrome c biogenesis system, we have been
able to shed light onto the requirements for heme chaperoning from
one protein in the pathway to the next. Heme transfer is dictated
by differential affinities during protein–protein interactions
as well as by modulating ligation properties and reactivity of residues
responsible for heme binding. Elucidating how the heme is driven preferentially
between these proteins to the final substrate apocytochrome is central
to our understanding of the overall pathway. There are parallel questions
in other systems, with one example being how bacterial heme acquisition
proteins are able to bind extracellular heme and transfer it, via
receptors, to intracellular proteins. Another example is the use of ATP hydrolysis by chaperone proteins
(e.g., Hsp90) to drive heme insertion into cytosolic apo hemoproteins. In each of these cases, the binding properties
and interactions of the proteins involved need to ensure that the
heme reaches its final target, especially given the potential toxicity
of heme when free in solution.

Supporting Information Available
Calculation of the errors for
the data presented in Table . This material
is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi400398t_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This work was
supported by the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council
(grant no. BB/H017887/1) and the Wellcome Trust (grant no. 092532).

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
CcmCytochrome c maturation

ABCATP-binding cassette

c-b562cytochrome b562 bearing a CXXCH motif

