A basic molecular process in
oxidative energy transformation is the coupling of redox reactions
with transmembrane proton translocation. In mitochondria, this proton
transfer is driven by redox reactions in three membrane-bound complexes:
NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase, the bc1 complex, and cytochrome c oxidase (CcO). Cytochrome c oxidases, members of the heme-copper oxidase superfamily,
are multisubunit complexes that catalyze the reduction of oxygen to
water and additionally pump protons across the mitochondrial inner
membrane (for reviews, see refs (−)). In isolated mammalian oxidases, the number of subunits is found
to be as many as 13. However, only two
subunits harbor all four redox active cofactors., Two
copper centers, CuA and CuB, and two hemes,
heme a and heme a3, are
located in subunits I and II and shielded from the solution by the
protein matrix. In addition to the cofactors, purified CcO also contains
a certain amount of protein-bound phospholipids.−

Under physiological conditions,
CuA, a dinuclear copper
site, is the initial electron acceptor from reduced cytochrome c. Subsequently, electrons flow from CuA to heme a and then to the catalytic binuclear heme a3–CuB center where oxygen is reduced
to water. The full reduction of O2 to H2O requires
four electrons and four protons that are delivered sequentially to
the catalytic site. Depending on the number of electrons and protons
entering the heme a3–CuB site, a series of discrete intermediates is observed. However, the
reduction of O2 can begin only when the enzyme is reduced
by at least two electrons. The reaction product of two-electron-reduced
CcO with O2 is an intermediate called the “peroxy”
form (P). An interesting feature of P is
that the dioxygen bond is already cleaved, and the iron of heme a3 is in the oxoferryl
state (Fea3IV=O). It is assumed that splitting of the O–O
bond in P is facilitated by the oxidation of an aromatic
amino acid in the vicinity of the heme a3–CuB center. It is probable that Tyr244 (bovine
numbering) is the original electron or hydrogen donor producing the
Tyr radical.− Entry of the third electron into the catalytic site
converts P to the second ferryl form (F),− in which the Tyr radical is expected to be annihilated. The full reduction of oxygen is completed by
a delivery of the fourth electron to the catalytic center of F, regenerating the oxidized enzyme (O).

The catalytic sequence O → P → F → O is mimicked by the appearance of
these intermediates during the treatment of the enzyme with H2O2.− The P state is formed by the interaction of the oxidized
CcO with one molecule of H2O2. A second molecule of H2O2 converts P to F.,, In addition to these observations, it has been proposed that F can react with either the third H2O2 molecule or a superoxide to yield O. In the presence of excess
peroxide, the enzyme shows the ability to continually decrease the
concentration of H2O2 by turnover, even in the
absence of external electron donors. In
the course of this turnover, the release of molecular oxygen (O2),− superoxide,, and hydroxyl radicals has been observed. Moreover, CcO exposed to
peroxide showed various sites of oxidative modifications and a decline
in catalytic activity.− It has also been demonstrated that this oxidative damage is triggered
by the reaction of H2O2 with the catalytic site
of CcO., These observations led to suggestions that
the oxidized enzyme possesses the so-called pseudocatalase and/or
endogenous peroxidase activity.,,,

Clearly, the characterization
of the reactions of CcO with peroxide
can assist in improving our understanding of the chemical nature of
the two transient ferryl intermediates. Moreover, these investigations
should be helpful in explaining the inhibition of the catalytic activity
of CcO caused by H2O2 treatments. In this study,
we have applied several kinetic and spectroscopic methods to identify
the type of interactions of CcO with peroxide and the pathway of the
oxidative damage and to demonstrate the specificity of peroxide attack
on the catalytic electron transfer reactions.

Experimental Procedures
Materials
Horseradish peroxidase (HRP), catalase, scopoletin,
imidazole, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), diethylenediaminepentaacetic
acid (DEPA), Tris and Ches buffers, sucrose, l-histidine,
hexaamineruthenium(III) chloride (Ru), nitro blue tetrazolium type
III (NBT), and sodium hydrosulfite (dithionite, DT) were purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich. Horse heart ferricytochrome c was obtained from Fluka, 30% hydrogen peroxide from Fisher Scientific,
sodium cyanide from Mallinckrodt, n-dodecyl β-d-maltoside (DM) from Anatrace, Triton X-100 from Roche Diagnostics,
and the high-purity spin trap α-(4-pyridyl-1-oxide)-N-tert-butylnitrone (POBN) from Alexis
Biochemicals.

CcO Purification and Activity Measurements
Bovine heart
cytochrome c oxidase was isolated from mitochondria
by the modified method of Soulimane and Buse into DM-containing buffer [10 mM Tris (pH 7.6), 50 mM K2SO4, and 0.1% DM]. The concentration
of the oxidized CcO was determined from the optical spectrum using
an extinction coefficient A424 of 156
mM–1 cm–1. Using the published purification procedure, we noticed that the pseudocatalase activity,
the rate of production of O2 from the reaction of H2O2 with the oxidized enzyme, varies with the CcO
preparation. Because it has been suggested that the catalase-like
function may reflect the action of adventitious transition metals
on H2O2, we have
included one additional step in the isolation protocol. This step
involved washing the first sediment obtained after solubilization
of mitochondria with Triton X-100 with buffer [10 mM Tris (pH 7.6)
and 250 mM sucrose] containing the chelators 10 mM EDTA and 5 mM histidine.
This modified procedure yields CcO showing no measurable generation
of O2 from H2O2 assessed by the oxygen
electrode.

Exposing the mitochondrial extract to 10 mM EDTA
and 5 mM histidine during purification does not result in the observable
deviation of the examined characteristics of CcO relative to those
of the enzyme not exposed to the chelators. The tested properties
included the optical spectra of the fully oxidized and fully reduced
CcO, the reaction of the oxidized CcO with carbon monoxide to produce
the “peroxy” intermediate under aerobic conditions,
the rate of electron transfer (ET) from heme a to
the heme a3–CuB center
during the anaerobic reduction of the enzyme, and the rates of reactions
of the oxidized enzyme with both cyanide and H2O2. Because alteration of the catalytic properties and the catalytic
center of CcO was not observed, we attributed the effect of the chelators
to the removal or decrease of the concentration of some transition
metals in solutions.

The catalytic activity of CcO was determined
from the kinetics
of the oxidation of 7 μM ferrocytochrome c by
15 nM CcO monitored as the absorbance change at 550 nm in a Hewlett-Packard
8452 UV–vis spectrometer. Ferrocytochrome c was prepared by the reduction of the oxidized protein with a few
crystals of solid dithionite, and then the solution was passed through
a G25 column. The concentration of the reduced cytochrome c was calculated from the optical spectra using an A550 of 27.6 mM–1 cm–1. To avoid any complexities of CcO aggregation during prolonged incubation
at neutral pH, a buffer with a high ionic strength [200 mM potassium
phosphate buffer (pH 7.0) and 0.1% DM at 23 °C] was used in most
of the measurements.

Complex of CcO with Cyanide
The
very high affinity
of cyanide for oxidized CcO facilitates the preparation of the complex
(CcO·CN) with no free cyanide in solution. This complex was formed
by an incubation of the enzyme with 10 mM NaCN for 20 min in 200 mM
potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.0) and 0.1% DM at 23 °C. Then
1 mM ferricyanide was added to ensure the oxidized state of CcO. Five
minutes after initiation of the incubation, this sample was passed
through a 2 cm × 25 cm Sephadex G25 column to remove all free
reagents. The concentration of CcO·CN was calculated from the
optical spectra using an extinction coefficient A428 of 163 mM–1 cm–1 for CcO·CN.

Phospholipid
Extraction
Lipids were extracted from
CcO following the published protocol. One milliliter of 35 μM CcO [200 mM KPi, 30 mM
K2SO4 (pH 7.0), and 0.1% DM] was mixed thoroughly
with 3 mL of a 2:1 (v/v) chloroform/methanol mixture, followed by
centrifugation at 1000g for 10 min to separate the
two phases. Most of the upper layer was removed by suction, and 2
mL of the lower chloroform layer was recovered by syringe. The chloroform
layer was dried at 23 °C under a stream of N2, and
the lipid residue was dissolved in 2 mL of cyclohexane for optical
absorption measurements. Lipid extraction was applied to two CcO samples.
Both were exposed to 1 mM H2O2 for 30 min at
23 °C, the difference being that one sample was the complex with
cyanide (2 mM NaCN in buffer) while the other was the uninhibited
oxidized enzyme.

Determination of the Concentration and Rate
of Decomposition
of H2O2
The concentration of stock
solutions of H2O2 was assessed from absorption
measurements at 240 nm using an A240 of
40 M–1 cm–1. To detect changes in the concentration of H2O2 during the reaction with CcO, a fluorescent method
using scopoletin and horseradish peroxidase (HRP) was employed. The basis of this method is that the fluorescent
scopoletin is oxidized to the nonfluorescent derivative by HRP in
the presence of H2O2. The detection of H2O2 was performed in 50 mM potassium phosphate buffer
(pH 7.0) containing 0.45 μM HRP and 11 μM scopoletin.
Using these concentrations of HRP and scopoletin in the assays, fluorescence
quenching was achieved in the time of manual mixing. To determine
the kinetics of peroxide decomposition, small aliquots were taken
from the reaction mixture at selected times of incubation and injected
into the assay solution. The fluorescence measurements were conducted
in a Cary Eclipse Spectrometer using excitation at 360 nm and the
detection of emission at 460 nm.

The kinetics of H2O2 degradation was measured in the presence of the native
uninhibited CcO, CcO·CN with no free cyanide in the solution,
and also in the buffer alone (Figure A). Because
the contribution to the rate of H2O2 decomposition
by CcO·CN is small and &lt;13% of the values observed for CcO
(Figure A), the determined rate constants
were used without a correction (Figure A).

Kinetics
of decomposition of H2O2 by oxidized
cytochrome c oxidase. (A) Consumption of H2O2 by the oxidized enzyme (CcO), the enzyme in which the
heme a3–CuB center is
blocked by cyanide (CcO.CN), and the enzyme in buffer without CcO
(buffer). (B) Kinetics of decomposition of H2O2 by CcO at 50, 200, 400, and 800 μM peroxide. The dashed lines
are monoexponential fits to the data. Conditions of measurements:
3.0 μM CcO in 200 mM potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.0), 10
mM EDTA, and 0.1% DM at 23 °C.

Kinetic dissimilarity between the decomposition of H2O2 and superoxide formation by cytochrome c oxidase. (A) Dependence of the initial rates of H2O2 decomposition on peroxide concentration. The dashed line
is a fit of the data to the Michaelis–Menten equation. (B)
Dependence of the initial rate of superoxide generation by CcO on
the concentration of H2O2. The dotted line is
a guideline enhancing the visualization of the dependence. Conditions
of measurement were the same as those described in the legend of Figure , except that for superoxide detection 147 μM
NBT was present in the buffer. The kinetics of formation of superoxide
was monitored by changes in the absorbance difference of NBT at 517–700
nm.

Steady-State Concentrations
of Ferryl Intermediates
The concentrations of the two oxoferryl
intermediates, P and F, generated in the
reaction of CcO with H2O2, were obtained from
the difference optical spectra
of treated oxidase minus oxidized enzyme using the an A607–630 of 11 mM–1 cm–1 for P and an A580–630 of 5.3 mM–1 cm–1 for F. For these (steady-state) measurements,
the buffer with a pH of 8.0 (200 mM KPi and 0.1% DM at
23 °C) was used.

Detection of Superoxide
The dye
nitro blue tetrazolium
(NBT) in molar excess over CcO was utilized to monitor the production
of superoxide radical during the reaction of CcO with H2O2. The reduction of NBT
by superoxide generates the monoformazan (MF+) whose concentration
was assessed by the changes in the optical absorption spectrum. The
concentration of NBT was quantified from the optical spectra using
an extinction coefficient A257 of 61 mM–1 cm–1.

To determine the extinction coefficient of MF+ under
the specific conditions of the measurements, we have prepared MF+ in ethanol by the reduction of 200 μM NBT with 100
μM sodium ascorbate. The addition of the substoichiometric amount
of ascorbate resulted in the formation of 100 μM MF+ in ethanol. Then the known amount of
MF+ was transferred from ethanol into a buffer [200 mM
KPi (pH 7.0) containing either 0.1% Triton X-100 or 0.075%
Tween 20]. From the optical spectrum of these samples (5% ethanol),
we obtained an extinction coefficient A517–700 of 17.2 ± 0.5 mM–1 cm–1 for MF+. The quantification of superoxide formation was
based on the stoichiometry of 2 mol of superoxide producing 1 mol
of MF+.

Determination of Oxygen Release
A model 53 oxygen monitor
from Yellow Springs Instruments equipped with a Thermolyn type 7200
electrode and stirrer was used for the detection of O2 release
in the reaction of oxidized CcO with H2O2.

EPR Measurements
For assessment of a free radical produced
in the reaction of CcO with H2O2, we employed
the spin trapping technique. To the sample of 5 μM CcO and 110
mM spin trap POBN [α-(4-pyridyl-1-oxide)-N-tert-butylnitrone] was added 200 μM H2O2 [200 mM KPi (pH 7.0) and 0.1% DM at 23 °C].
Immediately after the addition of peroxide, the sample was loaded
into the glass capillary, and over a period of 20 min, the five EPR
spectra were recorded. The Varian E-6 EPR spectrometer was used for
the measurements with the following settings: frequency of 9.225 GHz,
modulation amplitude of 2 G, modulation frequency of 100 kHz, scan
time of 4 min, power of 20 mW, and temperature of 23 °C.

Rapid
Kinetic Measurements
Two methods were employed
in these measurements: the stopped-flow technique for the measurements
of the reduction kinetics of heme a and heme a3 and the flow-flash method to assess the reaction
of the fully reduced enzyme with oxygen.

The kinetics of anaerobic
reduction of CcO was measured in the rapid scanning OLIS RSM-1000
stopped-flow apparatus equipped with a 20 mm path length observation
cell. The reduction of heme a by ferrocytochrome c was initiated by mixing in a 1:1 volume ratio of 3.7 μM
CcO·CN with an anaerobic solution of 13.8 μM cytochrome c and 10 mM dithionite. In the CcO·CN complex, the
transfer of the electron to heme a3 is
blocked by the ligand. This permits the selective measurement of the
reduction kinetics of heme a. The kinetics of the
reduction of heme a for two CcO·CN complexes
were compared: the first complex was prepared from the enzyme as purified
(native CcO), and the second was prepared from CcO after the treatment
with 100 μM H2O2 for 3 h at 23 °C
[10 mM Tris (pH 7.6) and 0.1% DM].

The internal ET from heme a to heme a3 was measured under
anaerobic conditions at pH 9.0. In
this case, an anaerobic solution of 3.7 μM CcO was mixed with
buffer [200 mM Ches (pH 9.0), 100 mM NaCl, and 0.1% DM] containing
10 mM Ru(II) and 10 mM sodium dithionite. A high concentration of
Ru(II) was employed to reduce both CuA and heme a in the dead time of the stopped-flow instrument. The subsequent
reduction of heme a3 takes place on a
time scale that can be recorded by this apparatus. The reduction of
heme a3 was recorded as changes in absorbance
at 444 nm.

The flow-flash method was employed for monitoring
the kinetics
of oxidation of the fully reduced CcO with O2. For these
measurements, the preformed complex of 33.1 μM fully reduced
CcO with carbon monoxide (CuA+Fea2+Fea32+-CO CuB+) was rapidly mixed in a 1:1
volume ratio with oxygen-saturated buffer [1.25 mM O2,
200 mM KPi (pH 7.0), and 0.1% DM at 20 °C] into the
observation cell (2 mm path length). Then the reaction with O2 was triggered by photolyzing CO with a laser pulse (577 nm,
0.5 μs, phase-R 2100 dye laser), and the kinetics of oxidation
of CcO was recorded at 445 nm. The rapid mixing of the solutions was
achieved in a Bio-Logic stopped-flow module (SFM 400).

To prepare
the complex of the fully reduced CcO with CO, the air
in the sample of the oxidized enzyme was exchanged with argon. Then
0.5 μM cytochrome c and 25.5 mM ascorbic acid
were added from a side arm of the tonometer to fully reduce the enzyme.
To ensure complete reduction, the enzyme was incubated under 1.3 atm
of CO for 20 min at 20 °C prior to beginning the kinetic measurements.

Results
H2O2 Decomposition and Superoxide Production
In the absence of external electron donors, CcO is able to decompose
hydrogen peroxide by turnover (Figure A, CcO). The kinetics of this decomposition was
measured in the range between 50 and 800 μM H2O2 using 3 μM CcO (Figure B).
A plot of the initial rate of decomposition versus peroxide concentration
appears to exhibit hyperbolic behavior (Figure A). When this dependence
was fit to the Michaelis–Menten equation, the following parameters
were derived: kcat = 0.07 s–1 (Vmax = 0.2 μM s–1), KM = 230 μM, and kcat/KM ≈ 300 M–1 s–1. The apparent bimolecular rate
constants of 200 M–1 s–1 and 63 M–1 s–1 were recently determined for the consumption
of H2O2 by the bovine CcO purified by different
protocols. We also observed that the increase in the CcO concentration
leads to a proportional increase in the kinetics of H2O2 degradation. For example, increasing the concentration of
CcO 2-fold, from 3 to 6 μM, increases the pseudo-first-order
rate constant for the decomposition of 100 μM H2O2 from 6 × 10–4 to 1.1 × 10–3 s–1. This rate was not substantially
affected by changing the detergent in solution. The rate constants
of 2 × 10–4 and 3.2 × 10–4 s–1 for the degradation of 100 μM H2O2 by 3 μM CcO were found in the buffer containing
0.1% Triton X-100 and 0.075% Tween 20, respectively.

Blocking
the catalytic heme a3–CuB center with cyanide significantly decreases the rate of H2O2 decomposition (Figure A, CcO.CN).
The measurement using CcO·CN was performed in a buffer with no
free cyanide. Very similar rates of H2O2 degradation
were observed for the spontaneous decay of H2O2 in buffer only or in the presence of denaturated CcO (Figure A, buffer). These rates show that almost full inhibition
of peroxide disintegration is accomplished by the exclusion of the
heme a3–CuB site from
the process.

Previously, it had been suggested that degradation
of H2O2 occurs via pseudocatalase activity at
the heme a3–CuB center.
This activity
should release the superoxide molecules whose dismutation is associated
with O2 formation., We examined a possible
oxygen release in the reaction of 3 μM oxidized CcO with 100
μM, 1 mM, and 5 mM H2O2. Under the given
conditions [200 mM KPi buffer and 10 mM EDTA (pH 7.0) at
23 °C], the production of O2 was detected only at
concentrations of 1 and 5 mM H2O2, while at
100 μM H2O2, oxygen formation was absent.

The measurement of the initial rates of superoxide generation,
monitored by NBT, revealed two concentration regions with different
characteristics for H2O2 decomposition (Figure B). Below ∼1 mM H2O2, there was almost no superoxide formation detected. However, above
this concentration, superoxide production was observed. It appears
that the peroxide concentration has to be above ∼1 mM to be
able to produce superoxide in its reaction with CcO.

The spectral
changes of NBT were completely suppressed by the addition
of superoxide dismutase to the reaction buffer or by blocking the
catalytic center of CcO with cyanide. Changing the concentration of
NBT in the reaction to 300, 600, and 900 μM, the CcO concentration
to 6 and 9 μM, the KPi concentration from 200 to
20 mM, and the pH to 8 did not lead to the observation of superoxide
formation when using a submillimolar concentration of H2O2. We have also verified that under our experimental
conditions, the oxidation of preformed monoformazan cation (2 μM)
by 3 μM CcO proceeds at a very slow rate (∼0.1 nM s–1). This confirms that its oxidation cannot be responsible
for the missing detection of superoxide.

In the millimolar range
of peroxide concentrations, the initial
rate of superoxide production appears to be linearly dependent on
peroxide concentration up to 80 mM (not shown). The calculated bimolecular
rate constant of 2.6 M–1 s–1 for
superoxide generation from these data is in a good agreement with
the published value of 2–4 M–1 s–1.

Transitions of CcO during
Turnover
The overall transitions
of CcO in the reaction with H2O2 were monitored
via the time evolution of the UV–vis absorption spectrum of
the enzyme (Figure ). The difference spectra
of CcO in the presence of peroxide relative to that of the oxidized
enzyme demonstrate the formation of the two ferryl intermediates, P and F (Figure A). Their
presence can be distinguished in the α-band region where the
peak at 607 nm indicates the P form and the maximum at
580 nm reflects the population of the enzyme in the F state (Figure A).

Spectral transitions
of cytochrome c oxidase induced
by H2O2. (A) Difference spectra of the peroxide-reacted
CcO relative to that of the initial oxidized CcO. The spectra were
recorded at 2 and 180 min following addition of 100 μM H2O2 to 3.5 μM CcO. (B) Time evolution of the
absorbance changes [ΔA(436–414 nm)]
of 3.5 μM CcO during the interaction with H2O2. At the time indicated by the arrow, 100 μM H2O2 was added. Conditions of the measurements were the
same as those described in the legend of Figure .

Because the Soret bands of P and F are
almost identical, the absorbance changes
at 436–414 nm versus time do not discriminate between these
two forms (Figure B). However, the kinetics
of A(436–414 nm) shows (Figure B) that the steady state of the combined population of P and F is reached relatively quickly after the
addition of excess peroxide. This steady state is followed by the
disappearance of both oxoferryl forms with the subsequent recovery
of the spectrum of the apparently oxidized CcO (Figure A).

In the transition from P and F to O (Figure B), some
acceleration of
the conversion is discernible at ∼1500 s. This increased rate
of conversion is due to the limited availability of free H2O2. After this time point, the spontaneous decay of the
ferryl states becomes the dominant reaction and their formation through
the reaction of the recovered oxidized CcO with the residual free
peroxide is substantially slower or even absent. Before this time,
the peroxide concentration is high enough to maintain a sufficient
rate of formation of P and F to compete
with the decay rate of these intermediates to the oxidized enzyme.

It is known that the conversions of O to P and P to F are driven by H2O2.,,,,, Each of these steps is accomplished by 1 equiv of
peroxide:,The third transition,
from F to O, which has to occur during turnover,
may be due to the reaction
of F with an additional H2O2 molecule,
may take place without the participation of peroxide by the endogenous
decay of F to O, or is the result of the
reduction of F with superoxide produced in the preceding P to F step. Which of these pathways dominates
in the turnover can be evaluated from the dependence of the [F]/[P] molar ratio on the concentration of H2O2 under steady-state conditions. Using the steady-state
approximation, it can be calculated that only in the case when the
reaction cycle proceeds as O + H2O2 → P + H2O2 → F → O, through the endogenous decay of F → O, should the [F]/[P] ratio be linearly dependent upon peroxide concentration.

These measurements of the steady-state concentration of P and F were performed at pH 8.0 because the reaction
of oxidized CcO with H2O2 is pH-dependent.,, The major feature of this dependence
is the branching of the reaction at the level of P that
is under the control of an acid–base group(s) characterized
for bovine heart oxidase with a pKa of
approximately 6.7–7.0.,, Only at higher pH values, where the group is deprotonated, does
the reaction of CcO with H2O2 proceed with the
dominant production of P. Using excess H2O2, this initial P state is followed by the transition
to F and consequently to the steady-state level characterized
as a mixture of P and F (Figure A). Under these conditions, we found that the dependence
of the steady-state [F]/[P] ratio on H2O2 concentration is linear (Figure B). This observation supports the model in which O is regenerated by the spontaneous or endogenous decomposition of F.

Dependence of the molar ratio of ferryl (F) to the
peroxy (P) form on H2O2 concentration
under steady-state conditions. (A) Kinetics of transitions of 3.0
μM oxidized CcO to the steady-state level of P induced
by 200 μM H2O2. The transition is monitored
as the spectral change at 607 nm. (B) Dependence of the steady-state
[F]/[P] molar ratio on H2O2 concentration. The steady-state concentrations of F and P forms were determined from the difference spectra
of 3.0 μM CcO exposed to peroxide vs oxidized enzyme. Measurements
were performed in a solution of 200 mM KPi (pH 8.0), 0.08%
DM, and 5 mM diethylenediaminepentaacetic acid at 23 °C. The
data points are the averages of three measurements, and for each measurement,
a fresh sample of CcO was used. The dashed line is the linear fit.

Decline of Catalytic Activity
of CcO Treated with H2O2
The absence
of almost any loss of the heme
absorbance after peroxide treatment (Figure A) may imply the complete catalytic recovery of CcO. Despite this
apparent spectral restoration, a substantial and irreversible decrease
in the catalytic activity is observed for the H2O2-reacted CcO. Incubation of CcO with H2O2 initiates
a progressive decline in its ability to oxidize ferrocytochrome c (Figure , H2O2). The activity decreases by ∼65% in a period of ∼3
h after incubation of CcO with 100 μM H2O2. This inactivation cannot be ascribed to the aging of the enzyme
as the incubation of CcO in buffer alone under the same conditions
causes a diminution of the activity by only ∼10% (Figure , buffer). The inactivation also takes place when
CcO is not exposed to multiple turnovers with peroxide. This is the
case when catalase is added to the sample immediately after all the
CcO has reacted with H2O2 (Figure , H2O2/Cat). This simple endogenous
decay of the intermediates to oxidized CcO diminishes the enzymatic
activity by ∼40%.

Decline of the catalytic activity of cytochrome c oxidase during incubation with H2O2. The catalytic
activity of CcO during the reaction of 3.3 μM CcO with H2O2 was determined for (○) CcO incubated
with 100 μM H2O2, (■) CcO reacted
with 100 μM H2O2 for 120 s and then residual
peroxide removed from solution by the addition of catalase (3000 units),
and (●) CcO incubated in buffer only [200 mM potassium phosphate
(pH 7.0) and 0.1% DM at 23 °C] in the absence of hydrogen peroxide.
Aliquots of the enzyme were removed from the samples at selected times,
and the catalytic activity was assessed by measuring the rate of the
oxidation of 7 μM ferrocytochrome c by 15 nM
CcO. The molecular activity is expressed as a percentage of the rate
of the oxidation of ferrocytochrome c by the untreated
oxidized CcO. The absolute value at time zero, expressed as the number
of electrons transferred by CcO, corresponds to an activity of ∼14
s–1. The dashed lines are monoexponential fits to
the data.

Oxidation of CcO-Bound
Lipids
In contrast to the reversibility
of the absorbance of the heme centers, the exposure of CcO to peroxide
produces an irreversible increase in the absorbance in the UV region.
The kinetics of this process is illustrated in Figure A. However, the development of this absorbance takes place
only if peroxide is present in the solution. Adding catalase to the
sample during the reaction of CcO with H2O2 completely
stops this increase in absorption (Figure A). This spectral development was also absent when the catalytic
heme a3–CuB center was
blocked by cyanide. In the presence of superoxide dismutase (SOD,
150 units/mL), the amplitude of this spectral change was slightly
decreased (1–5%) relative to that of a control lacking SOD.
Replacing the air with argon has no measurable effect on the development
of this transition.

Spectral changes of cytochrome c oxidase
and the
protein-bound lipids induced by H2O2. (A) Development
of the irreversible UV spectral change of CcO [ΔA(244–262 nm)] caused by H2O2 (···)
and effect of catalase on the progress of these changes (—).
The addition of catalase (3000 units/mL) is indicated by the arrow.
In both samples, 3.0 μM CcO was reacted with 100 μM H2O2. The reaction with peroxide was initiated at
time zero. Conditions of the measurements are the same as those described
in the legend of Figure . (B) UV difference
spectrum of 3 μM CcO monitored 3 h after the reaction with 100
μM H2O2 vs the initial oxidized CcO. The
buffer consisted of 200 mM KPi (pH 7.0) and 0.1% DM. (C)
Spectrum of lipids extracted from CcO samples exposed to H2O2: (CcO) spectrum of lipids obtained from the uninhibited
oxidase and (CcO.CN) spectrum of lipids from the oxidase in which
the catalytic center was blocked by cyanide. The spectra were collected
on the lipids dissolved in cyclohexane.

The difference spectrum in the UV region of the peroxide-reacted
CcO versus untreated enzyme exhibits a positive band at ∼274
nm together with a large increase in the absorbance below 250 nm (Figure B). The appearance of these bands is indicative
of the formation of conjugated dienes and trienes− produced by
the oxidation of the lipids copurified with CcO.,, To verify this possibility, we examined
the lipids extracted from two samples of CcO subjected to the reaction
with H2O2. In the first sample, the enzyme was
inhibited by cyanide while the second sample contained native, uninhibited
CcO. The spectrum of the lipids from uninhibited CcO shows the substantial
increase in the absorbance in the UV region relative to that of the
lipids extracted from the cyanide-inhibited enzyme (Figure C, CcO.CN). The similarity of the absorbance changes
in CcO and the extracted lipids shows that, indeed, the bound lipids
are the sites of modification of the enzyme by peroxide.

Generation
of Lipid-Derived Radical
In the course of
the reaction of CcO with peroxide, we observed the production of organic
free radical. The formation of the radical is demonstrated by the
EPR spectrum of the spin trap POBN–radical adduct (Figure ). The cumulative spectrum shows six lines characterized
by the following hyperfine coupling constants: aN = 16.1 G, and aH = 2.7 G. Very
similar coupling constants (aN = 15.8
G, and aH = 2.5–2.6 G) were attributed
previously to either the carbon-centered radical of a POBN–linoleic
acid adduct or the adduct of POBN with
a lipid peroxyl radical. No EPR signals
were detected in experiments in which CcO·CN was reacted with
200 μM H2O2.

Generation of lipid-centered
radical in the reaction of cytochrome c oxidase with
H2O2. Cumulative spectrum
of the POBN–radical adduct recorded on the sample in which
5.0 μM CcO reacted with 200 μM H2O2 for 20 min. The buffer consisted of 200 mM potassium phosphate (pH
7.0), 0.1% DM, and 110 mM POBN at 23 °C. For a detailed description
of the measurements and conditions, see .

Electron Transfer in Peroxide-Modified
CcO
To identify
the impaired step in the overall catalytic cycle of the peroxide-reacted
CcO, we examined the kinetics of ET under three conditions. We have
measured the kinetics of ET in both native and peroxide-treated CcO
from ferrocytochrome c to heme a (Figure A) and from heme a to heme a3 (Figure B) and the kinetics of oxidation of the fully reduced oxidase
with O2 (Figure C).

Effect of H2O2 modification of cytochrome c oxidase
on the kinetics of electron transport. (A) Kinetics
of transfer of an electron from ferrocytochrome c to heme a for both native (control) and peroxide-modified
CcO (H2O2-treated). The catalytic center in
both CcO samples was blocked by cyanide (10 mM), and the reduction
kinetics was measured using 7.0 μM ferrocytochrome c and 5 mM sodium dithionite. The dots are the recorded traces and
the solid lines the monoexponential fits to the data. The control
trace is offset by +0.04 OD unit. (B) Kinetics of internal ET from
heme a to heme a3 for
native (control) and peroxide-modified CcO (H2O2-treated). CcO is reduced by a mixture of 5 mM Ru(II) and 5 mM dithionite
under anaerobic conditions. All measurements were performed with 1.8
μM CcO in 200 mM Ches buffer (pH 9.0), 100 mM NaCl, and 0.1%
DM at 23 °C. Concentrations are after the mixing in the stopped-flow
apparatus. Progress of the reduction of heme a and a3 was monitored as a change in absorbance at
444 nm. The dashed line is an extension of the two-exponential fit
of data up to 10 s. H2O2-treated enzyme was
prepared via preincubation of CcO for 3 h with 100 μM H2O2 in 200 mM potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.0)
and 0.1% DM at 23 °C. (C) Kinetics of oxidation of fully reduced
cytochrome oxidase with O2. Anaerobic fully reduced native
(control) and peroxide-treated CcO (H2O2-treated)
complexed with carbon monoxide were mixed rapidly with oxygen-saturated
buffer in the flow-flash apparatus. At time zero, the reaction with
O2 was initiated by photodissociation of CO by a laser
pulse. The redox transitions from the reduced to oxidized enzyme were
monitored as the change in absorbance at 445 nm. The traces mostly
show the last phase of the reaction, the conversion of the accumulated
ferryl intermediate (F) to the oxidized enzyme. The peroxide-treated
enzyme was prepared by preincubation of 33.1 μM CcO with 600
μM H2O2 for 1 h at 23 °C. The trace
of the untreated control is offset by +0.07 absorbance unit.

Nearly identical amplitudes and
kinetics of the anaerobic reduction
of heme a by ferrocytochrome c (Figure A) show that peroxide treatment does not affect
the entry of an electron into CcO. The apparent rate constants obtained
from the monoexponential fits of data for untreated and H2O2-treated CcO are 4 ± 0.2 and 3.9 ± 0.2 s–1, respectively.

However, quite different kinetic
behavior was observed for internal
ET from heme a to a3 (Figure B). The kinetics of the heme a3 anaerobic reduction in the untreated enzyme was biphasic;
the major phase, which contributed 88% to the absorbance change, is
characterized by a rate constant of 13 ± 0.4 s–1. The corresponding phase for heme a3 reduction in H2O2-modified CcO contributes
70% to the absorbance change and proceeds with a rate constant of
4 ± 0.2 s–1. This rate corresponds to one-third
of that observed in the untreated enzyme. It is noted that the almost
identical amplitudes of the absorbance change of heme a3 observed for the native and peroxide-modified enzyme
show that the same amount of heme a3 is
reduced in each form of the enzyme.

To measure the kinetics
of oxidation of reduced CcO with O2, the fully reduced
CcO was prepared with carbon monoxide
bound at the heme a3–CuB center and the reaction with O2 was initiated by photodissociation
of the CO. The subsequent spectral changes take place in four kinetically
distinguishable phases (Figure C). All phases
and their assignment to particular intermediates were established
in previous studies.− The immediate absorbance increase at 445 nm comes
from the photodissociation of CO and the appearance of nonligated
reduced heme a3. The interaction of the
uninhibited enzyme with O2 results in a rapid decrease
in the absorbance at 445 nm, and this phase ends with the formation
of PR. The subsequent small absorbance
increase represents the conversion of PR to F. The transition of F to oxidized
CcO is the final phase that occurs with a rate constant of 594 ±
43 s–1 for the untreated enzyme (Figure C, control) and 622 ± 44 s–1 for H2O2-treated CcO (Figure C, H2O2 treated). In spite of the complex
kinetic pattern, a comparison of both kinetic traces shows that the
transition of the fully reduced enzyme to oxidize CcO is not altered
by the peroxide treatment.

Altogether, the kinetic measurements
demonstrate that the peroxide
treatment of CcO results in a quite specific impact on the internal
electron transfer from heme a to a3 (Figure B). The extent of this
inhibition correlates well with the observed decrease in the overall
catalytic activity of the enzyme (Figure ).

Discussion
Reduction of H2O2 at the Catalytic Center
The continuous reduction of H2O2 at the catalytic
center of CcO via the P and F intermediates
has been previously attributed to the pseudocatalase function of the
enzyme.,,, According to this proposal, free H2O2 acts as a one-electron donor for the transition of P to F or even for the conversion of F to O. The two superoxide
anions expected to be formed in transitions of P to F and F to O are released and subsequently
dismute to peroxide and O2., We demonstrated
that at a low H2O2 concentration (below ∼1
mM) (Figure ), only two molecules of peroxide
are involved in the single turnover of CcO, utilizing the pathwaywhere the first H2O2 produces P from O and the second
converts P to F. This process is followed
by the endogenous
decay of F to O. However, the absence of
both superoxide (Figure B) and oxygen release
during the cycle shows that the pseudocatalase mechanism is not in
effect or has only a very weak contribution in the submillimolar H2O2 concentration range. Consequently, it raises
the question about the nature of the reactions in this cycle.

Previous investigations showed that the reaction of O with H2O2 is the redox reaction producing
both the oxoferryl heme iron and a putative radical (Y•) in the vicinity of the heme a3–CuB center in the P state.,− The nature of the second reaction, the conversion of P to F, is enigmatic and very interesting. This transition,
without the formation of superoxide, can be accomplished by two different
mechanisms (Figure ). The first is that the P to F transition results from a structural rearrangement
of CcO. We assume, in accord with an
earlier suggestion, that the binding
of the second molecule of H2O2 to CuB triggers a structural change. This explanation has some support
in the observed conversion of PR to the F intermediate during the reaction of fully
reduced CcO with O2. The oxoferryl PR state, spectrally very similar if not identical to
the P intermediate (but
see ref ()), is formed
after three electrons are delivered to the catalytic center in the
reaction with O2. It is presumed that the neutral radical
Y• present in P (Fea3IV=O CuBII Y•) is annihilated in the PR intermediate
(Fea3IV=O CuBII Y). The spectral conversion of PR to F is associated with the proton uptake
and release without any electron transfer to the catalytic center.− The second possibility for P to F conversion
is the redox reaction (Figure ). According
to this proposition, H2O2 is cleaved at CuB into two HO• radicals and one of these
radicals annihilates Y•. The second HO• radical propagates the oxidative damage of the enzyme.

Proposed pathways
for the conversion of P to F stimulated by H2O2. Two reactions responsible for the P(607 nm) to F(580 nm) transition triggered by H2O2 proceed through the intermediate state (I). In P, the iron of heme a3 is in the
oxyferryl state, and it is expected that at
the catalytic heme a3–CuB center (oval box) the radical (Tyr244, Y•) is
also present. The ligation state of CuB is excluded from
consideration. The top path represents the conversion stimulated by
the peroxide binding to CuB. The transition is associated
with the change in affinity of CuB for H2O2 that is followed by the dissociation of peroxide. In the
bottom path, one of the two hydroxyl radicals, produced by homolytic
splitting of H2O2, is able to annihilate the
Y• radical. The second HO• radical
is released from the catalytic center. The presence or absence of
the neutral Y• radical in the F form
is presumed to not affect in a substantial way the optical absorption
spectra of heme a3.

Our data indicate that two molecules of H2O2 participate in the formation of F from the oxidized
enzyme. However, in the recovery of O from F, peroxide or superoxide is not involved. This implies that the oxoferryl
state of iron of heme a3 is reduced to
ferric iron by the endogenous oxidation of the protein and lipid components
of purified CcO. This autoxidation is accompanied by the progressive
loss of the catalytic activity of the enzyme during the conversion
of F to O (Figure ).

The described cycle of peroxide reduction at the catalytic
center
is, however, restricted to H2O2 concentrations
below ∼1 mM. In this submillimolar range, the action of CcO
is characterized by the absence of the production of both superoxide
(Figure B) and O2 from peroxide.
In contrast, the reactions of CcO with peroxide above 1 mM H2O2 result in the release of both O2 and superoxide.
This change in product formation indicates that with increasing H2O2 concentrations there is a gradual change in
the mechanism of peroxide decomposition by CcO. One is effective in
the submillimolar range, and the second prevails at millimolar H2O2 concentrations.

This conclusion is also
supported by the different rates of peroxide
decomposition and superoxide production by CcO at submillimolar and
millimolar H2O2 concentrations. The dependence
of the rate of peroxide decomposition on H2O2 concentration conforms to the Michaelis–Menten approximation
below 1 mM H2O2 (Figure A). This dependence suggests that the rate of peroxide decomposition
should approach a limiting value at ∼1 mM H2O2. However, this observation contradicts the observation that
superoxide generation increases linearly with the increase in peroxide
concentration from 2 to 80 mM H2O2. This discrepancy
is an additional fact in favor of the change in the mechanism of peroxide
decomposition by CcO caused by the increased concentration of H2O2.

Secondary Sites of H2O2 Decomposition
A discrepancy between the rates of P and F production and the rates of superoxide
production and peroxide consumption
using the linear sequential model has already been noted., This kinetic mismatch can be reconciled by the presence of the additional
reaction(s) of peroxide with CcO that is not confined to the heme a3–CuB center. These secondary
reactions are indicated by two observations. The first is the generation
of the surface-exposed lipid-based radical (Figure ) that is initiated by the reaction of H2O2 with the catalytic center. Protein-based radicals like thiyl
and tyrosine and hydroxyl radicals were already observed under similar experimental
conditions that we have utilized in this study. Additionally, we have
established the reaction between the protein-bound lipids and the
free peroxide in solution (Figure ). Similar
to radical formation, this reaction is also fueled by the initial
interaction of H2O2 with the catalytic center.
On the basis of these two observations, we suggest that the lipid-based
radicals and possibly protein radicals react with the free peroxide,
leading to the peroxidation of CcO-bound lipids and the promotion
of the oxidative damage of these distant sites of the enzyme.

The proposed radical pathway can explain the degradation of the vast
molar excess of peroxide by a low concentration of the enzyme (Figure ). The surface-exposed radical (R•) can decompose peroxide to water by the self-propagating chain reactionsThis reaction will continue as long as the
active radical is not quenched by a second radical.

The appearance
of radicals on the surface of the enzyme, formation
of which is triggered by the reaction of H2O2 with the heme a3–CuB center, can be explained by two different reactions. The first,
previously suggested,, is the production of R• by the intraprotein electron transfer from surface sites to both
the highly oxidative oxoferryl state and the putative radical (Y•) at or near the catalytic center. The second route
for generation of R• is based on formation of HO• radicals during the P to F conversion (Figure ). If these hydroxyl
radicals can reach the surface of the enzyme, they could react with
the bound lipids as well with some other distant groups.

All
our measurements were performed on the solubilized enzyme in
the presence of 0.1% detergent (dodecyl maltoside). Thus, we can expect
that organic groups, functioning as electron donors, will not come
exclusively from the proteolipid CcO complex. It is likely that R• can additionally be produced from the detergent. Because
the concentration of the detergent is sufficiently high, its oxidation
may sustain the degradation of excess peroxide. Moreover, an additional
contribution to peroxide degradation is suggested by the study of
the peroxidase activity of CcO. As shown previously, CcO exhibits
peroxidase activity with organic compounds usually considered to be
redox inactive. Then it is conceivable
that some product(s) of the oxidatively modified detergent may serve
as the true electron donor for CcO, and this reaction will contribute
to the reduction of H2O2 at the heme a3–CuB center.

Selective Inhibition
of Catalytic Activity
The reactions
of oxidized CcO and H2O2 always result in a
decrease in the catalytic activity of the enzyme (Figure ). The time of incubation and the concentrations
of peroxide employed, which determine the number of cycles at the
heme a3–CuB center,
progressively increase the extent of damage to CcO. This progressive
decline in catalytic activity can be understood by the accumulation
of the damaged sites in CcO (Figure ). Obviously, the multiplication of the modified
amino acid residues, and/or bound phospholipids is
the most plausible reason for the loss of activity.,,

Interestingly, we found that the loss
of the catalytic activity of the peroxide-treated CcO was only associated
with the diminution of the rate of ET from heme a to the catalytic heme a3 center during
the reductive phase of the catalytic cycle (Figure B). There are at least three events that may control ET during
the anaerobic reduction of the heme a3–CuB center in native CcO. The first is an apparent
uptake of two protons, through the K-channel, that coincides with the reduction of the heme a3–CuB center. The second is the release of the native bridging ligand between
oxidized Fea33+ and CuB2+,,− associated
with reduction. The third is a structural change at the catalytic
center demonstrated by the increase in the distance between Fea32+ and CuB+ relative to that in the oxidized state., At
present, there are no structural data or data on proton uptake or
ligand release available for peroxide-treated CcO. However, we can
assume that the reduction of the peroxide-modified enzyme is also
associated with corresponding events that may control the rate of
ET. Consequently, the modification of any of these processes may have
an adverse effect on ET.

One simple explanation for the specific
inhibition of ET between
hemes a and a3 in the
reductive phase of the catalytic cycle is an impairment of the K-channel
produced by peroxide treatment. In this view, ET to the heme a3–CuB center is inhibited
because of the impaired delivery of a proton to the catalytic site
via the modified K-channel., This selective impairment
of the K-channel without modification of the D-channel is consistent
with the kinetics of F to O conversion during
the reaction of fully reduced CcO with O2 (Figure C). The F to O transition
is controlled by the delivery of a proton through the D-channel, and
the absence of any effect of peroxide on this reaction indicates that
this channel is intact.,

This work was
supported by National Institutes of Health Grants GM 084348 (M.F.)
and GM 080575 (G.P.) and FP7 EU Project CELIM 316310.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Drs. R. J. Kulmacz and G. Wu for
access
to and instructions about the use of the oxygen monitor.

Dedication
Dedicated to the memory
of Professor Vladimir Hajko, inspirational mentor and dear colleague.

Abbreviations
CcOcytochrome c oxidase

CcO·CNcytochrome c oxidase with cyanide bound at
the heme a3–CuB center

Feairon
of heme a

Fea3iron of heme a3

CuAdinuclear copper center

CuBcopper at the catalytic site

ETelectron transport

DMn-dodecyl
β-d-maltoside

SODsuperoxide dismutase

NBTnitro blue tetrazolium

HRPhorseradish peroxidase

DEPAdiethylenediaminepentaacetic acid

POBNα-(4-pyridyl-1-oxide)-N-tert-butylnitrone.

