Amyloid-β
(Aβ) peptides
play a fundamental role in Alzheimer’s disease (AD)., They are formed by enzymatic cleavage of the amyloid precursor protein
(APP). Although amyloid fibrils were originally
believed to be the cytotoxic species in AD, the emphasis has shifted toward smaller oligomers,− and a growing body of evidence indicates that intermediate Aβ
oligomers are the toxic species while fibrils appear not to be involved
in cytotoxicity.− Among the family of Aβ peptides, oligomers composed of pyroglutamate
(pE)-modified Aβs appear to be intimately involved in AD,,− as they constitute the most abundant oligomeric species
in the brains of AD patients, but their amount is significantly smaller
in brains of age-matched individuals with normal cognition.,− One of the most abundant species, the AβpE3–42 fragment, is generated by cleavage of the first
two amino acids at the N-terminus of Aβ1–42, leaving a glutamate (E) residue in position 3. The pyroglutamate
(pE) residue is subsequently generated by intramolecular dehydration.,

Self-assembly of Aβ peptides into polymorphic structures
and their binding to lipid membranes are key processes in the pathogenesis
of AD.,− Although the exact molecular
mechanisms of cell dysfunction are insufficiently understood, they
involve the interaction of oligomeric species with the plasma cell
membrane.,,,− Depending on lipid composition,
membranes can promote the conformational changes of Aβs that
lead to the formation of toxic β-sheet structures and serve
as nucleation sites for faster self-assembly. In addition, ganglioside-containing
membranes have been found to play a role in altering the aggregation
pathways of Aβ. On the other hand,
Aβ oligomers can induce permeabilization of the membrane to
unregulated passage of small molecules and ions.,,,, Potential mechanisms of membrane permeabilization
include carpeting, pore formation, and the detergent effect.,− Also, recent solid state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) studies
of Aβ and the islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP) peptides have
shown similarities between the modes of membrane permeabilization
of these amyloid peptides and those of the better studied antimicrobial
peptides (AMPs)., Permeabilization mechanisms appear
not to be mutually exclusive; for instance, pore formation appears
to occur prior to membrane fragmentation. All permeabilization mechanisms ultimately lead to changes in the
cellular ionic concentration, producing a loss of cell homeostasis
and subsequent cell death. These processes have been characterized
for full-length Aβ1–40/42, but similar studies
are missing for the AβpE3–42 fragment.

AβpE3–42 is more hydrophobic than Aβ1–42 because of the loss of negative charges from residues
Asp1 and Glu3 and the formation of the lactam ring in the pE residue.
This increased hydrophobicity affects the kinetics of self-assembly,
as well as the interactions of the peptide with the membrane lipids.
Here, we examine different mechanisms of membrane permeability induced
by AβpE3–42 peptides. We compare the kinetics
of self-assembly for AβpE3–42 and Aβ1–42 and examine the relationship between self-assembly
and membrane binding. We used a mixture of phosphoethanolamine (PE)
and phosphoserine (PS) lipid headgroups because these are dominant
lipid components in the brains of the elderly, and these levels have been found to change in AD brains. We find lower concentrations of AβpE3–42 oligomers adsorbed on membrane surfaces, likely
reflecting the weaker interactions between the more hydrophobic AβpE3–42 peptides and the lipid heads. The faster kinetics
of AβpE3–42 self-assembly leads to larger
dimensions of the adsorbed AβpE3–42 oligomers.
These adsorbed oligomers produced little or no significant damage
to the membrane. Membrane permeabilization to ionic species was observed
as pore activity and can be understood as a result of oligomers inserted
into the membrane.

Materials and Methods
Peptide Handling
Both Aβ1–42 and AβpE3–42, &gt;90% purity as provided by
the manufacturer (Bachem, Torrance, CA), were first dissolved in 1%
ammonium hydroxide until the peptides were completely dissolved. They
were subsequently sonicated for approximately 2 min. The desired amount
of peptide was aliquoted and lyophilized using a lyophilizer (FreeZone
2.5 Plus, Labconco, Kansas City, KS). The aliquots were stored at
−80 °C for a maximum of 3 months until they were used.
For every experiment, aliquoted peptides were taken from −80
°C and hydrated in Tris (pH 7.4) or HEPES (pH 7.0) buffer solutions.
The peptide concentration was measured using the 280 nm UV absorbance
(extinction coefficient: ε = 1490 M–1 cm–1).

Thioflavin-T (ThT) Assays
A stock
solution of 500 μM
ThT in water was prepared, and 2 μL was added to 100 μL
of 10 mM HEPES [20 mM MgCl2 and 150 mM NaCl (pH 7.0)] buffer
in 96-well black-walled plates (Nunc) to make 10 μM ThT solutions.
For peptides, 20 mM NaOH was used to dissolve lyophilized aliquot
peptides and prevent aggregation. After that, the peptide solution
was diluted with HEPES to its final peptide concentration in the plate
well, and the NaOH content was maintained at &lt;10% of the total
volume. ThT fluorescence (450 nm excitation, 490 nm emission) was
monitored every 5 min at 25 °C for the indicated times using
a SPECTRAmax Gemini EM fluorescent plate reader (Molecular Devices,
Sunnyvale, CA). The obtained curves were fit using the sigmoidal curve
in eq ()where t is the time, t1/2 is the time to reach half-maximal ThT fluorescence, F0 is the initial fluorescence intensity, a is the amplitude of the maximal intensity, and k is the rate constant. The lag phase time was calculated
from the fitting parameters obtained above using

Lipid Bilayer Preparation
for Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM)
Experiments
For liposome preparation, 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine (POPE) and 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-l-serine (DOPS) lipids were
used in a 1:1 ratio (both purchased from Avanti Polar Lipids, Alabaster,
AL). Liposomes were prepared by mixing 20 μL of each lipid (5
mg/mL) dissolved in chloroform and allowed to dry overnight in vacuum.
The dried lipid film was hydrated with a peptide solution to facilitate
incorporation of the peptide in the lipid bilayer, resulting in proteoliposome
formation. For imaging, peptide:lipid ratios in the range of 1:10
to 1:2 were used, while the peptide:lipid ratios for force mapping
were 1:10. For the preparation of control liposomes, 200 μL
of 25 mM Tris buffer [300 mM NaCl (pH 7.4)] were used. The resulting
liposome and proteoliposome suspensions were vortexed occasionally
for approximately 1 h for better hydration. The large multilamellar
vesicles formed with this procedure were sonicated for 5 min. These
suspensions were subsequently extruded using 100 nm filters to produce
small unilamellar vesicles. Supported lipid bilayers were formed by
(proteo)liposome rupture and fusion on the mica substrate.− Lipid concentrations of 0.1–1 mg/mL were deposited on freshly
cleaved mica and incubated for ∼10 min on a hot plate above
the lipid transition temperature to facilitate fusion of the ruptured
proteoliposomes on the mica surface. As a last step, samples were
rinsed with buffer to remove unruptured proteoliposomes still in solution.
For incubation of AβpE3–42 on preformed lipid
bilayer experiments, liposomes were allowed to form supported lipid
bilayers on mica. The formation of bilayer patches was verified by
AFM before incubation in peptide solutions. AβpE3–42 was injected in a buffer solution at the final concentration of
20 μM for a given time at room temperature.

AFM Imaging
Topographic images were acquired using
a Multimode atomic force microscope equipped with a Nanoscope V controller
(Bruker, Santa Barbara, CA). Silicon cantilevers with a spring constant
of 48 N/m (NSC11, JPK) were used for imaging in air using tapping
mode. Silicon nitride cantilevers with spring constants of 0.08 N/m
(OMCL-TR400, Olympus) were employed for imaging in fluid using tapping
mode. Resonance frequencies of ∼8 kHz and drive amplitudes
under 100 mV were used. The Nanoscope software was used for analyzing
imaging data. Particle analysis was used to measure the number of
membrane-associated oligomers. Section analysis was used for measuring
widths and heights of membrane-associated oligomers. Oligomer widths
were measured as full widths at half the maximal height (fwhm) in
section profiles, and these values were corrected to take tip widening
effects into account. On the basis of previous models,,, tip widening of the inserted
oligomers was modeled as a spherical tip of radius R in contact with a spherical cap of radius r protruding
a height h above the surface of the lipid bilayer
(eqs  and ).where D is the corrected
oligomer diameter and w = 2x is
the measured width at half-height. Similarly, tip widening of the
adsorbed oligomers was modeled as a spherical tip of radius R in contact with another sphere of radius r located on a surface.where y is the height of
the tip above the surface and w = 2x is the measured width at height y. Because widths
were measured at half the measured oligomer height, we set y equal to r. Origin software (OriginLab
Corp., Northampton, MA) was used to generate histograms and fitting
curves in this section and all others.

AFM Force Mapping
For force mapping experiments, the
atomic force microscope was changed to force volume mode after imaging
an area of interest. Forces of &lt;12 nN and tip velocities of 800
nm/s were used. Force curves were acquired point by point in each
point of a 32 × 32 array (force map). Data processing for force
mapping data was conducted by using a custom-made MATLAB (Natick,
MA) program. Breakthrough forces were measured with this program by
detecting the force discontinuity during a breakthrough event. When
no event was detected, the breakthrough force was set to zero and
no further analysis was performed on that curve. Statistical distributions
of breakthrough forces were fit with Gaussian functions. All experiments
were performed at room temperature. Actual spring constants were measured
using the thermal tune method before the experiments.

Planar Lipid Bilayer Electrical Recording
For electrical
recording experiments with planar lipid bilayers (known as BLM for
black lipid membranes because they appear “black” when
viewed by reflected light),, AβpE3–42 peptides were dissolved in Milli-Q water to a concentration of 1
mg/mL and subsequently used a single time. Membranes were composed
of DOPS/POPE mixtures (1:1 by weight) in heptane at a total lipid
concentration of 20 mg/mL. For membrane formation, lipid was added
directly over a hole (∼250 μm diameter) in a Delrin septum
(Warner Instruments, Delrin perfusion cup, volume of 1 mL). As an
electrolyte, we used 150 mM KCl, 10 mM HEPES (pH 7.4), and 1 mM MgCl2. Before data were acquired, we verified that the bilayer
was stable for several minutes with a low conductance (&lt;10 pS)
across an applied voltage of ±100 mV and that the system capacitance
was &gt;110 pF. When both criteria were met, the peptide solution
was
added to one of the compartments of the bilayer chamber (cis side), reaching a final concentration of ∼10 μM. The
solution was stirred for 5 min before data were acquired. Bilayer
stability was monitored by periodic capacitance measurements. All
traces were recorded in voltage clamp mode using the 2 kHz built-in
filter cutoff of our BC-535 amplifier (Warner Instruments, Hamden,
CT). A sampling frequency of 15 kHz was used for the acquisition of
data. We used a custom-made LabVIEW (National Instruments, Austin,
TX) program to record the current and Clampfit version 10.2 (Molecular
Devices) to analyze traces. For the representation in figures, time
traces were filtered with a digital Gaussian low-pass filter with
a cutoff frequency of 50 Hz.

Results
Kinetics of
AβpE3–42 Self-Assembly in
Solution
The ThT fluorescence was used to compare the kinetics
of fibril self-assembly for Aβ1–42 and AβpE3–42 peptides (Figure ). AβpE3–42 peptides have faster self-assembly kinetics,
indicated by a considerably shorter lag phase and a faster elongation
phase (Figure A). The lag phase for AβpE3–42 becomes visible only at the lower concentrations
(Figure B). Their lag phase times and rate
constants using eqs  and  are as follows: tlag = 1.14 h and k = 0.51 h–1 for the 5 μM solution,
and tlag = 2.01 h and k = 0.31 h–1 for the 2.5 μM solution. From
the fitted curves in Figure A, we obtained
a tlag of 13.51 h and a k of 0.46 h–1 for Aβ1–42. Our results are in good agreement with previous results for Aβ1–40 and AβpE3–40, although those lag phase times are considerably
longer. This is possibly due to the two additional hydrophobic residues
(Ile41 and Ala42) at the C-terminus of the Aβ1–42 and AβpE3–42 peptides.

Self-assembly kinetics
of Aβ1–42 and AβpE3–42 measured by thioflavin-T (ThT) fluorescence at
25 °C. The ThT intensity (I) was monitored as
a function of time (t) for (A) AβpE3–42 (black) and Aβ1–42 (blue) solutions (fitted
curve shown with a solid blue line) with 20 μM concentrations
(a.u., arbitrary units) and (B) 5 μM (dark gray) and 2.5 μM
(light gray) solutions of AβpE3–42. Fitted
curves are shown with black lines. tlag and k were obtained from the fitted curves using
eqs  and .

AFM was used to characterize the morphology of
the self-assembled
species. Only globular and small linear oligomers were seen in the
initial state of the freshly prepared AβpE3–42 and Aβ1–42 oligomers (Figure ). While annular AβpE3–42 protofibrils
were already seen after incubation for 30 min at room temperature
(Figure A), globular Aβ1–42 oligomers were still found even after incubation for 14 h (Figure B). The diameters of AβpE3–42 oligomers changed significantly after 0.5 h, whereas the diameters
of Aβ1–42 oligomers remained approximately
constant after 14 h (Table ). The heights
changed by a factor of ∼2 for both peptides (Table ). As regions with high concentrations of AβpE3–42 fibrils were already seen after 48 h (Figure A), only protofibrils and large quantities of Aβ1–42 oligomers were observed (Figure B). Aβ1–42 fibrils were found only
after incubation for several days. These results correlate well with
the ThT data discussed above (Figure A).

AFM images
of (A) AβpE3–42 and (B) Aβ1–42 aggregated peptides after different periods of
incubation. Images were acquired in air. A 10 μL droplet was
deposited on a mica surface for 5 min, rinsed with ∼ 50 μL
pure water and dried with gentle N2 flow. The vertical
color-coded scale is 10 nm everywhere except for the 48 h images,
where it is 50 nm.

Heights
(h), Widths
(W), and Diameters (D) for the Globular
and Annular Oligomers of Aβ1–42 and AβpE3–42 Shown in Figure  at the Indicated Times (n = 28
for all entries)
 	Aβ1–42 (t = 0)	AβpE3–42 (t = 0)	Aβ1–42 (t = 14 h)	AβpE3–42 (t = 0.5 h)	
h (nm)	1.7 ± 0.7	1.1 ± 0.6	3.9 ± 1.6	2.3 ± 0.9	
W (nm)	18.3 ± 4.4	22.1 ± 6.4	19.0 ± 4.4	136.4 ± 33.8	
D (nm)	7.3 ± 3.1	10.1 ± 5.0	7.7 ± 3.1	136.4 ± 33.8	
The tip widening effect was considered
for D using eq .

Values are presented as averages
± the standard deviation.

The peak–peak distance (not
affected by tip widening) was measured.

Membrane-Adsorbed AβpE3–42 Oligomers
We used AFM to characterize the morphology of Aβ oligomers
adsorbed on anionic membranes and the loss of membrane integrity induced
by these oligomers. We attempted to monitor the adsorption of AβpE3–42 oligomers when they were allowed to interact
with preformed supported lipid bilayers. We did not observe oligomer
adsorption even after incubation for several hours in the AFM liquid
cell. Instead, fibrils were observed on membrane regions after ex situ incubation for 38 h (Figure ). Significantly, membrane patches appeared to be intact without
a substantial number of adsorbed AβpE3–42 oligomers
or apparent defects in the lipid bilayer. These results suggest weak
interactions between AβpE3–42 oligomers and
headgroups in the lipid membrane. In comparison, oligomeric and fibrillar
self-assembled structures of full-length Aβs were found to form
on different supported membranes.−

AFM (A) height and (B) amplitude images of AβpE3–42 fibrils formed on a supported DOPS/POPE (1:1)
lipid membrane after
incubation for 38 h at room temperature. Fibril structures on a seemingly
intact membrane are observed. The vertical color-coded scale is 25
nm for panel A.

To increase the probability
of Aβ peptides interacting with
membrane lipids, lipids were hydrated into liposomes in the presence
of peptides, subsequently sonicated together, and finally extruded
to form unilamellar proteoliposomes. Following this method, large
quantities of AβpE3–42 oligomers adsorbed
on a seemingly flat membrane were seen (Figure A). The adsorbed AβpE3–42 oligomers (green
circles) have typical diameters in the range of 30–40 nm and
heights of 2–10 nm (Figures A and A,C and Table ). In addition,
bilayer deep (∼5 nm) gaps separating regions of seemingly intact
patches are observed. Smaller structures (≤2 nm in height)
are found in these flatter regions, suggesting the presence of membrane-inserted
oligomers. We compared the density and dimensions of adsorbed AβpE3–42 oligomers with those of Aβ1–42 oligomers. The Aβ1–42 oligomers have higher
concentrations (∼200 oligomers/μm) and smaller dimensions
compared to those of the AβpE3–42 oligomers
even though their heights are similar (Figures B and A,C and Table ). In addition, a large surface density of membrane defects with
depths of one bilayer (dark spots) is observed. At lower peptide:lipid
ratios (Figure C), the number of these defects
was no longer significant and most of the observed structures protruded
≤2 nm from the bilayer plane, suggesting a majority of inserted
oligomers.

AFM images of (A) AβpE3–42 oligomers and
membrane defects induced by the oligomers in a DOPS/POPE (1:1) lipid
bilayer and (B) Aβ1–42 oligomers adsorbed
on a lipid bilayer with the same composition described above. (C)
Aβ1–42 oligomers adsorbed on a lipid bilayer
with a lower peptide:lipid ratio. The peptide:lipid mass ratios are
1:2 in panels A and B and 1:10 in panel C.

Diameter and height histograms of inserted and adsorbed oligomers
obtained from AFM images similar to Figure . (A) Diameter (D) histograms for membrane-adsorbed
oligomers of AβpE3–42 (blue) and Aβ1–42 (black). AβpE3–42 oligomers
have a diameter DA(AβpE3–42) of 43.8 ± 7.6 nm, while DA(Aβ1–42) = 21.5 ± 7.6 nm for Aβ1–42 oligomers. (B) Diameter histograms for inserted oligomers. Inserted
AβpE3–42 oligomers (blue) have a diameter DI(AβpE3–42) of 26.0
± 7.1 nm, whereas DI(Aβ1–42) = 13.8 ± 4.8 nm for Aβ1–42 oligomers (black). Diameters were measured as described in the Methods
section. (C) Height (h) histograms for membrane-adsorbed
oligomers of AβpE3–42 (blue) and Aβ1–42 (black). AβpE3–42 oligomers
have a height hA(AβpE3–42) of 5.7 ± 1.5 nm, while hA(Aβ1–42) = 6.2 ± 2.4 nm for Aβ1–42 oligomers. (D) Height histograms for inserted oligomers of AβpE3–42 (blue) and Aβ1–42 (black).
AβpE3–42 oligomers have a height hI(AβpE3–42) of 1.4 ± 0.2
nm, while hI(Aβ1–42) = 1.8 ± 0.4 nm for Aβ1–42 oligomers.
Histograms were fit using a Gaussian function, and D and h values are given as peak center values ±
the half-width at half-maximum of the distribution. A height of 2
nm was chosen as the boundary between inserted and adsorbed species. n = 20 for all histograms, except n = 30
for DI(Aβ1–42)
and hI(Aβ1–42).

Densities (nO) of Membrane-Associated Oligomers (inserted
and adsorbed)
and Measured Widths, Diameters, and Heights of Inserted and Adsorbed
Aβ1–42 and AβpE3–42 Oligomers (WI, DI, hI, WA, DA, and hA, respectively)
peptide	nO (μm–2)	WI (nm)	WA (nm)	DI (nm)	DA (nm)	hI (nm)	hA (nm)	
AβpE3–42	43	38.2 ± 6.9	62.2 ± 12.5	26.0 ± 7.08	43.8 ± 7.6	1.4 ± 0.2	5.7 ± 1.5	
Aβ1–42	195	22.7 ± 6.7	33.5 ± 5.7	13.8 ± 4.77	21.5 ± 7.6	1.8 ± 0.4	6.2 ± 2.4	
nO was measured using
particle analysis for all oligomers in panels
A and B of Figure , while all other values
were measured for individual oligomers; n = 20 everywhere,
except n = 30 for DI(Aβ1–42) and hI(Aβ1–42).

Values
are represented as peak centers
± the half-width at half-maximum from the Gaussian fitting.

Diameters were obtained from
the
measured widths by taking into account eqs – for tip deconvolution.

Membrane-Inserted AβpE3–42 Oligomers
In addition to the adsorbed oligomers discussed
above, we observed
numerous smaller structures protruding &lt;2 nm from the membrane
plane (red circles in Figures A,B). These
structures are attributed to populations of oligomers inserted into
the membrane. Similar to the membrane-adsorbed oligomers, the inserted
Aβ1–42 oligomers have higher concentrations
and smaller dimensions compared to those of the AβpE3–42 oligomers (Figures A,B and B,D and Table ). Most of these oligomers
have a globular appearance (Figure A), although
a smaller subpopulation of pore-forming oligomers was also found (inset).
Their electrophysiological activity is indicated by discrete features
in the ionic current passing through the lipid membrane (Figure B), with pore conductances of &lt;0.7 nS. From these data, the pore diameters can be roughly
approximated (Figure C) using eq :,with r is the pore radius, r0 = G/4σ, G is the
single-pore conductance, σ is the solution conductivity
(∼1.5 S/m for 150 mM KCl), and L is the pore
length (∼6 nm). After longer recording times (∼20 min
following the first activity) and in approximately 50% of our experiments,
an exponential-like phase was observed before the saturation current
of the amplifier was reached.

(A) AFM image
of AβpE3–42 oligomers inserted
into a DOPS/POPE (1:1) membrane. A subpopulation of these oligomers
forms pore structures. (B) Electrical recording data demonstrating
the activity induced by AβpE3–42 pore-forming
oligomers. (C) Pore diameters estimated from eq  for the interval of single-pore conductances measured in our experiments
(0–0.7 nS).

We conducted force measurements
on membrane patches with inserted
AβpE3–42 oligomers. We characterized the mechanical
properties of these membranes by measuring the breakthrough force
seen in indentation curves. These curves show that lipid membranes
are first deformed elastically by the AFM tip (O–FB region in Figure A). At the critical breakthrough
force, marked by a discontinuity in the curve, the membrane undergoes
an irreversible (plastic) deformation. The breakthrough force has
been characterized for different lipid membranes and found to be sensitive
to lipid composition, ionic strength, and temperature.− We measured a value of 1.31 ± 0.22 nN (mean value ± the
half-width at half-maximum) for the breakthrough force of DOPS/POPE
membranes. Insertion of AβpE3–42 oligomers
significantly increased this value by ∼40% (Figure B–D).

AFM force measurements demonstrating the
effect of membrane-inserted
AβpE3–42 oligomers on the mechanical properties
of DOPS/POPE membranes. (A) Indentation curves (only approach is shown)
for DOPS/POPE membranes without (blue) and with (red) inserted AβpE3–42 oligomers displaying the breakthrough forces
(FB) and thicknesses (h) of the membranes. F is the force, and δ
is the tip–sample separation. (B) Histograms of breakthrough
forces show FB1 = 1.31 ± 0.19 nN
for the DOPS/POPE membrane and FB2 = 1.83
± 0.25 nN for a similar membrane with inserted AβpE3–42 oligomers. (C and D). Force maps of the analyzed data for (C) the
DOPS/POPE membrane and (D) the DOPS/POPE membrane with inserted AβpE3–42 oligomers. The outline of the membrane patch
is seen in panel D. An FB value of 0 was
given to curves that did not show breakthrough forces outside the
membrane. These curves were not analyzed further. The peptide:lipid
ratio is 1:10 for all data.

Discussion
Using ThT fluorescence, we have found that
self-assembly of AβpE3–42 oligomers into fibrils
has faster kinetics than
that of Aβ1–42 (Figure ). During the first phase, the lag phase, monomers and small oligomers
nucleate with very slow kinetics into β-structured oligomers
serving as nucleation seeds. In the second phase, these seeds elongate
into amyloid fibrils at a much faster rate as more peptides are incorporated
into the preformed seeds. Hydrophobic interactions and hydrogen bonding
are the driving forces behind the self-assembly processes leading
to amyloid fibril formation. A recent 19F NMR study has reported multiple oligomeric species in the
lag phase, including α-helix and reversible β-sheet oligomers. In addition, it has been reported that Aβ1–40 adopts a compact, partially folded structure, forming
a 310-helix in the H13–D23 central hydrophobic region, and that these helical intermediates are crucial
intermediates in amyloid self-assembly.

Annular protofibrils
with polygonal appearances and diameters of
8–25 nm have been observed by transmission electron microscopy
(TEM) for Aβ1–42 as a product of their aggregation
process. The diameters of the AβpE3–42 annular protofibrils we found (Figure A) are significantly larger, ranging from 80 to
200 nm (Table ). The shapes we observed agree
with the TEM observations for Aβ1–42; thus,
they cannot be attributed to AFM imaging artifacts. Although annular
protofibrils have been reported for many different amyloids,,,, their structures, interrelationships, and contributions to disease
pathogenesis are not entirely clear.

We have considered mechanisms of membrane permeability and loss
of membrane structural integrity induced by AβpE3–42 oligomers (i) adsorbed on the membrane and (ii) inserted into the
membrane. We observed a higher surface density of adsorbed AβpE3–42 oligomers when they were allowed to interact
with lipids during lipid hydration and lipid self-assembly into liposomes
(method 1) than when the oligomers were injected on preformed supported
bilayers (method 2). This observation suggests that the former oligomers
have a different, more favorable membrane-binding conformation than
the latter. The additional energy necessary for oligomers to acquire
this conformation might be provided during the sonication step in
method 1. The higher fluidity of the liposome membrane might also
facilitate rearrangement of the peptide in method 1, compared to the
surface-supported membrane of method 2.

We found significantly
larger dimensions and lower densities for
membrane-adsorbed and membrane-inserted AβpE3–42 oligomers than for Aβ1–42 oligomers (Figures  and  and Table ). The larger size of AβpE3–42 oligomers is attributed to their faster kinetics of self-assembly
(Figures  and ). The
higher density of Aβ1–42 oligomers appears
to be counterintuitive because of the repulsion expected between the
negatively charged Asp1 and Glu3 residues of Aβ1–42, with the also negatively charged PS headgroups in the membrane.
However, this higher density of Aβ1–42 oligomers
is understandable if we hypothesize that PE-reach domains are induced
by Aβ1–42 oligomers due to attractive charge–dipole
interactions between the negatively charged residues and the zwitterionic
PE headgroups (Figure ), thus leading to formation
of PE-rich proteoliposomes during lipid hydration in our proteoliposome
preparation protocol (method 1). In addition, the larger size of AβpE3–42 oligomers would increase the barrier for membrane
insertion leading to lower densities of inserted AβpE3–42 oligomers. However, once the peptide is inserted, the stronger interactions
of the more hydrophobic AβpE3–42 with the
lipid tails would lead to a more stable conformation in the hydrophobic
lipid core.

Schematics of supported membrane (SM) formation via proteoliposome
(PL) rupture and fusion. (A) Aβ1–42 proteoliposomes
having a very high concentration of membrane-inserted oligomers are
not able to form supported membranes by fusion of ruptured proteoliposomes.
(B) AβpE3–42 proteoliposomes have lower concentrations
of inserted oligomers, thus being able to form supported membranes.
The dimensions of the inserted and adsorbed AβpE3–42 oligomers are larger because of faster aggregation kinetics. Attractive
interactions between Aβ1–42 and PE headgroups
induce PE-rich proteoliposomes.

We interpret the high level of fragmentation of supported
membranes
formed from Aβ1–42 proteoliposomes (Figure B) to be due to insufficient vesicle fusion induced
by the high concentration and steric repulsion of membrane-inserted
Aβ1–42 oligomers (Figure ). The larger dimensions of inserted and adsorbed AβpE3–42 oligomers (Figure  and
Table ) are attributed to their faster kinetics
of self-assembly (Figures  and  and Table ). We believe that even
relatively low concentrations of AβpE3–42 oligomers
can produce high cytotoxicity because of higher level of pore formation
and higher stability in the membrane. Our BLM results indicating a
larger populations of high-conductance AβpE3–42 pores as well as our molecular dynamics (MD) simulations indicating
a more stable membrane conformation of inserted AβpE3–42 pore structures lead to a similar conclusion.

Among the populations of membrane-inserted oligomers,
pore structures
are observed less frequently than globular structures, suggesting
that the former structures represent a minority population in the
membrane. This is partly due to experimental difficulties in achieving
a sufficiently high resolution by AFM, including the inability of
broad tips to resolve pore features and the potential distortion of
pore structures induced by tip–sample interactions. It should
be noted, however, that even small pore populations have the ability
to produce high cytotoxicity. It was estimated that a single pore
with a 4 nS conductance would produce a loss of cell homeostasis in
seconds., A group of pores with the conductances observed
in our data (≤0.7 nS) would lead to a similar result.

Because of the different sensitivities between AFM imaging and
BLM, higher pore concentrations are required for AFM imaging. For
BLM, the opening of a single pore can produce a detectable increase
in the current across the bilayer. As bilayer areas have typical dimensions
of ∼104 μm2, pore densities of
∼10–4 pores/μm2 can be detected
by BLM. However, pore densities of ∼102–103 pores/μm2 are necessary for optimal AFM
imaging (1–10 pores for 100 nm × 100 nm imaging areas).
Therefore, BLM provides information about early stages of pore formation
when pore densities are low, while AFM gives information about later
stages when the concentration of membrane-inserted oligomers is higher.

The pore diameters found using eq  (Figure C) are in general smaller than those predicted in
MD simulations and seen by AFM imaging (Table ). The relation in eq  assumes a cylindrical
geometry with no charge along the length of the pore, while Aβ
pores have a charged surface and a nonuniform geometry. As a result,
the relation provides only a very rough estimate of pore diameter
that is used as a “ballpark” figure. With this in mind,
the calculated diameters compare reasonably well with the inner diameters
of Aβ pores found using MD simulations and AFM imaging (∼1.5–2.5
nm). The structures of these membrane-embedded pores have been well
characterized by AFM for full-length Aβs,,, Aβ1–42 point substitutions, Aβ fragments,, and other amyloidogenic proteins., Here, they
were not investigated in detail. The pore diameters for 18-mers of
AβpE3–42 found using atomistic MD simulations
were 1.9 and 2.2 nm for two different Aβ conformers.

Comparison of Pore
Diameters for AβpE3–42, Aβ1–42, and Aβ17–42 Obtained from eq , MD Simulations, and AFM
peptide	pore diameter (nm)	method	
any	0.7–2.1	eq  for 100–700 pS	
AβpE3–42	∼2.2 (18-mer, conformer 1)	MD	
 	∼1.9 (18-mer, conformer 2)	 	
Aβ1–40	∼1.0–2.0	AFM	
Aβ1–42	∼1.9 (18-mer, conformer 1, d-isomer)	MD,,	
 	∼2.1 (18-mer, conformer 2, d-isomer)	 	
 	∼1.8–2.2 (18-mer, conformer 1, l-isomer)	 	
 	∼1.9–2.2 (18-mer, conformer 2, l-isomer)	 	
Aβ17–42	∼1.0–2.0	AFM	
 	∼1.7 (16-mer channel)	MD	
 	∼0.8, ∼1.9, ∼2.5–2.7 (12-, 20-, and 24-mer channels)	MD,	
 	∼1.8, ∼1.5,
∼2.2 (12-, 16-, and 20-mer barrels)	MD	
We measured a 40% increase in the breakthrough
force of membranes
allowed to interact with AβpE3–42 oligomers
using method 1 of sample preparation. For these experiments, we used
a 1:10 peptide:lipid ratio. At this ratio, we observed a sizable population
of inserted AβpE3–42 oligomers (Figure ), but not many adsorbed oligomers. In the presence
of the latter population, the mechanical response measured by the
tip likely would have been dominated by the adsorbed oligomers directly
under the tip, not by their influence on the mechanical properties
of the membrane. Therefore, our results indicate that the population
of inserted oligomers induces a significant modification of the mechanical
properties of the membrane.

The higher breakthrough force measured
for membranes with inserted
AβpE3–42 oligomers would suggest (i) the presence
of local populations of rigid β-sheet oligomers, leading to
increased local stiffness, or (ii) an increased global ordering of
the membrane lipids induced by the AβpE3–42 oligomers, thus leading to a global increase in the stiffness of
the membrane, similar to the modulation of membrane stiffness induced
by cholesterol molecules.− From our measurements, we cannot discriminate which mechanism is
predominant. Both stiffer and more flexible membranes could lead to
higher membrane permeability, although by different mechanisms. A
membrane hole would likely heal slower for stiffer membranes, thus
enhancing permeability, and a more flexible hole would decrease the
membrane thickness, also leading to increased permeability. Previous
results found the breakthrough force of POPC/POPS membranes to increase
when they were allowed to interact with Aβ1–40 oligomers and to be dependent on the aggregation state of the peptide. Significantly, Aβ1–42 oligomers induced a decrease in the breakthrough force of supported
membranes. Some variability in the results
is not surprising, as the free energy landscape of Aβs has been
found to be highly dependent on the exact experimental conditions.,,

Conclusions
We
have examined the effect of AβpE3–42 oligomers
on the ion permeability and the structural and mechanical
properties of anionic lipid membranes. We have found lower concentrations
and larger dimensions for the adsorbed and membrane-inserted AβpE3–42 oligomers compared to those of Aβ1–42. The larger sizes of AβpE3–42 oligomers
are attributed to their faster kinetics of self-assembly. The lower
concentrations are attributed to their weaker interactions with the
membrane lipids. However, once inserted into the membrane, these larger
AβpE3–42 oligomers induce considerable ion
permeability through the membrane and are stable in the lipid core
of the membrane because of their increased hydrophobicity. The adsorbed
AβpE3–42 oligomers appeared to have little
effect on the structural integrity of the membrane. Membrane permeabilization
can be understood more easily as a result of the membrane oligomers.
These oligomers also produced a change in the mechanical properties
of the membrane, suggesting a reordering of membrane structure.

Support by the
National Institutes of Health (R01AG028709) is acknowledged. A.L.G.
was supported in part by National Institutes of Health Neuroplasticity
of Aging Training Grant T32 AG 000216 and the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute Med Into Grad Initiative. This project has been funded in
whole or in part with Federal funds from the Frederick National Laboratory
for Cancer Research, National Institutes of Health (NIH), under Contract
HHSN261200800001E. This research was supported, in part, by the Intramural
Research Program of the NIH, Frederick National Lab, Center for Cancer
Research.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We are deeply thankful to Prof. Ratnesh
Lal for his insight
and support for this work. All simulations had been performed using
the high-performance computational facilities of the Biowulf PC/Linux
cluster at the National Institutes of Health (Bethesda, MD).

