Aldehyde
decarbonylases (ADs) have attracted interest
in the search for
sustainable, drop-in biofuels because of their ability to produce
long-chain alkanes., Few biosynthetic pathways to hydrocarbons
have been identified, although they are produced by a wide range of
organisms, including plants, insects, and microbes, and serve a variety
of important biological roles.− Long-chain alkane biosynthesis utilizes fatty acids
in the form of fatty-acyl-CoA esters as precursors. These are converted to alkanes in a two-step process. First,
a fatty-acyl-CoA reductase reduces the fatty-acyl-CoA ester to a long-chain
fatty aldehyde. Second, in a chemically
difficult reaction, AD cleaves the bond between the aldehyde carbon
and the α-carbon to produce the corresponding n-1 alkane and an aldehyde carbon (C1) coproduct.

Three mechanistically distinct types of
ADs have been identified.
These produce different C1 coproducts and in each case
perform chemistry that is highly unusual for their respective enzyme
families. The plant and algal ADs are
integral membrane metalloenzymes that belong to the fatty acid hydroxylase
superfamily. These enzymes convert the aldehyde carbon to carbon monoxide.,, Insect AD is a membrane-bound
cytochrome p450 enzyme that oxidizes C1 to carbon dioxide.− The recently identified cyanobacterial AD is the most widely studied
enzyme because, unlike the insect or plant ADs, it is a small, stable,
soluble protein.− In this case, C1 is released as formate in a reaction
that requires oxygen and reducing equivalents; it is now generally
termed cyanobacterial aldehyde deformylating oxygenase (cADO).

cADO is a member of the non-heme diiron oxygenase family of enzymes.
Typical enzymes of this class, as exemplified by methane monooxygenase,
employ molecular oxygen and two reducing equivalents to oxidize their
substrates through hydroxylation. However,
cADO is unique in requiring four reducing equivalents per turnover,
fully reducing one oxygen atom to water and resulting in an oxygenated
C1 coproduct. The kinetics
of alkane formation by cADO are notable for their sluggishness, and
despite various attempts to optimize the reaction conditions, in no
cases have steady state turnover numbers faster than ∼1 min–1 been obtained.,, Over the past few years, investigations of cADO have elucidated
several key steps in the mechanism; however, it remains unclear which
step(s) in the mechanism is rate-limiting.

In the mechanism shown in Figure ,
an initial
two-electron reduction of the resting diferric state to the active
diferrous state (species I) initiates the reaction between
cADO and molecular oxygen., This forms an intermediate
peroxo-bridged diiron core (species II). Next, nucleophilic
addition to the aldehyde substrate results in the formation of a peroxy-hemiacetal
intermediate (species III). Addition of an electron results in the breakdown of this intermediate,
possibly through the formation of a transient formyl radical (species IV) that undergoes homolytic cleavage of the C1–C2 aldehyde bond, resulting in the formation of
a primary alkyl radical and formate (species V). Finally, the alkyl radical is reduced to an
alkane by electron–proton transfer (EPT), and the products
are released from the enzyme (species VI).

Proposed mechanism
for deformylation of aldehydes by cADO. The
color coding indicates the origin of the oxygen atoms and the protons
in the products.

Experimental evidence
supporting this mechanism comes from labeling
studies indicating that the aldehyde proton is retained in formate
whereas the alkane proton is derived from the solvent or an exchangeable
site on the enzyme,, and that one atom of O2 is retained in formate., Recent spectroscopic
evidence supports the formation of a peroxy-hemiacetal intermediate
(species III) and its breakdown upon addition of the exogenous reductant. Recently, our laboratory has used both cyclopropyl
and oxiranyl aldehydes designed to function as radical clocks to support
a radical mechanism for C–C bond scission. From these experiments,
the lifetime of the alkyl radical was estimated to be in the range
of 10–100 μs, implying that the EPT step occurs relatively
fast (k ∼ 104–105 s–1)., This suggests the electron
is transferred directly from a site on the protein rather than from
the external reducing system, with the diiron center being the most
likely source of electrons. However, the proton donor in the reaction
remains unclear.

To investigate further the nature of the protonation
step, we have
undertaken solvent isotope effect (SIE) studies, which we report here.
SIEs are informative in identifying proton donors in enzymatic reactions
if the donating group has an unusual fractionation factor and may
also inform on the nature of the rate-determining step.

Materials and
Methods
Materials
Recombinant cADO from Prochlorococcus
marinus MIT9313 was purified from Escherichia coli, loaded with FeII by anaerobic incubation with ferrous
ammonium sulfate, and subsequently desalted as previously described. Spin desalting columns were from Thermo Scientific.
Octadecanal, heptanal, heptadecane, hexane, phenazine methosulfate,
ferrous ammonium sulfate, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH),
and deuterium oxide were obtained from Acros Organics. Potassium chloride
and 2-[4-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazin-1-yl]ethanesulfonic acid (HEPES)
salts were from Fisher Chemicals.

Preparation of Deuterated
Buffers
HEPES buffer was
dissolved in 99.8% D2O and lyophilized, twice, to produce
deuterated HEPES (D-HEPES). Deuterated cADO assay buffer was prepared
in 99.8% D2O with 100 mM D-HEPES (pD 6.8) and 100 mM KCl.
Proteated and deuterated buffers were purged with nitrogen for 2 h
before being transferred to an anaerobic chamber (Coy Laboratory Products
Inc., Grass Lake, MI), where they were allowed to equilibrate for
at least 0.5 h before being used. Mixed D2O/H2O buffers were prepared at various mole fractions by combining deuterated
and proteated buffers at the desired ratios, and differences in molar
volumes between H2O and D2O were accounted for
using values of 18.126 and 18.058 mL/mol, respectively. The mole fraction of D2O in each
assay was recalculated to account for the isotopic purity of the D2O and the addition of enzyme from the stock solution in proteated
buffer. The buffers were brought to pL 6.8 using the equation pL =
pHobs + 0.311x + 0.0766x2, where x is the mole fraction of deuterium.

Enzyme Assays
All assays were prepared
under microaerobic
conditions in an anaerobic chamber under an atmosphere of 3% hydrogen
and 97% nitrogen, at &lt;20 ppm O2. Standard assay conditions
include 10 μM FeII-loaded cADO, 100 μM PMS,
1 mM NADH, and 300 μM substrate with a total assay volume of
500 μL in either 100 mM HEPES or D-HEPES buffer containing 100
mM KCl. All assays were initiated by the addition of substrate, removed
from the chamber, and shaken at 37 °C.

We note that removing
the tubes from the chamber allows the slow diffusion of O2 into the sealed tubes so that the concentration of oxygen is certainly
significantly higher than 20 ppm (equivalent to ∼26 nM dissolved
O2). However, as the enzyme turns over very slowly, the
low O2 concentration does not appear to limit the overall
rate of reaction and minimizes side reactions that deplete the auxiliary
reducing system, the products of which appear to inhibit the enzyme.

Assays containing octadecanal were performed in triplicate in 2
mL Eppendorf tubes for varying lengths of time. Octadecanal stock
solutions were made up in DMSO and dissolved at 70 °C; the final
concentration of DMSO in the assay was 2%. Assays were quenched with
500 μL of ethyl acetate, vortexed, and centrifuged to extract
the heptadecane product to the organic layer, which was then combined
with a tridecane internal standard for gas chromatography–mass
spectrometry (GC–MS) analysis.

Assays containing heptanal
were performed like those described
above except that 1.5 mL gastight vials were substituted for Eppendorf
tubes. At the end of the reaction period, the vials were shaken vigorously
for 3 min to volatilize the hexane product. A gastight syringe was
used to extract 250 μL of headspace, which was analyzed by GC–MS
to quantify the total ion counts of labeled and unlabeled hexane produced.

Quantification of Hydrocarbon Products by GC–MS
Quantification
of hydrocarbon products was performed using a Shimadzu
QP-2010 GC–MS system equipped with a DB-5 column (30 m ×
0.25 mm × 0.25 μm). During heptadecane quantification,
the flow rate of the helium carrier gas was 1.0 mL/min with an injection
temperature of 200 °C. Eight microliters of sample was injected
in splitless mode. The initial temperature was held at 70 °C
for 2 min, increased to 320 °C at a rate of 20 °C/min, and
then maintained at 320 °C for 2 min. The interface temperature
for MS was 250 °C, and the solvent cut time was 4.5 min. Heptadecane
eluted between 8.9 and 9.1 min, and the concentration was determined
using a calibration curve of heptadecane standards prepared in ethyl
acetate.

For hexane quantification, the flow rate of the helium
carrier gas was 4.0 mL/min with an injection temperature of 200.0
°C; 250 μL aliquots of gas were manually injected in splitless
mode. The initial temperature was held at 70.0 °C for 2 min,
increased to 275 °C at a rate of 20.0 °C/min, and then maintained
at 275 °C for 1.75 min. The interface temperature for MS was
250 °C, and the solvent cut time was 4 min. Hexane eluted between
1.73 and 1.98 min. Total ion counts for 86 and 87 amu, corresponding
to the molecular ion peaks for proteated and deuterated hexane, respectively,
were generated for each sample and corrected for instrument background
as well as natural 13C isotope abundance. Chromatographic
data were analyzed by Shimadzu GC–MS solution software.

Results
and Discussion
The crystal structures of wild-type cADO and
two mutant forms have
been determined with aliphatic carboxylic acids bound to the diiron
center. The carboxylic acid side chain
occupies a hydrophobic channel leading from the metal center and likely
closely mimics the binding of the aldehyde substrate. Close inspection
of the structure of cADO with stearate bound reveals a network of
hydrogen bonding residues and water molecules that leads from the
exterior of the enzyme to the active site. This suggests a potential
route by which the solvent-derived proton transferred to the alkane
gains access to the active site. As shown in Figure , there are four potential proton-donating groups within 5
Å of the α-carbon of stearate (corresponding to the carbon
atom that would be the site of protonation in the reaction). These
are the side chains of Gln123 and Tyr135, an iron-bound water, and
a water molecule hydrogen-bonded to Gln123. We considered that SIE
measurements might provide insight into the identity of the proton
donor and/or the kinetic significance of the proton transfer step.

Crystal
structure of cADO with stearate (purple) bound (Protein
Data Bank entry 2OC5). Possible proton donors within ∼5 Å of Cα in the active site are Gln123 and Tyr135 (yellow) and the two water
molecules (red spheres). The diiron core is colored orange.

Various assay conditions have
been reported in mechanistic investigations
of cADO.,,,, Although the enzyme
requires oxygen, in air-saturated buffer we have found that only 1–2
equivalents of product are formed, relatively rapidly, before the
reaction nearly ceases. This is because the auxiliary reducing system
necessary to supply the electrons needed in the reaction also efficiently
reacts with oxygen. This side reaction depletes the reducing system
and produces H2O2 as a byproduct that has been
shown to inhibit cADO. However, at low
oxygen concentrations that have been termed microaerobic conditions,
we have consistently found that the enzyme achieves multiple turnovers
with the reaction rate remaining linear for several hours. For steady
state kinetic measurements, it is, of course, necessary to take measurements
over multiple turnovers, and therefore, we employed microaerobic conditions,
as described in , for
these experiments.

Dependence of Rate on pL
SIEs can
be a function of
pL (L = H or D) because of kinetically significant ionizations of
protic positions in the enzyme or substrate. Therefore, we initially investigated the rate of reaction as a function
of pL in H2O and D2O, both to determine the
optimal pL for SIE measurements and to examine whether any isotope-dependent
shift in activity was observed. cADO was assayed in proteated and
deuterated buffers at various pL values between 6.0 and 8.4 using
octadecanal as the substrate. Plots of reaction rate as a function
of pL are shown in Figure . At pL &lt;6.0,
cADO activity was too low to reliably measure. Activity increased
to a maximum near pL 7.0 in either proteated or deuterated buffers,
before diminishing slightly at higher pL. The activity of the enzyme
appears to be slightly lower in deuterated buffer, but given the experimental
errors associated with these measurements, we do not consider the
differences significant. The plots provide no evidence of a kinetically
significant ionization occurring during the reaction.

pL–rate profiles
for cADO in H2O (empty red circles)
and D2O (filled blue circles).

Solvent Isotope Effect on the Transfer of Deuterium to Product
On the basis of the pL–rate profile, solvent isotope effect
measurements were taken at pL 6.8, where enzyme activity was found
to be near maximal in both H2O and D2O. At this
pL, the nonenzymatic exchange of deuterium from the solvent at the
α-carbon of the aldehyde was sufficiently slow that it did not
interfere with the experiment. At pL 6.8, measurements of the rates
of heptadecane formation in H2O and D2O allowed
the SIE on Vmax for cADO reacting with
octadecanal as a substrate to be calculated as 1.0 ± 0.2. This
result is consistent with the pL-dependent activity of the enzyme
discussed above.

This observation indicates that proton transfer
is not a kinetically significant step in the reaction. Taken together
with other experimental data, the absence of a solvent isotope effect
on Vmax suggests that all of the chemical
steps are relatively fast compared to the steady state rate of turnover.
Although spectroscopic studies of the formation of the differic-peroxide
intermediate(s) appear to be complicated by multiple reactant states
arising from the order of binding of aldehyde and O2, the
rate constants for the formation of the activated oxygen species (II or III in Figure )
have been measured as 0.75 and 0.2 s–1 depending
on which substrate binds first. Subsequent
reaction of species III with reduced OMePMS,
with concomitant formation of formate (species V), was
reported to occur in &lt;1 s. Previous studies performed using an
α-oxiranyl aldehyde as a radical clock indicated the rate at
which species V was converted to VI was
fast (∼104 to ∼105 s–1). These observations are in accord
with chemical logic, in that species IV and V involve the formation of highly reactive radical species that would
be expected to have very short lifetimes.

The preceding discussion
points to a nonchemical step being rate-determining
during turnover. We have discussed possible reasons for very slow
turnover of substrates by cADO previously, which we briefly summarize here. These include the insoluble nature
of both the substrates and products, which may limit both diffusion
of the substrate into the active site and release of the product alkane
from the highly hydrophobic substrate-binding channel of cADO. As
noted above, the inhibition of cADO by hydrogen peroxide, which arises
from the uncoupled reaction of the reducing systems employed to assay
the enzyme with O2, may also slow the reaction. The transfer of reducing equivalents from the
auxiliary reducing system, e.g., PMS or ferredoxin, to cADO during
the catalytic cycle could also be rate-limiting during the reaction.
In this respect, it should be noted that the physiological electron
donor to cADO has yet to be identified, nor is the reason that some
cyanobacteria produce alkanes understood. It is possible that the
cADO may require other proteins to activate it, similar to the plant decarbonylase, or that the deformylating
activity could be a side reaction and that the enzyme catalyzes an
oxidative reaction on an as yet undiscovered substrate.

Fractionation
Factor for the Transfer of Deuterium to Product
Solvent fractionation
factors (Φ) have the potential to discriminate
between different proton donors in enzymatic reactions. Therefore, we sought to generate a proton inventory
for the cADO reaction that would allow Φ to be determined. If
the proton donor was a free water molecule, Φ would be predicted
to be near unity. If Tyr135 or Gln123
were the proton donor, Φ would be predicted to be greater than
one based on Φ for phenol and R-NL2 (Φ = 1.13
for each). However, a water molecule
bound to a Lewis acidic group, such as a metal ion, will behave more
like a free hydroxyl group (Φ = 0.43) and will have a characteristically
inverse Φ.−

Typically, proton inventories are calculated using the rate
ratio of reactions in mixed isotopic versus pure protic solvents plotted
against the mole fraction of deuterium (χ) in the mixed solvent. In this case, the velocity of the reaction is
independent of the isotopic composition of the solvent; therefore,
we determined Φ by performing an internal competition experiment
in mixed isotopic solvents. We note that in this experimental design
the observed fractionation factor (Φobs) is related
to the observed solvent isotope effect (D2OSIEobs) on V/K by the relationship
Φobs = 1/D2OSIEobs.

The ratio of protium to deuterium in the alkane product was
determined
as a function of χ using GC–MS. To obtain the requisite
degree of precision in measuring the mass ratios of the product molecular
ion peak, heptanal was used as a substrate for these experiments.
Measurements with octadecanal proved to be unreliable because of the
low abundance of the molecular ion peak. The ratios of unlabeled to
deuterated hexane were determined at every tenth χ D2O (average of five determinations per point) and were used to plot
the data shown in Figure . The observed solvent
isotope effect (D2OSIEobs) on the
reaction was calculated by fitting the data to eq :

Proton inventory for cADO. The mole fraction of D2O
in the solvent is plotted against the ratio of proteated to deuterated
product alkane. The solid line represents the best fit to eq  where R2 = 0.998. Error
bars are contained within the points. The inset represents a fit to
the linearized form of eq  (R2 = 0.999).

From the data, a D2OSIEobs value
of 2.19 ± 0.02 was calculated. Equation  assumes that D2OSIEobs does not
vary as a function of χ, i.e., that only a single proton is
involved in the transition state. The excellent fit of the data to
eq  (R2 = 0.998)
indicates that this is indeed the case, and fits of the data to the
linearized form of eq  give a straight line
(Figure , inset).

Interpretation of Φobs
Isotope effect
measurements seldom allow unambiguous mechanistic interpretations
to be made; here we consider two interpretations that are consistent
with our data. More likely, D2OSIEobs represents a reactant state equilibrium SIE arising from a protic
site that is characterized by an inverse fractionation factor, Φobs. In this interpretation, the distribution of isotope is
established at the proton-donating group prior to the start of the
catalytic cycle. Because the chemical steps in the reaction are irreversible,
the enzyme is forced to take whichever isotope is present at the active
site, and thus, the distribution of isotopes in the product alkane
reflects the equilibrium distribution of isotopes at the proton-donating
group prior to the reaction, i.e., Φobs. In this
case, Φobs = 1/D2OSIEobs = 0.457 ± 0.004.

We are not aware of any experimentally
determined fractionation factors for Fe-dependent enzymes. However,
fractionation factors have been measured for two isoforms of carbonic
anhydrase with CoII bound, for which the M-OL2 species has a Φ in the range of 0.81–0.9 and the M-OL– species has a Φ in the range of 0.72–0.77.,, These agree quite well with the
fractionation factor for Co(H2O)62+ in solution (Φ = 0.70), and it is generally assumed that other
divalent metals such as Zn and FeII have a Φ of ∼0.7., We note that Φ is calculated on a per-bond basis and is multiplicative.
It is therefore diagnostic for the number of a metal-bound water molecules;
for one water molecule, Φobs = Φ2 ∼ 0.49.

The low value of Φobs for
cADO is consistent with
an iron-bound water molecule being the proton donor in the reaction,
as the experimentally determined Φobs of 0.457 is
in good agreement with the predicted value of Φ2 (0.49). This value is similar to that determined for
another non-heme iron enzyme factor inhibiting hypoxia inducible factor-1α. For this enzyme, fractionation factors were
measured on kcat (Φobs = 0.51) and kcat/KM (Φobs = 0.40) that were associated with
a kinetically significant dissociation of an FeII-bound
water molecule prior to O2 binding. Thus, we conclude that
the observed SIE may reasonably be interpreted as arising from a reactant
state EIE due to the equilibration of H2O and D2O at the diiron core that leads to enrichment of H2O at
the metal site.

An alternative explanation is that D2OSIEobs arises from a kinetic competition
between two equivalent
proton donors at the active site. This can give rise to isotopic discrimination
even if the preceding steps in the reaction are irreversible and in
favorable cases can allow intrinsic kinetic isotope effects to be
determined even when proton transfer is not rate-determining., This would also be consistent with an iron-bound water molecule
as the proton donor, as opposed to the active site tyrosine residue.
However, in this case, the interpretation of the isotope effect would
be complicated because of the expected additional discrimination against
deuterium arising from the inverse fractionation factor. It is, however,
unclear whether the two protons on a water molecule in the active
site would behave as chemically equivalent given the strong propensity
of the protons to form hydrogen bonds with polar groups at the active
site. Therefore, although these findings are consistent with our experimental
data, we consider this the less likely explanation, and we are not
aware of a precedent in which SIEs have been demonstrated to arise
by such a mechanism.

Mechanistic Implications
Interpreting
the low Φobs value as arising from the donation of
a proton by an iron-bound
water molecule raises a question of whether the metal is in the ferric
or ferrous oxidation state. Mechanistic considerations make it more
likely that the proton donor is an FeII-OH2 species
rather than an FeIII-OH2 species. The pKa values of FeIII-OH2 species
are much lower than those of FeII-OH2 species
[cf. Fe3+-(OH2)6 (pKa = 2.2) and Fe2+-(OH2)6 (pKa = 9.5)] so that at neutral pH FeIII-OH– would predominate at the active site
of cADO. Also, donation of a proton from
FeIII-OH– would result in the formation
of a terminal iron oxide species or would require the concerted transfer
of a second proton from another site, which is not supported by the
proton inventory.

In contrast, proton transfer coupled with
electron transfer from FeII-OH2 through a multiple-site
electron–proton transfer (MS-EPT) reaction appears to be quite
plausible (Figure A). In this case, an electron would be transferred to the alkyl radical
from the metal and the proton transferred from the metal-bound water
in a concerted manner. Here, oxidation of FeII to FeIII facilitates proton transfer due to the increased Lewis
acidity of the metal. Previous studies using an α-oxiranyl aldehyde
as a radical clock provide evidence that the intermediate alkyl radical
is reduced extremely rapidly, consistent with direct electron transfer
from FeII, as opposed to long-range electron transfer from
an external reductant.

Two potential mechanisms
for multiple-site electron–proton
transfer (MS-EPT) from an Fe2+-OH2 species.
(A) Single-electron reduction of the diferric core after deformylation
resulting in a mixed valent FeIII/II species. (B) Two-electron
reduction of the diferric core prior to deformylation resulting in
a divalent FeII/II species that undergoes subsequent chemical
steps.

The mechanism discussed above
implies the formation of a mixed
valent FeII/FeIII metal center during the reaction,
prior to reduction of the alkyl radical. We note that the previous
step in the mechanism requires an electron to facilitate C–C
bond cleavage and that this electron could also be transferred from
iron. It is therefore an interesting question of whether these steps
occur sequentially through mixed valent metal species or whether,
prior to C–C bond cleavage, complete reduction of cADO to the
diferrous enzyme occurs, as shown in Figure B. These mechanisms may be hard to distinguish experimentally given
the short lifetimes of the reactive intermediates involved, but the
attractive feature of forming a diferrous intermediate is that the
enzyme is primed to complete the deformylation reaction without the
need to shuttle further electrons into the active site.

Lastly,
we note that a rather different mechanism for cADO has
been proposed on the basis of the observation of low levels of hydroxylated
products when cADO is reacted with medium chain-length aldehydes such
as decanal and nonanal. The mechanism
involves the formation of a transient FeIV superoxo species
that subsequently acts to hydroxylate the product alkane and does
not require additional electrons to be introduced during the reaction.
Whereas we regard this mechanism as less likely to be operating, at
least with octadecanal and heptanal, the substrates we commonly use
to assay cADO, the experiments described here do not rule out such
a mechanism.

In conclusion, the solvent isotope effect measurements
we have
described provide information about the likely donor of the proton
to the product alkane. The absence of any kinetic solvent isotope
effect on the reaction, taken together with other experimental observations,
points to a nonchemical step as likely being rate-determining in the
reaction. With the caveat that intramolecular competition between
two active site proton donors cannot be rigorously excluded, the D2OSIEobs measured in these studies most
likely arises from a highly inverse reactant state fractionation factor
associated with the active site group that donates the proton to the
product alkane. The low Φobs value is characteristic
of the pre-equilibrium binding of H2O to an iron center,
pointing to an iron-bound water molecule as the likely proton donor.

This research
was supported in part by National Science Foundation Grants CHE 1152055
and CBET 1336636, National Institutes of Health Grant GM 093088, and
European Union Grant FP-7 256808.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank
the reviewers of the manuscript for their suggestions
about the interpretation of the solvent isotope effects reported here.

Abbreviations
ADaldehyde decarbonylase

cADOcyanobacterial aldehyde
deformylation oxygenase

SIEsolvent isotope effect

EPTelectron–proton transfer

MS-EPTmultiple-site electron–proton
transfer

PMSphenazine
methosulfate

Φfractionation factor.

