Biological
energy conversion
faces an engineering problem of joining the one- and two-electron
stoichiometry of redox reactions between substrates and cofactors.
Most catalytic sites accomplish this by supporting two sequential
one-electron transfers toward a single cofactor chain involving a
stable intermediate radical., The catalytic Qo site of cytochrome bc1 (respiratory
complex III) is different and unique in that it changes the electronic
stoichiometry by steering two electrons from ubiquinol (QH2) to two separate chains of cofactors: it delivers one electron to
the Rieske cluster (FeS) in the high-potential chain and the second
electron to heme bL in the low-potential
chain (Figure S1 of the ).− The common view of this bifurcation process is that the intermediate
semiquinone radical (SQo), formed by one-electron oxidation
of QH2 by FeS, is highly unstable, and
reduces heme bL very rapidly before it
can react with dioxygen to generate superoxide.− This concept has been supported
by a general difficulty to detect SQo under aerobic conditions.
In fact, the only report of detection of SQo under those
conditions comes from early studies with submitochondrial particles
(SOM). The origin of this signal was,
however, questioned by later studies showing the insensitivity of
the SQ signals in SOM to specific inhibitors of the Qo site. More recent studies reported either detection
of small amounts of SQo under anaerobic conditions, or a lack of detection of SQo under aerobic conditions, which further supported the concept of the high
instability of SQo and its high reactivity with oxygen.
Apart from those examples, there have been no other studies reporting
detection of intermediate states for Qo site catalysis,
which leaves the mechanism of electronic bifurcation largely unknown.

Here, we explore a possibility that the intriguing lack of SQo detection is a result of its magnetic interactions with metal
centers of the Qo site rather than an effect of its high
instability. In principle, a strong antiferromagnetic coupling of
SQo with a metal center could result in the elimination
of the SQo electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) signal,
as proposed by Link. However, if the
coupling is ferromagnetic and/or weak (in comparison to the thermal
energy of the lattice), it may be expected that it will manifest itself
as a new spectroscopic identity., Indeed, by
exposing the purified enzyme to its substrates (oxidized cytochrome c and QH2), we have detected new transitions
in EPR spectra assigned to a SQo magnetically coupled to
reduced FeS via spin–spin exchange interaction. We also detected
a separate radical signal of SQo with relaxation properties
consistent with its location between the metal centers of the Qo site. This discovery offers a new perspective on understanding
the mechanism of quinol oxidation at the Qo site. It also
provides new insight into side reactions of the catalytic cycle involved
in the production of superoxide by cytochrome bc1.

Materials and Methods
Biochemical Procedures
The cytochrome bc1 complex was isolated from the purple bacterium Rhodobacter capsulatus strain grown semiaerobically as described
previously. Bovine cytochrome c, 2,3-dimethoxy-5-decyl-6-methyl-1,4-benzoquinone (DB),
and inhibitors (antimycin, myxothiazol, atovaquone, azoxystrobin,
kresoxim-methyl, and famoxadone) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich
and used without further purifications. Tridecyl-stigmatellin was
a generous gift from N. Fisher. DB was dissolved in an HCl/DMSO solution
and then reduced to its hydroquinone form (DBH2) with sodium
borohydride. Inhibitors were used in 5-fold molar excess over the
concentration of cytochrome bc1 monomers.
Cytochrome bc1 and cytochrome c solutions were dialyzed against the reaction buffer composed
of 50 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 100 mM NaCl, 20% glycerol (v/v), 0.01% (m/m)
dodecyl maltoside, and 1 mM EDTA. All buffers were in equilibrium
with air. Glycerol, added as a cryoprotective agent, increased the
viscosity of the reaction buffer, which resulted in a deceleration
of the overall catalytic turnover rate of the enzyme by decreasing
diffusion rates of the substrates.

Freeze-quench experiments
were performed using a Biologic SFM-300 stopped-flow mixer equipped
with an MPS-70 programmable syringe control. The system was equipped
with EPR FQ accessories. One syringe contained a cytochrome bc1/cytochrome c solution, and
the second syringe contained DBH2 in reaction buffer. Steady-state
reduction of cytochrome c by cytochrome bc1 was initiated by mixing the cytochrome bc1/cytochrome c solution with DBH2 in a 1:1 volume ratio to obtain final concentrations of cytochrome bc1, cytochrome c, and DBH2 of 50, 393, and 665 μM, respectively. The reaction
mixture was incubated at room temperature in a delay line for a programmed
number of milliseconds and then injected into an isopentane bath cooled
to 100 K. Samples with higher cytochrome bc1 concentrations required for hemes b measurements
were prepared by manual injection of DBH2 into the cytochrome bc1/cytochrome c solution inside
EPR tube. The reaction was stopped by immersing the tube into cold
ethanol glue.

EPR Spectroscopy and Data Analysis
All measurements
were performed using a Bruker Elexsys E580 spectrometer. X-Band continuous
wave electron paramagnetic resonance (CW EPR) spectra of hemes and
FeS were measured at 10 and 20 K, respectively, using a SHQE0511 resonator
and ESR900 cryostat (Oxford Instruments). X-Band spectra of semiquinones
were recorded using a TM9103 resonator equipped with a temperature
controller system (Bruker). Q-Band spectra of semiquinones were measured
at 200 K by CW EPR using an ER507D2 resonator (Bruker) equipped with
homemade modulation coils using a 0.6 mT modulation amplitude, a 90
kHz frequency, and a 1.92 mW microwave power. Q-Band echo-detected
EPR (ED EPR) spectra of FeS were measured at 10 K using a π/2–148
ns−π sequence with a π pulse of 48 ns and a shot
repetition time of 300 μs. First-derivative spectra of FeS were
generated by applying the pseudomodulation procedure on ED EPR spectra using Eleana (http://www.wbbib.uj.edu.pl/web/gbm/eleana). The magnitude of the external magnetic field was controlled using
a Bruker NMR teslameter.

The microwave power saturation profiles
of semiquinones were fit using formulas described in ref (). The data for chemically
induced semiquinone (SQCH) were fit assuming a contribution
from one saturable component, while data for SQo were fit
assuming the presence of two species: major, nonsaturable component
and minor, saturable component. The temperature dependencies of the
amplitude of SQCH were fit with the well-known Curie law.
The data for SQo were fit assuming the presence of the
Leigh effect in which the correlation
time of the fluctuating dipolar field increases with a decrease in
temperature. Q-Band spectra of semiquinones were simulated with Easy-spin using the anisotropic g tensor,
assuming homogeneous and inhomogeneous line broadening.

Spectral
simulations based on a spin Hamiltonian including Zeeman
interaction of spins of FeS and SQo centers with the external
static magnetic field and a general bilinear spin–spin interaction
term were performed as described in the .

Results
Detection of New EPR Transitions
Associated with the Qo Site of Cytochrome bc1
In searching
for intermediates of the Qo site, we performed series of
experiments in which isolated cytochrome bc1 in equilibrium with air catalyzed steady-state electron transfer
from the water-soluble QH2 analogue [2,3-dimethoxy-5-decyl-6-methyl-1,4-benzohydroquinone
(DBH2)] to oxidized cytochrome c, and
the time course of spin states of redox centers was monitored by EPR.
The time points of freezing the samples were selected to cover the
range from the beginning of the reaction until an equilibrium between
the substrates and the products was reached. As a measure of the reaction
progress, the amount of oxidized cytochrome c available
for reaction was determined from the amplitude of the EPR signal of
heme c (not shown). We compared two cases: the reaction
catalyzed by the noninhibited enzyme and that catalyzed by the enzyme
inhibited with antimycin. These two cases differ by the way in which
the heme bL undergoes reoxidation (after
its initial reduction by an electron derived from quinol) to support
the turnover of the Qo site. In the noninhibited enzyme,
heme bH rapidly reoxidizes heme bL and then transfers an electron to the Qi site (see Figure S1 of the ). This reaction sequence continues until the equilibrium
is reached (the substrates are used up). In the antimycin-inhibited
enzyme, the Qi site is blocked by the inhibitor, and after
the first QH2 oxidation at the Qo site, heme bH remains reduced, preventing fast reoxidation
of heme bL after the oxidation of a second
QH2 at the Qo site. Nevertheless, this heme
can undergo slow reoxidation by the back electron transfer to SQo that re-forms QH2 or electron transfer to Q that forms SQo.,− With these reactions, the Qo site can
also keep the turnover until the equilibrium is reached, although
the overall rate is significantly slower than that of the noninhibited
enzyme.

As shown in Figure a, in the
noninhibited enzyme, the level of reduced FeS increased within the
first 7 s, reflecting the expected progress of the reaction, and after
an equilibrium had been reached, the amplitude of the FeS signal remained
constant. In the antimycin-inhibited enzyme, the rate of reaching
the equilibrium level of reduced FeS decreased, as expected, but at
the same time, quite unexpectedly we observed an additional EPR transition
at g = 1.94 (Figure b). Its
amplitude reached a maximum at 10 s and then gradually decreased to
zero. A comparison of amplitudes of EPR signals of hemes b shown in Figure c indicates that in the
samples exhibiting a g = 1.94 signal, heme bL remained fully oxidized. The presence of a g = 1.94 signal correlated with the presence of another
weak signal of organic radical at g = 2.0 (exact
value of 2.0045) detected with the use of a high microwave power (Figure b). Both g = 1.94 and g = 2.0 signals arose during the enzymatic turnover to reach their
maximal amplitudes at the time where the gy (1.89) transition of reduced FeS reached approximately half of its
maximal amplitude. After the maximum had been reached, the amplitude
of both g = 1.94 and g = 2.0 signals
gradually decreased, and when the system reached equilibrium (gy of FeS remains at its maximum),
both signals disappeared completely.

Detection of new g =
1.94 and g = 2.0 EPR transitions in cytochrome bc1. Monitoring changes in paramagnetic states
of redox centers in WT
cytochrome bc1 by X-band EPR during steady-state
reduction of cytochrome c and oxidation of DBH2. Samples were frozen at different time points after addition
of DBH2 to the mixture containing enzyme and cytochrome c. (a) Spectra of FeS in the noninhibited enzyme and time
dependence of the amplitude (measured for the gy transition of FeS indicated by the dashed
line). (b) Appearance of a new g = 1.94 transition
(arrow) and a g = 2.0 radical signal in the antimycin-inhibited
enzyme. The plot on the left shows time dependencies of the amplitude
of the g = 1.94 signal (red line) and of gy of the FeS cluster (gray
line). The plot on the right shows the time dependence of the amplitude
of the g = 2.0 signal. (c) Spectra of hemes bL and bH (left)
and FeS (right) for mixtures with antimycin-inhibited (red) or myxothiazol-
and antimycin-inhibited cytochrome bc1 (green), respectively, frozen 12 s after addition of DBH2. Hemes, FeS, and SQ signals
were measured at 10, 20, and 200 K, respectively. In panels a and
b, the numbers on the left correspond to the reaction time in seconds
(time before freezing).

The experiments described in Figures c
and  asserted that g = 1.94
and g = 2.0 signals originate specifically from the
Qo site. Both signals were sensitive to inhibitors of the
Qo site and to point mutations that abolish the activity
of the site, and were not present in the b-c1 subcomplex lacking the FeS subunit. On the other hand, the amplitude of the g = 1.94 and g = 2.0 signals was larger
in the mutants with affected motion of the FeS head domain (+2Ala) (see Figure S2 of the ). As +2Ala arrests this domain at the Qo site for seconds with FeS in the reduced state (this way it abolishes the natural submillisecond electronic
connection between the Qo site and heme c1), the observed enhancement of the signals immediately
suggests that they must be associated with paramagnetism of FeS occupying
the Qo site. Furthermore, in light of all of the results
described above, the g = 2.0 signal must report SQo. We note that g = 1.94 and g = 2.0 signals were not present in samples reduced with dithionite
(not shown), precluding the possibility that they originate from a
contamination of the sample with low-potential iron–sulfur
centers.

Testing the sensitivity of g = 1.94 and g = 2.0 signals to inhibitors and mutations that abolish
the activity of the Qo site. X-Band EPR spectra of isolated
WT cytochrome bc1 obtained under the conditions
described for Figure c in the presence of
antimycin alone (a) or antimycin and one of the Qo site
inhibitors: tridecyl-stigmatellin (b), atovaquone (c), famoxadone
(d), myxothiazol (e), azoxystrobin (f), or kresoxim-methyl (g). Spectra
of antimycin-inhibited mutants G158W (h) and the b-c1 subcomplex (i). The left panel (FeS)
shows spectra measured at 20 K in a magnetic field range of the FeS
signal, and the right panel (SQo) shows spectra measured
at 200 K in a magnetic field range typical of organic radicals.

Identification of the Semiquinone–Rieske
Cluster Coupled
System
Chemicals, such as DMSO or glycerol, and some point
mutations have been reported to induce small changes in the EPR spectra
of iron–sulfur clusters in proteins (Rieske or ferredoxins)
with shifts in the gy values of &lt;0.01.,− The new g =
1.94 transition does not fall into this category, because the observed
difference between the gy of Rieske and the new signal was 1 order of magnitude larger (Δg ∼ 0.05) and the signal disappeared over time. Most
importantly, the g = 1.94 signal detected at X-band
(9.46 GHz) shifted to a g = 1.96 when the same samples
were measured at Q-band (33.5 GHz) (Figure , black). This excludes the possibility that this signal originated
from a new paramagnetic center. It thus must be a result of magnetic
interactions between two closely separated paramagnetic species. An
assumption that reduced FeS at the Qo site is one of them
leaves SQo as the only possible candidate for the other.

Simulating
EPR spectra to define the physical nature of the g = 1.94 transition. Analysis of EPR transitions in a magnetic
field range of the FeS signal at Q-band (a) and X-band (b) for the
antimycin-inhibited +2Ala mutant. In panels a and b, experimental
spectra (black) were simulated (green) as a sum of the FeS spectra
(red) and the spectra resulting from exchange coupling between FeS
and SQo (blue), assuming |J0| ∼ 3500 MHz. Blue and red represent 17 and 83%, respectively,
of the total number of spins in green. The blue spectrum in panel
b represents the spectrum of the SQo–FeS triplet
state.

To verify that both FeS and SQo do interact with one
another and to identify the dominant mechanism responsible for the
appearance of a new EPR spectrum, we performed simulations based on
a spin Hamiltonian including isotropic (scalar exchange) and anisotropic
(exchange and dipolar) terms of spin coupling between SQo and the FeS cluster (Figure ) (see details
in the ). Dipolar interaction alone appeared to be too
weak to produce the g = 1.94 transition. However,
when spin–spin exchange interaction was taken into account
and its frequency |J0| was on the order
of 3500 MHz (∼0.1 cm–1), the simulations
neatly reproduced experimental spectra (Figure ). We thus identified the SQo–FeS coupled system
that at lower magnetic fields (those used at X-band) exists as a triplet
state (and will be termed as such, in the remaining text). The SQo–FeS triplet emerges as a new intermediate of the reactions
at the Qo site that when formed averages the g transitions of SQo and FeS.

Distinct Population of
SQo without Spin–Spin
Exchange Interaction
The presence of a separate g = 2.0 SQo transition identified a distinct population
of SQo centers for which spin–spin exchange with
FeS does not exist or is too small to be resolved. Nevertheless, fast-relaxing
paramagnetic metals of the Qo site (oxidized heme bL and reduced FeS) still exerted a profound
impact on SQo, resulting in its unusually fast relaxation
compared to the relaxation of chemically induced semiquinone in buffer
(SQCH) or well-known Qi site semiquinone (SQi)., This manifested itself in significant
homogeneous line broadening of the SQo signal (Figure a,b and Table ), an inability
to saturate it with microwaves (Figure c),
and the presence of a Leigh effect (Figure d). We note that the fast relaxation
makes this SQo signal different from other reported SQo signals,, that did not show signs of interactions with the FeS and/or heme bL metal centers of the Qo site.

Unusual
magnetic properties of the SQo center. (a) The
Q-band spectrum of SQo (red) shows significant homogeneous
broadening in comparison to the spectrum of SQi generated
in myxothiazol-inhibited enzyme (green) or SQCH generated
chemically in buffer (black). The spectra were simulated using the
rhombic g tensor (dashed lines). (b) The same samples
as in panel a measured at X-band. (c) X-band microwave power dependence
of the amplitude of SQo at 200 K (red) compared with that
of SQCH (black). (d) Temperature dependence of the SQo amplitude showing the Leigh effect (red) while SQCH obeys the Curie law (black). Solid lines in panels c and d represent
appropriate fits (see ). a–d refer to the SQo signal generated in the
+2Ala mutant for which the signal is the strongest (see Figure S2
of the ).

Parameters of Q-Band Semiquinone Spectra
Obtained by Simulation
 	gz	gy	gx	homogeneous
line broadening (mT)	
SQo	2.0059	2.0045	2.0010	0.718	
SQi	2.0052	2.0043	2.0013	0.306	
SQCH	2.0052	2.0043	2.0009	0.330	
The contribution
from Gaussian broadening
was set to 0.03 mT and kept constant in all simulations.

Discussion
Conditions
of Formation of SQo and SQo–FeS Coupled
Centers Detected by EPR
In our experiments,
the SQo–FeS coupled centers (g =
1.94) and SQo (g = 2.0) were detected
during the continuous turnover of quinol oxidation and cytochrome c reduction when fast reoxidation of heme bL through heme bH and the
Qi site was prevented. Under such conditions, the reoxidation
of heme bL required to maintain the progress
of oxidant-induced (by oxidized Rieske) heme bL reduction is achieved by the transfer of an electron from
heme bL back to the Qo site.
Because the formation of the g = 1.94 signal requires
the concomitant presence of the reduced FeS and SQo, the
back electron transfer may predispose the Qo site to generate
the g = 1.94 signal if heme bL reduces Q to form SQo (via semireverse reaction−) at the time when reduced FeS is already present in the site.

Indeed, this appeared to be the dominant way through which the SQo–FeS triplet and SQo signals were trapped
in our experiments. The first indication of that comes from the observation
that the signals were detected along with oxidized heme bL (Figure c). Furthermore, the
signals reached maximal amplitudes when FeS and cytochrome c (acting as the oxidizing pool) were approximately half-reduced
(Figure b). This suggests that the probability
of trapping the g = 1.94 and g =
2.0 intermediates comes as a result of competition between the rate
of oxidant-induced heme bL reduction and
the rate of its oxidation by the transfer of an electron from heme bL to Q to form SQo at the time when
FeS is reduced. It follows that the conditions of the formation of
SQo–FeS coupled centers are not favored at the beginning
of the reaction, when the population of Rieske clusters is largely
oxidized and capable of “consuming” electrons from SQo (time points before appearance of the g =
1.94 and g = 2.0 signals in Figure b). On the other hand, as the system reaches equilibrium,
the populations of Rieske clusters and cytochrome c become largely reduced and the average oxidant-induced reduction
of the heme bL rate decreases, diminishing
the amount of electron donor for Q at the Qo site. This
leads to the loss of SQo–FeS and SQo signals
(Figure b).

Incorporation of the SQo–FeS Triplet State
in the Electronic Reactions of the Qo Site
Detection
of the SQo–FeS triplet state along with the residual
SQo sets a new stage for understanding the mechanism of
reactions catalyzed by the Qo site from both kinetic and
thermodynamic points of view (Figure ). It
can be envisaged that the SQo–FeS triplet forms
as an initial step of oxidation of QH2 when oxidized FeS
withdraws an electron from QH2 (state b in Figure ). Evolution of this state into the state where
SQo and reduced FeS exist as separate spectral identities
(state c in Figure ) leads to immediate reduction
of heme bL by SQo, which completes
the reaction generating Q (state d in Figure ). In this scheme, a direct transition from state b to state d cannot
be ruled out and might be even rapid enough to consider the two-electron
oxidation of QH2 at the Qo site as a virtually
concerted process. The flow of electrons out from the cofactor chains
(state e in Figure ) allows the enzyme to
regain state a to complete the cycle.

Model of electronic bifurcation of the
Qo site accommodating
the SQo–FeS coupled system. (a) Bound QH2 is flanked by oxidized heme bL and oxidized
FeS. (b) FeS withdraws an electron from QH2, which leads
to the formation of the SQo–FeS triplet state. (c)
The SQo–FeS distance increases (by movement of the
FeS head domain and/or SQo), breaking spin exchange interaction,
exposing separate spectra of SQo and reduced FeS. (d) Heme bL is reduced by SQo generating Q.
(e) In the noninhibited enzyme, heme bL rapidly transfers an electron across the membrane to heme bH directly or through heme bL in the other monomer, (not shown).
The enzyme goes through further states to reach the initial state
a. Antimycin prevents oxidation of heme bH, interrupting the transition from state d to state e. Black and
red denote the oxidized and reduced cofactor, respectively, while
the dot with an arrow indicates the paramagnetic state of the center.
Orbitals engaged in spin exchange are shown as gray ovals. Blue, black,
magenta, and green spectra are EPR spectra of heme bL, SQo, FeS, and the SQo–FeS
triplet state, respectively. Green arrows show transitions between
the enzyme states. The blue box denotes the state that was detected
as a major fraction of SQ. The scheme does not consider the still
unknown proton transfers that may influence transitions between the
states.

For this scheme, the measured g = 1.94 (the SQo–FeS triplet) and g = 2.00 (SQo) signals are spectroscopic signatures
of states b and c,
respectively. These states were detected only when the flow of electrons
out from the Qi site was blocked by antimycin (interrupted
transition from state d to e) that, in the context of full reversibility
of Qo site reactions, indirectly increased the probability
of transfer of an electron from reduced heme bL to Q to form SQo (bringing the site back to state
b or c).,−

One may ask why
a significant amount of SQo cannot be
detected in the noninhibited enzyme. At this stage, the precise answer
is difficult. Nevertheless, we may propose that if electron transfer
among SQo, heme bL, and heme bH is a pure tunneling process, not coupled to
any chemical event (like protonation/deprotonation, conformational
change, etc.), then freezing the samples will not prevent the transfer
of the electron from SQo to heme bH involving a transient step through heme bL. However, in the antimycin-inhibited enzyme, heme bH remains reduced; thus, in frozen samples containing
a reduced FeS cluster, an electron may circulate only between SQo and heme bL. Under these conditions,
the highest probability of finding unpaired electrons is on SQo–FeS coupled centers, and as long as the electron circulation
is significantly slower than the Larmor frequency (∼9.5 GHz),
it exerts no effect on the EPR spectra of SQo–FeS
coupled centers at the Qo site.

Thermodynamic Properties
of the SQo–FeS Couple
While the quantity
of residual SQo (from state c) cannot
be determined because of the presence of the Leigh effect, the estimated maximal abundance of the SQo–FeS triplet state (state b) reaches as much as ∼9
and ∼17% of the total concentration of FeS in WT and +2Ala
cytochrome bc1, respectively (Figure ). This indicates that SQo may not be
as highly unstable as the models of the Qo site assume.,,, This raises the question of how much the stability constant (Kstab) of SQo detected in this work
differs from the Kstab of ≪10–7 typically reported in the literature.,,,, Any temptations to estimate this difference
must consider the fact that in our experiments the new intermediates
were detected under nonequilibrium conditions of continuous turnover;
thus, the use of Kstab for a description
of the stability of SQo may be invalid, as this parameter
is used to define stability in systems under thermodynamic equilibrium
conditions. Nevertheless, the use of this parameter for the description
of SQo–FeS triplet stability at the time point (tmax) where the amount of SQo is the
highest yields a Kstab on the order of
10–2.6. This is more than
3 orders of magnitude larger than the previously defined upper limit
of Kstab for SQo. Such a value
of Kstab makes the stability of SQo comparable to stabilities of other semiquinones in proteins,
such as that of the Qi site.

Until now, the Qo site has been considered exceptional
in that, unlike other quinol oxidation–reduction sites, it
did not stabilize semiquinones that were naturally volatile outside
the protein matrix. Our work suggests
that the instability of SQo is apparent and is a consequence
of the simultaneous accessibility of two redox partners rather than
a lack of an influence of the site on the stability of SQo.

Relation of SQo to the Superoxide-Generating Activity
of Cytochrome bc1
The observation
that large quantities of SQo can be detected under aerobic
conditions indicates that SQo is not as highly reactive
with oxygen as current mechanisms of superoxide production by cytochrome bc1 assume.,,, In fact, high levels
of the SQo–FeS triplet state signal observed in
the +2Ala mutant, which does not produce any detectable superoxide,, indicate that conditions of triplet formation (when SQo is likely to be hydrogen-bonded to histidine liganding the FeS cluster)
do not impose a risk of electron leaks on oxygen. This, however, does
not preclude the possibility that the enzyme faces such a risk if
SQo is present at the time when FeS is remote from the
Qo site, (and the hydrogen bond is not
formed). This could be explained in analogy to the reactions of 1,4-semiquinones
with oxygen in solution. In such chemical systems, it was found that
“hydrogen bonding of the -OH moiety in the semiquinone radical
to the HBA (hydrogen-bond-accepting) solvent prevents reaction of
the semiquinone with O2”.

Possible Contribution of bc-Type Complexes
to the g = 1.94 Signal in Other Bioenergetic Systems
Signals near g = 1.94 often reported in studies
on mitochondrial and bacterial respiration have usually been attributed
to iron–sulfur clusters of complex I and II, even though their
origin was not always clear.− Our work implies that the Qo site of complex
III, so far beyond consideration, should in fact be regarded as one
of the possible contributors to the mitochondrial g = 1.94 signal. The diagnostic feature of the Qo site-deriving g = 1.94 signal at X-band is its shift to larger values
with an increase in EPR frequency, as observed in cases of weak exchange
between two paramagnetic centers. We
anticipate that knowledge of spectroscopic properties of the SQo–FeS triplet signal will allow us to examine whether
it can accumulate in mitochondria to relate SQo levels
with other radicals, including ROS, formed during respiration.

Conclusions
In this work, we identify
new EPR transitions (g = 1.94 and g = 2.0) associated with the enzymatic
activity of cytochrome bc1. Those two
transitions revealed the presence of two distinct populations of semiquinone
(SQo) formed at the quinol oxidation site (the Qo site). The g = 1.94 signal was assigned as one
of the transitions originating from SQo coupled to the
Rieske cluster (FeS) by spin–spin exchange interaction. By
analyzing the Q- and X-band EPR spectra of this coupled system, we
estimated the 3500 MHz value of the isotropic exchange coupling constant,
|J0|, which is strong enough to create
the SQo–FeS triplet state at the lower magnetic
field typical of X-band. The radical signal centered at g = 2.0 corresponded to the population of fast-relaxing SQo for which spin–spin exchange does not exist or is too weak
to be resolved. The paramagnetic properties of this signal were strongly
affected by metal centers, consistent with its location between two
fast-relaxing metal centers of the Qo site (FeS and heme bL). The detection of SQo together
with oxidized heme bL in samples containing
antimycin suggests that the dominant way of generating SQo that can be detected under nonequilibrium conditions is the transfer
of an electron from heme bL to Q bound
at the Qo site. Under these conditions, the amount of SQo is comparable to the amount of stable semiquinones detected
in catalytic sites of other bioenergetic enzymes.

Supporting Information Available
Simulations of EPR spectra,
outline of catalytic cycle of cytochrome bc1 (Figure S1), comparison of EPR spectra of wild type and +2Ala mutant
(Figure S2) and references. This material is available free of charge
via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi400624m_si_001.pdf

This work was supported
by The Wellcome Trust International Senior Research Fellowship (to
A.O.).

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
SQosemiquinone at the Qo site

SQCHchemically
generated semiquinone

QH2ubihydroquinone

Qubiquinone

DBH22,3-dimethoxy-5-decyl-6-methyl-1,4-benzohydroquinone

EPRelectron paramagnetic
resonance

FeStwo-iron,
two-sulfur Rieske cluster

WTwild type.

Given that ∼20% of the total
Rieske clusters is coupled to SQo, the total concentration
of SQo is ∼10 μM. This means that the total
concentrations of QH2 and Q at tmax are ∼75 and ∼580 μM, respectively. For these
values, the Kstab calculated from the
formula Kstab = [SQo]2 × [Q]−1 × [QH2]−1 is 10–2.6.

