Phosphorylation
of proteins
is an essential regulatory process in biology. Activating kinase enzymes
deliver the γ-phosphoryl group from an ATP cofactor to the hydroxyl
group of a substrate protein’s serine, threonine, or tyrosine
side chain to produce a phosphomonoester. Because kinases affect a
variety of physiological responses and are associated with many diseases,
their structures have been studied extensively. Among the diverse
Ser/Thr protein kinase family, protein kinase A (PKA) is most studied
and has become a paradigm for the whole class of kinase enzymes., When inactive, PKA is an R2C2 holoenzyme tetramer
of two catalytic (C) and two regulatory (R) subunits. When the cAMP
concentration is increased following β-adrenergic stimulation,
PKA undergoes activation through binding of four cAMP molecules to
the R subunits, and subsequent dissociation of the holoenzyme and
release of the active C subunits (PKAc) for phosphorylation. This activation process and the subsequent phosphorylation
process are highly regulated and are still not completely understood.
PKAc folds into a bean-shaped structure, with two (small and large)
lobes producing a cleft at the base between the lobes for ATP and
a ledge for the protein substrate binding. The small lobe also contains
the glycine-rich loop, a hairpin structure that spans residues 49–57,
that comprises three Gly residues and acts as a lid for the catalytic
site cleft.

Experimental and theoretical studies of the binding
and dynamic
events involved in the phosphoryl transfer reaction catalyzed by PKAc
point to a precisely controlled dynamic switching process. Kinetic
studies revealed that large conformational changes in PKAc are responsible
for the slow rate of turnover,− while the chemical step is at
least an order of magnitude faster. The
apo form (without ATP or substrate bound) shows an open conformation
that partially closes when ATP binds to give a binary PKAc–ATP
complex with an active site that is primed for substrate binding.
It has been reported that one or two divalent metals are required
for ATP binding and catalysis, with Mg2+ believed to be
the physiologically relevant metal., The chemical
reaction happens only in the fully closed conformation of PKAc after
the protein or peptide substrate binds to produce a ternary complex., At physiological Mg2+ concentrations, the slow PKAc domain
movements associated with binding of ATP and release of ADP each partially
determine the catalytic rate. At higher metal concentrations, the
removal of ADP is rate-limiting.

At the atomic level of chemical catalysis, exact details of the
phosphoryl group transfer remain uncertain. Theoretical, crystallographic,
nuclear magnetic resonance, and solution stereochemistry studies suggest
that the transfer proceeds through a concerted SN2 mechanism− with a loose transition state (which is, however, mistakenly termed
the dissociative mechanism in the literature!). However, a dissociative
SN1 mechanism has also been proposed on the basis of a
quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics study, and this possibility cannot be ruled out without observation of
a stable metaphosphate intermediate. Further uncertainty surrounds
the roles of active site residues and also the details of hydrogen
transfer pathways among Ser/Thr substrate side chain groups, ATP phosphates,
and PKAc. In particular, different functional roles have been proposed
for the catalytically important and invariant residues Asp166 and
Lys168.− Our recent crystallographic studies of PKAc in complex with ATP
and the 20-residue peptidic inhibitor (IP20) at high Mg2+ concentrations, called PKAc–Mg2ATP–IP20
in the text, have also challenged assumptions about the exact role
of metal ions in catalysis.

We
present here crystallographic structures of various complexes
of PKAc that provide new information about the detailed chemistry
of the catalytic mechanism. The structures were determined at 100
K (LT) to maximize resolution, but representative structures were
also determined at room temperature (RT, 293 K) to verify that conformational
differences were not caused by temperature effects and that the structures
are physiologically relevant. First, we determined the structure of
a pseudo-Michaelis complex containing Mg2+, nonhydrolyzable
AMP-PCP (β,γ-methyleneadenosine 5′-triphosphate),
and a 20-residue pseudo-substrate peptide SP20 (PKAc–Mg2AMP-PCP–SP20) at 100 K. Next, we determined the structures
of PKAc in complex with different divalent metals, ATP, and SP20.
We found that all Mg2+, Ca2+, Sr2+, and Ba2+ alkaline earth metals bound in the active site
along with trapped products of the phosphoryl transfer reaction, ADP,
and the SP20 peptide phosphorylated at Ser21SP20 (pSP20).
These structures are denoted in the text as PKAc–M2ADP–pSP20 (where M is either Mg2+, Ca2+, Sr2+, or Ba2+). These structures suggest
that the currently held notion that most metals (apart from Mg2+) do not support phosphoryl transfer and do not allow ATP
to bind in the active site requires revision. However, establishing
the physiological relevance of metals other than Mg2+ will
require solution studies under physiological conditions. Finally,
the two pseudo-Michaelis complexes PKAc–Mg2AMP-PCP–SP20,
newly determined here, and PKAc–Mg2ATP–IP20,
previously determined, together with
the PKAc–Mg2ADP–pSP20 product complex, provide
snapshots of the PKAc active site at different stages of the phosphoryl
transfer reaction. Comparison of these structures reveals conformational,
coordination, and hydrogen bonding changes that might occur during
the chemical reaction and might shed new light on the mechanism of
the chemical step, in particular the roles of metals and active site
residues Asp166 and Lys168 during the reaction, and the conformation
of the Ser21SP20 side chain in the pseudo-Michaelis and
product complexes.

Materials and Methods
General Information
Pseudo-substrate peptide SP20 (TTYADFIASGRTGRRASIHD;
residues 5–24 of the heat-stable PKAc inhibitor PKI, where
positions 20 and 21 have been mutated to Ala and Ser, respectively)
was custom-synthesized by and purchased from Biomatik (Wilmington,
DE). ATP as the magnesium or disodium salt and AMP-PCP as the disodium
salt were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Protein purification
supplies were purchased from GE Healthcare (Piscataway, NJ). Crystallization
reagents were purchased from Hampton Research (Aliso Viejo, CA).

Protein Expression and Purification
His6-tagged
recombinant mouse PKAc was expressed in Escherichia
coli using LB or minimal medium at 24 °C for 16–18
h. The recombinant enzyme was purified by affinity chromatography
using HisTrap fast-flow chromatography columns supplied by GE Healthcare.
The enzyme was then buffer-exchanged with 50 mM MES, 250 mM NaCl,
and 2 mM DTT (pH 6.5) on a desalting column. Isoforms of PKAc that
represent different phosphorylated states of the enzyme were not separated,
without any obvious effect on crystallization of the ternary complexes.

Crystallization and Data Collection
For crystallization
trials, PKAc was concentrated to 8–12 mg/mL. The ternary complexes
with different metals, ATP (or AMP-PCP), and SP20 were made before
crystallizations were set up. First, the concentrated PKAc solution
was mixed with a solution of metal chloride salt to achieve the final
metal concentration of ∼20 mM. Second, the nucleoside was added
and the peptide substrate introduced into the mixture last. The PKAc:ATP:SP20
molar ratio was kept at 1:10:10. Crystals were grown in sitting drop
microbridges or in nine-well glass plates using well solutions consisting
of 100 mM MES (pH 6.5), 5 mM DTT, and 15–20% PEG 4000 at 4–14
°C. In addition, for complexes with different metal ions the
corresponding metal chloride salts were introduced into the well solutions
at concentrations of 50 mM prior to crystallization drops being set
up.

Structure Determination and Refinement
X-ray crystallographic
data were collected from frozen crystals at 100 K for all complexes.
In the case of PKAc–Mg2ADP–pSP20 and PKAc–Sr2ADP–pSP20, equivalent diffraction data were also measured
at room temperature. The data sets were collected on a Rigaku HomeFlux
system, equipped with a MicroMax-007 HF generator and Osmic VariMax
optics. The diffraction images were obtained using an RAXIS-IV++ image plate detector. Diffraction data were collected, integrated,
and scaled using the HKL3000 software suite. The structures were refined using SHELX-97 for resolutions equal to or better than 2.0 Å, and using CNS for resolutions of &lt;2.0 Å. A summary
of the crystallographic data and refinement is given in Table 1 of
the . Similar to
our previous observations, all the structures
were of isoform 2 and contained three post-translationally phosphorylated
residues, Ser139, Thr197, and Ser338. The structure of the ternary
complex of PKAc with two Mg2+ atoms, ATP, and peptide inhibitor
IP20 [Protein Data Bank (PDB) entry 4DH3] was used
as a starting model to determine all the structures described here.
The structures were built and manipulated with Coot, whereas the figures were generated using PyMol version
1.5.0.3 (Schrödinger, LLC). The presence of metal ions was
established by ensuring that the strongest peaks in difference FO – FC maps
with metals omitted and 2FO – FC maps with metals present corresponded to positions
M1 and M2, and by checking that the coordination spheres of six to
eight ligands were present around the metal ions. Also, differences
in coordination geometries were used to distinguish among metal ions.
Mg2+, Ca2+, Sr2+, and Ba2+ have increasing numbers of electrons; therefore, they were identified
by electron density peaks that were larger than those for the smaller
metals. The representative electron densities in the active sites
are shown in Figures  and  and Figures 1 and 2 of the , while the coordination of metals in Ca, Sr, and
Ba complexes is given in Table 2 and Figure 3 of the .

The Ramachandran statistics
for the structures reported here are as follows. PKAc–Mg2AMP-PCP–SP20: 91.6% of residues in most favored regions,
8.4% of residues in additional allowed regions. PKAc–Mg2ADP–pSP20 at a low temperature: 90.5% of residues in
most favored regions, 9.5% of residues in additional allowed regions.
PKAc–Mg2ADP–pSP20 at room temperature: 90.8%
of residues in most favored regions, 9.2% of residues in additional
allowed regions. PKAc–Ca2ADP–pSP20: 91.8%
of residues in most favored regions, 8.2% of residues in additional
allowed regions. PKAc–Sr2ADP–pSP20 at a low
temperature: 92.5% of residues in most favored regions, 7.5% of residues
in additional allowed regions. PKAc–Sr2ADP–pSP20
at room temperature: 91.1% of residues in most favored regions, 8.9%
of residues in additional allowed regions. PKAc–Ba2ADP–pSP20: 91.8% of residues in most favored regions, 8.2%
of residues in additional allowed regions.

The structures have
been deposited in the PDB and were assigned
the following codes: 4IAC for PKAc–Mg2AMP-PCP–SP20, 4IAD for low-temperature
PKAc–Mg2ADP–pSP20, 4IAF for room-temperature
PKAc–Mg2ADP–pSP20, 4IAI for PKAc–Ca2ADP–pSP20, 4IAK for low-temperature PKAc–Sr2ADP–pSP20, 4IAY for room-temperature
PKAc–Sr2ADP–pSP20, and 4IAZ for PKAc–Ba2ADP–pSP20.

Results
Pseudo-Michaelis
Complex PKAc–Mg2AMP-PCP–SP20
The
nonhydrolyzable ATP analogue AMP-PCP and the Ser21SP20 substrate
are found to be chemically unchanged in the active site
of PKAc–Mg2AMP-PCP–SP20 at LT, and thus,
this complex represents a pseudo-Michaelis complex (Figure a,b). Our previously
reported structure of PKAc–Mg2ATP–IP20 at
LT is also a pseudo-Michaelis complex
because IP20 contains Asn20IP20 and Ala21IP20 residues, instead of Ala20SP20 and Ser21SP20 in the substrate peptide, and thus is an inhibitor of PKAc activity.
Comparison of these two structures reveals that they are similar.
In particular, the metal ions coordinate to AMP-PCP in PKAc–Mg2AMP-PCP–SP20 in much the same way as they do to ATP
in PKAc–Mg2ATP–IP20. The importance of the
similarity of these two structures is that it tells us that the conformations
of ATP, SP20, and PKAc in the two different structures, when combined,
are representative of the actual Michaelis complex. We can thus compare
the position of ATP in PKAc–Mg2ATP–IP20 and
the position of SP20 in PKAc–Mg2AMP-PCP–SP20
to the position in the product complex to obtain meaningful mechanistic
insights.

 (a) Close-up view of the enzyme active site in the PKAc–Mg2AMP-PCP–SP20 pseudo-Michaelis complex showing metals
Mg1 and Mg2 bound at sites M1 and M2, respectively, AMP-PCP, Ser21SP20, and the residues of the enzyme that are important for
metal binding or catalysis. Metal coordination is shown as black solid
lines, whereas possible hydrogen bonds are represented as red dashed
lines. (b) Electron density for the active site components AMP-PCP,
Mg2+, water molecules, and Ser21SP20 of the
substrate peptide SP20 contoured at the 2.0σ level.

However,
there are some differences between PKAc–Mg2AMP-PCP–SP20
and PKAc–Mg2ATP–IP20.
M2 coordination is octahedral in PKAc–Mg2ATP–IP20,
but because of the substitution of the β,γ-bridging CH2 group for an oxygen atom, the M2 site lacks a sixth coordination
bond and consequently has trigonal bipyramidal coordination in PKAc–Mg2AMP-PCP–SP20. In PKAc–Mg2ATP–IP20,
two of the γ-phosphate oxygen atoms that are bound to the metals
form hydrogen bonds with side chains of Lys168 and Asp166, but in
PKAc–Mg2AMP-PCP–SP20, the hydrogen bond with
Asp166 is lost (Figure a). The larger steric
volume of CH2 compared to that of an oxygen atom and the
former’s inherent inability to bind to a metal ion pushes the
γ-phosphate group farther from M2 and Asp166 in PKAc–Mg2AMP-PCP–SP20. Another notable difference is a 2.6–2.8
Å displacement of the glycine-rich loop, with the loop being
closer to the metals in PKAc–Mg2ATP–IP20
and in a more open conformation in PKAc–Mg2AMP-PCP–SP20
(Figure ), again because of the stronger steric
effects of the CH2 group.

Superposition of the active sites of PKAc–Mg2AMP-PCP–SP20 (colored by atom type, carbon colored
green),
PKAc–Mg2ADP–pSP20 (magenta), and PKAc–Mg2ATP–IP20 (cyan). The distance between the γ-P
atom of ATP and the nucleophilic oxygen of Ser21SP20 is
only 3.0 Å, indicating correct positioning of the reactants in
the studied complexes. Distances are in angstroms.

Product Complex PKAc–Mg2ADP–pSP20
Both Mg2+ ions have an octahedral
configuration with
M1 coordinated to phosphoryl oxygen atoms of pSer21SP20 and the β-phosphate of ADP, two water molecules, and chelated
by the carboxylate group of Asp184 at LT (Figure ). ADP’s β-phosphate oxygen is located in the
axial position, while that of the phosphorylated serine is in the
equatorial position. M2 is chelated by the α- and β-phosphates
of ADP and has interactions with Asn171, Asp184, and two water molecules.
The coordination of M2 has changed significantly from its coordination
in PKAc–Mg2ATP–IP20 (Figure ; see also Figure 1b of ref ()). In the PKAc–Mg2ATP–IP20
complex, Mg2+ at site M2 is coordinated to oxygen atoms
of the α- and γ-phosphates, to the β,γ-bridging
oxygen, and to a single water molecule. In PKAc–Mg2ADP–pSP20, M2 has lost the interaction
with the γ-phosphate, which has moved ∼2 Å onto
Ser21SP20, and its M2 coordination has been replaced with
a new water molecule. In PKAc–Mg2ATP–IP20
and PKAc–Mg2ADP–pSP20, the α- and β-phosphates
are stabilized by bonding to the metal ions and by hydrogen bonding
with Lys72. The γ-phosphate oxygens of ATP hydrogen bond with
side chain atoms of Asp166 and Lys168 in PKAc–Mg2ATP–IP20 (Figure ). However, surprisingly,
the phosphate group on pSer21SP20 is too far (∼4
Å or more) from Asp166 and Lys168 to form hydrogen bonds in PKAc–Mg2ADP–pSP20. On the other hand, the phosphate group on
pSer21SP20 gains a new 2.8 Å hydrogen bond with the
OH group of Ser53 in the glycine-rich loop in PKAc–Mg2ADP–pSP20 compared to that in PKAc–Mg2ATP–IP20.
Thus, the reactive γ-phosphate of ATP is transferred to the
substrate with a net loss of one metal interaction, and one hydrogen
bond. This occurs as a result of the Cβ–Oγ bond
of pSer21SP20 being rotated away from the metals and Asp166
toward the bulk solvent. Importantly, a similar orientation of this
phosphate group was found in the structure of the holoenzyme–product
complex, indicating that our structure
with a small peptide substrate is, in fact, physiologically relevant.

Close-up
view of the enzyme active site in the PKAc–Mg2ADP–pSP20
product complex showing metals Mg1 and Mg2
bound at sites M1 and M2, respectively, ADP, phosphorylated pSer21SP20, and the residues of the enzyme that are important for
metal binding or catalysis. Metal coordination is shown as black solid
lines, whereas possible hydrogen bonds are represented as red dashed
lines.

Superposition of the active sites of PKAc–Mg2ADP–pSP20 and PKAc–Mg2ATP–IP20.
The
distance between the γ-P atom of ATP and the phosphorus in pSer21SP20 is shown as a black dashed arrow, indicating that the
phosphate has to move &lt;2 Å during the phosphoryl transfer
reaction to its new position in pSer21SP20.

Product Complexes with Other Alkali Earth
Metals
In
complexes of PKAc with Ca2+, Sr2+, and Ba2+, we found that the metals, when in excess, bind in the active
site in both M1 and M2 sites and furthermore that the phosphotransfer
products, ADP and pSP20, were also present. The ionic radii of these
metals are significantly longer than that of Mg2+ (0.72
Å). Ba2+ represents the largest cation, with an ionic
radius of 1.42 Å. Sr2+ is slightly smaller, with a
radius of 1.26 Å, whereas Ca2+ has a radius of ∼1.1
Å. The active sites in all the structures of the metal complexes
are very similar to each other and to that of PKAc–Mg2ADP–pSP20. In particular, the phosphoryl groups on pSer21SP20 are similarly oriented away from Asp166 and Lys168, keeping
the length of the hydrogen bond to the OH group of Ser53 in the glycine-rich
loop in the range of 2.4–2.7 Å (see Figure  for the highest-resolution
PKAc–Ca2ADP–pSP20 complex), which compares
well with the distance of 2.8 Å in PKAc–Mg2ADP–pSP20. However, because of differences in the metal size
and electronic structure, there are differences in coordination spheres,
metal–ligand distances, and metal hydration between complexes
(for examples of electron density maps, see Figures 1 and 2 of the ; for metal–ligand
distances, see Figure 3 and Table 2 of the ).

Electron density for the active site components ADP, pSer21SP20, and Ser53 contoured at the 2.0σ level (4σ
for calcium cations) in PKAc–Ca2ADP–pSP20.
Distances are in angstroms.

The octahedral geometry seen around ions in PKAc–Mg2ADP–pSP20 is not present in any of the other complexes.
Both metal sites are surrounded by seven ligands in PKAc–Ca2ADP–pSP20, whereas in PKAc–Sr2ADP–pSP20
and PKAc–Ba2ADP–pSP20, M1 and M2 metals have
coordination numbers of 8 and 7, respectively. As the protein residues
cannot provide additional coordination to these metals, the extra
ligands are water molecules. The sizes of the metal cations appear
to have little effect on the positions of the side chains to which
they are bound, but the terminal phosphoryl groups on ADP and pSer21SP20 are pushed away from each other compared to their locations
in PKAc–Mg2ADP–pSP20. The increase in the
βPADP···P21SP20 separation
from 4.3 Å in PKAc–Mg2ADP–pSP20 is negligible
(0.3–0.4 Å) in the calcium product complex but increases
substantially to ∼1 Å for complexes with strontium and
barium. These changes in the geometry of the active sites of different
metal complexes can be partially explained by the variations in the
metal ionic radii. Also, they can be linked to the increased coordination
number of 8 for Sr2+ and Ba2+ cations at site
M1. The larger the coordination sphere, the longer the metal–ligand
distances, and consequently the phosphoryl groups are pushed apart.

Superposition of our product structures reveals that the main chain
of the glycine-rich loop adopts two major positions related by a more
than 2 Å sliding shift relative to its location in PKAc–Mg2ADP–SP20, which nonetheless does not affect the loop’s
closed conformation (Figure 4 of the ). The shift is observed in PKAc–Sr2ADP–pSP20 and PKAc–Ba2ADP–pSP20,
where the ionic radii of the metals are longest. The side chain OH
group of Ser53 has various conformations in the complexes studied,
related by the Cβ–Oγ bond rotation, but keeps its
hydrogen bond to the phosphate group of pSer21SP20 in all
the structures. This observation is in contrast to the 3.1 Å
structure of the tetrameric PKA complex, where the Ser53 side chain was not found to interact with the phosphate
group on serine of the regulatory subunit. In addition, the position
of the side chain phenyl of Phe54 changes dramatically when PKAc–Mg2ATP–IP20 and the product structures are compared (Figure
4 of the ). In PKAc–Mg2ATP–IP20, when there is no phosphate at position 21
of the bound peptide, the phenyl is located within 3.3 Å of the
oxygens of the γ-phosphate of ATP and is only 4.2 Å from
the Cβ atom of Ala21IP20. In the product complexes,
Phe54 is pushed away by the presence of the bulky side chain of pSer21SP20 toward a hydrophobic pocket lined by Leu74, Val79, and
Leu82.

Discussion
The first PKA structure
of a physiological product complex was
reported recently by Zhang et al. for
the tetrameric holoenzyme at 3.1 Å resolution (PDB entry 3TNQ), which was obtained
by soaking in MgATP. That structure raised important questions about
the role of autophosphorylation of the regulatory subunits in cells.
However, the resolution of the holoezyme–product structure
prevented a detailed analysis of the PKAc active site after the phosphoryl
transfer had occurred, including accurate positions of products and
enzyme residues, and the hydration of metal cations. In this work,
the low-temperature structures of the PKAc–product complexes
ranged between 1.55 and 1.90 Å resolution, whereas the two room-temperature
product structures were obtained at 2.0 and 2.2 Å. These resolutions
are sufficient to perform a detailed investigation of the active site,
containing products, ADP, and phosphorylated SP20.

A previous
report by Bhatnagar et al. on solution
kinetics measurements of PKAc activity suggested that
only a handful of divalent metal species promotes binding of ATP to
the PKAc active site and is capable of facilitating the transfer of
a phosphoryl group to a substrate. Most notably, Ca2+ and
Sr2+ were found to allow ATP to bind, but no activity was
detected. The heavier alkaline earth metal Ba2+ failed
to support ATP binding or enzymatic activity. An exciting finding
in this study is that all the alkaline earth metals, when in excess,
appear to promote both ATP binding and phosphotransferase activity.
The physiological relevance of our observation of the products in
the reported structures has to be interpreted with great care. The
SP20 pseudosubstrate peptide has been generated from the inhibitor
peptide IP20 that represents a portion of the heat-stable protein
kinase inhibitor, PKI, by mutation of residues 20 and 21. PKI, and
hence IP20 and SP20, are able to bind to PKAc with high affinity., Possibly, in solution SP20 binds to PKAc first and facilitates the
binding of ATP and metal ions by increasing the nucleoside affinity
for PKAc, as has been seen for the PKI. In fact, a binary complex of PKAc with bound SP20 was reported previously. The phosphoryl transfer occurs, and the stable
product complex is trapped in the crystals. Our ability to trap the
products in all the reported structures can, thus, be attributed to
the unique binding properties of the substrate peptide used. We are
pursuing solution kinetics studies, including steady-state and single-turnover measurements, to clarify which metals do indeed support phosphoryl
transfer. Our preliminary enzyme kinetics measurements of the RIIβ
subunit and Kemptide acting as substrates have shown that alkaline
earth divalent metals do in fact support phosphoryl transfer catalyzed
by PKAc. Conversely, the phosphorylated RIIβ subunit could not
be detected in the steady-state kinetics when calcium was used, perhaps
because the phosphorylated product does not dissociate from PKAc,
suggesting a low off rate of the product complex decomposition. However,
in the single-turnover (“burst”) kinetics measurements,
we were able to detect phosphorylation of the RIIβ subunit using
both magnesium and calcium. A full kinetic study will be published
separately.

In principle, the transfer of a phosphoryl group
from ATP to a
substrate’s Ser/Thr can proceed according to dissociative,
associative, and concerted mechanisms. The dissociative mechanism, designated DN + AN or SN1 by IUPAC, necessitates the production of intermediate
metaphosphate ion PO3– that is attacked
by an incoming nucleophile. In the associative mechanism, termed AN + DN, a detectable pentacoordinated phosphorane
intermediate is formed along the reaction path. In the concerted mechanism,
ANDN or SN2, the reaction proceeds
through a trigonal bipyramidal pentacoordinated transition state,
in which fission of the bond of the leaving ADP group and formation
of a bond to the nucleophile’s hydroxyl group (OH) both occur
at the same time. This transition state can be loose or tight depending
on the distances from the central phosphorus atom to the apical positions
in the trigonal bipyramid and on how synchronous the nucleophilic
attack and leaving group departure are. None of these mechanisms has
been ruled out definitively for PKAc.

Recently, Montenegro and
co-authors have reported a comprehensive
molecular dynamics study on the Michaelis complexes containing Kemptide
or SP20 as the substrate. Notably, they
found that the OH group of Kemptide’s serine is rotated toward
Asp166, forming hydrogen bonds with this aspartate and Lys168. On
the other hand, the OH group of Ser21SP20 adopts a conformation
very similar to that observed in our PKAc–Mg2AMP-PCP–SP20
structure. Furthermore, these authors argued that the chemical mechanism
of the phosphoryl transfer may depend on the substrate bound to the
enzyme, suggesting that with Kemptide the reaction proceeds through
a loose transition state, resulting in the protonation of Asp166 in
the product. With SP20, however, the transition state is tight and
Ser21SP20 protonates the incoming phosphate. Importantly,
the loose transition state in the concerted mechanism has been verified
for the transfer of the phosphoryl group to alcohols in solution for
small molecules. We, therefore, want
to emphasize that our current structures of the pseudo-Michaelis and
product complexes provide some insight only into the possible mechanism
with substrate SP20. The detailed atomic rearrangements may be different
when the substrate is an actual physiological protein. Nonetheless,
our findings with respect to the chemical mechanism of the phosphoryl
transfer step with SP20 as a substrate are summarized as follows.
Before the reaction, (a) the OH group of Ser21SP20 is rotated
away from metals and lacks a hydrogen bond to Asp166, with an Oγ–Cβ–Cα–N
torsion angle of 64°, (b) the OH group of Ser21SP20 forms a 2.7 Å hydrogen bond with a γ-phosphate oxygen
of ATP and is 3.5 Å from the γ-phosphorus atom, and (c)
the γ-phosphate forms a hydrogen bond with Lys168 and is coordinated
to both metals. After the phosphoryl transfer has taken place, (a)
the orientation of the Cβ–Oγ bond in pSer21SP20 is identical to that in the pseudo-Michaelis complex,
(b) the transferred PO3 maintains coordination to M1 but
loses its bond to M2 while the sixth position in the coordination
sphere of M2 is replaced by a new water molecule, and (c) the transferred
PO3 lacks a hydrogen bond to either Asp166 or Lys168 but
gains an interaction with the side chain of Ser53 in the glycine-rich
loop. Ser53 is not a conserved residue in the kinase family, and previous
solution studies showed that mutations of this serine did not affect
the steady-state phosphorylation kinetics of a small peptide. However, it is possible that Ser53 may have
a certain effect on the pre-steady-state kinetics, stabilizing the
transition state or the metaphosphate intermediate by providing additional
hydrogen bonding for the moving γ-PO3.

These
results can also be placed in context with the previous structural
reports of PKAc complexes obtained by cocrystallizing presynthesized
MgADP, SP20, phosphorylated SP20, and AlF3,, in which OH and PO3 groups of Ser21SP20 were
rotated toward metals, with an Oγ–Cβ–Cα–N
torsion angle of −65°, and formed hydrogen bonds with
Asp166 and Lys168. Assuming our current structures represent stable
intermediates before and after the reaction with SP20, while the previous
structure with AlF3 truly mimics the transition state,
the substrate OH group should rotate ∼110° from its position
in PKAc–Mg2-AMP–PCP–SP20 to reach
the conformation found in the transition-state mimic, and once the
phosphate is transferred, it should rotate back 110° to assume
its position in PKAc–Mg2ADP–pSP20. On the
basis of this perspective, we can hypothesize that the initial conformational
change of the flexible Ser21SP20 side chain may initiate
the chemistry and play the role of the reaction driving force. Later,
after the phosphoryl transfer, the transferred phosphoryl group rotates
toward the bulk solvent so that the product can be released from the
enzyme. The γ-P atom is ∼3–3.5 Å from the
substrate’s OH group depending on its location in the pseudo-Michaelis
PKAc–Mg2AMP-PCP–SP20 or PKAc–Mg2ATP–IP20 structure (Figure ). Theoretical calculations for the mechanism that
accommodates our current enzyme–substrate and enzyme–product
and the earlier transition-state mimic structures could resolve this
issue for PKAc, although the calculations would be successful in mapping
the correct reaction pathway only if the locations of hydrogen atoms
before and after the reaction were established for the starting theoretical
models. Future neutron crystallographic studies of PKAc may be the
only direct structural technique that will provide us with this information
and therefore a definitive answer.

Conclusions
In
summary, our X-ray structure of a pseudo-Michaelis complex with
AMP-PCP and substrate SP20 showed the conformation of the Ser21SP20 side chain rotated away from the metals and Asp166, in
agreement with recent molecular dynamics simulations. γ-PO3 has been transferred, and the product’s side chain
was observed similarly rotated away toward the bulk solvent, perhaps
representing a state just before the product is released from the
enzyme. We have observed that alkaline earth divalent metal cations
can indeed bind and facilitate the phosphoryl transfer chemical reaction
in the active site of PKAc. Therefore, our results provide new insights
into the chemistry of the phophoryl transfer reaction catalyzed by
PKAc when the SP20 high-affinity peptide substrate is used and challenge
the conventional views about the roles metals play in it.

Supporting Information Available
Crystallographic
data collection,
refinement, and additional figures. This material is available free
of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi400066a_si_001.pdf

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
PKAccatalytic subunit of protein kinase
A

PKIheat-stable
protein kinase inhibitor

SP2020-residue peptide substrate

IP2020-residue peptide inhibitor.

