DNA polymerases catalyze template-dependent
DNA synthesis during
genome replication and repair. These enzymes are responsible for preferentially
binding and incorporating a nucleotide, from a pool of chemically
and structurally similar molecules, that correctly base pairs with
the appropriate templating base. DNA polymerase (pol) β has
served as a model enzyme for studying this fundamental task, providing
a detailed understanding of the events during substrate selection.
Pol β is the smallest cellular DNA polymerase (335 residues,
39 kDa) and lacks a 3′ → 5′ proofreading exonuclease
activity that enhances the accuracies of replicative DNA polymerases
(e.g., pol ε and pol δ). On the basis of its primary sequence,
pol β belongs to the X-family of DNA polymerases. This review will highlight recent advances and
insights provided by the structural characterization of pol β
in various liganded and conformational states. For earlier kinetic
and structural descriptions, see previous in-depth reviews.,

Biological Role
Endogenous and environmental agents continually
modify genomic
DNA, resulting in physical damage or modification that results in
steady-state levels of 50000—200000 apurinic/apyrimidinic (AP)
sites per eukaryotic cell. AP sites are
generated through spontaneous depurination or lesion specific enzymatic
hydrolysis of the N-glycosyl bond between the deoxyribose
and base. The rate of spontaneous depurination has been estimated
to be ∼104 depurinations per cell per day. The base excision repair (BER) pathway (Figure ) is responsible for removing simple base lesions
and AP sites in DNA. Pol β contributes two enzymatic activities,
DNA synthesis and deoxyribose phosphate (dRP) lyase, during the repair
of AP sites.

Base excision repair. Base excision repair involves the
removal
of a damaged nucleotide (red pointers) from DNA. It is replaced with
an undamaged nucleotide (green pointers). The damaged base is removed
by a damage specific DNA glycosylase (1) that hydrolyzes the N-glycosidic
bond between the deoxyribose and damaged base. In this image, uracil
would be removed by uracil DNA glycosylase. AP endonuclease 1 incises
the sugar–phosphate backbone 5′ to the AP site (2).
The lyase domain of pol β (3) removes the 5′-dRP group
(red pointer), and the polymerase domain inserts a nucleotide in a
template-dependent reaction (green pointer). DNA ligase (4) seals
the nicked DNA, resulting in restoration of the original DNA structure.

AP sites represent potentially
dangerous lesions because they can
be mutagenic and cytotoxic. AP endonuclease 1 incises the AP site,
resulting in 3′-hydroxyl and 5′-dRP termini. The dRP
group is excised by the lyase activity of pol β, resulting in
a 5′-phosphate and a one-nucleotide gap (i.e., a single templating
base). Pol β fills this single-nucleotide gap, resulting in
nicked DNA that will subsequently be ligated to restore DNA’s
native structure.

As discussed in detail below and elsewhere,, pol
β and other members of the X-family of DNA polymerases have
evolved to fill short DNA gaps during essential cellular transactions.
In a mouse model system, the loss of pol β results in embryonic
lethality; however, cultured embryonic mouse fibroblasts are viable. These cells are hypersensitive to genomic toxicants
because of the accumulation of cytotoxic repair intermediates. In addition to its enzymatic activities, pol
β physically interacts with other key BER factors that hasten
repair at AP sites.

The fundamental
role that pol β plays in BER and high-fidelity
gap-filling DNA synthesis implicates pol β and BER as tumor
suppressors., Consistent with this idea is
the observation that a high percentage of tumors have variants of
pol β. These often have altered fidelity or catalytic activities
and can induce cellular transformation. Many of these variants have amino acid changes that are distant
from the polymerase or lyase active sites. It remains to be seen whether
these alterations affect critical protein–protein interactions
necessary for efficient BER or critical protein dynamic behavior that
influences catalytic activity and/or fidelity (see below).

Minimal
Reaction Path for Nucleotide Insertion
DNA polymerases are
believed to follow the general pathway outlined
in Scheme . The detailed kinetic and equilibrium
constants are sensitive to the identity of the polymerase and substrates
(e.g., base and sugar of the nucleoside triphosphate and DNA sequence
context). In addition, the nature (kinetic and thermodynamic) of the
conformational changes(s) before and after chemistry has been the
subject of a long-standing debate as well as their impact on substrate
discrimination (i.e., fidelity). Steady-state
kinetic analyses indicate that pol β follows an ordered binding
of substrates; after binding DNA (Scheme , step 1), DNA polymerases preferentially bind a
nucleoside triphosphate (dNTP) that preserves Watson–Crick
hydrogen bonding as dictated by the template (coding) base (step 2).
The ternary substrate complex undergoes a global conformational change
(step 3). While many DNA polymerases undergo a large subdomain motion,
more subtle conformational adjustments that either hasten or deter
the subsequent chemical step (step 4) occur. Following chemistry,
the ternary product complex undergoes a conformational change (step
5) that facilitates PPi release (step 6). At this point,
the extended product (DNA+1) is released (single-nucleotide
insertion) or serves as substrate DNA for another round of nucleotide
insertion following translocation (processive DNA synthesis). DNA
synthesis also requires at least two divalent metal ions. These are
not explicitly shown in Scheme  but are discussed
in detail below.

Minimal DNA Polymerase Reaction Pathway
After binding DNA (step 1),
the nucleotide triphosphate binds, forming an initial ternary complex
(circle, step 2). The polymerase–substrate complex undergoes
rapid conformational adjustments that lead to a productive ternary
substrate complex (square, step 3). Catalysis (step 4) leads to a
postchemistry product ternary complex. Product release occurs concurrent
with or following conformational changes (step 5) that facilitate
PPi release (step 6). Translocation of the nascent base
pair upstream vacating the active site prepares the polymerase for
the next insertion event (gray solid line). Alternatively, product
DNA+1 may dissociate from the polymerase (step 7), terminating
DNA synthesis. While two divalent metals (Mg2+) are required
for catalysis, they are not explicitly shown in this scheme. See the
text for the role of these metals.

Structural Intermediates
Structural biology offers a unique opportunity to visualize well-populated
intermediate states during catalytic cycling at a molecular level.
This approach requires that intermediate states be trapped using modified
enzymes, inert cofactors, or substrate analogues. Alternatively, reactions
can be initiated in the crystal and stopped at defined moments by
rapid freezing. In each case, the structures should be interpreted
in the context of a kinetic–thermodynamic model for ligand
binding and catalysis. This is especially challenging because structural
models often represent static snapshots of dynamic events. Computational
studies that bridge the observed intermediate states can be very useful
in correlating structural and kinetic observations. Crystallographic structures of most of the intermediates
depicted in Scheme  have been determined at
high resolution and provide molecular insights by which an induced-fit
model bestows substrate specificity (Table ). We next describe salient features of available crystallographic
structures of the intermediates outlined in Scheme .

Crystallographic Structures of Pol
β Catalytic Intermediates
intermediate
(conformation)	ligand	PDB entry	refs	
I (O)	none	1BPD, 3UXN	(), ()	
II (O)	DNA	1BPX, 3ISB	(), ()	
III (O)	DNA, dNTP	4F5N, 4F5O, 4F5P	()	
IV (C)	DNA, dNTP	2BPF, 1BPY, 2FMS, 1HUO, 4KLD, 4KLE, 4KLF, 3C2L,3C2M,4KLP, 4KLQ,4KLS	(), (), (), (), (), ()	
V (C)	DNA+1, PPi	1HUZ, 4KLG, 4KLH, 4KLI, 4KLJ, 4KLL, 4KLM, 4KLO, 4KLT	(), ()	
VI (O)	DNA+1, PPi	–	–	
VII (O)	DNA+1	1BPZ, 1TV9,1TVA,4KLU	(), (), ()	
The global conformation is specified
as open (O) or closed (C).

Refers to a structure with an active
site mismatch.

Apoenzyme (I)
Controlled proteolytic or chemical cleavage
of pol β first demonstrated that it is folded into discrete
domains. The structure of the unliganded
apoenzyme was first reported in 1994. It confirmed that the enzyme was folded into two domains: an amino-terminal
8 kDa domain and the 31 kDa polymerase domain (Figure ). Consistent with sedimentation velocity measurements and small-angle X-ray scattering studies of
the apoenzyme, the global structure displays
an extended conformation (Figure A). It is
now recognized that the dRP lyase activity resides in the amino-terminal
domain., Like other DNA polymerases, the polymerase
domain has a modular organization with three functionally distinct
subdomains. The catalytic subdomain coordinates two divalent metal
cations (Mg2+) that facilitate DNA synthesis. The other
two subdomains are spatially situated on opposite sides of the catalytic
subdomain. While the catalytic subdomains of X- and C-family DNA polymerases
share structural homology, those from other families (e.g., members
of the A- and B-families) exhibit a similar but unique fold. Structures of A-, B-, and Y-family polymerases
have likened these enzymes to a right hand with fingers, palm, and
thumb subdomains.− However, this nomenclature is the opposite of that
originally proposed for pol β. Thus,
there is not a consistent usage of the handlike nomenclature in the
literature. Because the handlike architectural analogy lacks functional
insight, we use functionally based designations for the subdomains.
The polymerase domain includes the C-subdomain (catalytic), the D-subdomain
(DNA binding), and the N-subdomain (nascent base pair binding) that
are equivalent to the palm, thumb, and fingers subdomains, respectively,
of right-handed DNA polymerases (Figure ).

Domain and subdomain organization of DNA polymerase β.
Ribbon
representation of pol β illustrating the polymerase (colored)
and amino-terminal lyase (gray) domains. The polymerase domain is
composed of three subdomains: D, orange; C, red; and N, yellow. These
correspond to the thumb, palm, and fingers subdomains, respectively,
of DNA polymerases that utilize an architectural analogy to a right
hand. (A) The structure of the apoenzyme indicates that it forms an
extended structure (PDB entry 1BPD). (B) The
molecular surface (semitransparent) of pol β bound to single-nucleotide
gapped DNA (PDB entry 3ISB) exhibits a global doughnutlike
structure in which the lyase domain interacts with the N-subdomain
of the polymerase domain.

Binary DNA Substrate Complex (II)
In contrast to replicative
DNA polymerases that are targeted to the growing 3′-primer
terminus at the double-stranded–single-stranded DNA junction,
pol β is targeted to the 5′-margin in gapped DNA. In
contrast to the extended protein conformation of the apoenzyme, the
binding to single-nucleotide gapped DNA results in a doughnutlike
protein conformation (Figure B). The lyase
domain strongly binds the 5′-phosphate or 5′-dRP BER
intermediate in gapped DNA. The product
of the dRP lyase reaction generates a 5′-phosphate; transient-state
kinetic characterization of the dRP lyase reaction indicates that
it is significantly more rapid than single-nucleotide insertion, so
that DNA synthesis would occur using a “clean” gap (i.e.,
the 3′- and 5′-margins in the gap are appropriate for
their respective enzymatic activities; DNA synthesis and subsequent
ligation).

In the binary one-nucleotide
gapped DNA structure, the 5′-phosphate in the gap is hydrogen
bonded to Lys35 and Lys68 (Figure A). Importantly, pol β binds tightly to the
5′-phosphate only when there is single-stranded DNA adjacent
to the 5′-phosphate. This can be nongapped single-stranded
DNA because a 3′-primer terminus is not required for optimal
binding. Accordingly, pol β is
expected to bind to the 5′-phosphate in a DNA gap of any size.
The observation that it will processively (i.e., insert several nucleotides
before dissociating from the DNA substrate) fill short gaps (fewer
than six nucleotides) suggests that the lyase domain tethers the polymerase
domain to the downstream position in gapped DNA. When the primer terminus
(i.e., 3′-OH) is within six nucleotides of the 5′-phosphate
on the downstream DNA strand, the proximity of the polymerase domain
to the primer terminus would hasten processive DNA synthesis.

DNA binding.
(A) Surface representation of the lyase domain highlighting
the 5′-phosphate binding pocket (PDB entry 3ISB). The 5′-phosphate is hydrogen bonded to Lys35 (K35)
and Lys68 (K68). Lys72 serves as the nucleophile for removal of the
5′-dRP intermediate during BER. (B) The lyase domain and the
D-subdomain each have a HhH motif (blue ribbons) that interacts with
the DNA backbone of the incised DNA strand (yellow) downstream and
upstream of the gap, respectively. This motif binds a monovalent cation
(Na+, purple) making sequence nonspecific interactions
with the DNA backbone. The template strand is colored orange, and
most of the nucleotides are illustrated in a ladder representation.
The coding templating base in the gap is shown as sticks. The 5′-margin
in the gap of the incised strand is indicated.

The α-helical 8 kDa lyase domain includes a structural
motif
that binds a monovalent metal interacting with the DNA backbone downstream
of the single-nucleotide gap (Figure B). This helix–hairpin–helix (HhH)
motif (residues 55–79) includes Lys72 that serves as the primary
amine that forms a Schiff base intermediate during excision of the
5′-dRP moiety in BER. In addition,
the D-subdomain interacts with the DNA sugar–phosphate backbone
of the duplex DNA upstream of the gap utilizing a second HhH motif
(Figure B, residues 92–118). This HhH
motif also interacts with the primer strand phosphate backbone through
a monovalent metal ion. Thus, the two HhH motifs are observed to make
DNA backbone interactions with each end of the incised DNA strand.
In the structure of the binary gapped DNA complex, the DNA is bent
∼90° as it enters the polymerase active site. The sharp
bend occurs at the 5′-phosphodiester bond of the templating
base. The function of the HhH motifs appears to be a sequence nonspecific
phosphate backbone binding motif that stabilizes the pronounced bend
observed in the gapped DNA structure. The abrupt bend in the DNA also
exposes the terminal base pairs of each DNA duplex that is situated
in the gap. His34 of the lyase domain interacts with the first base
pair of the downstream duplex, whereas the N-subdomain contributes
interactions with the nascent base pair in the closed ternary complex
(see below). The altered path of the template strand as it enters
the polymerase active site is a general feature observed in most structures
of substrate complexes of DNA polymerases.

Open Ternary Substrate
Complex (III)
Pol β and
members of the A- and B-families of DNA polymerases exhibit a rapid
repositioning of the N-subdomain (fingers) upon nucleotide binding
to close around the nascent base pair (Figure A). In the presence of an incoming dNTP, the closed complex of the
wild-type enzyme is stable (i.e., K3 ≫
1). By weakening interactions of the
N-subdomain believed to stabilize the closed complex, an intermediate
complex with an incoming nucleotide bound to the open conformation
was determined. Substituting lysine for
arginine at residue 283 (Figure B) of α-helix
N results in a mutant polymerase with moderately reduced catalytic
efficiency. The structure reveals that
the coding template base facilitates binding of the incoming correct
dNTP to the open form of pol β through Watson–Crick hydrogen
bonds (Figure A). However, the nascent base
pair is severely buckled, because the sugar/triphosphate moieties
interact with protein side chains that have not moved to their closed
positions. Surprisingly, the negative charge on the incoming nucleotide
triphosphate was neutralized through protein interactions (Figure A). Although free nucleotides are usually associated
with a magnesium ion, the nucleotide–metal complex exists in
several coordination states and diastereoisomers. The ability to trap
a metal-free complex suggests that the polymerase has a strong influence
on metal coordination and triphosphate reorganization. It remains
to be determined how the polymerase directs and/or deters (e.g., for
an incorrect nucleotide) the metal coordination state of the incoming
nucleotide.

Nucleotide-induced conformational changes. (A) Ribbon representation
of the single-nucleotide gapped DNA binary pol β complex (PDB
entry 3ISB). The ribbon is colored according to the protein
backbone displacement upon formation of the ternary substrate complex
(PDB entry 2FMS), from white (0 Å) to red (10
Å). The nascent base pair is also illustrated with a semitransparent
surface representation (PDB entry 2FMS). Significant domain and subdomain repositioning
occurs exclusively in the lyase domain and N-subdomain. (B) In the
open conformation, Arg283 (N-subdomain, yellow) does not interact
with other key residues, but in the closed conformation, it interacts
with the templating (coding) base, the upstream template nucleotide,
and Glu295 (green dotted lines). Consequently, the position of the
N-subdomain is structurally transmitted to the active site through
a series of interactions involving Arg283 and Asp192 that coordinates
(purple dotted lines) both active site Mg2+ ions. This
is also accompanied by altered interactions of Glu295/Tyr296 with
Arg258 in the open and closed forms. Phe272 is postulated to transiently
interfere with interactions between Asp192 and Arg258, permitting
an interaction with Glu295/Tyr296. Residues in the C-subdomain are
colored red. Panel B was adapted from ref ().

Nucleotide binding to pol β. (A) A ternary substrate complex
with the correct incoming nucleotide was trapped in the open conformation
using a mutant of pol β that destabilizes the closed conformation. In this structure (PDB entry 4F5N), protein side chains
coordinate the extended anionic triphosphate moiety of the incoming
nonhydrolyzable dCTP analogue, dCMP(CF2)PP. Although the
nascent base pair (yellow carbon atoms) is severely buckled, the incoming
cytosine base hydrogen bonds (green lines) with the templating guanine.
Asp276 (D276) hydrogen bonds with O3′ of the incoming nucleotide,
while Arg183 (R183) coordinates nonbridging oxygens on the α-phosphate
(Pα) and β-phosphate (Pβ) of the incoming nucleotide.
Arg149 (R149) and Gly189 (D189) coordinate the γ-phosphate (Pγ)
of the incoming nucleotide. Active site aspartates (D190, D192, and
D256) that coordinate active site metals are also indicated. The templating
(coding) nucleotide and primer terminus are also indicated (T6 and
O3′, respectively). (B) The active site structure and metal
coordination of the precatalytic ternary substrate complex (PDB entry 2FMS) are consistent
with a two-metal mechanism for nucleotidyl transfer. This closed structure
was trapped with an inert dUTP analogue (dUMPNPP). Importantly, the primer terminus O3′ coordinates
the catalytic Mg2+, labeled Mg(C). The catalytic Mg2+ also coordinates all three active site aspartates (purple
dashed lines). In this structure, O3′ of the primer terminus
is 3.4 Å from the α-phosphate of dUMPNPP. A nucleotide
binding metal, Mg(N), coordinates nonbridging oxygens on all three
phosphates. The protein coordination of the triphosphate also differs
from that observed in the absence of metals. Arg183 now only coordinates
the β-phosphate, and Arg149 has lost its direct contact with
Pγ.

Closed Ternary Substrate
Complex (IV)
Precatalytic
closed crystallographic structures have been trapped by employing
inert analogues of catalytic participants; the dideoxy-terminated
primer (i.e., absence of primer O3′), an incoming nucleotide where the bridging oxygen between the α-
and β-phosphates has been replaced with an imido or methylene
group;, or substituting calcium for magnesium. All three approaches have been successfully
utilized to trap closed ternary complexes of pol β. The structures
show that the N-subdomain has closed around the nascent base pair
(Figures  and ). This
global structural transition induces many subtle conformational adjustments
that lead to conformational activation. One key aspect of this activation
is that Asp192 is released from its salt bridge interaction with Arg258,
permitting it to coordinate both the catalytic and nucleotide binding
metals (Figure B). The importance of this
conformational activation is illustrated by the observation that mutagenesis
of Arg283 and Glu295, which are &gt;10 Å from the active site,
dramatically
decreases activity and the extent of conformational activation.,−

Another key conformational adjustment resides
in the precise positioning of O3′ of the deoxyribose of the
primer terminus. The catalytic metal coordinates a nonbridging oxygen
of the α-phosphate of the incoming nucleotide as well as O3′
of the primer terminus. In the absence of this metal or O3′
(i.e., dideoxy-terminated primer), crystallographic structures indicate
that the sugar pucker is 2′-endo; however, binding of the catalytic
magnesium alters the sugar pucker of the primer terminus (3′-endo),
thereby repositioning O3′ for in-line attack on the α-phosphate
of the incoming nucleotide. These conformational adjustments facilitate
binding of the catalytic magnesium necessary to activate the primer
3′-OH and position the α-phosphate of the incoming dNTP.
Because the closed ternary substrate complex can be determined without
the catalytic magnesium, it is believed that this is the last component
that binds to complete the precatalytic complex. This is also consistent
with the reported binding affinity for the catalytic metal.

Recently, ternary complex crystallographic
structures of intermediate
complexes undergoing nucleotidyl transfer have been captured with
natural substrates and metals., This is achieved by
generating crystals of precatalytic substrate ternary complexes in
the presence of the inert metal Ca2+ and then initiating
the reaction through ion exchange with Mg2+. The reaction
is stopped by freezing the crystal as the reaction progresses (i.e.,
after a defined time period), and the structure is determined. Unexpectedly,
an additional divalent metal site is observed transiently bridging
oxygen atoms on the products (Figure A). Thus,
this metal is associated with the product state and postulated to
be involved in pyrophosphorolysis, the reverse reaction of DNA synthesis
(Scheme , k–4). The presence of this metal is expected
to be unique to X- and Y-family DNA polymerases because other DNA
polymerases have a conserved basic side chain that occupies this position., Those side chains appear to have multifunctional roles that are
dependent on the stage of the reaction: a role in polarizing Pα
of the incoming nucleotide, stabilizing the negative charge developing
on the products, and modulating K4 (i.e.,
the internal chemical equilibrium). In addition, there are basic side
chains in the N-subdomain that stabilize the incoming dNTP in the
closed conformation.

Structures of the closed product complex of pol β.
(A) As
the nucleotidyl transfer reaction proceeds in the crystal, an additional
divalent metal is observed in the closed product complex. After a 40 s reaction in the crystal (PDB entry 4KLG), the active site
structure reveals a new metal [Mg(P)] that bridges the two products,
i.e., coordinates nonbridging oxygens on the phosphates of the incorporated
dCMP and the remnant β-phosphate of PPi (yellow carbons).
Water molecules (red spheres) complete the octahedral coordination
(purple dashed lines). A sodium ion (purple sphere, Na+) replaces the catalytic magnesium, but the nucleotide-associated
Mg2+ still coordinates nonbridging oxygens on the phosphates
of the products (dCMP and PPi). (B) After an extended reaction
in the crystal (45 min, PDB entry 4KLL), the polymerase remains closed, but
the PPi appears to be preparing to dissociate. In this
case, a water molecule (S) replaces the remnant of the γ-phosphate
for nucleotide metal coordination. Hydrogen bonds are displayed as
green lines.

Closed Ternary Product
Complex (V)
After chemistry,
the ternary product complex remains in the closed conformation. However,
there are subtle active site changes concomitant with chemistry. The
resulting phosphodiester bond alters the coordination state of the
catalytic Mg2+, hastening its dissociation and its replacement
with Na+. In contrast, the nucleotide-associated Mg2+ remains in the active site coordinating aspartates and PPi (Figure B). After longer periods
of time, the PPi coordination is altered as one phosphate,
the Pγ remnant, is stripped from the nucleotide metal by a competing
water molecule, indicating that metal solvation may play a role in
PPi dissociation and/or subdomain opening. Surprisingly,
the product complex after correct nucleotide insertion (i.e., nicked
DNA) remains in a closed conformation with bound PPi even
with extended incubations. Because catalytic cycling in solution occurs
much more rapidly, other factors such as crystal packing or excessive
divalent metals are influencing the open or closed state of the enzyme.
The ternary product complex can also be formed by crystallizing pol
β with nicked DNA (annealed oligonucleotides) to generate an
open binary complex. Addition of PPi and Mg2+ produced a closed ternary product complex similar to that described
above in which the nucleotide and product metals sites are occupied
with Mg2+ and the catalytic metal site is occupied with
Na+ (Figure A). A reverse reaction
is not observed probably because of the unfavorable equilibrium for
this reaction.

Previously, a similar approach employing an exchange-inert
nucleotide analogue, Cr3+-2′-deoxythymidine 5′-β,γ-methylene-triphosphate,
bound to pol β could turn over in the crystal after the addition
Mn2+. As described above,
the catalytic metal ion was not observed, indicating that it had dissociated
after chemistry. Additionally, the polymerase remains in the closed
conformation with bound products. Because Cr3+ does not
permit ligand exchange and is bound at the nucleotide binding metal
site, it remained bound to the oxygens of the product phosphates (incorporated
TMP and PCP) so that solvent could not compete for metal coordination,
hastening dissociation of the PPi analogue. These structural
observations are consistent with pyrophosphate exchange experiments
with T7 DNA polymerase that suggest that PPi release occurs
with or after a postchemistry conformational change (Scheme , step 5).

Binary DNA
Product Complex (VII)
As described above,
pol β can be crystallized after being incubated with annealed
oligonucleotides that create a nicked product DNA., In this situation, pol β is in the open conformation with
the primer terminus in the nascent base pair binding pocket. While
addition of PPi creates a closed ternary product complex,
the structure of an open ternary product complex (Scheme , complex VI) has not been determined probably because
of the weak affinity of PPi and the inclination of the
polymerase to close with bound products. Mutagenesis of the polymerase
to destabilize the closed form might overcome this obstacle.

DNA
Polymerase Nucleotidyl Transferase
A model for the nucleotidyl
transferase enzymatic mechanism is
supported by structures of ternary substrate complexes.,, The chemical mechanism proceeds
by an in-line nucleophilic attack of the Mg2+-activated
primer O3′ anion on the α-phosphate of the incoming nucleotide,
leading to a pentacoordinated bipyramidal α-phosphate transition
state. The transition state is resolved by release of PPi from the opposite side of the attacking nucleophile, resulting in
stereochemical inversion about the α-phosphorus of the newly
incorporated nucleotide. The pol β active site includes three
conserved acidic residues that bind two divalent magnesium ions. One
Mg2+ (nucleotide binding metal) coordinates two aspartate
residues (Asp190 and Asp192) and the triphosphate moiety of the incoming
nucleotide, thereby facilitating nucleotide binding. The other Mg2+ (catalytic) coordinates all three active site aspartates
(Asp190, Asp192, and Asp256) and O3′ of the primer terminus
(Figures A and B).
It lowers the pKa of the primer terminus
3′-OH, hastening attack on Pα of the incoming nucleotide,
and serves as a general base upon O3′ activation. Thus, the pKa values
of both the donor (primer O3′) and the acceptor group (OD2
of Asp256) are modulated by the catalytic Mg2+.

Site-directed
mutagenesis of Asp256 coupled with crystallographic,
activity–pH profile, and computational studies confirms that
this residue plays a fundamental role in nucleotidyl transfer. In this study, quantum calculations revealed
the transfer of charge into the catalytic metal and a decrease in
the charge of Asp256(OD2) that accompanies the proton jump from the
primer terminus (O3′) to OD2. In spite of the loss of the proton,
the charge on O3′ remains almost constant, facilitating its
approach toward Pα of the incoming nucleotide. Interestingly,
in the structure of a D256E mutant, a water molecule replaces OD2
of Asp256, and this water is seen to coordinate the catalytic Mg2+. However, in quantum calculations, this water does not substitute
for Asp256(OD2) in the transfer of charge to the catalytic Mg2+. In this situation, the water molecule jumps to OE1 of Glu256,
and the energy barrier for the transition state is much higher than
that for the wild-type enzyme. The critical
role of Asp256(OD2) appears to be facilitated by a stabilizing salt
bridge interaction between Asp256(OD1) and the nearby Arg254. In the
D256E mutant, Arg254 is repositioned and does not interact with Glu256.

Fidelity
Correct
Nucleotide Insertion Efficiency Controls Fidelity
DNA polymerase
fidelity, specificity, and discrimination are relative
kinetic terms used to describe the probability of a polymerase producing
a base substitution error (i.e., mismatch). The base substitution
error frequency for DNA replication and repair polymerases is generally
between 10–3 and &gt;10–6. These frequencies represent one error per 1000
and 1 million nucleotides synthesized, respectively. These levels
of discrimination are far greater than those predicted by free energy
differences between matched and mismatched DNA termini (predicted
error frequency of ∼0.4; one error per three nucleotides synthesized),
indicating that DNA polymerases enhance fidelity by a large factor. DNA polymerase specificity is commonly characterized
by determining the misinsertion frequency. The misinsertion frequency is the insertion efficiency of an incorrect
nucleotide divided by the sum of the insertion efficiencies for incorporation
of incorrect and correct nucleotides at the same concentration of
nucleotides. Quantitatively, fidelity is simply the reciprocal of
the misinsertion frequency. In general, the specificity constants
for incorrect nucleotides are much lower than for the correct nucleotide,
so that fidelity is simply the ratio of specificity constants [(kcat/Km)corr/(kcat/Km)incorr]. Because relative misinsertion efficiency and
fidelity are the simple ratio of specificity constants for insertion
of correct and incorrect nucleotides, they can be altered by a change
in one specificity constant or both.

Importantly, low- and high-fidelity
polymerases insert incorrect nucleotides with similar efficiencies. Consequently, fidelity is modulated by the efficiency
of correct nucleotide insertion, and the molecular strategies that
contribute to efficient DNA synthesis are dependent on the specific
polymerase. Thus, an understanding of fidelity at the molecular level
requires structural insight into the attributes that contribute to
correct insertion efficiency rather than the molecular interactions
that may occur between a low-fidelity polymerase during incorrect
insertion. The lower efficiency and fidelity of DNA synthesis displayed
by Y-family DNA polymerases is most likely reflected in the positioning
of charged active site residues in the catalytic core. As noted previously, X- and Y-family DNA polymerases do not exhibit a conserved basic
side chain interacting with a nonbridging oxygen of the α-phosphate.
The lack of this interaction would be expected to diminish the rate
of correct nucleotide insertion, thereby decreasing fidelity.

Induced
Fit
The induced-fit hypothesis proposes that
ligand-induced conformational changes align catalytic groups for optimal
activity. Poor substrates would deter
catalysis through the misalignment of the reactive atoms. As described
above, crystallographic structures of polymerase binary DNA and ternary
(+dNTP) complexes indicate that the N-subdomain closes around the
nascent base pair. For 25 years, researchers
characterizing the polymerase reaction have attempted to show that
correct nucleotide insertion was limited by a nonchemical step. For
most DNA polymerases, small elemental effects on the rate of nucleotide
insertion of α-thio-substituted nucleotide analogues relative
to the natural substrates were provided as evidence that chemistry
was only partially rate-limiting. On the basis of model compounds,
a significant decrease in rate upon sulfur substitution would suggest
that chemistry is rate-limiting. However, there appears to be significant
steric considerations, in addition to the electronegativity of sulfur,
that influence the measured rate. Following
polymerase–DNA conformational changes with fluorescently labeled
DNA and the effect of viscosity on both nucleotide insertion and fluorescent
transients, the Tsai laboratory has provided compelling evidence that
for pol β, chemistry is generally rate-limiting for nucleotide
insertion.− Likewise, Sucato et al., and Oertell et al. employing nucleotide
analogues that alter the pKa of the leaving
group provide direct kinetic evidence that the rate-determining step
during transient-state nucleotide insertion involves bond breaking
in the transition state.

A significant effort has been invested
in determining the identity of the rate-determining step because it
was assumed that a rate-limiting conformational change must limit
correct nucleotide insertion for polymerases that utilize an induced-fit
model. However, Post and Ray have pointed
out that induced fit can alter enzyme specificity even when critical
conformational changes are kinetically silent (i.e., fast), such as
when the transition states for correct and incorrect nucleotide incorporation
are unique. Additionally, they show that an induced-fit model reduces
specificity. This reduced level of discrimination represents an acceptable
compromise for an enzyme such as a DNA polymerase that must select
a different and/or new substrate (DNA and dNTP) with each catalytic
cycle.

More recently, Tsai and Johnson highlighted that catalytic
efficiency
(kcat/Km)
of correct nucleotide insertion is independent of the chemical step
(k4) even when it is the slowest step
in the forward direction., Critically, efficiency
is linked to the reversal of the polymerase conformational change
(k–3). Thus, the concentration
of complex IV may accumulate for correct insertion, but not for incorrect
insertion (i.e., the concentration of complex III is high because k–3,incorrect ≫ k–3,correct). Consequently, the conformational change
insulates the correct nucleotide from dissociating from the ternary
substrate complex and commits it to the forward insertion reaction.

Structural Characterization of a Base Substitution Error
Crystallographic structures of pol β with an incoming incorrect
nucleotide indicate that the ternary complex is in a closed conformation
(Figure A)., Using a mutant
enzyme that destabilizes the closed form suggests that the incorrect
incoming nucleotide absolutely requires an active site nucleotide
metal (sometimes termed metal B) for binding because the Watson–Crick
edge of the base does not participate in initial binding, in contrast
to that of a correct nucleotide (Figure A). To accommodate the wrong incoming nucleotide
in the closed polymerase conformation, the templating base vacates
the coding position with an upstream shift in the template strand.
The resulting pseudoabasic template site relieves potential steric
conflicts with the wrong incoming nucleotide. Although hydrogen bonding
is precluded, the kinetics of dATP insertion is similar to that observed
for a true abasic site. Importantly,
the shift in the template strand results in rotation of the primer
terminus as it remains hydrogen bonded to its templating base. The
rotation of the primer terminus displaces O3′ to a position
that deters misinsertion (Figure B). Misinsertion
would require that the primer terminus sugar realign through transient
template strand slippage (i.e., partially subdomain opening) or melting
of the primer terminus from the template strand.

Intermediate pol β
structures for insertion of the wrong
nucleotide. (A) Overlay of the ternary substrate complex structure
with a correct incoming nucleotide (PDB entry 2FMS, light green carbons)
with a precatalytic complex with an active site mismatch (PDB entry 3C2M, yellow carbons;
dG-dAMPCPP)., The position of α-helix
N (ribbon) of the N-subdomain indicates that the polymerase is in
the closed conformation. The coding template base (T6) is shifted
upstream 3.2 Å, while the incoming nucleotide is positioned in
the dNTP binding pocket. The α-, β-, and γ-phosphates
of the incoming nucleotide are denoted Pα, Pβ, and Pγ,
respectively. The primer terminus (P10) of the mismatched structure
rotates to follow its templating base that has shifted upstream, as
the coding templating nucleotide vacates its binding site. This displaces
O3′ from the primer terminus (highlighted), thereby deterring
incorrect nucleotide insertion. (B) In contrast to insertion of the
correct nucleotide in the crystal, misinsertion of an incorrect nucleotide
results in an open binary complex in which PPi has dissociated
(PDB entry 4KLU). The structure of the binary product
complex following misinsertion indicates that the enzyme is in the
open conformation (pink carbons). In this open conformation, the density
for the misinserted nucleotide is poor, indicating that it can assume
multiple conformations.

In contrast to the stable closed conformation observed after
correct
insertion, crystallographic structures after nucleotide misinsertion
demonstrate that the N-subdomain can open and release PPi and metals. The phosphate of the misinserted
nucleotide has rotated to a position that would deter further DNA
synthesis (i.e., stalling primer elongation). As a result, a product-associated
metal is not observed because this phosphate group contributes important
stabilizing ligands with the product metal. The only stable conformation
for the misinserted adenine is where it stacks over the templating
guanine, but the sugar and base exhibit poor electron density, indicating
that the nascent terminus is dynamic.

Oxidative DNA Damage
Environmental and endogenous toxic
chemicals lead to oxidative stress that threatens the integrity of
genomic DNA. Cells maintain an intricate surveillance system for protecting
themselves against adverse genotoxic stress. A major lesion found
in DNA and dNTP pools exposed to reactive oxygen species is the promutagenic
lesion 8-oxo-7,8-dihydro-2′-deoxyguanosine (8-oxoG). Thus,
oxidative stress leads to production of 8-oxodGTP in the dNTP pool
and 8-oxoG in DNA. At neutral pH, the major tautomeric form of 8-oxoG
has a carbonyl group at C8 and is protonated at N7. Thus, guanine
oxidation results in the alteration of the hydrogen bonding capacity
of its Hoogsteen edge. Whereas the unmodified deoxyguanine glycosidic
torsion-angle preference is anti, 8-oxoG favors a syn conformation that can form a Hoogsteen base pair with
adenine. The altered glycosidic torsion-angle preference is due to
steric repulsion between O8 and deoxyribose. Although the 8-oxoG(syn)-A(anti) base pair does not exhibit
Watson–Crick hydrogen bonding, this mispair is well-accommodated
within duplex DNA.

The mutagenic
effects of 8-oxoG are mediated by the action of DNA polymerases, because
the molecular interactions of 8-oxoG in the confines of the active
site can influence its anti–syn conformation.
Structural characterization of pol β ternary complex structures
with DNA containing 8-oxoG indicates that the glycosidic torsion-angle
preference is determined by its base pairing partner, being anti with a complementary cytosine and syn when base-paired with adenine.− The structures reveal
that the template binding pocket will permit 8-oxoG to assume an anti or syn conformation and encode incorporation
of an incoming cytosine or adenine, respectively. However, the binding
pocket for the incoming nucleotide does not have this flexibility,
so that insertion of 8-oxodGTP opposite cytosine is strongly discouraged.

A binary complex crystal structure was
obtained with 8-oxoG in
the template position of the single-nucleotide gapped DNA substrate., As expected, the enzyme is in the open conformation. In this binary
complex structure with unpaired 8-oxoG, the 8-oxoG base could be modeled
into the electron density in both the syn conformation
and the anti conformation, indicating that the 8-oxoG
is in conformational equilibrium in the absence of enzyme; once the
enzyme is bound, the base is sterically restrained from altering its
general glycosidic angle. In this case, the 8-oxoG base may be available
for pairing with an incoming dATP or dCTP. Similarly, the structure
of the phosphate backbone of the 5′-phosphate of the 8-oxoG
nucleotide suggests two positions similar to that observed with alternate
templating bases [G and 8-oxoG (see below)].

Structures of preinsertion
complexes of 8-oxoG paired with an incoming
dCTP or ddCTP in the confines of the pol β active site have
been determined.− The N-subdomain is in the closed conformation with
the bases of the nascent base pair in anti conformations.
Only a minor change in the phosphate backbone conformation of the
templating 8-oxoG is required to relieve the steric clash of O8 with
the sugar–phosphate backbone (Figure A). A ternary complex structure of pol β with 8-oxoG as the
templating base and an incoming nonhydrolyzable nucleotide analogue,
dAMPCPP, has also been determined. In
this case, the templating base 8-oxoG is in a syn conformation and forms a Hoogsteen base pair with the incoming adenine.
The syn conformation of 8-oxoG is stabilized by stacking
with an adjacent lysine residue (Lys280).

Structures of pol β
with nonstandard substrates. (A) Structure
of a ternary substrate complex with 8-oxoG in the templating position
(Gt) paired with cytosine (PDB entry 3RJI, yellow carbons). It is superimposed with a ternary substrate
complex with a templating guanine (PDB entry 2FMP, gray carbons). The bases are in an anti conformation,
but the phosphate of the adducted guanine is repositioned to relieve
steric and electrostatic clashes. (B) Structure of a ternary substrate
complex with an incoming 8-oxodGTP in the syn conformation
paired with adenine (PDB entry 3MBY, yellow carbons). In contrast to a staggered arrangement of bases described
previously with active site mismatches, the 8-oxodGTP-dA mispair is
planar because 8-oxodGTP assumes the syn conformation
while the templating deoxyadenine (dA) remains in the anti conformation providing for good Watson–Crick geometry. The syn conformation is stabilized through Hoogsteen hydrogen
bonding with the templating adenine (yellow dashed lines) and a hydrogen
bond with Asn279 (not shown). The syn conformation
of 8-oxodGTP positions O8 in the DNA minor groove in a position similar
to that of O2 for a Watson–Crick base pair. The structure of
the ternary substrate complex with dUMPNPP paired with adenine is
shown for reference (PDB entry 2FMS, gray carbons). Additionally, an intramolecular hydrogen bond between N2 and a nonbridging
oxygen on Pα (pro-SP) of 8-oxodGTP
could stabilize the syn conformer. (C) Structures
of precatalytic ternary substrate complexes of pol β with an
incoming CTP (wild-type enzyme, PDB entry 3RH4, light green carbons; Y271A mutant, PDB
entry 3RH6,
yellow carbons) were superimposed with the wild-type enzyme with an
incoming dUMPNPP (PDB entry 2FMS, gray carbons)., The 2′-ribose
oxygen is unusually close to the carbonyl oxygen of Tyr271 (2.54 Å,
dashed line) but is well-accommodated in the closed complex of these
structures. Replacing the tyrosine side chain with a methyl group
(Y271A) provides additional freedom to subtly displace this carbonyl
from O2′, resulting in a mutant enzyme that displays a decreased
level of discrimination for ribonucleotides. (D) Tyr271 hydrogen bonds to the base of the minor groove edge of
the primer terminus (dashed black line). Substitution of Tyr271 with
alanine results in the loss of this hydrogen bond and displacement
of the dideoxy-terminated primer into the major groove. This is illustrated
by examining the position of N3 of the guanine base in the structures
of wild-type and mutant enzymes with an incoming CTP. The carbonyl
of Ala271 is also illustrated.

In contrast to the template binding pocket, there is a severe
constraint
for the incoming nucleotide for insertion of 8-oxodGTP. This is expressed kinetically as moderate insertion
efficiency for 8-oxodGTP opposite adenine and a severely reduced efficiency
opposite cytosine. The structure of a ternary complex of 8-oxodGTP
opposite adenine indicates that 8-oxodGTP assumes the syn conformation and forms a Hoogsteen base pair with the templating
adenine (Figure B). In contrast to previously
published structures of pol β with active site mismatches, this
mispair is planar and exhibits Watson–Crick-like geometry,
albeit with Hoogsteen hydrogen bonds. The syn conformation
of 8-oxodGTP is stabilized through Hoogsteen hydrogen bonding with
the templating adenine, a hydrogen bond with Asn279, and an intramolecular
hydrogen bond between N2 and a nonbridging oxygen on the α-phosphate.

For most DNA polymerases, 8-oxodGTP is preferentially misinserted
opposite adenine rather than cytosine. This is consistent with the lack of polymerase crystal structures
with 8-oxodGTP paired with a templating cytosine. Modeling an incoming
8-oxodGTP in an anti conformation paired with cytosine
indicates that steric repulsion between O8 and its deoxyribose phosphate
would distort the active site. Although DNA polymerases can modulate
the backbone position of the templating nucleotide, perturbing the
position of the α-phosphate of the incoming 8-oxodGTP to accommodate
an anti conformation would be expected to severely
compromise its insertion.

Recent progress in understanding the
structural basis of 8-oxoG
mutagenesis by DNA polymerases has provided insight into how the architecture
of the DNA polymerase active site is able to adapt to the Hoogsteen
base pair. All DNA polymerases can accommodate a Hoogsteen base pair
with an 8-oxoG(syn)-A(anti) mispair
much more effectively than with a G-A mispair. Ultimately, discrimination
will rely on the effect of the anti–syn equilibrium
imposed on 8-oxoG by the DNA polymerase active site.

Sugar Discrimination
Ribonucleoside triphosphates differ
from their deoxynucleotide counterparts by a single atom (oxygen)
at C2′ of the sugar, and their cellular concentrations significantly
exceed those of dNTPs. Thus, ribonucleotides would be inserted during
DNA replication and repair at frequencies much higher than those observed
for deoxynucleotides with the wrong base. The presence of a ribose
2′-hydroxyl group stabilizes the glycosyl bond but makes the
DNA phosphodiester backbone more susceptible to hydrolysis. Spontaneous
or enzyme-catalyzed DNA strand breaks initiate repair and cellular
signaling events that would impact overall genome stability and cell
survival.

In most instances, DNA polymerases discriminate against
ribonucleotide insertion by binding them weakly and inserting them
more slowly than their natural substrate. Crystallographic structures of substrate complexes of DNA polymerases
from different families have indicated that a side chain could sterically
interfere with binding of a ribonucleoside triphosphate. This side
chain has been termed a “steric gate”. In contrast, X-family DNA polymerases deter insertion of
ribonucleotides using the protein backbone near the carboxyl terminus
of α-helix M [i.e., Tyr271 of pol β (Figure C)]. The backbone carbonyl of
Tyr271 would be expected to clash with the hydroxyl group on C2′
of the incoming ribonucleotide. This would be expected to have important
consequences because after binding a deoxynucleotide, α-helix
M rotates so that Tyr271 forms a hydrogen bond with the minor groove
edge of the primer terminus (Figure D). Therefore,
ribonucleotide binding could alter interactions at the primer terminus
transmitted through the altered interactions with α-helix M.

Wild-type pol β inserts ribonucleotides with an efficiency
comparable to those of other polymerases that have been examined. With a decrease in the size of the side chain
of residue 271 by alanine substitution (i.e., Y271A), the level of
pol β ribonucleotide discrimination decreases. Surprisingly, ternary substrate complex structures of wild-type
and Y271A pol β with an incoming CTP indicated that the incoming
ribonucleotide is well-accommodated in the nascent base pair binding
pocket of pol β (Figure C). Comparing
the crystallographic structures of the wild-type enzyme with bound
dCTP or CTP and that of the Y271A mutant with CTP reveals that Tyr271
appears to play two significant roles in ribonucleotide discrimination.
The backbone carbonyl at Tyr271 gets unfavorably close to 2′-OH
of the ribose in the wild-type structure, and the structure of the
mutant indicates that this carbonyl attempts to move farther from
O2′ of the incoming ribonucleotide (Figure C). Quantum calculations suggest that the energetic cost for
the proximity between the backbone carbonyl and ribose O2′
was only ∼2.2 kcal/mol, similar to the observed loss of binding
affinity when the wild-type enzyme binds ribonucleotides. Thus, favorable interactions in one region of
an enzyme can overcome smaller repulsive interactions in adjacent
regions. Significantly, the alanine side chain also removes a hydrogen
bond between the tyrosine hydroxyl group and the minor groove edge
of the primer terminal base in the closed ternary substrate conformation
(Figure D). In the wild-type enzyme, this
hydrogen bond may alter the active site geometry, thereby deterring
insertion of substrates with the wrong sugar. Therefore, discrimination
of the ribonucleotide by pol β is attributed to the loss of
a contact with the primer terminus and a steric clash between O2′
of the ribose ring and the adjacent polymerase backbone carbonyl.

The dNTP binding affinity for many DNA polymerases is in the range
of concentrations found in cells. Although DNA polymerases bind ribonucleotides
weakly, their elevated concentration in the cell would permit them
to effectively compete for binding. Although ribonucleotides may not
be incorporated, they would impact the rate of DNA polymerization.
In contrast, because RNA polymerases bind dNTPs weakly and their cellular
concentration is low, dNTPs would exert a weaker impact on RNA polymerization.

Future Outlook
Structural, kinetic, and computational approaches
have provided
powerful tools for the development of molecular insights into DNA
polymerase function. These experimental approaches indicate that dynamic
events within the protein, substrates, and cofactors underlie molecular
events that hasten correct and deter incorrect DNA synthesis. The
observation that additional divalent metals may participate in catalysis,
in addition to the two metals that have been traditionally proposed,
provides additional motivation to probe chemistry in greater detail.
Clearly, the highly charged active site provides an environment that
could modulate chemistry through subtle molecular (charge and position)
changes. Although the experimental focus has been on the forward DNA
synthesis reaction, further characterization of the reverse reaction,
pyrophosphorolysis, is warranted, especially because the reverse reaction
can play an important role in nucleoside drug resistance., Additionally, solution studies indicate that divalent metals can
influence the conformational equilibrium (open–closed) of the
pol β DNA binary complex that would influence the distribution
of active enzyme species.

DNA polymerases
often have accessory factors, and our understanding
of the kinetic and structural effects these factors have on substrate
binding and chemistry is lacking. Likewise, how substrates and/or
products are optimally processed through a pathway with several enzymes
(substrate channeling) provides important experimental opportunities
that will certainly uncover cellular strategies for enhancing enzyme
efficiency. The polymerase’s ability to replicate DNA of varying
sequence with high fidelity represents an evolutionary achievement
that perpetuates life and evolution. The elegant mechanisms that contribute
to this elementary reaction are finally being uncovered. Even though
structural biology has uncovered key molecular details during DNA
synthesis, there are sure to be new details that have not been considered.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We recognize the significant contributions
of Drs. J. M. Krahn,
V. K. Batra, and B. D. Freudenthal for their structural characterizations.
Structural images were produced using the Chimera package from the Resource for Biocomputing, Visualization,
and Informatics at the University of California, San Francisco (supported
by National Institutes of Health Grant P41 RR-01081).

Abbreviations
8-oxoG8-oxo-7,8-dihydro-2′-deoxyguanosine

APapurinic/apyrimidinic

BERbase excision repair

C-subdomaincatalytic
subdomain

D-subdomainDNA binding subdomain

dNTPdeoxynucleoside triphosphate

dRPdeoxyribose phosphate

HhHhelix–hairpin–helix

N-subdomainnascent
base pair binding subdomain

PDBProtein Data Bank

polDNA polymerase

PPipyrophosphate.

