When proteins
are subjected
to increasingly denaturing conditions, they progressively lose secondary
and tertiary structure. The resulting non-native states are ensembles
of states because they are highly dynamic and can thus not be described
as a single conformation. The presence of residual structure in such
ensembles of denatured states is well-known for soluble proteins.− High-resolution structural characterization of denatured states
of proteins is one way to obtain information about the propensity
of interactions among residues in early stages of folding. Determining
the motion of residues in denatured states is thus a direct measure
of their involvement in interactions., The extent
to which residual structure is retained in the denatured states of
membrane proteins and the nature of such residual structure are not
known. Numerous membrane proteins have been reversibly unfolded and
refolded but typically not to or from a fully random coil state (reviewed
in ref ()): in vitro unfolding studies uniformly show the difficulty
in denaturing membrane proteins; usually large regions of structure
remain intact despite the presence of high denaturant concentrations.− In fact, bR and CopA are to date the only helical membrane proteins that have
been almost fully unfolded. It is thermodynamically unlikely that
membrane proteins will be completely unfolded inside the membrane
environment in vivo or in the membrane mimetics used
to study these proteins in vitro. Thus, for membrane
proteins, residual structure may actually play an even more important
role for folding than in soluble proteins. It is critical for our
understanding of membrane protein folding mechanisms to characterize
the molecular nature of denatured states that are an ensemble of states
observed under given denaturing conditions. With an increasing denaturant
concentration, a new ensemble of unfolded states that are all unfolded
to a different extent compared to that of the ensemble at the previously
used concentration is formed. Of particular interest are those ensembles
of denatured states found under the most denaturing conditions used.
For membrane proteins, no in-depth characterization of the structure
and dynamics in these most denatured states, where the majority of
secondary structure is unfolded, exists. This is largely due to the
difficulties in working with membrane proteins, which are prone to
aggregation, especially in the presence of denaturants where the membrane-spanning
regions are no longer in their native environment.

A recent
screen of denaturing conditions simultaneously maximizing
the extent of denaturation while preventing aggregation have identified
30% SDS or 3% SDS with 8 M urea (3S8U) as suitable conditions for
studying largely denatured states of rhodopsin. However, the molecular nature of these unfolded states,
and whether there are differences between them, was not known and
is the subject of this work. Our previous study showed that addition
of increasing amounts of SDS to rhodopsin in dodecyl maltoside (DM)
micelles denatured the protein in four stages (Figure ). These stages were identified by circular dichroism (CD)
spectroscopy. Mean residue ellipticity
(MRE) at 222 nm indicative of α-helix content decreased abruptly
at a SDS concentration of 0.05–0.3% (stage 1) and then remained
constant until 3% (stage 2). In this concentration range, SDS forms
spherical micelles. With further increases
in SDS concentration, rhodopsin lost secondary structure in stage
3, where the spherical micelles undergo a transition to cylindrical
micelles, and the latter predominate
in stage 4, where maximal denaturation is observed at the highest
possible SDS concentration of 30%. Approximation of helix content
from the CD spectra suggested that at this concentration 45% of the
native helix content is lost. A similar loss of helix content was
reported for 3S8U.

Model representing global and domain-specific changes
in denatured
states. TM regions of native rhodopsin are shown as cylinders with
the colors corresponding to different degrees of flexibility as shown
in the color bar. Stage 1 represents changes occurring at low SDS
concentrations (0.05–0.3%) where opening of the helical bundle
occurs. This is followed by stage 2, where with an increase to a SDS
concentration of 3%, a compact state is formed with rigid regions
in EC and TM domains. Beyond 3% SDS, a transition to cylindrical micelles
occurs followed by formation of compact states in cylindrical micelles
in 30% SDS in stage 4, where residual structure is formed in the TM
and EC region.

Secondary structure representation
of rhodopsin showing predicted
folding core residues in green circles,
tryptophans in red circles, and lysines in blue circle.

The changes in global structure with increasing
concentrations
of SDS have also been characterized by several complementary time-resolved
and steady state spectroscopic measurements. They confirmed the progression of denaturation in four stages and
further identified that denatured states in SDS spheres and cylinders
show a relatively greater burial of cysteine and tryptophan residues
and are more compact than the states observed in mixed micellar structures.
Protein structural changes at the membrane/water interface region
were most prominent at very low SDS concentrations but reached transient
stability in the compact conformations in SDS spheres. These studies
therefore supported the hypothesis that a compact intermediate is
formed in the denatured states. Compact intermediates have been suggested
by the long-range interaction theory of folding of membrane proteins
that proposes that interactions involving loops and transmembrane
(TM) helices form during early folding stages. The model was based on computational simulation of thermal
denaturation of rhodopsin that had predicted the existence of a folding
core involving loops and TM helices near the extracellular (EC) surface
of rhodopsin. The residues implicated
to be part of the folding core are highlighted by green circles in
the secondary structure representation shown in Figure  and include EC loops E-I and E-II, residues in the N-terminal
tail, and some portions of TM helices 3–5 toward their EC sides.

One-dimensional 1H spectra of native and denatured rhodopsin.
Overlay of native and 30% SDS-denatured rhodopsin showing the region
from 6 to 10.3 ppm. (A) Overlays of native rhodopsin and 0.05, 1,
10, 15, and 30% SDS-denatured rhodopsin in the region around 10 (B),
8 (C), and 6 ppm (D).

Here, we present the first attempt to characterize the structure
and dynamics of denatured states of membrane proteins, using rhodopsin
as a model over a range of SDS concentrations up to 30%, and in 3S8U.
We adopted a combined NMR and EPR spectroscopic approach. NMR spectroscopy
has seen significant advances recently in studies of α-helical
membrane proteins.− Particularly for rhodopsin, extensive studies incorporating 15N, 15N/13C, and 19F labels
have shown the applicability of NMR to this system in the folded state.− Here, we use NMR spectroscopy of [15N]-α-lysine-
and [15N]-α,ε-tryptophan-labeled rhodopsin
to obtain a characterization of denatured states that is more in-depth
than what is possible with global biophysical approaches such as CD
and fluorescence spectroscopy. Because the assignment of signals is
still problematic, we also obtained residue-specific information by
using site-directed spin labeling with the nitroxide side chain. This
method has been very well established for studying structure and structural
changes in the cytoplasmic (CP) domain of rhodopsin in its dark- and
light-activated states by specifically mutating residues of interest
to cysteines and labeling them with spin labels.− Here, we used site-directed spin labeling to follow residue-specific
conformational changes upon denaturation of rhodopsin using EPR spectroscopy.
The NMR and EPR results locate the positions of residual structure
to a cluster of residues that as a minimum contains V204 and I205
and likely extends to the full predicted folding core region (Figure , green) involving the EC ends of helices III–V
and possibly two or three turns toward the membrane interior involving
tryptophan residues (Figure , red), residues
in E-I, E-II, and the N-terminal tail. This residual structure would
explain the compactness as observed by global characterization of
denatured states of rhodopsin. Residual
structure was observed under both maximally denaturing conditions,
30% SDS and 3S8U, but the structure appeared to be overall more restricted
in 3S8U than in 30% SDS, indicating that 30% is a more drastically
denaturing condition. However, the difference between CP and EC residues
was clearly visible under both conditions.

Materials and Methods
SDS (electrophoresis grade) was purchased from Bio-Rad (Hercules,
CA) and dodecyl maltoside (DM) from Anatrace (Maumee, OH). Deuterated
SDS and urea, deuterium oxide, [15N]-α-lysine, and
[15N]-α,ε-tryptophan were purchased from Cambridge
Isotope Laboratories (Cambridge, MA), and the methanethiosulfonate
spin label (MTSL) was from Toronto Research Chemicals (Toronto, ON).
Rhodopsin for NMR studies was purified from a tetracycline inducible
HEK 293S cell line stably transfected with the wild-type opsin gene,
as described previously. All samples
were purified in 10 mM sodium phosphate buffer containing 0.05% DM.
Rhodopsin mutants for EPR studies (N151C, I154C, M155C, T108C, V204C,
and I205C) were obtained by site-directed mutagenesis according to
the established Stratagene protocol. Mutants were expressed by DEAE-Dextran
transient transfection of COS-1 cells and harvested after 60 h. Spin
labeling to introduce the nitroxide side chain designated R1 and purification
of each mutant were conducted on an immunoaffinity column as described
previously.

NMR Spectroscopy
All NMR experiments were conducted
in a Bruker 900 MHz spectrometer at 37 °C. The [15N]-α-lysine-labeled rhodopsin at 50 μM in 20 mM sodium
phosphate buffer, 10% D2O, and 0.5% DM and [15N]-α,ε-tryptophan-labeled rhodopsin at 0.12 mM in the
same buffer but with 1.2% DM were used to record NMR spectra. A 0.15
mM [15N]-α,ε-tryptophan-labeled sample was
used to record the native two-dimensional (2D) HSQC spectrum. All
one-dimensional (1D) 1H spectra were referenced to DSS
(4,4-dimethyl-4-silapentane-1-sulfonic acid). 1D spectra were recorded
using the pulse program p3919gp. 2D spectra
were not referenced to any external standard. The numbers of scans
for all denatured 2D HSQC spectra of [15N]-α-lysine-labeled
rhodopsin were 256 and 80 in the 15N and 1H
dimensions, respectively, except for 3S8U at pH 2 for the denatured
sample (2000 and 48, respectively); 128 × 48 scans were used
to record the native state spectrum for this sample. The numbers of
scans for all denatured 2D HSQC spectra of [15N]-α,ε-tryptophan-labeled
rhodopsin were 2000 and 42, respectively, except for the native state
(1000 and 72, respectively).

EPR Spectroscopy
EPR spectra were
recorded at room
temperature on a Bruker ELEXSYS 580 instrument using the High Sensitivity
Resonator (Bruker). Each spectrum is the average of 25 scans of 30
s each over a range of 100 G. Samples (6 μL) at protein concentrations
of 50–100 μM were placed in 0.6 (inside diameter) ×
0.84 (outside diameter) borosilicate capillary tubes. All samples
were in 5 mM MES [2-(morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid] buffer with DM
concentrations varying from 3 to 5%.

Results
Changes in
Overall Protein Dynamics
Because identification
of residual structure in denatured proteins relies largely on finding
restriction in conformational space, measurement of protein dynamics
is the most direct approach. We have therefore
studied qualitatively the global motions experienced by rhodopsin
residues under denaturing conditions by measuring 1D 1H
NMR spectra in the presence and absence of different denaturants.
Figure A shows a comparison between the 1D
spectrum of native and 30% SDS-denatured rhodopsin, which is its maximally
denatured state. The native state spectrum
shows broad and overlapping peaks caused by the presence of 348 amino
acids that cannot be resolved on a 1D 1H spectrum. Further,
it was observed previously that backbone amides of tryptophans and
lysines show more than the expected number of signals with varying
intensities in the NMR spectrum of [15N]-α-lysine-labeled
and [15N]-α,ε-tryptophan-labeled rhodopsin., These observations indicated that there are conformational fluctuations
on a microsecond to millisecond time scale leading to signal broadening.
In the presence of 30% SDS, the number of the resolved proton peaks
increases, supporting the hypothesis that an increase in the level
of motion from the microsecond to millisecond time scale to nanosecond
time scales of motion in unfolded regions of the protein is taking
place. Although more quantitative relaxation measurements are needed
to prove this hypothesis, this shift to rapid motion (nanoseconds
or faster) of unfolded regions in a protein will be henceforth termed
qualitatively an increase in flexibility upon denaturation. Panels
B–D of Figure  show the aromatic side
chain region [around 10 ppm (Figure B)], the
backbone [around 8 ppm (Figure C)], and the
further upfield regions, where side chains and backbone protons of
some amino acids appear [around 6 ppm (Figure D)]. In all regions, peaks that are not observed in native rhodopsin
appear upon addition of SDS, indicating their enhanced flexibility.
The changes in 1H NMR spectra fit well with our previous
observation of four stages based on circular dichroism spectroscopy
(Figure ). Stage 1 (represented by the 0.05%
spectrum) is characterized by an appearance very similar to that of
the native state, which remains similar even in stage 2 (represented
by the 1% spectrum). The similarity is particularly apparent in Figure C. The next stages, stages 3 and 4, differ dramatically
from stages 1 and 2 and are again similar to each other. This indicates
that the NMR spectra are strongly affected by the shape of the micelles,
spherical in stages 1 and 2 and cylindrical in stages 3 and 4.

2D HSQC spectra
of native and denatured isotope-labeled rhodopsin.
(A) Overlay of 2D HSQC spectra of [15N]-α,ε-tryptophan-labeled
rhodopsin: (1) denatured with 1% SDS (green), 30% SDS (orange), and
3S8U (blue) and (2) 2D HSQC spectrum of native rhodopsin. (B) Overlay
of 2D HSQC spectra of [15N]-α-lysine-labeled rhodopsin:
(1) denatured with 1% SDS (green), 10% SDS (magenta), and 30% SDS
(orange) and (2) 2D HSQC spectrum of native rhodopsin. (C) Overlay
of 2D HSQC spectra of denatured [15N]-α-lysine-labeled
rhodopsin: (1) denatured with 0.05% SDS and (2) denatured with 3S8U
at pH 2.

Identification of Flexible
and Rigid Regions in SDS-Denatured
States
To determine dynamics more specifically, we compared
the motions of denatured regions of rhodopsin carrying isotope labels
that preferentially label TM and EC versus CP residues. Tryptophans,
labeled with 15N at its backbone and side chain nitrogens,
and lysines, labeled with 15N at its backbone nitrogen,
were used as reporters. This is because with the exception of Lys296,
the TM attachment site for retinal, and one lysine near the N-terminus
(Lys16), all other lysine residues are located in the CP domain (Figure , blue circles). In contrast, tryptophans are observed
in only the TM and EC domains (Figure , red
circles). This allows us to obtain higher-resolution structural information
than with 1H spectra alone. The folding core is predicted
to be located at the interface between TM and EC domains (Figure , green circles). Thus,
we expect tryptophan residues to be more rigid under denaturing conditions
than lysine residues.

An overlay of 2D heteronuclear single-quantum
correlation (HSQC) spectra of 1% SDS-denatured (stage 2) and 30% SDS-denatured
(stage 4) [15N]-α,ε-tryptophan-labeled rhodopsin
is shown in panel 1 of Figure A. The corresponding
spectrum of native rhodopsin is shown in panel 2 and is identical
to that reported previously. The native
spectrum is characterized by a number of tryptophan backbone peaks
larger than the number of tryptophans in the structure due to conformational
heterogeneity, while the expected five side chain peaks are observed
for the five tryptophan residues in rhodopsin. In panel 1 of Figure A, at 1% SDS
(green), fewer backbone peaks and clustering of the side chain peaks
are observed compared to case for the native state, supporting the
significant overall reduction of secondary and tertiary structure
revealed by CD and fluorescence spectroscopies. At 30% SDS (orange), which maximally
unfolds rhodopsin, decreased background signal intensities were observed
compared to that observed in the presence of 1% SDS (green). The side
chain peaks remain clustered at a similar position (∼10 ppm)
but with intensities significantly lower than that at 1% SDS, suggesting
that a residual structure containing tryptophan residues is retained
even at this high SDS concentration.

Continuous wave EPR (CW-EPR) spectra of
native and denatured rhodopsin
studied by EPR. (A) Secondary structure representation of rhodopsin
showing predicted folding core residues in green circles and the residues
studied by EPR in red circles. (B) Panel 1 shows the three-dimensional
(3D) structure of rhodopsin viewed from the EC face with the EC residues
studied by EPR colored red. Panel 2 shows the 3D structure of rhodopsin
viewed from the CP face with the CP residues studied by EPR colored
red. (C) Panel 1 shows an overlay of CW-EPR spectra for EC sites T108R1,
V204R1, and I205R1 in the native state and treated with 30% SDS, 3S8U,
and 3S8U at pH 2. Arrows marked a and b denote regions on the EPR
spectra that represent relatively immobile and mobile components,
respectively. Panel 2 shows an overlay of CW-EPR spectra for CP sites
N151R1, I154R1, and M155R1 in the native state and treated with 30%
SDS, 3S8U, and 3S8U at pH 2.

In contrast to tryptophan residues, which probe the predicted
folding
core region extended by one or two turns of a helix into the transmembrane
domain, lysine residues are located mostly away from the predicted
folding core. In panel 1 of Figure B, an overlay
of 2D HSQC spectra of 1, 10, and 30% SDS-denatured states is shown
in comparison with the native spectrum (Figure B, panel 2). There are 11 lysines in rhodopsin, but the most intense
peak originates from Lys339 in the C-terminal tail; other signals
had intensities that were &lt;10% of that of Lys339. Because of the low protein concentration of 50 μM
used here, we observe only the Lys339 resonance. Comparing the HSQC
spectra of the SDS-titrated protein with the spectrum of the native
state, we see that the most intense peak observed in the native protein
does not exist in SDS-treated samples but other peaks begin to appear.
The intensity and number of backbone peaks increase with an increase
in SDS concentration from 0.05% (Figure C,
panel 1) to 1% (green) and finally to 10% (magenta), indicating an
increase in the flexibility of lysines with an increase in the level
of unfolding. At 30% SDS (orange), peak intensities decrease compared
to those at 10% SDS but appear to be similar to those observed in
the 1% SDS-denatured state except for the peaks around 120 and 7.9
ppm in 15N and 1H dimensions, respectively.
These signals have a greater peak intensity in the 30% SDS-denatured
state, indicating that in contrast to tryptophan residues, lysine
residues are fully flexible under these conditions.

Mobility of
Residues in the Predicted Folding Core (EC loops)
in SDS
Following the indication from NMR spectroscopy that
there is differential mobility upon denaturation upon comparison of
CP versus TM and EC regions in rhodopsin, we collected residue-specific
information about the mobility of three residues within the predicted
folding core in the EC domain, T108R1, V204R1, and I205R1 (colored
red in Figure A and B1). Continuous wave EPR
(CW-EPR) spectra of these mutants in the native and denatured states
were recorded. Because the shape of the spectrum is biased toward
the most mobile component, they were normalized for equal height of
the central peak to allow qualitative comparison of the immobile component.
Mobile and immobile components of a CW-EPR spectrum as described in
ref () are indicated
by arrows a and b, respectively, in panel 1 of Figure C. The spectrum of T108R1, V204R1, and I205R1 in the native
state shows two components, each corresponding to a different degree
of mobility (Figure C, panel 1). Upon addition
of SDS at increasing concentrations, a gradual decrease in the immobile
component was seen (Figures  and ), which is indicative of a direct relationship
between higher residue mobility and an increasing level of denaturation.
While samples in 0.05% SDS (Figure , orange
lines) display a spectrum similar to the native one, suggesting that
under these conditions the helical bundle is opened but the dynamics
are similar to those of the native state, a further small change is
observed in 1% SDS (Figure , olive line),
with more dramatic changes at the higher concentrations (Figure , from green to turquoise to blue to purple).

CW-EPR spectra
of native and denatured states of EC and CP mutants
studied by EPR. (A) Overlay of CW-EPR spectra of T108R1, V204R1, and
I205R1 in the native state and treated with different SDS concentrations.
(B) Overlay of CW-EPR spectra for N151R1, I154R1, and M155R2 in the
native state and treated with different SDS concentrations.

Comparison of CW-EPR spectra of native and denatured
EC and CP
residues. Overlays of EPR spectra of (A) T108R1 and N151R1, (B) V204R1
and I154R1, and (C) I205R1 and M155R1 in which each mutant is treated
with different concentrations of SDS and with 3S8U and 3S8U at pH
2.

Mobility of Residues Away
from the Predicted Folding Core (CP
loops) in SDS
To compare the motions of folding core residues
with that of residues away from the core, CW-EPR spectra of CP domain
mutants, N151R1, I154R1, and M155R1 (colored red in the CP domain
in Figure A,B2), in the native and denatured
states were recorded. Comparing the native state spectra of N151R1,
I154R1, and M155R1 in panel 2 of Figure C,
we found the latter two mutants have an immobile component more dominant
than that of N151R1. This component only slightly decreases with an
increase in SDS concentration for N151R1 as seen in Figure B because it is already mobile in the native state.
However, for the I154R1 mutant, the immobile component disappears
from 1% SDS onward, whereas for the M155R1 mutant, a greater amount
of immobile component is retained at 1% SDS, which completely disappears
only at 10% SDS (Figure B). For all CP mutants
at 30% SDS, there is no immobile component. This is in contrast with
the results for the EC residues in which an immobile component was
still retained in 1% SDS for all the residues tested and up to 7%
for T108R1 and V204R1.

Dependence of the Mobility of EC and CP Residues
on SDS Concentration
We also investigated if there are differences
in the concentration
of SDS required to mobilize residues fully when comparing EC and CP
residues. Residues were compared pairwise on the basis of their relative
positioning with respect to the helical bundle.

Figure  shows a comparison of
CW-EPR spectra for pairs of residues at each denaturant concentration.
Figure A shows the comparison of N151R1 (CP)
and T108R1 (EC), residues located at the membrane interface, at the
end of their helices and with side chains facing the aqueous environment.
T108R1 appears to be slightly more immobile than N151R1 in the native
state, which could be due to differences in backbone dynamics or the
surrounding environment. At 1% SDS, this difference increases and
T108R1 shows an immobile component greater than that of N151R1. However,
from 7% SDS onward, T108R1 becomes very mobile. Spectra for 7 and
10% SDS-denatured states for T108R1 were obtained after 5 h because
this was the amount of time needed for it to equilibrate, and no time
dependent changes were observed for N151R1 at any SDS concentration
or for that matter for any other mutant under any denaturing condition.

Figure B shows the comparison between I154R1
(CP) and V204R1 (EC). Both these residues are at the same membrane
depth and at the same turn of the helix, but the side chain of I154R1
is slightly more exposed than that of V204R1. As we saw for the T108R1/N151R1
pair, the EC residue, V204R1, is more immobile than the corresponding
CP residue, I154R1, in the native state. However, unlike T108R1 (EC),
which becomes flexible from 7% SDS onward, immobility in V204R1 (EC)
is retained more than in I154R1 up to 20% SDS. At 30% SDS, V204R1
is still slightly more immobile than I154R1. These results indicate
that the EC residue, V204R1, shows rigidity in the denatured states
greater than that of the corresponding CP residue.

Figure C shows the comparison between M155R1
(CP) and I205R1 (EC). Both these residues are equivalently placed
with regard to membrane depth and position in the helix. In the native
state, M155R1 has a slight immobile component compared to I205R1 in
the native state. With a SDS concentration increasing to 0.05 and
1%, I205R1 becomes more immobile than M155R1, with both showing a
similar spectrum at 30% SDS.

Comparison of Residual Structure under 3S8U
Denaturing Conditions
Besides 30% SDS, our previous screen
had identified 8 M urea as
well as 3S8U as maximally denaturing conditions with decreases in
mean residue ellipticity at 222 nm of 40–55%. While 8 M urea also results in aggregation, 3S8U does not,
allowing us to characterize this highly denatured state via NMR and
EPR. An overlay of 2D heteronuclear single-quantum correlation (HSQC)
spectra of 3S8U-denatured [15N]-α,ε-tryptophan-labeled
rhodopsin with the 1 and 30% SDS conditions is shown in panel 1 of
Figure A. To avoid the urea background signal
in the amide region of the spectrum, the pH was lowered to 2. According
to CD, the denaturing efficiency of 3S8U at pH 2 is lower than that
of 3S8U at neutral pH (data not shown), estimated to decrease the
molar ellipticity of rhodopsin by only ∼25% as compared to
∼45%. As shown in the overlay in panel 1 of Figure A (blue), the backbone signals in 3S8U at pH 2 are
fewer in number and lower in intensity than that in native and 1%
SDS but are greater than that at 30% SDS. The side chain peaks appear
to be less clustered than those in the spectra recorded in the native
state and in the presence of 30% SDS, indicating that a different
denatured state is formed in 3S8U at pH 2 than in 30% SDS. The differences
observed are in line with the intermediate denaturing capacity of
this condition suggested by CD. As in the study of tryptophans, we
recorded an HSQC spectrum of [15N]-α,ε-lysine-labeled
rhodopsin in the presence of 3S8U at pH 2 as shown in panel 2 of Figure C. Unlike the case with tryptophans, here larger
numbers of scans (see ) were needed to obtain a suitable signal-to-noise ratio compared
to the SDS-titrated samples, indicating formation of a different denatured
state with slower dynamics compared to those of the SDS denatured
samples.

We also recorded EPR spectra of all mutants under 3S8U
conditions. Spectra of EC mutants T108R1, V204R1, and I205R1 denatured
with 3S8U and 3S8U at pH 2 are overlaid with that of the native and
30% SDS-denatured proteins to compare the maximally denatured states
in panel 1 of Figure C. It is evident that
states denatured with 3S8U and 3S8U at pH 2 retain a more immobile
component than the 30% SDS-denatured state for all EC mutants. This
difference is most clearly evident for I205R1. In panel 2 of Figure C, the spectra of CP mutants denatured with 3S8U
and 3S8U at pH 2 are overlaid with those of native and 30% SDS-denatured
protein to compare the maximally denatured states. Similar to what
we observed for EC residues, the states denatured with 3S8U and 3S8U
at pH 2 retain more immobile components than the 30% SDS-denatured
state for all CP mutants (Figures –). The immobility of I205R1 is pronounced to a great
extent when the mixture of SDS and urea is used as a denaturant. Here
again, it is seen that the EC residue is in a more structured environment
than the corresponding CP residue. These results support the conclusion
from NMR spectroscopy that a less dynamic state is formed in 3S8U
than in 30% SDS, suggesting that the molecular nature of denatured
states of rhodopsin is dependent on the chemical nature of the denaturants
used.

Discussion
Our recent optimization of denaturing conditions
that lead to the
greatest possible unfolding without aggregation of rhodopsin has opened
the door to in-depth characterization of largely unfolded states of
rhodopsin. The extent of denaturation
was judged on the basis of CD, which is a global characterization
method from which we concluded that the maximally denatured states
that did not also result in aggregation, 30% SDS and 3S8U, had lost
some 50% of their helical content. Because CD does not allow conclusions
about the location of this residual structure to be reached, we further
studied the SDS-denatured states with several other biophysical approaches. Absorption spectroscopy relies on the retinal
located in the TM domain facing the EC side; steady state and time-resolved
fluorescence spectroscopies are based on tryptophan residues predominantly
located in the TM domain, and cysteine accessibility is based on the
locations of cysteines, two of which reside in the CP domain and are
accessible in the native state. Furthermore, we measured the size
of intermediates using light scattering and fluorescence depolarization.
This initial characterization provided evidence of a compact intermediate
implying the possibility of “folding core”-like interactions
responsible for the decrease in the overall size of the denatured
states. The qualitative locations of
cysteine and tryptophan residues indicated that the earliest disruption
of structure is located at the CP surface. To test this hypothesis,
we attached a fluorescein reporter to Cys316 in the CP domain and
showed that its tertiary interactions are lost already at the lowest
SDS concentration of 005% studied, with biphasic behavior following
the changes from stage 1 to stage 2.

To quantitatively test the hypothesis from our previous computational, and experimental studies that CP and
EC domains are differentially affected by denaturation, here we employed
biophysical techniques that allow simultaneous probing of EC and CP
domains and/or residues with the same approach. We report on structural
features of specific residues to isolate the position of residual
structure in the compact states identified in our previous work by
using NMR and EPR, as both techniques rely on reporter chemical groups
that can be localized to EC and CP domains for the NMR approach used
and specific residues within these domains for the EPR approach used.
The NMR approach in principle also provides residue-specific information,
but because of the challenges in assignment, interpretation currently
remains at the domain level. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first time that residue-specific methods are being used in structural
characterization of unfolded states of polytopic integral helical
membrane proteins. Collectively, the two approaches support the conclusion
that there is a difference in the motions of EC and TM domains as
compared to the CP domain in denatured states of rhodopsin. This finding
experimentally supports the long-range theory for membrane protein
folding that was based on theoretical considerations., One cysteine investigated here does not follow this general trend
between CP and EC residues, namely T108. This residue appears to be
more mobile than any other residue in the denatured state, and it
is an EC residue. However, this residue was not predicted to be part
of the folding core (Figure ). The glycine
amino acid at position 109 and the proline amino acid at position
107 are immediate neighbors of T108, which contributes to the lack
of contacts made with the structurally rigid cluster nearby. This
result emphasizes the power of the site-directed approach afforded
by EPR spectroscopy in validating details of the predictions and lends
strong support to the validity of the location of the predicted folding
core.

In our previous studies of optimization of denaturing
conditions
of rhodopsin, we have observed four stages in unfolding of TM helices
(as recorded by CD spectroscopy) when SDS is added as a denaturant, as depicted in Figure . These stages correlate with SDS micellar structural changes whereby
in stage 1, mixed SDS/DM micelles are formed followed by formation
of SDS spherical micelles in stage 2 that show a transition in stage
3 to form cylindrical micelles in stage 4. Characterization of the global tertiary structure of denatured states
also corroborates these stages. Via combination
of earlier studies with the one reported here, a model in which micellar
structural changes and structural changes of denatured rhodopsin correlate
with dynamics in different SDS concentration ranges emerges. We have
updated Figure  to include reference to the
dynamic information from this paper. At low SDS concentrations (0.05–0.3%),
where we saw initial opening of the helical bundle, we now know that the motions of the EC and CP domains are
similar to those of the native state. At concentrations of SDS between
0.3 and 3%, where earlier studies had supported formation of a compact
state, current residue-specific studies
show this compactness to be in the EC region. The rigidity of this
domain still remains in stage 3 (3–15% SDS), where further
unfolding along with a transition of spherical SDS micelles to cylindrical
ones occurs. Finally, in maximally unfolded states, the data reported
here support the notion that there is a compact intermediate, as suggested
previously. In these unfolded states,
the CP and EC ends have become flexible but residual structure remains
in the TM and EC regions, specifically in a core of structural stability
that resists unfolding.

Because the location of the folding
core correlates with residues
implicated in misfolding of rhodopsin that have been studied extensively
because of their mutation in patients affected by the degenerative
disease of the retina, retinitis pigmentosa, it is tempting to speculate that our experimental identification
of this folding core may lead to a better understanding of misfolding
of rhodopsin and its association with the disease. Indeed, we plan
to conduct studies of the most frequent retinitis pigmentosa mutant
P23H under denaturing conditions to test the hypothesis that the folding
core may be disrupted in some way in this mutant. However, it is important
to remind the reader that folding in vivo takes place
with the membrane composed of complex lipid mixtures and cellular
machinery assisting in folding present, so our in vitro studies have to be interpreted with this caveat in mind.

This work was
in part supported by National Science Foundation Grants CC044917 and
1144281, National Institutes of Health Grant 2R01LM007994-05, and
EU Marie Curie Actions International Incoming Fellowship 626470 MPFP
FP7-PEOPLE-2013-IIF. Support for W.L.H. was provided by NIH grants
5R01 EY05216, 2P30 EY0331, and the Jules Stein Professor endowment.

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
CDcircular
dichroism

CPcytoplasmic

DMdodecyl maltoside

ECextracellular

HSQCheteronuclear
single-quantum correlation

TMtransmembrane

SDSsodium dodecyl
sulfate

3S8U3%
SDS with 8 M urea

R1nitroxide side chain attached to cysteine.

