

   
BiochemistryBiochemistrybibichawBiochemistry0006-29601520-4995American
Chemical Society 10.1021/bi501004yArticleAcetylation of Gly1 and
Lys2 Promotes Aggregation
of Human γD-Crystallin DiMauro Michael
A. §#Nandi Sandip K. †#Raghavan Cibin T. §∥Kar Rajiv
Kumar ⊥Wang Benlian ‡Bhunia Anirban ⊥Nagaraj Ram H. *§∥Biswas Ashis *†§Department of Ophthalmology and Visual
Sciences and ‡Center for Proteomics and Bioinformatics, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, United
States† School
of Basic Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India⊥ Department
of Biophysics, Bose Institute, Kolkata, India* (R.N.)
Phone: 303-724-5922. Fax: 303-724-5270.
E-mail: ram.nagaraj@ucdenver.edu. * (A.B.) Phone: +91-674-2576051. Fax: +91-674-2306202. E-mail: abiswas@iitbbs.ac.in.30 10 2015 30 10 2014 25 11 2014 53 46 7269 7282 11 08 2014 27 10 2014 Copyright © 2014 American
Chemical Society2014American
Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

The human lens contains three major
protein families: α-,
β-, and γ-crystallin. Among the several variants of γ-crystallin
in the human lens, γD-crystallin is a major form. γD-Crystallin
is primarily present in the nuclear region of the lens and contains
a single lysine residue at the second position (K2). In this study,
we investigated the acetylation of K2 in γD-crystallin in aging
and cataractous human lenses. Our results indicated that K2 is acetylated
at an early age and that the amount of K2-acetylated γD-crystallin
increased with age. Mass spectrometric analysis revealed that in addition
to K2, glycine 1 (G1) was acetylated in γD-crystallin from human
lenses and in γD-crystallin acetylated in vitro. The chaperone ability of α-crystallin for acetylated γD-crystallin
was lower than that for the nonacetylated protein. The tertiary structure
and the microenvironment of the cysteine residues were significantly
altered by acetylation. The acetylated protein exhibited higher surface
hydrophobicity, was unstable against thermal and chemical denaturation,
and exhibited a higher propensity to aggregate at 80 °C in comparison
to the nonacetylated protein. Acetylation enhanced the GdnHCl-induced
unfolding and slowed the subsequent refolding of γD-crystallin.
Theoretical analysis indicated that the acetylation of K2 and G1 reduced
the structural stability of the protein and brought the distal cysteine
residues (C18 and C78) into close proximity. Collectively, these results
indicate that the acetylation of G1 and K2 residues in γD-crystallin
likely induced a molten globule-like structure, predisposing it to
aggregation, which may account for the high content of aggregated
proteins in the nucleus of aged and cataractous human lenses.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9bi501004ydocument-id-new-14bi-2014-01004yccc-price

   
The mature lens is an avascular,
soft, and transparent organ composed of a monolayer of epithelial
cells that continually grows throughout life. The epithelial cells
near the equatorial region undergo mitotic division, elongate, and
then transform into fiber cells. During this elongation, the fiber
cells accumulate high concentrations of crystallins (∼300–450
mg/mL).1 This concentrated, protein-rich
material not only provides mechanical and structural stability to
the eye lens but also contributes to its refractive properties and
transparency.2,3 Because protein turnover in the
lens is minimal, crystallins must remain soluble and maintain their
structure throughout the life span of an individual. However, with
age, these lens proteins undergo several modifications, which result
in the formation of insoluble protein aggregates. This protein aggregation
or insolubility causes visible opacity and, thus, cataract formation
during aging.

Three major crystallin protein families (α-,
β-, and
γ-crystallin) constitute greater than 90% of the total proteins
of the lens, and α-crystallin constitutes ∼50% of the
total lens protein mass.4 α-Crystallin
is a large oligomeric protein composed of two subunits, αA-
and αB-crystallin. In 1992, Horwitz first demonstrated that
α-crystallin exhibited molecular chaperone activity.5 By virtue of this property, α-crystallin
is thought to prevent the aggregation of other lens proteins during
aging and, thus, maintains lens transparency. β- and γ-Crystallins
are the natural substrates of α-crystallin. These proteins function
solely as structural proteins whose packing and interactions are optimized
for the maintenance of eye lens transparency and refractivity.

The human lens contains five different γ-crystallins encoded
by five different genes (γA, γB, γC, γD, and
γS). γD-Crystallin is highly expressed in human lenses,
in addition to γC- and γS-crystallins. Human γD-crystallin,
which is a monomeric protein with a molecular mass of ∼20 kDa,
contains 173 amino acid residues.6 This
protein contains predominantly β-sheet structure, and its three-dimensional
structure was elucidated by X-ray crystallography, revealing four
Greek key motifs organized into two homologous domains.7 Several posttranslational modifications of human
γD-crystallin have been reported in human lenses, among which
include the oxidation of tryptophan (W156) and the deamidation of
glutamine and asparagine (Q12, N49, and N160).8−13 These modifications have been found to accumulate in cataractous
lenses to a greater extent than in noncataractous, clear lenses.13 In contrast, S-methylation
of cysteine residues in human γD-crystallin was predominantly
found in young clear lenses, which suggests that inhibition of disulfide
bond formation due to this modification may play an important role
in the long term survival of γD-crystallin against environmental
stress.14

Acetylation is another
important posttranslational modification
found in human lens crystallins. Lapko et al. reported that the N-terminal
glycine residue (the N-terminal methionine is naturally cleaved in
γD-crystallin; thus, glycine becomes the N-terminal residue)
of γD-crystallin is acetylated in vivo.(14) This N-terminal acetylation, which is a widespread
phenomenon in eukaryotic cells, is mediated by Nα-acetyltransferase.15 Acetylation of the ε-amino group of lysine is another
modification. Lysine (K) acetylation is mediated by a lysine acetyltransferase
(KAT), which transfers the acetyl group of acetyl-coenzyme A to the
ε-amino group of the lysine residue of a protein.16 The N-acetylation of lysine residues in proteins
can be reversed by lysine deacetylase (KDAC).17 Recently, we have identified that K70 and K99 in αA-crystallin,
as well as K92 and K166 in αB-crystallin, are acetylated in
the human lens.18−20 Although human γD-crystallin contains only
one lysine residue at position 2 (the numbering for the residues is
based on the γD-crystallin crystal structure, PDB code: 1HK0),7 this lysine acetylation has not been previously reported.
Additionally, the impact of acetylation on the structure and aggregation
of human γD-crystallin is unknown.

In this study, we have
found that G1 and K2 are acetylated in γD-crystallin
from human lenses. We found that such acetylation increases stress-induced
aggregation of γD-crystallin and decreases its chaperoning by
α-crystallin. Our biochemical, biophysical, and theoretical
analyses provide the molecular basis for enhanced aggregation of the
acetylated γD-crystallin.

Materials and Methods
Dithiothreitol (DTT); 4,4′-dianilino-1,1′-binaphthyl-5,5′-disulfonic
acid, dipotassium salt (bis-ANS); guanidium hydrochloride (GdnHCl);
and ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, disodium salt dehydrate (EDTA)
were obtained from Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis, MO). 5,5′-Dithiobis(2-nitrobenzoic
acid) (DTNB) was obtained from Sisco Research Laboratories, India.
αL-Crystallin was purified from bovine eye lenses,
as previously described.21 All other chemicals
were of analytical grade.

Detection of Nε-Acetyllysine
in γD-Crystallin of the Human Lens
The ages of the
analyzed noncataractous lenses are shown in Figure 1. The cataractous lenses were obtained from 65- to 75-year-old
donors. Each lens was processed through homogenization, centrifugation,
and sonication to obtain the water-soluble protein, as previously
described.18 Water-soluble proteins (20
μg from each lens) were analyzed on a 12% denaturing gel, transferred
to a nitrocellulose membrane, and probed with a monoclonal antibody
against human γD-crystallin (1:2500 dilution, Santa Cruz Biotechnology,
Dallas, TX) and an HRP-conjugated goat antimouse IgG (1:5000 dilution,
Promega, Madison, WI). The immunoreactivity was identified using the
SuperSignal West Pico Chemiluminescent Substrate (Thermo Scientific,
Waltham, MA). The membrane was reprobed using a monoclonal antibody
against Nε-acetyllysine (1:2500
dilution, Cell Signaling Technologies, Danvers, MA).

Figure 1 Detection of K2-acetylated
γD-crystallin in the human lens.
Western blot analysis of γD-crystallin and Nε-acetyllysine-modified proteins in the human lens.
Water-soluble human lens proteins were subjected to Western blot analysis
using a monoclonal antibody against γD-crystallin (A). The membrane
was stripped and reprobed using a monoclonal antibody against Nε-acetyllysine (B). Densitometry of Western
blot B is shown in C. Water-soluble human lens proteins were immunoprecipitated
using a monoclonal antibody against γD-crystallin and were subjected
to Western blot analysis using an antibody against Nε-acetyllysine (D). The age of the donor lenses
is shown below the lanes. M denotes the molecular weight markers.
Arrows indicate the positions of the light (LC) and heavy chains (HC)
of the antibody. The (−) denotes nonacetylated recombinant
γD-crystallin; the (+) denotes in vitro acetylated
recombinant γD-crystallin. SDS-PAGE of the purified γD-crystallin
is shown in panel E. Lanes 1 and 2 are two preparations of γD-crystallin,
and lane 3 is in vitro acetylated γD-crystallin.
Western blot analysis of acetylated γD-crystallin using an antibody
against Nε-acetyllysine; acetylation
was carried out using various molar excess concentrations of Ac2O relative to lysine in γD-crystallin (F).

The water-soluble protein samples were also immunoprecipitated
using a monoclonal antibody against human γD-crystallin by adding
5 μL of the antibody to 500 μg of protein from various
lenses followed by incubation with mixing for 4 h at 37 °C. Twenty
microliters of Protein A/G Agarose (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) was
then added to each sample and incubated with mixing at 4 °C overnight.
The samples were centrifuged at 1000g for 5 min at
4 °C. Pellets were washed on ice three times with a cell lysis
buffer (Cell Signaling Technologies) and resuspended in 30 μL
of 2× SDS sample buffer. The samples were subsequently analyzed
on a 12% denaturing gel and probed for Nε-acetyllysine as previously described.

Cloning, Expression, and
Purification of Human γD-Crystallin
The human γD-crystallin
in pET-3d plasmid was a kind gift
from Dr. Ajay Pande of the University at Albany. The bacterial expression
and purification of γD-crystallin were performed using previously
described methods22 with minor modifications.
Briefly, the amplified PCR product was recloned into a pET-23d vector
at the NcoI/BamHI restriction sites
in which the NdeI site had been replaced with an NcoI site. The resultant DNA was transformed into BL21(DE3)
pLysS cells to overexpress the recombinant protein. When the culture
reached its target density of OD ≈ 0.8 (OD 600 nm), the recombinant
proteins were overexpressed in E. coli BL21(DE3)
pLysS cells by induction with 500 μM IPTG. The bacterial pellet
obtained after centrifugation at 5000g was suspended
in 50 mM Tris, pH 8.0, containing 50 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, and 10 μL/mL
of a protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma, Cat# P8849). Lysozyme was
added to the cell suspension at 0.3 mg/mL and incubated for 10 min
at 37 °C followed by sonication on ice at 30% amplitude and duty
cycle = 40. To the resulting cell lysate, 1.0 μL of benzonase
nuclease (Sigma-Aldrich, Cat#E1014) was then added and incubated at
37 °C in a shaker for 20 min, which was followed by the addition
of sodium deoxycholate at 1.0 mg/mL and another incubation for 10
min at 37 °C. DTT was then added to the lysate at a 5 mM concentration
and incubated for 10 min at 37 °C. The cell lysate was centrifuged
at 20000g for 30 min at 4 °C. DNA in the lysate
was precipitated by adding 0.2% polyethylenimine followed by centrifugation
at 20000g for 15 min. Ammonium sulfate was added
to the lysate to reach 60% saturation; the protein solution was then
left at 4 °C overnight and centrifuged at 20000g for 5 min. The resulting pellet was suspended in 50 mM sodium phosphate
buffer, pH 7.4, containing 150 mM NaCl and 5 mM DTT, and it was centrifuged
at 20000g for 5 min. The supernatant was passed through
a 10 kDa MWCO filter. The retenate from the filtration was dialyzed
for 48 h against PBS with 0.2 mM EDTA before loading onto a Sephacryl
S-200 HR column. Elution was carried out using 50 mM sodium phosphate
buffer, pH 7.4, containing 5 mM DTT. Fractions of 3.0 mL were collected,
and their OD at 280 nm was recorded. SDS-PAGE of the fractions was
carried out to detect γD-crystallin; fractions containing γD-crystallin
were pooled and dialyzed for 24 h at 4 °C against PBS with 0.2
mM EDTA.

In vitro Acetylation of Recombinant Human γD-Crystallin
Acetylation of human recombinant γD-crystallin was performed
as previously described with minor modifications.18 Acetic anhydride (Ac2O) was prepared in dioxane
to a final concentration of 50 mM and added to 500 μg of recombinant
γD-crystallin over a period of 1 h to obtain K2 at Ac2O molar ratios of 1:0, 1:1, 1:2, 1:4, and 1:10, with the pH controlled
at 7.4 using diluted NH4OH as necessary. Samples were dialyzed
overnight against PBS. We dialyzed nonacetylated and acetylated γD-crystallin
against suitable buffers prior to each biophysical and biochemical
assay.

Identification of Acetylation Sites in Human γD-Crystallin
Using Mass Spectroscopy
Water-soluble γD-crystallin
(500 μg) isolated from a 73-year-old human lens was immunoprecipitated
using a γD-crystallin antibody (5 μL), as previously described,
and the resultant gel pellet was dissolved in the sample buffer and
subjected to SDS-PAGE analysis. Recombinant γD-crystallin that
had been acetylated as previously described (with a 10 molar excess
of Ac2O) was also subjected to SDS-PAGE analysis. SDS-PAGE
gel bands containing γD-crystallin were cut into small pieces
and destained with 50% acetonitrile in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate
followed by dehydration in 100% acetonitrile and then dried in a SpeedVac
centrifuge. Prior to overnight in-gel trypsin digestion, the protein
was chemically reduced using 20 mM DTT at room temperature for 1 h
and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate
for 30 min in the dark. Proteolytic peptides were extracted from gels
using 50% acetonitrile in 5% formic acid and then resuspended in 0.1%
formic acid after being completely dried under a vacuum. The analysis
of the resultant peptides was performed using an Orbitrap Elite hybrid
mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) equipped
with a Waters nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters, Taunton, MA, USA).
Spectra were recorded using data-dependent methods that involved an
alternative full scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans. The data were analyzed
using Mascot Daemon (Matrix Science, Boston, MA) at a setting of 10
ppm for parent ions and 0.8 Da for product ions. Carbamidomethylation
of Cys (C) residues were set as fixed modifications, and oxidation
of Met and acetylation of N-terminal G1 and K2 residues were set as
variable modifications. Acetylation sites were further verified by
manual examination of each tandem mass spectrum.

Circular Dichroism
(CD) Measurements
Far-UV CD spectra
were measured at 25 °C using a Chirascan-plus spectrometer (Applied
Photophysics, UK). Spectra were collected from 195 to 260 nm using
a cylindrical quartz cell with a 1 mm path length. Proteins (0.2 mg/mL)
were dissolved in 10 mM phosphate buffer, 5 mM DTT, and 1 mM EDTA
(pH 7.0). The reported spectra are the average of five scans. Spectra
were analyzed for secondary structure content using the CONTILL curve-fitting
program.23 The near-UV CD spectra were
measured at 25 °C using an identical spectropolarimeter. The
spectra were measured with a 1.0 mg/mL protein solution in 10 mM phosphate
buffer, 5 mM DTT, and 1 mM EDTA (pH 7.0). The reported spectra are
the average of five scans.

Intrinsic Tryptophan Fluorescence Measurements
The
intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence spectra of the proteins (0.025 mg/mL)
in 10 mM phosphate buffer, 5 mM DTT, and 1 mM EDTA (pH 7.0) at 25
°C were recorded using a FluoroMax-4P spectrofluorometer (Horiba
Jobin Mayer, USA). The excitation wavelength was set to 295 nm, and
the emission spectra were recorded between 310 and 400 nm. The data
were collected at 0.5 nm wavelength resolution.

Bis-ANS Fluorescence
Experiment
Bis-ANS (10 μM)
was added to nonacetylated and acetylated γD-crystallin (0.05
mg/mL in 10 mM phosphate buffer, 5 mM DTT, and 1 mM EDTA [pH 7.0]),
and the mixture was incubated for 1 h at 25 °C. Fluorescence
emission spectra were recorded between 450 and 600 nm using an excitation
wavelength of 390 nm. The excitation and emission band passes were
2.5 and 5 nm, respectively. The data were collected at 0.5 nm wavelength
resolution.

Quantification of Sulfhydryl Groups
Proteins at a concentration
of 0.4 mg/mL in 50 mM phosphate buffer containing 1 mM EDTA (pH 7.4)
and DTNB solution were added to yield a protein to DTNB molar ratio
of 1:7. Following the addition of DTNB, the exposure of thiol groups
was monitored by measuring the absorbance at 412 nm at 25 °C
as a function of time in a PerkinElmer spectrophotometer fitted with
a thermostatic cell holder and an electronic temperature control.
A molar extinction coefficient of 14 150 M–1 cm–1 for the thionitrophenylate anion at 412 nm
was used to calculate the amount of sulfhydryl (free -SH) groups present
in γD-crystallin samples. To confirm the thiol specificity,
we also performed an identical experiment using Mycobacterium
leprae HSP18, which lacks cysteine residues.

Estimation
of Structural Stability
(a) Chemical Denaturation
The structural
stability of nonacetylated and acetylated human γD-crystallin
was determined using an equilibrium chemical denaturation experiment.
Both proteins (0.025 mg/mL in 10 mM phosphate buffer, 5 mM DTT and
1 mM EDTA [pH 7.0]) were individually incubated with various concentrations
of GdnHCl (0–7 M) for 18 h at 37 °C. Intrinsic tryptophan
fluorescence spectra of all samples were recorded between 310 and
400 nm using an excitation wavelength of 295 nm. The equilibrium unfolding
profile was fit according to a three-state model.18,20,24

(b) Thermal Denaturation Monitoring
the Intrinsic
Tryptophan Fluorescence
The structural stability of nonacetylated
and acetylated human γD-crystallin was also determined by monitoring
the changes in the maximum emission wavelength (λmax) of the intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence in a FluoroMax-4P spectrofluorometer
equipped with a temperature-controlled water bath. The change in λmax was recorded stepwise between 25 and 90 °C in a quartz
cell, allowing the samples to equilibrate at each temperature for
2 min. The data were recorded at intervals of 2 °C. A protein
concentration of 0.025 mg/mL in 10 mM phosphate buffer, 5 mM DTT,
and 1 mM EDTA (pH 7.0) was used. The raw data were fitted to a two-state
model, and the fitting results are indicated by solid lines.24 The midpoint transition, or Tm, was calculated using sigmoidal analysis.24

(c) Thermal Denaturation Using
far-UV CD Spectroscopy
The structural stability of nonacetylated
and acetylated human
γD-crystallin was also determined using thermally induced unfolding
experiments in a Chirascan-plus spectrometer (Applied Photophysics,
Leatherhead, UK) equipped with a Peltier system. The change in ellipticity
at 218 nm was recorded stepwise between 25 and 90 °C in a quartz
cell with a path length of 2 mm, allowing the samples to equilibrate
at each temperature. The heating rate was set to 0.5 °C/min.
The data were recorded at intervals of 2 °C. A protein concentration
of 0.1 mg/mL in 10 mM phosphate buffer, 5 mM DTT, and 1 mM EDTA (pH
7.0) was used. The values for the fraction unfolded (αU) for both proteins were calculated using the following equation: 1  where θF is the ellipticity
value at 25 °C for completely folded or native protein, θt is the observed ellipticity value at any temperature between
25 and 90 °C, and θU is the ellipticity value
at 90 °C for the completely denatured or unfolded state. The Tm was calculated using sigmoidal analysis as
previously described.24

Kinetics of
Unfolding/Refolding
The time course of
unfolding of nonacetylated and acetylated γD-crystallin in 5.5
M GdnHCl, 10 mM phosphate buffer, 5 mM DTT, and 1 mM EDTA (pH 7.0)
was monitored by fluorescence emission at 355 nm using an excitation
wavelength of 295 nm in a FluoroMax-4P spectrofluorometer. Protein
at a concentration of 100 μg/mL was injected into the cuvette,
yielding a final protein concentration of 10 μg/mL at two different
temperatures (25 and 37 °C), with constant stirring. Fluorescence
was monitored until no further changes were observed. Each unfolding
experiment was performed in triplicate.

Refolding experiments
were performed in an analogous fashion. Protein (100 μg/mL)
that had been incubated in 5.5 M GdnHCl, 10 mM phosphate buffer, 5
mM DTT, and 1 mM EDTA (pH 7.0) at two different temperatures (25 and
37 °C) for 5 h was subsequently injected into 0.5 M GdnHCl in
an identical buffer. The final GdnHCl concentration was 1.0 M, and
the final protein concentration was 10 μg/mL.

In
Vitro Aggregation Assay
Nonacetylated
and acetylated γD-crystallin (0.1 mg/mL) in 10 mM phosphate
buffer, 5 mM DTT, and 1 mM EDTA (pH 7.0) were incubated at 80 °C.
Light scattering at 400 nm was monitored for 1 h in the kinetic mode.
Thermal aggregation of both proteins was also performed in the presence
of 0.075 or 0.1 mg/mL αL-crystallin.

Adaptive Poisson–Boltzmann
Solver (APBS)
The
crystal structure of human γD-crystallin was obtained from the
Protein Data Bank (PDB code: 1HK0).7 Acetylation of G1 and
K2 was considered when analyzing the bond order, overlapping atoms,
and missing hydrogen atoms. The nonacetylated and acetylated γD-crystallin
were further optimized by reorienting the hydroxyl groups and amide
groups of Asn and Gln to define the hydrogen bonding network. In addition,
we also considered the appropriate orientation and states for the
His residues of both proteins. The macro-model was subjected to minimization
in the Protein Preparation Wizard (Schrödinger Suite) using
the OPLS_200525 force field up to a maximum
deviation of 0.8 Å. Final energy minimization of the protein
macro-models was performed with 3500 steps, employing the Polak-Ribiere
conjugate gradient algorithm, which iterates the energy minimization
scheme every 3N steps. The energy minimized conformations were used
to generate pqr files using the PDB 2PQR server.26 All computations required to evaluate the electrostatic
properties were performed using a plugin option of PyMOL v1.2r3pre. Visualization of the electrostatic isosurfaces was contoured at
±0.37 kT/e for positive and negative isosurfaces, respectively.

Molecular Dynamics (MD) Simulation
The structural behavior
of the acetylated and nonacetylated γD-crystallin was further
examined in solvent conditions using molecular dynamics simulations.
An entire MD simulation was performed using Desmond utilizing the
OPLS_2005 force field. Acetylation at K2 and G1 was manually introduced
using the edit option in Maestro. Simulations using an equal time
scale were performed for both the nonacetylated and the acetylated
models of γD-crystallin. All of the hydrogen bonds were constrained
using the M-SHAKE algorithm,27 with an
integration frequency of a 2 fs time step. A RESPA integrator28 was employed with a 6 fs time step for long-range
Coulomb interactions; electrostatic interactions were computed using
the particle-mesh Ewald method with a cubic-β spline and a grid
spacing of 1 Å. As a microcanonical system, an NPT ensemble was
set up to execute the simulation at 1 bar pressure and a constant
temperature of +27 °C (300 K). The temperature and pressure of
the system was maintained employing Langevin dynamics and the Nosè-Hoover
method. All of the models were solved using TIP3P water models with
a 10-Å edge length in the orthorhombic boundary conditions. Appropriate
quantities of counterions were added for neutralization. Initially,
the systems were subjected to energy minimization with 4000 steps
of steepest descent integration to avoid steric clashes between the
atoms. The remaining protocol of energy minimization and equilibration
was adopted from the default protocol in the Desmond MD simulation
system (Desmond Molecular Dynamics System, version 3.4 (2013) D. E.
Shaw Research, New York, NY. Maestro-Desmond Interoperability Tools,
version 3.4, (2013) Schrodinger, New York, NY). All of the images
were rendered using the PyMOL software.

Statistics
The
data are presented as the means ±
SD of the number of experiments indicated in the figure legends. The
data were analyzed using the StatView software (SAS Institute Inc.,
Cary, NC). Statistical significance among the groups was determined
using an analysis of variance, and p &lt; 0.05 was
considered significant.

Results and Discussion
In the human
lens γ-crystallin subtypes, γC, γD,
and γS share approximately 80% amino acid sequence homology
(Figure S1 of the Supporting Information). The N-terminal methionine residue that is incorporated during
the translation initiation step has been found to be cleaved from
all three of these γ-crystallins.11,29 Furthermore,
multiple sequence alignment of these γ-crystallins indicates
that K2 is conserved among these three proteins (Figure S1 of the Supporting Information). Interestingly, Park
et al. identified acetylation of this conserved lysine residue in
γS-crystallin of the human lens.9 We hypothesized that acetylation of K2 also occurs in human γD-crystallin.
Recently, we demonstrated that lysine acetylation in α-crystallin
enhanced its chaperone function.18 In another
study, we demonstrated that K92 acetylation improved the chaperone
and antiapoptotic properties of human αB-crystallin.20 Based on these observations, we hypothesized
that acetylation could alter the structure, stability and aggregation
properties of human γD-crystallin.

Western blot analysis
using monoclonal antibodies against human
γD-crystallin and Nε-acetyllysine
exhibited distinct immunoreactivity at approximately 20 kDa and 37
kDa in human lenses (Figure 1A,B). Furthermore,
the total proteins bearing Nε-acetyllysine
increased with age (Figure 1B,C). To further
confirm K2 acetylation in γD-crystallin, we immunoprecipitated
γD-crystallin from human lenses and probed by Western blot analysis
using an antibody against Nε-acetyllysine.
As shown in Figure 1D, Nε-acetyllysine was present in γD-crystallin in
all of the lenses. These results also indicated that K2 in γD-crystallin
is acetylated at an early age and that this acetylation increased
with age. Furthermore, we observed acetylation of γD-crystallin
in cataractous lenses (Figure 1D).

SDS-PAGE
of the recombinant γD-crystallin indicated that
it was pure (Figure 1E). We then acetylated
the purified γD-crystallin in vitro using Ac2O. This modification did not result in cross-linking of the
protein (Figure 1E, lane 3). Acetylation of
recombinant γD-crystallin was achieved using different molar
ratios of lysine to Ac2O (considering one lysine residue
per molecule of γD-crystallin). Western blot analysis using
the Nε-acetyllysine antibody indicated
acetylation of γD-crystallin, and the intensity of the band
increased as the concentration of Ac2O increased (Figure 1F).

We further verified the acetylation sites
in human γD-crystallin
using mass spectrometry. Both γD-crystallin from a 73-year-old
lens (Figure 2A) and in vitro acetylated γD-crystallin (Figure 2B)
exhibited similar tandem mass patterns in the modified peptides (the
sequence coverages for the two proteins were 94 and 99%, respectively).
The N-terminal peptide GKITLYEDR of the protein was observed in both
the unmodified and the modified forms with mass shifts of +42 Da and
+84 Da (Table 1), indicating that in addition
to K2 acetylation, G1 was acetylated in both the in vivo and the in vitro samples.

Figure 2 Mass spectrometric detection
of acetylation at G1 and K2 in human
γD-crystallin. Tandem mass spectra of γD-crystallin from
a 73-year-old human lens (A) and in vitro acetylated
γD-crystallin (B). The precursor ion of 589.81 (2+) that indicates
a mass shift of +84 Da compared with the unmodified peptide is shown.
The mass shift of +42 Da was observed at y8, but not y-series ions
from y1 to y7, which indicated acetylation of K2. The mass shift of
+84 Da was observed on the precursor ion, as well as b-series ions
from b2 to b7, which suggested acetylation of K2 and G1.

Table 1 Detection of Acetylated Amino Acids
in Human γD-Crystallin
 	 	 	 	 	 	samples	
sequence	Mr (expt)	Mc (calc)	error (ppm)	modified
site	mass shift
(Da)	in
vitro	in
vivo	
GKITLYEDR	1093.5742	1093.5768	–2	none	 	X	X	
GKITLYEDR	1135.5856	1135.5873	–1	protein N-terminus	+42.0106	X	X	
GKITLYEDR	1177.5962	1177.5979	–1	protein N-terminus and K2	+84.0212	X	X	
In the human lens, crystallins undergo various modifications.8,30 Several studies have attempted to understand the effect of these
modifications on the structure and function of crystallins.18,31−34 For γD-crystallin, Flaugh et al. demonstrated that deamidation
of glutamine destabilizes the protein by lowering the kinetic barrier
to unfolding.35 Schafheimer and King demonstrated
that UVA/UVB radiation induced photoaggregation of γD-crystallin in vitro.36 Therefore, to determine
how acetylation affects γD-crystallin, we first examined the
aggregation profiles of nonacetylated and acetylated γD-crystallin.
The acetylated γD-crystallin exhibited a 2-fold increase in
thermal aggregation in comparison to the nonacetylated protein (Figure 3A,B). The aggregation profiles of the nonacetylated
and acetylated proteins remained unaltered in the presence of DTT
(Figure 3A,B), suggesting that disulfide formation
was not responsible for the greater aggregation of the acetylated
protein. We then determined whether the ability of α-crystallin
to suppress thermal aggregation was altered by acetylation of γD-crystallin.
Heat-induced γD-crystallin aggregation profiles in the absence
or presence of α-crystallin are shown in Figure 3C,D. α-Crystallin efficiently inhibited the aggregation
of γD-crystallin (∼80%) at a chaperone to substrate ratio
of 1:1 (w/w); however, acetylation decreased the chaperone efficiency
by 20%. Similar results were obtained at a chaperone to substrate
ratio of 0.75:1 (w/w). Under these assay conditions, α-crystallin
did not aggregate (Figure 3C, trace 3). These
results suggested that acetylation of G1 and K2 in human γD-crystallin
enhanced its aggregation under thermal stress. The decreased chaperone
function of α-crystallin for the acetylated protein further
suggested that acetylation of γD-crystallin could lead to its
aggregation in aging and cataractous lenses.

Figure 3 Acetylated γD-crystallin
is more prone to thermal aggregation
and less protected by αL-crystallin. (A) Time-course
aggregation of nonacetylated and acetylated human γD-crystallin
at 80 °C. The samples were prepared in 10 mM phosphate buffer
containing 1 mM EDTA (pH 7.0). 1: Nonacetylated; 2: acetylated; 3:
nonacetylated with 5 mM DTT; and 4: acetylated with 5 mM DTT. The
protein concentration was 0.1 mg/mL. (B) Scattering values of both
proteins during thermal aggregation after 1 h. (C) Time-course aggregation
of nonacetylated and acetylated γD-crystallin at 80 °C
in the presence/absence of αL-crystallin. The samples
were prepared in 10 mM phosphate buffer containing 5 mM DTT and 1
mM EDTA (pH 7). The concentration of both γD-crystallin proteins
was 0.1 mg/mL. 1: Nonacetylated; 2: acetylated; 3: αL-crystallin alone; 4: nonacetylated + αL-crystallin
(1:1) (w/w); 5: acetylated + αL-crystallin (1:1)
(w/w); 6: nonacetylated + αL-crystallin (1:0.75)
(w/w); and 7: acetylated + αL-crystallin (1:0.75)(w/w).
(D) Percent protection of nonacetylated and acetylated γD-crystallin
by αL-crystallin during thermal aggregation after
1 h. Bars represent the means ± SD of three independent experiments.
*p &lt; 0.05 and ***p &lt; 0.0005.

We have previously reported that
acetylation of α-crystallin
perturbed its structure.18,32,33 To verify whether a similar structural perturbation occurred in
γD-crystallin, we probed the structure by monitoring the intrinsic
tryptophan fluorescence, in addition to using near- and far-UV CD
spectroscopy. Far-UV CD spectra of the nonacetylated and the acetylated
proteins were nearly identical (Figure 4A).
The spectra exhibited characteristics of a dominant β-sheet
structure (minima at approximately 218 nm). Quantitative analysis
of the far-UV CD spectra confirmed that γD-crystallin is a predominantly
β-sheet protein (55% β-sheet and only 8% α-helix).
These results further indicated that G1 and K2 acetylation did not
perturb the secondary structure of γD-crystallin.

Figure 4 Acetylation
perturbed only the tertiary structure of γD-crystallin.
(A) Far-UV CD spectra of nonacetylated and acetylated human γD-crystallin.
(B) Near-UV CD spectra of nonacetylated and acetylated human γD-crystallin.
The concentrations of the protein samples used in far- and near-UV
CD were 0.2 and 1.0 mg/mL, respectively. (C) Intrinsic tryptophan
fluorescence spectra of nonacetylated and acetylated human γD-crystallin
(0.025 mg/mL) were recorded from 310 to 400 nm. The excitation wavelength
was 295 nm. Excitation and emission slit widths were 5 nm each. The
data were collected at a 0.5 nm wavelength resolution. All assays
were performed in 10 mM phosphate buffer containing 1 mM EDTA and
5 mM DTT (pH 7.0) at 25 °C.

The near-UV CD spectra of γD-crystallin are shown in
Figure 4B. The signal for tryptophan and tyrosine
(greater
than 270 nm) was different in the acetylated protein compared with
the nonacetylated protein. Moreover, peaks for phenylalanine in the
250–270 nm region for the acetylated protein were found to
differ in both intensity and position from those of the nonacetylated
protein. These alterations suggested that G1 and K2 acetylation significantly
perturbed the tertiary structure of γD-crystallin. The intrinsic
tryptophan fluorescence spectra of the two proteins agreed with the
near-UV results (Figure 4C). The λmax for both the nonacetylated and the acetylated protein occurred
at 327 nm, which suggested that the tryptophan residues are buried.
However, the intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence of the acetylated protein
was ∼10% higher than that of the nonacetylated protein, suggesting
that acetylation perturbed the microenvironment of the tryptophan
residues.

We also used molecular dynamics simulations to understand
the fluctuations
in different conformations of γD-crystallin. The superposition
of the nonacetylated and acetylated model structures (Figure 5A) revealed that the overall globular conformation
was identical in the two proteins. The relative architecture of the
protein, which consists of antiparallel β-sheets, was well preserved
in the acetylated form. These results correlated well with the far-UV
CD spectra (Figure 4A), in which the spectral
characteristics were found to be identical for the acetylated and
nonacetylated proteins. All four tryptophan (W) residues (W42, W68,
W131 and W157) were found to be buried in the conformational samplings
(Figure 5B), which, again, fully agreed with
our intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence results (Figure 4C).

Figure 5 Conformational analysis of nonacetylated and acetylated γD-crystallin
using molecular dynamics simulations. Molecular dynamics simulation
results suggest that acetylation does not alter the secondary structure
of γD-crystallin (A). Tryptophan residues in the nonacetylated
(yellow), in the K2-acetylated (orange) and in the G1- and K2-acetylated
γD-crystallin (blue) models are shown (B). The structures used
for superposition are models from the top conformational cluster.
All tryptophan residues were found to be buried within the globular
core of the proteins. The “circled” portions in the
panel B represents modulation in the structure/conformation of human
γD-crystallin due to aceylation.

Human γD-crystallin contains six cysteine residues.
The crystal
structure of human γD-crystallin (PDB code: 1HK0) indicated that
all six cysteine residues exist in the reduced (−SH) form.
Because acetylation perturbed the tertiary structure of γD-crystallin,
we determined whether this perturbation was accompanied by alterations
in the microenvironment of the cysteine residues. Upon reaction between
DTNB and the −SH groups of the nonacetylated protein, 2-nitro-5-thiobenzoic
acid (TNB) was formed, and, as a result of this adduct formation,
an increase in the absorbance at 412 nm (A412) with time
was observed (Figure 6). This increase was
significantly smaller in the acetylated protein. On the basis of these
reactions, we estimated the DTNB-reactive sulfhydryl groups in the
nonacetylated and acetylated protein to be 4.43 μM and 1.21
μM, respectively. To confirm whether changes in the DTNB assay
were due to the alteration in the available free thiol moieties of
cysteine residues, we performed the assay using the cysteine-lacking Mycobacterium leprae HSP18, which we have previously cloned
and purified.24 We did not observe a change
in the absorbance value at 412 nm with time for HSP18. Collectively,
these results confirmed that acetylation of γD-crystallin altered
the microenvironment of cysteine residues in a manner that rendered
them inaccessible for reaction with DTNB.

Figure 6 Acetylation alters the
cysteine microenvironment in γD-crystallin.
DTNB reaction kinetic profiles of nonacetylated and acetylated γD-crystallin
at 25 °C. A protein concentration of 0.1 mg/mL in 50 mM phosphate
buffer containing 1 mM EDTA (pH 7.4) was used. DTNB was used at a
7-fold molar excess of the protein. Absorbance was measured at 412
nm as a function of time. Mycobacterium leprae HSP18,
which lacks cysteine residues, was used as a negative control.

The X-ray crystal structure of
human γD-crystallin indicated
that cysteine (C) residues C18 and C78 are in close proximity and
are therefore likely to form a disulfide bond. Heat map analysis was
performed based on the atomic information from molecular dynamics
simulations to explore the energy minima points on the correlated
projections. The y-axis was plotted by considering
the RMSD for C18 and C78 as a collective variable. The interatomic
distance between the sulfur atoms of both residues constituted the
collective variable for the x-axis (Figure 7). An analysis of the structures representing the
top cluster revealed the interatomic distance between C18 and C78
to be 5.1 Å in the nonacetylated, 4.2 Å in the K2-acetylated
and 3.8 Å in the G1- and K2-acetylated proteins (Figure 7). The local minima were found to be much further
to the right on the x-axis for the nonacetylated
protein. In contrast, these minima were closer to the origin of the
axis for the K2 acetylation model, suggesting that the two cysteine
residues contained minimum energy and drew closer to each other. Interestingly,
the minima was found to be even more conserved for the G1- and K2-acetylated
protein, suggesting that the bond distance between C18 and C78 was
reduced even further. These results correlate well with the in vitro thiol reactivity experiment (Figure 6) in which a significant reduction in the free −SH
groups was observed for the acetylated protein. Collectively, acetylation
of human γD-crystallin perturbed the cysteine microenvironments
and brought the two cysteine residues within close proximity of each
other.

Figure 7 Orientation of thiol residues in nonacetylated and acetylated γD-crystallin.
The relative distance between C18 and C78 in the nonacetylated (A),
K2-acetylated (B), and G1- and K2-acetylated γD-crystallin (C)
calculated from the top conformational cluster models. Heat map analysis
for C18 and C78 of human γD-crystallin [nonacetylated (D), K2-acetylated
(E), and G1- and K2-acetylated γD-crystallin (F)] was prepared
using the root-mean-square deviation of C18 and C78 as collective
variables for the y-axis and the distance between
C18 and C78 as the collective variable for the x-axis.

In addition to these structural
perturbations, we also probed the
surface of nonacetylated and acetylated γD-crystallin. Molecular
modeling based on the X-ray crystal structure was used to evaluate
the changes in the surface electrostatics attributable to acetylation
in human γD-crystallin. The acetylation was introduced at the
G1 and K2 positions and analyzed using APBS. Prior to calculation,
energy minimization of the macro-models was performed to ensure the
correct positioning and orientation of each atom. The electrostatic
isosurface revealed marked changes in the acetylated protein. The
associated region that exhibits changes in electropositive and electronegative
contours near the acetylation site has been highlighted in Figure 8A,D,G. The relative orientation of the residues
in close proximity to K2 (within a ∼4-Å radius) and the
respective hydrogen bonds (red) are shown in Figure 8B,E,H. Interestingly, as a consequence of acetylation, the
surface electronegativity appeared to disperse the electropositive
character (blue contours). A similar overview is observed from the
vacuum-generated local potential for the proteins (Figure 8C,F,I). On the basis of all of these findings, we
concluded that structural perturbations as a result of acetylation
promoted thermally induced aggregation of γD-crystallin.

Figure 8 Surface electrostatic
potential attributable to acetylation in
human γD-crystallin. Molecular electrostatic potential surfaces
for nonacetylated (A), K2-acetylated (D), and G1- and K2-acetylated
(G) human γD-crystallin that were obtained using the adaptive
Poisson–Boltzmann solver. Blue and red contours represent electropositive
and electronegative isosurfaces at ±0.3 kT/e, respectively. The
residues within a 4-Å radius of K2 (green) and G1 (cyan) are
represented as sticks with hydrogens, and hydrogen bonds are represented
as red dotted lines (B, E, and H). The vacuum-generated electrostatic
potentials near the acetylation region are highlighted in all models,
and the models show the electropositive (nonacetylated: C) and electronegative
potentials (K2 acetylation: F; G1 and K2 acetylation: I). The yellow
arrow in panel D, F, G, and I depicts comparative changes due to acetylation
of human γD-crystallin.

Because lens proteins have a negligible turnover rate throughout
the life span, the stability of crystallin proteins is a great concern.
Our previous studies on α-crystallin suggested that structural
stability modulated its chaperone function. We demonstrated that the
enhancement of the chaperone function of α-crystallin under
different conditions was commonly associated with increased structural
stability.18,37−39 To determine
the effect of acetylation on the structural stability of γD-crystallin,
the thermodynamic stability was examined. Equilibrium GdnHCl unfolding
was estimated by monitoring the intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence
of the protein at various GdnHCl concentrations. The λmax values were recorded at 327 and 355 nm and plotted as a ratio of
intensities (I327/I355) against GdnHCl concentration (Figure 9A). A crude estimation of the transition midpoint (C1/2) from sigmoidal analysis of the denaturation
profiles indicated that the C1/2 value
decreased from 2.06 M for the nonacetylated protein to 1.77 M of GdnHCl
for the acetylated protein (Figure 9A and Table 2). This decrease suggested that acetylation destabilized
the overall structural integrity of γD-crystallin. To quantify
the stability, all of the profiles were analyzed with the aid of a
global three-state fitting procedure, according to the following equation: 2  where FN, FI, and FU are the fluorescence intensities
for 100% nonacetylated,
100% intermediate, and 100% unfolded forms, respectively. ΔG10 represents the standard free energy
change between native (N) and the intermediate (I) forms, and ΔG20 represents the standard free energy
change between the I and unfolded (U) forms. ΔG0, which is the sum of ΔG10 and ΔG20, represents the standard free energy change of unfolding (between
the N and U forms) at zero GdnHCl concentration. The standard free
energy change of the nonacetylated protein at 37 °C was 41.93
kJ/mol (Table 2). The ΔG0 value for the acetylated protein was reduced to 35.72
kJ/mol, suggesting a decrease in thermodynamic stability by ∼6.21
kJ/mol.

Figure 9 Acetylated γD-crystallin is structurally less stable than
the nonacetylated γD-crystallin. Equilibrium GdnHCl unfolding
profile for 0.025 mg/mL of nonacetylated and acetylated human γD-crystallin
at 37 °C (A). The profile was normalized to a scale of 0–1.
Symbols represent the experimental data points, and the solid lines
represent the best fit according to the three-state model. The thermal
stability of both proteins was evaluated by far-UV CD measurements
(B). The temperature was controlled by a water bath, and the data
were recorded at a given temperature after a 2 min equilibration.
A protein concentration of 0.1 mg/mL in 10 mM phosphate buffer, 5
mM DTT, and 1 mM EDTA (pH 7.0) was used. The raw data were fitted
to a two-state model, and the fitting results are represented by solid
lines. The thermal stability of both proteins was evaluated by monitoring
the intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence (C). The temperature was controlled
by a water bath, and the data were recorded at a given temperature
after a 2 min equilibration. A protein concentration of 0.025 mg/mL
in 10 mM phosphate buffer, 5 mM DTT, and 1 mM EDTA (pH 7.0) was used.
The raw data were fitted to a two-state model, and the fitting results
are represented by solid lines. Potential energy estimation computed
from the molecular dynamics simulation (D). The relative difference
in the potential energy profiles indicate the stability of the macro-models
in the order nonacetylated &gt; K2-acetylated &gt; G1- and K2-acetylated.

Table 2 C1/2 and
ΔG0 Values of Nonacetylated and
Acetylated Human γD-Crystallin at 37 °C
protein	C1/2 (M)	ΔG0(kJ/mol)	
nonacetylated	2.06 ± 0.04	41.93 ± 0.72	
acetylated	1.77 ± 0.05	35.72 ± 0.57	
We then compared the stability of the proteins against thermal
stress by measuring far-UV CD spectra and the intrinsic tryptophan
fluorescence. The change in the ellipticity magnitude at 218 nm (which
is characteristic of the β-sheet secondary structure of the
protein) and the alteration in the λmax of intrinsic
tryptophan fluorescence were monitored over a temperature range from
25 to 90 °C (Figure 9B,C). The thermal
denaturation profiles of both proteins were sigmoidal in nature and
exhibited an apparent two-state transition. Sigmoidal analysis of
far-UV CD profiles demonstrated that the nonacetylated protein underwent
thermal unfolding with a midpoint transition or melting temperature
(Tm) of 82 °C (Table 3). Acetylation shifted the Tm value
to ∼76 °C (Figure 9B and Table 3). A similar decrease in Tm (∼8 °C) was also observed when probed using the
intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence (Figure 9C, Table 4), suggesting that acetylation reduced
the thermal stability of human γD-crystallin.

Table 3 Thermal Unfolding Parameters of Nonacetylated
and Acetylated Human γD-Crystallin Determined from Far-UV CD
Spectroscopy
protein	Tm (°C)	
nonacetylated	82.1 ± 0.3	
acetylated	75.7 ± 0.4	
Table 4 Thermal Unfolding Parameters of Nonacetylated
and Acetylated Human γD-Crystallin Determined from the Intrinsic
Tryptophan Fluorescence
protein	Tm (°C)	
nonacetylated	83.4 ± 0.5	
acetylated	75.2 ± 0.3	
We then estimated the structural stability of the nonacetylated
and acetylated γD-crystallin by computing the potential energy
(PE) of the system throughout the simulation time scale (Figure 9D). The average PE for the nonacetylated protein
was found to be −7.9 × 104 kcal/mol, whereas
the PE for acetylated K2 and acetylated G1 and K2 was found to be
−7.7 × 104 and −6.7 × 104 kcal/mol, respectively. Theoretical analysis, as well as chemical
and thermal denaturation experiments, revealed that acetylation significantly
decreased the structural stability of human γD-crystallin. A
previous study has shown that deamidation, which is another posttranslational
modification, also induced a similar reduction in the structural stability
of γD-crystallin.35 In addition,
it has been demonstrated that congenital cataract mutants of human
γD-crystallin (R14C, G61C) are also structurally less stable
than the wild-type protein.22,40 On the basis of these
observations, we concluded that acetylation destabilized human γD-crystallin,
which promoted its aggregation under a thermally stressed condition.

In addition to structural stability, lens crystallins exhibit high
kinetic stability, which allows them to retain their folded conformation
during aging. In vitro unfolding/refolding progression
of human γD-crystallin has been extensively studied, and these
studies indicate that the protein contains a partially folded intermediate
population.41−43 We also examined the effect of acetylation on the
unfolding kinetics of γD-crystallin. The increase in tryptophan
fluorescence intensity at 355 nm was monitored with time, while the
protein was rapidly diluted into 5.5 M GdnHCl (pH 7.0) at 25 °C.
The kinetic unfolding profile of the nonacetylated protein was best
fit by two exponentials, which suggested the presence of one intermediate
(Figure 10A,B). The rate constant values further
reflected that the transition of the native state to the intermediate
(transition 1) was nearly 10-fold more rapid than the transition from
the intermediate to the unfolded state (transition 2) (Table 5). The unfolding transition demonstrated t1/2 values of 23.1 and 277 s for the two phases,
respectively. The kinetic unfolding transitions for the acetylated
protein was best fit by a single exponential with a t1/2 value of ∼69 s. When we performed this unfolding
kinetics experiment at 37 °C, we observed a similar result (data
not shown). Collectively, these results revealed that the acetylated
protein unfolded more rapidly than the nonacetylated protein.

Figure 10 Acetylation
alters the unfolding and refolding of γD-crystallin.
Productive kinetic unfolding data of nonacetylated and acetylated
human γD-crystallin (A). For unfolding, nonacetylated proteins
(0.1 mg/mL) were diluted into 5.5 M GdnHCl, 10 mM phosphate buffer,
5 mM DTT, and 1 mM EDTA (pH 7.0) at 25 °C. Changes in the fluorescence
intensity at 355 nm were monitored over time using an excitation wavelength
of 295 nm. The final protein concentration in the unfolding buffer
was 0.01 mg/mL. Unfolding time-course profiles (B) of both proteins
were fitted with double and single exponentials, respectively, as
indicated by solid lines. Productive kinetic refolding data of nonacetylated
and acetylated human γD-crystallin (C). The protein (0.1 mg/mL)
was initially unfolded in 5.5 M GdnHCl and diluted into 10 mM phosphate,
5 mM DTT, and 1 mM EDTA (pH 7.0) at 25 °C to yield a final GdnHCl
concentration of 1.0 M. The final protein concentration was 0.01 mg/mL.
Changes in the fluorescence intensity at 355 nm were monitored over
time using an excitation wavelength of 295 nm. Both refolding time-course
profiles were fitted with double exponentials, as indicated by solid
lines (D).

Table 5 Productive
Kinetic Unfolding Parameters
of Nonacetylated and Acetylated Human γD-Crystallin
 	kinetic
unfolding transition 1	kinetic unfolding transition 2	
protein	k1 (s–1)	t11/2 (s)	k2 (s-1)	t21/2 (s)	
nonacetylated	0.03 ± 0.004	23.1 ± 3.0	0.0025 ± 0.0001	277 ± 9	
acetylated	0.01 ± 0.001	69.3 ± 6.0	 	 	
The effect of acetylation
on the refolding kinetics of human γD-crystallin
was also determined by productive kinetic refolding experiments at
pH 7.0. The protein was diluted from 5.5 M GdnHCl to 1.0 M GdnHCl,
and the decrease in intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence intensity at
355 nm was monitored (Figure 10C,D). The refolding
kinetics profile of the nonacetylated protein exhibited a rapid decrease
in fluorescence intensity up to 180 s followed by a gradual decrease
during the remainder of the assay. The profile was best fit by two
exponentials (Figure 10D), yielding t1/2 values of 9.9 and 83.5 s for the unfolded
state (U) → intermediate state (I) (transition 1) and intermediate
(I) → native state (N) (transition 2), respectively (Table 6). The t1/2 values for
the U → I and I → N transitions increased ∼4-
to 5-fold for the acetylated protein compared with that of the nonacetylated
protein (Table 6), suggesting that refolding
of the acetylated protein was slower than the nonacetylated protein.
The results obtained from structural stability and unfolding/refolding
kinetics experiments suggested that G1 and K2 in the N-terminal region
of γD-crystallin are critical for both the overall structural
stability and the kinetic stability of this protein. Our results are
analogous to previous observations that deamidation and cataract-causing
point mutations in the N-terminal region of γD-crystallin (L5S,
V75D) decreased the kinetic unfolding barrier of γD-crystallin.35,41 Interestingly, our results also demonstrate that acetylation destabilized
the native conformation by decreasing the potential barrier of the
unfolding pathway, which may be account for the increased aggregation
of the acetylated protein under thermal stress.

Table 6 Productive Kinetic Refolding Parameters
of Nonacetylated and Acetylated Human γD-Crystallin
 	kinetic
refolding transition 1	kinetic refolding transition 2	
protein	k1(s–1)	t11/2(s)	k2(s–1)	t21/2 (s)	
nonacetylated	0.07 ± 0.003	9.9 ± 0.5	0.0083 ± 0.0003	83.5 ± 0.5	
acetylated	0.02 ± 0.001	34.6 ± 1.0	0.0016 ± 0.0001	433.1 ± 3.0	
Folding studies of multidomain proteins are of significant importance.
The geometry of interdomain interfaces and stability of different
domains play a crucial role in protein folding. Partially unfolded
chains/domains are often known to trigger aggregation reactions, which
in turn lead to several protein aggregation diseases.44 Human γD-crystallin has two indistinct domains (N-
and C-terminal domains). Although, acetylation of G1 and K2 residues
in the N-terminal domain of this protein grossly perturbed the tertiary
structure, structural stability and cysteine microenvironment, negligible
alteration in the secondary structure of this protein indicated that
only a part of the protein is involved for such alteration. Moreover,
theoretical studies also predicted that acetylation of γD-crystallin
brought the two distant cysteine residues (C18 and C78) in the N-terminal
domain within close proximity of each other. In light of all these
observations, it appeared acetylation affected the stability of the
two domains in human γD-cystallin. Previously, several attempts
have been made to understand the folding and stability of these two
domains in this crystallin protein using unfolding/refolding kinetic
experiments.6,41,45 All these studies used an assumption/hypothesis proposed by Flaugh
et al. during analyzing the data associated with these experiments
i.e. during unfolding/refolding kinetics experiment, the native to
intermediate transition corresponds to unfolding/refolding of N-terminal
domain and the intermediate to unfolded transition corresponds to
unfolding/refolding of the C- terminal domain of γD-crystallin.41 We also used this hypothesis to understand the
effect of acetylation on the stability of these two domains in human
γD-crystallin. When the kinetic unfolding profile of nonacetylated
and acetylated γD-crystallin was compared, it was found that
the N-terminal domain of the acetylated protein unfolded faster than
that of the nonacetylated protein (Table 5).
When the kinetic refolding profiles of both the proteins were compared,
it was found that the N-terminal domain of the acetylated protein
takes longer time to refold compared to the nonacetylated protein.
However, when the same was compared for the C-terminal domain, the
difference in refolding time for these two proteins was comparatively
less (Table 6). Therefore, we can suggest that
acetylation of human γD-crystallin presumably destabilized its
N-terminal domain more compared to its C-terminal domain which made
γD-crystallin more prone to aggregation (Figure 3B).

Our biophysical studies clearly revealed that the
structural stability
of γD-crystallin was decreased due to acetylation, which was
accompanied by a perturbed tertiary structure and native-like secondary
structure. This finding led us to hypothesize that acetylation of
γD-crystallin may induce the formation of a molten globule-like
intermediate structure. The term “molten globule” evolved
from the work of Ohgushi and Wada in 1983.46 A molten globule is typically an intermediate state, which is clearly
different from the native and denatured states of a protein, with
a native-like secondary structure but grossly perturbed/disordered
tertiary structure and a significant exposure of hydrophobic surface.
Chemical modifications of proteins are often responsible for the formation
of a molten globule structure. For example, reductive alkylation of
lysine residues induced a molten globule structure in the thermostable
lipase found in the Geobacillus zalihae strain T1
and decreased the stability of this protein.47 Another example is the modification of ε-amino groups of lysine
residues in glucose oxidase, which resulted in a molten globule-like
intermediate structure of the protein.48 These studies also demonstrated that the partially flexible structure
of the molten globule-like intermediate state exposed a higher amount
of hydrophobic sites on its surface. Therefore, we evaluated whether
acetylation exposed hydrophobic sites in γD-crystallin using
bis-ANS as a hydrophobic probe. This hydrophobic probe is commonly
used to monitor the molten globule state in a protein.49,50 We observed that the fluorescence intensity of bis-ANS bound to
the protein was ∼30% higher compared with the nonacetylated
protein (Figure 11). This finding suggested
that acetylation induced a molten globule state in γD-crystallin
with a semiflexible structure, which permitted exposure of some hydrophobic
groups at the protein surface. This probably led to the increase in
aggregation of γD-crystallin under thermal stress.

Figure 11 Acetylation
exposes additional hydrophobic sites at the surface
of γD-crystallin. The concentrations of the protein samples
and bis-ANS were 2.5 μM and 10 μM, respectively. All samples
were prepared in 10 mM phosphate buffer, 5 mM DTT, and 1 mM EDTA (pH
7.0). The fluorescence spectrum of bis-ANS bound to different samples
was recorded from 450 to 600 nm at 25 °C. The excitation wavelength
was 390 nm.

In summary, the present
study has demonstrated that G1 and K2 acetylation
occurred in γD-crystallin of the human lens and that this acetylation
decreased the structural stability, altered the unfolding/refolding
kinetics, and perturbed the conformation of this protein. Whether
the acetylation of γD-crystallin alters the binding affinity
of γD-crystallin for α-crystallin remains to be determined.
We propose that these changes increase the propensity of γD-crystallin
to self-aggregate and contribute to the aggregation of proteins that
occurs in aging and cataractous lenses.

Supporting Information Available
Sequence alignment to show
conserved K2 in human γ-crystallin variants. This material is
available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi501004y_si_001.pdf

 Author Present Address
∥ Department
of Ophthalmology, University of Colorado School of Medicine,
12800 East 19th Avenue, RC-1 North 5102, Aurora CO 80045.

Author Contributions
# M.A.D. and S.K.N.
contributed equally to this work.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This study was supported by National Institutes of Health
Grants R01EY-022061, R01EY-023286 (R.H.N.), P30EY-11373 (Visual Sciences
Research Center of Case Western Reserve University), Research to Prevent
Blindness, NY, The Ohio Lions Eye Research Foundation and the CSIR
India Grant 37(1535)/12/EMR-II (AB). S.K.N. acknowledges the receipt
of an Institute Fellowship from the Indian Institute of Technology
Bhubaneswar. We thank Drs. Rooban Nahomi and Sruthi Sampathkumar for
critical reading of the manuscript.

Abbreviations
bis-ANS4,4′-dianilino-1,1′-binaphthyl-5,5′-disulfonic
acid, dipotassium salt

DTNB5,5′-dithiobis(2-nitrobenzoic acid)

TNB2-nitro-5-thiobenzoic acid

DTTdithiothreitol

GdnHClguanidine hydrochloride

MDmolecular dynamics

APBSadaptive Poisson–Boltzmann
solver



   
References
Bloemendal H.  (1982 ) Lens proteins . CRC Crit. Rev. Biochem. 
12 , 1 –38 .7037295 
Benedek G. B.  (1971 ) Theory
of transparency of the eye . Appl. Opt. 
10 , 459 –473 .20094474 
Delaye M. ; Tardieu A.  (1983 ) Short-range order of
Crystallin proteins accounts for
eye lens transparency . Nature 
302 , 415 –417 .6835373 
Bron A. J. ; Vrensen G. F. ; Koretz J. ; Maraini G. ; Harding J. J.  (2000 ) The ageing
lens . Ophthalmologica 
214 , 86 –104 .10657747 
Horwitz J.  (1992 ) Alpha-Crystallin
can function as a molecular chaperone . Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
89 , 10449 –10453 .1438232 
Flaugh S. L. ; Kosinski-Collins M. S. ; King J.  (2005 ) Interdomain side-chain interactions
in human gammaD Crystallin influencing folding and stability . Protein Sci. 
14 , 2030 –2043 .16046626 
Basak A. ; Bateman O. ; Slingsby C. ; Pande A. ; Asherie N. ; Ogun O. ; Benedek G. B. ; Pande J.  (2003 ) High-resolution X-ray
crystal structures of human gammaD Crystallin (1.25 Å) and the
R58H mutant (1.15 Å) associated with aculeiform cataract . J. Mol. Biol. 
328 , 1137 –1147 .12729747 
Sharma K. K. ; Santhoshkumar P.  (2009 ) Lens aging: effects of crystallins . Biochim. Biophys. Acta 
1790 , 1095 –1108 .19463898 
Park Z. I. ; Sadygov R. ; Clark M. J. ; ClarkI J. ; Yates J. R.  (2007 ) Assigning
in vivo carbamylation and acetylation in human lens proteins using
tandem mass spectrometry and database searching . Int. J. Mass Spectrom. 
259 , 161 –173 .
Hanson S. R. ; Hasan A. ; Smith D. L. ; Smith J. B.  (2000 ) The major in vivo
modifications of the human water-insoluble lens crystallins are disulfide
bonds, deamidation, methionine oxidation and backbone cleavage . Exp. Eye Res. 
71 , 195 –207 .10930324 
Lampi K. J. ; Ma Z. ; Shih M. ; Shearer T. R. ; Smith J. B. ; Smith D. L. ; David L. L.  (1997 ) Sequence analysis of betaA3, betaB3, and betaA4 crystallins
completes the identification of the major proteins in young human
lens . J. Biol. Chem. 
272 , 2268 –2275 .8999933 
Hanson S. R. ; Smith D. L. ; Smith J. B.  (1998 ) Deamidation and
disulfide bonding
in human lens gamma-crystallins . Exp. Eye Res. 
67 , 301 –312 .9778411 
Searle B. C. ; Dasari S. ; Wilmarth P. A. ; Turner M. ; Reddy A. P. ; David L. L. ; Nagalla S. R.  (2005 ) Identification
of protein modifications
using MS/MS de novo sequencing and the OpenSea alignment algorithm . J. Proteome Res. 
4 , 546 –554 .15822933 
Lapko V. N. ; Smith D. L. ; Smith J. B.  (2003 ) Methylation and carbamylation of
human gamma-crystallins . Protein Sci. 
12 , 1762 –1774 .12876325 
Polevoda B. ; Sherman F.  (2003 ) N-terminal acetyltransferases
and sequence requirements
for N-terminal acetylation of eukaryotic proteins . J. Mol. Biol. 
325 , 595 –622 .12507466 
Sadoul K. ; Wang J. ; Diagouraga B. ; Khochbin S.  (2011 ) The tale of protein
lysine acetylation in the cytoplasm . J. Biomed.
Biotechnol. 
2011 , 970382 .21151618 
Choudhary C. ; Weinert B. T. ; Nishida Y. ; Verdin E. ; Mann M.  (2014 ) The growing
landscape of lysine acetylation links metabolism and cell signalling . Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 
15 , 536 –550 .25053359 
Nagaraj R. H. ; Nahomi R. B. ; Shanthakumar S. ; Linetsky M. ; Padmanabha S. ; Pasupuleti N. ; Wang B. ; Santhoshkumar P. ; Panda A. K. ; Biswas A.  (2012 ) Acetylation of alphaA-Crystallin
in the human lens: effects on structure and chaperone function . Biochim. Biophys. Acta 
1822 , 120 –129 .22120592 
Nahomi R. B. ; Oya-Ito T. ; Nagaraj R. H.  (2013 ) The combined effect of acetylation
and glycation on the chaperone and anti-apoptotic functions of human
alpha-Crystallin . Biochim. Biophys. Acta 
1832 , 195 –203 .22982407 
Nahomi R. B. ; Huang R. ; Nandi S. K. ; Wang B. ; Padmanabha S. ; Santhoshkumar P. ; Filipek S. ; Biswas A. ; Nagaraj R. H.  (2013 ) Acetylation
of Lysine92 Improves the Chaperone and Anti-apoptotic Activities of
Human alphaB-Crystallin . Biochemistry 
52 , 8126 –8138 .24128140 
Das K. P. ; Surewicz W. K.  (1995 ) Temperature-induced
exposure of hydrophobic surfaces
and its effect on the chaperone activity of alpha-Crystallin . FEBS Lett. 
369 , 321 –325 .7649280 
Pande A. ; Pande J. ; Asherie N. ; Lomakin A. ; Ogun O. ; King J. A. ; Lubsen N. H. ; Walton D. ; Benedek G. B.  (2000 ) Molecular
basis of a progressive juvenile-onset hereditary cataract . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
97 , 1993 –1998 .10688888 
Provencher S. W. ; Glockner J.  (1981 ) Estimation of globular protein secondary
structure
from circular dichroism . Biochemistry 
20 , 33 –37 .7470476 
Nandi S. K. ; Rehna E. A. ; Panda A. K. ; Shiburaj S. ; Dharmalingam K. ; Biswas A.  (2013 ) A S52P mutation in
the ’alpha-Crystallin domain’
of Mycobacterium leprae HSP18 reduces its oligomeric size and chaperone
function . FEBS J. 
280 , 5994 –6009 .24024660 
Jorgensen W. L. ; Maxwell D. S. ; TiradoRives J.  (1996 ) Development
and testing of the OPLS
all-atom force field on conformational energetics and properties of
organic liquids . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
118 , 11225 –11236 .
Dolinsky T. J. ; Nielsen J. E. ; McCammon J. A. ; Baker N. A.  (2004 ) PDB2PQR: an automated
pipeline for the setup of Poisson-Boltzmann electrostatics calculations . Nucleic Acids Res. 
32 , W665 –667 .15215472 
Krautler V. ; Van Gunsteren W. F. ; Hunenberger P. H.  (2001 ) A fast SHAKE: Algorithm to solve
distance constraint equations for small molecules in molecular dynamics
simulations . J. Comput. Chem. 
22 , 501 –508 .
Tuckerman M. ; Berne B. J. ; Martyna G. J.  (1992 ) Reversible
Multiple Time Scale Molecular-Dynamics . J. Chem.
Phys. 
97 , 1990 –2001 .
Zarina S. ; Abbasi A. ; Zaidi Z. H.  (1992 ) Primary
structure of beta s-Crystallin
from human lens . Biochem. J. 
287 (Pt 2 ), 375 –381 .1445197 
Andley U. P.  (2006 ) Crystallins
and hereditary cataracts: molecular mechanisms and potential for therapy . Expert Rev. Mol. Med. 
8 , 1 –19 .17049104 
Fujii N. ; Hiroki K. ; Matsumoto S. ; Masuda K. ; Inoue M. ; Tanaka Y. ; Awakura M. ; Akaboshi M.  (2001 ) Correlation between
the loss of the chaperone-like activity and the oxidation, isomerization
and racemization of gamma-irradiated alpha-Crystallin . Photochem. Photobiol. 
74 , 477 –482 .11594064 
Ito H. ; Kamei K. ; Iwamoto I. ; Inaguma Y. ; Nohara D. ; Kato K.  (2001 ) Phosphorylation-induced
change of the oligomerization state of alpha
B-Crystallin . J. Biol. Chem. 
276 , 5346 –5352 .11096101 
Gupta R. ; Srivastava O. P.  (2004 ) Deamidation affects structural and
functional properties
of human alphaA-Crystallin and its oligomerization with alphaB-Crystallin . J. Biol. Chem. 
279 , 44258 –44269 .15284238 
Nagaraj R. H. ; Oya-Ito T. ; Padayatti P. S. ; Kumar R. ; Mehta S. ; West K. ; Levison B. ; Sun J. ; Crabb J. W. ; Padival A. K.  (2003 ) Enhancement of chaperone function of alpha-Crystallin
by methylglyoxal modification . Biochemistry 
42 , 10746 –10755 .12962499 
Flaugh S. L. ; Mills I. A. ; King J.  (2006 ) Glutamine
deamidation destabilizes
human gammaD-Crystallin and lowers the kinetic barrier to unfolding . J. Biol. Chem. 
281 , 30782 –30793 .16891314 
Schafheimer N. ; King J.  (2013 ) Tryptophan cluster protects human gammaD-Crystallin from ultraviolet
radiation-induced photoaggregation in vitro . Photochem. Photobiol. 
89 , 1106 –1115 .23683003 
Biswas A. ; Das K. P.  (2004 ) Role of ATP on the interaction of alpha-Crystallin
with its substrates and its implications for the molecular chaperone
function . J. Biol. Chem. 
279 , 42648 –42657 .15292216 
Biswas A. ; Goshe J. ; Miller A. ; Santhoshkumar P. ; Luckey C. ; Bhat M. B. ; Nagaraj R. H.  (2007 ) Paradoxical
effects
of substitution and deletion mutation of Arg56 on the structure and
chaperone function of human alphaB-Crystallin . Biochemistry 
46 , 1117 –1127 .17260942 
Nagaraj R.
H. ; Panda A. K. ; Shanthakumar S. ; Santhoshkumar P. ; Pasupuleti N. ; Wang B. ; Biswas A.  (2012 ) Hydroimidazolone modification
of the conserved Arg12 in small heat shock proteins: studies on the
structure and chaperone function using mutant mimics . PLoS One 
7 , e30257 .22272318 
Zhang W. ; Cai H. C. ; Li F. F. ; Xi Y. B. ; Ma X. ; Yan Y. B.  (2011 ) The congenital cataract-linked
G61C mutation destabilizes
gammaD-Crystallin and promotes non-native aggregation . PLoS One 
6 , e20564 .21655238 
Flaugh S. L. ; Kosinski-Collins M. S. ; King J.  (2005 ) Contributions of hydrophobic domain
interface interactions to the folding and stability of human gammaD-Crystallin . Protein Sci. 
14 , 569 –581 .15722442 
Kosinski-Collins M. S. ; Flaugh S. L. ; King J.  (2004 ) Probing folding and fluorescence
quenching in human gammaD Crystallin Greek key domains using triple
tryptophan mutant proteins . Protein Sci. 
13 , 2223 –2235 .15273315 
Kosinski-Collins M. S. ; King J.  (2003 ) In vitro unfolding,
refolding, and polymerization of human gammaD
Crystallin, a protein involved in cataract formation . Protein Sci. 
12 , 480 –490 .12592018 
Dobson C. M.  (2004 ) Principles
of protein folding, misfolding and aggregation . Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 
15 , 3 –16 .15036202 
Moreau K. L. ; King J.  (2009 ) Hydrophobic core mutations associated with cataract development in
mice destabilize human gammaD-Crystallin . J.
Biol. Chem. 
284 , 33285 –33295 .19758984 
Ohgushi M. ; Wada A.  (1983 ) ‘Molten-globule
state’: a compact form of globular
proteins with mobile side-chains . FEBS Lett. 
164 , 21 –24 .6317443 
Cheong K. W. ; Leow T. C. ; Rahman R. N. ; Basri M. ; Rahman M. B. ; Salleh A. B.  (2011 ) Reductive alkylation
causes the formation of a molten
globule-like intermediate structure in Geobacillus zalihae strain
T1 thermostable lipase . Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol. 
164 , 362 –375 .21153892 
Hosseinkhani S. ; Ranjbar B. ; Naderi-Manesh H. ; Nemat-Gorgani M.  (2004 ) Chemical modification
of glucose oxidase: possible formation of molten globule-like intermediate
structure . FEBS Lett. 
561 , 213 –216 .15013780 
Shi L. ; Palleros D. R. ; Fink A. L.  (1994 ) Protein conformational changes induced
by 1,1′-bis(4-anilino-5-naphthalenesulfonic acid): preferential
binding to the molten globule of DnaK . Biochemistry 
33 , 7536 –7546 .8011619 
Brumano M. H. ; Oliveira M. G.  (2004 ) Urea-induced denaturation
of beta-trypsin: an evidence
for a molten globule state . Protein Pept. Lett. 
11 , 133 –140 .15078201 



