Selenium is a trace element
that is used in biology in at least two ways. First, it is found in
enzymes and proteins as part of the “21st”
amino acid selenocysteine (Sec, U), replacing the sulfur atom of cysteine
(Cys)., Second, it is found in tRNA as 2-selenouridine. A key question for us and others is “Why
has Nature chosen selenium?”. Sulfur and selenium share many
physicochemical properties because they are highly related elements
as part of the chalcogen family. Presumably,
selenium has been selected to replace sulfur in some rare instances
because it can perform chemistry that sulfur cannot.

We have studied this question by dissecting the enzymatic
reaction
mechanism of mammalian thioredoxin reductase (TR) through a series
of papers.− Others have also examined this question in studies of the reaction
mechanism of TR and other selenoenzymes.− Selenium participates in the reaction mechanism of
TR by two principal means as shown in Figure : (1) as the donor of electrons to the substrate, the disulfide bond
of thioredoxin (Trx), and (2) by acting as the acceptor of electrons
in the thiol/disulfide exchange step that occurs between the N- and
C-terminal redox centers [recently shown by us (DOI )]. Most selenoenzymes characterized to date
are oxidoreductases that make use of thiol/disulfide exchange reactions
of the type shown in Figure  in which selenium
has replaced sulfur.

Key thiol/disulfide exchange reactions in the mechanism
of mammalian
Sec-containing TR and Cys ortholog TR from Drosophila melanogaster. (A) The penultimate Sec residue acts as the donor of electrons
to the substrate Trx through an initial nucleophilic attack step governed
by rate constant kNuc-Se. (B) The
penultimate Cys residue of DmTR should act in an analogous fashion
to attack the disulfide bond of the substrate with rate constant kNuc-S. To increase the nucleophilicity
of the attacking thiolate, it has been proposed that flanking serine
residues (magenta) help to stabilize the negative charge through hydrogen
bonding. These flanking Ser residues
of DmTR contribute a factor of ∼8 to the catalytic rate constant, kcat. (C) After
reduction of the substrate, the vicinal selenosulfide ring of the
mammalian enzyme must be reduced in the exchange step by the N-terminal
redox center. The N-terminal redox center consists of an interchange
Cys residue (CysIC), and a charge-transfer Cys residue
(CysCT) that is involved in charge-transfer complexation
with the flavin coenzyme. The selenium atom acts as the electrophile
in this step (DOI ). (D)
Analogous exchange step in DmTR. Our hypothesis is that in order for kexS to approach kexSe, the electrophilicity of the attacked sulfur atom must be increased.

Thiol/disulfide exchange reactions
are accelerated when (i) the
strength of the attacking thiol nucleophile is increased, (ii) the
ability of the sulfur atom being attacked to accept electrons (electrophilicity)
is enhanced, and (iii) the stability of the leaving group is increased.
Substituting selenium for sulfur in a thiol/disulfide exchange reaction
will increase the rate of the reaction because of one or a combination
of all three of these factors. The use
of selenium as a superior electron donor (superior nucleophile) relative
to sulfur is the most commonly held belief about why Sec is used to
replace Cys in enzymes.

Cys-TR
orthologs, such as the Cys-containing TR from Drosophila
melanogaster (DmTR), must compensate for the absence of Sec
by increasing the reactivity of Cys in thiol/disulfide exchange reactions
by one or more of the aforementioned factors. DmTR contains a C-terminal
Ser-Cys-Cys-Ser redox motif in place of a Gly-Cys-Sec-Gly motif found in the mammalian enzyme. It has been
shown that the flanking serine (Ser) residues of the Cys-Cys dyad
(especially the final Ser residue) help to increase the nucleophilicity
of the attacking thiol by helping to stabilize
the thiolate form. This concept is further
explained in Figure .

It should be expected
that DmTR uses other factors mentioned above
to increase the rates of the several thiol/disulfide exchange reactions
that the enzyme uses during the catalytic cycle so that it would be
as effective as the mammalian enzyme as a catalyst. A key thiol/disulfide
exchange reaction examined in this study is the exchange step that
occurs between the N-terminal redox center of the enzyme and the oxidized
Cys-Cys dyad of the C-terminal redox center shown in Figure D (termed throughout this work simply the “exchange
step”).

In the analogous exchange step in the mammalian
enzyme (Figure C), Brandt and Wessjohann proposed
that selenium
is used as the leaving group in this exchange step and that formation
of the resulting selenolate was stabilized by the presence of a Glu-His-Sec
catalytic triad., In this model, the stabilized
selenolate helps to drive the equilibrium between the oxidized N-terminal
redox center and the reduced C-terminal redox center (containing the
selenolate) forward, so that the selenolate could then attack the
disulfide bond of Trx. Replacement of
Sec with Cys would no longer favor the reduction of the C-terminal
redox center in this model, explaining the loss of activity in the
Cys mutant., We also proposed that selenium
was used as the leaving group due to selenolate formation in this
critical exchange step and that loss of leaving group ability in the
Sec → Cys mutant explained the large decrease in activity.,

We recently presented evidence that selenium is not the leaving
group in the exchange reaction shown in Figure C but is in fact the electrophile being attacked (DOI ). Selenium is a superior electrophile in
comparison to sulfur in thiol/disulfide exchange reactions of the
type shown in Figure C.− This should
mean that DmTR would need to increase the electrophilicity of sulfur
in the corresponding thiol/disulfide exchange reaction shown in Figure D, so that this exchange reaction does not become
slow in comparison to the same reaction in the mammalian enzyme.

In this paper, we propose that the electrophilicity of the attacked
sulfur atom (also termed the center sulfur atom or Sc in
the literature) is increased by polarization of the disulfide bond
that forms between adjacent Cys residues of the C-terminal Ser-Cys-Cys-Ser
redox motif as shown in Figure A. We term this idea the “electrophilic activation”
hypothesis to explain how sulfur can become as electrophilic as selenium
in analogous thiol/disulfide exchange reactions. Two similar but alternative
models to electrophilic activation for increasing the rate of thiol/disulfide
exchange between the N- and C-terminal redox centers of DmTR are presented
in panels B and C of Figure .

Electrophilic activation
and leaving group stabilization models
for the exchange step. (A) We propose that Sc becomes electron
deficient through polarization of the shared electrons in the disulfide
bond. These electrons would be drawn near SL because of
the proximity of the positively charged His464 that acts as the general
acid/general base catalyst in the DmTR reaction mechanism. In the ground state, lone pairs of electrons
of SL could hydrogen bond with the imidazolium group of
His464. In the transition state, this hydrogen bond could strengthen,
increasing the polarization of the disulfide bond, resulting in its
labilization. The result would be an electron deficient Sc, which in turn would lower the barrier for the transfer of electrons
from CysIC to Sc. (B) An alternative model to
electrophilic activation is leaving group stabilization by use of
a general acid to protonate the leaving group. In this model, the
electrons in the disulfide bond between Sc and SL are evenly shared. When CysIC attacks Sc,
the electrons in the disulfide bond would move toward SL and then attack the proton from the nearby imidazolium cation. (C)
A second alternative to the one presented in panel B is stabilization
of the leaving group by ion pair formation.

To explain our hypothesis, we will revisit and reinterpret
our
data on the exchange step (Figure C, D). This
reinterpretation will be strengthened through the use of homocysteine
(hCys) replacement of each of the vicinal Cys residues of the Ser-Cys1-Cys2-Ser tetrapeptide to show how the geometry
of the eight-membered ring of the oxidized Cys1-Cys2 dyad is critical to rate acceleration of the exchange step
shown in Figure D. Our experiments with hCys
will also show that it is the penultimate Cys2 residue
that acts as both the acceptor of electrons from the N-terminal redox
center and the donor of electrons to the substrate. This is in complete
agreement with our recent results with the mammalian mitochondrial
enzyme for which we showed that the penultimate Sec residue of the
Gly-Cys1-Sec2-Gly redox motif also acts an acceptor
and donor of electrons in an analogous fashion (DOI ), and as originally proposed by modeling
studies of the oxidized Gly-Cys1-Sec2-Gly redox
motif in the crystal structures of mouse mitochondrial enzyme and the rat cytosolic enzyme.

Materials and Methods
Materials
NADPH was purchased from
AppliChem (Darmstadt,
Germany). DEAE resin was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO).
Phenyl sepharose resin was from Pharmacia-Amersham Biosciences (Uppsala,
Sweden). Microcon Ultracel YM-50 ultrafiltration devices by Millipore
(Billerica, MA) were used for concentrating enzyme samples. 2-Chlorotritylchloride
resin was from Novabiochem (San Diego, CA). Fmoc amino acids were
from Synbiosci Corp. (Livermore, CA), except for Fmoc-homocysteine,
which was from Bachem (King of Prussia, PA). CLEAR-OX resin was from
Peptides International (Louisville, KY). Primers for DmTR mutants
were from IDT (Coralville, IA), and plasmid pTYB3 and restriction
enzymes were from New England Biolabs (Ipswich, MA). The DmTR-SG construct
was synthesized by Retrogen, Inc. (San Diego, CA). Enzyme kinetic
assays were performed on a Cary50 UV–vis spectrophotometer
(Walnut Creek, CA), and all enzymatic assays were conducted at room
temperature unless otherwise noted. All other chemicals were from
Fisher Scientific (Fair Lawn, NJ) or Acros Organics (Morris Plains,
NJ).

Peptide Synthesis
All peptides in this study were synthesized
on 2-chlorotritylchloride resin using standard Fmoc chemistry as previously
detailed., Peptides were cleaved from the resin using
trifluoroacetic acid containing triisopropylsilane and water in a
96:2:2 ratio. The cleavage volume was reduced by evaporation under
a stream of N2, and the peptides were then precipitated
in ice-cold diethyl ether. Once dry, the peptides were redissolved
in 5–10% acetonitrile in water, lyophilized, and analyzed by
both MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry and analytical HPLC.

8-mer
peptides, H-PTPASCCS-OH (I), H-PTPASC(hC)S-OH (IV), and H-PTPAS(hC)CS-OH (V) were subsequently
oxidized to their cyclic forms by using CLEAR-OX resin. Briefly, a
3-fold excess of resin (vs a molar amount of peptide) was swelled
in dichloromethane (DCM) for 40 min, after which the resin was washed
with (three times each) DCM, dimethylformamide, methanol, deionized
water, and a degassed 1:1 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate/acetonitrile
mixture. Peptides were then dissolved in the degassed ammonium bicarbonate/acetonitrile
mixture and added to the resin. After gentle agitation for 90 min,
the peptide solution was filtered away from the resin and lyophilized.
Oxidized peptides were purified by HPLC and lyophilized to obtain
the crystalline, oxidized 8-mers.

Production of Semisynthetic
Mutants of DmTR
A brief
description of the nomenclature used in Tables – (and throughout) is warranted here.
The C-terminal redox tetrapeptide of DmTR contains the amino acids
Ser-Cys-Cys-Ser-OH. The wild-type (WT) enzyme is abbreviated as DmTR
or DmTR-SCCS. The abbreviation DmTR-SCCS refers to the main body of
the enzyme plus the C-terminal tetrapeptide, especially when we are
referring to amino acid changes made to the C-terminal redox center
throughout this work. Thus, in Tables –, mutants are abbreviated as DmTR-aa1aa2aa3aa4 (using
one-letter codes for the amino acids). The C-terminal redox center
of the mouse mitochondrial TR contains the amino acids Gly-Cys-Sec-Gly-OH.
Therefore, it is abbreviated as either mTR3 or mTR3-GCUG. In Tables  and , the mutants of mTR3 are abbreviated as mTR3-aa1aa2aa3aa4, using
the same manner of abbreviation that is used for mutants of DmTR.
The production of the full-length, semisynthetic WT enzyme and mutant
enzymes by intein-mediated peptide ligation (IPL) has been previously
described for mTR3 (enzymes 13–16) in refs (−) and DOI  and for DmTR (enzymes 1, 2, and 11) in ref () as listed in Tables  and . For the production
of enzymes 3–5, 10, and 12, a DmTRΔ3–intein fusion protein (missing the final
three amino acids of DmTR) was cleaved in the presence of peptide
and 50 mM N-methylmercaptoacetamide (NMA) in cleavage
buffer [50 mM MOPS buffer (pH 8.0) with 150 mM NaCl]. Cleavage of
the DmTRΔ3–intein fusion protein with either l-cysteine (25 mM) or l-homocysteine (25 mM) dissolved in
cleavage buffer but in the absence of NMA yielded enzymes 6 and 7. The C-terminus of the DmTRΔ3–intein
fusion protein is tagged with a chitin binding domain (CBD) to allow
for affinity purification and cleavage on chitin agarose beads after
recombinant expression in Escherichia coli cells. After cleavage, enzymes were
purified using hydrophobic and anion exchange chromatography as described
previously.−

For the production of enzymes 8 and 9, the DmTRΔ3 fusion protein construct was
modified to include an additional codon (GGT, Gly) between DmTR and
the intein/CBD to give a mutant where Cys1 of the Ser-Cys1-Cys2-Ser tetrapeptide was mutated to Gly, resulting
in a new DmTRΔ2-intein/CBD fusion construct. This construct
was cleaved from the intein by adding either 25 mM l-homocysteine
in cleavage buffer or 25 mM l-cysteine in cleavage buffer
to the chitin agarose resin. The resin was incubated overnight at
4 °C with gentle agitation to produce enzymes 8 and 9, respectively. The enzymes were then purified as described
above. After being purified, enzymes were concentrated using ultrafiltration.
Homodimeric enzyme concentrations were determined using an extinction
coefficient of 22.6 mM–1 cm–1 for
flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD).

Enzymatic Assays of TR
The assays for Trx and selenocystine
as substrates of TR have been previously described.,,,, Assay conditions for Trx with WT and mutant TRs consisted
of 50 mM potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.0) with 1 mM EDTA, 150 μM
NADPH, and 170 μM bovine pancreatic insulin with varying concentrations
of E. coli Trx. Assays with selenocystine as the
substrate contained 500 mM potassium phosphate (pH 7.0), 10 mM EDTA,
200 μM NADPH, and varying concentrations of selenocystine. Both
assays monitor the consumption of NADPH by following the loss of absorbance
at 340 nm (A340).

Peptide Complementation
Assays
To analyze the reduction
of the TR C-terminus by its N-terminal disulfide, truncated DmTR without
its final eight amino acids (DmTRΔ8, enzyme 2)
was assayed with oxidized 8-mer peptides corresponding to the eight
deleted C-terminal residues of enzymes 1, 3, and 4. Assays contained 100 mM potassium phosphate
(pH 7.0), 1 mM EDTA, 150 μM NADPH, and varying concentrations
of peptide. Assays with H-PTPASCCS-OHox (I) contained 25 nM DmTRΔ8, and assays with both H-PTPASC(hC)S-OHox (IV) and H-PTPAS(hC)CS-OHox (V) contained 610 nM DmTRΔ8. The reduction of each peptide
was monitored by the decrease in A340.

Enzyme Crystallization
A crystal of enzyme 8 was grown by the vapor diffusion hanging drop method. The crystal
was grown by adding 3 mL of 36 mg/mL protein in 10 mM magnesium sulfate,
50 mM ammonium citrate, 50 mM Tris (pH 8.5), and 10% glycerol mixed
with 1.5 mL of a precipitant solution containing 1.6 M magnesium sulfate,
100 mM MES (pH 6.5), and 0.5 mL of 10 mM NADP+ and incubated
at 4 °C. Orange crystals grew in 10 days.

Results and Discussion
The Electrophilic
Activation Hypothesis Explained. Part 1: Isolation
of the Exchange Reaction from the Rest of the Catalytic Mechanism
It is already recognized that Cys orthologs of Sec enzymes increase S-nucleophilicity to increase the rate of thiol/disulfide
exchange reactions to chemically behave
more like the strong nucleophile selenium. However, selenium is also
more electrophilic than sulfur,− so Cys orthologs of Sec enzymes
should also increase S-electrophilicity to mimic
the chemistry of selenium. The electrophilic activation hypothesis
is simply that Cys orthologs of Sec enzymes must (or may) increase S-electrophilicity to match Se-electrophilicity
so that the corresponding thiol/disulfide exchange reactions that
occur in the Cys ortholog will be as fast as thiol/selenosulfide exchange
reactions in Sec enzymes (Figure C, D).

Our hypothesis is that DmTR increases S-electrophilicity
by polarizing the disulfide bond of the C-terminal
redox center by placement of a positive charge on one end of the disulfide
to mimic the polarization that occurs in the selenosulfide bond of
the mammalian enzyme (Figure ). In other words,
the disulfide bond is “electrophilically activated”
for attack. This means that DmTR is heavily dependent on the geometry
of the active site, and especially dependent on the ring geometry
of the eight-membered disulfide ring that results from oxidation of
the vicinal Cys1-Cys2 dyad of the C-terminal
redox center. Vicinal disulfide ring structures occur at a low frequency
in the Protein Data Bank, perhaps because of the strain present in
such a small ring. Relief of strain energy
could contribute to increasing the rate of thiol/disulfide exchange
in DmTR. This should be less important in the mammalian enzyme because
the selenium atom is larger than the sulfur atom and the corresponding
Se–S and C–Se bonds are longer than the S–S and
C–S bonds in DmTR.

Evidence that the eight-membered disulfide
ring of DmTR is an especially reactive disulfide
(in the context of the active
site microenvironment) comes from the data in Table . Here, and previously,, we used a truncated
DmTR missing the C-terminal tail (DmTRΔ8) to measure the rate
of reduction of various disulfide substrates as illustrated in Figure . These substrates include a peptide that is identical
to the missing C-terminal disulfide (peptide I), various
permutations of this peptide to test features of ring geometry (peptides II–V), and lipoic acid. While the native, eight-membered
ring disulfide (peptide I) is somewhat strained, it is
not as strained as the disulfide bond of lipoic acid, yet it is turned over 11-fold faster. Further evidence
that the native peptide is activated for reduction in the enzyme active
site comes from comparing the turnover rate of I with
that of II. Peptide II has an amino acid
sequence identical to that of I, but the ring has been
disrupted by removal of the amide bond between the adjacent Cys residues.
This comparison demonstrates the importance of the geometry of the
eight-membered ring to the “activation” of the disulfide.
However, the linear form of the peptide becomes “activated”
by substituting Se for S (peptide III). Comparison of I with III clearly shows that there is not a
requirement for specific substrate geometry as long as Se is present
in the scissile bond.

Strategy for isolating
the exchange step in the reaction mechanism.
Here, and previously,, we make use of a truncated enzyme
missing the C-terminal redox center (constructed by using standard
recombinant DNA methodologies) in conjunction with disulfide-containing
substrates to gain a better understanding of factors that effect the
thiol/disulfide exchange reaction that occurs between the N- and C-terminal
redox centers. This strategy allows us to use linear disulfide substrates,
cyclic disulfide substrates, or substrates in which Se replaces S
to study the effects on this exchange step.

Disulfide Reductase Activity of DmTRΔ8
with Peptide Substrates with Varying Ring Sizes
Reported
in ref ().

Reported in ref ().

Trx-Reductase Activity of WT DmTR
and Homocysteine-Containing Mutants
enzyme	enzyme number	kcat (min–1)	Km (μM)	activity
at 90 μM	
DmTR-SCCS	1	300 ± 7.4	173 ± 8.1	95	
DmTRΔ8	2	ND	ND	ND	
DmTR-SChCS	3	103 ± 10	101 ± 20	48	
DmTR-ShCCS	4	NA	NA	0.4	
DmTR-ShChCS	5	35 ± 2.2	143 ± 17	14	
DmTR-ShC	6	ND	ND	ND	
DmTR-SC	7	ND	ND	ND	
DmTR-SGhC	8	ND	ND	ND	
DmTR-SGC	9	ND	ND	ND	
DmTR-SGhCS	10	ND	ND	ND	
Please see  for a description of abbreviations of the mutant
enzymes.

Reported in ref ().

Reported in ref ().

Not
detectable.

Not applicable.

Selenocystine Reductase
Activities
of WT DmTR and Mutant Enzymes
enzyme	enzyme number	kcat (min–1)	Km (μM)	activity
at 91 μM	
DmTR-SCCS	1	1112 ± 172	1090 ± 223	110	
DmTRΔ8	2	NA	NA	3.3	
DmTR-SChCS	3	1213 ± 233	1536 ± 363	68	
DmTR-ShCCS	4	NA	NA	41	
DmTR-ShChCS	5	520 ± 55	954 ± 137	41.6	
DmTR-ShC	6	NA	NA	38.6	
DmTR-SC	7	NA	NA	27.5	
DmTR-SGhC	8	NA	NA	13.9	
DmTR-SGC	9	NA	NA	25	
DmTR-SGhCS	10	NA	NA	25.7	
DmTR-SCAACS	11	113.0 ± 8.64	291.3 ± 45.0	27.9	
DmTR-SCAAUS	12	868.2 ± 51	87.53 ± 15	454	
Please
see  for a description of abbreviations of the mutant
enzymes.

Reported in ref ().

Not applicable.

Trx-Reductase Activity of WT DmTR
and Backbone Mutants
enzyme	enzyme number	kcat (min–1)	Km (μM)	
DmTR-SCCS	1	300 ± 7.4	173 ± 8.1	
DmTR-SCAACS	11	1 ± 0.2	166 ± 58	
DmTR-SCAAUS	12	153 ± 6.8	19 ± 3.3	
Please see  for a description of abbreviations of the mutant
enzymes.

Reported in ref ().

Trx-Reductase Activities of WT mTR3
and Mutant Enzymes
enzyme	enzyme number	kcat (min–1)	Km (μM)	
mTR-GCUG	13	2220 ± 78	67.6 ± 6	
mTRΔ8	14	ND	ND	
mTR-GCCG	15	4 ± 0.1	49 ± 3	
mTR-GCAAUG	16	500 ± 40	35 ± 10	
Please see  for a description of abbreviations of the mutant
enzymes.

Reported in ref ().

Reported in ref ().

Reported
in ref ().

Not detectable.

Selenocystine Reductase Activities
of WT mTR3 and Mutant Enzymes
enzyme	enzyme number	kcat (min–1)	Km (μM)	activity
at 91 μM	
mTR-GCUG	13	1403.6 ± 128	341.2 ± 59.0	295	
mTRΔ8	14	NA	NA	0.6	
mTR-GCCG	15	681.7 ± 91.5	791.3 ± 151.7	78.4	
mTR-GCAAUG	16	1228 ± 100	205 ± 40	415.5	
Please
see  for a description of abbreviations of the mutant
enzymes.

Reported in ref ().

Not applicable.

Here we show that even very subtle changes to the
ring of the native
peptide result in “deactivation” of the disulfide. Peptides IV and V have incorporated hCys in place of Cys
at either position of the Cys1-Cys2 dyad to help differentiate their individual functions.
The side chain of hCys is one methylene unit longer (∼3 Å)
than Cys, and an oxidized Cys-hCys dyad results in the formation of
a nine-membered ring instead of an eight-membered ring from an oxidized
Cys-Cys dyad. As shown by the data in Table , peptides with either a Cys1-hCys2 dyad or
a hCys1-Cys2 dyad are reduced 100-fold slower
(peptide IV) or 50-fold slower (peptide V) by the truncated enzyme than the native peptide (I). This shows that the precise positioning of the two sulfur atoms
of the substrate disulfide bond is critical for its activation and
reduction in the active site of DmTR. We again emphasize that precise
positioning of substrate atoms in the active site is NOT required
if the substrate disulfide bond is replaced with a selenosulfide bond,
as in the case of peptide III. We contend that this is
due to polarization of the scissile bond conferred by the presence
of the selenium atom. In other words, selenium is highly electrophilic
and can easily accept electrons from CysIC in the exchange
step, irrespective of the geometric arrangement of
the substrate atoms. This concept was further tested by experiments
described in the next section.

The Electrophilic Activation
Hypothesis Explained. Part 2: Alteration
of Ring Geometry in DmTR by Backbone Lengthening and Homocysteine
Substitution
Our hypothesis was tested by constructing mutants
of DmTR using both conventional methodologies and protein semisynthesis,
so that the C-terminal disulfide ring was altered in two different
ways as illustrated in Figure . The previously
described experimental design in Figure  is
a system in which we add a peptide as a substrate for the truncated
enzyme to measure the rate of thiol/disulfide exchange between the
two enzyme redox centers. The rate of thiol/disulfide exchange was
slow when the peptide substrate contained a nine-membered disulfide
ring due to hCys substitution. Construction of a full-length enzyme
allowed us to determine if the overall rate of Trx reduction was similarly
slow when hCys substituted for Cys (enzymes 3–5 in Table ).

Methods
for altering the ring geometry of the C-terminal vicinal
disulfide of DmTR used in this study. The top panel shows the situation
in the WT enzyme with a vicinal disulfide forming an eight-membered
ring. The geometry of the disulfide ring can be altered by inserting
amino acids between Cys1 and Cys2 as shown in
the middle panel. Each addition of an amino acid increases the backbone
length by three atoms (magenta). The other method for altering the
ring geometry maintains the amide bond connectivity but increases
the length of the side chain through the use of hCys substitition
(magenta in the bottom panel).

Our expectation was that there would be little or no Trx-reductase
activity in the case of the hCys-containing full-length enzymes 3–5. This was true for enzyme 4 in which
hCys replaced Cys1. Unexpectedly, however, we found that
enzyme 3 in which hCys replaced Cys2 had Trx-reductase
activity very similar to that of the WT enzyme (compare enzymes 3 and 1 in Table ). This
is despite the fact that the rate of thiol/disulfide exchange between
the N-terminal redox center of the enzyme and the nine-membered ring
disulfide substrate of peptide IV was very slow (Table ). Enzyme 3 also had
selenocystine-reductase activity very similar to that of the WT enzyme
as shown by the data in Table . This experiment differentiates the roles of the
two Cys residues of the dyad and supports our electrophilic activation
hypothesis as outlined in Figure .

When
Cys1 is replaced with hCys, there is little Trx-reductase
activity because the enzyme relies upon Cys1 to resolve
the mixed disulfide formed between DmTR and Trx, resulting in the
formation of the eight-membered ring. As the data in Table  demonstrate, the eight-membered disulfide ring
is activated for thiol/disulfide exchange. The low Trx-reductase activity
that results when hCys replaces Cys1 can be explained in
one of two ways. First, the longer side chain of hCys compared to
that of Cys may result in steric hindrance that prevents ring formation
between hCys and Cys, resulting in an inability of the mutant enzyme
to resolve the mixed disulfide bond between TR and Trx. Second, the
enzyme may use a pathway that results in the formation of a nine-membered
disulfide ring, which our previous experiments show is unreactive
toward reduction. However, when hCys replaces Cys2, the
enzyme can still reduce Trx efficiently because a ring formation pathway
can be avoided. We term this ring avoidance pathway the “bypass
mechanism” as further explained in Figure .

Partial mechanisms for WT DmTR and hCys mutants. For a description
of the complete catalytic mechanism, please see ref (). As presented here, the
mechanism proceeds from left to right and begins with initial nucleophilic
attack by S2 on the disulfide bond of Trx. (A) The mechanism
of WT DmTR must use a pathway that involves resolution of the mixed
disulfide between the enzyme and Trx resulting in the formation of
the eight-membered ring. Shown in the far right portion of panel A
is our proposal for how the C-terminal disulfide is electrophilically
activated for attack via the HisH+:::S-Cys1 interaction
(indicated by the red hash marks). (B) When hCys replaces Cys490 (Cys2), the activity of the mutant enzyme (enzyme 3) is close to that of the WT enzyme even though the electrophilic
activation mechanism is disrupted. The longer side chain of hCys permits
direct resolution of the mixed disulfide bond between TR and Trx via
attack by CysIC. We term this mechanism the bypass mechanism.
(C) The electrophilic activation mechanism is disrupted when hCys
replaces Cys489 (Cys1) in enzyme 4 because
the enzyme must use a ring formation pathway involving a nine-membered
ring that disrupts the key HisH+:::S-Cys1 interaction
proposed by us resulting in impaired catalysis.

We would like to note that we can rule out inefficient peptide
ligation as the reason for the low Trx-reductase activity of enzyme 4 because this mutant has one-third of the selenocystine-reductase
activity (specific activity) of the WT enzyme as shown by the data
in Table . If the peptide were not ligated
to the enzyme, it would be expected to have the same selenocystine-reductase
activity as the truncated enzyme (enzyme 2).

While
replacement of Cys1 with hCys results in a mutant
with almost no Trx-reductase activity, a double mutant in which both
Cys residues of the Cys1-Cys2 dyad are replaced
with hCys (enzyme 5) has 10% of the Trx-reductase activity
of the WT enzyme, supporting our hypothesis that the use of hCys in
the second position of the dyad allows the enzyme to use a pathway
for Trx reduction that is independent of ring formation.

As
a test of our proposed bypass mechanism, we constructed mutant
enzymes 8 and 10 in which the Cys1 position was occupied by glycine. We predicted that these mutants
would have Trx-reductase activity, similar to results with the mammalian
enzyme with an analogous mutant [reported by us (DOI )]. However, these mutants showed no Trx-reductase
activity as summarized in Table . This was
a disappointing result. However, an unexpected and redeeming result
was the fact that both enzymes were orange in color. This contrasts
with the typical yellow color of the isolated, oxidized enzyme (Eox). The absorbance spectra of the WT and mutant enzymes show
that there is significant charge-transfer complexation occurring in 8 as shown by the increased extinction coefficient at 540
nm (Figure A). Bauer and co-workers reported
a near identical phenomenon for mutant C489S of DmTR (C489 is Cys1 of the dyad). The mutant constructed
by Bauer showed more red color, indicating a higher concentration
of charge-transfer complexation. The orange color of enzymes 8 and 10 indicates that they are in equilibrium
between Eox and a two-electron-reduced state that produces
a charge-transfer complex as shown in Figure B. A dramatic demonstration of the formation of this oxidation state
of the enzyme is shown in the inset of Figure A, which shows a picture of an orange crystal of enzyme 8.

(A) Extinction vs wavelength plot for WT and mutant enzymes. The
plot shows an increase in the extinction coefficient at 540 nm for
DmTR-SGhC (enzyme 8), which contains hCys
in place of Cys490. This increase in the extinction coefficient is
explained by back attack of the sulfhydryl of the hCys residue on
the disulfide bond of the N-terminal redox center. This results in
charge-transfer complexation of the flavin ring and is observed spectroscopically
as shown here as well as visibly by the enzyme taking on an orange
color. The top right inset shows a crystal of enzyme 8 grown by the vapor diffusion hanging drop method as described in . (B) Diagram of the equilibrium
hypothesized to produce the orange color of enzyme 8 in
solution and in the crystal. When the enzyme is oxidized, the flavin
takes on the characteristic yellow color (left). The long side chain
of the homocysteine permits back attack on the N-terminal disulfide
and results in a reduced flavin that is red (right). A rapid equilibrium
of the two structures would produce the observed orange color of the
mutant enzyme.

The kinetic and spectral
data of enzymes 3, 8, and 10 demonstrate that atom S2 of Cys2 (Cys490)
is the atom responsible for accepting electrons from
the N-terminal redox center and
then donating them to the substrate. Cys490 of DmTR
occupies the same position in the C-terminal redox dyad as Sec does
in the mammalian enzyme. We recently presented evidence that the Se
atom of Sec both accepts and donates electrons in an identical fashion
(DOI ). The evidence presented
here that the sulfur atom of Cys490 is attacked in the thiol/disulfide
exchange step that occurs between N- and C-terminal redox centers
is consistent with structural observations from both the mammalian
mitochondrial TR and the mammalian cytosolic
TR in which attack at the Se atom seemed
the most likely in the analogous thiol/selenosulfide exchange reaction.
We emphasize that Bauer and co-workers first proposed that the sulfur
atom of Cys490 (Cys2) acted as the acceptor of electrons
in the exchange step based upon spectroscopic data. Our data using hCys substitution confirm this finding.

Thus, both the mammalian Sec-containing enzyme and the Cys ortholog
from D. melanogaster use nearly identical catalytic
mechanisms. This bolsters our hypothesis that Cys orthologs must increase S-electrophilicity to help compensate for the absence of
an electrophilic selenium atom. According to our electrophilic activation
hypothesis (Figure ), a key difference between
the mechanism of the Sec-TR and the Cys ortholog TR is that the Cys
ortholog makes use of the enzyme microenvironment to induce polarization
in the disulfide bond of the C-terminal redox center, while this type
of polarization may not be needed in the mammalian enzyme because
of the polarization of the selenosulfide bond induced by the selenium
atom itself.

In addition to altering ring size by increasing
the length of the
side chain via hCys substitution, we also increased ring size by lengthening the backbone between Cys1 and Cys2 by the insertion of two alanine residues (enzyme 11 in Table ) reported
by us previously. Increasing the backbone
length results in a 300-fold decrease in kcat compared to that of the WT enzyme. This decrease in activity can
be explained in one of two ways in the mutant: (i) loss of nucleophilicity
of Cys2 or (ii) loss of electrophilic activation of the
Cys1-Ala-Ala-Cys2 disulfide due to disruption
of our proposed HisH+:::S-Cys1 interaction.
Here, we revisited this experiment with the thought of rescuing the
activity of the enzyme via Se substitution at the Cys2 position
(enzyme 12) to test our hypothesis that ring geometry
is nearly irrelevant to the exchange reaction if selenium is present
in the C-terminus. As the data in Table  show,
the Trx-reductase activity of enzyme 12 is “rescued”,
approaching the activity of the WT enzyme. The conventional thinking
in the field would be to ascribe the rescue effect to the greater
nucleophilicity of Se relative to that of S. However, this rationale
does not match the data in Table , where enzyme 12 has only 8–16-fold higher activity (as measured
by kcat or specific activity) with selenocystine
as the substrate compared to enzyme 11. Moreover, enzyme 12 has only ∼4-fold higher specific activity with selenocystine
as the substrate compared to that of the WT enzyme (enzyme 1), or 10-fold higher as measured by kcat/Km.

While Se-nucleophilicity
undoubtedly does make
a contribution to the rescue effect, a significant part of the rescue
effect would come by increasing the rate of the exchange reaction.
This could occur through the use of an alternative mechanism of Trx
reduction in mutant 12 as shown in Figure . Further support for the contribution of Se-electrophilicity as a primary factor in the rescue effect comes
from data with the analogous mutant in the mammalian enzyme (enzyme 16 in Table ). Enzyme 16 does have reduced Trx-reductase activity,
but it is only reduced 4-fold compared to that of the WT enzyme. In
contrast, lengthening the backbone of the C-terminal dyad results
in a 300-fold decrease in activity in the Cys ortholog (compare enzyme 11 with enzyme 1 in Table ). Furthermore, mutant enzyme 16 has selenocystine-reductase
activity nearly identical to that of the WT enzyme (Table ). These data suggest
to us that enzyme 16 also does not use a pathway involving
formation of a C-terminal ring for the reduction of substrates.

Proposed direct
resolution mechanism of the enzyme–substrate
complex by CysIC in enzymes 12 and 16. This alternative mechanism is consistent with our proposed bypass
mechanism used by enzyme 3 (Figure B). The Trx-reductase activity of 16 decreases 4.5-fold
relative to that of the WT mammalian enzyme, while the Trx-reductase
activity of 12 is decreased 2-fold relative to that of
the WT DmTR enzyme. Previous results with mTR3 using a mutant containing
a Gly-Gly-Sec motif in place of the Gly-Cys-Sec-Gly motif of the WT
enzyme showed that the mutant could still reduce Trx (DOI ), and this shows proof of concept
of our proposed direction resolution mechanism shown here.

Further Evidence of the Electrophilic Activation
Hypothesis:
A “Seleno Effect” in DmTR Can Be Explained by an Electrophilic
Activation Mechanism
It has been well-known for many decades
that phosphodiesterases exhibit a “thio effect” when
S for O substitution occurs in a nonbridging oxygen atom of a substrate
phosphate group.− There is strong evidence that the phosphorus atom
is activated for nucleophilic attack by a hydrogen bonding/electrostatic
interaction of the nonbridging phosphate oxygen with a positively
charged hydrogen bond donor. This interaction
not only stabilizes the negative charge built up in the transition
state but also polarizes the P–O bond, thereby
activating the phosphorus center for nucleophilic attack. One proposal
for the way in which the phosphorus atom is activated is via the so-called
“low-barrier” hydrogen bond, which involves pKa matching between the donor and acceptor, like what might occur for HisH+:::S-Cys1 in DmTR (Figure A).

We have previously described an analogous seleno effect
in DmTR that supports our proposed HisH+:::S-Cys1 interaction. Our previous results show
that when we used DmTRΔ8 and peptide substrates in which each
Cys residue of the dyad is replaced with Sec, there is a 12-fold increase
in turnover rate relative to that of peptide I when Cys2 is replaced with Sec (peptide VI), and a 10-fold
decrease in turnover rate relative to that of peptide I when Cys1 is replaced with Sec (peptide VII). The proposed seleno effect is shown in Figure S1 of the . Our original explanation
for this phenomenon was that the increase in activity due to Sec substitution
at the Cys2 position was caused by the superior leaving
group ability of Se relative to that of S. We ascribed the decrease
in activity to Sec substitution at the Cys1 position from
attack on the “incorrect atom”. Our electrophilic activation hypothesis offers a much better explanation
of this data. If it is S2 of Cys2 that is attacked
by CysIC, then Se substitution should cause an increase
in the rate because of the superior electrophilicity of Se relative
to that of S. Likewise, Se substitution for S1 would cause
a decrease in rate because Se is less basic than S and thus cannot
as easily hydrogen bond or accept a proton from His464. This decrease
in basicity relative to that of S would deactivate the Se1–S2 bond, resulting in a slower
rate.

Does Glutathione Reductase Also Use an Electrophilic Activation
Mechanism?
There is a strong evolutionary relationship between
glutathione reductase and TR, and the C-terminal redox center of TR
can be considered a glutathione-like module that is covalently linked
to the enzyme that shuttles electrons from the N-terminal redox center
to the substrate. This evolutionary relationship
is underscored by the structural relationship between bound oxidized
glutathione and a peptide vicinal disulfide bond as depicted in Figure
S2 of the .

Blanchard and co-workers proposed that the rate-determining step
in the reaction mechanism was the transfer of a proton from a catalytic
histidine to the thiolate of the glutathione anion during the analogous
exchange step in the TR reaction mechanism. The exchange step in the glutathione reductase mechanism is identical
to the exchange step between N- and C-terminal redox centers in the
TR mechanism shown in panels C and D of Figure . For the DmTR mechanism, this would mean the transfer of a proton
to Cys489 (Cys1) from His464 as shown in Figure B is the rate-determining step. Our electrophilic
activation idea (Figure A) is very similar
to this proton-transfer mechanism. The difference between our hypothesis
presented here and Blanchard’s model is that we have considered Se-electrophilicity in the Sec-TR and, thus, the corresponding S-electrophilicity in the Cys ortholog as a way to enhance
thiol/disulfide exchange reactions. The electrophilic activation model
might be described as a more refined version of Blanchard’s
original model as can be seen from the similarities between the models
presented in Figure .

Which Model Is Correct?
Enzymologists studying thiol/disulfide
exchange reactions have only considered two possibilities for increasing
the rates of these reactions: increasing the strength of the thiolate
nucleophile and increasing the stability of the leaving group thiolate.− With the discovery that Sec participates in analogous thiol/disulfide
exchange reactions in Sec-containing enzymes, this view must be modified
because of the high electrophilicity of selenium. The key concept we are trying to convey here is that Cys
orthologs of Sec-containing enzymes should also increase S-electrophilicity of the center sulfur atom to help labilize the
disulfide bond to more closely match the labilization/polarization
of a selenosulfide bond imparted by the presence of the selenium atom,
as our data in Table  clearly indicate.

In this paper and previously,, we have shown the importance
of the thiol/disulfide exchange reaction that occurs between the N-
and C-terminal redox centers to the overall catalytic reaction mechanism.
In Figure , we have presented three different
models for how this exchange reaction could be accelerated. A key
difference between the electrophilic activation model shown in panel
A and the alternative models in panels B and C is that in the electrophilic
activation model, the disulfide bond is labilized (i.e., activated
for attack), whereas models B and C only stabilize the product of
the reaction. Bond polarization as a method for labilizing bonds is
a well-established principle in enzymology.,

Key to our electrophilic activation model in DmTR is polarization
of the C-terminal disulfide by His464. Electron density from the C-terminal
disulfide is not present in the crystal structure of DmTR, but our modeling studies show that His464 can
be placed close to the sulfur atom of Cys489 as we depict in Figure A, demonstrating
the feasibility of our proposed mechanism. The equivalent His residue
in rat cytosolic TR is His472. Modeling studies of the oxidized Cys-Sec
dyad of the C-terminal redox center of this enzyme show that the selenium
atom of Sec498 appears to be somewhat closer to the imidazolium cation
than the sulfur atom of Cys497 (Cys1) is to His472. The mammalian enzyme may not use an electrophilic
activation mechanism of the type proposed here because of the polarization
of the -S–Se- bond conferred by selenium itself. A crystal
structure showing the C-terminal disulfide positioned next to the
N-terminal redox center in DmTR would help substantiate our interpretation
of our data and the hypothesis we have presented here.

Conclusions
We recently presented evidence that the selenium atom from the
C-terminal Cys1-Sec2 redox dyad is responsible
for both accepting and donating electrons in the
enzymatic reaction cycle (DOI ). This is because selenium is a Janus-faced element, as it is both
strongly nucleophilic and strongly electrophilic. Here we have shown
that the analogous sulfur atom of the C-terminal Cys1-Cys2 redox dyad in the Cys ortholog TR is also responsible for
accepting and donating electrons in the enzymatic reaction cycle.
We have presented evidence that Cys orthologs of Sec enzymes compensate
for the absence of Sec by increasing S-electrophilicity
as a way of accelerating thiol/disulfide exchange reactions. This
is a concept that has not been considered heretofore.

Supporting Information Available
A diagram explaining the seleno
effect (Figure S1) and superposition of the disulfide bond of the
Cys-Cys dyad of DmTR with that of oxidized glutathione (Figure S2).
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi4007258_si_001.pdf

The
authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Hans J. Reich (University of Wisconsin,
Madison,
WI) without whose counsel we would never have developed the electrophilic
activation hypothesis. We also acknowledge the Vermont Cancer Center
DNA Facility for sequencing services.

Abbreviations
A340absorbance
at 340 nm

βMEβ-mercaptoethanol

CBDchitin-binding domain

Cyscysteine

CysCTcharge-transfer cysteine

CysICinterchange cysteine

DCMdichloromethane

DEAEdiethylaminoethyl

DmTRTR from D. melanogaster

EDTAethylenediaminetetraacetic acid

FADflavin adenine dinucleotide

Fmoc9-fluorenylmethoxycarbonyloxy

Gluglutamic acid

Glyglycine

HPLChigh-pressure liquid
chromatography

Hishistidine

hCyshomocysteine

IPLintein-mediated peptide ligation

MALDI-TOFmatrix-assisted laser desorption ionization
time-of-flight

MES2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid

MOPS3-(N-morpholino)propanesulfonic acid

Mrmolecular ratio

mTR3mouse mitochondrial
thioredoxin reductase

NADPHreduced β-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate

NMAN-methylmercaptoacetamide

Secselenocysteine

Serserine

Tristris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane

Trxthioredoxin

TRthioredoxin reductase

tRNAtransfer ribonucleic acid

Uone-letter code for Sec

UV–visultraviolet–visible

WTwild-type.

DmTR uses a Ser-Cys1-Cys2-Ser C-terminal redox
center. We denote the N-terminal Cys
with the subscript “1” and the C-terminal Cys with the
subscript “2”. Cys1 corresponds to Cys488,
and Cys2 corresponds to Cys489. In Figure , the S atom of Cys1 is SL while the
S atom of Cys2 is SC.

Thioredoxin reductase is abbreviated
as TR. The cytosolic enzyme is abbreviated as TR1, while the mitochondrial
enzyme is abbreviated as TR3. This study was performed with the mouse
mitochondrial enzyme, and it is therefore abbreviated as mTR3 or mTR3-GCUG
to denote the last four amino acids of the C-terminal redox center.

These data have been presented
previously
by us, but we concluded that Se “activated” the substrate
by acting as a good leaving group.

