The increase in life expectancy
in the modern era has increased the population subject to neurodegenerative
diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD), occurring late in
life.− AD is characterized clinically by memory loss and pathologically
by the presence of intracellular neurofibrillary tangles and extracellular
senile plaques. These plaques are insoluble amyloid deposits composed
primarily of aggregates of amyloid-β (Aβ) in their fibril
form. Although Aβ is found in large fibrils in the brain, the
mechanism by which Aβ causes neurotoxicity is not fully understood.
Fibrils are no longer considered the main toxic agent in AD; rather,
Aβ oligomers have been shown to be most damaging to cells.− The unstable nature of oligomeric structures complicates efforts
aimed at characterizing the Aβ toxic species.−

To be cytotoxic, Aβ
aggregates must interact with the cell
surface by either a receptor or the membrane itself.,,,− The channel hypothesis suggests that Aβ is cytotoxic because
of its ability to form ion channel-like pores, inducing an unregulated
ionic flux across cellular membranes.,,− The ionic fluxes produced by Aβ create a state of calcium
dysregulation, leading to cell death. Understanding the molecular
mechanics by which Aβ induces unregulated ionic fluxes has become
crucial to AD pathology. Cellular membranes are very complex, involving
many variables that are difficult to isolate and control. Consequently,
to isolate and study the Aβ-dependent ionic fluxes across a
controlled membrane, we use model bilayers or the planar lipid bilayer
(PLB) technique. Both Aβ1–40 and Aβ1–42 peptides have been shown to exhibit channel-like
activity in PLBs. This activity shows a wide range of heterogeneous
conductances. Ionic fluxes resulting from Aβ channels have been
shown to be inhibited by metal ions such as Zn2+.,,

Polymorphism in the Aβ
channel structure makes it difficult
to examine the relative role of specific amino acids in channel structure
and activity. The Aβ peptide has several point mutations occurring
naturally, and some are related to familial forms of AD. Their mutation
sites are particularly clustered at Aβ peptide positions 22
and 23: Arctic (E22G),, Dutch (E22Q), Italian (E22K), and Iowa (D23N). These mutants have a strong tendency to form
fibrillar aggregates on a lipid membrane and are associated with cerebral amyloid angiopathy and AD., Unlike the disease-related Aβ mutants, an artificially designed
substitution of Phe19 with Pro (F19P) in the Aβ17–42 (p3) channel prevented bilayer channel activity and cellular toxicity. Proline has been defined as a β-sheet
breaker on the basis of the U-shaped p3 structural information with
the β-strand–turn−β-strand motif. In the pore-lining region of p3, the Phe19 side
chains are π-stacked between two β-sheets, holding tightly
the U shape morphology. However, the kink produced by Pro19 introduces
into each peptide an unbalanced force on the pore-lining β-strands
that move toward the interior pore and consequently inhibit ions crossing
through the pore. The nonconductive bilayer behavior seen in electrophysiological
recordings and low fluorescence intensities in cell calcium imaging
suggest that the p3-F19P mutant is a nontoxic species.

This
work focuses on testing the activity of Aβ1–42 models, as a growing body of evidence points toward oligomers rich
in β-sheet structure as the species toxic to neurons. Structural
models of Aβ channels allow the design of experiments in which
Aβ1–42 amino acid substitutions can be used
to interrogate these models,,− which in turn provides further insight for optimizing the models.
Here we examined non-natural Aβ1–42 amino
acid substitutions for their Aβ channel membrane activity to
gain information about the structural requirements for Aβ channel
formation and structure. The results gathered are used to refine the
structure(s) of the Aβ pore. The ultimate goal is to understand
which residues are necessary structurally and which line the pore
and whether those residues are water accessible. This work presents
the conductance behavior of two mutants, F19P and F20C, and its implications
in the first step of such a study. Structural information relating
to the membrane is needed to map the channel structure(s) and aid
drug design, with the aim of controlling unregulated Aβ ion
fluxes.

Materials and Methods
Materials
We obtained wild-type Aβ1–42 and F19P and F20C mutants from Bachem Inc. The phospholipids 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoserine (DOPS) and 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine (DOPE) were purchased from
Avanti Polar Lipids. All other chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.

Formation of Planar Lipid Bilayers
We prepared planar
lipid bilayers by using the so-called “folded technique”,
which employs apposition of lipid monolayers.,− We used a Teflon film with a hole diameter of 120
μm. We pretreated the Teflon film with hexadecane in pentane.
Then using high-vacuum grease (Corning), we secured the film to a
Teflon chamber separating two 4 mL bath solutions. As the electrolyte,
we used 150 mM KCl, 10 mM Hepes (pH 7.4), and 1 mM MgCl2. All bilayers were prepared with a 1:1 (w/w) mixture of DOPS and
DOPE lipids at a concentration of 20–25 mg/mL in pentane. This
phospholipid solution was added to each chamber. We formed the bilayer
by raising the buffer in each chamber until the hole on the Teflon
film was completely submerged in the electrolyte buffer. Lipid monolayers
in each chamber came into contact over the hole to form the lipid
bilayer.,

Planar Lipid Bilayer Recordings
We measured the current
using Ag/AgCl electrode pellets placed in each compartment of the
PLB chamber. Before performing electrical recordings, we verified
that the bilayer was stable for several minutes and that the system
capacitance was &gt;70 pF. When both criteria were met, we added the
specific Aβ1–42 peptide to the cis (hot wire) chamber and stirred the contents for a few minutes and
if no activity was present every 15–30 min. Frozen aliquots
of 20 μg of each Aβ1–42 peptide (wild
type, F19P, or F20C) at 0.5 or 1 mg/mL in water were used. Aliquots
were thawed only once. Aβ peptide concentrations in the bilayer
chamber ranged from 0.5 to 18 μM. We recorded all current traces
using the voltage clamp mode. We used the amplifiers built-in filter
cutoff set at 2 or 3 kHz for BC535 or EPC-7, respectively. All current
recordings were acquired at a sampling frequency of 15 kHz. We used
a custom-made LabVIEW program to record the current traces and Clampfit
10.2 to analyze current versus time traces.,,, For representation
in figures, we filtered the recorded current versus time traces with
a digital Gaussian low-pass filter with a cutoff frequency of 50 Hz
unless noted otherwise.

Membrane Stability
Before performing the experiments
with Aβ peptides in folded bilayers, we determined that the
lipids used [1:1 (w/w) DOPS/DOPE] were stable over long periods of
time. We chose DOPS/DOPE bilayers because Aβ requires a negatively
charged membrane. Both PE and PS are enriched in brain lipids, and
in previous studies, this membrane composition was shown to be stable.
We performed seven PLB experiments using the folded technique in which
no peptide was added. These experiments were conducted for up to 4
h. Periodic capacitance measurements monitored membrane quality and
stability. We found that in these seven experiments, the average bilayer
conductance (in the ±100 mV range) was 0.86 ± 0.40 pS (n = 7). The lowest conductance we obtained was 0.32 pS and
the highest 1.36 pS. These conductances corresponded to membrane resistances
of 3125 and 735 GΩ, respectively. By verifying the stability
of our membranes prior to addition of the Aβ peptide, we ensured
that the values measured for the membranes fell within the range measured
in these control experiments. The stability of all seven peptide-free
DOPS/DOPE bilayers exceeded 4 h. After data had been recorded for
4 h, the bilayers were further examined for integrity by adding, to
both sides of the bilayer, gramicidin A (gA), a peptide known to form
well-defined ion channels. As expected, we obtained gA channel activity,
further demonstrating that DOPS/DOPE bilayers were stable after 4
h.

Molecular Dynamics (MD) Simulations
Aβ1–42 barrels were simulated using two U-shaped monomer conformations:
Aβ1–42 as defined in the pentamer on the basis
of hydrogen–deuterium exchange NMR data, side chain packing
constraints from pairwise mutagenesis, solid-state NMR, and EM [Protein
Data Bank (PDB) entry 2BEG] and Aβ1–40 based on the solid-state NMR model of small protofibrils. However, both conformers miss the N-terminal
coordinates due to conformational disorder. We used the N-terminal
coordinates obtained from the solution NMR structure of Aβ1–16; however, removing the Zn2+ (PDB entry 1ZE7). This structure was used to fill in the missing N-terminal
portion of the peptides. For each combination of the N-terminal structure
with the U-shaped motifs, two Aβ1–42 conformers
were generated. Conformer 1 has a turn at Ser26–Ile31, and
conformer 2 has a turn at Asp23–Gly29. In the latter conformer,
two C-terminal residues, Ile41 and Ala42, were added to create Aβ1–42.

Two mutant coordinates were obtained by
replacing Phe19 with Pro19 (F19P) and Phe20 with Cys20 (F20C). Thus,
six Aβ1–42 monomers, including wild type,
F19P, and F20C for each conformer, were used to construct the β-barrel
structure. These Aβ conformers were inclined ∼37°
relative to the pore axis and then rotated
18 times with respect to the pore axis creating Aβ barrels.
A unit cell containing two layers of lipids was constructed. The Aβ
barrels were embedded in an anionic lipid bilayer containing DOPS
and 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine
(POPE) (1:2 DOPS:POPE molar ratio). For the bilayer construction,
we closely follow previous β-sheet channel simulations.,,,−,, The anionic lipid bilayer containing a total of 420 lipids constitutes
the unit cell with TIP3P waters, added at both sides. The system contains
Mg2+, K+, Ca2+, and Zn2+ at the same concentration (25 mM) to satisfy a total cation concentration
near 100 mM. CHARMM was used to construct
the set of starting points and to relax the systems to a production-ready
stage. For production runs, the NAMD code on a Biowulf cluster (http://biowulf.nih.gov) at the
National Institutes of Health was used for the starting point with
the same CHARMM27 force field. Averages were taken after 20 ns discarding
initial transients. Analysis was performed with the CHARMM programming
package.

Results and Discussion
The “Aβ ion channel
hypothesis” suggests that
Aβ forms ion channel-like pores in lipid membranes causing transmembrane
currents via Aβ ion channels.,,,−,,− Upon addition of the Aβ peptide to one side
of the PLB chamber, Aβ must first bind to the bilayer and then
likely undergo a conformational change that helps the Aβ peptide
overcome the barrier to insert or slip into the bilayer. Once in the
bilayer, monomers or oligomers need to interact with one another to
form a porelike structure. There are three different types of ion
channel activity that have been described for Aβ channels. The first type of channel activity is the “bursting”
fast cation channel that, as its name implies, is a short burst of
activity that gives a nonlinear current–voltage relationship.
The second type of channel activity is the so-called “spiky”
fast cation channel that is similar to a burst of activity; however,
the spikes are short-lived compared to bursting activity. Lastly,
the third type of channel activity is the “step” or
“steplike” activity. With the steplike behavior, a clear,
defined jump in current is seen as a channel opens and closes. We
observed these types of current activity for wild-type Aβ1–42 in the DOPS/DOPE lipid bilayers. Figure A illustrates bursting and spiky behavior of the
wild-type Aβ1–42 channels. At −80 mV,
these channels began to exhibit the so-called “bursting fast
cation channel”. The only truly apparent difference between
bursting and spiky behavior is that the bursting channel activity
is characterized by the absence of the long closures of channels. As we increased the applied potential from −80
to −50 mV in 10 mV steps, the magnitude of the current decreased,
as well. The inset of Figure A shows a higher
time resolution of the steplike activity seen with Aβ1–42 channels. These steps are much less frequent in folded bilayers
than in painted bilayers.

Current vs time trace of wild-type Aβ1–42 showing channel-like activity. (A) The channel
activity shown here
depicts the more frequently seen spikes and bursts for Aβ1–42 in the folded bilayers used. The inset, indicated
by the red bar, shows steplike activity at a higher time resolution.
(B) The Aβ1–42 channel is inhibited by Zn2+. Two continuous current vs time traces totaling 30 min of
recording with 4.5 μM wild-type Aβ1–42. We added Zn2+ to final concentration of 2 mM and stirred
the mixture. The activity was not immediately inhibited and decreased
gradually. The voltage vs time plot shown below follows the changes
in applied potential to the current vs time trace above. The vertical
line marked with the letter C indicates a capacitance measurement
during the recording. The electrolyte contained 150 mM KCl, 10 mM
Hepes (pH 7.4), and 1 mM MgCl2. The bilayer was made by
the folded technique, using a 1:1 (w/w) DOPS/DOPE lipid solution in
pentane. Peptide was added to the cis side (hot wire),
while the trans side was the virtual ground.

Figure B depicts 30 min
of recording and
the ability of zinc to block a portion of the Aβ1–42 activity as previously shown.,,, Zn2+ appears to inhibit
Aβ1–42 in two sites; it binds to the N-terminal
histidines (His6, His13, and His14) on the peptide, inducing a conformational change, and it has been shown
also to inhibit the current activity induced by the Aβ17–42 fragment (p3), a fragment without histidines. The arrow in Figure B points to
the time at which zinc was added to the same chamber. The channels
are not immediately blocked by zinc (Figure B), yet as the experiment progressed, we observed decreased conductances.

The electrical recordings show the ionic current with multiple
conductances; this heterogeneous nature is typical of Aβ ion
channels and other channel-forming amyloids. One possible explanation
for this behavior is that the channels consist of distinct oligomeric
species, forming channel-like structures.,,, Given the
different conductances of the Aβ channels, this could explain
the variance in conductance measured in the electrical recordings.
In 13 experiments with wild-type Aβ1–42, we
measured channel activity in six cases, making the frequency of channel
activity 46%, which is comparable to reports from previous work with
Aβ1–42.,,, Interestingly, we also found
that different lots of Aβ1–42 differentially
affected the percentage of channel activity observed. This suggests
that the aggregation state of Aβ1–42 affects
channel activity. Our results show that Aβ1–42 activity occurred at concentrations as low as 0.5–1 μM.
We did not exceed concentrations of 4.5 μM with Aβ1–42. Channel-like behavior was never observed in bilayers
prior to the addition of the peptide, or without its addition.

Although work showing channel activity of Aβ1–42 has previously been done,,,,,, one prerequisite for this work was to characterize
Aβ1–42 activity in our membrane/buffer system.
We also needed a reference to which we could compare our results with
those of the Aβ1–42 mutants. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the second report showing Aβ channel-like
activity with folded bilayers,, and only one report
exists using the tip-dip method. Most
groups studying Aβ ion channel formation in model membranes
used painted bilayers.,,,,, Generally, solvent free bilayers (folded and tip-dip)
are considered better models of bilayers, because the bilayers are
thinner and contain smaller amounts of nonbiological solvents in the
hydrophobic core. We found that Aβ1–42 in
folded bilayers generally exhibited more spiky and bursting types
of activity (short-lived) than steplike activity. The combined results
of the membrane-only experiments and Aβ1–42 activity in DOPS/DOPE folded bilayers validate a system for testing
the activity of Aβ1–42 mutants. To gather
structural information about Aβ ion channels, we studied amino
acid substitutions of Aβ1–42. By studying
these mutants, we aim to infer structural features of Aβ and
its function in membranes. This functional approach provides structural
information that cannot be elucidated by other techniques.

The F19P Mutant Does Not Exhibit Channel-like Activity
The amino acid proline (Pro or P) is under-represented in β-sheets
of proteins with known structure. Thermodynamic
studies of amino acid replacements identify proline as the amino acid
least compatible with β-sheet structure.− Consequently,
proline mutagenesis of Aβ has been intensively studied, specifically
the ability of these types of mutants to form fibrils.− Proline is energetically unfavorable in the extended cross-β-sheet
structure and, as a result, inhibits amyloid aggregation.− The substitution with proline introduces a “kink”
into the strands of the U-shaped peptide. In previous work, we proposed
that the Aβ17–42 fragment (p3) with the F19P
substitution (p3-F19P) exhibited no channel activity. We show here that Aβ1–42 F19P exhibits
no channel activity, suggesting that the Pro substitution at this
position hinders the formation of Aβ-conducting structures.
Figure  shows a current versus time trace
of the nonconductive F19P mutant. At voltages as high as ±150
mV, there was still no visible conductance from channel formation
(see the inset of Figure ).

Representative current
vs time trace of Aβ1–42 F19P. (A) The trace
shows F19P at 4.5 μM with no activity.
The inset shows the lack of activity for applied voltages as high
as ±150 mV. These 4 h bilayer experiments were repeated 10 times
with no channel-like activity observed. (B and C) The Aβ1–42 F19P mutant may form collapsed channels. Current
vs time trace showing the low-conductance, steplike activity for F19P
at 4.5 μM. The calculated conductance for all steps shown was
(B) ∼4.6 pS at an applied voltage of 50 mV and (C) ∼2.2
pS at an applied voltage of −50 mV. Note that this is the only
activity observed after we had recorded data for &gt;40 h. Current
traces
shown in panels B and C were filtered at 10 Hz and could barely be
seen otherwise. The electrolyte contained 150 mM KCl, 10 mM Hepes
(pH 7.4), and 1 mM MgCl2. The bilayer consisted of a 1:1
(w/w) DOPS/DOPE mixture and was made by the folding technique.

We conducted these experiments for up to 4 h and
then verified
again the integrity of bilayers by adding gramicidin A, a well-established
pore former. F19P was tested in folded
bilayers (n = 10) at concentrations ranging from
4.5 to 13.5 μM. After data had been recorded for more than 40
h (n = 10, 4 h each) with F19P, we observed only
100 s of channel-like activity with very low conductance. The activities
are presented in Figure B,C. The pores shown
in Figure B,C have conductances of 4.6 and
2.2 pS (below the level for gA in this membrane/electrolyte system),
compared to the wide range of higher conductances for wild-type Aβ1–42, generally between 50 pS and 1 nS (Figure ). F19P was also tested in DOPS/POPE painted bilayers
[n = 7 (data not shown)] and showed no sign of instability
for extended periods of time, with an average of 104 ± 40 min.
In these painted bilayers, the lowest recorded point of bilayer instability
was 75 min and the highest 190 min. This is comparable to the normal
life span of these bilayers without any addition of peptide. However,
the unusually low and unique conductance measurements (Figure ) might suggest that either F19P forms collapsed
pores or this mutant is impaired in its binding and/or insertion into
bilayers. The most rigorous interpretation of the F19P results is
that F19P does not form conducting structures in the bilayers, which
suggests that the β-sheet structure of the U-turn is necessary
for Aβ1–42 pore formation (see below).

The F20C Mutant Behaves Like the Wild Type in Lipid Bilayers
For the Aβ1–42 F20C mutant, we substituted
Phe20 with Cys. To the best of our knowledge, the membrane behavior
of the F20C mutant has not been described previously. We found that
the F20C mutant conducts in a manner somewhat comparable to that of
the wild type, in good agreement with the model presented here (see
below). We performed seven experiments with F20C and observed activity
in four (57%). In all experiments, we added F20C directly to one side
of the PLB chamber. We initially added the mutant to a final concentration
of 4.5 μM and if needed added additional 4.5 μM mutant
every 45 min until a final concentration of 13.5 μM was reached.
Under these conditions, F20C activity appears mostly as spikes and
bursts and occasionally as short-lived steplike activity. Spiky and
bursting activities are shown in the .

Figure  presents
a 1 h current versus time trace recording of a continuous activity
by F20C. During this time, we added Zn2+ ions and observed
inhibition of this activity. For the sake of simplicity, the figure
is presented in 15 min panels. Figure A presents
a current trace that can be described in four smaller parts that closely
follow the voltage plot under the trace. Initially, (i) the applied
voltage is −50 mV showing channel-like activity, followed by
(ii) a gradual decrease in the applied potential. Once there is no
current (at −1.5 mV), (iii) the voltage is set to zero and
sustained at this level. Finally, (iv) the applied voltage is increased
to 30 mV. In Figure B, we added 0.5 mM Zn2+ to the same side of F20C. Following the addition of Zn2+, the activity begins to subside, although not immediately.
In the next 30 min (Figure C,D), the amplitude
and frequency of membrane conductance decrease and ultimately appear
to be inhibited by Zn2+. This result shows that F20C activity
is sensitive to Zn2+ ions. The replacement of Phe20 with
Cys in Aβ1–42 does not preclude channel formation.
This region of the Aβ peptide is central to its ability to form
fibrils. We observed precipitates in Aβ1–42 F20C residual aliquots. In fact, a scanning cysteine mutagenesis
study of Aβ1–40 found that the F20C mutant
was accessible to alkylation in the fibril state, indicating that
F20 is exposed to the solvent in fibers.

Current
vs time trace of channel-like activity of Aβ1–42 F20C. Channels formed by F20C predominantly exhibited
spiky and bursting activity. The Aβ1–42 F20C
mutant channel-like activity is inhibited by Zn2+ ions.
(A) Channel-like activity of Aβ1–42 F20C shows
large sustained bursts and spikes with fast openings and closings.
This panel shows changes in voltage as indicated by the voltage plot
below the current trace. Starting at −50 mV, we gradually reduced
the applied potential first to −1.5 mV and then to 0 mV followed
by an increase to 30 mV. (B) We added Zn2+ to a final concentration
of 0.5 mM and stirred the mixture. The activity decreased gradually
as shown in panels C and D. (C) We changed the voltage bias to −50
mV, and after an additional 15 min (D), we changed the applied potential
to 50 mV. At this point, the channel activity is mostly inhibited
with occasional events. The figure shows four continuous 15 min traces
totaling 1 h of continuous recording. The vertical lines marked with
C in panels A, B, and D indicate a capacitance measurement during
the recording. The electrolyte contained 150 mM KCl, 10 mM Hepes (pH
7.4), and 1 mM MgCl2. The bilayer consisted of a 1:1 (w/w)
DOPS/DOPE mixture. The Aβ1–42 F20C concentration
was 9 μM.

Both F19P and F20C Mutants Form Channel-like Structures but
Have Different Pore Morphologies
For two Aβ1–42 conformers, we performed 100 ns explicit MD simulations on the wild-type,
F19P, and F20C barrels embedded in an anionic lipid bilayer composed
of DOPS and POPE (1:2 molar ratio). Conformer 1 barrels have a turn
at Ser26–Ile31, and conformer 2 barrels have a turn at Asp23–Gly29.
Both Aβ conformers can be divided into four domains: the N-terminal
chain (residues 1–16 and 1–8 for conformers 1 and 2,
respectively), pore-lining β-stand (residues 17–25 and
9–22 for conformers 1 and 2, respectively), turn (residues
26–31 and 23–29 for conformers 1 and 2, respectively),
and C-terminal β-strand (residues 32–42 and 30–42
for conformers 1 and 2, respectively). Both point mutations were in
the pore-lining β-stand. All Aβ barrels were initially
designed as a perfect annular shape. However, the initial annular
conformation is gradually lost via relaxation of the lipid bilayer,
and environmentally relaxed peptides can be observed after 30 ns.
The membrane-embedded U-shaped portions of the Aβ barrels reach
equilibration after the initial transient state, while the extramembranous
N-termini of the peptides are disordered. Heterogeneous channel conformations
as observed in the average Aβ barrels structure (Figure ) are similar to the structure of Aβ channels
with various sequences in our previous simulations.,,,−,, However, although the outer shapes of Aβ barrels are similar
to each other, the morphology of the solvated pore is quite different.
For the wild-type Aβ barrels, both conformers preserve the solvated
pore, wide enough for ions to enter and exit at the same time. The
averaged pore diameters are ∼1.83 and ∼1.86 nm for the
conformer 1 and 2 Aβ barrels, respectively. However, both conformers
of each mutant significantly decrease the size of the solvated pore.
For F19P, the averaged pore diameters are ∼1.48 and ∼1.69
nm for the conformer 1 and 2 Aβ barrels, respectively, and for
F20C, they are ∼1.67 and ∼1.69 nm for the conformer
1 and 2 Aβ barrels, respectively. In particular, the conformer
1 F19P mutant completely blocks the channel mouth in the lower bilayer
leaflet (Figure C).

Cartoons representing
snapshots of the averaged Aβ barrel
structures over the simulations for the (A) conformer 1 and (B) conformer
2 wild-type Aβ1–42 barrels, (C) conformer
1 and (D) conformer 2 F19P barrels, and (E) conformer 1 and (F) conformer
2 F20C barrels. In the channel structures, hydrophobic residues are
colored white, polar and Gly residues are green, positively charged
residues blue, and negatively charged residues red.

The pore diameter was calculated using HOLE. Figure  shows the pore
diameter
measured along the pore axis for the averaged barrel conformations.
The averaged pore heights calculated from the program are ∼4.1,
∼5.6, and ∼5.2 nm for conformer 1 and ∼4.5, ∼5.9,
and ∼5.3 nm for conformer 2 wild-type, F19P, and F20C barrels,
respectively. The pore heights for the wild-type Aβ barrels
match the bilayer thickness, while both mutant barrels have longer
and narrower pores than the wild type. Especially, both F19P barrels
have a collapsed pore due to interacting N-terminal chains at the
lower channel mouth blocking the entry into the pore (Figure A,B). The N-terminal chains contain several charged
residues; they normally stretch toward the lipid headgroups, and only
a few chains can fluctuate toward the channel mouth in wild-type barrels.
However, in the F19P barrels, the N-terminal chains easily stick together
because of kinks produced by the Pro19 residues in the pore-lining
β-stands. No kinks can be observed in the F20C barrels, but
still the F20C mutants provide a less stable and smaller pore than
wild-type Aβ1–42.

Pore diameters measured
for the averaged Aβ barrel conformations
as a function of the distance along the pore center axis for the (A)
conformer 1 and (B) conformer 2 Aβ1–42 barrels.
In each conformer, black, blue, and red lines represent the pore diameters
for the wild-type, F19P, and F20C barrels, respectively. (C and D)
Change in total charge in the pore as a function of simulation time
for (C) conformer 1 and (D) conformer 2 Aβ barrels. The following
pore heights with cutoffs along the pore axis were used: −10
nm &lt; z &lt; 10 nm for conformer 1 Aβ barrels,
and −15 nm &lt; z &lt; 15 nm for conformer
2 Aβ barrels.

In the wild-type Aβ barrels, we observe that
few ions cross
through the water pore, but most ions spend time at the binding sites
and are frequently near the channel mouth during the simulation. However,
in F19P barrels, we found that no ions cross through the water pore
during the simulations, although ions can spend time at the binding
sites located in the upper channel mouth. The behavior of ions in
the F20C pores is similar to those in the wild-type pores. To observe
the fluctuation of the ion across the pore, we calculated the change
in the total charge in the pore as a function of simulation time (Figure C,D). For the conformer 1 Aβ barrels, a pore
height cutoff along the pore axis is |z| &lt; 10
nm, while for the conformer 2 Aβ barrels, the cutoff is |z| &lt; 15 nm. With these cutoffs, charge fluctuations involve
only contributions of ions fluctuating in the middle of the pore.
Apparently, the wild-type pores have larger charge fluctuations than
any mutant pore, because the wild-type Aβ barrels have the wider
pore. The electrical charge fluctuation due to movement of a number
of ions across the pore appears to resemble the single-channel conductance,
although the measured time frame is significantly limited.

We
provide experimental evidence that amino acid substitutions
can have a direct and profound impact on Aβ1–42 membrane activity measurements. This functional tool can be coupled
with molecular dynamics (MD) models to gain valuable insights into
structural aspects of the Aβ1–42 channel structure.
The initial results presented in this work suggest that (i) the nature
of the bilayer affects the type of Aβ1–42 activity.
In folded DOPS/DOPE bilayers, we rarely observed steplike activity
with wild-type Aβ1–42. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the second report showing Aβ1–42 channel-like activity with folded bilayers., (ii) Results with the Aβ1–42 F19P mutant
may imply that the β-sheet U turn is needed for activity in
bilayers. The fact that F19P has been previously shown not to form
fibers, provides further information about the structural
significance of this residue. The lack of membrane activity for F19P
suggests that a β-sheet in the U turn is necessary for Aβ1–42 pore formation. Generally, Pro substitutions form
a kink hindering either β-sheets or α-helices. Additional
amino acid substitutions at position Phe19 would be needed to exclude
other Aβ1–42 secondary structures, which could be embedded in the bilayer. The
F19P peptide could be used as a structure-impaired negative control
in experiments aiming to address toxicity or other structural features
of Aβ1–42. In model bilayers, the heterogeneous
activity of Aβ1–42 has been at times interpreted
as nonspecific membrane perturbations by the peptide. The lack of
F19P activity (n = 17; 10 folded and 7 painted) lends
support to the electrical activity most likely occurring through a
defined structure(s), i.e., pore formation. While this conclusion
is strictly applicable for only the folded and painted bilayers with
the electrolyte used in this study, we may expect similar behavior
in other lipid compositions where Aβ1–42 exhibits
bilayer activity.

These results led us to suggest that, like
p3-F19P, the Aβ1–42 F19P mutant might form
a collapsed pore that is
nonconductive. Further support for this suggestion was obtained by
the MD simulations in which we observed that the pore is blocked by
the N-terminal chains due to kinks at Pro residues in the pore-lining
β-strands. We observed F19P minor channel conductances in one
experiment. This F19P activity is inconclusive, because this activity
was seen in 100 s out of 40 h of recording, yet we did not see such
activity in 28 h in identical bilayers without peptide. The MD model
proposed in this study, together with the PLB results, suggests a
collapsed pore. Results with F19P are negative (no bilayer activity);
therefore, its implications are inferential, and other experimental
approaches are needed to exclude the possibility that the F19P peptide
might simply not insert or bind the membrane or that the peptide binds
and inserts itself into the membrane and forms a collapsed pore.

Here, we present evidence showing that Aβ1–42 F20C forms ion channels with membrane activity comparable to that
of the wild type, and this activity can be inhibited by low millimolar
concentrations of Zn2+ like the wild type. Cysteine residues
have a reactive sulfhydryl group that if in the proximity of other
monomers could form −S–S– bridges with neighboring,
in-register monomers, somewhat stabilizing the pore structure. This
possibility remains unaddressed in this study. In future work, we
would like to react the F20C residue with MTS reagents. These experiments are often difficult without
prior knowledge of the pore structure., If we succeed,
we will be able to experimentally determine if the Phe20 residue lines
the pore of the ion channel as suggested by the MD models presented
here.

Conclusion
To summarize, we demonstrate the applicability
of a combined approach
using PLB and MD modeling toward testing Aβ1–42 pore structures. We do this by testing the membrane activity of
designed amino acid substitutions in the Aβ peptide. These substitutions
aim to experimentally probe the structural requirements for Aβ1–42 pore formation and modulation. By comprehensively
studying Aβ mutants, we believe that it is possible to develop
a clearer picture of conducting Aβ structure in bilayers; this
should aid drug design aiming to ameliorate or prevent channel-dependent
Aβ toxicity.

Acknowledgments
All simulations were performed using the high-performance
computational facilities of the Biowulf PC/Linux cluster at the National
Institutes of Health.

Abbreviations:
ADAlzheimer’s
disease

Aβamyloid-β

PLBplanar lipid bilayers

MDmolecular dynamics

Pro
or Pproline

Phe
or Fphenylalanine

Cys or Ccysteine

DOPS1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoserine

DOPE1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine

POPE1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine.

Supporting Information Available
Two monomer conformers
and
the position of each mutation as well as the starting point and conformation
for each Aβ1–42 β-barrel and an additional
Aβ1–42 F20C current trace showing activity
in DOPS/DOPE bilayers. This material is available free of charge via
the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi2017427_si_001.pdf

