Daptomycin
(Figure ) is an FDA (the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration)-approved
lipopeptide antibiotic, notably active against multidrug-resistant,
Gram-positive pathogens, including methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus (MRSA) and vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus (VRE). In recent reviews,− it was concluded that despite
nearly 25 years of study and 9 years of clinical use, aspects of the
mechanism of action of daptomycin remained poorly understood. The
evidence so far suggests that its main target is the cytoplasmic membrane,
where daptomycin causes leakage of cations leading to loss of membrane
potential and cell death.,,− The membrane function is compromised in the absence
of cell lysis or leakage of molecules other than atomic cations., What is not yet clear is what molecular process underlies the action
of daptomycin. One major concern about the clinical use of daptomycin
is the development of resistance during therapy. Many of the mutations
that alter susceptibility to daptomycin have been shown to directly
affect the membrane lipid composition.− This further supports the role of the membrane being
the central target for the action of daptomycin. Thus, the interaction
of daptomycin with lipid bilayers is fundamental to its antibiotic
activity.

Structural formula of daptomycin. The molecule has a net charge
of approximately −3 at pH 7.

The antibacterial activity of daptomycin is calcium-dependent and correlates with the target membrane’s
content of phosphatidylglycerol (PG). In the presence of Ca2+ ions, daptomycin spontaneously
binds to artificial membranes, but only
minor effects of daptomycin on lipid vesicles have been detected in
past experiments.− Fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) experiments
have shown daptomycin aggregation in membranes,− but no leakage
of calcein from lipid vesicles was detected. The only noticeable effect of daptomycin on the membrane properties
was causing leakage of cations from lipid vesicles, but the effect
was weak compared with that of an ionophore valinomycin at comparable
concentrations. These earlier studies
used artificial membranes in the form of small liposomes (≲100
nm).−,, Here we used giant unilamellar vesicles (GUVs) (&gt;10 μm)
that
allowed us to observe the action of daptomycin under a microscope.
Our results are consistent with all previous measurements, but in
addition, we discovered an effect of lipid extraction that appears
to be similar to the direct action of daptomycin on bacterial membranes.

Lipid extraction occurred only when the
GUV lipid composition included
phosphatidylglycerol (PG) and in the presence of Ca2+ ions,
exactly the same condition found to be necessary for daptomycin to
be effective against bacteria. The greatest advantage of the GUV method
over the methods of smaller liposomes is that we can measure the membrane
area change as daptomycin binds to it. Thus, we obtained a quantitative
measure of the lipid extracting effect and showed that it has a daptomycin
concentration dependence. We found that lipid extraction by daptomycin
is a cooperative phenomenon with a threshold concentration. The effect
was detected only for daptomycin concentrations above this threshold.

Because daptomycin targets bacterial cell membranes, the resistance
mechanisms have been suspected to involve changes in the lipid composition
of the bacterial cell membrane. One possibility
is decreasing the extent of the synthesis of PG or increasing the
extent of the conversion of PG to lysylphosphatidylglycerol (LPG). These were found in the resistant mutants of Staphylococcus aureus() and Bacillus subtilis. Our experiment
shows that replacing PG with LPG has the effect of diminishing the
lipid extracting effect. Another possibility involves cardiolipin. Recent reports suggested interference of cardiolipin
with the action of daptomycin on membranes., Our experimental results described here are inadequate to address
the reported effects of cardiolipin.

Materials and Methods
Materials
Daptomycin was purchased from Selleckchem
(Munich, Germany) and from Haorui-Pharma Chem Inc. (Irvine, CA); 18:1
(Δ9-Cis) PC (DOPC), 18:1 (Δ9-Cis) PG (DOPG), 18:1 Liss
Rhod PE (Rh-PE), 18:1 cardiolipin, and 18:1 Lysyl PG (lysyl PG) were
purchased from Avanti Polar Lipids (Alabaster, AL). Texas Red sulfonyl
chloride (MW 625) was purchased from Invitrogen Probe (Grand Island,
NY). Fluorescence-labeled BODIPY-daptomycin was a gift from Cubist
Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (Lexington, MA).

Aspirated GUV Experiment
This experiment was a modification
of the original method of Kwok and Evans and of Longo et al. as described by
Sun et al. Giant unilamellar vesicles
(GUVs) of a chosen lipid composition were produced by the electroformation
method in a solution containing 199 mM
sucrose for the purpose of controlling the osmolality and 1 mM Tris
(pH 7). Ten microliters of a GUV suspension was injected into a control
chamber that contained 190 mM glucose and 10 mM Tris (pH 7). A selected
GUV (diameter of ∼20–30 μm) was aspirated at a
low constant negative pressure (∼100 Pa producing a membrane
tension of ∼0.4 mN/m) with a micropipette, which was connected
to an oil-filled U tube in which a negative pressure was produced
and controlled by reference to the atmospheric pressure. A separate observation chamber contained ∼190
mM glucose, 10 mM Tris (pH 7), Ca2+ ions, and daptomycin.
The aspirated GUV was then transferred through a movable pipe from the control chamber to the observation
chamber. We used sucrose inside and glucose outside of GUV, so that
GUVs sank to the bottom for ease of aspiration manipulation. Also
the phase contrast between sucrose and glucose could be monitored
by a phase condenser to detect possible leakage of sugar through the
membrane. We included a small amount of dye lipid (1 mol % Rh-PE)
to make the boundary of the GUV clear, except in the case of the dye
leakage experiment in which 10 μM Texas Red sulfonyl chloride
was encapsulated in the GUV. The osmolality of each solution used
in the experiment was measured by the Wescor (Logan, UT) model 5520
vapor pressure osmometer. Equi-osmolality between the inside and outside
of the GUV was the initial condition in all GUV experiments. The response
of the GUV to daptomycin binding was observed and recorded by a camera-equipped
microscope. All GUV experiments were performed at room temperature
(∼25 °C).

The binding of daptomycin to a GUV can
be monitored by the expansion of the membrane area. This expansion
is too small to be measured accurately by the change in the diameter
of GUV. We used a technique developed by Kwok and Evan, in which a spherical GUV was aspirated partially
into a micropipette by a constant, low membrane tension (∼0.4
mN/m) (Figure A). The shape of the GUV then
consisted of two parts, a spherical part and a cylindrical part, with
different surface area/volume (A/V) ratios. An overall A/V change
due to peptide binding would cause a repartition between these two
parts, from which the change in area could be accurately measured.
From the microscopic images, the length of the protrusion into the
micropipette (Lp), the radius of the micropipette
(Rp), and the radius of the GUV (Rv) were carefully measured. Then it is straightforward
to show ΔA = 2πRpΔLp + 8πRvΔRv and ΔV = πRp2ΔLp + 4πRv2ΔRv. If there were no molecular leakage (see below) and as long
as the inside and outside of the GUV had the same osmolality, there
would be no change in volume. When ΔV = 0,
ΔA is directly proportional to ΔLp: ΔA = 2πRp(1 – Rp/Rv)ΔLp. The
fractional area change (ΔA/A) is calculated from the change in protrusion length ΔLp. When the protrusion length decreased, the
data analysis was limited to the point at which the protrusion length
vanished. The maximal negative ΔA/A value depended on the initial protrusion length (before the exposure
to daptomycin) that varied from vesicle to vesicle. All experiments
reported here were highly reproducible, although small quantitative
variations were expected of GUV experiments. For the sake of clarity,
only two or three representative results are presented in the figures
for each type of experiment, approximately 20–30% of actual
measurements. No error bars are shown because the results are interpreted
qualitatively, except for the measurement of the threshold concentration.

Effect
of daptomycin on 7/3 DOPC/DOPG GUVs (including 1% Rh-PE)
in the presence of Ca2+ ions, in widefield images. (A)
Rh-PE fluorescence widefield images of GUVs at different daptomycin
concentrations (0.3, 1.0, and 5.0 μM from top to bottom, respectively).
Note that the length of protrusion into the micropipette increased
to a maximal value at 0.3 μM and increased and then decreased
at 1.0 and 5.0 μM. When the protrusion length decreased, aggregates
appear on the GUV surface. (B) Fractional area change ΔA/A of the GUVs over time. For the sake
of clarity, only two or three representative runs are shown for each
daptomycin concentration. The red data points and blue triangles ended
when the GUV ruptured. (C) As ΔA/A decreased, substances including Rh-PE came off or appeared on the
GUV surface, as indicated by arrows (see Movies S1 and S2 of the ). The scale bar is 10
μm.

Results
Lipid Extracting
Effect
The antibacterial activity
of daptomycin requires Ca2+ ions. The standard media for in vitro susceptibility
testing of daptomycin in clinical laboratories are set to a calcium
content of 50 mg/L (∼1.25 mM), which is close to the calcium concentration in human serum. The reported minimal inhibitory concentration
(MIC) values of daptomycin are in the micromolar range., Thus, we chose 1 μM daptomycin and 1 mM Ca2+ as
our reference condition (we found our results to be insensitive to
Ca2+ concentration from ∼0.5 to ∼2 mM). Also,
the susceptibility of bacteria to daptomycin is correlated to the
target membrane’s content of phosphatidylglycerol (PG)., To simulate the PG content of bacterial membranes, we used lipid
bilayers of a DOPC/DOPG mixture at a 7/3 ratio. PC/PG mixtures were
commonly used in previous model membrane experiments,, for daptomycin.

First,
for the control experiments, in the absence of daptomycin, we detected
no membrane expansion of a 7/3 DOPC/DOPG GUV with Ca2+ (Figure
S1 of the ). Figure A shows the responses of the GUVs to the binding
of daptomycin. The GUVs were made visible by including a small fraction
(1 mol %) of 18:1 Liss Rhod PE (Rh-PE). They were transferred at time
zero into an observation chamber containing a solution of daptomycin
and Ca2+ ions (see  for the exact solution compositions). In a solution of 0.3 μM
daptomycin, the peptide binding caused the GUV surface area to expand
initially (see Figure B for ΔA/A values calculated from the increasing
protrusion length ΔLp). Gradually,
the area expansion saturated at a maximum ΔA/A value of ∼3% and showed no further changes.
In contrast, when the daptomycin concentration was higher than 0.3
μM, the membrane area expansion first reached a maximum and
then the area decreased (Figure ). During
the membrane area decrease, we detected lipid–peptide aggregates
(see below) exuded from the outer surface of the GUV and most of the
aggregates appeared to stay on the outer surface (Figure A,C). The phenomena are most clearly seen in the
movies of the GUV images that show the movement of exuded substances
(see Movies S1 and S2 of the ). The aggregates were the end products of the reaction. The net
effect on the GUV was that lipid molecules were removed or extracted
from the lipid bilayer during the reaction and the amount of lipid
in the GUV bilayer was reduced. Because the most important consequence
of the interaction is the effect on the membrane, we will call this
phenomenon the lipid extracting effect (see Note S1 of the ).

To show that the
aggregates are those of both lipid and daptomycin,
we performed the same experiment with daptomycin, including 30% fluorescence-labeled
BODIPY-daptomycin. (Note that BODIPY-daptomycin is 2–4 times
less active than the unmodified molecule.) Figure  shows that the exuded aggregates
contained both Rh-PE and BODIPY-daptomycin.

Same experiment as in
Figure  with fluorescent
daptomycin shown as confocal images. A 7/3 DOPC/DOPG GUV (including
1% Rh-PE) was introduced at time zero into a solution containing 1
μM daptomycin with 0.5 μM BODIPY-daptomycin and 1 mM Ca2+. To show colocalization of lipid and peptide in aggregates,
confocal images were taken: red for RH-PE and green for BODIPY-daptomycin.
The GUV protrusion length increased and then decreased as in Figure . As the protrusion length decreased, aggregates
appeared on the GUV surface containing both lipid and peptide. The
scale bar is 10 μm.

To show that the protrusion length decrease was indeed due
to lipid
extraction, not caused, for example, by a GUV volume increase due
to any exchange of solute between the inside and outside of the GUV,, we performed a GUV (7/3 DOPC/DOPG) experiment with the inside and
outside solutions being as similar as possible. We used an interior
solution containing 1 mM pH 7.4 Tris buffer, 200 mM glucose, and 0.5
mM CaCl2 and an exterior solution containing 1 mM pH 7.4
Tris buffer, 200 mM glucose, 1.0 mM CaCl2, and 1 μM
daptomycin. (GUVs are difficult to produce in 1.0 mM CaCl2.) Thus, the worst case leakage, if any, could at most affect the
osmolality by 0.5%, which would change ΔA/A by at most ∼0.33%. The results shown in Figure  (and Movie S3 of the ) are essentially the same as those shown in Figure  (compare with the data for 1 μM daptomycin);
in both cases, ΔA/A decreased
from a maximum by more than 4% that could be due to only lipid extraction.

DOPC/DOPG
(7/3) GUVs containing 200 mM glucose, 1 mM pH 7.4 Tris
buffer, and 0.5 mM CaCl2 were introduced, at time zero,
into an observation chamber containing 200 mM glucose, 1 mM pH 7.4
Tris buffer, 1.0 mM CaCl2, and 1 μM daptomycin. The
inside and outside solutions of GUV had equal osmolality as measured
by an osmometer. Two runs are shown. The movie of one run is shown
in Movie S3 of the . The scale bar is 10 μm.

Molecular Leakage Experiment
To test if the lipid extracting
effect causes any molecular leakage, we included 10 μM Texas
Red sulfonyl chloride (TRsc, MW 625) in the GUV. In this case, no
dye lipid (Rh-PE) was used, because Lissamine Rhodamine B (Rh) and
Texas Red are of the same color; consequently, the aggregates were
not directly visible (Figure ). The change
in the slope of ΔA/A signaled
the occurrence of lipid extraction, but there was no leakage of the
content dye. The fluorescence intensity of the encapsulated TRsc decreased
slightly over time at a rate comparable to that of photobleaching
of the background fluorescence. For comparison, the TRsc leakage caused
by melittin pores is shown in Figure S2 of the .

Molecular leakage experiment. A DOPC/DOPG
(7/3) GUV encapsulating
10 μM TRsc was brought into a solution of 1 μM daptomycin
and 1 mM Ca2+ at time zero, imaged by TRsc fluorescence.
The increase and decrease in ΔA/A (scale on the right ordinate) indicates the occurrence of the lipid
extracting effect (the aggregates are invisible for the lack of lipid
dye). The intensity of TRsc fluorescence (scale on the left ordinate)
inside the GUV (small circles) was the same as that of the control
experiment (black line) without daptomycin, and both slowly decreased
over time due to photobleaching. There was no leakage of TRsc of 625
MW during lipid extraction. For the sake of clarity, only one scan
is shown. Another run is shown in Figure S2 of the  where, for comparison, we also show
a case of TRsc leakage by melittin pores. The scale bar is 10 μm.

Ion Dependence
What is the role of Ca2+ ions
in the action of daptomycin on membranes? In the absence of Ca2+ ions, no binding of daptomycin was detected at a concentration
of 1 μM (not shown). Even when Ca2+ was replaced
with Mg2+ (at 1 mM), we saw little binding of daptomycin
to the PG-containing membranes (Figure ).
This is consistent with the reports that the antibacterial activity
of daptomycin requires Ca2+ ions and that the MICs increased at least 32-fold if Ca2+ ions
were replaced with Mg2+ ions.

Effect
of daptomycin on 7/3 DOPC/DOPG GUVs in the absence of Ca2+. The top panel shows the GUV in 1 μM daptomycin and
1 mM Mg2+, in 5 μM daptomycin, and in 50 μM
daptomycin (from top to bottom, respectively). The scale bar is 10
μm. The bottom panel shows the fractional area change ΔA/A of the GUVs over time. For the sake
of clarity, only two representative runs are shown for each condition.
There was no detectable binding of daptomycin at 1 μM, either
with or without Mg2+ (not shown). However, even without
Ca2+, daptomycin binds to DOPC/PG membranes at high concentrations
(&gt;5 μM).

However, if the daptomycin
concentration was increased to 5 μM,
there was a membrane area expansion indicating daptomycin binding
at higher concentrations in the absence of Ca2+ ions. At
50 μM daptomycin without Ca2+ ions, the response
of the GUV was similar to that with 1 μM daptomycin with Ca2+ (Figure ). This result indicates
that the role of Ca2+ is to facilitate the binding of daptomycin
to lipid bilayers, as suggested in an earlier study, but the binding affinity of daptomycin for membranes is
not zero in the absence of Ca2+. As long as there is a
sufficient amount of daptomycin bound to a PG-containing membrane,
there is a lipid extracting effect. Again, this is consistent with
the MICs increasing 32-fold in the absence of Ca2+ ions.

Lipid Dependence
The susceptibility
of bacteria to
daptomycin is correlated with the membrane content of PG. Indeed, we found that the lipid extracting effect
occurred only when GUVs contained PG. Interestingly, daptomycin binds
to the electrically neutral pure DOPC membrane in the presence of
Ca2+ but exhibited no lipid extraction (Figure ). The peptide moiety of daptomycin is anionic [net
charge of approximately −3 at pH 7 (Figure )], yet it still has a low binding affinity for the DOPC/PG
anionic lipid bilayer in the absence of Ca2+ (Figure ). With Ca2+, daptomycin has a stronger
affinity for DOPC than for DOPC mixed with anionic CL or LPG (Figure ). Thus, the binding affinities of daptomycin for
lipid bilayers do not follow a naive electrostatic argument based
on the net charge.

Effect of daptomycin on GUVs in the absence of PG. (A)
GUVs of
pure DOPC, 7/1.5 DOPC/cardiolipin GUVs, and 7/3 DOPC/LPG GUVs (from
top to bottom, respectively), all exposed to 1 μM daptomycin
and 1 mM Ca2+. (The 7/1.5 DOPC/cardiolipin GUV was chosen
to compare with the 7/3 DOPC/PG GUV because cardiolipin is a diphosphatidylglycerol
lipid.) The lipid extracting effect was not seen in any of these experiments.
The scale bar is 10 μm. (B) In each case, ΔA/A increased to a maximum without a decrease. For
the sake of clarity, only two representative runs are shown for each
experiment.

Some studies of the resistance
to daptomycin implied the possibilities
of shifting the phospholipid composition from PG to LPG in one case,, and to CL in another., We found that replacing PG with either LPG or CL eliminated the
lipid extracting effect at a daptomycin concentration of 1 μM
(Figure ). However, the most recent studies
implied possible interference of CL with the action of daptomycin., This clearly calls for much more extensive studies of daptomycin
with the lipid mixtures of CL and PG.

Existence of a Threshold
Concentration
The lipid extracting
effect has a strong daptomycin concentration dependence. Below a threshold
concentration, the effect was absent. Above the threshold, the effect
occurred in a shorter and shorter time as the daptomycin concentration
increased. To quantify this dependence, we plotted the time τ
for reaching the maximum of ΔA/A [(ΔA/A)max] as
a function of daptomycin concentration (Figure ). As the daptomycin concentration decreased from 4 to 0.4 μM,
the time to reach (ΔA/A)max exponentially increased. When the concentration decreased
to 0.3 μM, the membrane area increased to ∼3% and stayed
constant without a decrease (Figure ); there
was no lipid extracting effect, equivalent to τ → ∞.
Thus, the threshold concentration for the lipid extracting effect
is ∼0.3 μM or, more exactly, between 0.3 and 0.4 μM.
These measurements were first performed at a constant Ca2+ concentration of 1.25 mM. The same result was reproduced at 0.5
and 1.0 mM Ca2+ (Figure ).

Time τ
to the maximal ΔA/A [(ΔA/A)max] vs
daptomycin concentration. The Ca2+ concentration was constant
at 1.25, 1.0, and 0.5 mM (from top to bottom, respectively). The inset
shows examples of how τ was measured for 1 and 2 μM daptomycin
(see arrows). The curves are a guide to the eye. The vertical dashed
lines are at 0.3 μM. The error bars represent the ranges of
reproducibility by several runs. The results measured at three different
Ca2+ concentrations are essentially the same.

We examined all GUV experiments with a 7/3 DOPC/DOPG
GUV and Ca2+ ions and concluded that there is a critical
value of (ΔA/A)max of ∼3%. [This
is the average of (ΔA/A)max values for daptomycin at 0.4–0.5 μM.] At &lt;0.4
μM daptomycin, ΔA/A reaches
a constant value of ≲3% without a lipid extracting effect.
At &gt;0.4 μM daptomycin, ΔA/A increases to a (ΔA/A)max of &gt;3% and then decreases, concurrent with a lipid
extracting
effect. The lipid extracting effect started when the membrane expansion
ΔA/A reached the critical
value of ∼3%. However, at high daptomycin concentrations, the
membrane area continued to increase even after the lipid extracting
effect had started, because daptomycin continued to bind to the lipid
bilayer from the solution. Consequently, the (ΔA/A)max value could reach ∼6% before
the membrane area started to decrease showing the effect of lipid
extraction (Figure B).

Discussion
Daptomycin is the first approved member of a new structural class
of antibiotics, the cyclic lipopeptides (Figure ). It is a water-soluble membrane-acting antibiotic.,,− The apparent
membrane-acting feature of the molecule is its hydrophobic N-terminal
decanoyl chain. It is worth noting that the decanoyl chain can be
replaced by varieties of hydrophobic substitutes without losing antibacterial
activity., The hydrophobic moiety is expected to insert
into the hydrocarbon region of a membrane. However, the research so
far has not yielded the molecular configuration of membrane-bound
daptomycin. There is a change in the circular dichroism (CD) of daptomycin when it binds to PG-containing
lipid bilayers in the presence of Ca2+, indicating a possible
structural change upon membrane binding, but there has been no theoretical
interpretation of the CD spectra of daptomycin. Nuclear magnetic resonance
studies were limited to daptomycin in solutions without lipid bilayers.,, The lack of structural information
about membrane-bound daptomycin is the main obstacle for understanding
its molecular mechanism.

Over the past two and a half decades,
the field of membrane-active
peptides has grown from the studies of host-defense antimicrobial
peptides (AMPs).− AMPs are characterized by their abilities to form pores in membranes
and cause leakage of dye molecules from lipid vesicles.− Thus, very active research of AMPs has focused on the molecular
mechanisms of AMPs that cause molecular leakage.− In contrast, daptomycin does not induce molecular leakage across
a membrane;, the proof is shown here in Figure  (and Figure S2 of the ; see Note S2 of the ). Compared with the research publications for AMPs,
there are fewer studies of daptomycin–membrane interactions
because of the lack of obvious effects on the membrane. Until now,
the only detected reaction in membranes is oligomerization or aggregation
of daptomycin by the FRET technique., A hypothesis
for transmembrane octameric daptomycin pores has been postulated from
the FRET and ion leakage experiments.,, This hypothesis required many assumptions,, that have not been critically
evaluated. There is no structural evidence of such pores, and there
are no free energy arguments about why daptomycin, given its molecular
structure, would form such an octameric complex and why such a complex
would be stable inside a lipid bilayer. In contrast, pores induced
by AMPs have been detected by X-ray diffraction in lipid crystallines, and by neutron scattering in fluid membranes,, and they are free energy minimum states (see references in refs () and ()).

Here we discovered
an effect of daptomycin on lipid bilayers that
appeared to be similar to the direct action of daptomycin on bacterial
membranes observed in a recent fluorescence microscopy study, i.e., inducing lipid aggregates on the surface
of a bacterial membrane. We emphasize that the observed aggregates
are the end product of the daptomycin interaction. We imagine that
the aggregates must have started from a microscopic size and became
visible only after they grew or combine to micrometer size. With a
microscope, we cannot see the aggregation process. Most of the macroscopic
aggregates appeared to stay on the GUV surface. They moved away from
the GUV surface if there was a flow in the solution (see Movies S1
and S2 of the ).
As far as we could detect, the aggregates staying on the surface of
GUV had no effect on the property of the GUV bilayer. Therefore, we
believe that the main effect of daptomycin on the membrane is removing
lipid molecules from the bilayers as a result of the interaction.

The lipid extracting effect is a predictable reaction of daptomycin
with lipid bilayers under specific conditions. It occurred only when
the GUV lipid composition included PG and in the presence of Ca2+ ions, the same condition found to be necessary for daptomycin
to be effective against bacteria., Most surprisingly,
the lipid extracting effect has an all-or-none cooperative concentration
dependence that is similarly to a MIC. This suggests that the lipid
extracting effect and the antibacterial activity of daptomycin are
correlated. The current consensus view of daptomycin’s bactericidal
activity is that it causes leakage of atomic cations through the cytoplasmic
membrane of bacteria, leading to loss of membrane potential and cell
death.,,− It compromises the membrane function without cell lysis or molecular
leakage., Can the lipid extracting effect be the underlying
mechanism for the bactericidal activity? We discuss this possibility
by offering the following observations.

Lipid Extraction and Ion
Leakage
The permeation of
a membrane by ions is one of the subjects most studied by molecular
simulations.− The consensus results can be summarized as follows. (i) Ion permeation
is an activated process; spontaneous ion permeation is rare., (ii) Ions enter the bilayer with a trail of water molecules called
water fingers (the potential energy for
an isolated ion in membrane is too high). The water finger is lined
by lipid headgroups. This results in a major rearrangement of neighboring
lipids, commonly called water pore defects.− (iii) Simulations by displacing a pair of chain-to-chain
lipid molecules from a bilayer create a water pore defect, allowing
ion permeation. (iv) The transient water
pores created by activated ion permeation or by lipid molecule displacement
have radii of &lt;1 nm and lifetimes
of 10–100 ns.,

Thus, it is reasonable
to expect that daptomycin-induced lipid extraction can lead to ion
permeation. So far, daptomycin-induced K+ and Mg2+ leakage
has been observed in bacteria. The negative counterions were most
likely blocked from permeation by the presence of anionic lipid PG.
The water pore defects induced by the lipid extracting effect would
be too transient and too small to allow molecular leakage. It is well-known
that very small amounts of net charge translocation can cause significant
changes in membrane potential; e.g., it has been demonstrated that
the translocation of only 2.9 × 103 H+ ions
per Escherichia coli cell was sufficient to change
the membrane potential by 16 mV.,

Molecular Process
That Causes Lipid Extraction
The
lipid extraction effect is not unique to daptomycin. Similar effects
have been observed previously in the studies of β-amyloid peptides
human islet amyloid polypeptide (hIAPP) and amyloidogenic peptide penetratin., Despite having
different molecular structures, daptomycin and β-amyloid peptides
exhibit similar behaviors in solution. β-Amyloid peptides are
monomeric at low concentrations but aggregate at high concentrations. Similarly, daptomycin exists as soluble monomers
at micromolar concentrations but oligmerizes
at millimolar concentrations.,,

In the presence of lipid bilayers, β-amyloid peptides
first bind to bilayers as α-helical monomers, but when the bound
peptide/lipid ratio exceeds a threshold, peptides transform from α-monomers
to β-sheet aggregates (can be detected by CD).− The latter appeared as peptide–lipid aggregates on the membrane
surface,, exactly like the aggregates induced by daptomycin.
Normally, a molecule bound to a lipid bilayer either adsorbs on the
interface between the headgroups and the chains or embeds inside the
chain region. Both the β-peptide aggregates and the daptomycin
aggregates unbind from the lipid bilayer, because, we believe, they
are not compatible with being a bound state in lipid bilayers. It
is not clear in either case whether lipid is intrinsically part of
the molecular aggregation or lipid molecules attach to the peptide
aggregates when the latter unbind from the bilayer. In either case,
the actions of molecular aggregation and unbinding from the bilayer
have an effect of lipid extraction, i.e., removing lipid molecules
from the bilayer.

The connection of the lipid extracting effect
to daptomycin’s
bactericidal activity is reinforced by the findings that hIAPP and
penetratin are cytotoxic, and antibacterial,, respectively. They were also found to induce transmembrane ion conduction
without causing molecular leakage.,,−

Supporting Information Available
Movies of Figure  showing
the effect of daptomycin on 7/3 DOPC/DOPG GUVs (including
1% Rh-PE) in the presence of Ca2+ ions (Movies 1 and 2),
movie of Figure  showing the lipid extracting
effect when the inside and outside solutions of the GUV are almost
the same (Movie S3), control experiments without daptomycin (Figure
S1), additional runs of the molecular leakage experiment as shown
in Figure  (Figure S2), and additional notes
and references. This material is available free of charge via the
Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500779g_si_001.pdf

bi500779g_si_002.avi

bi500779g_si_003.avi

bi500779g_si_004.avi

This work was
supported by National Institutes of Health Grant GM55203 and Robert
A. Welch Foundation Grant C-0991.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Cubist Pharmaceuticals,
Inc., for providing BIDOPY-daptomycin.

