Monoclonal
antibodies (mAbs),
which offer stable protein scaffolds with variable domains capable
of high target affinity and selectivity, have emerged as an important
class of therapeutic biologicals.− Several mAbs to the human
immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) coreceptors CXC chemokine receptor
4 (CXCR4) and CC chemokine receptor 5 (CCR5) have demonstrated antiviral
activity and have been advanced for clinical applications in HIV-1
fusion and entry inhibition.− Among them, we decided to study the interaction of
CXCR4 with mAb 12G5 and that of CCR5 with
two mAbs, 2D7 and PRO 140. mAb 12G5 exhibits moderate to strong potency
as an HIV-1 entry inhibitor. 2D7 is a
potent HIV-1 entry inhibitor that is awaiting successful humanization. PRO 140, a humanized form of the PA14 antibody,
showed HIV-1 entry inhibition in several preclinical studies, and
it is currently in phase 2b clinical trials (http://clinicaltrials.gov) as a potential therapeutic agent in the treatment of HIV-1 infection., These antibodies seem to recognize conformation-dependent epitopes
in the chemokine receptors formed by amino acid residues either exclusively
in extracellular loop 2 (EC2) or along with the N-terminal tail.−,− In fact, as conformation-sensitive mAbs, 12G5 and 2D7 are routinely
used to detect cell surface expression levels of CXCR4 and CCR5, respectively.

Topological mAb epitope maps for CXCR4 and CCR5 would be useful
for designing HIV-1 entry inhibitors.− Traditional site-directed
mutagenesis and variations thereof are routinely used for mapping
the epitopes of antibodies on target proteins. Other methods include but are not limited to shotgun mutagenesis, site-directed masking, and phage and bacterial surface display., The highest-resolution epitope maps can be obtained from structural
analyses of antigen–antibody co-complexes, which permit direct
visualization of contact sites. The recently
revealed antagonist-bound crystal structures of CXCR4 and CCR5 facilitate
identification of antibody accessible sites on the extracellular surface
of the receptor., However, in the absence of antibody-bound
cocrystal structures, precise identification of contact sites and
binding modes can be challenging. We previously developed an amber
codon suppression technology to introduce an unnatural amino acid
(UAA) at an engineered amber nonsense codon in expressed GPCRs., The technology relies on the use of an orthogonal aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetase (aa-RS)/suppressor tRNA pair to site-selectively introduce
UAAs such as p-benzoyl-l-phenylalanine (BzF)
and p-azido-l-phenylalanine (azF) into target
proteins.− We optimized the methodology in mammalian cells by
using an engineered Tyr-RS, and a chimera
of human and Bacillus stearothermophilus tRNATyr to heterologously express low-abundance GPCRs. We recently exploited the physical and chemical
properties of these UAAs in several different studies. AzF, which
is also IR active, was used in Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) difference
spectroscopy studies to monitor conformational changes associated
with rhodopsin activation., Recently, azF in CCR5
was chemically ligated to triarylphosphine-conjugated FLAG peptides to label GPCRs in whole cells., Photolabile BzF and azF were used to map ligand binding sites on
CXCR4 and CCR5 via a method called targeted photo-cross-linking.− A covalent complex of CXCR4 incorporating BzF and its peptide ligand
T140 revealed that the benzophenone carbonyl group needs to be ∼3
Å from the nearest atom in the ligand. This study was corroborated by later work using azF- and BzF-substituted
CCR5 in complex with maraviroc. These
results agree well with structural studies that indicate that the
requirement is in the range of 2–4 Å.

Here, we describe a microplate-based detection strategy,
with potential
for high throughput, which is based on targeted loss-of-function mutagenesis
and subsequent photo-cross-linking using genetically encoded UAAs
to study antibody–receptor complexes. The method relies on
a sensitive cell-based enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) to
detect fluorimetrically the transiently bound or photo-cross-linked
mAb. We used the strategy to map complexes between 12G5 and CXCR4,
with a focus on the role of residues in EC2. We also created maps
that depict the contribution of residues in EC2 on CCR5 for binding
of mAbs 2D7 and PRO 140. In our method, we describe two parallel assays:
one that identifies loss-of-binding azF mutants and another that identifies
photo-cross-linked residues. In essence, we use the same mutants to
identify and confirm the primary “hot spot” of interaction,
as well as proximal sites that may be not indispensable for binding
yet allow the formation of a stable covalent adduct. This is the first
description, to the best of our knowledge, of whole cell detection
of photo-cross-linked mAb–GPCR complexes. Our targeted mutagenesis
and photo-cross-linking approach should provide a general framework
for mapping any GPCR epitope.

Materials and Methods
Materials
Antibodies
were obtained from the following
sources: 12G5 (eBioscience, catalog no. 14-9999), 2D7 (BD Pharmingen,
catalog no. 555990), T21/8 (eBioscience, catalog no. 14-1957), PRO
140 (gift from J. P. Moore at Weill Cornell Medical College), 1D4
(National Cell Culture Center), and horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-labeled
goat anti-mouse (KPL, catalog no. 474-1806) and goat anti-human (Jackson
Immuno Research, catalog no. 709-036-149). Protein A/G UltraLink was
purchased from Pierce (catalog no. 53132), and p-azido-l-phenylalanine (azF) was purchased from Chem-Impex International
(catalog no. 06162).

Plasmids
Plasmid pSVBpUC carrying
the amber suppressor
tRNA gene and plasmid pcDNA3.1(+) carrying the azF aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetase gene were described previously. Human CXCR4 and human CCR5 genes were in pcDNA3.1(+) and contained
a C-terminal 1D4 epitope tag (TETSQVAPA). Amber mutations (TAG) were introduced using
the QuikChange Lightning Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit (Stratagene).

Expression of azF Mutants in Mammalian Cells
HEK293T
cells were maintained in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s
medium (DMEM) (Gibco, catalog no. 10566) supplemented with 10% fetal
bovine serum (FBS) (Gemini) at 37 °C with 5% CO2.
The cells were transfected simultaneously with three vectors encoding
the wild-type (wt) or amber mutant receptor, suppressor tRNA, and
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen). The
ratio of transfected DNA in micrograms was 1:1:0.1. For transfection
of the wt receptor, the microgram amount of DNA was maintained at
a 1:10 ratio of the UAA mutants. The total microgram amount of DNA
for all transfections was maintained at the same value by supplementing
the wt and mock transfections with empty vector pcDNA3.1(+). For example,
a transfection in a 10 cm dish uses 3.5 μg of amber receptor
DNA, 3.5 μg of suppressor tRNA, and 0.35 μg of aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetase together with 19 μL of Lipofectamine 2000. These
components are diluted approximately 1:2 or 1:38 for a transfection
in a well of a six-well or 96-well plate, respectively. FBS was maintained
at 10% in DMEM in the presence or absence of 0.5 mM azF. All assays
were performed ∼40 h after transfection.

ELISA-Based
Detection
Cells expressing wt or azF mutant
receptors were washed two times with PBS containing Ca2+ and Mg2+ (PBSc/m, Gibco, catalog no. 14040)
supplemented with 0.5% (w/v) bovine serum albumin, Fraction V (Calbiochem,
catalog no. 126575) (Pc/mB). For 12G5 and 1D4 detection,
the cells were fixed with 4% (v/v) paraformaldehyde (Thermo Scientific)
for 20 min at room temperature (RT). Subsequently, the wells were
washed three times with Pc/mB and for 1D4 analysis only,
followed by permeabilization with 0.2% Triton X-100 for 20 min at
RT. After three washes with Pc/mB, the wells were incubated
with the primary antibody (1 μg/mL 1D4, 1.5 μg/mL 12G5,
0.5 μg/mL T21/8, 1.5 μg/mL 2D7, or 9.1 μg/mL PRO
140) for 1.5 h on ice. After three washes with Pc/mB, the
wells were incubated with the secondary antibody (HRP-coupled anti-mouse
or anti-human) for 1 h at RT. The wells were washed three times with
Pc/mB, followed by one wash with PBSc/m. The
cells were then treated for 15 min with a detection buffer mixture
containing Amplex Red (2.6 mg/mL) (Invitrogen, catalog no. A12222),
20 mM H2O2, and PBS in a 1:10:90 ratio. Fluorescence
emission at 590 nm from the wells was detected via excitation at 530
nm in a multiwell fluorescence plate reader instrument (CytoFluor
II, PerSeptive Biosystems).

Western Blot Detection
Cells expressing
wt or azF mutant
receptors from each well were harvested in PBS (Gibco, catalog no.
14200) supplemented with 0.1 mM PMSF and 10 μg/mL aprotinin
and spun at 1100g for 3 min. The cell pellets were
solubilized for 1 h on a nutator at 4 °C in a buffer containing
1.5% (w/v) n-dodecyl β-d-maltoside
(DDM) (Anagrade, Affymetrix), 30 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 150 mM sodium
chloride (NaCl), 10% (v/v) glycerol, and 5 mM EDTA and supplemented
with PMSF and a protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, catalog no. 11836170001).
The lysate was centrifuged at 15800g for 10 min at
4 °C, and the supernatant fraction was treated with NuPAGE-LDS
gel loading buffer (Invitrogen), supplemented with 100 mM DTT. The
samples were then loaded on 4 to 12% Bis-Tris gels (Invitrogen) and
electrophoresed in MOPS gel running buffer. After the proteins in
the gel had been transferred to a PVDF membrane (Millipore, catalog
no. IPVH00010) at 18 V for 45 min using a semidry transfer apparatus
(Bio-Rad), the membrane was blocked in TBS-T [10 mM Tris-HCl buffer
(pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, and 0.05% (v/v) Tween 20] supplemented with
5% (w/v) nonfat dry milk for 1 h at RT. The membranes were then incubated
with 0.5 μg/mL 1D4 antibody in PBS supplemented with 0.5% (w/v)
BSA (PB buffer) overnight at 4 °C. The next day the membrane
was washed extensively in TBS-T, followed by incubation with the HRP-coupled
goat anti-mouse antibody diluted 1:20000 in TBS-T supplemented with
5% (w/v) milk for 1 h at RT. Following TBS-T washes as described above,
the protein bands were revealed with enhanced chemiluminescence detection
reagents (Pierce) and detected with HyBlot CL autoradiography film
(Denville Scientific).

ELISA-Based Detection of Photo-Cross-Linked
Samples
After primary antibody incubation, the plates were
placed on a cold
pack and exposed to 365 nm UV light (Spectroline Maxima ML-3500S)
for 15 min at 4 °C at a distance of 3 in. from the source. Subsequently,
the wells were washed twice, each time with 150 μL of 50 mM
glycine-HCl buffer (pH 2.5) supplemented with 500 mM NaCl (G500 buffer).
Then the wells were washed once with Pc/mB, followed by
secondary antibody incubation as described above.

Western Blot
Detection of Photo-Cross-Linked Samples
After the cells in
PBS had been harvested in the absence of protease
inhibitors, the pellet was resuspended in PB buffer containing the
appropriate conformation-dependent antibody. The cell suspension was
then incubated while being shaken in a 12-well plate at 4 °C
for 1.5 h. The plate was exposed to 365 nm UV light for 15 min at
4 °C. After the cells had been harvested, the cell pellet was
washed twice with G500 buffer. This was followed by one wash with
PB buffer. After the cell pellets had been solubilized, the supernatant
fraction from the clarified lysate was incubated with Protein A/G
UltraLink (Pierce, catalog no. 53132) overnight while being shaken
at 4 °C. The next day the samples were centrifuged at 1900g for 3 min, and the supernatant fraction was aspirated.
The packed resin was incubated with 1.5× LDS sample buffer, supplemented
with 200 mM DTT, for 1 h at 37 °C while being shaken. The samples
were centrifuged again, followed by separation of the eluted samples
from the resin. The eluate was then loaded on gels and analyzed with
a Western blot as described above.

Results
Expression
of azF-CXCR4 Mutants
We first studied the
interaction of mAb 12G5 with CXCR4 as
a model system to demonstrate the feasibility of our cell-based microplate
photo-cross-linking approach. We used site-directed mutagenesis to
generate a panel of 19 CXCR4 mutants incorporating azF at positions
177–195 within EC2 (Figure a) and transiently
transfected them in HEK293T cells. We confirmed expression of full-length
receptors by probing with mAb 1D4, which detects the C-terminal C9
epitope tag on CXCR4. Full-length CXCR4 UAA mutants expressed to detectable
levels only in the presence of added azF in the cell growth media,
as indicated by Western blot analysis (Figure S1, ). We tested the ability of 12G5 to
recognize the azF-CXCR4 variants using a whole cell ELISA-based detection
strategy.

ELISA analysis of binding and photo-cross-linking of azF-CXCR4
mutants to 12G5 mAb. (a) CXCR4 schematic showing sites of azF incorporation.
(b) Binding signal normalized to total expression, which is detected
in permeabilized HEK293T cells using the 1D4 antibody to a C-terminal
epitope. (c) Experimental scheme for photo-cross-linking and detection.
HEK293T cells expressing the mutants were incubated with 12G5 and
then exposed to UV light. After being washed with a low-pH, high-salt
buffer, the cells were incubated with the HRP-coupled anti-mouse secondary
antibody. The complexes were detected by HRP-catalyzed formation of
a fluorescent product from Amplex Red. (d) Relative photo-cross-linking
level obtained by normalizing to the signal from Y184azF-CXCR4. Fluorescence
emission at 590 nm was detected with excitation at 530 nm in a multiwell
fluorescence plate reader instrument (CytoFluor II, PerSeptive Biosystems).
Error bars in panels b and d represent the standard error of the mean
from three independent trials, each performed in duplicate or triplicate.

Most of the variants bound appreciably
to the conformation-sensitive
mAb 12G5, suggesting that azF incorporation did not significantly
perturb the epitope structure (Figure b).
CXCR4 variants incorporating azF at positions 179, 181, 182, and 186
bound poorly to 12G5. These results agree well with literature reports
on the observed importance of E179, D181, and D182 for 12G5 binding.,− Most of the previously reported data were obtained
from FACS analyses of alanine scanning mutants in COS, HEK293T, and
BHK21 cells. Because C186 and C109 form a disulfide bond in the crystal
structure, azF substitution at position
186 presumably disrupted the tertiary structure of the receptor, thereby
weakening 12G5 binding.,

Cell-Based Photo-Cross-Linking
of mAb 12G5 to azF-CXCR4 Mutants
To map the 12G5 mAb epitope
on CXCR4 with precision, we evaluated
the cross-linking efficiency of the UAA mutants to 12G5 in a cell-based
ELISA format (Figure c). The azF-CXCR4 mutants
were expressed in a 96-well plate, incubated with 12G5, and subsequently
exposed to UV light. This step was followed by a stringent wash with
a low-pH glycine buffer supplemented with salt to remove the transiently
bound but non-cross-linked antibody from the photo-cross-linked, covalently
associated antibody. Low-pH acid washes have been employed to strip
cell surface-bound 12G5, and chemokines, in flow cytometric assays. In our assay, this wash step is conducted
to circumvent the necessity of solubilizing the cells and analyzing
the samples by electrophoresis and Western blotting to separate and
quantify noncovalent and covalent complexes after photo-cross-linking.
As a result, our photo-cross-linking experiments proceed rapidly to
detection, as opposed to the long time scales of gel electrophoresis-based
analyses.

The receptor–antibody complexes were then fluorimetrically
detected as described above. The results depicted in ascending order
of signal strength showed the most intense signals when azF was introduced
at positions 184 and 178, followed by position 189 (Figure d), under similar total expression levels (Figure
S2, ). There was
no detectable signal above mock when azF was at positions 179, 181,
182, and 186 (data not shown). In comparison, sites in EC1 (F104),
TM5 (L210), and IC3 (G231) did not produce corresponding signals under
the same conditions (Figure S7, ). It was interesting to note that positions 178 and 184 surround
the primary 12G5 interaction epitope identified by our azF scan and
previous reports of Ala scans, constituting residues 179, 181, and
182 (Figure ).

We corroborated our results
with Western blot analysis, where detection
proceeded after immunoprecipitation of the antibody-containing complexes
with Protein A/G. We detected UV exposure-dependent protein bands
only in the S178-, Y184-, and F189azF-CXCR4 mutants, whereas wt, F104azF-CXCR4
(in EC1), and C186azF-CXCR4 did not produce similar bands under the
same conditions (Figure  and Figure S8a, ). Considering that CXCR4
has a molecular mass of ∼40 kDa and mAb heavy and light chains
have molecular masses of 50 and 25 kDa, respectively, we speculate
that the observed UV-dependent bands are complexes between CXCR4 dimers
and mAb heavy chains.

Western blot analysis of photo-cross-linking of CXCR4
variants
to 12G5. Detergent-solubilized cells were incubated with Protein A/G
UltraLink resin, and immunoprecipitated samples were probed with the
HRP-coupled anti-mouse secondary antibody. Receptor expression in
crude lysates was detected with the 1D4 antibody to a C-terminal epitope.
(a) UV-exposed samples containing CXCR4 incorporating azF at position
104 (EC1) or 184 (EC2) are compared to wt and mock transfections.
Specific bands appeared only in the Y184azF-CXCR4 lane. (b) Appearance
of unique bands in the Y184azF-CXCR4 sample tested in the presence
and absence of 12G5, UV exposure, and subsequent stringent washes.
The bands are specific to 12G5 incubation and UV exposure. Blots are
representative of at least two independent trials.

Expression of azF-CCR5 Mutants
We
were interested in
comparing the epitope maps of mAbs 2D7 and PRO 140 in the CCR5 EC2 loop. Amber
mutations were introduced at 25 sites from position 166 to 189 (in
EC2) and 263 (in EC3, for comparison), and azF was incorporated (Figure a). We detected full-length expressed receptors
only in the presence of added azF, as indicated by Western blot analysis
(Figure S3, ). Next
we measured the interactions between 2D7 and the panel of azF-CCR5
mutants. Cell surface expression was monitored with T21/8, an antibody targeting an N-terminal epitope
of CCR5 (Figure S4b, ). Under similar surface expression levels of receptors, 2D7 bound
reasonably well to most of the CCR5 mutants, with a loss of function
observed with receptors incorporating azF at positions 171–173
and 178 (Figure S4a, ).

ELISA analysis of binding and photo-cross-linking of azF-CCR5 mutants,
expressed in HEK293T cells. (a) CCR5 schematic showing sites of azF
incorporaton. (b) Photo-cross-linking to 2D7, relative levels obtained
by normalizing to Y176azF-CCR5. (c) Photo-cross-linking to PRO 140,
relative levels obtained by normalizing to H175azF-CCR5. Error bars
represent the standard error of the mean from three or four independent
trials, each performed in duplicate or triplicate.

Interpretation of cross-linking data according to the
crystal structure
of the CXCR4–CVX15 complex (Protein Data Bank entry 3OEU). Cartoon representation of CXCR4 with the N-terminus colored
blue, fading to red at the C-terminus. The cyclopeptide ligand CVX15
and disulfide-linked Cys residues are shown as sticks (cyan carbons).
Surface representation of CXCR4 with residues cross-linked to 12G5
depicted in red fading to green. Residues substituted with azF are
numbered in white. The color bar indicates the range of relative cross-linking
signals from non-cross-linked sites (green) to cross-linked sites
(red). The blue surface corresponds to residues not tested in this
study. Molecular graphics were prepared with VMD version 1.9.1.

Cell-Based Photo-Cross-Linking of 2D7 and PRO 140 to azF-CCR5
Mutants
We then extended our photo-cross-linking strategy
to study the epitope maps of 2D7 and PRO 140 on CCR5. The azF-CCR5
mutants were expressed in 96-well plates and incubated with T21/8,
2D7, or PRO 140. After UV treatment of the wells containing 2D7 and
PRO 140 antibody-bound receptors, the plates were washed and the antibody–receptor
complexes were fluorimetrically detected as described for the CXCR4–12G5
photo-cross-linking experiment.

We observed that azF at positions
170, 176, and 184 in CCR5 cross-linked most efficiently to 2D7 (Figure b). On the other hand, azF at positions 174 and
175 cross-linked most efficiently to PRO 140 (Figure c). For both CXCR4 and CCR5, mutants that did not bind appreciably
to these mAbs did not produce detectable signals under cross-linking
conditions (Figures S4–S6, ).

Discussion
The HIV infection process is initiated by
membrane fusion with
host cells, whereby the envelope glycoprotein (Env) interacts with
the CD4 receptor. This binding event
triggers conformational changes in Env, followed by interactions of
Env with coreceptor CCR5 or CXCR4. Strains of HIV-1 are classified
as M-tropic (uses CCR5 for entry), T-tropic (uses CXCR4 for entry),
or dual-tropic based on the expression pattern of chemokine receptors
on the cell types they infect. Dual-tropic strains use both coreceptors
for entry. Current antiretroviral therapy approaches include blocking
viral entry with inhibitors that target CCR5 and CXCR4. To this end, several small molecule and peptide
agonists and antagonists have been developed and characterized for
their efficacy as potential HIV therapeutics. Additionally, highly specific mAbs have provided an alternative
anti-HIV approach., Moreover, nanobodies, single
variable domains of heavy chain camelid antibodies, are being investigated
for their potential to target and modulate the function of receptors
like CXCR4. At least 30 FDA-approved
mAb drugs are currently being used to treat cancers, osteoporosis,
macular degeneration, and autoimmune diseases., One challenge of using mAbs to target coreceptors is the possibility
of heterologous post-translational modifications, such as tyrosine
sulfation.

Determining the epitope
of a mAb is not always straightforward.
In some cases, information can be obtained from biochemical assays
like alanine scanning mutagenesis that help identify interaction hot
spots in the binding interface.− A high-throughput alanine scanning
shotgun mutagenesis strategy was used to map the epitopes of several
conformation-dependent mAbs on CCR5. Studies
of antibody–receptor complexes have been complemented with
other methodologies like site-directed masking, phage and bacterial surface display,, and CLIPS technology. In CLIPS, conformational
peptide libraries are created for detecting conformational, discontinuous,
and complex epitopes on oligomeric proteins. A library of linear peptides
is chemically converted into a matrix of conformationally constrained
CLIPS peptides, and the potential epitopes are identified by monitoring
binding affinity with the antibody of interest.

Here we employed
a method for expressing GPCRs with site-specifically
introduced azF using an orthogonal aa-RS/suppressor tRNA pair., The photolabile azF can serve as a chemical reporter of protein
interaction sites. Upon UV irradiation, aryl azides form nitrenes
that can insert into C–H and N–H bonds or undergo ring
expansion to form adducts with amines. We sought to identify positions in CXCR4 and CCR5 that when substituted
with azF would photo-cross-link to their respective mAbs 12G5, 2D7,
and PRO 140 upon UV irradiation.

We first demonstrated the feasibility
of a microplate cell-based,
photo-cross-linking approach to investigate the interaction between
12G5 and CXCR4 at a single-residue level. The amber codon was introduced
successively from position 177 to 195 in EC2 to incorporate azF (Figure a). After the expression of full-length receptors
had been verified by Western blot analysis, their interaction with
12G5 was interrogated with a whole cell ELISA in a 96-well plate format.
We next adapted the ELISA detection strategy to measure whether UV
irradiation of the azF CXCR4 variants in the presence of 12G5 produced
covalent cross-links between the receptor and mAb at the cell surface.
We observed significant cross-links at positions 178, 184, and 189
(Figure d). The results are graphically presented
on a structural model of CXCR4 (Figure ).

We then studied the cross-linking maps
of 2D7 and PRO 140 on the
molecular surface of CCR5. Similar to the 12G5–CXCR4 cross-linking
results, we identified positions 170 and 176, which surround the putative
primary 2D7 binding epitope constituting K171 and E172, and also found
position 184 (Figures b and ). Immunoblot analysis also supported this observation with
unique UV-dependent protein bands (Figure S8b, ). The sizes of the UV exposure-dependent
bands are consistent with complexes between CCR5 monomers and 2D7
heavy chains for Q170 and Y184azF, and a light chain for Y176azF.
It is noteworthy that two different positions, 174 and 175, formed
the strongest cross-links with PRO 140, a humanized form of the PA14
antibody (Figure c). We also note that R168
and Y176 are essential in PA14 recognition, as previously determined
by alanine scanning mutagenesis. The
two positions identified in our photo-cross-linking screen, 174 and
175, are proximal to the key residue Y176 (Figure ). Interestingly, PA14 exhibits a multidomain epitope, spanning
D2 in the N-terminus and residue D95 in EC1, in addition to EC2 residues.

Interpretation
of cross-linking data according to the crystal structure
of the CCR5–maraviroc complex (Protein Data Bank entry 4MBS). Ribbon diagram of CCR5 as viewed from the extracellular
surface of the receptor with the N-terminus colored blue, fading to
red at the C-terminus. Maraviroc and disulfide-linked Cys residues
are shown as sticks (cyan carbons). Surface representation of CCR5
with residues cross-linked to 2D7 (middle) and PRO 140 (bottom) colored
red fading to green. Residues substituted with azF are numbered in
white. The color bar indicates the range of relative cross-linking
signals from non-cross-linked sites (green) to cross-linked sites
(red). The blue surface corresponds to residues not tested in this
study. Molecular graphics were prepared with VMD version 1.9.1.

Various studies using alanine point mutants and synthetic
peptide
scaffolds have collectively reported the importance of amino acid
residues Q170, K171, E172, G173, W190, T195, and L196 of CCR5 EC2
in 2D7 recognition.,,− The positions common to all of the previous studies,
and therefore perhaps the most important, are K171 and E172. Upon
evaluating 2D7 recognition of the azF-CCR5 variants, we found reasonable
binding of 2D7 to all azF variants, except those in positions 171–173
and 178. The loss-of-function positions were consistent with literature
reports on the key role of K171, E172, and G173 for 2D7 recognition
and the importance of C178 in forming a necessary disulfide bond.,,

Although 2D7 and PA14/PRO
140 are both potent HIV-inhibitory mAbs, it is interesting that there is a lack of synergy
between PA14 and 2D7 in inhibiting HIV-1 viral fusion to the host
cells. We find that the two mAbs have
nonoverlapping epitopes in EC2 of CCR5, and PRO 140 additionally recognizes
residues in the N-terminus. The results
of the photo-cross-linking screen with CCR5 described here highlight
unique azF-substituted positions upon interrogation with the two different
mAbs. Collectively, this information points to alternate binding and
viral inhibition modes of these two mAbs. Upon closely examining the
EC2 photo-cross-link maps in CCR5, we see that L174azF-CCR5 cross-links
to 2D7 with moderate efficiency and is a primary photo-cross-linked
position with PRO 140. This observation leads us to postulate that
there is a potential overlap in the epitopes surrounding residue 174.
In fact, the crystal structure of CCR5 bound to maraviroc highlights
the spatial proximity of Y176, which
is important in PA14 recognition, and
L174 (Figure ). Also, L174 is close to the
2D7 binding epitope comprising residues K171, E172, and G173.,−, Considering the HIV
inhibitory potential of both mAbs, we hypothesize the possibility
of designing a synthetic ligand with druglike properties that would
span interaction sites in common to 2D7 and PRO 140 recognition.

It is interesting to note for all the mAbs tested that photo-cross-linked
residues identified in two chemokine receptors, CXCR4 and CCR5, were
in general clustered around known hot spots of interaction. These
hot spots have been reported earlier and also identified in two of
our azF scans. We previously observed a similar pattern of key binding
residues surrounded by efficiently photo-cross-linking residues in
studies of the T140–CXCR4 complex. Here we find that 12G5 and 2D7 produced similar patterns of cross-linking,
with the strongest cross-linked sites spanning two regions, one surrounding
the core epitopes and another in the C-terminal halves of the EC2
loop. Taking a closer look at this secondary site, we note that Y190
in CXCR4 is reportedly important for 12G5 recognition. Therefore,
it is not surprising that position 189, which is located close to
Y190, would produce a cross-link. However, position 184 in the second
half of the CCR5 EC2, which cross-linked efficiently with 2D7, does
not have any known proximal hot spots of interaction. 2D7 has a predicted
split epitope based on an earlier phage display-identified peptide
sequence containing residues 170-QKEGL-174 and 195-TL-196 corresponding
to two distal regions of the CCR5 EC2 loop, which was shown to bind
efficiently to 2D7. A clear limitation
of phage display experiments is that the mapping of the linear epitope
on the phage to the complex protein epitope on the receptor is not
unequivocal. In fact, the maraviroc-bound structure of CCR5 shows
that residues T195 and L196, which were identified as part of the
epitope in the phage display study, are buried in TM5 and perhaps
not easily accessible to the mAb. Instead, our experiments suggest
that the secondary mAb contact site may be closer to Y184.

We
and others have used photo-cross-linking as a tool to form covalent
adducts of protein co-complexes. In general, residues that photo-cross-link
are likely to be involved in binding interactions that are at the
periphery of the protein–protein binding interface and are
therefore weaker than those in the core hot spot. Interaction hot
spots are characterized by high-affinity interactions that are driven
by burial of interacting residues excluding bulk solvent. Computational
biologists discuss the presence of an “O-ring” around
these hot spots., The O-ring comprises hydrophobic
residues that exclude water and thereby determine the solvation pattern
at the binding interface. This underscores their importance as a surrounding
seal of contacting residues that are not detected by alanine scans
but are still important to the affinity, albeit with a smaller contribution.
Comprehensive knowledge of all these contacting and interacting residues
from complementary techniques is therefore important for the creation
of detailed structural and biochemical maps of protein–protein
interactions that can facilitate drug design efforts.

Recent
work from our group also highlights the importance of photo-cross-linking
in elucidating the binding site of small molecule and peptide ligands
on GPCRs.− Specifically, the photo-cross-linking data were evaluated
with existing ligand binding models to provide information about spatial
orientation in the binding site. Identifying suitable sites in target
GPCRs for photo-cross-linking to mAbs can also be applied to structural
studies. The crystal structure of the photo-cross-linked complex of
the oncoprotein gankyrin with the C-terminal domain of the S6 proteasomal
protein has been reported to 2.05 Å resolution. This study used BzF as the photolabile residue and highlights
structural requirements for forming the cross-link. As another case
example, the crystal structure of neurotensin receptor NTSR1 has been
reported in an activelike conformation bound to the C-terminal portion
of the agonist NTS. Extensive alanine
scanning mutagenesis was employed to identify stabilizing mutations
to facilitate crystallization in the agonist-bound form.

In
summary, we have developed a microplate-based photo-cross-linking
strategy based on genetic encoding of azF into chemokine receptors
to facilitate structural mapping of receptor–mAb interactions.
Antibodies 12G5, 2D7, and PRO 140 used in this study are known to
interact, at least in part, with residues in EC2 of their respective
target receptors. Alanine scanning mutagenesis studies have been used
previously to pinpoint loss-of-binding mutations, which correspond
to hot spots of interaction between protein partners. Our method of
targeted loss-of-function mutagenesis in combination with photo-cross-linking
is designed to study the interaction of the antibody with residues
that are substituted with photolabile UAAs. We propose using both
screens in a complementary fashion to map the binding surface epitope
of a mAb on a target cell-surface receptor. In principle, a photo-cross-link
is formed upon UV exposure only when the UAA does not disrupt protein
interactions and indicates a threshold distance between the two protein
partners. On the basis of previous reports, the distance dependence
of the photo-cross-linking reaction is predicted to be in the range
of 3 Å.,, In future work, cross-linking information can be further enhanced
with mass spectrometric analyses to identify specific cross-linked
residues of the antibody. We envision the possibility of a detailed
analysis of the binding mode and orientation even with limited availability
of co-complex crystal structures, a critical step in the design of
high-potency therapeutics. Many transient interactions and low-affinity
complexes are difficult to study by alanine scanning or crystallography.
“Stapling”’ the GPCR–mAb interaction with
the chemical cross-links may facilitate such studies. Our microplate-based
format of probing antibody epitopes on receptors can be generalized
to any GPCR–antibody interaction of choice and also to map
the epitopes of extracellular ligands.

Supporting Information Available
Experimental methods and supplementary
figures. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi401289p_si_001.pdf

The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Yamina A. Berchiche, Manija A. Kazmi, Saranga Naganathan,
and Minyoung Park for helpful discussions and scientific assistance.
We also thank John P. Moore for providing us with PRO 140 and Raymond
C. Stevens for providing Protein Data Bank coordinates for CCR5 in
advance of publication.

Abbreviations
azFp-azido-l-phenylalanine

CCR5CC chemokine receptor 5

CXCR4CXC chemokine receptor 4

ECextracellular

ELISAenzyme-linked immunosorbent assay

GPCRG protein-coupled receptor

HIVhuman immunodeficiency
virus

HRPhorseradish
peroxidase

mAbmonoclonal
antibody

UAAunnatural
amino acid

wtwild
type.

