Protein asparagine-linked
(N)
glycosylation is a cotranslational event that confers a wide range
of properties to the underlying polypeptide, including enhanced folding
and stability, favorable pharmacokinetic properties, decoration with
specific epitopes central to function (reviewed in ref ()), and allosteric modulation
of protein function. Many of these properties
can be attributed to intramolecular interactions between N-glycan and polypeptide epitopes. Investigations
of the structure–activity relationships of glycoprotein glycans
must surmount two challenges: glycan compositional and conformational
heterogeneity.

Unlike the template-dependent biosynthesis of
nucleic acids or
proteins, N-glycans are synthesized, ligated, and
remodeled by glycosylhydrolases and glycosyltransferases that operate
without a template. This complex biosynthesis generates significant
compositional heterogeneity (reviewed in refs () and ()). Immature N-glycans with a high mannose (Man) content are transferred to the
nascent polypeptide chain during import into the lumen of the endoplasmic
reticulum from lipid-linked donor molecules. For glycans destined
to be complex-type, a single Man residue is removed followed by export
to the Golgi, where three more Man residues are removed to form a
Man5 structure (Figure ). In the next step,
an N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) residue forms the
base of the first N-glycan branch upon addition to
the C2 hydroxyl of the Manα1–3 residue by the glycosyltransferase
enzyme Gnt1. The final hydrolysis step removes two of the five remaining
Man residues. Gnt2 then adds a GlcNAc residue to the C2 hydroxyl of
the remaining Manα1–6 residue to form the base of a second
branch. The steps that follow do not proceed to completion for every
glycan, resulting in significant heterogeneity. The most common modifications
are fucosylation, synthesis of additional GlcNAc branches, and transfer
of galactose (Gal) and sialic acid residues. Lastly, the glycoprotein
is exported to the cell surface where glycosyltransferase- or glycosylhydrolase-mediated
modifications may occur.

Native IgG1 Fc N-glycan processing
in the Golgi.
Conversions catalyzed by the enzymes indicated above the solid arrows
and labeled with black type largely proceed to completion. Reactions
catalyzed by enzymes denoted with gray type a dashed arrow modify
some but not all of the secreted IgG1. Glycoforms studied here by
nuclear magnetic resonance are underlined. Carbohydrate residues are
numbered according to ref () and represented using the CFG convention and shown in the
inset (GlcNAc, N-acetylglucosamine).
Glycosidic linkages of the human IgG1 Fc N-glycan
are indicated.

Glycoengineered proteins,
including antibodies and antibody fragments,
are of great interest because of the potential to enrich them with
glycoforms with elevated therapeutic properties or to obtain homogeneous preparations for detailed studies.
Many routes that show promising results have been reported, including,
but not limited to, purely synthetic methods,− enzymatic remodeling
of the glycan termini in vitro with sugar nucleotides,− approaches to enzymatically transfer a synthetic carbohydrate,− and genetic manipulation of expression host organisms.− Each method faces its unique challenges, and a single method for
each situation has not been found.

N-Glycans
are mobile moieties that often inhibit
crystallization. Thus, N-glycans are enzymatically
removed for studies of protein structure as a matter of routine. Solution
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy offers a significant
advantage in that proteins, highly concentrated in a buffered solution,
are not required to crystallize and can be studied with complete carbohydrates
(reviewed in ref ()). Solution NMR spectroscopy offers another advantage over solid-state
methods: the entire ensemble of interconverting conformations contributes
to the observable signals. While X-ray crystallography is adept at
capturing high-resolution images of low-energy conformations at low
temperatures, NMR can capture subtle shifts in conformational equilibria.
NMR methods for studying N-glycans often incorporate 13C-labeled sugars into N-glycans with glycosyltransferase
enzymes after purification and have utilized terminal galactose and
sialic acid transfer reactions,− though an expression-based method
to label the entire glycan is also available.,

This work describes a novel in vitro route
to
UDP-[13C,15N]GlcNAc and stepwise, site-specific
labeling of the immunoglobulin G1 (IgG1) fragment crystallizable (Fc) N-glycan. One significant advantage of this approach is
facile assignment of NMR resonances due to the stepwise labeling approach.
This permits an assessment of N-glycan structures
isolated at multiple crucial points along the N-glycan
remodeling pathway as it would occur in the Golgi. The nomenclature
used to describe carbohydrate residues of the Fc N-glycan is highlighted in Figure . For example, “(5′)GlcNAc”
refers to the N-acetylglucosamine residue at the
nonreducing end of the GlcNAcβ1–2Manα1–6Manβ1–4GlcNAcβ1–4GlcNAcβ-N
moiety.

IgG1 is a critical defense protein that recognizes specific
pathogen
epitopes through tight binding, antigen recognition domains and triggers
a pro-inflammatory, pathogen-destroying immune response through the
Fc region. Interactions between IgG1
Fc and certain cell surface receptors, the low-affinity Fc γ
receptors, require Fc N-glycosylation at Asn297 of the Fc Cγ2
domain., Transient, intramolecular interactions between
the Fc N-glycan and polypeptide are central to this
requirement,,, though the structure–activity relationship of this phenomenon
remains undefined. This report covers new methods for addressing this
relationship that are broadly applicable to structure–function
studies of N-glycans.

Experimental Procedures
Materials
All materials were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich
unless otherwise noted. Structure figures were prepared using PyMOL
(Schrödinger LLC).

Protein Expression
An expression
plasmid encoding the
GlmS enzyme (glutamine:fructose-6-phosphate transaminase, EC 2.6.1.16)
from Escherichia coli was prepared by amplifying
and cloning the GlmS open reading frame from the pMA1 phagemid into the NcoI and XhoI restriction sites of the pET21d plasmid (Merck Millipore). The
final cloned open reading frame encoded GlmS with N- and C-terminal
tags: M+A+C2-E609+LEHHHHHH. Plasmid preparation was verified by DNA
sequencing (Iowa State University DNA Facility). GlmS was expressed
in transformed E. coli BL21star(DE3) cells carrying
the GlmS:pET21d vector in the presence of ampicillin (50 mg/L). Expression
was induced with 0.5 mM isopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside
(IPTG) once the culture density reached an OD600 of 0.7,
and cells were incubated for 20 h at 18 °C in an orbital shaking
incubator. Cells were harvested in 50 mL aliquots by centrifugation;
the spent medium was decanted and the pellet frozen and stored at
−80 °C. Cells from a single frozen aliquot were lysed
in 10 mL of 25 mM 4-morpholinepropanesulfonic acid (MOPS), 100 mM
sodium chloride, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, and 1 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic
acid (EDTA) (pH 7.2), with four or five passages through an EmulsiFlex-C5
homogenizer (Avestin) operating at 15000 psi. Insoluble debris was
removed by centrifugation at 25000g for 1 h. The
clarified lysate was washed extensively in a 10 kDa cutoff Amicon
centrifugal filter unit in the same buffer (without EDTA) to remove
salts and concentrated to ∼1 mL. GlmS-containing washed cell
lysate was prepared fresh for each reaction. GlmS proved to be unstable
during purification, and removing the C-terminal six-His tag failed
to improve stability.

A vector containing the GlmM (phosphoglucosamine
mutase, EC 5.4.2.10) open reading frame from Bacillus anthracis cloned into the pDEST17 plasmid was
transformed into E. coli BL21star(DE3) cells. Protein
expression was induced after a culture grown at 37 °C in Luria-Bertani
medium reached an OD600 of 0.6 with 0.5 mM IPTG. Cells
were incubated for 20 h at 18 °C in an orbital shaking incubator
and then separated from the growth medium by centrifugation. Cells
were lysed using the homogenizer described above in a buffer containing
50 mM 2-amino-2-hydroxymethylpropane-1,3-diol (Tris), 200 mM sodium
chloride, and 10 mM imidazole (pH 8.2) and then centrifuged at 25000g for 1 h to remove insoluble debris. Clarified lysate containing
GlmM was loaded directly on a Ni2+-NTA column (Qiagen)
using a Biologic LP chromatography system (Bio-Rad) and eluted with
a linear gradient from 10 to 250 mM imidazole in the same buffer.
Fractions containing GlmM were pooled, concentrated, and loaded on
a Superdex 200 column (GE Healthcare) equilibrated with 25 mM Tris
and 100 mM sodium chloride (pH 8.2). GlmM eluted as a sharp peak.
Positive fractions were pooled and concentrated to 250 μM GlmM
as judged by A280, diluted to 25% (v/v)
glycerol, and frozen at −80 °C.

A vector containing
the open reading frame encoding the bifunctional
GlmU [glucosamime-1-phosphate-N-acetyltransferase
(EC 2.3.1.157) and UDP-N-acetylglucosamine diphosphorylase
(EC 2.7.7.23)] from E. coli cloned into the pET21b
plasmid was transformed into E. coli BL21star(DE3) cells. Protein expression was performed
largely as described from GlmM, except cells were lysed with a buffer
containing 50 mM Tris, 500 mM sodium chloride, and 10 mM imidazole
(pH 8.2); gel-filtration chromatography was performed in a buffer
containing 10 mM Tris, 100 mM sodium chloride, and 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol
(pH 8.2). GlmU eluted as a sharp peak. Positive fractions were pooled
and concentrated to 190 μM GlmU as judged by A280, diluted to 25% (v/v) glycerol, and frozen at −80
°C.

IgG1 Fc was expressed in HEK293F and HEK293S(lec1–/–) cells and purified as
previously described. The luminal domains
of Gnt1 and Gnt2 were expressed
as GFP fusions at the N-terminus using the pGen2 vector in HEK293F or HEK293S(lec1–/–) cells in the same manner. Crude expression
medium was passed over a Ni2+-NTA column using gravity.
Next, the column was washed with 12 column volumes of 50 mM Tris,
500 mM sodium chloride, and 30 mM imidazole (pH 8.0) and then eluted
with the same buffer containing 250 mM imidazole. Fractions containing
the desired protein were washed extensively with 50 mM 2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid and 100 mM potassium chloride (pH 6.25), concentrated with a 10
kDa cutoff centrifugal filter to 25–40 μM protein as
judged by A280, diluted to 50% (v/v) glycerol,
and frozen at −80 °C.

One-Pot UDP-[13C,15N]GlcNAc Synthesis
and Partial Purification
Buffer, small molecule, and protein
components were combined in a single tube to final concentrations
of 100 mM MOPS (pH 7.2), 100 mM sodium chloride, 5 mM magnesium chloride,
1 mM dithiothreitol, 1 mM α-d-glucose 1,6-bisphosphate,
5 mM d-[13CU]glucose, 10 mM adenosine
triphosphate, 25 mM [15N-amido]glutamine,
10 mM acetyl-coenzyme A, 10 mM uridine triphosphate, 17 units of hexokinase
(from Saccharomyces cerevisiae), 18 units of phosphoglucose
isomerase (from S. cerevisiae), a 10% (v/v) final
concentration of washed cell lysate containing recombinant EcGlmS,
4 μM BaGlmM, and 2.4 μM EcGlmU in water. The reaction
mixture was incubated at room temperature for 24 h in a closed tube
in the dark. Reaction purification was performed on the basis of a
published method. Briefly, reaction products
were applied to a diethylaminoethylene-cellulose column equilibrated
in 10 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) (pH 7.0). The column
was washed with 2 column volumes of 10 mM TEAB and 4 column volumes
of 50 mM TEAB and eluted with 4 column volumes of 100 mM TEAB. Fractions
from the 100 mM elution were pooled, lyophilized, resuspended in H2O, and lyophilized again to remove the remaining TEAB. The
concentration of the purified material was determined by comparing 1H signals of the compound to that of an internal 0.5 mM 4,4-dimethyl-4-silapentane-1-sulfonic
acid (DSS) standard.

Preparing N-Man5 N-Glycans
IgG1 Fc
(13 mg/mL) expressed in HEK293S(lec1–/–) cells was incubated with 50 mM MES (pH 6.25), 100 mM potassium
chloride, 20 mM manganese chloride, 1 mM UDP-[13C,15N]GlcNAc, and 5 μM Gnt1 at room temperature for 24
h in the dark. The reaction mixture was exchanged into an NMR buffer
[10 mM MOPS (pH 7.2), 100 mM potassium chloride, and 0.5 mM DSS in
&gt;98% deuterium oxide] using a 10 kDa cutoff centrifugal concentrator.

Preparing N1F and N2F N-Glycans
IgG1
Fc (14 mg/mL) expressed in HEK293F cells was incubated with 50 mM
sodium citrate and 40 units of an N-acetylglucosaminidase
(New England Biolabs) for 48 h at 37 °C. IgG1 Fc was then purified
using a Protein A column as described previously. Next, a Gnt1-catalyzed reaction was performed as described
above to incorporate a single [13C,15N]GlcNAc
residue. The second residue was added using 6 mg/mL IgG1 Fc, 50 mM
MES (pH 6.25), 100 mM potassium chloride, 20 mM manganese chloride,
1 mM UDP-[13C,15N]GlcNAc, and 4 μM Gnt2
at room temperature for 48 h in the dark. The reaction mixture was
exchanged into the same NMR buffer described above using a 10 kDa
cutoff centrifugal concentrator. Reactions were monitored by permethylation
and matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization mass spectrometry
(MALDI-MS) analysis at each step as previously described using a Voyager-DE PRO instrument (Applied Biosystems).

Endoglycosidase Treatments To Cleave N-Glycans
A pET:GFP-EndoF1 plasmid for expression in E. coli was provided by K. Moremen (University of Georgia, Athens, GA) and
expressed and purified using standard protocols (Qiagen). Purified
EndoF1 (10 μM) was added to 60 μM IgG1 Fc in a 50 mM phosphate
buffer (pH 6.0) and incubated for 12 h at 37 °C.

NMR Spectroscopy
NMR spectra were recorded using 5
mm Shigemi NMR tubes in a spectrometer equipped with a cryogenically
cooled probe and an Avance II console (Bruker) and operating at 50
°C and 16.4 T. Fc dimer concentrations were between 60 and 100
μM in a final volume of 300 μL. The pulse sequence for
the 1H–13C heteronuclear single-quantum
coherence (HSQC) spectra of Fc did not include a sensitivity enhancement
element or coherence selection gradients to minimize the loss of broad
peaks. Data were analyzed using Topspin (version 3.2), NMRviewJ (One
Moon Scientific), and NMRPipe. Chemical
shifts were referenced directly (1H) and indirectly (13C and 15N) to the internal DSS methyl peak at
0.07 ppm (1H).

Results and Discussion
One-Pot
Synthesis of UDP-[13C,15N]-N-Acetylglucosamine
Synthesis of UDP-GlcNAc from
glucose by eukaryotic and prokaryotic organisms proceeds along similar
metabolic pathways; however, the prokaryotic system includes a bifunctional
enzyme (GlmU) that catalyzes the last two steps (Figure A).− Because of its relative simplicity, the prokaryotic
pathway was recapitulated in vitro using a combination
of commercially available and laboratory-expressed enzymes with off-the-shelf
metabolites, including [13CU]glucose and [15N-amido]glutamine. Recovery of the starting
[13CU]glucose in the form of UDP-[13C,15N]GlcNAc, following purification, was ∼18%
(moles of UDP-[13C,15N]GlcNAc per mole of [13CU]glucose). A higher conversion would likely
be achieved by increasing the concentrations of certain donor substrates,
including [15N-amido]glutamine and acetyl-CoA;
however, the cost of greater metabolite concentrations is unlikely
to be offset by the increased yield. A 1 mL reaction mixture, starting
with 1 mg of [13CU]glucose, produced 0.55 mg
of UDP-[13C,15N]GlcNAc. This is enough UDP-[13C,15N]GlcNAc for the Gnt1-catalyzed labeling of
at least 13 mg of IgG1 Fc [a typical sample for two-dimensional (2D)
NMR analysis contains 1 mg of IgG1 Fc].

Schemes for in
vitro enzymatic conversions described
in this study. (A) A one-pot synthesis of UDP-[13C,15N]GlcNAc utilizes enzymes from bacterial pathways and [13C]glucose. Carbohydrate remodeling started with Fc bearing
either a mannose-type (B) or a complex-type (C) N-glycan. [13C,15N]GlcNAc is shown as a blue
square with a white star in the cartoon figures and by “*N”
in the glycan name; residue numbers corresponding to the convention
introduced in Figure  are given in parentheses.

A 1H–13C heteronuclear single-quantum
coherence (HSQC) spectrum of the purified material revealed chemical
shifts that were identical to database values for UDP-GlcNAc(Figure S1 of the ). A 1H–15N HSQC spectrum
also showed a single, intense peak for the amide moiety (Figure S1B
of the ). This preparation
proved to be sufficiently pure for glycosyltransferase-catalyzed sugar
additions even though minor impurities were observed in the NMR spectra.
This one-pot synthetic route permits an additional labeling strategy
to incorporate a 13C-labeled acetate moiety from acetyl-CoA.
Methyl groups have beneficial spin relaxation properties in magnetic
resonance applications that permit measurements on very large (∼1
MDa) or dynamic systems., Furthermore, the synthesis
of the methyl donor in this reaction, (13C-acetyl)-CoA,
is easily achieved.

Beyond the
applications to N-glycans, UDP-[13C,15N]GlcNAc is a “gateway” nucleotide
sugar that can be converted to many other products, too diverse to
completely describe here. Potential immediate applications include
using UDP-[13C,15N]GlcNAc as a substrate in
glycosaminoglycan or sialic acid biosynthesis. Alternatively, a simple single enzyme-catalyzed epimerization
leads to UDP-[13C,15N]-N-acetylgalactosamine that serves as the basis of eukaryotic O-GalNAc glycans (including mucins and many others) and
is critical for glycosaminoglycan and glycosphingolipid biosynthesis.

The enzymatic method for preparing UDP-GlcNAc
described here offers
marked benefits over previously described methods with respect to
isotope labeling for NMR and MS-based studies. Other enzymatic methods
for synthesizing UDP-GlcNAc that start from GlcNAc or GlcN have been
described.− However, isotope-labeled GlcNAc and GlcN can be cost prohibitive
and are available with only limited labeling patterns, unlike the
scheme presented here that can be used to produce a wide array of
custom labeling patterns starting with inexpensive starting materials,
including glucose and glutamine. Numerous chemical methods are also
available and can be adapted for the synthesis of GlcNAc analogues;
however, these methods are less efficient than the one-pot enzymatic
method presented here (not limited to refs (−)).

Gnt1-Catalyzed Conversion of the Man5 N-Glycan
Addition of a GlcNAc residue in a β1–2
linkage to
the (3)Man residue, catalyzed by Gnt1 (also known as lec1 or MGAT1), is a crucial step in hybrid and complex-type N-glycan maturation (Figure ). A
Gnt1-deficient HEK293 cell line (HEK293S or lec1–/–) halts this process and produces glycoproteins
with nearly homogeneous Man5 N-glycans., Glycans on IgG1 Fc expressed using this cell line are thus auspicious
substrates for investigating Gnt1 activity in vitro. As expected on the basis of published reports,, MS analysis of IgG1 Fc incubated with UDP-GlcNAc and Gnt1 revealed
complete conversion of Fc-Man5 to the Fc-N-Man5 glycoform (Figure ; experimental mass of 1825.3 Da, observed mass
of 1824.9 Da).

Gnt1-catalyzed remodeling of lec1–/–-expressed IgG1 Fc with a Man5 N-glycan as monitored
by MALDI-MS. Enzymatic remodeling occurs when the N-glycans are attached to the Fc polypeptide; however, the analysis
shown here includes N-glycan removal followed by
permethylation.

Enzymatic Conversion to
a Complex-Type Fc N-Glycan
HEK293F cells,
unlike the HEK293S (lec1–/–) cells, have the capacity to generate
complex-type polysaccharides and express Fc with a fucosylated biantennary N-glycan that varies with respect to the amount of terminal
galactose incorporated (Figure ). Exoglycosidase
treatment removed terminal sugars and resulted in Fc with a primarily
Man3F glycan (Figure ; experimental mass of
1345.7 Da, observed mass of 1345.5). This material was then used as
a substrate for modification by Gnt1, the result being Fc containing
the (5)-[13C,15N]GlcNAc residue (*N1F; Figures C and ; experimental mass
of 1597.8 Da, observed mass of 1597.3 Da). The fact that Gnt1 could
recognize a Man3F substrate was unknown; Gnt1 was shown to modify
a polysaccharide with an identical display of three Man residues tethered
through the β-Man to a GlcNAc,, but because
the Fut8 core fucosyltransferase modifies N-glycans
only after Gnt1 in vivo()(Figure ), it was unknown if the presence
of the (0)fucose(Fuc) residue would prevent this modification in vitro.

Generation of *N1F and *N2F Fc glycoforms from HEK293F-expressed
Fc was confirmed using MALDI-MS analysis. These steps are shown in
Figure C. Enzymatic remodeling occurs when
the N-glycans are attached to the Fc polypeptide;
however, the analysis shown here includes N-glycan
removal followed by permethylation.

The *N2F glycoform was prepared from the *N1F material following
a reaction catalyzed by Gnt2, which likewise forms a GlcNAcβ1–2Man
linkage, except Gnt2 modifies the (3′)Man residue rather than
the (3)Man modified by Gnt1 (Figures C and ; experimental mass of 1850.0 Da, observed mass
of 1850.1 Da). On the basis of MALDI-MS analysis, the Gnt1- and Gnt2-catalyzed
reactions proceeded nearly to completion [&gt;95% conversion (Figure )].

This approach represents a significant
advance to in vitro enzymatic N-glycan
remodeling. In contrast to the
methods described in the introductory section, this method rebuilds N-glycans from a paucimannose (Man3) core N-glycan that is present in all eukaryotic N-glycans
and permits incorporation of 13C or 15N labels
at each step. Thus, it is expected that all eukaryotic N-glycans could be remodeled in this manner with suitable exoglycosidases,
many of which are commercially available. The robust nature of this
approach is reflected in the high conversion of the IgG1 Fc glycoprotein,
a notably difficult protein to remodel enzymatically.,, Furthermore, this method utilizes
commercially available sugar nucleotides (if stable isotope-enriched
sugars are not required) in place of synthetic oligosaccharide precursors
for the case of transglycosylation (see ref ()).

NMR Analysis of [13C,15N]GlcNAc-Labeled
Fc Glycoforms
NMR spectra of IgG1 Fc following Gnt1-catalyzed
remodeling of the Man5 glycan using UDP-[13C,15N]GlcNAc revealed peaks for each 1H–13C and 1H–15N moiety (Figure ). The peaks were relatively intense and narrow,
considering the glycans are part of the ∼55 kDa Fc. This property
indicates the presence of significant GlcNAc motion relative to the
polypeptide domains and is consistent with similar measurements of
galactose and sialic acid residues on the 3–4–5 branch
of the N-glycan [as opposed to the 3′–4′–5′
branch (Figure )].,,1JC–C couplings from a one-dimensional (1D) 13C-observe experiment
agreed with the resonance assignments based on an assignment of β-GlcNAc
(Figure B). Similar spectra were observed
at 25, 37, and 50 °C, and peak positions in duplicate samples
were reproduced.

1H–13C HSQC spectra of IgG1
Fc with
a Man5 N-glycan following addition of [13C,15N]GlcNAc. (A) A 2D 1H–13C HSQC spectrum of the *N-Man5 N-glycan following
EndoF1-catalyzed hydrolysis is shown as gray contours. Blue contours
show the positions of peaks from IgG1 Fc bearing a *N-Man5 N-glycan. Arrows indicate the direction of peak movement
because of interactions with the Fc polypeptide. Peak labels that
correspond to a figure of β-linked GlcNAc are shown (inset)
and refer to the carbon position of the 1H–13C peak. 1JC–C couplings are not resolved because of the limited resolution in
the 13C dimension. (B) 1D 13C-observe NMR spectrum
of *N-Man5 Fc. 1JC–C values are indicated. (C) 2D 1H–15N HSQC spectra before and after N-glycan
hydrolysis with the same colors used in panel A.

The Fc polypeptide influences the position and line shapes
of GlcNAc
peaks. Endoglycosidase F1 treatment hydrolyzed the glycosidic linkage
between the (1)GlcNAc and (2)GlcNAc residues, releasing the glycan
from its covalent attachment to Fc. As a result, resonances of the
released N-glycan were different from those of the
Fc-conjugated material [average Δ1H = 0.098 ppm (Figure )], even though the Fc polypeptide was still present
in the experiment. It was previously shown that the N-glycan termini (residues 6 and 6′) exchange between a restricted
and free state on a microsecond time scale, which results in a single
observable peak in NMR spectra that represents the population-weighted
average of the two states. Mutating the
polypeptide surface to prevent interaction resulted in the predominance
of the free state. On the basis of these
reports, it is likely that peaks corresponding to the (5)GlcNAc residue
also represent the population-weighted average of two distinct states.
Thus, the farther the peak is shifted from that of the free state
(seen with the hydrolyzed N-glycan), the greater
the restriction mediated by intramolecular interactions between N-glycan and polypeptide residues. It is not clear how the
Fc polypeptide influences the frequencies of (5)GlcNAc resonances
in the restricted state, though electric field effects likely contribute. Multiple charged surface residues lie in the
proximity of the (5)GlcNAc residue, including lysine 334, which is
within 8 Å (Figure S2 of the ).

A 2D 1H–13C spectrum of the
*N1F glycoform
reveals a pattern of peaks similar to that observed with *N-Man5 (Figure , red and blue contours, respectively). A spectrum
of the *N2F glycoform was likewise similar, but not identical, with
respect to the position of peaks corresponding to the (5)GlcNAc residue
(Figures  and , black
contour). As the glycoform advanced from *N-Man5 to *N1F to *N2F,
the deviation of the peak positions as compared to the released glycan
(shown with an “X” in Figure ) likewise increased. A small shift in peak positions was observed
between spectra of *N-Man5 and *N1F (average Δ1H
= 0.016 ppm), though a larger shift was seen between *N1F and *N2F
(average Δ1H = 0.034 ppm). This indicates the (5′)GlcNAc
residue (*N1F → *N2F) had a greater effect on resonance frequency
than removing the two Man residues [*N-Man5 → *N1F (see Figure )]. Changes in resonance frequencies of the (5)GlcNAc
residue likely reflect changes in structure of the N-glycan. Peaks observed with the *N-Man5, *N1F, and *N2F Fc glycoforms
shifted away, in a stepwise manner, from peaks observed in spectra
of a hydrolyzed N-glycan. This shift indicated that N-glycan conformation becomes more restricted as maturation,
mediated by glycan-modifying enzymes in the Golgi, proceeds. This
conclusion is supported by previous work showing similar directions
of chemical shift changes for galactose and sialic acid resonances
upon temperature changes.,

Overlay of 1H–13C HSQC spectra collected
with purified IgG1 Fc glycoforms that reveals shifts of peaks away
from that of a hydrolyzed N-glycan. The positions
of peaks from an Fc N-glycan following EndoF-catalyzed
hydrolysis are indicated with X’s. Arrows show the direction
of peak movement as the N-glycan matures. The C1
peak for the hydrolyzed glycan was obscured by residual water in the
sample and was not observed.

Broad, low-intensity peaks appear in a 1H–13C HSQC spectrum following Gnt2-catalyzed addition of a second
[13C,15N]GlcNAc. The resonance assignments for
the (5′)GlcNAc C3, C4, and C5 peaks were obtained by comparison
to a report by Yamaguchi et al.

Peak line widths also reflected
changes in the N-glycan. NMR line widths are a direct
reflection of transverse relaxation
rates of nuclear orientations in an NMR experiment. These values decrease
with the tumbling rate of the nucleus and can also be increased by
conformational exchange (Rex) on the microsecond
to millisecond time scale (contributions from magnetic field inhomogeneity
and chemical shift anisotropy likewise increase line widths but are
not considered here). Line widths of
(5)GlcNAc resonances from the 1H–13C
HSQC spectra, measured without applying a line-broadening function
during processing, increased following attachment of the N-glycan to Fc and indicated structural differences between the different
glycoforms. The line width of (5)GlcNAc H6, after removing the effect
of 2&amp;3JHH coupling, showed
a representative response and increased from 7 Hz (hydrolyzed *N-Man5)
to 14 Hz (*N-Man5-Fc) to 19 Hz (*N1F-Fc) to 14 Hz (*N2F-Fc) as shown
in Figure S3 of the . These values are much smaller than the expected value of 35 Hz
for the same nucleus at the same magnetic field strength tumbling
with an apparent molecular mass of 55 kDa. The value of 35 Hz is based
on contributions of nearby nuclei to the line width and excludes effects
of chemical shift anisotropy (CSA) and Rex. It is unclear why the values measured
from the *N1F glycoform are larger than those of the *N-Man5 and *N2F
forms, but this may reflect changes in exchange rates.

Interactions
between the N-glycan and polypeptide
surface can explain both the peak position and line width differences
in the spectra of Fc glycoforms. Phe241 is located adjacent to the
β-Man residue in Fc models determined by X-ray crystallography,(Figure ) and was shown to restrict N-glycan motion. Covalent attachment
of the N-glycan through Asn297 places the glycan
in a prime position to make this crucial contact. A smaller shift
is observed between the *N-Man5 and *N1F glycoforms as two Man residues
are removed and a (0)Fuc is added (Figure ). The Fuc is not expected to influence movement of the N-glycan branch termini greatly because it does not appear to interact
with the Fc polypeptide. Man residues
interfere with contacts along the polypeptide surface and likely result
in a relatively small stabilization upon removal. Bowden et al. observed the C2 hydroxyl of the Man residue
at the nonreducing terminus of the Manα1–6Manα1–6Manβ
moiety in the Man5 N-glycan (see Figure ) was positioned to prevent an interaction with
F243 and shifted the entire N-glycan away from the
polypeptide surface.

Structural model of the IgG1 Fc–N-glycan
interface (based on Protein Data Bank entry 4ku1()). F243 directly contacts the (5′)GlcNAc residue.
The (5)GlcNAc does not appear to make a direct contact with the polypeptide
surface. Carbohydrate residues are shown in a stick model with the
color of each residue corresponding to the key for each residue shown
in Figure . Only ring atoms of the carbohydrates
are shown for the sake of simplicity, and galactose residues present
in the original Protein Data Bank model are not shown for the sake
of clarity.

The (5′)GlcNAc,
however, can adopt a conformation suitable
for contact with F243,, (Figure ). This is supported by the relatively
greater shift of (5)GlcNAc peaks following Gnt2-catalyzed glycan modification,
and in the appearance of the (5′)GlcNAc resonance that appeared
to be broad and weak (1H6 line width of ∼67 Hz)
&gt;0.5 ppm (1H) upfield of the (5)GlcNAc peaks (Figure ). A 1H–15N HSQC spectrum
of the *N2F glycoform likewise shows two distinct peaks corresponding
to acetamide moieties of the 5 and 5′ [13C,15N]GlcNAc residues (Figure S4 of the ). This dramatic shift of all (5′)GlcNAc
resonances is consistent with close contact of the (5′)GlcNAc
residue with the polypeptide for at least some period of time. NMR
spectra of the (6′)-13C-Gal residue of Fc with a
G2F glycoform (Figure ) showed similar peak
displacements and reduced intensities, which was due to a transient
interaction with the polypeptide surface. Furthermore, line widths and positions of these peaks from Fc with
double F241S and F243S mutations overlapped with an N-glycan on a trypsinized Fc glycopeptide.

Summary
A one-pot, purely enzymatic method was used
to produce UDP-[13C,15N]GlcNAc efficiently from
[13C]glucose
and [15N]glutamine. IgG1 Fc N-glycans
were enzymatically remodeled from a natural immature form and an unnatural
core N-glycan, common to all eukaryotic N-glycans, to high conversion using UDP-[13C,15N]GlcNAc. NMR spectra recorded at different points along the N-glycan remodeling pathway reveal enhanced interactions
of the carbohydrate with the polypeptide surface. These small changes
in equilibria cannot be observed by X-ray crystallography. These methods
are broadly applicable beyond IgG1 Fc and provide spectroscopic probes
for characterizing N-glycan structure and motion.

Supporting Information Available
2D 1H–13C and 1H–15N HSQC spectra of
UDP-α-d-[13C,15N]GlcNAc, Fc model
showing the location of charged residues, representative line shapes
and peak information extracted from 2D NMR measurements, and a 1H–15N HSQC-TROSY spectrum of (15N-Y;2×[13C,15N]-GlcNAc)-IgG1 Fc (*N2F
glycoform). This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi501380t_si_001.pdf

This work was
financially supported by National Institutes of Health Grant K22AI099165
and by funds from the Roy J. Carver Department of Biochemistry, Biophysics
and Molecular Biology at Iowa State University.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
I am indebted to Dr. Kelley Moremen (University of
Georgia)
for providing the Gnt1:pGen2, Gnt2:pGen2, and EndoF1 expression plasmids,
Dr. Marie-Ange Badet-Denisot (ICSN-CNRS) for providing the pMA1 phagemid,
Dr. Lesa J. Beamer (University of Missouri, Columbia, MO) for providing
the BaGlmM:pDEST17 plasmid, and Dr. Jian Liu (University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC) for providing the EcGlmU:pET21b
plasmid. I also thank Dr. Bruce Fulton (Iowa State University) for
help with the NMR instrumentation and Mr. Quinlin M. Hanson for preparing
the EndoF1 enzyme.

