Zinc is an essential cofactor
in thousands of proteins. As one of the most prevalent transition
metal cofactors in biological systems, it plays structural, signaling,
and regulatory roles and is found in all six classes of enzymes (most
commonly hydrolases)., The discovery of its presence
as the catalytic center in the hydrolytic metalloenzyme carbonic anhydrase
(CA) in 1939 was followed by its characterization
in carboxypeptidase in 1950 and, soon
after, in enzymes of all classes. In 1990,
Vallee and Auld published a report analyzing the coordination spheres
around Zn(II) in available protein crystal structures, including examples
from most of the enzyme classes. Here,
the authors introduced the spacer rule for native zinc proteins, in
which at least two of the ligating residues exist within a few residues
(1–3) of each other in the primary sequence, while the third
is separated by a longer spacer much more varied in length (5–200
residues). This rule, in which the shorter spacer is proposed as a
nucleus for formation of the Zn(II) site while the longer spacer allows
for some flexibility, has been rarely violated. The general guidelines
for the coordination of Zn(II) in proteins have been described in
a number of reports., In most cases, Zn(II) is coordinated
by a combination of His, Glu/Asp, and Cys residues. Because Zn(II)
is a borderline metal according to the hard-soft acid-base theory,
it can coordinate well to both hard (nitrogen and oxygen) and soft
(sulfur) donor atoms. Specifically, Zn(II) can coordinate to the Nδ or Nε atom of the His ring, the Oε1 or Oε2 atom of Glu/Asp (syn or anti), or the S atom of Cys in either a monodentate
or bridging fashion (Figure ). More rarely,
Zn(II) will also bind to the phenolate group of Tyr, the carboxamide oxygen of Asn or Gln,, or
a protein backbone carbonyl oxygen. A
detailed analysis of the amino acids coordinating zinc in proteins
found in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) has been reported and is broken
down by ligand as follows: His, 28%; Cys, 23%; Asp, 13%; Glu, 11%;
other ligands (not amino acids), 9%; water, 15%; and other amino acids,
1% (of which the most significant are Ser, Thr, and Lys).

Zinc(II)–amino acid side chain binding modes as
described
in the text. Most zinc ligands in proteins are the side chains of
cysteine (S donor), histidine (N donor), and glutamate or aspartate
(O donor).

There are several reasons for
the prevalence of Zn(II) as a catalyst
in enzymes. First, it is earth abundant, with concentrations of 30
ppb in seawater and 75 ppm in the earth’s crust. Compared to other first-row transition metals,
Zn(II) stands out because its filled d orbital precludes it from participating
in redox reactions and allows it to function solely as a Lewis acid.
This particular property makes Zn(II) an ideal metal ion for reactions
requiring a redox-stable cofactor to function as a Lewis acid catalyst.
As a d10 metal ion, Zn(II) has zero ligand field stabilization
energy, so no geometry is electronically more stable than another.
This lack of an energetic barrier for Zn(II) may be important for
its catalytic properties, allowing for changes in coordination number
throughout the catalytic cycle (from four- to five-coordinate, for
example, to accommodate the intermediate) and for alterations in the
reactivity of the metal ion. Additionally, Zn(II) complexes can undergo
rapid ligand exchange, enhancing the ability of Zn(II) to effect a
catalytic cycle through efficient product release. Although no coordination
number or geometry is inherently more stable, most zinc-dependent
proteins feature a resting state with a tetrahedral zinc center [in
some cases, Zn(II) is found in a five-coordinate trigonal bipyramidal
geometry]., This is in contrast to simple zinc complexes
that have more instances of higher coordination numbers (e.g., 5 and
6). Clearly, the protein plays a role
in enforcing a lower coordination number. Zinc sites in proteins have
been classified into three general categories: structural, catalytic,
and cocatalytic., Structural sites have a saturated
coordination sphere with all metal ligands originating from amino
acids and confer stabilization on the tertiary structure. On the other
hand, catalytic sites require an open coordination sphere with at
least one water molecule and three or four protein ligands and participate
directly in the bond-making and bond-breaking process of a chemical
reaction. Cocatalytic sites have several metals in proximity of each
other, where one is directly catalytic and the others serve to enhance
the activity. It is worth noting that while these basic guidelines
for Zn(II) coordination are generally true, additional principles
continue to emerge for Zn(II) sites at protein interfaces and inhibitor
and transient binding sites in Zn(II)-transporting and Zn(II)-sensing
proteins.,

Although Zn(II) is required for the
function of enzymes in all
six enzyme classes, the hydrolase class contains the most representatives
(397 of a total of 933 zinc enzymes, including aminopeptidases, carboxypeptidases,
matrix metalloproteinases, phosphatases, β-lactamase, etc.)., CA catalyzes the nucleophilic addition of OH– to
CO2 and officially belongs to the lyase class of enzymes
but will be discussed here in the context of hydrolytic enzymes. Notably,
while CO2 hydration is the physiological reaction for CA,
this enzyme can also catalyze the hydrolysis of a number of other
substrates, including the often-used and well-studied p-nitrophenyl acetate (pNPA)., The zinc hydrolase superfamily shares a common structural scaffold
consisting of an eight-stranded β-sheet flanked by six α-helices.
Although the active site is located at the end of the four central
β-strands, in this class of zinc enzymes, there is little to
no conservation between active site structure or amino acid composition. Some members of this superfamily are monozinc
enzymes (carboxypeptidase and thermolysin), while others contain cocatalytic
zinc sites (aminopeptidase, β-lactamase, and alkaline phosphatase). The binding residues around the catalytic Zn(II)
ions follow the spacer rule, but their identities are not conserved. The active sites can be comprised of differing
residues, most commonly His2Glu/Asp(H2O) (e.g.,
thermolysin and carboxypeptidase A), and His3(H2O) (e.g., CA), but
sometimes also CysHis2(H2O) (e.g., bacteriophage
T7 lysozyme), Cys2His(H2O) (e.g., liver alcohol dehydrogenase), and even Cys3(H2O) (e.g., 5-aminolevulinate
dehydratase), which can be located on a combination
of loops, β-sheets, and α-helices., One
common feature is that the active sites are generally buried within
the protein structure. There are multiple evolutionarily unrelated
families for CA (α-, β-, γ-, δ-, and ζ-CAs),, although all are zinc enzymes. All 16 known isoforms of the most
extensively studied α-family of CAs share a conserved monomeric
tertiary structure mainly comprised of β-strands. Specifically, the structure consists of 10 β-strands
that form a large twisted β-structure surrounded by six α-helices
on the surface of the molecule. The active site is located at the
bottom of a cavity that reaches almost to the center of the molecule
where Zn(II) is bound to three His residues and a solvent molecule
in a tetrahedral geometry. The His residues are located along adjacent
β-strands, two with a one-residue spacer between them on a single
strand (His94 and His96) and the third separated by a longer spacer
at position 119. These examples of zinc enzymes from the hydrolase
and related lyase classes clearly illustrate variability in the coordination
environment, yet most hydrolases are contained within a similar overall
structure primarily comprising β-sheets where often at least
one ligand originates from a loop region or the end of a secondary
structural element. Numerous differences in protein structures encompassing
hydrolytic zinc centers (some are small and monomeric, whereas others
are complicated multimeric structures) may tune their interactions
with substrates. Determining the patterns, if they exist, between
the protein folds and functions for each zinc site is complicated
at present, although important questions are the role of the protein
fold in the metal center’s activity and whether it is necessary
or simply a remnant of evolution.

Along similar lines, while
the variability that can be achieved
through just four amino acids and their assorted binding modes is
striking, it has been demonstrated that it is not simply the first
coordination sphere that differentiates Zn(II) sites and functions
from one another. Although the importance of secondary interactions
is well-known,, reliable guidelines such as those
for the first coordination sphere around Zn(II) are not yet well-defined.
For example, not only is a ZnHis3 site present in the metalloenzymes
CA and many matrix metalloproteinases
(MMPs), both where activation of a Zn(II)-bound
water molecule to a hydroxide nucleophile occurs, it also exists as
a structural anchor in insulin (each
His ligand originating from a different subunit) and as an inhibitor
in serine protease tonin; in ZnuA, the ZnHis3 site transports Zn(II)
in the periplasm (Figure ). This variability
generates a number of questions. How can a single first coordination
sphere be modified by the protein environment to result in such a
wide variety of metalloprotein functions? What are the ligands and
structures necessary for a given function? Is the native protein fold
critical for optimal function? To what extent does the structure of
the binding pocket discriminate different types of reactivity? Are
there minimal changes that can be made around the metal site to alter
or completely change the function? How many different functions can
a single metal site perform? Although direct biochemical studies of
existing metalloproteins have begun to answer some of these questions,
it is difficult to imagine a situation in which a native enzyme can
be mutated to determine the baseline requirements of the first coordination
sphere in the absence of most of the surrounding protein matrix (the
metal site would likely not fold and/or bind metal). Of course, this
can be (and is often) approached by synthesizing small molecule models
of the active sites of zinc metalloproteins, but this approach comes
with a number of limitations, including difficulties in working under
aqueous conditions, in using the natural amino acid ligands, in stabilizing
lower coordination numbers within a hydrophobic core, and in assessing
the influence of hydrogen bonding and electrostatics on catalytic
activity. Protein design is an effective
yet challenging approach to re-creating functional metal sites found
in native enzymes. With this process, one may replicate a proteinlike
environment more straightforwardly than with synthetic models (using
the real amino acid ligands, aqueous environment, etc.). The design
itself can be approached in different ways.− One route is to redesign an existing native protein scaffold to
incorporate a metal-binding site. Alternatively, one can design, de
novo, both the protein scaffold and the metal-binding site. Successes
seen with this approach are more rare; however, they may yield unprecedented
information regarding hidden structural features.

ZnHis3 sites
in various proteins., (a) Insulin (PDB entry 1AIO), in which Zn(II)
organizes the hexamer with His ligands
originating from three different subunits. (b) Carbonic anhydrase II (PDB entry 2CBA), in which Zn(II) forms a hydrolytic
active site and each of the three His ligands is on a β-sheet. (c) Matrix metalloproteinase adamalysin II (PDB
entry 1AIG),
in which Zn(II) forms a hydrolytic active site with two His ligands
on an α-helix and the third from a loop. (d) Serine protease tonin (PDB entry 1TON), in which Zn(II)
binding inhibits activity. (e) Zinc transporter
ZnuA (PDB entry 1PQ4), in which the structure mediates Zn(II) mobility for transport.

Metalloprotein design studies collectively aim to illuminate
the
relationships between the metal site and surrounding protein structure
and the corresponding function. Both rigorous de novo design and assorted
redesign approaches can provide useful information to this end. Although
this Current Topic will focus on the design of zinc metalloproteins,
much of the information gleaned from these studies may be applied
to the design of proteins coordinating a variety of different metals.
The ultimate goal is to apply this work to the development of novel
metalloproteins and enzymes for a variety of applications, which may
be limited by only our understanding of how to design and prepare
them.

Zn(II) as an Attractive Catalyst in Proteins
Zn(II)
ions serve as powerful catalysts in many hydrolase enzymes
with diverse, though generally related, mechanisms.,, The reactivity of Zn(II) in enzymes centers
around a Zn–OH2 moiety (Figure ). In the most common mechanism, the Lewis acidic Zn(II) center
simply promotes deprotonation of the coordinated water to generate
a hydroxide species at neutral pH (as in the mechanism for CA,,). For less Lewis acidic Zn(II)
centers (such as that in carboxypeptidase, which has an anionic Glu
residue in the coordination sphere),
further activation may occur by interaction with an adjacent base
(such as a Glu residue) to generate the hydroxide species. A third
type of mechanism involves displacement of the water molecule by substrate,
which can then be activated (such as in 5-aminolevulinate dehydratase or liver alcohol dehydrogenase). There are also examples in which zinc can activate thiols
toward nucleophilic attack, such as in the Ada DNA repair protein., As will become apparent throughout the rest of this Current Topic,
designed hydrolytic zinc proteins are generally intended to operate
by the simple deprotonation mechanism and have not yet encompassed
the design of nearby basic residues to assist in deprotonation (a
feature of many of zinc hydrolases), nor have they been tested for
activation of substrates such as alcohols.

General mechanisms for
mononuclear Zn(II) enzymes. (a) Ionization
to form a Zn(II)–hydroxide nucleophile. (b) Polarization with
the assistance of a general base to generate a nucleophile. (c) Displacement
by the substrate that can be subsequently activated to generate a
nucleophile.

Designing Zinc-Binding
Proteins
De Novo Sites in de Novo and Preexisting Scaffolds
Given the importance of zinc, it is not surprising that zinc site
design was among the initial metalloprotein design reports. In the
earliest work, ZnHis3 sites (as inspired by CA) were engineered
into the de novo-designed four-helix bundle protein, α4, and the redesigned antibody-like protein, minibody. In the case of α4, the binding of Zn(II)
to the His3 site helped to decrease the protein’s
molten globule-like properties (because of a lack of conformational
specificity in the core) and induce a more nativelike protein fold,
although no structure or binding affinity was reported. In the minibody reported by Pessi et al., a
61-residue all β-sheet structure, the dissociation constant
for Zn(II) binding was estimated to have a lower limit of ∼10–6 M (Figure a). While this represents fairly strong binding,
it is relatively weak when compared to that of native zinc enzymes
that generally have dissociation constants in the nanomolar to picomolar
range.− A Zn(II)-binding His3 site was also introduced into the
retinol binding protein in a solvent-exposed position on the surface. The dissociation constant for binding of Zn(II)
to this site is stronger and closer to the range for native zinc proteins
(36 ± 10 nM). The geometry, based on competition with chelating
ligands, is likely octahedral, with three open coordination sites. Soon after, a scorpion toxin, charybdotoxin
(37 amino acids and comprised of a short α-helix on one face
and an antiparallel triple-stranded β-sheet on the opposite
with three stabilizing disulfide bonds in the interior), was used
as a small scaffold for the incorporation of a His3 site
(Figure b). Nine
mutations were made to incorporate the metal-binding site, including
engineering in three His sites and including the Gln and Glu residues
found in CA that form hydrogen bonds to two of the primary His residues.
While X-ray crystal or NMR structures were not reported, CD and 1H NMR indicate that the structure is largely retained relative
to the parent sequence. The dissociation constant for Zn(II) binding
is (5.3 ± 0.4) × 10–6 M, and although
no catalytic activity was reported, the design demonstrates the achievement
of a stable, yet solvent-exposed metal-binding site at the surface
of a miniprotein., Table  summarizes the known dissociation constants for many of the designed
Zn(II)-binding sites that are reported. It should be noted that these
metal binding affinities are determined using various methods [e.g.,
isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC), equilibrium dialysis, and
absorbance or fluorescence spectroscopy] under various conditions,
some which are thermodynamic and others of which are based on metal
site activity. As such, these metal site affinities should be relied
upon only as a broad, general comparison between different sites.

(a) Modeled
structure for the design of the minibody and its predicted
metal-binding site (His3). Panel a was reprinted from ref (). Copyright 1993 Nature
Publishing Group. (b) Model of the redesigned scorpion toxin charybdotoxin
(orthogonal views) with a His3 metal-binding site. Disulfide
bonds are colored yellow. Metal-binding ligands are colored red. Panel
b was reproduced from ref (). Copyright 1995 National Academy of Sciences.

Comparison of Zn(II) Binding Affinities
for Selected Designed Proteins
design	coordination
site	Kd(Zn(II))
(M)	pH	ref	
minibody	His3	∼10–6	not available		
retinol binding protein	His3	(3.6 ± 1.0) × 10–8	not
available		
charybdotoxin	His3	(5.4 ± 0.4) × 10–6	6.5		
IZ-3aH	His3	9 × 10–6	7.0		
IZ-3adH	His6	(2.3 ± 0.2) ×
10–5	7.0		
Zα4	His2Cys2	2.5 × 10–8	7.5		
Zβ1M,A,L	His3Cys	∼1 × 10–9	7.5		
Trx[ZS].C and Trx[ZS].F	His2Cys2	∼1 × 10–8	7.5		
Trx[ZS].A, Trx[ZS].B, and
Trx[ZS].E	His2Cys2	∼1 × 10–6	7.5		
BABZ5	His2Cys2	2.2 × 10–6	7.3		
IGA	Cys4	4 × 10–16	8.0		
 	 	4 × 10–12	7.0		
GGG	Cys4	1.8 × 10–17	pH-independent		
 	 	5 × 10–13	7.4		
 	HisCys3	7 × 10–16	pH-independent		
 	 	5 × 10–13	7.4		
 	His2Cys2	4 × 10–14	pH-independent		
 	 	5 × 10–13	7.4		
αββ Zn(II)-hydrolase	His3	8 × 10–4	not available		
[Zn(II)(H2O/OH–)]N (TRIL2WL23H)3n+	His3	(0.6 ± 0.1) × 10–6	7.5		
[Hg(II)]S[Zn(II)(H2O/OH–)]N (TRIL9CL23H)3n+	His3	(0.8 ± 0.1) × 10–6	7.5		
[Zn(II)(H2O/OH–)]N[Hg(II)]S (TRIL9HL23C)3n+	His3	∼8 × 10–6	7.5		
[Hg(II)]S[Zn(II)(H2O/OH–)]N (TRIL9CL19H)3n+	His3	(3.7 ± 1.3) × 10–6	7.5		
From ref ().

From ref ().

From ref ().

From ref ().

From ref ().

From ref ().

From ref ().

From ref ().

From ref ().

From ref ().

From ref ().

From ref ().

From ref ().

The de novo-designed
four-helix bundle, α4, was also used
as a scaffold for the incorporation of a closed-sphere ZnCys2His2 site (Zα4), much like the structural site found
in zinc finger (ZF) proteins (Figure a)., Co(II) was used as a spectroscopic probe to demonstrate successful
design of a tetrahedral site. It should be noted that recent literature
indicates that although Co(II) substitution in Zn(II) enzymes may
result in the same coordination environment, there are a number of
cases in which an identical coordination environment does not result. Mutants of this design, in which one ligand
was removed at a time (by substitution with Ala) to generate an open
coordination site, were also tetrahedral, although the Co(II) binding
affinities were all decreased by at least 1 order of magnitude. Overall,
the Cys residues were thought to be stronger determinants for Co(II)
binding than His, which is not unexpected because the negative charge
on the Cys thiolate residue is known to provide a stronger binding
contribution.− Klemba et al. reported the redesign of the B1 domain of IgG-binding
protein G (a 56-residue protein with a four-stranded β-sheet
crossed by a single α-helix) to incorporate a closed-sphere
His3Cys site for binding Zn(II) (Figure b). Co(II) confirmed the presence
of a tetrahedral site, and on the basis of the competition, the dissociation
constant for Zn(II) binding was estimated to be on the order of 10–9 M. There are also numerous other studies involving
the design of a variety of peptide ligands for the preparation of
metal sites meant to mimic ZF proteins [coordination environment Zn(Cys)4–x(His)x, where x = 0, 1, or 2], which are beyond the scope
of this Current Topic., Overall, these examples of designed
Zn(II) sites with four protein ligands generally display higher affinities
than the designed sites with three protein ligands discussed above.
It is worth noting that no strict correlation exists between the number
of ligands bound in the first coordination sphere for native zinc
enzymes and their Zn(II) binding affinities.,, This is likely due to the incorporation
of secondary interactions and demonstrates the utility of protein
design to uncover features of metal binding that would otherwise be
difficult to determine in a native system.

(a) Model of Zα4.
The side chains (clockwise from top right)
are Cys21, His25, Cys47, and His51. Panel a was reproduced from ref (). Copyright 1995 American
Chemical Society. (b) Model of the metal-binding site in the B1 domain
of streptococcal protein G. The ribbon diagram is specifically of
Zβ1M. The side chains around the metal-binding site are His16,
His18, His30, and Cys33. Panel b was reproduced from ref (). Copyright 1995 Nature
Publishing Group.

Recently, the Baker group
designed a high-affinity Zn(II)-binding
site using a computational design approach to incorporate the unnatural
amino acid (2,2′-bipyridin-5yl)alanine (Bpy-Ala). Using RosettaMatch to identify appropriate backbone
geometries and a negative design approach to disfavor undesirable
coordination environments, the group engineered an octahedral metal-binding
site comprised of Bpy-Ala, Asp, Glu, and two water molecules. Although
the site binds a number of divalent metal cations, including Co(II),
Fe(II), and Ni(II), competition experiments estimate that the metal
binding affinity of Zn(II) is ∼40 pM. The preorientation of
the two metal-binding pyridine nitrogen atoms from Bpy-Ala likely
contributes to this high metal binding affinity by lowering the entropic
cost of orienting ligands (e.g., His) for metal binding, therefore
demonstrating the power of using nonnatural amino acids for designing
metal-binding sites.

Metal-Mediated Stabilization of Protein Structures
There are a number of examples in which designed Zn(II)-binding
sites
have resulted in enhanced folding of partially or completely unfolded
peptide structures.,− A His3 site was introduced into a de novo-designed three-stranded
coiled coil (3SCC), IZ [YGG(IEKKIEA)4], to generate IZ-3aH,
which folds in the presence of Zn(II) (Kd = 9 μM), although no X-ray crystal structure was reported. The same group reported a similar 3SCC, but
with six His residues available for binding in an octahedral geometry
with a Kd for Zn(II) binding of 23 ±
2 μM. These affinities remain in
the same range as those described above for Zn(II) sites with three
protein ligands (Table ).

Wisz et al.
reported the semiautomated design of a series of ZnCys2His2 centers into the non-metalloprotein thioredoxin (Trx,
using Dezymer) (Figure ). Dezymer was used to identify
sites where appropriate amino acids could be engineered to create
a metal-binding site with predetermined geometry, in this case tetrahedral.
Visual inspection identified seven variants with buried potential
metal sites and few steric clashes with the backbone. Five of seven
experimentally characterized mutants bound Co(II) in a tetrahedral
geometry with strong dissociation constants for some (2–4 μM)
and weak for others (150–250 μM). Zn(II) binding (measured
by displacement) was 2–3 orders of magnitude stronger than
Co(II) binding (nanomolar to micromolar Kd). The strongest dissociation constants were for structures in which
the apo form was stable and metal binding further increased the stability
(Trx[ZS].C and Trx[ZS].F). In two cases (Trx[ZS].A and Trx[ZS].B),
the apo form was unstable and metal binding induced folding [Co(II) Kd values of ∼150 μM]. In the fifth
case (Trx[ZS].E), the apo form was stable but metal binding decreased
the stability. The weak metal binding affinity for this variant results
from clashing steric interactions within the metal coordination sphere.
Thermodynamic analysis revealed that all variants bound metal to the
unfolded state, and the observed metal-mediated stability is a consequence
of differential binding to the folded native state and unfolded structures,
although the dominant factor for binding to the unfolded state is
unclear. This work demonstrates how the design of a family of similar
sites within the same scaffold can lead to an understanding of how
both the intrinsic properties of the metal center and the surrounding
protein matrix can affect the metal binding affinity (and stabilization).
In this case, the metal dictates geometry and the thermodynamic price
paid by the protein to accommodate the metal is reflected in the binding
constant. Important considerations for designing metal-binding sites
are that packing interactions in the binding site should be carefully
considered to avoid costly reorganization energies and binding to
the unfolded stable should be destabilized (negative design).

Distribution
of the designed Cys2His2 sites
in thioredoxin (letters identify each design). This figure was reproduced
ref (). Copyright
1998 American Chemical Society.

Another example examining the design of a ZnHis2Cys2 site in several locations of a protein (de novo-designed
DS119 with βαβ structure) was reported by Zhu et
al. It was found that Zn(II) sites designed
into the protein core generally destroyed the folding even in the
presence of zinc, while those at flexible terminals or loops displayed
Zn(II)-induced aggregation, with dissociation constants in the range
of 2–20 μM; however, the binding stoichiometry was 1:1
in only one case [BABZ5 (Kd = 2.2 μM)].
These observations result from a balance between the energy provided
by metal binding and the cost of folding the protein. In the cases
where the engineered ligands destroy the core of the protein, energetic
contributions from the binding of Zn(II) are not enough to recover
the fold.

Overall, these design studies in which metal binding
induces or
further stabilizes a protein fold demonstrate a connection between
the binding constant and the energy required to fold a given protein.
The formation of metal–ligand bonds provides a favorable enthalpic
contribution to the free energy of protein folding. There are also
entropic contributions from the release of water molecules from the
binding site and the solvated metal upon binding. In an effort to
separate protein–protein and metal–protein contributions
to the free energy of folding, Reddi et al. reported the thermodynamic
analysis of binding of Zn(II) to a Cys4 site in a minimal,
unstructured, 16-mer peptide, GGG (a variant of IGA with the sequence NH2-KLCEGG·CGGCGGC·GGW-CONH2). Petros et al. had initially reported the design
of a structural ZnS4-binding site in a de novo-designed
16-amino acid peptide ligand, IGA (sequence H2N-KLCEGG-CIGCGAC-GGW-CONH2), and
found apparent dissociation constants for Zn(II) at pH 8.0 of 0.4
fM and at pH 7.0 of 4 pM [similar to that for a redesigned ZF, CP1-CCCC
(Kd = 1.1 pM)]. These are well within the range observed for natural zinc proteins
like metallothionein (Kd = 0.1 pM at pH
7.0), yet (at pH 7.0) weaker than those
of the zinc sensor proteins ZntR and Zur (Kd = 1.5 and 1.1 fM, respectively)., It was suggested
from this work that the formation of the ZnCys4 site provides
a −22.1 kcal mol–1 driving force for protein
folding. The goal of the work using GGG [designed to
more closely resemble structural Zn(II) sites than IGA, which was originally based on a [4Fe-4S] binding motif] was to
decouple the metal binding and protein folding events by choosing
a structure in which the free energies of the folded and unfolded
states are identical. The results indicate that Zn(II) binding is
entropy-driven and controlled by proton release. The pH-independent
dissociation constant for binding of Zn(II) to GGG is
18 × 10–18 M (18 aM), indicating that a ZnCys4 site can provide up to −22.8 kcal mol–1 of driving force for protein structure stabilization (Figure ). The majority of
the driving force is due to dehydration of the metal and binding site,
so the process is largely entropy-driven. ZnCys3His and
ZnCys2His2 sites were also examined with similar
results and dissociation constants of 0.7 fM (and a −20.7 kcal
mol–1 contribution to protein stability) and 40
fM (a −18.3 kcal mol–1 contribution), respectively.
The observation that the Cys thiolate is a better ligand for Zn(II)
than His is again consistent with literature precedent.− However, it should be noted that at physiological pH (7.4), the
contributions from each of the differing coordination motifs are equal,
because of proton competition with the Cys ligands, given that the
thiols (in the apo peptides) have pKa values
in the range of 7.8–9.1. The dissociation constant for binding
of Zn(II) to each peptide (Cys4, Cys3His, and
Cys2His2 sites) is the same, 0.5 pM, with the
same −16.8 kcal mol–1 energetic contribution
to the protein folding driving force from metal binding. This driving
force results from a combination of the favorable entropic contribution
from proton loss and the unfavorable enthalpic contribution from thiol
deprotonation. In natural proteins, which can have weaker binding
affinities for the same coordination motifs, the difference may be
due to the loss of Zn(II) binding energy to protein folding. We also
note that the role of the binding pocket itself is important and can
affect the energy needed for metal binding.

Molecular model of the
Zn(II)–GGG complex with
a Cys4 site rendered using Biosystem Insight II. This figure
was reproduced from ref (). Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.

The work described in this section, although focused
on structural
zinc sites, is important in the context of this Current Topic because
it highlights several aspects of metal binding and protein folding
that must be considered when designing zinc metalloenzymes. The energetic
cost of protein folding should be minimized in both the apo form and
the metal-bound form to minimize the reorganization requirements upon
metal binding. Next, the binding of metal should be optimized toward
the folded state rather than the unfolded state while keeping the
structure flexible enough to allow for metal and substrate binding.
Although very high binding affinities may be achieved for unfolded
structures such as designed peptides IGA and GGG and natural ZFs, catalytic zinc sites will likely require further
structural contributions from a larger protein matrix for the stabilization
of unsaturated coordination spheres and substrate binding. Additionally,
although Cys residues can clearly provide more favorable Zn(II)–ligand
interactions, their effects on the Lewis acidity of the Zn(II) center
must be considered and will be discussed below. Therefore, designing
catalytic zinc sites will require striking a balance between achieving
sufficiently strong Zn(II) binding to promote catalysis [the affinities
reached using IGA and GGG variants are certainly
higher than those observed for effective native Zn(II) enzymes] and
forming well-folded protein structures.

Metal-Mediated Stabilization
toward the Preparation of Designed
Multimeric Structures
Another approach for the design of
structural metal sites (and, in some cases, catalytic sites) in proteins
that is gaining ground in recent years is to use the binding energy
provided by metals to direct the folding and assembly of multiple
protein subunits and even extended nanostructures. Although metalloprotein
design is typically associated with incorporating stable metal sites
into protein cores, metal–protein surface interactions are
at least equally significant, and metal sites are often located at
the interfaces of multimeric protein complexes. Additionally, the
formation of metal sites at protein interfaces has been proposed as
a possible evolutionary route toward efficient metalloenzymes. Therefore,
gaining a full understanding of how this might occur through a design
approach should prove to be very important. This topic has been reviewed,− but the strategy has since expanded to include the generation of
periodic protein arrays and, as will
be discussed below, the design of a hydrolytic zinc metalloenzyme., Briefly, the Tezcan group has focused on using metal-coordinating
motifs on the surface of a monomeric protein, cytochrome cb562, to engineer novel protein–protein interaction
interfaces to control the assembly of proteins. The initial model
system, MBPC-1 (metal binding protein complex), has two bis-His motifs
on its surface which, upon addition of equimolar amounts of divalent
metals [Zn(II), Cu(II), and Ni(II)], forms discrete multimeric structures
according to the stereochemical preferences of the metal ions.,, Subsequent computational redesign
using RosettaDesign optimized the hydrophobic
packing between interfaces and included additional hydrogen bonding
and salt bridge interactions to convert the Zn(II)-mediated tetramer
into a structure that could self-assemble even in the absence of metals. The Tezcan group also successfully incorporated
nonnatural metal chelates onto the surfaces to generate not only coordinatively
unsaturated metal sites but also a site that enforces a nonpreferred
geometry on a metal due to the steric bulk of the chelates (a buried
conformation is 4.2 ± 1.3 kcal mol–1 more favorable
than an extended conformation for Phen, or 1,10′-phenanthroline,
in MBPPhen2) and lattice packing arrangements that hold the metal
centers in proximity of each other (Figure ). This is of particular importance
to the design community because an efficient metalloenzyme often requires
coordinatively unsaturated metal sites with strained metal geometries.
More recently, the group also reported the design of a self-assembling
Zn(II)-binding protein cryptand, in which a ZnHis3(H2O) site is achieved in a structure templated by disulfide
bonds. Although Zn(II) binds well (four total sites in a tetrameric
structure, where Kd,4Zn = 480 ± 35
nM), no esterase activity was observed (toward pNPA),
possibly because the Zn(II) sites are not very accessible (Figure ). While assembly
processes can lead to structures under kinetic control, achieving
these unsaturated metal sites with designed proteins requires structures
that strike the delicate balance between thermodynamic stability at
the metal site and over the whole peptidic structure.

(a) Crystal structure
of the Zn–MBPPhen2 dimer (PDB entry 3MNK). (b) Superposition
of Ni–MBPPhen2 (yellow) and Zn–MBPPhen2
(magenta) metal centers. (c) Close-up showing the proximity between
the coordinatively unsaturated metal centers in the asymmetric unit
of the Zn–MBPPhen22 structure. The 2Fo – Fc electronic density
map is contoured at 1.2σ. The dimer is formed in solution and
in the solid state. This figure was reproduced from ref (). Copyright 2011 Elsevier.

Overall structure and example of a Zn(II) site
in a self-assembling
protein cryptand templated by disulfide bonds. (a) Overlay of protein
backbones of the apo and Zn(II)-bound forms of C81/C96RIDCl4. (b) One of four ZnHis3(H2O) sites
in A74/C81/C96RIDCl4 with the 2Fo – Fc electron density
map contoured at 1.4σ (cyan) and 7σ (magenta). This figure
was reproduced from ref (). Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.

Reengineering Preexisting Metal Sites for
Hydrolytic Activity
Beyond the introduction of Zn(II)-binding
sites into both de novo
and existing protein scaffolds through the variety of approaches discussed
above, existing Zn(II) sites can be redesigned to introduce new functions
or alter existing functions. In this section, we will first describe
extensive mutagenesis studies on CA, which is a desirable target for
many protein design studies. Then we will discuss a design study involving
the related MMPs, which, like CA, have a ZnHis3(H2O) active center. We will then discuss
the more extensive redesign approach of an enzyme, glyoxolase II,
structurally unrelated to CA and MMP but that still performs hydrolytic
catalysis. Finally, we will discuss
the redesign of native zinc proteins, which are not initially catalytic
but have mononuclear structural zinc sites., Additionally (although we will not go into further detail here),
there are several examples of using Zn(II)-binding sites to control
or alter different protein functions. These studies range from the
design of Zn(II)-binding sites for inhibition, or control of specificity of protease activity in trypsin− to Zn(II)-induced conformational changes for sensing− and control of various protein functions.,

Although there are many examples of zinc metalloenzymes that
have been studied through alteration of their zinc coordination spheres,
none have been more extensively reengineered than CA. This enzyme
represents a target for achieving efficient hydrolytic catalysis for
many designed zinc metalloproteins, so here we will summarize selected
reengineering studies for CA (Figure ). The
direct metal-binding residues around the Zn(II) site (His94, His96,
and His119) have been replaced by a variety of amino acids (Asp, Glu,
Asn, Gln, Cys, and Ala) to study the effects on the first coordination
sphere., Early work involved the preparation of the
H94D mutant, which resulted in a tetrahedral His2Asp coordination
environment with a solvent molecule. An ∼104-fold loss of metal binding affinity was
observed [Kd = 15 nM (Table )], probably in part due to the movement of the Zn(II) ion
∼1 Å toward the Asp residue, resulting in the interruption
of the evolved His3 ligand arrangement. Although a recent
report using ITC demonstrated a weaker Zn(II) binding affinity (Kd = 0.5 nM) for
CA compared to that previously reported (Kd = 0.8 pM), we will continue to refer
to previous values for consistency between mutants. Changes in the
electrostatics of the site (neutral to anionic substitution) also
lead to an increase in the pKa for Zn-OH2 deprotonation (as in Figure a) from
6.8 to &gt;9.6. A larger loss of Zn(II) binding affinity is observed
when His94 is replaced with Ala (Kd =
270 nM). Substitution of the same His
residue with a Cys also results in an ∼104-fold
loss of Zn(II) binding affinity [movement of the Zn(II) ion toward
Cys is essentially the same as that observed for Asp in H94D] and
an increase in the pKa to &gt;9.5., Acknowledging that Cys substitutions in the designed structures
discussed earlier led to increased binding affinities, we find it
is worth noting that the apparent discrepancy described here is likely
the result of interrupting the binding site structure of a highly
evolved protein. Overall, changes to the charge of the zinc site by
addition of charged residues result in severe losses to catalytic
activity [altered Lewis acidity of Zn(II)]. However, when alternate
neutral residues (Asn and Gln) are introduced, reasonable catalytic
activity is retained, although ∼104–105-fold losses of binding affinity are still observed. Altering the other His positions in similar
ways gives similar results., Interestingly, a route
toward improving the affinity of Zn(II) for CA has also been taken
by substituting a nearby residue [Thr199, which forms a stabilizing
hydrogen bond with the Zn(II)-bound solvent] with Cys, Asp, Glu, or
His. Substitution with Cys results in an improvement in the Kd (from 4 to 1.1 pM) and some loss of activity
(∼103-fold) due to an alternate conformer with a
Zn(II)–hydroxide species., In the case
of T199E, the affinity is greatly improved (Kd = 20 fM) and the activity is abolished because of the displacement
of Zn(II)-bound hydroxide. For T199H,
the affinity actually decreases 20-fold as the fourth His does not
bind to Zn(II). Another example that
alters the secondary coordination sphere is the mutation of Thr199
to Ala (abolishing the hydrogen bond), which retains the His3 coordination environment, but results in a 100-fold loss of activity
and an increase in the pKa of ∼1.5
units. Further, Glu106 forms a hydrogen bond acceptor interaction
with Thr199, resulting in a zinc–hydroxide–threonine–glutamate
hydrogen-bonding network. When Glu106 is substituted with Ala or Gln,
to abolish this “secondary” hydrogen bond, the catalytic
efficiency for CO2 hydration is diminished ∼10-fold
to 9.5 or 23 μM–1 s–1, respectively
(although the kcat values are ∼1000-fold
slower, suggesting a stronger effect on HCO3– dissociation and/or proton transfer steps than on the CO2–HCO3– interconversion rates
at the metal center), and that for pNPA hydrolysis
is nearly 100-fold less efficient (30 and 40 M–1 s–1 for E106A and E106Q, respectively). The pKa for the
E106A mutant increases to 7.9, while that for E160Q (pKa = 7.1) is similar to that of wild-type CAII (pKa = 6.8). There are also hydrogen bonding interactions
with unbound nitrogen atoms of each of the His residues in the primary
coordination sphere (His94 to Gln92, His119 to Glu117, and His96 to
the backbone of Asn244). The effects of mutating Gln92 and Glu117
on the pKa are within ±1 unit with
only subtle effects on the Kd and losses
of activity of ∼10-fold or less. This is likely because the
direct metal ligands will often replace the lost hydrogen-bonding
partners with other protein sites or even solvent.− One case in which drastic effects were observed is that of the E117Q
mutant, in which a 55000-fold loss of activity, an increase in the
pKa to &gt;9, and a 1100-fold weaker Zn(II)
binding affinity were reported. These
results have been proposed to arise from reversal of the hydrogen
bond between residue 117 and His119, stabilizing His119 as a histidinate
anion.

Schematic of the active site structure of carbonic anhydrase II
displaying the extended active site around the Zn(II) center.

Coordination Environments
and pNPA Hydrolysis Rate Constants of Zinc Finger
Mutant Peptides
ZF variant	coordination
no. (no. of vacant sites)	pNPA hydrolysis rate constant (M–1 s–1)	
Zn(II)–zf(CCHH)	4 (0)	0	
Zn(II)–zf(CCGH)	5 (2)	0.218 ± 0.0085	
Zn(II)–zf(CCAH)	5 (2)	0.232 ± 0.0051	
Zn(II)–zf(CCHG)	5 (2)	0.351 ± 0.0182	
Zn(II)–zf(CCHA)	4 (1)	0.568 ± 0.0228	
Zn(II)–zf(GCHH)	5 (2)	0.399 ± 0.0014	
Zn(II)–zf(CGHH)	5 (2)	0.458 ± 0.0021	
Zn(II)–zf(AHHH)	6 (3)	0.478 ± 0.0057	
Zn(II)–zf(HAHH)	6 (3)	0.497 ± 0.00058	
Zn(II)–zf(HHAH)	6 (3)	0.370 ± 0.0289	
Zn(II)–zf(HHHA)	6 (3)	0.443 ± 0.0147	
Zn(II)–zf(HHHH)	6 (2)	0.966 ± 0.0492	
Taken from ref (). In 20 mM HEPES buffer
(pH 7.5), 0.1 M NaCl, and 3.5% acetonitrile at 25 °C.

Based on Co(II)-substituted UV–vis
absorption studies.

These
studies on the primary and secondary coordination spheres
of CA clearly demonstrate many of the characteristics of successful
Zn(II) sites that should be taken into account in the protein design
approach. Specifically, mutagenesis studies demonstrate that neutral
His ligands in the primary coordination sphere are essential for enhancing
the net positive charge at the Zn(II) site. Anionic protein ligands
lead to a decrease in the Lewis acidity of Zn(II) with an increase
in the Zn(II)–OH2 pKa. Substitutions in which the primary coordination sphere was altered
but maintained at three protein ligands resulted in a loss of binding
affinity, regardless of the charge of the ligand. This is contrary
to the studies described above for designed peptides and proteins,
in which thiolate ligands result in stronger binding affinities for
Zn(II) than His ligands, therefore highlighting both the importance
of the evolved metal site structure in a native protein and the difficulty
in examining separate factors for metal site structure using a native
metalloprotein. Of course, an open coordination site is required for
catalysis, and hydrogen bonding interactions, such as those involving
the primary His ligands and Zn(II)-bound solvent, can fine-tune Zn(II)
binding affinities and pKa values. Loss
of these interactions typically results in a decreased binding affinity,
a decreased activity, and an increased pKa.

There are also several reports on the redesign of carbonic
anhydrase
for improved activity toward alternate ester substrates, in which
controlling the steric interactions within the hydrophobic pocket
can lead to altered substrate specificities and esterase activities.,− Therefore, protein design efforts should
also consider how size and charge interactions of the desired substrates
could affect activity and control selectivity.

An alternative
approach to enzyme mutagenesis studies is to retain
the enzyme active site sequence while removing the remainder of the
structure. A related class of enzymes, which also contain a catalytic
zinc site comprised of three His residues and a solvent molecule,
are the MMPs. MMPs are the main processors
of extracellular matrix components and perform hydrolytic cleavage
of amide bonds. The catalytic domain contains a well-conserved sequence,
including the His triad and also a nearby Glu residue that is crucial
for catalysis (HExxHxxGxxH).
A recent report analyzed a peptide corresponding to the Zn(II)-binding
sequence from human MMP13 (Ac-KAHEFGHSLGLDHSK-NH2) to determine its suitability as a flexible and minimal chemical
model for the more rigid metal-binding sites found in native metalloproteins. Potentiometric, CD, NMR, and mass spectrometric
techniques support Zn(II) binding in a His3(H2O) environment at pH 7 with a pKa of
7.59 for deprotonation of Zn(II)–OH2. Formation
of a dihydroxide Zn(II)–(OH–)2 species occurs with a pKa of 8.60. Given
the similarity of these coordination environments to those of native
zinc metalloenzymes such as the MMPs and CA, the Zn(II)–peptide
complexes were tested for their ability to catalyze pNPA hydrolysis. The second-order rate constants are 0.24 and 1.44
M–1 s–1 for the mono- and dihydroxide
species, respectively (these rate constants were determined by fitting
observed rates between pH 7.4 and 9.2 to the equation kobs,corr = kZnHL[ZnHL] + kZnL[ZnL], where ZnHL is the monohydroxide species
and ZnL is the dihydroxide complex). At pH 8.7, the initial rates
were measured as a function of substrate concentration for the dihydroxide
species and yield a catalytic efficiency of ∼1.2 M–1 s–1. While this activity compares favorably with
those of small molecule models with similar structures,− it further highlights the importance of a preorganized protein structure
for acquiring native enzymelike activity.

Another example of
reengineering a zinc metalloenzyme is the computational
redesign of the dizinc-containing glyoxalase II enzyme into a β-lactamase. Both of these enzymes have reactions somewhat
different and structures (dizinc metal sites) very different from
those of the two zinc enzymes discussed above. Glyoxalase II catalyzes
the hydrolysis of the thioester bond of S-d-lactoylglutathione, an important step in the conversion of toxic
2-oxoaldehydes into their corresponding 2-hydroxycarboxylic acids. The active site structure includes two Zn(II)
centers bridged by a water molecule and an Asp residue. One of the
Zn(II) ions is further coordinated by three His residues and the other
by one Asp and two His residues. The dizinc site found in metallo-β-lactamases,
which catalyze the hydrolysis of β-lactam amide bonds to inactivate
β-lactam antibiotics, is similar. However, the Zn(II) centers
are linked by a hydroxide molecule; one Zn(II) ion remains coordinated
to three His residues, and the other is coordinated to Asp, Cys, and
His residues in Bacteroides fragilis and Bacteroides cereus. Despite
relatively well-conserved metal-binding sites, these enzymes share
only marginal structural similarity and differ greatly in terms of
substrate binding. The conversion of glyoxalase II into a β-lactamase
was achieved through a series of extensive modifications involving
insertion, deletion, and substitution of several active site loops
and subsequent point mutations. This
redesign endeavor altered the metal binding geometry as well as the
substrate-binding pocket, yet both glyoxalase II and metallo-β-lactamase
enzymes contain binuclear metal ions essential to the hydrolysis reaction.
Although a designed dinuclear zinc site is present in the de novo-designed
due ferri (DF) family of proteins, no
activity has been reported for any dinuclear zinc site introduced
into any de novo or preexisting metal scaffold that did not already
contain a Zn2 site.

Another approach to the design
of zinc enzymes is to begin with
a zinc protein that is not catalytically active at all, but in which
the Zn(II) center serves solely a structural function, as it does
for the ZF proteins., Catalytic Zn(II) sites can be
prepared by taking the existing structural site and removing a ligand
to create an open coordination sphere for binding and activation of
external ligands. This was first attempted by Merkle and co-workers,
who reported a truncated ZF peptide, CP1-C4 (CP1, PYKCPECGKSFSQKSDLVKHQNTHTG) in which
the last four residues (including a His) were removed, to create a
peptide that binds Co(II) with a tetrahedral geometry. Although evidence of an open coordination site
was obtained by examining the spectra of Co(II)–peptide complexes
with external ligands, neither Zn(II) or Co(II) complexes displayed
any hydrolytic activity, a result proposed to be due to the high pKa expected for a thiolate-rich site with no
secondary interactions. Later, Nomura et al. reported the first successful
attempt at redesigning the structural zinc center in a ZF [wild-type
sequence of RPFMCTWSYCGKRFTRSDELQRHKRTHTGE, zf(CCHH)]
into a hydrolytic Zn(II) site by preparing a series of ZF mutants
in which one of the coordinating residues was substituted with a noncoordinating
residue (Ala or Gly) (Figure a).,, For those mutants retaining
at least one Cys in the coordination sphere, Co(II) substitution indicated
four- or five-coordinate geometries. The highest activity (pNPA hydrolysis) was observed for zf(CCHA), which has a
sequence similar to that of the truncated ZF CP1-C4 and four-coordinate
geometry (with an open site) and a second-order rate constant of 0.568
± 0.0228 M–1 s–1. The zinc
center is located in a more hydrophobic environment in zf(CCHA) than
in CP1-C4 because of the presence of
the C-terminal residues, which can affect both substrate binding and
the acidity of the Zn(II)-bound water molecule. All of the other mutants with at least one Cys in the coordination
sphere were five-coordinate, including two vacant sites. Generally,
ZFs of the CHH type displayed activities higher than those of the
CCH type, probably because the Cys residue can decrease the Lewis
acidity of the Zn(II) center via its electron donating ability and
consequently reduce the activity (Table ).
To this end, the authors prepared several HHH-type ZFs, which should
bind as neutral ligands (as in CA) and help maximize the Lewis acidity.
As expected, increased activity was observed relative to those of
the Cys-containing ZFs [up to 0.966 ± 0.0492 M–1 s–1 for zf(HHHH)]. While only rarely seen in nature
(for example, a structural site in the HAP1 transcriptional factor), a ZnHis4 site has also been observed
in a related redesigned ZF protein (although there are no structural
data indicating whether additional solvent molecules are found in
the coordination sphere) and in the
MBPC-2 system reported by Salgado et al., but no activity was reported for either. Co(II) substitution of
all of these, however, indicated six-coordinate geometries with at
least two vacant sites, but given the preference of Co(II) for octahedral
geometries, lower coordination numbers for Zn(II) cannot be ruled
out. The hydrolysis of pNPA as performed by these
ZF mutant peptides is pH-dependent with pKa values for Zn-OH2 deprotonation ranging from 6.3 to 7.6
that increase according to the Lewis acidity of the Zn(II) center.
The activity of the His4 site falls within the range of
activities reported for synthetic small molecule model complexes in
mostly aqueous conditions−,, yet remains almost 3000-fold
slower than CAII., zf(HHHH) also displays nuclease
activity toward substrates bis(p-nitrophenyl) phosphate
and supercoiled plasmid DNA (pUC19GC). Overall, this work further demonstrates the importance of having
primarily neutral ligands in the coordination spheres of Zn(II) centers
in hydrolytic enzymes.

(a) Amino acid sequence of the zinc finger
parent peptide. Panel
a was reproduced from ref (). Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society. (b) Natural
zinc finger fold (αββ structure) and (c) zinc finger
αββ fold modified as a metallohydrolase. Panels
b and c were reproduced from ref (). Copyright 2010 Elsevier.

Active Site Properties of Carbonic
Anhydrase II and Selected Mutants
 	coordination
site	Kd(Zn(II))
(pM)	pKa of
Zn-OH2	CO2 hydration kcat/KM (μM–1 s–1)	pNPA hydrolysis kcat/KM  (M–1 s–1)	
wild type	His3(H2O)	0.8 ± 0.1	6.8 ± 0.1	110 ± 10	2600 ± 50	
Primary Coordination-Sphere Mutants	
H94D,	His2Asp	15000 ± 5000	≥9.6	0.11 ± 0.01	365 ± 70	
H94A	His2	270000 ± 50000	 	0.012 ± 0.0002	18	
H94C,	His2Cys	33000 ± 7000	≥9.5	0.11 ± 0.01	117 ± 20	
Secondary Coordination-Sphere
Mutants	
T199C,	His3Cys	1.1 ± 0.2	 	0.11 ± 0.02	 	
T199D	His3Asp	4 ± 0.02	 	0.04 ± 0.005	 	
T199E	His3Glu	0.02 ± 0.01	 	0.04 ± 0.005	 	
T199H	His3(H2O)	77 ± 13	≥9.0	0.024 ± 0.002	 	
T199A	His3(H2O)	60 ± 10	8.3 ± 0.1	1.1 ± 0.05	44 ± 2 or 15	
E117Q	His3(H2O)	4400 ± 400	≥9.0	0.002	3	
Taken from ref (). Notably, recent ITC
data revealed a Kd (0.5 nM) ∼3
orders of magnitude weaker than prior values for CA. However, for this discussion, we have chosen to use the
stronger Kd value so that it can be uniformly
compared to those of the mutants that have not been re-evaluated.

From ref ().

From ref ().

From ref ().

From ref ().

From ref ().

From ref ().

From ref ().

From ref ().

From ref ().

From ref ().

From ref ().

In another study, a ZF protein (αββ
fold) was
targeted for computational redesign as a hydrolase (Figure c). In this design
method, CYANA and then IDeAS were used to design a linker between d-amino acid-nucleated secondary structures (α-helix and
two β-hairpins) and to optimize the sequence, respectively.
The resulting small 21-mer sequence with αββ structure
bound Zn(II) with a Kd of ∼800
μM and a ΔG° of approximately −17.2
kJ mol–1. Therefore, binding of Zn(II) to this His3 site is weaker than for any of the other designs discussed
above (Table ). Hydrolysis of pNPA was observed with an initial rate of (103.45 ± 0.25) ×
10–9 M s–1, a 45-fold enhancement
over the background at pH 7.0 and 25 °C. However, enzymelike
hydrolysis with substrate binding was not observed, possibly because
the short sequence and small size of the fold do not provide sufficient
protein structure to support substrate binding.

From Zinc-Binding
Proteins to Hydrolytic Metalloenzymes
Until recently, designed
zinc metalloproteins have often shown
very little, if any, catalytic activity relative to their natural
counterparts and few have been structurally characterized. As discussed
above, there are examples in which preexisting Zn(II) sites have been
redesigned for different functions, such as converting glyoxalase
II to a metallo-β-lactamase and
converting ZF peptides (closed coordination spheres) to catalytic
sites by opening up the first coordination sphere, but generating hydrolytic activity from a “new”
zinc site in either a de novo or preexisting protein scaffold had
not yet been achieved. In early 2012, we reported the first example
of a hydrolytically active de novo-designed zinc site. Soon after, Khare et al. reported the de novo
computational redesign and subsequent directed evolution of a Zn(II)-containing
mouse adenosine deaminase for efficiently catalyzing the hydrolysis
of a model organophosphate substrate. Not long after that, Der et al. reported the de novo design of a
ZnHis3 site at the computationally designed interface between
two copies of the Rab4-binding domain of Rabenosyn, which effectively
catalyzes the hydrolysis of both pNPA and p-nitrophenyl phosphate (pNPP).,

Here, we will emphasize our work on introducing a hydrolytic
zinc
site into a de novo-designed scaffold and provide detailed comparisons
to these other hydrolytic zinc enzymes. Our original goal was to create
a de novo-designed protein (a homomeric parallel 3SCC), which could
bind two different metals in spatially separated sites, with different
functions. The design of the parent coiled coil sequence [TRI, Ac-G(LKALEEK)nG-NH2], is based on the heptad repeat approach, consisting of seven amino
acid repeats, labeled a–g. This sequence results
in formation of amphipathic α-helices with all Leu residues
in positions a and d to make up the hydrophobic
face, Ala in position c as a helix inducer, and mostly
Lys and Glu residues in the remaining hydrophilic positions. The resulting
3SCC structure (at pH &gt;5.5, where stabilizing salt bridge interactions
can be formed between the Lys and Glu residues) has Leu residues in
positions a and d oriented toward the interior.
Therefore, when residues such as His or Cys are substituted into these
positions, metal-binding sites can be formed. The sequence chosen
to achieve our original goal is TRIL9CL23H, where His
at position 23 is intended for formation of a ZnHis3X site.
In addition to the envisioned catalytic zinc site, we engineered a
stabilizing structural site (HgS3, where S represents a
thiolate ligand) utilizing principles for heavy metal binding defined
by earlier work in the group.,− Having a structural site was initially desirable in part to support
substitution of the bulky, potentially destabilizing, His residues
into the interior of the coiled coil. X-ray crystallographic analysis
does demonstrate some fraying of the coiled coil below the His site
(Figure ), and circular dichroism (CD) studies
indicate somewhat lower α-helical content for His-containing
peptides (∼70–80%) than for those that contain single
Cys substitutions (&gt;90%). Hg(II) was specifically chosen for the
structural
site (Cys3) for several reasons. Previous work had demonstrated
that Hg(II) could be used to induce folding in an otherwise unfolded
3SCC. Interestingly, although Hg(II)
prefers to form a two-coordinate metal complex,, it not only induces folding in this system but also forms a stable
three-coordinate Hg(II) site, only rarely observed.,, Additionally, its high affinity
for sulfur atoms ensures it will remain bound to the thiolate ligands,
allowing Zn(II) to bind exclusively to the His3 site. Finally,
the spectroscopic properties of Hg(II) sites of varying coordination
numbers have been well-characterized, allowing for a spectroscopic
tag to assess trimer formation (this is especially important for our
most recent work in which the position of His along the peptide sequence
is varied).

Comparison of the size
of the active site cavities of (a) the modeled
His3 site using the structure of [As(III)]S(CSL9C)3 (PDB entry 2JGO) and (b)
the actual structure containing the His3 site, [Hg(II)]S[Zn(II)(H2O/OH–)]N(CSL9PenL23H)3n+ (PDB entry 3PBJ). (c) Overlay of the two sites with
the model colored gray and the actual structure colored cyan. This
figure was reproduced from ref (). Copyright 2013 Elsevier.

CD denaturation titrations quickly confirmed the function
of the
structurally stabilizing HgS3 site [UV–vis spectroscopy
also confirmed the trigonal binding nature of Hg(II) in the site]. The X-ray crystal structure of the Hg(II)-
and Zn(II)-bound form of CSL9PenL23H (CoilSer or CS, sequence of Ac-E WEALEKK LAALESK LQALEKK LEALEHG-NH2, is the crystallographic analogue sequence of TRI and behaves similarly in solution) verified the geometry of the
HgS3 site and provided the first picture of the designed
ZnN3X site (where N represents a His ligand, Figure ). Although two individual
trimers are present in the asymmetric unit of the structure, both
have Zn(II) bound in a pseudotetrahedral geometry to three His residues
and one chloride or water. The two sites overlay well with each other,
and the ZnN3O (where O represents water or hydroxide) site
overlays extremely well with the active site of CAII (and with those
of MMPs such as adamalysin II) (Figure ).
Despite the structural similarity, especially in the geometry of the
first coordination sphere, there are several differences between this
designed Zn(II) site within a coiled coil and CAII. The most noticeable
distinction is that the secondary structure around the active sites
is very different between the two: primarily β-sheets for CA
and all α-helices for the design. Smaller differences exist
in the relative orientation of the imidazole rings of the His residues,
the identities of the coordinating nitrogens (ε vs δ),
and, of course, the hydrogen bonding structure and water channels
present in CA that have not been explicitly designed in the coiled
coil (Figure ). These differences can allow
us to use this design to address one of the objectives of metalloprotein
design, determining the minimal unit required to achieve the desired
coordination environment and then, significant catalytic activity.
Of course, the achievement of a Zn(II) site structurally similar to
that in CA shows that this Zn(II) coordination environment can be
achieved in diverse protein scaffolds, but a more challenging question
is whether this minimal site is enough to confer significant enzymelike
catalytic activity. Is it possible to remove an active site from a
native metalloenzyme, put it into a wholly different (and smaller)
protein structure, and preserve similar activity and properties? Can
the minimal site be built up to match the native protein’s
catalytic power, by introducing increasing complexity along the way?
Achievement of these goals will require a deep understanding of the
structure–function relationships involved, gained through careful
analyses of all designed systems.

Ribbon diagrams of the [Hg(II)]S[Zn(II)(H2O/OH–)]N(CSL9PenL23H)3n+ parallel
3SCC (one of two different
three-helix bundles present in the asymmetric unit) at pH 8.5. Shown
are the main chain atoms represented as helical ribbons (cyan) and
the Pen and His side chains in stick form (yellow for sulfur, blue
for nitrogen, and red for oxygen). (a) One of two trimers found in
the asymmetric unit of the crystal structure. (b) Top-down view of
the structural trigonal thiolate site, HgS3, confirming
the proposed structure of Hg(II) in Cys-containing TRI peptides. This metal site should mimic
well the structural site in the metalloregulatory protein MerR. (c) Side view of the tetrahedral catalytic
site, ZnN3O, which closely mimics carbonic anhydrase and
matrix metalloproteinase active sites. All figures are shown with 2Fo – Fc electron density contoured at 1.5σ overlaid.
This figure was reproduced from ref (). Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group.

Overlay of the ZnN3O site
in [Hg(II)]S[Zn(II)(H2O/OH–)]N(CSL9PenL23H)3n+ with the active site of human
CAII and the matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) adamalysin II. [Hg(II)]S[Zn(II)(H2O/OH–)]N(CSL9PenL23H)3n+ is colored cyan (PDB entry 3PBJ), CAII tan (PDB entry 2CBA), and adamalysin II gray (PDB entry 1IAG). (a) Top-down view
of the overlay with CAII. The solvent molecule associated with [Hg(II)]S[Zn(II)(H2O/OH–)]N(CSL9PenL23H)3n+ is colored red, and that associated with CAII lies underneath. (b)
Side-on view of the overlay with CAII. The model displays an excellent
structural overlay for the first coordination-sphere atoms with CAII;
however, the orientation of the imidazoles differs between the two
proteins. Another subtle difference is that the present structure
has three ε-amino nitrogens bound to the Zn(II) ion whereas
CAII has a mixed two-ε and one-δ coordination sphere.
(c) Top-down view of the overlay with adamalysin II. The solvent molecule
associated with adamalysin II is colored gray. (d) Side-on view of
the overlay with adamalysin II. While the position of the His rings
is close between the model and adamalysin II, the locations of the
solvent molecules differ noticeably. Unlike for CAII, three ε-amino
nitrogens bind to Zn(II) in adamalysin II. The overlay was performed manually in PyMOL. This figure was adapted
from ref ().

To answer the first catalytic
activity question, we chose to examine
whether the designed metal–peptide complex could hydrolyze pNPA. Indeed, the minimal first coordination-sphere model
{[Hg(II)]S[Zn(II)(H2O/OH–)]N(TRIL9CL23H)3n+, where the subscript S represents metal binding to the sulfur
site, N is used for binding to the His site, and H2O/OH– refers to solvent coordinated to Zn(II) for which
the protonation state varies depending on pH} exhibits saturation
kinetics for pNPA hydrolysis in a pH-dependent manner
with a measured kcat of up to 0.04 s–1 at pH 9.5 and a kcat/KM of 23.3 M–1 s–1. Fitting the pH-dependent data (kcat/KM vs pH) yields
a kinetic pKa of 9.0 ± 0.1, presumably
due to deprotonation of Zn(II)-bound water to hydroxide, and a maximal
efficiency [assuming 100% active Zn(II)–hydroxide species]
of 31 ± 4 M–1 s–1 (Table ). This is &gt;500-fold
higher than second-order rate constants for comparable small molecule
model complexes− and within ∼100-fold of the efficiency
of CAII, the fastest of the α-CA isozymes., As discussed above, many mutant CAs in which secondary interactions
are removed suffer from reduced activity (such as T199A, in which
the direct hydrogen bonding Thr199 residue is removed, resulting in
an ∼100-fold lower catalytic efficiency,). Therefore, although this de novo-designed metalloenzyme is already
within only ∼100-fold of the fastest CA isozyme that has numerous
conserved secondary interactions, removal of such interactions yields
a mutant native protein with an efficiency that is approximately the
same as that of a first-coordination-sphere-only model. Further, the
kinetic parameters for the corresponding metal complex lacking the
structural site, [Zn(II)(H2O/OH–)]N(TRIL2WL23H)3n+ (Figure ), are similar (maximal kcat/KM = 25 ±
2 M–1 s–1, and pKa = 9.2 ± 0.1), confirming that the thermodynamic
stability conferred by HgS3 to the protein is not detrimental
to the catalytic ZnN3O site. This is important for the design of multi-metal site proteins in
which one may require different metals in different positions for
different functions (e.g., one for catalysis and one for electron
transfer). Additionally, the Zn(II) binding affinities for both complexes
fall into the same range. At pH 7.5,
the Kd for binding of Zn(II) to (TRIL2WL23H)3 is 0.6 ± 0.1 μM and for
[Hg(II)]S(TRIL9CL23H)3n– is 0.8 ± 0.1 μM. The binding
affinity increases at pH 9.0 to 0.24 ± 0.02 μM for the
peptide lacking the structural site and to 0.22 ± 0.06 μM
for [Hg(II)]S(TRIL9CL23H)3n–. These Zn(II) binding affinities
fall into the range of those of designed Zn(II) proteins with metal
sites made up of three protein ligands (Table ).

Comparison of the X-ray crystal structure of [Hg(II)]S[Zn(II)(H2O/OH–)]N(CSL9PenL23H)3n+ (left,
PDB entry 3PBJ) with a PyMOL model of [Zn(II)(H2O/OH–)]N(TRIL2WL23H)3n+ lacking the HgS3 structural site (right, based on PDB entry 3PBJ). This figure was
reproduced from ref (). Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.

Properties of Zn(II)-His3 Sites in TRI Peptides
design complex	Kd(Zn(II)) (M) at
pH 7.5	Kd(Zn(II)) (M) at pH 9.0	pNPA hydrolysis kcat/KM (M–1 s–1)	KM (mM)	KI (M)	
[Zn(II)(H2O/OH–)]N(TRIL2WL23H)3n+	0.6 ± 0.1	0.24 ± 0.02	25 ± 2	2.1 ± 0.2	0.34 ± 0.01	
[Hg(II)]S[Zn(II)(H2O/OH–)]N(TRIL9CL23H)3n+	0.8 ± 0.1	0.22 ± 0.06	31 ± 4	1.7 ± 0.5	0.32 ± 0.01	
[Zn(II)(H2O/OH–)]N[Hg(II)]S(TRIL9HL23C)3n+	∼8	0.8 ± 0.3	24 ± 3	1.2 ± 0.2	0.20 ± 0.01	
[Hg(II)]S[Zn(II)(H2O/OH–)]N(TRIL9CL19H)3n+	3.7 ± 1.3	0.4 ± 0.2	27 ± 5	2.8 ± 0.4	0.36 ± 0.01	
From ref ().

In 50 mM HEPES buffer and 0.1 M
Na2SO4.

In 50 mM CHES buffer and 0.1 M Na2SO4.

Maximal kcat/KM assuming 100% Zn–hydroxide
complex.

For pNPA hydrolysis
at pH 9.5 in 50 mM CHES buffer and 0.1 M Na2SO4 at 25 °C.

Inhibition
constant for pNPA hydrolysis by acetate at pH 8.5
in 50 mM CHES buffer
and 0.1 M Na2SO4 at 25 °C.

We also chose to examine product
inhibition of pNPA hydrolysis in our de novo-designed
system. Acetate anion was
used as the inhibitor because of its charge and relatively small size
compared to those of the other p-nitrophenol/p-nitrophenolate (depending on pH) products. The competitive
inhibition constants (KI’s) obtained
at pH 8.5 for [Hg(II)]S[Zn(II)(H2O/OH–)]N(TRIL9CL23H)3n+ and [Zn(II)(H2O/OH–)]N(TRIL2WL23H)3n+ are similar within error (0.32 ± 0.01 and 0.34 ± 0.01
M, respectively). Notably, the concentration
of acetate required to inhibit this reaction is quite high, demonstrating
that product inhibition is not an issue for our model protein, despite
its relatively small size compared to the sizes of native proteins,
under the conditions of our experiments. This is contrary to synthetic
small molecule model complexes, which often have issues with product
inhibition. Further, it should be noted that the KI for the designed system is also higher than that for
CA (KI = 0.085 M for noncompetitive acetate
inhibition at pH 7.55).− Acknowledging the different
inhibition mechanisms, we find this is likely due to the presence
of a substrate-binding pocket in CA whereas the designed system does
not have a discrete binding pocket and has tighter packing interactions
around the Zn(II) center. In both systems, the inhibitory effect decreases
with an increase in pH, presumably because of competition with hydroxide.

There are now several examples of designed hydrolytic enzymes.
Although none are truly de novo with regard to the scaffold into which
they were designed, there are two that may be considered de novo sites
designed into preexisting native protein scaffolds (this excludes
designs such as the redesigned ZF sites described earlier). The Baker
group reported a computationally redesigned mouse adenosine deaminase
with a ZnHis3Asp site (trigonal bipyramidal geometry with
one open coordination site), which could catalyze hydrolysis of an
organophosphate substrate, diethyl 7-hydroxycoumarinyl (DECP), with
a catalytic efficiency of 9750 M–1 s–1 after directed evolution. The wild-type
enzyme showed no acceleration for DECP hydrolysis over buffer at &lt;20
μM enzyme, suggesting a kcat/KM of ∼10–3 M–1 s–1. The template protein for this model, although
also a hydrolytic Zn(II) enzyme, has distinct transition state geometry,
leaving group character, and inherent reactivity at the substrate
electrophilic center. Although the primary coordination environment
around the metal has not been changed, this design demonstrates an
effective approach to introducing new reactivity into an existing
metalloenzyme without relying on preexisting activity and demonstrating
the substantial effects that the surrounding protein structure can
have on the activity of the “same” metal site. Despite
the high hydrolytic activity, we cannot directly compare this system
to ours given the different substrates and also the distinct coordination
environments. However, the Kuhlman group later reported the design
of a ZnHis3 site at the interface between two copies of
the Rab4-binding domain of Rabenosyn that can catalyze both pNPA and pNPP hydrolysis (Figure ). This work involved
the use of computational methods to introduce a metal-binding site
onto the surface of a monomeric protein to direct the formation of
a dimer. Two His residues from one monomer and two from the other
make up what was intended to be a ZnHis4 site. The goal
of the design was to use metal binding to improve the computational
design of protein–protein interfaces, because metals can form
stronger interactions with certain residues than simple protein–protein
hydrogen bonds or van der Waals contacts. The approach is similar to that taken by the Tezcan group, as discussed
previously.,, When the X-ray crystal structure unexpectedly revealed a ZnHis3 site at the interface, with tartrate filling the open coordination
site, the authors tested the system for hydrolytic activity. At pH
8.5, the designed Zn(II) homodimer catalyzes the hydrolysis of pNPA with a rate of 0.22 s–1 and a KM of 0.47 mM. As for [Hg(II)]S[Zn(II)(H2O/OH–)]N(TRIL9CL23H)3n+, the rate of hydrolysis is
pH-dependent, increasing with an increase in pH and MID1-Zn (metal
interface design with zinc) has a kinetic pKa of 8.2 ± 0.1 and a maximal efficiency of 630 ±
90 M–1 s–1. The authors demonstrate
that mutating some of the surrounding residues to Glu results in a
closed coordination sphere and a corresponding loss of activity (supporting
a Zn–OH– mechanism). Product inhibition constants
were not reported; however, given the relatively open metal site in
this structure and the increased Lewis acidity of Zn(II), it is reasonable
to expect this designed zinc site will be more strongly inhibited
by acetate anion than [Hg(II)]S[Zn(II)(H2O/OH–)]N(TRIL9CL23H)3n+. MID1-Zn can also effectively catalyze
the hydrolysis of pNPP (14 M–1 s–1 at pH 8.5), although it is an intrinsically less
reactive substrate. Notably, the KM for
this reaction is 40-fold lower (12 μM), probably because of
electrostatic interactions between the positively charged active site
and the negatively charged phosphate group. Product inhibition of
this reaction would likely be even more potent than for pNPA because it is a dianionic phosphate product that could bind to
Zn(II). The authors discuss the importance of an apolar substrate-binding
cleft around the active Zn(II) center in achieving these efficiencies.
The presence of tartrate in the crystal structure highlighted a binding
pocket ∼6 Å wide and 4 Å deep around the open coordination
site of the Zn(II) center. Many synthetic models are relatively ineffective
given that they have no such binding cleft, although this can be improved
somewhat in apolar solvents (and under micellar conditions), which
can simulate the apolarity of an active site cleft. The maximal efficiency of MID1-Zn is 20-fold higher than
that of [Hg(II)]S[Zn(II)(H2O/OH–)]N(TRIL9CL23H)3n+. One potential reason is the size of the active site; although
there is room for substrate binding in [Hg(II)]S[Zn(II)(H2O/OH–)]N(TRIL9CL23H)3n+, it is in a hydrophobic core
and not open to solvent as is the interface site in MID1-Zn. Further,
although we do not yet understand the source of the differences in
the kinetic pKa values, it has been suggested
that the lower the pKa, the more hydrolytically
active the site will be [because Zn(II) will be a better Lewis acid]. Regardless, both designs display hydrolytic
activity close to that of the fastest CA isozyme and competitive with
both mutants of CAII and other CA isozymes with varying catalytic
activities, making these the first examples of highly efficient designed
metalloproteins with efficiencies that fall in the range expected
for many native metalloenzymes. We have already discussed the possibilities
of designing secondary hydrogen bonding interactions into [Hg(II)]S[Zn(II)(H2O/OH–)]N(TRIL9CL23H)3n+, like Thr199 in CA, for matching the activity of the fastest isozyme;
however, in the case of MID1-Zn, one may imagine that if the same
increase in efficiency can be achieved by adding hydrogen bonding
interactions, then in theory the design could surpass the activity
of CAII.

X-ray crystal structure of MID1-zinc, a designed protein with a
metal-mediated protein interface. The red mesh represents the active
site cleft above the open coordination site of the ZnHis3 metal site. This figure was reproduced from ref (). Copyright 2012 American
Chemical Society.

Although examination
of the hydrolysis of pNPA
is informative, it is not equal to the native, evolved reaction of
CA, CO2 hydration. No other designed protein has yet reported
CO2 hydration, but we have shown that [Hg(II)]S[Zn(II)(H2O/OH–)]N(TRIL9CL23H)3n+ can
catalyze this reaction at pH 9.5 with an efficiency of ∼1.8
× 105 M–1 s–1 and
a rate of ∼1800 s–1. These kinetic parameters represent a complex that is certainly
faster than any previous structurally related small molecule model
complex.− More significantly, this catalytic efficiency falls close (∼1.7-fold
lower than that of CAIII and ∼60-fold lower than that of CAXIII)
to the range of efficiencies achieved by nature with the different
CA isozymes (kcat/KM ranging from 3.0 × 105 to 1.5 × 108 M–1 s–1). Further, the design remains only ∼500-fold
less than CAII, which is the fastest of the CA isozymes, therefore
representing the most rigorous criterion. These results make this
the first hydrolytic metalloenzyme designed from scratch that is competitive
with one of the most efficient known natural enzymes. This work clearly
demonstrates that it is possible to remove the active site from a
native enzyme, embed it into an entirely different and minimized fold
while retaining a structured “proteinlike” environment,
and still achieve significant catalytic activity similar to those
of highly evolved native metalloenzymes.

Now that we have learned
that a minimal model of the native enzyme’s
active site can achieve a significant amount of hydrolytic activity,
we are interested in gaining the remaining few hundred-fold difference
between our design and CAII. We have already discussed several design
examples illustrating the importance of secondary interactions. Although
we have successfully achieved a first-coordination-sphere model, we
have yet to incorporate any of the many surrounding interactions that
exist in CAII, mainly hydrogen bonding networks (Figure ). When we compare our model with mutant CAs, such
as the T199A mutant [where the hydrogen bond to the Zn(II)-coordinating
solvent molecule has been removed], little to no difference in efficiency
is observed. Approximately 100-fold is lost for the CAII T199A mutant
for both pNPA hydrolysis and CO2 hydration,
although the importance of the full hydrogen bond network including
Thr199 and also Glu106, as described earlier, should be recognized
because it is likely that more than a single hydrogen bond will be
needed., Further, the pKa for these mutants can increase by 1.5–2 pH units, reaching
that of the model. Therefore, it will be necessary to incorporate
secondary interactions into this designed system. However, the attainment
of hydrogen bonding channels such as those that would be required
may be dependent on the location of the metal site in the 3SCC and
other considerations, such as solvent and substrate access and metal
binding affinities. To this end, we chose to first examine how the
location of our minimal active site model may affect the catalytic
efficiency for pNPA hydrolysis, kinetic pKa, solvent and substrate access, rate, and Zn(II)
binding affinities. Few studies have
taken a similar approach in which the location of a single metal-binding
site is varied throughout a designed structure.,, One example of a de novo protein in which
this was done resulted in only one well-folded scaffold that demonstrated
a 1:1 binding stoichiometry for Zn(II) to the protein (DS119 with
βαβ structure, as described earlier in this Current
Topic). The redesign of Trx to incorporate
a ZnHis2Cys2 site discussed earlier is an example
in which the location of the site was varied and used to compare the
effects on metal binding affinity and structural stability. Another example in which the effects of site
location on catalysis were examined also involved the redesign of
Trx, this time for the incorporation of a mononuclear non-heme iron
site for superoxide dismutase function. In both cases, the location of the site was observed to have significant
effects on metal binding [for Zn(II)] and function (for the iron site).

We chose to perform complete kinetic analyses on two other sequences.
The first was TRIL9HL23C, in which the catalytic site
has been moved from the C-terminus to the N-terminus (Figure b). The anticipated
difference in this design is the relative exposure of the open coordination
site on Zn(II) to the solvent. According to the crystal structure
of [Hg(II)]S[Zn(II)(H2O/OH–)]N(CSL9PenL23H)3n+, the coordinated solvent molecule in the Zn(II)
active site is oriented toward the N-terminus, or into the hydrophobic
interior of the 3SCC. Assuming the orientation of the site remains
constant when moved from position 23 to position 9, we may expect
the coordinated solvent molecule to continue pointing toward the N-terminus,
but given its shorter distance from position 9, it may be more exposed
to the solvent. Indeed, kinetic analysis of pNPA
hydrolysis by this complex yields a reduced KM (from ∼2 to ∼1 mM for the L23H sites), representative
of increased substrate access (Table ). The
kinetic pKa has not changed (9.2 ±
0.1), suggesting that the Lewis acidity has not been altered relative
to that of the L23H site, and the maximal catalytic efficiency is
approximately the same (24 ± 3 M–1 s–1); however, the rate has also decreased ∼50% (to 0.020 ±
0.002 s–1) relative to that of [Hg(II)]S[Zn(II)(H2O/OH–)]N(TRIL9CL23H)3n+ at pH
9.5 (0.04 ± 0.01 s–1). The Zn(II) binding affinity
for this “upside-down” peptide is also decreased, ∼10-fold
relative to that of [Hg(II)]S[Zn(II)(H2O/OH–)]N(TRIL9CL23H)3n+ at pH 7.5 (Kd ∼ 8 μM) and by ∼4-fold at pH 9.0 (Kd = 0.8 ± 0.3 μM). While the KM suggests our hypothesis of increasing substrate
access by moving the site to position 9 is correct, another method
was needed for validation. To this end, we studied the product inhibition
for pNPA hydrolysis using the acetate anion at pH
8.5, as described above for [Hg(II)]S[Zn(II)(H2O/OH–)]N(TRIL9CL23H)3n+ (KI = 0.32 ± 0.01 M) and [Zn(II)(H2O/OH–)]N(TRIL2WL23H)3n+ (KI = 0.34 ± 0.01 M). While
these are equivalent within the error, that obtained for [Zn(II)(H2O/OH–)]N[Hg(II)]S(TRIL9HL23C)3n+ decreases
to 0.20 ± 0.01 M, providing stronger evidence for increased levels
of solvent, substrate, and now inhibitor access to the Zn(II) site
at position 9. Despite this increased level of access to the active
Zn(II) site, the kinetic pKa suggests
the Lewis acidity has not changed relative to that of the L23H sites,
implying that site access may not play a large role in tuning pKa values in this system.

Comparison of the X-ray
crystal structure of (a) [Hg(II)]S[Zn(II)(H2O/OH–)]N(CSL9PenL23H)3n+ (PDB
entry 3PBJ) with PyMOL models of (b) [Zn(II)(H2O/OH–)]N[Hg(II)]S(TRIL9HL23C)3n+ based on the coordinates
of PDB entry 2JGO() and (c) [Hg(II)]S[Zn(II)(H2O/OH–)]N(TRIL9CL19H)3n+ based on the coordinates of
PDB entry 3PBJ. Models were prepared in PyMOL using the mutagenesis option and
PyMOL’s rotamer library. This
figure was adapted from ref ().

The next sequence we
designed to study the effects of position
on the active site is TRIL9CL19H. In this sequence, the active site is also moved closer
to the N-terminus, but only by a few residues, from an a position to a d position in the heptad repeat and also
further into the interior of the 3SCC (Figure c). Because various thiolate conformations of Cys residues (in a vs d sites) in the TRI peptides
have strongly affected the pKa’s
for Cd(II), Hg(II), and Pb(II) binding,,, we hypothesized that similar
behavior could occur with His residue substitutions and Zn(II) binding.
Also, moving the site further into the interior could affect the hydrophobicity
surrounding the site, the substrate access, and the folding of the
entire complex. CD studies confirmed that TRIL9CL19H
remained well-folded despite moving the large His residues closer
to the center of the assembly. The binding affinity of Zn(II) for
[Hg(II)]S(TRIL9CL19H)3n– falls between those for the L23H sites and
the L9H site and follows the same trend with pH (Kd of 3.7 ± 1.3 μM at pH 7.5 and 0.4 ±
0.2 μM at pH 9.0). The maximal catalytic efficiency for pNPA hydrolysis is approximately the same as the others,
27 ± 5 M–1 s–1, but the pKa has increased to 9.6 ± 0.1 (Table ). This increase may be due to altering the conformation
of the His residues or because the metal site has been moved farther
into the interior of the 3SCC. The KM has
slightly increased to ∼2.5 mM, and the maximal kcat is now estimated to be ∼0.076 s–1 (relative to an average of ∼0.054 s–1 for
the L23H sites and only ∼0.030 s–1 for L9H).
The acetate inhibition constant is approximately the same as for the
L23H sites, 0.36 ± 0.01 M.

Overall, the position of the
Zn(II) active site along the 3SCC
affects the binding affinities; rates; substrate, solvent, and inhibitor
access; and kinetic pKa values but does
not collectively change the overall catalytic efficiency significantly.
A relatively small ∼10-fold variation is observed in the binding
affinities between each of the sites, consistent with other designed
proteins, supporting a potential limit to the affinity that can be
achieved with three protein ligands and no further stabilizing interactions.
The kinetic pKa is highest for the site
most central to the 3SCC, although all of the pKa values remain at least 2 units higher than that for CAII
(6.8). The catalytic rates follow a
trend, where the lowest maximal kcat is
observed for the most solvent-accessible site in TRIL9HL23C
and the highest for the probably least solvent-accessible site in TRIL9CL19H. It is an important finding for protein design
that simply moving the active site along the sequence of a helical
structure can control solvent and substrate accessibility while not
diminishing the maximal catalytic efficiency. These modifications
can potentially be used to control substrate selectivity, a desirable
feature of native enzymes. Regardless of these differences, the overall
catalytic efficiency for the metal complex of each sequence is retained,
suggesting that this minimal first-coordination-sphere Zn(II) site
in a helical structure is all that is required to attain significant
hydrolytic activity. This is especially important for the next steps
of this design series involving the incorporation of hydrogen bonding
channels and stabilizing secondary interactions because one can alter
the position of the active site to maximize the potential for such
interactions.

Conclusions
The methodology for
attaining a stable mononuclear Zn(II) site
with the desired coordination geometry is now well-established, although
there is minimal success at incorporating second-sphere interactions., Recent work has provided several examples of designed hydrolytic
zinc enzymes, prepared through a variety of routes and leading to
a deeper understanding of the structure–function relationship
in zinc metalloproteins. On the basis of our de novo-designed system,
it seems that a significant amount of hydrolytic activity can be achieved
by simply harnessing the inherent catalytic power of Zn(II) within
a well-defined protein structure (coiled coils). A first-coordination-sphere
match, in which the binding ligands are three neutral His residues,
is enough to achieve a modest binding affinity (Kd on the order of ∼10–6 M) and
substantial catalytic activity, and only small variations are observed
depending on the surrounding structure. The current challenge is to
fine-tune such sites so as to match the properties of native zinc
enzymes fully with higher binding affinities, kinetic pKa values in a physiological pH range, and higher catalytic
activities. Mutagenesis studies of native enzymes have clearly indicated
the importance of surrounding hydrogen bonding networks to all active
site properties, and CA, in particular, has proven to be a powerful
model enzyme for understanding the effects of many of these interactions.
However, similar first coordination spheres are found in a variety
of different proteins with various functions, and native enzymes can
often accommodate a mutation by replacing the lost residue with a
similar interaction, indicating that the bulk of the protein matrix
in native proteins can hide potentially important structural features
and patterns. Now that primary Zn(II) sites can be modeled in small,
stable designed protein scaffolds with efficient enzymelike hydrolytic
activities, the feat of truly building a mononuclear zinc enzyme from
the bottom up, uncovering these hidden structural features, and including
specific hydrogen bonding networks and substrate selectivity, may
be addressed.

Here we have highlighted the presence of similar
binding sites
in proteins across a range of zinc enzymes (with an emphasis on the
ZnHis3 site), but it should be recognized that these MHis3 sites are also present in other metalloproteins, including
those with redox activity. Specifically, CuHis3 sites are
found in enzymes such as peptidylglycine α-hydroxylating monooxygenase
(for electron transfer), Cu nitrite
reductase (CuNiR, for redox catalysis), and amine oxidase and quercetin 2,3-dioxygenase (for O2 activation). It is intriguing
that a metal site with the same primary structure in three different
enzymes can be tuned for this variety of functions. Unlike hydrolytic
sites, redox sites are more challenging to design as one must account
for the structural changes associated with changing metal oxidation
states. We have reported the design and characterization of a CuHis3 site in the same scaffold as described earlier for Zn(II)
binding in the absence of a structural site (TRIL2WL23H). While both Cu(I) and Cu(II) complexes are formed
and have been well-characterized, these do not appear to model the
coordination geometries of native copper enzymes like CuNiR as faithfully
as the corresponding designed ZnHis3 site does for CA.
Further, while catalytic activity relevant to the CuNiR system can
be achieved, it is ∼107-fold lower than that of
native CuNiR, whereas the designed Zn(II) system is only ∼102-fold less efficient than native CA. This illustrates two
important points. Hydrolytic Zn(II) sites will, in general, be more
amenable to design strategies as only one oxidation level needs to
be accurately reproduced, and simply placing the three minimal His
residues into a protein environment does not ensure that high activity
will be achieved in every case, with every metal. From this perspective,
the development of a deep understanding of and attention to the secondary
coordination environment is likely critical for the most successful
metalloprotein design.

Author Present Address
† M.L.Z.:
Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02139.

V.L.P. thanks the
National Institutes of Health for support of this research (ES012236).
M.L.Z. thanks the National Institutes of Health Chemistry-Biology
Interface Training Program and the University of Michigan Rackham
Graduate School for support of this research.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
CAcarbonic anhydrase

PDBProtein Data Bank

pNPAp-nitrophenyl acetate

MMPmatrix metalloproteinase

ITCisothermal titration calorimetry

ZFzinc finger

Bpy-Ala(2,2′-bipyridin-5-yl)alanine

3SCCthree-stranded
coiled coil

Trxthioredoxin

MBPCmetal binding protein complex

Phen1,10′-phenanthroline

DFdue ferri

pNPPp-nitrophenyl phosphate

CDcircular dichroism

CSCoilSer

DECPdiethyl 7-hydroxycoumarinyl

MID1-Znmetal interface design with zinc

CuNiRcopper nitrite reductase.

