Tuberculosis
(TB) is an infectious
disease caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis that results in over a
million deaths annually., According to a report
published by the WHO, one-third of the world’s population is
latently infected with Mtb, with new infections occurring at a rate
of about one per second., Global tuberculosis
control is facing major challenges today. Current treatments require long-term adherence (at least 6 months)
and are not effective against nonreplicating forms of TB. The emergence of multidrug-resistant (MDR) and
extensive drug-resistant (XDR) strains of Mtb is also a major public
health concern. In addition, coinfection with TB and HIV, especially
in Africa, makes control activities more complex and limited. So,
development of novel and more effective therapeutics is an immediate
and urgent necessity.

Starting with
the first report of penicillin in 1929, the β-lactam
family is the most often prescribed antibacterial family and includes
penicillin derivatives, cephalosporins, monobactams, carbapenems,
and others., Extremely high specificity and low toxicity
has made them essential for the treatment of both Gram-positive and
Gram-negative bacterial infections. This
class of compounds has been rarely used against Mtb, and the lack
of efficacy is caused by the expression of a chromosomally encoded
gene (blaC) that provides resistance to most classes
of β-lactams. BlaC is a class A
β-lactamase (EC 3.5.2.6). It catalyzes
the opening of the β-lactam ring via nucleophilic attack by
an active site serine residue (Ser70) to generate the acyl enzyme
followed by hydrolysis of the ester bond to generate the inactive
ring-opened product.− Carbapenems, like all β-lactam antibacterials that bind to
and inhibit the peptidoglycan cross-linking transpeptidases, were
specifically designed to resist the action of β-lactamases with
activity against penicillins and cephalosporins. All approved carbapenems
that are used clinically for the treatment of bacterial infections
(imipenem, meropenem, ertapenem, doripenem, and biapenem) contain
the 6-α-1R-hydroxyethyl substituent on the
β-lactam ring that sterically blocks binding to other class
A β-lactamases.

Tebipenem
pivoxil (TBPM-PI, ME1211) has been under development
as the first orally available carbapenem for the treatment of otolaryngological
and respiratory infections caused by drug-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae in pediatric patients. It has a 1-(1,3-thiazolin-2-yl)azetidin-3-ylthio
group at the C-2 position (Scheme ) and was
developed by Wyeth Lederle Japan in 1994. TBPM-PI is a prodrug that is quickly hydrolyzed to tebipenem (TEBI),
and the absorption rate of TBPM-PI is higher than that of other prodrug-type
β-lactam antibiotics. Tebipenem
is approved in Japan for treating children, as these oral antibiotics
are often better tolerated than infusions.

Structure of Tebipenem
In our current study, we have performed an in
vitro biochemical characterization of tebipenem (TEBI) with
BlaC. We have
also solved the high-resolution crystal structure of the Michaelis–Menten
complex (1.7 Å) of TEBI and the covalent BlaC acylated adduct
(1.9 Å). These are compared to covalent acyl-adducts of other
carbapenems with BlaC.

Experimental Procedures
Materials
Tebipenem
was kindly provided by Anacor Pharmaceuticals
(Palo Alto, CA). Buffer reagents for crystallography were purchased
from Hampton Research (Aliso Viejo, CA). Unless noted, other chemicals
were from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO).

Cloning and Purification
of WT and Mutant BlaC
The blaC gene was
amplified from genomic M. tuberculosis H37Rv DNA and cloned into pET28 using NdeI and HindIII. BlaC was expressed as an N-terminally truncated
form, lacking the first 40 amino acids, as previously described. The same pET28-based plasmid was used as a template
for site-directed mutagenesis to generate the K73A mutant form of
BlaC. After both of the constructs were
confirmed by sequencing, the plasmids expressing N-terminal His6-tagged BlaC WT and mutant proteins were transformed into Escherichia coli BL21/DE3 cells and cultured in LB
broth at 37 °C. When the culture OD600 reached 0.6,
the cultures were cooled to 16 °C, and protein expression was
induced with 0.5 mM isopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside
(IPTG). After continued shaking for 18 h, cells were harvested, resuspended
in 25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, containing 300 mM NaCl, and disrupted by
sonication. After centrifugation, the soluble extract was loaded onto
a Ni-NTA agarose column (Qiagen) and eluted with 200 mM imidazole
in 25 mm Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, containing 300 mM NaCl. The eluted fractions
were dialyzed against the same buffer without imidazole. To remove
the His-tag, the eluted protein was incubated with thrombin (Novagen
Madison, WI) overnight at 4 °C (1.6 units/mg of protein). The
cleaved protein was separated from the His6-tag peptide
by size-exclusion chromatography using a HiLoad 26/60 Superdex 200
column (GE Healthcare Life Science, Uppsala, Sweden).

Inhibition
Assays
The steady-state hydrolysis of tebipenem
by BlaC was monitored at 297 nm (Δε = 9550 M–1 cm–1). For the inhibition assays, the hydrolysis
of 100 μM nitrocefin was monitored at 486 nm (Δε
= 20 500 M–1 cm–1) with
0.6 nM BlaC in the presence of 1 to 160 μM tebipenem. All assays
were performed in 100 mM MES, pH 6.5, and reactions were initiated
by the addition of BlaC.

The progress curves from the inhibition
assays were fitted to the following equationwhere [P] is the product
concentration, vi and vs correspond to the initial and steady-state velocities,
respectively, and kiso is the apparent
first-order rate constant.

The general inhibition mechanism
is modeled aswhere k1 and k–1 represent the rate constants of the
binding and dissociation of tebipenem and BlaC, and k2 and k3 represent the rate
constants for the acylation and deacylation steps, respectively. kiso, determined from eq , was plotted against tebipenem concentration (eq ) to obtain the values of k2 and k3 as well as K, which is equal
to k–1/k1.

Km and kcat can then be calculated with the eqs  and 

Mass Spectrometric Analysis
BlaC
(50 μM) was
incubated with 50 μM tebipenem at room temperature as previously
described., Mass spectra were determined
after 0, 30, 60, and 90 min incubation times using a 9.6 T Fourier
transform ion cyclotron resonance (FT-ICR) mass spectrometer (Ionspec,
Lake Forest, CA). The molecular weight of the protein species was
calculated for the +25 charge state using the equation m = (m/z × 25) – 25
on the isotopic centroid.

Crystallization
Hanging-drop vapor
diffusion was used
for crystallization of both the WT and K73A BlaC variants. The composition
of the well consisted of 0.1 M HEPES, pH 7.5, and 2 M NH4H2PO4, which makes the final pH of the well
solution 4.1. Protein at a concentration of 12 mg/mL was mixed 1:1
with the well solution and incubated at 10 °C. The mutant was
initially seeded with the native enzyme crystals, and then after iterative
crystal growth, the pure mutant crystals were obtained. Repeated microseeding
resulted in efficient crystal growth as well as improved morphology
to produce diffraction-quality crystals of the mutant enzyme.

Data Collection
and Refinement
Mineral oil was added
to the solution as a cryo-protectant. Diffraction data were collected
from a single frozen crystal using a RAXIS-IV++ detector mounted on
a Rigaku RH-200 rotating anode (copper anode) X-ray generator. The
data were processed using HKL2000., The previous structure of BlaC with bound NXL104 (PDB entry 4HFX) was used to phase the data using the CCP4 software suite. Multiple rounds of structural refinement and
model building were performed in Refmac5, Phenix, and Coot. Structure figures were generated using PyMOL. Atomic coordinates and experimental structure
factors have been deposited in the Protein Data Bank (Table ). Table  lists the data
collection statistics for the structures as well as the final refinement
statistics.

Summary of Data Collection and Refinement
Statistic for the K73A BlaC–Tebipenem and WT BlaC–Tebipenem
Complexes
data collection
statistics	K73A BlaC–tebipenem complex	WT BlaC–tebipenem complex	
 X-ray source	 	rotating anode	rotating anode	
 wavelength (Å)	 	1.5418 (Cu anode)	1.5418 (Cu anode)	
 temperature
(K)	 	100	100	
 resolution range (Å)	 	30.00–1.75	30.00–1.90	
 reflection	 	25 499	20 497	
 completeness (%)	 	97.3	97.3	
 redundancy	 	8.6	3.4	
 space group	 	P212121	P212121	
 unit cell (Å)	
 	a	49.57	49.93	
 	b	67.56	68.03	
 	c	75.11	75.55	
 	 α = β = γ	90.0°	90.0°	
 	 molecules
per a.u.	1	1	
Refinement
statistics	
 	Rwork (%)	15.27	16.73	
 	Rfree (%)	17.83	22.51	
 number
of atoms	
 	 protein (chain A)	2000	2019	
 	 phosphate (chain B)	20	25	
 	 tebipenem (chain T)	25	25	
 	 water (chain W)	323	366	
rms deviation	
 	bond length (Å)	0.008	0.006	
 	 bond angles (deg)	1.363	1.210	
average B-factors (Å2)	
 	 protein main chain	10.21	16.27	
 	 protein side chain	12.42	15.22	
 	 protein whole chain	11.24	17.45	
 	 phosphate	32.37	37.91	
 	 tebipenem	25.59	33.06	
 	 water	24.74	31.60	
PDB accession code	4QB8	4Q8I	
Result and Discussion
Inhibition Studies
We attempted to directly monitor
the steady-state hydrolysis of tebipenem by BlaC at 297 nm. The reaction
rate remained unchanged when the tebipenem concentration was varied
from 2 to 20 μM, suggesting that Km is smaller than 2 μM. The kcat value was estimated to be 0.04 min–1.

Carbapenems
such as meropenem, doripenem, and ertapenem have been demonstrated to be poor substrates
of BlaC. The deacylation step is extremely slow, thus trapping BlaC
as the covalent acyl intermediate. Because of the tight binding of
tebipenem to BlaC, the very slow rate of hydrolysis, and the modest
extinction coefficient, we chose a second assay to determine the kinetic
parameters and rate constants of acylation and deacylation for the
hydrolysis of tebipenem. We performed an inhibition assay, where nitrocefin,
a good substrate of BlaC (kcat ∼
1800 min–1), was used as a reporter for the conversion
of BlaC into the stable acyl adduct. As shown in Figure A, the hydrolysis of nitrocefin by BlaC was inhibited in the
presence of tebipenem in a time- and concentration-dependent manner.
The first-order rate constant kiso was
determined after fitting the progress curves to eq  and then plotted against tebipenem concentration (Figure B). The values of k2 and k3 were determined to be 3.9 and
0.03 min–1, respectively, whereas the dissociation
constant K was 122 μM. We then calculated the
values of kcat (0.03 min–1) and Km (0.8 μM) using eqs  and . In Scheme , we compare the kinetic constants for tebipenem
with meropenem, doripenem, and ertapenem and show the different C2
substitutents. Tebipenem is most similar to doripenem and ertapenem,
with kcat and Km values that are below those of meropenem. Of the C2 substituents,
only the meta-aminobenzoic acid substituent of doripenem makes contact
with the enzyme after isomerization (see
below).

Kinetic Parameters of Carbapenem Hydrolysis by BlaC and Structure
of the C2 Substituent
Determination of the inhibition rate constants. (A) Time-dependent
hydrolysis of nitrocefin in the presence of various concentrations
of tebipenem. The apparent first-order rate constants (kiso) were calculated by fitting the curves to eq . (B) Plot of kiso vs
tebipenem concentration. The data were fit to eq  to obtain k2/K and k3 values.

Mass Spectrometry
Because of the slow deacylation reaction,
the acyl BlaC intermediate could be detected by FT-ICR mass spectrometry.
After incubating the enzyme with an equal amount of tebipenem for
10 min, peak A, corresponding to free BlaC, disappeared, and two new
peaks were observed (Figure ). Peak C corresponds
to the intact tebipenem–BlaC adduct, whereas peak B corresponds
to the adduct minus mass 44, which comes from the covalent intermediate
after a retro-aldol fragmentation to release the C6-hydroxyethyl side
chain as acetaldehyde (Scheme ), as we proposed
originally for meropenem. This fragmentation
also occurs with both doripenem and ertapenem. Interestingly, no breakdown of the covalent intermediate
was seen after 90 min, in contrast to that for the meropenem–BlaC
adduct, suggesting an even slower deacylation
of tebipenem compared to that of meropenem.

Mechanism of Acylation,
Fragmentation, and Hydrolysis of Tebipenem
by BlaC
FT-ICR mass spectra of
BlaC and the (BlaC–tebipenem)25+ covalent adduct.

Structures of the Covalent
and Noncovalent Tebipenem Complexes
Lys73 is involved in
the activation of the acylating nucleophile,
Ser70 (Ambler notation). A mutation of Lys73 to alanine abolishes
the acylation reaction, thus allowing
us to trap the Michaelis–Menten complex by soaking the K73A
BlaC mutant crystal with tebipenem. The three-dimensional structure
was solved at a resolution of 1.75 Å, with Rwork 15.3 and Rfree 17.8 (Table ). In this structure of the tebipenem Michaelis
complex (Figure ), there is clear electron
density corresponding to the intact β-lactam ring, and Ser70
adopts two different conformations (Figure B). The C2 atom of the pyrroline ring is sp2 hybridized,
again confirming that tebipenem is bound, but it is not covalently
attached via Ser70. There are four hydrogen bonds to the tebipenem
carboxylate (Figure C). The side chain hydroxyls
of Thr237 and Thr239 contribute three, whereas a conserved active
site water molecule (W1) contributes the fourth. The hydroxyl
group of Ser70 interacts with the carbonyl of the β-lactam ring,
as does a second active site water molecule (W2) that is involved
in hydrolysis of the acylated enzyme. This same water molecule interacts
with the C6 hydroxyl group. There are an additional two hydrogen bonds
to the C6 hydroxyl group from Glu166 and Ser130. There are no interactions
with the azetidine and thiazoline rings of the C2 substituent that
differentiates tebipenem from other carbapenems.

Crystal structure of
BlaC K73A–tebipenem Michaelis–Menten
complex. (A) Overall backbone structure of BlaC with the bound tebipenem
molecule displayed by atom color (resolution 1.75 Å). (B) Fo – Fc omit
map of the BlaC–tebipenem Michaelis–Menten complex contoured
at 2.0σ. (C) Active site of BlaC–tebipenem Michaelis–Menten
complex showing interactions and interatomic distances between tebipenem
and active site residues.

The extremely slow deacylation, via hydrolysis, of the BlaC–tebipenem
covalent adduct allowed us to structurally characterize the covalent
tebipenem acyl intermediate by soaking the apo WT BlaC crystals with
tebipenem. The three-dimensional structure was solved at a resolution
of 1.9 Å, with Rwork 16.7 and Rfree 22.5 (Table ).
In this structure, Ser70 is covalently linked to the β-lactam
ring-opened tebipenem. The electron density of the covalently bound
tebipenem is shown under the calculated Fo – Fc omit map (Figure B), revealing that the β-lactam ring has been
opened and that the initially formed Δ2 pyrroline
has now isomerized to generate the S-Δ1 pyrroline in which C2 is sp3 hybridized (Scheme ). The S stereochemistry is sterically
preferred, with the C1 methyl group and the C2 substituent in a trans orientation on opposite sides of the pyrroline ring.
This ring-opening and isomerization have been previously observed
for carbapenems reacting with BlaC., The differences
in the orientation of the linked azetidine and thiazoline rings are
the result of the change in the hybridization of the C2 position of
the pyrroline ring. The hydrogen-bonding pattern to the tebipenem
carboxylate and C6 hydroxyethyl group are remarkably similar in the
covalent complex (). The one exception
is that the hydrogen bonding between Ser130 and the C6 hydroxyethyl
group observed in the tebipenem–K73A BlaC Michaelis complex
is replaced in the covalent complex with an interaction between the
hydroxyl group and the ε-amino group of K73, and Ser130 now
hydrogen bonds exclusively to the pyrroline ring nitrogen. Most importantly,
the conserved hydrolytic water (W2) is hydrogen-bonded
to the C6 hydroxyl group, but it has been displaced from its position
in the Michaelis complex and no longer interacts with the carbonyl
group of the ester. This accounts for the stability of the tebipenem
covalent complex to hydrolysis. There are again no significant interactions
between the enzyme and the heteroatoms of either the azetidine or
thiazoline rings. An overlay of the tebipenem Michaelis and covalent
complexes is shown in Figure A.

Crystal structure
of BlaC–tebipenem covalent adduct. (A)
Overall structure of BlaC with the tebipenem covalent adduct displayed
by atom color (resolution 1.9 Å). (B) Fo – Fc omit map of the BlaC–tebipenem
covalent adduct formed at the active site residue Ser70 contoured
at 2.0σ. (C) Active site of BlaC–tebipenem covalent adduct
showing interactions and interatomic distances between tebipenem and
active site residues.

Overlay of the BlaC–tebipenem covalent adduct with the BlaC–tebipenem
Michaelis–Menten complex (A) and the BlaC–tebipenem
covalent adduct with the BlaC–meropenem covalent adduct (B)
to show the significant difference in the orientation of the C2 substituent.

The structures of the covalent
acyl intermediates of BlaC structures
with bound tebipenem and bound meropenem were compared (Figure B). The two structures are extremely similar, with
rmsd values of 0.11 (for all 1669 atoms). The pyrroline rings, carboxylate,
and C6 hydroxyethyl group are superimposable, whereas the C2 side
chains are found in quite different orientations because of their
different chemical composition, and neither makes any contacts with
the protein. The conserved active site hydrolytic water molecule is
also in the same place and shares the same hydrogen-bonding partners
in both structures. This water molecule interacts with the C6 hydroxyl
group and is unable to make a close approach to the carbonyl carbon
of the ester linkage (), ruling
out the possibility that the very slow hydrolysis of bound carbapenems
is due to the potential exclusion of the hydrolytic water molecule
from the active site. The C6 hydroxyethyl substituent common to all
the carbapenems is sterically accommodated at the active site of BlaC
in both the Michaelis complex and in the covalent complex, with few
changes in the interactions observed between the two ().

These biochemical and
structural studies reveal several potential
advantages for the use of tebipenem in the treatment of MDR- and XDR-TB.
The prodrug pivalyl ester is orally available, as opposed to meropenem,
doripenem, and ertapenem. It is rapidly absorbed into intestinal cells and has high bioavailabilty with favorable pharmacokinetics. Tebipenem is an extremely poor substrate for
the sole M. tuberculosis β-lactamase,
BlaC, and hydrolyzes very slowly from the enzyme. The use of meropenem
in combination with the β-lactamase inhibitor clavulanate has
been shown to be effective in the treatment of MDR-TB infected patients, suggesting that tebipenem might also be useful
in the treatment of the disease.

Supporting Information Available
Numbering of tebipenem and
meropenem common atoms used in Table S1; side chain of meropenem;
interactions of tebipenem and meropenem covalent adducts with M. tuberculosis β-lactamase; active site molecular
description of BlaC–tebipenem Michaelis–Menten complex;
and active site molecular description of BlaC–tebipenem covalent
adduct. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500339j_si_001.pdf

Accession Codes
The Protein Data
Bank entry for the WT BlaC–tebipenem adduct is 4Q8I, and that for the
mutant K73A BlaC–tebipenem Michaelis–Menten complex
is 4QB8.

This
work was
supported by NIH grant AI60899 (to J.S.B.).

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank the Almo
lab staff for their support and Dr. Hui
Xiao at Albert Einstein College of Medicine for his assistance in
the FT-ICR analysis.

