The assembly of proteins into
amyloid fibrils is associated with many diseases such as Parkinson’s
disease or Alzheimer’s disease as well as functional processes. The accumulated study of different amyloid-forming
proteins has led to the general observation that amyloids share common
features, including cross-β sheet structure and binding by Congo
red (CR) and thioflavin T (ThT). Atherosclerotic plaques contain significant
amounts of amyloid with a poorly understood composition. Several apolipoproteins (Apos), which bind to
lipoproteins, form amyloid in vitro and are associated
with atherosclerotic plaques. ApoAI in
particular has known mutations linked to atherosclerosis, is found
in atherosclerotic plaques, and forms
amyloid. ApoCII spontaneously forms amyloid
and colocalizes with amyloid-containing human atherosclerotic plaque
tissue.

ApoCIII is predominantly
found on very-low-density lipoprotein
(VLDL), high-density lipoprotein (HDL), and chylomicrons at a plasma concentration of ∼14 μM. A growing body of evidence demonstrates correlations
among ApoCIII, triglycerides, and heart disease., While
ApoCIII has been shown to inhibit lipoprotein lipase and inhibit the uptake of lipoprotein particles by isolated
rat liver, the mechanisms by which ApoCIII
levels impact health are not understood. We explored the possibility
that ApoCIII is amyloidogenic in vitro, as has been
shown for other apolipoproteins, including ApoAI and ApoCII.

A common strategy for promoting amyloid formation is to agitate
while monitoring ThT emission, which is expected to increase if amyloid
forms. Figure A shows ThT intensity increasing
as a function of incubation time for three ApoCIII concentrations,
where an apparent lag and a subsequent exponential growth phase were
observed. Interestingly, lag times did not decrease with increasing
protein concentration as is typically found for amyloid formation
kinetics. The three native Trp residues of ApoCIII can also be used
to probe conformational changes. Trp emission increased, showing kinetic
trends similar to those of ThT (Figure B and
inset). To confirm the presence of amyloid at the end of these experiments,
we used CR, another amyloid-specific dye. A clear shift toward 540
nm is observed, indicating binding (Figure C) and the presence of amyloid. Circular
dichroism spectroscopic data also indicate the presence of a β-sheet
conformation corroborating the presence of amyloid structure (Figure D).

ApoCIII aggregation kinetics simultaneously monitored
by ThT (A)
and Trp (B) fluorescence. Using a 96-well plate, samples in 10 mM
NaPi, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, pH 7.4 buffer, including
a 2 mm glass bead, were incubated at 37 °C with orbital shaking
(1 mm) using a microplate reader. In the inset of panel A, the recombinant
ApoCIII sequence includes a C-terminal hexahistidine tag following
two spacer residues (green). Basic, acidic, and Trp residues are colored
blue, red, and purple, respectively, and α-helical regions are underlined. The inset of panel B shows the
ApoCIII Trp fluorescence (20 μM) at the beginning (T0) and end (Tend) of the experiment.
(C) CR absorption spectra measured in the presence of ApoCIII (2 μM)
at T0 (red) and Tend (black). (D) CD spectra of ApoCIII (20 μM) at T0 (red) and Tend (black) and Tend without ThT (blue).
(E) Sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
results for limited PK digestion at 37 °C for 20 μM ApoCIII
at T0 without PK and with PK for 5 and
60 min (lanes 2–4) and at Tend without
PK and with PK for 5 and 60 min (lanes 5–7).

(A) Representative TEM image at Tend with the indicated scale bar. (B) Electron diffraction
ring with
a spacing of (4.7 Å)−1 for ApoCIII at Tend. (C) Representative AFM image at Tend with the indicated scale bar. Insets of
panels A and C show magnified sections (100 nm) that highlight triangles
and squares. (D) Additional examples and possible models for the triangles
(left) and squares (right).

Proteinase K (PK) was used to probe whether ApoCIII samples
have
proteolytic resistance as would be expected for amyloids (Figure E). Clearly, ApoCIII at Tend is more resistant as an apparent protected band, slightly smaller
than the original monomer, persists after reaction for 1 h, whereas
complete proteolysis was observed for ApoCIII at T0. Mass spectrometry analysis indicates that almost all
ApoCIII residues are incorporated into the core of the structure,
though unambiguous assignments could not be made (Table S1 of the ). Taken together, the
spectroscopic and biochemical data support the finding that ApoCIII
is amyloidogenic.

To visualize the ultrastructural features
of ApoCIII conformations,
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was employed revealing a ribbonlike
morphology with a consistent helical twist (Figure A), though the chirality cannot be determined as TEM images
are projections. A typical interstrand spacing of (4.7 Å)−1 for the β-sheet conformation was measured by
electron diffraction (Figure B), demonstrating
that these amyloid loops contain well-ordered β-sheet structure. This measurement does not distinguish cross-β
structure, which would require alignment of the fibrils and X-ray
diffraction. Though some free ends were observed, most structures
appear to form highly regular loops. An average width of ∼13.5
nm is found (Figure S1 of the ), comparable to widths for ApoCII and
ApoAI. The periodicity was ∼77
nm for ApoCIII segments that appeared to have helical repeats without
sharp kinks (Figure S2 of the ). For comparison, periodicities were somewhat shorter, ∼53
and 25–60 nm for ApoCII and ApoAI, respectively.

These TEM images are notable
for their clarity, allowing us to
interpret finer features in the ribbonlike morphology and identify
novel structures not previously reported. Panels A and D of Figure  reveal a triangular conformation in which the ribbon
may be joined at the ends in an antiparallel manner as in a Möbius
strip and a square conformation in which the ends appear aligned in
a parallel manner. Proposed models are shown in Figure D, though the direction of the folds cannot be definitively
inferred from the TEM images. If the ribbons are continuous, this
would suggest that the underlying structure has rotational symmetry.

In general, it is difficult to follow the contour of the longer
structures as there are ambiguous sites regarding the direction of
the ribbon fold, resulting from either a seam, a kink in the ribbon,
a loss of clarity due to viewing the ribbon edge-on, or damage induced
by the staining process. Loop closure could have implications for
the mechanism of amyloid formation as it may trap the protein conformational
state by blocking fibril end growth., One unanswered
question is whether the loops are continuous β-sheets or connected
end to end through different types of interactions.

ApoCIII
loops were imaged by atomic force microscopy (AFM) to verify
structures are formed in the absence of a stain (Figure C). Clearly, triangles, squares, and loops are observed (Figure C). A height of ∼2–3 nm is measured
(Figure S3 of the ), comparable to those of ApoCII loops, while the periodicity was ∼35 nm (Figure S4 of the ).

Apart from the
comparisons to ApoCII and oxidized ApoAI
amyloid ribbons, the triangular and square
conformations we observed are remarkably
reminiscent of those previously reported for other amyloid-forming
proteins. For example, loops formed by 1:1 A53T/WT α-synuclein
(α-syn) have a diameter of ∼50 nm, a periodicity of ∼23
nm, and a height of ∼2–4 nm. TEM images of α-syn loops formed in the presence of trifluoroethanol
have similar dimensions as well as an apparent helical twist.

ApoAI, ApoCII, and ApoCIII all adopt a
helical conformation when
they are bound to lipid membranes but there is no obvious relationship
that would explain why they form loops while other proteins do not.
They do share some general properties of interest that may be irrelevant
to loop formation. All three proteins are found on HDL and can remodel
lipids into “nanodiscs” that are similar to HDL particles
in size and shape. ApoAI is directly
implicated as an important amyloid component of atherosclerotic plaques, while ApoCIII levels have been correlated with
atherosclerosis; however, whether ApoCIII
plays a direct role in the formation of these plaques is unknown.
Of note, ApoCII in the presence of lipids can progress from a looped
morphology to straight fibrils. It has
also been shown that the propensity of ApoAI to form fibrils is modulated
by mutations and oxidation. Further studies of ApoCIII should consider the
effect of lipids as well as oxidation as they may be critical factors
for amyloid formation in atherosclerotic plaques.

In conclusion,
we have presented evidence that recombinant ApoCIII
forms amyloid, albeit a rather unusual looped structure, which is
stable at physiologically relevant concentrations of 5–20 μM
and blood pH. Numerous features of amyloids have been characterized:
ThT and CR binding, β-sheet structure determined by CD and electron
diffraction data, and protease resistance. TEM and AFM demonstrate
that ApoCIII forms ribbonlike amyloid loops, and we postulate that
they are related to those reported for two other apolipoproteins,
ApoCII and ApoAI. Apart from raising the possibility of a biological
role for ApoCIII amyloid, we have identified novel loops in the shapes
of triangles and squares. Future work is needed to determine how these
structures play a role in the mechanism of amyloid assembly and to
address whether these conformations are also related to potentially
toxic oligomers (intermediates) characterized for other amyloid-forming
proteins.

Supporting Information Available
Experimental details, Table
S1, and Figures S1–S4. This material is available free of charge
via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500502d_si_001.pdf

Supported by
the Intramural Research Program at the National Institutes of Health,
the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, and the National Institute
of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases.

The authors
declare no competing financial interests.

Acknowledgments
TEM, CD, and MS data were collected
in the National Heart,
Lung and Blood Institute Electron Microscopy, Biophysics, and Biochemistry
Cores, respectively. We thank Philippa Talmud (University College
London, London, U.K.) for providing the ApoCIII plasmid and Alasdair
Steven (National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin
Diseases) for the use of the Philip CM120 electron microscope for
electron diffraction.

