7B2 is a small secretory protein that is known to be required for
the productive maturation of the subtilisin-like endoprotease prohormone
convertase 2 (proPC2).− Extensive work by our group and other groups has
established the motifs and domains required for the interaction between
7B2 and proPC2.− The 7B2 protein itself is cleaved, most likely by a furin-like enzyme,
to yield the 21 kDa amino-terminal domain and a 31-residue carboxy-terminal
fragment., The C-terminal domain, also known as the
CT peptide, is a potent inhibitor of PC2, whereas the N-terminal domain is essential for the effective maturation
of proPC2 within the secretory pathway.

Apart from its role
in transporting folded proPC2 to the Golgi
apparatus in neuroendocrine cells (reviewed in ref ()), 7B2 has been shown to
have antiaggregant properties,, blocking oligomer formation
and aggregation of both proPC2 and insulin-like
growth factor 1 (IGF1). We have recently
shown that co-incubation of neurodegeneration-related peptides and
proteins, such as β-amyloid, α-synuclein, and tau, with
micromolar quantities of 7B2 results in inhibition of fibril formation
(Helwig et al., manuscript submitted for publication). Recent proteomics
studies have provided evidence that the 7B2 protein may be a potential
biomarker for early detection of Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s
disease.− These results, coupled with the selective expression of 7B2 in endocrine,
neural, and neuroendocrine cells, led
to the hypothesis that this protein might be a member of a novel family
of secretory chaperones that prevent the self-association of proteins
with tendencies toward aggregation, such as neurodegenerative-related
proteins (Helwig et al., manuscript submitted for publication).

To date, nothing is known about the three-dimensional structure
of this 186-residue protein. The minimal domain necessary for the
biological function of 7B2 with proPC2 is a 36-residue internal peptide
that consists of a proline-rich segment, a putative α helix,
and a disulfide bridge. Mutation of the
fourth proline residue in the PDPPNPCP stretch (residues 88–95;
numbering does not include the signal peptide) disrupts the ability
of the protein to facilitate the maturation of proPC2. The structural motifs responsible for inhibition of amyloid
aggregation are not yet known though clearly involve the N-terminal
domain (Helwig et al., manuscript submitted for publication).

All vertebrate 7B2 sequences are extremely well conserved, with
almost 97% sequence identity. However, the level of sequence identity
between vertebrate 7B2 and the Caenorhabditis elegans protein is low, only 20–23% overall. An interesting feature
of the C. elegans 7B2 sequence is the conservation
of the signature proline-rich motif, PPNPCP, which has been identified
as a critical domain for facilitation of proPC2 maturation. It is not clear whether the large differences
in the amino acid sequence of C. elegans 7B2 alter
its secondary structure as compared to vertebrate 7B2s. Despite the
low level of overall sequence conservation, the physiological functions
of the C. elegans protein with regard to proPC2 appear
to be similar to those of the vertebrate proteins.

To gain a better understanding of structural contributions
to the
physiological functions of the full-length and truncated forms of
the 7B2 protein, we examined potential differences in folding states
between each of these variants, shown in Figure , using intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence, 1-anilino-8-naphthalenesulfonate
(ANS) binding, circular dichroism, and nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) spectroscopy. The hydrodynamic properties of 21 kDa rat 7B2
were also analyzed using gel filtration chromatography. This was followed
by primary structural analysis of C. elegans and rat 27 kDa 7B2s using the disorder prediction algorithm PONDR
VL-XT. Our data indicate that 7B2 is
an intrinsically disordered protein with a tendency toward oligomerization
at high protein concentrations.

Domain structures for the proteins used
in our study.

Methods
Expression and Purification of 7B2 Variants
Rat and C. elegans 7B2 variants previously cloned into the pQE30
vector,, were subcloned
into the pET45b(+) vector with an attached N-terminal hexahistidine
tag. The vectors containing the different 7B2 constructs, rat 27 kDa,
rat 21 kDa, and C. elegans 27 kDa, were transformed
into the Bl21(DE3) strain of Escherichia coli (GE
Healthcare). Expression was induced by the addition of isopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) to a final concentration of
1 mM. The cells were harvested by centrifugation after being induced
for 4 h, pelleted, and stored at −80 °C. The pellets were
thawed and lysed using BugBuster Protein Extraction Reagent (Novagen)
containing protease inhibitors (Complete EDTA-free,
Roche). The lysed cells were centrifuged for 50 min at 13000 rpm.
The supernatant was loaded onto a 5 mL HisTrap HP column (GE Healthcare),
equilibrated with 20 mM Tris-HCl, 0.1 M NaCl, and 5 mM imidazole (pH
7.9). The column was washed with 5 volumes of the same buffer containing
500 mM NaCl and eluted with 175 mM imidazole. The protein was diluted
five times in 20 mM bis-Tris, 2 mM CaCl2, and 0.4 mM octyl
glucoside (pH 6.5) and loaded onto a 1 mL MonoQ column (GE Healthcare).
The column was washed and eluted with 10 volumes of the same buffers
containing first 100 mM NaCl and then 500 mM NaCl. The eluted fractions
were desalted into the final buffer with a HiPrep 26/10 column (GE
Healthcare) and concentrated using an Amicon Ultra 30K spin concentrator
(Millipore). The purity and integrity of the 7B2 variants were assessed
by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(SDS–PAGE) and matrix-assisted laser desorption mass spectroscopy
(MALDI-TOF MS) at the University of Maryland, Baltimore, mass spectrometry
core facility. The theoretical molecular masses for recombinant 7B2
and its derivatives are 21901 Da (27 kDa WT), 17611 Da (21 kDa WT),
and 23093 Da (27 kDa C. elegans). These compare well
with the mass spectroscopic experimentally derived molecular masses
of 21921.6 and 17674.4 Da for the 27 and 21 kDa 7B2 proteins, respectively.

To obtain uniformly 15N-labeled protein samples, the
7B2 expression vectors were grown in minimal medium supplemented with
0.6 g/L 15NH4Cl (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories)
and purified using the procedures described above.

The eukaryotic
21 kDa 7B2 protein was purified from CHO cells stably
overexpressing 7B2. Conditioned serum-free OptiMem medium from CHO
cells was diluted 2.5 times in 20 mM bis-Tris, 2 mM CaCl2, and 0.4 mM octyl glucoside (pH 6.5) and loaded onto a DEAE column
(GE Healthcare). The column was washed with the with 7 and 12 % of
the same buffer containing 1 M sodium acetate. The fractions that
were eluted with 200 mM sodium acetate were subsequently diluted 10
times and subjected to Mono Q chromatography, HiPrep 26/10 desalting,
and gel filtration following the same procedures described above for
the purification of the bacterial recombinant 7B2 protein.

Size Exclusion Chromatography
One hundred microliters
of 21 kDa 7B2 at a concentration of either 0.5 or 2 mg/mL was injected
onto a Superdex 75 10/300 GL column connected to a Superdex 200 10/300GL
(GE Healthcare) column, previously equilibrated with 20 mM bis-Tris,
150 mM NaCl, 2 mM CaCl2, and 0.4 mM octyl glucoside (pH
6.5). The gel filtration column was calibrated using Bio-Rad standards,
including thyroglobulin (670 kDa), bovine gamma globulin (158 kDa),
chicken ovalbumin (44 kDa), equine myoglobulin (17 kDa), and vitamin
B12 (1.35 kDa). The elution volumes of the standards were
used to determine the apparent molecular mass of 7B2. The gel filtration
experiments were conducted with two independent recombinant 7B2 preparations.

In Vitro Cross-Linking
The 7B2 gel filtration peaks
were treated with 0.1% glutaraldehyde for 30 min at 4 °C. The
reactions were quenched by the addition of 1 M Tris for 15 min at
room temperature. The samples were then analyzed by SDS–PAGE
(4 to 20% gradient). The 27 and 21 kDa 7B2 proteins were also cross-linked
with 0.1% glutaraldehyde at concentrations ranging from 30 to 7.5
μM for 30 min at 4 °C. Samples were separated on a 4 to
20% gradient SDS–PAGE gel. The
images acquired by scanning of the SDS–PAGE gel were digitized
using UN-SCAN-IT version 6.1 (Silk Scientific Inc.).

Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometry
(MALDI-TOF MS)
7B2 samples were mixed in a 1:1 (v/v) ratio
with a sinapinic acid matrix (Thermo-Scientific). Aliquots of 1 μL
were spotted on the MALDI-TOF plate using the dried droplet method,
and mass spectra were recorded in a Bruker Autoflex mass spectrometer
operated in linear mode. The instrument was calibrated using a protein
mixture ranging from 4000 to 20000 Da (protein calibration standard
I, Bruker Daltonics).

Tryptophan Fluorescence
Fluorescence spectra were recorded
on a SpectraMax M2e fluorescence spectrophotometer (Molecular Devices)
at 25 °C. The concentration of samples was 2 μM in a buffer
consisting of 20 mM bis-Tris, 2 mM CaCl2, 150 mM NaCl,
and 0.4 mM octyl glucoside at pH 6.5. The protein samples were incubated
in buffers containing 0, 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, or 9 M urea for 18 h at 4
°C before the fluorescence was measured. The excitation wavelength
was set to 295 nm, and emission spectra were recorded between 300
and 400 nm at 1 nm intervals.

1-Anilino-8-naphthalenesulfonate (ANS) Binding
The
fluorescent probe molecule 1-anilino-8-naphthalenesulfonate (ANS)
was obtained from Sigma (Sigma-Aldrich). ANS, at a concentration of
40 μM, was incubated with urea-denatured protein samples (as
described in the previous section) for 1 h at 25 °C. ANS fluorescence
spectra were recorded using a SpectraMax M2e fluorescence spectrophotometer
at 25 °C. ANS was excited at 360 nm, and the emission spectra
were recorded between 400 and 600 nm.

Circular Dichroism Spectroscopy
All purified protein
samples were buffer-exchanged with 10 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH
6.5), containing 0.4 mM octyl glucoside, using a HiTrap desalting
column (GE Healthcare). The final concentration of all protein samples
used for CD measurements was 20 μM. The precise concentrations
for CD samples were determined using molar extinction coefficients,
based on the number of tryptophan and tyrosine residues. CD spectra
were recorded on a Jasco CD spectrophotometer. The spectra were recorded
between 190 and 260 nm at intervals of 1 nm/s. The final spectra represent
an average of three runs. The raw data (in millidegrees) were converted
to mean residue ellipticity (MRE), expressed in θ degrees square
centimeter per decimole using the following equation,where θ is the observed ellipticity
in millidegrees, M is the molecular mass of the sample, C is the concentration in milligrams per milliliter, l is the optical path length in centimeters, and n is the number of residues.

The secondary structure
was estimated using the K2D2 analysis tool (http://www.ogic.ca/projects/k2d2/index.html).

NMR Spectroscopy
All NMR spectra were collected with
a Bruker AVANCE NMR spectrophotometer (800.21 MHz for protons) equipped
with four frequency channels and 5 mm triple-resonance z-axis gradient cryogenic probeheads. Protein samples were dissolved
in a buffer composed of 20 mM bis-Tris, 2 mM CaCl2, 0.4
mM octyl glucoside, and 150 mM NaCl (pH 6.5) to a final concentration
of 0.5 mM. D2O (10%) was added to lock the signal. Two-dimensional
(2D) 1H–15N HSQC spectra were acquired
at 283 K with a spectral width of 16 ppm and 32 scans. The 2D 1H–13C natural abundance carbon HSQC spectrum
was also acquired at 283 K with 256 scans.

15N-labeled
27 kDa 7B2 protein was incubated with human α-synuclein (kindly
supplied by N. Lorenzen and D. E. Otzen) at a ratio of 1:2 in the
same buffer that was used for 7B2 alone. 2D 1H–15N TROSY spectra were acquired at 283 K with a spectral width
of 16 ppm and 200 scans.

Results
Gel Filtration Chromatography and in Vitro Cross-Linking
The hydrodynamic characteristics of 21 kDa 7B2 were analyzed by size
exclusion chromatography using a Superdex 75 10/300GL column connected
to a Superdex 200 10/300GL column. A single peak was observed in the
elution profile with an apparent molecular mass of ∼42000 Da
(Figure a), which is larger than that of the
molecular mass obtained by mass spectrometry (17674.4 Da). This result
suggests either that 7B2 forms a dimer, as previously suggested, or that it exists as an extended monomer. The
elution volume for the 7B2 peak was reproducibly shifted by 1.8 mL,
corresponding to an upward molecular mass shift of ∼20 kDa,
when a higher concentration of the protein was applied to the gel
filtration column. The chromatography fractions were subsequently
cross-linked using glutaraldehyde (panels c and d of Figure , low- and high- concentration gel filtration chromatographies,
respectively) and analyzed by SDS–PAGE. A major band that corresponds
to the monomer mass was observed; dimeric, trimeric, and higher-order
oligomers were also present, but at lower concentrations. We also
tested whether the presence of the His tag in the recombinant 7B2
protein affected the elution profile. Eukaryotic 21 kDa 7B2 was purified
from the medium of CHO cells overexpressing the native rat protein
and analyzed by size exclusion as described above. The results, presented
in Figure a (inset), show that this form of
7B2 also eluted at ∼24 mL, i.e., with an apparent molecular
mass much greater than that of a monomer. We conclude that the aberrant
molecular mass is not a function of the His tag.

Size exclusion chromatography
and cross-linking. (a and b) Size
exclusion chromatogram of 21 kDa 7B2 at 0.5 and 2 mg/mL (blue line),
respectively. The inset of panel a shows the size exclusion chromatogram
of eukaryotic 21 kDa 7B2 at 0.5 mg/mL. The molecular mass standards,
thyroglobulin (670 kDa), bovine gamma globulin (158 kDa), chicken
ovalbumin (44 kDa), equine myoglobulin (17 kDa), and vitamin B12 (1.35 kDa), are shown with asterisks. (c and d) Chemical
cross-linking (0.1% glutaraldehyde) of gel filtration experiments
using 0.5 and 2 mg/mL 21 kDa 7B2, respectively.

We also tested if dilution played a role in determining
whether
7B2 exists as a monomer or an oligomer. 7B2 samples were cross-linked
at varying protein concentrations using a fixed amount of glutaraldehyde.
These data, shown in panels a and b of Figure , demonstrate that both the 27 and 21 kDa forms of the 7B2 protein
are prone to forming dimers, trimers, tetramers, and higher-order
oligomers in a concentration-dependent manner. To visualize the ratio
between monomers and oligomeric species at different protein concentrations,
samples were analyzed by SDS–PAGE, loading equal mass for all
concentrations. Cross-linking at 30 μM resulted in major oligomerization
of both the 27 and 21 kDa forms (Figure a,b,
lane 2). The extent of oligomerization was gradually reduced with
decreasing concentrations of 7B2. No such behavior was observed for
the similarly sized globular protein carbonic anhydrase (Figure c). Glutaraldehyde cross-linking is known to affect
the migration of unstructured proteins on SDS–PAGE by reduction
of the hydrodynamic radius and increased level of SDS binding. This likely explains the aberrant molecular
mass of the monomer, dimer, and trimer bands following cross-linking.

Chemical
cross-linking of 27 and 21 kDa 7B2s: concentration dependence
of multimer formation. (a) The 27 kDa 7B2 was cross-linked with 0.1%
glutaraldehyde at final concentrations ranging from 7.5 to 30 μM.
(b) The 21 kDa 7B2 was cross-linked with 0.1% glutaraldehyde at final
concentrations ranging from 7.5 to 30 μM. (c) Carbonic anhydrase,
at 30 μM, cross-linked with 0.1% glutaraldehyde. Bands corresponding
to monomer (M), dimer (D), and trimer (T) are marked on the gels with
arrows.

The homogeneity of the 7B2 protein preparations
was ascertained
by digitization of the lanes corresponding to the non-cross-linked
27 and 21 kDa proteins in panels a and b of Figure  using Un-Scan-IT, as described by the manufacturer. This
quantitation indicates that 99.9% of the total pixel intensity of
protein in each lane corresponds to the 27 and 21 kDa proteins.

Secondary Structure Analysis Using Intrinsic Tryptophan Fluorescence
and ANS Fluorescence
The 21 kDa N-terminal and 31-residue
C-terminal domains of the 7B2 protein (which together constitute the
27 kDa protein) are responsible for two very different functions with
regard to proPC2, inhibition of aggregation and potent inhibition
of enzyme activity, respectively. To
understand the contribution of the C-terminal domain to the overall
structure of the protein, we compared the intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence,
ANS binding, and circular dichroism spectra of the full-length protein
with those of the 21 kDa protein.

7B2 samples, at a concentration
of 2 μM, were exposed to increasing concentrations of urea (0–9
M), and we measured fluorescence by exciting the samples at 295 nm
and recording the emission spectra between 300 and 400 nm. The results
are shown in Figure . The 27 kDa rat protein
(Figure a) has a single tryptophan residue
at position 137. The fluorescence spectrum of the 27 kDa protein,
in the native state, showed an emission maximum at 335 nm that was
shifted to 351 nm upon the addition of 9 M urea as a denaturing agent.
The shift indicates that the tryptophan residue is shielded from the
aqueous phase in the native state and gradually becomes exposed to
solvent by urea-induced protein unfolding, emitting at 351 nm, the
wavelength typical for l-tryptophan in water. Urea-induced unfolding was also studied using ANS binding,
as ANS fluorescence is known to be highly environmentally sensitive.
The fluorescence intensity of ANS is very low in polar environments,
whereas binding of ANS to hydrophobic surfaces causes an increase
in quantum yield (fluorescence intensity) coupled with a blue shift
in the maximal emission wavelength. ANS
bound strongly to the 27 kDa 7B2 protein in the native state (0 M
urea), as observed by a large increase in fluorescence intensity.
However, upon exposure to increasing concentrations of urea, the ANS
fluorescence intensity was linearly reduced, suggesting gradual unfolding
of the 27 kDa 7B2 protein upon urea denaturation (Figure b).

Tryptophan (left) and ANS (right) fluorescence spectra of 7B2 variants.
(a and b) Wild-type rat 27 kDa 7B2. (c and d) Wild-type rat 21 kDa
7B2. (e) C. elegans 27 kDa 7B2.

In contrast, 21 kDa 7B2 exhibited an emission spectrum
typical
of proteins with exposed tryptophan residues with a maximum at 345
nm. This form of 7B2 was also much more vulnerable to urea-induced
denaturation than the full-length protein. Exposure to only 2 M urea
caused a red shift in the fluorescence maximum to 351 nm, as shown
in Figure c. The ANS binding data for this
form of 7B2 were very interesting as well. Along with a 44% reduction
in ANS fluorescence intensity between 1 and 2 M urea, the emission
maximum shifted to 510 nm (Figure d). This
spectrum is very different from that of the 27 kDa protein, where
no change in the ANS emission maximum, 470 nm, was observed even at
the highest urea concentration of 5 M. These data indicate that the
C-terminal fragment of the 7B2 protein greatly contributes to the
maintenance of the tertiary structure of the protein.

The 27
kDa C. elegans 7B2 protein, which has only
a single tryptophan residue located near the carboxy terminus, was
not analyzed using the intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence technique
as the tryptophan residue is most likely already solvent-exposed because
of its location. The ANS binding data for this protein, depicted in
Figure e, are also nonlinear, with maximal
emission at 510 nm. This maximum is characteristic of unbound ANS
and contrasts with the 470 nm emission maximum seen using the vertebrate
27 kDa 7B2 protein. These data reflect a possible absence of the hydrophobic
clusters necessary for binding of ANS in C. elegans 7B2.

Circular Dichroism
The far-UV CD spectra of the 7B2
protein samples did not support the presence of typical features related
to known secondary structures such as α helices or β strands
(Figure ). The characteristic negative peaks
at 208 and 222 nm displayed by α helical proteins were not visible
in 7B2 spectra. Estimation of secondary structure content revealed
that all samples had a low α helical fraction (see Table ). The α helical content was 29% for 27 kDa
7B2, while the β sheet content was 14%. The 21 kDa rat and the
27 kDa C. elegans proteins contained even fewer structural
elements, with only 18% α helix and 26% β sheet content.

Far-UV
CD spectra of 7B2 and variants. Wild-type rat 27 kDa 7B2
(black dashed line), wild-type rat 21 kDa 7B2 (black solid line),
and 27 kDa C. elegans 7B2 (gray solid line) in 10
mM sodium phosphate and 0.4 mM octyl glucoside (pH 6.5).

Secondary Structure Analysis of 7B2
Forms
7B2	% α helix	% β strand	
27 kDa	29	14	
21 kDa	18	26	
27 kDaC. elegans	18	26	
Disorder Prediction of 27 kDa 7B2
The CD and fluorescence
findings were in accordance with predictions by PONDR-VL-XT (http://www.pondr.com/background.html), which identifies disordered
regions in a protein. VL-XT predicts that 65% of the polypeptide chain
of 27 kDa 7B2 and 50% of the C. elegans 7B2 amino
acid sequence are disordered. The longest disordered stretch in the
rat 27 kDa 7B2 protein includes 40 residues between amino acid positions
73 and 112 (Figure ). Such patterns of long
unfolded regions lying between short structured segments are typical
of intrinsically disordered proteins.

PONDR
analysis of 27 kDa 7B2 and C. elegans 27
kDa 7B2 (signal peptides not included). The black bar shows a disordered
region &gt;40 residues in length.

NMR Spectroscopy
On the basis of the observations from
the intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence and ANS binding experiments,
we decided to evaluate the 27 kDa 7B2 protein using 2D NMR. The 1H–15N HSQC spectrum, shown in Figure , displayed a considerably smaller number of peaks
than would be expected from a well-folded 186-residue protein. The
chemical shift dispersion was also extremely narrow, between 6.9 and
8.4 ppm, which is indicative of unfolded protein. This conclusion
was strengthened by the natural abundance 13C–1H HSQC spectrum, used to assess the environment around the
core methyl groups, where we observed far fewer peaks and poor chemical
shift dispersion (Figure ) characteristic
of unfolded protein. Together, these data support the CD results in
showing that 7B2 lacks appreciable amounts of secondary structure.
However, incubation of 27 kDa 7B2 with its putative client protein
α-synuclein (Helwig et al., manuscript submitted for publication)
resulted in the appearance of several new peaks as well as chemical
shift perturbations for several of the peaks observed for 7B2 alone,
indicating a change in protein conformation (marked with arrows in
Figure ). Complete assignment of the observed
resonances is, however, necessary to confirm that new peaks are due
to changes in 7B2 structure and not resonances within the central
overlapped regions.

NMR of 27 kDa 7B2. These data depict the 1H–15N HSQC spectrum for 27 kDa 7B2.

13C–1H natural abundance
carbon HSQC
spectrum for 27 kDa 7B2.

7B2 in complex with client protein. 1H–15N TROSY spectrum for 27 kDa 7B2 complexed with α-synuclein.
The black peaks were obtained from spectra acquired without α-synuclein,
and the red peaks were obtained from spectra acquired after incubation
with α-synuclein. 

Discussion
The small acidic 7B2 protein, expressed
in all tissues containing
a regulated secretory pathway (even those lacking proPC2 expression,
for example, the thalamus), was first
described in 1982,, with N-terminal protein and cDNA
sequence information provided between 1982 and 1991,,− yet nothing is known of its three-dimensional structure to date.
Recent data show that 7B2 can act as an antiaggregant chaperone for
proPC2, IGF-1, and two neurodegeneration-related molecules, α-synuclein and
Aβ 1–42. However, 7B2 is unable either to refold luciferase
or to assist Hsp70 in refolding luciferase (Helwig et al., manuscript
submitted for publication); thus, this protein does not function as
a typical chaperone or cochaperone. In an effort to decipher the means
by which 7B2 can interact with unrelated client proteins, we examined
the secondary and tertiary structure of this protein.

A variety
of biophysical techniques were used to demonstrate that
both forms of 7B2 are natively disordered. Using intrinsic fluorescence,
we found that although the 27 kDa form of 7B2 is somewhat susceptible
to urea-induced unfolding, the 21 kDa form is relatively insensitive
to changes in denaturant concentration, suggesting that the tryptophan
residue in this form is already exposed to solvent in the native state.
The relative folding propensities of the two forms were further characterized
by ANS binding studies. A comparison of ANS binding to the 27 and
21 kDa forms of 7B2 under native conditions showed that ANS fluorescence
increases by more than 40-fold upon binding the 27 kDa protein, but
only 2-fold upon binding the 21 kDa protein. The 27 kDa protein thus
has more accessible ANS-binding hydrophobic clusters than the 21 kDa
form. It is known that ANS binds weakly to both the native and extensively
unfolded states of proteins but binds quite strongly to solvent-accessible
hydrophobic pockets in well-folded and partially folded stable intermediates
such as the molten globule state.− On the basis of our
ANS binding data, we infer that the 27 kDa 7B2 protein either contains
a larger amount of tertiary structure than the 21 kDa form or has
a higher degree of hydrophobic packing accessible to ANS, due to oligomerization. CD spectroscopy also supported structural differences
between the 27 and 21 kDa forms; however, both proteins exhibited
a very small amount of secondary structure. We conclude from these
data that while the 27 kDa 7B2 protein is somewhat more compact than
the 21 kDa form, overall, both proteins are mostly disordered.

Intrinsically disordered proteins are common in eukaryotes and
are involved in the regulation of transcription, translation, and
cell signaling. A large number of disordered
proteins are known to be associated with human disease (reviewed in
ref ()); these proteins
do not adopt stable tertiary structures under physiological conditions.
Protein disorder is believed to provide a number of functional advantages,
such as permitting multiple binding partners, a large surface area
for partner binding, and providing considerable structural plasticity. A special class of disordered proteins, known
as elastomeric proteins, has been shown to be crucial for the elasticity
of many biological tissues, e.g., the human arterial wall. Understanding the physical and mechanistic basis
of disorder-mediated functioning of unfolded proteins is currently
a topic of active investigation., In light of
our previous findings that the 7B2 protein plays a critical role in
blocking proPC2 aggregation and ensuing inability to activate, as well as preventing fibrillation of several
amyloidogenic proteins (Helwig et al., manuscript submitted for publication),
we investigated a possible relationship between the structural properties
of 7B2 and those of other molecular chaperones.

While no significant
sequence homology exists between 7B2 and known
chaperone proteins, the presence of structurally disordered regions
is common among certain types of molecular chaperones, for example,
α-crystallin and the small heat shock proteins (sHSP) Hsp 16.9,
Hsp 25, and Hsp 33., A known extracellular chaperone,
clusterin, has been shown to colocalize with Aβ plaques in the
brains of patients with Alzheimer’s and with Lewy bodies in
Parkinson’s disease. Similarly,
we have demonstrated that 7B2 immunoreactivity colocalizes with Aβ
plaques in an Alzheimer’s model mouse (and in human Alzheimer’s
brain tissue), as well as with α-synuclein-rich Lewy bodies
in Parkinson’s brain tissue (Helwig et al., manuscript submitted
for publication). Clusterin binds Aβ oligomers of all sizes,
thereby influencing the rate of oligomer aggregation and disaggregation; 7B2 blocks the fibrillation of both Aβ
1–40 and 1–42 (Helwig et al., manuscript submitted for
publication). Lastly, clusterin is partially disordered and can bind
several different proteins; similarly,
7B2 also blocks the aggregation and fibrillation of a variety of unrelated
proteins, (Helwig et al., manuscript submitted for
publication). Our present data showing that 7B2 exists primarily as
a disordered protein in a nonglobular, extended form support the idea
that, like clusterin, 7B2 may possess a large surface area for binding
multiple partners.

On the basis of the behavior of the 7B2 protein
in gel filtration
and cross-linking studies, we conclude that 7B2 is capable of forming
dimers and multimers in a concentration-dependent manner. We confirmed
the presence of multiple species (dimer, trimers, oligomers, etc.)
in the 21 kDa 7B2 gel filtration peak, the amounts of which were proportional
to the concentration of protein loaded onto the size exclusion column.
This led us to hypothesize that a concentration-dependent dynamic
equilibrium exists among the various 7B2 species. It was, however,
surprising that the 7B2 protein, presumably consisting of a mixture
of different oligomerization states, always eluted as a single peak
during gel filtration chromatography. We postulate that a rapid, concentration-dependent
equilibrium exists among the various species; coupled together with
diffusion and dilution during gel filtration, this could result in
the disappearance of the multiple peaks expected for the multimeric
forms and the appearance of a single peak consisting of a mixture
of all forms. Certain intrinsically disordered proteins have been
shown to form dynamic homodimers that exist in rapid equilibrium between
monomeric and dimeric forms.− 7B2’s probable highly
extended conformation, resulting in an increased hydrodynamic volume,
may also contribute to its higher-than-expected apparent molecular
mass during gel filtration. Interestingly, small heat shock proteins
(sHSPs) are also known to form large oligomeric complexes that function
to prevent protein aggregation. We speculate
that the antiaggregant effects of 7B2 can be attributed at least in
part to this tendency toward multimerization, which has been regarded
as a prerequisite for sHSP chaperone activity., Further work is required to determine the size(s) of the 7B2 species
that best bind client proteins.

Intrinsically disordered chaperones
are known to exhibit distinct
changes in secondary structure upon binding client proteins. Consistent with this idea, we observed a shift
in the conformational properties of the 27 kDa 7B2 protein when in
complex with α-synuclein, suggesting induction of some structural
features. Although α-synuclein is primarily a cytoplasmic protein,
recent studies have reported detection of the protein in cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) and plasma. The extracellular
form of α-synuclein is believed to be delivered by exocytosis
of α-synuclein and is the probable source of extracellular aggregates. This mechanism may underlie the extracellular
interaction between α-synuclein and secreted 7B2. In addition,
unpublished data from our group (Helwig et al., manuscript submitted
for publication) have shown that recombinant 7B2 can be taken up by
Neuro2A cells, most likely by endocytosis. Thus, another possible
mechanism of interaction between 7B2 and α-synuclein is re-uptake
of 7B2 into an intracellular synuclein-containing compartment. Again,
the mechanism of α-synuclein binding is unclear. Aggregation-prone
proteins contain exposed hydrophobic surfaces that tend to associate. The highly hydrophilic nature of disordered
stretches within chaperone proteins provides a solubilization effect
upon substrate binding that prevents these hydrophobic surfaces from
approaching each other.,, The disordered segments of the 7B2 protein may also function in
this manner to block α-synuclein aggregation.

In conclusion,
we show here that the small secretory protein 7B2
is an intrinsically disordered protein capable of oligomerization,
thus exhibiting biophysical properties consistent with its proposed
role as a secretory chaperone for misfolded neurodegeneration-related
proteins.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Nikolai Lorenzen and Dr. Daniel Otzen for recombinant
α-synuclein. We are also grateful to Dr. Ilia Baskakov for the
use of his CD spectrophotometer. We thank Dr. Kristen Varney and the
University of Maryland, Baltimore, NMR Core Facility for her help
with collecting NMR spectra.

Abbreviations
HSQCheteronuclear
single-nuclear quantum
coherence spectroscopy

TROSYtransverse relaxation optimized spectroscopy

MALDI-TOF MSmatrix-assisted
laser desorption time-of-flight mass spectrometry.

