Heme proteins conduct a myriad
of diverse biological functions such as O2 transport, storage
and reduction, electron transport, oxidation and oxygenation of manifold
organic and inorganic compounds, hydrogen peroxide dismutation, O2, NO, and CO sensing, etc. The
distinct reactivity of these oxidoreductases is determined by (i)
the architecture of the active site and the substrate access channel(s),
(ii) the conformation and modification of the prosthetic group, (iii)
the nature of the proximal ligand of the heme iron and its mode of
interaction with outer sphere ligands, (iv) the interaction of the
two heme propionates with the protein, and (v) the nature and position
of amino acids as well as the amount of space at the distal heme site
where substrate binding and conversion take place. All these factors determine the redox chemistry of the
respective metalloproteins and as a consequence their (bioinorganic)
reaction mechanism.

Chlorite dismutases
(Clds) are recently described heme b oxidoreductases
(EC 1.13.11.49) found in prokaryotic organisms.
The given denomination “dismutase” is misleading because
Cld converts chlorite (ClO2–) to chloride
and dioxygen. In recent years, several X-ray structures of multimeric
(di, penta, and hexa) Clds and Cld-like proteins from archaea and
bacteria have been published.− Together with mechanistic studies,− these structures helped to postulate an enzymatic mechanism that
includes oxidation of native ferric Cld by chlorite to an oxoiron(IV)porphyryl
radical intermediate [Por•+Fe(IV)=O, Compound
I] and hypochlorite, which is kept in the reaction sphere of active
Clds by a fully conserved distal arginine (reaction ).The second redox half-reaction
(reaction ) is unique because it generates
an O–O bond, a reaction found so far in biology mediated only
by the water splitting manganese complex of photosystem II of oxygenic
phototrophic organisms and by a yet-uncharacterized enzyme of an anaerobic
methane-oxidizing bacterium.Reaction  resembles the heterolytic cleavage of hydrogen peroxide forming
Compound I and water that occurs in heme peroxidases and catalases
(Reaction ).Reaction  shows similarities
with the action of some peroxidases (e.g., mammalian myeloperoxidase)
that can oxidize chloride to hypochlorous acid using chloride as a
two-electron donor of Compound I and releasing hypochlorite as the
reaction product (Reaction ).,

Understanding differences in reaction
mechanisms between related
heme enzymes and the driving forces of individual redox reactions
requires, besides knowledge of the structure and the catalytic amino
acids in the heme cavity, information about the redox thermodynamics
of the respective heme centers. The reduction
potential (E°′) of the Fe(III)/Fe(II)
couple not only determines the stable oxidation state of the heme
proteins in their native state (i.e., the ferric state for Cld) but
also reflects the hierarchy of redox properties of higher oxidation
states (e.g., of the Compound I/ferric protein couple), which was
demonstrated for many heme peroxidases. Moreover, valuable information about the mechanism of E°′ modulation in heme proteins can be obtained from the
enthalpic (ΔH°′rc) and
entropic (ΔS°′rc) changes
of the reduction reaction, measured through variable-temperature spectroelectrochemical
measurements. It must be mentioned that
single E°′ values of the Fe(III)/Fe(II)
couple of three Clds determined by different methods can be found
in the literature (Cld from Dechloromonas aromatica, −23 mV; Cld from Ideonella
dechloratans, −21 mV; and Cld from Azospira oryzae, −158 mV), which differ significantly (as do the UV–vis
spectra in comparison to those of NdCld and NwCld),,,, despite very similar structures of the respective
heme cavities.−

This paper reports for the first time the thermodynamics of
Fe(III)/Fe(II)
reduction of chlorite dismutases determined spectroelectrochemically
by using an OTTLE cell. This allows direct
comparison with related heme oxidoreductases that have been investigated
by the same method. Two representatives of two phylogenetically separated
lineages, namely, pentameric Cld from Candidatus “Nitrospira
defluvii” [NdCld (Figure A)] and dimeric Cld from Nitrobacter winogradskyi [NwCld (Figure B)], have been analyzed. Besides differences in oligomeric architecture,
the two Clds exhibit differences in subunit structure (Figure C) as well as in conformational
and thermal stability. Despite these
significant disparities in overall structure and stability, the heme
ligation and environment in NdCld and NwCld are almost identical to
those of other published structures (Figure C)− of this protein family., Moreover, NdCld and
NwCld exhibit similar chlorite degradation kinetics.,,

Overall and active site structures of
chlorite dismutases from Candidatus “Nitrospira
defluvii” (NdCld) and N. winogradskyi (NwCld).
(A) Ribbon representation of pentameric
NdCld (PDB entry 3NN1) after a 2 ns molecular dynamics (MD) simulation showing the secondary
structure and semitransparent protein surface (cyan). Each subunit
shows a heme b (red) as well as the catalytically
important Arg173 of the distal heme side (yellow). Substrate channels
leading to heme b, determined with CAVER, are colored
orange. (B) Ribbon representation of dimeric NwCld (PDB entry 3QPI) after a 2 ns MD
simulation showing the secondary structure and semitransparent protein
surface (yellow), heme b (red), distal Arg127 (black),
and substrate channels (orange). (C) Overlay of ribbon representations
of the X-ray structures of NwCld (yellow) and NdCld (cyan). Heme cavity
residues are shown as sticks. Figures were generated using PyMOL (http://www.pymol.org/).

Here we report on (i) the E°′
values
of the Fe(III)/Fe(II) couple in the ferric high-spin native forms
and of the six-coordinate low-spin cyanide adducts of NdCld and NwCld,
(ii) the enthalpic and entropic contribution to the reduction reaction
of the high-spin forms, (iii) the calculation of the contribution
of the protein and the solvent to the reduction process, and (iv)
the simulation of the molecular dynamics of the ferrous and ferric
forms of NwCld and NdCld. Additionally, we have compared the substrate
access channel dimensions and probed the kinetics of cyanide binding
and dissociation by stopped-flow spectroscopy. The findings are discussed
with respect to the known structures of NdCld and NwCld and the proposed reaction
mechanism of Cld (reactions  and ) in comparison with those of related heme enzymes.

Materials and Methods
Cloning, expression, and purification
of wild-type NdCld and NwCld
were described previously.,, All chemicals were reagent grade.

Spectroelectrochemistry
All experiments were conducted
in a homemade OTTLE (optical transparent thin-layer spectroelectrochemical)
cell. The three-electrode configuration
consisted of a gold minigrid working electrode (Buckbee-Mears, Chicago,
IL), a homemade Ag/AgCl/KClsat microreference electrode,
separated from the working solution by a Vycor set, and a platinum
wire as the counter electrode. The reference
electrode was calibrated against a saturated calomel (HgCl) electrode
before each set of measurements. All potentials are referenced to
the SHE (standard hydrogen electrode, 242 mV).

Potentials were
applied across the OTTLE cell with an Amel model 2053 potentiostat/galvanostat.
A constant temperature was maintained by a circulating water bath,
and the OTTLE cell temperature was monitored with a Cu-costan microthermocouple.
UV–vis spectra were recorded using a Varian Cary C50 spectrophotometer.
The OTTLE cell was flushed with argon gas to establish an oxygen-free
environment in the cell.

Variable-temperature
experiments were performed using a nonisothermal
cell configuration. The temperature of
the reference electrode and the counter electrode was kept constant,
whereas that of the working electrode was varied. Parametrization of enthalpic and entropic components was
possible via calculation of ΔS′°rc from the slope of the plot of E′°
versus temperature; ΔH°′rc could be obtained from the Gibbs–Helmholtz equation, thus
from the slope of the plot E°′/T versus 1/T. Experiments with NwCld and NdCld were conducted over a temperature
range from 15 to 35 °C using 650 μL samples containing
6 μM NdCld and 5 μM NwCld in 150 mM phosphate buffer (pH
7.0) and 100 mM NaCl, in the presence of various mediators: methyl
viologen, lumiflavine 3-acetate, methylene blue, phenazine methosulfate,
and indigo. The concentration of each mediator in the cell was 4.6
μM, except for that of methyl viologen (230 μM). Nernst
plots consisted of at least five points and were invariably linear
with a slope consistent with a one-electron reduction process.

The experiments for the determination of the E°′
of the cyanide adducts of NdCld and NwCld were conducted
at 25 °C using 650 μL samples containing 3 μM NdCld
and 4 μM NwCld in 150 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7.0) with 100
mM NaCl and 50 mM cyanide, in the presence of the same mediator set
as described above.

EPR Spectroscopy
For electron paramagnetic resonance
(EPR) measurements, 200 μM NdCld and 240 μM wild-type
NwCld were prepared in 50 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7.0). Solutions
(100 μL) were transferred in Wilmad quartz tubes (3 mm inside
diameter) under an inert nitrogen atmosphere in a glovebox.

Measurements were taken at 10 K on a Bruker EMXplus continuous wave
(cw) spectrometer, operating at X-band (9 GHz) frequencies, equipped
with a 4122SHQE resonator and an Oxford Instruments ESR900 cryostat.
EPR spectra were recorded under nonsaturating conditions using a 0.2
mW microwave power, a 100 kHz modulation frequency, a 1 mT modulation
amplitude, and a 21 ms conversion time and time constant. Saturation
studies confirmed the presence of the individual Fe(III) species.
Simulations of high-spin and low-spin Fe(III) forms were conducted
using EasySpin.

Transient-State Kinetics
The experiments were conducted
with a stopped-flow apparatus (model SX-18MV, Applied Photophysics)
equipped for both conventional and sequential measurements. The optical
quartz cell with a path length of 10 mm had a volume of 20 μL.
The fastest time for mixing two solutions and recording the first
data point was 1.3 ms. All measurements were performed at 25 °C.
For the cyanide binding studies with ferric NwCld, the conventional
stopped-flow mode was used and the increase in absorbance at 420 nm
was monitored. In a typical experiment, one syringe contained 2 μM
NwCld in 50 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7.0) and the second syringe contained
an at least 5-fold excess of cyanide in the same buffer. A minimum
of three measurements were performed for each ligand concentration.
The apparent second-order rate constants, kon, were obtained from the slope of a plot of kobs versus cyanide concentration. Additionally, the binding
of cyanide to NwCld was also investigated using the diode array detector
(Applied Photophysics), which allowed the synthesis of artificial
sets of time-dependent spectra as well as spectral analysis of enzyme
intermediates.

Molecular Dynamics Simulations
Molecular dynamics simulations
of NwCld (PDB entry 3QPI) and NdCld (PDB entry 3NN1) with a reduced and oxidized heme b were performed using the GROMOS11 molecular simulation package and GROMOS force field 54A7. The proteins were solvated in periodic rectangular simulation
boxes containing the simple point charge water model with a minimal solute–wall distance of 0.8 nm. Chloride
and sodium counterions were added to create an overall neutral system
at pH 7. The systems were gradually heated to 300 K with 60 K increases
in temperature every 20 ps and equilibrated at a constant pressure
for 100 ps.

Simulations were subsequently performed for 2 ns,
using a step size of 2 fs. Coordinates were written out every 0.5
ps. The temperature and pressure were kept constant at 300 K and 1
atm, respectively. This was achieved through weak coupling with a
relaxation time of 0.1 ps for the temperature and 0.5 ps for the pressure. The isothermal compressibility was set to 4.575
× 10–4 (kJ mol–1 nm–3)−1. Bond lengths were constrained to their optimal
values with a relative geometric accuracy of 10–4 using the SHAKE algorithm. The nonbonded
interactions were calculated using a twin-range cutoff, and a molecular pairlist, with a short-range
cutoff of 0.8 nm and a long-range cutoff of 1.4 nm. A reaction-field
contribution was added to the electrostatic
interactions and forces to account for a homogeneous medium outside
the cutoff using a dielectric permittivity of 61.

To analyze the amount and behavior of the water molecules
in the
binding pocket and substrate channels, the radial distribution function
was calculated using GROMOS++ package for the analysis of biomolecular
simulation trajectories. The radial distribution
function is defined here as the probability of finding a particle
at a given distance relative to the same probability for a homogeneous
distribution of the particles.

Substrate Channel Calculation
CAVER was used to detect tunnels and therefore putative substrate
channels of NwCld and NdCld (PDB entries 3QPI and 3NN1, respectively). For calculation of the
length of the channels, the heme iron was set as the starting point.

Results
Despite significant differences in oligomeric
and subunit structure
and stability,,, the
overall chlorite dismutase activities of NdCld and NwCld (polarographic
measurement of the initial rate of O2 release at 25 °C
and pH 7.0) are similar. For NdCld, KM, kcat, and kcat/KM were determined to be 58 μM,
35 s–1, and 6.0 × 105 M–1 s–1, respectively, whereas for NwCld, the corresponding
values were 90 μM, 190 s–1, and 2.1 ×
106 M–1 s–1, respectively
(Table ).

(A) Steady-State Kinetic Parameters
for Chlorite Degradation Measured Polarographically as Dioxygen Evolution
Mediated by NdCld and NwCld and (B) Pre-Steady-State Kinetic Parameters for the Binding
of Cyanide to NdCld and NwCld (this study)
 	NdCld	NwCld	
(A)	
KM (μM)	58 ± 9	90 ± 12	
kcat (s–1)	35 ± 5	190 ± 14	
kcat/KM (M–1 s–1)	6.0 × 105	2.1 × 106	
(B)	
kon (M–1 s–1)	2.6 × 106	1.0 × 106	
koff (s–1)	9.3	2.4	
KD (μM)	3.6	2.4	
The spectroscopic properties of ferric wild-type NdCld
and NwCld
are indicative of predominant five-coordinate high-spin heme b. In detail, recombinant ferric high-spin NdCld (S = 5/2) has its Soret maximum at
408 nm, a prominent Q-band at 533 nm (shoulder at 568 nm), and a charge-transfer
(CT) band at 640 nm (Figure A). The corresponding
maxima for recombinant ferric NwCld are at 405, 506, 543, and 640
nm, respectively (Figure A). It is important
to note that so far published spectra of the ferric form of Clds from
other sources show a rather broad Soret band at extraordinary peak
maxima around 392 nm,,, which is 12–15 nm blue-shifted compared to those of NdCld
and NwCld (despite the high degree of similarity in heme cavity architecture).

UV–vis
and continuous wave electron paramagnetic resonance
spectra of chlorite dismutases from Candidatus “Nitrospira
defluvii” (NdCld) and N. winogradskyi (NwCld).
(A) UV–vis spectra of NwCld and NdCld at pH 7.0. Spectra of
the oxidized and reduced proteins are colored black and red, respectively.
Enzymes were reduced with 10 mM sodium dithionite from a freshly prepared
solution. (B) Continuous wave EPR spectra of NdCld and NwCld at pH
7.0 and 10 K.

The cw EPR spectrum of NdCld shows the presence
of two rhombically
distorted high-spin forms (Figure B), arising
from the transition of ms = ±1/2 of an S = 5/2 system. The rhombicity (determined by the zero-field interaction
parameters D and E) of the two high-spin
spectra differs slightly, leading to one broader and one narrower
signal in the low-field part of the EPR spectrum (Table 1 of the ). Additionally, spectral
simulation (Table 1 of the ) suggests the occurrence of two low-spin heme species. Comparable
high-spin spectra were described previously for chlorite dismutases
from other sources.,, In
contrast, the cw EPR spectrum of dimeric NwCld consists of only one
dominant high-spin species with axial symmetry in addition to one
minor low-spin Fe(III) form (Figure B). This
indicates a higher symmetry around the heme cavity and two comparable
coordination structures in the two subunits, whereas the different
EPR spectra in the homopentamer NdCld lead to the assumption that
the structural environment of the heme pocket within the subunits
of the pentamer varies by distortion in the x–y plane.

Figure A depicts
a representative family
of spectra of ferric NdCld at different applied potentials in the
OTTLE cell. The pentameric metalloprotein is directly reduced to its
ferrous form with absorption maxima at 435 and 556 nm with a clear
isosbestic point at 420 nm. The calculated midpoint potential for
the Fe(III)/Fe(II) couple, determined from the corresponding Nernst
plot (inset of Figure A), was calculated to
be −0.113 ± 0.001 V at 25 °C and pH 7.0. Similar
experiments were performed with the dimeric chlorite dismutase from N. winogradskyi. Upon its direct conversion from Fe(III)
to Fe(II), the identical ferrous spectrum was obtained (maxima at
435 and 556 nm, isosbestic point at 420 nm) and the standard reduction
potential was very similar; i.e., E°′
= −0.119 ± 0.002 V (25 °C, pH 7.0) (Figure B and Table ).

Spectroelectrochemical
titrations of the Fe(III)/Fe(II) redox couple
of the high-spin native form of chlorite dismutases from Candidatus “Nitrospira defluvii” (NdCld) and N. winogradskyi (NwCld) and their six-coordinate low-spin cyanide adducts. (A) Electronic
spectra of high-spin native NdCld at various potentials at 25 °C
in 150 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7.0) and 100 mM NaCl. (B) Electronic
spectra of high-spin native NwCld at various potentials at 25 °C
in 150 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7.0) and 100 mM NaCl. (C) Electronic
spectra of the six-coordinate low-spin cyanide adduct (50 mM cyanide)
of NdCld at various potentials at 25 °C in 150 mM phosphate buffer
(pH 7.0) and 100 mM NaCl. (D) Electronic spectra of the six-coordinate
low-spin cyanide adduct (50 mM cyanide) of NwCld at various potentials
at 25 °C in 150 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7.0) and 100 mM NaCl.
The insets depict the corresponding Nernst plots, where X represents (AλredMax – Aλred)/(AλoxMax – Aλox), where
λox = 409 nm and λred = 435 nm for
high-spin NdCld, λox = 422 nm and λred = 435 nm for the six-coordinate low-spin cyanide adduct of low-spin
NdCld, λox = 407 nm and λred = 435
nm for high-spin NwCld, and λox = 422 nm and λred = 435 nm for the six-coordinate low-spin cyanide adduct
of NwCld.

Reduction Potentials of the Fe(III)/Fe(II)
Couple of High-Spin Native Forms and Six-Coordinate Low-Spin Cyanide
Adducts of Chlorite Dismutases from Candidatus “Nitrospira
defluvii” (NdCld) and N. winogradskyi (NwCld)
 	E°′ (V)	 	 	
metalloprotein	high-spin	low-spin
(cyanide adduct)	ΔE°′ (V)	ref	
NdCld	–0.113 ± 0.001	–0.404 ± 0.005	0.291	this
study	
NwCld	–0.119 ± 0.002	–0.397 ± 0.002	0.278	this
study	
ARP	–0.183	–0.390	0.207	()	
soybean peroxidase	–0.310	–0.443	0.133	()	
HRP-C	–0.306	–0.430	0.124	()	
cucumber basic peroxidase	–0.320	–0.412	0.092	()	
MPO	0.005	–0.037	0.042	()	
For comparison, data from Arthromyces ramosus peroxidase (ARP), horseradish peroxidase
isoform C (HRP-C), soybean peroxidase, cucumber basic peroxidase,
and myeloperoxidase (MPO) are listed. ΔE°′
is the difference in the reduction potential of the Fe(III)/Fe(II)
couple between high-spin and low-spin forms.

To gain deeper insight into the mechanism of E°′ modulation in chlorite dismutases from Candidatus “Nitrospira defluvii” and N. winogradskyi, the temperature dependence of the reduction
potential of the high-spin
forms was investigated (Figure ). This allows
parameterization of the corresponding enthalpic (ΔH°′rc) and entropic (ΔS°′rc) components of the Fe(III) to Fe(II)
reduction reaction. For both metalloproteins, the oxidized state is
enthalpically stabilized over the reduced state: NwCld (40 ±
4 kJ mol–1) &gt; NdCld (29 ± 6 kJ mol–1) (Figure B and Table ). Reduction of both species is entropically favored. The entropic
components are positive for both chlorite dismutases: NwCld (95 ±
13 J mol–1 K–1) &gt; NdCld (63
±
20 J mol–1 K–1) (Figure A and Table ). As a consequence,
the resulting entropic contributions to E°′
at 25 °C, i.e., 292 and 194 mV, respectively, partially compensate
for the enthalpic stabilization of the ferric state, i.e., −413
and −305 mV, respectively (Table ).

Redox
thermodynamics of the high-spin native form of chlorite dismutases
from Candidatus “Nitrospira defluvii”
(NdCld) and N. winogradskyi (NwCld). (A) Temperature
dependence of the reduction potential and (B) E°′/T vs 1/T plots for NdCld (■) and
NwCld (□). The slopes of the plots yield the ΔS°′rc/F (A) and
−ΔH°′rc/F (B) values. Solid lines are least-squares fits to the
data points. All experiments were conducted in 150 mM phosphate buffer
and 100 mM NaCl (pH 7.0).

Thermodynamic Parameters for the Fe(III)
→ Fe(II) Reduction of High-Spin Native Chlorite Dismutases
from Candidatus “Nitrospira defluvii”
(NdCld) and N. winogradskyi (NwCld)
protein	E°′ (V)	ΔH°′rc (kJ mol–1)	ΔS°′rc (J mol–1 K–1)	–ΔH°′rc/F (V)	TΔS°′rc/F (V)	–FE°′ [=ΔH°′rc(int)] (kJ mol–1)	ref	
NwCld	–0.119 ± 0.005	40 ± 4	95 ± 13	–0.413 ± 0.040	0.292 ± 0.040	11.5 ± 0.1	this study	
NdCld	–0.113 ± 0.005	29 ± 6	63 ± 20	–0.305 ± 0.060	0.194 ± 0.060	10.9 ± 0.1	this study	
HRP-C	–0.306	91	210	–0.943	0.648	29	()	
KatG	–0.226	17	–18	–0.176	–0.056	22	()	
MPO	0.005	3	10	–0.031	0.031	0	()	
IdCld	–0.021	–	–	–	–	–	()	
AoCld	–0.023 ± 0.009	–	–	–	–	–	()	
AoCld	–0.158 ± 0.009	–	–	–	–	–	()	
DaCld	–0.023	–	–	–	–	–	()	
For comparison, the thermodynamic
parameters of three heme peroxidases from different superfamilies
are shown, namely, those of horseradish peroxidase isoform C (HRP-C),
catalase-peroxidase (KatG) from Synechocystis, and
myeloperoxidase (MPO). Furthermore, all available literature data
about E°′[Fe(III)/Fe(II)] values of chlorite
dismutases are included: those from chlorite dismutases from I. dechloratans (IdCld), D. aromatica (DaCld),
and A. oryzae (AoCld). Dashes indicate that no data
are available.

Upon addition of cyanide, both heme enzymes were converted
to their
low-spin complexes (S = 1/2) exhibiting a red-shifted Soret maximum at 422 nm (isosbestic point
at 413 nm) (Figure A). Ligand binding followed
by stopped-flow spectroscopy at 420 nm was monophasic, and kobs values could be obtained from single-exponential
fits (Figure B). The apparent second-order
rate constant for cyanide binding (kon) was calculated from the slope of the linear plot of kobs versus cyanide concentration (Figure C). The apparent dissociation rate constant, koff, was determined from the intercept of the linear plots,
allowing the calculation of the dissociation constant (KD) of the cyanide complexes from koff/kon ratios. Both Clds exhibited
similar kinetics and thermodynamics of cyanide binding with the following
values: kon = 2.57 × 106 M–1 s–1, koff = 9.3 s–1, and KD = 3.6 μM for NdCld, and kon = 1.0 × 106 M–1 s–1, koff = 2.4 s–1, and KD = 2.4 μM
for NwCld (Table ). These data clearly underline
the fact that both access to and binding at the heme cavity of cyanide
are very similar.

Transient-state kinetics of binding of cyanide to ferric
chlorite
dismutase from N. winogradskyi (NwCld). (A) Spectral
changes upon reaction of 2 μM ferric NwCld with 10 μM
cyanide measured in the conventional stopped-flow mode. The first
spectrum is that of native NwCld; the second spectrum was recorded
1.3 ms after mixing, and subsequent spectra show the formation of
the low-spin cyanide complex (absorbance maximum at 420 nm). Arrows
indicate changes in absorbance with time. Conditions: 50 mM phosphate
buffer, pH 7.0, and 25 °C. (B) Typical time trace at 420 nm with
a single-exponential fit (1 μM NwCld and 15 μM cyanide).
(C) Linear dependence of kobs values from
the cyanide concentration. The apparent association rate constant, kon, was calculated from the slope and the apparent
dissociation rate constant, koff, from
the intercept. The final concentration of NwCld was 1 μM in
50 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7.0).

Next, we probed the effect of binding of the low-spin
ligand cyanide
on the redox properties of the Fe(III)/Fe(II) couple, performing redox
titrations of cyanide complexes of both enzymes at different applied
potentials (Figure C,D). The ferric cyanide
complexes were directly reduced to the corresponding ferrous cyanide
adducts (Soret band at 435 nm) with an isosbestic point at 430 nm.
The calculated midpoint potentials determined from the corresponding
Nernst plots are almost identical with values of −0.404 ±
0.005 V for NdCld and −0.397 ± 0.002 V for NwCld (25 °C,
pH 7.0). The E°′ values are similar to
those of the six-coordinate low-spin cyanide adducts of other heme
proteins (Table ). However, the differences
between the E°′ values of high- and low-spin
forms are sensibly higher in Clds (Table ).

Because both the protein and the solvent contribute to enthalpic
and entropic changes during the reduction of ferric Cld, it is important
for the interpretation of data to know (i) the solvent accessibility
of the heme center in the ferric and ferrous states and (ii) the extent
of solvent reorganization and of conformational change of the protein
during Fe(III) reduction. Thus, by using CAVER, we have identified
and measured the dimensions of the substrate channels for each subunit
of both proteins. Panels A and B of Figure  illustrate the substrate channels and their orientation within the
oligomeric structures. Figure A shows that
substrate channels in the NdCld homopentamer are solvent-exposed on
the outside of the protein and equidistant from each other. The substrate
channels to heme b of both NwCld subunits (Figure B) have calculated averages for the bottleneck radius
of 2.6 ± 0.05 Å, for the length of 15.7 ± 1.7 Å,
and for the volume of 389 ± 27 Å3. These values
compare with the average values of the substrate channels for all
five NdCld subunits (bottleneck radius of 2.8 ± 0.01 Å,
length of 15.1 ± 0.9 Å, and volume of 518 ± 44 Å3). Thus, despite the differences in overall and subunit structure,
NdCld and NwCld have access channels of similar length and bottleneck
radius. The observed discrepancy in volume might be explained by a
more restricted channel entrance at the protein surface in NwCld (see
the overlay in Figure A) and/or in some uncertainty
in defining the position of the access channel entrance at the protein
surface.

Finally, molecular dynamics simulations were performed
to evaluate
differences in protein structure and solvation between the ferric
and ferrous state of the two Clds. Starting with the respective crystal
structures,, we simulated both proteins for 2 ns in their
oxidized and reduced heme states, demonstrating that the protein structures
in both redox states are highly similar. For NdCld and NwCld, the
backbone atom-positional root-mean-square deviations (rmsd) between
the respective crystal structure and the ferric or ferrous state after
a 2 ns simulation were 1.5 and 1.6 Å, and 1.3 and 1.4 Å,
respectively. The calculated rmsd values for the backbone atom positions
of active site residues were 1.4 and 1.4 Å, and 1.2 and 1.3 Å,
respectively. It must be mentioned that both NdCld and NwCld structures
as deposited in the PDB are most likely in the reduced state because
of X-ray-induced radiation. Additionally,
no changes in the structure (including planarity) of the prosthetic
group were observed (Figure 1 of the ). These findings clearly suggest that during reduction
of the ferric Clds to the ferrous state the overall protein structure
and the active site are not altered.

To analyze the amount and
behavior of water molecules in the binding
pocket, we calculated the radial distribution function (rdf, defined
here as the probability of finding a particle at a given distance
relative to the same probability for a homogeneous distribution of
particles). Figure  clearly depicts that the
rdfs for the water molecules show a similar pattern for both NdCld
and NwCld up to a distance of approximately 20 Å (thus including
the full length of the substrate channel). In the Fe(III) state, the
water dipoles are located closer to the metal ion compared to those
in the Fe(II) state (see the spikes in Figure A,B). To investigate this further, the number of water molecules
at a given distance was calculated from the rdf. In both proteins,
the oxidized heme has one water molecule very close to it, and up
to a distance of 7.0 Å, there are three more water molecules
in the pocket than in ferrous Cld (Figure C). These findings reflect the solvent reorganization that occurs
during the Fe(III) to Fe(II) reduction reaction (see below).

Radial distribution
function of water molecules of high-spin ferric
and ferrous chlorite dismutases from Candidatus “Nitrospira
defluvii” (NdCld) and N. winogradskyi (NwCld).
Radial distribution function with respect to the heme iron of NdCld
(A) and NwCld (B) with oxidized states colored red and reduced states
colored black. (C) Difference in the number of water molecules in
the oxidized and reduced state, Δn(H2O), of NdCld (red) and NwCld (black).

Discussion
Chlorite dismutase-like proteins are found
in 15 bacterial and
archaeal phyla, suggesting ancient roots., Recently,
it has been demonstrated that Clds are structurally related to other
protein families like dye-decolorizing heme peroxidases. Indeed, when the active site of Clds and these
novel peroxidases was examined, both the proximal and the distal amino
acids (with the exception of the peroxidase-typical aspartate) are
found at very similar positions, suggesting
also a comparable E°′ value for the Fe(III)/Fe(II)
couple. The two chlorite dismutases investigated in this study were
selected because they belong to the two major lineages of the Cld
family. Pentameric NdCld is a representative of lineage I that comprises
the so-called canonical Clds all featuring very similar subunit structures
and oligomerization,− whereas NwCld was the first representative of lineage II with a
determined crystal structure and chlorite degradation activity (Table ). Moreover, because
the two metalloproteins exhibit similar chlorite degradation kinetics
and have their active site residues at very similar positions, we
hypothesized that the reduction potentials might show similar values
and thus could be representative for the whole Cld family.

In
the native ferric state, both chlorite dismutases exhibit UV–vis
and EPR spectra typical for heme b high-spin (S = 5/2) enzymes. Although the subunit
structure of NwCld as a typical representative of lineage II Clds
is very different from that of NdCld (the primary sequence of the
former is ∼30% shorter than that of the latter, with a significant
deletion in the N-terminal region),, these findings
clearly demonstrated that the heme ligation and environment as well
as the dimension of the substrate access channel are very similar
in the two enzymes (Figure B). Both NdCld and NwCld exhibit almost identical standard
reduction potentials of the Fe(III)/Fe(II) couple of −113 and
−119 mV at pH 7.0, respectively, underlining the fact that
the native stable oxidation state of Cld is Fe(III).

Structural analysis of
the surface area at the substrate channel
entrance and of the active site of chlorite dismutases from Candidatus “Nitrospira defluvii” (NdCld) and N. winogradskyi (NwCld). (A) Close-up of the surface area
of substrate channels of NwCld (yellow, PDB entry 3QPI) and NdCld (cyan,
PDB entry 3NN1). Catalytically active arginine 173(127) is highlighted.
The crystal structure of NdCld shows an imidazole and that of NwCld
two water molecules (red balls) bound to the distal heme side. (B)
Superposition of active site residues of NwCld (yellow) and NdCld
(cyan) and prosthetic groups. Amino acid numbering according to NdCld
and NwCld (brackets). Figures were generated using PyMOL (http://www.pymol.org/).

It must be mentioned that E°′
values
of Clds from other sources reported so far (all available data are
given in Table ) range from −21 to
−158 mV. Because the heme cavity architecture of all crystallized
Clds− is almost superimposable (Figure B), this
variability might result from different methods used in the determination
of E°′.,,, However, variability
is also seen in the UV–vis spectra of those metalloproteins
and in the kinetics of chlorite degradation. The ferric forms of chlorite
dismutases from I. dechloratans (IdCld),D. aromatica (DaCld), and A. oryzae (AoCld), (Table ) were reported to exhibit a rather
broad Soret maximum around 392 nm, which is 13–16 nm blue-shifted
compared to those of NwCld (405 nm) and NdCld (408 nm). At the same
time, these enzymes show higher kcat values
of chlorite degradation compared to those of NdCld and NwCld, although
comparison of kinetic parameters has been shown to be problematic
because of the irreversible inhibition of the enzyme during chlorite
degradation that starts to be relevant in different concentration
regimes with different Clds.,, On the other hand, chlorite dismutase from Pseudomonas chloritidismutans (PcCld) exhibits a Soret absorbance
of its resting state at 411 nm, similar to that of NdCld. Moreover,
the related Dyp-type peroxidases, which together with chlorite dismutases
constitute a distinct superfamily of heme enzymes because of similarities
in overall fold and heme cavity architecture, also exhibit Soret maxima in this range (404–409 nm).− Future comparative studies must be performed to elucidate the origin
of the spectral differences among AoCld, DaCld, and IdCld on one hand
as well as NdCld, NwCld, PcCld, and Dyp-type peroxidases on the other.

In addition to almost identical E°′
values, the substrate access channels of NdCld and NwCld have similar
lengths (15.1 and 15.7 Å, respectively) and bottleneck radii
(2.8 and 2.6 Å, respectively). Moreover, the amount and distribution
of water molecules in the ferric and ferrous state were shown to be
very similar in the two metalloproteins (Figure A). This high degree of structural homology agrees with the overall
chlorite degradation kinetics as well as the determined apparent bimolecular
cyanide binding constants (2.6 × 106 and 1.0 ×
106 M–1 s–1, respectively)
(Table ).

When cyanide bound, the six-coordinate
low-spin (S = 1/2) forms of
NdCld and NwCld were formed,
inducing a significant decrease in the reduction potential of the
Fe(III)/Fe(II) couple (−404 and −397 mV, respectively).
The same phenomenon has been observed with other heme proteins. Usually, in the ferrous high-spin form of heme
proteins, the electrostatic interaction of the metal ion with the
water molecules in the heme cavity is weakened compared to that in
the ferric state.,− This is also the case in Cld
as has been demonstrated by the MD simulations of the ferric and ferrous
forms of NdCld and NwCld (Figure ). The electrostatic
interaction described above is much smaller in the corresponding cyanide
complexes, where the solvent accessibility to the heme is diminished.,− As a consequence, the solvent-derived increase in entropy during
the reduction reaction is significantly smaller in the six-coordinate
low-spin cyanide adducts. In addition, the enthalpic stabilization
of the ferric state is more pronounced and both phenomena lead to
more negative E°′ values (Table ).,,−

To gain deeper insight into the mechanism of E°′ modulation, the relative contributions of ΔH°′rc and ΔS°′rc were determined from E°′ measurements at various temperatures (Table ). The obtained values for both state functions
(Table ) were similar and demonstrated that
the ferric state in native chlorite dismutases (NdCld and NwCld) is
enthalpically stabilized (29 and 40 kJ mol–1, respectively),
whereas formation of the ferrous state is entropically favored (63
and 95 J mol–1 K–1, respectively).

Reduction-induced changes in enthalpy and entropy contain contributions
from both intrinsic protein-based factors (ΔH°′rc,int and ΔS°′rc,int) and solvent-based factors (ΔH°′rc,solv and ΔS°′rc,solv): ΔH°′rc = ΔH°′rc,int + ΔH°′rc,solv, and ΔS°′rc = ΔS°′rc,int + ΔS°′rc,solv. It has been shown that ΔH°′rc,int is determined primarily
by metal–ligand binding interactions and the electrostatics
among the metal, the protein environment, and the solvent, whereas
ΔS°′rc reflects the
oxidation-state-dependent changes in conformational degrees of freedom
of the polypeptide chain and solvent reorganization (ΔS°′rc,solv) effects. Our MD simulations have shown that the structures of both
the protein and the prosthetic group in the Fe(III) and Fe(II) forms
are very similar (ΔS°′rc,int ≈ 0), confirming that the change in entropy mainly reflects
solvent reorganization (ΔS°′rc ≈ ΔS°′rc,solv). This agrees with available data for the ferric and ferrous forms
of other heme proteins that indicate that, in general, reduction-induced
3D structural changes are quite small in heme proteins.,−

Because reduction-induced solvent reorganization effects usually
induce compensatory enthalpy and entropy changes, the corresponding
enthalpic contribution can be factored out from the measured enthalpy
change,,,, finally allowing estimation of the protein-based
contribution to ΔG°′rc = −nFE°′ = ΔH°′rc – TΔS°′rc = ΔH°′rc,int + ΔH°′rc,solv – TΔS°′rc,int – TΔS°′rc,solv. Because the solvent reorganization
effects cancel exactly in the enthalpy and entropy, it follows that
ΔG°′rc = −nFE°′ = ΔH°′rc,int – TΔS°′rc,int. Because the structures are very
similar, the internal entropy change must be very small (TΔS°′rc,int ≈
0). Hence, to a first approximation, the measured E°′ value coincides with ΔH°′rc,int and would ultimately be determined by the selective
enthalpic stabilization of one of the two redox states by first coordination
and electrostatic effects.,, As a consequence, ΔH°′rc,int = −nFE°′ corresponds to 10.9
kJ/mol for NdCld and 11.5 kJ/mol for NwCld (Table ). This approximation clearly suggests that in solution the
heme iron environment in the two Clds is very similar.

In chlorite
dismutases, the enthalpic stabilization of the ferric
form could be attributed to the basic character of the proximal histidine
(because of its hydrogen bond interaction with the nearby glutamate)
(Figure B) and to the polarity of the distal
heme site because of the presence of water molecules in the ferric
state (Figure ). In comparison with peroxidases
that also have heme b as prosthetic group and a proximal
histidine hydrogen-bonded to an acidic amino acid (i.e., aspartate)
like HRP or KatG (Table ), the polarity of the distal heme
cavity is less pronounced because of the lack of the catalytic histidine.
Recently, it has been reported that the imidazolate character of the
proximal histidine in Cld is also less pronounced than in peroxidases
because of weaker H-bonding interaction with the glutamate as suggested
from recent resonance Raman spectroscopy measurements., These differences could contribute to the more positive E°′ values in Cld compared to those of most
heme peroxidases, which (with the exception of MPO) have E°′ values in the range from −180 to −320
mV (Tables  and 3).

In summary, we could demonstrate that chlorite dismutases
from
both main lineages have, despite significantly different overall structures,
a very similar active site and access channel architecture and as
a consequence redox chemistry. Stabilization of the ferric high-spin
state is important for efficient reaction with chlorite, thereby producing
the enzyme intermediate Compound I and hypochlorite (reaction ). Because within a defined heme enzyme the same
molecular factors influence the redox properties of the heme iron
at different oxidation states [e.g., in heme peroxidases, the hierarchy
of E°′ values of Fe(III)/Fe(II) couples
reflects that of E°′ values of the Compound
I/ferric state couple],,− it is reasonable to assume that the oxidation capacity of Cld Compound
I is very high, possibly with E°′ values
of &gt;1 V. This usually needs, to prevent unspecific oxidation of
the
protein matrix, stabilization of Compound I by (i) a partially (e.g.,
histidine H-bonded to Asp or Glu) or fully negatively charged (cysteinate
or tyrosinate) proximal heme ligand and (ii) a short half-life of
Compound I due to efficient reaction with the electron donor(s). In
the case of Cld, both factors might contribute to partially prevent
side reactions, although kinetic investigations have shown that with
increasing chlorite concentrations the enzyme is progressively and
irreversibly inactivated.−

Supporting Information Available
EPR
simulation parameters of
spectra from NdCld and NwCld (Table 1) and molecular dynamics simulations
of NdCld and NwCld in the Fe(III) and Fe(II) states (Figure 1). This
material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi3013033_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Dr. Christopher W. M. Kay (University College
London, London, U.K.), who provided the EPR spectrometer for low-temperature
measurements.

Abbreviations
Cldchlorite
dismutase

NdCldchlorite dismutase
from Candidatus “Nitrospira defluvii”

NwCldchlorite dismutase
from N. winogradskyi

E°′standard reduction
potential

ΔH°′rcenthalpy change for the
reaction center upon reduction of the oxidized protein

ΔS°′rcentropy change for the reaction center upon
reduction of the oxidized protein

SHEstandard hydrogen electrode

rdfradial distribution function

rmsdroot-mean-square deviation

cw-EPRcontinuous wave
electron paramagnetic resonance

OTTLEoptical thin layer spectroelectrochemical

MDmolecular dynamics

PDBProtein Data Bank.

