Herpesviruses
make up one of
the most prevalent viral families, including nine human types that
cause a variety of severe illnesses and are classified into three
subfamilies. The α subfamily of
human herpesviruses (HHVs) includes herpes simplex viruses 1 and 2
(HSV-1 and HSV-2, respectively), as well as Varicella Zoster virus
(VZV). The β subfamily includes human cytomegalovirus (HCMV)
and human herpesviruses 6a, 6b, and 7 (HHV-6a, -6b, and -7, respectively).
Lastly, the γ subfamily includes Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and
Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV). All currently
approved treatments for herpesvirus infection target viral DNA replication.
However, these drugs suffer from poor efficacy because of viral resistance
mutations, the requirement of frequent intravenous injection, or severe
dose limiting side effects such as myelosuppression or nephrotoxicity.
For these reasons, there has been a prevailing interest in alternative
potential therapeutic targets for herpesvirus infection.

All human herpesviruses share a structurally
and functionally conserved
serine protease (Pr) that is critical in the formation of the mature
capsid and is allosterically activated through dimerization. Genetic deletion of this viral Pr in HSV-1 precluded
capsid maturation, confirming that the protease is necessary for successful
viral replication and validating the enzyme as a potential therapeutic
target. Similarly, knockdown of the maturational
Pr in murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV), a model of β herpesvirus
infection, causes a significantly reduced viral load. The critical role that these proteases play in the viral
replication cycle and their conservation across the HHVs make them
potential therapeutic targets.

Initial attempts to exploit HHV
proteases as therapeutic targets
were directed at the active site. These relied heavily on chemical
“warheads” for covalent inhibition and/or peptidomimetic
scaffolds., Despite some in vitro success,
efforts to target the active site of these essential serine proteases
have yet to yield inhibitors ready to advance into the clinic.,− Structural evidence helps explain the need for covalent inhibitors
and the lack of pharmacologically viable lead compounds. All HHV proteases
have a relatively shallow substrate binding pocket with a strict preference
for alanine at P1 and serine at P1′. In addition, substrate
binding is reported to occur through an induced-fit mechanism.− Being both shallow and dynamic, this active site is particularly
challenging to inhibit.

Through studying the structure–function
relationships of
these enzymes, researchers built up an understanding of their allosteric
regulation.,,,− Each monomer has an independent active site. In the monomeric state, the enzyme is inactive and partially disordered.
As the dimer, the enzyme is active, and the disordered C-terminal
residues of the monomer form two helices, one that functions as a
major contact surface at the dimer interface and one that interacts
with the catalytic site. This disorder-to-order transition links the
dimer interface to the catalytic site., Given the
evidence supporting an allosteric link between Pr dimerization and
activation, we have focused our efforts on identifying molecules that
target the dimer interface.,,,,, In doing so, we previously identified a
small molecule inhibitor of KSHV Pr designated DD2 [compound 1 (Table )].,

DD2, a benzyl-substituted
4-(pyridine-2-amido)benzoic acid, is
a helical peptide mimetic and allosteric inhibitor that prevents the
disorder-to-order transition that activates KSHV Pr, thus trapping
an inactive monomeric state., The primary DD2 binding
pocket, ∼15 Å from the active site, is formed by conformational
changes that occur only in the partially disordered monomer. The pocket
forms when Trp109, an aromatic hot spot in the core of the protein,
changes rotomeric state. The presence
of a conserved aromatic hot spot in all nine human herpesvirus proteases
suggests the potential for the development of broadly antiherpetic
small molecules that allosterically inhibit HHV Pr enzyme activity
by disrupting protein–protein interactions.

We set out
to determine whether DD2 or analogues thereof could
be pan allosteric inhibitors of herpesvirus proteases. To accomplish
this, we generated a series of compounds in which the carboxylate
of DD2 was replaced with polar nonionic or polar anionic functional
groups (Table ) and assessed the inhibitory
activity of the compounds. These new analogues and DD2 were evaluated
with respect to their potency and mechanism of action against a panel
of representative HHV proteases spanning all HHV subfamilies: HSV-2
(α), HCMV (β), EBV (γ), and KSHV (γ) proteases.
Binding of an inhibitor to KSHV Pr was characterized using our repertoire
of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) assays as well as X-ray crystallographic
studies, which established the mechanism of action and binding site
at atomic resolution. To facilitate more
rapid determination of the mechanism of inhibition, particularly where
NMR and crystallographic approaches are not readily available, we
applied a kinetic analysis that distinguishes between dissociative
(i.e., dimer disruption) and nondissociative inhibitors of obligate
dimeric enzymes. This analysis was first described and conducted for
dimer disruptors of HIV-1 Pr by Zhang and Poorman. Cumulatively, this approach allowed the development of
improved inhibitors and detailed analysis of the inhibition of this
highly dynamic protein–protein interface.

Materials and Methods
Materials
Buffer and solvent components were purchased
from VWR or Fisher Scientific at &gt;99% purity. The P6 peptide substrate
(PVYtBuQA-ACC) was purchased crude (AnaSpec, Inc.) and purified via
reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography on a C18 column as described previously. The
P4 peptide substrate, YtBuQA-ACC, was synthesized and purified as
previously described, but using the Symphony Quartet multiple synthesizer
(Protein Technologies, Inc.) for the addition of the last three amino
acids.

Protein Expression and
Purification
Expression and
purification of the KSHV, HCMV, HSV-2, and EBV proteases and their
respective isoleucine-to-valine and truncated variants were conducted
as previously described., Primer sequences are
listed in the .

Acquisition and Analysis of NMR Data
All protein NMR
data were acquired at 27 °C on a Bruker Avance 500 MHz spectrometer
equipped with a QCI CyroProbe and a B-ACS 60-slot autosampler. Protease
sample concentrations, buffer conditions, data acquisition, and data
processing were as previously described., NMR characterization of the small molecule inhibitors is described
in the  under Analog
Synthesis.

Determination of Kinetic IC50 Values
IC50 values were determined as previously described
with the
following modifications. A 2-fold dilution
series of the compound was prepared in 100% DMSO from 10 to 0.156
mM and/or from 5 to 0.078 mM. The P6 substrate concentrations were
5, 65, 150, and 30 μM for KSHV, EBV, HCMV, and HSV-2 proteases,
respectively. For KSHV, EBV, and HCMV proteases, the final enzyme
concentration was 1 μM in assay buffer [25 mM potassium phosphate
(pH 8), 150 mM KCl, 0.1 mM EDTA, and 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT)] with
a final DMSO concentration of 2%. HSV-2 protease assays were conducted
at a final enzyme concentration of 10 μM in the assay buffer
described above, supplemented with 10% glycerol and 500 mM sodium
citrate. HSV-2 Pr has very low activity and requires large amounts
of an antichaotropic agent to induce dimerization and activation. Data were acquired from a Spectra MAX Gemini
EM fluorescence microplate reader (Molecular Devices) using excitation
and emission wavelengths of 380 and 460 nm, respectively. The initial
velocity was used to calculate percent activity, which was plotted
versus inhibitor concentration and fit to eq  using IGOR Pro (WaveMetrics, Inc.). Y, U, L, C, and H correspond to the percent activity, maximal percent activity, minimal
percent activity, inhibitor concentration, and Hill slope, respectively.
All IC50 values are reported as the mean ± the standard
deviation (n = 3).Previously
reported IC50 values
for DD2 against KSHV Pr were determined with the concentration of
substrate (S0) used for screening, a value
approximately 10-fold greater than the KM (P6 substrate KM = 11 ± 3 μM; S0,prev = 100 μM). Herein, reported IC50 values were obtained at S0 = 0.5–1 × KM for all enzymes unless explicitly stated otherwise. Substrate-induced
dimerization has been reported for KSHV Pr whereby an excess of substrate
drives the monomer–dimer equilibrium toward the dimeric state,
decreasing the apparent potency of dimer disruptors. This explains why the KSHV IC50 value for DD2
reported herein is somewhat lower than that previously reported.

Zhang–Poorman Analysis
The analysis of Zhang
and Poorman is based on Scheme 1 and eqs S1 and S2 of the , which describe the linear
relationship between E0/√kexp and √kexp under first-order kinetics for inhibited and apo conditions, where E0 is the total enzyme concentration and kexp is the experimental first-order rate constant. The enzyme concentration is varied while the
initial substrate concentration, S0, is
held constant with or without inhibitor.

Data collection was
conducted in black round-bottom polystyrene 96-well plates (Corning)
with reaction volumes of 100 μL in assay buffer (described above).
The substrate concentration was optimized for each enzyme to achieve
first-order reaction kinetics. For EBV and HCMV proteases, the initial
concentration of the P6 substrate was 15 μM. The KM for KSHV Pr and P6 substrate is approximately 11 μM. This relatively low KM value prevented us from achieving S0 ≪ KM while still having substrate
in large excess of enzyme. To achieve the conditions described above,
we synthesized a shorter substrate, P4 (YtBuQA-ACC), with a KM of 80 μM, allowing us to satisfy the
constraints imposed by Zhang–Poorman analysis. For KSHV Pr,
15 μM P4 substrate was used. Concentrated enzyme stocks were
diluted into assay buffer in siliconized Eppendorf tubes to reach
concentrations of 1–4.6 μM for all proteases, with final
concentrations determined by a Hewlett-Packard 8453 UV–vis
spectrometer (1 cm path length). Inhibitor was added from a stock
in 100% DMSO, with a final assay DMSO concentration of 2%. Enzyme
and inhibitor were incubated at room temperature for 45 min and then
dispensed into the 96-well plate. Addition of 5 μL of a substrate
stock in 10% DMSO was used to start the reaction, resulting in a final
DMSO concentration of 2.5%. Reactions were conducted at room temperature,
and data were acquired as described above. Full kinetic curves were
recorded for the majority of reactions and fit to a single exponential
using IGOR Pro (Wavemetrics, Inc.) to determine kexp. For high inhibitor concentrations, with low enzyme
concentrations the signal remained linear and a full curve could not
be recorded, even over a 7 h time course. In these cases of low activity,
we utilized the relationship kexp = v0/S to calculate kexp from the initial velocity, where v0 is the initial velocity and S is the
substrate concentration determined from total hydrolysis. The use
of v0 as a substitute for kexp was noted by Zhang and Poorman and has been used successfully
elsewhere., The dependent variable (E0/√kexp)
is plotted as a function of √kexp for each inhibitor concentration and fit to a line in accordance
with eqs S1 and S2 of the .

Acquisition of X-ray Crystallography
Data and Determination
of Structure
Stock KSHV Pr Δ196 solutions for crystallography
were prepared at a concentration of 7 mg/mL in 100 mM KCl, 0.07 mM
EDTA, 16.5 mM KPi (pH 8.0), and 0.66 mM DTT. Inhibitor
was added to the stock protein solution to a final concentration of
1 mM (3.4-fold molar excess, final DMSO concentration of 9%) and incubated
at 30 °C for 30 min. The protein/inhibitor solution was added
in a 1:1 ratio to the reservoir solution, and crystals were grown
at 17 °C with the hanging drop vapor diffusion method. Initial
crystallization hits were identified using the MCSG2 sparse matrix
screen (Microlytics) and subsequently optimized by grid screening.
The final reservoir solution for compound 2 cocrystallization
consisted of 0.1 M sodium acetate (pH 7.8), 0.88 M NaH2PO4, 1.32 M K2HPO4, and 0.2 M KCl.
For compound 3, the reservoir solution contained 0.1
M imidazole (pH 8), 0.4 M NaH2PO4, 1.6 M K2HPO4, and 0.1 M NaCl. Crystals appeared after 14–30
days as small rectangular prisms. For compound 2, a 1.45
Å resolution data set was collected from a 0.2 mm × 0.05
mm × 0.05 mm crystal. In the case of compound 3,
a 2.15 Å resolution data set was collected from a smaller crystal
measuring 0.1 mm × 0.03 mm × 0.03 mm. Data were collected
at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Advanced Light Source beamline
8.3.1 using a crystal flash-cooled to 100 K in mother liquor with
12% glycerol as the cryoprotectant. Further details of the X-ray diffraction
data processing and analysis are described in the . Resulting structures of compounds 2 and 3 in complex with truncated KSHV protease
were deposited in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) as entries 4P3H and 4P2T, respectively.

Structural figures within this paper and the  were created using UCSF Chimera version
1.8.1. Chimera is developed by the Resource for Biocomputing, Visualization,
and Informatics at the University of California, San Francisco (supported
by National Institute of General Medical Sciences Grant P41-GM103311).

Modeling Using the Protein Local Optimization Program (PLOP)
MarvinSketch version 5.11.3 (ChemAxon) was used to generate mol2
files for compounds 2 and 3 based on the
PDB coordinates determined from their cocrystal structures. PLOP (M.
Jacobson, http://www.jacobsonlab.org) was used to optimize
the entire monomer–ligand complex and structural waters within
10 Å of the ligand using the opt boolean followed by the minim
side and minim res commands.− OPLS-AA 2005 force field parameters
for compounds 2 and 3 were generated using
the hetgrp_ffgen command from Schrodinger with mol2 files from MarvinSketch
as input.

Results
A Scaffold for Broad-Spectrum
Allosteric Inhibition of Human
Herpesvirus Proteases
DD2, compound 2, and compound 3 inhibit HCMV (β), EBV (γ), HSV-2 (α),
and KSHV (γ) proteases with micromolar potencies (Figure ). KSHV Pr, the HHV Pr used in the discovery of
DD2, was the most potently inhibited enzyme with IC50 values
of 1.0 ± 0.1 μM for compound 2, 1.5 ±
0.3 μM for DD2, and 3.6 ± 0.7 μM for compound 3 (Figure ). All compounds bearing
a polar but nonionic substitution for the carboxylate of DD2 [compounds 4–7 (Table )] showed no inhibition
of KSHV Pr, although some of these analogues exhibit poor solubility
at low micromolar concentrations. For example, compounds 5 and 7 were found by dynamic light scattering to form
large aggregates (&gt;80 nm radii) at 1 μM. These results suggest
limited concentrations of the free compound are available in solution
under such conditions, precluding conclusions about the SAR. Compounds 4 and 6, however, did not form large aggregates
but were inactive (Figure S1 and methods of the ). Overall, the data for compounds 2–7 suggest the importance of an anionic group at the
position of the carboxylate in DD2 for inhibition.

IC50 values
across multiple HHV proteases. IC50 values for DD2 and
compounds 2 and 3 against
KSHV, EBV, HCMV, and HSV-2 proteases. Two asterisks for HSV-2 indicate
values were determined with a buffer and enzyme concentration different
from those used for all other enzymes ().

The compounds developed here had the lowest potency against
HSV-2
Pr, with IC50 values ranging from ∼37 to 94 μM
(Figure ). This may be in part due to the
high concentration of enzyme and antichaotropic agents necessary for
activity with this enzyme (). While DD2 inhibits HCMV and EBV proteases with similar potencies
(IC50 values of 7.4 ± 2 and 7.7 ± 0.6 μM,
respectively), compound 3 inhibits HCMV Pr with an IC50 of 39 ± 8 μM and EBV with an IC50 of
19 ± 1 μM. Compound 2 is more potent than
either DD2 or compound 3 against HCMV and EBV proteases
(IC50 values of 4.7 ± 0.4 and 4.0 ± 0.1 μM,
respectively). It is noteworthy that the IC50 values for
these enzymes are similar to the total enzyme concentration used.
This may indicate tight binding; however, analysis of tight-binding
inhibition is confounded by the monomer–dimer equilibrium in
our system. The IC50 value for DD2 against KSHV protease
is similar at 395 and 1300 nM total enzyme, suggesting stoichiometric
inhibitor binding is not the only determinant of IC50. For
all enzymes, compound 2 was most potent, followed by
DD2 and finally compound 3. While broad-spectrum inhibition
of herpesvirus proteases is apparent from these data, the mechanism
of inhibition cannot be inferred from IC50 data. We therefore
applied Zhang–Poorman analysis to determine whether a consistent
mechanism of inhibition was operating across Pr family members. For
this analysis, we used our most potent inhibitor, compound 2, as a representative of the inhibitor class.

Application of Zhang–Poorman
Analysis in Investigating
Dimer Disruption of Human Herpesvirus Proteases
Zhang and
Poorman developed a kinetic approach for determining whether an obligate
dimeric enzyme, HIV-1 Pr, is inhibited by a dissociative mechanism
(dimer disruption) or a nondissociative mechanism (Scheme 1 and eq
1 of the ) using
a plot of E0/√kexp (y-axis) versus √kexp (x-axis) with and without inhibitor.
This plot is generated by measuring the experimental first-order rate
constant (kexp) with varied enzyme (E0) and inhibitor concentrations as described
in . When dimer disruption is the dominant mode of inhibition,
an increasing inhibitor concentration results in an increasing y-intercept that scales as 1 + [I]/Ki, where [I] is the total concentration of the inhibitor and Ki is the dissociation constant of the inhibitor–monomer
complex (eq 1 of the ). Zhang–Poorman analysis provides
orthogonal mechanistic data based solely on enzyme kinetics, complementing
our NMR-based assays.

Application of this analysis to KSHV Pr
and our known dimer disruptor, DD2, provided a positive control and
illustrates the effectiveness of this analysis for HHV proteases.
As expected, increasing concentrations of DD2 resulted in increasing y-intercepts, indicating higher apparent dissociation constants
for the dimer [Kd,app (Figure b)]. For strictly dissociative inhibition where Ki is relatively small and on the order of the
inhibitor concentration, the competitive (Kc) and noncompetitive (Kc′) dissociation
constants are very large, and the noncompetitive rate constant (kcat′) is small, the slope of these plots
simplifies to (kcat/KM)−1 and should be constant across all
inhibitor concentrations (Scheme 1 and eq 2 of the ). The
slope we observe decreases slightly with an increasing DD2 concentration.
This observation is consistent with mixed-type inhibition previously
reported for this inhibitor. A decrease
in slope with an increasing inhibitor concentration indicates Kc/Kc′ &gt;
1
and Kc &gt; Kc′, suggesting the dimer–substrate–inhibitor
complex is more dominant than the dimer–inhibitor complex in
contributing to mixed inhibition (derivation in the ). This illustrates how Zhang–Poorman
analysis can reveal both the more subtle noncompetitive inhibition
(Kc′) and the diagnostic increase
in the y-intercept indicative of dimer disruption
(dissociative inhibition).

Zhang–Poorman analysis of DD2 and compound 2. Against KSHV protease, both compound 2 (a)
and DD2
(b) show an increasing intercept with an increasing inhibitor concentration,
indicative of dimer disruption. The same trend is observed for compound 2 with HCMV (c) and EBV (d) proteases.

We applied this analysis to our new inhibitor compound 2 against our panel of HHV proteases. HSV-2 Pr had too little
activity
to reliably perform the kinetic analysis under the required first-order
conditions and so was excluded from analysis. Zhang–Poorman
analysis of compound 2 for the other three proteases
(KSHV, EBV, and HCMV) is fully consistent with a mechanism of dimer
disruption. In each case, increasing concentrations of compound 2 result in increased y-intercepts and Kd,app values (Figure a,c,d). Mixed inhibition was also observed for compound 2, indicated by a decreasing slope with an increasing inhibitor concentration.

Compounds 2 and 3 Disrupt Dimerization
by Binding the Dimer Interface Core Analogously across All HHV Protease
Subfamilies
Application of 13C–1H HSQC spectroscopy using selectively [13C-ε-methyl]methionine-labeled KSHV Pr allowed for more direct
structural confirmation that compounds 2 and 3 disrupt dimerization. Met197 in helix 5 of KSHV Pr is directly involved
in monomer–monomer interaction (Figure a,c). The monomer–dimer equilibrium of KSHV Pr exhibits slow
exchange on the NMR time scale, giving rise to distinct Met197 monomer
and Met197 dimer resonances in the HSQC spectrum. It was previously
shown that the addition of DD2 results in the loss of the Met197 dimer
peak and a chemical shift perturbation in the Met197 monomer peak,
diagnostic of dimer disruption. Addition
of equimolar amounts of compound 2 or 3 has
a similar effect with a complete loss of the dimer peak and a shift
in the Met197 monomer peak [Δδtotal(compound 2) = 0.095 ppm, and Δδtotal(compound 3) = 0.049 ppm (Figure b)].
These data provide further support for the conclusion drawn from Zhang–Poorman
analysis though fall short of defining the site of binding for these
inhibitors.

HHV domain diagram and 13C–1H HSQC
spectrum of KSHV protease with selectively labeled Met197. HHVs share
a common structure consisting of seven β strands and six major
helices. Helices 1 (cyan) and 5 (blue) are major components of the
dimer interface. Helices 5 and 6 (yellow) undergo a disorder-to-order
transition upon dimerization. The locations of the aromatic hot spot
residues (KSHV W109, HCMV Y128, EBV W111, and HSV2 Y124), active site
serines (KSHV S114, HCMV S132, EBV S116, and HSV2 S129), conserved
oxyanion arginines (KSHV R142 and R143, HCMV R165 and R166, EBV R147
and R148, and HSV2 R156 and R157), and sites of truncation are indicated.
(a) Met197 exhibits distinct resonances for the dimeric and monomeric
states of KSHV Pr. The spectral overlay of the apo form (black), 1
molar equiv of compound 3 (cyan), and 1 molar equiv of
compound 2 (b) shows addition of either compound results
in a reduction in the Met197 dimer peak intensity as well as a chemical
shift perturbation and an increase in the intensity of the Met197
monomer peak. The Met1 peak remains unperturbed. The location of Met197
at the dimer interface (c) is shown on the wild-type dimeric KSHV
protease crystal structure (PDB entry 2PBK) in the proximity of the aromatic hot
spot residue Trp109.

To determine whether our new inhibitors 2 and 3 bind at the dimer interface, we first performed selective
[13C-δ1-methyl]isoleucine labeling
for analysis by 13C–1H HSQC spectroscopy.
Like we did for KSHV Pr–DD2 interactions, we hypothesized that
binding of compounds 2 and 3 would take
place at the conserved putative aromatic hot spot of each enzyme and
be largely independent of the two C-terminal helices. This led us
to design a truncated obligate monomeric construct of HSV-2 Pr analogous
to those previously reported for KSHV and HCMV proteases [KSHV Pr
Δ196 and HCMV Pr Δ221, respectively (Figures a and b,d, pink)]. For HSV-2
Pr, a stop codon was introduced at residue 214, leaving two turns
of helix 5 and completely removing helix 6 to generate HSV-2 Pr Δ213
(Figures a and f,
pink). Selective [13C-δ1-methyl]isoleucine
labeling provided a set of NMR probes for monitoring binding at the
dimer interface near the aromatic hot spot. In addition to selective
labeling, the large majority of 15N–1H HSQC resonances for KSHV Pr have been reported previously, including
that of the side chain indole ring of Trp109. Perturbation of the dimer interface residue Trp109 resonance provides
additional support for binding at the dimer interface hot spot.

13C–1H HSQC Ile spectra in the presence
of compound 2. The 13C–1H HSQC spectra of selectively 13C–1H
[δ1-methyl]isoleucine-labeled truncated constructs
KSHV Pr Δ196 (a), HCMV Pr Δ221 (c), and HSV-2 Pr Δ213
(e) in the presence of 0 (black) and 5–10 molar equiv of compound 2 (red) indicate compound 2 binds at the dimer
interface across representative members of all three herpesvirus subfamilies.
Prime signs denote minor conformer peak resonances. The locations
of isoleucine δ1-methyl groups in the KSHV (b), HCMV (d), and
HSV-2 (f) truncated constructs are shown at the dimer interface, and
color-coded with respect to the distance to the putative aromatic
hot spot (red). Isoleucine residues within 5 Å (green), 5–10
Å (blue), 10–15 Å (orange), and &gt;15 Å (yellow)
are indicated. Helix 5 (tan), the active site (cyan), and the point
of truncation (pink) are also denoted.

Addition of a &gt;5-fold molar excess of compound 2 or 3 to KSHV Pr Δ196 yielded resonance perturbations
in
both the 13C–1H and 15N–1H HSQC spectra indicative of binding at the dimer interface
in the same pocket bound by DD2 (Figure a
and Figure S3 of the ). All seven isoleucines of KSHV Pr Δ196 are resolved in the 13C–1H HSQC spectrum and were previously
assigned. The crystal structure of DD2
bound to KSHV Pr Δ196 shows that Ile44 and Ile105 contribute
hydrophobic surface area to the DD2 pocket and are closest to the
aromatic hot spot residue Trp109 [≤5 Å (Figure b)]. Therefore, binding of a small molecule to the
DD2 pocket is expected to most significantly perturb resonances corresponding
to Ile44 and Ile105 while leaving the five remaining isoleucine peaks
largely unperturbed. Indeed, in the presence of compound 2, Ile44 and Ile105 exhibit significant peak shifts [for Ile44, Δδtotal = 0.078 ppm; for Ile105, Δδtotal = 0.094 ppm (Figure S2 of the )]. Compound 3 binding and positive control DD2 exhibit
similar effects [for Ile44, Δδtotal(compound 3) = 0.063 ppm and Δδtotal(DD2) = 0.060 ppm; for Ile105, Δδtotal(compound 3) = 0.120 ppm and Δδtotal(DD2) = 0.087 ppm (Figure  and Figure S2 of the )]. Ile44 also exhibits
substantial peak broadening for all compounds. Addition of DD2, compound 2, or compound 3 causes extensive peak broadening
of the Trp109 indole HN 15N–1H HSQC resonance,
further supporting the conclusion that DD2, compound 2, and compound 3 bind the same transient allosteric
pocket at the dimer interface (Figure S3 of the ).

13C–1H HSQC
Ile spectra in the presence
of compound 3. The 13C–1H HSQC spectra of selectively 13C–1H
[δ1-methyl]isoleucine-labeled truncated constructs
KSHV Pr Δ196 (a and b), HCMV Pr Δ221 (c and d), and HSV-2
Pr Δ213 (e and f) in the presence of 0 (black) and 5–10
molar equiv of compound 3 (red; a, c, and f) or DD2 (red;
b, d, and e) indicate compound 3 and DD2 bind at the
dimer interface across representative members of all three herpesvirus
subfamilies.

NMR was utilized to map
the binding of a small molecule to truncated
HCMV Pr (HCMV Pr Δ221). HCMV Pr Δ221 contains only two
isoleucines, Ile61 and Ile96, assigned by isoleucine-to-valine mutations
(Figure d and Figure S5 of the ). In the wild-type dimer
crystal structure, Ile61 and Ile96 are located ∼5 and ∼9
Å from the putative aromatic hot spot Tyr128, respectively (Figure d, PDB entry 1CMV). Addition of an approximately 10-fold
molar excess of compound 2 or 3 to HCMV
Pr Δ221 resulted in peak broadening of both the Ile61 and Ile96
probes (Figures c and d). A comparable effect was observed for the addition of DD2 at the
same relative concentration (Figure c). The
decrease in peak volume was greater for compound 2 than
for compound 3 with both isoleucine probes. For all three
inhibitors, exchange peak broadening is consistent with binding to
HCMV Pr.

13C–1H HSQC experiments
suggest compounds 2 and 3 also bind at the
dimer interface of HSV-2
Pr. The truncated HSV-2 Pr construct (HSV-2 Δ213) contains nine
isoleucine residues (Figure f), which were
assigned by isoleucine-to-valine mutations (Figure S4 of the ). Addition of DD2, compound 2, or compound 3 causes substantial peak broadening
for the Ile21 and Ile57, and to a lesser extent Ile86 and Ile121,
peak resonances (Figures e and e,f). Ile21, Ile86, and Ile121 are predicted to be in the
proximity of the putative hot spot residue Tyr124 (PDB entry 1AT3). The observation
that the resonance of Ile57 is also perturbed indicates a change in
the electronic environment farther from the predicted binding site,
consistent with changes in conformational equilibria in the presence
of a compound or binding to multiple sites. In total, the NMR experiments
described here suggest that DD2, compound 2, and compound 3 bind the dimer interface across representative members of
all HHV Pr subfamilies. For KSHV Pr, X-ray crystallographic analysis
of KSHV Pr Δ196 cocrystallized with compound 2 or 3 confirms at atomic resolution that these compounds bind
the same pocket as DD2 and adopt similar conformations (see below).

Cocrystals with Compounds 2 and 3 Confirm
the Mode of Binding and Explain Structure–Activity Relationships
The discovery that an anionic group is required for inhibitory
activity is not clearly explained by the DD2–KSHV Pr Δ196
cocrystal structure or other prior studies., To improve our understanding of the SAR for this compound series
and to establish the effect of bioisosteric replacement on binding
to KSHV protease at an atomic level, we pursued cocrystallization
studies of KSHV Pr Δ196 with compounds 2 and 3.

Compounds 2 and 3 cocrystallized
with KSHV Pr Δ196 to yield 1.45 and 2.15 Å resolution structures,
respectively (PDB entry 4P3H for compound 2 and PDB entry 4P2T for compound 3). The two structures overlay with a Cα rmsd of 0.25
Å. Comparison to the KSHV Pr Δ196–DD2 cocrystal
structure (PDB entry 3NJQ) gives a Cα rmsd of 0.3 Å for both. Structures with compounds 2 and 3 have an asymmetric unit containing two
truncated monomers, each with largely the same conformation [Cα
rmsd ∼ 0.8 Å (Figure )]. A noteworthy
difference between the two monomers is the position of the C-terminal
residues, which are in the proximity of the inhibitor. Residues Val190
and onward diverge in backbone position (Cα rmsd for residues
190–193 of 3 Å), with monomers A and B contacting opposite
faces of the small molecule inhibitor (Figure S6 of the ). Those same residues
from a given monomer compared across structures overlay well [e.g.,
residues 190–193 of monomer B from PDB entries 4P3H and 4P2T (Figure S6 of the )]. The difference in the
observed conformation of the C-terminal residues between monomers,
but not between the same monomer across structures, is likely dictated
by differences in crystal packing interactions experienced by the
two monomers. The interface between monomers is largely hydrophilic
and contains structural waters. The buried solvent-accessible surface
areas of the monomer interfaces for the cocrystal structures of compounds 2 and 3 are 1550 and 1400 Å, respectively,
while the solvent-excluded surface areas are only 670 and 615 Å,
respectively. This strongly suggests the interface between monomers
is purely crystallographic, consistent with NMR data showing this
construct is monomeric in solution. The overall architecture of the
unit cell resembled the configuration and had the same space group
(I222) as the previously published DD2–KSHV
Pr Δ196 structure (PDB entry 3NJQ) despite the use of different crystallization
conditions. Both monomer chains have
a small molecule bound in the DD2 pocket at aromatic hot spot Trp109.
Chain B contains an additional instance of the small molecule that
acts as a crystal contact and bridges asymmetric units, as previously
observed (Figure ). All three instances of the inhibitor for both structures have an
occupancy of 1 and average B factors in the range
of 20–25, consistent with the B factor of
surrounding residues.

Asymmetric unit with the inhibitor bound. The asymmetric
unit contains
a crystallographic dimer of inhibited monomers (monomers A and B).
The compound 2-bound structure (a) and compound 3-bound structure (b) show the major inhibitor molecules (bright
green) and the bridging inhibitor molecule (dark green). The active
site Ser-His-His catalytic triad is colored purple, distant from the
major inhibitor molecules.

Examination of monomer A for both cocrystal structures shows
a
hydrogen bond between the carboxylate bioisostere and a structural
water molecule, as well as van der Waals interactions with Pro192
and the Leu193 side chain (Figure a,c). The
partial positive charge of proline and the negative π electron
density of aromatic groups such as tetrazoles have been reported to
interact specifically. The methyl of
the sulfonamide in compound 3 of monomer A contacts the
Leu193 side chain (Figure a). The larger acylsulfonamide
moiety appears to help order the C-terminal residues in monomer A
through van der Waals interactions between Leu193 and the methyl of
the sulfonamide, as well as interactions with the Leu196 backbone.
Density extending to the final residue, Leu196, is present in the
cocrystal structure with compound 3, whereas density
for residues Glu194, Thr195, and Leu196 was not present in the structure
of monomer A with the smaller tetrazole moiety of compound 2. The structure of monomer B shows hydrogen bonding from the carboxylate
bioisostere to the Ser191 hydroxyl for both the tetrazole and sulfonamide
substituents (Figure b,d). In monomer A, Ser191
was positioned away from the small molecule binding pocket (Figure a,c). This interaction with Ser191 may be responsible
for ordering the C-terminus, which could be resolved in both cocrystal
structures, contrary to monomer A where it was only resolved for the
compound 3 cocrystal structure. Hydrogen bonding to structural
waters is also observed for the tetrazole of compound 2 in monomer B. Interactions between the remainder of the inhibitor
and the pocket for both monomers mirror those previously reported
for DD2 and are comprised primarily of interactions between the benzyl
and cyclohexyl moieties of the small molecules and aliphatic and hydrophobic
residues of the pocket. Data collection
and refinement statistics are listed in Table S1 of the .

Compound 2 and 3 binding pockets. Compound 2 (green)
in monomers A (a) and B (b) and compound 3 (green) in
both monomers (c and d) bind the same largely hydrophobic
pocket. The pocket is comprised primarily of aliphatic residues where
binding is driven by hydrophobic interactions with the cyclohexyl
and benzyl substituents of the compound. Trp109 adopts an open rotameric
conformation relative to the dimeric KSHV Pr structure (PDB entry 2PBK). In momomer A,
both compounds interact with Pro192 (cyan) and a structural water
molecule. Compound 3 interacts extensively with Leu193
(cyan). In monomer B, both compounds hydrogen bond to the Ser191 hydroxyl,
while in monomer A, Ser191 faces away from the small molecule. The
mesh displays the 2Fo – Fc density map contoured to 1σ.

Given that the small molecule inhibitors are at
the interface between
asymmetric units and that three distinct conformations are observed,
crystal packing was analyzed to determine if one instance of the inhibitor
might be more representative of solution-state binding than others.
The bridging molecule (associated with monomer B) is oriented such
that in the absence of the crystal lattice the benzyl and cyclohexyl
rings would be largely solvent-exposed, with a total solvent-excluded
surface area of just 70 Å2. This would be highly unfavorable
and is not likely to exist in solution. In contrast, the inhibitor
bound at Trp109 in monomer B buries 288 Å2 of solvent-excluded
surface area. In monomer A, the symmetry-mate bridging inhibitor molecule
interacts extensively with the monomer A inhibitor and appears to
severely perturb the small molecule binding pose (Figure S7 of the ). Approximately 30% of
the total surface area of the monomer A inhibitor molecule is buried
by other instances of the inhibitor in the lattice, in comparison
to only half of that (∼15%) for the monomer B inhibitor. For
these reasons, we hypothesize that the monomer B inhibitor bound in
the Trp109 pocket is most representative of the solution state, not
that of monomer A or the bridging molecule.

It was not immediately
apparent how these structures, or the previous
DD2–KSHV Pr Δ196 structure, explain the observation that
only anionic replacements of the carboxylate in DD2 inhibit enzyme
activity, while polar nonionic groups such as the carboxamide and
ester (compounds 4 and 6, respectively)
show no inhibition. To improve our understanding of solution-state
binding and the observed structure–activity relationships (SARs)
for DD2 and its analogues, the inhibitor-bound monomer was minimized
using the Protein Local Optimization Program (PLOP) with the OPLS2005
force field (). Minimization
of the monomer–ligand complex alone is intended to help remove
artifacts introduced by crystal packing. This modeling of monomer
B predicts an interaction between cationic Arg82 and the anionic substituent
of these inhibitors, with very little change in backbone or side chain
positions in the pocket (Figure b,e and Figure
S8 of the ). Arg82–inhibitor
interaction was not observed in either crystal structure or in the
previous KSHV Pr Δ196–DD2 structure. Hypothesizing that
this interaction could take place in solution, we examined the packing
of neighboring symmetry-mate molecules in the crystal lattice and
revealed how crystal packing could prevent this interaction from taking
place. In monomer B, the symmetry-mate Leu140 side chain (from chain
A of a neighboring asymmetric unit) sterically occludes an Arg82–compound
interaction (Figure a,d). For monomer A, the
symmetry-mate bridging inhibitor molecule interacts with Arg82 and
sterically occludes interaction with the monomer A inhibitor molecule
(Figure S7 of the ). Crystallographic data for all three structures, however, suggest
the Arg82 side chain is dynamic with a high average B factor (relative to the structure average) and density consistent
with at least one alternate conformation. To test the prediction that
Arg82 interacts with the anionic substituent of DD2 and its analogues,
IC50 values were determined for DD2, compound 2, and compound 3 with the R82Q mutant of KSHV Pr. Even
with this conservative mutation, which retained potential polar interaction
and the overall side chain shape, a 3–4-fold decrease in potency
was observed, indicating weaker binding of KSHV Pr R82Q compared to
that of the wild-type protease (Figure c,f
and Figure S9 of the ).

Compound binding mode with and without crystal packing. Models
of compounds 2 and 3 were generated by minimizing
the compound–monomer complex using PLOP (b and e). Arg82 is
predicted to interact with the anionic carboxylate bioisostere, in
contrast to the crystal structure in which a symmetry-mate Leu140
side chain prevents such interaction (a and d). IC50 values
determined for KSHV Pr R82Q are substantially greater (reduced potency)
than those for WT KSHV Pr (c and f).

Discussion
Small molecules that allosterically regulate
protein function have
been increasingly sought-after as an alternative to classical active
site inhibitors.− The homodimeric human herpesvirus proteases illustrate
one such case in which small molecule allosteric modulators of activity
could find extensive use in both improving our understanding of herpesvirus
biology and treating infection. Because these proteases have thus
far been recalcitrant to noncovalent active site inhibition, likely
because of their shallow and conformationally dynamic substrate binding
site, we pursued allosteric inhibitors., Targeting
protein–protein interactions with small molecules, while still
a major challenge in chemical biology and drug discovery, represented
an opportunity and alternative approach to regulating HHV Pr activity.
The conserved allosteric link between the dimer interface and each
monomer’s active site allowed us to pursue a small molecule
that allosterically inhibits HHV proteases from all subfamilies by
targeting their dimer interfaces.

Our data support a model in
which compounds 2 and 3 allosterically inhibit
representatives of all three subfamilies
of HHV proteases in a manner analogous to DD2 inhibition of KSHV Pr.
In this model, they bind a pocket at the dimer interface, &gt;10 Å
from the active site. Binding to this site prevents C-terminal helices
5 and 6 from folding against the hydrophobic dimer interface. While
these two helices are in a disordered state, the oxyanion hole of
the active site, normally formed in part by the two conserved arginines
in contact with helix 6, cannot adopt the correct conformation that
allows efficient proteolysis of peptide substrates to occur. Additionally,
substrate binding may be prevented by conformational changes that
occlude the substrate binding pocket, such as movement of loop residues
14–27 in KSHV Pr (Figure ). In this model, binding of compound 2 or 3 results in trapping of the inactive monomer, preventing
homodimerization and thus allosterically inhibiting proteolysis across
all HHV Pr subfamilies.

Model of the conserved mechanism of inhibition.
Compounds 2 and 3 and DD2 bind an allosteric
pocket in
the core of the protein preventing folding of helix 5 (H5, blue) and
helix 6 (H6, yellow), “trapping” the inactive monomer
(right). In contrast to the active dimer (left), when H6 is unfolded,
two conserved arginines no longer stabilize the oxyanion hole (red
arrow), thus preventing proteolytic activity. The active site serine
is largely unperturbed; however, a loop (right) partially occludes
the substrate binding cleft. R in the chemical structure represents
anionic carboxylate bioisosteres.

Via alteration of the carboxylate moiety of the parent compound,
DD2, compound 2 was identified and demonstrated to have
comparable or improved potency against all HHV proteases. This improvement
could be caused by the larger van der Waals surface area of the tetrazole
compared to the carboxylate functional group of DD2, without additional
rotatable bonds, as found in compound 3. Compound 3 may exhibit IC50 values higher than those of
DD2 due to steric or entropic effects deriving from the larger acylsulfonamide
moiety.

The application of Zhang–Poorman analysis to
HHV Pr family
members provides a new tool for mechanism of action studies with potential
inhibitors and suggests utility for the approach with other dimeric
enzymes. This strictly kinetic approach is more rapid and cost-effective
than NMR-based assays, with potential for use as a secondary screen
in high-throughput screening campaigns for dimer disruptors. The data
obtained from the kinetic analysis complement direct structural methods
when they are available, as showcased here. Zhang–Poorman analysis
shows that compound 2 inhibits primarily by dimer disruption
of KSHV (γ), EBV (γ), and HCMV (β) proteases. Selective 13C–1H [ε-methyl]Met
labeling of KSHV Pr confirms dimer disruption, wherein slow exchange
allows for the observation of distinct dimer and monomer Met197 peaks
and addition of compound 2 or 3 results
in a loss of the dimer resonance. Across representative proteases
from all three subfamilies, selective 13C/1H
[δ1-methyl]Ile data indicate compounds 2 and 3 bind at the dimer interface in the core
of the Pr monomer &gt;10 Å from the active site.

Interestingly,
nascent structure–activity relationships
(SARs) for this class of inhibitors suggest a role for carboxylate
or carboxylate bioisosteres in inhibiting HHV proteases. This prompted
us to pursue cocrystallization studies with compounds 2 and 3 and to re-examine the DD2-KSHV Δ196 structure.
Initial crystallographic results did not reveal an obvious structural
explanation for this observation. After careful analysis, it became
apparent that crystallographic contacts obstructed the key interaction
driving the observed SAR, namely, formation of a salt bridge between
Arg82 and the anionic substituent of this class of inhibitors. This
interaction was predicted from computational modeling of the asymmetric
unit outside of the context of the crystal lattice. A conservative
mutation of Arg82 to glutamine supported the conclusion that Arg82
interacts with members of this inhibitor series. The IC50 of DD2 for the R82Q mutant was roughly 3–4-fold higher than
that for the wild-type enzyme, suggesting a significantly weaker binding
to the DD2 pocket. In this case, minimization of the structure without
surrounding symmetry-mate molecules likely revealed a more accurate
solution-state structure. This approach may be particularly important
for protein–protein interaction inhibitor studies in which
an exposed protein-binding interface may be involved in crystallographic
contacts that are not representative of conformations in solution.

Consistent with other examples of small molecules binding at large
protein surfaces, compounds 2 and 3 rely
on the malleability of protein–protein interfaces, binding
a cryptic pocket not apparent from apo structures., Strikingly, our model suggests that some conformations sampled in
the dynamic and inactive monomeric states of HHV proteases are shared
across subfamilies and are thus available to be trapped by compounds
such as DD2, compound 2, and compound 3.
This has broad implications for the discovery of allosteric inhibitors,
indicating that highly dynamic proteins of the same family may share
pockets present in states with diminished or enhanced activity that
could be exploited for modulation by small molecules. This observation
is consistent with and expands on prior reports using sequence conservation
in large protein families to infer residue networks involved in allostery., Many examples of both homo- and heterodimeric complexes that undergo
conformational changes upon dimerization are detailed in the literature
and could be subject to allosteric regulation, especially those in
which one or both partners are in part intrinsically unfolded.−

In summary, we have established kinetic and structural methods
for analysis of representative members of all three subfamilies of
the HHV proteases. In doing so, we showed that compound 2 has improved potency and allosterically inhibits HHV proteases broadly
by disrupting dimerization. At 1.45 Å resolution, the cocrystal
structure with compound 2 bound provides the highest-resolution
structure to date of the KSHV Pr monomer bound to a protein–protein
interaction inhibitor. SAR data and modeling inform our interpretation
of cocrystallization studies as well as previously published data
for this class of inhibitors and will aid in future screening and
design against this family of targets. These analyses and discoveries
provide an approach for the identification of small molecules that
allosterically regulate protein activity by targeting protein–protein
interactions.

Supporting Information Available
Additional data and graphics
to aid in the interpretation of this work. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5003234_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Prof. Geeta Narlikar,
Dr. Brian Metcalf, and Prof.
R. Kip Guy for useful discussions and technical support.

Abbreviations
ACC7-amino-4-carbamoylmethylcoumarin

DD2dimer disruptor
2

DTTdithiothreitol

EBV PrEpstein-Barr
virus protease

HCMV Prhuman cytomegalovirus protease

HHV Prhuman herpesvirus protease

HSQCheteronuclear single-quantum coherence

HSV-2 Prherpes simplex
virus 2 protease

KSHV PrKaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus protease

MCMVmurine cytomegalovirus

rmsdroot-mean-square
deviation

SARstructure–activity
relationship

tButert-butylglycine

VZVVaricella Zoster virus.

