Bacterial plasmids are extrachromosomal
genetic elements, characterized by an autonomous replication mechanism
when transferred into a suitable host. Understanding how such plasmids
transfer and replicate provides important information about how such
genetic material might be controlled. In this context, it is important
to understand control elements that differentiate plasmid replication
from that of chromosomal DNA, for example, to provide potential targets
for drugs to impede the spread of these plasmids. Some bacterial plasmids
use a mechanism of replication different from the bidirectional mechanism
that is normal for the chromosomal DNA. In the latter, the double-stranded
DNA (dsDNA), separated at the origin, is simultaneously unwound in
each direction by helicases, allowing DNA replication on both strands
moving away from the origin. An alternative mechanism is termed asymmetric,
rolling circle replication and is used by plasmids, including those
belonging to the pT181 family, for example, those from Staphylococcus
aureus that contain antibiotic resistance genes. These plasmids are transferred readily between
Gram-positive organisms, thereby transmitting selective advantage.

Asymmetric, rolling circle replication starts with the interaction
between a replication initiator protein (Rep), which is encoded on
the plasmid, and the double-stranded origin of replication (DSO) sequence
on the plasmid. In this work, the particular protein RepD from staphylococcal
plasmid pC221 interacts with the DSO sequence, oriD. RepD binds as a dimer with high affinity
to an inverted complementary repeat, ICRIII, that is contained within
the DSO (Figure A), so RepD is brought into
the proximity of the neighboring ICRII sequence. The latter is often assumed to have a cruciform structure,
as shown in the cartoon in Figure A, although
its actual structure may depend on the degree of DNA supercoiling
and the binding of initiator proteins. RepD nicks one strand [the (+)-strand] of the DNA within the ICRII
sequence, resulting in a covalent phosphodiester between the tyrosine
within the active site of RepD and the 5′-end of the nicked,
(+)-strand DNA., (+)-Strand elongation is initiated
by PcrA helicase and DNA polymerase III from the host. PcrA binds
to the exposed single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) of the (−)-strand
and unwinds in the 3′- to 5′-direction, relative to
this strand. RepD then remains part of the replication complex during
the complete synthesis of a new (+)-strand of the plasmid DNA, using
the parental (−)-strand as the template for the polymerase. RepD remaining associated with PcrA during this
process results in displacement of a ssDNA loop. The (+)-strand extension
continues around the plasmid until it reaches the DSO again. At this
point, RepD performs a series of transesterifications to produce strand
exchange, to resolve the complex, probably
using nicking sites on each monomer of the dimer. The complete, double-stranded
plasmid is released, along with a circular single-stranded plasmid,
created from the (+)-strand and RepD as an inactive form, covalently
modified with a short length of DNA. The
displaced single-stranded plasmid is able to initiate replication
from a region of secondary structure, the single-stranded origin (SSO). Finally, the new plasmid, currently in a relaxed,
closed form, is supercoiled by a DNA gyrase.

Schematic representation
of the first steps of asymmetric replication of the T181 family plasmid.
(A) Interaction of RepD with oriD (step 1, with numbering
equivalent to the scheme in panel B) followed (steps 2 and 3) by nicking
to produce a single-stranded region to allow PcrA to bind and to release
the free 3′-end for the polymerase to begin replication. The
strand of ICRII that is nicked is colored green; ICRIII is colored
brown. (B) Simplified reaction scheme for RepD binding an appropriate
DNA structure (A-B with the nicking site between sequences A and B),
nicking, and then dissociation of the 3′-end of nicked DNA
product (A) from RepD. Steps are numbered so that for step i, the rate constants for the forward and reverse reactions
and the equilibrium constant are k+i, k–i,
and Ki, respectively.

RepD causes a very large improvement in the ability
of PcrA to unwind double-stranded DNA (dsDNA). PcrA is unable to unwind
DNA substrates as short as 30 bp on its own, yet in the presence of
RepD, PcrA becomes highly processive: a single PcrA molecule can unwind
plasmid lengths of DNA without significant, premature termination. Thus, RepD has significant roles in three main
stages of replication. As well as being responsible for nicking at
initiation and the strand exchange at termination, RepD seems to be
essential for the high processivity of PcrA during unwinding. This
study describes the kinetic mechanism of the formation of the initiation
complex among oriD, RepD, and PcrA and characterizes
these separate, albeit linked, functions of RepD.

Rolling circle
plasmid replication is a complex process that requires specific interactions
between DNA and three different proteins, RepD, PcrA, and DNA polymerase
III, each with essential roles in producing a copy of the (−)-strand
template. Although there have been several investigations of the role
of Rep proteins, there are considerable gaps in our understanding
of their detailed mechanism. There is no crystal structure of a replication
initiator of this protein family, but it is known that the different
members have specificity for the matching ICRIII sequence and that
this part of the DSO is mainly responsible for the affinity of RepD
for the plasmid. RepD mutations have been
central to delineating its activity, and the positions of these mutations
will be discussed in relation with the sequence for the RepD used
here. The position for formation of the
DNA–RepD
covalent bond is Y188, although a mutation
at this position, Y188F, did not affect its noncovalent binding to
ICRIII. Another RepD variant, R186K (published
as R189K
using different numbering), has the mutation two residues from the
active tyrosine, meaning it is likely to be within the RepD active
site. This variant may form a covalent DNA–protein complex
but is religation deficient: in other words it does not allow the
final processing to re-form circular DNA. This study describes the activity of (N189K)RepD with the mutation
at a position +1 from the active tyrosine. Because this mutant retains
the ability to form a covalent attachment to the DNA, albeit impaired,
it is useful to study the nicking and binding properties of RepD.

A transesterification involving primary alcohols in the absence of
the protein and plasmid framework might be expected to have an equilibrium
constant close to unity: one phosphodiester bond is broken, but another
is formed. In practice, the reaction seems driven toward nicking by
the supercoiling of the plasmid, and in
addition, Rep proteins seem to induce formation of a cruciform at
the nicking site, thereby ensuring that the DNA at this position is
not base-paired., Biochemical evidence supports
the model in which PcrA interacts directly with RepD: RepD recruits
PcrA helicase at oriD and increases the affinity
of PcrA for this region. Although RepD
increases PcrA processivity,,, it is possible that this is due to the topology of the DNA at the
unwinding junction, a result of the interaction of RepD with the DNA
and steric blocking of premature PcrA dissociation. Once DNA is unwound
past the ICRIII sequence, the proteins must remain bound even though
RepD is no longer interacting with its high-affinity site. During
unwinding, the (+)-strand forms a single-stranded loop due to the
fact that the 5′-end is tethered to RepD through a covalent
bond: such loops have been observed by atomic force microscopy.

Factors relating to RepD that are important
for successful initiation and strand separation are described here.
As part of this, the kinetic mechanism of the initiation reaction
is described in terms of RepD and PcrA loading. In particular, there
is reversible binding and nicking, as indicated in FigureB. Previous work described
the use of Y-shaped oligonucleotide junctions to mimic part of oriD that is needed for initiation and strand separation.
Fluorescence labeling gave signals that are correlated with protein
binding and dissociation of the nicked DNA 3′-end. Here, this
is extended by using the techniques to examine different structural
mimics of parts of oriD and combined with rapid-mix
quenched flow to study the nicking reaction itself. Some of the features
that lead to successful initiation, in terms of the structure of the
DNA prior to RepD nicking, are investigated. Furthermore, it is demonstrated
that there is not an absolute requirement for RepD to nick and covalently
bind the DNA. Although this function is required for initiation of
plasmid unwinding in terms of producing a site for PcrA to bind, it
is not necessary for the unwinding itself.

Experimental Procedures
PcrA from Bacillus
stearothermophilus and RepD from S. aureus were prepared as previously described.,, The (N189K)RepD gene was generated using the QuikChange
II site-directed mutagenesis kit and protocol (Stratagene) using primers
containing the single mutation (CGTGACAGTGATAGATTTATTAGAATTTATAAAAAAAAACAAGAACG
and GGCGTTATCTTTACGTTCTTGTTTTTTTTTATAAATTCTAATAAATC), and the newly
generated gene was confirmed by sequencing. Diethylaminocoumarin-labeled
single-stranded DNA-binding protein (DCC-SSB) was prepared and characterized
as described previously.,

Oligonucleotides,
either unlabeled or labeled with fluorescent dyes, were from Eurofins
Ltd. DNA junctions were made by mixing two oligonucleotides as described
previously. A construct containing the
whole oriD was also generated by annealing two synthetic
oligonucleotides [OriD1 and OriD2 (Figure )]. DNA plasmids of different lengths, based on the pCERoriD plasmid,
which contains oriD, were prepared with 2437, 3094, 3650, 4907, 6086, and 6642 bp, as
described
previously. The 4907 bp plasmid was digested
using the NdeI restriction enzyme (New England Biolabs) under the
appropriate conditions at 37 °C for 2 h to produce linear dsDNA
with oriD positioned around the middle of the plasmid
length. The digest was run on a 1% (w/v) agarose gel. The DNA fragment
was visualized, removed from the gel, and purified using the QIAquick
gel extraction kit (Qiagen).

Structure of DNA junctions. The circled F shows
the position of the fluorescein label, when present. The arrow shows
the nicking site. The ICRII and ICRIII sequences are labeled, but
using a dotted line where only part of ICRII is present. Two lengths
of the Y junction are shown with Cy3/Dabcyl labeling but with random
sequence in the dsDNA rather than ICRIII, used for the unwinding assay;
other lengths have been described previously.

Nicking Assay on Agarose Gel Electrophoresis
The nicking
reaction was performed at 30 °C, via incubation of 15 nM pCERoriD
plasmid and 60 nM RepD in 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 100 mM KCl, 10
mM MgCl2, 1 mM EDTA, and 10% ethanediol and quenching with
50 mM EDTA at different times. The DNA topology of products was analyzed
on 1% agarose gels in 40 mM Tris-acetate (pH 8.0) and 1 mM EDTA containing
1 μg/mL ethidium bromide. Visualization was achieved by illumination
using a trans-illuminator (Uvitec, Cambridge, U.K.), and gel bands
were quantified using Uvitec software.

Nicking Assay via Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate–Polyacrylamide
Gel Electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE)
Nicking was achieved
by mixing 1 μM RepD and 10 μM DNA. Reactions were conducted
in 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 1 mM EDTA, 10% (v/v) ethanediol, 200 mM
KCl, and 10 mM MgCl2, for 10 min at 30 °C. RepD nicking
was analyzed using PAGE (Bio-Rad mini gel system) under SDS denaturing
conditions. Gels were stained with Coomassie brilliant blue R-250
(Bio-Rad).

Gel Shift Assay
The extent of RepD binding to Y junction
DNA (as in Figure ) was determined by incubating
1 μM DNA with 0, 1, 3, 5, 10, or 15 μM RepD at 30 °C
for 10 min in binding buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 200
mM KCl, and 5 mM EDTA. Samples were then applied to a 6% polyacrylamide
native gel (Bio-Rad mini gel system). The gel was run in 89 mM Tris
base, 89 mM boric acid, and 2 mM EDTA (pH 8.0) at 200 V for 30 min
and then stained with SYBR gold (Invitrogen). Visualization was achieved
using a UVItec trans-illuminator.

Stopped-Flow Kinetic Measurements
These were performed
using a Hi-Tech stopped-flow apparatus with a xenon–mercury
lamp (TgK Scientific). Solution conditions and concentrations for
measurements are indicated in the figure legends. In all the experiments
described, the stated concentrations are those in the mixing chamber
and reactions were conducted at 30 °C. For DCC-SSB fluorescence,
the excitation wavelength used was 436 nm with a 455 nm cutoff filter
(Schott glass). Cy3 was excited at 548 nm, with a 570 nm cutoff filter
(Schott glass) on the emission. Anisotropy was measured with the instrument
in the T format, allowing simultaneous acquisition of parallel (I∥) and perpendicular (I⊥) components. This allowed anisotropy, (I∥ – I⊥)/(I∥ + 2I⊥), and intensity, I∥ + 2I⊥, to be calculated from
the same set of data. Because the fluorescence intensity change was
very small, anisotropy data were not corrected for different species
having different intensities. Fluorescein was excited at 497 nm with
a 515 nm cutoff filter. Fluorescence data were analyzed on Kinetic
studio (TgK Scientific) or Grafit.

Quench-Flow and High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC)
Analysis of Nicking
Quench-flow experiments were performed
using the RQF-63 Hi-Tech Rapid Quench Flow system (TgK Scientific)
to elucidate the extent and kinetics of nicking of various DNA constructs
by RepD. For oligonucleotide-based junctions, labeled with fluorescein,
RepD (3 μM) was mixed with DNA (1 μM) (concentrations
after mixing) in 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 200 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EDTA, and 10% ethanediol. Concentrations are those
after mixing. Quench-flow products were analyzed with a gradient HPLC
system (Waters), equipped with the Waters 2475 multiwavelength fluorescence
detector and the Waters 2487 dual λ absorbance detector. The
DNA was analyzed on a 1 mL Resource Q ion-exchange column, run at
1 mL/min with a linear gradient (15 mL) from 250 mM to 1 M NaCl in
10 mM NaOH. Fluorescein was excited at 497 nm with emission at 519
nm. Peaks were integrated using the Waters HPLC software package,
Empower 2, including correction for any sloping baseline.

For
quench-flow measurements using a DNA plasmid, 3650 bp pCERoriD (30
nM) was mixed with 150 nM RepD (concentrations after mixing) in 50
mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 100 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EDTA,
and 10% ethanediol, and then the reaction was quenched with 25 mM
EDTA (pH 7.5) at 30 °C. Products were separated on an agarose
gel, as described above, and bands were quantified using UVIpro (UVItec,
Cambridge, U.K.).

Results
Nicking Kinetics
It has been shown previously that
Y junctions, made from two partially base-paired oligonucleotides
and shown in Figure , are substrates for RepD
and PcrA with similar unwinding kinetics as a whole plasmid. These junctions have ICRIII within the duplex
region. The single-strand 5′-arm contains part of the ICRII
sequence, including the nicking site. The other arm is dT10, providing a site to which PcrA can bind. In particular, junctions
with fluorescein attached gave signals that allowed the measurement
of RepD binding kinetics. The rapid binding
is accompanied by an increase in fluorescence anisotropy, consistent
with formation of a larger complex, including the fluorophore with
a concomitant increase in rotational correlation time. There was then
a slow decrease in anisotropy, which likely correlates with dissociation
of the small nicked DNA, containing the fluorescein.

Such fluorescence
measurements did not allow measurement of the nicking reaction kinetics.
To obtain those directly, we mixed RepD and the fluorescent Y junction
in a quench-flow instrument, to obtain rapid mixing and reaction for
a short time. We quenched the reaction by mixing with 50 mM EDTA at
specific times, which rapidly reduces the free Mg2+ concentration
and stops the nicking reaction. The quenched
solution was then analyzed for fluorescent DNA species by HPLC (Figure
S1 of the ). Quenching
at different times gave the time course of the nicking reaction (Figure ). This measurement does not distinguish between
bound and dissociated fluorescein–DNA forms because HPLC is
conducted under denaturing conditions. This shows that the nicking
reaction at 1.5 s–1 is very similar to the slow
decrease of the anisotropy, shown in the inset of Figure , suggesting that the chemical step, nicking, is rate-limiting
and is followed by rapid release of the nicked DNA. The amplitude
of the quench-flow transient shows ∼80% of the DNA is nicked
(Table ). A gel shift assay showed that for
the conditions of this measurement and others described below with
DNA junctions, such as quench-flow or other nicking assays (≤3
μM RepD), only a single RepD dimer is bound to the DNA (Figure
S2 of the ).

Time course
of nicking the fluorescein Y junction with excess RepD. Quench-flow
time course of nicking using EDTA as the quench and HPLC to analyze
product formation as described in . The line is the best fit exponential to the data, giving a rate
constant of 1.5 ± 0.2 s–1 for nicking. Reproducibly
∼80% of the DNA is nicked. The inset shows the fluorescence
anisotropy at 800 nM RepD and 100 nM DNA for comparison.

Summary of Rate Constants for Binding
and Nicking
 	 	nicking	
 	 	fast phase	slow phase	
 	binding (μM–1 s–1)	s–1	%
of signal	s–1	% of signal	
Y junction	109 ± 3	1.5 ± 0.2	77 ± 4	–	 	
DS
junction	259 ± 38	15 ± 3	41 ± 4	0.56 ± 0.12	31 ± 2	
hinge junction	175 ± 4	&gt;0.5	15 ± 5	–	 	
plasmid
with wild-type RepD	not determined	&gt;25	35 ± 2	2.6 ± 0.4	52 ± 3	
plasmid with (N198K)RepD	not determined	0.0031 ± 0.0001	86 ± 1	–	 	
Binding was measured by anisotropy
with fluorescein-labeled DNA; nicking was measured by quenching and
gel or HPLC analysis of product DNA. Wild-type RepD was used unless
otherwise stated. Only single phases in the nicking reaction were
determined with the Y junction and hinge junction and with the plasmid
nicked by (N189K)RepD. In all cases, a small fraction of the DNA did
not react. See the text for details. The data are for a single set
of measurements, but all sets were repeated.

Dependence of Nicking on DNA Structure
This Y junction
allows successful initiation and unwinding, even though only a partial
ICRII sequence is present as a single strand. Several different structures
were examined to see how the form of ICRII, presented to RepD, affects
the nicking by either altered kinetics or thermodynamics. The reactions
with various DNA structures were followed by a combination of fluorescence
stopped-flow, quench-flow, and gel assays. As shown previously,, only a short ssDNA containing part of ICRII is required for cleavage.
Thus, oligonucleotide CTAATAGCCGGTT [ICRII-part (Figure )], incubated with RepD, results in quantitative formation
of RepD-AATAGCCGGTT, as shown by the gel in Figure A and identified by mass spectrometry.

RepD nicking and translocation
activities on DNA containing mutations in the nicking site. (A) Nicking
activity of the ICRII-part oligonucleotide (Figure ) analyzed by SDS–PAGE (see  for details). Variants of ICRII-part were obtained
by deleting the first three bases (mutation ΔCTA) or changing
the nick site A to T (mutation A &gt; T) or to C (mutation A &gt;
C). The molecular mass standard bands in order from top to bottom
are 66, 45, and 31 kDa, respectively. Note that only one subunit of
the dimer becomes DNA-bound. The control with the wild-type sequence
of ICRII-part is also shown. (B) Comparison of unwinding by wild-type
RepD and (N189K)RepD using the “20 bp-F” Cy3-Dabcyl-labeled
junction (Figure ). Nick site variants of
this junction were ΔCTA and A &gt; T, as described above. See
Figure S8 of the  for concentrations and conditions. The traces are normalized to
an initial value of 1.

The binding of RepD and nicking of three types
of oligonucleotide junctions were compared by measuring the kinetics
of fluorescence anisotropy changes and the quench-flow reaction, as
described above. The results are summarized in Table . These junctions, whose structures are in Figure , differ only in the form of the ICRII, and all
share the same dsDNA sequence containing ICRIII. The Y junction is
described above. The hinge junction contains the complete ICRII sequence
on one arm and so is likely to have the hairpin structure shown in
the representation of oriD in Figure . The DNA can form a hinge at the connection between ICRII
and ICRIII. The DS junction is a completely complementary double strand
containing part of the ICRII sequence, so the nicking site is presented
as a double strand, not hinged. These therefore represent three classes
of possible structures of ICRII that might be present in the plasmid,
albeit lacking supercoiling.

With fluorescein labeling, both
the hinge junction and DS junction showed a similar rapid increase
in fluorescence anisotropy upon being mixed with RepD (Figure ), as described previously for the Y junction and shown in the inset of Figure . Analysis of this binding phase involved measuring the observed
rate constant as a function of RepD concentration under pseudo-first-order
conditions (Figure S3 of the ). This gave rate constants of 109 μM–1 s–1 for the Y junction, 259 μM–1 s–1 for the DS junction, and 175 μM–1 s–1 for the hinge junction (Table ). In addition, a junction totally lacking the ICRII
arm or having random sequence in this arm gave a rate constant of
85 or 124 μM–1 s–1, respectively
(data not shown). This suggests that all these junctions have similar,
rapid binding kinetics, presumably dominated by binding of RepD to
ICRIII, which is common to all the junctions. In contrast, the second
phase of the anisotropy traces showed kinetics that differed greatly
among the three junctions (Figures  and ).

Time course of fluorescence anisotropy and quench-flow
analysis on mixing the fluorescein hinge and DS junctions with excess
RepD. Solution and experimental conditions are as in the legend of
Figure . (A) Fluorescence anisotropy at 800
nM RepD with the DS junction (100 nM). (B) Quench-flow time course
of DS junction nicking with EDTA quench. The line shows a best fit
double exponential. Following a burst, the slow phase has a rate constant
of 0.56 ± 0.12 s–1. The inset shows shorter
time points to define the rapid phase. Circles are time points using
EDTA as the quench, and triangles are from a quench by 5% perchloric
acid. The solution was then neutralized with sodium acetate. The two
sets of data are the same within experimental error, and the line
is the best fit single exponential with a rate constant of 15 ±
3 s–1. (C) Fluorescence anisotropy at 800 nM RepD
with 100 nM hinge junction.

The DS junction had a much slower decrease in anisotropy
(0.13 s–1) (Figure A), but
like that of the Y junction, the anisotropy returned to approximately
its starting value. Note that the long time-base traces shown in Figures  and  do not show this starting
value clearly because of the rapid initial increase. The slow decrease
in anisotropy presumably represents slow release of the four-nucleotide
product containing the fluorescein from the protein complex. Quench-flow–HPLC
analysis (Figure B and Table ) showed a rapid phase of nicking (15 s–1) with an ∼40% amplitude. There was then a slow phase at 0.56
s–1, resulting in a further 30% reaction. A potential
explanation is that for this junction, there is rapid nicking to form
the equilibrium amount (∼50% for these conditions) of the RepD–DNA·CTCT–fluorescein
complex. There is then slow release of product, resulting in further
nicking. The difference between the kinetics of the anisotropy and
quench-flow time courses will be reviewed in .

Note that the quench-flow data of the DS junction at short
times (Figure B, inset) showed that there
is little or no difference between using EDTA or acid as a quencher.
This supports the use of EDTA as an effective, rapid-quench reagent
for this reaction and the fact that release of Mg2+ from
the reactive site of RepD is rapid.

The hinge junction shows
a similar rapid, initial increase in anisotropy, but this is followed
by a further, large increase at 2.4 s–1 (Figure C). Finally, there is a very slow, small decrease
at 0.07 s–1 (data not shown). For this junction,
presumably not much product dissociates, although the physicochemical
basis of the second phase increase is not clear. Quenching the reaction
at times between 5 and 120 s showed a constant ∼15% nicking
by HPLC (data not shown). These data suggest that nicking (&gt;0.5
s–1) occurs but only to a small extent (Table ), so a time course was not attempted by the quench-flow
method. This is consistent, at least qualitatively, with the anisotropy
time course of this type of junction, described above.

For all
three junctions, the kinetics of PcrA-driven unwinding were measured,
as previously described, using the signal
provided by Cy3 and Dabcyl labels at the distal end of the duplex,
which now has random sequence rather than ICRIII to mimic unwinding
of the plasmid away from oriD (data not shown). There
were relatively small differences in translocation rates: 62 bp/s
for the Y junction, 34 bp/s for the DS junction, and 86 bp/s for the
hinge junction. There were also differences in the amplitudes, but
it is difficult to correlate this between different preparations of
DNA, which, apart from structure, may have different percent labeling.

Plasmid Nicking
Nicking was also measured for a supercoiled
plasmid (3650 bp) containing the whole oriD sequence. Manual mixing shows rapid and essentially complete
nicking to form the open, relaxed structure as visualized on an agarose
gel (Figure A). This simple assay gives a topological analysis of the plasmid: the
supercoiled plasmid, substrate for RepD, runs differently from the
relaxed form produced by RepD nicking. Quench-flow mixing was then
used to obtain greater time resolution. RepD and the supercoiled plasmid
were mixed, and the reaction was then quenched with 50 mM EDTA at
different times. The reaction products were separated on an agarose
gel and the bands quantified to obtain a time course of the nicking
reaction (Figure C). This shows a rapid burst
at &gt;25 s–1 (too fast to obtain a rate constant)
with an ∼35% amplitude followed by a slow phase at ∼2.5
s–1 with a further ∼50% reaction (Table ).

RepD nicking–closing activity on the 3650 bp pCERoriD
plasmid for (A) wild-type RepD and (B) (N189K)RepD. Reactions were
initiated by addition of 60 nM RepD to 15 nM pCERoriD in 50 mM Tris-HCl
(pH 7.5), 100 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EDTA, and 10% ethanediol
at 30 °C. At the time points indicated (in seconds and minutes),
samples were removed and quenched by addition of 50 mM EDTA. Samples
were analyzed on a 1% agarose gel. The plasmid topology is indicated
by the bands (SC, supercoiled; OC, open, circular, nicked RepD complex;
CC, closed, circular). Molecular mass markers are in order from top
to bottom 10, 8, 6, 5, 4, 3, and 2 kb, respectively. (C) Quench-flow
time course, analyzed on a 1% agarose gel of wild-type RepD nicking
on the 3650 bp supercoiled plasmid. See  for concentrations and conditions. The line is the
best fit exponential for the slow phase that follows a burst. The
burst at &gt;25 s–1 has an ∼35% amplitude
followed by a slow phase at ∼2.6 ± 0.4 s–1 with a further 50% reaction. The inset shows the equivalent time
course with (N189K)RepD, but using manual mixing. The line is the
best fit exponential giving a rate constant of 0.0031 ± 0.0001
s–1.

On a longer time scale (Figure A), a new gel band appears, corresponding to a closed, circular
plasmid form, formed by religation of
the DNA ends. This slow reaction results in 23% closed, relaxed plasmid
at apparent equilibrium with nicked, open DNA. This is likely to represent
the equilibrium constant for the nicking reaction of the relaxed plasmid·RepD
complex in the absence of supercoiling. Quantitation of the gel bands
as a function of time gives a rate constant of 0.0037 s–1 for this religation (Figure S4 of the ).

Requirement for Nicking
RepD binding and nicking on
the ICRII sequence represent the first events in the plasmid replication.
The following step is the recruitment of PcrA helicase onto the (−)-strand
of the oriD sequence. Nicking is presumably essential
for loading of PcrA on the plasmid, as this is the way in which ssDNA
is created in the correct position for this helicase to bind.

The N189K mutant of RepD has been used to investigate further the
interaction of RepD with DNA. (N189K)RepD bound to the Y junction
with kinetics similar to those of wild-type RepD (wtRepD), as shown
using a fluorescent junction (Figure S3
of the ). The activities
of wild-type and mutant RepD on the supercoiled pCERoriD plasmid were
initially compared using agarose gel electrophoresis (Figure ). wtRepD has high nicking activity with supercoiled
plasmid, as described above: almost all the DNA was converted to the
open circular form within 5 s of mixing (Figure A). Then some closed, relaxed, circular plasmid formed slowly by
religation. In contrast, the nicking of supercoiled plasmid by (N189K)RepD
was much slower (Figure B): integration of
the bands gives a rate constant of 0.003 s–1 (Figure C, inset), ∼1000-fold slower than that of
wtRepD (Table ). A faint band was detected
for the closed circular form after 30 min, and after further incubation,
the amount of this band (24%) remained constant (data not shown).
An equilibrium was reached between closed relaxed and open nicked
DNA, similar to that of wtRepD.

After incubation with either
wild-type RepD or (N189K)RepD, PcrA-driven plasmid unwinding was followed
in real time using the previously described assay. Different lengths of supercoiled pCERoriD plasmids were
unwound with detection of the ssDNA product by fluorescently labeled
single-stranded DNA binding protein, DCC-SSB (Figure A). Qualitatively, the traces are
similar to those obtained with wtRepD, a lag followed by a fairly constant rate of increase in fluorescence
as the plasmid is unwound and then the fluorescence is constant. The
translocation rate could be obtained by plotting the unwinding time
as a function of length (Figure B): the mutant
gives a slightly slower rate (19 bp/s) than the wild type (30 bp/s).

Unwinding of supercoiled plasmids monitored in real time
using the SSB fluorescence assay. (A) Fluorescence time course for
unwinding of plasmids of different lengths (shown in base pairs) with
PcrA and (N189K)RepD. RepD was added to the solution containing the
plasmid and left for 5 min before the addition of PcrA; the solution
was then mixed with ATP in a stopped-flow apparatus. The solution
contained 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 100 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EDTA, and 10% ethanediol at 30 °C. Final concentrations
after mixing were 0.5 nM plasmid, 95 nM PcrA, 2 nM RepD, 1 mM ATP,
and 200 nM DCC-SSB tetramers. (B) Dependence of unwinding time on
plasmid length, as described previously. The linear fit gives a rate constant of 19 ± 2 bp/s for unwinding.

A feature of wtRepD unwinding is that intensities
seen in these assays decrease if the RepD is preincubated for long
times with the plasmid and PcrA before initiation of unwinding by
mixing with ATP (Figure S5A of the ). This is consistent with the plasmid partly religating
over the time frame of a few minutes as shown in the gel assay described
above, albeit that in this translocation assay PcrA is also present.
This religation then reduces the concentration of active, nicked DNA.
Unlike that of wild-type RepD, the fluorescence change obtained for
(N189K)RepD is fairly constant for the different aged complexes (Figure
S5A of the ), suggesting
that the mutant performs nicking on oriD to give
a complex more stable than the wild type over the time range of the
aging. This is consistent with the gel assay of plasmid nicking and
religating in Figure .

Linearized plasmids
were not unwound by PcrA when (N189K)RepD was used, although there
was some unwinding with wtRepD (Figure S5B of the ). Linearized plasmids are less favored
than the supercoiled plasmids as a nicking substrate, so with wtRepD, less DNA was available for unwinding and
a smaller amplitude was observed relative to that with circular plasmids
(Figure S5 of the ). Nicking with nonsupercoiled substrates was tested by SDS–PAGE,
in which RepD monomers bound to DNA migrate behind the unbound monomers.
When wtRepD was incubated with a DNA construct, containing the complete oriD sequence (Figure S6 of the ), an adduct formed with the DNA, albeit substoichiometrically.
The mutant RepD showed little or no adduct, consistent with the lack
of unwinding with the linear DNA. It seems that nicking is required
before dsDNA can be fully unwound. This is likely to be due to the
need to open a single-strand region at the correct location for PcrA
to bind.

(N189K)RepD was also analyzed for its nicking activity
on ssDNA oligos and Y junctions, containing a single-stranded ICRII
(Figure S6 of the ). SDS–PAGE assays as described above showed that these Y
junctions were nicked by wtRepD but not the (N189K)RepD mutant, even
at very long incubation times [&gt;20 min (data not shown)]. The anisotropy
measurement with the fluorescein-labeled Y junction, as shown in Figure  with wtRepD, was also conducted with (N189K)RepD
(Figure S7 of the ). This showed a rapid rise in anisotropy consistent with binding
of the fluorescent Y junction, but no subsequent decrease, supporting
the idea that it was not being nicked.

Despite not being nicked,
(N189K)RepD allowed PcrA-driven junction unwinding, presumably because
the ssDNA region is always present for PcrA binding. This was demonstrated
using the Cy3-Dabcyl method using the Y junctions (Figure ), outlined above (Figure
S8 of the ). Note
that these junctions do not contain the ICRIII sequence, rather random
dsDNA sequence to mimic translocation during pseudo-steady-state plasmid
unwinding. The rate of unwinding is 47 bp/s (Figure S8 of the ), identical to that of
the wild type for identical junctions.

As an alternative approach to limit nicking, mutations were
introduced into the ICRII region. Nicking was tested by SDS–PAGE,
using the single oligonucleotide, ICRII-part (Figure ), and unwinding the 20 bp-F junction by the Cy3-Dabcyl assay
(Figure ). One mutation deleted the 5′-side
of the nicking site [ΔCTA, removing positions 1–3 of
20 bp-F and ICRII-part (Figure )], so that
there is no phosphodiester in the correct position for transesterification
by RepD. The others replaced the A on the 3′-side of the nicking
site (A changed to T, A &gt; T, or to cytosine, A &gt; C), which is
the base that should form the phosphodiester with the RepD tyrosine.
Both types of mutation prevented nicking by RepD (Figure A). However, both mutant DNAs supported unwinding with similar
activity as shown by the similar fluorescence traces (Figure B). This supports the idea that the nicking activity
and PcrA translocation activity are separate, but nicking is essential
in natural plasmid substrates to provide the helicase with a binding
site.

Discussion
RepD is essential for the initiation of
asymmetric, rolling circle plasmid replication of plasmids containing
the DSO, oriD, prior to PcrA helicase binding. In
this work, most of the data relate to the interaction of RepD with
DNA, although there is also information about how such interaction
affects the PcrA-driven unwinding. The data do not address directly
the interactions of PcrA with RepD, although this remains an unclear
aspect of RepD. Because of this, it remains valid to use B.
stearothermophilus PcrA, although the RepD is from S. aureus. This PcrA allows comparison of unwinding with
different RepD variants and different DNA constructs, even though
it is possible that precise protein–protein interactions are
not completely optimal. The role of RepD (and similar proteins) can
be considered in several distinct but related parts.

First,
it ensures that copying the (−)-strand starts and ends at the
DSO.,, This is achieved
by specific
interaction with the inverted complementary repeat sequence, ICRIII,
carried by the plasmid that encodes RepD. Other pairs of Rep initiators
and ICRIII provide their own specificity for this family of plasmids.,,

The second part of the
function of RepD is to nick one strand within ICRII with three particular
consequences. First, nicking removes the negative supercoiling so
the plasmid is accessible to the replicative enzymes. Second, the
5′-end of the nicked strand, covalently bound to RepD, is carried
around the plasmid with the protein and so is already in position
to take part in the strand exchanges to form the closed, circular
parental (+)-strand. Lastly, this nicking also opens up a short stretch
of ssDNA on the (−)-strand, allowing PcrA to bind. Another
function of RepD is to enhance the processivity of PcrA, allowing
the complete plasmid to be unwound. In the absence of a protein such
as RepD, PcrA is a poor helicase.,, Finally, RepD modulates more chemistry to terminate
replication by processes including strand exchange. The work, described above, addresses the factors that are
involved in ensuring that RepD successfully initiates the replication,
in particular by examining the kinetics of the nicking reaction and
how this is related to subsequent unwinding.

Inverted complementary
repeats are essential both for RepD recognition and for formation
of the initiation complex. These elements were introduced into DNA
junctions that were prepared from oligonucleotides and used in several
biochemical assays. In particular, real-time measurements of nicking
kinetics show how features of the DNA are important for different
steps of formation of the initiation complex. In addition, some measurements
were taken on the whole plasmid using discontinuous real-time assays,
for example, using the quench-flow technique. Real-time translocation
assays were also performed on each type of initiation complex to confirm
that the complexes were fully competent in this regard.

The
scheme in Figure B shows elementary steps
of the nicking process. RepD binding (step 1) is followed by the chemical
step 2. The resulting intermediate is shown as a noncovalent complex
between the RepD–DNA complex and the nicked DNA. There may
be interactions of RepD with the nicked DNA as well as potential remnant
base pairing of the nicked DNA with the covalently bound part of ICRII.
Finally, in step 3, the 3′-end of the nicked DNA dissociates
to provide the structure with a stretch of ssDNA to which PcrA binds.
This dissociation could be complete separation in the case of some
oligonucleotide junctions, or just removal from the RepD binding site
in the case with the complete oriD. Apart from inhomogeneities
that may occur in any biochemical reactions, such as partially damaged
proteins, further inhomogeneity could arise in this type of reaction
because DNA with inverted complementary repeats might take up various
structures, particularly hairpins. Such inhomegeneities could add
to the complexity of the measured kinetic transients.

The binding
kinetics of RepD that were measured by fluorescence anisotropy (Figures  and  and Figure S3 of the ) depend largely on the
presence of ICRIII and vary little with the structure of the neighboring
ICRII sequence. This binding [k+1 (Figure B)] is fairly rapid [&gt;108 M–1 s–1 (Table )]. This binding
step is also independent of whether subsequent nicking occurs, as
shown using (N189K)RepD (Figure S7 of the ).

The direct measurement of nicking kinetics,
using quench flow, suggests that both thermodynamic equilibria and
kinetics play a part in the observed time courses (Table ). The extent of reaction was almost quantitative when a single-stranded
ICRII is used as substrate, either as a ssDNA oligonucleotide or as
part of a Y junction (Figure A). Note that
only one of the RepD monomers becomes covalently linked via its active
site tyrosine to the 5′-end of the DNA. The kinetics with this
DNA were not measured, but the reaction of the Y junction (Figure ) indicates that single-stranded ICRII is nicked
slowly (1.5 s–1). In these cases, it is likely that
nicking is followed by rapid dissociation of the small DNA product
(step 3, Figure B). This is advantageous for
using this type of Y junction in translocation assays: the loading
yield is high, and it seems fully functional in such assays.

The nicking time courses of other junctions
and whole plasmids were more complex because of the slow release of
the nicked DNA end from RepD and reversibility of the nicking step.
The hinge and DS junctions mimic to some degree the extremes of whether
the plasmid substrate contains ICRII as a hairpin or whether it is
a continuous double strand. The nicking reaction of the DS junction
shows burst kinetics (Figure B and Table ). There was an initial rapid phase (15 s–1), likely to represent k+2 (Figure B). There was then a slow phase (0.56 s–1) of similar size, which might represent the dissociation rate constant, k+3, with K2 close
to unity: only upon dissociation of the product is the nicking reaction
pulled to completion. The linear structure of the DS junction may
require a bending or contouring of the ICRII region to allow the nick
site to be located at the RepD active site.

In contrast, the
hinge junction has only a small nicking burst (∼15%), based
on HPLC analysis (data not shown). This is consistent with the anisotropy
signal (Figure C), which shows an increase
following binding of RepD, suggesting little release of the small
DNA product. It seems likely that the substrate structure causes K2 to be small, favoring substrate. Release of
the nicked product is very slow, with the anisotropy only decreasing
a small amount at 0.07 s–1. This is possibly due
to the remnant base pairing, although for this junction the fluorophore
may also interact with bases in the rest of the DNA.

The plasmid
nicking kinetics are also multiphasic (Figure ), a rapid phase (&gt;25 s–1) with a 35% amplitude
and then a slow phase (∼2.5 s–1) (Table ). The plasmid preparations exhibit some heterogeneity
as there is a variable amount of relaxed, open plasmid at time zero.
The nicking kinetics are qualitatively similar to those of the DS
junction, described above, with K2 close
to unity and k+2 fast, followed by slow
product release.

Gel analysis of plasmid nicking on a slower
time scale shows the slow religation of the DNA to give a relaxed,
closed plasmid at an observed rate constant of 0.0037 s–1 with an equilibrium constant of 0.3 (Figure A and Figure S4 of the ). It seems likely that RepD remains bound to the relaxed, closed
plasmid, based on the dissociation constant for dissociation of RepD
from the Y junction, so this is a direct
measurement of the equilibrium constant for the nicking reaction.
The reaction is formation and breakdown of a phosphodiester bond,
and as described in the introductory section, this equilibrium might
be expected in the absence of other factors to be close to unity.

Depending on the structure of the DNA substrate, either release of
DNA as a separate molecule or relief of supercoiling results in the
high extent of product formation. Both the free energy of supercoiling
in the intact plasmid and RepD binding could drive the formation of
the cruciform extrusion of palindromic sequences contained within oriD. The formation of the cruciform has been shown to be
dependent on superhelicity: the torsional stress of supercoiling leads
to a decrease in the activation energy of the reaction followed by
conformational changes in DNA structure that favor the formation of
cruciform structures. In the absence
of enzymes, this occurs only very slowly, even when thermodynamically
favored. However, RepD might enhance
and stabilize the
extrusion on the supercoiled plasmid through binding, as seen previously
with RepC on supercoiled but not linear DNA., This
then exposes the nick site as a single-stranded loop as the target
site for RepD nicking activity. Supercoiling
could also be the cause of a larger k+3, thereby shifting the equilibrium toward “product release”
by physically separating the 3′-end of the nicked DNA from
the RepD active site. In this model, the supercoiling has little effect
on step 2 (Figure B).

The site-specific
nick results in a phosphodiester bond at Tyr188. (N189K)RepD was examined in detail for nicking activity
and its ability to support the helicase activity of PcrA. A range
of linear DNA constructs containing ICRIII and the nicking site were
not substrates for this mutant (Figure A and
Figure S6 of the ). Only the supercoiled plasmid showed significant nicking, and this
was at a rate 3 orders of magnitude slower than that of wtRepD (Table ). However, when PcrA/RepD-mediated unwinding was
tested using this mutant, DNA structures that had a ssDNA region in
the appropriate place for PcrA binding were unwound with little or
no modification of kinetics. The DNA also required a site for this
RepD to bind, containing most of the ICRII sequence on the 3′-side
of the nick site, but not necessarily the ICRIII sequence. As with
wtRepD, a random sequence can be used here, albeit with a lower affinity
for RepD (Figure S8 of the ). Complementary data were obtained by introducing mutations into
ICRII to prevent nicking. Again, when there is a site for PcrA and
RepD (wt or N189K) to bind, then the dsDNA is unwound approximately
as with unimpaired ICRII (Figure B).

However, DNA structures that did not provide a site for PcrA to bind,
such as a linearized plasmid that was not nicked by (N189K)RepD, were
also not unwound (Figure S5B of the ). If the supercoiled plasmid was allowed sufficient
preincubation
time with (N189K)RepD to complete the slow nicking, then this was
also unwound with kinetics very similar to those of wtRepD (Figure  and Figure S5A of the ). This again illustrates the importance of supercoiling
in driving the nicking to completion. The combined data with this
mutant RepD suggest that K2 and k+2 (in the scheme of Figure B) are greatly reduced by the mutation. Only the effect of
supercoiling is driving the reaction to completion.

The nicking
activity per se and the presence of the covalent DNA bonding with
RepD are not essential for the role of RepD in enhancing PcrA processivity
in DNA unwinding (Figure ). The speed of unwinding
is reduced with (N189K)RepD: PcrA unwinds junction DNA at a rate of
47 bp/s and plasmid at a rate of 19 bp/s. The DSO is also used as
a termination signal, leading to formation of the closed plasmid following
replication. RepD nicking and closing
activities are part
of initiation and termination, respectively. It might be expected
that the presence of the 5′-end on RepD is important for the
religation, as it brings this DNA end in the correct position to undergo
strand exchange. Following termination, RepD is released with a short
oligonucleotide attached to one subunit and then cannot initiate replication
in vitro. The attached oligonucleotide
induces protein conformational changes that weaken its ability to
form the cruciform structure, preventing
the recycling of the initiator.

As conformational changes in the DNA–RepD complex are essential
for nicking, it is possible that mutation of N189 might reduce bending
activity. RepC is a homologue of RepD but with specificity for another
ICRIII sequence, part of oriC. The heterodimer, RepC·RepC–oligonucleotide,
in which one subunit has a short oligonucleotide bound to its tyrosine,
is able to bind but not to induce melting of oriC. Thus, a similar situation could occur for (N189K)RepD.
This mutant could not efficiently enhance the secondary structure
causing a very slow nicking reaction for supercoiled plasmid and an
absent nicking for linear DNA. However, this cannot be the complete
effect, as the mutation reduces the rate of nicking of ssDNA substrates,
suggesting that either the DNA at the nick site cannot assume the
correct conformation or the nicking itself is impaired.

In summary,
detailed examination of the kinetics of RepD binding and nicking for
a variety of DNA structures has shown that, while binding is usually
rapid, the nicking rate constant is very dependent on the way in which
the nicking site is presented. Although the equilibrium constant for
the nicking is close to unity, the extent of overall reaction is considerably
affected by the DNA structure, particularly by supercoiling, which
favors product formation and increases the overall rate of nicking.
The separation of nicking function of RepD from its role in assisting
strand separation is clearly demonstrated by the measurement of translocation
rates in situations where nicking does not occur. However, it is intriguing
that RepD can increase the processivity of PcrA during unwinding,
so it presumably must maintain interaction with the PcrA·DNA
junction throughout. The fact that covalent attachment of DNA to RepD
is not apparently essential means that this factor is not crucial
in maintaining RepD at the junction. Furthermore, once unwinding is
underway, RepD cannot be in contact with its tight-binding ICRIII
site. The interactions of RepD with DNA and PcrA during unwinding
remain to be elucidated. What factors maintain tight interaction of
RepD with DNA once unwinding has progressed beyond ICRIII? What are
the interactions between RepD and PcrA? Do the physical arrangements
of the DNA and proteins impose constraints on dissociation of each,
for example, by there being a hole in the proteins through which DNA
threads?

Supporting Information Available
Figures of HPLC analysis of fluorescein-labeled oligonucleotides, gel shift assay
of RepD binding, kinetics of binding of RepD to different junctions,
and kinetics of formation of the relaxed, closed plasmid from the
relaxed, open plasmid. This material is available free of charge via
the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi300172p_si_001.pdf

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
ssDNAsingle-stranded
DNA

dsDNAdouble-stranded
DNA

DCC-SSBsingle-stranded
DNA-binding protein from Escherichia coli, labeled
at G26C with IDCC {N-[2-(iodoacetamido)ethyl]-7-diethylaminocoumarin-3-carboxamide}

wtRepDwild-type RepD
from S. aureus plasmid pC221

ICRinverted complementary repeat

DSOdouble-stranded origin
of replication.

