The discovery of DNA secondary
structures, including quadruplexes in G-rich DNA (G4s) and iMs in
C-rich DNA (iMs), has enabled the diversification of nucleic acid
uses from their original roles in conventional biological processes
to building blocks for nanoscale composite materials. Both G4s and
iMs are four-stranded tetraplexes that can be formed by multiple individual
single strands or by internal folding of a single-strand (ss) DNA., iMs are formed from cytosine repeats in C-rich DNA at slightly acidic
pH, where unprotonated and protonated C–C+ base
pairs intercalate and stabilize the structure., In
genomic DNA, G- and C-rich regions capable of forming G4/iMs are enriched
in regulatory elements of genes, particularly around the transcriptional
start sites (TSS)., G4s/iMs are associated with gene
ontological (GO) terms like transcription factor activity, development,
cell differentiation, and neurogenesis. DNA-based nanomaterials have found usefulness in arenas ranging
from electronic circuit building to drug delivery systems.−

In mammalian cells, C-rich DNA located near the TSS has also
been
found to be susceptible to two different epigenetic modifications:
methylation and hydroxymethylation., The occurrence
of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) modifications has been discovered
only recently and is generated by oxidation of 5-methylcytosines (5mC)
by the ten eleven translocation (TET) family of oxygenases.− Jin et al. demonstrated the role of
5hmCs as epigenetic regulators of gene expression, which is similar
to the role of 5mC., Thus, 5mC, 5hmC, and iM formation
have been studied individually as gene regulators. Although Dai et
al. showed (via NMR) that methylation could adversely affect the integrity
iMs, there have been no thorough studies
that document the thermodynamic consequences of methylation or hydroxymethylation
of cytosines to iMs.

The cellular environment likely also influences
the pH- and temperature-dependent
stability of G4s/iMs. Crowding agents and cosolutes together constitute
about 20–40% of cellular volume. Cosolvents can alter the thermal/pH stability of DNA secondary structures
via dehydration effects. The effects
of cosolvents and crowding agents on the thermal stabilities of DNA
triplexes, G-quadruplexes, and hairpin structures have been previously
characterized by Chaires et al. and Sugimoto,, but iMs were not among the secondary structures examined. This prior
research showed duplexes are destabilized and G4s are stabilized under
identical solution conditions where fewer water molecules associated
with the DNA structure. Crowding is known to induce the pH-dependent
stability in iMs, leading to their formation at near physiological
pH,, but there has been no detailed investigation
of effects of dehydration on iMs. Because iMs and G4s are complementary
structures that could be formed in gene regulatory regions, it is
essential to understand the effects of hydration on iMs just as for
G4s.

The biological function of G4s/iMs has yet to be completely
established,
as most of the experiments done on these structures have been in vitro. However, the consistency of G4/iM formation in
the laboratory has created a new role for G4/iM DNA in nanomaterials.
The iM structures have been used as proton-fueled nanomachines, which
are reversibly actuated by cycling the solution conditions from acidic
to basic and hence operate as a conformational switch to generate
precise nanometer-scale motions., In these devices, iMs
can act as pH-stimulated mechanical arms and/or as nanometer-height
containers; in their folded form, they can nonspecifically trap small
molecules and release these particles on controlled unfolding. When coupled with quantum dots and immobilized
on gold electrodes, iMs work as photoelectric switches. iMs have been used as nanoprobes inside living
cells to map spatial and temporal pH variations. Intracellular applications like this not only require characterization
of iM probes under varying pH but also under intracellular crowding
conditions that could affect the conformation of the probes and hence
the signal output.

In both biological systems and nanomaterials,
it is essential to
have a thorough knowledge of the factors that affect iM formation
and stability both in vivo and in vitro. Hence, here we present a systematic study on three important factors
(epigenetic modification, molecular crowding, and hydration) that
have thermodynamic consequences on the formation of the widely studied
iM sequence from the c-myc gene.

Experimental
Section
Methods: Genome-Wide Analysis of Colocalization of iMs and 5hmC
iM Density
Calculations
To determine how widespread
the phenomenon of 5hmC incorporation into putative iM structures in
genomic DNA is, we first identified all of the putative unimolecular
iMs using the Quadfinder tool developed by Scaria et al. This tool searches for sequences composed of
CxNyCxNyCxNyCx motifs (for iMs on template strands) or GxNyGxNyGxNyGx motifs (for
iMs on nontemplate strands), where x = 3–5
denotes the G/C stretch and y = 1–25 is the
intervening loop length. The Quadfinder analyzes for, and lists all
of, the probable motifs, including the overlapping ones, in a given
DNA sequence. Promoters and intragenic regions of 15 760 reference
sequence genes from the human GRCh37.p10 primary assembly were analyzed
for the presence of iMs/G4s. The promoter region is defined as a 1
kb stretch upstream of the TSS, whereas
the intragenic analyses covered a 1 kb stretch downstream of the TSS.
To account for the iMs present on template and nontemplate strands,
the total numbers of iMs were calculated by summing the G-motifs and
C-motifs found in the template strand. To calculate the density of
iMs, the 1 kb regions upstream and downstream of the TSS were divided
into 100 bp segments for each gene, and each of these segments was
analyzed with Quadfinder. The density of iMs per gene in any 100 bp
was then calculated using the following equation.The resulting plots (Figure ) are similar to those in prior published reports.

Localization of 5-Hydroxymethylcytosine
We used the
5hmC sequencing data from H1 human ESC deposited to the Gene Expression
Omnibus (accession GSE36173) by Yu et al. Their 5hmC sequencing was done using Tet-assisted bisulphite sequencing
and was done on the UCSC hg18 build. These data were converted by
us to GRCh37 using the liftOver genome tool by UCSC. () The 5hmC density calculation is similar to the iM density
calculation and is shown in the following equation.

To visualize the enrichment of 5hmCs
with the putative G4/iM forming genes, a contour plot of the enrichment
of 5hmC content with varying GC content and G4/iM-forming potentials
were plotted using JMP 10 statistical software (Figure ).

Materials
As a representative iM,
we have studied an
iM-forming sequence from the nuclease-hypersensitive element (NHEIII) of the c-myc gene. The
product of the c-myc gene is a proto-oncogene
that is known to be overexpressed in cancer cells. The 22-mer sequence we used has been mutated from C to
T at the sixth position to eliminate structural polymorphism and restrict
its melting transition from folded iM to unfolded iM to two states. While evaluating the enrichment of 5hmC modification
associated with iMs (Figure ), we concluded
that most of the iM-forming sequences show only single 5hmC modification;
very infrequently, the 5hmC modification occurs more than once in
an iM-forming sequence, regardless of whether it is located in intercalated
C–C+ residues or in loop regions. Hence, for thermodynamic
measurements, we have modified only a single cytosine to 5mC or 5hmC
as a model of single-strand genomic DNA. Even though the C6T sequence
predominantly exists as a single major conformer, a minor fraction
can exist as a slip structure. However,
in both of these conformations, the cytosine in the fourth position
in the sequence always remains intercalated. Hence, we modified the
cytosine in the fourth position to 5mC/5hmC to ensure that when the
structure was folded, irrespective of the conformation, the modified
cytosine could participate in intercalation. This approach facilitated
considering the changed thermodynamic properties of fully intercalated
iM residues as a function of changing epigenetic modifications alone.
Although most methylation occurs in CpG islands (which do not occur
in the myc promoter), the modification also occurs at significant
numbers of CpC locations.,− Hence, the DNA oligonucleotides used have the following sequencesC6T:	5′-TTCCCTACCCTCCCCACCCTAA-3′	
5mC-C6T:	5′-TTC(mC)CTACCCTCCCCACCCTAA-3′	
5hmC-C6T:	5′-TTC(5hmC)CTACCCTCCCCACCCTAA-3′	
where 5mC and 5hmC indicate 5-methyl- and 5-hydroxymethylcytidine,
respectively. All oligos were purchased from Midland Certified Reagent
Co. (Midland, TX, USA). For all experiments, the oligos were dissolved
either in 20 mM sodium cacodylate buffer (for pH ranging from 5.3
to 7.4) or in 10 mM Tris base, 1 mM EDTA (for pH ranging from 7.6
to 8.0). All buffers were made from spectroscopic-grade reagents from
Fisher Scientific. Poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG-300) was obtained from
PCCA (Houston, TX, USA), and 2-methoxyethanol, ethylene glycol, glycerol,
1,3-propanediol, and 1,2-dimethoxyethane were purchased from Fisher
Scientific.

Sample Preparation
Solutions of
oligonucleotides were
initially heated at 90 °C for 10 min and then cooled to room
temperature to eliminate any possible duplex structures. For pKa determinations, concentrations of samples
were matched via absorbance spectra when the samples were still hot.
The circular dichroism (CD) spectra of the oligos at decreasing pH
were obtained at 25 °C with DNA concentrations of 2 to 3 μM.
The molecular crowding agents or cosolvents in 10, 20, 30, and 40
wt % (w/v) were added to the buffers and the pH adjusted as necessary
for a range of 5.3 to 8.0.

Temperature- and pH-Dependent Circular Dichroism
CD
experiments were performed in 1 cm cuvette using an Olis instrument
(DSM 20 CD). Wavelength scans were collected from 225 to 350 nm. For
melting experiments, temperature increments were either 1 or 2 °C
per minute, and samples were allowed to equilibrate for 30 s before
collecting each spectrum. Final CD spectra were obtained by averaging
at least three scans for a given set of buffer conditions. All melting
experiments were performed at pH 5.4 ± 0.1. To ensure that there
were no intermolecular iMs, thermal melting experiments were performed
at concentrations ranging from 0.3 to 20 μM. Plots of Tm versus concentration showed that all Tm values were identical, indicating that at
all concentrations in this range the iMs were intramolecular. Furthermore,
nondenaturing PAGE at pH 5.4 was used to look for formation of multiple
structures. Concentrations of DNA &lt; 30 μM traveled as a single
band, suggesting that at pH 5.4 and at a concentration of 2 to 3 μM
(those used in our studies) the sequences adopted an intramolecular
iM structure. To obtain the thermodynamic parameters from the melting
curve, curve fitting and data analyses were done using IGOR Pro (version
4.0, Wavemetrics). The values for Tm,
ΔG°T, and ΔHm were obtained by fitting the data to a two-state model,
where ΔG°T is a change in the
free energy at a particular temperature and ΔHm is the enthalpy at the melting temperature, Tm.

The two-state model for DNA melting
is described byandwhere K is the equilibrium
constant for unfolding and [U] and [N] are the concentrations of unfolded and folded state, respectively.

The mole fraction of unfolded DNA, f(U), is given byThe free energy of unfolding at any given
temperature, T, is given by eq ()The fraction folded was
normalized from 0
to 1 prior to fitting, and the change in heat capacity (ΔCp) was assumed to be negligible. The fits yielded
the values for Tm and ΔHm.

Hydration Effects on iM Stabilities
Water activities
were obtained from osmolality measurements, which were done using
a model 5520R vapor pressure osmometer (Wescor, Inc.). For higher
concentrations of volatile cosolvents, osmolality was calculated.
The water activity (aw) values were obtained
from osmolality using eq where Cosm is
osmoles of cosolvent per kilogram of solvent.

To assess the effects of hydration on the thermodynamic properties
of the iM structure, we used the approach of Sugimoto that was previously used to study hairpins and G-quadruplex
structures. The equilibrium between the folded and unfolded iM structure
can be represented bywhere U and N represent unfolded and native
(folded iM) forms, CS represents cosolvent, and H+ represent
protons. The equilibrium constant, K, is then given
bywhere (U/N) = Kobs.

At constant temperature
and pressure, the first derivative of ln Kobs by ln aw is
given by

In our plots of ln Kobs against ln aw, because
of buffering, the difference in the
number of protons, ΔnH+, between the folded and unfolded state is negligible. The change
in the activity of cosolvents with respect to the change in activity
of water is assumed to be insignificant over the small range tested.
On the basis of the previously reported work on duplexes and triplexes,, the linear slopes of the graph of eq  give
the number of water molecules associated with each iM at the temperature
studied, which, in our case, was physiologically relevant 37 °C.

Results
Colocalization of iMs with 5hmCs Showed That Most iM-Forming
Sequences Have Only a Single 5hmC Modification
The density
of iMs within 1 kb upstream and downstream was plotted for all genes
(Figure a,b). The
contour plots of 5hmC with respect to iM-forming potentials and GC
content indicate that in the 1 kb region upstream relative to the
TSS (Figure a)
the 5hmC enrichment occurs around those sequences that have lower
potential to form iMs. In contrast, in the 1 kb downstream region,
the 5hmC enrichment occurs around the sequences with high-iM-forming
potential (Figure b). Asymmetry in the distribution
could be caused by intragenic regions that are more likely to be enriched
in 5hmC content. In any case, most of the iMs do not have more than
single 5hmC modification associated with them. The genes with putative
iM-forming sequences were a subset of all 5hmC-modified genes in the
database. Each individual putative iM-forming sequence was analyzed
for the presence of 5hmC. Quantitatively, our analyses indicated that
among all of the putative iM-forming sequences that could have cytosines
modified to 5hmCs only a small fraction (less than 15% of sequences)
had two or more 5hmCs located within an iM-forming sequence. Although
many 5hmC residues were found in regions that would constitute loops
in putative i-motifs, there were also a significant number of 5hmC
associated with residues that could form the C–C+ intercalation bond that stabilizes the i-motif. Hence, as a representative
of those sequences, we have used the constructs having only single
5mC and 5hmC modifications to evaluate whether a singly modified cytosine
can affect the biophysical properties of iMs by altering the intercalated
bases.

Very few 5hmC-modified iMs contribute to the overall density of
iMs around the TSS. (a) Overall density of iM-forming genes relative
to the TSS. (b) Density of iM-forming genes having 5hmCs colocalized
within 100 bp of an iM.

Relationship between iM potential and 5hmC density. (a) Contour
plot for the sequences upstream of the TSS shows that 5hmC enrichment
is associated with genes having low-iM-forming potential. (b) Contour
plot for the downstream sequences shows that the 5hmC enrichment is
associated with genes having high-iM-forming potentials.

Single 5hmC and 5mC Modifications Do Not
Inhibit iM Formation,
but the Presence of 5hmC Alters pH-Dependent Folding
Initially,
we evaluated whether the 5hmC and 5mC modifications affected the ability
of the DNA to adopt the iM conformation. The conformations of 22-mers
at decreasing pH were examined to determine the pKa for iM formation (defined as the pH at which 50% of
the strands are folded). The characteristic CD signal maxima for iMs
at 289 nm and minima at 254 nm was observed for modified strands,
indicating that they formed iM structures. By measuring the change
in the ellipticity at 289 nm, the pKa was
determined (Figure ). This showed that the
pKa values were 6.1 ± 0.1 for C6T
and 6.3 ± 0.1 for 5mC-C6T but were slightly lowered to 5.9 ±
0.1 for 5hmC-C6T. Thus, a single 5hmC modification reduced the pH-induced
stability of the iM structure. However, the unfolding with respect
to increase in pH for 5hmC modified construct was strikingly different
from that of 5mC and unmodified DNA; for 5hmC modification, the unfolding
was highly cooperative, transitioning from fully folded to fully unfolded
over the small pH range of 5.6–6.2. We attribute this dramatic
change in pH response to the 5hmC polarity, which likely makes it
more favorable for water molecules to interact with ssDNA and hence
results in an ease of unfolding of the structure at relatively low
pH compared to C6T and 5mC-C6T.

pH denaturation of (a) C6T, (b) 5mC-C6T,
and (c) 5hmC-C6T. pKa increases slightly
with 5mC modification and
is lowered with 5hmC modification. The pH melting curve (d) shows
substantial co-operativity when the iM contains 5hmC modification.

Macromolecular Crowding
Agents Shift the pKa of iMs toward Physiological
pH, whereas Smaller Cosolvents
Have No Effect on the pKa
Physiologically,
crowding agents and cosolutes occupy 20–40% of cellular volume. Hence, for evaluating the effects of cosolvents
and crowding agents on the iM structure of C6T, we used 40% (w/v)
of 1,2-dimethoxyethane, 2-methoxyethanol, ethylene glycol, 1,3-propanediol,
glycerol, and PEG-300 as representative of the cellular milieu. The
pKa measurements were repeated as described
above. Addition of cosolvents did not perturb the maxima and minima
in the CD spectra of iM structures. The low-molecular-weight cosolvents
showed no effect on the pKa of iMs (±0.1).
Thus, dehydration did not have any significant consequence on the
pKa of iMs. However, PEG-300 stabilized
the iMs at higher pH. The pKa of the C6T
iM structure was raised to 7.0 ± 0.1 in the presence of PEG-300
(Figure ), which is a considerable shift and
is consistent with the previously published literature. Similarly, a rise in pKa was observed for 5mC-C6T as well as for 5hmC-C6T. However,
under molecular crowding conditions, the pKa difference between the C6T and epigenetically modified DNA is rendered
insignificant. The comparative studies conducted using the crowding
agent PEG 300 and other smaller cosolvents lead to the conclusion
that it is primarily crowding because of steric effects that is responsible
for conferring pH-dependent stability in PEG 300. Previously, it has
been reported that the direct interaction between ssDNA and macromolecules
like PEG are thermodynamically unfavorable. However, Hänsel et al. reported
on the differences between the effects of the two molecular crowding
mimetics, Ficoll 70 and PEG 200, on G-quadruplex folding topology.
Their results suggested that PEG may promote the formation of high-order
parallel topologies in G-quadruplexes via a mechanism other than simple
crowding. However, unlike the G-quadruplexes studied, our iM-forming
sequence cannot adopt intramolecular parallel/antiparallel conformations.
Also, our iM-forming sequence is conformationally restricted and cannot
undergo significant structural polymorphism by intercalated residues.
Hence, the increase in stability of the iM in the PEG solution we
attribute to the resistance offered by macromolecular crowding to
iM unfolding and not to an alternate physical mechanism or structure.

pH scans
for C6T in the presence of PEG-300. (a) Melting scans
of iM structure, under molecular crowding conditions, with increasing
pH. (b) Fits showing that the pKa of C6T
in the presence (black) of molecular crowding agents shifts toward
neutral, whereas the pKa in the absence
(blue) of crowding is in the acidic range. The other smaller cosolutes
did not show any pKa shifts.

Epigenetic Modification by 5hmC Results in
iM Thermal Destabilization
To characterize the thermodynamic
differences between the modified
and unmodified oligos, thermal denaturation experiments were conducted.
The CD signal at 289 nm (maximum for iMs) was then plotted against
temperature. The melting profiles are shown in Figure . All the three oligos melted in a fashion that could be described
by a two-state transition but showed small yet significant (p value &lt;0.05 using one-way ANOVA) differences in melting
temperature of C6T when the cytosine was modified to 5hmC. 5hmC-C6T
had the lowest melting temperature of 40.5 ± 0.6 °C, whereas
5mC-C6T and unmodified C6T have Tm of
43.7 ± 0.3 and 42.5 ± 0.9 °C, respectively. The results
of the fits to the Tm profiles for the
three oligos are shown in Table . The ΔG° of unfolding at 37 °C for 5hmC-C6T is substantially
lower than the other two oligos, indicating the unfolded state is
more favorable at physiological temperatures. With 5hmC, we again
interpret the difference as being due to the additional −OH
group, which likely leads to the increase in the water-accessible
surface area upon denaturation. As with pH-dependent unfolding, the
−OH group in thermally unfolded DNA can interact with water
molecules, facilitating the unfolding of iMs at lower temperatures.
Conversely, the methyl group of 5mC, being nonpolar, likely introduces
an entropic penalty for formation of additional iceberg waters with
the ssDNA form, making 5mC iMs slightly more difficult to thermally
unfold. An alternative explanation for the lower melting temperature
and pH response of 5hmC-C6T could be attributed to a different conformation
of iM in 5hmC-modified DNA. However, this seems unlikely given the
similarity of the CD spectra for each folded DNA, modified or not.

CD melting
trends for C6T (□), 5hmC-C6T (●), and
5mC-C6T (▲). 5hmC modification thermally destabilized the iM
structure.

Comparison of the
Thermodynamic Parameters
for Melting of C6T, 5mC-C6T, and 5hmC-C6T
 	ΔHm (kcal/mol)	Tm (°C)	ΔG° (kcal/mol, 37 °C)	
C6T	42.0 ± 0.3	42.5 ± 0.9	0.80 ± 0.20	
5mC-C6T	44.4 ± 0.3	43.7 ± 0.3	0.94 ± 0.05	
5hmC-C6T	37.9 ± 0.1	40.5 ± 0.6	0.42 ± 0.07	
Values
are given ± standard
deviations. 

Indicates that
the difference in
the thermodynamic parameters between the epigenetically modified and
unmodified DNA is significant. ANOVA (Turkey post hoc test) with p &lt; 0.05 was considered significant.

Thermodynamics of iM Melting Systematically
Change with the
Total Number and Position of Hydroxyl Groups in the Cosolvents
The thermal stability of the C6T iM in water is greatly dependent
on the presence and composition of cosolvents. Nonionic cosolvents
like 1,2-dimethoxyethane (with no −OH groups), 2-methoxyethanol
(with a single −OH group), 1,3-propanediol (with two −OH
groups), ethylene glycol (with two vicinal −OH groups), and
glycerol (with three vicinal −OH groups) were used from 10
to 40% (w/v). Increasing amounts of 1,2-dimethoxyethane and 2-methoxyethanol
increased the thermal stability of the iM structure, glycerol lowered
it significantly, and ethylene glycol and 1,3-propanediol had a negligible
effect on the melting temperature. Hence, adding cosolvents did not
always stabilize the iM structure; the composition of the cosolvents
played an important role. The melting profiles for C6T in 1,2-dimethoxyethane,
2-methoxyethanol, glycerol, and PEG-300 are shown in Figure . The melting temperature was raised approximately
10 °C on addition of 1,2-dimethoxyethane or PEG-300 to the buffer.
The thermodynamic parameters obtained from fitting all thermal melting
data are given in Table . Below, we further
analyze the hydration of iMs in the presence of the different cosolvents.

Thermal
melting profiles for C6T in 10 (◊), 20 (●),
30 (▲), and 40% (■) cosolvents. Melting temperature
increases with the addition of (a) dimethoxyethane, (b) 2-methoxyethanol,
and (d) PEG-300. Melting temperature decreases with the addition of
(c) glycerol.

Comparison
of the Thermodynamic Parameters
of C6T in Varying Concentrations of the Cosolvents and PEG-300
cosolvent/crowding
agent	 	40% (w/v)	30% (w/v)	20% (w/v)	10% (w/v)	
dimethoxyethane	ΔHm (kcal/mol)	33.9 ± 1.7	34.6 ± 2.0	37.3 ± 0.8	43.0 ± 1.8	
 	Tm (°C)	52.0 ± 0.4	49.0 ± 1	46.5 ± 0.2	44.7 ± 0.3	
 	ΔG° (kcal/mol, 37 °C)	1.5 ± 0.2	1.3 ± 0.2	1.1 ± 0.1	1.04 ± 0.02	
methoxyethanol	ΔHm (kcal/mol)	32.0 ± 1.9	35.0 ± 2	38.0 ± 2.8	41.0 ± 1.8	
 	Tm (°C)	47.0 ± 0.2	45.0 ± 2	44.0 ± 0.1	43.0 ± 1	
 	ΔG° (kcal/mol, 37 °C)	1.0 ± 0.2	0.9 ± 0.2	0.8 ± 0.1	0.77 ± 0.02	
ethylene glycol	ΔHm (kcal/mol)	38.0 ± 0.4	36.7 ± 0.4	38.0 ± 1.0	37.1 ± 0.4	
 	Tm (°C)	40 ± 0.1	41.0 ± 0.1	42.2 ± 0.3	42.1 ± 0.6	
 	ΔG° (kcal/mol, 37 °C)	0.6 ± 0.1	0.5 ± 0.2	0.6 ± 0.2	0.6 ± 0.1	
glycerol	ΔHm (kcal/mol)	34.0 ± 2.8	41.0 ± 3.0	42.0 ± 2.0	42.5 ± 0.4	
 	Tm (°C)	39.0 ± 0.2	41.0 ± 0.1	43.0 ± 0.5	43 ± 1	
 	ΔG° (kcal/mol, 37 °C)	0.23 ± 0.03	0.5 ± 0.1	0.8 ± 0.2	0.8 ± 0.2	
PEG-300	ΔHm (kcal/mol)	31.1 ± 0.9	34.0 ± 2.0	37.0 ± 1.0	38.0 ± 1.0	
 	Tm (°C)	52.0 ± 0.2	50.2 ± 0.3	47.2 ± 0.2	45.0 ± 0.9	
 	ΔG° (kcal/mol, 37 °C)	1.4 ± 0.1	1.40 ± 0.01	1.2 ± 0.2	0.9 ± 0.2	
Values are given ± standard
deviations.

Under Molecular
Crowding Conditions or in the Presence of Cosolvents,
the Epigenetic Modifications Lose Their Governance on the iM Stability
When pKa and thermal melting experiments
were done with the modified DNA in the presence of cosolvents, all
of the differences caused as a result of modifications were abolished
(Table ). Thus, epigenetic modification governs
the iM stability only weakly compared to cosolvents. From these experiments,
we conclude that in the cellular environment the iM stability would
not vary significantly in the presence or absence of the modified
cytosine residues. Table  gives the comparisons
of melting temperatures of 5hmC-C6T and 5mC-C6T in various solvents,
and these temperatures are similar to the melting temperatures of
C6T (Table ).

Melting
Temperatures of Epigenetically
Modified DNA Strands in the Presence of Cosolvents
 	5mC-C6T (°C)	5hmC-C6T (°C)	C6T (°C)	
40% dimethoxyethane	51.8 ± 0.2	52.4 ± 0.2	52.0 ± 0.4	
20% dimethoxyethane	46.2 ± 0.2	46.6 ± 0.2	46.5 ± 0.2	
40% methoxyethanol	46.6 ± 0.2	46.9 ± 0.4	47.0 ± 0.2	
20% methoxyethanol	43.4 ± 0.3	43.5 ± 0.2	44.0 ± 0.21	
40% glycerol	39.1 ± 0.2	39.0 ± 0.2	39.0 ± 0.2	
20% glycerol	42.9 ± 0.2	43.1 ± 0.2	43.0 ± 0.5	
40% PEG-300	52.5 ± 0.4	52.6 ± 0.6	52.0 ± 0.2	
20% PEG-300	47.4 ± 0.3	48.9 ± 0.9	47.2 ± 0.2	
Values are given ± standard
deviations.

Stability of
iM Structure Is Affected by Both Hydration and
Molecular Crowding
The stability of iMs is affected by the
composition of the cosolvent, which governs the hydration state of
the structure. The small cosolvents, such as 1,2-dimethoxyethane (MW
= 90 g/mol), 2-methoxyethanol (MW = 76 g/mol), ethylene glycol (MW
= 62 g/mol), 1,3-propanediol (MW =76 g/mol), and glycerol (MW = 92
g/mol), vary the degree of hydration associated with the iM structure.
These smaller cosolvents have similar molecular weights and should
contribute similarly to any crowding resulting from their steric bulk.
Hence, the differences in the thermodynamic characteristics of iMs
in the presence of these small cosolvents were attributed to differences
in the degree of hydration of the iMs by these cosolvents. To be able
to quantify the hydration associated with the DNA molecules at 37
°C, the logarithm of water activity is plotted against the logarithm
of Kobs (Figure ). From the slopes of the plots in Figure , we calculated that in the presence of glycerol there were six water
molecules associated with the folded DNA structure, whereas ethylene
glycol led to the uptake of 1.4 water molecules per iM structure.
However, 1,2-dimethoxyethane and 2-methoxyethanol caused the release
of eight and two water molecules, respectively. Likewise, in the folded
state, PEG-300 facilitated release of 26 water molecules. Addition
of 1,3-propanediol did not result in either the uptake or release
of water molecules, and the total number of water molecules associated
with iM-forming sequence remained unchanged between folded and unfolded
states. From the Tm data, we demonstrated
that the presence of ethylene glycol and glycerol lowered the Tm, whereas 1,2 dimethoxyethane, 2-methoxyethanol,
and PEG-300 considerably increased the thermal stability of C6T. Together,
these results lead to a very important inference that the iMs are
stabilized by the release of water molecules. It has been previously
reported that macromolecules like PEG do not interact with DNA directly
because such interactions are thermodynamically unfavorable. Therefore, PEG-dependent stabilization of iMs
are more likely a result of the molecular crowding phenomenon, which
restricts the degrees of freedom available for iMs to unfold, thereby
hindering the process of unfolding. In contrast to PEG, small molecules
like 1,2-dimethoxyethane, 2-methoxyethanol, ethylene glycol, 1,3-propanediol,
and glycerol can directly interact with both structured and random-coiled-single
stranded DNA. These cosolvents can be either taken up or released
during the secondary-structure formation along with water molecules.
In our studies, glycerol, having three hydroxyl groups, increases
the water molecules associated with the folded iMs and also destabilizes
the iM form. In contrast, dimethoxymethane favors the release of water
molecules associated with the iM and imparts stability to the iM structure.
These data suggest that the entropic penalty for increased water participation
during folding is the thermodynamic phenomenon that disfavors the
folded form in selected cosolvents. Hence, cosolvent effects on iM
formation in cells are likely to be a complex function of the cellular
environment of genomic DNA.

Changes in Kobs with
respect to changing
water activity (aw) for C6T at 37 °C
in pH 5.4 solutions. Nearly identical results were obtained for 5hmC-C6T
and 5mC-C6T, indicating that the solvent effects are indifferent to
epigenetic modification.

Discussion
With the recent confirmation of the existence
of G4s in
vivo, the probability of biological
roles for iMs has increased significantly. G4s/iMs are gene regulatory
elements abundant near the TSS of several genes. G4s/iMs are known to promote expression of certain genes.
As one example, the presence of G4s/iMs enhances myoD-dependent gene
expression. In contrast, transcription
of the c-myb gene is suppressed by G4/iM formation. These conflicting roles in regulating gene expression
indicate a complex underlying mechanism of gene regulation. Hence,
to develop a better understanding of the gene regulatory function
of iMs, it is important to comprehensively study and account for the
factors affecting the formation and stability of iMs in vivo.

One of the factors that might affect iM stability is epigenetic
modification. The cytosines in mammalian DNA can undergo epigenetic
modifications to 5mC and 5hmC., Our determination of
the pKa of modified iMs indicated that
the 5mC modification shifted the pKa toward
physiological pH (from 6.1 to 6.3), whereas the 5hmC modification
shifted the pKa to more acidic pH (from
6.1 to 5.9). The thermal melting data showed that a single cytosine
modification to either 5mC or 5hmC did not inhibit the formation of
iMs at 37 °C. The 5hmC modification had the lowest melting temperature
of 40.5 ± 0.6 °C, whereas 5mC and unmodified C6T have Tm at 43.7 ± 0.3 and 42.5 ± 0.9 °C,
respectively. The observed shifts in pKa and melting temperature indicate that 5mC and 5hmC modifications
can alter the conformational stability of iMs, depending on experimental
conditions. Therefore, these modifications may need to be accounted
for when studying transcriptional regulation of iM-forming, epigenetically
modified genes.

Macromolecules including nucleic acids, proteins,
and polysaccharides
occupy 20–40% of the intracellular volume, resulting in the
phenomenon of molecular crowding. Crowding
conditions are known to stabilize G4s and triplexes. Experiments done in dilute aqueous buffers often exclude
volume and osmotic pressure effects found in the cellular environment.
Hence, we used PEG-300 as a surrogate to introduce molecular crowding
into our experiment on the stability of iMs. Concurring with the earlier
work on crowding and stability of iMs, our results demonstrate that molecular crowding via PEG-300 significantly
increased the pKa of iMs approximately
to physiological pH (7.0). Also, addition of PEG-300 increased the Tm of iMs. Our data indicate that the increased Tm and pKa result
from the resistance offered by the crowding agents to the unfolding
process, making the folded form more favored. Hence, along with above-mentioned
epigenetic modifications, crowding conditions should also be accounted
for when studying conformational dynamics and energetic landscapes
of folding/unfolding and gene regulatory mechanisms involving iMs.

Owing to their pH- and temperature-dependent conformational response,
iMs are being used in a diverse range of nanotechnological applications. These applications include drug delivery systems,
nanocircuitry, and mechanical motors. For example, Pu et al. have
developed a supramolecular complex based on iMs that is capable of
performing multiplex logical operations. The ability iMs/G4s to undergo
conformational variation (from tetraplex to duplex) in response to
temperature and/or pH stimuli is harnessed to operate these logic
gates. To build logic gates operational over different temperature
and pH ranges, Pu et al. have suggested altering the sequence and
the length of iM-forming oligonucleotides. Alternatively, our studies
show that introducing 5mC and 5hmC modifications in intercalating
cytosines alter both the pKa and Tm of iMs. Thus, 5mC and 5hmC modifications could
be used to fine-tune the pH- and temperature-dependent iM conformational
switching of C-rich sequences. The pH- and temperature-dependent response
of iMs can also be varied by changing the environment in which iMs
are formed. For example, the presence of a cosolvent like glycerol
lowers the Tm of iMs and hence glycerol
could be used to design iM-based logic gates that operate over a narrower
range of temperature changes. In contrast, crowding agents like PEG-300
raise the Tm of iMs, resulting in a molecular
switch that undergoes a conformational change at higher temperatures.
Overall, our work on the effects of epigenetic modifications, hydration,
and crowding effects provides a systematic study of ways to modulate
iM-based conformational changes.

Conclusions
In
this work, we examined the stabilities of iMs for comparison
with prior work on DNA G4s, duplexes, and triplexes., In dilute aqueous solutions, modification of cytosine to 5mC raised
the pKa and Tm of iMs, whereas modification to 5hmC lowered the pKa and Tm. The introduction
of molecular crowding by using PEG-300 stabilized the iMs versus both
temperature and pH. However, under molecular crowding conditions,
neither 5mC nor 5hmC modification could alter the stability of iMs.
The degree of hydration of iMs changed their temperature-dependent
stability. Depletion of water molecules associated with folded iMs
stabilized them against thermal melting, indicating an important cosolvent
dependence. Our methodical study of the effects of hydration and molecular
crowding on iMs suggests that the microenvironment around the iMs
should be accounted for when studying these structures. Thus, both
epigenetic modification and the matrix surrounding the iMs affect
their formation; hence, these factors could be used both for understanding
the physiological roles of iMs and for fine tuning pH- and temperature-dependent
responses of nanodevices based on iM structures.

Author Contributions
The manuscript
was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have
given approval to the final version of the manuscript.

This research
was supported by National Science Foundation Mississippi EPSCoR grant
EPS-0903787 and National Institutes of Health/National Cancer Institute
grant 1R15CA173667-01A1 (T.A.B., PI; R.M.W., co-PI).

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Christopher
J. Fields from the University of
Illinois–Urbana–Champaign, USA, for helping us with
BioPerl. We thank Dr. Souvik Maiti and Vinod Scaria form the Institute
of Genomics and Integrative Biology, India, for sharing the code for
the Quadfinder program. We also acknowledge the valuable input of
Samantha M. Reilly, a graduate student at the University of Mississippi,
USA.

Abbreviations
G4guanine quadruplex

iMi-motif

TSStranscription start site

