Phytochromes are photoreceptors
first discovered in plants, where they function as critical developmental
regulators, and later found in fungi, bacteria, and algae., Phytochromes utilize photoisomerization of a covalently attached,
heme-derived linear tetrapyrrole (bilin) chromophore (Figure ) to photoconvert between two states. Phytochromobilin
and phycocyanobilin chromophores are incorporated in plant and cyanobacterial
phytochromes, respectively. Both proteins possess red/far-red photocycles
in which their dark-stable, red-absorbing Pr state (peak
absorption at 640–680 nm) reversibly photointerconverts with
a metastable far-red-absorbing Pfr photoproduct (700–740
nm). Photoconversion effects structural changes that are subsequently
transduced by cellular signaling pathways. In plants, phytochromes
regulate many processes, including germination, shade avoidance, and
flowering. Phytochrome engineering in
crop plants thus holds great agronomic potential.

Stereodiagram showing
protein–chromophore interactions in
the Cph1Δ Pr state. The
PCB chromophore is shown with Tyr176 and Cys259, which is covalently
attached to PCB.

Red/far-red photocycles
of phytochromes are well separated from
those of blue-sensing photoproteins, leading to increasing focus on
phytochromes as reporters for biological imaging and as a basis for
red-responsive modules in synthetic biology.− In such applications,
high quantum yields are desirable. The excited-state population generated
upon photoexcitation undergoes productive photoisomerization and fluorescence,
with quantum yields denoted by Φphoto and Φfluor, in addition to other nonradiative deexcitation pathways.
Despite the availability of crystal structures and multiple spectroscopic
studies, our understanding of the photodynamic processes immediately
following photoexcitation does not adequately explain the observed
fluorescence and photochemical quantum efficiencies of plant and cyanobacterial
phytochromes. Photoisomerization of the bilin 15,16-double bond occurs
with a low Pr-to-Pfr Φphoto of &lt;20% for nearly all known phytochromes, while the room-temperature
Pr fluorescence yield can vary in a range of 0.1–3%.− Moreover, Φphoto for phytochrome is lower than
those reported for distantly related cyanobacteriochromes that use
the same chromophore.− These data indicate that both Φphoto and Φfluor reflect specific protein–chromophore
interactions rather than an intrinsic property of bilins per se. Indeed,
in different protein contexts (e.g., the phycobiliproteins and mutant
apophytochromes), Φfluor for PCB chromophores can
reach 100% at the expense of photochemistry.,

Excited-state decay of phytochromes is multiphasic, which
has been
interpreted in varying ways, including excited-state equilibrium, partial Z-to-E isomerization in the excited state, and excited-state proton transfer. Despite
support for a homogeneous Pr ground state, ongoing studies of the cyanobacterial phytochrome Cph1
from Synechocystis sp. PCC6803 implicate its heterogeneity,, providing the rationale for the investigation presented here. Cph1
from Synechocystis has proven to be an excellent
model system for plant phytochromes because of its robust recombinant
expression and the availability of a crystal structure for the conserved
photosensory core module (Figure )., The full length Cph1 protein consists of a PAS-GAF-PHY photosensory
core module (termed Cph1Δ) coupled to a C-terminal histidine
kinase domain.

In Cph1, red light initiates the forward Pr-to-Pfr conversion, affording the primary isomerized
intermediate
(Lumi-R) on a picosecond time scale.,− Lumi-R subsequently evolves on the ground-state electronic surface
via several spectroscopically distinct intermediates ultimately generating
the Pfr signaling state on an approximately millisecond
time scale., Primary Lumi-R formation for
Cph1Δ has been studied with both electronic, and vibrational,− transient spectroscopies,
often with contradictory conclusions. All studies resolve multiexponential
excited-state decay kinetics, typically ascribed to either complex
nonexponential dynamics arising from a single ground-state population
(the “homogeneous perspective”) or an ensemble of ground-state
subpopulations, each exhibiting single-exponential dynamics (the “inhomogeneous
perspective”). Resonant Raman intensity analysis and hybrid
quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics simulations support a homogeneous
Pr state, also corroborated
by earlier pump–dump–probe (PDP) studies., In contrast, solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) resolved
two Pr subpopulations: one structure consistent with the
known crystal structure and a second interpreted as having a modified
charge distribution and hydrogen bond network. More recent PDP experiments also implicate a heterogeneous
Pr ground state for a red-absorbing cyanobacteriochrome
(CBCR). The fluorescence excitation spectrum
of the Cph1Δ Pr state exhibits a small but significant
blue shift relative to the absorption spectrum. Given that both are static measurements, this discrepancy
is consistent with a blue-shifted fluorescent subpopulation (although
it does not exclude distinct excited-state populations reflecting
isomers across a low-barrier hydrogen bond). Moreover, equilibrium
between such subpopulations could explain reversible temperature effects
on the Pr absorption band that have been attributed to
thermal spectral broadening of a homogeneous population.

Resolution of the question of Pr ground-state heterogeneity
has broad implications. If understood, ground-state heterogeneity
of Cph1 not only will help reconcile conflicting interpretations of
available spectroscopic and X-ray crystallographic data (discussed
later) but also will inform our understanding of the merits and limitations
of Cph1 as a model system for plant phytochromes. Additionally, a
fluorescent subpopulation in wild-type Cph1 (WT) potentially provides
a rationale for the behavior of the fluorescent, photochemically inactive
Y176H variant of Cph1 (YH), because this mutation in both
Cph1 and plant phytochromes blue shifts the Pr absorption
maximum while also greatly increasing Φfluor. Here,
we revisit the Pr photodynamics for Cph1Δ using a
combination of static fluorescence, temperature-dependent static/transient
absorption, and excitation wavelength-dependent transient absorption
spectroscopies for both WT and YH. Surprisingly, WT exhibits an inverted
Arrhenius effect on excited-state decay, with faster decay occurring
at lower temperatures. Using global analysis and singular-value decomposition
(SVD), five coexisting ground-state subpopulations were resolved in
thermal equilibrium, allowing quantitative interpretation of Φfluor and Φphoto and reconciling various independent
spectroscopic observations. Our study thus represents definitive evidence
of Cph1 Pr ground-state heterogeneity at ambient temperatures
and also correlates the observed photodynamics of different coexisting
excited-state subpopulations with observed rates and yields of double-bond
photoisomerization.

Experimental Procedures
Protein Purification
Escherichia coli strain LMG194 (Invitrogen) was
cotransformed with two plasmids,
pBAD-Cph1(N514)-CBD and pPL-PCB, to permit production of holo-Cph1Δ in vivo. Transformed cells were selected on rich medium
(RM) plates containing 100 mg/mL ampicillin and 50 mg/mL kanamycin.
An individual colony was cultured overnight in RM (AMP50 KAN25) and
inoculated with a 1:500 ratio in 100 mL of RM. Upon reaching an optical
density (OD) of 0.5 at 600 nm, the culture was transferred to 900
mL of LB (Luria-Bertani medium or lysogeny broth) containing 50 mg/mL
ampicillin, 25 mg/mL kanamycin, and 1 mM isopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside for a total expression of 6 L. After 1 h
at 37 °C and after the sample had been shaken at 250 rpm in a
shaker-incubator (Innova 4340 from New Brunswick Scientific), arabinose
was added to a final concentration of 0.002% (w/v) followed by incubation
for 1 h prior to a decrease in the temperature to 20 °C for 16
h. Subsequently, cells were harvested by centrifugation at 5000g for 10 min and stored at −80 °C. The pellet
was resuspended at 1 g of wet weight/4 mL of lysis buffer A [25 mM
Hepes-Na (pH 8.0), 500 mM NaCl, and 1 mM EDTA] and 0.1% (v/v) Triton
X-100. Cells were lysed by two passes through a microfluidizer (M-110Y)
at 15000 psi, and all subsequent steps were conducted at 4 °C.
The crude lysate was clarified by centrifugation (35000 rpm, Ti-60
Beckman, 30 min) and applied to a 30 mL chitin column (New England
Biolabs), which was washed thoroughly with buffer A at a rate of 1
mL/min. Intein-mediated cleavage was induced by flushing the column
with 1 bed volume of elution buffer (buffer A and 1 mM dithiothreitol
and overnight incubation at 4 °C). Eluted fractions containing
Cph1Δ(N514) were pooled and concentrated in Amicon spin prep
columns (10000 kDa cutoff) and dialyzed overnight at 4 °C in
1 L of buffer B [25 mM Tes-KOH (pH 8.0), 25 mM KCl, and 10% glycerol].

Transient Absorption Measurements
The primary light
source was an amplified Ti:sapphire laser system (Spectra Physics
Spitfire Pro) that delivered 1 kHz pulses at a λcenter of 790 nm with an energy of 2.4 mJ and a 40 fs full width at half-maximum
(fwhm) duration. The laser beam was split into separate pathways for
the independent generation of the pump and probe pulses. The pump
pulses were produced by a home-built noncollinear optical parametric
amplifier (NOPA). For temperature-dependent
studies, a single NOPA generated 630 nm light with a 20 nm fwhm bandwidth
at 300 nJ/pulse. For the dual-excitation wavelength interleaved pump–probe
(DEWI-PP), two NOPAs were used to generate 600 and 650 nm pump pulses
at a 20 nm bandwidth and powers of 300 and 200 nJ, respectively. Broadband
white-light probe pulses (300–770 nm) were generated by focusing
a portion of the fundamental 790 nm pulses into a slowly translating
2 mm CaF2 crystal. These probe pulses were mechanically
delayed with respect to the pump pulses by a computer-controlled linear
motor stage (Newport IMS 600LM), which provided a maximal delay of
7 ns.

The pump pulses were mechanically chopped at 500 Hz to
generate a Pump-ON and Pump-OFF sequence. For DEWI-PP, two choppers
mechanically chopped two excitation pulses at frequencies of 500 and
250 Hz to generate four pulse sequences (each 1 ms): Pump-1-ON/Pump-2-OFF/Probe,
Pump-1-OFF/Pump-2-ON/Probe, Pump-1-ON/Pump-2-On/Probe, and Pump-1-OFF/Pump-2-OFF/Probe.
These pulse sequences allowed nearly simultaneous (separated by milliseconds)
pump–probe measurements of two different excitation pulses
on the same sample. Thus, the DEWI-PP approach ensures that the primary
experimental variable is the excitation energy, which was successfully
utilized previously to study excitation-dependent dynamics in carotenoids
and phytochrome-related CBCRs.

After being temporally and spatially overlapped with the pump pulses
in the Cph1Δ sample, the broadband probe light was detected
by an imaging spectrograph (Oriel MS 127) equipped with a 256 pixel
photodiode array (Hamamatsu S3901 and C7884). The resulting transient
absorption signals had an ∼100 fs temporal resolution [instrumental
response function (IRF)], estimated by the rise of the excited-state
absorption (ESA) band at 490 nm. The polarizations of pump and probe
pulses were set at 54.7° (magic angle) with respect to each other
to eliminate any anisotropic effects to the signals. The pump beam
size was significantly greater (3-fold) than the probe beam size at
the sample to eliminate any aberrations due to spatial chirp of pump
and probe beams, which was confirmed by dithering the pump pulse a
little to show the uniform decay of the signals.

The samples
were passed continuously through a quartz 2 mm flow
cell that was back illuminated with a 720 nm LED light source (Epitex
Inc., model L720-66-60). For temperature-dependent studies, a refrigerating
circulator (Fisher Scientific Isotemp 1016D) circulated water at 8,
25, and 40 °C to a custom-made bath in contact with a sample
bath in the flow system. Before an experiment, the sample was circulated
at a set temperature for 10 min to ensure temperature equilibration.

SVD Analysis
The temperature-dependent absorbance spectra
of WT were analyzed with MATLAB version 7.11.0. Two SVD vectors were
extracted, and the two basis sets, photoactive and fluorescent basis,
were constructed by the linear combination of the two vectors with
a good fit. Modified Gibbs–Helmholtz equation fitting to a
van’t Hoff plot based on a SVD analysis concentration was simulated
by MATLAB Curve Fitting Toolbox version 3.0.

Results
WT Cph1Δ
and YH Variant Spectra Exhibit Distinct Temperature
Dependence
Fluorescence spectra for WT and YH at 25 °C
are both shown in Figure . WT and YH have
identical maxima at 645 and 672 nm (excitation and emission, respectively).
Consistent with previous work,, the absorption maximum
of WT Cph1Δ at 25 °C is significantly red-shifted relative
to the excitation maximum (Figure C, red curve).
The absorption maximum of YH at 25 °C is the same as the fluorescence
excitation maximum at 645 nm (Figure D, red
curve). The absorption spectra for WT and YH were both temperature-dependent;
the observed changes were fully reversible in the range from 4 to
43 °C (Figure S1 of the ). As previously reported,, WT exhibits an isosbestic
point at 600 nm with the absorption maximum blue shifting with a decrease
in temperature (Figure C, inset), approaching
that of the excitation spectrum. The absorbance also decreases in
the peak region (∼660 nm) while increasing on the blue shoulder
at &lt;600 nm. In contrast, YH exhibits a different temperature dependence
(Figure D): the peak absorbance decreases
with an increase in temperature, and the absorption maximum undergoes
a slight red shift with an isosbestic point at a much longer wavelength
(655 nm). These observations are consistent with the presence of a
blue-shifted population in the WT that is increasingly populated at
high temperatures, a population that may predominate in the fluorescent,
blue-shifted YH variant.

Static measurements on the Pr state
of Cph1Δ.
Static fluorescence excitation (black) and emission (red) with peak
wavelengths indicated in respective color (A and B) and absorption
(C and D) spectra are shown for WT (A and C) and YH (B and D) Cph1Δ.
Absorption spectra at indicated temperatures are shown; the arrow
in the inset emphasizes the spectral shifting of the peak as a function
of increasing temperature. The vertical dash indicates 645 nm.

WT Cph1Δ Exhibits
Inverted Arrhenius Excited-State Kinetics
Because the temperature
dependence of static spectra can be interpreted
many ways, we collected pump–probe (PP) transient absorption
spectra for both WT and YH at 8, 25, and 40 °C using the same
excitation pulse at 630 nm (Figure  and Figure
S2 of the ). PP signals
at each temperature were scaled to the initial amplitude of the 490
nm band of excited-state absorption (ESA), where other overlapping
signals such as ground-state bleach, stimulated emission, and Lumi-R
absorption are minimized or absent (Figure S2 of the ). Data in Figure  are thus normalized to the initial excited-state Pr*
population to allow meaningful comparison of the excited-state signals
and Lumi-R quantum yields (Φphoto). YH exhibited
an excited-state decay significantly slower than that of WT (Figure ), consistent with single-molecule studies of this
variant., YH exhibited standard Arrhenius kinetics,
i.e., faster excited-state decay at elevated temperatures. WT instead
exhibited inverted Arrhenius kinetics, with slower excited-state decay
at elevated temperatures. Inverse temperature effects have previously
been described for photoactive proteins. For example, proton dissociation
in GFP and the adduct formation reaction
in the flavin-based blue light sensors of the LOV (light, oxygen,
voltage) family show slower kinetics
at elevated temperatures. For these proteins, an apparent transition
temperature that separates regimes with positive and negative activation
energies was observed. These observations
support conformational transitions that activate or deactivate certain
reaction pathways, which imply the existence of a heterogeneous mixture
of conformations near the transition temperature.

Temperature-dependent
PP spectroscopy. PP experiments were performed
at 8, 25, and 40 °C (blue, green, and red, respectively). (A
and C) Kinetic traces are shown at 490 nm for WT and YH Cph1Δ.
Arrows indicate the trend with an increase in temperature. These kinetic
traces are fit with respective global analysis models (Figure  and Figure S4I–L of the ). (B) Comparison of early (at 1 ps)
and later (scaled by 5.5-fold, at 110, 150, and 200 ps for 8, 25,
and 40 °C, respectively) transient spectra of WT. (D) Comparison
between the 25 °C WT and Y176H transient spectra at
150 ps, with a difference between them (gray) compared to Lumi-R (magenta).

Excited-State Decay of
the YH Variant Matches That of a WT Subpopulation
We employed
a two-step procedure to analyze the transient data.
First, we decomposed the temperature-dependent PP signals for both
proteins using global analysis with a sequential model (Figures S3
and S4 of the )., In the second step, global analysis using a target model to describe
the underlying populations was conducted following further data collection
(see below). The sequential model analyzed PP signals by extracting
a finite number of exponentially decaying and sequentially interconverting
spectral components with fixed difference spectra (evolution-associated
difference spectrum or EADS, termed wtEADS and yhEADS for WT and YH,
respectively). Good fitting of the WT and YH signals at each temperature
required seven and four populations, respectively (wtEADS1–wtEADS7
and yhEASD1–yhEADS4, respectively). At 25 °C, WT exhibited
multiexponential dynamics with relaxation times (τ) of 120 fs,
2.3 ps, 13 ps, 99 ps, and 800 ps and a nondecaying population (Figure
S3A–C of the ). YH Cph1Δ also exhibited multiexponential dynamics, with
τ values of 120 fs, 9 ps, 120 ps, and 1.6 ns (Figure S4I–L
of the ). Comparable,
but not identical, lifetimes were observed for the respective proteins
at other temperatures (Figures S3 and S4 of the ).

At 1 ps, WT Cph1Δ exhibited
a greater absolute amplitude from 525 to 700 nm at 8 °C than
at 25 and 40 °C signals (Figure B), well
represented by wtEADS2 (Figure S4B of the ). At later times, this difference was lost, well
represented by wtEADS4 (Figure B and Figure
S4C of the ). Thus,
temperature-dependent effects are more notable at short times and
are lost after approximately 100 ps. After 150 ps, the WT and YH signals
at 25 °C differed only in the 650–750 nm region (Figure D). Notably, the difference between them was identical
to that exhibited by the Lumi-R spectrum (Figure D), indicating that the only difference between WT and YH
signals at 150 ps is Lumi-R formation in WT. A 1–2% photoactivity
that is expected for YH could not be
resolved in the current data. These results thus demonstrate that
the slower phases of excited-state decay in WT are spectrally equivalent
to those of the fluorescent, photochemically compromised YH variant,
which is further supported by the 8 and 40 °C transient signals
(Figure S3 of the ).

On the basis of this spectral equivalence, the “crossover
region” between 580 and 630 nm can indicate the relative amplitude
of a YH-like population in WT. YH shows a consistent negative amplitude
in this region, while WT shows a positive amplitude at short times
[&lt;50 ps (Figure S2 of the )]; therefore, a negative amplitude correlates with the depletion
of a YH-like population. Moreover, a negative amplitude also correlates
with temperature. For example, a negative amplitude at 605 nm under
the same excitation energy condition is greater at 40 °C than
at 25 and 8 °C (Figure S2F of the ). These results provide a potential explanation
for the inverted Arrhenius effect of WT: a subpopulation with slower
excited-state dynamics similar to those of YH becomes increasingly
significant at higher temperatures.

WT Cph1Δ Mimics the
YH Variant at Short Excitation Wavelengths
A YH-like subpopulation
in WT would be preferentially excited at
shorter wavelengths, because the YH variant is blue-shifted relative
to the WT absorption band and instead matches the WT fluorescence
excitation band (see above). We therefore undertook a dual-excitation
wavelength interleaved pump–probe (DEWI-PP) study on both proteins
(Figure S5 of the ). In DEWI-PP, two independent PP experiments
are performed simultaneously with a train of alternating excitation
pulses differing in center wavelength and/or line shape. This approach
minimizes experimental variation such as sample degradation, flow
rate, temperature, and laser stability. We used pulses centered at
600 and 670 nm (Figure A) to target the putative
YH-like and WT populations, respectively.

DEWI-PP of WT Cph1Δ.
(A) Absorbance of WT Pr overlaid
with excitation spectra at 600 and 670 nm (blue and red, respectively).
(B and C) Excitation wavelength-dependent kinetic traces at 490 and
630 nm, respectively. (D) Excitation wavelength-dependent quantum
yields of Lumi-R represented by a 695 nm probe wavelength. These kinetic
traces were fit with a global target model (Figure ).

WT Cph1Δ exhibited pronounced
excitation wavelength dependence
in DEWI-PP (Figure S5B,C of the ). Decay kinetics of Pr* at 490 nm are distinctly slower
after initiation with 600 nm light than with 670 nm light (Figure B). At 630 nm, in the crossover region, excitation
at 600 nm results in a negative amplitude that persists beyond the
experimental time scale (Figure C). By contrast,
excitation at 670 nm results in an initial positive amplitude that
decays to a negative amplitude by 10 ps. At 695 nm, the peak of the
Lumi-R absorption band (Figure D), excitation
wavelength-dependent quantum yield is clearly resolved, with the higher-energy
excitation at 600 nm having a Φphoto that is lower
than the lower-energy excitation at 670 nm (Figure D).

The YH variant also exhibited wavelength-dependent
effects in DEWI-PP
(Figure S5H,I of the ). For example, 670 nm excitation produced a more pronounced negative
amplitude in the region assigned to ground-state bleach and stimulated
emission. However, the excited-state decay kinetics of YH Cph1Δ
exhibited negligible wavelength dependence (Figure S5J of the ), demonstrating that the
kinetic effects observed with WT Cph1Δ are an authentic property
of the protein scaffolding and are not an artifact of the DEWI-PP
experiment on the PCB chromophore.

Integrated Analysis of
Cph1Δ Dynamics
Our studies
demonstrate that WT Cph1Δ exhibits discrepant absorption and
fluorescence excitation maxima, temperature effects on absorption
spectra, inverted Arrhenius excited-state dynamics, multiphasic excited-state
decay, including a component mimicking that of the YH variant, and
excitation wavelength-dependent photodynamics. These results are consistent
with a heterogeneous Pr ground state in WT Cph1Δ.
We therefore used a heterogeneous target model in the second step
of data analysis. An integrated model with five subpopulations (Figure ) was constructed to
describe the effects of temperature and excitation wavelength within
the framework of global target analysis., Target analysis extracts time-independent spectra (species-associated
difference spectra) or SADS (Figures S4E–H and S6E–H
of the ) and corresponding
time-dependent concentration profiles for the constituent (sub)populations
in the model (Figure S7 of the ). Each SADS represents the spectrum of a particular microscopic
subpopulation within the postulates of the model and its underlying
connectivity scheme. Key features of the target model are presented
below, with further details in the .

(1) Five subpopulations coexist in thermal
equilibrium, grouped into two spectrally distant categories: the fast-decaying
“photoactive” (Pr 1 and 2) and slow-decaying
“fluorescent” populations (Pr 3–5).
For each subpopulation, the initial 120 fs decay from the sequential
model (Figure S3 of the ) is assigned as Franck–Condon relaxation. The latter are
spectrally and kinetically identical to those of YH Cph1Δ (Figures
S4I–L and S6I–L of the  for temperature-dependent and DEWI-PP signals,
respectively). While Pr 1 and 2 share identical SADS (Figure
S4E–H and S6E–H of the ) and are thought to have the same static absorption
spectrum, only Pr 2 generates Lumi-R. Similar heterogeneity
was also observed in phytochrome-related cyanobacteriochrome NpR6012g4
photodynamics.

(2) Each subpopulation
exhibits normal Arrhenius kinetics, with
a higher temperature inducing faster Pr* decay kinetics.
The inverted Arrhenius kinetics observed in WT Cph1Δ (Figure A) are explained by temperature-dependent changes
in the occupation of Pr subpopulations: for example, at
8 °C, the 630 nm pump-induced occupancies of photoactive and
fluorescent Pr* populations are 73 and 27%, respectively
[Pr 1 + Pr 2 and Pr 3 + Pr 4 + Pr 5, respectively (Table )], while they are 64 and 36% at 25 °C and 53 and 47% at 40
°C, respectively (Figure  and Table ).

(3) Excitation wavelength dependence is
modeled on the basis of
the kinetic parameters obtained at 25 °C with the 630 nm pump
pulse by varying only the initial occupancy of Pr*. For
600 nm excitation, the photoactive/fluorescent Pr* population
ratio is modeled as 52/48, while for 670 nm excitation, the ratio
is 75/25 (Table ).

(4) The model predicts
Φphoto values of 9.5 and
12% for the 600 and 670 nm excitation signals, respectively (Figure
S7D of the  and Table ). For 630 nm excitation, Φphoto was temperature-independent at approximately 14% (Figure S7A–C
of the  and Table ). With 630 nm excitation, apparent temperature
independence arises due to offsetting factors: the photoactive Pr 2 population is excited less efficiently at 40 °C, but
the efficiency of Lumi-R generation is higher. Lower-energy excitation
(670 nm) selectively excites more of Pr 2 (Figure ).

(5) SADS are temperature-independent (Figure
S4E–H of the ). DEWI-PP SADS of WT Cph1Δ
are excitation wavelength-dependent (Figure S6E–H of the ), likely because of an
intrinsic red-edge effect. SADS of “fluorescent
populations” from DEWI-PP signals (Figure S6G of the ) qualitatively reproduce
DEWI-PP signals from YH Cph1Δ (Figure S6I–L of the ).

Integrated target model
for both PP experiments. Pr 1–5
reflect subpopulations in thermal equilibrium, where Pr 1 and 2 are red-shifted subpopulations and Pr 3–5
are blue-shifted subpopulations. The relative amplitude of initially
excited subpopulations under different experimental conditions is
indicated. Parameters for 8, 25, and 40 °C are colored blue,
green, and red, respectively. DEWI-PP was performed at 25 °C,
and occupancy parameters are color-coded as gray and black for 600
and 670 nm excitation, respectively.

Initial Occupancies of Each Subpopulation
under Each Experimental Condition of Temperature and Excitation Pulse
Energy
 	photoactive
population occupancy (%)	fluorescent
population occupancy (%)	
 	Pr 1	Pr 2	total	Pr 3	Pr 4	Pr 5	total	
temperature dependence (630 nm excitation)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
8 °C	25	48	73	4	17	6	27	
25 °C	16	48	64	8	21	7	36	
40 °C	13	40	53	11	29	7	47	
excitation energy dependence (at 25 °C)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
600 nm excitation	20	32	52	5	38	5	48	
670 nm excitation	35	40	75	3	18	5	26	
The five subpopulations, Pr 1–5, are categorized as photoactive (Pr 1 and
2) and fluorescent (Pr 3–5) populations.
These parameters are based on the target model from Figure .

Lumi-R Quantum Yields (ΦLumi-R) under Each
Experimental Condition of Temperature
and Excitation Pulse Energy
 	Pr 2 occupancy (%)	branching % to Lumi-R	ΦLumi-R (%)	
temperature dependence (630 nm excitation)	 	 	 	
8 °C	48	29	14	
25 °C	48	30	14.4	
40 °C	40	34	13.6	
excitation energy dependence (at 25 °C)	 	 	 	
600 nm excitation	32	30	9.6	
670 nm excitation	40	30	12	
The branching ratio is calculated
based on τ (Pr 2* → Pr 2) and τ
(Pr 2* → Lumi-R) in Figure . The ΦLumi-R is calculated by Pr 2 occupancy × branching % to Lumi-R.

The resulting model provides a good fit to both temperature-dependent
PP signals and DEWI-PP signals (Figures S2 and S5 of the ). For example, the wtEADS6
derived from sequential analysis (corresponding to Lumi-R formation)
showed a slight discrepancy in the Lumi-R peak wavelength for the
two DEWI-PP data sets (Figure S6D of the ). Such a discrepancy is not seen for the Lumi-R
SADS from the target model (Figure S6H of the ). Moreover, the target model correctly
predicts the inverse Arrhenius effect (Figure ), excitation wavelength-dependent kinetics (Figure ), and excitation wavelength-dependent quantum yield (Figure ).

Modeling the Inverted Arrhenius Effect
The excellent
agreement of the model in fitting both the temperature-dependent and
DEWI-PP signals (Figure ) strongly supports
the underlying dynamic heterogeneity hypothesis. As a model describing
the behavior of the excited-state populations, it formally describes
the distribution of excited-state subpopulations generated by a given
excitation. We therefore sought similar information about the Pr ground state. We applied singular-vector decomposition (SVD)
(Figure ) of the temperature-dependent absorption
spectra (Figure S1D–F of the ) to estimate the absolute ratio of ground-state
subpopulations. In analyzing the transient signals, we had postulated
that the subpopulations within the fluorescent and photoactive categories
were spectrally indistinguishable. We therefore used only two bases,
fluorescent and photoactive, in analyzing the static spectra. The
calculated fluorescent basis is blue-shifted relative to that of WT
(Figure A) and is similar to that of YH (Figure C), overlapping well with the WT fluorescence excitation
spectrum (Figure C). The photoactive basis
is red-shifted relative to the fluorescent basis, as expected. The
temperature-dependent ground-state subpopulation partitioning obtained
from SVD is also consistent with the partitioning estimated from the
integrated model for the temperature-dependent signals (Figure B). This analysis thus quantitatively reproduces
the static spectral behavior of WT Cph1Δ and is consistent with
the heterogeneous target model. Moreover, the equivalent distributions
obtained for static and transient signals indicate that the heterogeneity
arises in the Pr ground state and that the distribution
of ground-state subpopulations gives rise to an equivalent distribution
of excited-state subpopulations.

SVD analysis of temperature-dependent
absorbance spectra of WT.
(A) Photoactive (red) and fluorescent (blue) bases representing Pr 1 and 2 and Pr 3–5, respectively, are compared
to the WT absorbance spectra (black) at 25 °C. WT was simulated
(green) as 67% photoactive and 31% fluorescent. (B) Temperature-dependent
concentrations of photoactive and fluorescent bases were determined
for static measurements using SVD (red diamonds and blue circles,
respectively) and are compared to those estimated by temperature-dependent
PP (empty diamonds and circles). (C) The fluorescent basis (blue)
is compared to the YH absorption spectrum at 25 °C (black) and
the WT fluorescence excitation spectrum (magenta). (D) van’t
Hoff plot for WT Cph1Δ subpopulations extracted from SVD concentrations
from panel B. Data were fit to a standard model (orange, ΔCp = 0) and eq  (green). The thermodynamic parameters with a standard model
fit are as follows (at 25 °C): ΔS = 21.4
± 2.3 cal mol–1 K–1, ΔH = 6.76 ± 0.68 kcal/mol, and ΔG = 364 cal/mol. Parameters with a fitting according to eq : ΔCp = 446 ± 53 cal mol–1 K–1, ΔS = 22.1 ± 0.9 cal mol–1 K–1, ΔH = 7.05 ± 0.27
kcal/mol, and ΔG = 458 cal/mol.

SVD analysis also allowed us to examine the subpopulation
partitioning
in the static spectra in more detail, which gave the ratio of photoactive
and fluorescent populations at each temperature, allowing derivation
of the equilibrium constant for their interconversion at that temperature.
This allows construction of a van’t Hoff plot (Figure D), which demonstrates a nonlinear relationship
of ln K versus 1/T. Such nonlinear
van’t Hoff plots are often observed in protein folding studies
and are indicative of a change in heat capacity (ΔCp) between folded and unfolded states.
A similar interpretation can readily be applied to photoactive and
fluorescent subpopulations if one assumes that they are structurally
different. Assuming that ΔCp is constant in the temperature range being studied here and
is defined as Cp(fluorescent)
– Cp(photoactive),
the change in the free energy for photoactive–fluorescent interconversion
would follow eq :where Tm is a
reference temperature (25 °C) and ΔHm is the change in enthalpy at that temperature., Employing the standard relationship between free energy change ΔG and equilibrium constant K allows the
van’t Hoff plot to be fit with eq  (Figure D, green curve), resulting in good agreement with
the observed data with a ΔCp of 446 cal mol–1 K–1.
Agreement is much poorer if the data are instead fit to a standard
linear relationship with a ΔCp of 0 (Figure D, orange curve). This
analysis demonstrates that the static spectra are described well by
the target model and that there is a change in heat capacity upon
fluorescent–photoactive interconversion.

We also analyzed
the Arrhenius kinetics of the microscopic rate
constants derived from target analysis of temperature-dependent PP
studies (Figure ). The fast relaxation process
with 120 fs is temperature-independent, consistent with Franck–Condon
relaxation after photoexcitation. Evolution of the relaxed excited-state
subpopulations follows normal Arrhenius kinetics. Surprisingly, the
activation energies (Ea) show an unexpected
pattern: the fast-decaying Pr 1 and 3 subpopulations have Ea values (2.2–2.5 kcal/mol) greater than
those of slow-decaying subpopulations Pr 2, 4, and 5 (∼0.9
kcal/mol) (Figure S1G,H of the ). There is thus an inverse correlation between relaxation time and
activation energy in WT Cph1Δ, despite the direct correlation
between relaxation time and temperature arising from standard Arrhenius
behavior. This indicates that the observed rate constants for excited-state
decay in WT Cph1Δ are largely determined by the Arrhenius pre-exponential
coefficient, A, instead of Ea. These data thus confirm standard Arrhenius behavior of the
microscopic subpopulations while also demonstrating that there is
not a simple correlation between excited-state decay and excited-state
activation energy.

Discussion
In this report, we have
characterized the forward reaction of the
model cyanobacterial phytochrome Cph1Δ providing new insight
into the temperature- and excitation wavelength-dependent static and
ultrafast photodynamic properties. These studies provide compelling
support for a heterogeneous Pr ground state in Cph1Δ,
in which a blue-shifted, fluorescent population is in equilibrium
with a photoactive population peaking at longer wavelengths. Our results
therefore corroborate solid-state NMR and fluorescence, measurements, although such previous
studies were performed on samples held at much lower temperatures.
We also show that interconversion between these two forms of Cph1Δ
is accompanied by a change in heat capacity, indicative of a structural
rearrangement with a change in buried nonpolar surface area., The ΔCp for WT
Cph1Δ is significantly lower than that observed for protein
unfolding and that observed for the pB-to-pG
transition in photoactive yellow protein (PYP), which is known to
involve a partial loss of structure. The
rearrangement of Cph1Δ thus seems likely to involve a large-scale
conformational change rather than denaturation or loss of secondary
structure. Such structural heterogeneity is a challenging issue for
crystallographic analysis because of the constraints associated with
crystallization, and the potential for selection of a conformation(s)
that preferentially crystallizes.

It presently is unclear whether other phytochromes show similar
behavior. Temperature dependence has been reported in static measurements;
in both oat phytochrome A, and the bacteriophytochrome
Agp1, effects that are somewhat similar
to those reported for Cph1Δ. The temperature dependence of the
ultrafast photodynamics of plant phytochromes has not yet been analyzed.
However, previous studies of the excitation wavelength dependence
in Cph1Δ have produced conflicting interpretations: an initial
PP study with single-wavelength detection produced results similar
to ours, with slower dynamics at shorter wavelengths. A more recent study by van Thor and coworkers with broadband
detection resolved sequential EADS with the same spectra trends we
report in the crossover region, although these data were interpreted
differently since they were unable to resolve the kinetic differences
the DEWI-PP approach extracts. The Pr state of phytochromes has also been examined using vibrational
methods. In particular, a femtosecond resonance Raman study of Cph1Δ
was interpreted in terms of complete photoisomerization on the excited-state
surface due to rapid formation of Lumi-R bands with a time constant
faster than that of excited-state decay. Such an interpretation requires a homogeneous population, so our
results call this conclusion into question. Similarly, Raman intensity analysis was used to model the absorption
band of Cph1Δ in solution or in crystals as a single homogeneous
population. This analysis used values
of the homogeneous broadening constant, Γ, significantly higher
than those that have been reported for other proteins, and hole-burning
experiments were not conducted to provide independent support for
this Γ value. We have performed two independent ultrafast measurements,
and the successful fitting of both ultrafast inverse Arrhenius effects
and static temperature effects provides powerful additional evidence
of our target model.

In addition to its implications for the
interpretation of spectroscopic
studies, our work provides new insight into the means by which phytochromes
partition the excited-state population between fluorescence and photochemistry.
The red-shifted subpopulations must have a chromophore configuration
and/or protein–chromophore interactions slightly different
from those of the blue-shifted subpopulations. Moreover, the difference
in heat capacity between the two categories implies the existence
of two distinct configurations of the protein. Mutations such as Y176H would thus seem to change the equilibrium between these
configurations. Such configurational heterogeneity has physiological
implications, as well. Indeed, the YH mutation in plant phytochromes
from Arabidopsis has been shown to confer light-independent
constitutive signaling phenotypes consistent with a signaling-active
protein conformation and the ability
to bind to phytochrome-interacting transcription factors in the absence
of light. Further engineering of phytochrome
will ultimately benefit from elucidation of the protein–chromophore
interactions that determine partitioning between potentially signaling-active
and -inactive subpopulations.

Supporting Information Available
Details of global analysis
target model construction, SVD analysis fit over the full temperature
range and Arrhenius analysis based on the target model, temperature-
and excitation-dependent transient absorption data and their species-associated
spectra, with the target model concentration profile. This material
is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500108s_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
Dr. Mikas
Vengris (Light Conversion Ltd.) is acknowledged
for the donation of the global and target analysis software package.

Abbreviations
Cph1ΔPAS-GAF-PHY photosensory
core module of Cph1

WTwild type

YHY176H mutant

CBDchitin-binding domain

CDcircular dichroism

EADSevolution-associated difference spectrum

SADSspecies-associated
difference spectra

DEWI-PPdual-excitation wavelength interleaved pump–probe

ESIexcited-state intermediate

ESAexcited-state absorption

SEstimulated emission

GAFdomain name derived
from cGMP phosphodiesterase/adenylyl cyclase/FhlA

GSAground-state absorbance

RcaEregulator of chromatic
adaptation E

NOPAnoncollinear optical parametric amplifier

PASPer-ARNT-Sim

PCBphycocyanobilin

Prred-absorbing ground state
of red/far-red phytochromes

Pfrfar-red-absorbing photoproduct state of red/far-red
phytochromes

Φtotal photocycle quantum yield

ΦLumiquantum yield of generating
Lumi-Rf

PYPphotoactive yellow protein.

