DNA polymerases are complex bisubstrate enzymes
that facilitate
DNA replication. From the chemical point
of view, these enzymes catalyze the transfer of the nucleotidyl moiety
of deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates (dNTPs) to the 3′-end
of the DNA primer. This reaction is known to involve deprotonation
of the 3′-terminal oxygen atom of the primer strand, which
is followed by the attack of this nucleophile on the Pα atom of dNTP and the breaking of the Pα–O
bond in the Pα–O–Pβ bridge to generate inorganic pyrophosphate (PPi). The
knowledge of the free energy surface for the corresponding reference
reaction in aqueous solution is important to quantitatively assess
the DNA polymerase catalysis and identify mechanistic alterations
that could facilitate the insertion of wrong or nonstandard dNTP substrates
into the growing DNA chain.

The nature of the transition state
(TS) for the enzymatic nucleotidyl
transfer reaction has been studied in human DNA polymerase β
(pol β) using a series of modified dNTP substrates that differed
in the chemical structure of the group that bridges β and γ
phosphorus atoms of the triphosphate part of dNTP.− These experiments initially showed
that the rate constant of the enzymatic reaction is directly proportional
to the equilibrium constant for the protonation of PPi or
its bisphosphonate analogues and that the slope (βlg) of this linear free energy relationship (LFER) differs between
the right and wrong dNTP substrates. Later,
a structurally broader range of substituents showed a clearly separate
LFER for the insertion of a wrong dNTP with mono- and dihalogenated
β–γ bridging substituents., Interestingly,
these effects of bulky substituents were later reproduced by quantum
mechanical calculations in the absence of the enzyme environment.

In this paper, we present computational
study of the uncatalyzed
reaction of tetrahydrofuranolate (THFO–) with a
series of Mg2+ complexes of β–γ-substituted
methyl triphosphates in aqueous solution (Figure ). These reactants were chosen as models of the deprotonated
deoxyribose terminus of the primer DNA strand and dNTP, respectively.
After exploring the free energy surface near the TS plateau for this
reaction, we expanded our study to include an additional 11 dNTP analogues
with bisphosphonate leaving groups of pKa4 constants spanning the 7.8–12.3 range. For these compounds,
we examined βlg and the corresponding linear relationship
(βeq) between leaving group pKa and the logarithm of the calculated equilibrium constant
for the studied reaction. To address the structural basis of the observed
Brønsted LFER, we also evaluated substituent effects on the POlg bond length and atomic charges.

Schematic structure of
the reacting system. X = O, (R)-CHF, (S)-CHF, (R)-CHCl, (S)-CHCl, (R)-CHBr, (S)-CHBr,
(R)-CFCl, (S)-CFCl, (R)-CHCH3, (S)-CHCH3, (R)-CFCH3, (S)-CFCH3, CH2, CF2, CCl2, CBr2, C(CH3)2; R = H+ or nothing.

Computational Methods
Structural and Mechanistic
Models
The 3′-terminus
of the primer DNA strand and β,γ-substituted dNTP substrate
were modeled by 3′-hydroxy tetrahydrofuran and β,γ-substituted
methyl triphosphate, respectively, in a complex with a Mg2+ ion and three explicit water molecules (Figure ). The initial reactant state geometry of methyltriphosphate
and Mg2+ ion was identical to the geometry of these atoms
in dCTP bound to pol β. Of the two
Mg2+ ions present in the pol β active site we kept
the “structural” ion, which is complexed to the triphosphate
moiety, while the “catalytic” Mg2+ ion, which
coordinates only the α-phosphate, was removed. Although the
“structural” Mg2+ ion may increase the reaction
rate in aqueous solution by up to 3 orders of magnitude (about 4 kcal/mol
at 298 K), its main purpose in our study
is to make the calculated gas-phase and solvation energetics more
accurate by decreasing large negative charge of the substrate.

The following two mechanistic variants of this reacting system were
considered: For the parent triphosphate (X = O in Figure ), the first mechanism contained doubly protonated
γ-phosphate:and the second
mechanism contained unprotonated
γ-phosphate:resulting, respectively,
in the −1
and −3 total charge of the reacting system. (Note that eq  is referred in the text either as mechanism 2 or
as reaction 2. In the former case THFO– has the
role of reaction intermediate, and in the latter it is considered
to be the reactant.)

The reaction free energy surfaces in aqueous
solution were studied
by constrained mapping of the relative free energy of the reacting
system as a function of the POnuc and POlg distances
(Figure ). Each gas-phase ab initio energy and solvation free energy of the reacting system was calculated
relative to the sum of the corresponding energies of THFO– and the Mg2+ complex of β–γ-substituted
methyl triphosphate. The free energy cost of protonating the γ-phosphate
in mechanism 1 was determined as ΔGpH = 2.303RT(pH – pKa1) + 2.303RT(pH – pKa2), where pKa1 = 6.6 and pKa2 = 1.5., To generate free energy
surfaces for the reaction of the primer terminus of DNA with dNTP
in aqueous solution at pH 7 and 1 M concentration of each reactant,the resulting relative free
energies from mechanism 1 and 2 were corrected for the configuration
entropy and experimental pKa of deoxyribose
(pKa = 12.67). The constant configuration entropy correction of 5.3 kcal/mol was
taken from the restraint-release entropy calculations of hydrolysis
of a phosphate monoester with the 3-chloro phenyl leaving group, whose pKa of 9.02
is similar to the pKa of PPi, which is the leaving group for our parent compound.

Ab
Initio Quantum Mechanical Calculations
Partial and
full geometry optimizations were carried out in the
gas phase at the HF/6-31G* level using the Gaussian 03 program. Each point on the reaction pathway was defined
by a pair of fixed POnuc and POlg distances,
which were the same for mechanisms 1 and 2. For each mechanism, three
reaction pathways were considered to generate relevant POnuc and POlg pairs (Figures  and ). Due to our primary focus on aqueous solution
rather than gas-phase energies, we used a loose convergence criterion
of maximum force = 0.0025 hartree/bohr. Single point energies were
obtained using the B3LYP hybrid density functional combined with Ahlrich’s
triple-ζ valence polarized basis set (TZVP). This method was selected to allow consistent comparison
with an earlier study of methanolysis of dimethylphosphate that was
carried out at the same B3LYP/TZVP//HF/6-31G* level.

Schematic free energy surface for the hydrolysis of phosphate diesters
with good leaving groups in aqueous solution. Figure inset illustrates
the minimal number of reaction pathways that are required to map the
free energy profile in the TS region.

Bond distances that were used for mapping of relative free energies
in the vicinity of the TS plateau for reaction 3. The labels A, S,
D, P, and C denote, respectively, associative, synchronous, dissociative
reaction pathways, a slice orthogonal to the reaction coordinate,
and points belonging to two or more pathways. The A7, S7, D9, and
D6 points were used in our analysis of the β–γ
substituent effects.

For the reactant state and all points on the reaction pathways,
positions of the Olg, Pα, and Onuc atoms were maintained in a plane perpendicular to the Pα–O1–O2 plane, and the torsional
angles χ = Pα–Olg–Pβ–Oβγ, δ = Olg–Pβ–Oβγ–Pγ, and ε = Pβ–Oβγ–Pγ–Oγ1 (Figure ) were fixed at −87.09°,
98.47°, and 97.95°, respectively; the δ and ε
angles remained fixed also in the product structure, while the structure
of the diester product was fully optimized. These torsional angles
were observed in dCTP bound to pol β. Other DNA polymerases− and dUTPases, which catalyze an analogous
reaction, bind dNTP substrates in a similar gauche conformation that does not significantly change during their chemical
transformation, (). For the diester product, we considered only the
lowest free energy gauche–gauche conformer. In addition, each
point for mechanism 1 was initially optimized with the oxygen atom
in the β,γ-bridge and with the γ-phosphate in a
doubly protonated form (Figure , X = O, R
= H). All torsional angles in the final optimized geometry were kept
fixed in the subsequent optimization of the geometry of the point
with the same POnuc and POlg distances for mechanism
2.

For each chemically modified compound (i.e., Xβγ ≠ O, Figure ), the partially optimized
geometries and solvation free energies were evaluated for the reactant
and product states and for the TS along each of the three reaction
pathways of mechanisms 1 and 2 (Figure ).
The POnuc and POlg distances at the six TS points
were chosen to be the same for all β–γ-substituted
compounds; these distances were determined from the free energy surfaces
calculated for the parent substrate (i.e., X = O, Figure ). This approximation is justified by the flatness
of the free energy surface near the TS. In other words, the use of
the same P–Onuc and P–Olg distances
for the TS of all compounds causes an error of the calculated substituent
effect on the activation free energy that is negligible compared to
the inaccuracy of the calculated solvation free energy differences.
Partial geometry optimizations for these TS points were carried out
at the PCM/HF/6-31G* level using the Gaussian 09 program and employing the torsional constraints for
the triphosphate backbone that were described in the previous paragraph.

Free Energy Calculations
Calculations of reaction free
energy surfaces of charged flexible compounds in aqueous solution
are associated with challenging difficulties. These issues include,
for example, the large charge–charge interactions distorting
the solute geometries during quantum-mechanical geometry optimizations
in the gas phase or implicit solvents, the difficulties with sampling
of the energies along degrees of freedom that do not contribute to
the reaction coordinate, in particular torsional coordinates that
feature multiple minima on their potential energy surfaces, and the
multidimensional nature of the reaction coordinate. To partly offset
these artifacts we fixed several torsional coordinates of the substrate
and studied doubly protonated and Mg2+-complexed substrates,
thereby decreasing the total charge of the reacting system to −1.
The main purpose of examining the −1 charged system was to
improve the validity of the gas-phase geometries of the coordinates
perpendicular to the reaction coordinate during the exploration of
the free energy surface of the parent compound (). The −3 charged reacting system,
as the predominant form at pH 7, was then relied upon for the calculations
of the substituent effects.

The free energies in aqueous solution
at pH 7 were calculated as a sum of the B3LYP/TZVP//HF/6-31G* energy,
the solvation free energy, and empirical pKa and configurational entropy corrections (). The energies for the reactant and product states
were calculated as a sum of free energies of the corresponding infinitely
separated fragments.

Solvation free energies (i.e., the free
energies of transfer of
the solute molecule from a 1 M concentration in the gas phase to a
1 M concentration in aqueous solution at 298 K) were calculated using
the Langevin dipoles (LD) solvation model and the ChemSol 2.1 program., The LD model, which evaluates an average polarization of the solvent
molecules and energetics of solute–solvent interactions by
using a discrete dipolar representation of the solvent, has been used
extensively in studies of chemical processes in solution.,− The LD solvation free energies also involve parametrized terms that
represent dispersion and hydrophobic solute–solvent interactions
and that depend on the atom type and solute–solvent boundary.
In the present study, the solute–solvent boundary was determined
using the atomic radii of 3.2, 2.8, 2.65, 2.65, 2.46, 3.16, 3.44,
and 1.82 Å for the P, O, C, N, F, Cl, Br, and Mg atoms, respectively.
The radius of each hydrogen atom was equal to the radius of the nearest
non-hydrogen atom multiplied by a factor of 0.88. With the exception
of the radius of the oxygen atoms, these radii and other parameters
correspond to the default parameter set in the ChemSol program. The radius of the oxygen atoms was adjusted
to obtain reasonable agreement between the calculated (−71
kcal/mol) and experimental (−68 ± 5 kcal/mol) solvation free energy of H2PO4–. For each solute, the calculated solvation
free energies were averaged over 50 separate calculations, each calculation
having a different position of the grid of solvent dipoles with respect
to the solute.

In order to account for the polarization of the
solute that is
induced by the solvent, the ChemSol program models an electrostatic
field of the solute by atomic charges that are calculated using the
polarized continuum method (PCM). Atomic charges that were used in
our LD calculations were fitted to the molecular electrostatic potential
(ESP) that was calculated at the PCM/B3LYP/TZVP level using the Merz–Kollman
set of atomic radii. The PCM calculations were carried out using the
Gaussian 03 program and options scrf=(pcm, solvent=water), scfvac,
radii=uahf, alpha=0.95, and noaddsphere.

Results
Free Energy
Profiles for the Parent Substrate
Points
that were used to map free energies for the parent compound X = O
(Figure ) along three possible reaction pathways
are shown in Figure . The choice of the associative,
synchronous, and dissociative pathways was guided by the free energy
surfaces of phosphate diester reactions.,, After initial calculations, extra points were inserted
along the associative, synchronous, and dissociative pathways to keep
the calculated free energy difference between two adjacent points
in the TS area below 1 kcal/mol. Additionally, we mapped free energy
along the “tightness coordinate” that passes through the highest energy plateau in the direction
that is approximately perpendicular to the synchronous pathway.

The free energy profiles for the mechanism involving unprotonated
γ-phosphate (mechanism 2) at pH 7 are shown in the bottom section
of Figure . The associative, synchronous,
and dissociative pathways have activation free energies of 32.0, 30.5,
and 31.3 kcal/mol, respectively. Since the synchronous pathway provides
the lowest barrier at 30.5 kcal/mol, the position of its highest point
at rPOnuc = 2.06 ± 0.05 Å and rPOlg = 1.88 ± 0.05 Å represents the TS for mechanism 2.

Bottom: Relative
free energy (ΔG, bottom)
along the associative (left), synchronous (middle), and dissociative
(right) pathway for mechanism 2 of reaction 3 in aqueous solution
at pH 7. Top: The corresponding solvation (ΔGsolv, color, right y-axis scale) and
gas-phase (black) energy components. Individual points along each
reaction pathway can be associated with specific rPOlg and
rPOnuc distances using labels defined in Figure . For easier orientation, some of these labels are
also shown in the center portion of this figure.

The individual gas-phase and solvation components of the
free energy
profiles (Step 4 in ) are shown in the upper part of Figure .
The gas-phase energies rise as the −1-charged nucleophile approaches
−2-charged methyl triphosphate complex. Concomitantly, solvation
free energy of the reacting system becomes more negative, resulting
in relatively flat free energy profiles, especially for the associative
pathway. The compensation of gas-phase and solvation energetics occurs
also for the tightness coordinate of the reaction free energy surface
(Figure ).

Bottom: Slice of the free energy surface
for mechanism 2 of reaction
3 along the direction that is perpendicular to the reaction pathway
(Figure ). Top: The corresponding solvation
(ΔGsolv, color, right y-axis scale) and gas-phase energy (black) components. Individual
points can be associated with specific rPOlg and rPOnuc distances using labels defined in Figure . For easier orientation, some of these labels are also shown
in the center portion of this figure.

Starting from the same reactant state (at pH 7) we also investigated
an alternative reaction mechanism that involves the initial double
protonation of the γ-phosphate (mechanism 1). This mechanism
yields higher activation barriers of 34.1, 33.0, and 31.7 kcal/mol
for the associative, synchronous and dissociative pathways, respectively
(Figure ). Thus, the reaction of the doubly
protonated triphosphate proceeds via the dissociative pathway that
is characterized by a looser TS (rPOnuc = 2.24 ± 0.05
Å and rPOlg = 2.00 ± 0.05 Å) for the rate-limiting
step.

Bottom: Relative free energy (ΔG, bottom)
along the associative (left), synchronous (middle), and dissociative
(right) pathway for mechanism 1 of reaction 3 in aqueous solution
at pH 7. Top: The corresponding solvation (ΔGsolv, color, right y-axis scale) and
gas-phase (black) energy components. Individual points along each
reaction pathway can be associated with specific rPOlg and
rPOnuc distances using labels defined in Figure . For easier orientation, some of these labels are
also shown in the center portion of this figure.

Charge Distribution for the Parent Substrate
To interpret
Brønsted LFER of phosphoryl transfer reactions, and to provide quantitative data for the parametrization of empirical
valence bond (EVB) methods, it is important
to examine how the charges of atoms or groups change along various
reaction coordinates. The NBO charges for the reactant, TS, and product
states of the two mechanistic models of reaction , which differ in the total charge of the reacting system, are presented
in Table . In both mechanisms, the total charge
of the leaving group, which includes the complex of pyrophosphate
(PPi) with the Mg2+ ion and three water molecules,
decreases upon going from the methyl triphosphate reactant to the
pyrophosphate product. This decrease is slightly larger (0.36 au)
when the γ-phosphate is unprotonated (mechanism 2) than in mechanism
1 (0.32 au), the charge transfer to Olg contributing 33%
and 45% of this change for mechanisms 2 and 1, respectively. Similar
trends emerge from the analysis of Mulliken charges (). For both mechanisms, the shift of
the electron density to the leaving group during the nucleotidyl transfer
reaction is accompanied by depletion of the electron density on the
nucleophile, which is modeled in our calculations by the THFO– moiety.

Variation of Atom
and Group Charges
during Model Nucleotide Transfer Reactions in Aqueous Solution
 	total
charge (au)	
atom/group	R∞	R3.6	TSA	TSS	TSD	P∞	
Mechanism 2	
lg	–1.64	–1.79	–1.80	–1.84	–1.90	–2.00	
Olg	–1.11	–1.15	–1.15	–1.17	–1.19	–1.28	
nuc	–1.00	–0.81	–0.75	–0.76	–0.78	–0.72	
Onuc	–1.10	–1.04	–0.93	–0.93	–0.95	–0.83	
CH3PO3	–0.36	–0.40	–0.44	–0.40	–0.32	–0.28	
Pα	2..53	2..53	2..54	2.55	2..56	2.49	
Pβ	2.55	2.54	2.54	2..54	2..53	2.48	
Pγ	2.50	2.50	2.50	2.50	2.50	2.49	
	–1.19	–1.20	–1.23	–1.22	–1.19	–1.19	
	–1.20	–1.20	–1.23	–1.23	–1.24	–1.25	
	–1.25	–1.26	–1.26	–1.26	–1.26	–1.26	
Mg	1.48	1.54	1.58	1.58	1.58	1.52	
Mechanism 1	
lg	0.32	0.15	0.11	0.13	0.07	0.00	
Olg	–1.11	–1.13	–1.13	–1.14	–1.17	–1.22	
nuc	–1.00	–0.90	–0.70	–0.74	–0.76	–0.72	
Onuc	–1.10	–1.04	–0.90	–0.92	–0.94	–0.83	
CH3PO3	–0.32	–0.37	–0.41	–0.39	–0.30	–0.28	
	–1.18	–1.19	–1.23	–1.22	–1.19	–1.19	
Mg	1.49	1.52	1.69	1.60	1.59	1.58	
Atomic charge or the sum of atomic
charges for the group of atoms. NBO atomic charges that were calculated
at the PCM/B3LYP/TZVP//HF/6-31G* level. R∞, R3.6, P∞, TSA, TSS,
and TSD denote, respectively, infinitely separated reactants
(i.e., THFO– and methyl triphosphate·Mg complex,
Figure ), reactants with an Onuc–Pα distance of 3.6 Å, infinitely separated
products (i.e., phosphate diester and PPi·Mg complex), and transition
states along the associative, synchronous, and dissociative pathways
(Figure ).

The nucleophile (nuc) includes all
atoms of the THFO moiety. The leaving group (lg) includes the complex
of Mg2+ ion with three water molecules and β- and
γ-phosphate groups. CH3PO3 denotes “Metaphosphate”
moiety that consists of Pα, O1, O2, O3 atoms and the methyl group. ,  and  denote average of atomic
charges of nonbridging
oxygen atoms on the α-, β-, and γ-phosphate, respectively.
For atom numbering, see Figure .

See eq 

See eq .

The leaving group NBO charge
at the three TS (Table ) is approximately
halfway between reactant and product state.
This charge becomes closer to its reactant value as the tightness
of the TS increases (i.e., upon going to a more associative TS structure).
The charge of the “metaphosphate” moiety, which consists
of Pα, two nonbridging oxygen atoms and the -OCH3 group, becomes more negative by 0.08 au in the associative
TS for the mechanism 1 but increases by 0.04 au in the dissociative
TS. Similarly, each of the two nonbridging oxygen atoms on the α-phosphate
(O1 and O2) shows a small but significant buildup
of the electron density, Δq = −0.04
and −0.05 au for mechanisms 2 and 1, respectively, upon going
from the reactant to the associative TS. This increase is diminished
in the synchronous TS (Δq = −0.03 and
−0.04 au) and dissociative TS (Δq =
−0.002 and −0.01 au). While Δq for the metaphosphate changes sign as tightness of the TS decreases,
charges on both the nucleophile and leaving group compensate for this
change. These variations of NBO charges between the reactant and TS
are validated by changes in the corresponding Mulliken charges ().

We describe structural variations of electron
density using the NBO and Mulliken rather than ESP atomic charges
because the ESP charges of large molecules tend to suffer from large
conformation-dependent fluctuations. This deficiency especially affects
charges of atoms that are buried inside large molecules, for example,
phosphorus and oxygen atoms that are located in the P–O–P
or P–O–Mg bridges. However, ESP charges tend to have
more realistic magnitudes for application in classical force fields
or the LD models (). Since the charge variations between the reactant and TS, or between
the TS for different mechanisms, determine the electrostatic stabilization
of these states by the enzyme active site, it is important to properly
incorporate these charge effects into reactive force fields. For this
purpose, adding NBO or Mulliken charge variations to the ESP charges
of the reactant state would represent a reasonable parametrization
strategy.

Structural Effects of the β–γ Phosphate Bridging
Groups in the Reactant State
Recently, a series of guanidyl
triphosphates with their β–γ bridging oxygen substituted
by various methylene and halomethylene groups (Figure ) have become available.− These compounds were shown to bind to pol β
and to alter the reactant and TS properties for the nucleotide-transfer
reaction.

The PC bonds in β–γ-substituted
methyl triphosphates are significantly longer than the corresponding
bridging PO bonds for the parent triphosphate: the bridging Pβ–O and Pγ–O distances
are 1.574 and 1.696 Å, respectively, while the corresponding
average P–C distances are 1.858 ± 0.03 and 1.909 ±
0.03 Å. The double protonation of γ-phosphate lengthens
the Pβ–O bond to 1.659 Å and shortens
the Pγ–O bond to 1.565 Å; a similar trend
occurs for the substituted triphosphates. The longer P–C bonds
are compensated by Pβ–C–Pγ angles that are more acute than the Pβ–O–Pγ angle, resulting in similar distances between Pβ and Pγ atoms. Thus, the methylene
and halomethylene β–γ substitutions do not significantly
perturb the calculated Mg2+ coordination geometry.

The length of the scissile Pα–Olg bond in the unprotonated methyl triphosphate complexes varies from
1.616 to 1.632 Å; these distances agree reasonably well with
the distance of 1.608 Å observed in the ternary complex of pol
β (PDB code 1BPY). The double protonation of the γ-phosphate
tends to slightly lengthen this bond length (Figure ). Interestingly, compounds with the highest pKa of the Olg atom in the corresponding bisphosphonate
leaving group (PO3–CH2–PO34–) have the shortest Pα–Olg bond. In fact, further analysis shows a linear
trend between the pKa of Olg and the scissile bond length for both unprotonated and protonated
methyl triphosphate complexes (Figure ). The
calculated pKa-dependence of this bond
length agrees well with the structural substituent effects observed
by Jones and Kirby for phosphate mono- and triesters.,

Calculated
Pα–Olg bond length
for methyl triphosphate complexes, averaged over two diastereomers
(Figure ), are plotted as a function of the
corresponding experimental pKa of PPi and the substituted bisphosphonates. The correlation coefficients are R = 0.93 and 0.87
for the doubly protonated (black circle, slope −0.00423) and
unprotonated triphosphates (blue square, slope −0.00338), respectively.
The green triangle is for the parent O compound in the dianion system
that was not included in the linear fit line for unprotonated triphosphates.

As the pKa of PPi and the
β–γ-substituted bisphosphonates decreases, the
NBO charges of the Olg, O4, and O5 atoms bonded to Pβ of the corresponding methyl
triphosphate become less negative (Figure , ), and the corresponding Mulliken charges show similar correlations
(). Consistent with
this trend, the “metaphosphate” (CH3PαO3) () and nonbridging oxygen atoms on α- and γ-phosphate
also become less negative as the leaving group pKa decreases. This excess negative charge flows into the
bridging group and the two adjacent phosphorus atoms (Figure ).

Relationship between the experimental pKa of the leaving group (PPi or its bisphosphonate
analogues)
and the selected NBO charges of the [Mg·3H2O·methyl
triphosphate]2– complex and its analogues. The purple
diamonds (slope = −0.0028, R = 0.78), red
circles (slope = −0.007, R = 0.89), and green
triangles (slope =0.049, R = 0.90) represent the
Olg charge, average of the charges of the two nonbridging
O atoms on β-phosphate, and the sum of charges on the X group
(Figure ), Pβ and Pγ,
respectively. Values of the Xtot + Pβ + Pγ charge are depicted along the y-axis on the right.

The γ-phosphate protonation does not affect the local
scissile
bond polarity. That is, Olg is more negative than the CH3PαO3 moiety by 0.746 and 0.788
au for unprotonated and doubly protonated methyl triphosphates in
solution, respectively. The difference in the charge of the CH3PαO3 moiety and the remaining
part of the methyl triphosphate was 2.982 and 2.254 au for unprotonated
and protonated compounds, respectively. In the absence of electron
transfer between the two halves, one would expect double protonation
of γ-phosphate to result in the charge difference of 0.982 au.
Thus, the actual charge difference of 2.254 au shows that the γ-phosphate
protonation represents a significantly larger electron withdrawing
effect than even the most electron-withdrawing moiety, the -CF2- substitution, of the β–γ bridging oxygen.

Kinetic and Equilibrium Effects of the β–γ
Phosphate Bridging Groups
Since Brønsted LFER, is usually expressed as a linear relationship between the substituent-induced
changes in the logarithm of the rate constant of the studied reaction
(log k) and changes in pKa of the leaving group,an important quantity for
the LFER analysis of our system is the pKa of Olg in the product state (i.e., PPi for
X = O and β,γ-X-bisphosphonates for X ≠ O, Figure ). In our particular case, k corresponds
to the rate constant for the nucleotidyl transfer reaction (reaction ), and the pKa corresponds
to the protonation of PPi or bisphosphonate. More specifically,
for mechanisms 1 and 2, pKa corresponds,
respectively, to the equilibrium between H3PPi–1 and H2PPi2– (pKa2) and HPPi3– and PPi4– (pKa4) with X = O and to
analogous pKa constants of β,γ-X-bisphosphonates.
The validity of eq  is difficult to justify
theoretically; however, the corresponding LFER is frequently utilized, since it serves as a practical surrogate for the theoretically established
linear free energy relationship between the activation (Δg⧧) and reaction (ΔGr) free energies,Validity of eq  can
be derived for a single-step reaction, in which the free energy surface
in the reactant and product states can be described as a quadratic
function of the reaction coordinate called a Marcus parabola. The
activation barrier is determined by the intersection of the two Marcus
parabolas of equal curvature., This approach has been
generalized for multistep reaction mechanisms for the hydrolysis of
phosphate monoesters. In addition, Rosta
and Warshel have recently established that during SN2 reactions
the magnitude of coupling between the two Marcus parabolas is not
affected by chemical substitutions.

Because ΔGr = −2.303RT log Keq and ΔΔg⧧ = −2.303RT Δlog k, eq  can be equivalently presented as log k versus log Keq, where Keq is
the equilibrium constant for the reactionReplacing
the relationship of eq  with eq  is convenient because
in most cases the pKa of the leaving group
is significantly easier to measure than Keq. Furthermore, because the free energy of the PPi product
(X = O, bisphosphonate for X ≠ O) factors into both Ka and Keq, it is
usually assumed that these equilibrium
constants are linearly related,Combining eq  and  implies the relationshipand validity of eq , which is supported by the observed kinetics of many phosphoryl
transfer reactions.

On the basis
of the experimental data for pol β and model diester compounds in solution, a change of the acidity of the leaving group
by 1 pKa unit results in a change of the
activation free energy by about 1 kcal/mol. Thus, the need for accurate
reproduction of the observed LFER effects puts extreme demands on
the precision of the calculated energetics in solution.

The
calculated free energy for reaction  in aqueous
solution shows a linear correlation with the experimental
pKa4 of PPi and β–γ-X-bisphosphonates
that is characterized by a slope of 1.27 (Table ). This linear relationship implies βeq value of
−0.93 (eq ), which is consistent with
the close correlation between Ka and Keq that has been empirically confirmed for phosphate
monoester hydrolysis.

Calculated Gas-Phase Reaction Energies
(ΔEgas,0), Reaction Free Energies
in Aqueous Solution (ΔGr,0), Gas-Phase
Activation Free Energies (ΔE⧧gas), and Activation Free Energies in Aqueous Solution
(ΔG⧧) for Reaction 2 Involving
β–γ-Substituted Methyl Triphosphate Analogues
X	isomer	pKa4	ΔEgas,0 (kcal/mol)	ΔGr,0 (kcal/mol)	ΔE⧧gas (kcal/mol)	ΔG⧧ (kcal/mol)	
CF2	 	7.8	1.3	–16.3	103.5	20.9	
CFCl	S	8.4	7.7	–14.5	104.2	21.9	
CClF	R	8.4	–3.3	–16.3	99.4	20.1	
CCl2	 	8.8	5.4	–15.4	101.1	21.7	
O	 	8.9	3.2	–15.9	107.9	22.4	
CHF	S	9.0	–2.2	–13.8	102.7	23.8	
CFH	R	9.0	3.7	–13.0	103.3	22.0	
CBr2	 	9.3	–1.2	–14.5	96.2	23.0	
CHCl	S	9.5	4.1	–10.4	105.0	23.7	
CClH	R	9.5	3.0	–17.8	104.8	22.5	
CHBr	S	9.9	8.6	–16.1	108.1	24.8	
CBrH	R	9.9	9.7	–12.4	109.2	23.7	
CFCH3	R	10.2	14.1	–15.5	106.0	23.6	
CCH3F	S	10.2	–1.6	–12.7	103.6	25.0	
CH2	 	10.5	5.9	–12.8	106.2	25.5	
CHCH3	S	11.6	8.0	–11.0	105.7	25.6	
CCH3H	R	11.6	4.9	–11.2	104.5	25.1	
C(CH3)2	 	12.3	12.3	–10.7	108.2	25.8	
slope	 	 	2.21	1.27	1.23	1.23	
R	 	 	0.76	0.94	0.46	0.94	
Note that the data in this table
utilize the reactant and product protonation states shown in eq  (reaction ) to evaluate energy
differences.

The R- or S-stereoisomers. Atoms bound to the
chiral center (bridging
C) are ordered with the lowest atomic number atom pointing away and
the remaining atoms from Pβ to Pγ to the remaining substitutent are ordered clockwise in the R-form. This means that when looking from Pβ to bridging C to Pγ, the heavier substituent is
on the left in the R-form.

Reference ().

Slope and R denote
the slope of the linear interpolation of energy as a function of pKa and the correlation coefficient, respectively.
Diastereomer energies were averaged.

By adding 7.8 kcal/mol for the protonation of the
nucleophile () and
by subtracting 2.6
kcal/mol for the protonation of PPi (pKa = 8.9) to the calculated value for the parent rection
2 (ΔGr = −15.9 kcal/mol,
Table ), we obtain the ΔGr° = −10.7 kcal/mol that corresponds to the
most stable reactant and product states at pH 7. This calculated reaction
free energy agrees reasonably well with the experimental free energy
of ATP hydrolysis to AMP and PPi reported by Jencks (−7.7
kcal/mol, pH 7) and Schuegraf (−10.3
kcal/mol, pH 7.5).

The calculated
activation free energies trend linearly with the
calculated ΔGr for the reaction . That is, when we fixed the Pα–Onuc and Pα–Olg distances
at 2.06 and 1.88 Å, which corresponds to the synchronous TS for
mechanism 2 (point S7 in Figure ), while relaxing
remaining coordinates except the backbone torsional angles (see ), we obtained a linear trend of eq  with the slope β′ = 0.73 and a correlation
coefficient R = 0.85. Similarly, we obtained β′
= 0.71 and R = 0.81 for the associative TS (point
A7 in Figure ) and β′ = 0.86
and R = 0.85 for the dissociative TS (point D9 in
Figure ). Thus, as expected, tightening the TS yields an LFER relationship with a smaller
slope.

The data presented in the previous paragraph were generated
by
considering the individual points for the parent, dihalogenated, methylene,
and dimethyl compounds, and the average free energy of each pair of
diastereomers. Since the synchronous and dissociative TS show undistinguishable
free energies (considering their error bar), whereas those for associative
TS are systematically higher, we improved the quality of the linear
fit by averaging over activation free energies for the synchronous
and dissociative TS, yielding β′ of 0.79 (Figure ) that corresponds to βlg = −0.73
(eq ). This averaging of the two TS could be
used to lower the data noise because the free energy surface is very
flat in the TS region. By considering compounds protonated on γ-phosphate
as a natural extension of the range of the substituent effects in
terms of available reaction free energy values, we obtain linear correlations
with β′ = 0.59 () and βlg = −0.55. Finally, direct
correlation of the calculated log k and experimental
pKa4 yielded βlg = −0.89
with a correlation coefficient of 0.94 (Figure ).

Relationship between calculated activation free energy and calculated
reaction free energy for reaction 2 (eq ).
The reaction free energy values for the stereoismeric compounds (i.e.,
data on the x-axis) were averaged over the two diastereomers,
while activation free energies were allowed to show stereoismeric
effects. S-form diastereomers, R-form diastereomers, and average of S- and R-form diastereomers with other compounds, are shown as
red triangles, blue squares, and black circles (β′ =
0.79, R = 0.89), respectively.

Linear relationship (βlg = −0.89, R = 0.94) between experimental pKa’s of the leaving groups (PPi or its bisphosphonate
analogues) and the logarithm of the rate
constants calculated for the mechanism 2 (eq ) at pH 7 and 298 K. Green squares denote data for dihalogenated
compounds.

R-Diastereomers
have systematically lower activation
free energies than the S-diastereomers (Figure ). The stereoisomeric effects for the average synchronous
and dissociative TS energies decrease by 1.79, 1.76, 1.34, 1.17, 1.10,
and 0.50 kcal/mol for CClF, CFH, CFCH3, CClH, CBrH, and
CCH3H, respectively. Similar R-form preference
has been observed in pol β kinetic experiments where an incoming
β–γ-substituent guanine is inserted opposite cytosine
with a stereospecificity of 0.41 (0.62
with G opposite T) and 0.28 (1.00 with G opposite T) kcal/mol for
CHF and CHCl, respectively. Previously, researchers have attributed
this difference to the interaction of the dipole of the halogen bond
with the Arg183 residue in the pol β active site; interestingly, our data show a significant R-form preference even in the absence of the protein. Unfortunately,
the decomposition of the calculated stereoisomeric energy differences
into structural components is not feasible due to the small magnitude
of these differences and inherent nonadditivity of quantum-mechanical
energies and solvation free energies.

Effects of the β–γ
Phosphate Bridging Groups
on the TS Charge Distribution
The substituent effects on
pKa constants of organic compounds are
often attributed to through-bond induction effects that result in
the withdrawal or donation of electron density from or to the protonation
site. In our specific case, substituted
dNTPs with lower leaving group pKa's
have
atoms at the β–γ-X-phosphate bridging position
that are expected to show greater electron-withdrawing propensity.
As the pKa increases, electron density
withdrawing effects should lessen and electron-donating should become
more evident. Indeed, in both protonated and unprotonated methyl triphosphate
complexes (RS), and all TS, the Olg charge, the average
of O1 and O2 charges, and the average of O4 and O5 charges all became
more negative as the pKa of the leaving
group increased, while the opposite was calculated for the charge
of the Pβ + Xtot + Pγ group (Figure , ).

However, for most atoms and groups, these
pKa correlations disappeared when the
charge difference between TS and the RS, ΔQ = Q(TS) – Q(RS), was considered.
The two exceptions included the CH3PO3, i.e.
“metaphosphate” moiety, and Olg in mechanism
1 (). The ΔQ value for CH3PO3 became more negative
as pKa of the leaving group decreased
but less negative for Olg. These two events occur with
relation to one another, as the ΔQ for Olg correlates strongly with ΔQ for CH3PO3.

Discussion
The first motivation
for the present study was to verify that the
unusual irregular Brønsted LFER that was observed for the insertion
of β–γ-modified dGTP substrates into DNA by pol
β, occurs also in the corresponding nonenzymatic
reactions as suggested by Kamerlin et al. More specifically, we wanted to verify the plot of kpol as a function of pKa4 of
the free bisphosphonic acid corresponding to the leaving group that
showed both experimentally in pol β (Figure A) and computationally in aqueous solution (Figure B) two distinctly different linear correlations,
one for monohalogenated and the other for dihalogenated substituents.

Linear
relationships between experimental pKa's of the leaving groups (PPi or its bisphosphonate
analogues) and the logarithm of the rate
constant for (A) the insertion of dGTP and its β–γ
bisphosphonate analogues opposite dT by pol β at 37 °C and (B) hydrolysis of methyl triphosphate
and its β–γ bisphosphonate analogues in aqueous
solution at 37 °C. Green squares
denote data for dihalogenated compounds.

The nonenzymatic hydrolysis of β–γ-modified
dGTPs in aqueous solution is difficult to be studied experimentally
due to very long reaction times, and the necessity to
distinguish between mechanisms that involve nucleophilic attack on
α- and β-phosphate. Therefore, Kamerlin et al. carried
out a computational study of hydrolysis of β–γ-substituted
methyl triphosphate4– in aqueous solution by H2O attack on Pα. For the nine studied compounds, Kamerlin et al. separately mapped
the free energy surface by scanning fixed POnuc and POlg distances with 0.15 and 0.2 Å increments, respectively,
fully optimized all remaining internal coordinates of the reacting
system at the gas-phase B3LYP/6-31+G* level, and included solvation
free energies at the LD or PCM level. Because these calculations yielded
a similar pattern of the LFER separation between compounds containing
mono- and dihalogenated substituents as experimental pol β essays
(Figure ), it was concluded that this peculiar
LFER behavior is mainly due to solvation effects.

Because conformational equilibria of phosphate diesters
in aqueous
solution are characterized by several states of similar stability
that are separated by low torsional barriers,, large conformational variability can be expected also for methyl
triphosphates. However, Kamerlin et al. did not examine free energies
of possible multiple conformational minima. Thus, the agreement with
the experimentally observed mono- and dihalogen LFER separation calculated
by Kamerlin could be a coincidence caused by a subset of compounds
converging to a higher energy conformation. In fact, Figure  in ref () shows a TS structure in which the methyl group on the pentavalent
α-phosphate (pseudo)rotated from its initial equatorial position
to the apical position, a process that should not be allowed to occur
during a concerted in-line attack on α-phosphate. It is quite
possible that this pseudorotation occurred only for some of the compounds
calculated by Kamerlin et al. Furthermore, the reaction mechanism
of Kamerlin et al. employs proton transfer from the nucleophilic water
to the nonbridging oxygen on β-phosphate. Although this protonation
might explain the calculated LFER splitting, it is unlikely to occur
in aqueous solution or the pol β active site due to low pKa of the acceptor oxygen atom.

Our suspicion
that Kamerlin et al. results were affected by numerical
instability was reinforced by the fact that the βlg coefficients of −3.39 and −4.06 for the di- and monohalo-substituted
methyl triphosphates, respectively, which we obtained by converting
activation free energies published by Kamerlin et al. to log k at 310 K, were significantly larger (in absolute value)
than the corresponding experimental βlg. Moreover,
when we made a new linear fit that considered all of the kinetic data
(dashed line in Figure B), the corresponding
correlation coefficient R decreased to 0.53 but the
resulting βlg of −1.77 was much closer to
the experimental βlg (Figure A).

To increase the precision and stability of our activation
free
energies, we increased the pKa range and
number of the studied compounds, neglected substituent effects on
the POlg and POnuc distances in the TS, and
considered only an in-line nucleophilic attack and a single triphosphate
conformation. Here, a natural choice was to use the three crystallographic
torsional angles from the triphosphate chain of dCTP bound in the
active site of pol β. Small torsional
movements during the catalytic reaction that were revealed by time-lapse
crystallography () suggest that this was an appropriate
approximation. Additionally, in order to obtain realistic geometries
in aqueous solution and support the use of a smaller quantum-mechanical
basis set, we reduced the total solute charge by including an explicitly
hydrated structural Mg2+ ion into our model system. The
intended goal of our model, to generate sufficiently stable and also
realistic free energies for a series of chemically similar compounds,
appears to have been achieved.

Our calculations did not confirm
the results of Kamerlin et al.
but showed that all β–γ-modified methyl triphosphates
follow a single Brønsted LFER line with a βlg of −0.89 (Figure ). This slope reflects
the POnuc and POlg distances being in the 2.05–2.15
Å and 1.90–2.05 Å range, respectively. The free energy
surface in the rectangular area between these two points is within
the relative accuracy of our calculations (1 kcal/mol) and is equal
to 30 kcal/mol (for the parent methyl triphosphate in 1 M concentration,
pH 7 and 298 K). The absolute accuracy of this activation free energy
is difficult to estimate since there are many possible sources of
computational errors that may or may not cancel upon going from the
reactant state to TS. One such source, namely, the effect of a small
difference in the geometry of the studied compounds, can be estimated
from our data. Since we have calculated the activation free energy
using both the geometry optimized in the gas phase (30.5 kcal/mol,
HF/6-31G*, Figure ) and in water modeled by
dielectric continuum (30.2 kcal/mol, PCM/HF/6-31G*), this geometry-related
error is negligibly small. Furthermore, changing the quantum mechanical
method to LD/PCM/B3LYP/6-31+G*//PCM/B3LYP/6-31+G* yielded activation
free energy of 30.1 kcal/mol. However, the magnitude of these method-dependent
deviations could be significantly larger if the triphosphate torsions
were fully relaxed.

Although the calculated POlg and
POnuc distances
in the TS imply that this TS has a large contribution of bond making
and a smaller contribution of POlg bond breaking, the calculated
βlg of −0.89 is close to βeq = −0.93, which reflects the limiting case of the POlg bond being fully broken. The large βlg value occurring
even for the TS that occurs quite early on the reaction coordinate
can be rationalized by the electron withdrawal from the “metaphosphate”
portion of the molecule in compounds with low leaving group pKa's. The resulting slightly more positive
charge
facilitates a lower activation barrier for the attack by the negative
nucleophile. Nevertheless, as indicated by the calculated βlg variation along the tightness coordinate and by longer POlg bond length in the compounds with lower leaving group pKa's (Figure ),
the dominant
contribution to βlg still originates from the POlg bond breaking.

In conclusion, the splitting of LFER
lines observed in pol β
is not due to general solvation effects. Since the structural Mg2+ ion and torsional constraints characteristic of the pol
β active site were included in our model, it is also unlikely
that the LFER splitting would be caused by systematic alteration of
Mg2+–halogen interactions or intramolecular steric
or electrostatic effects upon going from monohalogenated to dihalogenated
bisphosphonates. These exclusions point to differences in specific
interactions with the enzyme active site, including possible effects
of γ-phosphate monoprotonation or changes in the catalytic mechanism
as the cause of the splitting effect. Although the LFER slope and
its splitting could be also altered “intrinsically”,
by significant changes in the conformations of the substrates bound
in the pol β, these conformational effects were not evaluated
in this study, nor were they observed crystallographically.

Supporting Information Available
Flow
chart of the free energy
surface calculations, relationships between pKa of the leaving group and the NBO and Mulliken charges of
select atoms, variation of charges of atoms and groups during model
nucleotide transfer reactions in aqueous solution, β–γ
substituent effects on charges of atoms and groups, calculated reaction
and activation energies in gas phase and aqueous solution, relationships
between activation and reaction free energies, and conformational
variability of the triphosphate chain of dNTP substrates bound to
DNA polymerases. This material is available free of charge via the
Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5003713_si_001.pdf

This work was
supported by the National Institutes of Health Program Project Grant
5U19CA105010.

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Prof. Charles E. McKenna and
Dr. Boris A. Kashemirov
for sending us their experimental pKa values
prior to their publication. We thank former lab members Dr. Martin
Klvana, Dr. James Borden, and Mr. Kiran Thalody for assistance and
helpful discussions.

Abbreviations
DNAdeoxyribonucleic acid

dNTPdeoxyribonucleoside
triphosphates

PPipyrophosphate

TStransition state

LFERlinear free energy relationship

THFO–tetrahydrofuranolate

HFHartree–Fock

dCTPdeoxycytidine
triphosphate

TZVPtriple-ζ valence polarized

LDLangevin dipoles

PCMpolarized continuum model

ESPelectrostatic potential

NBOnatural bond orbitals

PDBprotein database

RPearson correlation coefficient

pol βhuman DNA polymerase β

