Introduction
RNA has a more expansive
functional role than merely serving as
an intermediate between DNA and protein. For example, recent studies
have investigated the catalytic role of ribozymes, the role of snRNAs in mRNA splicing, and the control of gene expression by riboswitches, siRNAs, and miRNAs. As more functions of RNA are elucidated, greater
interest develops in investigating RNA structure. Programs such as RNAstructure,mfold, and the Vienna package predict RNA secondary structure from sequence. These predictive
algorithms use a nearest neighbor model based on the thermodynamic
parameters of various structural motifs. Current algorithms correctly
predict ∼73% of base pairs. Any
improvement to the nearest neighbor model could improve secondary
structure prediction from sequence. Accurate RNA secondary structure
prediction can provide clues about the tertiary structure of a given
sequence.

One common naturally occurring secondary structure
motif in RNA
is a bulge. Bulges consist of one or more consecutive unpaired nucleotides
on one side of an RNA duplex. Bulges greater than one nucleotide are
assumed to prevent the base pairs adjacent to the bulge from stacking
on one another. Bulges serve in a variety
of functions including viral replication, ligand binding, feedback regulation, intron splicing, gene expression, as well as the formation
of RNA tertiary structures. Thermodynamic
data have been collected on all combinations of single nucleotide
bulges and adjacent base pairs, and algorithms predicting the free
energy contribution of this motif have been developed from these data.− In contrast to the single nucleotide bulge motif, the thermodynamic
parameters of the trinucleotide bulge motif have not been well characterized.
This lack of data is unfortunate since trinucleotide bulges are prevalent
in nature and have significant biological functions. Trinucleotide
bulges have been discovered in all three domains of life. Most notably,
two trinucleotide bulges form a bulge-helix-bulge motif that is conserved
throughout all archaea and acts as the site of recognition and cleavage
by splicing endonucleases. Another notable
trinucleotide bulge occurs in the HIV-1 TAR RNA hairpin fragment and
is crucial for the interaction between the TAR RNA and Tat protein.
Since this interaction is vital to mRNA synthesis, and ultimately,
to the replication of the HIV-1 virus, this trinucleotide bulge has
been widely studied as a potential drug target.

Despite the natural prevalence of trinucleotide bulges,
few studies
have characterized the thermodynamic parameters of this motif., In fact, the current predictive model is based on free energy values
for only six trinucleotide bulges, and it attributes a 3.2 kcal/mol
free energy penalty to all trinucleotide bulges, regardless of sequence. The aim of this study was to determine whether
a sequence-independent model is the most accurate approach for predicting
the free energy contribution of trinucleotide bulges. Reported here
are the thermodynamic parameters for 19 trinucleotide bulges, most
of which occur frequently in nature. These results can be incorporated
into predictive models, allowing experimental rather than predicted
values to be used for these naturally occurring bulges. For trinucleotide
bulges whose thermodynamic parameters have not yet been characterized,
an improved model for predicting their free energy contribution was
derived.

Materials and Methods
Compiling and Searching a Database for RNA
Trinucleotide Bulges
A previously compiled database containing
1349 RNA secondary structures
was used to identify common naturally occurring trinucleotide bulges
and closing pair sequences. The database contained structures for
484 tRNAs, 309 5S rRNAs, 223 large subunit rRNAs, 123 small subunit
rRNAs, 100 group I introns, 91 signal recognition particles, 16 large
subunit rRNAs, and 3 group II introns. This database was searched for trinucleotide bulges and their adjacent
base pairs. In this work, G-U pairs were considered to be canonical
base pairs.

Design of Sequences
RNA duplexes
were composed of one
strand that was 11 nucleotides long and a second strand that was 8
nucleotides long; the bulge and adjacent pairs were centered in the
duplex with three additional Watson–Crick pairs on each side.
In order to prevent end fraying during melting, the terminal pairs
of each duplex were G-C pairs. The sequence of the trinucleotide bulge
and nearest neighbor pairs was selected based on those that appeared
most frequently in the secondary structure database described above.
Prior to the experiments, all sequences were checked for possible
competing unimolecular or alternative bimolecular folding. It was
assumed that all of the duplexes studied here formed a trinucleotide
bulge, as this was the fold with the lowest free energy fold. Any
possible competing folds were at least ∼2 kcal/mol less stable.

RNA Synthesis and Purification
The RNA oligonucleotides
were ordered from Integrated DNA Technologies (Coralville, IA). The
synthesis and purification procedures were standard and have been
described previously.

Optical Melting
Experiments and Thermodynamics
Optical
melting experiments were performed in 1 M NaCl, 20 mM sodium cacodylate,
and 0.5 mM Na2EDTA (pH 7.0). Optical melting curves were
obtained, and the thermodynamic parameters for the entire duplex were
determined as previously described., Each duplex
was melted at least nine times, using a different concentration each
time, to ensure that the total oligonucleotide concentration range
was at least 50-fold. The free energy contribution of the canonical
pairs was determined using the nearest neighbor method (a 0.45 kcal/mol
penalty was applied per each A-U pair adjacent to the bulge, as it
was considered a terminal A-U pair)., This calculated
free energy value was subtracted from the experimental free energy
of the entire duplex, obtained from the 1/Tm vs ln CT plots, in order to determine
the free energy contribution of the trinucleotide bulge. A reference duplex was not used because multiple
different reference duplexes would have been needed. In addition,
the nearest neighbor method is quite accurate for canonical pairs, and was used since the bulge parameters will ultimately be used
in conjunction with nearest neighbor parameters as part of predictive
models.

Linear Regression and Trinucleotide Bulge Thermodynamic Parameters
This study investigated the thermodynamic parameters of 16 trinucleotide
bulge and closing pair combinations which occurred frequently in the
secondary structure database. Data for 3 additional bulges were added to these 16, and data for all 19
bulges were used during data analysis. These three additional bulges
were studied previously by our laboratory, but these particular bulge sequences were not found in the secondary
structure database described above. Two previous studies did report
thermodynamic parameters for some trinucleotide bulges;, however, due to non-two-state melts and different buffer conditions, these
data were not included in this analysis. The experimental free energy
contribution of the trinucleotide bulge was used as a constant when
doing linear regression using the LINEST function in Microsoft
Excel. Multiple parameters were tested, and the parameters
that yielded the greatest predictive accuracy accounted for the closing
base pair and the number of purine and pyrimidine nucleotides in the
bulge.

Results
Database Searching
In the database of 1349 RNA secondary
structures, 410 trinucleotide bulges were found. The first data set
in Table  presents the frequency and percent
occurrence when bulge and closing pair sequence are specified. When
the data is analyzed in this fashion, 122 unique bulge and closing
pair combinations were identified. The top 20 most frequent bulge
and corresponding closing pair sequences found in the database are
shown in Table . These bulges and corresponding
closing pair sequences account for ∼65% of all trinucleotide
bulges identified in the database search. Many of the bulges identified
do not occur frequently, as 62% of the unique bulge and closing pair
combinations found each account for &lt;0.25% of the total number
of trinucleotide bulges. The most frequent occurring bulge and corresponding
closing pair sequence is , which accounts for ∼12% of all
of the bulges identified. All of the trinucleotide bulges with this
bulge and closing pair sequence were discovered in 16S rRNA, suggesting
that this sequence is conserved in this ribosomal subunit. However,
the thermodynamic parameters of this bulge and closing pair combination
were not characterized in this study due to possible competing conformations.
Similarly, other bulge and closing pair combinations found frequently
in the secondary structure database were also not studied here due
to possible competing structures. For example, the most frequent bulge
found in the database, 5′GAG3′, (Table ) was not studied here. Based on the sequence of the bulge
and nearest neighbors, it is possible that a different trinucleotide
bulge could form, 5′GGA3′, resulting from the 3′
U in the bottom strand forming a G-U pair with the 3′-most
G in the top strand. This ambiguity in the bulge sequence is akin
to the ambiguity described for single nucleotide bulges.− Due to the ambiguity of the bulge sequence, this bulge was not studied;
however, this study did investigate 7 of the top 10 most frequent
bulge and corresponding closing pair sequences found in the database.

Frequency of Occurrence of Trinucleotide
Bulge Sequences in a Secondary Structure Database
Not all
bulges found in the database
are shown due to space limitations.

Trinucleotide bulge when bulge and
nearest neighbor sequence is specified.

Frequency of occurrence in the database
search.

Percent out of 410
trinucleotide
bulges, the total number found in the database search.

Trinucleotide bulge when only the
bulge sequence is specified.

Closing pairs of trinucleotide bulges
are specified.

The second
data set in Table  presents
the frequency and percent occurrence when only the bulge sequence
is specified. This analysis identified 49 unique trinucleotide bulge
sequences in the database, out of a possible 64 bulge sequence combinations.
Table  shows the top 20 most frequent trinucleotide
bulge sequences found, which account for ∼86% of all of the
trinucleotide bulges found in the database. The trinucleotide bulge
sequences not included in Table  individually
account for ≤4% of the total trinucleotide bulges found in
the database search. The most frequent bulge sequence identified was
5′GAG3′ which accounts for 15% of all the trinucleotide
bulges found in the database search. As mentioned earlier, the prevalence
of the 5′GAG3′ bulge sequence in this database can be
attributable to the fact that it appears to be conserved in 16S rRNA.
This thermodynamic study investigates a total of 12 different bulge
sequences (not considering the nearest neighbors), which represents
48% of the different types of trinucleotide bulges identified in the
database search.

The third data set in Table  lists the
frequency and percent occurrence when only the closing pair combination
is specified. The database search yielded 31 of the 36 possible types
of closing pair combinations, and 95% of all of the trinucleotide
bulges are represented by the closing pair combinations in Table . The most frequent closing pair found in the database
was , accounting for 25% of all closing pairs
found. As was true with the predominant bulge sequences, this closing
pair pattern appears to be conserved in 16S rRNA, but it also appears
in other rRNA subunits as well. This thermodynamic study investigates
a total of nine unique closing pair sequences, which account for 74%
of closing pair sequences found in the database.

Thermodynamic
Parameters
Table  shows the thermodynamic
parameters for the formation of duplexes
containing trinucleotide bulges. These thermodynamic parameters are
derived from an analysis of individual melt curves and an analysis
of the 1/TM versus log(CT) plots. The duplexes in the table are listed in order
of decreasing frequency in the secondary structure database.

Thermodynamic Parameters for the Formation
of Duplexes Containing Trinucleotide Bulges
Measurements were
made in 1.0 M
NaCl, 10 mM sodium cacodylate, and 0.5 mM Na2EDTA pH 7.0.

Frequency of occurrence obtained
from database described in .

The trinucleotide bulge
is identified
by bold letters. The nearest neighbors and bulge are set apart for
easy identification. The top strand of each duplex is written 5′
to 3′, and each bottom strand is written 3′ to 5′.

All values are calculated at
10–4 Moligomer concentration.

Melt data from ref ().

Contribution
of the Trinucleotide Bulge to Duplex Thermodynamics
The contribution
of the trinucleotide bulge to duplex thermodynamics
(Table ) was calculated as described in . The free energy contribution
of the measured trinucleotide bulges has a large variance, ranging
from 2.3 to 5.6 kcal/mol. The most destabilizing trinucleotide bulge
reported here is , while the least destabilizing trinucleotide
bulge is .

Contribution of the Trinucleotide
Bulge to Duplex Thermodynamics
Frequency of occurrence obtained
from database described in .

The trinucleotide bulge
is identified
by bold letters. The top strand of each duplex is written 5′
to 3′, and each bottom strand is written 3′ to 5′.

The experimental free energy
contribution
of the bulge calculated as described in the text.

The free energy prediction made
by the sequence-independent model (ref ()).

The
difference between the free
energy predicted by the sequence-independent model (ref ()) and the experimental free
energy.

The free energy
prediction made
by the sequence dependent model proposed here.

The difference between the free
energy predicted by the sequence-dependent model and the experimental
free energy.

Data from ref ().

The average (absolute value) deviation.

Free Energy Parameters for Trinucleotide
Bulges
Currently,
a free energy penalty of 3.2 kcal/mol is attributed to all trinucleotide
bulges regardless of bulge and closing pair sequence. In order to improve prediction, multiple other models were
tested, and a model that resulted in a low average deviation from
the experimental bulge values with minimal parameters was derived.
This model is

As shown in Table , ΔG°37, bulge is dependent upon the number of purines and pyrimidines in the bulge
sequence. Thus, ΔG°37, bulge is a 4.19 kcal/mol penalty for three bulged purines, a 5.06 kcal/mol
penalty for three bulged pyrimidines, a 3.36 kcal/mol penalty for
two bulged purines and one bulged pyrimidine, and a 3.56 kcal/mol
penalty for two bulged pyrimidines and one bulged purine. ΔG°37, AU is a 0.49 kcal/mol penalty
for each A-U closing pair, and ΔG°37, GU is a −0.56 kcal/mol bonus for each G-U closing
pair. When using this model, the average magnitude of difference between
the predicted values and the experimental values was only 0.30 kcal/mol
(Table ).

Sequence-Dependent
Model for Predicting
the Free Energy Contribution of Trinucleotide Bulges
ΔG°37, trint bulge parameter	free energy
contribution (kcal/mol)	
ΔG°37, bulge	 	
3 purines	4.19 ± 0.30	
3 pyrimidines	5.06 ± 0.45	
2 purine,
1 pyrimidine	3.36 ± 0.26	
1 purine,
2 pyrimidines	3.56 ± 0.37	
ΔG°37, AU	0.49 ± 0.30	
ΔG°37, GU	–0.56 ± 0.26	
Free energy contribution
attributed
to the three bulged nucleotides. One of the four values will be applied
depending on the purine/pyrimidine composition of the bulge.

Free energy penalty penalty applied
for each A-U closing pair of a trinucleotide bulge.

Free energy bonus applied for each
G-U closing pair of a trinucleotide bulge.

Discussion
Database Searching
The database search yielded 124
out of 2304 possible combinations of bulge and closing pair sequence
combinations, 49 out of 64 possible bulge sequence possibilities,
and 33 out of a possible 36 closing pair combinations. It is likely
that many of the possible sequence combinations that were not found
in our database do exist in nature and would have been found in a
larger secondary structure database. There may be a structural explanation
for why certain sequence combinations occur more frequently than others,
but such an explanation would require an extensive structural study.

The two most frequent bulge sequences in the database, 5′GAG3′
and 5′GAU3′, are similar and account for 15% and 12%,
respectively, of the bulge sequences found in the database. While
5′GAA3′ and 5′GAC3′ were also found in
the database search, it is interesting to note that these sequences,
with the same first two nucleotides, only accounted for 4% and 2%,
respectively, of bulges in the database. Similarly, the two most frequently
occurring closing pair sequences for trinucleotide bulges in this
database  and , are similar and account for 25% and 20%,
respectively, of the trinucleotide bulges found in the database. However,
the closing pair sequences that result from flipping the C-G pair,  and , occur far less frequently. The former
sequence accounts for ∼0.5% of all trinucleotide bulges found
in the database, and the latter was not found in the database. There
are no obvious explanations for these observed idiosyncracies.

Thermodynamic
Contributions of a Trinucleotide Bulge to Duplex
Thermodynamics
All of the trinucleotide bulges included in
this study destabilize the duplex. This destabilization is expected,
as it is presumed that every trinucleotide bulge disrupts what would
otherwise be stabilizing stacking interactions between neighboring
base pairs. Also, the presence of the
bulge may put strain on the adjacent base pairs, and the bend or kink
at the site of the bulge may also destabilize the helix. Recall that
the free energy contribution of the bulge ranged from 2.3 to 5.6 kcal/mol.
This large variance suggests that the thermodynamic contribution attributed
to the bulge may be dependent upon bulge and closing pair sequence,
and thus, a sequence-dependent model would be preferred over a model
that attributes a constant value to all trinucleotide bulges regardless
of sequence.

At first glance, the thermodynamic data appear
to suggest a relationship between frequency of occurrence in the database
and stability of the bulge. Considering the 16 duplexes in this study
that were found in the database, the average free energy contribution
of the bulge for the three most frequent was 2.8 ± 0.5 kcal/mol,
while the average free energy contribution of the bulge for the three
least frequent was 3.5 ± 0.5 kcal/mol. The three additional sequences
included in this study did not occur in the database search, and the
average free energy of the bulge for these sequences was 5.2 ±
0.5 kcal/mol. From this analysis, less stable bulges appear to be
occurring less frequently in the database.

However, a more detailed
analysis suggests that no relationship
between frequency and stability exists. Recall that the new model
derived for predicting the free energy of formation of trinucleotide
bulges has a parameter that was dependent upon the sequence of the
bulge (ΔG°37, bulge).
The corresponding values for this parameter suggest that triple pyrimidine
bulges and triple purine bulges are more destabilizing than bulges
with a mix of purines and pyrimidines. If there is a relationship
between bulge frequency and stability, then it would be expected that
the most frequently occurring bulges would favor a mix of purines
and pyrimidines. From analyzing the top 10 most frequent occurring
trinucleotide bulge sequences from the database search (Table ), bulges with a mix of purines and pyrimidines
do not appear to be significantly favored over what would be statistically
expected. This supports the conclusion that there is no relationship
between frequency and stability. Conversely, there are 15 bulge sequences
which did not appear in the database at all, making these sequences
the least frequently occurring. If there was a relationship between
bulge frequency and stability, then it would be expected that the
least frequently occurring bulge sequences would favor all purine
and all pyrimidine sequences. The 15 bulge sequences which did not
appear in the database do not significantly favor all purine and all
pyrimidine sequences over what would be statistically expected, giving
further support to the conclusion that there is no relationship between
frequency and stability.

Improving the Model Used to Predict Trinucleotide
Bulge Thermodynamics
As shown in Table , every trinucleotide
bulge receives a ΔG°37, bulge penalty depending upon the purine and pyrimidine composition of
the bulge. All four possible ΔG°37, bulge penalties have a far greater magnitude than the G-U closing pair
bonus. Thus, all trinucleotide bulges will be predicted to be destabilizing,
regardless of bulge and closing pair sequence.

Several of the
patterns observed here for trinucleotide bulges are consistent with
what was reported previously for single nucleotide bulges. A study
by Serra et al. (2007) on single nucleotide bulges concluded that
the more stable a duplex is without the bulge, the greater the potential
for a single nucleotide bulge to destabilize the duplex. This trend was also evident in this study. The
average free energy contribution for trinucleotide bulges located
within the five most stable duplexes is 4.45 kcal/mol, while the average
free energy contribution for trinucleotide bulges located within the
five least stable duplexes is 3.32 kcal/mol. This suggests that the
free energy contribution of bulges is somewhat dependent upon non-nearest
neighbors.

In eq , all of the free energy
parameters
are penalties, except for the free energy contribution of a G-U closing
pair, −0.56 kcal/mol. This bonus is very near −0.6 kcal/mol,
the bonus attributed by Serra et al. (2007) to single nucleotide bulges
with the closing pair sequence . Our study
included a total of 10 trinucleotide bulges with one or more G-U closing
pairs. Eight of these 10 bulges matched the closing pair orientation
that was attributed the −0.6 kcal/mol bonus in the single nucleotide
bulge study. Thus, it is not surprising
that the bonus discovered in this study is very near the previously
discovered bonus for single nucleotide bulges.

The current model
used by RNAstructure to predict
the free energy contribution of trinucleotide bulges was derived by
averaging the measured free energy contributions of six trinucleotide
bulges. Unlike that model, the model derived
in this study is sequence-dependent and is based upon the measured
free energy contribution of 19 trinucleotide bulges, a 3-fold increase
in the sample size. On average, the sequence-independent model predicts a free energy that is 0.67 kcal/mol
different than the experimental value. On average, the sequence-dependent
model proposed here predicts a free energy that is 0.30 kcal/mol different
than the experimental value, a more than a 2-fold improvement over
the sequence-independent model. Additionally, the standard deviation
of the sequence-independent model is 0.92 kcal/mol, which is more
than double the standard deviation of the sequence-dependent model,
0.41 kcal/mol (Table ). Also, the sequence-dependent
model works well on bulges that are predicted rather poorly by the
sequence-independent model. For example, the prediction made by the
sequence-independent model deviates from the measured value by more
than 1 kcal/mol for four bulges, and three of these four bulges have
measured free energy values which deviate by more than 2 kcal/mol
from the predicted value. In contrast, the sequence-dependent model
predicts the free energy of all the bulges studied within 1 kcal/mol
of the measured free energy.

With the collection of thermodynamic
data for 19 trinucleotide
bulges, the model for predicting the free energy of formation of trinucleotide
bulges was updated. While the current model used by RNAstructure attributes a constant free energy penalty to all trinucleotide bulges,
the new model takes both bulge and closing pair sequence into consideration.
This adjustment resulted in a sequence-dependent model with half the
average error of the sequence-independent model.

Research
reported
in this publication was supported by the National Institute of General
Medical Sciences of the National Institutes of Health under award
number [R15GM085699]. The content is solely the responsibility of
the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views
of the National Institutes of Health.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

