Quaternary
ammonium (QA) compounds
have long been used in the study of potassium channels and have greatly
contributed to our understanding of their structural and functional
properties. QA compounds compete with potassium at ion binding sites
in the channel and impede potassium flow because they are unable to
permeate across the narrow selectivity filter. Tetraethylammonium
(TEA), the most widely studied QA, can bind to potassium channels
on both sides of the membrane with comparable affinity., Hydrophobic QAs, on the other hand, show a marked preference for
internal binding. Indeed, early work by Armstrong on the squid giant
axon showed that the binding affinity of long-chain TEA analogues
(Figure A) increased with increasing alkyl-chain
length, suggesting that hydrophobic interactions were important for
the stabilization of QA compounds on the internal side of the channel. In this series of landmark experiments, Armstrong
showed that internally applied long-chain QAs act as open channel
blockers that can be trapped in the pore under favorable conditions
and that the binding of these ligands can increase the rate of slow
inactivation in the squid giant axon potassium channel.− These concepts were also demonstrated and extended by Yellen and
co-workers on the cloned Shaker potassium channel,− leading to a
precrystallographic consensus view of the QA–channel interaction
that can be summarized as follows. First, QAs and other related drugs
bind at potassium binding sites between the selectivity filter and
the gate and are further stabilized through favorable hydrophobic
interactions with the cavity wall. Second, QAs can be trapped within
the channel if there is enough room in the pathway to accommodate
them in both the open and closed states. Trapping can be facilitated through a reduction in the size of pathway-exposed
residues,, and conversely, trapping can be prevented
if the drug interferes with the closing of the intracellular gate
through a “foot in the door” mechanism.,,, Third,
QAs promote slow inactivation by emptying the selectivity filter of
potassium. Higher-affinity blockers have longer dwell times at the
binding site, leading to increased loss of potassium to the external
solution and enhanced inactivation.,,

Blockade of potassium channels by quaternary ammonium
compounds.
(A) Structure of QA compounds. Tetrabutylammonium (TBA), tetrahexylammonium
(THA), and tetraoctylammonium (TOA) are the symmetrical compounds
used in this study. Triethylhexylammonium (C6) and triethyloctylammonium
(C8) are asymmetrical long-chain QAs introduced by Armstrong. (B) Overview of the KcsA potassium channel and
the TBA binding site. Two diagonal subunits of the tetrameric channel
are shown with the selectivity filter highlighted in black (residues
75–80). Potassium ions are shown as green spheres, and TBA
is shown as sticks. The locations of the aqueous cavity and the inner
gate are shown. (C) Detail of the TBA–channel interaction.
View along the symmetry axis onto the TBA binding site. TBA and the
side chains of I100 and F103 are highlighted. (D) Expected binding
of C8. All structural figures were created using PyMOL.

The ability to determine atomic structures of potassium
channels
has led to further study of the QA–channel interaction. Crystallographic
studies of the prokaryotic KcsA potassium channel, for example, have
shed much light on the structural basis of ion permeation through
potassium channels and the mode of action of QAs.− Specifically, cocrystal structures of KcsA in complex with the symmetrical
QA compound tetrabutylammonium (TBA) have demonstrated the precise
location of the internal QA binding site, as well as the structural
basis of the TBA–channel interaction (Figure B,C).− The TBA site is located in the internal water-filled
cavity of the channel, directly underneath the innermost ion in the
selectivity filter, and coincides with a dehydration transition site
for permeant ions. TBA binding is stabilized
in the cavity through favorable van der Waals interactions between
the alkyl chains of the blocker and the hydrophobic side chains of
inner helix residues I100 and F103 (Figure C). This binding site and mechanism of blockade fit nicely with the
precrystallographic concept of QA binding, a concept that can be extended
to include more hydrophobic, longer-chain QA compounds (Figure D) if the long alkyl chains of the blockers are
assumed to be stabilized by interactions with the predominantly hydrophobic
lining of the ion pathway.

In this
study, we have cocrystallized KcsA with two symmetrical
long-chain QA compounds expected to bind the internal QA binding site
with high affinity: tetrahexylammonium
(THA) and tetraoctylammonium (TOA) (Figure A). We compare these two structures with the structure determined
in the presence of TBA, a symmetrical intermediate-length QA. The
three structures reveal the internal potassium channel binding site
for long-chain, hydrophobic QA blockers. The internal receptor is
unexpected in that it is located between the transmembrane helices
of KcsA and consists of a hydrophobic binding pocket that allows direct
communication between the aqueous cavity of the channel and the lipid
bilayer, reminiscent of the fenestration observed in bacterial sodium
channel structures. Access to the pocket
is apparently controlled by the rotameric state of residue F103, which
is altered by binding of the long-chain blockers. Our structures also
provide insight into the structural basis of closed-state blockade,
use dependence of blockade, and drug trapping.

Experimental Procedures
Protein
Expression and Purification
KcsA was overexpressed
and purified as described previously. Briefly, the KcsA-L90C gene in pQE60 (Qiagen) was transformed into
Novablue (Novagen) cells, and the cells were grown to logarithmic
phase in Luria broth, induced with IPTG, and cultured. After cell
membranes were disrupted by sonication, KcsA was solubilized with
decyl maltoside (DM) and purified on a cobalt affinity column (Talon,
Clontech). Thirty-five residues of KcsA were removed with chymotrypsin,
and the truncated channel was further purified by gel filtration on
a Superdex 200 column (GE Healthcare). The Fab fragment was obtained
and purified as described previously. Briefly, mouse hybridoma cells, generously provided by R. MacKinnon,
were grown in cell culture, and the supernatant was harvested. The
antibody was purified with protein A chromatography (GE Healthcare).
The Fab fragment was obtained by papain proteolysis, followed by anion-exchange
chromatography on Source Q and gel filtration on Superdex 200 (both
GE Healthcare). The Fab–KcsA complex was formed overnight in
a solution containing 150 mM KCl, 50 mM Tris, and 5 mM DM (pH 7.5).
The complex was purified by gel filtration in a buffer containing
150 mM KNO3, 50 mM HEPES, and 5 mM DM (pH 7.5).

Crystallization
TBA nitrate (5 mM) or THA or TOA nitrate
(100 μM) was added to the dialyzed Fab–KcsA complex and
the mixture incubated overnight. The complex was concentrated to ∼5
mg/mL, and crystals of space group I4 were grown
at room temperature using the sitting drop vapor diffusion method
as described previously. Crystallization
trials were set up using equal volumes of protein and reservoir solution
[20–25% PEG 400, 50 mM magnesium acetate, and 50 mM sodium
acetate (pH 5–5.6)].

Data Collection and Processing
Crystals
were cryoprotected
by incrementally increasing the precipitant concentration as described
previously, harvested in nylon loops,
and immediately flash-cooled in liquid nitrogen. Data were measured
under a stream of nitrogen at the GM/CA 22ID-B beamline at the Advanced
Photon Source (APS) at Argonne National Laboratory (Argonne, IL).
All data were integrated and scaled using XDS. Phases were obtained by molecular replacement using PHASER with the structure of the Fab–KcsA complex
[Protein Data Bank (PDB) entry 1K4C] as the search model. The models were
refined by several cycles of manual rebuilding with COOT, followed by refinement using REFMAC. Data collection and refinement statistics are
listed in Table .

Data Collection
and Refinement Statistics
 	TBA	THA	TOA	
wavelength (Å)	0.977	0.978	1.033	
space group	I4	I4	I4	
cell dimensions
(Å)	 	 	 	
a	156.15	154.61	155.76	
c	76.33	75.95	75.89	
resolution (Å)	50.0–2.40 (2.54–2.40)	50.0–2.40 (2.54–2.40)	50.0–2.40 (2.54–2.40)	
Rsym or Rmerge	7.4 (44.1)	5.2 (58.3)	3.8 (48.4)	
I/σI	15.3 (3.5)	17.1 (2.1)	20.6 (2.5)	
completeness (%)	99.5 (98.9)	98.1 (97.7)	97.8 (96.3)	
redundancy	3.75 (3.75)	3.31 (3.31)	3.24 (3.27)	
Refinement	
resolution (Å)	30.0–2.40	30.0–2.40	30.0–2.40	
no. of reflections	33912	32854	30907	
Rwork/Rfree	20.2/24.9	19.2/24.8	20.0/24.1	
no. of atoms	4422	4343	4378	
protein	4130	4150	4096	
ligand/ion	84	104	114	
water	208	90	168	
B factor
(Å2)	 	 	 	
protein	44.5	69.5	60.6	
ligand	22.5	53.9	44.4	
ions	31.0	39.1	42.4	
lipid	58.6	74.2	69.7	
water	45.8	58.8	61.1	
root-mean-square deviation	 	 	 	
bond lengths (Å)	0.012	0.014	0.010	
bond angles (deg)	1.336	1.310	1.260	
Functional Assay
Functional assays using ANTS fluorescence
were performed as described previously., Briefly, 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (POPC) and 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-[phospho-rac-(1-glycerol)]
(POPG) (Avanti Polar) at a ratio of 4:1 were solubilized in a buffer
containing 100 mM KNO3, 10 mM HEPES (pH 7.0), 10 mM succinic
acid, 25 mM 8-aminonaphthalene-1,3,6-trisulfonic acid (ANTS), and
35 mM CHAPS. Purified KcsA was added at a lipid:protein molar ratio
of ∼9000:1, and the detergent was removed with BioBeads SM-2
(Bio-Rad). The liposomes were extruded through a 100 nm polycarbonate
filter, and extravesicular ANTS was removed by gel filtration on a
PD-10 column (GE Healthcare) with 140 mM KNO3, 10 mM HEPES
(pH 7.0), and 10 mM succinic acid. The resulting KcsA:liposome ratio
was ∼10:1. The QA compounds were dissolved in DMSO and added
to the vesicle solution. The ANTS fluorescence was measured using
a stopped-flow spectrofluorometer (SLM, Olis) by mixing the vesicle
solution in single-mixing mode with an equal volume of quench buffer
consisting of 50 mM TlNO3, 94 mM KNO3, 10 mM
HEPES, and 10 mM succinic acid. The pH of the quench buffer was adjusted
to obtain the described pH values in the mixing chamber. About 60
repeats were signal averaged and normalized. The time course of the
fluorescence signal was fit to a stretched exponential, and the initial
rate was determined at 10 ms as described previously.

Results
KcsA’s Hydrophobic
Binding Pocket: The Binding Site for
Long-Chain QAs
To determine the location of the internal,
hydrophobic QA binding site, the KcsA potassium channel was cocrystallized
with tetrahexylammonium (THA) and tetraoctylammonium (TOA), two symmetrical
analogues of the long-chain TEA derivatives originally used by Armstrong, as well as with TBA, a symmetrical intermediate-length
TEA analogue (Figure A). The TBA structure
serves as a reference in these experiments and has previously been
described.− All three compounds have 2-fold symmetry and are
therefore more easily resolved in electron density maps of a 4-fold
symmetrical channel than the better-studied, but nonsymmetrical, alkyl-triethylammonium
compounds (Figure A). Indeed, we have determined
structures of KcsA in complex with these compounds (C6, C8, and C10)
at high resolution, but the symmetry mismatch leads to weak electron
density of the bound QA alkyl chains (data not shown). All crystals
were grown as KcsA–Fab complexes to improve diffraction, and
in the presence of potassium as the permeant ion. The cocrystals diffracted X-rays to ∼2.4 Å
Bragg spacings at the synchrotron, and the structures were determined
by molecular replacement using the KcsA–Fab complex in potassium
(PDB entry 1K4C) as the search model (Table ).

There
are several consistent features among the structures (Figure ). First, the ammonium headgroup of the three blockers
binds at the same location in the cavity below the selectivity filter.
Second, the three blockers all bind with the same quasi-planar symmetry
(D2D) that was first
observed for TEA in the structure of carbamoyl phosphate synthetase, allowing their four alkyl chains to extend laterally
into the space between KcsA monomers (Figure A). Third, the orientation of the alkyl chains with respect to the
symmetry axis is essentially the same for all three blockers; i.e.,
larger blockers recapitulate and extend the structural interactions
of shorter blockers (Figure A). There is,
however, a significant difference in the cavity at residue F103 between
the TBA structure and the other two structures (Figure B). The side chain of F103 has adopted a new rotamer in the
THA and TOA structures and now projects into the cavity, making room
for the alkyl chains of the ligand to bind in the space previously
occupied by the original rotamer. Although the rotation of a single
bond may appear to be a subtle structural change, it has substantial
implications here. The side chain of F103 in its original (TBA) rotamer
is all that physically shields the aqueous cavity of the channel from
the surrounding lipid bilayer. This can be illustrated with space-filling
models of the three structures (Figure C).
The side-chain rotation of F103 opens a lateral window in the channel
between the internal cavity and the outside environment. There are
thus three pathways into the central cavity of KcsA in the THA- and
TOA-bound structures. Two of these pathways are the well-known aqueous
access routes used by potassium ions along the symmetry axis of the
channel. The third pathway connects the cavity laterally with the
middle of the membrane.

Hydrophobic binding site in KcsA. Comparison
of the TBA (left),
THA (middle), and TOA (right) structures. (A) View down the symmetry
axis onto the QA binding site. KcsA is shown as gray ribbons, and
the ligands are shown as sticks. The blue 2Fo – Fc maps are contoured
at 1σ. (B) Side view at the height of the ligand. The 2Fo – Fc maps
over the protein are contoured at 1.5σ, while Fo – Fc omit maps (the
ligand was omitted during map calculation) over the ligand are contoured
at 3σ (2.5σ for THA). Note the F103 rotamer change between
the TBA and the THA and TOA structures. (C) Outside view of the channel.
The van der Waals surface of the channel is drawn using a 1.6 Å
sphere. Note the lateral window in the THA and TOA structures (arrows).

Stabilization of Long-Chain
QAs in the Hydrophobic Binding Pocket
Figure  demonstrates the incremental extension
of alkyl chains into the hydrophobic pocket. The hexyl chain of THA
initially recapitulates the butyl chain of TBA (Figure A) and can therefore maintain many of the van der Waals interactions
known to stabilize TBA binding in the cavity (mainly to the side chains
of the inner helix residues I100 and, in a new rotamer, F103). The
peripheral ethylene of the hexyl chain undergoes additional van der
Waals interactions with the main chain of the inner helix residues
G99, the side chain of I100 from a neighboring subunit, and the main
chain of T74 (Figure B). The octyl chain of
TOA in turn recapitulates the interactions with the channel observed
with TBA and THA and forms additional interactions with the peripheral
ethylene (Figure C). These additional interactions
occur with Cα of G99, the side chain of S102 (in a new rotamer
compared to the THA-bound structure), the side chain of T74, and the
side chain of outer helix residue L36.

Incremental extension
of QAs into the hydrophobic binding pocket.
Views along the symmetry axis (left) and side views at the height
of the hydrophobic pocket (right) are shown. In each panel, only the
van der Waals interactions not previously observed with shorter QAs
are shown. (A) Interaction between the C4 alkyl chain of TBA and residues
I100 and F103. Favorable van der Waals interactions are shown. (B)
Favorable interactions between the peripheral ethylene of the C6 alkyl
chain of THA and T74, G99, I100, and F103 are shown. (C) Favorable
interactions between the peripheral ethylene of the C8 alkyl chain
of TOA and L36, T74, G99, and S102 are shown.

Three findings involving the channel–blocker interaction
are particularly noteworthy. First, the octyl chain of TOA is found
to be in van der Waals contact with a residue of the outer helix.
This interaction demonstrates that drug binding is not confined to
the inner helix but that outer helix residues can participate if the
ligand is able to penetrate deeply into the pocket. Second, both the
hexyl and the octyl chains interact closely with the main chain of
the inner helix at G99, a site thought to act as a pivot point or
hinge in the gating of the channel., This interaction
is interesting in light of the observed drug trapping and gating effects
of QA binding that were previously thought to occur inside the cavity
and near the bundle crossing of the inner helices (Figure D). Third, both long
alkyl chains interact closely with the pore helix. The structural
consequences of this interaction will be described next.

Ligand-Induced
Conformational Changes in the Selectivity Filter
Figure  compares the state of the selectivity
filter in the presence of TBA (short alkyl chain) and TOA (long alkyl
chain). All crystals in this study were grown in the presence of the
same potassium concentration (150 mM), were of similar quality, and
were treated identically throughout all procedures (Table ). In the presence of TBA, the selectivity filter
adopts the same open and conductive conformation observed in its absence
(Figure A, left)., In other words, binding of TBA does not alter the state of the selectivity
filter with potassium as the permeant ion species. (It has previously
been shown that TBA can alter the structure of the selectivity filter
in the presence of thallium in what appears to be a thallium concentration-dependent
manner.,) The open conformation of the selectivity
filter is characterized by the presence of four, approximately equally
occupied, potassium binding sites (Figure B, left) and is accompanied by a hydrogen bond network that includes
a set of specific interactions among residues W68, E71, and D80 that
maintain the structural integrity of the filter in the conducting
state.,, In the presence
of TOA, however, the selectivity filter adopts the collapsed conformation
observed at low potassium concentrations., (The selectivity filter adopts a very similar conformation in the
presence of THA, but evidence of external THA binding, as observed
by weak electron density for the ligand at the external TEA site,
complicates the analysis in this case.) The collapsed conformation
of the selectivity filter is thought to be nonconductive,− and is characterized by the presence of only two
potassium ions (Figure B, right), an altered
hydrogen bond network, and the binding of three water molecules,, (Figure A, right). Unlike TBA, TOA is thus capable of shifting the conformational
state of the selectivity filter under otherwise identical conditions.

Structural
change in the selectivity filter induced by long-chain
QA binding. Comparison of the TBA (left) and TOA (right) structures.
(A) Side view of the selectivity filter. The main chain of the selectivity
filter as well as the side chains of residues W68, E71, and D80 are
shown as sticks. Potassium ions are illustrated as green spheres,
water molecules as red spheres, and important stabilizing hydrogen
bonds as black dotted lines. (B) Normalized one-dimensional electron
density along the symmetry axis. The ion numbering is from outside
to inside. The map was calculated using MAPMAN, and the selectivity filter and ions were omitted during Fo – Fc map
calculation.

Increasing Affinity with
Increasing Alkyl-Chain Length
Figure  shows results from a functional assay
to determine the relative binding energies of the interaction of KcsA
with the three QA compounds. In this stopped-flow assay, vesicles
containing KcsA and loaded with the fluorescent dye ANTS are mixed
with a low-pH solution containing thallium. The low pH activates KcsA
and allows thallium to enter the vesicles through open KcsA channels
and quench ANTS fluorescence. The number of open channels is approximately
proportional to the initial decay of the fluorescence trace. Figure A shows the fluorescence
trace for control vesicles (pH 3) and vesicles containing a constant
concentration of 100 nM of each compound. The control and TBA traces
decay almost identically, indicating that very few channels are blocked
by 100 nM TBA. The decay is notably slower in the presence of 100
nM THA (Figure B), indicating that more channels
are blocked in the presence of the same concentration of THA. The
decay is even slower in the presence of 100 nM TOA (Figure B). The low solubility of THA and TOA and the adverse
effect of DMSO limit the assay to concentrations of 100 nM (TOA) and
2 μM (THA), respectively. Figure C shows
dose–response curves of the three inhibitors up to their solubility
limit in the assay buffer. The observed inhibition constant of TBA
is ∼120 μM. While the obtainable data are insufficient
to determine the inhibition constants for THA and TOA with acceptable
accuracy, they are sufficient to demonstrate the basic concept of
increasing binding affinity with increasing alkyl-chain length, consistent
with the observed incremental increase in the number of van der Waals
interactions in the three structures.

Functional assay that shows an incremental
increase in QA binding
affinity with increasing alkyl-chain length. (A) Fluorescence traces
of ANTS-loaded vesicles containing reconstituted KcsA mixed with thallium
nitrate at pH 3. The low pH transiently opens KcsA and allows extravesicular
thallium to enter the vesicles and quench ANTS fluorescence. The stopped-flow
experiment was performed in the absence (pH 3, black) and presence
of 100 nM TBA (red), THA (green), or TOA (blue) in the vesicle solution.
(B) The averages and standard deviations (n = 4)
of the fluorescence decay rate measured at 10 ms are shown for five
conditions. The control conditions demonstrate the rate of closed
(pH 7) and open (pH 3) channels in the absence of QA compounds. The
100 nM conditions show the different rates in the presence of a constant
concentration of the three QA compounds. (C) Dose–response
curves of the three QA compounds. The averages and standard deviations
(n = 3–14) of the initial rates normalized
to the closed (pH 7) and open (pH 3) conditions (control) are shown.
The red dotted line is a fit of the TBA data to the Hill equation
with an inhibition constant of 119 μM and a Hill coefficient
of 1. The solubility limit in the assay buffer is ∼100 nM for
TOA and ∼2 μM for THA.

Discussion
Hydrophobic Drug Binding in Potassium and
Sodium Channels
The cocrystal structures of KcsA with THA
and TOA demonstrate the
internal hydrophobic binding site for long-chain QA compounds in the
KcsA potassium channel (Figure A). The configuration
of this binding site is unexpected. The alkyl chains of the blockers
are not accommodated in the central cavity of the channel as anticipated
but instead bind within a hydrophobic binding pocket, a space lined
by predominantly hydrophobic moieties from two adjacent inner helices
and a pore helix. The alkyl chains gain access to the pocket from
the central cavity through rotation of the phenylalanine side chain
at position 103. The most striking consequence of this rotameric adjustment
of the channel to drug binding is the opening of a direct lateral
conduit between the internal cavity and the lipid bilayer, a third
pathway into the central cavity of the channel (Figure C). Given the high degree of structural conservation among
the pore-forming units of cation selective channels,, it appears likely that the hydrophobic binding pocket represents
a conserved hydrophobic binding site in potassium and related ion
channels. Indeed, a similar hydrophobic access pathway has been observed
in sodium channel structures., The corresponding pocket
has been proposed to constitute the tetracaine binding site in voltage-dependent
sodium channels.

Stabilization of the Nonconducting
State by QAs
It
has been shown that the equilibrium between the open and collapsed
states of KcsA’s selectivity filter can be influenced by the
permeant ion species, the binding of an antibody fragment used to
obtain high-resolution crystals, mutations in or near the selectivity
filter, the gating state of the channel, and the binding of QA compounds
to either side of the membrane.,,,,,,, The data presented here demonstrate that the collapsed
conformation is also induced by QA compounds in the continued presence
of high concentrations of potassium. The differences between the TBA
and TOA structures suggest that this occurs because of an interaction
between the octyl chain of TOA and the pore helix: placing the TOA
ligand into the TBA structure (with TBA and the F103 side chain removed)
leads to a prominent steric clash between the alkyl chains of TOA
and pore residues T74 and T75 (data not shown). It thus appears that
the alkyl chain pushes the pore helix upward and forces the selectivity
filter into a nonconducting state. Alternatively stated, the binding
pocket is accessible to the octyl chain only in the nonconducting
state of the channel. It could be argued, therefore, that long-chain
QAs inhibit potassium channels through two different mechanisms, namely,
physical occlusion and allosteric regulation, and that these two mechanisms
manifest themselves functionally as open channel block and promotion
of slow inactivation, respectively. It follows that it may be possible
to block permeation without physically occluding the permeation pathway
simply by stabilizing the nonconducting state of the selectivity filter.
Such a mechanism would be expected to show a high degree of cooperativity
if the blocker were completely excluded from the symmetry axis. There
is evidence suggesting that this mechanism may indeed be operational:
disubstituted cyclohexyl compounds inhibit the Kv1.3 potassium channel
with an apparent stoichiometry of 2:1 and may access their binding
sites through a hydrophobic pathway.,

KcsA as a Model
for QA Binding in Kv-Type Potassium Channels
Most of the
functional data describing QA blockade of potassium
channels have been obtained on voltage-gated (Kv-type) channels.−, Figure  demonstrates the structural conservation between KcsA and the pore
domain of the eukaryotic Kv1.2 channel., A high degree
of structural conservation is maintained at the QA binding site despite
differences in the gating mechanics (a glycine residue acting as a
hinge in KcsA, a PNP motif in Kv1.2) and gating states (KcsA is closed;
Kv1.2 is open) of the two channels. The residues colored red contribute
to the TOA binding site in KcsA and are similarly situated in the
Kv1.2 structure. The most notable structural differences are located
below the glycine hinge at KcsA positions S102 and F103 (T401 and
I402 in Kv1.2, respectively) and are thus likely due, at least in
part, to the different gating states of the two channels. The side
chains of the remaining inner helix residues involved in TOA binding
(A73, T74, T75, G99, and I100) are chemically very similar to their
corresponding Kv1.2 residues (M372, T373, T374, G398, and V399). The
KcsA binding site may thus provide sufficient structural conservation
to provide useful insight into the QA binding site in Kv-type potassium
channels.

Structural conservation of the QA binding site. Structural alignment
of the pore regions of KcsA (TOA structure) and Kv1.2 (PDB entry 2A79) generated by aligning
KcsA residues L40–G99 with Kv1.2 residues V339–G398.
Three monomers of each channel are shown; KcsA is colored green and
Kv1.2 cyan. TOA is shown as sticks. Residues of KcsA within van der
Waals distance of bound TOA and their Kv1.2 counterparts are colored
red: A73 (M372), T74 (T373), T75 (T374), G99 (G398), I100 (V399),
S102 (T401), and F103 (I402).

Mechanism of Long-Chain QA Stabilization
Armstrong’s
landmark experiments on the squid giant axon demonstrated that the
hydrophobicity of a QA blocker is a major determinant of its ability
to block potassium channels. Using mutagenesis
studies, Yellen and co-workers found that increasing the hydrophobic
character of the amino acid at position 469 in Shaker (corresponding
to S102 in KcsA and T401 in Kv1.2) increased the affinity of the blockers
by at least 1 order of magnitude. In contrast, a mutation known to
drastically decrease the affinity of TEA itself had little effect
on the affinity of long-chain QA blockers., These
and related findings were explained by proposing two competing binding
sites for long-chain QAs: a hydrophilic headgroup binding site (corresponding
to the internal TEA site) and a hydrophobic tail binding site. The present structures support this hypothesis
and locate the headgroup binding site in the aqueous cavity and the
tail binding site in the hydrophobic binding pocket. The hallmark
result observed in eukaryotic channels of increasing binding affinity
with increasing alkyl-chain length of the QA compound was also observed
in KcsA (Figure C), further substantiating
the general applicability of the binding mechanism described here.

Mechanism of Drug Trapping and Long-Chain QA Effects on Gating
Given the closed state of the internal activation gate [inner helix
bundle (Figure B)] and the presence of bound
drug in the cavity, it would seem that the structures described here
capture the channel in a trapped state. Trapping is important pharmacologically
as the ability to bind the channel in the closed state potentiates
the actions of drugs and underlies use dependence, the accumulation
of inhibition with repetitive stimuli. The Yellen laboratory has demonstrated that modifications at a single
amino acid position can switch the Shaker channel from a nontrapping
mode to a trapping mode (I470A and I470C)., Because
the mutations that facilitated trapping in their experiments reduced
the volume of a side chain thought to line the cavity, the results
were interpreted in terms of cavity size. The crystallographic data reported here suggest a slightly different
mechanism. Instead, the long-chain QA trapping properties, or lack
thereof, of the Shaker channel might be due to the energetic cost
of accessing the pocket, i.e., the low probability of the I470 side
chain to change rotamer and move from the hydrophobic pocket to the
more hydrophilic cavity environment.

The phrase “foot
in the door” is frequently used to describe the blocking mechanism
of QAs in potassium channels. It implies that these blockers impose
themselves between the moving parts of the gating machinery of the
channel. The general location of the hydrophobic binding site described
here and the interaction between the alkyl chains of the blockers
and the inner helix main chain at residue G99 (Figure ) suggest that an alternative phrase such as “finger
in the hinge” might more aptly describe the action of these
blockers. The interference does not occur, at least in KcsA, near
the activation gate of the channel at the bundle crossing of the inner
helices, but near residues G99 and F103. While the amplitude of the
gating transition may be larger elsewhere, these two residues are
strategically located at or near the hinge of the gating movement
where small but critical structural rearrangements take place. By
interacting with this mechanically central part of the channel, QAs
and other drugs may be able to influence the relative stability of
the different gating states with functional consequences that can
vary from subtle shifts in the gating equilibrium, to
the more dramatic phenomena observed by Armstrong.

Accession Codes
The coordinates
and structure factors of the Fab–KcsA complex with TBA, THA,
and TOA have been deposited as Protein Data Bank entries 2JK5, 4UUJ, and 2W0F, respectively.

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank I. Popova
for antibody production and M. Becker for
assistance with data collection. Portions of this work were conducted
at LS-CAT. Use of the APS is supported by the U.S. Department of Energy
(Contract W-31-109-Eng-38).

Abbreviations
ANTS8-aminonaphthalene-1,3,6-trisulfonic
acid

APSAdvanced
Photon Source

CHAPS3-[(3-cholamidopropyl)dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate

C4butyltriethylammonium

C6hexyltriethylammonium

C8octyltriethylammonium

C10decyltriethylammonium

DMdecyl maltoside

DMSOdimethyl sulfoxide

Fabfragment antigen
binding

HEPES4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic
acid

IPTGisopropyl
β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside

KClpotassium chloride

KNO3potassium
nitrate

PEGpolyethylene
glycol

POPC1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine

POPG1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-[phospho-rac-1-glycerol]

TBAtetrabutylammonium

TEAtetraethylammonium

THAtetrahexylammonium

TlNO3thallium nitrate

TOAtetraoctylammonium

Tristris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane

QAquaternary ammonium.

