Pyruvate carboxylase (PC, EC
6.4.1.1) is a biotin-dependent carboxylase, which catalyzes carboxylation
of pyruvate to oxaloacetate. This reaction is considered to be an
important anaplerotic reaction because it replenishes tricarboxylic
acid cycle intermediates that have been withdrawn for anabolic purposes. PC is found in wide variety of organisms, including
eubacteria, yeast, fungi, and animals (for reviews, see refs () and ()). In mammals, PC is also
involved in gluconeogenesis in liver, de novo fatty
acid synthesis in liver and adipose tissue, and neurotransmitter synthesis
in astrocytes., Furthermore, PC is also necessary
for glucose-induced insulin secretion in pancreatic β-cells. As PC has such diverse metabolic roles, dysregulation
of this enzyme is involved in many diseases, including type 2 diabetes,
obesity, and cancers.,,

Pyruvate carboxylation catalyzed by PC proceeds through a series
of reactions shown in Figure . Reactions  and , in which the biotin
cofactor is carboxylated via a carboxyphosphate intermediate (−O2COPO32–),
occur in the biotin carboxylase (BC) domain. Reaction , in which the carboxyl group is transferred from the carboxybiotin
to pyruvate to form oxaloacetate, occurs in the carboxyl transferase
(CT) domain. PC is commonly an α4 tetramer, and the
overall pyruvate carboxylation reaction has been shown to proceed
via intersubunit catalysis where the subunits act in pairs so that
the biotin of one subunit is carboxylated in its own BC domain but
transfers its carboxyl group to pyruvate in its partner subunit’s
CT domain.

Partial reactions catalyzed
by pyruvate carboxylase. Reactions  and  occur in the BC domain,
and reaction  occurs in the CT domain.

In the majority of organisms,
the activity of PC is positively
regulated by the allosteric activator acetyl-CoA as a result of an
increased rate of fatty acid oxidation. This mechanism allows sufficient
levels of oxaloacetate to oxidize β-oxidation-derived acetyl-CoA.
In microbes, PC is negatively regulated by l-aspartate, which
signals an abundance of tricarboxylic acid cycle intermediates. From
structural studies of RePC and Staphylococcus aureus PC, the
binding site for acetyl-CoA has been identified as an allosteric domain
that is surrounded by the BC, CT, and biotin carboxyl carrier protein
(BCCP) domains. The binding site for l-aspartate has yet
to be identified.

While much has been learned about the action
of acetyl-CoA in a
wide variety of organisms (see ref () for a review), the action of l-aspartate
has been most extensively studied in the eukaryotic microbial PCs
from Aspergillus nidulans() and Saccharomyces cerevisiae., In both cases, the inhibition was reported to be competitive with
respect to acetyl-CoA; in A. nidulans, PC l-aspartate decreased the cooperativity of activation of the enzyme
by acetyl-CoA, while in S. cerevisiae PC, it increased
the cooperativity. Much less is known about the inhibitory effects
of l-aspartate in bacterial PCs, and in general, the loci
and mechanisms of action of l-aspartate are not well understood.
In this study, we have performed a detailed steady-state kinetic analysis
of the inhibitory effects of l-aspartate on RePC, which has
been extremely thoroughly characterized in structural and mechanistic
terms,,− to investigate the loci
of action and inhibitory mechanisms of l-aspartate.

Experimental
Procedures
Materials
Sodium pyruvate, sodium oxaloacetate, ATP,
sodium phosphoenolpyruvate, acetyl-CoA, NADH, malate dehydrogenase,
lactate dehydrogenase, and pyruvate kinase were purchased from Sigma.
2′,3′-O-(2,4,6-Trinitrophenyl)adenosine
5′-triphosphate (TNP-ATP) was obtained from Jena Bioscience. l-Aspartic acid was purchased from Fluka.

RePC Expression
and Purification
N-Terminally His-tagged
RePC was expressed in Escherichia coli BL21(DE3)
and purified as described previously. The purified RePC was resuspended and stored at −80 °C
in storage buffer containing 30% (v/v) glycerol, 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH
7.8), and 1 mM dithioerythreitol.

Pyruvate
Carboxylation Activity Assay
The pyruvate
carboxylating activities in the absence or presence of acetyl-CoA
were determined by a coupled spectrophotometric assay in which the
oxaloacetate produced was converted to malate with concomitant oxidation
of NADH in a reaction catalyzed by malate dehydrogenase. The assays were performed at 30 °C in 1
mL reaction mixtures containing 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 7.8), 20 mM NaHCO3, 6 mM MgCl2, 1 mM MgATP, 0.2 mM NADH, 10 mM sodium
pyruvate, and 5 units of malate dehydrogenase. The concentrations
of acetyl-CoA and l-aspartate were varied from 0 to 150 μM
and from 0 to 8 mM, respectively.

To determine the effect of l-aspartate inhibition on the MgTNP-ATP activation of pyruvate
carboxylation, MgTNP-ATP concentrations were varied from 0 to100 μM
at different l-aspartate concentrations (140 μg of
enzyme was used per assay).

The kapp values were calculated by
dividing the initial velocity by the enzymic biotin concentration
in each assay.

Oxamate-Induced Oxaloacetate Decarboxylation
The activity
of oxamate-induced oxaloacetate decarboxylation in the absence of
acetyl-CoA was determined by a coupled spectrophotometric assay in
which the pyruvate produced was converted to lactate with concomitant
oxidation of NADH in a reaction catalyzed by lactate dehydrogenase. All assays were performed at 30 °C in 1
mL of a reaction mixture containing 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 7.8), 0.22
mM NADH, 1 mM oxamate, and 4 units of lactate dehydrogenase. The concentrations
of oxaloacetate and l-aspartate were varied between 0 and
250 μM and between 0 and 8 mM, respectively. The kcat value was calculated from the initial velocity divided
by the enzymic biotin concentration in each assay.

Bicarbonate-Dependent
ATP Cleavage Activity Assay
The
activity of bicarbonate-dependent ATP cleavage reactions in the absence
of acetyl-CoA was determined by a coupled spectrophotometric assay
in which the ADP produced was converted to ATP with concomitant dephosphorylation
of phosphoenolpyruvate to form pyruvate in a reaction catalyzed by
pyruvate kinase. The pyruvate thus formed was converted to lactate
with concomitant oxidation of NADH in a reaction catalyzed by lactate
dehydrogenase. The reactions were performed
at 30 °C in 1 mL mixture containing 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 7.8),
20 mM NaHCO3, 5 mM MgCl2, 0.22 mM NADH, 10 mM
phosphoenolpyruvate, 5 units of pyruvate kinase, and 4 units of lactate
dehydrogenase. Activities were determined by varying concentrations
of MgATP and l-aspartate from 0 to 1000 μM and from
0 to 8 mM, respectively. The assay was initiated by the addition of
the purified enzyme (493 μg/each assay).

Coupling between Oxaloacetate
Formation and Pi Release
in the Pyruvate Carboxylation Reaction
To determine the effect
of l-aspartate on the coupling between oxaloacetate formation
and Pi release in the pyruvate carboxylation assay, the
initial rates of oxaloacetate formation and Pi release
were determined in the absence and presence (8 mM) of l-aspartate.
The rate of Pi release was measured using the assay of
Black and Jones. Briefly, 2% (w/v) ammonium
molybdate·4H2O, 14% (w/v) ascorbic acid in 50% (v/v)
trichloroacetic acid, and 2% (w/v) trisodium citrate·2H2O with 2% (w/v) sodium arsenite in 2% (v/v) acetic acid were prepared
as reagents A–C, respectively; 200 μL of reagent A, 300
μL of reagent B, and 800 μL of water were added to the
cuvette followed by the addition of 200 μL samples of the pyruvate
carboxylation reaction mixture 4, 8, 12, and 16 min after the start
of the reaction. The solution was immediately mixed and stood for
1 min, after which 1 mL of reagent C was added. The blue color developed
within 4 min, and the absorbance was measured at 700 nm. A standard
curve of a range of Pi concentrations was prepared using
a standard solution of NaH2PO4 in 0.1 M Tris
(pH 7.8) and the assay described above. The Pi content
of the pyruvate carboxylation reaction mixtures was calculated from
the standard curve. From plots of Pi released versus time,
the initial rates of Pi release were calculated by linear
regression analysis for triplicate time courses. The initial rates
of oxaloacetate formation were determined from spectrophotometric
assays using the malate dehydrogenase coupling reaction, as described
above. The reactions were initiated by addition of the purified RePC
(35 μg/assay). The coupling between oxaloacetate formation and
Pi release was calculated as the ratios of initial rates
of these two reactions, and three separate sets of measurements were
taken so that ratios are reported as the mean and standard deviations
of these measurements.

Data Analysis
The acetyl-CoA dependence
or MgTNP-ATP
dependence of the pyruvate carboxylation reaction at each concentration
of l-aspartate was analyzed by using nonlinear least-squares
regression fits of the data to eq .where [A] is either the acetyl-CoA
concentration or the MgTNP-ATP concentration, Ka is the activation constant, h1 is the Hill coefficient of cooperativity, kapp is the apparent catalytic rate constant for the reaction
at each concentration of l-aspartate, k0 is the catalytic rate constant of the acetyl-CoA-independent
reaction (determined experimentally), and kcat is the catalytic rate constant of the acetyl-CoA-dependent reaction
when acetyl-CoA is saturating. A global analysis of the acetyl-CoA
activation of pyruvate carboxylating activities at the different,
fixed concentrations of l-aspartate was performed by a nonlinear
least-squares regression fit of the complete set of data initially
to eq  that was derived for the reaction scheme
in Figure , which describes competitive inhibition
by l-aspartate with respect to acetyl-CoA but where kasp is set to zero.where k0, kcat, Ka, and h1 are as described for
eq  except they are the values of these parameters
in the absence of l-aspartate, [Asp] is the concentration
of l-aspartate, Ki is the dissociation
constant of the enzyme–aspartate complex, and h2 is the Hill coefficient of cooperativity for the binding
of l-aspartate to the RePC tetramer.

Reaction scheme showing
the proposed inhibitory mechanism of pyruvate
carboxylating activity by l-aspartate in the presence of
acetyl-CoA, where k0 and kcat are catalytic rate constants for the acetyl-CoA-independent
and -dependent reactions catalyzed by the enzyme (E) and enzyme·acetyl-CoA
complex (EAh1), respectively. The catalytic rate constant
for the reaction catalyzed by the enzyme·l-aspartate
complex (EAsph2) is kasp. Ka is the apparent dissociation constant of the
EAh1 complex, and h1 is the
Hill coefficient for the activation process. Ki is the apparent dissociation constant of the enzyme·l-aspartate complex (EAsph2), and h2 is the Hill coefficient for the inhibition by l-aspartate.

Inactivation of pyruvate
carboxylating activity by l-aspartate
in the absence of acetyl-CoA was analyzed by using nonlinear least-squares
regression fits of the data to eq .where the parameters are as
described for eq , except for kasp, which is the catalytic rate constant for the pyruvate
carboxylation reaction conducted by the enzyme·l-aspartate
complex. The value of k0 was determined
experimentally.

The data in Figure  were
subsequently fit
to eq , where the value of kasp was set at the value determined from the analysis
of the effect of l-aspartate on acetyl-CoA-independent pyruvate
carboxylation described above.

Effect of increasing concentrations of l-aspartate
[(●)
0, (▲) 2, (▽) 4, (◆) 6, and (○) = 8 mM]
on the activation of the pyruvate carboxylation reaction by acetyl-CoA.
The lines represent a global, nonlinear least-squares regression fit
of the data to eq . Reaction conditions were
as described in .

The kinetics of oxamate-induced
oxaloacetate decarboxylation in
the absence of acetyl-CoA at different l-aspartate concentrations
were analyzed by nonlinear least-squares regression fits of the data
to eq .where KOAA and
[OAA] are the Michaelis–Menten constant for and the concentration
of oxaloacetate, respectively. KI is the
substrate inhibition constant for oxaloacetate.

The data describing
inhibition of the bicarbonate-dependent MgATP
cleavage reaction by l-aspartate were analyzed by a nonlinear
least-squares regression fit initially to eq  that describes mixed inhibition and then to eq  that describes competitive inhibition.where Km is the
Michaelis–Menten constant for MgATP, Ki is the dissociation constant of the enzyme·l-aspartate complex, and Kis is that for
the enzyme·l-aspartate·MgATP complex.

Results
Effect
of Increasing l-Aspartate Concentrations on
the Activation of Pyruvate Carboxylation by Acetyl-CoA
Table  shows the parameters estimated from the fits of
eq  to each individual set of data at each
concentration of l-aspartate shown in Figure  and k0. This clearly shows that Ka increases with increasing l-aspartate
concentrations, whereas there is no strong trend of change in either kcat or h1. However, k0 does appear to decrease with increasing l-aspartate concentrations. As mentioned earlier, inhibition
of fungal PCs by l-aspartate has been found to be competitive
with respect to acetyl-CoA. To determine if this could be the case
here, we developed a model (Figure ) that
describes this type of inhibition and from which eq  was derived. The data in Figure  were
globally fit to this equation, and the solid lines in Figure  represent the fit. As one can see, the fit was
good with an R2 of 0.992. The following
parameters were estimated from the fit: kcat = 23.7 ± 0.2 s–1, Ka = 7.70 ± 0.27 μM, h1 = 2.65 ± 0.09, Ki = 1.26 ±
0.08 mM, and h2 = 2.78 ± 0.11. The
value of h2 suggests that the binding
of l-aspartate to RePC is also cooperative with a Hill coefficient
similar to that for acetyl-CoA. A fit of eq  in which h2 was set to 1 (no allosteric
binding of l-aspartate) failed to give a good fit to the
data.

Kinetic Parameters for Acetyl-CoA
Activation of the Pyruvate Carboxylation Reaction Catalyzed by RePC
in the Presence of Different Concentrations of l-Aspartate
[l-aspartate] (mM)	Ka for acetyl-CoA (μM)	Hill coefficient (h1)	kcat (s–1)	k0 (s–1)	
0	7.3 ± 0.9	2.47 ± 0.21	22.9 ± 0.5	0.32	
2	14.5 ± 0.5	2.87 ± 0.26	23.9 ± 0.6	0.27	
4	23.7 ± 0.7	2.48 ± 0.16	24.9 ± 0.6	0.23	
6	35.6 ± 1.1	2.74 ± 0.22	22.4 ± 0.6	0.21	
8	60.5 ± 3.0	2.54 ± 0.21	25.3 ± 1.2	0.19	
Assay conditions:
0.1 M Tris-HCl
(pH 7.8), 20 mM NaHCO3, 6 mM MgCl2, 1 mM MgATP,
0.2 mM NADH, 10 mM sodium pyruvate, and 5 units of malate dehydrogenase
(MDH). The concentrations of acetyl-CoA and l-aspartate were
varied from 0 to 150 μM and from 0 to 8 mM, respectively. The
parameters (±standard errors) were estimated from a nonlinear
regression fit of the data at each l-aspartate concentration
to eq  except k0, which was measured directly.

Effect of Increasing l-Aspartate Concentrations on
the Pyruvate Carboxylation Reaction in the Absence of Acetyl-CoA
Figure  shows a plot of kapp at different concentrations of l-aspartate
in the absence of acetyl-CoA. The data were fit to eq  that describes inhibition that depends on [l-aspartate]h2, using the value of h2 estimated above. The fit to eq  gave values of Ki and kasp of 2.2 ± 0.2 mM and 0.19 ± 0.01
s–1, respectively. The value of Ki is somewhat higher than that estimated for the global
fit of the data in Figure , but the data set
in Figure  is much smaller. The positive value
of kasp, which is significantly different
from zero (t test; p &lt; 0.01),
indicated that at a saturating concentration of l-aspartate,
the enzyme retains some residual activity. Refitting the data in Figure  to eq , which accounts for
this residual activity in the enzyme·l-aspartate complex,
resulted in only very small changes to the estimated parameters: kcat = 23.7 ± 0.2 s–1, Ka = 7.70 ± 0.27 μM, h1 = 2.69 ± 0.09, Ki =
1.25 ± 0.07 mM, and h2 = 2.81 ±
0.11.

Effect of increasing concentrations of l-aspartate on
the acetyl-CoA-independent pyruvate carboxylation reaction. Data points
at zero acetyl-CoA concentration were replotted from Figure . The line represents a nonlinear least-squares
regression fit of the data to eq .

Effect of Increasing l-Aspartate
Concentrations on
the Activation of Pyruvate Carboxylation by MgTNP-ATP
Figure  shows the effects of l-aspartate on the
activation of pyruvate carboxylation by MgTNP-ATP, with each set of
data at individual l-aspartate concentrations fit to eq . The estimated parameters from these fits are listed
in Table . It is clear that with increasing
concentrations of l-aspartate the value of Ka increases markedly and, as expected, that of k0 decreases. The value of kcat also appears to decrease with increasing concentrations
of l-aspartate; however, the value of kcat at 8 mM l-aspartate is not significantly different
from that at 0 mM l-aspartate (t test; p &gt; 0.1).

Effect of increasing concentrations of l-aspartate
[(●)
0, (▲) 2, (▽) 4, and (○) 8 mM] on the activation
of the pyruvate carboxylation reaction by MgTNP-ATP. The lines represent
a nonlinear least-squares regression fit of each set data at a particular
concentration of l-aspartate to eq , where h1 was set to 2.3, the value
determined previously. Reaction conditions
were as described in .

Kinetic Parameters
for MgTNP-ATP Activation
of the Pyruvate Carboxylation Reaction Catalyzed by RePC in the Presence
of Different Concentrations of l-Aspartate
[l-aspartate] (mM)	Ka for MgTNP-ATP (μM)	kcat (s–1)	k0 (s–1)	
0	16.1 ± 2.9	2.1 ± 0.1	0.48	
2	33.5 ± 5.6	1.9 ± 0.1	0.43	
4	39.1 ± 6.2	1.6 ± 0.1	0.23	
8	85.1 ± 17.6	1.5 ± 0.3	0.16	
Assay conditions:
0.1 M Tris-HCl
(pH 7.8), 20 mM NaHCO3, 6 mM MgCl2, 1 mM MgATP,
0.2 mM NADH, 10 mM sodium pyruvate, and 5 units of malate dehydrogenase
(MDH). The concentrations of MgTNP-ATP and l-aspartate were
varied from 0 to 100 μM and from 0 to 8 mM, respectively. The
parameters (±standard errors) except k0, which was measured directly, were estimated from a nonlinear regression
fit of the data at each l-aspartate concentration to eq , where h1 was set to
2.3, the value determined previously.

Effect of l-Aspartate
on the Coupling between MgATP
Cleavage and Pyruvate Carboxylation
The coupling between
MgATP cleavage in the BC domain and pyruvate carboxylation in the
CT domain was examined by measuring the rates of the formation of
oxaloacetate and release of Pi in the absence and presence
(8 mM) of l-aspartate under identical reaction conditions.
The ratios of oxaloacetate formation to Pi release in the
absence and presence of l-aspartate (8 mM) were 0.96 ±
0.06 and 0.89 ± 0.06, respectively. The means ± SD of coupling
ratios in the absence and presence of l-aspartate were found
to be not significantly different using a t test
(p &gt; 0.2). This suggests that binding of l-aspartate to the enzyme has no effect on the coupling between the
reactions in the BC and CT domain reactions.

Effect of Increasing l-Aspartate Concentrations on
the Partial Reactions of RePC in the Absence of Acetyl-CoA
To examine how l-aspartate has the observed inhibitory effect
on pyruvate carboxylation in the absence of acetyl-CoA and to determine
the locus of its action, the kinetics of oxamate-dependent oxaloacetate
decarboxylation (CT domain) and bicarbonate-dependent
MgATP cleavage in the absence of pyruvate (BC domain) were measured in the presence of increasing concentrations
of l-aspartate.

Kinetic parameters for oxamate-dependent
oxaloacetate decarboxylation (data not shown) in the absence of l-aspartate and in the presence of 8 mM l-aspartate
were obtained by fitting the data to eq . Comparison
of the estimates of these parameters and their accompanying standard
errors using t tests showed that there were no significant
differences among the values of kcat, KOAA, and KI in the
presence of 0 and 8 mM l-aspartate (p &gt;
0.2 in all cases).

The effects of increasing concentrations
of l-aspartate
on the kinetics of bicarbonate-dependent MgATP cleavage in the absence
of pyruvate are shown in Figure . The solid
lines represent global fits of the data to eq , which describes competitive inhibition and gave the following estimates
for parameters: kcat = 0.0062 ± 0.0001
s–1, Km = 11 ±
2 μM, and KI = 1.2 ± 0.3 mM.
A fit to eq , which describes mixed inhibition,
gave a fit of the data that was not significantly better than the
fit to eq  by the variance ratio test (p &gt; 0.1).

Effect of increasing concentrations of l-aspartate
[(●)
0, (▲) 2, (▽) 4, and (○) 8 mM] on the bicarbonate-dependent
MgATP cleavage reaction in the absence of acetyl-CoA and pyruvate.
The lines represent global fits of the data to eq . Reaction conditions were as described in .

Discussion
Previously, IC50 values for the
inhibition by l-aspartate for PC have been reported to be
in the range of 0.6–4
mM,,, while Dunn
et al. reported that 10 mM l-aspartate only marginally inhibited the enzyme from Sinorhizobium
meliloti. Thus, the Ki value
of 1.3 mM obtained for RePC in this study is at the lower end of the
range.

As with PC from S. cerevisiae,, increasing concentrations of l-aspartate resulted in an
increase in the apparent Ka for activation
of the enzyme by acetyl-CoA. However, unlike in the S. cerevisiae enzyme where increasing l-aspartate concentrations markedly
increased the Hill coefficient of cooperativity for the activation
by acetyl-CoA,,l-aspartate had little
effect on the cooperativity of acetyl-CoA activation in RePC. The
competitive nature of the inhibition of RePC by l-aspartate
with respect to acetyl-CoA activation was also noted in the fungal
PCs,− and the antagonistic nature of the inhibition with
respect to acetyl-CoA was noted but not analyzed for PC from the bacterial
enzyme Rhodobacter capsulatus. The cooperative nature of the binding of l-aspartate
to RePC has also been observed in the fungal PCs,, where Hill coefficients of 1.53 and 2.1 have been reported for the
enzymes from S. cerevisiae and A. nidulans, respectively. In a bacterial PC from Arthrobacter globiformus, a Hill coefficient of 2.0 was reported.
Thus, the value of the Hill coefficient of 2.8 reported here for RePC
inhibition by l-aspartate was somewhat higher than these
values, indicating increased cooperativity of binding. In RePC, the
value of the Hill coefficient for l-aspartate inhibition
is similar to that of acetyl-CoA activation, but in the case of PC
from S. cerevisiae, the
Hill coefficient for l-aspartate inhibition is greater than
that of acetyl-CoA binding; in A. globiformus, it is lower and acetyl-CoA does not activate A. nidulans PC in the absence of l-aspartate.

The inhibition of RePC in the absence
of acetyl-CoA in this work
has also been reported to occur in the fungal PCs,,, but there has been little investigation
of the mechanism of this inhibition. We have shown that l-aspartate affects reactions in the BC domain but not the CT domain
of RePC. It is clear that one mode of action is that of competitive
inhibition with respect to MgATP binding in the bicarbonate-dependent
MgATP cleavage reaction. However, this does not explain the inhibition
of the pyruvate carboxylation reaction of RePC that was performed
in the presence of close to saturating concentrations of MgATP. Because the effect of l-aspartate does
not lie in the CT domain, it is likely that this inhibition of pyruvate
carboxylation occurs in the BC domain. It has been reported that acetyl-CoA
enhances the coupling between the cleavage of MgATP (as measured by
Pi release) and the formation of carboxybiotin and oxaloacetate in RePC. However, l-aspartate does not appear to significantly
affect the coupling between MgATP cleavage and oxaloacetate formation.
This indicates that the inhibitory effect of l-aspartate
at saturating concentrations of MgATP may be an effect on the rate
of either carboxybiotin formation or the translocation of carboxybiotin
to the CT domain.

As with activation of PCs by acetyl-CoA, there
seems to be considerable
variation in the parameters that describe the inhibition of PCs by l-aspartate, even between bacterial species. Generally, however, l-aspartate inhibition appears to be competitive with respect
to acetyl-CoA and cooperative. The question of the mechanism of this
competitive inhibition by l-aspartate then arises. The simplest
model would be one in which l-aspartate and acetyl-CoA compete
for the same binding site on PC. There is, however, some evidence
to suggest that this is not the case. First, Libor et al. showed that modification of the thermophilic Bacillus PC with trinitrobenzenesulfonate specifically inhibited
acetyl-CoA-dependent enzyme activity but had no effect on the acetyl-CoA-independent
activity or its inhibition by l-aspartate. Moreover, the
presence of acetyl-CoA protected the enzyme against modification.
Second, Adina-Zada et al. showed that
mutation of key residues in the acetyl-CoA binding site that increased
the Ka between 76- and 252-fold had virtually
no effect on the inhibition of RePC by l-aspartate in the
absence of acetyl-CoA. Thus, it is probable that there is a distinct
binding site for l-aspartate that exerts its effects on acetyl-CoA
binding through allosteric effects. RePC has been crystallized in
the presence of l-aspartate, but because of the high B factors the binding site for the inhibitor could not be
located. Adina-Zada et al. showed that inhibition of RePC by MgTNP-ATP
was also competitive with respect to acetyl-CoA but that its binding
site was separate from that of the allosteric activator. Like l-aspartate, MgTNP-ATP was also shown to have allosteric effects
in the absence of acetyl-CoA, but MgTNP-ATP allosterically activated
the enzyme. In this work, we have shown that l-aspartate
also inhibits MgTNP-ATP activation of RePC. Thus, it is possible that
the binding site for l-aspartate is separate from both that
of acetyl-CoA and that of MgTNP-ATP but that there are allosteric
interactions among all three binding sites.

In summary, we have
shown that the inhibition of RePC by l-aspartate is multifaceted.
As with other microbial PCs, the inhibition
is competitive with respect to the allosteric activator, acetyl-CoA,
but there is a component of the inhibition that is independent of
acetyl-CoA. The locus of this part of the inhibition lies in the BC
domain and is comprised in part of competitive inhibition of MgATP
binding and biotin carboxylation and/or carboxybiotin translocation.
Because it is unlikely that the l-aspartate binding site
is in the MgATP binding site, the acetyl-CoA binding site, or the
MgTNP-ATP binding site, the effects of l-aspartate on acetyl-CoA
activation, MgTNP-ATP activation, and MgATP binding and the effects
on biotin carboxylation and/or carboxybiotin translocation are allosteric,
induced from a remote l-aspartate binding site. Further understanding
of the mechanism of action of l-aspartate must await a structural
resolution of its binding site.

This work was
supported by National Institutes of Health Grant GM070455 and the
Thailand Research Fund (BRG5480002) to S.J. C.S. was supported by
the RGJ-PhD scholarship (PHD/0308/2551) from the Thailand Research
Fund.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
acetyl-CoAacetyl-coenzyme A

PCpyruvate carboxylase

RePCRhizobium
etli pyruvate carboxylase

TNP-ATP2′,3′-O-(2,4,6-trinitrophenyl)adenosine
5′-triphosphate

BCbiotin carboxylase

CTcarboxyl transferase.

