The packaging and organization
of DNA into higher-order structures, termed chromatin, serves as a
mechanism for the regulation of DNA repair, replication, and gene
expression within the cell., The nucleosome represents
the basic packaging unit of the chromatin and consists of ∼147
bp of DNA wrapped around an octamer of positively charged proteins
called histones; two of each of the four core histones (H2A, H2B,
H3, and H4) interact to form a stable octamer., The
wrapped DNA contacts the histone octamer at 14 different sites spaced
approximately 10 bp apart, with each contact site harboring several
different types of noncovalent interactions between histone proteins
and DNA. For DNA to be accessible to gene
expression and DNA replication machinery, the chromatin must be dynamically
reorganized. One mechanism of regulating this reorganization of chromatin
structure involves the activity of a group of ATP-utilizing molecular
motor enzymes termed chromatin remodelers.− All chromatin
remodelers share a highly conserved ATPase domain and are further
categorized into four subfamilies (ISWI, SWI/SNF, CHD, and INO80)
based on additional domains that confer specific functional properties.,, Because of homology of sequence
and function, chromatin remodelers are classified as part of a large
family of proteins called the SNF2 family, which in turn is part of
helicase superfamily II (SF-II). Similar
to proteins belonging to the helicase families of proteins, remodelers
share the ability to translocate along free or nucleosomal DNA in
an ATP-dependent manner.− This ability to translocate along DNA has been shown
to be critical to their nucleosome repositioning activity.− Several models have been proposed for how these remodelers reposition
the histone octamer along the DNA, all of which rely on the general
ability of the remodeler to translocate along the nucleosomal DNA
causing at least partial distortion of histone–DNA interactions
leading to the movement of the octamer to a new position on the DNA
and re-establishment of DNA–histone contacts.

The 135
kDa ISWI (imitation switch) ATPase from Xenopus
laevis is a member of the ISWI subfamily of chromatin remodeling
enzymes with homologues identified in several species, including humans, Drosophila melanogaster, and Saccharomyces cerevisiae.− ISWI is the molecular motor that drives the activities of several
chromatin remodeling complexes. In Xenopus, for example,
ISWI interacts with other noncatalytic protein subunits to form three
additional chromatin remodeling complexes (ACF, CHRAC, and WICH). Interestingly, ISWI has been shown to have
basal nucleosome binding and repositioning activities independent
of its association with other complexes; however, the nucleosome repositioning
strategy of ISWI appears to change when it is in these different complexes,− from creating well-spaced arrays to completely random nucleosome
spacing. Additionally, the directional bias of histone repositioning,
either toward or away from thermodynamically favored positions on
the associated DNA, varies among these complexes.− Naturally, understanding the nucleosome repositioning activity of
the fundamental ISWI motor is essential to understanding how the activities
of these various chromatin remodeling complexes are differentiated
and thus how the function of ISWI is regulated by the other interacting
proteins in these complexes. The elucidation of these regulation mechanisms
will then allow for the determination of how these different complexes
are used by the cell to achieve different chromatin reorganization
outcomes in vivo.

Many experiments have been
conducted to understand the regulatory
mechanisms underlying the remodeling activity of ISWI and ISWI-containing
complexes. The results of recent studies have suggested that the rate
of nucleosome repositioning by SNF2h, the human ISWI homologue, is
dependent upon the length of flanking DNA on each side of the nucleosome
core and that the interaction of SNF2h with nucleosomes is allosterically
regulated by the binding of nucleotides.,, Taken together, these data form the basis
of the hypothesis that the coupling of the nucleotide regulation and
flanking DNA length sensing properties modulates the repositioning
activity and directionality of this remodeler. However, in the preceding paper (), we show that nucleosome binding by ISWI
is not regulated by nucleotide binding. These results suggest that
ISWI is stably anchored to the nucleosome core with high affinity
and that the allosteric regulation by nucleotides may not play the
dominating role in modulating the nucleosome repositioning activity
of ISWI. Consistent with this conclusion are the results of two recent
reports re-evaluating the proposed role of the C-terminal DNA binding
domains of ISWI and the related chromatin remodeler Chd1 in the nucleosome
repositioning activities of these enzymes., In contrast to the widely accepted view, the results of these studies
demonstrated that the ATPase domains of these two related chromatin
remodelers are both sufficient to reposition nucleosomes. Therefore,
neither energy transduction nor conformational changes between the
ATPase and the DNA binding domains of these enzymes are directly required
for their nucleosome repositioning activity. Instead, the DNA binding
domain might affect the affinity of DNA binding and consequently the
directionality and efficiency and/or processivity of nucleosome repositioning.
Thus, these data demonstrate that several questions still persist
regarding the mechanism of nucleosome repositioning by ISWI.

Here we report the characterization of the ability of ISWI to reposition
various nucleosomal substrates using both a gel-based assay and a
new, fluorescence anisotropy-based assay to monitor repositioning.
We found that nucleosome repositioning by ISWI generated a distinct
distribution of histone octamer translational positions. Furthermore,
analysis of time courses of ISWI repositioning nucleosome substrates
with limited lengths of DNA, and hence limited translational positions,
was consistent with ISWI remodeling the nucleosomes through a random
walk mechanism. Our characterization of nucleosome binding in the
preceding paper () was
utilized in additional analysis of repositioning time courses observed
with nucleosomes containing shorter lengths of flanking DNA. This
analysis revealed that even though two ISWI can bind to a nucleosome,
the presence of a second ISWI monomer bound to the nucleosome did
not affect the rate at which the nucleosome was repositioned, suggesting
that a monomeric ISWI is sufficient to obtain the observed repositioning
activity.

Experimental Procedures
Recombinant ISWI Expression and Purification
The pPIC3.5-CBP-Xpress-zz
expression construct encoding Xenopus laevis ISWI
was used to express and purify the recombinant protein from the GS115
strain of Pichia pastoris as described in the preceding
paper ().

Nucleosome
Reconstitution Reactions
pET28 plasmids
containing untagged yeast H2A, H2B, H3, and H4 were used to express
and purify the histone proteins as described previously., DNA fragments containing the 148 bp 601 high-affinity nucleosome
positioning sequence and an additional
length of flanking DNA were amplified using large scale polymerase
chain reaction followed by purification of the amplified fragment.
Either nonlabeled primers or Alexa488 end-labeled primers (IDT) were
used to reconstitute the mononucleosome substrates with the desired
fluorophore label and flanking DNA length using salt gradient dialysis
as described previously., Reconstituted mononucleosomes
were evaluated using a 5% native polyacrylamide–bisacrylamide
gel (60:1) run at 100 V in 0.25× Tris-Borate-EDTA (TBE) buffer
followed by staining using SYBR gold or exposed for fluorescence imaging
using a Typhoon imager (GE Healthcare).

ISWI ATPase Activity Assay
Nucleosome substrates were
incubated with ISWI (see tables and figure legends for specific concentrations)
in reaction buffer [10 mM HEPES (pH 7.0), 20 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 4% glycerol, 0.1 mg/mL BSA, and 0.5 mM DTT] at 25 °C.
The reactions were initiated by addition of 1 mM cold ATP containing
7.5 μCi of [α-32P]ATP. Aliquots were withdrawn
at specific time points and mixed with an equal volume of 0.5 M EDTA
to stop the reaction. To separate ADP from ATP species, reaction mixtures
were analyzed using thin liquid chromatography PEI-cellulose plates
(EMD chemicals) in 0.6 M potassium phosphate (pH 3.4) buffer and quantified
using a Typhoon Phosphor imager. The ATPase rate for each nucleosome
substrate was determined from a linear fit of the data.

Gel-Based Repositioning
Assays
ISWI (10 nM) was incubated
with 50 nM nucleosome substrates in reaction buffer [10 mM HEPES (pH
7.0), 20 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 4% glycerol, 0.1 mg/mL BSA,
and 0.5 mM DTT] at 25 °C. Repositioning reactions were initiated
by the addition of 1 mM ATP and allowed to proceed for specific time
points before being stopped by the addition of a quenching solution
containing EDTA and competitor plasmid DNA. The reaction mixtures
were then analyzed using a 5% native polyacrylamide–bisacrylamide
gel (60:1) run at 100 V in 0.25× TBE buffer followed by staining
using SYBR gold and visualized using a Typhoon imager (GE Healthcare).

Anisotropy-Based Repositioning Assays
Varying ISWI
concentrations ranging from 5 to 20 nM (specific concentrations listed
in figure legends) were incubated with 10 nM Alexa488-labeled nucleosome
substrates in reaction buffer [10 mM HEPES (pH 7.0), 20 mM KCl, 10
mM MgCl2, 4% glycerol, 0.1 mg/mL BSA, and 0.5 mM DTT] at
25 °C. Reactions were initiated by the addition of 1 mM ATP,
and the movement of the octamer was detected by monitoring changes
in the fluorescence anisotropy of the fluorophore using a Syergy2
fluorescence spectrophotometer (BioTek) set at 485 nm excitation and
monitoring emission at 520 nm.

Data Analysis
The simplest model consistent with our
three-state random walk model for the ISWI-catalyzed repositioning
of an 18N18 nucleosome is shown in Scheme . In Scheme , Ri denotes the population of nucleosomes bound with ISWI with histone
octamers in the ith translational position; i = 0 denotes the central position, defined by the NPS,
and i = ±1 denotes positions one translational
step from the central position. NRi denotes
the population of nucleosomes with histone octamers in the ith translational position, but without ISWI bound. The
rate constant for the dissociation of ISWI from nucleosomes is denoted
by kd, and the rate constant for ISWI
binding nucleosomes is denoted by kb.
The macroscopic rate constant for octamer movement between translational
positions is denoted by kr. As shown in
the , the equation for the time dependence
of the population of octamers at the i = ±1
positions is given by eq .The variable K in eq  denotes
the fraction of ISWI bound initially at
R0. Similarly, for repositioning of 24N24 nucleosomes in
which there are two positions for the histone octamer on either side
of the central position, defined by the NPS, the equation for the
time dependence of the population of octamers at the i = ±2 positions is given by eq .All
ATPase time courses were simultaneously
globally analyzed using eq .where kATP,PN and kATP,P2N are the steady state rates
of ATP hydrolysis for the PN and P2N states, respectively.
The PN and P2N states denote nucleosomes with one or two
ISWI monomers bound, respectively.

Analysis of repositioning
time courses using eqs  and  and ATPase time courses using eq  was
performed using Conlin. Unless otherwise
noted, all traces presented in the figures have been normalized to
the final asymptotic value of the anisotropy change as determined
from this analysis. Finally, unless otherwise noted, all uncertainties
represent 68% confidence intervals (±1 standard deviation) as
determined by Monte Carlo analysis.

Results
ISWI Distributes
the Nucleosomes into Distinct Translational
Positions
We began our characterization of the nucleosome
repositioning activity of ISWI using central or asymmetric nucleosome
substrates reconstituted with the 601 high-affinity positioning sequence,− in a native gel electrophoresis assay. In this assay, the length
of DNA flanking either side of the histone octamer or, equivalently,
the position of the octamer on the DNA affects the mobility of the
nucleosome on the gel, with centrally positioned nucleosomes displaying
the slowest gel mobility.,, The ISWI-catalyzed repositioning of three nucleosomes with symmetric
lengths of flanking DNA (51, 71, and 91 bp) extending on both sides
of the nucleosome core (N) is shown in Figure . As shown in Figure , we found that ISWI
changed the distribution of octamer locations on the DNA from initially
being primarily centered on the DNA to being spread over a series
of translational positions. Furthermore, the number of apparent translational
positions was dependent on the total length of the flanking DNA. From
a linear analysis of the number of apparent translational positions
as a function of the length of the flanking DNA, we determined that
a new position was associated with each ∼12 bp of additional
flanking DNA (data not shown). Similarly, ISWI was able to reposition
asymmetrical nucleosome substrates away from their original position
into a similar distribution of distinct translational positions (Figure
1A of the ). Additionally,
repositioning reactions with different asymmetrical substrates demonstrated
the ability of ISWI to move the octamer in both directions along the
DNA (Figure 1A,B of the ).

Native gel-based repositioning of various nucleosome substrates
by ISWI. (A) Repositioning of 51N51, 71N71, and 91N91 nucleosomes
(50 nM) by ISWI (25 nM). ISWI and nucleosomes were incubated together
at 25 °C, and repositioning reactions were initiated by addition
of 1 mM ATP. Reactions were stopped at the indicated time points by
the addition of stopping buffer and resolved using a 5% TBE–acrylamide
native gel. The first lane in each gel (C) shows a control reaction
without ISWI that was allowed to proceed for 120 min before being
stopped. Gels were stained for DNA and imaged as indicated in . (B) Analysis of changes
in translational positions over time for the 91N91 nucleosome substrate.

The ATPase activity of ISWI was
linear over the entire repositioning
reaction time (Figure 2 of the ). Altering the repositioning assay conditions by increasing the
concentration of ISWI or the continuous titration of additional ISWI
and ATP into the reactions also did not affect the final distribution
of octamer positions (data not shown). Thus, this distribution appears
to be a stable dynamic equilibrium of the possible translational positions
for the histone octamer on the DNA.

ISWI Remodels the Nucleosomes
through a Random Walk
The final dynamic equilibrium of histone
octamer positions on the
DNA is consistent with ISWI moving the octamers between these defined
positions through a random walk mechanism. Specifically, the processivity with which ISWI moves the octamers
is so low that the location of an octamer is shifted, on average,
only to the nearest translational position before ISWI dissociation.
In subsequent ISWI binding, there is no “memory” of
the previous direction of translocation, so there is equal probability
of the octamer moving in either direction. To simplify the determination of the microscopic rate constants
associated with this mechanism, we sought to analyze the ISWI-catalyzed
repositioning of nucleosome substrates with only one or two possible
translational positions for the histone octamer on the flanking DNA.

We also developed a new assay for monitoring nucleosome repositioning
in which the effect of histone octamer position on the motion of the
flanking DNA is measured. In this assay, the movement of the histone
octamer toward the end of the DNA constricts the motion of the DNA
and thus increases the anisotropy of a fluorophore attached there,
similar to how the movement of the counterweight along the pendulum
of a metronome changes the frequency of the metronome’s oscillation.

Initially we characterized the repositioning activity of ISWI using
a double-fluorophore-labeled F18N18F substrate. The addition of ISWI
and ATP causes an increase in anisotropy as a function of time, while
the addition of ISWI only or ATP only had no effect on the anisotropy
(Figure ). Furthermore, no effect on the anisotropy
was observed when using ADP or slowly hydrolyzable ATP analogues (Figure
3A of the ). This
suggests that these changes in anisotropy require the presence of
ISWI and both the binding and hydrolysis of ATP. These results are
therefore consistent with the change in anisotropy being associated
with the movement of the histone octamer. Additionally, changes in
anisotropy are not observed when a 181 bp fluorophore-labeled DNA,
comparable in length to the DNA used to reconstitute the F18N18F nucleosomes,
was used as the substrate in the reaction (Figure 3B of the ). This is also consistent
with movement of the octamer by ISWI being responsible for the observed
time-dependent changes in anisotropy, rather than the binding or movement
of ISWI. It is worth mentioning that this assay allows us to monitor
changes in the total population of nucleosomes as a function of time
and that the change in anisotropy we observe is an average of all
species present in solution.

Fluorescence anisotropy-based repositioning
of F18N18F by ISWI.
Measurements of changes in anisotropy (Δr)
of 10 nM fluorophore-labeled F18N18F nucleosome incubated with 10
nM ISWI and 1 mM ATP (●), without ISWI (■), or without
ATP (▲).

Using this molecular
metronome assay, we then monitored the repositioning
of nucleosome substrates with 18 or 24 bp of flanking DNA; these lengths
of flanking DNA were chosen such that these substrates would be expected
to have one or two, respectively, translational positions for the
histone octamer on the flanking DNA. Results of experiments conducted
with 10 nM ISWI and 10 nM nucleosomes are shown in Figure . As demonstrated in Figure , the apparent rate of repositioning of F24N24F nucleosomes is slower
than the rate of repositioning of F18N18F nucleosomes; these rates
are 0.012 ± 0.003 and 0.031 ± 0.003 min–1, respectively, as determined from a single-exponential fit of the
time courses. This change in repositioning rate is not a function
of differences in the stoichiometry or affinity with which ISWI binds
these substrates as these are identical for these nucleosomes as demonstrated
in the preceding paper (). Rather, it is likely a simple consequence of the F24N24F substrate
having more translational positions for the histone octamer than the
F18N18F substrate. This is consistent with our native gel-based repositioning
experiments using long nonlabeled nucleosome substrates demonstrating
that the rate of repositioning for 51N51 is faster than that of 71N71
and 91N91 (Figure A).

Fluorescence anisotropy-based
repositioning of F18N18F and F24N24F.
Measurements of changes in anisotropy (Δr)
of 10 nM fluorophore-labeled F18N18F (●) or 24N24 (■)
nucleosomes incubated with 10 nM ISWI and 1 mM ATP. The solid lines
represent single-exponential fits of the data.

To test this hypothesis further, we monitored the ISWI-catalyzed
repositioning of F18N18F and F24N24F nucleosomes at several different
concentrations of ISWI and subsequently analyzed the individual time
courses for each nucleosome substrate separately to determine the
number of octamer translational positions for each nucleosome substrate
(see ). The results
of this analysis (Tables 1 and 2 of the ) demonstrate that the best fit of the time courses
is associated with F18N18F nucleosomes having one translational position
on the flanking DNA and F24N24F nucleosomes having two. This is consistent
with our previous estimate of ∼12 bp being required for each
translational position.

We next performed global analysis of
the repositioning time courses,
which includes both nucleosome substrates, F18N18F and F24N24F, together
at each ISWI concentration. In this analysis, we assumed that the
apparent rate of repositioning was constant for both substrates but
that the number of translational positions was different for each
substrate. In our analysis, we used the fact that the affinity and
stoichiometry of ISWI–nucleosome binding are not affected by
nucleotides as shown in the preceding paper () ( for analysis).
This analysis provided a good description of the data, as judged by
the variance of the fits and visually, and furthermore demonstrated
that the apparent rate of repositioning increased with an increase
in ISWI concentration (Figure  and Table ).

Fluorescence anisotropy-based repositioning of F18N18F
and F24N24F
in the presence of various ISWI concentrations. Measurements of changes
in anisotropy (Δr) of 10 nM F18N18F (●)
or F24N24F (■) incubated with (A) 5, (B) 10, (C) 15, or (D)
20 nM ISWI. The reaction was started by the addition of 1 mM ATP.
Isotherms were analyzed as described in . The solid lines represent fits of the data.

Results of Global
Analysis for F18N18F
and F24N24F Together at Each ISWI Concentration According to eq  for F18N18F and eq  for F24N24F
[ISWI] (nM)	kr (min–1)	variance of fit	
5	5.65 × 10–3	3.63 × 10–6	
10	1.78 × 10–2	2.55 × 10–6	
15	2.31 × 10–2	2.17 × 10–6	
20	4.87 × 10–2	2.27 × 10–6	
The Binding of a Second
ISWI Does Not Affect the Rate of Nucleosome
Repositioning
In the preceding paper (), we characterized the equilibrium binding
of ISWI to nucleosomes and demonstrated that two ISWI can bind to
nucleosome substrates with limited lengths of flanking DNA (5–24
bp). Using the determined stoichiometric binding constants, we are
able to determine the fraction of nucleosomes bound with a single
ISWI and the fraction bound with two ISWIs (Table 3 of the ); we denote these species
as PN and P2N, respectively. We then performed additional
global analysis, including all of our nucleosome repositioning time
courses together with these species fractions as additional constraints,
to determine the repositioning activity of each species (Figure 4
of the ). The result
of this analysis is summarized in Table ;
the best fit of the data is associated with a model in which both
species have the same repositioning rate. Thus, the presence of a
second ISWI monomer bound did not affect the rate at which the nucleosome
was repositioned, suggesting that a monomeric ISWI is sufficient to
obtain the observed repositioning activity. The efficacy of eqs  and  () in characterizing nucleosome repositioning was
further verified by conducting a series of Monte Carlo simulations
of nucleosome repositioning and analyzing them using eqs  and  ().

Results of Simultaneous Global Analysis
for All F18N18F and F24N24F Repositioning Time Courses at Different
Nucleosome Binding Affinities Using eqs  and  for the F18N18F and F24N24F Substrates, Respectively
affinities	species	kr (min–1)	variance of fit	
1/β1 = 1.26 nM, 1/β2 = 13.92 nM2	PN	0.030 ± 0.002	3.34 × 10–6	
P2N	0.13 ± 0.01	3.37 × 10–6	
PN + P2N	0.0247 ± 0.0018	2.96 × 10–6	
1/β1 = 1.04 nM, 1/β2 = 11.94 nM2	PN	0.029 ± 0.002	3.34 × 10–6	
P2N	0.137 ± 0.011	3.48 × 10–6	
PN + P2N	0.0240 ± 0.0018	2.97 × 10–6	
1/β1 = 1.62 nM, 1/β2 = 20.32 nM2	PN	0.032 ± 0.002	3.30 × 10–6	
P2N	0.138 ± 0.011	3.30 × 10–6	
PN + P2N	0.0256 ± 0.0019	2.96 × 10–6	
Affinities were determined using
the stoichiometric binding constants reported in the preceding paper
() and varied on the
basis of uncertainties determined therein. P denotes ISWI, N nucleosomes,
PN a nucleosome with one ISWI bound, P2N a nucleosome with
two ISWIs bound, and PN + P2N total nucleosomes bound.
As shown from the variances of the fits, the PN + P2N species
model is the best.

ATP Hydrolysis
Is Weakly Coupled to Octamer Movement
Our observation that
the PN and P2N species have identical
repositioning rates prompted us to question the role played by the
second bound ISWI in the repositioning reaction. We sought to answer
this question by determining the ATPase activity associated with each
species of bound ISWI during repositioning. We began by measuring
the ATPase activity of ISWI at four different ISWI concentrations
(50, 250, 500, and 800 nM) in the presence of 250 nM nucleosomes (10N5,
18N18, and 24N24). Although the observed ATPase rate was dependent
upon the concentration of ISWI, as expected, there was no significant
difference in the ATPase rates among the three nucleosome substrates
at each ISWI concentration. Using the determined stoichiometric binding
constants (), we determined
the fraction of PN, P2N, and P species present in each
of these ATPase reaction mixtures. We then used these species fractions
to determine the ATPase rate associated with each species (Table ). As shown in Table , the
ATPase activity of the P2N species is equal to that of
the PN species within the uncertainty of the analysis.

Determination of Nucleosome-Stimulated
ATP Hydrolysis Rates Associated with Different ISWI–Nucleosome
Species (analysis performed using eq )
affinities	species	kATP (no. of ADPs/min)	average kATP (no.
of ADPs/min)	coupling efficiency (no.
of ADPs/step)	coupling efficiency (no.
of ADPs/bp)	
1/β1 = 1.26 nM, 1/β2 = 13.92 nM2	PN	17 ± 5	22 ± 2	890 ± 110	74 ± 9	
 	P2N	23 ± 3	 	 	 	
Using the rate of repositioning determined from our
global analysis
of repositioning time courses measured at different ISWI concentrations,
0.0247 ± 0.0018 min–1, we can calculate from
Table  the efficiency at which ISWI couples
ATP hydrolysis to octamer movement. From this calculation, we determined
that 890 ± 110 ATPs are hydrolyzed for each translational step
of the octamer by ISWI.

Discussion
The mechanism of nucleosome
repositioning by chromatin remodelers
remains incompletely understood. Elucidating how ISWI repositions
nucleosomes requires knowledge of the stoichiometry, the affinity,
and the fraction of ISWI bound to the nucleosomes during the repositioning
reaction. In the preceding paper (), we determined these parameters and demonstrated that two ISWIs
are bound at equilibrium with high affinity to nucleosome substrates
with short lengths of flanking DNA and that the binding of ISWI to
these substrates is not affected by nucleotides or the length of flanking
DNA. These results, together with our determination of the equilibrium
constants for nucleosome binding, allow us to predict the fraction
of ISWI bound to the nucleosomes during repositioning at various ISWI
concentrations.

Using native gel-based repositioning assays,
we observed that the
chromatin remodeler ISWI is able to move histone octamers away from
their initial location at the high-affinity positioning sequence and
generate a distribution of octamer positions when repositioning both
central and asymmetrical nucleosome substrates with long lengths of
extranucleosomal DNA (51, 71, and 91 bp). These findings are consistent
with previous studies that demonstrated the ability of ISWI to generate
a distribution of remodeled nucleosome products., Furthermore, movement of the octamer in both directions along the
DNA was evident by the ability of ISWI to reposition a variety of
asymmetrical nucleosome substrates with different initial octamer
positions. Interestingly, from a linear analysis of the number of
apparent translational positions as a function of the length of the
flanking DNA, we determined that a new position was observed for each
∼12 bp of additional flanking DNA; this spacing is consistent
with the periodicity of histone–DNA contacts within the high-affinity
positioning sequence (∼10 bp,). The observed
distribution of translational positions may therefore be influenced
by both the inherent step size of the enzyme ISWI and the underlying
DNA–nucleosome interactions and could very well be much larger
than the individual movements of ISWI along the DNA and/or the size
of potential DNA loops and/or bulges associated with repositioning.
Indeed, the possibility exists that other intermediate species are
created by ISWI during repositioning, but we are unable to detect
these species because they are unstable and collapse into positions
that are more thermodynamically favorable following ISWI dissociation.

The distribution of histone octamers into
a dynamic equilibrium
of translational positions on the DNA is consistent with ISWI moving
the octamers between these defined positions through a random walk
mechanism (see Figure 5 of the  for a model). To confirm this and more readily analyze this remodeling
behavior, we sought to study the repositioning activity of ISWI by
means of a new, anisotropy-based, repositioning assay using nucleosome
substrates with short lengths of flanking DNA. Specifically, we designed
centrally positioned nucleosomes with lengths of flanking DNA predicted
by our native gel analysis to be short enough to accommodate only
one or two octamer translational positions. Subsequent analysis of
repositioning time courses for fluorophore-labeled F18N18F or F24N24F
nucleosome substrates using a random walk model demonstrated that
the best fit is associated with F18N18F nucleosomes having one translational
position on the flanking DNA (one on each side of the nucleosome positioning
sequence) and F24N24F nucleosomes having two translational positions
on the flanking DNA (two on each side of the nucleosome positioning
sequence); these results are consistent with our estimate of ∼12
bp being required for each observed translational position. We also
globally analyzed the repositioning time courses for F18N18F and 24N24F
together at several ISWI concentrations and found that the rate of
repositioning increased with an increase in ISWI concentration as
expected.

In the preceding paper (), we demonstrated that two ISWIs can bind to a nucleosome substrate
with short flanking DNA. Previous studies demonstrated that two SNF2h
monomers can bind to a nucleosome and that the repositioning activity
of this SNF2h dimer is regulated by the effect of nucleotide binding
on nucleosome binding affinity together with the flanking DNA length
sensing capability of the remodeler. However, the nucleosome binding
affinity of ISWI is not affected by nucleotide binding or the length
of the flanking DNA as demonstrated in the preceding paper (). To explore the role of
the two ISWIs in the observed nucleosome repositioning activity, we
used the determined stoichiometric binding constants to quantify the
fraction of nucleosomes bound with a single ISWI and the fraction
bound with two ISWIs. These values were used as additional constraints
in a global analysis of all repositioning time courses where we found
that the presence of a second ISWI monomer bound did not affect the
rate at which the nucleosome was repositioned, suggesting that a monomer
is sufficient for the observed repositioning activity. These findings
are consistent with in vivo estimates of ISWI concentration
suggesting that it is predominantly present as a monomer. While it is not immediately clear what determines
which monomer is responsible for the repositioning activity, it is
possible that the binding of one ISWI monomer causes a conformational
change in nucleosome structure or affects the binding of the second
monomer, rendering only one of the monomers active for repositioning.
The binding orientation of the active monomer may in turn determine
the direction of the octamer movement (as discussed below). Further
mutagenesis and structural studies will be required to resolve these
questions.

We determined the efficiency at which ISWI couples
ATP hydrolysis
to octamer movement. Consistent with what has been observed previously,
we found that ATP binding and hydrolysis are poorly coupled to octamer
movement, specifically that this movement requires the consumption
of hundreds of ATP molecules. If we assume
a size of ∼12 bp for each translational movement of the octamer,
then moving the octamer 1 bp requires the hydrolysis of 74 ±
9 ATPs. As the ATP coupling efficiency for DNA translocation by other
DNA translocases, including chromatin remodelers, is between 0.5 ATP/bp
and 3 ATPs/bp,− our result argues against the possibility that DNA
translocation by ISWI is energetically rate-limiting for the repositioning
reaction. Therefore, we believe that the poor coupling efficiency
of ATP hydrolysis to octamer movement results either from significant
hydrolysis being associated with futile repositioning or from a significant
ATP consumption requirement associated with the initiation of repositioning.
It is worth noting that the former might be an indication of several
abortive attempts to move the octamer occurring prior to each successful
repositioning event. A low probability of successful repositioning
associated with ISWI binding is consistent with the poor template
commitment previously reported for SNF2h. Additionally, we found that the rate of ATP hydrolysis of the PN
species is the same as the rate of the P2N species; this
is consistent with our global analysis of repositioning data suggesting
that a monomer is responsible for the observed nucleosome repositioning
activity.

As demonstrated in the preceding paper (), the presence of two ISWI binding
sites on the nucleosome as evident
in the ability of two ISWIs to bind to a nucleosome substrate with
a very short length of extranucleosomal DNA. The random walk movement
of the octamer back and forth among various translational positions
requires a continuous change in the directionality of octamer movement
along the DNA. Because the directionality of octamer movement is likely
determined by the orientation with which ISWI is bound to the nucleosome,
i.e., perhaps each binding site is associated with one direction of
translocation. Such changes in the directionality of octamer movement
can then potentially be achieved randomly through the dissociation
and rebinding of ISWI to the nucleosome in a different orientation
and in a manner independent of the previous binding. According to
this model, the presence of a distribution of remodeled species then
suggests that the rate at which ISWI dissociates from the nucleosomes
is much faster than the rate at which it moves the octamer between
translational positions. This conclusion is consistent with previous
competition experiments demonstrating that SNF2h dissociates from
the nucleosomes at a rate faster than the rate of repositioning taking
place and is therefore not rate-limiting with respect to the repositioning
process.

In recent single-molecule
studies of nucleosome repositioning by
the ISW2 complex, it was reported that changes in the direction of
nucleosome movement could occur after translocation of at least ∼7
bp of DNA by ISW2. Interestingly, the fraction of nucleosomes undergoing
these changes in directionality increased significantly (from 6 to
54%) in repositioning experiments with an ISW2 complex containing
mutations that compromised the interaction of the C-terminal DNA binding
SLIDE domain with extranucleosomal DNA. While these mutations were
shown not to affect the affinity of ISW2 for nucleosomes or the interaction
of its ATPase domain with the nucleosomes, DNA fingerprinting showed
that the interactions of this ISW2 mutant with flanking DNA were altered
and that the repositioning activity was significantly affected., The fact that nucleotide binding has an effect on ISWI–free
DNA interaction but no effect on the affinity of ISWI for nucleosomes
[see the preceding paper ()] may suggest a role for the ATPase cycle in regulating the interactions
with flanking DNA and hence the repositioning activity of ISWI. Similar
to the effects of compromising mutations in the SLIDE domain of ISW2
on repositioning efficiency and directionality of nucleosome translocation,
the ATP binding and hydrolysis cycle of ISWI may contribute to the
random walk behavior that we observe. Interestingly, recent studies
revealed that the ATPase domain of Drosophila ISWI
and Chd1 serves as the basic motor that is sufficient for the repositioning
activity of these remodelers and that the C-terminal DNA interacting
domain may serve more of a regulatory role in the nucleosome repositioning
process such as determining the directionality, binding specificity,
and processivity of the repositioning process.,

The ability of the catalytic subunit ISWI to reposition nucleosomes
in a random walk fashion might be modified and regulated by other
binding subunits as part of larger complexes. Indeed, the final outcome
of repositioning activity and remodeled products is different between
free ISWI and ISWI as part of a complex, and the repositioning outcome
was shown to greatly vary among different ISWI-containing complexes.− Future studies elucidating the mechanism by which these subunits
regulate the repositioning activity of ISWI would be of great interest.

Appendix
We begin by considering a model
in which there are three possible
locations for the histone octamer on the DNA; this model is depicted
in Scheme . In this model, these locations
(Ri) relative to the central position
are denoted by a subscript. Thus, R0 denotes a nucleosome
at the central position, and R±1 denotes a nucleosome
that is one translational position from the central position. Because
the affinity of DNA binding by the histone octamer is likely strongest
at the central position, we will assume different rate constants for
the movement of the octamer away and toward this location. We define k1 as the rate constant for the movement away
from R0 and k2 as the rate
constant for the movement toward R0. Note that because
there are two pathways for repositioning from R0 the rate
constant for each pathway is denoted as k1/2 in Scheme .

The differential equations
associated with this scheme areIf we assume that a fraction f of the octamers is initially at R0 and (1 – f)/2 at R+1 and R–1, then the
solution of these differential equations isThus, the apparent rate constant for the approach
to the steady state equilibrium isAs
expected, it is not possible to determine
values for k1 and k2 from the rate at which the system approaches its steady state.

The repositioning reaction is coupled to the hydrolysis of ATP.
If we assume that each movement of a histone octamer is associated
with c ATP molecules being hydrolyzed (and thus c ADP molecules being formed), the equation for the rate
of change of the concentration of ADP isThe solution to this equation is given in
eq .According to eq , the time course of ADP production will consist
of a burst phase, with associated rate constant kobs, followed by a steady state phase. The magnitude of
the burst phase is directly proportional to the difference between k1 and k2. If the
rates of repositioning are the same regardless of octamer position
(i.e., if k1 = k2 = k), then eq  simplifies
to eq .

Scheme  can be modified to include the
binding and dissociation of ISWI from the nucleosome as shown in Scheme . In this scheme, the
histone octamer can exist in two states, R and NR. In the R state,
the octamer is bound by ISWI and thus is capable of being repositioned.
In the NR state, the octamer is not bound by ISWI and thus cannot
be repositioned. The rate constant for the dissociation of ISWI from
the nucleosome is kd, and the rate constant
for binding of ISWI to the nucleosome is kb; in this representation, kb is a composite
rate constant that includes contributions from the concentration of
ISWI present in the solution. As previously demonstrated, it is not
possible to determine independent estimates of the microscopic rate
constants for repositioning (k1 and k2 in Scheme ), so we
will assume that they are equal (denoted kr in Scheme ). The differential equations
associated with Scheme  areFor the
sake of simplicity, we will assume
that all of the protein is bound initially at either R0 or NR0 and we will use the variable K to denote the fraction of the protein bound initially at R0; 1 – K is thus the fraction initially bound
at NR0. Because the presence of nucleotide does not affect
the affinity of ISWI for nucleosomes, these fractions will remain constant throughout the repositioning
reaction. ThusThe solutions to eqs – are too cumbersome to reproduce
here but can be simplified if we assume that the rate of dissociation
of ISWI from the nucleosome is faster than the rate of repositioning
(i.e., kd ≫ kr). This assumption is consistent with the poor substrate commitment
demonstrated by ISWI-containing chromatin remodelers for nucleosome
repositioning. With this assumption, we haveThe total population of octamers at the i = ±1
positions is given by eq .Thus, the repositioning reaction approaches
its steady state solution with an apparent rate constant ofThe rate of ADP production associated with
repositioning isAs expected, the rate of ADP production
is
linearly dependent upon the fraction of bound nucleosomes. Similarly,
if there were two octamer positions available on each side of the
central position, thenThe total population of octamers at the i = ±2 positions is given by eq .The repositioning reaction is now biphasic
withHowever, the rate of ADP production is still
given by eq .

Monte Carlo Simulations
Nucleosome repositioning time
courses were simulated using a Monte Carlo program written in C++.
In these simulations, the motion of an ISWI-bound histone octamer
along the DNA was determined according to the probabilities that were
assigned to forward motion of the octamer and dissociation of ISWI
from the octamer. The corresponding kinetic rates for Scheme  associated with these probabilities are listed
in Table  and Table  for each simulated data set. The direction of octamer movement remained
constant as long as ISWI was bound. When ISWI bound to an unbound
nucleosome, the direction of repositioning was assigned randomly.
The probability of ISWI binding to an unbound octamer was varied to
alter the fraction of bound ISWI. For all simulations, all octamers
were initially centrally located on their DNA substrate and the direction
of repositioning for each initially bound octamer was assigned randomly.

Two time courses were generated for each set of simulation parameters:
one in which there was one additional translational position for the
octamer on each side of the initial central position (corresponding
to the 18N18 substrate) and one in which there were two additional
translational positions for the octamer on each side of the initial
central position (corresponding to the 24N24 substrate).

Data Analysis
of Monte Carlo Simulations
All repositioning
time courses were globally analyzed using eqs  and  as described in . This is the same procedure that was implemented
for the analysis of experimental time courses. No additional experimental
noise was added to these time courses, so the uncertainties associated
with the parameter estimates obtained from this analysis are artificially
smaller than they would be for the analysis of experimental data.

Results of Monte Carlo Simulations
In the first set
of simulations, repositioning time courses at a single fraction of
bound ISWI were generated and analyzed. Each set of data consists
of two time courses: one for the 18N18 substrate and one for the 24N24
substrate. For all sets of data analysis, eqs  and  provided a good description of the data
as judged by the variance of the fit and visually, demonstrating the
general applicability of these equations for describing a variety
of repositioning reactions. However, as shown in Table , the estimate of kr was typically
an underestimate, often significantly so.

Results
of Global Analysis of Simulated
Repositioning Time Courses Using eqs  and 
 	input
parameters	fit
parameter	
data set	kr (min–1)	kd (min–1)	P	kr (min–1)	
1	1	2	0.33	0.882 ± 0.002	
2	1	5	0.17	0.827 ± 0.003	
3	1	10	0.09	0.762 ± 0.002	
4	2	1	0.67	1.531 ± 0.004	
5	5	1	0.83	3.77 ± 0.02	
6	10	1	0.91	7.33 ± 0.05	
The parameter P is the processivity
of the repositioning reaction defined as kr/(kr + kd).

To further investigate
the efficacy of our approach in analyzing
repositioning time courses, we conducted an additional set of simulations
in which we generated different fractions of bound ISWI by varying
the probability of binding in the simulation. For each data set, we
generated time courses for two different nucleosome substrates (18N18
and 24N24) at four different fractions of bound ISWI. This more accurately
mimics the conditions under which we analyzed our experimental data.
For three of the four sets of data analysis, eqs  and  provided a good description of the data
as judged by the variance of the fit and visually. Furthermore, as
shown in Table , with one exception, the
estimates of kr were within 10% of the
simulated value. For the one outlier data set, the quality of the
fits was poor, as judged by the variance of the fit and visually,
which we believe results from the presence of long-lived intermediate
species in these time courses that cannot be described by eqs  and .

Results of Global Analysis of Simulated
Repositioning Time Courses Using eqs  and 
 	input
parameters	fit
parameter	
data set	kr (min–1)	kd (min–1)	P	kr (min–1)	
1	1	0	1	0.912 ± 0.002	
2	1	4	0.25	1.000 ± 0.003	
3	1	10	0.09	0.935 ± 0.003	
4	2	1	0.67	2.5 ± 0.02	
The parameter P is the processivity
of the repositioning reaction defined as kr/(kr + kd).

Taken together, we believe
that these simulations not only demonstrate
the efficacy of our analysis method for determining the rate constant
for repositioning but also show that the generality of this approach
extends beyond the restrictive assumptions used in its derivation.

Supporting Information Available
Native
gel-based repositioning
of asymmetrical nucleosome substrates 51N5 and 10N71 (Figure 1), nucleosome-stimulated
ATPase activity of ISWI (Figure 2), requirement of octamer and ATP
for the observed changes in the fluorescence anisotropy-based assay
(Figure 3), results of global analysis of measurements of changes
in anisotropy (Figure 4), model of nucleosome repositioning by ISWI
(Figure 5), results of analysis of F18N18F nucleosomes using eqs  and  (Table 1), results of
analysis of F24N24F nucleosomes using eqs  and  (Table 2), and determination of the fraction of
nucleosomes bound with one or two ISWIs at various ISWI concentrations
using species fractions as constraints (Table 3). This material is
available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500226b_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Mark Richter, Dr. John Karanicolas,
Dr. Philip
Gao, and Dr. Alexander Moise (University of Kansas) for the generous
donation of equipment and reagents. We are grateful to Dr. Bradley
Cairns (University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT) for the histone expression
plasmids. We also thank Dr. Timothy J. Richmond (ETH, Zurich, Switzerland)
for the kind gift of the nucleosome positioning sequence. We are thankful
to Dr. Paul Wade (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD) for
xISWI cDNA.

