The NTC (NineTeen
Complex),
named after its founding member Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Sc) Prp19, is a conserved protein-only spliceosome
subcomplex that has been isolated in both human and S. cerevisiae splicing extract systems.− Stable binding of the NTC is required for the formation of a catalytically
active spliceosome that is competent to precisely remove introns from
precursor mRNA (pre-mRNA) to form mature message (mRNA). Although
the exact NTC composition varies among eukaryotes, at least nine proteins
are conserved in yeast and are often referred to as the core NTC complex.
For both S. cerevisiae and Schizosaccharomyces pombe (Sp),
these include the proteins Prp19/Prp19 (Sc/Sp), Cef1/Cdc5, Prp46/Prp5, Clf1/Cwf4, Syf2/Cwf3, Cwc15/Cwf15,
Isy1/Cwf12, Snt309/Cwf7, Cwc2/Cwf2, and Sc Ntc20.,− In mammalian cells, the NTC is called the hPrp19/CDC5L complex and
is composed of a similar, but not identical, set of proteins. These
include hPrp19 (Prp19/Prp19 (Sc/Sp)), CDC5L (Cef1/Cdc5),
PRL1 (Prp46/Prp5), AD002 (Cwc15/Cwf15), SPF27 (Snt309/Cwf7), HSP73
(Ssa4/Sks2), and CTNNBL1 (Sp SPAC1952.06c).,

Although it is clear that the NTC is essential for the spliceosome
to transition from an inactive to active complex,, as well as ensuring both the fidelity and efficiency of the splicing
reaction,, the molecular mechanism(s) of NTC function
is not known. One model is that the NTC acts as a molecular scaffold,
supporting and/or facilitating essential RNA–RNA, RNA–protein,
and protein–protein rearrangements that are required for the
formation of a catalytically active spliceosome. In support of this
model, a number of NTC components contain characteristic protein–protein
interaction domains that include WD40 repeats, TPR (tetratricopeptide)
repeats, and HAT (half a TPR domain) repeats. Additionally, two conserved
components, Cef1/Cdc5 (Sc/Sp) and
Cwc2/Cwf2 (Sc/Sp), contain Myb (myeloblastosis)
repeats and a RRM (RNA recognition motif), respectively, serving as
potential nucleic acid binding domains., While the
zinc-finger (ZnF) and RRM in Sc Cwc2 and its mammalian
homologue RBM22 cross-links directly to the U6 snRNA and pre-mRNA,, the biochemical function of the Cef1/Cdc5 (Sc/Sp) Myb repeats has not been determined.

S. pombe cdc5+ was first
identified in a screen of fission yeast mutants
defective for cell cycle progression, and subsequent studies have shown that S. pombe Cdc5 is an essential member of the spliceosome and functions in
pre-mRNA splicing,− a role conserved in other organisms.,,,,− In addition to its essential
function in pre-mRNA splicing, Cdc5 proteins in various organisms
have also been implicated in transcription, DNA damage response,− mitotic spindle assembly, and microRNA
(miRNA) biogenesis, although whether
these diverse cellular activities are splicing-dependent or -independent
has not been fully determined.

The N-terminus of Cdc5 family
members contains two canonical Myb
repeats (R1 and R2) and a third conserved domain (D3) previously classified
as a Myb-like repeat (MLR, also referred
to as Cdc5-MLR3 and -MYB3,). Myb repeats are classically
considered to be DNA binding motifs, and multiple copies of these
domains are often found in transcription factors (reviewed in ref ()). Structurally, the Myb
domain is composed of three well-defined helices, with the second
and third helices adopting a fold similar to that of the canonical
helix-turn-helix motif (HTH). Despite
its name, a Myb repeat is not an integrated tertiary motif in a larger
domain, but rather an independently folded domain that is often found
in multiple copies within proteins. Although the N-terminus of Cdc5
family members has been shown to interact with DNA in vitro(,,) and is required for
cell viability,, the function of the Cdc5 N-terminus
and its individual domains in pre-mRNA processing has yet to be determined.
Unlike the N-terminus, the sequence of the Cdc5 C-terminus is not
conserved and has no recognizable protein motifs; however, it interacts directly with several NTC core components., The presence of nucleic acid binding domains in Cdc5 and its direct
interaction with other core NTC members has led us to hypothesize
that Cdc5 may facilitate NTC-mediated RNA–RNA and/or RNA–protein
transitions by acting as a scaffold linking NTC components and RNAs,
similar to what was observed with RRM containing RBM22/Cwc2 family
members in humans and S. cerevisiae.,,

To further
characterize how the NTC stabilizes and activates the
spliceosome, we investigated the role of the N-terminus of Cdc5 in
cell function and its ability to bind RNA in vitro. Using a combination of yeast genetics and RNA binding assays, we
show that R1, R2, and D3 are all required for function and that the
Cdc5 N-terminus binds RNA in vitro. Structural and
biochemical analyses of Cdc5-D3 show that, unlike what has been predicted, this domain does not adopt a canonical Myb fold
and that Cdc5-D3 preferentially binds double-stranded RNA in vitro. Our data demonstrate that the Cdc5 N-terminus
(R1, R2, and D3) can function as an RNA binding platform and can directly
interact with RNA structures found near the catalytic core of the
spliceosome. Our results support a model where Cdc5, by interacting
with both NTC proteins and RNA, serves as an important scaffold that
facilitates the conformational changes required for the formation
of a catalytically active spliceosome.

Materials and Methods
Strains,
Yeast Methods, and Molecular Biology
Strains
and plasmids used in this study are listed in . Yeast strains were grown in yeast extract
(YE) media or Edinburgh minimal media (EMM) with appropriate supplements.
A plasmid containing the LEU2 marker (pIRT2), the
ORF of cdc5+, and at
least 500 base pairs (bp) of the 5′and 3′ flanking sequence
was used to generate cdc5ΔR1, cdc5ΔR2, cdc5ΔD3, cdc5ΔL, cdc5ΔMID, and cdc5ΔD3::Myb integration plasmids using
QuikChange II (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). All vector
transformations were performed as previously described. Both control and cdc5 deletion
plasmids were transformed into a diploid strain of S. pombe, cdc5+/cdc5::ura4+. Transformations were grown on minimal medium lacking leucine,
adenine, and uracil. Colonies were grown in EMM (− nitrogen)
to induce sporulation, and haploid cells were grown on minimal media
(+ adenine) to select for haploid cells that were cdc5::ura4+ and carried
the pIRT2 plasmid. Stable integrants were selected on the basis of
resistance to 5-fluoroorotic acid (5-FOA) and the acquisition of the LEU– phenotype. Mutants
were validated by whole-cell PCR with primers 5′ and 3′
of the cdc5 gene. Deletions in pREP3X cdc5+ (cDNA) vectors were generated as above and transformed
to a haploid strain of S. pombe, cdc5-TAP. Transformants were grown on minimal media lacking
leucine and containing thiamine (30 μM) for pREP3X repression
or no thiamine for pREP3x induction. OD30 lysate western blots with
anti-pSTAIR and anti-Cdc5 were performed as previously described. For spot assays, cells were grown to mid log
phase at 25 °C and resuspended in water to achieve an OD595 of 0.3. Ten-fold serial dilutions were made, and 2 μL
of each dilution was plated on YE. Plates were incubated at the indicated
temperatures for 3–5 days before imaging. Protparam was used to calculate pI’s of protein
domains.

Protein Expression and Purification
Cdc5-R1-R2-D3ΔL (amino acids (aa) 5–208Δ111–146), Cdc5-R1-R2 (aa 5–112), Cdc5-R1 (aa 5–55), Cdc5-R2
(aa 58–111), and Cdc5-D3 (aa 155–214) (S. pombe Cdc5, NP_593880) were cloned into pET-15b
(NdeI/BamHI) (EMD Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) and transformed into Escherichia coli Rosetta 2 (DE3) pLysS cells (EMD
Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany). Cells were grown in terrific broth
(Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY) to an OD595 of ∼0.9
and cold shocked for 20 min on ice. Upon addition of 1 mM IPTG, the
plasmids were overexpressed for 20 h at 15 °C. Cells were lysed
in 25 mM MES (pH 6.0), 300 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM imidazole, 5% glycerol,
0.1% Triton X-100, and one SIGMAFAST protease tablet (Sigma-Aldrich,
St. Louis, MO). Cdc5 constructs were purified using two 5 mL Histrap
HP columns (GE Healthcare, Waukesha, WI) in 50 mM MES (pH 6.0), 500
mM NaCl, 5% glycerol, and a 2.5–1000 mM imidazole linear gradient.
After the Histrap column, the protein fractions were concentrated
and buffer exchanged into heparin buffer A (10 mM sodium phosphate,
pH 7.0, 1 mM EDTA, and 5% glycerol) using a 3K Amicon Ultra-15 filter
(Millipore, Billerica, MA). The pooled fractions were treated overnight
at room temperature with RECOthrom (The Medicines Company, Parsippany,
NJ) to cleave the His6 tag. Cdc5 constructs were further
purified using a heparin column (GE Healthcare, Waukesha, WI) in 10
mM sodium phosphate (pH 7.0), 1 mM EDTA, 5% glycerol, and a 0–1
M NaCl linear gradient. Gel filtration (Superdex 200, GE Healthcare,
Waukesha, WI) in 25 mM MES (pH 6.0), 100 mM NaCl, and 1 mM EDTA was
used for the final step of purification.

For NMR experiments, Sp Cdc5-D3 was purified as above except cells were grown
and expressed in M9 media supplemented with the appropriate isotopic
label (either 15N NH4Cl or 15N NH4Cl and 13C d-glucose) (Cambridge Isotopes,
Andover, MA). Ten percent D2O was added to the final sample
for all NMR experiments. For the 15N Cdc5-D3 used in RNA
titration experiments, S200-RNA buffer (25 mM MES (pH 6.0), 300 mM
NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, and 1 mM EDTA) was used for gel filtration.
For 15N-leucine and 15N-histidine (Cambridge
Isotopes, Andover, MA) specific labeling, M9 media was supplemented
with the appropriate unlabeled amino acids as well as 15N l-leucine or 15N l-histidine.

Maltose binding protein MS2 binding protein
(MBP-MS2BP) was expressed
and purified using both a MBP and heparin column as described. After elution from the heparin column, fractions
were pooled and concentrated using a 30K Amicon Ultra-15 filter (Millipore,
Billerica, MA). Gel filtration (Superdex 200, GE Healthcare, Waukesha,
WI) in 25 mM Tris (pH 7.4), 200 mM NaCl, 40 mM maltose, and 1 mM EDTA
was used for the final step of purification. Samples were concentrated
to approximately 1 mg/mL using a 30K Amicon Ultra-15 filter (Millipore,
Billerica, MA) and stored at −20 °C. For the RNA pull-down
experiment, samples were diluted in RNA buffer (20 mM HEPES (pH 7.4),
100 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, and 5% glycerol) to a concentration
of ∼0.15 mg/mL.

Analytical Ultracentrifugation
Purified Sp Cdc5-D3 was run in an Optima XLI ultracentrifuge (Beckman
Coulter,
Brea, CA) equipped with a four-hole An-60 Ti rotor at 42 000
rpm at 4 °C. Samples were loaded into double-sector cells (path
length of 1.2 cm) with charcoal-filled Epon centerpieces and sapphire
windows. Sedfit (version 12.0) was used
to analyze velocity scans using every seven scans from a total of
360 scans. Approximate size distributions were determined for a confidence
level of p = 0.95, a resolution of n = 300, and sedimentation coefficients between 0 and 15 S.

NMR Spectroscopy
NMR experiments were performed at
25 °C in a 3 mm NMR tube (Wilmad Lab Glass, Vineland, NJ). Four-channel
Bruker AVIII 600 and 800 NMR spectrometers (Bruker, Billerica, MA)
equipped with CPCQCI and CPTCI probes, respectively, and single axis
pulsed-field gradients were used. The assignment of backbone resonances
for Cdc5-D3 was completed using standard 2D sensitivity enhanced echo/anti-echo 1H–15N heteronuclear single quantum coherence
(HSQC)− and 3D HNCO, HNCA, CBCA(CO)NH, HNCACB, HN(CA)CO, HN(CO)CA, and 15N-edited NOESY (τ = 120
ms) experiments. The spectra were referenced
to DSS (4,4-dimethyl-4-silapentane-1-sulfonic acid) at 0 ppm (parts
per million).

NMR Analysis, TALOS+, and Chemical Shift
Rosetta
Data
were processed in Topspin 3.2 (Bruker, Billerica, MA) and analyzed
with Sparky (T. D. Goddard and D. G. Kneller, University of California,
San Francisco). Complete backbone 1H and 15N
resonance assignments were obtained for all residues except for amino
acid E188 and the GSH residues remaining from the N-terminal His tag.
The chemical shifts of H, N, Cα, Cβ, and CO were analyzed
with TALOS+, a chemical shift index software
that predicts secondary structure elements. An online version of Chemical
Shift (CS)-Rosetta (https://condor.bmrb.wisc.edu/rosetta/), was also used to generate 3000 models using
the H, N, Cα, Cβ, and CO backbone chemical shift data.
The flexible C-terminus of D3 (aa 201–214) was removed for
CS-Rosetta modeling to allow for model convergence.

RNA and DNA
Binding Assays
RNAs with a 5′ biotin
were ordered from Dharmacon (GE Healthcare, Waukesha, WI) () and were 2′-bis(2-acetoxyethoxy)methyl
(ACE) deprotected according to the manufacture’s protocol.
RNAs were further purified by ethanol precipitation and two 80% ethanol
washes. RNA was heated at 94 °C for 10 min and then placed on
ice before use. DNAs with a 5′ biotin were ordered from Operon
(Eurofins Genomics, Huntsville, AL) (). DNAs were annealed by heating at 94 °C for 10 min and then
slowly cooled to room temperature. Streptavidin agarose (Life Technologies,
Grand Island, NY) blocked with bovine serum albumin (BSA) (Sigma,
St. Louis, MO) was incubated with 400 μL of 50 μM RNA
or DNA for 45 min. The RNA or DNA-resin was washed in 10 mM HEPES
(pH 7.5), 100 mM NaCl, and 10 mM MgCl2 before the addition
of ∼0.15 mg/mL recombinant N-terminal domains of Cdc5 for 45
min at room temperature. New RNA or DNA-resin was made for each replicate
experiment. The resin was then washed in RNA buffer (20 mM HEPES (pH
7.4), 100 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, and 5% glycerol). For protein–RNA
or −DNA pull-down experiments, lithium dodecyl sulfate (LDS)
sample buffer (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) was added directly to the
resin that was then boiled except in the case of Cdc5-R1-R2, due the
presence of a contaminant on the resin at the same molecular weight.
Cdc5-R1-R2 was eluted from the RNA-resin using RNA buffer with 1 M
NaCl. Samples were then treated with LDS and boiled as above. Samples
were run on 4–12% Bis-Tris PAGE gels (Invitrogen, Carlsbad,
CA) and stained with Colloidal Coomassie. All gels were quantified using ImageJ. Average values were determined by comparing the intensity of each
individual pull-down relative to the amount of protein loaded (relative
to input %). Although adding excess RNA or DNA to the streptavidin
agarose to saturate binding, we are unable to correct for the amount
of RNA or DNA bound to the resin in these experiments. Graphs and
statistics were generated using GraphPad Prism (version 5.0a).

NMR RNA
Titration
RNAs () were
ordered from Dharmacon (GE Healthcare) and were deprotected
and washed per the manufacturer’s instructions. RNAs were resuspended
in S200-RNA buffer (25 mM MES (pH 6.0), 300 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, and 1 mM EDTA). For RNA titrations, Cdc5-D3 was at ∼135
μM, and the RNA concentrations were titrated at 1:0.25, 1:0.5,
1:1, 1:2, 1:3, and 1:5 protein-to-RNA molar ratios for U6-ISL dsRNA
and examined at a 1:1 protein-to-RNA molar ratio for U2 ssRNA, U6
ssRNA, and MS2 dsRNA. Chemical shift differences were calculated using
the following formulawhere B equals
the chemical
shift at variable RNA concentrations and B0 is the chemical shift of protein only; 9.86204 is the absolute ratio
of the gyromagnetic constants of 1H and 15N. Changes in chemical shifts were fit to a single
site-binding curve using GraphPad Prism (version 5.0a) and the following
formulawhere Bmax is
the maximum binding and Kd is the equilibrium
binding constant.

Circular Dichroism (CD)
Purified Cdc5-D3 was analyzed
using a Jasco J-810 spectropolarimeter (Jasco Analytical Instruments,
Easton, MD). Far-UV (Ultraviolet) data were collected at a protein
concentration of 0.15 mg/mL in a 1 mm quartz cuvette. Spectra were
collected with an average time of 4 s for each point and a step size
of 50 nm/min from 198 to 260 nm. Far-UV spectra were collected in
quadruplicate and background-corrected against a buffer blank. Data
were converted to mean residue ellipticity [θ]m (degrees
cm2 dmol–1) using the following formulawhere θ is the measured ellipticity, l is the cell path length in centimeters, c is the molar concentration of protein in moles/liter, and n is the number of amino acids.

Circular dichroism
data was deposited in the PCDDB (PCDDB ID: 0004551000). Backbone resonance
assignments have been deposited in the BMRB (accession no. 25084).

Results
R1, R2, and D3 Are Essential for S. pombe Cdc5 Function
Although cdc5 and CEF1 deletion studies in S. pombe and S. cerevisiae have been reported,, most of the deletion mutants used in these analyses did not directly
correspond to secondary structural elements, making it difficult to
determine the specific regions required for function. Using sequence
alignments and secondary structure predictions, we identified five
structural elements in the Cdc5 N-terminus, including the two Myb
repeats (R1 and R2), a predicted Myb-like repeat (D3), a nonstructured loop (L) between R2 and D3,
and a predicted α-helical region (MID) downstream from D3 (Figure A). As a first step toward characterizing the role
of the Cdc5 N-terminus in pre-mRNA splicing, we attempted to construct
five S. pombe strains where the only
copy of cdc5 lacked one of the identified structural
elements (Figure A). Although strains containing
only cdc5ΔL or cdc5ΔMID grew normally
at all temperatures (Figure B), we were unable
to recover viable strains relying on only the expression of cdc5ΔR1, cdc5ΔR2, or cdc5ΔD3 (Figure C). Importantly, the R1, R2, and D3 deletions did not destabilize
Cdc5, as seen from western blot analysis of wild-type cells overexpressing
these mutants (). From these results,
we conclude that both of the canonical Myb repeats (R1 and R2) as
well as Cdc5-D3 are essential for Cdc5 function, whereas the loop
between R2 and D3 and the MID region are not. Although it was previously
demonstrated that mutations in both canonical Myb repeats R1 and R2
affect pre-mRNA splicing,,, this is the first evidence that Cdc5-D3 is also required for Cdc5
function.

The canonical Myb repeats (R1, R2) and the proposed Myb-like repeat
(D3) are required for function. (A) Domain architecture of S. pombe Cdc5. The Cdc5 N-terminus (aa 1–346)
contains two canonical Myb repeats (R1, R2) and a third domain (D3)
that is predicated to be a Myb-like repeat. R2 and D3 are separated
by a loop region (L) predicted to be unstructured. A middle region
of Cdc5 (MID) is predicted by PSI-PRED, to be α-helical.
Position of domains are as follows: R1 (aa 5–55), R2 (aa 58–111),
loop (aa 111–146), D3 (aa 155–214), and MID (aa 237–346).
The Cdc5 C-terminus (aa 347–757) contains no predicted structural
motifs. Black arrow marks the position of the mutation (W29R) found
in temperature-sensitive cdc5-120. (B) The loop and predicated α-helical regions of
the Cdc5 N-terminus are not essential. Growth of serial dilutions
of integrated cdc5ΔL or cdc5ΔMID cells
grown at 18, 25, and 36 °C. cdc5-120 is a heat-sensitive
mutant, whereas nda3-km11 is a cold-sensitive mutant. (C) Summary
of N-terminal deletions of Cdc5 in S. pombe. cdc5 deletions were determined to be essential
by assaying for ability to rescue the cdc5 null.
(D) Sequence alignment of Cdc5-D3 from yeast to humans compared with Mus musculus c-Myb R3. Hs, Homo sapiens; Mm, Mus musculus; Dm, Drosophila melanogaster; Ce, Caenorhabditis elegans; Sp, Schizosaccharomyces pombe; Sc, Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The red boxes mark the
location of the conserved tryptophan (W) residues in c-Myb and show
that these tryptophans are not conserved in Cdc5-D3. Periods (.) represent
weakly similar amino acids, colons (:) represent strongly similar
amino acids, and asterisks (*) represent identical amino acids. (E) cdc5-120 and prp3-1 (the S. pombe homologue of S. cerevisiae cwc2) interact genetically. Growth of
serial dilutions of wild-type, cdc5-120, prp3-1, and cdc5-120 prp3-1 cells grown
at 29 and 32 °C.

Myb repeats are approximately 50 amino acids in length, with
a
tryptophan or tyrosine residue every 18–19 amino acids. The
highly conserved tryptophan or tyrosine residues make up the hydrophobic
core of a Myb repeat and are important for proper folding.,, Structurally, this domain is
composed of three well-defined helices, with the second and third
helices adopting a fold similar to that of the canonical helix-turn-helix
motif (HTH) found in many DNA binding proteins.,, Cdc5-R1 and Cdc5-R2 adopt a canonical Myb-fold,
as determined by NMR analysis (PDB: 2DIM and 2DIN). Although Cdc5-D3 has been predicted
to be a Myb-like domain, the lack of
highly conserved tryptophan residues usually found in Myb domains
(Figure D) suggests that Cdc5-D3 could adopt
a different fold. To test whether the D3 region in Cdc5 could be replaced
with a Myb fold, we replaced cdc5-D3 with the sequence
of Myb repeat 3 (R3) from Mus musculus (Mm) c-MYB (cdc5D3::Myb) and asked whether this mutant
could support cell function. The R3 Myb repeat from Mm c-Myb was chosen to replace Cdc5-D3 since it has been structurally
characterized and has a similar pI (isoelectric
point) as Cdc5-D3 (10.4 and 10.7, respectively). As was seen with
the cdc5ΔR1, cdc5ΔR2, and cdc5ΔD3 mutants, we were unable to
recover a viable strain relying solely on the domain-swap mutant (Figure C). The inability of a canonical Myb repeat to substitute
for Cdc5-D3 in cells suggested that the functional surfaces present
on Cdc5-D3 are essential for function and cannot be replaced with
a structural Myb domain.

Recently, another NTC component, Sc Cwc2 (Sp Cwf2/Prp3), was shown to interact
directly with the U6
snRNA near the active site of the spliceosome.,, Interestingly both Sc Cef1
(Sp Cdc5) and Sc Cwc2 (Sp Cwf2/Prp3), the two NTC components with nucleic acid binding domains,
interact directly with Prp19,, putting them in close
physical proximity to each other and suggesting they could both interact
with RNA near the catalytic core of the spliceosome. To investigate
if there is a functional connection between Cdc5 and Cwf2/Prp3, we
tested for a genetic interaction between cdc5-120 and prp3-1. The cdc5-120 mutation
causes the amino acid substitution W29R in the R1 domain (Figure A), whereas prp3–1() causes the amino
acid substitution G123R in the ZnF domain, a domain that has been
shown to cross-link to RNA in S. cerevisiae. Our analysis shows that cdc5–120
prp3–1 cells are synthetically sick (Figure E), suggesting that Cdc5 and Cwf2/Prp3 may function
at similar stages of the splicing reaction.

Secondary Structure Analysis
of Cdc5-D3 Shows That This Domain
Is Composed of Two α-Helices and Does Not Adopt a Canonical
Myb Fold
To examine the structural characteristics of Cdc5-D3,
we expressed and purified recombinant Cdc5-D3 (aa 155–214)
from E. coli (Figure A). Analysis by sedimentation analytical ultracentrifugation
(SVAU) shows that Cdc5-D3 sediments as a monomer (S = 0.5; predicted molecular mass, ∼7.2 kDa; root-mean-square
deviation [RMSD] = 0.004) with a frictional ratio of 1.5 (Figure B). Circular dichroism (CD) analysis of Cdc5-D3
using far-UV light was done to predict secondary structure. When comparing
this spectrum to known spectra, Cdc5-D3
is primarily α-helical but contains random coil, as indicated
by the lower signal at 222 nm (). To further examine the secondary structure of this domain, we 15N-labeled Cdc5-D3 and performed a two-dimensional (2D) 15N–1H HSQC experiment using nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) spectroscopy (Figure C). In
this spectrum, peaks were observed for ∼94% of the expected
amino acids in Cdc5-D3 (59 residues out of a total of 63; ), making Cdc5-D3 amenable for NMR secondary
structure analysis.

Biophysical characterization of Cdc5-D3. (A) Coomassie
stained
SDS-PAGE of Cdc5-D3 (aa 155–214). Cdc5-D3 runs at a higher
molecular weight than what is predicted because of its pI. (B) SVAU
analysis of Cdc5-D3. The S value, frictional ratio,
and determined molecular mass are given for the main peak, which is
∼93% of the sample. The RMSD is 0.004. (C) 15N–1H HSQC spectra of Cdc5-D3. Peaks for 59 of the 63 (94%) expected
residues were identified.

To determine the secondary structure of Cdc5-D3, we used
a combination
of NMR experiments and computational modeling. Using 13C- and 15N-labeled Cdc5-D3, we ran a series of two-dimensional
(2D) and three-dimensional (3D) NMR experiments to determine the backbone
connectivity of Cdc5-D3. Results from a 15N-NOESY-HSQC
experiment showed there were two, as opposed to three, helical regions
in Cdc5-D3 (Figure A). We then used TALOS+
to predict the secondary structure of Cdc5-D3 using the NH, Cα,
Cβ, CO, and N chemical shift data. This analysis confirmed that
Cdc5-D3 contains two α-helical regions (Figure A), rather than the three α-helices that would be expected
for a Myb repeat (). To generate
a 3D model of Cdc5-D3, we used the backbone chemical shift data and
chemical-shift Rosetta (CS-Rosetta)., For calculations
of 3D models, the chemical shift values for residues 201–214
were not included due to their predicted flexibility as calculated
by TALOS+ and the lack of NOEs for these residues (Figure A). CS-Rosetta generated 3000 models of Cdc5-D3,
and when these models were plotted with their all-atom energy versus
their Cα RMSD in angstroms (Å), the models converged on
the lowest energy model (Figure B,C). The
10 lowest energy models contain two α-helices (Figures D,E and )
and do not resemble a Myb fold (). Strikingly, all of the lowest 100 models contained two rather
than three α-helices, leading us to conclude that Cdc5-D3 does
not adopt a canonical Myb fold and should not be referred to as a
Myb-like repeat.

Secondary structure analysis and 3D modeling of Cdc5-D3
using backbone
chemical shifts. (A) Secondary structure analysis of Cdc5-D3 using
TALOS+. Top row is the primary sequence
for Cdc5-D3. The TALOS+ prediction is shown in the bottom row, where
C represents random coil and H represents helical. Gray highlights
the predicted helical regions. The black lines correspond to the helical
regions found using 15N-NOESY-HSQC. Each bar represents
an i,i+4 or an i,i–4 NOE. (B) Summary
of 3000 CS-Rosetta models of Cdc5-D3, comparing the all-atom energy
versus the Cα RMSD relative to the lowest energy model. The
black dashed box corresponds to the 100 lowest energy structures.
(C) Magnification of the 100 lowest energy structures from panel B.
Solid black line encompasses the 10 lowest energy structures. The
asterisk (*) marks the lowest energy structure. (D, E) Two of the
10 lowest energy models calculated by CS-Rosetta shown at 0°
and 90°. Panel D is the lowest energy model.

The N-Terminus of Sp Cdc5 Binds RNA
As
an essential pre-mRNA splicing factor and a core component of
the NTC, Cdc5 family members in S. pombe, S. cerevisiae, and humans associate
with the spliceosome starting with assembly of the B-complex and remain
bound throughout the entire splicing reaction.,− Because Cdc5 associates with the spliceosome, we hypothesize that
the N-terminus may interact and bind to RNA. However, although the
N-terminus of Cdc5 family members has been reported to bind DNA in vitro,,, the ability of Cdc5 to interact with RNA has not been reported.
Cdc5, as a core member of the NTC, is required for formation of the
catalytic core, suggesting that Cdc5
may interact with core regions of the spliceosome required for catalysis.
This possibility is supported by the ability of mutations in the Sc Cef1 N-terminus to suppress first and second step splicing
defects of a variety of mutants, including mutations in introns and
the U6 snRNA. To test the ability of
the Cdc5 N-terminus to bind RNA, we used well-characterized regions
of the U2 and U6 snRNAs that are predicted to be near the catalytic
core of the spliceosome− (). These RNAs
include the double-stranded U6 snRNA interstem loop (U6-ISL), a single-stranded
region of the U6 snRNA involved in 5′ splice-site selection
(U6 ssRNA), and a single-stranded region of the U2 snRNA involved
in branchpoint recognition (U2 ssRNA),− (Figure A). The MS2 RNA hairpin (MS2 dsRNA)
from bacteriophage was also prepared to analyze the sequence specificity
of dsRNA binding. To test for a direct
interaction with the Cdc5 N-terminus, biotinylated RNAs bound to streptavidin
agarose beads were incubated with recombinant Cdc5-R1-R2-D3ΔL. The nonessential loop region (Figure A–C)
in this construct was deleted to generate a more stable protein. To
detect binding, protein that remained bound to the resin after multiple
washes was visualized by Coomassie staining (Figure A), and the percentage of protein that remained bound as compared
to the original input was quantified using the results from multiple
binding assays (Figure B). As seen in Figure A,B, Cdc5-R1-R2-D3ΔL directly interacts
with all of the tested RNAs.

The N-terminus of Cdc5 binds RNA in
vitro. Streptavidin-RNA
pull-down assays using the indicated recombinant protein. Panels A,
C, E, G, I, and K are Coomassie-stained SDS-PAGE gels of a representative
pull-down experiment. Panels B, D, F, H, J, and L show the quantification
of binding from multiple experiments. (A, B) Coomassie-stained representative
SDS-PAGE gel of Cdc5 R1-R2-D3ΔL bound to RNA agarose
beads and quantification of three binding assays. (C, D) Coomassie-stained
representative SDS-PAGE gel of Cdc5-R1 that binds to RNA agarose beads
and average of two binding assays. Ampersand (&amp;) marks the position
of a contamination band released from the boiled U6 ILS dsRNA conjugated
streptavidin resin. (E, F) Coomassie-stained representative SDS-PAGE
gel of Cdc5-R2 bound to RNA agarose beads and average of two binding
assays. Ampersand (&amp;) marks the position of a contamination band
released from the boiled U6 ILS dsRNA conjugated streptavidin resin.
(G–H) Coomassie-stained representative SDS-PAGE gel of Cdc5-R1-R2
bound to RNA agarose beads and quantification of three binding assays.
(I–J) Representative coomassie stained SDS-PAGE gel of Cdc5-D3
bound to RNA agarose beads and quantification of four binding assays.
Pound (#) represents contamination from the streptavidin resin. (K–L)
Representative coomassie stained SDS-PAGE gel of MBP tagged MS2 binding
protein (MBP-MS2BP) that binds to RNA
agarose beads and quantification of four binding assays. SDS-PAGE
gel quantification was done using ImageJ. Molecular weight markers
are shown to the left of each gel. Error bars and statistics were
generated using GraphPad Prism (version 5.0a), where the error bars
correspond to the standard error of the mean (SEM), and the p-values are represented by asterisks (p &lt; 0.05, *; p &lt; 0.01, **; and p &lt; 0.001, ***). 5′-Biotinylated RNA sequences used in the
RNA binding experiment can be found in .

The N-terminus of Cdc5 is composed
of three essential domains,
the two canonical Myb repeats (R1 and R2) and D3 (Figure A,C). To determine if the canonical Cdc5 Myb domains
(R1 and R2) can individually interact with RNA, we repeated the RNA
binding experiment using recombinant Cdc5-R1 and Cdc5-R2 (Figure C–F). In this assay, neither R1 nor R2 binds
RNA (Figure C–F). However, since Myb
repeats are often found as clustered groups, we also investigated whether Cdc5-R1-R2 could bind RNA (Figure G–H). While Cdc5-R1-R2 does bind RNA (Figure G), we were surprised to find that when comparing
the percentage of protein bound to the RNA (as compared to the initial
input), only ∼20% of Cdc5-R1-R2 versus over 60% of Cdc5-R1-R2-D3ΔL was bound to the U6-ISL (Figure B,H). Thus, although Cdc5-R1-R2 interacts with RNA, these two domains
do not replicate the RNA binding seen with the entire Cdc5 N-terminus.
Finally, since the N-terminus of Cdc5 family members have been reported
to bind DNA,,, we also tested the ability of Cdc5-R1-R2-R3ΔL to
interact with DNA, which it does (). Our RNA binding results suggests that the Cdc5-D3 region serves
a more prominent role in facilitating RNA interactions than the canonical
Myb repeats or, alternatively, all three domains are required for
full RNA binding activity.

To discriminate between these possibilities,
the binding experiment
was repeated using Cdc5-D3 (Figure I–J).
Cdc5-D3 alone binds directly to all of the RNAs in the assay (Figure I), with a significant binding preference for the
U6-ISL (Figure J). To test whether the spliceosomal
RNAs bind nonspecifically, we repeated the binding assays using an
N-terminally MBP-tagged MS2 dsRNA binding protein (MBP-MS2BP) that
interacts with the MS2 RNA hairpin loop. While MPB-MS2BP bound to the MS2-dsRNA as expected, it did not bind
to any of the spliceosomal RNAs (Figure K–L).
In addition, like Cdc5-R1-R2-R3ΔL, Cdc5-D3 also binds
DNA (). The results of these
RNA binding assays demonstrate that the Cdc5 N-terminus binds to RNA
directly and that, of the three essential domains, Cdc5-D3 binds RNA
more robustly than the canonical Myb repeats alone.

Cdc5-D3 Preferentially
Binds Double-Stranded RNA
To
further characterize the interaction of Cdc5-D3 with RNA, we performed
several NMR RNA titration experiments using the U2 ssRNA, U6 ssRNA,
U6-ISL dsRNA, MS2 dsRNA, and 15N Cdc5-D3 (Figures A and ).
The preference for Cdc5-D3 binding to double-stranded RNAs detected
in the in vitro binding assays (Figure I–J) was confirmed through chemical shift perturbation
by examining the HSQC spectra of 15N-labeled Cdc5-D3 after
RNA was added at a 1:1 protein-to-RNA molar ratio (Figures B and ).
The interaction between the U6-ISL dsRNA and Cdc5-D3 was further characterized
using a titration of RNA into 15N-labeled protein ranging
from substoichiometric molar ratios of protein-to-RNA (1:0.25) to
saturable concentrations (1:5). This RNA titration resulted in substantial
chemical shift changes in the NMR spectra for a subset of Cdc5-D3
peaks (Figure A), with the strongest shift
differences localized to the last 16 amino acids (aa 199–214,
Figure B,E–F), a region predicted to
be unstructured in our secondary structure calculations. The last
16 amino acids also showed strong shifts with the titration of MS2
dsRNA (). Therefore,
it is possible that this flexible region of Cdc5-D3 may become ordered
when bound to RNA. The chemical shift changes appear to saturate at
high RNA concentrations and can be fit to a 1:1 binding model (Figure C). Dissociation constants (Kd) from single site binding curves are ∼210 μM
(Figure C,D). The location of the Cdc5-D3
residues that interact with the U6-ISL in 2 of the 10 lowest energy
models is shown in Figure E,F. The RNA titration
experiments confirm that Cdc5-D3 preferentially binds double-stranded
RNAs.

Cdc5-D3 RNA titration with U6-ISL dsRNA. (A) 15N–1H HSQC spectra of Cdc5-D3 with varying concentrations of U6-ISL
dsRNA. The 15N–1H HSQC inset shows amino
acids 167R and 169R. The black arrows indicate the direction the peaks
shift upon the addition of U6-ISL dsRNA. (B) Chemical shifts (Δppm)
from 15N–1H HSQC at a 1:1 molar ratio.
The 20 strongest chemical shifts are above the dashed line. (C) Saturation
curves of amino acids 181 K, 193L, 201E, and 205A are plotted and
fit with a single-site binding curve. (D) Binding affinities (Kd) of 181 K, 193L, 201E, and 205A. (E, F) Chemical
shifts from Cdc5-D3 and U6-ISL dsRNA NMR titration were plotted in
red onto 2 of the 10 lowest energy models of Cdc5-D3. Models have
an added flexible C-terminal extension that was not included in the
CS-Rosetta calculations due to lack of NOEs, but do interact with
RNA. Models shown at 0° and 90°.

Discussion
While the highly conserved N-terminus is
essential for cell viability,
the function of this portion of Cdc5 has not been characterized. The
presence of Myb repeats in the N-terminus coupled with the ability
of the C-terminus to directly interact with core NTC members,, led us to hypothesize that Cdc5
may facilitate NTC-mediated RNA–RNA and/or RNA–protein
transitions by interacting with both RNA and protein in the spliceosome.
Using a combination of yeast genetics and in vitro RNA binding assays, we have shown that each of the R1, R2, and D3
domains in the Cdc5 N-terminus is essential and that Cdc5-R1-R2-D3ΔL binds directly to regions within the U2 and U6 snRNAs.
In addition, structural and biochemical analyses of Cdc5-D3 reveal
that although this domain does not adopt a predicted Myb fold it is
able to interact preferentially with double-stranded RNAs, suggesting
that it may be a Myb variant or a unique structural domain. Thus,
the N-terminus of Cdc5 can directly interact with multiple RNAs while
the C-terminus contacts other core NTC components,, suggesting
that in vivo Cdc5 could tether NTC to RNA components
within the spliceosome and provide a RNA binding platform that stabilizes
the RNA–RNA and RNA–protein pre-mRNA splicing transitions.

Since Cdc5-D3 has a strong preference for U6-ISL and the MS2 dsRNAs
despite the lack of sequence similarity between these RNAs, it seems
likely that Cdc5-D3 might stabilize dsRNA conformations in a nonspecific
manner. However, an alternative explanation is that Cdc5-D3 binds
with high specificity to an RNA that we did not directly test. Combined
with our in vivo results showing that the R1, R2,
and D3 domains are all essential, we propose that Cdc5’s N-terminus,
with an overall pI of 9.4, acts as a charged RNA binding platform
that binds to dsRNAs found near the catalytic core of the spliceosome.

Our finding that all three Cdc5 nucleic acid binding domains (R1,
R2, and D3) are essential suggests a potential model where these domains
could act synergistically in vivo. The interaction
of multiple Myb repeats with DNA is common in transcription factors
(reviewed in ref ()). For example, the transcription factor c-Myb contains three Myb
repeats (R1, R2, and R3), and it is the third helix in the R2 and
R3 Myb domains that directly contacts the major groove of a specific
DNA sequence., Therefore, using Myb-containing
proteins as an example, we speculate that the Cdc5 R1, R2, and D3
domains may bind RNA in a similar manner as c-Myb binds DNA, with
the exception that the lack of the third canonical Myb repeat may
make the Cdc5 N-terminus better suited for binding nucleic acid structures
(i.e., dsRNA) versus binding specific nucleic acid sequences. The
ability of Cdc5 to interact with multiple RNA structures could provide
a platform to stabilize the conformational changes that occur during
the transition of the spliceosome from an inactive to activated complex.

The spliceosome is a dynamic macromolecular machine composed of
both protein and RNA components. During the transition from the inactive
spliceosomal B-complex to the activated Bact-complex, the
U1 and U4 snRNAs dissociate, allowing the U6 snRNA to change conformation
by forming the catalytic U6-ISL, and form duplexes with both the U2
snRNA and the 5′ end of the intron via the ACAGAGA box. Although these RNA–RNA remodeling events
are the major requirements for the formation of the spliceosome active
site, additional events, including the stable association of the NTC,
are required for catalysis to occur. The active site of the spliceosome
is highly conserved from yeast to humans,− and is centered on a region of the U6 snRNA, which
shares three similarities with group II self-splicing introns, the
AGC triad, Mg2+ binding, and the U6-ISL.,, Similarities between the U6 snRNA and the
group II self-splicing introns, as well
as the splicing-like activity demonstrated by a protein-free RNA construct
containing regions of the U6 and U2 snRNAs that base pair in the spliceosome,, have led to the conclusion that the regions of U6 and U2 snRNAs
make up essential components of the spliceosome active site. However,
unlike the group II self-splicing introns that use additional RNA
domains to support catalysis, the spliceosome has evolved to also
use proteins to facilitate the splicing reaction. Two proteins, the
highly conserved Prp8 (Sp Spp42) and Hs RBM22/Sc Cwc2 (Sp Cwf2/Prp3),
have been shown to directly cross-link to both the U6 snRNA and the
pre-mRNA within the active site of the spliceosome (Figure ).,, The physical interaction between Sc Cwc2 and U6 snRNA places the NTC at the active site of
the spliceosome, and, interestingly, both Sc Cef1
(Sp Cdc5) and Sc Cwc2 bind directly
to Prp19, (Figure B). Thus,
the only two NTC components that contain nucleic acid binding domains
are likely in close physical proximity. However, although Cwc2 family
members have been shown to directly cross-link to the U6 snRNA in vitro,,, Cdc5 family members have not. While there is no direct evidence
that Cdc5 interacts with RNA in vivo, genetic mutations
in Cef1 (Sp Cdc5) are able to suppress mutations
in the U6 snRNA found in the active site of the spliceosome (Figure A), and we have shown
that there is a negative genetic interaction between the cdc5 and cwf2/prp3 temperature-sensitive
alleles that generate point mutations in the RNA binding domains of
each protein (Figure E). The proximity of
Cwc2 to Cef1 in the NTC, the capability
of Cef1/Cdc5 (Sc/Sp) to suppress
U6 snRNA mutations, the ability of Cdc5
to bind RNA in vitro, and the negative genetic interaction
between cdc5-120 and prp3-1 (Sp cwf2) make it possible that Cdc5, as a core member of
the NTC, is positioned near the active site of the spliceosome and
can act as a charged platform that helps to stabilize the RNA–RNA
rearrangements that occur during the transition from the B- to Bact-spliceosome (Figure B).

Model of the
U2 and U6 snRNAs and NTC components in the spliceosome
Bact complex. (A) A secondary structure model of U2 and
U6 snRNA interactions in the S. pombe spliceosome active site, as predicted from studies in S. cerevisiae. (Adapted from ref (). Copyright 2012 RNA Society). The snRNAs are highly conserved. The
U6-ISL is pink, the U6 ssRNA is green, and the U2 ssRNA is blue. Dashed
boxes are residues cross-linked to Sc Prp8, and solid boxes are residues cross-linked to Sc Cwc2. Circles mark the location
of mutations in Sc U6 snRNA suppressed by mutations
in the R1 domain of Sc Cef1. (B) Model of a subset of NTC components and the U2–U6 snRNA.
The Prp19 tetramer binds directly to NTC components Cdc5 (Sc Cef1), Cwf7 (Sc Snt309), and Cwf2 (Sc Cwc2) (solid lines).Sc Cwc2 cross-links to regions of the U2 and U6 snRNAs.
The C-terminus of Cdc5 binds directly to Prp5 (Sc Prp46) and Cwf3 (Sc Syf1), while the N-terminus binds RNA in vitro. Dashed
lines indicate a direct in vitro interaction between
components, and solid lines represent in vitro protein–RNA
cross-linking. Models are not to scale. Prp19 tetramer: light gray
structures, WD40 repeats (PDB: 3LVR()); black
and medium gray structures, U-box dimers (PDB: 2BAY()); and black rectangle, coiled-coil region. Cwc2: blue structures,
Torus/Zn-finger and RRM domain (PDB: 3U1M()); blue
oval, the C-terminus. Cdc5: red structures, a model of the N-terminus,
generated using Modeler 9v8 and hCDC5 R1 (PDB: 2DIM), hCDC5 R2 (PDB: 2DIN), and the lowest
energy CS-Rosetta structure for Cdc5-D3; red box, the C-terminus. Sc U2–U6 snRNA (PDB: 2LKR()).

Our findings suggest a model where
the ability of the Cdc5 N-terminus
to directly interact with a variety of RNA structures allows it to
act as a binding scaffold that supports and/or facilitates the RNA–RNA
and RNA–protein remodeling that occurs during the transition
from the B- to Bact-spliceosomal complexes. Thus, we propose
that Cdc5 contributes to NTC function by playing an essential role
in facilitating the conformational changes that occur during spliceosome
activation. Our studies indicate that Cdc5 is biochemically positioned
to play a pivotal role in pre-mRNA processing through its interaction
with NTC components and RNA within the active site of the spliceosome.

Supporting Information Available
Cdc5 deletions
are stable (Figure
S1), CD spectrum of Cdc5-D3 (Figure S2), labeled 2D HSQC of Cdc5-D3
(Figure S3), secondary structure analysis of Cdc5 N-terminal domains
(Figure S4), the N-terminus of Cdc5 binds to DNA in vitro (Figure S5), and chemical shift analysis of Cdc5-D3 with ssRNA and
MS2-dsRNA (Figure S6). Strains and plasmids used in this study are
listed in Tables SI and SII, and sequences of RNA and DNA used in
these studies in Table SIII. This material is available free of charge
via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5008639_si_001.pdf

bi5008639_si_002.pdf

This work was
supported by T32 GM08320 to S.E.C. and NIH DP2OD004483 to M.D.O.

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
DSS4,4-dimethyl-4-silapentane-1-sulfonic
acid

aaamino acid

BSAbovine serum albumin

CDcircular dichroism

cDNAcomplementary
DNA

DNAdeoxyribonucleic
acid

dsRNAdouble-stranded
RNA

HAThalf a TPR
domain

HSQCheteronuclear
single-quantum correlation

HsHomo sapiens

ISLinterstem
loop

pIisoelectric
point

LDSlithium
dodecyl sulfate

MBPmaltose binding protein

MBP-MS2BPmaltose binding protein-MS2 binding protein

mRNAmessenger RNA

MsMus
musculus

myeloblastosisMyb

NTCNineTeen Complex

nmtno message in thiamine

NMRnuclear magnetic
resonance

ORFopen
reading frame

P-complexpostcatalytic complex

ppmparts per million

pre-mRNAprecursor mRNA

RNAribonucleic acid

RRMRNA recognition motif

ScSaccharomyces cerevisiae

SpSchizosaccharomyces pombe

SVAUsedimentation velocity
analytical ultracentrifugation

ssRNAsingle-stranded RNA

snRNPssmall nuclear ribonucleoproteins

snRNAssmall nuclear RNAs

SEMstandard error
of the mean

TPRtetratricopeptide repeats

ACEtwo-acetoxyethoxy

2Dtwo-dimensional

UVultraviolet

ZnFzinc finger

