High-fidelity
DNA polymerases
(Pol) are usually blocked by bulky DNA lesions., They
can be replaced for local translesion synthesis to bypass the distorting
DNA damage by one or more bypass polymerases, followed by restoration
of the processive and faithful replicative machinery.− Each of the four human Y family bypass polymerases has unique structural
and lesion bypass properties while also possessing common features., Human DNA Polκ is similar to other Y family lesion bypass
polymerases. It has fingers, palm, and
thumb subdomains that comprise the conserved catalytic core, and the
DNA substrate is located between the thumb and the little finger or
polymerase-associated domain (PAD). In
Polκ, there is a uniquely large structural gap on the minor
groove side that separates the catalytic core and the little finger,
and a unique N-terminal extension (N-clasp) on the DNA major groove
side that holds the little finger and the palm/fingers of the catalytic
core together (Figure A). The functional role
of this gap and the N-clasp in lesion bypass by Polκ has attracted
considerable interest,− because Polκ bypasses minor groove bulky DNA
lesions that are linked to the amino group of guanine with predominant
incorporation of the correct nucleotide dCTP; however, some mutagenic
outcome that varies among different lesions is observed.− Furthermore, adducts that bind to adenine N6 or guanine C8 on the major groove side are mainly blocking
or more mutagenic.,,−

Structures
and sequences investigated. (A) Ternary crystal structure
of Polκ (PDB entry 2OH2). The nucleotide at the
preinsertion position is hidden behind the fingers domain, and its
location is designated with a black frame. (B) Structures of the dG-N2-AAF and dG-N2-B[a]P adducts. Torsion angles for dG-N2-AAF are defined as follows: χ for O4′ (dR)–C1′
(dR)–N9–C4 (dR is deoxyribose), α′ for
N1–C2–N2–C3(AAF),
β′ for C2–N2–C3(AAF)–C2(AAF),
γ′ for C3(AAF)–C2(AAF)–N(AAF)–C(AAF),
δ′ for C2(AAF)–N(AAF)–C(AAF)–Cm(AAF), and ε′ for N(AAF)–C(AAF)–Cm(AAF)–Hm(AAF) (m denotes a methyl group). For the dG-N2-B[a]P adduct, the ring containing the OH groups
is termed the benzylic ring. (C) Base sequences of the preinsertion
and insertion models. The incoming nucleotide dNTP is colored blue.
G* denotes the damaged guanine.

At present, the structural and dynamic origins of the various
outcomes
in lesion processing by DNA Polκ are poorly understood. The
size and shape of bulky polycyclic aromatic DNA lesions, their site
of linkage to different bases, and their stereochemical properties
determine their handling by lesion bypass DNA polymerases,,− and other macromolecular machines,
such as DNA repair enzymes. Our understanding
of the relationships between lesion and polymerase architectures and
functions is limited. However, this knowledge is crucially needed
to identify the molecular mechanisms underlying lesion-induced mutagenesis.
In earlier work, we have shown that the major adduct derived from
the environmental procarcinogen benzo[a]pyrene (B[a]P), (10S)-(+)-trans-anti-B[a]P-N2-dG (dG-N2-B[a]P), is easily accommodated on the minor groove side
of the damaged template in Polκ while the (10S)-(+)-trans-anti-B[a]P-N6-dA adduct on the major groove side
is sterically constrained by the Polκ N-clasp,, explaining their respective observed bypass and blocking properties
in primer extension studies.

To
pursue the goal of investigating impacts of lesion topology
and stereochemistry on the fidelity of lesion processing by Polκ,
we investigate an adduct derived from the carcinogenic aromatic amine
2-acetylaminofluorene (AAF), 3-(deoxyguanosin-N2-yl)-2-acetylaminofluorene (dG-N2-AAF or dG*) (Figure B). This lesion shares
its N2-dG linkage site with dG-N2-B[a]P but is less bulky with
three rather than four aromatic rings and no chiral center at the
linkage site. Moreover, it is planar, while dG-N2-B[a]P contains the nonplanar and OH-bearing
benzylic ring (Figure B). However, the AAF
adduct contains the bulky acetyl group. The AAF lesion can be produced
by exposure to the environmental contaminant 2-nitrofluorene, a major
byproduct of kerosene and diesel combustion., The adduct is housed in the B-DNA minor groove in solution where
it increases the thermal and thermodynamic stability of the B-DNA
duplex. It is persistent in mammalian
tissues,− consistent with its thermodynamic lesion-induced
DNA duplex stabilization, which is associated with nucleotide excision
repair resistance., However, protection against transcriptional
errors by this lesion via transcription-coupled nucleotide excision
repair− has recently been demonstrated, indicating that its persistence results from resistance
to global genomic nucleotide excision repair., Primer extension studies show that Polκ bypasses the dG-N2-AAF lesion with predominant incorporation
of dCTP but also with significant misincorporation of dTTP in vitro. The lesion’s
persistence and its mutagenicity in mammalian cells suggest that this
minor AAF-derived adduct can readily survive to replication and cause
cancer-initiating mutations; in simian kidney (COS-7) cells, G →
T transversions were the predominant observed targeted mutations,
but bypass was mainly error-free.

In this study, we have characterized structural and dynamic factors
governing the fidelity of processing of dG-N2 minor groove adducts by Polκ. With extensive molecular
modeling and molecular dynamics simulations, we have gained a detailed
molecular and dynamic characterization of dG-N2-AAF lesion bypass through stages of the replicative process
as the lesion transits from the preinsertion to the insertion position
and then to the chemical transition state for the nucleotidyl transfer
reaction. We provide a new understanding
of Polκ’s structural architecture for bypass of minor
groove lesions by revealing how the flexibility of its N-clasp and
its housing of lesions in the minor groove gap are impacted differently
by the structurally dissimilar dG-N2-AAF
and dG-N2-B[a]P lesions
to yield different balances of mutagenic and nonmutagenic outcomes.
Thereby, we show how the fidelity of the human Polκ bypass polymerase
is regulated by lesion topology.

Methods
Models of Polκ
with Unmodified DNA
The ternary
crystal structure (PDB entry 2OH2()) of Polκ19–526 with DNA and incoming dTTP was the basis
for all our prepared enzyme–substrate models. The sequence
utilized, shown in Figure C, was the same
as in the crystal except that it was remodeled in previous work to
provide a template G and incoming dCTP; the crystal structure had
also been remodeled to create a reaction-ready active site with two
Mg2+ ions, based on a high-resolution
crystal structure of a complete DNA polymerase β catalytic complex. With 100 ns MD, we utilized this unmodified
ternary complex as a control for the dG-N2-AAF simulations.

For simulations involving the pentacovalent
phosphorane transition state in the water-mediated and substrate-assisted
(WMSA) mechanism (Figure S1 of the ), we utilized our previously obtained transition
state structure determined by ab initio quantum mechanics/molecular
mechanics (QM/MM) simulations.

Initial
Models with the dG-N2-AAF
Adduct for 100 ns MD Simulations
We utilized the remodeled,
unmodified Polκ structure to obtain models of the dG-N2-AAF lesion in the preinsertion and insertion
positions (Figure C). The nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) solution structure (PDB entry 2GE2()) provided initial guidance for modeling of the lesion with
minimal collisions. For the very crowded preinsertion site, we could
only create a model in which only the fluorenyl ring system fits in
the small cavity at the apex of the gap; here the lesion can be housed
on the damaged guanine’s evolving major groove side. The minor
groove side of the evolving duplex was entirely obstructed by the
fingers (Figure A). Table S1 of the  gives linkage site torsion
angle values for α′, β′, γ′,
δ′, ε′, and χ (Figure B) and Met115 (whose side chain also had to be remodeled)
for this initial model for MD.

For the insertion site, we modeled
two orientations for the dG-N2-AAF adduct.
In the NMR solution structure, the fluorenyl ring system is directed
5′ along the damaged strand in the minor groove. In addition,
computational studies had shown that
a 3′ orientation was also feasible, and we investigated this
orientation, as well. Using the NMR solution structure as a guide,
we covalently linked the AAF moiety to the template anti G amino group in the unmodified ternary complex model and adjusted
torsion angles α′, β′, γ′,
δ′, ε′, and χ (Figure B) to obtain 3′- and 5′-oriented structures;
this also required a change in a side chain torsion angle of Phe171.
We considered both incoming dCTP and dTTP. Table S1 of the  gives linkage site torsion
angle values for α′, β′, γ′,
δ′, ε′, χ, and Phe171 for these initial
models for MD. For dCTP, we maintained Watson–Crick pairing
as in the unmodified model. For the mismatched
dTTP, we created a wobble pair with dG*:dTTP paired with N1H1(G)···O2(T)
and O6(G)···N3H3(T) hydrogen bonds (Figure S2 of the ). For the study of the
transition state, we remodeled our previously obtained transition
state structure determined by a QM/MM–MD investigation to contain the lesion in its preferred 3′
orientation in the ternary complex before reaction (see ). The unmodified transition state structure was used
for a control simulation. All initial models were prepared using INSIGHT
II 2005 (Accelrys Software, Inc.).

Force Fields and Molecular
Dynamics
MD simulations
were conducted using the PMEMD module of the AMBER 11 simulation package with Amber99SB− and GAFF force fields and the TIP3P water model. A new AMBER-compatible force field set was developed
for the dG-N2-AAF adduct and is given
in Table S2 of the . For dCTP and dTTP, we utilized previously calculated parameters. For the transition state models, we utilized
our previously developed parameters for
dCTP as the incorporated nucleotide, and we developed a new parameter
set for the transition state model for dTTP as the incorporated nucleotide
(Table S2 of the ).

For each model, a 100 ns MD simulation was performed after
initial equilibration. The last snapshot of the simulation was used
to illustrate the structures, except where indicated. All analyzed
properties are ensemble averages over the entire 100 ns MD simulations.
Trajectory analyses were conducted with the Ptraj and Carnal packages
of Amber 11. Full details of the MD and force field protocols are
given in the . PyMOL was employed to make molecular images and the
movies.

Results
In Polκ, we have investigated
the dG-N2-AAF adduct in three positions:
(1) the preinsertion site
to determine how feasible it is for the adduct to translocate from
the preinsertion site to the insertion site, (2) the insertion site
opposite dCTP and dTTP (Figure S2 of the ), and (3) the pentacovalent phosphorane transition
state, which is formed during the nucleotidyl transfer reaction in
the WMSA mechanism previously determined by QM/MM–MD calculations
for Polκ (Figure S1 of the )., We have used molecular modeling and molecular
dynamics simulations (detailed in )
to gain an understanding on a molecular and dynamic level of the cycle
of events in the Polκ active site and thereby obtain insights
into the fidelity of Polκ’s processing of minor groove
polycyclic aromatic lesions.

The Adduct in the Preinsertion Site Can Be
Housed in the Crevice
at the Apex of the Gap
Our modeling for dG-N2-AAF in the preinsertion site showed that the adduct
can fit only on the major groove side pointing in the 5′ direction
of the damaged strand in a crevice at the apex of the gap, while the
minor groove side is crowded by the fingers (Figure A). This positioning is preserved following 100 ns MD as shown
in Figure A. Ensemble average torsion angle
values for α′, β′, γ′, δ′,
ε′, and χ (Figure B) and
Met115 are listed in Table S1 of the . The glycosidic torsion of the damaged guanine
is very dynamic but remains largely in the overall anti domain (Figure S2 of the )

Lesion structures in the Polκ gap at preinsertion and insertion
positions. Polκ containing the dG-N2-AAF adduct (A) in the preinsertion position and (B) in the insertion
position opposite dCTP. dG-N2-AAF in the
insertion site exhibits favorable stacking interactions with Phe171
as shown in the inset. (C) As the damaged base translocates through
the gap in Polκ from the preinsertion site (dG-N2-AAF in red sticks) to the insertion site (dG-N2-AAF in cyan sticks), the fluorenyl rings rotate
∼180° around the α′ torsion angle (see Movie
S1 of the ). The
part of the protein that comprises the gap region through which translocation
occurs is shown as yellow spheres. (D) Polκ containing the dG-N2-B[a]P adduct in the insertion
position. Color scheme for panels A, B, and D: dG-N2-AAF and dG-N2-B[a]P as red sticks, damaged guanine as orange sticks, N-clasp
as a blue surface, thumb domain as a magenta surface, fingers domain
as a yellow surface, and DNA template strand as a gray cartoon.

In the Insertion Site,
the Lesion Is Housed in the Polκ
Gap Directed 3′ along the Modified Strand toward the Duplex
Region
From our modeling efforts, we obtained two initial
conformations for MD simulations that comfortably accommodate the
fluorenyl rings in the Polκ gap, between the fingers and the
palm on one side and the little finger on the other side, and with
a dCTP partner: (1) with the AAF ring system oriented toward the single-stranded
overhang and directed 5′ along the modified strand, as in the
NMR solution structure in duplex DNA, and (2) with the AAF ring system directed toward the duplex region
in a 3′ orientation, as predicted computationally. Ensemble average linkage site torsion angle
values are summarized in Table S1 of the . The Watson–Crick pairing was retained in
the MD simulations of both orientations. Also, the active site is
as well organized in the structures containing lesions as in the unmodified
control; key properties include maintenance of the octahedral coordination
of the Mg2+ ions, the in-line O3′–Pα attack distance, maintenance of interactions with key amino acid
residues, and preservation of the two water molecules participating
in the WMSA mechanism. In this respect,
both MD models appear equally feasible. The dG*:dCTP (dG* denotes
the damaged base) model in the 3′ orientation of the fluorenyl
rings is illustrated in Figures B and A, and full details are given in Figure S3 and Table
S3 of the . The active
site organization of the 5′-oriented model is similar (data
not shown). However, there are important differences. In the 5′-directed
case, the fluorenyl distal aromatic ring is entirely solvent-exposed
on one face and steric crowding causes the distortion of the fingers
(Figure S4 of the ), while in the 3′-directed orientation, the entire aromatic
ring system is neatly sandwiched in the gap (Figure B). In addition, the 3′-directed orientation has a
favorable dynamic stacking interaction with Phe171 that is not present
for the 5′ case, where the ring system is directed away from
Phe171. Figure B and Figure S4 of the  show the differences in
these interactions. For these reasons, the 5′ orientation is
disfavored.

Watson–Crick and wobble pairing for dG-N2-AAF. (A) dG-N2-AAF Watson–Crick pair with dCTP. (B) dG-N2-AAF wobble pair with the dTTP mismatch. Methyl
groups of Ala150 and Ala151 from the fingers domain have van der Waals
interactions with the dTTP methyl group. The shortest distances between
methyl hydrogen atoms are given. Dashed lines denote hydrogen bonds,
with occupancies all above 95%, given in Table S3 of the . Snapshots at 92 and 86
ns were selected as being representative for panels A and B, respectively.

The Pentacovalent Transition
State Structure Remains Stable
with a 3′-Oriented Lesion
For investigation of the
transition state structure in the WMSA mechanism (Figure S1 of the ),, we used the favorable 3′ lesion orientation with dCTP to
establish whether the pentacovalent phosphorane and the local organization
were maintained in the presence of the dG-N2-AAF adduct. Our results of the 100 ns MD simulation showed that
the transition state structure is well-maintained (Figure  and Figure S3 and Table S3 of the ): the geometry of the pentacovalent
phosphorane transition state, the geometry of the protonated γ-phosphate
ready to transfer its proton to the α,β-oxygen bridge,
hydrogen bonding interactions with amino acids that stabilize the
transition state, Mg2+ ion coordination, and base pairing
between the template and the incoming dCTP.

Pentacovalent phosphorane
transition state with dCTP incorporated
into the dC priming nucleotide. Polκ’s active site at
the transition state maintains the octahedral coordination of the
two Mg2+ ions (shown with the blue dashed lines) and the
water molecules utilized in the WMSA mechanism to shuttle the proton from the γ-phosphate to the
α,β-bridge (yellow dashed lines) as pyrophosphate leaves.

Wobble Pairing Stabilizes
an Incoming dTTP Mismatch
While incorporation of dCTP opposite
dG-N2-AAF predominated in the primer extension
studies in Polκ,
a significant amount of dTTP was also misincorporated. To determine how a dG*:dTTP mismatch is accommodated
in the polymerase active site, we created an initial model with anti-dG-N2-AAF in the favored
3′ orientation and wobble paired with incoming dTTP (Figure
S2 of the ). Following
a 100 ns MD simulation, we found that a nicely aligned, well-hydrogen-bonded
wobble pair was maintained for the reactant state (Figure B), and also for the subsequent 100 ns transition
state simulation (Figure S5 of the ). The dynamic stacking interaction between Phe171
and the AAF ring system is present as in the case of the Watson–Crick
base pair. In addition, an analysis of the active site region of Polκ
showed the presence of Ala residues 150 and 151, whose methyl groups
have favorable van der Waals interactions with the methyl group of
thymine, which seems to aid in stabilizing the incorporation of dTTP
(Figure B and Figure S5 of the ). Both simulations maintained
well-organized active sites; details are given in Figure S3 and Table
S3 of the . Ensemble
average linkage site torsion angle values are listed in Table S1 of
the .

Translocation
of the Adduct from the Preinsertion Site to the
Insertion Site through the Gap Is Feasible
Evaluating the
MD structures of the preinsertion and insertion sites to consider
translocation to the insertion site, we found that the adduct would
need to rotate around α′ (Figure B) as the strand translocates; α′ adopts a value of
19.6 ± 12.3° (range of 8.7–30.4°) in the preinsertion
site and 150.6 ± 45.0° (range of 98.1–160.9°)
in the insertion site opposite dCTP in its 3′ favored orientation
(Figure S2 and Movie S1 of the ). The large standard deviations and ranges indicate opportunities
for significant conformational flexibility, particularly in the insertion
site. This is seen in Figure B, which shows
the aromatic ring system housed in the gap and oriented in the 3′
direction of the template strand, toward the palm. The gap is sufficiently
spacious to allow the bulky adduct on the major groove side in the
preinsertion position to translocate to the minor groove side in the
insertion position, as shown in Figure C and
Movie S1 of the .

MD Simulations Show That the N-Clasp Is Flexible
We
observed flexibility of the N-clasp domain. This dynamic appeared
along the MD trajectories of unmodified (Movie S2 of the ) and modified (Movies
S3 and S4 of the ) models, but to a greater extent in the models with the AAF-damaged
templates. Of special interest is the region of the tether between
αN1 and αN2 that dynamically elongates and shortens because
of the unwinding of primarily the αN1 helix. This dynamic allows
conformational flexibility in the template strand, which likely facilitates
the wobble pairing with dTTP for the dG-N2-AAF adduct (Movie S4 of the ). However, as discussed below for the dG-N2-B[a]P adduct, lesion topology significantly
impacts this flexibility.

Discussion
Lesion Housing
in the Minor Groove Gap for Bypass by Polκ
Our modeling
and molecular dynamics studies show that the dG-N2-AAF lesion is well-accommodated in the Polκ
gap opposite dCTP. We investigated this minor groove lesion at the
insertion site, directed either 5′ or 3′ along the modified
strand in the gap, based on its NMR solution structure and computational modeling studies. However, the 3′ orientation fits distinctly
better in the gap (Figure B and Figure S4
of the ). The fluorenyl
rings are neatly sandwiched between the fingers/palm and the little
finger, forming van der Waals contact with the fingers/palm domains
on one face, and are well-protected from solvent. Also, the adduct
is well-aligned with the damaged strand, and the distal aromatic ring
stacks dynamically with Phe171. In contrast, in the 5′ orientation,
the fluorenyl rings crowd the fingers domain and deform the gap, and
they are not positioned for stacking with Phe171 (Figure S4 of the ). Moreover, the distal
aromatic ring protrudes from the DNA double helix, extruding from
the protein surface, and thus is solvent-exposed. Therefore, the 3′-oriented
conformer is clearly favorable. Furthermore, Watson–Crick pairing
and all other hallmarks of the reaction-ready state are preserved,
including the water molecules that participate in the WMSA mechanism
(Figure S1 of the ), which retain positions to permit shuttling of the O3′ proton
to the γ-phosphate. In addition, simulations of the transition
state also show the same stability (Figure  and Figure S3 and Table S3 of the ). Only two Mg2+ ions are needed to stabilize the transition state in the low-energy
reaction path of the WMSA mechanism,, but recent
structural evidence indicates that a third metal ion can aid in charge
stabilization as the reaction proceeds in Polη and Polβ.− Future work will provide further insights into the roles of the
metal ions in nucleotidyl transfer with various polymerases.

Our models of the preinsertion site containing the dG-N2-AAF lesion show that its fluorenyl rings can be well-housed
in a crevice of the gap, on the major groove side of the evolving
duplex (Figure A). Notably, we show that translocation
from the preinsertion to the insertion site via rotation of α′
(Figure S2 of the ) is unobstructed through the gap between the fingers/palm and little
finger domains (Figure C and Movie S1 of the ). Thus, our results provide
structural and dynamic explanations for the observed preferred incorporation
of dCTP for this adduct in Polκ. Our models suggest that other
polycyclic aromatic lesions, such as the dG-N2-B[a]P adduct, could be similarly accommodated
in the preinsertion site and translocate through the gap to the insertion
site.

dG:dTTP Mismatches Are Facilitated by N-Clasp Flexibility for
Stable Wobble Pairing
Experimental results showed that dTTP
is misincorporated to a significant extent opposite dG-N2-AAF; our models and MD
simulations showed that an anti-dG*:dTTP wobble pair
was well-accommodated at the insertion site with maintenance of waters
and reaction-ready geometry, and that the transition state structure
was also preserved (Figure S3 and Table S3 of the ). We examined the active site region
to gain insight into the preference for dTTP over other mismatches
and noted a pair of Ala residues positioned so that their methyl groups
engaged in favorable van der Waals interactions with the thymine methyl
group (Figure B). The flexible N-clasp and
the favorable interactions with Ala may also play a part in the observed
preference of Polκ to incorporate dTTP opposite template G above
other mismatches,, opposite unmodified template dG.

Deletion of a part or the
whole N-clasp domain of Polκ reduces the polymerase activity. The N-clasp completes the encircled grip around
the primer/template pair at the insertion position, and it was suggested
that, by inducing conformational changes from disordered to ordered
states when binding to DNA, it locks all the domains of Polκ
around the DNA. Recently, Liu et al. highlighted that the N-clasp is essential for
bridging the minor groove gap by forming van der Waals interactions
with the little finger, but that it is flexible. Our simulations revealed
the flexibility of the N-clasp domain: the region of the tether between
αN1 and αN2 is of particular interest; it dynamically
elongated and shortened because of the unwinding of primarily the
αN1 helix. Moreover, the dynamics appeared along the MD trajectories
of all models (Movies S2–S4 of the ), but to a greater extent in the models with AAF-damaged
templates (Figure  and Movies S3 and S4 of
the ). This dynamics
allows mobility in the template strand, which facilitates the wobble
pairing between an incoming dTTP and dG*, because the N-clasp flexibility
permits the template base to position itself optimally for wobble
pair geometry.

αN1 of the N-clasp domain is more flexible in (A)
dG-N2-AAF than in (B) dG-N2-B[a]P. The most representative structures
for αN1 throughout the 100 ns trajectory are shown.

Lesion Topology Influences N-Clasp Flexibility,
Which Impacts
Polκ Fidelity
Polκ is also responsible for the
near error-free bypass in vitro(,) of the more bulky minor groove dG-N2-B[a]P adduct (Figure B). In this case, nucleotide misincorporation is
much more rare than for the dG-N2-AAF case. Furthermore,
Polκ appears to be utilized in near error-free bypass of the
dG-N2-B[a]P minor groove
adduct in vivo as well,,− with the aid of Polζ for extension. Our previous investigations by modeling and
MD methods, have shown that this lesion is
housed in Polκ like the dG-N2-AAF
adduct opposite dCTP, with aromatic ring directed 3′ along
the modified strand, sandwiched in the gap, protected from solvent,
aligned with the DNA template strand, and stacked with Phe171. In
this lesion, the 5′ orientation, seen in the NMR solution structure, appears to be much more unfavorable than for
the dG-N2-AAF adduct in Polκ, because
the four bulkier aromatic rings would offer greater steric hindrance
to the finger region of the gap. In addition, we have shown that the
pentacovalent phosphorane transition state in the WMSA mechanism for
the nucleotidyl transfer reaction (Figure S1 of the ) is stable when the B[a]P lesion is present. The placement
of the B[a]P ring system in the Polκ gap is
supported by the work of Liu et al. These
workers designed mouse Polκ variants with a reduced gap size
and reported efficient DNA synthesis across from unmodified DNA and
blockage by the dG-N2-B[a]P adduct, proving the positioning of the B[a]P
ring system in the gap. In their models of Polκ mutants, the
lesion is placed in the gap directed 3′ along the template
strand, as in our predicted orientation.,

To explore the flexibility of the N-clasp in the B[a]P lesion, we extended our previous short simulation to 100 ns (Figure D)
and found that the N-clasp is much less flexible (Movie S5 of the ) than for the dG-N2-AAF cases (Figure ). In this trajectory, we observed a hydrogen bond between the dG-N2-B[a]P nonplanar benzylic
ring C8-OH (Figure ) and the in-chain carbonyl
oxygen of Met135 (Figure A and Figure S6 and
Movie S6 of the ).
On the other hand, the acetyl group of the dG-N2-AAF adduct is bulky and dynamic, and its carbonyl is repulsive
to the carbonyl of Met135 (Figure B and Movie
S7 of the ), leading
to a cascade of disturbances between the fingers and the N-clasp via
the adjacent Met135. By contrast, the B[a]P hydrogen
bond to Met135 provides stability in this region. With the lesser
dynamics in the B[a]P case, nucleotide misincorporation
through altered hydrogen bonding schemes such as wobble pairing will
be less facile.

Impact of lesions on Met135. (A) The dG-N2-B[a]P adduct benzylic ring C8-OH hydrogen
bonds with the in-chain carbonyl of Met135. (B) The dG-N2-AAF acetyl group carbonyl is repulsive to the in-chain
carbonyl of Met135. The B[a]P and AAF moieties and
Met135 are colored by atom: C, green; N, blue; O, red; S, yellow;
H, white. The protein domains are colored as in Figure A.

Taken together, our results provide
new structural and dynamic
insights into how the spacious Polκ gap and flexible N-clasp
facilitate bypass of minor groove polycyclic aromatic lesions and
show how lesion topology provides structural and dynamic signals that
determine the extent of fidelity in bypass by Polκ. We determine
for the first time how such lesions can be housed in the preinsertion
site and translocate through the gap to the insertion site. In this
position, we reveal how the distinct features of lesion topology govern
the N-clasp’s flexibility, which in turn impacts the fidelity
of translesion synthesis. Our results show why the dG-N2-AAF lesion manifests a significant propensity to misincorporate
dTTP through wobble pairing facilitated by N-clasp flexibility, while
the dG-N2-B[a]P adduct
imposes diminished flexibility and is bypassed in a nearly error-free
manner by Polκ. More broadly, our
work points to the lesion dependence of Polκ’s processing
in mutagenic and faithful lesion bypass and hence the degree of protection
against mutagenesis by environmental carcinogens that this bypass
polymerase can afford.

Supporting Information Available
Details of the force
field
and MD simulation protocol, the water-mediated and substrate-assisted
(WMSA) mechanism, anti-dG* conformation in the preinsertion
site and insertion site, maintenance of active site organization along
the 100 ns MD simulations, model of dG-N2-AAF in the insertion site oriented in the 5′ direction of
the modified template strand, maintenance of transition state features
with dG*:dTTP wobble pairing, hydrogen bond distance between the dG-N2-B[a]P benzylic ring and Met135,
torsion angle values in initial models and MD-simulated structures,
base pair hydrogen bond occupancies and maintenance of active site
organization, force field parameters, and videos showing dG-N2-AAF translocation, N-clasp flexibility with
the unmodified and modified duplex, and interactions of the adducts
with Met135. Note: Movie S1 is the second Supporting Information
file listed (bi5007964_si_002.avi), followed by Movies S2 to S7 (bi5007964_si_003.avi
to bi5007964_si_008.avi, respectively). This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5007964_si_001.pdf

bi5007964_si_002.avi

bi5007964_si_003.avi

bi5007964_si_004.avi

bi5007964_si_005.avi

bi5007964_si_006.avi

bi5007964_si_007.avi

bi5007964_si_008.avi

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
In this
work, we used the computational resources of the Extreme
Science and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE), which is supported
by National Science Foundation Grant MCB060037, and the Multipurpose
High Performance Computing Resources of New York University (NYU-ITS).

Abbreviations
PolκDNA polymerase κ

AAF2-acetylaminofluorene

dG-N2-AAF3-(deoxyguanosin-N2-yl)-2-acetylaminofluorene

B[a]Pbenzo[a]pyrene

dG-N2-B[a]P(10S)-(+)-trans-anti-B[a]P-N2-dG

NERnucleotide excision repair

WMSAwater-mediated and substrate-assisted

MDmolecular dynamics

PDBProtein Data Bank.

