With our
improving understanding
of the critical role of functional control sequences in DNA from projects
such as ENCODE, it is now clear that the opportunities for selective
targeting of specific and important, but nontranscribed, sequences
of DNA offer exciting options for gene control. Such control possibilities have potential in enhancing
our understanding of gene expression mechanisms as well as therapeutic
development that could not be imagined even a short time ago. The
recent evidence that G-quadruplex DNA could be selectively targeted,, as well as the excellent clinical anti-infective and anticancer
activity of minor groove binding agents, provides encouraging examples of the therapeutic possibilities in
this area. To allow new gene control mechanisms, it is essential to
find agents that target a specific DNA sequence and exert a desired
biological response, such as inhibition or activation of a critical
transcription factor. At the same time, binding the active compounds
to other DNA sequences should not cause significant biological effects
in the same concentration range. Selective activity can be accomplished
with molecules that are not particularly large, so that they maintain
cell uptake and are reasonable in cost and effort to synthesize on
a large, clinical scale.− While compounds that meet these
requirements are not common, they do exist, but unfortunately, the
rules for their design are essentially unknown. Emerging information
about local DNA microstructural states− may help unravel some
keys to the selective biological action of effective DNA-targeting
small molecules.

Initial steps for success in developing agents
that function, as
described above, require design and synthesis of new DNA-binding compounds
and evaluating their DNA affinity and selectivity. A compound that
has recently been shown to exhibit effects quite close to the desired in vivo behavior is dithiophene DB1255 (Figure ). The compound targets
the DNA binding of the ERG protein, an ETS transcription factor that
is commonly overexpressed or translocated in leukemia and prostate
carcinoma.− This is a promising finding because transcription factors have generally
been considered undruggable and direct modulation of gene expression
by targeting oncogenic transcription factors is an exciting new area
of development for cancer treatment. The inhibition of binding of
ERG to DNA was discovered in a screening assay of synthetic DNA binding
compounds and was verified by electrophoretic mobility shift assays
(EMSAs). Additional EMSA analysis defined the precise DNA-binding
sequence required for optimal binding of dithiophene DB1255 and thus
for efficient inhibition of the ERG–DNA complex. It is very
important that biological assays confirmed that DB1255 could modulate
transcription factor binding in cells. Thus, relatively small molecules can specifically target DNA-transcription
factor sites, such as the ERG–DNA recognition site, both in vitro and in cells.

DNA oligomer sequences and compounds used
in this study.

Given the importance
of the cellular activity and transcription
factor inhibition of DB1255, as well as our lack of detailed knowledge
about the biophysical chemistry of the interaction of the compound
and its derivatives with DNA, the experiments reported here were initiated.
Dithiophene DB1255 is unusual for heterocyclic diamidines that target
the DNA minor groove in that it can bind to GC-containing sequences,
and this is essential for its inhibition of the ERG transcription
factor. It was not clear from the initial studies whether DB1255 binds
as a monomer, as with the most similar AT specific minor groove binders,
or as a dimer as observed with the furan derivative, DB293, in mixed
AT- and GC-containing sequences (Figure ).
It was also not clear what structural features and chemical properties
of DB1255 are necessary for its recognition of mixed DNA sequences.
To address these key points, spectroscopy, thermal melting, DNase
I footprinting, biosensor surface plasmon resonance (SPR), and molecular
modeling were used to evaluate the interactions of DB1255 and its
analogues with both pure AT-containing and GC-containing (Figure ) DNA sequences. Very surprisingly, we have found
that, unlike DB293 and synthetic polyamides that bind to mixed DNA
sequences as dimers, DB1255 binds to certain GC-containing sequences
in the minor groove as a monomer, and the binding is very dependent
on the dithiophene group.

Materials and Methods
DNAs, Compounds, and Buffers
The syntheses of DB75,
DB832, DB914, DB1255, DB1282, DB1341, DB1450, and DB1998 (Figure ) have been previously described,, and the scheme and experimental details for DB2297 are given in
the . Their purity
was verified by nuclear magnetic resonance and elemental analysis.
Concentrated stock solutions (1 mM) of compounds were prepared in
water. Solutions of the compounds for biosensor surface plasmon resonance
(SPR) and spectroscopic studies were prepared by dilution with 0.01
M cacodylic buffer (pH 6.25) with 0.001 M EDTA and 0.1 M NaCl. SPR
binding studies were conducted with 5′-biotinated DNAs as previously
described,, while spectroscopic studies were
performed with non-biotin-labeled DNAs (Figure ). The concentration of the DNA solutions was determined spectrophotometrically
at 260 nm using extinction coefficients per nucleotide for 5′-CCATGATTGCTCTCAATCATGG-3′ and 5′-GGAATTCGTCTCCGAATTCC-3′. The extinction
coefficients were calculated by the nearest-neighbor method.

DNase I Footprinting
Experiments
were performed as
previously described using a 265 bp 3′-end-labeled
DNA fragment obtained from EcoRI and PvuII double digestion of the pBS plasmid (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA)
followed by radiolabeling using [γ-32P]dATP (Perkin-Elmer)
and the Klenow enzyme for 30 min. The 265 bp radiolabeled DNA fragment
was then purified on a 10% polyacrylamide gel under native conditions.
Increasing concentrations of the various ligands were incubated with
the radiolabeled DNA fragment for 15 min at 37 °C to ensure equilibrium
prior to digestion for 3 min upon addition of DNase I (0.01 unit/mL)
in 20 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, and 2 mM MnCl2 (pH
7.3). The DNA samples were then precipitated, heated at 90 °C
for 4 min in loading denaturing buffer, and chilled in ice prior to
being loaded on an 8% denaturing polyacrylamide gel for 90 min at
65 W in TBE buffer. The data were collected using a Phosphor Imager
and analyzed using ImageQuant as previously described. Each resolved band was assigned to a particular
base of the DNA fragment by comparison of its position relative to
the guanine sequencing standard (G-track) obtained using DMS/piperidine
treatment of the 265 bp DNA fragment.

Thermal Melting (Tm)
Tm experiments
were conducted with a Cary 300
UV–visible spectrophotometer in 1 cm quartz cuvettes. The absorbance
of the DNA–compound complex was monitored at 260 nm as a function
of temperature, and DNA without the compound was used as a control.
Cuvettes were mounted in a thermal block, and the solution temperatures
were monitored by a thermistor in a reference cuvette with a computer-controlled
heating rate of 0.5 °C/min. Experiments were generally conducted
at a hairpin duplex oligomer concentration of 3 × 10–6 M. For experiments with complexes, a ratio of two compounds per
oligomer duplex was generally used.

CD Spectroscopy
A 1 cm path length cell was used, and
all experiments were conducted at 25 °C. The DNA hairpin duplexes
(3 × 10–6 M per hairpin duplex) were titrated
with increasing concentrations of compound. The resulting ratios increased
from 0.25 to 2.0 (moles of compound to moles of DNA duplex). The experiments
were performed in cacodylic acid buffer (pH 6.25). The sensitivity
was set at 1 mdeg, and the scan speed was set at 50 nm/min. Four scans
were recorded and averaged by the computer for each titration point.

Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR)
SPR measurements were
performed with a four-channel Biacore 2000 optical biosensor system.
The 5′-biotin-labeled DNA samples were immobilized onto streptavidin-coated
sensor chips (Biacore SA) as previously described., Three flow cells were used to immobilize the DNA oligomer samples,
while a fourth cell was left blank as a control. The SPR experiments
were performed at 25 °C in filtered, degassed, 10 mM cacodylic
acid buffer (pH 6.25) containing 100 mM NaCl and 1 mM EDTA. Steady-state
binding analysis was performed with multiple injections of different
compound concentrations over the immobilized DNA surface at a flow
rate of 25 μL/min and 25 °C. Solutions with known ligand
concentrations were injected through the flow cells until a constant
steady-state response was obtained. Compound solution flow was then
replaced by buffer flow, resulting in dissociation of the complex.
The reference response from the blank cell was subtracted from the
response in each cell containing DNA to give a signal (RU, response
units) that is directly proportional to the amount of bound compound.
The predicted maximal response per bound compound in the steady-state
region (RUmax) was determined from the DNA molecular weight,
the amount of DNA on the flow cell, the compound molecular weight,
and the refractive index gradient ratio of the compound and DNA, as
previously described. The reference response
from the blank cell was subtracted from the response in each cell
containing DNA to give a signal (RU, resonance units) that is directly
proportional to the amount of bound compound. The stoichiometry of
the reaction can be calculated as follows:where RU is the observed (experimental) response
in the plateau region and RUmax is the predicted maximal
response for a single small molecule binding to a nucleic acid site.
Dividing the observed steady-state response RU by RUmax yields a stoichiometry-normalized binding isotherm. The calculated
value (r) was fit to an appropriate binding model,
either a single-site model (K2 = 0) or
a two-site model:where K1 and K2 are macroscopic binding constants and Cfree is the free compound concentration in equilibrium
with the complex (the concentration in the flow solution).

Molecular Docking
Dithiophene DB1255
and difuran DB914
were optimized at the B3LYP/6-31G* level of theory using Spartan 10. All minimized ligands were assigned Gasteiger–Hückel
charges by using Autodock version 4.02. A DNA duplex sequence of d[(5′-CCATGATCT-3′)(5′-AGATCATGG-3′)],
based on footprinting results, was generated from the Biopolymer-build
DNA double helix from the Tripos SYBYL-X1.2 software package. The modeled double-stranded DNA (ds-DNA) was
then docked with the optimized ligand using Autodock version 4.02.

The center of the macromolecule is the
grid center with a grid size of 20 Å × 25 Å ×
33 Å and a grid spacing of 0.375 Å. Docking runs were performed
using the Lamarckian genetic algorithm (LGA) with no modifications
of docking parameters. LGA was used because of the existence of rotatable
bonds in the ligands and to evaluate the correct conjugate DNA conformation,
as it is known to reproduce various experimental ligand–DNA
complex structures. Initially, we used a population of random individuals
(population size of 150), a maximal number of 2500000 energy evaluations,
a maximal number of evaluations of 2700, and a mutation rate of 0.02
fs. Fifty independent flexible docking runs were conducted for each
ligand, and then the lowest-energy dock conformation obtained from
the flexible docking was resubmitted for rigid docking to remove the
internal energy of the ligand (steric clashes) and retain the hydrogen
bonding interaction with ds-DNA bases.

Results
DNase I Footprinting
To evaluate the optimal binding
sites for DB1255 and analogues on DNA and to gain insight into the
precise bases that are crucial for DNA complex formation, a DNase
I footprint assay was conducted. The DNA restriction fragment used
is one that has previously been tested with several heterocyclic diamidines. Footprinting gel results are shown in Figures A and A–C and Figure
S1A of the , and
densitometer traces are shown in Figures B
and B–D and Figure S1B of the . The DNA sequence used
contains three AT sites that give strong footprints with AT specific
minor groove binders: 5′-AAAA-3′ between positions 50
and 60, 5′-AAATTA-3′ between positions 70 and 80, and
5′-ATTA-3′ between positions 90 and 100. The sequence
also has two 5′-ATGA-3′ sites within different contexts
(5′-ATGAC-3′ and 5′-ATGAT-3′) on both
sides of position 100, and both bind DB293 as a dimer. DB1255 behaves
in a different manner with strong footprints at only one 5′-ATGA-3′
site (5′-ATGAT-3′ and not 5′-ATGAC-3′)
and the 5′-ATTA-3′ site between positions 90 and 100
(Figure ). It also has footprints at the more
remote 5′-AAAA-3′ and 5′-AAATTA-3′ sites
described above. The results for the site with a single GC base pair
in an AT sequence agree with the optimal footprinting site observed
around the ERG protein binding site for DB1255, 5′-AAGTT-3′. Clearly, DB1255 has an overall recognition capability
different from that of classical AT specific minor groove binders
or the DB293 dimer at ATGA.

DNase I footprinting titration experiments that
aimed to examine
the binding of DB1255 to DNA. (A) Denaturing polyacrylamide gel of
the 265 bp 3′-end-radiolabeled DNA fragments incubated with
the various tested compounds and (B) the corresponding densitometric
analysis. Gray boxes indicate AT-rich tracks of the indicated sequences.
Black boxes indicate the ATGA site specific for DB293 (italic) or
specifically recognized by DB1255 (bold). G indicates a G-track was
performed to localize guanines in the DNA fragment and thus deduce
the position of each base within the known 265 bp sequence.

DNase I footprinting titration experiments with
derivatives of
DB1255. (A and C) Denaturing polyacrylamide gel and (B and D) the
corresponding densitometric analysis. G, gray, and black boxes are
as defined in the legend of Figure .

Related derivatives were also
evaluated for sequence selectivity
on the same DNA sequence (Figure ) to establish
structure–binding selectivity relationships. Among the dithiophenes,
the addition of a methyl group to the phenyls (DB1357) or the thiophenes
(DB1514) and addition of a fluoro substituent to the phenyls (DB1578)
maintain the binding on the 5′-ATGA-3′ site that is
recognized by DB1255 (Figure ). Similar binding
to ATGA also occurs, but to a lesser extent, when phenyls are replaced
with pyridines (DB1247). However, the ATGA binding specificity is
lost when the two thiophenes are replaced with two furans (DB914),
and related compounds DB832, DB934, DB1246, DB1324, DB1579, DB1315,
and DB1256, or by two selenophanes (DB1282 and DB1273 with phenyls
or pyridines, respectively). Replacing dithiophenes in DB1255 with
dithiazoles in DB1998 results in a loss of binding to the 5′-ATGAT-3′
footprint site but retention of the recognition of its closest AT-rich
site at positions 92–95 as well as to the AT-rich sequences
around positions 75 and 55 (Figure S1 of the ). DB1998 is known to have nonspecific binding properties, and because the footprinting ATGA sequence overlaps
significantly with AT sites, it does not discriminate between these
sites. Therefore, for other biophysical studies such as Tm, SPR, and CD, we have used hairpin sequences that do
not have overlapping sites to verify the binding strength of DB1998
and other compounds. Interestingly, the addition of a second furan
ring (DB1256) to DB293 results in a longer molecule that totally abolishes
the binding to both ATGA sites and strongly reduces the level of binding
to AT-rich sites. Binding could be seen only using 1.5 μM DB1256
(Figure A,B) and not lower concentrations
(Figure S1 of the ). These results illustrate that the increased curvature of DB1256
is not optimal for minor groove binding.

Relative Binding Affinity
and Specificity Determined by Thermal
Melting (Tm)
To obtain initial
affinity values for the DNA complexes of different compounds, thermal
melting experiments were performed with hairpin oligomer duplexes
containing a pure AT sequence (5′-AATT-3′) and a mixed
sequence (5′-ATGA-3′ in the preferred 5′-ATGAT-3′
context). The specific binding sites in each oligomer duplex were
based on DNase I footprinting studies (Figures  and ). The compounds were added to the target
DNAs at 1:1 and 2:1 compound:DNA ratios, and the maximal Tm value is near 1:1 for the strong binding compounds.
These results indicate that a maximum of 1 mol of compound is bound
per mole of DNA sites at saturation. Figure S2 of the  shows representative Tm plots of selected compounds in the presence
of the 5′-ATGA-3′ sequence, and Tm values are listed in Table S1 of the . Dithiophene DB1255 binds strongly
to the 5′-ATGA-3′ hairpin duplex (ΔTm = 12.2 °C) compared to furan DB914 (2.1 °C)
and selenophane DB1282 (5.3 °C) derivatives, in agreement with
DNase I footprinting experiments. Dithiazole DB1998 binds to ATGA
strongly with a ΔTm of 14.1 °C
but also binds equally strongly to AATT with a ΔTm of 15.1 °C and thus has poor sequence selectivity,
while dithiophene DB1255 and closely related compounds bind more weakly
to 5′-AATT-3′ (AATT ΔTm = 7.5 °C). The fused dithiophene, DB2297, shows a low ΔTm of 1.0 °C with 5′-ATGA-3′,
and this indicates its shape does not match that of the minor groove.
From the Tm studies, it is clear that
DB1255 has better DNA sequence selectivity and stabilizes the ATGA
sequence better than other related compounds (Figure ).

Binding Modes Determined by Circular Dichroism
Although
these compounds are expected to target the DNA minor groove, CD studies
are important to establish the binding mode, especially for the ATGA
sequence. Strong positive induced CD signals upon titration of the
compound to DNA sequences are characteristic of binding in the minor
groove of DNA. DB1255 showed a strong
positive induced CD (Figure A) upon titration
into the ATGA sequence. The CD results as a function of ratio are
compared for ATGA in Figure C, and the plots
clearly illustrate that DB293 binds at a 2:1 ratio as opposed to DB1255,
which exhibits binding site saturation and CD signal magnitudes characteristic
of a 1:1 complex with ATGA. The monomer binding mode is surprising
for a sequence with GC base pairs and is unlike that of DB293 and
most polyamides of a similar size.−, DB1255 also showed positive induced CD in the presence of AATT,
but the signal is significantly weaker than in the presence of ATGA
(not shown). DB1998 also induces strong CD signals when it is bound
to ATGA (Figure G), again in agreement with Tm values. The tricyclic compounds DB1450, DB832,
and DB1341 bind very weakly to DNA (Figure E,F) and did not induce a strong signal upon forming a complex with
the ATGA sequence, in agreement with footprint and Tm results.

CD spectra of compounds in ATGA: (A) DB1255, (B) DB293,
(D) DB1282,
(E) DB1450, (F) DB832, and (G) DB1998. The ratios of the compound
to DNA are given. (C) Plot of the induced CD signal vs the compound
to DNA concentration ratio for DB293 and DB1255.

Binding Affinity, Specificity, and Stoichiometry Determined
by Biosensor Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR)
To quantitatively
evaluate the DNA affinity and stoichiometry of DB1255, biosensor SPR
experiments were conducted with immobilized DNA hairpin duplexes containing
ATGA and AATT binding sequences (Figure ).
Because the SPR approach responds to mass, it is an excellent method
for comparative studies of dications that have very large differences
in properties and equilibrium binding constants, K. In the initial studies, it was observed that DB1255 sticks to the
injection needle and tubing of the instrument, and in the beginning
injection time range, the flow solution is depleted of DB1255. Therefore,
the experiments for DB1255 were performed in the presence of DMSO
in samples and running buffer. We have tested such conditions previously
and found that the presence of ≤10% DMSO helped to reduce the
loss of compound to tubes and surfaces in SPR without significantly
affecting the binding affinity or the DNA properties on the surface. At a DMSO concentration of 10%, we were able
to successfully obtain SPR sensorgrams of binding of DB1255 to DNA.

SPR sensorgrams (Figure ) were subjected
to steady-state analyses and then fit to appropriate binding models
to determine K values for all compounds (). On the basis of Tm, CD, and footprinting studies, only four compounds,
dithiophene DB1255, diselenophane DB1282, dithiazole DB1998, and furan
DB293, were selected for SPR binding studies. DB293, which was shown
earlier to bind as a cooperative dimer to ATGA, was used to provide
a reference for the stoichiometry of these complexes., In Figure , the SPR signal for DB1255–ATGA
complex formation is half that produced by DB293 and shows that DB1255
binds as a monomer compared to the stacked dimer formed by DB293 in
the ATGA minor groove. In agreement with the results produced by other
methods, the binding to AATT and ATGA in SPR was very dependent on
compound structure. SPR results in Figure B show that DB1255 binds strongly to ATGA (KD = 26 nM) compared to AATT (KD = 86 nM). The Se derivative, DB1282 (Figure D and Table ), binds 15 times weaker to ATGA
than DB1255 with significant nonspecific interactions. The differences
in binding affinity for these two compounds that differ only at the
central heterocycles are striking. DB1255 is approaching saturation
of the ATGA binding sites at 0.1 μM, while DB1282 is just beginning
to bind at that point.

Surface plasmon resonance study. Representative sensorgrams
of
DB293 and DB1255 in the presence of ATGA. The compound concentration
for DB293 ranges from 0.01 to 1 μM and for DB1255 from 0.001
to 0.3 μM (from bottom to top, respectively).

Binding affinity study using SPR. Binding plots for ATGA
and AATT
for (A) DB293, (B) DB1255, (C) DB1998, and (D) DB1282. The data were
fit to a steady-state binding function using appropriate 1:1 or 2:1
models to determine equilibrium binding constants.

Equilibrium Binding Constants for
DB1255 and Its Analogues in the Presence of ATGA and AATT
 	KD (nM)	
compound	ATGA	AATT	
DB293	114; 32	45	
DB1255	26	86	
DB1282	416	1219	
DB1998	24	33	
The experiments
were conducted in
cacodylic acid buffer (pH 6.25) at 25 °C.

K1 and K2 are the first and second equilibrium binding
constants, respectively, obtained from a 2:1 cooperative binding model
for DB293 with ATGA. Other compounds bind to both DNAs as 1:1 complexes.
Dissociation constants were calculated from SPR experiments.

Dithiazole analogue DB1998 binds
as strongly to ATGA [KD = 30 nM (Figure C)] as dithiophene
DB1255 but shows little specificity as it also binds strongly to AATT
[KD = 24 nM (Table )]. The thiazole SPR result is different from the footprinting sequence
in which no footprint is seen at ATGA (Figure  and Figure S2 of the ). The difference is likely due to the isolated ATGA site in the
DNA oligomer used in SPR, while there is an AT site almost overlapping
the ATGA site in the footprint sequence. The strong binding of DB1998
at AT sequences, also observed in SPR, probably explains the inhibition
of its binding to ATGA in the footprint sequence. The fused ring compound,
DB2297, binds very weakly to ATGA, and the binding constants are not
in the instrument’s range for binding analysis. Interestingly,
sensorgrams for DB293 (Figure ) and other
compounds show off rates much faster than those of DB1255. Clearly,
the features of the DB1255 molecule allow it to bind as a monomer
to ATGA with a higher affinity compared to other diamidines, and with
much slower binding kinetics. These binding trends are supported by
the Tm results listed in Table S1 of the  and by DNase I footprinting
experiments (Figures  and  and Figure S1 of the ) for these and other compounds.

Discussion
Our
previous studies with dithiophene derivative DB1255 showed
that the compound could bind to an AT sequence with one GC base pair but provided limited quantitative information
about the complex of DB1255 or its analogues with mixed base pair
sites. Given the excellent transcription factor inhibition and biological
results with DB1255 in cells, we have undertaken a more detailed biophysical
analysis of DB1255 and some analogue complexes with DNA. The intrinsically
narrow AT DNA minor groove that is recognized by monomer heterocyclic
compounds is a well-established phenomenon., Mixed guanine-containing DNA sequences typically have wider grooves
and are, therefore, difficult to recognize using a monomer complex. On the basis of work with polyamides and heterocyclic
diamidines, such as DB293,, dimer-forming compounds
have been used to enhance specificity and affinity for wider DNA minor
grooves with GC base pairs. Even after these initial successes, however,
we understand relatively little about the general compound structural
features necessary for mixed DNA recognition by most heterocyclic
cations. Because DB1255 has been found to bind strongly to a mixed
AT and GC sequence in both cellular and in vitro contexts, the compounds of Figure  were evaluated in an effort to understand the compound structural
features necessary to recognize mixed sequences of AT and GC base
pairs in DNA. The compounds (Figure ) have
variable lengths, symmetries, and ring heteroatoms for testing of
their effects on the mixed sequence of DNA.

In our initial investigation
of DNA binding by DB1255, it was a
surprise to find that it has a high Tm value, very strong CD signals with ATGA, and 4-fold better binding
affinity for ATGA versus AATT. Compounds that specifically recognize
GC base pairs usually have strong H-bond acceptors such as the furan
in DB293. The second major surprise with DB1255 was that it clearly
binds strongly as a monomer, not as a dimer, to ATGA. SPR results
show better specificity for that sequence with DB1255 than for the
DB293 dimer (Table ). The results in this
paper, thus, clearly show that DB1255 has a novel GC recognition mode
and is able to induce narrowing in the minor groove width of GC-containing
sequences for optimal interactions.

To evaluate ideas for how
DB1255 is able to effectively bind to
the ATGA sequence, a molecular docking study was conducted with the
duplex d[(5′-CCATGATCT-3′)(5′-AGATCATGG-3′)]. The molecule was docked into the 5′-cATGAt-3′
sequence, found in footprinting and used in the other experiments,
and energy minimized. The low-energy form (Figure ) has bifurcated H-bond-type interactions from the G-NH2 group, which projects into the minor groove, to the two thiophene
S atoms that are symmetrically located on both sides of the G-NH2 group. The G-NH2 group–S distances are
2.3 and 2.2 Å (Figure ). One amidine
(the bottom one in Figure ) forms an H-bond
with a thymine (T) carbonyl group on the complementary strand. The
other amidine (the top one in Figure ) is
adjacent to the flanking 3′-T in cATGAt, so that the actual
binding site is 5 bp and should be written as 5′-ATGAT-3′.
This latter amidine can alternately form H-bonds with the thymine
carbonyl (weaker in this calculation) or to an adjacent backbone deoxyribose
O (stronger). Interaction with the 3′-T can explain why DB1255
binds more strongly to 5′-ATGAT-3′ than to 5′-ATGAC-3′,
which has the 3′-terminal GC base pair H-bond in the minor
groove. DB293 binds well to both sequences, but DB1255 binds to only
5′-ATGAT-3′. The thiophenes have the best shape to give
the optimal minor groove binding conformation to DB1255 with the thiophenes
and terminal amidines in position to strongly recognize the ATGAT
sequence.

Docking of DB1255 to d[(5′-CCATGATCT-3′)(5′-AGATCATGG-3′)]
by using Autodock version 4.02. Two thiophene S atoms (yellow) form
bifurcated hydrogen bonds with the G-NH in the minor groove (shown
with a yellow dashed line). The lower amidine group forms H-bonds
with the thymine (T) carbonyl of T4, which is at the 5′ side
of G on the opposite strand), and to a deoxyribose oxygen of the DNA
backbone (yellow dashed lines) on the same strand as G. The top amidine
group is adjacent to the flanking 3′-T in cATGAt and forms
an H-bond with the DNA backbone (yellow dashed line). The DNA backbone
is shown as a stick model, colored by atom type (gray for carbon,
red for oxygen, blue for nitrogen, and orange for phosphorus). The
G5 base is displayed as a ball and stick and colored by atom type
(cyan for carbon, white for hydrogen, and blue for nitrogen), and
the ligand is displayed as a ball and stick also and colored by atom
type (magenta for carbon, white for hydrogen, and blue for nitrogen).

A similar modeling study was conducted
with DB914, the difuran
analogue of DB1255, which does not have significant binding with the
ATGA sequence. No satisfactory minor groove-bound conformation could
be found for DB914 (Figure S3 of the ). The difuran system is significantly more curved
than the dithiophene of DB1255, and as a result, the difuran is pushed
away from the floor of the minor groove and only the amidines interact
with the bases. Frequently, a more linear conformation was observed
with one furan O pointed into the groove and one pointed out, but
all of the observed DNA complexes have a higher energy than the DB1255
complex. A second relatively low-energy model for DB1255 was also
found in the modeling experiments (Figure S4 of the ) but with a frequency significantly
lower than that of the structure in Figure . The higher-energy model has a single thiophene S–G NH group
interaction such that DB1255 can slide back and forth first to have
one thiophene and then the other interacting with the G NH group.
It seems likely that the single-interaction models are in a dynamic
minor groove equilibrium with the structure that has two interactions.
The low-energy structure probably serves as a bridge between the two
single-interaction conformations.

Dithiazole DB1998 binds to
ATGA in the isolated sequence in SPR
and CD but does not bind to it in the more complex footprinting sequence.
The compound also failed to show specificity in SPR as it binds equally
strongly to pure AT sequences (Table ). Such
a strong propensity to interact at an AT-rich site may have oriented
the binding of DB1998 to the AT-rich site adjacent to the ATGA site
rather than to the ATGA site in the footprinting experiments. This
is a very important observation because in our recent findings, it was concluded that DB1255 has better biological
activity than DB1998. DB1255 recognizes mixed sequence DNA strongly
and specifically to inhibit DNA binding by the ERG transcription factor
and is an excellent lead compound for anticancer therapeutic development. DB2297, the fused ring analogue of DB1255, binds
very weakly to ATGA. The presence of fused thiophenes changes the
structure and properties of DB2297 completely, giving it a more linear
shape, which in this case is not appropriate for minor groove binding.
This compound modification shows that the presence of two thiophenes
is not sufficient for strong binding if the shape of the compound
is not optimal for the ATGA groove. The shorter dithiophene, DB1450,
showed nonspecific binding to ATGA via SPR and is not comparable to
DB1255. The loss of a phenyl in DB1450 and the nonoptimal radius of
curvature cause poor binding of that compound. In DB1341, the presence
of three thiophenes did not help to improve the DNA binding affinity
for ATGA. In conclusion, these results show that in DB1255 the two
thiophenes are essential in making key contacts with the G NH group,
and the two terminal phenylamidine modules play an extremely important
role in the fit of the compound into the ATGAT minor groove. When
this structure is significantly modified, for example, in the difuran
and diselenophane compounds, the affinity for ATGA decreases dramatically.

Supporting Information Available
Synthetic
scheme of DB2297,
supporting figures (Figures S1–S4), and Table S1. This material
is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi401582t_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
§ M.M.:
Central University of Rajasthan, NH-8, Bandar Sindri, Ajmer,
Rajasthan, India.

Author Present Address
∥ P.P.:
Metastases Research Laboratory, GIGA-CANCER, University of
Liege, 4000 Liege Sart Tilman, Belgium.

Author Present Address
⊥ M.A.I.:
Department of Chemistry, College of Science, King Faisal
University, Hofuf 31982, Saudi Arabia.

Author Present Address
@ A.A.F.: Department
of Pharmaceutical Organic Chemistry, Faculty
of Pharmacy, Mansoura University, Mansoura 35516, Egypt.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
SPRsurface plasmon
resonance

RUresponse
unit of Biacore
SPR instruments

CDcircular dichroism

Tmthermal melting.

