Cystic fibrosis is caused by
loss of function mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance
regulator (CFTR) Cl– channel, a member of the ATP-binding
cassette (ABC) family of ATP-dependent membrane transport proteins.
All ABC proteins share a common modular architecture, consisting of
two membrane-spanning domains (MSDs) that form the substrate translocation
pathway and two cytoplasmic nucleotide binding domains (NBDs) that
bind and hydrolyze ATP (Figure ). In CFTR,
an additional cytoplasmic regulatory domain (R domain) is the site
of regulation by PKA-dependent phosphorylation. Consistent with this
ABC architecture, several transmembrane (TM) α-helices− and extracellular loops (ELs), have been shown to contribute
to the Cl– channel pore in CFTR. The activity of
the channel is controlled by ATP interactions at the NBDs,, which leads to the opening and closing of a “gate”
located in the MSDs.

Location of CL3 within
the overall structure of CFTR. The CFTR
protein consists of two MSDs and two NBDs, joined by a cytoplasmic
R domain. Each MSD consists of six TM helices connected by three ELs
and two CLs. (A) Proposed overall structure of CFTR (viewed from the
side), based on atomic homology modeling of bacterial ABC protein
Sav1866. TMs that are known to line the
Cl– channel pore are colored red (from left to right,
TM1, TM6, and TM12, respectively). The locations of TM8 (left) and
TM9 (right) are colored blue. Connecting these two TMs is CL3, which
is colored blue, with the region mutated in this study colored gold.
(B) Isolated TM8–CL3–TM9 region from the same model,
showing the juxtamembrane region of this CL as a cytoplasmic extension
of these two TMs. (C) Position of the CLs around a narrow “funnel”
region in the cytoplasm, as viewed from above. Other parts of the
protein have been removed for the sake of clarity. The part of CL3
that appears to line this narrow region is that proximal to TM9. Illustrations
were prepared using PyMOL based on the structure presented by Serohijos
et al. (D) Two-dimensional topology of
CFTR, illustrating two MSDs, two NBDs, the R domain (RD), and 12 TMs.
The coloring of the TMs is the same as that in panel A. The region
mutated in this study is enclosed in the dotted box, which is magnified
in panel E. This shows the amino acid sequence of CL3, from P936 at
the cytoplasmic end of TM8 to P988 at the cytoplasmic end of TM9.
As in panels A–C, residues mutated in this study (L941–K951
and L973–L983) are colored gold.

The NBDs are not in direct contact with the TMs
but instead are
connected indirectly via the long cytoplasmic loops (CLs) that are
located between individual TMs (Figure ).
Structural models of the CFTR protein− therefore suggest that
NBD–CL interactions should be important in coupling ATP action
at the NBDs to channel opening in the MSDs. In fact, the role of the
CLs in forming a physical and functional link between the NBDs and
the transmembrane substrate translocation pathway may be conserved
among all ABC proteins., The location of the
CLs below the TMs (Figure A) also suggests
that the CLs could form a cytoplasmic extension of the permeation
pathway for Cl– ions. In fact, on the basis of these
models, it has been suggested that the CLs form a narrow “funnel”
connecting the TMs to the cytoplasm (Figure C), and that this CL funnel, not the TMs, forms the narrowest part
of the Cl– channel pore where channel opening and
closing may occur.

Functional evidence
also supports a role for NBD–CL interactions
in ATP-dependent channel gating (pore opening and closing). For example,
CL3, located between TM8 and TM9 (Figure ),
interacts with both NBDs as well as the
R domain, to regulate gating. Mutations within CL3
also affect gating,, perhaps by disrupting communication
between the NBDs and the gate in the MSDs. CF-associated mutations in this loop also disrupt processing and
trafficking of CFTR protein to the membrane,, perhaps highlighting the importance of domain–domain interactions
in proper protein folding,,− although CL3 has also been implicated in ubiquitination-dependent
CFTR trafficking. There is also some
functional evidence that CL3 may contribute to the Cl– permeation pathway. The CF-associated mutations S945L and G970R
were shown to have very slightly altered single-channel Cl– conductance. Furthermore, the positive
charge associated with CL3 residue K978 is involved in interactions
with cytoplasmic channel blocking substances., However, the role of CL3 in channel function has not previously
been addressed in a comprehensive way.

To investigate the possibility
that CL3 forms a cytoplasmic extension
of the CFTR pore, we have undertaken a substituted cysteine accessibility
mutagenesis (SCAM) study of the juxtamembrane parts of this loop.
Because residues within the CLs have not previously been directly
demonstrated to contribute to the permeation pathway, we reasoned
that this region relatively close to the TMs might be considered most
likely to influence Cl– permeation. Furthermore,
more cytoplasmic parts of CL3 are likely to be involved in interactions
with NBD1.,, We have used
SCAM because of the proven power of this approach in identifying amino
acids that contribute to the CFTR permeation pathway.,,− Our results indicate that the
juxtamembrane regions of CL3 are exposed to the cytoplasm and are
readily modified by intracellular cysteine-reactive methanethiosulfonate
(MTS) reagents. However, the effects of modification appear to reflect
changes in channel gating, rather than channel permeation properties.
These results suggest that while CL3 plays a role in the coordination
of ATP-dependent gating, it does not make an important functional
contribution to the Cl– permeation pathway.

Materials and Methods
Experiments were conducted on
baby hamster kidney (BHK) cells transiently
transfected with CFTR. As in our recent SCAM-based studies of individual
TMs,,, we have used
a human CFTR variant from which all cysteines had been removed by
mutagenesis (as described in ref ()) and which includes a mutation in NBD1 (V510A)
to increase the level of protein expression in the cell membrane. Use of this Cys-less variant is necessary for
these studies because wild-type CFTR is potently inhibited by cytoplasmic
MTS reagents. However, in addition to
its severe trafficking defect,, Cys-less CFTR has been
reported to have gating, and permeation,, properties subtly different from
those of wild-type CFTR. Additional mutations were introduced into
the Cys-less background using the QuikChange site-directed mutagenesis
system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) and verified by DNA
sequencing. Mutations were introduced into the juxtamembrane regions
of CL3, replacing each consecutive amino acid between L941 and K951
(in the cytoplasmic extension from TM8) and from L973 to L983 (in
the cytoplasmic extension from TM9) individually with cysteine (Figure E). BHK cells were transiently transfected as described
previously, except that 24 h after transfection
cells were transferred to 27 °C to promote mature protein expression. Cells were used for Western blotting analysis
after 48 h at 27 °C, and for electrophysiological experimentation
after 1–3 days at 27 °C.

For Western blotting, cells
at ∼80% confluence were washed
twice with ice-cold PBS, harvested by being scraped, and lysed on
ice for 30 min in RIPA buffer supplemented with protease inhibitors.
Cells were lysed by repeated vortexing as well as by passing the lysate
through a pipet tip every 5 min. The lysate was then centrifuged (15000g for 30 min at 4 °C) and the supernatant poured into
a fresh tube. The protein concentration was assayed using the Bradford
protein assay method. Approximately 30 μg of protein was preincubated
with an equal volume of loading buffer for 30 min at 37 °C and
then loaded onto a 7.5% acrylamide–SDS gel and finally transferred
to an Immobilon-P membrane (Millipore, Bedford, MA). Immunoblotting
for CFTR was performed by incubating the membrane overnight at 4 °C
with monoclonal mouse anti-CFTR antibody (M3A7, Millipore) at a 1:1000
dilution. After being washed, the membrane was incubated for 1 h at
room temperature with a secondary antibody (horseradish peroxidase-conjugated
goat anti-mouse, Jackson ImmunoResearch, West Grove, PA) at a 1:5000
dilution. Detection was conducted using the ECL Plus kit (Amersham
Pharmacia, Baie d’Urfe, QC) following the manufacturer’s
instructions. The relative expression of mature, complex glycosylated
CFTR protein (“Band C”) and immature, core glycosylated
protein (“Band B”) was assessed by densitometric analysis
of scanned Western blots using 1-D (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA).

Macroscopic and single-channel recordings were made using the excised,
inside-out configuration of the patch clamp technique. CFTR channels
were activated after patch excision and recording of background currents
by exposure to protein kinase A catalytic subunit (PKA, 20 nM) and
MgATP (1 mM) in the cytoplasmic solution. For macroscopic current
recordings, both the intracellular (bath) and extracellular (pipet)
solution contained 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM N-tris(hydroxymethyl)methyl-2-aminoethanesulfonate,
and 2 mM MgCl2. For single-channel recordings, NaCl in
the pipet solution was replaced with 150 mM sodium gluconate to generate
an outwardly directed Cl– concentration gradient.
This was done to allow CFTR single-channel currents to be resolved
at a membrane potential of −20 mV during the prolonged recordings
necessary for measurement of channel open probability (see Figure ). During preliminary recordings, we found that
inside-out patches held at more negative or positive membrane potentials
using the same symmetrical Cl– solutions used for
macroscopic current recordings were unstable over these prolonged
recording periods. The transmembrane Cl– concentration
gradient is not expected to influence any of the parameters measured
in our experiments. All experimental solutions were adjusted to pH
7.4.

Channels were exposed to intracellular cysteine-reactive
MTS reagents
to covalently modify an introduced cysteine side chain. Two MTS reagents,
the negatively charged [2-sulfonatoethyl] MTS (MTSES) and the positively
charged [2-(trimethylammonium)ethyl] MTS (MTSET) were used at high
concentrations (200 μM) that had no effect on Cys-less CFTR., MTS reagents were applied to the cytoplasmic face of inside-out
patches after stable current activation with PKA and ATP, and the
current was monitored for at least 5 min to ensure stable modification.
In some cases, the identity of the remaining currents as being carried
by CFTR was confirmed using the CFTR-specific inhibitor CFTRinh-172. To measure the rate of modification, the macroscopic current
amplitude was monitored continuously and the time-dependent change
in amplitude after the addition of MTS reagent was fitted by a single-exponential
function. The time constant of exponential current decay, τ,
was then used to calculate the apparent second-order reaction rate
constant, k, from the equation k = 1/([MTS]τ).

Current traces were filtered at 100 Hz
(macroscopic currents) or
50 Hz (single-channel currents) using an eight-pole Bessel filter,
digitized at 250 Hz, and analyzed using pCLAMP9 (Molecular Devices,
Sunnyvale, CA). Macroscopic current–voltage (I–V) relationships were constructed using
voltage ramp protocols from a holding potential of 0 mV. The single-channel
current amplitude and channel open probability were estimated from
all-points amplitude histograms (Figure ).
For analysis of the effects of MTSES on single-channel currents, currents
were recorded for at least 5 min at a membrane potential of −20
mV under control conditions to ensure stable channel activity, following
which MTSES was applied to the cytoplasmic face of the patch and currents
were recorded for a further 5–12 min. Because channel open
probability was highly variable between patches (see Figure S2 of
the ), we have focused
on the effect of MTSES exposure on open probability, which we found
to be considerably more consistent (Figure B).

Experiments were conducted at room temperature (21–24
°C).
Values are presented as means ± the standard error of the mean.
Tests of significance were conducted using an unpaired t test, for which p &lt; 0.05 was considered statistically
significant. All chemicals were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (Oakville,
ON), except MTSES and MTSET (Toronto Research Chemicals, North York,
ON) and PKA (Promega, Madison, WI).

Results
Expression of CL3 Mutants in a Cys-less CFTR Background
We used site-directed mutagenesis to introduce cysteines into the
juxtamembrane region of CL3 (Figure ). Cysteines
were substituted for each amino acid from L941 to K951 in the cytoplasmic
extension from TM8, and from L973 to L983 in the extension from TM9
(Figure E). Mutant CFTR was expressed in BHK
cells, and proper processing of the CFTR protein was assayed using
Western blot analysis. As shown in Figure , Cys-less CFTR was able to generate mature, complex glycosylated
(Band C) protein, although the relative abundance of this mature form
was lower than that of wild-type CFTR. Previously, we have shown that
the ability of Cys-less to produce Band C protein in BHK cells is
dependent on (i) the growth of the cells at a reduced temperature
of 27 °C and (ii) the presence of the V510A “rescue”
mutation. In contrast to the Cys-less
background, almost all CL3 cysteine mutants studied gave almost undetectable
levels of Band C protein (Figure ), suggesting
that mutations in this juxtamembrane region result in serious misprocessing
of the CFTR protein.

Protein expression of CL3 mutants. (A) Representative
Western blot
for CFTR using protein from BHK cells transfected with the wild type,
the Cys-less mutant, or the named cysteine mutants in a Cys-less background.
Note the near absence of Band C protein for these mutants. (B) Mean
abundance of Band C protein (as a percentage of total). Only R975C
was not significantly different from the Cys-less mutant (p &gt; 0.6); for H950C and L983C, p &lt;
0.05,
and for all other mutants, p &lt; 0.00005. Means
of data from nine independent transfections for Cys-less and three
to six for other constructs are shown.

Effects of the MTS Reagents on Macroscopic Currents
Functional properties of mutant CFTR expressed in BHK cells were
investigated using inside-out patch recording. Sixteen of the 22 mutants
that were constructed generated macroscopic PKA- and ATP-dependent
currents in inside-out membrane patches (e.g., Figure ). However, for the six remaining mutants (S945C, L948C, H949C,
K951C, K978C, and D979C), application of PKA and ATP consistently
failed to generate a significant increase in the macroscopic current
amplitude above background levels. Each of these six
mutants was also associated with undetectable levels of mature, Band
C protein (Figure ), suggesting that these
mutants were misprocessed and absent from the cell membrane. However,
other CL3 mutants with similar apparent misprocessing as determined
by Western blotting (Figure ) did generate
measurable macroscopic currents. Our favored interpretation of this
apparent discrepancy is that our patch clamp experiments are, in fact,
able to detect tiny amounts of CFTR protein in the cell membrane that
cannot be detected by Western blotting, either because the amount
of mature Band C protein is below detection levels or because some
immature Band B protein is present at the membrane. However, on the
basis of our results, we cannot rule out the alternative explanation
that S945C, L948C, H949C, K951C, K978C, and D979C are also present
at the cell membrane but that these mutants generate CFTR channels
that are functionally nonresponsive to PKA and ATP.

Modification of cysteines
introduced into CL3 by internal MTS reagents.
(A–C) Example time courses of macrosopic currents (measured
at −50 mV) carried by L941C (A), V944C (B), and L983C (C).
After patch excision and recording of baseline currents, patches were
treated sequentially with 20 nM PKA and 1 mM ATP (hatched bars), 200
μM MTS reagent (left panels, MTSES, black bars; right panels,
MTSET, white bars), and 5 μM CFTRinh-172 (gray bars).
(D and E) I–V relationships
for the patches shown in panels A and B following maximal current
stimulation with PKA and ATP (control), following addition of MTSES
(left panels) or MTSET (right panels), and following addition of CFTRinh-172 (+Inh).

For those 16 CL3 mutants that could be studied
functionally, modification
of introduced cysteines by negatively charged MTSES and positively
charged MTSET was investigated by application of these reagents to
the cytoplasmic face of inside-out membrane patches following channel
activation by PKA and ATP. Three different types of functional effects
were observed. In most cases (L941C, I942C, K946C, I947C, H950C, L973C,
N974C, S977C, I980C, A981C, and I982C), macroscopic currents were
inhibited by both MTSES and MTSET (e.g., Figure A). In contrast, T943C, V944C, and R975C were inhibited by MTSES
but not significantly affected by MTSET exposure (e.g., Figure B). Two mutants, F976C and L983C, were not significantly
affected by either MTSES or MTSET (e.g., Figure C), as recently demonstrated for Cys-less using similar protocols, (Figure ). The shape of the macroscopic I–V relationship was nearly linear
for Cys-less CFTR and was not significantly
altered by any of the mutations studied, nor did modification by either
MTSES or MTSET have any significant effect on the shape of the I–V relationship (Figure D,E and Figure S1 of the ). The effects of MTS reagents on the amplitude
of macroscopic currents carried by different channel constructs are
summarized in Figure . The rate of modification
of introduced cysteines was quantified from the time course of macroscopic
current amplitude change following application of MTSES or MTSET (Figure ).

Effects of internal MTS reagents on macroscopic current
amplitudes.
Mean effect of treatment with 200 μM MTSES (black bars) or MTSET
(white bars) on the macroscopic current amplitude measured at −50
mV, for Cys-less CFTR and each of the cysteine-substituted CL3 mutants
named. Mutants that did not yield measurable macroscopic currents
in inside-out patches are shown in parentheses. Means of data from
three or four patches are shown. Asterisks indicate a significant
difference from the value of Cys-less (p &lt; 0.05).

Rate of modification by MTSES and MTSET. (A and B) Example
time
courses of macroscopic currents (measured at −50 mV) carried
by I942C (A) and I947C (B). Current ampliutes were measured every
6 s after attainment of stable current amplitude following activation
by PKA (20 nM) and ATP (1 mM). In each case, 200 μM MTSES (black
bars) or MTSET (white bars) was applied to the cytoplasmic face of
the patch at time zero. The decline in current amplitude due to MTS
modification has been fit by a single-exponential function in each
case. Currents remaining in the presence of MTSES or MTSET were inhibited
by application of 5 μM CFTRinh-172 as indicated.
(C) Calculated modification rate constants for both MTSES (●)
and MTSET (○) for each of the 14 MTS reagent-sensitive mutants
listed. Note that T943C, V944C, and R975C were inhibited by MTSES
but not by MTSET (see Figure ). Means of data
from three patches are shown. Asterisks indicate a significant difference
between the modification rate constant for MTSES and that for MTSET
(p &lt; 0.05).

Effects of MTSES on Single-Channel Currents
To further
characterize the nature of the inhibitory effects of MTS reagents
on cysteine-substituted CL3 mutants, we recorded single-channel currents
carried by these mutants in inside-out patches. For technical reasons,
single-channel recordings were taken using a low extracellular Cl– concentration of 4 mM (see ). Under these conditions, all channel constructs
studied had identical single-channel conductance, even where the mutation
involved removal of a positive charge (K946C and R975C) (Figure ). Note that those six mutants that failed to generate
macroscopic currents (see above) were also not associated with detectable
single-channel currents.

Single-channel conductance of cysteine mutants.
(A) Example single-channel
currents carried by Cys-less CFTR and the charge-substituting mutants
K946C and R975C as indicated, at a membrane potential of −50
mV. The horizontal line to the left of the traces indicates the channel
closed state current level. (B and C) Mean single-channel I–V relationships recorded under
these conditions for Cys-less (○), K946C (●, B), and
R975C (●, C). (D) Mean single-channel conductance for different
channel variants measured under these conditions. None of these were
significantly different from the Cys-less background. Means of data
from three to twelve patches are shown in panels C and D.

We restricted our single-channel studies to the
use of MTSES, because
this reagent had more consistent effects on cysteine-substituted CL3
mutants [i.e., all MTS-sensitive mutants were inhibited by MTSES,
although not all were inhibited by MTSET (Figure )] and also because we considered modification by this negatively
charged substance more likely to interfere electrostatically with
Cl– permeation and so more likely to influence Cl– conductance.− In fact, in most cases, MTSES
and MTSET had similar effects on macroscopic current amplitudes (Figure ). The approach we followed is illustrated in Figure , using I982C as an example.
PKA- and ATP-stimulated single-channel currents were recorded for
&gt;5 min to ensure stable activation, following which MTSES was applied
to the intracellular solution. In the example shown in Figure , it can be seen that the application of MTSES reduced
the open probability of the channel to ∼55% of the control,
without affecting the single-channel current amplitude. Effects of
MTSES on both unitary current amplitude and open probability were
quantified using all-points amplitude histograms constructed from
data before and after MTSES exposure (e.g., Figure B). This data for all channel constructs studied are summarized
in Figure . In
no case did MTSES exposure significantly affect single-channel current
amplitude (Figure A). In contrast, for all
mutants for which MTSES exposure reduced macroscopic current amplitudes
(Figure ), MTSES also caused a reduction in
open probability (Figure B). MTSES did not
affect open probability in Cys-less, or in two mutants that were not
sensitive to MTSES at the macroscopic current level [F976C and L983C
(Figure )] (Figure B), suggesting that it is an MTSES-induced reduction in open probability
that is responsible for the reduction in macroscopic current amplitude
due to MTSES modification observed in Figure .

Example of the effect of modification by MTSES on single-channel
currents. (A) Current recorded from a patch containing two I982C channels,
before (Control) and after addition of 200 μM MTSES to the intracellular
solution, at a membrane potential of −20 mV. The horizontal
line to the left of the traces indicates the zero current level. (B)
All-points amplitude histograms prepared from extended periods of
the recordings shown in panel A, corresponding to control (left) and
post-MTSES (right) conditions. Each has been fit by the sum of three
Gaussian functions, giving mean unitary amplitudes of −0.504
pA (control) and −0.488 pA (+MTSES) and open probabilities
of 0.183 (control) and 0.101 (+MTSES).

Effects of MTSES on the single-channel current amplitude
and open
probability. Single-channel recordings such as those shown in Figure  were used to quantify the effect of MTSES (200
μM) on the single-channel current amplitude (A) and open probability
(B) for each of the channel variants named. Means of data from three
to nine patches are shown. Asterisks indicate a significant difference
from Cys-less (p &lt; 0.05).

Discussion
Of 22 cysteine mutations introduced into
CL3, 21 appeared to be
associated with a significant defect in protein processing relative
to the Cys-less background, as determined by densitometric analysis
of production of mature CFTR protein (Figure ). Superficially, this might appear to support an important, and
relatively non-site-specific, role for CL3 in normal CFTR processing
(see the introductory section). However, Cys-less CFTR itself has
a severe protein misprocessing defect,, that in this study has been partially ameliorated
by a rescue mutation in NBD1 (V510A) and by growing transfected BHK
cells at a reduced temperature of 27 °C (see ). Thus, the relevance of these findings
for the processing of wild-type CFTR is uncertain, as is the rationale
for studying trafficking in a Cys-less CFTR background.

Interestingly,
many CL3 mutants could be studied functionally in
spite of an apparent lack of mature protein (Figure ). We believe this most likely reflects the sensitivity of
our patch clamp assay to the presence of even very small amounts of
CFTR in the cell membrane. Only six mutants (S945C, L948C, H949C,
K951C, K978C, and D979C) failed to generate functional channels in
inside-out membrane patches (Figure ). Each
of these six was associated with undetectable Band C protein by Western
blotting (Figure ), consistent with the failure
of trafficking of these mutants to the cell membrane. Misprocessing
of CF-associated mutants S945L, H949Y, and D979A has previously been
demonstrated,, perhaps indicating that these
residues are particularly critical for normal protein processing.
However, because our work failed to show a direct correlation between
protein processing determined biochemically (Figure ) and function determined electrophysiologically (Figure ), we cannot rule out the possibility that the six
nonfunctional mutants are present in the cell membrane but nonfunctional
for other reasons, such as a failure to open in response to ATP and
PKA or an undetectably low single-channel conductance.

Interestingly,
one mutant that failed to express functional channels
in our hands (K978C) has previously been studied in a Cys-less background
by patch clamp recording by others (see
below). Results with this mutant, which was shown to generate constitutively
active (ATP-independent) channel, formed a central part of the hypothesis
put forward by Wang et al. concerning
the role of CL3 in channel gating. It was a great surprise to us,
therefore, that we were unable to observe functional expression of
K978C in our experiments (Figure ), especially
as Wang et al. had also studied this
mutant in a Cys-less background. Because we were so surprised at not
being able to replicate the functional expression of this mutant,
we in fact constructed this mutant on three independent occasions,
but in each case, the lack of fuctional expression remained the same.
We can only imagine that some difference in the expression system
has resulted in our failure to observe currents for this mutant. Indeed,
our results indicate that this mutant is associated with a severe
protein processing defect in BHK cells (Figure ). In fact, the functional results of Wang et al. for K978C, that the open probability of the channel is
reduced following modification by MTSET, are quite consistent with
our own findings for other, nearby CL3 residues.

Our focus in
this work was to explore the functional properties
of CL3 mutants that do express functional channels in the membrane
of BHK cells. We found that 14 of 16 functional cysteine-substituted
mutants were sensitive to cytoplasmic exposure to MTSES and/or MTSET
(Figure ). This suggests that most of the
juxtamembrane parts of CL3 (Figure ) are exposed
to the cytoplasm and readily accessible to large cytoplasmic substances.
In fact, there was no apparent difference between those mutations
located proximal to TM8 compared to those proximal to TM9, in terms
of the functional effect of modification (Figure ) or the rate of modification (Figure ), suggesting that these two “limbs” of CL3 show approximately
equivalent accessibilities to the cytoplasm. We reasoned that the
reduction in macroscopic current amplitude that consistently resulted
from MTSES and/or MTSET modification of CL3 (Figure ) could reflect a reduction in Cl– conductance
(i.e., interference with the movement of Cl– through
the open channel pore) and/or a reduction in open probability (i.e.,
interference with the normal opening and closing of the channel).
Direct single-channel recording experiments with MTSES (Figures  and ) support the latter
explanation. However, we have additional reasons to doubt an important
functional role for CL3 in influencing the functional properties of
the permeation pathway for Cl– ions.

We,, and others, have
recently used cytoplasmic MTS reagents to identify pore-lining
amino acid side chains in TM1, TM6, and TM12, and several patterns
emerge from these studies. In each of these studies, MTSES modification
inside the pore always causes a reduction in channel function, most
likely because of interference with Cl– permeation.
This contrasts with MTSES modification of CL3, which has no effect
on Cl– conductance (Figure A). It would be most surprising if introduction of a negative charge
by covalent modification by MTSES close to the permeation pathway
for Cl– ions did not alter Cl– conductance. The rate of MTSES modification is high for cysteines
introduced close to the cytoplasmic ends of the TMs and decreases
with the apparent distance into the pore from its cytoplasmic end,
consistent with narrowing of the pore.,, In contrast, there was no apparent pattern to the
rate of MTS modification of different CL3 residues (Figure ). Importantly, in TM1 the rate of modification
by positively charged MTSET is consistently ∼10-fold lower
than that by negatively charged MTSES, which was interpreted as reflecting
the function of the CFTR channel as an anion-selective pore. In contrast, although some differences in the
rate of MTSES versus MTSET modification were observed for some CL3
residues (Figure ), there was no consistent
pattern suggestive of an overall anion selectivity of this region
of CFTR. Instead, we suggest that local factors may result in the
small differences in the rate of MTSES versus MTSET modification measured
at specific CL3 residues (Figure ). The effects
of cysteine substitutions per se also do not support an important
role for the juxtamembrane regions of CL3 in the Cl– permeation pathway. None of the mutants studied altered the shape
of the macroscopic I–V curve
(Figure S1 of the ) or the single-channel conductance (Figure ), even though both of these parameters are highly sensitive to cysteine
substitutions both in the TMs,,,− and in the ELs that are thought
to contribute to the outer mouth of the pore., The
shapes of the I–V relationships
were also not altered by MTSES or MTSET modification (Figure S1 of
the ), even though
the charge deposition associated with MTS modification often affects
the rectification of the I–V relationship for cysteines located close to the Cl– permeation pathway.,,,,,

Overall, our findings suggest that, even though
molecular models
of CFTR suggest that the juxtamembrane region of CL3 might contribute
to a restricted region of a central “pore” through the
MSDs (Figure ), this region does not make
a sufficiently important functional contribution to the channel to
significantly influence Cl– permeation. One possibility
is that CL3 does line the aqueous lumen of the pore, but that Cl– ions do not approach close enough to CL3 for their
movement to be influenced by the properties of individual amino acid
side chains here. This would imply that the open pore is very wide
at the level of the CLs, much wider than in the TMs where Cl– ions certainly do interact with pore-lining side chains. This suggestion
would be consistent with longstanding functional data suggesting the
pore has a deep and wide inner vestibule that is readily accessible
to large cytoplasmic substances in open channels., However,
it is in direct contrast with the idea, based on homology modeling,
that the CLs form a physically narrow region of the pore (Figure ). It is also possible
that other CLs make a more important functional contribution than
CL3 does, although the model shown in Figure  suggests a fairly symmetrical contribution of all four CLs to the
apparent central pore. An alternative possibility is that this central
pore apparently formed by the CLs (Figure C) is not part of the Cl– permeation pathway at
all. In some ion channel types, the permeant ion does not follow a
direct pathway along the central axis of the entire protein but instead
enters and exits a central transmembrane pore via lateral “portals”
located close to the cytoplasmic side of the membrane.− There is no functional evidence of the existence of such portals
in CFTR, although we would point out that there is also no direct
evidence that Cl– ions enter the permeation pathway
at the cytoplasmic end of the CLs and pass along the extent of the
central axis of the channel protein. Interestingly, a recent direct
structural study of CFTR suggested that portals might exist at the
TM5–CL2 and TM11–CL4 cytoplasmic boundaries. In many ABC proteins, the substrate translocation
pathway is partially open to part of the lipid bilayer, raising the
possibility that some substrates enter and exit via the bilayer. As described by Bai et al., such an opening to the bilayer, which can actually be observed
at the extracellular end of the CFTR structural model of Figure A, is inconsistent with the function of CFTR as
an ion channel. Nevertheless, these openings do raise the precedent
that ABC protein substrates do not necessarily follow an unwaveringly
central path through the protein.

Our results do support the
previously suggested role for CL3 in
gating of the CFTR channel.− MTSES modification of 14 of 16 functional cysteine-substituted mutants
led to a decrease in channel open probability (Figure B), even though the mutations themselves did not appear to
have dramatic effects on open probability (Figure S2 of the ). In most cases, MTSET
had a similar effect (Figure ), indicating
a lack of strong charge dependence in the functional effects of modification.
The consistent effects of MTS modification (Figure ) argue against a specific role for individual amino acid
side chains in CL3 in channel gating and instead suggest that changes
in the structure of this CL exert a relatively nonspecific effect
on gating. This would appear to be consistent with the hypothesis
put forward by Wang et al. that CL3 forms
a “compression spring” that regulates the opening and
closing of the channel. Modification by MTS reagents may then stiffen
the spring and reduce the open probability in a relatively position-independent
fashion. This hypothesis emphasizes the role of the CLs in transmitting
gating information “forward” from the NBDs to the pore.
It is also possible that the CLs are involved in transmitting gating
information “backward”, i.e., that changes in the structure
of CL3 feed back to modify NBD function, ultimately resulting in a
change in channel gating., Irrespective of the
precise mechanism, our similar results for mutations in the two limbs
of CL3 suggest these regions of the protein play similar functional
roles. Furthermore, because MTS modification of most residues resulted
in a similar, ∼25–75% inhibition of the macroscopic
current amplitude, it might be considered that no sites in CL3 are
absolutely essential to channel function, perhaps pointing to a role
of this region as a mediator, rather than a controller, of channel
gating.

In summary, our comprehensive functional screening of
CL3 suggests
that this region of CFTR is readily accessible to the cytoplasm, where
it plays a role in the control of channel gating. This is consistent
with the prevailing idea that CL3 forms the link between the site
of ATP action (the NBDs) and the opening and closing of a channel
gate located in the TMs. However, our results do not support the hypothesis
that this region is close enough to the Cl– permeation
pathway to exert any influence on permeating Cl– ions.

Supporting Information Available
Two figures as described in
the text. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi300065z_si_001.pdf

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
ABCATP-binding
cassette

BHKbaby
hamster kidney

CFTRcystic fibrosis
transmembrane conductance regulator

CLcytoplasmic loop

ELextracellular loop

MSDmembrane-spanning domain

MTSmethanethiosulfonate

MTSES[2-sulfonatoethyl]
methanethiosulfonate

MTSET[2-(trimethylammonium)ethyl] methanethiosulfonate

NBDnucleotide binding domain

PKAprotein kinase
A

SCAMsubstituted
cysteine accessibility mutagenesis

TMtransmembrane α-helix.

