Gprotein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) signal through multiple pathways
that are regulated by G proteins andβ-arrestins., Many of these signaling pathways respond selectively to ligands
that are able to stabilize preferred subsets of receptor conformations., As a result of conformational heterogeneity, small differences in
ligand structure can dramatically shift signaling toward one response
pathway and away from another. The ability
of an agonist–receptor pair to produce a quantitative response,
measured as efficacy, has been historically modeled by a transducer
ratio parameter reflecting the total receptor concentration and the
transduction of the agonist–receptor complex into a pharmacological
response. Potent ligands having low transducer
ratios may not be efficacious, and conversely, efficacious responses
precipitated by large transducer ratios do not necessarily require
potent ligands. Because ligand potencies and their associated transducer
ratios can vary widely, a signaling bias may result in which different
ligands produce variable degrees of response in a single pathway or
a single ligand displays large differences in efficacy between two
independent signaling pathways.

A comprehensive review of qualitative and quantitative strategies
for assessing ligand bias is found in ref (). The available approaches similarly address bias
within the confines of experiment and attempt to define it observationally
or numerically, by data trends or bias factors, as a property that
arises from the signaling paradigm. In contrast, an axiomatic formalism
for bias could be developed in a manner that is independent of experiment
and subsequently applied to a particular signaling paradigm. We believe
that this latter approach allows a broader treatment of signaling
bias and provides a more fundamental development and conceptual understanding
of bias-dependent factors. Applying this strategy to logistic (sigmoid)
response functions representative of most biological processes, we present a comprehensive, simple formalism
for qualitative and quantitative signaling bias comparisons. In this
formulation, hyperbolae represent the comparative responses of test
ligands, and signaling biases are described by mappings of bias coordinates
representing the hyperbolae from the unit square to a stack of Poincare
unit disks. Bias factors are simple consequences of the map and the
novel distance metric of the disk, and the distance between bias coordinates
in the disk provides a quantitative means of characterizing and sorting
ligands. Our analysis of comparative signaling bias, which can be
applied to many signal transduction systems, was developed with G
protein-coupled receptors in mind, and we illustrate the approach
and its utility using dopamine 2 receptor signaling.

Materials and Methods
Preparation of Theoretical Curves
Equations for the
different bias models were added to the library of nonlinear equations
in GraphPad Prism 4.0 (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA) using the
user supplied equations option. Graphs were then prepared under the
“generate theoretical curves” option of the analysis
menu. Graphs illustrating mappings to the unit disk were prepared
using Prism 4.0.

Cell Culture and Transient Transfections
HEK-293T cells
(ATCC, Manassas, VA) were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS
(Sigma, St. Louis, MO) and seeded into a six-well plate at a density
of 500000 cells/well. Twenty-four hours later, the cells were transfected
with calcium phosphate. Twenty-four hours post-transfection, the cells
were split onto white 96-well clear bottom plates (Corning, Lowell,
MA) in phenol-free MEM (Gibco, Carlsbad, CA) supplemented with 2%
FBS, 2 mM l-glutamine, and 0.05 mg/mL gentamicin. BRET and
GloSensor experiments were conducted 24 h after the cells had been
plated onto the 96-well plates. For GRK2 overexpression experiments,
the cells were transiently transfected alongside BRET and GloSensor
assays without GRK2 overexpression. For pertussis toxin (PTX) treatment,
the cells were treated 6–8 h after being plated with 200 ng/μL
PTX (Sigma) in phenol-free MEM supplemented with 2% FBS, 2 mM l-glutamine, and 0.05 mg/mL gentamicin.

Recruitment of β-Arrestin 2 by BRET
Bioluminescent
resonance energy transfer (BRET) assays were performed as described
by Masri et al., with minor modifications.
Briefly, mD2LR-RLuc (mouse dopamine 2 long receptor-Renilla luciferase)
was expressed with a saturating concentration of β-arrestin
2-EYFP. Coelenterazine-h (Promega, Madison, WI), at 5 μM, was
added to the cells in PBS with calcium and magnesium, followed 5 min
later by dose responses of quinpirole (Sigma) or terguride. The ratio
of EYFP emission (515–555 nm) to RLuc emission (465–505
nm) was measured using a Mithras LB940 instrument with Mikrowin 2000
(Berthold Technologies, Oak Ridge, TN). The BRET ratios derived were
normalized to the maximal quinpirole response on mD2LR-RLuc.

Measurement of cAMP by GloSensor
HEK-293T cells were
transfected with the GloSensor construct (Promega) and mD2LR. On the day of the experiment, cells were washed in HBSS (Gibco),
25 μL of 25 mM luciferin (Gold Biotechnology, St. Louis, MO)
in HBSS was added to each well, and the plates were incubated at room
temperature in the dark for 2 h. Following incubation, the luciferin
was aspirated, and 80 μL of HBSS was added, followed by dose–response
curves of quinpirole. Five minutes after addition of drug, isoproterenol
was added at a concentration of 10–7 M to stimulate
the accumulation of cAMP, and the level of accumulation was read 5
min later. Luminescence generated from the GloSensor construct was
measured with a Mithras LB940 instrument with Mikrowin 2000. All curves
generated were normalized to the maximal response of isoproterenol
to control for differences in expression between experiments; the
data were then normalized to the maximal response of inhibition of
the isoproterenol response by quinpirole.

Theoretical Calculations
Form of the Bias Function B12a
Conjugate Relationships
For bounded, continuous functions f and g over the interval (c1, c2), f(c), g(c) ≥
0, the bias function is defined as . Note that
for relationships of the form , “a” can be said
to be conjugate to “b” when it has the same form: . Therefore, when  is defined,
then B12a is
conjugate to  and

Functions f and g Are Chosen
as Rectangular Hyperbolae with Different
Hill Coefficients
For unequal Hill coefficients (j ≠ j′), setThen the bias B12a, which equals  becomes 

B12a in
Terms of Conjugate Variables B0 and B∞
Important conjugate relationships we will employ to express bias B12a involving
parameters ρ and η are:In terms
of B0,Employing the
definition of the inner product of two vectors, (a1,b1)·(a2,b2) = a1a2 + b1b2, and the change of variable 

B12a in Terms of B0 and B∞ for Equal Hill
Coefficients
In this case, α = 1 and the bias has the
simple form:where  and .

In Transducer Ratio Format
In terms of transducer ratio
τ (defined in ref (), eq 5), we have the relationships  and for EC50,  where KA is the
ligand affinity. Transducer ratios for the two response functions are:

Form of the Bias Function B12b (equal Hill coefficients)
From the derivations given above for equal Hill coefficients:

C1/2 (Half-Height) Concentration
of the Bias Function
Because , the value at which the bias approaches half its
final value occurs at y = 1. Therefore,

Bias Viewed as a Parametric Mapping from a Square to a Disk
We will demonstrate that bias factors arise from a parametric mapping
(mapping parameter θy) of a square
defined bybias-coefficient co-ordinates B⃗ = (B0, B∞) ≤
(±1,±1) onto a unit disk defined by mapped coordinates B⃗θy =
(B0θy, B∞θy), ||B⃗θy||
≤ 1, and (Poincare disk) distance metric:

Inner Products of Complex Numbers and Vectors
The vector
inner product is written in the notation ⟨A⃗·C⃗⟩ = ⟨(a,b)·(c,d)⟩
= ac + bd, and this equals the product
of the length of the two vectors, ||A⃗||·||C⃗||, times the cosine of the angle x between them. Thus,  and
 are viewed geometrically
as the projection of A⃗ on C⃗ and C⃗ on A⃗.
For complex numbers B = B0 + iB∞ and  the complex product BY̅ is:The inner
product of complex numbers B and Y is written
as ⟨B·Y̅⟩ and is
defined as the real part of BY̅, Re(BY̅). Importantly, Because the bias function B12a is always between −1
and 1, the inner product of B and Y in vector
or complex number notation must be between −1 and 1. This suggests
how to map the unit square into the unit disk.

Relationship of Normalized Concentration y to
Angles
As y changes from 0 to ∞,
 goes from 1 to 0,  from 0 to 1, and . A plausible relationship
is one in which , because their sum is 1; x will range from 0 to . An alternative substitution is y = tan θy for . This substitution
gives

Families of Hyperbolae
The set of points (B0 + iB∞), −1
≤ B0, B∞ ≤ 1 reside in a unit square centered on the origin (0,0).
For a fixed angle θB from the origin defined by , each co-ordinate point (B0,B∞) along the θB vector can be represented
as αRθBmax(cos (θB) + i sin (θB)) = αRθBmaxeiθB. The point αRθBmaxeiθB lies on the edge
of or inside the unit square for 0 ≤ α ≤ 1 and
the following definition for RθBmax: The bias coordinates (B0,B∞) in the square along
the vector defined by θB represent a family of hyperbolae for which tan .

Parametric Map from the Square to the Unit Disk
Define
a mapping from the unit square, the points with bias coordinates (B0,B∞) = αRθBmaxeiθB by:for 0 ≤ α ≤ 1, 0 ≤
θB ≤ 2π, and 0 ≤ θY ≤ π/2. This function for a fixed θY (or equivalently for a fixed y) maps every
coordinate point (B0,B∞) in the unit square to a coordinate point in
the unit disk because Re(BY̅) ≤ 1, |eiθB| = 1, and . The term  of M(α,θB,θY) preserves the orientation between vectors
at angle θB in the square to vectors at angle θB in the disk. The bias magnitude that is between −1
and 1 defines the position of the coordinate along a unit vector in
the disk of orientation eiθB.

Projection of the Bias onto Unit Vectors
Because ⟨B·Y̅⟩ can be interpreted as
either a projection onto eiθB or eiθY, we can consider (i) that a point along
a fixed direction vector eiθB moves
to a different position along eiθB as the
parameter θY increases from 0 to . In a
second interpretation (ii) we can consider that a point attached
to the tip of a vector parallel to eiθY rotates counterclockwise with eiθY as θY increases from 0 to , and the length of that vector
is the bias and the vector orientation determined by the sign of the
bias. Observe that each bias-coefficient coordinate in the unit square
is mapped into a stack of disks that form a bias-coordinate cylinder
with height of . The particular disk varies with mapping
parameter θY.

Distances and Mapping in the Unit Disk and Bias-Cylinder
Hyperbolic Distance between Pairs of Complex Points, z1 and z2, in the
Poincare Disk
This distance is:For z1 = (a1, b1) and z2 = (a2, b2) this distance is:For points
on the x or y axis, b1 = b2 = 0 or a1 = a2 = 0,for h = a or b where the sign
is positive if h1 &gt; h2 and negative if h2 &gt; h1. For,B0m = (B0m, 0) and B∞m = (0, B∞m), m = 1, 2:

Distance Preserving Mapping of the Unit Disk in the Complex
Plane to Itself
The mapping  takes neighborhoods about the point z1 = c + i·d to neighborhoods about the origin and similarly neighborhoods about
the origin to neighborhoods about the point –z1. For z = a + i·b, this mapping is,

Distance Metric in the θy Direction
The metric is  because y = tan θy. Similar to
boundary points, disks near the top of the cylinder are distant from
one another even though changes in θy may be small.

Relative Probability, Distance, and Bias Factor in the Poincare
Disk
Distance from the Origin (zero bias point) and Relative Probability
The distance along the axis to the point R &gt;
0 is:Define a distance coefficient . For m ≥ 0 and R =  this distance is:Observe that in model B12a we can set  and solve for “m”. Thus,Therefore, for every unit change in m, the relative probability  doubles
while the distance along the axis γcm = γc1.m increases linearly with the change in m. In the
Poincare disk the conformal transformations  preserve distance relationships,
rotations about the center being a special case. We show in  that the bias factor β is equivalent to a length along the B0 or B∞ axis.
It can be generalized to the whole disk by rotation for any two points z and z1; βL = d(z, z1), and for


Grouping Bias Coordinates on the Basis of Distance
The distance relationship between the origin and points z1 and z2 in the disk satisfies:Let z be the set of all points in the
disk about z1 such that d(z,z1) ≤ dz1. From above,
 and . Therefore,indicating all bias coordinates in the neighborhood of z1 within the distance dz1 represent response functions g2 and f2 having ratios  within
. For  set,

Bias Factor Expression β in Heuristic Modeling
Equiactive Comparison
From  and ,For coordinates both associated with vector θB,so that,with . Identifying Emax with P, EC50 with k, lig with coordinate B01, and ref with
coordinate B02, we obtain the bias factor:

Pharmacological Model
From  and ,Therefore, for coordinates with the same θB,so that,and .
Identifying i and j with pathways
and ρ1 and ρ2 with lig and ref;Setting β = d(B∞1, B∞2) we see that for small transducers for which
τ &lt; 1 this result reduces to, which is the result found in ref () (within a multiplicative constant). The bias
factor defined in ref () is appropriate for small transducers. However, for very large transducers
in both pathways, this bias factor should in general approach zero,
and this is not guaranteed to occur with β defined using . If the
reference ligand is unbiased, then ρref = 1 and the
bias factor β is d(B∞1 ,0) = ln(ρlig).

Curve Fitting of Bias Parameters for Bias-Coordinate Distance
Determinations
Using the definitions of the arctangent as
 and hyperbolic arctangent
12, the above mapping is summarized as a polar co-ordinate transformation. The polar
bias coordinates (β,θB,θY)
are shown below where β is the polar distance and θB the polar angle.

The bias co-ordinates in rotated or
non-rotated (n = 1 or 0, respectively) complex notation
and Euclidean notation are:(x, iy) = bias × ei(θB–nθY), and (x, y) = bias[cos(θB – nθY), sin(θB – nθY)]. Determining
the bias parameters from experiment requires fitting to concentration c and calculating θY, which cannot be expressed
as a simple function of c alone. The GraphPad Prism
macro below will fit the parameters (B0,K = log EC50, θB) and/or
(j, α) against the experimental bias .
In most cases, j and α are fixed to 1. The
independent variable is X = log(c), and the dependent variable is Y = bias.Fitting Macro:Yc = 10j(X–K)

Yα = Yc(1 – α)

Yz = 2Yc/([1 + B0 tan(θB)]{1
+ [(1 – B0)/(1 + B0)]Yα})

Y1 = 1/(1 + Yz)

Y2 = Yz/(1 + Yz)

B1 = {B0 +
[(1 – Yα)/(1 + Yα)]}/{1
+ B0[(1 – Yα)/(1
+ Yα)]}

B2 = B0 tan(θB)

Y = B1Y1 + B2Y2



Results
Overview of Strategy
An analysis of biological signaling
bias will be presented in four parts. First, a general bias formalism
will be developed with paradigms showing procedures that input response
functions and output bias-response functions. Second, the number of
candidate paradigmswill be narrowed to two. Third, a particular class
of biological response functions will be chosen and processed by each
of the bias paradigms for generation of the corresponding bias function.
Last, the bias-response functions will be characterized and applied
to the analysis of dopamine receptor 2 signaling. Mathematical detail
that is not necessary for moving the main discussion forward has been
placed in .

Development of Bias Formalism
We now define the properties
of a bias response function using a generating function B whose domain includes response functions that are bounded, positive,
and continuous. B acts upon paired response functions
and by a series of rules creates a corresponding bias function. Specifically,
the function B(R1,R2) compares the signaling of response functions R1 and R2 that represent
two processes, A1 and A2, with respective inducers c1 and c2. R1 and R2 are each standardized by normalization
using a maximally efficacious inducer, c1m and c2m, producing responses E1m and E2m, respectively.
Thus, the relative response [En(cn)]/Em of all other
inducers (n ≠ m) of either R1 or R2 is ≤1.

Because bias suggests preference, a function B(R1,R2) for an ordered
pair of responses should quantitatively predict an opposite bias exists
for the reverse ordered pair, i.e., B(R1,R2) = –B(R2,R1).
Functions with this property are defined as odd as opposed to even
functions G with the behavior G(R1,R2) = G(R2,R1).
Additionally, bias implies some difference exists between two responses R1 and R2, and a
simple relationship to reflect difference is subtraction. This leads
to a generating function of the form B(R2 – R1) × G(R1,R2), where B(R2 – R1) is odd and G(R1,R2) is even. There are multiple
choices for B(R2 – R1) and G(R1,R2), including those that are
combinations of integer powers of R1 and R2. Limited to integer powers, and with the straightforward
selection of B(R1,R2) = R2 – R1 (first power in the response functions), there
are only two fundamental forms for G(R1,R2) (within multiplicative
constants) for constructing dimensionless bias functions by B(R2 – R1) × G(R1,R2).,

,

with the corresponding bias functions;,

.

The denominator
term in example (a) provides a bounded “probability-like”
normalization to B12a(R1,R2). In contrast, the bias B12b (R1,R2) depends upon ratios of the response functions
and may become problematic in practice when one response is much larger
or smaller than the other.

Characteristics of the B12a Bias Function
B12a (R1,R2) has two characteristic
properties related to interpreting the response bias. When the two
responses are equal, the bias is 0, and for positive responses, B12a is between
−1 and 1. When response R1 is unlikely
and much smaller than response R2, B12aasymptotically
approaches 1 to indicate this, and conversely, B12aapproaches −1 when response R2 is unlikely and much smaller than response R1. With the normalization for B12aprovided by R1 + R2, the bias B12acan be
interpreted with a probability formalism where the probability of
response Ri(prob Ri), Ri/(R1 + R2) (i = 1
or 2), is (1 – B12a)/2 or (1 + B12a)/2 (see the first section of ).

Logistic Response Functions
So far, we have not chosen
a particular subclass of response functions to plug into the bias
formulation from the many positive, bounded, and continuous possibilities.
Using ref (), a plausible
candidate is the large cohort of logistic (sigmoid) functions that
represent biological processes and are written with Hill parameter j aswhere 0 ≤ P ≤ 1 as a result of normalization by Em and kj equals cj when a half-maximal response
occurs. To couple paired response functions, we define the ratios
ρ = P1/P2 and η = k2/k1 from their defining parameters. Even though the response
functions may have different Hill coefficients (j ≠ j′), the following discussion will
concentrate on response functions with equal Hill coefficients for
the sake of simplicity and because the conclusions carry over to the
case of unequal coefficients. It is also no loss of generality to
set j equal to 1, because the effect of the exponent, j, in the ratio kj/cj can be accounted
for by defining k = kj and c = cj.

Form of the B12a Bias Functions
With the selection of logistic response
functions described above, the bias function B12a is a hyperbola that can be
conveniently written in one of the three forms shown in eq . The form (B0 + B∞y)/(1 + y) is used for the majority of the discussion and is defined by normalized
concentration variable y, baseline B0, and asymptote B∞. Parameter Bk = B∞ – B0 represents the change in the bias over the interval y = (0,∞).

The bias function B12b (second
section of ) is the
difference of two hyperbolae, has a relatively more complex parametrization
than B12a,
and is related to it by the probabilities of R1 and R2 as shown in eq .

For either B12a or B12b, when
the response curves have equal EC50 values (i.e., η
= 1), the variation parameter Bk identically equals 0 and the bias is constant over the entire
concentration range. The concentration at which the bias B12a will change
from its initial value to halfway toward its final value occurs at C1/2 = [(1 + ρη)/(1 + ρ)]EC50 (see the third section of ).

In Figure , parameters
ρ and η that determine the values of B∞ and Bk defining bias
curves B12a (panels
A, C, and E) also generate the corresponding B12b curves (panels B, D, and F).
The curves in the two models are generally similar in appearance,
but the range over which the bias varies is always greater in model B12b (compare
especially panels E and F and eq ). Significantly,
the additional inflection point (denoting a change in curvature) in
the bias graph of Figure F results from model B12b requiring
a summing of two hyperbolae rather than being represented by a single
one, as is B12a.

Theoretical bias curves. (A, C, and E) Curves for model B12a were generated
from parameters B∞ and Bk using GraphPad Prism. Curves
shown in panels B, D, and E are the B12b representations of the curves in panels
A, C, and E, respectively, using the parameters ρ and η
computed from the values of B∞ and B0.

Transducer Ratios and Bias Coefficients
Transducer
ratios are useful for explaining the variable responses to stimuli
that are observed in complex biological systems such as tissue.,As a consequence of how we defined the normalized responses P, we can evaluate the parameters B0 and B∞ characterizing
the bias functions in terms of transducer ratios (see the first section of ; for a comprehensive discussion of transducer
ratios in signaling, see ref ()). For B12a, the bias coefficients B0 and B∞ in this representation are

Analogous relationships
(eq ) can be calculated for the terms describing B12b or the
relationship in eq III applied. The forms of the coefficients as ratios
indicate that changes in their magnitudes can become quite large for
disparities in pathway transduction or ligand affinities, somewhat
limiting their utility for making comparisons.

From Transducer Ratios to Biased Ligands, Affinity or Efficacy
Natural variables for investigating the behavior of the bias coefficients
for B12a in
terms of the transducer ratios are τ1 and τ1/τ2. Panels A–D of Figure  show comparative graphs of these relationships
for the bias coefficients forming B12a (A and C) and B12b (B and D). Panels A and B indicate
that if one of the transducers such as τ1 is large,
then the bias will approach zero despite some variability in τ1/τ2. This occurs because B∞ in both models asymptotically goes to zero as
1/τ1. It is also evident in panels C and D from the
parametric curves that the baseline bias coefficients B0 are small whenever the product of ε(τ1/τ2) approaches 1. Thus, relatively low concentrations
of ligand in this case would have produced limited to no signaling
bias. Comparison of panels B and D demonstrates the B12b bias model is
subject to wide variations in the zero baseline for changes in ε
or τ1/τ2. Additionally, comparison
of panels A and C indicates that the bias coefficients are more uniformly
distributed for changes in parameter τ1/τ2 in B12a. Importantly, the curves in panels C and D show that at relatively
low ligand concentrations and very small or large values of ε, B0 is appreciable and the bias from affinity
differences may not be inconsequential and should be considered with
pathway efficacy when characterizing drug behavior. The results also
suggest that it may be more difficult to develop drugs targeting efficaciously
coupled signaling pathways in tissues where the transducer ratios
are relatively large but unequal and the concentrations of the drugs
are greater than their respective affinities (KA). One possible developmental strategy for biased ligands
would rely upon identifying a compound with a much higher affinity
for one of the signaling pathways (very large or small ε in
Figure C) rather than concentrating solely
on differences in efficacy that result from transducer ratios.

Theoretical
curves of bias parameters B∞ and B0 as functions of the transducers. Representative
curves are shown for model B12a (A and C) and model B12b (B and D). Curves are parametrized
by either τ1/τ2 or ε = KA2/KA1.

Categorization of Ligands on the Basis of Their Bias Coefficients B0 and B∞
Ligand bias coefficients not only define the relative behaviors
of dose–response curves but also could potentially represent
a means of quantifying differences between ligands; if this is true,
what form do the coefficients take in this other role? The following
observations present a strategy for answering this question. (1) The
set of all pairs of bias coefficients represented in the B12a model are coordinate
points that in aggregate compose a unit square, indicating that the
unit square is equivalent to a comprehensive index for addressing
response hyperbolae. (2) It is not clear what geometry to apply to
the unit square because it lacks rotational symmetry because of the
corners, whereas the unit disk has been well characterized in terms
of nonstandard geometries for making distance comparisons. Therefore,
an improved understanding of signaling bias, including insight into
response hyperbolae, bias coefficients, bias coordinates, bias, and
bias factors, may evolve from a mapping of points of the unit square
to points of the unit disk.

Panels A and B of Figure  illustrate an angle-preserving transformation in
which every unit square coordinate point B composed of
bias coefficients B0 and B∞ and lying at position α along a vector
at angle θB is acted upon
by the single vector Y⃗ pointing along parametric
angle θY. The effect of Y⃗ on each point B is to map it to a corresponding
point in a unit disk lying along the vector at angle θB and at a vector position defined by the
signaling bias, which is just the term we formerly recognized as (B0 + B∞y)/(1 + y) (see the fourth anf fifth sections
of ). As the parameter θY increases, Y⃗ undergoes a counterclockwise rotation to the angle θY about an axis perpendicular to the disk
center. Additionally, the bias generated by B changes,
and the mapped point corresponding to B in the disk moves
up or down along the θB vector (Figure C). Alternatively, an observer
on the vector Y⃗ can consider it as fixed in direction,
and the points corresponding to the mapping of B appear
to rotate by θY in the
clockwise direction (Figure D). This parametric
angle preserving mapping of B in the unit square to a
point in the unit disk, M(α,θB,θY) = ⟨B·Y⃗⟩[(cos θB)/|cos θB|]eiθB, is described in detail in the fourth and fifth sections of .

The unit disk can
support a non-Euclidean geometry where a familiar Euclidean rule,
such as the parallel postulate, is not valid, and distances are computed
by a correspondingly unfamiliar metric. Choosing the mapping M(α,θB,θY) and a unit
disk with a Poincare distance metric results in geometry where the
disk boundary is infinitely far from the disk center, where pairs
of coordinate points near the boundary can be quite far apart. Also,
each θY will map the unit
square to a different disk, so that the full map M(α,θB,θY) takes the unit square to
a cylindrical stack of disks of angular height θY = π/2 (Figure E), and where each disk, because Y̅ rotates, is
rotated by an angle |dθY| from the disk above or below it. Thus, in aggregate, the mapped-to
disks compose a cylinder that is twisted between top and bottom by
π/2. Similar to distances computed between points within a disk,
the distance between disks near the top becomes very large for small
changes in the angular height θ because of a non-Euclidean distance
metric that applies to the θ direction (fifth section of ). As a consequence, each
coordinate point (hyperbola) of the unit square is transformed to
a vertical string that rotates by π/2 over its course from the
bottom to the top of a three-dimensional twisted cylinder (Figure E). The dose–response hyperbolae familiar
to pharmacology are two-dimensional projections of these strings,
generated by observers rotating with the strings while measuring their
magnitudes and directions of displacement (their bias) from the vertical
cylinder axis.

Mappings of the square of bias coordinates bounded by
≤±1 into the Poincare disk. Panels A and B depict the
angle preserving nature of the map to the disk that recapitulates
the orientation and relative relationships of families of coordinate
points that lie along well-defined vectors originating in the center
of the square. (C) For an observer sitting on the vector at angle
θB in the disk, it appears that parametrically mapped
points move up or down the length of the vector to a position dependent
upon the magnitude and sign of the bias. (D) For an observer sitting
on and rotating through angle θY with the mapping
vector Y⃗, it appears as if the mapped points B′0 and B′inf in the Poincare disk are rotating toward the observer.
Additionally, these points are projections of the vertical string
that curves about the cylinder axis and that represents the signaling
response hyperbola immersed in a three-dimensional space. (E) Cartoon
depicting how the string that corresponds to the sigmoid response
curve from −1 to 1 (depicted below and at the left) appears
in the three-dimensional space of the hyperbolic cylinder. The left-hand
cylindrical view depicts the fixed-angle bias interpretation in which
the corresponding response string is in a frame where the mapping
vector Y⃗ is not only rotating but also changing
its length as it rotates (see the accompanying graph below the cylinder
at the right for the angular dependence of vector length, which is
minimal at π/4). Points are plotted along the fixed vector according
to the bias because of the rotation angle of the mapping vector. The
right-hand view corresponds to the frame of an observer sitting on
the rotation vector that is performing the mapping. In this frame,
the disks appear to rotate clockwise as the cylinder and string
grow in height with each incremental rotation.

Distance as Bias Factors and Relation to Relative Probability
The hyperbolic distance or length in the Poincare disk between
paired, mapped bias coordinates (points) provides a quantitative measure
for comparing signaling behaviors and on that basis can be used to
sort groups of ligands (fifth and sixth sections of ). When one of those coordinates is
at the zero bias origin, the hyperbolic length defined by βL has a straightforward probabilistic interpretation that also
applies to any pair of points in the disk. When the ratio of the response
functions g and f that compose the
bias function is expressed as g/f =  2m/1, the distance between
their corresponding bias coordinate and the origin can be written
as βL = γcm≈ 0.69m (sixth section of ). m = 0 is consistent with no
bias, and every change in m of 1 doubles the relative
probability of g versus f occurring.
The coordinate distances between points on the B0 and B∞ axes can be
written respectively as βL = ln(ρ1η1)/(ρ2η2) and βL = ln(ρ1/ρ2), which notably are the bias factors
for models described in ref () and occur as special consequences of the formalism presented
here (seventh section of ).

Three Examples of Relative Bias
The examples in Figure  will illustrate bias analyses of dopamine D2 receptor
signaling using model B12a and experimental results from our laboratory. Data will be
displayed in standard dose–response curve format (projections
of cylinder strings onto rectangular grids) and also as string projections
onto rotated or fixed-angle Poincare disks oriented perpendicular
to the cylindrical axis.

Dopamine 2 Receptor and Signaling Pathway Comparison
Figure A shows the system bias between Gi
and arrestin signaling for the D2R agonist quinpirole in three dose–response
projections (standard, rotated disk, and fixed-angle disk). Bias curves
were generated using the maximal response and affinity parameters (Pi and EC50) of the
individual signaling curves. To demonstrate an alternative method
of generating a bias curve, data for quinpirole bias, (g – f)/(g + f), were directly fit [dashed curve, ●, ±95% confidence
interval (see the eighth section of )], and to demonstrate grouping like coordinates
with distance, the oval and circular shaded regions at the two ends
of the quinpirole + GRK curve (nonrotated disk view) define neighborhoods
of points βL ≤ 0.22 (m =
0.32) of the central coordinates (■ or ●), representing
relative probabilities and biases within 25% of those reference coordinates
[■ or ● (see the sixth section of )]. Figure B displays the unit square bias coordinates, Poincare disk mapped
coordinates, transducer ratio parameters, and relative distances (βL) from the angle equivalent quinpirole coordinates. Quinpirole
is a potent D2R ligand that at low concentrations clearly demonstrates
greater efficacy for Gi signaling than β-arrestin recruitment
in the standard plot, which is reflected also in the Poincare plots
by coordinate proximity to the left-side boundary. Quinpirole demonstrates
near zero bias at higher concentrations when it loses signaling preference.
This suggests that β-arrestin coupling possesses at least a
modest transducer ratio; otherwise, the tilt toward Gi signaling bias
would remain. The overexpression of GRK shifts the bias curve uniformly
upward toward β-arrestin in the standard plot format, suggesting
an increase in the β-arrestin transducer that is reflected by
increasesin both B0 and B∞ (a clockwise rotation of coordinates toward arrestin
in the disk model). Pertussis toxin treatment of cells, by noncompetitively
inhibiting Gi signaling, markedly drives the bias toward β-arrestin,
and this is readily apparent in the fixed-angle disk model by a shift
of points to the first quadrant.

Bias of compounds at the dopamine 2 receptor
in different signaling paradigms. (A–D) Responses are plotted
for experimental dose–response data as string projections either
in standard dose–response curve format or in either a rotating
or fixed-angle Poincare disk representation. (A and B) Bias plots
for β-arrestin vs Gi signaling with corresponding parameter
and coordinate mapping tables for the agonist quinpirole in the absence
or presence of a pathway enhancer (GRK) or inhibitor (pertussis toxin).
Distances, β, from the corresponding quinpirole point are provided
in the table for nonrotated and rotated coordinates. To provide a
comparison of two strategies for calculating bias curves, curves for
quinpirole have been calculated from (1) fitting the individual Gi
and β-arrestin responses, separately determining the individual Pi and Ki, and then
calculating the bias curve (orange curve) or (2) directly fitting
the two response ratios (g – f)/(g + f) at different concentrations
[∗, ±95% confidence interval (see the eighth section of )]. Additionally, the
first and last coordinates plotted for the quinpirole + GRK curve
(green) are bounded by closed curves defining neighborhoods of points
within a distance of 0.22 [m = 0.32 (see the sixth
section of )], or
with a &lt;25% difference in the g/f ratio of the bias curves. (C) Plots of the bias of quinpirole and
terguride for β-arrestin signaling in the absence and presence
of added GRK, a β-arrestin pathway enhancer. (D) Plots representing
the bias of different D2 receptor antagonists for inhibiting either
the β-arrestin pathway or Gi signaling.

Dopamine 2 Receptor Bias in a Single Signaling Pathway
Figure C demonstrates an increase in quinpirole
bias toward β-arrestin in cells expressing additional GRK compared
to β-arrestin in cells expressing normal levels of GRK, a result
expected on the basis of mass action for upstream receptor/arrestin
modulators. Additionally, GRK phosphorylation
might further enhance the bias by stabilizing receptor states with
greater affinity for quinpirole (ε and η increase with
increasing affinity). An increased level of expression of GRK is effective
in producing a β-arrestin bias at low quinpirole concentrations,
and bias coordinates in the disk plot fall closer to the boundary.
GRK-induced bias is lost at high quinpirole concentrations, possibly
because the transducer for the process is already moderately sized
in the absence of additional GRK. Remarkably, terguride bias toward β-arrestin
and GRK remains strong at high terguride concentrations even though
terguride is more potent than quinpirole with respect to the receptor.
The terguride profile is consistent with that of a partial agonist
with a relatively small transducer, as observed for morphine-mediated
activation of β-arrestin trafficking by the mu opiate receptor.

Dopamine 2 Receptor and Pathway Antagonist Comparisons
Data depicted in Figure D were based upon
D2R studies that investigated whether
antagonist signaling bias, evaluated as inhibition of Gi protein signaling
versus inhibition of β-arrestin trafficking, differentiates
clinically superior neuroleptics from less effective ones. Bias coefficients B0 and B∞ for
each drug were computed using the affinity and efficacy values listed
in Table 1 of ref (). Not surprisingly, the majority of drugs had little to no bias at
high concentrations, indicating a modest transducer ratio for each
process. All drugs except olazapine were biased over one to two decades
of the displayed concentration range. Aripiprazole stands out, especially
in the Poincare fixed disk-angle plot, as the only compound to undergo
the transition from a Gi inhibition bias to a β-arrestin inhibition
bias, whereas clozapine is unique in being completely β-arrestin
biased; its bias coordinate is at the disk boundary and its bias factor
correspondingly infinite. Remarkably, all the drugs are biased at
low concentrations, and the biases generally disappear as concentrations
increase. Apparently, pathway bias is not an uncommon drug property
at lower concentrations where affinities play a role in determining
transducer ratios, and aripiprazole-like drugs with smaller transducers
may form a more likely pool of biased ligands for use at higher concentrations.

Discussion
The recent recognition that altering a receptor’s
conformational space has physiological consequences has accelerated
searches for biased compounds. This study addresses a lack of formalism
in receptor bias analysis by characterizing the mathematical relationship
between signaling bias and the hyperbolae that commonly describe biological
responses. Specifically, we incorporate the response functions into
an axiomatic system that defines signaling bias rather than determining
the nature of bias on the basis of the responses. Our study shows
that (1) coordinates (B0,B∞) of paired bias coefficients form a unit square
indexing response hyperbolae, (2) the signaling response hyperbolae
form groups of families defined by direction vectors centered about
(0,0) in the unit square, (3) the bias is the position of the mapped
bias coordinate along a direction vector in the unit disk determined
by the parametric mapping of the square and ranges between −1
and 1, (4) the bias length or bias factor is the distance to the disk
center of the mapped bias coordinate in the Poincare metric, (5) the
relative probability between two responses is directly related to
the bias factor, and (6) the parametric angles defining the unit square
mapping of hyperbolae to the bias (Poincare) cylinder are normalized
concentrations that span an angular measure from 0 to π/2. Even
though this study investigates hyperbolae describing signaling response
bias, it can be applied to the normalized hyperbolae in general that
represent biological, pharmacological, or biochemical phenomena.

The B12a formalism
provides a novel and innovative way of considering dose–response
data. It provides a qualitative platform for identifying and characterizing
ligand and pathway bias using projections of hyperbolic strings for
plotting in the Poincare disk or in a standard rectangular format.
The formalism also provides for detailed quantitative characterizations
of signaling behavior, examples being that the bias factors β
in the equiactive and pharmacological models can be derived as simple consequences of the analysis, and in calculating
bias factors, the B12a model appropriately handles large transducer ratios that prove
to be problematic for the pharmacological model. Additionally, the
Poincare plots show that the bias factor alone is not necessarily
a good measure of ligand or signaling differences, because it corresponds
to only a radial distance and needs to be associated with an angle
or family of curves to reflect the distance relationships of bias
coordinates. Thus, a novel application of the formalism may be in
drug discovery, where Poincare disk distances and polar bias analysis
plots may expedite classifying the behaviors of large numbers of lead
compounds in SAR analysis.

Our data indicate that signaling
bias in drugs is relatively common, occurring frequently at low to
moderate concentrations of compounds. Importantly, for ligands with
large transducer ratios for both response pathways, good agonists,
for example, there is essentially zero signaling bias at high concentrations.
This bias is predominantly lost at high ligand concentrations because in many instances transducers reflect the presence of spare
receptors for the pathways. While we do not suggest that developing
biased compounds with large transducers is not possible, our results
suggest that in the search for pharmacological bias it may be expeditious
also to consider lead compounds with low to modest transducer ratios
such as partial agonists, to consider the consequences that many drugs
are biased when utilized at concentrations below or near the KA, and to encourage approaches that modify transducers
for selected responses using pathway or receptor modulators that act
independently of the primary ligand.

Acknowledgments
We thank Professor Marc Caron for stimulating discussions
concerning receptor bias and its significance to pharmacology and
drug innovation.

