The ATP-binding
cassette (ABC)
transporters comprise a large family of transmembrane ATP-dependent
efflux pumps that are best described by their shared “ATP-switch”
mode of action. In humans, the isoform
ABCB1, or P-glycoprotein, plays a significant role in cellular drug
resistance in tumors in which it is overexpressed, and it contributes
to drug–drug interactions due to its high level expression
in hepatic, renal, and intestinal tissue.− As a result, there is significant interest in designing
inhibitors of P-gp that could be used to modulate drug efflux, particularly
in the central nervous system, and efforts
to develop inhibitors could be facilitated by further understanding
of the role of substrate–nucleotide binding and concomitant
structural changes in transmembrane domains (TMDs) and nucleotide
binding domains (NBDs) during the ATP catalytic cycle.

On the
basis of structural models of murine and Caenorhabditis
elegans proteins,, the human P-gp likely
consists of a dimer of two TMDs with six transmembrane helices (TMHs)
that form a hydrophobic and promiscuous drug binding site, or sites
with access to the plasma membrane inner leaflet (Figure ). These sites are coupled functionally to two NBDs
on the cytosolic side of the membrane that catalyze the hydrolysis
of ATP. On the basis of the structural models, it has been suggested
that the NBDs are brought into close proximity upon binding nucleotide,, but the magnitude of functionally important conformational changes
remains unknown. All three steps in the NBD cycle (ATP binding, hydrolysis,
and release of products) are associated with release of energy coupled
to some form of conformational change in either the TMDs or NBDs.
Although mechanistic models differ in their details depending on the
particular ABC transporter, the available data indicate that ATP hydrolysis
alternates between the two NBDs, and the hydrolysis, or dissociation
of ADP, is used to drive distant conformational changes in the transmembrane
helices, to allow drugs to be released to the extracellular surface
and to “reset” the conformational state of the protein.−

Left:
Ribbon structure of murine P-gp (pdb: 3G5U) in the inward-facing
nucleotide free state. The NBDs (blue) move into close proximity and
the TMHs (yellow) rearrange upon nucleotide binding. Right: Chemical
structures of three P-gp substrates studied in this work.

P-gp binds a remarkably wide range of drugs or
probe ligands that
differentially stimulate or inhibit the ATPase activity at saturating
concentrations. In fact, several distinct
binding sites have been proposed within the transmembrane helices,
which may communicate allosterically despite their distinct selectivities. These binding sites include residues on helices
4 and 5 and 10 and 11, and, taken together, they exhibit impressive
promiscuity. On the basis of many biochemical
data, it is likely that the large binding site within the TMDs includes
subsites with overlapping but distinct substrate preferences, and
this could result in multiple drug translocation pathways.,

Despite major progress in our understanding of the human P-gp
mechanism,
including the availability of X-ray structures of closely related
homologues,, the molecular details of several aspects
of the P-gp reaction cycle remain uncertain. For example, P-gp exhibits
a basal ATP hydrolysis even in the absence of substrates or drug,
but no physiological purpose is known for this activity. In addition,
different substrates bind in different regions of the large promiscuous
binding site, so it is challenging to understand how drugs bound at
different sites can communicate with the NBDs to stimulate ATP hydrolysis.
Although significant evidence indicates that the D-loops of the NBDs
and helices 6 and 12 of the TMDs are important in the interdomain
communication, it remains unknown how different substrates utilize
a common mechanism or whether there are drug-dependent differences
in the coupling between these domains.−

P-gp poses an
interesting example of ATP hydrolysis because it
is widely proposed that release of ADP is rate limiting in the catalytic
cycle,,, which implies
a significant population of the [P-gp·ADP·Pi]
or [P-gp·ADP] complex at steady state, where Pi is
used throughout this manuscript to abbreviate HPO42–. In addition, there is a vast body of evidence that
indicates that the enzyme undergoes significant conformational change
immediately after ATP hydrolysis and prior to ADP release.,, The majority of data that support
the posthydrolysis conformational change exploit a nonphysiologic
“trapped state” with VO43– ion replacing the Pi to form a pseudoirreversible complex.
On the basis of the resulting mechanistic models, it is reasonable
to expect that, if the release of ADP is sufficiently slow or incompletely
coupled to formation of the posthydrolysis conformation, then the
highly populated [P-gp·ADP·Pi] complex could
regenerate ATP at a measurable rate, as observed for other classes
of ATPases., On the other hand, if a sufficiently
fast conformational change preceded ADP release, then no regeneration
of ATP would be possible, and the hydrolysis step would be completely
coupled to the subsequent conformational change. In effect, the relative
rates of hydrolysis and conformational change are not well understood,
yet they determine the commitment to catalysis once ATP is hydrolyzed.

Because many ATPases demonstrate substantial reversibility of the
hydrolytic step, without full commitment to catalysis, particularly
in the absence of one or more of their cosubstrates, we considered
the possibility that P-gp could include a reversible component in
the ATP hydrolysis. For other ATPases, such reversibility has been
documented by NMR-based approaches as well as mass spectrometry which
both rely on the rearrangement or “isomerization” of 18O in labeled ATP and is referred to as positional isotope
exchange (PIX).− Therefore, we performed NMR-based PIX experiments aimed to quantify
the relative rate of regeneration of ATP from hydrolytic products
ADP and Pi at the active sites of the NBDs. With PIX experiments
using γ-18O4-ATP, it is possible to monitor
the relocation of 18O label in the bridging position of
the γ-phosphate of ATP into the nonbridging position on the
β-phosphate, as a measure of reformation of the ATP from ADP
and 16O-/18O-containing free phosphate ion (Figure ). The extent of PIX that occurs is essentially
a measure of the forward flux to the new conformation associated with
the [P-gp·ADP·Pi] complex versus backward flux
to the [P-gp·ATP] complex. PIX would not be observed if the new
conformation that is populated immediately after hydrolysis differed
significantly in the ATP binding sites. In addition, if the ATP hydrolysis
of P-gp was reversible, then different [P-gp·ADP·Pi·drug] complexes would potentially yield varying amounts of
PIX. In effect, a change in reversibility, if present, would provide
a direct measure of the impact of different substrates or inhibitors
on linking conformational changes with ATP hydrolysis.

Top: Schematic of PIX.
Open and shaded circles represent 16O and 18O, respectively. Starting with γ-18O4-ATP with 18O at each of the γ-phosphorus
positions, hydrolysis followed by isomerization and reformation of
ATP (pathway B) yields 18O in the nonbridging (NB) versus
the initial bridging (B) position of the β-phosphorus. Bottom:
Schematic of H2O exchange with Pi in the [P-gp·ADP·Pi] complex. Attack of H2O on the Pi bound
to P-gp leads to exchange of the 18O from the Pi with 16O.

A second measure of reaction dynamics for ATP hydrolysis
has been
exploited for many well-studied enzymes, wherein there is incorporation
of additional water-borne oxygen atoms into the enzyme-bound Pi prior to release. If the [enzyme·ADP·Pi] complex is sufficiently long-lived, then additional rounds of H2O attack at the Pi lead to further incorporation
of oxygen from H2O. We analyzed both PIX and H2O exchange with Pi with human P-gp in liposomes. We report
that no detectable PIX is observed in either the basal ATPase activity
of P-gp or in the presence of the probe substrates nicardipine, verapamil,
or loperamide, or the inhibitor cyclosporin A. Furthermore, none of
the Pi in the [P-gp·ADP·Pi·drug]
complex exchanges oxygen with water in any of the complexes studied.
Thus, these data further support the model wherein there is fast conformational
change immediately post hydrolysis, which allows for fast Pi release and a high commitment to catalysis in the NBDs.

Materials and
Methods
Materials
n-Dodecyl-β-d-maltopyranoside (DDM) was purchased from Affymetrix. His60 nickel
affinity resin was from Clontech. Escherichia coli total lipid extract was purchased from Avanti Polar Lipids. C219
mouse IgG1 monoclonal antibody for immunoblots was from Covance. Goat
antimouse IgG (H + L) secondary antibody, DyLight 800 conjugate was
from Thermo Scientific. Commercial P-gp supersomes were purchased
from BD Biosciences.

Adenosine 5′-triphosphate sodium
salt, γ-18O4-ATP, with a per-site basis
isotopic enrichment of at least 94% was purchased from Cambridge Isotopes.

Insect cell lines and expression medium were from Invitrogen. Cholesterol,
chloroform, and all other reagents were from Sigma-Aldrich.

Baculovirus
Expression of Human P-Glycoprotein (P-gp)
The strains, expression
constructs, and growth conditions for expression
of human P-gp in insects cells have been described previously.

Preparation of Supersomes or Microsomes
Throughout
the manuscript the term “supersome” refers to microsomes
obtained from insect cells that overexpress P-gp, and “microsome”
refers to those obtained from “control” insect cells
not overexpressing P-gp. Trichoplusia ni (T.ni) cells expressing P-gp were harvested by centrifugation
and then resuspended in ice-cold hypotonic homogenization buffer (5
mM Tris, 5 mM TCEP, 40 μM leupeptin, 2 μM pepstatin A,
4 mM benzamidine, 200 μM PMSF, pH 7.4) at a ratio of 5 mL of
buffer per gram wet-weight of cells and incubated for 45 min on ice.
All further steps were carried out at 4 °C or on ice. The mixture
was lysed with a minimum of 10 strokes using a Potter-S homogenizer
and then preclarified by spinning at 500g for 10
min. The supernatant was centrifuged at 200000g for
60 min. The supersome or microsome pellet was resuspended in a minimum
of storage buffer (50 mM Tris, 250 mM sucrose, 20% w/v glycerol, 5
mM TCEP, 40 μM leupeptin, 2 μM pepstatin A, 4 mM benzamidine,
200 μM PMSF, pH 7.4) and stored at −80 °C until
further use. Aliquots were removed prior to freezing to determine
total membrane protein concentration and test for drug-stimulated
ATPase activity.

Colorimetric Determination of Drug-Stimulated
ATPase Activity
Basal versus drug-stimulated ATPase reactions
were carried out
with various concentrations of ATP at 37 °C and quenched with
10 mM EDTA. Liberated phosphate was quantified by colorimetric assay () using phosphate standards and commercial P-gp-supersomes
(BD Biosciences) as a positive control.

Solubilization and Purification
of P-gp
Frozen supersomes
were thawed quickly and then resuspended in solubilization buffer
(2% w/v DDM, 50 mM Tris, 300 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgSO4, 20
mM imidazole, 0.4% w/v E. coli lipids, 20% w/v glycerol,
5 mM TCEP, 40 μM leupeptin, 2 μM pepstatin A, 4 mM benzamidine,
200 μM PMSF, pH 7.4). The mixture was homogenized by passing
through a narrow 25-gauge syringe and then incubated at 4 °C
with mixing for 1 h. The mixture was clarified by centrifugation at
10000g for 30 min at 15 °C and the supernatant
transferred to pre-equilibrated His60 resin. The protein was batch
adsorbed to the resin over 4 h at 4 °C and then washed extensively
with equilibration buffer (0.1% w/v DDM, 50 mM Tris, 300 mM NaCl,
1.5 mM MgSO4, 20 mM imidazole, 0.4% w/v E. coli lipids, 20% w/v glycerol, 5 mM TCEP, 40 μM leupeptin, 2 μM
pepstatin A, 4 mM benzamidine, 200 μM PMSF, pH 7.4). Next, the
resin was washed with buffer containing 200 mM imidazole without protease
inhibitors. Fractions containing pure P-gp were collected by eluting
three times with 2 bed volumes each of 500 mM imidazole and lowering
the pH from 7.4 to 6.8.

Preparation of P-gp Liposomes
Purified
P-gp was incorporated
into preformed liposomes as follows. E. coli lipids/cholesterol
4:1 films were resuspended in 50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.4 using
a bath sonicator. The opaque mixture was subjected to several freeze–thaw
cycles in liquid nitrogen prior to passing through a mini-extruder
(Avanti Polar lipids) fitted with a 200 nm polycarbonate (PC) membrane.
Detergent -saturated liposomes were used for P-gp-reconstitution,
and the Rsat value was determined by titrating
a sample of preformed liposomes with detergent and measuring the change
in absorbance at 540 nm. When preparing detergent-saturated liposomes
for mixing with purified P-gp, the Rsat value was adjusted to compensate for detergent and lipid present
in purified P-gp sample. Upon mixing, the P-gp/detergent/liposome
sample was incubated for 1 h with mixing. Detergent was removed by
incubating the mixture with prewashed Amberlite-XAD beads that were
prewashed with methanol and resuspended in buffer for a minimum of
2 h at 25 °C, and the mixture was passed several times through
a 200 nm PC membrane using an extruder. The resulting P-gp-liposome
prep was stable at −80 °C with no significant loss in
ATPase activity.

Determination of Total Phosphorus in Phospholipids
and Protein
Concentration
Phospholipids were quantified based on the
colorimetric assay recommended by Avanti Polar Lipids, Inc., using
phosphate standards. Protein concentration was determined using trichloroacetic
acid (TCA)/acetone protein precipitation, followed by Bio-Rad DC protein
assay.

NMR Spectroscopy
All NMR experiments were performed
at 25 °C on a 499.73 MHz Agilent DD2 spectrometer equipped with
a 5-mm AutoX Dual Broadband, z-axis pulsed-field
gradient probe head.

Solutions of 31 nM liposomes-reconstituted
P-gp (200 nm E. coli lipids/cholesterol liposomes)
were incubated at 37 °C with 2 mM γ-18O4-ATP, 50 mM Tris·HCl, 15 mM NH4Cl, 5 mM MgSO4, 2.5 mM EGTA, 0.02 wt % NaN3, 2 mM TCEP, pH 7.4
in the absence (basal activity) or in presence (stimulated activity)
of 50 μM nicardipine, loperamide or verapamil (from 10 mM stock
solutions in dimethyl sulfoxide, Sigma-Aldrich). Inhibition of P-gp
was studied with final concentrations of cyclosporin A of 20 μM,
by dilution from a stock solution in DMSO, to yield a final DMSO concentration
of 1%. Aliquots were taken at variable times, quenched by addition
of 20 mM EDTA, pH adjusted to approximately 8.5 with 5 M NaOH, and
spun at 14 000 rpm for 5 min to remove insoluble material.
The supernatant was transferred to a clean tube and D2O
added to a final concentration of 10% v/v. The final cosolvent content
was &lt;1% v/v. Adding EDTA quenched ATPase activity and sequestered
all divalent cations to minimize the exchange broadening. A high pH
value was also employed to minimize broadening due to protons exchange.

PIX positive control samples were prepared
as above but using commercial
human P-gp-supersomes (28.2 μg/mL total protein, BD Gentest)
or sf9 insect cell-microsomes (28.2 μg/mL total protein, BD
Supersomes) and adding 2.5 mM EGTA to inhibit Ca2+-dependent
ATPases. Alternatively, to inhibit other major ATPases other than
P-gp including Na+/K+ ATPases and F1, H+/K+ ATPases, 1 mM ouabain (Sigma-Aldrich), 8 mM
sodium azide (Sigma-Aldrich), and 50 μM mellitin were used.

31P NMR spectra (at 202.29 MHz) were acquired
at a resolution of 16k complex points in the time domain with 2048
accumulations each (sw = 7062.1 Hz, d1 = 1.5 s). Data were zero filled
to 32k points, and no apodization function was applied before Fourier
transformation. Spectra were referenced to Phosphoric acid 85 wt %
in H2O (Sigma-Aldrich).

All data were processed and
analyzed using MNova 8.1 processing
software (Mestrelab Research, Santiago de Compostela, Spain). All
NMR experiments were performed at least four times on at least two
different preparations of P-gp supersomes or P-gp liposomes.

Results
To establish a PIX assay, “positive control” supersomes
known to contain multiple ATPases were incubated for varying times
with labeled ATP, where each oxygen atom attached to the γ-phosphorus
was 18O. The aim of these experiments was to demonstrate
the feasibility of observing PIX with membrane ATPases in our hands,
rather than to quantify PIX for any specific ATPase, and to determine
if PIX due to P-gp could be detected in this environment. The 31P nuclei of ATP were monitored by NMR; it is well established
that the chemical shift of 31P is sensitive to the oxygen
isotope that is attached to it, and whether the oxygen isotope is
in a position that bridges the γ and β phosphorus atoms
or in a nonbridging position. Specifically,
the substitution of an 18O for an 16O induces
a ∼0.02 ppm (about 4 Hz at 202.93 MHz) downfield shift in the 31P NMR resonance per oxygen substituted, while the effect
of 18O exchange from the βγ-bridge position
to a β-nonbridge position on the 31Pβ resonance is a less pronounced upfield shift (∼0.01 ppm or
about 2 Hz at 202.93 MHz). This enables PIX at the γ-phosphoryl
group to be easily detected by inspection of the 31P NMR
spectrum. In fact, the 18O exchange from the βγ-bridge
position to a β-nonbridge position results in a decrease in
the signal of 31Pγ with four bound 18O and an increase in the signal for the 31Pγ with three 18O atoms (Figure ).

Positional isotope exchange with commercial human P-gp supersomes.
Total proteins (28.2 μg/mL) were incubated with 2 mM γ-18O4-ATP, 50 mM Tris·HCl, 15 mM NH4Cl, 5 mM MgSO4, 2.5 mM EGTA, 0.02 wt % NaN3, 2 mM TCEP, pH 7.4 in the presence of 50 μM nicardipine. For
the samples with inhibitors (gray spectra top middle panel), conditions
were as described in . 31P NMR spectra were recorded at the times indicated.
In the left-hand inset, the 31Pγ signals
of ATP bearing four or three 18O are presented in blue
and red, respectively. The 31Pβ signals
from ADP clearly demonstrate that ADP is formed concomitant with the
changes in isotopic composition of the 31Pγ signal (red vs blue). In the right-hand inset, the 31Pβ signals originating from ATP with 18O at the bridging position (18OB) or at the
nonbridging position (18ONB) are shown in blue
and red, respectively.

After incubation of supersomes with 18O-labeled
ATP,
the Mg2+ in the assay buffer was chelated with EDTA to
eliminate the line broadening that results from rapid dissociation
and association of Mg2+ to the ATP. For a series of incubations,
the NMR spectra of the ATP were then collected at varying times. For
supersomes with expressed P-gp, clear NMR signals from ADP were observed
and increased in intensity with increasing time of incubation (Figure ). In addition, the appearance of 18O
in the nonbridging position of the β-phosphorus was readily
apparent. PIX was easily detected in commercial supersomes that contain
overexpressed P-gp. Interestingly, for several preparations of microsomes
and P-gp supersomes, those containing overexpressed P-gp consistently
demonstrated a clear increase in PIX compared to control supersomes
(Figure ). This suggested that P-gp was contributing
significantly to the observed PIX. In order to determine whether other
highly abundant ATPases contributed to the PIX, experiments were performed
in the presence of 2.5 mM EGTA, to inhibit Ca2+-dependent
ATPases, and 1 mM oubain, 50 μM mellitin and 8 mM sodium azide,
to inhibit Na+/K+ ATPases and F1 H+/K+ ATPases. These inhibitors had no detectable effect
on the observed PIX, suggesting the possibility that P-gp contributes
significantly in the P-gp supersomes. Similarly, however, the addition
of nicardipine at concentrations that stimulate purified P-gp had
no effect on the overall ATPase activity or PIX of P-gp supersomes,
indicating that P-gp is not a dominant source of ATPase activity or
PIX in these membranes. Results shown in Figure  are representative. The degree of PIX in P-gp supersomes as measured
by the ratio γ-18O3-ATP/γ-18O4-ATP varied less than 10% between preparations and between
experiments with the same preparation.

Apparently, multiple
ATPases are active in these membranes and
contribute to PIX, such that inhibition or stimulation of one or a
few ATPases does not yield a detectable change.

After 30 min,
31.8% of the residual (nonhydrolyzed) ATP was γ-18O4-ATP, 63.1% was present as γ-18O3-ATP, 5.2% as γ-18O2-ATP,
and γ-18O-ATP was not detectable. Therefore, ∼63%
of the total residual ATP was exchanged after 30 min. At t0, γ-18O4-ATP was ∼85.4%,
and γ-18O3-ATP was ∼14.6%. PIX
clearly occurs with these P-gp supersomes, and the potential contribution
of P-gp is discussed further below. Most importantly, these experiments
demonstrated that PIX is observable in our hands.

Having established
that we could observe PIX in a sample with our
experimental protocol using the “positive control”,
we examined purified P-gp reconstituted in liposomes. The purified
protein was judged to be &gt;90% pure based on gel electrophoresis
(). In preparing
P-gp reconstituted
liposomes using purified P-gp expressed in insect cells, it was observed
that using preformed liposomes to which detergent had been added to
the saturation point (Rsat) increased
the yield and activity of the preparation. The addition of TCEP as
a reducing agent was also critical for maintaining stability in P-gp
liposome preparations and activity in PIX experiments. These P-gp
liposomes exhibited a 2.8–4.0-fold increase in ATPase activity
with nicardipine compared to basal hydrolysis in the absence of drug,
depending on the liposome preparation used.

In contrast to the
P-gp supersomes, purified P-gp in liposomes
exhibited no detectable PIX. Using 18O-labeled ATP as above,
the data for drug-free P-gp or in the presence of either 50 μM
nicardipine, 50 μM loperamide or 50 μM verapamil or 20
μM cyclosporin A demonstrate no 18O in the nonbridging
position at any point during the time course of ATP hydrolysis (Figure ). This is a remarkable result, inasmuch as many
two-substrate enzymes that use ATP exhibit detectable reversibility
in the hydrolysis., Notably, however, some ATPases
yield no PIX.

Absence of positional
isotope exchange with purified liposome-reconstituted
P-gp. 31 nM P-gp was incubated with 2 mM γ-18O4-ATP, 50 mM Tris·HCl, 15 mM NH4Cl, 5 mM MgSO4, 2.5 mM EGTA, 0.02 wt % NaN3, 2 mM TCEP, pH 7.4
in the presence of 50 μM nicardipine. The specific activity
for the Nicardipine-stimulated P-gp was 1660 nmol of Pi/min/mg protein, at 2 mM ATP concentration, 37 °C. The reactions
were conducted as described in the text, and 31P NMR spectra
were recorded at the times indicated. The incubation was also conducted
in the presence of 50 μM loperamide or 50 μM verapamil,
or 20 μM cyclosporin A (right-hand side inset).

Exchange of Oxygen from H2O into Phosphate Ion
As a second probe of the lifetime of the [P-gp·ADP·Pi] complex, we monitored the incorporation of 16O from water into the Pi resulting from ATP hydrolysis.
For some ATPases, further “attack” of water at Pi results in incorporation of multiple oxygen atoms from H2O in addition to the one incorporated as a result of attack
on the initial γ-phosphate of ATP. This occurs on the enzyme,
but not in bulk solution, when active site features “activate”
water as a nucleophile or Pi as an electrophile via specific
or general acid or base catalysis., For each round
of H2O reaction with the Pi, an additional 16O atom is incorporated (Figure ).
Thus, if no exchange occurs, the Pi will contain the single 16O from the original ATP hydrolytic reaction. In the presence
of P-gp liposomes, the fraction of Pi containing either
two or three 16O atoms reflected the isotopic composition
of the starting ATP, indicating no incorporation of 16O
resulting from a second or third attack of H2O at this
phosphorus, after the initial attack on ATP. Clearly, the Pi formed in the active site is highly protected from any “activated”
H2O, or it is rapidly released into bulk solution where
the reaction is undetectably slow.

The combined results for
the P-gp supersomes and P-gp liposomes are shown in Figure , which shows the time-dependent changes in the
isotopically labeled species. Specifically, the concentration of ATP
with three 18O atoms on the γ-phosphorus (γ-18O3-ATP), resulting from a single round of PIX,
and the ATP with two 18O atoms on the γ-phosphorus
(γ-18O2-ATP), resulting from two rounds
of PIX, increase at the expense of starting γ-18O4-ATP. The concentrations of species with two or three 18O atoms in the ATP do change as ATP is depleted with P-gp
in liposomes, as expected (Figure ). The data
for the concentration of ATP in the liposome experiment (Figure B) fit well to a first-order decay even at the longest
time point of the experiments. This, combined with direct measurement
of ATPase activity via the colorimetric assay in P-gp liposome samples
incubated for times comparable to NMR experiments, indicates that
no significant loss of enzyme activity occurred during the experiment.
The first-order decrease in [ATP] (Figure B) reflects the non-steady-state nature of these experiments in which
substrate depletion is significant by the end of experiments. It is
useful to emphasize that, although the ATP concentration is changing
in this experimental design, the ratio of γ-18O3-ATP/γ-18O4-ATP is a valid indicator
of PIX at low extent of ATP hydrolysis, unless there were a kinetic
isotope effect favoring hydrolysis of the γ-18O3-ATP. Such heavy atom isotope effects would be negligible
in these experiments, and no significant kinetic selection for hydrolysis
of initially reformed γ-18O3-ATP is expected.
Even if reversibly formed γ-18O3-ATP were
hydrolyzed preferentially, the ratio γ-18O3-ATP/γ-18O4-ATP would be expected to
increase, as it does with supersomes, where it changes from a value
of ∼0.2 to 2.0 in 30 min (Figure A
black curve). The ratio does not change with P-gp liposomes (black
curve in Figure B). As with the experiments
with supersomes, the results with P-gp liposomes in Figures  and  are representative;
three preparations of P-gp liposomes demonstrated no PIX at comparable
levels of ATPase activity.

Rates of positional isotope exchange or ATP
hydrolysis. (A) P-gp
supersomes. The fractions of the exchanging species γ-18O4-ATP in red, γ-18O3-ATP
in blue, and γ-18O2-ATP in green as a
function of the incubation time are shown. Also, the time dependence
of the ratio γ-18O3-ATP/γ-18O4-ATP is presented (black line). (B) Purified liposome-reconstituted
P-gp. The hydrolysis rate (red line) and the time dependence of the
ratio γ-18O3-ATP/γ-18O4-ATP (black line) are shown. The reactions were conducted
as described in the text, and 31P NMR spectra were recorded
at the times indicated. ATP concentrations and the PIX rates were
determined from the areas of the 31P NMR signals of the
γ-phosphorus atom of ATP corresponding to the γ-18O4-ATP, γ-18O3-ATP, and γ-18O2-ATP moieties.

Discussion
Despite significant progress in understanding
the mechanistic details
of P-gp, few data report on the details of ATP hydrolysis and functionally
important conformational changes in the protein that gate the release
of spent nucleotide or drugs. The “vanadate-trapped”
P-gp has provided a valuable model for the posthydrolysis [P-gp·ADP·Pi] state, and it is clear that this state is conformationally
distinct from others throughout the reaction cycle.− However, little
is known about the reaction dynamics for the ATP hydrolysis step and
the relative rates of chemical steps vs the conformational changes
that follow. Although PIX studies are well established probes of ATP
hydrolases, none have been reported for P-gp. The PIX and H2O exchange experiments reported here are consistent with a few possible
scenarios.

First, we discuss the results of the experiments
with supersomes,
for which some uncertainty exists regarding the contribution of P-gp
to PIX. The observation that PIX occurs to a greater extent at equivalent
degrees of ATP hydrolysis for the P-gp supersomes vs “normal”
sf9 cell microsomes suggests that P-gp is either contributing to the
PIX or its overexpression results in a change in levels of other ATPases
that catalyze PIX. To determine whether other ATPases catalyze the
PIX in these samples, incubations were performed with established
inhibitors of Ca2+-ATPases, Na+/K+-ATPases, and the F1 H+/K+ ATPase. None of
these inhibitors resulted in a decrease in PIX at any time point we
examined, supporting the possibility that P-gp is responsible. However,
it is extremely difficult to completely isolate PIX due to any specific
enzyme in crude supersomes, so although these experiments are suggestive,
they do not prove that P-gp in supersomes catalyzes PIX. Further experiments
with mutants with altered ATPase activity may be useful to determine
whether the P-gp contributes.

In contrast, the results with
the P-gp liposomes are clear: no
PIX occurs in this system. If the PIX in supersomes includes a contribution
from P-gp, this difference obviously requires consideration. Possibly,
the lipid environment of supersomes vs our liposomes could be sufficiently
different to alter the catalytic properties of P-gp. Alternatively,
other constituents of supersomes, including sterols or other proteins,
could interact with P-gp and alter its properties. As above, further
work is required to explore these possibilities. However, given the
definitive lack of PIX in P-gp liposomes, we discuss the implications
of those results.

One possibility is that there is fast conformational
change immediately
after the initial hydrolysis step that prevents reversible formation
of ATP, as summarized in Figure . In this
case, conformational rearrangement to a state that is chemically incompetent
for either reformation of ATP or for attack of water on the product
Pi is significantly faster than either of these chemical
processes. A second possibility is that Pi dissociates
very rapidly, and this causes a subsequent conformational change that
disfavors Pi rebinding and ATP synthesis. In either case,
rapid changes in structure or ligand occupancy disfavor the reverse
reaction.

Schematized mechanism for conformational changes coupled to ATP
hydrolysis in P-gp. A portion of the entire catalytic cycle is shown
starting from the drug and nucleotide-bound state. After hydrolysis
of one ATP, the conformational change and release of Pi are fast, preventing reformation of ATP or exchange of bound HPO42– with H2O. The conformational
change is unlikely to include full dissociation of the NBD dimers
but rather is fast with minor structural rearrangement. This conformational
change is sufficient to ensure a high commitment to catalysis for
ATP hydrolysis.

Regarding the role of
conformational change in P-gp catalysis,
there are currently two competing models proposed to explain the events
involved in drug efflux by P-gp that differ in the timing of drug/substrate
release with ATP binding or hydrolysis. The first uses ATP binding
and NBD dimerization as the pumping mechanism., Interaction of drug/substrate in the active site causes a conformational
change in the NBDs that enhances ATP binding and initiates dimerization
of the NBDs. This dimerization then results in another conformational
change propagated to the TMDs, which open and expose the drug to the
extracellular space. This TMD conformational change reduces affinity
for the substrate allowing for its release. The next step in this
model involves ATP hydrolysis to separate the NBD dimer and release
Pi and ADP. In the other model, binding of ATP and substrate occur
followed by hydrolysis of ATP at one NBD, which causes a conformational
change that lowers affinity for the drug/substrate thereby releasing
it. Release of Pi and ADP
is followed by hydrolysis of ATP at the second NBD resulting in a
conformational change that resets the enzyme. In addition to the uncertainty
concerning the timing of ATP hydrolysis relative to drug release,
the magnitude of the conformational changes that take place during
the catalytic cycle is debated. The crystal structures of the nucleotide-free
murine P-gp or its homologue from C. elegans suggest
that the inward-facing conformation to which drugs bind has the NBDs
very far apart with no inter-NBD contact., However,
cross-linking studies in which the NBDs are tethered suggest that
their full dissociation from one another is not required for P-gp
function.

Although the evidence
for a significant posthydrolysis conformational
change is abundant, it remains unknown whether the conformations observed
in the crystal structures are physiologically relevant. In fact, recent
MD simulations based on crystal structures of NBD domains from the
Sav1866 homologue suggest a detailed mechanism in which more localized
conformational changes are sufficient to allosterically communicate
with the drug binding sites and release ADP. In those studies, the ATP/ATP structure (ATP bound in each of the
two sites at the NBD–NBD interface) was used as a starting
point, and one ATP was removed to yield an ATP/apo NBD dimer. The
highly conserved D-loop of the ATP-bound site was observed to undergo
a conformational switch to allow hydrogen bonding between a conserved
glutamate with a water molecule, which also hydrogen bonded to the
backbone of the other D-loop of the other NBD. This oriented the water
molecule for in-line displacement of ADP from the γ-phosphate
of ATP. The rearrangement of the D-loop occurs with movement of other
elements, which are thought to communicate with the TMHs, suggesting
a mechanism for communication between the local reaction trajectory
and the drug binding sites. However, for the ATP/ADP structure, with
one ATP and one ADP bound, this conformational change to favor ATP
hydrolysis did not take place. Thus, the MD simulations suggest that
large scale conformational changes, to fully dissociated NBDs observed
in the crystal structures, are not required to release ADP or drug.
Such a full dissociation of the NBDs from the original nucleotide-bound
NBD dimer conformation would be expected to be slow due to the need
to disrupt many inter-NBD contacts. In turn, a slow dissociation would
likely occur with a low commitment to catalysis by the NBDs with significant
reversibility, in contrast to our observations here. In addition,
other water molecules did not rearrange to provide additional nucleophilic
waters in the vicinity. Thus, the PIX and H2O exchange
data support these MD simulations, requiring only local conformational
changes to disrupt the ATP hydrolysis machinery, which happen fast
relative to chemical steps. Notably, our experiments report only on
the aggregate ATP hydrolysis at both sites. However, the data do indicate
that neither ATP hydrolysis event is reversible nor yields a long-lived [P-gp·ADP·Pi] complex. If either ATP site yielded PIX or H2O exchange,
it would be observed. Figure  schematically
demonstrates the relative rates of conformational change and chemical
steps that are consistent with, but not proven by, the PIX results.

A second possible interpretation of the PIX and H2O
exchange results is that ADP and Pi are bound so rigidly
that no rearrangement of oxygen ligands on phosphorus is possible.
In principle, if all atoms were sufficiently immobilized with respect
to their orientation on the phosphorus atoms, then the 18O oxygen atom of initially formed β-phosphate of ADP that was
initially the bridging oxygen of γ-phosphate of ATP could attack
the bound Pi and release the 16O atom derived
from solvent, thus reforming γ-18O4-ATP.
This would yield no PIX despite reversible ATP hydrolysis. Similarly
for the water exchange with Pi, it is possible that the
Pi  could be rigidly held so that even if the water exchanged
with it, it could be displaced upon reversible reformation of the
fully labeled 18O4-ATP. A few observations suggest
that these formal possibilities are unlikely. Rapid pseudo rotation
of phosphorus ligands in hydrolysis reactions is common, wherein oxygen
atoms readily exchange between positions in pentavalent phosphorus
en route to hydrolysis products. Also, ADP and Pi have
low binding affinities for P-gp and therefore would be expected to
be able to “tumble” to some degree and allow for rearrangement
of the oxygen atoms. For these reasons, we propose the lack of PIX
or H2O exchange in the liposome experiments represents
irreversibility, or very low reversibility, of ATP hydrolysis, rather
than rigidly held hydrolysis products.

To the extent that this
is the case, it is interesting that PIX
and H2O exchange with Pi are absent in both
the drug-free P-gp and with several different drugs bound. A hallmark
of P-gp is its extraordinary promiscuity wherein it couples ATP hydrolysis
with transport of a remarkable range of structurally unrelated substrates.
Presumably, different drugs lead to different conformations of the
TMHs, and this prompted the expectation that different drugs could
promote PIX or H2O exchange to different extents. However,
the results indicate that P-gp is able to ensure a high commitment
to catalysis for each ATPase half reaction for the drug-free state
as well as with the structurally distinct drugs we examined. This
is particularly interesting in comparison to ATPases that demonstrate
PIX or H2O exchange with Pi at appreciable rates. Typically, PIX is maximal when a cosubstrate
is not present. Such enzymes appear “perched”
to optimize rates of ATP hydrolysis when cosubstrate is added but
exhibit a high degree of reversible ATP hydrolysis, possibly, to minimize
wasteful expenditure of ATP. That is, they are “perched”
to optimize rates of ATP hydrolysis in the presence of cosubstrate
and to minimize wasteful hydrolysis in their absence. To the extent
that the vast array of drug substrates recognized by P-gp represent
“cosubstrates”, measurable PIX would be expected in
the absence of any drug. However, the basal ATPase activity exhibited
no PIX or H2O exchange. Unlike other ATPases, P-gp does
not minimize or reduce wasteful ATP consumption with a reversible
reaction manifold with drug-dependent increase in the commitment to
catalysis. This further amplifies the enigmatic role, if any, of the
basal ATPase activity of P-gp.

Supporting Information Available
Results for gel electrophoresis
with purified P-gp. This material is available free of charge via
the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi401280v_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
# M.S. and M.A. contributed equally to this work.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
PIX experiments were
performed at the University of Washington
Analytical Biopharmacy Core, which is supported by the Washington
State Life Sciences Discovery Fund and the Center for the Intracellular
Delivery of Biologics.

Abbreviations
EGTAethylene glycol tetraacetic acid

EDTAethylene diamintetraacetic
acid

NBDsnucleotide
binding domains

TCEPtris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine

PC membranepolycarbonate membrane

PIXpositional isotope exchange

PMSFphenylmethanesulfonyl
fluoride

TMDstransmembrane
domains

