The E1 (activating),
E2 (conjugating),
and E3 (ligating) ubiquitination cascade plays a key role in controlling
cellular protein levels by catalyzing the polyubiquitination of substrate
proteins, leading to their subsequent proteasomal degradation.− The E3 ubiquitin ligases impart specificity for this process and
act by bringing a ubiquitin-loaded E2 enzyme and the substrate into
close proximity to allow the ubiquitin transfer to occur. The Cullin-RING ligases (CRLs) function as multisubunit
protein complexes (Figure A). They are the
largest family of E3 ligases in eukaryotes, consisting of ∼400
members that target ∼20% of the
proteins degraded by the proteasome. CRLs
are therefore involved in a myriad of cellular processes, including
cell-cycle control, gene transcription, and signal transduction, so it is of great interest to study how these
complex molecular machines assemble and function.

ASB9 is part of a Cullin-RING
E3 ubiquitin ligase complex. (A)
Cartoon showing the assembly of Cullin-RING E3 ubiquitin ligases.
ASB9 acts as a substrate recognition subunit (SRS) utilizing Elongin
B and Elongin C as adaptor proteins to bind the Cullin N-terminal
domain. The Cullin C-terminal domain binds RING-box protein (Rbx)
to bring the ubiquitin (Ub)-loaded E2 enzyme into close proximity
with substrate (S), allowing polyubiquitination to occur. (B) Crystal
structures of the ASB9–EloBC ternary complex (PDB 3ZKJ) and Cullin 5 N-terminal
domain (Cul5NTD, PDB 2WZK). ASB9 is shown in purple, EloC, in green,
and EloB, in cyan. The ASB9 BC-box is shown in pink and the Cullin-box
in orange. Cul5NTD is shown in red. (C) Sequence schematic
of ASB9 highlighting the C-terminal SOCS-box domain. The EloBC-binding
region (BC-box) is underlined in pink, and the Cullin 5-binding box
underlined in orange. The canonical Cullin 5-binding motif is shown
underneath and is also underlined in orange (φ is a hydrophobic
residue and X is any residue).

Cullin (Cul) proteins are composed of two domains. The N-terminal
domain consists of three repeats of five α-helix bundles (Figure B) and binds to a substrate recognition subunit
(SRS), usually via adaptor proteins, whereas the C-terminal domain
binds to RING-box proteins (Rbx) to recruit the ubiquitin-loaded E2
enzyme (Figure A). Therefore, Cullin acts as a scaffold on which to build the modular
CRL functional complexes. There are seven Cullin proteins in the human
genome (Cul1, Cul2, Cul3, Cul4a, Cul4b, Cul5, and Cul7),, and each one binds to specific adaptor proteins and motifs within
the SRS. Cul1 binds F-box proteins via the adaptor Skp1, Cul4 recruits WD40-containing proteins via linker-damaged
DNA binding protein (DDB1), and Cul3 is
unusual in that it recruits the adaptor and SRS in the same Bric-a-Brac,
Tramtrack, and Broad complex (BTB)-domain proteins. In contrast, Cul2 and Cul5 both use Elongin B and Elongin
C as adaptor proteins to bind VHL-box and SOCS-box proteins, respectively,
as part of ECS-type (EloBC–Cullin–SOCS-box) CRLs. CRL
ligase activities are controlled by several complex regulation mechanisms,
including activation by conjugation with the protein NEDD8 (neural
precursor cell expressed, developmentally downregulated 8) and inhibition
by binding of CAND1 (cullin-associated and neddylation-dissociated
1). Interestingly, it is emerging that
many CRLs may function as dimers as well as or instead of as monomeric
multisubunit complexes.− CRL dimerization interactions
tend to occur through the adaptor proteins or SRS, for example, BTBSPOP–Cul3, BTBKLHL11–Cul3, and Fbx4–Skp1.

The ankyrin-repeat and SOCS-box (ASB)
proteins are postulated to
act as substrate-recognition domains in ECS-type CRL complexes.− However, this protein family is currently poorly understood, and
there is limited knowledge of their degradation substrates and cellular
roles. Crucially, no studies to date have investigated the assembly
of ASB E3 ligase component structures or their interaction affinities.
Here, we provide a biophysical and structural characterization of
the noncovalent complex formed between ankyrin-repeat and SOCS-box
protein 9 (ASB9), Elongin B (EloB), Elongin C (EloC), and Cul5. ASB9
(Figure B,C) has previously been shown to
act as the substrate-recognition domain of an E3 ligase that includes
EloB, EloC, Cul5, and Rbx2. ASB9 is predominantly
expressed in the kidney and testes, and it has been shown to bind
to and ubiquitinate brain-type cytosolic creatine kinase B and ubiquitous mitochondrial creatine kinase. However, the exact function of ASB9 remains
unknown. Recent evidence suggests that ASB9 could be a biomarker for
human breast cancer, and it has also
been linked to colorectal cancer, suggesting
that it may be a new potential drug target against these diseases.
In this Article, we show that ASB9 forms a high-affinity 1:1:1:1 quaternary
complex with EloB, EloC, and Cul5, and we describe a structural model
for this complex that is consistent with ion-mobility mass spectrometry
and temperature-dependent ITC data. These results present insights
into the assembly of ECS-type CRLs and provide a platform for further
investigation of the ASB protein family.

Experimental Procedures
Protein
Expression and Purification
Recombinant human
ASB9 (residues 35–294), Elongin B (residues 1–118),
and Elongin C (residues 17–112) were coexpressed in Escherichia coli BL21(DE3) cells. Coexpression of
the ASB9–EloBC complex was achieved by cotransforming a pNIC
plasmid containing the ASB9 coding sequence with a C-terminal TEV
cleavage site followed by His6 and FLAG tags (a gift from
Dr. Alex Bullock, Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Oxford)
along with a pCDF_Duet plasmid containing the Elongin B (TCEB2) and
Elongin C (TCEB1) coding sequences as a bicistronic message (a gift
from Dr. Yong Xiong, Yale University). A single colony from the transformation
was used to grow a starter culture in 100 mL of Luria–Bertani
(LB) media containing 50 μg/mL of kanamycin and 50 μg/mL
of streptomycin at 37 °C for 18 h. Ten milliliters of the starter
culture was added to 1 L of LB media supplemented with 50 μg/mL
of kanamycin and 50 μg/mL of streptomycin, and the cells were
grown at 37 °C until the OD600 reached ∼0.5,
at which point protein expression was induced with 0.1 mM isopropyl-1-thio-β-d-galactopyranoside for 18 h at 18 °C.

The recombinant
human Cullin 5 N-terminal domain (Cul5NTD, residues 1–386
with solubilizing mutations V341R and L345D) was also expressed in E. coli BL21(DE3) cells from a pNIC plasmid containing
the CUL5 coding sequence with C-terminal His6 and FLAG
tags and a TEV cleavage site (a gift from Dr. Alex Bullock). A single
colony from the transformation was used to grow a starter culture
in 100 mL of LB media supplemented with 50 μg/mL of kanamycin
at 37 °C for 18 h. Five milliliters of the starter culture was
added to 1 L of LB media containing 50 μg/mL of kanamycin, the
cells were grown to an OD600 of ∼0.5, and protein
expression was induced with 0.5 mM isopropyl-1-thio-β-d-galactopyranoside for 18 h at 18 °C.

The recombinant
human Cullin 2 N-terminal domain (Cul2NTD, residues 8–384
with solubilizing mutations V340R and L344D)
was expressed in E. coli Rosetta cells
from a pNIC plasmid containing the CUL2 coding sequence followed by
C-terminal His6 and FLAG tags and a TEV cleavage site (a
gift from Dr. Alex Bullock). A single colony from the transformation
was used to grow a starter culture in 100 mL of LB media containing
50 μg/mL of kanamycin and 30 μg/mL of chloramphenicol
at 37 °C for 18 h. Twenty milliliters of the starter culture
was added to 1 L of LB media containing 50 μg/mL of kanamycin
and 30 μg/mL of chloramphenicol, the cells were grown to an
OD600 of ∼0.8, and protein expression was induced
with 0.5 mM isopropyl-1-thio-β-d-galactopyranoside
for 18 h at 18 °C.

ASB9–EloBC, Cul5NTD, and Cul2NTD were
independently purified using the following procedure. The cell pellets
were harvested by centrifugation at 4000 rpm (4 °C) for 20 min
and resuspended in 20 mL of lysis buffer containing 50 mM HEPES, pH
7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol, 5 mM imidazole, and 1× EDTA-free
protease-inhibitor tablet (Roche) for lysis using a french press.
The cell lysate was filtered through a 0.45 μm syringe filter
and purified by passing it through 3 mL of Ni-NTA beads (GE Healthcare).
The beads were washed three times with wash buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH
7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol, and 30 mM imidazole), and the protein
was eluted using 5 mL of each elution buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5,
500 mM NaCl, and 5% glycerol containing 50, 100, 150, and 250 mM imidazole).
The elution fractions were pooled, and the His6 and FLAG
tags were cleaved by incubation of the protein with TEV (1:75 TEV/protein)
at 4 °C for 18 h. The protein solution was diluted with 50 mM
HEPES, pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, and 5% glycerol to dilute the imidazole
followed by a second Ni-NTA affinity purification, and the flow through
was collected. The flow through was further purified by preparative
size-exclusion chromatography using a Superdex 75 16/60 column (GE
Healthcare) with a running buffer consisting of 50 mM HEPES, 100 mM
NaCl, pH 7.5, and 1 mM TCEP. (The yields of the purifed products were
ASB9–EloBC ∼10 mg/L, Cul5NTD ∼40 mg/L,
and Cul2NTD ∼8 mg/L.) See  for SDS-PAGE analysis of Cul2NTD.

Reconstitution
of the ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD Quaternary Complex
Equimolar amounts of cleaved and purified
ASB9–EloBC (430 μM) and Cul5NTD (470 μM)
were mixed and incubated at room temperature for 20 min before purification
by preparative size-exclusion chromatography using a Superdex 75 16/60
column (GE Healthcare) equilibrated in 50 mM HEPES, 100 mM NaCl, pH
7.5, and 10 mM DTT.

Native Nanoelectrospray Ionization Mass Spectrometry
(nanoESI–MS)
NanoESI–MS measurements were performed
in positive ion mode
using a Synapt HDMS quadrupole ion-trap IM–MS instrument described
in detail previously (Waters, U.K.)., The samples
were prepared by a buffer exchange of the protein into 500 mM ammonium
acetate, pH 7.0, using micro Biospin columns (Bio-Rad, U.K.). To preserve
the noncovalent interactions, the typical instrument settings were
as follows: capillary voltage, 1.7 kV; sample-cone and extraction-cone
voltages, 80 and 1.4 V, respectively; trap, 12 V; transfer, 13 V;
backing pressure, 3.8 mbar; trap pressure, 5 × 10–2 mbar; time-of-flight analyzer pressure, 1.17 × 10–6 mbar. All spectra were calibrated internally using a solution of
cesium iodide (100 mg/mL). The data were processed with MassLynx 4.0
software (Waters/Micromass).

Ion-Mobility Mass Spectrometry (IM–MS)
IM–MS
measurements for the ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD protein
complex were performed with the Synapt HDMS. N2 gas was
used in the ion-mobility cell at 0.5 mbar pressure, whereas the traveling
wave velocity was 250 ms–1. To optimize the IM separation
for the ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD complex, measurements
were taken at six wave heights (7.0, 7.5, 8.0, 8.5, 9.0, and 9.5 V).
The reported collision cross section (CCS) values are an average of
the data recorded over all of the wave heights. The CCS calibration
procedure used was described previously and involved validation through the use of CCS data from other known
protein ions. The drift times for all
charge states were obtained using MassLynx and DriftScope (Waters).

Calculations of the Theoretical Collision Cross Sections (CCS)
from Atomic-Level Structures
To compare the CCS values measured
for ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD with their theoretical
values, the atomic-level structure of the ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD quaternary complex was obtained by molecular modeling.
The program used for the CCS calculation was DriftScope, which is based on the projection approximation
(PA) method.

Differential-Scanning Fluorimetry
Thermal-shift experiments
were carried out in 96-well real-time PCR plates (LightCycler 480
Multiwell Plate 96, Roche) using a 100 μL total volume per sample,
and each sample had a final concentration of 2.5× Sypro Orange
(Sigma) in 50 mM HEPES, 100 mM NaCl, pH 7.5, and 1 mM TCEP. The plates
were covered with the provided sealing foils, briefly vortexed, and
centrifuged for 2 min. The temperature was increased from 37 to 95
°C at a rate of 1 °C/min using a LightCycler 480 real-time
PCR system (Roche). The protein melting curves were plotted as the
fluorescence intensity (RFU) versus temperature, and the melting temperatures
were identified by the minimum of each curve’s derivative (−dRFU/dT). To examine the thermal stability of ASB9–EloBC,
the melting curve of 2 μM ASB9–EloBC was monitored in
the presence of Cul5NTD at final concentrations of 8, 4,
2, 1, 0.5, and 0.25 μM (doubling dilutions).

Isothermal-Titration
Calorimetry
Isothermal-titration
calorimetry experiments were performed with a MicroCal ITC200 microcalorimeter (GE Healthcare). Cul5NTD (450 μM)
was titrated into ASB9–EloBC (60 μM) in the sample cell
using 19 injections of 2 μL each (120 s spacing between injections
with a 500 rpm stirring speed) at 288, 293, 298, and 303 K. Cul2NTD (450 μM) was titrated into ASB9–EloBC (60
μM) at 298 K. All protein solutions were equilibrated in 50
mM HEPES, 100 mM NaCl, pH 7.5, and 1 mM TCEP prior to performing the
titration experiments. Control experiments were performed by titrating
Cul5NTD (450 μM) into buffer. Data analyses for the
ITC experiments were performed using the MicroCal Origin 7.0 software
package. The dissociation constant, Kd, binding enthalpy, ΔH, and stoichiometry, n, values were calculated by fitting the calorimetric data
curves to a standard one-set-of-sites model. The values quoted in
Figure D are the mean of triplicate experiments,
and the errors are the standard deviations of the mean.

Molecular Modeling
of ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD
A structural
model of the ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD quaternary
complex was obtained in Pymol using the crystal
structure of FboxSkp2–Skp1–Cul1NTD (PDB 1LDK) as a template. To construct the model, the ASB9–EloBC
crystal structure (PDB 3ZKJ) was first superimposed as a rigid body on the template
by aligning its EloC subunit with the Skp1 subunit of FboxSkp2–Skp1–Cul1NTD. Second, the crystal structure
of Cul5NTD (PDB 2WZK) was superimposed as a rigid body to the template
by aligning its first α-helical bundle domain (residues 15–146)
with the corresponding region of Cul1NTD (residues 20–170).

Results
ASB9 Forms a Stable Complex with Elongin B–Elongin C
To monitor the formation of the ternary complex among ASB9 and
Elongin B–Elongin C (EloBC), the three proteins were coexpressed
in Escherichia coli, and the complex
purified using Ni-affinity chromatography and size-exclusion gel filtration
followed by analysis using native nanoelectrospray ionization mass
spectrometry (nanoESI–MS). Native nanoESI–MS is one
of the most accurate and sensitive techniques for determining the
molecular weight and stoichiometry of large intact protein complexes., ASB9–EloBC was examined by mass spectrometry at three concentrations
(20, 80, and 130 μM), all of which supported the existence of
the ternary protein complex (expected molecular weight calculated
from protein sequences, 53 447 Da). The peaks for the ternary
ASB9–EloBC complex appear in the range 3500–4000 m/z, with four (12+ to 15+) charge states (Figure A). The presence
of a dimeric species (ASB9–EloBC)2 with a molecular
weight of 107 kDa was also observed at each concentration in the 4800–6000 m/z range with four charge states (18+ to 21+). The low population of dimeric species
would imply only a weak interaction; however, the monomer–dimer
distribution over the range of concentrations could not be fitted
to a binding isotherm, suggesting the observed dimerization could
be due to an artifact of the nanoESI–MS. Additionally, this
dimerization was not observed by size-exclusion chromatography, although
there was a contaminant protein with a molecular weight of ∼75
kDa present arising from the expression in E. coli (Figure A). This contaminant was removed
by gel filtration to provide purified ASB9–EloBC for biophysical
analysis.

ASB9–EloBC binds Cul5NTD to form a monomeric
quaternary complex, ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD. Size-exclusion
gel filtration traces, denaturing SDS-PAGE, and native mass spectra
are shown for ASB9–EloBC (A), Cul5NTD (B), and ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD (C). The tables below the spectra quantify the amount of
the different species in each protein sample, as observed by nanoESI–MS
at three concentrations. The first peak in the gel-filtration trace
for ASB9–EloBC (A) is due to a contaminant protein resulting
from the expression in E. coli and
was removed during this purification. Only one gel-filtration peak
is observed upon mixing equimolar amounts of ASB9–EloBC and
Cul5NTD (C), suggesting the formation of quaternary complex
ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD.

The Cullin 5 N-terminal domain (Cul5NTD, residues
1–386)
was also expressed in E. coli, purified
by Ni-affinity chromatography and size-exclusion gel filtration, and
examined by nanoESI–MS. Cul5NTD is able to fold
independently in solution and is known to contain the binding site
for the adaptor EloBC and the SOCS-box-containing substrate recognition
subunits of CRLs; therefore, this construct was used for the in vitro
analysis rather than full-length Cullin 5., The construct contains two point mutations, V341R and L345D, to
increase the solubility and stability of recombinant Cul5NTD (expected molecular weight from protein sequences, 45 690
Da). Cul5NTD eluted at a smaller elution volume during
size-exclusion chromatography (54 mL) than ASB9–EloBC (57 mL)
despite having a lower molecular weight (Figure ), which is likely a result of its elongated shape (Figure B), causing it to behave as a larger protein by
gel filtration. As shown in Figure B, monomeric
Cul5NTD appears in the mass spectrum in the range 2800–4000 m/z with four charge states (12+ to 15+). Additionally, dimeric Cul5NTD was
present at the three concentrations tested (5, 10, and 20 μM).
As in the case of ASB9–EloBC, the monomer–dimer distribution
could not be fitted to a binding isotherm and dimerization was not
observed by size-exclusion chromatography, suggesting that Cul5NTD is predominantly monomeric at physiological pH.

ASB9–EloBC
and the Cullin 5 N-Terminal Domain Bind to
Form a Monomeric Multisubunit Protein Complex
To investigate
further the assembly of the E3 CRL protein subunits, the ASB9–EloBC
ternary complex and Cul5NTD were mixed in equimolar amounts
at room temperature, and the solution was purified by size-exclusion
chromatography. The resulting species eluted as a single peak at elution
volume 50 mL (Figure C), which is consistent
with the formation of a protein complex that is larger than ASB9–EloBC
(elution volume 57 mL) or Cul5NTD (elution volume 54 mL).
The formation of quaternary complex ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD was confirmed by native mass spectrometry analysis. The
main species showed an observed mass of ∼99 500 Da (expected
molecular weight from protein sequences, 99 137 Da), corresponding
to ASB9–EloBC forming a 1:1 complex with Cul5NTD (Figure C), although unbound ASB9–EloBC
was also present. The proportion of quaternary ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD relative to ASB9–EloBC increased with increasing
protein concentrations, suggesting that ASB9–EloBC and ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD are in equilibrium with each other and that the equilibrium
shifts toward ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD dissociation
at lower protein concentrations. Only negligible amounts of ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD dimer were observed, and this disappeared at higher dilutions,
implying that the ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD CRL
assembles as a specific monomeric complex.

ASB9–EloBC Binds
to Cul5NTD with High Affinity
but Not to Cul2NTD
To investigate the effect of
Cul5NTD binding on ASB9–EloBC protein stability,
we performed differential-scanning fluorimetry experiments. The melting
point (Tm) of ASB9–EloBC in the
absence of Cul5NTD is relatively low at 40.2 °C (Figure A), which is consistent
with that observed for other ankyrin-repeat-domain-containing proteins,
including Notch, p16, and IκBα.− Interestingly,
the melting curve derivative of ASB9–EloBC contains just one
minimum, suggesting that the ternary protein complex unfolds in a
single-step process. Titration of the more stable Cul5NTD (Tm = 50.2 °C) increases the Tm of ASB9–EloBC (ΔTm = 4.6 °C with a 4-fold excess of Cul5NTD), indicating the enhanced stability of ASB9–EloBC upon Cul5NTD binding, which is consistent with the formation of the
quaternary complex ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD (Figure A).

ASB9–EloBC binds with high affinity to Cul5NTD and specifically over Cul2NTD, and binding increases
the stability of ASB9–EloBC. (A) Differential-scanning fluorimetry
curves for ASB9–EloBC (2 μM, Tm = 40.2 °C) in the presence of increasing concentrations of
Cul5NTD (max ΔTm = 4.6
°C). The minima observed between 48 and 52 °C are due to
the melting of Cul5NTD, and they increase in intensity
with increasing Cul5NTD concentrations. (B) Example ITC
titration of Cul5NTD (450 μM) into ASB9–EloBC
(60 μM) at 293 K. (C) ITC titration of Cul2NTD (450
μM) into ASB9–EloBC (60 μM), confirming that ASB9–EloBC
does not bind to Cul2. (D) Thermodynamic data for the ASB9–EloBC
+ Cul5NTD interaction obtained from ITC experiments performed
at various temperatures. (E) Thermodynamic parameters ΔH, −TΔS,
and ΔG are plotted against temperature (T). The slope of the linear fit of ΔH against T corresponds to the ΔCp of ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD complex formation (−0.35 kcal mol–1 K–1).

To gain further insights into the affinity and thermodynamics
of
the ASB9–EloBC and Cul5NTD interaction, we performed
temperature-dependence studies using isothermal-titration calorimetry
(Figure B,D). ASB9–EloBC was found
to bind to Cul5NTD with a Kd value of 220 ± 90 nM at 298 K. This affinity is weaker than
that previously reported for Cul5NTD binding to the ternary
complexes between EloBC and SOCS-box fragments from SOCS2, SOCS4,
SOCS5, SOCS6, and SOCS7 (Kd = 10–40
nM). In part, this may be due to variations
in the buffers and assay conditions used. However, it may also reflect
the sequence deviation in the ASB9 Cul5-box (LVLP) from the canonical
motif, LPXP (Figures C and ), which is essential for the recruitment of Cul5.,, The stoichiometry of binding
is 1:1 ASB9–EloBC/Cul5NTD, which is consistent with
the native mass spectrometry analysis. The binding of ASB9–EloBC
to Cul5NTD is favorable both enthalpically (ΔH = −6.0 ± 0.2 kcal mol–1)
and entropically (−TΔS = −3.1 ± 0.5 kcal mol–1) at 298 K.
At increased temperatures, ΔH dominates binding
as −TΔS becomes less
favorable (at 303 K, ΔH = −8.3 ±
0.7 kcal mol–1 and −TΔS = −1.4 ± 1.2 kcal mol–1),
and conversely, at 288 K entropy drives complex formation (ΔH = −3.0 ± 0.1 kcal mol–1 and
−TΔS = −5.6
± 0.2 kcal mol–1). However, ΔG does not show significant variation with temperature as
a result of enthalpy–entropy compensation (Figure D,E).

We plotted ΔH against temperature to calculate
the change in heat capacity (ΔCp) upon ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD complex formation, resulting in ΔCp = −0.35 kcal mol–1 K–1 (Figure E). This value is
very similar to that previously reported for the Cul5NTD interaction with the ternary complex formed among the SOCS-box-containing
C-terminal domain of HIV-1 Vif and EloBC (VifCTD–EloBC),
which was determined to be −0.30 kcal mol–1 K–1 using an analogous method of temperature-dependent
ITC titrations. This consistency between
ΔCp values suggests
that Cul5NTD binding to various SOCS-box–EloBC complexes
occurs via similar interactions, which may be conserved in other ECS-type
CRLs.

To address the specificity of the ASB9–EloBC and
Cul5 interaction,
we performed isothermal-titration calorimetry studies of ASB9–EloBC
with the Cullin 2 N-terminal domain (Cul2NTD, residues
8–384). Cul2 also forms Cullin-RING E3 ubiquitin ligase complexes
using EloBC as the adaptor proteins, but is believed to interact with
proteins containing VHL-box domains rather than SOCS-box motifs., As expected, no binding was observed for the titration of Cul2NTD into ASB9–EloBC by ITC (Figure C). This suggests that CRL formation of ASB9–EloBC
is specific for Cul5 over Cul2.

Molecular Modeling Provides
the First Insights into the Structure
of the N-Terminal Region of an ASB-Containing Cul5 E3 Ubiquitin Ligase
We constructed a structural model of the ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD quaternary complex using the published crystal structure
of the homologous FboxSkp2–Skp1–Cul1NTD complex as a template. The
first α-helical bundle of the crystal structure of Cul5NTD(PDB 2WZK) was aligned with the corresponding region of Cul1NTD (sequence identity 29%, rmsd of all atoms 2.31 Å), whereas
the EloC subunit of the ASB9–EloBC ternary-complex crystal
structure (PDB 3ZKJ) was aligned with the homologous Skp1 subunit (sequence identity
38%, rmsd of all atoms 1.19 Å) to give the quaternary complex
shown in Figure A. Similar models of other
ECS-type CRL quaternary complexes have previously been reported, including
those for SOCS2–EloBC–Cul5, RAR3–EloBC–Cul5, HIV-1
Vif–EloBC–Cul5, and VHL–EloBC–Cul2. Our model shows that the Cul5NTD stalk
is oriented in the opposite direction relative to the ankyrin repeats
of ASB9.

Structural model of the quaternary complex ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD. The model was constructed using the crystal structure
of FboxSkp2–Skp1–Cul1NTD as a
template (PDB 1LDK). The Cul5NTD crystal structure
(PDB 2WZK) was
aligned with Cul1NTD, and EloC of the ASB9–EloBC
crystal structure (PDB 3ZKJ) was aligned with Skp1 of the FboxSkp2–Skp1–Cul1NTD structure. ASB9 is shown in purple, EloC, in green, EloB,
in cyan, Cul5NTD, in red, Cul1NTD, in orange,
Skp1, in dark pink, and FboxSkp2, in light pink. (A) Surface
representation of the ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD quaternary
complex. (B) Structural alignment of ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD with FboxSkp2–Skp1–Cul1NTD showing the variation in the Cullin NTD orientations. The kink at
Cul1NTD residue Gly212 is labeled. (C) Close-up structural
alignment of ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD with FboxSkp2–Skp1–Cul1NTD showing the high
structural conservation at the interface between the adaptor protein
(Skp1/EloC) and Cullin (Cul1/Cul5, respectively).

The superposition of our model onto the FboxSkp2–Skp1–Cul1NTD complex shows that although
Cul1NTD and Cul5NTD have the same overall structure
there is variation in the
relative orientation of their α-helix bundles (Figure B). This likely reflects the inherent flexibility
of the Cullins that has been predicted computationally by Liu et al. and is proposed to be relevant to the allosteric
regulations of CRLs. In fact, the Cul1NTD kink observed
in the structural alignment with Cul5NTD occurs near Gly
212 on repeat 2, which is a residue that was previously observed to
act as a hinge during molecular dynamics simulations of Cul1NTD. However, there is high structural
conservation at the interface between Cullin and the adaptor-box proteins
(Figure C).

We used this model together
with the individual crystal structures
of ASB9–EloBC and Cul5NTD to calculate the change
in solvent-accessible surface area (ΔSASA) upon ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD complex formation. Using PyMOL, ΔSASA of ASB9–EloBC
and Cul5NTD binding was calculated to be −1238 Å2, of which 437 Å2 is due to the burial of
polar atoms and 801 Å2 from the burial of hydrophobic
regions (). This ΔSASA value
is of a similar magnitude to those determined for the interface between
FboxSkp2–Skp1 and Cul1NTD (1780 Å2, PDB 1LDK), the BTBSPOP–Cul3NTD binding interface (825 Å2, PDB 4EOZ), and the KLHL11–Cul3NTD interface (1508
Å2, PDB 4AP2), supporting the relevance
of our model and further indicating that many CRL complexes assemble
via a common topology at the CulNTD–adaptor interface.

Ion-Mobility Data Support Our Modeled Structure of the ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD Quaternary Complex
Attempts to obtain the atomic-level
structure of the ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD quaternary
complex in our laboratory have so far been unsuccessful, and previously
reported models of quaternary ECS-type CRL complexes have not been
experimentally validated. To provide structural validation of our
quaternary complex model, ion-mobility mass spectrometry (IM–MS)
experiments were performed on the ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD complex purified by size-exclusion chromatography. Under
native conditions, drift times were measured for four charge states
(17+ to 20+) of the intact monomeric heterocomplex
ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD (Figure ), and the average collision cross section (CCS) was determined
to be 6000 ± 200 Å2 (Figure B,C), which is in very good agreement with the CCS calculated
from the model of ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD (5895
Å2). This implies that our model reflects a highly
probable conformation of the quaternary complex and therefore provides
insight into the physiological structure of this multimeric system.

Ion-mobility
mass spectrometry data for the ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD quaternary complex. (A) Native mass spectrum and ion-mobility
drift-time plot of the ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD sample. The quaternary complex (cyan) partially dissociates. ASB9–EloBC
(purple) and Cul5NTD (monomeric (red) and dimeric (yellow))
are also present but are separated by their varying drift times. (B)
Experimentally measured collision cross section (CCS) areas of four
charge states (17+ to 20+) of ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD. (C) Average CCS values for the ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD quaternary complex were determined to be 6000 ± 200
Å2, which is in good agreement with that calculated
(5895 Å2) from the model shown in panel D.

Discussion
ASB9 is the substrate-recognition
subunit of a Cullin-RING E3 ubiquitin
ligase complex and is part of the 18-member ASB protein family. To
date, little is known about the interactions and biological functions
of this family, and there have previously been no reported in vitro
biophysical studies on the structural assembly of any of these proteins
as part of a CRL complex. Here, we provide the first evidence that
ASB9–EloBC binds to Cul5NTD with high affinity to
form a monomeric multisubunit protein complex with an analogous structure
to that of other CRLs.

The majority of Cullin-RING ligases are
believed to function as
monomeric species, although it is known that some can act as dimers,
for example, SPOP–Cullin3,, KLHL11–Cullin3, SCFFbx4, and SCFCdc4. Our data suggest
that the ASB9–EloBC–Cul5 CRL functions as a canonical
monomeric heterocomplex because the quaternary species ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD was only observed in a monomeric state by size-exclusion
chromatography and native mass spectrometry. Cul5NTD and
ASB9–EloBC were able to form dimeric species in native mass
spectrometry analysis; however, this is likely to be due to a nonspecific
nanoESI–MS artifact; Cul1, Cul3, and Cul4a have all been reported
to form homodimers in cells, but this was not previously observed
for Cul2 and Cul5.

ASB9 is stable
when complexed to EloBC, but we were unable to express
it recombinantly alone. This instability of the free protein has also
been reported for ASB2. The ankyrin-repeat
domain of ASB9 (ASB9 isoform 2, ASB9-2) has recently been crystallized
and the structure solved, implying that
this species is stable in solution. Therefore, it is likely that it
is the SOCS-box domain or the linker region of ASB9 and other ASB
proteins that causes the instability of the noncomplexed species.
The fact that unbound ASB9 does not seem to be favorable in solution
suggests that it is likely to first form a long-lived complex with
EloBC before recruiting Cullin 5 to form the active CRL system in
cells. This is also indicated by native mass spectrometry analyses
of the quaternary ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD complex;
ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD readily dissociates into
ASB9–EloBC and Cul5NTD, but only small amounts of
further subunit dissociation within ASB9–EloBC were seen.

ASB9–EloBC binds to Cul5NTD with a Kd value of ∼200 nM at 298 K. This is approximately
5–20-fold weaker than the affinities previously reported for
other SOCS-box–EloBC complexes binding to Cul5NTD. The SOCS-box domain contains a Cullin
5-binding motif φXXLPφPXXφXX[YF][LI]
(φ is a hydrophobic residue and X is any residue), and the SOCS proteins that exhibit Kd &lt;100 nM for Cul5NTD all contain the canonical
sequence LPLP at the key positions 4–7 of this motif (). However, in ASB9 this is replaced
with LVLP, possibly leading to the apparent weaker affinity for Cul5.
SOCS1 (IPLN) and SOCS3 (LPGP) also show deviations from this motif
(), and they bind Cul5NTD with Kd values of 1 μM and 105
nM, respectively, which further indicates
that mutations in these positions can cause a reduction in the affinity
for Cul5. In addition to ASB9, ASB4, ASB5, ASB11, ASB12, and ASB13
show deviations from the canonical Cul5-box sequence, although the
majority of the ASB family contains LPLP in positions 4–7 (). A weaker affinity for Cul5NTD and therefore reduced CRL complex formation may have consequences
for the efficiency of ASB9-dependent ubiquitination in cells because
ASB9 will be less effective at competing for Cullin 5 than other EloBC–Cul5
binding proteins. This may play a role in the regulation of ASB9-mediated
polyubiquitination of its substrates. Interestingly, both SOCS1 and
SOCS3 are believed to act as suppressors of cytokine signaling by
an additional SOCS-box-independent mechanism, explaining why Cul5NTD affinity need not be so high for these proteins. The SOCS proteins that act only through SOCS-box-dependent
ubiquitination and substrate degradation all have Kd &lt;50 nM. This raises the possibility that ASB9 could
have an additional role to that of CRL substrate-binding protein in
vivo, although this awaits further study.

The ΔCp value
of ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD complex formation was
measured to be −0.35 kcal mol–1 K–1 by ITC. The negative value of ΔCp indicates that the surface buried on complex formation
is dominated by hydrophobic interactions. The ΔCp value
may be used to calculate an approximation of the change in solvent-accessible
surface area (ΔSASA) of a protein interaction using the equation

This results in
a ΔSASA value of 2397 Å2,
which is about twice the value calculated from the structural model
of ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD. This variation in
ΔSASA is likely partly due to the crude method used in converting
ΔCp to ΔSASA
but may also indicate a conformational change in ASB9–EloBC
and/or Cul5NTD that is not accounted for by the static
crystal-structure-based model. However, because the quaternary complex
model shows good agreement with ion-mobility experimental measurements,
any conformational variation is likely to be small and localized at
the quaternary complex interface.

It is interesting to note
that in the structural model of the ASB9–EloBC–Cul5NTD complex the ankyrin groove of the ASB9 ankyrin-repeat domain
faces the C-terminal region of Cul5NTD where the RING-box
protein and ubiquitin-loaded E2 enzyme would be located in the full
CRL complex. The ankyrin groove of ankyrin-repeat domains is a common
binding site for protein–protein interactions,, suggesting that this region of ASB9 may bind the substrate and orient
it in a suitable way to allow polyubiquitination.

We have reported
the first biophysical characterization of the
components of an ASB CRL complex as well as the first experimentally
validated structural information for the assembly of the quaternary
N-terminal region of an ASB CRL. We provide a platform for further
investigation of the assembly mechanisms of ASB proteins and other
ECS-type CRLs, which will assist in the development of chemical probes
to examine the biological functions and therapeutic potential of this
important protein family. Recent progress in identifying small molecules
targeting binding surfaces and interfaces of CRLs, such as SCFCdc4, ECSVHL, and SCFSkp2, suggests that other E3 ligases, including the ASB CRL family, may
be also amenable to modulation by drug-like small molecules.

Supporting Information Available
SDS-PAGE analysis
of Cul2NTD; sequence alignment of the SOCS-box regions
of SOCS proteins
1–7, ASB9, and HIV Vif; ITC data for the titration of Cul5NTD into various SOCS-box/EloBC proteins; solvent-accessible
surface area (SASA) calculated from crystal structures; and sequence
alignment of the SOCS-box domains of all 18 members of the ASB protein
family. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi400758h_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
† College of Life Sciences, Division of Biological
Chemistry and
Drug Discovery, University of Dundee, James Black Centre, Dow Street,
Dundee, DD1 5EH, United Kingdom. Dr. Inge Van Molle: VIB, Department
of Structural Biology, Structural Biology Brussels, Vrije Universiteit
Brussel, Building E, room 4.16, Pleinlaan 2, 1050 Brussels, Belgium.

Author Contributions
A.C.
designed
the research. J.T. and D.M.V. performed the experiments. All authors
analyzed data. J.T. and A.C. wrote the manuscript with suggestions
from all authors.

This research
was supported by the U.K. Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research
Council grant BB/G023123/1 (David Phillips Fellowship to A.C.) and
by the European Research Council ERC-StG-2012-311460 (starting grant
to A.C.). I.V.M. was supported by a European Commission Marie-Curie
Intra European Fellowship (PIEF-GA-2010-275683).

The
authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Alex Bullock (Structural Genomics Consortium,
University of Oxford) for the ASB9, Cul5NTD, and Cul2NTD plasmids and Dr. Yong Xiong (Yale University) for the EloBC
plasmids.

Abbreviations
SOCSsuppressors of cytokine signaling

ASB9ankyrin-repeat
and SOCS-box protein 9

EloBelongin B

EloCelongin C

EloBCelongin B elongin C complex

CulCullin

RINGreally interesting new gene

RbxRING-box protein

CRLCullin RING ligase

ECSEloBC–Cullin–SOCS-box

SRSsubstrate recognition subunit

NTDN-terminal domain

VHLVon Hippel-Lindau

BTBBric-a-brac, Tramtrack
and Broad complex

SkpS-phase, kinase-associated protein

RMSDroot-mean-square deviation

IM–MSion-mobility mass spectrometry

CCScollision cross
section

