Metal ions
play important functional
roles in biological systems but can also be significant environmental
pollutants. A detailed understanding of the mechanisms of speciation
and transfer of heavy metals in biological and environmental systems
is thus of both fundamental and practical interest. Among those chemical
mechanisms involving heavy metals, of particular biological importance
are ion transfers in proteins.

Some
microorganisms are able to overcome high concentrations of
toxic heavy metals and can directly biotransform contaminants to innocuous
or immobile forms., A key example is mercury resistance
in bacteria conferred by the mer operon, which encodes
a suite of proteins that carry out the transport and reduction of
Hg2+ to transform this toxic ion into less toxic, elemental
Hg0.,Mer loci have
been discovered in many different species, underscoring the ubiquitous
nature of this mode of mercury detoxification among bacterial communities.,

One of the key enzymes in the mer system
is mercuric
reductase, MerA, which catalyzes the reduction of Hg2+ to
Hg0 within the bacterial cytoplasm., The
active form of MerA is a homodimer in which the two active sites within
the catalytic core domain are found at the dimer interface and comprise
residues from both monomers (Figure ). To
compete with other cellular thiols for its Hg2+ substrate,
each chain of the MerA dimer contains three pairs of strictly conserved
cysteines that serve as binding sites for Hg2+ transfer
and provide a platform for Hg2+ reduction. One cysteine
pair (C11/C14, numbering hereafter adapted from Tn501 MerA, from Pseudomonas aeruginosa) is located in the small, N-terminal metallochaperone-like domains
of MerA (NmerA, not shown in Figure ) in a
GMXCXXC motif that is present in many metalloproteins, including the
homologous periplasmic Hg2+ transporter, MerP.− NmerA binds and delivers Hg2+ to the C-terminal cysteine
pair, C558′ and C559′, of the other monomer near the
surface of the MerA dimer interface.,, After Hg2+ binds to the C558′/C559′
cysteine pair, the flexible C-terminal tail must change conformations
to move the complex from the surface to the protein interior where
Hg2+ is transferred to the active site cysteine pair, C136
and C141,− located adjacent to the isoalloxazine ring of the
flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) cofactor (Figure ). From the opposite face of
FAD, the other substrate, dihydronicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
phosphate (NADPH), transfers hydride to FAD, yielding the two-electron
reduced FADH– and oxidized NADP+. Subsequently,
FADH– reduces the C141–S-Hg(II)–S-C136
complex to yield Hg0 in a reaction that proceeds to completion;
i.e., with stoichiometric quantities of NADPH and Hg(SR)2 substrate, all of the NADPH is consumed., As expected, mutation of either C136 or C141 or both results in
a total loss of Hg2+ reductase activity. The overall Hg2+ transfer and reduction processes
are shown in Scheme .

Stereo (walleye) image
of the interfacial active site of the MerA
homodimer with monomer chains in cyan and magenta. FAD, NADP+, and residues with cyan carbons are from the left monomer. Amino
acid residues with magenta carbons are from the right monomer. Several
ordered water molecules are shown as red spheres. Other atoms are
colored red for oxygen, blue for nitrogen, and yellow for sulfur.
The structure was constructed from an overlay of the AACC Hg2+/NADP+ complex (PDB 4K7Z, magenta) and the oxidized wild type
(CCCC) enzyme (PDB 1ZK7, cyan) with only one chain from each shown for clarity. FAD molecules
from the left monomer in both structures are shown to highlight the
close alignment of the two structures. Abbreviations: CCCC, wild type
MerA; CCAA, Cys136 Cys141 Ala558 Ala559 Tn501 MerA;
AACC, Ala136 Ala141 Cys558 Cys559 Tn501 MerA; NADPH,
dihydronicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate; FAD, flavin adenine
dinucleotide.

Hg2+ Transfer
and Reduction in the MerA Core Domain
The reduced and oxidized cofactors
are shown in blue and red, respectively. The two chains of the MerA
homodimer are shown in orange and green. The dashed line represents
the charge transfer interactions between the C141 thiolate and FAD. Kh is the equilibrium constant between the NADPH/FAD
and NADP+/FADH– redox states. The red
arrow shows the Hg2+ transfer studied in this work.

A critical role for the C558′/C559′
pair in Hg2+ transfer and/or reduction was initially suggested
by the
observation that the CCAA mutant retains only 0.09% of the steady-state
catalytic activity of the wild type (CCCC) enzyme with typical Hg(SR)2 substrates. Pre-steady-state
kinetic studies with alternative substrates subsequently showed that
the C-terminal cysteines are essential for efficient acquisition of
Hg2+ from the incoming Hg(SR)2 substrate and
transfer into the active site, but they are not directly involved
in the catalytic reduction step., Thus, with
HgBr2 as substrate, from which the bromide ligands dissociate
as stable anions (Br–) with no need for protonation,
the CCAA enzyme can acquire Hg2+ through an alternative
channel and reduce Hg2+ as rapidly as the CCCC enzyme. In contrast, with physiologically relevant Hg(SR)2 substrates in which the thiol ligands are more basic and
require protonation, successive Hg2+ transfers from substrate
at the protein surface all the way into the catalytic site of the
CCCC enzyme occur at an overall rate exceeding that of turnover (≥224
s–1 vs 12–15 s–1 for kcat), while the single Hg2+ transfer
from the Hg(SR)2 substrate to the active site of the CCAA
mutant occurs at least 103-fold more slowly and results
in a complex that is inhibited toward reduction due to an apparent
increase in negative charge in the active site. Thus, the C558′/C559′ cysteine pair is critical
both for displacing the high-affinity ligands of physiological Hg(SR)2 substrates and for presenting Hg2+ for efficient
transfer into the active site to yield a neutral, readily reducible
complex.

How the enzyme catalyzes these efficient transfers
is one of the
fundamental questions of interest in understanding the overall catalytic
mechanism of MerA. Previous studies have shown that exchange of thiol
ligands in Hg(SR)2 complexes in aqueous solution occurs
through the formation of transient or semistable tricoordinate [Hg(SR)3]− complexes, with faster rates of formation
of the tricoordinate species at high pH where the thiolate anion predominates,
and rates for loss of a ligand from the tricoordinate complex favored
by protonation of the leaving thiol ligand. Thus, we anticipate a similar mechanism likely occurs in the enzyme
with a need for acid/base catalysis.

To gain additional insight
into intramolecular Hg2+ transfer
in MerA, we determined the X-ray structure of the C-terminal Hg2+ complex of a double active-site mutant of the Tn501 MerA core and performed DFT-based QM/MM simulations
to explore Hg2+ transfer pathways from the C-terminal cysteine
pair to the active site. Based on the mechanistic principles noted
above and the X-ray structure (Figure ), we
propose a potential pathway for Hg2+ transfer in the MerA
core and determine the corresponding potential energy profile. The
results from the calculations provide a detailed picture of Hg2+ transfer likely to be of general applicability in biological
systems.

Methods
AACC MerA Protein and Complex Preparation
Mutation
of codons for cysteines 136 and 141 to alanines in the merA gene for the Tn501 catalytic core construct (pET3d:cmerA) was performed following the QuikChange (Stratagene)
protocols with appropriate primers to generate pET3d:AACCcmerA for
expression of the AACC double mutant of the MerA catalytic core. The
protein was expressed in Escherichia coli BL21(DE3)
pLysS cells, purified, and stored as previously described. Prior to complex formation, the purified protein
was first incubated with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at 4
°C, separated from DTT by gravity gel filtration through Sephadex
G-25, and the reduced thiol content assayed using dithionitrobenzoic
acid as previously described. The Hg2+ complex of the C-terminal cysteines was generated by stoichiometric
titration with Hg-bis-thionitrobenzoate [Hg(TNB)2], separated from TNB by gel filtration, and concentrated
to ∼25 mg/mL in 50 mM potassium phosphate buffer (KPi), pH
7.3. Glycerol was added to 5% (v/v) for storage at −80 °C
for shipping to the University of Toronto.

Crystallization, Data Collection,
and Structure Determination
Co-crystals of the NADP+/Hg2+ complex of
AACC Tn501 MerA catalytic core were grown using the
hanging drop vapor diffusion technique. Glycerol was removed from
the 2:1 (Hg/dimer) Hg2+-AACC protein complex by repeated
washing in centricon-30 concentrators with 50 mM KPi, pH 7.3, after
which 2 μL of 25 mg/mL protein solution were mixed with 2 μL
of 0.1 M Tris, pH 9.4, 20 mM NADP+, 2.0 M (NH4)2SO4 and the drop then equilibrated against
0.5 mL of this solution at room temperature. After growth, crystals
were harvested, transferred to the reservoir solution with 16% (w/v)
glycerol added for cryo-protection.

Diffraction data sets were
collected at APS, BIOCARS beamline 14BM-C at a wavelength of 0.90
Å equipped with an ADSC Q4 CCD detector. All data sets were processed
with the help of the program packages DENZO and SCALEPACK. The CNS v. 1.0 program suite was used to solve the structure by molecular replacement.
REFMAC v. 5.7.0032 and Coot 0.6.2 were
used for structure refinement. The atomic models were generated in
the graphics program O. Parameters for
data collection and refinement are summarized in .

Model Preparation for Simulations
Coordinates for the
MerA core domain were obtained from the 1.5 Å X-ray crystal structure
of the AACC homodimer presented herein (PDB 4K7Z). In this structure,
each monomer contains an NADP+ and FAD cofactor in positions
analogous to the structure of MerA from Bacillus sp. strain RC607 and a Hg2+ ion
bound to the C-terminal cysteine pair (C558/C559 and C558′/C559′)
(Figure ). The C136 and C141 side chains were
modeled from corresponding Ala mutations in AACC, NADPH was modeled
from NADP+, and this structure was taken as the initial
configuration for Hg2+ transfer. The low experimentally
observed pKa (∼5.0) of C141, renders it a thiolate at physiological pH (7.0), forming a charge-transfer
complex with FAD. For the other residues,
protonation states were assigned on the basis of manual inspection
of the environment of each polar residue, and on pKa values predicted by PROPKA− at pH 7.0.
All crystal waters were retained and the orientations of the hydrogen
atoms were optimized before further operations on this model were
performed.

The CHARMM27 force field with CMAP corrections and the TIP3P
water model were used to describe the
protein, NADPH and FAD, and the solvent. Stochastic boundary conditions were applied in the QM/MM simulations. The sulfur
atom of C558′ was chosen as the reference center for partitioning
the system into a reaction zone and a reservoir zone, and the former
was further divided into a reaction region and a buffer region. The
reaction region was a sphere of radius (R) 23 Å, and the buffer
region with R between 23 and 25 Å. The Adopted Basis Newton–Raphson
(ABNR) method was used for all energy minimizations. Before proceeding
to the reaction coordinate driving (RCD) calculations, the system
was heated with MD from 50 to 100 K over 60 ps and then the energy
was minimized until convergence with an average gradient tolerance
of 10–4 kcal mol–1 Å–1 to relax unfavorable interactions. Atoms in the QM
region were fixed during heating but were fully relaxed during the
energy minimization.

QM/MM Method and Reaction Coordinate Driving
Calculations
GAMESS-US and CHARMM, were used for the QM/MM calculations. The QM region included the
Hg2+ ion, the side chains of C136, C141, C558′,
and C559′, and the crystal water molecule (WAT) hydrogen bonded
to C136 and C558′, with the rest of the system comprising the
MM subsystem. Hydrogen link atoms between
the Cβ and Cα atoms of the QM residues were added to separate
the QM and MM regions. The QM region was described by density functional
theory (DFT) with the B3PW91 functional,, which has been applied successfully to studies of group 12 dihalides and solvation, Hg–C
bond cleavage by organomercurial lyase, and Hg(II) ligand binding. The 6-31+G(d)
basis set− was used for all nonmetal atoms (H, C, N, O, S),
and the SBKJC effective core potential (ECP) and basis set− were used for Hg.

The reaction coordinate driving (RCD) method
with a harmonic restraint potential of 900 kcal mol–1 Å–2 was used to calculate a minimum energy
path (MEP) for the Hg2+ transfer from the C-terminal cysteine
pair to the active site cysteine pair. The reaction coordinates for
each elementary step in the reaction are shown in Figure S1 of the  (SI). Forward and backward
scans were performed to obtain a smooth reaction path for each step.
An iterative QM/MM optimization strategy was used in each step of the reaction coordinate driving calculations.

To explore potential intermediate states during the Hg2+ transfer, the Hg2+ ion was driven systematically between
C136, C558′, and C559′, which form a plane. The energies
of structures on each path were minimized without restraints to identify
stable intermediate states. Two configurations, labeled INT-I and
INT-II, in which Hg2+ is bound between one active-site
cysteine and one C-terminal cysteine, i.e., C136–Hg-C559′,
were found. These stable states were connected by both forward- and
backward-scanning RCD runs. After the scans reached convergence with
total energy differences of two rounds of scans less than 1 kcal mol–1, the reaction was driven toward the product state
from INT-II and back to the reaction state from INT-I with a series
of forward-and-backward RCD scans. As each step of the transfer is
reversible, the minimum energy pathway of Steps I to IV were assembled
to create the complete reaction path (Scheme , Figure ).

Gas-phase and continuum
calculations for the QM region at the stationary
points along the MEP were performed to estimate the energetic contribution
from the rest of the enzyme. The B3PW91/6-31+G(d)/SBKJC level of theory
and the IEF-PCM continuum solvent model with Bondi radii and a dielectric constant
of 78.4 were used for all calculations. To investigate whether this
representation is adequate for the present purposes, larger basis
sets were employed with Gaussian09 to
calculate single-point energies of the isolated QM region of the reactant
state (RS), product state (PS), intermediate state (INT) and the transition
state (TS) obtained with 6-31+G)(d)/SBKJC. The following basis sets
and ECPs were used: 6-31+G(d)/SBKJC, 6-31+G(d)/SDD, 6-31G(d)/SDD, and aug-cc-pVTZ (aTZ) with the corresponding aTZ-pp
pseudopotential. We also assessed the effects of dispersion on the aTZ/aTZ-pp energies by including DFT-D3
empirical dispersion corrections., The energy
profile obtained with SBKJC agrees well with that from the widely
used SDD method and aTZ/aTZ-pp with
DFT-D3 empirical dispersion corrections ().

Results and Discussion
Structure
of the AACC Hg2+/NADP+ Complex
Although
structures of the catalytic core of MerA from both the Bacillus
sp. RC607 and the
Tn501 operons are available,
neither has Hg2+ bound. Thus, as an initial step to investigate
the Hg2+ transfer pathway, we generated the C136A/C141A
double alanine mutant (AACC) in the truncated Tn501 catalytic core construct. This construct
lacks the NmerA domains and previously yielded much higher resolution
structural data than the full-length Bacillus enzyme.
Crystals of the AACC/NADP+ complex with Hg2+ bound to C558′/C559′ were obtained under similar conditions
and in the same space group as those of the wild type CCCC enzyme
(PDB 1ZK7) and
diffracted to 1.5 Å resolution (cf. ; PDB 4K7Z).  shows a structural alignment
of the full CCCC and AACC dimers (RMSD = 0.16 Å for backbone
atoms), and Figure  shows a composite figure
with one chain from CCCC (cyan) and one chain from
AACC (magenta) to demonstrate the relative positioning
of both pairs of cysteines to each other and to the cofactors and
other active site residues.

As indicated above, we anticipate
Hg2+ transfer in MerA will occur in a similar fashion as
in aqueous solution, which has been shown to occur primarily through
formation of transient tricoordinate [Hg(SR)3]− complexes facilitated by acid/base catalysis. As shown in the structural overlay in Figure , the C136 thiol lies close to the C558′–Hg-C559′
complex in the dimer cleft while the C141 thiolate lies deeper in
the active site cavity behind V421, strongly suggesting C136 will
make the initial attack. For acid/base catalysis, the only obvious
polar residues near both C558′/C559′ and C136/C141 cysteine
pairs are two conserved tyrosines (Y194 and Y535′) and a few
ordered water molecules, while a conserved glutamate (E540′)
lies somewhat more removed and near only C559′. Previous mutations
of either tyrosine to phenylalanine in MerA from Bacillus
sp. RC607 decreased the catalytic activity, but that corresponding
to Y194 was most dramatic, making it
a likely candidate for an acid/base catalyst. In the structure, the
Y194 phenol interacts with an ordered water molecule (WAT) that lies
within hydrogen bonding distance to both C136 and C558′ (Figure , dashed lines) suggesting WAT participates as the
actual acid/base catalyst for proton transfer between the cysteines,
while Y194 may assist in its positioning without transferring a proton.
On the basis of these observations, we propose that only WAT, the
four cysteine side-chains, and Hg2+ are directly involved
in the bond-making and breaking reactions and have included these
in the QM region for the simulations, but have left Y194 in the MM
region.

QM/MM Simulation
The overall QM/MM MEP is shown in
Figure , and the geometries and energetics
of each step of the path are described in detail below. We then analyze
the energetics in terms of the overall contributions from the enzyme
with comparisons with gas-phase and polarizable continuum calculations.

The Hg2+ transfer is modeled with a QM/MM MEP calculated
using four distinct steps that capture representative configurations
of the system during the Hg2+ transfer (Scheme ). The net result of the pathway is that, as the
Hg2+ is transferred from the C-terminal cysteine pair (C558′:C559′)
to the active site cysteine pair (C136:C141), a proton is transferred
in the opposite direction and a negative charge is transferred over
a distance of ∼7.5 Å, from the interior cysteine C141
to C558′. The presence of a C558′ thiolate anion in
the PS complex is consistent with the observation of an apparent pKa of ∼6.5 for C558′ in the oxidized
enzyme in which C141 and C136 form a neutral disulfide similar to
the neutral C141–Hg–C136 complex.

In this reaction path, as the Hg2+ is
transferred inward
the proton is shuttled outward from the active site through the ordered
water molecule (WAT) observed in X-ray crystal structures of the wild
type (PDB 1ZK7) and the AACC mutant (PDB 4K7Z) used for the simulation. Specifically, the proton
is transferred from C136 to C558′ (through WAT) and then from
C558′ to C559′, each proton transfer being used to drive
the transfer of Hg2+ toward the active site by destabilizing
the interactions between the targeted thiolate and Hg2+.

Proposed Hg2+ Transfer Pathway in the MerA Core
Scheme  shows the proposed Hg(II) transfer
pathway in the catalytic core of MerA.

Proposed Hg(II) Transfer
Pathway in the Catalytic Core of MerA
Step I: Hg2+ Transfer from C558′ to C136
The first step of the reaction exchanges H+ and Hg2+ between C136 and C558′ to form an intermediate (INT-1)
that is 9.0 kcal mol–1 less stable than the reactant
state (RS) (Figure ). The H+ is
shuttled via a Grotthuss-like mechanism (Scheme ) through a hydrogen bond network
that links C136, WAT, and C558′ and is anchored by a hydrogen
bond donated from WAT to the Y194 phenol (Figure A). As the proton is transferred, the bond between Hg2+ and C558′ is broken, and a bond between Hg2+ and C136 is formed. The transition state, TS-I, consists of a distorted
H3O+ species and Hg2+ in a tricoordinated
complex with the thiolates of C136, C558′, and C559′
(Figure B). The excess H+ on WAT
interacts strongly with C136 and C558′, which in turn weakens
their interactions with Hg2+ (Hg–S distances of
2.60 and 2.84 Å, respectively) compared to C559′ (2.48
Å). The network of interactions in TS-I spreads the charge density
over the distorted hydronium and the tricoordinated Hg2+ complex, rather than exhibiting zwitterionic character (Figure ). This spreading of charge provides some stabilization
to TS-I, but the potential energy barrier remains high (20.4 kcal
mol–1), which we discuss further below. Collapse
of TS-I leads to INT-I, characterized by a neutral C558′ thiol
and Hg2+ bis-coordinated to the C559′ and C136 thiolates
(Figure A). All of the corresponding hydrogen
bonds between WAT and the side chains of T194, C136, and C558′
are longer and therefore weaker in INT-I than in RS (Figures A and A). The weakened hydrogen
bonds are consistent with the relative instability of INT-I, which
facilitates the hydrogen bond rearrangement in the next step.

QM/MM minimum
energy pathway for Hg2+ transfer and charge
distributions at the stationary points. At each step, the electrostatic
potential is mapped onto the electron density isosurface. Energies
(relative to RS) are shown in parentheses. Note that, compared with
Figure , the active site here is viewed from
the bottom looking up through Y535′ at the C-terminal cysteines.

Optimized geometries of (A) RS and (B) TS-I.
H-bond distances are
shown in blue and covalent bond lengths in black. Relative to Figure , Figures 3–6 are rotated backward by ∼135°
about a horizontal axis. Heteroatoms are shown in standard CPK colors
with red for oxygen, yellow for sulfur, white for hydrogen, dark gray
for mercury, and light gray for carbon atoms. Nonpolar hydrogen atoms
are omitted for clarity.

Optimized geometries of (A) INT-I and (B) TS-II. Coloring scheme
can be found in Figure  caption.

Step II: Hydrogen Bond Network Rearrangement
The second
step involves a reorganization of the hydrogen bonding network of
the C136 thiolate, WAT, Y194, and the C558′ thiol (Scheme ) in INT-I to form INT-II (Figure A). The WAT, Y194 phenol, and C558′ thiol rotate more
or less synchronously to form INT-II (Figure A). The negative charge density on C558′ decreases significantly
in TS-II relative to INT-I (Figure ) as its
hydrogen bond to WAT is broken (Figure B).
Furthermore, the negative charge density on C558′ is again
reduced (i.e., becomes more positive) as TS-II relaxes to INT-II and
the C558′ thiol sulfur accepts an electron-withdrawing hydrogen
bond from WAT. The energy barrier (relative to INT-I) for Step II
is 9.2 kcal mol–1 (Figure ). In INT-II, WAT accepts a hydrogen bond from Y194 and donates two
hydrogen bonds to C558′ and C136 (Scheme  and Figure A). INT-II is only slightly less
stable (0.8 kcal mol–1) than INT-I (Figure ) even though the hydrogen bond networks in the
two states are different. Comparing INT-I and INT-II, the type of
hydrogen bond changes, from S–H···O in INT-I
to O–H···S in INT-II. Consideration of CCSD(T)
hydrogen bond energies computed at the estimated complete basis set
(CBS) limit suggests that the contribution to the overall energy difference
from hydrogen bonding between the two states is small.

Step III: Formation of a Tri-Coordinated
Intermediate State,
INT-III
In the third step of the Hg2+ transfer
pathway, the C141 thiolate attacks Hg2+ (Figure B) to form a tricoordinated intermediate (INT-III)
that also includes C136 and C559′ (Figure A). A hydrogen bond between C559′ and the phenol of
Y535′ (cf. Figure ) is formed at TS-III
but is subsequently broken when a hydrogen bond is formed with C558′
in INT-III. The hydrogen bond network in INT-III increases the extent
of charge delocalization and thereby stabilizes the tricoordinated
complex (see below). The potential energy barrier of Step III (relative
to INT-II) is 10.8 kcal mol–1, and INT-III is a
relatively stable intermediate that is only 1.1 kcal mol–1 higher in energy than the RS (Figure ).
The enhanced stability of INT-III is accompanied by a significant
delocalization of negative charge across the tricoordinated complex
and hydrogen-bonded active site residues.

Optimized geometries
of (A) INT-II and (B) TS-III. Coloring scheme
can be found in Figure  caption.

Optimized geometries of (A) INT-III, (B) TS-IV, and (C)
PS. Coloring
scheme can be found in Figure  caption.

The trigonal planar complex INT-III
possesses significant configurational
differences from TS-I. First, the three Hg–S bond lengths in
this complex are nearly equal to each other, with the Hg–S(C136)
bond slightly longer (2.56 Å). An S–H···S
hydrogen bond is formed between C558′ and C559′, but
the interaction appears too weak to affect the Hg–S(C559′)
bond length. As described above, the anionic tricoordinated complex
of TS-I has longer bonds due to strong interactions with the excess
proton bound to WAT, the energetics of which largely destabilize TS-I
compared to INT-III.

Step IV: Hg2+ Binding to the Active-Site
Cysteine
Pair
In the final step of the path, the tricoordinated Hg2+ intermediate relaxes to the bis-coordinated complex with
C136 and C141 as the proton is transferred from C558′ to C559′.
The final product state (PS) consists of a C558′ thiolate,
C559′ thiol, and the (C136)S–Hg–S(C141) complex,
which is poised for Hg2+ reduction by way of the NADPH
and FAD cofactors (Scheme ). Upon formation
of the neutral complex between Hg2+ and the thiolates of
C136 and C141, WAT moves away from C136 to interact more closely with
the negatively charged C558′ thiolate (Figure C). The potential energy barrier for Step IV (relative to
INT-III) is 7.2 kcal mol–1, and the PS is 2 kcal
mol–1 lower in energy than RS, which we discuss
in more detail below.

Comparisons between QM/MM and Gas-Phase/Continuum
Calculations
In the protein, the overall energetics favors
the PS by around
2 kcal mol–1 compared to the RS. Assuming the bis-coordinated
Hg2+ is equally stable when bound to either cysteine pair,
the relative pKa’s of the two pairs
of cysteines might be expected to lead to the reaction being slightly
exothermic because energy would be gained from transferring H+ from the inner C136:C141 pair to the outer C558′:C559′
pair as the Hg2+ is transferred. The calculated MEP agrees
well with these expectations. However, two contributions are neglected
in this study that likely cancel. First, if dynamic sampling were
carried out, the thiolate that is semiexposed to solvent in the PS
might be further stabilized (relative to the RS), yielding a more
exothermic transfer of Hg2+. This would have the effect
that the PS would be destabilized relative to the RS in the present
pathway. At the same time, however, the RS is also destabilized. In
the setup of the QM region, C141 is treated as a thiolate, based on
its experimentally determined pKa of ∼5., The deprotonated, anionic state of C141 is stabilized by electronic
interactions with the FAD, which reduce its pKa. These interactions are not
fully accounted for in the present QM/MM calculations because the
FAD was included in the MM region to make the calculations computationally
feasible. Most importantly, neither error is expected to be that large,
as the pKa shift of C141 is only 4 units,
and only a small number of water molecules interact with the semiexposed
thiolate in the PS. However, correcting for these effects might be
expected to stabilize both the RS and PS relative to INT-III. To test
these ideas and evaluate the role that the enzyme plays in Hg2+ transfer, DFT calculations were applied to the isolated
QM region in the absence of the rest of the enzyme using the geometries
of the minima (RS, INT-I, INT-II, INT-III, and PS) and transition
states (TS-I to TS-IV) from the optimized QM/MM MEP (Figure ).

Energy profiles for Hg2+ transfer in the gas
phase,
aqueous phase, and in MerA. All energies were calculated with the
same QM region geometries and are displayed relative to RS. The enzyme
and continuum solvent contributions (open circles, dashed lines) were
calculated by subtracting the gas-phase energies from the respective
paths.

Gas-Phase Energetics
In the absence of the enzyme,
the exposed and isolated C141 thiolate (Figure A) destabilizes the RS significantly. INT-III and the PS are significantly
more stable than the RS, with the tricoordinated complex (INT-III)
being the most stable point on the path in the gas phase, −45.5
kcal mol–1 lower in energy than the RS (Figure ). This increased stabilization stems from spreading
the negative charge of the system across the tricoordinated Hg2+ complex. TS-I, the other configuration with a nominally
tricoordinated Hg2+, is only 7.3 kcal mol–1 higher in energy than RS, but 52.7 kcal mol–1 higher
in energy than INT-III. The relative instability of TS-I stems from
its neutral components; the negative charge largely remains on the
C141 thiolate. INT-I, TS-II, INT-II, and TS-III all have similar energies
and are more stable than the RS (Figure ).
Comparing the PS to the RS, the gas-phase reaction is exothermic by
∼20 kcal mol–1. This energy difference can
be understood in terms of the C141 and C558′ thiolates in the
RS and PS, respectively. Compared to the isolated C141 thiolate in
the RS (Figure A), the C558′ thiolate
in the PS forms hydrogen bonds with WAT and C559′ (Figure C).

Comparison between Enzyme and Continuum Solvent
When
contributions from continuum solvent are included, the exposed and
isolated C141 thiolate (Figure A) is significantly
stabilized relative to the gas phase. INT-III is still the most stable
point on the path but is only −4.9 kcal mol–1 lower in energy than the RS (a change of around +40 kcal mol–1, see Figure ). The difference
between INT-III and TS-I is reduced from 52.7 kcal mol–1 to 18.6 kcal mol–1. TS-I is 13.8 kcal mol–1 higher in energy than the RS, an increase of 6.5
kcal mol–1 compared to the corresponding gas-phase
energy difference. The energy difference between the RS and PS is
very similar to that in the full enzyme (Figure ). In other words, continuum solvation stabilizes the exposed C141
thiolate in the RS by ∼18 kcal mol–1 relative
to the more buried C558′ thiolate in the PS.

When the
full enzyme and explicit solvent from the QM/MM MEP are included,
the RS is similarly stabilized relative to INT-III and the PS by ∼46.5
and 18 kcal mol–1, respectively. The C141 thiolate
is located ∼3.5 Å from the plane of the neutral isoalloxazine
group of FAD (cf. Figure B), and ∼5.5
Å from the K145 ammonium group, which is in a salt bridge with
the E284 carboxylate. C141 is located at the base of an α-helix,
which may also provide helix dipole charge stabilization for the anion. In the PS, the semiexposed C558′ thiolate
gains one additional hydrogen bond from an MM water molecule in the
MEP. It may also interact electrostatically with the ammonium group
of K193, which is located ∼6 Å away in an interaction
with the backbone carbonyl of V553. It is unlikely that the enzyme
provides as much electrostatic stabilization as the continuum solvent,
but the energetic effects are qualitatively similar. While the contributions
from the enzyme MM electrostatic environment stabilize the RS relative
to the gas phase as noted above, they also clearly destabilize the
latter portion of the reaction path relative to the initial step(s)
(dashed lines in Figure ). In this way, the
electrostatic environment around the C558′ thiolate in the
PS may further drive a conformational change of the C-terminal loop
such that the C558′/C559′ cysteine pair becomes more
solvent-exposed, a step that is essential for acquisition of the next
Hg2+ from NmerA or other Hg(SR)2 substrates
during enzyme turnover.

Relationship of MEP to Experimental Observations
A
final consideration in this analysis is how the energetic and mechanistic
characteristics of the MEP determined here relate to the rates and
intermediates observed in kinetic and titration studies of the wild
type (CCCC) and C-terminal (CCAC and CCCA) mutant MerA proteins. Energetically,
the near thermoneutrality of the overall transfer from RS to PS and
the relative stability of the three-coordinate intermediate INT-III
are consistent with the accumulation of ≥50% of species with
Hg2+ bound at the active site that has been observed both
in titrations and kinetic studies of
wild type MerA with Hg(SR)2 substrates. Thus, these elements of the simulated pathway are likely
to be robust independent of the pathway itself. In addition, with
the exception of the first step, the barriers for all other steps
(7.2–10.8 kcal mol–1) are lower than the
maximal free energy of ∼13.5 kcal mol–1 (estimated
with transition state theory) for any step in the pathway from the
observed rate constant (224 s–1) for Hg2+ transfer through the entire pathway from initial exchange with Hg(Cys)2 all the way into the active site of the wild type (CCCC)
enzyme, suggesting the general mechanistic
characteristics of these steps are also relatively robust.

On
the other hand, the energetic cost of the first step in the computed
pathway, at 20.4 kcal mol–1, is much higher than
the maximal free energy estimated (∼13.5 kcal mol–1) from the observed rate constant (224 s–1) for
the overall Hg2+ transfer pathway and is also inconsistent with the rate for overall turnover of the
enzyme (12–15 s–1).,, While configurational sampling along reaction
coordinates may expose other pathways, reduce the free-energy barrier,
and bring the computed values into better agreement with experiment,
the reason for the discrepancy remains an open question. Such potential
of mean force calculations are still computationally intensive at
the DFT level, and semiempirical methods, while computationally more
feasible, await a set of reliable parameters for systems containing
Hg and S., A closer analysis of the characteristics
of TS-I and RS, however, suggests the likely cause of the high barrier
is the presence of a neutral water molecule rather than a stronger
base to initiate the reaction. In aqueous solution, [Hg(SR)3]− complexes form rapidly at pH values ≥9
where thiolates predominate (thiol pKa ∼ 9) and rapidly dissociate to Hg(SR)2 and RSH
below an apparent pKa of ∼7 for
the thiol in the [(RSH)Hg(SR)2] complex., Hg(SR)2 complexes are stable down to at least pH 2, indicating
a pKa &lt; 2 for the (RSH)Hg(SR) complex. These observations suggest that substantial
deprotonation of C136 to a thiolate would be needed for rapid formation
of a three-coordinate TS or INT, which is consistent with the much
lower barrier (10.8 kcal mol–1) determined for attack
of the C141 thiolate on the C136–Hg–C559′ complex
in the conversion of INT-II to INT-III in the MEP. In the current
RS QM model, however, the neutral water is not basic enough (hydronium
pKa = −1.7) to deprotonate a thiol
(pKa ≈ 9) to a significant extent
nor acidic enough (pKa = 15.7) to protonate
a thiolate in a Hg(SR)2 complex (pKa &lt; 2). Thus, Step 1 in this
model proceeds with the weakly nucleophilic C136 thiol initiating
attack on the neutral C558′–Hg-C559′ complex,
i.e., without activation of either the nucleophile or the electrophile.
The result is a significant energetic cost as TS-I can only be reached
when sufficient C136–S-Hg bond formation and C558′–S-Hg
bond weakening occur to shift their respective pKa’s toward each other until they are essentially
the same, as suggested by the nearly identical hydrogen bond lengths
between the distorted hydronium ion and the two cysteine sulfurs in
TS-I (Figure B).

The above considerations
notwithstanding, the arrangement of residues
in the active site as observed in the X-ray structure strongly suggests
the core elements (four Cys side chains, Hg2+, and WAT)
of the current model are correct. However, to increase negative charge
character on the C136 sulfur, additional components would be needed
in the QM region of the model that allow full or partial Grotthuss
proton transfer from WAT and/or the C136 thiol to a negatively charged
residue in an initial step. One potential pathway would involve a
proton transfer from WAT to the E540′ carboxylate via the Y194
phenol, several additional water molecules, and possibly the Y535′
phenol. In a second potential pathway, the C141 thiolate could accept
the proton from C136 in the first step, but would then need to be
deprotonated in a later step to form the C136–S-Hg2+–S-C141 complex. From its deeply buried position in the active
site, the most likely pathway for that proton transfer would involve
the 2′- and 4′-OH groups of the FAD ribityl side chain,
1–2 additional water molecules, and the Y194 phenol group.
A third potential pathway would involve transfer from the C136 thiol
to a phosphate oxygen in the FAD cofactor via WAT, the Y194 phenol,
and two very well ordered water molecules observed in the X-ray structure
(Figure ). Of the three pathways, the last
two are more appealing as catalytic pathways because the components
of both are well ordered in the enzyme structure. All of these alternative
pathways involve the migration of a “proton hole” to
the active site cysteine residues, which may both facilitate the mobility
of the Hg2+ and be more favorable at physiological pH (∼7.4). Unfortunately, to explore any of these pathways
for activation would require significant expansion of the QM region
at a prohibitive computational cost. Regardless, the combined insights
gained from the current simulation and the detailed analysis of the
X-ray structure provide testable predictions for roles of these other
active site residues in the catalytic pathway.

Besides the energetic
considerations, the MEP determined here also
identifies C558′ as the first of the C-terminal thiols to dissociate
leaving C559′ in the 2- and 3-coordinate complexes with the
active site thiolates. This result is in contrast to previous postulates
predicting C559′ as first to dissociate,, which
were based primarily on the observation of Cd2+ complexed
to the equivalent of C136, Y194, Y535′, and C558′ in
the Bacillus MerA X-ray structure. However, the orientation of that distorted tetrahedral
complex would place the Hg2+ in a position that would be
largely inaccessible by the C141 thiolate, which is inconsistent with
the observation that Hg2+ does become fully bound to the
C136/C141 pair for reduction. The reverse order identified here for
dissociation of C558′ first is much more consistent with that
observation and also provides a clearer rationale for the relative
reactivities observed in vitro for the two C-terminal
single alanine MerA mutants (CCAC and CCCA) with Hg(SR)2 substrates. As both mutants retain
only one of the C-terminal cysteines, they can only displace one free
thiol from the incoming Hg(SR)2 substrate, and then must
drag the other bound ligand as far into the dimer cleft as possible
for C136 to initiate attack on the mixed enzyme–Cys-Hg-SR complex.
With relatively small mercaptoethanol (S-ME) as the external ligand,
the CCCA enzyme, which retains only C558′, was found to catalyze
several cycles of reduction as fast as the wild type enzyme. Initially this finding was thought to support
the postulate that the C136–Hg–Cys558′ complex
was a key intermediate in the binding pathway. However, in light of
the structure and simulation results, a simpler explanation is that
the C558′–Hg-S-ME complex can be positioned well into
the cleft for optimal attack by C136 and dissociation of C558′
as in the wild type enzyme. In contrast, catalytic turnover of the
same substrate by the CCAC enzyme, which retains only C559′,
is ∼20-fold slower, which makes
sense in the context of the structure, as the positioning of the C559′–Hg-S-ME
complex for attack by C136 would be less optimal and would likely
require the C-terminal tail to adopt an energetically less favorable
position for the reaction to occur.

Concluding Remarks
Building on our previous studies detailing the modes of transfer
of Hg2+ between the N-terminal domain (NmerA) and the C-terminal
cysteine pair (C588′ and C589′) of MerA, the X-ray structure and QM/MM calculations presented
here provide molecular-scale insight into how Hg2+ is transferred
from the C-terminal cysteines into the MerA core for reduction to
Hg0. To accomplish these transfers, Hg2+ is
always paired with at least two thiolates and thus binds to the N-terminal,
C-terminal, and core domains as a neutral complex. MerA orchestrates
the transport of this soft divalent cation by pairing a competition
between Cys thiolates and Hg2+ with a corresponding competition
between Hg2+ and protons for the Cys thiolates. We have
previously discussed this competition in more general terms relevant
to Hg speciation. Considering the similar
energies of the reactant and product states, the present MEP and the
pKa values of the cysteines involved, we expect that the interaction enthalpies between
the pairs of cysteines in MerA and Hg2+ should be similar
to that with two glutathione molecules in the cytoplasm. Thus, we
propose an entropic driving force for each sequential Hg2+ transfer, i.e., the transfer from two free thiols in the cytoplasm
to the dynamic metallochaperone-like NmerA, followed by the transfer
from NmerA to the extended C-terminal loop of the MerA, followed by
the transfer from the C-terminal loop to the reactive core of the
enzyme. From our analysis of the underlying quantum mechanical energetics
of computed reaction pathways, we find that MerA makes the Hg2+ transfers feasible by electrostatic stabilization of the
reactant and product states relative to the intermediates, preventing
the system from being trapped in deep potential wells. These findings
are of general relevance for understanding the mechanisms of heavy
metal trafficking in biological systems.

Supporting Information Available
Table S1, additional Figures
S1–S3, the coordinates of the QM atoms in the RS, INT(I–III),
TS(I–IV), and PS. This material is available free of charge
via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500608u_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
¶ Center for Molecular Modeling and Design,
Department of Medicinal
Chemistry, School of Pharmacy, Fudan University, Shanghai 201203,
China.

Author Present Address
◆ Department
of Chemistry, Earlham College, Richmond, IN.

Author Present Address
○ Structural Genomics Consortium, Toronto, ON, M5G 1L7, Canada.

The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The protein
preparation and X-ray structure work were conducted
at the University of California San Francisco and the University of
Toronto with support from the U.S. Department of Energy Office of
Science Grant DE-FG03-01ER63087 (S.M.M. &amp; E.F.P.) and the Canada
Research Chairs Program (E.F.P.). We thank Mat Falkowski and Melissa
Malone for assistance with site-directed mutagenesis and preparation
of the Hg2+-complex. X-ray data were collected at BioCARS
sector 14 beamlines at the Advanced Photon Source (APS), Argonne National
Laboratories. Use of the BioCARS sector 14 was supported by the National
Center for Research Resources, National Institute of Health, under
Grant RR07707; use of the APS was supported by the Basic Energy Sciences,
Office of Science, U.S. Department of Energy, under Contact W-31-109-Eng-38.
The simulation work was conducted under the Subsurface Biogeochemical
Research (SBR) program at the University of Tennessee Knoxville and
Oak Ridge National Laboratory supported by Grant DE-SC0004895 from
the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE). P.L. was supported in part by
a fellowship from Shanghai Jiao Tong University. This research used
resources of the National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center,
supported by the Office of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy
under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231, and resources of the National
Institute of Computational Sciences under Contract No. TG-MCA08X032.
D.-Q.W. is supported by grants from the National High-Tech R&amp;D
Program (863 Program Contract No. 2012AA020307), the National Basic
Research Program of China (973 Program) (Contract No. 2012CB721000),
the Key Project of Shanghai Science and Technology Commission (Contract
No. 11JC1406400), and Ph.D. Programs Foundation of Ministry of Education
of China (Contract No., 20120073110057).

