Accumulating evidence supports
a prominent contribution of misfolding and aggregation of SOD1 to
the dysfunction and progressive death of motor neurons in ALS. Over
140 mutations (mostly missense) in the SOD1 gene
have been identified in patients with familial ALS (FALS), most of
which destabilize the native SOD1 homodimer and/or increase aggregation
propensity., Current evidence supports the pathogenic
capacity of soluble misfolded SOD1, rather than the large insoluble
aggregates that appear only near the onset of paralysis in ALS mouse
models.− However, little is known about the structural features of soluble
non-native SOD1 conformers or the factors in the cellular environment
that influence misfolding and aggregation. Soluble misfolded WT SOD1
has been found in the spinal cord from sporadic ALS patients that
do not carry mutations in SOD1,, demonstrating
the sufficiency of nongenetic factors to induce the formation of potentially
toxic oligomers by SOD1.

To identify misfolded SOD1 conformers
with greatest relevance to
ALS pathology, we probed isolated oligomeric species with a conformation-specific
antibody (C4F6) to identify those with potential cytotoxicity. In
FALS patients and mouse models, C4F6 specifically recognizes soluble
SOD1 found only in disease-affected tissue, revealing a connection
between FALS pathology and the as-yet unidentified epitope bound by
C4F6. Here, we show that higher-order
non-native oligomers of mutant SOD1, but not dimers or monomers, contain
the epitope recognized by the C4F6 antibody. To assess the impact
of the cellular redox environment on the formation of potentially
toxic soluble oligomers, we determine the effect of a physiologically
prevalent oxidative modification (glutathionylation at Cys-111) on
oligomerization. Cys-111 glutathionylation increases both the abundance
of soluble oligomers and exposure of the disease-specific epitope
recognized by C4F6, revealing a novel mechanism by which oxidative
stress modulates potentially toxic SOD1 aggregation. Our results suggest
that SOD1 acquires pathogenic features upon the formation of soluble
non-native oligomeric assemblies, indicating a particular relevance
of these species to neuronal dysfunction in ALS.

Experimental Procedures
Cloning,
Expression, and Purification of Recombinant SOD1 from S. cerevisiae
Mutagenesis of constructs
for the expression of human SOD1, expression in S. cerevisiae, and SOD1 purification were performed according to previously published
methods., The final step of purification of recombinant
SOD1 is anion-exchange chromatographic separation using a MonoQ HR
10/10 column connected to an AKTA purifier system (GE Healthcare),
which separates a population of predominantly unmodified SOD1 from
one enriched in SOD1 that is glutathionylated at Cys-111. Samples were stored at −80 °C in
20 mM Tris and 150 mM NaCl at pH 7.4 until use.

High-Resolution
Mass Determination of Intact Recombinant SOD1
SOD1 sample
buffer was exchanged with 10 mM ammonium acetate using
2 kDa VIVACON 500 filtration devices (Sartorius Stedim Biotech GmbH),
after which samples were collected by centrifugation of the inverted
concentrator body within a fresh tube. These samples were then diluted
1:10 in a 50% acetonitrile/49% water/1% formic acid mixture and directly
infused into the LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using
a Picoview nanoelectrospray source (New Objective). Spectra were collected
with the Orbitrap analyzer in positive ion mode at a resolution of
30,000 (at 400 m/z), with a maximum
ion injection time of 200 ms, a spray voltage of 5 kV, and the automatic
gain control (AGC) set to 2 × 105. Spectra were deconvoluted
using Promass for Xcalibur, version 2.5 SR-1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

Time-Resolved Analytical Size Exclusion Chromatography (SEC)
Cu2+ and Zn2+ were removed from as-isolated
remetalated SOD1 by dialysis against 50 mM sodium acetate and 10 mM
EDTA at pH 3.8 for 1.5 h in the case of mutant SOD1 and 2 h in the
case of the WT enzyme. Removal of EDTA and return to physiological
pH were achieved by overnight dialysis against 20 mM Tris and 150
mM NaCl at pH 7.4. All dialysis was performed at 4 °C. Demetalated
(“apo”) SOD1 was brought to a concentration of 100 μM
in 20 mM Tris and 150 mM NaCl at pH 7.4 and incubated in a 37 °C
water bath. At each indicated time point, an aliquot containing 64
μg of apo-SOD1 was removed, filtered using a 0.22 μm centrifugal
filter, and injected onto a Superdex 200 10/300 GL column (GE Healthcare)
at 4 °C equilibrated in 20 mM Tris and 150 mM NaCl at pH 7.4.

Estimation of Molecular Weight of Oligomers Using Size Exclusion
Chromatography Combined with Multiangle Light Scattering (SEC-MALS)
Apo-SOD1 incubated for 1 week under the pH, temperature, concentration,
and ionic strength conditions listed above was analyzed using a DAWN
HELEOS II light scattering instrument (Wyatt Technology), which detects
scattered light at 18 angles with respect to the incident beam. The
light scattering instrument is interfaced to an Agilent FPLC System
with a connected Superdex 200 10/300 GL column (GE Healthcare), a
T-rEX refractometer, and a dynamic light scattering module (Wyatt
Technology). SEC separation and detection of scattered light, absorbance
at 280 nm, and differential refractive index were performed at room
temperature. Data were analyzed, and weight average molar masses as
a function of elution volume were determined using ASTRA software
(Wyatt Technology) with the Zimm fit method, which assumes weak protein–solvent
interactions.

Measurement of C4F6 Epitope
Exposure of Isolated Apo-SOD1 Oligomer
Populations
Apo-SOD1 oligomers were prepared by incubation
at 100 μM in 20 mM Tris and 150 mM NaCl at pH 7.4 at 37 °C
for 1 week. Samples containing 640 μg of apo-SOD1 were filtered
and separated by SEC as described above. Immediately following elution,
individual oligomeric populations were collected and individually
loaded onto PVDF membranes equilibrated in 20 mM Tris at pH 7.4 using
a chilled Minifold I dot-blot system (S&amp;S). Samples were blotted
in duplicate simultaneously; one blot was immediately incubated with
monoclonal antibody to misfolded SOD1 (C4F6, MediMabs) diluted 1:250
in blocking buffer (TBS-T with 5% (w/v) nonfat dry milk); the duplicate
blot was stained with Ponceau S in 5% acetic acid to visualize total
protein loaded onto the membrane. Duplicate blotting was carried out
in lieu of fixation with Ponceau S prior to incubation with primary
antibody due to our observation of increased C4F6 reactivity following
Ponceau S staining and destaining, as well as to minimize the time
elapsed between isolation of oligomers by SEC and probing with C4F6.
Blots were incubated with C4F6 overnight at 4 °C, and C4F6 binding
was visualized using HRP-conjugated antimouse antibodies (GE Healthcare,
Pierce, Millipore). To quantify abundance of individual oligomeric
populations represented in SEC chromatograms, A280 data
from Ve = 7.5–19 mL were deconvoluted
into multiple single Gaussian distributions using Matlab (Mathworks),
and the area under each Gaussian curve was calculated as a percentage
of the total area under all Gaussian curves in the deconvoluted chromatogram.
For comparison of oligomeric populations in glutathionylated and unmodified
apo-SOD1, oligomers were grouped based on Ve at the center of the Gaussian curve obtained by deconvolution: O1
consists of oligomers eluting between 14 and 15 mL, O2 consists of
oligomers eluting between 11.3 and 13.5 mL, O3 consists of oligomers
eluting between 9.2 and 11.2 mL, and Vo consists of oligomers eluting between 8.0 and 9.0 mL (corresponding
to the approximate void volume of the column).

In Vitro Glutathionylation of SOD1
SOD1 was glutathionylated in vitro by incubating
at 37 °C for 30 min with 1000-fold molar excess oxidized glutathione
(GSSG) in 50 mM CAPS buffer at pH 9.7. Untreated SOD1 was subjected
to the same incubation in 50 mM CAPS buffer at pH 9.7, containing
no GSSG. Following this incubation, untreated and GSSG-enriched SOD1
samples were demetalated as described above, then brought to 100 μM
apo-SOD1. A 64 μg aliquot was removed, filtered using a 0.22
μm centrifugal filter, and injected onto a Superdex 200 10/300
GL column (GE Healthcare) at 4 °C equilibrated in 20 mM Tris
and 150 mM NaCl at pH 7.4.

Effect of Reducing Agent
Treatment on Apo-SOD1 Oligomer Stability
Oligomers of apo-SOD1
were prepared as described above, and DTT
was added to a final concentration of 1 mM to the sample and SEC running
buffer. Aliquots from the mixture of oligomers were separated by SEC
as described above immediately following the addition of DTT and after
2 h and overnight incubation at room temperature.

Results
Formation of
Metastable Soluble Oligomers by Apo-SOD1 with FALS-Linked
Substitutions
To identify potentially disease-relevant metastable
SOD1 oligomers, we incubated apo-SOD1 at physiological pH, temperature,
ionic strength, and SOD1 concentration for up to one week, separating
the reaction mixture by size exclusion chromatography (SEC) at multiple
time points. We use recombinant protein in which SOD1’s native
free cysteines (Cys-6 and Cys-111) are retained, as they have been
demonstrated to play crucial roles in oligomerization., Metal-free (“apo”) SOD1 is utilized in all experiments
since it is widely considered to be the common precursor to misfolded
and aggregated species.,, We analyze soluble oligomers because of their particular relevance
to ALS pathology; apo-SOD1 remains soluble throughout the 1-week incubation
period, as evidenced by the minimal changes in total A280 from SEC chromatograms (Figure B,C). WT
SOD1 (Figures B and B) and SOD1 containing the FALS-linked G93A and G37R substitutions
(Figure B) have low propensities to form soluble
oligomers under these conditions, whereas SOD1 with the A4V or I112T
substitutions shows substantial oligomerization (Figures C and B). Analysis of SEC-separated
oligomers with multiangle light scattering is consistent with the
presence of native-like dimers, non-native-like expanded dimers, trimers,
tetramers, and hexamers (Figure D). The presence
of an expanded dimer is inferred from the SEC-MALS data based on the
presence of a peak eluting before the native-like dimer (indicating
its larger hydrodynamic radius), yet having a calculated molecular
weight equivalent to that of the native-like dimer (red vs cyan curves,
Figure D). In the case of the aggregation-prone
A4V and I112T variants, small soluble oligomers are apparent by 2
h of incubation at 37 °C (Figure C) and
remain detectable throughout the 1-week incubation period. The smallest
non-native oligomers (those eluting near 13 and 14.5 mL following
injection onto the gel filtration column) increase in abundance for
the first 8–24 h, after which their populations decline concomitant
with the appearance of higher-order species (Figure C).

Formation of metastable soluble non-native oligomers of metal-free
SOD1. (A) Positions of the glutathione modification and of the FALS-linked
amino acid substitutions included in the current study; residue positions
are indicated by colored spheres on the background of the WT SOD1
crystal structure (PDB ID: 1spd). (B) SEC chromatograms showing aggregation of 100
μM apo-WT SOD1 at 37 °C in 20 mM Tris and 150 mM NaCl at
pH 7.4 for up to 1 week. (C) Aggregation of 100 μM apo-SOD1
with the indicated FALS-linked amino acid substitutions under identical
conditions as those described for B. Insets show chromatograms with
expanded y-axes. (D) Weight average molar masses
of metastable soluble SOD1 oligomers separated by SEC, as determined
by multiangle light scattering (SEC-MALS). Black curves, absorbance
at 280 nm (A280) vs elution volume (Ve); colored curves, molecular weight (MW) calculated at each Ve from the intensities of scattered light at
multiple fixed detectors. Dashed gray lines indicate approximate theoretical
molecular masses for SOD1 oligomers.

Cys-111 glutathionylation that occurs endogenously promotes the
formation of non-native apo-SOD1 oligomers. (A) Analysis of full-length
SOD1 by mass spectrometry. For each SOD1 variant studied, deconvoluted
mass spectra are shown for two populations separated by ion exchange
chromatography: one in which unmodified SOD1 is the predominant species
(black spectra) and one enriched in post-translationally modified
SOD1 (red spectra). Labeled masses correspond to the average masses
obtained by the deconvolution of spectra using ProMass for Xcalibur
software. Mass shifts consistent with glutathionylation (+305), irreversible
oxidation (+32, +48), and phosphorylation (+80) are labeled. Occasionally,
a mass shift of +136 was observed and is consistent with SOD1 containing
phosphorylation (+80), oxidation (+32), and a nonspecific sodium adduct
originating from the sample buffer (+22), all of which have been previously
observed on SOD1., (B) Left, SEC chromatograms showing
populations of soluble oligomers of unmodified (black) and glutathionylated
(red) apo-SOD1 incubated at 100 μM (initial dimeric concentration)
for 1 week at 37 °C in 20 mM Tris and 150 mM NaCl at pH 7.4.
Right, oligomeric populations quantified by deconvolution of SEC data
and integration of Gaussian curves corresponding to individual oligomeric
populations. Bar heights represent average values, and error bars
represent SD from at least 3 independent experiments. Student’s t test was used to compare the abundance of oligomers in
the presence and absence of Cys-111 glutathionylation. * = p ≤ 0.05; ** = p ≤ 0.01;
*** = p ≤ 0.001.

Glutathionylation at Cys-111 Induces Monomerization of Apo-SOD1
and Increases Propensity to Form Non-Native Oligomers
Protein
S-glutathionylation is a reversible post-translational modification
that serves, in addition to regulatory and signaling functions, as
a protective measure against irreversible oxidation of cysteines. SOD1 glutathionylated at Cys-111 is abundant
in SOD1 isolated from human tissue or expressed in S. cerevisiae can be partially resolved from the unmodified enzyme by ion-exchange
chromatography and destabilizes the holo-SOD1 dimer.,− To assess the effects of Cys-111 glutathionylation on the assembly
of soluble SOD1 oligomers, we analyzed the impact of this modification
on the oligomeric distributions of soluble WT and mutant apo-SOD1.
For each SOD1 variant studied, a predominantly unmodified SOD1 population
and one enriched in glutathionylated SOD1 (GS-SOD1) (Figure A) were incubated at physiological pH, temperature,
ionic strength, and SOD1 concentration. We assess the effect of Cys-111
glutathionylation on oligomer formation by comparing these two populations
of recombinant human SOD1, which are isolated by ion-exchange chromatography. The GS-SOD1-enriched population contains SOD1
modified endogenously during expression in S. cerevisiae, and only singly modified (one glutathione moiety per monomer) SOD1
is detected. We first analyzed this GS-SOD1-enriched fraction without
further in vitro glutathionylation to determine the
effect of Cys-111 glutathionylation alone, without modification of
Cys-6, Cys-57, or Cys-146 (which are not glutathionylated in SOD1
isolated from human tissue due to the intermolecular Cys-57-Cys-146
disulfide bond and the low solvent accessibility of Cys-6).

For the wild type as well as all FALS
mutants studied, glutathionylation of apo-SOD1 results in a significant
increase in the proportion of soluble protein present as monomers
(Figure B), in accordance with previous findings.,, Glutathionylation also significantly
increases the abundance of several non-native higher-order species,
especially in G93A SOD1 (Figure B). In all
variants except A4V SOD1, glutathionylation significantly increases
the formation of the oligomeric population eluting just prior to the
native-like dimer: O1, the putative expanded dimer (Figures B and D). In vitro enrichment of SOD1 with oxidized glutathione (GSSG) recapitulates
the increased abundance of apo-SOD1 monomers and small oligomers (Figure ); this effect was also observed for the A4V variant,
which contains a relatively low amount of endogenously modified GS-SOD1
(Figure A).

In vitro glutathionylation
of SOD1 also promotes
dimer dissociation and formation of soluble non-native oligomers.
(A) Deconvoluted mass spectra for full-length SOD1 (unenriched and
treated with GSSG). Labeled masses correspond to the average masses
obtained by deconvolution of spectra using ProMass for Xcalibur software.
Mass shifts corresponding to the addition of one, two, three, and
four glutathione adducts are shown at left. At right, spectra are
expanded to show only the mass range corresponding to unmodified SOD1
and SOD1 containing a single glutathione modification. (B) SEC chromatograms
showing oligomeric populations of apo-SOD1 incubated in the presence
or absence of GSSG prior to demetalation, then immediately separated
by SEC at 4 °C.

Glutathionylation of SOD1 in vitro generates
protein
with a single glutathione adduct, as well as species containing 2
(most likely corresponding to the modification of both free cysteines,
at positions 6 and 111) or 4 adducts (corresponding to the modification
of all cysteines in SOD1, including those at positions 57 and 146
that participate in the native intramonomer disulfide bond); species
with multiple glutathione adducts were only observed for the A4V,
I112T, and G93A variants (Figure ). In the
latter case, disruption of the native disulfide bond likely contributes
to the observed misfolding and aggregation. The increased abundance
of monomeric and oligomeric SOD1 in endogenously modified samples
and in vitro glutathionylated WT and G37R SOD1, which
contain only a single glutathione modification (Figures  and ), supports the conclusion that
Cys-111 glutathionylation is predominantly responsible for the observed
promotion of dimer dissociation and oligomerization.

Metastable
Oligomers Show Enhanced Exposure of an Epitope Common
to SOD1 Found in ALS Patients
Though soluble misfolded SOD1
(as opposed to that which is present in insoluble aggregates) is increasingly
implicated in motor neuron dysfunction,,,, the potential cytotoxicities
of individual oligomeric species have not been evaluated. Direct determination
of the effects of specific oligomers on motor neuron viability is
complicated by the difficulty of delivering metastable protein assemblies
to the cytoplasm of living cells. To begin to evaluate the cytotoxic
potential of the apo-SOD1 oligomers isolated by SEC, we probed for
exposure of an epitope known to be exposed on misfolded SOD1 in disease-affected
cell populations of ALS patients., The various
apo-SOD1 oligomeric populations isolated by SEC and dimeric holo-SOD1
were bound to PVDF membranes and probed with the C4F6 conformation-specific
antibody (Figure ). The species with greatest
reactivity to C4F6 are higher-order non-native oligomers, those eluting
at postinjection volumes ranging from the column void to ∼14.5
mL, just prior to the elution of native-like SOD1 dimer (Figures B and ). Monomeric apo-SOD1
is not C4F6-reactive in any of the SOD1 variants studied, while dimeric
holo- and apo-SOD1 is faintly reactive in some cases. Oligomers of
glutathionylated apo-SOD1 were also probed with C4F6 to determine
whether this modification induces structural rearrangements that enhance
exposure of the disease-specific epitope. In the case of SOD1 with
the FALS-linked A4V or I112T substitutions, glutathionylation enhances
exposure of the C4F6-recognized epitope in higher-order soluble oligomers
(Figure ), suggesting that glutathionylation
substantially alters the conformations of oligomers formed by these
disease-associated mutant proteins.

Non-native oligomers of SOD1 are potentially
toxic in ALS. Dot
blots of apo-SOD1 oligomers isolated by SEC and probed with the C4F6
monoclonal conformation-specific antibody, which has been proposed
to recognize a toxic subset of misfolded SOD1. Dimeric SOD1 isolated from S. cerevisiae and remetalated
(“holo”) was also probed to determine initial C4F6 reactivity
prior to the removal of metals and oligomerization. The amounts of
each oligomeric population bound to the membrane were visualized by
Ponceau S staining.

Cys-111 Modulates Soluble
Oligomer Formation through Mechanism(s)
Independent of Intermolecular Disulfide Bonding
The two free
cysteines of SOD1, especially Cys-111, have been recognized to modulate
its aggregation propensity., The most commonly assumed
mechanism by which free cysteines affect aggregation is their participation
in aberrant disulfide bonds, including “scrambled” non-native
intramolecular disulfide bonds and intermolecular disulfide bonds
that stabilize oligomers., However, our findings
of decreased dimer stability (Figure B) and increased aggregation propensity (Figure B) in GS-SOD1 suggest that the propensity of Cys-111
to be glutathionylated contributes to its role in SOD1 aggregation.
We therefore sought to determine whether intermolecular disulfide
bonds are required for the stability of the apo-SOD1 oligomers we
observed in vitro. Oligomers of A4V and I112T SOD1
generated by incubation at physiological pH, temperature, ionic strength,
and SOD1 concentration for one week (WT, G93A, and G37R SOD1 form
few oligomers under these conditions (Figures  and B)) were incubated at room temperature
with the reducing agent DTT, and aliquots were removed at various
time points for SEC analysis. The largest oligomers, those eluting
from the void volume to ∼13.5 mL postinjection on the Superdex
200 10/300 GL column, are most sensitive to dissociation by treatment
with reducing agent (Figure ). While the abundance
of these oligomers decreases steadily following the addition of DTT,
the oligomeric population eluting at ∼14.5 mL (O1) is relatively
stable in the presence of the reducing agent (in A4V, O1 abundance
remains largely unchanged for at least 2 h following the introduction
of DTT; in I112T, O1 abundance increases in the presence of DTT (Figure )). The relative resistance of the O1 population
to dissociation by DTT indicates that the stability of these oligomers
is less dependent on the presence of intermolecular disulfide bonds
or that any intermolecular disulfide bonds present are not sufficiently
solvent-exposed to be reduced by DTT added to the buffer. The increase
in O1 abundance in I112T may be attributed to both continual accumulation
of this oligomer throughout the period of incubation with DTT or the
generation of oligomers of this size upon dissociation of larger oligomers.

Intermolecular
disulfide bonding is not universally required for
the persistence of metastable non-native oligomers in vitro. (A) Apo-SOD1 oligomers generated by incubation for 1 week at 37
°C in 20 mM Tris and 150 mM NaCl at pH 7.4 were separated by
SEC in the absence (black curves) of DTT and in the presence of 1
mM DTT following incubation at room temperature (red curves). Designations
of oligomeric populations (D, M, O1, O2, O3, and V0) correspond to those in Figure A, while M* denotes a species that that appears subsequent to DTT
treatment and whose elution volume is consistent with an expanded
monomer. (B) Quantification of oligomeric populations prior to DTT
treatment and after room temperature incubation with 1 mM DTT for
the indicated time periods. ON = overnight incubation.

Discussion
Relevance of the in Vitro System to Pathological
SOD1 Aggregation in ALS
Although misfolding and aggregation
of SOD1 is believed to be a major contributor to ALS pathology, little
is known about the potential toxicities of individual aggregate species
or the cellular determinants of their formation. Here, we examine
the propensities of WT and FALS mutant SOD1 to form metastable soluble
oligomers with an epitope linked to toxicity in ALS and explore the
effects of oxidative modification of Cys-111, a residue known to modulate
SOD1 aggregation. We assess oligomerization of SOD1 under conditions
approximating physiological pH (7.4), temperature (37 °C), and
SOD1 concentration (100 μM,) without
agitation. The degrees to which the various FALS-linked mutations
increase SOD1 destabilization and aggregation propensity have been
shown to be correlated with disease severity. Although this correlation was recently challenged, this latter study employed the use of SOD1 in which both
free cysteines (at positions 6 and 111) are mutated to alanine and
serine, respectively, potentially restricting the applicability to
physiological SOD1 aggregation. We find that the A4V and I112T substitutions,
which are found in patients with rapidly progressing FALS, exhibit the highest propensities to form soluble
oligomers (Figures C and B). These results would be predicted by the correlation of
aggregation propensity with disease severity, as would the minimal
aggregation of SOD1 containing the G37R substitution (Figure B), which causes relatively slowly progressing paralysis
in ALS patients and mouse models., The higher
oligomerization propensities of the A4V and I112T variants may stem
from the proximity of these substitutions to the native homodimeric
interface (Figure A).

Identification of Species
with Potential Toxicity in ALS
While we observe differences
in aggregation propensities among the
SOD1 variants studied, the formation of certain metastable non-native
oligomers (such as those eluting at 14.5 mL) by both wild type and
FALS mutant SOD1 suggests that some common mechanism(s) underlie SOD1
oligomerization. To explore potentially unifying conformational changes
that occur as apo-SOD1 transitions from dimeric to monomeric and higher-order
oligomeric species, we analyzed the exposure of a putatively disease-relevant
epitope. The epitope recognized by C4F6 is not known, but this antibody
binds to soluble misfolded SOD1 in disease-affected motor neuron populations
in ALS patient spinal cord., For this reason, the
C4F6 monoclonal antibody has been proposed to recognize an epitope
present specifically in toxic conformers of SOD1. We find that the C4F6 antibody binds to several higher-order
oligomers of apo-SOD1 but not to monomers and rarely to native-like
dimers (Figure ). The C4F6 antibody was raised
against apo-G93A and has been shown to have specific reactivity to
this sequence element (WT SOD1, FALS mutants other than G93A, and
SOD1 with other substitutions other than alanine at position 93 show
little reactivity to C4F6 when denatured)., However,
C4F6 also exhibits conformation-specific reactivity, which is not
restricted to G93A under nondenaturing conditions. We probe apo-SOD1 oligomers under nondenaturing conditions
in order to detect species with the conformation-specific epitope
recognized by C4F6 in ALS-affected motor neurons. The strong C4F6
reactivity of unmodified apo-G93A oligomers may partially be due to
the recognition of the G93A sequence epitope. Previous work has implicated
soluble misfolded SOD1 in a range of oligomeric states in specific
cytotoxic phenomena;,, our findings suggest that, of the pool of soluble species formed
by apo-SOD1 in vitro, metastable oligomers larger
than the native dimer are the most likely toxic culprits.

Oxidative Modification
of Cys-111 Induces Conformational Changes
That Promote Oligomer Assembly and Exposure of the Disease-Linked
C4F6 Epitope
Oxidation of SOD1 has been shown to induce its
misfolding and aggregation,,, and various oxidized forms of SOD1 have been linked to toxicity
in cultured neurons, a mouse model of
FALS, and a subset of sporadic ALS cases. In particular, the presence of an oxidizable
cysteine at position 111 has been shown to promote SOD1 aggregation,, an effect that has been widely attributed to the stabilization of
insoluble aggregates and soluble oligomers by intermolecular disulfide
bonds involving Cys-111.,,, However, others have suggested
that intermolecular disulfide cross-linking is a secondary event to
non-native oligomer assembly and is not universally present in SOD1
oligomers.,

We find that glutathionylation
of Cys-111, a reversible oxidative modification present extensively
on SOD1 from human tissue,,,, increases the proportion of monomeric
apo-SOD1 in all studied variants and enhances the formation of several
soluble non-native oligomers (Figure B). This
observation, as well as the increased C4F6 reactivity of GS-I112T-SOD1
and GS-A4V-SOD1 oligomers (Figure ), suggests
that conformational changes in SOD1 induced by Cys-111 glutathionylation, have significant effects on the abundance and morphologies of SOD1
oligomers. In particular, the altered morphologies of GS-SOD1 oligomers
suggest that glutathionylation induces substantial conformational
change(s) not limited to those which result in a weakened dimer interface.
That is, rather than simply increasing the population of monomers
available to oligomerize, glutathionylation alters the structural
features of oligomers themselves. The alteration of oligomer structure
induced by this modification is particularly notable since it increases
exposure of an epitope linked to toxicity in ALS. We also find that
while intermolecular disulfide bonds stabilize higher-order soluble
SOD1 oligomers, these bonds are absent or not essential for stability
in the smallest and earliest-appearing non-native oligomers (the O1
population, Figure ).

Taken together,
these results suggest that intermolecular disulfide
cross-linking represents just one mechanism by which Cys-111 facilitates
oligomerization. At the earliest stages of SOD1 misfolding and aggregation,
oxidative modification of Cys-111 induces conformational changes that
destabilize the dimer, and favor assembly into potentially
toxic non-native oligomers (Figures B and ). Given the central role of Cys-111 in SOD1 aggregation () and the abundance of glutathionylated SOD1 in
human tissue, we hypothesize that Cys-111
glutathionylation is a physiologically relevant mechanism by which
oxidative stress induces aberrant oligomerization of SOD1.

Overall,
our results highlight the toxic potential of soluble oligomers
of apo-SOD1 and demonstrate the ability of Cys-111 oxidation to promote
the formation of oligomers with the disease-linked epitope. The latter
finding implicates oxidative stress as a factor in the cellular environment
that can induce the formation of potentially toxic SOD1 oligomers.
Our use of C4F6 binding as a proxy for disease relevance is, to the
best of our knowledge, the first evaluation of the potential toxicities
of SOD1 oligomers isolated in vitro. Enhanced exposure
of the disease-linked epitope in non-native SOD1 oligomers supports
a cytotoxic role for these assemblies, in parallel with previous findings
directly demonstrating the toxicity of small oligomers of Aβ
and α-synuclein in models of Alzheimer’s disease and
Parkinson’s disease, respectively., A pattern is thus emerging among numerous neurodegenerative disorders
in which small oligomers exert neurotoxic effects that are mitigated
by assembly into large, insoluble species such as amyloid fibrils., Inhibition of small oligomer formation of disease-linked proteins
therefore represents a therapeutic approach with potentially broad
applicability to many neurodegenerative disorders. Knowledge of atomic-level
structural features of putatively toxic soluble SOD1 oligomers and
identification of factors modulating their formation would facilitate
the direct determination of their contribution(s) to cellular pathology,
as well as provide an avenue for the development of antioligomerization
therapeutics for ALS.

This work was
supported by the National Institutes of Health grant R01GM080742 to
N.V.D. R.L.R. was supported by the National Institutes of Health Predoctoral
Fellowship F31NS073435 from the National Institute of Neurological
Disorders and Stroke.

This research is based in
part upon
work conducted using the UNC Michael Hooker Proteomics Center, which
is supported in part by the NIH-NCI Grant No. CA016086 to the Lineberger
Comprehensive Cancer Center.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank
Dr. Joan S. Valentine for graciously providing the
EG118 yeast strain and yEP351:hwtSOD1 vector and Drs. Ashutosh Tripathy,
Xian Chen, and David Smalley for instrument training and helpful discussions.

Abbreviations
ALSamyotrophic lateral sclerosis

DTTdithiothreitol

EDTAethylenediaminetetraacetic
acid

FALSfamilial
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

GSSGoxidized glutathione

MALSmultiangle light scattering

SECsize exclusion chromatography

SOD1Cu/Zn superoxide
dismutase

