A number
of biologically active
natural products arise from the biosynthetic coupling and subsequent
oxidative rearrangement of two tryptophans (e.g., tryptophan dimers). One rare subclass of this general family is the
indolotryptolines, which are characterized by the presence of a tricyclic
tryptoline fused to an indole in the final structure (Figure )., The two reported indolotryptolines,
BE-54017 and cladoniamide A, both exhibit potent (nanomolar) antiproliferative
activity against diverse cancer cell lines in vitro. As this is one of the defining characteristics for natural products
that have successfully transitioned into clinically useful cancer
chemotherapy drugs,, these compounds have recently
attracted an increasing level of interest.,−

While biological studies of indolotryptolines are still in
their
infancy, the biological activities of the more common indolocarbazole-type
natural product tryptophan dimers, which differ from indolotryptolines
by the presence of a tricyclic carbazole in place of a tryptoline,
have been extensively studied (Figure ). More than 100 natural indolocarbazoles have
been discovered to date, with many showing potent in vitro cytotoxicity, and both natural and
synthetic derivatives of the indolocarbazoles, staurosporine and rebeccamycin,
have been introduced into clinical trials as cancer therapeutic agents. One of the key events in the therapeutic development
of indolocarbazole-related metabolites (e.g., Gleevac and others) was the determination that although staurosporine
and rebeccamycin bind unique molecular targets (e.g., protein kinase
and DNA topoisomerase I, respectively), they function through a common
binding motif involving their interaction at the nucleotide (i.e.,
ATP or DNA)-binding site of the target protein.,

Chemical
structures of indolotryptoline (green)- and indolocarbazole
(red)-containing natural product cytotoxins.

A recent high-throughput screen for small molecule inhibitors
of
the vacuolar-type H+-ATPase (V-ATPase) seredipidously found
that BE-54017 shows V-ATPase inhibitory activity in a human cell line. The V-ATPase is highly conserved across eukaryotes
and is responsible for pumping protons across the plasma membranes
and acidifying an array of intracellular organelles., As the V-ATPase is increasingly viewed as a potentially underexplored
target for anticancer therapy because of the variety of pH gradients
observed in cancer development,, we were interested
in using a more systematic genome-wide approach to either genetically
corroborate V-ATPase or possibly identify a different entity as the
physiologically relevant molecular target of indolotryptolines.

Elucidating the molecular target of a bioactive small molecule
in a genome-wide context remains a significant challenge., This is especially true when studying cytotoxic natural products
that might serve as anticancer agents. One approach for determining
the mode of action of a small molecule involves the selection and
full genome sequencing of mutants that acquire compound resistance. Upon identification of resistance-conferring
mutations, a compound’s effect on the activity of both the
mutant and wild-type gene products can be used to directly validate
a proposed mode of action. This powerful approach is commonly employed
for target identification of antimicrobial natural products., However, its application to antitumor natural product mode of action
studies has been limited because of the time-consuming, costly, and
cumbersome nature of conducting these experiments using human cells.

Yeasts are often used as a eukaryotic model for antineoplastic
mode of action studies because of their small genomes, fast growth
rates, and genetic tractability. While
budding yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) have usually
been used in these types of studies, fission yeast (Schizosaccharomyces
pombe) maintain many more of the basic cancer-relevant cellular
processes present in human cells (e.g., cell division, DNA replication,
and heterochromatin assembly), making fission yeast a potentially
much more general model for mode of action studies. However, despite the clear biological advantages fission
yeast provide, resistant mutant screening has seldom been employed
in S. pombe, because of its robust multidrug resistance
(MDR) response and therefore lack of sensitivity to many cytotoxins. A recent study identified five major contributors
to fission yeast’s MDR phenotype (four drug efflux transporters
and a transcription factor) and showed that their deletion results
in the increased sensitivity of S. pombe to a wide
range of chemical toxins. This MDR-suppressed
(MDR-sup) strain of S. pombe should be particularly
well suited for antiproliferative natural product target identification
studies because of its broad sensitivity to cytotoxins and its weakened
ability to acquire drug resistance through uninformative, nonspecific
MDR mechanisms.

Here we have used MDR-sup S. pombe to study the
mode of action of the indolotryptoline-containing natural products,
BE-54017 and cladoniamide A (Figure ). Whole-genome
sequencing of indolotryptoline resistant MDR-sup S. pombe mutants identified point mutations in the c/c′ proteolipid
subunits of the V-ATPase. The reintroduction of these mutations into
a clean background showed that they were necessary and sufficient
for indolotryptoline resistance. Fluorescent visualization of acidic
vacuoles confirms that the indolotryptolines inhibit V-ATPase activity
and that the mutations in the proteolipid subunits provide resistance
to V-ATPase inhibitory activity by indolotryptolines. Mapping of the
observed resistance-conferring mutations onto a model proteolipid
structure shows that indolotryptoline-conferring mutations map to
a site that is distinct from sites known to confer resistance to previously
described V-ATPase inhibitors. As well as providing corroborative
genetic evidence of the predicted molecular target of indolotryptoline
natural products, this work demonstrates that resistant mutant screening
using MDR-sup S. pombe can serve as a simple and
generic tool for natural product mode of action studies.

Four-step schematic
for resistance screening using S. pombe. For mutagenesis,
the S. pombe strain with its
multidrug resistance (MDR) response suppressed (MDR-sup) through five-gene
knockouts (KO) is randomly mutagenized with methylnitronitrosoguanidine
(NTG). For selection, NTG-mutagenized cells are plated on drug-containing
solid media to select for resistant mutants. For backcrossing, drug
resistant mutants (orange) are crossed with unmutagenized MDR-sup
(white), resulting in the formation of ascus containing four spore
progeny with a decrease in the number of mutations. Progeny retaining
drug resistance (orange) are maintained. For sequencing, the genome
of each backcrossed mutant is sequenced and compared to the unmutagenized
parent genome to identify the specific mutation that confers drug
resistance.

Materials and Methods
Reagents
and Strains
The multidrug resistance-suppressed
(MDR-sup) S. pombe, SAK84 and SAK690, and the MDR-active S. pombe SAK1, from which MDR-sup S. pombe was derived, were generously provided by T. M. Kapoor (Laboratory
of Chemistry and Cell Biology, The Rockefeller University). The genotypes, of these strains are listed in Table S1 of the . The indolotryptoline-based compounds,
BE-54017 and cladoniamide A, were isolated from Streptomyces
albus harboring the abe gene cluster, as
described previously. Bafilomycin A1,
concanamycin A, and brefeldin A were purchased from a commercial supplier
(Santa Cruz Biotechnology).

S. pombe Whole-Cell Cytotoxicity
Assay
Freshly struck MDR-sup S. pombe SAK84
was inoculated
into liquid YE4S medium and grown (30 °C, 300 rpm) to log phase
(OD595 = 0.5). The culture was diluted 50-fold and distributed
as 100 μL aliquots into a sterile 96-well microtiter plate.
BE-54017 or cladoniamide A resuspended in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)
was added to the first well at an initial concentration of 0.50 μg/mL
(1109 nM for BE-54017 and 1144 nM for Cladoniamide A) and serially
diluted 2-fold across the plate (final concentrations of 0.50, 0.25,
0.13, 0.063, 0.031, 0.016, 0.0078, 0.0039, 0.0020, 0.0010, 0.00050,
and 0.00025 μg/mL). A compound-free DMSO control was similarly
diluted across the plate (final DMSO concentration of &lt;1%; no effect
was observed on the apparent growth rate of MDR-sup S. pombe). After outgrowth (36 h, 30 °C, 300 rpm), the absorbance (OD595) of each well was measured using a microplate reader (Epoch
Microplate Spectrophotometer, BioTek). Using GraphPad Prism, the normalized
absorbance values were plotted and curve-fitted to determine the half-maximal
inhibitory concentration (IC50) for each indolotryptoline.
The same method (using different initial drug concentrations) was
used to determine IC50 values for bafilomycin A1, concanamycin
A, and brefeldin A against resistant and nonmutant strains.

Selection
of Indolotryptoline Resistant S. pombe Mutants
Twenty milliliters of log phase S. pombe SAK84
was pelleted by centrifugation (3000g for
3 min) and resuspended in TM buffer [50 mM Tris, 50 mM maleic acid,
7.5 mM (NH4)2SO4, and 0.4 mM MgSO4 (pH 6.0)] containing 50 μg/mL methylnitronitrosoguanidine
(NTG) to randomly mutagenize the genome. After 30 min at 32 °C
(250 rpm), the mutagenized cells were pelleted, washed twice with
10 mL of sterile water, resuspended in 20 mL of fresh YE4S, and allowed
to recover for 3 h (32 °C and 250 rpm). The culture was adjusted
to an OD595 of 0.5, and 150 μL aliquots were spread
onto YE4S plates containing different concentrations of the indolotryptolines.
After 72 h at 32 °C, resistant clones were picked from plates
containing either ∼10 (BE-54017, 69 nM; cladoniamide A, 143
nM) or ∼50 (BE-54017, 35 nM; cladoniamide A, 72 nM) colonies.
Each strain was then reassessed for indolotryptoline resistance and
cross-resistance to brefeldin A using the whole-cell cytotoxicity
assay described above.

Backcrossing of Indolotryptoline Resistant
Mutants
Resistant strains were crossed with nonmutant MDR-sup
strain SAK690,
which differs in genetic background from SAK84 only by having a different
mating type (h-). Both resistant and nonmutant S. pombe strains grown on YE4S plates were resuspended in water to produce
suspensions with an OD595 of ∼1. These were mixed
in equal volumes, and 10 μL aliquots were spotted onto an SPA
plate. After 40 h at 25 °C, the mixture was struck onto a YE4S
plate. Using a dissecting microscope/micromanipulator (Axioskop 40,
Zeiss), zygotic asci (mating products) were isolated from the YE4S
plate and incubated (37 °C for 6 h) to permit native digestion
of the ascus wall. The four spores from each zygotic ascus were then
separated and individually grown on a YE4S plate (30 °C for 5
days). The resulting colonies were tested for resistance to indolotryptolines,
and resistant colonies were used in subsequent rounds of backcrossing.
For additional rounds of backcrossing, the progeny that retained resistance
were crossed, depending on their mating type, with either SAK84 or
SAK690.

Whole-Genome Sequencing and Bioinformatics
Backcrossed
mutants were grown in YE4S, and genomic DNA was isolated from these
cultures using zymolyase treatment followed by phenol/chloroform extraction. Genomic DNA from six resistant mutants and two
nonmutant strains (SAK84 and SAK690) was sequenced at the Rockefeller
University Genomics Resource Center using Illumina HiSeq 2000 technology
(50 bp single end, ∼150 million reads in total). Reads from
resistant mutants were compared to those of nonmutant samples to identify
resistant mutant specific somatic mutations that altered the wild-type
amino acid sequence with ≥4× coverage and &gt;50% mutation
allele frequency. In brief, the variant detection pipeline consisted
of the mapping of Illumina reads to the S. pombe genome using BWA, removal of duplicates, indel-based
realignment using GATK, base quality score recalibration, mutation
calling for a single-nucleotide variant using a GATK Unified Genotyper,
and annotation using SnpEff (Sloan Kettering Bioinformatics Core).

Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) Sequencing of V-ATPase Proteolipid
Subunit Genes
A fresh colony of each resistant strain that
was not sequenced by HiSeq was resuspended in 0.2% SDS and heated
at 95 °C for 10 min. One microliter of this crude cell lysate
was used as a template in PCRs designed to amplify the vma3, vma11, and zhf1 genes (Phusion Hot Start Flex DNA polymerase kit, New England Biolabs).
Primers are listed in Table S2 of the . The following PCR cycling conditions were used:
one cycle of 95 °C for 2 min; 30 cycles of 95 °C for 10
s, 58 °C for 30 s, and 72 °C for 30 s per kilobase; one
cycle for 7 min at 72 °C; and hold at 4 °C. The resulting
amplicons were sequenced from both ends using the same set of primers
that were used for PCR.

Targeted Mutagenesis of the S. pombe Genome
The vma3 or vma11 specific recombination
cassettes containing point mutations of interest were amplified from
the appropriate resistant mutant using the same Phusion Hot
Start Flex PCR conditions described previously. Primers were
designed (Table S2 of the ) to generate amplicons with ∼500 bp homology arms flanking
each side of the point mutation of interest. The PCR cassette was
introduced into SAK84 by lithium acetate-assisted transformation. The transformation reaction mixture was spread
onto YE4S plates containing defined concentrations of indolotryptoline
to select for strains conferring drug resistance. The acquisition
of drug resistance and point mutation were confirmed by a whole-cell
cytotoxicity assay and PCR sequencing, respectively.

Data from BE-54017 (B#)
and cladoniamide A (C#) resistant mutant
strains. Compilation of data from either (A) fully sequenced or (B) vma3, vma11, or zhf1 PCR-sequenced
resistant mutants. Genes containing mutations, the amino acid change
encoded by each mutation, and the fold difference in whole-cell cytotoxicity
(IC50) relative to the unmutagenized strain are shown.
Abbreviations: BE, BE-54017; Cla, cladoniamide A; Baf, bafilomycin
A1; Con, concanamycin A; Bre, brefeldin A; N/D, not determined. The
numbers followed by asterisks represent average values. (C) Examples
of dose response curves used to determine whole-cell cytotoxicity
and fold differences in IC50. Curves for BE-54017 and bafilomycin
A1 against mutant B1, mutant B7, or unmutagenized MDR-sup S. pombe are shown. See also Figure S1 and Table S3 of the .

V-ATPase Activity Assay by Acidic Organelle Staining
Log
phase S. pombe was added to fresh indolotryptoline-containing
media [final concentrations of 0.50 (1109 nM for BE-54017 and 1144
nM for cladoniamide A), 0.25, 0.13, 0.063, 0.031, 0.016, 0.0078, and
0.0039 μg/mL] to give 5 mL cultures with an OD595 of 0.15. These cultures were grown at 30 °C for 1 h, pelleted
(2 min at 3000g), and washed with YE4S buffered with
50 mM MOPS (pH 7.6). The cell pellet was then resuspended in buffered
YE4S containing 200 μM quinacrine, and staining was allowed
to proceed at room temperature for 10 min. After being washed with
buffered YE4S, the samples were resuspended in the same medium and
transferred to an eight-chamber slide. Cells were imaged at the Rockefeller
University Bio-Imagining Resource Center under a fluorescent microscope
using a 100× objective lens with DIC optics for Nomarski imaging
or with a fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) filter set for quinacrine
visualization (DeltaVision Image Restoration Microscope System with
Olympus IX-70 base microscope, Applied Precision). A minimum inhibitory
concentration (MIC) was defined as the minimum dose at which the formation
of fluorescent puncta was inhibited in &gt;95% of the cells.

Mapping
of Resistance-Conferring Residues onto a V-ATPase Structure
The Enterococcus hirae Na+-ATPase proteolipid
subunit, NtpK [Protein Data Bank (PDB) entry 2bl2], was imaged using
PyMOL. A CLUSTALW alignment of S. pombe V-ATPase
proteolipid subunits Vma3 and Vma11 and NtpK was created to map residues
between proteins from the two organisms. Residues that confer resistance
to indolotryptoline and plecomacrolide compounds were identified in
NtpK based on this alignment. Side chains for resistance-conferring
residues were converted to those seen in wild-type Vma3 or Vma11 and
then represented as colored sticks on the NtpK structure.

Results
Random
Mutagenesis and Selection of Indolotryptoline Resistant
MDR-sup S. pombe Mutants
As an initial step
in investigating the mode of action of indolotryptolines, methylnitronitrosoguanidine
(NTG)-mutagenized MDR-sup S. pombe was plated on
medium containing either BE-54017 or cladoniamide A (Figure ). For both metabolites, concentrations ranging
from 2- to 6-fold above the IC50 (BE-54017, 35–70
nM; cladoniamide A, 70–150 nM) were used for resistant mutant
selections, which yielded between 1 and 10 resistant colonies per
100000 mutagenized cells. In contrast, the S. pombe strain from which MDR-sup S. pombe was derived
(MDR-active S. pombe) is approximately 50 times less
sensitive to these natural products (IC50 values of 780
nM for BE-54017 and 1600 nM for cladoniamide A). For each target compound,
we picked 12 resistant colonies for further analysis (S. pombe strains B1–B12 for BE-54017 and S. pombe strains C1–12 for cladoniamide A). These 24 mutants were
re-examined for indolotryptoline resistance and tested for cross-resistance
to the unrelated cytotoxin, brefeldin A (protein transport inhibitor).
Strains that failed to show resistance when they were rescreened against
indolotryptolines (B2, B9, C1, and C11) and those showing cross-resistance
to brefeldin A (C7) were abandoned. All of the remaining strains were
found to be resistant to both BE-54017 and cladoniamide A, suggesting
a common mode of action and drug-binding site. The IC50 for these resistant mutants ranged from 2- to 8-fold above the IC50 determined for unmutagenized MDR-sup S. pombe (Figure  and Figure S1 of the ).

Characterization of Indolotryptoline
Resistance-Conferring Mutations
by Backcrossing and Sequencing
Random NTG mutagenesis can
result in the introduction of multiple mutations into the genome of
each strain, complicating the identification of the specific mutations
that are relevant to the molecular target. An additional benefit of
using fission yeast as a model for the resistance selection approach
is that the complexity of the mutagenized genetic background can be
significantly simplified through backcrossing with unmutagenized yeast
(Figure ). Backcrossing serves to replace
non-drug resistance-associated mutations with wild-type allelles from
the unmutagenized strain, thereby preventing irrelevant mutations
from complicating downstream genome-wide bioinformatics analyses.
Six representative mutant strains showing varying levels of resistance
(B1, B5, B7, B12, C3, and C6) were backcrossed four to six times with
unmutagenized MDR-sup S. pombe (Figure ). Consistently, two of the four progeny from each backcross
retained drug resistance, suggesting that a single mutation was responsible
for the observed resistant phenotype in each strain. The final backcrossed
clones were subjected to Illumina whole-genome sequencing, and the
resulting reads were mapped onto the unmutagenized MDR-sup genome
to identify differences in protein-coding sequences. Upon comparison
to the unmutagenized MDR-sup genome, the six backcrossed strains were
found to contain between one and four point mutations (Figure A). While various one-off mutations (e.g., qcr6 in B1 and apl5 in B5) were observed
in this strain collection, every resistant strain had mutations either
in the zinc transporter gene, zhf1 (B1, B5, and C3),
or in genes encoding the c (vma3 for B7 and B12)
or c′ (vma11 for C6) subunits of the vacuolar
H+-ATPase complex (V-ATPase), suggesting that zinc transporter
and V-ATPase activity were likely linked to the molecular mechanism
of indolotryptoline cytotoxicity. In no cases did we detect mutations
that might traditionally be associated with a generic MDR-like phenotype,
highlighting a key advantage of using the MDR-sup strain.

The zhf1, vma3, and vma11 genes
from the 13 resistant strains that were not analyzed by Illumina whole-genome
sequencing were amplified via PCR and individually sequenced (Figure B). All 13 strains were found to contain a mutation
in one of these three genes. Eight strains contain the same zhf1 mutation (W324L) observed previously, making it the
most common mutation we detected. Four strains contain new variants
of vma3 (C8), vma11 (B10 and C12),
and zhf1 (B3), and the remaining strain B11 has the
same vma11 mutation that is seen in C6.

Targeted Mutagenesis
of V-ATPase and Zinc Transporter Genes
The genetic tractability
of yeast allows for a specific mutation
of interest to be easily introduced into a clean background to provide
a genetic validation of its role in conferring resistance. To confirm
the relevance of the vma and zhf mutations to indolotryptoline resistance, each unique vma3/11 point mutation (B7, B10, B12, C6, and C8) and the common W324L zhf1 mutation (B1) were introduced into the unmutagenized
MDR-sup S. pombe strain by homologous recombination.
The resulting strains, which were shown by PCR amplicon sequencing
to harbor the desired mutation, were all found to be resistant to
indolotryptolines at the same level as the randomly mutagenized clones
containing the same mutation (Figure S2 of the ). The individual vma3, vma11, and zhf mutations we detected
are therefore necessary and sufficient for conferring resistance to
indolotryptoline-based compounds.

Visualization of whole-cell V-ATPase activity
by acidic organelle
staining. (A) Nomarski and fluorescent images of quinacrine-stained
unmutagenized MDR-sup S. pombe upon incubation with
BE-54017 (BE) or brefeldin A (Bre). The formation of fluorescent puncta
is inhibited at higher concentrations of BE, with no puncta observed
in &gt;95% of the cells at 69 nM, which is defined as the minimum
inhibitory
concentration (MIC) of V-ATPase activity (red). Bre has no effect
on puncta formation. (B) Summary of the fold difference in whole-cell
V-ATPase MIC relative to unmutagenized MDR-sup. Cla, cladoniamide
A. See also Figure S3 and Table S3 of the .

Sensitivity of the unmutagenized
MDR-sup S. pombe to cytotoxins in the presence of
increasing concentrations of zinc.
(A) Summary of fold differences in whole-cell cytotoxicity (IC50) relative to media without the addition of ZnCl2. (B) Dose response curve for unmutagenized MDR-sup when it is exposed
to BE-54017 in the presence of different concentrations of ZnCl2. In the tested ZnCl2 concentration range (0.01–0.2
mM), zinc has no effect on the apparent growth rate of MDR-sup S. pombe in the absence of any cytotoxins. See also Table
S3 of the .

Acidic Staining of Vacuoles
As the V-ATPase is responsible
for maintaining the acidification of cellular organelles, V-ATPase
activity can be monitored in whole cells by using acidic staining
dyes (e.g., quinacrine) that form fluorescent puncta in vacuoles at
reduced pH., Similar to the known plecomacrolide-type
V-ATPase inhibitors, bafilomycin and concanamycin, indolotryptolines
also prevented the formation of fluorescent puncta in the cells in
a dose-dependent manner, while the presence of brefeldin (protein
transport inhibitor) had no effect (Figure A). Whole-cell V-ATPase inhibition by indolotryptolines (MICs of
69 nM for BE-54017 and 143 nM for cladoniamide A) occurs at concentrations
similar to those needed for whole-cell cytotoxicity (MICs of 35 nM
for BE-54017 and 72 nM for cladoniamide A). In addition, acidic staining
experiments were conducted using strains containing each unique vma3 (B7, B12, and C8) and vma11 (B10 and
C6) mutation, as well as a representative strain with the common W324L zhf1 (B1) mutation (Figure B and
Figure S3 of the ). All vma3 and vma11 mutants showed
increased tolerance to the disruption of puncta by indolotryptolines,
while the zhf1 mutant responded like nonmutant MDR-sup
in these experiments.

Structure of V-ATPase. (A) Schematic of yeast V-ATPase
architecture,
which consists of the catalytic V1 domain (green) and the
membrane-translocating V0 domain (yellow and beige). Proteolipid
subunits c, c′, and c″ (beige) are part of the V0 domain and form a hexameric ring structure. (B–D)
Side, close-up, and top views, respectively, of the crystal structure
of a proteolipid subunit from the E. hirae V-ATPase
(PDB entry 2BL2). The peptide backbone is represented as a green stick model. Residues
found to be involved in conferring resistance to indolotryptolines
are colored red. Residues reported in previous studies to be involved
in plecomacrolide resistance are colored blue. See also Figure S4 of the .

V-ATPase Inhibition in
the Presence of Zinc
As Zhf1
is responsible for controlling zinc homeostasis, in particular in
regulating the zinc concentration in the endoplasmic reticulum and
nucleus, we tested the relationship between indolotryptoline toxicity
and zinc concentration. In these assays, we observed that MDR-sup S. pombe becomes more sensitive to BE-54017 and cladoniamide
A with increasing concentrations of zinc in the growth medium (Figure ). This effect is similarly observed with the known
V-ATPase inhibitors, bafilomycin and concanamycin, but not with the
protein transport inhibitor, brefeldin.

Cross-Resistance
Indolotryptoline resistant strains
were tested for cross-resistance to the well-characterized plecomacrolide-type
V-ATPase inhibitors, bafilomycin and concanamycin (Figure  and Figure S1 of the ). The W324L Zhf1 mutant confers resistance to both
of the known V-ATPase inhibitors. With the exception of the M130I
Vma3 (C8) mutant, which confers a 2-fold increase in resistance to
bafilomycin, V-ATPase mutants did not show cross-resistance to either
bafilomycin or concanamycin.

Mapping of the Putative Indolotryptoline
Proteolipid-Binding
Site
The V-ATPase is a multiprotein complex that consists
of two domains: a peripheral ATP-binding domain (V1) and
a membrane-associated proton translocating pore domain (V0) (Figure A)., In yeast,
the V0 domain contains a hexameric cylinder that is known
as the proteolipid ring. The catalytic V1 subunit hydrolyzes
ATP, which drives the rotation of the proteolipid ring that in turn
allows for protons to translocate across the membrane. The proteolipid
ring is thought to be composed of c (vma3), c′
(vma11), and c″ (vma16) subunits
that assemble in a 4:1:1 (c:c′:c″) stoichiometry.,, As is the case with plecomacrolide
resistance-conferring mutations, indolotryptoline-conferring mutations
are found in the proteolipid subunits.

The detailed molecular
structure of the yeast V-ATPase is not known; however, the proteolipid
substructure from the vacuolar Na+-ATPase from the bacterium E. hirae has been determined by X-ray crystallography. Despite phylogenetic and functional differences,
the high degree of sequence homology seen between the E. hirae proteolipid subunits and those found in eukaryotic V-ATPase complexes
has led to the use of the E. hirae V-ATPase structure
as a model for eukaryotic V-ATPase studies. In particular, the residues
that confer resistance to V-ATPase inhibitors have been mapped onto
the E. hirae V-ATPase structure to predict putative
inhibitor-binding sites., Residues reported to
confer resistance to plecomacrolide-like inhibitors generally cluster
midway between the cytoplasmic and luminal faces of the proteolipid
ring and point out from the four-helix bundle that makes up each of
the proteolipid subunits. In contrast,
indolotryptoline resistance-conferring mutations map near the cytoplasmic
face and mostly point into the center of the bundle (Figure  and Figure S4 of the ).

Discussion
Through whole-genome
sequencing of indolotryptoline resistant mutants,
we identified point mutations in the proteolipid (c/c′) subunits
of V-ATPase and the zinc transporter Zhf1 that conferred resistance
to this family of natural products. Previous studies have observed
a tight functional connection between zinc toxicity and V-ATPase activity.
The inactivation of the V-ATPase in diverse organisms from yeasts
to plants, by either a gene knockout or a small-molecule inhibitor,
is known to result in increased sensitivity to zinc, indicating that
the V-ATPase plays a critical role in zinc homeostasis and that zinc
toxicity is likely the principal downstream deleterious consequence
of V-ATPase inhibition.− As would be expected for a V-ATPase
inhibitor, we observed that MDR-sup S. pombe becomes
more sensitive to indolotryptolines in the presence of increasing
concentrations of zinc.

Although V-ATPase activity in budding
yeast (Sa. cerevisiae) has been investigated in vitro using isolated
vacuolar membranes, the purification
of similar membrane fractions from S. pombe has proven
to be challenging, thereby precluding comparable in vitro biochemical analyses of these mutants. However, because the V-ATPase is responsible for maintaining the
acidification of cellular organelles, V-ATPase activity in whole cells
can be monitored using acidic staining dyes., As previously reported for known V-ATPase inhibitors,, the addition of indolotryptolines to culture media at subminimal
inhibitory concentrations resulted in the loss of fluorescent puncta
formation in a dose-dependent manner in unmutagenized MDR-sup S. pombe (Figure A), confirming
the inhibition of V-ATPase activity in the presence of indolotryptolines.
The fact that our indolotryptoline resistance-conferring V-ATPase
mutants are largely compound class specific, while Zhf1 mutants confer
resistance irrespective of the compound class, further suggests a
model in which zinc toxicity is a downstream deleterious consequence
of V-ATPase inhibition in the presence of indolotryptoline natural
products. Ultimately, the in vitro biochemical reconstitution
of mutant and wild-type human V-ATPase will be necessary to definitively
confirm V-ATPase as the molecular target of indolotryptolines in human
cells.

Chemical structures of previously characterized V-ATPase inhibitors.

The V-ATPase is a highly conserved
protein complex in eukaryotes
that plays a role in acidifying a variety of organelles., V-ATPase inhibitors have been explored as cancer therapeutic agents
because of their cytotoxicity toward diverse cancer cell lines., Cell lines from cancers that are especially malignant, aggressive,
and unresponsive to current therapies are known to be sensitive to
V-ATPase inhibitors, possibly because of the involvement of an acid
microenvironment in tumor progression and multidrug resistance., On the basis of the fact that four of the five vma3/11 mutations that confer resistance to indolotryptolines do not show
cross-resistance to plecomacrolide-type metabolites and that the fifth
mutation confers only low-level resistance to bafilomycin (Figure ), the indolotryptoline-binding site is likely distinct
from the plecomacrolide-binding pocket in the proteolipid ring. On
the basis of the significant structural differences between indolotryptolines
and known V-ATPase inhibitors (Figure ), it would not be surprising that they bind at
a distinct site and therefore have selected for unique resistance-conferring
mutations. The potential existence of a unique indolotryptoline V-ATPase-binding
site suggests that these natural products can serve as the inspiration
for the development of a new class of nanomolar V-ATPase inhibitors
that can be explored for anticancer activity.

Tryptophan dimers,
in particular the closely related indolocarbazole
family of natural products, have been observed to interact with proteins
containing nucleotide-binding sites (i.e., ATP or DNA) through mimicry
of a nucleotide base.,− While the V-ATPase
uses ATP, the proteolipid subunits of V-ATPase are not known to contain
a nucleotide-binding site, suggesting that tryptophan dimer-binding
motifs might extend beyond simple nucleotide mimicry. Disruption of
the planar indolocarbazole ring system through the sp3 hybridization
of the two carbons at the base of the pyrrole ring in the indolotryptoline
structure is likely to lead to an altered mode of binding of this
class of tryptophan dimers. Eventually, an indolotryptoline–proteolipid
cocrystal structure will be required to confirm this change in binding
motif hypothesis.

Any molecular target elucidated in a model
organism like S. pombe must ultimately be confirmed
in human cancer cells
if relevance to cancer therapy
is to be established. Nevertheless, resistant mutant selection of
MDR-sup S. pombe provides the means for developing
mode of action hypotheses that do not require any chemical modification
of the bioactive compound, preliminary prediction of the target, or
construction of a custom-made genetic library, thereby serving as
a convenient alternative approach for target identification studies
of cytotoxic natural products. The characterization of a cytotoxic
natural product’s molecular target using human cells has traditionally
been costly, time-consuming, and technically cumbersome. Resistant
mutant screening using MDR-sup S. pombe should serve
as a powerful and generally applicable alternative target identification
technique that fits nicely into diverse drug discovery pipelines for
gene-level target identification and validation of cytotoxins.

Supporting Information Available
Complete whole-cell cytotoxicity
dose response curves, targeted mutagenesis data, complete V-ATPase
activity data, and protein sequence alignment of resistance-conferring
mutations (Figures S1–S4, respectively) and S. pombe strain list, PCR primer list, and summary of IC50 and MIC values
(Tables S1-S3, respectively). This material is available free of charge
via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi501078j_si_001.pdf

This work was
supported by National Institutes of Health Grant GM077516. S.F.B.
is a Howard Hughes Medical Institute Early Career Scientist.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Tarun M. Kapoor for the generous
gift of S. pombe strains.

