Exposure of Escherichia
coli cells to small
doses of DNA-methylating agents initiates a response that mitigates
the mutagenic and cytotoxic effects of DNA methylation.− This process, known as the adaptive response, involves the upregulation
of four proteins: Ada, AlkA, AlkB, and AidB., Ada
is a DNA methyltransferase that irreversibly transfers a methyl group
from the DNA phosphodiester backbone to its Cys38 side chain or from O4-methyl-T and O6-methyl-G lesions to its Cys321 side chain., Upon
methylation at Cys38, Ada becomes a transcription factor and activates
the transcription of its own encoding gene and the other adaptive
response genes., AlkA is a DNA glycosylase that
repairs a variety of lesions, including 3-methyl-A, through a base
excision mechanism., The third member of the adaptive
response, AlkB, is an α-ketoglutarate- and Fe(II)-dependent
dioxygenase that repairs 1-methyl-A and 3-methyl-C lesions by an oxidative
demethylation mechanism.− While the roles of Ada, AlkA, and AlkB in the adaptive response
are well-established, AidB is still enigmatic.

Although reported
to diminish the mutagenic effect of the methylating agent N-methyl-N′-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine (MNNG),() an exact AidB
phenotype has been difficult to establish. While in vitro studies
clearly show protection of DNA from methylating agents such as MNNG,() cells with an inactivated aidB gene do not show the expected increase in methylation sensitivity., Recently, it has been suggested that localization of AidB and its
protective function to specific regions of the genome could obscure
the AidB phenotype, although more work is needed to fully resolve
this issue.() Our understanding of how
AidB exerts its protective function is also in its infancy. AidB is
known to be a flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD)-containing protein() that shares sequence homology with members of
the acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase (ACAD) flavoenzyme family and exhibits
low levels of isovaleryl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase (IVD) activity.() However, this activity is 1000-fold lower than
that of other known ACADs, indicating that it does not represent the
biological function of AidB.() The concomitant
discovery that AidB can bind double-stranded DNA nonspecifically with
low micromolar dissociation constants, led to a functional
model in which AidB screens DNA and directly repairs methylated bases
by a dehydrogenation reaction.() While
there is structural and biochemical support for the presence of DNA-binding
domains on AidB,, the AidB structure also shows
that the four FAD binding sites per tetramer are far from these DNA-binding
regions, raising doubt that AidB directly repairs DNA.()

In a previous crystallographic study, AidB was crystallized
in the presence of DNA oligonucleotides, and although these DNA molecules
were not observed in the crystal structure, the assembly of AidB molecules
in the crystal lattice created 25 Å pores lined by the DNA-binding
regions of AidB.() On the basis of this
structure, a model was put forward in which AidB sheaths DNA from
destructive modification by completely sequestering it in these pores,
with a potential secondary role for the FAD cofactor in detoxifying
damaging agents via an unknown mechanism.() It was later shown that AidB can bind to certain DNA sequences with
enhanced affinity during normal cell growth, including the upstream
sequence of its own promoter, and that AidB plays a protective role
even when its DNA-binding regions are deleted, suggesting that the
purpose of the DNA binding ability of AidB is to localize detoxification
activity rather than to protect DNA by providing a sheath.() Again, the exact nature of this putative detoxification
reaction is unknown, with a recent study ruling out MNNG as an obvious
substrate
candidate.()

As outlined above, numerous
models have been proposed for the role of AidB in the adaptive response.
At the heart of this mystery is the role of the bound FAD. Is AidB
an enzyme that uses the FAD as a cofactor for detoxification or DNA
repair? Is AidB a DNA-binding protein for which the FAD plays a structural
role, or could FAD play both a catalytic and a structural role in
a multifaceted AidB protein? To address these questions, we investigated
for the first time the properties of binding of FAD to AidB. Using
a combination of techniques, we find that FAD binds tightly and cooperatively
to AidB, inducing a change in the oligomeric state of the protein,
from dimer to tetramer.

Materials and Methods
Cloning and Site-Directed Mutagenesis
The AidB gene
was amplified from E. coli strain AB1157 using a
protocol reported previously.() The amplified
gene was subcloned into a pET28a vector (Novagen) that had been digested
with NcoI and HindIII. The resulting tag-free construct, pET28a-wtAidB, was transformed into E. coli BL21(DE3)
cells for expression. An AidB triple mutant (T185V/S191R/R324D, mtAidB) was generated from the wild-type AidB-pET28a clone
using the QuikChange Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit (Stratagene) and
the primers listed in Table S1 ().

Overexpression and Purification
Luria-Bertani medium
(4 × 1 L) containing 50 μg/mL kanamycin was inoculated
with a starter culture of E. coli BL21(DE3) transformed
with pET28a-wtAidB. Cells were grown at 37 °C
to an optical density of 0.5 at 600 nm, at which point the cells were
induced with 1 mM isopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside.
The cultures were then transferred to 21 °C for overnight growth.
Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 10000g for
10 min, and the resulting cell pellets were resuspended in AidB buffer
[50 mM Tris (pH 7.8), 1 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA),
300 mM NaCl, 10% (v/v) glycerol, and 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol
(β-ME)] and lysed by sonication. Cell debris was separated from
the soluble supernatant by centrifugation at 35000g for 30 min at 4 °C. The cell lysate was treated with ammonium
sulfate at final concentrations of 30 and 45% in a stepwise fashion.
After each addition, the solution was stirred gently for 1 h at room
temperature to reach equilibrium. Precipitated protein was removed
by centrifugation at 6000g for 30 min at 4 °C.
The protein that precipitated after the addition of 45% ammonium sulfate
was separated from the supernatant and dissolved in 10 mL of AidB
buffer. This solution, containing crude wtAidB, was
loaded onto a low-substitution phenyl Sepharose column (GE Healthcare)
pre-equilibrated with AidB buffer, and the column was washed with
10 column volumes of AidB buffer. wtAidB was eluted
with AidB buffer supplemented with 0.4% (w/v) deoxycholate. Fractions
containing wtAidB, as judged by color and sodium
dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE),
were merged, concentrated to 5 mL, and loaded onto a HiPrep 26/60
Sephacryl S200 size exclusion column (Amersham Bioscience) pre-equilibrated
with AidB buffer. Protein was eluted with 1.5 column volumes of AidB
buffer. Fractions containing pure wtAidB, as judged
by SDS–PAGE, were merged and used for experiments within 2
days (here, “fresh” AidB is protein that is &lt;2 days
old). mtAidB was overexpressed and purified in the
same fashion as wtAidB. Reduced wtAidB was generated by incubation of a solution of 1 mg/mL wtAidB in AidB buffer with a 2-fold molar excess of sodium
dithionite in an oxygen-free environment (Coy Scientific chamber under
a 95% Ar/5% H2 atmosphere).

Deflavination
wtAidB (10 mL) that
eluted from the Sephacryl S200 size exclusion column was diluted to
a final volume of 50 mL with deflavination buffer [250 mM sodium phosphate
(pH 7.5), 3 M KBr, 1 mM EDTA, 10% (v/v) glycerol, and 5 mM β-ME].
The mixture was incubated at 4 °C for 4 days, concentrated to
5 mL, and applied to a PD-10 desalting column (GE Healthcare) pre-equilibrated
with deflavination buffer to remove free FAD. The amount of residual
FAD was determined photometrically by the absorbance at 450 nm (ε450 = 11300 M–1 cm–1 ()), and the deflavination process was repeated
if necessary. The final apo wtAidB sample was buffer
exchanged with AidB buffer using a PD-10 column. UV–vis spectra
of apo wtAidB were recorded on a Cary 50 Bio spectrophotometer
(Varian).

Circular Dichroism Spectroscopy
Circular dichroism
spectra were recorded on an Aviv 62 DS circular dichroism spectrometer
at 25 °C using a 0.1 cm optical path length cell. The protein
concentration was 1.2 mg/mL in a buffer containing 200 mM potassium
phosphate (pH 7.5), 1 mM EDTA, 10% (v/v) glycerol, and 5 mM β-ME.
Ellipticity was recorded from 200 to 240 nm in 1 nm steps with a 20
s averaging time and a 1.5 nm bandwidth. At least three scans were
averaged for each sample. Mean residue ellipticity, θ in degrees
square centimeters per decimole, was calculated from the equation θ
= MRW × θobs/(10dc), where θobs is the observed ellipticity measured
in degrees, MRW is the mean residue molecular mass (112.0 Da), c is the protein concentration in grams per milliliter,
and d is the optical path length of the cell in centimeters.()

Fluorescence Quenching
The affinity of apo wtAidB for free FAD was determined by monitoring the extent
of fluorescence quenching() at 20 °C,
using a SpectraMax M2 microplate reader (Molecular Devices). Fluorescence
emission of FAD was detected at 520 nm with excitation at 350 nm.
Fresh apo wtAidB (200 nM to 5 μM) and 1 μM
FAD, each in AidB buffer, were mixed by being shaken for 2 min. Fluorescence
was recorded over time until equilibrium was reached. The change in
fluorescence intensity as a function of binding of apo wtAidB to FAD was fit to the Hill equation (eq ), which accounts for cooperative binding:where ΔF is the change in FAD fluorescence at 520 nm at each AidB concentration,
ΔFmax is the change in fluorescence
at 520 nm at a saturating wtAidB concentration, Kd is the dissociation constant, h is the Hill coefficient, and [AidB] is the concentration of wtAidB.

Analytical Ultracentrifugation
Sedimentation velocity
experiments were performed using a Beckman Coulter Optima XL-I analytical
ultracentrifuge equipped with a Beckman An60Ti rotor and an XL-A monochromator.
Absorbance data were collected at 280, 350, or 385 nm, 20 °C,
and 30000 rpm until sedimentation was complete. All experiments were
performed with at least two different protein samples. The protein
concentrations for the different samples were 9.0 and 9.6 μM
for holo wtAidB, 6.1 and 16.7 μM for apo wtAidB, 7.0 and 8.5 μM for apo mtAidB, 6.8 and 16.7 μM for reconstituted wtAidB, and 7.4 and 7.4 μM for reduced wtAidB.
All protein samples were freshly prepared in AidB buffer. For reduced wtAidB, the protein solution and the analytical ultracentrifugation
cells were handled in an oxygen-free environment (Coy Scientific chamber
under a 95% Ar/5% H2 atmosphere) until the cells were sealed
from air. Stoichiometric reconstitution experiments were performed
by incubation of apo wtAidB with free FAD at 4 °C
for 16 h. For the following sedimentation velocity experiments, the
FAD absorbance at 385 nm was simultaneously monitored along with the
absorbance at 280 nm. The density and viscosity of the buffer solution
at 20 °C were calculated with Sednterp, which uses formulae based
on a database of known values.() Hydropro
was used to calculate theoretical AidB hydrodynamic properties,() based on a hydrodynamic model created from our
AidB crystal structure. The distribution of sedimentation coefficients
was calculated by fitting sedimentation velocity data using Sedfit.() For this analysis, the continuous distribution c(s) Lamm equation model was used, which
accounts for protein diffusion.() All Sedfit
sedimentation coefficient results were confirmed by additional g*(s) analysis using DCDT+.()

Fluorescence Anisotropy
Fluorescence anisotropy experiments
were performed using a SpectraMax M5 microplate reader (Molecular
Devices) as described previously.() The
oligonucleotide consisted of a 28-mer of DNA that is known to bind
to AidB (UP element with the −35 box of the rrnB P1 promoter)
and contained a fluorescein label at the 5′-end: 5′-fluorescein-GAAAATTATTTTAAATTTCCTCTTGTCA-3′
and 5′-TGACAAGAGGAAATTTAAAATAATTTTC-3′.()Polarized fluorescence was monitored using excitation and
emission wavelengths of 495 and 538 nm, respectively. Samples of 50
nM fluorescein-labeled DNA in AidB buffer were mixed with 0–20
μM holo or apo wtAidB or apo mtAidB, in agreement with conditions used previously.() Anisotropy was measured after equilibrium was reached.
Binding curves were fit to a two-state binding model to determine Kd as follows:where r0 is the
anisotropy of labeled DNA, rmax is the
anisotropy at saturating concentrations of AidB, Kd is the dissociation constant, and [AidB] is the concentration
of AidB.

Crystallization of AidB and Data Collection in the P32 Crystal Form
wtAidB was crystallized
at 25 °C by the hanging drop vapor diffusion technique; 1 μL
of a protein solution [10 mg/mL wtAidB in 10 mM Tris
(pH 7.8), 100 mM NaCl, 10% (v/v) glycerol, and 2 mM β-ME] was
mixed with 1 μL of a precipitant solution [100 mM HEPES (pH
7.5), 20% (v/v) ethanol, and 200 mM MgCl2] on a coverslip
and sealed over 0.5 mL of precipitant solution. Trigonal crystals
with dimensions of ∼0.3 mm × 0.2 mm × 0.1 mm appeared
within 2 weeks. Crystals were flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen without
the use of additional cryoprotectants.

All crystals belonged
to space group P32. Data were collected
to 2.8 Å resolution at the Advanced Photon Source (Argonne, IL)
on beamline 24ID-C using an ADSC Q315 detector. All data were collected
at 100 K. Data were reduced in Denzo and scaled using Scalepack.() Data collection statistics are summarized in
Table S2 of the .

Determination and Refinement of the P32 Crystal Structure of AidB
The structure of wtAidB was determined by molecular replacement in Phaser() using data to 2.8 Å resolution. The search
model was the published structure of wtAidB (Protein
Data Bank entry 3DJL()) without any cofactor or water atoms.
The best rotational and translational solution had a correlation coefficient
of 26.9 with 12 wtAidB protomers per asymmetric unit,
corresponding to three tetramer units related by noncrystallographic
symmetry (NCS). The resulting model was subjected to rigid body refinement
followed by simulated annealing refinement in CNS., After the first round of refinement, Rcryst and Rfree were 31.9 and 31.5%, respectively.
Cofactors, ions, and a modest number of water molecules were added
to the model at 2.8 Å resolution followed by iterative rounds
of model building in Coot() and refinement
in PHENIX.() NCS restraints were applied
across the six wtAidB dimers in the asymmetric unit
to reduce the number of variables in the refinement as opposed to
applying NCS restraints across wtAidB tetramers.
Residues involved in crystal lattice contacts were excluded from NCS
restraints. The final cycles of refinement included TLS parametrization
using one TLS group per tetramer.() In
all chains, either residues 2–540 or residues 1–540
were observed out of a total of 541 residues. In addition, each chain
contained one molecule of FAD, one chloride ion, and a disulfide bridge
between Cys28 and Cys540. Simulated annealing composite omit maps
calculated in CNS were used to validate the model., The final structure was refined to 2.8 Å resolution with Rcryst and Rfree values
of 20.4 and 22.9%, respectively. The resulting model exhibited excellent
stereochemistry and small root-mean-square deviations from ideal values
for bond lengths and bond angles; 0.1% of the residues are in disallowed
regions of the Ramachandran plot. For most of the outliers, the backbone
is involved in FAD binding, possibly providing stabilization for less
favorable backbone conformations. Refinement statistics for the final
model are summarized in Table S3 of the . The geometry of the final model was analyzed using
MolProbity.() Figures were generated in
PyMOL.()

Results
Preparation and Spectroscopic Analysis of Deflavinated AidB
To investigate the role of the bound flavin cofactor, we generated
deflavinated AidB (apo AidB) both by a chemical method using KBr (apo wtAidB) and by creating a flavin-binding deficient triple
mutant (T185V/S191R/R324D) of AidB (apo mtAidB).
Whereas deflavination by typical treatments, such as dialysis and
chromatography,() was unsuccessful with
AidB, dilution of fresh wtAidB into a buffer containing
KBr, a chaotropic agent
that competes with the flavin for the phosphate binding site, quantitatively
yielded apo wtAidB. To generate a mutant form of
AidB with greatly reduced FAD affinity, we inserted the T185V, S191R,
and R324D mutations into the sequence of wtAidB.
All three of these residues are directly involved in FAD binding (Figure
S1 of the ). During
the size exclusion chromatography step of the protein purification
procedure, the resulting triple mutant mtAidB eluted
as two species. A minor species with a shorter retention time exhibited
a bright yellow color, indicative of bound FAD, while the major species
was colorless and appeared to be deflavinated. Because we did not
overexpress our mutant protein in an aidB knockout
strain, the minor species most likely represents endogenous AidB while
the major species is our overexpressed mutant protein.

To ensure
deflavination of all samples used in these experiments, we analyzed
both apo wtAidB and apo mtAidB by
UV–vis
spectroscopy. The characteristic FAD absorption features were not
observed in either apo wtAidB or apo mtAidB, indicating that no or very little FAD was present in either
sample (Figure S2A of the ). We then performed circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy on holo wtAidB, apo wtAidB, and apo mtAidB to assess whether the deflavinated protein was properly folded.
The CD spectra of apo wtAidB and apo mtAidB were almost identical to that of holo wtAidB,
with no deviations above background (Figure S2B of the ). Upon stoichiometric
reconstitution of apo wtAidB with FAD, the absorption
features were restored and the CD spectrum remained unchanged. Therefore,
we concluded that we achieved deflavination without major structural
perturbations and used these deflavinated species for further analyses.

wtAidB Binds FAD Tightly and Cooperatively
To investigate the interaction of FAD with wtAidB,
we measured the dissociation constant (Kd) by fluorescence quenching (Figure ). FAD
has a fluorescence emission band centered at 520 nm when it is excited
at 350 nm. When FAD binds to wtAidB, the fluorescence
emission of FAD at 520 nm is quenched by a factor of 3.1. Binding
data were fit to a Hill equation (eq ) to account
for cooperative binding. Because cooperativity implies multiple and
unequal binding equilibrium states, the resulting Kd is a rough estimation of the average dissociation constant.
We calculate an apparent Kd of 402.1 ±
35.1 nM with a Hill coefficient (h) that is greater
than 1 (1.73 ± 0.21), consistent with tight and cooperative binding
of FAD to wtAidB.

Quenching of FAD fluorescence upon binding
to apo wtAidB. Plotted is the ratio between the change
in FAD fluorescence at each wtAidB concentration
(ΔF) and the change in fluorescence at saturating wtAidB concentrations (ΔFmax) vs the concentration of wtAidB. The data were
fit to the Hill equation (eq ). Data points
and error bars represent the average of three experiments.

The Oligomeric State of AidB Is Flavin-Dependent
We
performed sedimentation velocity analytical ultracentrifugation (AUC)
experiments to determine the oligomeric state of AidB under different
conditions. Sedimentation velocity data were fit to a continuous distribution c(s) Lamm equation model using Sedfit,() yielding the experimental sedimentation coefficient
distribution. All sedimentation coefficients, which are dependent
on the mass and shape of the protein, were normalized to 20 °C
in water (s20,w). We also used Hydropro() to determine theoretical s20,w values for different oligomers of AidB based on our crystal
structure (see below). The calculated s20,w value for the putative AidB tetramer was 11.5 S. In contrast, the s20,w values for possible dimer combinations
ranged between 6.4 and 7.0 S, and the s20,w value for an AidB monomer was 4.2 S. These values were compared
to experimentally determined s20,w values,
allowing us to assign oligomeric states to the different AidB samples.

First, we collected AUC data on holo wtAidB, apo wtAidB, and apo mtAidB to assess the influence
of the FAD cofactor on the oligomeric state. For holo wtAidB, we obtained an experimental s20,w value of 11.5 S (Figure A), indicative of
a tetramer structure and in agreement with previously reported results., Trace amounts of smaller species (asterisks in Figure A) likely represent a small amount of misfolded, denatured,
or monomeric protein. In contrast, the major species of apo wtAidB exhibited an s20,w value
of 7.0 S, indicating that apo wtAidB is a dimer (Figure B). Small amounts of a tetrameric species are observed
in the sample, but the ratio of dimer to tetramer did not change with
a 2.7-fold increase in protein concentration. For apo mtAidB, we obtained an s20,w value of 7.1
S for the dominant species (Figure C), in
close agreement with the value obtained for apo wtAidB. Thus, both deflavinated AidB species are dimeric in solution,
indicating that AidB undergoes a change in the oligomerization state,
from a tetramer to a dimer, upon removal of the FAD cofactor.

Sedimentation
coefficient distributions for different AidB samples, showing the
effect of FAD on AidB oligomeric state: (A) holo wtAidB, (B) apo wtAidB, (C) apo mtAidB, (D) apo wtAidB reconstituted with 0.25 equiv
of free FAD, (E) apo wtAidB reconstituted with 0.5
equiv of free FAD, (F) apo wtAidB reconstituted with
1.0 equiv of free FAD, and (G) reduced holo wtAidB.
For panels D–F, the distribution in the top panel is calculated
from 280 nm absorbance and the distribution in the bottom from the
FAD absorbance at 385 nm. Minor species observed (marked with asterisks)
are likely the result of misfolded, denatured, or monomeric protein.

Using a stepwise reconstitution protocol of apo wtAidB with free FAD, we then tested whether the observed
changes in oligomerization state are reversible. FAD was added to
apo wtAidB at molar ratios of 0.25, 0.5, and 1.0
with respect to the concentration of the AidB monomer. The samples
were then subjected to AUC with simultaneous monitoring of the absorbance
at both 280 and 385 nm (Figure D–F).
Sedimentation coefficients of the various forms of AidB were calculated
from the absorbance at 280 nm (Figure D-F,
top traces), while the absorbance at 385 nm was used to identify FAD-containing
AidB (Figure D-F, bottom traces). Upon reconstitution
of apo wtAidB with 0.25 equiv of FAD, we observed
a species with an s20,w value of 11.5
S in the AUC experiment, accounting for 47% of the total AidB (Figure D). A second species exhibited an s20,w value of 7.0 S, accounting for the remaining AidB.
The absorbance at 385 nm was observed only in the species with an s20,w value of 11.5 S. Thus, 47% of the AidB
in solution had formed a tetramer, and all FAD was bound to this tetrameric
species; no FAD was bound to a dimeric species that was also present
in solution. When we increased the amount of FAD to 0.5 equiv relative
to the concentration of AidB monomer, 77% of AidB was present in a
tetrameric state. Again, FAD was only observed in those tetramers
(Figure E). Finally, reconstitution using
1 equiv of FAD relative to AidB monomer resulted in 95% tetramer formation,
a value similar to that observed for holo wtAidB
(Figure F). All in all, these results suggest
the presence of an FAD-dependent equilibrium between the dimeric and
tetrameric states of AidB in which binding of FAD induces a transition
to the tetramer.

We also examined whether the oxidation state
of the flavin cofactor had an effect on the oligomeric state of wtAidB. We generated wtAidB in complex
with its reduced flavin cofactor by chemical reduction of holo wtAidB with a 2-fold molar excess of sodium dithionite in
an oxygen-free environment. Reduced wtAidB exhibited
an s20,w value of 11.2 S (Figure G), indicating that reduced wtAidB
is a tetramer. We confirmed that the flavin cofactor remains in the
reduced state during the time course of an AUC experiment by collecting
UV–vis
spectra in an oxygen-free environment after the experiment, which
indicated the absence of the oxidized flavin cofactor in the sample
(data not shown). Furthermore, we monitored the absorbances at 280,
350, and 385 nm in a separate anaerobic AUC experiment. All three
traces exhibited the same profile: the absorbances at 350 and 385
nm remained the same over the time course of the experiment, indicating
that there was no change in the oxidation state of the cofactor (data
not shown). Thus, while removal of the flavin cofactor has a significant
impact on the oligomerization state of wtAidB, holo wtAidB is a tetramer regardless of the oxidation state of
the flavin cofactor.

Interaction between DNA and Apo AidB
To estimate the
effect of deflavination on the DNA binding capability of wtAidB, we measured the affinity of holo wtAidB, apo wtAidB, and apo mtAidB for DNA by fluorescence
anisotropy. In our binding studies, a specific E. coli DNA fragment (5′-GAAAATTATTTTAAATTTCCTCTTGTCA-3′)
was chosen because AidB offers enhanced protection from damage to
this DNA sequence.() We first determined
the Kd of this oligonucleotide and holo wtAidB to be 2.2 ± 0.1 μM under conditions similar
to those used previously (data not shown).() This interaction is approximately 2-fold stronger than the interaction
between holo wtAidB and a fluorescein-tagged random
25-mer of DNA used in previous experiments (Kd = 4.3 ± 0.1 μM).() We
also measured the effect of ionic strength on AidB–DNA affinity
by lowering the NaCl concentration from 300 to 100 mM. As expected,
tighter binding (Kd = 463 ± 48 nM)
between holo wtAidB and DNA is observed at the lower
salt concentration (Figure ). Under these
low-salt conditions, both forms of apo AidB have similar though nonidentical
DNA affinities compared to each other and to holo wtAidB. The Kd for the interaction of apo mtAidB and DNA is 763 ± 66 nM, and the Kd for the interaction of apo wtAidB and
DNA is 548 ± 20 nM (Figure ). Thus, although
there is a significant change to the oligomerization state upon deflavination
of AidB, we find the effect on DNA binding to be negligible.

Interaction
between a fluorescein-labeled DNA 28-mer and holo wtAidB (■), apo wtAidB (○), and apo mtAidB (●). Δr is the change
in fluorescence anisotropy observed upon addition of AidB. Dotted
lines are the curve fits according to eq .
Data points and error bars represent the average of three experiments.

P32 Crystal Structure of the AidB
Tetramer
To investigate the molecular basis of the FAD-dependent
changes in the AidB oligomerization state, we determined the crystal
structure of holo wtAidB in space group P32 to 2.8 Å resolution (Figure B–D). Unlike the previous I222 structure,() this crystal form has three tetramers of AidB
in the asymmetric unit as opposed to a single monomer. The P32 structure was determined by molecular replacement
using the I222 crystal structure.() Protomers from the two crystal structures superimpose with
a root-mean-square deviation (rmsd) of 0.34 Å over 538 Cα atoms, indicating that the structures of wtAidB protomers are unchanged. Also, the wtAidB tetramer
from the P32 structure and the AidB tetramer
generated by symmetry from the I222 structure superpose
well, with an rmsd of 0.40 Å over 2152 Cα atoms.
However, there are profound differences in the crystal packing arrangement
of these tetramers (Figure A,B). The previous
structure contained a crystal lattice in which four AidB tetramers
form another higher-order oligomer, with the AidB DNA-binding regions
lining a central pore with a 25 Å diameter (Figure A). In the P32 crystal structure,
the three tetramers in the asymmetric unit are arranged in a triangular
shape with the DNA-binding domains pointing outward and no obvious
pore (Figure B). Even when considering symmetry-related
molecules in the P32 crystal lattice,
the resulting arrangement does not reveal a central pore with which
AidB could sequester DNA (Figure S3 of the ). Thus, although the tetramer of AidB is conserved
in both crystal forms, the assembly of those tetramers into higher-order
oligomers is not.

Crystal structures of holo wtAidB. (A)
Higher-order oligomer of AidB observed in the I222
crystal structure,() with the central AidB
tetramer colored by protomer as described below. (B) Three AidB tetramers
in the asymmetric unit of the P32 crystal
structure, with the bottom AidB tetramer colored by protomer. (C)
Tetramer of holo wtAidB with protomers labeled A–D.
(D) Tetramer of holo wtAidB, rotated by 45°
with respect to panel C. Ribbons are transparent to emphasize the
bound FAD molecules and the L1′2′ loops of each protomer
(thicker ribbons, marked by arrows). The general coloring scheme was
as follows: protomers in a tetramer colored yellow (A), orange (B),
cyan (C), and blue (D). Additional tetramers are colored pink. The
putative DNA-binding regions of AidB are highlighted in purple and
magenta. Bound FAD molecules are shown in ball-and-stick representation
with carbon atoms colored green.

Structural Basis for Flavin-Dependent Oligomerization
In the P32 crystal structure, each protomer
of an AidB tetramer interacts with each of the other protomers. Thus,
there are three different types of dimers that could be formed upon
deflavination: “up and down” (AB or CD dimers), “side by side” (AC or
BD dimers), and “diagonal” (AD or BC dimers) (Figure ). To investigate which of the three possible dimers of AidB
is present after deflavination, we calculated theoretical s20,w values for each of the dimers from our
crystal structure and compared these values to the results from our
AUC experiments. We obtained theoretical s20,w values of 7.0, 6.6, and 6.4 S for the AB dimer, the AC dimer, and
the AD dimer, respectively. These values reflect their differences
in shape, as the AB dimer would be more globular while the AC and
the AD dimers would be more elongated (Figure ). Our observed s20,w values for apo wtAidB and apo mtAidB are 7.1 and 7.0 S,
respectively, consistent with the value calculated for the AB dimer
of 7.0 S.

Dimer interfaces within holo wtAidB: (A) AB dimer,
(B) AC dimer, and (C) AD dimer of wtAidB shown as
ribbons. Protomers A–D of AidB are colored yellow, orange,
blue, and cyan, respectively, with the DNA-binding regions colored
magenta and purple. Bound FAD molecules are shown in ball-and-stick
representation with carbon atoms colored green. Calculated s20,w values are given for each dimer.

In the P32 crystal
structure, the AB dimer is held together by an extensive interface,
burying a combined area of more than 6500 Å2 from
solvent (Figure A). The dimer interface features
33 hydrogen bonds and 24 salt bridges. In contrast, the AC and AD
dimer interfaces have solvent-buried areas of only 1782 and 1319 Å2, respectively (Figure B,C), providing
an additional rationale for the presence of an AB dimer in solution.
The FAD of each protomer is bound at the AB dimer interface, with
both protomers contributing to the binding of FAD (Figure A). FAD is bound by 12 hydrogen bonds from one protomer,
while the second protomer adds another two hydrogen bonds and two
salt bridges to binding of the pyrophosphate moiety and the adenine
ring (Figure A). In contrast, FAD makes no
direct contacts across the AC or AD interfaces.

Involvement of FAD and
chloride at interfaces of holo wtAidB. (A) Wall-eyed
stereoview of the bound FAD cofactor at the AB dimer interface of
AidB, with coloring as in Figure . Residues
interacting directly with the FAD are shown as sticks, colored according
to their corresponding protomer. Hydrogen bonding and ionic interactions
between the FAD cofactor and its corresponding protomer are represented
as black dashed lines, while interactions between the cofactor and
the opposite protomer are represented as magenta dashed lines. Residues
of the opposite protomer are labeled with their protomer in parentheses.
Side chains not involved in specific contacts have been truncated
for the sake of clarity. (B) Wall-eyed stereoview of the tetramer
interface and the nearby FAD cofactor, with coloring as in Figure . Residues involved in interactions at the interface
are shown as sticks, colored and labeled according to their corresponding
protomer. Water molecules are shown as red spheres. Hydrogen bonding
and ionic interactions are represented as black dashed lines. (C)
Wall-eyed stereoview of chloride ions bound at the tetramer interface,
with coloring as in Figure . Chloride ions
are shown as purple spheres. Interactions between chloride ions and
protein atoms are represented as black dashed lines. Residues are
labeled with their corresponding protomer in parentheses.

The AidB tetramer, as observed in both crystal
structures, is a dimer of dimers with three 2-fold symmetry axes (Figure C,D). The combined buried surface area between the
AB and the CD dimers is 5700 Å2, and we refer to this
interface as the “tetramer interface”. With 37 hydrogen
bonds and 10 salt bridges at this interface, the size of the buried
surface area (7.3% of the total surface area) and the number of specific
stabilizing interactions are small compared to the overall size of
the putative assembly. When the tetramer interface is treated as a
single interface between two polypeptide chains, the complexation
significance score determined by the PISA server for interface analysis() is extremely low, 0.086 on a scale from 0 (lowest
significance) to 1 (highest significance). Furthermore, the free enthalpy
of formation is calculated to be 12.3 kcal/mol for this interface,
rendering interface formation energetically unfavorable. These analyses
would suggest that the interface is not significant for complex formation
and is instead an artifact of crystal packing. Nonetheless, our AUC
data provide conclusive evidence that holo wtAidB
is indeed a tetramer in solution.

As described previously,() tetramer formation is mainly mediated by the
N-termini and the L1′2′ loops (residues 69–80)
of each protomer (Figures D and B). As the tetrameric assembly is symmetric, each set of interactions
is present four times at the interface. The L1′2′ loop
of each protomer protrudes into the opposite dimer interface, generating
an overall structure that resembles two gears interlocking (Figure D). The residues of the four loops contribute the
majority of interactions as well as 31% of the buried surface area
toward
formation of the tetramer (Figure B). In addition,
four chloride ions are present at these interfaces in the P32 structure, one for each L1′2′
loop. Each of these chloride ions is located between Arg71 of one
chain and Arg256 of the other, thereby stabilizing these two adjacent
positive charges (Figure C). The L1′2′
loops have no direct interactions with the FAD cofactors. However,
Ala74, Gln75, Gly76, and Arg77 are positioned within 13 Å of
the FAD cofactor, and a network of hydrogen bonds connects these residues
to the pyrophosphate moiety and the isoalloxazine ring system of the
cofactor (Figure B).

Discussion
The function of AidB in the adaptive response
has been a subject of debate.,,− With no catalytic activity reported outside of the
residual IVD activity, it remains unclear if the role of AidB in the
adaptive response involves the use of the bound flavin in catalysis.
The flavoprotein literature reports several cases in which flavins
play structural roles and are not directly involved in catalysis.() Glyoxylate carboligases, for example, do not
appear to use their flavins to catalyze redox chemistry but instead
display flavin-dependent transitions in the oligomerization state., For both Pseudomonas oxalaticus and E.
coli glyoxylate carboligases, deflavination leads to oligomer
disassembly and subsequent inactivation., With this
precedent in the literature, here we investigate the possibility that
FAD serves a structural role in AidB.

With the first crystal
structure of AidB showing FAD bound at the AB and the CD dimer interfaces,() it was tempting to propose that FAD might play
a structural role in the dimerization. To test this idea, deflavinated
AidB (apo AidB) was generated to measure the FAD dissocation constant
and to investigate whether AidB is monomeric or even unfolded without
flavin. Using CD spectroscopy, we found that removal of flavin does
not unfold the protein (Figure S2B of the ), and by fluorescence quenching, we measured an
apparent Kd for FAD of 402.1 ± 35.1
nM and a Hill coefficient (h) of 1.73 ± 0.21,
consistent with each FAD making extensive interactions with two AidB
protomers. With the knowledge that FAD binds tightly and cooperatively
to AidB, along with crystal structures showing FAD engaged in numerous
interactions at the AB dimer interface, AUC experiments were conducted
to determine if AidB is monomeric in the absence of flavin. Surprisingly,
we found that both apo wtAidB and apo mtAidB exhibit a dimeric state instead of the expected monomeric state,
while holo wtAidB is a tetramer.

Because the
AB interface is most directly affected by FAD binding (Figures  and A), we considered whether
the dimeric structure of apo AidB could be represented by AC or AD
dimers, such that FAD binding would yield tetramers by bringing the
A protomer of AC together with the B protomer of BD to yield ABCD
tetramers. To determine which protomers create the apo AidB dimers,
we calculated s20,w values from the crystal
structure and compared them to the experimental s20,wvalues for apo wtAidB and apo mtAidB. The excellent agreement between the calculated value
for the AB dimer (s20,w of 7.0 S) with
experiment (s20,w of 7.0 and 7.1 S) provides
strong evidence that deflavinated AidB has the form of an AB dimer.
Thus, even though the flavin cofactor appears to contribute stabilizing
interactions to the AB dimer, our data indicate that the AB dimer
interface is present even in the absence of bound flavin cofactor.
In contrast, the AC and AD interfaces are disintegrated upon deflavination
despite not being directly involved in flavin binding. Although an
unexpected result if one considers only direct FAD–protein
interactions, this result makes sense from the perspective of total
buried surface area. When a contact area is small, as is the case
for the AC and AD interfaces (1782 and 1319 Å2, respectively),
even a few changes in hydrogen bonds or packing interactions can make
a dramatic difference in interface stability, whereas when the interface
is extensive, such as the case with the AB dimer (6500 Å2), hydrogen bonds and packing interactions can be lost without
having an impact on stability.

With a rationale at hand for
why AidB is an AB dimer in the absence of FAD, we then considered
how FAD binding generates AidB tetramers when the cofactor does not
appear to be directly involved in creating the tetramer interface.
To more carefully evaluate the tetramer interface, it was important
to obtain a crystal structure in which more than one protomer was
present in the asymmetric unit. In the P32 structure presented here, the asymmetric unit contains three copies
of the tetramer interface, none of which are restrained by crystallographic
symmetry. With independent tetramers to analyze, we find that binding
of flavin to dimers of AidB could order residues that create an intricate
network of hydrogen bonds, thereby exerting a long-range stabilization
on the tetramer interface (Figure B). Importantly,
the L1′2′ loops (residues 69–80) that protrude
across the tetramer interface (Figure D) and
make the majority of contacts at the interface are involved in this
hydrogen bonding network. With so little buried surface area at the
tetramer interface, the loss or disruption of these interactions due
to the absence of FAD must be enough to shift the balance from tetramer
to dimer, while the AB interface is strong enough to exist without
FAD. Formation of the tetramer interface could also be dependent on
ionic strength, as four chloride molecules are present at the interface,
again contacting the L1′2′ loop (Figure C). AidB remains a tetramer at NaCl concentrations as low
as 100 mM (data not shown), but the instability of the protein precluded
experiments at lower salt concentrations.

Notably, while AidB
shares sequence homology and structural similarity with members of
the ACAD family such as IVD and medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase
(MCAD),,, the AidB L1′2′
loop and the DNA-binding region are not conserved in any other members
of the ACAD family. Presumably, as a result of these differences,
the structures of IVD and MCAD reveal a completely different tetrameric
arrangement compared to that observed for AidB (Figure S4 of the ). The DNA-binding domain
prevents AidB from forming the IVD-type tetramer, while the lack of
the L1′2′ loop in IVD would restrict the formation of
an AidB-like tetramer in that protein. Thus, AidB could have diverged
from the ACAD family by the addition of this DNA-binding domain, allowing
it to perform its function in the adaptive response, while the addition
of the L1′2′ β-hairpin loop would still allow
for tetramer formation. With so few alterations in the secondary structure
between the ACAD family and AidB, the adaptation of the L1′2′
loop suggests that tetramerization is important to the function of
AidB.

We also found that the transition from a tetrameric state
to a dimeric state is fully reversible and does not depend on the
flavin oxidation state, as reconstitution of apo wtAidB by oxidized FAD restores the tetrameric state and reduced holo wtAidB is a tetramer. Notably, incorporation of free FAD
into apo wtAidB is a highly cooperative process as
indicated by both AUC and fluorescence quenching studies. During stepwise
reconstitution experiments, regardless of the amount of FAD used,
all FAD-containing AidB molecules are tetramers. Although we cannot
predict the exact mechanism of tetramerization, all of these results
support a model in which binding of substoichiometric amounts of FAD
promotes tetramer formation for wtAidB. Thus, while
the individual structures of AidB protomers are likely to be retained
during deflavination, we observe a reversible and flavin-dependent
change in the oligomeric state, indicating that flavin, regardless
of oxidation state, does play a structural role in the creation of
the AidB tetramer.

Despite the switch in oligomeric state upon
deflavination, the in vitro DNA binding capability of apo AidB was
not significantly affected, with a &lt;2-fold effect compared to that
of holo AidB. These results also suggest that tetramerization is not
essential for the interaction of AidB with double-stranded DNA. In
agreement with these findings, it was recently reported that a truncated
version of AidB that contains only the DNA-binding domain, and thus
is unlikely to be tetrameric, retains the capability of binding DNA
in vitro.() In vivo, however, tetramerization
could allow AidB to bind DNA at multiple locations simultaneously.

Interestingly, the higher-order AidB oligomer observed in the I222 crystal structure and proposed to sequester and thereby
protect DNA() is not present in the P32 crystal form, nor do we observe any higher-order
AidB oligomers in our solution studies. The distinct architecture
of the crystal lattice could be due to the absence of DNA under our
crystallization conditions; however, no electron density for DNA was
observed in the previously reported structure.() More likely, AidB can crystallize in multiple lattice systems,
as is frequently observed for other proteins (for examples, see refs () or () and ()), with these two AidB
crystal structures representing two of the possible lattice systems.
While an AidB “mega complex” exists at least in the I222 crystal lattice, a role for this complex in sequestering
DNA is not supported by our studies. With respect to the idea of protection
by DNA sequestration in general, recent data from the Volkert laboratory
oppose this model.() Their data show that
deletion of AidB’s DNA-binding domain does not result in the
loss of AidB’s protective function; the protective ability
is independent of DNA binding.() Protection
in the absence of DNA binding is also inconsistent with AidB serving
as a DNA repair protein. While our studies clearly show FAD-dependent
oligomerization of AidB, they do not address whether FAD also has
a catalytic function. However, the picture of AidB that is emerging
invokes a role for the DNA-binding domain in localization of AidB
to specific genes, while the protective function appears to reside
elsewhere on the protein., Whether this protective
function resides with FAD or whether FAD was retained in the evolutionary
process solely for its ability to stabilize the AidB tetramer remains
to be determined.

Supporting Information Available
Primers for site-directed mutagenesis,
crystallographic data collection and refinement statistics, UV–vis
and CD spectra of different AidB forms, and additional figures of
the crystal structure. This material is available free of charge via
the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi201340t_si_001.pdf

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Nozomi Ando for assistance with AUC experiments
and data analysis. We thank Dr. Michael Volkert for providing information
about the ability of AidB to bind to UP elements prior to publication.
Use of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Biophysical Instrumentation
Facility for the Study of Complex Macromolecular Systems (National
Science Foundation Grant 0070319 and National Institutes of Health
Grant GM68762) is gratefully acknowledged. Use of the Advanced Photon
Source, an Office of Science User Facility operated for the U.S. Department
of Energy (DOE) Office of Science by Argonne National Laboratory,
was supported by the U.S. DOE under Contract No. DE-AC02-06CH11357.

Abbreviations
MNNGN-methyl-N′-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine

FADflavin adenine dinucleotide

ACADacyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase

IVDisovaleryl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase

Kddissociation constant

β-MEβ-mercaptoethanol

EDTAethylenediaminetetraacetic acid

hHill coefficient

NCSnoncrystallographic symmetry

CDcircular dichroism

AUCanalytical ultracentrifugation

s20,wsedimentation coefficient normalized to 20 °C and water

rmsdroot-mean-square
deviation

MCADmedium
chain acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase.

