The link between mutations in
the gene encoding α-synuclein (aS) and familial early onset
Parkinson’s disease, has stimulated a very
wide array of biophysical studies of this protein., In
aqueous solution, this 140-residue protein adopts a dynamically disordered
backbone conformation, but its 13Cα chemical
shifts also have been interpreted as being indicative of a slight
propensity to adopt α-helical torsion angles for several sections
of its backbone., Electrostatic interaction between
the, on average, 100 positively charged N-terminal residues and the
negatively charged C-terminal tail results in a hydrodynamic radius
(Rh = 28 Å) that is smaller than expected for a true random coil (∼37
Å) but larger than the value of ≈15 Å for a globular
protein with the mass of aS.

A recent study suggests that when
expressed in mammalian cells,
aS can also form a stable helical tetramer, and the same conclusion was reached for a form of aS that included
an N-terminal decapeptide extension, remaining after cleavage of its
GST tag. In both cases, aS was purified
without the heating step, usually employed in aS purification as an
effective way to precipitate the vast majority of other, folded proteins.
However, the conclusions of both studies remain the subject of much
debate.

The N-terminal 100-residue
segment of aS has a high affinity for
negatively charged lipids, and adopts an α-helical
conformation when bound to the surface of small unilamellar vesicles
(SUVs) or detergent micelles.− However, virtually all biophysical studies of aS conducted to date
have focused on bacterially overexpressed protein, which lacks post-translational
acetylation of the N-terminal residue, a modification commonly found
in mammalian proteins. Indeed, extensive
N-terminal acetylation of aS was detected when it was isolated from
erythrocytes. Considering the critical
role of the N-terminal aS residues in its interaction with phospholipids,,, it therefore is of interest to
evaluate the impact of N-terminal acetylation. A very recent study
reports that N-terminal acetylation is responsible for the formation
of folded, α-helical aS tetramers.

Selective chemical acetylation of bacterially expressed aS
is challenging
because of the many Lys amino groups in the protein. However, a recently
developed recombinant expression system includes a plasmid for overexpression of the requisite acetylation
enzyme NatB and permits bacterial expression of N-terminally acetylated
and isotopically enriched aS, needed for NMR studies. Using the recently
described “soft” purification protocol, we were unable to generate aS samples of sufficient purity
for detailed biophysical studies. In an unsuccessful attempt to detect
the putatitive tetramer, we also employed an aS construct extended
with a C-terminal His tag, allowing for effective protein purification
by using a nickel affinity column, thereby eliminating the heat denaturation
step.

Here, we report primarily on the impact of N-terminal
acetylation
on the structural and lipid binding properties of wild-type aS (lacking
the His tag), as viewed by NMR and CD spectroscopy. We evaluate the
effect of the acetylation both on chemical shifts, which are extremely
sensitive to even minute structural differences, and on 3JHN–Hα couplings that are
accurate residue-specific reporters of the distribution of the backbone
torsion angle ϕ. Our results show that in the absence of lipids
the effect of acetylation is completely restricted to the 12 N-terminal
residues. We therefore also evaluate the impact of acetylation on
a 15-residue N-terminal peptide fragment of aS by both CD and NMR
spectroscopy. Although the structural impact of acetylation remains
strictly limited to transient formation of a very short α-helical
segment at the very N-terminus of the protein, we find a strong increase
in lipid binding affinity for acetylated aS.

Materials and Methods
Protein Expression and Purification
Expression and
purification of nonacetylated wild-type (WT) aS were conducted largely
as described previously. Briefly, bacteria
were grown in M9 medium at 37 °C to an OD600 of 0.6,
and the protein production was induced by addition of 1 mM IPTG. Cells
were harvested by centrifugation 3 h later and immediately frozen
at −80 °C. Lysis of cells and initial protein purification
were achieved by several freeze–thaw cycles followed by heat
precipitation (15 min at 85 °C) in 50 mM Tris (pH 7.4) and 500
mM NaCl. Streptomycin was added at a concentration of 10 mg/mL to
partially precipitate DNA. The solution was then centrifuged at 50000g for 30 min, and the supernatant was diluted 10-fold with
50 mM Tris buffer (pH 7.4). Anion-exchange chromatography on a Q-Sepharose
column was performed, and fractions containing aS were pooled together.
As the final purification step, which principally served to remove
residual DNA, size-exclusion chromatography was performed on a Superdex
75 HiLoad 16/60 prep grade column in 20 mM Tris (pH 7.4) and 50 mM
NaCl. The protein was then dialyzed into water and lyophilized for
storage.

Expression of Acetylated Protein
N-Terminal acetylation
of WT aS was achieved by coexpression of a plasmid carrying the components
of the NatB complex with a plasmid containing the wild-type aS gene,
following the protocol described by Johnson et al. We observed that the restrictive conditions of M9 media
have a strong effect on the acetylation reaction. Essentially complete
acetylation (≥98%) was observed only when using protonated
M9 medium, supplemented with 1 g/L protonated IsoGro (Sigma, St. Louis,
MO). IsoGro is a protein hydrolysate and to some extent mimics LB
medium. In protonated M9 supplemented with MEM vitamins, but lacking
IsoGro, the extent of acetylation was only ∼85%. In fully deuterated
M9, including 99% D2O solvent, supplemented with 1 g/L
[2H,15N]IsoGro, the extent of acetylation was
only ∼40%. Notably, upon expression of aS in fully deuterated
M9 supplemented with MEM vitamins but in the total absence of IsoGro,
no significant acetylation could be detected. Unless noted otherwise,
all NMR experiments with acetylated aS were performed on 15N- and 13C-labeled aS samples, obtained using [15N,13C]IsoGro.

Expression and Purification of Acetylated His-Tagged aS
For the purposes of efficient purification while avoiding a heat
denaturation step, we used a C-terminally His-tagged aS construct.
The sequence of the protein matched the full sequence of wild-type
aS, followed by one Gly and six His residues. The gene was synthesized
and placed into the pGS21a plasmid, carrying ampicillin resistance,
by GenScript.

Escherichia coli carrying aS-His
and NatB plasmids were cultured in 1 L of fully protonated M9 medium
supplemented with [15N]IsoGro. Protein production was induced
at an OD600 of 0.6 via addition of 1 mM IPTG. Bacteria
were collected by centrifugation 3 h after induction. The cell pellet
was immediately resuspended in 20 mL of BOG buffer matching that described
by Trexler and Rhoades [100 mM HEPES,
20 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, and 0.1% BOG (pH 7.4)] with the addition
of one full Complete protease inhibitor tablet (Roche). The cell suspension
was lysed using a pressure cell, and the lysate then was cleared by
centrifugation at 50000g for 30 min. The supernatant
was loaded on a 5 mL Ni column. The column was washed with BOG buffer,
including 20 mM imidazole. Target protein was then eluted with BOG
buffer and 250 mM imidazole, yielding 10 mL of eluate. This solution
was dialyzed overnight at 4 °C into a buffer better suited for
NMR measurements [1× PBS, 5% glycerol, and 0.05% BOG (pH 7.4)].
On the basis of the UV absorption measurement, the final protein concentration
was 150 μM and the total protein yield was 22 mg. NMR measurements
were performed on the dialyzed protein after the addition of 7% D2O and a decrease in the pH to 6 by titration with a 0.1 M
HCl stock solution. The time between lowering the pH and the start
of the NMR experiments was ∼15 min.

Preparation of SUVs
Phospholipids were purchased from
Avanti Polar Lipids (Alabaster, AL) as lyophilized powders of pure
DOPC and a DOPE/DOPS/DOPC mixture with a 5:3:2 weight ratio (coagulation
reagent I). A lipid mixture that consisted of approximately 15% DOPS,
25% DOPE, and 60% DOPC was also prepared by codissolving equal amounts
of coagulation reagent I and DOPC in chloroform followed by solvent
evaporation under a stream of N2 gas. SUVs were prepared
as described previously in 20 mM sodium
phosphate buffer [pH 6, 10% (w/v)].

NMR Spectroscopy
Diffusion measurements were performed
on a 600 MHz Bruker spectrometer equipped with a triple-gradient room-temperature
probe using the water-sLED experiment with observation optimized for the methyl region of the spectrum.
The samples contained 100 μM protein and 5 mM dioxane (internal
reference) in 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 6). Experiments were
performed at 288 K using a diffusion delay of 300 ms and 1 ms x,y-gradient pulses with intensities set
to 2, 8, 10, 12, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 44, 46, and 48% of the maximal
value. An acquisition time of 200 ms was used, and 2048 scans with
a 1.6 s interscan delay were collected for each gradient strength.
Peak attenuations were measured in the methyl region of the spectrum,
by scaling relative to the spectrum collected for the weakest gradient,
using the dual-mode feature of Bruker XwinNMR, and hydrodynamic radii
were extracted using the dioxane hydrodynamic radius (2.12 Å)
as an internal reference.

For the backbone chemical shift assignments,
three-dimensional (3D) TROSY-HNCO and TROSY-HNCACB spectra were recorded
on 15N- and 13C-labeled WT aS (0.35 mM nonacetylated
aS and 0.45 mM N-terminally acetylated aS) at 288 K, using a 600 MHz
Bruker Avance II spectrometer running Topspin 2.1 and equipped with
a z-axis gradient TCI cryogenic probe. All data were
collected with two scans per free induction decay. The HNCO spectra
comprised 70* × 200* × 575* complex points, for acquisition
times of 70.7, 150, and 76.7 ms in the 13C, 15N, and directly detected 1H dimensions, respectively.
An acquisition time in the 15N dimension much longer than
the 1JNC′ refocusing
INEPT delay, typically around 30 ms, was achieved by using the mixed-time
(MT) evolution approach without requiring
additional pulses. With an interscan delay of 0.8 s, the total measuring
time for each HNCO spectrum was approximately 1.5 days.

The
TROSY-HNCACB spectra were collected using the acquisition parameters
listed above in the 15N and 1H dimensions. The 13C chemical shift was recorded using a 28 ms constant-time
evolution (212 complex pairs of data points) to remove the 1JCC coupling and achieve an increased
resolution. All the TROSY-HNCACB data were collected using 15% sparse
sampling, with the sampling schedule in the two indirect dimensions
generated randomly. The final spectra were reconstructed on a Linux
computer containing dual six-core Xeon processors using 400 iterations
of the recently described IST method at
a threshold value of 0.98. The interscan delay was set to 1.4 s, and
the total measuring time for each experiment was approximately 24
h. Standard data processing and most analyses were conducted using
NMRPipe. Backbone assignments were traced
using SPARKY.

The 3JHN–Hα couplings were measured at
288 K from the cross-peak intensity modulation
in a series of constant-time 1H–15N HMQC
spectra, recorded at 900 MHz. In total,
nine constant-time delays with durations of 50, 60, 75, 95, 140, 180,
210, 240, and 280 ms were used, which samples a J modulation curve with up to two zero crossing points for the majority
of residues. Depending on the length of the JHH modulation time, the data matrix size ranges from 79* ×
1024* in the 15N and 1H dimensions for the shortest
constant-time duration to 579* × 1024* points for the longest
constant-time duration, with a 103.2 ms 1H acquisition
time in all the experiments. Cross-peaks were picked from the spectrum
with the longest 15N acquisition time and therefore the
highest resolution, unless it was near the zero crossing point and
the peaks were too weak for a reliable determination of the peak positions,
in which case the next best resolved spectrum was used. With the peak
positions accurately determined, the autoFit.tcl routine in the NMRPipe
software package was applied to extract
the peak intensity in each spectrum, keeping the position fixed. Nonlinear
least-squares fitting of the J-modulated peak intensities
to eq 4 of ref () was performed to obtain the 3JHH couplings.

Two-dimensional (2D) TOCSY and NOESY spectra were
recorded at 278
K on peptide samples containing 1.6 mM nonacetylated and 1.0 mM acetylated
N-terminal 15-residue peptides, both amidated at V15, using a 900
MHz Bruker Avance III spectrometer with a cryogenic probe. For the
NOESY spectra, a mixing time of 300 ms was used. In all the spectra,
512* × 2048* complex points in the indirect and direct dimensions
were collected for acquisition times of 69.6 and 227 ms. The interscan
delay was set to 1.5 s, with four and eight scans per free induction
decay, yielding total measuring times of 2 and 4.5 h for the 2D TOCSY
and NOESY spectra, respectively.

TROSY-HSQC spectra were recorded
at 1H frequencies of
500 and 800 MHz on Bruker spectrometers equipped with cryogenic probes.
At 500 MHz, 200* × 560* complex points were collected for acquisition
times of 165 (t1) and 80 ms (t2). At 800 MHz, 300* × 900* complex points were collected
for acquisition times of 154 (t1) and
80 ms (t2).

CD Measurements
All CD measurements were taken at 20
°C, using a 1 mm path-length cuvette. Samples contained 20 mM
sodium phosphate (pH 6), 150 mM NaCl buffer, and either 100 μM
15-residue peptides or 10 μM full-length protein.

Fibrillation Experiments
Experiments were performed
using a Tecan Infinite 200 Pro multimode microplate reader. The sample
volume was 200 μL per well. Sample conditions were as follows:
200 μM WT aS, either acetylated or nonacetylated, PBS buffer,
pH 7.4. The plate was shaken at 88 rpm and 37 °C. A 1 mm diameter
glass bead was placed into each sample well to accelerate fibrillation.
Fibril formation was followed using the fluorescence of thioflavin
T (ThT), which was added at a concentration of 10 μM to all
samples. The instrument took fluorescence readings of all samples
at regular intervals of 50 min for a total duration of 92 h. The excitation
wavelength was set to 415 nm, and the ThT emission was measured at
480 nm. Four samples for acetylated and three for nonacetylated aS
were measured.

Results and Discussion
The recently introduced bacterial
expression system coexpresses
the fission yeast NatB enzyme complex together with the protein of
interest. It provides an effective method for obtaining N-terminal
acetylation of proteins such as aS, which starts with a Met-Asp pair
at its N-terminus. Using the regular
bacterial strain BL21(DE3), we obtained yields of acetylated WT aS
that were comparable to amounts normally harvested for nonacetylated
protein (∼20 mg/L) when expressed in minimal media, required
for incorporation of 13C and 15N stable isotopes.
With no resonances visible in the 15N–1H HSQC NMR spectrum at the positions of the nonacetylated protein,
levels of acetylation were established to be &gt;98%. However, when
an
attempt was made to express perdeuterated aS, which can generate extremely
well resolved 15N–1H correlation spectra
for aS, the level of acetylation was
at most 40% (for more details, see ). All results presented in this study therefore are
for fully protonated material.

Effect of Acetylation on NMR Characteristics of aS
A comparison of the 15N–1H HSQC NMR
spectra of N-terminally acetylated and nonacetylated WT aS reveals
the impact of acetylation to be strictly limited to the first 12 residues
of the protein, and both line widths and resonance positions are essentially
indistinguishable for the remainder of the protein, despite the very
high precision at which these values were recorded (Figure ). Backbone assignments (Tables S1 and S2 of the ) were obtained from nonuniformly
sampled HNCACB 3D spectra. Evaluation of the actual chemical shift
values in terms of secondary structure propensity, using the latest
sets of sequence, pH, and temperature correction factors, shows root-mean-square differences (rmsds) from
random coil values that are even considerably smaller (Figure S2 of
the ) than previously
reported for both aS and other intrinsically unstructured proteins. The newer chemical shift evaluation method of
Camilloni et al. identifies secondary
structure by using all available backbone chemical shifts as input
parameters. With this program, δ2D, the population of α-helix
for aS in free aqueous solution is estimated to be even lower than
initially deduced from older, less advanced
approaches (Figure ). This result is consistent
with the random coil characteristics of its CD spectrum recorded in
the absence of lipids (Figure A). However,
δ2D indicates a small but distinct increase in the population
of α-helix near the N-terminus for the acetylated form of the
protein (Figure ). Although the effect of
N-terminal acetylation on the chemical shifts of residues 6–12
rapidly decreases with the distance from the N-terminus (Figure ), it is rather remarkable that the effect of this
small covalent modification in a disordered protein propagates as
far as residue 12, an effect explained by the cooperative formation
of a transient short α-helix of the N-terminal residues.

Impact of N-terminal
acetylation on the NMR spectrum of aS. (A)
Overlay of a small expanded region of the 800 MHz HSQC spectra of
nonacetylated (black) and acetylated (red) aS. The pronounced change
in the peak position for Ser9 is marked with an arrow. For the overlay
of full spectra, see Figure S1 of the . Differences in chemical shifts in parts per million
between acetylated and nonacetylated aS for different backbone atoms
as a function of residue number: (B) 13Cα, (C) 13Cβ, (D) 13C′,
(E) 15N, and (F) 1HN. Pairwise rmsds
calculated over residues 13–140 are 0.008 ppm (13Cα), 0.007 ppm (13Cβ), 0.005 ppm (13C′), 0.019 ppm (15N),
and 0.002 ppm (1HN).

Population of α-helix for nonacetylated (black)
and acetylated
(red) WT aS as derived from the measured 13Cα, 13Cβ, 13C′, 15N, and 1HN chemical shifts using δ2D.

CD data for the interaction of nonacetylated (black) and
acetylated
(red) WT aS with lipid vesicles. (A) Solid lines represent CD spectra
obtained at a 75:1 lipid:protein molar ratio. Dashed lines show CD
spectra in the absence of lipids. (B) Graph showing the change in
CD signature at 222 nm, reflecting the amount of α-helical structure,
as a function of lipid:protein molar ratio. Buffer conditions were
20 mM phosphate (pH 6) and 150 mM NaCl. Measurements were performed
on samples containing 10 μM protein. The lipid consisted of
30% DOPS, 50% DOPE, and 20% DOPC.

Remarkably, there is no discernible impact of the
acetylation on
the chemical shifts of the acidic C-terminal tail of the protein,
despite the decrease in positive charge and increase in helical population
at the N-terminus. An interaction between the net positively charged
N-terminus and the acidic C-terminal region of the protein was previously
established on the basis of paramagnetic relaxation experiments and
was postulated to be primarily electrostatic in nature. The presence
of such a long-range interaction is also reflected in a hydrodynamic
volume that is ∼2.3 times smaller than expected for a true
random coil of 140 residues., The absence of any
detectable chemical shift perturbation for residues 13–140
upon losing the positive N-terminal charge indicates that the acetylation
has no discernible effect on the time-averaged backbone angles of
these residues, highlighting the absence of specific interactions
between the C-terminal region and the N-terminus. However, very weak,
nonspecific interactions between the N-terminal and C-terminal regions
are reflected in a slight decrease in the global electrostatic compaction
of the protein, as indicated by a small ∼1.5% decrease in the
rate of translational diffusion upon acetylation of WT aS (Figure ). The 1.5% decrease in translational diffusion
corresponds to a 1.5% (0.5 Å) increase in the hydrodynamic radius
and requires only extremely small (≪1°) changes in the
time-averaged backbone torsion angle distributions. Therefore, the
absence of any significant difference in backbone torsion angles between
the acetylated and nonacetylated forms of the protein, deduced from
the indistinguishable chemical shifts, is not inconsistent with the
slight difference in the hydrodynamic radii of the two forms of the
protein.

Linearized (logarithmic) PFG diffusion plots for nonacetylated
(black) and acetylated (red) WT aS. Proton peak intensities were observed
in the methyl region. Dashed lines represent linear fits to the symbols
of the matching color.

Next to chemical shifts, 3JHN–Hα couplings are particularly reliable
quantitative reporters of the
time-averaged distribution of the backbone torsion angles, ϕ. For folded proteins with known structures, the
quantitative relation between these torsion angles and 3JHN–Hα couplings is defined
by the empirical Karplus equation. Recent work has demonstrated that
this equation is remarkably robust and typically is limited by the
accuracy of the atomic coordinates that define the ϕ angles
and by small out-of-peptide-plane deviations of the amide protons. When atomic coordinates were used that had been
refined by the use of residual dipolar couplings, the level of agreement
between 3JHN–Hα couplings and backbone torsion angles decreased to within the 0.35
Hz uncertainty of the measurement, indicating that no correction for
amino acid type (excluding Gly) or H-bonding is needed. We therefore measured a nearly complete set
of 3JHN–Hα couplings
in both acetylated and nonacetylated aS. With the exception of small
decreases in 3JHN–Hα for the first few residues in the protein upon acetylation (Table
S4 of the ), the
values measured for the two forms of the protein are essentially indistinguishable
(rmsd of 0.05 Hz).

It is interesting to note, however, that
the different residue
types show distinct clustering of their 3JHN–Hα values (Table S4 of the ), with the smallest values
found for Ala residues (⟨3JHN–Hα⟩ = 5.64 ± 0.26 Hz, excluding
C-terminal A140) and the largest values found for β-branched
residues such as Val (⟨3JHN–Hα⟩ = 7.60 ± 0.29 Hz), reflecting the natural tendencies
of these amino acids to populate more helical or extended regions
of Ramachandran space in intrinsically unstructured peptides and proteins.
The first six residues of acetylated aS show decreases relative to
these random coil values that fall outside the standard deviation,
again indicative of α-helix. Residues following G7 do not show
such an effect.

Effect of Acetylation on an N-Terminal 15-Residue Peptide Fragment
As the impact of acetylation appears to be restricted to the first
few residues of aS, we also studied the synthetic 15-residue N-terminal
fragment of the protein in the absence and presence of N-terminal
acetylation. Because of their much smaller number of residues, these
peptides exhibit far less 1H resonance overlap than the
full-length protein and make it possible to study their structure
by the conventional 2D NOESY method. With the exception of residues
13–15, proximate to the C-terminus of the peptide, the chemical
shifts of the two peptides match those seen in the corresponding full-length
proteins very closely, lending validity to the study of these peptides.
The nonacetylated peptide shows essentially random coil characteristics.
Its 2D NOESY spectrum lacks medium-range (i, i + n; 2 ≤ n ≤
5) NOEs at the lowest contour level. By contrast, weak dαβ(i,i+3), dαN(i,i+3), and dαN(i,i+4) NOEs point to α-helical character for
the first six residues of the acetylated peptide (Figure S3 of the ). However, upon quantitative
comparison of the intraresidue dαN(i,i) and sequential dαN(i–1,i) NOE intensities, these ratios remain considerably below unity.
As pointed out previously,, the dαN(i,i)/dαN(i–1,i) NOE intensity ratio is very sensitive to the value of
the ψ angle of residue i – 1 and ranges
from ∼6 for α-helix to ∼0.25 for β-sheet.
Ratios observed in the absence of acetylation are very close to values
of ∼0.35, typical of fully disordered proteins. A decrease
of ∼50% in the intensity of the sequential dαN(i–1,i) NOEs for residues V3 and F4 increases the NOE intensity ratio to
&gt;0.5 (Figure ), consistent with a shift
to
an increased population of helical backbone angles compared to random
coil. However, the fact that dαN(i,i)/dαN(i–1,i) ratios remain much
below unity clearly indicates that the population of α-helical
conformations remains low, fully consistent with the analysis of chemical
shifts, described above.

Ratios of intraresidue to sequential Hα–HN NOE intensities, dαN(i,i)/dαN(i–1,i), for the first 10
residues of the nonacetylated (black) and acetylated (red) 15-residue
N-terminal peptides. The ratio for residue G7 was divided by 2, and
the ratio for L8 was multiplied by 2 to roughly account for the presence
of two Hα protons on G7. Ratios for the full-length,
nonacetylated protein can be found in ref ().

Only a very slight increase in α-helicity
is observed in
the CD spectrum of the full aS protein upon acetylation (Figure A), because the CD signal remains dominated by the
random coil character of the ∼95% of the chain that is not
impacted by the N-terminal acetylation. However, upon comparison of
the CD spectra of the N-terminal 15-residue peptides, an increase
in α-helical character is clearly observed upon acetylation
(Figure S4 of the ). Consistent with the NMR results, the degree of α-helicity
remains low, however.

Estimated Increase in the Helicity of the First Five Residues
N-Terminal acetylation is known to stabilize α-helices., For the first few residues of N-terminally acetylated aS in the
absence of lipids and detergents, comparison of 3JHN–Hα couplings as well as 13Cα and 13Cβ chemical
shifts with those of the nonacetylated protein shows a small increase
in the propensity for α-helical structure. Acetylation results
in an ∼0.5 ppm increase in the 13Cα chemical shifts for the first five residues and progressively smaller
increases for the following few residues. Assuming an ∼3 ppm
secondary chemical shift for an ideal α-helix, this indicates
an ∼17% increase in the α-helical population for the
first five residues.

Upon acetylation, 3JHN–Hα decreases by ∼0.5 Hz for residues
3–5, whereas the value for K6 (6.1 Hz) falls about two standard
deviations or 0.5 Hz below the values observed for Lys residues in
the remainder of the chain for both forms of the protein (Table S4
of the ). With an
average 3JHN–Hα of 4 Hz expected for an ideal α-helix and a 3JHN–Hα of ≈7 Hz for random
coil, the approximate increase in the level of α-helical conformation
is also estimated to be ∼17%.

CD measurements show a
markedly stronger helical signature for
the acetylated N-terminal 15-residue peptide than for the nonacetylated
peptide (Figure S4 of the ). If this increase is attributed solely to a change in helical content,
then the average increase in helicity is ∼6% (according to
JFit). Considering that on the basis of our NMR chemical shift perturbation
this change can be attributed to the first five residues, the 6% increase
in average helicity corresponds to an ∼18% increase in helicity
for these five residues.

Thus, the three independent indicators
of helical propensity all
indicate an increase in helicity for the first five residues of ∼17%,
a number that is slightly larger than the smoothed 11% increase reported
by the δ2D program of Camilloni et al., which takes into account all backbone secondary chemical shifts.

Impact of Acetylation on Lipid Binding
Interactions
between aS and a variety of different types of lipid vesicles have
previously been studied by optical spectroscopic methods, in particular
CD,, as well as by both continuous wave and pulsed
EPR,,− and solution NMR, spectroscopies. All of these
techniques indicate a transition from a disordered to an α-helical
state upon lipid binding, with some debate remaining about whether
the first ∼100 residues form a single contiguous helix or whether
aS adopts a flexibly tethered two-helix structure, as was seen in
the presence of small SDS micelles., The various
studies unanimously agreed on the important role of negative membrane
charge in the interaction, with the highest affinity for lipids with
phosphatidylglycerol and phosphatidylserine headgroups and a very
low affinity for neutral, zwitterionic phosphatidylcholine lipids,
an observation solidified by fluorescence correlation spectroscopy.

Even when using very dilute suspensions
of negatively charged small unilamellar vesicles (SUVs), corresponding
to a lipid:protein molar ratio as low as unity, significant attenuation
of NMR resonance intensity of the N-terminal residues of aS was observed. Remarkably, the attenuated N-terminal HSQC cross-peaks
are not shifted relative to those seen in lipid-free samples and show
an only very small degree of line broadening, indicating a slow exchange
process between the free, disordered state and the lipid-bound state.
The absence of attenuation seen for the C-terminal residues indicates
that these residues retain their dynamically disordered, random coil
character even when the corresponding N-terminal amides have converted
to an NMR-invisible “dark state”, induced by lipid binding.,

Here, we evaluated the impact of N-terminal acetylation of
aS on
lipid binding by both CD and NMR spectroscopy. CD measurements were
taken under conditions of 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 6) and
150 mM NaCl at 20 °C, using SUVs composed of 30% DOPS, 50% DOPE,
and 20% DOPC. This commercially available lipid mixture is convenient
for generating highly stable and reproducible SUVs and includes the
headgroups of some of the most abundant phospholipids found in synaptic
vesicles. At an intermediate lipid:protein
molar ratio of 75, the CD spectra show a substantially higher α-helical
content for acetylated aS (Figure A). A full
titration curve, probing the effect of lipid binding on helicity over
a wide range of lipid:protein stoichiometries, indicates that acetylated
aS has a roughly 2-fold higher affinity for the negatively charged
lipid vesicles than does nonacetylated protein (Figure B).

NMR experiments were performed under the same buffer
conditions
but at 15 °C, with lipid vesicles composed of 15% DOPS, 25% DOPE,
and 60% DOPC. Vesicles with lower charges were used because this decreases
their affinity for aS and thereby weakens the effect of crowding on
their surface when aS binds to them. These lower-affinity vesicles
are less suitable for CD measurements because of interference from
SUV scattering at high lipid concentrations but are well suited for
NMR measurements. As one can see in Figure , the general shape of the attenuation profile observed for the nonacetylated
protein shows the same stepwise attenuation profile as previously
reported by Bodner et al. for the vesicles carrying a higher charge
density. Remarkably, however, the acetylated
aS shows a distinct additional attenuation for the first 12 residues,
followed by the transition to the characteristic flat profile for
residues 25–90 (Figure ). The same
average attenuation of residues 25–90 is achieved for acetylated
aS at 2-fold lower lipid concentration, compared to that of the nonacetylated
protein. This observation is consistent with the ∼2-fold higher
lipid affinity of acetylated aS, indicated by the CD measurements.

Ratios
of WT aS TROSY-HSQC peak heights in the presence (I) and absence (Io) of lipids.
Data from the following three samples are presented: acetylated aS
at a lipid:protein (L:P) ratio of 22 (red circles), nonacetylated
aS at an L:P ratio of 22 (black triangles), and nonacetylated aS at
an L:P ratio of 44 (black circles). Experiments were performed on
200 μM protein samples in 20 mM phosphate (pH 6) and 150 mM
NaCl buffer at 15 °C on an 800 MHz spectrometer. The lipid consisted
of 15% DOPS, 25% DOPE, and 60% DOPC.

Effect of Acetylation on aS Fibrillation
The impact
of N-terminal acetylation on the fibril forming propensity of aS,
in the absence of lipids, was investigated by measurement of the fibrillation
kinetics of the two forms of the protein, using a Tecan Infinite 200
Pro multimode microplate reader to monitor ThT fluorescence. Readings
were taken automatically every 50 min for 92 h under conditions of
continuous agitation at 37 °C, using four and three separate
samples for the acetylated and nonacetylated aS, respectively. The
amount of data available so far remained limited by the amounts of
available protein and showed some spread in both the lag time and
growth rate of the fibrils (Figure S5 of the ). However, these data point to the absence of any
significant impact of N-terminal acetylation on either the lag phase
or the fibril elongation rate. Indeed, under our conditions, both
acetylated and nonacetylated aS showed an ∼20 h lag phase and
an ∼22 h fibril elongation phase. The absence of any effect
on fibrillation could not be anticipated considering that mutations
quite close to the N-terminus of the nonacetylated protein, such as
V16P, have been reported to inhibit aS fibrillation substantially. On the other hand, this absence of any effect
appears to be consistent with the notion that the structural changes
induced by acetylation are very remote from the hydrophobic NAC region
of aS (residues 61–95), the main region implicated in aS fibrillation.

Concluding Remarks
The vast majority of the very wide
array of biophysical measurements
reported to date on the structural characterization of aS as well
as its interaction with lipids have been taken on bacterially expressed
protein that lacks the N-terminal acetylation, a post-translational
modification that is present to a very high degree in mammalian cells.
An initial report on mammalian-expressed aS suggested the protein
exists as an α-helical tetramer, a finding subsequently attributed to its N-terminal acetylation but disputed by a number of other research groups.

All of the work described above involving
full-length protein was
performed on aS that underwent a heating step during purification.
We tried to replicate the procedure followed by Trexler and Rhoades but failed to isolate the putative tetrameric
form of the protein, possibly because of difficulties in separating
it from a host of other proteins. Although the isolated material showed
considerable α-helical character as judged by CD, it was heterogeneous
in mass and showed precipitation after the sample had been heated
to 90 °C, characteristic of irreversible denaturation. To work
around these difficulties with aS purification under nondenaturing
conditions, we resorted to adding a C-terminal His tag to aS. Using
this new construct, we were able to perform gentle purification and
obtain highly pure N-terminally acetylated protein (see  for details). The resulting protein
showed the same dynamic disorder that was seen for nonacetylated or
acetylated monomeric protein, despite the absence of a heat denaturation
step and very mild conditions used during purification. When using
carefully matched buffer conditions, the only differences between
the NMR spectra of the gently purified acetylated His-tagged aS and
acetylated WT aS, lacking the His tag but purified using heat denaturation,
are localized to the C-terminal residues, presumably reflecting the
effect of a weak electrostatic interaction between the mostly positively
charged His tag (at pH 6.0) and the mostly negatively charged C-terminal
residues (Figure ). It is conceivable that
the C-terminal His tag prevents the formation of the putative tetramer.
However, this scenario seems unlikely because in the proposed structure
of the tetramer the C-terminal region of aS remains disordered.

Overlay of small expanded regions of the TROSY-HSQC spectra
of
N-terminally acetylated, C-terminally His-tagged aS after soft purification
(red) and of acetylated WT aS that had undergone heating during purification
(black), recorded under matching buffer conditions [1× PBS, 5%
glycerol, 0.05% BOG, and 7% D2O (pH 6)]. Spectra were acquired
on a 500 MHz spectrometer equipped with a cryoprobe. The signature
position of the S9 peak indicates that both proteins are indeed N-terminally
acetylated. The only peaks that show small chemical shift differences
between the two samples are in the acidic C-terminal region (e.g.,
S129) and result from the direct effect of the His tag. The full spectrum
is shown in Figure S6 of the .

In the absence of lipids, the N-terminal acetylation
of aS induces
a modest ∼17% population of α-helical conformation for
the first six residues. However, the exchange between α-helix
and random coil takes place on a time scale faster than ∼1
μs, as judged by the absence of significant line broadening
for these N-terminal residues. In the absence of lipids, the chemical
shifts of only the very N-terminal residues of aS are visibly impacted
by the acetylation and no significant perturbations can be seen in
the NMR spectrum beyond residue 12. Considering that the NMR resonances
are exquisitely sensitive to the distribution of backbone torsion
angles sampled by the molecule, this strongly suggests the absence
of any specific interactions of other aS residues with this transient
small N-terminal helical segment. At first sight, the very small,
∼1.5% increase in the hydrodynamic radius of aS upon acetylation
might appear to contradict the absence of long-range interactions.
However, it appears that the 20% lower hydrodynamic radius of aS compared
to a total random chain of the same length simply reflects a small
electrostatic compaction caused by the opposite net charge between
the 40 C-terminal residues and the 60 N-terminal residues. This charge
difference, and thereby the compaction, is reduced by the removal
of one elementary positive charge upon acetylation of the N-terminal
amino group.

The distinct increase in lipid affinity seen for
N-terminally acetylated
aS, which extends well beyond the 20 N-terminal residues as judged
by both CD and NMR (Figures  and ), is perhaps surprising. In fact, one might have expected
that the removal of the N-terminal positive charge associated with
acetylation of the amino group would slightly decrease the affinity
of aS for negatively charged lipid surfaces. Instead, we observed
that the minor change in the protein’s chemical structure upon
N-terminal acetylation, and its associated transient ∼17% α-helical
character of the first few residues in free solution, strongly impacts
the lipid binding properties of the entire protein. This observation
points to a special and essential role for the N-terminus of the protein
in initiating membrane binding, prior to elongation of the bound section
of the protein beyond its dozen immediate N-terminal residues. This
“initiation–elongation” model of binding is consistent
with the stepwise decrease in NMR resonance attenuation seen in the
presence of small quantities of SUVs when moving farther from the
N-terminus and explains the strong increase
in the level of lipid binding upon acetylation. Indeed, with the helical
structure of aS in the lipid-bound state being well established, preformation
of helical structure at the N-terminus in aqueous solution will significantly
increase the on rate for binding of aS to lipid, while not significantly
affecting the off rate. This kinetic change therefore results in an
increase in lipid binding affinity. The distinct steps in the attenuation
profile as a function of distance from the N-terminus (Figure ) point to significant kinetic barriers between
aS free in solution and the cases where either just the first dozen
residues are lipid-bound or the entire N-terminal 100-residue region
of the protein interacts with the membrane. A special role in initiating
lipid binding has already been ascribed to the N-terminal residues., Our current data for acetylated aS amplify this role considerably
and suggest that N-terminal acetylation of the protein is critical
for the study of its interaction with lipid vesicles.

Supporting Information Available
Overlay of 800 MHz HSQC spectra
of nonacetylated and acetylated aS; plots of the differences between
chemical shifts measured for nonacetylated aS and random coil values
predicted on the basis of the work of Kjaergaard et al. for five nuclei;
comparison of small expanded regions of the 900 MHz NOESY spectra
of the nonacetylated and acetylated 15-residue N-terminal fragment
of aS; CD spectra of nonacetylated and acetylated 15-residue peptides;
changes in thioflavin T fluorescence as a function of time in the
course of fibrillation experiments for nonacetylated and acetylated
aS; overlay of 500 MHz HSQC spectra of acetylated wild-type aS and
acetylated His-tagged aS, purified under soft conditions; tables of 13Cα, 13Cβ, 13C′, 15N, and 1HN chemical
shift assignments measured for acetylated and nonacetylated aS at
15 °C and pH 6; a table of chemical shifts predicted on the basis
of the work of Kjaergaard et al. for WT aS at 15 °C and pH 6;
and a table of 3JHN–Hα couplings for the first 15 residues of acetylated and nonacetylated
aS and the average 3JHN–Hα values for the residue types involved. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi300642h_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Daniel Mulvihill (University of Kent, Kent, U.K.)
for the N-acetylation B complex construct, Dr. Sven Hyberts for software
modules used to allow processing of NUS 3D NMR spectra, Dr. Jennifer
Lee [National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI), National Institutes
of Health] for use of her multimode microplate reader, Dr. Zhiping
Jiang for help with setting up fibrillation experiments, and Drs.
Rodney L. Levine and Jue Chen (NHLBI) and Jennifer Lee for helpful
discussions and suggestions.

Abbreviations
aSα-synuclein

BOGoctyl β-d-glucopyranoside

NACnon-amyloid component

CDcircular dichroism

DOPC1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine

DOPEdioleoylphosphatidylethanolamine

DOPS1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-l-serine

HSQCheteronuclear single-quantum correlation

PFGpulsed field gradient

ThTthioflavin T

TROSYtransverse relaxation-optimized
spectroscopy

NOEnuclear Overhauser effect

rmsdroot-mean-square difference

WTwild type, lacking the C-terminal His tag.

