One of the
building blocks of
DNA, 2′-deoxythymidine 5′-monophosphate (dTMP), is synthesized
from 2′-deoxyuridine 5′-monophosphate (dUMP) and (6R)-N5,N10-5,10-methylene-5,6,7,8-tetrahydrofolate (CH2THF)
by thymidylate synthase (TS). Flavin-dependent TSs (ThyX), encoded
by thyX genes, have been identified in microbes,
including many pathogens associated with diseases such as tuberculosis,
anthrax, pneumonia, diarrhea, and syphilis.− ThyX catalyzes the reaction shown in Scheme . Crystal structures of oxidized ThyX have been
determined− from Thermotoga maritima, Paramecium bursaria chlorella virus-1, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Corynebacterium glutamicum, and Helicobacter pylori. ThyX is a tetramer with each of the four active sites being formed
by the juncture of three of the four subunits. dUMP binds in a pocket
protected from the solvent by a protein loop (residues 87–91, T. maritima numbering), and the uracil ring of dUMP stacks
on the si-face of the isoalloxazine of FAD with its
C6 position next to N5 of the flavin (Figure ). Structures of the T. maritima enzyme with bound CH2THF and folinic acid have been determined,
showing that dUMP and folates bind to sites separated by the isoalloxazine,
an arrangement that does not allow carbon transfer. Thus, catalytically
relevant structures with deoxynucleotide and folate have not yet been
determined.

Overall Reaction
Catalyzed by ThyX
Active site of ThyX from T. maritima. The crystal structure (Protein Data Bank entry 1o26) shows dUMP (green
carbons) bound to the active site, stacking directly below the isoalloxazine
of the flavin (yellow, of course). The different subunits that make
up the active site are colored differently. The residues mutated in
this work are also shown (white carbons); others have been omitted
for the sake of clarity.

Synthesizing dTMP from dUMP and CH2THF is complex.
The
well-studied TSs, which do not use a prosthetic group, accomplish
the synthesis through a sequence of several steps: activation of C5 of dUMP as a nucleophile so that it can
react with CH2THF, activation of the methylene carbon of
CH2THF to its electrophilic iminium form, transfer of methylene
from CH2THF to the nucleotide, and reduction by THF of
the transferred carbon to form the methyl of dTMP (summarized in Figure
S1 of the ). ThyX
accomplishes the same synthesis using the same substrates but has
inserted a flavin prosthetic group into the reaction sequence in a
way that is not yet fully understood. The analogy of the classic TS
has guided investigations into the mechanism of ThyX. It is especially
interesting to learn whether ThyX accomplishes particular chemical
tasks in the same way as the classic TS and to determine whether similar
intermediates are formed.

A key catalytic step in the classic
TS is the activation of dUMP
by the Michael-like addition of a cysteine residue so that the pyrimidine
becomes nucleophilic. No similar cysteine
residue is found in ThyX. Several mechanisms have been proposed for
the activation of dUMP, generally invoking an alternate nucleophile
(e.g., see ref ()). We propose here that dUMP is not activated by covalent catalysis
but instead is activated by the polarization of the uracil moiety
upon binding and that carbon transfer occurs before oxidation of the
flavin. This proposal is based on transient kinetic studies (both
stopped-flow and chemical quenching) using the natural ThyX–substrate
system and from the changes caused by using mutated enzymes, substrate
analogues, or an artificial flavin. This proposal is consistent with
a number of published studies− and is supported by the recently
reported trapping of an intermediate.

Experimental Procedures
Materials
dUMP, dTMP, 5F-dUMP, sodium
dithionite, EDTA,
formaldehyde, and l-cysteine were purchased from Sigma Chemical
Co. dUMPS was from Axxora, LLC. CH2THF was kindly provided
by R. Moser from Merk-Eprova AG. Protocatechuate dioxygenase, purified
from Pseudomonas cepacia DB01, was a gift from D.
P. Ballou (University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI). Prepurified dry argon from Matheson Coleman and Bell was
passed through a column of OxiClear (LabClear) to remove traces of
oxygen.

WT ThyX from T. maritima (TM 0449)
and five different variants containing substitutions S88A, R90A, R174A,
Q75A, and Y91A were expressed with an N-terminal His tag in Escherichia coli BL21 grown in terrific broth, induced by
adding l-(+)-arabinose, and
purified with TALON metal affinity resin (Clontech). ThyX was purified
further by being incubated at 65 °C for 15 min, followed by removal
of the precipitate by centrifugation for 10 min at 23400 g.

Preparation of Enzyme for Reactions
Enzyme was prepared
for oxidative half-reactions by being exchanged into 0.1 M Tris-HCl
(pH 8.0) with 1 mM EDTA using Bio-Rad PD10 desalting columns. Enzyme
solutions were made anaerobic in glass
tonometers fitted with a cuvette (for rapid reaction experiments)
or in anaerobic cuvettes with side arms (for slow scanning experiments).
A syringe containing ∼6 mM dithionite was attached, and the
enzyme was titrated to complete reduction.

Substrates
For
rapid reaction experiments, 300 μM
deoxynucleotide (dUMP, the phosphothioate analogue dUMPS or the fluorinated
analogue 5F-dUMP) was added to the reduced enzyme before the stopped-flow
instrument was loaded and reactions were initiated by the rapid mixing
of CH2THF (400 μM). For slow reactions, the two substrates
were added sequentially from the side arms of an anaerobic cuvette.
Formaldehyde (15 mM) was added to solutions of CH2THF;
no reaction was observed spectrophotometrically between free reduced
enzyme and CH2O.

Spectrophotometry
Slow reactions were studied in anaerobic
cuvettes and monitored in a Shimadzu UV-2501PC scanning spectrophotometer
by repeated scanning from 700 to 300 nm. Rapid reactions were monitored
spectrophotometrically in a Hi-Tech Scientific SF-61 DX2 double-mixing
instrument (TGK Scientific) using either a monochromator and photomultiplier
tube to collect single-wavelength absorbance traces or a photodiode-array
detector (1.5 ms integration time) to collect absorbance spectra from
350 to 700 nm. The stopped-flow instrument was made anaerobic by flushing
the system with an oxygen-scrubbing solution containing ∼0.1
unit mL–1 protocatechuate dioxygenase and 1 mM protocatechuate (3,4-dihydroxybenzoate)
in 0.1 M KPi buffer (pH 7.0) and soaked overnight. The
apparatus was thoroughly rinsed with anaerobic buffer prior to being
used. Reaction traces were fit to sums of exponentials using Kinetic
Studio (Hi-Tech Scientific), KaleidaGraph (Synergy Software), or Program
A (R. Chang, C.-Y. Chiu, J. Dinverno, and D. Ballou, University of
Michigan). Spectra collected by the photodiode array were analyzed
by singular-value decomposition to calculate the spectrum of a reaction
intermediate using KinTek Explorer (KinTek Corp.).

Acid Quenching
For chemical quenching, the optical
cell and detectors of the double-mixing instrument were replaced with
a prototype of a qPod attachment (TGK Scientific). The oxygen-scrubbing
solution was included with the enzyme in acid-quench experiments.
Reactions were quenched with 1 M HCl after different aging times (0.045–199.96
s). The quenched reaction mixtures (80 μL) were collected by
flushing the cell with 500 μL of anaerobic buffer. The pH was
adjusted to 7.0 by adding 6 μL of 2.5 M NaOH. The solutions
were spun in a microcentrifuge, and the supernatants were filtered
with Millex-GV filter units for analysis of soluble components. Pellets
(denatured enzyme) were stored at −80 °C for later analysis
by digestion with trypsin and were subjected to matrix-assisted laser
desorption ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) analysis by the University
of Michigan Biomedical Mass Spectroscopy Facility. To analyze soluble
components of the quenched reaction mixtures, 25 μL of each
filtrate was injected into a Waters high-performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC) system [Waters C-18 Symmetry column, 3.9 mm × 150 mm,
5 μm pore size; 200 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (pH 7.0)].
The chromatograms showed many peaks, corresponding to dTMP, dUMP,
FAD, CH2THF, and breakdown products (e.g., THF). In this
system, dUMP and dTMP eluted at 7.34 and 15.0 min, respectively. The
assignments of the dUMP and dTMP peaks were confirmed by co-injecting
standards. Concentrations of dUMP and dTMP were determined from standard
curves of peak area as a function of nucleotide concentration.

dTMP Production
by Mutant Enzymes
Oxidative half-reactions
of mutant enzymes (∼25 μM) were performed in anaerobic
cuvettes using 500 μM dUMP and 500 μM CH2THF.
After oxidation, the enzyme was removed using a 10000 molecular weight
cutoff microcentrifugal spin filter (Millipore), and 10 μL of
the filtrate was injected onto a Shimadzu HPLC system fitted with
a 3.9 mm × 150 mm, 5 μm Symmetry C18 column (Waters) and
run with isocratic elution [1 mL min–1 with 200
mM ammonium phosphate (pH 5.0)]; dTMP had a retention time of 5.3
min.

Results
Spectrophotometric
Detection of Intermediates
In the
oxidative half-reaction of ThyX, the reduced flavin is oxidized only
when both dUMP and CH2THF are available to the enzyme. The reaction was studied at 25 °C by mixing
the reduced WT ThyX·dUMP complex (14 μM, final concentration)
with CH2THF (400 μM) in 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and
1 mM EDTA. A diode-array spectrometer was used to collect spectra
from 350 to 700 nm (Figure A). These data
were analyzed by singular-value decomposition and fitting to a two-step
reaction (Figure B). The initial spectrum
calculated in this analysis was different from that of the WT ThyX·dUMP
complex, indicating CH2THF binding in the dead-time of
the instrument (1.6 ms) to form the reduced WT ThyX·dUMP·CH2THF complex. After CH2THF binding, a small spectral
change—a decrease in absorbance centered at 420 nm—followed,
indicating the formation of an intermediate (I1 in Figure B). The spectrum of I1 is clearly that
of a flavin hydroquinone, indicating
that non-redox reaction(s) changed the flavin environment and, therefore,
its spectrum. The spectra of reduced isoalloxazines vary considerably
among flavoenzymes and are sensitive to their environments, but not
in a way that is readily interpretable. After its formation, I1 reacted causing a large increase in the absorbance at wavelengths
greater than ∼340 nm as the enzyme-bound flavin became oxidized
(Figure B). Rate constants for these reactions
were determined at 420 nm by collecting single-wavelength traces using
a monochromator and photomultiplier tube (Figure A). The first reaction phase had a rate constant of 28.4 ±
0.8 s–1, and the second phase, corresponding to
flavin oxidation, had a rate constant of 0.20 ± 0.01 s–1 (Table ). These reactions were dependent
on pH. In 100 mM glycine (pH 10.0), observed rate constants of 1.2
and 0.025 s–1 were obtained for the decrease and
increase in A420, respectively. In 100
mM potassium phosphate (pH 6.0), these observed rate constants were
60 and 0.77 s–1, respectively.

Spectrum of the intermediate
detected in the oxidative half-reaction.
An anaerobic solution of reduced WT ThyX (14 μM active sites,
after mixing) and dUMP (300 μM) in 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and
1 mM EDTA was mixed with 400 μM CH2THF and 15 mM
formaldehyde using a stopped-flow spectrophotometer in diode-array
mode. (A) Stereoview of spectra as a function of time. Spectra were
recorded with an integration time of 1.5 ms at various intervals out
to 10 s. Note the logarithmic time scale. (B) Deconvoluted intermediate
spectra calculated by singular-value decomposition using the raw data
in panel A and a two-step mechanism, giving rate constants of 28.4
and 0.2 s–1.

Chemical quenching. (A) An anaerobic solution of reduced WT ThyX
(50 μM) and dUMP (300 μM) was mixed with 400 μM
CH2THF and 15 mM formaldehyde in 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.0)
and 1 mM EDTA. The reaction was quenched with 1 M HCl at different
times, and the concentrations of dUMP (green) and dTMP (orange) were
calculated from the area under the peaks of HPLC chromatograms. An
absorbance trace at 420 nm obtained in stopped-flow experiments (black)
is shown for comparison. The vertical lines at 0.13 and 2.6 s indicate
the times of maximal accumulation of intermediates I1,
detected by the flavin spectral change, and I2, detected
by the consumption of dUMP. (B) Calculated concentrations of species
during the oxidative half-reaction. The rate constants from stopped-flow
experiments, 28.4 and 0.2 s–1, and the rate constant
from the consumption of dUMP, 0.7 s–1, observed
by quenching, were used to simulate consecutive reactions. The simulation
used an enzyme concentration of 20 μM and shows that intermediates
accumulate maximally at 0.13 and 2.6 s.

Comparison of the Oxidative Half-Reaction
Rate Constants of Variants
enzyme	k1 (s–1)	k2 (s–1)	k3 (s–1)	
WT	28.4 ± 0.8	0.20 ± 0.01	–	
Q75A	2.2 ± 0.3	0.074 ± 0.002	0.003 ± 0.0005	
R90A	0.33 ± 0.01	0.026 ± 0.01	–	
R174A	6.8 × 10–5 ± 1.6 × 10–7	–	–	
Y91A	0.53 ± 0.04	0.007 ± 0.0001	0.001 ± 0.0002	
S88A	0.82 ± 0.05	0.06 ± 0.002	0.019 ± 0.0005	
An anaerobic solution
of reduced
enzyme (14 μM active sites) and dUMP (300 μM) was mixed
with 400 μM CH2THF using a stopped-flow spectrophotometer.
The reactions were monitored at 420 nm, and the traces were fit to
a sum of exponentials. Reactions were conducted in 0.1 M Tris-HCl
(pH 8.0) with 1 mM EDTA and 15 mM CH2O at 25 °C.

Some reaction traces required
a
third exponential to fit a small increase in absorbance at the end
of the reaction. We speculate that this small phase was caused by
the reassociation and subsequent oxidation of a small amount of free
FAD that dissociated during the preparation.

Acid Quenching
The reaction of the reduced WT ThyX·dUMP
complex with 400 μM CH2THF in 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH
8.0) and 1 mM EDTA was quenched with 1 M HCl at different times. Deoxynucleotides
were quantified by HPLC. dUMP consumption takes place after the small
initial decrease in absorbance at 420 nm observed in stopped-flow
experiments (Figure A), and dTMP formation
occurs with a concomitant increase in absorbance at 420 nm, corresponding
to FAD oxidation. dUMP was consumed with a single exponential giving
an observed rate constant of 0.7 s–1. There was
a single-exponential rise of dTMP with an observed rate constant of
0.15 s–1. The rate constant for the loss of dUMP
is larger than that for the formation of dTMP; if dUMP were converted
directly to dTMP, these rate constants would be equal. Therefore,
conservation of mass requires the existence of a deoxynucleotide intermediate.
This intermediate was not detected during HPLC analysis. With rate
constants of 0.7 s–1 for formation and 0.15 s–1 for decay, it would form maximally at 2.6 s (Figure B). The precipitated protein from quenched samples
was analyzed by MALDI-TOF in an attempt to detect a protein adduct
to deoxynucleotide or folate, but no change in the molecular weight
of the protein was observed. Scheme  shows
a minimal kinetic scheme describing the stopped-flow and quenching
experiments.

Reactions Detected by Transient Kinetics
Oxidative Half-Reaction
with 5-dUMPS
The phosphate
moiety of dUMP is in an unusual conformation for a nucleotide, curling
close to the uracil moiety, suggesting a possible role in the mechanism.
Its importance during the oxidative half-reactions was examined using
the phosphothioate analogue of dUMP (5-dUMPS). The sulfur atom of
the analogue is more nucleophilic than the oxygen it replaces and
also disperses the negative charge compared to the concentrated charge
on the smaller, more electronegative oxygen. Therefore, substituting
oxygen with sulfur should drastically speed step(s) in which phosphate
acts as a nucleophile but slow steps requiring a localized charge.
The reaction of the reduced WT ThyX·5-dUMPS complex with a saturating
concentration of CH2THF (400 μM) was monitored at
420 nm using a stopped-flow spectrophotometer (Figure ). As with the reaction of the WT ThyX·dUMP complex,
there was an initial decrease in absorbance followed by a large increase,
with an observed rate constant for the first phase of 3 s–1 and an observed rate constant for the second phase of 0.08 s–1, 9- and 2.5-fold slower than with dUMP, respectively.
The production of the phosphothioate analogue of dTMP was confirmed
by HPLC as a new peak in the chromatogram. These data suggest that
the reaction is favored by the more concentrated negative charge of
oxygen in dUMP rather than by the more nucleophilic sulfur of dUMPS.

Reaction
of the reduced WT ThyX·5-dUMPS complex with CH2THF.
Anaerobic solutions of reduced WT ThyX (14 μM active
sites) and dUMP [300 μM (black)] or with 5-dUMPS [300 μM
(blue)] were mixed with 400 μM CH2THF and 15 mM formaldehyde
using a stopped-flow spectrophotometer. The reaction mixtures were
in 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) with 1 mM EDTA and 15 mM CH2O at 25 °C.

Formation of the WT ThyX·5F-dUMP·CH2THF
Complex
The analogue 5F-dUMP is useful for probing the relative
timing of flavin oxidation and carbon transfer. While the fluorouracil moiety of 5F-dUMP can be reduced,
it cannot be dehalogenated because fluorine would need to leave as
F+, a species too unstable for biochemical conditions.
In classic TS, the inability to dehalogenate 5F-dUMP prevents C–C
bond scission between the 5-methylene adduct of 5F-dUMP and THF. The effect of fluorine substitution was tested
in T. maritima ThyX. Reduced WT ThyX was incubated
with 5F-dUMP and CH2THF and monitored over time using a
scanning spectrophotometer. Spectral changes associated with the binding
of both 5F-dUMP and CH2THF were observed immediately (Figure ), but flavin oxidation was not observed even after
many hours, showing that the fluorine substituent blocks the oxidative
half-reaction at a step prior to or at redox chemistry.

Formation of
the reduced WT ThyX·5F-dUMP·CH2THF complex. An
anaerobic solution of WT ThyX [87 μM active
sites (green)] was reduced with 1 equiv of dithionite (blue). An anaerobic
solution of 5F-dUMP (300 μM) was added to form the reduced WT
ThyX·5F-dUMP complex (red). The anaerobic addition of 400 μM
CH2THF and 15 mM formaldehyde formed the reduced WT ThyX·5F-dUMP·CH2THF complex (black). The flavin remained reduced indefinitely.
These spectra were recorded using a scanning spectrophotometer.

Reactions of Variant Enzymes
The roles of active site
residues making contact with dUMP (Figure ) were investigated by replacing them with alanine and determining
the effects on the oxidative half-reaction in stopped-flow experiments
(Table ). All variant enzymes synthesized
dTMP, as detected by HPLC. The reactions of all mutant enzymes, except
R174A, showed an initial decrease in absorbance at 420 nm followed
by a large increase (Figure ). R174 hydrogen
bonds to dUMP at N3 and at the C4 carbonyl oxygen. Substituting R174
with alanine had a huge effect on the oxidative half-reaction. Only
one phase, a large increase in absorbance, was observed. Its rate
constant was 6.8 × 10–5 s–1, ∼400000-fold slower than that of the oxidation phase of
the WT reaction. The loss of the initial phase and the drastic decrease
in the rate constant for flavin oxidation suggest that a reaction
before flavin oxidation has become severely rate-limiting. R90 also
hydrogen bonds to the C4 oxygen of dUMP. The oxidative half-reaction
of the R90A enzyme has a greater effect on the first reaction phase
(86-fold) than on the second phase (flavin oxidation) (7.6-fold).
Residues Q75 and S88 are within hydrogen bonding distance of the phosphate
oxygen of dUMP, 2.9 and 2.6 Å, respectively. Substitutions of
these residues gave rate constants that were lower by 13- and 35-fold
on the first phase and by 2.7- and 3.3-fold on the second phase, respectively,
compared to the WT reaction. Y91 is 4.6 Å from N5 of the flavin.
The Y91A mutation also had a greater effect on the first phase (53-fold
slower) than on the second phase (28-fold slower).

Oxidative half-reactions
of variant enzymes. The reduced variant
enzyme·dUMP complexes were mixed with saturating concentrations
CH2THF using a stopped-flow spectrophotometer. The reactions
were monitored by their absorbance at 420 nm. The reaction mixtures
were in 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) with 1 mM EDTA and 15 mM CH2O at 25 °C. Traces, labeled by ThyX variant, are displayed in
two panels for the sake of clarity.

Discussion
Two intermediates were detected in the oxidation
of reduced ThyX
by dUMP and CH2THF; however, the complexity of the chemistry
dictates that any mechanism proposed for the transfer and reduction
of the methylene must include additional species to account for all
chemical steps. One important reaction in the sequence is the nucleophilic
attack of the pyrimidine on the methylene of CH2THF. How
ThyX activates dUMP as a nucleophile for this reaction is an important
question. The classic TSs, use an active site
cysteine to activate dUMP through a Michael-like addition at C6 to
increase the nucleophilicity of C5 (Figure S1 of the ). Activation by Michael-like addition
is also thought to occur in other enzymes that methylate pyrimidines,
and each uses an active site cysteine.− There has been an extensive search
for an activating nucleophile in ThyX. There is no cysteine in the
active site. The only conceivable nucleophilic residue close to the
uracil moiety of dUMP is a conserved active site serine. Substituting S88 in T. maritima ThyX with an alanine to eliminate the putative nucleophile did not
have a strong effect on the oxidative half-reaction, with both phases
slowed only 10-fold, confirming the observation that S88A was still
active, and showing that S88 is not a critical nucleophile
(Figure A).

Nucleophiles other than
protein residues have been considered and
also rejected. Conceivably, water could act as a nucleophile, but
the available data do not support this. Activation of a water molecule
would require its deprotonation, but the active site has no bases
or metals that would deprotonate water.− The closest potential base is Y91, but it
points away from the reaction site rather than toward it; in addition,
C5 of dUMP is not accessible to water. Also, the rate constants of
all the phases of the oxidative half-reaction increase with a decrease
in pH, behavior that is the opposite of that predicted if water were
a nucleophile. The possibility that the phosphate of dUMP might act
as a nucleophile was considered because the structure of ThyX shows
that dUMP is in an unusual curled conformation, with phosphate oxygens
3.5 and 4 Å from C6 of the uracil moiety (Figure ). However, the phosphothioate analogue of dUMP, with a more
nucleophilic sulfur atom available to attack the uracil moiety, reacted
slower, not faster, than dUMP, which is not expected if the phosphate
oxygen of dUMP is the nucleophile. N5 of reduced flavin has also been
considered as a possible nucleophile, based on analogies with some
other flavoenzymes., However, the enzyme substituted
with reduced 5-deaza-FAD, which does not have a lone electron pair
at position 5 of the flavin for nucleophilic attack, was still oxidized
by dUMP and CH2THF, leading
to the rejection of reduced flavin as a nucleophile. (Also, the reaction
of the 5-deaza-FAD-substitued enzyme is strong evidence against mechanisms
invoking flavin radicals because 5-deaza-FAD radicals are extremely
unfavorable.)

The transfer of a
hydride from the reduced flavin to dUMP has been
considered as the activation mechanism of dUMP. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) analysis clearly shows
that a hydrogen derived from the solvent labels C6 and C7 of dTMP,
suggesting that it washes-in via exchange at N5 of the reduced flavin., However, several experiments show that the transfer of the hydride
to dUMP cannot take place until after other events occur, likely including
the transfer of the methylene from CH2THF to dUMP. Activation
of dUMP by hydride transfer would mean that flavin oxidation is the
first step of the oxidative half-reaction sequence. This is not observed;
the addition of dUMP alone does not oxidize the reduced flavin, while
dUMP and CH2THF together oxidize the flavin only after
at least two other reactions form I1 and I2 (Figure ). Importantly, dUMP is consumed by forming I2, but before flavin oxidation. The reduced enzyme is also
not oxidized by 5F-dUMP and CH2THF, although fluorine substitution
would not prevent the reduction of the pyrimidine. However, fluorine
substitution would prevent the breakdown of a nucleotide–folate
adduct because C5 could not be deprotonated to expel the leaving-group
(THF) in the elimination reaction, which would block redox chemistry
if it occurs in a subsequent step. This is consistent with previously
published data obtained for Campylobacter jejuni ThyX
that show 5F-dUMP and CH2THF do not oxidize the reduced
enzyme. All of these results strongly
suggest that dTMP synthesis cannot be initiated by reductive enolization
of dUMP.

The extensive search for a nucleophile that activates
dUMP has
been futile. We propose that there actually is no activating nucleophile;
instead, bound dUMP is activated by electrostatic polarization. Crystal
structures show that the negative charge from the phosphate of dUMP
is close to N1 and C6 of dUMP, and the positive charges from R90 and
R174 are close to the carbonyl oxygen of C4 (Figure ). This electrostatic environment would favor the polarized
resonance description of dUMP in Scheme ,
which has a electron density on C5 higher than the usual nonpolarized
resonance description. The higher electron density on C5 accelerates
attack on the iminium carbon of CH2THF. It is noteworthy
that in aqueous solution uracil can react with formaldehyde without
nucleophilic catalysis.− The conclusion that there is
no enzymatic nucleophile in this mechanism is corroborated by our
inability to detect a protein adduct by MALDI-TOF and by the absence
of radiolabeled protein in the sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis results of quenched reactions using radioactive
dUMP.

Polarization of dUMP
This concept leads to the chemical mechanism
for the oxidative
half-reaction shown in Scheme . Steps whose
arrows are colored red (1–3) are suggested to occur in the
first phase observed in stopped-flow experiments, while those colored
blue (4–6) occur in the second phase as the flavin becomes
oxidized. Candidates for I1 and I2 are indicated
in maize and blue boxes, respectively. The first phase, the small
flavin spectral change, could comprise polarization of dUMP upon binding,
activation of CH2THF by ring opening (step 1), nucleophilic
attack of dUMP on CH2THF (step 2), and deprotonation of
C5 (step 3). None of these reactions involve the flavin directly but
could change its immediate environment leading to changes in the spectrum
of the flavin hydroquinone, as observed. I1 represents
an enzyme form (or forms) after the spectral change to the flavin
hydroquinone but from which dUMP can still be recovered in an acid
quench. These criteria are met by the species in the maize box in
Scheme . Thus, the spectral change might be
caused by the formation of the iminium from CH2THF (Step
1) or by the formation of the dUMP–CH2THF adduct
that, prior to deprotonation of C5 of uracil, could be cleaved by
acid quench, but after deprotonation of the nucleotide–folate
adduct (step 3), a stable adduct is expected; an analogous methylene-bridged
adduct between uracil and THF has been synthesized. Thus, the deprotonated adduct formed in step 3 is rejected
as a candidate for I1.

Proposed Mechanism of the Oxidative
Half-Reaction
Flavin oxidation occurs
in the second phase observed in stopped-flow
experiments, which is the step that forms dTMP from I2.
Our analytical methods did not affirmatively detect the putative intermediate
I2, but its presence was inferred by the loss of total
identified deoxynucleotide (dUMP and dTMP). Scheme , on the basis of our data, suggests that I2 could
be either the methylene-bridged dUMP–THF adduct or the cleaved
adduct (THF and the exocyclic enone deoxynucleotide). Importantly,
Mishanina and colleagues trapped 5-hydroxymethyl-dUMP,
detected by radioactivity and mass spectroscopy, at times when I2 should be maximal. 5-Hydroxymethyl-dUMP likely forms upon
acid quench from the exocyclic enone deoxynucleotide before hydride transfer occurs (step 5), suggesting that
I2 is the cleaved adduct. The elimination of THF from the
methylene-bridged complex between THF and dUMP immediately precedes
flavin oxidation (step 4) and would be catalyzed by the protonation
of N5 of THF. Preliminary stopped-flow experiments show that flavin
oxidation is faster at lower pH, consistent with the acid-catalyzed
step 4 determining the rate of flavin oxidation. A hydride is then
transferred from the flavin to the nucleotide in step 5, accounting
for the incorporation of solvent-derived hydrogen at C6 of the nucleotide
observed previously, and forming the penultimate nucleotide
intermediate, an exocyclic enone tautomer of dTMP. Lastly, a 1,3-hydride
shift has been previously proposed as the final step (step 6) based
on NMR analysis of label incorporation. This reaction is unlikely to perturb the absorbance spectrum of
the oxidized flavin by much and so may not be detected in stopped-flow
experiments. Furthermore, if tautomerization to dTMP is fast compared
to the time required for HPLC analysis of acid-quenched samples, only
dTMP would be detected.

In Scheme ,
it is proposed that the pyrimidine
moiety is deprotonated (step 3) and then THF is eliminated (step 4),
followed by hydride transfer (step 5). Other sequences
might be imagined and are not firmly excluded by the available data
but seem less likely than the reaction sequence in Scheme . For instance, steps 3 and 4 might be combined
into a single concerted step; however, that would eliminate the explanation
for acid catalysis of flavin oxidation. Alternatively, concerted expulsion
of THF and hydride transfer, combining steps 4 and 5 of Scheme , would exclude the enone deoxynucleotide as a distinct
intermediate, but this would eliminate from the mechanism the species
most likely to lead to 5-hydroxymethyl-dUMP identified in quenching
experiments.

Many of the kinetic
perturbations to the first reaction phase caused
by mutagenesis or substrate analogues can be rationalized by the mechanism
in Scheme . The replacement of R90 or R174
with alanine diminishes polarization of dUMP so that the more nucleophilic
resonance form (Scheme ) is not stabilized.
Thus, the first phase for these variants is slower than the WT phase.
Likewise, the correctly positioned phosphate helps to efficiently
polarize dUMP by stabilizing a positive charge at N1. Substitution
of either Q75 or S88 slows the first phase, presumably because the
lost hydrogen bonds from the phosphate to the protein disrupt the
optimal positioning, decreasing the level of polarization. The nucleotide
analogue 5-dUMPS, which has a more dispersed negative charge, should
also be less effective in polarizing the uracil moiety, consistent
with the slower first reaction phase observed with this analogue (Figure ).

Conclusion
The search for a nucleophile
to initiate the ThyX reaction by a
Michael-like addition to dUMP has been unsuccessful because, we believe,
there is no nucleophile. We propose a chemical mechanism in Scheme  for the synthesis of dTMP that does not invoke
nucleophilic activation. It is consistent with the data presented
here and most of the thyX literature. This scheme is useful as a working
hypothesis, and further investigation could show that some of the
reactions might in fact be more complex. This novel scheme adds to
the rich repertoire of mechanisms that have evolved to methylate pyrimidine
rings.

Supporting Information Available
A reaction scheme showing the
mechanism of the classic thymidylate synthase. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500648n_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
§ J.A.C.:
Department of Chemistry, University of Nebraska—Omaha,
Omaha, NE 68182-0109.

Author Present Address
∥ M.O.-M.:
Genencor, Palo Alto, CA 94304.

Author Present Address
⊥ S.W.H.:
Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI
48201.

Author Contributions
J.A.C. and
M.O.-M. contributed equally to this work.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Meran M. Ebadi-Tehrani
for purifying ThyX, Rudolf
Moser from Merk-Eprova AG for the kind gift of (6R)-5,10-CH2THF, and Professor David P. Ballou and Dr. Michael
Tarasev for the use of an HPLC system. We are especially grateful
to Ted King of TGK Scientific for the qPod quenching module and for
guidance in its use, and we thank Professor Kenneth A. Johnson for
the use of an early version of KinTek Explorer. We also thank Eric
Koehn, Tatiana Mishanina, and Professor Amnon Kohen (University of
Iowa, Iowa City, IA) for critical readings of the paper and endless
stimulating scientific debates.

Abbreviations
TSthymidylate synthase

5F-dUMP5-fluoro-2′-deoxyuridine
5′-monophosphate

dUMP2′-deoxyuridine 5′-monophosphate

5-dUMPS2′-deoxyuridine
5′-monophosphothioate

dTMP2′-deoxythymidine 5′-monophosphate

THF(6S)-5,6,7,8-tetrahydrofolate

CH2THF(6R)-N5,N10-methylene-5,6,7,8-tetrahydrofolate

FolAdihydrofolate reductase

Tris-HCltris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane
hydrochloride

5-deaza-FAD5-carba-5-deaza-flavin adenine dinucleotide.

