Post-translational modifications
(PTMs) of proteins are widely
involved in biological regulation through the alteration of proteins’
properties. The variability in the lifetime and stoichiometry of natural
protein PTMs and the extensive crosstalk that can occur between them makes the in vivo study of PTMs
very challenging. While mass spectrometric studies have significantly
advanced our understanding of how extensively PTMs are involved in
biological processes (e.g., ref ()), mass spectrometry does not provide information about
how PTMs alter a protein’s functionality. Adding to the challenge
of studying the functional effects of PTMs is that the homogeneously
modified protein needed for biochemical characterization can be difficult
to produce. Some PTMs can be installed by enzymes or chemical oxidants,
but these methods are often hard to control and result in a mixture
of protein forms that need to be separated from each other and from
unmodified protein before biochemical characterization. Genetic code
expansion− is one of the most powerful approaches to generate
protein-containing PTMs because the method is site specific and, in
principle, can produce quantities of modified protein sufficient for
biochemical and biophysical analyses. It also even has the potential
to produce modified proteins in a variety of cells. But the power
of these genetic code expansion efforts depends on the efficiency
(the ability to incorporate a noncanonical amino acid) and fidelity
(the ability to discriminate against canonical amino acids) of the non-canonical amino acid aminoacyl tRNA synthetases (ncAA-RS) that are developed.

Increased cellular levels of nitrated tyrosine residues have been
detected in at least 80 major human diseases., Recent
bioinformatics analyses have also suggested that approximately 9%
of the human proteome is nitratable even
though not all surface-exposed tyrosine residues are equally susceptible
to such chemical modification. These observations prompted us to use
genetic code expansion to encode 3-nitro-tyrosine (nitroTyr) site-specifically
into recombinant proteins. We generated
an orthogonal ncAA-RS/suppressor tRNA (RS/tRNACUA) pair
that could incorporate nitroTyr in response to an amber (TAG) stop
codon. Using this first-generation tool,
we showed that nitration of Tyr34 in mitochondrial superoxide dismutase
is sufficient to inactivate this key antioxidant enzyme. When attempting to use this nitroTyr-RS to establish
possible pathological roles of tyrosine nitration of heat shock protein
90 (Hsp90) in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and of apolipoprotein A1 in atherosclerosis, we discovered that
the nitroTyr incorporation efficiencies of our first-generation nitroTyr-RSs
were too low to produce sufficient yields of single nitroTyr- and
multiple nitroTyr-containing Hsp90 and apoA1 for biological evaluation.

We thus sought to obtain a more efficient nitroTyr incorporation
system. Several approaches have been used to improve the utility of
such systems, depending on the source of the bottleneck, including
mutagenesis of ncAA-RS active-site amino acids,, optimization of the suppressor tRNA recognition, modification of RS proof-reading domains, replacement of endogenous tRNA/RS pairs, modification of elongation factors, and reassignment of chromosomal amber codons. Although identifying the most significant factor
hindering expression of ncAA-containing proteins is not always trivial,
the most common source of poor expression is suboptimal recognition
of the ncAA by the RS. We therefore attempted to extensively mutagenize
our first-generation nitroTyr-RSs; however, this did not result in
significant functional improvements. Alternatively, we decided to
rescreen for nitroTyr-RSs from the same initial synthetase library
by modifying the process in which RSs were selected from a library
of mutants. This altered selection process produced a group of second-generation
nitroTyr-RSs with improved efficiencies that were useful for successfully
incorporating nitroTyr at multiple sites in both Hsp90 and apoA1. Here, we characterize the efficiency, fidelity
(the ability of the synthetase to discriminate against the 20 canonical
amino acids), and permissivity (the ability of a synthetase to incorporate
ncAAs structurally similar to the parent ncAA) of these second-generation
nitroTyr-RSs. Crystal structures of the most efficient of these new
nitroTyr-RSs reveal insight into the molecular origin of their high
efficiency compared to the first-generation RSs, and interestingly
provide clues regarding why these second-generation RSs were discarded
in the original selection process. They also bring to light the previously
under recognized complex nature of RS fidelity. The possibility of
improving the efficiency of other ncAA-RSs through similarly altered
selection processes, and thus the overall utility of this powerful
technology, is discussed.

Materials and Methods
Selection of Second-Generation
Aminoacyl-tRNA Synthetases Specific
for nitroTyr
For a detailed description of the positive selection
plasmid, pCG, negative selection plasmid, pNEG, and aminoacyl synthetase
library plasmid, pBK-3D-Lib see  (SI). Scheme  depicts a brief comparison
of the selection strategies utilized for creating the first- and second-generation
synthetases. For the positive selection of the second-generation synthetases,
2 mL of pCG/pBK-3D-Lib cells were thawed on ice before addition to
1.2 L of room temperature 2 × YT media containing 50 μg/mL
kanamycin (Kn) and 25 μg/mL tetracyline (Tet). After incubation
(11 h, 250 rpm, 37 °C), a 200 μL aliquot of these cells
was plated on eleven 15 cm LB agar plates containing 50 μg/mL
Kn, 25 μg/mL Tet, and 40 μg/mL chloramphenicol (Cm). The positive selection agar medium also contained 1
mM nitroTyr. After spreading, the surface of the plates was allowed
to dry completely before incubation (37 °C, 15 h). To harvest
the surviving library members from the plates, 10 mL of 2 × YT
(50 μg/mL Kn, 25 μg/mL Tet) was added to each plate. Colonies
were scraped from the plate using a glass spreader. The resulting
solution was incubated with shaking (60 min, 37 °C) to wash cells
free of agar. The cells were then pelleted, and plasmid DNA was extracted
using a Qiagen midiprep kit. The smaller pBK-3D-Lib plasmid was separated
from the larger pCG plasmid by agarose gel electrophoresis and extracted
from the gel using the Qiagen gel extraction kit.

The purified pBK-3D-Lib
was then transformed into pNEG-containing
DH10B cells. A 100 μL sample of pNEG electrocompetent cells
was transformed with 50 ng of purified pBK-3D-Lib DNA. Cells were
rescued in 1 mL of SOC for 1 h (37 °C, 250 rpm) and the entire
1 mL of rescue solution was plated on three 15 cm LB plates containing
100 μg/mL Amp, 50 μg/mL Kn, and 0.2% l-arabinose.
Cells were collected from plates, and pBK-3D-Lib plasmid DNA was isolated
in the same manner as described above for positive selections.

In order to evaluate the success of the selections based on variation
in synthetase efficacy (as opposed to traditional survival/death results),
the synthetases resulting from the selection rounds were tested with
the pALS plasmid. This plasmid contains the sfGFP reporter with a
TAG codon at residue 150 as well as tyrosyl-tRNACUA. When
a pBK plasmid with a functional synthetase is transformed with the
pALS plasmid and the cells are grown in the presence of the appropriate
amino acid on autoinduction agar, sfGFP is expressed, and the colonies
are visibly green. One microliter of each library resulting from the
negative selection was transformed with 60 μL of pALS-containing
DH10B component cells. The cells were rescued for 1 h in 1 mL of SOC
(37 °C, 250 rpm). Aliquots of cells (250 and 50 μL) from
each library were plated on autoinducing media plates with 25 μg/mL
Kn, 25 μg/mL Tet, and 1 mM nitroTyr. Autoinducing agar plates
were prepared by combining the reagents in supplemental Table 1 in  with an autoclaved solution of 40 g of agarose
in 400 mL water. Sterile water was added to a final volume of 500
mL. Plates were grown at 37 °C for one day and then grown on
the benchtop, at room temperature, for an additional day.

A
total of 68 visually green colonies were selected from autoinduction
plates and used to inoculate a 96-well plate containing 0.5 mL per
well noninducing media (supplemental Table 1 in , with sterile water added to a final volume of 500 mL)
with 25 μg/mL Kn, 25 μg/mL Tet. After 24 h of growth (37
°C, 250 rpm), 5 μL of these noninducing samples were used
to inoculate 96-well plates with 0.5 mL autoinduction media (supplemental
Table 1 in , with sterile water added
to a final volume of 500 mL) containing 25 μg/mL Kn, 25 μg/mL
Tet with and without 1 mM nitroTyr. Fluorescence measurements of the
cultures were collected 40 h after inoculation using a HORIBA Jobin
Yvon FluoroMax-4. The emission from 500 to 520 nm (1 nm bandwidth)
was summed with excitation at 488 nm (1 nm bandwidth). Samples were
prepared by diluting suspended cells directly from culture 100-fold
with phosphate buffer saline (PBS). Sequencing of the top 12 performing
clones showed that all had unique sequences (Table ). The top performing clones were moved from the pBK-RS plasmid to the pDule plasmid (pDule-RS) and evaluated
with the pBad-GFP150 reporter plasmid (Figure ). pDule plasmid was generated by amplifying the MjYRS gene from the pBK plasmid isolated
from the library using primers RSmovef (5′-CGCGCGCCATGGACGAATTTGAAATG-3′)
and RSmover (5′-GACTCAGTCTAGGTACCCGTTTGAAACTGCAGTTATA-3′).
The amplified DNA fragments were cloned into the respective sites
on the pDule plasmids using the incorporated NcoI and KpnI sites.

In vivo expression yields of nitroTyr-150-sfGFP
using the selected nitroTyr Mj synthetases. The total
yield of sfGFP containing nitroTyr at position 150 expressed in autoinducing
cultures (see ) is shown
in milligrams of protein per liter of culture for each RS in media
lacking (black) and supplemented with (gray) 1 mM nitroTyr. First-generation
nitroTyr-RSs are those reported previously, while the second-generation nitroTyr-RSs are characterized here.
Inset contains identical data except the y-axis has
been adjusted to more easily observe values for the low-yielding expression
cultures.

Sequences for Second-
and First-Generation
nitroTyr-RSs at the Positions That Were Allowed to Vary in the Library
Used for Screening
First-generation nitroTyr-RS sequences
as reported by Neumann et al.

Expression, Purification and Crystallization
the of nitroTyr-5B
RS
The DNA fragment containing nitroTyr5B-RS was amplified
by PCR from the pDule plasmid and ligated into the NcoI/XhoI sites of the expression vector pET28a (forward primer: 5′-CGCGCGCCATGGACGAATTTGAAATG-3′,
reverse primer: 5′-GGGCGCTCGAGTAATCTCTTTCTAATTGGCTCTAAAATC-3′).
This vector was transformed into DH10B cells, purified with a QIAprep
spin mini kit (Qiagen), and transformed into BL21(DE3) cells for expression.
Protein was expressed and purified similar to previous descriptions with only minor modifications (see ).

Crystals of the apo-open and apo-closed
nitroTyr-5B RS were grown using the hanging-drop vapor diffusion method
at room temperature against a reservoir containing 22–23% polyethylene
glycol (PEG) 300, 5% PEG 8000, 10% glycerol, and 100 mM Tris pH 8.0–8.3
by mixing 2 μL of protein (16 mg/mL in 20 mM Tris, 50 mM NaCl,
10 mM β-mercaptoethanol, pH 8.5) with 2 μL of reservoir.
Crystals grew to full size (∼300 × 100 × 100 μm)
within 4–6 days, at which time they were harvested by directly
submerging in liquid nitrogen. Both apo-open and apo-closed crystals
were present in the same individual drops and were indistinguishable
by eye.

For the nitroTyr structure, crystals were grown in an
identical
manner except that the nitroTyr-5B RS was preincubated with 2 mM nitroTyr.
A preliminary data set of a crystal grown under these conditions resulted
in a structure identical to that of the apo-closed crystals with Cys70
similarly modified (see ); thus, all subsequent crystals were soaked in mother liquor supplemented
with 10 mM DTT and 100 mM nitroTyr for 1 h at room temperature prior
to freezing in liquid nitrogen.

Data Collection, Structure
Determination and Refinement of the
nitroTyr-5B RS
Data were collected using beamlines 5.0.2
and 4.2.2 at the Advanced Light Source (Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory) at a temperature of 100 K. Data were processed and scaled
in space group P43212 using
iMosflm v1.0.040 and SCALA, and 5% of the data were randomly flagged
for use in Rfree. Data collection statistics
are reported in Table .

Data Collection and Refinement Statistics
for the nitroTyr-5B RS
 	apo-open	apo-closed	closed-nitroTyr	
Data Collection	 	 	
space group	P43212	P43212	P43212	
unit
cell axes a, b, c (Å)	100.14, 100.14, 73.29	101.77,
101.77, 72.28	102.1, 102.1, 71.72	
resolution limits (Å)	50.57–2.00 (2.09–2.00)	51.00–2.00 (2.10–2.00)	23.99 – 1.70 (1.79–1.70)	
unique observations	25,254 (3549)	26,261 (3737)	41,621 (5634)	
completeness	96.6 (94.9)	100.0 (100.0)	98.7 (98.7)	
multiplicity	12.9 (11.4)	16.1 (13.3)	9.3 (5.4)	
average I/σ	13.2 (0.8)	12.7 (1.2)	13.7 (1.5)	
Rmeas (%)	9.3 (172)	12 (225)	9.4 (142)	
CC1/2	1.00 (0.38)	1.00 (0.42)	1.00 (0.25)	
Refinement	 	 	 	
Rcryst/Rfree (%)	19.9/24.9	22.3/27.8	18.0/22.3	
no. protein molecules	1	1	1	
no. protein residues	306	310	308	
no. water molecules	125	134	300	
total number atoms	2573	2596	2914	
rmsd bond
angles (deg)	1.08	1.05	1.04	
rmsd bond lengths (Å)	0.007	0.007	0.007	
&lt;B&gt;
protein (Å2)	36.5	36.6	20.7	
&lt;B&gt; water (Å2)	39.9	35.0	30.4	
&lt;B&gt; nitroTyr (Å2)	N/A	N/A	9.9	
Ramachandran Plot (%)	 	 	
 favored	97.7	98.4	99.1	
 outliers	0.3	0.0	0.3	
PDB code	4ND6	4ND7	4NDA	
Numbers in parentheses correspond
to values in the highest resolution bin.

Rmeas is the multiplicity-weighted
merging R-factor.

Correlation coefficient between
two randomly chosen subsets containing the average intensities of
each unique reflection.

Ramachandran plot generated using
Molprobity.

Structures were determined by molecular substitution using previously solved structures (PDBs 1u7d for the apo-open
structure and 2zp1 with substrate omitted for the apo-closed and substrate-bound structures).
The majority of the apo crystals adopted the apo-open form. All model
building and refinements were conducted using Coot v0.6.1 and Phenix v1.8, respectively. Standard criteria were used for modeling water molecules
(&gt;1 ρrms intensity in the 2Fo – Fc map, &gt;2.4 Å
distance from nearest contact). Translation/libration/screw (TLS) refinement of B-factors was performed for each
structure using two groups which roughly correspond to the N- and
C-terminal domains (residues 1–194 and 195–307). For
the closed-nitroTyr structure, substrate was omitted from the model
until the final rounds of refinement. Molecular restraints for nitroTyr
were created using Phenix-Elbow. Molprobility () was used to monitor model geometry. For all
three structures independently, water molecules were sorted by their
peak 2Fo – Fc electron density, and numbered so that Wat1 is the water
with the strongest density. The apo-open (2.0 Å resolution),
apo-closed (2.0 Å resolution) and closed-nitroTyr structures
(1.7 Å) were refined to final R/Rfree values of 19.9/24.9, 22.3/27.8, and 18.0/22.3%, respectively.
We suspect that the ∼2.5% higher R-factors
in the apo-closed compared to those in the apo-open structure are
due to it having slightly higher crystal lattice disorder as is reflected
in its unit cell dimensions being between those of the apo-open and
closed-nitroTyr, rather than matching closed-nitroTyr, and for this
reason it may not be as well modeled by a single conformation. We
also suggest that, since the electron density for Cys70 is unmodified
in the apo-open form and modified in the apo-closed form (supplemental
Figure S1 in ), the Cys70-modified and
unmodified proteins largely partition into the respective crystal
forms (see ). Additional
refinement statistics are reported in Table .

Assessment of nitroTyr-RS Efficiency, Fidelity and Permissivity
Each ncAA used in this study was purchased from Peptech (Burlington,
MA), Bachem (Torrance, CA), or Sigma (St. Louis, MO). To measure the
efficiency of nitroTyr incorporation, a pBad expression
plasmid containing superfolder GFP (sfGFP) with an amber (TAG) codon
at position 150 (pBad-sfGFP-150TAG) was cotransformed
with pDule plasmids containing first- and second-generation
nitroTyr-RSs (see Table ) into DH10B cells.
Five milliliters of autoinducing medium (see supplementary Table 1
in ) containing 1 mM nitroTyr was inoculated
with 50 μL of overnight culture grown in noninducing medium.
Cells were incubated with shaking at 37 °C for 40 h, at which
time sfGFP fluorescence of the cultures was measured in a 96-well
plate (excitation: 488 nm, emission: 510 nm). The amount nitroTyr-incorporated
sfGFP was determined by comparing total fluorescence of each culture
with a standard curve of purified sfGFP. No fluorescence over that
of phosphate buffer saline was detected in cells grown in noninducing
medium. To measure the absolute fidelity of each nitroTyr-RS, the
same procedure was performed except that nitroTyr was omitted from
the autoinduction media. Permissivity measurements were conducted
similarly except that nitroTyr was substituted for each of the ncAAs
shown in supplemental Figure 2 in . Mutations
were introduced into the nitroTyr-5B RS gene using established overlap
extension PCR protocols, which were confirmed
by sequencing (Center for Genome Research and Biocomputing, Oregon
State University), and their functional effects tested using the same
efficiency, fidelity, and permissivity assay described above.

Results
and Discussion
Selection Strategy Leading to the Second-Generation
nitroTyr
tRNA Synthetases
Noncanonical amino acid tRNA synthetases
are typically generated using multiple alternating rounds of lethal
positive and negative selection and they have been used for a diverse
assortment of scientific exploration in many different cell types
and animals., Similarly, the first-generation
nitroTyr-RSs were selected from a library of mutant Methanocaldococcus jannaschii (Mj) Tyr-RSs by three rounds of alternating positive and negative selection
steps (Scheme ). The three rounds of positive selection required amber suppression
in a chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene in E. coli on minimal media plates containing 1 mM nitroTyr and chloramphenicol
at concentrations of 60, 60, and 80 μg/mL, respectively, while
the negative selection step required suppression of an amber disrupted
barnase gene in the absence of nitroTyr. After these selections, library
members surviving a fourth positive selection at 100 μg/mL chloramphenicol
were evaluated for efficiency and fidelity. This resulted in four
distinct first-generation synthetases with good efficiency and strict
fidelity, among which ‘nitroTyr-8’ was the top performer
(Figure , Table ).

In an attempt to improve their efficiency,
we performed extensive mutagenesis on these first-generation nitroTyr-RSs;
however, no significant improvements in efficiency were observed (supplemental
Table 2 in ). Alternatively, we redesigned
the selection strategy (Scheme ) to use only
a single round of positive selection with reduced antibiotic concentrations
(at 40 μg/mL chloramphenicol) and a single negative selection,
and all selections were performed on rich media plates rather than
plates with minimal media. After the single positive and negative
selection step, the remaining library was directly assessed for nitroTyr
containing protein expression using the sfGFP-ncAA fluorescence assay
on autoinduction media plates as opposed
to ramping up antibiotic concentrations to select for the “best”
ncAA-RS. Green fluorescing colonies were selected (68), and their
efficiency and fidelity in producing sfGFP under protein expression
conditions were measured. For further evaluation, the top 12 nitroTyr-sfGFP
producing RS hits (Table ) were ligated into
the pDule expression plasmid containing its cognate amber suppressing tRNACUA.

Efficiency
and Fidelity of Second-Generation nitroTyr-RSs
The efficiency
and fidelity of the 12 nitroTyr-RS variants in pDule were evaluated using a similar fluorescent expression
reporter, but now the truncated sfGFP gene was encoded on a standard
protein expression plasmid. Efficiencies for each of the 12 second-generation
RSs ranged between 100 and 200 mg of nitroTyr-incorporated sfGFP per
liter of culture, a substantial improvement over the 10–30
mg per liter of culture with the first-generation nitroTyr-RSs, and
only ∼5-fold less than native sfGFP production (Figure ).

When assessed in the absence of nitroTyr,
fidelities of the second-generation nitroTyr-RSs were about 10-fold
worse than those of the first-generation nitroTyr-RSs (Figure ). However, when fidelities were assessed in the
presence of 1 mM nitroTyr, no evidence for Tyr incorporation (or any
other canonical amino acid) was observed in tryptic digests of purified
sfGFP and Hsp90 proteins analyzed by ESI-Q-Tof mass spectrometry analysis
and tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) fragmentation. These results indicate that the relaxed fidelity of the
second-generation RSs in the absence of nitroTyr compromises neither
the integrity nor the utility of the new nitroTyr-RSs and is therefore
of no functional consequence as fidelity only needs to be high enough
to avoid incorporation of canonical amino acids when in competition
with the targeted ncAA. Important to note is that rescreening did
not lead to the lucky discovery of a single rare high efficiency version
or even to a few variants that had incrementally higher efficiency,
but in a single new selection run with reduced stringency, we obtained
at least a dozen variants that were all nearly 10 times more efficient.

The nitroTyr 5B Synthetase Is Minimally Permissive
Permissivity
is a desirable property of ncAA-RSs because relaxation
of substrate specificity would eliminate the need to select or engineer
a unique ncAA-RS variant for each new ncAA., For instance, a permissive nitroTyr synthetase that could incorporate
other related meta-substituted analogues of nitroTyr modification
would facilitate work to uncover the molecular mechanisms by which
the nitroTyr PTM confers altered protein functionality, and/or to
probe its physiological fates. Several such ncAAs (supplemental Figure
2 in ) were tested for their ability
to be incorporated by the nitroTyr-RS 5B, the most efficient of the
second-generation nitroTyr-RSs; however, no incorporation into sfGFP
was detected for any. Rescreening libraries or rebuilding libraries
from scratch based on the nitroTyr-5B RS structure (discussed below)
will therefore be necessary to expand the number of nitroTyr analogues
capable of being incorporated into proteins with this Mj Tyr-RS/tRNA system.

Structural Basis for nitroTyr Recognition
by the Most Efficient
nitroTyr-RS
To investigate the structural features that account
for the improved efficiency of the second-generation nitroTyr-RSs,
we crystallized the most efficient of the second-generation nitroTyr-RSs,
variant 5B (Figure  and Table ). Fortuitously, this synthetase crystallized in three different
conformations, an “open” state without substrate bound
(referred to as the apo-open structure), a “closed”
state without substrate bound (referred to as the apo-closed structure),
and a “closed” state with nitroTyr bound in the active
site (referred to as the closed-nitroTyr structure). All three crystal
forms were similar to that used for solving the structure of the parent MjTyr-RS, making the structure
solution trivial. The three structures were solved at resolutions
of 1.7–2.0 Å with final Rfree values ranging from 22 to 28% (Table ).
All structures adopt the expected architecture seen for other Mj RS structures which includes an N-terminal Rossmann-fold
catalytic domain (residues 1–202), within which the connective
polypeptide 1 (CP1) region (residues 110–148) and the acceptor
stem binding region (133–143) are located, a KMSKS loop (residues
202–209), which links the N- and C-terminal domains, and the
C-terminal domain (residues 210–308) (Figure ).

Structures of nitroTyr-5B RS. (A) Cartoon representation of the
apo-open conformation of the nitroTyr-5B RS depicting the N- and C-terminal
domains in blue and gray, respectively, and the KMSKS loop in yellow.
The amino acid substrate binding pocket is labeled along with its
surrounding helices. Nt: N-terminus, Ct: C-terminus.
(B) Overlay of the apo-open structure (same coloring as panel A) with
the apo-closed structure (magenta) demonstrating the inward collapse
of helix pairs α4/α5 and α7/α8. (C) Overlay
of the apo-closed structure (same coloring as panel B) with the nitroTyr
bound structure (yellow). Carbon atoms of the nitroTyr substrate are
colored in cyan.

The Apo-Open Structure
Unexpectedly, multiple data
sets collected on crystals grown in the absence of nitroTyr showed
variations in unit cell dimensions of up to ∼2%. The solved
structures showed that, in crystals with unit cell dimensions a = b =  ∼100.0
Å, c = ∼73 Å, the protein adopted
an apo-open conformation, whereas in those with unit cell dimensions a = b =  ∼102 Å, c = 72 Å, it adopted a more closed conformation (described
below). Screening of several crystals grown under these conditions
indicated the majority adopted the apo-open structure. The best resolved
apo-open conformation structure was refined at 2.0 Å (Table , Figure A), and in this
structure, only residues 139–141 were without interpretable
density and were not modeled. These residues are part of the tRNA
acceptor stem binding loop that is similarly disordered in the apo
wild-type MjTyr-RS structure (PDB 1u7d;) but not in the apo o-methyl-tyrosine
variant structure (PDB 1u7x;). The KMSKS loop, which
is involved in ATP-binding, is also ordered in this nitroTyr-RS structure
despite the absence of ATP, just as seen in the o-methyl-Tyr-RS but in contrast to the apo wild-type MjTyr-RS structure. In well-ordered portions of the structure, little
difference exists between this apo-open structure and the two other
known apo MjRS structures (0.66 Å Cα RMSD
over 306 residues for both wild-type and the o-methyl-Tyr-RSs).

The Apo-Closed Structure
Crystals of the apo-closed
structure grew in the same drops as for the above-described apo-open
structure and were distinguishable only by measurement of their unit
cells. The best diffracting crystal with the larger unit cell dimensions
was refined at 2.0 Å resolution (Table ). Although no nitroTyr is bound, this conformation approximates
that observed for MjTyr-RS when substrate is bound
(e.g., PDB 1zh6;). In this conformation, helix pairs
α4/α5 (residues 66–88) and α7/α8 (residues
127–155) collapse inwardly toward the core of the N-terminal
domain to form the amino acid substrate binding pocket (Figure B). Residues 139–141 of the acceptor stem
loop region, which help form the active site pocket, were sufficiently
ordered to model. In the amino acid binding pocket electron density
for four water molecules was present as well as additional density
extending from the sulfur atom of Cys70 (supplemental Figure 1 in ), which we hypothesize is a mixed disulfide
with a partially disordered β-mercaptoethanol molecule—a
reagent present during purification and crystallization. The additional
hydrophobic burial associated with a modified Cys70 could be responsible
for stabilizing this apo-closed conformation, and consistent with
this, the crystals containing the apo-open structure appear not to
have this modification (supplemental Figure 1 in ). This would explain why this conformation has not been
seen for wild-type enzyme which has a more polar His residue at position
70. It also provides a striking reminder that substrate affinity and
specificity is not simply a matter of the interactions made by the
bound ligand, but they depend on how much better those interactions
are compared with the interactions made with solvent in the unliganded
enzyme. Thus, changes in the energetic difference between the open
and closed conformations of this apo enzyme could be a part of what
enhances the overall kinetic properties of these second-generation
nitroTyr-RSs. In any case, this is the first structure to our knowledge
of an Mj synthetase variant in an apo-closed state,
and its identification provides interesting insight into factors that
influence the conformational dynamics and catalytic action of these
synthetases.

The Closed-nitroTyr Structure
The
initial diffraction
data set from a crystal grown in the presence of nitroTyr showed no
nitroTyr bound with the RS adopting the apo-closed conformation described
above. As for the apo-closed structure, Cys70 was modified, leading
us to speculate this modification was impeding the ability of nitroTyr
to bind the RS. Indeed, reduction of the crystals with dithiothreitol
(DTT) in the presence of nitroTyr led to a structure, refined at 1.7
Å resolution (Figure C and Table ), with unambiguous electron density for nitroTyr
at the active site (Figure A).

Active site of nitroTyr
5B synthetase. (A) The 1.7 Å structure
of the substrate-bound nitroTyr-5B RS active site reveals key protein–substrate
interactions. Carbon atoms of nitroTyr are colored in cyan, and protein
carbon atoms are colored in yellow. Oxygen and nitrogen atoms are
colored in red and blue, respectively. Hydrogen bonds are depicted
with black dashed lines. Blue mesh represents 2Fo – Fc omit map density
contoured at 1.5 ρrms. (B) Overlay of the substrate-bound
active site (same coloring as panel A) with that of the apo-closed
structure (carbon atoms in pink). Waters present in the apo-closed
structure that are displaced by nitroTyr binding are shown as transparent
green spheres. Green arrow represents the change in positioning of
the Ser158 side chain when nitroTyr is bound to the active site.

Comparison of the closed-nitroTyr
and the apo-closed structures
reveals minimal changes occur in the active site upon substrate binding.
Notable differences include the displacement of four water molecules
by the nitroTyr substrate and a conformational adjustment in the side
chains of Ser158, Gln173, and Leu65 (Figure B). The four displaced water molecules had been placed at positions
roughly corresponding to those filled by the amino, carboxyl, and
hydroxyl groups as well as the Cβ of nitroTyr.

The structure
of the closed-nitroTyr-RS reveals how its active
site recognizes nitroTyr. Although the nitroTyr-5B RS possesses five
mutations compared to wild-type Tyr-RS (Tyr32His, His70Cys, Asp158Ser,
Ile159Ala, and Leu162Arg, Table ), only three
of these residues are directly involved in protein–substrate
interactions. Specifically, the hydroxyl group of nitroTyr is positioned
by hydrogen bonds with the side chain of Ser158 and Wat34 (waters
with lower numbers have stronger electron density; see ), which is held in place by the side
chain of His32. The NO2 moiety hydrogen bonds with both
Gln109 and Wat2 (Figures A and ). To satisfy this hydrogen-bonding network, the nitro group
is rotated out of the plane of the aromatic ring by 22° (Figure ). This out-of-plane rotation is also partly stabilized
by Cys70 in which the sulfur atom lies slightly above and in close
contact with the plane of the nitro group. The size and positioning
of residue 70 is therefore important to accommodate the nitro group.
Although the pH of the crystals (∼8.0) is above the expected
pKa of nitroTyr in solution (∼7.1),
we suggest that the rotation of the nitro group decreases its resonance
with the phenolate which, together with the local H-bonding environment,
stabilizes the protonated form of nitroTyr upon binding.

Interactions
of the nitro group of nitroTyr with the active site
of the nitroTyr-5B RS. Binding of nitroTyr to the nitroTyr-5B RS induces
a 22° rotation of the nitro group out of the plane of the phenolic
ring, which is stabilized by hydrogen bonds with Gln109 and Wat2,
as well as close-packing interactions with Cys70 and Leu65. Coloring
is the same as in Figure . Dots represent
space filled by the side chains of Cys70 and Leu65.

Comparisons of the nitroTyr-5B active site with
that of the wild-type
Tyr-RS reveal why the wild-type RS is incompatible with nitroTyr binding.
Specifically, the Asp158-Gln109-His70 interaction seen in the wild
type active site fills space at the meta position of the phenolic
ring, preventing the binding of substrates with substituents at this
position, such as nitroTyr (Figure ). This
space is enlarged in the nitroTyr-5B RS to accommodate the additional
nitro group by reducing the size of side chains of Glu158 and His70
in the wild-type enzyme to Ser and Cys in the nitroTyr-5B RS, respectively.
In doing so, this pocket is not only enlarged compared to that of
the wild-type synthetase, but a suitable hydrogen-bonding network
for interaction with the nitro group is also formed (Figure ).

Comparison of nitroTyr-RS active site with wild-type Tyr-RS.
Overlay
of the nitroTyr-5B RS amino acid substrate binding pocket (same coloring
as Figure ) with that of the wild-type MjTyr-RS (PDB 1j1u). For the wild-type Tyr structure, carbon, oxygen,
and nitrogen atoms are colored in gray, red, and blue respectively.
Also, the shown amide conformation of Gln109 in the wild-type structure
is flipped 180° from the deposited coordinates, because the electron
density and refined B-factors of that structure imply that it had
been incorrectly fit. This corrected orientation of Gln109 matches
that of the closed-nitroTyr structure.

Features Distinguishing the Second- from the First-Generation
nitroTyr-RSs
To understand the key features of the second-generation
nitroTyr-RSs, we looked for elements that were common to the 12 second-generation
RSs and different from the first-generation versions. One of the most
conserved residues among the second-generation enzymes is Gln155,
which is involved in interactions with the backbone portion of the
amino acid substrate (Figure A). Also conserved
in 11 of the 12 second-generation RSs is Gln109 (making Phe108 similarly
conserved since alterations in these two residues were linked by design
of the library; see ),
which hydrogen bonds with the nitro group. Two of the four first-generation
RSs (nitroTyr-8 and -10) have a different residue at one of these
positions—nitroTyr-8 has a hydrophobic Met at position 155,
abolishing important protein–substrate hydrogen bonds, while
nitroTyr-10 has a Glu at position 109, which would interact unfavorably
with the partially negative oxygen atoms of the nitro group (Figure ). In both cases, protein–substrate interactions
(and therefore ncAA incorporation efficiency) would be expected to
be significantly compromised in these two first-generation RSs.

Also well conserved in the second-generation RSs is a Ser at position
158, which is observed in 11 of the 12 variants and contributes an
important hydrogen bond to the hydroxyl group of nitroTyr (Figure A). Interestingly, three of the four first-generation
RSs possess a Gly at this position, rendering them incapable of forming
such a hydrogen bond. Compromising this interaction in nitroTyr-5B
RS by mutation of the Ser158 to Ala reduced its ability to incorporate
nitroTyr by 85% (supplemental Figure 3 in ), demonstrating the importance of this residue in substrate recognition.

Interestingly, nitroTyr-1 of the first-generation RSs possess all
three of the most conserved residues found in the second-generation
RSs (Gln155, Gln109, and Ser158), yet it still displays limited ability
to incorporate nitroTyr. Although the reasons for its poor nitroTyr
incorporation efficiency are not immediately obvious, it is the only
variant among first- and second-generation nitroTyr-RSs to possess
a negatively charged side chain at position 32 (Table ).

Structural Basis for the Fidelity of the
nitroTyr-RSs
In terms of rationalizing the differences in
fidelity between the
first- and second-generation nitroTyr-RSs, we note that the nitroTyr-5B
RS preserves all hydrogen-bonding interactions required for Tyr binding
and has a larger binding pocket in order to accommodate the NO2 moiety, suggesting that nitroTyr-5B should still be able
to bind Tyr (though less favorably than nitroTyr). In the first-generation
RSs, however, these interactions with Tyr would not be expected to
be preserved given that most have either Gly at position 158 (which
would abolish important interactions with this side chain) or compromised
interactions with the amino acid substrate backbone.

These observations
are consistent with the relaxed fidelity observed for the second-generation
nitroTyr-RSs and the near perfect fidelity observed for the first-generation
nitroTyr-RSs (when expression is conducted in the absence of nitroTyr).
They are also consistent with the main differences by which the first
and second-generation RSs were generated, whereby selection pressures,
particularly those for maintaining fidelity, were relaxed. It seems
plausible, therefore, that during the original screening process the
higher efficiency second-generation nitroTyr-RS variants were lost
due to selection criteria that maintained unnecessarily stringent
fidelity in the absence of nitroTyr, leaving behind only nitroTyr-RSs
with strict fidelity but poor efficiency. Given that in the application
of ncAA technology, the expression of protein is always conducted
in the presence of ncAA, the relaxed fidelity of the second-generation
RSs in the absence of ncAA is of no consequence as long as fidelity
is maintained when nitroTyr is present in the media at 1 mM concentration
during expression. Thus, for the broad application of ncAA incorporation
technology, only the “functional fidelity” of the RS,
that is the fidelity measured in the presence of ncAA, is of any consequence.
Yet historically, all ncAA-RS selection strategies are largely designed
to maintain fairly strict “absolute fidelity”, that
is fidelity in the absence of ncAA. While the correlation between
enhanced efficiency and relaxed ‘absolute’ fidelity
seen for the nitroTyr-RSs could be the consequence of the structural
similarity between nitroTyr and Tyr, it is important to note that
many ncAAs capable of being incorporated into proteins through in vivo recombinant expression systems are structural analogues
of the amino acid substrate for the parent natural RS. These results
highlight the potential value of optimizing future selection strategies
to focus on enforcing ‘functional’ rather than ‘absolute’
fidelity.

Structural Basis for the Lack of Permissivity
of the Second-Generation
nitroTyr-RSs
The exact reasons for the observed lack of permissivity
of nitroTyr-5B are not immediately obvious. However, its crystal structure
reveals a relatively tightly packed active site, and mutagenesis analyses
show that the enzyme is rather sensitive to mutations that might be
expected to promote incorporation of alternative substrates (supplemental
Figure 3 in ). Also, given that the nitroTyr
substrate is bound through an intricate network of hydrogen bonds
with the phenolic alcohol and the nitro group (which must be rotated
out of the plane of the aromatic ring), it can be understood why alternative
substrates missing one or more of these groups would bind significantly
more weakly and their incorporation would therefore be limited.

Conclusions
We have described here the development
of second-generation amino-acyl
tRNA synthetases capable of incorporating nitroTyr with efficiencies
roughly an order of magnitude greater than those previously reported.
Biochemical and structural characterizations of these highly efficient
second-generation nitroTyr-RSs reveal key protein–substrate
interactions that form the basis for this improvement. Intriguing
to ask is why were these second-generation nitroTyr-RSs not identified
in the original screening process? On
the basis of the crystal structure of the nitroTyr-5B RS, we suggest
this is the result of the second-generation nitroTyr-RSs preserving
more of the protein–substrate interactions associated with
Tyr binding—a feature consistent with the relaxed selection
strategy leading to these second-generation RSs. These observations
reveal the complexities associated with ncAA-RS fidelity and highlight
a possible need to rethink the way in which fidelity is implemented
as a selection criteria during the selection process. Because we did
not do any work to try to optimize the new selection strategy, it
cannot be ruled out that additional efforts to explicitly optimize
screening strategies might lead to yet further major gains in efficiencies,
not only for nitroTyr-RSs but also other ncAA-RSs. This is particularly
relevant because, just as we experienced in our work on nitroTyr modifications,
the production of sufficient quantities of pure site-specifically
modified proteins via suitably efficient in vivo expression
systems is often a major methodological roadblock to applying ncAA
technologies for the study of human physiology and disease and for
the development of novel probes and nanomaterials.

Supporting Information Available
Description of the plasmids
used in the selection of nitroTyr tRNA synthetases and the process
by which the nitroTyr 5B synthetase was expressed and purified. Supporting
Tables 1 and 2 as well as Supporting Figures 1–3 with their
associated legends. This material is available free of charge via
the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5001239_si_001.pdf

Accession Codes
Coordinates
and
structure factors for the apo-open, apo-closed and nitroTyr-bound
structures have been deposited in the Protein Data Bank under accession
numbers 4ND6, 4ND7 and 4NDA, respectively.

This
work was
supported by F&amp;M Hackman and Eyler funds, NSF-MCB-0448297, HHMI
Undergraduate Science Program and the services provided by the Cell
Imaging and Analysis Facilities and Services Core of the Environmental
Health Sciences Center, Oregon State University, Grant Number P30
ES00210, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National
Institutes of Health.

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

