Prenyl transfer
reactions are
ubiquitous in nature and are utilized by organisms to generate a wide
range of biologically active small molecules.− The fungal indole prenyltransferases
(indole PTs) are a unique example of this class of enzyme. They differentiate
themselves from other PTs by not requiring metal cofactors such as
Mg2+ and Zn2+ to affect the prenyl transfer
reaction, nor do they require the (N/D)DxxD motif seen in other PTs
for binding or catalysis.− However, the “αββα” duplicate
chain order rule for α helices and β strands is satisfied
in this class of PTs. Recently, a number
of experimental papers on fungal indole PTs exploring their regioselectivity
have been published.− Multiple reaction channels are possible, so the fundamental question
is how one reaction channel is favored over another by the characteristics
of the active site of the protein catalyst involved. Importantly,
once the C–O bond in DMAPP is cleaved, the dimethylallyl carbocation
can react at one of two ends of the molecule: the less sterically
crowded C5 position or the more crowded C2 site (see Figure ). Indeed, both product types are observed, and
the fundamental question of how formation of a sterically more crowded
product can be favored over a less crowded reaction channel by active
site characteristics arises. Both pathways yield interesting molecules,
so the ultimate goal is to tune one pathway over another to synthesize
the more desirable product. Figure  shows,
as an example, the possible reaction products for the reaction of
Brevianamide F and DMAPP as catalyzed by FtmPT1.

Catalytic mechanism hypotheses
for the reaction between DMAPP and
Brevianamide F catalyzed by FtmPT1: (a) C5–C8 and (b) C2–C9
reaction channels.

As shown in Figure , FtmPT1 is a PT whose
polypeptide chain sequence is αααββαααββααα–ββααββααββ,
which satisfies the indole PT’s “αββα”
motif. Produced by Aspergillus fumigatus, this fungal
indole prenyltransferase catalyzes the reaction between dimethylallyl
pyrophosphate (DMAPP) and l-Trp derivatives. Specifically,
in this enzyme, the reaction of DMAPP with Brevianamide F (cyclo-l-Trp-l-Pro) to form the cell growth-inhibiting
compound Tryprostatin B has been investigated. Via biochemical and X-ray crystallographic techniques,
Li et al. identified two reaction channels
for the prenyl transfer reaction between DMAPP and Brevianamide F:
a C5–C8 reaction between the C5@DMAPP and the C8@indole for
the wild-type enzyme and a C2–C9 reaction between the C2@DMAPP
and the C9@indole for the Gly115Thr mutant (the C5–C8 is seen
in the mutant, but as a side reaction). The native reaction channel
produces Tryprostatin B, while the Gly115Thr mutant produces a product
not seen in the native enzyme (see Figure ). Further studies, regarding the regioselectivity of FtmPT1, have
been reported., Furthermore, nonaromatic carbon
atoms can be prenylated along with aromatic carbon atoms on indole
rings. All these experimental papers
demonstrate various regioselectivities observed in FtmPT1, making
it a promising enzyme for the formation of novel products of value
to the pharmaceutical industry.

General view of the FtmPT1 complex system.
Purple ribbons represent
α-helices, yellow bands β strands, and green and white
tubes loops. The licorice structures in the center of the binding
site represent the substrates DMAPP and Brevianamide F.

Given the interesting behavior of this reaction
and its sensitivity
to point mutations, we decided to gain further insight into the catalytic
mechanism of native FtmPT1 by studying the reaction between Brevianamide
F and DMAPP. The reaction pathway consists of the prenyl transfer
step, which is then followed by a proton transfer step and substrate
loss to complete the reaction process. According to Li et al., besides
the C5–C8 regioselectivity for the wild-type enzyme, and C2–C9
for the G115T mutant (with a decrease in product yield of 80%), they
hypothesize that Glu102 is the proton acceptor for the deprotonation
step in the reaction. Given the bifurcation in the preferred reaction
channel between the native and mutant proteins, we decided to determine
what was blocking the C2–C9 reaction channel in the native
protein (see Figure ) using modern theoretical
tools. To reach this goal, we hypothesized an initial reaction mechanism
for both the C2–C9 and C5–C8 reaction pathways, as shown
in Figure . Our goal was to elucidate three
important aspects of FtmPT1 catalysis: (1) elucidate the energetics
of the C5–C8 and C2–C9 reaction channels in the wild-type
enzyme, (2) identify the proton acceptors in the active site be it
Glu102, surrounding water molecules, or another residue in the active
site region, and (3) identify the prenylation reaction as being an
SN1 or SN2 process, with the former involving
a free carbocation. Herein, we describe the results of detailed quantum
mechanical/molecular mechanical (QM/MM) studies of the catalytic mechanism
of FtmPT1.

Hypothesized reaction mechanisms for complete reactions in FtmPT1
between DMAPP and Brevianamide F of (a) C5–C8 and (b) C2–C9
selections.

Methods
General Features
All molecular dynamics simulations
were performed in the assisted model building with energy refinement
(AMBER, version 11) molecular dynamics package. The crystal structures of FtmPT1 in complex with dimethylallyl S-thiolodiphosphate (C5H14O6P2S) and Brevianamide F (C16H17N3O2) were used as the starting geometry [Protein
Data Bank (PDB) entry 3O2K]. The PDB structure was
modified by replacing sulfur with oxygen in dimethylallyl S-thiolodiphosphate to form dimethylallyl pyrophosphate.
Using the LEaP module of AMBER, hydrogen atoms were added to the structure.

The complex system was then solvated in a truncated octahedral
cell with TIP3P explicit water molecules.
The ff99sb force field was employed for
the protein system, and the generalized Amber force field (GAFF) was used for the substrate molecules to construct
the parameter topology files. In all QM/MM molecular dynamics (MD)
simulations, unless otherwise noted, we used the self-consistent charge
density functional tight binding (SCC-DFTB) method, as implemented in AMBER11. This approach has worked well
in the past for prenylation-type reactions− among other reaction types and
allows us to conduct extensive sampling along the reaction pathways.
The charges for the substrate molecules were determined according
to the restrained electrostatic potential (RESP) methodology by a prior structure optimization at the M06L/6-31+G(d,p)
level of theory with a subsequent electrostatic potential calculation
at the HF/6-31+G(d,p) levels of theory using the Gaussian09 electronic
structure program, and the Antechamber
module in the AMBERTools suite of programs. Long-range electrostatic
interactions were treated with the particle mesh Ewald (PME) method,− and 8.0 Å cutoffs were used for the nonbonded interactions.
All bonds with hydrogen atoms were constrained using SHAKE, except those included in the QM region for the calculations on the
proton transfer step.

The entire system was initially minimized
to remove close contacts
using weak restraints. The system temperature was gradually increased
to 300 K over 50 ps using a restrained MD simulation with a 1 fs time
step. Then the restraints were slowly removed prior to a constant NPT 450 ps MD run. The SANDER module, was used for the minimization step and the 500 ps MD runs. The following
22 ns constant NVT MD simulation was subsequently
finished using the PMEMD program. During the 22 ns production run,
a 2 fs time step was used and snapshots were saved every 2 ps. The
1 ns product equilibration was completed using a similar procedure
of initial minimization using the QM/MM MD capabilities in SANDER.
The corresponding reactive substrate molecules, residues, and relevant
water molecules were included in the QM region.

Visual Molecular
Dynamics (VMD), was used for
structure analysis. GNUPlot was used
for all free energy profile (FEP) plots.

Prenyl Transfer Reaction
Calculations
C5–C8 Bond Formation
QM/MM
MD studies were used
to obtain two-dimensional (2D) free energy profiles in which DMAPP
and Brevianamide F were in the QM region. In the C5–C8 case,
the two reaction coordinates were bond cleavage along the C5–O6
axis and bond formation along the C5–C8 axis. For C5–C8
bond formation, steered molecular dynamics (SMD)− was first applied to propagate the trajectory along
the reaction coordinate, covering a bond distance range from 5.3 to
1.4 Å at an interval of 0.1 Å, using a force constant of
5000 kcal mol–1 Å–2) and
a pulling speed of 0.02 Å/ps. A 2D umbrella sampling was performed
using as starting structures the C5–C8 SMD snapshots at the
corresponding C5–C8 distances. We next propagated along the
C5–O6 axis at an interval of 0.1 Å, resulting in 2040
windows within a C5–C8 region bound by [1.4 Å, 5.3 Å]
and a C5–O6 region bound by [1.4 Å, 6.4 Å]. An initial
50 ps constant NVT equilibration was followed by
another 50 ps constant NVT production run, during
which the data were collected. The force constants for C5–C8
and C5–O6 bonds were 500–600 and 300–500 kcal
mol–1 Å–2, where the larger
force constants were used for the higher-energy regions to ensure
thorough sampling at the desired location of the 2D surface. The 2D
weighted histogram analysis method (WHAM-2D) was used to analyze the probability density and obtain the free
energy profiles (FEP, 2D) for the unbiased system along the two reaction
coordinates. For all of the steered MD and umbrella sampling calculations,
unless otherwise indicated, a time step of 1 fs was used.

In
addition to the 2D umbrella sampling simulations, one-dimensional
(1D) umbrella sampling simulations were also performed for both C5–C8
and C5–O6 as single-reaction pathways. Starting structures
of the corresponding umbrella sampling simulations were extracted
from the corresponding steered MD trajectories at an interval of 0.1
Å between adjacent windows for both the O5–C6 and C5–C8
reaction coordinates in the 1D PMF calculations. The C5–C8
distance decreased from 5.3 to 1.4 Å, while the O6–C5
distance increased from 1.4 to 4.6 Å, resulting in 40 windows
for the C5–C8 reaction coordinate and 33 windows for the O6–C5
reaction coordinate. Each of the windows was first equilibrated for
100 ps under NVT simulation conditions and then followed
by a 150 ps production NVT simulation, during which
the data were collected. The 1D weighted histogram analysis method
(WHAM) was implemented to analyze the probability density and obtain
the free energy profiles (FEP, 1D) for the unbiased system along the
corresponding reaction coordinates.

C2–C9 Bond Formation
Carbon–carbon bond
formation at C2–C9 was also examined using both 1D PMF and
2D PMF calculations. As in our studies outlined in , the C2–C9 reaction coordinate
was mapped out using steered MD simulations with an interval of 0.1
Å between adjacent windows covering a distance interval of [4.5
Å, 1.4 Å]. The 1D PMF profile for C2–C9 bond formation
was created using equilibration for 100 ps and sampling for 150 ps
along the C2–C9 distance interval of [4.5 Å, 1.4 Å].
The 2D profile was generated using constant NVT equilibration
for 50 ps and constant NVT sampling for 50 ps using
a C2–C9 distance region of [4.5 Å, 1.4 Å] and for
C5–O6 a distance interval of [1.4 Å, 6.4 Å], again
resulting in 2040 windows. The force constant used for the steered
MD studies was 5000 kcal mol–1 Å–2 with a pulling speed of 0.02 Å/ps. For the 1D and 2D PMF simulations,
the force constants were 500–600 kcal mol–1 Å–2 for C2–C9 and 300–500 kcal
mol–1 Å–2 for C5–O6,
with the higher value being used in higher-energy regions of the profiles.
The QM region employed included DMAPP and Brevianamide F.

Final Product Formation
Proton Transfer To Form the Final Product
for the C5–C8
Reaction Pathway
The reaction system required a proton transfer
step to remove the hydrogen atom connected to C8 on the indole ring
of Brevianamide F after the C5–C8 prenylation step to produce
the final product (Tryprostatin B). First, we needed to locate the
minimum for the intermediate state by varying the distance between
the diphosphate anion and the carbocation of the prenylation product
using umbrella sampling. Starting from the protonated prenylation
product, an umbrella sampling calculation was conducted for the C5–O6
distance, covering an interval of [6.0 Å, 15.0 Å] at 0.25
Å increments with a force constant of 100 kcal mol–1 Å–2. Because this calculation was for the
nonreactive pathway, the sampling was conducted using classical MD
under NVT conditions using a time step of 1 fs, with
a 1 ns equilibration stage followed by a 1 ns data collection step.
This simulation was conducted to energetically characterize the prenylation
product minimum. This free energy profile is given in Figure 6 of
the .

From
the end of the prenylation reaction, we conducted a 20 ns constant NTP MD equilibration of the protonated prenylation product
complex followed by a 1 ns constant NVT QM/MM MD
equilibration prior to the subsequent QM/MM steered MD and umbrella
sampling steps. The position of the minima arising from these simulations
versus the classical PMF simulations described above is given in Figure
6 of the .

Via analysis of the system after MD equilibration, the only two
possible receptors of the proton were Glu102 and the water molecule
adjacent to this residue. Hence, we included the side chain of Glu102
as well as the water molecule in the QM region, together with the
protonated C5–C8 prenylation product. The diphosphate anion
was not included in the QM region for this step. The steered MD and
umbrella sampling calculations for the H(@C8)–C8 bond cleavage
covered a distance interval of [1.1 Å, 3.5 Å]. The force
constant for the steered MD study was 5000 kcal mol–1 Å–2 with a pulling speed of 0.02 Å/ps.
For the umbrella sampling calculations, the force constant was 300
kcal mol–1 Å–2 for regions
before and after windows in the transition state region, 600 kcal
mol–1 Å–2 for windows close
to the transition state, and 100 kcal mol–1 Å–2 for windows far from the transition state. WHAM-1D
was used afterward to obtain the 1D FEP curve for this deprotonation
step.

Cyclization and Deprotonation To Form the Final Product for
the C2–C9 Reaction Pathway
An extra cyclization step
via C8–N7 bond formation coupled with a proton transfer step
via H(@N7)–N7 bond breakage was required to obtain the final
product for the C2–C9 prenylation reaction pathway. As in the
C5–C8 deprotonation step study, only a neighboring water molecule
and the side chain of Glu102 as well as the C2–C9 prenylation
product were included in the QM region. Starting from the protonated
prenylation product, we created another 1D FEP curve using NVT MD umbrella sampling along the C5–O6 pathway
over a distance increment of [6.0 Å, 15.0 Å] at intervals
of 0.25 Å and a force constant of 100 kcal mol–1 Å–2. This fully classical simulation was
used to energetically characterize the minimum for this intermediate
state.

We also simulated the prenylated C2–C9 system
for 20 ns of MD simulation and 1 ns of QM/MM MD simulation (to generate
the starting minimum for the subsequent QM/MM simulations) followed
by a 1D steered MD study along the C8–N7 cyclization reaction
pathway. The steered MD force constant was 5000 kcal mol–1 Å–2 with a pulling speed of 0.02 Å/ps.
A 2D umbrella sampling study was conducted afterward using snapshots
from the steered MD simulations for the C8–N7 reaction pathway
as starting points. The H(@N7)–N7 distance was then varied,
as well, resulting in 456 windows with a C8–N7 distance interval
of [3.2 Å, 1.4 Å] and a N–H distance interval of
[0.9 Å, 3.2 Å]. The force constants for C8–N7 bond
formation were 300–500 kcal mol–1 Å–2, and for the N–H bond cleavage, values between
500 and 1000 kcal mol–1 Å–2 were used. The higher force constants were used at windows close
to the saddle points. WHAM-2D was used to obtain the final 2D profile.

Interaction Energy Decomposition
For the C5–C8
and C2–C9 prenylation reaction pathways, “π-chambers”,− were used to encapsulate the carbocation intermediate states. The
intermediate carbocations formed a cation−π interaction
with the π-chamber, which was formed by phenol rings from three
tyrosine residues in the active site region, Tyr382, Tyr435, and Tyr450.
To quantitatively analyze the energies of interaction between each
phenol ring and the carbocation, we used high-level QM calculations
for the energy analysis. The calculations included only the formed
carbocation and the three tyrosine residues. The backbones of the
tyrosine residues were removed with only the phenol ring and the hydrogen-capped
β-carbon being used in the subsequent calculations.

Five
snapshots were picked from the umbrella sampling QM/MM MD simulation
results at the intermediates states for both the C5–C8 and
C2–C9 calculations. The reduced system of four aromatic fragments
and the carbocation was first optimized at the M06L/6-31+G(d,p) level
of theory, with all heavy atoms fixed. The optimization was then followed
by a set of single-point calculations with basis set superposition
error (BSSE) corrections to more quantitatively study the interactions
between the carbocation and the π-chamber.

In addition,
in the FtmPT1 active site, there are more residues
that could affect the catalytic mechanism and the resulting product
distribution. Hence, we used the energy decomposition method within
the MM-GBSA module− in AMBER11 to analyze how the active site residues stabilize and
destabilize the reactive species. Approximately 100 residues within
10 Å of the diphosphate anion, the dimethylallyl carbocation,
and Brevianamide F were studied and analyzed via pairwise free energy
decomposition. To facilitate this analysis, 42 ns NVT MD simulations of the starting, intermediate, and product states
for the C5–C8 prenylation reaction were conducted to save snapshots
for the analysis. Snapshots over the 42 ns MD were obtained every
50 ps for the MM-GBSA calculation.

Results and Discussion
C5–C8
Reaction Pathway
Prenyl Transfer Process
Starting
from a MD and QM/MM
MD equilibrated staring complex, we conducted steered MD and umbrella
sampling simulations to obtain the 2D free energy profiles (FEPs).
Figure a shows the energy-contoured map for
the corresponding FEP, with the C5–C8 distance as the X-axis and the C5–O6 distance as the Y-axis. From the figure, we can identify two saddle points and three
wells, i.e., the starting state, two transition states, and one intermediate
state, along with the product carbocation state. Starting at a C5–C8
distance of 5.25 Å and a C5–O6 distance of 1.42 Å,
we proceed to the first transition state at a C5–C8 distance
of 4.88 Å and a C5–O6 distance of 2.45 Å where the
C5–O6 bond is initially broken. The next step for this reaction
is the formation of the relatively stable dimethylallyl carbocation
(DMA+) at a C5–C8 distance of 2.15 Å and a
C5–O6 distance of 5.45 Å. The carbocation is then attacked
by C8 on the indole ring of Brevianamide F, yielding the second transition
state of the reaction at a C5–C8 distance of 1.95 Å and
a C5–O6 distance of 5.50 Å. The final prenylation product,
which is the protonated form (@C8) of Tryprostatin B, is reached at
a C5–C8 distance of 1.58 Å and a C5–O6 distance
of 6.35 Å.

Free energy profiles (FEPs) in kilocalories per mole for
(a) C5–C8
and (b) C2–C9 prenyl transfer steps. The free energies of starting
states were set to zero. Map colors correspond to the energy scale
shown to the right of the images. Lime-colored values represent free
energies of iso-contour lines. Dots represent the stationary points
for the reactions. Dots from right to left: starting state (green),
first transition state (blue), intermediate state (yellow), second
transition state (orange), and prenylation product (red), respectively.

Other than the five states described
above, no other local minima
or saddle points could be identified for this reaction. Therefore,
we conclude that this reaction follows an SN1 reaction
mechanism rather than an SN2 reaction mechanism. The relative
free energies are listed in Table . From this
table, the rate-determining first transition state for C5–O6
bond cleavage has a relative free energy of 19.2 kcal/mol. This result
matches the estimated experimental free energy barrier of 17.5 kcal/mol,
which is approximated from its turnover rate of 5.57 s–1.

Relative Free Energies
(in kilocalories
per mole) for Each State in the C5–C8 and C2–C9 Reaction
Pathways
 	 	prenyl
transfer step	proton transfer/cyclization
step	
free energy (kcal/mol)	starting
point	transition state 1	intermediate
state	transition state 2	prenylation
product	resting starting
state	transition state 3	final product	
C5–C8	0.0	19.3	9.2	10.0	5.3	–2.5	0.5	–20.8	
C2–C9	0.0	18.5	9.5	10.0	6.5	0.8	16.8	–9.2	
Note that the energies of the
starting states are set to zero.

Proton Transfer Process
To obtain the final product,
we need to deprotonate C8 from the protonated prenylation product.
Prior to the deprotonation process, we estimate that the relaxation
of the protonated prenylation product (with a C5–O6 distance
of 6.35 Å) to the starting state of the deprotonation process
(with a C5–O6 distance of 15.00 Å) has a free energy decrease
of 7.8 kcal/mol (see Figure 6 of the ). This energy decrease was also counted in the
total reaction, as shown in Figure a and Table . For the deprotonation process, with both Glu102
and a nearby water molecule serving as proton acceptor candidates,
we generated a 1D free energy profile for the deprotonation step along
the H(@C8)–C8 reaction pathway, as shown in Figure a. From the figure, we find that the deprotonation
process reaches a transition state at a H(@C8)–C8 distance
of 1.25 Å with an energy barrier of 3.0 kcal/mol compared to
the starting protonated state. The reaction reaches the product state
at a H(@C8)–C8 distance of 2.4 Å with a free energy 18.3
kcal/mol lower than that of the starting state.

Free energy profiles
(FEPs) in kilocalories per mole for (a) the
proton transfer for the C5–C8 reaction pathway and (b) the
deprotonation and cyclization steps for the C2–C9 reaction
pathway. Map colors correspond to the energy scale shown at the right.
Lime-colored values represent free energies of the iso-contour lines.
Dots represent the key points for the reactions: starting state (green),
transition state (blue), and final product (red). Note that for panel
b the yellow dot also represents another potential transition state
for the reaction.

From the mechanisms shown
in Figures a
and a, the starting
state for the protonated intermediate has two proton accepting groups:
Glu102 and a water molecule. Initially, Glu102 forms a hydrogen bond
with the nitrogen atom on the indole ring of the protonated prenylation
product, and simultaneously forms another hydrogen bond with the water
molecule. At the transition state, we find that the proton is initially
transferred to the water molecule. Right after the transition state,
the extra proton is transferred to the water molecule and then without
activation to Glu102. Hence, Glu102 is the final transfer point for
the proton as proposed, but an intervening
water molecule facilitates the transfer.

Reaction mechanisms for
the proton transfer steps in the (a) C5–C8
and (b) C2–C9 reaction pathways.

Final Product Equilibration
To observe the dynamics
of the final product, Tryprostatin B, in the binding pocket of FtmPT1,
we ran a 22 ns classical MD simulation. In the MD simulation, we found
that the product remained bound in the active site with two different
hydrogen bonding situations. Initially, the two original hydrogen
bonds formed at the end of the proton transfer reaction remained;
the water molecule, which was involved in the proton transfer, was
forming a bridge between the oxygen atom on Tryprostatin B’s
six-membered ring and protonated Glu102 through two hydrogen bonds
(see Figure 1a of the ). In the later stages of the MD simulation, the water molecule escapes
the active site and two other hydrogen bonds are formed: one from
the protonated oxygen on Glu102 to the oxygen atom on Tryprostatin
B’s six-membered ring and the other from the oxygen atom on
Glu102 to the nitrogen atom on Tryprostatin B’s six-membered
ring (see Figure 1b of the ). At least at the short time scale of these simulations, Tryprostatin
B remains in the active site of FtmPT1, and to observe product loss,
lengthier simulations will be required.

Complete reaction profiles
with relative free energies and the
associated structures for the C5–C8 and C2–C9 pathways:
(1) prenyl transfer reaction and (2) proton transfer reaction. Distances
for the relevant reaction coordinates are given on the structures.
Free energies compared to the starting state are given above the green
and blue lines. Note the energies in parentheses for the proton transfer
step that are compared to their own starting state minima (for the
diphosphate and prenylated carbocation). The starting state for reaction
2 (proton transfer) is the relaxed state of the product from reaction
1 (prenylation reaction).

C2–C9 Reaction Pathway
To understand the regioselectivity
of native FtmPT1, we decided to examine the reaction pathway (C2–C9)
that generates the product observed in the G115T mutant of FtmPT1.
The initial steps in both the C5–C8 and C2–C9 pathways
are identical (cleavage of the DMAPP C–O bond), so the origin
of regioselectivity is another step in the reaction. From a study
of the C2–C9 pathway, we will garner insights into how the
enzyme controls its product distribution once the carbocation intermediate
is formed.

Prenyl Transfer Process
For the prenyl transfer part,
the computed 2D free energy profile is given in Figure b. From this 2D FEP map, we find that the C2–C9 pathway
is similar to the C5–C8 pathway. For the formation of the carbocation,
the cleavage of the DMAPP C–O bond is again rate-limiting,
while the resultant minima on the surface between C2–C9 and
C5–C8 are very similar. Hence, the C2–C9 prenyl transfer
reaction also follows an SN1 reaction mechanism, which
supports the mechanistic hypothesis depicted in Figure b. This means that the enzyme does not favor one product or
another from a thermodynamic perspective along the pathway generating
the appropriately positioned carbocation intermediate.

Looking
into the details of the C2–C9 reaction pathway based on the
2D FEP shown in Figure b, we find that the
reaction starts at a C2–C9 distance of 4.49 Å and a C5–O6
distance of 1.42 Å, with the first transition state at a C2–C9
distance of 3.81 Å and a C5–O6 distance of 2.45 Å,
which cleaves the C5–O6 bond on DMAPP. A relatively stable
dimethylallyl carbocation is formed reaching the intermediate state
at a C2–C9 distance of 2.15 Å and a C5–O6 distance
of 6.05 Å. The carbocation then forms a C–C bond with
C9 on the indole ring of Brevianamide F via a second transition state
at a C2–C9 distance of 1.95 Å and a C5–O6 distance
of 5.95 Å. The final prenylation product, which is the protonated
state of the novel product, was finally formed at a C2–C9 distance
of 1.65 Å and a C5–O6 distance of 6.35 Å.

The
energy barriers for each state are listed in Table . Compared to the C5–C8 prenylation reaction,
we find that the first transition state has a similar free energy
barrier of 18.5 kcal/mol with respect to the starting state. As noted
above, this is because the first transition state involves the cleavage
of only the C5–O6 bond on DMAPP and has nothing to do with
C–C bond formation.

For C–C bond formation, the
two free energy barriers for
C2–C9 and C5–C8 are essentially identical at ∼10.0
kcal/mol with respect to the starting state. The free energy for the
C5–C8 prenylated product (5.3 kcal/mol) was slightly lower
than that of C2–C9 (6.5 kcal/mol). This is because the C2–C9
prenylated product is less stable because of steric effects associated
with the formation of a highly substituted C–C bond (see Figure b).

Cyclization and Proton Transfer Process
Prior to the
deprotonation process for the C2–C9 reaction pathway, similarly,
we find that the relaxation from the protonated prenylation product
(with a C5–O6 distance of 6.35 Å) to the deprotonation
starting state (with a C5–O6 distance of 11.15 Å) involves
a free energy decrease of 5.7 kcal/mol (see Figure 7 of the ). This energy decrease
was included for the total reaction, as shown in Figure b and Table .

For the deprotonation
process, the C2–C9 reaction pathway was more complicated than
the C5–C8 one, as the protonated prenylation product had to
undergo another cyclization process in addition to the deprotonation
step to yield the final product. The cyclization takes place via C8–N7
bond formation yielding a new five-membered ring between indole and
the six-membered ring of Brevianamide F generating Tryprostatin B
(see Figure ). To fully characterize this
pathway, we used a 2D FEP approach. A 2D graph is shown in Figure b with the C8–N7 distance as the X-axis and the H(@N7)–N7 distance as the Y-axis. From this 2D map, we were able to fully characterize
the details of this deprotonation/cyclization process.

From
the starting state at the bottom right with a C8–N7
distance of 3.0 Å and a H(@N7)–N7 distance of 1.0 Å,
the transition state is reached at a C8–N7 distance of 2.05
Å and a H(@N7)–N7 distance of 1.27 Å, where both
the N7–C8 bond is starting to be formed and the H(@N7)–N7
bond is starting to break. H@N7 then left N7 and transferred the extra
proton to Glu102 by bridging of the water molecule close to them,
while the final product was finally formed by formation of the N7–C8
bond with a distance of 1.55 Å. At this time, the H atom was
3.4 Å from N7. One more possibility for the transition state
was observed at a C8–N7 distance of 1.65 Å and a H(@N7)–N7
distance of 1.25 Å. In both cases, the H(@N7)–N7 bond
breaks and the proton ends up bound to Glu102 via an activationless
transfer through the active site water molecule. The transition state
free energy barrier for the first pathway is 16.0 kcal/mol, while
for the second one, the free energy barrier is 16.5 kcal/mol. The
two transition states are along a ridge between the starting state
and the final product and differ by the amount by which the N7–C8
bond is formed, the former being longer than the latter. The first
pathway is favored and will be used throughout the remaining discussion.

With the energy barriers listed in Table , we find that the rate-determining step for the C5–C8 and
C2–C9 reaction pathways is the O–C bond cleavage step.
Because the prenylation reactions for both pathways follow an SN1 reaction mechanism and start from the same starting state,
the O–C bond cleavage process should be identical as observed.
The relative free energies for C5–C8 and C2–C9 prenylation
pathways are also nearly identical. Hence, the final proton transfer/cyclization
step determines the final product distribution. The cyclization/deprotonation
step (16.8 kcal/mol) for the C2–C9 pathway has a barrier much
higher than that for the C5–C8 deprotonation step (0.5 kcal/mol).
Thus, once the intermediate prenylation product is formed, the C5–C8
pathway transitions to the product nearly without activation, while
the C5–C8 pathway has a substantial barrier to overcome, which
is higher than that of the intermediate state itself. Equilibration
between C2–C9 and C5–C8 can then funnel away the C2–C9
pathway, yielding the exclusive C5–C8 product for the reaction.

Final Product Equilibration
To further explore the
binding interactions for the C2–C9 product, we performed a
22 ns classical MD simulation. Hydrogen bonds between the active site
water and Glh102 (protonated Glu) stabilized the final product within
the active site where it remained over the relatively short time scale
of the final classical MD simulation (see Figure 1c of the ).

π-Chamber
Binding Analysis
To further examine
the interactions between the formed carbocation and the aromatic groups
from the active site tyrosine residues during the prenyl transfer
reaction, we conducted QM calculations (Figure ), and the results are summarized in Table . From Table , we observe that Tyr435, which
has a T-stacking interaction with the carbocation (see Figures b and b), contributed similar
interaction energies to the C5–C8 (−9.81 kcal/mol) and
C2–C9 (−9.67 kcal/mol) reaction pathways. Tyr382 had
a −13.17 kcal/mol interaction energy with the C5–C8
intermediate carbocation and a −9.82 kcal/mol interaction energy
with the C2–C9 intermediate carbocation. Tyr450 contributed
−12.57 kcal/mol to the C5–C8 intermediate carbocation
and −10.58 kcal/mol to the C2–C9 intermediate carbocation.
Both Tyr382 and Tyr450 had a &gt;2.0 kcal/mol stronger interaction
with
the C5–C8 intermediate carbocation. In the case of Tyr450,
the π-chamber placed the least substituted end of the carbocation
into the face of this aromatic ring, while the C2–C9 intermediate
placed the methyl groups from the more substituted end into the face
of this aromatic ring. This placed more charge into the face of the
rings for C5–C8 than for C2–C9, ultimately leading to
a greater stabilization in this instance. For Tyr382, the situation
is less obvious, but it does appear that the intermediate carbocation
has a closer interaction with the aromatic ring of Tyr382, which might
afford the differential stabilization that is observed.

Truncated representations
of the intermediate state π-chambers
observed along the (a) C5–C8 prenylation and (b) C2–C9
prenylation pathways. The center fragment represents the carbocation,
and the phenol fragments represent truncated tyrosine residues.

Truncated snapshots for intermediate state π-chambers
observed
along the C5–C8 and C2–C9 prenylation pathways. (a–d)
Different views of the tyrosine phenol rings and the intermediate
carbocation.

Snapshots from the wild-type
FtmPT1 catalytic pathway along the
C5–C8 and C2–C9 reaction pathways: (a) starting and/or
resting state, (b) prenylation intermediate state, (c) prenylation
product (intermediate) state, (d) final product, and (e) final product
state inside FtmPT1. Numbers represent ligands and active site residues:
(1) DMAPP, (2) Brevianamide F, (3) OPP, (4) DMA and carbocation, (5)
protonated prenylation product, (6) final product, (7) Tyr205, (8)
Tyr382, (9) Tyr435, and (10) Tyr450. Pink residues (Arg113, Lys201,
Lys294, and Gln380) are hydrogen-bonded to the diphosphate anion;
ice blue residues (Glu102 and Tyr205) are hydrogen-bonded to Brevianamide
F.

π–Cation
Interaction
Energies (kilocalories per mole) for the Carbocation Intermediate
States along the C5–C8 and C2–C9 Reaction Pathways
pathway	Y382	Y435	Y450	
C5–C8	–13.17	–9.81	–12.57	
C2–C9	–9.82	–9.67	–10.58	
To further study the factors stabilizing the phosphate
dianion
and the carbocation, we conducted an energy decomposition analysis.
Figure 2 of the  shows
the four states involved in the C5–C8 pathway with their interacting
residues and water molecules. From the figure, we observe that the
diphosphate group is stabilized by hydrogen bonding interactions with
the side chains of Arg113, Lys201, Tyr205, Gln380, Lys294, Tyr450,
and nine crystal water molecules (not shown in the figure) in all
states that were examined. It also reveals the reason for stabilization
of the DMA+ carbocation: the surrounding side chains of
the tyrosine residues (Tyr201, Tyr382, Tyr435, and Tyr450) play an
important role in stabilizing the carbocation from beginning to end
via π–cation interactions. Specifically, at the intermediate
state, Tyr382 was parallel to the carbocation, while Tyr435 and Tyr450
were perpendicular to the carbocation. These three residues are perfectly
situated to stabilize of the carbocation. Table 1 of the  also shows the decomposition
free energies for these four tyrosine residues paired with the DMA+ carbocation using MM-PBSA. The results show that the tyrosine
residues have strong van de Waals interactions with the carbocation.
Hence, all four tyrosine residues help to stabilize DMA+ from bond cleavage to new bond formation.

Conclusion
We have successfully conducted QM/MM simulations to further elucidate
the catalytic mechanism for the prenyltransferase reaction catalyzed
by wild-type FtmPT1. We explored the reaction of Brevianamide F with
DMAPP via the C5–C8 and C2–C9 reaction channels and
found, as expected, that C5–C8 and C2–C9 had very similar
activation parameters for the prenylation step. Hence, the final proton
transfer/cyclization step was the product-determining step for these
reactions, with the deprotonation of the C5–C8 intermediate
being nearly without activation (0.5 kcal/mol), while the deprotonation
process for the C2–C9 pathway had a substantial barrier (higher
than the C5–C8 and C2–C9 intermediate states) of 16.8
kcal/mol, resulting in the exclusive formation of the wild-type product
Tryprostatin B. A key feature of the final deprotonation step was
the involvement of a bridging water molecule between the transferring
proton and Glu102, which was found in both cases to be the proton
receptor.

Via energy decomposition analysis, we assessed the
stabilizing
effects of active site tyrosine residues on the DMA+ carbocation
at the QM level. The surrounding tyrosine residues formed a π-chamber
resulting in cation−π interactions between the formed
carbocation intermediate and the π-chamber. The C5–C8
carbocation was stabilized 5.48 kcal/mol more than the C2–C9
carbocation intermediate. The origin of this is the placement of the
methyl groups into the aromatic faces for the C2–C9 intermediate,
while the hydrogen atoms from the primary end of the allyl cation
are placed into the aromatic faces for C5–C8. Finally, the
diphosphate anion leaving group was stabilized throughout by Arg113,
Lys201, Tyr205, Gln380, Lys294, Tyr450, and nine crystal water molecules
in the active site of FtmPT1.

Supporting Information Available
We provide
binding site snapshots
for each stable state, 1D FEPs for O–C bond cleavage and C5–C8
bond formation, 1D FEPs for the relaxation of the prenylation product,
RESP charges of the carbocation, and a table of decomposition free
energies contributed by tyrosine residues with respect to the stability
of the carbocation. This material is available free of charge via
the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500747z_si_001.pdf

We acknowledge
the financial support from National Institutes of Health Grants GM044974
and GM066859.

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank
Dr. Michael Weaver for meaningful discussions on
this topic. We also thank the high-performance computing center at
the University of Florida (UFHPC) for providing and maintaining computational
resources.

Abbreviations
MDmolecular dynamics

QM/MMquantum mechanics/molecular mechanics

AMBERassisted model
building with energy refinement

SANDERsimulated annealing with NMR-derived energy
restraints

WHAMweighted histogram analysis method

rmsdroot-mean-square deviation

RESPrestrained electrostatic potential

GAFFgeneral Amber
force field

PMEparticle mesh Ewald

PTprenyltransferase

DMAPPdimethylallyl pyrophosphate

DMA+dimethylallyl carbocation

TStransition state.

