Intrinsically
disordered proteins
(IDPs) have revolutionized structural biology in recent years. Despite
a lack of well-folded, crystallizable structure in the conventional
sense, they fulfill essential functions in eukaryotic life and thus
challenge the traditional structure–function paradigm., The flexible and dynamic structure of IDPs and their ability to
adopt different functional structures (e.g., folding upon binding)
yet allow for multiple interactions of a particular protein with several
binding partners., This makes IDPs intriguing substrates
for studies in modern proteomics. Also from a biophysical and structural
biology point of view, IDPs remain puzzling in many aspects. Because
of the limited number of experimental techniques suited for investigations
of IDPs, their solution states, conformational space, and modes of
conformational sampling are not well understood.,, However, there is a growing body of evidence
that these proteins commonly classified as disordered or unstructured
should be conceived as “ensembles of a continuum of rapidly
interconverting structures” that
contain a heterogeneous assembly of conformations, ranging from random
coils to compact structures that have regions that have stronger tendencies
toward secondary structures.− Often, preformed local secondary
structure elements comprise epitopes for biologically relevant protein
interactions.− Although these partially preformed elements typically undergo folding-upon-binding
events resulting in stable structural arrangements of separated interaction
elements, no distinct tertiary structure is observed in the apo state.

Motivated by the fact that in the past several years intrinsically
local magnetic resonance techniques, especially nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR), have led to intriguing insight into conformational and dynamic
properties of IDPs, we here apply solution-state
NMR in combination with frozen-state electron paramagnetic resonance
(EPR) spectroscopy to an IDP. We aim to combine data gained from a
dynamic system state (NMR) with data about a static snapshot of the
system (EPR) to gain a detailed picture of structural transition events
that are potentially comprised in the conformational space of an IDP.
We have chosen Osteopontin (OPN) as a model compound, because earlier
studies have shown that this IDP exhibits interesting structural properties
like preformed ligand binding sites and a varying compactness profile
along the disordered protein backbone. From a biological point of
view, OPN is a cytokine involved in metastasis of several kinds of
cancer (see ref () for a biophysical characterization of OPN)., Here
we show through the combination of EPR and NMR that OPN is also interesting
from a biophysical point of view. The compound samples a broad distribution
of compact and expanded conformations as expected for an IDP, and
the conformational sampling also comprises cooperative folding and
unfolding events. Cooperative folding is well-documented in classical
proteomics, where transitions between random coil and globular states
with distinct long-range interactions are typically described as first-order
processes. These transitions are in most cases sigmoidal in nature, and different conformations constitute energetically
different thermodynamic states. The unexpected
finding reported here requires that the classification of IDPs in
terms of rapidly interconverting structures has to be augmented by
simultaneous conformational sampling of extended as well as cooperatively
folded conformations, i.e., with the fact that in IDPs different conformations
of a single protein may interconvert via cooperative (phase) transitions.

Initial studies combining NMR and EPR for partially unfolded proteins
have already been published. The complementary
combination of EPR with NMR spectroscopy applied here leads to coarse-grained
information about the conformational states of the disordered OPN
(EPR) as well as detailed information about its folded conformations
(NMR). This combined magnetic resonance methodology and data interpretation
may be applicable to other disordered protein systems.−

Experimental Procedures
Protein Preparation
The expression
and purification
of recombinant quail OPN protein (OPN220) mutants were performed as
described previously. All details of
protein expression, purification, and spin labeling are given in ref (). Essentially, cysteine
mutations were introduced using the QuickChangeII site-directed mutagenesis
kit (Stratagene). For NMR and EPR analysis, all protein samples were
concentrated to 0.8 mM in phosphate buffer [50 mM sodium phosphate
and 50 mM NaCl (pH 6.5)] in a 90% H2O/D2O mixture.
EPR double mutants were tagged with the nitroxide spin label (1-oxyl-2,2,5,5-tetramethyl-Δ3-pyrroline-3-methyl)
methanethiosulfonate (MTSL), in a process analogous to the labeling
procedure described in ref (). For the purpose of this work, the choice of the label
is, however, not crucially important, because the increase in ring
rigidity one would gain by changing to PROXYL is negligible. The protein
mutants were subject to rigorous purification using PD-10 desalting
columns to remove all excess spin labels. The labeling efficiency
was determined by means of 5,5′-dithiobis(2-nitrobenzoic acid)
(DTNB) and UV–vis absorbance. The labeling efficiency was always
&gt;95%.

Experimental Double Electron–Electron Resonance (DEER)
DEER is applied to glassy solids obtained by freeze quenching the
solutions after addition of 30% (v/v) glycerol. [Note that the presence
of 20–30% (v/v) glycerol in buffered solutions of proteins
is known to not affect protein conformations significantly.] This is achieved by immersing the sample tube
in supercooled isopentane. In this way, a snapshot representative
of the solution at the glass transition temperature is detected. Prior
to being freeze-quenched, the samples were transferred to 3 mm outer
diameter quartz tubes. The sample volume was approximately 100 μL
and always large enough to fill the complete sensitive volume in the
resonator. The four-pulse DEER sequence π/2(νobs)−τ1–π(νobs)–(τ1 + t)−π(νpump)–(τ2 – t)−π(νobs)−τ2–echo was used to obtain dipolar time evolution data at X-band
frequencies (9.2–9.4 GHz) with a Bruker Elexsys 580 spectrometer
equipped with a Bruker Flexline split-ring resonator (ER4118X_MS3).
The dipolar evolution time t was varied, whereas
τ2 (3 μs) and τ1 were kept
constant. Proton modulation was averaged by the addition of eight
time traces of variable τ1 values, starting with
a τ1,0 of 200 ns and using increments (Δτ1) of 8 ns. The resonator was overcoupled to Q ≈ 100. The pump frequency, νpump, was set
to the maximum of the EPR spectrum. The observer frequency, νobs, was set to νpump + 61.6 MHz, coinciding
with the low-field local maximum of the nitroxide spectrum. The observer
pulse lengths were 32 ns for both π/2 and π pulses, and
the pump pulse length was 12 ns. The temperature was set to 50 K by
cooling with a closed cycle cryostat (ARS AF204, customized for pulse
EPR, ARS, Macungie, PA). The total measurement time for each sample
was ∼12 h. The resulting time traces were normalized to t = 0.

DEER Background Correction
Background
correction was
conducted by dividing by experimental functions gained by DEER on
four spin labeled single mutants (C54, C108, C188, C427). All single-mutant
data corresponded to a homogeneous three-dimensional distribution
of spins (homogeneous exponential decay). Measurements on single mutants
were taken at similar protein concentrations as in the case of the
double mutants (0.8 mM) to ensure a similar excluded volume. Because
the spin concentration was therefore only half the concentration as
in the case of double mutants, this adds a factor of 2 to the exponent
of the homogeneous background function to compensate for the lower
concentration:where cpump is
the concentration of the spins resonant at frequency νpump and d = 3. g1 and g2 are the g values of the observer
and the pump spin, respectively, in a two-spin system. μ0 is the magnetic moment of the electron spin. βe is the Bohr Magneton. λ is an experimental constant
that denotes the fraction of spins flipped by the pump pulse (ℏ
= h/2π). The concentration factor of 2 can,
however, be neglected (as we did for background correction) for the
relative comparison used for analysis of the data presented here.

Determination of Δeff
Δeff was determined by fitting the background-corrected DEER
data with a Gaussian distance distribution according to eqs S3–S5
of the . As such,
a VR(t) was determined
from the fit and Δeff = 1 – VR(t = 3 μs).

Experimental
NMR Spectroscopy
NMR spectra were recorded
at 20 °C on Varian spectrometers operating at 500, 600, and 800
MHz. OPN220 protein samples were dissolved in 50 mM sodium phosphate
and 50 mM NaCl (pH 6.5) with 10% D2O as the lock solvent.
PRE intensity ratios were derived from pulsed field gradient (PFG)
sensitivity-enhanced two-dimensional 15N–1H HSQC spectra of 15N-labeled OPN220 mutants C54, C108,
C188, and C247. NMR spectra were processed
using NMRPipe and analyzed using SPARKY.

Paramagnetic
Relaxation Enhancements (PREs)
Single-cysteine
OPN220 mutants (C54, C108, C188, and C247) were tagged with the nitroxide
spin label (1-oxyl-2,2,5,5-tetramethyl-Δ3-pyrroline-3-methyl)
methanethiosulfonate (MTSL). The overall PRE effect on OPN220 was
measured as the intensity ratio of cross-peaks in presence (I+MTLS) and absence (I–MTSL) of the cysteine-attached spin labels, as ΔMTSL = I+MTLS/I–MTSL. To account for possible interactions of the spin label with the
protein, we added MTSL to untagged, 15N-labeled OPN220
at a final concentration of 1 mM. The intensity ratios (peak intensity)
of OPN220 with unbound and free (I+FREEMTSL) and without (I–MTSL) MTSL (ΔUNSPEC = I+FREEMTSL/I–MTSL) were combined with the intensity ratios
from attached MTSL (ΔMTSL) to calculate the PRE effect
on the protein: PRE = ΔMTSL + (1 – ΔUNSPEC). ΔPRE was calculated as the difference in signal
heights under nondenaturing conditions and high-urea and -salt conditions
as ΔPRE = 15N–1H HSQC intensity
(high urea and salt) – 15N–1H
HSQC intensity (no urea or salt).

The usage of two different
samples in the presence and absence of free MTSL is a necessary to
ensure that MTSL itself does not have an intrinsic binding affinity
for certain preferential protein sites. This cannot be probed by reduction
of covalently attached MTSL, because the native protein conformations
could not be separated from MTSL-induced folding in this case.

It should be noted that significant spectral overlap at 8 M urea
and high NaCl concentrations precluded the extraction of a complete
PRE data set. Additionally, PRE measurements under complete denaturation
conditions using both high urea and NaCl concentrations were not possible
because of substantial viscosity effects (and thus substantially broadened
NMR signals).

13C–1H HSQC
NMR
Reductive
methylation procedures were performed as described by Means and Feeney. The protein was dialyzed against 10 mM HEPES,
150 mM NaCl, and 1 mM DTT buffer (pH 7.4); 0.25 mL of 1.6 mM borane
dimethylamine complex [(CH3)2NH·BH3] and 0.5 mL of 1.6 mM 13C-labeled formaldehyde
were added to 0.5 mL of 0.1 mM protein, and the reaction mixture was
incubated while being stirred at 4 °C. Subsequently, the addition
of the borane ammonium complex and [13C]formaldehyde was
repeated, and the reaction mixture was incubated for an additional
2 h. After 0.12 mL of a 1.6 mM borane ammonium complex solution had
been added, the reaction mixture was incubated at 4 °C while
being stirred overnight. The reaction was quenched by adding glycine
to yield a concentration of 200 mM. Undesired reaction products as
well as excess reagents were removed by dialysis against Tris buffer
(pH 7.4). The sample was concentrated to a final concentration of
approximately 0.1 mM. Two-dimensional 13C–1H HSQC NMR experiments were conducted with synthesized 13C-methylated Osteopontin on a Varian Innova 600 MHz spectrometer.

Results and Discussion
We first probe structural preferences
of OPN by applying the EPR-based
method double electron–electron resonance (DEER) spectroscopy
to six spin labeled Cys double mutants of 220-residue truncated OPN
[residues 45–264 of the native protein; we denote the spin
labeled OPN double mutants as Cx–Cy (n/3 E, L, or S) with x and y being the labeling sites, n/3 the fraction spanned by the respective mutant, and E, L, or S
the shape (exponential, linear, or sigmoidal, respectively) of the
denaturation profile as will be explained below]. Mutants C54–C108
(1/3 L), C108–C188 (1/3 L), and C188–C247 (1/3 E) each
span approximately one-third of the whole protein; mutants C54–C188
(2/3 S) and C108–C247 (2/3 L) each span approximately two-thirds
of the protein, and mutant C54–C247 (3/3 S) spans nearly the
whole truncation mutant (see Figure  for a
schematic representation of the spanned ranges). Conformational stabilities,
understood here as resistance to urea unfolding, of these individual
structural segments of OPN are investigated by recording DEER time
traces for the different double mutants that are dependent on the
urea concentration. In a second step, we investigate cooperatively
compacted states by means of paramagnetic relaxation enhancements
and rationalize our results on the basis of noncovalent structuring
principles in OPN.

Scheme of spin labeling sites along the protein backbone
and sketch
of residues spanned by each of the six OPN double mutants.

Cooperative Transition Events
DEER experiments yield
nonaveraged data [i.e., the superposition of data from every single
OPN molecule in the shock-frozen solution (see  and section 1 and Figure S1 of the  for a detailed description of DEER)] that, after
background correction that eliminates intermolecular contributions,
display intramolecular dipole–dipole couplings between the
two electrons of the spin labels of double mutants as damped cosine
modulation of time domain traces. These traces are the evolution of
echo intensity with interpulse delay for the four-pulse DEER sequence
as described in the .

DEER time traces of C108–C188 (1/3 L) and C54–C247
(3/3 S) at different urea concentrations. Δeff is
defined as the signal decay at 3 μs, as indicated by the double-headed
arrow [note the different V(t)/V(0) scales].

In particular, the modulation is related to the dipolar coupling
frequency that in turn depends on the interspin distance, R, as R–3. Typical DEER data for an OPN double mutant at
different urea concentrations are shown in Figure  for two different double mutants [C108–C188 (1/3 L),
representative of a double mutant defining a small OPN segment, and
C54–C247 (3/3 S), representative of a large segment]. No clear-cut
modulations can be observed after experimental background correction.
This indicates that the pair distribution functions, P(R), between the two spin labels of the two double
mutants (R being the distance between the two spins)
are quite broad, because the sum over varying damped cosines converges
to exponential decay functions. This is expected for an IDP with very
broad conformational ensembles like OPN, because every conformation (corresponding to a certain R) gives rise to a certain modulation function (the complete data
set for all double mutants is shown in Figures S2 and S3 of the ; all time traces are devoid
of modulations). In contrast, globular
proteins frequently display DEER time traces with significant and
apparent dipolar modulations because their narrow conformational ensembles
give rise to a restricted interspin distance range (see Figure S1b
of the  for time
traces calculated from a single discrete interspin distance). Because the established standard analysis methods cannot be applied for the nonmodulated DEER
data under investigation, we analyze DEER time traces through an effective
modulation depth, Δeff (as sketched in Figure  and Figure S1b of the ), which denotes the total signal decay at a tmax of 3 μs. As such, Δeff = 1 – V(t = 3 μs)/V(t = 0). V(t) is the DEER echo intensity at time t [for details
on the determination of Δeff, see ]. Three microseconds is with our setup the longest achievable experimental
DEER evolution time for this study but is generally arbitrary for
the proposed analysis of very broad distance distributions reflected
in large conformational ensembles. Δeff is an approximate
measure of the average interspin distance for broad P(R) values. For broad distance distributions Δeff decreases with an increasing interspin distance R. As such, a decrease in Δeff with an
increasing urea concentration is representative for unfolding and
expansion of a doubly spin labeled protein of interest. This is shown
and explained in detail in section 1 of the  and graphically illustrated in Figure S1b,c of
the  for calculated
data.

(a) Δeff for selected double mutants as a function
of urea concentration. All the data for all double mutants under investigation
can be found in Figures S2–S4 of the . (b) Detailed representation of Δeff for C54–C247 (3/3 S) as a function of urea concentration.
Error bars stem from signal noise. The gray curve is based on a sigmoidal
data fit to confirm the visual observation of sigmoidality. The fit
is based on the relationship Δeff = a + b/{1 + exp[−c(urea) – m]/s}.

In Figure a, experimental Δeff values are shown as a function of urea concentration for
selected
double mutants comprising segments of OPN of different lengths (i.e.,
starting from the C-terminus approximately one-third, two-thirds,
and the entire truncation mutant; for the entire data set, see Figures
S2–S4 of the ). For the C-terminal part of OPN, comprised by the mutant C188–C247
(1/3 E), an exponential decay of Δeff (i.e., an increase
in interspin distance) can be observed with an increasing urea concentration.
This mutant gives rise to the steepest observed slope of any of the
Δeff functions and can hence be regarded as a relative
reference for the effect of conformational denaturation on unstably
folded protein segments of potentially random coil-like character.
Already for low urea concentrations, such segments show significant
conformational expansion (i.e., a decrease in Δeff) in accordance with the idea of very low stability of transient
or residual structural elements in IDPs. For mutant C108–C247
(2/3 L) [as well as for mutants C54–C108 (1/3 L) and C108–C188
(1/3 L) (see Figure S4 of the )], one observes an approximately linear decrease in Δeff with urea concentration, indicating that the OPN segment
framed by this mutant (approximately two-thirds of the protein) is
on average conformationally more stable than the segment between C188
and C247 [C188–C247 (1/3 E)], although still largely unstructured,
random coil-like or (pre)molten globule-like. Strikingly, however,
for mutant C54–C247 (3/3 S) of OPN and C54–C188 (2/3
S), we observe a sigmoidal development of the Δeff-derived denaturation profiles with urea concentration (see Figure b). Sigmoidality is a hallmark of cooperative folding
of protein conformations and unexpected for an IDP. The sigmoidal development of Δeff is depicted
in more detail for C54–C247 (3/3 S) in Figure b. In Figure , the six spin label
pairs probed through the six double mutants of OPN are sketched and
labeled with the shape of the respective denaturation or Δeff profile, i.e., linear (L), exponential (E), or sigmoidal
(S).

Sketch of OPN double mutants assessed by DEER. Labels E (exponential),
L (linear), and S (sigmoidal) denote the profile shapes of the respective
Δeff functions (see Figure  and Figures S2 and S4 of the ).

A sigmoidal denaturation profile
is indicative of stably and cooperatively
folded tertiary structures of OPN, because for low urea concentrations
of ≤0.75 M the whole protein does not expand significantly
(as seen in a nearly constant Δeff). This observation
of a cooperatively folded conformation is surprising as P(R) values for OPN are generally quite broad, which
can be deduced from prior studies concerning OPN’s conformational
space and is reflected in the nonmodulated
DEER time traces (see section 1 and Figures S2–S4 of the  and Figure ). This interesting finding can, however, be understood by
concluding that the structural ensemble of OPN contains both cooperatively
folded and unfolded conformations and that both contribute to the
DEER signals. It should be noted that the interpretation of DEER data
is complicated by the fact that for rather small separations of spin
label sites both compact and extended (sub)structures contribute significantly
to the observed Δeff values. This means that compact
conformations contribute more strongly to DEER time domain data of
systems with distant spin labels (e.g., C54–C247 (3/3 S)).
In contrast, if the spin labels come closer along the primary sequence
and the mean distance becomes shorter (e.g., C188–C247 (1/3
L)), longer distances more significantly dominate the DEER data. This
is shown in detail in section 2 of the . Because cooperatively folded conformations are
more compact than unfolded ones, sigmoidal Δeff profiles
can therefore only be observed for double mutants with labeling sites
that are separated by more than 130 residues, because in these cases
the mean distance of the conformational ensemble is large and hence
the time domain data are dominated by contributions of folded conformations
comprising short (electron–electron) distances. Hence, the
corresponding Δeff profiles are sigmoidal. In contrast,
for the three mutants that comprise only one-third of OPN, the DEER
signal is dominated by contributions of extended structures. These
exhibit linear or exponential denaturation profiles, lacking any sigmoidal
contributions to the development of Δeff. In general,
one can thus state for broad P(R) values that with increasing separations between two labeling sites
the relative contributions of compact conformations to the Δeff profiles increase. Compact conformations consequently dominate
the urea dependence of Δeff for C54–C247 (3/3
S), while extended conformations contribute more significantly to
Δeff for C188–C247 (1/3 E), C108–C188
(1/3 L), and C54–C108 (1/3 L). In summary, it is important
to note that only the simultaneous sampling of both extended and compact
(cooperatively folded) substates in OPN leads to superposition of
DEER data with a significantly different urea dependence: a sigmoidal
Δeff profile for mutant C54–C247 (3/3 S) and
only gradual changes for double mutants spanning segments smaller
than this mutant. Partial structuring as an underlying reason for
this observation can be ruled out. For C54–C247 (3/3 S) (nearly
the whole length of the truncation mutant), cooperative unfolding
can be observed, while this is not the case for the inner segments
comprising only approximately one-third of OPN. The latter would,
however, necessarily be the case if any segment of OPN would be statically,
partially structured. This deduction is possible here only because
EPR of freeze-quenched solutions elucidates the whole set of coexisting
conformations; ensemble averaged data here would not allow one to
discern between partial structuring and sampling of compact conformations.
In summary, OPN’s structural behavior comprises cooperative
phase transition events between compact and expanded conformations.

Noncovalent Structuring Principles of OPN Conformations As Seen
in DEER Data
Given the enrichment (compared to the whole
proteome) of polar and charged amino acids in IDPs, one can expect
the stabilization of cooperative folded structures of OPN (as a necessary
consequence of the cooperative phase transition events) likely to
be triggered by electrostatic interactions. In Figure , the effect of 4 M NaCl on Δeff is shown for the six double mutants under investigation
in the presence and absence of 8 M urea. Figure a shows Δeff values for denaturation conditions
with 4 M NaCl, 8 M urea, or 4 M NaCl with 8 M urea. Figure b shows exemplary DEER time traces for double mutant
C108–C188 under these conditions and its native state. Note
that NaCl does not significantly affect the effective modulation depth
in the absence of urea but does in its presence. For C108–C188
(1/3 L) and C54–C188 (2/3 S), Δeff decreases
with an increasing NaCl concentration even at 8 M urea. As such, the
interspin distance still increases because of the increasing NaCl
concentration even if 8 M urea is already present in the solution.
Thus, one can state that urea alone does not expand OPN as strongly
as urea in combination with NaCl. NaCl alone has only small effects
on Δeff. This can be rationalized as follows. NaCl
screens electrostatic interactions, while urea does not.− Hence, screening of electrostatic interactions seems not to be enough
to significantly expand OPN’s conformations. Only complementary
screening of hydrophobic interactions and hydrogen bonds by urea and
screening of electrostatics through NaCl lead to the most effective
expansion of OPN’s conformations. Hence, one might speculate
that urea alone is not sufficient to completely denature OPN and eliminate
all residual structural elements from its conformations; only the
combination of complementary screening agents might be sufficiently
strong. This is remarkable because earlier biophysical characterizations
of OPN undoubtedly classify this protein as intrinsically disordered. The significant electrostatic contribution to
the energetics of OPN’s conformational sampling modes is discussed
in more detail below, taking into account paramagnetic relaxation
enhancement (PRE) data. Protein dimerization as a possible source
of error is ruled out through DEER measurements performed on the four
corresponding single mutants (see section 3 and Figure S7 of the ). There, completely homogeneous
spin distributions are observed, indicating that OPN does not show
any form of aggregation at the concentrations (0.8 mM) used for the
DEER (and NMR) measurements.

(a) Δeff values for the different
double mutants
under different denaturing conditions (4 M NaCl, 8 M urea, or 4 M
NaCl with 8 M urea). (b) Exemplary (for C108–C188 (1/3 L))
DEER time traces for different denaturation conditions (4 M NaCl,
8 M urea, or 4 M NaCl with 8 M urea).

It should be noted that there is a growing body of evidence
of
the so-called direct mechanism of urea denaturation to describe protein–urea
interaction correctly., This mechanism states that urea
directly binds to the protein backbone likely (primarily) through
dispersive interactions and thereby interrupts protein structure-stabilizing
interactions., For this case of urea denaturation
of OPN, this direct mechanism might be important for gaining a full
understanding of the DEER data, because the Δeff values
for some cases indicate mean distances between two labeling sites
that are longer than the distance one would expect in a random coil
polypeptide. For example, for the 54–108 mutants, one would
expect distances between the two labels of ∼10 nm from Δeff (see Figure S1c of the ), while for a true random coil with a Flory characteristic ratio
of 2, distances of ∼6 nm would be expected. This discrepancy might be traced back to binding of urea
to the protein backbone, which leads to longer persistence lengths
or rather scaling exponents and thus also to longer inter-residue
distances.

Noncovalent Structuring
Principles of OPN Conformations As Seen
in NMR Data
The urea dependence of NMR backbone chemical
shift 15N–1H (cs) data was analyzed for
residues of the core region and of the terminal region of OPN (see
Figure a, , and Figure S5 of the ; the superposition of 15N–1H NMR spectra at different urea concentration
is shown in Figure S8 of the ). The data show only marginal chemical shift changes (Δcs)
observed below 1 M for some residues in the compact core region (171
and to some degree 144), and Δcs increases substantially only
with ≥2 M urea. For most residues in and outside the core region,
a more or less steady increase in Δcs can be observed. The core
regions are approximately located between residues 100 and 180 (see
Figure S5 of the  for more cs data for residues of the core segment of OPN). Overall, larger chemical shift changes were
observed for residues located in the compact core of OPN (100–180).
Most importantly, slight deviations from the linear Δcs versus
urea concentration behavior were observed for residues in the core
segment (171 and 144). It should be noted that all conformational
substates of OPN contribute to the observed chemical shift changes.
Given the small population of the compact structure, only small contributions
can be expected. Although the cooperative phase transition observed
by means of EPR, indicating the existence of rather stable conformations
of OPN that resist denaturation by lower urea concentrations, cannot
generally be reproduced through Δcs, the chemical shift changes
clearly provide additional evidence of a more compact segment in OPN
located between residues 100 and 180., As such, the
Δcs data are not in conflict with the interpretation derived
above from DEER.

(a) 15N–1H NMR chemical shift
changes
{calculated as cs[c(urea) = 0 M] – cs[c(urea) = x M]} of selected backbone positions
as a function of urea concentration. (b) 13C–1H HSQC of 13CH3-Lys-labeled side chains:
green for 0 M urea, pink for 2 M urea, blue for 4 M urea, and black
for 6 M urea. Note that the shift in the 1H dimension is
merely a consequence of readjusting the transmitter offset in the
dependence of the urea concentration to achieve suppression of water
signals.

An additional indication of the
existence of compact structures
in the conformational ensemble was provided by NMR observations of
side chain positions. In Figure b, data from 13C–1H HSQC [heteronuclear single-quantum
coherence (see 13C–1H HSQC NMR)] of 13CH3-Lys-labeled
OPN are shown. The majority of cross-peaks is overlapped and stems
from side chains of residues in random coil-like conformations (signal
at a higher number of parts per million of the 1H dimension),
which are typically more solvent-exposed and flexible than residues
in folded protein segments. However, a fraction of methyl cross-peaks
(approximately 20% as determined from fitting signal volumes; signal
at a lower number of parts per million of the 1H dimension)
is significantly shifted from the bulk signals. This shows that a
fraction of the lysine residues in the conformational ensemble are
exposed to an environment that is different from that observed for
random coil polypeptides. This might indicate that the conformational
ensemble partially exists in a compacted form in which the lysine
residues are embedded in a more water-depleted core. As such, the 13C–1H HSQC is not in conflict with the EPR-derived
conclusion that part of the conformational ensemble of OPN cooperatively
folds into compact conformations. The shifted lysine peaks even remain
unchanged and clearly separated from the bulk of lysine side chains
at urea concentrations of ≤1 M. We refrain here from analyzing
this observation in the context of cooperativity, yet it further supports
the existence of compact structures in the ensemble of OPN. The NMR 15N–1H chemical shift changes and 13C–1H HSQC data (that is, backbone-based as well
as side chain-based data) are in agreement with a compact, presumably
cooperatively folded substate in the conformational ensemble of OPN
besides large fractions of extended conformations.

Paramagnetic
Relaxation Enhancements
Because in a hypothetical
random coil polymer paramagnetic relaxation enhancements (PRE; i.e.,
enhanced relaxation rates of nuclear resonances due to the presence
of an electron spin) are limited to residues flanking the spin label
sites, the observation of specific and sizable long-range PRE effects
provides unambiguous evidence of the existence of compact states., PRE effects were measured for the four single mutants C54, C108,
C188, and C247. The different PRE-residue plots (see Figure a) show that the conformational ensemble of OPN
indeed features distinct long-range interactions. Specifically, the
PRE results obtained for mutants C108 and C188 provide clear evidence
of the prevalence of a structurally compact region in OPN encompassing
residues 100–200 (recall that intermolecular contributions
can be ruled out by DEER on the single mutants at the given concentration).
The structural stability of this compact conformation as a function
of urea and NaCl concentration was monitored further by condition-dependent
PRE changes. Figure b shows experimental PRE
differences (ΔPRE) measured under NaCl and high-urea conditions.

(a) PRE
data for the four single mutants C54, C108, C188, and C247.
Superimposed in blue are PREs calculated for random coils with a Flory
characteristic ratio of 2 by the Solomon–Bloembergen relation. The red dots mark the different labeling sites.
The asterisks mark stretches comprising larger numbers of unassigned
resonances. (b) Charge map of OPN (top; blue corresponds to patches
of primarily basic residues, red to patches of acidic residues, and
gray to primarily hydrophobic patches) and PRE changes (ΔPRE)
for high-salt (center) and high-urea (bottom) conditions obtained
for the C188 mutant [ΔPRE = 15N–1H HSQC intensity (high urea and salt) – 15N–1H HSQC intensity (no urea or salt)].

The significantly charged region encompassing residues 75–125
is nearly unaffected by the addition of urea but displays sizable
PRE changes under high-NaCl conditions, while residues 125–150
are strongly affected by urea. Hence, from these results and the EPR
results (also compare with Figure ), we can
conclude that hydrophobic interactions contribute to the structural
stability of OPN and electrostatics play a pivotal role in stabilizing
the compact substates of OPN in solution. These findings can be rationalized
by a closer inspection of the charge map of OPN (Figure b, top). In OPN, negative charges (acidic residues, red) are
concentrated in the region between residues 75 and 125, while there
is a high density of positive charges (basic residues, blue) in the
region between residues 145 and 165. The attraction between these
positively and negatively charged regions and the hydrophobic patches
around residues 60, 130, and 180 therefore suggest stabilizing interactions
and consequently stronger tertiary structure propensity between residues
60 and 180, compared to other
regions of OPN. In Figure , a sketch of OPN’s compact comformation is shown,
as one would derive it from the PRE data in Figure a. Long-range intrachain contacts between stretches between
residues 100 and 180 as well as a slight sampling of the more central
regions of OPN by the two termini are depicted. In conclusion, the
NMR data indicate significantly populated compact structures in OPN
that are stabilized (even cooperatively stabilized as evidenced by
the DEER data above) by both hydrophobic and electrostatic interactions.
This is also in excellent agreement with the NaCl dependence of Δeff (see Figure ). The significant
resistance to both urea and NaCl unfolding is clearly remarkable for
an IDP. It is thus reasonable to conclude that the subtle interplay
between conformation-stabilizing enthalpic contributions and destabilizing
entropic contributions ultimately account for OPN’s conformational
flexibility and its ability to cooperatively sample both unfolded
and cooperatively folded structures.

Sketch of the assumed “average”
structure of OPN
based on the PRE data. The arrows indicate significant PRE effects.
As such, OPN can be pictured as having a more compact core and back-folded
termini. The colors refer to the charge map in Figure b (blue corresponds to patches of primarily basic residues,
red to patches of acidic residues, and gray to primarily hydrophobic
patches).

Conclusion
Altogether,
we have shown that the IDP OPN cannot be described
by polymer physical models such as random coil or molten globule polymers. Instead, OPN simultaneously populates extended
as well as cooperatively folded structures and sigmoidal molecular
interconversion. This observation for OPN is a convincing experimental
demonstration of conformational sampling of different thermodynamic
states in an IDP. The fact that OPN samples
cooperatively stabilized as well as extended conformations further
is particularly intriguing in the context of IDP binding mechanisms.
Often protein recognition by IDPs proceeds via folding-upon-binding
events accompanied by disorder-to-order transitions, although even in the bound state IDPs (can) retain substantial
conformational flexibilities (“fuzziness”), be it static (multiple conformations) or dynamic
disorder (fluctuation between different states). Protein–protein
interaction is typically described either as an induced fit, or as a conformational selection fit. While the induced fit model postulates the formation of an encounter
complex followed by structural adaptation, conformational selection
indicates the existence of a conformational ensemble in which the
final bound state is partly present and populated by stabilizing intermolecular
interactions, although there is evidence that both mechanisms can
be active simultaneously. The existence
of a cooperatively folded substate in the structural ensemble of OPN
suggests protein–protein interactions occur largely via conformational
selection characterized by a significant reduction of the entropic
penalty and presumably reduced fuzziness in the bound state., The unexpected long-range preformation of the apo state of OPN might
thus be of relevance for providing specific interaction interfaces
across cellular surfaces and might thus endow OPN with unique abilities
to modulate interaction patterns with its several natural ligands.

Furthermore, our results substantiate recent
insights that urea-unfolded
states of proteins differ significantly from the native state of intrinsically
disordered proteins. We show that urea
can induce drastic structural rearrangements of IDPs and changes in
their conformational space. This is valid in terms of elongation of
end-to-end distances of random coils through coordination of urea
to the protein backbone, as stated above, and secondary structure
propensities become significantly altered and populations of compact
substates change when urea interacts with IDP backbones directly., Most importantly, the existence of structural cooperative transitions
from folded to unfolded states and vice versa in IDPs calls for a
novel conceptual view of IDPs that goes beyond the traditional binary
scheme of order versus disorder. The subtleties of heterogeneous conformational
sampling in IDPs and their putative relevance for biological functions
have to be adequately addressed.

Supporting Information Available
Supplementary NMR and EPR data,
experimental details, and details of sample preparation. This material
is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi400502c_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
D.K. and
G.P. contributed equally to this work.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We
thank Christian Bauer for technical support and Prof. Hans
W. Spiess for continuing support. M.A.H. acknowledges the support
of Professor Dr. Hassan Eisa, Dr. Alaa El-Din Barghash, and Dr. Laila
A. Abouzeid (Department of Pharmaceutical Organic Chemistry, Faculty
of Pharmacy, Mansoura University). The expression plasmid for wild-type
OPN was provided by the group of K. Bister (University of Innsbruck,
Innsbruck, Austria).

