High-fidelity
DNA polymerases,
such as Escherichia coli DNA polymerase I (Klenow
fragment) [Pol I(KF)], copy a DNA template with an accuracy far greater
than would be expected on the basis of the energetics of base pairing. This accuracy is attributed to a sequence of
noncovalent steps, preceding the chemical step of phosphoryl transfer,
which act as kinetic checkpoints ensuring that only a complementary
nucleotide with a deoxyribose sugar progresses efficiently toward
product formation. During each synthetic
cycle in vivo, the correct dNTP is outnumbered by
three noncomplementary dNTPs and a 10–100-fold excess of the
corresponding rNTP, but these are detected at the
early checkpoints, resulting in their rejection before commitment
to the chemistry step.

Cocrystal structures of Bacillus
stearothermophilus DNA polymerase (Bst DNA
pol), a very close A-family
homologue of Pol I(KF), provide snapshots of important conformations
likely to be part of the prechemistry steps in the reaction mechanism
(Figure ). The open Pol–DNA binary
complex (panel A) and the closed Pol–DNA–dNTP ternary
complex (panel C), formed in the presence of a complementary dNTP
(under conditions where the chemical step of incorporation cannot
take place), have been observed in many high-fidelity DNA polymerases.− The open and closed conformations differ by a substantial movement
of a segment of the fingers subdomain, including helix O that contains
several important active-site residues. More recently, partially closed
ternary complexes have been observed with Bst DNA
pol in the presence of a mismatched dNTP or a complementary rNTP;, in these structures, the mobile part of the fingers subdomain appears
to be on the trajectory between the open and closed conformations,
suggesting that the partially closed conformation might be an important
intermediate in the prechemistry steps.

Conformations of A-family
DNA polymerases illustrated using structural
data from Bst DNA pol. In panels A–C, the
protein backbone is colored gray, except for the portion of the fingers
subdomain from residue 680 to 714 [equivalent to residues 732–766
in Pol I(KF)] whose position changes during the fingers-closing transition
(blue). The green and red spheres mark the positions of residues 692
and 498, respectively, equivalent to residues 744 and 550 in Pol I(KF),
respectively, used for attachment of fluorescent probes in this study
and others. The duplex DNA substrate is colored orange, with the template
strand darker than the primer strand. The templating base, T(0), is
colored magenta, and its 5′ neighbor, T(+1), is colored cyan.
The T(−8) position, the location of a dabcyl quencher in the
FRET-based assay for fingers closing, is colored black. The incoming
dNTP, where present, is shown in stick representation in green. Panels
D–F show an expanded view of the polymerase active-site region.
Helices O and O1 of the protein are illustrated as ribbons.
The T(0) and T(+1) bases and the incoming dNTP are colored as in panels
A–C; the primer-terminal base pair is colored dark gray. Each
structure has a single divalent metal ion at the active site, represented
by a gold sphere. The E658 and Y714 side chains (equivalent to residues
E710 and Y766, mutated in our study) are colored blue and yellow,
respectively. The two carboxylate ligands to the catalytic metal ions
are colored pale gray; from left to right, they are D830 and D653
[D882 and D705, respectively, in Pol I(KF)]. This figure was made
using PyMOL (Schrödinger, LLC). The coordinate files used are
the open conformation from PDB entry 4BDP (A and D), the partially closed conformation, with mispaired G-dTTP, from PDB
entry 3HP6 (B
and E), and the closed conformation,
with correctly paired G-dCTP, from PDB entry 2HVI (C and F).

Our single-molecule FRET (smFRET) studies of Pol I(KF) also
indicate
the existence of a conformation intermediate between open and closed
complexes., The position of the fingers subdomain
was reported using FRET between a donor fluorophore on the mobile
portion of the fingers subdomain and an acceptor on the thumb subdomain
(green and red spheres, respectively, in Figure ). As expected, the binary complex had the majority of polymerase
molecules in the open conformation and the ternary complex with a
complementary dNTP had the majority in the fingers-closed conformation.
In the presence of mispaired dNTPs or complementary rNTPs, a novel
intermediate-FRET species was abundant in the molecular population.
Moreover, the FRET value of this species was consistent with the probe
positions predicted from the cocrystal structure of the Bst DNA pol partially closed mispaired ternary complex. Thus, it appears
that an intermediate conformation accumulates when the DNA polymerase
binary complex binds an inappropriate nucleotide substrate, raising
the possibility that this complex may be involved in the kinetic steps
that serve as checkpoints for correct substrate selection. A more
recent smFRET study of Pol I(KF), using probes on the protein and
DNA, is also consistent with this model.

In our lab, we have developed two different ensemble fluorescence
assays to investigate prechemistry conformational transitions in Pol
I(KF).− One reports the fingers-closing transformation using
a donor fluorophore on the fingers subdomain, as in the smFRET study
(green sphere in Figure ), and a quencher
located on the DNA template strand, eight bases back from the terminal
base pair (black in Figure ). The other uses
a fluorescent DNA base analogue, 2-aminopurine (2-AP), that reports
changes to the environment of the T(+1) base, 5′ to the templating
base (cyan in Figure ). In this study, we
have used these two assays to characterize the conformational shifts
associated with all four correctly paired ternary complexes, all 12
mispairs, and several rNTP-containing complexes. In WT Pol I(KF),
we show that the closed complex is highly populated only in the presence
of a complementary nascent base pair, while all other ternary complexes
fail to progress efficiently beyond the (presumed) partially closed
state. The T(+1)2-AP reporter distinguishes a variety of species within
the family of partially closed complexes, indicating that different
types of ternary complexes reach distinct conformational end points.

In Pol I(KF), two active-site side chains, E710 and Y766, play
important roles in maintaining selectivity in the polymerase reaction,
as shown by the reduced fidelity (mutator phenotype) associated with
some mutations in these residues.− Together, these two side chains define the boundaries
of the pocket that binds and constrains the shape of the nascent base
pair (Figure D–F): Y766 (blue) on the
template side and E710 (yellow) on the dNTP side. In the transitions
illustrated in Figure D–F, Y766 moves
to create space in the binding pocket for the templating base. The
contact surface between E710 and the nucleotide contributes to nucleotide
binding affinity as well as providing steric constraints that hinder
formation of a fully closed conformation with complementary ribonucleotides. In cocrystals of fully closed ternary complexes,
the homologues of Y766 and E710 are linked via a hydrogen bond (Figure F). Here we use substitutions at Y766 and E710 to
investigate the role of these side chains in the prechemistry fidelity
checkpoints.

Experimental Procedures
Materials
DNA
oligonucleotides for fluorescence and
kinetics experiments were synthesized by the Keck Biotechnology Resource
Laboratory at Yale Medical School and purified by denaturing gel electrophoresis.
Ultrapure deoxynucleotides and [γ-32P]ATP were purchased
from Amersham Pharmacia Biosciences (GE Healthcare).

Expression,
Purification, and IAEDANS Labeling of Pol I(KF)
Expression
and purification of the Pol I(KF) construct used for
fluorophore labeling have been described previously., The protein has an N-terminal hexahistidine tag for nickel chelate
affinity purification, the D424A mutation to inactivate the 3′–5′
exonuclease, the C907S mutation to remove the single native cysteine,
and the L744C mutation to provide a unique labeling site on the fingers
subdomain. These changes have no significant effect on DNA polymerase
activity. The N-His6/D424A/C907S/L744C
protein, termed the wild type (WT), was labeled with IAEDANS (Molecular
Probes, Eugene, OR) as described previously. The E710A, E710Q, Y766A, and Y766F mutations were introduced into
the Pol I(KF) construct described above, using the QuikChange site-directed
mutagenesis kit (Stratagene), according to the manufacturer’s
instructions.

Chemical Quench Experiments
Single-turnover
measurements
of nucleotide incorporation were made at room temperature (22 °C)
in a rapid quench-flow instrument (KinTek Corp. model RQF-3). The
DNA substrate was the linear duplex L:unmod:3′OH (Figure A), consisting of a 13-mer primer, 5′-labeled
with 32P (or, in a few experiments, Cy5), annealed to a
1.5-fold molar excess of the complementary 19-mer, with A, C, G, or
T as the templating base. The reaction was initiated by rapid mixing
of an enzyme/DNA solution (typically 2 μM polymerase and 0.2
μM primer–template duplex) with an equal volume of a
dNTP solution. Our standard polymerase reaction buffer, used in all
experiments, consisted of 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 1 mM EDTA, and
10 mM MgCl2. Reactions were quenched at appropriate time
intervals with excess EDTA, and mixtures were fractionated on denaturing
polyacrylamide–urea gels and quantitated on a Fuji FLA 5100
scanner.

DNA oligonucleotides used in this study. (A) DNA substrate used
in chemical quench experiments. The 13-mer primer, 5′-labeled
(indicated with an asterisk) with either 32P or Cy5, was
annealed to the 19-mer template. (B) DNA duplex oligonucleotide used
for 2-AP fluorescence measurements. The 2-AP fluorophore (P) is 5′
to the templating base, designated as the T(+1) position. (C) DNA
duplex oligonucleotide having 2-AP at the templating, T(0), position.
(D) DNA substrate used in FRET-based fluorescence measurements of
fingers closing. The dabcyl-dT quencher (D) was placed at the T(−8)
position. (E) Similar to D, but a hairpin DNA duplex, used in FRET-based
assays of fingers closing. Except for panel A, the primer strand was
dideoxy-terminated (3′H) to prevent the reaction from proceeding
beyond the ternary complex. To avoid having a run of three consecutive
G residues, the 5′ end of the template strand had the sequence
5′GGTATG when the templating base (underlined)
was G.

Incorporation of mismatched dNTPs
(at a final concentration of
1 mM) was measured using the same approach, but with manual sampling
because of the slower reaction rate. To remove any traces of the dNTP
complementary to the template base, a 2 mM solution of the dNTP was
pretreated for 5 min at 22 °C with 1.1 μM Pol I(KF) and
0.4 μM unlabeled duplex with the same template base that was
to be used in the incorporation experiment. This dNTP solution, now
depleted of impurities of the dNTP complementary to the templating
base, was then added to the mixture of polymerase and labeled DNA,
as described above.

Fluorescence Emission Spectra
Steady-state
fluorescence
spectra of 2-AP were recorded at 22 °C using a Photon Technology
International scanning spectrofluorometer. Solutions contained 1 μM
L:T(+1)2-AP:3′H duplex DNA (Figure B), formed by annealing the T(+1)2-AP template strand with a 1.5-fold
molar excess of the complementary primer strand, and 2 μM Pol
I(KF) in polymerase reaction buffer. Nucleotides were added to a final
concentration of 1 mM. Samples were excited at 310 nm, and emission
spectra were scanned from 330 to 460 nm. Spectra were corrected by
subtraction of the fluorescence emission contributed by the identical
concentration of Pol I(KF), with nucleotides where appropriate.

Stopped-Flow Fluorescence
Stopped-flow experiments
were performed at 22 °C using an Applied Photophysics SX.18MV
spectrofluorometer. For measurements using the T(+1)2-AP reporter,
one drive syringe contained a solution of L:T(+1)2-AP:3′H duplex
DNA with Pol I(KF) and the other contained nucleotide (complementary
or mismatched dNTP, or rNTP), all in polymerase reaction buffer. Rapid
mixing of the two solutions gave final concentrations of 0.5 μM
DNA and 1 μM Pol I(KF), with varied nucleotide concentrations
(indicated in the figures). The excitation wavelength for the 2-AP
probe was 313 nm, and fluorescence emission was detected using a 345
nm long-pass filter.

For FRET-based stopped-flow experiments
reporting the fingers-closing transition, one drive syringe contained
AEDANS-labeled Pol I(KF) and the dabcyl-modified H:T(−8)D:3′H
or L:T(−8)D:3′H DNA (Figure ) while the other contained the nucleotide. The final concentrations
after mixing were 0.5 μM labeled Pol I(KF) and 1 μM DNA.
The excitation wavelength for the AEDANS reporter was 350 nm, and
fluorescence emission was detected with a 400 nm long-pass filter.

DNA dissociation rates were measured by stopped-flow methods using
either of these reporters. One drive syringe contained either 0.1
μM L:T(+1)2-AP:3′H duplex DNA and 0.2 μM Pol I(KF)
(2-AP probe) or 0.1 μM AEDANS-labeled Pol I(KF) and 0.2 μM
H:T(−8)D:3′H DNA (FRET assay). The second drive syringe
contained an unmodified DNA duplex (2 μM). When the two solutions
are mixed, the large excess of unmodified DNA acts as a trap, preventing
the modified DNA molecules from rebinding to the polymerase, and the
resulting fluorescence change reports DNA dissociation. To measure
the dissociation of DNA from Pol–DNA–dNTP ternary complexes,
the DNA trap solution also contained 2 mM dNTP.

In a typical
stopped-flow experiment, data were collected for 10
s using a logarithmic time base, and averages were taken from four
or more traces. Reaction rate constants were derived from curve fitting
to exponential equations using Kaleidagraph (Synergy Software, Reading,
PA).

In many of our stopped-flow experiments, we needed to compare
the
signal levels for several different nucleotides, all at the same instrument
settings. Over the course of a long series of measurements, changes
in lamp intensity could be misinterpreted as fluorescence changes;
this problem was particularly acute for the FRET-based experiments
because the overall signal changes tended to be smaller than with
the 2-AP probe. Under such circumstances, we conducted multiple measurements
of the buffer-only control (binary complex) throughout the experiment.
Typically, the lamp intensity decreased as the experiment proceeded;
to assess whether a particular nucleotide addition caused a FRET change,
its stopped-flow trace was compared with buffer-only traces taken
around the same time.

Results
To report the rates of different
steps within the Pol I(KF) reaction
pathway, we used the DNA substrates shown in Figure . The duplex with an extendable (3′OH) primer terminus
(A) was used in chemical quench experiments, providing information
about the entire reaction up to and including covalent incorporation
of the nucleotide. The DNAs used in fluorescence experiments (B–E)
had nonextendable (dideoxy: 3′H) primers to focus on prechemistry
intermediates. To investigate the roles of active-site side chains
E710 and Y766, we introduced mutations into a Pol I(KF) construct
that also had the L744C mutation for fluorophore labeling of the protein.
At both positions, we studied the alanine replacement and also the
more conservative E710Q and Y766F mutations.

Correct and Incorrect Nucleotide
Incorporation Kinetics
Using four DNA duplexes with essentially
the same sequence except
for the templating bases (Figure A), we measured
the rate of incorporation of each correctly paired dNTP by WT Pol
I(KF) under single-turnover conditions. The pre-steady-state kinetic
constants, kpol and Kd, obtained from plots of the rate constants (kobs) as a function of dNTP concentration (Figure
S1 of the ), show
significant variation in the kinetics of incorporation of the four
complementary base pairs (Table ). Especially
noteworthy are the faster rate for dATP incorporation and the substantially
tighter binding of dGTP in this particular sequence context.

Single-Turnover Kinetic Data for the
Incorporation of Complementary dNTPs
Pol I(KF)	base pair	Kd(dNTP) (μM)	kpol (s–1)	kpol/Kd (M–1 s–1)	
WT	C-dGTP	2.9 ± 0.1	46 ± 1	1.6 × 107	
WT	G-dCTP	9.4 ± 0.5	63 ± 5	6.7 × 106	
WT	T-dATP	8.6 ± 0.7	110 ± 2	1.2 × 107	
WT	A-dTTP	17 ± 1	40 ± 2	2.3 × 106	
E710A	A-dTTP	110 ± 10	0.26 ± 0.01	2.4 × 103	
E710Q	A-dTTP	320 ± 20	0.23 ± 0.01	7.2 × 102	
Y766A	A-dTTP	150 ± 40	5.0 ± 0.6	3.3 × 104	
Y766F	A-dTTP	41 ± 4	50 ± 3	1.2 × 106	
WT	G-dCTP	6.7	30	4.5 × 106	
Y766A	G-dCTP	8.2	25	3.0 × 106	
Using the duplex
DNA substrates
listed in Figure A. Data reported as means
± the standard error are average values from at least two experiments;
the others are single measurements. The data for WT Pol I(KF) are
in good agreement with previous measurements.

All the proteins had the
genotype
N-His6/D424A/L744C/C907S in addition to the listed mutations.

These measurements were taken
using
a 5′-Cy5-labeled substrate, which gives an ∼2-fold lower kpol compared with that of the corresponding 32P-labeled DNA. All the other rate measurements were taken
using 5′-32P-labeled DNA.

For the mutant proteins, single-turnover measurements
of the incorporation
of dTTP opposite a template A showed that the E710A, E710Q, and Y766A
mutations caused substantial decreases in the reaction rate and dTTP
binding affinity, whereas Y766F was very similar to WT except for
∼2-fold weaker binding of dTTP (Table ). The effect of the Y766A mutation on incorporation kinetics was
base pair-specific; the kpol and Kd parameters were each ∼10-fold less
favorable than those of WT for A-dTTP incorporation, but very similar
to those of WT for G-dCTP incorporation. Rates for C-dGTP and T-dATP
incorporation were intermediate between these two extremes (data not
shown).

Misinsertion rates for WT Pol I(KF), measured using
the same four
DNA duplexes and 1 mM mismatched dNTPs, varied over nearly 2 orders
of magnitude (Table  and Figure S2A,B of the ). The fastest misincorporations
(T-dGTP and C-dATP) were ∼500-fold slower than incorporation
of correctly paired dNTPs, and the slowest (C-dCTP and A-dGTP) were
∼50000-fold slower. Because a complementary dNTP is incorporated
much more efficiently than a mismatch, misinsertion kinetic measurements
can be compromised if the mismatched dNTP is contaminated with even
a small fraction of a complementary dNTP. An obvious example is the
presence of dUTP as a contaminant formed by deamination of dCTP, but
we have observed other instances in which a dNTP contains a low-level
contaminant with a different coding potential. To eliminate this problem,
we devised a simple procedure for removing such contaminants: the
dNTP was first exposed to Pol I(KF) and the unlabeled DNA, to remove
any complementary dNTP by incorporation, before addition of the corresponding
labeled DNA to measure the kinetics of misinsertion (see  and Figure S2C,D of the ).

Rate Constants
for Misinsertion by
WT Pol I(KF)
base pair	kobs (s–1) at 1 mM dNTP	
A-dATP	0.054 ± 0.004	
A-dCTP	0.013 ± 0.001	
A-dGTP	0.0016 ± 0.0001	
C-dATP	0.086 ± 0.009	
C-dCTP	0.0014 ± 0.0001	
C-dTTP	0.0041 ± 0.0005	
G-dATP	0.057 ± 0.005	
G-dGTP	0.036 ± 0.005	
G-dTTP	0.049 ± 0.003	
T-dCTP	0.028 ± 0.003	
T-dGTP	0.098 ± 0.001	
T-dTTP	0.012 ± 0.001	
Using the duplex
DNA substrates
listed in Figure A. Rate constants for dNTP
misinsertion in the presence of 1 mM dNTP were measured in duplicate
and are reported as means ± the standard deviation. See Figure
S2 of the  for examples
of misinsertion time courses.

The DNA Rearrangement of Step 2.1 Reveals Multiple Steps with
Complementary dNTPs
A 2-AP fluorescent probe 5′ to
the templating base [the T(+1) position (Figure B)] reports the early prechemistry step 2.1 that precedes fingers
closing., With WT Pol I(KF) and a nonextendable DNA,
this step is detected in the stopped-flow instrument as a rapid fluorescence
increase, attributed to unstacking of the T(+1)2-AP from its immediate
neighbors, whose rate and amplitude are
dependent on the concentration of the complementary dNTP (Figure A). Figure  (left-most column)
shows data for all four template bases and, in each case, the complementary
dNTP (red trace) elicits the characteristic fluorescence increase.

Stopped-flow
fluorescence experiments using DNA duplexes with the
T(+1)2-AP reporter (Figure B). The fluorescence
traces were observed upon addition of dGTP, at the indicated concentrations,
opposite a template C for WT (A), Y766A (B), and E710A (C). Time is
plotted on a logarithmic scale to display clearly all phases of the
reaction. The black lines superimposed on the data traces show fitting
to double- or triple-exponential equations, giving the parameters
reported in Table S1 of the  (see Figure S3 of the  for examples of curve fitting and residuals).

Ternary complex formation, by WT, Y766F, Y766A, and E710A Pol I(KF),
at all four template bases examined by stopped-flow fluorescence using
the T(+1)2-AP reporter. The traces show the fluorescence signal upon
addition of correct or mismatched nucleotides to a binary complex
of Pol I(KF) with each 2-AP-containing DNA duplex (Figure B). For each panel, the PMT voltage was set at a
level appropriate for the range of that particular experiment and
maintained at this setting throughout, allowing comparison of the
fluorescence signals resulting from each nucleotide. All nucleotides
were at a final concentration of 1 mM unless a lower concentration
is indicated. (For template G, Figure S4H of the  shows the traces observed at high dCTP
concentrations, with a substantial fluorescence increase in the instrument
dead time.) The traces marked 0 correspond to addition of reaction
buffer, showing the fluorescence of the binary complex. The black
lines superimposed on some data traces show fitting to exponential
equations, giving the parameters reported in Table S1 of the .

The fitting of these fluorescence traces to exponential equations
to extract rate constants is not a simple process. Most of the traces
fit best to a triple exponential (see Figure S3 of the  for an example of curve
fitting and residuals) but, for some, a double exponential is satisfactory.
Our interpretation is that three processes contribute to the rate
of the observed fluorescence change but that some of these processes
are less apparent at the extremes of the concentration range; specifically,
the slowest phase becomes insignificant at the lowest concentrations,
whereas the fastest phase tends to be lost in the instrument dead
time at the highest concentrations. At all but the lowest concentrations,
the sum of the amplitudes from empirical triple (or double)-exponential
fits fails to account for the entire observed fluorescence change
relative to the buffer control (see WT data in Table ). In a previous study, we had
assumed that the “missing amplitude” was part of the
fastest of the fitted rates, and therefore, we constrained the exponential
fits of our data to include the entire fluorescence change. The current
study shows this assumption to be incorrect. When using a DNA duplex
with a template A (Figure ), the fluorescence
change observed upon addition of the complementary dTTP originates
at a point lower than the signal of the Pol–DNA binary complex
(buffer-only control). Therefore, there must be an additional intermediate,
with a distinct T(+1)2-AP fluorescence signal, that is formed within
the first ∼1 ms and then undergoes further transformations
resulting in the fluorescence trace recorded after the instrument
dead time. At a template A, this intermediate has a 2-AP fluorescence
signal lower than that of the binary complex. Assuming analogous intermediates
are formed at templates C, G, and T, their fluorescence signals are
almost certainly higher than those of the corresponding binary complexes.
Emission spectra of WT binary and ternary complexes (Figure A) confirm the template-dependent differences seen
in the stopped-flow traces and suggest that variability in the fluorescence
of the binary complex (particularly the much higher fluorescence in
the template A complex) is a major contributor to the observed templating
base effects. Because the existence of an additional intermediate
creates uncertainty with regard to the start point of the T(+1)2-AP
fluorescence traces, reaction rates were calculated from empirical
exponential fits of the observable portion of the fluorescence change,
without further adjustment.

Kinetic Parameters
of Wild-Type and
Mutant Pol I(KF) in Stopped-Flow Fluorescence Experiments with a T(+1)2-AP
Reporter
protein	reaction	k1 (s–1)	k2 (s–1)	k3 (s–1)	missing amplitude (% of total)	Kd(overall) (μM)	
WT	A-dTTP (1 mM)	95 ± 9	21 ± 3	3.5 ± 0.3	–(58 ± 13)	 	
 	C-dGTP (100 μM)	260	45	5.8	74	1.5	
 	C-dGTP (1 mM)	120	34	3.8	69	 	
 	C-rGTP (1 mM)	94	 	 	79	41	
 	G-dCTP (100 μM)	130 ± 30	16 ± 3	1.5 ± 1.0	73 ± 6	0.60 ± 0.21	
 	T-dATP (100 μM)	230	27	2.1	80	 	
 	T-dATP (1 mM)	380 ± 50	38 ± 7	2.2 ± 0.2	73 ± 3	 	
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
Y766F	A-dTTP
(1 mM)	73 ± 3	7.1 ± 0.6	 	 	 	
 	C-dGTP (1 mM)	110 ± 1	11 ± 1	 	 	5.9 ± 2.4	
 	C-rGTP
(1 mM)	≥500	 	 	 	68	
 	G-dCTP (1 μM)	68	 	 	 	 	
 	T-dATP (1 mM)	≥500	 	 	 	 	
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
Y766A	A-dTTP (1 mM)	120 ± 20	4.9 ± 1.5	 	 	 	
 	C-dGTP (1 mM)	160 ± 20	28 ± 10	 	 	2.9 ± 2.0	
 	C-rGTP
(1 mM)	180 ± 20	73 ± 34	 	 	13	
 	G-dCTP (1 mM)	220	12	0.67	 	 	
 	T-dATP (1 mM)	110 ± 10	 	 	 	 	
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
E710A	A-dTTP	like mispair	 	 	 	 	
 	C-dGTP	like mispair	 	 	 	46 ± 13	
 	C-rGTP	like mispair	 	 	 	 	
 	G-dCTP (1 mM)	58 ± 1	 	 	 	 	
 	T-dATP (1 mM)	53 ± 9	0.52 ± 0.40	 	 	 	
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
E710Q	C-dGTP (1 mM)	44 ± 5	 	 	 	10 ± 1	
The sequences of
DNA duplexes with
2-AP at the T(+1) position and all four possible templating bases
are shown in Figure B. Concentrations of the
complementary nucleotide are given in parentheses. Data reported as
means ± the standard deviation are average values from two or
more experiments; the others are from single determinations. The results
for WT Pol I(KF) with C-dGTP are in good agreement with our previous
work. See Table S1 of the  for a full list of rate
constants and amplitudes relevant to the data in this table and Figure
S3 of the  for examples
of curve fitting and residuals.

The total fluorescence change in
going from the binary complex to the ternary complex was calculated
by subtracting the start point of the buffer-only trace from the end
point of the trace observed upon addition of the indicated concentration
of the complementary dNTP. The sum of the fitted amplitudes (e.g.,
A1 + A2 + A3 for a triple exponential) was subtracted from the total
fluorescence change to give the missing amplitude, for which the fitted
data do not account. This is expressed as a percentage of the total
fluorescence change. The value for the A-dTTP base pair is negative,
indicating that the traces observed upon addition of dTTP started
below the buffer-only (binary complex) signal.

Kd(overall) was determined
from titration experiments by plotting the end point
of each fluorescence trace vs nucleotide concentration and fitting
to a hyperbolic equation (Figure S4 of the ).

Corresponds
to a fluorescence increase
that is ≥80% complete within the first 3 ms of data collection.

At templates A and C, the 2-AP
fluorescence
signal obtained with E710A upon addition of the complementary dNTP
shows a decrease, as observed typically with mispairs (Figure ).

Fluorescence
emission spectra of T(+1)2-AP DNAs with all four template
bases (Figure B). The bars indicate the fluorescence
signal at the 2-AP emission maximum after appropriate corrections
(see ). (A) Fluorescence
of each 2-AP template strand oligonucleotide alone (blue), annealed
to its complementary primer (red), as a binary complex with Pol I(KF)
(green), and as a ternary complex with the complementary incoming
dNTP (gray). (B) To aid comparison among the four template bases,
the fluorescence signals for each templating base were normalized
relative to the corresponding complementary dNTP ternary complex (gray).
The Pol–DNA binary complex (green), the ternary complex with
a complementary ribonucleotide (purple), and ternary mismatch complexes
A-dGTP, C-dTTP, G-dATP, and T-dCTP (orange) were examined. Error bars
on the binary complex data indicate the reproducibility of three independent
measurements.

The rates of the 2-AP
fluorescence change were similar for all
four correct base pairs with WT Pol I(KF) (Table ): a rapid first phase of ∼100–300 s–1 and a slower second phase of ∼20–50 s–1. In some cases, the fit was slightly improved by including a low-amplitude
final phase of ∼1–5 s–1. At high dNTP
concentrations, more than half of the total fluorescence change goes
unrecorded in the first few milliseconds (missing amplitude in Table ); of the remaining amplitude, the first phase typically
accounts for ≥70%, the second phase ∼20%, and the third
phase ≤10% (Table S1 of the ). A complementary ribonucleotide (C-rGTP) elicited
a fluorescence change whose early stages resemble that of the corresponding
dNTP (Figure A): a substantial fluorescence
increase in the instrument dead time followed by an increase at a
rate of ∼100 s–1. However, the overall amplitude
was lower; there were no detectable changes corresponding to the second
and third phases observed with dNTPs, and the dissociation constant
[Kd(overall)], measured from the end points
of the fluorescence traces (Figure S4 of the ), was ∼30-fold higher for rGTP than for
dGTP (Table ).

Ternary complex formation
with a complementary rNTP examined by
stopped-flow fluorescence using the T(+1)2-AP reporter (Figure B). The fluorescence change resulting from addition
of rGTP (final concentration of 1 mM) to a Pol–DNA binary complex
with a template C is compared with that observed with the same concentration
of dGTP, for WT (A), Y766F (B), and Y766A (C). The black lines superimposed
on some data traces show fitting to exponential equations, giving
the parameters reported in Table S1 of the . The lack of a subsequent efficient fingers-closing
step with the rNTP complex results in lower amplitudes for the T(+1)2-AP
fluorescence changes [and also lower equilibrium fluorescence of complementary
rNTP complexes relative to that of dNTP complexes (Figure B)] because the equilibrium will not be displaced
as effectively in the direction of products.

A Different Active-Site Rearrangement Is Detected by the T(+1)2-AP
Probe with Mispaired dNTPs
In contrast to the addition of
complementary dNTPs, the addition of mispaired dNTPs to a WT Pol–DNA
binary complex results in either very little fluorescence change or
a fluorescence decrease (Figures  and B). In a stopped-flow experiment, the majority of
mispairs showed a fast (∼200–500 s–1), low-amplitude fluorescence decrease; this rate is too fast to
be explained by DNA dissociation, which would likewise result in a
fluorescence decrease (see below). The fluorescence changes, relative
to the binary complex start point, were more pronounced at template
purines and were larger for purine–purine mispairs than for
purine–pyrimidine mispairs. The mispair results indicate that
the step 2.1 DNA rearrangement observed with a complementary dNTP
or rNTP does not occur if the incoming nucleotide forms a mispair
with the templating base; instead, mispairs may follow a different
pathway or group of related pathways.

A T(0)2-AP Probe Also Distinguishes
Complementary Nucleotides
from Mispaired Nucleotides
In agreement with previous results, a 2-AP probe at the templating base [T(0) (Figure C)] reports an early rapid step, much of which occurs
within the dead time of the stopped-flow instrument, on binding the
complementary dTTP (Figure ). The fluorescence
decrease associated with this step is believed to result from an increased
level of stacking of the nascent base pair onto the primer terminal
base pair as the incoming nucleotide engages with the templating base.
The reaction rate mirrors our observations with the T(+1)2-AP probe:
an initial very fast rate followed by a process at a rate similar
to the T(+1) probe Rate1. Addition of mispaired dNTPs or
the complementary rUTP gave a much smaller fluorescence decrease,
suggesting that they fail to engage effectively with the 2-AP template
and do not progress as far along the reaction pathway as the complementary
dTTP.

Ternary complex formation at a 2-AP templating base, monitored
by stopped-flow fluorescence using the 2-AP signal. The traces show
the fluorescence signal upon addition of complementary or mismatched
dNTPs, or a complementary rNTP, to a binary complex of Pol I(KF) with
the DNA duplex shown in Figure C. Except for
the complementary dTTP, whose final concentrations are indicated,
the other nucleotides were added to a final concentration of 500 μM.
The black lines superimposed on the dTTP traces show fitting to a
double-exponential equation, giving the parameters reported in Table
S1 of the . For 100
μM dTTP, data from three independent experiments gave a k1 of 490 ± 100 s–1 and
a k2 of 84 ± 33 s–1.

Y766 Is Not Required for
Step 2.1
Using the T(+1)2-AP
probe to report step 2.1, the fluorescence traces for Y766F and Y766A
showed the characteristic fluorescence increase with all four correct
base pairs (red traces in Figure ). Moreover,
the change in signal relative to that of the binary complex (black
traces) was similar to that observed for WT, even including the decrease
in the dead time seen with the A-dTTP pair. The Kd(overall) values for the prechemistry steps, obtained
by measuring the fluorescence end point as a function of dGTP concentration
(Figure  and Figure S4 of the ), were within ∼4-fold
for WT, Y766F, and Y766A, with Y766F showing the weakest dNTP binding
(Table ). For both mutants, the rates of the
2-AP fluorescence changes were similar to that of WT (Table ); moreover, Y766A did not show the base pair-specific
differences seen in its correct dNTP incorporation rates.

The
Y766 mutants showed some small differences from WT Pol I(KF) in the
2-AP fluorescence changes when binding a complementary rNTP (Figure ). The size of the fluorescence increase was always
less for rNTP than for dNTP, but the difference was greatest for Y766F
and smallest for Y766A, with WT in between. The “Rate1” portion of the rNTP fluorescence traces (following the initial
dead time fluorescence increase) had a larger amplitude for Y766A
than for WT. By contrast, the Rate1 fluorescence increase
was absent in the Y766F trace, suggesting that the corresponding conformational
transition is either too fast to detect or completely absent. The
discrimination against rNTPs in the prechemistry steps, reflected
in the Kd(overall) values for dGTP and
rGTP, is ∼25-fold for WT and at least 2-fold lower for the
Y766 mutants (Table ). Notably, the complementary
rNTP binding affinity of Y766A is greater than that of WT or Y766F.

The T(+1)2-AP fluorescence changes for Y766F and Y766A with mispaired
dNTPs were, for the most part, similar to those observed with the
WT (Figure ), though some differences were
apparent, e.g., for G-dGTP and T-dGTP mispairs with Y766F, and the
A-dATP and C-dATP mispairs and all mispairs at template G with Y766A.
In Figure , all the panels have the same scale
on the vertical axis (3 V total in every case) so that relatively
small differences between individual base pairs are not overemphasized
in experiments where the overall fluorescence changes cover a small
range (e.g., Y766A, template A or T). These small differences may
not be meaningful because of fluctuations in the lamp intensity during
the hour or more required to collect all the traces for a particular
combination of polymerase and template base. It is also difficult
to make comparisons between data in different panels of Figure  because each set of fluorescence traces is collected
at a PMT voltage appropriate for the range of that particular experiment.
The stopped-flow observations in Figure  were
therefore supplemented by steady-state measurements of fluorescence
emission spectra (Figure S5 of the ) that confirmed the trends seen in the stopped-flow
data. Because the instrument settings were the same for the entire
series of spectra obtained with each DNA template base, we could identify
obvious outliers, for example, the high 2-AP fluorescence when Y766F
binds the G-dGTP mispair and the lower fluorescence of Y766A binary
complexes with the template A and G DNAs, largely accounting for the
differences seen in the corresponding Y766A stopped-flow experiments.

Requirement of E710 for Step 2.1
The absence of the
E710 side chain, in the E710A mutant, has a profound effect on the
outcome of step 2.1 and the distinction between complementary and
mismatched dNTPs. At A and C template bases, binding of the complementary
dNTP results in a T(+1)2-AP fluorescence change indistinguishable
from the fluorescence changes seen with mismatched dNTPs with either
WT or E710A (Figure ). The E710A C-dGTP fluorescence
change can be titrated (Figure C and Figure
S3 of the ), just
as with WT and the Y766 mutants, though the binding [Kd(overall)] is much weaker (Table ). The apparent inability of E710A to distinguish between correct
and incorrect base pairs is template-specific; at G and T templates,
the characteristic step 2.1 fluorescence increase is observed, though
high dNTP concentrations are required (Figure ).

The more conservative E710Q mutation showed a phenotype
intermediate between WT and E710A and was not studied in detail. At
template C, binding of the complementary dGTP caused a fluorescence
increase (as with WT), though the rate and binding affinity were lower
(Table  and Figure S6 of the ). However, as with E710A, the complementary
ribonucleotide caused a fluorescence decrease similar to that observed
with mismatched dNTPs (compare Figure  and
Figure S6 of the ).

The Closed Ternary Complex Is Not Formed in the Presence of
Mispaired dNTPs
Our previously described FRET-based assay,
using an AEDANS probe attached to the mobile portion of the fingers
subdomain (residue 744) and a dabcyl quencher on a nonextendable DNA
duplex (Figure ), reports the fingers-closing
conformational change., The experiments depicted in Figure  and Figure S7A,B of the  show that all four complementary base pairs caused
the expected fingers-closing transition in WT Pol I(KF), confirming
and extending the observations from our previous studies. The rates
of the fingers-closing FRET change (Table ) fit best to a biphasic curve and, like the dNTP incorporation rates
(Table ), are fastest at templates T and G
and slowest at A. Addition of any noncomplementary dNTPs, or complementary
rNTPs, even at 1 mM, caused little or no change in the fluorescence
signal relative to the buffer-only control (Figure  and Figure S7 of the ), showing that the full fingers-closing transition does not take
place with these substrates. The gradual decrease in lamp intensity
that takes place over the course of the experiment (shown as a gray
band in Figure ) means that we cannot completely
rule out FRET changes caused by small movements of the fingers subdomain.

Kinetic Parameters of WT and Mutant
Pol I(KF) Derivatives in the FRET-Based Stopped-Flow Assay of the
Fingers-Closing Conformational Change
protein	reaction	k1 (s–1)	k2 (s–1)	Kd(overall) (μM)	
WT	A-dTTP (100 μM)	91 ± 15	23 ± 2	8.6; 11 ± 3	
Y766F	A-dTTP (100 μM)	58 ± 14	4.9 ± 2.2	76 ± 7	
WT	T-dATP (100 μM)	410 ± 30	5.6 ± 4.3	 	
E710A	T-dATP (1 mM)	74 ± 12	 	 	
WT	G-dCTP (100 μM)	250	 	 	
WT	G-dCTP (10 μM)	89	 	 	
Y766A	G-dCTP (100 μM)	170	 	 	
Y766A	G-dCTP (10 μM)	65	 	 	
E710A	G-dCTP (1 mM)	79	0.34	 	
WT	C-dGTP (10 μM)	320 ± 40	46 ± 40	 	
The nucleotide
concentrations for
each reaction are in parentheses. The template A and T data were obtained
using the hairpin H:T(−8)D:3′H DNA substrates (Figure E); the template G and C data were obtained using
the linear L:T(−8)D:3′H DNA substrates (Figure D). Data reported as means ± the standard deviation
are average values from two experiments; the others are from single
determinations. Stopped-flow traces are shown in Figures – and Figures S7
and S8 of the . See
Table S2 of the  for
a list of rate constants and amplitudes relevant to the data in this
table.

From refs () and ().

From ref ().

Fingers-closing conformational
change monitored by stopped-flow
fluorescence using 744-AEDANS Pol I(KF) and the dabcyl-containing
DNA hairpin (Figure E) with a template A (A)
and template T (B). The respective complementary dNTPs were present
at a final concentration of 100 μM; all other nucleotides were
at a final concentration of 1 mM. The black lines superimposed on
the traces for the complementary dNTPs show fitting to double-exponential
equations, giving the parameters reported in Table S2 of the . As described in , the buffer-only control
was measured multiple times throughout the experiment, to track possible
variations in lamp intensity. The range of the buffer-only signals
is shown as a band, while the black trace, marked 0, corresponds to
the average of all the determinations. To assess whether a particular
nucleotide addition caused a FRET change, its stopped-flow trace was
compared with buffer-only traces taken around the same time during
the experiment. Intriguingly, the signal from the complementary rNTP
is often at or below the lowest buffer-only signal, raising the possibility
of some slight degree of fingers closing in ternary complexes with
a complementary ribonucleotide.

In the experiments with G or C as the templating base, which
used
linear dabcyl-containing DNAs (Figure D),
we were surprised to observe a slow (∼1 s–1) fluorescence decrease upon addition of mispaired dNTPs (Figure
S7A,B of the ). Further
investigation (Figure S7C–F of the ) showed that this FRET change occurred only with
a linear DNA substrate and was abolished by using a multiply mutated
Pol I(KF) in which binding to the 3′–5′ exonuclease
site is severely compromised. These observations
suggest that the mispaired ternary complex, weakly bound at the polymerase
active site, is in equilibrium with a species in which the other end
of the linear DNA duplex interacts with the exonuclease site, bringing
the quencher closer to the donor fluorophore at position 744.

Effect
of Active-Site Mutations on the Fingers-Closing Step
The
effect of mutations at E710 and Y766 on fingers closing is
determined both by the mutation itself and, in some cases, by the
identity of the base pair.

Although both Y766F and Y766A mutant
proteins behaved like WT in step 2.1, their ability to execute the
fingers-closing step 2.2 was markedly different. The kinetic parameters
for Y766F were very similar to those of WT (Table ), aside from ∼10-fold weaker binding of the correct
dNTP [measured by titration on a template A-containing substrate (Figure
S8 of the )]. In
contrast, Y766A gave no observable fingers closing with the complementary
dNTP at either a template A or a template T (Figure A,B) even though this mutant performs step 2.1 with approximately
WT kinetics (Figure  and Table ). At template G, binding of dCTP caused fingers closing by
Y766A and, although the amplitude of the fluorescence signal was smaller,
the rate was nearly as fast as that for WT (Figure C,D and Table ).

Stopped-flow fluorescence
assay of the fingers-closing conformational
change for Y766A Pol I(KF). In panels A and B, the added nucleotides
were present at a final concentration of 1 mM with DNAs having templates
A and T, respectively, and no fingers closing could be detected with
either complementary or mismatched nucleotides. The range of the buffer-only
signals is shown as a gray band, as in Figure . In panel C, fingers closing was observed upon binding of dCTP,
at the indicated concentrations, opposite a template G. Panel D shows
that a G-dCTP nascent base pair promotes fingers closing by WT Pol
I(KF) at rates similar to those of Y766A. The black lines superimposed
on the traces in panels C and D show fitting to single-exponential
equations, giving the parameters reported in Table S2 of the .

The behavior of the E710A mutant with respect to fingers
closing
mirrored what we observed for the preceding step 2.1 with the T(+1)2-AP
probe. At template A, the complementary dTTP did not cause fingers
closing, whereas the T-dATP and G-dCTP base pairs allowed fingers
closing to take place [at 1 mM dNTP (Figure )]. It appears that
the lack of the E710 side chain may not provide any additional impediment
to fingers closing beyond what already exists at step 2.1.

Stopped-flow
fluorescence assay of the fingers-closing conformational
change for E710A Pol I(KF). All nucleotides were present at a final
concentration of 1 mM. In panel A, no fingers closing could be detected
for any nucleotide opposite a template A. In panels B and C, the complementary
nucleotide promoted fingers closing at templates T and G. The range
of the buffer-only signals is shown as a gray band in panels A and
B, as in Figure . In panel C, the template
G DNA was a linear duplex (Figure D), and
therefore, mismatched dNTPs caused the slow FRET decrease that we
have observed in other experiments using linear DNAs (see the text
and Figure S7 of the ). The black lines superimposed on the traces for complementary dNTPs
in panels B and C show fitting to exponential equations, giving the
parameters reported in Table S2 of the .

As with WT, none of
the mutant Pol I(KF) derivatives showed any
detectable fingers closing with mispaired dNTPs (Figures  and ).

Strong DNA
Binding Correlates with the Formation of the Fully
Closed Complex
The FRET-based stopped-flow fluorescence assay
was adapted to measure the rates of dissociation of Pol I(KF) from
binary and ternary complexes by using a non-dabcyl DNA to trap the
dissociated DNA. Dissociation results in a fluorescence increase due
to removal of the dabcyl quencher from the complex with the AEDANS-labeled
protein (Figure ). With WT Pol I(KF) at a
template A, the presence of the complementary dTTP decreased the off-rate
constant by 4–10-fold, whereas a mismatched dNTP or a complementary
rNTP increased the off-rate constant by up to 10-fold, compared with
that of the binary complex (Table ). Analogous
results were obtained using the T(+1)2-AP reporter (Figure S9 of the ).

DNA Dissociation
Rates Obtained from
the FRET-Based Assays in Figure , with A as the Templating Base
 	koff (s–1)	
nucleotide	WT	Y766F	Y766A	E710A	E710Q	
none	3.1 ± 0.2	4.5 ± 0.2	17 ± 7	6.5 ± 1.0	2.6 ± 0.3	
dTTP	0.80 ± 0.07	0.68 ± 0.07	27 ± 11	26 ± 6	13 ± 4	
dATP	29 ± 0.4	 	32	29 ± 6	17	
dCTP	14 ± 0.14	13	55	24 ± 3	9.6	
dGTP	26 ± 3	28 ± 2	59 ± 21	33 ± 7	15 ± 8	
rUTP	19 ± 0.3	18	52 ± 18	26 ± 2	12 ± 5	
Using the dabcyl-containing
H:T(−8)D:3′H
DNA and the indicated 744-AEDANS Pol I(KF) derivatives. Most of the
rate constants were determined by fitting the fluorescence increase
to a single exponential. The traces for WT and Y766F with the correct
nucleotide (dTTP) were fit to double exponentials because of the initial
rapid fluorescence decrease due to fingers closing. The traces for
E710A were fit to a double exponential to take into account a second
slow phase; only the rates of the predominant first phase are reported
here. See Table S2 of the  for a list of rate constants and amplitudes relevant to the data
in this table and Figure S3B of the  for an example of curve fitting and residuals.
Data reported as means ± the standard deviation are average values
from two experiments; the others are from single determinations.

The indicated nucleotide (2
mM)
was present in the syringe with the unmodified trap DNA, giving a
final concentration of 1 mM in the stopped-flow cell.

Corresponds to dissociation from
the Pol–DNA binary complex.

DNA dissociation measured by stopped-flow fluorescence using the
FRET-based assay with 744-AEDANS Pol I(KF) and the T(−8)dabcyl
DNA hairpin with templating base A (Figure E), for WT and mutant proteins, as indicated in each panel. Addition
of an excess of an unmodified DNA duplex to serve as a trap prevented
reassociation of the original Pol–DNA binary complex, resulting
in a fluorescence increase. Throughout, the orange trace shows the
dissociation of the Pol–DNA binary complex without additional
dNTPs. The other traces show the dissociation of ternary complexes,
measured by including 2 mM complementary or mismatched deoxynucleotide,
or a complementary ribonucleotide, in the DNA trap solution. The rates
of dissociation are listed in Table . The
black lines superimposed on the traces show fitting to single- or
double-exponential equations, giving the parameters reported in Table
S2 of the  (see Figure
S3B of the  for an
example of curve fitting and residuals).

With the Y766 or E710 mutant proteins, a DNA dissociation
rate
slower than that of the binary complex was observed only under circumstances
in which the closed ternary complex was formed, specifically with
the Y766F A-dTTP ternary complex (Table ).
The dissociation rates for all mispaired or ribonucleotide ternary
complexes were typically in the range of 20–30 s–1; moreover, the correctly paired ternary complexes with the Y766A,
E710A, or E710Q mutants also had dissociation rates in the mispairlike
range. The dissociation rates for all Y766A complexes were higher
than for the other proteins, reflecting the DNA binding defect associated
with Y766A.

Discussion
Our
two ensemble fluorescence assays provide complementary information
about the prechemistry transformations that form the basis of the
fidelity decisions made by Pol I(KF). The FRET-based AEDANS-dabcyl
assay distinguishes open and closed conformations, whereas the assay with a 2-AP probe on the DNA reports
on subtle changes in the protein–DNA interactions; the latter provides additional details about
the earliest steps on the reaction pathway, although the structural
basis of the 2-AP signal is less clear. We also consider our data
in the context of single-molecule FRET studies, which use donor and
acceptor probes on the protein to report the position of the fingers
subdomain.,

Existence of Partially
Closed Conformations
In addition
to showing the open and closed conformations predicted from structural
studies (Figure A,C), smFRET experiments detected
a novel conformational species with a FRET value intermediate between
those of the open and closed species.− With wild-type Pol I(KF),
this intermediate-FRET species predominates in ternary complexes where
the nucleotide is a noncomplementary dNTP or has the wrong sugar structure
(rNTP). The observed intermediate-FRET value would correspond to movement
of the mobile portion of the fingers subdomain by 20–25% of
the distance along the trajectory from open to closed conformations,
in excellent agreement with the partially closed mispair ternary complex
structure of Bst DNA pol. We therefore infer that an early event in the DNA polymerase reaction
pathway, following the binding of any nucleotide to form a ternary
complex, is the formation of a partially closed complex similar, but
not necessarily identical, to the G-dTTP mispair structure (Figure B). With WT Pol I(KF) and a complementary dNTP,
the initial partially closed complex undergoes an efficient transition
to the lower-energy fully closed complex, as indicated by the low Kd(dNTP) and strong binding affinity for DNA.
In mispaired or ribonucleotide complexes, the fully closed complex
is destabilized and, therefore, the partially closed complex remains
highly populated (provided that the dNTP concentration is high); this
partially closed state is characterized by a high Kd(dNTP) (Table  and ref ()) and a DNA interaction
that is weaker than in the Pol–DNA binary complex [shown by koff values (Table )].
Although our current FRET probes do not distinguish different types
of partially closed complex, the T(+1)2-AP probe has allowed us to
dissect this population further, showing that the precise structure
of the partially closed conformation depends on the nature of the
incoming nucleotide, as described below.

How do we reconcile
the idea of a partially closed complex as the predominant species
in a mispaired or ribonucleotide ternary complex, with our ensemble,
FRET-based, fingers-closing assay that shows little or no change upon
addition of a mispaired dNTP (or a complementary rNTP) to the Pol
I(KF) binary complex (Figure  and Figure S7
of the )? Close examination
of our most recent smFRET data provides an explanation. The binary
complex typically shows 15–20% occupancy of the closed conformation;
this decreases to ≲10% when the partially closed conformation
becomes populated upon addition of a mispaired dNTP. As a result, the population-average FRET changes very little
on going from the binary complex to a mispaired ternary complex and,
in an ensemble measurement, would be impossible to distinguish from
signal intensity fluctuations due to lamp drift. This situation illustrates
very clearly the limitations of using ensemble fluorescence measurements
to report relatively subtle changes, especially in complex molecular
populations.

The 2-AP Fluorescence Elucidates Early Steps
on the Reaction
Pathway for WT Pol I(KF) with Complementary dNTPs
Examining
all four correct base pairs has greatly improved our understanding
of the fluorescence changes reported by the T(+1)2-AP probe. The key
observation involved template A, where addition of dTTP caused the
2-AP fluorescence to decrease and then increase (Figure ), showing that there must be two processes, each with a characteristic
effect on the environment of the 2-AP probe, in the reaction at template A and, by analogy, at the other three
template bases. In a previous study using a template C, we had assumed that the observed rapid fluorescence
increase resulted from a single 2-AP fluorescence transition on the
pathway from binary to ternary complex and, therefore, that the detectable
part of the fluorescence change was the latter part of a process that
started within the instrument dead time. We therefore fitted the fluorescence
traces to include the missing amplitude, resulting in very fast rates
(≥400 s–1) for the T(+1)2-AP fluorescence
change. Recognizing that this assumption is incorrect, here we have
simply fitted the observed fluorescence traces to exponential equations
and assigned the missing amplitude to a rapid initial step that takes
place entirely within the instrument dead time. We were encouraged
by similarities in the fitted rates from the T(+1)2-AP probe to reaction
rates obtained using other experimental approaches.

First, we
note that the extremely rapid T(+1)2-AP fluorescence change (the missing
amplitude) may report the same step as that detected within the instrument
dead time with a T(0)2-AP probe (templating base). Because the fluorescence of 2-AP within DNA is quenched
by stacking with its immediate neighbors, this initial step would therefore involve a structural transition
that simultaneously causes the templating base to become more stacked
and its 5′ neighbor to become less stacked (in the case of
templates C, G, and T, but not A). If one considers the structural
transition from the open complex (Figure A,D)
to the partially closed complex (Figure B,E),
the increased level of stacking of the templating base (magenta) on
the primer-terminal base pair is apparent. The structural basis for
the fluorescence changes of the T(+1) base (cyan) may be more complex,
as suggested by the strong influence of the nature of the templating
base (discussed below).

Following the dead time fluorescence
change, the subsequent T(+1)2-AP
fluorescence transitions (corresponding to the first and second fitted
rates) give rates similar to the measured fingers-closing and dNTP
incorporation rates, respectively (compare k1 in Tables  and  and k2 in Table  with kpol in Table ). Moreover, there is a consistent correlation such that situations
that show a rapid k1 with the T(+1)2-AP
probe also show a rapid fingers-closing k1; compare, for example, the four correct base pairs with WT Pol I(KF),
the results with mutant proteins in this study, and the D705A mutant
in a previous study. One possible explanation
is that the two stopped-flow assays report the same process, fingers
closing coupled with a change in the environment of the T(+1) base.
However, we have observed situations in which the two processes are
decoupled, giving a robust T(+1)2-AP fluorescence increase but no
fingers closing; these are the D882A mutant and, in the study presented here, several reactions with complementary
rNTPs. We therefore favor the alternative explanation that fingers
closing is fast but the DNA rearrangement step is required before
fingers closing can take place. As a result, fingers closing will
be kinetically invisible and rate-limited by the DNA rearrangement
step. In either stopped-flow assay, the k1 fluorescence increase would then be augmented
at a slower rate, k2, as the following
reaction steps displace the equilibrium toward products. The similarity
of k2 to the dNTP incorporation rate suggests
that k2 reflects rate-limiting step 3
of the pathway (Figure ).

Revised reaction pathway
for Pol I(KF) from DNA binding to phosphoryl
transfer, showing the proposed common ternary complex intermediate
(boxed), whose subsequent transformations lead to different fates
for mispaired dNTPs, complementary ribonucleotides, and complementary
dNTPs. EO, EPC, and EC represent
the open, partially closed, and fully closed conformations, respectively,
of the polymerase fingers subdomain. The fluorescent probes diagnostic
of each of the early steps are indicated. DNA* represents the DNA
rearrangement that results in a fluorescence increase of the 2-AP
probe 5′ to the templating position; DNA§ represents
the alternative rearrangement that takes place with a mispaired nucleotide.
EC to EC‡ (step 3) is a transformation,
probably involving entry of a divalent metal ion, that assembles the
active site for catalysis; this step
is rate-limiting for addition of a single complementary dNTP. The
existence of additional, as yet undetected, steps cannot be ruled
out.

A Structural Description
of Early Steps of the Reaction Remains
Elusive
The T(+1)2-AP probe reveals distinct conformational
intermediates within the population of putative partially closed complexes
early in the Pol I(KF) reaction pathway. However, deducing structural
transitions from the observed fluorescence changes is extremely challenging,
and we therefore use the T(+1)2-AP fluorescence signal empirically,
as an identifier for distinct species on the reaction pathway rather
than an indication of their structures.

The template strands
used in these experiments differ in only one position, the templating
base, 3′ to the 2-AP probe. In the absence of protein, the
fluorescence of these DNAs, whether single-stranded or annealed to
a primer strand, roughly follows the expectation that purine neighbors
would stack more effectively than pyrimidines (Figure ). When 2-AP is bound to Pol I(KF),
the fluorescence at both the T(0) and T(+1) positions is greatly enhanced, consistent with binary complex cocrystal structures
showing that the interaction between the T(0) and T(+1) bases is disrupted
(Figure A,D). The different fluorescence signals
of T(+1)2-AP in the four binary complexes (Figure ) are somewhat surprising and imply variability in the interaction
between the T(+1) base and the four templating bases. Structurally, we could envisage the template bases A, C,
G, and T being sequestered in the pocket between helices O and O1 to differing extents, with A being the most buried (therefore
least available for stacking) and G the least. However, because smFRET
data show the binary complex to be a mixture of open and closed conformations,, a more likely explanation is that the identity of the T(0) base
could influence the conformational distribution of the binary complex.
Compared to the binary complex, the correctly paired closed ternary
complex has much less structural variability, judging from the similar
T(+1)2-AP fluorescence emission regardless of the identity of the
T(0) base (Figure A). The high fluorescence
of the correctly paired ternary complex, implying minimal interaction
between the T(0) and T(+1) bases, is as expected from cocrystal structures
of Bst DNA pol (Figure C,F)
and many other DNA polymerases,− in which the T(+1) base is completely dislocated
from the T(0) base and the primer-terminal duplex.

On the basis
of their T(+1)2-AP fluorescence signals, mispaired
ternary complexes can be divided into two classes. Mispaired ternary
complexes with template pyrimidines have fluorescence emission that
is similar to that of the corresponding binary complex, whereas those
with template purines have lower fluorescence (Figures  and B), suggesting more structural
reorganization (with an increased level of quenching of the 2-AP probe)
upon formation of a Pu-dNTP mispair. As with the binary complex (discussed
above), the difference between the categories could be purely physical
(two distinct structural classes) or temporal, with the templating
base influencing the equilibrium between high- and low-fluorescence
conformational states. In Figure B, which
shows the mispair with the lowest fluorescence emission at each template
base, the templating G is the most effective quencher of T(+1)2-AP,
just as in the unbound duplex DNA. Interestingly, the fluorescence
signals from G-dCTP (closed) and G-dTTP (partially closed) complexes
are quite different, despite the apparently similar environments of
the T(+1) base in the corresponding cocrystal complexes (Figure E,F and ref ()). If, as suggested above, the mispair complex were a conformationally
mixed population, this complexity would probably not be captured in
a cocrystal. Furthermore, we should not necessarily take the G-dTTP
complex structure as a universal model for mispair ternary complexes.
The degree of engagement of the templating base with the incoming
nucleotide, and the extent of its stacking on the primer-terminal
base pair, are likely to be determined by the identity of the nascent
base pair. The geometry of G-dTTP may be particularly compatible with
the polymerase active site, and one should not necessarily expect
the same for Pu-dPuTP, Py-dPyTP, or even the opposite orientation
wobble mispairs, Py-dPuTP. Given the exceptional versatility of Bst DNA pol in generating interesting cocrystal structures,
we must hope that other mispaired ternary complex structures will
be determined in the future.

A Branched Reaction Pathway Governs Nucleotide
Selection by
Pol I(KF)
In Figure , we have updated
the polymerase reaction pathway of Pol I(KF), to incorporate new information from the current study and to indicate
the alternative pathways followed by mispair and ribonucleotide ternary
complexes.

We propose that all nucleotides cause the open binary
complex to undergo a transition (in step 2) to a common intermediate
(boxed in Figure ), probably a partially
closed state. This first binding event is extremely rapid and corresponds
to the 2-AP fluorescence changes at T(0) or T(+1) that take place
within the dead time of the stopped-flow instrument. While it is easy
to envisage a common early intermediate in the dead time T(+1)2-AP
signals observed upon binding of a complementary dNTP or rNTP (Figures  and ), the case for an
analogous intermediate with mispaired dNTPs is more speculative. Nevertheless,
in support of this idea, we note that the majority of the mispair
traces in Figure  have a concave-up shape
and could plausibly be the tail end of processes originating at a
fluorescence higher than the observed vertical axis intercept. We
would not necessarily expect all the traces for a particular template
base to emanate from the same fluorescence value because the equilibrium
between the binary complex and the proposed common intermediate may
be less favorable for some mispairs, resulting in a smaller fluorescence
change upon binding of the mispaired dNTP.

Within the initial
partially closed ternary complex, there must
be an interaction that allows the incoming nucleotide to preview the
templating base; this could be a configuration resembling that seen
in the Bst DNA pol mismatch ternary complex (Figure E), but with the precise geometry of the nascent
mispair dictated by the type of mispair being formed. This first complex
constitutes the most important checkpoint on the reaction pathway,
in that it is where noncomplementary nucleotides are identified and
diverted, at step 2.1, toward a mismatch-specific outcome, resulting
in a family of complexes that are distinguishable, by their much lower
T(+1)2-AP fluorescence, from those formed by complementary nucleotides.

Complementary nucleotides (both ribo and deoxyribo) undergo a different
conformational transition at step 2.1, signaled by a further increase
in the fluorescence of the T(+1)2-AP probe. The subsequent fingers-closing
step 2.2 is the second checkpoint on the pathway; with deoxynucleotides,
the equilibrium favors the forward reaction, whereas the steric constraints
associated with the 2′OH of a ribonucleotide destabilize the
closed conformation, making the equilibrium of this step unfavorable
and trapping the rNTP ternary complex at the partially closed state. Thus, the step 2.1 and 2.2 checkpoints ask successive
binary questions: Is the nucleotide complementary to the template,
and is the sugar a deoxyribose? Only when the answers to both questions
are “yes” does a WT Pol I(KF) ternary complex undergo
an efficient transition to the immediate prechemistry state (where,
in our experiments, it is arrested because of the absence of the primer
3′OH). Formation of the fully closed ternary complex increases
the binding affinity of both dNTP and DNA; successful transit through
step 2.1 (e.g., for WT with complementary rNTPs) is not sufficient
to provide strong DNA binding. The favorable equilibrium across step
2.2 for correctly paired dNTP complexes will also displace the equilibrium
of the earlier steps, amplifying their fluorescence signals (e.g.,
compare dGTP and rGTP traces in Figure A).

With the exception of the complex with the complementary dNTP,
all other ternary complexes are trapped as a population consisting
primarily of partially closed complexes, characterized by weaker binding
of both DNA and nucleotides, which should facilitate dissociation
and further attempts to bind the correct dNTP. Although the ternary
complexes of mispairs and complementary ribonucleotides are both effectively
arrested at the partially closed state, they clearly have different
physical characteristics as shown by the T(+1)2-AP signal. The same
conclusion was reached in a study using an entirely different physical
technique based on the properties of single Pol I(KF) complexes associated
with α-hemolysin nanopores. Although
both incorrect dNTPs and complementary rNTPs can be incorporated into
DNA, their incorporation rates are slower than those of complementary
dNTPs by at least 500-fold. This rate difference represents the combination
of (1) inefficient progress through the prechemistry steps and (2)
a geometrically compromised transition state that slows the rate of
phosphoryl transfer to the point where this step becomes rate-limiting.

Mutator Mutants Affect the Early Checkpoints
Our inference
that the early checkpoints are implicated in fidelity is supported
by the observation that they are compromised in mutator mutants Y766A
and E710A. In WT Pol I(KF), the net result of the two early checkpoints
is that a ternary complex with a complementary dNTP is uniquely directed
to the fully closed complex. Both E710A and Y766A are less effective
in routing at least a subset of the correct nascent base pairs toward
the closed complex. As a result, the early checkpoints operate with
a lower specificity and a larger proportion of errors pass through
the checkpoints.

E710A Affects the Step 2.1 Checkpoint
On the basis
of the T(+1)2-AP signal, we infer that E710A fails to recognize A-dTTP
and C-dGTP as correct nascent base pairs. Instead of the normal step
2.1 DNA rearrangement, these base pairs undergo a transition resembling
the mispair-specific step 2.1 (Figure ). With
G-dCTP and T-dATP base pairs, the normal step 2.1 fluorescence change
is observed but much higher dNTP concentrations are required, indicating
that the product of step 2.1 is destabilized relative to the situation
with WT Pol I(KF). Nevertheless, the G-dCTP and T-dATP products after
step 2.1 are able to proceed through step 2.2 (fingers closing), suggesting
that there is no subsequent defect in fingers closing due to the E710A
mutation. Structural studies of the equivalent mutant of Bst DNA pol (E658A) could not capture a G-dCTP nascent base pair at
the active site, consistent with the
weaker binding of complementary dNTPs by E710A Pol I(KF) (this study
and refs (), (), and ()). These same structural
studies noted the absence in E658A Bst DNA pol of
an active-site water molecule, which is normally present in all A-family
DNA polymerase complexes.,, This water molecule is coordinated by three invariant active-site
side chains [E710, N845, and Q849 in Pol I(KF)] and interacts with
the minor groove of the nascent base pair; its absence could potentially
affect nucleotide binding in the complexes that play a role in the
early fidelity checkpoints.

The base specificity of the E710A
phenotype is puzzling: Why should T-dATP and G-dCTP base pairs be
less affected than A-dTTP and C-dGTP base pairs? It would be easy
to rationalize a distinction between A/T and G/C pairings, based on
the hydrogen-bonding strength of the nascent base pair, or between
purines and pyrimidines as the incoming nucleotide, based, for example,
on whether N3 (purines) or O2 (pyrimidines)
were available to interact with the active-site water molecule mentioned
above. The observed preference by E710A for T-dATP and G-dCTP roughly
parallels some properties of WT Pol I(KF) at templates T and G: higher
dNTP incorporation rates (Table ) and more
robust T(+1)2-AP fluorescence changes upon binding of the complementary
rNTP (Figure B). Thus, the bias in favor of
templates T and G might be inherent to this particular polymerase
active site, and the differences in reaction kinetics are merely exacerbated
by mutation of a critical active-site residue. An important caveat
is that DNA polymerase behavior, reflected in measurable properties
such as processivity or fidelity, is strongly influenced by sequence
context. If the rate constants of individual
reaction steps are similarly influenced, one might not necessarily
find the identical base pair preferences in a different DNA sequence.

The Y766 Side Chain Primarily Affects Fingers Closing (step
2.2)
The Y766F and Y766A mutations have very little effect
on the T(+1)2-AP fluorescence signals from the majority of ternary
complexes in step 2.1 (Figure ). The few differences
observed for mispaired complexes (e.g., the higher fluorescence signal
for G-dGTP with Y766F) could indicate either that mutation of Y766
alters the DNA conformation around the templating base in particular
complexes or that the DNA conformation is the same but the mutated
766 side chain affects the 2-AP fluorescence signal. In contrast with
E710A, Y766A strongly influences step 2.2, with no fingers closing
detectable in our assay for A-dTTP and T-dATP base pairs, although
fingers closing is similar to that of WT for G-dCTP base pairs. The
smFRET data for Y766A support these observations, showing that, for
A-dTTP and T-dATP, the partially closed and fully closed complexes
are isoenergetic, whereas the fully closed G-dCTP complex is stabilized,
just as in the WT enzyme. As with E710A,
we do not have an explanation for this base pair specificity.

In the partially closed Bst DNA pol complexes, helix O is kinked such that residues close to
the C-terminus occupy positions very similar to those in the fully
closed complex. The side chains equivalent to Y766 and F762 (Y714
and F710) point toward the active-site cleft, abutting one another
and forming a substantial part of the binding pocket for the nascent
base pair. In the Y714S mutant of Bst DNA pol [which
we assume to be a reasonable model for Pol I(KF) Y766A], the F710
side chain is differently positioned and this, together with the smaller
size of the side chain at position 714, significantly changes the
shape of the active-site pocket (Figure ).
The loss of these inter-side chain contacts could change the relative
stabilities of open, partially closed, and fully closed conformations,
influencing the energy profile of the early checkpoint steps. Although
the Y766A mutation creates space in the active site that could potentially
accommodate noncomplementary pairings, we see no evidence, either
in this study or in the smFRET data, that
Y766A processes mispairs through the early checkpoints in a manner
that is different from that of the WT enzyme. The data point to a
deficiency in singling out certain correct base pairs for preferential
treatment, resulting in an overall increase in the frequency of errors
that pass through steps 2.1 and 2.2. The more spacious active site
may, however, play a role in the subsequent steps of misincorporation
as shown by the more favorable kinetics (relative to that of WT) of
some misinsertion reactions of Y766S.

Structural changes associated with the Y766A mutation, inferred
from Bst DNA pol cocrystal structures. The panels
show ternary complexes with a nascent G-dTTP mispair at the active
site, and the protein in the partially closed conformation. The protein is shown as a surface representation,
with the positions of Bst DNA pol side chains 714,
710, and 658 colored magenta, yellow, and cyan, respectively; in Pol
I(KF), the equivalent side chains are 766, 762, and 710, respectively.
(A) Active site with Tyr at position 714 (766) (from PDB entry 3HP6). (B) Active site
in the Y766S mutant (from PDB entry 3HPO). [Note that the protein in panel A is
the F710Y mutant whereas the protein in B has the wild-type Phe at
position 710. A comparison of structures that differ only in having
F or Y at position 710 (e.g., PDB entries 1LV5 and 2HVI, refs () and ()) indicates that this change does not account for the active-site
differences illustrated here.] This figure was made using PyMOL (Schrödinger,
LLC).

Phenotype of Y766F
Unlike Y766A, the conservative Y766F
mutation has very little effect on the kinetics of fingers closing.
Thus, the Y766–E710 hydrogen bond does not appear to stabilize
the fully closed complex. smFRET studies support this conclusion,
showing that, in the unliganded protein, Y766F actually favors the
closed conformation whereas WT is biased slightly toward the open
conformation. Our explanation is that the hydrophobic phenylalanine
side chain destabilizes the open conformation because of the extremely
solvent-exposed environment of the 766 residue. Because the relatively
mild phenotype of Y766F argues against the Y766–E710 hydrogen
bond being a necessary feature of Y766, perhaps its purpose is to
fix the position of E710. Mispositioning, or increased mobility, of
E710 could account for the subtle changes associated with the Y766F
mutation: weaker dNTP binding and slight changes in the handling of
rNTPs in the early steps (Table  and Figure ).

Given that the Y766F mutant shows very
little difference from WT in terms of reaction kinetics, fidelity,
and other properties that have been examined in this and previous
studies,,, it is perhaps
surprising that tyrosine is invariant at this position in A-family
DNA polymerase sequences., The corresponding Y-to-F
substitution was observed in a localized mutagenesis experiment on Taq DNA polymerase that involved a short selection in vivo, implying that the
defect associated with the Y766F substitution is indeed mild but that
this allele would eventually be eliminated during growth in the wild.
Our data suggest that Y766F is associated with a small decrease in
the level of discrimination against rNTPs, too small to be detected
in an earlier screen for rNTP incorporation. This behavior of Y766F could plausibly confer a small selective
disadvantage, given the excess of rNTPs over dNTPs in vivo and the deleterious consequences of incorporation of rNTPs into
DNA.,,

Error Specificity
of the E710A and Y766A Mutator Polymerases
As described above,
the E710A and Y766A mutators are impaired in
the processing of at least a subset of correct base pairs, making
the early checkpoints less effective in screening out mispairs so
that a higher frequency of these errors can be recovered as mutations
using an appropriate indicator gene (Table ). The base pair-specific effects we describe predict that E710A
should be more accurate at templates G and T than at templates A and
C, and that Y766A should be inaccurate at templates A and T but have
approximately WT fidelity at template G, where the kinetic parameters
are similar to those of WT. In Table , which
shows the frequencies of mutations resulting from all 12 possible
mispairs for WT, E710A, and Y766A, the aggregate mutation frequencies
at each template base (fourth entry for each template base) are broadly
consistent with the expectations from our biochemical analysis. The
notable exception involves E710A at template C where our data predict
a substantially higher error rate.

Frequencies of Individual Base Substitution
Errors Made by E710A and Y766A Pol I(KF) Mutants
mispair	WT
mutants	E710A mutants	error rate, E710A:WT	Y766A mutants	error
rate, Y766A:WT	
A-dCTP	1	51	75	6	21	
A-dATP	2	7	5.1	5	8.8	
A-dGTP	0	0	 	5	 	
A-dXTP	3	58	28	16	19	
 	 	 	 	 	 	
T-dGTP	19	14	1.1	55	10	
T-dTTP	1	6	8.8	0	0	
T-dCTP	6	18	4.4	0	0	
T-dXTP	26	38	2.1	55	7.5	
 	 	 	 	 	 	
G-dTTP	2	14	10	7	12	
G-dGTP	10	1	0.1	1	0.4	
G-dATP	10	3	0.4	2	0.7	
G-dXTP	22	18	1.2	10	1.6	
 	 	 	 	 	 	
C-dATP	13	7	0.8	1	0.3	
C-dCTP	0	0	 	0	 	
C-dTTP	0	2	 	0	 	
C-dXTP	13	9	1.0	1	0.3	
 	 	 	 	 	 	
total	94	135	 	103	 	
MF (×10–4)	57	120	 	220	 	
Polymerase errors were measured
in a forward mutational assay using the lacZα
gene in a phage M13mp2 vector. The table
lists the number of lacZ mutants, recovered after
gap-filling synthesis by each of the indicated polymerases, that result
from individual mismatch errors. The data for WT and E710A Pol I(KF)
are from ref (),
and the data for Y766A are from ref ().

The
fourth entry of each set (bold)
is the total number of lacZ mutants resulting from
mispairing at the indicated template base (A, C, G, or T).

The frequency of each type of base
substitution error is calculated by multiplying the overall mutant
frequency (MF) by the proportion of mutants of each type (as a fraction
of the total number of mutants recovered). Correction factors for
the expression of errors on transfection, and for the number of detectable
sites for each type of mutation, cancel out when calculating the ratio
of error frequencies for mutant and WT polymerases.

We would not necessarily expect
the behavior of polymerases at
the early checkpoints to account fully for the error specificities
reported in Table . To be detected as a mutational
end point, a mispaired dNTP must not only pass through the early checkpoints
but also be covalently incorporated onto the DNA primer followed by
extension of the resulting mismatch. The constraints of active-site
geometry in these later steps of the reaction pathway will result
in mispair-specific preferences that determine which mutations are
recovered at high frequency; note, for example, the predominance of
mutations resulting from wobble (Pu-Py) mispairs in Table . In a previous study, we were able to account for
aspects of the incorporation kinetics and mispair specificity of WT
and E710A Pol I(KF) simply by considering mispair geometry relative
to the closed complex active-site pocket.

This study suggests that a common feature of mutator polymerases
is the impaired recognition of complementary base pairs as “correct”,
diminishing the overall effectiveness of the early checkpoints. The
mutator alleles that affect these early transitions will also influence
the interactions between nascent mispairs and the polymerase active
site in later steps of the reaction, determining the characteristic
mutational repertoire of each mutator.

Supporting Information Available
Additional chemical quench
data (Figures S1 and S2), stopped-flow fluorescence data (Figures
S3, S4, and S6–S9), fluorescence emission data (Figure S5),
amplitudes and rate constants corresponding to the fitted curves throughout
this study (Tables S1 and S2). This material is available free of
charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi400837k_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
† O.B.: Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599.

This work was
supported by National Institutes of Health Grant GM-28550.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Olga Potapova for invaluable technical
support and Enrique De La Cruz and Anna M. Pyle for the use of their
stopped-flow instruments.

Abbreviations
Pol
I(KF)Klenow fragment of E. coli DNA
polymerase I

Bst DNA polportion of B.
stearothermophilus DNA polymerase equivalent to Klenow fragment

smFRETsingle-molecule
fluorescence resonance energy transfer

2-AP2-aminopurine

IAEDANS5-{[(2-iodoacetyl)amino]ethyl}aminonaphthalene-1-sulfonic
acid

dNTPdeoxynucleoside
triphosphate

WTwild-type

PDBProtein
Data Bank

PMTphotomultiplier
tube.

A previously published experiment, using a linear DNA with template C, did not
show the slow fluorescence decrease because the multiply mutated polymerase
was used.

Because the template
A substrate shows
an immediate fluorescence decrease followed by a fluorescence increase,
the latter must derive from an actual change in the environment of
the T(+1)2-AP probe. Conversely, in situations where we observe a
biphasic fluorescence increase, we cannot rule out the possibility
that only the first step gives rise to the fluorescence signal, and
the subsequent slower step merely augments the signal by shifting
the equilibrium toward products.

This is analogous to the way in which
the chemical step of phosphoryl transfer is rate-limited by the preceding
noncovalent step and, just as in this
case, one might expect to find mutations or other circumstances that
slow fingers closing to the point where it becomes kinetically observable.

The effect of the neighboring
base
on the fluorescence intensity in our study is different from the published
report for 2-AP within a duplex DNA environment.

There is no correlation
between the
binary complex fluorescence and the fluorescence of the unbound DNA
duplex, ruling out the possibility that the structural character of
the DNA is preserved in the binary complex.

An important caveat is that the WT
number of C-dATP errors could be inflated by C-to-U depurination on
the template strand. Because of the low frequency of mutants recovered
from the WT polymerase, rare events of this type are more likely to
be represented in the WT data, leading to an underestimate of the
C-dATP error rate for the mutator polymerases.

