Thiamin diphosphate
(ThDP, the
vitamin B1 coenzyme) is a cofactor used for biological
decarboxylations of 2-oxo acids, as well as C–C bond formations
resembling a benzoin condensation, and comprises three distinct chemical
moieties, two heteroaromatic rings and a diphosphate group. Early
X-ray structural studies of three ThDP enzymes showed that the diphosphate
group is important for binding of the cofactor to the enzymes.− Seminal studies of Breslow revealed
that the thiazolium ring participates as an electrophilic covalent
catalyst by conversion of the weak C2-H acid to its conjugate base
(called variously a C2 carbanion, a carbene, or an ylide) to initiate
the reaction. Only relatively recently was it demonstrated that the
4′-aminopyrimidine ring likely participates in an intramolecular
acid–base reaction, probably by assisting the deprotonation
at C2-H to generate the nucleophile., This acid–base
function of the 4′-aminopyrimidine is deemed very important
in view of the paucity of acid–base catalysts at the active
centers of several ThDP enzymes, especially (a) glyoxylate carboligase
that lacks even the highly conserved Glu within the short hydrogen
bond of the ThDP N1′ atom, or any other potential acid–base
catalyst, and (b) benzaldehyde lyase,
still bearing the conserved Glu side chain, but with only a single
His residue in the active center with potential acid–base catalytic
function, but too distant from the C2 atom to be directly involved
in any proton transfers.

Typical
ThDP enzymes commence the reaction sequence with formation
of a covalent nucleophilic adduct of the C2 atom of the thiazolium
ring of ThDP with the carbonyl group of the substrate. The decarboxylation
of pyruvate to acetaldehyde (Scheme ) conducted
by yeast pyruvate decarboxylase (YPDC,
EC 4.1.1.1) is shown as an example in Scheme . Such reactions proceed by a series of ThDP-bound covalent complexes,
including the C2α-tetrahedral predecarboxylation intermediate
C2α-lactylThDP (LThDP); the enamine, a C2α-trigonal (first)
postdecarboxylation intermediate; and the C2α-tetrahedral (second)
postdecarboxylation intermediate C2α-hydroxyethylThDP (HEThDP).
Given the chirality of the protein matrix, all enzyme-bound complexes
of ThDP, covalent and noncovalent, are chiral and, in theory, can
be detected by circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy. More than four
decades ago, the group of Kochetov pioneered application of CD to
ThDP enzymes with experiments on transketolase,, in which in the absence of substrate a negative CD band with a maximum
near 320 nm was observed. During the past dozen years, the Rutgers
group has uncovered multiple spectral signatures for intermediates
along the ThDP-dependent enzymatic pathways. These spectral signatures
are best seen by CD, where proximal bands are often fortuitously resolvable
because they have opposite phases (a property absent in absorption
spectra). So far, the following assignments have been made on more
than 10 ThDP enzymes: (1) a positive CD band centered near 300–315
nm pertaining to the 1′,4′-iminopyrimidineThDP tautomer
(IP form) in either enzyme-bound ThDP or intermediates related to the C2α-tetrahedral adducts LThDP
and HEThDP at pH values near or above the pKa of the 4′-aminopyrimidinium (APH+) conjugate
acid;, (2) a negative CD band centered at 320 nm
pertaining to the canonical 4′-aminopyrimidine form (AP form),,, the band observed by Kochetov
and co-workers; (3) electronic transitions
corresponding to the enamine, which until the discovery of the IP
form was the only obvious conjugated ThDP-bound intermediate, whose
λmax depends on the group attached to the C2α
atom (ranging from 295 nm for CH3,, to ∼380 nm for a phenyl ring− to 430–440 nm for a styryl substituent);, and (4) the Michaelis complex reported by a negative CD band centered
around 330–340 nm., The λmax of the IP form in case (1) and the enamine in case (3) observed
on enzymes could be well reproduced in chemical models., However, those of AP form (2) and Michaelis complex (4) could not,
and the band pertinent to the AP form almost certainly originates
from a charge transfer (CT) transition between the 4′-aminopyrimidine
as a donor and the thiazolium ring as an acceptor.,

Mechanism of Yeast Pyruvate Decarboxylase
Additionally, we had reported CD spectroscopic detection
of ThDP-bound
intermediates derived from a chromophoric substrate, (E)-2-oxo-4-(pyridin-3-yl)-3-butenoic acid, on benzaldehyde lyase at
wavelengths much longer than expected on the basis of the length of
the conjugated system. In view of the information that has been gathered
at Rutgers, we were intrigued by the report of Merski and Townsend of a vis intermediate with a λmax of 430 nm on the first enzyme in clavulanic acid biosynthesis. This
was attributed to 2-acryloylthiamin diphosphate, but that λmax could not be achieved by any of the conjugated synthetic
models created. Having available a battery
of ThDP enzymes, we undertook a study of four alternate 2-oxo acid
substrates, acetyl pyruvate (ACP), its methyl ester (MACP), fluoropyruvate,
and (E)-4-(4-chlorophenyl)-2-oxo-3-butenoic acid
(CPB) (Figure ). We did this in a search for
CT bands that could serve as reporters of ThDP-bound covalent intermediates
on enzymes, especially signatures for such intermediates not previously
characterized.

Suggested origins of CT bands formed on ThDP enzymes using
(A)
ACP, (B) MACP, (C) fluoropyruvate, and (D) CPB.

In addition to YPDC, we used the E1 components of the Escherichia
coli pyruvate (E1p) and 2-oxoglutarate (E1o) dehydrogenase
complexes, and benzaldehyde lyase (BAL), an enzyme conducting a retro-benzoin
condensation from (R)-benzoin to two benzaldehyde
molecules (Scheme S1 of the ). The four compounds listed were used to elucidate the origin of
the CD or photo diode array bands observed at wavelengths longer than
expected on the basis of the length of the conjugated system. The
compound MACP could form only an LThDP-like predecarboxylation complex,
a model for the pre- and postdecarboxylation C2α-tetrahedral
intermediates produced by ACP. Upon decarboxylation of fluoropyruvate
to the enamine, subsequent fluoride ion elimination is a source of
2-acetylThDP., Compounds ACP, MACP, and fluoropyruvate
create ThDP-bound intermediates with very short conjugations in the
C2 side chain, assuring us that all observations above 320–330
nm reflect CT transitions and/or bands, while CPB gives rise to both
styryl-type conjugation and CT transitions. The results provide new
spectroscopic signatures for ThDP intermediates, including the very
important 2-acetylThDP (in general 2-acylThDP), a likely intermediate
on the superfamily of 2-oxo acid dehydrogenase multienzyme complexes
(Scheme S2 of the ).

Experimental Procedures
Materials
Methyl 4-hydroxy-2-oxopent-3-enoate
(MACP)
and morpholinoethanesulfonic acid (MES) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich
(St. Louis, MO). Hydrolysis of MACP to ACP was achieved by following
the procedure mentioned in the . The potassium salt of (E)-4-(4-chlorophenyl)-2-oxo-3-butenoic
acid (CPB) was synthesized as previously reported. ThDP was purchased from USB (Cleveland, OH).

Circular Dichroism
Experiments
All steady state CD
spectra were recorded on a Chirascan CD spectrometer from Applied
Photophysics (Leatherhead, U.K.) in 2.4 mL volume with a 1 cm path
length cell.

pH Titration of E477Q YPDC with Pyruvate
Present
E477Q
(33.3 μM active centers) in a triple-pH buffer system containing
50 mM acetic acid, 50 mM MES, 100 mM Tris, 0.5 mM ThDP, 5 mM MgCl2, and 10 mM pyruvate was titrated in the pH range of 5.3–6.2
at 5 °C.

Titration of E477Q YPDC with ACP
E477Q YPDC (83.3 μM
active centers) was titrated with ACP (0.05–10 mM) in 50 mM
MES (pH 6.0) containing 0.5 mM ThDP and 2 mM MgCl2 at 5
°C.

Titration of E477Q YPDC with MACP
E477Q YPDC (33.3
μM active centers) was titrated with MACP (0.05–10 mM)
in 50 mM MES (pH 6.0) containing 0.5 mM ThDP and 2 mM MgCl2 at 5 °C.

Titration of E1o with ACP
E1o (33.3
μM active
centers) was titrated with ACP (0.05–2 mM) in 20 mM KH2PO4 (pH 7.0) containing 0.2 mM ThDP and 2 mM MgCl2 at 5 °C.

Reaction of E1p and Its H407A and E571A Variants
with Fluoropyruvate
E1p (3.0 mg/mL, 30 μM active centers)
was reacted with 5
mM fluoropyruvate in 50 mM KH2PO4 (pH 7.0) containing
0.2 mM ThDP and 1 mM MgCl2, and the CD spectra were recorded
after different periods of incubation at 25 °C. Fluoropyruvate
(15 mM) for the H407A E1p variant (2.5 mg/mL, 25 μM active centers)
and fluoropyruvate (10 mM) for the E571A E1p variant (3.0 mg/mL, 30
μM active centers) were used under conditions similar to those
used for wild-type E1p.

Titration of YPDC with CPB
YPDC
(33.3 μM active
centers) was titrated with CPB (0.03–4 mM) in 50 mM MES (pH
6.0) containing 0.5 mM ThDP and 2 mM MgCl2 at 5 °C.

Titration of BAL with CPB
BAL (25.5 μM active
centers) was titrated with CPB (0.08–10 mM) in 50 mM Tris (pH
8.0) containing 0.2 mM ThDP and 1 mM MgCl2 at 30 °C.
The Kd value was calculated by fitting
the data to a Hill function (eq ).where CDλ is the observed CD signal at a particular wavelength,
CDmaxλ is the maximal CD signal at saturation
with ligand,
[ligand] is the concentration of substrate, and nH is the Hill coefficient.

Rapid-Scan Stopped-Flow
Photodiode Array (PDA) Experiments of
BAL with CPB
These experiments were conducted on an SX.18MV
stopped-flow spectrophotometer from Applied Photophysics. Experiments
were performed by mixing equal volumes of BAL (34.0 μM) and
CPB (10 mM). A slit width of 2 mm and a path length of 2 mm were used.
Sigma plot 10.0 was used to fit the data using a single-exponential
model as in eq where k1 and k2 are the apparent rate
constants and c is the Amaxλ in the exponential rise to maximum or decay model.

Results
Formation of the 1′,4′-Iminopyrimidinyl Tautomeric
Form of ThDP on YPDC
Previously, we had shown that titrating
the slow E477Q YPDC variant with increasing concentrations of pyruvate
forms LThDP, the predecarboxylation intermediate, present in its 1′,4′-iminopyrimidylLThDP
form (positive CD band at ∼300 nm) and as a Michaelis complex
(negative band at 330 nm). Increasing
the pH from 5.3 to 6.2 and recording the positive CD band at 305 nm
formed from pyruvate with E477Q YPDC (1′,4′-iminoLThDP)
resulted in an increase in amplitude (Figure S1 of the ), suggesting formation
of the IP form from the N1-protonated 4′-aminopyridinium (APH+), and implying a pKa near 6.1
for the APH+ form.

Circular
Dichroism Band Formation with ACP and MACP
In contrast to
the result with pyruvate, CD titration of E477Q YPDC
with ACP did not provide evidence of formation of either the IP form
or the Michaelis complex; instead, it revealed formation of a negative
band at 400 nm that exhibited saturation, a band that increased in
amplitude after overnight incubation at 4 °C, thus suggesting
a slow reaction. The CD spectrum of the protein after separation of
the supernatant confirmed that the species represented by the 400
nm CD band is protein-bound. The negative CD band at 400 nm was assigned
to a CT transition based on the following. The 400 nm band could not
correspond to the enamine because the enamine derived from pyruvic
acid has a λmax of 295 nm, and even an additional double bond could not shift the λmax beyond 330 nm. The CT band (Figure A) is believed to correspond to the predecarboxylation intermediate
on ThDP with a Kd of 1.64 mM (Figure ). A similar experiment conducted with E1o also
revealed the formation of a CD band at 408 nm, but in this case with
a positive phase (Figure S2 of the ). Next, a CD titration of E477Q YPDC was also conducted
at 5 °C with MACP, the methyl ester of acetopyruvate, which after
overnight incubation also formed a negative CD band at 399 nm (Figure ), at the same wavelength as with ACP. The weak
signal at 399 nm was confirmed to be protein-bound, as it persisted
in a spectrum after the protein had been separated from supernatant
and redissolved in fresh buffer.

(a) Formation of a CD charge transfer
band on YPDC at 5 °C:
(1) E477Q YPDC enzyme, (2) E477Q with ACP, and (3) E477Q YPDC with
MACP. (b) Data from the experiment with E477Q YPDC and ACP were fit
to a Hill function [eq  (see )].

Formation of the intermediate appears to be very slow with
MACP
(ester), while ACP undergoes slow turnover forming a steady state
level of intermediate saturating the available active centers. These
results suggest that the similar CD band observed with both ACP and
MACP (Figure a) pertains to the same predecarboxylation
intermediate because the ThDP–MACP adduct could not be decarboxylated
(Figure B). Irrespective of whether the CD
band with ACP pertains to the pre- or postdecarboxylation C2α-tetrahedral
intermediate (these could be differentiated according to their C6′-H 1H chemical shifts), its wavelength
excludes the enamine and clearly demonstrates the possibility of forming
ThDP intermediates with λmax at 400 nm in the absence
of significant conjugation. This band likely corresponds to a CT transition
in origin.

Reaction of Fluoropyruvate with E1p Leads
to the Formation of
a New CD Band Corresponding to 2-AcetylThDP
It had been reported
by Frey and co-workers that fluoropyruvate is a convenient source
of 2- acetylThDP on E1p (Figure C). Following
decarboxylation to the enamine, fluoride ion elimination leads to
the enol form of 2-acetylThDP, which then tautomerizes to the keto
form., CD spectra of E1p and some of its low-activity
active center variants revealed formation of a very broad new positive
band near 390–395 nm (Figure ), which
was assigned to the enzyme-bound 2-acetylThDP. It has been amply demonstrated
in the literature that, in model reactions, this intermediate can
undergo rapid hydrolysis to acetate ion. Hence, its short lifetime
is not surprising, and in fact, the rate of decomposition appears
to be similar in E1p and in its slow H407A and E571A variants (Figure
S3 of the ). This
acetyl group is the shortest side chain at the ThDP C2 position in
our list in Table , yet it still has a long
λmax (390 nm) CT transition. This is our closest
model for the Merski–Townsend observation attributed to 2-acryloylThDP.
It is not unreasonable that replacement of the methyl group with a
vinyl group, an extension of the π system by a C=C double
bond, according to the Woodward–Fieser rules,, would account for the observed λmax of 430 nm (390
nm + 30 nm = 420 nm).

Circular dichroism spectra of E1p in the presence of 5
mM fluoropyruvate.
The inset shows the time dependence of the CD band at 392 nm.

CT Bands Related
to ThDP Observed
by CD Spectroscopy in This Study
enzyme	substrate	CT band
(nm) (phase)	assignments	
E477Q YPDC	ACP	400 (−)	predecarboxylation	
E1o	ACP	408 (+)	predecarboxylation	
E477Q YPDC	MACP	399
(−)	predecarboxylation	
E1p	fluoropyruvate	390 (+)	2-acetyllThDP	
BAL	CPB	488 (−), 434 (+)	predecarboxylation and
enamine	
Formation of
a Long Wavelength CT Band with a Longer Conjugated
Substrate, CPB
CPB was the first conjugated 2-oxo acid giving
evidence of a YPDC-bound enamine intermediate (λmax at 440 nm) and is also a suicide substrate
with YPDC. Here we used CD to observe
the formation of the enamine on YPDC from CPB as a negative band at
440 nm (Figure S4 of the ). Thus, both vis spectroscopy and CD suggest that the enamine derived
from ThDP-CPB on YPDC has a λmax of 440 nm, while
the CD experiment also confirms that the ThDP-bound enamine is chiral,
as expected. Unlike that with YPDC, reaction of CPB with BAL at 30
°C formed a negative CT band at 488 nm and a positive one at
434 nm [Kd = 1.1 mM (Figure )]. These results are similar to those obtained by our groups
with (E)-2-oxo-4-(pyridin-3-yl)-3-butenoic acid.
In that instance, the band near 480 nm was assigned to the LThDP-type
predecarboxylation intermediate (Figure D). A stopped-flow UV–vis photodiode array
experiment was conducted by mixing BAL (34 μM active centers)
in one syringe with an equal volume of 10 mM CPB placed in the second
syringe at 30 °C. As with CD, time-dependent changes were observed
at 480 and 430 nm (Figure ). This provided
the following rate constants: k1 = 0.0098
± 0.0007 s–1 (formation of the LThDP-like intermediate), k2 = 0.0031 ± 0.0007 s–1 (formation of the HEThDP-like intermediate from the enamine), and k1 = 0.0090 ± 0.0002 s–1 (formation of the enamine) (Figure ). The
rates indicate that conversion of the LThDP-like intermediate (488
nm) to the enamine (434 nm) is very fast compared to depletion of
the enamine to the HEThDP-like intermediate. Both the CD and stopped-flow
PDA analysis confirmed that CPB on BAL forms a tetrahedral covalent
adduct with ThDP, leading to the appearance of a CT band. An X-ray
structure of (E)-2-oxo-4-(pyridin-3-yl)-3-butenoic
acid cocrystallized with benzoylformate decarboxylase revealed the
stability of the postdecarboxylation HEThDP-like intermediate [the
C2 adduct of ThDP and (E)-3-(pyridin-3-yl)acrylaldehyde],
also confirming fast decarboxylation. Quantitative analysis of the kinetic data in Figure  is made difficult because the LThDP- and HEThDP-like C2α-tetrahedral
intermediates derived from (E)-2-oxo-4-(pyridin-3-yl)-3-butenoic
acid have very similar λmax values (477 and 473 nm
in vis photodiode array spectra, respectively).

(a) Formation of the CT band by CD titration of BAL with CPB at
30 °C. (b) Data were fit to a Hill function [eq  (see )].

(a) Time-dependent formation of a CT band on
BAL with CPB detected
by a stopped-flow photodiode array at 30 °C. (b) Data were fit
using eq  (425 nm) and eq  (480 nm) (see  for
reaction conditions and equations).

Discussion
In this study, CD spectroscopy was used
to identify the CT signal
corresponding to intermediates derived from substrates covalently
bound to ThDP on four different enzymes. A summary of the steady state
formation of ThDP-related intermediates reflected by formation of
CT bands is given in Table  and Figure .

It was shown that the predecarboxylation
intermediate upon addition
of pyruvate to E477Q YPDC is preferentially in its IP tautomeric form
and the pKa for the APH+ form
is 6.1, very near the pH of optimal activity of 6.2. This finding provides the eighth example of the suggestion
that at the optimal pH for activity, all ionization states and tautomeric
forms of ThDP (APH+, IP, and AP) may be needed in the mechanism, ensuring that all are available for catalysis.

With the examples revealed here, we have now identified CD spectroscopic
signatures for nearly all covalent and noncovalent ThDP-related intermediates
in Scheme  and Figure . The substrates selected for this study helped us to assign signatures
to intermediates at wavelengths longer than 380 nm, well beyond the
spectrum of the protein. For instance, ACP and its methyl ester MACP
with E477Q formed a similar negative CD band near ∼400 nm.
Because MACP could not undergo decarboxylation, the signal must correspond
to a predecarboxylation intermediate. The λmax of
∼400 nm could not correspond to a conjugated π system
(only adding an acetyl group to pyruvate), strongly implying some
other system, such as a CT interaction. Similarly, the very broad
CD band at 390 nm formed from fluoropyruvate with E1p corresponds
to 2-acetylThDP, a signature never before observed by CD spectroscopy,
which also likely represents a CT transition. With this result, the
Merski–Townsend observation of
an intermediate with a λmax near 430 nm on the first
enzyme in clavulanate biosynthesis can be assigned with confidence
to 2-acryloylThDP and attributed to a CT transition originating from
an interaction of the positively charged thiazolium ring with the
π bond of the ThDP C2 substituent. From the limited number of
examples available to us, we could speculate that the Woodward–Fieser
rules also apply to the shift in the λmax of the
CT bands. For example, addition of the styryl substituent of CPB to
the MACP in the conjugated system (or indeed to the acetyl in 2-acetylThDP)
leads to a shift from 390 to 400 to 488 nm.

Attribution of some
of the CD bands to charge transfer transitions
is also supported by nonenzymatic models using UV–vis spectroscopy.
The negative CD band at 320 nm that we attribute to the AP form was
assigned to a CT interaction of the 4′-aminopyrimidine ring
as an electron donor with the thiazolium ring as an acceptor. This
was accomplished by surveying many E1p variants, which indicated that
there is no need for an aromatic side chain in the vicinity of ThDP
for us to observe the AP form, in contrast to what had been previously
believed. For reasons only theory can address, the CD signals for
the CT bands are very much stronger on the enzymes than in models.
In a paper by Nemeria et al., we searched
for CT bands generated by addition of a thiazolium salt to 4-aminopyrimidine.
We could indeed observe such an absorbance with a λmax of 340 nm, but 200 mM thiazolium triflate and at least 30 mM 4-aminopyrimidine
were required to produce as much as 30 mA. On ThDP enzymes, we could
conduct entire pH titrations of the AP form by CD at an enzyme concentration
of 30 μM. This model experiment does provide support for assigning
the CD band for the AP form to a CT transition. We have also observed
that the CD bands we attribute to CT transitions tend to be much broader
than those originating from extended conjugation.

In conclusion,
there are now characterized CT bands for both pre-
and postdecarboxylation C2α-tetrahedral ThDP-bound intermediates,
which can also be differentiated using the NMR method invented by
Tittmann and Hübner. The remaining
ThDP-related species needing spectral signatures are the C2-carbanion/ylide/carbene
and the APH+ form. The presence of the APH+ form
was established by solid state NMR on three ThDP enzymes. Recently, Tittmann’s group reported X-ray
evidence suggestive of the existence of the carbene on pyruvate oxidase. With our CD assignments in hand, stopped-flow
CD can now be exploited to provide rate constants for individual steps
on the reaction pathways. This has been demonstrated recently on three
ThDP-dependent enzymes, E1p, glyoxylate
carboligase, and 1-deoxy-d-xylulose-5-phosphate
synthase. It is also worth emphasizing
that with the ready availability of high-sensitivity steady state
and stopped-flow CD instrumentation, the methods here used could indeed
be applied to other enzymes, as such signatures for intermediates
are so much more readily quantified by CD than by UV–vis spectroscopy.

Supporting Information Available
Synthesis of acetyl pyruvate,
enzyme purification, activity assays, two schemes, four figures, and
references. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi4015743_si_001.pdf

The
authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
ThDPthiamin diphosphate

YPDCyeast pyruvate decarboxylase

E1oE1 component of
the E. coli 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex

E1pE1 component of
the E. coli pyruvate dehydrogenase complex

BALbenzaldehyde lyase

ACPacetyl pyruvate

MACPmethyl acetyl
pyruvate

CPB(E)-4-(4-chlorophenyl)-2-oxo-3-butenoic acid

3-PKB(E)-2-oxo-4-(pyridin-3-yl)-3-butenoic acid

CTcharge transfer transition, a result of an
electronic transition to an excited state in which there is a partial
transfer of electronic charge from the donor to the acceptor moiety

CDcircular dichroism

PDAphotodiode array

YlC2-carbanion/ylide/carbene
(known by all three names) conjugate base form of ThDP

IP1′,4′-iminopyrimidine
tautomeric form of ThDP

AP4′-aminopyrimidine tautomeric form of ThDP

APH+4′-aminopyrimidinium
conjugate acid form of ThDP

LThDPC2α-lactyl ThDP

NADHreduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide

YADHyeast alcohol dehydrogenase

DCPIP2,6-dichlorophenolindophenol

MES2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid.

