Through covalent
attachment
to intracellular proteins, a process termed protein ubiquitylation,
the small protein ubiquitin (Ub) regulates a wide range of biological
processes.− Ub is tethered to proteins via the action of three proteins: E1
Ub activating enzymes, E2 Ub conjugating enzymes, and E3 Ub ligating
enzymes (Figure A)., This
enzymatic cascade results in the formation of an isopeptide linkage
between the C-terminus of Ub and an ε-amino group of a substrate
lysine residue. Analogous to protein glycosylation, once Ub is anchored
to a substrate protein additional rounds of conjugation afford polymeric
Ub (polyUb) chains. A variety of chains can be assembled due to the
presence of seven Ub lysine residues (K6, K11, K27, K29, K33, K48,
and K63) and an amino terminus (M1) (Figure B). The prevailing view is that distinct polyUb chains govern specific
biological pathways. This supposition
is based, in large part, on the disparate activities of single-linkage
(homotypic) K48- and K63-linked polyUb chains. K48-linked Ub chains
with a minimum of four subunits endow cells with the ability to remove
intracellular proteins by acting as the principal signal for proteasomal
degradation.− By contrast, K63-linked polyUb chains serve as nondegradative
signals during the DNA damage response and cytokine signaling., These functional discrepancies have motivated efforts to uncover
the roles of other polyUb chains, particularly because proteomics
studies have revealed all eight Ub–Ub linkages are present
in eukaryotic cells. While it has become
evident that the abundance of non-K48 and K63 linkages increases under
certain cellular conditions (e.g., M1, K6, and K11),− the precise function of these conjugates is unclear. Moreover, the
exact topology of chains (e.g., whether a chain is linear or branched)
that govern a particular cellular pathway has been a mystery.

Protein ubiquitylation.
(A) Cascade of E1, E2, and E3 enzymes that
catalyze the formation of an isopeptide bond between a substrate protein
and ubiquitin (Ub). (B) Structure of Ub (PDB entry 1ubq) showing the seven
lysines (K6, K11, K27, K29, K33, K48, and K63) and the types of polymeric
Ub (polyUb) chains that form due to the presence of these residues.
The lines between Ub subunits in the chains denote an isopeptide linkage,
and the numbers indicate the lysine used to link subunits together.
In the case of a branched heterotypic chain, a single subunit is modified
with two or more Ub molecules via two or more isopeptide linkages.

Connecting chain topology to a
particular biological function presents
a significant analytical challenge. The three most common methods
for analyzing polyUb chains include expression of Ub lysine-to-arginine
(K-to-R) variants in different cell lines, linkage-specific antibodies,
and mass spectrometry (MS). Use of Ub
K-to-R variants blocks chain extension through specific sites and
therefore prevents downstream events associated with a particular
polyUb chain. The implementation of this approach has led to seminal
discoveries related to K48 and K63 linkages., However, Ub K-to-R variants are overexpressed in living cells, and
the presence of wild-type Ub often complicates analysis. Furthermore,
definitive conclusions cannot be drawn with regard to the formation
of linear or branched heterotypic chains, and particular K-to-R substitutions
may affect the surface of Ub and bias polyUb assembly. Although linkage-specific
antibodies (four of which are available, M1, K11, K48, and K63),, provide an opportunity to explore
the impact of chain linkage on the fate of endogenous polyUb-modified
proteins, it is difficult to differentiate between homotypic and heterotypic
chains.,

MS approaches have also been instrumental
in characterizing polyUb
chains. The most common strategy is to use a bottom-up approach in
which Ub conjugates are first digested extensively by trypsin and
then analyzed by MS. Modified lysine
residues of a particular protein, including Ub itself, are then identified
by the presence of a diglycine (GG) motif appended to the ε-amino
group (trypsin cleaves between R74 and G75 of Ub, leaving behind the
GG motif). While bottom-up MS enables characterization of the linkages
between two Ub molecules, it is difficult to assess chain length and
topology because the connectivity of Ub fragments harboring branch
points is destroyed during digestion. To address this, there has been interest in using other approaches
that examine intact proteins such as middle-down MS.− Middle-down MS combines the benefits of both bottom-up and top-down
approaches by exploiting minimal protease digestion of protein samples
and the ability to detect multiple post-translational modifications
on a single polypeptide chain.− However, this approach has not
been applied to the analysis of Ub chain topology.

Here we demonstrate
the utility of middle-down MS in the characterization
of branched polyUb chains produced by bacterial E3 ligases. Several
pathogenic bacteria deliver proteins, termed effectors, into host
cells to undermine the defense response. Because the ubiquitylation network plays a major role in the immune
response, it is one of the primary targets of these effector proteins.
Many effectors functionally mimic eukaryotic E3 ligases and catalyze
the assembly of polyUb chains on a distinct subset of host proteins. One particular example is the E3 ligase NleL
(non-Lee-encoded effector ligase) from enterohemorrhagic Escherichia
coli (EHEC) O157:H7., NleL is important for
modulating the actin cytoskeleton of the host cell and has recently
been shown to build heterotypic polyUb chains bearing K6 and K48 linkages in vitro., Because of the challenges associated
with the assessment of chain topology, however, the extent to which
NleL constructs polyUb chains bearing branch points is unknown. Therefore,
we sought to employ middle-down MS in the characterization of polyUb
chains produced by NleL as well as another bacterial E3 ligase from Shigella flexneri, IpaH9.8. The results of our investigation suggest middle-down MS can be used
to evaluate polyUb chain branching and dissect the factors that contribute
to the formation of this underexplored chain topology.

Materials and
Methods
Protein Expression and Purification
Wild-type ubiquitin
(Ub) and lysine-to-cysteine (K-to-C) Ub variants were expressed in E. coli RosettaTM 2(DE3)pLysS cells (Novagen) and purified
by perchloric acid precipitation, following a procedure adapted from
ref (). DNA encoding
the human E1 Ub-activating enzyme was amplified from the HeLa cell
cDNA library and cloned into pET24a(+). The UbcH5c(Ube2D3)-pET14a
DNA construct was purchased from Addgene. The catalytic domain of
IpaH9.8254–545 was cloned into pET28a(+). Human
E1, UBE2D3, and IpaH9.8 (S. flexneri) with six-histidine
(His) tags were expressed and purified as previously described. A bacterial expression vector encoding glutathione S-transferase (GST)-tagged NleL170–782 was a gift from D. Y. W. Lin and J. Chen. Briefly, GST-tagged NleL
was expressed in E. coli BL-21 cells grown in LB
medium (OD600 of 0.06) at 37 °C, induced with IPTG
(0.1 mM), and grown at 16 °C (16 h). GST-NleL was then purified
by glutathione sepharose affinity chromatography. The GST tag was
cleaved from the eluted protein with TEV protease (4 °C for 16
h) and further purified by gel filtration (Superdex 200, GE Healthcare).
The gene construct for UbcH7 (UBE2L3) was purchased from DNASU Plasmid
Repository and cloned into the pGEX-4-T2 bacterial expression vector
with an N-terminal GST tag (BamHI and XhoI restriction sites). Cells
were grown in LB medium at 37 °C (OD600 of 0.06),
induced using IPTG (0.4 mM), and grown for 4 h. As with GST-tagged
NleL, GST-tagged UBE2L3 was purified by glutathione sepharose affinity
chromatography. The GST tag was again cleaved from the eluted protein
with thrombin protease (4 °C for 16 h; minimal N-terminal perturbation
is imperative for chain synthesis activity with NleL), and the protein
was further purified by cation exchange chromatography.

Thiol–Ene
Ub Chain Synthesis
Homotypic Ub chains
linked via non-native isopeptide bonds at position 6 or 48 were synthesized
using thiol–ene coupling (TEC) chemistry as previously described.,

Native PolyUb Chain Synthesis
To solutions containing
reaction buffer A [50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 50 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, and 0.1 mM DTT] were added Ub (50 μM), E1 (150 nM),
E2 (1 μM UBE2D3 or UBE2L3), and E3 (0.05–5 μM NleL
or IpaH9.8). Reactions were then initiated using ATP (2 mM) and allowed
to proceed at 37 °C. PolyUb chain formation was analyzed by sodium
dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE)
and MS (see below).

Chain Elongation Using Thiol–Ene-Derived
Ub Substrates
To each reaction mixture were added Ub oligomers
derived from thiol–ene
chemistry (50 μM), Ub (25 μM), E1 (150 nM), UBE2D3 (1
μM), and NleL (5 μM) in buffer A. ATP (2 mM) was then
added, and polymerization was allowed to occur for 3 h at 37 °C.
It is important to note the concentrations of Ub dimers and tetramers
are based on the molecular weight of each chain. By contrast, the
concentrations of heterogeneous mixtures of Ub oligomers were measured
on the basis of the molecular weight of a single Ub molecule.

Minimal
Trypsin Digestion of Ub Chains
After chain
synthesis, reaction mixtures were concentrated and exchanged into
water using Amicon spin filters [0.5 mL with a 3.5 kDa molecular weight
cutoff (MWCO)]. The enzyme/chain mixture (30 μL or half of the
total reaction mixture) was digested with trypsin (0.5 μg; Cal
Biochem MS grade) in ammonium bicarbonate buffer at 37 °C for
6 h. Trypsin was deactivated with 10% acetic acid, and the resulting
mixtures were dialyzed into water (Slide-A-lyzer MINI dialysis units,
3.5 kDa MWCO) to remove small peptides arising from conjugating enzymes.

Middle-Down Mass Spectrometry Analysis
Samples were
dissolved in a water/acetonitrile/acetic acid (45:45:10) solution
and injected into a 7T linear ion trap/Fourier transform ion cyclotron
resonance (LTQ/FT-ICR) hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific
Inc., Bremen, Germany) equipped with an automated chip-based nanoESI
source (Triversa NanoMate, Advion BioSciences, Ithaca, NY) as described
previously.− The resolving power of the FT-ICR mass analyzer was
set at 100000. All FT-ICR spectra were processed with in-house software
(MASH Suite) using a signal-to-noise
threshold of 3 and a fit factor of 60% and then validated manually.

Electron Capture Dissociation (ECD) Analysis of Ub Chain Linkages
For tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) experiments using ECD, individual
charge states of protein molecular ions were first isolated. Then,
the ions were dissociated by ECD using 3–4% “electron
energy” and a 70 ms duration with a 65 μs delay. All
FT-ICR spectra were processed with the MASH software suite using a
signal-to-noise threshold of 3 and a fit factor of 60% and then validated
manually. The resulting mass lists were further assigned on the basis
of the protein sequence of Ub with or without the diglycine (GG) modification
at each lysine residue using tolerances of 10 and 20 ppm for precursor
and fragment ions, respectively. All reported calculated (calcd) and
experimental (exptl) values correspond to the most abundant molecular
weights.

Results
Middle-Down Analysis of
Branched PolyUb Chains
Under
conditions in which Ub is completely folded, trypsin cleaves only
the peptide bond between arginine 74 and glycine 75, thereby releasing
the C-terminal diglycine (GG) motif. By
exploiting the minimal trypsinolysis of Ub, we reasoned middle-down
MS could be employed to unambiguously characterize the presence of
branching within polyUb chains. The general concept is that minimal
trypsinolysis furnishes Ub1–74 monomers still harboring
a GG motif at any lysine previously engaged in the formation of a
chain. Because chain branching involves the addition of multiple Ub
molecules to a single Ub subunit, minimal trypsinolysis should then
afford a Ub1–74 derivative harboring two or more
GG motifs tethered to specific lysine residues. If there is chain
branching, we would expect to observe at least three distinct species
by MS: Ub1–74, arising from chain caps and/or unpolymerized
Ub (calcd, 8450.57 Da); Ub1–74 with a single GG
motif (GG-Ub1–74; calcd, 8564.62 Da), resulting
from the linear portion of the chain; and Ub1–74 with two GG motifs (2xGG-Ub1–74; calcd, 8678.66
Da), originating from the branch point of the chain (Figure ).

Minimal trypsinolysis of substrates modified with polyUb
chains
of different topologies. What differentiates the formation of linear
and branched chains is the presence of a Ub1–74 derivative
harboring a single GG motif (linear; GG-Ub1–74)
or two GG motifs (branched; 2xGG-Ub1–74).

To determine whether middle-down
MS could be used to detect branched
conjugates, we examined polyUb chain formation by the E3 ligase NleL
from EHEC O157:H7. NleL is composed of an N-terminal unstructured
region (residues 1–169), a pentapeptide repeat domain (residues
170–370), and a catalytic HECT-like domain (HECT; homologous
to the C-terminus of E6AP) with a conserved cysteine residue (C753)
at the C-terminus. Previous studies with NleL have shown that residues
170–782 comprise a catalytically active E3 ligase capable of
assembling chains on itself through a process termed autoubiquitylation
as well as building unanchored/free chains., In accordance, the addition of NleL170–782 to
reaction mixtures containing human E1, the E2 UBE2D3 or UBE2L3, ATP,
and Ub resulted in the formation of polyUb chains (Figure A). To characterize the topology of these chains,
minimal trypsinolysis was performed in an ammonium bicarbonate buffer
to maintain Ub in a native, folded state. Initial experiments focused
on determining the amount of trypsin required to completely disassemble
chains into Ub1–74 fragments. Using a trypsin concentration
of 12.5 μg/mL and an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of approximately
1:1, chains were completely digested within 5 h as judged by SDS–PAGE
(Figure S1 of the ). The resulting Ub1–74 derivatives were then analyzed
using FT-ICR MS. Although Ub species were detected, low-molecular
weight peptides from other proteins in the reaction mixture dominated
the spectra. This was not entirely unexpected considering that, unlike
peptides, the concentration of intact proteins is typically diluted
by isotopic distributions and the presence of multiple charge states. To eliminate signals arising from peptides,
a postdigest dialysis step was incorporated into the workflow (Figure
S2 of the ). This
led to the detection of all three Ub1–74 species
(Figure B).

Middle-down MS analysis of NleL-catalyzed
reactions. (A) Generation
of unanchored and NleL-anchored polyUb chains using two different
E2s: UBE2D3 and UBE2L3. (B) FT-ICR MS analysis of NleL-catalyzed reactions
after minimal trypsinolysis with UBE2D3 as the E2. The spectra correspond
to the Ub8+ charge state. The top spectrum shows all three
Ub1–74 species after restricted trypsin digestion.
The middle spectrum displays the isolated GG-Ub1–74 M8+ parent ion, and the bottom spectrum shows the isolated
2xGG-Ub1–74 M8+ parent ion.

Next, we sought to confirm that 2xGG-Ub1–74 was
generated from a branch point. We first tested whether there was a
correlation between the concentration of NleL and the levels of 2xGG-Ub1–74. Changing the concentration of NleL from 50 nM
to 5 μM was commensurate with an increase in the peak intensity
of both 2xGG-Ub1–74 and GG-Ub1–74 (Figure A), indicating the presence of these
Ub species is directly related to the catalytic activity of NleL.
Analysis of minimally digested wild-type Ub supported this conclusion,
as signals corresponding to 2xGG-Ub1–74 and GG-Ub1–74 were absent in the MS spectra (Figure B). Because the 2xGG-Ub1–74 signal
could also reflect a Ub derivative in which the GG motif is not removed
from the C-terminal, i.e., proximal, subunit of an unanchored polyUb
chain but is cleaved from the adjoining Ub, we wanted to evaluate
minimal digestion of different linear chains. Previously, our lab
has shown that a bifunctional Ub derivative harboring both a cysteine
in lieu of a specific lysine residue and a C-terminal allylamine adduct
could be polymerized using thiol–ene coupling chemistry to
furnish single-linkage polyUb chains of varying length that functionally
mimic native oligomers., Thus, we assembled
homotypic 6- and 48-linked polyUb chains using thiol–ene chemistry
and subjected these polymers to restricted digestion conditions. FT-ICR
analysis of the resulting Ub1–74 derivatives showed
that 2xGG-Ub1–74 is absent (Figure C). These data indicate that within a complex mixture of homotypic
polyUb chains the GG motif on the proximal subunit is always removed
by trypsin. Collectively, these results demonstrate that middle-down
MS can be used to characterize the presence of branched polyUb chains.

Formation
of branch points under different conditions. (A) Generation
of 2xGG-Ub1–74 and GG-Ub1–74 as
a function of NleL concentration. Reactions were performed with three
different concentrations of NleL. FT-ICR MS shows that each Ub1–74 species can be detected at all three NleL concentrations.
(B) FT-ICR MS analysis of minimal trypsin digests of wild-type Ub
(top) and NleL-catalyzed polyUb chain formation (bottom). GG-modified
Ub1–74 is only present in reaction mixtures with
NleL. (C) Homotypic 6- and 48-linked polyUb chains of varying length
were assembled using thiol–ene coupling and subsequently digested
with trypsin. FT-ICR MS shows the presence of Ub1–74 and GG-Ub1–74, but not 2xGG-Ub1–74, in the spectrum for both 6-linked (top) and 48-linked (bottom)
polyUb chains. The red box indicates where the signal for 2xGG-Ub1–74 should be.

Identification of Modified Lysine Residues by ECD
To
identify residues of 2xGG-Ub1–74 modified with Ub
GG motifs, we used ECD to induce protein
fragmentation, resulting in the cleavage of N–Cα bonds
and the formation of c- and z•-type ions. Analysis of the fragments then identifies
the exact residues modified with GG. In the case of the 2xGG-Ub1–74 species, the M8+ charge state was isolated
and fragmented by ECD, resulting in 19 c ions and
25 z• ions with a total of 35 of
73 bond cleavages (Figure B). The fragmentation
patterns around K6 and K48 unambiguously confirmed the presence of
isopeptide linkages at these positions (Figure A and Figure S5 of the ). ECD analysis was also performed on the M8+ charge state
of GG-Ub1–74, and the fragmentation pattern showed
the GG modification largely resides on K6 (Figure S4 of the ). These results are consistent
with previous reports in that NleL assembles K6-linked polymers with
an efficiency greater than that with which it generates K48 linkages.

ECD analysis
of 2xGG-Ub1–74 generated from NleL-catalyzed
reactions. (A) ECD fragments of 2xGG-Ub1–74 containing
modified lysines (a red K represents a lysine-harboring GG motif).
Circles represent theoretical isotopic abundance distributions of
the isotopomer peaks. Calcd, calculated most abundant molecular weight;
exptl, experimental most abundant molecular weight. (B) Observable
ECD fragments (c and z• ions) containing GG-modified lysines at positions 6 and 48.

Branching Depends on Chain
Length
With an established
characterization method, we wanted to gain more insight into the formation
of branched polyUb chains. We reasoned that because the Ub sequence
remains largely the same among Ub1–74, GG-Ub1–74, and 2xGG-Ub1–74, the effect
of the GG motif on ionization efficiency should be negligible. As
a result, FT-ICR MS could be used to measure the relative ratios of
Ub1–74, GG-Ub1–74, and 2xGG-Ub1–74 and monitor the formation of branch points over
time. Indeed, a similar approach has been used to calculate the ratio
of Ub1–74 to GG-Ub1–74 to determine
the length of homotypic polyUb chains. To ensure this strategy would be suitable for relative quantitation,
signal ratios were measured over a range of charge states (Figure
S6 of the ) from
Ub8+ to Ub+12; in each case, the ratios remained
invariant.

Using ratios of different Ub1–74 signals, the extent of chain branching was then examined. E3 ligases
catalyze polyUb formation via a step-growth mechanism in which individual
Ub subunits are sequentially added to the growing chain.,, According to this mechanism,
the product distribution should be composed of low-molecular weight
conjugates such as dimers, trimers, etc., at early time points. As
the reaction proceeds, the distribution should shift to high-molecular
weight species, increasing the number of lysine residues in each chain
that can serve as acceptors for another Ub. Accordingly, the probability
of building a branched chain depends on the length of the polyUb chain
because the internal acceptor sites outnumber the sites at the end
of the chain as the chain gets longer. To test this, the population
of branch points was evaluated at different times during chain formation.
At each time point, signal intensities were measured and divided by
the total population to arrive at the amount of individual Ub1–74 derivatives. With UBE2D3 as the E2 partner, approximately
3% of the total chain population (GG-Ub1–74 and
2xGG-Ub1–74) contains a branch point at the onset
of the reaction (Figure A). As the reaction
progresses, the amount of branching doubles, reaching 7% of the total
chain population by 4 h (Figure A.) Additional
branch points were not formed after the reaction had been allowed
to proceed overnight. SDS–PAGE analysis showed that the polyUb
chain population is largely composed of dimers, trimers, and tetramers
at 0.5 h (Figure A). However, by 4 h, a significant
proportion of the chains exist as high-molecular weight species. Using
UBE2L3 as the E2, the formation of polyUb chains appeared to be faster
during the initial phases of the reaction than polymerizations conducted
with UBE2D3 (Figure B). For instance, at 0.5
h, ∼30% of the Ub1–74 derivatives are composed
of GG-Ub1–74 and 2xGG-Ub1–74 compared
to only 20% with UBE2D3 (Figure C). There
is also a slight increase in the total amount of branch points with
UBE2L3, as 2xGG-Ub1–74 represents 10% of the chains
by 4 h. These results suggest a combination of UBE2L3-NleL affords
a chain assembly complex more active than that of UBE2D3-NleL. Consistent
with this notion, SDS–PAGE analysis showed that with UBE2L3
dimers and trimers are almost completely consumed after 4 h, whereas
with UBE2D3 short oligomers persist at longer incubation times (Figure A).

Dynamics of branched chain formation using FT-ICR to analyze
minimally
digested polyUb chains formed by NleL (0.5 uM) over time. (A) Time
course analysis of NleL-catalyzed reactions with UBE2D3 (1 μM)
as the E2. Percentages are based on the total population of Ub1–74 derivatives. (B) Time course analysis of NleL-catalyzed
reactions with UBE2L3 (1 μM) as the E2. (C) Ratio of branch
point (2xGG-Ub1–74) to linear (GG-Ub1–74) Ub over time with UBE2D3 and UBE2L3.

To provide additional support for a model in which branching
depends
on chain length, we assessed the ability of NleL to extend unanchored
polyUb chains. Because NleL is related to the HECT family of human
E3 ligases and members of this family of enzymes are capable of binding
and elongating free polyUb chains,, we surmised
NleL might also interact with and modify well-defined 6- and 48-linked
oligomers. To evaluate this possibility, we again employed homotypic
polyUb chains derived from thiol–ene coupling chemistry (Figure A)., These chains contain cysteine
residues in the distal subunits, which block extension in the form
of homotypic chains and allow us to assess the ability of NleL to
exclusively catalyze the formation of linear or branched heterotypic
chains as a function of chain length. The thiol–ene-derived
chains are also composed of a proximal subunit bearing a C-terminal
allylamine adduct, which prevents activation by E1 and subsequent
transfer to E2 and NleL. Thus, thiol–ene-derived chains can
be modified only if (i) Ub is also present in the reaction mixture
and NleL catalyzes the transfer of Ub to the synthetic chains or (ii)
the allylamine moiety has been removed from the C-terminus using the
yeast Ub C-terminal hydrolase Yuh1,, and NleL transfers a preformed chain to another chain. As evidenced by a new peak indicative of a branch
point (calcd, 8710.83 Da), NleL catalyzes the modification of allylamine-capped,
48-linked Ub dimers only in the presence of free Ub (Figure B). With allylamine removed, the addition of free
Ub is not required for heterotypic chain formation, indicating that
48-linked dimers are shuttled from E1 to E2 and finally to the active
site cysteine of NleL.

Extension of preformed 48-linked Ub dimers using NleL.
(A) Reaction
scheme depicting the modification of 48-linked dimers along with the
subsequent trypsin digestion. (B) FT-ICR MS analysis of NleL-catalyzed
extension reactions. The resulting branched chains are colored red.
Preformed dimers retained the allylamine moiety from the thiol–ene
reaction, or the allylamine was removed prior to chain extension using
the C-terminal hydrolase Yuh1.

Encouraged by the results with 48-linked dimers, we sought
to evaluate
6-linked oligomers as substrates of NleL. First, we wanted to investigate
whether the linkage influences the efficiency of chain extension.
Comparing reactions with 48- and 6-linked trimers, we measured the
ratio of branched product (II) to unmodified substrate (I) (Figure A). From these data, we observed that II is formed
to a much greater extent with 6-linked chains than those bearing 48-linkages,
suggesting NleL prefers the former as substrates. Next, we wanted
to evaluate the extent of branching as a function of chain length.
Starting with 6-linked dimers, we observed two new product peaks:
one corresponding to a linear heterotypic chain (calcd, 8539.83 Da)
and another commensurate with a branched chain (Figure B). With 6-linked trimers and tetramers, however, only 2xGG-Ub1–74 could be detected, suggesting linear chains are
not formed and branching occurs by placing Ub on one or more of the
internal subunits (Figure A,B). From these
data, we conclude that (i) branching depends on the linkage of the
linear chain initially assembled by the E3 ligase and (ii) as the
chain length increases, it is more favorable to install a branch point
rather than extend the chain in a linear fashion.

Impact of chain length
and linkage on the ability of NleL to extend
preformed Ub oligomers. (A) Comparison between the NleL-catalyzed
ubiquitylation of preformed 6- and 48-linked Ub trimers. (B) Comparison
between the NleL-catalyzed extension of preformed 6-linked dimers
and tetramers. The linear products are colored turquoise and the branched
chains red.

Formation of Branched Chains
with Other Bacterial E3 Ligases
Recently, another class of
bacterial effector proteins that catalyze
polyUb chain formation via a thioester intermediate was discovered.,− Unlike NleL, these proteins, termed NELs (novel E3 ligases), bear
no sequence or structural similarity to eukaryotic HECT or RING (really
interesting new gene) ligases. NELs contain an N-terminal leucine-rich
repeat and a C-terminal α-helical catalytic domain. Despite
differences between bacterial HECT-like ligases and the NELs, we sought
to determine whether a representative member of the NEL family, IpaH9.8,
assembles branched polyUb chains. IpaH9.8 is produced by the pathogen S. flexneri to dampen the host inflammatory response during
infection. Consistent with previous reports,
when IpaH9.8 was added to a reaction mixture containing UBE2D3 and
Ub, polyUb chain formation was observed by SDS–PAGE (Figure B). Chain formation, however, was negligible with
UBE2L3 as the E2. Minimal trypsin digest of the resulting Ub conjugates
then led to the detection of Ub1–74, GG-Ub1–74, and 2xGG-Ub1–74 by FT-ICR MS (Figure A), and ECD analysis of GG-Ub1–74 revealed that K48 is the predominant linkage (Figure S11 of the ). Compared to reactions
with NleL, branch points are formed to a much lesser extent, making
it difficult to characterize the linkages in 2xGG-Ub1–74 using ECD. To overcome this problem, we used a bottom-up approach.
Complete trypsinolysis of the Ub conjugates followed by MS analysis
using an Orbitrap instrument showed that both K6 and K48 linkages
are present (Figure S12 of the ), suggesting IpaH9.8 catalyzes the formation of the same branch
points as NleL.

Branching in IpaH9.8-catalyzed reactions. (A) Time course
analysis
of IpaH9.8-catalyzed ubiquitylation reactions. Percentages are based
on the total population of Ub1–74 derivatives. (B)
SDS–PAGE analysis of NleL- and IpaH9.8-catalyzed reactions.
(C) Examining the amount of 2xGG-Ub1–74 as a function
of GG-Ub1–74 for both NleL- and IpaH9.8-catalyzed
reactions.

Because the efficiency with which
IpaH9.8 assembles branched chains
is lower than that of NleL, we sought to further investigate the relationship
between chain extension and branching. The population of branch points
(2xGG-Ub1–74) was assessed at different time points
and compared to the amount of linear polyUb (GG-Ub1–74) (Figure C). With NleL, branch points are
detected within the first 20% conversion of Ub into polyUb chains.
By contrast, IpaH9.8 does not generate branch points until ∼50%
of Ub has been transformed into polyUb chains. Analysis of IpaH9.8-catalyzed
reactions by SDS–PAGE indicated that while chains form rapidly,
they have molecular weights lower than the molecular weights of those
produced by NleL. These results provide additional support for the
conclusion that branching is directly related to chain length. Alternatively,
because IpaH9.8 primarily builds chains bearing K48 linkages and our
results with NleL show that it is difficult to generate branch points
starting from preformed K48-linked chains, the low abundance of 2xGG-Ub1–74 could be a consequence of the linkage type within
the linear chains.

Discussion
Bottom-up MS methods
have been instrumental in shaping our understanding
of the repertoire of polyUb chain linkages in eukaryotic cells.,, Trypsinolysis of polyUb chains
furnishes signature peptides bearing a lysine residue with a GG motif
from the C-terminus of Ub. The seven tryptic peptide fragments generated
from this process then inform on the sites of polyUb chain formation.
Because the signature GG motifs reside in distinct Ub peptides, it
remains a formidable challenge to assess chain length and topology,
i.e., the degree to which branched chains are formed unless modifications
occur on adjacent lysines, e.g., K6+K11, K27+K29, and K29+K33. Characterizing length and topology is important
because both factors control the dynamics of biochemical pathways., For instance, chains with a minimum of four subunits provide an
effective signal for proteasomal degradation, and differences in the intracellular trafficking of major histocompatibility
complex class II (MHC II) in professional antigen-presenting cells
are a consequence of differences in chain length. With regard to topology, chain branching through K11 and
K63 has also been implicated in controlling the rate at which MHC
I is internalized by endocytosis, and
just recently, the anaphase-promoting complex (APC/C) was found to
assemble branched chains containing K11 linkages to promote efficient
degradation by the proteasome during prometaphase of the cell cycle.

In the work presented here, we exploited
middle-down MS to investigate
the formation of branched polyUb chains containing isopeptide linkages
at nonadjacent lysines. Our studies focused on the bacterial E3 ligase
NleL as it has the ability not only to tether heterotypic chains to
itself, but also to form free, unanchored polyUb chains. The results
of these studies demonstrate that NleL constructs branched chains
containing isopeptide linkages at K6 and K48 when polyUb formation
is completely unrestricted by the presence of K-to-R substitutions.
Experiments with well-defined polyUb chains as substrates for NleL
showed that it is equally probable to extend a dimer in the form of
a linear or branched heterotypic chain. However, when longer chains,
such as tetramers, are used as substrates, branching becomes a more
prevalent modification. The observation that another bacterial E3
ligase, unrelated to NleL, along with the metazoan APC/C also assembles branched conjugates suggests
these atypical chains could be more widespread than currently appreciated.

In light of our results, we speculate that mixtures of linkages,
which are often present in high-molecular weight Ub conjugates, could
represent branched chains in both enzymatic assays and cellular extracts.
For example, high-molecular weight K48-linked polyUb chains immunoprecipitated
from mammalian cells using the K48 linkage-specific antibody typically
contain K6, K11, and K63 linkages., Our results
could also apply to the action of E4 Ub ligases as these enzymes collaborate
with E1, E2, and E3 enzymes to catalyze the extension of polyUb chains. The prototype of this activity is the yeast
enzyme Ufd2, which elongates existing K29-linked chains by forming
K48 linkages. The initial Ufd2-dependent
elongation step may occur by extending the chain from the end to form
a linear heterotypic chain. Alternatively, Ufd2 could first build
a branch point before continuing to catalyze the sequential addition
of Ub through K48.

The distinct Ub topologies created by different
chain linkages
could also play an important role in the ability to construct branched
conjugates. Although NleL generates both K6 and K48 linkages, we found
that by using unanchored polyUb chains as substrates K6-linked chains
could be elongated in the form of a branched conjugate, whereas K48-linked
chains were modified to a much lesser extent. These results, along
with observations that long (more than two subunits) K6-linked chains
are constructed by NleL at a rate much faster than the rates of those
bearing K48 linkages, suggest the structural
ensemble of K6-linked chains is well-suited for NleL to maintain a
persistent and productive interaction. By contrast, the conformations
adopted by K48-linked chains may not promote high-affinity interactions
with NleL, and as a result, processive chain formation does not occur.
Although additional binding studies are required to test this hypothesis,
we surmise that as K6-linked chains become longer and the number of
available K48 residues increases within each chain, entropy becomes
an important factor in targeting the placement of a Ub unit at an
internal subunit rather than at the chain terminus. This model could
pertain to other ligases. For example, the yeast HECT ligase Rsp5
prefers to assemble K63 linkages, but because chains can also be extended
through K11, K33, and K48, there could be a preponderance of arborization
within these oligomers. Middle-down MS
will be instrumental in testing this model and further elucidating
the biochemical details of E3 ligases, one of the most predominant
classes of enzymes encoded by the human genome. Moreover, middle-down
MS can ultimately be combined with affinity chromatography steps to
uncover the extent to which branched chains form under different cellular
conditions, thus providing unprecedented insight into how Ub chain
topology influences function.

Supporting Information Available
Supplemental Figures S1–S12.
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5006305_si_001.pdf

Financial support
is provided by the University of Wisconsin—Madison, the Greater
Milwaukee Shaw Scientist Program (awarded to E.R.S.), Susan G. Komen
for the Cure (Grant KG110081 to E.R.S.), the Wisconsin Partnership
Fund for the establishment of the University of Wisconsin Human Proteomics
Program (Y.G.), and National Institutes of Health Grant R01HL096971
to Y.G.

The
authors declare no
competing financial interest.

