The enzyme
dihydrofolate reductase
(DHFR) is a critical node within the metabolic pathway for producing
folate derivatives that are required for the synthesis of nucleic
acids and proteins. There are significant
differences in this enzyme that allow specific targeting to prokaryotes,
such as with the antibacterial trimethoprim (TMP), in contrast to
non-species specific DHFR inhibitors, such as the anticancer drug
methotrexate., The success of TMP as an antimicrobial
is tempered by the prevalence of TMP-resistant (TMPR) DHFR
enzymes, including two forms identified in Enterococcus faecalis., It is not clear if these TMPR DHFR sequences
are merely maintained as members of larger drug resistance cassettes
or if they offer an ecological benefit to the organism. Amino acid changes within TMPR DHFR
enzymes typically impart steric clashes with inhibitors while also
negatively impacting the intrinsic catalytic efficiency of the enzyme.− Our interest in this classic target has been fueled by its favorable
properties of “drugability” and selectivity, as well
as the growing burden of antimicrobial resistance., As
such, our long-term goal is the development of anti-folates that can
augment or replace TMP and, in so doing, overcome resistance phenotypes.

Increasing resistance to antibacterials has propelled the normal
constituent of flora E. faecalis to a prominent nosocomial
pathogen., Given its residence within the gastrointestinal
tract of animals, it is likely that the problem of resistance is exacerbated
by ingestion of antimicrobial therapies for the treatment of other
infections. The most prominent resistance profile is to the antibiotic
vancomycin, and the presence of vancomycin resistance in Enterococci (VRE) is a harbinger of an expanded resistance profile., Current treatments approved by the Food and Drug Administration
for simple infections of E. faecalis are limited
to linezolid, as this organism is intrinsically resistant to the other
recommended Enterococcus treatment, quinupristin-dalfopristin. More serious and complicated infections, such
as Enterococcus-mediated endocarditis, do not have
a clear regimen of drug therapy but instead heavily rely on synergistic
or additive activities between different classes of antibiotics.

Treatment of E. faecalis infections with anti-folates
has been controversial because of reports of a reversal of TMP-sulfamethoxazole
(SMZ) inhibition by exogenous folinic acid, a DHFR product analogue. The mechanism for this reversal was postulated
to be uptake from the surrounding media, thus providing a bypass to
the metabolic DHFR node. Although no direct evidence of an entrococcal
folate transporter has been documented, a recent study of amino acid
uptake by E. faecalis through ABC transporters could
suggest a role for glutamylation of folate metabolites in their uptake., Previous analysis into the impact of folate uptake showed no clear
correlation with treatments, and it was concluded that the environment
at different sites of infection played a larger role, such as the
acidic pH found with urinary tract infections., Our studies with E. faecalis were initiated as
part of a larger investigation of a new series of anti-folate compounds.
These anti-folate compounds have previously been demonstrated to be
potent inhibitors of Staphylococcus aureus in addition
to the target organism for their development, Bacillus anthracis.(−) During experiments to gauge the broad-spectrum capability of this
series, it was noted that they were efficacious for E. faecalis, including for cases in which a vancomycin resistance (vanB) cassette
was present.,

The DHFR enzyme from E. faecalis (Ef DHFR) has
an unusual inserted cysteine residue in the binding site, which, on
the basis of our initial homology model, was predicted to impact the
anti-folate binding. This report reveals the accommodation of this
inserted cysteine residue to maintain the binding site structure and
also conserved interactions with the anti-folate RAB-propyl as compared
to other DHFR enzymes. We have constructed a limited structure–activity
relationship for the dihydrophthalazine anti-folate series and found
that it closely mirrors that previously derived for S. aureus and B. anthracis., Experiments
that aimed to characterize the inhibitory potential in the presence
of folinic acid, a stable product analogue, revealed a minimal impact
on anti-DHFR inhibitors alone but a modest effect with TMP-SMZ, a
synergistic anti-folate mixture that targets DHFR and dihydropteroate
synthetase (an enzyme upstream from DHFR). The crystallized Ef DHFR
reveals two conformations for the ribose–nicotinamide portion
of the NADPH cofactor, which is further exacerbated by the RAB-propyl
anti-folate. Finally, we have constructed homology models for the
DHFR enzymes reported to impart TMP resistance to E. faecalis strains. One of these mutated DHFR enzymes, encoded by the dfrK gene, contains amino acid substitutions that are predicted
to block TMP and RAB-propyl binding. The other mutated DHFR enzyme
is encoded by the dfrF gene and has widely distributed
changes in sequence that are expected to impact the global stability
and cofactor interactions of this protein.

Experimental Procedures
Methods for the synthesis, purification, and verification of the
composition of racemic dihydrophthalazine compounds used in this work
have been published previously.

Methods for broth microdilution minimal inhibitory concentration
(MIC) determinations closely followed the guidelines put forth by
the Clinical Laboratory and Standards Institute as well as previous
citations., The bacterial species tested
were E. faecalis strain ATCC 29212 and S.
aureus strain ATCC 29213. For evaluation of media, aliquots
of CAMHB growth media were titrated with hydrochloric acid to a pH
value of 5.5–6.0, or folinic acid was added to a concentration
of 0.1 μg/mL, as in previous reports. The MIC value is reported as the lowest tested concentration of
a compound that prevents growth either visible to the eye or detectable
by turbidity measured at 600 nm.

Enzymatic assays were performed
in a 96-well format as described
previously in detail. The assay employed
purified recombinant C-terminally StrepII-tagged E. faecalis DHFR protein at a final concentration of 2.5 μg/mL and yielded
an activity of ∼1.5 nmol of dihydrofolate reduced/min. Reduction
of dihydrofolate to tetrahydrofolate was monitored by following the
change in absorbance of a redox-sensitive dye [3-(5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium (MTS) (Promega)] at a wavelength of 450 nm.
The concentration of the compound resulting in 50% absolute inhibition
was calculated with a four-parameter curve fit within the plate reader
software KC Jr. This value was used in
combination with an experimentally determined Km value of 10.9 ± 0.8 μM for the dihydrofolate substrate
to derive the Ki for each inhibitor, as
calculated by the Cheng–Prusoff formalism.

The gene for Ef DHFR was cloned from genomic material
extracted
from vancomycin-resistant E. faecalis strain ATCC
700802. Primer sequences introduced a TEV cleavage site at the N-termini
and a thrombin cleavage site at the C-termini of the protein coding
sequence. Protein was expressed from the pPSG-IBA3 vector (IBA Lifesciences)
in Escherichia coli strain BL21(DE3)pLysS (Invitrogen)
grown in Terrific Broth and induced for 20 h using 1 mM IPTG at 20
°C. Cultures were lysed using BugBuster (EMD Millipore) supplemented
with benzonase (EMD Millipore), a reducing agent, and the protein
inhibitor cocktail, and the clarified lysate was applied directly
to a prepacked column of Strep-Tactin Superflow (IBA Lifesciences).
The eluted protein was &gt;95% pure as determined by sodium dodecyl
sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis analysis and, after buffer exchange and protein
concentration, was used directly for enzymatic assays. Preliminary
experiments determined the C-terminal Strep tag did not affect enzyme
activity or inhibition by RAB-propyl (data not shown).

For crystallization,
NADPH was added at equimolar concentrations,
and the affinity tag was removed by cleavage with thrombin (EMD Millipore)
following the manufacturer’s recommendations. The sample was
again run over the Strep-Tactin resin, and the cleaved protein was
chromatographed over a Sephycryl-100 column (GE Lifesciences). The
RAB-propyl inhibitor was added to saturation in the protein sample,
incubated for 3 h at room temperature, and centrifuged for 10 min
prior to the initiation of the crystallization trials. Crystallization
was successful using 96-well sitting-drop vapor diffusion plates containing
150 μL of a well solution and mixed in equal 0.8 μL volumes
with protein at 16.5 mg/mL in 20 mM Tris (pH 8), 150 mM NaCl, and
2 mM DTT. Crystals of Ef DHFR grew from a well containing 5% polyethylene
glycol 3350 and 1.5 M ammonium citrate dibasic (pH 7) and appeared
within 1 week at room temperature. Crystals complexed with RAB-propyl
were grown from 1.1 M ammonium tartrate dibasic (pH 7) at 4 °C
and required between 2 and 3 months to appear. The uncleaved TEV site
remained intact and was found to participate in crystal packing interactions.

X-ray data were collected at 100 K using a Rigaku generator and
captured on an RaxisIV++ image plate. Data were indexed
with iMosflm and scaled with Scala. Molecular replacement was conducted using Phaser as incorporated into the Phenix software suite. The model for molecular replacement was a DHFR
structure from Bacillus stearothermophilus [Protein
Data Bank (PDB) entry 1ZDR], which was the model
selected as most similar in sequence from homology modeling studies
(below). Refinement was conducted with Phenix, and manual model adjustments
were made with Coot., Analysis of atomic contacts was
aided by the Ligand Protein Contacts server; diagrams of contacts were made with Ligplot+. Refined models and structure factor data have been deposited
in PDB (4M7U and 4M7V).

Homology models were constructed with the SwissModel automated
pipeline. For both of the TMP-resistant
sequences, the template with most similar sequence was the DHFR from B. anthracis. For the dfrF model, the template
was the structure in PDB entry 4ELG, which is 35% identical (61.2% strongly
conserved) and coincidentally was cocrystallized with a related dihydrophthalazine. For the dfrK model, the template
selected by the automated procedure was from PDB entry 3S9U, which is 65% identical
(87.9% strongly conserved) in sequence. RAB-propyl was manually docked into the site based on superposition
with Ef DHFR, and the resulting models were subjected to geometry
minimization using Phenix.

Results and Discussion
Sequence
Characteristics of E. faecalis Dihydrofolate
Reductase Enzymes
The overall sequence of the E.
faecalis (Ef) DHFR protein maintains the identity of residues
known to contact the dihydrofolate substrate or inhibitor (Figure , circles) and the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
phosphate (NADPH) cofactor (Figure , crosses),
as well as a catalytic aspartic acid (Ef residue 27).,, Positions previously shown to
mediate the TMPR phenotype in B. anthracis and S. aureus encode the susceptible variants in
Ef DHFR: Ile96 and Val102., A dynamic catalytic
cycle has previously been mapped using structures of Es. coli DHFR. This indicated a role for nicotinamide
mobility coordinated to the Met20 loop, comprising Ef residues 13–25.
The most notable amino acid change for the Ef DHFR in this region
is an Asn to Gly mutation at position 18. Of note, the human DHFR
possesses a double-proline insertion at the equivalent position, which
is known to limit movements of the loop during catalysis that, only
in concert with other mutations in the p-aminobenzoyl
glutamate (pABG) binding cleft (see below), improves the catalytic
efficiency. Throughout the catalytic
cycle, this loop movement in bacterial DHFR occurs in concert with
other structural variations around the substrate binding site, particularly
in the pABG cleft spanning residues 50–58 in Figure . A particularly unusual sequence change identified
for the Ef DHFR is the insertion of a cysteine residue at position
52 (Figure , arrow). This correlates with
the “PEKN” insertion found in human DHFR, which serves
as a lid over the substrate DHF site and is a major determinant blocking
interaction of the current anti-folate series with human DHFR.,

Amino
acid sequence alignment
for DHFR enzymes from E.
faecalis (Ef), B. anthracis (Ba), S. aureus (Sa), and Es. coli (Ec). Residues
contacting the RAB-propyl inhibitor in Ef DHFR are noted with a circle,
and those contacting the NADPH cofactor are noted with a times sign.
The inserted cysteine residue in Ef DHFR is indicated with an arrow;
secondary structure is also indicated. Completely conserved residues
are highlighted in black boxes; conservative changes in sequence are
highlighted in dark gray, and weakly conserved residues are highlighted
in light gray.

The first TMPR DHFR enzyme identified in E.
faecalis is the dfrF sequence (Figure ); it was found only in select strains and is harbored
chromosomally but within a transposon cassette. Amino acids at positions known to mediate TMPR are not present, and a susceptible phenotype is predicted on the
basis of these sequence data., However, previous studies
with compounds related to the current series clearly demonstrated dfrF-mediated resistance. The dfrK gene encodes the other TMPR DHFR enzyme
identified in E. faecalis. It was identified within
a tetL resistance cassette located chromosomally
in a transposon-mediated mobile genetic element and is believed to
have originated in a staphylococcal species. Its resistance phenotype is likely correlated with a Tyr at position
102, as this has been demonstrated to invoke TMPR in B. anthracis and S. aureus (Figure )., In addition, it has a mutation
of a weakly conserved Leu residue at position 28 to encode a much
larger Trp, and this is visualized to protrude into the binding pocket
(see below and Figure S1 of the ).

Efficacy of Trimethoprim-Based Dihydrophthalazine Inhibitors
The inhibitor series used in these studies maintains a scaffold
based on the structure of TMP, containing a 2,4-diaminopyrimidine
ring and a central dimethoxyphenyl ring. The current inhibitor series
is extended beyond this scaffold to include a dihydrophthalazine heterocycle
with variations appended at a chiral center on the pyridazine ring.
A collection of these racemic inhibitors has been screened (Table ) with the organism E. faecalis to assess growth inhibition, presented as the minimal inhibitory
concentration (MIC, in micrograms per milliliter), and for competitive
inhibition of the purified DHFR enzyme (Ki, in nanomolar).

Efficacy of TMP and Dihydrophthalazine
Series of Compounds with E. faecalis 29212
 	modification
(R)	MIC (μg/mL)	Ki (nM)
(SEM)	
TMP	 	0.06–0.125	2.1 (0.2)	
RAB	propyl	0.06–0.125	4.5 (0.1)	
OSU31	isopropyl	0.03–0.06	3.8 (0.1)	
OSU35	trifluoropropyl	0.03–0.125	3.8 (0.1)	
OSU52	isobutyl	0.125	3.5 (0.2)	
OSU53	isobutenyl	0.06–0.125	3.8 (0.2)	
OSU69	1-ethylpropyl	0.5	7.4 (0.1)	
OSU34	phenyl	0.06–0.125	2.6 (0.2)	
OSU77	m-fluorophenyl	0.125	4.8 (0.3)	
OSU45	p-fluorophenyl	0.125	5.6 (0.2)	
OSU15	cyclohexyl	0.25–0.5	2.7 (0.2)	
OSU37	p-methylphenyl	0.25	5.1 (0.3)	
OSU66	m,m′-dimethylphenyl	0.25–0.5	7.1 (0.1)	
OSU79	o-methylphenyl	0.125	7.2 (0.2)	
OSU60	benzyl	0.5	5.0 (0.1)	
OSU67	p-methylbenzyl	0.5–1.0	6.2 (0.2)	
OSU72	p-methoxybenzyl	4–8	6.7 (0.2)	
OSU75	p-trifluoromethoxybenzyl	1.0	18.8 (0.1)	
These values were assessed relative
to those for TMP, which has
a MIC of 0.06–0.125 μg/mL and a Ki of 2.1 nM. The compound in the crystal structure, RAB-propyl,
is the founding member of this inhibitor series and has an MIC equivalent
to that for TMP. Appending fluorine atoms to the termini of the propyl
moiety modestly improved it MIC to 0.03–0.125 (OSU35), but
with a clear improvement in the Ki value
(4.5 nM for the propyl compound RAB vs 3.8 nM for the trifluoropropyl
compound OSU35). In contrast, including fluorine atoms on the phenyl
moiety of OSU34 decreased the efficacy, as seen for compounds OSU77
(m-fluorophenyl) and OSU45 (p-fluorophenyl)
(Table ). Smaller linear or branched alkyl
chains are well-tolerated, with Ki values
in the range of 3.5–4.5 nM, with the value of OSU69 (1-ethylpropyl)
representing an upper limit at 7.4 nM, while and all others tested
had values clustered closely around 3.8 nM (Table ). Compound OSU15 (cyclohexyl) is unique among this collection
as it is the only saturated ring, and while it has among the best Ki values at 2.7 nM, it has some of the poorer
MIC values (0.25–0.5 μg/mL). Finally, as the moieties
become larger and more complex, there is a compensatory loss of activity,
as noted for compounds OSU37 (p-methylphenyl), OSU66
(m,m′-dimethylphenyl), and
OSU79 (o-methylphenyl), all with Ki values of &gt;5.0 nM. This is made worse for even larger
compounds such as OSU60 (benzyl), OSU67 (p-methylbenzyl),
OSU72 (p-methoxybenzyl), and OSU75 (p-trifluoromethoxybenzyl).

To address previous observations
of increased MIC values for E. faecalis with anti-folates
and in the presence of folinic
acid, the MIC assay was performed with compounds RAB-propyl, OSU34
and OSU53, TMP, and TMP-SMZ at acidic pH and with the addition of
exogenous folinic acid. These results
clarify a significant role for an acidic environment with both E. faecalis and S. aureus, which caused
an increase in MIC of 2–3-fold for TMP or TMP-SMZ and of 1–2-fold
for the current anti-folates (Table ). Exogenous
folinic acid, which can be metabolized by enzymes downstream from
DHFR, can presumably exert an effect only if it is taken up from the
surrounding media. In experiments with S. aureus,
no change in MIC was noted, while with E. faecalis, shifts in MIC of up to 1-fold were noted with TMP and the current
anti-folates (Table ). Interestingly, the
major effect of folinic acid in the media was an increase in the MIC
value for TMP-SMZ by 2–3-fold, and this was specifically with E. faecalis.

Effect of Acidic
pH and Exogenous
Folinic Acid on MIC Values for Anti-Folates and Control Compounds
 	MIC (μg/mL)	
 	E.
faecalis 29212	S. aureus 29213	
 	pH 5.8	pH 7	folinic acid	pH 5.8	pH 7	folinic acid	
TMP	1.0	0.125–0.25	0.25–0.5	8	2	2–4	
TMP-SMZ	0.06–0.125	≤0.03	0.25	0.125–0.25	0.125	0.125	
RAB	0.125–0.25	0.06	0.06–0.125	0.25	0.03–0.06	0.06	
53-isobutenyl	0.25	0.06–0.125	0.125–0.25	0.25–2	0.06–0.125	0.125	
34-phenyl	0.25	0.06–0.125	0.125–0.25	0.5	0.125–0.25	0.125	
VAN	1–2	1–2	2–4	1	1	1	
DOX	2	4	4	0.125–0.25	0.25	0.25	
Ef DHFR Structure and RAB-propyl Binding
To fully characterize
the binding interactions between RAB-propyl and Ef DHFR, and particularly
any role for the inserted cysteine residue at the active site, we
completed the crystal structures of the Ef DHFR enzyme with NADPH
and with RAB-propyl to 2.3 Å, or without RAB-propyl to 2.1 Å
(Table ). These structures refined to acceptable R factor values, and the models satisfy criteria for geometry
and protein packing. Among the noted crystal packing interactions,
the N-terminal TEV site remained uncleaved and participated in packing
against a symmetry-related molecule in both structures, although the
orientation of this segment was different in the absence and presence
of RAB.

Crystallographic Data for E. faecalis DHFR
 	with NADPH	with NADPH
and RAB-propyl	
PDB entry	4M7U	4M7V	
space group	P41212	P41212	
cell dimensions (Å)	63.25 (a = b), 97.15	63.25 (a = b), 97.15	
resolution (Å) (highest
shell)	52.8–2.10 (2.18–2.10)	53–2.3 (2.38–2.30)	
Data Collection	
Rsym	9.7 (39.4)	4.1 (18.4)	
I/σI	9.0 (3.4)	17.4 (6.0)	
completeness (%)	98.2 (89.7)	99.4 (100)	
redundancy	4.5 (4.4)	4.2 (4.2)	
mosaicity	0.33	0.43	
Wilson B factor (Å2)	26.5	35.7	
Refinement	
resolution (Å)	40.6–2.10	40.6–2.30	
no. of reflections	11737 (1064)	9220 (903)	
Rwork/Rfree	18.6/22.3	19.0/26.5	
no. of atoms	 	 	
protein	1363	1334	
ligand/ion	96	163	
water	131	63	
B factor	 	 	
protein	22.7	30.3	
ligand/ion	21.6 (NADPH)	29.5 (RAB)	
 	 	25.4 (NADPH)	
water	28.6	33.1	
root-mean-square deviation	 	 	
bond lengths (Å)	0.008	0.008	
bond angles (deg)	1.23	1.22	
Ramachandran (%)	 	 	
favored	98	97	
outliers	0	0	
Clashscore	10.6	11.2	
These structures have revealed that, in contrast to
the homology
model, the inserted Cys residue is folded back onto the surface of
the protein, pulling this loop away from the pocket relative to other
DHFR enzyme structures (Figure A,E,F). This
is in contrast to the homology model that, based on a template from
a Bacillus species, placed the cysteine residue as
impinging on the edge of the substrate binding site and partially
occluding the opening (Figure E). As we have
noted for B. anthracis, an arginine at position 53
extends over the site and has a role in enantiomer selection of RAB-propyl
and related anti-folates. The homology model of Ef DHFR maintained
this and, when the binding site was empty, was predicted to protrude
into the site. As seen in the structure of Ef DHFR with RAB-propyl
(Figure A,E), the Arg53 residue is projected
up and out of the site, in concert with placing Cys52 at the edge
of the binding pocket, and further back on the protein domain. The
cysteine residue does not participate in a disulfide bond within the
structure. It is, however, related by crystal symmetry to Cys52 of
another molecule with an approach of sulfur atoms at 6.9 Å.

Details
of the Ef DHFR binding site and interactions with the inhibitor
RAB-propyl. (A) The two positions for the phthalazine of RAB-propyl
(yellow and cyan) are visualized in the cocrystal structure. Two water
molecules (red spheres) are seen at the periphery of the binding site,
by the termini of the propyl moiety. In the inset, four ordered water
molecules (red spheres) are seen buried in the substrate binding site
in the absence of inhibitors or substrate. (B) The cocrystal structure
(blue backbone) is superposed with the structure of Ef DHFR with an
empty substrate binding site (gray backbone); the inserted residue
Cys52 is shown. Electron density (2Fo – Fc coefficients with structure factors from an
initial molecular replacement solution not containing ligands, and
contoured at 0.8σ) is shown for RAB-propyl and the NADPH cofactor,
which both occupy alternate positions. The externally bound nicotinamide
is oriented to interact with the indicated residues from a symmetry-related
molecule (purple). (C) Two-dimensional representation of the binding
interactions between RAB-propyl and Ef DHFR. Hydrogen bonds are depicted
as green dashes, and hydrophobic interactions are depicted by red
hatched semicircles. Note that the hydrophobic contacts with Pro56,
Arg58, and Lys32 are lost in the second position (colored cyan in
panel A). (D) Two-dimensional representation of the binding interactions
between the ribose–nicotinamide component of the NADPH cofactor
and the Ef DHFR. Hydrogen bonds are depicted as green dashes, and
hydrophobic interactions are depicted by red hatched semicircles.
The inset shows a two-dimensional representation of the interactions
between the externally bound nicotinamide and the Ef DHFR protein.
There are no hydrogen bonds in this orientation of the nicotinamide.
(E) Superposition of the Ef DHFR cocrystal structure (blue), including
the two RAB-propyl positions in the substrate site (yellow and cyan),
with the homology model of Ef DHFR (orange) and the DHFR enzyme from B. anthracis (magenta). The position of the inserted residue
Cys52 is shown for both the experimentally determined (blue) and modeled
(orange) structures, as is Arg53 for all three structures. (F) The
cocrystal structure of Ef DHFR (blue) with RAB-propyl (gray) is superposed
with two conformations of Es. coli DHFR, one with
an “occluded” Met20 loop and empty substrate pocket
(PDB entry 1RX1, magenta) and one with a “closed” Met20 loop and folinic
acid in the substrate pocket (PDB entry 1RX6, green). Distances denote the width of
the cleft through which the nicotinamide moiety of NADPH accesses
the catalytic pocket.

The loop placement as a result of the inserted residue also
causes
a movement of the helix preceding this loop of up to 0.6 Å, which
has a large impact on NADPH binding (see below). Surrounding residues
in this loop are also pulled away, resulting in a widening of the
Ef DHFR binding site as compared to other bacterial DHFR enzymes (Figure E). This structure revealed the RAB-propyl inhibitor
situated in the substrate pocket with a placement conforming to a
known hydrogen bonding network to the 2,4-diaminopyrimidine ring,
a relatively hydrophobic groove to support the central dimethoxyphenyl
ring, and a hydrophobic cavity to accommodate the dihydrophthalazine
moiety (Figure A,C). For either position,
only the S-enantiomer of the propyl modification
is visible in the electron density (Figure A,B).

The phthalazine moiety adopts two mutually exclusive
conformations
within the binding site with a more deeply buried position in approximately
two-thirds of the molecules within the crystal lattice (Figure A, yellow). The second position is achieved by torsion
around the acryloyl linker, which displaces the dihydrophthalazine
moiety at an angle of ∼40° and results in a displacement
of 2.8–4.7 Å at the dihydrophthalazine heterocycle (Figure A, cyan). The second position places the dihydrophthalazine
in a more solvent-exposed position adjacent to a cavity created above
Leu63 and the loop containing inserted Cys52. The positioning of the
more solvent-exposed RAB-propyl results in a loss of hydrophobic interactions
with Pro64, Arg66, and Ala40, reflected in a loss of ∼10% of
the buried surface area of RAB-propyl in the complex (total surface
area of ∼790 Å2). The alternate position of
the dihydrophthalazine translates along the RAB-propyl molecule and
shifts the central ring position ∼0.6 Å closer to the
NADPH site (Figure A, inset). The closest
approach of either RAB-propyl conformation to the NADPH cofactor is
3.2 Å, but the more deeply buried RAB-propyl buries 40.9 Å2 of surface area with NADPH as compared to the more solvent-exposed
version, which buries 63.7 Å2 of surface area with
NADPH due to the translated position.

The floor of the binding
pocket in the Ef DHFR binding site is
not as deep as in other bacterial DHFR enzymes because of a Phe at
position 31 rather than a Val or a smaller hydrophobic residue (Figure )., This places the face of the dihydrophthalazine
moiety directly adjacent to the side chain of Leu55. The proximity
to Leu55 is consistent with both the observed orientations and is
positioned to result in steric repulsion of the R-enantiomer in the more buried phthalazine position (Figure A,C). For the more solvent-exposed dihydrophthalazine
position, there is no obvious deterrent within the binding site to
the placement of an R-enantiomer, despite an adjacent
indentation that appears to be suitable at the Cys52-containing loop.
It is of note that Arg53 appeared to sterically block docking of the R-enantiomer in previous structures, while in Ef DHFR, the
Arg53 residue is folded back on the surface (Figure A,E). A final notable feature is an accessible surface depression
on the opposite side of the binding site, and in line with the propyl
group, which could allow larger or planar modifications to interact
favorably with Leu28 (Figure A). This region
can also interact favorably with polar groups, and in the +RAB-propyl
structure, two water molecules are ordered in this pocket. They are
coordinated by His23 and Lys29, as this is the likely interaction
with the more efficacious OSU35 (trifluoropropyl) compound versus
RAB-propyl.

Changes in Ef DHFR Structure upon Binding
of RAB-propyl
The ability to compare the NADPH-complexed
structure with and without
the RAB-propyl inhibitor offers insight into the consequences of binding
on protein conformation and on the ordered waters. In the absence
of RAB-propyl, four water molecules are seen deep within the pocket
(Figure A, inset). Two of these are positioned
at the location occupied by the diamino groups of the pyrimidine ring,
which correspond to diamino groups found on the substrate pterin ring.
These diamino moieties, and the requisite hydrogen bonds formed between
them, or between the observed water molecules, with conserved protein
atoms, are known to be major determinants of binding in the substrate
pocket. The third buried water molecule
is at a position corresponding to the face of the pyrimidine ring
when bound, and the fourth buried water is at a position adjacent
to the pyrimidine ring binding site. The latter two water molecules
provide additional binding partners for the first two waters, which
appear to serve as direct placeholders for the substrate.

Upon
complexation of RAB-propyl, the main chains of the protein on each
side of the substrate binding pocket are closer together. Residues
26–34 encode a helix, and once RAB-propyl binds, this helix
more closely approaches another helix encoded by residues 45–50
that is present on the opposing side of the binding site. This change
is seen to compress the width of the overall shape of the binding
site. Another change in the overall shape is a lengthening of the
binding site cavity. This change results from movement of residues
32–36, located below the dihydrophthalazine, and residues 56–58,
located at the periphery of the dihydrophthalazine moiety (Figures  and A,B). Movement of side
chains is also noted, as Lys29 moves inward toward the propyl-occupied
space in the complex and Lys32 moves outward and becomes disordered,
leading to compensatory movement of Glu33. Arg58 is shifted to permit
the dihydrophthalazine access to the site and causes His37 to move
away from the site as well as a variation of the rotomer for Ile36.
In addition, Met50 must turn slightly to accommodate the planar central
aromatic ring of RAB-propyl. While there are other minor adjustments
in the binding site resulting from RAB-propyl complexation, the inserted
cysteine residue shows absolutely no change in position (Figure B).

Alternate Conformation of the NADPH Cofactor
Regardless
of the presence of RAB-propyl, the nicotinamide–ribose moiety
of the NADPH cofactor presents a well-ordered second conformation
protruding from the surface of the protein and into the solvent (Figure B). This orientation is achieved by rotation around
the phosphate–sugar linkage of the nucleotide moiety, as was
noted in early studies with Es. coli DHFR structures. This rotation places the ribose sugar and nicotinamide
groups outside the protein pocket, and the nicotinamide engages in
long-range crystal packing with residues His37 (3.7 Å), Thr59
(3.75 Å), and Tyr90 (4.4 Å) of a symmetry-related molecule
(Figure B). This exposed position lacks interactions
observed between the buried NADPH conformation and the protein, including
five hydrogen bonds formed with residues Ala7, Ile14, Ser100, and
Thr126. Further, hydrophobic interactions with Trp14, Gly15, Leu20,
Trp22, Gly97, Gly98, and Phe103 are lost (Figure B,D). Crystallographic refinement of occupancies of these
two mutually exclusive NADPH conformations indicates a preference
of ∼60% for the externally bound form. This is exacerbated
by the presence of RAB-propyl, in which the level of the externally
bound form is increased to ∼80%. The limited 20% occupancy
within the pocket when RAB-propyl is also present is visualized as
discontinuous electron density at the nicotinamide moiety (Figure B).

The point of divergence in the NADPH orientation
is centered on residue Gly18, which, in bacterial DHFR enzymes, is
typically a larger and polar Asn residue (Figure ). It is located at the apex of a previously identified flexible
loop in Es. coli (the “Met20” loop). Upon comparison to structures of DHFR from Es. coli, S. aureus, and B. anthracis, it is apparent that the insertion of Cys52 induces the helix immediately
upstream, which faces the NADPH site, to shift into the NADPH site
(Figure E,F). This results in less space between
the two lobes of the protein that comprise a channel for nicotinamide
access. As a means of quantifying this closure of the nicotinamide
channel in Ef DHFR, distances were measured spanning the α-carbons
of residues Ef Gly18, found in the loop, and Ef Gly49, the closest
residue in the helix across from this loop (Figure F). For Ef DHFR, this results in only 3.7 Å of available
space between the α-carbon atoms of the opposing residues. In
contrast, Es. coli DHFR displayed an “occluded”
loop conformation in which this opening ranges from 5.9 Å (PDB
entry 1RX1)
to 6.6 Å (PDB entry 1RX9), and up to 8.6 Å in the “closed”
loop form seen with the product analogue (PDB entry 1RX6), as measured from
Asn10 to Ser49 in each instance. For B. anthracis DHFR (from Asn19 to Ala50, PDB entry 3FL8) or S. aureus DHFR (from Asn18 to Ser49, PDB entry 3M08), upon formation of a complex with RAB-propyl,
this distance is 6.0 Å., The net result is reduced
access to the nicotinamide pocket in the Ef DHFR, which may explain
the favored alternate conformation external to the catalytic site.

The structural effect of the insertion at position 52 is a movement
of the loop, which also shifts the preceding helix that lines the
opening to the NADPH site. This helix protrudes farther into the cofactor
site, which results in a narrowing of the cleft by which the nicotinamide–ribose
moiety accesses the catalytic portion of the binding site. In Es. coli DHFR, this Met20 loop was identified in crystal
structures to form an open, occluded, and closed structure. The configuration of the equivalent loop in
Ef DHFR most closely aligns with the occluded form, which for Es. coli was attained by including an oxidized NADPH and
an empty substrate pocket (i.e., PDB entry 1RX9). In the
series of Es. coli structures, the nicotinamide–ribose
moiety was also forced into the externally bound form when the substrate
site was filled with a product analogue (i.e., PDB entry 1RX6). However, in the
latter case, the loop in question collapsed into the closed form,
which is more deeply embedded than that seen in Ef DHFR. These observations
provided the rationale for linking the movements to binding and to
release as distinct parts of the catalytic cycle. Similarly, other
studies were able to purposefully displace the nicotinamide–ribose
moiety through inhibitor binding in the DHFR enzyme from the fungal
organism Candida albicans. In each previous case of an externally bound NADPH conformation,
there was disorder that prevented clear interpretation beyond the
ribose unit. In the current structures of Ef DHFR, the involvement
in crystal packing has allowed very clear visualization of density
for the external nicotinamide, and in addition, the preceding ribose
sugars of the current structures and the previous Es. coli and C. albicans structures superpose well.

It is unlikely that the crystallization forces could remove the
nicotinamide from its buried position within the pocket, particularly
as the packing contacts that are formed are fewer in number and display
longer bond distances. This leads us to conclude that this external
conformation of the nicotinamide must exist within the solution and
that the crystallization process is selecting from this population.
We also note that, over the time course of crystallization, the NADPH
is likely oxidized to NADP+ and this oxidation, yielding
a planar conformation for the nicotinamide, would facilitate liberation
of the nicotinamide from within the catalytic pocket., For the structure without RAB-propyl, the electron density for the
nicotinamide within the pocket clearly indicates a puckered conformation,
supporting a reduced form; however, in the structure with RAB-propyl,
the electron density is too diffuse to distinguish the ring conformation.
In either structure, the externally bound nicotinamide could be modeled
as either planar or puckered and still satisfy the electron density,
such that one can hypothesize it is a mixture of oxidized and reduced
forms. Our data demonstrate that the nicotinamide pocket within the
protein is less accessible, resulting in a higher proportion of externally
located forms regardless of the nicotinamide oxidation state, which
are then available for interactions within the crystal lattice.

Trimethoprim-Resistant DHFR Enzymes in E. faecalis Strains
The original description of the DHFR enzyme sequence
from E. faecalis also revealed a second integrated
DHFR gene in a subset of strains that displayed elevated MIC values
for TMP; as such, this was evidence of a TMPR DHFR enzyme
and was named dfrF. We
have constructed a homology model to identify amino acid changes that
could mediate this resistance to TMP and, in addition, show what impact
they would have on RAB-propyl or similar anti-folate binding. Typical
residues imparting resistance to TMP are not present in the sequence,
such as a Phe (TMPS) to Tyr (TMPR) mutation
at position 102 (Figure ). Visual inspection
of the model also did not reveal any notable obstruction to RAB-propyl
or anti-folates within the binding site.

However, the resulting
model for the dfrF-encoded protein scored poorly
with regard to estimations of quality, as might be expected because
of the low level of sequence identity (35%) and sequence conservation
(61.2%) with the most closely matching template. The resulting QMEAN score of 0.725 indicates that the modeling
parameters were successful, based on a scale of 0–1, with 1
being the most ideal. The QMEAN Z score estimates the “nativeness” of the
internal protein packing in comparison to crystallographically determined
structures, and in this measure, the dfrF-encoded
model scored very poorly (−0.796). Visual examination of the minimized homology model highlighted instances
of unpaired, buried polar residues as well as residues that impede
on the NADPH site access, particularly Glu49. Other disruptions to
packing within the NADPH site were noted, such as Tyr97, which would
provide a steric clash with the first phosphate of the NADPH. Finally,
this molecule has lost a π–π stacking interaction
between residue Tyr 30, which in the dfrF sequence
is a Gln, and residue Phe 159, which in the dfrF sequence
is an Arg. This is likely due to an insertion of three residues (Val-Lys-Tyr)
immediately upstream of the Arg residue, which alters the register
of the model (Figure S1 of the ).

We also constructed a homology model for the dfrK-encoded protein, the other TMPR DHFR identified to date
in select strains of E. faecalis. This model is based on a template that has a sequence that
is 64.2% identical (87.9% strongly conserved), and indicators of model
quality were favorable (QMEAN score of 0.806, QMEAN Z score of 0.137). Visual inspection reveals an obvious mechanism
for escaping inhibition by TMP. A Trp residue at position 28 replaces
a typically found Leu, and its bulk sterically occludes the substrate
binding site specifically at the trimethoxyphenyl ring of TMP (Figure
S1 of the ). The
structure of dihydrofolate is based on a dihydropterin heterocycle
linked to a central benzoyl by a methylamino group. While the Trp
residue does closely approach the portion of the folate substrate
containing the methylamino linkage, minimal alterations in the protein
geometry are able to relieve the clash. In so doing, the Trp side
chain fits well with the face of the central benzoyl moiety. In contrast,
TMP and related scaffolds link a single aromatic pyrimidine ring to
a central benzoyl moiety by a methyl group, providing much shorter
spacing and resulting in a direct clash between the mutated Trp side
chain and the inhibitor. To overcome this resistant mechanism, a scaffold
different from that of TMP will be required.

Conclusions
The goals of this work were to characterize the DHFR enzyme from E. faecalis, to determine the capacity of the dihydrophthalazine
series to inhibit this enzyme, and to derive preferences in inhibitor
structure. Early work to clarify treatment modalities for E. faecalis revealed
a reversal of anti-folate inhibition if a metabolically active product
analogue of the folate pathway, folinic acid, was included in the
medium. Continuing studies sought to
address the impact of those observations within an animal model of
peritoneal infection and documented an inferior outcome with TMP-SMX
treatment. However, peritoneal spaces
have a demonstrated capacity to serve as reservoirs for folate metabolites,
so this result is not surprising. Our
investigations were able to only marginally reproduce this effect
for E. faecalis, limited to an increase in the MIC
of one dilution or less for TMP or for the anti-folate series under
investigation. Interestingly, the most striking increase in MIC was
for the synergistic combination of TMP with SMZ. These results led
us to surmise the possible existence of a strain-dependent acquired
uptake mechanism that might not be present in the current strain,
which is of great interest for further study. Larger increases in
MIC values were noted for both E. faecalis and S. aureus under mildly acidic conditions, such as those
found in urine. Overall, it is clear that the environment of the infection
will play a crucial role in the efficacy of treatment with anti-folates
or other classes of antimicrobials.

In general, the Ef DHFR
binding site is able to form complexes
with many modifications at the chiral center within the dihydrophthalazine
heterocycle with a minimal impact on the overall efficacy. Inhibition
of the enzyme displays some variation that correlates with the volume
and shape of the modification. As noted in previous work with the
DHFR enzyme from S. aureus or B. anthracis, a modification of three to four carbon lengths at this chiral center
is preferred, as is an aromatic or more planar moiety such as OSU34
(phenyl) and OSU53 (isobutenyl)., Moreover,
consistent with previous work is the presence of only the S-enantiomer of RAB-propyl in the binding pocket despite
the use of a racemic mixture in crystallization trials. Interestingly, the OSU35 (trifluoropropyl) modification
is more efficacious than the RAB-propyl inhibitor with the Ef DHFR.
This is likely due to a unique polar subsite on Ef DHFR that, in the
cocrystal structure with RAB-propyl, is seen to coordinate two ordered
water molecules adjacent to the termini of the propyl moiety that
form hydrogen bonds to residues His23 and Lys29 (Figure A). Finally, the presence of ordered water molecules buried
within the substrate pocket leads us to conclude that the conserved
pattern of hydrogen bonding between the DHFR protein and substrate
or inhibitors is essentially preformed, with water molecules serving
as placeholders in the “empty” pocket. These waters
would thus seem to be important to the intrinsic structure of the
protein and to the substrate binding site, and this arrangement is
likely stabilized by neighboring waters previously identified as highly
conserved but with unknown function. This
is also a reasonable mechanism for the recruitment and maintenance
of water molecules important for hydride tunneling as required for
catalysis.

The presence of an alternate
position for the dihydrophthalazine
moiety was also found in structures with S. aureus DHFR complexed to RAB-propyl. In these
observations, the torsion was at the same location around the acryloyl
linker, indicating this flexibility is an important determinant in
the fit of the inhibitor, thereby allowing it to take advantage of
any available subpockets of the binding site. While for S.
aureus the subsite is a prominent surface feature, in the
Ef DHFR this arrangement results from (1) a more shallow binding site
at this position due to a bulkier Phe31 residue comprising the “floor”,
resulting in a somewhat higher position in the site for the phthalazine,
and (2) a subpocket, smaller than that in S. aureus, that is created by movement of the binding site loop containing
the insertion of cysteine at position 52. In general, the two dihydrophthalazine
positions in Ef DHFR are spatially closer than those of S.
aureus. Thus, while S. aureus DHFR is predicted
to readily accommodate the R-enantiomer in the second
position, Ef DHFR, like B. anthracis DHFR, seems
to be capable of accepting only the S-enantiomer.

One of the effects of this insertion of Cys at a binding site loop
is to generate a structure more like that of human DHFR, which has
an inserted Pro-Glu-Lys-Asn sequence at a position equivalent to Cys52. In the case of human DHFR, the “PEKN”
insertion generates specificity by blocking access of the dihydrophthalazine
to the binding site, but in Ef DHFR,
the effect on a single insertion is translated to the cofactor site.
It is curious that among the three locations in the human DHFR enzyme
that have been most altered in evolution, Ef DHFR shares changes at
two of those, the Gly18 mutation and the Cys52 insertion, both of
which contribute to altered NADPH docking.

Although we are limited to only the two current structures
for
Ef DHFR, it is striking that the percentage of molecules with externally
bound nicotinamide groups is increased from 60 to 80% in the presence
of RAB-propyl. In the experimental procedure, NADPH was added during
purification at least 3 days prior to saturation with RAB-propyl.
As noted above, there are multiple courses that would result in the
displaced nicotinamide, including reduced access due to the inserted
Cys52 residue, oxidation of the cofactor, and/or general dynamics
of enzymatic cycling. We now add to this the hypothesis that RAB-propyl
plays a role in either blocking complete access to the binding pocket
or displacing bound nicotinamide through steric mechanisms. This observation
builds on our approach to use substrate mimics as competitive inhibitors
that can have enhanced potency by perturbing cofactor dynamics.

The mutated DHFR enzyme encoded by dfrF has substantive
changes in sequence that are expected to impact its global stability
and cofactor interactions. We suggest that the dfrF-encoded enzyme is relatively unstable because of poor core packing
of the protein. In contrast, the DHFR enzyme encoded by the dfrK gene appears to be likely to conform to known DHFR
structural elements, and it contains amino acid substitutions that
would block TMP and RAB-propyl inhibitor binding while likely maintaining
interactions with the folate substrate needed for catalysis. At least
one inhibitor class under development would overcome the predicted
steric clash due to a novel propargyl linkage between a pyrimidine
and a central benzoyl ring. This arrangement
more closely follows the shape of the natural dihydrofolate substrate
and thus would not impinge on the substituted Trp residue (Figure
S1 of the ). A remaining
question is the interplay of TMPR enzymes with the hypothesized
strain specific folate uptake machinery, which is of extreme interest
for future investigations.

Supporting Information Available
A supplemental image of the
comparison homology models for the TMP-resistant DHFR proteins encoded
by the dfrF and dfrK genes. This
material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi401104t_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
§ Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Oklahoma,
Norman, OK 73019.

Author Present Address
∥ Department
of Cell Biology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences
Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104.

Author Present Address
⊥ Dow
Chemical Co., Buffalo Grove, IL 60089.

This work was
supported by funding from National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases Grant R01-AI090685 to W.W.B.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
X-ray data
were collected at the Macromolecular Crystallography
Laboratory, University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK. DNA sequencing of
clones and constructs was conducted at the Oklahoma State University
Recombinant DNA and Protein Resource Facility. Figures were generated
with the UCSF Chimera package, which is made freely available by the
Resource for Biocomputing, Visualization, and Informatics and supported
by National Institutes of Health Grant P41 RR-01081.

Abbreviations
DHFRdihydrofolate reductase

TMPtrimethoprim

VREvancomycin-resistant Enterococcus (faecalis)

SMZsulfamethoxazole

RAB-propyl(S,E)-3-{5-[(2,4-diaminopyrimidin-5-yl)methyl]-2,3-dimethoxyphenyl}-1-[1-propylphthalazin-2(1H)-yl]-2-propen-1-one

NADPHnicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate

EfE. faecalis

MICminimal inhibitory
concentration

IC50concentration producing 50% inhibition of a reaction

SEMstandard error of the
mean

DTTdithiothreitol

pABGp-aminobenzoyl glutamate.

