Side-chain
oxysterols are key
regulators of cellular cholesterol balance that
act through activation of cholesterol-homeostatic pathways that serve
to decrease the level of excess free cholesterol.− Acting at a
transcriptional level, side-chain oxysterols such as
25-hydroxycholesterol (25-HC) bind to the liver X receptor (LXR),
activating LXR-mediated transcriptional pathways resulting in increased
rates of cholesterol efflux and elimination. 25-HC also inhibits the processing of sterol regulatory
element binding proteins (SREBPs), transcription factors that stimulate de novo cholesterol synthetic pathways and enhance low-density
lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) expression. 25-HC inhibits SREBP processing
by promoting binding of the SREBP cleavage activating protein (SCAP)
to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) retention protein Insig, thereby
retaining the SCAP–SREBP complex in the ER and preventing egress
to the Golgi, the site of SREBP processing.

In addition to these transcriptional effects, 25-HC also acutely
regulates cholesterol levels through two well-characterized, nongenomic
responses. First, 25-HC suppresses the activity of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA
reductase (HMGR), the rate-limiting enzyme in cholesterol synthesis,
by promoting formation of an HMGR–Insig complex and the consequent
proteosomal degradation of the enzyme. Second, 25-HC stimulates the esterification of cholesterol
and its storage in lipid droplets. This is accomplished both by allosterically
activating the ER resident cholesterol esterification enzyme acylCoA:cholesterol
acyltransferase (ACAT) and by increasing the extent of transport of
cholesterol to ACAT-accessible domains within ER membranes.,

Side-chain oxysterols are known to have strong effects on
membrane
structure and dynamics, expanding and disordering the membrane.− Recent work with the enantiomer of 25-HC in
vitro has shown that effects of side-chain oxysterols on
specific physiological pathways are nonenantioselective, providing
compelling evidence that
side-chain oxysterols exert their cholesterol-homeostatic effects
in part through nonenantioselective modulation of membrane structure
rather than wholly through enantioselective
protein interactions. Previous work on
cholesterol regulatory pathways has
shown that key steps in cholesterol sensing and regulation respond
identically to ent-cholesterol, indicating a broad
involvement for sterol–membrane interactions in cholesterol
regulation.−

Previous attempts to link membrane structure
to cholesterol
regulation
led to a biophysical model, termed the “cholesterol activation
hypothesis”, which explains how changes in the membrane can
lead to downstream effects on cholesterol levels. In this model, cholesterol
is thought to exist in two distinct pools: an accessible pool that
is available for cholesterol trafficking and regulation and an inaccessible
pool that is complexed to the lipids around it. The membrane lipid
composition determines how much cholesterol can be complexed within
the inaccessible pool, and cholesterol in excess of that threshold
partitions into the accessible pool.−

On the basis of
studies of model membranes, we have recently proposed
a revised model of cholesterol behavior, in which the observed increase
in cholesterol accessibility at high cholesterol concentrations is
not driven by saturation of cholesterol–lipid complexes but
rather by cholesterol-dependent changes in membrane structure. In this revised model, there are no distinct
pools of
accessible and inaccessible cholesterol; rather, changes in membrane
structure at high cholesterol concentrations lead to decreased membrane
thickness and an increase in the availability of all cholesterol molecules
in the membrane. As additional cholesterol is added to a membrane,
all cholesterol within the membrane becomes increasingly more accessible
and, at some threshold concentration, becomes available to external
cholesterol sensors.

Our previous studies of the effects of
25-HC on membrane structure
showed that 25-HC significantly expands the membrane area through
its interfacial orientation within the bilayer., We further found that high concentrations of 25-HC in membranes
significantly
increase the availability of cholesterol within membranes. In the
study presented here, we examine our revised model of cholesterol
accessibility in the context of these membrane effects of side-chain
oxysterols as well as sterol analogues known to modulate cholesterol
homeostasis in vitro. We use perfringolysin O (PFO)
as a sensor of physiologically available
membrane cholesterol. PFO is a cholesterol-dependent cytolysin that
binds to accessible membrane cholesterol, triggering PFO oligomerization,
membrane insertion, and pore formation. PFO membrane insertion can be monitored by a change
in fluorescence (as a consequence of the insertion of several tryptophan
residues into the membrane). PFO insertion is dependent on the membrane
cholesterol concentration and exhibits a threshold response, indicating
that it acts as a sensor of available cholesterol. Using this PFO
binding assay, we demonstrate that 25-HC increases the availability
of membrane cholesterol, and that this cholesterol activating effect
is specific to side-chain oxysterols. We also employ molecular dynamics
simulations of oxysterol-containing membranes to examine the changes
in cholesterol availability obtained from experimental systems, allowing
us to gather specific information about changes in membrane and molecular
structure caused by 25-HC and to identify the underlying structural
changes associated with 25-HC-driven increases in cholesterol availability.
Finally, we also analyze the effects of the molecule LY295427 (“agisterol”),
a small molecule inhibitor of 25-HC-mediated cholesterol activation., We find that agisterol blocks the increase in cholesterol accessibility
caused by 25-HC in a nonenantioselective manner, and that this effect
of limiting cholesterol accessibility
in model membranes is evident even in the absence of 25-HC. Together,
our results underscore the importance of nonchiral, protein-independent
membrane interactions in membrane structure and suggest how they can
play an important role in the regulation of cholesterol homeostasis.

Materials
and Methods
Materials and Buffers
Phospholipids, sterols, and oxysterols
were obtained from
Steraloids [25-HC, 7α-hydroxycholesterol (7α-HC), dioleoylphosphatidylcholine
(DOPC), 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoylphosphatidylcholine (POPC), desmosterol,
and 19-hydroxycholesterol (19-HC)], Sigma [7-ketocholesterol (7-KC)],
Research Plus [27-hydroxycholesterol (27-HC)], and Avanti (24S-hydroxycholesterol).
PFO buffer consisted of 150 mM NaCl and 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4). LY295427,
which we have termed agisterol, was synthesized in two steps from
cholest-4-en-3-one, as described in both its original synthesis and
the synthesis of ent-agisterol from ent-cholestenone.,ent-Agisterol
was prepared by total steroid synthesis
(stepwise construction of the ring system and side chain) as described
previously.epi-Agisterol
was similarly synthesized
in two steps from cholestenone, but rather than reduction of the 3-ketone
with K-selectride to form the 3α-alcohol, the ketone was reduced
with LiAl(OtBu)3H to yield
the 3β-hydroxy epimer. ent-25-Hydroxycholesterol
was prepared as described previously except that one of the two methyl
groups attached to C-25 was trideuterated.

Overexpression and Purification of PFO
The His6-PFO (C459A)
expression construct
in the pRSETB vector (Invitrogen) was kindly provided by A. Heuck
(University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA) and was transformed into BL21-CodonPlus(DE3)-RIPL Escherichia
coli competent cells (Stratagene). Protein expression
and purification were performed according to the manufacturer’s
instructions and as described previously. The pooled fractions containing PFO were concentrated
using an Amicon Ultra 10 kDa cutoff centrifugal filter (Millipore).
The PFO concentration was adjusted using PFO buffer such that, after
the addition of 10% (v/v) glycerol, the final concentration was 5–9
mg/mL. The PFO was aliquoted, flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen,
and stored at −80
°C.

PFO Binding Measurements
Liposomes were synthesized
as described previously. PFO binding
experiments were performed as described previously. Briefly, PFO
binding was assessed in 96-well plates (Corning Inc.) with 200 μL
reaction mixtures containing 4 μM PFO and 800 μM liposomes
in PFO buffer. After incubation at 37 °C for 1 h, the tryptophan
fluorescence was measured (excitation wavelength
of 290 nm, emission wavelength of 340 nm, band-pass of 5 nm) using
an Infinite 200 microplate reader (Tecan Group Ltd.).
Fluorescence measurements were calculated as F/Fo, where F is the measured
fluorescence and Fo is the fluorescence
of unbound PFO (as measured in liposomes with either 0 or 20% cholesterol
in DOPC), with increased fluorescence being indicative of PFO binding.
Data are expressed as means ± the standard error (SE) and are
the result of at least three separate experiments. Sigmoidal binding
curves were fit to the data using weighted least-squares regressions,
and the data are presented as fractions of maximal
binding based on these fitted curves. Cholesterol activation thresholds
presented in the text were calculated as the cholesterol concentrations
at which the fitted curves reach between 5 and 25% of their maximal
value.

Molecular Dynamics Simulations
25-HC, cholesterol,
and POPC parameters
and charges were used as described previously., An initial 27-HC structure and topology were prepared by modifying
equilibrated 25-HC structures. 27-HC charges were parametrized as
described previously for 25-HC. Simulations
of the pure POPC bilayer, the POPC bilayer
with 30% 25-HC, and POPC with cholesterol concentrations from 5 to
54% have already been described and published and are used here as
controls for new simulations.,, A 30% 27-HC structure was prepared from an equilibrated 30% 25-HC
structure with 25-HC molecules replaced by 27-HC molecules and relaxed
as previously described to resolve steric occlusions.,, Initial bilayer structures containing
cholesterol concentrations
from 5 to 54% as well as an additional 5 or 10% 25-HC were prepared
by taking structures from the oxysterol-free simulations with the
desired cholesterol concentration and adding individual 25-HC molecules
sampled from the 30% 25-HC system and similarly relaxed to resolve
steric occlusions. These starting structures were then solvated with
simple point charge (SPC) water molecules and K+ and Cl– ions to approximately 55 waters per lipid (both phospholipid
and sterol) and a KCl concentration of 115 mM. These structures were then warmed to 300 K in 50 K increments
and simulated for 50 ps at each temperature before being used as the
starting point for the production simulations.

All molecular
dynamics simulations were performed using GROMACS version 3.3.1, 4.0,
or 4.5, and followed the same molecular dynamics
protocol that was described
in our previous work.,, Production simulations were run for 400 ns of total simulation time.
On
the basis of examination of the membrane-projected area and system
energy drift, we chose to discard the first 200 ns of each simulation
as equilibration time, leaving 200 ns of steady-state simulation time
for analysis of each membrane composition. Statistical comparisons
between simulations were conducted by treating lipids independently,
with an estimated relaxation time of 5 ns between independent samples
based on autocorrelation times of membrane-projected areas. Measurements
of membrane and lipid properties, including lipid solvent-accessible
surface area (SASA), phospholipid tail order, membrane thickness,
and phospholipid interdigitation, were performed as described previously.,,

Results
25-HC Increases
the Availability of Cholesterol within Membranes
To determine
whether oxysterols such as 25-HC increase the availability
of membrane cholesterol, we used PFO binding as a sensor of physiologically
accessible cholesterol. In previous studies of binary cholesterol/phospholipid
liposomes, we found that the experimental cholesterol-accessibility
threshold,
or the threshold range at which cholesterol becomes available
for PFO binding, was between 29.2 and 33.0 mol % cholesterol in liposomes
composed of DOPC, establishing the baseline
capacity to retain cholesterol in an inaccessible state (Figure A)., Above this concentration threshold,
cholesterol is less shielded
by the membrane lipids and becomes increasingly available for PFO
binding.

PFO binding to liposomes. (A) PFO binding to liposomes composed
of DOPC (—) or 5% 25-HC in DOPC (−–−)
at varying cholesterol concentrations. (B) PFO binding to liposomes
composed of 25% cholesterol in DOPC at varying concentrations of 25-HC.
(C) Comparison of PFO binding to liposomes composed of 25% cholesterol
in DOPC, with varying concentrations of nat-25-HC
(—) or ent-25-HC (−–−).
(D) PFO binding to liposomes composed of DOPC (—), 5% 25-HC
in DOPC (−–−), POPC (···), or
5% 25-HC in POPC (−·−).

To examine the effect of 25-HC on the cholesterol-accessibility
threshold in DOPC bilayers, we synthesized liposomes composed of 5%
25-HC in DOPC and increasing amounts of cholesterol. By comparison
with the previous results, 25-HC lowered the cholesterol-accessibility
threshold by ∼15 mol % to 11.0–16.3
mol %, demonstrating a significant increase in the availability
of cholesterol at lower cholesterol concentrations (Figure A). To ensure that the PFO was not binding
to the 25-HC within the liposomes, and thus producing an artifactual
cholesterol-accessibility threshold based upon the total sterol (cholesterol
plus 25-HC) concentration, we prepared liposomes containing no cholesterol
but with varying amounts of 25-HC in DOPC. PFO did not bind 25-HC
at any concentration up to 60 mol %, validating PFO binding as a faithful
indicator of the accessibility
of cholesterol, rather than total sterol, in a ternary system (Figure
S1 of the ). In liposomes
composed of 25% cholesterol in DOPC, which
do not have sufficient accessible cholesterol to support PFO binding,
the addition of as little as 1% 25-HC was sufficient to enhance PFO
binding (Figure B). Experiments using the
enantiomer of 25-HC
(ent-25-HC) demonstrated that 25-HC-mediated cholesterol
activation was largely nonenantioselective, indicating that 25-HC
affects cholesterol because of its general
properties in the membrane, rather than via a specific interaction
with cholesterol or phospholipids in the membrane (Figure C).

To determine the contribution of membrane
lipid saturation to the
ability of 25-HC to increase cholesterol accessibility, we prepared
liposomes composed of 5% 25-HC in POPC. It is known that the lipid
composition affects the cholesterol-accessibility threshold within
a membrane, with saturated lipids having thresholds higher than those
of unsaturated lipids., Further, in previous studies,
we demonstrated that acyl-chain saturation
was an important determinant in mediating the membrane behavior of
25-HC. In agreement with previous reports,
we found
that the
cholesterol-accessibility threshold in POPC (with one saturated and
one monounsaturated acyl chain) was 41.6–45.0
mol % cholesterol, increased by ∼10 mol % compared with the
DOPC cholesterol-accessibility threshold. The
incorporation of 5% 25-HC increases cholesterol accessibility in POPC
liposomes and lowers the cholesterol-accessibility threshold (to 36.3–39.1
mol %) (Figure D). However, the magnitude
of the change
in cholesterol accessibility was greater in unsaturated DOPC membranes
than in partially saturated POPC membranes, indicating that the lipid
composition not only sets the baseline cholesterol-accessibility threshold
within a membrane but also affects how other compounds can alter that
cholesterol-accessibility threshold.

Cholesterol Activation
Is Associated with Oxysterol-Mediated
Membrane Thinning
To examine the structural changes associated
with 25-HC-mediated cholesterol activation, we prepared a set of 20
new molecular dynamics simulations of lipid bilayers composed of POPC
with 5 or 10% 25-HC, and cholesterol concentrations from 0 to 54%
to compare with previously
published controls lacking 25-HC. As
a measure of cholesterol activation, we measured
the mean SASA of cholesterol molecules in each simulation (Figure A). At all concentrations of 25-HC, we find
lower cholesterol accessibility at low cholesterol concentrations
and large increases in accessibility at higher cholesterol concentrations.
Moreover, membranes containing 25-HC show a concentration-dependent
increase in cholesterol accessibility at cholesterol concentrations
above ∼15 mol %, suggesting that the lowered PFO binding threshold
for cholesterol
in membranes containing 25-HC is caused by a shift in cholesterol
to more accessible positions. We further measured the membrane thickness
of our simulated bilayers containing 25-HC (Figure B) and found concentration-dependent decreases
in membrane thickness in membranes containing 25-HC at cholesterol
concentrations above ∼15 mol %, suggesting that increases in
cholesterol accessibility are associated
with reduced membrane thickness in the presence and absence of 25-HC.

Analysis
of membrane properties calculated from simulated membrane
bilayers composed of 5% 25-HC in POPC (−–−) and
10% 25-HC in POPC (···) with varying concentrations
of cholesterol, compared with data from previously published control
simulations lacking 25-HC (solid gray
lines). (A) Mean cholesterol solvent-accessible surface area. (B)
Mean membrane thickness. (C) Mean phospholipid tail order. (D) Percent
lipid interdigitation.

Thickness changes in membranes can be caused
either by conformational changes in individual lipids tilting or folding
up, reducing individual leaflet thickness, or by increased interdigitation
of the lipids in each leaflet allowing closer apposition of the leaflets.
In panels C and D of Figure , we show that
25-HC promotes changes in
both tail order and leaflet interdigitation associated with decreased
membrane thickness. Together, the data from these simulations indicate
that 25-HC increases cholesterol accessibility through its effects
on phospholipids, thereby decreasing membrane thickness and rendering
cholesterol more exposed.

Cholesterol Activation Is Specific to Side-Chain
Oxysterols
While 25-HC is commonly used to modulate cholesterol
homeostasis in vitro, cells produce a variety of
other endogenous oxysterols
that similarly regulate cholesterol-homeostatic pathways (Chart ). To determine whether the cholesterol activating
effect of 25-HC was common to other side-chain oxysterols, we used
the PFO binding assay to examine 27-HC, another physiologically relevant
side-chain oxysterol. We found that 27-HC has effects on cholesterol
accessibility nearly identical to those of 25-HC, suggesting that
side-chain oxysterols share a common mechanism for disordering membrane
lipids and increasing cholesterol accessibility (Figure A). In support of the PFO binding data, molecular
dynamics simulations revealed that 27-HC has lipid disordering and
membrane-expansive properties similar to those of 25-HC opposed to
the normal action of cholesterol (Figure B).

Oxysterol Structures
(A) PFO binding to liposomes composed of POPC (—), 5% 25-HC
in POPC (−–−), or 5% 27-HC in POPC (···)
with varying concentrations of cholesterol. (B) Mean POPC lipid surface
area in simulated membrane bilayers containing no additional sterols,
an additional 30 mol % cholesterol, an additional 30 mol % 25-HC (···),
or an additional 30 mol % 27-HC. Asterisks show p values of &lt;0.01 for the difference from the control POPC simulation,
as calculated with Kolmogorov–Smirnof tests. (C) PFO binding
to liposomes composed of DOPC (—) or 5% 7α-HC in DOPC
(−–−), with varying concentrations of cholesterol.

Side-chain oxysterols have cholesterol-homeostatic
and cell signaling properties distinct from those of ring-modified
oxysterols., To determine whether the homeostatic actions
of oxysterols correlate
with cholesterol activating properties, we synthesized liposomes composed
of 5% 7α-HC, the most abundant ring-modified oxysterol in human
plasma, in DOPC. We found little change in the cholesterol-accessibility
threshold for the 7α-HC-containing liposomes (Figure C), indicating that only the side-chain oxysterols
have significant effects on cholesterol accessibility. Further measurements
with other sterols (desmosterol and epi-cholesterol)
and oxysterols (7-ketocholesterol, 19-hydroxycholesterol, and 24S-hydroxycholesterol)
showed a strong correlation between the ability to induce cholesterol
activation in model membranes and reported interactions with cholesterol-homeostatic
machinery, suggesting that changes in cholesterol accessibility driven
by oxysterol–membrane interactions may be contributing to modulation
of the sterol-sensing machinery in the ER (Figure S2 of the ).

Agisterol, a 25-HC Antagonist, Abrogates the Membrane Effects
of 25-HC
We have amassed significant evidence that 25-HC
modulates cholesterol homeostasis in part through its effects on cholesterol
accessibility. As such, it is reasonable to expect that inhibitors
of the effects of 25-HC on cholesterol homeostasis would also abrogate
its effects on cholesterol accessibility. The hypocholesterolemic
compound agisterol is well-known to antagonize the cellular effects
of 25-HC, although its mechanism
of action has remained elusive., To determine whether
agisterol can abrogate the effects of 25-HC
on cholesterol accessibility, we prepared liposomes composed of 25%
cholesterol and 5% 25-HC in DOPC, with varying concentrations of agisterol.
In the absence of agisterol, the 5% 25-HC in these liposomes increases
cholesterol accessibility sufficiently to support partial PFO binding.
The addition of agisterol prevents PFO binding in a concentration-dependent
manner (Figure A). Experiments performed with ent-agisterol showed similar behavior, indicating that the
ability of
agisterol to abrogate the increase in cholesterol accessibility caused
by 25-HC is nonenantioselective, and that its mechanism is based on
its general membrane properties,
rather than a direct stereospecific interaction between agisterol
and 25-HC or cholesterol within the membrane (Figure A). In liposomes composed of 5% 25-HC and
10% agisterol, the cholesterol-accessibility threshold increases to
20.3–25.9
mol %, toward the cholesterol-accessibility threshold established
for DOPC. Liposomes
composed of 5% 25-HC and 15% agisterol completely abrogate any increase
in cholesterol accessibility caused by the 5% 25-HC, further increasing
the cholesterol-accessibility threshold to 27.2–31.2
mol % cholesterol (Figure B).

(A) PFO binding to liposomes
composed of 25% cholesterol and 5%
25-HC in DOPC, with varying concentrations of nat-agisterol (—) or ent-agisterol (−–−).
(B) PFO binding to liposomes composed of DOPC (—), 5% 25-HC
in DOPC (−–−), 10% agisterol and 5% 25-HC in
DOPC (···), and 15% agisterol and 5% 25-HC (−·−),
with varying concentrations of cholesterol. (C) PFO binding to liposomes
composed of DOPC (—), 10% agisterol in DOPC (−–−),
or 15% agisterol in DOPC (···), with varying concentrations
of cholesterol.

To identify whether agisterol
affects the cholesterol-accessibility
threshold in membranes independent of oxysterols, we prepared liposomes
composed of 10 and 15% agisterol in DOPC. We found that agisterol
increases the cholesterol-accessibility threshold even in the absence
of 25-HC and thus decreases cholesterol availability in a manner independent
of any inhibitory effects on 25-HC-mediated cholesterol activation
(Figure C).

epi-Agisterol,
the 3β-Hydroxy
Epimer
of Agisterol, Does Not Oppose the Cholesterol Activating Effects of
25-HC
Although agisterol does not compete with 25-HC at any
known binding sites, it is generally thought that agisterol inhibits
25-HC via a specific binding interaction. This is principally based
on finding that epi-agisterol, the 3β-hydroxy
epimer of agisterol, lacks 25-HC-inhibitory activity and the premise
that substituting an α-hydroxyl for a β-hydroxyl at the
3-position in the steroid ring would be expected to disrupt potential
protein-binding interactions (Chart )., This inference assumes that the membrane properties of these epimers
are similar, yet it is known that changing a hydroxyl from an axial
to an equatorial position in a ring system can have considerable effects
on a molecule’s membrane properties.− Using liposomes
composed of 25% cholesterol and 5% 25-HC, which supports partial PFO
binding,
we examined the effect of epi-agisterol on the increase
in cholesterol accessibility caused by
25-HC. Notably, we found that epi-agisterol exerted
the opposite effect of agisterol and further increased cholesterol
accessibility in a concentration-dependent manner (Figure A). Experiments using liposomes composed
of 5% 25-HC and 10% epi-agisterol demonstrated that epi-agisterol lowered the cholesterol-accessibility threshold
to 4.6–12.1 mol % cholesterol, effectively enhancing the ability
of 25-HC to
increase cholesterol accessibility (Figure B). We further examined the effects of epi-agisterol
on cholesterol accessibility independent of
its effects on 25-HC. Using liposomes composed of 10% epi-agisterol in DOPC, we found that epi-agisterol
lowers the accessibility threshold to 22.0–25.7 mol % cholesterol
in the absence of 25-HC (Figure C).

Agisterol
Structures
(A) PFO binding to liposomes
composed of 25% cholesterol and 5%
25-HC in DOPC, with varying concentrations of agisterol (—)
and epi-agisterol (−–−). (B)
PFO binding to liposomes composed of 5% 25-HC in DOPC (—),
10% agisterol and 5% 25-HC in DOPC (−–−), and
10% epi-agisterol and 5% 25-HC in DOPC (···),
with varying concentrations of cholesterol. (C) PFO binding to liposomes
composed of DOPC (—), 10% agisterol in DOPC (−–−),
and 10% epi-agisterol in DOPC (···),
with varying concentrations of cholesterol.

Discussion
In this study, we used PFO binding as a
sensor of cholesterol availability
in a membrane bilayer and demonstrated that the side-chain oxysterol
25-HC increases the cholesterol accessibility within membranes. We
found that 25-HC-mediated cholesterol activation was nonenantioselective,
indicating that increased cholesterol accessibility is due to the
general lipid disordering and membrane expansive properties of 25-HC,
rather than direct stereospecific interactions with cholesterol in
the membrane. We further show that 25-HC-driven cholesterol activation
is caused by effects on lipid order and leaflet interdigitation that,
in turn, significantly reduce the membrane thickness to leave cholesterol
in a more accessible state. Taken together, we conclude from these
findings that a specific cholesterol:oxysterol ratio does not determine
cholesterol accessibility, but rather that low concentrations of oxysterols
can activate a relatively larger percentage of membrane cholesterol.
In our assay, a detectable increase in cholesterol accessibility was
seen with as little as 1% 25-HC. While bulk oxysterol concentrations
in the ER, where the cholesterol regulatory machinery largely resides,
has been measured to be several orders of magnitude lower than those
examined in these model membranes, these data suggest that, if oxysterols
are locally concentrated within specialized domains, their membrane
effects could result in measurable changes in cholesterol accessibility
and sterol-homeostatic responses.

It is known that the lipid composition determines the cholesterol-accessibility
threshold of a membrane, and previous studies have shown that the
lipid composition influences the magnitude of any oxysterol membrane
disordering effects (i.e., 25-HC
has stronger membrane disordering effects in unsaturated vs saturated
lipid environments).,, We found that lipid composition also affects the magnitude
of oxysterol-mediated changes in cholesterol accessibility. 25-HC
causes a larger increase in cholesterol accessibility in unsaturated
membranes, which is of particular interest as the ER membrane—the
site of cholesterol synthesis, esterification, and sterol sensing—is
highly enriched in unsaturated lipids. Thus, the different lipid composition of the ER that
results in a much lower basal cholesterol activation threshold would
also be expected to amplify the oxysterol-induced membrane effects,
allowing cholesterol-homeostatic machinery to be more sensitive to
small changes in cellular cholesterol levels. Recent results showing
increased cholesterol accessibility in ER membranes and deactivation
of the SREBP transcription factor occurring concurrently with changes
in ER cholesterol concentrations support this model of cholesterol
homeostasis dependence on membrane structural changes.

The strikingly different effects of side-chain
oxysterols versus
ring-modified oxysterols on cellular cholesterol homeostasis are well-established.
In previous studies, we showed that side-chain oxysterols such as
25-HC and 27-HC disorder membranes whereas ring-modified oxysterols
such as 7α-HC and 7-KC condense membranes. In this study, we show that the oxysterol-induced increase
in cholesterol accessibility is specific to side-chain oxysterols,
as 25-HC, 27-HC, and 24S-HC all significantly increase cholesterol
accessibility, while ring-modified sterols such as 7α-HC, 7-KC,
and 19-HC have little effect. This distinction between side-chain
and ring-modified oxysterols is in agreement with the observed functional
differences between these oxysterol classes. Side-chain oxysterols
regulate physiologically relevant cholesterol-homeostatic pathways:
LXR activation, inhibition of SREBP processing and stimulation of
HMGR degradation through interaction with Insig-2, and stimulation
of cholesterol esterification. Ring-modified oxysterols, on the other
hand, while able to influence several cellular processes, are not
physiological effectors, and have little or no effect on these specific
cholesterol-homeostatic pathways.,,, The finding that side-chain
and ring-modified oxysterols do not share
the same ability to increase cholesterol-accessibility membrane properties
further suggests that the unique membrane behavior of the side-chain
oxysterols,
specifically increasing the accessibility
of membrane cholesterol,
is a key determinant in regulating cholesterol regulatory
pathways.

Novel insight into the molecular basis of the cholesterol
regulatory
effects of side-chain oxysterols has come from study of the agisterol
compound. Agisterol (LY295427) was discovered to antagonize the cholesterol
regulatory effects of 25-HC nearly two decades ago, yet its mechanism
of action has remained elusive. Others
have proposed that agisterol competes with 25-HC
at a specific binding site. Evidence that was suggested to support
a specific-binding mechanism is the fact that epi-agisterol, the 3β-hydroxy epimer of agisterol, has no inhibitory
effect on 25-HC-mediated cholesterol-homeostatic responses.,, However, subsequent studies found
that agisterol did not compete
with 25-HC for Insig binding. While studies
examining the effect of agisterol on inhibiting
oxysterol-mediated activation of LXR-regulated targets found that
agisterol antagonized the LXR activating effects of several side-chain
oxysterols, agisterol did not inhibit LXR activation by TO-901317,
a small molecule activator of LXR. Taken
together, it seems unlikely that agisterol directly
competes with oxysterols for binding to Insig or the LXR binding site.
Rather, agisterol appears to work through a mechanism that directly
interferes with oxysterol effects on membrane cholesterol accessibility.

Our results show that agisterol abrogates the effects of 25-HC
on cholesterol accessibility in a nonenantioselective manner, suggesting
that its in vivo effects on 25-HC-mediated cholesterol-homeostatic
responses are due to these membrane effects rather than any stereospecific
protein interactions. Further, this suppression of cholesterol accessibility
by agisterol is not dependent on the presence of 25-HC and also occurs
in 25-HC-free membranes. Thus, it appears that agisterol and 25-HC
both directly modify membrane structure to modulate cholesterol accessibility,
but in opposing ways, and that these opposing effects are responsible
for the observed antagonism of agisterol and 25-HC.

Our data
also suggest an alternative explanation for the regulatory
inactivity of epi-agisterol. We found that epi-agisterol, unlike ent-agisterol, was
unable to suppress cholesterol accessibility in model membranes. The
observed inability of epi-agisterol to inhibit the
cholesterol regulatory effects of 25-HC is thus likely due not to
impaired protein interactions but rather to its altered membrane interactions,
providing further evidence of the importance of membrane structure
in regulating cholesterol homeostasis.

Our previous work has
shown that changes in cholesterol accessibility
as a function of cholesterol concentration are driven largely by decreases
in membrane thickness at high cholesterol concentrations. In this setting, the phospholipids and the water
interface
move inward while the cholesterol remains fixed in position, leaving
it more
exposed to solvent and extramembrane acceptors. This membrane thinning
observed at high cholesterol concentrations is consistent with both
other simulated models and nuclear magnetic resonance and X-ray studies.− We had independently shown that
high concentrations of oxysterols
can significantly thin the membrane, because of their strong disordering
effects on lipid acyl chains and their adoption of interfacial orientations
within the membrane., In this study, these observations
are extended to understanding the
behavior of cholesterol in oxysterol-containing membranes. We find
that oxysterols thin the membrane in a manner that is independent
of cholesterol, in turn partially exposing cholesterol, and thus increasing
cholesterol accessibility indirectly through changes to membrane structure.

In this study, we add to the mounting evidence the fact that side-chain
oxysterols increase the accessibility of membrane cholesterol via
their membrane properties, and that this mechanism contributes to
25-HC-mediated cholesterol regulation. As demonstrated in earlier
work, increases in cholesterol accessibility expose cholesterol to
cytosolic acceptors such as cyclodextrin or apolipoproteins, providing
a possible mechanism for how 25-HC could enhance intracellular cholesterol
trafficking or elimination of cholesterol from the cell.,, It seems plausible that 25-HC-mediated
increases in cholesterol accessibility
could allow other cholesterol-sensing molecules to bind the newly
available cholesterol. It is intriguing that SREBP processing is inhibited
once the cholesterol content within the ER rises above 5 mol %, the
same threshold at which cholesterol becomes available for PFO binding. The implication is that membrane cholesterol
must be
in an accessible conformation to be sensed and bound by SCAP, ultimately
leading to Insig binding and the retention of the Insig–SCAP–SREBP
complex in the ER. If cholesterol-sensing proteins bind only accessible
cholesterol, then by lowering the cholesterol-accessibility threshold,
25-HC can increase the sensitivity of these cholesterol-sensing proteins
by increasing the fraction of cholesterol available to bind to these
proteins.

Maintaining a narrow cholesterol range within cell
membranes is
required for cell viability. While a number of transcriptional mechanisms
are known to be essential for the maintenance of cholesterol homeostasis,
these mechanisms necessarily act on a comparatively slow time scale.
It is apparent that a membrane-based biophysical mechanism for the
control of cholesterol homeostasis offers significant advantages for
rapid responses to abrupt changes in cellular cholesterol levels,
as would be encountered in vivo. Our previous work
shows that 27-HC is synthesized within minutes of cholesterol loading,
indicating their ability to rapidly respond to changes and mediate
sterol-homeostatic responses. While these
oxysterols act on a number of transcriptional
cholesterol regulatory pathways, we propose that the oxysterols initially
act in a feed-forward pathway to further activate cholesterol by altering
the membrane environment, resulting in an increased level of plasma
membrane to ER cholesterol trafficking for esterification, as well
as enhanced sensitivity of cholesterol-homeostatic machinery to cholesterol.
In this work, we show that the lipid environment and cholesterol accessibility
are poised to respond to the presence of side-chain oxysterols, contributing
to downstream cholesterol regulation. Further investigation of the
molecular basis of oxysterol-mediated activation of cholesterol will
improve our understanding of the mechanisms through which cholesterol
is transported and sensed.

Supporting Information Available
PFO binding
measurements with 25-HC, agisterol, and ent-agisterol
in membranes as well as measurements of the
effects of desmosterol, 24S-hydroxycholesterol, 7-ketocholesterol,
19-hydroxycholesterol, and epicholesterol on the binding of PFO to
cholesterol. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5000096_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
A.A.B.
and
B.N.O. contributed equally to this work.

This work was supported
by National Institutes of Health (NIH) Grant F30 HL97563 to A.A.B.,
Cardiovascular Biology Training Grant T32HL007275 to A.A.B. and B.N.O.,
and NIH Grant HL067773 to D.S.O., D.F.C., P.H.S., and N.A.B. Computational
resources were provided by the Texas Advanced Computing Center through
Teragrid Grants TG-MCB060053 and TG-MCA08X003 as well as the National
Biomedical Computation Resource (NIH Grant P41 RR0860516). This work
used the Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE),
which is supported by National Science Foundation Grant OCI-1053575.

The authors declare
no competing
financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank
Alejandro Heuck for generously providing the PFO
expression construct.

Abbreviations
25-HC25-hydroxycholesterol

PFOperfringolysin O

agisterolLY295427

LXRliver X receptor

SREBPssterol regulatory
element binding proteins

LDLRlow-density lipoprotein receptor

SCAPSREBP cleavage activating protein

ERendoplasmic reticulum

HMGR3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA
reductase

ACATacylCoA:cholesterol
acyltransferase

DOPCdioleoylphosphatidylcholine

ent-25-HCenantiomer of 25-HC

POPC1-palmitoyl-2-oleoylphosphatidylcholine

27-HC27-hydroxycholesterol

7-αHC7-α-hydroxycholesterol

7-KC7-ketocholesterol

epi-agisterol3β-hydroxy epimer of agisterol.

