A bimolecular chemical reaction
occurring in water is best viewed as a stochastic event. The two reacting
molecules must “hunt” through the available phase space
until the two are close enough in space and attain the correct geometry
for reaction. Moreover, the solvent molecules may also transiently
make any structural and electrostatic contacts to provide sufficient
momentum to the solvent–molecule system to carry the system
over the reaction barrier. The phase space describing this system
is very large. Hence, a reaction in water might take years despite
the fast characteristic clock time for searching through this phase
space, on the femtosecond to picosecond time scale.

Similar
considerations can be applied to enzyme-catalyzed reactions.
It has long been recognized that a protein does not occupy a unique
folded three-dimensional array of atoms. Rather, a protein’s
structure is best described as a hierarchy or ensemble of interconverting
conformations on all time scales from picoseconds to minutes, and
the spatial extent from small atom displacements to large scale domain
motions. This physical picture flows from the nature of the folded
structure, whose stability and structural integrity are dictated by
a large number of weak forces acting together. The exact role of a
protein’s dynamical nature in function is directed by its so-called
“energy landscape” (e.g., ref ()). While some of the rate
enhancement may be caused by differences in the nature of the characteristic
clock,− the basic job of an enzyme in catalyzing a chemical
reaction is to “guide” the enzyme–substrate Michaelis
complex toward a quite restricted set of reactive conformations so
that the search can be completed in the ∼1 ms time that typically
characterizez enzymatic catalysis. This is accomplished via specific
interactions between the substrate and the enzyme protein and also
within the protein itself that may be partly revealed by X-ray structural
and other spectroscopic studies as well as computational approaches.
However, how such interactions drive the enzyme system along the reaction
coordinate to achieve catalysis is not well understood.− The ensemble of structures of the enzyme–substrate Michaelis
complex imposes a specific energy landscape that guides the search.
The actual nature of the landscape and its relationship to catalysis
may be quite complex. The propensity
toward on-enzyme chemistry may vary quite substantially among the
substates (i.e., varying effective kcat values). Moreover, the dynamics of interconversion among the substates
is almost certainly complex, with varying interconversion times and
free energies of activation.

Here, we investigate how (pig heart)
lactate dehydrogenase (phLDH)
guides the on-enzyme reaction pathway as the system goes from LDH·NADH·pyruvate
to LDH·NAD+·lactate. Our goal is to determine
the phase space carved out of the subpopulation of the substate ensemble
of the LDH·NADH·pyruvate Michaelis complex that is along
the reaction coordinate. We look for the population of substates of
the protein ensemble, trying to determine which ones, if any, are
more reactive toward the chemical step than others.

Figure  shows the reaction catalyzed by
LDH, hydride transfer chemistry with H– and H+ transfers occurring simultaneously on the ∼20 fs time
scale. It has been concluded that three
structural factors are responsible for the 1014 M rate
enhancement of the pyruvate·NADH to lactate·NAD+ interconversion catalyzed by LDH, compared to the uncatalyzed chemistry
in water (i.e., comparing the on-enzyme rate with the solution rate
for 1 M solutes).− (1) Approximately 104–106 M comes from bringing the reacting molecules close together in a
favorable position for reaction. (2) An enzyme-imposed restriction
of the ring geometry of bound NADH toward an “activated”
conformation brings about another factor of at least 10 in rate enhancement., (3) Specific electrostatic interactions at the active site contribute
as much as 106 M to reaction rate acceleration. This dissection is very useful but does not
yield any physical insight into the dynamical nature of the chemical
reaction.

Active site contacts of pyruvate and NADH (left) and lactate and
NAD+ (right) bound to LDH with key active site residues
as determined by X-ray crystallography. The substrate is placed near
the nicotinamide ring of the NADH and key protein residues, His195,
Arg106, and Arg171. The C2=O bond of the bound pyruvate
forms hydrogen bonds with His195 and Arg106. The catalytically key
surface loop (residues 98–110), accompanied by the motions
of mobile areas in the protein, has the
effect of closing over the ligand, bringing residue Arg109 within
hydrogen bond contact with ligand; water leaves the pocket, and the
pocket geometry rearranges to allow for favorable interactions between
the cofactor and the ligand that facilitate on-enzyme catalysis. It
is generally accepted that the hydride transfer and proton transfer
occur virtually simultaneously, with both approximately halfway through
their motion at the transition state; the C2=O group
is thus very polar at the transition state.

While of major interest, it is notoriously difficult to characterize
the specific ensemble of conformational substates of an enzyme and
determine the propensity toward on-enzyme chemistry of a particular
member. Crucially, the part of the distribution of the substate ensemble
of the LDH·NADH·pyruvate Michaelis complex that is key to
the reaction coordinate can be characterized in part by measuring
the C2=O stretch frequency of the bound pyruvate
molecule. Previous temperature-dependent vibrational measurements
and ab initio calculations on hydrogen donor–acceptor
pairs that include a C=O group have revealed simple linear
correlations between the C=O stretch frequency and the interaction
energy (enthalpy of hydrogen bond formation)., For a simple molecule such as acetone, the correlation coefficient
is ∼0.5 (the 2 cm–1 C=O stretch frequency
shift corresponds to a 1 kcal/mol H-bond energy change). Pyruvate bound to LDH forms hydrogen bonds (an
enthalpy of interaction of ∼15 kcal/mol) with specific residues
at the active site (Figure ) much stronger
than that normally found in an aqueous solution (although transient
H-bonding interactions can be very strong); these interactions polarize
the C2=O moiety and downshift the C2=O
stretch. Hence, the C2=O stretch monitors the distance
between the oxygen of that key group and the essential active site
histidine residue and mobile loop arginine; it is thought that this
distance is a marker for reactivity. In fact, the frequency of the
C2=O stretch is a direct measure of the strength
of the electrostatic interactions at the active site for a particular
conformation and is highly correlated with the propensity toward the
on-enzyme chemical reaction (production of lactate) of that conformation. The concentration of a specific conformation
is proportional to the intensity of the IR band to a reasonable approximation.
Hence, the IR band profile acts as a measure of the density of states
per unit C2=O stretch frequency. The C2=O stretch frequency of a specific conformation of bound pyruvate
within the LDH·NADH·pyruvate Michaelis complex is an excellent
monitor of the protein’s ensemble nature because the stretch
value is highly correlated with the propensity toward the on-enzyme
chemical reaction (production of lactate) of that conformation. Thus, we have used the C2=O
stretch frequency as a quantitative measure of the energy landscape
of the enzyme substrate complex compared to that found in solution.
The results provide direct evidence of a restricted ensemble of more
reactive conformational substates in the enzyme system.

Experimental
Procedures
NAD+ and NADH were purchased from Roche. 15N-labeled ammonium chloride, uniformly 13C-labeled
glucose,
and 13C2-labeled pyruvate were purchased from
Cambridge Isotope Laboratories. 13C2-labeled
lactate was converted by the enzyme from 13C2-labeled pyruvate. Typically, 15 mg of pyruvate and 100 mg of NADH
were dissolved in 10 mL of deionized water without buffer. LDH was
then added to the solution to start the reaction. HCl was added slowly
during the reaction to maintain the pH of the reaction mixture. After
the completion of the reaction, the reaction mixture solution was
filtered with neutralized charcoal to remove NAD/NADH until no NAD
could be detected by NMR. The lactate solution was then concentrated
and desalted by being passed through a 20 cm × 1 cm Dowex50 column.
Fractions with lactate are collected and lyophilized to powder for
storage.

Pig heart LDH (phLDH) was purchased from Roche Diagnostics
(Indianapolis,
IN) and prepared as previously described., The pig heart cDNA library was purchased from Zyagen. The pig heart
LDH gene was obtained from this cDNA library by polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) using forward primer CATGCCATGGGCCATCATCATCATCATCATGCAACTCTTAAGGAAAAACTG
(with a six-residue His tag) and reverse primer CGGGATCCTCACAGGTCCTTCAGATCC.
The LDH gene with the His tag was subcloned into pET14b plasmids from
Novagen using restriction enzymes NcoI and BamHI with standard molecular
biology procedures. The integrity of the gene was verified by sequencing.
The plasmid was transformed into C43(DE3) competent Escherichia
coli cells from OverExpress for LDH expression. The growth
conditions of the cells and the purification procedures were otherwise
the same as those published previously for Bacillus stearothermophilus LDH, except a 20
mL Ni column was used in the first protein purification step. The
purity was estimated to be &gt;95% using sodium dodecyl sulfate gels.
Uniformly 15N- and 13C-labeled LDH was obtained
by growing the C43(DE3) cells at 37 °C in minimal medium supplemented
with 2 g of [13C]glucose and 0.5 g of 15N-labeled
ammonium chloride per liter of culture medium. The expression of LDH
was induced by the addition of IPTG to the culture medium to a final
concentration of 0.5 mM when the cell density reached an OD of 0.8–1.2
at 600 nm. After 15 h, the cells were harvested, and the uniformly 15N- and 13C-labeled LDH was purified according
to the same procedure as the unlabeled LDH. The D168N mutant plasmid
was made by using PCR on the pET14b plasmid containing pig heart cDNA
and the custom His tag in the presence of forward primer AGTGGATGTAACCTGAACTCTGCAAGG
and reverse primer CCTTGCAGAGTTCAGGTTACATCCACT
according to standard procedures. The uniformly 15N- and 13C-labeled D168N mutant enzyme was made using the same procedure
described above.

The steady state kcat was determined
for the pig heart protein using 0.16 mM NADH or NADD ([4-2H]-pro-R-NADH), which is &gt;100 times greater than
the Kd value for NADH [in 100 mM phosphate
(pH 8.0)]. NADH(D) concentrations were determined spectrophotometrically
with a λ340 of 6.22 mM–1 cm–1 and an A260/A340 of 2.3. The LDH concentration was determined using
an extinction coefficient of 50 mM–1 cm–1 in terms of active sites (pig heart LDH is a homotetramer, and all
protein concentrations in this paper are in terms of active sites). kcat was determined by a loss of the absorbance
maximum of NADH’s nicotinamide ring at 340 nm by titration
of pyruvate at concentrations from 0.02 to 0.8 mM. NADD was synthesized
and purified according to previously reported procedures.,

Static FTIR spectroscopy was performed on a Magna 760 Fourier
transform
spectrometer (Nicolet Instrument Corp.) using an MCT detector. We used a two-position sample shuttle to alternate
between the unlabeled sample and labeled sample positions; this procedure
substantially decreases the spectral contribution of residual water
vapor after subtraction. Both LDH·NADH·[12C]pyruvate
and LDH·NADH·[13C]pyruvate sample solutions were
simultaneously loaded into a dual-cell shuttle accessory. CaF2 windows with 6 μm Teflon spacers were used for the
protein sample cell. The typical sample volume was 10 μL. Spectra
were recorded in the range of 1100–4000 cm–1 with 2 cm–1 resolution. A Blackman–Harris
three-term apodization and a Happ–Genzel apodization were applied.
All samples were prepared in D2O buffer with 100 mM phosphate
(pH 7.2) (pH meter reading); measurements were taken at 295 K. The
typical LDH reaction mixture was prepared at an initial LDH:NAD:lactate
concentration ratio of 4:4:20 (where the LDH concentration refers
to active sites). Under such conditions, approximately half of the
NAD was converted to NADH, yielding an on-enzyme pyruvate concentration
of ∼2 mM as determined by UV–vis measurements. Typically,
two samples, prepared by using either 13C2-labeled
or unlabeled lactate, were loaded on a sample shuttle. Their spectra
were measured alternatively five times with 128 scans each time for
a total of 640 scans.

Results
Isotope-Edited Protein
Amide Bands
Figure  shows the IR
absorbance spectra of LDH (spectrum
A) and [13C/15N]LDH (spectrum B) in the protein’s
amide I region (a coupled mode containing a substantial amount of
C=O stretch of the polypeptide chain). Note the amide I peak
shifts ∼45 cm–1, from 1650 to 1605 cm–1, mostly because of the 13C label. Most
of our studies were conducted using the labeled protein because this
protein has a much reduced absorbance in the region of interest here,
the C2=O stretch of pyruvate, which lies at multiple
frequencies but near 1680 cm–1 (see Figure ).

FTIR absorbance spectra of (A) LDH and (B) [13C/15N]LDH. The sample concentration was ∼4 mN in
D2O with 100 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7).

(A) Isotope-edited FTIR difference spectrum of the [13C/15N]LDH·NADH·[13C2]pyruvate
complex subtracted from that of the [13C/15N]LDH·NADH·[12C2]pyruvate complex. (B) Isotope-edited FTIR difference
spectrum of the LDH·NADH·[13C2]pyruvate
complex subtracted from that of the LDH·NADH·[12C2]pyruvate complex. The samples were prepared from a
4:4:20 LDH/NAD/lactate mixture [initial concentration ratio (active
sites for LDH)] in D2O with 100 mM phosphate buffer (pH
7).

Isotope-Edited Static IR
Spectrum of Bound Pyruvate
The bond vibrations associated
with the C=O stretch of pyruvate
are &gt;1700 cm–1 in solution but shift down when
pyruvate
is bound in LDH. Because the IR spectrum of a ligand bound to a protein
is typically obscured by the many vibrations arising from the protein,
an isotope-edited difference FTIR technique was used., These studies were conducted by measuring the IR spectra for the
sample where the C2 atom of pyruvate is either with or
without the 13C label. This highly controlled and precise
comparison is required instead of simply a difference spectrum of
ligand-bound versus free protein because ligand binding can perturb
the vibrational modes of the protein, rendering interpretation of
the resulting difference spectra difficult or impossible.

Figure  shows isotope-edited FTIR difference spectra of
the LDH·NADH·pyruvate complex with LDH (spectrum A) or uniformly 13C- and 15N-labeled LDH (spectrum B). In these
spectra, all IR bands unrelated to pyruvate C2 should be
subtracted out, leaving only IR bands that are affected by the 13C2 labeling. The C2=O stretch
modes from unlabeled pyruvate appear as positive bands, and 13C-labeled pyruvate bands are negative. The major C2=O
stretch band at 1679 cm–1 shifts down by ∼40
cm–1 upon 13C2 labeling, yielding
the major negative band near 1640 cm–1. This shift
is expected via calculation of the shift from a local oscillator model
of the C=O moiety and was used as one of the criteria in the
subtraction procedure as described in detail previously. The pyruvate C2=O band shifts
∼28 cm–1 lower in the complex compared to
its solution value [1708 cm–1 (see spectrum D of
Figure )], indicating the significantly polarized
nature of the pyruvate C=O bond in the complex.

Coupling between
the Pyruvate C2=O Stretch
and the Reduced Nicotinamide Ring Stretch
In the unlabeled
LDH complex, there is another prominent band at 1685 cm–1 (Figure  A). This band intensity significantly
decreases when LDH is labeled with 13C and 15N. Interestingly, no corresponding IR band near 1645 cm–1 was observed when the pyruvate C2 is labeled with 13C in the LDH complexes, suggesting that some other motion
contributes to the 1685 cm–1 band besides the pyruvate
C2=O stretch. We assign the 1685 cm–1 band to the out-of-phase C=C stretch motions of the reduced
nicotinamide moiety of bound NADH. The
isotope shift of this vibrational mode is due to coupling to the pyruvate
C2=O stretch motion due to strong interactions between
NADH and pyruvate at the active site, despite the absence of a covalent
bond between them.

To support this assignment, second-derivative
analyses of the IR spectra of the LDH·NADH·pyruvate are
shown in Figure . The second derivative narrows
the band shape compared to the absorbance spectrum, and thus, it is
more sensitive to small frequency shifts induced by a perturbation.
Spectra A and B in Figure  show the second
derivatives of FTIR absorbance spectra of LDH and the LDH·NADH
complex, respectively, in the C=C and C=O stretch region.
The band at 1685 cm–1 in the second-derivative spectrum
of the LDH·NADH complex (spectrum B) can be assigned to the out-of-phase
C=C stretch mode of the reduced nicotinamide of NADH, based
on its absence from the LDH spectrum (spectrum A). Spectra C and D
in Figure  show the second derivatives of
FTIR absorbance spectra of LDH·NADH·pyruvate and LDH·NADH·[13C2]pyruvate complexes, respectively. The band
at 1679 cm–1 in the LDH·NADH·pyruvate
complex is due to the major pyruvate C=O stretch, which is
observed in the isotope-edited difference spectrum (Figure ). In the LDH·NADH·[13C2]pyruvate complex, this band shifts down to ∼1640 cm–1; thus, it is absent in the frequency range shown
in Figure . Remarkably, the band at 1685 cm–1, which is due to the out-of-phase C=C stretch
mode of the reduced nicotinamide of NADH, shifts down in energy by
∼1 cm–1 when C2 of pyruvate is
labeled with 13C in the LDH·NADH·pyruvate complex,
even though these groups are not covalently linked.

Second derivatives of
IR spectra of (A) LDH and the (B) LDH·NADH,
(C) LDH·NADH·[12C2]pyruvate, and (D)
LDH·NADH·[13C2]pyruvate complexes
in the C=O stretch region. Sample conditions are the same as
those described in the legend of Figure .

The fact that the 13C labeling of the pyruvate C2=O bond causes a small
frequency shift of the nicotinamide
ring mode of NADH suggests that the motions of these two groups at
the active site in the LDH·NADH·pyruvate complex are synchronized
and/or coupled to form a single, delocalized vibrational mode, which
can happen only when they are in very close contact. This contact
is close enough to allow some electronic orbital overlap between these
two molecular groups. The simplest model is that in which the overlap
is made through the C4pro-R hydrogen of the reduced nicotinamide, which is transferred as a
hydride to the C2 atom of pyruvate in the chemical step.
It is well established that the enzyme strongly restricts the orientation
and conformation of the nicotinamide ring, such that any such close
approach that allows direct vibrational coupling should be a reactive
state given the very high fidelity of transfer of the pro-R hydrogen.

Determination
of the Substate Population Distribution in the
Michaelis Complex
The conformational distributions of the
substrate pyruvate in the Michaelis complexes of the 13C- and 15N-labeled and unlabeled LDH are also different,
as demonstrated by the intensity profiles of the pyruvate C=O
stretches (see Figure ). We have repeated
the measurements of these LDH complexes more than 10 times, including
some under different experimental conditions (e.g., different sample
concentration ratios). The pyruvate C=O stretch intensity profiles
show some variations under different conditions, but the following
differences in 13C- and 15N-labeled and unlabeled
LDH complexes are consistently observed. First, the main 13C=O stretch frequency of the 13C2-labeled
pyruvate is ∼ 2 cm–1 lower in the unlabeled
LDH complex. Second, the band intensities near 1685 and 1672 cm–1 relative to that at 1680 cm–1 are
higher in the unlabeled LDH complex.

(A) 12C2=O
spectral region for pyruvate
in water. The pyruvate peak is at 1708 cm–1 with
a width (fwhm) of 22 cm–1. (B) IR difference spectrum
in the 12C2=O spectral region for pyruvate
in the [13C/15N](D168N)LDH·NADH·[12C2]pyruvate complex. The data have been normalized
such that the areas under the IR spectra of the three cases are equal.
Using Gaussian functions, a minimum of four subcomponents was needed
to fit to the IR spectrum with the position and bandwidth (fwhm) allowed
to float. The following widths (relative areas) were found: 1674 cm–1 (5.1 cm–1, 1.2), 1679 cm–1 (5.9 cm–1, 7.9), and 1686 cm–1 (4.7 cm–1, 1.5). (C) IR difference spectrum in
the 12C2=O spectral region for pyruvate
in the [13C/15N]LDH·NADH·[12C2]pyruvate complex. The following peaks [widths (fwhm),
relative areas] were found: 1674 cm–1 (5.1 cm–1, 1.2), 1679 cm–1 (5.9 cm–1, 7.9), 1686 cm–1 (4.7 cm–1,
1.5), and 1703 cm–1 (5.7 cm–1,
0.49). The protein samples were prepared from a LDH/NAD/lactate mixture
with initial concentration ratios of 7:8:30 (wild type) and 3:3.3:14
(D168N mutant) in D2O with 100 mM phosphate buffer (pH
7) at 20 °C. LDH brings about a rate of enhancement of 1014 M compared to the rate in a solution at pH 7 and a reactants
concentration of 1 M. kcat = 0.30 and
a H/D KIE that is essentially negligible. Catalytic parameters for
the (D168N)LDH mutant (B) and normal and labeled LDH (C and D, respectively)
show essentially the same kcat and Kd of 245 s–1 (kcat and Kd values of 235 s–1 and 0.12 mM, respectively, for the unlabeled form
and 242 s–1 and 0.14 mM, respectively, for the labeled
form) with a KIE of 1.4 for NADD/NADH.

To quantitatively determine the pyruvate conformational distribution
in the Michaelis complex, and how the distribution is affected by
LDH isotope labeling and mutation, curve fitting procedures were used
to simulate the observed intensity profile in the 12C=O
region where protein interference is less pronounced. Figure  shows the C2=O stretch bands (in the 12C=O region) of
pyruvate in solution (A), in the [13C/15N](D168N)LDH·NADH·[12C2]pyruvate complex (B), in the LDH·NADH·[12C2]pyruvate complex (C), and in the [13C/15N]LDH·NADH·[12C2]pyruvate
complex (D) obtained by the isotope-edited difference methods. These
pyruvate C=O stretch profiles can be typically fitted by four
Gaussian curves as listed in Table . We assume
each C=O band represents at least one distinct substate in
the Michaelis complex, but with the caveat that the bands near 1685
cm–1 also contain NADH band intensity. The relative
populations of these substates as determined from the pyruvate C=O
band intensities are also listed in Table . IR bands in the spectral region below ∼1665 cm–1 contain contributions from 13C=O stretches, and
they are excluded from the table.

Curve Fitting Results
for the Pyruvate
C=O Stretch Profile in the LDH Michaelis Complexes
 	band (cm–1)	fwhm (cm–1)	intensity	population (%)	frequency average (cm–1)	
pyruvate	1708	22	22	100	1708	
 	 	 	 	 	 	
[13C/15N](D168N)LDH·NADH·pyruvate	1683	5.2	2.2	17.9	 	
1691	7.2	6.7	54.5	 	
1701	13.2	3.4	27.6	1692.3	
1708	22	7.1	unbound	 	
 	 	 	 	 	 	
LDH·NADH·pyruvate	1673	5.7	6.5	33.3	 	
1679	5.0	4.7	24.1	 	
1686	7.9	5.7	29.2	 	
1699	13	2.6	13.3	1681.7	
 	 	 	 	 	 	
[13C/15N]LDH·NADH·pyruvate	1674	5.1	1.2	10.8	 	
1679	5.9	7.9	71.2	 	
1686	4.7	1.5	13.5	 	
1703	5.7	0.49	4.42	1680.5	
Band represents
the observed C=O
stretch frequency. The resolution of the spectrometer was 2 cm–1. The frequency errors for most bands are ±2
cm–1 but for bands between 1670 and 1675 cm–1 are ±3 cm–1. fwhm denotes
the full line width at the half-maximum. Intensity denotes the band
intensity (arbitrary units). Population denotes the percentage of
bound pyruvate at the given frequency. Frequency average denotes the
population-weighted average frequency of all bound pyruvate bands.

As stated above, the frequency
of the pyruvate C2=O
stretch is a direct measure of the electrostatic interactions that
polarize the bond, and hence, it projects this feature of the reaction
coordinate. The IR results of Figure  show
directly the effects of active site electrostatic interactions believed
to bring about an ∼106-fold increase in rate from
solution conditions to within the LDH Michaelis complex. The D168N
mutant shows a steady state kcat value
of 0.30 s–1 that is reduced by a factor of 820 from
the wt protein kcat value of 245 s–1, and the corresponding active site electrostatic
interactions on the pyruvate C2=O bond are significantly
weaker as indicated by the blue-shifted C=O stretch frequency
profile (Figure ). In a previous study on
an analogue of the LDH Michaelis complex, an empirical correlation
between bound pyruvate C=O frequencies and kcat values for a number of LDH variants was suggested
(see below). In the study presented here,
our results show that the bound pyruvate has more than one frequency
in the real Michaelis complex and the correlation must be reevaluated
on the basis of the the population distribution of the substates.
It is expected, every thing else being equal, that a substate with
a lower C2=O stretch will have a greater propensity
toward on-enzyme chemistry.

Kinetic Isotope Effects
Steady state
kinetics measurements
of the LDH enzyme yielded a kcat of 245
s–1 with a KIE of 1.4 comparing enzyme loaded with
NADD versus enzyme loaded with NADH. This
value for the H/D primary KIE is quite low; a value of ≥6 would
be much more characteristic if the purely chemical step were rate-limiting.
We can conclude that the chemical step is on a time scale similar
to that of the various protein atomic rearrangements occurring within
the phLDH·NADH·pyruvate Michaelis complex, such as loop
closure, as well as other interconversions among the substate ensemble
distribution. On the other hand, for (D168N)LDH, steady state kcat (=0.30 s–1) measurements
yield an H/D KIE that is essentially negligible. This is an interesting
observation because one explanation would be the chemical turnover
rate in this mutant is reduced significantly more than the (partially)
rate-limiting protein conformational motions. Currently, we are using
an IR T-jump to study the interconversion kinetics
among substates in the Michaelis complex to verify this possibility.
All this is consistent, as shown in Figure , with a shift of the C2=O stretch intensity profile
in the (D168N)LDH·NADH·pyruvate complex ensemble toward
conformations with much less propensity toward chemistry.

Binding Isotope
Effects Due to 13C and 15N Labeling of LDH
Comparison between spectra A and B in
Figure  reveals several interesting differences
when pyruvate binds to unlabeled or 13C- and 15N-labeled LDH. For example, the main pyruvate C=O stretch
frequencies (1679 cm–1 bands) are different by &lt;1
cm–1 for the 12C pyruvate, but this difference
increases to slightly more than 2 cm–1 when C2 is labeled with 13C (at 1640 and 1638 cm–1, respectively). This result suggests the binding isotope effect
due to pyruvate C2 labeling may be somewhat different in 13C- and 15N-labeled LDH and unlabeled LDH. In addition,
the most red-shifted pyruvate C=O stretch band intensity at
1674 cm–1 has a significantly higher intensity in
the unlabeled LDH (33% of bound pyruvate vs 11%), and the substate
population distribution is also more evenly spread (Figure  and Table ).

As discussed
above, the IR intensity at 1686 cm–1 in the isotope-edited
difference spectra depends on the coupling of the pyruvate C2=O stretch and the NADH ring stretch. The reduced relative
intensity of this band in 13C- and 15N-labeled
LDH [from 29 to 14% (Table )] suggests a reduced
level of coupling of the two molecular groups, or a reduced electronic
orbital overlap. Interestingly, while the D168N mutation significantly
reduced the level of hydrogen bonding on the pyruvate C2=O group, it did not affect the electronic orbital overlap
of C2=O with the reduced nicotinamide ring, as demonstrated
by the unchanged IR intensity of the 1683 cm–1 band
upon mutation (Figure  and Table ).

Discussion
There has been substantial
interest in how atomic motion in proteins
affects the functional properties of enzymes. Treatments of reaction
rate theories typically depend on the time scale of the motions, with
a separation between fast and slower motions of atoms., For example, there has been much conjecture about the notion of
so-called “promoting vibrations” (cf. ref ()). These are femtosecond
to picosecond vibrational-like motions of atoms located within the
protein (as well as the bound substrate) that are part of the transition
state coordinate, the bottleneck of the dynamical pathway of the actual
chemical event. In contrast, we are interested here in the flux of
the enzyme reaction system from the first step(s) of binding of the
substrate to the enzyme to the formation of conformations poised for
the actual chemical event. The focus of this study is atomic motions
on time scales intermediate between vibrational times and the overall
turnover of the enzyme, roughly motions from the subnanosecond to
(more typically) microseconds to milliseconds. Events occurring slower
than the time scale of the barrier crossing of the actual chemical
event have been difficult to treat and characterize.

We have
previously performed both static and dynamic studies of
two well-characterized Michaelis mimics of the true Michaelis complex
studied here. The results of those studies guided the design of our
experiments. These Michaelis mimics are the so-called NAD–pyruvate
adduct, (i.e., the LDH·NAD–pyruvate
complex) and oxamate,, (LDH·NADH·oxamate complex). Both are assumed to strongly
resemble the LDH·NADH·pyruvate species with regard to general
structure (Kd values and arrangement of
active site contacts). However, at the sensitive level of structure
that can be observed in isotope-edited IR studies, i.e., the C2=O stretch profiles, the three complexes are quite
different. The NAD–pyruvate adduct complex tends to show a
carboxyl stretch more strongly shifted from its solution value. The
oxamate complex shows a relatively less shifted C=O stretch
along with a populated substate with no shift at all. In addition,
kinetic IR T-jump studies show that the interconversion
kinetics among the substates are very different. The substates of
the LDH·NAD–pyruvate complex are virtually locked into
place (very high free energy barriers to interconversion), and the
substates of the LDH·NADH·oxamate complex interconvert on
the submillisecond time scale. The entirety of the results suggests
that the study of mimics yields substantial insights but also has
substantial limitations for the questions being asked here.

As an organizing principle for understanding dynamical events on
the slower time scales, we shall use the well-established notion that
a protein exists as an ensemble of interconverting conformations.
The dynamics of the system are then described well by the so-called
energy landscape of the system. This multidimensional energy surface
of the Michaelis complex describes how the system evolves from binding
substrate to chemistry. For LDH, like apparently many proteins, the
enzyme binds its substrate forming first a “loose” encounter
complex whose structure is quite far from catalytic competence. From
there, it is a good approximation that the system hunts, in a stochastic
manner, through the various accessible conformations, arriving eventually
at a reactive structure or, more likely, an array of reactive and
relatively inactive structures. In this picture for enzymes, the phase
space described by the energy landscape must be quite limited because
enzymic catalysis occurs on typically short time scales; the system
could not statistically sample all possible conformations that the
protein complex could adopt in that little time. This can be likened
to the protein folding problem and for many of the same reasons; the
formation of reactive conformation(s) must be funneled with minimal
frustration. We could call it the “catalysis landscape”.

We emphasize that this physical picture of the Michaelis complex
is distinctly different and can be contrasted to the “standard”
Eyring picture and evolved transition state concepts. In the literature
on enzymes, bringing the two reacting molecules sufficiently close
together and making them well oriented on the enzyme (and by extension
the recruitment of crucial active site residues) to bring about the
chemical event are typically understood as an enormous loss of entropy
compared to the same system in solution− (undoubtedly with stabilizing
enthalpic contributions, as well). The
empirically determined free energy barrier to the chemical event is
really an “effective” transition state free energy barrier,
taking into account many components: those involved in bringing all
the reacting groups together toward an ensemble of favorable to nonfavorable
(propensity toward chemistry) structures and the actual barrier to
the on-enzyme chemistry. Moreover, the Michaelis complex is typically
depicted in a single conformation. The part of the effective transition
state barrier attributed to bringing reactive groups together is probably
the largest contribution to the reduction of the reaction barrier
on LDH given previous work.− This is also seen by the low
primary H/D isotope effect on the overall kcat; the search process for finding the active state(s) “dilutes”
the H/D isotope effect that would be observed from the purely chemical
event. Moreover, calculations of the ground state energy landscape
of LDH strongly suggest that competent conformations within the Michaelis
complex are actually rare; ground state
conformations that show slow direct turnover, but presumably fast
conversion to productive conformations, substantially predominate.

Whether a specific ground state conformation within the LDH·NADH·pyruvate
Michaelis complex ensemble is advanced along the reaction coordinate
can be estimated by the distances from NADH’s C4-H group to pyruvate’s C2=O carbon and from
pyruvate’s C2=O group to the polarizing/proton
donor groups at the active site (see Figure ). These two distances are directly related to the hydride transfer
and proton transfer that occur in the chemical step and, thus, are
the major components of the reaction coordinate. In the studies presented
here, we have shown that the isotope-edited difference FTIR techniques
can potentially be used to evaluate both distances in the LDH·NADH·pyruvate
Michaelis complex. The NADH C4-H–pyruvate C2=O carbon distance may be evaluated by the extent of
coupling between the pyruvate C2=O stretch and the
out-of-phase C=C stretch of the reduced nicotinamide, although
further studies are required to establish a quantitative correlation.

In previous studies, we were able to project out pyruvate’s
C2=O and the polarizing/proton donor groups distance
and the strength of H-bond interactions because these directly show
up in the (polarizing) downward shift of the C2=O
stretch, as discussed above. The larger the downward shift in frequency
for a specific conformation, the closer the C2=O
group to the essential active site residues and the more that conformation
is advanced toward chemistry. This is all in agreement with empirical
studies that show the polarization of the C2=O moiety,, and hence the C2=O stretch, is highly correlated with chemical activity. Using the
NAD–pyruvate analogue bound to bsLDH as a mimic for the Michaelis
complex of the wt protein and a series of mutants, we found an empirical
correlation for kcat versus the shift
in frequency of the C2=O stretch from its solution
value:Sometimes, the C2=O stretch
shows up as heterogeneously broadened, so that the value at the average
frequency was employed. Also, as mentioned above, the structure of
the conformational substates is qualitatively different in the NAD–pyruvate
adduct Michaelis mimic complex and in the actual Michaelis complex.
Hence, while the rate of on-enzyme chemical conversion of a specific
substate is clearly strongly dependent on the shift in the frequency
of the C2=O group, this correlation must be taken
as semiquantitative. We are currently performing laser-induced T-jump IR studies of the LDH·NADH·pyruvate system
to determine a kinetic model of the interconversion kinetics and thermodynamics
among the substates and the rate of chemical conversion of a specific
substate (M. Reddish, H.-L. Peng, H. Deng, K. S. Panwar, R. B. Dyer,
and R. Callender, work in progress).

Figure  shows that the ensemble of conformations
in solution produces a heterogeneously broadened C2=O
stretch band. This is expected because there is a distribution of
water molecule conformations that surround the bond; each polarizes
the C2=O bond differently. In contrast, the LDH
Michaelis complex shows a strongly downshifted IR profile. It, too,
is heterogeneously broadened, but its character differs from that
in solution, being composed of discrete substates, at least four as
determined by the curve fitting results. According to the correlation
between LDH kcat and the bound pyruvate
C=O frequency described above, we may assume that each of the
substate populations has its corresponding degree of reactivity. The
subpopulation of the ensemble showing a C2=O stretch
at lower frequencies, at, e.g., 1673 cm–1 (Table ), is more reactive toward forming the LDH·NAD+·lactate complex than that characterized by 1679 or 1686
cm–1 and vastly more so than the species characterized
by 1699 cm–1 because, as stated above, pyruvate’s
C2=O stretch is a quantitative measure of C=O
bond polarization, which is in turn correlated to the reactivity of
the specific species; the larger the downshift in frequency, the greater
the reactivity of the species. On the
basis of substrate mimic kinetic studies, the substates appear to
interconvert on time scales faster than kcat., Our preliminary data concerning laser-induced
IR T-jump studies of the LDH·NADH·pyruvate
system show that interconversion kinetics among the substates also
proceed on the submillisecond time scale. Hence, whether the reaction
proceeds through the more reactive but smaller-population 1673 cm–1 substate (or even a less populated but more polarized
substate) depends on (1) its reactivity relative to its small population,
(2) whether the other less reactive substates can convert to it on
time scales faster than the ∼1 ms catalytic event, and (3)
the branching between the formation of the on-enzyme product relative
to other substates within the Michaelis complex.

We can conclude
that the process of binding NADH and pyruvate to
the enzyme has indeed imposed an enormously reduced phase space on
the reacting system compared to that in solution and strongly shifted
toward reactive conformations. These conformations may include one
or more of the structural features that are observed in our spectroscopic
studies such as stronger hydrogen bonding to the pyruvate C2=O group and closer contact between nicotinamide C4 and pyruvate
C2. The structure of the protein imposes an intermediate
energy landscape in the case of the (D168N)LDH·NADH·pyruvate
mutant system, as indicated by the C2=O IR stretch
band profile (Figure  and Table ), resulting in intermediate catalytic efficacy. The nature
of this mutant’s ensemble is characterized by a C2=O IR stretch that is less shifted than that of the wt protein,
but downshifted compared to the water spectrum; its IR profile is
broader than that for the wt protein and even that of pyruvate in
solution. This is strongly correlated with an intermediate catalysis
rate (kcat decreased by a factor of 820
from that of the wt protein). Interestingly, the kcat and Km parameters for
the wild-type proteins are unaffected by the 13C and 15N labeling of the protein within our level of precision (235
s–1 and 0.12 mM, respectively, for the unlabeled
form and 242 s–1 and 0.14 mM, respectively, for
the labeled form) despite the fact that the labeling yields clear
differences in the ensemble distribution. This may be due to numerous
small changes between the two systems that have opposite and canceling
effects on reactivity. The center C2=O IR stretch
frequency of the unlabeled protein distribution is comparatively slightly
upshifted (Table ), which suggests a slower
relative kcat. On the other hand, the
NADH marker band intensity for catalytic competence at 1679 cm–1 is larger for the unlabeled protein complex, suggesting
a more competent substate population. In addition, the distribution
profile of the unlabeled protein is broadened at both high and low
C2=O IR stretch frequency values compared to that
of the labeled protein. If rare substates must be reached for effective
catalysis, which seems likely, both labeled and unlabeled proteins
have significant populations of low-C2=O IR stretch
frequency conformers. Clearly, there is much work to be performed
to understand the dynamics quantitatively.

It is often stated
that the nature of the chemistry occurring either
in water or on the enzyme is largely the same. What is clearly quite different is that an enzyme can impose
a largely reduced and modified ensemble of conformational states and
thereby direct the thermo-activated conformational sampling toward
a small set of reactive substates. The value of kcat reflects this conformational sampling as well as the
actual time of the chemical event. The difference in chemical rate
between solution and that catalyzed by LDH largely reflects the huge
difference in the conformational sampling through ground state conformations.

Here we attempt to provide a quantitative analysis of the data
for how the LDH reactivity may be affected by the pyruvate C=O
stretch distribution observed in the Michaelis complex of the live
reaction mixture. It is mostly based on a correlation between the
bound pyruvate C=O frequency and LDH activity that was determined
from the studies of a series of Michaelis complex analogues in which
one C=O frequency can be associated with one activity value. Such analysis will provide some initial understanding
of the energy landscape of the LDH Michaelis complex. The observed
conformational substate distribution in the Michaelis complex and
its associated structural features presented in this work provide
additional opportunity to further characterize the energy landscape.
For example, IR T-jump measurements, may be conducted to investigate how these substates interconvert
kinetically among themselves, as well as their dynamic relationship
to pyruvate binding and on-enzyme substrate turnover.

There
has long been speculation that adaptation mechanisms and
allostery involve a small tuning of an enzyme structure to affect
its dynamical nature that in turn regulates key catalytic parameters.
For LDH, for example, various isozymes all have the same active site
architectures whether the isozymes are from psychrophiles, mesophiles,
or hyperthermophiles, but their individual kcat and Km values appear to be
tuned to operate properly at the respective temperatures. The shifting of the energy landscape, that is,
the shifting of the enzyme’s ensemble of microstates, as opposed
to the evolution of specific active site structures, is postulated
by many to account for the tuning (cf. ref ()). The results presented here are consistent
with this notion.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

