FGFRs constitute one of several subfamilies
in the RTK family of
membrane receptors. Four FGFRs, namely, FGFR1, FGFR2, FGFR3, and FGFR4,
are known to mediate a variety of cellular responses during embryonic
development. Dysregulation of FGFR signaling is associated with many
developmental disorders and cancer. The
prototypical FGFR consists of an extracellular ligand binding domain,
a single TM domain, and a cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase domain. The
crystal structures of the soluble extracellular, and
the intracellular, regions of FGFR3 provide a considerable
amount of information that aids in understanding the mechanism underlying
receptor signaling; however, there are still no high-resolution structures
of the full-length receptors of any RTK.

The mechanism that
emerges from structural and biochemical studies
is one where the FGF ligand binds to the extracellular domain of the
receptor in a 1:1 complex. This complex is thought to form a symmetric
dimer in the active state. The ligand
binds to two of the immunoglobulin-like extracellular subdomains,
D2 and D3, and these two subdomains along with the D2–D3 linker
are necessary and sufficient for ligand binding. The D1 subdomain
together with the D1–D2 linker have an autoregulatory role
in receptor function. High resolution
structures of activated kinase domains for FGFR1 and FGFR2 have been shown to
be asymmetric dimers. Importantly, Bae et al. demonstrated that the formation of the asymmetric dimer between
the activated FGFR1 kinase domains is required for the transphosphorylation
of the FGFR in FGF-stimulated cells.

The activation mechanism
proposed on the basis of FGFR crystal
structures builds on that proposed by Kuriyan and co-workers for the
EGFR., An open question has been how a symmetric
extracellular domain dimer leads to asymmetric interactions between
the intracellular domains. For the EGFR family, the question of how
ligand binding is coupled to receptor activation has been of intense
interest since the intracellular JM domain is allosterically coupled
to the ligand-binding site., We have addressed how
the TM and intracellular JM regions of the rat ErbB2/Neu receptor
might transmit the extracellular signal induced by ligand binding
to the intracellular domain. We took
advantage of a constitutively active mutation (V664E) in the TM region
of the Neu receptor and compared the structures of the TM–JM
sequences of the wild-type and V664E mutant. The results of solid-state
NMR and fluorescence studies on these peptides reconstituted into
lipid bilayers showed that the TM helices of the V664E mutant dimerized
more tightly than did those of the wild-type Neu construct. In addition,
the unstructured JM region of the wild-type Neu TM–JM peptide
was found to be bound to acidic membranes containing the phosphoinositide,
PIP2. In contrast, the JM region of the mutant was not bound to the
membrane, and we further showed that the binding affinity of the JM
sequence for the membrane was dependent on the relative orientation
of the TM helices. We concluded that the TM helices in the active
dimer conformation could release the JM region from the membrane surface,
which would then allow for the formation of an asymmetric dimer by
the intracellular kinase regions. Endres and co-workers proposed a
similar model on the basis of detailed biochemical and structural
analyses of the EGFR.,

The similar structures of
receptors in the EGFR and FGFR families
suggest a common mechanism involving the TM region for transmitting
the structural changes from the outside to the inside of a cell. There
are two pathogenic mutations, G380R and A391E, in the TM region of
FGFR3 that lead to activation. The A391E mutation appears to be similar
to the V664E mutation in the Neu receptor (i.e., substitution of a
hydrophobic residue with glutamic acid). A391E is the genetic cause
of Crouzon syndrome and has also been
identified as a somatic mutation in bladder cancer. This mutation can enhance FGFR3 activation in the absence
of the ligand, which results in an increase in the dimerization propensity
of the TM sequence alone in lipid bilayers and of the full-length receptor in the cell membrane. The G380R mutation is related to achondroplasia, which is the most common form of dwarfism. Hristova
and colleagues reported that the TM region containing the G380R mutation
did not alter the dimerization energetics of the TM helices in lipid
bilayers. Later, they showed that the
G380R mutation had only a modest effect on receptor dimerization in
plasma membrane vesicles derived from HEK293T cells, which suggests
that the kinase activity due to the G380R mutation is caused by a
mutation-induced structural change rather than an increase in dimerization.

Here we compare the structure of the TM–JM
region of wild-type
FGFR3 peptides reconstituted into lipid bilayers to that of FGFR3
peptides containing the G380R and A391E mutants. The results from
fluorescence, polarized FT-IR, and solid-state NMR spectroscopy show
that the introduction of active mutations in the TM sequence changes
the TM helix tilt angle relative to the membrane normal and releases
the JM region from the membrane. Additionally, we examined the correlation
between the TM helix orientation and the JM release from the membrane
and found that the JM sequence of FGFR3 was released from the membrane
as the TM helix tilt decreased relative to the bilayer normal. The
results obtained in this study provide a framework for the general
structural and functional understanding of how the TM–JM region
bridges the extracellular and intracellular regions in RTKs.

Experimental
Procedures
Materials
13C-labeled amino acids and (5,5,5-d3)
leucines were purchased from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories (Andover,
MA) and derivatized using standard methods. Other amino acids were
purchased from the Peptide Institute (Osaka, Japan). Solvents and
other agents for peptide synthesis were purchased from Wastanabe Chemicals
(Hiroshima, Japan). Octyl-β-glucoside was obtained from Nacalai
Tesque (Kyoto, Japan). DMPC, DMPG, POPC, and POPS were obtained from
Avanti Polar Lipids (Alabaster, AL) as lyophilized powders and used
without further purification. Alexa Fluor 568 C5-maleimide
was purchased from Invitrogen (Eugene, OR).

Peptide Synthesis and Purification
Peptides corresponding
to the TM and intracellular JM regions of the FGFR3 (369–407)
for solid-state NMR and FT-IR experiments were synthesized by solid-phase
methods with the following sequence.

RRAGSVYAGILSYG(/R)VGFFL385FIL388VVA(/E)AVTLCRLRSPPKKGLG.
Two arginine residues were added to the N-terminus of the peptide
following the suggestion from You et al. to eliminate complementary electrostatic interactions as a driving
force for dimer formation. The C-terminus was amidated. The synthetic
peptides were purified by reverse phase HPLC on a C4 column with a
gradient of formic acid/1-propanol (4:1) over formic acid/water (2:3). The purity was confirmed with MALDI mass spectrometry
and analytical RP-HPLC.

For fluorescence experiments that focused
on the JM region, peptides
with a longer sequence were synthesized using native chemical ligation. The sequence corresponds to FGFR3(367–422).

DEAGSVYAGILSYGVGFFLFILVVAAVTL-CRLRSPPKKGLGSPTVHKISRFPLKRC.
The ligation site was located between Leu395 and Cys396. Two peptide
fragments, FGFR3(367–395)-thioester and FGFR3(396–422),
were chemically synthesized using solid phase t-Boc and Fmoc chemistry,
respectively. For the C-terminal fragment, a thiazolidine ring was
introduced at the N-terminus to allow specific fluorescence labeling
on a thiol group at the C-terminal end of the fragment. The thiazolidine
ring was opened using methoxyamine to recover the thiol group for
the ligation reaction. For this reaction, the fragment with the TM
sequence was dissolved with n-octyl-β-d-glucoside following the procedure reported previously. The ligation reaction was monitored using RP-HPLC
and SDS-PAGE. The final product was characterized by mass spectrometry
and SDS-PAGE.

For the Trp fluorescence experiment, we chemically
synthesized
the FGFR3(367–422)-Trp sequence with microwave-assisted Fmoc
peptide synthesis using a peptide synthesizer, Liberty Blue (CEM Corporation,
NC, U.S.A.).

Reconstitution of Peptides into Membrane
Bilayers for NMR Experiments
The FGFR3 receptor peptides
were cosolubilized with DMPC, DMPG,
and n-octyl-β-d-glucoside in trifluoroethanol.
The peptide/lipid molar ratio was 1:50; the molar ratio between DMPC/DMPG
was 10:3. The solution was incubated for 90 min at 37 °C, after
which the solvents were removed under a stream of argon gas and then
under vacuum. MES buffer (50 mM MES, 50 mM NaCl, 5 mM DTT, pH 6.2)
was added to the solid from the previous step, and they were mixed
at 37 °C for 6 h. The n-octyl-β-d-glucoside was removed by dialysis. The reconstituted membranes were
pelleted and loaded into NMR rotors.

Fluorescence Spectroscopy
Fluorescence experiments
were carried out on a Hitachi F-2500 fluorescence spectrophotometer.
After the reconstitution, vesicles were formed via extrusion through
a 200 nm polycarbonate filter. POPC and POPS (or otherwise mentioned)
in a ratio of 10:3 were employed for the lipid bilayers in the fluorescence
experiments. The peptide/lipid ratio depended on the fluorescence
probe that we used. The ratio was set to 1:1000 for observing the
fluorescence from Alexa568. For experiments measuring the fluorescence
from tryptophan, the ratio was set to 1:100. The lipid concentration
was 200–250 μM in MOPS buffer (1 mM MOPS, 0.1 M KCl,
pH 7.0). For experiments with PIP2, the PIP2 was introduced into the
membranes by the addition of PIP2 micelles to the vesicle solution. The PIP2 concentration ranged from 0.05–4
μM, which corresponded to the PIP2/peptide ratios of 1:50–2:1.
For the experiments monitoring Alexa568, the excitation wavelength
was 568 nm. To monitor the fluorescense of tryptophan, the excitation
wavelength was 295 nm.

Solid-State NMR Spectroscopy
Solid-state
NMR MAS experiments
were performed on Varian Infinity-plus 500, 600, and 700 spectrometers
operated at 11.74, 14.09, and 16.44 T, respectively (Palo Alto CA).
Broadband triple resonance MAS probes for 3.2 mm and 4.0 mm rotors
were used. For the deuterium-observe experiments, the MAS frequency
was maintained at 5 kHz and a single pulse excitation was employed
with a 5 μs, 90° pulse length, followed by a 10 μs
delay before data acquisition. A total of ∼600 000 transients
were averaged for each spectrum. The probe temperature was maintained
at 25 °C.

Polarized IR Spectroscopy
Polarized
attenuated total
reflection FT-IR spectra were obtained on a Hitachi FT-730 spectrometer.
Membranes containing FGFR3 TM–JM peptides (∼1–2
mg) were layered on a germanium internal reflection element using
a slow flow of nitrogen gas directed at an oblique angle to the IR
plate to form an oriented multilamellar lipid–peptide film.
One thousand scans were acquired and averaged for each sample at a
resolution of 4 cm–1. The absorption of polarized
light by the amide I bond yields the dichroic ratio defined as a ratio
of absorption intensity for parallel, relative to perpendicular, polarized
light. From the dichroic ratio, we estimated the tilt angle of the
TM helix relative to the membrane normal based on the method described
by Smith and co-workers, using a value of 41.8
for angle α between the helix director and the transition-dipole
moment of the amide I vibrational mode. For our ATR FT-IR experiment,
the amount of lipid used per experiment was ∼4 mg. Considering
the area of the ATR plate covered (∼500 mm2), the
films on the plate in our experiments were assumed to be greater than
∼10 μm. For calculating the dichroic ratio, the thick
film limit is applicable. Equations that
we used for the calculation of the dichroic ratios were based on this
assumption.

Results
The JM Sequence of the
TM–JM (G380R) and TM–JM
(A391E) Peptides Is Not Associated with the Membrane Surface
We first show that peptides corresponding to the JM sequence alone
bind to the negatively charged surface of membrane vesicles, and an
increase in the concentration of the highly negatively charged phosphoinositide,
PIP2, leads to the association or aggregation of these peptides on
the membrane surface. The intracellular JM sequence of FGFR3 has four
positively charged residues that would be expected to bind to the
negatively charged surfaces of plasma membranes. Previous studies
by McLaughlin and co-workers showed that
model polylysine peptides with 3 and 5 residues bind to model membranes
having 33% negative charge and 100 mM monovalent salt with free energies
of 3 and 5 kcal/mol. Our system, with 4 positive charges, 23% negatively
charged lipids, and 100 mM monovalent salt is similar. Furthermore,
it was shown that the addition of polyvalent PIP2, but not monovalent
PS lipids, leads to the aggregation of positively charged peptides
on the membrane surface.

Figure A presents the results of the fluorescence experiments
on the intracellular JM sequence with the fluorescence label, Alexa568,
attached to the C-terminus. The peptides were added to large unilamellar
vesicles formed by extrusion and composed of POPC and POPS in a 10:3
molar ratio. PIP2 was incorporated into the preformed vesicles by
being mixed with a solution of PIP2 micelles, and the fluorescence
intensity of the Alexa568 label was measured as a function of the
amount of PIP2 in the bilayer. McLaughlin and co-workers have shown
that PIP2 monomers can be incorporated into the outer leaflet of preformed
vesicles by exposing them to micelles of PIP2; fluorescence correlation spectroscopy measurements showed
that PIP2 diffuses with other lipids in the membrane (giant unilamellar
vesicles) after incorporation.

Comparison of fluorescence spectra of
the wild-type FGFR3 TM–JM
peptide with the G380R and A391E mutants. The influence of PIP2 on
JM–JM interactions was measured for TM–JM sequences
of the isolated JM domain (A) and the TM–JM peptides corresponding
to the wild-type (B), G380R mutant (C), and A391E mutant (D) sequences.
The fluorescence measurements in panels A–D are representative
of three independent reconstitutions.

The fluorescence emission band at 604 nm shows a drop in
intensity
as PIP2 was added to the membranes. We interpret this as the quenching
of the Alexa568 fluorescence as the JM peptides aggregate on the membrane
surface. Similar results were observed for the positively charged
JM peptides corresponding to the Neu receptor.

We next performed similar experiments for TM–JM
peptides
reconstituted into large unilamellar vesicles composed of POPC and
POPS in a 10:3 molar ratio. In the , we show using solid-state NMR that the TM helix
breaks at the TM–JM boundary. The JM region is unstructured.
Figure , panels B–D present the fluorescence
spectra of the TM–JM (WT), TM–JM (G380R), and TM–JM
(A391E) peptides. Figure B shows that the
fluorescence intensity of the TM–JM (WT) peptide decreased
with the addition of PIP2, similar to the JM sequence alone. In contrast,
no significant changes were observed in the fluorescence intensity
of the TM–JM (G380R) and TM–JM (A391E) peptides with
the addition of PIP2, as shown in Figure C,D,
respectively. We attribute the lack of fluorescence changes in the
TM–JM (G380R) and TM–JM (A391E) sequences to a lack
of JM–JM association, which suggests that the JM sequence had
partitioned off of the membrane.

We further confirmed the interaction
of the JM region with the
acidic membrane by tryptophan fluorescence. Binding and insertion
of tryptophan into the hydrophobic membrane results in a blue-shift
of the fluorescence emission band. We chemically synthesized FGFR3
peptides (residues 367–422) that corresponded to the wild-type
sequence, the G380R and A391E mutants, and having a tryptophan residue
at the C-terminus. The peptides were reconstituted into lipid bilayers
composed of POPC/POPS (10:3). Here we set the peptide/lipid ratio
to 1:100 (or even up to 1:50) as opposed to that of 1:1000 for observing
the fluorescence from Alexa568. In our system, the high ratio was
required to overcome the effect of light scattering from the lipid
vesicles. We confirmed that the addition of PIP2 to the system reduces
the fluorescence intensity for the wild-type sequence, whereas PIP2
addition has no effect on the intensity from mutant sequences (data
not shown), which is in agreement with the results of the Alexa568
fluorescence at a 1:1000 molar ratio. Figure  shows the results of the fluorescence measurements from tryptophan
for each sequence. Intensities were normalized to the fluorescence
intensity value measured at the wavelength of the emission maximum.
In the system without PIP2, we observed only a small difference in
the value of λmax. The difference becomes distinct
with the addition of PIP2 to vesicles. The spectrum from the wild-type
sequence was blue-shifted 7 nm relative to that of the mutant sequences.
The results agree with our interpretation of the data in Figure , that the JM region binds to the acidic membrane
in the wild-type sequence and is released from the membrane in the
G380R and A391E mutant sequences.

Comparison of tryptophan fluorescence
spectra of the wild-type
FGFR3 TM–JM peptide with the G380R and A391E mutants. Interaction
between the JM region and the membrane was monitored. Spectra show
the fluorescence from the peptides reconstituted into the membrane
without PIP2 (on the left) and with PIP2 (on the right).

The G380R and A391E Mutations Induce a Change
in Helix Orientation
The fluorescence experiments described
above argue that the Alexa568
and tryptophan labels at the C-terminus of the JM region are in different
environments in the G380R and A391E mutants than in the wild-type
peptide. In this section, we address whether there is a change in
the orientation of the TM portion of the peptide in these mutants
using polarized FT-IR spectroscopy.

The TM–JM (WT), TM–JM
(G380R), and TM–JM (A391E) peptides were reconstituted into
POPC/POPS (10:3) or DMPC/DMPG (10:3) vesicles, and the vesicles were
aligned on an ATR plate for polarized FT-IR measurements. Figure  shows the deconvoluted polarized FT-IR spectra
of these sequences. The peak at 1657 cm–1 corresponds
to the α-helical structure within the TM sequence. The dichroic
ratio of each sequence is also shown in the figure. The values presented
are the average results from multiple measurements (&gt;3). The dichroic
ratios of the TM–JM (G380R) and TM–JM (A391E) peptides
were higher than that of the TM–JM (WT) peptide, suggesting
that the TM helices with the pathogenic mutations are less tilted
than the TM helix of the wild-type peptide. This tendency was observed
for measurements in both POPC/POPS and DMPC/DMPG membranes.

Comparison
of polarized FT-IR spectra of the wild-type FGFR3 TM–JM
peptide with the G380R and A391E mutants. The three TM–JM peptides
were separately reconstituted into POPC/POPS (10:3) (A) or DMPC/DMPG
(10:3) (B) membranes, and FT-IR spectra were obtained with light polarized
parallel (∥) or perpendicular (⊥) to the membrane normal.
Only the amide I region of the IR spectrum is shown for clarity. The
frequency of the amide I band at ∼1657 cm–1 is characteristic of α-helical secondary structure.

We then focused on the wild-type
sequence and examined whether
the orientation of the TM helix affected the release of the JM region
from the membrane. The TM helix tilt was changed by reconstituting
the TM–JM (WT) peptide into lipid bilayers with different thicknesses,
which were varied by using lipids with different acyl chain lengths.
It has been shown that the tilt angle of model TM peptides (WALP and
KALP) decreases as membrane thickness increases due to the hydrophobic
mismatch., In addition, it has been shown that the
tilt angle of the TM helix of the platelet-derived growth factor receptor,
another RTK, decreases as the membrane thickness increases. For these
experiments, the TM–JM (WT) peptide was reconstituted into
different bilayers containing POPC, C18, or C19, respectively. In
each case, POPS (23%) was added to maintain a negatively charged membrane
surface. The dichroic ratio was observed to increase with an increase
in the length of the acyl chain (C18, 2.8; C19, 3.3). The thicknesses
of the lipid bilayers used were expected to be 27 Å for POPC, 29.5 Å for C18, and 30.5 Å for C19. A dichroic ratio of 3.3 corresponds to a helix
tilt angle of ∼20° and a crossing angle between helices
in a dimer of ∼40°, which is a typical value of helices
in a left-handed coiled-coil geometry.

To examine the effect
of the TM helix orientation on the interaction
of the JM sequence with the membrane surface, we performed similar
experiments as described above to determine whether PIP2 affected
the fluorescence intensity of the Alexa probe incorporated at the
C-terminus of the TM–JM (WT) peptide. The results are shown
in Figure . For the POPC vesicles, the fluorescence
intensity decreased upon the addition of PIP2 (Figure A); for the C18 vesicles, the intensity first increased with
the initial addition of PIP2 and then decreased with additional PIP2
(Figure B). The decrease in the intensity
of POPC and C18 vesicles can be attributed to the association of JM
strands and the interactions of the vesicles with PIP2. However, for
the C19 vesicles, the intensity was not responsive to the addition
of PIP2 (Figure C), indicating that no interaction
occurred between the JM region and PIP2 and further suggesting that
the JM sequence was released from the membrane. A simple conclusion
that can be drawn from the polarized FT-IR and fluorescence experiments
is that for FGFR3, the JM region is released from the membrane as
the TM helix orientation is shifted closer to the membrane normal.

Dependence
of JM–JM interactions in the TM–JM peptides
on membrane thickness. The TM–JM peptide in the wild-type sequence
was reconstituted into bilayers containing POPC (A), C18 (B), and
C19 (C) along with 23% POPS. The influence of PIP2 on JM interactions
was measured. The dichroic ratios of POPC, C18, and C19 samples obtained
from polarized FT-IR experiments are also shown.

Deuterium NMR Provides a Probe of Helix Dimerization, Orientation,
and Motion
The FT-IR spectra reveal a distinct change in
helix tilt between the TM–JM peptides corresponding to the
inactive wild-type and active mutant sequences. Hristova and co-workers, have shown that the TM sequences of the wild-type, G380R, and A391E
peptides of FGFR3 have the potential to dimerize in membrane bilayers.
Comparison of dimerization between the wild-type and G380R peptides
showed that the G380R mutation did not alter the monomer–dimer
equilibrium in lipid bilayers. In contrast,
the comparison of the wild-type peptide and the A391E mutant peptide
showed that the A391E mutation stabilizes the TM dimer.

Deuterium MAS NMR spectroscopy provides
a simple method to probe helix dimerization, orientation, and motion. The intensities of the spinning side bands in
the deuterium MAS spectrum are sensitive to molecular motion. Leucine,
with a single deuterated methyl group at the end of its long side
chain, is highly mobile in TM helices when facing the surrounding
lipids and is relatively more constrained when packed within a dimer
interface, suggesting its use as a probe of the interface for interacting
TM helices. We used deuterium NMR spectroscopy here to probe whether
the wild-type peptide sequence exhibits differences compared to the
G380R and A391E peptides, but that G380R and A391E behave in a similar
fashion, as observed by fluorescence and FT-IR spectroscopy.

Deuterated leucine was introduced to positions 385 and 388 of the
TM–JM sequences of the wild-type, G380R, and A391E peptides.
These leucines are in the middle of the TM domain. The spectra are
shown in Figure . Distinct differences can
be observed between the spectra of Leu385 and Leu388 in the TM–JM
(WT) peptides. The line shape of Leu385 is broader than that of Leu388,
which corresponds to a decrease in mobility of the Leu385 side chain.
(Differences in the breadth of the line shape are reflected, for example,
in the intensity of the ±2 spinning side bands.) The line shape
of Leu385 is typical of that observed when the labeled leucine is
in a dimer interface., In contrast, the ±2 sidebands
in the spectrum of Leu388 are much less intense than the ±1 side
bands, indicating that Leu388 is more mobile, which is consistent
with an orientation facing the lipids. Together, these two spectra
suggest that the wild-type TM–JM peptides dimerize with an
interface mediated by S378-G382-L385. The S378-G382 interface is consistent
with the small amino acid motif originally identified in the N-termini
of RTKs by Sternberg and Gullick. The
dimer interface that we predict here agrees with the one obtained
from molecular dynamics simulations by Sansom and co-workers on FGFR3.

Deuterium MAS spectra of 5,5,5–2H Leu385 and Leu388
incorporated
to the wild-type, G380R, and A391E FGFR3 TM–JM peptides. Wild-type
(top), G380R (middle), and A391E (bottom) peptides with deuterium
labeling at Leu385 (left column) and Leu388 (right column) were reconstituted into DMPC:DMPG vesicles. The spectra were obtained
at 25 °C with a MAS frequency of 5 kHz. The MAS side bands are
labeled as ±1, ± 2, ± 3, etc. from the center band
at a frequency of 0 kHz. The spacing between side bands corresponds
to the MAS frequency of 5 kHz.

For A391E, little difference was observed between the spectra
from
Leu385 and Leu388. However, a comparison of the spectrum of Leu388
with that of the wild-type shows that the difference in intensities
between ±1 and ±2 spinning sidebands is smaller for the
A391E peptide. The line shape of Leu388 from the A391E peptide is
broader than the one from the wild-type peptide. Even considering
that TM helices may obtain some mobility from rotational diffusion
due to the JM release, this suggests that the mobility of the side
chain of Leu388 on the A391E peptide is relatively more restricted
than the one on the wild-type. In contrast, the side chain of Leu385
exhibits increased mobility in the A391E mutant. These results imply
that the A391E mutation induces a change in the dimer interface.

For the G380R peptide, the line shapes from Leu385 and Leu388 are
similar, suggesting that both side chains are mobile. The increased
mobility can be caused either by increased rotational diffusion induced
by the JM release from the membrane or by the reorientation of TM
helices or both.

Discussion
The FGFR3 is similar
to the ErbB2 or Neu receptor in that the mutation
of specific hydrophobic residues in the TM sequence to glutamate or
arginine can result in receptor activation. In the case of the Neu
receptor, the V664E mutation shifts the monomer–dimer equilibrium
toward the dimeric state, and the specific orientation of the helices
in the receptor dimer facilitates the partitioning of the positively
charged JM sequence from the membrane surface. In the FGFR3, there are two clinically important mutations
(G380R and A391E) that lead to receptor activation. The extensive
studies of Hristova and co-workers have indicated that these mutations
influence TM helix interactions in FGFR3. In fact, the A391E mutation
in FGFR3 appears analogous to the V664E mutation in the Neu receptor
in that both strengthen the association of the helices in a specific
active orientation. The major finding in our current studies is that
these mutations lead to similar changes in the orientation of the
TM helices and to the spectral changes on probes attached to the JM
domain. We interpret these changes as being due to the partitioning
of the JM region from the membrane surface.

The intracellular
JM region has long been recognized as an important
regulatory site in RTKs. Intracellular
JM sequences are often highly positively charged. The positive charge
not only serves as the stop sequence for the insertion of TM helices
into cell membranes but it also terminates the TM helix. McLaughlin
and others,, have shown that such highly positively charged sequences can bind
to negatively charged membrane surfaces and serve to sequester the
highly negatively charged phosphoinositide, PIP2. While PIP2 can act
as a second messenger in signal transduction, and has been associated
with EGFR activity, we are simply using
PIP2 in the current studies as a way to measure membrane association
of the JM region of the FGFR3. Another regulatory mechanism involving
the JM region of RTKs is the interaction with calcium calmodulin,
which is known to bind to the JM region of the EGFR. Calcium calmodulin interacts with the JM region of the
EGFR and facilitates its dissociation from the membrane, which in
turn increases the transphosphorylation of its intracellular domain. Phosphorylation typically occurs within the
activation loop or the C-terminus of the kinase domain; however, it
can also occur within the intracellular JM region itself. The studies
presented here and previously provide
insight into how the JM region can function in a regulatory role.

For the FGFR subfamily, there is only limited structural information
regarding how the extracellular domain is coupled to the intracellular
kinase domain. Here, we have characterized the intracellular JM region
of FGFR3 in order to see if there are parallels with the ErbB receptor
subfamily. The JM region from FGFR3 binds to the acidic membrane containing
PIP2. Importantly, this region is released from the membrane with
an activating mutation, G380R or A391E, in the TM sequence.

The positively charged sequence of the JM region suggests that
electrostatic interactions are essential for both membrane binding
and release. In the ErbB system, we modulated the helix orientation
with the V664E mutation and with engineered dimers. We assumed that in the G380R and A391E peptides, the TM
and JM regions are in active configurations. As mentioned above, the
dimerization propensity differs between these mutant sequences,, and consequently, the mechanism for activity enhancement without
ligand binding cannot be fully explained on the basis of dimerization
alone. It is possible that there are two different changes in the
TM region (induced by the two different activating mutations) that
lead to similar changes on the intracellular side of membrane. Here
we observed a decrease in the helix tilt angle relative to the membrane
normal (i.e., the helices “stand up” in the membrane)
as a common feature for these two mutant sequences. Furthermore, for
the wild-type sequence, we found that the decrease of the TM helix
tilt allows the release of the JM region from the membrane. On the
basis of similar observations regarding the TM helix tilt and the
JM release in the two FGFR3 mutant peptides, we propose that the orientation
of the TM helices in active full-length receptor dimers contributes
to the release of the JM region, allowing asymmetric interactions
to occur between intracellular kinase domains.

The mechanism
for release of the JM region from the membrane has
still not been elucidated. One important consideration is whether
the JM sequence is simply a helical extension of the TM helix or the
secondary structure breaks at the TM–JM boundary and the JM
sequence is unstructured. Preliminary solid-state NMR experiments
on peptides containing 1-13C labeled amino acids show that
the TM helix breaks at the TM–JM boundary and suggest that
the JM region is unstructured (). A similar observation was made for the Neu receptor peptides.
In the wild-type peptides (and for the isolated JM peptides), the
unstructured, positively charged JM sequence interacts electrostatically
with the negatively charged membrane surface., We propose that as the TM helices become less tilted in the membrane,
or as dimerization propensity is increased with the A391E mutation, the TM helices are brought together on the C-terminal
side of the membrane. This change would bring the positively charged
ends of the helices into closer proximity and result in repulsion
between the JM positive charges. We suggest that this might facilitate
the release of the JM region from the membrane.

The deuterium
NMR results suggest that Leu385 lies in the dimer
interface of the wild-type receptor. This orientation is consistent
with the presence of the S378-G382 sequence at the N-terminus of the
TM helix (Figure ). An SxxxA motif has been
shown to mediate the dimerization of the TM region of ErbB2, while both GxxxG and SxxxS sequences have been implicated
in TM dimerization. The dimer interface that we predicted agrees with
the one obtained for FGFR3 by Sansom and co-workers using molecular
dynamics. However, the result does not
agree with the interface observed in the high-resolution structure
reported by Bocharov et al., rather,
it corresponds to the activated configuration that they proposed.
The difference from our structure may arise from their use of detergent
micelles as a membrane-mimicking media. Micelles and bilayers may
impose different constraints on the tilt angles of the interacting
helices and hence the lowest energy interface.

On the basis
of our findings, together with the discussion above,
Figure  presents a schematic model for the
activation of FGFR3. Focusing on the TM–JM region, we propose
that a change in orientation or tilt angle of the TM helices in the
dimer results in the release of the JM region from the membrane surface.
A similar mechanism has been shown for the thrombopoietin receptor,
where a five residue sequence at the intracellular JM boundary modulates
the helix angle and receptor dimerization. This suggests that generally the structure and interactions of TM
helices and their adjacent intracellular JM sequences may be coupled
and that this coupling may be a target of regulation of receptor activity.

Schematic
of TM–JM coupling in FGFR3. The isolated TM–JM
peptides corresponding to FGFR3 have a propensity to form dimers in
membrane bilayers. The tilt angle of
the helices in the wild-type receptor is estimated from the polarized
IR experiments to be ∼40°. The positively charged JM regions
associate with the membrane surface. The incorporation of PIP2 leads
to the aggregation of the JM domains and the quenching of the fluorescence
of the Alexa label attached to the C-terminus of the JM sequence.
The incorporation of the activating G380R and A391E mutations changes
the helix orientation and leads to a loss of quenching. We propose
that the loss of quenching results from a partitioning of the JM sequence
from the membrane surface. The A391E mutation on the C-terminal side
of the TM domain increases dimerization and may bring the helices together on the C-terminal side of the
membrane, which in turn brings the positively charged ends into closer
proximity.

Supporting Information Available
Solid-state NMR 13C spectra for the
secondary structure of the FGFR3 TM–JM region.
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500327q_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
H.T. performed
experiments, interpreted data, and contributed to writing the paper;
Y.F. performed experiments and interpreted data; R.Y. and H.H. synthesized
peptides; S.A. and S.O.S. analyzed data and helped write the manuscript;
and T.S. is the project leader, designed experiments, performed experiments,
and wrote the manuscript.

This work was
supported by a JSPS KAKENHI Grant-in-Aid for Young Scientists (Grant
No. 24687013) to T.S., by the Sumitomo Foundation to T.S., and by
a grant from the National Institutes of Health (Grant No. GM46732)
to S.O.S. This work was also supported by the Platform for Drug Discovery,
Informatics, and Structural Life Science; a project funded through
the Japanese Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and
Technology. H.T. was a research fellow of the Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations:
ATRattenuated total reflection

C181,2-dioctadecanoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine

C191,2-dinonadecanoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine

DMPC1,2-dimyristoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine

DMPG1,2-dimyristoyl-sn-glycero-3-[phospho-rac-(1-glycerol)]

EGFRepidermal growth
factor receptor

FGFRfibroblast growth factor receptor

FT-IRFourier transform–infrared spectroscopy

JMjuxtamembrane

MALDImatrix-assisted
laser desorption ionization

MASmagic angle spinning

NMRnuclear magnetic resonance

PIP2phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate

POPC1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine

POPS1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-l-serine

PSphospho-l-serine

RP-HPLCreversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography

RTKreceptor tyrosine kinase

SDS-PAGEsodium dodecyl
sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis

TMtransmembrane

