Icosahedral
virus capsid assembly
is a highly regulated, efficient process in which tens to hundreds
of capsid proteins form a stable virus shell. During the virus life
cycle, capsid assembly has to be regulated to ensure correct packaging
and release of the viral genome. Newly formed capsids must be stable
to withstand the extracellular environment. Capsids also must be unstable
enough to allow disassembly, to release the viral genome.

One
mechanism regulating virus capsid assembly is allosteric activation,
described as dynamic or conformational changes that switch the capsid
protein from assembly inactive to assembly active states. Allosteric
changes during assembly help to package the right nucleic acid to
define the nucleation step and contribute to an induced fit mechanism
for elongation. Nucleation and induced fit both minimize the accumulation
of intermediates.−

Allosteric regulation, mediated by binding
of nucleic acid to the
capsid protein, has been observed in retroviruses and bacteriophage
MS2.,, Also, extensive
studies of the hepatitis B virus (HBV) capsid protein indicate allosteric
changes during assembly, independent of nucleic acid binding. Assembly
studies show that zinc ions induce a conformational change to the
HBV capsid protein dimer that alters its assembly behavior. Additionally, X-ray crystallography revealed
structural differences between free HBV dimers and dimers in capsids.,

The HBV capsid is formed from 120 core protein homodimers
that
are arranged with T = 4 icosahedral symmetry. A small
portion of the HBV capsids have T = 3 icosahedral
symmetry and consist of 90 homodimers. The full-length core protein has 183 amino acids and is comprised
of an assembly domain (amino acids 1–149) and a nucleic acid-binding
domain (amino acids 150–183). The
assembly domain, termed Cp149 in this paper, can be expressed in Escherichia coli and assembles spontaneously in response
to an increase in ionic strength. Cp149
thereby forms particles that are morphologically indistinguishable
from capsids isolated from cell cultures.,

In vitro capsid assembly of HBV has been
well-characterized.
Simulations and light scattering experiments have shown that the assembly
of large populations of particles displays sigmoidal kinetics.− Assembly for each capsid starts with nucleation that is followed
by elongation and growth involving the addition of free dimer subunits.
Because observations of in vitro assembly reactions
typically are based on very large ensembles of molecules, interpretation
of assembly kinetics requires particular care. For example, the initial
lag phase during assembly kinetics is the time to establish a steady
stream of intermediates.,

HBV capsid assembly
is defined by multiple weak interdimer contact
energies [approximately 3–5 kcal/mol (5–8 kT)]. However,
a T = 4 HBV capsid has 240 interdimer contacts. In
comparison, association energies found in antibody–protein
interactions were approximately 11–15 kcal/mol or 15–25
kT.,

In this study, we investigated how
changes at the intradimer interface,
the monomer–monomer contact region, propagate to the interdimer
interface to influence HBV core protein assembly and capsid stability.
We utilized a pair of cysteine residues located at position 61 that
can form an intradimer disulfide bond. Cysteine 61 is conserved throughout
all mammalian HBV core proteins (Figure ).
The C61–C61 disulfide has been shown to form within HBV particles
assembled from full-length core protein expressed in E. coli., However, recent reports found no disulfide
in freshly purified RNA-filled capsids, indicating oxidation of capsids
formed by full-length protein might be slower than that in empty capsids
formed by Cp149, and there are no data for mature DNA-filled capsids. We observed that formation of the C61–C61
disulfide bond alters capsid assembly and stability. Free dimers oxidized
slowly compared to dimer within capsid, which led us to hypothesize
that the oxidized form would favor capsid assembly. However, oxidized
Cp149 dimers assemble slowly to form capsids that are less stable
than reduced capsids. We thereby show that changes at the intradimer
interface are an important regulator of assembly. However, our results
also suggest that disulfide bond formation during the HBV life cycle
may promote the disassembly required to release the viral genetic
material.

(a) Sequence alignment of HBV core protein sequences from human
HBV genotypes (A–D and F–H) and hepadnaviruses isolated
from naturally infected ground squirrel, woodchuck, woolly monkey,
and chimpanzee. Residue C61 is completely conserved. (b) Ribbon representation
of the Cp149 dimer (Protein Data Bank entry 1QGT). Monomers are colored
light and dark blue. Residues C61 (red), I97 (orange), and L42 (green)
are shown as spheres. C61 forms a disulfide across the intradimer
interface.

Materials and Methods
Sequence Alignment
Sequences obtained from the National
Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Protein Data Bank were
aligned using CLUSTAWL.

Cp149red Sample Preparation
Cp149
was expressed in E. coli using a pET11-based vector.
Cp149 dimers were purified
as previously described. Aliquots of
frozen Cp149 were dialyzed into 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5) prior to use.

Oxidation Rate of Dimer and Capsid
Cp149red (50 μM)
was incubated with and without the addition of 300 mM NaCl at 37 °C
for up to 7 days. Capsid and dimer fractions were incubated with 250
mM iodoacetamide to block free thiols. Dimers containing the C61–C61
disulfide bond were separated from monomers using nonreducing SDS–PAGE.

Oxidation of Cp149 Dimer and Re-reduction
Cp149red
(50 μM) was assembled by addition of 200 mM NaCl and incubation
at 37 °C until capsids were fully oxidized. Capsids were purified
by size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) and disassembled by addition
of 3 M urea for 1.5 h at 4 °C. Oxidized dimers were dialyzed
into 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5) for further experiments. For re-reduction,
10 μM Cp149ox was incubated with 400 mM DTT at 4 °C for
24 h and dialyzed for 2 h into 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5) to remove excess
DTT. The oxidation state of the re-reduced Cp149 was determined using
nonreducing SDS–PAGE.

Size-Exclusion Chromatography (SEC)
SEC experiments
were performed using a 10/300 Superose 6 column (GE Healthcare) mounted
on an HPLC system (Shimadzu) with a temperature-controlled autosampler.
For thermodynamic experiments, varying concentrations of Cp149ox were
assembled by addition of NaCl (to a final concentration of 300 mM)
at 23–40 °C for 24 h. Dimer and capsid fractions were
separated and quantified by SEC using 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5) and 300
mM NaCl as elution buffer. Long-term kinetic experiments were conducted
at 23 °C. Assembly of 1.8 mL of 7 μM Cp149red, Cp149ox,
Cp149-C61S, and re-reduced Cp149ox protein was initiated by the addition
of 300 mM NaCl. Samples were analyzed hourly by SEC using 50 mM HEPES
(pH 7.5) and 300 mM NaCl as elution buffer. The concentrations of
dimer and capsid fractions for all assembly reactions were determined
by integrating the area under the dimer and capsid peaks, determined
by SEC. The area of the peaks could then be compared to the initial
protein concentration.

Analysis of Thermodynamic Data
Thermodynamic
analysis
was performed as described in detail in ref ().

Sucrose Gradient Centrifugation
Capsid assembly of
30 μM Cp149red or Cp149ox was induced by the addition of 300
mM NaCl and the sample incubated for 24 h at 23 °C; 300 μL
of the assembly reaction mixture was loaded onto a 10 to 40% (w/v)
continuous sucrose gradient and centrifuged for 4 h at 20 °C
and 200000g.

Transmission Electron Microscopy
Samples extracted
from sucrose gradients were applied to glow-discharged carbon copper
grids and stained with 2% uranyl acetate. Micrographs were recorded
at a nominal magnification of 25000× using a JEOL-1010 transmission
electron microscope equipped with a 4K × 4K charge-coupled device
(CCD) camera.

Light Scattering Experiments
Light
scattering experiments
were performed using a stopped-flow spectrometer (KinTek SF-300X).
Scattered light was detected at 90° using an excitation wavelength
of 320 nm. Assembly of increasing concentrations of Cp149red and Cp149ox
was initiated at 37 °C by addition of NaCl to a final concentration
at 600 mM.

Lag times were determined as described by Hagan et
al. The elongation rate constant was
calculated using eq , adapted from ref (), under the assumption fc0 ≫ belong.where f is the elongation
rate constant, c0 is the total protein
concentration, belong is the dissociation
rate constant, tlag is the lag time, telong is the mean elongation time, and nelong is the number of steps to complete a nucleated
capsid. For 120 dimer HBV with a three-dimer nucleus, nelong = 117.

Urea Disassembly
Capsid assembly
of varying percentages
of Cp149-C61S and Cp149ox at a total concentration of 20 μM
was initiated by the addition of 300 mM NaCl and the sample equilibrated
for 24 h at 23 °C. Prior to dissociation, capsids were purified
using SEC. To 2.5 μM capsid, measured in dimer concentration,
urea was added to a final concentration of 0–4 M. Disassembly
was analyzed by SEC. Urea was freshly prepared in 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH
7.5) and 300 mM NaCl to scavenge cyanide from decomposing urea.

Results
Dimer within Capsid Oxidizes
Relatively Rapidly
Disulfide
bond stability in proteins is highly dependent on the conformation
and environment of the cysteine residues. The intradimer interface
of the HBV dimer displays significant structural differences between
free dimers and dimers within capsids.,, It is therefore a marker of structural and dynamic
changes of the intradimer interface.

An indication of the propensity
of the C61–C61 disulfide to oxidize was the rate of disulfide
bond formation. The oxidation rates of Cp149 dimer and capsid were
measured by incubating samples for various times, quenching aliquots
with iodoacetamide, and separating disulfide-cross-linked dimers from
monomers by nonreducing SDS–PAGE. Iodoacetamide covalently
reacts with cysteines to block further disulfide bond formation. Oxidized
Cp149 dimer and iodoacetamide-passivated monomer were observed as
bands with molecular masses of 34 and 17 kDa, respectively. Our kinetic
data fit the expected first-order rate law. For capsids, the t1/2 of oxidation was 53 h (Figure a). Free dimers, however, oxidized ∼7 times slower
with an oxidation half-life of 392 h. This suggests that dimers within
capsids adopt a conformation that favors the formation of a disulfide
bond. On the basis of this observation, we developed a working hypothesis
that oxidized dimer represents an assembly active conformation that
would assemble into stable capsids more readily than reduced dimer.

Oxidation
paradox, in which capsids favor disulfide formation,
whereas the disulfide disfavors capsid assembly. (a) Representative
experiment showing the oxidation rates of free dimer and capsids at
37 °C. The C61–C61 disulfide bond formed 7.4 times faster
in Cp149 dimers within capsids than in free Cp149 dimers. Oxidation
states of Cp149 capsid dimer were determined by nonreducing SDS–PAGE
(panel b inset). Data were fit to a first-order rate law. A baseline
level of ∼5% oxidation in dimer and capsid fractions was adjusted
to zero to ensure accurate curve fitting. (b) Assembly of capsids,
quantified by SEC at 23 °C, was monitored over a 24 h time period.
Cp149ox assembled into less capsid than Cp149red. Samples of reduced
Cp149 (Cp149red), fully oxidized Cp149 (Cp149ox), Cp149 with C61 mutated
to serine (Cp149-C61S), and partially re-reduced Cp149 (Cp149re-red)
were at a dimer concentration of 7 μM. The inset shows nonreducing
SDS–PAGE of Cp149red (red), Cp149ox (ox), and Cp149re-red (re-red).
(c) Representative series of co-assembly reactions of Cp149-C61S with
varying percentages of Cp149ox were quantified by SEC at 23 °C.
Oxidized protein decreased the yield of capsid. The total dimer concentration
was 10 μM. Assembly for panels b and c was induced by 300 mM
NaCl at 23 °C.

Efforts to measure stability
of the C61–C61 disulfide bond
in capsid and free dimer by equilibration at a given redox potential
or by measuring the rate of reduction were frustrated. Even with extremely high concentrations of up
to 1 M β-mercaptoethanol, glutathione, or tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine,
little to no reduction of oxidized Cp149 was observed. The addition
of 400 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) led to an approximately 20% reduction
of Cp149 after incubation for 48 h (Figure b, inset, right lane). The limited reduction may be related to the
limited accessibility of the disulfide bond to reducing agents, the
intrinsic stability of the disulfide to a given redox potential, and the fact that DTT itself was subject to
air oxidation under the conditions used in this experiment.

Oxidized
Dimer Assembled into Small Amounts of Capsids
To test the
hypothesis that the C61–C61 disulfide locked the
dimer in an assembly active state, we investigated the assembly behavior
of oxidized protein. Freshly purified Cp149, here called Cp149red
(Figure b, inset, left lane), is mainly in
the reduced form, lacking the intradimer C61–C61 disulfide.
To generate fully oxidized dimer, Cp149 was assembled into capsids
and incubated until the C61 cysteines were fully oxidized. Capsids
were then disassembled to obtain fully oxidized Cp149 dimers, here
called Cp149ox (Figure b, inset, middle lane).
An important control for these experiments was Cp149-C61S, a mutant
dimer that lacks the C61 cysteines and thus resembles dimer that is
100% reduced.

On the basis of the facility of C61–C61
disulfide formation in capsids, we predicted that Cp149ox would assemble
faster and yield more capsid than Cp149red. However, results from
assembly studies ran contrary to this prediction. We investigated
the long-term kinetics of Cp149ox, in 1 h increments, over 24 h at
23 °C (Figure b). At most, 2% of the
7 μM Cp149ox dimer assembled into capsids. In comparison, 7
μM Cp149red yielded ∼33% capsid, while Cp149-C61S assembled
at an intermediate rate and yielded 16% capsids.

Capsid assembly
can be described with good approximation by the
law of mass action. When the free dimer concentration is increased
during assembly, little to no capsid assembly is observed until the
total dimer concentration exceeds a pseudocritical concentration. Above this pseudocritical concentration, almost
all additional free dimer assembled into capsid, leaving a nearly
constant concentration of free dimer (Figure a). The pseudocritical concentration can be estimated from the amounts
of assembled capsid and the corresponding amounts of free dimer at
the 21 h time point. At 23 °C and 300 mM NaCl, these values are
4.7 μM Cp149red and 5.9 μM Cp149-C61S. At an initial protein
concentration of 7 μM, Cp149ox was below its pseudocritical
concentration, resulting in extremely small amounts of assembled capsids
(Figure b).

Assembly of Cp149ox displays a dimer–dimer
contact energy
that is weaker than that of Cp149red. (a) Assembly under equilibrium
conditions that included increasing concentrations of Cp149ox was
induced by addition of 300 mM NaCl at 37 °C. A pseudocritical
concentration of 4.0 ± 0.2 μM was observed. Dimer and capsid
fractions were quantified by SEC and plotted as dimer concentration.
(b) van’t Hoff plot for the assembly of Cp149ox. The ln Kcontact for 23 °C (□) was excluded
from analysis of the van’t Hoff plot because the assembly reaction
of Cp149ox was not fully equilibrated at this temperature.

We hypothesize that these differences in assembly
can be attributed
to changes at the intradimer interface that are located around residue
61. Upon comparison of C61S and Cp149red, replacement of cysteine
with the more hydrophilic serine very likely perturbs some interactions
at the intradimer interface. Similarly, oxidation of the C61–C61
disulfide decreases the degree of freedom of the intradimer interface.
Similar effects have been observed upon mutation of residue F97 (strain
ayw, adyw) or I97 (strain adr, adw) (Figure b) to leucine. Mutation of F97 or I97 to leucine causes secretion
of mainly immature virions in cell culture and resulted in increased
assembly kinetics in vitro.−

We confirmed
that assembly activity of Cp149ox could be restored
by re-reduction of Cp149ox. Only ∼20% of Cp149ox could be reduced
in the presence of high concentrations of reducing DTT after incubation
for 48 h (Figure b, inset, right lane). Partial
re-reduction partially restored assembly of Cp149ox (Figure b). Re-reduced dimer assembled into a total of 7%
capsid over the experimental time period, indicating that the pseudocritical
concentration of assembly had decreased to 6.5 μM.

To
further evaluate the assembly of Cp149ox, we tested co-assembly
of Cp149ox with Cp149-C61S. We assembled increasing concentrations
of Cp149ox with Cp149-C61S at room temperature for at least 24 h to
approach equilibrium. Co-assembly of Cp149ox with Cp149-C61S decreased
the yield of capsid in a dose-dependent manner (Figure c). These results indicated that Cp149ox does not, as suggested
by the propensity of capsids to enhance oxidation, promote capsid
formation but is unfavorable for capsid assembly.

Cp149ox Displays
a Weaker Dimer–Dimer Contact Energy
Than Cp149red
To quantify the assembly properties of Cp149ox
and define the basis of the decreased level of assembly, we determined
the thermodynamics of Cp149ox assembly under equilibrium conditions.
Shown in Figure a are the 24 h concentrations
for capsid and dimer in terms of dimer concentrations for assembly
reactions at 37 °C.

As described above, capsid assembly
starts when the free dimer concentration exceeds a pseudocritical
concentration, also known as KDapp, the
apparent dissociation constant. KDapp is
evident as the concentration of free dimer and also as the x-intercept of the capsid concentration. During assembly
of increasing concentrations of dimer, the free/unassembled dimer
concentrations fit a linear regression with a slope of zero, indicating
the assembly reaction of Cp149ox was very close to equilibrium within
24 h (Figure a).

The observed KDapp of Cp149ox
at 300
mM NaCl and 37 °C was 4.0 ± 0.2 μM, which is significantly
higher than the KDapp for Cp149red of
1.4 μM determined under the same assembly conditions. Thus, Cp149ox forms dimer–dimer interactions
weaker than those of Cp149red at 37 °C. To define the enthalpy,
ΔH, and entropy, ΔS,
of the pairwise dimer–dimer contact energy, ΔGcontact, we used a van’t Hoff analysis
(Figure b). The nearly linear temperature
dependence seen in the van’t Hoff plot indicates that heat
capacity-dependent curvature is near zero. We therefore fit the data
to a straight line and estimated the enthalpy as a temperature-independent
value.

The thermodynamic parameters of assembly for Cp149ox
differed markedly
from those of Cp149red. Cp149ox, at 37 °C, had a markedly weaker
ΔGcontact of −3.6 ±
0.01 kcal/mol compared to that of Cp149red (−4.1 kcal/mol)
(Table ). In
virus capsids, even small changes in ΔGcontact can drastically change the overall capsid stability
because of the large number of pairwise subunit interactions within
a capsid, 240 of them for HBV. Our calculations for ΔGcontact are based on the formation of only T = 4 particles. Accounting for the varying percentage of T = 3 particles changes ΔGcontact by &lt;0.01 kcal/mol, which is below the error of our measurements.
Cp149ox and Cp149red showed strikingly different compensating changes
in the values for the enthalpy and entropy of assembly. ΔH and ΔS for assembly of Cp149ox
were 1.8 kcal/mol and 17.5 cal mol–1 K–1, respectively. In comparison, Cp149red had a ΔH of 4.3 kcal/mol and a ΔS of 27 cal mol–1 K–1 (from ref ()) (Table ).

Thermodynamic Parameters of Cp149ox
and Cp149red Assembly at 300 mM NaCl and 37 °C
 	Cp149ox	Cp149red	
ΔH (kcal/mol)	1.8	4.3	
ΔS (cal mol–1 K–1)	17.5	27	
ΔST (kcal/mol)	5.4	8.4 ± 0.6	
ΔG (kcal/mol)	–3.6 ± 0.01	–4.1	
KDapp (μM) at 37 °C	4 ± 0.2	1.4	
For
Cp149red, values of ΔH and ΔS were taken from Table 1
of ref () and ΔG was calculated from ΔH and ΔS.

For both reduced
and oxidized Cp149, HBV capsid assembly is an
entropically driven process. If assembly
were based on rigid subunits associating, values of ΔH and ΔS would be expected to correlate
with the amount of buried hydrophobic surface area and the amount
of replaced bulk water. However, capsids of both Cp149ox and Cp149red
have similar morphologies and thus similar amounts of buried interdimer
surface. Therefore, the large differences in the values of enthalpy
and entropy for Cp149red and Cp149ox must be related, at least in
part, to the conformational changes in the free dimer constrained
by the C61–C61 disulfide. These observations agree with the
data in Figure c showing Cp149ox formed small
amounts of capsid and inhibited capsid assembly during co-assembly
with Cp149-C61S.

Cp149ox Favors the Formation of T = 3 Particles
To further investigate how changes at the
intradimer interface
affect assembly, we investigated the morphology of the assembly products
of Cp149ox. We subjected assembly reactions of Cp149ox and Cp149red
to sucrose gradient centrifugation. Cp149ox assembled into ∼40%
more T = 3 particles than Cp149red (Figure a). In contrast, approximately 90–95% of
Cp149red capsids had a T = 4 morphology. Notably,
there was no evidence of intermediates or misassembled complexes in
either assembly reaction mixture, which would show up as cloudiness
in the gradient. The absence of intermediates was also confirmed by
SEC, where the capsid peak migrated after the void volume. In comparison,
large amounts of intermediates can be observed during drug-induced
kinetic traps. Particles extracted from
the upper and lower bands of the sucrose gradient were investigated
by TEM and had diameters of 26 and 30 nm, respectively (Figure b,c). These capsids were indistinguishable from
particles formed by Cp149red previously investigated.

Oxidation changed the relative proportion of T = 3 capsids. (a) Sucrose gradient centrifugation showed Cp149ox
assembled into a proportion of T = 3 particles higher
than that of Cp149red. (b) Negatively stained electron micrograph
of T = 4 sized particles, with a diameter of 30 nm extracted from the lower band of the Cp149ox
sucrose gradient. (c) Negatively stained electron micrograph of T = 3 particles, displaying a diameter of 26 nm extracted from the upper band of the Cp149ox
sucrose gradient.

These results indicated
that the oxidation state of the dimer affects
the quaternary structure of the capsids. We can thereby assume that
formation of the disulfide affects the geometry of the dimer molecule,
disfavoring capsid formation overall but increasing the relative preference
for T = 3 capsids (this latter point may have its
basis in kinetics or thermodynamics).

Cp149ox Assembles More
Slowly Than Cp149red
To provide
a complete picture of how C61 oxidation affects the energetics of
capsid assembly, we investigated the assembly kinetics of Cp149ox.
In particular, a difference in elongation rates would indicate whether
Cp149red and Cp149ox had to overcome different energetic barriers
to participate in assembly. As assembly reactions of Cp149ox did not
produce large fractions of intermediates (Figure ), the light scattering signal corresponds well to the amount
of capsid formed in solution. Interpretation of the kinetics for assembly
of a large number of capsids is distinctly different from interpretation
of kinetics for forming a single crystal. For capsid assembly, the lag phase corresponds to formation of a
steady state of intermediates from which we can estimate the average
rate for elongation steps.

We chose
assembly conditions that included a high salt concentration (600 mM
NaCl) and an increased temperature (37 °C) to facilitate comparison
of the Cp149ox and Cp149red assembly reactions. At corresponding initial
protein concentrations, Cp149ox yielded only ∼40% the amount
of capsid that Cp149red formed (Figure a,b).
The early time points of the assembly kinetics revealed a significant
difference in the duration of the lag phases between Cp149ox and Cp149red.
As described by Hagan et al., the lag time of an assembly reaction
can be directly related to the time to complete an individual capsid. From this information, we can estimate the average
rate for the elongation steps. We measured the lag times, as described
by Hagan et al., by extrapolating the steepest part of the assembly
curve to the baseline using a linear regression. To work with the
best signal, we only used the lag phases for reactions of 6–12.5
μM Cp149ox and 3.6–13 μM Cp149red. Lag times were
plotted against the inverse of the total protein concentration to
obtain the elongation rate constants (eq )
(Figure b, inset). To simplify our calculations,
we assumed that Cp149red and Cp149ox assembled entirely into T = 4 particles. Performing the calculation for the formation
of only T = 3 particles only slightly changed the
value for the elongation rate. The calculated elongation rate constants
revealed that Cp149ox assembled 1.7 times slower than Cp149red (Figure b, inset).

Light scattering of assembly reactions showed
Cp149ox assembled
slower and into less capsid than Cp149red. Increasing concentrations
of (a) Cp149red and (b) Cp149ox were induced to assemble with NaCl
at a final concentration of 600 mM at 37 °C. Assembly traces
are averages of three experiments. Total protein concentrations are
noted at the right end of assembly traces. The inset shows lag times
of the assembly reactions, determined from light scattering traces,
for Cp149red and Cp149ox, plotted vs the inverse of the total protein
concentration.

Capsids from Cp149ox Are
Less Stable to Treatment with Urea
Than Capsids from Reduced Dimer
To confirm the observation
based on assembly that Cp149ox capsids were less stable than capsids
from Cp149red, we investigated capsid stability by urea-induced disassembly.
Urea can induce HBV capsid dissociation without dimer unfolding. Importantly, urea does not affect ionic strength,
which modulates capsid stability. Capsids assembled from Cp149ox and
Cp149-C61S were incubated for 24 h with varying concentrations of
urea and the disassembly products analyzed by SEC. The disassembly
curves displayed a sigmoidal shape consistent with a two-state reaction
(Figure ) as described previously. Capsids formed entirely by Cp149-C61S appeared
to be the most stable. HBV displays a large hysteresis to disassembly. We therefore did not quantify the free dimer–dimer
contact energy from disassembly experiments. To ensure that Cp149
dimers did not become irreversibly denatured during their exposure
to urea, we monitored intrinsic fluorescence over time and at different
urea concentrations. Folded dimer has a characteristic blue-shifted
tryptophan emission at 323 nm. Dimer unfolding results in an increased
fluorescence intensity and a red shift to ∼345 nm. Even at 3.8 M urea, no such change in fluorescence
was apparent for Cp149 and Cp149-C61S (Figure 1 of the ).

Capsids assembled from
increasing amounts of oxidized protein showed
decreased stability to urea. Capsids were assembled from 100% Cp149ox
(black circles), a mixture of 80% Cp149ox and 20% Cp149-C61S (dark
gray circles), a mixture of 20% Cp149ox and 80% Cp149-C61S (light
gray circles), or 100% Cp149-C61S (white circles). The fitted lines
were calculated for unimolecular transitions and were plotted to guide
the eye.

A clear shift of the disassembly
transition toward lower urea concentrations
was observed for capsids containing increasing mole fractions of Cp149ox,
showing oxidized capsids were less stable to urea dissociation.

Discussion
We have shown that dimers within capsids adopt
a conformation (or
family of conformations) that favors C61–C61 disulfide formation
(Figure a). Compared to free Cp149 dimers,
dimers within capsids oxidized faster, indicating that structural
and/or dynamic changes at the intradimer interface favor disulfide
formation. Our results stand in agreement with findings from crystallographic
studies showing structural differences at the intradimer interface
between free dimers and dimers within capsids., The
main structural differences between free dimers and dimers within
capsids lay in the spike tips and the dimer contact domain, indicating
the dimer interface plays an important role in propagating structural
changes through the dimer molecule.

Even though dimers within capsids favor disulfide formation, capsids
of oxidized dimers are not as stable as capsids of reduced dimers,
summarized in Figure a. The core protein is
a dynamic molecule that is able to access assembly active and inactive
conformations in its free unbound form. We suggest that during assembly
this equilibrium of states shifts, favoring assembly active conformations
that facilitate dimer–dimer interactions (Figure b). During this process, structural changes from one dimer–dimer
contact region have to propagate through the dimer to change the binding
affinity of the second dimer-binding site. Helices of the intradimer
interface are thereby crucial in facilitating these conformational
changes (Figure ). We hypothesize that oxidation
of the free dimer constrains the intradimer interface. This constraint
may lock Cp149 into an incorrect geometry or prevent it from adopting
multiple geometries that play a role in assembly, a dynamic explanation.
In agreement with this, we observe that Cp149ox slowly forms small
amounts of capsids compared to the amount of capsids formed by Cp149red
(Figures b and ),
though these appear to be identical to capsids formed by Cp149red
(Figure b,c).

Redox state of the C61–C61 disulfide
influences the kinetics
and thermodynamics of capsid assembly. (a) Capsids oxidize faster
than free dimers; these reactions are essentially unidirectional.
Oxidized protein assembles slower than reduced protein to form capsids
that are less stable. Thus, the model of assembly of reduced and oxidized
dimer is based on kinetic and thermodynamic results. Long arrows indicate
energetically favored and short arrows energetically unfavored reactions.
(b) Energy diagram visualizing the thermodynamic and kinetic properties
of Cp149ox (blue) and Cp149red (red) assembly. Because of the structural
constraints, oxidized protein (Cp149ox) has to overcome an activation
energy barrier (ΔG⧧activation) higher than that of reduced dimer (Cp149red), resulting in slower
assembly kinetics for Cp149ox. Cp149ox has a dimer–dimer contact
energy (ΔGcon,ox) weaker than that
of Cp149red (ΔGcon,red), thereby
forming capsids that are less stable than those of Cp149red. Even
though reduced capsids are overall more stable than oxidized capsids,
formation of the C61–C61 disulfide bond is energetically favored.
The disulfide bond formation causes a decrease in the dimer–dimer
contact energy creating an overall metastable oxidized capsid (ΔGcon,ox + ΔGS–S). The energy term ΔGS–S includes contributions from dimer interactions and disulfide formation.

Thermodynamic analysis revealed
a weaker pairwise dimer contact
energy (ΔGcontact) and strongly
decreased values for the enthalpy (ΔH) and
entropy (ΔS) for assembly of Cp149ox compared
to those of Cp149red (Table ). Because the
final capsids have very similar structures, we propose that the greatest
source of the entropy and enthalpy difference between Cp149red and
Cp149ox arises from differences in the conformation of the inactive
and active states. To a first approximation, the ΔH of assembly is related to the change in the amount of buried surface
area, while ΔS correlates with the amount of
replaced bulk water and the change in molecular degrees of freedom. Given that the amount of buried surface in the
capsid is approximately the same, the lower values for ΔH and ΔS suggest that Cp149ox free
dimer has less exposed hydrophobic surface area and is more constrained
(Table ). The formation of higher proportions
of T = 3 particles during assembly of Cp149ox compared
to that of Cp149 suggests that Cp149ox has a slightly distorted geometry
(Figure ).

Assembly kinetic studies
for Cp149ox also indicate that Cp149ox
adopts unfavorable conformation(s) for capsid elongation. Cp149ox
assembled 1.7 times slower than Cp149red, indicating a higher kinetic
barrier to completing a capsid (Figures  and b). We propose that the slower elongation is due
to intermediates that are more prone to dissociation. Over the course
of the assembly reaction, dissociation of these intermediates contributes
to a net decreased elongation rate.

Together, our data suggest
that constraining the intradimer interface
affects the thermodynamics and kinetics of assembly. Oxidized protein
raises the barrier to the adoption of an assembly active conformation
(ΔG⧧activation) and weakens the dimer–dimer contact energy (ΔGcon,ox), resulting in the slow formation of
capsids that are less stable than those of Cp149red (Figure b).

These results strongly support the hypothesis
that allosteric changes
differentiate the stages of HBV assembly. We have shown that modulating
the intradimer interface influences assembly kinetics and capsid stability.
Our data imply that flexibility at the intradimer interface is beneficial
for efficient capsid assembly. The dynamic nature of the core protein
is also evident in the recently determined structure of HBeAg. Expressed from the same RNA transcript, HBeAg
comprises the core protein assembly domain with a 10-amino acid N-terminal
extension, the remains of a signal sequence. Cysteine 61 of HBeAg
can form a disulfide bond with cysteine −7 located in the N-terminal
extension. In HBeAg, the dimer interface
is flipped by 140° to accommodate the C(−7)–C61
disulfide, indicating the feasibility of a substantial rearrangement
of the intradimer interface., Furthermore, the dynamic
nature of the core protein is demonstrated by HDX–MS experiments.
Deuterium exchange rates were bimodal for the C-terminal dimer–dimer
contact region as well as the N-terminus, indicating that free dimer
is more dynamic than dimers within capsids. Also, emphasizing the importance of the intradimer interface in
propagating allosteric changes are mutations such as F97L and L42A,
located within and at the base of the spike tips, both of which alter
capsid assembly (Figure )., Mutant F97L assembled faster than the wild-type protein, while mutation
L42A completely abrogated assembly, despite being far from the dimer–dimer
contact region., These mutations illustrate the
importance of the intradimer interface in propagating structural changes
and facilitating the adoption of an assembly active conformation.

The poor stability of oxidized capsids estimated from assembly
was consistent with urea disassembly. Capsids assembled from Cp149ox
were less stable than capsids formed by Cp149-C61S, which mimics fully
reduced capsid particles (Figure ). These
data indicate that reduced dimer is more suitable for capsid assembly
than Cp149ox. One possible explanation for the enhanced stability
of reduced capsids is that the dynamic interface allows reduced capsids
to access more conformational states. Evidence of entropic stabilization
has also been described for picornaviruses.−

Our findings
also suggest a possible function for the C61–C61
disulfide. The mechanism underlying capsid disassembly at the nuclear
membrane is still unclear. Our results indicate that oxidation could
facilitate uncoating of the capsid particles. Increased internal capsid
pressure due to genome maturation together
with capsid oxidation is predicted to lower the energy barrier to
disassembly. Indeed, a recent study has shown that genome maturation
in HBV virions is associated with a destabilization of the capsid,
making it more sensitive to nuclease and protease treatment. Consistently, C61–C61 disulfides have
been observed in mature particles isolated from infected liver and
cell cultures.−

C61 and the C61–C61 disulfide are not
essential for assembly
of core particles., However, C61 is conserved in
all mammalian hepadnaviruses. Our results show that the C61–C61
disulfide affects assembly, disassembly, and stability, indicating
a physicochemical basis for its evolutionary conservation.

Supporting Information Available
Two figures showing the intrinsic
fluorescence of Cp149 and Cp149-C61S during treatment with 0–3.8
M urea. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500732b_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
§ S.P.K.: Department of Pediatrics and Elizabeth
B. Lamb Center for
Pediatric Research, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville,
TN 37232-2581.

This work was
supported by National Institutes of Health Grant R01-AI077688 to A.Z.

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We acknowledge Alex Kukreja for valuable comments
about the
manuscript and Joseph Che-Yen Wang for the graphic of the dimer structure
included in the thermodynamic cycle.

Abbreviations
DTTdithiothreitol

HBVhepatitis B virus

HBeAghepatitis B virus e-antigen

SECsize-exclusion
chromatography

HDX–MShydrogen–deuterium exchange–mass spectrometry

SDS–PAGEsodium
dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis

HEPES4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic
acid

HPLChigh-performance
liquid chromatography

TEMtransmission electron microscopy

KDappapparent dissociation
constant

Kcontactpairwise dimer–dimer dissociation
constant

fredelongation rate constant for reduced dimer

foxelongation rate constant for oxidized dimer

ΔGcontactpairwise dimer–dimer contact energy

ΔGcon,redpairwise dimer–dimer contact energy for reduced dimer

ΔGcon,oxpairwise dimer–dimer contact energy for oxidized
dimer

Credreduced capsid

Coxoxidized capsid

ΔG⧧activationactivation energy of capsid assembly

ΔGS–Senergy term including C61–C61 disulfide formation
and dimer–dimer interactions.

