The ability to fight pathogenic
γ-proteobacteria with antibiotic drugs led to a drastic decrease
in morbidity from bacterial infections in the 20th Century. However,
mounting antibiotic resistance makes fighting these deadly microbes
more difficult, necessitating new drugs and alternative targets. A
tempting target is the pathogenic machinery itself. Many pathogenic bacteria utilize a type III secretion system
(T3SS), which consists of secretion machinery that delivers pathogenic
proteins, called effectors, into the host cell where they subvert
host defenses, thereby facilitating colonization. Distinguished from commensal Escherichia coli, enterohemmorhagic E. coli (EHEC) belongs to the
attaching and effacing (A/E) family of pathogens that are characterized
by the effacement of the microvilli of infected epithelial cells upon
intimate attachment of the pathogen to the apical membrane., The genes for major pathogenic components are located on the locus
for enterocyte effacement (LEE), which encodes the T3SS machinery,
as well as essential chaperones and effectors.,, In addition to these well-characterized
components, numerous putative effectors have been identified outside
of the LEE in the EHEC O157:H7 Sakai strain.

The major virulence components of the T3SS are the secreted
effectors. These proteins are bound by
T3SS chaperones upon
translation, delivering them to the base of the T3SS needle complex
for secretion., The effectors must be unfolded
to be secreted through the 25 Å T3SS complex needle, which spans
the inner and outer membrane of the bacteria, the extracellular space,
and connects to a T3SS-inserted pore in the host epithelial cell.− Once they have been translocated into the host cell, the effectors
refold and target various signaling cascades to subvert the host physiology
and facilitate infection.

Host cells
respond to bacterial infection with an inflammatory
response mediated through activation of NF-κB transcription
factors, which involves interleukin-8 and TNF-α secretion and
results in activation of immunity cells in the underlying basal epithelium.− NleC (non-LEE effector C) works in concert with other effectors
to repress the host inflammation response, facilitating EHEC colonization.
NleC is a metalloprotease reported to cleave NF-κB subunits
RelA (p65), p50, and c-Rel, thereby depressing downstream transcription
events that lead to inflammation.− Recent publications also implicate
NleC in cleaving IκB, preventing phosphorylation of p38, and
binding of p300 and CREB-binding proteins.,,,

With
a low level of similarity of its sequence to those of proteases
with known structures, NleC was targeted for structural studies to
facilitate an understanding of its mechanism. Here we report the structure
of NleC from the EHEC Sakai strain refined to 1.9 Å resolution.
Through comparison with other zinc proteases, NleC is shown to represent
a distinct family within the Zincin fold superfamily. The basis for
substrate specificity, defined by activity assays and mutagenesis
studies, is also presented. The specificity and structural data are
then synthesized into a DNA mimicry hypothesis of substrate recognition.

Materials
and Methods
Protein Cloning, Expression, and Purification
The gene
encoding full-length NleC (residues 1–330) was amplified via
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) from EHEC O157:H7 Sakai strain genomic
DNA obtained from ATCC. Primers incorporating NdeI and XmaI sites
(Table ST1 of the ) allowed ligation into a pTYB2 vector (New England Biolabs) that
allows the expression of the target gene as a fusion with a self-cleavable
intein and a chitin-binding domain at the C-terminus. This plasmid
(pMS692) was used to express full-length NleC that, upon self-cleavage
of the tag, results in NleC carrying two extra amino acids (PG) at
the C-terminus. All fragments of NleC used in this study were amplified
via PCR directly from this vector with primers incorporating NdeI
and XmaI sites (Table ST1 of the ) and cloned into the same vector backbone. NleC mutants were cloned
using primer extension mutagenesis (Table ST1 of the ).

E. coli BL21(DE3)
or Rosetta(DE3) cells (Novagen) were transformed with the desired
NleC-expressing plasmid. Cells cultured in LB medium supplemented
with ampicillin were grown at 37 °C to an OD600 of
0.6. The cells were then incubated on ice for 30 min before expression
was induced with 1 mM isopropyl β-d-thiogalactopyranoside
(Gold Bio Inc.). After induction, the cells were grown at 20 °C
overnight before being harvested by centrifugation. The cells were
resuspended in buffer A [25 mM Tris (pH 8.0) and 150 mM NaCl] supplemented
with protease inhibitor cocktail [complete ethylenediaminetetraacetic
acid-free (Roche)] and either frozen until later use or immediately
lysed on ice by sonication. The soluble fraction was separated by
centrifugation at 20000g for 20 min at 4 °C,
added to chitin beads pre-equilibrated with buffer B [25 mM Tris (pH
8.0) and 500 mM NaCl], and incubated for 30 min at 4 °C. The
slurry was then packed into a column and washed with at least 10 column
volumes of buffer B. The column was then flushed with 2 column volumes
of cleavage buffer C [25 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 500 mM NaCl, and 50 mM dl-dithiothreitol (Gold Bio Inc.)] and incubated overnight at
4 °C to allow for cleavage of NleC from the chitin tag. The eluted
fractions were concentrated and loaded onto a size-exclusion column
(HiLoad 26/60 Superdex 75, Amersham Pharmacia Biotech) pre-equilibrated
with buffer A. The NleC-containing fractions were pooled and either
concentrated directly or dialyzed into buffer D [20 mM MOPS (pH 7)
and 20 mM NaCl], concentrated to a maximal concentration of 30 mg/mL,
and stored at 4 °C.

Plasmids encoding human RelA (p65)
and p50 were kind gifts from
Dr. J. Goodrich (University of Colorado at Boulder). A plasmid encoding
RelB was obtained from the Functional Genomics Facility at the University
of Colorado at Boulder. The gene fragments encoding RelA (residues
17–291), RelB (residues 124–413), and p50 (residues
39–363) were amplified via PCR and ligated into a modified
pHD plasmid obtained from Dr. T. F. Wang (Institute of Biological
Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan) following the published
procedure. This vector fuses a six-His
tag and the yeast small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) at the N-terminus
of the target gene. The tag is removed using the Ulp1 SUMO protease
(expressed from a plasmid obtained from
Dr. C. Lima, Sloan Kettering Institute) that results in a native N-terminus. The gene fragment encoding RelA residues 1–210
was also cloned into a modified pET28 vector that adds an N-terminal
His tag and TEV protease site. E. coli Rosetta (DE3)
cells (Novagen) were transformed with the plasmids and grown in LB
medium supplemented with 50 μg/mL kanamycin. Cultures were grown,
induced, and harvested, as described above for NleC. After sonication
and centrifugation, the soluble fractions of cells were affinity purified
on Ni-NTA beads (Qiagen) using buffers containing 1 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine
to prevent oxidation of cysteines. The purified proteins were concentrated
and loaded onto a Superdex 75 column (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech)
pre-equilibrated with buffer A. The protein fractions were utilized
as eluted or concentrated as necessary. Purified NFATc2 (residues
392–583 with a six-His N-terminal tag) was a kind gift from
Dr. J. Goodrich (University of Colorado at Boulder).

NleC Biochemical
Assays
The proteolytic activity of
NleC on RelA, RelB, p50, and NFATc2 fragments was tested in buffer
E [25 mM Tris (pH 8), 150 mM NaCl, and 1 mM TCEP] at various protein
concentrations. Cleavage was visualized using sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE). To test the cleavage efficiency
in the presence of DNA, a palindromic 20 bp DNA oligomer (5′-CGGCTGGAAATTTCCAGCCG-3′)
containing the NF-κB consensus sequence GGRRNNYYCC
was incubated with RelA at a 1:1 ratio for 1 h prior to the addition
of NleC for the activity assay. To define the cleavage sites of RelA,
RelB, and p50, the reaction was allowed to proceed overnight and a
SDS–PAGE gel overloaded with the products. This gel was electroblotted
onto a PVDF Mini Problott membrane (Applied Biosystems) and stained
with Coomassie Blue according to the standard procedure. The bands
corresponding to the C-terminal pieces of RelA, RelB, or p50 were
submitted for N-terminal sequencing by Edman degradation at the University
of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston Protein Chemistry Laboratory
(Galveston, TX).

Protein Crystallization and Structure Determination
An N-terminal truncation of NleC (residues 17–330) at a
concentration
of 6 mg/mL yielded crystals after incubation for 5 months with 10%
PEG-3350, 50 mM Mg(CHO2)2, and 0.1 M MES (pH
6.0) in a sitting-drop vapor diffusion experiment (0.2:0.2 protein:precipitant
volume ratio). The crystals were transferred to 35% PEG-3350 and 50
mM Mg(CHO2)2 for 1 min before being flash-frozen
in liquid N2 prior to data collection. A data set to 1.9
Å resolution was collected at the peak, inflection, and remote
wavelengths for zinc at the Advanced Light Source at the Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory (Berkeley, CA). These data were used
to determine the structure of NleC using multiwavelength Anomalous
dispersion (MAD) methods. All crystallographic calculations were performed
using the PHENIX software suite. Using
the AutoSol module, one zinc site was identified, corresponding to
the active site zinc, and used to calculate MAD phases for density
modification. A partial model was built into the resulting electron
density map by the AutoBuild module of PHENIX. Manual rebuilding of
the model with Coot was alternated with
refinement in PHENIX until Rfree and Rwork could no longer be improved. The final
model has NleC residues 22–280 modeled and refined. Data collection,
phasing, and refinement statistics are listed in Table .

Data Collection, Phasing, and Refinement
Statistics of NleC
 	remote	peak	inflection	
Data
Collection	
space group	P212121	
unit cell	 	
a (Å)	45.21	
b (Å)	67.48	
c (Å)	81.69	
wavelength (Å)	1.2574	1.2831	1.2835	
resolution (Å)	50.0–1.9 (1.95–1.9)	50.0–1.9 (1.95–1.9)	50.0–1.9 (1.95–1.9)	
Rsym (%)	8.1 (48.1)	7.7 (47.0)	7.7 (44.7)	
I/σ	13.3 (1.8)	15.8 (1.8)	14.7 (1.5)	
completeness (%)	96.4 (97.0)	96.0 (88.2)	96.4 (96.5)	
redundancy	2.3 (1.8)	2.4 (1.7)	2.3 (1.8)	
Refinement	
resolution (Å)	34.9–1.9	
no. of reflections	19840	
no. of protein
atoms (no H)	2067	
no. of water
molecules	186	
Rwork (%)	18.0	
Rfree (%)	21.8	
rmsd for bonds
(Å)	0.007	
rmsd for angles (deg)	0.993	
mean B (Å2)	28.0	
mean B for
protein (Å2)	27.5	
mean B for
solvent (Å2)	34.1	
Ramachandran plot (%)	 	
most favored	97.7	
allowed	2.3	
outliers	0	
Values in parentheses
are for the
highest-resolution shell.

Rsym = ∑h∑i|[Ii(h) – ⟨I(h)⟩]|/∑h∑IIi(h), where Ii(h) is the Ith measurement of reflection h and ⟨I(h)⟩ is the weighted mean of all
measurements of h.

Rwork = ∑|Fobs – Fcalc|/∑Fobs, where Fobs is the observed structure factor amplitude
and Fcalc the structure factor calculated
from the model. Rfree is computed in the
same manner as Rwork, but using the test
set of reflections.

Results
Crystallization
and Determination of the Structure of NleC
To gain insight
into the mechanism of NleC, we determined the structure
of E. coli strain Sakai NleC by X-ray crystallography.
Whereas the full-length protein was refractory to crystallization,
systematic truncations of the N- and C-terminal ends yielded an NleC
fragment spanning residues 19–330 that produced well-diffracting
crystals. A fluorescence scan revealed that zinc was present in the
crystals, consistent with the proposal that NleC was a zinc protease.− The structure of NleC was determined from one of these crystals
using multiwavelength anomalous dispersion (MAD) methods and a three-wavelength
data set collected at the Zn2+ absorption peak, inflection
point, and remote wavelengths (see  for details). The final model, refined to 1.9 Å
resolution using the remote wavelength, contains residues 22–280,
a Zn2+ ion in the active site, and a Mg2+ ion
distal from the active site. Data collection, phasing, and refinement
statistics are summarized in Table .

An NleC fragment (residues 19–287) approximating the crystallographic
model is similar to full-length NleC in its ability to cleave the
cognate substrate RelA, indicating that the model represents the catalytic
core of NleC. Furthermore, Mühlen et al. showed that an NleC
fragment similar to the crystallographic model (residues 1–266)
was able to abrogate RelA activation in cells as completely as full-length
NleC.

NleC Structure
Though NleC has no significant similarity
of sequence to any other known protein outside of a conserved zinc-binding
motif, HExxH, found in Zincin zinc proteases, the fold of NleC demonstrates
it is a member of the Zincin fold superfamily (SCOP FSF d.92.1, PFAM
CL0126 Peptidase MA, MEROPS clan MA).− The structure of NleC
consists of eight extended α-helices and three β-strands,
cradling the active site zinc (Figure A).
A hexahydrated magnesium ion is also present in the structure, but
it is not coordinated to the protein directly and is not expected
to be necessary for function. The zinc-ligating residues are H183,
H187, D194, and Y227, while E184 hydrogen bonds a water molecule that
is also the sixth Zn2+ ligand.

Structure of NleC. (A)
Structure of NleC with the active site highlighted.
The structure of NleC is shown in standard Zincin coloring as described
in Gomis-Ruth et al., with helices colored yellow, strands aqua, and
loops gray. The active site residues
are shown in magenta stick format. The inset shows a close-up of the
active site, including the distances between the zinc and coordinating
atoms. (B) Modified Ψ-loop β-sheet motif in NleC. The
NleC β-sheet is shown in cartoon and stick format. Red dotted
lines represent hydrogen bonds between the strands and illustrate
the standard β-sheet interactions between all three strands
and the outer two strands after the middle strand exits the sheet.

Structural comparisons of NleC
with other Zincins reveal that NleC
has maintained the basic Zincin fold of a three-helix bundle and mixed
β-sheet around the active site. However, the similarity to other
known Zincin proteins is limited to topology, with many divergent
details. The closest NleC structural relatives, identified utilizing
the Dali Server, are aminopeptidase tricorn
(Z score = 6.3; rmsd = 3.3 Å) and botulinum
toxin (Z score = 5.7; rmsd = 3.3 Å). As illustrated
by the relatively high rmsds of the superpositions, the orientation
of the conserved basic Zincin fold elements diverges in NleC compared
to known Zincins (Figure S1 of the ). The presence of a tyrosine coordinating the active
site zinc is a rare feature of NleC only seen in the Astacin subfamily
of Zincins (MEROPS family M12), which may suggest a close relationship
between their folds. However, NleC superimposes on Astacin with an
rmsd of 4.3 Å (Z score = 2.4), underscoring
the divergence of the structures (Figure S1 of the ). NleC also displays a unique feature
in its three-stranded β-sheet. Whereas all Zincins contain a
Ψ-loop motif within their β-sheets, NleC has a modified
Ψ-loop motif zippering the two external strands together upon
the exit of the interior strand midway in the β-sheet (Figure B). To the best of our knowledge, this modified
Ψ-loop has not been described before and a Dali server search
with this motif did not identify any similar structures.

NleC Is a Nonpromiscuous
Protease Specific for NF-κB Subunits
NleC was previously
described as a zinc metalloprotease capable
of cleaving NF-κB subunits RelA, p50, and c-Rel.− Of these NF-κB subunits, only the cleavage site of RelA was
defined in the literature, with reports of cleavage between residues
10 and 11 or 38 and 39 near the N-terminus of RelA., After purification, we subjected an N-terminal fragment of RelA
(residues 1–210) containing the DNA-binding domain to proteolysis
by NleC. The cleavage products were isolated by SDS–PAGE and
analyzed by Edman amino-terminal sequencing, confirming the cleavage
site published by Baruch et al. to be 35-RYKC/EGRS-42. Fragments of
RelB (residues 124–413) and p50 (residues 39–363), each
containing the DNA-binding domains and dimerization domains, were
then analyzed for cleavage by NleC. Digestion of these NF-κB
subunits with NleC resulted in cleaved products that were visualized
via SDS–PAGE, and the bands corresponding to the cleavage products
were subjected to Edman amino-terminal sequencing. RelB was found
to be proteolyzed at 141-RYEC/EGRS-148 and p50 at 59-RYVC/EGPS-66.
In all three subunits, the scissile bond is contained in a highly
conserved DNA-binding loop (Figure ).

NF-κB
proteolysis by NleC. (A) Cleavage of NF-κB subunits
by NleC. NF-κB subunits (20 μM), p50, RelA, and RelB,
were incubated with 20 nM NleC for 10 min before the reaction was
quenched by the addition of SDS–PAGE sample buffer and boiling
for 2 min. Results were analyzed by SDS–PAGE. The bands were
quantified in ImageJ for visualization in the bar graph. (B) DNA-binding
loop in Rel homology domains. Sequence alignment of the residues in
the DNA-binding loop of NF-κB subunits RelA, RelB, and p50 as
well as transcription factor NFATc2. The scissile bond is shown as
a red dotted line. In green are the residues whose mutation to alanine
strongly affects NleC cleavage. Light green delineates the arginine
that has an intermediate effect on NleC cleavage upon being mutated
to alanine, and the proline that is in the same position in p50. The
sequence of the NFATc2 DNA-binding loop is shown for reference. (C)
DNA-binding loop of RelA containing the scissile bond. Four residues
to either side of the scissile bond between cysteine 38 and glutamate
39 are colored green in the DNA-binding domain structure of RelA (PDB
entry 2RAM).
(D) Cleavage of RelA mutants by NleC. RelA (20 μM), wild type
or alanine mutants, was incubated with 20 nM NleC for 10 min before
the proteolysis reaction was quenched via addition of SDS–PAGE
sample buffer and boiling for 2 min. The results were analyzed by
SDS–PAGE and the bands quantified in ImageJ for visualization
in bar graph form.

Though the local cleavage
site is maintained between the NF-κB
transcription factors, further analysis shows the rate of cleavage
by NleC differs. Class II NF-κB subunits, RelA and RelB, are
cleaved more readily than the class I subunit, p50 (Figure A and Figure S2A of the ). Because NleC cleaves RelA and RelB with similar
efficiency, and most of the published work was conducted with RelA,
the further characterization described here was conducted for the
RelA DNA-binding and dimerization domains (residues 17–291)
only.

To determine which residues in the DNA-binding loop of
RelA are
important for the recognition by NleC, the residues four positions
to either side of the scissile bond in RelA were individually mutated
to alanine (Figure B–D). These residues
are named by their relative position from the scissile bond with P4,
P3, P2, and P1 being N-terminal to the scissile bond and P1′,
P2′, P3′, and P4′ being C-terminal. After purification,
the RelA mutants were tested for cleavage by NleC and compared to
the wild type. P4 residue R35, P3 residue Y36, and P1′ residue
E39 in RelA, when mutated to alanine, significantly reduced the rate
of cleavage by NleC, whereas the mutation of R41 had an intermediate
effect (Figure D and Figure S2B of the ). Mutagenesis of P1 residue
C38 to alanine increased the cleavage efficiency of NleC, presumably
by reducing the size of the P1 residue and alleviating steric hindrance.
The steric requirements of this position were further probed by iodoacetamide
modification of RelA, which resulted in inhibition of NleC-mediated
cleavage ostensibly because of C38 carboxymethylation. Together, these
results show that NleC does not specifically recognize C38, but that
a smaller residue is preferred at this position. The mutagenesis of
P3′ residue R41 had an intermediate effect on cleavage, while
the three remaining residues, P2 K37, P2′ G40, and P4′
S42, resulted in a cleavage rate similar to that of wild-type RelA.
Conserved among all NF-κB subunits, the three residues most
important for cleavage, R35, Y36, and E39, are also clustered together
on the structure of the NF-κB subunits (Figure C). An additional transcription factor, NFATc2, which contains
a Rel homology domain and thus structurally overlays with NF-κB
in the DNA-binding domain, was tested for proteolysis by NleC. NFATc2
contains the conserved tyrosine and glutamate that are important for
proteolysis by NleC in its DNA-binding loop and, additionally, has
an arginine at P4 whose guanidine functional group overlays with P4′
R35 of RelA (Figure S3A of the ). Cleavage of NFATc2 would be expected if NleC could recognize all
Rel homology domains; however, proteolysis by NleC was not observed
(Figure S3B of the ).

Though the residues directly surrounding the cleavage site
are
important for recognition and cleavage by NleC, a small eight-residue
peptide harboring these residues is insufficient for proteolysis by
NleC. Similarly, a longer 20-residue peptide containing the scissile
bond centered between two unrelated proteins could not be cleaved
by NleC (Figure S4 of the ). Thus, though the RelA DNA-binding loop is essential for cleavage
by NleC, distal elements appear to be necessary for efficient cleavage.

DNA Mimicry in NleC
Electrostatic surface potential
analysis of NleC, calculated with APBS, reveals that the face containing the active site is extremely negative.
The strongly electronegative surface of NleC, combined with the size
and shape of the active site cleft, is reminiscent of the major groove
of DNA where NF-κB transcription factors bind (Figure A). Indeed, a pattern of glutamate and aspartate
side chains along the ridges of the active site cleft can be aligned
with phosphates in the backbone of DNA that mediate the interaction
with RelA in the RelA–DNA structure (Figure B). In this superposition, the
carboxylate carbons of four negatively charged residues in the upper
lip of the NleC active site (E150, E115, E119, and D139) and one on
the lower lip (E202, red in Figure B) are
within ≤2.7 Å of the corresponding phosphates in DNA that
are directly contacted by RelA (dark green), although the phosphate
mimicked by E202 is hydrogen bonded by RelA in only one (PDB entry 2RAM()) of the seven available RelA–DNA structures.− Other phosphate residues in DNA that are not directly contacted
by RelA are colored light green in the superposition, and negatively
charged NleC residues E118, E28, and E229 are within 4.3 Å of
these, extending the mimicry of the DNA phosphate backbone. Negatively
charged E118 in the upper lip is within 6.9 Å of the corresponding
phosphate (light green). However, a different rotamer could be modeled
to bring the carboxylate within 2.8 Å of the phosphate.

DNA mimicry
in NleC. (A) Electrostatic surface potentials of NleC
and DNA. Electrostatic surface potentials calculated with APBS are shown mapped to the van der Waals surfaces
of NleC and DNA. Green bars illustrate the distances across the major
groove of RelA-bound DNA and the active site groove of NleC as measured
with Pymol. The right panel is rotated 90° from the left. (B)
Superposition of NleC and DNA. Stereoview of the cartoon and semitransparent
surface representation of NleC superimposed on a cartoon representation
of DNA aligning negatively charged residues in NleC with the phosphate
backbone of DNA. Glutamic acid and aspartic acid residues on the active
site face of NleC that overlay with DNA phosphates are colored red,
and the carboxyl carbon is depicted as a sphere. The carboxyl carbons
of other nearby negatively charged residues are depicted as salmon-colored
spheres. The phosphates in DNA that are contacted by RelA in the majority
of DNA–RelA crystal structures (PDB entries 1RAM, 2RAM, 1LE5, 2I9T, and 3GUT) are colored dark
green, with other phosphates that overlay with negatively charged
NleC residues colored light green. The superposition was done manually
to maximize shape similarity and charge correspondence between NleC
and DNA. (C) Alanine scanning mutagenesis of NleC negative charges.
RelA (20 μM) was incubated with 20 nM wild-type NleC or 20 nM
NleC mutant for 10 min before the reaction was quenched with SDS–PAGE
sample buffer and boiling for 2 min. The control reaction mixture
contained no NleC. The wild-type NleC reaction was repeated with three
biological replicates, which were each tested three times. All NleC
mutant reactions are the result of one biological replicate, repeated
three times with different dilutions. The results were analyzed by
SDS–PAGE and the bands quantified in ImageJ for analysis (Figure
S5 of the ). The
error bars indicate the standard error = standard deviation. (D) Effect
of DNA on NleC proteolysis of RelA. After incubation of 20 μM
RelA with (left) or without (right) a 1:1 molar ratio of palindromic
DNA encoding the RelA-binding site, 20 nM NleC was added and reaction
time points were taken. Reactions were quenched via the addition of
SDS–PAGE sample buffer and boiling for 5 min and the products
analyzed by SDS–PAGE.

To validate this model, we created alanine mutants of E115,
E118,
E119, D139, E150, D198, and E202. These mutants were purified in parallel
with wild-type NleC and tested for their ability to cleave wild-type
RelA. The E150A and E115A mutations had the greatest effect on the
ability of NleC to cleave RelA, while an intermediate effect was seen
for the D139A and E118A mutations (Figure C and Figure S5 of the ).

We thus propose that NleC mimics DNA as a strategy for NF-κB
recognition. We further suggest that this mimicry mediates the interaction
with residues in RelA that are distal from the cleavage site that,
as described above, is required for efficient cleavage. Consistent
with this proposal, palindromic DNA containing the RelA recognition
site inhibited NleC cleavage of RelA (Figure D), indicating that NleC and DNA occupy the same binding site on
RelA.

Discussion
The observation that NleC was capable of
inducing proteasome-independent
degradation of NF-κB resulting in abrogation of interleukin-8
secretion in TNF-α-stimulated cells, together with the detection
of the Zn2+-binding motif HExxH in the sequence, led to
the discovery that NleC is a Zn2+ protease.− The lack of detectable similarity in sequence to any known Zn2+ protease beyond the HExxH motif opened the possibility that
NleC represented a case of convergent evolution in which a novel fold
accommodated the known Zn2+ catalytic center. Such a case
would be analogous to the classical example of trypsin-like and subtilisin-like
families of serine proteases in which the catalytic strategy encoded
by the histidine-aspartate-serine triad is accommodated in different
folds., However, the structure of NleC shows that
it retains the topology and structural elements conserved in the Zincin
family, albeit with significant divergence from its closest structural
homologues, botulinum toxin and tricorn aminopeptidase. These proteins
utilize glutamate as the third Zn2+-coordinating residue
instead of aspartate and deviate greatly from NleC outside of the
Zincin core. The presence of a tyrosine as the final coordinating
residue in NleC is rare among Zincins and Zn2+-binding
proteins in general., Whereas many Zincins contain
a tyrosine at this position, it normally serves to hydrogen bond a
water molecule that directly coordinates the Zn2+. Direct
Zn2+ coordination by this tyrosine is only observed in
NleC and one other Zincin subfamily, the Astacins (MEROPS family M12)., However, members of the Astacin Zincin subfamily structurally deviate
from NleC outside of the Zn2+-binding site.

The modified
Ψ-loop motif in the β-sheet of NleC is
very unusual. The canonical Ψ-loop motif is a β-sheet
comprised of two consecutive antiparallel strands hydrogen bonded
to an additional strand between them. However, the middle strand exits
the motif halfway through the β-sheet in NleC. It is thought
that Ψ-loops are difficult to fold because one strand has to
be inserted between two N-terminal strands. Therefore, it is tempting
to speculate that the Ψ-loop modification observed in NleC arose
because of evolutionary pressure to select for ease of folding and
refolding, which is required for secretion through the narrow needle
complex of the T3SS.,

In contrast to many Zincins,
NleC appears to be highly specific.
We demonstrated that four residues near the scissile bond of NF-κB
subunit RelA, R35 at P4, Y36 at P3, E39 at P1′, and R41 at
P3′, are important for cleavage by NleC. In class II NF-κB
subunit RelB, these four residues are conserved and RelB was cleaved
with an efficiency similar to that of RelA. Analysis of the surface
of NleC reveals a large pocket near the active site that overlays
with the S1′ pockets of other Zincins that recognize the P1′
substrate position. This P1′ position corresponds to E39 in
the conserved RelA DNA-binding loop, and its mutation to alanine ablates
proteolysis, consistent with strong P1′ selectivity observed
in many Zincins. However, all four residues
cited above are determinants for cleavage by NleC, including P3′
residue arginine, whose mutagenesis had an intermediate effect. This
is illustrated by the reduced rate of cleavage observed for class
I NF-κB subunit p50, which contains a proline in place of arginine
at P3′. Similarly, the Rel homology domain of transcription
factor NFATc2 is not cleaved by NleC, despite NFATc2 overlaying structurally
with NF-κB subunits and having a tyrosine at P3, a glutamate
at P1′, and an arginine at P4′, whose guanidinium functional
group overlays with the RelA P4 arginine (Figure S3A of the ). However, a threonine
replaces the cysteine at position P1 from the scissile bond in NFATc2
(Figure B). When this residue was mutated
to an alanine in RelA, the cleavage efficiency was improved, whereas
incubation with iodoacetamide prevented efficient proteolysis. Thus,
the larger threonine in NFAT at P1 may partially account for the lack
of proteolysis by NleC.

Though residues near the scissile bond
in NF-κB are crucial
for proteolysis by NleC, cleavage of peptides or fusion proteins containing
the RelA DNA-binding loop was not detectable. This suggests that elements
distal to the scissile bond are also necessary for recognition and
cleavage by NleC. As shown in Figure , the
active site face of NleC displays a groove and a series of negatively
charged residues that can be aligned with the phosphate groups that
define the major groove of DNA. This DNA mimicking provides a rationale
for the recognition of substrate elements distal from the scissile
bond, as residues in RelA that interact with phosphate groups in the
DNA–RelA complex may be able to interact with negatively charged
residues in NleC. Consistent with this idea, mutation of several of
these negatively charged residues to alanine significantly reduced
the rate of cleavage of RelA. The residues with the strongest effect
on NleC cleavage upon mutagenesis are all located in the upper lip
of NleC, above the active site in the standard orientation (E150A,
E115A, D139A, and E118A). This observation correlates well with RelA–DNA
crystal structures, where RelA makes most of the direct contacts to
the DNA backbone with the “upper” strand in the major
groove, specifically with the phosphates mimicked by E150, E115, and
D139 whose mutation to alanine significantly reduced cleavage efficiency.
Only one of the seven crystal structures of the RelA–DNA complex
(PDB entry 2RAM)− shows a significant interaction of RelA with a phosphate in the
“lower” DNA strand, and mutation of its mimicking residue
(E202) did not have a significant effect on the cleavage of RelA by
NleC. Nevertheless, E202 and other phosphate-mimicking negative charges
may still be involved in RelA recognition, but their individual mutation
was not enough to induce a significant reduction in proteolysis efficiency
under the tested conditions. The general pattern of negative charges
on the face of NleC may promote electrostatic steering of RelA to
the active site of NleC. This is consistent with a recent report showing
that negatively charged residues in the NleC structure that are close
to the active site are important for efficient proteolysis.

To further test the feasibility of the
DNA mimicking hypothesis,
we modeled the docking of RelA to NleC by superimposing the phosphate
groups in the DNA–RelA complex (PDB entry 2RAM) onto the DNA aligned
with NleC (Figure S6 of the ). No major clashes between NleC and RelA are observed in the model.
Only residues 42 and 43 in RelA partially overlap with residues 195
and 196, which reside in a loop of NleC. However, the main chain atoms
in these NleC and RelA residues have temperature factors higher than
those of the residues in the rest of the protein main chains (RelA
residues 42 and 43, 79.5 Å2; RelA, 46.4 Å2; NleC residues 195 and 196, 34.5 Å2; NleC,
23.3 Å2), suggesting that they may be able to adopt
a conformation compatible with this mode of binding. In this simple
model, the scissile bond of RelA is located 4.3 Å from the Zn2+ ion in the NleC active site, further suggesting that this
RelA binding model would be compatible with catalysis.

DNA mimicry
has been described for other proteins on the basis
of their shape and a pattern of electronegative residues that resemble
the disposition of phosphate groups in the major groove of DNA. For
example, in eukaryotes, TAF1 mimics DNA to bind the TATA-binding protein,
decreasing its transcriptional efficiency.− Multiple viral
proteins that inhibit uracil DNA glycosylase (UDG) have been identified
by utilizing similar mechanisms for binding, despite the proteins
having no sequence or structural homology. These proteins mimic the
phosphate backbone of DNA by providing hydrogen bond acceptors at
the same locations and additionally contain a cavity for the UDG hydrophobic
residue that is responsible for flipping the uracil residue out of
DNA.− T7 bacteriophage protein Ocr has a broad specificity
for type I restriction/modification enzymes, mimicking the overall
shape and charge pattern of DNA, and bent to fit in the active sites
of these enzymes. In contrast to NleC,
these previously described DNA mimics function by stiochiometrically
sequestering DNA-binding proteins, whereas NleC possesses enzymatic
activity.

In addition to EHEC, NleC genes are found in other
enterobacteria, Vibrio species, the fish pathogen Photobacterium
damselae, and the insect pathogen Arsenophonus nasoniae. The residues in the active site and in the structural elements
around the active site are conserved among all family members (Figure
S7 of the ), suggesting
that all NleC proteins maintain the zinc metalloprotease function.
This NleC family is designated in the MEROPS protease database as
family M85. With the recent finding that
NleC family member Aip56 from Photobacterium damselae piscicida also cleaves RelA, it is likely that all NleC proteins share specificity
for NF-κB subunits.

Despite
the conservation in the catalytic core of NleC family members,
the C-termini are divergent starting where the crystallographic model
ends. This suggests there may be separate functions for the C-terminal
domains of EHEC NleC and other NleC family members. Photobacterium Aip56 is an exotoxin with an NleC zinc protease domain at the N-terminus
and a C-terminal domain divergent from that of NleC., Whereas Aip56 is secreted by an unknown mechanism, its C-terminal
domain is required for entry into fish host cells without Photobacterium contact, suggesting that a T3SS is not involved.
Conversely, NleC is clearly secreted by the T3SS, and it is possible
that its C-terminal domain, not present in the structure presented
here and not required for cleavage of NF-κB, may be important
for secretion and translocation by the T3SS. It thus appears that
NleC family members may represent effectors shared by different secretion
systems.

In summary, with NF-κB specificity data and the
structure
of the NleC catalytic core, we developed a model for their interaction
and tested it experimentally. We propose that NleC has evolved a bipartite
substrate specificity mechanism recognizing defined amino acids proximal
to the cleavage site while mimicking DNA to mediate the interaction
with distal elements to efficiently and specifically cleave its NF-κB
targets. As a protease, NleC is not required in stoichiometric ratios
and is thus more efficient at inhibiting its target than other DNA
mimics.

Supporting Information Available
Structural and topological
comparison of NleC with other Zincins (Figure S1), SDS–PAGE
results for NleC cleavage of NF-κB subunits (Figure S2), comparison
of NFATc2 to RelA (Figure S3), schematic of the fusion protein containing
the NleC cleavage site of RelA (Figure S4), representative SDS–PAGE
result for NleC mutant cleavage of RelA (Figure S5), DNA mimicry-motivated
model of NleC and RelA interaction (Figure S6), alignment of NleC
family members (Figure S7), and plasmids created for this study (Table
S1). This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500593e_si_001.pdf

Accession Codes
Coordinate
and
structure factors for NleC have been deposited in the Protein Data
Bank as entry 4Q3J.

Author Contributions
M.M.T. and
M.C.S. designed the research. M.M.T. performed the research. M.M.T.
and M.C.S. analyzed the data and wrote the paper.

M.M.T. was supported
in part by National Institutes of Health Training Grant GM08759. Structural
biology research at the University of Colorado at Boulder is supported
in part by the William M. Keck Foundation. Part of the work presented
in this manuscript was conducted at the Advanced Light Source, which
is supported by the Director, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy
Sciences, of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract DE-AC02–05CH11231.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Amy Dear for initiating
the T3SS effector project
in the Sousa lab, Dr. J. Goodrich for plasmids encoding RelA and p50
and for purified NFATc2, Dr. T. F. Wang for the SUMO fusion plasmid,
and Dr. C. Lima for the Ulp1 expression plasmid.

Abbreviations
NleCnon-LEE-encoded effector C

T3SStype III secretion system

A/Eattaching and effacing

EHECenterohemmorhagic E. coli

LEElocus for enterocyte effacement

MADmultiwavelength anomalous dispersion

NF-κBnuclear factor
κ light chain enhancer of activated B cells

IκBinhibitor of κ-B

Aip56apoptosis-inducing
protein of 56 kDa

CREBcamp response element-binding protein

NFATc2nuclear factor of activated T cells, cytoplasmic
2

rmsdroot-mean-square
deviation

SUMOsmall
ubiquitin-like modifier

TAF1transcription initiation factor TFIID subunit 1

TNF-αtumor necrosis
factor α

UDGuracil-DNA glycosylase

APBSAdaptive Poisson–Boltzmann Solver

MES2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonic
acid

PDBProtein
Data Bank.

