The circadian
clock controls
the daily rhythmicity of the biochemistry, physiology, and behavior
of organisms. In mammals, it is comprised mainly of a core transcription–translation
feedback loop (TTFL) that is cell autonomous and self-sustained. The
core clock consists of CLOCK-BMAL1 transcriptional activators and
cryptochrome (CRY) and period (PER) transcriptional repressors.− The primary TTFL is stabilized by secondary, consolidating loops.
The effect of the circadian clock on the DNA damage response and the
related questions of circadian clock–cancer connections may
be considered under two broad categories:− regulation of
DNA damage responses by the clock and circadian rhythmicity as a variable
in carcinogenesis and in cancer treatment.

Circadian
Clock and the DNA Damage Response
It has been reported that
the three major DNA damage response networks,
DNA repair, DNA damage checkpoints, and apoptosis, are affected by
the circadian clock.

Circadian
Clock Regulation of DNA Repair
The effect of the circadian
rhythm on the cell cycle in epidermal
and gastrointestinal tissues was well-documented long before the discovery
of the clock genes and the development of the current molecular model., Although it has been known that the cell cycle phase varies by the
time of day in proliferating tissues such as epidermis and intestine,, only recently has clock control of the cell cycle in these tissues
been demonstrated in mouse genetic models., In mice, DNA replication/S phase peaks in the morning and mitosis
peaks in the evening. In parallel with
these findings, it was reported that certain genotoxic chemicals such
as N-methyl-N-nitrosourea and cyclophosphamide, were more toxic in terms of tumor incidence and mortality when they
were administered in the early morning compared to delivery in the
evening. However, there is no evidence that this differential effect
of toxicity was due to a differential effect on damage induction or
repair because similar preferential mortality has been observed with
other treatments that do not induce DNA damage, such as injections
of massive doses of bacterial cultures or of lipopolysaccharides. Circadian clock regulation of DNA repair was
discovered more recently and is further explained below.

There
are five major pathways of DNA repair: direct repair, base excision repair, nucleotide excision repair,
mismatch repair, and recombination/cross-link repair (Table ). Currently available evidence indicates that of
all these pathways, only nucleotide excision repair is directly controlled
by the circadian clock.,− However, the possibility that the other repair pathways exhibit
low-amplitude circadian rhythmicity has not been eliminated. In addition,
because mismatch repair is coupled to replication, which is controlled by the clock,, it is indirectly affected by the circadian clock in replicating
tissues. Similarly, the mode of double-strand break/cross-link repair
is affected by the clock because the homologous recombination mode
of double-strand break repair is restricted to the S and G2 phases
of the cell cycle, whereas double-strand break repair by nonhomologous
end joining occurs throughout the cell cycle.

DNA Repair Mechanisms
DNA repair
mechanisms	types of
DNA damage repaired	
direct repair	pyrimidine dimers, O6-methylguanines	
base excision repair	oxidized bases, alkylated
bases	
nucleotide
excision repair	pyrimidine
dimers, oxidized
bases, cisplatin (GG) diadducts	
mismatch repair	base mismatches, insertions,
deletions	
recombination/cross-link
repair	double-strand
breaks and
interstrand cross-links	
These are nearly
universal mechanisms.
However, mammalian organisms do not have photolyase that directly
repairs pyrimidine dimers. Instead, repair of pyrimidine dimers is
by nucleotide excision repair, which is controlled by cryptochrome,
the evolutionary cousin of photolyase.

In humans and mice, nucleotide excision repair (excision
repair)
is the sole repair mechanism for eliminating bulky DNA base lesions
produced by ultraviolet (UV) light [cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers
and (6–4)photoproducts], chemical carcinogens such as benozo[a]pyrene and 2-acetylaminofluorene, and anticancer drugs
such as cis-diamminedichloroplatinum(II) (cisplatin). Humans with mutations in excision repair genes
suffer from xeroderma pigmentosum (XP), a disease characterized by
a 5000-fold increase in skin cancer incidence because of an inability
to repair UV-induced DNA damage. The
reaction mechanism of excision repair is remarkably similar from Escherichia coli to humans, although the proteins carrying
out the repair reaction, in contrast to all other repair systems,
are not evolutionarily related (Figure ).
Human excision repair is carried out by the concerted action of six
core repair factors comprising 16–20 polypeptides: RPA, XPA,
XPC, TFIIH, XPG, and XPF-ERCC1. Damage is recognized by RPA, XPA,
and XPC, and the enzyme specificity is ensured by the kinetic proofreading
function of TFIIH, which hydrolyzes ATP along several steps of the
damage recognition pathway to discern damaged DNA (Figure ). Then, at the damage site, RPA, XPA, and TFIIH
form a stable complex. This complex recruits the XPG and XPF-ERCC1
nucleases, which incise the damaged strand at the 6th ± 3 and
20th ± 5 phosphodiester bonds 3′ and 5′ to the
lesion, respectively. The excised 24–32-nucleotide damage-containing
oligomer (canonical 30-mer) is released in a complex with TFIIH, and degraded by intracellular nucleases. The resulting gap is filled
by DNA polymerases and ligated. Nearly all of the proteins involved
in the basic damage recognition/excision reaction are rate-limiting,
and therefore, circadian control of any of the proteins involved in
the dual incision could potentially confer circadian rhythmicity to
nucleotide excision repair.

Nucleotide
excision repair. An excision nuclease makes dual incisions
5′ and 3′ to the DNA damage to generate a 12–13-
or 24–32-nucleotide damage-containing oligonucleotide in E. coli or humans, respectively. The excised fragment is
released by helicases, and the gap is filled and ligated by DNA polymerases.
Adapted from ref ().

Model for the circadian regulation of XPA and
excision repair by
the clock and the ubiquitin–proteasome system. The transcription
factors CLOCK and BMAL1 make a heterodimer that binds to E-boxes (CACGTG)
in the promoters and activates transcription of the core clock genes Per and Cry, as well as clock-controlled
genes, including Xpa. The CRY and PER proteins dimerize
and, after a time delay, enter the nucleus where CRY dissociates from
PER and inhibits CLOCK-BMAL1-activated transcription, thus generating
an oscillatory pattern of gene expression. Robust protein oscillation
is achieved by the short half-lives of CRY and PER proteins because
of proteolysis by the ubiquitin–proteasome system., HERC2 is the ubiquitin ligase that targets XPA for relatively rapid
degradation. Excision of DNA damage is
accomplished by coordinated functions of six core repair factors.
Damage is recognized by RPA, XPA, and XPC, followed by recruitment
of TFIIH by XPC and XPA. The DNA near the damage site is unwound by
the helicase activity of the XPD subunit of TFIIH to form stable preincision
complex 1 (PIC1) that recruits XPG, and XPC is displaced from the
complex to form PIC2. XPF-ERCC1 is then recruited to form PIC3. Within
PIC3, XPG makes the 3′ incision 6 ± 3 phosphodiester bonds
3′ and XPF makes the 5′ incision 20 ± 5 phosphodiester
bonds 5′ to the damage. The excised 24–32-nucleotide
oligomer carrying the damage is released, and the resulting gap is
filled by DNA polymerases and ligated. The XPA protein plays an essential
role in damage recognition and is a rate-limiting factor that is regulated
by the clock and by the HERC2 ubiquitin ligase. A consequence of the
daily oscillation of XPA (red sinusoidal arrow) is that excision repair
activity exhibits a daily rhythm that increases during the late afternoon
and evening and decreases during the early morning in mouse.

When nuclear extracts from mouse
brain or liver were tested over
a circadian cycle, it was found that the excision activity, as measured
by the removal of (6–4)photoproduct or cisplatin-d(GpTpG) diadducts,
exhibited circadian rhythmicity, with a zenith at ∼5 p.m. (ZT10)
and a nadir around 5 a.m. (ZT22), (Figure ). When the expression patterns of the nucleotide
excision repair proteins were analyzed, it was found that only the
level of XPA exhibited circadian rhythmicity. Further analyses revealed that Xpa transcription
exhibits high-amplitude oscillation in all tissues that were tested
(brain, liver, and skin) except testis, which is known to lack a circadian clock.Xpa transcription, XPA protein level, and excision
activity all exhibit amplitudes of 5–10, and all are in phase
with one another. As is the case with other proteins with high-amplitude
rhythmicity, the XPA protein also has a relatively short half-life
(t1/2 ∼ 3 h). The protein is ubiquitinated by HERC2 E3 ligase and degraded
by the ubiquitin–proteosome system (UPS), and downregulation
of HERC2 by siRNA leads to the stabilization of XPA and to a constitutively
high level of the protein. Similarly,
in Cry1/2–/– mouse tissues,
XPA levels are at a constitutively high level. However, the increased
XPA level, whether it is a result of constitutive transcription or
reduced ubiquitination and proteolytic degradation, does not increase,
or only marginally increases, the nucleotide excision repair activity
because under these conditions other excision repair proteins become
rate-limiting.

Effect of the circadian clock on day and night expression
patterns
of excision repair proteins and excision activity. (A) Nucleotide
excision repair proteins were analyzed by immunoblotting in duplicate
C57BL/6 mouse brain samples harvested at ZT(zeitgeber time)18 (midnight)
and ZT06 (noon). XPA is highly expressed
during the day and downregulated at night. The other excision repair
proteins do not exhibit circadian variation between ZT18 and ZT06.
(B) Circadian rhythm of XPA transcript, protein, and nucleotide excision
repair in C57BL/6 mouse liver. (Top)
Excision repair. The liver extracts were tested for repair activity.
The control lane contained DNA substrate but no extract. The excision
products [indicated as a bar with a circle (isotope-labeled) and a
triangle (Pt adduct)] in the range of 24–32 nucleotides were
detected by autoradiography. (Middle) Transcription and protein expression.
WB indicates Western blot for XPA and Cry1. Note the antiphase relation
between the Cry1 repressor and the clock-controlled XPA protein. RT
indicates analysis of XPA transcript by quantitative RT-PCR. (Bottom)
Quantitative analysis. Values of Xpa transcription,
XPA protein level, and excision repair activity over a circadian cycle
are expressed relative to the maximum of each variable (ZT = 0 is
light on, and ZT = 12 is light off; EST is Eastern Standard Time).
The removal of both (6–4)photoproduct and cisplatin-d(GpTpG)
diadducts exhibits circadian rhythmicity under conditions of both
ZT and CT (circadian time).

In tissue culture, individual mammalian cells maintain their
circadian
rhythmicity. However, because of stochastic
perturbations the cells are out of phase with one another, and as
a consequence the culture as a whole does not exhibit circadian rhythm.
The circadian phase of the entire culture can be synchronized by extracellular
signals that activate essentially any of the major intracellular signaling
pathways (“a bewildering variety of signaling pathways”), including MAP kinase, nuclear receptors, and
DNA damage response pathways.− Activation of these pathways
by such treatments (serum shock and dexamethasone) synchronizes the
phases of the cells in culture, and the culture as a whole becomes
a circadian system. It should be noted, however, that although circadian
synchronization in tissue culture has been quite useful in studying
the basic mechanisms of the molecular clock,, this method is of limited use in studying most of the clock-controlled
genes and pathways because in tissue culture the clock is supplanted
by homeostatic control mechanisms. As
a consequence, even though excision repair exhibits high-amplitude
circadian rhythmicity at the animal and organ level, its rhythmicity
in circadian synchronized tissue culture is either nonexistent or
below the resolution limit of repair assays, which is true for other
circadian-controlled outputs in cell-based systems.

Finally, with respect to evolutionary considerations
regarding
the circadian control of nucleotide excision repair, we note that
one of the most commonly held views in circadian biology is the “escape
from light” hypothesis according to which circadian rhythmicity
evolved to minimize exposure to UV light-induced DNA damage in primitive
organisms by diel vertical movement to and from the surface of the
ocean.,, We also note
that photolyase, which repairs UV-induced DNA damage, uses blue light
as a cosubstrate and that while mammals do not have photolyase, its close evolutionary relative cryptochrome
regulates excision repair of UV-induced DNA damage. Thus, photolyase
and cryptochrome may have evolved from a common ancestor into an enzyme
that repairs UV damage and into a clock protein, which though it does
not repair UV damage, does regulate the excision repair system that
repairs UV damage in addition to many other types of DNA damage.

DNA Damage Checkpoints
Cell cycle checkpoints
regulate the progression of the cell cycle, and DNA damage checkpoints are biochemical pathways or networks
that delay cell cycle progression in response to DNA damage. DNA damage checkpoints are damage-amplified
forms of cell cycle checkpoints. The DNA damage checkpoints promote
cell survival by preventing cells from entering the S phase while
the DNA is damaged (G1/S checkpoint), by preventing the firing of
late replication origins while the early replicons are blocked by
DNA damage (intra-S phase checkpoint), by blocking cells from entering
mitosis while the S phase is ongoing albeit at a slow rate because
of DNA damage (S-M checkpoint), and by preventing cells from entering
into mitosis while DNA carries damage in the G2 phase (G2/M checkpoint).

Although coupling of the cell cycle to
the circadian clock has been reported in organisms ranging from unicellular
organisms− to mammals by various
mechanisms and to confer an evolutionary advantage, the significance
of this coupling in mammals is unclear at present. In mammals, it
has been reported that the clock controls the cell cycle by several
mechanisms, including G1/S regulation by p21, p20, and NONO, and G2/M regulation by Wee1. The significance
of these findings, as well as the converse findings that the cell
cycle controls the circadian cycle in proliferating tissues or tissue
culture,,, to the DNA
damage checkpoint response is unclear. In addition, circadian/cell
cycle coupling may not be that strong. A study with immortalized fibroblasts
revealed that the two become uncoupled at higher temperatures; with
an increase in temperature, the cell cycle is accelerated in accordance
with the rules governing the rate of chemical reactions as a function
of temperature, but the circadian period remained constant, which
has been known to occur in a bona fide circadian system (temperature
compensation).

In mammalian organisms,
two main DNA damage checkpoint pathways
and/or systems have been defined on the basis of the PIKK (phosphoinositol
3-kinase-related kinase) family member damage sensor that initiates
the signal transduction cascade (Figure ).
These two pathways are governed by the ATM (Ataxia Telangiectasia-Mutated)
and ATR (ATM and Rad3-related) protein kinases. Although there is some overlap and crosstalk between the
two pathways, as a general rule, DNA damage by ionizing radiation
(IR) and other agents that induce double-strand breaks activates the
ATM pathway while DNA damage by UV and UV-mimetic agents that produce
bulky base adducts activates the ATR pathway. Both pathways encompass
approximately 10 core proteins, but both are also affected by many
other proteins that are involved in cell growth and differentiation. It would be expected that such pathways with
pervasive effects on cellular homeostasis would form an interface
with the circadian clock molecular clockwork, which is another global
regulatory system with wide-ranging effects on cellular physiology. Indeed, interfacing of both the ATR– and
ATM–DNA damage checkpoints with the clock has been reported.

Model
for the mammalian DNA damage checkpoint pathways and/or systems.
Two main DNA damage checkpoint pathways and/or systems have been defined
on the basis of the PIKK family member damage sensor (ATR or ATM)
that initiates the signal transduction cascade. DNA damage by ionizing
radiation (IR) and other agents that induce double-strand breaks activates
the ATM pathway, while DNA damage by UV and UV-mimetic agents that
produce bulky base adducts activates the ATR pathway, although there
is overlap and crosstalk between the two pathways.

Coupling of the Circadian Clock with the ATR–Chk1
DNA Damage Signaling System
The first evidence that the circadian
clock interfaces with the DNA damage checkpoints came from the analysis
of Timeless (TIM) protein in human cells. There are two TIM paralogs in Drosophila, Tim1 (the classic Tim gene) and Tim2 (the subsequently discovered timeout gene)., dTIM1 is a core clock protein in Drosophila with no other known functions. The mammalian Tim gene is more homologous to dTim2 and
plays an essential role in growth and differentiation at the organismal
level and replication fork stability
at the cellular level,, and as a consequence, TIM knockout is embryonic lethal in the mouse. Nevertheless, cumulative evidence from a variety
of experimental approaches indicates that the human (and mouse) TIM is a bona fide clock gene, as well, albeit with additional
essential functions required for viability.−

The clue
about the essential function for TIM came from studies of its yeast
orthologs., These are Swi1 in Schizosaccharomyces
pombe and Tof1 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Moreover, it was shown that both Swi1 and Tof1 function as heterodimers
(Swi1–Swi3 and Tof1–Csm3, respectively) and play important
roles in stabilizing replication forks and in S phase (replication)
checkpoint activation. Similarly, most human TIM is in the form of
a TIM–TIPIN (Timeless interacting protein) complex. Thus, the two lines of research, circadian studies
in mammalian cells, implicating TIM in the circadian clock, and replication
checkpoint studies in yeasts, implicating it in replication fork stability,
suggested the possibility that the TIM–TIPIN complex may participate
in both circadian and cell cycle (checkpoint) regulation in mammalian
cells.

Experimental analyses supported this expectation. It
was found
that human TIM associates both with CRY2 on the circadian side and
with ATR–ATRIP damage sensor and Chk1 signal transducer kinases
on the checkpoint side of the cellular signaling network. At the functional level, the downregulation
of TIM by siRNA caused a significant reduction in PER2 protein levels
and disruption of circadian rhythmicity in the suprachiasmatic nucleus
(SCN) (clock effect) and a significant
reduction in the level of phosphorylation of Chk1 protein under conditions
of replication inhibition (Figure A), which
caused both intra-S (replication fork collapse) and S-M (premature
mitosis) checkpoint defects (cell cycle effect). These findings led to the conclusion that TIM, either alone
or in the form of the TIM–TIPIN complex, is both a clock and
a checkpoint protein by being a direct participant in both processes
(Figure B). This was named parallel coupling
of the circadian and cell cycles to indicate the participation of
the same protein in both systems, as opposed to serial coupling whereby
a clock-regulated protein or a cell cycle-regulated protein influences
the cell cycle or circadian clock phase and amplitude, respectively.
In further support of the clock–DNA damage checkpoint connection,
it was reported that downregulation of CRY1 in mouse NIH3T3 cells
by siRNA abolished ATR-mediated Chk1 phosphorylation after DNA damage; however, a different study with mouse skin fibroblasts
found that CRY1 downregulation had no effect on ATR activation.

Coupling the circadian clock to the cell cycle/checkpoint
response.
(A) Timeless (TIM) is required for Chk1 activation. HeLa cells were
transfected with control or TIM siRNA twice over a period of 3 days.
Seventy-two hours after the initial transfection, cells were treated
with 10 mM hydroxyurea (HU) for 1.5 h or left untreated. Two hundred
micrograms of cell lysates was immunoblotted with anti-Tim (α-Timeless),
anti-P-Chk1 (Ser345), anti-Chk1, anti-Per2, and anti-actin antibodies. (B) Model for parallel coupling of the circadian
clock and the cell cycle/checkpoint response. The core circadian clock
protein CRY2, in conjunction with TIM, participates in the ATR–Chk1
signaling pathway in response to UV and UV-mimetic agents.

Finally, we note that in parallel with studies
of human TIM, work
on dTIM2 (timeout) has shown that this protein plays a role in both
circadian clock and checkpoint functions.,

Coupling of the Circadian Clock with the ATM–Chk2
DNA Damage Signaling System
Findings similar to those reported
for the ATR–Chk1 system were reported for the ATM–Chk2
signaling pathway., It was reported that PER1, in
addition to its role as a clock protein, also participates in ATM
→ Chk2 signaling by directly interacting with both ATM and
Chk2. It was found that downregulation of PER1 interfered with IR-induced
phosphorylation of Chk2 by ATM and reduced the level of apoptosis
by agents that induce double-strand breaks. In further support of this function of PER1 as a pro-apoptotic protein,
it was reported that PER1 is downregulated in a number of cancers,
including lung and breast cancers.

Against this background, a systematic study of the clock effect on
the DNA damage response in tissue culture yielded unexpected results, which suggests that caution must be exercised
in relying on data from tissue culture experiments regarding the clock–checkpoint–apoptosis–repair
connection. First, it was found that mutations in clock genes in either
the positive arm (CLOCK and BMAL1) or the negative arm (CRYs and PERs)
in mouse cell lines had no effect on the two major DNA repair pathways
tested, nucleotide excision repair and recombination/cross-link repair.
These results indicate that if these repair systems are circadian-controlled
at the organismic level, this control mechanism is lost or overridden
by homeostatic mechanisms in tissue culture. This was not surprising
because a systematic analysis of circadian-controlled genes revealed
that even though in a given organ 1000–3000 genes are transcriptionally
clock-controlled,,,, in tissue culture of most commonly used
mammalian cell lines, transcription of only 10–20 genes, mainly
those of the core clock genes, was controlled by the TTFL of the circadian
clock. Second, when attempts were made
to compare the effects of clock gene mutations on checkpoint and apoptosis
using immortalized cell lines, it was realized that these cell lines
isolated in different laboratories have different amounts of checkpoint
and apoptosis proteins (both apoptosis proteases and their targets),
which makes comparison between wild-type and mutant cell lines impossible.
Thus, it was concluded that the effect of the clock on checkpoint
and apoptosis could be reliably compared only in the same cell strain
in which the particular clock protein is downregulated by siRNA. To
this end, primary mouse skin fibroblasts (MSFs) were studied. In MSFs,
downregulation of CLOCK, BMAL1, CRY1, CRY2, PER1, or PER2 had no effect
on Chk1 or Chk2 phosphorylation after DNA damage.

Because of a previous report indicating that CLOCK
knockdown rendered
cells sensitive to IR and mitomycin C, the MSFs were also analyzed for sensitivity to these DNA-damaging
agents, and there was no indication that eliminating any of the clock
proteins had any effect on the sensitivity to these DNA-damaging agents. Third, when apoptosis was analyzed in MSFs in
which clock gene expression was downregulated by siRNA, no effect
on apoptosis could be detected as probed by PARP and caspase-3 cleavage
following UV irradiation. Finally, in
contrast to the study that reported that certain human cancer cell
lines had reduced levels of Per1 transcription and
as a consequence were resistant to IR-induced apoptosis and clonogenic
killing by IR, and that they could be made sensitive by PER1 overexpression, no such effect could be detected in a follow-up
report. Similarly, in contrast to the
reports linking PER1 levels to IR sensitivity, when the NCI-H460 human
lung cancer cell line and the HCT-116 human colorectal cancer cell
line were transfected with a PER1 expression vector and then tested
for IR-induced apoptosis and clonogenic killing there was no effect
(Figure A). There was also no effect on either
apoptosis or clonogenic survival in response to IR treatment, relative
to control cells or the same cell lines in which PER1 was downregulated
by siRNA (Figure B). In agreement with these latter results, it has been reported that
in human gingival and pancreatic cancer cell lines, CA9-22 and MTA
PCa-2, respectively, and in the hepatocellular carcinoma cell line
HepG2, PER1 actually acts as an anti-apoptotic protein because downregulation
of PER1 by siRNA in these cell lines reduced the level of spontaneous
and cisplatin-induced apoptosis and had an only marginal effect on
clonogenic survival.−

Neither PER1 overexpression nor downregulation sensitizes
human
lung cancer cells to apoptosis or affects Chk2 phosphorylation following
ionizing radiation (IR). (A) Overexpression of PER1. Protein levels
were analyzed by immunoblotting 48 h after irradiation with IR with
the indicated antibodies from NCI-H460 cells following transfection
with either empty vector (pcDNA3) or a mPer1-overexpressing vector
for 72 h. T-PARP and C-PARP stand for total PARP and cleaved PARP,
respectively. (B) Downregulation of PER1. Protein levels from NCI-H460
cells transfected with either negative control (nontarget, NT) or
Per1 siRNAs were analyzed by immunoblotting 48 h after irradiation
with 0, 10, or 30 Gy of IR with the indicated antibodies.

To recapitulate, quantitative analyses of the DNA damage
response
with either immortalized cell lines or primary fibroblasts, with or
without any of the core clock proteins, do not provide convincing
evidence that in these systems the core clock affects the DNA damage
response. The only exception to this generalization is TIM. However,
TIM is an essential cell cycle gene in addition to its role in the
circadian cycle, and therefore, the effects of its downregulation
or mutation on DNA damage checkpoints are more likely the reflection
of its cell cycle function.

Circadian
Clock and Apoptosis
Although
apoptosis is one of the pathways activated by DNA damage, it is a
more general cell death program that can be activated by a variety
of stimuli, and hence, the clock–apoptosis
connection deserves a consideration separate from the general topic
of DNA damage responses. Apoptosis is the most common form of programmed
cell death and has been classified into two categories: intrinsic
apoptosis, which is initiated by DNA-damaging agents, and extrinsic
apoptosis, which is initiated by cytokines, including death ligands
such as tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα). Recently, the clock has been connected to both intrinsic
and extrinsic apoptosis (Figure ).

Model for effects
of the clock on apoptosis. Circadian regulation
of the extrinsic pathway occurs via regulation of the synthesis of
TNFα and the phosphorylation of GSK3β, both of which regulate
NF-kB signal transduction to caspase 8, which in turn activates executioner
caspases, including caspase 3. In the intrinsic pathway, DNA damage
causes the upregulation of p73 (in a circadian-regulated manner),
which activates transcription of Bax and Bak causing the release of cytochrome c (c) from the mitochondria, apoptosome assembly, and the eventual
cleavage and activation of transducer caspase 9, which in turn cleaves
and activates executioner caspase 3.

Clock and Intrinsic Apoptosis
In the
intrinsic (or mitochondrial) pathway, cellular damage, including DNA
damage and cellular stress caused by unfolded proteins, leads to an
increased level of expression of pro-apoptotic members (Bax and Bak)
of the Bcl-2 family. The p53 tumor suppressor plays an important role
in the DNA damage-initiated intrinsic apoptosis pathway. In fact, it appears that p53 acts as a tumor
suppressor to a large extent by inducing apoptosis in oncogenically
transformed cells by upregulating the expression of Bax and Bak in
response to genotoxic stress. p53 is
a member of a family of proteins comprised of p53, p63, and p73. Among these three proteins, p53 is the main
tumor suppressor and does so by promoting the apoptosis of damaged
or oncogenically transformed and hence stressed cells; p63 and p73
function primarily in growth and differentiation with a secondary
role as pro-apoptotic proteins, with p73 as the stronger tumor suppressor
of the two. As we will detail below,
it was found that oncogenically transformed p53–/–Cry1/2–/– cells were more sensitive to genotoxic agents than p53–/– cells, which
suggested that the absence of CRYs activated a p53-independent apoptosis
pathway that is not apparent in p53+/+ cells because of the strong pro-apoptotic effect of p53.

Detailed
analyses of the enhanced apoptosis in p53–/– cells by CRY mutation led to the discovery that p73 is upregulated
in these cells after DNA damage. Like
p53 protein levels, p73 protein levels also increase after DNA damage.
However, in contrast to p53, whose upregulation occurs mainly through
post-translational modifications, DNA damage-induced upregulation
of p73 occurs mainly by transcriptional induction. The p73 promoter contains five binding sites for Egr1, three binding sites
for E2F1, and one binding site for C-EBPα transcription factors.
Egr1 and E2F1 are transcriptional activators, whereas C-EBPα
functions as a repressor. Egr1 is controlled by the circadian clock
in addition to other ill-defined mechanisms related to growth control. Thus, with respect to circadian regulation, Egr1, which contains an E-box in its promoter, is a first-order
clock-controlled gene (CCG) and p73 is a second-order
CCG (Figure A). In most cell types in the
absence of DNA damage, the level of expression of p73 is rather low. DNA damage affects all three transcription factors
in a way to enhance p73 transcriptional activation.
DNA damage by UV or UV-mimetic agents causes C-EBPα phosphorylation,
its release from the p73 promoter, and exclusion
from the nucleus, facilitating p73 transcription.
Egr1 is also activated by UV and the UV-mimetic agent oxaliplatin;
therefore, p73 induction by these DNA-damaging agents has a strong
circadian component, and Cry mutation sensitizes p53–/– cells to
oxaliplatin (Figure B). In summary, in cells with wild-type p53, the circadian
clock does not appreciably affect intrinsic apoptosis, because of
the dominant effect of p53 in promoting apoptosis in response to DNA
damage. However, in p53 mutant cells (50% of cancers have p53 mutations)
for intrinsic apoptosis initiated by UV-mimetic agents, including
the widely used anticancer drug oxaliplatin, the clock affects apoptosis
through a gene (p73) that becomes a second-order
clock-controlled gene only after DNA damage.

Circadian clock and apoptosis.
(A) Model for targeting the clock
to improve the efficacy of oxaliplatin treatment of p53-null tumors. CRY regulates Egr1 expression, which
transactivates p73. In Cry mutants, Egr1 is upregulated. Following oxaliplatin treatment, there
is a decreased level of binding of C-EBPα and an increased level
of binding of Egr1 to the p73 promoter, causing massive
production of p73 and enhanced apoptosis. (B) Effect of cryptochrome mutation on clonogenic cell death by
oxaliplatin. Cells of the indicated genotypes were treated with the
indicated doses of oxaliplatin and incubated for 9–10 days,
and then colonies were stained with 5% methylene blue and counted
to obtain the UV survival curves. (C)
Model for the regulation of cytokine-initiated NF-κB anti-apoptotic
function through the clock-controlled GSK3β activity in p53-deficient
tumor cells and the consequence of cryptochrome inactivation. In the absence of CRY, GSK3β becomes hyperphosphorylated
and unable to phosphorylate NF-κB, leading to weakened anti-apoptotic
function of NF-κB. The absence of CRY also causes overexpression
of TNFα, which contributes to enhanced extrinsic apoptosis.
(D) Clonogenic cell survival assay showing the viable cells remaining
after treatment with TNFα (50 ng/mL) for 48 h as a percentage
of viable untreated cells.

Clock and Extrinsic Apoptosis
The finding
that mice of the p53–/–Cry1/2–/– genotype exhibit delayed
onset of cancer relative to p53–/– mice suggested that the absence of
CRY may amplify the extrinsic pathway of apoptosis that eliminates
cancerous cells by upregulation or amplification of cytokines that
promote extrinsic apoptosis. It was found that clock disruption through
CRY mutation promotes extrinsic apoptosis by two mechanisms (Figure C). First, in Cry mutant mice,
levels of inflammatory and pro-apoptotic cytokines such as TNFα
are elevated. Second, in p53 mutant cells with a functional clock, these cytokines activate the
transcription of anti-apoptotic genes in a manner gated by the circadian
clock through GSK3β phosphorylation. In contrast, the Cry-null mutation in p53-mutated cells leads to hyperphosphorylation and inactivation of
GSK3β and hence its failure to phosphorylate and activate the
anti-apoptotic activity of NF-κB, making cells more sensitive
to TNFα-induced apoptosis (Figure D). Thus, CRY mutation promotes extrinsic apoptosis
by two different mechanisms, by leading to overproduction of pro-apoptotic
cytokines such as TNFα and by leading to GSK3β hyperphosphorylation,
which in turn results in its failure to phosphorylate NF-κB
to perform its anti-apoptotic function. An additional level of regulation
may also be mediated by the direct interaction between CLOCK and the
p65 subunit of NF-κB. Thus, the
combination of an elevated level of TNFα with reduced NF-κB
anti-apoptotic activity because of its reduced level of phosphorylation
leads to enhanced apoptosis of malignant cells that are known to be
more susceptible to both intrinsic and extrinsic apoptosis as a general
rule.

Finally, with regard to circadian control of DNA damage
responses, we should also note that, conversely, evidence exists that
DNA damage also affects the clock by resetting the phase., However, as activation of any of the major intracellular signaling
pathways causes phase shifting, the physiological relevance of these
observations remains to be established.

Circadian Clock and Cancer
The circadian clock–cancer connection may be analyzed as
three separate entities, including circadian control of carcinogenesis
by the time of the day, circadian clock disruption as carcinogenic
or as a modality in cancer treatment, and the circadian rhythm as
a guide to administer anticancer treatment for improvement of the
therapeutic index.

Circadian Control of Carcinogenesis
It was recently shown that the capacity for excision repair in
mouse
skin oscillates with a circadian rhythm that is correlated with rhythmic
XPA protein oscillation. In addition
to excision repair oscillation, using Cry1/2–/– mice it was shown that DNA replication is
circadian in nature in proliferating tissues such as the skin and
intestine, and excision repair is antiphase to that of DNA replication.
Both excision repair and accurate replication are critical for maintenance
of genomic stability, and presumably also for melanoma and non-melanoma
skin cancer prevention. In fact, mice exposed to UV radiation in the
early morning when excision repair is at its minimum and replication
is at its maximum are more prone to squamous cell carcinoma with 5-fold
more invasive carcinomas than mice exposed to UV radiation in the
evening when excision repair is at its maximum and replication is
at its minimum (Figure ). These studies establish
a rationale for chrono-photobiological response and suggest that timing
or modulating the circadian clock mechanism may reduce the risk of
exposure to sunlight and other sources of radiation.

Effect of the time of
day of exposure to UVB on skin carcinogenesis
in SKH-1 hairless mice. The control was not irradiated; the AM group
was irradiated at 4 a.m. (XPA minimum), and the PM group was irradiated
at 4 p.m. (XPA maximum). (A) Physical appearance of mice from the
three experimental groups 23 weeks after the initiation of irradiation
(353 J/m2 of UVB). (B) Effect of the circadian clock on
repair and cancer. XPA protein levels in epidermis (line plot) over
the entire cycle and invasive cancer caused by UV at 4 a.m. and 4
p.m. (bar graph) are shown.

Circadian Clock Disruption
as a Carcinogenic
Factor
Because the circadian clock directly or indirectly
affects all metabolic processes, signaling pathways, and intracellular
systems and/or networks,−,, it would be expected that clock disruption
would have an effect on cancer development and progression. With this general premise as a starting point,
a number of studies have been conducted to demonstrate that clock
disruption increases cancer risk and promotes cancer progression.
These studies fall into three general categories: epidemiologic analysis
in human populations, xenograft growth in mice with a surgically or
environmentally disrupted clock, and analysis of the incidence of
spontaneous or induced cancer in mice in which the clock has been
permanently disrupted by gene targeting technologies. These studies
will be briefly summarized below, but it must be stated at the outset
that the evidence considered in its totality suggests that any link
between clock disruption and cancer is either anecdotal or so weak
that it might be considered nonexistent.

Epidemiological
Studies
Several studies
have reported that individuals with occupational clock disruption
have an increased risk of cancer., Thus, it has
been reported that night shift or rotating shift workers in health
and food industries and flight attendants working on intercontinental
routes have increased risk of breast and colorectal cancers, and correlations
were made between the length of rotating shift work and cancer incidence., In fact, on the basis of a ruling by the WHO-IARC that “shift
work that involves circadian disruption is probably carcinogenic to
humans”, night shift workers with breast cancer were awarded
compensation in Denmark. More recently,
an American Medical Association policy statement has recognized clock
disruption by light at night as a cancer risk based on consideration
of meta-analyses of several epidemiologic studies. While these studies are important from a public health
perspective, they do not establish causality, nor do they provide
a mechanistic insight into clock disruption and cancer. In fact, it
has been argued that night shift and rotating shift work and cancer
are two independent outcomes of certain personality traits. In support of this latter argument, it was reported
that in a large study of breast cancer incidence in Chinese women,
the incidence of breast cancer in night shift and rotating shift workers
was actually lower than the breast cancer incidence in women with
conventional working schedules. More
recently, the validity of epidemiological studies linking clock disruption
to increased cancer risk has been criticized on methodological grounds., Hence, when all relevant factors are taken into account, the epidemiological
data fall short of establishing an association between circadian clock
disruption and an elevated risk of cancer. Studies with animal models
and cell biological experiments have therefore been conducted to provide
a more direct approach to the question of a circadian disruption–cancer
connection.

Animal Models
Two
types of animal studies
have been done to investigate the effect of circadian clock disruption
on carcinogenesis.

Surgical Clock Disruption
In this approach,
the master circadian clock, the SCN, is surgically destroyed, tumors
(or cancer cell lines) are inserted into mice subcutaneously, and
tumor growth is monitored relative to xenografts in mice with a normal
SCN. It was reported that both pancreatic carcinoma and Glasgow osteosarcoma
xenografts grew at a faster rate in SCN-lesioned animals. However, as the clock was disrupted only in
the SCN of the host mice, it is not known whether the implanted tumors
had an intrinsic clock or whether the tumor clock was influenced by
the host circadian clock. In a related study, when Clock gene expression was downregulated in Lewis lung carcinoma (LLC1)
cells by siRNA and then inoculated subcutaneously into mice, the resulting
tumor grew at a rate slower than that of the control, suggesting that
in this experimental system disruption of the clock actually interfered
with tumor growth. However, it could
be argued that clock disruption by CLOCK mutation or downregulation
stops the circadian clock at around midnight (when CLOCK-BMAL1 activity
is at its minimum), and hence, stopping the clock by other means and
at other times of the biological time may differentially affect tumor
growth. This qualification notwithstanding, on the basis of this evidence
alone the generalization that clock disruption by whatever means promotes
tumorigenesis cannot be made.

Genetic
Disruption of the Circadian Clock
In this method, one (or
both paralogs when they exist) of the clock
genes is knocked out genetically, and in these genetically engineered
mice, the incidence of spontaneous and DNA damage-induced cancers
is monitored. In the first such experiment, it was reported that Per2 mutant mice were predisposed to spontaneous and IR-induced
cancers. This was ascribed to elevated c-Myc expression and reduced p53 levels, which together
were presumed to promote cell proliferation and inhibit apoptosis.
However, subsequent studies failed to support this conclusion. Because CRY and PER constitute the negative
arm of the circadian TTFL, it was reasoned that CRY-null mice would exhibit the same phenotype vis-à-vis spontaneous
and IR-induced carcinogenesis as Per2 mutant mice.
However, it was found that Cry1/2–/– mice were indistinguishable from wild-type mice. While this could be ascribed to PER or CRY having unique
functions in addition to their functions as repressors of CLOCK-BMAL1,
a recent study in which wild-type, Per1–/–, and Per2–/– mice in a
C57/BL6 background were compared showed no significant difference
among the three strains with respect to spontaneous and IR-induced
cancer incidence (Figure ), raising serious doubts about the validity of the report
that Per2 is a tumor suppressor. Similarly, neither CLOCK nor BMAL1
null mutant mice have elevated incidence of cancers, although they
exhibit some early aging phenotypes. Thus,
considered in its totality, the available data lead to the conclusion
that circadian clock disruption by genetic mutations does not predispose
mice to cancer. Other reports claiming not-permanent clock disruption
but repeated phase shifts might be carcinogenic await independent
verification. Clearly, the circadian
clock disruption–cancer connection is a very important public
health issue, and further well-controlled epidemiologic and animal
model studies are needed to provide a consensus about this subject,
upon which public health policy decisions can be made.

Kaplan–Meier
plots of death from cancer from three different
studies of mice with clock gene mutations. Eight-week-old mice of
the indicated genotypes were exposed to 4 Gy of IR at ZT10 and observed
for 90 weeks. Data for tumorigenesis and mortality are replotted from
(A) ref () (B) ref (), and (C) ref ().

Circadian Clock and Cancer
Treatment
Chronotherapy is the timing of drug delivery with
the appropriate
phase of the circadian rhythm to achieve optimal efficacy. Chonochemotherapy is the administration of chemotherapeutic
drugs at the appropriate phases of the circadian clock to obtain the
best therapeutic index., Although the application
of chronotherapy to certain pathologic conditions such as asthma,
hypertension, and cardiovascular disease has led to significant improvements
in developing drug regimens for these diseases,, the application of chronotherapy to cancer treatment has not. This
is due in large part to the empirical design of the treatment regimens
and to the anecdotal nature of the reports on the efficacy of chronochemotherapy.
With recent advances in the mechanistic basis of the molecular clock,
attempts are being made to develop mechanism-based chronochemotherapy
regimens. Two such approaches, one based on the circadian clock control
of excision repair and one based on the effect of circadian clock
disruption on apoptosis, will be summarized below.

Clock Control
of DNA Excision Repair and Chemotherapy
As noted above, the
essential nucleotide excision repair protein
XPA is a first-order clock-controlled protein, and as a consequence,
the rate of nucleotide excision repair exhibits high-amplitude circadian
rhythmicity. Because excision repair
is the sole mechanism for removing the predominant DNA adducts induced
by the anticancer drug cisplatin (and its second-generation derivatives
oxaliplatin and carboplatin), Pt-d(GpG) and Pt-d(GpXpG), the repair
rates of these adducts exhibit circadian rhythmicity in brain, liver,
kidney, skin, and all other tissues tested except testis.,− Thus, in tumors arising in tissues with circadian
rhythmicity, provided the tumor maintains rhythmicity in phase with
the normal tissue, administration of cisplatin when excision repair
is in the descending phase is expected to improve the therapeutic
index by administering a less toxic dose. Conversely, if the tumor
is rhythmic but out of phase with the normal tissue, the therapeutic
index may be improved by drug delivery when repair is ascending in
normal tissue. Similarly, if the cancerous tissue lacks rhythmicity,
delivery of the drug in the ascending phase of the excision repair
rate in the normal tissue would be expected to improve the therapeutic
index.

Application of these findings to the development of practical
chronochemotherapy regimens faces some technical problems that must
be overcome to be of clinical value. First, accurate information regarding
cisplatin pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics is needed for various
tissues, including the tumor. Second, a noninvasive method for determining
if the tumor has rhythmicity and, if it does, the phase of the rhythmicity
relative to the normal tissue must be known. Finally, the timing of
the other drugs that are used in combination chemotherapy, such as
doxorubicin, which induces double-strand breaks, must be considered.
There is no evidence that enzymes involved in double-strand break
repair are controlled by the circadian clock. However, the mode of
double-strand break repair is affected by the cell cycle (which is
affected by the clock), with repair by homologous recombination dominating
in the S phase and nonhomologous end joining in G1 and G2 phases. Similarly, cisplatin induces interstrand cross-links
that are repaired by interstrand cross-link repair pathways that are also cell cycle-dependent, and their
contribution to cisplatin lethality needs to be quantified. In summary,
while the finding that excision repair is controlled by the circadian
clock has provided the opportunity for a rational chronochemotherapy
regimen, other factors will have to be incorporated into the overall
approach in a clinical setting.

Clock Control
of Apoptosis and Cancer Therapy
Preferential killing of cancer
cells relative to normal cells is
the predominant rationale in all therapeutic approaches. A major mechanism
of drug-induced cell killing is programmed cell death (apoptosis).
Analyses of the effect of clock disruption on the cellular response
to DNA damage led to the finding that the circadian clock affects
apoptosis in certain genetic backgrounds and to the conclusion that
this effect must be considered in chronotherapy regimens.

The
initial finding that the clock affects apoptosis came from investigations
into the effect of clock disruption on carcinogenesis. To understand
the effect of CRY mutation on carcinogenesis, the Cry1/2–/– mutations were combined with a p53-null mutation following a commonly used strategy to
uncover the carcinogenicity of weakly penetrant tumorigenic genes. The p53–/– mice, as expected, developed lymphoma and lymphosarcomas and had
an average life span of 5.5 months. Contrary to expectation, the p53–/–Cry1/2–/– mice
had a reduced age-adjusted incidence of cancer and lived 1.5-fold
longer than the p53–/– mice
(Figure A). This finding led to the suggestion
that in the p53–/–Cry1/2–/– background, cells become more sensitive to DNA-damaging agents,
and therefore, the two cell lines after transformation with ras(V12G)/rasT24 were examined for their
DNA repair, DNA damage checkpoint, and apoptosis activities, all of
which are known to affect cell survival. It was found that the triple
knockout had nucleotide excision repair and checkpoint responses indistinguishable
from those in p53 mutant cells. However, the triple mutant exhibited increased sensitivity
to apoptosis, which was detailed in the earlier section on the effect
of the circadian clock on the cellular response to DNA damage. These
findings are briefly recapitulated here to emphasize the potential
of this increased sensitivity to apoptosis as a variable in cancer
therapy. It should be noted, however, that in contrast to the effect
of Cry mutation on increasing the survival of p53-null mice, no such effect was seen in another mouse
cancer model system. Ink4a–/–;ras(V12G) tumor suppressor/oncogene
mutant mice are used as a model for UV-induced melanomas, and these
mice develop malignant melanomas with 100% frequency in light-exposed
areas of the animal under standard mouse facility lighting conditions. The combination of Cry mutation
with the ink4a–/–;ras(V12G) mutation did not affect the melanoma incidence
(Figure B), and hence, it was concluded that
in this genetic background, Cry mutation has no moderating
effect on cancer incidence or progression.

Effect of CRY mutation
on cancer incidence and mortality in mouse
strains with a predisposition to cancer. Kaplan–Meier plots
of death from cancer are shown. (A) p53–/– (red) and p53–/–;Cry1/2–/– (green and blue) survival
probabilities. Data shown by the green line have been published, and the unpublished data shown by the blue line
were obtained by a different member of the lab in a blind experimental
design. (B) Tumor-free survival of ink4a–/–;ras(V12G) (blue) and ink4a–/–;ras(V12G);Cry1/2–/– (red) mice. The activated HRAS gene
is carried on the Y chromosome, and the experiment was conducted in
male mice maintained under standard conditions of 12 h light–12
h dark cycles and monitored regularly for the appearance of melanomas.
There is no statistical significance between the two survival curves
(p = 0.2), and hence, it is concluded that in this
genetic background Cry mutation has no mitigating
effect on cancer incidence or progression.

CRY Inactivation as a Modality in Chemotherapy
(intrinsic apoptosis)
To determine if the apoptosis enhanced
by CRY mutation could be used in chemotherapy, xenograft experiments
were performed. NOD/SCID mice were injected
in different flanks with ras-transformed p53–/– or p53–/–;Cry1/2–/– cells, and tumor growth was followed (Figure A). Tumors of both cell types grew at the same rate, and when they
reached a certain size, they were treated with oxaliplatin (Figure B,D). It was found that oxaliplatin had only marginal
effects on p53–/– tumors
but caused massive apoptosis and tumor regression in p53–/–;Cry1/2–/– tumors. Mechanistic analysis of this phenomenon revealed that in
the absence of p53, p73 (of the p53, p63, p73 family) becomes the
major driver of apoptosis and p73 is highly upregulated after DNA
damage as a second-order clock-controlled gene. The p53 gene is mutated in ∼50% of cancers, and therefore, these findings along with the recent report of identification
of small molecule CRY inhibitors would
suggest that CRY inhibition might be applicable to cancer chemotherapy.

Cry
mutation increases the efficacy of cancer treatment by chemotherapy
and immunotherapy. (A) Diagram of the NOD/SCID mouse bearing a p53–/– tumor xenograft on the left
flank (one asterisk) and a p53–/–;Cry1/2–/– tumor xenograft
on the right flank (two asterisks). (B and C) Effect of oxaliplatin
and TNFα on tumor growth (metabolism). (B) In the chemotherapy
experiment, following xenograft growth to 0.1 cm3 the mouse
was treated with oxaliplatin. (C) In the case of the biotherapy experiment,
the transformed cells were treated with TNFα before injection.
Tumor metabolism was measured either 38 days (oxaliplatin) or 40 days
(TNFα) after xenograft injection. Colored panels show micro
PET scans, and charts at the right show quantification of the [18F]FDG signal as the ratio of the percent injected dose (%ID)
within the circled area to the %ID in the background region. (D) Plot
of tumor growth with red arrows indicating days of oxaliplatin injection
following the xenograft injection on day 0. (E) Plot of tumor growth following injection of TNFα-treated
transformed cells.

CRY Inactivation
as a Modality in Biotherapy
(extrinsic apoptosis)
The finding that Cry1/2–/–;p53–/– mice developed tumors later than the p53–/– mice suggested that transformed cells
of the Cry1/2–/–;p53–/– genotype were more sensitive
to being eliminated by cytotoxic cytokines. Indeed, it was found that Cry1/2–/–;p53–/– cells were more sensitive to TNFα-induced
extrinsic apoptosis than p53–/– cells. To determine if this selective
sensitivity could be used as a therapeutic approach, p53–/–;ras(p24T) and Cry1/2–/–;p53–/–;ras(p24T) xenografts were treated with TNFα. It was found
that the absence of CRY made tumors very sensitive to TNFα-induced
apoptosis, and as a consequence, TNFα stopped the growth of
the CRY mutant but not the control tumors (Figure C,E). Although TNFα is rather toxic and its systemic
administration for cancer treatment is not practical, this finding
may provide an explanation for slower tumor progression in Cry mutant p53–/– mice: TNFα is itself
controlled by the clock, and in the absence
of CRY, this cytokine would be overproduced and act on cells already
sensitized to TNFα-induced apoptosis because of the reduced
anti-apoptotic effect of NF-κB as a result of CRY mutation.

Perspective
The
molecular circadian clock is integrated into all major transcriptional
and signal transduction networks,,, and therefore, it is expected that the clock would
influence and be influenced by essentially all major intracellular
communication systems and affect physiological and pathophysiological
events. Indeed, it is well-established that the clock affects the
daily rhythmicity of physiological functions, such as sleep and mental
and physical performance, and the time of occurrence of certain pathophysiological
events, such as allergic reactions, including bronchial asthma and
cardiovascular and cerebrovascular incidents.,,,

Generation
of mouse strains with mutations in the core clock genes
has made it possible to directly test the contribution of the molecular
clock to the normal functioning at cellular and organismal levels.
These studies have yielded some expected and some unexpected and rather
surprising results. Thus, while Bmal1 and, to a lesser
extent, Clock mutant mice exhibit premature aging
phenotypes, and most clock gene mutations including Bmal1, Clock, Per, and Cry mutations have been reported to predispose mice to metabolic syndrome, it also appears that Clock, Cry, and Per mutant mice have
essentially normal growth properties and normal life spans.

With regard to coupling of the molecular
clock to cell cycle and
DNA damage checkpoints, while the coupling does exist, its contribution
to normal cell physiology is limited and not essential. This is either
because the coupling of the clock to these systems is weak or nonresonant
with noncircadian pathways or because disruption of the molecular
clock activates compensatory homeostatic adjustments in other molecular
pathways and/or networks that mitigate the effect of clock disruption
on cellular and organismic biology.

From the perspective of
clock disruption as a causative factor
in cancer, and circadian rhythmicity as a modality in cancer therapy,
the following generalizations might be made. First, causality between
clock disruption and cancer has not been convincingly demonstrated.
It remains to be seen whether future research with more specific experimental
designs will uncover such a connection. In contrast, it appears that
disruption of the circadian clock in appropriate genetic backgrounds
may actually interfere with cancer growth. Finally, it is clear that the nucleotide excision repair rate has
a strong circadian component− and that this feature may be
used in developing more efficient chemotherapy regimens. In addition
to excision repair, it has been reported that the gating of the cell
cycle by the clock imposes a circadian pattern of hair follicle loss
by ionizing radiation. Thus, it is conceivable
that the efficiencies of both chemotherapy and radiation therapy alone
or in combination (combination therapy) may be improved by appropriate
circadian timing of delivery or by modulating the core circadian system.

Author Present Address
† J.H.L.:
Department of Food and Biotechnology, Korea University,
Sejong, Republic of Korea.

Author Present Address
‡ N.O.:
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Gebze Institute
of Technology, 41400 Kocaeli, Turkey.

This work was
supported by National Institutes of Health Grants GM31082 and GM32833
and by the National Science Council and Academia Sinica, Taiwan, ROC.

The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
TTFLtranscription–translation
feedback loop

CRYcryptochrome

PERperiod

UVultraviolet

cisplatincis-diamminedichloroplatinum(II)

UPSubiquitin–proteasome system

PIKKphosphainositol 3-kinase-related
kinase

ATMAtaxia
Telangiectasia-Mutated

ATRATM and Rad3-related

TIMTimeless

TIPINTimeless interacting protein

SCNsuprachiasmatic nucleus

IRionizing radiation

MSFsmouse skin fibroblasts

CCGclock-controlled gene

TNFtumor necrosis
factor

ZTzeitgeber
time

CTcircadian
time

HUhydroxyurea.

