Centrin is one of 350 eukaryotic
signature proteins thought to be critical to the structure and function
of the eukaryotic cell., In higher eukaryotes, e.g., Homo sapiens, there are four centrin isoforms: centrin 1,
centrin 2, centrin 3, and the pseudogene centrin 4 (abbreviated as Hscen1–Hscen4, respectively). These
centrins are localized to different cellular compartments or associated
with specialized tissues with different biological functions, yet
in other eukaryotes, only one centrin is required. All four isoforms have been associated with the interconnecting
cilia within the retina and have been associated with visual signal
transduction.Hscen4
has also been found in neuronal cells within the brain, while Hscen3 has been localized to the distal lumen of the centrioles
and basal bodies.,Hscen2 has been
found to regulate DNA excision repair within the nucleus, and export of mRNA from the nucleus. Finally, Hscen1 is localized to the base of the
flagella in the sperm and, by contributing the mother centriole of
the sperm to the ovum to allow for centriole duplication, is therefore
associated with the first division of the zygote.,

The canonical role of centrin, and particularly Hscen2, is as a structural and regulatory component of the centriole
and basal bodies, such that it has commonly
been used to identify centrioles and basal bodies in situ. The assembly of the microtubule organizing center
(MTOC), which includes centrioles and basal bodies, requires many
of the same proteins and is highly conserved in eukaryotes., Failure to duplicate the centriole properly once every cell cycle
has been linked to hypertrophy of the centrosomes, aberrant chromosome
segregation, and chromosome instability, all important factors in
understanding cancer.− Basal bodies are also associated with the assembly
of cilia. There are two classes of cilia:
the motile and the immotile, or primary cilia., Defects in the basal body are also associated with the aberrant
assembly of primary cilia in higher eukaryotes.,

Primary cilia, which are immotile and found in almost all
organs
of the human body, act as a sensory receptor for the cell., If the primary cilia are found to be defective, their photo-, chemo-,
and mechanosensory roles will also be defective. A defective ciliary
structure has been recently associated with ciliopathy.

Ciliopathies
are a new clinical classification of an expanding
group of genetic disorders that cause ciliary dysfunction in many
organs.− They include polycystic kidney disease, nephronophthisis, retinal
degeneration, such as retinitis pigmentosa, and a series of cilia-associated
syndromes such as Bardel-Biedl, Joubert, Alström, and Meckel
syndrome, among others.− These syndromes are usually observed within family members with
different clinical symptoms or phenotypes. The extent of the clinical
variability in the phenotypes even within the same family cannot be
explained solely on a genetic basis (single-locus allelism).,,− Therefore,
an alternate mechanism must also be involved to explain the variability
in phenotype. One possible explanation for the observed variability
in ciliopathy phenotypes may be the variable expression of conserved
proteins, or variability in the function of calcium
binding proteins.

Hscen1–Hscen3 are calcium
binding proteins that share common biochemical and structural properties
with each other and with Chlamydomonas reinhardtii centrin (Crcen). Their molecular mass is ∼20
kDa; their sequences are &gt;52% identical (Figure S1 of the ), and they have an acidic
isoelectric point., Upon closer examination, the
sequence of Crcen is &gt;71% identical with those
of Hscen1 and Hscen2, while for Hscen3, the level of sequence identity is 52%; the level
of sequence
identity between Hscen1 and Hscen2
is 84%. Like other EF-hand proteins, centrins respond to cellular
Ca2+ influx by selectively binding Ca2+ ions
in highly conserved helix–loop–helix motifs.− EF-hand proteins have two globular domains linked by a tethered
helix (Figure ). Each globular domain is composed
of two helix–loop–helix motifs, each capable of binding
calcium. It is within the loop region that five of six Ca2+-binding residues coordinate directly with a divalent cation. The
geometry adopted for calcium binding is that of a pentagonal bipyramid,
which can be described in a Cartesian coordinate system as X, Y, Z, −X, −Y, and −Z. The X, Y, Z,
and −Z positions coordinate calcium through
Asp– or Glu– carboxylates; in
the −Y position, the coordination occurs via
a backbone carbonyl group, and in the −X position,
the residue coordinates indirectly through a water molecule. In canonical
EF-hand proteins, like Crcen, there are two high-affinity
sites and two low-affinity sites for calcium, as shown in Figure . The dissociation constants range from 1 nM to
0.1 mM. However, Hscen1 and Hscen2
calcium binding sites (CaBS) II and III have a sequence that contributes
to lower affinity, with Asp88 or Asn125 being
responsible for the bidentate coordination of Ca2+ at the
−Z (12) position− (Figure a).

EF-hand calcium
binding sites (CaBS). (a) Sequence alignment based
on the following NCBI accession numbers: XP_001699499 (Crcen), EAX01727 (Hscen1), EAW72900 (Hscen2), and AAI12041 (Hscen3).− Dots in the CaBS sequence alignment represent identical residues
when compared to the first sequence (Crcen). (b)
Ribbon models of the available full-length Crcen
(red ribbon) and Hscen2 (green ribbon) structures
were generated from Protein Data Bank entries 3QRX and 2GGM, respectively, using
pyMOL from Scrödinger, LLC., Ca2+ is represented as orange spheres. (c) Schematic diagram of the predicted
low-affinity (white) and high-affinity (green) CaBS based on the sequence
analysis. In Crcen, the N-terminal domain is composed
of high-affinity CaBS as compared to the C-terminal domain, which
has the low-affinity sites, yet all sites bind calcium.,Hscen3’s CaBS III is predicted to have a
low affinity for Ca2+ because of the presence of aspartate
residues at positions 2 and 4, which are generally associated with
decreased calcium affinity. Similarly,
for Hscen1 and Hscen2, the presence
of the aspartate or asparagine residue at position 12 in CaBS II and
III is also predictive of low calcium affinity because of the lack
of bidentate coordination with calcium.,, Finally, residues found in the N-terminal end (as
shown in Figure ) may influence the calcium
affinity of the the first CaBS in Hscen2, specifically
Asn9 when compared to Ser9 of Hscen1.

While human centrins share similar biochemical
and structural properties,
a gap exists in our understanding of the relationship between their
structure and the diversity of their biological roles. Herein, we
present for the first time a comparative molecular biophysical study
involving differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), circular dichroism (CD), and
two-dimensional infrared (2D IR) correlation spectroscopy− to assess the relative stability of related centrin proteins that
establishes the differences in molecular flexibility and dynamics
as a function of temperature. These novel 2D IR correlation spectroscopic
results provide unique insight into the molecular behavior these proteins
exhibit as a function of temperature, while relating these differences
to their lower- and higher-calcium affinity sites. These factors may
be crucial in determining their different biological roles and potentially
may provide new insight into the modulation of their binding affinities
and the role of the EF-hand motif in the regulation of centrin–target
interactions.

Experimental Procedures
Bacterial Expression
The Hscen1 and Hscen2 cDNA inserts were generously supplied by E. Schiebel
(Peterson Institute for Cancer Research, Manchester, United Kingdom),
while the Hscen3 clone was generously supplied by
J. Kilmartin (University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom).
These cDNA inserts were subcloned into a pT7-7 expression vector and
transformed into Escherichia coli BL21(λDE3)
Star from Stratagene. The new recombinants were then sequenced to
verify the identity, proper orientation, and reading frame by J. C.
Martinez-Cruzado (University of Puerto Rico, Mayagüez, PR).

The fed-batch method was employed for a 5 L BIOFLO 3000 fermentor
(New Brunswick Scientific, Edison, NJ) of E. coli BL21(λDE3) Star cells newly transformed with the desired recombinant.
The bacterial cultures were grown in terrific broth medium (Bio 101,
Inc., Carlsbad, CA) at 37 °C with 350 rpm agitation, while the
dissolved oxygen, pH, and cell density were monitored. Bacterial cultures
were induced with 0.5 mM isopropyl β-d-thiogalactoside
at the onset of the log phase. Cells were harvested by centrifugation
once the stationary phase was reached, usually 3–4 h after
induction. Typical yields were 40–80 g of pelleted cells from
a 4 L culture.

Isolation and Purification
The purification protocols
have all been established in our laboratory.,, The isolation protocol has been modified
to improve the subsequent purification process. Routinely, the harvested
cell pellet was lysed using a cold buffer solution containing 50 mM
Tris, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.5 M NaCl, 0.04% NaN3, and 1% IGEPAL
(pH 7.4). To minimize proteolytic cleavage of the desired recombinant
protein, a cocktail of protease inhibitors was also added (2.0 mg/mL
aprotinin, 0.5 mg/mL leupeptin, 1.0 mg/mL pepstatin A, and 2 μL/mL
crude lysate of Pefabloc SC). The crude lysate was subjected to preparative
centrifugation using a JA-14 rotor and a Beckman J2-MC centrifuge
at 9615g for 15 min at 4 °C. This first supernatant
sample was then ultracentrifuged using a TI-70 rotor and a Beckman
L-80 ultracentrifuge at 70588g for 30 min at 4 °C.
This second supernatant was then incubated at 60 °C for 30 min
followed by a final preparative centrifugation to remove denatured
host protein precipitate using a JA-14 rotor and a Beckman J2-MC centrifuge
at 3840g for 30 min at 4 °C to recover the third
and final supernatant. This final supernatant sample was then clarified
using a hollow fiber cartridge with a 0.1 μm cutoff membrane.
The clarified sample was then subjected to buffer exchange using tangential
flow filtration with a 5 kDa membrane from Pall Corp. (Ann Arbor,
MI). For purification, this sample was then applied to a Phenyl Sepharose
CL4B affinity column and, if necessary, an anion exchange chromatography
column. In each case, the eluted fractions were analyzed by sodium
dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE)
and fractions containing the desired centrin protein were pooled.
Typically, 125–600 mg of &gt;98% pure centrin protein was obtained
from each batch.

Protein Sample Preparation
For each of the molecular
biophysical methods performed below, the buffer conditions and protein
concentration were identical to allow for comparative analysis. This
was achieved by accurate concentration determination using the predicted
molar extinction coefficients: ε280 = 1490 M–1 cm–1 for Crcen, Hscen1, and Hscen2, and ε280 = 8480 M–1 cm–1 for Hscen3. Direct UV absorbance measurements were taken only
after exhaustive dialysis of the desired protein against the appropriate
buffer conditions using a 5 kDa membrane.

Differential Scanning Calorimetry
Routinely, the desired
centrin (1.0 mg/mL) in 50 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 4 mM CaCl2, and 4 mM MgCl2 (pH 7.4) was analyzed with a VP-DSC microcalorimeter
from MicroCal LLC (Northampton, MA). Thermograms were collected at
25 psi and a scan rate of 60 °C/h over a temperature range of
10–127 °C, with an 8 s filtering period. The data analysis
was performed using Origin from MicroCal. The sample thermograms were
reference subtracted, normalized for concentration to determine the
change in heat capacity (ΔCp), and a progressive baseline was obtained to allow for
accurate determination of the change in the enthalpy of denaturation
(ΔHD) and Tm.,

Circular Dichroism
Centrin samples (2.3 μM) in
8 mM HEPES, 2 mM CaCl2, 2 mM MgCl2, and 50 mM
NaCl (pH 7.4) were used to acquire far-UV CD spectra on a Jasco (Tokyo,
Japan) model J-810 spectropolarimeter equipped with a Peltier temperature
controller accessory. The instrument was calibrated using (+)-10-camphorsulfonic
acid. Five scans, within the spectral range of 250–190 nm,
were collected at a scan rate of 20 nm/min at 5, 25, and 85 °C.
In addition, temperature dependence spectra were also collected from
0 to 95 °C, while being monitored at 222 nm at a rate of 1 °C/min.
The CD absorbance was converted to mean residue molar ellipticity
for each spectral data set to allow for proper comparison between
the centrin proteins., Origin 7 professional software
from MicroCal was used to render the desired plots.

Vibrational Spectroscopy
The protein samples were dialyzed
under the desired buffer conditions and then lyophilized repeatedly
to H → D exchange the sample as previously described.,− A 35 μL aliquot of 60 mg/mL protein in 50 mM
HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 4 mM MgCl2, and 4 mM CaCl2 (pD 6.6) was deposited on a 49 mm × 4 mm custom-milled CaF2 window with a fixed path length of 40 μm. A reference
cell was prepared similarly, and both cells were set in a custom dual-chamber
cell holder. The temperature within the cell was controlled via a
Neslab RTE-740 refrigerated bath (Thermo Electron Corp.) and monitored
with a thermocouple positioned in close contact with the sample cell.
The accuracy of the temperature was estimated to be within ±1
°C. Routinely, spectral data acquisition was performed at the
desired preset temperature with 10 min intervals, once the temperature
in the cell was reached, to allow for thermal equilibrium of the sample.
A Jasco model 6200 FT-IR spectrophotometer equipped with a narrowband
MCT detector, a sample shuttle, and an interface was used. Typically,
512 scans were co-added, apodized with a triangular function, and
Fourier transformed to provide a resolution of 4 cm–1 with the data encoded every 2 cm–1.

FT-IR Spectroscopy
This process provides information
regarding the conformational dynamics of proteins. In particular,
the amide I′ band typically observed within the range of 1700–1600
cm–1 is characteristic of peptide bonds within a
protein, composed mainly of highly coupled carbonyl stretching modes
[ν(C=O)] that are sensitive to the conformation of the
protein. H → D exchange simplifies the underlying spectral
contributions within the amide I′, side chain, and amide II′
bands as follows. As a result, the amide II band observed within the
range of 1600–1500 cm–1 is composed of the
side chain modes. The amide N–H deformation modes of the peptide
bonds within the amide II band (1550 cm–1) shift
∼100 cm–1 to lower wavenumbers, to the amide
II′ band (1450 cm–1). The protein sample
is considered to be fully exchanged when reversibility is observed
upon cooling after heating the amide I′ band returns to the
same position and intensity value when compared to the same temperature
value upon heating. Therefore, the H → D exchange effectively
reduces the number of contributing vibrational modes, without sacrificing
structural and dynamic information about the behavior of the protein.,−,−

For the FT-IR spectral analysis, the spectral data were not
manipulated except for baseline correction. The thermal dependence
plots were generated using Origin version 7 from OriginLab Corp. (Northampton,
MA).

2D IR Correlation Spectroscopy
Noda developed this
technique., It uses the FT-IR series of sequential
spectra as a function of a perturbation (temperature, H → D
exchange, ligand titration, etc.) to generate synchronous and asynchronous
plots. The spectra are collected at regular intervals of the perturbation.
In general, the analysis spreads the acquired spectral data into two
dimensions, thus enhancing the spectral resolution in the synchronous
plot and providing information about the sequence of molecular events
that occur in the asynchronous plot.,− Both plots provide information about the coupling of vibrational
modes within the spectral region of interest (1710–1500 cm–1). Consequently, this technique is sensitive to backbone
vibrational modes as well as certain side chain modes (i.e., arginine,
aspartates, glutamates, and tyrosine) being perturbed, and as a result,
one can identify changes in these modes as a function of the perturbation.

The spectral overlay, peak pick routines, and 2D IR correlation
analysis were performed using a Kinetics program for MATLAB (MathWorks,
Natick, MA) generously provided by E. Goormaghtigh (Free University
of Brussels, Brussels, Belgium).

Results
Partial Amino Acid Sequencing Results for H. sapiens Centrins
Figure  shows these results
for all three isoforms. The expected amino acid sequence with the
observed loss of the first methionine residue at the amino-terminal
end verifies their identities. Also shown are the microchip SDS–PAGE
analyses of the purified proteins for all three isoforms. In each
case, a single band was observed, indicating &gt;98% purity.

Biochemical
characterization of H. sapiens centrins.
(a) Partial amino acid sequencing analysis of the N-terminal end of
the recombinant human centrins, validating their identity and the
loss of M1. (b) SDS–PAGE microchip analysis of the
purified proteins. Each sample contained two internal standards to
calibrate the relative mobility in each lane, with an associated band
at 4.5 kDa that is also observed in the molecular mass standards.
For the assays involving Hscen1 and Hscen2, the lower internal standard was 3.5 kDa and the higher internal
standard 53 kDa, while for Hscen3, the assay contained
5 and 240 kDa molecular mass internal standards. In each case, a single
band was observed near the expected molecular mass.

Thermal Denaturation of Centrins
The thermal unfolding
process for these proteins was determined to be endothermic in each
case by DSC, the results of which are summarized in Table , Figure , and Figure S2
of the . The relative
stability of human centrins was compared to that of Crcen in which all CaBS are occupied (Figure )., There are two potential causes for the differences
in stability. The first is the differences in calcium affinity, and
the second is the sequence divergence of these proteins. The comparatively
large differences in the Tm and the changes
in the enthalpy of denaturation observed in our DSC analysis suggest
that calcium affinity is the primary driver of the observed differences
in the centrins’ relative stability (results not shown). Crcen was determined to have the highest thermal transition
temperature [111.32 °C (Table )], whereas Hscen3 was the most stable of the H. sapiens centrins. Hscen3’s Tm was lower by 15.6 °C than that of Crcen, suggesting this is due to the lower calcium affinity as summarized
in Figure . Similarly, for Hscen1 and Hscen2, whose calcium affinity differs
even more from that of Crcen, the transition temperatures
were 21.8 and 29.4 °C lower, respectively. The difference in Tm between Hscen1 and Hscen2, which have sequences that are &gt;80% identical,
was
∼7.6 °C, suggesting that the differences in the transition
temperature may be associated with changes in calcium binding as the
EF-hand motif adopts different conformations in the presence (open
conformation) and absence (closed conformation) of calcium., These two isoforms contain two lower-affinity CaBS (CaBS II and
III for Hscen1 and CaBS I and II for Hscen2) located in the N- and C-terminal domains for Hscen1, while for Hscen2, the lower-affinity CaBS
are located within the N-terminal domain. These lower-affinity sites could also account for the pretransitions
observed within centrins (Figure S2 of the ). As a result, differences in stability could also
be translated into differences in backbone flexibility upon the transition
between the open and closed conformations.

Overlay of DSC thermograms
establishing the relative stability
of H. sapiens and C. reinhardtii centrins: Hscen1 (black), Hscen2
(green), Hscen3 (blue), and Crcen
(red). Their respective Tm vaules are
89.52, 81.90, 95.72, and 111.32 °C, respectively.

Summary of the DSC Comparative Analysis
of H. sapiens and C. reinhardtii Centrins
protein	Tm (°C)	ΔCpD(kcal mol–1 °C–1)	ΔHD(kcal/mol)	temperature
range (°C)	
Hscen1	89.52	0.4	17.9	65.06–126.26	
Hscen2	81.90	0.3	40.0	55.01–115.09	
Hscen3	95.72	–0.4	47.3	75.11–125.02	
Crcen	111.32	0.2	93.5	85.11–126.40	
Wild-type recombinant proteins.

Transition temperature.

Change in the heat capacity of denaturation.

Change in the enthalpy of denaturation.

We also evaluated the change in the heat capacity
of denaturation
(ΔCpD) and the change
in the enthalpy of denaturation (ΔHD) for these centrins, which provide additional insight into the differences
in their stability (Table ). For Hscen3, the ΔCpD was negative,
while for Crcen, Hscen1, and Hscen2, this value was positive, suggesting differences
in side chain hydration contributions. Hscen3 contains
a primarily nonpolar N-terminal end sequence (Figure ), as well as a tryptophan residue and an additional tyrosine
residue that are not present in the Hscen1 and Hscen2 sequences. More importantly, the lower ΔHD of Hscen1 compared to that
of Hscen2 is consistent with loss of calcium coordination
at CaBS III because of the differences in calcium binding affinity
observed for these two highly conserved proteins, as discussed below
in . The concomitant
loss of weak interactions between the helix–loop–helix
motifs that are destabilized due to the EF-hand transitions between
open and closed conformations arises from the lack of divalent cation
coordination with the respective oxygens within the calcium binding
loop. Interestingly, the ΔHD determined
for Crcen is twice the value for Hscen3 and Hscen2, suggesting the destabilizing effect
on the EF-hand motif is similar, although for Hscen3
only one CaBS (III) located on the C-terminal domain has a lower affinity,
while for Hscen2, two CaBS in the N-terminal domain
have lower affinity. For Hscen1, both N- and C-terminal
domains contain one CaBS (II and III) with lower affinity, and thus,
the ΔHD is roughly one-half that
of Hscen3.

Relative Stability of the Helical Component of Centrins
CD experiments were performed to determine the helical content of
the human centrins under identical buffer conditions. In addition,
CD was used to investigate the extent to which the helical components
were being destabilized during thermal denaturation. A relationship
consistent with that established by the DSC endotherms was confirmed,
as shown in Figure a. The mean residue molar
ellipticity at 222 nm was monitored as a function of temperature.
In addition, the crossover point, random coil, and helical mean residue
molar ellipticity for each centrin were determined at 25 °C and
are summarized in Table S1 of the . Also shown are the spectral overlays for each human centrin at
5, 25, and 85 °C (Figure b–d).
All are consistent with exhibition of an isodichroic point, suggesting
these proteins undergo a series of conformational changes that do
not involve a typical helix-to-random coil transition, but rather
a different type of transition, which is discussed below. Therefore, a simple two-state model cannot be
assumed for these proteins, thus preventing further analysis.

Relative thermal
stability of H. sapiens centrins
by CD analysis. (a) Thermal dependence of the helical regions among
centrins Hscen1 (black), Hscen2
(green), and Hscen3 (blue). (b–d) Overlay
of spectra of far-UV CD at 5 (—), 25 (−–−),
and 85 °C (−·−) within the spectral region
of 195–250 nm for (b) Hscen1, (c) Hscen2, and (d) Hscen3. The greatest helical
content is observed for Hscen3. Also, the relative
stabilities established for the thermal dependence of the helical
regions for these centrins are in good agreement with the DSC results.

Vibrational Spectroscopy
The FT-IR thermal dependence
plot and the spectral overlay of the amide I′ and side chain
bands within the spectral region of 1710–1500 cm–1 are shown in Figure  for fully H →
D exchanged Hscen1, Hscen2, and Hscen3. The amide I′ band (1710–1600 cm–1) is composed primarily of peptide bond frequencies
[ν(C=O)] that are sensitive to conformational changes
within proteins. In general, the amide I′/side chain band ratio
varies slightly among human centrins, suggesting differences in the
calcium binding state. The side chain
band (1600–1500 cm–1) is composed of arginine
guanidinium [νa(N–D) and νs(N–D)], aspartate, and glutamate [νa–s(COO–)] side chain vibrational modes, located near or within the CaBS of these proteins and thus serving
as probes of these sites.,,, Furthermore, the carboxylate
asymmetric stretching vibrations within the aspartate and glutamate
residues are sensitive to the coordination state with calcium, such
that when calcium is unbound because of the thermal perturbation,
there is a peak shift toward higher wavenumbers (Table ). This fact allows the identification of the lower- and higher-affinity
CaBS.

FT-IR thermal dependence study for H → D exchanged wild-type
centrins within the temperature range of 5–95 °C. (a)
Thermal dependence plots for Hscen1 (black), Hscen2 (green), and Hscen3 (blue). The
plot shows the amide I′ band maximum as a function of temperature,
which is sensitive to all of the backbone ν(C=O) vibrational
modes of the protein. The vertical dashed line denotes the first temperature
range for all centrins. Also highlighted with the light blue arrow
is the temperature (60 °C) at which the Hscen3
curve begins to depart from Hscen2. (b–d)
FT-IR spectral overlay of wild-type centrins amide I′ and side
chain bands in the spectral region of 1710–1500 cm–1 within the temperature range of 5–95 °C: (b) Hscen1, (c) Hscen2, and (d) Hscen3.

Summary of the Peak Assignments for
Backbone Vibrational Modes within the Amide I′ Band (1710–1600
cm–1) As Determined by the Synchronous and Asynchronous
Plots
 	 	Hscen1 peak position (cm–1)	Hscen2 peak position (cm–1)	Hscen3 peak position (cm–1)	
peak assignment	average peak
position (cm–1)	5–35 °C	40–95 °C	5–35 °C	40–95 °C	5–35 °C	40–60 °C	60–90 °C	
CaBS loop	1682.8	1686.0	1687.5	1680.0	1683.7	1684.3	1682.4	1675.7	
loops	1668.1	1668.8	1666.0	1666.7	1672.5	1671.4	1668.6	1662.8	
π-helix	1653.1	1653.7	1652.0	1653.4	1653.7	1654.2	1654.8	1649.9	
α-helix	1643.9	1642.5	1642.0	1643.4	1646.2	1641.4	1645.6	1646.1	
β-sheet	1631.2	1635.0	1626.0	1636.7	1638.7	1626.3	1627.2	1628.7	
Underlined peak positions represent
the greatest intensity change (i.e., the level of perturbation or
flexibility) for the auto peaks within the synchronous plot.

The calcium binding site (CaBS)
loop would ordinarily be assigned as a β-turn, but for relevant
structural discussions related to the well-known EF-hand motif, we
have used the nomenclature associated with these calcium binding proteins.

The position of the peak maximum of the amide I′
band as
a function of temperature is used to generate the thermal dependence
plots for all three human centrins as shown in Figure a. Hscen1 and Hscen2 share
similar curve shapes but different relative stabilities, in good agreement
with both CD thermal dependence and the DSC endotherms, in which Hscen1 is more stable than Hscen2. Also, Hscen1 and Hscen2 both reveal a pretransition
at ∼20 °C. Meanwhile, Hscen3 reveals
characteristics similar to those of Hscen2 at low
temperatures, yet above 60 °C, the curve departs from that of Hscen2, suggesting differences in backbone dynamics, presumably
because of the similarities in the calcium binding affinities it shares
with both proteins (Hscen2 and Hscen1). To improve our understanding of the relationship between the
backbone dynamics and the calcium binding sites, 2D IR correlation
analysis was performed, the results of which are discussed below.

Band Assignments
Contributing backbone vibrational
modes within the FT-IR spectral overlay and 2D IR correlation analysis
are summarized below for the amide I′ band (1710–1600
cm–1) and side chain band (1600–1500 cm–1). In general, all spectral data sets are arranged
in columns, and the similar plot types are arranged in rows to facilitate
comparison and analysis (Figures –). The band assignments
were made using the asynchronous plot for which the highest spectral
resolution was obtained and extrapolated to the synchronous and baseline-corrected
spectral overlay for each data set to validate the assignment. A summary
of the actual band positions for these centrin samples is shown in
Tables  and . The
average of the actual peak positions for the backbone vibrational
modes determined for each asynchronous plot was used to facilitate
interpretation and comparison. Several spectral overlays within the
range of 1710–1500 cm–1 for Hscen1, Hscen2, and Hscen3 are shown
in Figures –, respectively. The acquired spectra were separated into spectral
data sets based on specific temperature ranges (step analysis) to
ascertain the thermally induced molecular changes that occurred in
the independent terminal domains of these related calcium binding
proteins. The first temperature range
studied for Hscen1 and Hscen2 was
the 5–35 °C range (pretransition) shown in panels A, C,
and E of Figures  and . The second temperature range for Hscen1 and Hscen2 used was the 40–95 °C range shown in
panels B, D, and F of Figures  and . Meanwhile, for Hscen3, which
exhibited a different thermal dependence plot (Figure ) compared to those Hscen2 and Hscen1, the spectral data set was separated into three steps: 5–35
°C (Figure A,D,G), 40–60 °C
(Figure B,E,H), and 65–90 °C (Figure C,F,I). The band assignments presented below have
been validated and are consistent with the available X-ray structural
information, previous studies with C. reinhardtii centrin, and the correlations observed within the asynchronous plots
during the thermal perturbation.−,− The amide I′ band comprises several backbone
vibrational modes (Table ) for the β-turn
(1682.8 cm–1), which will be considered as a CaBS
loop, because it is associated with the short antiparallel β-sheet
segments located within the CaBS;,, the loops (1668.1 cm–1), also termed
the hinge region between the two EF-hand motifs; the π-helix
(1653.1 cm–1), located at the C-terminal end of
all human centrins; the α-helical regions (1643.9 cm–1); and the β-sheets (1631.2 cm–1). The side
chain modes are summarized in Table  and include
the arginine guanidinium N–D antisymmetric and symmetric stretching
modes consistent with our previous studies,, and the aspartates and glutamates, which are located mainly within
the CaBS and contain carboxylate stretching modes [νa–s(COO–)] sensitive to coordination with a divalent
cation.,, Lower wavenumbers
for the aspartate and glutamate carboxylate stretching modes are associated
with the bound calcium state. As calcium
is released, first from the low-affinity CaBS and then from the high-affinity
CaBS, the peak positions shift to higher wavenumbers characteristic
of the unbound (apo) state.

2D IR correlation spectroscopy step analysis
of Hscen1 (WT) within the spectral region of 1710–1500
cm–1. (A and B) FT-IR spectral overlays of the amide
I′ and side
chain bands corresponding to the temperature ranges of 5–35
and 40–95 °C, respectively. (C and D) Synchronous plots
and (E and F) asynchronous plots corresponding to the temperature
ranges of 5–35 and 40–95 °C, respectively.

2D IR correlation spectroscopy step analysis of Hscen2 (WT) within the spectral region of 1710–1500
cm–1. (A and B) FT-IR spectral overlays of the amide
I′ and side
chain bands corresponding to the temperature ranges of 5–35
and 40–95 °C, respectively. (C and D) Synchronous plots
and (E and F) asynchronous plots corresponding to the temperature
ranges of 5–35 and 40–95 °C, respectively.

2D IR correlation spectroscopy step analysis of Hscen3 (WT) within the spectral region of 1710–1500
cm–1. (A–C) FT-IR spectral overlays of the
amide I′ and
side chain bands corresponding to the temperature ranges of 5–35,
40–60, and 65–90 °C, respectively. (D–F)
Synchronous plots and (G–I) asynchronous plots corresponding
to the temperature ranges of 5–35, 40–60, and 65–90
°C, respectively.

Summary of the Peak Assignments for
the Side Chain Vibrational Modes within the Side Chain Band (1600–1500
cm–1) As Determined by the Synchronous and Asynchronous
Plots
 	 	Hscen1 peak position (cm–1)	Hscen2 peak position (cm–1)	Hscen3 peak position
(cm–1)	
peak assignment	stretching
vibrational mode	5–35 °C	40–95 °C	5–35 °C	40–95 °C	5–35 °C	40–60 °C	60–90 °C	
arginine	guanidinium νa(N–D)	1608.7	1610.0	1603.4	1602.8	1604.2	1608.8	1613.3	
arginine	guanidinium νs(N–D)	1578.7	1586.2	1591.8	1597.5	1581.3	1585.8	1581.3	
aspartate	νs(COO–)	1561.4	1566.0	1572.5	1575.0	1560.5	1562.8	1564.1	
glutamate	νs(COO–)	1539.0	1548.0	1546.8	1552.5	1546.9	1551.3	1555.6	
The underlined peak position represents
the greatest intensity change for the auto peaks within the synchronous
plot.

Hscen1 and Hscen2 contain a single Tyr residue, and Hscen3 contains two Tyr residues, observed at 1517 cm–1, which will not be discussed in this work.

Aspartate and glutamate peak positions
are characteristic of the bound state, presumably in the lower-affinity
CaBS.

Aspartate and glutamate peak positions
are characteristic of the unbound (apo) state within the high-affinity
CaBS. The loss of calcium binding occurs because of the high-temperature
perturbation as a prerequisite step to thermal unfolding.

2D IR Correlation Spectroscopy
This technique enhances
the resolution of the spectral region of interest via the synchronous
and asynchronous plots and provides the order of events that occur
during the thermal perturbation. The auto-peaks found on the diagonal
of the synchronous plots show changes in intensity that occur in the
spectral region of interest, and the cross-peaks relate the auto-peaks
that are in phase with one another. Meanwhile, the asynchronous plots
are composed exclusively of cross-peaks that change in intensity out
of phase from one another. According to Noda’s rules, the phase
information in the asynchronous plot is used to ascertain the order
of events when the synchronous plot is composed of positive cross-peaks.
The order of events is reversed when the corresponding cross-peak
in the synchronous plot is negative.,

Similarities in Conformational Dynamics among Human Centrins
The auto-peaks in the synchronous plot comprise the overall intensity
changes (i.e., the magnitude of change) associated with the backbone
and side chain modes due to the temperature perturbation as indicated
in Tables  and . Small
changes in intensity are equivalent to smaller molecular fluctuations.
These intensity changes reflect the thermal instability of the protein,
and therefore, a comparative analysis of the overall effect of temperature
on each protein can be conducted, providing the molecular similarities
associated with the regions of greatest flexibility among the centrins.
For Hscen1 (WT) in the temperature
range of 5–35 °C, the aspartates (1561.4 cm–1), presumably of the low-affinity CaBS (II and III), had the greatest
perturbation, while in the temperature range of 40–95 °C,
the α-helical regions (1643.9 cm–1) had the
greatest flexibility. For Hscen2 (WT) in the temperature
range of 5–35 °C, the π-helix (1653.1 cm–1) located at the C-terminal end of the protein had the greatest flexibility,
while in the temperature range of 40–95 °C, it was the
short antiparallel β-sheet segments (1631.2 cm–1) located within the CaBS. This suggested that certain backbone vibrational
modes are more flexible in Hscen2, which exhibited
the lowest thermal transition temperature. For Hscen3 (WT) in the temperature ranges of 5–35 and 40–60
°C, the short antiparallel β-sheet segments (1631.2 cm–1) were located within the CaBS, while the largest
intensity change within the temperature range of 65–90 °C
was assigned to the α-helical regions (1643.9 cm–1) of Hscen3. The greatest perturbation observed
for Hscen3 (WT) in the temperature ranges of 5–35
and 40–60 °C was in the β-sheet, consistent with
that of Hscen2 (WT) at 40–95 °C. The
greatest perturbation observed for Hscen3 (WT) in
the temperature range of 65–90 °C was in the α-helical
regions, consistent with that of Hscen1 (WT) at high
temperatures. Thus, the similarities in the regions of the protein
with greatest molecular flexibility between these centrin proteins
were established.

Differences in Conformational and Side Chain Dynamics among
Human Centrins
The sequential order of events describes the
molecular behavior of these human centrins within the defined temperature
ranges to allow for the evaluation of the relative stability of these
proteins as shown in Figures – and summarized in Tables S2–S4
of the . For Hscen1 (WT), similar conformational dynamics were observed
in both temperature ranges (5–35 and 40–95 °C),
which is consistent with both N- and C-terminal domains containing
one EF-hand motif in the open conformation, while the other EF-hand
motif is in the closed conformation. The vibrational modes perturbed
in the temperature range of 5–35 °C are summarized in
Figure a. This molecular behavior presumably
involving the CaBS II and III describes the pretransition observed
for Hscen1 (WT). At higher temperatures leading up
to thermal denaturation (40–95 °C) shown in Figure b, similar backbone vibrational modes are perturbed,
while the side chains are presumably within the higher-affinity CaBS
(I and IV) within Hscen1 (Figure ).

Sequential order of molecular events for Hscen1
(WT) in the temperature ranges of (a) 5–35 and (b) 40–95
°C. The lowest temperature range includes the Glu– and Asp– side chain perturbations that are presumably
associated with the lower-affinity CaBS (II and III) as shown in Figure ., The most stable vibrational mode
(40–95 °C) was determined to be the glutamates within
the high-affinity CaBS (I and IV) as highlighted in panel b.

Sequential order of molecular events for Hscen2
(WT) for the temperature ranges of (a) 5–35 and (b) 40–95
°C. The most stable vibrational mode (40–95 °C) was
determined to be the glutamates within the high-affinity CaBS (III
and IV), as highlighted in panel b.

Sequential order of molecular events for Hscen3
(WT) for the temperature ranges of (a) 5–35, (b) 40–60,
and (c) 65–90 °C. In the low temperature range of 5–35
°C, the low-affinity CaBS (III) is perturbed, while the most
stable vibrational mode (65–90 °C) was determined to be
the loops within the EF-hand domains that contained the high-affinity
CaBS as highlighted in panel c.

For Hscen2 (WT), the protein behaves
more like
two independent domains, with the C-terminal domain being more stable
than the N-terminal domain. The N-terminal domain is composed of EF-hands
in the closed conformation, allowing more flexibility in the β-sheets
and helical regions, while the C-terminal domain has both EF-hands
in the open conformation causing the π-helix to be perturbed
first in the higher temperature range. A summary of the molecular
events that occurred in the temperature range of 5–35 °C
is shown in Figure a. This sequential order
of molecular events describes the pretransition of Hscen2 (WT) at higher temperatures leading to denaturation (40–95
°C), which are summarized in Figure b. These final events of the sequence are consistent with the EF-hand
motif undergoing the transition from the open to the closed conformation,
leading to thermal unfolding.

For Hscen3 (WT),
the C-terminal domain initially
had conformational dynamics similar to those of Hscen1 in which one EF-hand motif is in the open conformation while
the other is in the closed conformation. Thermal destabilization begins
to occur in the temperature range of 5–35 °C (Figure a) within the loop hinge of the C-terminal end
(1668.1 cm–1). The second temperature range analyzed
for Hscen3 was the 40–60 °C range (Figure b), in which the molecular behavior was similar
to that of Hscen2 where both EF-hand motifs within
the N-terminal domain are in the open conformation. The third temperature
range analyzed for Hscen3 was the 65–90 °C
range (Figure c). The conformational dynamics
are unique in that the initial sequential order of events was different
from that of Hscen2 and Hscen1.
This is consistent with the thermal dependence plot shown in Figure , in which the Hscen3 curve deviates
from the Hscen2 and Hscen1 curves
in having a different slope and therefore can be explained at the
molecular level as summarized in Figure c.

Discussion
The differences we have observed in the
molecular behavior of human
centrins are governed by the affinity for Ca2+ within the
different CaBS. In general, the lower-affinity CaBS were perturbed
first, leading to the differences in the molecular behavior among
the EF-hand motifs and in turn affecting the terminal EF-hand domain
where these lower-affinity sites are located. Similarly, as the temperature
was increased, the higher-affinity CaBS were perturbed, losing the
coordination with the divalent cation and causing the molecular flexibility
associated with the transition from the open to the closed conformation
within the EF-hand motifs. These differences in molecular behavior
are important factors that can be used to explain the interaction
with a wide variety of biological targets and the diverse roles centrins
are observed to have.

When the binding of calcium stabilizes
the EF-hand domain in the
open conformation, it allows for increased surface area and exposes
side chains that would normally be buried for potential interaction
with their biological target. It is this interface and the residues
that comprise it that are selective for a particular target; therefore,
a lower-affinity Ca2+ site would be less likely to accommodate
a biological target. This observation may also explain the relative
dependence on calcium affinity exhibited by different centrin biological
targets. The hinge loop region is also very important because of the
biochemical differences dictated by the residue composition.

Another important factor is the intrinsic molecular flexibility
dictated by the sequence composition within the EF-hand motif, which
causes the differences in dynamics within these structural domains.
It is these differences in molecular flexibility that affect the overall
complex formation and its stability. This is especially true when
one considers C. reinhardtii centrin, which, although
all of its sites are bound to calcium, is the most stable of the centrins. Crcen’s level of molecular flexibility within the
C-terminal domain and hinge loop residue composition provide the optimal
conditions for binding a model peptide, melittin. This Crcen–melittin complex, like
the Hscen2–XPC complex, adopts an extended
conformation, while other centrin complexes, among them the centrin–Sfi1p
complex, adopt a different wrap-around conformation requiring the
flexibility of the tethered helix.,, It is, in part, this flexibility that allows centrin
to have multiple biological targets and is a hub within the interactome.

Other potential implications may be inferred at the cellular level
for centrin in general. In the work by Winey’s group using Tetrahymena thermophila, selective site-directed mutants,
specifically Asp– for Ala at the X position of different CaBS, were constructed to cause a decrease
in calcium affinity at a particular site. The cellular outcomes observed were misorientation of the basal
body and changes in its stability. If we consider the differences
in molecular flexibility observed in H. sapiens centrins
caused by their differences in calcium affinity, then it is feasible
to envision the effect on the molecular flexibility of the Tetrahymena thermophila centrin (centrin 1), which might
then affect formation of the centrin–target complex and, in
turn, the structure of the basal body within this model organism.
Further investigation is warranted, and we plan to pursue the study
of different centrin–biological target complexes in the near
future.

In summary, 2D IR correlation spectroscopy has proven
to be an
excellent technique for the evaluation of the relative stability of
centrins. These novel 2D IR results were in good agreement with the
more traditional DSC and CD data and provided a detailed molecular
explanation for the differences in stability among highly related
centrins. We anticipate that this technique will also be suitable
for the evaluation of recombinant protein therapeutics for the evaluation
of their relative stability and viability.

Supporting Information Available
Amino acid sequence alignment
of H. sapiens and C. reinhardtii centrins (Figure S1), DSC thermograms within the temperature range
of 10–130 °C (Figure S2), summary of far-UV CD comparative
analysis of H. sapiens centrins (Table S1), summary
of the sequential order of events for Hscen1 (WT)
(Table S2), summary of sequential order of events for Hscen2 (WT) (Table S3), and summary of sequential order of events for Hscen3 (WT) (Table S4). This material is available free
of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi301417z_si_001.pdf

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Drs. Elmar Schiebel (Peterson Institute for Cancer
Research) and John Kilmartin (University of Cambridge) for providing
the centrin cDNA, Dr. Juan Carlos Martinez-Cruzado (University of
Puerto Rico, Mayagüez, PR) for performing the cDNA sequencing
of the centrin recombinants, Dr. Michael Berne (Tufts University,
Medford, MA) for performing the partial amino acid sequencing of the
centrin proteins, and Dr. Melissa Stauffer (Scientific Editing Solutions,
Walworth, WI) for editing the manuscript.

Abbreviations
2D IRtwo-dimensional
infrared

DSCdifferential
scanning
calorimetry

CDcircular
dichroism

Hscen1centrin 1

Hscen2centrin 2

Hscen3centrin 3

Hscen4centrin 4

MTOCmicrotubule organizing
center

CrcenC. reinhardtii centrin

CaBScalcium binding sites

FT-IRFourier transform infrared.

