Bactoprenyl
diphosphate (BPP 1) is a key platform utilized in the
biosynthesis of critical
bacterial glycoconjugates, including peptidoglycan and capsular polysaccharides.− Undecaprenyl pyrophosphate synthase (UPPS) catalyzes the formation
of BPP 1 from the 15-carbon isoprenoid farnesyl diphosphate
(FPP 2) and five-carbon isopentenyl diphosphates (IPPs)
(Figure )., The critical
role this enzyme plays in complex sugar biosynthesis makes it an excellent
target for antibiotic development. However, numerous nonpathogenic
organisms depend on functional UPPS, and antibacterial agents that
target its function would affect these benign and symbiotic organisms
as well as pathogens. Recently, several
classes of compounds that inhibit UPPS function have been discovered.
Bisphosphonate derivatives and tetrameric acids have exhibited clear
effects on the UPPS-catalyzed biosynthesis of BPP 1.− In addition, several anti-infective lead compounds without a known
mechanism of action are thought to target the protein. Importantly, while many anti-UPPS compounds appear to have
similar activity between bacterial species, several examples in which
enhanced activity is observed with one type of bacteria over another
have been noted.,

Reaction catalyzed by undecaprenyl pyrophosphate
synthase and analogues
used to probe UPPS activity.

The function of UPPS from Escherichia coli (UPPSEc) has been extensively characterized
using
steady-state and single-turnover enzyme kinetics, X-ray crystallography,
and site-directed mutagenesis.,,− UPPSEc is a homodimer in which each
monomer contains two α-helices and four β-sheets that
form a hydrophobic tunnel, which is the site of FPP 2 elongation., Polar residues in the binding
site of UPPSEc coordinate to the diphosphate
head of FPP 2, while nonpolar residues stabilize the
positioning of the isoprenoid chain through hydrophobic interactions.
The interaction between the tunnel and isoprenoid is held so firmly
that in vitro studies require a surfactant to promote
product release.,, It is presumed that in vivo, longer chain products
are removed from the enzyme through membrane interactions that promote
turnover.

Several analogues (Figure ) of the native
FPP 2 substrate have been designed to probe the substrate
chemical properties required for recognition by the protein.− UPPSEc is competent to catalyze the
full extension of fluorescent MANT-O-GPP 3 through the
incorporation of seven Z-configuration isoprenes. However, a coumarin analogue, 4, accepts the addition of only a single isoprene unit. The UPPS from the mammalian symbiont Bacteroides fragilis (UPPSBf) has also been probed with fluorescent analogue 2AA-GPP 5. This analogue was a substrate for
UPPSBf, and its optical properties have
been utilized to track the biosynthesis of complex bacterial polysaccharides., Interestingly, while the activity of various inhibitors on a few
species of bacteria has been tested, the effect of substrate modification
on the ability of various UPPS proteins to recognize different substrates
has not.

Traditional methods for quantifying UPPS activity have
depended
on either the incorporation of radiolabeled isoprenes from IPP or
coupled assays that detect the production of diphosphate.,A particularly interesting feature of fluorescent analogues designed
to probe UPPSEc activity was the ability
to use the fluorescence of these compounds to probe both the kinetics
and the association of the substrate with the protein., The fluorescence of MANT-O-GPP 3 increases upon elongation
of the isoprenoid chain, which was utilized to develop a continuous
assay for UPPSEc activity. Our group has recently reported the use of 2AA-GPP 5 as a fluorescent substrate for UPPSBf and the development of a robust HPLC assay to monitor fluorescent
product formation. It was not known whether
substrate recognition restrictions were similar for forms of UPPS
from different bacteria or whether this compound could be used for
continuous fluorescent monitoring of UPPS activity. Here we have tested
forms of UPPS from three species of bacteria and have found clear
differences in the ability of the enzymes from different bacterial
species to recognize the substrate. The results of this report have
implications for the development of new probes for downstream pathways
and the use of particular probes in bacterial UPPS screening platforms
and provide new insights into the effect of subtle differences in
functionally identical proteins on substrate recognition.

Methods
General
IPP and FPP 2 were synthesized
from isopentenol and farnesol as described previously by Poulter and
co-workers and purified by reverse phase
HPLC. Full synthetic procedures of new compounds followed routes previously
described by Spielmann and Chehade and are provided in the . 2AA-GPP 5 was prepared as described previously. All analytical HPLC was performed at 1 mL/min
in a 65:35 n-propanol/100 mM ammonium bicarbonate
mixture using a reverse phase C18 Agilent Eclipse XDB-C18, 5 μm,
4.6 mm × 150 mm column, unless noted otherwise. Anthranilamide-containing
compounds were detected with an excitation wavelength 340 nm and an
emission wavelength of 450 nm. 2-Nitrileaniline-containing compounds
were detected with an excitation wavelength of 340 nm and an emission
wavelength of 390 nm. All HPLC was performed on an Agilent 1100 HPLC
system equipped with an autosampler, a diode array detector, and a
fluorescence detector. All spectrophotometry and plate assays were
performed on a Molecular Devices M5 cuvette and plate reader. Electrospray
ionization mass spectrometry (ESI-MS) was performed on a Velos ESI-MS
system in negative ion mode. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) analysis
was performed on a 500 MHz JEOL spectrometer.

UPPS Cloning
The
UPPS gene was amplified using the
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) from B. fragilis strain
25285 genomic DNA (ATCC) as previously described. Genomic DNA from E. coli was isolated
from DH5α cells, and Vibrio vulnificus genomic
DNA was isolated from MO6-24/O cells provided by the J. D. Oliver
Laboratory (Department of Biology, University of North Carolina at
Charlotte). PCR primers were designed with BamHI and XhoI restriction
sites. PCR was performed with a Promega PCR core system kit on a thermocycler
with an annealing temperature of 55 °C and 35 cycles. Following
amplification, the purified PCR product was doubly digested with BamHI
and XhoI (New England Biolabs) and purified from a 1% agarose gel.
The doubly digested insert was ligated into the purified doubly digested
pET24a vector (Novagen). Ligation mixes containing 1:3 and 1:10 vector:insert
ratios were transformed into chemically competent DH5α cells
and plated. Colonies showing resistance to kanamycin (encoded by the
intact pET-24a vector) were cultured, doubly digested, and analyzed
on a 1% agarose gel to ensure the gene of interest had been successfully
incorporated. Sequencing results of the gene of interest also confirmed
the successful incorporation of the UPPS gene for E. coli and V. vulnificus UPPS. Plasmids were isolated
from the DH5α cells and transformed into C41 expression cells
(Lucigen) for protein expression.

UPPS Expression
A 5 mL starter culture of C41 cells
transformed with each UPPS encoding vector was grown overnight. Lysogeny
broth (LB, 1 L) was inoculated with 1 mL of starter culture and incubated
at 37 °C until an optical density (OD600) of 0.8 was
reached. The temperature was reduced to 16 °C for 30 min, and
overexpression was induced with 1 mM isopropyl thiogalactoside (IPTG).
After an overnight induction at 16 °C while being shaken, the
culture was centrifuged for 15 min at 5000g. Pellets
were resuspended in 20 mL of lysis buffer [50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0),
300 mM NaCl, and 20 mM imidazole] and lysed by sonication on ice at
25% power for 2 min with a pulse of 1 s on and 1 s off. The lysate
was centrifuged under vacuum at 150000g for 75 min
at 4 °C, and the resulting supernatant was mixed with 1 mL of
1:1 (v/v) nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid (NI-NTA, PerfectoPro, 5 Prime
Inc.) resin in lysis buffer for 30 min. The flow-through was passed
twice through the column, and the column was washed thrice with 4
column volumes of wash buffer [50 mM Tris-HCl, 50 mM imidazole, and
300 mM NaCl (pH 8)]. The protein was eluted in six half-column volume
fractions (1 mL) with elution buffer [50 mM Tris-HCl, 500 mM imidazole,
and 300 mM NaCl (pH 8)]. SDS–PAGE was performed with aliqouts
from the flow-through, wash, and elutions followed by Coomassie staining.
Additionally, a Ponceau stain and Western blot was performed with
an alkaline phosphatase-linked anti-T7 antibody and visualized with
NBT/BCIP (Pierce). All fractions that contained UPPS were dialyzed
thrice in dialysis buffer [50 mM Tris-HCl, 200 mM NaCl, and 0.5% glycerol
(pH 8.0)]. Protein was further purified by gel filtration chromatography
performed on a Hi-Load 16/60 Superdex 200 column (GE Healthcare) using
an Akta prime plus Fast Protein Liquid Chromatography system (GE Healthcare).
Purified protein was stored at −80 °C. The protein concentration
was determined with a 1:1 addition of guanidinium hydrochloride and
heating at 60 °C for 8 min, followed by quantification at 280
nm on a Thermo Scientific NanoDrop Spectrophotometer.

HPLC Assay
General Protocol
Reaction mixtures comprised
of 25 mM Bicine (pH 8.3), 0.1% DDM, 5 mM KCl, 0.5 mM MgCl2, and 1 mM IPP were prepared with 5 μM 2CNA-GPP 6 or 2AA-GPP 5 with 170 nM UPPS from each organism in
a total volume of 200 μL. Reactions mixtures were incubated
at 37 °C for 1 h, and then reactions were quenched with 50 μL
of 2-propanol and were analyzed by HPLC as described in . Nearly stoichiometric enzyme reaction
mixtures were prepared under identical buffer conditions with 2.5
μM 2CNA-GPP 6 or 2AA-GPP 5, 0.1 mM
IPP, and 1.7 μM UPPS of each type in a total volume of 200 μL.
Reaction mixtures were incubated at room temperature and reactions
quenched with 100 μL of 1-propanol at 2 min and then analyzed
by HPLC.

Extinction Coefficient
The extinction coefficient of
2-nitrileaniline was measured at 310 nm using dilutions of pure weighed
2-nitrileaniline at 11, 33, 55, and 77 μM dissolved in 20% PrOH
in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The extinction coefficient was confirmed
to be the same for 2CNA-GOAc at 340 nm, using a standard sample with
a known concentration based on mass. Each absorbance was measured
with triplicate samples.

Solvent Effects
Triplicate solutions
of 2CNA-GPP 6 and 2AA-GPP 5 were prepared
at 10 μM
in water or n-propanol. Solutions were placed in
a quartz cuvette with 2AA-GPP 5; the fluorophore was
excited at 350 nm, and emissions were scanned from 390 to 500 nm.
2CNA-GPP 6 was excited at 340 nm, and the emission was
scanned from 350 to 450 nm. For the comparison of BPP and GPP analogue
fluorescence, stock solutions of the 2CNA-B(6)PP (where 6 is the number
of Z-isoprenes) and 2CNA-GPP 6 were
dissolved in a solution of 40% i-PrOH in 25 mM ammonium
bicarbonate at identical concentrations (48 μM) as measured
spectrophotometrically at 340 nm. The fluorescence emission from 350
to 450 nm (excitation at 340 nm) was then compared for triplicate
preparations of 5 μM BPP or GPP analogue in buffer containing
0.1% n-dodecyl β-d-maltoside, 2 mM
MgCl2, 20 mM KCl, and 100 mM HEPES. A similar procedure
was followed with 2CNA-B(6–8)PP and 2CNA-GPP at 1 μM
dissolved in water.

Plate Reader Assay General Protocol
Triplicate plate
reader assays were performed in a 96-well standard nonbinding surface
opaque plate, and the fluorescence was recorded for 60 min with a
20 s interval. Each reaction mixture contained 25 mM Bicine (pH 8.3),
0.1% DDM, 5 mM KCl, 0.5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM IPP, and 5 μM
2CNA-GPP 6 or 2AA-GPP 5. Each reaction mixture
was incubated at 37 °C for 5 min prior to initiation with 167
nM UPPS from B. fragilis, V. vulnifiicus, or E. coli; 50 μL of 2-propanol was used
to quench each reaction. Alternatively, matched rate reaction mixtures
were prepared under identical conditions except enzyme concentrations
were 8.4, 167, and 334 nM for UPPS from B. fragilis, E. coli, and V. vulnificus, respectively,
with 2CNA-GPP 6 and 0.042, 1.0, and 1.7 μM, respectively,
with 2AA-GPP 5. Reactions were quenched with 50 μL
of 2-propanol for HPLC analysis.

UPPS Inhibition Assays
Inhibition of 2AA-GPP 5 and 2CNA-GPP 6 with disodium diphosphate was
performed via the 96-well plate reader assay. Reaction mixtures contained
0.010–3.5 mM diphosphate and 10 μM 2AA-GPP 5. Identical experiments were performed with 10 μM 2CNA-GPP 6 and 0.010–100 mM diphosphate. Inhibition assays were
performed with the plate assay protocols described above with a UPPSBf concentration of 215 nM. The fluorescence
was monitored to determine initial rates of product formation and
plotted relative to uninhibited rates. The data were fit to the Hill
equation to determine IC50 values.

Preparative UPPS Reactions
for ESI-MS Analysis
Reaction
mixutres were prepared using buffer conditions identical to those
described above with 0.24 mM 2AA-GPP 5 or 1 mM 2CNA-GPP 6 with 15 μM UPPSBf and
4 mM IPP. Reactions were monitored using the plate reader assay until
no further increase in fluorescence was detected, and then mixtures
were purified on a semipreparative C18 HPLC column at 3 mL/min in
a 65:35 propanol/100 mM ammonioum bicarbonate mixture. ESI-MS characterization
is given in Figure 3 of the . HPLC analysis was performed on the enriched n =
6–8 products derived from each analogue (Figure 4 of the ).

Results
Subtle Differences
in UPPS from Three Bacterial Species
Previous work from our
group has focused on UPPS derived from the
symbiotic microbe B. fragilis.,, In this work, we were interested in whether
the activity, and in particular substrate recognition, of this protein
was similar to that of forms of UPPS derived from other organisms.
Two species that had amino acid sequences moderately similar to that
of UPPSBf were sought. The UPPSs from V. vulnificus (UPPSVv) and E. coli were chosen, as these proteins were 47% identical
and 65 and 67% similar to UPPSBf, respectively.
UPPSVv and UPPSEc were 56% identical and 75% similar to each other. UPPS was
cloned from genomic DNA isolated from V. vulnificus strain M06-24/O and E. coli DH5α and then
incorporated into pET-24a vectors that encoded an N-terminal T7 tag
for highly sensitive Western blot detection and a C-terminal hexahistidine
tag for purification. SDS–PAGE and Western Blot analysis confirmed
the purity and identity of the proteins overexpressed in C41 E. coli cells (Figure 1 of the ). Gel filtration analysis of the purified proteins
suggested that UPPSEc and UPPSVv formed homodimers similar to what was observed
previously with UPPSBf and UPPSEc (Figure 2 of the ).,

Major Differences in the
Ability of UPPS To Utilize 2AA-GPP
Recently, fluorescent
analogue 2AA-GPP 5 has been
utilized by UPPSBf to provide fluorescent
substrates to track polysaccharide biosynthetic systems., It was not known whether UPPSEc or UPPSVv was also able to utilize this fluorescent
analogue as a substrate. The formation of products in UPPS-catalyzed
reactions with a fluorescent analogue can be readily monitored by
reverse phase HPLC with fluorescence detection over relatively short
analysis times. Reaction mixtures were
prepared with each isolated UPPS protein, 2AA-GPP 5,
and IPP, and then reactions were quenched with 2-propanol after incubation
for 1 h. Four major product peaks were observed by HPLC analysis with
retention times (tR) of 3.9, 5.6, 8.7,
and 13.8 min (Figure A). All peaks except
the peak at 3.9 min were significantly larger with the B.
fragilis protein, where the amounts of V. vulnificus and E. coli products were 9 and 4% (tR = 13.8 min), 10 and 10% (tR = 8.7 min), and 24 and 45% (tR = 5.6
min), respectively, of the amount of product formed with the B. fragilis protein. ESI-MS analysis suggested that these
major product peaks corresponded to six to nine Z-configuration isoprenes incorporated by the UPPS proteins (Figure
3A–D of the ). The concentration of all three proteins was increased by 1 order
of magnitude to nearly stoichiometric levels, and then reactions were
quenched after 2 min (Figure B). Under these
conditions, no product was observed with the E. coli or V. vulnificus protein, while a substantial amount
of product was observed with the B. fragilis enzyme.
Taken together, these data suggested that even though the differences
in the UPPS forms among species were not major, significant differences
were observed for the activity of the three proteins, with respect
to the ability to utilize a specific substrate.

2AA-GPP is an ineffective
substrate for UPPSEc and UPPSVv. HPLC analysis of 2AA-GPP
with (1, red) UPPSBf, (2, black) UPPSEc, and (3, blue) UPPSVv at (A) 167 nM and (B) 1.7 μM. Chromatograms 2 and 3
are offset by 2 and 4 min, respectively. Note that the peaks representing
flow-through material in panel B (2AA-GPP) are cut to give the best
view of long chain isoprenoid products. In all chromatograms, the
ESI-MS-identified product is indicated below the time axis with the
number of Z-configuration isoprenes associated with
each peak.

2CNA-GPP Is a Substrate
for B. fragilis UPPS
It was suspected that
the large 2-amide functionality on the aniline
ring may be responsible for the difference in activity between species.
To test this, a new analogue was designed that was fluorescent but
had a smaller nitrile at position 2 of the aniline. The 2CNA-GPP 6 (Figure ) analogue was synthesized
(Scheme 1 of the ) using methods similar to those previously described by our group
and others,,,, and then quantified
on the basis of a measured extinction coefficient (E340 = 2700 ± 600 M–1 cm–1). To determine if the new analogue was a substrate for B.
fragilis UPPS, 2CNA-GPP 6 was mixed with IPP
and UPPSBf, and then the reaction was
analyzed by HPLC after incubation for 1 h (excitation at 340 nm and
emission at 390 nm). Presumed long chain products were formed with
HPLC tR values of 5.1, 7.7, 12.3, and
20 min (Figure A). ESI-MS analysis of isolated
peaks (Figure 3E–H of the ) suggested that the peaks corresponded to 2-nitrileanilinobactoprenyl
diphosphates [2CNA-B(n)PP] with six to nine Z-configuration isoprenes incorporated. ESI-MS analysis
of the anthranilamide and nitrileaniline products was performed on
the purified product isolated from reactions with 0.2 and 1 mM substrate
analogue. In several cases, monophosphate and diphosphate were present
in these purified samples. This was surprising considering that we
have previously shown significant differences in the HPLC retention
of these types of materials. HPLC analysis of the isolated products
(Figure 4A,B of the ) indicated that the samples were primarily diphosphate but there
was some decomposition to the monophosphate. Because the isoprenoid
length was consistent with the diphosphate and monophosphate in the
MS analysis and only one peak was isolated by HPLC, the decomposition
likely occurred during the removal of the HPLC solvent after purification
or during the MS analysis.

2CNA-GPP is an effective substrate for all three
UPPS proteins.
HPLC analysis of 2CNA-GPP with (1, red) UPPSBf, (2, black) UPPSEc, and (3, blue)
UPPSVv at (A) 167 nM and (B) 1.7 μM.
Chromatograms 2 and 3 are offset by 2 and 4 min, respectively. Note
that the peaks representing flow-through material are cut to give
the best view of long chain isoprenoid products.

V. vulnificus UPPS and E. coli UPPS
Are Competent To Catalyze the Elongation of 2CNA-GPP
To test
whether replacing the amide of 2AA-GPP 5 with
the smaller nitrile in 2CNA-GPP 6 led to a compound that
could be utilized by all three UPPS proteins, 2CNA-GPP 6 was tested for activity with UPPSVv and
UPPSEc. HPLC analysis of the reaction
mixtures demonstrated that both of these enzymes utilized the new
fluorescent analogue under conditions in which very little product
was observed with 2AA-GPP 5 (Figure A). The product profiles of the V. vulnificus and B. fragilis proteins were very similar, while
the E. coli protein appeared to primarily produce
the 8Z-isoprene product. The percentages of products
with the V. vulnificus and E. coli proteins relative to the B. fragilis enzyme were
68 and 18% (tR = 20 min), 73 and 133%
(tR = 12.3 min), and 108 and 27% (tR = 7.7 min), respectively. The enzyme concentration
was increased to nearly stoichiometric concentrations, and unlike
2AA-GPP 5, significant product was formed under these
conditions in just 2 min with all three enzymes, although UPPSBf was clearly more active (Figure B). These results suggested that just this small
change in the 2-substituted aniline had a drastic effect on substrate
recognition by these similar but not identical enzymes.

2AA-GPP and
2CNA-GPP Fluorescence
Continuous assay
methods for UPPS could allow for simpler methods for monitoring the
reaction rates of the UPPS proteins for further analysis of the differences
between the enzymes. The previously reported assay with MANT-O-GPP 3 (Figure ) relied on an increase
in fluorescence of the analogue upon chain elongation. To test this solvatochromic effect with 2AA-GPP 5 and 2CNA-GPP 6, each was diluted into an aqueous
buffer solution or 1-propanol to determine whether there was a significant
change in fluorescence in these different environments. Under these
conditions, the 2AA-GPP 5 fluorescence emission spectrum
shifted by 20 nm without a significant change in fluorescence intensity
(Figure A). The 2CNA-GPP 6 fluorescence
emission maximum shifted very little but increased 9-fold in the nonpolar
solvent (Figure B). To determine if there
was a significant change in fluorescence from 2CNA-GPP 6 to the bactoprenyl isoprenoids, the concentration of the substrate
and potential products were verified by spectrophotometry, and then
1 μM solutions were prepared with 2CNA-GPP 6 and
the six to eight Z-configuration [2CNA-B(6–8)PP]
isoprenoids. Initially, the fluorescence difference was tested in
water (Figure 5 of the ) where an 11-fold increase was observed for the six to eight Z-configuration isoprenoids relative to 2CNA-GPP 6, with very little difference between the fluorescence values of
the larger isoprenoids. Next, the difference in fluorescence was tested
under typical reaction conditions in the presence of the n-dodecyl β-d-maltoside (DDM) surfactant and other
reaction components excluding IPP and enzyme (Figure C). The baseline fluorescence was increased for 2CNA-GPP 6 as would be expected in the presence of the surfactant.
Importantly, a 2-fold increase in fluorescence was observed even under
these conditions with the 6Z-configuration isoprenoid
2CNA-B(6)PP.

Solvatochromic properties of 2AA and 2CNA-GPP. (A) 2AA-GPP
in water
(gray line) or 1-propanol (black line) and (B) 2CNA-GPP in water (gray
line) or 1-propanol (black line). (C) Difference in fluorescence between
matched concentrations of 2CNA-GPP and 2CNA-B(6)PP under typical reaction
conditions without enzyme or IPP. Error bars represent one standard
deviation from the average value for three samples.

2CNA-GPP Is a General and Effective Continuous
Probe for UPPS
Activity
The solvatochromic changes in fluorescence cited
above suggested that both 2CNA-GPP 6 and 2AA-GPP 5 could be effective for continuous monitoring of UPPS activity.
The ability of these two compounds to undergo a change in fluorescence
as the isoprenoid is elongated was tested in a 96-well plate format
with each of the UPPS proteins isolated (Figure A,B). The fluorescence (excitation at 350 nm and emission at 405
nm) of 2AA-GPP 5 did increase over time with the addition
of UPPSBf, but as expected, it did not
substantially increase with UPPSVv or
UPPSEc (Figure A). Importantly, the fluorescence increased with all three enzymes
when 2CNA-GPP 6 was the substrate (Figure B). No fluorescence increase was observed when UPPS or IPP
was omitted from the reaction mixture. The increase in fluorescence
with 2AA-GPP 5 was only 1.2-fold, while the fluorescence
of 2CNA-GPP 6 increased 2.5-fold, which was consistent
with the model systems described above. These results suggested that
2CNA-GPP 6 was a more effective probe than 2AA-GPP 5 because of the lower signal-to-noise ratio associated with
the larger fold enhancement in fluorescence. In addition, nitrile
analogue 6 was more versatile than anthranilamide 5 because of our ability to use this analogue with forms of
UPPS from several species.

2AA-GPP and 2CNA-GPP are effective probes for
monitoring UPPS activity.
Plate monitoring of reactions of (1, red) UPPSBf, (2, black) UPPSEc, and (3, blue)
UPPSVv with (A) 2AA-GPP and (B) 2CNA-GPP.
Error bars represent one standard deviation from the average of three
samples. Product distributions upon quenching at 3500 s are shown
in Figures A and A.

Analogue Specific Difference
in UPPS Activity
The plate
assay results suggested that the UPPSEc and UPPSVv reactions were slower than
the UPPSBf reactions with 2CNA-GPP 6. It was possible that 2AA-GPP 5 was a less
effective substrate for all three enzymes and that the lack of activity
observed with the E. coli and V. vulnificus proteins did not represent a difference between their ability to
use the analogue but instead a lack of ability to detect the slower
turnover product with 2AA-GPP 5 as the substrate. To
test this, reactions were prepared with UPPS concentrations that doubled
the rate of 2CNA-GPP 6 utilization by UPPSEc and UPPSVv relative
to that by UPPSBf, and these conditions
were then tested with 2AA-GPP 5 (Figure A–D). These reaction conditions led to a very similar
distribution of products among the three proteins with 2CNA-GPP 6 (Figure B). However, with 2AA-GPP 5, the reaction rates with UPPSEc and UPPSVv were 0.7 and 1.2 times the
rate with UPPSBf, respectively (Figure C). In addition, the distributions of products from
these reactions were consistent with the fluorescence enhancement
(Figure D). Interestingly, the E.
coli protein again did not appear to form the 9Z-configuration isoprenoid while both of the other two proteins did.
Another assay was prepared in which the reaction rates were matched,
in which the E. coli and V. vulnificus UPPS reaction rates were 1.1 times the rate of the B. fragilis protein (Figure 6A,B of the ) with 2CNA-GPP 6, yet the rates of 2AA-GPP 5 utilization by the E. coli and V. vulnificus enzymes under these same conditions were 0.3 and 0.7 times the reaction
rate with the B. fragilis enzyme, respectively (Figure
6c,d of the ). These
results suggested that even with reaction rates increased relative
to that of the B. fragilis UPPS with 2CNA-GPP 6 the rate of 2AA-GPP 5 utilization was not proportional.
2AA-GPP 5 was therefore a less effective substrate for
all three enzymes and was less well utilized by the V. vulnificus and E. coli proteins beyond just differences in
the general activity of the enzymes.

2AA-GPP utilization is impaired with V. vulnificus UPPS and E. coli UPPS. (A)
UPPS concentrations
that doubled the 2CNA-GPP UPPSBf rate
with the E. coli and V vulnificus proteins were used. (B) Distribution of products form reactions
in panel A quenched at 1500 s. (C) Change in fluorescence with 2AA-GPP
with all enzyme concentrations used in panel A increased by 3.5-fold.
(D) Distribution of products in panel C after quenching at 1500 s:
(1, red) UPPSBf, (2, black) UPPSEc, and (3, blue) UPPSVv. Chromatograms 2 and 3 are offset by 2 and 4 min, respectively.
Note that the peaks representing flow-through material are cut to
give the best view of long chain isoprenoid products.

Monitoring UPPS Inhibition by a Plate Assay
We next
tested whether the difference in UPPS activity for the analogues affected
their ability to be inhibited. The ability of diphosphate to act as
an inhibitor was tested using the 96-well plate assay described above
(Figure ). We found that with 10 μM
2AA-GPP 5 and varying concentrations of diphosphate,
the diphosphate IC50 with UPPSBf was 1.0 ± 0.2 mM. In parallel inhibition assays containing
10 μM 2CNA-GPP 6, the IC50 of diphosphate
was found to be 7.4 ± 0.5 mM with UPPSBf. These results suggest that more diphosphate is required in
competitions with 2CNA-GPP 6 than with 2AA-GPP 6, again suggesting that nitrile analogue 6 is
a more effective substrate with UPPSBf than anthranilamide analogue 5.

UPPS inhibition by diphosphate.
2CNA-GPP (●) and 2AA-GPP
(■) inhibition by diphosphate. Reaction mixtures containing
each analogue and varying concentrations of diphosphate were monitored
using the 96-well plate assay. Rates are reported relative to that
of the uninhibited reaction.

Discussion
UPPS is a critical protein for the biosynthesis
of complex bacterial
polysaccharides and has become an important potential target for new
antibacterial agents., The ability to differentiate
between specific types of bacteria could lead to methods for targeting
bacterial species selectively. In this study, we have found that while
forms of UPPS from a variety of species catalyze identical reactions,
differences in these proteins can alter their ability to utilize specific
substrates. Importantly, we have observed that the nitrile in 2CNA-GPP 6 has little effect on the utilization of UPPS from three
different bacteria, yet the amide of 2AA-GPP 5 does appear
to affect which species can utilize this alternative substrate effectively.
We propose that this difference in the ability of these enzymes to
utilize these analogues is due to the size of the nitrile relative
to the amide. However, other properties of the functional group could
also play a role, including electronics and polarity. While this report
identifies a species specific difference, current work is focused
on the structure–activity relationships associated with this
difference.

While it is clear that very subtle changes in analogue
structure
affect the ability of three different UPPS enzymes to utilize them,
it is not clear from the protein perspective how these differences
come about. It was surprising that three proteins that evolved to
have the same biological function would show such a dramatic difference
in activity generally and with the anthranilamide substrate analogue.
Homology models have been constructed for UPPSBf and UPPSVv to compare with the
X-ray crystal structure of UPPSEc (data
not shown). On the basis of these models and sequence alignments,
several amino acid residues located near the enzyme active site could
be responsible for differences in selectivity. However, site-directed
mutagenesis work, thus far, has not positively identified residues
that alter the selectivity of these proteins (data not shown). Ongoing
work is focused on discovering the precise differences in these proteins
that lead to the observed variation in activity. While specific residues
could be responsible, the selectivity of the proteins may also be
governed by several residues rather than a few discriminating amino
acids. Both phylogenetic and rational site-directed mutagenesis approaches
could be keys to identifying specific amino acids that are responsible
for the differences in activity between the proteins.

In our
previous work, we have focused on the development of probes
to track the biosynthesis of complex polysaccharides in bacteria.,,, The strongly fluorescent anthranilamide has been extremely useful
for this application. The nitrile analogue developed in this work
as a fluorophore is not as potent as the anthranilamide. However,
this work highlights a key advantage to this less potent fluorophore,
which instead has enhanced sensitivity to environmental changes. The
development of the solvatochromic fluorophores, MANT-O-GPP 3, 2AA-GPP 5, and 2CNA-GPP 6, allows continuous
monitoring of the UPPS-catalyzed reaction and can in turn provide
rapid insight into kinetics and inhibition. Coupling this system to
an HPLC assay allows the relatively rapid analysis of the UPPS product
profile, as well. Here we have shown that the development of these
analogues as UPPS probes should take into account the species from
which the UPPS is derived. It is important to note that selectivity
may differ with other organisms, as it is possible that forms of UPPS
from other species may more readily utilize the amide-containing analogue
over the nitrile. In addition, the results described in this report
have important implications for the design of new probes for polysaccharide
biosynthetic systems. The results demonstrate that forms of UPPS from
other organisms may be an alternative source for the development of
new probes that cannot be elongated by the E. coli or B. fragilis UPPS protein.

Supporting Information Available
SDS–PAGE
and Western
blot analysis of all UPPS proteins used, SEC results with standards
and each UPPS expressed, ESI-MS data of bactoprenyl isoprenoids, differences
in fluorescence between 2CNA-GPP 6 and 2CNA-B(6–9)PP
in water, matched rate 2CNA-GPP 6 and 2AA-GPP 5 plate assays and HPLC product profiles, full descriptions of synthetic
procedures for 2CNA-GPP 6, synthesis scheme for 2CNA-GPP 6, and 1H NMR, 13C NMR, 31P NMR, and ESI-MS data on all new compounds. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500545g_si_001.pdf

This work was
supported by National Institutes of Health AREA Grant R15GM100402
(J.M.T.) and National Science Foundation Instrumentation Grant 1337873
(Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Charlotte).

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. James D. Oliver for providing V. vulnificus genomic DNA, Jennifer Stanziale for the expression of UPPSBf, and Katelyn Erickson for collection of the ESI-MS
data.

Abbreviations
UPPSundecaprenyl pyrophosphate synthase

2AA-GPP2-amideanilinogeranyl
diphosphate

2CNA-GPP2-nitrileanilinogeranyl diphosphate

BPPbactoprenyl diphosphate

FPPfarnesyl diphosphate

IPPisopentenyl diphosphate

MANT-O-GPP(2E,6E)-8-O-(N-methyl-2-aminobenzoyl)-3,7-dimethyl-2,6-octadien-1-diphosphate

4NA-GPP4-nitroanilinogeranyl
diphosphate

HPLChigh-performance liquid chromatography

DDMn-dodecyl β-d-maltoside

PCRpolymerase chain reaction

LBlysogeny broth

ODoptical density

IPTGisopropyl thiogalactoside

NI-NTAnickel-nitrilotriacetic acid

SDS–PAGEsodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis

NBT/BCIPnitro-blue tetrazolium chloride/5-bromo-4-chloro-3′-indolyl
phosphate p-toluidine salt.

