Riboswitches exemplify a class
of RNA molecules that function to regulate genetic expression through
recognition and selective binding of metabolites independent of proteins., Binding of cognate ligands is known to modulate RNA structure and
dynamics that influences the transcription, translation, or alternative
splicing processes of genes associated with the bound ligands., Regulatory ligands bind to the aptamer domains of riboswitches and
induce conformational changes in the downstream expression platforms.
The glycine riboswitch contains two tandem aptamers (Figure A), and this tandem domain resides upstream from
and regulates the expression of genes associated with glycine metabolism.

Recently, in-line probing experiments have
shown that the leader–linker
interaction increases glycine binding affinity and removes the previously
accepted cooperativity between the two glycine binding sites., Mfold analysis indicates that the leader sequence forms a conserved
(&gt;90%) P0 duplex with the linker sequence between the two aptamers., Further analysis revealed that in ∼50% of sequences, including
the Vibrio cholerae (VC) glycine riboswitch, the
leader–linker interaction forms a commonly found RNA structural
element, the kink–turn motif, which is boxed in Figure A.,

(A) Secondary structure of the 232-nucleotide
VC glycine riboswitch
with the kink–turn motif boxed in black, the P0 duplex boxed
in red, and P1 boxed in blue., (B) Site-directed spin
labeling scheme using phosphorothioate-modified RNA and the R5 spin-label.

Here, site-directed spin labeling
(SDSL) electron paramagnetic
resonance (EPR) spectroscopy is used to characterize the RNA backbone
dynamics of the leader–linker interaction in the VC glycine
riboswitch. SDSL investigations of conformational dynamics in nucleic
acids have been reported,− and within, we follow protocols
of Qin for R5 spin-label attachment. This
chemical modification scheme is shown in Figure B. Although this approach is facile for smaller RNAs, when spin labeling
larger constructs (&gt;40 nucleotides), other strategies must be considered,
such as using chemically synthesized spin-labeled small segments with
large segments in trans, or other chemical
ligation means.

For the VC glycine
riboswitch, optimized splinted ligation using
T4 DNA ligase was employed. This methodology has been used to enzymatically
ligate shorter modified RNA fragments to produce large RNAs that contain
desired probes or tags. Here, chemically
synthesized RNA oligomers that comprised the 5′ leader sequence
and a site-specific phosphorothioate modification were designed. After
spin labeling with R5, these oligomers were then ligated to the in vitro transcribed remaining
sequence of the VC glycine riboswitch. In our hands, optimized conditions for splinted ligation with T4 DNA ligase have allowed for the production of pure, full
length (232 nucleotides), spin-labeled riboswitches in yields satisfactory
for several EPR and biochemical control experiments. In-line probing
control experiments, show that labeled riboswitches
exhibit patterns and glycine binding affinities similar to those of
the wild-type construct (full details provided in the ).

Three sites were
chosen for spin-label attachment in this investigation,
and their locations are shown in Figure A.
Site 1 is between the first and second nucleotides at the 5′
end. Site 2 is within the interior of the leader–linker duplex
(canonical stem/P0 helix). Site 3 is located within the internal loop
of the kink–turn motif. The rationale for each is based upon
expected differences in backbone dynamics for predicted secondary
structural elements. Site 1 is expected to be most mobile as it is
located at the 5′ end between two nucleotides that are not
base paired. Site 2 resides within the interior of the leader–linker
duplex between base-paired nucleotides; hence, it is expected to be
the least mobile. Site 3 was chosen in the internal loop of the kink–turn
motif where the R5 label is between nucleotides that are not base
paired; however, this phosphodiester linkage may be constrained by
the 60° angle between the helical axes of the canonical and noncanonical
stems, and we expect site 3 to exhibit intermediate mobility.,

X-Band (9.5 GHz) continuous wave (CW) EPR spectra were collected
under various conditions. The influence of temperature on the dynamics
of the leader–linker region was probed from spectra collected
at 25 and 10 °C; these temperatures are above and below, respectively,
the calculated Tm value of the leader–linker
duplex under physiological conditions (Tm calculated using OligoCalc). Glycine
riboswitch folding and function are dependent upon the presence of
salts and cognate glycine ligand,, and as such,
data were collected for RNA alone, RNA in the presence of 100 mM KCl,
RNA in the presence of 100 mM KCl and 5 mM MgCl2, and RNA
in the presence of 100 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, and 5 mM glycine.

Figure B shows resultant EPR spectra for
the three sites under these varying conditions. CW X-band nitroxide
line shapes are sensitive to changes in motion as the rotational correlation
time varies between 0.1 and 50 ns. Integral
area-normalized spectra can be analyzed using empirical parameters
such as the normalized intensity of the central-field (h0) and high-field (h–1) resonance lines (defined in Figure A),
where larger values represent increased mobility. Values of h0 for each spectrum
are plotted in Figure B.

As expected,
spectra collected at 25 °C show increased mobility
compared to those collected at 10 °C. In the absence of salts
and glycine, the effect of temperature is more pronounced for sites
1 and 2, as would be expected, because of the increased level of motion
and dynamics associated with melting of the leader–linker interaction
above the Tm of the duplex. Changes in
dynamics upon RNA folding, induced by KCl, MgCl2, or glycine,
can also be observed to varying degrees for each labeled site.

(A) Enlarged
view of the leader–linker interaction with
labeled sites indicated by arrows. (B) Double integral area-normalized
100 G X-band CW EPR spectra for the three sites at varying temperatures
in the presence or absence of 100 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, and
5 mM glycine. The RNA concentration in water for each construct was
approximately 100 μM.

For example, at 25 °C, the dynamics of site 3 are invariant,
within error, upon addition of salts or glycine. For site 2, a large
decrease in mobility is observed upon addition of KCl, with further
decreases that could be distinguished upon addition of MgCl2 and glycine ligand. In contrast, for site 1, the backbone mobility
decreases upon addition of KCl only, with no further changes observed
with MgCl2 or glycine. The KCl-reduced mobility of sites
1 and 2 can be attributed to ionic strength-induced folding of the
RNA, leading to stabilization of the leader–linker duplex.
For temperatures above the Tm, the dynamics
of the duplex are further stabilized by MgCl2 and glycine,
whereas for site 3, the local dynamics are less variable upon addition
of KCl, which may be attributed to its proximity of the more stable
P1 duplex making site 3 insensitive to the P0 dynamics.

Detailed
analysis of the data collected at 10 °C, however,
reveals that dynamics at site 3 are reduced upon addition of MgCl2 and glycine. This agrees with a report indicating that the
60° turn is fully stabilized by MgCl2. In general, the overall mobility of each labeled
site is in agreement with expectations of a kink–turn motif
and P0 duplex formation of the leader–linker interaction, as
shown with in-line probing and Mfold-predicted secondary structural
motifs. The inset of Figure B shows that at
10 °C the 5′ end is most mobile, the duplex is least mobile,
and the internal loop of the kink–turn motif exhibits intermediate
motion, with sensitivity to MgCl2 and glycine.

The
rotation of bonds connecting the R5 spin-label to the RNA backbone
is expected to influence the internal motion of R5, and as expected, all spectra are in the fast limit at X-band
frequency. Spectral variation, however, is still distinguishable among
the three labeled sites and shows that R5 is reporting on the local
environment of the RNA backbone.

(A) Labels indicating the peak to peak
intensity of the corresponding
low-field, h+1, center-field, h0, and high-field, h–1, transitions of an X-band nitroxide spectrum. (B) Plot showing the
normalized intensity of h0 between labeled
sites at different temperatures and differing RNA folded states. Based
upon triplicate measurements, the standard deviation is one-third
the size of the data points.

Similar SDSL investigations utilizing R5 have been reported
for
DNA. This work extends these findings to RNA backbone dynamics. Spin labeling with R5 is known to produce a
diastereomerically mixed product, and previous work with DNA suggests
that the combined behavior of Rp and Sp diastereomers can be used for general probing
of the local environment., Here, it is encouraging
to see distinct spectral variation for the three labeled sites that
contain R5 in both Rp and Sp diastereomers.

In summary, optimized splinted
ligation procedures were used and
allowed for efficient incorporation of the R5 spin-label into the
232-nucleotide VC glycine riboswitch for direct study of dynamics
that are modulated by the folded state and ligand. X-Band SDSL is
routinely utilized for characterization of conformational sampling
and dynamics in proteins. Our results indicate that the R5 labeling
scheme may prove to be a valuable tool for characterizing backbone
dynamics in large RNAs. Specifically, this work reveals differential
changes in backbone dynamics of the leader–linker region of
the VC riboswitch that are modulated by salt, magnesium, and glycine.

Supporting Information Available
Description of materials and
methods, figures, and tables. This material is available free of charge
via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500404b_si_001.pdf

This work was
supported by National Science Foundation Grants DGE-0802270 (J.M.E.)
and MCB1329467 (G.E.F.). This work was also supported by start-up
funds of the University of Central Florida (J.-D.Y.) and National
Institutes of Health Grants CA175625 (J.-D.Y.) and GM105409 (G.E.F.).

The
authors
declare no competing financial interests.

Acknowledgments
We thank Peter Qin for helpful discussions about
SDSL of RNA
and Yu Chen and Carol A. Fierke.

