The proteins regulating the
cell cycle frequently adopt modular designs that use separate domains
to carry out distinct and complementary functions, such as binding
and catalysis., To dissect the mechanisms of these
proteins, structural biology has traditionally followed a reductionist
approach that focuses on the behavior of isolated domains. But, of
course, it is the interdomain interactions that give rise to the rich
diversity of protein function. In particular, it is now clear that
interdomain interactions provide autoinhibition for many protein functions
including kinase activity, transcriptional activation, and nuclear
localization (see, e.g., review by Pufall and Graves). Thus, comprehending protein function requires a scrutiny
of interdomain interactions to complement those of the isolated domains.
Moreover, at a practical level, these interdomain interactions represent
enticing opportunities for novel modes of drug targeting. For example,
small molecules that interfere with interdomain interactions are candidates
for therapeutic allosteric inhibitors.,

The above
considerations have motivated our studies of interdomain
interactions within human Pin1. Pin1 is
an essential mitotic regulator that consists of a Trp–Trp (WW)
docking domain (residues 1–39) flexibly tethered to a larger
peptidyl–prolyl isomerase (PPIase) domain (residues 50–163).
Pin1 catalyzes the cis–trans isomerization of phosphorylated
Ser/Thr–Pro (pS/T–P) segments in intrinsically disordered
regions of other cell cycle proteins− and is a potential therapeutic
target for both cancer and Alzheimer’s disease. Both the PPIase
and WW domains are specific for pS/T–P segments. The PPIase
domain is solely responsible for pS/T–P isomerization, whereas
the WW domain functions as a noncatalytic binder of pS/T–P
segments.− The “WW” refers to two conserved tryptophans
(W), separated by ∼20–22 residues, that are a defining
feature of this binding domain family.

There is compelling evidence for functional interdomain interactions
in Pin1. Specifically, while the isolated PPIase and WW domains retain
isomerase and binding capability, respectively, in vitro, full-length
Pin1 is essential for in vivo activity., Thus, some
form of interdomain communication must exist. Yet, the nature of this
communication remains unclear. The most straightforward explanation
is that the WW domain, being proximal to the PPIase domain via the
interdomain linker, simply increases the local concentration of substrate
available to the PPIase active site., In this scenario,
the WW domain acts as an independent binding module. As such, it exerts
its influence on the PPIase domain indirectly; it does not alter the
distribution of conformations sampled by the PPIase domain, or any
properties derived thereof.

Another possible explanation for
interdomain communication involves
physical contact between the two domains. Previous solution NMR studies
have demonstrated weak, transient interdomain interactions for apo
Pin1 that intensify upon addition of
phosphopeptide substrate. Additionally,
the original X-ray crystal structure of Pin1 (PDB id 1PIN) depicted a contact
interface between the two domains, stabilized in part by an interstitial
PEG molecule derived from the crystallization conditions. However, how such interdomain contact might
serve interdomain communication has been unclear.

Fresh insight
linking Pin1 interdomain contact with interdomain
communication has come from our previous NMR studies of Pin1 conformational
dynamics., In those studies, we showed that the substrate
binding to Pin1 not only enhances its interdomain interactions but
also causes a loss of subnanosecond flexibility along a “conduit”
of conserved hydrophobic residues in the PPIase domain that link the
PPIase–WW domain interface with the distal PPIase active site.
We also compared the binding affinity of full-length Pin1 versus the
isolated PPIase domain for a phosphoserine peptidomimetic inhibitor
locked in this cis conformation., Critically, that inhibitor
bound only to the PPIase catalytic site and not the WW domain. A comparison
of the inhibitor binding affinity of full-length Pin1 versus the isolated
PPIase domain thus compared the effects of the presence versus absence
of WW domain contact. We found 2–4 times higher binding affinity
for the isolated PPIase domain compared with full-length Pin1. The combined dynamics and binding results led
us to hypothesize that interdomain contact allows the WW domain to
allosterically regulate the PPIase domain via changes in flexibility
among the residues linking the interdomain interface with the PPIase
active site.

These previous findings
set the stage for the present work, which
is a more direct investigation of Pin1 interdomain contact and its
hypothesized role as a mediator for interdomain allostery. In particular,
a necessary condition for our allosteric hypothesis is that WW domain
contact with the PPIase domain should alter some internal atomic properties
of the PPIase domain pertinent to binding, activity, or both. To investigate
if this is so, we have conducted NMR studies of a Pin1 mutant containing
an alanine substitution designed to weaken Pin1’s capacity
for interdomain contact. Specifically, we have generated the isoleucine
(I) to alanine (A) substitution mutant, I28A.

Our choice of
I28 derives from several previous structural and
biophysical studies of Pin1. First, as suggested by the original Pin1
crystal structure (PDB id 1PIN), I28 is within the WW
domain β2−β3 loop (Loop II, H27–N30), which
forms the WW domain side of the domain interface (Figure ). Also, in our original study of Pin1 side-chain
dynamics, I28 emerged as part of the aforementioned
conduit of conserved hydrophobic residues that lose subnanosecond
side-chain flexibility upon substrate binding. Finally, extensive
Pin1–WW mutation work by Kelly and co-workers () suggested that an I28A substitution would preserve overall
folding.

Structure of human Pin1 (PDB id code 1PIN()) with key
regions color-highlighted. Aquamarine and magenta shading indicate
the PPIase and WW domains, respectively. Yellow spheres are selected
PPIase domain residues responsible for substrate recognition and catalysis
(H59, L61, V62, K63, R68, R69, C113, L122, M130, and F134). Aquamarine
spheres are PPIase domain residues at the domain interface (S138,
S138, A140, L141, and R142). Magenta spheres are WW domain residues at the domain interface, which include Loop II
(H27, I28, T29, and N30). I28, the mutated residue, is in orange. The same
Pin1 structure (PDB id code 1PIN()) is used for all subsequent
figures.

Our main results show that I28A
indeed has reduced interdomain
contact compared with wild-type Pin1 (WT), which alters substrate
binding affinity, isomerase activity, and conformational dynamics
(both backbone and side chain). These consequences reveal that (i)
WW domain contact with the PPIase domain perturbs the PPIase domain’s
intrinsic properties pertinent to substrate binding and activity,
(ii) critical mediators of this interdomain contact are I28 and its
host WW domain Loop II (H27–N30), as well as the PPIase domain
residues S138–R142, and (iii) interdomain contact influences
the aforementioned dynamic conduit response, and thus, the means for
interdomain allosteric communication between the PPIase domain interface
with its catalytic site.

Materials and Methods
Preparation of the I28A
Mutant
To make the single-site
alanine mutant I28A, we used site-directed mutagenesis by PCR, starting
from the wild-type Pin1 construct. The mutated construct was verified
by DNA sequencing (Genetics and Bioinformatics Core Facility at the
University of Notre Dame). I28A was overexpressed and isotope-labeled
using Escherichia coli BL21 (DE3) (Novagen)
cells at 25 °C with 50% (v/v) D2O M9 media with 15NH4Cl and d-glucose (13C6) as the sole nitrogen and carbon sources, respectively.
Overexpression and purification followed procedures outlined in our
previous Pin1 work. The final sample was
concentrated and dialyzed against the NMR buffer: 30 mM imidazole-d4 (pH 6.6), 5 mM DTT-d10, 30 mM NaCl, 0.03% NaN3, and 90% H2O/10% D2O. Folding was confirmed by comparing the two-dimensional
(2-D) 15N–1H heteronuclear single quantum
correlation (HSQC) spectra of I28A with wild-type Pin1.

Far-UV Circular
Dichroism (CD) Spectroscopy
CD measurements
were performed in 20 mM NaH2PO4, pH 7.5 on a
Jasco J-815 spectropolarimeter. Far-UV CD spectral acquisitions used
a 1 mm path length cuvette with protein concentrations ranging between
2 and 10 μM. Thermal denaturation was monitored at 200 nm over
a temperature range of 20–80 °C with 1 min thermal equilibrations
for each 1 °C step.

NMR Resonance Assignments and Chemical Shift
Perturbations
We recorded NMR spectra at 295 K using Bruker
Avance 700 MHz (16.4
T) and 800 MHz (18.8 T) spectrometers equipped with cryogenically
cooled probes. I28A backbone assignments (1HN, 15N, 13Cα, and 13Cβ)
were confirmed using three-dimensional (3-D) HNCACB, HNCOCACB, and 2-D 1H–15N HSQC pulse schemes.
Side-chain aliphatic 13C and 1H resonances were
assigned by comparisons with the corresponding wild-type Pin1 spectra.
Fourier transformation and NMR resonance assignment used Topspin 1.3
and 2.1 (Bruker Biospin, Inc.) and Sparky (T. D. Goddard and D. G.
Kneller, SPARKY 3, University of California, San Francisco). The 15N–1H chemical shift perturbations of the
protein in state A relative to state B were defined aswhere ΔδNA–B = δNA – δNB and ΔδHA–B = δHA – δHB. For assessing
mutation effects, A was the mutant, whereas B was wild-type Pin1.
For assessing ligand-binding effects, A was the protein–ligand
complex, whereas B was the apo protein. Backbone 13Cα/β
shift changes between apo I28A and apo WT Pin1 were determined from
comparing their HNCACB/HNCOCACB spectra.

Kd Values from Chemical Shift Perturbations
For binding
studies, the chemical shift perturbations were interpreted
in terms of a simple equilibriumwhere P, L, and PL are the free protein,
free
ligand, and protein–ligand complex, respectively. We fitted
the chemical shift perturbation versus the ratio of total ligand to
total protein (LT/PT) toEquation  assumes fast
binding exchange on the chemical shift time scale. The adjustable
parameters were the equilibrium dissociation constant, Kd, and the maximum chemical shift perturbation at saturation,
ΔδNH,max. Uncertainties in the fitted parameters
were estimated by jack-knife simulations.

Measurements of Cis–Trans
Isomerase Activity
We used two methods to measure cis–trans
isomerase activity.
The first method was the standard chromogenic coupled-assay of Kofron
et al. The chromogenic substrate, suc-AEPF-pNA
was purchased from Sigma. The assay procedures were the same as
in our previous Pin1 study. The second
method was 2-D 1H–1H exchange spectroscopy
(EXSY), using a NOESY-based pulse scheme. The substrate was a ten-residue phosphothreonine peptide, EQPLpTPVTDL
(Anaspec), which is an established proxy for the Pin1 target site
in the mitotic phosphatases Cdc25C., Experiments
were carried out at 18.8T (800 MHz 1H Larmor frequency),
295 K. The mixing times for exchange were 1, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 80,
100, and 200 (×2) ms. Samples consisted of 50 μM fresh
protein (wild-type Pin1, I28A, or the isolated PPIase domain) in the
presence of 2 mM Cdc25C phosphopeptide substrate. Exchange rate constants, kEXSY, were estimated by fitting the ratios of
the trans-to-cis exchange cross-peaks over the trans diagonal peaks
as function of the mixing time tmix, to
the two-state expression,The two adjustable parameters were kTC and kCT and kEXSY = kTC + kCT. The exchange cross-peaks were assigned by
comparison to 2-D 1H–1H total correlation
spectroscopy (TOCSY), and rotating-frame nuclear Overhauser
effect correlation spectroscopy (ROESY) spectra. In samples containing just 2 mM Cdc25C phosphopeptide (no
protein), the EXSY cross-peaks were absent because the exchange was
beyond the limit of detection (too slow).

NMR Spin Relaxation Experiments
and Analysis
All backbone R1(15N), R2(15N), and steady-state 1HN–15N NOE (ssNOE) values were
measured at 16.4 T (700 MHz 1H Larmor frequency) using
previously established 2-D 15N–1H pulse
schemes,, at 295 K. The delays for R1(15N) were trelax = 200.5 (2×), 411.4,
633.0, 833.4, 1044.4, 1266.0, 1677.4, and 2099.4 ms. The delays for R2(15N) were multiples of the basic
CPMG echo block (8.48 ms) that included pulses and delays to remove
unwanted cross-correlated relaxation effects;, this resulted in trelax = 17 (2×),
25.4, 33.9, 42.4, 50.9, 59.4, 76.3, and 93.3 ms. For the ssNOE, we
recorded interleaved pairs of spectra in which 1H saturation
of 5 s was applied alternately.

Deuterium relaxation rates R1ρ (2D) and R1 (2D) for CH2D methyl groups were measured
with established 2-D 13Cmethyl–1Hmethyl pulse schemes, at 16.4 and
18.8 T (700.13 and 800.13 MHz 1H Larmor frequencies), 295
K. 2D hard-pulses were applied at 1.78 kHz, while the spin-locks
were applied at reduced strengths of 1.2 kHz. The delays for R1ρ (2D) were trelax = 0.5 (2×), 1.5, 2, 3, 4, 6.5, and 8 ms at 700 and
800 MHz. The R1 (2D) delays
had trelax = 0.05 (2×), 10, 15, 21,
31, 42, and 50 ms at both 700 and 800 MHz.

All relaxation analysis
used in-house software written in C programming
language. Cross-peak intensities were measured by integrating along
f2 (1H dimension) through the cross-peak maxima
in f1 (13C or 15N), which gave for
each resonance a file of cross-peak intensities “I” versus relaxation delay “trelax”. The I(trelax) versus trelax files
were fit to two-parameter single-exponential decay functions, I(trelax) = A exp{−Rtrelax}, where R is the desired relaxation rate constant. Statistical errors
were estimated using Monte Carlo methods with duplicate spectra furnishing
the integral uncertainties.

To describe the backbone NH bond
motions, we determined reduced
spectral density values−, JeffNH(0), JNH(ωN), and ⟨JNH(ωH)⟩, using the relationsThe σNH was
extracted from the measured ssNOE and R1(N) viaThe C and D constants in eq  reflect the 15N chemical-shift-anisotropy and 15N–1H dipolar relaxation mechanisms, respectively, and were C = Δ2ωN2/3 and D = ℏ2γH2γN2/⟨rHN6⟩ (cgs
units).

The deuterium (spin-1) relaxation rates are dominated
by the quadrupolar
relaxation mechanism, resulting in rate constant expressions,JCD(ω) is
the spectral density function that reports on the reorientational
motions of the 13C–2D bond vectors with
respect to the external magnetic field, B0. We used a quadrupolar coupling constant QCC = (e2qQ/ℏ)
= 2π*167 kHz. To extract dynamics parameters from the relaxation rates,
we used eqs  and  to
fit the R1ρ(2D) and R1(2D) rates to an analytical JCD(ω) function given by the Lipari–Szabo
formalism,,Equation  assumes that
the “twirling” motions of the C–D bond vectors
about the methyl symmetry axis are completely averaged out (extreme-narrowing),
resulting in the factor of 1/9. Hence, the site-specific motions of
the 13C–2D bond vectors are actually
those of the corresponding methyl symmetry axes, with amplitudes given
by the order parameter SAXIS2. The parameter τ satisfies 1/τ
= 1/τm + 1/τe, where τm is the global correlation time for overall tumbling, and
τe is a site-specific correlation time related to
motions underlying SAXIS2.

For the overall tumbling correlation
time τm,
we used the Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm and fit the ratios R2(15N)/R1(15N) of each
domain (WW and PPIase) to get domain-specific τm values.
The fit included only ratios within one-standard deviation of the
raw mean. For each domain, we kept its τm fixed and
used the Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm to fit SAXIS2 and
τe for the individual
methyls. Errors in SAXIS2 and
τe were estimated
using Monte Carlo simulations based on the estimated uncertainties
in the experimental rate constants. Methyls excluded from this fitting
because of resonance overlap included V22Cγ2, A31Cβ,
L61Cδ2, L88Cδ2, L106Cδ1, L122Cδ2, T152Cγ2, and
T162Cγ2. Further details are in our previous studies
of Pin1 side chain-dynamics.,

Results
Backbone Chemical
Shift Perturbations
The goal of the
I28A substitution was to weaken interdomain contact within apo Pin1
while maintaining the overall folds of both domains. Comparisons of
2-D 15N–1H HSQC spectra for U–15N/13C, 50% 2D I28A and wild-type Pin1
(WT) indicated we had achieved our goal (Figure ). The majority of HSQC cross-peaks of I28A were in the same positions
as those of WT, indicating unchanged NH chemical shifts. We also compared 13Cα/β chemical shifts for I28A versus WT (Figure
S1 of the ) because
these shifts are sensitive probes to local torsion angles and their
fluctuations.− The majority of residues showed small (&lt;0.3 ppm)
or no 13Cα/β shift perturbations. Thus, together
the 15N and 13Cα/β chemical shifts
suggested preservation of the overall WT fold, albeit, with local
structural perturbations. Far-UV CD spectra corroborated the preservation
of the overall fold (Figure S2 of the ). In particular, wave scans of I28A and WT at 20
°C were essentially identical. Moreover, their thermal melts
followed by far-UV CD at 200 nm were identical (Tm,I28A = 62.1 ± 0.2 °C versus Tm,WT = 62.5 ± 0.2 °C).

Comparison of 2-D 15N–1H HSQC NMR
spectra for I28A (red cross-peaks) versus wild-type Pin1 (blue cross-peaks)
at 16.4 T, 295 K.

We focused mainly on
the 2-D 15N–1H spectra to determine the
effect of the I28A mutation on interdomain
contact. Although the 2-D 15N–1H I28A
and WT spectra were overall quite similar, there were important local
chemical shift perturbations. We quantified these perturbations, ΔδNHI28A–WT =
δI28A – δWT, using eq  ().
As expected, I28A showed prominent ΔδNHI28A–WT for its neighboring
residues N16 and T29 (Figure , upper panel),
but there were also perturbations in the PPIase domain. Some were
unexpectedly long-ranged, occurring on the far side of the PPIase
domain (PPIase catalytic loop, L60, K77, K82, and A107). These 15N–1H shift perturbations were corroborated
by similar long-range 13Cα shift perturbations (Figure
S1 of the ). Specifically,
beyond the expected 13Cα shift perturbations at WW
domain residues at and flanking the mutation site, there were also
a handful of significant 13Cα perturbations in the
PPIase domain, including (i) R54 at the C-terminal end of the interdomain
linker, (ii) S67, K77 in the catalytic loop, (iii) S105 and F110 in
α2, and (iv) I158 at the C-terminus. Most revealing, however,
were the 15N–1H shift perturbations at
the PPIase residues at the C-terminal end of α4 including S138–R142.
These PPIase residues lay across the domain interface from the I28A
mutation site and its host Loop II in the WW domain (see Figure ). Moreover, these perturbations matched those we
observed for the isolated WT PPIase domain, relative to full-length
Pin1, ΔδNHPPIase–WT (Figure , lower panel).
In effect, the pattern of chemical shift perturbations in apo I28A
matched those caused by the deletion of the WW domain. This was strong
evidence that the I28A mutation had weakened the interdomain contact
of apo Pin1.

Backbone 15N–1H chemical
shift perturbations
for apo protein constructs. Top panel: perturbations ΔδNHI28A–WT for
apo I28A relative to apo WT. Bottom panel: Perturbations ΔδNHPPIase–WT caused by deletion of the WW domain (i.e., isolated apo PPIase domain
relative to apo full-length WT). Green spheres are common chemical
shift perturbations &gt;0.05 ppm at the domain interface; red spheres
are all other perturbations &gt;0.05 ppm.

Additional evidence for weakened interdomain contact came
from
comparing the chemical shift perturbations caused by substrate binding
(i.e., ΔδNHCOMPLEX–APO) in I28A and WT Pin1. Specifically, previous
studies showed that WT binding of the phosphopeptide substrate EQPLpTPVTDL,
a proxy for the Pin1 target Cdc25C phosphatase from Xenopus laevis,, caused significant
chemical shift perturbations at S138–R142, (Figure , lower panel). These WT chemical shift perturbations
were the signature response indicating increased interdomain contact
stimulated by substrate binding. By contrast,
adding saturating amounts of Cdc25C substrate to I28A failed to show
this response (Figure , upper panel). This
failure of response in I28A is consistent with its weakened interdomain
contact.

Backbone 15N–1H chemical shift perturbations
of I28A (top) and WT (bottom) caused by adding saturating amounts
of Cdc25C phosphopeptide substrate, EQPLpTPVTDL. Green spheres highlight
domain interface shift perturbations &gt;0.05 ppm for WT, which are
mostly
absent in I28A. Red spheres indicate all other perturbations &gt;0.05
ppm. Light aquamarine and magenta shading indicate the PPIase and
WW domains, respectively.

Cis–Trans Isomerase Activity
We investigated
the effect of the I28A mutation on cis–trans isomerase activity
using two methods. We first measured activity via the standard chromophoric
coupled assay of Kofron et al., which
uses the substrate suc-AEPF-pNA. We found that I28A showed an ∼36%
reduction of the specificity constant, kcat./KM, relative to WT (I28A, 2724 ±
140 mM–1 s–1; WT, 4250 ±
213 mM–1 s–1). This result echoes
that of the isolated WT PPIase domain, which also showed a slight
decrease of kcat./KM relative to WT.

We also
measured I28A isomerase activity using 2-D 1H–1H NMR exchange spectroscopy (EXSY), which used the Cdc25C phosphopeptide substrate mentioned above.
EXSY spectra produced cross-peaks corresponding to pT5 methyl protons
exchanging between the cis versus trans chemical shifts. For both
I28A and WT, we fitted the time course of these exchange cross-peaks
to the two-state exchange expression in eq  () to get a net exchange
rate constant, kEXSY = kTC + kCT. It is important to note that kTC and kCT are the apparent rate constants
for trans-to-cis and cis-to-trans exchange and are functions of KM and kcat. for
the corresponding trans-to-cis and cis-to-trans isomerization processes. I28A showed increased kEXSY relative to WT (i.e., kEXSY(I28A) = kCT + kTC = 73 ± 2 s–1 versus kEXSY(WT) = kCT + kTC = 31.3 ± 0.5 s–1) (Figure S3
of the ). This increase
echoed our previous observation of increased kEXSY for isolated WT PPIase domain relative to full-length
WT Pin1.

Thus, the I28A mutation
altered the cis–trans isomerization
activity, despite the remote location of I28 from the PPIase active
site. The sense of alteration matched that observed when going from
full-length Pin1 to the isolated PPIase domain. In particular, both
I28A and the isolated PPIase domain show the same trend of slightly
increased kEXSY (2-D EXSY) and slightly
decreased kcat./KM (chromogenic assay) relative to WT.

Effect of I28A on Substrate
Binding Affinity
To assess
the mutation’s impact on substrate binding, we titrated I28A
with the Cdc25C phosphopeptide and fitted the resulting NH chemical
shift perturbations of resolved NH cross-peaks to eq  (). This gave
site-specific estimates for binding affinity (i.e., the
equilibrium dissociation constant Kd).
The values are listed in Table , and the corresponding
isotherm fits are in Figure S4 of the . Compared with WT, I28A showed weaker binding affinity
(i.e., KdI28A &gt; KdWT) in both domains. The affinity
decrease varied, with the ratios KdI28A &gt; KdWT values ranging
from ∼5 to ∼10. The spread partly reflected the low
signal-to-noise of some cross-peaks; nevertheless, the general trend
of an affinity decrease was unambiguous. The decreased binding affinity
was striking, given that neither I28 itself nor its host loop directly
contact phosphopeptide substrate.,

Equilibrium Dissociation Constants
of the Cdc25C Phosphopeptide Substrate for I28A vs WT from NMR Titrations,
295 K, 16.4 T
residue	location	I28A Kd (μM)	WT Kd (μM)	
R14	WW domain	48.5 ± 4.9	2.7 ± 0.7	
G20	WW domain	43.5 ± 3.0	9.1 ± 0.4	
R54	PPIase domain	110 ± 10	7.8 ± 0.4	
A140	PPIase domain	65 ± 39	9.7 ± 2.0	
Backbone Mobility of apo I28A
We previously characterized
the changes in WT Pin1 backbone and side chain flexibility caused
by binding the Cdc25C phosphopeptide substrate. It was therefore of interest to see whether I28A would
have similar responses, in light of its altered substrate binding
affinity and cis–trans isomerase activity.

We first characterized
the backbone flexibility of apo I28A, by measuring backbone amide 15N relaxation parameters, R1, R2, and steady-state 15N–1H NOE at 16.4 T, 295 K. We analyzed the relaxation data using
a reduced NH spectral density mapping procedure that produced for each NH a value for JeffNH(0), a
local mobility parameter. JeffNH(0) is the zero-frequency value for
the effective NH spectral density function JeffNH(ω) that
describes the reorientational motions of the NH bonds relative to
the external magnetic field, B0. For a rigid,
isotropically tumbling molecule, JeffNH(0) should be uniform across
all NH bonds. NH bonds with outlying JeffNH(0) values highlight
sites of internal motion. In particular, high JeffNH(0) outliers
indicate dynamic processes modulating the 15N chemical
shift on the microsecond to millisecond time-scale, whereas low JeffNH(0) outliers reflect large amplitude, internal motions that reorient
the NH bond on the subnanosecond time scale. Comparing JeffNH(0) values for apo I28A with those we had
previously obtained for apo WT allowed
us to assess the mutation’s affect on intrinsic backbone dynamics.

We found that the overall profile of JeffNH(0) versus the
sequence for apo I28A was similar to apo WT, in that the JeffNH(0) values
had partitioned into two distinct clusters, corresponding to the WW
and PPIase domains. This clustering indicated that the overall molecular
tumbling of I28A, like that of WT, could be approximated as two domains
tumbling in quasi-independent manner with domain-specific correlation
times, τm,WW and τm,PPI.

Nevertheless,
the apo I28A showed important local differences in JeffNH(0) compared
with apo WT. To highlight these differences, we used
the site-specific ratio JeffNH,I28A(0)/JeffNH,WT(0). Provided
the mutation does not affect internal mobility, this ratio should
be the same for all NHs within a given domain. Thus, those NH bonds
that display outlying ratios represent sites experiencing mutation-induced
changes in internal motion. We screened for such outliers by identifying JeffNH,I28A(0)/JeffNH,WT(0) ratios beyond one standard deviation
from the trimmed mean value for the WW or PPIase domain, as appropriate.
Figure  shows the results; the spheres/bars
colored blue and red indicate low and high outliers, respectively.
The most prominent high outliers were WW domain residues with JeffNH,I28A(0)/JeffNH,WT(0) &gt; 1. These are residues whose NH
bonds
experience microsecond to millisecond exchange dynamics in I28A that
are lacking in WT. These residues include N26, T29, and N30, which
lie within or adjacent to Loop II, and bracket I28. Surprisingly,
they also included WW domain residues outside Loop II, notably K13
and R14 in the β strand, β1′. Possible reasons
for these surprising β1′ changes are in the . Low outliers, JeffNH,I28A(0)/JeffNH,WT(0) &lt; 1, indicating enhanced subnanosecond mobility of apo I28A
versus apo WT, were distal from the mutation site and occurred in
the linker, the PPIase domain catalytic pocket, and the flexible PPIase
loop (H64–R80) “capping” the catalytic pocket.

(A) Pin1
colored to highlight changes in backbone NH dynamics in
apo I28A compared with apo WT. Ribbons colored aquamarine, magenta,
and yellow indicate the PPIase, WW,
and PPIase catalytic site regions, respectively. The red/blue spheres
are NHs with outlying values of JeffI28A(0)/JeffWT(0) (ratio values
&gt;1 standard deviation from the domain-specific trimmed mean). Red
spheres highlight NH sites showing enhanced exchange dynamics, whereas
blue spheres are sites with enhanced subnanosecond flexibility. (B)
Bar graph showing the data underlying panel A. The bars are deviations
of NH JeffI28A(0)/JeffWT(0) from the domain-specific
trimmed means. Red/blue bars correspond to the red/blue spheres in
(A).

Backbone Mobility of I28A
in the Presence of Substrate
We carried out the same backbone 15N relaxation analysis
described above for I28A in the presence of saturating amounts of
Cdc25C phosphopeptide substrate. To highlight changes in internal
motion caused by substrate binding, we used the ratio JeffNH,COMPLEX(0)/JeffNH,APO(0), where the JeffNH,APO(0) values
were those from the apo measurements described above. If substrate
binding simply alters the domain rotational correlation time (e.g.,
τm,WW or τm,PPI), then the JeffNH,COMPLEX(0)/JeffNH,APO(0) ratios should be the same across all
NHs within a given domain. Thus, those NH bonds that show outlying
ratios represent bonds whose local dynamics have changed upon substrate
binding. Ratios were identified as outliers if they deviated from
the trimmed domain average by more than one standard deviation. We
therefore compared the number and location of JeffNH,COMPLEX(0)/JeffNH,APO(0) outliers for I28A and WT, as a means to compare their dynamic
responses to substrate binding.

Comparing these outliers revealed
that Cdc25C substrate binding caused backbone dynamic changes in I28A
that were absent in WT. Specifically, Figure  shows the outliers for both WT and I28A; the spheres/bars colored
blue and red indicate low and high deviations, respectively. I28A
had many outliers in the WW domain that were absent in WT. These outliers
reflect the quenching of the aforementioned microsecond to millisecond
exchange dynamics of apo I28A in Loop II in apo I28A, upon substrate
binding. Interestingly, I28A also showed outliers at S58, V62, and
C113, which are part of the substrate proline binding pockets within
the PPIase domain. For these three residues, the ratio JeffNH,COMPLEX(0)/JeffNH,APO(0) became smaller, with the denominator JeffNH,APO(0) value close to the domain average; this indicated increased subnanosecond
flexibility upon substrate Cdc25 phosphopeptide binding. Such a response
was utterly lacking in WT. Thus, the I28A mutation in the WW domain
changed the dynamic response of residues in the distal PPIase domain
to substrate binding. Other sites outside the substrate binding pocket
showing distinctly different dynamic response for I28A included K82
and E83, at the juncture between the catalytic loop and the long helix
α1.

Site-specific changes in NH backbone dynamics caused by Cdc25C
substrate for both WT (top panel (A)) and I28A (bottom panel (B)).
All structures are from PDB id 1PIN. Ribbon colors of aquamarine, magenta,
and yellow ribbon indicate the PPIase, WW, and PPIase catalytic site
regions, respectively. The red/blue spheres are NHs with outlying
values of JeffNH,COMPLEX(0)/JeffNH,APO(0) (ratios
&gt;1 standard deviation from the domain-specific trimmed mean) and
thus
indicate binding-induced changes in local mobility. The red/blue bars
in the bar graphs correspond to the red/blue spheres in the structures.
In the bottom panel (B), S58, V62, and C113 are PPIase catalytic site
residues that show increased subnanosecond mobility upon substrate
binding for I28A but not for WT. K82 and E83, at the juncture between
the catalytic loop and the long helix α1, also show dynamic
changes not found in the WT.

Subnanosecond Side-Chain Mobility in apo I28A
We then
investigated the impact of the I28A mutation on side-chain flexibility,
specifically, the subnanosecond reorientational motions of methyl
symmetry axes with respect to the magnetic field, B0. This involved measuring 2D R1 and R1ρ rate constants
for all methyl CH2D isotopomers in U–15N, 13C, 50% 2D enriched I28A at 16.4 and 18.8
T, 295 K. We analyzed the resulting rates using the familiar Lipari–Szabo
formalism. This produced two methyl-specific
dynamics parameters: SAXIS2 and τe, per eq  (). SAXIS2 is a pure number that measures the
amplitude of reorientational dynamics of a methyl symmetry axis, due
to subnanosecond internal motions. SAXIS2 ranges
from 0 to 1: a value of 0 corresponds
to unrestricted internal motion, whereas a value of 1 corresponds
to no internal motion (rigid symmetry axis). The τe parameter is an effective correlation time that estimates the rapidity
of the internal orientational dynamics but also depends on the amplitude
of motion.

Fitting SAXIS2 and
τe relies on
prior characterization of the overall molecular tumbling. The backbone
NH reduced spectral density analysis above justified approximating
the overall I28A tumbling in terms of domain-specific rotational correlation
times. Accordingly, we determined τm,WW and τm,PPIase, using the R2(15N)/R1(15N) ratios of only those backbone NHs with Jeff(0) within 1 standard deviation of the trimmed mean.
For apo I28A, we found τm,WW = 7.8 ± 0.01 ns/r,
τm,PPIase = 12.0 ± 0.01 ns/r, and for the Cdc25C
complex τm,WW = 7.5 ± 0.01 ns/r and τm,PPIase = 11.4 ± 0.01 ns/r. With the domain-specific
overall tumbling times set, we were able to fit the site-specific
side-chain internal motion parameters, SAXIS2 and τe. We then compared SAXIS2 from apo I28A with
those we previously determined for apo WT, by evaluating the differences ΔSAXIS,APO2 = SAXIS,APO:I28A2 – SAXIS,APO:WT2.

Remarkably, despite the fact that the I28A mutation was in the
WW domain, it produced widespread changes in intrinsic side-chain
flexibility (ΔSAXIS,APO2) in both domains. In particular, Figure , top panel, maps these differences onto the 1PIN crystal structure.
Red spheres and positive bars indicate ΔSAXIS,APO2 &gt;
0,
and pinpoint methyl axes for which I28A was more rigid than for WT.
Blue spheres and negative bars indicate the opposite trend. In the
WW domain, we saw greater I28A flexibility at L7Cδ1; notably L7 has key hydrophobic interactions with W11, one of the
two conserved tryptophans of the WW domain. In the PPIase domain,
we observed both mobility increases and decreases. Sites where I28A
loosened relative to WT (ΔSAXIS,APO2 &lt; 0) included (i)
V62Cγ2 in the PPIase β4 strand near the PPIase
active site, (ii) T81Cγ2, A85Cβ, and I89Cδ1 in the long PPIase α1 helix, and (iii) A116Cβ
in α3 helix. Sites where I28A stiffened compared with WT (ΔSAXIS,APO2 &gt; 0) included (i) V55Cγ2, L60Cδ1, L60Cδ2, and L61Cδ1 in
the PPIase active site, (ii) I93Cδ1 and I96Cδ1 in the long α1 helix, (iii) A140Cβ and L141Cδ2 between α4 and β3, (iv) V150Cγ2 in β3, and (v) I159Cγ2 in β4. Interestingly,
the last three locales (A140Cβ, L141Cδ2, V150Cγ2, and I159Cγ2) are all near the domain interface.

Changes
in methyl side-chain order parameters SAXIS2 from
deuterium spin relaxation. Top panel: apo states for WT versus I28A,
ΔSAXIS,APO2 = SAXIS,APO:I28A2 – SAXIS,APO:WT2.
Middle panel: I28A complexed with Cdc25C phosphopeptide versus its
apo state, ΔSAXIS,BINDING2 = SAXIS,CMP:I28A2 – SAXIS,APO:I28A2. Bottom panel: Cdc25C phosphopeptide
complexed states for WT versus I28A, ΔSAXIS,COMPLEX2 = SAXIS,CMP:WT2 – SAXIS,CMP:I28A2. The bars denote SAXIS2 with magnitudes
greater than or equal to twice (purple) or once (hatched) the estimated
statistical errors. The structures to the right of each bar graph
shows colored spheres corresponding to the methyls changes highlighted
in the bar graphs. The red and blue spheres indicate sites of ΔSAXIS2 &gt; 0 (more rigid) and ΔSAXIS2 &lt; 0
(more flexible), respectively. Bottom structure: residues colored
to contrast the pattern of side-chain flexibility loss in I28A upon
Cdc25C substrate binding, with that of the previously defined WT conduit. Specifically, the red and deep salmon residues
trace the original WT conduit. The red residues are those that lose
side-chain flexibility only in WT (i.e., not I28A). The deep salmon
residues lose side-chain flexibility in both WT and I28A. The green
residues are those that lose side-chain flexibility only in I28A.
The red and green residues thus highlight the departure of I28A from
the previously defined WT conduit.

Subnanosecond Side Chain Mobility in I28A in the Presence of
Substrate
We investigated Cdc25C substrate binding affected
I28A side-chain mobility by evaluating ΔSAXIS,BINDING2 = SAXIS,CMP:I28A2 – SAXIS,APO:I28A2. The ΔSAXIS,CMP:I28A2 values were from I28A in the presence
of saturating amounts of Cdc25C substrate, whereas the ΔSAXIS,APO:I28A2 values were from the apo studies described
above. Positive and negative ΔSAXIS,BINDING2 indicate a loss or gain of side-chain flexibility, respectively,
upon Cdc25 binding. The middle panel of Figure  maps these differences onto the structure. Losses of flexibility
(ΔSAXIS,BINDING2 &gt; 0) occurred at the N-terminus
of
the WW domain L7Cδ1, the PPIase domain active site
V62Cγ2, T81Cγ2, and A85Cβ,
I89Cδ1, L106Cδ2, A118Cβ, L122Cδ1, M146Cε, and V150Cγ2. Gains in flexibility
(ΔSAXIS,BINDING2 &lt; 0) occurred at the flexible linker
(A53Cβ), the PPIase domain active site L60Cδ1 and L60Cδ2, the domain interface L141Cδ2, and the C-terminal L160Cδ2. Thus, many
sites that showed intrinsically different side chain mobility from
WT (ΔSAXIS,APO2) also underwent changes in Saxis2 upon substrate binding.

We wanted to compare how the
binding-induced changes in side chain
flexibility for I28A compared with what we had already documented
for WT. To this end, we compared order parameters from the two Cdc25C
complexes, WT/Cdc25C and I28A/Cdc25C, by evaluating the difference
ΔSAXIS,CMP2 = SAXIS,CMP:WT2 –
SAXIS,CMP:I28A2. Figure ,
bottom panel, reveals different responses in both domains. Generally,
the I28A/Cdc25 complex was stiffer than the WT/Cdc25 complex. The
I28A complex showed greater rigidity than the WT complex (ΔSAXIS,CMP2 &lt; 0) at L7Cδ1 in the WW domain, I89Cδ1 (PPIase α1, domain interface), L106Cδ2 (PPIase α2), L122Cδ1 (PPIase active site),
and V150Cγ1 V150Cγ2, I158Cδ1 and I159Cδ1 (PPIase β3 and β4,
adjacent to residues comprising the domain interface). On the other
hand, the WT complex showed greater rigidity than the I28A complex
(ΔSAXIS,CMP2 &gt; 0) at L7Cδ2 (WW domain),
A53Cβ (linker), and L60Cδ1 (PPIase β1
active site), and L141Cδ2 (domain interface).

A particularly striking difference in side chain dynamic response
occurred at L60–L61–V62, a conserved hydrophobic cluster
within the PPIase active site. Specifically, our previous dynamics
studies of WT showed a loss of side-chain flexibility for this conserved
cluster., By contrast, the response of I28A upon substrate
binding was an increase in flexibility at L60 (Figure , middle panel). This flexibility increase also
appeared in the subnanosecond backbone flexibility at these sites
(Figure ). The deviant dynamic response in
the I28A PPIase active site, for both side chain and backbone, is
noteworthy given that its isomerase activity (kcat./KM from the chromogenic assay,
and kEXSY from 2-D NMR) differs from WT.

Finally, the structure (PDB id 1PIN) in lower panel (B) of Figure  further highlights how the distribution of side-chain
flexibility loss in I28A caused by Cdc25C substrate binding deviates
from the conduit response we first observed for the WT. Specifically, the coloring denotes residues that
lose side-chain flexibility (i) only in WT (red), (ii) in both WT
and I28A (deep salmon) (iii), and only in I28A (green). The red and
deep salmon residues trace the original WT conduit.

Discussion
Pin1 has weak interdomain interactions,− whose functional significance has not yet been firmly
established. At the same time, Pin1 requires some form of interdomain
communication for in vivo function., We recently
connected these two observations through our studies of Pin1 functional
motions, which led us to propose that interdomain contact allows the
WW domain to allosterically regulate the distal PPIase active site., A necessary condition for this allosteric mechanism is that PPIase
domain contact with the WW domain should alter some intrinsic properties
of the PPIase domain relevant to binding, activity, or both. Our goal
here was to investigate this possibility by weakening the interdomain
interaction. Toward this end, we generated I28A, which lies within
Loop II (H27–N30) of the Pin1 WW domain. In the 1PIN crystal structure,
Loop II makes interdomain contacts with the PPIase domain. By observing effects of the I28A mutation on
Pin1, we would map the influence of interdomain contact away from
the immediate domain interface, and thus gain insight into its relevance
for interdomain communication.

I28A Weakens Intrinsic Interdomain Contact
As our 15N–1H NMR chemical shift perturbations
and
far-UV CD data indicate, the I28A mutation indeed weakens interdomain
contact, while preserving the overall structure of WT Pin1 (Figures –, Figure S1 of the ). The 15N–1H shift perturbations depict an interdomain contact region
consistent with the region depicted in the 1PIN crystal structure and include H27–N30 of the WW domain (Loop II) and
of the PPIase domain residues S138–R142 (C-terminal residues
of α4).

The backbone 15N dynamics study of
I28A provides further support for weakened interdomain contact. Loop
II (H27–N30) in I28A exhibits greater microsecond to millisecond
mobility than Loop II in WT, as evidenced by elevated ratios JeffNH,I28A(0)/JeffNH,WT(0) in Figure .
These elevated ratios indicate enhanced amide proton exchange, conformational
exchange, or both. Greater Loop II flexibility in I28A would be consistent
with its lowered commitment from Loop II to interdomain contact.

I28A Shows Isomerase Activity Consistent with Weakened Interdomain
Contact
The weakened interdomain contact in I28A coincides
with changes in isomerase activity. Notably, the changes of I28A relative
to WT are similar to those displayed by the isolated PPIase domain.
Specifically, both I28A and the isolated PPIase domain show the same
trend of slightly increased kEXSY (2-D
EXSY assay) and slightly decreased kcat./KM (chromogenic assay) relative to WT.
Thus, I28A mutation changes the PPIase activity in a direction that
is diagnostic of lost communication with the WW domain. These results
suggest that interdomain contact has a functional significance, in
that it can fine-tune PPIase activity.

This fine-tuning is intriguing
because I28 and the other residues supporting interdomain contact
(e.g., H27–N30 in the WW domain Loop II and S138–R142
in the PPIase domain) do not directly contact substrate. Rather, they
are spatially removed from those regions that do, namely, the PPIase
domain catalytic site and the WW domain substrate binding Loop I (S16–R21)
(Figure ). This physical separation raises
the question of how changes in the interdomain contact, either its
weakening or elimination, could alter the activity of the distal PPIase
catalytic site.

Interdomain Contact Affects the PPIase Domain
Properties
The standard explanation emphasizes the WW domain’s
role as
an independent binding module., Its proposed influence
on the PPIase activity, modulating the local substrate concentration,
simply reflects its proximity to the PPIase domain. Interestingly,
there appears to be no consensus on what this modulation is: both
the enhancement and the depletion of local substrate concentration
have been suggested.,, Mutating the WW domain may compromise its ability to bind substrate,
and hence, its ability to modulate local substrate concentration.
Two features of this standard explanation are noteworthy. First, it
does not explicitly invoke domain contact but merely domain proximity.
Second, the view of the WW domain as an independent module implies
that a WW domain mutation may perturb local conformation and flexibility
within the WW domain but not within the PPIase domain.

Our results
from I28A suggest a more complex interdomain relationship. Certainly,
the I28A mutation does perturb the WW domain, as evidenced by reduced
Cdc25C binding affinity and altered Loop II mobility (Figure ). But in contrast to the implications of the standard
explanation, the WW domain mutation also impacts the intrinsic properties
of the PPIase domain. First, comparisons of the apo I28A versus apo
WT backbone 15N–1H chemical shifts show
perturbations in both domains, including PPIase residues far removed
from the PPIase domain interface, such as those of the PPIase domain
catalytic loop (Figure ). Similar remote 13Cα chemical shift perturbations corroborate these remote 15N–1H perturbations (Figure S1 of the ). Second, we found weaker
Cdc25 phosphopeptide substrate binding affinities (higher Kd = C0 exp(ΔGPPIase,0/kBT)) for both domains (Table  and
Figure S4 of the ). This suggests that the I28A WW domain mutation makes the free
energy difference between the complexed and apo states, ΔGPPIase,0 = GCOMPLEXPPIase – GAPOPPIase,
less negative. Finally, the I28A mutation causes widespread changes
in the intrinsic (apo state) backbone and side-chain flexibility of
the protein, beyond the domain interface. Figure  and the top panel of Figure  show
distal changes in backbone and side-chain flexibility, respectively,
at functional sites of the PPIase domain. In particular, the top panel
of Figure  shows complementary changes in
side-chain flexibility at residues within the PPIase catalytic site
(V55Cγ2, L60Cδ1, L60Cδ2, and L61Cδ1). Considering the above points,
the view of the WW domain as an independent binding module would appear
incomplete. Rather, our data suggest that the internal properties
of the PPIase domain are sensitive to WW domain contact and to mutations
such as I28A that weaken that contact.

Interdomain Contact Tunes
the Dynamic Response of Pin1 to Binding
Our previous work
on WT Pin1 functional dynamics in the presence
and absence of inhibitors and substrates has led us to propose an
additional mechanism for WW domain influence on PPIase activity. Specifically,
we proposed that the WW domain also acts as an allosteric effector
molecule of the PPIase domain. The allosteric binding site involves
the interdomain contact region identified in this study. The mechanism
that communicates changes at the interdomain contact region to the
distal PPIase catalytic site involves propagated changes in flexibility
among the intervening residues. These flexibility changes manifest
as a loss of subnanosecond side chain flexibility along a conduit
of conserved hydrophobic residues linking the interdomain interface
to the active site.,

If this dynamic allosteric
explanation is tenable, then weakening the interdomain contact via
the I28A mutation should produce a different response in side-chain
dynamics upon Cdc25C substrate binding. This is what we observe (Figure , middle and bottom panels). Critically, I28A lacks
key features of the WT dynamic conduit, such as the loss of side-chain
flexibility for the PPIase active site residues L60 and L61. In fact,
L60 becomes more flexible (Figure , middle
panel). The colored structure (PDB id 1PIN) at the bottom of Figure  further underscores these differences. This differential
dynamic response is reinforced by the corresponding 15N
backbone dynamics; specifically, I28A showed an enhancement of backbone
subnanosecond flexibility for S58, V62, and C113 upon Cdc25C substrate
binding (Figure ) that is absent in the WT.
The side chain and backbone results above suggest that the interdomain
interface is a critical set of interactions that enable dynamic allosteric
regulation of the PPIase domain by the WW domain.

Long-Range
Interactions within the WW Domain
I28A weakened
both interdomain contact and WW domain binding affinity to the Cdc25C
phosphopeptide. This joint effect is intriguing because I28 does not
directly contact substrate; rather, it is on the opposite side of
the WW domain loop mediating substrate binding, Loop I (S16–R21).
The fact that the binding affinity at Loop I is sensitive to a mutation
at the far end of the domain points to a yet unremarked mechanism
for long-range Loop I–Loop II communication within the Pin1
WW domain.

We speculate that this long-range communication derives
from a network of short-range inter-residue interactions within the
WW domain. This speculation derives from our unexpected observation
that I28A causes changes in mobility beyond its host Loop II and extends
to K13 and R14 in the β1′-strand (Figure ). These long-range perturbations become comprehensible when
the Loop II hydrogen bond network in the 1PIN crystal structures is examined (Figure )., Of particular interest are hydrogen
bonds from the I28A backbone NH to side chains of N26. N26 is highly
conserved across Pin1 homologues and
makes multiple hydrogen bonds that stabilize Loop II and link it to
β1′ (cf. Figure ). In I28A, N26
shows large backbone chemical shift perturbations (Figure , Figures S1 of the ) and enhanced exchange dynamics (amplified JeffNH(0) in Figure ) that are absent in WT. Thus,
although we did not mutate N26 directly, we have nevertheless changed
its local mobility by mutating one of its hydrogen bond partners,
I28. Conceivably, the shorter Ala side chain in I28A could decrease
side chain steric contacts, both with the PPIase domain and within
Loop II itself. Indeed, the perturbations in 13Cα/β
chemical shifts for Loop II (apo I28A versus apo WT) suggest local
structural perturbations to Loop II, consistent with this notion (Figure
S1 of the ). This
could enable greater backbone mobility at position 28, which would
then propagate to N26 and more remote sites, such as K13 and R14,
via the network of backbone and side-chain hydrogen bonds. Thus, the
long-range mobility perturbations stimulated by I28A make it reasonable
to contemplate a network of short-range interactions within the WW
domain that could couple perturbations at Loop II to Loop I.

Loop II hydrogen
bond pairings of Pin1 WW domain within full-length
WT Pin1 (PDB id 1PIN). Solid line black arrows represent backbone–backbone hydrogen
bonds, whereas dotted black arrows represent backbone–side-chain
hydrogen bonds. The backbone NH of I28 makes hydrogen bonds to the
side chain of N26.

If this intra-WW domain
network is corroborated by subsequent experiments,
it would mean that substrate binding to the WW domain, and its allosteric
influence on the PPIase domain, are themselves coupled phenomena.
It would also justify the hypothesis of a larger network of interacting
residues that couple binding events at the WW domain Loop I (S16–R21)
all the way to the PPIase active site, with the interdomain contact
surface as a crucial intermediary.

Coevolving Residues
By itself, I28 is not a highly
conserved residue across Pin1 homologues. Nevertheless, our results show that I28 participates in inter-residue
interactions that sustain the weak contacts between the WW and PPIase
domain (e.g., the large chemical shift perturbations at PPIase domain
residues S138–R142 in Figure ). Thus,
we might expect that I28 would emerge in bioinformatics analyses aimed
at finding pairs of coevolving residues. An example is the “protein
sector” analysis of Ranganathan and co-workers, which identifies
sectors of coevolving residues based on their statistical coupling
analysis (SCA) of multiple sequence alignments (MSA). Our initial application of this sector/SCA to Pin1 reveals
I28/A140 as a coevolving pair. This pair would be consistent with
the interdomain contacts identified above (e.g., chemical shift perturbations
in Figure , side-chain dynamic changes Figure ), and form the basis for future double mutant studies.

Interdomain Contact Supports Interdomain Allostery in Pin1
In summary, our I28A results reveal that the WW domain Loop II
(H27–N30) is critical for establishing transient interdomain
contacts with the PPIase domain. Moreover, these contacts influence
the distribution of conformations sampled by the PPIase domain. Evidence
for this influence consists of the perturbations to backbone chemical
shifts, backbone/side-chain mobility, substrate binding affinity,
and isomerase activity documented above. These results show that interdomain
contact alters the internal properties of the PPIase domain and thus
strengthen our hypothesis for allosteric communication between the
interdomain interface and the distal active site.

We should
reiterate that although this investigation reveals Pin1 interdomain
allostery mainly through changes in protein dynamics parameters, it
does not exclude the possibility of joint changes in local conformation.
Indeed, the backbone chemical shift perturbations indicate that, although
the I28A mutation preserves the overall WT fold, it may also instigate
local structural changes within the PPIase domain. This possibility
is consistent with our main point: a WW domain mutation (I28A) at
the domain interface can perturb the conformational sampling of the
PPIase domain in such a way that it alters local flexibility, structure,
or both. All three scenarios would be consequences of interdomain
allostery.

By combining our I28A results with our previous ones,
we envision
the following underlying scenario. The Pin1 interdomain interactions,
although weak, influence the ensemble of conformations sampled by
both domains. From the perspective of the PPIase domain, the WW domain
acts not only as a binding module but also as an allosteric effector
molecule. WW domain contact with the PPIase domain perturbs the conformational
sampling by the PPIase domain. These changes in conformational sampling,
although stimulated at the domain interface, can propagate away from
that interface to the remote catalytic site via correlated internal
motions within the PPIase domain. These correlated motions include
(but are not limited to) the side chain motions whose perturbations
manifest as the dynamic conduit. The results are not gross structural
changes but rather subtle changes in local conformation and flexibility
at the PPIase catalytic site that fine-tune binding affinity and isomerization
activity. Substrate binding stabilizes the subset of conformations
involving more intimate interdomain contact and thereby tunes binding
affinity and activity. The exact manner of tuning doubtless depends
on the details of substrate composition (e.g., residues flanking the
pS/T–P segments).

To further investigate the above scenario,
we require further mutation
studies. In particular, we need mutations that perturb interdomain
contact, exclusively, without perturbing the binding affinity of WW
domain residues. These mutations could involve those of the PPIase
side of the domain interface, and modifications of the flexible linker.
Such work is in progress.

Modular proteins are replete in biochemical
networks maintaining
the cell cycle. The weak interdomain interactions
investigated here for Pin1 may be present in other modular systems
and, perhaps, play similar functional roles. Perturbing these interactions
systematically, via small molecule ligands, may be a promising approach
for advancing our understanding of the molecules regulating cell growth.
Also, as mentioned in the introduction, functional interdomain interactions
are attractive target sites for the design of allosteric inhibitors., Conceivably, fragment-based approaches that target both the catalytic
site and interdomain interfaces may enhance target specificity.

Supporting Information Available
Four figures including the 13Cα/β chemical shift perturbations for apo I28A
versus apo WT Pin1, far-UV CD wave scans and thermal melts at 200
nm, fits of 2-D EXSY spectra for cis–trans isomerase activity
measurements, and binding isotherms from NH titrations. This material
is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi401057x_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
† These
authors contributed equally to this work

This work was
supported by NIH Grant No. RO1-GM083081 to J.W.P.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We are
grateful to Dr. Xingsheng Wang, Dr. John S. Zintsmaster,
Ms. Petra Rovó, Mr. Thomas E. Frederick, Mr. Michael W. Staude,
Prof. Patricia L. Clark, and Dr. Jaroslav Zajicek for valuable suggestions
and useful discussions.

ABBREVIATIONS USED
I28Asingle site substitution mutant
I28A of Pin1

PPIasepeptidyl–prolyl isomerase

2-Dtwo-dimensional

MHzmegahertz

EXSYexchange spectroscopy

TOCSYtotal correlation spectroscopy

HSQCheteronuclear single quantum correlation

ppmparts per million

Cdc25Cphosphothreonine
peptide substrate EQPLpTPVTDL

WWTrp–Trp

