

   
BiochemistryBiochemistrybibichawBiochemistry0006-29601520-4995American
Chemical Society 10.1021/bi5009326ArticleA Relationship between the Transient Structure in
the Monomeric State and the Aggregation Propensities of α-Synuclein
and β-Synuclein Allison Jane R. *†Rivers Robert C. ‡Christodoulou John C. §Vendruscolo Michele *Dobson Christopher M. *Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, Lensfield Road, Cambridge CB2 1EW, U.K.* E-mail: j.allison@massey.ac.nz.* E-mail: mv245@cam.ac.uk.* E-mail: cmd44@cam.ac.uk.28 10 2015 28 10 2014 25 11 2014 53 46 7170 7183 29 07 2014 25 10 2014 Copyright © 2014 American Chemical
Society2014American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

α-Synuclein is an intrinsically
disordered protein whose
aggregation is implicated in Parkinson’s disease. A second
member of the synuclein family, β-synuclein, shares significant
sequence similarity with α-synuclein but is much more resistant
to aggregation. β-Synuclein is missing an 11-residue stretch
in the central non-β-amyloid component region that forms the
core of α-synuclein amyloid fibrils, yet insertion of these
residues into β-synuclein to produce the βSHC construct does not markedly increase the aggregation propensity.
To investigate the structural basis of these different behaviors,
quantitative nuclear magnetic resonance data, in the form of paramagnetic
relaxation enhancement-derived interatomic distances, are combined
with molecular dynamics simulations to generate ensembles of structures
representative of the solution states of α-synuclein, β-synuclein,
and βSHC. Comparison of these ensembles reveals that
the differing aggregation propensities of α-synuclein and β-synuclein
are associated with differences in the degree of residual structure
in the C-terminus coupled to the shorter separation between the N-
and C-termini in β-synuclein and βSHC, making
protective intramolecular contacts more likely.

document-id-old-9bi5009326document-id-new-14bi-2014-009326ccc-price

   
Intrinsically
disordered proteins
(IDPs) are involved in myriad biological processes, including cellular
signaling, molecular recognition, and transcriptional regulation.1−5 Additionally, members of this class of proteins have been implicated
in a number of debilitating protein misfolding disorders.6 For instance, Aβ peptides and α-synuclein
(αS) are the primary constituents of the amyloid deposits found
in Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease, respectively.7−9 A description of the native state ensembles of IDPs in terms of
the constituent structures and their relative populations is vital
to understanding both the function and the aggregation process of
these proteins. The absence of persistent secondary and tertiary structure
elements in IDPs does not preclude the presence of well-defined conformational
preferences. Indeed, residual structure, often in the form of transient
long-range contacts, has been detected in many IDPs,10−22 and some exhibit pockets of structure that have a propensity to
bind small molecules.23,24

The heterogeneity and broadness
of the ensembles of structures
characteristic of disordered states of proteins make the determination
of the conformational properties of IDPs particularly challenging.
For example, nuclear Overhauser effect (NOE)-based nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) measurements are sensitive only up to separations
of ∼0.5 nm, the result being that transient tertiary interactions
in disordered states are unlikely to be detected using this approach.
Despite this limitation, it has been possible to extract some structural
information about disordered states from certain types of X-ray techniques
and NMR spectroscopy measurements. For instance, small-angle X-ray
scattering (SAXS)25,26 and diffusion NMR spectroscopy27 have been used to determine the molecular dimensions
of IDPs. NMR observables such as residual dipolar couplings (RDCs)
have proven to be a useful source of detailed structural information
about disordered states,10,14,16,28−33 and methods are also emerging for utilizing chemical shifts.18−22,34−37

Paramagnetic relaxation
enhancement (PRE) experiments overcome
the limitations of NOE measurements in probing the conformational
properties of IDPs by utilizing the longer-range dipolar interactions
between unpaired electrons in paramagnetic probes and atomic nuclei,
which can be detected experimentally at distances up to ∼2.0
nm. The paramagnetic probe is often a free radical, typically a nitroxide
spin-label covalently attached to a cysteine residue introduced into
the protein of interest by site-specific mutagenesis. 1H–15N HSQC spectra are then recorded with the spin-label
in its paramagnetic (oxidized) and diamagnetic (reduced) states. The
enhancement of the transverse relaxation of each proton due to the
free electron of the oxidized spin-label can be quantified by comparing
the intensities of each proton resonance measured for each spin-label
state.38 From the resultant intensity ratios
(Iox/Ired),
the r–6 average of the distance
between the free electron and each proton (typically the backbone
amide hydrogen) in the protein can be deduced.38−40 The fact that
this distance is a time and ensemble average over the duration of
the experiment and the ensemble of molecules present is an important
consideration in the analysis of PRE data. When PRE–NMR experiments
are conducted with the spin-label attached at a number of different
positions in the protein, sufficient distances for characterizing
key features of the conformational ensemble of the protein can be
obtained.17

IDPs have also been characterized
using molecular dynamics (MD)
simulations,41−46 although such techniques are hampered by the need to explore very
large regions of conformational space. Because this is computationally
expensive, implicit solvent models are often used.17,47−53 Regardless of whether implicit or explicit solvent models are used,
however, compact structures tend to be favored relative to more extended
conformational states, most likely because most force fields have
been parametrized to reproduce structural data for natively folded
proteins. This is, however, an area of intense research in which rapid
progress can be expected. Conducting the simulations at high temperatures
allows more expanded structures to be sampled, but with the concomitant
risk of compromising the physical relevance of the structures that
are explored. Adding restraints derived from experimental data can,
however, help to overcome this problem, while simultaneously biasing
sampling toward relevant structures and restricting the conformational
space that is explored, thereby reducing the simulation time and computational
expense required for converged simulations.17,54,55 Such restrained MD simulations can also
be seen to aid the interpretation of experimental data in terms of
structures and their populations, particularly for IDPs where the
experimental data are in general averages over many disparate structures.
Because of this factor, it is important to apply the restraints as
averages, which can be achieved by averaging over time56,57 or space,58−61 i.e., over ensembles of structures. Care must be taken, however,
to ensure that there are sufficient data to warrant the additional
degrees of freedom that result from averaging over multiple replicas
or time points. Additionally, nonlinearly averaged restraints can
result in over- or underestimation of the population of structures
with short distances.62,63 In this context, it has been
recently recognized that the use of replica averaging represents an
implementation of the maximum entropy principle to incorporate the
experimental information into the molecular dynamics simulations.62−65

In this work, we consider two related and similarly sized
(127
and 140 residues) IDPs, α-synuclein (αS) and β-synuclein
(βS).66−68 Despite their significant sequence similarity (Figure 1), these two proteins differ considerably in their
behavior and medical significance. In particular, while αS aggregates
to form the Lewy bodies characteristic of Parkinson’s disease,
βS does not appear to aggregate in vivo and
has even been shown to inhibit fibril formation by αS.69,70 To explore the reasons for such differences between αS and
βS, we introduced a construct of βS, βSHC,71 which incorporates residues 71–82
of the non-β-amyloid component (NAC) region of αS (Figure 1) to determine whether this highly hydrophobic 11-residue
region, which is absent in the sequence of βS, is sufficient
to induce αS-like aggregation behavior in βS. Despite
the fact that the NAC region is thought to be the primary determinant
of αS aggregation72 and to be necessary
for fibril formation, particularly residues 63–74,73,74 the aggregation properties of βSHC are closer to
those of βS,71 which is much less
aggregation prone than αS.

Figure 1 Alignment of the amino acid sequences
of αS, βS, and
βSHC. Amino acids are colored according to the chemical
nature of their side chains. The region shaded in Cambridge blue indicates
the 11 residues from αS that were inserted into βS to
form βSHC.

To fully understand the reasons for these differing aggregation
behaviors, it is necessary to characterize the ensemble of structures
sampled by each protein under the same conditions under which aggregation
occurs. αS in solution has been the subject of very many experimental,75−86 computational,83,87 and hybrid10−12,17,19,20,88−92 investigations. While each study has highlighted
different structural features, there is a general agreement that in
solution, the C-terminal region of αS appears to provide some
protection to the remainder of the protein, including the aggregation
prone central NAC region. To date, the structural propensities of
βS have been characterized only experimentally.13,15,93 To build upon this, PRE–NMR
experiments were conducted on βS and βSHC,
and distances derived from the experimental data were used as replica-averaged
restraints in MD simulations to generate ensembles of structures representative
of the native states of these proteins. Comparison of these ensembles
and the ensemble of structures previously generated for αS reveals
specific differences in the structural preferences of the three proteins
and allows the effects of the hydrophobic core on the structural properties
of these forms of synuclein, including their different aggregation
propensities, to be examined at a molecular level.

Methods
Protein Preparation
15N-labeled βS
and βSHC were expressed and purified as described
previously.71 A QuickChange (Stratagene)
site-directed mutagenesis kit was used to engineer cysteine mutations
at positions A30, S42, S64, F89, A102, S118, and A134 in βS
and A30, S42, S64, A113, and A145 in βSHC. Mutation
sites were selected to minimize structural perturbations and to correspond
as closely as possible to the αS mutation sites (Q24, S42, Q62,
S87, N103, and N122). The nitroxide spin-label MTSL (1-oxyl-2,2,5,5-tetramethyl-3-pyrroline-3-methylmethanethiosulfonate)
(Toronto Research Chemicals Inc.) was attached to the introduced cysteine
residue in each variant in a thiol-specific reaction. The cysteine
variants were first reduced with 5 mM DTT, which was subsequently
removed using a 20 mL HiTrap desalting column (Amersham-Pharmacia)
connected to an Akta fast protein liquid chromatography instrument
(Amersham-Pharmacia). Immediately following DTT removal, the protein
solution was incubated overnight with a 10-fold molar excess of MTSL.
After incubation, unreacted MTSL was removed with a HiTrap desalting
column. Uniform labeling was confirmed using mass spectrometry. Analysis
of the spin-labeled variants using circular dichroism showed no evidence
of any conformational changes. Moreover, the amide proton and nitrogen
chemical shifts in the HSQC spectra were not significantly altered,
even for residues in the vicinity of the spin-label (Figures S1 and
S2 of the Supporting Information).

NMR Spectroscopy
Two-dimensional gradient-enhanced 1H–15N HSQC of βS and βSHC was conducted following
protocols described previously12 at the
EPSRC-supported biomolecular NMR facility
(Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge) on a Bruker Avance
700 MHz spectrometer operating at 10 °C. Experimental samples
contained 100 μM uniformly 15N-labeled protein with
MTSL attached in 10 mM sodium phosphate (pH 7.4), 100 mM NaCl, and
10% D2O. Control samples contained 100 μM 15N-labeled protein and 100 μM spin-labeled protein. The uniformity
of the Iox/Ired calculated from the control spectra showed that there were no complications
arising from the reduction method and that aggregation did not occur.
Backbone NMR assignments for αS and βS were obtained by
standard triple-resonance methods as previously described.71,75 Assignment of βSHC was obtained with truncated
triple-resonance CBCA(CO)NH and HNCO experiments, and an overlay of
the 1H–15N HSQC spectra confirmed that
the chemical shifts of the added and original residues conformed to
the chemical shifts of these residues in αS and βS, respectively
(Figure S3 of the Supporting Information). For each spin-labeled mutant, an HSQC spectrum was first acquired
with the label in its oxidized state. A 5-fold molar excess of sodium
ascorbate was then added from a concentrated stock solution to reduce
the spin-label without altering significantly the sample volume or
pH. After incubation for at least 20 h, a second HSQC spectrum was
acquired with all parameters remaining unchanged. HSQC spectra were
collected using 16 scans per increment, with 1024 complete points
for the direct dimension and 128 complex points for the indirect dimension.
NMR data were processed with NMRPipe94 and
analyzed with Sparky.95 Harsh resolution
enhancing functions were not used to avoid nonuniform effects on cross-peak
intensities, and cross-peaks exhibiting severe overlap were omitted
from further analysis.

Distance Calculations
The electron–proton
distances
were calculated from the intensity ratios (Iox/Ired) as described previously,12 including the modifications introduced by Allison
et al.17 as detailed below. Residue-specific
values of R2 were used where available;
otherwise, the average over all residues was used.

Examination
of the effect of introducing uncertainty of up to 15% in Iox/Ired on the calculated
distance showed that variation of up to 10% in Iox/Ired results in propagated uncertainties
of less than −0.19 or 0.38 nm in the calculated distance, which
is a tolerable level. Distances were therefore used as restraints
only if the difference between each replicate value of Iox/Ired and the average value
was less than 10% of the average Iox/Ired value. The fraction of the experimental
data that was discarded in this way for each protein is listed in
Table 3 along with the total number of distance
restraints for each protein. For each protein, 20% of the distances
were removed from the “working” data set to be used
for independent cross-validation.

During ensemble-averaged simulations
using PRE-derived distance
restraints, the calculated distance, dijcalc(t), is allowed to vary freely within dijexp(t) – L and dijexp(t) + U, where L and U are the distances
to the lower and upper bounds, respectively, of the flat bottom of
the harmonic square well. Detailed investigations using synthetic
data have shown that the optimal choices for L and U to best reproduce the distribution of distances as well
as the r–6 average are 0.1 and
0.8 nm, respectively.17,96

As a general rule, Iox/Ired values of
&lt;0.15 are unreliable,38 as any experimental
uncertainty is large relative to the
size of the measured Iox/Ired. Distances calculated from experimental Iox/Ired values of &lt;0.15
were therefore assigned only an upper bound corresponding to dij0.15 + U, where dij0.15 is the distance calculated from an Iox/Ired value of 0.15. The nature
of the equations used to calculate the distances means that for a
high Iox/Ired, a small change in Iox/Ired results in a large change in the calculated distance.
Thus, Iox/Ired values of &gt;0.85 were used as “negative” restraints
by assigning only a lower bound corresponding to dij0.85 – L, where dij0.85 is the distance calculated from an Iox/Ired value of 0.85.

Molecular Dynamics
Simulations
All simulations were
conducted using an in-house version of the CHARMM biomolecular simulation
package97 that has been modified to allow
restraints to be applied across multiple replicas. The Newtonian equations
of motion were integrated using the Velocity Verlet algorithm,98 and the Nose-Hoover thermostat99,100 was employed so that a canonical ensemble was sampled. The CHARMM19
polar hydrogen representation101 was used,
and bond lengths were constrained with the SHAKE algorithm,102 allowing for an integration time step of 2
fs. A set of unrelated, expanded starting structures for each protein
were chosen from high-temperature (500 K) simulations with the EEF1103 implicit solvent model. The final ensemble
for each simulation was obtained by pooling together all of the structures
obtained during the production phase; if multiple replicas were used,
these were pooled, as well.

Random Coil Model
A reference random
coil model for
each protein was produced by truncating the nonbonded interactions
so that only the repulsive part of the Lennard-Jones potential remained.
Molecular dynamics simulations were run in vacuum with no electrostatic
interactions. The temperature, T, was typically 500–600
K to enhance the rate of sampling, but the nature of the resulting
ensemble was similar at lower values of T. The coordinates
were saved every 20 ps for 200 ns, giving 10000 structures in total.

The intensity ratios expected for a purely random coil were computed
by first calculating the r–6-averaged
distances between the Cα atoms of the spin-labeled residues
and the amide hydrogens of all other residues. These distances were
converted into intensity ratios by following the inverse of the procedure
used to calculate distances from intensity ratios.

Molecular Dynamics
Simulations with Replica-Averaged Distance
Restraints
Restrained simulations were conducted using molecular
dynamics with replica-averaged distance restraints derived from PRE–NMR
measurements. In this approach,47,50,54,59,104−113 the restraints are applied to multiple independent replicas simulated
in parallel. A restraint coordinate, ρ, is defined as the difference
between the current average of each observable across all replicas, ficalc, and the experimentally derived restraint, fiexp, averaged over all Nres restraints: 1  where fiexp refers to
the r–6-averaged distance dijexp derived from the experimental PRE–NMR
data as detailed above and ficalc was calculated
from the simulated structures according to 2  where rij,k(t)
is the distance between residues i and j calculated from replica k of the restrained ensemble
at time t and Nrep is
the number of replicas. rij,k was defined as being between the Cα
atom of spin-labeled residue i and the amide hydrogen
of residue j. A flat bottom restraint potential was
used, meaning that the contribution of a given distance dij to the restraint coordinate is zero
if dijexp(t) – L &lt; dijcalc(t) &lt; dijexp(t) + U.

An energy penalty of the form 3  is added to the potential energy if ρ(t) &gt;
ρ0(t), where 4  and
α is a force constant associated
with the restraints. In this way, as the simulation proceeds, the
ensemble of structures is progressively biased toward structures that,
on average, satisfy the restraints.

The replica-averaged MD
simulations were conducted using the SASA114,115 implicit solvation model with default cutoff distances for nonbonded
and electrostatic interactions and rectangular periodic boundary conditions.
Following the protocol developed using synthetic data for αS,17 24 replicas were simulated in parallel. The
molecules were first heated to 700 K in 50 K increments (10 ps per
temperature), and then α was increased from its starting value
of 500 kcal mol–1 Å–2 to
its final value of 364500 kcal mol–1 Å–2 by a factor of 3 every 10 ps. After a brief equilibration
(200 ps), the coordinates were collected every 5 ps for 400 ps per
replica, giving 1920 structures in total. The temperature, T, was then lowered by 25 K and the system re-equilibrated
before 1920 structures were collected at the new T. Q values quantifying the agreement with the experimental
data (see below) were calculated at each T so that
the agreement with experiment could be monitored constantly. The cooling–equilibration–collection
cycle was continued until the various Q values (Table 3) were simultaneously minimized. An additional 5760
structures (1.2 ns per replica) were collected at this optimal T for further analysis.

Analysis
Calculation
of Rg and Rh
The geometric radius of gyration, Rg, was calculated from the heavy atoms of each structure
using CHARMM analysis facilities. For comparison with experimental
data, the hydrodynamic radius, Rh, of
each ensemble was computed. For each protein, the Rh of 200 randomly selected structures of varying degrees
of compactness was computed using HYDROPRO116 with default settings and six sizes of minibeads ranging from 0.18
to 0.28 nm. The molecular weight and partial specific volume were
evaluated from the amino acid sequence. Relationships between Rg–1 and Rh–1 were then determined by linear regression
(uncertainty represents standard error) (Table 1).

Table 1 protein	relationship	correlation
coefficient	
αS	Rh–1 = 0.0148(±0.0003) + 0.4882(±0.0038)Rg–1	0.994	
βS	Rh–1 = 0.0163(±0.0002) + 0.4537(±0.0042)Rg–1	0.991	
βSHC	Rh–1 = 0.0151(±0.0002) + 0.4943(±0.0044)Rg–1	0.990	
These equations were used to convert
the calculated Rg of each structure into
an Rh. The overall ⟨Rh–1⟩–1 was
then computed according to 5  where Nstruct is the number of structures in the ensemble, to reflect
the averaging inherent in the experimental measurement.

Compaction
Factors
Compaction factors, Cf, quantifying the degree of compaction relative to that
of a fully unfolded (random coil) and natively folded state were calculated
according to27 6  where Rhexp is the experimental Rh and RhF and RhU are the Rh values expected if the protein is natively
folded (F) and fully unfolded (U), respectively: 7  

Q Values
The agreement
between the
synthetic or experimental observables and those calculated from a
calculated ensemble was quantified with a “quality factor”:117 8  where Nobs is
the number of observables of that type (e.g., working or free PRE
distances) and the fkcalc values are the averages
over the pooled ensemble.

Distance Comparison Maps
Distance
comparison (DC) maps
were created by plotting the root-mean-square (rms) distance between
two residues, i and j, normalized
by the rms distance predicted for a purely random coil: 9  

The rms inter-residue distances for
the calculated ensemble were calculated as 10  where Nstruct is the number of structures in the calculated ensemble.
The rms inter-residue distances for a random coil were calculated
according to 11  which predicts the rms distance
between two
residues with sequence separation Nsep for a random flight chain with excluded volume and dihedral angles
taken from a Protein Data Bank coil library.118 Similar results were obtained if ⟨(dijrc)2⟩1/2 was calculated from the random
coil model of the protein in question. The normalization by ⟨(dijrc)2⟩1/2 is important
because it removes the dependence of the inter-residue distance on
the sequence separation, allowing pairs of residues with different
sequence separations and also proteins of different lengths to be
compared.

3J Couplings
The 3JHNHα couplings
were calculated
for each structure using the GROMACS119 program g_chi with default settings, values for the Karplus relation
parameters of A = 6.4, B = −1.4,
and C = 1.9,120 and an
offset of −60° and then averaged over all structures in
an ensemble.

Residual Dipolar Couplings
Residual
dipolar couplings
were calculated for each structure using steric PALES121 with default settings and then averaged over
all structures in an ensemble.

Solvent Accessible Surface
Area
The solvent accessible
surface area of each structure was calculated using the algorithm
of Lee and Richards,122 as implemented
in CHARMM, using default settings, including a probe radius of 0.16
nm.

Aggregation Propensity
Aggregation propensity profiles
(Zaggprof) of αS, βS, and βSHC were
computed using an updated version of the Zyggregator algorithm,123 which predicts the aggregation propensity of
peptides and proteins in aqueous solution from the physicochemical
properties of their constituent amino acids and compares this to the
aggregation propensity of a set of randomly generated amino acid sequences
of the same length.124Zaggprof indicates
the regions that are most prone to aggregation.

Results and Discussion
Detection
of Nonrandom Structure
PRE–NMR experiments
combined with the calculation of ensembles of structures consistent
with the NMR data have already been conducted for αS.12,17 The ensemble of structures obtained was validated by comparison
with independent experimental data. Here we describe similar experiments
and calculations for βS, and for the artificial construct βSHC. We note that in all cases, the nonacetylated form of the
protein was studied, as this is the form of the heterologously expressed
protein studied experimentally, and the simulations aimed to match
the experiments as closely as possible.

In discussing these
three proteins, we define the N-terminal and central regions as those
regions that can form α-helical lipid-bound structure:125 residues 1–98 in αS, residues
1–65 in βS, and, assuming the additional 11 residues
from αS extend the helical region of βS, residues 1–76
in βSHC, with the remainder of each protein being
designated as the C-terminal region.

The backbone assignments
of αS75 and βS71 were previously described.
For the βSHC construct, the 1H–15N HSQC spectrum overlaps with that of βS, and the additional
11 residues from αS exhibit chemical shifts in βSHC that correspond closely to their resonances in αS
(Figure S3 of the Supporting Information). This allowed a backbone assignment strategy in which the identification
of individual amino acid resonances was confirmed by a combination
of CBCA(CO)NH and HNCO triple-resonance experiments. The chemical
shifts for βSHC have been deposited in the BioMagResBank.

Seven distinct single-residue cysteine mutations were introduced
into βS, and five into βSHC, to which the MTSL
spin-label was subsequently attached. The positions of the cysteine
mutations were kept as consistent as possible among the three proteins
(Table 3 and Figure 2) to facilitate comparisons. For each cysteine mutant of each protein, 1H–15N HSQC spectra were collected with the
spin-label in both its oxidized state and its reduced state. The heights
of individual NMR resonances were then used to calculate the intensity
ratios shown in Figure 2.

Figure 2 Intensity ratios Iox/Ired for each
spin-label position for (A) αS,12,17 (B) βS,
and (C) βSHC. The experimental data
are shown as black bars, and the Iox/Ired values calculated from the random coil ensemble
are plotted as thick red lines. PRE–NMR experiments were conducted
on 100 μM uniformly 15N-labeled protein with MTSL
attached in 10 mM sodium phosphate (pH 7.4), 100 mM NaCl, and 10%
D2O at 10 °C. The experimental Iox/Ired values are those processed
for use in the simulations (see Methods);
thus, any Iox/Ired of &lt;0.15 or &gt;0.85 has been set to 0.15 or 0.85, respectively.
If no bar is present, then either Iox/Ired was not measured for this residue or it
was discarded because of an uncertainty of &gt;10%.

A decrease in the intensity ratio is expected for
residues proximal
in sequence to the spin-label attachment site. The predicted pattern
of intensity ratios stemming from this effect is illustrated by the
red lines in Figure 2, which show the intensity
ratios calculated from random coil representations of each protein.
Additional regions with intensity ratios lower than these values correspond
to internuclear distances that are significantly shorter than in a
random coil ensemble. All three proteins exhibit such long-range contact
formation, indicative of nonrandom structure, suggesting that they
are more compact than a random coil of the same sequence. Control
experiments in which the HSQC spectra were collected for a mixture
of isotopically labeled protein and spin-labeled protein confirmed
that the observed intensity decreases were due to intramolecular contact
formation, rather than from intermolecular contact formation due to
aggregation (data not shown).

Examination of the intensity ratios
in more detail reveals that
the majority of the contact formation is between residues of intermediate
(up to 30 residues apart) sequence separation, indicative of local
structural collapse. In particular, the decreases in the intensity
ratios for residues around spin-label positions Q24, A30, and A30
and Q62, S64, and S64 for αS, βS, and βSHC, respectively, and S42 in βS and βSHC extend
further from the spin-label in both directions than what is predicted
by the random coil model. However, when the spin-label is attached
at position N103, A102, or A113 in αS, βS, or βSHC, respectively, only residues located on the N-terminal side
of the spin-label show decreased intensity ratios, suggestive of an
extended C-terminus in all three proteins. In αS, attaching
the spin-label at position S42 results in lower intensity ratios for
C-terminal residues from position 110 onward, and some evidence of
the reciprocal interaction can be seen for spin-label position N122.
Neither of these effects is observed for βS or βSHC, suggestive of fewer, or at least different, patterns of
long-range contact formation for these proteins. Overall, the intensity
ratios suggest some local compaction in the N-terminal and central
regions of all three proteins, and more extended structure in the
C-terminal regions, particularly for βS and βSHC.

Generation of Ensembles of Structures
To determine
the molecular details of the structures giving rise to the PRE–NMR
data, ensembles of structures compatible with the PRE-derived distances
were determined using replica-averaged restrained MD (PRE-RMD) simulations.12,17,48 To account for the averaging
inherent in the experimental data, the PRE-derived distance restraints
were applied to multiple (24) independent replicas simulated in parallel.
At each point in time, a restraint coordinate, ρ, was obtained
by comparing the r–6 average of
each distance across all replicas to the experimental value (eq 1). An energy penalty, the magnitude of which depends
on the magnitude of ρ, was applied only if the value of ρ
at that time point was greater than the previous minimum (eq 3). In this way, the simulations were progressively
biased toward structures that, on average, satisfy the restraints.
The majority of the simulation parameters, including the number of
replicas, were optimized previously so they would be suitable for
reproducing disordered state ensembles.17 In particular, an asymmetric flat bottom harmonic potential was
adopted to ensure that the structures generated are not overly compact,
as can be the case for r–6-averaged
distance restraints like those used here. The only parameter that
was changed in this work is the simulation temperature, which is used
to tune the average dimensions of the structures that make up the
ensemble, as quantified by the harmonic average of the hydrodynamic
radius, ⟨Rh–1⟩–1, so that it matches the experimentally
determined value. This tuning was shown greatly to improve the accuracy
of the ensemble, measured in terms of the reproduction of distributions
of structural properties.17 To provide
further evidence that the ensembles of structures produced here are
valid representations of the experimental ensembles, cross-validation,
in which only 80% of the PRE-derived distance restraints were used
in the PRE-RMD calculations (“working”) and the remaining
20% provide a “free” data set whose satisfaction is
not preordained by their inclusion as restraints, was conducted. For
all three proteins, the agreement with the “free” set
of PRE-derived distances is almost as good as that of the “working”
PRE-derived distances (Table 3).

Molecular Dimensions
Two different ensembles of αS
restrained with PRE-derived distances have been obtained previously,
one with an average Rh close to 2.7 nm,12 consistent with the experimental Rh of 2.66 nm measured in unbuffered D2O at
298 K (2.66 nm),76 and one with an average Rh of 3.2 nm,17 to
match the experimental Rh values of 3.20
and 3.19 nm measured in subsequent PFG-NMR experiments at 288 K in
unbuffered D2O126 and in 20
mM phosphate buffer (pH 6.5) with 100 mM NaCl,13 respectively. The latter ensemble also made use of an additional
118 distance restraints obtained after determination of the first
ensemble as well as the original 478 distance restraints. The Rh values of the βS and βSHC ensembles were matched to experimental values measured under conditions
as close as possible to those of the PRE–NMR experiments [pH
6.5 for αS and pH 7.4 for βS and βSHC, 100 mM NaCl, 288 K (Table 2)] by tuning
the simulation temperature.

Table 2 Predictedaand Experimentalb,cRh Values (nanometers)
and Compaction
Factorsd (Cf)
for αS, βS, and βSHC in Various States
 	 	U	F	NaClb	NaCl and
SDSc	
αS	Rh	3.70	1.99	3.19	2.46	
 	Cf	 	0.61	0.30	0.725	
βS	Rh	3.60	1.97	3.24	3.22	
 	Cf	 	–	0.22	0.23	
βSHC	Rh	3.77	2.01	–	2.97	
 	Cf	 	–	–	0.46	
a U and F refer to the Rh values predicted
according to eq 7(27) for a fully unfolded and a compact
folded polypeptide, respectively.

b Measured by PFG-NMR on 200 μM
protein in D2O and 20 mM phosphate buffer (pH 6.5) with
100 mM NaCl at 288 K.13 Note that the Rh measured by PFG-NMR for 100 μM αS
in unbuffered D2O at 288 K is almost identical (3.20 nm).126

c Measured
by PFG-NMR on 70 μM
protein in 10 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7.7) with 100 mM NaCl and 0.5
mM SDS at 298 K.129

d Calculated according to eq 6.27

Comparison of the Rh values of αS,
βS, and βSHC must take into account their different
sequence lengths. The compaction factor27 (see Methods), Cf, allows for this difference by comparing the experimental Rh to that expected if the polypeptide were to
exist in a compact folded state or to be fully unfolded (i.e., random
coil-like). A Cf of 1.0 indicates compaction
typical of a natively folded protein, while a Cf of zero indicates random coil-like dimensions. According
to this measure, the dimensions of βS (Cf = 0.45) and βSHC (Cf = 0.23) resemble those of partially unfolded proteins that
retain some nonlocal interactions, such as reduced hen egg white lysozyme
at pH 2.0 or BPTI at pH 4.5 (Cf = 0.35),27 with βS slightly more compact and βSHC more unfolded. In contrast, αS (Cf = 0.72) is significantly more compact, exhibiting a
degree of expansion similar to that of the low-pH molten globule state
of myoglobin.27

An alternative to
the Rh value for
quantifying the size of a molecule is the radius of gyration (Rg). It should be pointed out, however, that
because the Rh is defined as the radius
of a hard sphere with the observed diffusion rate, this parameter
reflects only approximately the apparent size adopted by the solvated,
tumbling molecule. Rg is defined as the
mass-weighted average distance of each atom from the center of mass
of the molecule, and therefore, calculating its value from the sets
of coordinates obtained from an MD simulation is simple and fast.
The Rh and Rg values are related to each other and can be interconverted by the
approach described in Methods.

Table 3 Summary of the Experimental Restraints
and How Well They Were Satisfied during the PRE-RMD Simulationsa
 	data	Q values	
protein	NPRE	NwPRE	NfPRE	% discarded	QRh	QwPRE	QfPRE	
αS	595	476	119	17	0.006	0.19	0.20	
βS	635	508	127	17	0.005	0.20	0.19	
βSHC	578	462	116	3	0.020	0.20	0.28	
a NPRE is the total number of distances
derived from the PRE–NMR
experiment, and NwPRE and NfPRE are the numbers of distances in the working and free
data sets, comprising 80 and 20% of the total data, respectively.
The percentage of the experimental data that was discarded due to
uncertainties of &gt;10% is also shown. The Q values
(eq 8) quantify how well the experimental ⟨Rh–1⟩–1 (QRh) and
the working (QwPRE) and free (QfPRE) distances were satisfied by the ensemble
of structures obtained using PRE-RMD.

The broad distributions of the Rg values
of the ensembles (Figure 3) reflect the wide
variety of structures populated at least transiently by IDPs. Comparison
with the Rg distributions of the random
coil models of each protein, however, reveals that the range of structures
accessible to each protein is restricted to conformations that are
significantly more compact than those expected for a random coil,
reflecting the non-zero Cf values. Also
consistent with the trends observed for the compaction factors, the
difference distribution of the Rg (Figure 3D) of βSHC differs from those of
αS and βS in a manner that indicates that the shift toward
structures with smaller Rg values in the
PRE-RMD simulations, compared to those expected for a random coil,
is more pronounced for βSHC than for the other two
proteins. As with the Rh values, however,
it is not appropriate to compare directly the Rg probability distributions of the three different synucleins
because of their different sequence lengths.

Figure 3 Rg probability distributions for (A)
αS, (B) βS, and (C) βSHC. The random
coil ensembles (see the text for a definition) are colored black,
and the ensembles calculated using PRE-RMD are colored red. Representative
structures are shown for various values of Rg. The Rg distributions are shown
rather than the Rh distributions because
the former are faster to calculate, but the Rh distributions are similar. (D) Distributions of the difference
between the random coil and PRE-RMD ensemble Rg probabilities [Δp(Rg) = p(Rgrandom coil) – p(RgPRE-RMD)].

Comparison with Experimental Data Not Used
as Restraints
The most stringent test of how well a simulation
reproduces the actual
ensemble of structures is a quantitative comparison with independent
experimental data. As noted above, the agreement between the experimentally
derived and calculated “free” PRE distances is almost
as good as for the “working” PRE distances (Table 3), allowing a high level
of confidence that the ensembles of structures provide a good representation
of the long-range structural properties of αS, βS, and
βSHC.

While the primary aim of this work was
to reproduce the long-range structure of the three proteins, NMR data
reporting on more local structural properties, namely 3JHNHα couplings and amide N–H
RDCs, were calculated for αS and βS for comparison with
experimental values.11,13 Similar data are not available
for βSHC. The 3JHNHα couplings calculated from the PRE-RMD ensembles
of αS and βS structures are slightly greater than 5 Hz
throughout the sequence, and those calculated from the random coil
ensembles are slightly less than 5 Hz (Figure 4A,B). Neither set of calculated 3JHNHa couplings for either protein bears a close resemblance
to the experimentally measured values, which in general are larger
and fluctuate more dramatically along the sequence. Although no experimental
data are available for βSHC, 3JHNHa couplings were calculated from the PRE-RMD
and random coil ensembles for comparison with those calculated from
the αS and βS ensembles. The couplings calculated from
the PRE-RMD ensemble are again close to 5 Hz, whereas those calculated
from the random coil ensemble lie between 5 and 6 Hz and fluctuate
somewhat throughout the sequence, an observation likely to be due
to the more compact nature of the βSHC structures
inducing more local structure formation.

Figure 4 Comparison of experimentally
measured11,13 and calculated NMR observables for (A and
D) αS, (B and E)
βS, and (C and F) βSHC. (A–C) 3JHNHa couplings (black) measured experimentally,
(red) calculated from the PRE-RMD ensembles, and (green) calculated
from random coil ensembles. (D–F) Amide N–H RDCs measured
experimentally in (black) C8E5/octanol or (blue) Pf1 bacteriophage,
(red) calculated from the PRE-RMD ensembles, and (green) calculated
from random coil ensembles.

The magnitudes of the RDCs calculated from both the PRE-RMD
and
random coil ensembles of αS and βS are more similar to
those of the experimental RDCs (Figure 4D,E).
The larger RDC values observed experimentally for the C-termini are
not found in the values obtained from the random coil ensemble but
are detectable in the RDCs calculated from the PRE-RMD ensemble. Again,
however, the residue-specific variations in the experimental data
are for the most part not accurately reproduced in either of the calculated
ensembles.

Overall, the lack of agreement between the experimental 3JHNHa couplings and those calculated
from the PRE-RMD ensembles, coupled to the similarity between those
calculated from the PRE-RMD and random coil ensembles, suggests that
local residue-specific conformational preferences are not well reproduced
in the PRE-RMD ensembles. This result is not surprising, given that
the type of restraints used provides information about the long-range
residual structures of the proteins under investigation, but not about
their local conformations. Rather, it should serve as a warning that
reproducing experimental data describing one structural aspect of
a protein, particularly a disordered protein, does not imply that
other structural properties will be accurately described. RDCs report
on both local and global structure, so the improved agreement of the
PRE-RMD ensemble with the experimental data for the C-termini is likely
to reflect the fact that the long-range structure, in the form of
the replica-averaged PRE distances, of this ensemble is in good agreement
with that observed experimentally. However, the remaining discrepancies,
as with the 3JHNHa couplings,
most likely result from the fact that the local structure is not well
replicated in the calculated ensembles. A more accurate representation
of such local conformations should be obtained by using additional
restraints, such as 3J couplings and chemical
shifts. These calculations were not performed here because the aspect
of primary interest was the comparison of the long-range conformational
behaviors of αS, βS, and βSHC and whether
any differences observed might be linked to their differing aggregation
propensities.

Residual Structure Propensities
The nature of the structures
comprising each ensemble is summarized in the distance comparison
(DC) maps17 (Figure 5). In contrast to the residual contact probability (RCP) maps used
previously to characterize disordered state ensembles,12,48,49 which report on inter-residue
distances of &lt;0.85 nm, DC maps reflect the position of the center
of the distance distribution relative to that of a random coil. DC
values of &lt;1.0 indicate compaction, and those &gt;1.0 represent
expansion
relative to the random coil. DC maps were used here because unlike
RCP maps, they report on aspects of the distribution not accessible
experimentally.

Figure 5 Distance comparison (DC) maps for the (A) αS, (B)
βS,
and (C) βSHC ensembles determined by PRE-RMD. The
top half shows the full DC map, whereas the bottom half shows only
the scaled distances that are less than 75% of that expected for a
random coil polymer and occur between pairs of oppositely charged
residues. The same color scale is used for all the DC maps to aid
comparisons.

For βSHC, the scaled long-range distances are
shorter than for either αS or βS, reflecting its larger
compaction factor (Table 2). The DC maps for
αS, βS, and βSHC (Figure 5), however, all contain distinct regions of inter-residue
distances that differ from those expected for a random coil, as indicated
by DC values significantly less than or greater than 1.0, suggesting
the presence of nonrandom residual structure. In both βS and
βSHC, the C-terminal residues exhibiting the shortest
distances to residues 1–40 of the N-termini are broadened and
include residues located closer to the N-termini compared to that
in αS. In βS, the shortest distances are to residues 70–110,
and in βSHC, they are to residues 80–145;
in αS, they are to residues 100–140. This observation
may reflect additional shielding from intermolecular interaction of
the central region in βS and βSHC, in keeping
with the lower aggregation propensity of both of these polypeptides.

Within the N-termini of all three proteins are clusters of residues
close together in sequence separated by distances that are, on average,
similar to those observed in a random coil. Such DC values could result
from random coil or α-helical structure or some combination
of the two, as the expected inter-residue distances are effectively
the same for short sequence separations.127 Additionally, all three proteins, and in particular βS, exhibit
distances between residues within the C-terminal regions (residues
100–140 for αS, 100–134 for βS, and 110–145
for βSHC) that are larger on average than in a random
coil. This result could be indicative of either extended β-strand-like
or PPII structure, each of which is characterized by rms inter-residue
distances longer than those of a random flight chain.127 For βS, PPII structure is most likely
to be present, as the C-terminus of βS contains eight proline
residues, which are known to disrupt β-sheet formation, and
indeed, PPII structure has been observed experimentally.13 The experimental data for αS, in contrast,
suggest a much lower PPII propensity,13,75 indicating
that DC values of &gt;1.0 in the C-terminus of this protein are more
likely to correspond to extended β-strand-like structure. Greater
β-strand content in αS than in βS is in keeping
with the recent observation that αS variants that populate β-strand
structure more highly also aggregate faster.128 There are fewer experimental data available for βSHC, but the cross-peaks in the NMR HSQC spectra overlay with those
of βS for a majority of the sequence (Figure S3 of the Supporting Information), indicating that the
secondary structure preferences of the C-terminal region of βSHC are likely to be similar to those of βS. Interestingly,
the C-terminal region of βSHC does not contain as
many DC values greater than 1.0 as βS, suggesting that the insertion
of the αS hydrophobic core may have an indirect effect on the
structural propensities of this region of the protein.

Free Energy
Landscapes
A more global perspective on
the nature of the structures sampled by each of the three proteins
can be gained by examining the free energy landscapes (Figure 6), which show the probability of the occurrence
of different combinations of Rg and solvent
accessible surface area (SASA). βS exhibits the narrowest range
of SASA and βSHC the widest; this pattern reflects
the relationship between the Cf values
of the three proteins (Table 2). In all cases,
the structures with the lowest Rg values
encompass a wide range of SASA values; similarly, there is a large
range of Rg values corresponding to the
largest SASA values. Thus, having a small Rg poses few restrictions on the fraction of the surface area that
is exposed. This may facilitate the role of αS as a hub protein,130 as a larger surface area allows for a diverse
range of binding partners.2 The greater
similarity between the F(Rg,SASA) landscapes of αS and βS suggests that the insertion
of the central NAC region into βSHC causes it to
behave more like αS in this respect.

Figure 6 Free energy landscapes
of structural ensembles determined for (A)
αS, (B) βS, and (C) βSHC ensembles. The
free energy is defined as F(Rg,SASA) = −ln p(Rg,SASA). Examples of structures found at various points on
each landscape are given, and the position of the experimental micelle-bound
structure of αS137 and a homology
model of βS based on the αS structure are indicated by
filled cyan circles.

Implications for Aggregation
The construction and study
of βSHC was initiated with the aim of understanding
whether investigation of the transient long-range interactions can
provide insight about why the aggregation rate of βS is lower
than that of αS.71 It was originally
thought that the fundamental cause of the different aggregation propensities
of αS and βS was simply the absence of 11 residues (73–83)
from the NAC region of βS72,131 (Figure 1). Contrary to this expectation, however, βSHC, which contains residues 73–83 of αS within the βS
sequence following residue 72, was found to have aggregation properties
similar to those of βS.129 Further
investigations, including analysis of the aggregation properties of
two deletion mutants, αΔ73–83 and αΔ71–82,
showed that the most likely reason for the similar aggregation behavior
of βS and βSHC is the inclusion of E83 in the
βSHC construct.71 This
negatively charged residue is thought to disrupt the intermolecular
interactions of the hydrophobic core and may therefore act as an aggregation
“gatekeeper”.72,73 It has also been shown
that the aggregation properties of αS and βS can be effectively
interchanged by swapping six residues among them (63–66, 71
and 72).74 Further evidence of the role
of residue E83 in αS aggregation comes from a study that showed
that the interaction of dopamine and related derivatives with residues
125–129 of αS is mediated by electrostatic interactions
between the ligand and E83, with replacement of glutamine by alanine
preventing dopamine from inhibiting αS aggregation.132 Additionally, the incorporation of charged
residues into the hydrophobic core of full-length αS decreases
the rate of fibril formation, suggesting that the lower experimental
and theoretical aggregation propensities of βS and βSHC, both of which have a net charge greater than that of αS,
may be due to intermolecular repulsion between charged residues.72,73

The role of charge in preventing aggregation is not confined
to the intermolecular interactions. While any contacts made by the
C-terminus with the NAC region are thought to be hydrophobic in nature,
interactions with the N-terminus are most likely to be electrostatic.10 The lower panels of the DC maps (Figure 5) indeed reveal that many of the inter-residue distances
that are on average considerably shorter than would be expected for
a random coil polymer occur between oppositely charged residues. The
increased negative charge of the C-terminal regions of βS and
βSHC may therefore enhance these intramolecular electrostatic
interactions. Correspondingly, comparison of the DC maps shows that
the scaled distances between the N- and C-terminal regions of βS
and βSHC are shorter than those of αS (Figure 5), and the bottom panels show that many of the shortest
scaled average inter-residue distances in βSHC occur
between oppositely charged residues. Moreover, the predicted aggregation
propensities of the C-terminal regions of βS and βSHC are even lower than that of αS (Figure 7). In addition to the effects of the long-range conformational
properties on aggregation, contributions from the local secondary
structure propensities can be expected.128 The importance of electrostatic interactions between the N- and
C-terminal regions in determining the aggregation properties is also
supported by experimental data. C-Terminal truncation mutants of αS
aggregate faster than the wild type only if the truncation removes
the majority of the charged residues from the C-terminal region.133 Additionally, the binding of positively charged
polyamines such as spermine to the C-terminal region increases the
aggregation rates of βS in SDS and αS in the absence of
the addition of SDS.129,133−136 Thus, features apparent in the PRE-RMD ensembles correlate with
the experimental data and provide further support for the suggestion
that charge plays a key role in controlling the aggregation propensities
of the synucleins.

Figure 7 Aggregation propensity, Zaggprof, predicted
using the Zyggregator
algorithm123 for (black, solid) αS,
(red, solid) βS, and (green, dashed) βSHC.
The residue numbers and gaps correspond to the sequence alignment
shown in Figure 1. The gray line at Zaggprof = 1 indicates the threshold for classifying a sequence as being
aggregation prone; regions exhibiting Zaggprof values greater
than this are considered to be aggregation prone.

Conclusions
We have exploited the opportunities offered
by the use of PRE-derived
distances as replica-averaged structural restraints in MD simulations
to increase the amount of information available from experimental
measurements by providing atomic-level structural detail. Analysis
of the transient long-range intramolecular interactions shows that
the distances between the N- and C-terminal regions of all three proteins
are shorter than expected for random coil structures, indicative of
interactions between the two regions that may be electrostatic in
nature. The resemblance between the structural propensities of βSHC and βS echoes their similar aggregation propensities,
with the main difference likely to be related to aggregation between
these two proteins and being that αS and βSHC exhibit a greater number of inter-residue distances between the
N- and C-terminal regions that are shorter than expected for a random
coil. As interactions between the N- and C-terminal regions are expected
to be electrostatic in nature, this factor strengthens the case for
charge playing a key role in modulating the aggregation properties
of these polypeptides.

Supporting Information Available
Overlays of the 1H–15N HSCQ spectra measured for S64C βS and
βSHC with the attached MTSL spin-label in its oxidized
and reduced states, plots showing the change in the 15N
and 1H chemical shifts measured for each residue of S64C
βS and βSHC when the attached MTSL spin-label
is in its oxidized and reduced forms, and the 1H–15N HSCQ spectrum of βSHC alone and overlaid
with that of βS or of αS. This material is available free
of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5009326_si_001.pdf

 Author Present Address
† J.R.A.:
Centre for Theoretical Chemistry and Physics, Institute
of Natural and Mathematical Sciences, Massey University, Albany Highway,
Auckland 0632, New Zealand.

Author Present Address
‡ R.C.R.:
Office of Cancer Clinical Proteomics Research, National
Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-2580.

Author Present Address
§ J.C.C.: Institute of Structural and Molecular
Biology, University
College London and Birkbeck College, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT,
U.K.

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The provision
of the 3J couplings
and residual dipolar couplings by Carlos Bertoncini prior to publication
is gratefully acknowledged. We are grateful for financial support
from the Woolf Fisher Trust (J.R.A.), the Gates Cambridge Trust (R.C.R),
the Royal Society (M.V.) and the Wellcome Trust (C.M.D.).



   
References
Dyson H. J. ; Wright P. E.  (2005 ) Intrinsically unstructured proteins and their functions . Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 
6 , 197 –208 .15738986 
Gunasekaran K. ; Tsai C. J. ; Kumar S. ; Zanuy D. ; Nussinov R.  (2003 ) Extended disordered
proteins: Targeting function with less scaffold . Trends Biochem. Sci. 
28 , 81 –85 .12575995 
Uversky V. N. ; Dunker A. K.  (2010 ) Understanding protein non-folding . Biochim. Biophys. Acta 
1804 , 1231 –1264 .20117254 
Babu M. M. ; van der
Lee R. ; de Groot N. S. ; Gsponer J.  (2011 ) Intrinsically disordered
proteins: Regulation and disease . Curr. Opin.
Struct. Biol. 
21 , 432 –440 .21514144 
Tompa P.  (2012 ) Intrinsically
disordered proteins: A 10-year recap . Trends
Biochem. Sci. 
37 , 509 –516 .22989858 
Chiti F. ; Dobson C. M.  (2006 ) Protein misfolding,
functional amyloid, and human disease . Annu.
Rev. Biochem. 
75 , 333 –366 .16756495 
Dobson C. M.  (2001 ) The structural
basis of protein folding and its links with human disease . Philos. Trans. R. Soc., B 
356 , 133 –145 .
Irvine G. B. ; El-Agnaf O. M. ; Shanker G. M. ; Walsh D. M.  (2008 ) Protein aggregation
in the brain: The molecular basis for Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s
disease . Mol. Med. 
14 , 451 –464 .18368143 
Knowles T. P. J. ; Vendruscolo M. ; Dobson C. M.  (2014 ) The amyloid state
and its association
with protein misfolding diseases . Nat. Rev.
Mol. Cell Biol. 
15 , 384 –396 .24854788 
Bernadó P. ; Bertoncini C. W. ; Griesinger C. ; Zweckstetter M. ; Blackledge M.  (2005 ) Defining long-range order and local disorder in native
α-synuclein using residual dipolar couplings . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
127 , 17968 –17969 .16366524 
Bertoncini C. W. ; Jung Y. S. ; Fernandez C. O. ; Hoyer W. ; Griesinger C. ; Jovin T. M. ; Zweckstetter M.  (2005 ) Release of long-range tertiary interactions
potentiates aggregation of natively unstructured α-synuclein . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
102 , 1430 –1435 .15671169 
Dedmon M. M. ; Lindorff-Larsen K. ; Christodoulou J. ; Vendruscolo M. ; Dobson C. M.  (2005 ) Mapping long-range interactions in α-synuclein
using spin-label NMR and ensemble molecular dynamics simulations . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
127 , 476 –477 .15643843 
Bertoncini C. W. ; Rasia R. M. ; Lamberto G. R. ; Binolfi A. ; Zweckstetter M. ; Griesinger C. ; Fernandez C. O.  (2007 ) Structural characterization of the
intrinsically unfolded protein β-synuclein, a natural negative
regulator of α-synuclein aggregation . J. Mol. Biol. 
372 , 708 –722 .17681539 
Mukrasch M. D. ; Markwick P. ; Biernat J. ; von Bergen M. ; Bernadó P. ; Griesinger C. ; Mandelkow E. ; Zweckstetter M. ; Blackledge M.  (2007 ) Highly populated turn conformations
in natively unfolded tau protein identified from residual dipolar
couplings and molecular simulation . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
129 , 5235 –5243 .17385861 
Sung Y.-h. ; Eliezer D.  (2007 ) Residual structure,
backbone dynamics, and interactions
within the synuclein family . J. Mol. Biol. 
372 , 689 –707 .17681534 
Jensen M. R. ; Markwick P. R. ; Meier S. ; Griesinger C. ; Zweckstetter M. ; Grzesiek S. ; Bernadó P. ; Blackledge M.  (2009 ) Quantitative determination of the conformational properties
of partially folded and intrinsically disordered proteins using NMR
dipolar couplings . Structure 
17 , 1169 –1185 .19748338 
Allison J. R. ; Varnai P. ; Dobson C. M. ; Vendruscolo M.  (2009 ) Determination
of the free energy landscape of α-synuclein using spin label
nuclear magnetic resonance measurements . J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 
131 , 18314 –18326 .20028147 
Fisher C. K. ; Huang A. ; Stultz C. M.  (2010 ) Modeling intrinsically disordered
proteins with Bayesian statistics . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
132 , 14919 –14927 .20925316 
Jensen M.
R. ; Salmon L. ; Nodet G. ; Blackledge M.  (2010 ) Defining conformational
ensembles of intrinsically disordered and partially folded proteins
directly from chemical shifts . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
132 , 1270 –1272 .20063887 
Camilloni C. ; De Simone A. ; Vranken W. F. ; Vendruscolo M.  (2012 ) Determination
of secondary structure populations in disordered states of proteins
using nuclear magnetic resonance chemical shifts . Biochemistry 
51 , 2224 –2231 .22360139 
Ozenne V. ; Schneider R. ; Yao M. ; Huang J.-r. ; Salmon L. ; Zweckstetter M. ; Jensen M. R. ; Blackledge M.  (2012 ) Mapping the
potential energy landscape of intrinsically disordered proteins at
amino acid resolution . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
134 , 15138 –15148 .22901047 
Sibille N. ; Huvent I. ; Fauquant C. ; Verdegem D. ; Amniai L. ; Leroy A. ; Wieruszeski J.-M. ; Lippens G. ; Landrieu I.  (2012 ) Structural
characterization by nuclear magnetic resonance of the impact of phosphorylation
in the proline-rich region of the disordered Tau protein . Proteins: Struct., Funct., Bioinf. 
80 , 454 –462 .
Zhu M. ; De Simone A. ; Schenk D. ; Toth G. ; Dobson C. M. ; Vendruscolo M.  (2013 ) Identification of small-molecule binding pockets in
the soluble monomeric form of the Aβ42 peptide . J. Chem. Phys. 
139 , 035101 .23883055 
Tóth G. ; et al. (2014 ) Targeting
the intrinsically disordered structural ensemble of α-synuclein
by small molecules as a potential therapeutic strategy for Parkinson’s
disease . PLoS One 
9 , e87133 .24551051 
Svergun D. I. ; Koch M. H. J.  (2003 ) Small-angle scattering studies of biological macromolecules
in solution . Rep. Prog. Phys. 
66 , 1735 –1782 .
Bilsel O. ; Matthews C. R.  (2006 ) Molecular dimensions
and their distributions in early
folding intermediates . Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 
16 , 86 –93 .16442277 
Wilkins D. K. ; Grimshaw S. B. ; Receveur V. ; Dobson C. M. ; Jones J. A. ; Smith L. J.  (1999 ) Hydrodynamic radii
of native and denatured proteins
measured by pulse field gradient NMR techniques . Biochemistry 
38 , 16424 –16431 .10600103 
Mohana-Borges R. ; Goto N. K. ; Kroon G. J. A. ; Dyson H. J. ; Wright P. E.  (2004 ) Structural
characterization of unfolded states of apomyoglobin using residual
dipolar couplings . J. Mol. Biol. 
340 , 1131 –1142 .15236972 
Jensen M. R. ; Houben K. ; Lescop E. ; Blanchard L. ; Ruigrok R. W. H. ; Blackledge M.  (2008 ) Quantitative
conformational analysis
of partially folded proteins from residual dipolar couplings: Application
to the molecular recognition element of Sendai virus nucleoprotein . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
130 , 8055 –8061 .18507376 
Nodet G. ; Salmon L. ; Ozenne V. ; Meier S. ; Jensen M. R. ; Blackledge M.  (2009 ) Quantitative description of backbone conformational
sampling of unfolded proteins at amino acid resolution from NMR residual
dipolar couplings . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
131 , 17908 –17918 .19908838 
Blackledge M. , Bernadó P. , and Jensen M. R.   (2010 ) Instrumental Analysis of Intrinsically
Disordered Proteins , pp 89 –106 , John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc. , New
York .
Jensen M. R. , Salmon L. , Nodet G. , Markwick P. , Bernadó P. , and Blackledge M.   (2011 ) Protein NMR Spectroscopy:
Practical Techniques and Applications , pp 319 –345 , John Wiley &amp; Sons,
Ltd. , New York .
Salmon L. , Jensen M. R. , Bernadó P. , and Blackledge M.   (2012 ) In Intrinsically Disordered Protein Analysis  (Uversky V. N. , and Dunker A. K.  , Eds.) Vol. 895 , Chapter 9, pp 115 –125 , Methods
in Molecular Biology, Humana Press , Totowa, NJ .
Marsh J. A. ; Forman-Kay J. D.  (2009 ) Structure and disorder in an unfolded state under nondenaturing
conditions from ensemble models consistent with a large number of
experimental restraints . J. Mol. Biol. 
391 , 359 –374 .19501099 
Kjaergaard M. ; Poulsen F. M.  (2012 ) Disordered proteins
studied by chemical shifts . Prog. Nucl. Magn.
Reson. Spectrosc. 
60 , 42 –51 .22293398 
Camilloni C. ; Cavalli A. ; Vendruscolo M.  (2013 ) Replica-averaged metadynamics . J. Chem. Theory Comput. 
9 , 5610 –5617 .
Camilloni C. ; Vendruscolo M.  (2014 ) Statistical mechanics of the denatured state of a protein
using replica-averaged metadynamics . J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 
136 , 8982 –8991 .24884637 
Battiste J.
L. ; Wagner G.  (2000 ) Utilization
of site-directed spin labeling and high-resolution
heteronuclear nuclear magnetic resonance for global fold determination
of large proteins with limited nuclear Overhauser effect data . Biochemistry 
39 , 5355 –5365 .10820006 
Gillespie J. R. ; Shortle D.  (1997 ) Characterization of long-range structure in the denatured
state of staphylococcal nuclease. I. Paramagnetic relaxation enhancement
by nitroxide spin labels . J. Mol. Biol. 
268 , 158 –169 .9149149 
Gillespie J. R. ; Shortle D.  (1997 ) Characterization of
long-range structure in the denatured
state of staphylococcal nuclease. II. Distance restraints from paramagnetic
relaxation and calculation of an ensemble of structures . J. Mol. Biol. 
268 , 170 –184 .9149150 
Cino E. A. ; Wong-ekkabut J. ; Karttunen M. ; Choy W.-Y.  (2011 ) Microsecond molecular
dynamics simulations of intrinsically disordered proteins involved
in the oxidative stress response . PLoS One 
6 , e27371 .22125611 
Higo J. ; Nishimura Y. ; Nakamura H.  (2011 ) A free-energy landscape
for coupled
folding and binding of an intrinsically disordered protein in explicit
solvent from detailed all-atom computations . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
133 , 10448 –10458 .21627111 
Sgourakis N. G. ; Merced-Serrano M. ; Boutsidis C. ; Drineas P. ; Du Z. ; Wang C. ; Garcia A. E.  (2011 ) Atomic-level characterization of
the ensemble of the Aβ(1–42) monomer in water using unbiased
molecular dynamics simulations and spectral algorithms . J. Mol. Biol. 
405 , 570 –583 .21056574 
Knott M. ; Best R. B.  (2012 ) A preformed binding interface in the unbound ensemble
of an intrinsically disordered protein: Evidence from molecular simulations . PLoS Comput. Biol. 
8 , e1002605 .22829760 
Lindorff-Larsen K. ; Trbovic N. ; Maragakis P. ; Piana S. ; Shaw D. E.  (2012 ) Structure
and dynamics of an unfolded protein examined by molecular dynamics
simulation . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
134 , 3787 –3791 .22339051 
Mittal J. ; Yoo T. H. ; Georgiou G. ; Truskett T. M.  (2013 ) Structural ensemble
of an intrinsically disordered polypeptide . J. Phys. Chem. B 
117 , 118 –124 .23205890 
Best R. B. ; Vendruscolo M.  (2004 ) Determination of protein structures consistent with
NMR order parameters . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
126 , 8090 –8091 .15225030 
Lindorff-Larsen K. ; Kristjansdottir S. ; Teilum K. ; Fieber W. ; Dobson C. M. ; Poulsen F. M. ; Vendruscolo M.  (2004 ) Determination of an ensemble of structures
representing the denatured state of the bovine acyl-coenzyme A binding
protein . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
126 , 3291 –3299 .15012160 
Kristjansdottir S. ; Lindorff-Larsen K. ; Fieber W. ; Dobson C. M. ; Vendruscolo M. ; Poulsen F. M.  (2005 ) Formation of native and non-native
interactions in
ensembles of denatured ACBP molecules from paramagnetic relaxation
enhancement studies . J. Mol. Biol. 
347 , 1053 –1062 .15784263 
Francis C. ; Lindorff-Larsen K. ; Best R. ; Vendruscolo M.  (2006 ) Characterization
of the residual structure in the unfolded state of the Δ131Δ
fragment of staphylococcal nuclease . Proteins:
Struct., Funct., Bioinf. 
65 , 145 –152 .
Chen J.  (2009 ) Intrinsically
disordered p53 extreme C-terminus binds to S100B(ββ) through “Fly-Casting . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
131 , 2088 –2089 .19216110 
Ganguly D. ; Chen J.  (2009 ) Atomistic details of
the disordered states of KID and pKID. Implications
in coupled binding and folding . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
131 , 5214 –5223 .19278259 
Zhang W. ; Ganguly D. ; Chen J.  (2012 ) Residual structures,
conformational
fluctuations, and electrostatic interactions in the synergistic folding
of two intrinsically disordered proteins . PLoS
Comput. Biol. 
8 , e1002353 .22253588 
Vendruscolo M. ; Dobson C. M.  (2005 ) Towards complete
descriptions of the free-energy landscapes
of proteins . Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A 
363 , 433 –452 .
Vendruscolo M.  (2007 ) Determination
of conformationally heterogeneous states of proteins . Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 
17 , 15 –20 .17239581 
Torda A. ; Scheek R. ; van Gunsteren W. F.  (1989 ) Time-dependent distance restraints
in molecular dynamics simulations . Chem. Phys.
Lett. 
157 , 289 –294 .
Torda A. E. ; Scheek R. M. ; van Gunsteren W. F.  (1990 ) Time-averaged
nuclear Overhauser
effect distance restraints applied to Tendamistat . J. Mol. Biol. 
214 , 223 –235 .2370663 
Scheek R. M. , Torda A. E. , Kemmink J. , and van Gunsteren W. F.   (1991 ) Computational Aspects of the Study of Biological Macromolecules by
NMR , NATO ASI Series A22, pp 209 –217 , Plenum Press , New York .
Bonvin A. ; Boelens R. ; Kaptein R.  (1994 ) Time-averaged
and ensemble averaged
direct NOE restraints . J. Biomol. NMR 
4 , 143 –149 .22911161 
Kemmink J. ; van Mierlo C. P. M. ; Scheek R. M. ; Creighton T. E.  (1993 ) Local structure
due to an aromatic-amide interaction observed by 1H-nuclear
magnetic resonance spectroscopy in peptides related to the N terminus
of bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor . J. Mol.
Biol. 
230 , 312 –322 .7680725 
Mierke D.
F. ; Scheek R. M. ; Kessler H.  (1994 ) Coupling constants as restraints
in ensemble distance driven dynamics . Biopolymers 
34 , 559 –563 .
Pitera J. W. ; Chodera J. D.  (2012 ) On the use of experimental
observations to bias simulated
ensembles . J. Chem. Theory Comput. 
8 , 3445 –3451 .
Roux B. ; Weare J.  (2013 ) On the statistical
equivalence of restrained-ensemble simulations
with the maximum entropy method . J. Chem. Phys. 
138 , 084107 .23464140 
Cavalli A. ; Camilloni C. ; Vendruscolo M.  (2013 ) Molecular
dynamics simulations with
replica-averaged structural restraints generate structural ensembles
according to the maximum entropy principle . J. Chem. Phys. 
138 , 094112 .23485282 
Boomsma W. ; Ferkinghoff-Borg J. ; Lindorff-Larsen K.  (2014 ) Combining experiments and simulations
using the maximum entropy principle . PLoS Comput.
Biol. 
10 , e1003406 .24586124 
Uversky V. N.  (2002 ) Natively
unfolded proteins: A point where biology waits for physics . Protein Sci. 
11 , 739 –756 .11910019 
George J.  (2001 ) The synucleins . Genome Biol. 
3 , 3002.1 –3002.6 .
Jakes R. ; Spillantini M. G. ; Goedert M.  (1994 ) Identification of two distinct synucleins
from human brain . FEBS Lett. 
345 , 27 –32 .8194594 
Park J. Y. ; Lansbury P. T. Jr. (2003 ) β-Synuclein
inhibits formation
of α-synuclein protofibrils: A possible therapeutic strategy
against Parkinson’s disease . Biochemistry 
42 , 3696 –3700 .12667059 
Tsigelny I. F. ; Bar-On P. ; Sharikov Y. ; Crews L. ; Hashimoto M. ; Miller M. A. ; Keller S. H. ; Platoshyn O. ; Yuan J. X.-J. ; Masliah E.  (2007 ) Dynamics of α-synuclein
aggregation
and inhibition of pore-like oligomer development by β-synuclein . FEBS J. 
274 , 1862 –1877 .17381514 
Rivers R. C. ; Kumita J. R. ; Tartaglia G. G. ; Dedmon M. M. ; Pawar A. ; Vendruscolo M. ; Dobson C. M. ; Christodoulou J.  (2008 ) Molecular
determinants of the aggregation behaviour of α- and β-synuclein . Protein Sci. 
17 , 887 –898 .18436957 
Giasson B. I. ; Murray I. V. J. ; Trojanowski J. Q. ; Lee V. M.-Y.  (2001 ) A hydrophobic
stretch of 12 amino acid residues in the middle of α-synuclein
is essential for filament assembly . J. Biol.
Chem. 
276 , 2380 –2386 .11060312 
Du H. N. ; Tang L. ; Luo X. Y. ; Li H. T. ; Hu J. ; Zhou J. W. ; Hu H. Y.  (2003 ) A peptide
motif consisting of glycine,
alanine, and valine is required for the fibrillization and cytotoxicity
of human α-synuclein . Biochemistry 
42 , 8870 –8878 .12873148 
Roodveldt C. ; Andersson A. ; De Genst E. J. ; Labrador-Garrido A. ; Buell A. K. ; Dobson C. M. ; Tartaglia G. G. ; Vendruscolo M.  (2012 ) A rationally designed six-residue
swap generates comparability
in the aggregation behavior of α-synuclein and β-synuclein . Biochemistry 
51 , 8771 –8778 .23003198 
Eliezer D. ; Kutluay E. ; Bussell R. Jr.; Browne G.  (2001 ) Conformational
properties of α-synuclein in its free and lipid-associated states . J. Mol. Biol. 
307 , 1061 –1073 .11286556 
Morar A. S. ; Olteanu A. ; Young G. B. ; Pielak G. J.  (2001 ) Solvent-induced
collapse of α-synuclein and acid-denatured cytochrome c . Protein Sci. 
10 , 2195 –2199 .11604526 
Syme C. D. ; Blanch E. W. ; Holt C. ; Jakes R. ; Goedert M. ; Hecht L. ; Barron L. D.  (2002 ) A Raman optical activity study of
rheomorphism in caseins, synucleins and tau: New insight into the
structure and behaviour of natively unfolded proteins . Eur. J. Biochem. 
269 , 148 –156 .11784308 
Bernstein S. L. ; Liu D. ; Wyttenbach T. ; Bowers M. T. ; Lee J. C. ; Gray H. B. ; Winkler J. R.  (2004 ) α-Synuclein: Stable compact and extended monomeric
structures and pH dependence of dimer formation . J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
15 , 1435 –1443 .15465356 
Marsh J. A. ; Singh V. K. ; Jia Z. ; Forman-Kay J. D.  (2006 ) Sensitivity
of secondary structure propensities to sequence differences between
α- and γ-synuclein: Implications for fibrillation . Protein Sci. 
15 , 2795 –2804 .17088319 
McNulty B. C. ; Young G. B. ; Pielak G. J.  (2006 ) Macromolecular crowding in the Escherichia coli periplasm maintains α-synuclein
disorder . J. Mol. Biol. 
355 , 893 –897 .16343531 
McNulty B. C. ; Tripathy A. ; Young G. B. ; Charlton L. M. ; Orans J. ; Pielak G. J.  (2006 ) Temperature-induced reversible conformational
change
in the first 100 residues of α-synuclein . Protein Sci. 
15 , 602 –608 .16452621 
Cho M.-K. ; Kim H.-Y. ; Bernado P. ; Fernandez C. O. ; Blackledge M. ; Zweckstetter M.  (2007 ) Amino acid
bulkiness defines the
local conformations and dynamics of natively unfolded α-synuclein
and tau . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
129 , 3032 –3033 .17315997 
Wu K.-P. ; Weinstock D. S. ; Narayanan C. ; Levy R. M. ; Baum J.  (2009 ) Structural
reorganization of α-synuclein at low pH observed by NMR and
REMD simulations . J. Mol. Biol. 
391 , 784 –796 .19576220 
Coelho-Cerqueira E. ; Carmo-Gonçalves P. ; Sá Pinheiro A. ; Cortines J. ; Follmer C.  (2013 ) α-Synuclein as
an intrinsically
disordered monomer fact or artefact? . FEBS J. 
280 , 4915 –4927 .23927048 
Waudby C. A. ; Camilloni C. ; Fitzpatrick A. W. P. ; Cabrita L. D. ; Dobson C. M. ; Vendruscolo M. ; Christodoulou J.  (2013 ) In-cell NMR characterization of the
secondary structure populations of a disordered conformation of α-synuclein
within E. coli cells . PLoS One 
8 , e72286 .23991082 
Bartels T. ; Choi J. G. ; Selkoe D. J.  (2011 ) α-Synuclein
occurs physiologically
as a helically folded tetramer that resists aggregation . Nature 
477 , 107 –110 .21841800 
Jónsson S. A. ; Mohanty S. ; Irbäck A.  (2012 ) Distinct phases of free α-synuclein:
A Monte Carlo study . Proteins: Struct., Funct.,
Bioinf. 
80 , 2169 –2177 .
Salmon L. ; Nodet G. ; Ozenne V. ; Yin G. ; Jensen M. R. ; Zweckstetter M. ; Blackledge M.  (2010 ) NMR characterization
of long-range
order in intrinsically disordered proteins . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
132 , 8407 –8418 .20499903 
Rao J. N. ; Jao C. C. ; Hegde B. G. ; Langen R. ; Ulmer T. S.  (2010 ) A combinatorial
NMR and EPR approach for evaluating the structural ensemble of partially
folded proteins . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
132 , 8657 –8668 .20524659 
Ullman O. ; Fisher C. K. ; Stultz C. M.  (2011 ) Explaining
the structural plasticity
of α-synuclein . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
133 , 19536 –19546 .22029383 
Narayanan C. ; Weinstock D. S. ; Wu K.-P. ; Baum J. ; Levy R. M.  (2012 ) Investigation
of the polymeric properties of α-synuclein and comparison with
NMR experiments: A replica exchange molecular dynamics study . J. Chem. Theory Comput. 
8 , 3929 –3942 .23162382 
Mantsyzov A. B. ; Maltsev A. S. ; Ying J. ; Shen Y. ; Hummer G. ; Bax A.  (2014 ) A maximum entropy approach to the study of residue-specific backbone
angle distributions in α-synuclein, an intrinsically disordered
protein . Protein Sci. 
23 , 1275 –1290 .24976112 
Uversky V. N. ; Li J. ; Souillac P. ; Millett I. S. ; Doniach S. ; Jakes R. ; Goedert M. ; Fink A. L.  (2002 ) Biophysical
properties of the synucleins
and their propensities to fibrillate: Inhibition of α-synuclein
assembly by β- and γ-synucleins . J. Biol. Chem. 
277 , 11970 –11978 .11812782 
Delaglio F. ; Grzesiek S. ; Vuister G. ; Zhu G. ; Pfeifer J. ; Bax A.  (1995 ) NMRPipe: A multidimensional spectral processing system based on UNIX
pipes . J. Biomol. NMR 
6 , 277 –293 .8520220 
Goddard T. , and Kneller D.   (2008 ) SPARKY
3 , University of California , San Francisco .
Allison J. R.   (2008 ) Computational methods for characterising
disordered states of proteins . Ph.D. Thesis, University of Cambridge , Cambridge,
U.K. 
Brooks B. ; Bruccoler R. ; Olafson B. ; States D. ; Swaminathan S. ; Karplus M.  (1983 ) CHARMM: A program for macromolecular energy, minimization,
and dynamics calculations . J. Comput. Chem. 
4 , 187 –217 .
Swope W. C. ; Andersen H. C. ; Berens P. H. ; Wilson K. R.  (1982 ) A computer simulation
method for the calculation of equilibrium constants for the formation
of physical clusters of molecules: Application to small water clusters . J. Chem. Phys. 
76 , 637 –649 .
Nose S.  (1984 ) A unified
formulation of the constant temperature molecular dynamics methods . J. Chem. Phys. 
81 , 511 –519 .
Hoover W. G.  (1985 ) Canonical
dynamics: Equilibrium phase-space distributions . Phys. Rev. A 
31 , 1695 –1697 .9895674 
Reiher I. W.   (1985 ) Theoretical studies of hydrogen bonding . Ph.D. Thesis, Harvard University , Cambridge, MA .
Ryckaert J.-P. ; Ciccotti G. ; Berendsen H. J. C.  (1977 ) Numerical
integration of the Cartesian equations of motion of a system with
constraints: Molecular dynamics of n-alkanes . J. Comput. Phys. 
23 , 327 –341 .
Lazaridis T. ; Karplus M.  (1999 ) Effective energy function for proteins
in solution . Proteins: Struct., Funct., Genet. 
35 , 133 –152 .10223287 
Kemmink J. ; Scheek R.  (1995 ) Dynamic modeling of
a helical peptide
in solution using NMR data: Multiple conformations and multi-spin
effects . J. Biomol. NMR 
6 , 33 –40 .7545042 
Bonvin A. M. ; Brünger A. T.  (1995 ) Conformational variability of solution
nuclear magnetic resonance structures . J. Mol.
Biol. 
250 , 80 –93 .7602599 
Vendruscolo M. ; Paci E. ; Dobson C. M. ; Karplus M.  (2003 ) Rare fluctuations
of native proteins sampled by equilibrium hydrogen exchange . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
125 , 15686 –15687 .14677926 
Lindorff-Larsen K. ; Best R. B. ; Depristo M. A. ; Dobson C. M. ; Vendruscolo M.  (2005 ) Simultaneous
determination of protein structure and
dynamics . Nature 
433 , 128 –132 .15650731 
Clore G. M. ; Schwieters C. D.  (2004 ) How much backbone motion in ubiquitin
is required to account for dipolar coupling data measured in multiple
alignment media as assessed by independent cross-validation? . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
126 , 2923 –2938 .14995210 
Clore G. M. ; Schwieters C. D.  (2004 ) Amplitudes of protein backbone dynamics
and correlated motions in a small α/β protein: Correspondence
of dipolar coupling and heteronuclear relaxation measurements . Biochemistry 
43 , 10678 –10691 .15311929 
Clore G. M. ; Schwieters C. D.  (2006 ) Concordance of residual dipolar couplings,
backbone order parameters and crystallographic B-factors for a small
α/β protein: A unified picture of high probability, fast
atomic motions in proteins . J. Mol. Biol. 
355 , 879 –886 .16343537 
Hess B. ; Scheek R. M.  (2003 ) Orientation restraints
in molecular
dynamics simulations using time and ensemble averaging . J. Magn. Reson. 
164 , 19 –27 .12932451 
Gsponer J. ; Hopearuoho H. ; Cavalli A. ; Dobson C. ; Vendruscolo M.  (2006 ) Geometry,
energetics, and dynamics of hydrogen bonds
in proteins: Structural information derived from NMR scalar couplings . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
128 , 15127 –15135 .17117864 
Richter B. ; Gsponer J. ; Varnai P. ; Salvatella X. ; Vendruscolo M.  (2007 ) The MUMO (minimal under-restraining minimal over-restraining)
method for the determination of native state ensembles of proteins . J. Biomol. NMR 
37 , 117 –135 .17225069 
Ferrara P. ; Apostolakis J. ; Caflisch A.  (2002 ) Evaluation of a fast
implicit solvent model for molecular dynamics simulations . Proteins: Struct., Funct., Genet. 
46 , 24 –33 .11746700 
Fraternali F. ; van Gunsteren W. F.  (1996 ) An efficient mean solvation force
model for use in molecular dynamics simulations of proteins in aqueous
solution . J. Mol. Biol. 
256 , 939 –948 .8601844 
Garcia de la Torre J. ; Huertas M. L. ; Carrasco B.  (2000 ) Calculation
of hydrodynamic
properties of globular proteins from their atomic-level structure . Biophys. J. 
78 , 719 –730 .10653785 
Bax A.  (2003 ) Weak alignment
offers new NMR opportunities to study protein structure
and dynamics . Protein Sci. 
12 , 1 –16 .12493823 
Zhou H.-X.  (2002 ) Dimensions of denatured protein chains from hydrodynamic
data . J. Phys. Chem. B 
106 , 5769 –5775 .
Van Der Spoel D. ; Lindahl E. ; Hess B. ; Groenhof G. ; Mark A. E. ; Berendsen H. J. C.  (2005 ) GROMACS:
Fast, flexible, and free . J. Comput. Chem. 
26 , 1701 –1718 .16211538 
Pardi A. ; Billeter M. ; Wüthrich K.  (1984 ) Calibration
of the angular dependence of the amide proton-Cα proton
coupling constants, 3JHNα, in a globular protein: Use of 3JHNα for identification of helical secondary structure . J. Mol. Biol. 
180 , 741 –751 .6084720 
Zweckstetter M. ; Bax A.  (2000 ) Prediction of sterically induced
alignment in a dilute liquid crystalline phase: Aid to protein structure
determination by NMR . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
122 , 3791 –3792 .
Lee B. ; Richards F. M.  (1971 ) The interpretation
of protein structures: Estimation
of static accessibility . J. Mol. Biol. 
55 , 379 –400 .5551392 
Pawar A. P. ; Dubay K. F. ; Zurdo J. ; Chiti F. ; Vendruscolo M. ; Dobson C. M.  (2005 ) Prediction of “aggregation-prone”
and “aggregation-susceptible” regions in proteins associated
with neurodegenerative diseases . J. Mol. Biol. 
350 , 379 –392 .15925383 
DuBay K. F. ; Pawar A. P. ; Chiti F. ; Zurdo J. ; Dobson C. M. ; Vendruscolo M.  (2004 ) Prediction
of the absolute aggregation
rates of amyloidogenic polypeptide chains . J.
Mol. Biol. 
341 , 1317 –1326 .15302561 
Fusco G. ; De Simone A. ; Gopinath T. ; Vostrikov V. ; Vendruscolo M. ; Dobson C. M. ; Veglia G.  (2014 ) Direct observation
of the three regions in α-synuclein that determine its membrane-bound
behaviour . Nat. Commun. 
5 , 3827 .24871041 
Binolfi A. ; Rasia R. M. ; Bertoncini C. W. ; Ceolin M. ; Zweckstetter M. ; Griesinger C. ; Jovin T. M. ; Fernandez C. O.  (2006 ) Interaction
of α-synuclein
with divalent metal ions reveals key differences: A link between structure,
binding specificity and fibrillation enhancement . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
128 , 9893 –9901 .16866548 
Zagrovic B. ; Pande V. S.  (2003 ) Structural correspondence between
the α-helix and the random-flight chain resolves how unfolded
proteins can have native-like properties . Nat.
Struct. Biol. 
10 , 955 –961 .14555998 
Camilloni C. ; Vendruscolo M.  (2013 ) A relationship
between the aggregation
rates of α-synuclein variants and the β-sheet populations
in their monomeric forms . J. Phys. Chem. B 
117 , 10737 –10741 .23941114 
Rivers R. C.   (2007 ) Biophysical analysis of the aggregation
behaviour and structural
properties of α- and β-synuclein . Ph.D.
Thesis, University of Cambridge: Cambridge, UK.
Dunker A. K. ; Cortese M. S. ; Romero P. ; Iakoucheva L. M. ; Uversky V. N.  (2005 ) Flexible nets. The roles of intrinsic disorder in protein
interaction networks . FEBS J. 
272 , 5129 –5148 .16218947 
Biere A. L. ; Wood S. J. ; Wypych J. ; Steavenson S. ; Jiang Y. ; Anafi D. ; Jacobsen F. W. ; Jarosinski M. A. ; Wu G. M. ; Louis J. C. ; Martin F. ; Narhi L. O. ; Citron M.  (2000 ) Parkinson’s disease-associated
α-synuclein
is more fibrillogenic than β- and γ-synuclein and cannot
cross-seed its homologs . J. Biol. Chem. 
275 , 34574 –34579 .10942772 
Herrera F. E. ; Chesi A. ; Paleologou K. E. ; Schmid A. ; Munoz A. ; Vendruscolo M. ; Gustincich S. ; Lashuel H. A. ; Carloni P.  (2008 ) Inhibition of α-synuclein
fibrillization by dopamine is mediated by interactions with five C-terminal
residues and with E83 in the NAC region . PLoS
One 
3 , e3394 .18852892 
Murray I. V. ; Giasson B. I. ; Quinn S. M. ; Koppaka V. ; Axelsen P. H. ; Ischiropoulos H. ; Trojanowski J. Q. ; Lee V. M.  (2003 ) Role of α-synuclein carboxy-terminus
on fibril
formation in vitro . Biochemistry 
42 , 8530 –8540 .12859200 
Antony T. ; Hoyer W. ; Cherny D. ; Heim G. ; Jovin T. M. ; Subramaniam V.  (2003 ) Cellular polyamines
promote the aggregation
of α-synuclein . J. Biol. Chem. 
278 , 3235 –3240 .12435752 
Fernández C. O. ; Hoyer W. ; Zweckstetter M. ; Jares-Erijman E. ; Subramaniam V. ; Griesinger C. ; Jovin T. M.  (2004 ) NMR of α-synuclein-polyamine complexes elucidates
the mechanism and kinetics of induced aggregation . EMBO J. 
23 , 2039 –2046 .15103328 
Li W. ; West N. ; Colla E. ; Pletnikova O. ; Troncoso J. C. ; Marsh L. ; Dawson T. M. ; Jakala P. ; Hartmann T. ; Price D. L. ; Lee M. K.  (2005 ) Aggregation promoting
C-terminal truncation of α-synuclein is a normal cellular process
and is enhanced by the familial Parkinson’s disease-linked
mutations . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
102 , 2162 –2167 .15684072 
Ulmer T. S. ; Bax A. ; Cole N. B. ; Nussbaum R. L.  (2005 ) Structure
and dynamics of micelle-bound human α-synuclein . J. Biol. Chem. 
280 , 9595 –9603 .15615727 



