The α-amino-3-hydroxyl-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionate
(AMPA) receptor is one of the three receptor subtypes of the glutamate
ion channel receptor family with the other two subtypes being the N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor and kainate
receptor., AMPA receptors are the principal excitatory
neurotransmitter receptors in the brain and are indispensable for
brain activities, such as memory and learning., AMPA
receptors have four subunits, i.e., GluA1–4. GluA2 is subject
to RNA editing at the glutamine/arginine (Q/R) site. GluA1, 2Q (the
unedited isoform of GluA2), 3 and 4 can all form functional, homomeric
channels. However, GluA2R (the edited isoform of GluA2) must coassemble
with other subunits to form functional channels.,

The GluA1 AMPA receptor subunit plays important roles in the brain.
GluA1 is predominantly expressed in the forebrain, including the hippocampus,
a region that has been implicated in memory formation. In hippocampus, homomeric GluA1 channels are thought to
constitute ∼8% of the total AMPA receptor complexes. In pyramidal neurons of the adult hippocampus,
the GluA1/GluA2R AMPA receptor is one of the two major complex AMPA
receptor channels. Furthermore, GluA1
is critical for hippocampal synaptic transmission and plasticity., For example, phosphorylation of S831 of GluA1 mediates such plasticity,
as phosphorylation of this site increases during long-term potentiation
(LTP)., Studies with the use of GluA1 knockout mice
have revealed that this subunit is essential for LTP in the CA1 region
of the adult hippocampus, at least in
the rapidly decaying, GluA1-dependent phase of LTP at hippocampal
CA3–CA1 synapses.

Excessive
activity and elevated expression of GluA1 may be linked
to neurological diseases.− For example, the GluA1 expression level at the dentate
gyrus of Alzheimer’s patients is thought to be elevated. After conditioning administration of a drug
of abuse, the GluA1 expression in central nucleus of the amygdala
is significantly increased, but only acutely. In response to acute pain, GluA1 is upregulated. The increase of GluA1 and the concurrent decrease of GluA2
expression occur at the synapses between peripheral nociceptive and
dorsal horn neurons., Therefore, it is useful to develop
selective AMPA receptor antagonists, particularly those that target
the GluA1 subunit. These inhibitors can be used as potential drugs
and/or selective tools in the investigation of the specific function
of the GluA1 subunit in vivo.

In the study,
we investigate the mechanism of inhibition of the
GluA1 channel opening and the site of inhibition by two 2,3-benzodiazepine
(2,3-BDZ) compounds, i.e., GYKI 52466 (1-(4-aminophenyl)-4-methyl-7,8-methylenedioxy-5H-2,3-benzodiazepine) and its N-3 methyl-carbamoyl derivative
(i.e., (R)-5-(4-aminophenyl)-8-methyl-7-(N-methyl-carbamoyl)-8,9-dihydro-7H-1,3-dioxolo[4,5-h][2,3]benzodiazepine)
(for convenience, we term this compound as BDZ-f;
see chemical structures of both compounds in Figure ). 2,3-BDZ derivatives, also known as GYKI compounds, represent
one of the most promising group of compounds synthesized as selective
inhibitors of AMPA receptors and drug candidates for treatment of
a number of neurological diseases involving excessive activity of
AMPA receptors., To date, hundreds of 2,3-BDZ
derivatives have been synthesized, based on the structure of the prototypic
compound GYKI 52466.− In a series of studies of the structure–activity
relationship for 2,3-BDZ compounds that we published earlier, we described
that the compounds like these two (Figure ) bind to the same site, which we have termed as the “M”
site, on the GluA2Q receptors.− This is because both GYKI 52466 and BDZ-f contain a C-4 methyl group and the 7,8-methylenediox ring (Figure ). Furthermore, BDZ-f is more potent
than GYKI 52466 on GluA2Q, because addition of an acylating group
to the N-3 position of the 2,3-benzodiazepine ring is favorable for
compounds that bind to the “M” site. However, how these compounds act on GluA1 and whether they
bind to the same site on GluA1 are not known.

Chemical structures of
the 2,3-benzodiazepine derivatives GYKI
52466 (1-(4-aminophenyl)-4-methyl-7,8-methylenedioxy-5H-2,3-benzodiazepine) and BDZ-f (GYKI 53784, LY 303070,
(R)-5-(4-aminophenyl)-8-methyl-7-(N-methyl-carbamoyl)-8,9-dihydro-7H-1,3-dioxolo[4,5-h][2,3]benzodiazepine).

To investigate the mechanism of
inhibition of the GluA1 channel
opening, we use a laser-pulse photolysis technique, together with
a photolabile precursor of glutamate or caged glutamate. This technique
provides a time resolution of ∼60 μs, sufficient for
measuring the rate of channel opening and thus the effect of an inhibitor
on the channel-opening rate without the complication of channel desensitization
on the millisecond (ms) time scale. Therefore, our kinetic study permits
us to characterize these 2,3-BDZ compounds with the GluA1 receptor
channels while the receptors are still in the functional state.

Materials
and Methods
Cell Culture and GluA1 Expression
In this study, we
chose the flip variant of rat GluA1 or GluA1flip., GluA1flip was transiently expressed in human embryonic
kidney (HEK)-293S cells. The cells were grown in modified Eagle medium
(Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum
(Invitrogen), 100 units of penicillin/mL, and 0.1 mg streptomycin/mL
(Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). The cells were grown in a humidified
incubator at 37 °C and 5% CO2. The cells were transfected
with the cDNA encoding the GluA1flip receptor subunit by
a standard calcium phosphate protocol., For transfection,
4–6 μg of the GluA1flip plasmid was used,
together with green fluorescent protein and simian virus large T-antigen
at a ratio of 10:2:1. The cells were
used for recording from 24 h after transfection.

Whole-Cell
Current Recording
Glutamate was used as
the agonist. All whole-cell current recordings were collected with
transfected HEK-293S cells that were voltage-clamped at −60
mV and at ambient temperature. Specifically, an Axopatch 200B at a
cutoff frequency of 2–20 kHz by a built-in, 4-pole low-pass
Bessel filter was used. The current traces were digitized at a 5–50
kHz sampling frequency using a Digidata 1322A (Molecular Devices,
Sunnyvale, CA). The data was acquired with the use of pClamp 8 (Molecular
Devices). The electrode solution contained (in mM) 110 CsF, 30 CsCl,
4 NaCl, 0.5 CaCl2, 5 EGTA, and 10 HEPES (pH 7.4 adjusted
by CsOH). The extracellular bath buffer contained (in mM) 150 NaCl,
3 KCl, 1 CaCl2, 1 MgCl2, and 10 HEPES (pH 7.4
adjusted by NaOH). All chemicals used for making buffers were from
commercial sources.

Laser-Pulse Photolysis Measurement
The laser-pulse
photolysis technique has been previously described.,,− Briefly, we used 4-methoxy-7-nitroindolinyl-caged-L-glutamate
(Tocris Bioscience, Ellisville, MS). An
HEK-293 cell that expressed GluA1flip was equilibrated
with the caged glutamate for at least 250 ms before photolysis. A
single laser pulse at 355 nm generated from a pulsed Q-switched Nd:YAG
laser (Continuum, Santa Clara, CA), with a pulse length of 8 ns and
energy output in the range of 200–1000 μJ (measured at
the end of the optical fiber), was applied to an HEK-293S cell via
optical fiber. Free glutamate solutions were used to calibrate the
whole-cell current responses from the same cell before and after a
laser flash to estimate the concentration of photolytically released
glutamate. Free glutamate and/or caged glutamate solutions in the
absence and presence of inhibitor were delivered by the use of a U-shaped
flow device. The time resolution of this
flow device, determined by the rise time of the whole-cell current
response (10–90%) to saturating glutamate concentrations, was
1.0 ± 0.2 ms, an average of the measurement from &gt;100 cells
expressing
the same receptor. We also found that
full inhibition by either GYKI 52466 or BDZ-f was
achieved only by preincubating the inhibitor with the GluA1flip receptor for at least 6 s, similar to what we reported for other
2,3-BDZs with GluA2Qflip receptor., It should be noted that neither GYKI 52466 nor BDZ-f activated the GluA1 receptor. This was based on the observation
that a recorded trace did not deviate from the baseline during preincubation
of only an inhibitor in the flow measurement or when the inhibitor
mixed with the caged glutamate was exposed to the receptor prior to
a laser flash in the laser-pulse photolysis measurement. It should
be also noted that the amplitude of the whole-cell current measured
by using the flow device was corrected for receptor desensitization
for data analysis, as previously described.,

Experimental Design and Data Analysis
We first characterized
the effect of GYKI 52466 and BDZ-f on both the channel-opening
(kop) and the channel-closing (kcl) rate processes of the GluA1flip receptor. Specifically, the effect on kop and kcl was determined as a function
of inhibitor concentration at two glutamate concentrations. An observed
rate constant (kobs) of GluA1flip channel opening followed a first-order rate process with or without
an inhibitor (see eq 1 and all other equations in the ). As shown in eq 2, kobs is a function of ligand concentration (L) and includes the rate terms of kop and kcl. If the ligand concentration
is low (i.e., L ≪ K1; K1 is the intrinsic equilibrium constant,
in Figure ), eq 2 is reduced to kobs≈ kcl, and kcl is correlated to the lifetime of an open
channel (or τ = 1/kcl, where τ
is the lifetime). The effect of an inhibitor
on, and its inhibition constant for, the open-channel state are thus
determined (eq 4). At a higher ligand concentration, where kobs &gt; kcl, the kop value is determined by the difference between kobs and kcl or by
rearranging eq 2 such that kobs– kcl= kop [L/(L+K1)]. Similarly,
the effect of an inhibitor on kop and
the inhibition constant for the closed-channel state are determined
(eq 5). We have previously established the criteria by which kcl can be determined from the measurement of kobs.− For GluA1flip, kcl is numerically equal to the kobs value obtained at a glutamate concentration of 40 μM, which
corresponds to ∼4% of the fraction of the open-channel form. In this study, the effect of GYKI 52466 and
BDZ-f on kcl was determined
at 40 μM glutamate concentration. The effect of these compounds
on kop was determined at 300 μM
glutamate concentration.

The whole-cell current amplitude in
the absence and presence of an inhibitor was also measured for independently
determining an inhibition constant. Similarly,
we used 40 μM glutamate concentration (i.e., L ≪ K1), at which most receptors
were in the closed-channel state (see Figure ; defined as the unliganded, singly, and doubly liganded forms),
to determine the inhibition constant for the closed-channel state
(see eqs 6a and 6b). Conversely, we used a saturating ligand concentration
(L ≫ K1), where most of the receptors
were in the open-channel state, to determine the inhibition constant
for the open-channel state. For GluA1
receptors, we chose 2 mM glutamate concentration as a saturating concentration,
which corresponded to ∼93% of the receptors being in the open-channel
form.

Whether GYKI 52466 and BDZ-f bound to the same
site or two different sites on GluA1flip was investigated
using a double-inhibitor experiment (see detail in ). In this experiment, the concentration
of one inhibitor was kept constant while the concentration of the
other was varied. The current amplitude in the absence and presence
of two inhibitors was measured. An apparent inhibition constant obtained
from the two-inhibitor experiment (or the slope of the A/AI,P plot; see eqs 7 and 8) was compared
to that obtained from one-inhibitor experiment (or the slope of the A/AI plot; see eq 6). All other
conditions were the same as described before.

For data analysis
and plotting, we used Origin 7 (Origin Lab, Northampton,
MA). Unless otherwise noted, each data point shown in a plot was an
average of at least three measurements collected from at least three
cells. The error reported refers to the standard deviation from the
mean.

Results
GYKI 52466 and BDZ-f Inhibited
the Channel-Opening
Process of GluA1flip
Using the laser-pulse photolysis
technique, we first characterized the effect of GYKI 52466 and BDZ-f on the channel-opening rate process of GluA1flip. As shown in a pair of whole-cell recording traces (Figure A) initiated by laser-pulse photolysis of the caged
glutamate, the time course of the whole-cell current rise was slowed,
and the current amplitude was reduced in the presence of BDZ-f (here BDZ-f was used as an example).
We ascribed the reduction in both the rate and the amplitude to the
inhibition of the channel-opening process of GluA1flip by
BDZ-f. This interpretation was based on the fact
that the rate of the current rise in the laser-pulse photolysis measurement
was pertinent to the channel opening. Furthermore, the macroscopic current amplitude was correlated to
the number of channels on a single cell surface (see eq 6b in the ). Therefore, the reduction
of the amplitude in the presence of an inhibitor would be counted
for by the notion that a certain number of the channels on the cell
surface was blocked from ionic conductance by the inhibitor (eq 6a).
It should be further noted that the observed effects of BDZ-f on both the rate of current rise and the amplitude were
measured prior to the channel desensitization, reflected by the falling
phase of the current on a longer time scale (Figure A).

(A) Representative whole-cell current traces from the laser-pulse
photolysis experiment with BDZ-f as an example. As
shown, BDZ-f inhibited both the rate and amplitude
of the opening of the GluA1flip channels (lower trace with
10 μM BDZ-f; kobs = 2,299 s–1; A = 0.24 nA) as
compared to the control (upper trace; kobs = 3376 s–1; A = 0.56 nA). The
solid line superimposed in each trace was a single exponential fit
using eq 1 (). For
data plotting, we used every fourth point (or the point at every 100
μs); for plotting the desensitization phase, we used the data
points at every 500 μs. (B) Effect of BDZ-f on kcl was obtained at 40 μM of
photolytically released glutamate and as a function of BDZ-f concentration. From this plot, a K̅I* of 30 ±
3 μM was determined. (C) Effect of BDZ-f on kop obtained at 300 μM of photolytically
released glutamate and as a function of BDZ-f concentration.
From this plot, a KI* of 15 ± 1 μM was determined. Each
data point shown in this plot was an average of at least three measurements
collected from at least three cells.

That the time course of the whole-cell current rise reflected
the
rate of channel opening (see the minimal mechanism of channel opening
in the  and eq 2)
was based on the assumption that ligand binding rate(s) of all steps
were fast, relative to the rate of channel opening. On the basis of
this assumption, the kop of the GluA4
receptor we obtained, for instance, is
indeed 3 orders of magnitude smaller than the glutamate binding rate
constant estimated by Madden and co-workers using an extracellular
portion of the same receptor. It should
be noted, however, that the rate constant of glutamate binding to
any intact AMPA receptor (e.g., either unliganded or singly or doubly
liganded forms) is not known. On the basis of the same assumption,
the kcl we obtained for an AMPA receptor
is well corroborated with the lifetime obtained from single-channel
recording of the same receptor.,, In addition, if an observed rate constant represents the rate of
the transition from the closed- to the open-channel state and is slow
as compared to the ligand binding, the rising phase of the receptor
response is expected to be a single exponential rate process and to
remain so even when the concentration of the ligand varies. Indeed,
an observed rate constant of the current rise followed a single exponential
rate law for over 93% of the rising phase (i.e., the solid lines in
Figure A). This observation was without exception
in all inhibitor and glutamate concentrations used not only in this
but also in our previous studies of AMPA receptors in the absence
and presence of other inhibitors.,

The Effect
of GYKI 52466 and BDZ-f on kop and kcl
Next we characterized
the effect of GYKI 52466 and BDZ-f on both kop and kcl of GluA1flip. At the 40 μM glutamate concentration
where kcl was measured (see ), K̅I* or the inhibition
constant for the open-channel state was found to be 30 ± 3 μM
for BDZ-f (Figure B) by the
use of eq 4. At a higher concentration [i.e., 300 μM of glutamate
in this study, where kobs &gt; kcl()], KI* or the inhibition
constant for the closed-channel state was characterized, from the
effect of BDZ-f on kop, to be 15 ± 1 μM (Figure C) by
the use of eq 5. All of these values for BDZ-f are
also summarized in Table , along with the
inhibition constants for GYKI 52466 (i.e., the effect of GYKI 52466
on the kop and kcl of GluA1 was characterized similarly, and the original data
as well as the plots of GYKI 52466 are shown in Figure S1 in the ). The fact that GYKI 52466
and BDZ-f inhibited both kcl and kop of GluA1flip was
consistent with a noncompetitive mechanism of inhibition.− In contrast, an uncompetitive inhibitor would be expected to inhibit
only kcl but not kop, whereas a competitive inhibitor would be expected to inhibit kop but not kcl.−

Summary of the Inhibition Constants
of GYKI 52466 and BDZ-f, Obtained from Rate and Amplitude
Measurements, for the Closed-Channel and Open-Channel States of GluA1flip
 	rate
measurement	amplitude
measurement	
KI* (μM),	K̅I*,	KI (μM),	KI (μM),	KI (μM),	K̅I (μM),	
BDZ-f	15 ± 1	30 ± 3	6 ± 1	5 ± 1	5 ± 1	9 ± 1	
GYKI 52466	145 ± 30	281 ± 70	59 ± 9	52 ± 5	53 ± 2	140 ± 5	
Laser-pulse photolysis measurement.

Flow measurement.

Measurements at 40 μM glutamate
for the closed-channel state.

Measurements at ∼300 μM
glutamate.

Measurements
at 2 mM glutamate.

Effect of GYKI
52466 and BDZ-f on the Whole-Cell
Current Amplitude
In the laser-pulse photolysis measurement
of both GYKI 52466 and BDZ-f, we also used the amplitude
of the whole-cell current response (an example is shown in Figure A) in the absence and presence of an inhibitor to
determine the inhibition constant. From the ratio of the current amplitude
in the absence and presence of an inhibitor, such as BDZ-f (Figure A), we found a KI of 6 ± 1 μM for the closed-channel state
(i.e., at 40 μM glutamate as in Figure A, solid circles; see also  and eqs 6 and 7). A KI of 5 ± 1
μM was estimated at 300 μM glutamate for BDZ-f (Figure A, open circles). Similarly, the
inhibition constant of GYKI 52466 for the closed-channel and the open-channel
state of the GluA1flip were determined, respectively (see
Figure S2 in ). All
the inhibition constants obtained from the laser photolysis measurement
are summarized in Table .

(A) Effect of BDZ-f on the amplitude of the whole-cell
current obtained from laser-pulse photolysis measurements. A KI of 6 ± 1 μM was obtained from the A/AI value as a function of BDZ-f concentration (●) for the closed-channel state at 40 μM
of photolytically released glutamate. At 300 μM photolytically
released glutamate concentration (◊), the KI was determined to be 5 ± 1 μM. (B) Representative
whole-cell current traces of GluA1flip channels in the
absence (left) and presence (right) of BDZ-f obtained
by the flow measurement. The concentrations of glutamate and the inhibitor
were 2 mM and 6 μM, respectively. (C) Effect of BDZ-f on the whole-cell current amplitude of GluA1flip receptors obtained from the flow measurement. The inhibition constant
of KI of 5 ± 1 μM was determined
for the closed-channel state (40 μM glutamate, ●), whereas
a K̅I of 9 ± 1 μM was
obtained for the open-channel state (2 mM glutamate, ○).

We then compared the magnitude
of the inhibition constants obtained
from the rate of the current rise (Figure B,C) with those obtained from the current amplitude (Figure A) observed in the same experiment (i.e., the laser-pulse
photolysis experiment). We found, however, that the inhibition constant
of BDZ-f calculated from the amplitude was ∼2-fold
smaller than the one calculated from the rate for the closed-channel
state (i.e., 40 μM glutamate concentration; see Table ). For the inhibition constant of BDZ-f collected at 300 μM glutamate concentration, the inhibition
constant calculated from the amplitude (Figure A) was almost 6-fold smaller than the one obtained from the rate
(Figure C, and Table ). The same trend was observed for GYKI 52466 (see Table ). Because these inhibition constants were obtained
at the same glutamate concentrations and in the same experiment, we
suspected that the discrepancy between the corresponding inhibition
constants determined from the amplitude and rate measurements was
due to the nature of the inhibition, rather than the difference in
the measurements. We therefore decided to use a different technique,
i.e., a solution flow measurement (see ), to independently evaluate an inhibition constant.

As shown in glutamate-evoked whole-cell current traces in the absence
(left trace of Figure B) and presence (right
trace) of BDZ-f in the solution flow measurement,
BDZ-f inhibited the current amplitude from the GluA1flip receptor channels. From the data of the current amplitude
collected at glutamate concentrations of 40 μM and 2 mM (see ), we calculated a KI of 5 ± 1 μM
for the closed-channel and a K̅I of 9 ± 1 μM for the open-channel state, respectively.
Likewise the inhibition constants of GYKI 52466 were determined to
be 53 ± 2 μM and 140 ± 5 μM, respectively (all
these values are also summarized in Table ).

On the basis of these results, we drew the following conclusions.
First, the magnitude of the inhibition constant of BDZ-f or GYKI 52466 obtained at the 40 μM glutamate concentration
from the amplitude data of the laser-pulse photolysis measurement
was in good agreement with that of the solution flow measurement (columns
3 and 5 in Table ). Second, because the laser-pulse
photolysis experiments permitted the estimate of inhibition constants
at 300 μM glutamate concentration, we further conducted the
flow measurement at the same concentration. The inhibition constant
at 300 μM glutamate concentration, calculated from the amplitude
of the flow measurement, was found to be 5 ± 1 μM for BDZ-f and 55 ± 6 μM for GYKI 52466, respectively
(see Figure S3 in ). Like the 40 μM data, these values are in good agreement
with the corresponding data collected from the rate measurement (i.e.,
the values in column 4 in Table ). Third,
the inhibition constant of BDZ-f or GYKI 52466 obtained
at 300 μM glutamate concentration was similar to its respective
value at 40 μM (compare values in column 4 with those in column
3), but different from the value obtained at 2 mM glutamate concentration
(compare values in column 4 with those in column 6). These results
could be explained by the fact that at glutamate concentrations of
40 μM, 300 μM, and 2 mM, the fraction of the open channel
population from the ensemble current was approximately 6%, 42%, and
93%, respectively [note that the K1 value
for GluA1flip is 530 μM, and the EC50 value ranges from 500 to 700 μM−]. Furthermore, the channel-opening probability of GluA1flip is ∼0.93. Consequently, the
magnitudes of inhibition constants at 300 μm glutamate concentration
would be expected to be more similar to those at lower glutamate concentration.

Mechanism of Inhibition of GluA1flip by GYKI 52466
and BDZ-f
On the basis of the results we
described above, we conclude that both compounds inhibited the GluA1flip channel noncompetitively. This conclusion is supported
by the fact that GYKI 52466 and BDZ-f inhibited the
whole-cell current response from both the closed-channel and the open-channel
states of GluA1flip, and the two compounds inhibited both kcl and kop. The kcl is correlated to the open-channel state,
whereas the kop is correlated to the closed-channel
state.

For both GYKI 52466 or BDZ-f, we observed that the inhibition constants determined
using the amplitude ratio from both the laser and flow measurements
were in good agreement (KI values of columns
3–5 in Table ); yet those constants
were ∼2–3-fold smaller than the inhibition constants
determined from the measurement of the channel-opening rate (KI* values of columns 1 and 2 in Table ). To explain this difference, we proposed a two-step
mechanism of inhibition (Figure ). By this mechanism, the initial binding of GYKI
52466 or BDZ-f to GluA1flip forms a loosely
bound intermediate (e.g., 2*) in both the closed-channel and
open-channel
states of the receptor. A receptor:inhibitor intermediate is partially
conducting, which yields partial inhibition of channel activity. In
the second step, the receptor:inhibitor intermediate rapidly isomerizes
into a more tightly bound complex (2), and such a complex is no
longer capable of conducting ions.

A minimal mechanism of the inhibition
of GluA1 by 2,3-benzodiazepine
compounds. L represents ligand (glutamate) and the
number of ligands that bind to and open the channel is assumed to
be two. R represents the active, unliganded form
of the receptor; I represents an inhibitor. For simplicity
and without contrary evidence, it is assumed that glutamate binds
with equal affinity or K1, the intrinsic
equilibrium dissociation constant, at all binding steps. An asterisk
indicates those species in the intermediate state, i.e., loose receptor:inhibitor
complexes, whereas those species bound with inhibitor but without
asterisk represent those in the final state of the receptor complexes
through a rapid isomerization reaction. All species related to R, RL, and RL2, including those bound with inhibitors, are in the closed-channel
state, whereas those related to 2 refer to the open-channel state.

This two-step mechanism of inhibition (Figure ) can account for the results we obtained. On the basis of
the KI value calculated from the amplitude,
a larger inhibition constant obtained from the rate (Figure A) reflects that the inhibitory effect we observed
from the rate only correlates to a partial inhibition. Additional
step, therefore, must be involved in producing the full inhibition.
The ensuing step following the initial formation of the receptor:inhibitor
intermediate must be also faster. In other words, the observable step
in the rate measurement can only be the slow step, which correlates
to the formation of the receptor:inhibitor intermediate in the first
step. The first step only generates partial inhibition; the second
step or the isomerization reaction that turns the initial, partially
conducting complex into a totally inhibitory complex produces additional
inhibition. On the other hand, unlike the rate of channel opening,
the amplitude is an equilibrium measure, which reflects the overall
inhibition.

If the rate of the second step were slow or comparable
to that
of the first step, we would expect complete or nearly complete inhibition
or the inhibition constants calculated from the rate data would agree
fully or nearly fully with those from the amplitude. The fact that
(1/kobs) increased linearly with increasing
inhibitor concentration as predicted by eqs 4 and 5 (Figure B,C) in both the closed-channel and open-channel
states of the receptor further supports the assumption that the rate
of the isomerization should be faster than the initial step. As such,
the KI value (Table ) obtained from the rate measurement at a high glutamate concentration
should be pertinent to the inhibition of the closed-channel by either
GYKI 52466 or BDZ-f through the initial inhibitor:receptor
intermediate, whereas the KI* value (Table ) should be assigned to the inhibition of the open-channel state
by the corresponding initial inhibitor:receptor intermediate.

Although the effect of either GYKI 52466 or BDZ-f on kop and kcl is partial, that GYKI 52466 or BDZ-f inhibits both kop and kcl is consistent
with a noncompetitive mechanism but inconsistent with either a competitive
or an uncompetitive mechanism of inhibition. By a competitive mechanism,
an inhibitor would compete with glutamate for the same binding site.
Consequently, only the effect on kop,
but not on kcl, would be expected. In
other words, there would be no [K̅I*/(K̅I* + I)] term associated with kcl in eq 3, and thus 1/kobs, as in eq 4,
would be independent of inhibitor concentration.,, By an uncompetitive mechanism or an open-channel
blockade mode of action, GYKI 52466 or BDZ-f would
inhibit the open-channel state only. In this case, only the effect
on kcl, but not on kop, would be expected. Consequently the [KI*/(KI* + I)] term associated with kop in eq 3 would not exist. Furthermore, the (kobs – kcl′) term, as in eq 5, would be invariant
or independent of inhibitor concentration.

BDZ-f and
GYKI 52466 Bind to the Same Site
on GluA1flip
We have previously hypothesized that
the 2,3-benzodiazepine compounds with the azomethine group on the
diazepine ring, which contains the 4-methyl group (see Figure ), bind to the same site, which we termed it as
the “M” site., These compounds must
also contain the 7,8-methlenedioxy ring feature (Figure ). However, that hypothesis is based on our work with the
GluA2Qflip channel., Here we asked whether
GYKI 52466 and BDZ-f competed to the binding at the
same site on GluA1flip, because both compounds fulfill
the same structural characteristic for the “M” site,
at least for the GluA2Qflip receptor. To address this question,
we did a double-inhibitor experiment (see detail in the , and ) in which the concentration of GYKI 52466 was kept
constant while the concentration of BDZ-f was varied
(Figure ). From this experiment, we determined
that the apparent KI′ value for the double inhibition (or
the upper solid line in Figure ) was ∼5
μM (using eq 7 in ). This value was comparable with the KI of 5 μM for BDZ-f alone (the lower solid
line in Figure ). This finding was consistent
with the conclusion that both inhibitors competed the binding to the
same noncompetitive site on GluA1flip. If GYKI 52466 and
BDZ-f had bound to two different noncompetitive sites
on GluA1flip, an additive effect of inhibition or a stronger
inhibition than just a single inhibitor would have been observed.
This is shown, in Figure , by the dashed line,
which simulates the two-site model (using eq 8 in the ).

The double-inhibitor
experiment for GYKI 52466 and BDZ-f on GluA1flip is shown using the ratio of current
amplitude (upper solid line), as compared with the ratio of the amplitude
in the presence of a single inhibitor (lower solid line). The concentration
of GYKI 52466 was fixed at 50 μM, while the concentration of
BDZ-f varied from 2 to 10 μM. The upper solid
line represents the best fit to a one-site, double-inhibitor model,
as compared with the lower solid line (i.e., the best fit to the data
with BDZ-f alone). The dashed line is the simulated
data for a two-site, double-inhibitor model.

Discussion
Using a laser-pulse photolysis and a rapid
solution flow technique,
we have characterized the mechanism of action and the site of binding
for GYKI 52466 and BDZ-f by measuring their inhibitory
effects on the channel-opening rate process and the whole-cell current
amplitude of the GluA1flip receptors. Our findings, as
summarized in Table , establish that (i) both
compounds are noncompetitive inhibitors on GluA1flip and
have the same mode of action on GluA1flip that involves
a two-step, minimal mechanism of inhibition. Both compounds bind to
the same site on GluA1flip. (ii) Both compounds prefer
to inhibit the closed-channel over the open-channel state, albeit
the preference in the case of BDZ-f is much smaller
than GYKI 52466 (i.e., values in column 5 vs column 6). (iii) On the
basis of the magnitude of the overall inhibition constant, BDZ-f is a much stronger inhibitor of GluA1flip than
GYKI 52466. Specifically, BDZ-f is ∼10-fold
stronger in inhibiting the closed-channel state (i.e., KI is 5 μM for BDZ-f and 52 μM
for GYKI 52466, respectively; see Table ,
column 4). However, BDZ-f is ∼15-fold stronger
in inhibiting the open-channel state than GYKI 52466 (i.e., K̅I is 9 μM for BDZ-f and 140 μM for GYKI 52466, respectively; see Table , column 6).

The finding that BDZ-f is a stronger inhibitor
on GluA1flip than GYKI 52466 can be best accounted for
on the basis of the structure–activity relationship. (i) Because
BDZ-f and GYKI 52466 bind to the same noncompetitive
site on GluA1flip, our results suggest that the addition
of an N-3 methyl-carbamoyl group on the diazepine ring of GYKI 52466
improves potency without changing the site of binding of the new compound,
i.e., BDZ-f. This suggests that occupying the N-3
side pocket of the site is favorable. (ii) Furthermore, occupying the N-3 side pocket of this site is
already evident even at the first step or the step of the formation
of the initial, partially inhibitory receptor:inhibitor intermediate
(Figure ). Specifically, the GluA1flip:BDZ-f intermediate formed in the both the closed-channel
and the open-channel state is about 10-fold more inhibitory than the
GluA1flip:GYKI 52466 complex (i.e., KI* = 15 μM
for BDZ-f and 145 μM for GYKI 52466 for the
closed-channel state; for the open-channel state, KI* = 30 μM
for BDZ-f and 281 μM for GYKI 52466; see Table ).

The inhibitory properties of GYKI 52466
and BDZ-f we have observed in this study with the
GluA1flip receptor
are similar to those we reported for the same compounds but with the
GluA2Qflip receptor. Therefore, we believe that the site
to which both GYKI 52466 and BDZ-f bind is still
the “M” site. We have previously identified three different
types of noncompetitive sites on GluA2Qflip. The 2,3-benzodiazepine
compounds with the azomethine group on the diazepine ring, which contains
the 4-methyl group (see Figure ), bind to
the “M” site., Enlarging the 7,8-methylenedioxy
ring into the 7,8-ethylenedioxy one makes the resulting compound and
its derivatives bind to the “E” site. However, 2,3-benzodiazepine compounds with an ε-lactam
structure, which contains the 4-carbonyl group, bind to a different
site, which we termed as the “O” site., Apparently, more studies using a series of 2,3-BDZs with GluA1flip are needed to better define the sites we have previously
reported on GluA2Qflip. It should be further pointed that
currently, there is no structural information about a noncompetitive
inhibitor bound to an AMPA receptor, nor the exact location of any
of these noncompetitive sites, including the “M” site.

When we compare the inhibition constants of the same compounds
with different receptors, we can further infer some difference in
the “M” site between GluA1 and GluA2. This can be illustrated
in Figure , where the inhibition constants
of GYKI 52466 and BDZ-f on GluA1flip are
compared with those on GluA2Qflip. For GYKI 52466, there
is clear difference between different receptor subunits: its inhibition
constant on GluA2Qflip is &gt;3-fold and &gt;4-fold smaller
for
the closed-channel and the open-channel states, respectively, than
that on GluA1flip. However, the inhibition constants of
BDZ-f for the closed-channel and the open-channel
states of GluA1flip are similar to the corresponding values
on GluA2Qflip. These results suggest that the “M”
sites of the GluA1 and GluA2 receptors are different, although the
difference is not that large. Furthermore, the side pocket that accommodates
an acylating group at the N-3 position for the “M” site
is especially important in defining the difference in the binding
environment between the GluA1 and GluA2. Overall, the “M”
site or the binding environment on GluA2 accommodates the same compounds
better than that on GluA1 or the same inhibitors show stronger potency
on GluA2 than on GluA1. However, acylating the N-3 position to occupy
the N-3 side pocket of the “M” site on GluA1 can significantly
narrow the difference, especially on the closed-channel state of GluA1
(Figure ). This can be seen by the fact that
the second step or the isomerization step generates ∼2–3-fold
more inhibition as compared to the first step for both GYKI 52466
and BDZ-f on GluA1, whereas the same compounds produced
∼4-fold additional inhibition in the isomerization step on
GluA2Qflip (Figure ). It should
be noted that in drawing this inference in the difference of the properties
of the “M” site between GluA1 and GluA2, we have assumed
that the structures of the same compounds, i.e., GYKI 52466 and BDZ-f, remain the same regardless of whether they bind to different
receptors. As such, the difference in their inhibition constants reflects
the difference in the binding environment between GluA1 and GluA2.

A comparison
of the inhibition constant (KI, in μM)
between GluA1flip and GluA2Qflip for BDZ-f (upper panel) and GYKI 52466
(lower panel). The data for GluA2Qflip with the same compounds,
i.e., GYKI 52466 and BDZ-f, were published earlier. A dashed column represents the closed-channel
state, whereas a hollow column represents the open-channel state.

In summary, we have shown that
the addition of an N-3 methyl-carbamoyl
group to the diazepine ring with the azomethine feature (i.e., GYKI
52466) is what makes BDZ-f a better inhibitor of
the GluA1flip receptor subunit than the original template
GYKI 52466. In other words, adding an N-3 methyl-carbamoyl group improves
its potency but does not change the site of binding. At a mechanistic
level, adding an N-3 methyl-carbamoyl group significantly strengthens
potency of the resulting compound because occupancy of the N-3 side
pocket of the “M” site is structurally favorable to
inhibit the GluA1. Therefore, for developing more potent 2,3-BDZs
that bind to the “M” site on GluA1, it is desirable
to acylate the N-3 position of the 2,3-benzodiazpine ring.

Supporting Information Available
Original data
for the model
and the equations used for data analysis, the effect of GYKI 52466
on kop and kcl, as well as on the current amplitude. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5002079_si_001.pdf

The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
AMPAα-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic
acid

BDZ2,3-benzodiazepine
compounds

BDZ-fGYKI 53784, LY 303070, (−)-3-N-methylcarbamyl-1-(4-aminophenyl)-4-methyl-7,8-methylendioxy-5H-2,3-benzodiazepine

GYKI 524661-(4-aminophenyl)-4-methyl-7,8-methylenedioxy-5H-2,3-benzodiazepine

HEK-293 cellshuman embryonic kidney 293 cells

LTPlong-term potentiation

μsmicrosecond

msmillisecond

