Thioredoxin reductase (TR) is
a redox active, homodimeric flavoenzyme that belongs to the pyridine
nucleotide disulfide oxidoreductase family, whose members also include
glutathione reductase (GR), mercuric ion reductase, and lipoamide
dehydrogenase. TRs exist in both a low-Mr (∼35 kDa subunits) form found in both
prokaryotes and lower eukaryotes and a high-Mr (∼55 kDa subunits) form found in higher eukaryotes., These two classes employ different catalytic strategies to perform
the same overall reaction because of large differences in structure.
While both classes of TRs utilize NADPH as the ultimate source of
electrons in the reduction of the small protein thioredoxin (Trx),
the two classes of enzymes differ in the final transfer mechanism
of these electrons to Trx. The low-Mr TRs
have two redox centers (a noncovalently associated FAD and an N-terminal
dithiol/disulfide pair) and must undergo a large conformational change
to reduce their target substrate., In contrast,
high-Mr TRs contain FAD, a N-terminal
dithiol/disulfide pair, and a third, C-terminal redox center that
delivers electrons to Trx.

High-Mr TRs can be further classified
as type I or type II based on their respective C-terminal redox motifs.
Type I TRs utilize a vicinal disulfide bond with an X-Cys1-Cys2-X sequence (we designate the N-terminal Cys residue
of the dyad as residue “1” and the C-terminal Cys residue
of the dyad as residue “2”).− Vicinal disulfides
are an uncommon motif in proteins, with the resulting eight-membered
ring structure found relatively few times in protein structures. This type of TR can be even further differentiated
into two subtypes depending on the usage of the rare amino acid selenocysteine
(Sec or U) in the penultimate position in place of Cys2., We denote type Ia as those TRs that use Sec and type
Ib as those that use Cys. A second, distinct type of high-Mr TRs is used by apicomplexan protists such
as Plasmodium falciparum, Toxoplasma gondii, and Cryptosporidium parvum, which we denote as
type II. The C-terminal redox center
of these type II TRs has an amino acid composition much different
compared to that of type I TRs. For example, the type II TR from P. falciparum has a C-terminal redox center
with a Gly-Cys1-Gly-Gly-Gly-Lys-Cys2-Gly sequence.−

Humans as well as other higher eukaryotes have three genes
for
type Ia thioredoxin reductase: a cytosolic enzyme (TrxR1 or TR1),
a mitochondrial form (TrxR2 or TR3), and a testis specific thioredoxin/glutathione
reductase (TGR).− TGR is a multifunctional enzyme that can reduce glutathione
disulfide and the disulfide bond of Trx., In this report, the cytosolic TR will be termed TR1 and the mitochondrial
enzyme TR3. Each of these three genes contains an in-frame UGA codon
that encodes the Sec residue. While mutation of Sec to Cys in each
of these three enzymes results in a large decrease in catalytic activity,, Sec is not catalytically essential to the reduction of Trx because
of the presence of type Ib and type II Cys orthologs that catalyze
identical reactions with comparable efficiencies., The chemical and biological function of Sec in TR and other Sec-containing
enzymes is the subject of ongoing debate in the field.,,

Of the three type Ia TRs
of higher eukaryotes, TR1 has been studied
for the longest period of time and the most well characterized. TR1
has been found to reduce a broad range of macromolecular and small
molecule substrates (discussed in ref ()). The broad substrate specificity of TR1 has
been attributed to the presence of the rare Sec residue. Deletion of Sec or mutation of Sec to Cys in
TR1 results in a mutant enzyme whose catalytic activity toward many
small molecule substrates such as 5,5′-dithiobis(2-nitrobenzoic
acid) (DTNB), lipoic acid, selenite, and selenocystine is greatly
impaired.

In contrast to the work
on TR1, studies in our laboratory indicate
that the mouse mitochondrial TR (mTR3) behaves quite differently with
respect to the dependence on Sec for reduction of small molecule substrates., While the human mitochondrial TR has not been as extensively characterized,
a study by Rackham and co-workers showed that it could reduce DTNB
and lipoamide at pH 8.0 without the use of Sec. Similarly, TGR from Schistosoma mansoni does not need Sec to reduce some small molecule substrates. We have also shown that Cys-containing type
Ib TRs do not require Sec to reduce certain small molecule substrates., The data summarized here show that Sec is needed to impart broad
substrate specificity to TR1 only.

In this study, we have summarized
all of the steady-state kinetic
data with various small molecule substrates for type Ia and type Ib
TRs to demonstrate that TR1 is the exception, not the rule, with respect
to the dependence on Sec for the reduction of small molecule substrates.
To bolster our case, we show here that the type II TR from P. falciparum (PfTR) is dissimilar from TR1 and exhibits
behavior identical to that of the mitochondrial TR and type Ib Cys-TRs
with respect to substrate utilization. We have constructed various
mutants in the C-terminal redox center of mouse TR3 and PfTR and show
that these enzymes can utilize a catalytic pathway that is independent
of the C-terminal redox center for the reduction of various small
molecule substrates. Previous structural studies of human TR1 have
raised the possibility that TR1 and TR3 may operate differently with
respect to apparent differences in their flexible C-terminal tails
that contain the third redox active center,, which may offer a potential explanation for the kinetic differences
observed between TR1 and TR3 and multiple Cys-TR orthologs. The data
presented here support this structural observation.

Materials and
Methods
Materials
NADPH and racemic (R,S)-lipoic acid were from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO).
Fmoc-l-Cys(Trt) and Fmoc-d-Cys(Trt) amino acids
were from RS Synthesis (Louisville, KY) and NovaBiochem (San Diego,
CA), respectively. Wang resin was also from NovaBiochem. Glutathione
Fast Flow resin and bovine thrombin were from GE Healthcare (Waukesha,
WI). Plasmids pTYB1, pTYB3, T4 DNA ligase, and ER2566 Escherichia
coli cells were from New England Biolabs (Ipswich, MA). DNA
purification kits were from Qiagen. Production and purification of E. coli Trx have been previously described. All other reagents were purchased from either
Fisher Scientific (Fair Lawn, NJ) or Sigma-Aldrich and were of reagent
grade or better.

Enzyme Expression and Purification
Expression of mouse
mitochondrial TR (mTR3), Drosophila melanogaster TR
(DmTR), and Caenorhabditis elegans mitochondrial
TR (CeTR) and their truncated Δ8 mutants have been previously
described.,,− Production of P. falciparum TR (PfTR) and PfTRΔ7
is described below.

mTR-GSSG Expression and Purification
The full-length
mTR3 Cys mutant construct (mTR-GCCG) DNA was
used as a template to create a mutant in which both C-terminal redox
active residues were mutated to Ser (enzyme 8 in Table ). The sequences of the DNA primers used in polymerase
chain reactions (PCRs) were 5′-AACAGACCATGGGAGGGCAGCAGAGCTTT-3′
(upstream primer) and 5′-ACAGCCGCTCTTCAGCAGCCGCTACTACCAGTCACAGTAGGCTCCAGGCC-3′
(downstream primer). Amplified DNA and plasmid pTYB3 were each digested
with restriction enzymes NcoI and SapI at 37 °C for 2 h and then
purified with a Qiaprep Spin Miniprep Kit. The two DNA fragments were
ligated with E. coli T4 DNA ligase, yielding a plasmid
encoding mTR-GSSG as an intein–chitin binding domain fusion
protein. Expression and purification of the mutant TR were identical
to those of the wild-type (WT) enzyme and similar mutants as described
previously.

Comparison
of TR1 and TR3 Wild-Type
and Mutant Enzyme Activities toward Various Substrates
 	Activity [mol of NADPH min–1 (mol
of TR)−1]	
Enzyme	 	Trx (5 μM)	DTNB (5 mM)	Lipoic acid (1 mM)	Selenite (0.1 mM)	Se-cystine (50 μM)	
type Ia TR1	 	 	 	 	 	 	
cl TR1-GCUG	1	1667	1333	297	471	102	
cl TR1-GCCG	2	18	63	0.8	43	2.1	
cl TR1-GCSG	3	NA	17	0.9	3.5	1.1	
type Ia TR3	 	 	 	 	 	 	
mTR3-GCUG	4	162 ± 6	1020 ± 30	11.5 ± 1.0	110 ± 3.0	235 ± 35	
mTR3-GCCG	5	0.5 ± 0.1	605 ± 20	5.2 ± 1.4	41 ± 2	44 ± 4	
mTR3-GCSG	6	NA	400 ± 15	1.8 ± 0.3	14.6 ± 0.2	1.0 ± 0.4	
mTR3-GSCG	7	NA	700 ± 150	7.4 ± 0.3	22 ± 1	24 ± 2	
mTR3-GSSG	8	NA	990 ± 290	4.5 ± 0.4	15.0 ± 5.5	0.5 ± 0.1	
type Ib TRs	 	 	 	 	 	 	
DmTR-SCCS	9	13.1 ± 1.4	146 ± 6	2.4 ± 0.9	17.3 ± 1.4	45.5 ± 13.3	
CeTR-GCCG	10	21 ± 3	130 ± 26	1.9 ± 0.3	23.4 ± 1.0	50 ± 2	
type II TR	 	 	 	 	 	 	
PfTR-GCGGGKCG	11	37 ± 7	395 ± 5	24 ± 1	53 ± 4	170 ± 23	
PfTR-GSGGGKCG	12	NA	384 ± 8	27 ± 1	27 ± 4	11 ± 2	
PfTR-GCGGGKSG	13	NA	383 ± 19	32 ± 1	32 ± 3	41 ± 5	
PfTR-GSGGGKSG	14	NA	437 ± 1	35 ± 1	21 ± 3	0.6 ± 0.4	
The enzymes in
this study are abbreviated
with the name TR representing the body of the enzyme followed by the
amino acid sequence of the C-terminal redox center. A prefix is added
to denote the TRs from different species. The abbreviations are as
follows: clTR1-GCUG, calf liver cytosolic TR; mTR3, mouse mitochondrial
TR; DmTR, D. melanogaster TR; CeTR, C. elegans mitochondrial TR; PfTR, P. falciparum TR.

TR1 studies utilized human Trx,
while we utilized E. coli Trx for
the TR3-like enzymes.

TR1
values are for 45 μM selenocystine.

Values taken from ref ().

No
activity.

At 90 μM
Trx. We could not
establish an activity for Trx concentrations of &lt;90 μM.

PfTR Expression and Purification
The expression plasmid
encoding the full-length PfTR-CGGGKCG enzyme was kindly provided by
F. Angellucci of the University of Rome (Rome, Italy). The PfTR gene
was contained in a pGEX-4T-1 vector that encodes a GST fusion protein.
The full-length PfTR WT enzyme, as a GST fusion construct, was expressed
in 6 L of E. coli ER2566 cells containing 0.2 mg/mL
ampicillin at 37 °C until the OD600 reached 0.6. The
cells were cooled to 20 °C, and the expression was induced by
the addition of IPTG to a final concentration of 0.5 mM. After overnight
incubation at 20 °C, the cells were harvested by centrifugation
(Beckman J2-21 centrifuge, JA-14 rotor, 10000 rpm). The cells were
homogenized in buffer A [50 mM Tris, 200 mM NaCl, and 2 mM βME
(pH 7.4)] with the inclusion of 1 mg/mL chicken egg lysozyme to help
degrade bacterial cell walls. The cells were further lysed by probe
sonication, and the solution was cleared by centrifugation at 12000
rpm for 1 h at 4 °C.

Cleared lysate was gravity-loaded
onto glutathione Sepharose 4 fast flow resin pre-equilibrated with
buffer A. The bound PfTR was washed extensively with buffer A, and
the resin slurry was transferred to two 50 mL conical vials. Bovine
thrombin (20 units) supplemented with 5 mM CaCl2 was added
to the resin/protein slurry overnight at 4 °C while it was being
mixed to induce cleavage of the GST fusion protein to produce free
PfTR.

PfTRΔ7 Purification
The full-length PfTR construct
in pGEX-4T-1 was utilized as a template to generate a truncated mutant
that lacks the final seven C-terminal amino acids (PfTRΔ7).
This was accomplished by amplifying the DNA via PCR with the upstream
primer 5′-AACAGACATATGGGATCCTGCAAA-3′
and the downstream primer 5′-ACAGCCGCTCTTCAGCAACCACCTTT-3′,
which introduced NdeI and SapI restriction sites, respectively. The
amplified PfTRΔ7 DNA and plasmid pTYB1 were digested with NdeI
and SapI at 37 °C for 2 h, purified with a Qiaprep Spin Miniprep
Kit, and subsequently ligated with E. coli T4 DNA
ligase. The pTYB1 plasmid encodes an intein–chitin binding
domain fusion protein and allows for the liberation of TR from the
intein via cleavage by a small molecule thiol. Verification of the PfTRΔ7 mutant plasmid was performed
at the University of Vermont DNA sequencing facility. Truncated PfTRΔ7
and the full-length enzyme were expressed identically. Purification
of the PfTRΔ7–intein–CBD fusion protein was the
same as described for mammalian TR constructs., Briefly, PfTRΔ7 cleaved from the chitin resin was concentrated
and exchanged into buffer B [50 mM potassium phosphate and 500 mM
NaCl (pH 8.0)]. For the final purification step, the truncated enzyme
was loaded onto a S200-Sephacryl gel filtration column pre-equilibrated
with buffer B. The purity of PfTRΔ7 was judged by SDS–PAGE
analysis.

Peptide Synthesis
Trimer peptides
with d-Cys-l-Cys-Ser and l-Cys-d-Cys-Ser sequences were
synthesized on Wang resin using standard Fmoc chemistry. Peptides
were cleaved from the resin using a mixture of 95% trifluoroacetic
acid, 2.5% water, and 2.5% ethanedithiol. After precipitation in cold
diethyl ether, the dried peptides were dissolved in water with 5–10%
acetonitrile, lyophilized, and analyzed by both HPLC and MALDI-TOF
mass spectrometry.

Production of Semisynthetic Enzymes
For the production
and purification of semisynthetic DmTR enzymes, we followed our previously
published protocol., Purity was judged by SDS–PAGE
analysis, and concentrations of homodimeric enzymes were determined
spectrophotometrically, using a 22.6 mM–1 cm–1 extinction coefficient for FAD.

Kinetic Assays
All TR enzymes were assayed with a variety
of different substrates. Reductions of Trx, DTNB, selenocystine, lipoic
acid, and selenite have been previously described., Briefly,
assays contained potassium phosphate buffer (50 mM for Trx reductase
assays, 500 mM for selenocystine reductase assays, and 100 mM for
all other substrates), 1 mM EDTA, 150 μM NADPH, and varying
concentrations of each substrate. Enzyme concentrations utilized in
each assay can be found in Tables S1 and S2 of the . The change in absorbance at 412 nm
was used for DTNB to monitor production of the thionitrobenzoate anion,
and the change in absorbance at 340 nm was followed to monitor the
consumption of NADPH for all other assays. For steady-state assays
to measure the DTNB reductase activity of various TRs, the concentration
of DTNB was varied from 0.1 to 4 mM while the concentration of NADPH
was held constant at 150 μM. Plots of initial velocity versus
substrate concentration were constructed, and the curves were fit
to the Michaelis–Menten equation to determine kcat and Km.

Sequence
Alignment of TR1 and TR3-like Enzymes
The
primary amino acid sequences for TR1 enzymes (Homo sapiens and Rattus norvegicus) and TR3-like enzymes (H. sapiens, Mus musculus, D. melanogaster, C. elegans, and P. falciparum) discussed in this study were aligned using ClustalW2. Pairwise alignment was conducted using the default
program settings. The alignment was used to examine the conservation
of guiding bar residues among the various TRs.

Results and Discussion
Summary
of Substrate Utilization by Different TR Types
A seminal
study by Zhong and Holmgren of calf liver TR1 (a type Ia
TR) showed that Sec was required to reduce both macromolecular and
small molecule substrates. The results
of this earlier study are listed in Table  along with the same data as determined in this study for the type
Ia mouse mitochondrial enzyme, type Ib enzymes from D. melanogaster and C. elegans, and the type II TR from P. falciparum.

The Data Indicate Three Mechanistic Pathways
Are Possible
We believe our collective data indicate that
there are three mechanistic
pathways for substrate utilization in high-Mr TRs. These are shown in Figure  and
are (i) path A, which requires the full participation of both N- and
C-terminal redox centers for the reduction of all types of substrates
listed in Table , (ii) path B, where substrates
such as DTNB, lipoic acid, and selenite can be reduced solely by the
N-terminal redox center, and (iii) path C, which requires the N-terminal
redox center and only a partially functional C-terminal redox center.
Below we discuss our evidence for dividing the TRs listed in Table  into two groups based upon the substrate utilization
pathways shown in Figure . The first group
is comprised solely of TR1, while the second group is comprised of
TR3 and “TR3-like” enzymes, DmTR, CeTR, and PfTR. The
data indicate that TR1 can mostly use only path A, whereas TR3-like
enzymes can use all three pathways. Below we discuss each type of
substrate separately and their dependence (or lack of) on the use
of Sec. Some of the concepts we present here have been discussed previously
by us for TR3, for example, the electrophilicity of the substrate., However, the key concept that we are now proposing (supported by
our data) is that there are mechanistic differences between TR1 and
TR3-like enzymes, and this idea is new to the field.

Three different proposed
substrate utilization pathways in high-Mr TRs. In path A (top row), TR1 is physically
constrained to use this pathway for the reduction of Trx and other
small molecule substrates in this study. For the sake of brevity,
we show only part of the catalytic mechanism. For a complete description
of all of the steps in the catalytic mechanism of high-Mr TRs, please see ref (). The active site of type Ia TRs consists of a
vicinal Cys-Sec dyad, a N-terminal disulfide/dithiol pair consisting
of CysIC (interchange Cys) and CysCT (change-transfer
Cys), and a His residue that functions as an acid–base catalyst.
PfTR has a similar arrangement of residues with the exception of a
C-terminal redox center with a CGGGKC sequence that forms a 20-membered
disulfide ring upon oxidation. There are three basic chemical steps
in path A: (i) nucleophilic attack of the selenolate on the substrate
disulfide bond (Trx or another small molecule), (ii) resolution of
the mixed selenosulfide bond between the enzyme and substrate to form
the oxidized, eight-membered ring of the C-terminal tail, and (iii)
attack of the thiolate of CysIC on the Se atom of the dyad.
Type Ib TRs should have an identical mechanism but use Cys in place
of Sec (from left to right, respectively). Type II TRs should have
a similar mechanism, with the difference being the use of a 20-membered
C-terminal disulfide ring. In path B (middle row), TR3-like enzymes
can use the N-terminal redox center to reduce small molecules (SM)
like DTNB, lipoic acid, and selenite. In this mechanism, CysIC would initially attack the small molecule substrate to form a covalently
bound intermediate. This intermediate would be resolved by attack
of the thiolate of CysCT on the sulfide of CysIC, resulting in an oxidized (disulfide) N-terminal redox center. Path
C (bottom row) is the proposed mechanism for the reduction of selenocystine
by mutant TR3-like enzymes. Here X2 = S or Se. The data
show that variants of TR3-like enzymes need to contain only a single
sulfhydryl group to reduce selenocystine because the S–Sesub bond that is formed after the initial attack step is capable
of being reduced by the N-terminal redox center as shown. The data
show that path A is probably the favored pathway for reduction of
selenocystine by the WT enzymes.

Dependence of the Reduction of Macromolecular Trx on the Use
of Sec
With respect to Sec-containing mammalian TRs (enzymes 1 and 4), the data in Table  clearly demonstrate the necessity of Sec for the effective
reduction of Trx by both TR1 and TR3 because mutation of Sec to Cys
results in a very large decrease in activity (cf. 2 with 1 and 5 with 4 in Table ). We do note the ∼10-fold greater Trx reductase
activity of TR1 versus that of TR3 at a substrate concentration of
5 μM. This may be attributed to the use of human Trx in the
TR1 assay, while E .coli Trx was used to assay the activity with TR3. Enzymes 9–11 are Cys orthologs of the mammalian enzyme and
are not dependent upon the use of Sec to reduce their respective cognate
Trx substrates. The activities reported
here are with E. coli Trx, and these enzymes have
much lower activity toward the noncognate, E. coli Trx substrate. The C-terminal redox center of mammalian TR contains
a Cys-Sec redox dyad, and both residues are needed for catalysis of
Trx. The adjacent Cys residue most likely is involved in resolving
the mixed selenosulfide bond formed between TR and Trx, resulting
in the formation of an eight-membered ring as shown path A in Figure . Mutation of the resolving Cys residue to Ser eliminates
Trx reductase activity as can be seen by comparing the activities
of enzymes 7 and 4 in Table . The Sec residue most likely functions as the residue involved
in the initial nucleophilic attack on the disulfide bond of Trx. Mutation of this Sec residue to Ser also results
in a total loss of Trx reductase activity (compare 3 to 2 and 6 to 4 in Table ). Possible reasons for the dependence on the use of Sec for
the reduction of Trx will be discussed below. The requirement for
a fully intact C-terminal redox center for the reduction of macromolecular
Trx in all of the different types of TRs is demonstrated by a complete
loss of activity when the C-terminal redox center is eliminated by
truncation of the enzyme as demonstrated by the data in Table . While TR1 and TR3 are similar with respect to
their requirement for the use of Sec in the reduction of their primary
substrate Trx, mechanistic differences become readily apparent upon
examination of the reduction of various types of small molecules as
explained below.

Comparison of the Activities of Truncated
TRs with Various Substrates
 	Activity [mol of NADPH min–1 (mol
of TR)−1]	
Enzyme	 	Trx (5 μM)	DTNB (5 mM)	Lipoic acid (1 mM)	Selenite (0.1 mM)	Se-cystine (50 μM)	
type Ia TR1	 	 	 	 	 	 	
cl TR1Δ2	15	NA	4.1	0.3	1.2	1.6	
type Ia TR3	 	 	 	 	 	 	
mTR3Δ2	16	NA	815 ± 42	6.5 ± 0.4	23 ± 2	8.2 ± 1.4	
mTR3Δ8	17	NA	2430 ± 56	20.0 ± 0.2	18 ± 1	0.8 ± 0.4	
type Ib TRs	 	 	 	 	 	 	
DmTRΔ8	18	NA	520 ± 70	4.7 ± 0.7	12.4 ± 1.9	3.3 ± 2.2	
CeTRΔ8	19	NA	130 ± 50	4.2 ± 0.1	16 ± 1	2.2 ± 0.8	
type II TR	 	 	 	 	 	 	
PfTRΔ7	20	NA	280 ± 7	32 ± 1	28 ± 2	0.6 ± 0.2	
The enzymes in
this study are abbreviated
with the name TR representing the body of the enzyme followed by the
amino acid sequence of the C-terminal redox center. A prefix is added
to denote the TRs from different species. The abbreviations are as
follows: clTR1-GCUG, calf liver cytosolic TR; mTR3; mouse mitochondrial
TR; DmTR, D. melanogaster TR; CeTR, C. elegans mitochondrial TR; PfTR. P. falciparum TR.

TR1 studies utilized human Trx,
while we utilized E. coli Trx for
the TR3-like enzymes.

TR1
values are for 45 μM selenocystine.

Values taken from ref ().

No
activity.

Dependence of the Reduction
of the Disulfide Bond of DTNB in
TR1 but Not TR3-like Enzymes on the Use of Sec
TR1 retains
only 5% of its ability to reduce DTNB when Sec is mutated to Cys (cf.
enzymes 1 and 2 in Table ). This is in marked contrast to the data for TR3, which retains
58% of its DTNB reductase activity when Sec is mutated to Cys (cf.
enzymes 4 and 5). A nearly identical result
has been reported for human TR3 when the last two amino acids (Sec-Gly)
are removed from the enzyme (hTR3Δ2), but the pH of the reaction
must be increased to 8 to measure the enhanced activity. Mutants in which the Cys-Sec dyad in TR3 has
been altered to either a Cys-Ser dyad or a Ser-Cys dyad (enzymes 6 and 7) also retain high DTNB reductase activity.
To further examine the role of the C-terminal redox center in the
mitochondrial enzyme, we created a “dead tail” mutant
in which the Cys-Sec dyad was mutated to a Ser-Ser dyad (enzyme 8). This full-length enzyme contains a C-terminus that is
incapable of any redox chemistry, yet its DTNB reductase activity
approaches that of the WT enzyme (enzyme 4). These data
indicate that the mitochondrial enzyme reduces the disulfide bond
of DTNB using a mechanism that is independent of the C-terminal redox
center, unlike the case for TR1. This is further supported by the
data in Table , which show that a truncated
mutant of TR3 (enzyme 17) has even higher DTNB reductase
activity than the WT enzyme, while a truncated TR1 enzyme has &lt;1%
of the WT activity remaining (cf. enzyme 15 with enzyme 1).

We then constructed the analogous mutants with PfTR,
a type II TR, to see whether the mutants would yield kinetic behavior
more similar to that of TR1 or TR3 using DTNB as a substrate with
respect to usage of the C-terminal redox center. The data in Table  indicate that PfTR mutant enzymes 12–14 utilize DTNB in a fashion analogous to that of TR3 mutant enzymes 6–8. This result is in total agreement with results
reported by Gilberger and co-workers for analogous Cys → Ala
substitutions. These data indicate that
PfTR must use a mechanism that is independent of the C-terminal redox
center for the reduction of DTNB. This view is further supported by
the data in Table  that show that the truncated
PfTR (enzyme 20) has DTNB reductase activity similar
to that of the WT enzyme (enzyme 11). While we did not
construct the analogous serine mutants for the type Ib TRs, we previously
constructed truncated enzymes missing the C-terminal redox center,
and these enzymes (18 and 19) have DTNB
reductase activity higher than that of or the same as that of their
full-length WT counterparts.

While the data in Tables  and  compare the specific
DTNB reductase activity of
TR1 to those of the other TR3-like enzymes in this study, the data
in Table  provide a direct comparison of steady-state
catalytic parameters (kcat and Km). Just as the specific activity data show,
analysis of the steady-state parameters in Table  shows TR1 is almost completely dependent upon the use of
Sec for the reduction of DTNB, while all of the naturally occurring
Cys-TRs as well as mTR3 can reduce DTNB in a Sec-independent fashion.
Moreover, alteration of the C-terminal redox centers of these enzymes
by mutation or deletion either increases the DTNB reductase activity
(kcat) or has a minimal effect. The data
also show that the Km for DTNB in these
mutants increases moderately, in the range of 3–10-fold.

Comparison of the Steady-State Kinetic
Parameters of TR1 and TR3-like Enzymes Utilizing DTNB as a Substrate
Enzyme	 	kcat (min–1)	Km (mM)	kcat/Km (min–1 mM–1)	kcat/Km(WT)/kcat/Km(mutant)	
type Ia TR1	 	 	 	 	 	
rat TR1-GCUG	1	2040 ± 62	0.288 ± 0.023	7083	–	
rat TR1-GCCG	2	11.6 ± 0.1	0.044 ± 0.003	264	26.8	
rat TR1Δ2	15	&lt;2	NA	NA	NA	
type Ia TR3	 	 	 	 	 	
mTR3-GCUG	4	1250 ± 70	0.5 ± 0.1	2500	–	
mTR3-GCCG	5	794 ± 78	1.8 ± 0.4	441	5.67	
mTR3-GCSG	6	450 ± 70	2.2 ± 0.6	205	12.2	
mTR3-GSCG	7	920 ± 1	2.9 ± 0.5	317	7.89	
mTR3-GSSG	8	1940 ± 120	5.4 ± 0.4	359	6.96	
mTR3Δ2	16	1542 ± 302	5.0 ± 1.4	308	8.11	
type Ib TRs	 	 	 	 	 	
DmTR-SCCS	9	100 ± 3	0.2 ± 0.02	500	–	
DmTR-SCDCLS	9A	147 ± 7.6	0.4 ± 0.1	367.5	1.36	
DmTR-SCLCDS	9B	200 ± 20	1.4 ± 0.4	142.8	3.5	
CeTR-GCCG	10	134 ± 5	0.4 ± 0.1	335	–	
type II TR	 	 	 	 	 	
PfTR-GCGGGKCG	11	436 ± 17	0.44 ± 0.06	991	–	
PfTR-GSGGGKCG	12	477 ± 16	1.1 ± 0.1	433.6	2.28	
PfTR-GCGGGKSG	13	477 ± 40	1.5 ± 0.3	318	3.11	
PfTR-GSGGGKSG	14	478 ± 9	1.1 ± 0.1	434.5	2.28	
The enzymes in this study are abbreviated
with the name TR representing the body of the enzyme followed by the
amino acid sequence of the C-terminal redox center. A prefix is added
to denote the TRs from different species. The abbreviations are as
follows: clTR1-GCUG, calf liver cytosolic TR; mTR3, mouse mitochondrial
TR; DmTR, D. melanogaster TR; CeTR, C. elegans mitochondrial TR; PfTR, P. falciparum TR.

Taken from ref ().

Unable to determine.

Further support for our idea that TR1 is distinct
from TR3-like
enzymes comes from comparison of the kcat/Km(WT)/kcat/Km(mutant) ratios in Table . For type Ib and type II TRs, this ratio is small,
in the range of 1–3, while for TR1, this ratio is significantly
larger (26.8). For the mutants of type Ia TR, this ratio is between
(5–12) that of TR1 and that of the type Ib and type II TRs.

Use of Sec for the Reduction of Lipoic Acid and Selenite in
TR1 and TR3-like Enzymes
The reduction of selenite by TR3,
as well as type Ib and type II TRs in Table , is similar to that by TR1 but with some important differences that
we note below. TR1 has more overall activity than any of the other
enzymes in Table  toward selenite and therefore
loses a greater percentage of its overall activity when Sec is mutated
to Cys (enzymes 1 and 2) compared to the
same mutation in TR3 (enzymes 4 and 5).
In fact, enzyme 5 has activity toward selenite nearly
identical to that of enzyme 2.

A key difference
between TR1 and the TR3-like enzymes listed in Table  is the ability of the N-terminal redox center in the latter
group to reduce selenite in the absence of the C-terminal redox center,
as the data in Table  makes apparent. For
example, compare the activities of enzyme 16 or 17 with enzyme 15. This comparison demonstrates
that the N-terminal redox center of TR3 has an ∼15-fold stronger
ability to reduce selenite than the same redox center of TR1. The
same is true for the N-terminal redox centers of type Ib TRs; all
of the catalytic power to reduce selenite appears to come from the
N-terminal redox center in these enzymes [compare enzymes 9 and 10 with enzymes 18 and 19, respectively (Tables  and )], even though the overall activities of the full-length
enzymes are ∼20-fold lower than that of TR1. The type II TR
also has lower overall activity toward selenite as a substrate than
TR1 (compare enzymes 11 and 1 in Table ), but approximately half of this activity comes
from the N-terminal redox center in the type II TR (cf. enzyme 11 with enzymes 12–14). This contrasts
with TR1 in which the N-terminal redox center appears to contribute
∼1% of the selenite reductase activity [compare enzyme 15 with enzyme 1 (Tables  and )].

A somewhat different trend
is observed when lipoic acid is used
as the substrate. An analysis similar to the one presented above reveals
that the N-terminal redox center of TR3 has an ∼25-fold stronger
ability to reduce lipoic acid than the N-terminal redox center of
TR1 (cf. enzyme 1 with enzyme 4). While
type 1b TRs have significantly lower lipoic acid reductase activity
than TR1, a fair conclusion is that all this activity is due to the
N-terminal redox center. An identical conclusion can be reached for
the type II TR.

Some conclusions from the data in Tables – are as follows.
DmTR, CeTR, and
PfTR do not contain a Sec residue, but their patterns of substrate
utilization with DTNB, lipoic acid, and selenite are identical to
that of Sec-containing TR3 based upon both specific activity measurements
and steady-state kinetic analysis. The same data also show that these
enzymes are dissimilar to Sec-containing TR1. These data support the
hypothesis that the chemical mechanisms of DmTR, CeTR, PfTR, and TR3
are similar with respect to the utilization of small molecule substrates
but are distinct from that of TR1. This hypothesis was further tested
using selenocystine as a substrate with the data presented below.

The Reduction of Selenocystine Does Not Require a Sec Residue
in TR3-like Enzymes
The utilization of selenocystine, the
selenium analogue of cystine, as a substrate further illuminates the
mechanistic differences between TR1 and the other TR3-like enzymes
listed in Table . As previously reported,
DmTR, CeTR, and the Sec → Cys mutant of TR3 reduce selenocystine
with an efficiency that is approximately half that of TR1., Here we report that PfTR, a type II TR, reduces selenocystine with
a specific activity higher than that of TR1 (Table ), supporting our previous view that a Sec residue does not
confer broad substrate specificity to TR per se. The data in Table  also show that
TR3 and PfTR use a similar mechanistic strategy to reduce selenocystine,
and this mechanism is different from that of TR1. This point is explained
below.

For TR3 and PfTR, the reduction of selenocystine occurs
in the absence of a Sec residue but requires both N- and C-terminal
redox centers for catalysis to occur. This is evidenced by the fact
that the Sec → Cys mutant of TR3 retains ∼19% of the
activity of the WT enzyme (compare enzymes 4 and 5 in Table ) while PfTR, absent a
Sec residue, reduces selenocystine with a specific activity higher
than that of TR1. In addition, enzyme 7, with only a
partial C-terminal redox center and missing a Sec residue, retains
10% of the activity of the WT enzyme. Similarly, PfTR mutants with
a partial C-terminal redox center, enzymes 12 and 13, have 6 and 24% of the activity of the WT enzyme (enzyme 11), respectively. The data in Table  show that selenocystine is reduced very inefficiently when the C-terminal
redox center is absent in TR3, type Ib, and type II TRs.

The
data presented above are in marked contrast to the situation
for TR1, which requires both N- and C-terminal redox
centers and a Sec residue for the reduction of selenocystine. The
Sec → Cys mutant of TR1 retains only 2% of the specific activity
of the WT enzyme, and the mutants that contain only a partial C-terminal
redox center retain only 1% of the activity of the WT enzyme (compare
enzymes 3 and 15 with enzyme 1). These data highlight the mechanistic differences between TR1 and
TR3-like enzymes.

Mutants of DmTR Containing d-Cys
in the C-Terminal
Redox Center Differentiate Path A from Paths B and C
To further
illustrate our point about three distinct mechanistic pathways, we
constructed mutants of DmTR in which we replaced each of the C-terminal l-Cys residues with its enantiomer, d-Cys. This created
two new mutants that contain either d-Cys-l-Cys
dyads or l-Cys-d-Cys dyads in the C-terminal redox
center of DmTR. The rationale for this replacement is that a d-Cys for l-Cys substitution makes disulfide bond formation
between the adjacent Cys residues much less likely and also results
in a very rigid structure that cannot adopt cis amide
geometry in the peptide bond between the two Cys residues (ref () and unpublished observations
of E. L. Ruggles and R. J. Hondal). The overall
result is a C-terminal redox center that contains two sulfur atoms
just like the WT enzyme but is impaired and can be considered to be
only a partial redox center similar to the mutants listed in Table .

The results of insertion of d-Cys
into DmTR are listed in
Table . Replacement of either Cys residue
of the dyad results in a significant loss of Trx reductase activity
(compare enzymes 9A and 9B with enzyme 9 in Table ) and is most likely due
to an inability to utilize path A (Figure ). In contrast, enzymes 9A and 9B can reduce
DTNB and selenocystine because they are still able to utilize paths
B and C, respectively.

Comparison of the
Activities of d-Cys-Containing TRs with Various Substrates
 	Activity [mol
of NADPH min–1 (mol
of TR)−1]	
Enzyme	 	Trx (90 μM)	DTNB (1 mM)	Selenocystine (50 μM)	
DmTR-SCCS	9	165 ± 2	80 ± 10	46 ± 13	
DmTR-SCdClS	9A	3.4 ± 0.2	100 ± 6	41 ± 8	
DmTR-SClCdS	9B	0.4 ± 0.1	80 ± 6	7.7 ± 0.4	
A subscript d or l indicates that the Cys residue had d or l stereochemistry,
respectively.

The Use of
a “Guiding Bar” in TR1 Can Explain
the Different Mechanistic Pathways
Here we present our explanation
for why TR1 is dependent upon Sec for reduction of all of the different
types of substrates listed in Table  and why
the TR3-like enzymes can utilize other mechanistic pathways not available
to TR1 and are therefore less dependent upon the use of Sec for substrate
utilization. This explanation reconciles our accumulated data above
with the crystal structure of TR1 and the proposal that TR1 uses a
guiding bar to align the flexible C-terminal tail containing the C-terminal
Cys-Sec redox center., In determining the structure
of TR1, Becker and co-workers noted the presence of a guiding bar,
consisting of Trp407′, Asn418′, and Asn419′,
in human TR1 that functions to suppress random motions and hold the
tail more tightly to the TR1 enzyme body through a collection of weak
forces, including hydrogen bonding interactions. Figure  shows a sequence alignment of amino
acids 376–422 of human TR1, containing the region of the guiding
bar, and comparing it with the same region of human TR3 and the other
TR3-like enzymes in this study. As this alignment shows, the TR3-like
enzymes are missing residues Trp407′, Asn418′, and Asn419′
that were proposed to be critical for holding the C-terminal tail
of TR1 in one of three positions favoring interaction with the N-terminal
dithiol or alternatively with Trx. The three positions, CI, CII, and
CIII, were elucidated from three conformations and from the interactions
of certain key residues; the unit cell is a trimer of dimers, and
each dimer has been captured at a different point in catalysis. This
observation, combined with the proposed function of the guiding bar,
fits well with the available crystal structures of human TR1, rat
TR1, mouse TR3, DmTR, and PfTR enzymes.−,− The C-terminal tail has been observed in crystal structures of the
human, and rat enzymes,
but not mouse TR3, PfTR, or DmTR. A possible explanation
for this observation is that the absent guiding bar in mouse TR3,
PfTR, and DmTR renders the C-terminal tails of these enzymes too mobile
to generate sufficient electron density to observe the C-terminus
of these enzymes. In contrast, the guiding bar present in the TR1
enzymes from human and rat limits the motion of the C-terminal tail,
allowing it to be detected in the X-ray diffraction pattern.

Sequence alignment
of various TRs in the guiding bar region of
Pro376–Tyr422. Critical amino acids Trp407, Asn418, and Asn419
are present in TR1 of human (HsTR1) and rat (RnTR1) enzymes, but not
mitochondrial TR3 enzymes from human (HsTR3), mouse (MmTR3), fruit
fly (DmTR), nematode worm (CeTR3), or P. facliparum (PfTR).

As shown in the top panel of Figure , the
more tightly held tail of the enzyme in TR1 allows only the C-terminal
redox center to interact with substrates and prevents access to the
N-terminal redox center by small molecule substrates. As depicted
in Figure , the guiding bar restricts TR1
to exclusively use path A in Figure  for the
reduction of substrates, making TR1 highly dependent upon the presence
of a Sec residue in the C-terminus primarily because of both high
selenolate nucleophilicity and Se-electrophilicity
in a selenosulfide as described in the legend of Figure . This hypothesis is supported by experimental data provided
by Becker and co-workers, who reported that the N419A mutant of TR1
had significantly increased activity toward DTNB, most likely because
of the greater accessibility of the substrate to the N-terminal redox
center, by impairing the ability of the guiding bar to hold the C-terminal
tail rigidly.

Trp407′, Asn418′,
and Asn419′ in the guiding
bar of TR1 suppress random motions of the C-terminal tail of the enzyme
and restrict it to using path A (Figure )
for the reduction of substrates. Because of this restricted motion,
only the C-terminal redox center can donate electrons to the substrate
(top), and only the C-terminal redox center can approach the N-terminal
redox center to accept electrons (bottom). Most small molecule substrates
would be excluded as a result. In this cartoon model, the Se atom
is responsible for both donating electrons to the substrate and then
accepting them from the N-terminal redox center. Replacement of the
Se atom in the WT enzyme with a S atom in the Cys mutant would cause
the rate to decrease in at least two ways in this model. First, a
thiolate is less nucleophilic than a selenolate, and its use in the
mutant would decrease the rate of nucleophilic attack on the disulfide
bond of Trx (with associated rate constant knuc). Second, because a Se atom in a selenosulfide bond is
much more electrophilic than a S atom in a disulfide bond, the thiol–disulfide
exchange step between the N- and C-terminal redox centers (with associated
rate constant kex) would be significantly
slower. Because of the inability of TR1 to use path B or C, TR1 is
very dependent upon the use of Se for the reduction of substrate molecules.

Trp407′, Asn418′, and Asn419′
in the guiding
bar of TR3-like enzymes yield a much more flexible C-terminal tail
and allows substrates to approach the N-terminal redox center. This
additional flexibility allows TR3-like enzymes to utilize paths B
and C in Figure  for the reduction of substrates.
As a result, TR3-like enzymes are much less dependent upon the use
of Se for substrate utilization.

In contrast, as shown in Figure  the absence of Trp407′,
Asn418′,
and Asn419′ in the guiding bar of TR3-like enzymes allows much
greater flexibility in the C-terminal tail of these enzymes. This
affords TR3-like enzymes the ability to use paths B and C in addition
to path A for substrate utilization (Figure ), making them much less dependent upon the use of a Sec residue
for the reduction of substrates.

The ability of TR3-like enzymes
to use multiple catalytic pathways
imbues them with the ability to reduce substrates in the absence of
Sec due in part to greater access to the N-terminal redox center,
but there are other factors at work, as well. Previous data from our
laboratory indicate that the thiolate of CysIC of TR3 is
a weak nucleophile capable only of transferring electrons to very
good electron acceptors. This is also most certainly true of CysIC in TR1. However, our data here suggest that the N-terminal
redox centers of TR3-like enzymes are chemically more reactive toward
substrates such as DTNB than is the N-terminal redox center of TR1
(Table ). This may be due to differences in
the active site microenvironments of the respective enzymes that enhance
the overall reactivity of the N-terminal redox center in TR3-like
enzymes. Substrate discrimination through binding interactions and
steric hindrance must also be considered as factors. This might help
explain why TR1Δ2 (enzyme 15) can reduce juglone (containing an electrophilic α,β-unsaturated
ketone group) and nitroaromatic compounds,, with activity nearly equivalent to that of the full-length WT enzyme,
but reduces DTNB and lipoic acid very poorly, which are both highly
electrophilic disulfides, because of the presence of electron-withdrawing
groups (DTNB) and ring strain (lipoic acid).

Comparison of Selenocystine
to Cystine as a Substrate
As explained in the legend of Figure , the
guiding bar mostly restricts TR1 to utilize path A for the reduction
of substrates. The use of this pathway makes TR1 highly dependent
upon Se because substitution with S impairs the ability of the C-terminal
redox center to donate electrons to the substrate and accept them
from the N-terminal redox center. Are both of these factors equally
important, or is one of them a dominating feature of the use of Se
in TR? Traditionally, it has been assumed that Se-nucleophilicity is the dominating factor,, but the contribution of Se-electrophilicity should
be considered, as well. The use of selenocystine as a substrate is
instructive in this regard. Upon examination of the data in Table  with selenocystine as the substrate for the mutants
of TR3 and PfTR with partial C-terminal redox centers (enzymes 6, 7, 12, and 13),
it appears that path A is the optimal pathway for reduction of selenocystine
for both enzymes because these variants are still able to reduce selenocystine,
albeit at diminished rates. The use of this pathway results in an
oxidized C-terminal redox center (irrespective of the presence of
a Sec residue in the case of PfTR), which most likely is the optimal
substrate for the N-terminal redox center in each respective enzyme.
The use of path C by these mutants for the reduction of selenocystine
allows for significant catalytic activity, and this occurs in the
absence of a nucleophilic Sec residue. If cystine, with a S–S
bond, is used as the substrate, there is little catalytic activity
(data not shown). The difference in catalytic activities must be due
to chemical differences between a substrate Se–Se bond and
a substrate S–S bond. An obvious difference is the high electrophilic
character of the Se–X2 bond formed during the catalytic
cycle of path C (middle portion of the bottom panel of Figure ).

On the basis of our overall analysis and
discussion in this paper, we suggest three reasons why TR1 is so dependent
upon the use of Sec for the reduction of substrates. (i) The presence
of the guiding bar in TR1 allows for the use of only path A, and this
path allows only the oxidized C-terminal redox center to approach
the N-terminal redox center for reduction to the exclusion of most
other substrates. (ii) The apparent low chemical reactivity of the
N-terminal redox center of the TR1 enzyme and the comparative analysis
of selenocystine and cystine substrate utilization in TR3 described
above suggest that Se-electrophilicty is required
to accelerate the transfer of electrons from the N-terminal redox
center to the Se atom because in its absence electron transfer is
very slow. (iii) Se-nucleophilicity helps accelerate
the transfer of electrons to the substrate.

When utilizing path
A, Cys orthologs must compensate for the loss
of both Se-nucleophilicity and Se-electrophilicity to accomplish the reduction of Trx. While some
earlier work has addressed increased S-nucleophilicity
in Cys orthologs, we will address the
issue of S-electrophilicity in the future.

A Hypothesis
about SecTRAPs
It has been proposed that
the guiding bar of TR1 functions to help prevent the leakage of electrons
from the N-terminal redox center. Such
leakage is known to have deleterious effects. Arnér and co-workers
have described TR1 enzymes in which the Sec residue has been electrophilically
modified as “SecTRAPS”. SecTRAPS are characterized by a gain of function by the N-terminal
redox center. We propose that a Sec residue modified by an electrophile,
as has been shown with electrophilic prostaglandins, causes TR1 to undergo a conformational change that allows
greater accessibility of the substrate to the N-terminal redox center
(Figure ). This would explain the gain of
function property of SecTRAP enzymes and could explain their deleterious
effects, possibly via the increased NADPH oxidase activity as reported
by Arnér and co-workers.

Hypothesis
regarding SecTRAPs. SecTRAPS are characterized by a
gain of function by the N-terminal redox center. Our hypothesis is
that electrophilic modification of the Se atom results in a conformational
change in TR1 allowing the enzyme the use of either path B or path
C for the reduction of substrates. This could explain the cell killing
ability reported for SecTRAPs.

Conclusion
We
have presented evidence that TR1 is kinetically and mechanistically
distinct from TR3 and the TR3-like enzymes in this study. TR1 is highly
dependent upon the use of a Sec residue because the amino acids of
the so-called guiding bar restrict the movement of the C-terminal
tail of the enzyme containing the Cys-Sec redox dyad. We propose that
this restrictive motion permits the oxidized, C-terminal Cys-Sec dyad
to interact with the N-terminal redox center only during the exchange
step of the catalytic cycle. Selenium accelerates the rate of the
reaction by acting as both a good acceptor of electrons during the
exchange step and a good electron donor to the substrate during the
nucleophilic attack step. Replacement of the selenium atom with sulfur
therefore greatly slows the rate of the reaction because of the loss
of Se-electrophilicity and Se-nucleophilicity.
In contrast, TR3-like enzymes lack the guiding bar and can use alternative
mechanistic pathways for the reduction of substrates and are therefore
less dependent upon the use of a Sec residue for catalysis of many
small molecule substrates. Cys orthologs must compensate for the absence
of Sec by increasing S-nucleophilicity, S-electrophilicity, or both to be effective catalysts.

Supporting Information Available
Concentrations of enzymes and
substrates used in the enzyme assays in this study (Tables S1 and
S2, respectively). This material is available free of charge via the
Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi400651x_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We acknowledge the Vermont Cancer Center DNA Facility
for
sequencing services. We are extremely grateful to Professor Charles
Williams of The University of Michigan (Ann Arbor, MI) for a critical
reading of this manuscript prior to submission.

Abbreviations
Alaalanine

Asnasparagine

βME2-mercaptoethanol

CeTR3mitochondrial
TR from C. elegans

Cyscysteine

d-Cysd-enantiomer of Cys

DmTRTR from D. melanogaster

DTNB5,5′-dithiobis(2-nitrobenzoic
acid)

DTTdithiothreitol

EDTAethylenediaminetetraacetic
acid

FADflavin
adenine dinucleotide

Glyglycine

GRglutathione
reductase

GSHreduced
glutathione

HPLChigh-performance liquid chromatography

l-Cysl-enantiomer of Cys

LipDHlipoamide dehydrogenase

MALDI-TOFmatrix-assisted
laser desorption ionization time-of-flight spectroscopy

Mrmolecular ratio

mTR3mitochondrial TR from mouse

NADPHβ-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate, reduced

PfTRTR from P. falciparum

SDS–PAGEsodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis

Secselenocysteine

Serserine

SMsmall molecule

TBterrific broth

TGRthioredoxin/glutathione
reductase

TRthioredoxin
reductase

Tristris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane

Trptryptophan

Trxthioredoxin

Uone-letter code for Sec

WTwild type.

Throughout
this work, we use a nomenclature
of TR-AA1AA2AA3AA4 to denote the source of the enzyme and its C-terminal tetrapeptide
sequence. In addition, we use the nomenclature TRΔ2, TRΔ3,
etc., to denote the number of C-terminal amino acids missing from
the truncated enzyme.

Please
see Figure 4 from ref () and Figure 1 from ref () for a description of how
the Cys-Cys dyad might adapt cis amide geometry during
the catalytic cycle.

The “prime”
designation
denotes amino acids that are part of the B chain and is used to distinguish
residues from those of the A chain. The N-terminal and C-terminal
redox centers are on opposing subunits.

