Understanding
the interplay
between conformational dynamics and the population of reactive states
is a central challenge in biocatalysis. This pursuit has yielded major
successes in the past 15 years via the combination of diverse techniques
such as X-ray crystallography to define static protein states with
enzyme kinetics or solution spectroscopy to probe catalytically relevant
dynamic motions.− Studies of model systems have demonstrated the importance of motions
on a huge range of time scales, from femtoseconds, to
milliseconds., These strategies have been supported
by the use of substrate analogues and transition state mimics that
allow direct interrogation of high-energy states., Many of these techniques, however, are not suited to the study of
large autoprocessing systems, which possess intrinsic, unimolecular
chemical reactivity upon formation of a folded state. Autoprocessing
is implicated in diverse physiological processes such as signal transduction,, nucleoporin biogenesis,, RNA self-splicing, protein folding,, and formation
of enzyme catalysts., Because of their intramolecular
nature, autoprocessing reactions constitute one of the most simple
structure–function relationships in biochemistry. Despite this
fact there have been few links established between their inherent
structural plasticity and the chemical reactions they evolved to accelerate.

Autoproteolysis is a common post-translational modification that
proceeds through an N → O(S) acyl shift mechanism (Figure ). A nucleophilic residue attacks into its N-terminal
peptide bond, forming a five-membered (thia)oxazolidine ring, which
collapses to a (thio)ester. This acyl migration is identical to the
first step of intein splicing but differs
in autoproteolysis in that the (thio)ester intermediate is hydrolyzed
to produce an N-terminal nucleophile (Ntn). The nascent α-amine
generated by this chemistry is the base in a noncanonical catalytic
diad whose reactivity is tuned by neighboring interactions., A key development in our understanding of autoproteolytic enzymes
was the discovery that penicillin acylase, glutamine PRPP amidotransferase, and
the proteasome β-subunit (PβS) have a common Ntn fold and a shared evolutionary history. This group of enzymes is now designated clan
PB according to the MEROPS nomenclature. Early clues about autoproteolysis came from the study of PβS.
The structure of a fully assembled 20S proteasome with a Thr →
Ala mutation showed the system was poised for si-face
attack. However, all subsequent research
into the autoproteolysis of clan PB has implicated activation through
a re-face attack, a proposal that precludes utilization
of the enzymatic oxyanion hole. These conclusions imply that proteins
with a shared lineage use two fundamentally different mechanisms for
the same chemistry. While possible, our recent discovery that the
stereochemistry of catalysis for Ser, Cys, and Thr proteases is absolutely
conserved throughout divergent evolution demands that special consideration
be given to the evidence supporting divergence of mechanism.

Autoproteolysis mechanism with a Thr nucleophile. Activation
of
the nucleophile allows attack into its N-terminal amide bond, forming
a five-membered ring. Protonation of the amine leaving group facilitates
collapse to form an ester intermediate, which is subsequently hydrolyzed.
Dissociation of the new C-terminus yields an N-terminal nucleophile
used in substrate catalysis.

While studying the biosynthesis of the β-lactam antibiotic
thienamycin, we reported that the cis-autoproteolytic
enzyme ThnT acts late in the biosynthetic pathway as a pantetheine
hydrolase. ThnT is a member of clan PE
and is therefore related to hydrolases from clan PB through convergent
evolution. By mutating the active site nucleophile of ThnT from Thr
to Cys, we prepared a chemically stable variant that was capable of
undergoing a very slow N → S acyl shift. The X-ray structure of ThnT T282C was a dimer with two
conformations at the active site of the π1 subunit
(Figure A), and a single conformation in the
π2 subunit. The observation of multiple states at
the active site raised the important question of which conformation,
if either, corresponds to a reactive state. Comparison to the convergently
related Ntn hydrolases revealed the major conformer in the ThnT T282C
structure was almost identical to the precleavage structures of the
penicillin and cephalosporin acylases, which were proposed to autoproteolyze
through a re-face attack. However, the minor conformer
in the ThnT T282C active site was similar to the uncleaved PβS
enzyme, the only Ntn enzyme proposed to mature through a si-face attack. We applied simple mechanistic criteria to determine
which of these states might give rise to chemistry: the ability of
the wild-type nucleophile to populate a reactive rotamer, a well-formed
oxyanion hole, and the presence of proton donors or acceptors for
the nucleophilic hydroxyl and amide nitrogen leaving group. This analysis
strongly supported the assignment of the minor conformer of ThnT T282C
as the reactive state for cis-autoproteolysis. Moreover,
we found circumstantial evidence that the penicillin and cephalosporin
acylases undergo a hidden conformational rearrangement to prime their
active sites for si-face attack. These data demonstrated
the relevance of protein dynamics in establishing a chemically sound
mechanism for autoprocessing. Additionally, analysis of γ-glutamyltranspeptidase,l-asparaginase, and Taspase1 showed they crystallized
in inactive states, but there was not enough information to suggest
the nature of their reactive conformation, raising the question of
why X-ray crystallography so rarely captures reactive states in autoproteolytic
systems.

Electron density at the active site of the π1 subunit
of mutationally inactivated ThnT variants. (A) Two conformations corresponding
to reactive and inactive states observed in the structure of T282C.
(B) Only the inactive, state B, is found in the structure of T282A.
(C) Derivatization of C282 with EtHg causes a shift in the electron
density of the active site toward state B. Occupancy refinement indicates
reactive state A is still populated at ∼30% occupancy. The
2mFo – DFc maps are contoured at 1.0σ.

We suspected that most self-cleavage chemistry is initiated
from
a high-energy conformation and that some rearrangement must occur
to populate this state. The serendipitous observation of both active
and inactive states of ThnT provides a unique opportunity to study
the links between structural dynamics and autoprocessing chemistry.
We used a structural and kinetic approach to establish that large
conformational fluctuations in three regions of ThnT are coupled to
one another and that multiple states of this ensemble contribute to
the observed autoproteolysis rate. Our data establish that mutation
may slow autoproteolysis both by reducing the rate of transition state
stabilization and by biasing the ensemble toward less reactive states.
Therefore, the conditions used to impede autoprocessing for structural
characterization can reduce the population of the high-energy reactive
states such that they are impossible to observe through X-ray crystallography,
thereby explaining the overwhelming tendency of autoprocessing systems
to crystallize in inactive forms.

Experimental Procedures
Expression
Vector Construction
Codon-optimized ThnT
was expressed from a plasmid described previously. Overlap extension polymerase chain reaction was used to
create the S320A and N281A mutations using primer sequences listed
in Table S1 of the . Because of internal complementarity within the ThnT gene, conventional
primers for mutation of Pro78 resulted in a large internal deletion.
This aberrant amplification was circumvented by designing primers
that contained a codon-optimized synthon harboring the desired mutation.
Products were gel purified, digested with NdeI and HindIII restriction
enzymes (New England Biolabs), and ligated into pET28b(+) (EMD Biosciences),
yielding N-6His tag fusions. All mutant genes were sequence-verified
and transformed into Escherichia coli Rosetta2(DE3)
electrocompetent cells (EMD Biosciences).

Protein Expression and
Purification
Expression and
purification of all ThnT proteins were similar to reported procedures. Proteins were bound to a Ni-nitriloacetate column
and eluted in 250 mM imidazole, 50 mM sodium phosphate (pH 7.5), 40
mM NaCl, and 10% glycerol. Protein was concentrated in a 10 KDa molecular
weight cutoff Amicon filtration device (Bio-Rad) and buffer exchanged
into 10 mM potassium phosphate (pH 7.5) with 10% glycerol (for kinetic
experiments) or 20 mM potassium phosphate (pH 7.5) with 5% glycerol
(for crystallography). Protein was passed through 1 mL Q-Sepharose
anion exchange resin and reconcentrated before being stored at −80
°C. Purification at 4 °C was critical for wild-type ThnT
to capture enough of the precursor protein for quantification.

Autoproteolysis
Kinetics and Eyring Analysis
Purified
ThnT was diluted to a concentration of 1 μg/μL in 100
mM Tris (pH 7.5), 100 mM KCl, and 10% glycerol and preheated in a
water bath for 2 min before a time course was begun. We initially
observed that long incubations of ThnT variants in phosphate buffer
resulted in degradation that would preclude the long time courses
necessary to measure slow reaction rates. The inclusion of a protease
inhibitor cocktail halted some degradation, and switching to a Tris
buffer further increased the stability of the system, allowing quantification
of slow reaction rates (Figure S1 of the ). For each time point, protein was denatured in
sodium dodecyl sulfate loading buffer and heated to 98 °C for
2 min. Samples were subjected to 15% sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis and quantified with ImageJ. Autoproteolysis kinetics
for each ThnT variant were run in triplicate at 37 °C and quantified
with Prism and fit to eq .

Given that
the pKa of Tris is temperature sensitive,
special care was taken
to adjust the pH of each buffer at the desired temperature for Eyring
analysis. Each measurement was performed at least twice, and the data
were fit to the Eyring–Polanyi equation (eq ) in Prism.

Crystallization and Data
Collection
Trays for sitting-drop
vapor diffusion were prepared with ThnT T282A concentrated to 7.7
μg/μL, against a 1 mL reservoir of 17–25% PEG3350
and 0.15–0.4 M sodium acetate. Crystals were cryoprotected
by immersion in 22% PEG3350, 0.3 M sodium acetate, and 20% glycerol
and immediately flash-frozen in liquid N2. Diffraction
data were collected on NSLS X6A at the Brookhaven National Laboratory
(Upton, NY). To reduce reflection overlap, 1050 frames with a 0.2°
oscillation were collected, yielding 210° of data that were processed
in HKL2000.

Diffraction data for
the T282C EtHg-derivatized structure were described previously. We hypothesized that longer soaks of T282C crystals
in 200 μM ethylmercuric phosphate would result in greater incorporation
of the EtHg and thereby further shift the conformational ensemble
within the structure. Unfortunately, soaking crystals for longer periods
of time resulted in derivatization at additional sites.

Structure Solution,
Model Building, and Refinement
Direct multiple-wavelength
anomalous diffraction phase information
was used for the solution of the T282C EtHg-derivatized structure.
The structure of T282A was determined by molecular replacement using
Phaser, using the T282C variant of ThnT
[Protein Data Bank (PDB) entry 3S3U] with all active site and dual occupancy
residues removed from the search model. Iterative model building in
Coot and refinement in Refmac5 yielded readily interpretable maps. As higher-resolution
data were incorporated, it became clear that systematic absences from
the model corresponded to conformations described in previously determined
structures. These states were modeled in Coot, and their occupancy
was systematically varied by increments of 5% before restrained refinement
in Refmac5. The low-occupancy conformation whose B factors were approximately equal to the major conformer was included
in the model only if its geometry also refined within canonical values.
TLS operators were included in the final round of refinement, as implemented
in Refmac5. Crystallographic and model
statistics are listed in Table S2 of the .

Results
Systematic Structural Changes
Are Caused by Removal of the Nucleophile
We hypothesized
that the reactive state identified in the T282C
structure of ThnT was stabilized by the hydrogen bonding characteristics
of the thiol, which mimic those of the naturally occurring hydroxyl
group. To test this proposal, we expressed and purified ThnT T282A,
which does not undergo autoproteolysis and was amenable to crystallization.
Crystals of T282A grew in conditions comparable to those used for
the T282C variant and diffracted well, and molecular replacement readily
yielded a high-resolution structure. Consistent with our hypothesis,
the 1.5 Å crystal structure of T282A showed no electron density
corresponding to the reactive state in either subunit of the protein
(Figure B). Instead, the oxyanion hole was
filled by a network of water molecules. van der Waals constraints
imply these water molecules were too close to be present simultaneously,
indicating that multiple modes of water occupation are possible within
the cavity created by the T282A mutation.

During model building
and refinement, it became clear that a glycine-rich loop adjacent
to the active site, composed of residues R74–T80 (RGGGPGT),
adopted a conformation dramatically different from that observed in
the T282C structure (Figure A,B). This unanticipated
conformation was identical to that observed in the postautoproteolysis
structure of wild-type ThnT and is necessary for substrate binding
in the mature enzyme. Stepwise inclusion
of higher-resolution data during model refinement resulted in numerous
peaks in the Fo – Fc map indicative of structural heterogeneity (Figure C). Given that modeling of weak density results
in a phase bias, we were concerned that modeling with multiple conformations
would be impossible. However, we found that all of the positive omit
peaks systematically matched the conformation originally described
in the structure of T282C (Figure C). Therefore,
grafting this well-defined model into the T282A structure did not
rely on weak density for the initial build. Refinement of this alternative
state generated poor geometry when the resolution was above 1.75 Å
but resulted in excellent geometry and packing with the full 1.5 Å
data set, as measured by MolProbity. Refinement
with the occupancy of the minor conformer set at 30% yielded average B factors that were approximately equal in each state (Figure B; 14.9 Å2 for the major state and
14.5 Å2 for the minor state).

Multiple conformations
in residues R74–T80 are adjacent
to the active site of T282A. The 2mFo – DFc map at (A) 1.0σ and (B) 0.5σ
shows the predominant state (red) with the trans isomer
of the G77–P78 peptide bond. The low-occupancy conformation
(orange) features the cis isomer of the G77–P78
peptide bond. (C) Fo – Fc map contoured at 3.0σ from a model built
of T282A at 1.5 Å resolution with only the major conformer. Negative
density (red) indicates this conformation is not fully occupied, and
systematic peaks in the positive density (green) clearly correspond
to the conformer captured in the T282C structure (blue sticks).

Multiple States within
the Conformational Ensemble Contribute
to Autoproteolysis
These two conformations differ at the
G77–P78 peptide bond, which undergoes transitions between the cis and trans isomers. The trans isomer dominates in the structure of T282A and is the only one observed
in the postautoproteolysis wild-type enzyme. The cis isomer is more prevalent in the T282C structure,
and we hypothesized that it facilitates efficient autoprocessing.
Specifically, the data show that the backbone carbonyl of Gly77 in
the cis isomer positions a water molecule to aid
in the activation of the nucleophile for the N → O acyl shift. The different physical properties of the cis and trans isomers of the peptide bond
provide a convenient means of experimentally testing the role of the
R74–T80 loop dynamics in autoproteolysis. If the cis conformation were strictly necessary for autoproteolysis, then the
P78G and P78A mutations would intrinsically favor the trans isomer by &gt;300-fold and slow autoproteolysis
by a corresponding amount. We constructed these variants and observed
a relatively small, 10-fold rate deceleration for the P78G mutant
relative to that of the wild type (Table ).
This effect is even smaller for P78A and is consistent with our hypothesis
that the cis conformation of the R74–T80 loop
accelerates autoproteolysis but indicates that it is not strictly
necessary. Surprisingly, the ΔP78 deletion variant autoproteolyzed
faster than either of the point mutants but was still slower than
the wild type. Because this loop occurs at the surface of the protein,
these data suggest that the role of G76 in activating the nucleophile
is rescued by interactions with the solvent when the cis conformation is not populated.

Kinetic Parameters
for ThnT Autoproteolysis
protein	kobs (min–1)	ΔΔG⧧ (kcal/mol)	
wild-type	0.0140 ± 0.0016	 	
P78G	0.00134 ± 0.00013	1.45 ± 0.13	
P78A	0.00323 ± 0.00005	0.91 ± 0.08	
ΔP78	0.0059 ± 0.0004	0.54 ± 0.11	
N281A	0.0017 ± 0.0004	1.33 ± 0.18	
S320A	0.0045 ± 0.0007	0.62 ± 0.16	
N281A/S320A	0.00087 ± 0.0006	1.72 ± 0.11	
Autoproteolysis rates of ThnT variants
at 37 °C. Rate values are a weighted average of at least three
independent measurements with their standard deviation given.

Additionally, the collapse of the
R74–T80 loop into the trans conformation appeared
to influence the structure of
a short loop composed of residues L318–D321 (Figure S2 of the ). This motif was observed
in two conformations in the T282C structure but instead populates
a single conformation in the T282A structure that most closely resembled
the structure of ThnT after autoproteolysis occurs. This rearrangement
may be rationalized by recognizing that G76 in the trans-configured state would form a steric clash with L319 if some rearrangement
did not occur. Further insight into these interactions was hampered
by both the complexity of the large transitions observed upon mutational
removal of the nucleophile and the introduction of a non-native water
network into the cavity caused by this mutation. Therefore, we sought
a more subtle means of probing how population of the reactive state
influences the protein ensemble.

Probing Dynamics through
Mutagenesis and Chemical Derivatization
of the Nucleophile
One powerful means of identifying structural
changes relevant to catalysis is to titrate a substrate analogue or
transition state mimic and monitor changes in the structure and dynamics.
This approach is not possible for autoprocessing reactions, which
are limited by the chemical moieties present on the proteinogenic
amino acids. Instead, we attempted to exploit the unique reactivity
of the thiol present in the active site of the T282C variant of ThnT.
We hypothesized that chemical derivatization of the nucleophile would
trap the protein in its inactive state without creating the cavity
caused by the T282A mutation. Previous phasing experiments of ThnT
relied on a heavy atom soak of T282C with ethylmercury phosphate.
Model building from these data at 1.65 Å resolution indicated
∼45% incorporation of the EtHg, with the Hg atom covalently
linked to the thiol of T282C. This derivatized species was clearly
trapped in the inactive state (Figure C).

Difference density corresponding to the active state was still observable,
and a refinement procedure identical to that used to model the R74–T80
loop was used to assign an occupancy of 30%. Multiple conformations
of the L318–D321 loop were still detected; however, the electron
density showed a clear shift in the relative population of these states
(Figure A,B). This trend continues when including
the π2 subunit of ThnT, where only the inactive state
is observed and a single conformation of the L318–D321 loop
is present with a water-mediated hydrogen bond between S320 and N281
(Figure C). We identified two factors that
may contribute to the molecular basis for this interaction. When the
L318–D321 loop is away from the active site, the “Out”
conformation, there is a water-mediated hydrogen bond between N281
and S320. This bound water molecule is expelled when the L318–D321
loop moves ∼1.5 Å closer to the active site and a direct
hydrogen bond is formed between S320 and N281. This “In”
conformation has a 2.5 Å steric clash between the carbonyl of
S320 and the scissile bond in its inactive state B (Figure A). These crystallographic data suggest a model
in which the favorable expulsion of water at the S320–N281
interface destabilizes the inactive state B and promotes rearrangement
of the active site into a high-energy state primed for autoproteolysis.

Population
shifts in the L319–D321 region are associated
with the state of the active site. (A) Two conformations originally
discovered in the structure of T282C, with the “In”
state favored. (B) Derivatization of the nucleophile traps the inactive
state B, which in turn causes a shift in the population of the L319–D321
region toward an “Out” state. (C) When state B is exclusively
populated, only the “Out” state is observed.

The hydrogen bonding interactions in the S320–N281
interface
do not appear to directly participate in the chemistry of autoproteolysis
(Figure ). Nonetheless, measurement of the
autoproteolysis rates for the Ala variant at each position showed
they both slowed self-cleavage, with N281A autoproteolysis 2.6-fold
slower than S320A (Table ). The N281A mutation
opens a large space close to the site of amine protonation, and altered
solvation may affect amine reactivity during the N → O acyl
shift. However, the S320A variant maintains the chemical environment
of the active site. Its decelerated autoproteolysis is consistent
with the hypothesis that conformational coupling between N281 and
S320 stabilizes the reactive state. We attempted to measure the nonadditivity
in the effect of an N281A/S320A double variant, which would provide
an estimation of the coupling energy contributing to autoactivation.
However, the rate differences were too small relative to the error
of the measurements to make a statistically significant statement.

Determination of the Activation Parameters of Autoproteolysis
The polysterism we observed in these mutationally inactivated structures
of ThnT involves large backbone-level fluctuations. Although we do
not know the frequency at which these transitions occur, it is typical
that such motions take place on the millisecond time scale., Given that these motions are fast relative to autoproteolysis (t1/2 = 50 min), we posit that the states we observed
through X-ray crystallography are in a pseudothermodynamic equilibrium
prior to autoprocessing. If these states are populated at a significant
level prior to autoproteolysis, then selection for the reactive state
will be entropically unfavorable. To test whether this phenomenon
is possible, we subjected the wild-type ThnT to Eyring analysis to
determine the activation parameters of autoproteolysis.

We measured
the ThnT autoproteolysis rate between 52 and 27 °C and fit the
data to the Eyring–Polyani equation (Figure ). The ΔH⧧ of ThnT
was 18.1 ± 0.5 kcal/mol, and the TΔS⧧ was −5.0 ± 0.5 kcal/mol
at 37 °C, indicating that entropy effects play a significant
role in the autoactivation of ThnT. Whether this unfavorable change
in entropy reflects decreasing degrees of solvent or protein freedom
is difficult to determine, and sophisticated NMR techniques for measuring
protein conformational entropy are just now emerging.

Eyring plot of ThnT autoproteolysis. Each point represents a weighted
average of at least two independent measurements. See  for details.

Discussion
Mechanistic Importance of Conformational
Dynamics in ThnT Autoactivation
Our initial study of ThnT
autoproteolysis revealed a reactive state
formed through active site conformational rearrangement and found
that the majority of pro-enzyme structures do not represent a reactive
state. This investigation was driven
by two related questions: How do conformational dynamics relate to
ThnT function, and why do other pre-autoprocessing structures rarely
display reactive conformations? We hypothesized that the conserved
hydrogen bond capabilities of T282C stabilize the reactive state of
ThnT, and our first experiment was to observe what happens when this
group was removed.

The structure of T282A at 1.5 Å resolution
showed a complete lack of electron density corresponding to the reactive
state (Figure B). Given that this conformation
was present at 55% occupancy in the 1.6 Å structure of T282C
(Figure A), destabilization by as few as 0.5
kcal/mol would be sufficient to render this state invisible to X-ray
crystallography. Recent investigations have demonstrated that “noise”
in the electron density is statistically enriched in biologically
relevant side chain conformations,,, and we expand upon these studies with the structure
of T282A, which contains a low-occupancy conformer of that R74–T80
loop indicative of a large backbone-level rearrangement. Kinetic experiments
support the idea that this alternative conformation contributes to
the observed autoproteolysis rate, affirming the biological relevance
of low-occupancy states that can be observed in high-resolution X-ray
structures.

The second site of conformational coupling that
we observed was
the interface between N281 and S320. The structure of T282C showed
multiple conformations in the L318–D321 loop, suggesting it
might be sensitive to the population of the reactive state. In most
crystallographic studies, a causal relationship cannot be established
between the population of multiple conformational states. Two factors
allowed us to overcome this limitation. First, there is a steric clash
between the backbone of S320 and the scissile bond in its nonreactive
conformation, establishing that these states cannot be populated at
the same time. Second, site-specific derivatization with EtHg trapped
the active site in its inactive state, while all other features of
the structures remained constant. Therefore, the observed shift in
the population of the L318–D321 loop was caused by the derivatization.

We hypothesize that population of the “In” state
of the L318–D321 loop is stabilized by the release of water
and a hydrogen bond between the S320 and N281 side chains but causes
a steric clash with the carbonyl of the scissile bond. This clash
promotes the peptide flip necessary to place the reactive amide into
the oxyanion hole. Mutational disruption of the S320–N281 interface
slows autoproteolysis and supports our model of how protein conformational
dynamics influence population of the reactive state.

Exploring Entropy
Changes during Autoactivation
Each
of the conformational states captured in our X-ray structures differs
at the level of the backbone, and motion between them is likely near
the millisecond time scale., Therefore, each of
these states possesses a unique manifold of rotameric substates that
may interconvert on a relatively fast time scale. This scenario allows
an interesting possibility, that selection for the reaction state
causes a change in the protein conformational entropy. Conformational
entropy has been dubbed the “dark energy” of proteins, and its role in governing ligand binding has
only recently been experimentally verified. It would be of significant fundamental interest to extend this advance
into protein chemistry, and we performed Eyring analysis of ThnT to
collect as many relevant data as possible on this phenomenon.

We found that the TΔS⧧ at 37 °C contributes 5.0 kcal/mol to the activation
barrier of ThnT autoproteolysis. Because the chemistry in question
is unimolecular, this restriction on the degrees of freedom in the
transition state can come from only protein or solvent, significantly
simplifying the analysis. Unfortunately, the activation parameters
of uncatalyzed cis-autoproteolysis through the acyl
shift reaction are not known because direct hydrolysis is favored
in solution. The activation parameters
for glycosylasparaginase (GA) from Flavobacterium meningosepticum showed the barrier to autoproteolysis is entirely enthalpic (ΔH⧧ = 22 kcal/mol, and TΔS⧧ ∼ 0 kcal/mol
at 37 °C). Because GA shares the
same uncatalyzed rate of autoproteolysis with ThnT, the difference
in their activation parameters must reflect protein-specific entropic
contributions to rate enhancement. Further insights into conformational
entropy are not readily accessible through crystallography or mutagenesis,
and we look forward to the application of additional techniques to
study this problem.

Effects of Mutagenesis on the Observation
of Reactive States
The Boltzmann distribution allows for
all states to be populated
at some level, but only those within ≈0.7 kcal/mol of the global
minimum can be seen with a high-resolution crystal structure. Given
that autoprocessing chemistry proceeds from high-energy states, our
kinetic data establish that the ΔΔG⧧ values of the least disruptive mutations are sufficient
to shift the ensemble so that the reactive state is no longer observable.
Even without mutational disruption, the reactive state of an autoprocessing
system may be insufficiently populated for characterization by X-ray
crystallography. Indeed, this exact scenario hindered study of the
hammerhead ribozyme, a self-cleaving RNA molecule. A construct that
could react in the crystal gave rise to a structure that corresponded
to a nonreactive conformation., Investigators recognized
mechanistic inconsistencies implied by the structural data, and a
decade of research finally yielded a structure corresponding to a
reactive state.,, Given this cautionary lesson in the interpretation of “reactive”
crystal structures, we searched for chemical constraints that have
not been satisfied in the mechanisms suggested by inactivated pro-enzyme
structures, which might indicate nonreactive protein conformations.

Critical Re-evaluation of Reactive States in Autoproteolytic
Enzymes
The autoactivation of only one enzyme other than
ThnT from clan PE has been studied. The Nuc → Ala variant of
β-aminopeptidase (BapA) crystallized in a conformation comparable
to the inactive state of ThnT. From these
data, it was proposed that BapA did not undergo the canonical N →
O acyl shift mechanism, but rather an unprecedented trans-type autoproteolysis. This proposal, while provocative, lacked the
discriminating experiment in which the Nuc → Cys variant is
chemically rescued by addition of hydroxylamine. Moreover, the active site architecture for the proposed
Ser288 acylation is entirely unprecedented compared to that of canonical
Ser proteases, and the mechanism fails
to account for protonation of the amine leaving group. Until firm
biochemical data exist to overturn the deeply precedented N →
O acyl shift mechanism (Figure ), it should
be assumed that autoactivation of all members from clan PE will proceed
through cis-autoproteolysis with a si-face attack on the scissile bond, as has been described for ThnT.
This proposal is consistent with the observation that the stereochemistry
of catalysis in Ser, Cys, and Thr proteases is conserved throughout
divergent evolution.

Extensive
study of enzymes from clan PB has yielded two fundamentally different
mechanisms for their cis-autoproteolysis. The proteasome
β-subunit (PβS) autoprocessing is initiated through a si-face attack that utilizes the enzymatic oxyanion hole. Although the original interpretations of the
penicillin and cephalosporin acylase enzymes from clan PB supported
a re-face attack mechanism, our previous analysis
showed this was unlikely to be the case and found strong circumstantial
evidence supporting si-face attack.

Alternatively, glycosylasparaginase (GA) is proposed
to self-activate
through a re-face attack generating an oxyanion that
is not stabilized by the enzymatic oxyanion hole. This mechanism for GA is supported by the structure of
a Thr → Cys variant of the nucleophile that is reactive within
the crystal. Given that such reactivity is not a sufficient criterion
for the structural assignment of a reactive state, it remains that
GA could undergo an as-yet-uncharacterized rearrangement that places
the scissile bond in the catalytic oxyanion hole, thus priming the
system for si-face attack. More recent studies of
the human l-asparaginase (ASNase) enzyme have also implicated
a re-face attack. This
proposal was generated through inspection of the structure of the
wild-type enzyme, which undergoes self-activation so slowly that it
can be crystallized prior to autoproteolysis. Independent analysis
of these structures shows the nucleophile is separated from the scissile
bond by &gt;4.0 Å and that the extended geometry of the active
site
is ill-suited for oxazolidine formation. From these mechanistic constraints,
we conclude these structures of human ASNase cannot represent a mechanistically
relevant state and that some structural rearrangement must occur prior
to autoproteolysis. This analysis is supported by the structure of
a type III guinea pig ASNase (which is 79.9% identical with the human
ASNase) that indeed shows a different conformation at the active site.
However, the nucleophile crystallized in an inactive rotomeric state,
and it was concluded that some conformational change must occur to
populate a reactive state.

Collectively,
our analysis of the cis-autoproteolysis
literature reveals that the existing data cannot rule out our hypothesis
that self-cleavage proceeds through a si-face attack.
To date, direct and mechanistically sound structural data supporting
a si-face attack in clan PB exist for only PβS,
and it will be crucial to confirm this mechanism for other enzymes.
Application of room-temperature crystallography may aid in the observation
of higher-energy states. Even with this
advance, the data presented here demonstrate that the standard approach
of crystallizing inactive variants is unlikely to produce the evidence
needed to discriminate between closely related mechanisms, and that
additional techniques are needed in this pursuit.

Conclusions
Establishing the role of protein dynamics in reaction rate enhancement
is a subject of intense interest and debate. We report here our observation
and characterization of complex conformational coupling between the
reaction center and neighboring loop motifs in the autoproteolytic
site of ThnT. Our data provide evidence that unique conformational
ensembles are associated with each reaction catalyzed by ThnT, and
that autoproteolysis shifts the ensemble from one favoring self-cleavage
to one tuned for substrate catalysis. The conformational coupling
that allows this transition is strong enough that its disruption will
impede the ability to identify a reactive state through X-ray crystallography.
We argue that this may be a general phenomenon that is responsible
for the unfortunate misinterpretation of inactive protein structures
as being representative of a reactive state. We introduce the hypothesis
that the N → O(S) acyl shift in cis-autoproteolysis
always occurs through a si-face attack, thereby unifying
the chemistry of autoproteolytic enzymes through a common mechanism.
Additional data are needed to validate or refute this hypothesis.
This work demonstrates the importance of protein conformational coupling
in autoprocessing chemistry and makes clear the need for additional
experimental tools for studying autoactivation.

Supporting Information Available
Figures showing the steric
clash between L319 and G76 and the inhibition of proteolytic degradation
by inclusion of a protease inhibitor cocktail and tables listing the
primers used to generate the variants discussed here and the crystallographic
data collection and refinement statistics. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500385d_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
∥ A.R.B.:
Department of Chemical Engineering, California Institute
of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125.

Author Present Address
⊥ M.F.F.:
Institute of Microbiology, Eidgenössische Technische
Hochschule Zurich, Vladimir-Prelog-Weg 1-5/10, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland.

This
work was
supported by National Institutes of Health Grant R01 AI014937.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Courtney Hastings for long discussions of enzyme
kinetics and Eyring analysis. We thank Professors Doug Barrick and
Dominique Frueh for comments on early drafts of the manuscript and
Belinda Wenke for careful editing. We gratefully acknowledge Dr. Vivian
Stojanoff, Dr. Jean Jakonic, and Edwin Lazo at National Synchrotron
Lightsource beamline X6A for assistance in data collection.

