The anti-aging
protein α-klotho
(KL) is named after the mythical Greek goddess who “spins the
thread of life”. KL is highly expressed
in the kidney and brain and to a lesser extent in reproductive organs. In the brain, KL is most highly expressed in
the ependymal cells of the choroid plexus and cerebellar Purkinje
cells and is detected in cerebral white
matter. KL knockout (KL-KO) mice exhibit
many changes that also frequently occur during human aging, including
arteriosclerosis, osteoporosis, and cognitive decline. KL-KO mice
develop normally but die prematurely, with an average lifespan of
∼61 days, whereas mice overexpressing
KL live 30% longer than wild-type mice. In our microarray analyses focusing on age-associated cognitive
decline in the rhesus monkey, KL expression was decreased in the aged
corpus callosum, and this decrease was
likely due to the hypermethylation of its promoter. We recently discovered an important and novel role of KL
in the biology of oligodendrocytes, which are responsible for myelin
formation. We found that KL enhances oligodendrocyte differentiation
and maturation, suggesting that KL is an important factor in proper
myelination and possibly in the maintenance of myelin integrity.

KL is a type I transmembrane protein that
we reported to be cleaved
by a disintegrin and metalloproteinase 10 (ADAM10) and 17 and shed
from the cell surface, a finding confirmed
by others. Shed KL is detectable in serum,
cerebral spinal fluid (CSF), and urine. KL has two domains, KL1 and KL2, which have homology
to members of the glycosidase/glucuronidase family, and has been shown
to act as a sialidase on a number of channels, modifying their actions., Peripheral KL functions include regulation of FGF23 signaling, resulting
in the regulation of calcium and phosphate homeostasis, and suppression
of the insulin/IGF1 and Wnt signaling pathways. In the kidney, the transmembrane full-length KL (FL-KL)
and the shed extracellular domain of KL (sKL) have distinct functions:
FL-KL is a coreceptor with FGFR1 for FGF23, which regulates serum vitamin D levels and phosphate homeostasis,
and is possibly a coreceptor for other receptors, whereas sKL functions
as a hormone and/or a sialidase responsible for KL’s other
functions, including ion homeostasis. In other tissues, KL has been
implicated in anti-inflammation, tumor suppression (including breast
and pancreas),, senescence, cell differentiation,
and cardiovascular functions. For a comprehensive review, see refs ( and ).

Protein ectodomain shedding
plays a crucial role in development,
inflammation, and disease. Proteinases catalyzing ectodomain release,
or sheddases, comprise members of various families, including matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs), ADAMs,, and serine
proteases. ADAM10 and ADAM17 are the
sheddases responsible for KL ectodomain shedding and are the best characterized members of the ADAM family. Numerous protein substrates have been identified
for both ADAM10 and ADAM17, including cytokine receptors, chemokines,
and adhesion molecules, such as tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα),
transforming growth factor α (TGF-α), Notch, and the amyloid
precursor protein (APP).− Because of the important roles
of ADAM10 and ADAM17 in development and maintenance of normal physiology,
as well as in pathological mechanisms, both ADAM10 and ADAM17 have
been explored as targets for therapeutic interventions in cancer,
inflammatory disease, and Alzheimer’s disease.−

We have identified previously two cleavage sites in the KL
protein
by ADAM10 and ADAM17: one close to the juxtamembrane region (α1)
and a second between the KL1 and KL2 domains (α2) (Figure A and ref ()). However, the exact amino acid sequence of the recognition
sites by these two sheddases is unknown. In this study, we attempted
to identify the KL cleavage sites by mutating potential sheddase(s)
recognition sequences, and we examined the secretion of the KL extracellular
130 and 70 kDa fragments by transfection of the mutants in COS-7 cells.
We were able to identify the exact α1 cleavage site close to
the juxtamembrane region of KL. Moreover, we also demonstrated that
the cleavage at the α2 site is dependent on α1 cleavage.

ADAM10
and ADAM17 cleavage site motif prediction in KL protein.
(A) Schematic diagram of the KL protein structure and its processing
in COS-7 cells. KL protein contains a signal sequence (SS), two homologous
domains (KL1 and KL2), a transmembrane domain (TM), and a short cytoplasmic
domain (CD). The anti-KL antibody recognition region and the length
of the fragments are indicated. The predicted recognition sites are
in bold. Dashes (−) in the amino acid sequence indicate cleavage
positions. (B) A sequence alignment of 34 known substrate proteins
compiled by Caescu et al. was used to
generate a sequence logo with the program WebLogo 3.0. In the logo, the height of a particular letter
is proportional to the log of its frequency in the sequence alignment.

Experimental Procedures
Mutagenesis and Plasmid
Construction
The mutations
were introduced into KL cDNA in pcDNA3.1 vector and KL-V5 plasmid using the QuikChange Site-Directed mutagenesis
kit (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA) with the following sense and antisense
primers, respectively: KL EE mutant: 5′-TGTCCAGAAGAATTCGAAGAATGTACTGAGTGCAGTT-3′
and 5′-AACTGCACTCAGTACATTCTTCGAATTCTTCTGGACA-3′;
KLΔTL mutant: 5′-GTTTCCCGGGCCCAGAAGAAAGATTTTGTCCAG-3′
and 5′-CTGGACAAAATCTTTCTTCTGGGCCCGGGAAAC-3′;
KLΔTL PE mutant: 5′-GACAGCAATGGTTTCGAGGGCCCAGAAGAAAG-3′
and 5′-CTTTCTTCTGGGCCCTCGAAACCATTGCTGTC-3′;
and KLΔ9 mutant: 5′-GACAGCAATGGTTTCCATATGCCAGAAACTCTGGAAAG-3′,
5′-TTCCAGAGTTTCTGGCATATGGAAACCATTGCTGTC-3′,
5′-CCAGAAACTCTGGAACATATGTGTCCAGAAGAATTC-3′,
and 5′-GAATTCTTCTGGACACATATGTTCCAGAGTTTCTGG-3′.
The mutagenesis of KLΔ9 was done by introducing NdeI sites to
replace amino acids 954–955 and 961–962. The sequence
between the two NdeI sites was removed, and the plasmid was self-ligated
to produce KLΔ9 mutant with nine amino acids, 954–962,
deleted. The resulting mutant contains two additional amino acids,
H and M (CATATG), which were introduced to create the NdeI site. To
construct KLΔ9 tagged with V5 at the C-terminus, the EcoRI–XhoI
fragment from KL-V5 was ligated into the
KLΔ9 plasmid. The mutated plasmids were confirmed by DNA sequencing.
The mouse FGFR1c with a V5 tag in pcDNA3.1 plasmid was a gift from
Dr. Kuro-o (University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas,
TX and Jichi Medical University, Tochigi, Japan).

Cell Culture,
Transfection, Protein Sample Collection, and TCA
Precipitation
Details of cell culture, transfections, and
protein sample collection were described previously.

Western Blotting
Details of western
blotting were described
previously. The rat anti-KL antibody KM2076
(1:2000) was described previously and
was purchased from TransGenic Inc. (Tokyo, Japan). The antibodies
to total ERK and p-ERK were from the phospho ERK pathway kit (Cell
Signaling, Danvers, MA) and were used according to the manufacturer’s
protocol. The mouse anti-V5 antibody (1:5000) was from Invitrogen.

Immunofluorescence
Forty-eight hours post-transfection,
cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS at room temperature,
rinsed with PBS, and treated for 1 h with blocking solution (PBS supplemented
with 1% BSA with 0.1% Triton-X 100). Cells were incubated 45 min at
room temperature with the primary antibody diluted in blocking solution.
Cells were stained with antibodies to rabbit anti-V5 antibody (1:500,
Abcam, Cambridge, UK). Subsequently, cells were rinsed and incubated
with the relevant secondary antibody (Alexa 594) (Molecular Probes)
for 45 min at room temperature. Immunofluorescence images were obtained
by a Nikon Eclipse 660 microscope and a SPOT-cooled CCD digital camera
(Diagnostic Instruments).

Cell-Surface Biotinylation Assay
COS-7 cells in 6-well
plates were transfected with plasmids expressing KL980, KLWT, or KLΔ9. Forty-eight hours later,
cells were washed twice with PBS and incubated with a 1 mM solution
of cell impermeable NHS-SS-Biotin (Pierce, Rockford, IL) in PBS for
30 min on ice. Afterward, the cells were washed twice with ice-cold
PBS, and the cell lysates were collected. After collection and centrifugation,
the BCA protein assay (Pierce, Rockford, IL) was used to determine
the protein concentration of the samples. To precipiatate biotinylated
proteins, 100 μg of protein from each sample was incubated at
4 °C with neutravidin beads (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL)
overnight. Bound protein was eluted from the beads by incubating in
2× Laemmli sample buffer and separated by 10% SDS-PAGE.

FGF23
Signaling Assay
Details for the FGF23 signaling
assay were described previously. Briefly,
HEK293 cells were transfected with empty vector control (Ctrl) or
plasmids expressing either KLWT or KLΔ9. Twenty-four hours after
transfection, cells were incubated in serum-free medium for 2 h and
then either 50 ng/mL of bFGF (basic fibroblast growth factor) or 10
ng/mL of FGF23 (R&amp;D Systems, Minneapolis, MN) was added to the
wells. The cells were incubated for 15 min at 37 °C and then
were immediately washed in PBS and lysed in RIPA buffer containing
protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche, Mannheim, Germany). Various
incubation times and FGF23 concentrations were used as indicated in
the p-ERK phosphorylation kinetics and FGF23 dose–response
curve experiments. After lysis, samples were prepared for SDS-PAGE
as described previously.

Cell Viability
Assay
Details for the cell viability
assay were described previously. MO3.13
cells were plated in 96-well plates at a density of 0.65 × 106 cells/plate 1 day before the experiment. The cells were treated
with serum-free conditioned medium collected from 48 to 72 h post-transfection
of COS-7 cells transfected with either empty vector control, KL980,
KL WT, or KL Δ9. Twenty-four hours after treatment, cells were
assayed using the CellTiter-Glo luminescent cell viability assay (Promega,
Madison, WI).

Luciferase Transcription Factor Reporter
Assay
Details
for the luciferase reporter assay were described previously. MO3.13 cells were plated in 96-well plates at
a density of 0.65 × 106 cells/plate for transfection
on the following day. The cells were transfected with Sp1 and NF-κB
reporter plasmids (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) and incubated with conditioned
medium from COS-7 cells transfected with either empty vector control,
KL980, KL WT, or KL Δ9, as described above. Twenty-four hours
post-transfection, cells were assayed for luciferase activity.

Results
Determination
of the Potential Shedding Sites in KL
KL contains a signal
sequence (SS), two homologous domains (KL1 and
KL2), a transmembrane domain (TM), and a short cytoplasmic domain
(CD) (Figure A). We have identified two cleavage
sites for ADAM10 and ADAM17: one close
to the transmembrane (TM) region and another one between the KL1 and
KL2 domains (Figure A). However, the exact
sequences of the cleavage sites are not known. To predict the ADAM10
and ADAM17 recognition sites in KL, we examined highly conserved residues
found at cleavage sites in 34 reported substrate proteins as compiled
by Caescu et al. Sequence alignments
of these cleavage sites were used to generate sequence logos representing
the preferred amino acid residues for each primed and unprimed position
(Figure B). This analysis suggested that residues
at positions P5, P2, P1′, and P3′ are most predictive
of cleavage by ADAM17, whereas positions P1, P1′, P2′,
and P3′ are most predictive for ADAM10 (Figure B). Residues found with high frequency at ADAM10 and ADAM17
cleavage sites include either valine or leucine at the P1′
position. In addition, known ADAM17 substrates were enriched for Pro
at the P5 position, which was also selected by both ADAM10 and ADAM17
in peptide library experiments. Unlike
serine proteases, for which the P1 position is often critical for
cleavage site recognition, ADAM10 and ADAM17 do not appear to be highly
selective at this position. On the basis of these predicted recognition
patterns, there are two potential ADAM10/ADAM17 cleavage sites close
to the TM region (Figure A). In order to identify
which of the two potential sites is actually cleaved by these sheddases,
we mutated both sites and examined the KL secretion after transfection
of mutants in COS-7 cells, cells that express both ADAM10 and ADAM17 (Figure ). Replacement
of Thr-968 and Val-969 with two glutamic acid residues (KL EE) or
deletion of both amino acids (KLΔTV) did not reduce KL secretion
(Figure A). In fact, in the case of the KLΔTV
mutation, there was more secreted KL detected in the medium (Figure A, lane 4). For the KL EE mutation, there was more
of the 70 kDa KL fragment detected in the cell lysate compared to
KL WT (Figure A, lane 3). In contrast, deletion
of Thr-958 and Leu-959 (KLΔTL) resulted in 50–60% reduction
in KL shedding (Figure A,B,D), and an additional
mutation of Pro-954 to Glu (KLΔTLPE) resulted in a further reduction
in KL shedding by 70–80% (Figure B,D).
These results suggest that KL cleavage occurs primarily at the more
upstream site, possibly between Thr-958 and Leu-959. Furthermore,
deletion of the nine amino acids, 954–962 (KLΔ9), encompassing
the more upstream juxtamembrane site resulted in a 94% inhibition
of cleavage near the TM (α1 site) and between KL1 and KL2 (α2
site). When KLΔ9 was expressed, the 70 kDa band in the cell
lysate and the 130 kDa band in the medium were barely detectable (Figure C,D). Thus, mutations close to the TM region result
in reduction of both the 130 and 70 kDa forms of sKL (Figure B,C), suggesting that cleavage between the KL1 and
KL2 domains is dependent on the cleavage near the TM domain.

Determination
of the potential shedding sites and sheddases in
KL in COS-7 cells. (A–C, E) Western blots from COS-7 cells
transiently transfected with empty vector control (Ctrl) or with the
KL plasmids as indicated. Forty-eight hours post-transfection, cells
were incubated in serum-free media for 2 h, and the protein samples
were collected from either the cell lysate (Cell lysate) or the medium
(Medium). The medium samples in panel A were from 48 h post-transfection
conditioned medium (CM), whereas in panels B and C, the serum-free
medium was collected after 2 h incubation and TCA-precipitated as
described in the .
The estimated molecular weights of the KL fragments in the medium
are indicated (130 and 70 kDa). (D) Statistical analysis of the results
from panels A–C. The intensities of the 130 kDa bands were
analyzed and normalized to that of the KL bands from the tissue lysate
using the average intensity of the controls as 100% from 3 to 4 independent
experiments. Error bar indicates standard deviation. Significance
of results was determined using Student’s t-test: *, p &lt; 0.05; **, p &lt;
0.005. (E) Cotransfection experiments of KL WT and KL D9 with either
ADAM10 or ADAM17. Anti-HA antibody detects HA-tagged ADAM10, whereas
anti-V5 antibody detects V5-tagged ADAM17. (F) Statistical analysis
of the results from panel E. The intensities of the 70 kDa bands in
the medium were analyzed and normalized to the that of total KL bands
from the tissue lysate using the average intensity of the controls
as 100% from 3 independent experiments. Error bar indicates standard
deviation. Significance of results was determined using Student’s t-test: *, p &lt; 0.05.

We demonstrated previously that ADAM10 and ADAM17
are both responsible
for KL shedding in COS-7 cells. To determine
which of these shedding enzymes is responsible for the observed cleavage
at the nine amino acids (954–962) site, we cotransfected KL
WT or KLΔ9 with either ADAM10 or ADAM17. Cotransfection with
ADAM17 increased KL WT shedding by 7–8-fold but had no significant
effect on KLΔ9 shedding (Figure E and
F). Coexpression with ADAM10 did not increase KL shedding (Figure E,F). These results suggested that ADAM17 is the
main protease responsible for KL cleavage at amino acids 954–962
in COS-7 cells.

Subcellular Localization of the KL Mutant
To examine
the effect of the deletion in KL on its subcellular localization,
we performed immunofluorescence on COS-7 cells transfected with either
WT V5-tagged KL (KL WT) or KLΔ9. The results showed that the
KLΔ9 mutant distributed normally and similarly to that of KL
WT and other typical membrane proteins (Figure A). Furthermore, when we cotransfected KL GFP and KLΔ9 V5-tagged
into COS-7 cells and immunostained the cells with anti-V5 antibody,
the results showed that KL GFP and KLΔ9 colocalized (Figure B), suggesting that the KLΔ9 mutation does
not affect the subcellular localization, which was similar to that
of KL WT.

KLΔ9 mutant colocalization with KL WT and cell-surface distribution
in COS-7 cells. (A) Indirect immunofluorescence showed subcellular
localization pattern of KL WT and KLΔ9 mutant. COS-7 cells transfected
with KL WT or KLΔ9 mutant for 48 h were fixed, and indirect
immunofluorescence was performed using anti-V5 monoclonal antibody.
Green: anti-V5 (Alexa 488); blue: DAPI nucleus staining. (B) Colocalization
of KL GFP and KLΔ9 mutant with V5-tag. Green: GFP; red: anti-V5
(Alexa 594); blue: DAPI. (C) Western blots from COS-7 cells transiently
transfected with the KL plasmids as indicated. Forty-eight hours post-transfection,
the conditioned medium (Medium) was collected. The cells were surface-labeled
with biotin, and the protein samples were collected from the cell
lysates (Cell lysate). The biotinylated samples (Membrane) were pulled
down by neutravidin beads. (D) Statistical analysis of the results
from panel C. The intensities of the 130 kDa bands from the cell surface
were analyzed and normalized to that of the total KL bands from the
tissue lysate using the average intensity of the controls as 100%
from 3 independent experiments. The arrowhead in the middle panel
in C indicates nonspecific bands (arrowhead) at the 70 kDa position
in the CM samples, likely from the interaction of the antibody with
serum albumin. Error bar indicates standard deviation. Significance
of results was determined using Student’s t-test: *, p &lt; 0.05.

To quantify the amount of KL WT and KLΔ9 expressed
on the
cell surface, we conducted cell-surface biotinylation experiments.
We used a truncated secretory form of KL lacking the TM domain, KL980, as a non-membrane-localized control. As expected,
the cell-surface biotinylation assay revealed that KL980 did not localize
to cell surface (Figure C). KLΔ9 showed
about 60–70% cell-surface localization compared to that of
KL WT (Figure C,D). Similar biotinylation
experiments were also performed for the KLΔTL and KLΔTLPE
mutants. These two mutants had comparable cell-surface distribution
as that of KL WT (Figure D). These two mutants
do not show accumulation on cell surface, likely because they either
undergo more internalization or are more accessible to sheddases,
as shown in Figure A. Taken together, these
results suggested that even though KLΔ9 showed a normal distribution
similar to that of KL WT, it has less cell-surface distribution compared
to that of KL WT, likely due to less of the mutant protein being targeted
to the plasma membrane. However, because KLΔ9 shedding was severely
reduced (more than 90%), the modest observed decrease in plasma membrane
targeting cannot explain the impaired shedding for this mutant.

Functional Assay of the KL Mutant
To determine whether
the KLΔ9 mutation changes KL protein function, we performed
the FGF23 signaling assay in the HEK293 cell system transfected with
FGFR1 with KL acting as a coreceptor. Signaling was detected by assessing
ERK phosphorylation., The results showed that KLΔ9
induces phosphorylation of ERK in the FGF23 signaling assay in HEK293
cells similar to that of KL WT using 10 ng/mL FGF23 at the 30 min
time point (Figure A), indicating that the
mutation does not modify the ability of KL to function as a FGFR1
coreceptor. To examine the FGF23 signaling kinetics on ERK phosphorylation
of KL WT and KLΔ9, we compared ERK phosphorylation at various
times up to 45 min in HEK293 cells transfected with either KL WT or
KLΔ9. The results showed no difference in p-ERK kinetics of
KL WT vs KLΔ9 (Figure B,C). In addition,
we examined the effects of different FGF23 doses on KL WT and KLΔ9
and found that at higher FGF23 concentrations (50, 100, and 300 ng/mL)
KLΔ9 reached only 60–70% ERK phosphorylation compared
to that with KL WT (Figure D,E), likely because
of the lower cell-surface distribution of KLΔ9 (Figure C,D). These results suggest that KLΔ9 mutant
functions comparably as a FGFR1 coreceptor as KL WT on the cell surface.

KLΔ9
mutant showed similar function as KL WT in downstream
pERK signaling. HEK 293 cells transiently transfected with FGFR1c
and either KL WT or KLΔ9 were treated with 10 ng/mL FGF23 for
30 min to activate FGFR1c signaling. (A) Representative western blot
showing differences in ERK phosphorylation compared to total expression
of ERK after transfection of KL WT or KLΔ9. Lanes 1 and 2 are
negative controls without KL, and lanes 7 and 8 are positive controls
with bFGF. The antibodies used are indicated. (B) Bar graph depicting
no change in ERK phosphorylation normalized to total ERK expression
(error bars are ±SEM; n = 3) when comparing
KLΔ9 to KL WT. (C) Same experiments as in panel A with 0, 10,
20, 30, and 45 min time points for ERK phosphorylation kinetics analysis.
(D) Statistical analysis of the results from panel C. The intensities
of the pERK bands were normalized to that of the total ERK bands from
3 independent experiments. (E) FGF23 dose–response experiments.
Similar experiments as those in panels A and C, with different doses
of FGF23 for 10 min as indicated. (F) Statistical analysis of the
results from panel E. Error bar indicates standard deviation. Significance
of results was determined using Student’s t-test: *, p &lt; 0.05.

To demonstrate that the lower levels of soluble KL shed into
the
medium by KLΔ9 correlates with less activity compared to that
of KL WT, we collected the conditioned media (CM) of COS-7 cells transfected
with either KL WT or KLΔ9 and used the CM in various experiments
to assess sKL activity. Recently, we demonstrated that KL has dual
functions of inhibiting proliferation and enhancing differentiation
in MO3.13 cells, a human oligodendrocytic hybrid cell line. We treated MO3.13 cells with the CM of either
KL WT or KLΔ9 and found that the CM from cells transfected with
KL WT can inhibit MO3.13 cell proliferation, but much less inhibition
was observed with the CM from cells transfected with KLΔ9 (Figure A). Similar experiments were performed on MO3.13
cells transfected with the transcription factor (TF) luciferase reporters
Sp1 and NF-κB. We found that the
CM from KL WT transfected cells can inhibit MO3.13 cells Sp1 and NF-κB
TF reporter activity, but much less inhibition was observed with the
CM from KLΔ9 transfected cells (Figure B). These results demonstrate that KLΔ9 loses the activity
of sKL compared to KL WT, likely due to impaired shedding.

CM of COS-7
cells transfected with KLΔ9 has less inhibition
of proliferation and transcription factor reporter activity in MO3.13
cells compared to the that from CM of KL WT. (A) MO3.13 cells were
incubated with CM from either empty vector, KL WT, or KL Δ9
transfected COS-7 cells for 48 h and assayed for cell viability. Asterisks
(*) indicate statistical significance of p &lt; 0.01
by Student’s t test. Error bars indicate standard
deviation. Results are from 3 independent experiments. (B) Luciferase
assay of MO3.13 cells transfected with luciferase reporters as indicated.
Cells were incubated with CM from either empty vector, KL WT, or KL
Δ9 transfected COS-7 cells for 24 h and tested using the luciferase
assay. The luminescent signals were normalized to Renilla luciferase.
Luciferase activity was calculated relative to that of the control
(CM from empty vector transfected COS-7 cells), which was given a
value of 100%. Asterisks (*) indicate statistical significance of p &lt; 0.01 by Student’s t test.
Error bars indicate standard deviation.

Discussion
ADAM10 and ADAM17 do not appear to have
distinct recognition amino
acid cleavage sequence requirements, in that there is no particular
residue absolutely conserved at a given position in known sites of
cleavage. Many reports suggest that the position of each amino acid
is more important than the sequence of the substrate cleavage site.
The so-called “stalk” or linker region between the TM
and the first globular part of the protein determines whether the
substrate can be cleaved.− However, recent analysis of peptide
substrate libraries showed that both ADAM10 and ADAM17 have strong
sequence preferences., Using the information from peptide
library screening and systematic analysis of amino acids next to the
cleavage site of known substrates, we predicted and identified the
ADAM10 and ADAM17 recognition sites close to the TM region of KL to
be PGPET-LERF (amino acids 954–962) (Figure A). This site incorporates several residues frequently found
at ADAM10 and/or ADAM17 cleavage sites: a Pro residue at the P5 position,
a Glu residue at the P2 position, and a Leu residue at the P1′
position. Deletion of these nine amino acids resulted in a 94% reduction
in cleavage. We were not able to completely inhibit shedding, likely
because other proteases may also be involved in KL cleavage since
it is known that KL is a substrate for BACE1 and γ-secretase
in addition to ADAM10 and ADAM17. We cannot
exclude the possibility that ADAM10 and ADAM17 cut at other sites
but less efficiently. We demonstrated previously that both ADAM10
and ADAM17 can increase KL shedding; however,
we were not able to detect enhancement of KL shedding by overexpressing
ADAM10 in COS-7 cells (Figure E). Thus, we
conclude that in COS-7 cells ADAM17, rather than ADAM10, appears to
be the major sheddase.

We reported previously that membrane
anchoring is required for
KL shedding. To identify the function
of the shed KL, we initially prepared a truncated form of KL that
contains 980 amino acids all the way to the lysine before the TM.
This truncated form of KL contains the nine amino acid recognition
site; however, it was not a substrate for sheddases since it is a
soluble protein found in secretory vesicles. The membrane anchor region
is required for the sheddase to interact with KL and present the recognition
sequence for cleavage. Interestingly, deletion of the amino acids
968T and 969V (KLΔTV) downstream of the recognition sequence
increases KL shedding (Figure A). It is likely
that the deletion results in a conformation change in KL, which favors
sheddase recognition.

When assayed on peptide substrates, cleavage
activity of ADAM10
and ADAM17 was almost completely lost when alanine was used to substitute
the P1′ position. However, when
we substituted L959 with alanine, the resulting mutant had a similar
shedding pattern as that of KL WT (data not shown). This result suggests
that even though the chemical library provides valuable prediction
on sheddase selectivity, these proteases are likely to display more
promiscuity in vivo. One possibility for this discrepancy
is that short peptides are typically unstructured, whereas protein
substrates may have secondary or tertiary structures that influence
cleavage. However, point mutations in the ADAM17 substrate TNF-α
have similarly large effects on cleavage in vitro. Alternatively, comparing initial velocities of WT and mutant substrate
cleavage in vitro may not properly model cleavage
in cells, where sheddase activity is high and the system is not at
steady state.

There are two major cleavage sites in the KL protein
by sheddases:
one close to the juxtamembrane region and a second between the KL1
and KL2 domains (Figure A). In this study,
we identified the recognition site in the juxtamembrane region of
KL to be PGPET-LERF (aa 954–962). There are three potential
recognition sites between the KL1 and KL2 domains, PKSSA-LFYQ (aa
490–498), PENQP-LEGT (aa 510–518), and PLEGT-FPCD (aa
514–522), according to our rules of prediction. We made the
two amino acid deletion mutations at the P1 and P1′ positions,
and the results suggested that the second predicted site (aa 510–518)
is not the recognition site since the mutant was secreted similarly
to that of KL WT (data no shown). The other two mutations (D495–496
and D518–519) resulted in loss of both secreted fragments (70
and 130 kDa), likely because of protein misfolding and accumulation
in a subcellular compartment (data no shown). The identification of
the precise recognition site between KL1 and KL2 requires further
investigation. Here, we demonstrate that mutation in the juxtamembrane
region results in reduction of both the 130 and 70 kDa forms of sKL
(Figure B,C), suggesting that the cleavage
between the KL1 and KL2 domains is dependent on the cleavage near
the TM domain. We also found that the two cleavages happen simultaneously,
as both the 70 and 130 kDa fragments appeared at the same time in
the medium in a pulse–chase experiment (SI text of ref ()). Thus, these two cuts
happen simultaneously, and the cut between KL1 and KL2 is dependent
on the cleavage in the juxtamembrane region.

In this study,
we provide valuable information to predict the ADAM10
and ADAM17 recognition site in KL. These general rules for shedding
can be applied to search for the recognition sites in other α-secretase
substrate proteins. Here, we deleted the nine amino acid recognition
site and achieved 94% shedding inhibition. The mutation did not result
in a 100% reduction in shedding, either because there is no stringent
sequence requirement for ADAM10 and ADAM17 recognition or because
the remaining shedding activities may be due to β-secretase
or other sheddase(s). The secreted KL (sKL) and full-length membrane
form of klotho have distinct functions. sKL plays an important role
in oligodendrocyte differentiation and myelination, with a 50% reduction in KL in a KL+/– heterozygous mouse resulting in a strong hypomyelination phenotype
in the corpus callosum. In future experiments,
we plan to define the distinct roles of the two forms of KL by generating
knockin mice that express the KLΔ9 mutant, which will mostly
remain on the membrane. This knockin mouse line will be lacking sKL
and can be used to test the role of sKL in myelination and all other
humoral functions of sKL in vivo, including neuroprotection
in Alzheimer’s disease and tumor suppression in cancer.

This work was
supported by NIH-NIA grant AG-00001 to C.R.A.

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
KLklotho

ADAMa disintegrin and metalloproteinase

CSFcerebrospinal fluid

PCRpolymerase chain
reaction

DMEMDulbecco’s
modified Eagle’s medium

PBSphosphate buffered saline

FBSfetal bovine serum

BSAbovine serum albumin

SDS-PAGEsodium dodecyl
sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis

