The bacterium Francisella tularensis is an intracellular member
of the gamma Proteobacteria and the causative agent of tularemia,
a disease in humans and many other species.− Because of the
low dose sufficient for infection, the subspecies tularensis is one of the most virulent bacteria known and is classified as
a class A bioterrorism agent in the United States. F. tularensis employs bacterial surface proteins
to colonize the host cells by binding to specific host-cell receptors., After entry, the bacterium can escape from the phagosomal membrane
for replication and survival in the cytoplasm., During
the last 2 decades, biochemical and genetic analyses show that the
bacterium’s surface structure is among the factors that can
contribute to pathogenesis and virulence of F. tularensis., The surface structure is composed of an array of
macromolecules including proteins, lipids, sugars, and nucleic acids.
The dynamic processes of the surface include membrane turnover, alterations
in gene-expression profiles, capsular formation, and retractable elements
that modify the envelope structure to allow bacteria to adapt to changing
environments.− Bacteria use surface structure components to hide from the immune
system, attach to host cells, secrete effector molecules, and cope
with physiological stresses. In F. tularensis, the role of the surface in virulence is linked to the production
of a capsule and an unusual lipopolysaccharide (LPS).,

Despite the disease implications of F. tularensis, the mechanism of virulence is poorly understood. Proteins involved
in virulence have been identified on the surface of F. tularensis,− but their specific roles are largely undefined. The gene loci FTL_1416,
FTL_1415, and FTL_1414, which have been recently designated as capB, capC, and capA,
respectively, is highly conserved in the
genus Francisella and is necessary
for full virulence in the LVS vaccine strain of F.
tularensis subsp. holarctica. These genes encode three membrane proteins:
CapB (FTL_1416) of 44.9 kDa and 405 amino acid residues, CapC (FTL_1415)
of 16.7 kDa and 154 amino acid residues, and CapA (FTL_1414) of 44.4
kDa and 403 amino acid residues. Although the functions of the CapB,
CapC, and CapA proteins have not been unambiguously identified, studies
carried out in animal models have demonstrated that deletion of these
three proteins resulted in significant attenuation of bacterial virulence
in LVS.−,− Unmarked deletion of CapBCA in type A strain SCHU S4 resulted in
significant attenuation in virulence as well. However, the level of
attenuation in SCHU S4 was much less than in LVS. It has not yet been determined what stage of infection
is impacted by the loss of these proteins, with possibilities including
escape from the phagosomes to the cytosol, phagosomal maturation,
replication, or reinfection. The original annotation of the capBCA genes as being putative capsule genes was based on
their sequence homology to the poly-γ-glutamate (PGA) capsule
locus of Bacillus anthracis. Whole-genome sequencing revealed that CapB and
CapC proteins in F. tularensis LVS
share a 38 and 29% amino acid identity, respectively, to the proteins
CapB and CapC found in the poly-γ-glutamate (PGA) capsule biosynthetic
locus of B. anthracis., In B. anthracis, CapB and CapC are
believed to form a tight membrane-associated complex to catalyze the
synthesis of PGA, whereas CapA is suggested
to be a transporter.

PGA-based
capsules have been identified in many Gram-positive bacteria,
such as B. anthracis (see ref () for a review) and Staphylococcus epidermis, but are not typically found in Gram-negative bacteria because most
of these bacteria possess a polysaccharide-based capsule. Genome-sequencing
studies have revealed orthologues for PGA production proteins in several
Gram-negative bacteria, including Idiomarina loihiensis,Rhodopirellula baltica,Leptospira interrogans,Oceanobacillus iheyensis, and Desulfitobacterium
hafniense. In contrast,
the nature of the capsule in F. tularensis is still a subject of great controversy. Electron microscopy analyses
support the existence of a capsule in F. tularensis, whereas others suggest that the LPS
O-antigen might be the only capsule-like structure, with CapA, CapB,
and CapC playing no role.

To understand
the role of CapA in the virulence of F. tularensis, we characterized this protein from
the highly virulent strain F. tularensis subsp. tularesis SCHU S4. In this
study, the capA gene was cloned and overexpressed
in Escherichia coli as a C-terminal
His6-tagged folding reporter GFP fusion protein. A purification
protocol for CapA was developed, and the purified protein was subjected
to biophysical characterization using different techniques, including
SDS-PAGE gel electrophoresis, size-exclusion chromatography (SEC),
circular dichroism (CD), and dynamic light scattering (DLS). The experimental
results of this study are discussed in terms of a proposed role for
CapA in the virulence of F. tularensis.

Materials and Methods
Materials
All of the materials used
are given in the .

Cloning of CapA-frGFP
The SCHU S4 genomic DNA was provided
from Drs. C. Rick Lyons, Terry H. Wu, and Jason Zsemlye (Center for
Infectious Disease and Immunity, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque,
NM). The sequences of the CapA membrane protein (FTT0807) from F. tularensis subsp. tularesis SCHU S4 and of the folding reporter GFP were cloned into the pRSET B vector (Life Technologies, Carlsbad,
CA) using the In-Fusion cloning kit (Clontech, Mountain View, CA).
The sequence in the pRSET B vector immediately between the nucleotide
5′ of the ATG start codon and the sequence 5′-GATCCGGCTGCT-3′
near the T7 terminator was replaced by the following insert. The insert
contained, from 5′ to 3′, the full-length, unaltered
sequence of capA, the linker GGATCAGCAGGTTCCGCTGCTGGTTCTGGCGAATTC
encoding Gly-Ser-Ala-Gly-Ser-Ala-Ala-Gly-Ser-Gly-Glu-Phe, the sequence
encoding the full-length, unaltered frGFP, the sequence CACCACCACCACCACCAC
encoding the hexa-histidine tag, and the noncoding sequence TAATAATAAAAGGGCGAATTCCAGCACACTGGCGGCCGTTACTAGTG.
The corresponding parent expression vector for this construct was
called pRSET-natGFPHis (“nat” for expression of the
natural N-terminus of the target protein). The folding reporter GFP
carries a destabilizing mutation that has been shown to allow folding
and fluorescence of GFP only when its N-terminal-fused partner target
protein is also folded., In addition, the fusion
of frGFP provided a means to determine the localization of CapA in
the different cellular membranes, as has been reported for membrane
proteins of E. coli.−

Cloning of frGFP
The folding reporter GFP-His6 without capA was also cloned into pRSET B. The
sequence in pRSET B immediately between the nucleotide 5′ of
the ATG start and the sequence 5′-GATCCGGCTGCT-3′ near
the T7 terminator was replaced by the following insert. The insert
contained, from 5′ to 3′, the full-length, unaltered
sequence of frGFP, the sequence CACCACCACCACCACCAC
encoding the hexahistidine tag, and the noncoding sequence TAATAATAAAAGGGCGAATTCCAGCACACTGGCGGCCGTTACTAGTG.

Preparation of the Crude Membrane Fraction of CapA-frGFP
Fractions containing membranes were prepared following standardized
protocols for bacterial membrane proteins,, with a few modifications. All of the details
of this preparation are included in the . After isolation, the membrane pellet was flash-frozen
in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C. Then this fraction
was thawed, resuspended, and homogenized in 50 mM sodium phosphate,
pH 7.3 and 0.3 M sodium chloride prior to extraction.

Detergent Solubilization
of CapA-frGFP
The CapA-frGFP
protein was successfully solubilized with the following detergents
and concentrations: 1% β-DDM, 1% β-DM, 2% CYMAL-6, and
2% CHAPS. Further information on the procedure is included in the . Final suspensions were
analyzed by SDS-PAGE.

Purification of CapA-frGFP
The CapA-frGFP
protein was
first purified by nickel affinity chromatography in the presence of
each of the detergents tested. Then, the protein was further purified
by SEC using a Superdex-200 HR 10/300 gel-filtration column. All protein
fractions from both purification steps were analyzed for purity by
SDS-PAGE. More detailed information on the purification protocol can
be found in the .

Purification of the Folding Reporter GFP
The folding
reporter GFP was purified by nickel affinity chromatography followed
by a second purification step by SEC using a Superdex-200 HR 10/300
gel-filtration column. All elution fractions from both purification
steps were analyzed for purity by SDS-PAGE. More detailed information
on the purification protocol can be found in the .

SDS-PAGE and Western Blot
Analyses
Detection of proteins
was accomplished by SDS-PAGE using silver stain and Western blotting
as detection methods. SDS-PAGE was performed with Tricine-SDS gels
with stacking and resolving gels of 4 and 12%, respectively. For further
information on staining methods, see the . The mass of the purified CapA-frGFP protein was
verified to be 72 860 Da by MALDI-TOF mass spectroscopy using
sinapinic acid (SA) as matrix (Applied Biosystems DE-STR MALDI-TOF,
Mass Spectrometry service, Arizona State University).

Protein Sample
Preparation, Circular Dichroism (CD), and Dynamic
Light Scattering (DLS)
All information concerning sample
preparation, CD, and DLS is given in the .

Proteinase K Digestion
Digestion
of CapA-frGFP was
carried out with proteinase K. To adapt to the extreme proteolytic
sensitivity of proteins with intrinsically disordered regions, different
reaction tubes of 0.5 mL each were prepared with different amounts
of protein (25, 50, and 250 μg) and incubated in proteolysis
buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 200 mM NaCl, 5 mM CaCl2) with
increasing amounts of proteinase K (3.5, 31, 100, 200, 300, and 600
ng) at different incubation times (30, 20, 10, and 2 min) on ice.
The proteolytic reactions were stopped by adding PMSF to a final concentration
of 5 mM. The mass of the cleavage products obtained in the digestion
were directly verified by MALDI-TOF mass spectroscopy using sinapinic
acid (SA) as matrix (Applied Biosystems DE-STR MALDI-TOF, Mass Spectrometry
service, Arizona State University). Samples were also analyzed by
SDS-PAGE gel electrophoresis and visualized by Coomassie blue or Western
blotting using antibodies against GFP.

Bioinformatics and Disorder
Analyses
All of the information
concerning bioinformatics and disorder analyses is given in the .

Results
Membrane Protein
Topology and Secondary-Structure Predictions
of CapA
The sequence of CapA shows regions of predominantly
hydrophilic amino acids as well as regions that contain mainly hydrophobic
amino acid residues. To examine which regions of CapA are embedded
in the cell membrane and their in/out orientation relative to the
membrane, we predicted the membrane topology using several bioinformatics
algorithms. All programs identified an N-terminal transmembrane helix,
termed TM1, formed by amino acids 12–34, a large hydrophilic
region formed by residues 35–369, and a C-terminal transmembrane
helix, termed TM2, formed by amino acids 370–397 (Figure A). In addition to this, all predictors were in
agreement on the overall orientation of the transmembrane helices
relative to the membrane. As shown in  (which shows more detailed information on topology derived from
each program), the CapA protein is predicted to have its N- and C-termini
oriented toward the cytoplasm; therefore, the large hydrophilic domain
must be oriented toward the periplasm.

(A) Kyte and Doolittle
hydrophobicity plot of the CapA membrane
protein. Transmembrane (TM) regions are indicated
as black cylinders. These TM regions were predicted to form α-helices
by using several membrane topology prediction programs as described
in the text. (B) Amino acid sequence and domain structure of the CapA
membrane protein. Predicted secondary structures using the GOR algorithm are represented as solid lines (loops), enclosed
rectangles (α-helices), and block arrows (β-sheets). The
dashed rectangles indicate the transmembrane helices TM1 and TM2.
Larger loops corresponding to regions 1 and 2 are represented by dotted
lines.

Secondary-structure predictions
were performed using several predictors
such as GOR, NetSurfP, PSIPRED, and PORTER.− The average of these analyses
predicts the CapA protein to be mostly α-helical (35.2 ±
1.5%), with a high content of random coil (54.4 ± 1.1%) and a
small β-sheet content (10.4 ± 0.4%), where the error represents
the standard deviation from the results of the four programs. All
of the algorithms predicted a very similar distribution pattern of
the secondary-structure elements. As Figure B shows, for the secondary-structure elements predicted by the GOR
algorithm, that the CapA protein is predicted
to contain a total of 11 α-helices, with nine being located
in the hydrophilic domain, and eight short β-strands. A large
majority of the predicted random coil is located in the regions formed
by residues 65–105 and 260–320.

Initial Expression of CapA-frGFP
CapA was expressed
in E. coli from the pRSET-natGFPHis
vector to produce a C-terminally 6-histidine-tagged frGFP fusion protein
(Figure ). This construct results in the expression
of CapA with an unmodified N-terminus for natural targeting to the
membrane. The folding reporter GFP carries a destabilizing mutation
that allows folding and fluorescence only when its N-terminally fused
partner target protein is also folded., The reporter
GFP was used to identify the cellular location of CapA, as GFP becomes
fluorescent only when located in the cytoplasm and not in the periplasmic
space., The expression of the fusion protein was
monitored by western blotting using antibodies against GFP on whole
cells after growth at 20 °C (). In addition, uninduced cells and cells without the plasmid were
also grown under the same conditions for negative controls. In induced
cells, besides the full-length product at about 73 kDa, several fragmented
proteins were also visible, including a GFP-sized fragment at about
25 kDa, indicating proteolysis of the fusion joint. As it was expected,
a lower intensity band for the fragment of the fusion protein was
also detected on the gel for uninduced cells, and no bands were observed
for the cells without the plasmid. Whole cells were also positively
monitored by fluorescence emission on an advanced bio-spectrum imaging
system using an emission filter between 500 to 523 nm (UVP, LLC, Upland,
CA). The high emission fluorescence observed indicates that GFP is
correctly folded and located in the cytoplasm (). This confirms that CapA is an inner-membrane
protein with its N- and C-termini oriented toward the cytoplasm and
a very large hydrophilic domain located in the periplasmic region.

(A) Schematic
representation of the expressed CapA-frGFP fusion
protein (72.8 kDa). CapA was fused to the His-tagged folding reporter
GFP via a 12 amino acid linker (black rectangle). (B) Schematic representation
of the expressed folding reporter GFP (26.8 kDa).

Optimization of CapA-frGFP Expression and Purification
Terrific
broth medium was chosen for optimal cell growth based on
a significantly increased cell growth compared to Luria–Bertani
medium. Optimal expression of the CapA-frGFP fusion protein was achieved
at 20 °C with 12–15 h duration of the expression induction
phase. The inclusion of a His6 tag allowed purification
of the protein by affinity chromatography. Five detergents, β-DDM,
β-DM, CHAPS, CYMAL-6, and LDAO, were screened for their efficiency
to extract and purify CapA-frGFP. Membrane preparations were solubilized
in 50 mM sodium phosphate, pH 7.3, and 0.3 M sodium chloride containing
one of the following detergents: (i) 1% β-DDM, (ii) 1% β-DM,
(iii) 1% CYMAL-6, (iv) 2% CYMAL-6, (v) 1% CHAPS, (vi) 2% CHAPS, and
(vii) 1% LDAO. The CapA-frGFP protein could be extracted effectively
using all detergents (). To quantify
the efficiency of each of the detergents to extract the fusion protein
from the membranes, GFP absorbance measurements at 490 nm were carried
out (). The most efficient detergent
was β-DDM, with 46.5 mg of extracted protein from 1 L of TB
medium, followed by β-DM with 38.5 mg, and there were no significant
differences between CHAPS, CYMAL-6, and LDAO.

The supernatants
containing detergent-solubilized protein were purified by Ni-affinity
chromatography in the presence of a given detergent followed by elution
with 500 mM imidazole. The purity of each of the eluted fractions
was analyzed by SDS-PAGE and western blot (). The CapA-frGFP protein could be efficiently purified using
most of the detergents (data not shown). The exception was LDAO, where
the protein precipitated shortly after elution from the Ni-IMAC column.
Although the detergents CHAPS and CYMAL-6 were less effective in extracting
the protein, their use was continued to explore their effects on the
homogeneity, the conformational stability, and the oligomeric state
of the CapA-frGFP protein. For each detergent, elution fractions containing
CapA-frGFP were combined and dialyzed extensively against 20 mM HEPES,
pH 7.0, and 0.3 M sodium chloride to remove the imidazole prior to
biophysical characterization.

Gel-Filtration Analysis
SEC was used to purify the
solubilized CapA-frGFP and to assess its oligomeric state. Gel-filtration
analysis was carried out in 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.0, and 0.3 M sodium
chloride plus the appropriate detergent at the following concentrations:
0.05% β-DDM, 0.3% β-DM, 0.1% CYMAL-6, and 1% CHAPS. The
SEC chromatograms showed that CapA-frGFP was eluted in two major fractions:
one as an aggregated form from peak 1 (column void volume) and the
other as nonaggregated from peak 2 (Figure ). All fractions of the second peak of the SEC for all detergents
showed a very high purity upon SDS-PAGE analysis (Figure ). Using the monomeric molecular mass of 72.9 kDa
(as described above) and considering the following micelle sizes of
72, 45, and 46 kDa for β-DDM, β-DM, and CYMAL-6, respectively, and 6 kDa for CHAPS, the CapA-frGFP-detergent complex is estimated to be a heptamer in
the presence of β-DDM, a pentamer with β-DM and CYMAL-6,
and a tetramer in the presence of CHAPS.

Analytical gel-filtration
analysis of CapA-frGFP with the indicated
detergents in 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.0, and 0.3 M sodium chloride. The
arrows indicate the estimated elution position of the void volume
and of the oligomer species: tetramer (CHAPS), pentamer (β-DM,
and CYMAL-6), and dodecamer (β-DDM). The panels show silver-stained
SDS-PAGE of CapA-frGFP from the nonaggregated peak (indicated by a
star) following analytical gel filtration. M: protein molecular weight
marker.

Dynamic Light Scattering
(DLS)
To characterize the
size of the solubilized protein-detergent micelles, the hydrodynamic
radius of CapA-frGFP was analyzed by DLS in the presence of each detergent.
The oligomeric state of CapA-frGFP was found to be dependent on the
detergent used for purification (Figure ).
The hydrodynamic radii of the major species were 19.3, 10.4, and 9.5
nm for β-DDM, β-DM, and CYMAL-6, respectively, corresponding
to oligomers of 24, 8–9, and 8–9 identical protein subunits.
The smallest radius of 6.9 nm was found in the presence of CHAPS,
corresponding to an oligomer of 3–4 identical protein subunits.
The estimation of the oligomerization state of CapA-frGFP was done
as described in the previous section.

Size distribution comparison of CapA-frGFP
in the presence of detergents:
(A) β-DDM, (B) β-DM, (C) CHAPS, and (D) CYMAL-6. All experiments
were performed at 20 °C in 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.0, and 0.3 M sodium
chloride. The protein concentration was 10 mg mL–1 for the detergents β-DDM, β-DM, and CYMAL-6 and 20 mg
mL–1 for CHAPS.

The samples were homogeneous in size at low and moderate
protein
concentrations (5–20 mg mL–1), but larger
forms were observed at high protein concentrations (&gt;20 mg mL–1). For example, DLS measurements revealed particle
sizes of the protein–CHAPS complex with hydrodynamic radii
of 6.9–8.9 nm (with estimated molecular weights of 263–473
kDa) within a protein concentration range of 5–20 mg mL–1 (). Considering
72.9 kDa as the monomeric CapA-frGFP molecular mass and a micelle
size of 6 kDa for CHAPS detergent, the
oligomeric state of the CapA-frGFP protein is estimated to be between
a trimer and a hexamer at low protein concentrations. At higher protein
concentrations (25 and 30 mg mL–1), increasing amounts
of larger oligomeric species were observed (). Taken together, the detergents investigated in this study
are suitable for stabilizing CapA-frGFP in a stable and monodisperse
solution (polydispersity &lt;15%) up to 10 mg mL–1 for β-DDM, β-DM, and CYMAL-6 and 20 mg mL–1 for CHAPS.

Effects of Detergents and pH on Secondary
Structure
The far-UV circular dichroism spectrum of the CapA-frGFP
protein
was initially measured between 180 and 260 nm in the presence of β-DM
in 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.0, and 0.3 M sodium chloride at 20 °C using
a reduced-path-length cell (0.01 cm) (). The spectrum showed a strong CD signal with a positive band at
193 nm and a broad negative feature between 208 and 240 nm with two
minima near 208 and 222 nm, which is characteristic of a protein with
a large fraction of α-helices. Analysis of secondary-structure
content provided the following values: 32.5 ± 2.1% α-helix,
20.7 ± 1.5% β-sheet, and 46.8 ± 3.2% random coil.
For most measurements, circular dichroism spectra measurements were
performed using a regular-path-length cell (0.1 cm), whose use was
restricted to between 205 and 260 nm and yielded essentially equivalent
spectra and secondary-structure estimations. The spectra for the maltoside
detergents β-DDM, β-DM, and CYMAL-6 were largely similar
and yielded average secondary-structure values of 27 ± 1.8% α-helix,
23 ± 1.2% β-sheet, and 50 ± 2.8% random coil (Figure ). The use of CHAPS resulted in a single unresolved
peak near 220 nm, and the spectral analysis yielded a higher value
of 5% for the α-helical component with a corresponding 5% lower
value for random coil (Figure ). These values
are comparable to the predicted secondary-structure content of 24,
23, and 53% for α-helix, β-sheet, and random-coil content,
respectively, based upon the protein sequence. No significant changes
in the CD spectra were observed for CapA-frGFP in the presence of
β-DDM and 300 mM NaCl at pH values ranging from 3.0 to 9.0,
although the data indicate a small decrease of approximately 5% in
the α-helical content and a corresponding increase in β-sheet
content as the pH increased from 3 to 9 (). Thus, these results indicate that the fusion protein CapA-frGFP
is stable in a wide range of pH from 3.0 to 9.0. This unusual stability
of the CapA-frGFP protein might be attributed to the presence of the
folding reporter GFP protein.

Effect of detergents on far-UV CD spectra of
CapA-frGFP. All spectra
were recorded at 20 °C in 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.0, and 0.3 M sodium
chloride at the following detergent concentrations: 0.05% β-DDM
(green line), 0.3% β-DM (black line), 1% CHAPS (red line), and
0.08% CYMAL-6 (blue line).

To identify the contribution of the frGFP protein to the
spectra
of the CapA-frGFP fusion protein, CD measurements were performed on
purified folding reporter GFP (). The far-UV CD spectrum of the frGFP, in the absence of detergent,
showed a single minimum at 216 nm, which is characteristic of a β-sheet
structure. The averaging of the secondary-structure values obtained
from spectral analysis using CDPro software indicates the presence of 12 ± 0.9% α-helix, 55 ±
1.4% β-sheet, and 33 ± 2.0% random coil, in agreement with
earlier studies. No significant difference
was observed with the addition of 0.05% β-DDM, 0.3% β-DM,
0.1% CYMAL-6, or 1% CHAPS at 20 °C and pH 7.0. Likewise, no significant
differences were evident when the NaCl concentration was varied from
0 to 300 mM or when the pH was changed from 3 to 9. Thus, the effect
of detergents and ionic strength on the conformational stability of
the CapA-frGFP can be attributed to arising from changes in the secondary
structure of CapA and not frGFP.

Effect of Ionic Strength
on the Secondary Structure
To investigate the effect of ionic
strength on the secondary structure,
CD measurements were performed with CapA-frGFP in the presence of
either sodium chloride or calcium chloride at concentrations ranging
from 0 to 300 mM (Figure ). For β-DDM
with NaCl or CaCl2, the spectral band from 210 to 220 nm,
which is associated with the presence of α-helices, is present
at ionic strengths of 0.1 M and above, reaching a maximum at 0.2 M
(0.2 M NaCl and 0.075 M CaCl2), but greatly diminishes
in amplitude below 0.1 M. For CHAPS, the protein has a slightly higher
α-helical content, as described earlier, but the spectrum has
the same dependence upon ionic strength for both NaCl and CaCl2, with the spectral features being lost when the ionic strength
is decreased below 0.1 M. Thus, the presence of high concentration
of salt leads to a substantial increase in the secondary-structure
content of the CapA-frGFP protein at neutral pH, irrespective of the
detergent used.

Effect of ionic strength on conformational stability of
the CapA-frGFP
protein: (A) 0.05% β-DDM and NaCl, (B) 0.05% β-DDM and
CaCl2, (C) 1% CHAPS and NaCl, and (D) 1% CHAPS and CaCl2. Far-UV CD experiments were recorded at salt concentrations
ranging from 0 to 300 mM (0 mM, pink line; 50 mM, blue line; 100 mM,
green line; 200 mM, red line; and 300 mM, black line). These experiments
were performed in 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.0, at 20 °C. The protein
concentration was 0.5 mg mL–1.

Thermal Stability
To assess the thermal stability of
the CapA-frGFP protein in the presence of each detergent, CD measurements
were conducted at sample temperatures ranging from 4.5 to 90 °C.
For all of the detergents, the ellipticity at 220 nm decreased with
increasing temperatures, indicating a decrease in the α-helical
content (Figure ). For β-DDM, the spectral
features started to change above 25 °C. In contrast, the protein
was more stable in the detergents β-DM, CYMAL-6, and CHAPS,
as the spectra were independent of the temperature up to 37 °C.
Using the ellipticity at 220 nm as a marker for helicity, thermal-denaturation
profiles were determined for each detergent, yielding apparent melting
temperatures of 36, 41, 42, and 48 °C for β-DDM, β-DM,
CYMAL-6, and CHAPS, respectively. Thus, the samples purified using
CHAPS have the highest melting temperature and α-helical content.

Effect
of temperature on the conformational stability of the CapA-frGFP
fusion protein. (A) Temperature dependency of the far-UV CD spectra
of CapA-frGFP in 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.0, and 0.3 M sodium chloride, 0.05%
β-DDM, and 0.5 mg mL–1 protein. Eleven spectra
from 4.5 to 90 °C were recorded at increasing intervals of 5–10
°C. (B) Thermal-denaturation curves of CapA-frGFP in the presence
of β-DDM (green line), β-DM (black line), CHAPS (red line),
and CYMAL-6 (blue line) measured at 220 nm and at a rate of temperature
change of 1 °C min–1. Samples were heated from
4.5 to 90 °C. The apparent midpoint temperature of the protein
melting-point transition was Tm = 36.1
(β-DDM), 42.1 (β-DM), 48.3 (CHAPS), and 40.8 °C (CYMAL-6).

The stability of CapA-frGFP was
also examined by SDS-PAGE with
the sample prepared over the temperature range of 4–95 °C
(Figure ). Different samples of CapA-frGFP
were prepared and subjected to different temperatures before SDS-PAGE.
Unheated samples (4 and 20 °C) and those that were heated at
moderate temperatures (36 and 56 °C) showed the presence of two
bands on the gel. The upper band indicates a Mr value close
to the true molecular weight (Figure , lanes
1–4), and the lower band underestimates the true Mr value by approximately 8000 Da (Figure ,
lanes 5–7). However, the lower band disappeared after heating
the samples at temperatures ≥76 °C. Such behavior indicates
a compact, SDS-resistant, secondary structure that results in the
protein migrating through the gel faster than protein unfolded by
a combination of SDS and heat. This behavior has also been described
for SDS-PAGE analyses of TonB-dependent receptors,, a variety of porins, and the outer-membrane
protein BtuB.

Analysis of secondary
structure as identified by SDS-PAGE. Silver-stained
SDS 12% PAGE gel of CapA-frGFP after incubation for 1 h at 4, 20,
36, and 56 °C; for 30 min at 76 °C; and for 10 min at 95
°C.

Prediction of a Long Disordered
Region in the CapA Protein
The sequence of CapA was analyzed
using several programs that predicted
the presence of disordered regions in proteins such as the ammonia
channel from E. coli and the outer-membrane
protein G from E. coli., On the basis of these programs, the region of CapA formed by residues
260–315 is disordered or has increased propensity for disorder
(Figures A,B). Using a composite profiler
tool (Figure C), the disordered region is
depleted of order-promoting residues (W, C, F, Y, V, L, and H) and
enriched in disorder-promoting residues (S, P, D, and K). The abundance
of charged residues (K and D) and the lack of hydrophobic residues
(W, F, and Y) indicate a high net charge and a low mean hydrophobicity,
respectively. Such a combination has been correlated with intrinsic
disorder in proteins and thus can be used to discriminate intrinsically
disordered from folded proteins. On the
basis of a charge-hydrophobicity phase space distribution, a clear
tendency was revealed for intrinsic disorder, with CapA being located
in the region of folded proteins (Figure D).
The high content of polar and charged residues of this unstructured
region indicates that it may be highly solvent exposed, suggesting
that the secondary structure may be influenced by the ionic strength,
as has been reported for other proteins with disordered regions.−

Prediction
of intrinsically disordered residues in the CapA membrane
protein. (A) Plot comparing the prediction by PONDR VSL2 (red line),
PONDR-FIT (green line), MetaPrDOS (blue line), and MetaDisorder (purple
line). Structured domains are shown by black horizontal lines (S1
and S2). The transmembrane regions are shown by red horizontal lines.
Structured, nontransmembrane regions are shown by blue horizontal
lines. The dashed line at 0.5 on the y axis is the
threshold line for disordered/ordered residues. Residues with a score
above this line are predicted to be disordered, and residues with
a score below this line are predicted to be ordered. (B) Predicted
disordered regions on CapA. (C) Composition profile of full-length
CapA (red bars) and of the predicted disordered region (green bars).
Analysis was performed using the composite profiler tool and the SwissProt51
database. Horizontal bars indicate order-promoting and disorder-promoting
residues. (D) Charge-hydrophobicity phase space for full-length CapA
(green square) and for the predicted disordered region (blue dot).
Red dots depict intrinsically disordered proteins described in the
literature (data taken partially from ref ()). Black squares depict natively folded proteins
obtained from the PDB database. The solid black line represents the
border between intrinsically disordered proteins and folded proteins.

Experimental Evidence of
an Intrinsically Disordered Region
in the CapA Protein
A distinctive feature of proteins that
possess intrinsically disordered regions is their sensitivity to proteolysis, which results in their rapid and complete degradation
by proteases even under the usual conditions of limited proteolysis.
Limited proteolysis occurs preferentially at those loops that display
inherent conformational flexibility, whereas the protein core remains
quite rigid and thus resistant to proteolysis.− Therefore, to identify the presence of an intrinsically
disordered region in CapA experimentally, proteolysis experiments
were performed using proteinase K, which has been described to hydrolyze
flexible and therefore disordered regions.−

Incubation of purified
CapA-frGFP with increasing concentrations of proteinase K ranging
from 0.06 to 1.2 ng μL–1 at incubation times
of 10, 20, and 30 min led to the formation of many degradation products
(data not shown). Under these conditions, proteinase K degrades the
full-length CapA-frGFP protein into small fragments of molecular weights
≤15 kDa. Two more fragments at about 27 kDa are apparent, most
likely containing the fragments of frGFP alone and linker-frGFP. However,
a different protein-degradation pattern was observed when the amount
of proteinase K was decreased to 0.007 ng μL–1 and the incubation time was reduced to 2 min (Figure A, lane 1). Under these conditions, the presence of the prominent
band at about 73 kDa indicates that the full-length CapA-frGFP is
mostly resistant to this protease treatment. In addition, two additional
groups of bands are also visible on the gel: two bands migrating between
37 and 50 kDa and two more bands migrating between 25 and 37 kDa.
The fragments corresponding to these four bands were also detected,
along with the fragments of the singly and doubly charged ions of
the full-length protein (73 and 36.5 kDa, respectively), on MALDI-TOF
experiments (Figure A). Western blot analysis
with antibodies specific for GFP revealed that, besides the fragment
at 73 kDa for the full-length protein, only the upper bands contain
frGFP (Figure A, lane 2). Despite the high
number of predicted cleavage sites on CapA-frGFP for proteinase K
(a total of 326), our results with limited proteolysis demonstrates
the presence of two particularly susceptible locations: cleavage site
1 between residue Ser275 and Asp276 and cleavage site 2 between residue
Thr291 and Ser292 (Figure B). The fragments
lacking frGFP that migrate between 25 and 37 kDa (lower bands in Figure A, lane 1) can be identified as fragments 1 (Figure B) with observed molecular weights of 30.4 and
32.2 kDa. The fragments that contain frGFP and migrate between 37
and 50 kDa (upper bands in Figure A, lane
1) can be identified as fragments 2 (Figure B) with observed molecular weights of 40.8 and 42.6 kDa. Thus, these
results are consistent with the region of the protein between residues
268 and 316 as being highly disordered and therefore prone to proteolytic
cleavage.

Evidence of an intrinsically disordered region in CapA. (A) Limited
proteolysis of CapA-frGFP protein. CapA-frGFP protein at 0.5 mg mL–1 was digested with 0.007 ng μL–1 of proteinase K on ice. Digestion was stopped after 2 min and visualized
by SDS-PAGE using Coomassie blue stain (lane 1) and western blot with
anti-GFP antibody (lane 2). Fragments generated after proteolysis
are marked by long arrows. The upper band at about 73 kDa corresponds
to the uncleaved protein. The molecular masses of the marker are indicated
by triangles. (B) Schematic representation of the CapA-frGFP protein.
The linker and the 6× His-tag are in blue and pink, respectively.
The sequence is not to scale. The hypothetical cleavage sites, the
two fragments, and the molecular masses of each fragment are indicated.

Discussion
Despite
their key role in virulence, the characterization of the
inner- and outer-membrane-associated proteins of F.
tularensis is still limited because of the challenge
of isolating these proteins in a pure, monodisperse, stable, and functional
state. Toward this end, we have developed a purification protocol
coupled with biophysical characterization and sequence analyses of
the integral membrane protein CapA from the highly virulent SCHU S4
strain of F. tularensis. To generate
large amounts of pure membrane protein, we have developed a simple
and very efficient method of purification of the CapA protein tagged
with the folding reporter GFP., Optimal solubilization
conditions were found using the detergents β-DDM, β-DM,
CYMAL-6, and CHAPS (). Preparation
yields were 15 mg of purified CapA-frGFP per 1 L of culture with CYMAL-6
and CHAPS detergents and 30 mg of purified CapA-frGFP per 1 L of culture
using β-DDM and β-DM. The oligomeric state of the CapA-frGFP
protein was shown to be detergent-dependent (Figure ). The estimated values range from an oligomer consisting
of 3–4 identical protein subunits in the presence of CHAPS
to a larger oligomeric state observed in the presence of β-DDM
with approximately 24 identical copies of the CapA-frGFP protein.
Despite the large changes in the oligomeric states formed in the presence
of different detergents, all CapA-frGFP protein complexes were shown
to be highly monodisperse (polydispersity &lt;15%) with all of the
detergents investigated.

The conformational stability of the
CapA-frGFP protein was examined
using CD (Figures –). Use of the detergents β-DDM, β-DM, and CYMAL-6
showed similar spectral features, with two large peaks of negative
ellipticity centered at 210 and 220 nm, which is characteristic of
a protein with a large fraction of α-helices. The use of CHAPS
resulted in a notable change in the observed spectrum and a corresponding
small increase in the α-helical content. The CapA-frGFP protein
was found to be stable throughout a large pH range (). The thermal stability of the secondary structure
was examined by native SDS-PAGE at different temperatures and revealed
that the higher α-helical content corresponds with an increased
stability of the CapA-frGFP, as measured by the melting temperature
(Figure ).

Disordered Region of CapA
To maintain
its stability,
the CapA-frGFP fusion protein requires an ionic strength of 0.2 M
or higher, indicating that electrostatic interactions are playing
a role in stability of the protein (Figure ). This effect suggested that CapA has a disordered region, as many
proteins with disordered regions can be transformed into more ordered
conformations when electrostatic repulsion is reduced by the binding
of oppositely charged ions.− An analysis of the sequence and proteolysis experiments
(Figures  and ) revealed
the disordered region to involve residues 268–316. This region
contains an abundance of charged amino acids (nine K residues, four
D residues, and two E residues), making it very flexible and hydrophilic,
with a relatively high positive net charge (+3), which is characteristic
of solvent-exposed regions. Disordered regions have been implicated
as being binding sites of proteins to their target molecules,− suggesting that this region of CapA may interact with other proteins.
These interacting proteins may include CapB and CapC, as a study of
the protein–protein interactions using 2D BN/SDS-PAGE gels
analysis in the LVS vaccine strain of F. tularensis identified a complex with a size of 400 kDa formed by these three
proteins. We propose that CapA interacts
with CapB and CapC through the disordered region of CapA; work is
underway in our laboratories to identify the specific interactions.

Role of the CapA Protein in Polysaccharide Formation
Gram-negative
bacteria have a more complex cell wall envelope than
their Gram-positive counterparts. The outer and inner membranes of
Gram-negative bacteria are separated from the plasma membrane by a
prominent periplasmic space. Integral membrane proteins found in the
outer membrane are mainly β-barrel outer-membrane proteins (β-barrel
OMPs). These β-barrel OMPs mainly function as pores to allow
the transport of nutrients, solutes, and waste products in and out
of the cell. In contrast, integral membrane proteins found in the
inner membrane are mostly α-helical inner-membrane proteins
(α-helical IMPs). Among other functions, α-helical IMPs
have been described to be involved in the biosynthesis and export
of the polysaccharide-based capsule in Gram-negative bacteria. In this work, we have combined the use of membrane
topology predictors with frGFP as a C-terminal reporter to demonstrate
that the CapA protein is an IMP.

The CapA protein has two transmembrane
helices located at the N- and C-termini of the protein and a very
large hydrophilic domain of approximately 340 amino acid residues
between TM1 and TM2 (Figure A). This topology
is similar to that of a family of proteins called polysaccharide co-polymerases
(PCPs). PCPs, also known as BY-kinases
(for bacterial tyrosine kinases), belong
to a superfamily of membrane proteins usually encoded by genes in
the large operons involved in the export of polymeric compounds such
as LPS, O-antigen polysaccharides, and capsule polysaccharides (CPS)
in both Gram-negative and Gram-positive species.,,, The PCPs are
located in the cytoplasmic membrane and are distinguished by their
common membrane topology of one transmembrane helix located at the
amino terminus region and another at the carboxyl terminus region.
Between the transmembrane helices is a large hydrophilic region ranging
from 130 to 400 amino acid residues, which, for several Gram-negative
bacteria, is located on the periplasmic side of the inner membrane
and contains regions with significant α-helical content.,

Three crystallographic structures of PCP proteins of the subfamily
PCP1 are currently available. The periplasmic
domains of FepE (E. coli), WzzB (Salmonella typhimurium), and WzzE (E. coli), despite a limited sequence identity (15–20%),
all exhibit a very similar 3D fold that can be divided structurally
into two domains: an α/β base domain and a protruding
α-helical domain. In light of this structural information and
in order to explore wider structural similarities within the PCP family,
secondary-structure predictions have been used by Morona and co-workers
to analyze representatives of each PCP subfamily and to compare them
with the known atomic resolution structures of PCP1 proteins. The proteins Wzc from E. coli, ExoP from Sinorhizobium meliloti, and CpsC from Streptococcus pneumoniae, which are representative of the PCP2 subfamily, were shown to have
a very similar membrane topology as the PCP1 group, namely, two TM
helices flanking a hydrophilic domain of about 300 residues for Wzc
and ExoP and 130 residues for CspC.

This conservation of topology
suggests that all PCPs adopt a similar
fold and supports the identification of CapA from F.
tularensis as a PCP. The secondary-structure predictions
indicate the presence of β-strands at similar topological locations
as in PCP proteins: a β strand at the N-terminal end of the
hydrophilic region distal to TM1 and another β strand at the
C-terminus of this region proximal to TM2. Another similarity with
the PCP1 group is the long flexible connections between the secondary-structure
elements. CapA is predicted to contain several additional β-strands
and fewer α-helices than that found in PCP1 proteins, as has
been also observed for the capsule proteins CapA from S. aureus and CspC from S. pneumoniae. Although the sequence of the hydrophilic domain of CapA from F. tularensis does not match any structurally characterized
protein, the pairwise sequence identity between the sequences of CapA
and the PCP proteins WzzE and WzzB (from PCP1 group) and Wzc and ExoP
(from PCP2 group) calculated with BLAST reaches from 11 to 15% for
their hydrophilic segments alone, which would be in agreement with
the limited sequence identity described earlier for this protein family.
In addition, sequence analysis of the periplasmic regions of PCP proteins
has revealed the presence of random-coil regions,, as found for CapA from F. tularensis. Examination of the periplasmic region using disorder predictors
has demonstrated that this region is potentially disordered for several
members of the PCP family (),
which would be in agreement with the weak electronic density observed
for these regions in their crystallographic structures.

Conclusions
The CapA membrane protein
from F. tularensis can be purified
as a stable, monodisperse solution. These preparations
have allowed a detailed biophysical characterization, and crystallization
trials are underway to determine the 3D structure. The sequence analyses
predict transmembrane helices at the N- and C-termini regions and
a mostly α-helical secondary structure with several β-strands.
The sequence analyses and proteolysis experiments demonstrate that
CapA has a disordered region in the hydrophilic domain at residues
268–316 that becomes more ordered at high ionic strength. CapA
probably interacts with CapB and CapC through this disordered region;
these interactions are currently being investigated in our laboratory.
CapA is shown to be an inner membrane protein with a topology characteristic
of polysaccharide co-polymerases. On the basis of all of these properties,
we propose CapA to be a co-polymerase involved in polysaccharide assembly
in the cell, with loss of this function contributing to the observed
loss of virulence when the capBCA locus is deleted.

Supporting Information Available
Material
and methods, western
blot analysis of the detergent screening of the CapA-GFP protein,
SDS-12% PAGE of the CapA-GFP protein after purification in the presence
of β-DM with Ni-IMAC, size distribution of the CapA-GFP protein
in the presence of CHAPS detergent at different protein concentrations,
far-UV CD experiment of CapA-GFP at different pH values, far-UV CD
experiments of the folding reporter GFP, and predictions of intrinsically
disordered regions of PCP proteins. This material is available free
of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi401644s_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
∥ M.D.R.:
Ventana Medical Systems, Inc., 1910 East Innovation Drive,
Tucson, Arizona 85755, United States.

Author Contributions
Kathryn F.
Sykes supervised the GFP fusion constructs. Mark D. Robida did cloning
and expression of the CapA membrane protein in pRSET-natGFPHis. Andrey
V. Loskutov designed and constructed the Waldo-linker-GFP insert and
was involved in the construction of the pRSET-natGFP vector. Felicia
M. Craciunescu cloned the GFP-His into pRSET B vector. Debra T. Hansen
and Andrey V. Loskutov co-wrote the methods sections describing the
clones. James Zook purified the GFP-His protein. Rebekka M. Wachter,
Debra T. Hansen, and James Zook participated in revising the article
critically for important intellectual content. Jose M. Martin-Garcia,
Petra Fromme, and James P. Allen contributed to the conception and
design of the experiments. Jose M. Martin-Garcia acquired and analyzed
the data. Jose M. Martin-Garcia, James P. Allen, and Petra Fromme
contributed equally to the interpretation of the data. Jose M. Martin-Garcia
and James P. Allen contributed equally to the writing of the manuscript,
with comments from all authors.

This work was
funded by National Institutes of Health award U54 GM094599, the center
for Membrane Proteins in Infectious Diseases (MPID), which is funded
as part of the NIH PSI:Biology Initiative.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank
all of the staff at the MPID Center (Arizona State
University, Tempe, USA), particularly, Tina Esquerra, the manager
of the Center, and Katerina Dörner for her many helpful comments
and suggestions.

Abbreviations
CMCcritical micelle concentration

SDSsodium dodecyl
sulfate

GFPgreen
fluorescent protein

frGFPfolding reporter green fluorescent protein

SECsize-exclusion chromatography

MALDI-TOFmatrix assisted
laser desorption ionization time of flight

SAsinapinic acid

PVDFpoly(vinylidene difluoride)

DLSdynamic light scattering

CDcircular dichroism

TMtransmembrane

LPSlipopolysaccharide

PGApoly-γ-glutamate

LVSlive vaccine strain

CPScapsule polysaccharides

OMPouter membrane
protein

IMPinner
membrane protein

PCPpolysaccharide co-polymerases

