Escherichia coli integration
host factor (IHF)
is a basic, heterodimeric 22 kDa DNA binding protein that belongs
to a class of histone-like proteins capable of bending and wrapping
DNA into condensed structures.− As such, one of its biological functions is condensation of the
bacterial nucleoid along with other basic proteins such as DPS, HU,
and H-NS.,, In this case,
multiple IHF, HU, and H-NS proteins assemble onto DNA in a sequence-independent
(nonspecific) manner to condense the duplex. IHF is unique, however,
in that it also binds to specific DNA sequences with high affinity., This specific DNA binding activity is associated with the regulation
of a number of cellular processes, including transcription, DNA replication, and
site-specific recombination.,

In addition to
these host functions, IHF is required for the development
of several viruses, including bacteriophage lambda. Indeed, IHF was
originally described as a host protein that is required for site-specific
integration of the lambda genome into the E. coli genome during lysogeny., A number of IHF recognition
sequences (H-elements) have been identified in the viral synapse site
(attP), and specific binding of IHF to these elements
is required to assemble the integrase complex. IHF also plays an important role in the lytic pathway of
lambda development. A variety of studies have demonstrated that the
host protein stimulates virus development in vivo(,) and genome packaging reactions in vitro.−

Terminase enzymes are responsible for viral genome packaging, and we have demonstrated that IHF promotes the
assembly of a terminase motor complex at cos, the
packaging initiation site in a lambda genome (Figure A)., Our lab is interested in the
thermodynamic features of packaging motor assembly; unfortunately,
this represents a cooperative, multipartite interaction of four heterotrimeric
terminase protomers and an indeterminate number of IHF proteins with
multiple, putative recognition elements dispersed within the ∼270
bp cos sequence (Figure B).,,, This presents an extremely complex system from which to dissect
detailed mechanistic information. Therefore, as a first step toward
biochemical characterization of these viral genome packaging complexes,
we here characterize the most fundamental of these interactions, binding
of IHF to the lambda cos sequence. The results provide
insight into the general mechanism by which IHF can promote the assembly
of specific regulatory complexes in the context of a vast excess of
nonspecific nucleoid formation within the cell.

(A) Assembly of a viral
genome maturation and packaging complex
at the cos site of the lambda genome. The terminase
protomer is composed of one large gpA subunit tightly associated with
two smaller gpNu1 subunits. Four protomers and an indeterminate number
of IHF dimers cooperatively assemble at a cos sequence
of a genome concatemer to engender the packaging motor complex; cos (red dots) represents the junction of two genomes in
a concatemer and serves as the packaging initiation site. Terminase
and IHF are depicted as blue and purple circles, respectively, for
the sake of simplicity. The assembled motor nicks the duplex at cosN to yield the 12-base “sticky” end of
the genome (complex I). This intermediate binds a procapsid to yield
the functional packaging motor (complex II), which translocates viral
DNA into the shell. (B) Detail of the cos region
of the lambda genome. The sequence is multipartite consisting of cosN (nicking) and cosB (binding) subsites; cosB extends from I2 to R1 elements. The gpNu1 subunit specifically interacts with the three
R elements, and several putative IHF consensus sequences have been
identified (I0–I4). The model duplexes used in this study are
indicated in the Figure: cos274 (274 bp), [R3-I1-R2]
(75 bp), [I2-R3-I1] (75 bp), I1 (27 bp), and R3 (27 bp). (C) Structural
models for IHF–DNA nucleoprotein complexes. The left panel
shows the crystal structure of IHF bound in a specific complex with
the H′ element of attP (PDB entry 1OWF) showing a duplex
bend angle of &gt;160°. The DNA binding site size in this complex
is ∼34 bp. The middle panel shows the cocrystal structure of Anabaena HU protein bound in a nonspecific complex (PDB
entry 1P71)
depicting a “weak” (∼105°) bend in the duplex
that is found in condensed, nucleoid DNA. The DNA binding site size
in this complex is ∼20 bp. The right panel shows the structural
model for IHF bound in a nonspecific, linear complex. The model was
constructed using MacPymol by manually docking the crystal structure
of IHF onto the minimal nonspecific R3 duplex. The DNA binding site
size in this complex is ∼8 bp. In all structures, DNA is colored
cyan and the α and β subunits of IHF are colored light
and dark purple, respectively.

Experimental Procedures
DNA Substrates
DNA oligonucleotides
(unmodified, 5′-end-labeled
with IRDye 700, and 5′-end-labeled with 6-carboxyfluorescein)
were obtained from Integrated DNA Technologies (Coralville, IA). Preparation
of the duplex substrates used in this study is described in the . The molecular weights
and extinction coefficients of the DNA substrates were calculated
on the basis of their sequences and the molecular weights and extinction
coefficients of any appended dyes. The
concentration of the oligonucleotide strands and DNA duplexes was
determined spectrally using their calculated extinction coefficients.

Purification of Integration Host Factor (IHF)
IHF was
purified from HN880, a heat-inducible IHF-overproducing strain (a
kind gift of H. Nash, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD),
as described previously. The concentration
of IHF was determined spectrally (ε276 = 5800 M–1 cm–1), and the purified protein
was analyzed by sedimentation velocity analytical ultracentrifugation;
this affords an s(20,w) of 1.96 S (data
not shown) and an experimental molecular weight of 22.2 kDa, which
compares to the theoretical value based on the protein sequence (22.0
kDa). Importantly, there was no evidence of dissociation of the heterodimer
or further self-association or aggregation of the protein in the concentration
range utilized in this study.

Electrophoretic Mobility
Shift (EMS) Studies
Equilibrium
binding experiments were performed in 20 mM Tris buffer (pH 8 at 4
°C) containing 55 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 7 mM β-me, 2 mM spermidine,
and 10% (v/v) glycerol. The IRDye 700-labeled DNA substrate was included
at a final concentration of 4 nM, and IHF was added as indicated in
each individual experiment. The binding reaction mixtures were incubated
at room temperature for 20 min and then loaded onto an 8% polyacrylamide
gel (80:1 acrylamide/bisacrylamide mixture for the 274 bp substrates;
29:1 acrylamide/bisacrylamide mixture for the 75 and 27 bp substrates).
The gels were run at 15 V/cm in 0.5× TBE at 4 °C for 1 h,
and scanned using an Odyssey scanner (LI-COR Biosciences). The DNA
present as unbound (free) and gel-retarded (bound) species was quantified
using the ImageQuant software package (GE Healthcare Life Sciences),
and the fraction of bound DNA (Fbound)
was calculated according to

Analysis of the EMS Binding Data Using a
Nonspecific Finite
Lattice DNA Binding Model
Record and co-workers, building
on the elegant work of McGee and von Hippel, have developed a model that is essentially a Scatchard formulation
that takes into account the nonspecific, cooperative binding of a
ligand (e.g., protein) to a one-dimensional lattice of finite length
(e.g., DNA). The binding isotherm is
described bywhere [protein]free represents
the concentration of free protein in the titration mixture, n is the nonspecific protein binding site size in base pairs, N is the duplex length in base pairs, υns represents the protein binding density (moles of protein bound per
base pair in the duplex), Kns is the intrinsic
equilibrium constant for protein binding to the nonspecific site,
and (ff)n−1 is the probability
of finding n – 1 free base pairs adjacent
to any given unbound base pair in the duplex (i.e., an unoccupied
protein binding site of size n).where ω is the cooperativity
factor
and

To apply this model to EMS data, which
yields the fraction of bound duplex (Fbound) at a given concentration of IHF, we need expressions that describe
this experimentally observed value. The fraction of free duplex (Ffree) can be calculated according to the following
equationand therefore

Equation  can be rearranged
to generate
an expression for (ff)N−1, and
upon substitution into eq  and rearrangement,
it can be shown thatwhere [protein]total and [DNA]
represent the total molar concentrations of protein and DNA, respectively,
added to the reaction mixture. Importantly, this formulation includes
the nearest neighbor cooperativity parameter (ω, embedded within
ff), which describes cooperative protein assembly on the duplex.

To constrain the analysis and provide well-resolved parameters,
an ensemble of EMS data for cos274, [R3-I1-R2], and
[I2-R3-I1] model duplexes (in triplicate, representative data shown
in Figures A, C, and D, respectively) were globally fit to eq  by nonlinear least-squares (NLLS) analytical methods
using Scientist (Micromath Scientific Software). The duplex length
(N) was held as a local constant for each duplex.
The IHF binding site size (n = 8) and duplex concentration ([DNA]) were held as global constants. Kns, υns, and ω were global
variables that were allowed to float to their best values. The best
fit of the ensemble of data is shown as solid lines in Figure A.

Electrophoretic mobility shift (EMS) studies of binding
of IHF
to specific (cos274) and nonspecific (ns274) DNA
substrates. (A) Representative polyacrylamide gel showing that IHF
binds to the specific cos274 substrate to afford
a distinct retarded complex. The positions of free (F) and bound (B)
DNA complexes are indicated with arrows at the right of the gel image.
The band in the middle of the gel represents a contaminant in the
IRDye-labeled duplex (). It is unaffected in the titration study and was not considered
in the calculation of Fbound. (B) Representative
polyacrylamide gel showing that IHF binds to the nonspecific ns274
substrate to afford a concentration-dependent shift and smear on the
gel. The positions of free (F) DNA and the bound (B) DNA complexes
are indicated at the right of the gel image with an arrow and bar,
respectively.

EMS studies of binding
of IHF to minimal duplex substrates. (A)
Representative polyacrylamide gel showing that IHF binds to the minimal
27 bp I1-specific substrate to afford a distinct retarded complex.
We note that upward “smearing” of the retarded band
is observed at IHF concentrations of &gt;100 nM (not shown). (B) Representative
polyacrylamide gel showing that IHF binds to the minimal 27 bp I2
substrate to afford a smear on the gel. (C) Representative polyacrylamide
gel showing that IHF binds to the 75 bp [R3-I1-R2] duplex substrate
to afford a distinct retarded complex. (D) Representative polyacrylamide
gel showing that IHF binds to the 75 bp [I2-R3-I1] duplex substrate
to afford a distinct retarded complex. The positions of free and bound
DNA complexes are indicated at the right of each gel image.

Quantitative analysis of EMS binding data. The
EMS data (representative
data presented in Figures  and ) were converted to fraction bound DNA versus IHF concentration
as described in . (A)
Ensemble of EMS data for binding of IHF to the cos274 (blue), [R3-I1-R2] (red), and [I2-R3-I1] (green) duplexes. Each
data point is the average of at least three separate experiments with
the standard deviation indicated with error bars. The ensemble of
data was simultaneously analyzed according to the nonspecific finite
lattice DNA binding model as described in . The solid lines represent the best fits of the
data, and the derived binding parameters are presented in Table . (B) EMS data for binding of IHF to the minimal
I1-specific duplex. Each data point is the average of at least three
separate experiments with the standard deviation indicated with error
bars. The data were analyzed according to the competitive specific/nonspecific
finite lattice DNA binding model as described in . The solid line represents the best
fit of the data, and the derived binding parameters are presented
in Table .

Analysis of the EMS Binding Data Using a Competitive Specific
and Nonspecific Finite Lattice DNA Binding Model
Record and
co-workers have further developed a “competitive binding”
model that describes the interaction of protein with a short duplex
that contains a single specific binding element. In this model, the protein can bind to its cognate element
in a specific binding interaction, or it can bind in a distinct nonspecific
binding mode, but not both simultaneously; i.e., the two binding modes
compete with each other. Senear and co-workers have implemented this
approach to interrogate EMS data, which
is described by eq , except that the total
protein concentration is described byThe first term describes the concentration
of free IHF and the second term is the concentration of IHF bound
to I1 in a specific or nonspecific manner. This modification was incorporated
into eq , and the EMS data for the I1 model
duplex (in triplicate, representative data shown in Figure A) were fit to the model by NLLS analytical methods
using Scientist (Micromath Scientific Software). The IHF binding site
size (n = 8), duplex length (N =
27), and [DNA] were held constant while Kns, Ksp, υns, and ω
were fitting variables that were allowed to float to their best values.
The best fit of the data is shown as a solid line in Figure B

Sedimentation Velocity Analytical Ultracentrifugation
(SV-AUC)
Studies
Sedimentation velocity experiments were conducted
with a Beckman Coulter XL-I ultracentrifuge fitted with an Aviv Biomedical
fluorescence detection system (FDS) (λex = 488 nm;
λem = 505–565 nm). Unless otherwise noted,
each sample (400 μL) contained 4 nM 6-FAM-labeled DNA and the
indicated concentration of IHF in 20 mM Tris buffer (pH 8) containing
55 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 7 mM β-ME, 2 mM spermidine, and 5% (v/v)
glycerol. The samples were placed into preassembled 12 mm Epon charcoal-filled
double-sector centerpieces along with a fluorescein reference cell.
Fluorescence data were collected at 7 °C using a rotor speed
of 42000 rpm and a spacing of 2 mm with five averages per position.
Importantly, IHF protein added to the samples is “invisible”
because only DNA contains the fluorescent label. The raw data were
analyzed using the Sedfit data analysis package, using a continuous c(s) approach, and the weight-average sedimentation coefficients, ⟨s*⟩, were calculated by integration of the c(s) distribution.

Analysis of the Sedimentation
Velocity AUC Data
The
weight-average sedimentation coefficient obtained above captures all
of the species present during a titration experiment. Because fluorescence
optics were used in our studies, only those complexes that contain
the fluorescent DNA substrate contribute to the observed signal. We
first consider a duplex of nonspecific sequence (e.g., the R3 duplex).
In this case, ⟨s*⟩ reflects unbound
DNA (Ffree) plus that in complex with
protein (Fbound) andwhere sfree* is the sedimentation coefficient
of free (unbound) DNA and ⟨sbound-NS*⟩ is the
weight-average sedimentation coefficient for the ensemble of nonspecific
complexes at a given concentration of IHF. Note that Fbound represents DNA with at least one IHF dimer bound
in a nonspecific manner. The expressions of Ffree (eq ) and Fbound (eq ) were substituted into eq  to afford an expression that describes ⟨s*⟩ as a function of [IHF].

In the case of
a duplex that contains a specific binding element (e.g., the I1 duplex),
the weight-average sedimentation coefficient must consider not only
nonspecific binding interactions as described above but also the contribution
of the specific IHF–DNA complex to the experimentally observed
⟨s*⟩. In this casewhere the right-hand term incorporates the
contribution of the specific IHF–DNA complex into the experimentally
observed ⟨s*⟩. During a titration experiment, Ffree is obtained from eq  and the fraction of DNA bound in a specific complex is described
byand Fbound-NS can be calculated
according toThese
values were substituted into eq  to yield
an expression that describes ⟨s*⟩ as
a function of [IHF].

Analysis of the experimental data using
the models presented above
requires fitting of multiple parameters that if allowed to float in
an unconstrained NLLS analysis would likely contribute to lower precision
in the derived values. To constrain the analysis and provide better
resolved values, the ensemble of AUC data for the R3 and I1 duplexes
was analyzed globally, as follows. The R3 data were modeled to the
finite nonspecific binding model (eq ), and
the I1 data were simultaneously fit to the competition binding model
(eq ). The nonspecific site size (n = 8), duplex length (N = 27), and experimentally
determined sedimentation coefficient for free DNA (sfree* = 1.96)
were held fixed as global constants; ⟨sbound-NS*⟩
and sbound-SP* were local variables used in the finite nonspecific
binding and competition binding equations, respectively, and υns, Kns, Ksp, and ω were global variables that were allowed to
float to their best values by NLLS analytical methods using Scientist
(Micromath Scientific Software). The best fits of the data are shown
as solid lines in Figure C.

Interrogation of binding
of IHF to minimal substrates using sedimentation
velocity analytical ultracentrifugation (SV-AUC). Increasing concentrations
of IHF were added to the minimal I1 (specific) and R3 (nonspecific)
duplex substrates, and their sedimentation behavior was monitored
by SV-AUC as described in . The c(s) distribution for each
binding experiment was calculated using Sedfit. (A) Normalized c(s) profiles for the specific I1 duplex (27 bp). (B) Normalized c(s) profiles for the nonspecific R3 duplex (27 bp). (C)
Weight-average sedimentation coefficients for each of the c(s) distributions shown in panels A (red
triangles, I1) and B (black triangles, R3) were calculated using Sedfit and are plotted as a function of IHF
concentration. The red dotted line represents the best fit of the
I1 binding data to the nonspecific finite lattice DNA binding model,
which does not adequately describe the data. The solid lines represent
the best fit of simultaneous (global) analysis of the R3 (black) and I1 (red) binding data to (i) nonspecific
finite lattice DNA binding and (ii) competitive specific/nonspecific
finite lattice DNA models, respectively. The binding parameters derived
from global analysis are presented in Table .

Results
IHF Binds to cos-DNA and Nonspecific Duplexes
To Afford Distinctly Different Complexes
We previously examined
binding of IHF to a 272 bp DNA substrate that models the full-length cos sequence found in concatemeric lambda DNA. Our prior study utilized radiolabeled duplex
substrates under equilibrium binding conditions (10 pM DNA). To directly
compare EMS data to the results of AUC studies described below, the
EMS experiment was repeated to confirm that identical results are
obtained with an IRDye-labeled cos-containing duplex
[cos274 (Figure B)] present
at an elevated concentration (4 nM). As anticipated, IHF binds to cos274 in a concentration-dependent manner to form a discrete,
strongly retarded band in the gel (Figure A). Circular permutation
studies have demonstrated that this pattern reflects binding of IHF
to cosB to introduce a severe bend (120°) in
the duplex. The quality of the retarded
band is insensitive to IHF concentrations up to 1 μM; however,
an upward “smearing” of the band is observed at greater
concentrations, likely because of nonspecific binding at these elevated
concentrations (see below). The EMS data
were analyzed according to a phenomenological Hill model (eq S1 of
the ), which yields
a Kapp of (1.2 ± 0.4) × 109 M–1 and a Hill coefficient n of 2 ± 1; these values are virtually identical with those obtained
previously in our lab and with those
obtained for binding of IHF to duplexes containing a high-affinity
H′-element of attP.,, Importantly, our prior study utilized radiolabeled
duplex substrates (no dye), and the correspondence of the results
indicates that the IR tag used in the study presented here does not
influence IHF binding.

In stark contrast, IHF binds ns274, a
274 bp duplex of nonspecific sequence, to yield a diffuse smear in
the gel that becomes progressively retarded in a concentration-dependent
manner (Figure B). This pattern is consistent
with (i) weak binding interactions that result in dissociation of
the nucleoprotein complex in the gel and/or (ii) binding of multiple
IHF dimers to the duplex in a concentration-dependent manner. Both
of these features are consistent with the role of IHF in nucleoid
assembly, and we presume that this smeared pattern indicates weak,
cooperative binding of IHF to nonspecific DNA. Whatever the case,
the smears preclude quantitation of the binding data; however, visual
inspection of the gel suggests that IHF binds to this nonspecific
duplex with an apparent affinity 5–10-fold lower than that
of the cos-containing duplex, based on the disappearance
of the free DNA band.

IHF Binds to a Minimal I1 Consensus Sequence
To Yield a Discrete,
Bent Complex
Xin and Feiss identified several potential IHF
binding elements within cos (Figure B), based on the H-element consensus sequence originally defined
by Craig and Nash., The putative elements possess
varying degrees of sequence homology to the well-characterized H-elements
but differ from the “conventional” IHF recognition sequences
with respect to their spacing and orientation within cos. DNase I and hydroxy radical footprinting studies have demonstrated
that the I1 element is strongly protected by IHF,
that the I2 element may be weakly protected, but
that there is little to no protection at any of the other proposed
elements.− To dissect the binding interactions more fully and
to derive thermodynamic binding parameters, we utilized minimal duplex
substrates to define the affinity of IHF for the putative specific
elements found within cos.

We first examined
binding of IHF to I1, a 27 bp duplex comprising the I1 consensus sequence. As anticipated, IHF binds to I1 in
a concentration-dependent manner to yield a discrete gel-retarded
band in the EMS assay (Figure A). Analysis of the data yields a Kapp of (9.6 ± 0.5) × 107 M–1 and a Hill coefficient n of 2 ± 1. Importantly,
the apparent affinity of IHF for this minimal substrate is an order
of magnitude lower than that observed with the full-length cos substrate (Table S1 of the ). This is discussed further below. We next examined
binding of IHF to I2, a 27 bp duplex comprising the I2 element of cos (Figure B) that has been reported to weakly bind IHF. The EMS data presented in Figure B indicate that IHF binds to this putative element to afford a diffuse
smear in the gel, a pattern virtually identical to that observed for
binding of IHF to the ns274 duplex (Figure B) and to R3, a 27 bp “nonspecific” DNA
duplex (Figure S2 of the ). This pattern is typical of binding of IHF to duplexes of nonspecific
sequence,, and we interpret the data to indicate that
the I2 sequence is not recognized as a specific binding
element by IHF.

To further interrogate interactions of IHF with cos, we utilized [R3-I1-R2], a 76 bp duplex
that contains
a single, centrally located I1 element (Figure B). IHF binds to this duplex with high affinity,
resulting in a distinct gel-retarded band (Figure C), a pattern that is consistent with the formation of a specific
and strongly bent complex. Analysis of the binding data according
to a Hill model yields a Kapp of (9.2
± 0.4) × 108 M–1 and a Hill
coefficient n of 3 ± 1. Virtually identical
results were obtained with [I2-R3-I1], a 75 bp duplex
that contains both I2 and I1 elements
located at the ends of the duplex rather than the center (Figure D). Of note, the apparent affinity of IHF for these
76 bp model duplexes is similar to that observed for the full-length cos274 model substrate, all of which are an order of magnitude
greater than that observed with the minimal I1 duplex (27 bp) (Table
S1 of the ). We further
note that the complex formed with [R3-I1-R2]
is more strongly retarded than that observed with the [I2-R3-I1] duplex. This precludes
the possibility of cooperative binding of IHF to the I2 element in the presence of I1 in cis, which would result in a slower migrating complex, the opposite
of what is observed. Within this context, an empirical relationship
exists between duplex bending and nucleoprotein complex migration
in a gel; the degree of retardation is greater when the bend is introduced
in the center versus the end of a duplex of a given length (circular
permutation analysis). Thus, we interpret
the observed EMS patterns for the [R3-I1-R2]
and [I2-R3-I1] duplexes
to indicate that IHF binds with specificity only to the I1 element to introduce a solitary bend into both binding substrates.

Dissection of cos-Specific and Nonspecific
IHF Binding Interactions Using EMS
The EMS studies indicate
that I1 is the only element within cos that displays specific and high affinity for IHF. On the surface,
this predicts that binding of IHF to its cognate I1 element should be described well by a simple Langmuir binding model
and that the Hill coefficient should be 1; this is obviously not the
case. This phenomenon has been previously described, and it has been
attributed to nonspecific IHF binding interactions that are superimposed
on the specific binding event. To directly
test this hypothesis and to define the nonspecific binding parameters
for IHF, we first adapted a nonspecific finite lattice DNA binding
model as outlined by Record and co-workers. This analysis yields a nonspecific binding constant (Kns) and a nearest neighbor cooperativity factor (ω)
that best describe the assembly of multiple proteins onto a long duplex
of finite length, and of nonspecific sequence. Unfortunately, quantitation
of binding of IHF to nonspecific DNA by EMS is not possible because
of the diffuse nature of the retarded complexes (Figures B and B and Figure S2 of
the ). We therefore
utilized EMS data for the [R3-I1-R2], [I2-R3-I1], and cos274 duplex substrates, which are composed of predominantly nonspecific
DNA sequence. The ensemble of data was globally fit to the nonspecific
finite lattice DNA binding model as described in  (eq ), which
yields an excellent fit to all of the data sets well (Figure A). The global analysis
resolves a constrained nonspecific binding constant Kns of (7.0 ± 0.2) × 106 M–1 and the nearest neighbor cooperativity factor (ω = 37 ±
2). The positive value for ω is interpreted to indicate that
binding of IHF to a duplex increases the probability of a second IHF
dimer binding next to it by 37-fold, consistent with the greater than
unity values for the Hill coefficient observed above.

We note
that the resolved Kns obtained from this
initial analysis is greater than published values (Kns ∼ 6.6 × 105 M–1).,, We hypothesized
that this might reflect high-affinity specific binding of IHF to the I1 element, which is present in all of the duplexes used
in the global analysis, and that this contributes to the apparent
nonspecific binding affinity. To address this question and to further
resolve the specific DNA binding constant (Ksp), we utilized a competitive specific/nonspecific finite
lattice DNA binding model originally described by Record and co-workers and implemented for EMS data by Senear and co-workers. This model assumes that IHF can bind a short
duplex containing a single I1 element in either (i)
a specific (strongly bent) complex or (ii) a nonspecific (weakly bent/wrapped)
complex, but not both simultaneously. The EMS data for the minimal I1 duplex were used in this analysis because its length is
comparable to the site size required for specific IHF binding interactions
(∼30 bp) and is only ∼3
times larger than the estimated nonspecific binding site size (8 bp). Analysis of the EMS data according to this model
as described in  (eqs  and ) yields an excellent
fit (Figure B) and returns a Kns of (2.9 ± 0.3) × 106 M–1 and an ω of 9.7 ± 2.6 (Table ). These values are commensurate with previously published studies
that examined binding of IHF to the H1′ element of attP using calorimetric approaches. In addition, the analysis provides a constraint on the upper limit
of the IHF-specific DNA binding constant for the I1 element (Ksp ≤ 6.9 × 109 M–1). This is addressed further below.

Analysis of the EMS and AUC Binding
Data
 	EMS	AUC	 	
 	nonspecific
finite lattice model	competitive
specific/nonspecific finite lattice model	competitive
specific/nonspecific finite lattice model	hydrodynamic
modeling	
Kns	(7.0 ± 0.2) × 106 M–1	(2.9 ± 0.3) × 106 M–1	(1.7 ± 0.6) × 106 M–1	 	
ω	37 ± 2	9.7 ± 2.6	10 ± 4	 	
Ksp	–	≤6.9 × 109 M–1	(2.0 ± 1.6) × 108 M–1	 	
 	–	–	ssp* = 2.59 ± 0.12 S	ssp = 2.36 S	
 	–	–	⟨sns*⟩ = 3.37 ± 0.04 S	sns = 3.52 S	
EMS binding data
for the cos274, [R3-I1-R2], and [I2-R3-I1] duplexes
presented in
Figure A were simultaneously analyzed (globally
fit) according to the nonspecific finite lattice DNA binding model
as outlined in . The
best fit of the ensemble of data is presented as a solid lines in
Figure A.

EMS data for the minimal I1 duplex
presented in Figure B were fit to the competitive
specific/nonspecific finite lattice DNA binding model as outlined
in . The best fit is
presented as a solid line in Figure B.

SV-AUC binding data for the I1 and
R3 minimal duplexes presented in Figure  were
simultaneously analyzed (globally fit) according to the competitive
specific/nonspecific finite lattice DNA binding model and the nonspecific
finite lattice DNA binding model, respectively, as oulined in . The best fit of the ensemble
of data is presented as solid lines in Figure C.

Hydropro was used to
determine the
theoretical sedimentation coefficients for the specific IHF-I1 complex
(ssp based on high-resolution structural
data) and the nonspecific IHF–R3
complex [sns based on a structural model
of three IHF dimers bound to the 27 bp duplex ()].

In summary, the EMS data indicate that (i) IHF binds
weakly and
with modest cooperativity to duplexes of nonspecific sequence resulting
in diffuse smears on the gel regardless of duplex length, (ii) the
27 bp I1 sequence is the sole element within cos that is recognized as a specific IHF binding element,
(iii) I1 is necessary and sufficient to afford a
discrete, ostensibly strongly bent complex in the gel, regardless
of duplex length, and (iv) the apparent affinity of IHF for the I1 element is strongly influenced by duplex length resulting
from superimposed cooperative, nonspecific DNA binding interactions.

Dissection of cos-Specific and Nonspecific
Binding Interactions Using Analytical Ultracentrifugation
The EMS studies presented above demonstrate that while IHF binds
to the minimal I1 duplex to yield a distinct (specific) retarded band,
nonspecific binding interactions are also observed in a similar concentration
range (compare panels A and B of Figure ).
This feature precludes an accurate resolution of the specific I1 binding constant (Ksp) using
the EMS data because the specific binding event is likely polluted
with nonspecific binding interactions. We therefore turned to sedimentation velocity analytical ultracentrifugation
(SV-AUC) to interrogate the thermodynamic features describing binding
of IHF to the minimal 27 bp cos-specific (I1) and
nonspecific (R3) duplexes.

The AUC studies utilized binding
conditions identical to those used for the EMS experiments, except
that the duplexes were labeled with 6-carboxyfluorescein (6-FAM).
Sedimentation velocity data were collected using fluorescence optics
to selectively monitor sedimentation of the DNA. The SV-AUC data were
analyzed using Sedfit, which yields experimental sedimentation coefficients
of 1.96 S for both the I1 and R3 duplexes (Figure A,B). Incremental addition
of IHF to either duplex results in a progressive, concentration-dependent
increase in s*, consistent with the formation of
IHF·DNA nucleoprotein complexes of increasing mass. Importantly,
binding of IHF to the I1 duplex is observed at concentrations well
beyond that required to fully saturate the specific binding interaction
observed in the EMS study [&lt;50 nM (Figure B)]. This observation confirms that while EMS exposes the initial
specific binding interaction, it does not unmask additional lower-affinity
nonspecific binding to the duplex. In contrast, AUC additionally captures
the nonspecific binding interactions, and the two experimental approachs
are strongly complementary.

The individual c(s) distributions
displayed in Figure  were integrated using
Sedfit to obtain a weight-average sedimentation coefficient, ⟨s*⟩, which reflects the ensemble distribution of
nucleoprotein complexes in solution. A plot of ⟨s*⟩ as a function of IHF concentration is shown in Figure C. Close inspection of the data reveals that while
IHF binds to the nonspecific duplex (R3, black) in a monotonic manner,
the binding curve for the specific duplex (I1, red) appears to be
biphasic. This suggests that an additional, high-affinity binding
interaction is superimposed on nonspecific DNA binding. We hypothesized
that this high-affinity transition represents specific binding of
IHF to the I1 element, which is not present in the
R3 duplex; the second lower-affinity transition reflects nonspecific
DNA interactions available to both duplexes. To directly test this
hypothesis, we adapted the binding models developed by Record and
co-workers to analyze the SV-AUC data
as described in . To
constrain the resolved parameters, we performed a global fit of the
ensemble of AUC data as follows. First, the binding data were fit
to the nonspecific finite lattice DNA binding model (eq ). While this analysis provides an excellent fit to the R3
binding data, the I1 binding isotherm is poorly described by this
model (red dashed line, Figure C) and affords
unrealistic binding parameters (not shown). We therefore analyzed
the data using a more sophisticated approach; the R3 (nonspecific)
binding data were fit to the nonspecific finite lattice DNA binding
model (eq ), while the I1 (cos-specific) binding data were simultaneously fit to the competitive
specific/nonspecific finite lattice DNA binding model (eq ). Importantly, the common parameters Kns and ω were allowed to float as global parameters.
This approach results in an excellent fit to both data sets (Figure C); the monotonic interaction of IHF with nonspecific
DNA is described well by the nonspecific finite lattice DNA binding
model (black line), while the competitive specific/nonspecific finite
lattice DNA binding model captures the biphasic transition of specific
plus superimposed nonspecific binding events (solid red line). This
analysis returns a nonspecific binding constant Kns of (1.7 ± 0.6) × 106 M–1 and a nearest neighbor cooperativity ω of 10 ± 4, which
are in a good agreement with the EMS results (Table ). Furthermore, because of the constraints imposed by global
analysis of the data, the specific binding constant is also resolved
with reasonable precision [Ksp = (2.0
± 1.6) × 108 M–1]. This value
is commensurate with those observed for binding of IHF to the high-affinity
H′ element of attP despite the fact that the I1 element diverges from the cannonical high-affinity sequence., Moreover, the specificity parameter for binding of IHF to the I1 element (Ksp/Kns = 117) is harmonious with that observed for binding
of IHF to H′ derived from calorimetry approaches. Finally, the analysis resolves the weight-average
sedimentation coefficient for the nonspecific IHF·DNA complexes
(⟨s*ns⟩ = 3.37 ± 0.04
S) and the sedimentation coefficient for the specific IHF·DNA
binary complex (ssp = 2.59 ± 0.12
S). These experimentally resolved values are in good agreement with
hydrodynamic modeling of both the specific complex (ssp = 2.36 S, based on the IHF·DNA crystal structure)
and nonspecific complex [sns = 3.52 S,
based on a structural model of IHF bound to the R3 duplex (Table )].

Multiple IHF Dimers Assemble on Duplex DNA
To Afford Higher-Order
Nucleoprotein Complexes
We next utilized SV-AUC to examine
binding of IHF to the full-length cos274 and ns274
model duplexes. The SV-AUC data were analyzed using Sedfit, and the c(s) distributions are shown in Figure . Analysis of the data in the absence of IHF yields
experimental sedimentation coefficients of 4.1 for both the cos274 and ns274 duplexes. Incremental addition of IHF to
the specific cos274 duplex results in a progressive,
concentration-dependent increase in the experimental sedimentation
coefficient to a maximal value of ∼10 S (Figure A). Given the magnitude of the sedimentation coefficient and
considering the high concentration of IHF required to reach saturation,
it is likely that this complex reflects not only specific binding
of IHF to the I1 element but also the assembly of
multiple IHF dimers in a nonspecific manner. As noted above, these
subsequent binding events are not detected in the EMS studies except
at IHF concentrations of &gt;1 μM.

Interrogation of binding
of IHF to full-length cos274 and ns274 duplex substrates
using sedimentation velocity analytical
ultracentrifugation (SV-AUC). Increasing concentrations of IHF were
added to each duplex, and their sedimentation behavior was monitored
by SV-AUC as described in . The c(s) distribution for each
binding experiment were calculated using Sedfit. (A) Normalized c(s) profiles for the specific cos274 duplex. (B) Normalized c(s) profiles for the nonspecific ns274 duplex. (C) Weight-average
sedimentation coefficients for each of the c(s) distributions shown in panel A (red circles, cos274) and panel B (black circles, ns274) were calculated
using Sedfit and are plotted as a function of IHF concentration. The
solid lines represent the best fits of simultaneous (global) analysis
of the ensemble of binding data to the DNA unbending model (Scheme ) as described in . The binding parameters derived from global analysis
are presented in Table S2 of the .

Model for IHF Nucleoprotein Complexes
Details are provided in the
text.

A similar binding pattern is initially
observed with the nonspecific
ns274 substrate, and the evolution of an ∼10 S complex is apparent;
however, this undergoes a transition to a distinct, very slowly sedimenting
∼2.5 S species that appears at IHF concentrations of ≥100
nM (Figure B). The appearance of two distinct
peaks in the c(s) distribution suggests
that interconversion between the two disparate conformations is slow
relative to the time scale of the AUC experiment (hours).

The
individual c(s) distributions
were integrated using Sedfit to obtain a weight-average sedimentation
coefficient, and a plot of ⟨s*⟩ as
a function of IHF concentration is shown in Figure C. As expected, binding of IHF to ns274 (black circles) results
in an initial increase in ⟨s*⟩ followed
by a dramatic decrease, which reflects the concentration-dependent
evolution of the 2.5 S species. A similar though less striking trend
in ⟨s*⟩ is observed with the specific cos274 substrate (red circles). This phenomenon is discussed
below.

Discussion
IHF plays an important
role in a variety of biological processes,
including condensation of the bacterial nucleoid and regulation of
cellular processes such as DNA replication and transcription. In the former case, this involves binding to
DNA in a nonspecific manner, resulting in a condensed and compacted
nucleoprotein structure. In contrast, the regulatory duties of IHF
require specific recognition of a high-affinity cognate binding site
and introduction of a strong bend into the duplex; this provides an
architecture conducive to the cooperative assembly of additional proteins
at that site to engender functional, higher-order nucleoprotein complexes., The manner by which IHF fulfills these two disparate roles is of
significant biological interest.

IHF also plays an important
role in the development of several
viruses for which lambda serves as a prototype. In this case, IHF
binds specifically to the cos region of the lambda
genome and cooperatively assembles the terminase packaging motor complex.
Multiple putative I-elements have been identified within cos, but the data presented here demonstrate that IHF binds with high
affinity to only I1. Importantly, IHF binds to I1-containing substrates to afford a discrete band on the
EMS gel regardless of position within the duplex or duplex length.
The intrinsic affinity for the minimal 27 bp I1 element
is an order of magnitude lower than that observed with longer substrates,
however, which is the result of superimposed cooperative binding of
IHF in a nonspecific manner. EMS is able to discern the initial high-affinity,
specific complex formed between IHF and I1-containing
duplexes but does not readily resolve subsequent nonspecific binding
events. In contrast, SV-AUC readily reveals these higher-order nucleoprotein
complexes in a concentration-dependent manner. Thus, EMS and SV-AUC
techniques provide a complementary view of these complex interactions,
which has allowed a thermodynamic dissection of these two IHF binding
modes using model cos substrates.

Model for a Nucleoid to
Linear Rod Transition
While
the original intent of this work was to characterize binding of IHF
to cos as a foundation for the thermodynamic dissection
of cooperative packaging motor assembly, the results have much broader
implications. The EMS data indicate that IHF binds to nonspecific
duplexes, yielding an increasingly smeared pattern that reflects the
assembly of nucleoprotein complexes of increasing mass with increasing
protein concentration. Consistently, the SV-AUC data show an analogous
increase in ⟨s*⟩; however, the data
for binding of IHF to the ns275 duplex are remarkable. The initial
increase in ⟨s*⟩ is followed by a transition
to a smaller 2.5 S species despite the fact that the mass of the complex
continues to increase, as evidenced by the EMS data. The fact that
the ⟨s*⟩ of the complex is smaller
than that of free DNA suggests the former is fairly rigid in solution
as compared to the wormlike nature of the unbound duplex. How can this be rationalized?

The sedimentation
behavior of a particle in solution depends on not only its mass but
also its shapewhere f is the frictional
coefficient of the complex. Compact particles of a given mass have
a minimal frictional coefficient, whereas this value increases as
the shape of the particle becomes more asymmetric. Thus, the most
parsimonious interpretation of the SV-AUC data is that the 2.5 S species,
while large in mass, is also significantly extended in shape. We suggest
that the observed SV-AUC behavior reflects the histone-like properties
of IHF. Initially, the protein binds to nonspecific DNA with modest
cooperativity to afford condensed nucleoprotein complexes; this serves
to compact the DNA in a sequence-independent fashion (see Scheme ).,, The
combined effect of increased mass and duplex compaction (small f) leads to an increase in ⟨s*⟩
up to a maximal value where the condensed nucleoid state is saturated
with protein. The occluded site size in the condensed state is greater
than that found in a linear complex (see Figure C)., Thus, the duplex must undergo a transition
to an extended rod conformation to accommodate a full complement of
protein, a transition that is driven by the binding of additional
IHF dimers. This transition significantly increases the frictional
coefficient of the complex (large f), resulting in
a concomitant decrease in ⟨s*⟩.

The model proposed above is consistent with electron microscopy
studies that show IHF initially binds to DNA to afford compact nucleoids,
but that these undergo a transition to rigid, extended rodlike structures
with increasing concentrations of the protein. This feature is shared with other histone-like proteins, including
HU and H-NS, and these extended nucleoprotein conformations have been proposed
to play an important role in DNA organization within the nucleoid.
Whatever the case, the solution-based AUC studies presented here nicely
complement the structural EM studies, both of which indicate that
elongated, nonspecific nucleoprotein complexes are formed at high
IHF binding densities.

A Specific IHF Complex Inhibits the Nucleoid–Rod
Transition
Close inspection of binding of IHF to the specific cos274 duplex reveals a similar trend in the AUC, an initial
increase
in ⟨s*⟩ followed by a decrease as a
function of IHF concentration; however, the decrease is quite modest
compared to that of the nonspecific duplex (see Figure C). We interpret these observations as follows; at low concentrations,
IHF binds to the I1 element in cos274 to yield a specific, strongly bent complex (Scheme ). This high-affinity binding event is not discerned during
AUC because the mass change induced by binding the 20 kDa protein
to the 169 kDa duplex is small. This is followed
by weak, nonspecific cooperative assembly of IHF on the duplex resulting
in a concentration-dependent increase in ⟨s*⟩, as is observed with the ns274 duplex. At sufficiently
elevated IHF concentrations (&gt;1 μM), the observed ⟨s*⟩ declines as a result of a conformational change
to the extended rod conformation. Importantly, the transition is strongly
attenuated with the cos274 substrate as compared
to the nonspecific ns274 duplex. This observation suggests that “unbending”
of a duplex with a specifically bound IHF dimer is energetically more
demanding than “unwrapping” of the compacted, nonspecific
nucleoid complexes. In other words, the presence of a high-affinity,
specifically bound IHF dimer presents a significant energy barrier
to the transition. This interpretation is consistent with the EMS
studies that show the specific bent IHF·cos-DNA
complex remains unperturbed in the gel in the background of nonspecific
binding up to 1 μM IHF while continuous smears are observed
with nonspecific duplex substrates.

Energetic Analysis of the
Rigid Rod Transition
A simple
model that captures the hypotheses described above and describes the
ensemble of nucleoprotein complexes present in solution during an
IHF titration experiment is presented in Scheme . Initially, IHF binds weakly but cooperatively to nonspecific DNA
to yield an ensemble of complexes that contain multiple copies of
IHF (⟨DNAN⟩). At sufficiently
high concentrations, the nucleoid is “unbent” to accommodate
a full complement of IHF dimers, as described above. This equilibrium
transition is described by an equilibrium constant (KL) and is driven by the binding of “m” IHF dimers to the saturated nucleoid (essentially a Hill
binding model). We derive a mathematical expression for this “unbending”
model, and the ensemble of experimental AUC data for binding of IHF
to ns274 and cos274 DNA was globally fit to this
model as described in the . While admittedly simplistic, the model describes the data remarkably
well (see Figure C). The analysis predicts
that (i) the nucleoid to rod transition is a cooperative process driven
by the binding of at least four IHF dimers to the condensed nucleoid
(“Hill” coefficient, m = 4) and (ii)
“unbending” of a duplex with a specifically bound IHF
dimer is energetically more demanding than “unwrapping”
of the compacted, nonspecific nucleoid complexes. In other words,
the presence of a specific IHF complex imparts a significant energy
barrier to the extended rod transition [∼13-fold; ΔΔG ∼ 1.4 kcal/mol (Table S2 of the )]. The implications of this observation
are discussed further below.

In summary, complementary EMS and
AUC experiments combined with global analysis and mathematical modeling
of the ensemble of data have allowed a constrained thermodynamic dissection
of specific and nonspecific binding interactions of IHF with model
DNA duplexes. The complementary techniques provide a powerful approach
that can be applied to protein–DNA binding interactions in
a general sense.

Biological Implications
Consistent
with the data presented
here, all published studies indicate that the affinity of IHF for
its cognate element is in the low nanomolar range., In
contrast, the concentration of IHF in an E. coli cell
has been estimated to be ∼10 μM and up to 100 μM
in exponentially growing and stationary phase cells, respectively.,,, On the surface, this predicts that all of the specific DNA binding
sites in a cell should be occupied by IHF at all times, a situation
that belies its role as a regulator of nucleoprotein complex assembly;
however, the relative concentration of nonspecific DNA provided by
the E. coli genome must drive the bulk of intracellular
IHF into nonspecific nucleoid complexes. Indeed, this has been observed
experimentally, and the concentration
of “free” IHF in the cell is estimated to be in the
low nanomolar range., Record and co-workers have suggested
that specific IHF·DNA complexes are more likely to form when
the IHF concentration is limiting. The
data presented here further suggest that specific, strongly bent regulatory
complexes, once formed, are relatively stable in the background of
excess nonspecific binding interactions. Furthermore, one must consider
that IHF does not act in isolation, and its role is to provide a specific
duplex architecture conducive to the assembly of additional regulatory
proteins at that site. These cooperative interactions provide additional
binding energy that serves to further stabilize the specific, higher-order
nucleoprotein complexes. The corollary to this conclusion is that
a specifically bound IHF dimer may impose an impediment to nucleosome
assembly at that site, which would further promote the assembly of
specific regulatory complexes in the cell. In summary, these features
may allow the specific regulatory functions of IHF to be expressed
in the background of a vast excess of nonspecific nucleoid condensation.
This provides an ideal mechanism whereby IHF can fulfill its multiple
and diverse roles within the cell: nonspecific nucleoid formation
versus specific regulatory complex assembly.

The capacity of
IHF to assemble specific nucleoprotein complexes in the context of
a vast excess of nonspecific DNA similarly plays a critical role during
viral infection. While the cos sequence represents
less than 0.2% of the lambda genome length, IHF promotes site-specific
assembly of the packaging complexes at that site. We previously demonstrated
that IHF and the small subunit of lambda terminase cooperatively bind
and bend cos-containing DNA duplexes. The functional motor complex is composed of
eight copies of this small terminase subunit plus four copies of the
large, catalytic subunit,,,, and preliminary data indicate
that IHF and the terminase subunits cooperatively assemble at cos (manuscript in preparation). The study presented here
sets the stage for detailed biochemical interrogation of this complicated
assembly process, and ongoing studies in our lab are directed at dissecting
the thermodynamic parameters describing these essential steps in virus
development.

Supporting Information Available
Protocol for duplex substrate
preparation, mathematical models for the Hill equation and for a nucleoid
to linear rod transition, analysis of the duplex unbending data, hydrodynamic
modeling of the specific and nonspecific IHF nucleoprotein complexes,
and EMS data for binding of IHF to ns247 duplex. This material is
available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi501025s_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
S.J.S. and
T.-C.Y. contributed equally to this work.

This work was
supported by National Institutes of Health Grant 5R01GM088186 and
Washington State Life Sciences Discovery Fund Grant 2496490.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
Analytical
ultracentrifugation studies were conducted at the
University of Washington Center for Intracellular Delivery of Biologics.
We thank Dr. John Sumida for guidance on the AUC fluorescence detection
system and for helpful discussions. We are further indebted to Dr.
Karl Maluf for helpful discussions and critical review of the manuscript.

Abbreviations
EMSelectrophoretic mobility shift

AUCanalytical ultracentrifugation

SE-AUCsedimentation
equilibrium analytical ultracentrifugation

SV-AUCsedimentation velocity analytical
ultracentrifugation

coscohesive end site of the lambda genome

H-elementspecific IHF recognition
elements found within the synapse sites of the lambda and E. coli genomes

I-elementspecific IHF recognition elements found within the cos sequence of the lambda genome

PDBProtein Data Bank.

In contrast,
the specific binding
event is discerned when IHF binds to the 27 bp minimal duplex (16.7
kDa) (Figure C) and is clearly visible in
the EMS data (Figure A).

