A DNA adduct is DNA that is
damaged by interactions of the genome with endogenously or exogenously
produced reactive chemical species. Although
human cells are armed with various repair machineries to correct the
errors,, some lesions evade the repair process and
enter DNA synthesis. Replicative polymerases synthesize DNA with high
accuracy and processivity. However, bulky DNA lesions can stall high
fidelity replicative polymerases and often recruit specialized bypass
polymerases for translesion synthesis (TLS), resulting in either error-free
or error-prone DNA synthesis., DNA lesions can cause
complex mutations, depending on the structure, the nucleotide bases
surrounding the lesions, their interactions with the amino acids of
the polymerase, and the DNA polymerases involved during the replication
process.,

Arylamines and related chemicals have
been implicated in the etiology
of various sporadic human cancers, including breast, liver, and bladder
cancers, and form C8-substituted dG lesions in vivo. N-(2′-Deoxyguanosin-8-yl)-2-aminofluorene
(AF), N-acetyl-(2′-deoxyguanosin-8-yl)-2-aminofluorene
(AAF), and N-(2′-deoxyguanosin-8-yl)-4-aminobiphenyl
(ABP) are three extensively studied arylamine-DNA adducts (Figure A), which are caused by the liver carcinogen 2-aminofluorene
or the well-known human bladder carcinogen 4-aminobiphenyl.,In vitro, AF is processed by the high-fidelity
polymerases but slows down replication, whereas the bulky N-acetylated AAF blocks the replication process and needs
bypass polymerases for TLS. Thus, AF induces point mutations, and
AAF produces point and frameshift mutations. In the DNA duplex, the N-deacetylated AF- and ABP-modified dG adducts
tend to exist in an equilibrium of two prototype conformers: B-type,
in which the carcinogen occupies the major groove of a double helical
DNA without inducing any significant perturbations, and stacked (S),
in which the carcinogen is intercalated between neighboring nucleobases
in the duplex and the glycosidic linkage to the modified guanine is syn (Figure B).− The bulky N-acetylated AAF could additionally exist
in a wedge (W) conformer, in which the hydrophobic fluorene moiety
is well placed in the narrow minor groove area. The S/B conformeric
equilibrium is dependent on the size, coplanarity, and topology of
the arylamine carcinogen. For example, the AF/FAF adduct exists in
an S/B mixture owing to the methylene linkage between the two aromatic
rings that restricts the flexibility and makes it planar with efficient
stacking ability (Figure A). Similarly, the more planar bulky amine adducts such as
1-aminopyreneand isoquinoline adopt predominantly
S- and/or W-type conformers., In contrast, the flexible
one-ring aniline and two-ring ABP adducts primarily adopt major groove
B conformation.,, As shown in Figure A and B, ABP differs
from AF in that it lacks a methylene bridge so that the biphenyl moiety
is twisted. In addition, the nucleotide sequences surrounding the
lesion also dictate the lesion-induced conformational heterogeneity,,,,− thus modulating repair and replication outcomes.,− Using the fluorinated analogues of AF, AAF, and ABP (e.g., FAF,
FAAF, and FABP; Figure A), we have shown that
these arylamine lesions undergo conformation-specific nucleotide excision
repair (NER), i.e., the more thermodynamically unstable S-conformational
lesions are repaired more efficiently than B-conformational lesions.

(A) Structures of ABP [N-(2′-deoxyguanosin-8-yl)-4-aminobiphenyl],
AF [N-(2′-deoxyguanosin-8-yl)-2-aminofluorene],
and AAF [N-(2′-deoxyguanosin-8-yl)-2-acetylaminofluorene]
and their fluoro models, FABP [N-(2′-deoxyguanosin-8-yl)-4′-fluoro-4-aminobiphenyl],
FAF [N-(2′-deoxyguanosin-8-yl)-7-fluoro-2-aminofluorene],
and FAAF [N-(2′-deoxyguanosin-8-yl)-7-fluoro-2-acetylaminofluorene].
(B) Major groove views of the B and S conformers of AF and ABP (color
code: modified-dG, red; dC opposite the lesion site, green; and fluorine,
gray CPK); (C) The 11-mer duplexes used in the present study. (D)
Duplexes used in simulated translesion synthesis.

The mutagenicity of an adduct is also affected by its location
within a DNA template and the neighboring bases. We recently studied
the active site conformation of FAF in the presence of DNA polymerase
β using 19F NMR, nucleotide insertion assays, and
surface plasmon resonance (SPR). FAF in a single nucleotide gap adopted
both S and B conformations, and heterogeneity was retained upon binding
to the polymerase; however, it was altered by the incoming dNTP. One of the most striking examples of sequence
effects involves the NarI sequence (5′--G1G2CG3CN--3′),
in which AF and AAF adducts have been shown to yield higher frequencies
of frameshift mutations when they are associated with the third guanine
(G3) of the sequence in E. coli. Interestingly, mutational frequencies are affected
by the nature of the base at the 3′-next flanking position
(N); the presence of dC at the N position resulted in a high rate of mutation compared to that of
thymidine. In addition, structural studies
have indicated that AF adducts adopt the S conformation when N = C
but display heterogeneity when C is replaced by T.

Recently, we identified an unusual 3′-flanking
T effect
on a random 11-mer duplex sequence (5′-CCATCG*CNACC-3′; N = T or
A). As shown in Figure A, FABP modification exhibited a 4:6 ratio of B:S conformations
in the G*CT sequence context.
When the 3′-next flanking base was changed from T to A (5′-CCATCG*CAACC-3′),
the B conformation was adopted exclusively. Similar sequence effects
also have been observed for FAF- and FAAF-modified G*CN 11-mer sequences. FAF-modified G*CA and G*CT
sequences adopted the S conformation in 66% and 90% of populations,
respectively. Furthermore, E. coli repair studies have revealed that the bulky N-acetylated
FAAF was repaired 3- to 4-fold more efficiently than the N-deacetylated
FABP and FAF analogues, and all three adducts were repaired more efficiently
in the G*CA sequence compared
to that in the G*CT sequence
context.

19F NMR of FABP-modified 11-mer duplexes. (A) Original
G*CT and G*CA sequences and (B) sequences studied for the flanking
base effect (see Figure C) at 20 °C.
The 5-mer in the middle represents the core of the 11-mer duplex with
the 3′-next flanking base in italics; the underlined base indicates
the change compared to the original 11-mer G*CT sequence (5′-CCATCGCTACC-3′).

In the present study, we performed
systematic dynamic 19F NMR, SPR, and primer elongation
kinetic studies for the TLS of
the G*CT and G*CA sequences containing FAF and FABP adducts
(Figure ). The results showed that the bulky
lesions on the G*CT duplex exhibited greater populations
of the stacked S conformation compared to the G*CA counterparts and that the S conformation decreased the binding affinity
of complementary strands. Moreover, full length primer extension experiments
were performed to investigate the similar sequence effects on in vitro translesion synthesis by two different polymerases:
high fidelity replicative polymerase exofree Klenow fragment (Kf-exo–) and error prone specialized bypass polymerase Dpo4.
We found that the full-length primer extensions across the modified
templates were significantly faster in the G*CA sequence, which commonly adopted the B conformation. Significant
stalling occurred due to both lesions. The anti-B
conformation of FABP showed more stalling at the prelesion (n –
1) site, whereas the S conformation of FAF showed more stalling at
the lesion (n) site. The relative nucleotide insertion
rates were significantly reduced immediately upstream of the lesion
(n + 1 and n + 3). Together, the results of this study shed light
on the roles of lesion-induced conformational heterogeneity in modulating
the efficiency of TLS.

Materials and Methods
Caution:4-Aminobiphenyl and 2-aminofluorene
derivatives are mutagens and suspected human carcinogens; therefore,
they must be handled with caution.

Crude oligodeoxynucleotides
(ODN, 1–10 μmol scale)
in desalted form were purchased from Eurofins MWG Operon (Huntsville,
AL). All HPLC solvents were purchased from Fisher Inc. (Pittsburgh,
PA) and used as received. Kf-exo– and Dpo4 were
received as gifts from Dr. Catherine Joyce (Yale University, CT) and
Dr. F. Peter Guengerich (Vanderbilt University, TN), respectively.

Preparation
of FAF- and FABP-Modified ODNs
FABP modification
of 11-mer ODNs (5′--CCATXGXTACC-3′, X = A, T, C, G; Figure C) and FAF/FABP
modification of 19-mer ODNs (5′-CTTACCATCG*CNACCATTC-3′, G* = FABP
or FAF; N = A or T; Figure D) were performed by the procedures described previously.,,, Briefly, 5–10 mg of N-acetoxy-N-trifluoroacetyl-7-fluoro-4-aminobiphenyl or N-acetoxy-N-trifluoroacetyl-7-fluorofluorene dissolved in absolute
ethanol was added to a sodium citrate buffer (pH 6.0) containing 200–250
ODs of unmodified ODN and placed in a 37 °C shaker overnight.
The modified strands were purified by a reverse phase-HPLC system
which consisted of a Hitachi EZChrom Elite HPLC unit with an L2450
diode array detector and a Phenomenex Luna C18 column (150 ×
10 mm, 5.0 μm). We employed a gradient system involving 3–15%
acetonitrile for 25 min in ammonium acetate buffer (100 mM, pH 7.0)
with a flow rate of 2.0 mL/min.

Dynamic 19F
NMR
Approximately 15 ODs of
a modified strand was annealed with an equimolar amount of a complementary
strand to produce different duplexes (Figure C and D) that were lyophilized. The samples were then dissolved in
300 μL of typical pH 7.0 NMR buffer containing 10% D2O/90% H2O with 100 mM NaCl, 10 mM sodium phosphate, and
100 μM EDTA, and filtered into a Shigemi tube through a 0.2
μm membrane filter. All 1H and 19F NMR
results were recorded using a dedicated 5 mm 19F/1H dual probe on a Bruker DPX400 Avance spectrometer operating at
400.0 and 376.5 MHz, respectively, using acquisition parameters described
previously.,,, Imino proton spectra (Figure S1, ) at 5 °C were obtained
using a phase-sensitive jump-return sequence and referenced relative
to that of DSS. 19F NMR spectra were acquired in the 1H-decoupled mode and referenced relative to that of CFCl3 by assigning external C6F6 in C6D6 at −164.9 ppm. Dynamic 19F
NMR spectra (Figures , , and ) were measured between 5 and 60 °C
with an increment of 5–10 °C. Temperatures were maintained
by a Bruker-VT unit with the aid of controlled boiling of liquid N2 in the probe.

Dynamic 19F NMR spectra of FABP-modified 19-mer
(A)
G*CT and (B) G*CA duplexes at different single/double strand junction
positions, i.e., n – 1, n, n + 3, and full (see Figure D).

Dynamic 19F NMR spectra of FAF-modified 19-mer (A) G*CT
and (B) G*CA duplexes at different single/double strand junction positions,
i.e., n – 1, n, n + 3, and full (see Figure D).

Primer Extension Assays
Steady-state kinetic experiments
were performed as described previously., Briefly, the
primers (29–33-mers) were 5′-radiolabeled using [γ-32P]ATP and T4 polynucleotide kinase (T4 PNK) following the
manufacturer’s protocol. The 5′-32P-labeled
primer (100 pmol) was annealed to either an unmodified or adducted
template oligonucleotide (120 pmol) by heating to 95 °C for 5
min and then slowly cooled to room temperature in 3 h. The primer–template
sequence (100 nM) was incubated with Kf-exo– (0.5
or 1.0 nM) for 5 min to form a binary complex in Tris buffer (Tris,
50 mM at pH 7.4; BSA, 50 μg/mL; 5% (v/v) glycerol). The reaction
was initiated by adding a dNTP/MgCl2 (dNTP in variable
concentration and 5 mM MgCl2) solution to a binary mixture
and incubated at 20 °C. The reaction was quenched at different
time intervals using quenching buffer (containing 50 mM EDTA (pH 8.0)/95%
formamide solution). The quenched sample was heated to 95 °C
for 5 min and immediately cooled on ice. The products were resolved
with a denaturing polyacrylamide gel [20% polyacryamide (w/v)/7 M
urea] and electrophoresed at 2,000 V for 4 h. The gel was exposed
on a Kodak phosphor imaging screen overnight and scanned with a Typhoon
9410 variable mode imager. The band intensities were quantitated using
ImageQuantTL from GE Healthcare.

Running Start Experiments
A 25-mer primer was used
with the FAF- or FABP-modified dG at position 31 of the 44-mer template
(Figure ). The extension was performed using
both Kf-exo– (2.5 nM) and Dpo4 (50 nM FABP and 100
nM FAF) polymerase in the presence of all four dNTPs. Aliquots were
withdrawn at regular intervals of time, and the reaction was quenched
as mentioned above. The extended products were separated on a 20%
denaturing polyacrylamide gel.

(A) Template and primer sequences used
for running start experiments.
Gel results across FABP (left)- and FAF (right)-modified templates
(G*CA and G*CT) in the presence of all four dNTPs (250 μM each)
with (B) Kf-exo– (2.5 nM) or (C) Dpo4 (50 nM, FABP;
100 nM, FAF) at different time intervals (M, marker).

Steady-State Kinetics Experiments
Steady-state kinetic
parameters for incorporation of the nucleotide opposite the unmodified
and FAF- or FABP-modified templates were determined by following the
procedures reported previously., The reactions were
performed at 20 °C. For the unmodified sequence, reactions were
performed in a shorter time period of 1 min for correct nucleotide
incorporation and for up to 45 min in the case of incorrect nucleotide
incorporation. The percentage of primer extended in kinetic assays
was determined by taking the ratio of extended primer to the total
amount of primer (unextended + extended primer). The kinetic parameters kcat and Km were
determined as described earlier.,

Surface Plasmon
Resonance (SPR)
SPR measurements were
conducted using a Biacore T200 instrument (GE Healthcare) in order
to probe the effect of lesion-induced conformational heterogeneity
using different lengths of complementary strands from n – 1
to n + 5 full duplex in a polymerase-free condition (Figure A). A 14-mer biotinylated DNA strand (5′-biotin-CTATCGCNACCATC-3′, N = T or A) was used for the SPR work.
The template strands have the same sequence contexts as those utilized
in the NMR studies (Figure D) except for the
variation in the underlined portions (CC to CT; ATT to ATC) to avoid
complications in complementary strand elongation (n – 1, 5′-GATGGTXG-3′;
n, 5′-GATGGTXGC-3′; n + 1, 5′-GATGGTXGCG-3′;
n + 2, 5′-GATGGTXGCGA-3′; n + 3, 5′-GATGGTXGCGAT-3′;
and n + 5, 5′-GATGGTXGCGATAG-3′; X = T for the GCA sequence,
and X = A for GCT sequence; see Figure A).
The biotinylated oligonucleotides were modified with FABP and FAF
by using the usual biomimetic procedure, purified by HPLC and characterized
using MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry (, Figures S2 and S3). Streptavidin (SA) was immobilized
on a CM5 chip using the EDC-NHS coupling method using the manufacturer’s
protocol. The unbound SA was removed from the chip by injecting five
1 min pulses of NaOH (50 mM), and we stabilized the surface with running
buffer for 30 min. The unmodified and modified oligo strands were
coated over the SA surface to about 450 resonance units (RU) through
a manual command mode. The stability of duplexes was monitored by
injecting different concentrations of complementary strands (analytes)
in HBS-P+ buffer (10 mM Hepes at pH 7.4; 150 mM NaCl; and 0.05% surfactant
P20) at 25 °C. Dissociation rate constant (kd) for each duplex were determined by fitting the data
in a 1:1 model using the kd-alone fitting
method available in Scrubber software, version 2.0 (Myszka and collaborators;
BioLogic Software) (, Table S10). The concentration-independent parameter kd was calculated by fitting the initial 100 s of the dissociation
curves (, Figure
S4). The goodness of the fit was determined from the residual standard
deviation.

Results
Experimental DNA Sequences
The chemical structures
of ABP, AF, and AAF and their corresponding fluorine analogues, FABP,
FAF, and FAAF, are shown in Figure A. In addition,
the 11-mer G[FABP]CT duplex sequence used in our previous repair studies
and the flanking sequence variations used are shown in Figure C. These modified DNA
strands were annealed with complementary strands to form duplexes
for the 19F NMR measurements. The CG*CN (N = A or T) series designed for the TLS experiments
are shown in Figure D. The original 11-mer
oligonucleotides were extended to 19-mers to improve thermal stability
for the n – 1 and n duplexes. As shown in Figure D, four 19-mer G*CN strands (G* = FABP or FAF: N = A or T) were each annealed with complementary strands of variable
lengths (n – 1, n, n + 3, and n + 9; n is the lesion site)
to create four discrete model TLS systems.

Flanking Base Effects
The rationale behind this study
is to investigate the uniqueness of 5′- or 3′-flanking
C in the -CG*CT- sequence context in promoting lesion-induced conformational
heterogeneity. As such, the 3′- and 5′-flanking C of CG[FABP]CN (N = A or T) was systematically
switched to A, T, or G (Figure C). FABP was
chosen over FAF because of its dramatic sequence-dependent S/B-conformational
heterogeneity (Figure A). The 19F NMR results at 20 °C are shown
in Figure B and were compared with the original
FABP-modified -CG*CA- and -CG*CT- duplexes (Figure A). The full-range 1H imino and dynamic 19F NMR spectra of the modified
duplexes are shown in , Figure S1.

In all modified cases (Figure B), one major 19F signal was observed at approximately
−117 ppm. This result is consistent with the typical chemical
shift range for the FABP-modified B-conformer. These duplexes also exhibited a small intensity signal
(*) in the upfield region (−117.5 to −118.0 ppm). Assignment
of these minor signals was difficult, but they could be either the
stacked S- or minor groove W-type conformers as their fluorine atoms
are known to be upfield shifted relative to the external binding B-type
conformer (see below for more 19F NMR assignments).,, The G*AT sequence was an exception
and showed a small downfield signal (∼116.8 ppm), which could
be regarded as a variation of the B-type conformer. These results
indicated that the T adjacent to the lesion site promoted the B-type
conformation, while replacement of the 3′-flanking C with A
or G increased the conformational heterogeneity; however, the effect
was not as great as that of the 3′-next flanking T (Figure A). Therefore, it was concluded that the CG*CT sequence context is very unique in promoting the S conformation.

Conformational Heterogeneity at Simulated TLS Single/Double
Strand Junctions
The goal of this study was to determine
whether the S/B-conformational heterogeneity in the G*CA and G*CT duplexes also presents at the single/double strand junctions formed
during the primer elongation in TLS process. Therefore, we conducted 19F NMR experiments in buffer-only solutions in the absence
of a polymerase on four discrete 19-mer G*CN duplexes (G* = FABP or FAF: N = A or T) (Figure D). These four
model TLS systems were prepared by annealing the 19-mer modified strand
with complementary strands of variable lengths (n – 1, n, n
+ 3, and n + 9; n is the lesion site).

FABP
Figure A–B shows
the dynamic 19F NMR spectra (5–50 °C) for TLS
of the FABP-modified G*CT and
G*CA sequences (Figure D) at various elongation positions with a temperature
range between 5–50 °C. Signals were assigned according
to published procedures based on relative chemical shifts, dynamic
NMR signal patterns, and H/D isotope effects.,19F shielding is a hallmark of the van der Waals interactions
and the ring current effects caused by the carcinogen moiety within
the stacked and bulge duplexes (S-type conformation). We have studied
a number of 19F NMR spectra of arylamine-modified duplexes
(including FABP and FAF) in various sequence settings and in all cases
found that the fluorine of the S-type conformer resonates upfield
relative to that of the external binding B-type conformer., The same trend has been observed with various fully paired and deletion
duplexes modified with the bulky N-acetylated FAAF, which specifically
revealed a mixture of B, S, and W conformations in the −115.0
to −115.5 ppm, −115.5 to −117.0 ppm, and −116.5
to −118.0 ppm ranges, respectively. In contrast, the N-deacetylated FABP and FAF adducts adopted an
interchangeable mixture of the B- and S-conformers. Accordingly, the
signals in Figures  and  were assigned as the B (downfield)- and S (upfield)-type conformers,
respectively.

The fully paired 19-mer G*CT and G*CA duplexes (Figure D), which represent the
end points of TLS, displayed comparable conformational differences
(Figure A–B) similar to those of their
respective 11-mer duplexes (Figure A). Populations
of G*CT sequences in the S
conformation decreased significantly from the 11-mer (60%) to the
19-mer (33%) duplexes. The 19F signal patterns for the
n + 3 and full duplex sequences for both G*CA and G*CT did not
change much. The 19F NMR signals at the n and n –
1 sites were designated as B-like (B*) and S-like (S*), respectively,
based on their chemical shift similarities to the duplexes. The B
(B*)- and S (S*)-proportions were maintained as elongation progressed
from n – 1 to full in the G*CT TLS series. Interestingly, we observed a significantly
larger population of the S conformation at the n – 1 and n
positions as compared to that in the n + 3 or n + 6 position in the
G*CA series (Figure B). The conformer population ratios at different
positions for each modified strand are summarized in Table .

Summary of the Conformational
Profile
Exhibited by FABP and FAF at Different Complementary Strand Positions
in the G*CA and G*CT Sequence Context at 15 °C
 	 	conformational profile	
duplex	sequence
context	FABP	FAF	
n – 1	G*CA	B* (82%)	S* (18%)	B* (32%)	S* (68%)	
G*CT	B* (70%)	S* (30%)	B* (33%)	S* (67%)	
n	G*CA	B* (76%)	S* (24%)	B* (58%)	S* (42%)	
G*CT	B* (64%)	S* (36%)	B* (24%)	S* (76%)	
n + 3	G*CA	B (100%)	 	B (42%)	S (58%)	
G*CT	B (65%)	S (35%)	B (19%)	S (81%)	
full	G*CA	B (95%)	B* (5%)	B (36%)	S (64%)	
G*CT	B (67%)	S (33%)	B (20%)	S (80%)	
FAF
The dynamic 19F NMR spectra for the
FAF-modified G*CT and G*CA TLS series (n – 1 to full)
are shown in Figure A–B. In both sequences,
FAF exhibited B (B*)- and S (S*)-conformation heterogeneity, and G*CT had approximately 16% more S-conformers
than G*CA in the full duplex.
Like the FABP adduct, template strand elongation from the 11-mer to
the 19-mer duplex reduced the G*CT S-conformer population from 90% to 80%. At n + 3, the S-conformer
population differed by approximately 23% between the two sequences,
primarily due to the increase in the B-conformer population in the
G*CA template (Figure B). Moving from the n + 3 to the n and the n –
1 positions, FAF exhibited two 19F signals. The S conformation
gap was further increased to 34% at the lesion site (n), mostly due
to the increase in the B-conformer population of G*CA (Figure B and Table ). However, the n – 1 series displayed very
similar 19F characteristics and a 3:7 ratio of B- and S-conformations.
The conformational results of the FAF-induced TLS system are summarized
in Table .

Primer Extension Experiments
The purpose of primer
extension experiments was to determine the impact of lesion-induced
conformational heterogeneity on the polymerase efficiency during TLS.
Therefore, experiments were performed using 44-mer G*CN (G* = FABP or FAF; N = A or T) templates. As shown in Figure A, 32P-labeled 25-mer primers were annealed to
the templates, and primer extension was carried out in the presence
of all four dNTPs and polymerases (Kf-exo– or Dpo4).
Running start experiments were specifically carried out to determine
the overall impact on the rate of full length primer extension across
the lesion and the major blockage sites for polymerase.

Running Start
Experiments on FABP Adducts with Kf-exo– Polymerase
The products of Kf-exo–-mediated
primer extension across FABP at different time intervals at room temperature
are shown in Figure B (left). Kf-exo– was able to extend the primer to a full-length 44-mer across G*CT and G*CA in 2–5 min. However, two major stalls in extension
were observed: one at the nucleotide before the lesion site (n –
1, 30-mer) and the other at the lesion site (n). The blockage at n
was stronger than that at n – 1. The full-length product was
formed from this blocked primer, although the primers at n –
1 persisted even after incubation for 60 min. Additionally, both sequences
exhibited unusual blockage at the site five bases upstream of the
lesion (red arrows). Although the sequences G*CA and G*CT both showed similar blockage patterns, the durations of the blockages
were different. In the initial few minutes, G*CT displayed a significant increase in blockage
at the lesion site (green arrow), which decreased after the full-length
product was produced. A similar pattern was observed for G*CA, but TLS occurred in a shorter
time (see expanded red rectangular insets in Figure B). The prolonged blockage at the lesion site (n) was converted
to a full-length product with G*CA displaying a faster rate of extension than G*CT.

Running Start Experiments of FABP Adducts
with Dpo4 Polymerase
Similar running start experiments were
performed with Dpo4 in order
to compare the lesion and sequence effects between a replicative polymerase
and a bypass polymerase (Figure C, left).
Dpo4 extended the primer to a full-length 44-mer and displayed major
blockages at n – 1 and n. Compared to Kf-exo–, the extent of full-length extension was significantly less, even
at a high enzyme concentration (100 nM, data not shown). In addition,
a stronger blockage occurred at n – 1 with Dpo4, compared with
that using Kf-exo–. As with Kf-exo–, the G*CT sequence exhibited an extended blockage at n (green arrow),
resulting in slower extension of the primer to full length (rectangular
insets, Figure C).

Running Start Experiments
of FAF Adducts
The results
of the running start experiments for the FAF adducts are shown in
Figure B (right). Here, the primers were blocked
at n and, to a lesser extent, at n – 1 and n + 1. Regardless,
Kf-exo– was able to extend more efficiently across
the FAF adduct compared to that across FABP. In addition, a blunt-end
addition was also observed. A similar sequence effect was observed
with the FAF adduct, and G*CA showed a faster rate of extension compared
to that of G*CT (see expanded red rectangular insets, Figure B). As shown in Figure C
(right), primer extension was stalled at two sites, n – 1 and
n, in the Dpo4-mediated primer extension. Unlike with Kf-exo–, there was no blockage at n + 1; however, a slightly greater rate
of extension across G*CA compared
to that across G*CT was observed.

Steady-State Kinetics
Steady-state kinetic experiments
in the presence of Kf-exo– were performed in order
to investigate the roles of lesion-induced conformational heterogeneity
in nucleotide insertion kinetics. As shown in Figure A, lesions were positioned one nucleotide downstream of the
template base (n – 1), at the lesion position (n), one nucleotide
upstream (n + 1), or three nucleotides upstream (n + 3). We examined
the lesion effects using the relative insertion efficiency fins, which was defined as (kcat/Km)modified or mismatched/(kcat/Km)unmodified. Figure B shows plots
of the fins as a function of nucleotide
insertion position. The results are summarized in Table , and further details including standard deviations are provided
in , Tables S1–S9.

(A) Oligonucleotide
sequences used for steady state kinetics. (B)
Plots of the extension frequency (fins) vs insertion site for FABP- and FAF-modified dC match series.

Summary of the Insertion
Efficiency
against the FABP- and FAF-Modified Template in the Presence of Kf-exo– at Different Insertion Sites in the G*CA and G*CT Sequence Context
 	 	 	insertion
efficiency (fins)	
insertion
site	sequence
context	 	FABP	FAF	
n – 1	-G*CA-	dGTP	2.2 × 10–1	4.0 × 10–1	
-G*CT-	dGTP	2.2 × 10–1	3.1 × 10–1	
n	-G*CA-	dCTP	1.1 × 10–1	4.6 × 10–2	
dATP	3.0 × 10–4	1.5 × 10–3	
-G*CT-	dCTP	2.0 × 10–2	1.2 × 10–1	
dATP	1.8 × 10–4	1.5 × 10–2	
n + 1	-G*CA-	dG*:dC	9.6 × 10–6	4.8 × 10–5	
dG*:dA	ND	8.5 × 10–7	
-G*CT-	dG*:dC	9.1 × 10–6	5.1 × 10–5	
dG*:dA	ND	2.1 × 10–7	
n + 3	-G*CA	dG*:dC	4.9 × 10–1	1.5 × 10–1	
dG*:dA	2.0 × 10–2	1.3 × 10–2	
-G*CT-	dG*:dC	8.0 × 10–2	6.8 × 10–2	
dG*:dA	2.0 × 10–3	4.3 × 10–3	
Detailed
kinetic analysis with error
limits are provided in the  (Tables S1 to S8).

The
relative insertion efficiency fins = (kcat/Km)modified or mismatch /(kcat/Km)unmodified.

Incoming nucleotide.

Template–primer
terminus.

C or A opposite
G*.

Insertion Efficiency
At the prelesion site n –
1, the lesion effect was minimal for the insertion of the correct
nucleotide dGTP (for the G*CA and G*CT sequences, FABP, fins = 2.2 × 10–1 and 2.2 ×
10–1; FAF, fins = 4.0
× 10–1 and 3.1 × 10–1, respectively; Figure B and Table ). The fins values for
the correct dCTP opposite FABP at the lesion site (n) were reduced
to 1.1 × 10–1 and 2.0 × 10–2 for G*CA and G*CT, respectively, which amount to 10- and 50-fold reductions
relative to the controls. The fins for
the wrong nucleotide dATP was reduced significantly in the G*CA (3.0 × 10–4) and G*CT (1.8 × 10–4) contexts. These results suggested that the insertion
of dCTP was preferred over dATP by 367- and 111-fold in the G*CA and G*CT sequences, respectively (Table ). The fins values of dCTP opposite FAF
were reduced to 4.6 × 10–2 and 1.2 × 10–1 for G*CA and
G*CT, respectively, representing
rate reductions of 22- and 8-fold, respectively. The fins of the incorrect dATP opposite the lesion in the G*CA sequence was 1.5 × 10–3, and in the G*CT sequence, it was 1.5 × 10–2, indicating that
the dCTP insertion was preferred over the dATP insertion by 31-fold
in G*CA and 8-fold in G*CT (Table ).

For the FABP adducts, the fins values of dGTP opposite C at the n + 1 position were 9.6 ×
10–6 and 9.1 × 10–6 in the
G*CA and G*CT sequences, respectively. However, when the
incorrect dA was present opposite the lesion, nucleotide insertion
was blocked for both sequences and the efficiency could not be determined
(ND, Table ). For the FAF adducts (Figure B), the efficiencies of the correct nucleotide dGTP
at n + 1 were similar in both the G*CA (4.8 × 10–5) and G*CT (5.1 × 10–5) sequences.
The fins values for dGTP at n + 1 were
reduced by 6- and 242-fold in the G*CA and G*CT sequences,
respectively, when the incorrect dA was paired at the lesion site.
However, the effect of a lesion at n + 3 only minimally affected the
efficiency. The fins values for the FABP
adducts were 4.9 × 10–1 (G*CA) and 8.0 × 10–2 (G*CT), and the fins values for the FAF adducts were 1.5 × 10–1 (G*CA) and 6.8 × 10–2 (G*CT) for
the correct insertions (Table ). For dA opposite
the lesion site, the fins values at n
+ 3 between the G*CA and G*CT sequences differed by 10- and 3-fold
in the FABP and FAF adducts, respectively.

SPR Binding Affinity Measurements
for Simulated TLS Single/Double
Strand Junction Duplexes
The objective of SPR experiments
was to measure real-time association between template and complementary
strands in the absence of a polymerase. Binding data were obtained
by injecting different lengths (8-mer n – 1, 9-mer n, 10-mer
n + 1, 11-mer n + 2, 12-mer n + 3, and 14-mer n + 5) of complementary
strands to lesions containing 14-mer template strands (GCT vs GCA) coated on a streptavidin chip. For each elongation, it was necessary
to employ different concentrations of complementary strands to achieve
steady-state associations (Figure : 50 nM (n – 1), 100 nM (n), 150 nM (n +
1), 200 nM (n + 2), and 250 nM (n + 3 and n + 5). Following each binding
phase, the template-containing chip was washed with buffer as described
in . Figure B shows the representative sensograms as a function
of different lengths of complementary strands. As a result, the usual KD binding (kd/ka) kinetics of duplex formation for each elongation
was not obtained. Since all of the experimental conditions included
are identical for each elongation, direct qualitative comparison of
RU values for each elongation is presented. Similarly, dissociation
rates (kd) are concentration-independent
and thus could be used to estimate binding strengths for different
lengths of complementary strands. , Figure S4 shows curve data analysis using Scrubber (BioLogic Software). , Table S10 lists the respective
dissociation rate constants. The results are also summarized graphically
in Figure  as plots of log kd vs various elongation points for GCA and GCT sequences.

(A) Primer–template
duplex sequences for SPR measurements.
SPR binding responses of complementary strands opposite unmodified
and modified DNA for (B) GCA and (C) GCT sequence contexts. Strands
concentrations are 50 nM (n – 1), 100 nM (n), 150 nM (n + 1),
200 nM (n + 2), and 250 nM (n + 3 and n + 5 full length complementary
strands).

Plot of SPR log kd vs complementary
strand length: (A) GCA and (B) GCT sequence contexts. See Figure A for sequences.

FABP
SPR data shows generally greater binding activities
(RU) (Figure B) and kd (Figure ) values as the complementary
strand length increased from n – 1 to a full duplex in both
sequences, with increasing duplex stability. Overall, we observed
little difference between the unmodified GCA and GCT sequences. The
effect of a lesion modification was evident with modified duplexes,
which showed a substantial reduction in RU responses for the n to
n +
3 sites (Figure B). Interestingly, however,
the FABP modification caused an increase of RU values at the prelesion
n – 1 site compared to that in the unmodified controls. These
results indicate a lesion-induced stabilization which is in agreement
with the slower dissociation at the prelesion site (, Table S10 and Figure ). The effect of a lesion modification was evident with faster
dissociations (kd) than the unmodified
one at the n to n + 5 site (Figure  and , Figure S10). For example,
the binding
strength for G[FABP]CT at
n + 1 was decreased 3.3 (0.0443/0.0113)- and 37 (0.0443/0.0012)-fold
relative to the G*CA and the
unmodified GCT sequences, respectively (, Table S10). The sequence effect was found to be
consistently around 3–4-fold different between the G*CT and G*CA sequences, respectively: n + 2 (3.8-fold, 0.0307/0.00802),
n + 3 (3.7-fold, 0.00142/0.00378), and n + 5 (3.6-fold, 0.00571/0.00156).

FAF
A similar lesion and sequence effects were observed
for the FAF adducts. The RU intensities of all the elongations except
for n – 1 were generally suppressed compared to those of the
unmodified controls (Figure ). For example,
the binding strength for G[FAF]CT at n + 1 was decreased 2.9 (0.0326/0.012)- and 27.1 (0.0326/0.0012)-fold
relative to the G*CA and the
unmodified GCT sequences, respectively (, Table S10). As in the case of the FABP adducts,
the sequence effect was maintained at 2–3-fold differences
between the G*CT and G*CA sequences.

Discussion
We studied a range of structural, biochemical, and biophysical
properties of a pair of arylamine-DNA lesions, one (ABP) derived from
the very important human bladder carcinogen 4-aminobiphenyl that is
present in tobacco smoke and a second (AF) stemming from the model
carcinogen 2-aminofluorene. These two lesions, bound to the C8-position
of dG, differ only in that the biphenyl moiety lacks a methylene bridge
that restrains the aminofluorene ring to planarity so that the biphenyl
is twisted. Specifically, we characterized lesion-induced TLS involving
two unique G*CA and G*CT sequences by dynamic 19F NMR, primer extension
studies with two representative polymerases, Kf-exo– and Dpo4, with detailed steady state kinetic parameters, and surface
plasmon resonance measurements.

3′-Next Flanking Base Effect on Lesion-Induced
S/B Heterogeneity
during Simulated TLS
The fully paired 19-mer G[FABP]CT duplex exhibited a 67:33 ratio
of B- and S-conformers (Figure A and Table ), consistent with the 60:40 B:S ratio that was
previously observed for the 11-mer counterparts. A similar conformer ratio was intact at the n –
1 and n sites. In contrast, the G[FABP]CA duplex adopted the B conformation predominantly (95% B:5%
S) (see n + 6, Figure B). The FAF-modified
19-mer duplex (Figure ) exhibited S/B heterogeneity
comparable to that of the previously studied 11-mer: 90% S vs 80% S for G*CT and 66% S vs 64% S for G*CA. Similar conformational heterogeneity persisted even at the n –
1 and n positions.

In general, the larger S-conformer population
for the FAF adducts compared to the FABP adducts may be attributed
to the presence of single carbon atom methylene bridging in FAF., This linkage restricts the twisting between the two aromatic rings
that is possible in FABP, thus enhancing the stacking surface (Figure A,B).,, This simple topological difference is fascinating in its impact
on the structural and biochemical properties of the lesion. Similar
conformational behavior is observed with other planar bulky amine
adducts such as 1-aminopyrene (AP) and the food-borne heterocyclic
amine isoquinoline (IQ), which favor S and/or wedge (W)-type conformers., On the contrary, the AF analogue imidazopyridine (PhIP) occupies
the minor groove largely due to the freely rotatable phenyl at C6
position. These results clearly signify
the role of a single linkage in dictating the conformations adopted
by FAF.

A large S-conformational gap was noted in G*CA vs G*CT for FABP (30% vs 18%) at n – 1, while no such difference
(67% vs 68%) was observed for the FAF adduct (Figures – and Table ). At the lesion site n, FAF in the G*CT sequence exhibited a 34% higher S-conformer
population than G*CA (Table ). Complementary strand elongation from n to n +
3 increased the S-conformer population in both G*CA (42–58%) and G*CT (76–81%) for the FAF adduct. For fully
paired duplexes, the S-conformer population of G*CA increased to 64%, whereas the conformation
of G*CT was largely unaffected
(80%). Taken together, these results indicated that lengthening the
duplex sequence from 11 to 19 nucleotides had no major effects on
the S/B heterogeneity of FABP or FAF adducts in the G*CA or G*CT sequences. The unusual 3′-next flanking base effects observed
in the fully paired duplex were largely maintained at various stages
of complementary strand elongation, including the preinsertion (n
– 1) and lesion (n) sites.

We performed SPR experiments
to investigate the impact of lesion
heterogeneity on complementary strand binding (Figure ). SPR is a chip-based and label-free procedure that allows
real-time monitoring of various replication and repair interactions
involving DNA lesions.,− SPR has also been used to study DNA assembly, DNA
hybridization,,and triplex formation. We obtained simple sensorgrams as a function
of different complementary strands for each elongation, and consequently,
we were unable to conduct the usual global binding analysis using KD affinity values (see ). Instead, we utilize RU intensities (Figure ) and kd dissociation rates (, Table S10) to assess
lesion and sequence effects. In general, the binding strength of complementary
strands toward the unmodified DNA sequence was higher than the modified
sequences. In contrast, the effect of FABP or FAF modification was
sensed primarily around the lesion (n – 1 to n + 2), but then
the effect was reduced at n + 3 and full (n + 5) duplexes. It is worth
noting that the RU for G*CT were consistently less than those for G*CA throughout the elongation. There was a trend in lesion-induced
differences in terms of RU values in the G*CA/G*CT sequence context,
i.e., G*CT was a DNA destabilizer
compared to G*CA. Figure  shows graphical plots of log kd dissociation rates vs various elongation points for
the G*CA and G*CT TLS series. It is clear that the lesion effect
is seen throughout the simulated elongation process (n to n +
5) with greater impact for the G*CT compared to that for G*CA. As shown in Figure , however,
the nature of the lesion (FABP vs FAF) had no discernible effect on kd values. Although no polymerases were involved,
these SPR results are in line with the NMR and gel assay results as
the greater S-conformation of the G*CT sequence posed a major hindrance toward the binding affinity.
In other words, the lesion effect was propagated primarily upstream
of the template strand and gradually diminished once the adduct came
out of the pocket of the polymerase active site.,,

Conformation Effects on Stalling during TLS
in the Presence
of Kf-exo– and Dpo4
Kf-exo– is a high-fidelity replicative polymerase lacking the 3′–5′
proofreading exonuclease activity used for TLS of various types of
DNA damage, including bulky arylamine lesions. High fidelity polymerases generally are blocked by bulky
lesions. The DNA polymerase Dpo4 from Sulfolobus solfataricus is a Y-family bypass polymerase,
characterized by a loose active site that is accessible to solvent,
thus known to promote TLS. The running
start results (Figure ) showed that primer
extension was stalled at the lesion site (n) and near the lesion site
(n – 1 and n + 1). The extent of blockage was clearly influenced
by the nature of adduct structure, i.e., both FABP and FAF lesions
blocked Kf-exo– at n – 1 and n and additionally
at n + 1 for the FAF adducts. Both lesions strongly blocked at the
lesion site (n); however, they exhibited similar sequence effects,
i.e., the G*CA sequence exhibited
a greater extension efficiency compared to that of G*CT. With Dpo4, the lesions stalled primer extension
only at n – 1 and n, but the major blockage site occurred at
n – 1 for FABP, compared to n for FAF. The different stalling
characteristics could be due to the spacious nature of the Dpo4 active
site compared to that of Kf-exo–. The high steric
flexibility of Dpo4 has been shown to allow bulky and distorted DNA
lesions to proceed through the active site differently.− Surprisingly, however, we observed that Dpo4 exhibited a significantly
slower rate of primer extension for FABP, even at higher enzyme concentrations
(Figure C, left). Dpo4 also causes deletions
with bulky adducts.

The G*CT and G*CA sequences displayed
similar blocking patterns (Figure ), consistent
with their conformational profiles around the lesion sites (Table ). However, full-length extension across the G*CA sequence was faster compared to
that across the G*CT sequence
of both lesions as well as in the presence of Kf-exo– and Dpo4 (insets, Figure B and C). As mentioned
above, the polymerase prefers the modified dG in the anti-glycosyl conformation for efficient replication across the lesion.
The relatively slower extension across G*CT may be due to the higher percentages of the S-conformer
at the lesion site.

Hsu et al. have
reported the crystal
structures of AF during accurate replication by BF, a high-fidelity
DNA polymerase analogous to Kf-exo–. They found
that the AF adduct exhibited a syn conformation at
the preinsertion site (n – 1) and underwent a transition to
an anti-conformation at the insertion site (n), allowing
it to base pair with an incoming dCTP. According to our NMR results
(Figures –;
Table ), the planar FAF at n – 1 exhibited
a greater percentage of the syn-S-type conformation,
while the nonplanar FABP favored the anti-B-type
conformation (Table ). It is plausible that
the B-conformer of FABP stalls at n – 1, thus resulting in
the accumulation of an extension product at the prelesion site. We
have reported previously that FAF in the TG*A sequence adopted a higher percentage of the B-conformer
and exhibited a stronger stalling effect at the n – 1 site,
while the S-conformer of CG*A stalled primer extension at the lesion site (n). In addition, the B-conformer in the FAF-modified TG*A sequence context favored a misinsertion
of dATP by 80-fold compared to the CG*A sequence due to the presence of 5′-T.

Lesion
and Sequence Effects on Insertion Efficiencies during
TLS in the Presence of Kf-exo–
Both FABP
and FAF lesions exhibited different relative insertion efficiencies
(fins), depending on the primer positions
(Table ). The impact of the lesion was generally
minimal at the prelesion (n – 1) and lesion (n) sites. The
conformational characteristics of FABP and FAF and their fins values for the matched (dG*:dC) series were comparable
for the G*CA and G*CT sequences (Figure ). Although both FABP and FAF at the lesion site (n) favored
insertion of dCTP, the preference was more prominent for FABP than
for FAF. This result may be due to the high S-conformer percentage
of the FAF adduct (Table ). Similar trends
in extension efficiency patterns were observed for the dA-mismatched
series, although extremely low fins values
were observed for FABP at the lesion site (ND, Table ). The most dramatic lesion effects were observed at the n
+ 1 site. We noted a slightly greater lesion effect of FAF over FABP
in both G*CA and G*CT sequence contexts. These results
are consistent with the blocking patterns observed in the running
start and SPR binding results discussed above and could be attributed
to the relatively higher S-conformer population of the FAF adducts
compared to the FABP adducts (Table ).

Figure  shows difference factor (DF) histograms
to compare the relative insertion efficiency between two sequences
(G*CA vs G*CT) at various insertion points in the matched
(dG*:dC) series. DF is defined as the fins of G*CT over G*CA (fins G*CT/fins G*CA), and thus, DF below
one signifies a better insertion efficiency in the G*CA sequence compared to G*CT at a particular insertion site, while DF above
one signifies opposite efficiencies. It is clear that the sequence
effect was most dramatic at the lesion site (n), i.e., DF = 0.18 and
2.61 for the FABP and FAF adducts, respectively. We observed that
the sequence effects were negligible (DF ≈ 1.0) at the prelesion
site (n – 1) (Figure  and , Table S9). These results
seem to be in line with the NMR results showing that the nature of
the 3′-next flanking base (G*CA vs G*CT) did not
affect the conformational patterns at n – 1. In the FABP adducts
at the lesion site, dATP insertion did not lead to any significant
sequence effects (Table ). In contrast, in
the FAF adducts, the G*CT sequence
favored dATP insertion by 11-fold compared to that of G*CA. This result is probably due to the relatively
higher population of the S-conformer (76%) in the G*CT sequence compared to that of the G*CA (42%). Extension of the dG insertion
at the n + 1 site was significantly reduced due to perturbations at
the active site of the polymerase. As mentioned above, an extremely
low insertion rate was noted for the FABP adducts in the dA-mismatched
series. The insertion of dATP at n + 1 was observed for the FAF adducts,
but with low efficiency. However, no significant sequence effects
were observed at the n + 1 position in either the matched (Figure , DF = 0.95 and 1.06 for the FABP and FAF adducts,
respectively) or the mismatched series. The FABP in the G*CA series at n + 3 adopted exclusively
the B-conformation, yet exhibited a 6-fold greater insertion extension
efficiency of dATP than G*CT for the matched series (Figure , DF = 0.16).
In contrast, the planar FAF showed only a 16% difference in the B:S
population ratios (Table ), thus resulting
in a minimal sequence effect (DF = 0.45) (Figure ).

Histogram of the relative insertion efficiency of correct nucleotides
between G*CT and G*CA sequences for FABP and FAF adducts. A difference
factor (fins G*CT/fins G*CA) &lt; 1 signifies a better insertion efficiency
in the G*CA sequence compared to that of the G*CT at a particular
insertion site, whereas a factor above one has opposite efficiencies.

In summary, we conducted systematic 19F NMR, SPR, and
primer elongation kinetic studies for the TLS of the G*CT and G*CA sequences containing the bulky arylamine FAF and FABP adducts. The
results are summarized in Figure . DNA adducts
in the G*CT duplex exhibited
greater populations of the S-conformer compared to that in the the
G*CA duplex with the same
adducts. We also found the 3′-next flanking T in the former promotes lesion stacking, thus supporting the greater
S conformation. These lesions exhibited unique sequence-dependent
conformational heterogeneities at various elongation positions, including
the replication fork that differentially contributes to template–primer
bindings and insertion efficiency during TLS. In addition, the SPR
binding results revealed that the presence of adduct in the stacked
conformation decreases the binding affinity of the complementary strands
in the order of unmodified &gt; FABP &gt; FAF and G*CA &gt; G*CT. Full-length primer extensions across the modified templates were
significantly faster in the G*CA sequence, which commonly adopted the B-conformation. Primer extension
was stalled at (n) and near (n – 1 and n + 1) the lesion site,
and the extent of blockage and the extension rates across the lesion
were influenced by the DNA sequences as well as the nature of the
lesion (FAF vs FABP) and the polymerase employed (Kf-exo- vs Dpo4).
For example, with Kf-exo– the anti-B-conformeric FABP showed stalling at both the prelesion (n –
1) and lesion (n) sites, whereas the syn-S-conformeric
FAF showed stalling at all three sites (n – 1, n, and n + 1).
Moreover, the relative nucleotide insertion rates (fins) were small at n – 1 but were significantly
reduced immediately 5′ upstream of the lesion site (n + 1 and
n + 3). Together, these results demonstrated the roles of lesion-induced
conformational heterogeneity in modulating the efficiency of TLS.

Summary
of present results in terms of lesion stacking, primer
binding, lesion stalling, and nucleotide insertion rates.

Supporting Information Available
Imino proton and full dynamic 19F NMR
spectra of FABP-modified 11-mer duplexes, MALDI-TOF
spectra of biotinylated templates, and simulated SPR sensograms; kinetic
parameters for dNTP insertion at different primer positions; and the
dissociation constant values (kd) obtained
from SPR binding experiments. This material is available free of charge
via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5003212_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
† (V.G.V.)
Chemical Laboratory, CSIR-CLRI, Adyar, Chennai 600020,
India.

Author Present Address
‡ (S.P.)
CSIR-Indian Institute of Toxicology &amp; Research (IITR),
M.G. Marg, Lucknow 226001, India.

This research
is supported by NCI/NIH (CA098296) and NCRR/NIGMS (P20 GM103430-12)
(to B.P.C.). V.G.V acknowledges DST, India for the Ramanujan Fellowship.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Drs. Peter F. Guengerich of Vanderbilt University
and Catherine Joyce/Olga Potapova of Yale University for providing
Dpo4 and Kfexo– (D424A) for nucleotide insertion
kinetic assays.

Abbreviations
FAFN-(2′-deoxyguanosin-8-yl)-7-fluoro-2-aminofluorene

FABPN-(2′-deoxyguanosin-8-yl)-4′-fluoro-4-aminobiphenyl

Kf-exo–exonuclease deficient Klenow fragment

SPRsurface plasmon resonance

TLStranslesion synthesis

