Neuritogenesis is the process
by which a developing neuron extends protrusions that later become
dendrites and the axon. The process is complex, involving the entirety
of the cytoskeleton with significant cross talk among the microfilaments,
intermediate filaments, and microtubules. Many details of this process
have been reviewed elsewhere.− The careful regulation of these interacting systems
is important for the development of the adult nervous system. Neurite
formation commences during migration when postmitotic neurons utilize
internal stores of actin to develop growth cones, composed of filament
actin-based filopodia and lamellipodia. These structures sense the
extracellular environment and regulate actin dynamics to provide the
force necessary for neurite elongation. Actin is regulated by a host
of proteins and has been shown to influence the direction of neurite
outgrowth.

There are two characteristic ends of actin filaments (F-actin):
the fast-growing barbed end and the slow-growing pointed end. Addition
of monomers to the distally oriented barbed end provides protrusive
forces on the membrane that contribute to neurite extension, while
depolymerization from the pointed end provides a constant supply of
monomers for continued extension. Depolymerization from the pointed
end is often the rate-determining step of actin dynamics. Tmod is a 40 kDa tropomyosin-dependent actin-capping
protein that binds at the pointed end and inhibits depolymerization,
thereby stabilizing F-actin. Although
four isoforms of Tmod are known in vertebrates,− research on the structure of
Tmods has primarily been conducted on Tmod1, and the crystal structure
of this isoform has been determined. Tmod1
is found in many tissues, including the brain, but has been mainly
studied in erythrocytes, heart, and slow skeletal muscle. Tmod2 is
solely expressed in neuronal tissue. Tmod3 is ubiquitously expressed.
Tmod4 is primarily expressed in fast skeletal muscle. Isoform concentrations
vary by the type of tissue, cellular location, and stage of development.
Tmod1–Tmod3 have been shown to be expressed in the brain, but
only Tmod1 and Tmod2 have been shown to have a role in neural development.

Tmods have two structurally distinct functional halves (Figure ): an unstructured N-terminal half and a tightly
folded C-terminal half, a so-called LRR domain. The N-terminal half of Tmod1 acquires tertiary structure
upon binding to tropomyosin (TM) and actin at the pointed end., This domain holds Tmod’s two TM binding sites and a TM-dependent
actin-capping site.,, In contrast to the N-terminal half, the LRR domain is stable and
compact and forms a cooperatively melting domain., The LRR domain is highly conserved across species and contains five
leucine rich repeats (LRRs) and the C-terminal sixth α-helix.
LRR folds are a repeated pattern of α-helices and β-strands,
which are important for protein–protein recognition. Though removal of the LRR domain did not change
the capping activity of Tmod1 in vitro, it has been shown to impair Tmod1 localization
to the pointed end of thin filaments in cardiomyocytes; this indicates that the domain is crucial for
targeting Tmod1 to thin filaments during sarcomere assembly in muscle
cells. This domain also holds a TM-independent actin-capping site
that is believed to be close to the C-terminus. Both actin-capping sites are important for Tmod’s
nucleating ability.

Schematic of structural and functional sites of Tmod1 and Tmod2.
The TM-binding sites are colored yellow, and the actin-capping sites
are colored green. Indicated by an asterisk is a region that interacts
with thymosin β-10. The C-terminal
half is a leucine rich repeat domain that has a repeated pattern of
α-helices and β-strands. The highlighted sequences contain
the V8 protease (red) and trypsin (blue) cut sites as determined by
N-terminal sequencing and mass spectrometry of the proteolytic fragments.

Tmod’s affinity for actin is greatly enhanced in the presence
of TM, a coiled-coil protein that binds along F-actin. There are more than 40 isoforms of TMs, and they have been
shown to have isoform specific roles in recruiting other actin-associated
proteins; a thorough discussion of TM can be found in refs () and (). With regard to neural
systems, several TM isoforms are expressed in neurons and are important
in regulating neuron size and shape; for example, TM5NM1 is believed
to impact shape by recruiting myosin IIb. Recently, TMs have been implicated in neuritogenesis and neurite
branching patterns in B35 neuroblastoma cells. Previously, we have shown that mutations in the TM binding
sites in Tmod1 resulted in the altered localization of Tmod and a
decreased length of neurite-like processes in PC12 cells.

While Tmod1–Tmod3 are found in brain tissue, only Tmod2
is restricted to the nervous system. Mice lacking Tmod2 demonstrated
reduced sensorimotor gating, hyperactivity, and impaired learning
and memory. The authors suggested that
control of actin filament length through pointed end regulation could
be important in these processes. Proteomic studies have indicated
that Tmod2 expression is significantly altered in fetal Down syndrome, mesial temporal lobe epilepsy, and post-seizure, post-stroke, and post-methamphetamine exposure conditions. Both Tmod1 and Tmod2 are localized within growth
cones during development, but their location, level of expression,
and role in neurite extension differ significantly. Tmod1 levels increase
during neurite extension and proximally localize along actin filament
bundles in the lamellipodia and to growth cones later in development., Conversely, Tmod2 levels remain fairly constant within the cytoplasm
throughout neuritogenesis with some enrichment in the central region
of growth cones. Knockdown of Tmod2 in N2a cells doubled the number
of neuronal cells that developed neurites and the mean length of primary
neurites, while Tmod1 knockdown led to an increased number of neurites
per neuron. These results suggest an
isoform specific inhibition of different components of neurite extension.
Structural differences between the two isoforms may account for their
unique actin pointed-end capping activity, though these differences
remain unknown.

To further characterize the functional and structural differences
between Tmod1 and Tmod2, we first investigated the role of Tmod’s
LRR domain in neurite formation by overexpressing Tmod1 and Tmod2
with deleted LRR domains in PC12 cells, a model system used to study
early stages of neuritogenesis. Additionally, a Tmod1 mutant with
three point mutations in the LRR domain that resulted in disrupted
localization in cardiac cells, was overexpressed.
We further characterized the structural differences between the LRR
domain of Tmod1, a Tmod1 mutant, and Tmod2 by circular dichroism (CD),
limited proteolysis, and molecular dynamics simulation (MDS). We demonstrated
the lower stability of the Tmod1 mutant and Tmod2 compared to that
of Tmod1 and localized structural differences to the region of the
C-terminal (sixth) α-helix. Two chimeric Tmods were created
with the LRR domains exchanged between Tmod1 and Tmod2; this allowed
us to investigate the role of Tmod’s LRR domain while maintaining
the TM binding properties of the N-terminal domain. From these data,
we suggest that the TM-dependent actin capping ability of both Tmods
inhibits neurite formation, but in Tmod1, this inhibition can be controlled
via its LRR domain. Altogether, our data unravel the structural and
functional differences between the LRR domains of Tmod1 and Tmod2
and relate these changes to neurite outgrowth.

Experimental Procedures
Constructs for Tmod Expression
For transfection experiments
and expression in Escherichia coli, mouse Tmod2 (accession
number NM_016711) was subcloned into pReceiver-M55 with an mCherry tag (mChFP) and
into pReceiver-B01 with a His tag (GeneCopoeia, Rockville, MD), respectively.
Mouse Tmod1 (accession number NM_21883), Tmod1[1–159], and Tmod1[V232D/F263D/L313D]
(Tmod1[DDD]) were subcloned into pEGFP-C1
for transfection experiments. The construct with His-tagged Tmod1[DDD]
was used for expression in E. coli. Chimera constructs
GFP-Tmod1[1–159]/Tmod2[162–351] in mammalian expression
vector pEZ-M29 and mChFP-Tmod2[1–161]/Tmod1[160–359]
in mammalian expression vector pReceiver-M55 were ordered from GeneCopoeia.
Our attempts to change the codon for Pro162 in mChFP-Tmod2 to a stop
codon were not successful. Therefore, to create truncated Tmod2, the
codon for Val163 was changed to a stop codon by Mutagenex Inc. (Hillsborough,
NJ).

Tmod Purification
(His)Tmod1[DDD] and (His)Tmod2 were
overexpressed in E. coli BL21 plysE and BL21 cells,
respectively. Proteins were purified as described in refs () and (), respectively. The Tmod
concentration was determined using a PerkinElmer Lambda 2 UV–vis
spectrometer by dissolving 60 μL of protein in cuvettes containing
500 μL of 6 M guanidine base (pH 12.5) or 6 M guanidine-HCl
(pH 7.1). A baseline was taken from 320 to 270 nm with the pH 7.1
solution in the reference compartment and the pH 12.5 solution in
the sample compartment. The concentration in moles per liter of Tmods
in the cuvette was determined through the equation A/(2357Y + 830W), where A is the absorbance at 294 nm, Y is the
number of tyrosines, and W is the number of tryptophans
as in ref ().

Limited Proteolysis, N-Terminal Sequencing, and Mass Spectrometry
Limited proteolysis was performed using trypsin and Staphylococcus
aureus V8 protease at room temperature for wild-type Tmod2
or Tmod1[DDD] containing three point mutations in its C-terminal domain
(V232D, F263D, and L313D). At 1, 5, 15, and 60 min, aliquots were
removed and proteolysis was terminated with 10 mM Pefabloc or by mixing
with sample buffer for sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis. The enzyme:protein ratio was 1:200 (w/w) for
trypsinolysis and 1:50 for V8 proteolysis. Samples of the reaction
mixture were inhibited with Pefabloc, dialyzed, and sent for mass
spectrometry. The bands of corresponding fragments were cut from the
gel and sent for N-terminal sequencing. N-Terminal sequencing and
mass spectrometry of fragments were conducted at The Keck Biotechnology
Resource Laboratory at Yale University (New Haven, CT). Positions
of fragments were determined using the N-terminal sequence, the full-length
protein’s sequences, and Expasy’s molecular mass/pI
calculator.−

Circular Dichroism (CD) and Fluorescence Measurements
The CD spectra in the wavelength range of 190–260 nm for Tmod1
and Tmod2 were measured at 0.5 nm intervals on a spectropolarimeter
(Aviv model 400). A cylindrical fused quartz cell with a path length
of 0.1 cm was used. For titration experiments, two solutions containing
proteins dissolved in 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer with or without
10 M urea were combined to make protein solutions in 0–10 M
urea. Each urea solution was measured in the wavelength range of 221–223
nm, and the signal at 222 nm was recorded. Differential scanning fluorimetry
was conducted using an Agilent Technologies Stratagene Mx 3005 P system
with 0.5–1.0 mg/mL samples.

Molecular Dynamics Simulation (MDS) of Tmod1, Tmod1[DDD], and
Tmod2 Structure Prediction
X-ray and simulated structures
were visualized using CHIMERA. Mutated Tmod1 structures were generated
by editing Protein Data Bank (PDB) entry 1IO0 for the protein. Incomplete side chains in the mutated protein were generated using
the Leap function in AMBER11. The amino
acid sequence of Tmod2 has no insertions or deletions relative to
Tmod1. Over the length of the fragment in 1IO0, the level of sequence identity between 1IO0 and mouse Tmod2
is 72 and 78%. Given this level of sequence homology, a structure
for Tmod2 was generated by editing the PDB file of Tmod1 with the
amino acids appropriate for Tmod2. As necessary, incomplete side chains
were added to the generated Tmod2 structure using the Leap function
in AMBER11.

MDS are conducted using the AMBER11 suite of codes.
Hydrogen atoms are added to the X-ray structure on the basis of bond
angles. Counterions (Na+ or Cl−) are
added using a Coulombic potential on a grid to ensure charge neutrality.
The protein is then placed in a box of TIP3P water molecules with a minimal distance of 10 Å from the
protein to the edge of the box of waters. Periodic boundary conditions
are used to ensure the maintenance of the ensemble and statistical
mechanical measures. The protein/water system is then energy minimized
using 1500 steps of steepest descent and 1500 steps of conjugant gradient
minimization. The time evolution of the system is followed using the
particle mesh Ewald method− for calculating the electrostatic
part of the potential energy term at constant pressure, with gradual
heating to physiological temperature. Temperature is maintained via
coupling to an external bath using the Berendsen algorithm. The SHAKE algorithm is employed with a time step of 2 fs. Simulations are run for 40 ns
and then restarted for an additional 40 ns with the iwrap function
active.

Cell Culture and Imaging
Undifferentiated PC12 cells
were grown in DMEM (Invitrogen) supplemented with 5% fetal bovine
serum (FBS, Invitrogen) and 10% horse serum (HS, Invitrogen) and subcultured
every 3 days. For nerve growth factor (NGF)-induced differentiation,
PC12 cells were grown on 100 μg/mL poly-d-lysine-coated
eight-well plates or 35 mm culture dishes (ibidi LLC) in DMEM supplemented
with 0.5% FBS, 1% HS, and 100 ng/mL NGF (Invitrogen). PC12 cells were
transfected with GFP-Tmod1, GFP-Tmod1[1–159], GFP-Tmod1[DDD],
mChFP-Tmod2, mChFP-Tmod2[1–162], or GFP and mChFP constructs
using lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. GFP-Tmod1/Tmod2 and mChFP-Tmod2/Tmod1 chimeras were
transfected separately in PC12 cells before being plated and cocultured
together before NGF induction. Twenty-four hours after transfection,
NGF was used to induce differentiation outgrowth of neurite-like processes
(neurites) monitored on days 3 and 6 on a laser scanning confocal
microscope (LSM710, Zeiss) with a 63× oil immersion lens (Zeiss).
Images were acquired with Zen software (Zeiss), and the number and
length of neurites were analyzed with Imaris (Bitplane). Statistical
analysis was performed by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA).

Results
Tmod’s LRR Domain Is Influential in Differentiating PC12
Cells
The C-terminal domain, or the LRR domain, of Tmod is
highly conserved between Tmod isoforms. This domain is important for
localization in myocytes and contains a TM-independent actin-capping
site. We used PC12 cells, a cell line derived from pheochromocytoma
of rat adrenal gland and can be reversibly induced to produce neurite-like
processes by growth in media with NGF. For the sake of simplicity,
PC12 neurite-like processes will be called neurites hereafter. These
cells are a model for early stages of neurite outgrowth.−

It has been reported that there is a compensatory expression
of Tmod isoforms after knockdown of a single isoform. To prevent complications with compensatory expression,
Tmod knockdown was not utilized in these experiments. As all of our
constructs maintain the TM binding sites in the N-terminal domain,
we therefore expect the overexpressed proteins to replace endogenous
protein for pointed ends of actin filaments, which allows us to see
the effect of the altered LRR domain.

Constructs for expression of GFP-Tmod1, the GFP-Tmod1[V232D/F263D/L313D]
triple mutant (GFP-Tmod1[DDD]), and a 159-amino acid N-terminal fragment
with the LRR domain deleted (GFP-Tmod1[1–159]) were generated
with an N-terminal GFP. Tmod1[DDD] was developed to disrupt exposed
hydrophobic clusters and resulted in poor localization to pointed
ends in cardiac cells. The various constructs
were transfected into PC12 cells to assess their effect on neurite
outgrowth. After NGF-induced differentiation for 3 days, the number
and length of neurites of transfected cells were analyzed for each
Tmod construct and compared to those of PC12 cells overexpressing
GFP only. Representative confocal images of cells overexpressing GFP-Tmod1,
GFP-Tmod1[1–159], and GFP-Tmod1[DDD] are shown in Figure a, and the number of neurites per transfected cell
and the average length of neurites corresponding to each construct
are shown in Figure c. In agreement with our
previous observations, overexpression
of GFP-Tmod1 did not significantly alter the neurite formation (3.2
± 0.91 neurites/cell) or length (64.4 ± 15.81 μm)
compared to the values seen with GFP-overexpressing cells, 3.4 ±
0.81 neurites/cell and 74.2 ± 14.32 μm, respectively. In
addition, no difference in the length of the longest neurite can be
observed (data not shown). In contrast, overexpression of GFP-Tmod1[DDD]
resulted in an 80% reduction in the number of neurites (0.7 ±
0.61 neurites/cell), an 80% reduction in the average length of the
neurites (14.2 ± 12.69 μm), and a 65% reduction in the
longest neurite (data not shown) relative to the GFP-Tmod1 control.
Surprisingly, the reduction in the level of neurite formation and
growth in cells overexpressing GFP-Tmod1[DDD] is greater than the
reduction observed in cells overexpressing GFP-Tmod1[1–159]
with the deletion of the entire LRR domain. GFP-Tmod1[1–159]
resulted in reductions of 60, 45, and 30% in the number of neurites
(1.4 ± 0.58 neurites/cell), average length (34.7 ± 14.1
μm), and longest neurite length (data not shown), respectively.
The differences between GFP-Tmod1[DDD] and GFP-Tmod1[1–159]
are statistically significant for all three measures (p &lt; 0.005; by ANOVA). We also observed that a significant proportion
of GFP-Tmod1[DDD] is targeted to the nucleus compared to the proportion
of GFP-Tmod1[1–159]-overexpressing cells (data not shown).

Effect of deletion or mutations of the LRR domain in Tmod1 and
Tmod2 on neurite formation. Confocal imaging of PC12 cells overexpressing
GFP, GFP-Tmod1, GFP-Tmod1[1–159], and GFP-Tmod1[DDD] (a) and
mChFP, mChFP-Tmod2, and mChFP-Tmod2[1–162] (b) after NGF-induced
differentiation for 3 days. The bar is 30 μm. Bar graphs representing
the quantification of the number of neurites per cell and the average
length of neurites in PC12 cells overexpressing the various Tmod1
(c) and Tmod2 (d) constructs: GFP (n = 29), Tmod1
(n = 51), Tmod1[1–159] (n = 32), Tmod1[DDD] (n = 40), mChFP (n = 30), Tmod2 (n = 30), and Tmod2[1–162]
(n = 30). Error bars represent standard deviations
(ns, not specific; ***p &lt; 0.0005; one-way ANOVA).

Similarly, we next tested the effect of Tmod2 with a deleted LRR
domain. Constructs for the expression of full-length mChFP-Tmod2 and
a 162-amino acid N-terminal fragment (mChFP-Tmod2[1–162]) were
generated with an N-terminal mChFP. Representative confocal images
of PC12 cells transfected with mChFP-Tmod2 and mChFP-Tmod2[1–162]
are shown in Figure b, and the number of neurites
per transfected cell and the average length of neurites corresponding
to each constructs are shown in Figure d.
Overexpression of mChFP-Tmod2[1–162] resulted in a 70% reduction
in the number of neurites per cell (0.9 ± 0.64 neurites/cell)
and a 75% reduction in the average neurite length (22.9 ± 11.42
μm) relative to the values of control cells overexpressing mChFP
only, 3.1 ± 0.63 neurites/cell and 72.1 ± 17.38 μm,
respectively. After NGF-induced differentiation for 3 days, there
was no statistical difference between the cells overexpressing mChFP-Tmod2
and mChFP-Tmod2[1–162] (p &gt; 0.18), which shows
that with or without its LRR domain, Tmod2 significantly impairs neurite
formation. Interestingly, a similar degree of reduction is observed
between GFP-Tmod1[DDD] and mChFP-Tmod2[1–162] with no statistical
difference between either the number of neurites per cell or the longest
neurite length.

These data demonstrated that the difference in the effects of Tmod1
and Tmod2 on the initiation and extension of neurites is due to their
LRR domains. The N-terminal domains from both isoforms inhibit neurite
formation. Tmod1’s LRR domain counteracts the inhibition by
its N-terminal half, while Tmod2’s LRR domain lacks the ability
to counteract the inhibition by its N-terminal half. The V232D, F263D,
and L313D mutations in Tmod1’s LRR domain reduced the rate
of neurite outgrowth to an extent similar to that of Tmod2 overexpression.
It was shown using CD that these mutations caused a decrease in the
stability of the LRR domain. To determine
if there is a similar correlation between the stability of the LRR
domain and its function in the formation of neurite-like processes
in PC12 cells, we looked to uncover structural differences among Tmod1,
Tmod1[DDD] and Tmod2 using three different approaches: CD, limited
proteolysis, and MDS.

Tmod2 and Tmod1[DDD] Are Less Stable Than Tmod1
CD Experiments
CD is a common technique for determining
a protein’s stability and secondary structure. In our previous
studies, we showed that the V232D, F263D, and L313D mutations in the
LRR domain of Tmod1 did not change its overall secondary structure
but did decrease its stability. The stability
of Tmod2 was compared with that of Tmod1 using urea denaturation (Figure b) and thermal shift, or differential scanning fluorimetry
(data not shown). As the N-terminal half of Tmod2 is disordered, we
actually measured the stability of the C-terminal half, or LRR domain,
in these experiments. Titration experiments indicated that the midpoint
of the two-state transition corresponds to ∼3.5 M urea (Figure b) for Tmod2, while it was 5 M for Tmod1 and 4 M
for Tmod1[DDD]. Melting temperatures
determined from the thermal shift experiment are 48 °C for Tmod2
and 59 °C for Tmod1. These results demonstrate that the LRR domain
of Tmod2 is less stable than that of Tmod1. The CD spectrum of Tmod2
was measured (Figure a). The α-helical
content calculated from the spectrum was found to be 30.8% (predicted
value of 37.6%), which is lower than Tmod1’s α-helical
content (44%).

Structural properties of Tmod2. (a) CD spectrum of Tmod2. (b) Comparison
of titration of Tmod2 (left y-axis) and Tmod1 (right y-axis) with urea. The data for Tmod1 were taken from ref ().

Limited Proteolysis and Fragment Localization
Limited
proteolysis is a simple technique for checking the structural stability
of a protein. Proteins and protein domains that are tightly folded
are more resistant to proteases than those that are flexible and extended.
Limited proteolysis has already been conducted on Tmod1 and is used
as a reference. Tmod1 trypsinolysis yielded
stable fragments with molecular masses of 20 and 17 kDa. Digestion
by V8 protease yielded a stable 20 kDa fragment. The 17 kDa tryptic
fragment and the 20 kDa V8 proteolytic fragment were resistant to
further proteolysis and could be stored in the reaction mixture for
several days. In contrast, Tmod1[DDD]
produced only a 17 kDa fragment by trypsinolysis and two fragments,
20 and 16 kDa, by V8 protease digestion. These results indicate the
different accessibilities of Arg/Lys and Glu, respectively, in mutated
Tmod1. The 16 kDa tryptic and 20 kDa V8 proteolytic fragments (boxed
in Figure a) were cut from the gel and sent
for N-terminal sequencing. These fragments have N-terminal sequences
of YKPVP and GLNSV for trypsin and V8 proteases, respectively. The
N-termini of these fragments correspond to those obtained by limited
proteolysis of wild-type Tmod1. The maintained
N-termini with lower molecular masses indicate that the C-terminus
of the mutant is more susceptible to proteases. We suggest that this
could be a result of structural changes in the region of the sixth
α-helix.

Time course proteolysis of (A) Tmod1[DDD] and (B) Tmod2. Trypsin
and S. aureus V8 protease were added to Tmods [1:200
and 1:50 (w/w) ratios, respectively]. The arrowheads indicate the
positions of Tmods. The molecular masses shown on the sides of the
images correspond to boxed bands that were used for N-terminal sequencing.
Molecular mass standards are 250, 150, 100, 75, 50, 37, 25, 20, 15,
and 10 kDa.

Tmod2 was found to be even more susceptible to proteases than the
triple mutant (Figure b). The 16 and 20 kDa
fragments were produced by trypsin and V8 proteolysis, respectively.
While the corresponding fragments from Tmod1 were stable for several
days, the Tmod2 fragments degraded within a few hours. These fragments
were cut from the gel and sent for N-terminal sequencing; these bands
are boxed in Figure . The tryptic fragment’s
N-terminal sequence is AKPVF. The V8 proteolytic fragment’s
N-terminal sequence is KAKPV. The tryptic fragment had a mass of 15734
Da, and the V8 proteolytic fragment had a mass of 19790 Da. The positions
of the fragments were then approximated using the determined molecular
masses and N-terminal sequences; the tryptic fragment localized to
A172–R312 and the V8 proteolytic fragment to K171–E347
(Figure ). The mass of the fragments was found
to be 1 and 13 Da different from that predicted by protein sequences
for trypsinolysis and V8 proteolysis, respectively. The localization
of the fragments is shown in Figure . The
N-terminal sequence points of these fragments are very similar to
those of Tmod1’s fragments; however, rapid digestion of Tmod2’s
fragments indicates a greater degree of flexibility in the LRR domain.

One confounding factor of this conclusion is the presence of several
more proteolytic sites in Tmod2 than in Tmod1. Tmod1 has 12 V8 proteolytic
sites and 20 trypsin proteolytic sites in its C-terminal half, while
the Tmod2 sequence has 18 V8 proteolytic sites and 25 trypsin proteolytic
sites. Of the additional proteolytic sites in Tmod2, only one of the
trypsin cut sites is in the loop immediately before the sixth α-helix.
Although a structural difference is a conclusion that fits the data,
additional data are necessary to rule out the impact of these additional
cut sites.

Tmod1[DDD] and Tmod2 Have Altered Structure at Their C-Terminal
Ends
Using MDS, we can look for possible changes to protein
structure by using a known structure. The known structure can be manipulated
to include the sequence of an unknown protein and then, through simulation
of forces on individual atoms of the unknown protein, to produce an
approximation of the structure quite rapidly. The Protein Data Bank
structure of Tmod1 (entry 1IO0(,)) was used as the starting point
for the triple mutant simulation, and the mutations were substituted
into the protein’s structure. Simulations of the native (control)
and mutated protein were conducted for 40 ns and then restarted and
run for an additional 40 ns. Plots of the root-mean-square deviation
(rmsd) of the simulated protein from the original structure suggest
that the structures had reached a new quasi-steady state; these are
shown in Figure . Shown in Figure  is an overlay of the final frame of the simulations:
Tmod1 colored blue, Tmod1[DDD] purple, and Tmod2 yellow. There are
modest differences between Tmod1 and Tmod1[DDD], with an increase
in curvature between the two and a small angle and offset of the sixth
α-helix. A closer look yields the observation that a hydrogen
bond is added between D313 and N326 because of the mutations of Tmod1[DDD].

Plots of rmsd calculations for the MD simulations.

Molecular dynamics simulations of Tmod structures. Time averages
of the last 10 ns of the simulations for Tmod1 (blue), Tmod1[DDD]
(purple), and Tmod2 (yellow). The figure shows two different views
of the results of the simulations. Structures have the N-termini on
the left side; the top panel has the C-terminal α-helix directed
out of the page, and the bottom panel has the C-terminal α-helix
pointing down the page. The structures are matched over the α-carbons
of the 44 N-terminal amino acids.

In a manner similar to that used for Tmod1[DDD], a file was developed
with all of the substitutions necessary to mutate Tmod1 into Tmod2.
This file was used for a 40 ns simulation and restarted for an additional
40 ns. The rmsd from the initial structure as a function of time in
Figure  shows that the simulation had reached
a new pseudosteady state. The final frame of the simulation is shown
in Figure . From these structures, we see
significant deviation from the Tmod1 control, with a reduction in
curvature along the α-helices of the LRR domain and an offset
and angled sixth helix. Additionally, curvature is observed in the
final helix. A hydrophobic surface plot (Figure ) of Tmod2 shows that there is a hydrophobic pocket formed in the
area analogous to the added hydrogen bond in Tmod1[DDD].

Hydrophobic surface plots of Tmod structures. Hydrophobic surface
plots of Tmod1 (right) and Tmod2 (left) oriented such that the last
α-helix is positioned at the top of the frame with the β-strands
facing toward the reader. Indicated by arrows are hydrophobic (red)
pockets.

Together with the data obtained by CD, thermal shift, and limited
proteolysis, we can conclude that both Tmod1[DDD] and Tmod2 are less
stable than Tmod1 and the difference in stability is caused by changes
in the very C-terminal region of the LRR domain close to the sixth
α-helix.

Phenotypic Difference between Overexpression of Tmod Chimeras
In the presence of TMs, Tmod’s actin capping behavior is
determined by the N-terminal half, which holds two TM binding sites
that flank the TM-dependent actin-capping site (Figure ). Tmod’s actin nucleating and sequestering abilities
require the actin-capping sites in both domains. Tmod’s targeting
is attributed to only the LRR domain. To investigate the impact of Tmod’s LRR domains on neurite
formation, we produced a set of chimeras with the C-terminal and N-terminal
halves of Tmod1 and Tmod2 switched between the two isoforms. These
chimeras allow us to maintain TM binding of a single isoform while
switching the LRR domains. Two chimeric proteins were constructed;
mChFP-Tmod2/Tmod1 contained the N-terminal half of Tmod2 (residues
1–161) and the C-terminal half of Tmod1 (residues 160–359),
and GFP-Tmod1/Tmod2 contained the N-terminal half of Tmod1 (residues
1–159) and the C-terminal half of Tmod2 (residues 162–351).
Representative confocal images of PC12 cells transfected with mChFP-Tmod2/Tmod1
and GFP-Tmod1/Tmod2 and cocultured in the presence of NGF for 3 days
are shown in Figure a. The distributions of
the number of neurites per cell and the length of neurites are shown
in Figure b, and the corresponding average
values are shown in Figure c. After NGF-induced
differentiation for 3 days, PC12 cells overexpressing the GFP-Tmod1/Tmod2
chimera had significantly fewer (1.57 ± 0.51 neurites/cell) and
shorter (29.2 ± 14.7 μm) neurites than cells overexpressing
the mChFP-Tmod2/Tmod1 chimera, 3.17 ± 0.63 neurites/cell and
57.5 ± 16.8 μm, respectively. The number and length of
neurites in the mChFP-Tmod2/Tmod1 chimera were similar to the number
and length of neurites observed in control cells overexpressing mChFP
only (Table ). These data strongly argue in
favor of a differential role of Tmod1 and Tmod2’s LRR domains.
Tmod1’s LRR domain may act as a positive regulator of neurite
formation.

Comparison of the effect of Tmod1/Tmod2 and Tmod2/Tmod1 chimeras
on PC12 cell differentiation. (a) Confocal imaging of PC12 cells overexpressing
GFP-Tmod1/Tmod2 cocultured with PC12 cells overexpressing mChFP-Tmod2/Tmod1
after NGF-induced differentiation for 3 days. The bar is 50 μm.
(b) Distribution of the number of neurites per cell and distribution
of the length of the neurites in PC12 cells expressing the GFP-Tmod1/Tmod2
chimera (green traces and bars) and PC12 cells expressing the mChFP-Tmod2/Tmod1
chimera (red traces and bars). (c) Average numbers of neurites and
average lengths of neurites in PC12 cells expressing the GFP-Tmod1/Tmod2
chimera (n = 35; light gray) and the mChFP-Tmod2/Tmod1
chimera (n = 42; dark gray). Error bars represent
the standard deviation (***p &lt; 0.0005; one-way
ANOVA).

Surprisingly, after NGF-induced differentiation for 6 days, we
found that while cells overexpressing GFP-Tmod1 differentiated normally
and cells overexpressing mChFP-Tmod2 failed to differentiate as previously
observed after 3 days, a limited but significant number (approximately
20%) of cells overexpressing the mChFP-Tmod2/Tmod1 chimera or the
mChFP-Tmod2[1–162] truncated mutant were able to grow at least
one elongated neurite (Figure a). The number
of neurites per cell, the average length of neurites, and the length
of the longest neurites are shown in Figure b. Overexpression of the mChFP-Tmod2/Tmod1 chimera resulted in a
1.5-fold decrease in the number of neurites (2.2 ± 0.98 neurites/cell)
compared to the number seen with GFP-Tmod1, 3.1 ± 1.22 neurites/cell.
However, the average length (112.3 ± 22.3 μm) and the length
of the longest neurites (140.2 ± 19.6 μm) matched GFP-Tmod1
controls, 101.4 ± 24.1 and 133.1 ± 18.4 μm, respectively.
In cells overexpressing the mChFP-Tmod2[1–162] truncated mutant,
while the number of neurites per cell remains significantly lower
than in cells overexpressing GFP-Tmod1, the length (average and maximum)
of neurites becomes significantly higher (78.4 ± 19 μm)
than in cells overexpressing mChFP-Tmod2 (26.5 ± 16.1 μm).
These data suggested that the Tmod2 LRR domain strongly inhibits neurite
formation and growth in the later steps of neuronal differentiation,
and its deletion or replacement with Tmod1’s LRR domain, on
the other hand, can facilitate a partial recovery neurite growth and
elongation in the later steps of neuronal differentiation. PC12 cells
are not recognized as developing axons; however, the later appearance
of single long neurites is reminiscent of axon differentiation.

Comparison of the effect of Tmod1 and Tmod2 mutants on PC12 cell
differentiation. (a) Confocal imaging of PC12 cells overexpressing
wild-type GFP-Tmod1, wild-type mChFP-Tmod2, the mChFP-Tmod2/Tmod1
chimera, and the mChFP-Tmod2[1–162] truncated mutant after
NGF-induced differentiation for 6 days. The bar is 50 μm. (b)
Bar graphs showing the quantification of the number of neurites per
cell, the average length of neurites, and the length of the longest
neurite in PC12 cells overexpressing the different Tmod1 and Tmod2
constructs: Tmod1 (n = 42), Tmod2 (n = 33), Tmod2/Tmod1 (n = 40), and Tmod2[1–162]
(n = 28). Error bars represent the standard deviation
(*p &lt; 0.04, and ***p &lt; 0.0005;
one-way ANOVA).

Discussion
In our PC12 cell experiments, we set out to investigate the relative
impacts of the functional domains of Tmod1 and Tmod2 on neuritogenesis
and begin to narrow down the roles of different sites in Tmods. The
work presented here provides new insights into the role of Tmods in
neurite formation previously reported., The overexpression
of Tmod2 in PC12 cells inhibits neurite formation, while the overexpression
of Tmod1 does not significantly alter the number of neurites per cell
or the length of neurites. One might
expect that overexpression of pointed end stabilizing proteins would
interfere with actin turnover, thereby interfering with neurite outgrowth,
yet the overexpression of Tmod1 does not impact neurite outgrowth.
Fath et al. hypothesized that Tmod2’s actin sequestering ability
caused the inhibition of neurite outgrowth by Tmod2; however, co-overexpression of Tmod1 and Tmod2 resulted
in a normal phenotype, which challenges
this hypothesis. This suggests that the ratio of Tmod1 to Tmod2 is
more important than the absolute expression.

Results of overexpressing the N-terminal domains of Tmod1 and Tmod2
indicate that Tmod’s N-terminal domain, which is responsible
for capping actin filaments in the presence of TMs, is inhibitory
for neurite formation (Table  and Figure ). Mutations in Tmod1’s LRR domain, which
alter its tertiary structure, have the same inhibitory effect. The
LRR domain is currently attributed to Tmod’s actin sequestering
and/or nucleation ability, and is important for
targeting. Our findings suggest that
the LRR domain of Tmod1 counteracts inhibition of neurite formation
by Tmod1’s N-terminal half.

Visual summary of PC12 cell experiments.

Summary of Results from PC12 Cell
Experiments with Standard Deviations
 	day 3	day 6	
 	no. of neurites/cell	average neurite
length (μm)	no. of neurites/cell	average neurite
length (μm)	
GFP	3.4 ± 0.81	74.2 ± 14.32	nc	nc	
Tmod1	3.2 ± 0.91	64.4 ± 15.8	3.1 ± 1.22	101.4 ± 24.1	
Tmod1[1–159]	1.4 ± 0.58	34.7 ± 14.1	nc	nc	
Tmod1[DDD]	0.7 ± 0.58	14.2 ± 12.69	nc	nc	
mChFP	3.1 ± 0.63	72.1 ± 17.38	nc	nc	
Tmod2	1.1 ± 0.75	19.2 ± 10.6	0.9 ± 0.78	26.5 ± 16.1	
Tmod2[1–162]	0.9 ± 0.64	22.9 ± 11.42	1.3 ± 0.71	78.4 ± 19	
Tmod1/Tmod2	1.57 ± 0.51	29.2 ± 14.7	nc	nc	
Tmod2/Tmod1	3.17 ± 0.63	57.5 ± 16.8	2.2 ± 0.98	112.3 ± 22.3	
No noticeable change observed
relative to day 3 measurements.

Fath et al. observed the expression of Tmod1 and Tmod2 during N2a
differentiation and found that Tmod2 has a nearly constant expression
level during development and that Tmod1’s level of expression
increased by 74% after differentiation had been induced for 24 h. If an increasing level of expression of Tmod1
counteracts the inhibition by Tmod2 and neurites begin to form, then
regulation of Tmod expression may play a pivotal role in regulating
neurite formation.

Highly ordered subcompartments within neuronal growth cones that
have different localizations of actin-associated proteins have been
observed. Tmods are known to have isoform
specific interactions with TMs, which
suggests that different Tmod isoforms could stabilize actin filaments
coated by different TM isoforms. The N-terminal domain is responsible
for this function; however, by destroying the LRR domain, we could
be disrupting the targeting of Tmods to the subcompartments with different
TM actin filaments and thereby disrupting the spatially specific actin/TM
organization. The targeting may be realized through the LRR domain’s
interaction with proteins other than actin.

The binding partners of Tmod’s LRR domain are still poorly
understood. Some evidence that Tmod binds to nebulin and thymosin
β-10 has been presented., Several nebulin isoforms
have been shown to be expressed in the brain. Recently, nebulin–Tmod binding in muscle cells has been challenged
by microscopic techniques, which brings
into question the relevance of the possible interaction between the
two proteins. Moreover, when the blot overlay experiments with biotinylated
Tmod as described in ref () were performed using the M1–M3 nebulin fragment
instead of full-length nebulin, no interaction was detected with the
fragment. A strong interaction with a high-molecular mass contaminant
of the nebulin sample was observed (A. S. Kostyukova, unpublished
data). Other methods such as cross-linking, native gel electrophoresis,
and CD also did not show interaction. Because of the inconsistencies
in these results, additional experiments should be conducted to verify
or refute this interaction between Tmods and nebulin and then explore
its relevance in neurons.

Another possible binding partner for Tmod is thymosin β-10,
which has been shown to be strongly expressed during development and
decreases after birth.− Using truncations, Rho et al. suggest that there is a Tmod–thymosin
interaction site within the first two repeats of the LRR domain (Figure , denoted with
an asterisk). Our Tmod1[DDD] mutations are outside of this region;
however, it is possible that these mutations might alter Tmod–thymosin
interactions and contribute to phenotypic changes observed in our
experiments. Although there has been no experimentally determined
isoform-dependent difference in Tmod–thymosin interactions,
the sequence is only 55% identical and 62% similar to those of tropomodulin
isoforms, which keeps this door of reasoning open.

To investigate the impact of Tmod’s LRR domain while maintaining
the TM-dependent actin capping function, two chimeras were produced
with the N-terminal and C-terminal halves switched between isoforms.
In these experiments, we found recovery of neurite formation when
Tmod1’s LRR domain is expressed with either isoform’s
N-terminal domain; however, Tmod2’s LRR domain had no apparent
impact. These data support our conclusion that Tmod LRR domains have
isoform specific impacts on neurite formation. We used limited proteolysis,
CD, and MDS to investigate structural differences between the LRR
domains of Tmod1, Tmod1[DDD], and Tmod2. Altogether, these results
indicate that Tmod1[DDD] and Tmod2 are more disordered and flexible
than Tmod1.

From limited proteolysis data, we conclude that the lowered stability
is localized at the C-terminal end of the LRR domain. The MD simulations
predict that the sixth α-helices in the triple mutant and Tmod2
are offset relative to the Tmod1 control, which agrees with our data
on limited proteolysis. These structural changes may correlate with
isoform specific functions of Tmods’ LRR domains that result
in the observed phenotypic differences.

Our experiments suggest that the different domains of Tmod isoforms
play different roles in neurite formation, possibly implicating the
role of Tmod targeting in neurite outgrowth. These results suggest
two directions of study: (1) to check localization of the Tmod fragments
and localization in neurons and (2) to further delve into the roles
of individual functional sites of Tmod isoforms. From these continued
studies, we aim to further elucidate the roles of Tmods in neural
development.

Author Contributions
L.G. and
K.G. contributed equally to this work. N.M. and C.P. also contributed
equally to this work.

This work was
supported by National Institutes of Health Grants GM081688 to A.S.K.
and AR062279 to E.P.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Inna Krieger for differential scanning fluorimetry
measurements, Dr. Dmitri Tolkatchev for discussion, and the University
of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey Neuroscience Summer Undergraduate
Research Program that allowed C.P. to work in the laboratory of A.S.K.

