The amyloidoses
are a group
of degenerative diseases caused by the aggregation of a specific protein− leading to the dysfunction or loss of post-mitotic tissue.− Aggregation from an initially folded protein requires partial unfolding,
exposing hydrophobic side chains and backbone H-bonding donors and
acceptors that drive concentration-dependent aggregation.−

Transthyretin (TTR) is a tetrameric β-sheet-rich protein,
secreted by the liver into the blood, wherein it transports holo-retinol
binding protein and a small quantity of thyroxine.− The TTR tetramer
concentration in human plasma varies from ≈3.4 to 5 μM., Following rate-limiting tetramer dissociation and partial monomer
denaturation, TTR can aggregate via a downhill polymerization mechanism
to form fibrillar cross-β-sheet, or amyloid, deposits, as well
as a spectrum of structurally diverse aggregates.,− Dissociation of TTR tetramers begins by dimer separation along the
weaker dimer–dimer interface comprising the thyroxine binding
sites (Figure A)., Fast dimer dissociation to monomers, which can then misfold, leads
to extracellular aggregation.,,−

Subunit
exchange measures the stability of recombinant TTR tetramers.
(A) The top left panel shows a ribbon diagram of the TTR tetramer
with individual subunits shown in different colors. Arrowheads indicate
the thyroxine-binding pockets. The top right panel shows a cartoon
of the same tetramer. The weak dimer–dimer interface is indicated
with a dotted line. The bottom panel shows a schematic of the steps
involved in dissociation, reassociation, and subunit exchange of untagged
WT TTR subunits (green squares) and dual-FLAG-tagged (FT2) WT TTR subunits (orange squares). (B) Recombinant WT and FT2·WT TTR were mixed in equal amounts and separated by
ion exchange chromatography after exchange for 7 days. The initial
populations of homotetramers mix to create heterotetramers incorporating
zero to four FT2·WT TTR subunits. Green squares represent
untagged WT TTR subunits and orange squares FT2·WT
TTR subunits. (C) To quantify subunit exchange, the relative area
of peak 1 at time zero is calculated and used in the
binomial equation to calculate the expected area of peak 3 at equilibrium. At each time point, the fraction exchange is calculated
by comparing the actual relative area of peak 3 at that
time point to the expected relative area of peak 3 at
equilibrium (see the text for details).

Compelling human genetic and pharmacologic evidence supports
the
hypothesis that the process of TTR aggregation causes the degenerative
phenotypes characteristic of the TTR amyloidoses.−,,− Wild-type (WT) TTR aggregation causes senile systemic amyloidosis
(SSA), primarily a cardiomyopathy occurring in ∼20% of the
elderly population. WT TTR aggregation
on blood vessels also appears to play a central role in a variety
of vascular diseases. The autosomal dominant
familial TTR amyloidoses present as a polyneuropathy [familial amyloid
polyneuropathy (FAP)] and/or a cardiomyopathy
(familial amyloid cardiomyopathy,), depending on the
identity of the TTR mutation the patient has inherited
of the &gt;100 disease-linked variants.,

The
variability in the age of onset or the aggressiveness of the
hereditary TTR amyloidoses can, in part, be attributed to differences
in the thermodynamic and kinetic stability of heterotetramers comprising
disease-associated and WT TTR subunits.,,,− The decreased kinetic stability of TTR tetramers incorporating disease-associated
subunits, i.e., their increased rate of dissociation, is correlated
with their potential to cause pathology. The therapeutic value of kinetic stabilization of TTR using small
molecule drugs has been demonstrated in two placebo-controlled trials
in heterozygous patient populations, wherein the TTR heterotetramers
consist of a nearly statistical distribution of WT and destabilizing
disease-associated mutant subunits.− In these trials, binding
of the small molecule kinetic stabilizer drug tafamidis,,, or diflunisal,− dramatically
slows the progression of TTR polyneuropathy, as measured by neurologic
impairment scores, quality of life assessments, and other metrics., This provides strong evidence that the process of aggregation is
the cause of these degenerative phenotypes. Furthermore, incorporation
of T119M TTR subunits into tetramers otherwise composed of FAP-associated
V30M TTR subunits kinetically stabilizes the heterotetramer, preventing
the onset of FAP or resulting in very mild pathology.,,,,, T119M TTR
subunit-associated kinetic stabilization of tetramers otherwise composed
of WT TTR subunits also seems to prevent a range of vascular diseases,
and the presence of T119M subunits extends human lifespan by 5–10
years.

Because the decreased kinetic
stability of the TTR tetramer is
intimately linked to aggregation propensity and degenerative disease
risk, a quantitative assessment of TTR kinetic stability in human
plasma would serve as a biomarker for risk. This assay could also
quantify a patient’s response to kinetic stabilizer treatment,
which is especially valuable for patients carrying substantially destabilized,
rare, or currently uncharacterized TTR mutations. If the extent of
small molecule-mediated stabilization of the TTR tetramer could be
shown to correlate with clinical outcome in a future study, quantification
of TTR kinetic stability could become a much-needed surrogate biomarker
reasonably likely to predict clinical outcome in TTR amyloidosis patients.

Currently, the best available method for assessing TTR stability
in human plasma calls for acid or urea denaturation of plasma, followed
by glutaraldehyde cross-linking and SDS–PAGE separation of
the plasma proteins. TTR immunoblotting can be employed to quantify
the amount of tetramer remaining after denaturation as a function
of time, (unfolded monomeric TTR is highly modified
by glutaraldehyde treatment, precluding TTR antibody recognition of
the monomer). Alternatively, immunoturbidity can be used to quantify
the amount of TTR tetramer remaining after denaturation and cross-linking. A limitation of these related methods is that
they assess the stability of TTR under non-native conditions. Moreover,
rigorous quantification of the electrophoresis gels is challenging.

Herein we report a simple, highly reproducible, alternative approach
for quantifying the kinetic stability of TTR tetramers in human plasma
based on the previously reported subunit exchange assay for quantification
of the kinetic stability of recombinant TTR in buffer.,− Importantly, this assay is conducted under physiological conditions,
allowing for a TTR kinetic stability assessment directly in blood
plasma, in the presence of all of the factors that could contribute
to the stability of TTR and/or to the efficacy of small molecule TTR
kinetic stabilization. Furthermore, this assay is inherently quantitative
and reproducible and eliminates the difficult measurements for quantifying
cross-linked TTR. For these reasons, we believe that the subunit exchange
assay in human plasma could be useful in both academic and clinical
settings to assess individual differences in the kinetic stability
of endogenous TTR, to establish optimal dosing strategies for patients
and to measure their response to treatment, and possibly as a biomarker
for early diagnosis. We have already made several surprising observations
about the kinetic stability of TTR in plasma using this assay, further
highlighting the need for a quantitative in situ assay
for TTR kinetic stability.

Experimental Procedures
Expression and Purification
of Recombinant TTR
Recombinant
WT and dual-FLAG-tagged WT (FT2·WT) TTR were expressed
in and purified from Escherichia coli as described
previously, except that the buffer in
the final gel filtration purification step consisted of 10 mM sodium
phosphate (pH 7.6), 100 mM KCl, and 1 mM EDTA, hereafter termed “standard
phosphate buffer”. The molar absorbtivities (ε) of WT
TTR (73800 M–1 cm–1) and FT2·WT TTR (85720 M–1 cm–1) tetramers in standard phosphate buffer were used to calculate TTR
concentrations.

Plasma Samples
Blood from healthy
volunteers was obtained
from The Scripps Research Institute’s Normal Blood Donor Services
Center. The blood was collected in BD Vacutainer tubes prepared with
sodium citrate and allowed to sit upright for at least 30 min at room
temperature. The blood was then centrifuged at 1500g for 20 min. The resulting supernatant (plasma) was carefully removed
and centrifuged for an additional 20 min to remove any remaining cells.
Aliquots of the clarified plasma were stored at −20 °C.
Frozen plasma samples were thawed on ice before being used and then
stored at 4 °C for up to 1 week. Plasma from TTR knockout (KO)
mice was generously provided by J. Buxbaum of The Scripps Research
Institute. Blood from SSA patients and WT controls was collected in
8 mL BD Vacutainer Cell Preparation Tubes (CPT) with Sodium Citrate/Ficoll,
and after collection, each tube was stored upright at room temperature
for 40 min. The blood was remixed immediately prior to centrifugation
by gently inverting the tube 8–10 times and then centrifuged
at room temperature (18–25 °C) in a horizontal rotor for
20 min at 1700g. After centrifugation, approximately
one-half or one-third of the plasma was aspirated with a Pasteur pipet
without disturbing the cell layer. Plasma was transferred to 1.5 mL
cryovials with a cap and stored at −75 °C until it was
shipped.

Subunit Exchange Studies with Recombinant TTR in Buffer
The indicated concentrations of untagged and dual-FLAG-tagged (FT2) recombinant WT TTR tetramer in standard phosphate buffer
were incubated at 25 °C, and the reaction was followed for up
to 8 days. At each time point, a 50 μL sample, without or with
an A2 incubation step as described below, was injected
onto a Waters Acquity H-Class Bio-UPLC (ultra performance liquid chromatography)
instrument fitted with a strong anion exchange column. TTR was eluted
from the column using a nonlinear gradient at a flow rate of 0.6 mL/min
over 33 min (see the  for additional details). Tryptophan fluorescence, with excitation
at 295 nm and emission at 335 nm, was monitored at a sampling rate
of one point per second. Where indicated, samples were incubated with
30 μM A2 for 3 h before separation by ion exchange
chromatography. A2-modified TTR conjugate fluorescence
was monitored, using excitation at 328 nm with emission at 430 nm,
at a sampling rate of one point per second. Peaks 1–5 were integrated using Empower 3 software according to the manufacturer’s
instructions.

Subunit Exchange Studies using Endogenous
WT TTR in Human Plasma
Frozen plasma samples, collected as
described above, were thawed
on ice and stored as needed at 4 °C (see the  for important details regarding the
plasma thawing conditions). Experiments with plasma were started within
1 week of thawing. Sodium azide was added to plasma to a final concentration
of 0.05% at the beginning of the subunit exchange reaction and after
every 10 days during the subunit exchange incubation period. In some
experiments, tafamidis (100× stock in DMSO) was added to healthy
donor plasma ex vivo and the sample was incubated
at room temperature for 30 min before being further processed. All
samples were centrifuged for 5 min at maximal speed in a tabletop
microcentrifuge, and the supernatant was then filtered through a 0.22
μm PVDF filter.

To initiate subunit exchange, FT2·WT TTR at the indicated concentration was added to the plasma.
Unless otherwise indicated, the reaction mixture was incubated at
25 °C for the duration of the subunit exchange period. The subunit
exchange reaction can be fit with a single-exponential curve,,, consistent with tetramer dissociation
being rate-limiting. At each time point of interest during the incubation,
10 μL of the subunit exchange reaction mixture was removed and
added to a sample vial containing 3 μL of a 130 μM stock
solution of the fluorogenic small molecule A2 in DMSO. Unless otherwise stated, the samples were incubated
with A2 at 25 °C for 3 h to allow for complete covalent
modification by A2 of the two thyroxine binding sites
within the TTR tetramer. After completion of the A2 conjugation
reaction, the sample was diluted by adding 52 μL of 50 μM
sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7.6), flash-frozen with liquid nitrogen,
and stored at −20 °C for later UPLC analysis. A 50 μL
sample was injected onto a Waters Acquity H-Class Bio-UPLC instrument
and eluted as described above for recombinant TTR (see the  for details).

Analysis of
the Subunit Exchange Reaction
A detailed
description of the analysis of the subunit exchange reaction, including
the calculation of fraction exchange, is provided in the . Rate constants of exchange (kex) were calculated using GraphPad Prism by plotting the
fraction exchange data as a function of time and fitting the results
to the first-order single-exponential kinetic equation y = A(1 – e–kt) + B. For curves exhibiting very slow kinetics,
the plateau value calculated from the single-exponential fit was very
different from the theoretical maximum of 1.0 fraction exchange. In
these experiments, a constraint was added that the plateau values
for all curves within the experiment must be equal, though the precise
value was not specified a priori. It is also possible
to calculate kex based on the fraction
exchange at a single time point using the equation FEt=t = 1 – e–kt, which can be solved for kex,t=t = −ln(1 –
FEt=t)/t.

Immunoblot Analysis of the UPLC Peaks
Peaks 1–5, corresponding to the five TTR tetramers resulting from subunit
exchange, were collected via UPLC after passage through a fluorescence
detector. The peak from plasma detected 1–3 min after injection,
termed peak 0, was also collected. Because the concentration
of TTR in the collected fractions was predicted to be very low, each
peak was collected from four injections of the same sample, pooled,
and concentrated using an Amicon Ultra-4 Centrifugal Filter device
with a 10 kDa cutoff. The concentrated samples were then volume normalized,
analyzed by SDS–PAGE and Western blotting, and detected and
quantified using a Li-Cor Odyssey infrared imaging system. Untagged
TTR was detected using a polyclonal rabbit anti-TTR antibody (DAKO)
at a 1:5000 dilution, and FT2·WT TTR was detected
using the M2 mouse anti-FLAG antibody (Agilent) at a 1:1000 dilution.

HPLC Analysis of Tafamidis Concentrations in Plasma
Frozen
plasma samples, collected as described above, were thawed
on ice and stored as needed at 4 °C. A standard curve was made
for each experiment using plasma from a healthy normal donor and adding
0, 1, 3, 6, 12, or 24 μM tafamidis (final concentration) from
50× stocks in DMSO and then incubating the samples overnight
at 37 °C. Plasma was centrifuged for 5 min at maximal speed in
a tabletop microcentrifuge. Aliquots of plasma (2 × 20 μL)
were mixed with 100 μL of acetonitrile containing 1% (w/v) trichloroacetic
acid to precipitate proteins and extract tafamidis. Samples were shaken
for 30 min at 25 °C and 1500 rpm and then centrifuged for 10
min at maximal speed in a tabletop microcentrifuge. The supernatant
was separated by HPLC using a linear gradient over 20 min (see the  for more details). Integration
of the tafamidis peak and calculation of the tafamidis concentration
using the standard curve were executed in Empower 2 according to the
manufacturer’s instructions.

Results
Subunit Exchange
Rate Differences Reflect TTR Tetramer Kinetic
Stability Differences
Co-incubation of equal concentrations
of untagged WT TTR and dual-FLAG-tagged WT TTR (FT2·WT
TTR) homotetramers results in subunit exchange between the tetramers.,, Subunit exchange is a general
property of oligomeric proteins and can be measured using various
techniques.,, For TTR specifically, under conditions in which TTR aggregation
is minimal, such as in plasma where extracellular chaperones like
clusterin minimize aggregation,, the monomeric subunits
resulting from tetramer dissociation simply reassemble back to tetramers,
a process that is not normally detectable. However, if a population
of untagged TTR homotetramers is mixed with a population of tagged
homotetramers, the concurrent dissociation of the tagged and untagged
tetramers results in a mixed pool of tagged and untagged monomeric
TTR subunits (Figure A). When these monomers
come together during tetramer reassembly, the resulting heterotetramers
are made up of tagged and/or untagged TTR subunits (Figure A,B). The expected relative area of tetramers 1–5 at equilibrium is predicted by a binomial distribution
(Figure C), where n = 4, k is the number of untagged TTR subunits in the peak of
interest, and p is the probability of incorporating
an untagged TTR subunit, which is the fraction of untagged TTR relative
to total TTR, which equals [(area of peak 1 at time zero)/(total
area of peaks 1–5 at time zero)].

Several
lines of evidence indicate that the rate of TTR subunit exchange between
WT and FT2·WT TTR homotetramers is limited by the
rate of tetramer dissociation. First, the kinetics of TTR subunit
exchange can be rigorously fit to a first-order rate equation, from
which a rate constant for subunit exchange, kex, can be derived. This is true for TTR evaluated over a 200-fold
concentration range flanking the physiological range, revealing nearly
identical first-order subunit exchange rate constants. The rates at which tetramers 2–4 appear and tetramers 1 and 5 disappear
are identical within experimental error, consistent with TTR fully
dissociating to monomeric subunits before reassembling. If subunit
exchange bypassed monomeric intermediates, for example, by proceeding
through a dimeric intermediate, the kex rates for the five tetramers would be expected to differ on the
basis of the distribution of the intermediate(s). Second, the rate
constant for subunit exchange (0.027 h–1) is very close to the rate constant for tetramer
dissociation measured spectroscopically under nonreversible conditions,
i.e., between 6 and 8 M urea and extrapolated back to 0 M urea (0.017
h–1). Finally, mathematical
modeling of the subunit exchange reaction based on this evidence closely
recapitulates the experimental data. Thus,
it seems clear that tetramer reassembly is much faster than dissociation,, that the subunit exchange rate is limited by tetramer dissociation,
and that exchange rate differences therefore reflect differences in
the kinetic stability of distinct TTR tetramers.

For homotetramer 1 and homotetramer 5, composed of identical untagged
WT and FT2·WT TTR
subunits, respectively, the kinetics of tetramer dissociation and
reassociation are identical; thus, the polyanionic dual-FLAG tag does
not alter TTR kinetic stability. Heterotetramers
comprising untagged WT and FT2·WT TTR subunits also
appear to exhibit identical kinetics of tetramer dissociation and
reassociation. Thus, the probability (p) of incorporating
an untagged subunit into any tetramer is directly proportional to
the relative abundance of untagged TTR. At time zero, the relative
abundance of untagged tetramers is represented by the relative area
of peak 1 (Figure A,B). For each
time point, the area of peak 3 is calculated relative
to the total area of peaks 1–5 (Figure C). The fraction exchange at each time point is
calculated by dividing the relative area of peak 3 at
that time point by the expected relative area of peak 3 at equilibrium, calculated from the binomial distribution (Figure C). For example, if the relative area of peak 1 in a given sample at time time zero is 19.22/(19.22 + 1.73
+ 12.35) = 0.577, then the expected relative area of peak 3 at equilibrium is 0.357 based on the binomial distribution. For
that same sample, if the relative area of peak 3 after
subunit exchange for 7 days is 0.347, then the fraction exchange (FE)
will be 0.347/0.357 = 0.97 or 97% (Figure C).

All preparations of FT2·WT TTR homotetramers
used
for this study contain an impurity that elutes at nearly the same
retention time as heterotetramer 4 (Figure B) and is likely very similar to heterotetramer 4 (i.e., one of the subunits lacks the N-terminal FT2 tag).
Further purification did not deplete this impurity peak (Figure S1
of the ); however,
its presence did not meaningfully affect the accuracy of the subunit
exchange assay (see the  for details). We suspect that this impurity arises from undesirable
proteolysis of one subunit within the FT2·WT TTR homotetramer
during biosynthesis in E. coli, although we cannot
exclude the possibility that it may be some other kind of impurity.

Influence of the Concentration of Homotetramers 1 and 5 on TTR Subunit Exchange Kinetics
Previous
subunit exchange assays employing recombinant TTR in buffer always
maintained equal starting concentrations of WT and FT2·WT
TTR homotetramers. Because endogenous TTR concentrations in plasma
vary from patient to patient, we wanted to examine the extent to which
varying the starting concentrations of untagged WT and FT2·WT TTR subunits could influence the kinetics of subunit exchange.
We hypothesized that decreasing the starting concentration of homotetramer 5 [FT2·WT TTR (Figure B)] relative to that of homotetramer 1 (untagged WT
TTR) would lower the probability of incorporating FT2·WT
TTR subunits into tetramers 2–4 during subunit
exchange. The recombinant WT TTR homotetramer (5 μM) was incubated
with 5, 2, or 1 μM FT2·WT TTR homotetramer in
standard phosphate buffer. Subunit exchange kinetics were followed
over the course of 8 days (Figure A). As the
initial concentrations of WT and FT2·WT TTR changed,
the relative populations of tetramers 1–5 at equilibrium
changed as expected from the binomial distribution. Importantly, however,
the rate of subunit exchange remained constant within error as the
concentration of the reporter homotetramer was decreased (Figure B). From these results, we conclude that the starting
concentration of FT2·WT TTR relative to that of untagged
TTR tetramers does not meaningfully affect the rate of subunit exchange.

Subunit
exchange is a robust measure of TTR tetramer kinetic stability
at various ratios of tagged to untagged tetramer concentrations. (A)
After incubation in standard phosphate buffer for 8 days, different
ratios of the starting concentrations of WT and FT2·WT
TTR yield different ratios of the five tetramer peaks. (B) The kinetics
of subunit exchange, as measured by fraction exchange of peak 3, were followed over a time course of 8 days for the indicated
ratios of WT to FT2·WT TTR. Symbols represent means;
error bars represent the SEM, and lines represent fitted curves. (C)
The time course of appearance or disappearance of the five tetramer
peaks in absolute terms varies according to the molar ratio of the
initial populations of WT and FT2·WT TTR (top panels).
However, the time course of the increase in fraction exchange calculated
for each peak is very similar (bottom panels): (left) 5 μM WT
TTR and 5 μM FT2·WT TTR, (middle) 5 μM
WT TTR and 2 μM FT2·WT TTR, and (right) 5 μM
WT TTR and 1 μM FT2·WT TTR. Symbols represent
means; error bars represent the SEM, and lines represent fitted curves.

To further verify that the kinetics
of subunit exchange are invariant
to changes in the WT TTR to FT2·WT TTR relative starting
concentrations, we characterized the rate of appearance or disappearance
of TTR tetramers 1–5 for the indicated starting
ratios of WT and FT2·WT TTR homotetramers (Figure C). As expected, the rates of appearance or disappearance
of the five peaks in absolute terms (mole fraction) differ as the
starting concentrations of WT and FT2·WT TTR subunits
change (Figure C, top panels). The equilibrium
distribution, calculated using the binomial equation, also changes
because it is based on the relative starting concentration of peak 1. However, the time course of the increase in fraction exchange
(Figure C, bottom panels) and the calculated
subunit exchange rates [kex (Table )] are invariant within error, regardless of the
starting ratio of untagged to tagged subunits. At low starting concentrations
of FT2·WT TTR, there is essentially no difference
between the area of peak 4 at time zero (impurity peak)
and the expected area of peak 4 at equilibrium, and the
calculation for fraction exchange based on peak 4 becomes
very noisy. Therefore, we have omitted the analysis of peak 4 from the bottom panels in Figure C. We conclude that the determination of subunit exchange kinetics
is robust when unequal concentrations of tagged and untagged TTR are
employed. These results further indicate that the calculation of kex using peak 3, used predominantly
throughout this work, is representative of the overall subunit exchange
rate.

Subunit Exchange Rates [kex (h–1)] by Peak for Recombinant TTR
in Buffer, at Varying WT:FT2·WT TTR Molar Ratios
peak	5:5 WT:FT2·WT TTR molar ratio	5:2 WT:FT2·WT TTR molar ratio	5:1 WT:FT2·WT TTR molar ratio	
1	0.038 ± 0.001	0.038 ± 0.001	0.037 ± 0.003	
2	0.023 ± 0.002	0.033 ± 0.001	0.035 ± 0.001	
3	0.037 ± 0.001	0.043 ± 0.002	0.045 ± 0.005	
5	0.038 ± 0.002	0.040 ± 0.001	0.040 ± 0.001	
Subunit exchange
rates (kex) were calculated from the data
presented
in Figure C.

Detecting Endogenous TTR in Human Plasma Using Fluorogenic Small
Molecule A2
Having established that a substoichiometric
ratio of FT2·WT TTR homotetramers (1 μM) to
WT TTR homotetramers (5 μM) can be used to quantify TTR subunit
exchange in buffer, we next optimized the assay to study TTR subunit
exchange in human plasma (in which the TTR tetramer concentration
varies from ≈3.4 to 5 μM,). We wanted
to minimize the amount of FT2·WT TTR added to endogenous
TTR in plasma to minimally affect the stoichiometry of tafamidis or
diflunisal to the total TTR tetramer concentration in the plasma,
to avoid substantially underestimating the extent of TTR kinetic stabilization
imparted by a kinetic stabilizer.

The main challenge associated
with employing the subunit exchange assay in human plasma is the detection
of TTR tetramers over the background of &gt;4000 proteins and additional
biomolecules. To facilitate TTR detection in this complex biological
fluid, we employed the fluorogenic TTR-modifying small molecule A2 (Figure A). This small molecule rapidly binds to natively folded TTR
tetramers, arresting further subunit exchange while remaining nonfluorescent.
Only after A2 chemoselectively acylates the Lys-15 ε-amino
group on the periphery of one or both of the thyroxine binding sites
does the covalent TTR·A2 conjugate become fluorescent,
allowing specific detection and fluorescence-based quantification
of TTR tetramers in plasma. Because the N-terminal dual-FLAG tag does
not affect the binding site for A2, its use allows for
equal fluorescence from all the tetramers comprising recombinant tagged
and/or endogenous untagged TTR subunits.

A2 can be
used to quantify TTR subunit exchange in
blood plasma. (A) Samples were incubated with A2 or vehicle
control for 3 h at 25 °C. The recombinant WT TTR homotetramer
peak in standard phosphate buffer (···) is detected
at an elution time of 4.5 min. In healthy donor plasma (green line),
a similar peak is detected at 4.25 min. This TTR·A2 conjugate peak is absent in plasma from a TTR knockout (KO) mouse
(orange line) and in human plasma that was incubated with vehicle
without A2 (purple line). In all plasma samples, A2 also detects a peak eluting around 1–3 min (peak 0). The inset shows the structure of A2. (B)
Healthy donor plasma was incubated at 25 °C without (red) or
with 10 μM tafamidis (black). At time zero, A2 (30
μM) was added, and the sample was diluted with 5 volumes of
sodium phosphate buffer (50 μM, pH 7.6) and immediately placed
in the UPLC autosampler to acquire the first time point. Subsequent
time points were acquired automatically from the same vial at the
indicated times. The area of peak 1 was calculated for
each time point. Symbols represent means; error bars represent the
SEM. (C) At time zero, 1 μM FT2·WT TTR was added
to healthy donor plasma to initiate the subunit exchange reaction.
An aliquot was immediately removed, and A2 was added
at a final concentration of 30 μM (A2 at 0 h, solid
green line). Both samples were incubated at 25 °C for 24 h. At
24 h, a second aliquot was removed and A2 was added at
a final concentration of 30 μM and the mixture incubated at
25 °C for 3 h to allow for complete covalent modification of
TTR by A2 (A2 at 24 h, dotted black line).
Each sample was then analyzed by ion exchange chromatography. (D)
Recombinant WT TTR (5 μM) was incubated with FT2·WT
TTR (5 μM) for 96 h. At each time point, subunit exchange was
assessed by measuring Trp fluorescence (solid black line) or A2·TTR conjugate fluorescence (dotted red line). Symbols
represent means; error bars represent the SEM, and lines represent
fitted curves. (E) Healthy donor plasma was incubated with FT2·WT TTR for 21 days. The sample was incubated with A2 (30 μM) and then separated by ion exchange chromatography
(top panel). Peaks were collected from four identical injections,
pooled, concentrated, and separated by SDS–PAGE followed by
Western blotting for TTR or FLAG-tagged TTR (bottom panels). The expected
pattern of WT and FT2·WT TTR monomers is detected
in peaks 1–5. Total human plasma (Plsm) was included
as a control.

To scrutinize the selectivity
of TTR·A2 conjugate
formation in plasma, we started by incubating purified recombinant
WT TTR (3 μM) with A2 (30 μM) in standard
phosphate buffer for 3 h before the sample was subjected to anion
exchange chromatography by UPLC. The fluorescent conjugate eluted
from the column at a retention time of ≈4.5 min (Figure A, dotted trace). Incubation of A2 (30
μM) with human plasma for 3 h revealed a peak at ≈4.25
min (Figure A, green trace) as well as an
earlier nonretained proteome peak, peak 0, that eluted
between 1 and 3 min (see the  for details). No fluorescent peak was detected at 4.25–4.5
min in the plasma of TTR knockout mice (Figure A, orange trace) or in human plasma incubated with vehicle lacking A2 (purple trace). Additional evidence that peak 1 is comprised of endogenous TTR was obtained by immunoblotting, as
described below.

We chose to use 30 μM A2 in our experiments
in plasma for two reasons. First, we wanted to allow a conjugate to
form with both TTR thyroxine binding pockets in the presence of albumin
and other potential binders of A2 in the complex plasma
environment and, later, in the presence of tafamidis. Second, we were
confident that this concentration (30 μM) would ensure complete
arrest of subunit exchange, as demonstrated below. We found that A2 fluorescence in plasma is maximal after an incubation period
of approximately 2.5 h (Figure B) at concentrations
exceeding 10 μM (Figure S2A of the ), consistent with the reaction kinetics reported
previously. The presence of tafamidis
(10 μM) does not significantly alter the time course of TTR·A2 (30 μM) conjugate formation monitored by fluorescence
(Figure B), even though A2 and
tafamidis bind to the same thyroxine binding sites in TTR. This result
can be explained by the negative cooperativity of binding of tafamidis
to the two TTR binding sites: the first binding site in the TTR tetramer
is occupied by tafamidis with a higher affinity (kd1 = 2 nM) than the second binding site (kd2 = 154 nM). At 10 μM
tafamidis in plasma, only the first binding site of each TTR tetramer
is likely to be occupied. Thus, when
one A2 molecule covalently binds and reacts with TTR,
the tafamidis-bound pocket becomes the lower-affinity site, exhibiting
a higher rate of tafamidis dissociation, allowing A2 to
bind and react in the second site efficiently. Similar results were
obtained when 1 μM FT2·WT TTR was added to plasma
(Figure S2B of the ).

As anticipated, we found that addition of A2 arrests
the subunit exchange normally observed between endogenous plasma TTR
and FT2·WT TTR. Following addition of FT2·WT TTR tetramers (1 μM) to plasma to initiate subunit
exchange, an aliquot was immediately removed (time zero) and incubated
with A2 (30 μM) at 25 °C for 24 h. The remainder
of the plasma subunit exchange reaction mixture was incubated at 25
°C for 24 h (in the absence of A2). At 24 h, a second
aliquot from the subunit exchange reaction was removed and added to A2 (30 μM) for 3 h to allow for complete TTR·A2 fluorescent conjugate formation. Both aliquots were then
fractionated by ion exchange chromatography. The sample in which A2 was added at time zero showed no subunit exchange during
the subsequent 24 h incubation period in the presence of A2 (Figure C). When A2 was added
to an aliquot of the subunit exchange reaction at 24 h, the expected
amount of subunit exchange was observed (Figure C). On the basis of these results, we can be confident that no subunit
exchange occurs during the 3 h TTR·A2 fluorescent
conjugate formation period used to quantify TTR stabilization in plasma,
or in the solutions frozen after the 3 h reaction period with A2 and awaiting UPLC analysis, ensuring the precision of the
collected time points.

Next we probed whether the use of A2 to render the
TTR products of the subunit exchange reaction fluorescent could unexpectedly
alter the calculated rate of subunit exchange. To this end, we measured
subunit exchange kinetics between recombinant WT and FT2·WT TTR in standard phosphate buffer, comparing the quantification
of the TTR tetramers resulting from subunit exchange using both tryptophan
fluorescence-based detection (Figure D, black
trace) and TTR·A2 conjugate-based fluorescence detection
(Figure D, red trace). The calculated rates
of exchange from these different detection methods were not significantly
different (Figure D).

Finally, we show
that both endogenous and FT2·WT
TTR can be detected as expected directly in human plasma using TTR·A2 conjugate-based fluorescence. Plasma was incubated with
recombinant FT2·WT TTR (3 μM) for 21 days, affording
an equilibrium distribution of endogenous WT and FT2·WT
TTR heterotetramers. Peaks 1–5 were collected
from four identical UPLC chromatography runs, pooled, concentrated,
and analyzed by SDS–PAGE and immunoblotting, revealing the
expected stoichiometry of WT to FT2·WT TTR in peaks 2–4 by gel quantification (Figure E).

Because A2 specifically forms a fluorescent
conjugate
with folded tetrameric TTR in plasma, the ion exchange chromatograms
can be integrated to calculate the concentration of endogenous TTR
tetramers in human plasma under native conditions. We generated a
standard curve for TTR·A2 conjugate-based fluorescence
using recombinant WT TTR in buffer (Figure S3A of the ) and used the resulting
calibration line to calculate the concentration of endogenous TTR
tetramers in the plasma of a healthy donor, 5.48 μM (Figure
S3B of the ). We
then calculated the concentration of endogenous TTR tetramers in the
same plasma sample using quantitative SDS–PAGE immunoblotting
(Figure S3C of the ) and determined it to be 5.48 μM. Therefore, we conclude that
the integration of the TTR·A2 conjugate-based fluorescence
chromatograms at time zero in the subunit exchange reaction can be
used to rigorously quantify the endogenous TTR tetramer concentration
in human plasma. Because A2 labels only natively folded
TTR tetramers, whereas SDS–PAGE denatures all TTR conformations
to the component denatured monomers, we conclude that essentially
all of the TTR in this healthy donor plasma is natively folded.

Subunit Exchange of Endogenous TTR in Plasma Is Slower Than
Exchange of Recombinant TTR in Buffer
It is clear that WT
TTR subunit exchange is slower in plasma than it is in buffer. It
takes 22.0 h to achieve 50% subunit exchange in buffer, whereas it
takes 66.5 h to achieve 50% exchange in plasma (Figure A). Further analysis showed that the rate of exchange in plasma
was approximately 3-fold slower than that in buffer. Preliminary data
indicate that the higher stability of TTR tetramers in plasma is not
sufficiently explained by molecular crowding, as crowding only modestly
stabilizes TTR. This interesting, previously unreported effect is
apparently due to a molecule present in plasma, as adding recombinant
WT TTR (3 μM) to the plasma of a healthy donor causes recombinant
TTR to adopt the exchange rate of endogenous plasma TTR (Figure B). We are aggressively pursuing an explanation,
which will be reported in due time.

The small molecule tafamidis stabilizes
TTR tetramers when added ex vivo in human plasma.
(A) Subunit exchange was assessed
in the presence of 1 μM FT2·WT TTR in plasma
from healthy normal donors (orange) and in standard phosphate buffer
containing equal concentrations of recombinant WT and FT2·WT TTR (green). Symbols represent individual data points; lines
represent fitted curves. (B) Recombinant WT TTR (3 μM) was added
to endogenous WT TTR (3.8 μM) in a sample of healthy donor plasma
(red). FT2·WT TTR (1 μM) was then added, and
subunit exchange was assessed at the indicated time points. Recombinant
WT TTR (3 μM) was also incubated with 1 μM FT2·WT TTR in standard phosphate buffer (green) as a control. The
averages of the data for recombinant TTR in standard phosphate buffer
(dark gray) and for endogenous TTR in plasma (light gray) from panel
A are shown for comparison. Symbols represent individual data points;
lines represent fitted curves. (C) Recombinant WT TTR (4 or 3 μM,
as indicated) was mixed with FT2·WT TTR (1 μM)
and the indicated concentrations of tafamidis in buffer, and subunit
exchange was assessed at the indicated time points. Symbols represent
individual data points; lines represent fitted curves. (D) Tafamidis
was added ex vivo to healthy donor plasma at the
indicated concentrations and incubated for 30 min at room temperature.
FT2·WT TTR (1 μM) was then added, and subunit
exchange was assessed at the indicated time points. Symbols represent
individual data points; lines represent fitted curves. Rate constants
and relative fraction exchange were calculated for each condition
and are listed in Table . (E) Data from panels
C and D and Figure S4 of the  were graphed on the same set of axes to highlight the difference
in the sensitivity of TTR, in buffer and in plasma, to kinetic stabilization
by tafamidis.

Pharmacologic TTR Kinetic
Stabilization ex Vivo Can Be Quantified by Subunit
Exchange
Tafamidis is a TTR
kinetic stabilizer with demonstrated efficacy in slowing the progression
of FAP, as shown by clinical trial data and a 12 month extension study., To date, the effects of tafamidis on TTR subunit exchange have been
measured only in buffer, and only using equal concentrations of tagged
and untagged recombinant TTR. TTR kinetic
stabilization by tafamidis is known to be sensitive to the stoichiometry
of tafamidis to total TTR tetramer concentration. Therefore, we hypothesized that the degree of stabilization
measured by subunit exchange in plasma from tafamidis-treated patients
could be sensitive to the variations in the concentration of endogenous
TTR across individuals, and that it would be important to minimize
the amount of recombinant FT2·WT TTR added to the
plasma for the same reasons.

We first tested this hypothesis
using recombinant TTR in buffer. To simulate the differences between
individual plasma samples, we added 1 μM FT2·WT
TTR to either 3 or 4 μM recombinant WT TTR. Various concentrations
of tafamidis were then added to these samples, and subunit exchange
was followed over a time course of 48 h. As expected, in the absence
of tafamidis, the concentration of WT relative to FT2·WT
TTR concentration (1 μM) had no effect on the subunit exchange
rate (Figure C). However, in the presence
of tafamidis, differences in the WT TTR concentration relative to
the FT2·WT TTR concentration (1 μM) were reflected
in the subunit exchange rate (Figure C). These
anticipated differences in subunit exchange rates are due to differences
in the stoichiometry of tafamidis to total TTR tetramer concentration.
For example, adding 2 μM tafamidis to the samples with 3 μM
WT TTR and 1 μM FT2·WT TTR yields a tafamidis:total
TTR tetramer ratio of 1:2. However, adding 2 μM tafamidis to
the samples with 4 μM WT TTR and 1 μM FT2·WT
TTR leads to a tafamidis:total TTR tetramer ratio of 1:2.5. When tafamidis
was added at a concentration of 5 or 10 μM to these samples
(tafamidis:TTR tetramer ratio of ≥1.0), subunit exchange was
arrested during the time course of the experiment (Figure S4 of the ). These experiments show
that although variability in the ratio of WT to FT2·WT
TTR does not affect the subunit exchange rate in the absence of tafamidis,
small changes in the stoichiometry of tafamidis relative to the total
tetrameric TTR concentration, as might occur in individual patients,
do affect the observed rate of subunit exchange, as expected. Because
the use of A2 allows for precise quantification of the
endogenous TTR concentration in each plasma sample at the start of
all subunit exchange experiments, these differences can be integrated
into subsequent analyses of subunit exchange rates.

Next, we
quantified the kinetic stabilization of endogenous TTR
directly in human plasma by adding tafamidis at various concentrations ex vivo to the plasma of healthy donors. A fixed amount
of recombinant FT2·WT TTR (1 μM) was then added,
and the stability of the endogenous TTR tetramers was measured by
subunit exchange. Using standard curves for TTR·A2 conjugate fluorescence like those shown in Figure S3 of the , we calculated that the
concentration of TTR tetramers in the plasma of these donors was 3.1
± 0.6 μM. We found that tafamidis increased TTR kinetic
stability in a dose-dependent manner in plasma, yielding decreases
of 52, 74, 87, and 93% at tafamidis plasma concentrations of 5, 10,
20, and 30 μM, respectively (Figure D and Table ). It is important to be mindful
of the 48 h half-life of TTR in human plasma when interpreting these
data, as there is very little tetramer dissociation over this period
when tafamdis is present at plasma concentrations from 10 to 20 μM,
which can be achieved with 20 mg oral dosing once daily (see below).

Effects of Incubation of Tafamidis ex Vivo on Subunit Exchange Kinetic Parameters in Human
Plasma
[tafamidis]
(μM)	kex (h–1)	SE kex	t1/2 (days)	change in kex (%)	
0	8.91 × 10–3	2.93 × 10–4	3.24	–	
5	4.29 × 10–3	1.23 × 10–4	6.73	–51.8	
10	2.31 × 10–3	6.37 × 10–5	12.52	–74.1	
20	1.12 × 10–3	4.12 × 10–5	25.71	–87.4	
30	5.98 × 10–4	3.10 × 10–5	48.31	–93.3	
Subunit exchange
rates and half-times,
as well as the change in subunit exchange rates relative to vehicle
control, were calculated from the data presented in Figure D.

SE kex is the standard error of kex.

t1/2 is the time needed for the subunit exchange
reaction to reach a
fraction exchange of 0.5.

The change in kex is calculated relative
to the vehicle control as [(kex of interest)
– (kex of vehicle)]/(kex of vehicle)
× 100.

The DMSO vehicle
control is 0 μM
tafamidis.

The TTR subunit
exchange rate in buffer is more responsive to changes
in tafamidis concentration than is the exchange rate in plasma (Figure E). This observation was expected because in plasma,
tafamidis can also bind to other proteins, including albumin. For
example, it is known that tafamidis added to plasma ex vivo at a concentration of 7.2 μM binds the two available TTR binding
pockets with a stoichiometry of 0.81 tafamidis molecule per TTR tetramer.

Although subunit exchange can be monitored
for up to 30 days, as
in Figure D, we reiterate that the half-life
of endogenous TTR in plasma is approximately 2 days., Therefore, the biological significance of differences in the kinetic
stability of TTR tetramers should be interpreted from experiments
on the time scale of 2–4 days. All experiments described in
the following sections were followed over a time course of 8 days,
but we have focused our quantification and interpretation on the 48
and 96 h time points for this reason.

The Temperature Dependence
of Subunit Exchange Is Attenuated
by Tafamidis-Mediated Kinetic Stabilization
Previous work
showed that recombinant TTR in buffer exchanges subunits on a time
scale of hours at 4 °C and on a time scale of days at 37 °C. The results presented thus far are from subunit
exchange reactions conducted at 25 °C. This temperature was chosen
as a compromise because 25 °C is more physiologically relevant
than 4 °C,, and at 25 °C subunit exchange is fast enough to be convenient
on a laboratory time scale. However, we wanted to be certain that
experiments conducted at 25 °C provide a reasonable approximation
of the more physiologically relevant subunit exchange reactions that
occur at 37 °C. Thus, we investigated the effect of temperature
on the subunit exchange rate exhibited by endogenous TTR in plasma
and on the kinetic stabilization of endogenous TTR resulting from ex vivo addition of tafamidis. In the absence of tafamidis,
endogenous TTR in plasma exchanged subunits at 25 °C 3.6-fold
faster than at 37 °C. Surprisingly, the temperature-dependent
differences in kinetic stability, as discerned by subunit exchange,
were markedly attenuated in the presence of tafamidis at all concentrations
tested (Figure A,B). Thus, for example, the
rate of exchange in the presence of 10 μM tafamidis was only
2.6-fold faster at 25 °C than at 37 °C. We conclude that
subunit exchange experiments conducted at 25 °C do reflect tafamidis-associated
stabilization nicely but suggest that studies for selecting doses
of tafamidis for various TTR genotypes should be conducted at 37 °C
to ensure that such critical patient-centered decisions are based
on the most physiologically relevant data possible.

Sensitivity of TTR subunit
exchange to incubation temperature is
attenuated by tafamidis stabilization. Tafamidis was added at the
indicated concentrations to plasma from three healthy donors and incubated
for 30 min at room temperature. Each sample was then split into two
aliquots for incubation at 25 or 37 °C. FT2·WT
TTR (1 μM) was added to each aliquot. (A) Subunit exchange was
assessed at the indicated time points over a time course of 8 days.
Filled symbols and solid lines represent data from 25 °C; empty
symbols and dotted lines represent data from 37 °C. Symbols represent
means; error bars represent the SEM, and lines represent fitted curves.
(B) The rate of tetramer dissociation (kex) was calculated for each sample using a least-squares fit to a one-phase
association model in GraphPad Prism. Filled symbols represent data
from 25 °C; empty symbols represent data from 37 °C, and
error bars represent the SEM.

Pharmacologic TTR Kinetic Stabilization in Patient Plasma Can
Be Quantified by Subunit Exchange
To demonstrate that the
subunit exchange assay can be used to quantify the kinetic stability
of endogenous TTR in patients taking tafamidis orally (20 mg once
daily), senile systemic amyloidosis (SSA) patients who were orally
treated with tafamidis for months leading up to this study were compared
to untreated SSA patients and untreated age-matched controls. Subunit
exchange was followed over 8 days (Figure S5 of the ). Because the half-life of endogenous
TTR in plasma is approximately 2 days,, we chose to
focus on the 48 and 96 h time points. As expected, the fraction exchange
at 48 h (Figure A) was lower than the fraction
exchange at 96 h (Figure B) for each sample.
It is interesting to note that there was less variability within each
group at 48 h exchange, suggesting that this time point is optimal
for maximizing the signal-to-noise ratio of the subunit exchange assay
and reflects the half-life of TTR in humans. The rate of tetramer
dissociation (subunit exchange rate, kex) was calculated for each individual from the 48 and 96 h time points
separately and plotted on one set of axes (Figure C) as filled (kex,48 h) and
empty symbols (kex,96 h), where each
individual is represented by a distinct color. The stability of endogenous
TTR in the plasma of untreated SSA patients was not significantly
different from that of the age-matched controls. In contrast, the
TTR in tafamidis-treated SSA patients exhibited a &gt;73% decrease
in
the tetramer dissociation rate (Figure C).

TTR kinetic
stabilization by orally administered tafamidis can
be measured directly in patient plasma. (A and B) Plasma samples were
obtained from SSA patients treated with 20 mg of tafamidis once daily
(SSA + tafamidis, green triangles), SSA patients not treated with
tafamidis (SSA no tafamidis, orange squares), and age-matched controls
(WT ctrls, black circles). For each sample, subunit exchange was quantified
at 48 (A) and 96 h (B), and fraction exchange was calculated as described.
Differences between groups were assessed by one-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA) followed by Tukey’s post hoc test. (C) The rate of
tetramer dissociation (kex) was calculated
for each sample from each time point using the equation kex,t=t = −ln(1
– FEt=t)/t. The kex values calculated
from the 48 h subunit exchange incubation (filled symbols) and from
the 96 h subunit exchange incubation (empty symbols) were plotted
on the same set of axes, with each individual patient represented
by a different color. Differences between groups were assessed by
one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc test. (D) The kex values calculated from the 48 h subunit exchange
data were plotted as a function of the concentration of tafamidis
measured in each sample by HPLC. The data (excluding the outlier with
a calculated kex of 0) were fit by a linear
regression model, yielding a calibration line with the equation y = −0.00014x + 0.00318 (R2 = 0.929).

Finally, we investigated the extent to which tetramer stabilization
in each patient, as measured by subunit exchange at 48 h, correlates
with the concentration of the kinetic stabilizer tafamidis in a patient’s
blood. Tafamidis levels in the plasma from the six tafamidis-treated
SSA patients were quantified by HPLC. Excluding one outlier whose
calculated kex at 48 h was 0, we found
the rate of tetramer dissociation (subunit exchange) correlated strongly
with tafamidis concentration in the plasma (Figure D; R2 = 0.929). Stabilization
of TTR by tafamidis has been shown to lead to modest increases in
the plasma concentration of TTR itself., However, we
did not detect a correlation between the rate of tetramer dissociation
(subunit exchange rate) and TTR tetramer concentration as calculated
from TTR·A2 conjugate fluorescence (Figure S6 of
the ). While these
preliminary results are exciting, further work with greater numbers
of individuals is needed to confirm and expand on these findings.

Discussion
Herein, we describe a subunit exchange assay
that facilitates quantification
of endogenous TTR kinetic stability in human blood plasma in the presence
of all of the factors, both established and unknown, which may contribute
to the kinetic stability of this protein. Central to the utility of
this method is the small amount of the recombinant FT2·WT
TTR (1 μM) reporter tetramer that is added to plasma. The fluorogenic
native TTR tetramer probe A2, which reacts with and renders
the TTR tetramers in the plasma fluorescent, also plays a critical
role in that it allows ion exchange chromatography to be conducted
on the plasma proteome, resolving peaks 1–5 and
thus allowing subunit exchange to be quantified.

In addition,
the subunit exchange assay in patient plasma allows
the direct quantification of the stability imparted by oral tafamidis
administration. Tafamidis is a kinetic stabilizer that slows the progression
of FAP, one of the TTR amyloid diseases. While 90% of V30M FAP patients
taking tafamidis progress at less than one-fifth of the rate of untreated
patients,, it is not currently known why 10% of the
treated population progresses faster. Many factors could contribute,
including differences in TTR post-translational modifications, compliance
issues, variance in the absorption/metabolism of tafamidis, or variations
in the levels of endogenous small molecule TTR binders or binding
proteins that contribute to TTR stability in plasma. Indeed, our results
show that there is some variability in the degree of stabilization
of plasma TTR from different individuals, even in the presence of
identical doses of tafamidis delivered ex vivo (Figure D). These findings underscore the need for a personalized,
quantitative measure of TTR stabilization to ensure optimal tafamidis
dosing for each patient. The subunit exchange method for quantifying
TTR stability in human plasma enables such personalized medicine.
In addition, ongoing studies on the correlations between the kinetic
stabilization of TTR afforded by tafamidis treatment and clinical
outcomes have the potential to shed more light on the physiopathology
of the TTR amyloidoses.

An accurate measurement of TTR kinetic
stability is also critical
for optimal treatment of the familial TTR amyloidoses as a function
of genotype. Different mutations in the TTR sequence
often alter the binding constants of the kinetic stabilizer to the
TTR tetramers, necessitating personalized treatment regimens. We envision
that this quantification method can be helpful in the case of rare
disease-associated mutations, allowing clinicians to choose the appropriate
dose of drug for optimal or maximal TTR stabilization, as clinical
trials or even clinical studies may not be practical for these small
populations.

Several of the findings reported herein were unexpected.
The 3.1-fold
slower exchange of plasma TTR, compared with that of recombinant human
TTR in buffer (Figure A), indicates that a
molecule(s) in plasma stabilizes TTR tetramers in a way that has not
previously been appreciated. Therefore, experiments using recombinant
protein probably overestimate TTR’s aggregation propensity
in the body. We speculate that holo-retinol binding protein, an endogenous small molecule, protein, or some
combination of factors kinetically stabilizes endogenous TTR in plasma
relative to recombinant TTR in buffer. We are aggressively seeking
a molecular explanation for these differences. As expected, tafamidis-associated
kinetic stabilization of TTR in buffer is more effective than kinetic
stabilization in plasma at identical concentrations of tafamidis (Figure E), likely because of nonspecific binding of tafamidis
to other proteins in plasma such as albumin. This observation highlights
the importance of assessing TTR kinetic stability under native conditions,
i.e., in the presence of all potential interactors in plasma. Differences
in the rate of tetramer dissociation (subunit exchange) as a function
of temperature were expected, but we were surprised to find that these
differences are attenuated in the presence of tafamidis (Figure B). While the level of TTR stabilization at a given
tafamidis concentration is greater in buffer, endogenous TTR in plasma
is inherently more kinetically stable; thus, dose suitability assessments
are best conducted in patient plasma at 37 °C.

The subunit
exchange assay was employed herein to quantify the
stabilization of TTR from senile systemic amyloidosis patients being
chronically treated with tafamidis (20 mg orally, once daily). The
significant TTR kinetic stability imparted by oral tafamidis dosing
correlated strongly with the tafamidis plasma concentrations, suggesting
the possible utility of this method as a surrogate biomarker.

In summary, we believe that the subunit exchange assay, either
alone or in combination with another methodology, could be useful
in establishing the optimal dose of kinetic stabilizer for individual
patients, for quantifying the response to tafamidis treatment, and
possibly for use as a biomarker for early diagnosis. Upon correlation
of tafamidis-associated kinetic stabilization of TTR with clinical
outcomes of patients treated with tafamidis, the subunit exchange
assay could become a surrogate biomarker likely to predict clinical
outcomes in this population.

Supporting Information Available
Supporting methods and Figures
S1–S6. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500171j_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
I.R.
and
C.M. contributed equally to this work.

This work was
supported by National Institutes of Health Grant DK046335 (J.W.K.)
as well as the Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology and the Lita
Annenberg Hazen Foundation. I.R. was supported by a National Research
Service Award fellowship from the National Institute of General Medical
Sciences (F32-GM099364).

The authors declare the
following competing financial interest(s): J.W.K. discovered tafamidis
and benefits from its sale.

Acknowledgments
We thank
Dr. Joseph Genereux for helpful discussions, Dr.
Colleen Fearns for critical reading of the manuscript, and Michael
Saure and Gina Dendle for technical support.

Abbreviations
FAPfamilial amyloid polyneuropathy

FEfraction exchange

FT2·WT TTRdual FLAG-tagged wild-type TTR

SDS–PAGEsodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis

SEMstandard error of the mean

SSAsenile systemic amyloidosis

TTRtransthyretin

UPLCultra performance liquid chromatography

WTwild type.

