Alzheimer’s
disease (AD)
is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by the loss of brain
tissue and impaired cognitive function. One of the pathological hallmarks of AD is the aggregation of amyloid-β
(Aβ) peptides into β-sheet rich fibrils and plaques. It is of vital importance for the development
of therapeutic strategies for AD to determine the key factors that
lead to the initial development of the disease and also those factors
that inhibit its progression. Although plaques containing Aβ
fibrils have been viewed as the conventional hallmark of AD, recent
research has implicated small oligomeric species formed during the
aggregation of Aβ in the neuronal toxicity and cognitive deficits
associated with diseases such as AD.− A large number of studies has been performed
in which mixtures of Aβ monomers and oligomers have been added
to cells and brain slices and the consequent physiological changes
monitored;, the results of these studies have identified
oligomers of Aβ, not the monomers, to be the most damaging species.
In the majority of such experiments, however, only the total monomer
concentration is known accurately, and in several cases, it is higher
than the endogenous concentrations of Aβ monomers in CSF, typically
1–10 nM. Therefore, the important
questions concerning the specific mechanisms by which oligomers initially
damage cells and the concentration of oligomers that is required to
elicit such damage remain to be answered.

Our approach to addressing
these questions is to determine directly
the monomer and oligomer concentrations and indeed the complete distribution
of oligomer sizes of preparations of Aβ40 and Aβ42, using
single molecule fluorescence techniques, immediately prior to applying
these preparations to primary neuronal cultures and brain slices.
All of our measurements were completed 10–30 min following
the addition of Aβ to the cellular cultures. This experimental
procedure is designed to determine the earliest detectable physiological
response at the lowest possible concentration of oligomers and how
this response varies with oligomer concentration, and hence to identify
the initial events that lead to cellular damage. A defining objective
of the present study is to conduct a highly quantitative analysis
of the concentration and time dependence of the physiological effects
of Aβ40 and Aβ42 oligomers on primary neuroglial cultures,
ensuring that the Aβ oligomer concentration is defined in every
experiment. In order to achieve this objective, we have monitored
a variety of key indicators of cellular health and homeostasis, notably
intracellular calcium levels, the release of reactive oxygen species,
and the activation of caspase-3. All of these metrics have been previously
suggested to be affected by exposure to Aβ species in previous
studies using higher Aβ concentrations.−

Experimental Procedures
Aβ40 and Aβ42 Peptide Preparation
and Characterization
Monomeric solutions of HiLyteFluor488-
and HiLyteFluor647-labeled
Aβ40 or Aβ42 (Anaspec, San Jose, CA) were prepared by
dissolving the lyophilized peptides in SSPE buffer (150 mM NaCl, 10
mM Na2H2PO4 × H2O,
and 10 mM Na2EDTA, adjusted to pH 12 using NaOH), followed
by sonication over ice for 30 min (Bandelin Sonorex, Berlin, Germany),
and subsequently flash freezing into 5 μL aliquots. Prior to each of the incubations, aliquots of
each peptide were diluted into SSPE buffer (pH adjusted to 7.4 using
HCl) to the desired concentration and placed under conditions for
aggregation (e.g., 37 °C, agitation). The concentration of each
labeled peptide was measured before mixing the two different fluorophore-labeled
samples using cTCCD as previously described.

For each experiment, Aβ monomers (Aβ40 at 20 μM
and Aβ42 at 10 μM) were incubated in SSPE buffer (defined
above) at 37 °C with agitation (200 rpm on a rotary shaker).
After 1 h of aggregation, the samples were placed at 4 °C and
used within 10 h of preparation. Monomeric solutions were kept frozen
at −80 °C until use. For experiments with clusterin, the
chaperone was added at a 1:1 molar ratio to Aβ (unless otherwise
stated) and incubated for 30 min at 25 °C.

For each preparation
of Aβ40 or Aβ42, the number and
size distributions of oligomers were determined using the single molecule
cTCCD method. The instrumentation and methodology required for this
characterization have been described in detail previously.

Preparation and Labeling of Human Clusterin
Clusterin
was extracted from human serum from Wollongong Hospital (Wollongong,
NSW, Australia), as described previously. Labeling of clusterin was carried using lysine conjugation of succinimidyl
ester-functionalized AlexaFluor647 (Molecular Probes, Grand Island,
NY) using previously described protocols.

Cell Cultures
Mixed cultures of neurons and glial cells
were prepared as described previously with modifications, from Sprague–Dawley
rat pups 2–4 days postpartum (UCL breeding colony). Experimental procedures were performed in full
compliance with the United Kingdom Animal (Scientific Procedures)
Act of 1986. The hippocampus and cortex were removed and placed in
ice-cold PBS (Ca2+ and Mg2+-free, Invitrogen,
Paisley, UK). The tissue was then minced and trypsinized (0.25% for
5 min at 37 °C), triturated, and plated on poly-d-lysine-coated
coverslips, and cultured in Neurobasal A medium (Invitrogen, Paisley,
UK) supplemented with B-27 (Invitrogen) and 2 mM l-glutamine.
Cultures were maintained at 37 °C in a humidified atmosphere
of 5% CO2 and 95% air, and the medium was in each case
replaced twice a week and maintained for 12–15 days before
experimental use to ensure the expression of glutamate and other receptors.
Neurons were easily distinguishable from glia using microscopy: they
appeared phase bright, had smooth rounded somata and distinct processes,
and lay just above the focal plane of the glial layer.

Measurements
of [Ca2+]c and ROS
For measurements
of [Ca2+]c, cells were loaded
for 30 min at room temperature with 5 μM fura-2 AM and 0.005%
pluronic acid in a HEPES-buffered salt solution (HBSS) containing
156 mM NaCl, 3 mM KCl, 2 mM MgSO4, 1.25 mM KH2PO4, 2 mM CaCl2, 10 mM glucose, and 10 mM HEPES;
the pH of each solution was adjusted to 7.35 with NaOH, and the fluorescence
of 488 nM-excitable fura-2 was measured as a function of time.

For measurement of ROS production, dihydroethidium (2 μM HEt)
was added into the solutions during the experiments. No preincubation
(loading) was used for HEt to limit the intracellular accumulation
of oxidized products. Measurements monitored the ratio of two fluorescent
wavelengths, representing the oxidized and nonoxidized form, as a
function of time (see ).,,

Large fields containing
100–200 cells were imaged at a given
time. These images were taken alternating between phase-contrast and
fluorescence images for the duration of the experiment (∼10
−30 min).

Caspase-3 Activation Assay
For measurements
of caspase-3
activation, cells were loaded for 15 min at room temperature with
10 μM NucView 488 caspase-3 substrate (Biotium, Hayward, CA)
in HBSS. NucView 488 is a member of a novel class of enzyme substrates
for real-time detection of caspase-3 activity in live cells. The substrate
can rapidly cross cell membranes to enter the cytoplasm, where it
is cleaved by caspase-3 to release the high-affinity DNA dye, which
fluoresces when excited by a 488 nm laser. The released DNA dye migrates
to the cell nucleus. Therefore, cells having undergone caspase-3 activation
are distinguishable from all other cells by visualizing their bright-green
nuclei. The NucView 488 substrate was used according to the manufacturer’s
specifications.

Microscopy
All microscopy protocols
used for monitoring
intracellular Ca2+ and ROS have been described previously., Fluorescence measurements were obtained on an epi-fluorescence inverted
microscope equipped with a 20× (0.5 NA) fluorite objective. [Ca2+]c was monitored in single cells using excitation
light provided by a xenon arc lamp, the beam passing through a monochromator
centered sequentially at 340 and 380 nm (Cairn Research, Kent, UK).
The emitted fluorescence was reflected through a 515 nm long-pass
filter to a cooled CCD camera (Retiga, QImaging, Canada). All imaging
data for Ca2+ and ROS experiments were collected every
15–30 s and analyzed using software from Andor (Belfast, UK).
Each coverslip on which cells were cultured was placed in an AttoFluor
Cell Culture chamber (Molecular Probes, Grand Island, NY) in 300 μL
of Hank’s Balanced Salt Solution (HBSS). Solutions containing
Aβ and clusterin were added for specific experiments to the
HBSS surrounding the cells. The fura-2 data were not calibrated in
terms of [Ca2+]c because of the difficulty in
deconvoluting the strength of the signal from the amount of dye taken
up by each cell. The fura-2 ratio is defined as the ratio of fluorescence
emission upon excitation at 340 nm (Ca2+-bound form) to
emission upon excitation at 380 nm (unbound fluorophore). For HEt
measurements, a 543 nm excitation and 560 nm long pass filter were
used to quantify oxidized HEt and excitation at 355 nm, and measurement
at 405–470 nm was used to detect nonoxidized HEt. The HEt ratio
is defined as the ratio of fluorescence emission upon excitation at
543 nm to emission upon excitation at 355 nm. All of the data shown
were obtained from at least 5 coverslips and 2–3 different
cell preparations. We measured between 100 and 200 cells per coverslip.

Confocal images were obtained using a Zeiss (Oberkochen, Germany)
710 confocal laser scanning microscope and a 40× oil immersion
objective. A 488 nm argon laser was used to excite NucView 488, and
the resulting fluorescence was measured using a bandpass filter from
510 and 560 nm. Images were acquired at 10 frames s–1 for 30 min.

Electrophysiology
All the protocols
used are as described
previously. Acute hippocampal slices
were prepared from 26 to 32 day-old male Wistar rats. Experiments
were carried out in accordance with the UK Animals (Scientific Procedures)
Act of 1986. Animals were sacrificed by dislocation of the neck followed
by decapitation. The brains were rapidly removed and placed in ice-cold
artificial CSF (aCSF) containing (in mM) 124 NaCl, 3 KCl, 26 NaHCO3, 1.25 NaH2PO4, 2 CaCl2,
1 MgSO4, and 10 d-glucose (bubbled with 95% O2/5% CO2). Transverse hippocampal slices (400 μm
thick) were prepared using a McIllwain tissue chopper (Mickle Laboratory
Engineering, Gomshall, UK). Hippocampal slices were stored in aCSF
(between 20–25 °C) for 1–2 h before transferring
to the recording chamber, in which they were submerged in aCSF (30
°C) flowing at 2 mL/min. Extracellular field potentials were
recorded in the CA1 region of the hippocampus using glass electrodes
containing 3 M NaCl. Stimulating electrodes were placed in the Subiculum
and CA2 (Schaffer Collateral pathway) of the hippocampus. Stimuli
(constant voltage) were delivered alternately to the two electrodes
(each electrode at 0.016 Hz). LTP was induced by two trains of tetanic
stimuli (each 100 Hz, 1 s; repeated after a 30 s interval). The slopes
of the evoked field potential responses were measured and expressed
relative to the normalized preconditioning baseline.

Statistical
Methods
All statistical analyses were performed
using both Origin 8 (OriginLab) and Prism 6.00 (GraphPad, La Jolla,
CA). Nonparametric tests were performed to avoid assumptions of normality.

Results
In Vitro Characterization of Aβ40 and
Aβ42 Oligomers
We used a single-molecule fluorescence
method, confocal two-color coincidence detection (cTCCD),, to characterize the quantities of oligomers and monomers of both
Aβ40 and of Aβ42 in our samples. Aβ42 has a higher
aggregation propensity and is the primary isoform found in AD-associated
amyloid plaques. Although Aβ40 is less-aggregation prone than
Aβ42, it is the more abundant isoform in cerebrospinal fluid
and has been found to form oligomers with similarly cytotoxic properties
to those of Aβ42.,, The results of these experiments indicate that 3.9 ± 0.4% of
the Aβ42 molecules were present as oligomers in the preparations
used for addition to cells, corresponding to a concentration of ∼20
nM oligomers in a 500 nM solution of Aβ42 monomers. Aβ40,
with its reduced propensity to aggregate relative to Aβ42, was
found to have a maximum of 0.3 ± 0.1% of the molecules in a 500
nM solution of monomers as oligomeric species, corresponding to a
1.5 nM concentration of oligomers in a solution of 500 nM Aβ40
monomers. Dilutions of these preparations to 5–50 nM concentrations
of monomers resulted in solutions containing as little as 20 pM of
oligomers. Oligomers of both Aβ isoforms in their respective
preparations varied in size from dimers to 50-mers (Figure A,B). Since the oligomers are stable on dilution
over at least 3 h, the distribution of
oligomer sizes did not change over the course of our experiments.
The concentrations of oligomers at different total peptide concentrations
used in this study are given in Table .

Characterization
of Aβ40 and Aβ42 oligomers using single-molecule
cTCCD. (A) The extent of fibril formation as a function of time for
Aβ42 (10 μM) measured by tracking thioflavin-T fluorescence
as a function of time (plotted as mean ± SD, n = 5). The right panel is zoomed in on the first 2 h of aggregation.
The gray shaded area indicates the time during the aggregation reaction
from which the oligomeric samples were obtained. Aβ40 oligomer-containing
samples were obtained at a similar extent of reaction. (B) The distribution
of sizes of the oligomers present in samples of Aβ40 and Aβ42
acquired at the time indicated in panel A, (n = 2,
error bars are the range).

Concentrations of Oligomers Present
in Solutions of Aβ40 and Aβ42
total peptide
concentration	concn of Aβ40 oligomers	concn of Aβ42 oligomers	
1 μM	15 ± 5 nM	195 ± 20 nM	
500 nM	1.5 ± 0.5 nM	19.5 ± 2 nM	
50 nM	150 ± 50 pM	1.95 ± 0.2 nM	
5 nM	15 ± 5 pM	195 ± 20 pM	
These values were
obtained by multiplying
the percentage of oligomers in solution (as determined by cTCCD) by
the total peptide concentration (also determined by cTCCD). Values
are expressed as the mean ± SEM of at least three independent
trials.

Induction of Calcium Transients
in Astrocytes by Aβ Oligomers
We next examined the
effects of these well-characterized, fluorescently
labeled Aβ oligomers on the cytosolic calcium concentrations
([Ca2+]c) of rat primary hippocampal neuroglial
cultures, using the fluorescent intracellular Ca2+-sensitive
dye fura-2 and imaging a large field of cells over 30 min. We alternated
between brightfield exposure and fluorescent imaging to obtain a time
dependence of the Ca2+ transients. The medium in which
the cells were incubated was exchanged within 5 min of the start of
the experiments to eliminate effects of any proteins endogenously
secreted from cells. Oligomeric preparations of Aβ42 and Aβ40
were found to induce rapidly an increase in [Ca2+]c in astrocytes) giving rise to unsynchronized oscillations
(Figure A and Figure S1A,B () though not in neurons (Figure B). The elevation of [Ca2+]c specific to astrocytes but not neurons was observed even at very
low concentrations, down to 195 pM oligomers, of the peptide (Aβ42,
Figure C,E and Aβ40, Figure S1C ()). No detectable increase
in [Ca2+]c was, however, observed even at the
highest concentration examined with solutions containing just monomers
of Aβ40 and Aβ42 (Aβ42, Figure D; Aβ40, Figure S1D ()). In each of these cases, we ensured that the
effects measured were not due to the presence of the fluorescent dye
since incubating the cultures with the fluorophore alone elicited
no increase in [Ca2+]c (Figure S2A, ). Furthermore, incubation
of the cultures with unlabeled versions of Aβ42 oligomers resulted
in changes in intracellular calcium levels similar to those observed
in experiments with the fluorescently labeled oligomers (Figure S2B, ). These controls confirmed
that the effects we observed were specific to the experiments we performed
rather than effects due to the conditions of our experiments.

Effects of
Aβ oligomers on cytosolic calcium levels. The
ratio of fluorescence emitted from excitation at 340/380 nm of the
Ca2+-binding dye, fura-2, (defined to be the fura-2 ratio)
correlates with the cytosolic Ca2+ concentration. For all
plots displaying the change in fura-2 ratio with time, each line represents
the cytosolic Ca2+ concentration within a single cell.
Each experiment was performed with at least three replicates. Since
the analysis was performed at the single cell level, the number of
cells examined is stated. (A) Cytosolic Ca2+ concentration
(as quantified by the fura-2 ratio) as a function of time in astrocytes
to which 500 nM (total peptide) of Aβ42 (containing 19.5 nM
oligomer) has been added. Results for experiments performed with Aβ42
are shown here. The number of astrocytes incubated with Aβ42
and examined was 549. Similar results for cells incubated with Aβ40
peptide preparations containing ∼1.5 nM oligomers can be found
in Figure S1B ().
(B) Cytosolic Ca2+ concentration (as quantified by the
fura-2 ratio) as a function of time in neurons to which 500 nM (total
peptide) Aβ42 containing 19.5 nM oligomers) has been added;
126 neurons were examined. (C) Cytosolic Ca2+ concentration
(as quantified by the fura-2 ratio) as a function of time in astrocytes
to which 50 nM (total peptide) Aβ42 (containing 1.95 nM oligomers)
has been added. The number of astrocytes examined was 414. Similar
results for cells incubated with Aβ40 peptide preparations containing
150 pM oligomers are shown in Figure S1C (). (D) Cytosolic Ca2+ concentration (as
quantified by the fura-2 ratio) as a function of time in astrocytes
to which 500 nM monomeric Aβ42 was added. Similar results for
cells incubated with 500 nM monomeric Aβ40 peptide are shown
in Figure S1D ().
The number of astrocytes incubated with Aβ42 that were examined
was 69. (E) The fraction of total astrocytes that displayed Ca2+ transients within the first 15 min following the addition
of exogenously added Aβ40 or Aβ42, as a function of Aβ
oligomer concentration. Each point represents the mean ± SEM
of at least three biological replicates. For each concentration, from
81 to 550 cells were examined. Control experiments to verify that
the observed effects on Ca2+ transients are not a consequence
of fluorophores attached to the Aβ peptides are shown in Figure
S2A,B ().

No significant difference in the average amplitude
of the initial
[Ca2+]c transients was observed upon incubation
of the primary cultures with a 10-fold variation in concentration
of either Aβ40 or Aβ42 (19.5 nM oligomer, 500 nM total
Aβ42 induced a 0.67 ± 0.06 increase in the fura-2 fluorescence
intensity ratio, compared to 0.71 ± 0.09 at 1.95 nM oligomer,
and 0.62 ± 0.7 at 19.5 pM oligomer; similar data for the Aβ40
peptide can be found in Figure S1B,C ()). In contrast, the number of astrocytes that displayed
a change in [Ca2+]c within 15 min increased
with increasing concentration of oligomers added to the primary cultures
(for both Aβ40 and Aβ42, Figure E). Even at low concentrations of oligomers, ∼195 pM, 16 ±
3% of astrocytes displayed [Ca2+]c transients.
Increasing the concentration did not therefore increase the magnitude
of the calcium response of a given astrocyte but rather increased
the number of astrocytes affected.

We then performed a set of
experiments designed to reveal the origin
of the [Ca2+]c transients in astrocytes. When
Aβ40 and Aβ42 oligomers were added to cells in a Ca2+-free medium (which included 0.5 mM of the chelating agent,
EGTA), no [Ca2+]c transients were observed (Figure
S1E, ); when Ca2+ was added to the medium (at concentrations excess of EGTA),
the [Ca2+]c transients could be reactivated
(Figure S1F, ). In
addition, pretreatment of cells with thapsigargin (a sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic
reticulum Ca2+-ATPase blocker that leads to a depletion
of intracellular Ca2+) followed by subsequent extracellular
addition of either Aβ40 or Aβ42 oligomers in a Ca2+-containing medium, resulted in the observation of [Ca2+]c transients (Figure S1F, ). These results were obtained from
cultures where the neuron/astrocyte ratio was consistently between
1:1 and 1:2 depending on the area and preparation used. Taken together,
these experiments show that the [Ca2+]c transients
in astrocytes are caused by the entry of Ca2+ from the
extracellular space rather than by the release from intracellular
stores.

Since we were able to determine the concentration of
oligomers
in each of our experiments, we can explore the dependence of the incidence
of [Ca2+]c transients on the oligomer dose.
As previously mentioned, we found that the number of cells displaying
Ca2+ transients (rather than the magnitude of the transients
themselves) correlated with the concentration of Aβ oligomers
present. Therefore, we incubated cells with varying concentrations
of either Aβ42 or Aβ40 oligomers and counted the number
of cells that displayed Ca2+ influx within 15 min of addition
of the oligomers. The regime where only a fraction of cells show calcium
influx in response to the addition of oligomers can be used to roughly
estimate what fraction of all oligomers can cause this influx, while
at higher oligomer concentrations, all of the cells show calcium influx,
and the effect saturates. For this estimation, we fitted these data
in Figure E using the following dose–response
relationship:In this relationship, I is
the fraction of astrocytes showing cytosolic Ca2+ influx, d is the number of oligomers per cell, p is the probability that an oligomer causes Ca2+ influx,
and k is a parameter determining the degree to which
oligomers interact independently (k = 1), or act
synergistically (k &gt; 1) or antagonistically (k &lt; 1). From the fit of the data (Figure S1G, ), we extracted a k value of 0.5 ± 0.1 and a p value
of 0.002 ± 003 (quoted as the mean of fit parameter ± standard
error). The k value of 0.5 suggests a competitive
interaction of oligomers for sites on the cell membrane. The p value of 0.002 suggests that approximately 1 in 500 oligomers
is responsible for triggering the observed influx of Ca2+. While this fitting is approximate, it does clearly show that only
a small fraction of the oligomers present initiate cellular damage.

Generation of Reactive Oxygen Species Induced by Aβ Oligomers
We next examined the effects of Aβ oligomers on the generation
of reactive oxygen species (ROS) because oxidative stress, induced
by exposure to cytotoxic oligomers, has been observed to profoundly
affect neuronal health and survival in the context of AD., The application of solutions containing oligomers of Aβ42
or Aβ40 resulted in a significant increase in the rate of ROS
production in astrocytes (by a factor of 3.5 ± 0.3 for Aβ42
and a factor of 2.0 ± 0.05 for Aβ40, Figure A,H). As the monomeric peptides had no significant effect
on the rate of ROS production (the ratio of rates was 1.1 ± 0.1
for monomeric Aβ42 and 0.97 ± 0.02 for monomeric Aβ40),
we can attribute the increase in ROS generation specifically to oligomers
of Aβ40 and Aβ42 (Figure A,H).
This control also verified that the media exchange just prior to the
experiments had no detectable effect on cell physiology.

Effects of
Aβ species on ROS production. The ratio of fluorescence
emitted from excitation at 543/355 nm of the fluorescent dye dihydroethidium
(HEt) that is sensitive to oxidation correlates with the amount of
cytosolic reactive oxygen species (ROS) present in the cell. The HEt
ratio is defined as the ratio of fluorescence emission upon excitation
at 543 nm to emission upon excitation at 355 nm. All plots are displayed
as the mean ± SEM of all cells measured in at least three independent
trials. (A) The HEt ratio as a function of time upon the addition
of Aβ42 (500 nM total peptide) either containing only monomers
(mono) or 19.5 nM oligomers (oligo). Similar data for Aβ40 is
summarized in (H). The number of cells examined for experiments involving
oligomers of Aβ42 was 163 and 181 for those involving oligomers
of Aβ40; 201 cells were examined in experiments involving monomeric
Aβ42 and 156 for Aβ40. (B) The HEt ratio as a function
of time upon the addition of Aβ42 (500 nM total peptide) containing
19.5 nM oligomers to astrocytes and neurons in mixed primary cultures,
where the data are separated into ROS production in astrocytes and
neurons. The experiment was conducted in media with and without Ca2+. For experiments in Ca2+-containing
media, 256 astrocytes and 131 neurons were examined. For experiments
in Ca2+-free media, 106 astrocytes and 72 neurons were
examined. (C) The change in rate of ROS production (%) in astrocytes
and neurons in media with and without Ca2+. Data from B
are replotted here for clarity. (D) The change in rate of ROS production
(%) in astrocytes and neurons as a function of oligomer concentration.
Data for experiments with both Aβ42 and Aβ40 are shown
here as the mean ± SEM of at least three trials per concentration.
(E) The HEt ratio as a function of time upon the addition of Aβ42
(500 nM total peptide), containing 19.5 nM oligomers, to astrocytes
and neurons in mixed primary cultures treated with NADPH-oxidase inhibitors,
AEBSF (20 μM), or DPI (0.5 μM). The results of experiments
without inhibitors and in Ca2+-free medium are shown for
comparison; similar data for Aβ40 are summarized in H. In experiments
with DPI, 134 cells were examined with Aβ42 and 62 with Aβ40.
In experiments with AEBSF, 164 cells were examined with Aβ42
and 121 cells with Aβ40. (F) The percent change in the rate
of ROS production in astrocytes and neurons in mixed cultures upon
the addition of either 500 nM Aβ42 containing 19.5 nM oligomers
(termed “oligo”) or 500 nM Aβ40 containing 1.5
nM oligomers (“oligo”) or 500 nM monomeric solutions
(“mono”) in the presence of NADPH oxidase inhibitors
(AEBSF or DPI). The data here are replotted from parts A and E. **
represents a p-value &lt;0.01, and **** represents
a p-value &lt;0.0001 using a Kruskal–Wallis
test followed by Dunn’s post-test. Comparisons were performed
with the “oligo” sample of the same Aβ isoform.
Control experiments to verify that the observed effects on ROS production
are not affected by the fluorophores attached to the Aβ peptides
are shown in Figure S2C,D ().

Importantly, the rate of ROS production
also increased in neurons
upon the addition oligomers of Aβ42 (by a factor of 2.3 ±
0.4). This increase, however, occurred after a longer length of time
following the initial addition of the oligomers than was observed
for the corresponding increase in astrocytes (Figure B,C). In astrocytes, where large increases in ROS production
were observed upon the addition of Aβ oligomers, the quantity
of oligomers (whether of Aβ42 or of Aβ40) correlated directly
with the increase in the rate of ROS production (Figure D) suggesting that the difference in toxicity between solutions
of Aβ42 and Aβ40 is directly related to their oligomer
content rather than to inherent differences in their amino acid sequences.
We also observed that the increased rate of ROS production in astrocytes
instigated by Aβ oligomers does not occur without calcium in
the extracellular medium. This finding suggests a direct relationship
between the calcium transients observed in astrocytes and the increased
ROS production (Figure B,C). Although no calcium
transients were observed in neurons, ROS production was still inhibited
in neurons in Ca2+-free medium (Figure B,C) indicating that the neuronal ROS production in these
hippocampal samples occurs as a result of calcium entry into astrocytes.
Previous work has suggested that these results do not depend on the
ratio of astrocytes to neurons in the preparation.,

In order to probe the mechanism of ROS production, we examined
the effects of a range of small molecule compounds and found that
incubating the hippocampal cultures for 20 min with NADPH oxidase
inhibitors (0.5 μM diphenyleneiodonium chloride or DPI, or 20
μM aminoethyl-benzenesulfonylfluoride or AEBSF) prior to exposing
the cultures to solutions of Aβ40 or Aβ42 oligomers inhibited
the increase in rate of ROS production (AEBSF, 0.89 ± 0.02-fold
change for Aβ42 and 0.97 ± 0.03-fold change for Aβ40;
DPI, 1.2 ± 0.02-fold change for Aβ42 and 0.94 ± 0.01-fold
change for Aβ40; Figure E,H). The effects
of these inhibitors suggest that the Aβ40 and Aβ42 induce
ROS production in astrocytes through activation of NADPH oxidase.

Aβ Oligomer-Induced Activation of Caspase-3 in Both Astrocytes
and Neurons
Next, we examined the effects of Aβ42 on
the activation of caspase-3. Caspase 3 activation has been associated
not only with apoptosis but also with nonapoptotic pathways of synaptic
pruning and LTP deficits as shown in recent work on rodent models
and primary culture models of Alzheimer’s disease biology., The extracellular application of 500 nM Aβ42 (19.5 nM oligomers)
induced activation of caspase-3 in 78 ± 9.7% of both neurons
and astrocytes within 30 min of observation (Figure A,C). Strikingly, even small quantities of oligomeric Aβ42
(50 nM total peptide concentration and 1.95 nM oligomers) activated
caspase-3 in 36 ± 2.7% of the cells (Figure C). We verified that the activation of caspase-3 by Aβ42
was specific to oligomers since monomeric Aβ42 (500 nM) only
activated 4.1 ± 1.2% of cells during the time of observation
(Figure B,C).

Effects of Aβ oligomers on the activation
of caspase-3. The
NucView488 substrate used to monitor the activation of caspase-3 in
real time becomes fluorescent when cleaved by caspase-3 and subsequently
migrates to the nucleus. The kinetics of caspase-3 activation were,
therefore, monitored by measuring the fluorescence within each cell
as a function of time. In the kinetic traces shown here, each line
represents a single cell with data for neurons in red and for astrocytes
in black. Additionally, end point measurements of net caspase-3 activation
after 30 min of observation were taken by counting the number of cells
observed with fluorescent nuclei as a fraction of total cells observed.
The experiments were performed on at least 4 different samples. (A)
Fluorescence of the NucView488 caspase-3 substrate as a function of
time following treatment of primary cultures containing both neurons
and astrocytes with 500 nM Aβ42 (containing 19.5 nM oligomers);
370 cells were monitored over 6 samples. (B) Fluorescence of the NucView488
caspase-3 substrate as a function of time following the treatment
of primary cultures containing both neurons and astrocytes with 500
nM of monomeric Aβ42; 187 cells were monitored over 4 samples.
(C) Proportion of cells (%) that experience activation of caspase-3
following 30 min of incubation with monomeric Aβ42 (500 nM)
or oligomeric Aβ42 solutions (total peptide concentrations of
50 nM and 500 nM with oligomer concentrations of 1.95 nM and 19.5
nM). These data are the end points (after 30 min) of experiments presented
in A and B. For experiments using 50 nM of Aβ42, 231 cells were
monitored over 4 different samples. ** signifies a p-value &lt;0.01 by a Mann–Whitney nonparametric rank correlation.
Comparisons were performed relative to the data obtained with 500
nM of Aβ42 oligomers. (D) Fluorescence of the NucView488 caspase-3
substrate as a function of time following the treatment of primary
hippocampal cultures containing both neurons and astrocytes with 500
nM Aβ42 (containing 19.5 nM oligomers). Cultures in this experiment
had been pretreated with the NADPH-oxidase inhibitor, AEBSF (20 μM),
for 30 min prior to the addition of Aβ42; 154 cells were monitored
in a single sample. (E) Fluorescence of the NucView488 caspase-3 substrate
as a function of time following the treatment of primary hippocampal
cultures containing both neurons and astrocytes with 500 nM Aβ42
(containing 19.5 nM oligomers). The cultures in this experiment had
been pretreated with the NADPH-oxidase inhibitor, DPI (0.5 μM),
for 30 min prior to the addition of Aβ42; 138 cells were monitored
on a single sample. Control experiments to verify that the observed
effects on caspase-3 activation are not affected by the fluorophores
attached to the Aβ peptides are reported in Figure S2E,F, .

Aβ42-Induced Inhibition of Long-Term Potentiation in Hippocampal
Slices
We then explored the relationship between these changes
in cellular pathology and the inhibition of long-term potentiation
(LTP) by Aβ42 oligomers., Using systematic electrical
stimulation patterns on hippocampal brain slices, we found in accord
with the results of cellular experiments that a concentration of 500
nM (total peptide concentration) of Aβ42 (containing 19.5 nM
oligomers) inhibits LTP in hippocampal slices (Figure A,B). In order to investigate whether or not the NADPH-oxidase
inhibitors prevent the downstream detrimental effects caused by Aβ42
oligomers, we incubated the hippocampal slices with the NADPH oxidase
inhibitor, AEBSF, which, as we have described above, inhibited an
increase in ROS production in our cellular studies. When we measured
the LTP levels following the addition of Aβ42 to the hippocampal
slices, we found that the presence of AEBSF prevented the Aβ-induced
inhibition of LTP (Figure C) as has been reported
previously for other ROS inhibitors. There
was no detectable cell death over the duration of this experiment.

Aβ
oligomers induce the inhibition of LTP at the CA1-Shaffer
collateral synapse in the hippocampus. The CA1 regions of hippocampal
slices from rats were stimulated in the Schaffer-collateral pathway
(test input) of the hippocampus, while another region, the subiculum,
served as an internal control (control input). The summation of the
evoked excitatory field potentials (fEPSP) was quantified by measuring
the peak amplitude and the rate of voltage change (slope = mV/ms)
before and after high frequency electrical pulse stimulation (HFS).
The slopes of the fEPSP measurements are greater upon the induction
of long-term potentiation of synaptic efficacy (LTP). HFS (100 Hz)
was applied twice for 1 s each with a 30 s gap in between. After this
stimulation, LTP is visible in the test input as an increased fEPSP
slope. This value is normalized to the internal control input. All
values are plotted as the means ± SEM. (A) The fEPSP slope as
a function of time following HFS in untreated slices showing the induction
of LTP. Data were recorded for 8 slices. (B) The fEPSP slope as a
function of time in hippocampal slices incubated prior to the experiment
for 2 h with 500 nM Aβ42 (containing 19.5 nM oligomers). No
induction of LTP is observed after HFS. Data were recorded for 7 slices.
(C) The fEPSP slope as a function of time in hippocampal slices incubated
prior to the experiment for 30 min with the NADPH oxidase inhibitor,
AEBSF (20 μM), followed by a 2 h incubation with 500 nM Aβ42
(containing 19.5 nM oligomers). Induction of LTP is observed after
HFS. Data were recorded for 7 slices.

Clusterin Prevents Damage Induced by Aβ Oligomers
Clusterin is an extracellular chaperone that has been genetically
associated with AD at the level of genome-wide significance, and that is present in human cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) at endogenous
concentrations similar to those of the Aβ peptides., In previous work, we have shown that, in vitro,
clusterin suppresses Aβ40 aggregation and binds selectively
to Aβ40 oligomers, and we found
that a similar phenomenon occurs for the Aβ42 peptide (Figure
S3A, ). Clusterin
prevented calcium influx, ROS production, and caspase 3 activation
(Figure A–C). At substoichiometric
levels relative to the total Aβ42 monomer, clusterin protected
both neurons and astrocytes from Aβ-oligomer-induced ROS supporting
the conclusion that clusterin forms complexes, specifically with the
oligomers, to inhibit their toxicity (Figure B) and revealing how much clusterin is needed for this inhibition.
Clusterin could also prevent the Aβ42-induced inhibition of
LTP; when we exposed the hippocampal slices to Aβ42 oligomers
that had been preincubated with clusterin, we found that the latter,
like AEBSF, prevented the Aβ42-induced inhibition of LTP (Figure D). This finding directly relates our in
vitro level experiments with the tissue-level processes of
LTP. It also provides strong evidence that oligomers are the key inducers
of synaptic dysfunction and that the sequestration of these cytotoxic
species can effectively prevent their damaging effects.

Clusterin inhibits
physiological damage caused by Aβ oligomers.
(A) (i) The cytosolic Ca2+ concentration is shown as a
function of time in astrocytes to which 500 nM (total peptide) Aβ42
(containing 19.5 nM oligomers), incubated with 500 nM clusterin, has
been added; 327 astrocytes and 187 neurons were examined. (ii) The
same experiment with 500 nM Aβ40 (1.5 nM oligomers). Each line
represents the intracellular calcium within a single cell; 69 cells
were examined, and 158 astrocytes and 84 neurons were examined. (B)
(i) The percent change in rate of ROS production in astrocytes and
neurons in mixed cultures upon the addition of either 500 nM Aβ42
containing 19.5 nM oligomers (termed “oligo”) or 500
nM Aβ40 containing 1.5 nM oligomers (“oligo”)
or 500 nM monomeric solutions (“mono”) in the presence
or absence of a 1:1 molar ratio of clusterin to Aβ (“clusterin”).
** represents a p-value &lt;0.01, and **** represents
a p-value &lt;0.0001 using a Kruskal–Wallis
test followed by Dunn’s post-test. Comparisons were performed
with the “oligo” sample of the same Aβ isoform.
(ii) The HEt ratio as a function of time upon the addition of Aβ42
(50 nM total peptide), Aβ42 (50 nM total peptide) mixed with
50 nM clusterin, or clusterin only (50 nM total peptide) to astrocytes
and neurons in mixed primary cultures. Experiments examined 61 cells
with Aβ42 and 59 with Aβ40. (iii) The HEt ratio as a function
of time upon the addition of Aβ42 (500 nM total peptide containing
19.5 nM oligomers) mixed with 0, 0.5, 50, or 500 nM of clusterin and
then added to astrocytes and neurons in mixed primary cultures. For
the various ratios of (Aβ/clusterin), the following number of
cells was examined: 10:1, 111; 100:1, 99; and 1000:1, 114. (C) (i)
Fluorescence of the NucView488 caspase-3 substrate as a function of
time following the treatment of primary cultures containing both neurons
and astrocytes with a mixture of 500 nM Aβ42, containing 19.5
nM oligomers, and 500 nM clusterin; 215 cells were monitored over
4 different samples. (ii) The proportion of cells (%) that experience
activation of caspase-3 following 30 min of incubation with either
oligomeric Aβ42 solutions (total peptide concentrations of 50
nM and 500 nM with oligomer concentrations of 1.95 nM and 19.5 nM)
or Aβ42 solutions (500 nM total peptide, 19.5 nM oligomers)
incubated with 500 nM clusterin. These data are the end points (after
30 min) of the experiments presented in Figure A and panel C, i. ** signifies a p-value &lt;0.01
by a Mann–Whitney nonparametric rank correlation. Comparisons
were performed relative to data acquired with 500 nM oligomers of
Aβ42. (D) (i) The fEPSP slope as a function of time in hippocampal
slices incubated prior to each experiment for 2 h with a mixture of
500 nM Aβ42 (containing 19.5 nM oligomers) and 500 nM clusterin.
The induction of LTP is observed after HFS. Data were recorded for
9 slices. (ii) The fEPSP slope as a function of time following tetanus
in hippocampal slices incubated prior to the experiment for 2 h with
a mixture of 500 nM Aβ42 (containing 19.5 nM oligomers). This
experiment was conducted as a biological control for the results presented
in panel D, i. No induction of LTP is observed, and 4 slices were
studied.

Discussion
Physiological
Responses Can Be Initiated by Individual Aβ
Oligomers at Low Concentrations
We have examined the initial
physiological responses in both neurons and astrocytes to solutions
containing known quantities of both Aβ oligomers and monomers
and then observed how the extracellular chaperone clusterin inhibits
these responses. While these pathways induced by the addition of Aβ
oligomers have been previously identified in other work, how the response
depends on the oligomer concentration has not been determined to date.
We were able to observe rises in intracellular Ca2+, increased
generation of ROS, and activation of caspase-3 in response to physiologically
relevant concentrations of both total Aβ40 and Aβ42 (in
the 1–10 nM range). First, the
Aβ40 and Aβ42 oligomer-mediated increase in [Ca2+]c, resulting from the entry of extracellular Ca2+ through the plasma membrane of astrocytes, activates NADPH oxidase.
This increases ROS production in astrocytes and then neurons, which
then initiates caspase-3 cleavage in both cell types. Finally, in
brain slices, Aβ oligomers, acting via caspase-3 cleavage, impair LTP, a cellular analogue of memory. These
effects are all observed upon incubation of the cells and tissue with
oligomeric but not monomeric Aβ species. Since similar concentrations
of Aβ40 and Aβ42 oligomers induce similar degrees of [Ca 2+]c transients and ROS production (Figures E and D), it appears that
the main difference in the context of cytotoxicity between preparations
of Aβ40 and Aβ42 containing the same total peptide concentration
is in the oligomerization propensity of the two peptides to form oligomeric
species. In vitro work has corroborated such observations
suggesting a secondary nucleation mechanism used by Aβ42 to
catalyze oligomer formation.

The
lack of observable [Ca2+]c transients when Aβ
oligomers are added to cultures in Ca2+-free medium and
the observation of [Ca 2+]c transients even
after depletion of Ca2+ from the endoplasmic reticulum
stores using thapsigargin suggest that the origin of the observed
Ca2+ transients is from the extracellular medium. In combination
with previously published results,,,,,, our data suggest that individual
oligomeric Aβ40 and Aβ42 can disrupt the plasma membranes
of astrocytes, but not of neurons, thereby leading to the entry of
extracellular Ca2+ into the former but not the latter.
A possible mechanism for this phenomenon could be through the formation
of pore-like structures that have previously been observed in studies
of Aβ oligomer toxicity., Specific binding
to any ion transporter is unlikely due to the low oligomer concentrations
at which these effects still occur. In the light of previous observations,
the differences in the nature and composition of astrocytic and neuronal
membranes provide one possible explanation for the observation that
the effects of the Aβ oligomers differ between cell types., Subtle differences in membrane lipid composition, perhaps, could
lead to differential binding of Aβ oligomers to these cell types
and could be an explanation of the cell-type-specific effects observed.

ROS production in neurons appears to be induced by Aβ oligomers
in a different manner from that in astrocytes, as the entry of extracellular
Ca2+ triggers increased ROS production in astrocytes, but
no Ca2+ transients are observed in neurons. One possible
mechanism by which ROS production could be stimulated in neurons is
by exposure to pro-inflammatory factors such as cytokines, which are
known to be released by astrocytes that have been exposed to Aβ
oligomers., Exposure of neurons to such factors
have been shown to induce ROS production and caspase-3 activation. While damage to both glia and neurons occurs
in Alzheimer’s disease, it is unclear as to which cell type
is damaged first. This work suggests that the initial damage is to
astrocytes in agreement with previous work that made similar observations
with cell cultures using higher concentrations of oligomerized Aβ
fragments., Moreover, there has been an increasing
amount of evidence of damage to astrocytes in the onset and progression
of tissue damage in cellular and organismal models of AD.−

The calcium influx and ROS production increase smoothly with
oligomer
concentration and then saturate at about 10 nM oligomer concentration.
There is no evidence for a sigmoidal curve that might suggest specific
binding to a specific target, for example, a cell surface receptor.
At higher oligomer concentrations, the effects we have observed are
already saturated but other specific interactions may start to occur,
turning on additional pathways and giving rise to other physiological
changes. This conclusion makes interpretation of such experiments
more complex. Furthermore, in many experiments the oligomer concentration
is not measured and will depend on the preparation method used. Therefore,
even at the same total monomer concentration, the fraction of oligomers
could be significantly higher than the preparations used in this work
and have a different distribution of oligomer sizes. Our work reveals,
for the first time, however, that the initial calcium influx in an
astrocyte can be caused by an individual oligomer and that several
oligomers do not need to bind the cell at the same time. This is an
important observation since it limits the possible mechanism by which
the calcium influx may be induced. Furthermore, at low concentrations
the fraction of astrocytes showing calcium influx will depend linearly
with oligomer concentration, so a small fraction of astrocytes will
still be subjected to calcium influx at subpicomolar oligomer concentrations.

Model for the Onset of Neuroglial Damage in Response to Aβ
Oligomers
Quantitative analysis of the results described
in this article suggests that even picomolar concentrations of Aβ40
or Aβ42 oligomers can cause Ca2+ influx in astrocytes,
which leads to ROS production and then caspase-3 activation not just
in astrocytes but also neurons. By incubating the Aβ oligomers
with clusterin prior to their addition to the primary hippocampal
cultures, we were able to inhibit all of the aforementioned physiological
responses. In a previous study, we found
that clusterin forms long-lived complexes with both Aβ40 and
Aβ42. In this work, we have determined how much clusterin is
required to prevent cellular damage. The primary mechanism of the
protective effect of clusterin appears to be binding to Aβ oligomers
of either isoform, thereby preventing detrimental interactions between
oligomers and hippocampal cells. In our experiments, clusterin was
found to be an effective inhibitor of the cellular damage caused by
Aβ oligomers at concentrations as low as 5 nM, indicating that
the dissociation constant of an Aβ oligomer–clusterin
complex is at least in the low nanomolar range, a finding consistent
with recent in vitro studies. Similar instances of sequestration by binding proteins in vivo have been previously observed to inhibit toxicity
and increase degradation propensity of the sequestered species.

AD takes decades to develop, but our data
shows that an individual oligomer, unsequestered by chaperones, can
cause neuronal damage within 30 min. These apparently conflicting
observations lead us to suggest the following model for the onset
of AD. Extracellular chaperones (such as clusterin) are present in
the CSF of healthy individuals at sufficient levels to protect against
the cytotoxic effects by a dual mode of action, namely, inhibiting
the formation of Aβ40 and Aβ42 oligomers and sequestering
them when formed. Even with high binding affinities, however, there
is a finite probability that individual oligomers will, from time
to time, escape such protective mechanisms and interact with cells
to initiate the cascade of calcium influx, ROS production, and caspase-3
activation in astrocytes and neurons on a local cellular level, resulting
in altered synaptic function. The accumulation of damage to neurons
over long periods of time could potentially result in tissue-level
symptoms including the loss of cognitive function. Similar stochastic
models for other neurodegenerative diseases, where random events lead
to cell death, have been proposed for the pathologies associated with
Parkinson’s disease and huntingtin-aggregate-induced
toxicity.

The extent and rate of
neuronal damage, as seen in our data, increases
with the oligomer concentration and decreases with the clusterin concentration.
Therefore, any genetic or epigenetic perturbations that result in
lowered protection against aggregate-induced damage such as lower
clusterin concentrations, reduced efficacy of clusterin binding, or
increased production of Aβ oligomers could manifest themselves
in a greater rate of Aβ-oligomer-induced cellular damage and
earlier onset of disease. Such situations could occur in early onset,
inheritable forms of AD where higher populations of toxic oligomers
are likely to be present at any given time and as a result of aging
where relative or absolute decrease in the efficacy of clearance is
likely to occur.,

Supporting Information Available
Further control experiments
including those testing effects of fluorescent dyes used for the single-molecule
characterization of Aβ oligomers. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi401606f_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
◆ (P.N.)
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 9 Cambridge
Center, Cambridge, MA, USA.

Author Present Address
¶ (K.M.H.)
National Institutes of Health (NHLBI-CMM), 10 Center Drive,
Bldg. Ten CRC, Bethesda MD, USA.

Author Contributions
▽ P.N. and
K.M.H. contributed equally to this work.

This work was
supported by the Wellcome Trust/MRC Parkinson’s Disease Consortium
Grant to UCL/IoN, the Wellcome Trust/MRC Alzheimer’s Disease
Consortioum Grant to the University of Cambridge/Bristol, Korea-UK
Alzheimer’s Disease Consortium Grant by the Korean Ministry
of Health and Welfare, and the Augustus Newman Foundation. P.N. is
supported by the Marshall Aid Commemoration Commission (Marshall Scholarship)
and the National Science Foundation (Graduate Research Fellowship).
K.M.H and A.Y.A were supported by the Wellcome Trust, MRC Parkinson’s
Consortium Grant. M.R.W. acknowledges the support of the Australian
Research Council (DP0773555 and DP0984341). A.Y.A. is a Parkinson’s
UK Senior Research Fellow. D.H.K. is supported by the Korea-UK Alzheimer’s
Disease Consortium Grant by Korean Ministry of Health and Welfare.
K.C. is supported by the Wolfson Research Merit Award and Royal Society,
London.

The
authors declare no
competing financial interest.

