d-Cycloserine [DCS, (R)-4-amino-1,2-oxazolidin-3-one
(Scheme )] is an antibiotic currently employed
as the cornerstone of treatment options for multiresistant and extensively
drug resistant tuberculosis. DCS is a
structural analogue of d-alanine [d-Ala (Scheme )] and blocks bacterial growth by inhibiting two
enzymes involved in d-Ala metabolism and peptidoglycan biosynthesis:
alanine racemase and d-alanine:d-alanine ligase
(Ddl). The molecular targets and mechanism
of action of DCS are unique among all classes of antibiotics that
are currently known, and congruently, DCS displays no cross-resistance
with any other front- or second-line antitubercular drugs. This feature of DCS, along with low reported
levels of clinical resistance, makes DCS
a valuable asset in the antituberculosis compound arsenal. Host toxicity
(principally neuronal NMDA receptor partial agonism), however, remains
a serious and dose-limiting side effect of DCS treatment. Nonetheless, understanding the inhibitory mechanisms
and molecular interactions between DCS and its microbial targets could
aid future endeavors in the rational design of improved, next-generation
antimycobacterial compounds.

Structures of d-Alanine and d-Cycloserine
We have previously characterized the steady-state kinetics
of DCS
inhibition of Mycobacterium tuberculosis Ddl (MtDdl). Ddl catalyzes the ATP-dependent formation of
the amide bond between two d-alanine molecules, forming the
peptidoglycan precursor dipeptide d-alanyl-d-alanine
(d-Ala-d-Ala). Ddl catalysis proceeds through two
half-reactions, and the two participating d-Ala molecules
occupy distinct regions of the active site (N- and C-termini binding
sites). As such, DCS can potentially inhibit
binding of either d-Ala molecule to Ddl, and steady-state
kinetic data from us and others support this hypothesis.,

During routine spectrophotometric analysis of MtDdl activity,
we
noticed that individual time courses of DCS-containing reactions exhibited
transient biphasic curvature suggestive of slow-onset inhibition. Although this phenomenon was disregarded for
our initial steady-state kinetic analysis of DCS inhibition, the potential
significance of this observation motivated us to investigate it further;
our findings are reported herein.

Materials and Methods
Materials
All chemicals were reagent or analytical
grade and sourced as previously described. Solutions of DCS were prepared in CHES buffer (pH 9.0) and aliquots
stored indefinitely at −80 °C. Aliquots were thawed directly
before being used and discarded after 24 h.

Protein Purification
Recombinant MtDdl was overexpressed
and purified as a hexahistidine tag fusion protein, as previously
described. The gene encoding Escherichia
coli DdlB (EcDdl) was amplified via polymerase chain reaction
from E. coli BL21 genomic DNA and cloned into the
NdeI and SacI sites of pET28a+. E. coli BL21 was
transformed with the resulting vector, and the recombinant enzyme
was overexpressed and purified in a manner identical to that of MtDdl.
Proteins were stored indefinitely at −20 °C in 20 mM TEA
(pH 7.8) containing 50% (v/v) glycerol. Proteins were &gt;95% pure
as
judged by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(results not shown).

Kinetic Measurements
Steady-state
kinetics and equilibrium
binding were performed as previously described. Time courses for the measurement of slow-onset inhibition
were collected on an SX20 stopped-flow spectrometer (Applied Photophysics)
at 37 °C, using a 10 mm path-length cell. Data points were recorded
every 0.1 s. Catalysis was detected by the same coupled enzyme mechanism
as used previously for steady-state kinetic measurements. All reaction mixtures contained 50 mM HEPES (pH
7.3), 10 mM MgCl2, 80 mM KCl, 3 mM ATP, 0.25 mM NADH, 1.5
mM PEP, and a 40 μL/mL pyruvate kinase/lactate dehydrogenase
enzyme solution (PK-LDH; stock solution of 600–1000 units/mL
PK and 900–1400 units/mL LDH). MtDdl was employed at concentrations
from 60 to 290 nM and EcDdl at a final concentration of 30 nM. DCS
and d-Ala concentrations were varied as required. Reaction
components were sorted into two syringes, with rapid mixing of 60
μL from each starting each reaction. For all assays, both syringes
contained HEPES, MgCl2, KCl, NADH, PEP, and PK-LDH. MtDdl
and d-Ala were always stored in separate syringes. For analysis
of slow-onset inhibition at the C-terminal d-Ala binding
site (i.e., data for Figure ), DCS and Mt/EcDdl
were stored in separate reaction mixtures prior to the commencement
of the reaction. For analysis of slow-onset inhibition at the N-terminal d-Ala site (i.e., data for Figure ),
MtDdl and DCS (with or without ATP) were stored in the same reaction
mixture (for at least 4 min) prior to the commencement of the reaction.

Representative
reaction progress curves for (A) MtDdl and (B) EcDdl
at multiple concentrations of DCS (4 and 0.75 mM d-Ala, respectively).
Gray lines depict data obtained by averaging three injections, and
black lines are fittings of individual data sets using eq . Insets show replots of kobs vs DCS. Symbols are data, and the solid line is a fit of the data
using eq .

Representative reaction progress curves for MtDdl (final concentrations
of 40 mM d-Ala and 3 mM ATP) following preincubation of MtDdl
for 5 min with DCS alone (0.5 mM, green curve) or with ATP and multiple
concentrations of DCS (blue curves). The progress curve for reaction
in the absence of DCS is also displayed (gray). Gray, green, and blue
lines depict data, obtained by averaging three injections, and thin
black lines are fits of individual data sets using the appropriate
equation.

Individual time course data were
fit using eq where [P]t is
the product formed at time t, [E] is the total MtDdl
concentration, vi is the initial rate, vf is the final (steady-state) rate, and kobs is the apparent rate constant for approach
to the steady state. Time courses were
performed in triplicate and kobs values
averaged for each DCS and d-Ala concentration tested. Secondary
replots of kobs versus DCS concentration
were fit using eq where [I] is the DCS concentration, [S] is
the d-Ala concentration, and k2 and k–2 are rate constants as
described in Scheme . The Km value was that for the C-terminal site (4 mM), as previously
reported.

Minimal Kinetic Mechanism
Describing Slow-Onset Inhibition without
Slow Conformational Changes
pH Dependence
Ki,DCS2 and Kd,DCS1 pH profile data were fit using eq , describing the involvement of two acidic (unresolvable
pKa values) and two basic (unresolvable
pKa values) residues in ligand binding:where
pKx is the
negative log10 of the parameter being measured (Ki,DCS2 or Kd,DCS1), pKx0 is the pH-independent value of
the parameter being measured, H is the proton concentration,
and Ka1 and Ka2 are acid dissociation constants for enzyme or ligand ionizable groups.
One-dimensional NMR data indicated that DCS was stable and consisted
of a single chemical species across all pHs tested over the time frame
of the experiment (data not shown).

Software
All data
analysis, curve fitting, and graph
design were performed with SigmaPlot 12.0. Reported values and errors
were derived from software-assisted regression analyses of averaged
replicate (at least triplicate) data sets.

Results and Discussion
Using stopped-flow spectrophotometry to guarantee sufficient sampling
and the accuracy of the crucial early time points (first 0–20
s), we generated high-resolution time course data for MtDdl activity
at multiple concentrations of DCS and d-Ala (Figure A). To simplify the kinetic
analysis, all d-Ala concentrations tested were saturating
for the N-terminal d-Ala binding site (≫Km,d-Ala1). It was therefore assumed that
all DCS binding events involved the MtDdl–ATP–d-Ala1 complex, i.e., competitive with binding of the C-terminal d-Ala. Consistent with our previous
observations, reaction progress curves displayed biphasic curvature
only when DCS was present in the reaction mixture (Figure A).

Equation  was applied
to individual time
course data to permit estimation of the rate constants for the approach
to steady state, or kobs. The dependence
of kobs on inhibitor concentration is
diagnostic of the slow-onset inhibitory mechanism being observed. Replots of kobs versus
DCS concentration (at each d-Ala concentration) correlated
linearly (inset Figure A), implicating a mechanism
as illustrated in Scheme . In this case, association
and/or dissociation of the enzyme–inhibitor complex occurs
slowly (relative to the rate of catalysis), and enzyme–inhibitor
complex isomerization steps do not contribute noticeably to the rate
of inhibition onset. Individual replots
of kobs versus DCS concentration, at each d-Ala concentration tested, were then fit to eq  to calculate estimates of the individual rate constants for
DCS binding and dissociation (k2 and k–2, respectively, in Scheme ). Our results indicated that the d-Ala
concentration employed (from 0.4 to 40 mM) did not affect the magnitudes
of the calculated rate constants (results not shown), and therefore,
values were averaged across all d-Ala concentrations tested
and are listed in Table .

Kinetic Parameters for Slow-Onset
Inhibition of MtDdl and EcDdlB by DCS
preincubation	parameter	MtDdl	EcDdl	
ATP	k2 (M–1 s–1)	888 ± 36	2970 ± 360	
 	k–2 (s–1)	0.014 ± 0.003	0.13 ± 0.03	
 	t1/2 (s)	48	5	
ATP with DCS	k2 (M–1 s–1)	373 ± 11	 	
 	k–2 (s–1)	0.028 ± 0.001	 	
 	t1/2 (s)	25	 	
Values and errors were derived
from regression analyses of averaged replicate (at least triplicate)
data sets.

Components with
which the enzyme
was preincubated prior to the commencement of the reaction.

Reaction composition listed in .

Only 0.75 mM d-Ala (≈Km,d-Ala2) tested for EcDdl

Although our data indicate that
isomerization events do not significantly
contribute to the rate of inhibition onset, it is possible that rapid
enzyme-dependent modifications of DCS could lead to formation of new
species with differing affinities for MtDdl. Similarly, other resonant
or dimerized forms of DCS may exist under certain conditions and influence
inhibition parameters (Scheme S1 of the ). We therefore checked
the stability of DCS by one-dimensional and 13C HSQC NMR
in the presence and absence of enzyme (and other buffer components)
and found no spectral changes between the two conditions (Figures
S1 and S2 of the ). Furthermore, liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry analysis
of reaction products of MtDdl, d-Ala, DCS, and ATP failed
to reveal MtDdl-dependent DCS modifications (data not shown). We therefore
conclude that a single, stable DCS species is responsible for the
slow-onset behavior observed with MtDdl.

Slow-onset inhibition
has not previously been reported for DCS
with any Ddl orthologue.,,− Therefore, to test if the behavior we observed is unique to MtDdl,
or if similar behavior in prior studies had been missed, we overexpressed,
purified, and assessed the activity of recombinant E. coli DdlB (EcDdl), an enzyme for which DCS inhibition data are available. Steady-state kinetic analysis revealed kcat, Km,d-Ala2, and Ki,DCS2 values consistent with
previous reports (Table S1 of the ). More importantly, progress curves
for reaction mixtures containing DCS were nonlinear, although with
a substantially smaller curvature (Figure B). Accordingly, rate constants calculated from these data (Table ) were considerably different from those of MtDdl;
EcDdl displayed a &gt;3-fold faster rate of association of the enzyme–inhibitor
complex (k2) and a 10-fold faster rate
of dissociation of the enzyme–inhibitor complex (k–2). These results suggest that although DCS displays
slow-onset inhibition against both EcDdl and MtDdl, the response is
substantially more prolonged, and therefore more mechanistically significant,
for MtDdl.

On the basis of the magnitude of the dissociative
half-life alone
(48 s), it is difficult to conceive a strong physiological effect
for the slow-onset behavior of DCS against MtDdl; however, theoretical
calculations provide a DCS–MtDdl complex residence time up
to 8 orders of magnitude longer than that for the d-Ala–MtDdl
complex ( and Figure
S3), suggesting a significant and substantial contribution of slow-onset
binding to enzyme activity in its physiological setting, and may indeed
partially account for the observed narrow-spectrum activity of DCS
against M. tuberculosis. With an increasing significance
of drug–enzyme residence times in drug discovery ventures,− these results emphasize the importance of DCS as a functional scaffold
for future MtDdl-targeted drug design experiments.

A complementary
technique for confirming slow-onset inhibition
is to preincubate enzyme with inhibitor prior to the commencement
of the reaction. Time-dependent dissociation of the enzyme–inhibitor
complex produces a characteristic “lag” phase at the
beginning of the time course before equilibration to a steady-state
rate. This method is impossible to apply
to the study of slow-onset inhibition of DCS at the C-terminal d-Ala binding site of MtDdl, as preincubation would require
both ATP and d-Ala (the substrate for the N-terminal site),
generating a kinetically competent enzyme complex in the process.
Instead, by preincubating MtDdl with only ATP and DCS prior to the
commencement of the reaction, we were able to investigate whether
slow-onset inhibition occurs at the N-terminal d-Ala binding
site. Figure  shows
time courses of MtDdl activity following preincubation with DCS and
ATP, or with just DCS. A lag period was evident when both ATP and
DCS were included in the preincubation mixture, but not when ATP was
absent, reiterating the importance of ATP in DCS binding. In conclusion, binding and dissociation of DCS
with both the MtDdl–ATP and the MtDdl–ATP–d-Ala complexes can be described by a slow-onset mechanism.
Equations  and  were
used on relevant progress curve data to calculate rate constants for
DCS binding and dissociation from the MtDdl–ATP complex (Table  and Figure S4 of the ). We were surprised at the similarity of these
values to those obtained for DCS inhibition at the C-terminal d-Ala binding site (2-fold difference between k2 and k–2 values),
especially when compared with the differences in active site architecture, d-Ala affinities, and substrate specificities between the two
distinct substrate binding pockets.,− Together with our previous data demonstrating similar (also unexpected)
DCS affinity at each binding site (Ki,DCS1 and Ki,DCS2 of 15 and 25 μM, respectively),
and in the absence of any published Ddl–DCS cocrystal structure
to claim otherwise, we now propose a novel mechanism of DCS inhibition
whereby only the C-terminal d-Ala binding site of Ddl is
capable of binding DCS but can be occupied either in the presence
or in the absence of bound N-terminal d-Ala (Scheme ). This theory is entirely consistent with previous
steady-state kinetic data from our group and other research groups,, as such studies are able to distinguish only between enzyme forms
(as per the definition of a competitive inhibitor); no positional information is derived. It can also explain
the inability of two DCS molecules to simultaneously occupy each binding
site, as we have previously shown. Although
structural data are required to definitively assess the true binding
mechanism, we were able to lend further support to the proposed mechanism
by comparing pH profiles of dissociation constants of the MtDdl–ATP
complex and DCS (using intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence quenching)
with those of Ki,DCS2 (binding or inhibition
of DCS to the MtDdl–ATP–d-Ala complex). As
the active site residues that constitute the chemically distinct binding
pockets do not share the same pKa values, the almost superimposing pH profile curves shown
in Figure  refute a model involving separate
binding sites for the two DCS binding events.

Representation of
the Uninhibited Kinetic Mechanism (1), the DCS-Inhibited
Forms Proposed To Exist with MtDdl (2 and 3), and Forms That Are Not
Likely To Exist (4)
Comparison of the pH dependence on Ki,DCS2 (red circles) and Kd,DCS1 (blue squares)
for MtDdl. Ki,DCS2 values were taken from
previous work.Kd,DCS1 values were determined as described in . Symbols are data, and solid lines are
fits of each data set using eq . Calculated
pKa values are indicated.

In summary, our DCS inhibition results indicate
that MtDdl binds
DCS slowly, resulting in slow-onset inhibition kinetics, contrary
to what has been observed for other orthologues. More importantly,
the magnitude of the rate constants obtained in the presence and absence
of d-Ala and the similarities observed in pH studies of DCS
dissociation and inhibition strongly suggest that DCS inhibition is
attained by DCS binding solely at the C-terminal d-Ala site.
This information is of paramount importance for the rational development
of improved analogues of DCS that can be used to treat human tuberculosis.
In particular, enhanced drug target residence time, the specific and
high affinity for the C-terminal d-Ala site, and negligible
off-target host interactions (by counterscreening against the human
NMDA receptor, for example) should all be factored into future MtDdl-targeted
drug discovery ventures.

Supporting Information Available
Table
S1, Scheme S1, and Figures
S1–S4. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi400839f_si_001.pdf

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank the
National Institute for Medical Research Large
Scale Laboratory for E. coli growth and Dr. Gerald
Larrouy-Maumus for initial help with the stopped-flow spectrophotometry.
We thank Dr. Geoff Kelly (MRC Biomedical NMR Centre) for conducting
NMR experiments.

Abbreviations
DCSd-cyloserine

Ddld-alanine:d-alanine ligase

d-Ala-d-Alad-alanyl-d-alanine

MtM. tuberculosis

EcE.
coli.

