The shikimate
pathway has been
recognized as an attractive antibiotic target due to the fact that
it is essential in bacteria but absent in humans. The product of this seven-step pathway is chorismate, a
precursor required for the synthesis of aromatic amino acids and other
important metabolites. Step 3 of the shikimate pathway is catalyzed
by dehydroquinate dehydratase (DHQD), an enzyme that converts 3-dehydroquinate
(DHQ) to 3-dehydroshikimate (DHS) (Figure ). Two nonhomologous and mechanistically dissimilar DHQD types with
discrete phylogenetic coverage have been characterized. Members of the greater class I aldolase superfamily,
type I DHQDs establish a Schiff base with the substrate that acts
as an electron sink to promote the catalytic dehydration.− By contrast, type II DHQDs employ an unrelated noncovalent mechanism
that proceeds via an enolate intermediate.,

Type I
DHQD reaction intermediates and analogues. The DHQD-catalyzed
reaction is depicted centrally. Quinate and shikimate, boxed on the
sides, biosynthetically relate to DHQ and DHS, respectively. Schiff
base formation occurs between the ε-amino group of Lys170 and
C3 of the substrate. The atoms that are a part of Schiff base formation
are colored red.

The focus of this work
is the type I DHQD from the human pathogen Salmonella enterica. Our interest in this enzyme is twofold:
(1) to improve our understanding of the mechanism used by this enzyme
to convert DHQ to DHS and (2) to ultimately exploit this improved
understanding to inform the development of DHQD inhibitors. Such inhibitors
could act as a new class of antibiotics.

The greater class I
aldolase superfamily consists of a group of
enzymes that share a TIM barrel (α/β)8 fold
and an active site lysine that forms a covalent Schiff base with the
reaction substrate. Within this superfamily,
formation of the catalytic Schiff base is initiated by nucleophilic
attack of the active site lysine Nε atom on the electrophilic
carbonyl carbon of the substrate, generating a carbinolamine intermediate
that gives way to the Schiff base (Figure ).

On the basis of accepted nucleophilic approach principles,
it can
be deduced that significant angular rotation changes must occur between
the substrate–protein interactions over the course of Schiff
base formation. The reasoning behind this
argument is as follows: if, as predicted by physical chemistry principles,
the nucleophilic approach of the Schiff base-forming lysine Nε atom relative to the plane of a substrate double bond
(carbonyl) follows an obtuse trajectory but ultimately the same Nε atom is contained within the plane of that double bond
(in the Schiff base), then over the course of bond formation &gt;90°
of angular rotation (the Nε atom toward the substrate
and/or the substrate back toward the Nε atom) must
occur.

To ascertain the precise
form this angular rotation takes in a
representative enzyme, in previous work we analyzed the individual
steps that occur during Schiff base formation for the enzyme transaldolase. These studies revealed that bond formation is
associated with significant conformational change that is predominantly
confined to the substrate, specifically to the bonds adjoining the
substrate carbonyl, with little change in the conformation of active
site residues. A comparison to related enzymes suggests that this
form of substrate conformational change likely represents a common
feature of Schiff base formation in enzymes acting on linear ketone
substrates.

However, the Schiff
base-forming mechanism observed in transaldolase
cannot be extended to type I DHQDs. Unlike transaldolase and the majority
of other characterized Schiff base-forming enzymes, the DHQD substrate
carbonyl is a carbocyclic ring constituent. This unique property constrains
the allowed dihedral change in the carbonyl adjoining bonds, the defining
feature associated with transaldolase Schiff base formation, and means
that Schiff base formation must qualitatively differ from the process
for enzymes that act upon linear substrates.

To understand Schiff
base formation in type I DHQDs, we previously
attempted to capture the DHQD Michaelis complex. Our strategy was
to analyze the structure of the inactive Schiff base-forming lysine
to methionine mutant (K170M) cocrystallized with DHQ. The resulting complex revealed that DHQ initially docks
in an orientation similar to its Schiff base-bound state. This was
a surprising result, because this binding mode is inconsistent with
nucleophilic approach by Lys170 following an obtuse trajectory. On
the basis of this observation, we reasoned that formation of a bond
between the Lys170 ε-amino group and the C3 atom of DHQ (i.e.,
Schiff base bond) must either follow a higher-energy pathway with
the substrate binding in its observed orientation or, alternatively,
follow a lower-energy pathway with the substrate binding in a different
orientation at which the obtuse approach angle can be accessed.

Complicating the analysis of DHQD Schiff
base formation is the
question of whether binding of substrate to the K170M mutant accurately
reflects the wild-type Michaelis state. At issue is the position of
the ε-amino group of Lys170, which when modeled into the K170M
structure could sterically clash with the substrate carbonyl oxygen.
To address this concern, we sought an alternative strategy for probing
the Michaelis state.

Quinate and shikimate are one biosynthetic
step removed from the
DHQD substrate and product, respectively. Differing from DHQ and DHS
only in containing a hydroxyl rather than a carbonyl at the reactive
3-position (Figure ), quinate and shikimate
should bind noncovalently to DHQD. With the objective of clarifying
the mechanism of Schiff base formation, we characterized the binding
of quinate and shikimate to the wild-type and K170M mutant DHQD using
ITC, NMR, and X-ray crystallography. The data presented here reveal
three distinct binding modes of the reaction analogues and demonstrate
enhanced affinity in the K170M mutant. Incorporating these findings
with previous data, we propose that the dynamic interplay of residues
on either side of the active site acts to correctly position the substrate
for nucleophilic attack.

Experimental Procedures
Protein Expression and
Purification
As previously described,
wild-type and K170M constructs were expressed in Escherichia
coli strain BL21(DE3) in the pMCSG7 vector.− After being inoculated with an overnight culture, cells were grown
for 4 h at 37 °C. Then, the temperature was reduced to 25 °C
and protein overexpression induced by the addition of isopropyl 1-thio-d-galactopyranoside to a final concentration of 0.5 mM. Cells
were grown overnight before being harvested by centrifugation, resuspended
in a buffer containing 10 mM Tris (pH 8.3), 500 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol,
and 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, and lysed by sonication. Protein
was purified by Ni-NTA affinity chromatography and step-eluted with
0.5 M imidazole. To remove the expression tag, purified DHQD was incubated
overnight at 4 °C with hexahistidine-tagged TEV protease and
repurified by Ni-NTA chromatography.

Protein Crystallization
and Collection of X-ray Data
Sitting drop crystallization
experiments were performed at room temperature
using a 1:1 ratio of DHQD (7.5 mg/mL) to reservoir. Wild-type crystals
were incubated for ∼15 min in 5 M sodium quinate or 2 M sodium
shikimate solutions before being frozen. The K170M mutant crystal
was soaked for ∼15 min in a mother liquor, consisting of reservoir
solution supplemented with 5 mM quinate. The wild-type crystals were
harvested from a condition containing 0.01 M nickel chloride, 0.1
M Tris (pH 8.5), and 20% poly(ethylene glycol) monomethyl ether 2000.
The K170M mutant crystal was harvested from a condition containing
0.1 MIB buffer (pH 4) and 25% poly(ethylene glycol) 1500. Crystals
were frozen in liquid nitrogen, and diffraction data were collected
at 100 K at the Life Sciences Collaborative Access Team at the Advance
Photon Source (Argonne, IL).

Crystal Structure Determination and Refinement
Data
were processed using HKL-3000 for indexing, integration, and scaling. Structures were determined by molecular replacement
in Phaser, using the unliganded DHQD structure [Protein Data Bank
(PDB) entry 3L2I] as a search model. Structures were
iteratively refined with Refmac after
working models were displayed in Coot and manually adjusted on the basis of electron density maps. All
structure figures were prepared using PyMOL Molecular Graphics System,
version 1.3 (Schrödinger, LLC).

Isothermal Titration Calorimetry
(ITC)
ITC experiments
were performed using the MicroCal ITC200 instrument (GE Healthcare)
with the jacket temperature set at 25 °C. Wild-type and K170M
DHQD samples were prepared by dialysis into a buffer containing 50
mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, and 5 mM 2-mercaptoethanol. Titrations
of 10 mM quinate or shikimate dissolved in the same buffer were performed
with either buffer or 200 μM wild-type or K170M DHQD. In each
case, injections from a 40 μL syringe rotating at 500 rpm were
spaced at 2 min intervals. An initial 0.2 μL injection, which
was subsequently removed during data analysis, was followed by 17
injections of 2.0 μL each. For K170M DHQD, binding parameters
(Kd, ΔH, and −TΔS) were obtained by fitting the
resultant data to a single-site binding model using Origin 7 after
subtracting heats of dilution into buffer. The Kd was calculated as the inverse of the Ka.

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
NMR experiments were
performed on a Bruker 900 MHz AVANCE spectrometer equipped with a
cryogenic triple-resonance probe. Experimental conditions were 10
μM DHQD and 500 μM quinate or shikimate in 20 mM PO4 (pH 7.4) and 100 mM NaCl in 90% 1H2O and 10% 2H2O at 25 °C in 3 mm NMR tubes.
The WaterLOGSY experiments were performed as previously described. Water was selectively saturated using a 2 ms
square-shaped pulse with a mixing time of 2 s and a relaxation delay
of 2.5 s. Spectra were processed by NMRPipe with a 5 Hz line broadening
function and analyzed by NMRDraw.

Results
Wild-Type
DHQD–Quinate and −Shikimate Complexes
Wild-type
DHQD was cocrystallized with 0.5 M quinate or shikimate.
However, no discernible electron density for the compounds was observed
at the DHQD active site. Consequently, we resorted to soaking crystals
in 5 M quinate or 2 M shikimate prior to data collection. Employing
this soaking regime, structures determined to 1.78 and 1.50 Å
resolution (Table ) revealed clear active
site electron density for quinate and shikimate, respectively.

Data Collection and Refinement Statistics
 	WT–quinate	WT–shikimate	K170M–quinate	
PDB entry	4GUI	4GUJ	4IUO	
Data Collection	
space group	P21	P21	P212121	
unit cell dimensions	a = 48.67 Å	a = 48.62 Å	a = 36.91 Å	
 	b = 74.43 Å	b = 74.97 Å	b = 72.80 Å	
 	c = 63.13 Å	c = 63.04 Å	c = 170.91 Å	
 	α = 90.00°	α = 90.00°	α = 90.00°	
 	β = 100.57°	β = 100.49°	β = 90.00°	
 	γ = 90.00°	γ = 90.00°	γ = 90.00°	
resolution range
(Å)	30.00–1.78 (1.81–1.78)	30.00–1.50 (1.53–1.50)	28.51–1.80 (1.85–1.80)	
completeness
(%)	97.2 (99.3)	96.8 (95.0)	99.2 (95.3)	
redundancy	3.0 (2.3)	3.9 (3.9)	5.3 (4.2)	
⟨I/σ(I)⟩	17.5 (2.4)	25.5 (3.8)	16.4 (2.8)	
Rmerge (%)	5.6 (31.4)	4.5 (36.7)	11.0 (55.0)	
Refinement	
resolution range
(Å)	28.66–1.78 (1.83–1.78)	28.66–1.50 (1.54–1.50)	28.51–1.80 (1.85–1.80)	
no. of
reflections	41302 (3071)	68926 (4983)	43418 (3058)	
Rwork/Rfree	15.9/18.8	15.5/18.2	17.8/20.8	
no. of atoms	 	 	 	
protein	3619	3501	3583	
water	239	420	435	
shikimate or quinate	26	24	26	
average B factor (Å2)	 	 	 	
protein	33.8	20.5	18.9	
water	40.3	30.8	27.8	
shikimate or quinate	37.6	19.8	16.2	
root-mean-square
deviation	 	 	 	
bond lengths
(Å)	0.008	0.009	0.007	
bond angles
(deg)	1.35	1.42	1.26	
Ramachandran analysis (%)	 	 	 	
favored regions	98.0	98.7	97.8	
allowed regions	100	100	100	
disallowed regions	0	0	0	
Data for the highest-resolution
shell are given in parentheses.

Definition of Rwork and Rfree: R = ∑hkl||Fobs| – |Fcalc||/∑hkl|Fobs|, where hkl are the reflection
indices used in the refinement for Rwork and the 5% not used in the refinement for Rfree. Fobs and Fcalc are structure factors deduced from measured
intensities and calculated from the model, respectively.

As in previously described S. enterica DHQD structures,
the crystallographic asymmetric units of the shikimate and quinate
complexes each contain the physiological homodimer (Figure a). Interestingly, in both the quinate and shikimate
complexes, the two protomers in the asymmetric unit, here termed protomer
A and protomer B, exhibit disparate conformational behaviors.

Distinct conformational
behavior within the physiological DHQD
homodimer present in the crystallographic asymmetric unit. (a) The
DHQD homodimer present in the quinate asymmetric unit is depicted
in cartoon representation. Quinate molecules are shown as spheres,
and the β8−α8 loops are colored yellow and orange.
(b) Superposition of the two protomers highlights the high degree
of overall structural similarity but pronounced differences in the
β8−α8 loop and quinate conformations.

The first difference between protomers A and B
concerns the conformation
adopted by the Val228-to-Gln236 loop that connects β-strand
8 to α-helix 8 (β8−α8 loop). The β8−α8
loop has previously been observed open and partially disordered in
the unliganded state but closed over the active site and hydrogen
bonding with DHQ in the K170M mutant and Schiff base reaction intermediate
structures in the wild-type enzyme., In protomer
A of both the quinate and shikimate complex structures, the β8−α8
loop adopts the closed conformational state (colored yellow in Figure b). By contrast, in protomer B of these complexes
the loop adopts the open conformational state (colored orange in Figure b).

The second difference between protomers
A and B concerns the mode
of ligand binding. Correlating with the difference in β8−α8
loop conformation, quinate and shikimate exhibit distinct binding
modes within the two protomers (Figure b).

Binding of Quinate and Shikimate to Protomer A of Wild-Type
DHQD
Quinate (Figure a) and shikimate
(Figure b) assume similar binding modes within
protomer A of their respective complexes. With the closed β8−α8
loop, shikimate and quinate are positioned within the enclosed active
site like the covalent reaction intermediate observed in a previous
wild-type complex with DHQ and noncovalently bound DHQ in the K170M–DHQ
complex (Figure c).

Forms
of protomer A of the quinate and shikimate complexes. (a)
Stick model of the quinate complex active site (protomer A). (b) Stick
model of the shikimate complex active site (protomer A). The Fo – Fc map
was calculated with ligand omitted and is contoured at 3σ. (c)
Superposition of forms of protomer A of quinate (blue) and shikimate
(gray) to the K170M–DHQ complex (pink, PDB entry 3NNT) illustrates the
similar mode of ligand binding and closed loop conformational states.
(d) Superposition of forms of protomer A of quinate (rmsd = 0.31 Å
over 196 Cα atoms) and shikimate (rmsd = 0.20 Å over 196
Cα atoms) to the unliganded structure (yellow, PDB entry 3L2I). The retraction
of Lys170 from its unliganded state conformation prevents a clash
(dashed red line) with quinate or shikimate.

Establishing essentially the same interactions that have
been observed
for DHQ in the K170M–DHQ complex, the presence of Lys170 represents
the principal feature differentiating the wild-type quinate and shikimate
complex structures from the mutant complex. Within both quinate and
shikimate structures, the Lys170 side chain has retracted, with its
Nε atom displaced 1.5–1.9 Å from its
extended unliganded state position (Figure d). This retraction of Lys170 is rationalized by a superposition
with the unliganded structure, which reveals that the unliganded state
Lys170 conformation would otherwise sterically clash with the quinate
or shikimate 3-hydroxyl (dashed red line in Figure d). This indicates that the change in the Lys170 conformation,
from fully extended to retracted, is necessitated by the proximity
of the bound ligand.

Binding of Quinate and Shikimate to Protomer
B of Wild-Type
DHQD
The ligand electron density is not as well-resolved
within the respective forms of protomer B but is nonetheless of sufficient
quality to allow quinate (not shown) and shikimate (Figure a) to be confidently modeled with partial occupancy.
Unlike the similar mode of quinate and shikimate binding exhibited
in protomer A, dissimilar binding modes are exhibited between protomer
B of the quinate and shikimate complexes (not shown). This distinction
persists despite nearly identical open β8−α8 loop
conformational states in the two protomers.

Protomer B of the shikimate
complex. (a) Stick model of the protomer
B active site of the quinate complex. The Fo – Fc electron density map was
calculated and contoured as described in the legend of Figure . (b) Superposition of protomers A (light gray)
and B (dark gray) of the shikimate complex. The difference in shikimate
position (arrow 1) tracks with the conformational change of Arg213
(arrow 2).

In protomer B of the quinate complex,
the carbocyclic quinate ring
is flipped relative to its protomer A conformation (Figure b). As a result of this flipped orientation, the
quinate carboxylic moiety interacts with Lys170 and the C3 atom that
corresponds to the reactive atom in DHQ is located ∼7.5 Å
from the Lys170 Nε atom (not shown). This mode of
binding is similar to the mode of DHS binding observed in the previously
described E86A mutant DHS complex. As
the functional implications of this presumably nonproductive binding
mode have been thoroughly discussed in a recent publication and do not pertain to the mechanism of Schiff
base formation, we will leave discussion of quinate complex protomer
B here.

In contrast to the quinate protomer B, shikimate in
protomer B
(light gray in Figure b) retains its protomer
A orientation (dark gray in Figure b). However,
the carbocyclic shikimate ring has shifted from its protomer A conformation
(arrow 1 in Figure b). Like in protomer A,
the shikimate 1-carboxyl group forms a bidentate salt bridge with
Arg213. The difference in the protomer B shikimate position is related
to the distinct conformation of Arg213 (arrow 2 in Figure b). Arg213 has previously been observed to undergo
a coordinated conformational change upon β8−α8
loop closure. The Arg213 guanidinium
group points away from Lys170 in its open loop conformation but swivels
to point toward Lys170 following loop closure (Figure b). Tracking with the open loop
conformation of Arg213, shikimate is shifted away from Lys170 and
its protomer A position in protomer B (Figure b).

Binding of Quinate to the K170M Variant
To obtain the
wild-type quinate and shikimate complex structures, it was necessary
to soak crystals in molar concentrations of these compounds. By contrast,
2 mM substrate DHQ was sufficient to obtain the previously described
K170M–DHQ complex. To determine
if this difference in required ligand concentration resulted from
the K170M mutation, diffraction data were collected from a preformed
unliganded K170M crystal soaked in 5 mM quinate.

Indeed, a 1.80
Å crystal structure (Table ) revealed
that, in contrast to wild-type DHQD, a low millimolar quinate concentration
was sufficient to generate unambiguous ligand electron density at
the K170M mutant active site (Figure a). Within
both of the protomers in the asymmetric unit, quinate adopts the closed
loop binding mode observed in wild-type protomer A (Figure b). We could also discern quinate at the K170M active
site following a 0.5 mM soak, albeit with partial occupancy (not shown).
Thus, despite representing a 1000-fold reduction from the concentration
that failed to generate a wild-type complex, 0.5 mM quinate proved
to be sufficient to produce unambiguous quinate electron density in
the K170M variant.

K170M–quinate complex. (a) Stick model of the K170M
mutant–quinate
complex active site (protomer A). Density map calculated and contoured
as in Figure . (b) Overlay of the K170M mutant–quinate
(green) and wild-type–quinate (blue) complexes.

Next, we sought to confirm the different ligand
concentrations
required for successful crystal soaks were indicative of differing
binding affinities to the two DHQD variants. For the K170M variant, Kd values of 224 μM for quinate and 862
μM for shikimate were measured by ITC (Figure a,b). By contrast, titrations of quinate and shikimate into
the wild-type enzyme provided no indication of binding (Figure a,b). We further probed quinate and shikimate binding
using WaterLOGSY NMR, a technique previously shown to be useful for
detecting binding of small molecules to large protein complexes., In this experiment, a positive sign of the quinate peaks indicates
binding to K170M DHQD (bottom spectrum in Figure c,d). On the other hand, a negative sign of the quinate and
shikimate peaks indicates little or no binding to wild-type DHQD (top
spectrum in Figure c,d).

Binding of quinate and
shikimate to wild-type and K170M DHQD. (a)
Data from ITC experiments in which 10 mM quinate was injected into
200 μM wild-type (red) or K170M (black) DHQD are shown. The
top panel shows the direct heat generated per injection, while the
bottom panel shows the integrated and normalized heat data with a
curve fit to the K170M DHQD data. (b) Data from ITC experiments in
which 10 mM shikimate was injected into 200 μM wild-type (red)
or K170M (black) DHQD. The experimental setup and presentation are
the same as in panel a. (c) WaterLOGSY NMR spectrum of quinate in
the presence of wild-type DHQD (top) or K170M DHQD (bottom). Red arrows
denote the resonances corresponding to those of quinate. The negative
sign of the quinate peaks in the wild-type spectrum indicates little
or no binding. The positive sign of the quinate peaks in the K170M
spectrum indicates binding. (d) WaterLOGSY NMR spectrum of shikimate
in the presence of wild-type DHQD (top) or K170M DHQD (bottom). Red
arrows denote the resonances corresponding to those of shikimate.
The negative sign of the shikimate peaks in the wild-type spectrum
indicates little or no binding. The positive sign of the shikimate
peaks in the K170M spectrum indicates binding.

Discussion
Significance of Quinate and Shikimate Binding
Modes Observed
in Protomer A
While quinate and shikimate complexes were
pursued with the objective of clarifying the noncovalent basis of
substrate and product binding, it may be more instructive to view
protomer A binding (Figure ) in the context
of analyzing the carbinolamine intermediates. In the forward direction
of the reaction, the carbinolamine #1 intermediate precedes Schiff
base formation, whereas the carbinolamine #2 intermediate follows
Schiff base hydrolysis (Figure ). The quinate
and shikimate 3-hydroxyl contains the sp3 geometry and stereochemistry
that defines these intermediate states (Figure ). Quinate, in particular, is positioned very much like the Schiff
base-bound dehydroquinate, with C3 of quinate shifted 0.3 Å from
C3 of the Lys170-bound dehydroquinate. It thus stands to reason that
quinate should form interactions characteristic of the carbinolamine
intermediates.

Interestingly, the quinate 3-hydroxyl interacts
with His143 and Arg82 (Figure a). Recent computational
studies of Schiff base formation and hydrolysis predicted such an
interaction, as well as a key role for these residues in coordinating
the attacking water in Schiff base hydrolysis. Thus, this experimentally observed interaction combined
with recent computational predictions makes an emerging case for an
important role for Arg82 in DHQD catalysis.

A Proposal for the Mechanism
of Schiff Base Formation in Type
I DHQDs
The first insight into Schiff base formation in type
I DHQDs came from the structure of the K170M mutant in complex with
DHQ. In that structure, DHQ assumes an
orientation similar to that of the Schiff base-bound intermediate
states within the wild-type enzyme. Notably, such a DHQ orientation
vis-à-vis Lys170 is inconsistent with the required nucleophilic
approach trajectory for Schiff base formation. This observation combined
with the enhanced affinity of the K170M variant for substrate and
product reaction analogues makes a compelling case that the K170M–DHQ
complex does not accurately represent the Michaelis state.

We
are aware that the high ligand concentration necessary to obtain the
shikimate and quinate complexes raises questions about the functional
relevance of the binding modes observed in these structures. Nevertheless,
the binding mode observed in protomer B of the shikimate structure
is intriguing. Previous structural and kinetic data make it clear
that the β8−α8 loop closure and the accompanying
Arg213 conformational change fundamentally relate to substrate binding. In protomer A of the wild-type DHQD complex
with shikimate, the β8−α8 loop is open and Arg213
adopts its unliganded conformation (Figure a,b). Because Arg213 engages the shikimate carboxyl group in a fashion
similar to that in closed β8−α8 loop complexes,
it is easy to envision how loop closure and the accompanying Arg213
conformational change would cause the substrate to shift toward Lys170
(Figure b). Importantly, as these conformational
changes (of the β8−α8 loop and Arg213) push the
substrate deeper into the active site, some rearrangement must be
necessary to avoid a steric clash between Lys170 and substrate carbonyl
(Figure c,d) and differentiate this state
from the one observed in the K170M–DHQ complex structure (Figure , box).

Proposed mechanism of Schiff base formation.
(a) DHQD adopts an
open loop conformation in the absence of ligand. (b) DHQ binds to
the open loop conformational state, as observed in protomer B of the
shikimate complex. (c) Closure of the loop requires Arg213 and DHQ
to shift deeper into the active site. The presence of Lys170 in the
wild-type enzyme sterically disallows the K170M binding mode (black
box), forcing the DHQ 3-carbonyl to pivot away from Lys170 and generating
a prenucleophilic attack state like that described by Pan et al. (d) The reactive carbonyl is positioned at a
stereoelectronically reasonable nucleophilic approach angle in the
prenucleophilic attack state that allows reaction with Lys170 to generate
the Schiff base intermediate.

In protomer A of the quinate and shikimate complexes, such
a steric
clash is avoided by the retraction of the Lys170 side chain (Figure d). However, the high concentration of ligand necessary
to generate these structures as compared to the lower concentration
required for the K170M mutant suggests that this retraction is energetically
unfavorable. An alternative mechanism by which the steric clash could
be resolved would involve the substrate, or a portion of its carbocyclic
ring, pivoting away from Lys170. In addition to preventing a clash,
such a rearrangement has the potential advantage of exposing the carbonyl
to an energetically favorable nucleophilic approach angle and thus
promoting Schiff base formation.

The notion that the reactive
portion of the DHQ ring might pivot
away from Lys170 falls in line with recent docking/molecular dynamic
experiments, which, performed using the closed β8−α8
loop conformational state as a starting model, identified a stable
binding mode for DHQ, similar to its position in the K170M structure
but differing in that the 3-carbonyl has rotated away from Lys170. When this model was subjected to quantum chemical
calculations, small movements of the substrate and/or Lys170 side
chain positioned the reactive components at a reasonable nucleophilic
approach angle. Taken together with the
computational findings, the new structural data suggest that, following
the initial binding event, β8−α8 loop closure helps
guide the substrate into the active site. Here, the DHQ 3-carbonyl
pivots away from the K170M binding mode to prevent a steric clash
and to allow nucleophilic approach to follow a favorable trajectory
(Figure ).

In summary, the most striking
feature of this model of Schiff base
formation concerns the interplay of residues on either side of the
substrate in promoting Schiff base formation. On the external side
of the active site cavity, the β8−α8 loop critically
interacts with the substrate, effectively pushing it into sufficient
proximity of Lys170 for covalent bond formation to occur. The direct
contribution of the β8−α8 loop to the catalytic
rate is confirmed by studies of loop mutant Q236A, which reveal a
30-fold decrease in kcat. On the other side of the substrate, as evidenced by structural
revelations demonstrating perturbed substrate binding to the K170M
mutant, Lys170 sterically orients the carbonyl, presumably positioning
it at a favorable nucleophilic approach angle. In this way, the β8−α8
loop and Lys170 act in concert, pressing the substrate from opposing
sides, drawing it in and positioning it for nucleophilic attack. Importantly,
Lys170 causes DHQ to rotate away from the Schiff base-forming residue,
exposing it to a favorable nucleophilic approach by the lysine amino
group, a reaction that results in Schiff base formation. These results
reveal the various substrate binding modes that must occur during
the catalytic cycle, and it is the mimicking of these binding modes
that can be used by inhibitors to prevent the dehydration reaction.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
DHQdehydroquinate

DHQDdehydroquinate dehydratase

DHSdehydroshikimate

ITCisothermal titration
calorimetry

NMRnuclear magnetic resonance.

