One of the
most convenient probes
of protein structure is the intrinsic fluorophore tryptophan. However,
interpretation of tryptophan fluorescence is difficult because it
can be sensitive to either local or global changes or both. Furthermore,
introduction of new tryptophan probes into a protein structure may
perturb the structure and the folding dynamics and mechanism. A complementary
approach is infrared spectroscopy of the amide I mode of the peptide
backbone. The advantage of using vibrational spectroscopy is that
the spectral features are local; different regions of the amide I′
band report on different parts of a folded peptide or protein. Using
infrared spectroscopy to independently probe the portion of the peptide
assigned to different secondary structure elements, it should be possible
to determine the folding dynamics with a resolution greater than that
of fluorescence spectroscopy. β-Proteins
are naturally composed of two secondary structure elements, the turn
and β-sheet. The turns are thought to act as nucleation sites
for the folding of the larger β-protein. Via comparison of the dynamics when the turn and β-sheet are
probed, it should be possible to identify whether the turn and β-sheet
form concurrently or with a specific ordering.

Here we have
compared time-resolved measurements probed by fluorescence
and infrared in one of the fastest folding β-protein families,
the WW domain. The WW domain family consists of an antiparallel and
highly twisted three-stranded β-sheet structure with a small
hydrophobic core and two highly conserved tryptophan residues.− Because of the fast, submillisecond folding and native tryptophan
fluorescence, WW domains have been the focus of extensive computational
and experimental studies.− Studies of the Formin Binding Protein 28 (FBP28) WW domain (Figure ) have proposed different folding models involving
either three states,,, or two states.,,, In many of the experimental
studies, laser-induced temperature jumps probed by fluorescence were
used to determine the folding kinetics.,− We employed two approaches to increase the structural resolution
of the temperature jump measurements. In the first approach, infrared
spectroscopy was used to independently probe the dynamics of the turn
and β-sheet. In the second approach, tryptophan mutations were
introduced to create a more localized fluorescent probe.

(A) Cartoon
and (B) space filling model of the FBP28 WW domain
(Protein Data Bank entry 1E0L) showing the Trp8 (blue) and Trp30 (red) residues.
Below is shown the mutated protein sequence, FBP28, compared to the
wild-type sequence, WTFBP28. The three β-sheets are labeled
above and underlined in the WTFBP28 sequence. Mutations (bold), Trp8
(blue), and Trp30 (red) are highlighted in the FBP28 sequence. This
figure was prepared with PyMOL (http://www.pymol.org).

Mutation of the two conserved
tryptophans in the FBP28 WW domain
has been performed with varying degrees of success., The tryptophan in the second loop, Trp30, has been shown to be more
amenable to mutation than the tryptophan in the first loop, Trp8,
likely because Trp8 is buried in the hydrophobic core of the WW domain.
Mutation of Trp8 to glycine or alanine completely destabilized the
WW domain, whereas mutation to another aromatic residue, phenylalanine,
still allowed folding into a WW domain. Similarly, mutation of Trp30, located in the second loop, to phenylalanine
had a slight stabilizing affect compared to the effect of mutation
to alanine, which was slightly destabilizing. On the basis of these observations, we concluded that mutation of
the tryptophans to another aromatic group preserves the aromatic packing
necessary for the protein to fold. Therefore, we investigated fluorescent
mutants in which the tryptophans are individually replaced with the
aromatic residue tyrosine, W8Y and W30Y.

We compared the stability
and folding kinetics of the wild-type
and mutated WW domains. The stability of the WW domains was determined
by equilibrium circular dichorism and Fourier transform infrared (FTIR)
measurements. The dynamics of WW domain formation was measured using
temperature jump, time-resolved infrared and fluorescence spectroscopy.
Pulsed laser excitation was used to rapidly initiate a shift in the
folding equilibrium. The relaxation of the WW domains was measured
by both an infrared probe and a fluorescence probe. The dynamics of
the β-sheets and turns were independently measured by probing
the components of the IR amide I band assigned to each structure.
We found that mutation of Trp8 resulted in a destabilization of the
peptide and a less rigid hydrophobic core. Because FBP28 W8Y does
not fold with a tightly packed core, the slowest step in folding is
eliminated in this case, and therefore, its folding rate is 1 order
of magnitude faster than those of the other systems studied here.
As expected, mutation of Trp30 had little effect on the protein’s
stability. Both mutants and the wild-type system exhibited multiexponential
behavior upon being probed by infrared spectroscopy, but only one
phase upon being probed by fluorescence.

These experiments demonstrate
the importance of using multiple
probes to determine protein dynamics. Wavelength-dependent infrared
measurements reveal a fast 100 ns phase, an intermediate microsecond
phase, and a slow phase of hundreds of microseconds. These measurements
provide direct evidence of a mechanism of WW domain formation initiated
in the turns. The single phase observed by fluorescence coincides
with the slowest phase observed by infrared spectroscopy. Tryptophan
mutants enhance our understanding of the dynamics of the hydrophobic
core. They suggest that there is an intermediate dry molten globule
state prior to the rearrangement of the tryptophan residues in the
hydrophobic core of the WW domain. These results demonstrate the value
of multiple spectroscopic probes in providing a more complete view
of the mechanism of protein folding.

Experimental Section
Protein
Synthesis and Purification
FBP28 (Figure ) and tryptophan mutants were synthesized via standard
9-fluorenylmethoxycarbonyl (Fmoc)-based solid-phase chemistry on a
Liberty1 microwave peptide synthesizer (CEM, Matthews, NC). Fmoc-PAL-PS
resin (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) was used to form a peptide
amide. The peptide was purified by reverse-phase chromatography (C18
column) using a water/acetonitrile gradient with 0.1% trifluoroacetate
(TFA) as the counterion. TFA interferes in the amide I IR measurements
at 1672 cm–1, so we remove it by anion exchange.
The peptide was lyophilized and dissolved in a 2 mM HCl solution to
allow exchange of the TFA counterion for chloride. The identity of the peptide was confirmed by matrix-assisted
laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry. The
peptide was lyophilized and dissolved in D2O to allow deuterium–hydrogen
exchange of the amide protons. The peptide was lyophilized a second
time and resuspended in D2O buffer with 20 mM potassium
phosphate buffer at pD* 7.0 (pD* refers to the uncorrected pH meter
reading). Sample concentrations of 0.5–1.0 mM were prepared
for both IR and fluorescence experiments.

Circular Dichroism (CD)
Spectroscopy
CD spectra and
CD melting curves were recorded on a Jasco J-810 spectropolarimeter
equipped with a PFD-425S Jasco temperature controller module (Jasco,
Inc., Easton, MD). Peptides were dissolved at a concentration of 50
μM in 20 mM potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.0). All measurements
were taken using a 1 mm path length cell. Wavelength scans were recorded
over the range from 260 to 190 nm with an average of three repeats.
A bandwidth of 2 nm and a scan rate of 50 nm/min were used for spectral
acquisition. Thermal unfolding experiments were performed by monitoring
the signal at 226 nm from 5 to 90 °C using a 0.1 °C interval
and a scan rate of 30 °C/h. During the thermal unfolding experiment,
a full wavelength scan was obtained every 5 °C after a 60 s delay.
The buffer and protein concentrations were the same as those used
in the wavelength scan experiment.

FTIR Spectroscopy
The equilibrium melting behavior
was monitored on a Varian Excalibur 3100 FTIR spectrometer (Varian
Inc., Palo Alto, CA) using a temperature-controlled IR cell. The IR
cell consists of two CaF2 windows stacked and separated
by a 100 μm Teflon spacer split into two compartments, a sample
and a reference. The same cells are used for equilibrium FTIR and T-jump experiments. No aggregation was observed in the infrared
at the reported concentrations. All spectra shown at a specific temperature
were constructed by subtracting the spectrum of the reference buffer
solution without protein from the spectrum of the sample solution
with protein. The temperature-dependent difference spectra were then
generated by subtracting the spectrum at the lowest temperature from
the spectra at higher temperatures. The second-derivative spectra
were computed in IGOR PRO after smoothing the data with a sixth-order
binomial algorithm to remove any residual water vapor (WaveMetrics,
Lake Oswego, OR).

Time-Resolved Temperature Jump (T-jump) Relaxation
Measurements
The IR T-jump apparatus has
been described previously. Pulsed laser
excitation is used to rapidly perturb the folding equilibrium on a
time scale faster than the molecular dynamics of interest. Time-resolved
infrared is then used to probe the reaction. A Q-switched DCR-4 Nd:YAG
laser (Spectra Physics, Mountainview, CA) fundamental at 1064 nm is
Raman-shifted (one Stokes shift in 200 psi of H2 gas) to
produce a 10 ns pulse at 2 μm. The magnitude of the T-jump is calculated using the change in reference absorbance
with temperature. The T-jump reference is taken from
D2O buffer with 20 mM potassium phosphate buffer (pD* 7.0)
at the same temperature and frequency that were used for the sample.
Absorbance changes at the reference frequency are due only to changes
in D2O absorbance, which is used as an internal thermometer.

The change in signal induced by the T-jump is probed in real time by a continuous laser with
a frequency in the amide I′ band of the IR or at 285 nm to
excite Trp fluorescence. The mid-IR probe beam is generated by a continuous
wave quantum cascade laser (Daylight Solutions Inc., San Diego, CA)
with a tunable output range of 1570–1730 cm–1. The transient transmission of the probe beam through the sample
is measured using a fast, 100 MHz, photovoltaic MCT IR detector/preamplifier
(Kolmar Technologies, Newburyport, MA). Transient signals are digitized
and signal averaged (1000 shots) using a Tektronics (Beaverton, OR)
model 7612D digitizer.

The fluorescence excited at 285 nm and
collected from 320 to 370
nm is sensitive to changes in the tryptophan residues. A Verdi V12
DPSS high-power continuous wave laser (Coherent, Santa Clara, CA)
is used to pump a Mira 900 Ti:Saph laser (Coherent) that produces
a quasi-continuous beam at 855 nm. The beam is then passed through
a second and third harmonic generator (Coherent) to produce the fluorescence
probe beam at 285 nm. The back-emitted fluorescence light induced
by the 285 nm pump laser is measured using a Hamamatsu R7518 photomultiplier
tube (Hamamatsu Photonics K. K., Hamamatsu City, Japan), digitized,
and signal averaged (5000 shots) using a Tektronics model 7612D digitizer.
A 400 μM tryptophan (Trp) solution in D2O is used
as a reference to measure the magnitude of the temperature jump and
determine the temperature dependence of the tryptophan signal. Instrument
control and data collection are controlled using a LabVIEW computer
program (National Instruments, Austin, TX).

Analysis of Kinetic Data
The peptide relaxation kinetics
must be deconvolved from the observed kinetics. Accurate deconvolution
is possible as the instrument response is determined from the reference
measurement under the exact conditions of the sample measurements.
To minimize detector artifacts, the reference is scaled prior to subtraction
from the sample. The decay function is a triple-exponential decay
with the formulawhere A0 is an
offset, n is the number of exponentials to fit, An is a preexponential factor,
τn is the relaxation lifetime of
the sample, and x0 is the time offset.
To best fit the data, the minimal number of exponentials with unique
relaxation lifetimes was selected. The data are fit over the interval
from 90 ns to 1 order of magnitude outside the slowest exponential.
In the cases where a fast phase is not reported, the fit starts at
400 ns. Fluorescence measurements are fit starting at 5 μs.
Data analysis was performed in IGOR PRO.

Results and Discussion
Far-UV
CD Spectroscopy
The CD spectra of wild-type
FBP28 and, to a lesser extent, the FBP28 W30Y and FBP28 W8Y mutants
exhibit a positive peak at 226 nm and a negative peak at 197 nm (Figure A). The typical β-sheet spectrum has a negative
peak at ∼218 nm and a positive peak at ∼195 nm. Spectra of folded WW domains instead have a
negative peak at ∼202 nm and a positive peak at ∼230
nm that provides a distinct CD signature.,

(A)
Far-UV CD spectra of 50 μM solutions of FBP28 (black),
FBP28 W8Y (blue), and FBP28 W30Y (red) WW domains in 20 mM potassium
phosphate buffer (pD 7.0) acquired at 5 (solid lines) and 95 °C
(dashed lines) during the course of a thermal denaturation in a 0.1
cm path length cell. (B) Thermal denaturation of the WW domains monitored
by CD at 226 nm. The solid line is a fit to an apparent two-state
model (eq ) that was then normalized.

Small variations in the position
and intensities of these peaks
have been observed among members of the WW domain family. The peak at ∼202 nm resembles the random
coil peak usually found at 200 nm. Disorder in the N- and C-termini
of the folded structure of WW domains is thought to contribute to
the negative peak in the CD spectrum.,− The peak at ∼230 nm arises from the presence of ordered aromatic
side chains.,, Therefore, the CD spectra of FBP28 and the tryptophan mutants are
consistent with a WW domain topology.

Mutation of Trp8 or Trp30
results in a reduction in the intensity
of the 226 nm peak. FBP28 W30Y exhibits a cooperative thermal denaturation
detected by CD (Figure B) that closely resembles
that of wild-type FBP28. This is further evidence that the W30Y mutant
adopts a WW domain structure. Thus, the diminished 230 nm CD signal
of the FBP28 W30Y mutant compared to that of wild-type FBP28 can be
attributed to the absence of Trp30. A similar mutation to loop 2 of
the human Pin1 WW domain was confirmed to be a WW domain based on
the same observations, supporting this assignment. FBP28 W8Y exhibits a weak feature at 230 nm with a broad,
noncooperative dependence on temperature (Figure ). WW domains include a conserved Trp8-Tyr20-Pro33 hydrophobic
core. Apparently, mutation of Trp8 disrupts
this core, affecting the packing of the entire domain. In this mutant,
the observed CD band at 226 nm must be due to Trp30. The expected
contribution of Trp30 to the 226 nm CD signal for the correctly folded
WW domain is obtained from the difference between the wild-type (WT)
and W30Y mutant CD spectra shown in Figure A. The weak feature at 226 nm observed for the W8Y mutant is not
consistent with the expected contribution of Trp30 in the folded state.
This suggests that the environment of the tryptophan in the outer
loop is not rigid, supporting our observation that the fold is disrupted
by the W8Y mutation.

Thermal denaturation was monitored by recording
the absorbance
change at 230 nm with temperature (Figure B). The WW domains exhibit the typical heat-induced unfolding behavior
with a loss of intensity at 226 nm and a shift of the minimum from
197 to 200 nm, corresponding to a change in the secondary structure
from the WW domain to the random coil (Figure A). The melting curves (Figure B) were fit to an apparent two-state equilibrium
model:where AO is the observed absorbance, AF and AU are the
absorbance contributions
from the folded and unfolded populations, ΔH is the enthalpy change at the midpoint, R is the
gas constant, and Tm is the transition
midpoint. This analysis assumes a ΔCp of 0 as it is unlikely that
a small peptide like a WW domain would have a large difference in
heat capacity between the folded and unfolded states. The data are
then normalized for comparison. The observed melting temperature of
wild-type FBP28 is 51.1 ± 0.3 °C. This agrees with the previously
reported melting temperature of FBP28, 50.9 °C, obtained by an
infrared melt of the β-sheet band at 1636 cm–1. The melting temperature of the FBP28
W30Y mutant is 49.0 ± 0.1 °C. The W30Y mutation results
in a decrease in the melting temperature of ∼2 °C. The
breadths of the transition of FBP28 and FBP28 W30Y are the same, showing
that while the mutation results in a slight destabilization, the cooperativity
of the folding transition is unchanged (Figure B). The transition of FBP28 W8Y was too broad to obtain a reliable
fit. This is evidence that mutation of Trp8 results in destabilization
of the fold such that the transition becomes less cooperative.

FTIR Spectroscopy
The temperature-induced unfolding
of FBP28 and the tryptophan mutants was studied over the range from
5 to 85 °C in 5 °C intervals using FTIR spectroscopy to
monitor the amide I′ region. An example of the temperature-dependent
absorption spectra of the amide I′ spectral region (amide I
region of peptides in D2O) of FBP28 is shown in Figure A (see tryptophan mutants in Figure S1 of the ).

Temperature-dependent
FTIR spectra of 1 mM FBP28 in 20 mM potassium
phosphate buffer (pH 7). (A) Absorbance spectra in the amide I′
region. The temperature of the individual traces varies from 5 to
85 °C in 5 °C intervals. (B) Difference spectra obtained
by subtracting the spectrum at 5 °C from the spectra at higher
temperatures. (C) Second derivative of the FTIR absorbance spectrum
of FBP28 (black), FBP28 W8Y (blue), and FBP28 W30Y (red) WW domains
at 5 °C.

The amide I′ absorbance
arises from C=O stretching
vibrations of the polypeptide backbone carbonyls and is an established
indicator of secondary structure.− This relatively broad
band contains contributions from the entire polypeptide backbone,
which in the case of the WW domain includes β-sheet, β-turn,
and random coil structure. The changes with temperature are highlighted
by the difference spectra for each peptide (Figure B). The difference spectra are generated by subtracting the
lowest-temperature spectrum from each absorbance spectrum at higher
temperatures. Negative peaks correspond to specific structures or
interactions present in the folded state, and positive peaks correspond
to new interactions with solvent in the unfolded state. The individual
peaks are more easily distinguished in the second derivative of the
FTIR spectra at the lowest temperature (Figure C).

This analysis reveals three main components of the amide
I′
band at 5 °C, centered at 1613, 1638, and 1678 cm–1. The intensity of these features decreases with an increase in temperature,
meaning that they are all associated with the folded state. These
peaks have previously been observed in other WW domains., A peak at ∼1611 cm–1 in β-hairpins
has been assigned to an amide C=O group in the turn usually
involved in multiple hydrogen bonds with side chain or backbone donors., There is one such group in the first turn and none in the second
turn of the wild-type FBP28 WW domain., We assign
the peak at 1613 cm–1 to the backbone amide I′
mode of threonine 13, which is strongly hydrogen-bonded to the backbone
NH groups of glycine 16 and lysine 17 in the first turn of the WW
domains. This peak is of equal intensity in all three peptides (Figure C) as all three peptides contain the same first
turn. IR bands at 1634 and 1681 cm–1 are well-established
components of antiparallel β-sheets. The amide I band is split into a peak at 1681 and 1634 cm–1 due to out-of-phase and in-phase C=O stretching of neighboring
amides. The efficiency of interstrand coupling depends on the orientation
of the dipole moments of the individual carbonyl oscillators. Misaligned
carbonyl oscillators do not couple as efficiently, leading to a decrease
in the magnitude of splitting. The splitting is sensitive to the number
of strands in a β-sheet; as the number decreases, the amide
I splitting and intensity also decrease. The FBP28 and FBP28 W30Y amide I′ bands at 1638 and 1678
cm–1 are consistent with these characteristic β-sheet
markers. The β-sheet peaks of the FBP28 W8Y mutant have decreased
intensity and splitting, such that they are shifted to 1641 and 1673
cm–1 (Figure C). One interpretation
of the FBP28 W8Y data is that the decrease in splitting and intensity
of the in- and out-of-phase C=O bands is due to the formation
of fewer strands (e.g., a two-stranded β-sheet) compared to
the number for the wild-type system. Infrared and CD measurements
do not support this model. The peak at 1613 cm–1 is due to the turn of the first loop, indicating that the turn is
formed and the strong cross-strand hydrogen bonds are in place. CD
measurements of FBP28 W8Y at low temperatures show that Trp30 resides
in a rigid environment, so there is also structure to the third β-sheet
and the second loop. These results demonstrate that there is structure
in both the first and second loop, so the decrease in splitting is
not due to loss of a β-sheet. Instead, we postulate that disruption
of the hydrophobic core caused by the Trp8 mutation misaligns the
carbonyl oscillators in the three sheets causing the decrease in splitting
and intensity.

The normalized melting curves for the WW domains
derived from the
temperature-dependent IR absorbance at 1634 cm–1 are shown in Figure . The data were normalized
after being fit to an apparent two-state equilibrium model using eq . The melting curve probed by infrared (Figure ) is more broad than the melting curve probed by
CD (Figure B) likely because infrared probes
the secondary structure of the entire peptide whereas CD probes the
chirality of the environment of the tryptophan residues. The melting
temperatures derived from the amide I′ absorbance of FBP28
(52 ± 1 °C) and FBP28 W30Y (53 ± 1 °C) are the
same within error. The melting curve derived from other wavelengths
agreed with the melting temperature within the error of the fit. The
fact that the melt and breadth of transitions of the FBP28 and FBP28
W30Y mutant agree supports the conclusion from the CD measurements
that the Trp30 mutation does not affect the WW domain fold. The transition
of FBP28 W8Y was too broad to obtain a reliable fit. This supports
the observation from the FTIR and circular dichroism analysis that
the W8Y mutation destabilizes the fold.

FTIR melt curves for
FBP28 (black), FBP28 W8Y (blue), and FBP28
W30Y (red) WW domains obtained by plotting the change in IR difference
spectra at 1634 cm–1 vs temperature. The data are
fit to an apparent two-state model (eq ) and
then normalized.

Temperature-Jump Relaxation
Kinetics
The probe-dependent
relaxation kinetics of the folding–unfolding transition following
a laser-induced temperature jump were monitored using time-resolved
infrared spectroscopy. Structure specific measurements were made using
the amide I′ frequency for the amide bond vibration of the
turn (1619 cm–1) and residues involved in coupling
between the strands of the β-sheet (1634 cm–1). Jumps were performed slightly off peak center to maximize the
transient absorbance signal. The complete relaxation kinetics for
each peptide is reported in Tables S1 and S2 of the . Time-resolved measurements examined
the dependence of the relaxation rates on the final temperature following
a temperature jump. The magnitude of the temperature jump was kept
constant while the final temperature was varied for a range of final
temperatures below the melting transition. The relaxation kinetics
is best fit by a triple exponential (eq  and
Figure S2 of the ). Figure  displays the relaxation kinetics
of the peptides following a jump from 15 to 30 °C. The data were
normalized for comparison. The fits of the data in Figure  are reported in Table .
There is good agreement between the dynamics of FBP28 and the FBP28
W30Y mutant (Table S2 of the ). Both exhibit a fast phase of hundreds of nanoseconds (τ1), a microsecond phase (τ2), and a slower
∼100 μs phase (τ3). FBP28 W8Y also exhibits
three phases, with the two slower phases being 1 order of magnitude
faster than the other peptides. T-jump IR relaxation
transients were also collected at 1661 cm–1 at all
temperatures probed, and they exhibit three kinetic phases with the
same lifetimes as those observed at 1619 and 1634 cm–1. The 1661 cm–1 probe frequency is sensitive to
disorder in the peptide, whereas the probes at 1619 and 1634 cm–1 report directly on specific secondary structures.
Because of this, the data at 1661 cm–1 were useful
as a control but do not provide any new information about the folding
of specific secondary structures within the WW domain.

Representative IR T-jump relaxation kinetics of
FBP28 (black), FBP28 W8Y (blue), and FBP28 W30Y (red) monitored in
the amide I′ spectral region at 1634 cm–1 following a T-jump from 15 to 30 °C. A triple-exponential
fit using eq  is overlaid on each kinetic trace.
The data are normalized at the minimum for comparison.

Relaxation Kinetics following a Temperature
Jump to ∼30 °C
 	infrared
(1634 cm–1)	fluorescence	
 	A1 (%)	τ1 (ns)	A2 (%)	τ2 (μs)	A3 (%)	τ3 (μs)	τ (μs)	
FBP28	11 ± 4	230 ± 15	6 ± 4	9 ± 1	83 ± 1	105 ± 1	88 ± 5	
FBP28 W8Y	20 ± 4	140 ± 12	15 ± 1	2.1 ± 0.2	65 ± 1	17.3 ± 0.3	22 ± 6	
FBP28 W30Y	18 ± 2	320 ± 23	19 ± 2	7.4 ± 0.5	63 ± 1	143 ± 3	77 ± 4	
Wavelength-dependent measurements
reveal differences in the dynamics
of the turn of loop 1 (1619 cm–1) and the β-sheet
of the WW domain (1634 cm–1) (Figure ). The relaxation lifetimes observed at 1619 and 1634 cm–1 are similar (Tables S1 and S2 of the ). Because there is overlap
between the peaks at 1619 and 1634 cm–1, probes
at either location are sensitive to dynamics associated with folding
at both locations, resulting in multiexponential kinetics regardless
of the probe frequency. The relative amplitude of each kinetic phase
depends on the probe frequency, however, which allows us to assign
the structural feature that contributes most strongly to each phase.
The relative amplitude of the fast phase is greatest in the transient
measured at 1619 cm–1, which probes the turn of
loop 1. In contrast, the slower phases dominate the kinetics measured
at 1634 cm–1, which probes interstrand coupling
across the sheet of the WW domain (Figure ). On the basis of these observations, we assign the fast phase to
turn formation in loop 1, whereas the slow phases are assigned to
sheet formation. This conclusion supports the prediction from previous
studies that FBP28 forms through an intermediate state in which the
first hairpin is highly structured.,,

Representative IR T-jump relaxation kinetics
of
FBP28 monitored in the amide I′ spectral region at 1619 and
1634 cm–1 following a T-jump from
15 to 30 °C. A triple-exponential fit is overlaid on each kinetic
trace (solid black lines).

In previous work, measurements of the FBP28 WW domain with
the
fast folding hairpin chignolin incorporated into the loops resulted
in similar triple-exponential kinetics, where the intermediate phase
is interpreted as arising from the development of the cross-strand
interactions of loop 1 to form the first half of the WW domain. Chignolin is a 10-residue hairpin whose sequence
was optimized for stability based on the 16-residue β-hairpin
G-peptide. Replacing a native WW domain
turn with the chignolin sequence created a difference in the stability
of the two loops, which resulted in characteristic IR peaks that could
be assigned to each of the loops. This made it possible to probe formation
of the first and second loop separately. Because the folding of the
two hairpins in the FBP28 WW domain and mutants is more cooperative,
it is not possible to independently probe the dynamics of the first
and second loop; however, the intermediate phase likely arises from
formation of the cross-strand interactions of the first loop, because
turn 1 is already formed and by analogy to the chignolin-containing
system. These results support a model in which the first hairpin is
formed in the intermediate state.

A second set of kinetic experiments
with a series of T-jumps similar in magnitude was
performed using time-resolved fluorescence
as a probe. Figure  shows the relaxation kinetics
for a T-jump from 20 to 28 °C probed by Trp
fluorescence. The fits of the data in Figure  are listed in Table . The complete relaxation
kinetics for each peptide and a figure demonstrating the full resolution
of the fluorescence T-jump are reported in Figure
S3 and Table S3 of the . In the WT and each of the mutants, we observe a single phase in
the fluorescence relaxation kinetics, corresponding to the slowest
IR-probed relaxation lifetime; we have already assigned the latter
to folding of the second strand of the β-sheet (Figure ). Because the fluorescence kinetics coincide with
the slowest IR phase, both report on the final step in the folding
process. When the fluorescence probe is in the first loop (the W30Y
mutant has a single Trp reporter, W8, in the first loop), the observed
fluorescence change corresponds to the ∼100 μs step.
When the Trp is on the second loop (W8Y), the fluorescence transient
corresponds to the ∼10 μs step, but there is no slower
phase in this case.

Representative fluorescence T-jump relaxation
kinetics of FBP28 (black), FBP28 W30Y (red), and FBP28 W8Y (blue)
excited at 285 nm and monitored at 350 nm following a T-jump from 20 to 28 °C. Single-exponential fits are overlaid
on the kinetics traces. Data are offset for the sake of clarity.

Arrhenius plot of the relaxation kinetics of
FBP28 in the folding
branch (below Tm). The values of T used for the 1/T axis are the final temperatures
reached during the jump. k is the value obtained
from a fit (see the text) of the T-jump transient
probed by infrared at 1634 cm–1 (●) or fluorescence
(○) spectroscopy. Lines are a results of fitting τ1 (—), τ2 (−–−),
and τ3 (···).

The Trp fluorescence does not report on the peptide backbone
conformation
(at least not directly), but rather the packing of the Trp side chains
in the hydrophobic core. The Trp side chains are at least partially
buried in the hydrophobic core based on the FBP28 structure (Figure ), so the Trp fluorescence maximum reports on the
formation of this core. The fluorescence spectra of FBP28 and FBP28
W30Y have similar maxima near 345 nm, typical of Trp buried in a hydrophobic
environment. In contrast, the FBP28 W8Y has a decreased intensity
and red-shifted maximum at 360 nm (Figure S4 of the ), consistent with a more solvent-exposed
Trp. The fluorescence spectrum of each of the Trp mutants is sensitive
to the changes in the environment of the single remaining Trp, indicating
that W8 is solvent-protected as expected from the structure (Figure ) whereas W30 is more solvent-exposed, causing the
red shift of the W8Y fluorescence spectrum. The level of solvent exposure
of W30 is likely increased in the W8Y mutant because of disruption
of the hydrophobic core, consistent with evidence from the IR and
CD spectra. Regardless, in all cases, the fluorescence kinetics can
be assigned to formation of the hydrophobic core and at least partial
protection of the indole ring (or rings in the case of FBP28) from
solvent. The correspondence of the fluorescence kinetics with the
slowest IR phase indicates that burial of the Trp is concomitant with
the folding to the native backbone topology. Therefore, the formation
of the hydrophobic core depends on acquiring the native topology,
meaning there is not an initial nonspecific hydrophobic collapse followed
by a rearrangement to correctly align the three strands of the β-sheet
structure. Importantly, this process happens faster for the W8Y mutant,
which does not form a tightly packed hydrophobic core.

An intermediate
dry molten globule state in which solvent has been
expelled from the protein core, but having only loosely packed side
chains, has been observed in several proteins.− A dry molten globule state has been observed in a protein similar
to the FBP28 WW domain in size, the 35-residue villin headpiece subdomain
(HP35). The FBP28 W8Y mutant folds to
a final state that has all of the characteristics of a dry molten
globule. Its IR spectrum is consistent with a nativelike WW domain
topology, having the turns and stabilizing cross-strand interactions
that make up the β-sheet. Its fluorescence spectrum indicates
a solvent-protected Trp30, but the critical observation is its CD
spectrum, which does not have the characteristic Trp peak at 230 nm,
indicating that although the Trp is buried in the core, it is disordered.
We conclude that the hydrophobic core is disrupted by the Trp8 mutation
and therefore does not pack tightly. The IR T-jump
data provide further support for this model because FBP28 W8Y exhibits
simplified folding kinetics, missing the slowest ∼100 μs
phase observed for the wild type, and the fluorescence exhibits only
the ∼10 μs phase. These results are consistent with a
model in which the W8Y mutant folds to a dry molten globule state,
but the side chains are unable to tightly pack into the final folded
structure. Hydrophobic collapse to the dry molten globule state occurs
on the same time scale of formation of the second loop (∼10
μs). Because the FBP28 W8Y mutant does not have to search for
the final closely packed side chain conformations, the folding is
1 order of magnitude faster than that of WT FBP28.

Comparison
of the folding kinetics of the WT sequence with that
of the W8Y mutant implies that the slow (100 μs) step in the
folding of the former is tight packing of the side chains to form
the native structure. Similarly, the W30Y mutant clearly folds to
a nativelike structure (having the Trp 230 nm CD band and IR and fluorescence
spectra nearly identical to those of the wild type) with the same
kinetics as the WT sequence. Folding of the W8Y mutant occurs on the
same time scale as the intermediate phase observed in the folding
of the parent FBP28 and the W30Y mutant. Therefore, we assign the
∼10 μs phase to formation of a dry molten globule state
and the ∼100 μs phase to the conversion of the dry molten
globule to the tightly packed native structure as the rate-limiting
step. Two different folding models involving the dry molten globule
have been proposed within various systems. In the “dry molten
globule hypothesis”, the rate-limiting step is packing of the
side chains into their native conformation from the dry molten globule.,, In the other model, expulsion
of water from the hydrophobic core to form the dry molten globule
is the rate-limiting step.−,, Our observations support the first mechanism
for FBP28, for which the tight packing of the side chains is the rate-limiting
process.

Previous fluorescence T-jump studies
of FBP28
revealed biexponential kinetics below 65 °C with relaxation lifetimes
of ∼30 and &gt;900 μs. In
those
studies, a single-point mutation, W30F, was shown to change the kinetics
from biexponential to monoexponential. The interpretation of this
was inconclusive, as the change could either be a reporter effect
or indicate a change in the folding mechanism. We did not observe
the slow &gt;900 μs phase in our fluorescence T-jump measurements. A major difference in the measurements presented
here is that we modified the FBP28 sequence to include point mutations
designed to limit aggregation. The slow phase may have been lost because
of the sensitivity of the observed kinetics to aggregation. The slow
phase was also not observed in extensive studies performed by the
Fersht group.,, They concluded that the slow phase may be an early step in off-pathway
aggregation, but not part of the folding mechanism. Because the FBP28
mutant that we studied was designed to eliminate aggregation, we would
not expect to observe this phase. The
fluorescence measurements that we performed were consistent with the
fast ∼30 μs phase that was previously observed. Infrared
measurements offer a level of detail not available from the fluorescence
experiments. In particular, frequency-dependent IR measurements reveal
fast nanosecond and microsecond phases not captured by fluorescence
measurements. Because the infrared measurements are sensitive to changes
in the peptide backbone, they are able to capture subtle changes and
do not rely on a side chain reporter. This highlights the local sensitivity
of infrared spectroscopy over more conventional fluorescence probes.

Conclusion
Using infrared spectroscopy, we are able to observe
subtle differences
in the time scale of formation of the turns and β-sheets of
the WW domain. We propose a model to describe WW domain folding initiated
in the turns, similar to that proposed for other WW domains.,,, Formation of the first turn initiates the formation of a two-stranded
sheet from the first loop. Subsequently, the second turn and third
strand fold to form the full WW domain structure. Fluorescence T-jump could not lead to observation of the level of detail
available from infrared spectroscopy. Whereas infrared spectroscopy
is sensitive to changes in the secondary structure of the protein,
fluorescence spectroscopy is sensitive to the formation of the hydrophobic
core, and thus, the measurements are complementary. Tryptophan mutants
provide evidence of an intermediate dry molten globule state. We observe
packing of the tryptophan residues on the same time scale of formation
of the second loop. Thus, by utilizing multiple probes, we gain a
more detailed picture of the folding landscape.

Supporting Information Available
Temperature-dependent FTIR
spectra of FBP28 W8Y and FBP28 W30Y, equilibrium fluorescence, residuals
from transient fits, and a complete table of relaxation kinetics for
FBP28, FBP28 W8Y, and FBP28 W30Y probed by infrared and fluorescence
spectroscopy. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500556h_si_001.pdf

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

