Cysteine
dioxygenase (CDO) is
a mononuclear non-heme iron enzyme that catalyzes the first step in
oxidative cysteine metabolism, namely, the oxidation of l-cysteine (Cys) to cysteine sulfinic acid (CSA) via the incorporation
of both oxygen atoms of O2., In certain
organisms, including mammals such as mice and humans, CSA has then
been shown to be further metabolized to pyruvate and sulfate through
deamination and subsequent C–S bond cleavage, or to taurine
through decarboxylation, followed by further oxidation of the sulfur. The malfunctioning of CDO, and thus the accumulation
of Cys and deficiencies of sulfate and taurine, have been implicated
in a variety of neurological diseases.− Additionally, recent investigations with both knockdown and knockout
mice have revealed that a complete lack of CDO activity is correlated
with severe developmental problems, as well as drastically (∼90%)
lower hepatic levels of taurine.

When CDO was characterized by X-ray crystallography in 2006, it was discovered that this enzyme contained
two distinct structural features. The first was the existence of a
neutral three histidine (3His) facial triad that coordinated the ferrous
iron center, as opposed to the much more common, anionic 2-His-1-carboxylate
facial triad motif., The 3His motif has been observed
in only two other iron enzymes to date (namely, diketone cleaving
dioxygenase and gentisate 1,2 dioxygense), though it has been postulated to also occur
in cysteamine dioxygenase. The second
unusual feature revealed by the structure of CDO was the presence
of a thioether cross-link in the active site, with the thiol of C93
being covalently bonded to an ortho carbon of Y157. Much like the
3His triad, this feature of the CDO structure has only been observed
in a relatively small number of enzymes (including galactose oxidase and NirA). The
exact role this cross-link plays in catalysis is unknown. A potential
role in proper substrate Cys positioning and gating of solvent access
to the active site has been proposed on the basis of kinetic and EPR
spectroscopic measurements, while participation
in a tyrosyl radical-based mechanism has been ruled out. Although eukaryotic forms of CDO are catalytically
competent if the cross-link is not formed, enzymatic activity increases
drastically (&gt;20-fold) when the cross-link is present. Notably, prokaryotic versions of CDO lack this
cross-link, yet they maintain a similar level of activity as eukaryotic,
cross-linked CDO.

Several reaction
mechanisms for CDO have been proposed in the literature,
but experimental data providing conclusive support for any one of
these mechanisms is still missing. Cys has been shown both spectroscopically and crystallographically, to coordinate to the iron center in a bidentate fashion through
its thiolate and amino groups and to activate the Fe(II) center for
the reaction with dioxygen. Previous
spectroscopic studies by our group have revealed that only the Fe(II)CDO
state is catalytically active, though substrate Cys as well as is
its close analogue selenocysteine (Sec) are also capable of binding
to the oxidized Fe(III) ion. Magnetic circular dichroism (MCD), resonance
Raman (rR), and density functional theory (DFT) data indicated that
the Cys-Fe(III)CDO adduct is structurally similar to the Cys-Fe(II)CDO
species, and as such the oxidized complex provides an excellent starting
point for generating models of putative reaction intermediates featuring
an Fe(III) center. This strategy has
recently been employed by exposing Cys-Fe(III)CDO to cyanide, which
led to the formation of an S = 1/2 species whose electronic structure was found to be sensitive
to the absence or presence of the C–Y cross-link. Furthermore, an electron paramagnetic resonance
(EPR)-based investigation of a superoxide- and Cys-bound Fe(III)CDO
complex generated in situ demonstrated that this
species is capable of turning over, albeit slowly, strongly suggesting
that a (superoxo/Cys)-Fe(III)CDO intermediate is formed in the catalytic
cycle. Additional support for the involvement
of such an intermediate has been obtained in a recent investigation
of the NO adducts of Cys- and Sec-Fe(II)CDO. After validating the computational methodology through the successful
prediction of key spectroscopic parameters of the nitrosyl complexes,
O2-bound Cys- and Sec-Fe(II)CDO adducts and likely reaction
intermediates were investigated computationally. These studies revealed
that a low-energy, S = 2 (superoxo/Cys)-Fe(III)CDO
adduct featuring an intermediate spin Fe(III) ion coupled ferromagnetically
to a superoxo-based radical likely participates in the CDO reaction
mechanism.

Prompted by the likely involvement of a superoxo-Fe(III)
complex
in the CDO reaction mechanism, we have engaged in a detailed characterization
of Cys-Fe(III)CDO both in the absence and presence of azide. Having
similar frontier orbitals and the same charge as superoxide (O2•–), azide has frequently been utilized
to prepare models of putative Fe(III)- and Mn(III)-superoxide intermediates
that are amenable to a wide range of spectroscopic techniques. In
the present study, the different Cys-Fe(III)CDO species were characterized
by MCD and EPR spectroscopic techniques, in conjunction with quantum
mechanics/molecular mechanics (QM/MM) and DFT computations. The results
obtained in this study provide unprecedented insights into the active-site
properties of Cys-Fe(III)CDO and afford important clues regarding
the nature of the putative superoxo-Fe(III)CDO intermediate.

Experimental Procedures
Gene Expression and Protein
Purification
The expression of the cdo gene
for Mus
musculus and isolation of the wild-type protein were performed
as described previously. In brief, the cdo gene was inserted into a pVP16 vector with an N-terminal
maltose binding protein (MBP) tag, and CDO was expressed in Escherichia coli BL21(DE3) cells after induction with IPTG.
Cells were collected, lysed using pulsed sonication in a buffer containing
25 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), and pelleted by centrifugation. The cell-free
extract was loaded onto a pre-equilibrated DEAE column, and a gradient
of 0–400 mM NaCl was applied. The appropriate fractions were
collected and loaded onto an amylose column, to which the MBP-CDO
fusion protein binds. Bound protein was released from the column by
washing with buffer containing 25 mM maltose. Cleavage of the MBP
protein from CDO was achieved by incubation with tobacco etch virus
protease at 4 °C overnight. The
resultant protein solution was applied to a Sephacryl 100 size exclusion
column, and fractions containing the CDO protein were identified by
SDS-PAGE, pooled, and concentrated. Consistent with other isolations
reported in the literature, in the as-isolated protein only ∼60%
of the active sites contained iron, ∼85% of which were in the
Fe(II) oxidation state.

Sample Preparation
Protein concentration
and active-site iron occupancy were determined as described previously. Samples used for spectroscopic measurements
were ∼2 mM in Fe-bound CDO, as well as 2 mM in dithionite,
5 mM in Cys and/or ∼200 mM in azide, where appropriate. All
samples for Abs and MCD experiments were prepared anaerobically, with
solid reagents (namely, l-Cys, sodium azide, and sodium dithionite)
being degassed separately on a Schlenk line before they were dissolved
in degassed buffer under an N2 atmosphere. Samples for
MCD studies also contained 55% glycerol as a glassing agent.

Spectroscopy
Room-temperature electronic
absorption (RT Abs) spectra were collected using a Varian Cary 5e
spectrophotometer. Low-temperature (LT) Abs and MCD spectra were collected
with a Jasco J-715 spectropolarimeter in conjunction with an Oxford
Instruments SM4000-8T magnetocryostat. To reduce contributions from
the CD background signal and glass strain, the MCD spectra presented
herein were obtained by taking the difference between spectra obtained
with the magnetic field aligned parallel and antiparallel to the light-propagation
axis. Iterative Gaussian deconvolutions of all absorption and MCD
spectra were conducted using IGOR version 6.22a.

X-band EPR spectra were collected using a Bruker
ESP 300E spectrometer equipped with a Varian EIP model 625A continuous-wave
frequency counter. The sample temperature was maintained at 20 K by
an Oxford ESR 900 continuous-flow liquid He cryostat that was regulated
by an Oxford ITC temperature controller. Spectra were fit using the
EasySpin program by Stoll and Schweiger. Double integration of the signals was conducted using IGOR version
6.22a.

Computations
The initial coordinates
for the QM/MM whole-protein optimizations were generated as described
previously. In brief, two published crystal
structures of mouse/rat CDO (2ATF and 3ELN()) were modified appropriately and used to build the initial
coordinates for Cys-bound Fe(III)CDO, as at the time this study was
initiated no high-resolution crystal structure of Cys-bound mouse
CDO was available. The optimized structure for this species was used
as a starting point for generating the initial coordinates for all
other CDO models included in this study, with the appropriate atoms
for the various adducts being added manually to this structure.

All QM/MM optimizations were conducted in Gaussian09, utilizing DFT in conjunction with the B3LYP, functional for the QM region, and the Amber force field for the MM portion of the calculation. The QM
region included residues R60, H86, H88, C93, H140, H155, and Y157,
in addition to six crystallographically defined water molecules in
the active site, the iron atom, and all exogenous ligands at the iron
center. The boundary between the QM and MM regions was placed between
the alpha and beta carbons of the protein residues, and hydrogen was
used as the link atom. The 6-31G basis
set was used for all QM region atoms except the iron, the atoms immediately
ligated to it, and bound azide, hydroxide, or water, for which TZVP was used. During the optimization process, the
alpha carbons of the QM residues were kept frozen. Note that well
after this study was initiated, Driggers et al. deposited several
crystal structures of mouse CDO in the presence of Cys at a variety
of pH values at a reasonably high (1.45–2.00 Å) resolution. Importantly, our QM/MM optimized protein models
reproduce the key geometric features of the new crystal structures
very well (vide infra).

In generating small
active-site models for single-point calculations,
residues H86, H88, and H140 were excised from the protein matrix and
capped with a methyl group at the beta carbon, while all exogenous
ligands to the Fe center were retained. Spin-unrestricted single-point
DFT calculations were conducted using Orca 2.9.1 with the same basis sets and functional as described above
for the QM/MM optimizations. EPR parameters for these models were
computed by solving the coupled-perturbed self-consistent field equations
as implemented in Orca 2.9.1,, using the B3LYP hybrid
functional and the TZVP basis set on all atoms except iron, for which
CP(PPP), was used. These calculations included all
orbitals within ±100 hartree of the HOMO–LUMO gap, and
the origin of the g-tensor was set at the center of the electronic
charge. A high-resolution radial grid with an integration accuracy
of 7.0 was used for the Fe atom. Both spin–spin and spin–orbit
contributions to the D-tensor were considered. Because previous attempts
to utilize time-dependent DFT (TDDFT) for predicting the absorption
spectra of CDO species proved unsuccessful, in part because this method tends to underestimate the energies
of charge transfer transitions, electronic
transition energies and absorption intensities were computed by utilizing
the semiempirical INDO/S-CI module, as implemented in Orca 2.9.1.
For each model the orbitals obtained from the single-point DFT calculation
were used as the initial orbital guess. PyMOL version 1.5.0.4 was used to generate isosurface plots of the
molecular orbitals (MOs) and electron density difference maps (EDDMs),
with isodensity values of 0.05 and 0.005 au, respectively.

Results
Spectroscopy
Fe(III)CDO Resting State
CDO is
isolated with iron occupying only 60% of the active sites. Of the
occupied sites, the majority (typically ∼85%) contain catalytically
active Fe(II) with the remaining sites containing Fe(III). We have
previously demonstrated that the Fe(III) sites can be quantitatively
reduced to the Fe(II) state by the addition of a slight stoichiometric
excess of sodium dithionite under anaerobic conditions. Thus, the Abs and MCD spectroscopic features
associated with the Fe(III)CDO fraction can be readily resolved by
removing any spectral contributions from fully reduced CDO. No signal
subtraction is necessary when using perpendicular mode EPR spectroscopy,
as any adduct of Fe(II)CDO with a closed-shell substrate (analogue)
will necessarily possess an integer spin ground state.

The Abs
spectrum of as-isolated CDO exhibits a shoulder at ∼21 750
cm–1 on a slowly rising background absorption above
12 000 cm–1 (see Figure ). As these features disappear upon the addition of sodium
dithionite, they can be attributed to ligand-to-metal charge transfer
(LMCT) transitions involving the Fe(III) center. While neither the
CD nor the MCD spectra of as-isolated CDO display any features of
note (data not shown), the perpendicular mode EPR spectrum exhibits
a broad, distorted signal at gobs ≈
4.27 (see Figure ), consistent with previous
reports. Though the coordination number of the Fe(III) centers contributing
to this spectrum is ambiguous (with one to three water molecules potentially
completing the first coordination sphere), a recent crystal structure
of reduced CDO at low (≤5) pH revealed a tetrahedral coordination
of the iron(II) center.

RT Abs spectra of as-isolated
CDO in the absence and presence of
azide (top) and 4.5 K MCD spectra of as-isolated and fully reduced
CDO in the presence of azide (bottom).

X-band EPR spectrum (at 20 K) of as-isolated CDO in the absence
(top) and presence (bottom) of azide. No features attributable to
Fe(III)CDO species are observed at higher fields.

N3–-CDO Adduct
It has previously been demonstrated that dioxygen is incapable
of binding to the Fe(II)- and Fe(III)-containing CDO active sites
in the absence of pre-bound substrate (analogue). However, upon the addition of azide to as-isolated CDO,
a new Abs feature is observed centered at ∼24 000 cm–1, and several additional features appear in the corresponding
LT MCD spectrum (see Figure  for spectra and , Figure S3, for Gaussian
deconvolutions). As no such features are observed when azide is added
to fully reduced CDO (which does not necessarily rule out the formation
of an N3–-Fe(II)CDO species), these data
clearly indicate that an inner-sphere N3–-Fe(III)CDO complex is formed. As evidenced by the EPR spectrum of
as-isolated CDO in the presence of azide (with resonances at geff ≈ 4.20, 4.35, and 4.45 see Figure ), the azide-bound Fe(III) center remains high-spin
(S = 5/2). To the best of our
knowledge, this represents the first time a small molecule has been
shown to be capable of binding to the Fe center in CDO in the absence
of Cys (or one of its analogues).

Cys-Fe(III)CDO
Adduct
Consistent
with previous investigations into the electronic structure of Cys-Fe(III)CDO,, the addition of Cys to a solution containing as-isolated CDO leads
to the appearance of a new Abs feature in the visible region at ∼15 875
cm–1 that is absent when a complete reduction of
the enzyme is performed prior to Cys addition. This Abs feature coincides
with two positively signed bands in the corresponding MCD spectrum
(see Figure ). An iterative Gaussian deconvolution
of the Abs and MCD spectra of Cys-Fe(III)CDO was performed to determine
the energies of the underlying transitions (see Table ). These transitions have previously been assigned as SCys → Fe(III) charge transfer (CT) transitions on the
basis of resonance Raman data.

RT Abs (top)
and 4.5 K MCD (bottom) spectra of Cys-Fe(III)CDO in
the absence and presence of azide.

Band Positions (in Wavenumbers) Derived
from Iterative Gaussian Deconvolutions of the RT Abs and 4.5 K MCD
Spectra Shown in Figures  and 
species	band 1	band 2	band 3	band 4	band 5	band width	
N3–-Fe(III)CDO	16 300	20 150	22 825	26 100	30 775	3300	
Cys-Fe(III)CDO	15 050	18 650	22 475	 	 	2650	
(N3–/Cys)-Fe(III)CDO	14 950	19 300	22 000	 	 	2850	
The values
shown are for the 4.5
K MCD spectra, differing very slightly from those obtained for the
RT Abs spectra. See the  for overlays of the experimental and Gaussian-fit spectra.

The 20 K X-band EPR spectrum of
the Cys-Fe(III)CDO adduct exhibits
a sharp signal with effective g-values of 4.24, 4.32,
and 4.43 (see Figure ), as well as a significantly
weaker feature at geff ≈ 9. No
features attributable to this species are discernible at higher magnetic
fields (note that the small signal at geff ≈ 2 is due to a contaminant in the cavity). The EPR feature
centered at geff ≈ 4.3 is readily
distinguishable from that exhibited by Fe(III)CDO in the absence of
substrate, as the latter is significantly broader in nature (see Figure ). Together, the Abs, MCD, rR, and EPR data of Cys-Fe(III)CDO
obtained in this study and reported previously provide compelling evidence that a high-spin Fe(III) complex
with direct sulfur ligation is formed upon the addition of Cys to
as-isolated CDO.

X-band EPR spectra at 20 K of Cys-Fe(III)CDO in the absence
(top)
and presence (bottom) of azide, as well as simulations of these spectra
where S2 and S3 refer to two distinct species (center). No features
attributable to these Fe(III) species were observed at higher fields.
For simulation parameters, see , Table S1.

Cys-Fe(III)CDO
in the Presence of Azide
Upon the addition of a 100-fold
excess of sodium azide to Cys-bound
as-isolated CDO (corresponding to a &gt;500-fold excess of azide over
Cys-Fe(III)CDO), modest changes are observed in the Abs, MCD, and
EPR spectra of the Fe(III)-bound fraction. Specifically, the broad,
asymmetric Abs feature at 15 875 cm–1 undergoes
a modest (∼725 cm–1) red-shift, while the
higher energy component of the pair of MCD features blue-shifts by
∼650 cm–1 (see Figure ). An additional shoulder is also observed at 25 500 cm–1, though the corresponding negatively signed feature
in the MCD spectrum is temperature independent and potentially the
result of residual glass strain. Although it may seem possible that
these shifts are merely caused by the appearance of an underlying
set of features attributable to a new species, the Gaussian deconvolution
of the MCD spectrum of Cys-bound Fe(III)CDO in the presence of azide
for the region in question is readily completed using only three peaks
with band widths and intensities similar to those in the original
spectrum. Additionally, the trace obtained by subtracting the MCD
spectrum collected in the absence of azide from that in the presence
of azide exhibits residual features that are unreasonably intense
when taking into account the low concentration of the (N3–/Cys)-bound species as established by EPR spectroscopy
(vide infra). Therefore, the close resemblance of
the Abs and MCD data obtained for Cys-Fe(III)CDO in the absence and
presence of azide indicates that the N3– ion does not bind directly to the Cys-bound Fe(III) ion in the majority
of active sites. Instead, azide must bind somewhere within or near
the active-site pocket, resulting in only a modest perturbation of
the electronic structure of the iron center. These findings suggest
that a sixth ligand is already present in the Cys-Fe(III)CDO species,
making the Fe(III) center coordinately saturated.

The low-field
regions of the X-band EPR spectra of Cys-Fe(III)CDO in the absence
and presence of azide are strikingly similar to each other (see Figure ), both exhibiting a sharp feature centered around geff ≈ 4.3. However, an additional weak
signal is observed at higher magnetic fields only when azide is present,
suggesting that a minor fraction (∼15%, based on an approximate
spin quantitation by double integration of both signals) of active
sites directly bind azide when a &gt;500-fold excess of azide is used
over Cys-Fe(III)CDO. This additional signal is rhombic in nature with
effective g-values of 2.47, 2.29, and 1.90, and with
no resolvable hyperfine structure, consistent with a low-spin (S = 1/2) Fe(III) complex. Thus, our
EPR data indicate that a small population of (N3–/Cys)-Fe(III)CDO is formed in the presence of a large molar excess
of azide, even though we were are unable to identify features associated
with this species in our MCD spectra (which are dominated by (OH–/Cys)-Fe(III)CDO-based features).

Computations
Geometric and Electronic
Structures of N3–-Bound Fe(III)CDO
As evidenced
by our EPR and MCD spectra presented above, azide readily binds to
Fe(III)CDO in the absence of Cys to form an inner-sphere coordination
complex. In an effort to determine the identity of the resulting species,
several viable models of azide-bound Fe(III)CDO were generated via
QM/MM whole-protein geometry optimizations. Initially, three related
models were investigated with azide and two water molecules completing
an octahedral coordination environment of the Fe center, which differed
with respect to the positioning of the azide ligand relative to the
three facially ligating His residues. All three models remained six-coordinate
at the Fe center and converged to similar relative geometries with
nearly identical total energies for the QM region (ΔE ≈ 5.7 kcal/mol). However, one model (with the azide
moiety trans to His140) optimized with the distal nitrogen of azide
within 2.13 Å of a hydrogen bond donor on Arg60’s guanidyl
group, whereas a similar stabilizing interaction could not be found
with either of the other two models. Thus, moving forward in the investigation
of the azide-bound species, only models with azide in this coordination
site were considered. Given the low pKa (∼2.2) associated with Fe(III)-bound
water, we optimized three additional models possessing either one
hydroxide and one water (two permutations, with hydroxide initially
bound trans to either His86 or His88) or two hydroxides also bound
to the Fe center. Depending on which site was originally occupied
by hydroxide, the two (N3–/OH–/H2O)-Fe(III)CDO models converged to distinct geometries,
yielding either a five-coordinate, trigonal bipyramidal (N3–/OH–) species or a six-coordinate,
octahedral (N3–/OH–/H2O) species.

As all QM/MM-optimized models converged
to reasonable geometries (see ),
their Abs spectra and EPR parameters were calculated () to determine which model best reproduces
our experimental data for azide-bound Fe(III)CDO. On the basis of
a comparison between the computationally predicted and experimentally
derived EPR parameters (see ), we propose that a single hydroxide and a single azide
ligate to the Fe center of azide-bound Fe(III)CDO, with both the five-coordinate
model and the six-coordinate model (featuring an additional water
ligand) yielding nearly identical results. The same conclusion is
reached from a comparison of the INDO-calculated Abs spectrum for
each of the four models investigated with the experimentally determined
Abs spectrum (see ). Although
for all models the computed energies and intensities of the electronic
transitions are overestimated, both the (N3–/OH–)- and (N3–/OH–/H2O)-Fe(III)CDO models are predicted to
exhibit transitions with significant N3– → Fe CT character in the visible spectral region. In contrast,
the EDDMs calculated for the relevant transitions of the (N3–/2H2O)- and (N3–/2OH–)-Fe(III)CDO models reveal substantial contributions
from His → His and N3–→N3– intraligand excitations, respectively.
Hence, these transitions would be expected to carry very little intensity
in the corresponding MCD spectrum, which is inconsistent with our
experimental data.

As the computed Abs spectra and EPR parameters
for both the (N3–/OH–)- and (N3–/OH–/H2O)-Fe(III)CDO
models are in reasonable agreement with our experimental data obtained
for azide-bound Fe(III)CDO, a closer examination of the electronic
structures of these models is warranted. In each case, all of the
Fe 3d-based spin-up (α) MOs are filled, while their spin-down
(β) counterparts are unoccupied (see ), as expected for high-spin Fe(III) species. Moreover, because
the water molecule in the (N3–/OH–/H2O)-Fe(III)CDO model only weakly interacts
with the Fe center, the dominant N3–/OH––Fe(III) bonding interactions in this and the
five-coordinate model are nearly identical. Both σ- and π-type
OH––Fe(III) bonding interactions are present.
Alternatively, the azide in-plane (i.p., where the plane in question
is defined by the Fe–NAz,prox-NAz,med fragment) π-nonbonding orbital engages in a strong σ-type
bonding interaction with the Fe center, whereas the out-of-plane (o.p.)
π-nonbonding orbital has only a very weak π-type interaction
with the Fe center.

Geometric and Electronic
Structures of Cys-Bound
Fe(III)CDO in the Absence of Azide
The low affinity of the
active site of Cys-Fe(III)CDO for azide suggests that a sixth, semi-labile
ligand is present at the iron center of this species. To evaluate
this possibility computationally, we performed whole-protein QM/MM
geometry optimizations of Cys-bound Fe(III)CDO with either water or
hydroxide occupying the open coordination site, as well as a model
featuring a five-coordinate iron center. The relevant structural parameters
for these models (see Table ) all agree well
with those derived from the 2.00 Å resolution crystal structure
of Cys-Fe(II)CDO published recently. The
orientation and relative position of the key outer-sphere residues
(including R60, Y157, and C93) are remarkably similar for all structures
considered here, where in each case the carboxylate of the substrate
Cys serves as a hydrogen-bond acceptor from the guanidyl group of
R60 and the phenol moiety of Y157.

Relevant Active-Site
Bond Lengths
(in Å) and Angles (in Degrees) As Derived from the QM/MM-Optimized
Models and the 2.00 Å Resolution Crystal Structure of Cys-Bound
Fe(II)CDO
species	Fe–His86	Fe–His88	Fe–His140	Fe–SCys	Fe–NCys	Fe–X	His86–Fe–X	
Cys-Fe(II)CDO, 4JTO	1.893	2.199	2.110	2.291	2.262	n.a.	n.a.	
(OH–/Cys)-Fe(III)CDO	2.347	2.135	2.238	2.436	2.252	1.899	168.6	
(H2O/Cys)-Fe(III)CDO	2.148	2.221	2.100	2.446	2.175	2.219	169.1	
Cys-Fe(III)CDO	2.116	2.147	2.109	2.436	2.170	n.a.	n.a.	
(N3–/Cys)-Fe(III)CDO	2.073	2.154	1.994	2.261	2.069	1.930	177.6	
X refers to the ligating atom of
the sixth ligand (hydroxide, water, or azide) bound to iron.

Crystal structure at 2.00 Å
resolution, ref ().

Optimized as an S = 1/2 species.

Despite having a higher iron oxidation
state, our QM/MM-optimized
models of Cys-Fe(III)CDO feature a somewhat (∼0.15 Å)
longer Fe–SCys bond than is observed in the Cys-Fe(II)CDO
crystal structure, while the Fe–NCys bond length
is predicted to be shorter in the computational models. This unexpectedly
long Fe–SCys bond in the Cys-Fe(III)CDO models may
be attributed to partial electron donation from the Cys sulfur to
the Fe center, which reduces the effective nuclear charge of the Fe(III)
ion. Consistent with this prediction, all three models contain significant
unpaired spin density on the sulfur, as determined by a Loewdin spin
population analysis (vide infra).

In both the
crystal structure and our five-coordinate model, the
iron center resides in a distorted trigonal bipyramidal coordination
environment, with a clearly visible open coordination site trans to
the His86 ligand. Upon the binding of a hydroxide or water to this
site, the coordination about the Fe center becomes very nearly octahedral,
though in the case of the (OH–/Cys) adduct the Fe–NHis88 bond lengthens considerably as a consequence of the trans
influence exerted by the hydroxide ligand. In contrast, the binding
of water to the Fe center causes only a modest perturbation to the
original Fe–ligand bonds, as expected considering that water
is a weak field ligand.

As all of our QM/MM optimized models
converged to reasonable geometries,
the corresponding active sites were evaluated further using DFT and
semiempirical INDO/S-CI computations to generate quantitative bonding
descriptions and predict their EPR parameters and Abs spectra (see
Figures  and ). Of
the DFT-computed EPR spectra for the various Cys-Fe(III)CDO models
examined, the one obtained for the six-coordinate, hydroxide-bound
species provides by far the closest match to the experimental EPR
spectrum with regards to the overall shape, rhombicity, and g-values.
Likewise, the INDO/S-CI-computed Abs spectrum for this model agrees
best with the experimental Abs spectrum of Cys-Fe(III)CDO (see Figure ). EDDMs for the two intense transitions predicted
at 18 500 and 21 050 cm–1 show predominant
SCys → Fe(III) CT character, consistent with published
resonance Raman data obtained with laser excitation into the dominant
Abs feature at ∼15 875 cm–1. Although the INDO/S-CI computation overestimates
the energies and intensities of these two features by ∼4000
cm–1 and about an order of magnitude, respectively,
these errors are within the expected range for this type of calculation.

Comparison between the DFT-computed EPR spectra for various
Cys-Fe(III)CDO
models and the experimental 20 K EPR spectrum of Cys-Fe(III)CDO (bottom).
The EPR parameters for each model are given in the , Table S1.

Comparison between the INDO/S-CI-predicted Abs spectra for various
Cys-Fe(III)CDO models and the experimental RT Abs spectrum of Cys-Fe(III)CDO
(bottom). EDDMs are shown for the major transitions for each species,
where loss and gain of electron density are denoted by white and colored
lobes, respectively.

An examination of the EDDMs computed for the other two Cys-Fe(III)CDO
models [namely, six-coordinate (H2O/Cys)-Fe(III)CDO and
five-coordinate Cys-Fe(III)CDO] reveals that the major electronic
transitions predicted to occur in the region between 13 000
and 25 000 cm–1 involve electronic excitations
from MOs localized on the carboxylic acid moiety of the substrate
Cys to MOs with mixed Fe/S orbital character, likely because the thiolate
ligand possesses partial radical character (see below). This prediction
is not supported by the resonance Raman-based assignment of the Abs
feature in the visible region as SCys → Fe(III)
CT transitions. For this reason, as well
as the poor match between the experimentally derived vs computationally
predicted EPR parameters for the water-bound and five-coordinate Cys-Fe(III)CDO
models along with the inability of azide to readily coordinate to
Cys-bound Fe(III)CDO, we conclude that the six-coordinate model with
hydroxide occupying the sixth position provides the most realistic
description of the active site of Cys-bound Fe(III)CDO.

The
drastically different EPR parameters predicted for the three
models considered for Cys-Fe(III)CDO have prompted us to carry out
further investigations into the DFT-computed electronic structures
for these species. Because in general the Fe 3d-based spin-up MOs
of high-spin Fe(III) complexes are strongly mixed with ligand-based
orbitals due to spin polarization, only the compositions of the spin-down
MOs will be examined further. In the (OH–/Cys) adduct,
all of the Fe 3d-based α-MOs are filled, whereas the spin-down
counterparts are unoccupied, as expected for a high spin Fe(III) species.
The highest occupied β-MO (β-HOMO) is a sulfur-based lone
pair, whereas the β-HOMO–1 contains contributions from
the S 3py and Fe 3d orbitals, making it
σ-bonding with respect to the Fe–SCys bond
(see Figure ). Both π- and σ-bonding
interactions between the Fe(III) center and the hydroxide ligand are
also present, though at substantially lower energies (HOMO–2
and HOMO–3, respectively). The Fe 3dxz-, 3dxy-, and 3dyz-based unoccupied MOs (the t2g set of orbitals in
the parent octahedral symmetry) are lower in energy than the Fe 3dx2–y2- and 3dz2-derived MOs
(the eg set). Both the Fe 3dyz- and Fe 3dxz-based MOs are π*-antibonding
with respect to the Fe–OH bond, while the Fe 3dxy orbital is essentially nonbonding. In contrast,
the Fe 3dx2–y2- and 3dz2-based MOs are strongly σ*-antibonding with respect to the
Fe–SCys and Fe–OH bonds, respectively.

DFT-computed
energies of relevant spin-down MOs for the active
sites of (from left to right) the (OH–/Cys)-Fe(III)CDO,
(H2O/Cys)-Fe(III)CDO, and five-coordinate Cys-Fe(III)CDO
models, with lines connecting analogous MOs between different species.
Boundary surface plots of key MOs for the (OH–/Cys)
and five-coordinate Cys models (far left and far right, respectively)
are also shown. Note that the orientations of the molecular axes differ
between these models, and orbitals lacking significant Fe, S, hydroxide,
or water character are omitted for clarity. The orbital energies for
each species were adjusted such that α-LUMO (a ligand-based
orbital with essentially identical compositions for all species) lies
at 0 eV.

Interestingly, the computed electronic
structures for the (H2O/Cys)- and five-coordinate Fe(III)CDO
species do not support
a +3 oxidation state assignment for the iron center. Although in both
cases all five Fe 3d-based spin-up MOs are occupied, a single Fe 3d-based
spin-down orbital is also occupied (note that due to extensive mixing
among the filled orbitals, two separate β-MOs actually contain
substantial Fe 3dxz orbital character,
see Figure ). Accordingly, both the (H2O/Cys) and five-coordinate models can be described as possessing
a high-spin Fe(II) center, with the remaining unpaired spin density
residing on the cysteine moiety. This description is corroborated
by the Loewdin spin densities obtained from the single-point DFT calculation
for each species. In the case of the (OH–/Cys) model,
the total spin population on the cysteine moiety is 0.52, due to the
high covalency of the Fe(III)–SCys bond in this
species, as opposed to 0.95 and 1.05, respectively, in the (H2O/Cys) and five-coordinate models.

Note that in an earlier
computational investigation, the five-coordinate
Cys-Fe(III)CDO complex was described as possessing a high-spin Fe(III)
center. However, this earlier study only
used a truncated first sphere model in the optimization of the crystal
structure coordinates, and thus did not account for any steric or
electrostatic constraints imposed by outer-sphere residues. Since
the QM/MM approach employed in the present study does account for
these effects, we expect our computed electronic structure description
to be more accurate, and thus conclude that the active site of Cys-bound
Fe(III)CDO binds hydroxide to yield a six-coordinate species in which
the Cys sulfur retains partial radical character.

Geometric and Electronic Structures of Putative
(N3–/Cys)-Fe(III)CDO Species
In addition to investigating a variety of potential Cys-Fe(III)CDO
adducts in the absence of azide, we also performed whole-protein QM/MM
geometry optimizations for viable S = 1/2 and S = 5/2 (N3–/Cys)-Fe(III)CDO complexes. Although both
spin states converged to reasonable geometries, the S = 1/2 species is predicted to be more stable
by ∼18 kcal/mol (corresponding to the difference in single-point
energies). As an S = 1/2 minority
species is indeed formed upon the addition of a large excess of azide
to Cys-Fe(III)CDO according to our EPR analysis (see Figure ), the computational results for the S = 1/2 adduct were investigated further. For
this species, the bond lengths and angles about the iron center are
consistent with those reported for our other models (see Table ), with slightly shorter Fe–NHis bonds trans to the cysteinyl amide and azide moieties. Azide binds
in a bent, end-on fashion with an Fe–NAz distance
of 1.93 Å and an Fe–N–N bond angle of 131.5°.
The azide moiety is oriented such that the NAz–NAz–NAz bond vector lies directly above the
Fe–SCys bond vector, with an S–Fe–NAz,prox–NAz,med dihedral angle of just 0.1°.
This places the medial nitrogen atom of the azide moiety (which mimics
the position of the distal oxygen atom of superoxide) within 3.12
Å of the cysteine sulfur.

Consistent with our EPR results,
the S = 1/2 (N3–/Cys)-Fe(III)CDO species is predicted to feature a
low-spin iron(III) center. The Fe 3dyz- and 3dxz-based MOs are occupied in
both the α and β manifolds, whereas the Fe 3dxy-based MO is occupied only in the α manifold
(see Figure , right side). The occupied Fe
3d-based orbitals contain considerable contributions from the azide
πnb orbitals and, in the case of the Fe 3dyz-based MO, a strong σ-bonding interaction
with one of the SCys 3p-based orbitals. The unoccupied
Fe 3d-based β-MOs show π-antibonding (Fe 3dxy) or σ-antibonding (Fe 3dx2–y2 and Fe 3dz2) interactions with the ligands.
The Fe–NAz bond is very covalent, having contributions
from both σ- and π-type bonding interactions between the
Fe 3d orbitals and the azide in-plane and out-of-plane πnb orbitals, respectively. Of particular importance with respect
to the orientation of the azide ligand within the CDO active site
is the composition of the Fe 3dyz-based
β-MO. To maximize its σ- and π-bonding interactions
with the thiolate and azide ligands, respectively, this orbital forces
the NAz–NAz–NAz and
Fe–SCys bond vectors to lie directly above each
other. This particular configuration is predicted to be stabilized
further by a short (∼2.35 Å) hydrogen bond between residue
H155 and the distal nitrogen of the azide ligand.

DFT-computed energies
of relevant spin-down MOs for the active
sites of the (OH–/Cys)-Fe(III)CDO and (N3–/Cys)-Fe(III)CDO models, with lines connecting
analogous MOs between different species. Boundary surface plots of
key MOs for each model are also shown. Note that the orientations
of the molecular axes differ between these models, and orbitals lacking
significant Fe, S, hydroxide, or azide character are omitted for clarity.
The orbital energies for each species were adjusted such that the
α-HOMO (a ligand-based orbital with essentially identical compositions
for both species) lies at 0 eV.

Although extensive mixing between the Fe 3dxy and ligand orbitals in the α manifold precludes a direct
analysis of the “singly occupied MO” (SOMO), the Fe
3dxy β-MO does not undergo such
orbital mixing and thus provides an excellent representation of the
unpaired spin density distribution for the (N3–/Cys)-Fe(III)CDO species. As required by the low-spin Fe(III) description
for this species, the Fe 3dxy β-MO
possesses predominantly (71%) Fe 3d character, with modest contributions
from the sulfur (11%) and azide (6%) moieties. A similar composition
of the “SOMO” was recently predicted for a related S = 1/2 adduct, namely the (CN–/Cys)-Fe(III)CDO species. This species exhibits a g-spread similar to, though slightly smaller than, that
of the (N3–/Cys)-Fe(III)CDO adduct (Δg = 0.442 for the cyanide adduct, as compared to Δg = 0.547 for the azide-bound species). The small differences in g-spread likely
reflect a more delocalized “SOMO” and/or smaller splitting
of the “t2g set” of Fe 3d-based MOs (due
to π-backbonding) in the (CN–/Cys)-Fe(III)CDO
species.

Discussion
All recently
proposed mechanisms for CDO invoke a (superoxo/Cys)-Fe(III)CDO
intermediate,,, thus making this species a particularly attractive target to mimic.
To this end, we initiated a detailed investigation of the Cys-bound
Fe(III)CDO active site both in the absence and in the presence of
azide, which serves as a mimic for superoxide. Azide mimics not only
the electronic structure of superoxide (having similar frontier MOs)
but also its charge and size, yet it does not support catalytic turnover
and instead forms a stable adduct.

To the best of our knowledge,
the binding of azide to Fe(III)CDO
represents the first time a small molecule has been unequivocally
observed to bind to the active site of CDO in the absence of Cys (or
one of its analogues). An evaluation of QM/MM-optimized viable models
for azide-bound Fe(III)CDO on the basis of our spectroscopic data
reveals that a hydroxide also binds to the Fe center in the presence
of azide, giving iron an overall dianionic ligand environment. We
cannot, however, determine whether this species is five- or six-coordinate
at the Fe center. Regardless, these results suggest that superoxide
may also be capable of binding to Fe(III)CDO, though it has been previously
reported that superoxide is incapable of reducing the Fe(III)CDO active
site.

Several factors indicate
that the Cys-Fe(III)CDO complex is coordinately
saturated, including the ease by which azide binds to Fe(III)CDO in
the absence of Cys and the large super-stoichiometric excess of azide
over Cys-Fe(III)CDO required to observe the formation of any inner-sphere
complex. Because both the EPR and Abs spectra collected for the Cys
adduct of Fe(III)CDO are in much better agreement with those computed
for our (OH–/Cys)-Fe(III)CDO model than for the
(H2O/Cys)-Fe(III)CDO and five-coordinate Cys-Fe(III)CDO
models, we conclude that a hydroxide ion occupies the sixth coordination
site of the Cys-bound Fe(III) center. It is this hydroxide ligand
that must be displaced for azide (or any other potential ligand) to
coordinate to the Fe(III) ion in the presence of Cys.

The slight
red-shifts of the Abs and MCD spectral features observed
upon exposure of Cys-Fe(III)CDO to azide suggest that only a minor
fraction of active sites form an inner-sphere complex. The majority
of sites appear to bind azide in an outer-sphere pocket, such that
this anion perturbs the electronic structure of the (OH–/Cys)-Fe(III)CDO complex without actually displacing the hydroxide
ligand from the iron center. Being a member of the cupin family, CDO
possess a relatively open active site, with at least two potential
substrate tunnels to the active site (see Figure ). However, there are few residues lining the tunnels with
which a negatively charged small molecule would favorably associate.
The most obvious candidate is Arg60, which has previously been proposed
to play a key role in the proper positioning of the substrate Cys. With one side of the guanidyl group participating
in a salt bridge with the carboxylate moiety of the bound substrate
Cys, the other side would be free to associate with azide. The presence
of azide in this position could conceivably subtly modulate the H-bonding
abilities of Arg60’s guanidyl group, and thus the positioning
of Cys and the electronic structure of the active site. Due to its
cationic nature, this same R60 side chain may also help form a pre-binding
site for the Cys substrate, as well as potentially gate access to
the Fe center. On the opposite side of the active site, another access
tunnel can be identified that may serve to provide O2 (or
analogues thereof) access to the Fe center.

Interior view of the
QM/MM-optimized structure of (OH–/Cys)-Fe(III)CDO,
with the protein surface (as determined by PyMOL)
shown. For clarity, only atoms that were included in the QM region
are shown.

Another Fe-dependent
enzyme with a coordination environment similar
to that of Cys-bound Fe-CDO is superoxide reductase (SOR). This enzyme
features a 4His1Cys ligand set at the Fe center, with a sixth, monoanionic
ligand (a glutamate residue) also binding when the metal center is
in the +3 oxidation state. The addition of a 45-fold molar excess
of azide over Fe(III)SOR results in the complete conversion to an
azide-bound enzyme complex, where azide binds trans to the cysteine
sulfur at the position originally occupied by the glutamate ligand.
EPR studies revealed that this complex possesses an S = 5/2 ground state, as opposed to the S = 1/2 ground state observed for
the (N3–/Cys)-Fe(III)CDO complex described
above. However, a model complex of SOR
with the azide and sulfur ligands arranged in a cis configuration
features essentially the same binding mode of the azide (bent, and
positioned directly over the Fe–S bond), other key geometric
parameters (e.g., a relatively short Fe–S bond), and spin ground
state (S = 1/2) as our computational
model for (N3–/Cys)-Fe(III)CDO.

The present investigation was motivated,
in part, by the fact that
three separate studies have recently provided evidence for the formation
of a superoxo-Fe(III) intermediate in the catalytic cycle. In one
study this intermediate was described as an S = 3
species [featuring a high-spin Fe(III) ion coupled ferromagnetically
to a superoxide radical] on the basis of parallel-mode EPR data obtained
for a complex that was prepared by reacting superoxide with Cys-bound
Fe(III)-CDO. However, the authors pointed out that their data could
also be fit with parameters describing a species with an S = 2 ground state. The second study
predicted an S = 2 ground state [formally due to
ferromagnetic coupling between an intermediate spin Fe(III) ion and
a superoxide radical] on the basis of a spectroscopically validated
computational methodology. Finally, a
purely computational, QM/MM study suggested that this adduct is best
described as possessing an S = 1 ground state (with
a low-spin Fe(III) center coupled ferromagnetically to a superoxide
radical); however, this prediction is
inconsistent with the EPR signal displayed by the species obtained
by reacting superoxide with Cys-bound Fe(III)-CDO.

The (N3–)-Fe(III)CDO
and (N3–/Cys)-Fe(III)CDO species investigated
in this
work have provided us with a valuable opportunity to evaluate further
a computational methodology suitable for modeling the putative (superoxo/Cys)-Fe(III)CDO
intermediate, and thus to distinguish between the three proposed spin
states for this species. Importantly, by using the same computational
methodology we have successfully employed in previous investigations
of (NO/Cys)-Fe(II)CDO and (CN–/Cys)-Fe(III)CDO, the spin ground states
and key spectroscopic signatures of both the (N3–)-Fe(III)CDO and (N3–/Cys)-Fe(III)CDO
species could be adequately reproduced. Hence, we are quite confident
that our computational approach is capable of successfully predicting
key geometric and electronic structures that are relevant to the CDO
catalytic cycle. As such, favor is lent toward the involvement of
an S = 2 superoxo-Fe(III) intermediate in this reaction
mechanism, as we previously proposed.

In our preferred CDO mechanism, the initial step in the reaction
of Fe(II)CDO with O2 is to generate a (superoxo/Cys)-Fe(III)CDO
adduct. In the next step (Scheme ), a bond
forms between the SCys and distal superoxo oxygen, yielding
a four-membered Fe–O–O–S ring. Our present computational
investigation of the (H2O/Cys)- and five-coordinate Cys-Fe(III)CDO
adducts suggests that sulfur can act as a redox non-innocent ligand
in the absence of a sixth, strongly donating ligand at the metal center.
This finding lends indirect support for our previously proposed mechanism
in which the accumulation of radical character on sulfur was invoked
to avoid the formation of a Fe(IV)-oxo species, and to direct the
attack of the putative “oxyl-Fe(III)” intermediate toward
the SCys atom.

Partial
Mechanism for Oxidation of Cys by CDO, Where the Formation
of the First S–O Bond Is Shown
Accumulation of partial SCys radical character
may also
play an important role in directing the formation of the first S–O
bond in the CDO catalytic cycle. A resonance structure of our proposed
Fe(III)-superoxo intermediate exists that features a reduced Fe(II)
ion linked to a cysteine radical cation (see Scheme ). With unpaired spin density located on both the sulfur and
the superoxide moiety, the formation of the first S–O bond
could occur through a radical recombination mechanism. Such a thiolate-based
stabilization of an Fe(III)-superoxo species [by imposing partial
Fe(II)-superoxo character] has previously been invoked in the catalytic
mechanism of isopenicillin-N-synthase. While our previous computational investigation of viable intermediates
in the CDO catalytic cycle revealed that the Fe(III)-superoxo intermediate
possesses little unpaired spin density on the SCys atom,
indicating that the Fe(II)/cysteine radical cation resonance structure
is a relatively minor contributor, the accumulation of unpaired spin
density on SCys is expected to become more pronounced on
approaching the transition state for S–O bond formation.

Conclusions
Fe(III)CDO is capable of binding azide
in the absence of pre-bound
Cys substrate to produce a five- or six-coordinate complex featuring
one additional anionic ligand (hydroxide). The addition of Cys to
a solution containing Fe(III)CDO results in the formation of a six-coordinate
complex with a hydroxide ion completing the ligand sphere. The presence
of hydroxide makes the Fe(III) ion coordinatively saturated, disfavoring
the binding of an alternative exogenous ligand. Consequently, azide
occupies a position within the active site (likely near the guanidyl
group of R60) without displacing the hydroxide ligand, resulting in
a slightly perturbed electronic structure of the active site. However,
in a small subset of active sites, azide does bind directly to the
iron center, which results in the formation of an S = 1/2 species possessing a low-spin Fe(III)
ion. Because the spin ground states and key spectroscopic features
of the species investigated in this work could be adequately reproduced
by using the same computational methodology we have previously employed
to evaluate key steps in the CDO catalytic cycle, our results lend
further support to the involvement of an S = 2 superoxo-Fe(III)CDO
intermediate featuring an intermediate spin Fe(III) ion.

Supporting Information Available
Table of geometric
parameters
for converged QM/MM models, EPR parameters obtained from fits of experimental
and computationally predicted spectra, results from iterative Gaussian
deconvolutions of Abs and MCD spectra obtained for (N3–)-, (Cys)-, and (N3–/Cys)-Fe(III)CDO,
and Cartesian coordinates for all active-site atoms derived from the
QM/MM-optimized models. This material is available free of charge
via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500767x_si_001.pdf

This work was
supported by the National Institutes of Health grant GM 64631 (T.C.B.),
the National Science Foundation grant MCB-0843239 (B.G.F.), and the
National Science Foundation grant CHE-0840494 (computational resources).

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
E.J.B. thanks the Fox laboratory for providing
extensive access
to their facilities.

Abbreviations
CDOcysteine dioxygenase

Cyscysteine

Secselenocysteine

EPRelectron paramagnetic
resonance

MCDmagnetic
circular dichroism

Abselectronic absorption

DFTdensity functional theory

RTroom temperature

LTlow temperature

QM/MMquantum mechanics/molecular mechanics

MOmolecular orbital

EDDMelectron density difference
map

INDO/S-CIintermediate
neglect of differential overlap/singles-configuration interaction

