The bleomycins
[BLMs (Figure )] make up a family of glycopeptide-derived
antitumor
agents employed clinically for the treatment of several types of cancer.− Their antitumor activity has been attributed to their well-characterized
sequence selective cleavage of DNA.− Although they mediate efficient single-strand
DNA cleavage, their antitumor activity has been thought to be due
to their ability to mediate specific double-strand DNA cleavage,, and a recent study has suggested that the nature of double-strand
cleavage may be a strong function of the affinity of BLM for specific
DNAs.

Structure of bleomycin A5.

Cytidine methylation is a key
factor in epigenetic gene regulation
as well as carcinogenesis. Characterized by its dynamic nature, the DNA methylation pattern is altered in cancer
cells and marked by overall hypomethylation,− although local CpG-cytidine hypermethylation has
been documented in a number of cancers,, especially
with regard to CpG islands in tumor suppressor regions.− Given the observed effect of DNA structure on double-strand cleavage
by BLM, and earlier reports suggesting
an effect of methylation on DNA cleavage by BLM,, it seemed of interest to determine whether DNA methylation might
also affect double-strand cleavage and potentially provide an additional
mechanism for selective cleavage of DNA in tumor cells.

In recent
studies from our laboratory, the use of hairpin DNAs
that bound strongly to BLM A5 revealed enhanced double-strand
cleavage,, which occurred both by the previously reported
coupled double-strand cleavage mechanism, and by a novel
mechanism involving two closely spaced independent single-strand breaks. In this study, we employ three strongly bound
hairpin DNAs (Figure ) to study the effects
of DNA methylation on their interaction with Fe(II)·BLM A5. We also demonstrate the probable molecular basis for diminished
binding and cleavage of methylated DNAs by Fe(II)·BLM.

Three 64-nucleotide
hairpin DNAs, their methylated counterparts,
and a 16-nucleotide profluorescent hairpin DNA employed in a competition assay with the 64-nucleotide
hairpin DNAs. The blue base is 5-methylcytidine.

Materials and Methods
T4 polynucleotide kinase was purchased
from New England Biolabs.
Recombinant terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase was obtained from
Roche Applied Science. Radiolabeled nucleotides, [γ-32P]ATP and [α-32P]cordycepin, were purchased from
PerkinElmer Life Sciences. Fe(NH4)2(SO4)2·6H2O and Chelex 100 were obtained from
Sigma-Aldrich. Bleomycin A5 was obtained as an outdated
clinical sample. All synthetic oligonucleotides, including the hairpin
DNAs, were purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies, Inc.

5′-
and 3′-32P End Labeling and Purification
of Hairpin DNAs
The hairpin
DNAs were 32P-end-labeled using a combination of [γ-32P]ATP with T4 polynucleotide kinase and [α-32P]cordycepin with terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase for labeling
at the 5′- and 3′-ends, respectively. Ten picomoles
of 64-nucleotide hairpin DNAs was 5′-32P-end-labeled
by incubation with 20 units of T4 polynucleotide kinase and 0.06 mCi
of [γ-32P]ATP [specific activity of 6000 Ci (222
TBq)/mmol] in 50 μL (total volume) of 70 mM Tris-HCl buffer
(pH 7.6) containing 10 mM MgCl2 and 5 mM DTT. The reaction
mixture was incubated at 37 °C for 1 h followed by purification
of the labeled DNAs by 16% polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis at 1800
V for 2.5 h. The 3′-32P end labeling was conducted
by incubating 10 pmol of hairpin DNA with 20 units of terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase
and 0.06 mCi of [α-32P]cordycepin [specific activity
of 6000 Ci (222 TBq)/mmol] in 50 μL (total volume) of 70 mM
Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.6) containing 10 mM MgCl2, 10 mM
CoCl2, and 5 mM DTT. The reaction mixture was incubated
at 37 °C for 1 h followed by purification of DNA by 16% polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis at 1800 V for 2.5 h.

Double-Strand DNA Cleavage
of 5′- and 3′-32P-End-Labeled Hairpin DNAs
by Bleomycin A5
Bleomycin-mediated
cleavage of 5′-
and 3′-32P-end-labeled hairpin DNAs was performed
by incubating the hairpin DNA (∼30000 cpm) with 5 μM
Fe2+ and 5 μM bleomycin A5 at 25 °C
for 30 min in 10 mM sodium cacodylate (pH 7.0, total volume of 5 μL)
containing 10 μL of 2 mM MgCl2. Two microliters of
native gel loading buffer containing 0.25% bromophenol blue, 0.25%
xylene cyanol, and 40% d-sucrose was added to the reaction
mixture, which was separated on a 20% native polyacrylamide gel (200
V, 16 h, 4 °C). Double-strand cleavage sites were identified
by visualizing comigrating bands using a phosphorimager.

Maxam–Gilbert
Sequencing Reaction
Ten microliters
of 5′- and 3′-32P-end-labeled DNAs (∼50000
cpm) was incubated with
25 μL of formic acid at 25 °C for 5 min. The reaction mixtures
were combined with 200 μL of 0.3 M sodium acetate, containing
0.1 mM EDTA, and 25 μg/mL Escherichia coli tRNA.
The resulting solutions were immediately mixed with 750 μL of
ethanol to precipitate the DNAs. The DNA pellets were washed twice
with 70% ethanol and then resuspended in 75 μL of 10% piperidine.
The reaction mixtures were incubated at 90 °C for 30 min and
then chilled on ice. The cooled supernatants were concentrated under
diminished pressure. The DNA pellets were washed with small amounts
of water to remove residual piperidine and mixed with denaturing loading
buffer containing 80% formamide, 2 mM EDTA, 1% bromophenol blue, and
1% xylene cyanol. The combined solutions were heated at 90 °C
for 10 min and used as the sequencing lanes to compare 5′-
and 3′-32P-end-labeled DNAs on denaturing polyacrylamide
gels.

Sequence Selective Cleavage of Radiolabeled Hairpin DNA by BLM
A5
A 5′-32P-end-labeled hairpin
DNA (∼50000 cpm) was incubated with 5 or 10 μM Fe(II)·BLM
A5 in a 5 μL reaction mixture containing 10 mM sodium
cacodylate buffer (pH 7.0) for 30 min. Five microliters of denaturing
gel loading buffer containing 98% formamide, 2 mM EDTA, 0.25% (w/v)
bromophenol blue, and 0.25% (w/v) xylene cyanol was added to the reaction
mixture. The resulting solution was heated at 90 °C for 10 min
and then chilled on ice. Five microliters of each sample was loaded
onto a denaturing gel (16% polyacrylamide and 7 M urea) along with
2 μL of 5′- and 3′-32P-end-labeled
Maxam–Gilbert sequencing lanes to determine the sequences of
the cleavage sites. The gel was run at 50 W for 2.5 h. The gels were
visualized using a phosphorimager.

Fluorescence Competition
Analysis of Binding of BLM to Hairpin
DNAs
The 64-nucleotide hairpin DNAs (5 μM) were incubated
with 5 μM bleomycin A5 in a 10 mM sodium cacodylate
buffer solution for 20 min at room temperature (25 °C). The resulting
solution was mixed with 5 μM 16-nucleotide hairpin DNA having
Cf in lieu of cytidine15 (hairpin DNA-Cf15)
and incubated at room temperature for 1 min. Freshly prepared Fe(NH4)2(SO4)2 was added to the
solution to a final concentration of 1 μM. The final solution
contained 16-nucleotide hairpin DNA, 64-nucleotide hairpin DNA, bleomycin
A5, and Fe2+, all at concentrations of 1 μM.
The combined solution was maintained at room temperature for 30 min.
The same volume of buffer solution was added to the control samples
without Fe2+ or 64-nucleotide hairpin DNA. The fluorescence
emission was measured at 25 °C. The samples were excited at 310
nm, and the emission signal was recorded from 400 to 550 nm using
an excitation slit width of 10 nm and an emission slit width of 10
nm.

Results
DNA Methylation Results in Reduced Cleavage
by Fe·BLM
Comparison of the Fe(II)·BLM A5-induced cleavage
of 5′-32P-radiolabeled DNAs 7 and 10 (Figure ) with their methylated
counterparts is shown in Figure  under conditions
of limited DNA cleavage, as evidenced by the persistence of uncleaved
DNA in each lane. As is readily apparent, a decrease in the intensity
of the cleavage bands was observed for both methylated DNAs. At 5
μM Fe(II)·BLM A5, cytidine methylation reduced
overall cleavage of DNA 7 from 36 to 18%, while for DNA 10, methylation of a single cytidine (C13) reduced
the cleavage from 28 to 16%. A comparable effect was noted for hairpin
DNA 11 [from 32 to 17% (Figure S1 of the )]. The statistical significance
of the diminution in cleavage was verified by conducting the cleavage
reactions in replicate experiments, and the results are summarized
in Table , which indicates an ∼2-fold
reduction in cleavage for each. Interestingly, while all of the Fe·BLM
cleavage bands for DNA 7 appeared to be diminished upon
methylation of cytidines at four positions (cf. panels A and B of
Figure ), cleavage at sites more distant from
the sites of methylation (e.g., A9 and C17)
seemed to diminish less. This effect was documented more directly
by recording the intensity of cleavage at each position from A9 through C17 following cleavage with 10 μM
Fe(II)·BLM A5. As shown in Figure A, methylation caused a decrease in total DNA cleavage, largely
as a result of diminished cleavage at the sites of the methylated
cytidines. Analysis of cleavage at the same sites following treatment
with 5 μM Fe(II)·BLM A5 revealed suppressed
cleavage essentially at all sites (Figure B).

Percentage of DNA Cleavage of Hairpin
DNAs
hairpin DNA	percent cleavage
(%)	
DNA 7	35 ± 3	
DNA 7-4Me	16 ± 2	
DNA 10	26 ± 4	
DNA 10-Me	16 ± 3	
DNA 11	33 ± 3	
DNA 11-5Me	15 ± 4	
DNA 9	20 ± 1	
DNA 9-2dU	27 ± 2	
The percent cleavage
(%) for 5 μM
Fe·bleomycin treatment was calculated as the ratio of the intensity
of cleavage bands to the overall intensity of the DNA hairpin loaded
in each well of a denaturing polyacrylamide gel.

(A) Sequence selective cleavage of DNA 7 by BLM A5: lane 1, DNA 7 alone;
lane 2, 5 μM Fe(II)·BLM
A5; lane 3, 10 μM Fe(II)·BLM A5;
lane 4, G+A lane. (B) Sequence selective cleavage of DNA 7-4Me by BLM A5: lane 1, DNA 7-4Me alone; lane
2, 5 μM Fe(II)·BLM A5; lane 3, 10 μM Fe(II)·BLM
A5; lane 4, G+A lane. (C) Sequence selective cleavage of
DNA 10: lane 1, DNA 10 alone; lane 2, 5
μM Fe(II)·BLM A5; lane 3, 10 μM Fe(II)·BLM
A5; lane 4, G+A lane. (D) Sequence selective cleavage of
DNA 10-Me: lane 1, DNA 10-Me alone; lane
2, 5 μM Fe(II)·BLM A5; lane 3, 10 μM Fe(II)·BLM
A5; lane 4, G+A lane. The numbers at the bottom of lanes
2 represent the total percent cleavages of the DNAs in those lanes.

Percent DNA cleavage of DNA 7 and
DNA 7-4Me at nucleotide positions A9–C17 following
treatment with (A) 10 μM Fe(II)·BLM A5 or (B)
5 μM Fe(II)·BLM A5.

Characterization of Double-Strand Cleavage of DNAs
As summarized
in Figure  on the basis of
results from four laboratories,,,,− the double-strand cleavage of DNA involves initial abstraction of
a C-4′ H atom from a DNA sugar, leading to an initially formed
C-4′ deoxyribose radical.,,− That intermediate can partition to form either of
two sets of products, one of which leads to a C-4′ hydroxyapurinic
acid without immediate strand scission (Figure , product I),− although this species is alkali labile and can undergo subsequent
strand scission., The second set of products results
in frank strand scission (Figure , product
II).−, For the second set of products,
it has been shown that a coupled double-strand cleavage can occur
at a site on the strand opposite the initial strand break. Again,
two products can form: the appearance of a C-4′ hydroxyapurinic
acid on the second leads to product III (Figure ) without the direct formation of a double-strand break, while frank
strand scission leads to a double-strand break (Figure , product IV). Because double-strand breaks of type IV have
been observed under conditions of single-hit kinetics, it is believed that they result from reactivation of the
same DNA-bound bleomycin that induced the initial lesion on the first
strand. In fact, such double-strand breaks afford well-defined double-strand
cleavage patterns with regard to sequence selectivity (the first cleavage
almost always occurs at a GPy sequence) and the relative position
of the second cleavage (which generally affords a duplex with a blunt
end or single-base 5′-extension).

Mechanisms
of bleomycin-induced double-strand DNA cleavage. Activated
Fe·BLM abstracts a H atom from the C-4′ position of deoxyribose
at the primary site (typically 5′-G-Py-B-3′ of one strand
of the hairpin DNA, where B is any nucleobase) producing either an
AP (apyrimidinic/apurinic) site (I) or a single-strand break terminating
with a 3′-phosphoroglycolate (II) from the initially formed
C-4′ deoxyribose radical intermediate shown in brackets. While
the AP site does not undergo further reaction, strand break II is
a potential target for a secondary bleomycin cleavage on the opposing
strand of the hairpin DNA. The secondary attack of (re)activated bleomycin,
by abstracting the C-4′ H atom from the secondary site (5′-B-Pu-C-3′
of the bottom strand of the hairpin DNA), affords either a strand
break with a 5′-phosphate and 3′-phosphoroglycolate
or an AP site. The final products are either a double-strand break
with 5′-phosphate and 3′-phosphoroglycolate termini
(IV) or a strand break at the primary site accompanied by an AP site
at the secondary site (III), which upon treatment with mild base (e.g., n-butylamine) produces a double-strand cleavage product.

We have recently analyzed the
nature of double-strand cleavage
of 10 hairpin DNAs strongly bound by bleomycin. While coupled double-strand cleavage was also noted for
these hairpin DNAs, the majority of the observed double-strand breaks
resulted from two independent breaks; these could be distinguished
from the coupled double-strand breaks by analysis of products of type
III (Figure ) and also generally exhibited
sequence selectivity different from those found for coupled double-strand
breaks.

The double-strand cleavage
of hairpin DNA 11 was conducted
as described previously by treating the
alternatively 5′- and 3′-32P-end-labeled
hairpin DNA with Fe·BLM A5 and then analyzing the
products on a nondenaturing polyacrylamide gel (Figure A). The comigrating bands in lanes 2 and 3 were recovered
from the gel, and each was analyzed further on a sequencing gel (Figure B) to identify the four sites of double-strand cleavage.
Additional analysis of the DNAs in bands 2a and 3a of the nondenaturing
gel permitted differentiation of the coupled double-strand cleavage
events (A12/C52 and C16/C48) from those double-strand cleavages that had resulted from closely
spaced but independent single-strand cleavage events (T10/A55 and C14/C50). A summary of
the cleavage sites is shown in Figure , along
with the previously determined patterns for DNAs 7 and 10, the latter of which
involved double-strand cleavage at five and three sites, respectively.
Of these 12 total sites, seven involved coupled double-strand cleavage
while five resulted from closely spaced but independent cleavage events.

(A) Native
gel electrophoresis of double-strand cleavage products
of 5′-32P-end-labeled (lane 2) and 3′-32P-end-labeled (lane 3) 64-nucleotide hairpin DNA 11 by bleomycin A5: lane 1, 5′-32P-end-labeled
DNA alone; lane 2, 5 μM Fe(II)·BLM A5; lane
3, 5 μM Fe(II)·BLM A5; lane 4, 3′-32P-end-labeled DNA alone. (B) The left panel shows sequencing
gel analysis of bleomycin-induced double-strand cleavage sites of
5′-32P-end-labeled DNA 11 (lanes 1–6): lane 1, Maxam–Gilbert G+A sequencing
marker of 5′-32P-end-labeled DNA 11; lane 2, band 2a; lane 3, band 2b; lane 4, band 2c; lane 5, band
2d; lane 6, band 2e. The right panel shows sequencing gel analysis
of bleomycin-induced double-strand cleavage sites of 3′-32P-end-labeled DNA 11 (lanes 1–6): lane
1, Maxam–Gilbert G+A sequencing marker of 3′-32P-end-labeled DNA 11; lane 2, band 3a; lane 3, band
3b; lane 4, band 3c; lane 5, band 3d; lane 6, band 3e.

Summary of Fe·bleomycin-induced double-strand cleavage
sites
on DNAs 7, 10, and 11. Orange
bases indicate the randomized region of the original hairpin DNA library.
Arrows of the same shape and color indicate paired cleavages. Black
arrows correspond to coupled double-strand cleavage events, whereas
red arrows indicate noncoupled double-strand cleavage events, resulting
from two independent single-strand cleavages on opposite strands.
Nucleotides colored red indicate primary sites of coupled double-strand
DNA cleavage.

Double-Strand Cleavage
of Methylated DNAs
The effect
of methylation on double-strand DNA cleavage was assessed initially
using hairpin DNA 10, which was methylated at a single
site (C13) to afford DNA 10-Me. As shown in
Figure  for an experiment conducted under
single-hit conditions [1 min treatment with 5 μM Fe(II)·BLM
A5], methylation of this DNA at C13 resulted
in a significant reduction in the overall extent of double-strand
cleavage of the hairpin DNA (20 to 11% overall double-strand cleavage
for both end-labeled hairpin DNAs). There was also a large decrease
in cleavage at the double-strand cleavage site closest to the site
of methylation (C13/G52, 10 to 2% for the 5′-end-labeled
DNA and 9 to 2% for the 3′-end-labeled DNA) with a large increase
in double-strand cleavage at the site most distant from the site of
methylation (T10/A55, 2 to 6% for both end-labeled
DNAs). Interestingly, when double-strand cleavage of DNAs 10 and 10-Me was analyzed under more forcing conditions
[30 min treatment with 5 μM Fe(II)·BLM A5] intended
to maximize double-strand cleavage, double-strand cleavage of DNA 10-Me was also approximately one-half of that obtained using
DNA 10, and the relative intensities of double-strand
cleavage were also shifted as in Figure  (Figure
S2 of the ). In this
case, the large increase in cleavage at site C13/G52 was counterbalanced by a relative decrease in cleavage at
site C11/C53 as well as T10/A55.

(A) Native polyacrylamide gel showing bands resulting from double-strand
cleavage of 5′-32P-end-labeled (lanes 1 and 3) and
3′-32P-end-labeled (lanes 2 and 4) 64-nucleotide
hairpin DNA 10 (lanes 1 and 2) and DNA 10-Me (lanes 3 and 4) by 5 μM Fe(II)·BLM A5 for
1 min. (B) Histogram illustrating a shift of double-strand DNA cleavage
intensity from the C13/G52 site to the neighboring
sites upon methylation of C13.

Also studied was the effect of adding more methylated cytidines
to hairpin DNA 10 at known sites of double-strand cleavage.
This included a hairpin DNA containing 5-methylcytidine at positions
C13 and C53, and another containing 5-methylcytidine
at positions C11, C13, and C53. As
shown in Figure , under the same conditions
used to cleave DNA 10 and DNA 10-Me (Figure ), much less cleavage of DNA 10-2Me and DNA 10-3Me was observed. As might have been anticipated
on the basis of the results in Figure , the
additional methylated cytidines further reduced the binding of Fe·BLM
to the DNAs (Table ), which undoubtedly contributed
to the smaller amount of cleavage seen in Figure .

Inhibition of Fluorescence Emission
by Hairpin DNAs
hairpin DNA	binding specificity
(%)	
DNA 7	97 ± 1	
DNA 7-4Me	91 ± 2	
DNA 7-5Me	64 ± 4	
DNA 9	90 ± 2	
DNA 9-2dU	95 ± 1	
DNA 10	85 ± 1	
DNA 10-Me	20 ± 3	
DNA 10-2Me	14 ± 2	
DNA 10-3Me	11 ± 1	
DNA 11	97 ± 1	
DNA 11-5Me	13 ± 3	
The binding specificity
was calculated
as the decrease in fluorescence intensity at the maximal emission
wavelength (455 nm) compared to the reaction having no competitor
(0%) and the reaction mixture without Fe2+ (100%).

(A) Native polyacrylamide gel showing bands
resulting from double-strand
cleavage of 5′-32P-end-labeled (lanes 1 and 3) and
3′-32P-end-labeled (lanes 2 and 4) 64-nucleotide
hairpin DNA 10-2Me (lanes 1 and 2) and DNA 10-3Me (lanes 3 and 4) by 5 μM Fe(II)·BLM A5 for 1 min. (B) Histogram illustrating the overall decrease
in double-strand DNA cleavage intensity of C13/G52 and C11/G53 sites upon methylation of C53 (DNA 10-2Me) and C11 and C53 (DNA 10-3Me) in addition to C13.

Binding of Methylated Hairpin DNAs by Fe·BLM
In
an effort to understand the basis for the diminished and altered cleavage
of DNA following methylation, we employed a competition assay developed
previously to define the relative binding affinities of Fe·BLM
for hairpin DNAs. The assay is based
on the Fe·bleomycin-induced cleavage of a profluorescent 16-nucleotide
hairpin DNA that is cleaved stoichiometrically by Fe·BLM and
contains a fluorescent nucleotide (Figure ) at the site of cleavage. The intact
16-nucleotide DNA does not fluoresce upon excitation because of quenching
by nucleotides within the hairpin. However, when the DNA is cleaved
by Fe·BLM, the fluorescent nucleobase is released and fluoresces
upon being excited at 310 nm. Admixture
of an equivalent of a strongly bound 64-nucleotide hairpin DNA to
the reaction mixture inhibits binding to the 16-nucleotide DNA and
results in a proportionate decrease in fluorescence. As shown in Figure B and Table , hairpin DNA 10-Me was much less inhibitory with respect to fluorophore
release (20%) than DNA 10 (85%) even though DNA 10-Me contains only a single methylated cytidine. Additional
methylation of C53 (DNA 10-2Me) or of C11 and C53 (DNA 10-3Me), both of which are at sites of DNA cleavage (Figure ), further diminished DNA binding (Figure S3 of
the  and Table ) in parallel with the observed diminution of DNA
cleavage (Figure ). Likewise, methylation
of DNA 11 (at five cytidines) also significantly reduced
its ability to block the Fe·BLM-mediated degradation of the 16-nucleotide
reporter DNA (Figure C and Table ).

Fluorescence emission spectra obtained following treatment
of the
profluorescent 16-nucleotide hairpin DNA Cf15 (Figure ) with Fe(II)·BLM in the presence or absence
of 1 equiv of a 64-nucleotide hairpin DNA. (A) Emission spectra obtained
following treatment of 1 μM 16-nucleotide hairpin DNA with 1
μM Fe(II)·BLM A5 with or without 1 μM
DNA 7 or DNA 7-4Me. The emission of 1 μM
16-nucleotide hairpin DNA following treatment with metal-free BLM
A5 was used as a control. The emission spectra were obtained
following excitation at 310 nm. (B) Emission spectra obtained following
treatment of 1 μM 16-nucleotide hairpin DNA with 1 μM
Fe(II)·BLM A5 with or without 1 μM DNA 10 or DNA 10-Me. The emission of 1 μM 16-nucleotide
hairpin DNA following treatment with metal-free BLM A5 was
used as a control. (C) Emission spectra obtained following treatment
of 1 μM 16-nucleotide hairpin DNA with 1 μM Fe(II)·BLM
A5 with or without 1 μM DNA 11 or DNA 11-5Me. The emission of 1 μM 16-nucleotide
hairpin DNA following treatment with metal-free BLM A5 was
used as a control.

In comparison, DNAs 7 and 7-4Me both
substantially inhibited cleavage of the 16-nucleotide DNA. The difference
seemed likely to be due to the presence of the unmethylated 5′-GC17 and 5′-GT53 sequences in DNA 7-4Me, both of which are known primary sites of double-strand cleavage
in DNA 7 (Figure ). To test this hypothesis, we investigated a related
hairpin DNA in which cytidine17 was also methylated (DNA 7-5Me). As shown in Figure S4 of the  and Table , this did reduce
the ability of the hairpin DNA to compete with the profluorescent
16-nucleotide hairpin DNA (64% inhibition).

Structural Basis for Diminished
Binding and Cleavage of DNAs
Containing Methylated Cytidines
The introduction of a methyl
substituent at position 5 of cytidine has little effect on the pKa of the nucleobase and introduces the substituent into the major groove of DNA while
BLM conducts its chemistry in the minor groove.− Further, DNA
already contains a methyl substituent at the same position of each
deoxythymidine residue in DNA, and 5′-GT sites are often excellent
sites for cleavage by Fe·BLM. Nonetheless, this does not exclude
the possibility that in the absence of these methyl groups, (demethylated)
DNA might be a better substrate for cleavage by Fe·BLM. Accordingly,
we studied an analogue of hairpin DNA 9, which has two
5′-GT sequences and utilizes both as primary sites for Fe·BLM-mediated
double-strand cleavage. Both deoxythymidine
residues were replaced with deoxyuridine, and the modified DNA 9-2dU was employed as a substrate for Fe(II)·BLM.
As shown in Table , DNA 9-2dU was cleaved to a slightly greater extent (27%) than DNA 9 (20%), in parallel with its tighter binding by Fe(II)·BLM [95
vs 90% binding specificity (Figure S5 of the  and Table )].

To
better define the effect of the methyl groups normally found on dT
residues in DNA on Fe·BLM-mediated DNA cleavage, we also compared
the cleavage of DNA 9 and DNA 9-2dU at lower
temperatures, where Fe·BLM cleaves B-form DNA less quickly, presumably
reflecting the presence of a more compact DNA structure. As shown
in Figure , under these conditions, DNA 9-2dU was cleaved to a greater extent (2–3-fold) after
30 min than was DNA 9. Thus, methylation of DNA in the
major groove at deoxyuridine or deoxycytidine residues diminishes
both DNA binding and cleavage, the latter of which involves minor
groove chemistry.

(A) Time-dependent, sequence selective cleavage of 5′-32P-end-labeled DNA 9 by 5 μM Fe(II)·BLM
A5 at 0 °C: lane 1, 5 min; lane 2, 10 min; lane 3,
15 min; lane 4, 20 min; lane 5, 25 min; lane 6, 30 min; lane 7, G+A
lane. (B) Time-dependent,
sequence selective cleavage of 5′-32P-end-labeled
DNA 9-2dU by 5 μM Fe(II)·BLM A5 at 0 °C: lane 1, 5 min; lane 2, 10 min; lane 3, 15 min; lane
4, 20 min; lane 5, 25 min; lane 6, 30 min; lane 7, G+A lane. (C) Histogram
representing time-dependent enhanced cleavage of DNA 9-2dU.

Discussion
Methylated
DNAs as Substrates for Bleomycin Binding and Cleavage
Although
two early reports from our laboratory noted effects of
DNA methylation on DNA cleavage by bleomycin,, no systematic study of the effects of DNA methylation on DNA binding
or cleavage has been reported. Given the presence of thymidine (5′-deoxyuridine)
as one of the four canonical nucleobases in DNA, and the highly efficient
cleavage of many 5′-GT sequences in B-form DNA by Fe(II)·BLM,
a consideration of the possible effects of pyrimidine nucleobase methylation
might be considered illogical. Nonetheless, our recent focus on factors
that render some DNA structures amenable to high-affinity binding
by bleomycin under conditions where the drug is limiting, such as
in a therapeutic setting, suggested the need to consider the effects
of naturally occurring DNA modifications. DNA cytidine methylation
has been shown to affect nucleosome structure and gene expression and is altered in many cancers, again arguing
for the need to consider DNA methylation as one possible factor influencing
the action of bleomycin as a therapeutic agent.

In several recent
studies, we have provided evidence that suggests that DNAs having
a strong affinity for Fe·BLM are likely to be bound selectively
when numerous DNAs having varying affinities for Fe·BLM are targeted
by a limiting amount of the drug.,,,− Further, such DNAs undergo a newly recognized type of double-strand
DNA cleavage that could lead to the production of double-strand gaps
in duplex DNA and contribute to cell
killing. Given the demonstrated selective targeting of tumor cells
by BLM,− the creation of double-strand gaps in certain DNAs
within tumor cells may be relevant to the mechanism of action of BLM
as an antitumor agent. While there are numerous sites of DNA methylation
within the human genome in both normal and cancer cells, considering
the effect of DNA methylation in DNAs known to be bound strongly by
Fe·BLM in the absence of cytidine methylation may plausibly provide
additional insights into characteristics of DNAs that are the targets
responsible for tumor cell killing by bleomycin.

Effects of
DNA Methylation on Binding and Cleavage by Fe·BLM
For
the strongly bound hairpin DNAs utilized in this study, not
all cytidine methylations had the same impact on bleomycin binding.
Thus, methylation at a single position (C13) in DNA 10 substantially diminished binding of Fe(II)·BLM A5, and this effect was not greatly enhanced by the introduction
of additional methylation at C53 (Table ). This bis-methylated species (DNA 10-2Me) had
the same BLM binding specificity as DNA 11-5Me, containing
five methylated cytidines (Table ). In contrast,
the methylation at four sites in DNA 7 (DNA 7-4Me) had little effect on the binding specificity of that hairpin DNA,
in spite of the fact that DNA 7 and DNA 11 themselves exhibited identical affinities for Fe(II)·BLM A5 (Table ). The more substantial effect
of adding a fifth methyl group to DNA 7-4Me (affording
DNA 7-5Me) at a known site of double-strand DNA cleavage
[C17 (Figure S4 of the  and Table )] suggests that the site of methylation
is important to its effect on Fe·BLM binding.

The same
conclusion can be reached by considering the effects of DNA cytidine
methylation on Fe·BLM-mediated DNA cleavage. As shown in Figure  and Figure S2 of the  for DNA 10, methylation at C13 results both in an overall diminution of DNA cleavage (Table ) and in a shift of the observed cleavage to sites
distant from the site of methylation. This implies that methylation
may shift the preferred site(s) of DNA binding. The same effect was
also apparent in Figures  and  upon methylation of DNA 7.

Molecular Basis
for the Effects of Major Groove Modifications
on the Binding and Cleavage of DNAs by Bleomycin
There are
numerous examples of the selective cleavage of BLM involving specific
sequences and higher-order structures in both DNA and RNA. When excess
Fe(II)·BLM is employed to cleave B-form DNAs, the major sites
of cleavage involve 5′-GT and 5′-GC sequences,,,− and 5′-GPy
sequences also figure prominently as primary sites of cleavage in
coupled double-strand DNA cleavage events. It is believed that DNA binding by Fe·BLM must precede cleavage,
limiting cleavage to a subset of those DNA and RNA sites bound effectively
by Fe·BLM, and having the bound Fe·BLM–DNA complex
in an orientation that permits abstraction of a H atom from C-4′
of (deoxy)ribose in the rate-limiting chemical step.

The minor groove of B-form DNA is relatively wide
and shallow at 5′-GT and 5′-GC sequences, and this feature
could plausibly favor binding to Fe·BLM. Consistent with this
thesis, Fe·BLM was found to cleave the duplex domain of a DNA
triplex at the 5′-duplex–triplex junction, a site suggested
by computational modeling to have a minor groove somewhat wider and
shallower than that in canonical B-form DNA. Likewise, the cleavage of tRNAs by Fe·BLM occurred disproportionately
at the junction between single- and double-strand regions, where the
minor groove-like structures might be expected to be relatively wide, and proved to be very sensitive to even small
changes in tRNA structure.

As noted
in Tables  and , the
methylation of cytidine nucleobases in the major groove
of hairpin DNAs 7, 10, and 11 led in each case to decreased Fe·BLM binding affinity and a
decrease in DNA cleavage products. Because the chemistry of DNA cleavage
involves initial abstraction of a H atom from the C-4′ position
of deoxyribose in the DNA minor groove, the diminution of DNA binding
and cleavage could not have resulted from a direct steric interaction
between the methyl group of 5-methylcytidine and Fe·BLM. However,
it seemed possible that introduction of one or more methyl groups
within the DNA major groove might result in steric interactions that
were relieved in part by compressing the DNA minor groove, thereby
affecting Fe·BLM binding and cleavage. It is also possible that
the reported decrease in flexibility that accompanies DNA methylation− may have an effect on DNA binding and cleavage by Fe·BLM.

If the introduction of methyl groups into the DNA major groove
was the source of diminished Fe·BLM-mediated cleavage in the
DNA minor groove, then the removal of such methyl groups might be
expected to increase Fe·BLM binding and cleavage. In fact, the
10 hairpin DNAs in the library studied to date all had thymidine residues
within the 8 bp region originally randomized to produce the library.
Thus, all of the DNA binding and cleavage studies have been conducted
in a background of (per)methylated major grooves. Hairpin DNA 9 has five thymidine residues, two of which (T13 and T16) are primary sites of double-strand cleavage
by Fe·BLM. Replacement of these
two thymidines with deoxyuridine residues resulted in an increased
binding affinity for Fe·BLM (Table )
and increased DNA cleavage products (Table ). While the differences were not large, when hairpin DNAs 9 and 9-2dU were compared at 0 °C, where
DNA cleavage by Fe·BLM is intrinsically slower, a 2–3-fold
increase in cleavage was noted for DNA 9-2dU after 25–30
min.

Modulation of minor groove width has been documented in
a number
of systems, including DNAs that are intrinsically bent, as a consequence of protein binding to the DNA
major groove,, and to accommodate the parallel
binding of hairpin polyamide DNA binders. The results presented here suggest that Fe·BLM is sufficiently
sensitive to the dimensions of the DNA minor groove to recognize changes
in geometry caused by the introduction of methyl groups into pyrimidine
nucleobases in the DNA major groove.

Conclusions
In
conclusion, we have demonstrated that cytidine methylation in
DNA reduces the overall cleavage mediated by Fe·bleomycin and
also changes the facility and pattern of double-strand DNA cleavage.
Cytidines, being part of highly conserved CpG sequences, have direct
involvement in epigenetic gene regulation, developmental processes,
and carcinogenesis., The nonmethylated and methylated
hairpin DNAs employed in this study have provided a model system that
has permitted the analysis of the effects of cytidine methylation
on single- and double-strand DNA breaks mediated by Fe·BLM. To
the extent that this study is predictive of events in more complex
cellular systems, it suggests that DNA methylation in normal cells
could protect them from the cytotoxic effects of the antitumor agent
bleomycin, while focusing the effects of the drug on the (undermethylated)
DNA in cancer cells. The dramatic decrease in binding of Fe·BLM
to the methylated cytidines in the proximity of BLM cleavage sites
in our model hairpin DNAs may plausibly contribute to the selective
action of BLM toward the DNA in tumors as compared with normal cells
in their response to treatment with bleomycin, especially given that
the extent of double-strand DNA cleavage, the putative lethal event
mediated by BLM, has recently been found to correlate with DNA binding
affinity.

Supporting Information Available
Experimental procedures for
the DNA radiolabeling, cleavage, and competition assay. This material
is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5010848_si_001.pdf

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

