Mammalian
thioredoxin reductase
(TR) is a pyridine nucleotide disulfide oxidoreductase that uses the
rare amino acid selenocysteine (Sec, U) in place of the more commonly
used amino acid cysteine (Cys) in its catalysis of the reduction of
its major target protein, thioredoxin (Trx), and a variety of small
molecule substrates.− The thioredoxin system, comprised of TR, Trx, and NADPH, is one
of the major antioxidant systems in mammalian cells.

The use of a selenium (Se) atom in place of a sulfur
(S) atom in
TR and other selenoenzymes is most likely due to important physicochemical
differences between the two residues and confers some biological advantage
to the organism containing the selenoenzyme. The physicochemical advantage
given to an enzyme that uses Sec instead of Cys is the subject of
ongoing debate in the field.− Most selenoenzymes studied to
date are oxidoreductases that are involved in thiol/disulfide exchange
reactions in which Sec replaces Cys. In such cases, the presence of
selenium in the form of a selenolate or selenosulfide can accelerate
the rate of the exchange reaction by being (i) a better nucleophile
than a thiolate, (ii) a better electrophile than a disulfide, (iii)
a better leaving group than a thiolate, or (iv) a more chemically
reactive species compared to sulfur in the form of a thiolate or disulfide
using a combination of all three of these factors.

Selenocysteine
participates in the reaction mechanism of TR in
two key thiol/disulfide exchange reactions as shown in Figure . First, the selenolate of Sec acts as the donor
of electrons to the substrate, the disulfide bond of Trx (Figure A), and second, as part of the selenosulfide bond
found in the C-terminus of the enzyme, selenium takes part in accepting
electrons from the N-terminal redox center of TR (Figure B). It is well-established that selenols and selenolates
are better nucleophiles than are thiols and thiolates,− and because Sec was first discovered in TR, the selenolate has been
the presumptive nucleophile for the initial attack on a substrate
disulfide bond in the TR mechanism. Experimental
evidence of this includes a large
decrease in reaction velocity when Sec is replaced by Cys,,, as well as recent crystallographic
data in which TR was crystallized in a mixed disulfide complex with
a mutant form of human Trx1 (hTrx1). In
this latter experiment, the C-terminal Cys497-Sec498 redox dyad was mutated to a Ser497-Cys498 dyad,
and this TR mutant was incubated with the C35S/C73S mutant of hTrx1.
The result was a mixed disulfide-bonded complex between Cys498 of
human TR (hTR) and Cys32 of hTrx1. This is strong evidence that Sec498
of hTR in the wild-type (WT) enzyme is the attacking nucleophile in
thiol/disulfide exchange reactions involving substrates such as the
one shown in Figure A.

Mechanistic roles of
Se in the TR reaction mechanism as a donor
or acceptor of electrons. In the TR reaction mechanism, electrons
flow from NADPH to the enzyme-bound flavin. The reduced flavin coenzyme
then reduces the N-terminal redox center, consisting of CysCT and CysIC (colored green). CysIC then attacks
the selenosulfide bond of the C-terminal Cys-Sec dyad, forming either
a mixed disulfide (path 1) or a mixed selenosulfide (path 2). CysCT then resolves the mixed disulfide/selenosulfide, re-forming
the N-terminal disulfide between CysCT and CysIC. For a complete description of the mechanism, please see ref (). Two equivalents of NADPH
are required to produce the active EH4 form. The EH4 form is the active form of the enzyme that reduces Trx as
shown by Williams and co-workers. (A)
Se donates electrons to Trx in an initial nucleophilic attack step.
The individual rate constant for this step is given as kNuc-Se. (B) Se can accelerate the thiol/disulfide
exchange step that occurs between the two reaction centers either
by acting as a good leaving group (arrow 1) or by acting as a good
electrophile (arrow 2). The individual rate constant for this step
is given as kex. Mutating Sec to Cys may
impair the enzyme’s ability to either donate or accept electrons
as discussed in the text.

After reducing its substrate, the C-terminal Cys-Sec dyad
of TR
becomes oxidized and forms an eight-membered ring structure (Figure B). This vicinal selenosulfide bond then undergoes
another thiol/disulfide exchange reaction with the N-terminal redox
center that is composed of an interchange Cys residue (CysIC) and a charge-transfer Cys (CysCT) residue that interacts
with the flavin coenzyme. As explained in the legend of Figure B, the thiolate of CysIC can attack either
the sulfur (path 1) or the selenium (path 2) of the selenosulfide
bond. Unlike the thiol/disulfide exchange step involving Trx, there
is no X-ray crystal structure of a trapped mixed disulfide intermediate
between the C-terminal redox center and the N-terminal redox center.
Attempts have been made to model this thiol/disulfide exchange step
in crystal structures of various high-Mr TR enzymes.− These studies are inconclusive because they show
that either path 1 or path 2 is a feasible route of attack depending on how the C-terminus is modeled into the active
site.

In our early work, we had argued for path 1 because of
the belief
that the selenolate of Sec would act as a superior leaving group in
this exchange reaction., Path 1 can thus be
described as a “Se as a leaving group” model. Later,
we began to favor path 2, which involves attack at the selenium of
the selenosulfide by CysIC, and this can be described as
the “Se as an electrophile” model. This model was supported
by experimental data that showed that the truncated TR, missing the
C-terminal tail, would only reduce highly electrophilic, small molecule
substrates, irrespective of whether they contained a low-pKa leaving group., This model
is also supported by recent theoretical and experimental studies that
show that attack at the selenium in a selenosulfide is highly favored
over attack at the sulfur in thiol/disulfide exchange reactions., The high electrophilicity of selenide relative to that of sulfide
has been recognized in the field of chemistry but is a largely unrecognized property in the biochemical literature.

In this report, we resolve the question of attack at Se or S in
a selenosulfide by performing Brønsted
analyses of synthetic, disulfide-containing substrates in which the
pKa of the leaving group thiol was varied
by changing the substituent at the para position
of the aromatic ring. In addition, we have constructed a mutant of
TR with either a single Sec residue or a single sulfhydryl group in
place of the Cys-Sec redox dyad in the C-terminal redox center. The
data from these mutants show that the second position of the C-terminal
redox dyad, occupied by a Sec residue, is responsible for both donating
electrons to Trx and accepting them (from CysIC, path 2)
in the thiol/disulfide exchange reaction that occurs between the N-
and C-terminal redox centers. The results reported here highlight
how the enzyme can use selenium to accelerate thiol/disulfide exchange
reactions.

Materials and Methods
Materials
NADPH was purchased from
AppliChem (Darmstadt,
Germany). Dithionitrobenzoic acid (DTNB), sodium selenite, and DEAE
resin were all obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Phenyl
Sepharose resin was from Pharmacia-Amersham Biosciences (Uppsala,
Sweden). Microcon Ultracel YM-50 ultrafiltration devices from Millipore
(Billerica, MA) were used for concentrating enzyme samples. Resin
for peptide synthesis (2-chlorotritylchloride) was from Novabiochem
(San Diego, CA). Fmoc amino acids were from Synbiosci Corp. (Livermore,
CA), except for Fmoc-homocysteine, which was from Bachem (King of
Prussia, PA). Primers for mTR3 mutants were from IDT (Coralville,
IA). Plasmid pTYB3 and restriction enzymes were from New England Biolabs
(Ipswich, MA). The production and purification of the recombinant
and semisynthetic enzymes used in this study have been previously
reported.,,,, The selenium content
of the wild-type (WT) semisynthetic enzyme is 91% as reported in ref (). Enzyme kinetic assays
were performed on a Cary50 UV–vis spectrophotometer (Walnut
Creek, CA), and all enzymatic assays were conducted at room temperature
unless otherwise noted. All other chemicals were from Fisher Scientific
or Acros Organics (Morris Plains, NJ). Aryl disulfides were prepared
by Watson Lees and others as described in refs (−).

Peptide Synthesis
All peptides in this study were synthesized
on 2-chlorotritylchloride resin using standard Fmoc chemistry as previously
detailed.,, Peptides were
cleaved from the resin using trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) containing
triisopropylsilane and water in a 96:2:2 ratio. The cleavage volume
was reduced by evaporation under a stream of N2 or air,
and the peptides were then precipitated in ice-cold diethyl ether.
Once dry, the peptides were redissolved in a 90:10 (v/v) water/acetonitrile
mixture and lyophilized. The freeze-dried peptide was then analyzed
by both MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry and analytical HPLC to judge the
composition and purity.

Peptides I–IV (Table ) containing a mixed aryl disulfide bond were constructed
by first synthesizing a peptide corresponding to the sequence of the
C-terminus of mTR, with the Sec residue replaced with a Gly residue
(H-PTVTGCGG-OH). This peptide and a para-substituted
aryl disulfide compound (1:3 molar ratio) were dissolved in 50 mM
potassium phosphate buffer (pH 8.0), and then the mixture was stirred
at room temperature for 16 h. Peptides I–IV were
isolated by HPLC, analyzed by MALDI-TOF MS, and lyophilized for later
use.

Activity of mTRΔ8 toward Mammalian
Peptide-Aryl Disulfide Substrates
Taken from ref ().

Taken from ref ().

Taken
from ref ().

Taken from ref (). The data reported here
for peptides V–VIII and DTNB was taken from ref ().

Production of Recombinant
and Semisynthetic Mutants of Mouse
Mitochondrial TR (mTR3)
A brief description of the nomenclature
used in Tables  and  (and throughout) is warranted here. The C-terminal redox-active
tetrapeptide of mTR3 contains the amino acids H-Gly-Cys-Sec-Gly-OH.
In Table , we abbreviate the main body of
the enzyme as mTR3 and the C-terminal tetrapeptide as GCUG. Thus,
the WT enzyme is abbreviated as mTR3-GCUG throughout this report.
Mutants are abbreviated as mTR3-aa1aa2aa3aa4 (using one-letter codes for the amino acids).
The production of both the full-length WT enzyme and semisynthetic
mutant enzymes by intein-mediated peptide ligation (IPL) has been
previously described. Briefly, mTR3 missing
the final three C-terminal residues (mTR3Δ3) is expressed as
an intein–chitin binding domain (CBD) fusion protein in Escherichia coli cells and then bound to chitin agarose
beads. Enzyme 1 was produced by cleaving a truncated
enzyme–intein fusion protein with 50 mM N-methylmercaptoacetamide
(NMA) in the presence of peptide H-Cys-Sec-Gly-OH to effect ligation
of the peptide to the thioester-tagged enzymes (Tables  and ). Enzyme 2, the Sec → Cys mutant of mTR, was produced
using standard recombinant methods previously reported by us. Cleavage of the truncated enzyme–intein
fusion protein with either l-cysteine or l-homocysteine
in the absence of NMA yielded enzymes 3 and 4. l-Homocysteine was generated from a solution of l-homocystine (25 mM) dissolved in 50 mM MOPS buffer (pH 7.0) with
150 mM NaCl and 75 mM DTT. The pH of the solution was adjusted to
10 to improve the homocysteine solubility and then reduced to 7.9
for optimal cleavage of the enzyme from the intein. After incubation
for 30 min, this cleavage buffer was added to the chitin resin-bound
enzyme, and the mixture was gently agitated overnight at 4 °C.
Enzyme 5 was produced by treating the mTR3Δ3–intein
fusion protein with 50 mM l-selenocysteine. l-Selenocysteine
was produced by reducing l-selenocystine with a 3-fold excess
of sodium borohydride in water for 15 min. The excess sodium borohydride
was quenched by addition of acetic acid, after which the solution
was brought to pH 7.0 by addition of 500 mM potassium phosphate buffer.
This solution was then immediately applied to the bound fusion protein
on the chitin resin.

Selenocystine Reductase
Activities
of WT mTR3 and Mutant Enzymes
enzyme	enzyme number	kcat (min–1)	Km (μM)	activity
at 91 μM [mol of NADPH min–1 (mol of enzyme)−1]	
mTR-GCUG	1	1403.6 ± 128	341.2 ± 59.0	295 ± 20	
mTR-GCCG	2	681.7 ± 91.5	791.3 ± 151.7	78 ± 3	
mTR-GC	3	NA	NA	12.5 ± 2	
mTR-GhC	4	NA	NA	8 ± 1	
mTR-GU	5	NA	NA	176 ± 4	
mTR-GGC	6	NA	NA	12 ± 1	
mTR-GGhC	7	NA	NA	16 ± 0.1	
mTR-GGU	8	194.5 ± 7	10.4 ± 2	124 ± 9	
mTR-G	9	NA	NA	1.4 ± 0.2	
mTRΔ8	10	NA	NA	0.6 ± 0.1	
Not applicable.

Trx-Reductase Activities
of WT mTR3
and Mutant Enzymes
enzyme	enzyme number	kcat (min–1)	Km (μM)	
mTR-GCUG	1	2220 ± 78	67.6 ± 6	
mTR-GCCG	2	4 ± 0.1	49 ± 3	
mTR-GC	3	ND	ND	
mTR-GhC	4	ND	ND	
mTR-GU	5	ND	ND	
mTR-GGC	6	ND	ND	
mTR-GGhC	7	4 ± 0.1	42 ± 3	
mTR-GGU	8	11.6 ± 0.3	8 ± 1	
mTR-G	9	ND	ND	
mTRΔ8	10	ND	ND	
Not detectable.

The mTR3Δ3 fusion protein
construct was modified to include
an additional codon (GGT, Gly) between mTR3 and the intein–CBD
fusion protein to give a mutant in which Cys1 was mutated
to Gly, resulting in an mTR3Δ2 fusion construct. This construct
was cleaved from the intein using either l-cysteine or l-homocysteine to generate enzymes 6 and 7. Enzyme 8 was produced by treating the mTRΔ2–intein
fusion protein with 50 mM selenocysteine using a procedure identical
to that described for enzyme 5.

Truncated mTR enzymes
missing either the final three C-terminal
amino acids or the final eight C-terminal amino acids, mTR3Δ3
or mTR3Δ8, respectively (enzyme 9 or 10, respectively), were produced as reported by us previously.,, All enzyme constructs were purified
using hydrophobic and anion exchange chromatography as described previously.,, After purified enzymes had been
concentrated using ultrafiltration, homodimeric enzyme concentrations
were determined by measuring the absorbance of flavin adenine dinucleotide
(FAD) at 460 nm using an extinction coefficient of 11.3 mM–1 cm–1 and a stoichiometric ratio of 2 mol of FAD/mol
of dimeric enzyme.

Enzymatic Assays of TR
The assays
for Trx, DTNB, and
selenocystine as substrates of TR have been previously described.,,,,, Assay conditions
for Trx with WT and mutant TRs consisted of 50 mM potassium phosphate
buffer (pH 7.0) with 1 mM EDTA, 150 μM NADPH, and 170 μM
bovine pancreatic insulin with varying concentrations of E.
coli Trx. DTNB assays were conducted with 100 mM potassium
phosphate buffer (pH 7.0), 10 mM EDTA, 200 μM NADPH, and various
concentrations of DTNB. Assays with selenocystine as the substrate
contained 500 mM potassium phosphate (pH 7.0), 10 mM EDTA, 200 μM
NADPH, and various concentrations of selenocystine.

Brønsted Analysis of Aryl Disulfide
Peptide Substrates
Assays with arylthiol peptide substrates I–IV in Table  contained 100
mM potassium phosphate (pH 7.0), 1 mM EDTA, 150 μM NADPH, and
various concentrations of peptide substrates (between 50 and 2000
μM). The assay was initiated by the addition of 96.4 nM mTR3Δ8.
The rate constant was calculated as the slope from a plot of the rate
of the reaction (micromolar per minute) versus substrate concentration.
A Brønsted plot was then constructed by
plotting the log of the rate constant versus the pKa of the thiol of the peptide substrate.

Results
and Discussion
Brønsted Analysis of Mixed Aryl-Peptide
Disulfide Substrates
Does Not Support the Leaving Group Model
To assess whether
our original Se as a leaving group model was correct for the thiol/disulfide
exchange reaction shown in Figure B, we assayed
enzyme mTR3Δ8, which lacks the C-terminal redox motif, for activity
using synthesized mixed aryl-peptide disulfide substrates. The aryl
group contained a para substituent that allowed for
variability of the arylthiol pKa in the
range of 5.7–6.6 (the atom labeled S2 in Figure ). The advantage of the experimental design shown
in Figure  is that it allows for the study
of the kinetics of the thiol/disulfide exchange step that occurs between
N- and C-terminal redox centers. We refer to this step simply as “the
exchange step” hereafter.

Strategy for isolating the exchange step
in the reaction mechanism.
Our previous studies as well as this study make use of a truncated
enzyme missing the C-terminal redox center in conjunction with small
molecule substrates to gain a better understanding of the exchange
step in the mechanism (represented by rate constant kex). Here, we have constructed peptides in which Sec2 is replaced with a para-substituted arylthiol
group that allows us to alter the pKa of
S2 of the product, to measure the dependency of kex on leaving group pKa.

The structure, pKa values, and specific
disulfide-reductase activities for these peptide substrates (I–IV) using mTR3Δ8 as the enzyme catalyst are
given in Table . We note that although we used the symbol kex to denote the individual rate constant of the exchange step
in Figure , we did not make this measurement.
Rather, we report a specific disulfide-reductase activity in Table , which is a composite of all of the individual
steps on the path needed to generate the product of the reaction.

However, a rate constant for each peptide substrate was determined
by plotting the rate of the steady-state reaction (micromolar per
minute) versus peptide concentration (micromolar). The slope of the
resulting plot yielded the rate constant k. A plot
of log k versus pKa (Brønsted plot) shows that the rate increases with
an increase in pKa as shown in Figure . The slope of the line in this plot is the Brønsted coefficient, β, and has a value of
1.1. A high, positive value of β such as this is interpreted
to mean either that there is positive charge on S2 in the
transition state or that there is a loss of negative charge on S2 in the transition state. These
data do not support the Se as a leaving group model. If the exchange
step in Figure B was dominated by the need
for a low-pKa leaving group, the Brønsted coefficient in Figure  would be large and negative (i.e., −1). The fact that the
experimentally determined value of β was large and positive
is interpreted by us to mean that the -S1–S2- bond becomes highly polarized in the transition state, with
electron density moving away from S2 toward S1 of the arylthiol peptide substrate. If the aryl-peptide disulfide
substrates are accepted as a reasonable model for the C-terminal redox
center of the enzyme, this would mean that in the native enzyme the
-S–Se- bond becomes polarized to allow the Se atom to accept
electrons more easily from CysIC during the exchange step.
Thus, the analysis of the Brønsted data
supports the Se as an electrophile model mentioned in the introductory
section. We note that our analysis assumes that dissociation of both
products that result from cleavage of the disulfide bond of the aryl-peptide
disulfide substrate is not too dissimilar from the dissociation of
the C-terminal redox center that is covalently bound to the enzyme.
As discussed in the next section, the concept of bond polarization
can explain why some disulfides can be used as substrates by the N-terminal
redox center and others cannot.

Brønsted plot
for the truncated enzyme
with peptide disulfide substrates. The plot shows that over this range
of pKa values, high disulfide reductase
activity is correlated with increase in thiol pKa with a Brønsted coefficient of
1.1 (slope). The position of peptide IV is indicated
by the arrow.

In the Absence of Se, Some
Disulfides Are Good Substrates for
the N-Terminal Redox Center: An Explanation
A good example
illustrating how bond polarization (electrophilicity) can accelerate
the rate of the exchange reaction between the N-terminal redox center
of mTR3Δ8 and disulfide substrates is the comparison of two symmetric, linear disulfides such as DTNB and cystine. The
disulfide bond of DTNB is highly polarized (activated) because of
the attachment of strong, symmetrical electron-withdrawing nitroaryl
groups and is turned over 11–14-fold faster than peptides IV and V (Table ). Symmetrical,
nonpolarized disulfides, such as cystine, are extremely poor substrates
for the truncated enzyme. For the purposes of direct comparison, the
activity of mTR3Δ8 toward 200 μM DTNB is 420 mol of NADPH
min–1 (mol of enzyme)−1, while
at the same concentration of cystine, the activity is 0.1 mol of NADPH
min–1 (mol of enzyme)−1, a 4200-fold
difference.

The Se as a leaving group model predicted that mTR3Δ8
would reduce peptide IV (highest pKa) with the slowest rate and peptide I (lowest
pKa) with the fastest rate. The opposite
result was found experimentally (Table ).
The mTR3 enzyme has nearly 24-fold higher activity with peptide IV than with peptide II, in which the arylthio
group has a pKa that is lower by 0.65
pK units. In fact, the activity with peptide IV was nearly as high as that with peptide V,
which contains the “native”, vicinal selenosulfide bond,
identical to that which is found in the C-terminal tail of the enzyme
(the result with V was originally reported in ref ()).

Upon closer inspection
of the structure of IV, we
realized that it can mimic the physicochemical properties of the native
peptide V in two ways. First, peptide IV can be held rigidly in the active site, just as is true for any
substrate that is efficiently turned over in a typical enzyme active
site. We suggest that the reason for peptide IV being
rigidly held is that the p-carboxylate group is the
“correct” distance from S2, allowing it to
form an ionic interaction with a basic group on the enzyme as shown
in Figure . The geometric similarity between IV and the native peptide is further explained in the legend
of Figure . Even though IV is
a linear disulfide, the ability to be held rigidly in the active site
would mimic the geometry of the eight-membered ring in the native
peptide. Second, the S1–S2 bond is polarized
because of the presence of the para-substituted aryl
group and would be further polarized if S1 were near a
positive charge in the active site, such as His463′, which acts as an acid/base catalyst during the enzymatic
reaction cycle. Both of these factors would help to make S2 electron deficient (make S2 electrophilic) and accelerate
the thiol/disulfide exchange reaction between the N-terminal redox
center and the substrate.

Peptide IV can be held rigidly
in the active site
and activated for the exchange reaction. The correct placement of
the peptide disulfide in IV relative to the N-terminal
active site could serve to “electrophilically activate”
the disulfide for attack by CysIC by positioning atom S1 of the disulfide near the positively charged imidazolium
group of His463′, inducing a strong polarization in the disulfide
bond of IV. This polarization would be made possible
by tight binding of the substrate in the active site because of an
interaction between the negatively charged phenylacetate group (colored
red) and a basic group on the enzyme (colored green). The basic group
on the enzyme has been predicted to be either Lys29 in the rat TR1
structure (equivalent to Lys29 in the mouse TR3 enzyme) or Arg351
in a model of the human TR–Trx complex structure (equivalent
to Arg342 in the mouse TR3 enzyme)., This suggests
how a similar exchange reaction is accelerated in the Cys ortholog.
For the sake of simplicity, we do not show the interaction between
FAD and NADP+.

We note that the distance between S2 of the disulfide
of IV and the carboxylate group (colored red) is similar
to the distance between the Se atom of the native peptide and the
C-terminal carboxylate group (five intervening carbon atoms). This
similarity could further explain why the disulfide of IV is turned over at a rate similar to that of the selenosulfide of
peptide V. This is also similar to the distance between
the carboxylate group of lipoic acid and the sulfur atom of the ring.
We have shown previously that lipoic acid is a surrogate substrate
for the C-terminal redox center. This
structural similarity of the various substrates is underscored by
the evolutionary relationship between TR and lipoamide dehydrogenase,
another pyridine nucleotide disulfide oxidoreductase that reduces
lipoyl-disulfide groups.

The correct active site geometry is not the only requirement
for
disulfide substrates to be turned over by mTR3Δ8 because peptide VII meets the same distance criteria between S2 and the C-terminal carboxylate as peptide IV (both
asymmetric, linear disulfides). However, IV is turned
over ∼4500-fold faster than VII by mTR3Δ8.
This large difference in rate acceleration can be explained if the
-S1–S2- disulfide bond of IV is highly polarized as we posit. If the S atom of VII is removed and replaced by Se as is the case for VIII, the rate increases 225-fold. This latter number is in the range
of the fold decrease in activity when Sec is mutated to Cys in TR
and other selenoenzymes., A reasonable conclusion
from these data is that Se confers polarization to a -S–Se-
bond, and this bond polarization is responsible for the acceleration
of the rate in VIII compared to that in VII.

Further support for this polarization hypothesis is given
by comparing
the turnover rates of peptide substrates in Table  that differ by only a single feature. For example, the V:VI turnover ratio shows that bond polarization
contributes a factor of ∼2000 to rate acceleration. Comparison
of the activities of V/VIII and VII/VIII pairs implies that a combination of correct distance and geometry
contributes a factor of 10–25 to the exchange rate, while polarization
(electrophilicity) contributes a factor of 200 for the mammalian enzyme.
Please note that peptides VI and VII are
both turned over at nearly the same slow rate, which shows the dramatic
effect that the loss of polarization in the disulfide bond caused
by substitution of S for Se has on the exchange step. This analysis
of the data in Table  supports the Se as an
electrophile model and supports path 2 as being the correct pathway
for the exchange reaction shown in Figure B.

Functional Assay for Assessing Peptide Incorporation in IPL
Enzymes 3–8 were constructed by using IPL. This method allows us to incorporate Sec, hCys,
and other non-natural amino acids into TR to investigate the function
of the C-terminal redox center as done here and reported by us previously.,, IPL usually involves ligation
of a peptide containing an N-terminal Cys, Sec, or hCys residue to
a thioester-tagged protein. However,
here we are using a single amino acid instead of
a peptide to achieve the same goal. The use of Cys, Sec, or hCys as
a cleavage/ligation reagent results in the addition of a single amino
acid to the C-terminal end of mTR3 as shown in Figure A. One possible side reaction of the thioester is hydrolysis,
which would result in protein eluting from the column without the
addition of the added amino acid. To test whether cleavage of the
thioester-tagged TR was due to the addition of amino acid rather than
hydrolysis of the thioester, a control experiment was performed for
enzymes 3–8 to measure the amount of cleavage
in the absence of an amino acid from the cleavage buffer. These experiments
yielded an eluent from the chitin column with no measurable selenocystine-reductase
activity, which is evidence that little or no hydrolysis of the thioester
occurs during incubation with the cleavage buffer containing the single
amino acid.

Selenocystine-reductase activity of mTR3 as a semiquantitative
measure of ligation efficiency. (A) The truncated enzyme lacking the
Cys1-Sec2 dyad has very low selenocystine-reductase
activity as reported by us previously. In the experiments reported here, we constructed mutants containing
a single redox-active residue (Cys, hCys, or Sec) by using these amino
acids as reagents that would simultaneously undergo a transthiolesterification
reaction with the thioester-tagged mTR3 enzyme produced as an intein
fusion protein and subsequently become ligated to the C-terminal end.
Cleavage of mTR3Δ3 with either Cys, hCys, or Sec results in
the production of enzyme 3, 4, or 5, respectively (Table ). Similarly,
cleavage of mTR3Δ2 with either Cys, hCys, or Sec results in
the production of enzyme 6, 7, or 8, respectively. All of these enzymes have significantly higher
selenocystine-reductase activity than the truncated enzyme (Table ), demonstrating that cleavage and ligation were
successful. (B) The truncated enzyme cannot reduce selenocystine because
of an apparent lack of ability of the N-terminal redox center to catalyze
this reduction. (C) Reduction of selenocystine by mTR3 can be achieved
with either a fully intact C-terminal redox center as in the case
of enzymes 1 and 2 or a partially intact
C-terminal redox center containing only a single redox-active residue
(enzymes 3–8). While we do not know complete mechanistic
details for certain, the most likely explanation is that the C-terminal
redox center is required for initiating attack on the substrate diselenide
bond.

In ligation experiments of the
type performed here, it is desirable
to achieve complete ligation of the peptide (amino acid) to the thioester-tagged
protein. To test the efficiency of the ligation of the amino acid
to thioester-tagged mTR3, we have devised an assay that allows us
to make a semiquantitative assessment of ligation efficiency as shown
in panels B and C of Figure . This assay uses
the reduction of selenocystine as an alternative substrate in place
of Trx. We have previously reported that the Sec → Cys mutant
of mitochondrial TR and any variant in which the C-terminal redox
center contains either a sulfhydryl or selenol, as is the case with
enzymes 3–8, will reduce selenocystine as the
data in Table  shows. Thus, this assay becomes a simple test that allowed
us to determine whether the C-terminal amino acid that we added in
the cleavage buffer is present. If the amino acid were not ligated
to the enzyme, the mutant should have selenocystine reductase activity
similar to that of the truncated enzyme (enzyme 10).
The data in Table  indicate that the cleavage/ligation
procedure was successful in adding Cys, Sec, or hCys to the C-terminus
of TR. A second conclusion that can be drawn from the data in Table  is that enzymes 3–8, with only
partially intact C-terminal redox centers, are able to catalyze the
same two thiol/disulfide exchange reactions that are shown in panels
A and B of Figure  except that selenocystine
has replaced Trx as the substrate. As discussed in the next section,
only enzymes 7 and 8 can also reduce Trx.

Evidence That Selenium both Donates and Accepts Electrons in
the Trx-Reductase Mechanism
The selenium atom of TR acts
as the electron donor to the disulfide bond of Trx in both the selenium
as a leaving group model (path 1 in Figure B) and the selenium as an electrophile model (path 2 in Figure B). We therefore predicted that a mutant of mTR3
containing only a single Sec residue in the C-terminal redox center
would have Trx-reductase activity only if the single Sec residue was
in the second position of the C-terminal Cys1-Sec2 redox dyad and selenium acted as the acceptor of electrons from
the N-terminal redox center. This prediction
was tested by creating mutant enzymes 5 and 8 and assaying these enzymes for Trx-reductase activity. As can be
seen by the data listed in Table , while enzyme 8 has only 0.5% of the
Trx-reductase activity of the WT enzyme, it has more than twice the
Trx-reductase activity as the Sec → Cys mutant of mTR3 (enzyme 2). Enzyme 5 has no detectable Trx-reductase
activity in comparison. This experimental result provides strong evidence
for the selenium as an electrophile model and also confirms the role
of selenolate as the electron donor to substrate provided by the X-ray
crystal structure of the mutant TR–Trx complex.

As a further test of this hypothesis,
we also considered whether selenolate could be acting as a leaving
group in the mixed selenosulfide bond of the TR–Trx complex
in mutant enzyme 8. In such a case, the thiolate of CysIC would attack the sulfur atom of the mixed selenosulfide
bond and the reaction in mutant 8 would be fast relative
to that with mutant 6 because of the superior leaving
group ability of selenium. This possibility was tested by replacing
each residue of the Cys1-Sec2 redox dyad with
homocysteine (hCys, hC), while leaving the other position vacant to
create mutants 4 and 7, respectively. These
two mutants are analogous to mutants 5 and 8 in design and construction. The thiolates of the Cys and hCys residues
should have identical leaving group abilities and have similar nucleophilic
character. A key difference is that the introduction of a hCys residue
lengthens the distance between Cα and the sulfur atom by ∼3
Å relative to Cys. This added side chain length and flexibility
should make the sulfur atom of hCys more accessible to the thiolate
of CysIC for attack in a mixed disulfide complex between
mutant TR and Trx. The results show that Trx-reductase activity is
only present when the second position of the dyad is replaced with
hCys [enzyme 7 (Table )]. This
result confirms that the second position of the redox dyad is responsible
for both accepting electrons from the N-terminal redox center and
donating electrons to the substrate, whether it be a selenium atom
of the Sec residue in the WT enzyme or the sulfur atom of the hCys
residue in the mutant enzyme as shown in Figure . We note that neither enzyme 3 nor enzyme 6 has Trx-reductase activity.

Partial mechanism for WT TR and mutant enzymes 7 and 8. Because of space considerations, we
begin our depiction
of the mechanism with the EH4 form of the enzyme and omit
interactions between FAD and NADPH/NADP+ as occurs in the
enzyme. Please see ref () for a more detailed and complete description of the mechanism and
electron flow from NADPH to the substrate. (A) The selenolate of the
WT enzyme attacks the disulfide bond of Trx, forming a mixed selenosulfide
bond between the enzyme and substrate (left). The mixed selenosulfide
bond is then attacked by a resolving Cys residue, labeled as Cys1 of the Cys1-Sec2 dyad (middle). The
resolution step results in the formation of a unique eight-membered
ring structure that must be “opened” for the catalytic
cycle to begin again (right). Our data, based on mutant enzymes 7 and 8, indicate that it is the Se atom of the
ring that is attacked by the thiolate of CysIC (interchange
Cys). (B) Enzyme 8 was able to reduce Trx at a rate higher
than that of the Sec → Cys mutant (enzyme 2) but
lacks the resolving Cys residue (Cys1) so that a ring formation
pathway is impossible with this mutant. As shown above, the mechanism
must bypass this ring-closing step and resolution of the mixed selenosulfide
bond must be conducted by the thiolate of CysIC. (C) Mutant
enzyme 7 contains only a single sulfhydryl group in the
C-terminal redox center and, similar to enzyme 8, can
still reduce Trx. Mutant enzyme 7, like enzyme 8, must avoid a pathway that involves ring formation and instead
rely on the thiolate of CysIC for the resolution step.
Both of these results provide strong evidence that the residue in
the second position of the C-terminal dyad of the mammalian enzyme
(Sec) is responsible for both accepting and donating electrons. The
Sec residue accepts electrons from the N-terminal redox center and
then donates them to the substrate, Trx.

Conclusion
This study has provided the first experimental
evidence that the
selenium atom is attacked in a “thiol/disulfide-like”
exchange reaction in which Se replaces S. Our data show that Se is responsible for both donating and accepting
electrons during the catalytic cycle of mammalian TR and that the
role of Se as an electron acceptor should be given consideration as
a way in which Se helps to accelerate enzymatic reactions.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We acknowledge the Vermont Cancer Center DNA
Facility for
sequencing services.

Dedication
This paper is dedicated
to Professor Hans J. Reich (University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI)
on the occasion of his retirement.

Abbreviations
Cyscysteine

CysCTcharge-transfer Cys

CysICinterchange
cysteine

DEAEdiethylaminoethyl

DTNB5,5′-dithiobis(2-nitrobenzoic
acid)

DTTdithiothreitol

EDTAethylenediaminetetraacetic
acid

Glyglycine

hCyshomocysteine

IPLintein-mediated
peptide ligation

Mrmolecular ratio

mTR3mitochondrial TR from mouse

NADPHreduced β-nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide phosphate

NMAN-methylmercaptoacetamide

Secselenocysteine

Serserine

TBTerrific Broth

TRthioredoxin reductase

Tristris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane

Trxthioredoxin

Uone-letter code for Sec

WTwild-type.

The prime designation denotes amino
acids that are part of the B-chain. The N- and C-terminal redox centers
are on opposite subunits of the head-to-tail dimer.

We note that there are large differences
in the catalytic mechanisms of the cytosolic TR1 enzyme and the mitochondrial
TR3 enzyme as reported in ref (). As a result of these differences, the experiments performed
here may not have been possible with TR1. Even so, results from the
X-ray crystal structures of TR1 and TR3 show that attack at the selenium
atom of the selenosulfide is the most likely path, as the data here show. All of our work on the TR reaction mechanism
has been with the mitochondrial form of the enzyme, and only recently
have we begun to appreciate differences in reaction mechanism between
the two types. For example, the selenocystine-reductase activity of
the Cys mutant of mTR3 is high, while
for the cytosolic enzyme, this activity is very low.

