The twin-arginine translocation
(Tat) pathway is a protein export system found in the cytoplasmic
membranes of many prokaryotes (bacteria and archaea) and in the thylakoid
membranes of plant chloroplasts. The physiological
function of the Tat system is the transmembrane translocation of fully
folded proteins. Substrates are targeted to the Tat translocase by
N-terminal signal peptides bearing an SRRxFLK “twin-arginine”
amino acid motif. Such Tat signal peptides
have a tripartite structure comprising a polar n-region of variable
sequence, followed by a hydrophobic h-region (15–25 amino acid
residues) and a more polar c-region (often positively charged) that
usually contains a protease cleavage site. The twin-arginine motif
is positioned at the boundary between the n- and h-regions.

The Tat translocase itself is membrane-embedded
and contains a universally conserved TatC protein, which is involved
in signal peptide recognition, a TatA-like
protein that may form the protein-conducting channel,− and, in some cases, a TatB component that forms a complex with TatC. The translocation event is driven by the transmembrane
electrochemical gradient, and signal peptides
are usually cleaved from substrates by membrane-bound signal peptidases.

As a result of the ability of the Tat pathway
to transport fully folded proteins, the vast majority of traffic following
this route comprises enzymes that bind, and therefore fold around,
cofactors in the cell cytoplasm prior to translocation. Clearly, premature
export of immature cofactor-containing enzymes must be avoided, and
systems have been unearthed that coordinate the assembly and export
events. Using an alkaline phosphatase reporter, Delisa et al. suggested that the Tat translocase itself may
actively reject unfolded substrates. This was termed “Tat quality
control”; however, the molecular basis of this phenomenon remains
unresolved. In recent years, an alternative system designed to regulate
transport on the Tat pathway by utilizing signal peptide-binding chaperones
has been described. In this case, the signal peptides of immature
Tat substrates are bound tightly by specific cytoplasmic proteins
in a process that is hypothesized to suppress Tat transport until
all other assembly processes are complete. Once cofactor insertion and protein folding has occurred, the signal
peptide is released by the chaperone and is free to interact with
the Tat translocase in the membrane. This system is termed “Tat
proofreading”.

The archetypal
Tat proofreading chaperones belong to the TorD family., These are peptide-binding proteins dedicated to the assembly of
molybdenum-dependent enzymes and include those required for biosynthesis
of trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO), dimethyl sulfoxide
(DMSO), nitrate, and selenate reductases.− Crystal structures of TorD family
proteins show an α-helical fold arranged into two domains (N-
and C-terminal) connected by a “hinge”. The proteins
exist as monomers or domain-swapped homodimers where the N-domain
of one protomer packs onto the C-domain of another. The hinge is often partially or completely unstructured
and flexible, so many structures lack electron density for this region.
This is a problem since the most highly conserved motif in TorD family
proteins (EPxDH) is located within the hinge. The “DH” dipeptide is practically invariant and is
essential for Tat proofreading activity, while biochemical and modeling studies have suggested these residues
play a direct role in signal peptide recognition., TorD family proteins usually bind exclusively to one Tat signal
peptide only, although one Salmonella chaperone has
been shown to recognize three related Tat signal peptides. The molecular basis of peptide selectivity,
or the peptide binding-and-release mechanism, is not fully understood,
and the 3D structure of a signal peptide–chaperone complex
is not available for any TorD family protein.

In an attempt
to make new breakthroughs in understanding the Tat proofreading system
in general, and the structure and function of TorD family chaperones
in particular, the genetics of a number of microbes were studied.
The hyperthermophilic archaeon Archaeoglobus fulgidus was found to carry the genes for several Tat-dependent reductases.
One of those is a homologue of the Salmonella enterica tetrathionate reductase, an enzyme that has recently been implicated
in the virulence of that human pathogen. Interestingly, a gene (Af0160) was identified in
the A. fulgidus ttr operon that would encode a TorD
family protein which we named TtrD (Figure A). This observation suggests that assembly of these important enzymes
may require a Tat proofreading chaperone.

A putative tetrathionate
reductase (ttr) operon in Archaeoglobus fulgidus. (A) Schematic representation of the AF0157–AF0161 operon from A. fulgidus. AF0157 (TtrB) is predicted
to be an Fe–S protein, AF0158 (TtrC) is predicted to be an
integral membrane protein with nine transmembrane domains, AF0159
(TtrA) is predicted to encode a Tat-dependent molybdenum- or tungsten-dependent
reductase with most similarity to tetrathionate reductases from bacteria,
TtrD is a member of the TorD family of signal peptide binding proteins,
and Moe-A3 is a member of a family of proteins required of Mo or W
incorporation into a pterin cofactor. (B) Schematic representation
of a synthetic ttrBACD operon constructed in this
study. Incorporated restriction sites are shown, and E. coli-biased ribosome binding sites are indicated by “R”.
(C) A cartoon of how the A. fulgidus tetrathionate
reductase may be assembled in the cell membrane. The black squares
represent [4Fe–4S] clusters, and the white star represents the
MGD cofactor. (D) 35S-Met pulse-labeling of the Ttr proteins
expressed from the synthetic operon under the control of the T7 promoter
in pUNIPROM followed by SDS-PAGE and autoradiography. Derivatives
of the pUNI-TtrBACD vector deleted for ttrD (ΔD), ttrB (ΔB), ttrBC (ΔBC), and ttrAD (ΔAD) are indicated.

In this work it is demonstrated that the TtrD protein
binds directly to the twin-arginine signal peptide of the putative
catalytic subunit of the A. fulgidus tetrathionate
reductase. The binding epitope for TtrD on the signal peptide is identified
as a short 11-residue stretch partly overlapping the conserved Tat
motif. The high-resolution crystal structure of TtrD reveals a monomeric
protein with a fold similar to some TorD family chaperones from bacteria.
In this case, however, electron density corresponding to the hinge
region is well-defined. This work suggests that archaea employ a Tat
proofreading system during assembly of complex, cofactor-containing
enzymes that is identical to that of bacteria.

Materials and Methods
Bacterial Strains and Growth Conditions
Bacterial strains
used in this study are listed in . E. coli strains were routinely cultured in LB
media, at 37 °C and with appropriate antibiotic selection (Amp
100 μg/mL, Cm 25 μg/mL, and Kan 50 μg/mL). For SDS-resistance
tests, SDS was added to LB agar plates at 2% (w/v) final concentration.

Plasmids and Molecular Biology
Plasmids used in this
study are described in . All molecular
biology was performed according to standard procedures. A synthetic ttrBACD operon was designed by back-translation of the amino
acid sequences of the TtrBACD (AF0157-AF0160) proteins from A. fulgidus DSM4303 (GenBank: AE000782.1)
using the online Backtranslation tool (Entelechon, Germany). The sequence
was also codon optimized for expression in E. coli. These sequences were then assembled into the synthetic operon in silico, with the concomitant introduction of ribosome
binding sites and restriction sites for convenient downstream manipulation.
Finally the complete 5.66 kbp sequence was synthesized and supplied
in the cloning vector pGH (Biomatik) to yield pGH_SG1080110. The pUNI-TtrBACD
plasmid was generated by the introduction of ttrBACD from the synthetic construct into pUNIPROM on a BamHI-XbaI restriction fragment.
Subsequent derivatives were generated by removal of one or more ttr genes using their flanking restriction sites (Figure B). Other plasmids were generated by PCR amplification
using oligonucleotide primers, the sequences and details of which
are supplied in . For analysis
of signal peptide function, the N-terminal 36 amino acids of TtrA
(“ssTtrA”) were expressed as an N-terminal genetic fusion
to mature (signal peptide-lacking) AmiA in pUNIPROM (pUNI-ssTtrAAf-AmiA), to mature BlaM in pSUPROM (pSU-ssTtrAAf-Bla), or to GFP with a C-terminal SsrA tag in pBAD24 (pBAD-ssTtrAAf-GFP-SsrA). For concomitant arabinose-inducible expression
of TtrD, the synthetic ttrD gene was cloned into
pBAD33. For TtrD protein purification, the synthetic ttrD gene was cloned into pETM-11 so as to allow IPTG-inducible expression
of TtrD with an N-terminal 6-His tag followed by a TEV protease cleavage
site (pETM-TtrD). For copurification analysis, pQE80 based plasmids
were constructed expressing either His6-GST or a ssTtrA-GST
fusion protein, with or without the coexpression of untagged TtrD
from the same plasmid (each protein cloned with a similar E. coli optimized ribosome binding site but both expressed
from the vector T5 promoter). Plasmids for bacterial two-hybrid analyses
were constructed using the pUT18 and pT25 vectors., TtrD was fused to the C-terminus of T25 (pT25-TtrD) and ssTtrA fused
to the N-terminus of T18 (pUT18-ssTtrAAf). Single glutamine
substitutions were incorporated into pUT18-ssTtrAAf using
the Quikchange procedure according to the manufacturer instructions
(Agilent Technologies). A. fulgidus DSM4303 genomic
DNA was kindly supplied by Clive S. Butler’s group (University
of Exeter, UK).

Expression and Production of Synthetic Gene Products
Expression of the ttrBACD genes from pUNI- plasmids
can be controlled by the T7 promoter. E. coli strain
K-38 was cotransformed with pGP1-2 (KanR), coding for the
T7 RNA polymerase, and a pUNI-vector encoding the gene(s) of interest. Synthesis of gene products was induced by heat
shock followed by radiolabeling with 35S methionine. Proteins were separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) before gels were fixed
in 50% (v/v) methanol and 10% (v/v) acetic acid and analyzed by autoradiography.

Protein–Protein Interaction Analysis
BL21(DE3)
and BL21(DE3)Δtat were transformed with pQE80-GST-ssTtrA
or pQE80-GST-ssTtrAAf_ TtrD1 and expression of the GST fusion
protein induced with 1 mM IPTG overnight at 19 °C. Cells were
harvested and solubilized in B-Per (Pierce) containing protease inhibitors
(Roche). GST fusion proteins were then isolated from the clarified
bacterial extract by incubation (1 h, 4 °C) using glutathione
Sepharose beads (GE Healthcare). The beads were washed three times
with 20 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 1 M NaCl, 1 mM DTT, and 0.1% (v/v) Triton
X-100. Finally, bound proteins were released from the beads by the
addition of sample buffer (1.6% (w/v) SDS, 50 mM Tris·HCl pH
6.8, 1.6 mM EDTA, 8% (v/v) glycerol, bromophenol blue) and visualized
by SDS-PAGE and Coomassie staining. Copurifying proteins were identified
by LC MS-MS (FingerPrints Proteomics Facility, University of Dundee).

Bacterial two-hybrid analyses were performed according to that
described by Karimova and co-workers, using the
pUT18 and pT25 complementary pair of vectors. E. coli reporter strain BTH101 was transformed with pUT18-ssTtrAAf (or derivative/control) and pT25-TtrD (or control), and the color
of the resulting transformants scored on MacConkey media with 0.2%
maltose (positive result being red). For quantitative measurement
of the interaction, β-galactosidase assays were performed according
to the method of Miller on double-transformed
BTH101 grown to exponential phase (or in the case of ssTtrA-RD and
controls, to stationary phase) in LB and permeabilized with toluene.
Assays were performed on at least three independent transformants.

Protein Purification
His6-TtrD was overproduced
from plasmid pETM-TtrD in E. coli BL21 (DE3) pLysS,
and cells were harvested and broken in the presence of protease inhibitors
(Calbiochem cocktail III). His6-TtrD was isolated from
the soluble fraction by immobilized metal affinity chromatography
(IMAC) using a HiTrap (GE Healthcare) chelating column (20 mM Tris·HCl
pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, 25–500 mM imidazole). The His6 tag was removed by TEV protease treatment (overnight digestion
at room temperature in buffer: 50 mM Tris·HCl pH 7.5, 0.5 mM
EDTA, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 2 mM DTT) and then noncleaved His-TtrD and
TEV protease removed by reverse IMAC. Untagged TtrD was further purified
using a Superdex 200 26/60 size-exclusion column (GE Healthcare) equilibrated
with 50 mM Tris·HCl pH 7.5, 250 mM NaCl. The protein eluted as
a single species with a mass consistent with that of a monomer. Selected
fractions were pooled and concentrated to ∼40 mg mL–1(2 mM) for crystallization trials. Sample purity was assessed by
SDS-PAGE. The protein concentration was determined spectrophotometrically
using a theoretical extinction coefficient of 13 410 M–1 cm–1.

Crystallization and Data Collection
Initial crystallization
trials were performed using sitting drop vapor diffusion with standard
sparse matrix screens and set up using a Rigaku Phoenix automated
system. Equimolar amounts of a synthetic peptide (DFIKGLVAVGS) and
5 mM GMP-PNP were added to the protein prior to setting up crystallization
experiments. Numerous conditions gave small crystals and optimization
of selected conditions using hanging drop vapor diffusion then yielded
diffraction quality crystals in three distinct forms from one (form
I) previously deposited in the PDB (2idg). Crystal form II was obtained
with 0.2 M potassium formate, 20% (w/v) PEG 3350 as the reservoir
solution; form III with 0.1 M CHES pH 9.5, 20% (w/v) PEG 8K and form
IV 4.3 M NaCl, 0.1 M HEPES pH 7.5. In each case crystals were obtained
from drops containing 1 μL of protein and 1 μL of reservoir,
at room temperature. Crystal forms II and III were obtained after
the protein–peptide mix had been incubated on ice; crystal
form IV was obtained when the mixture was heated to 70 °C. This
resulted in some precipitation of the sample that had to be removed
by centrifugation prior to crystallization. Crystals were flash cooled
in liquid nitrogen, mounted on a goniostat, and maintained at −173
°C in a flow of cold nitrogen, and diffraction properties were
characterized with a Rigaku Micromax 007 rotating anode R-AXIS IV+2 image plate system. For crystal forms II and IV, data were
collected at the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (Grenoble,
France) on beamline ID29. The diffraction data for form III were collected
in-house; however, due to a hardware fault, they are only 90% complete.
Data were integrated using XDS (forms III and IV) and iMosflm (form II) and
scaled with SCALA. Crystallographic statistics
are presented in . Coordinates
for the three new crystal forms have been deposited in the PDB under
accession codes 2xol, 2yjm, and 2y6y.

Structure Solution and Refinement
Each structure was
solved by molecular replacement using PHASER. For crystal form II, a model was generated from PDB entry 2idg (referred to as
crystal form I). The structures of the other forms were solved using
the refined monomer from form II. Rounds of model adjustment using
Coot interspersed with refinement calculations
with Refmac5 were used to complete the
protein model; the addition and refinement of water molecules and
components of the crystallization mixture (1,2-ethanediol, N-cyclohexyl-2-aminoethanesulfonate, or Cl–) then completed the refinement. Translation/libration/screw (TLS)
refinement using three domains (analysis was completed using the TLS
server) was performed for crystal form
IV and two domains for form III. Anisotropic thermal parameters were
refined for form II. Despite the inclusion of a peptide in crystallization
experiments, the electron density maps did not reveal any evidence
for ordered binding.

Results
A Synthetic Operon Encoding a Putative Tat-Dependent Tetrathionate
Reductase
The genome of hyperthermophilic archaeon A. fulgidus encodes a putative tetrathionate reductase (Figure A). The genes in question are Af0157–Af0159, but for ease of understanding here,
and in agreement with the Salmonella nomenclature, these have been renamed ttrBCA here (Figure A). A. fulgidus TtrA (1134 residues) is predicted to bear a twin-arginine signal
peptide at its N-terminus and shares 30% overall sequence identity
with the Salmonella TtrA protein (1020 residues).
TtrA is therefore the putative catalytic subunit containing an N-terminal
[4Fe–4S] cluster and a cysteine ligand (C297) to the metal
component of a pterin cofactor. The Salmonella TtrA
is known to utilize molybdopterin guanine dinucleotide (MGD) at its
active site in order to catalyze the reductive cleavage of tetrathionate
(−3OS–S–S–SO3– or S4O62–) to thiosulfate (−S–SO3– or S2O32–)
and so confers the ability to use this unusual sulfur compound as
a terminal electron acceptor during respiration.A. fulgidus TtrB is predicted to bind
four [4Fe–4S] clusters and is most likely the electron-transfer
partner of TtrA but bears no signal peptide of its own, and TtrC is
predicted to be a membrane anchor/quinol dehydrogenase subunit containing
nine transmembrane domains (Figure C). The
overall architecture of this enzyme is therefore predicted to be a
Tat-targeted heterodimer anchored to the extracytoplasmic side of
the membrane by the TtrC subunit (Figure C).

A key feature of the A. fulgidus ttr operon is
the presence of a gene encoding a putative Tat proofreading chaperone,
TtrD (Figure A). To begin to understand the
role of TtrD in assembly of tetrathionate reductase, a synthetic strategy
was applied. The A. fulgidus protein sequences (TtrA-D)
were “back-translated” into DNA sequence incorporating
engineered ribosome binding- and restriction enzyme recognition-sites
and biased toward E. coli codon usage (Figure B). The completely synthetic DNA sequence was arranged
as ttrBACD to allow facile removal of each gene
from the 3′ end and so leave the catalytic dimer intact. The
synthetic operon was cloned into the E. coli expression
vector pUNIPROM, and derivatives devoid
of ttrAD, ttrB, ttrBC, and ttrD alone were prepared. Synthesis of the
synthetic gene products in E. coli was monitored
by 35S-methionine labeling in vivo (Figure D). The expression and synthesis of TtrB and TtrC
could be identified, especially when the ttrA and ttrD genes were removed from the vector (Figure D). TtrD could also be readily identified, though
it may be susceptible to proteolysis (Figure D). However, it is clear from this experiment that the synthetic
TtrA subunit is very unstable when expressed in E. coli and becomes rapidly fragmented (Figure D).

The A. fulgidus TtrA Signal Peptide Has Transport
Activity in E. coli
The putative twin-arginine
signal peptide of A. fulgidus TtrA shares 33% overall
sequence identity, and 50% overall sequence similarity, with the TtrA
signal peptide from Salmonella (over 30 amino acids).
Given the close evolutionary relationship between Salmonella and E. coli, the A. fulgidus TtrA
signal peptide was tested for Tat transport activity in E.
coli (Figure ).

The N-terminus of TtrA
contains an active twin-arginine signal peptide. (A) SDS-resistance
(Tat-dependent amidase export) assay. Parental strain (WT) or amiAC mutant E. coli (strains MC4100 and
MCDSSAC, respectively) carrying pUNIPROM (pUNI, vector control) or
pUNI-ssTtrAAf-AmiA (expressing an ssTtrAAf-AmiA
fusion protein) were grown aerobically on LB plates containing 2%
(w/v) SDS where indicated. (B) Tat-dependent β-lactamase (Bla)
transport assay. Parental strain (WT) or tatABCD mutant
(tat–) E. coli (strains MC4100-A and DADE-A, respectively) were transformed with
a plasmid encoding the A. fulgidus TtrA signal peptide
fused to signal-less β-lactamase (pSU-ssTtrAAf-Bla)
and a vector encoding TtrD (pBAD-TtrD). Control plasmids were pSUPROM
(pSU) and pBAD33 (pBAD). Overnight cultures of each strain were diluted
10–4 and 10 μL spotted onto an LB plate supplemented
with Kan (50 μg/mL), Cm (25 μg/mL), Amp (6 μg/mL), and l-arabinose (0.2% w/v). (C) TtrD enhances the transport activity
of the TtrA signal peptide. E. coli strains MC4100-A
(WT) and DADE-A (tat–) were each
transformed with pBAD-ssTtrAAf-GFP-SsrA (or vector control
pBAD24) and pBAD-TtrD (or vector control pBAD33) and grown aerobically
in LB containing Amp (100 μg/mL), Cm (25 μg/mL), and arabinose
(0.2% w/v). GFP fluorescence was measured after 18 h. The fluorescence
for each strain carrying pBAD-ssTtrAAf-GFP-SsrA is expressed
relative to the background fluorescence of the parent strain carrying
the vector control plasmids. Bars show mean ± SEM.

One of the most sensitive in vivo Tat-transport assays available involves the Tat-dependent targeting
of the amidase AmiA to the bacterial periplasm. An E. coli strain lacking periplasmic
Tat-dependent amidases (MCDSSAC) cannot grow in the presence of 2%
(w/v) SDS (Figure A) as the protective barrier
of the cell envelope is weakened. However,
this phenotype can be complemented by providing a Tat-targeted amidase
(e.g., AmiA) in trans. In this work the mature E. coli AmiA enzyme was genetically fused to the A. fulgidus TtrA N-terminus (residues 1–36). When
this fusion was expressed in MCDSSAC, it was observed to restore the
ability of the strain to grow in the presence of SDS (Figure A). This demonstrates that the N-terminal region
of TtrA contains an active twin-arginine signal peptide that can direct
AmiA to the E. coli periplasm.

This finding
was corroborated with a second in vivo Tat-transport
assay. E. coli is normally sensitive to the antibiotic
ampicillin unless a periplasmic β-lactamase (Bla) is expressed.
The Bla catalytic domain can be exported in a Tat-dependent manner. In this case the A. fulgidus TtrA signal peptide was genetically fused to Bla and the ability
of this fusion to confer resistance to ampicillin tested (Figure B). Production of the TtrA signal peptide-Bla fusion
was indeed able to confer ampicillin resistance on E. coli (Figure B), and this phenotype was completely
abolished in a Tat transport mutant (Figure B).

TtrD Interacts Directly with the TtrA Signal Peptide
TorD family chaperones are renowned for their ability to bind directly
to twin-arginine signal peptides or inactive remnants of such peptides., To assess the ability of TtrD to bind to the TtrA signal peptide,
small-scale copurification experiments were designed (Figure ). The TtrA Tat signal peptide (residues 1–36)
was genetically fused to the N-terminus of glutathione-S-transferase (GST) and expressed alone, or in the presence of TtrD,
in E. coli (Figure ). The
GST was then isolated using glutathione beads and copurifying proteins
identified following SDS-PAGE and mass spectrometry (Figure ). It is clear from these experiments that TtrA-GST
copurified with a single protein, which was unambiguously identified
as A. fulgidus TtrD (Figure ). No endogenous E. coli Tat proofreading chaperones,
or any other E. coli proteins, were found to interact
with TtrA-GST. Interestingly, the amount of copurifying TtrD was enhanced
by coexpression of TtrA-GST in a Δtat mutant
background (Figure ). Indeed, inspection of
the SDS-PAGE gel suggests that the full-length TtrA signal peptide-GST
fusion is less susceptible to proteolysis when expressed in the E. coli Δtat strain (Figure ) and that this probably accounts for the increased
amounts of TtrD protein that can be copurified from this genetic background.

Interaction
of TtrD with the TtrA signal peptide in vivo. The
ssTtrAAf-GST fusion protein was expressed either alone
(from plasmid pQE80-ssTtrAAf-GST) or together with TtrD
(from plasmid pQE80-ssTtrAAf-GST_TtrD1) in either tat mutant or parental strain E. coli BL21(DE3).
As a control, His6-GST was coexpressed with TtrD (plasmid
pQE80-GST-TtrD1). GST fusion proteins were affinity purified and isolated
proteins visualized by SDS-PAGE and Coomassie staining. The protein
copurifying protein with ssTtrAAf-GST was identified as
TtrD (AF0160) by mass spectrometry. Molecular weight standards (M) are indicated.

To further corroborate the binding between TtrD
and the TtrA Tat signal peptide, an E. coli-based
bacterial two-hybrid (BTH) system was
employed. This adenylate cyclase-based method works exceptionally
well for detecting chaperone–Tat signal peptide interactions,, and fusion of TtrD to the T25 domain, and the TtrA signal peptide
(TtrA amino acids 1–36) to the T18 domain, of the adenylate
cyclase used in the BTH reporter system showed a clear positive interaction
between the two proteins (Figure B).

Analysis of the TtrD-TtrA signal peptide interaction using
a bacterial two-hybrid assay. (A) Schematic figure depicting the full-length A. fulgidus TtrA twin-arginine signal peptide and positions
of truncations (regions A–D) and glutamine substitutions (indicated
by an asterisk) tested in the two-hybrid system. The twin-arginine
motif is underlined. (B) The bacterial two-hybrid system of Karimova
et al. was used to measure the in vivo interaction
between TtrD and full-length TtrA signal peptide (WT) and truncated
versions. (C) The bacterial two-hybrid system was used to measure
the in vivo interaction between TtrD and variants
of the TtrA signal peptide bearing single glutamine substitutions.
In all assays TtrD was fused to the T25 fragment of adenylate cyclase,
and the signal peptide variants were fused to T18. Output from the
two-hybrid system was detected as β-galactosidase activity and
expressed as a percentage of the native interaction. Bars show mean
± SEM.

Next, an assay was performed in order to assess
whether the TtrD protein retained physiological activity when interacting
with the TtrA signal peptide. An interesting observation for E. coli TorD was that overproduction of this proofreading
chaperone could enhance the Tat-dependent export of a fusion between
the TorA signal peptide and green fluorescent protein (GFP). To reconstruct this assay for the A.
fulgidus system under investigation here, a plasmid was constructed
encoding a fusion between the TtrA signal peptide and GFP bearing
an SsrA tag (Figure C). An SsrA tag is a short
C-terminal sequence (...AANDENYALAA-COOH) that will target any protein
for degradation by cytoplasmic proteases. However, transport of an SsrA tag-containing protein to the periplasm
protects it from degradation and in the case of Tat-dependent targeting
of GFP-SsrA therefore leads to an increase in GFP fluorescence in
a tat+ strain compared to a tat mutant. In this work, production of
the ssTtrA-GFP-SsrA fusion alone in Tat-active E. coli led to a very low level of fluorescence, pointing to a rate of export
for this fusion protein that is too slow to escape proteolytic degradation
(Figure C). However, coexpression of TtrD
with the ssTtrA-GFP-SsrA fusion protein in the same strain lead to
a clear increase in cellular GFP fluorescence (Figure C). This TtrD effect was not evident in a tat– background (Figure C),
which taken together suggests the functional interaction between the
chaperone and the signal peptide can enhance the rate or efficiency
of transport of GFP-SsrA on the Tat pathway.

Collectively, these
experiments demonstrate that TtrD is a signal peptide-binding protein
and that at least one of its binding partners in A. fulgidus is the Tat-targeted reductase with which it is coexpressed.

Identification of the TtrD Binding Epitope on the TtrA Signal
Peptide
The BTH system was exploited in order to focus in
on the minimum TtrD binding epitope within the TtrA signal peptide.
The plasmid encoding the TtrA signal peptide-T18 fusion was modified
to produce four truncated forms, A–D (Figure A). Region A comprised residues 1–26 of the TtrA signal
peptide, and this showed similar binding to TtrD in vivo as the full length signal peptide (Figure B). However, constructs producing both region B (residues 10–27)
and region C (residues 11–36) were essentially unable to interact
with TtrD in this assay (Figure B). This suggested
immediately that the binding epitope for TtrD on this peptide lay
toward the N-terminus.

Next, site-directed mutagenesis was employed
to narrow down the TtrD binding epitope still further. Glutamine residues
are among the least common to be found in twin-arginine signal peptides
in general. Here, TtrA residues R6, V15,
S17, V20, L22, and G24 were substituted by glutamine (Figure A) and their ability to interact with TtrD assessed
by BTH (Figure C). Of the six variants tested,
only the V15Q substitution was found to interfere with TtrD binding in vivo (Figure C). Substitution
of the highly conserved R6 from the targeting motif with glutamine
had no impact on TtrD binding (Figure C).
This new knowledge was then used to design a BTH construct producing
only region D of the TtrA signal peptide (Figure A), which was observed to interact strongly with TtrD in vivo (Figure B).

Taken
together, this systematic truncation and site-specific mutagenesis
approach was successful in identifying TtrA signal peptide residues
7–17 as being sufficient for TtrD recognition.

Crystal Structure of A. fulgidus TtrD
The TtrD protein was overproduced and purified, and attempts were
made to determine a structure of the complex with a TtrA signal peptide.
However, crystallization experiments with either the 27-mer region
A (Figure ) or shorter 11-mer region D binding
epitope identified in this work (Figure )
were unsuccessful. The crystallization trials rather produced three
new crystal forms of ligand-free TtrD distinct from that previously
obtained by a structural genomics consortium (PDB entry 2idg, crystal form I).
The new crystal forms provide a significant improvement in the resolution
of the structure of TtrD, from 2.7 to 1.35 Å. The enhanced resolution
has allowed an improvement in overall accuracy and the correction
of erroneous side chain orientations found in the original deposition.
The analyses also enabled an investigation regarding whether intermolecular
interactions in the crystal lattice influenced the protein structure.
The four crystal forms of TtrD that are now available present seven
individual molecular structures. Least-squares fitting of the different
structures, ∼160 Cα atoms, results in a range of RMSDs
from 0.36 to 1.11 Å with an average of 0.7 Å. These data,
and structural overlays (data not shown), indicate that the structures
are similar irrespective of the crystalline environment in which they
have been determined and it is therefore only necessary to describe
a generic TtrD structure.

The TtrD molecule is a globular, single-domain
protein of dimensions approximately 35 × 43 × 45 Å.
There are nine α-helices, with α1, α7, α8,
and α9 forming a four-helix bundle (Figure A). TtrD represents an archetypal thermophilic protein displaying
features noted as contributing to enhanced stability (reviewed by
Zhou et al.). The protein contains a
pronounced hydrophobic core, formed by a number of aromatic residues
(eight phenylalanines and three tyrosines), which almost surrounds
the N-terminal segment of α8. There are 51 polar residues, 28
basic and 23 acidic, in the crystallographic model. These residues
form eight salt bridge interactions plus, at numerous positions, hydrogen-bonding
networks to main chain functional groups that help to hold the polypeptide
in a tight globular fold with no extended loop structures.

Crystal structure
of TtrD. (A) A cartoon representation of the TtrD secondary structure.
The four-helix bundle is yellow, the hinge region is blue, and peripheral
helices red. (B) The functionally important His90 side-chain interacts
(van der Waals) with the highly conserved Phe20. The functionally
important Asp89 forms a salt bridge with Arg52 in the ligand-free
structure and forms hydrogen bonds with Ser54. Arg52 may also interact
with the nonconserved His87 from the hinge region. (C) The position
of two hydrophobic patches on the surface of TtrD that could represent
peptide binding sites. The protein is shown as a semitransparent van
der Waals surface, and secondary structure is depicted as in panel
A.

A search of the PDB using the Dali server identified two orthologous structures worthy
of comment: the E. coli DmsD Tat proofreading chaperone (PDB entry 3efp, Z-score 10.4, rmsd 2.7 Å for overlay
of 120 Cα positions) and the low-resolution structure of A. fulgidus NarJ (PDB entry 2o9x, Z-score 9.2, rmsd
3.1 Å for overlay of 123 Cα positions). The overall sequence
identity shared between TtrD with these two proteins is only 17 and
21%, respectively, and structural overlays primarily align the four-helix
bundles (data not shown). Collectively, the three structures suggest
that a small, stable, globular and α-helical protein fold has
evolved for a peptide-binding role.

Discussion
MGD-dependent tetrathionate reductases are
an important family of respiratory enzymes, and the subcellular localization
is critical to their physiological function, since the substrate is
likely to be membrane impermeable. Indeed, tetrathionate is normally
produced outside the prokaryotic cell by, most commonly, an animal
host during bacterial infection. As a
result, genes for similar tetrathionate reductases can be identified
in bacterial opportunistic pathogens, for example, Salmonella, Proteus mirabilis, Bordetella parapertussis, Serratia marcescens, and now also in the archaeon A. fulgidus. In all cases the enzymes are predicted to have
similar architectures and topologies (e.g., Figure C) and assembly of such Tat-dependent and MGD and [Fe–S]
cluster-binding enzymes would be expected to require a Tat proofreading
chaperone. For example, the broadly similar heterodimeric DMSO reductase
(DmsAB) from E. coli and Salmonella requires a TorD family chaperone (DmsD) for its correct assembly., However, subtle but interesting differences can be observed. DmsA
is a member of the “type II” molybdoenzymes that contain an active-site serine or aspartate
ligand to the metal. Most Type II enzymes that have been studied (NarG-type
nitrate reductases, DMSO/TMAO reductases, selenate reductases) require,
and are usually coexpressed with, a TorD family chaperone for correct
assembly. On the other hand, tetrathionate reductase is a “type
I” molybdoenzyme, which is a family of enzymes bearing cysteine
or selenocysteine as active site metal ligands including the Nap-like
periplasmic nitrate reductases, the respiratory formate dehydrogenases,
and thiosulfate reductases. The Type
I nitrate reductases require the activity of the NapD family of signal-peptide-binding
proteins for assembly, which bears no relationship at all with the
TorD family. The type I formate dehydrogenases
do not normally require a TorD family chaperone for assembly either,
save for one example in Campylobacter jejuni. However, in this particular case the formate
dehydrogenase seems to have acquired a (type II) selenate reductase-like
signal peptide and its cognate binding protein in a natural gene-shuffling
event. It was a surprise, therefore, to find ttrD located at the 3′ end of the ttrBCA operon
in A. fulgidus, especially as the signal peptide
itself was closely related to that of Salmonella TtrA,
and none of the tetrathionate operons from pathogenic bacteria are
clustered with a gene encoding a TorD family chaperone. Does the Salmonella tetrathionate reductase require a TorD family
chaperone for activity? This work on the A. fulgidus system would imply strongly that it does, and our preliminary experiments
in this area suggest that Salmonella DmsD, as well
as the uncharacterized TorD family protein STM0610, have roles to
play in tetrathionate reductase assembly in that bacterium (Guymer,
D., and Sargent, F., unpublished).

In this work TtrD was found
to bind directly to the TtrA signal peptide. The 11-residue TtrD binding
epitope on TtrA is close to, but does not include, the conserved arginines
that would be essential for protein export (Figure ). This is an important observation because any chaperone
binding motif completely reliant on these conserved arginines would
immediately reduce the specificity of the peptide–chaperone
interaction, and to date a general Tat chaperone that will recognize
all Tat substrates in a given organism has never been identified.
Indeed, despite the conservation of critical residue V15 in both A. fulgidus and Salmonella TtrA, the TtrD
chaperone was unable to bind to the Salmonella TtrA
signal peptide (data not shown), suggesting that TtrD is not a promiscuous
signal-binding protein but specific for its natural partner. The location
of the binding epitope near the N-terminus of the TtrA signal peptide
was a surprise, however, as the E. coli TorD protein
has been shown to bind to its cognate signal peptide at the C-terminus,
well away from the conserved Tat motif.

Understanding how and why TorD family proteins bind to twin-arginine
signal peptides in more detail will require additional structural
information. The interdomain “hinge” region noted previously
in TorD family proteins, consensus EPxDH, corresponds to the sequence stretch Leu86-His-Ala-Asp-His90
in TtrD. Unlike many other structures for TorD family proteins, this
region is very well-defined in the TtrD structure. This pentapeptide
forms a turn linking a region of extended structure after helix α6
with helix α7. These polypeptide segments form a similar structure
in DmsD but are displaced relative to each other in the least-squares
alignment due to a difference in the length of TtrD α6 (data
not shown). In both DmsD and TtrD the conserved aspartate (Asp89 in
TtrD) makes hydrogen-bonding interactions with a conserved glycine-serine
unit (Gly53-Ser54 in TtrD). The acidic side chain accepts hydrogen
bonds donated from the serine amide and hydroxyl groups, and the aspartate
main chain carbonyl accepts a hydrogen bond from the glycine amide.
These interactions serve to connect the hinge to the α3/α4
section on the surface of the protein (Figure B). In TtrD the Asp89 side chain also makes a hydrogen bond with
the side chain of Arg52, further stabilizing this part of the protein
structure. His90 is tucked down into a hydrophobic pocket near helices
α1 and α3. The side chain donates and accepts hydrogen
bonds with the Val48 carbonyl and Ala92 amide. Despite reference to
this stretch of polypeptide as the “hinge”, it should
be noted that TtrD cannot be correctly referred to as a “two-domain”
protein. Rather, TtrD is clearly a globular, single domain, built
around a central four-helix bundle.

There is no obvious, clearly
defined peptide binding cleft on the surface of TtrD. It is clear
that the Tat signal peptide binding epitope does not include the conserved
arginine pair and instead possesses significant hydrophobic character.
Therefore, an inspection of the TtrD structure was carried out to
identify potential complementary features on the surface of the protein.
Two hydrophobic patches are noted on either side of the conserved
hinge segment. First, about 15 Å distant is a patch formed by
residues on helices α3 and α4 and the turn linking helices
α8 and α9. In particular, Leu47, Leu51, Val55, Leu56,
and Pro140 contribute to forming a hydrophobic surface. On the other
side of the hinge, closer at about 10 Å, residues from α5
and α7 (Pro61, Leu64, Val67, Val71, Phe75, His131, Pro134) form
a potential Tat substrate-binding site (Figure C). This second hydrophobic patch occupies a similar position on
the TtrD surface as a hydrophobic patch on the surface of DmsD, which
is made from Leu82, Pro86, Trp87, and Pro124 (data not shown). Although
the two protein structures are very different in this area, the conservation
of a hydrophobic surface is intriguing. Indeed, DmsD Pro86 was found
to be important for the signal peptide interaction, with a Pro86Gln
variant having significantly impaired signal peptide binding activity. Moreover, a DmsD Trp87Tyr variant was found
to bind the DmsA signal peptide more tightly in vitro, also suggesting this residue has a role to play in signal recognition. Further work will be required to investigate
these two potential substrate-binding sites.

Concluding Remarks
Although archaea clearly utilize
the Tat pathway for transport of folded proteins similar to bacteria, this work now demonstrates that Tat proofreading
systems are also at work in these normally extremophilic organisms.
It is anticipated that the structural breakthroughs described here
will lead to a greater understanding of the mechanism of signal peptide
recognition on the Tat pathway.

Supporting Information Available
Tables S1–S3.
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi201852d_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no competing
financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Tracy Palmer (University of Dundee) for useful discussions
and for providing plasmids producing AmiA, β-lactamase and GFP.
We acknowledge the ESRF for synchrotron beam time and excellent staff
support.

Abbreviations
DMSOdimethyl
sulfoxide

Tattwin-arginine
translocation system

TMAOtrimethylamine N-oxide

GSTglutathione S-transferase

GFPgreen fluorescent
protein.

