The dysregulation of endocytosis
and vesicle trafficking is a characteristic feature of many cancers,
particularly during the poorly understood processes of invasion and
metastasis. Critical receptors responsible
for cell signaling, cell–cell interactions, and cell–matrix
interactions all require endocytosis and recycling pathways for their
roles in malignant growth. For example, an increase in the long-loop
recycling of β1-integrins is observed in motile cancer cells,
assisting polarization and invasion., Thus, the proteins
involved in the long-loop recycling pathway are potential anti-invasiveness
cancer targets. While some chemical tools for modulating vesicle trafficking
are available, no specific inhibitors of long-loop recycling have
been discovered to date.− EH domain-containing protein 1
(EHD1) has emerged as a critical regulator of long-loop endocytic
recycling. Genetic knockdown of EHD1 prevents recycling of β1-integrin,
and misregulation and mutation of EHD1 have been implicated in cancer
progression.,

EHD1 binds several key proteins
involved in vesicle trafficking,
many via its EH domain. Proteins with C-terminal EH domains, such
as EHD1, are primarily involved in intracellular vesicular transport,
while proteins with N-terminal EH domains, such as Eps15, are more
involved in endocytosis., These two functional
classes of EH domains also have different substrate preferences, but
all EH domains recognize a core asparagine-proline-phenylalanine (NPF)
motif. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) structures of NPF-containing
peptides bound to EH domains, including the EH domain of EHD1, have
revealed that the NPF motif forms a type 1 β-turn when bound.−

Previous attempts to identify binding partners of EH domains
have
used yeast two-hybrid screens, phage-display selections, and pull-down
assays.− However, all identified inhibitors to date are linear peptides with
low affinities. Using isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC), we measured
the affinity (Kd) of a typical linear
peptide ligand to be 35.7 ± 3.7 μM at 20 °C and a
physiological salt concentration (Table S2 of the ). To date, quantitative determination
of peptide–EH domain affinities relied on NMR and ITC, which
are robust but demanding assays, and typically required low-salt or
no-salt conditions to increase affinity (Table S2 of the ). Without higher-affinity
inhibitors, practical assays with higher throughput and a low level
of reagent consumption (such as fluorescence polarization) have not
been feasible.

Earlier work with linear peptides established
that C-terminal type
EH domains prefer multiple negatively charged residues directly C-terminal
to the NPF motif., Thus, we incorporated the sequence
NPFEE within a head-to-tail cyclic peptide, with the hypothesis that
cyclization would stabilize the β-turn and preorganize the binding
epitope. A tyrosine was also included
N-terminal to the NPF sequence because it is present in endogenous
EHD1-EH ligands and allowed for spectrophotometric determination of
the ligand concentration. For direct comparison to prior work in this
area, we first analyzed ligand binding to EHD1-EH by ITC with no NaCl
and then repeated the experiments at 15 and 150 mM NaCl (Table S2
and Figure S3 of the ). At physiological NaCl concentrations, cyclic peptide cNPF1 had
a Kd of 9.9 ± 0.8 μM. The nearly
4-fold improvement in affinity was consistent at all salt conditions.
This suggested that the increase in affinity was not due to electrostatic
interactions, but rather the conformation of the NPF motif. These
data indicated that the NPF motif and flanking residues were able
to make more favorable contacts with EHD1-EH within the context of
a cyclic scaffold.

While ITC is powerful, we sought a more rapid
and convenient assay
for discovering EHD1-EH inhibitors. To this end, we linked cNPF1 to
fluorescein (cNPF1Flu) to monitor direct EHD1-EH binding
using fluorescence polarization (FP). We also synthesized dye-labeled
cNPF1 analogues with an altered ring size (cNPF2Flu and
cNPF3Flu), cNPF1 analogues with a reduced overall negative
charge (cNPF4Flu and cNPF5Flu), and linear and
non-NPF-containing controls (sequences listed in Table ). FP assays were performed at 15 and
150 mM NaCl (Figure a, Figure S4 of the , and Table ). At 15 mM NaCl, the data fit well to a two-state binding
curve. Reduced affinities were observed at 150 mM NaCl, but these
data were fit well by assuming upper bounds for polarization similar
to those observed at 15 mM (Figure S4 of the ). The FP assay produced Kd values similar to those obtained by ITC, with very similar
trends among linear and cyclic peptides, and among different salt
concentrations. We concluded that this FP assay was reliable for assessing
binding to EHD1-EH. We also showed that increasing the ring size (cNPF2Flu) or decreasing the ring size (cNPF3Flu) within
cNPF1Flu led to poorer binding. This is consistent with
the hypothesis that a specific cyclic structure improves binding of
the NPFEE sequence to EHD1-EH.

(a) Direct binding assay of each probe
with EHD1-EH. Curve fits
match the Kd values reported in Table . (b) Competitive binding assay with cNPF1Flu. Curve fits match the IC50 values reported in Table . Error bars show the standard deviation from three
or more independent trials. Experiments were performed in 25 mM MOPS
(pH 6.8), 1 mM CaCl2, and 15 mM NaCl with 1.5% DMSO and
0.1% Tween 20.

Binding
of Dye-Labeled Probes to EHD1-EH
peptide	sequence	Kd (μM)	low-salt Kd (μM)	
LinFlu	Flu-ββYNPFEE-NH2	31.4 ± 0.5	6.9 ± 0.6	
cNPF1Flu	-YNPFEEGK(Flu)-	16.8 ± 0.1	3.3 ± 0.3	
cNPF2Flu	-YNPFEEγK(Flu)-	20.5 ± 0.3	4.5 ± 0.3	
cNPF3Flu	-YNPFEEK(Flu)-	57.8 ± 0.2	11.3 ± 1.0	
cNPF4Flu	-YNPFAEGK(Flu)-	46.7 ± 0.9	17.4 ± 0.1	
cNPF5Flu	-YNPFEAGK(Flu)-	28.3 ± 0.3	8.7 ± 0.9	
cNPF6Flu	-YNPFEQGK(Flu)-	34.0 ± 0.3	12.8 ± 0.8	
cAPAFlu	-YAPAEEGK(Flu)-	nd	&gt;67	
Kd at
150 mM NaCl.

Kd at
15 mM NaCl.

Not determined.

To rule out the possibility
that nonspecific electrostatics dominates
cNPF1 binding, we tested a cyclic peptide that maintained the negative
charge but lacked the critical NPF motif (cAPAFlu). No
binding was observed up to 67 μM EHD1-EH even at 15 mM NaCl,
demonstrating that an intact NPF motif is the primary requirement
for binding. Next, we probed the effects of reducing the number of
charged residues in the context of a cyclic peptide with cNPF4Flu, cNPF5Flu, and cNPF6Flu. All three
of these inhibitors had less affinity for EHD1-EH, which demonstrated
that negatively charged flanking sequences boost affinity for cyclic
ligands, as they do for linear ligands., Interestingly,
cNPF5Flu exhibited an only 3-fold loss of affinity. This
implies that EHD1-EH ligands with moderate affinity and reduced negative
charge can be further designed and optimized, either as a free acid
or in an esterified form, for later cellular studies.

To evaluate
the selectivity of our probes for EHD1-EH over unrelated
EH domains, we expressed and purified the second EH domain of Eps15
(Eps15-EH2) and used circular dichroism spectroscopy to verify that
it was properly folded (Figure S5b of the ). Under low-salt conditions,
the dye-labeled probes were unable to bind this EH domain up to an
Eps15-EH2 concentration of 50 μM (Figure S4d of the ). This provided initial
evidence that these probes are selective for the C-terminal type of
EH domain (EHD1-EH) over the N-terminal type of EH domain (Eps15-EH2).

To develop an assay suitable for high-throughput screening applications,
we used cNPF1Flu to set up a FP competitive binding assay.
The probe was used with a range of inhibitors to establish its effectiveness
for future screens (Figure b and Table ). As with the direct binding assays, cNPF1 was
the strongest inhibitor. An analogue of cNPF1Flu with an
acetyl group in place of the dye was also tested and showed 2-fold
less potent inhibition (Table ). This suggests
that the introduction of the dye decreases the cNPF1 affinity and
that its positioning within the cNPF1 ring could be further optimized.
cNPF4 was tested as an example of a lower-affinity inhibitor, and
cAPA was used as a negative control. Because the results showed the
same trends observed in direct binding assays, we concluded that this
competitive binding assay represents a useful assay for high-throughput
screening for EH domain inhibitors.

Competition Assay
for EHD1-EH Binding
peptide	sequence	IC50 (μM)	
linear	Ac-YNPFEEGG-NH2	107 ± 1	
cNPF1	-YNPFEEGG-	49.2 ± 0.2	
cNPF1B	-YNPFEEGK(Ac)-	100 ± 1	
cNPF4	-YNPFAEGG-	240 ± 1	
cAPA	-YAPAEEGG-	&gt;450	
As a complement to
screening, we also sought a basis for the structure-based
design of additional macrocyclic EH domain inhibitors. We determined
the solution structures of the linear NPF-containing peptide and the
cyclic peptide cNPF1 (Figure ). The linear
peptide was relatively unstructured in aqueous solution (Figure a), though some low-energy conformations showed
the characteristic β-turn. cNPF1, by contrast, adopted a tight
ensemble of well-structured conformations in aqueous solution (Figure b). This is unusual for a cyclic octamer, and the
surprising degree of structure is likely promoted by the turn-forming
NPF sequence. The NPF motif of cNPF1 formed a β-turn in solution
that was nearly identical to the turn observed in linear NPF motifs
bound to EHD1-EH. When superimposed with
the NPF motif within a previously determined NPF/EHD1-EH structure,
the backbone of cNPF1 overlaid with the NPFE sequence of the ligand
with a root-mean-square deviation of 0.333 Å (Figure c). A posed model of cNPF1 within the binding site
of EHD1-EH (Figure d) provides a clear rationale
for the observed structure–activity relationships within cNPF1
analogues and provides an excellent starting point for the structure-based
design of additional cyclic peptide and small-molecule macrocycle
inhibitors of EHD1-EH.

(a) Thirty lowest-energy
structures calculated for the linear NPF-containing
peptide (Ac-YNPFEEGG-NH2 sequence) in aqueous solution.
The NPF motif is colored green, and other residues are colored magenta.
(b) Thirty lowest-energy structures calculated for cNPF1 in aqueous
solution. The NPF motif is colored green, and other residues are colored
cyan. (c) Overlay of cNPF1 with the structure of the YNPFEE sequence
from a peptide bound to EHD1-EH. The backbone overlay for the residues
NPFE has a root-mean-square deviation of 0.333 Å. cNPF1 is colored
as in panel b, and YNPFEE is colored gray. (d) Solution structure
of cNPF1 positioned in the binding pocket of EHD1-EH. cNPF1 is colored
as in panel b, and EHD1-EH is shown as a surface colored according
to electrostatics.

There are relatively
few chemical agents that can be used to study
vesicle trafficking, and even molecules with relatively high IC50 values are welcomed as useful tools. For example, the small
molecule dynasore, first reported in 2006, has an IC50 of
∼15 μM in a biochemical assay of dynamin GTPase activity. It is widely used to study clathrin-dependent
endocytosis despite the fact that it is typically applied at a concentration
of 80 μM. By this standard, cNPF1
and related molecules have potential as chemical biology tools, pending
further work to maximize target affinity and cell penetration. The
4-fold improvement in affinity for cNPF1 over those of linear peptides
also allowed the development of a straightforward fluorescence polarization
competition assay. This assay is high-throughput-ready and will accelerate
the development of additional classes of constrained peptides as inhibitors,
as well as small-molecule inhibitors that target the same pocket.
These approaches will increase the likelihood that the overall effort
produces cell-penetrant, reasonably potent antagonists of EH domain-dependent
vesicle trafficking pathways. Ultimately, cNPF1 and related EHD1 inhibitors
will allow pharmacological investigation of EHD1’s roles in
vesicle trafficking and its importance in cancer invasion and metastasis.

Supporting Information Available
Procedures for
peptide synthesis,
protein preparation, FP assays, and NMR experiments, Figures S1–S6,
and Tables S1–S7. This material is available free of charge
via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500744q_si_001.pdf

This work was
supported in part by National Institutes of Health Grant DP2-0D007303
to J.A.K. A.J.K. was supported in part by Department of Education
GAANN Grant P200A090303.

The authors
declare no competing financial interests.

