Leptospira spp. are pathogenic
spirochetes that
can cause multiorgan failure in both humans and animals. The associated neglected tropical disease, leptospirosis,
is reemerging in the United States but is especially prevalent in
developing nations., While the molecular details of
leptospiral infection are poorly understood, the initial steps of
host attachment are being uncovered., Host-interacting
surface proteins from virulent bacteria have been implicated in pathogenesis; however, these same proteins offer an opportunity
for the development of vaccine antigens, serological markers, and
attachment blockers. In the outer membrane of Leptospira spp., over 12 proteins have been shown to express at detectable
levels, yet articles describing high-resolution
structures of only two leptospiral surface proteins, LipL32 and Lp49,
have been published.− The occurrence of Leptospira immunoglobulin-like
genes (Lig) is limited to the pathogenic subset of Leptospira species and is being developed for use as a marker for leptospirosis. Lig proteins are promiscuous adhesins and bind
to a wide variety of extracellular proteins. The Lig protein family is composed of the outer surface proteins
LigA, LigB (Figure A), and LigC, which contain
13, 12, and 13 immunoglobulin-like (Ig-like) domains, respectively.− The N-terminal 630 amino acids of LigA and LigB (LigCon), covering
the first 61/2 Ig-like domains, are highly conserved
between the two Lig proteins, but the remaining C-terminal domains
are variable (Figure A)., In addition, a non-Ig-like region is located at the C-terminus of
LigB and LigC. The modular Ig-like domain repeats allow binding to
a large number of host proteins since each Ig-like domain may exhibit
different specificities. A host-interacting region of LigB is located
within the LigBCen2 construct (amino acids 1014–1165 of LigB),
which contains part of the 11th and the entire 12th Ig-like domain
(LigBCen2R) as well as a disordered region from the non-Ig-like C-terminus
(LigBCen2NR)., LigBCen2 binds to fibronectin
(Fn), elastin, laminin, and fibrinogen (Fg).− The ability
of LigBCen2 to impart variable host binding interactions suggests
that LigB plays an important role in Leptospira infections.

Ig-like
domain, LigB-12, interacts with Fg. (A) A schematic showing
the location of domains within the LigB protein. (B) Binding of LigB
constructs to Fg. Increasing concentrations of His-tagged LigBCen2R
(positive control), LigB-12, or LigB-4 (negative control) were added
to microtiter plate wells coated with 1 μM of Fg. Bound proteins
were detected by ELISA.

Bacterial Ig-like (Big) domain-containing surface proteins
have
been identified in a number of pathogenic species and provide an evolutionarily
tunable protein-binding functionality that is convenient for mimicking
natural host interactions., Although the sequence
identity among Big domains is quite low, the structures of intimin
from Escherichia coli and invasin from Yersinia
pseudotuberculosis are similar and representative of the
stably folded β-sheets that are characteristic of many Big domains.− The Big domain β-sandwich is typically stabilized by a conserved
hydrophobic core and a Greek key topology. Here, we report the NMR solution structure for LigB-12 and highlight
features of the Ig-like domain structure from the Lig protein family.
LigB-12 is the 12th and most C-terminal Ig-like domain from LigB and
the only full Ig-like domain in LigBCen2. In addition, we have identified
LigB-12 as the physiologically relevant region involved in LigBCen2
binding to Fg. The LigB-12 structure is compared with the Ig-like
domains from other pathogen surface proteins., The LigB Ig-like domains contribute the scaffold for the Lig family
of surface proteins and should aid in the understanding of Leptospira–host interactions as well as in the development
of ways to treat and diagnose leptospirosis.

Experimental Procedures
Cloning,
Expression, and Purification
Histidine-tagged
LigBCen2R (amino acids 1014–1123), LigB-4 (amino acids 309–403),
and LigB-12 (amino acids 1029–1123) were cloned from L. interrogans serovar Pomona (L. Pomona)
as described previously., Histidine-tagged, sumo-fused
LigB-12 was constructed by inserting the PCR-amplified LigB-12 fragment
into the vector pET28-His-Sumo between
the BamHI and HindIII sites (primers
5′-CGCGGATCCGCAGCAACCCTTTCT-3′
and 5′-CCCAAGCTTCTACGTGTCCGTTTTGTTTAC-3′).
LigB-11 (amino acids 939–1033) was also generated in the same
way as LigB-12 by using the forward primer 5′-CGCGGATCCGCTGCCACGTTAGAT-3′ and the reverse primer
5′-CCCAAGCTTCTAAAGGGTTGCTGCGCT-3′.
Amplified PCR product was digested by BamHI and HindIII and then ligated into pET28-His-Sumo vector. Similarly,
two-domain construct LigB-11,12 (amino acids 939–1123) was
amplified and constructed with the same forward primer used for LigB-11
and the same reverse primer used for LigB-12. LigB-12 mutations (F1053C
and P1040C/F1053C) were generated using the Quik Change protocol (Stratagene).
The correct sequences for all constructs were confirmed at the Cornell
DNA Sequencing Facility. His-tagged LigBCen2R, LigB-4, and LigB-12
protein constructs were purified using the protocols previously described., The protocols were modified slightly for the His-sumo protein constructs,
LigB-11, LigB-12, and LigB11,12. After isopropyl β-d-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG)-induced protein expression in E. coli, the bacterial cells were harvested and lysed by
high-pressure cell disruption systems (Constant Systems Ltd.) at 20000
psi. After removal of cell debris by centrifugation, the soluble fraction
was incubated with phosphate buffered saline (PBS; 137 mM sodium chloride,
10 mM sodium phosphate, 2.7 mM potassium chloride, 1.8 mM potassium
phosphate) equilibrated Ni-NTA resin for 2 h. The resin was washed
with aliquots of PBS buffer of increasing imidazole concentrations
up to 30 mM, and His-sumo-tagged LigB protein was then eluted with
200 mM imidazole–PBS buffer (pH 7.4). The sumo specific protease,
His-tagged Ulp-1, was applied to remove the N-terminal His-sumo tag
from the LigB protein construct and digestion was allowed to proceed
overnight at 4 °C with dialysis against PBS buffer (pH 7.4).
Mixtures of His-tagged Ulp-1 and untagged LigB protein were separated
by passing the sample over an additional Ni-NTA column. The untagged
LigB protein was washed off of the column and concentrated. For NMR
experiments, His-sumo-tagged LigB proteins were expressed in E. coli that were grown in isotopically enriched, vitamin-supplemented
minimal media. Stable isotopes were purchased
from Cambridge Isotopes (Cambridge, MA). Prior to NMR sample loading,
the labeled proteins were exchanged into PBS, pH 7.0, 1 mM sodium
azide, and 10% D2O by successive concentration and dilution
and finally concentrated to 0.5 mM.

ELISA Binding Assays
The ability of LigB proteins to
bind to human plasma fibrinogen (Fg) (obtained from Sigma-Aldrich)
was assessed using an ELISA assay as previously described. Various concentrations (0, 0.31, 0.63, 1.25,
2.5, 5, 10, and 20 μM) of histidine-tagged LigBCen2R (positive
control), LigB-4 (negative control), and LigB-12 were added to microtiter
wells coated with 1 μM Fg or BSA (negative control, data not
shown) in PBS buffer. Following 1 h incubation at 37 °C, the
wells were washed with PBS buffer containing 0.05% Tween 20 (PBS-T)
to remove unbound LigB proteins. To detect the interaction of each
LigB truncate with Fg, mouse anti-His tag antibody (1:500) and horseradish
peroxidase (HRP) conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG antibody were used
as primary and secondary antibody (Eugene). Finally, 100 μL
of HRP substrates was applied to develop the color and then the plates
were read at 630 nm with an ELISA plate reader (Biotek EL-312, Winooski,
VT). To determine the end-point dissociation constant (KD), the binding curves were fit with the following equation
using KaleidaGraph software (Abelbeck software, Reading, PA):

Measurement
of Protein Thiols (Free Cysteine)
An Ellman’s
reagent assay was used to assess the
presence of free cysteine versus intramolecular disulfide bonds in
LigB-12 cysteine mutants. LigB-12 wild type or F1053C or P1040C/F1053C
mutant (20 μM) was treated with 1 mM of 5,5′-dithiobis(2-nitrobenzoic
acid) (DTNB) in Tris buffer (pH 7.4) containing 4 M urea for 5 min.
The absorption intensity of reaction product, 2-nitro-5-thiobenzoic
acid (TNB2–), was measured at 412 nm, which indicated
the relative amount of free cysteine in each protein sample. In a
complementary assay, the formation of intermolecular disulfide bonds
was used to infer the presence of free cysteine in LigB-12 wild-type
and mutants. Each set of protein samples was preincubated with 100
μM oxidized glutathione (GSSG) at room temperature for 1 h.
Subsequently, the protein samples were heated at 37, 60, and 100 °C
for 10 min and then were separated on the nonreducing SDS-PAGE gel. β-mercaptoethanol
(5%) was also added to wild type and mutant proteins to serve as a
reducing condition counterpart. Proteins involved in intermolecular
disulfides migrated with twice the molecular weight as expected for
a monomer.

NMR Spectroscopy and Resonance Assignments
NMR spectra
were acquired on a 500 MHz Varian spectrometer at 286 K. Spectral
assignments were obtained from HNCOCA, HNCACO, HNCA, HNCO, CBCANH,
HNCBCACO, CCONH, HCCONH, and TOCSY-NHSQC experiments performed on 15N-only and 15N, 13C-labeled protein.
Distance constraints were generated using NOESY–15N-HSQC, NOESY–13C-HSQC, and aromatic NOESY–13C-HSQC. Additional secondary structural constraints were
taken from stable hydrogen bonded amides determined from 1H,15N-HSQC spectra of hydrogen–deuterium (H-D)
exchanged protein. For H-D exchange, an initial control spectrum was
taken in 90% H2O/10% D2O. The sample was lyophilized
and resuspended in 100% D2O. Immediately after exchange
into D2O, the sample was transferred to an NMR tube and
was measured with a series of 12 1H,15N HSQC
experiments. In the proton dimension, 2048 points (real plus imaginary)
were recorded with 256 points in the nitrogen dimension (real plus
imaginary) for 16 scans per increment. Each experiments lasted ∼82
min. For residual dipolar coupling (RDC) measurements, 15N-labeled protein was aligned in 5% stretched acrylamide gels. Spectra were processed using NMRPipe and analyzed using SPARKY (T. D. Goddard and
D. G. Kneller, UCSF). Residue assignments were generated manually
and confirmed with the PINE server v1.0. The structure of LigB-12 was determined using NIH-Xplor with distance constraints, dipolar coupling
constraints, hydrogen bond constraints, Promega-determined proline
conformations, and dihedral angle restraints
generated using TALOS-N. Structure validation
was performed using PROCHECK-NMR, MolProbity, PSVS, and SuperPose. Assigned chemical shifts and coordinates were
deposited in the PDB and BMRB databases under the PDB accession code 2MOG and the BMRB accession
number: 19942.

Sequence Analysis and Modeling
The
Ig-like domains
from LigA, LigB, and LigC from L. Pomona were aligned
with the LigB-12 construct sequence (Figure S1, ), and residue conservation was determined
and illustrated using the HMMER software suit. Homology models of LigB-1 through LigB-11 and LigB-11,12
were generated using Modeller with the
LigB-12 structure as a template. The pI for each Ig-like domain was
computed using the ExPASy server, while
electrostatic surfaces were calculated using Delphi.

Results
LigBCen2R and LigB-12 Constructs
Initial attempts to
gain structural insight into the Lig protein family focused on the
previously characterized LigBCen2R construct, which is composed of
the last 15 residues of the 11th Ig-like domain and the entire 12th
Ig-like domain (Figure A). NMR experiments
performed on 15N-only and 15N, 13C-labeled LigBCen2R were used to identify preliminary 15N–1H backbone assignments (results not shown).
The regions from partial domains were not well structured and could
not be assigned. The start of the LigBCen2R protein corresponding
to the C-terminal end of the 11th Ig-like domain has homology to the
final two predicted β strands in LigB’s 12th Ig-like
domain. When the solvent was exchanged to deuterium oxide, the remaining 15N–1H backbone peaks corresponded to unexchanged
hydrogen-bonded secondary structural elements and could be assigned
to residues from the 12th Ig-like domain. The partial 11th Ig-like
domain at the N-terminus of LigBCen2R probably does not contribute
to hydrogen bonded secondary structural elements and may require additional
β-strands to complete proper folding of its β-sheet.

The construct, LigB-12, residues S1029–T1123 from LigB, was
designed to remove the nonstructured regions and isolate the core
Ig-like domain. The alignment of each unique Ig-like domain from LigA
(six common with LigB and seven LigA-only), LigB (six unique), and
LigC (six unique) suggests that the secondary structure of LigB-12
is shared by the family of 31 domains (Figure S1, ). The sequence is well conserved for
the predicted β-sheets, which comprise the major elements of
Ig-like domain folds. The ability of LigB-12 to retain the binding
affinity displayed by LigBCen2R for Fg was investigated using ELISA
(Figure B). The KD of LigBCen2R and LigB-12 were similar (LigBCen2R, KD = 117 ± 11 μM; LigB-12, KD = 125 ± 20 μM), suggesting that LigB-12 is
the Fg-interacting Ig-like domain from the LigB protein. The negative
control LigB-4 (residues T309–L403) does not bind to Fg.

NMR Solution Structure of LigB-12
The 15N,1H-HSQC NMR spectrum of LigB-12 (sequence; Figure A) was well dispersed suggesting a folded Ig-like
domain protein (Figure B). NMR spectra of
LigB-12 was found to be more stable at 286 than 298 K over long acquisition
times (1 week); therefore all data used for structure determination
was obtained at 286 K. Although chemical shift resonances were assigned
for 95.1% of the backbone, the following residues could not be assigned
in the 15N,1H-HSQC NMR spectrum: S1029, A1030,
P1040*, T1047, S1050, Q1078, P1101*, and T1103. Chemical-shift derived
dihedral angles, NOEs, RDCs, and H-D exchange data from NMR spectra
were used to determine the solution structure of the LigB-12 construct.
P1040 was determined to favor a cis conformation
by Promega. Of the 100 calculated structures
using NIH-Xplor, the 20 lowest energy
structures were selected to represent the LigB-12 ensemble (Table ). The PROCHECK-NMR Ramachandran statistics (from PDB submission; includes all nonterminal,
non-glycine, and non-proline residues) provide an indication of the
overall structural quality with most favored regions at 86.7%, additionally
allowed regions at 11.3%, generously allowed regions at 1.7%, and
disallowed regions at 0.3%.

Structure of LigB-12 determined using NMR spectroscopy
(PDB ID 2MOG). (A) The primary
sequence and secondary structure of LigB-12 is shown. Half circles
indicate the core tryptophan (green), residues aligned with the proposed
LigC-2 disulfide (cyan) (Figure C), and additional
residues that are important to the hydrophobic core (yellow) (Figure A). (B) Residue assignments are labeled on the 15N,1H-HSQC NMR spectrum of LigB-12 obtained on
a Varian 500 MHz NMR spectrometer at 13 °C. (C) Overlay of the
20 lowest energy structures of LigB-12 calculated from the NMR constraints.
(D) A schematic of the secondary structure of LigB-12 indicating the
position of residues P1040, F1053, and W1073. (E) The lowest energy
NMR solution structure of LigB-12.

Structural Statistics for the NMR
Structure of LigB-12 (PDB ID 2MOG) (20 of 100)
NMR Distance and Dihedral Constraints	
Distance Constraints	 	
total NOE	1504	
intraresidue	489	
inter-residue	 	
sequential
(|i – j| = 1)	437	
medium-range (|i – j| ≤ 5)	137	
long-range (|i – j| &gt; 5)	441	
hydrogen
bonds	39	
Total Dihedral Angle
Restraints	 	
ϕ	85	
ψ	81	
χ1	36	
total RDCs	50	
Percent Resonance Assignments	 	
backbone,
with CA (%)	96.0	
side chain, without CA (%)	83.8	
Structure Statistics	
Constraint Violations (mean
and SD)	 	
distance constraints	 	
number &gt;0.2 Å	1.2 ± 1.1	
rms deviation
(Å)	0.015 ± 0.002	
dihedral
angle constraints	 	
number &gt;5°	1.9 ± 0.9	
rms deviation
(deg)	0.857 ± 0.110	
RDCs	 	
number &gt;5 (Qa)	0.0 ± 0.0	
rms deviation
(Qa)	0.174 ± 0.052	
Deviations from Idealized
Geometry	 	
bond lengths (Å)	0.002 ± 0.000	
bond angles
(deg)	0.440 ± 0.010	
impropers
(deg)	0.380 ± 0.025	
Average Pairwise rms Deviation
from Average Model (Å) Residues L1033–V1118	 	
backbone	0.397	
heavy	0.723	
Ramachandran Statistics	
PROCHECK-NMR (includes all nonterminal, non-glycine,
and non-proline
residues)	
most favored
regions (%)	86.7	
additionally allowed regions (%)	11.3	
generously allowed regions (%)	1.7	
disallowed regions (%)	0.3	
The LigB-12 structure displays the characteristic
fold found in
other Ig-like domains (Figures C,E). The fold
is composed of β-strands A–G, which form a β-sandwich
based on a Greek key folding arrangement (Figure D). Two layers of β-sheets close around a hydrophobic
side-chain core. The more extensive layer is divided into sheets 1a
(β-strands A, B, and C) and 1b (β-strands B′, D,
and E) each containing a portion of β-strand B separated by
a break and a slight twist but otherwise composed of distinct β-strands.
Sheet 1b participates in forming the β-sandwich with sheet 2
(β-strands C′, F, and G), while sheet 1a extends beyond
the complementary surface with sheet 2 leaving both surfaces solvent-exposed.
The β-strands A, C, and G are also not continuous with each
participating in two sheets. The break in β-strand C is almost
a full helical turn allowing for the strand to interact directly with
both layers of the β-sandwich. A single helical turn between
β-strands C and D is also present. Ramachandran statistics using
MolProbity (includes glycine and proline)
identify P1040 (A–A′ loop), N1042 (A–A′
loop), T1047 (A′–B′ loop), and A1097 (E–F
loop) as major torsion angle outliers (disallowed) in 25–100%
of models. By limiting the Ramachandran analysis to residues L1033–S1039,
S1050–I1096, and N1100–V1118, we improved the overall
quality of the structure to 96.3% in favored regions (vs 90.3% for
residues L1033–V1118), 3.7% in allowed regions (vs 6.3% for
residues L1033–V1118), and 0.0% in disallowed regions (vs 3.4%
for residues L1033–V1118). Since the per residue rms deviation
for the A–A′ loop to the A′–B′
loop and the E–F loop are higher than the overall rms deviation
for residues L1033–V1118, these loops can be described as having
a high degree of structural variability relative to the rest of the
LigB-12 domain ensemble. P1040 within the A–A′ loop
favors a cis conformation but may be present in trans form leading to increased structural variability of
the region extending to the A′–B′ loop and possibly
affecting the neighboring E–F loop. In addition, the possibility
of a calcium ion binding site was investigated on LigB-12 in 3-(N-morpholino)propanesulfonic acid (MOPS) buffer at pH 7.0.
No chemical shift changes were observed after a titration of either
CaCl2 up to 5 mM or EGTA up to 5 mM suggesting that calcium
ions do not induce an overall conformational change in LigB-12 and
are not an integral component of the fold.

Based on the identified
LigB-12 domain, two additional constructs
for LigB-11, the full homologous Ig-like domain neighbor preceding
LigB-12, and for LigB-11,12, the double Ig-like domain that includes
both LigB-11 and LigB-12, were generated. The 1H,15N-HSQC spectra of LigB-11 (green) and LigB-12 (red) were overlaid
onto the LigB-11,12 (black) spectrum (Figure S2, ). The high degree of spectral similarity
between the isolated domains and the two domain construct suggests
that the individual LigB-12 and LigB-11 constructs are representative
of its Ig-like domain structure in the context of the multiple linked
domains found in the full length protein.

Hydrophobic Core
The residues located between the two
layers of the LigB-12 β-sandwich form a hydrophobic core for
LigB-12 (Figure A). The sequences from the β-strands that line the folded core
are generally composed of alternating buried hydrophobic and surface-exposed
hydrophilic residues. Aromatic residues from each of the layers, F1053
(sheet 1) and W1073 (sheet 2), interact and contribute to a hydrophobic
center (Figures A,D and A). In addition, the side chain NH of W1073 does not efficiently
exchange with solvent as observed by NMR-based deuterium exchange
experiments (Figures B,C). In the structure,
the backbone carbonyl oxygen of T1068 points toward the W1073 side
chain nitrogen and is in proximity to be its hydrogen-bonding partner
(Figure A). The unique hydrogen bond provides
an anchor for the twist in β-strand C that rotates almost a
full helical turn at the break in sheet 1.

Hydrophobic core of LigB-12.
(A) Structure of LigB-12 showing the
residues in the hydrophobic core. (B) A section of the LigB-12 15N,1H NMR spectrum (red) is shown overlaid with
a spectrum of the same protein after replacing the solvent with D2O for 12 h (blue). (C) H–D exchange data for the five
backbone amide protons shown in panel B. Note the slow exchange of
the side chain of W1073.

Lig Protein Ig-like Domain Conservation
An alignment
of the 12 LigB repeats reveals a high level of conservation for residues
facing the hydrophobic core (Figure S1, ). The degree of conservation for the 12 LigB domains
was mapped onto the LigB-12 structure in Figure A. The residues surrounding
the core tryptophan, W1073 (green surface), are well conserved. The
high level of sequence consensus decreases as a function of distance
from the central tryptophan residue (Figure B). The Ig-like domains from Lig proteins are likely derived from
a common evolutionary Ig-like domain through gene replication, and residue conservation across the domain set
can provide clues to a residue’s importance. Conserved residues
are clustered in the core of the Lig protein Ig-like fold suggesting
that all 12 repeats have homologous structures and common folding
pathways that are stabilized by a conserved hydrophobic core.

Conservation
of Lig Ig-like domains. (A) Residue conservation mapped
onto the LigB-12 structure. The core tryptophan, W1073, is shown with
a green surface, while atoms for the neighboring residues are also
shown in stick representation. (B) The average residue consensus for
aligned LigB domains plotted as a function of distance to the core
tryptophan (W1073 in LigB-12). (C) The disulfide seen in LigC-2 was
transplanted to LigB-12 by making the P1040C/F1053C mutation of LigB-12.
Shown is the model of the mutant protein (white) overlaid on the LigB-12
structure (beige). (D) Absorption of the reaction product (TNB2–) at 412 nm after DTNB modification of a free cysteine
for wild-type LigB-12 and the F1053C and P1040C/F1053C mutations (n = 3). (E) A nonreducing SDS-PAGE gel was used to detect
the formation of interdomain disulfides at increasing temperatures.
A significant increase in disulfide-trapped dimers was seen for the
single cysteine but not the double cysteine mutant.

LigC-2 Disulfide
Among all of the
31 unique Lig protein
Ig-like domains only three cysteines are present with two occurring
in LigC-2. The two LigC-2 cysteines are positioned on neighboring
β-strands, A and B, and are close enough to form a disulfide
bond as suggested by a model of LigB-12 containing cysteine mutations
(P1040C, F1053C) at the corresponding sites (Figure C). When the mutations are modeled as a disulfide, the LigB-12
structure is left unaltered as illustrated by backbone RMSDs mapped
onto the model. The potential for the internal disulfide to exist
in LigC-2 and to be transplanted to LigB-12, a more divergent Lig
Ig-like domain, was tested by generating
the P1040C/F1053C mutant of LigB-12.

LigB-12, the F1053C mutant,
and the P1040C/F1053C mutant were reacted with 5,5′-dithiobis(2-nitrobenzoic
acid) (DTNB) to investigate the presence of free cysteines. Under
denaturing conditions (4 M urea), both the wild-type and P1040C/F1053C
mutant exhibited little reactivity while the F1053C mutant reacted
with DTNB (Figure D). The difference between
the F1053C mutant and other constructs is statistically significant
(F-test p-value = 0.0), while the difference between
wild-type and P1040C/F1053C mutant is not statistically significant
(F-test p-value = 0.199). In addition, when the three
LigB-12 constructs were incubated at various temperatures under oxidizing
conditions, disulfide cross-linked dimers were observable on a nonreducing
Coomassie blue-stained gel as the incubation temperature increased
for the F1053C mutant (Figure E). A decrease
in the F1053C mutant monomer band (10 kDa) corresponded to the increase
in the dimer band (20 kDa) suggesting that a free cysteine (F1053C)
was available for intermolecular cross-linking. Essentially no dimer
was observed for the wild-type and P1040C/F1053C mutant. The inability
to detect free cysteines for the P1040C/F1053C mutant in either assay
suggests that an internal disulfide forms as predicted by the LigB-12
structure-based model.

LigB-12 Specific Divergence
The
degree of conservation
for the set of LigB Ig-like domains from Figure  was further analyzed for residue specific deviation of LigB-12 (Figure A). A patch of residues facing the non-Ig-like terminal
domain and near to the C-terminus of LigB-12 showed nonconserved changes
at positions that are conserved for the other 11 Ig-like domain sequences.
Specifically, a conserved stretch of three residues, A–K–G,
is located in a loop between β-strands A and B for most of the
LigB Ig-like domains; however in LigB-12, the corresponding AB loop
sequence was unrelated, N1046–T1047–T1048. While the
nonconserved surface provides a potential LigB-12 interaction site
with the terminal non-Ig-like domain, the complementary conserved
surface in other LigB domains likely interacts with the immediate
Ig-like domain neighbor. The conserved lysine (in 15 of 19 LigA and
LigB Ig-like domains) projects toward the neighboring C-terminal Ig-like
domain. A model of LigB-12 and the preceding (11th) Ig-like domain
was generated using Modeller with the
LigB-12 structure as a template (Figure B).
The conserved lysine from the 11th Ig-like domain, K957, is readily
positioned toward a conserved aspartic acid, D1061, on the loop between
β-strands B and C of the 12th Ig-like domain. The conservation
of this lysine–aspartic acid pair suggests a possible salt
bridge. Electrostatic interactions between similar positions are also
present in between the three Big (bacterial Ig-like) domains found
in the invasin (Yersinia pseudotuberculosis) structure (Figure C).

Divergence
of Lig Ig-like domains. (A) A surface showing and structure
colored to show the divergence between LigB-12 and the consensus sequence
for the LigB domains. The deviation occurs at a patch near the C-terminus
that would be near the terminal non-Ig-like domain. (B) A set of five
models of LigB-11,12 is shown illustrating the linker and potential
interdomain interactions. The models depict a range of relative orientations
that would allow for the formation of a domain–domain salt
bridge. (C) The crystal structure of invasin (1CWV) is depicted highlighting
possible salt bridges between neighboring Big domains.

Ig-like Domain Surface Differences
The structural homology
of the Lig protein Ig-like domains allows us to generate models of
the protein set. A comparison of the modeled structures highlights
potentially important differences between the Lig domains. Differences
on the surface of the Lig domains are greater than within the hydrophobic
core and may reveal regions that interact with host proteins. The
calculated pI values for the Lig protein domains are likely to be
either acidic (pI = 4–5) or basic (pI = 8–10). Models
of the LigB domains were aligned, and the electrostatic surfaces (calculated
using Delphi) are displayed in Figure A. The first four repeats are calculated to have
an acidic pI and are characterized by patches of negative charge;
whereas the next five repeats are much more basic, with corresponding
positively charged patches. The distribution of charged domains is
similar for both LigA and LigB, that is, a stretch of negatively charged
repeats near the membrane followed by a stretch of positively charged
domains at the midsection of the Ig-like domain stretch, and finally
a stretch of negatively charged domains. In contrast, all of the domains
of LigC are negatively charged. The arrangement of LigA, LigB, and
LigC is summarized in Figure B,C. The difference
in surface charges could represent points of electrostatic interaction
with host proteins.

Electrostatics of Lig Ig-like domains. (A) Electrostatic
surfaces
of modeled repeats of LigB, showing differences in surface charges
computed with Delphi (2kT/e (blue),
0kT/e (white), and −2kT/e (red)). (B) A schematic diagram of
the domains of LigA, LigB, and LigC (N-terminal anchor, yellow squares;
Ig-like domains, red/blue beads; C-terminal domains, green diamonds).
The Ig-like domains are colored by calculated pI values, and blue/red
arrows indicate positive/negative charges for a potential domain–domain
salt bridge. (C) A plot of the calculated pI for each domain of LigA,
LigB and LigC.

Bacterial Ig-like Domain
Fold Comparison
Insertions
and deletions within the set of homologous Lig domains are positioned
at the D–E and G–F loops and also the A–A′
and C–C′ transitions. The largest differences between
Lig protein Ig-like domains can be seen in the variation in the loop
between the D and E β-strands. Interestingly, these positions
are located toward the middle of the domain near the interface between
sheets 1a and 2. Changes in the length of these loops can affect the
extent to which sheet 1a is exposed. Comparing the Lig protein Ig-like
domain structure to other bacterial Ig-like (Big) domain structures
illustrates the importance of the D–E and the C–C′
β-strands to the shape of the folded protein (Figure ). Big_1 domains from intimin (Escherichia
coli) (1F00) and invasin (Yersinia pseudotuberculosis) (1CWV) have long D–E β-strands with only
three hydrogen bonds connecting the C β-strand with the B β-strand
as a subtle hairpin within the loop before the strand analogous to
the C′ β-strand initiates a twist to sheet 2. The resulting
structure is almost a full β-sandwich with little of sheet 1
uncovered. Big_3 domain structures from a putative bacillolysin (Bacillus cereus) (2KPN) and a putative endo-β-N-acetylglucosaminidase (Streptococcus pneumonia) (2L7Y) lack the
equivalent D–E β-strands and the Greek key structure.
The Big_3 domains are therefore narrower along the short axis. While
both Bacillus cereus and S. pneumonia Big_3 domains have a turn connecting the C β-strand in sheet
1 to the C′ β-strand in sheet 2, the Bacillus Big_3 domain has a full sheet 2 with a β-sandwich along the
entire domain and the Streptococcus Big_3 domain
has a short sheet2 with only two-thirds of the domain’s sheet
1 participating in a β-sandwich. The LigB-12 structure is classified
as a Big_2 domain and is somewhat intermediate between the Streptococcus Big_3 domain and the Big_1 domains. The comparison
across Big domains may yield a better understanding of Ig-like domains
for design and bioengineering technologies.

Comparison of structures
of various Big domains (invasin, 1CWV; intimin, 1F00; BC Big_3, 2KPN; SP Big_3, 2L7Y), highlighting folding
patterns and secondary structures. A set of structures illustrates
the relationship between the position of the C and C′ loop
and the length of sheet 2. The Greek key structure of invasin, intimin,
and LigB-12 is colored yellow. Note the lack of the Greek key structure
due to the absence of D and E β-strands in Big_3 domains. The
length of the D–E loop is highly variable among Lig domains.
An alignment of sequences for the illustrated structures can be found
in the  (Figure S3).

Discussion
Surface
proteins from pathogenic bacteria offer novel opportunities
for combating dynamic and evolving disease threats. Lig proteins function
as adhesins and are directly involved in the binding of numerous host
cell matrix proteins. The individual Ig-like domains from LigA and
LigB possess various affinities for different host proteins. Here,
we show that the terminal Ig-like domain from LigB, LigB-12, binds
to Fg. Protein constructs containing the LigB-12 domain also provide
host protein interactions with Fn and tropoelastin.− Fg, Fn, and tropoelastin are all accessible to invading
pathogens and provide important contacts for initiating an infection.

The structure of LigB-12 provides an important view of a surface-expressed
Ig-like domain from leptospirosis-causing pathogens as well as insight
into the overall architecture of the Lig protein family. Within Lig
proteins, the oblong Ig-like domains are organized as multiple repeats
of up to 13 homologous domains with only a few amino acids between
neighboring domains. Because the domains are tethered together near
the antipodal points of its longest diameter, the multiple domains
have the potential to form long extensions. Crystal structures of
multiple Ig-like domains from various proteins, including fibronectin
and invasin, adopt such a linear confirmation., For similar tandem Ig domains, dynamic conformations have also been
shown to exist in solution. An outstretched
extracellular Lig protein structure could explain the preference for
the more C-terminal variable Ig-like domains to interact with host
proteins., Associations between host proteins and the
conserved Ig-like domains that are positioned closer to the N-terminal
membrane-bound domain may confer special anchoring or cell invasion
properties.

While the main fold
of Lig protein Ig-like domains is conserved,
the LigB-12 structure can be used to compare differences between the
domains that may play a role in pathogenesis. Residue conservation
is an indication of importance to stability and function. In contrast,
the least conserved residues, those that lie on the surface of the
Ig-like domains, are most likely to make adhesive contacts with the
host proteins and are also most likely to be evolutionarily tuned
to tightly bind targets. The eukaryotic extracellular matrix (ECM)
forms a biopolymer hydrogel with a propensity to bind both positive
and negative charges and also to allow neutral charges to move more
freely. The majority of Lig protein Ig-like
domains are charged (either acidic or basic) providing a platform
for ECM immobilization (Figures B,C). Binding
assays between LigB domains and ECM proteins reveal that LigB-4 and
LigB-8 through LigB-12 have the highest affinity for host proteins.−,, Surface electrostatics could influence specific domain interactions
with ECM binding partners. For example, tropoelastin, a protein containing
a high density of lysine residues, has been shown to bind to constructs
containing LigB-4, LigB-8, LigB-9, and LigB-12. The relative binding
affinity for the domains, LigB-4 &gt; LigB-12 &gt; LigB-8 &gt; LigB-9. correlates well with the theoretical pI of the
domains. For tropoelastin, the binding to the more acidic LigB-4 could
be influenced by attractive lysine interactions while the binding
to the more basic LigB-8 and LigB-9, could be influenced by repulsive
lysine interactions. In a second example, a multidomain segment of
Fn with an overall negative charge interacts preferentially with basic
LigB domains LigB-8, LigB-9, and LigB-12.

In an attempt to identify potential protein interacting sites
on
LigB-12, a comparative analysis of LigB-12 against the consensus for
LigB Ig-like domains was used to locate the residues that are generally
conserved for the set of Ig-like domains but only diverge for LigB-12.
A patch of surface residues that are specifically divergent for LigB-12
faces the non-Ig-like terminal domain of LigB (Figure A). While the difference in LigB-12 could be important for
binding of a host protein, the position of the residues along the
terminal surface are probably related to adaptive interactions with
the nonrepeat terminal domain. Currently, the structure of the nonrepeat
domain is not known, but it may interact directly with LigB-12. Conversely, the conserved surfaces in the other
LigB Ig-like domains face the neighboring Ig-like domains, suggesting
that a domain–domain interaction may be maintained through
selective pressure. A conserved lysine is flanked by two small flexible
residues (A–K–G). The positive charge is positioned
in a loop to extend toward the neighboring Ig-like domain. A homology
model of LigB-11 in tandem with the LigB-12 structure reveals a potential
electrostatic interaction between the conserved lysine (K957) on LigB-11
and a conserved aspartic acid (D1061) on LigB-12 (Figure B). Along with the domain–domain linker,
the potential salt bridge offers a second point of contact between
the Ig-like domain neighbors. A two-point interaction between domains
would function to limit relative rotation of neighboring domains but
would be unlikely to limit a hinge motion. A domain–domain
interaction network could allow for modulatory control of rigidity
in the tandem Ig-like domains through environmental cues or host interactions.
Interestingly, three Ig-like domains in the X-ray crystal structure
of invasin have two domain–domain interfaces, each of which
has a salt bridge that is similar to the ones suggested between the
Ig-like domains of LigB (Figure C). In tandem Ig domains from titin, a network of
nonhydrophobic interactions has been demonstrated to impose rigidity
on the relative domain orientation in solution. The dynamic aspects of tandem Ig and Ig-like neighboring
domain interactions may be important for functional regulation of
multirepeat containing proteins.

The β-sandwich anchored
by a central Greek-key fold is thought
to provide Ig and Ig-like domains with a simple and common folding
pathway. Big domains represent a large Ig-like domain Pfam fold family with many subgroups (e.g., Big_1,
Big_2, and Big_3) and are often found in bacterial cell surface proteins. The comparison of Big domain folds and sequences
shows that the Greek-key is one of the least conserved features with
two of the four Greek-key β-strands being absent from two representative
Big_3 domains (Figure ). The two dispensable
β-strands border the loop with the largest degree of insertion
and deletion variability among Lig domains and are potential targets
for engineering the size and shape of the Big domains.

An important
feature of all Big domain folds is the hydrophobic
core. The residues comprising the hydrophobic core of LigB-12 were
recently identified using tryptophan fluorescence spectroscopy for
wild-type and aromatic residue mutants. The fluorescence of W1073 was shown to be consistent with a hydrophobic
environment. Additionally, an alanine mutation of a conserved phenylalanine
residue, F1053A, decreases the hydrophobic environment surrounding
the tryptophan as well as the stability of the fold. In agreement
with fluorescence observations, the majority of the F1053 and W1073
aromatic rings are positioned within 7.5 Å of each other and
buried within the hydrophobic core of the LigB-12 NMR structure. Tryptophan
side chain hydrogen bonding, as observed for the W1073 side chain
nitrogen, could also have an influence on the emission wavelength. For the Big domains with structures solved,
the tryptophan–phenylalanine core is unique but is also highly
conserved among Lig protein domains. Within homologous proteins, conserved
residues often play a role in fold stability or function. The tryptophan
fluorescence studies have been extended
to support a hydrophobic tryptophan environment at the core of several
Lig protein Ig-like domains with similar results.

Core disulfides
are commonly found in some Ig domain families where
the disulfides connect the main β-sheets of the β-sandwich. The disulfide from LigC-2 is positioned within
a single β-sheet and should provide stability near the fold’s
N-terminus. Investigations of an Ig-like domain from the muscle protein
titin suggest that force-induced unfolding is initiated when hydrogen
bonds between β-strands A and B (near the N-terminus) break,
followed by those of β-strands A′ and G′ (near
the C-terminus), and finally the main domain strands unfold. Stabilizing sheet 1 should be important in limiting
the type of mechanical unfolding that regulates the functional elasticity
of some multi-Ig-like domain proteins. The ability to transplant the
disulfide to the LigB-12 domain provides additional evidence of structural
homology among Lig domains. Thermal denaturation of LigB-12, the F1053C
mutant, and the P1040C/F1053C mutant observed by tryptophan fluorescence
shows that the F1053C mutant is less stable than wild-type; however,
some stability is recovered in the P1040C/F1053C mutant (C.-L. Hsieh
et al., unpublished results). The inability of the P1040C/F1053C mutant
to improve wild-type stability is likely related to the high degree
of conservation and hydrophobic core proximity of these two residues.
Future work directed at stabilizing Big domains for use in biotechnologies
could incorporate disulfides at similar positions between β-strands
A and B but closer to the N-terminus and further from the hydrophobic
core.

Ig-like domains are one of the most common extracellular
fold types,
and tethering repeats of Ig-like domains produces a simple architecture
with the potential for multiple tunable surfaces and rigidity control,
features that are highly advantageous for an adhesion molecule. The
structure of LigB-12 has, as expected, an Ig-like fold, but the details
of the structure and comparison with other Big proteins provides insight
into the function of the domains and their interaction with host proteins.

Supporting Information Available
Full sequence
alignment of
Ig-like domains from LigA, LigB, and LigC, an overlay of the 15N,1H-HSQC NMR spectra for LigB-11, LigB-12, and
LigB-11,12, and a sequence alignment for structures depicted in Figure . This material is available free of charge via
the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500669u_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
§ C.P.P. and C.-L.H. contributed equally to
this work.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Y. Mao (Cornell) for providing the pET28-His-Sumo
vector.

Abbreviations
Bigbacterial Ig-like

DTNB5,5′-dithiobis(2-nitrobenzoic
acid)

Fgfibrinogen

Fnfibronectin

Igimmunoglobulin

LigLeptospira immunoglobulin-like genes

LigBCen2amino acids 1014–1165 of LigB

LigConN-terminal 630 amino acids of
LigA and LigB

RDCresidual dipolar coupling

