Plant cell
walls consist of
the polysaccharides cellulose, different hemicelluloses, and pectins
and the complex polymer lignin. While cellulose is a linear β-1,4-linked d-glucose polymer, the structure and composition of hemicelluloses
and pectins are more diverse. Following d-xylose, l-arabinose is the second most abundant pentose in hemicelluloses
and pectins. It is present as a single residue or a short side chain
in arabinoxylans or as larger branched side chains in the form of
arabinan or arabinogalactan in pectins., Though the
enzymatic steps for the catabolism of l-arabinose were described
in the 1960s, most of the genes encoding
the enzymes of this five-step pathway were only characterized recently. One reason for this might be that an l-arabinose pathway is not found in the fungal model organism Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Recently, considerable efforts
were undertaken to fully elucidate this pathway for introduction of
such a trait into S. cerevisiae to allow a complete
conversion of plant biomass to, e.g., advanced biofuels or other biorefinery
products., Degradation of l-arabinose in fungi
usually consists of four oxidoreductive reactions and a final phosphorylation
step, distinguishing this path from the different pathways for bacterial l-arabinose catabolism. The last two reactions of the fungal l-arabinose pathway are shared with the d-xylose catabolic
pathway (Figure ). The bacterial isomerase
pathway consists of an l-arabinose isomerase, ribulokinase,
and l-ribulose phosphate-4-epimerase, while the enzyme sequence
of the oxidative pathway consists of l-arabinose dehydrogenase, l-arabinolactonase, l-arabonate dehydratase, l-2-keto-3-deoxy-arabonate dehydratase, and 2,5-dioxovalerate dehydrogenase,
the end product being α-ketoglutarate. In a modification of
this oxidative pathway, l-2-keto-3-deoxy-arabonate is split
by an aldolase into pyruvate and glycoaldehyde., Most
of the genes and proteins involved in the fungal l-arabinose
pathway were characterized in the two ascomycetes Aspergillus
niger and Trichoderma reesei. In T. reeseil-arabinose
reduction is mediated by the NADPH specific d-xylose reductase
XYL1, which is the major reductase activity for the reduction of both
pentoses d-xylose and l-arabinose., In A. niger, this NADPH-dependent reduction is
accomplished by an l-arabinose specific LarA and a d-xylose specific XyrA. The subsequent
steps are mediated by l-arabitol 4-dehydrogenase,,l-xylulose reductase, xylitol
dehydrogenase, and xylulose kinase.

Fungal l-arabinose degrading pathway represented
by enzymes
of A. niger and T. reesei. The first
three specific steps of the fungal l-arabinose catabolism
lead to xylitol, the first common intermediate of the l-arabinose
and d-xylose pathway. Xylitol is then converted to d-xylulose 5-phosphate before entering the pentose phosphate pathway. l-Arabinose reduction is mainly mediated by the d-xylose
reductase XYL1 in T. reesei, while A. niger has a specific l-arabinose reductase LarA.

Enzymes with l-xylulose reductase activity
are found within
the short chain dehydrogenase and reductase family and participate in the glucuronic acid/uronate cycle of
mammals. In humans, LXR deficiency causes pentosuria, a clinically
benign condition that results in large amounts of l-xylulose
in the urine of such patients. The first
fungal l-xylulose reductase, ALX1, was identified in the
yeast Ambrosiozyma monospora and, interestingly,
is NADH-dependent. Although an enzyme
with l-xylulose reductase (LXR1) was described for T. reesei, its functional characterization
showed that it is actually a d-mannitol 2-dehydrogenase., Only recently was a true l-xylulose reductase LxrA identified
in A. niger. Its deletion resulted in an almost complete
loss of the NADPH specific l-xylulose reductase activity
but had an only small effect on the growth on l-arabinose
as the carbon source, explained by the presence of a NADH-dependent l-xylulose reductase activity. However,
deletion of the LxrA homologue LXR4 in T. reesei showed
that this gene is not involved in the oxidoreductive catabolism of l-arabinose but of d-galactose.

To clone putative LXRs involved in l-arabinose
catabolism
in T. reesei, we made use of the fact that all LXRs
identified to date are found within the group of short chain dehydrogenases
and reductases. Consequently, we screened the T. reesei genome database for SDRs encoding genes and reduced the number of
LXR candidates by selecting for highly conserved fungal LXRs that
are expressed in the presence of l-arabinose. Functional
analysis identified a novel NADPH-dependent l-xylulose reductase
that is involved in l-arabinose catabolism in T.
reesei, which is different from the case for the previously
described enzymes.

Materials and Methods
Strains and Growth Conditions
T. reesei QM9414 (ATCC 26921), Δlxr2, Δtku70, and Δlxr3 were cultivated on malt
extract agar supplemented with uridine (10
mM) when necessary. Escherichia coli JM109 (Promega)
was used for plasmid construction. For liquid cultivations, 106 spores per milliliter were incubated at 28 °C on a rotary
shaker (250 rpm) in 250 mL of medium in
1 L Erlenmeyer flasks containing 1% (w/v) of the indicated carbon
source. For replacement cultivations, strains were pregrown for 24
h with glycerol as the carbon source, washed with sterile media without
the carbon source, and transferred to new medium with the indicated
carbon source. Mycelia for biomass measurements were washed and dried
to a constant weight at 80 °C. Dry biomass data are the average
of three separate biological experiments with a deviation of &lt;15%.
Growth on solid substrates was recorded by inoculating agar plates
with a piece of pregrown agar in the center and measuring the colony
diameter daily.

Screening for T. reesei Putative l-Xylulose Reductase-Encoding Genes
One hundred genes
encoding
SDRs are found in the T. reesei genome database (http://genome.jgi-psf.org/Trire2/Trire2.home.html). Their corresponding
protein sequences were used in a BLASTP search against the NCBI database
to identify highly conserved proteins in mycelial fungi (e value of &lt;10–80), followed by a BLASTP search
to the genome database of the l-arabinose-utilizing yeast Candida guilliermondi (http://www.broadinstitute.org/annotation/genome/candida_guilliermondii; e value of &lt;10–30). The number
of candidate LXRs was then further reduced by selecting those genes
for which respective ESTs were found in the NCBI T. reesei EST database. The GenBank entries of the other four genes of the l-arabinose pathway are CB905315.1 (xyl1), CF883445.1 (lad1), CF944055.1 (xdh1), and CF878255.1 (xki1). LXR3 was deposited as GenBank entry BK008567.

Construction
of Fungal Strains
For deletion of lxr3,
∼1 kb of the lxr3 up- and
downstream regions were amplified with specific primers (Table ). The downstream region was ligated into pGEM-T
Easy (Promega) followed by the SpeI/XhoI restricted upstream region
and the SalI restricted orotidine-5′-monophosphate
decarboxylase-encoding gene pyr4 as a selection marker, resulting in pBM1. A 4.9 kb NotI lxr3 deletion fragment was released from pBM1 and transformed into strain
Δtku70 as described previously. For reintroduction of lxr3 into
a Δlxr3 strain, the pyrithiamine resistance
gene ptrA of Aspergillus oryzae was
amplified from vector pME2892 with primers
ptrA_fw_PstI and ptrA_rv_HindIII (Table )
and ligated into pBluescript SK(+) (Stratagene). A 2.6 kb DNA fragment
containing the whole lxr3 coding region, ∼1
kb of the upstream region, and 0.5 kb of the downstream region was
amplified using the RElxr3-Acc65I/RElxr3-XhoI primer pair and introduced
into the Acc65I and XhoI sites of this vector, resulting in pBM2.
The Acc65I/HindIII fragment was used for transformation of Δlxr3 by electroporation. The
reintroduction of lxr3 was verified by amplification
of the 2.6 kb fragment by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) with oligonucleotides
RElxr3-Acc65I and RElxr3-XhoI (data not shown). Deletion of lxr2 (tre54086) was described previously.

Oligonucleotides
Used in This Study
oligonucleotide	sequence	
ups-lxr3-Acc65I	GGTACCGTCTTCAACTCCTGATAGGG	
ups-lxr3-XhoI	CTCGAGGGTCGGAGATCAAGAAAG	
dws-lxr3-XhoI	CTCGAGCAACAGAAAGAGGTAGACC	
dws-lxr3-XbaI	TCTAGACAACTTTAGCACCTGGAGC	
RElxr3-Acc65I	GGTACCAACTCCTCGACCGAAATAG	
RElxr3-XhoI	CTCGAGTCATGCTCATTGTGTGCTCC	
ptrA_fw_PstI	TCTGCAGAAAGCTAGGAGATCGTCC	
ptrA_rv_HindIII	TAAGCTTCTCTTGCATCTTTGTTTG	
rc_lxr3_HisN_fw_EcoRI	ATATGAATTCACAATGCATCACCATC	
ACCATCACGGGAAGAACGGCGCCTTTCCG	
rc_lxr3_rv_EcoRV	TAATGATATCTCATGGCAGGCTGTAGCCGCC	
qPCR_tef1_fw	CCACATTGCCTGCAAGTTCGC	
qPCR_tef1_rv	GTCGGTGAAAGCCTCAACGCAC	
qPCR_xyl1_fw	AGAACCTGGACAACACCTC	
qPCR_xyl1_rv	GGCGGAGAAGTAGTTTGTAG	
qPCR_lad1_fw	GAGCGGTGTCATCGATCTATC	
qPCR_lad1_rv	TCTTGGGATCTGCTGACGTCTC	
qPCR_lxr3_fw	AACAGCTCCAAGGCCGCCGTGATTC	
qPCR_lxr3_rv	AGACACGGTGTTGACGCGGGCAAAG	
qPCR_xdh1_fw	GCATCTCGGCTGAGGACAAC	
qPCR_xdh1_rv	CGTGAATGCTCGTCTGGATC	
qPCR_lxr2_fw	GCCGATATTGGAACAGACG	
qPCR_lxr2_rv	GAAGACTGCGCCAATGTAC	
qPCR_tre122079_fw	TCCAAGGCTGGTGTCATGC	
qPCR_tre122079_rv	ATCCAGGCGAGAGTGTGTTG	
Nucleic Acid Isolation
and Transcriptional Analysis
Fungal mycelia were harvested
by filtration, washed with cold tap
water, frozen, and ground in liquid nitrogen. Following RNA isolation, 5 μg of total RNA was treated with DNase
[DNase I, RNase free (Fermentas)] and reverse transcribed [RevertAid
First Strand cDNA Kit (Fermentas)] using a 1:1 mixture of oligo-dT
and random hexamer primers. To test for potential LXR-encoding genes,
reverse transcription PCR (RT PCR) was performed with RNA isolated
from T. reesei QM9414. Strain QM9414 was pregrown
on medium containing glycerol as the carbon source followed by a transfer
to new medium with l-arabinose, d-galactose, or d-glucose [1% (w/v)] as the carbon source. Data are found in
Table S1 of the .
Quantitative real-time PCRs (qPCRs) were performed by the iCycler
iQ real-time detection system (Bio-Rad). Each reaction mixture contained
1 μL of the 1:10 diluted cDNA (approximately 2.5 ng), 12.5 μL
of the iQ SYBR Green Supermix (Bio-Rad), primers (Table , final concentration of 100 nM), and nuclease free water
in a final volume of 25 μL. Primer efficiency was calculated
using a dilution series from 1:1 to 1:1000 with the PCR baseline-subtracted
mode. The threshold cycles (CT) were adjusted for an optimal efficiency
of 2. The amplification protocol consisted of an initial denaturation
step for 3 min at 95 °C followed by 40 cycles of denaturation
(95 °C for 15 s), annealing, and elongation (61 °C for 20
s). qPCRs were conducted in triplicate. Data calculation was performed
with iQ5 Optical System software version 2.0 (Bio-Rad) and REST. Individual samples were normalized to the expression
of tef1 (translation elongation factor 1α)
as described previously.

Phylogenetic
Analysis
Phylogenetic analysis was performed
using CLUSTALX version 1.8 for protein
sequence alignment, GENEDOC version 2.6 for visual adjustment, and MEGA version 5 for construction of phylogenetic trees. Neighbor joining was used
as the algorithm for distance calculation and evaluated by 1000 bootstrap
rearrangements. To retrieve closely related SDR sequences from other
species, T. reesei candidate SDRs were used in a
BLASTP search against the NCBI database.

Recombinant Production
and Purification of LXR3
Expression,
protein extraction, and purification of LXR3 in S. cerevisiae strain CEN.PK2-1D (European S. cerevisiae Archive
for Functional Analysis) were performed as described for A.
niger LxrA. An lxr3 cDNA was amplified with primers rc_lxr3_HisN_fw_EcoRI
and rc_lxr3_rv_EcoRV (Table ) and cloned in pYX212 [URA3 selection (Ingenius
R&amp;D Systems, Madison, WI)], allowing expression of lxr3 under the TPI1 (triosephosphate isomerase) promoter
to produce the recombinant LXR3 with an N-terminal His tag. The lxr3 cDNA was verified by sequencing.

Preparation
of T. reesei Cell Free Extracts
T. reesei mycelia grown in a liquid culture were
washed and ground in liquid nitrogen. Per gram of mycelia (wet biomass)
3 mL of extraction buffer was added (PBS) [8 g/L NaCl, 0.2 g/L KCl,
1.44 g/L Na2HPO4, 0.24 g/L KH2PO4 (pH 7.4), and 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol] and the mixture
homogenized (12 × 20 s, duty cycle of 25%, output of 2) with
a Branson model 250 sonifier at 4 °C. After centrifugation (10000
rpm for 10 min at 4 °C), 20% glycerol (final concentration) was
added and the cell free extracts were stored at −80 °C.

For the LXR activity measurements of T. reesei grown in the rich medium, 100 mL of YPG medium containing 10 g/L
yeast extract, 2 g/L Bacto peptone, and 3% Difco gelatin (Becton Dickinson
and Co.) was inoculated with 1 mL of the spore suspension. Overnight
(16 h) growth at 28 °C resulted in a dense homogeneous mycelium
suspension, which was collected by filtration and split into two comparable
portions. The mycelia were resuspended in 50 mL of YP medium supplemented
with either 1% d-glucose or 1% l-arabinose and incubated
for 6 h at 28 °C. For LXR activity measurements on minimal medium,
100 mL of medium containing 1% (w/v) glycerol was incubated for 24
h, and the mycelia were collected by filtration, split into two comparable
portions, resuspended in 50 mL of MM medium supplemented with either
1% d-glucose or 1% l-arabinose, and incubated for
15 h at 28 °C. Following induction, mycelia were isolated by
filtration and washed with water, and an appropriate amount of mycelia
was transferred to a 2 mL tube with 0.6 mL of acid-washed glass beads
(Sigma), 1 mL of lysis buffer [500 mM NaCl and 50 mM NaH2PO4 (pH 8.0)], and protease inhibitors (Complete, Roche).
The cells were disrupted in a 30 s breaking session in a Precellys
24 instrument (Bertin Technologies). The cell extracts were clarified
by centrifugation, and the supernatants were used in the enzyme assays.
The protein concentration was measured using the Protein Assay kit
(Bio-Rad).

Enzyme and Polyol Assays
The enzyme
activity of cell
free extracts was measured with a NanoPhotometer Pearl (Implen) or
Helios Beta UV–vis spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific) by
recording the rate of change in absorbance at 340 nm for NAD(P)+ reduction and NAD(P)H oxidation. Polyol oxidation was performed
in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 9.0) and 2 mM NAD(P)+ in the presence
of 100 μg of cell free extracts and started with addition of
100 mM substrate. For sugar reduction, 100 mM HEPES-NaOH (pH 7.0)
and 0.2 mM NAD(P)H were used.

Enzyme activity measurements of
recombinantly produced proteins were performed by varying the substrate
concentration over the range of 5–285 mM in 50 mM Tris-HCl
buffer (pH 7.0) with 0.5 mM NADPH for sugar reduction and 100 mM Tris-HCl
(pH 8.0) with 1 mM NADP+ for polyol oxidation. For analysis
of the kinetic constants with NADPH, the activity was measured with
varying NADPH concentrations over the range of 8–500 μM
in 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.0) with 125 mM l-xylulose.
Reactions were initiated by addition of the enzyme. The different
substrate concentrations are indicated in the results. Enzyme assays
were performed in microtiter plates (NUNC) with a Varioscan spectrophotometer
(Thermo Electron Corp.). Activities are expressed in nanokatals and
are given as specific activities (nanokatal per milligram of protein).
High-performance liquid chromatography measurements were performed
as described previously., Enzyme measurements
for l-arabinose reductase, l-arabitol dehydrogenase,
and xylitol dehydrogenase activity in cell free extracts were described
previously.,

Results
Identification
of Putative T. reeseil-Xylulose Reductases
All l-xylulose reductases
characterized to date belong to the superfamily of short chain dehydrogenases
and reductases (SDR). We therefore screened the T. reesei genome database for genes encoding putative LXRs and identified
∼117 different SDRs. To reduce the number of putative candidate
LXRs, we reduced their number by presuming the following: an l-xylulose reductase is a highly conserved enzyme, and therefore,
orthologues should be present in the genomes of most mycelial fungi
and present in the l-arabinose-utilizing yeast C.
guilliermondi. Because the genes encoding the other four
steps of the l-arabinose pathway in T. reesei are represented by ESTs in the NCBI database, we also tested if
our potential LXRs are present in this EST database. To further reduce
the number for functional analysis, we tested their expression by
RT PCR under l-arabinose inducing conditions and compared
it to their expression on d-glucose. For seven genes, we
found transcription under all conditions, but only three were specifically
induced by l-arabinose. Because we originally also assumed
that an LXR would be induced by d-galactose, we chose the
two genes that showed on both sugars induction and termed them lxr2 (tre54086) and lxr3 (tre60033). An overview of the results of the in
silico and expression analysis of 20 candidates is given in Table
S1 of the .

Their transcriptional response to the presence of different inducers
was then quantified by qPCR using lad1 as a positive
control for an l-arabinose inducible gene (Figure ). lxr3 showed increased transcript
levels when induced by l-arabinose and l-arabitol
and an increase in transcript level from 2 to 8 h after replacement. lxr2 also exhibited upregulation with highest transcript
levels found at the earlier time point on l-arabinose or l-arabitol. In comparison to both lxr2 and lxr3, lad1 showed a higher inducibility
on both l-arabinose and l-arabitol, which is due
to its lower basal transcription level on glycerol.

Transcriptional analysis
of T. reesei lxr2 and lxr3. T. reesei QM9414 was cultivated for
24 h on glycerol and replaced with new medium containing 1% (w/v)
of the indicated carbon source (GLC, d-glucose; ARA, l-arabinose; AOL, l-arabitol) for 2 (gray bars) and
8 h (white bars). Expression of lxr2, lxr3, and lad1 is related to their expression on glycerol
after 24 h and normalized to the expression of tef1.

Effect of Deletion of lxr2 and lxr3 on Growth
To test
the potential role of lxr3 in fungal l-arabinose
catabolism, we produced a knockout
cassette for lxr3 in which the lxr3 coding region was replaced by the T. reesei pyr4 marker gene. Following transformation and analysis of the purified
transformants by diagnostic PCR, several lxr3 deletion
strains were identified. The growth behavior of the Δlxr2 and Δlxr3 strains was tested on different carbon sources. In this test, Δlxr2 strains showed no specific growth phenotype compared
to its parental strain (Figure A). This was
in contrast to Δlxr3 strains: here levels of
growth on solid medium and biomass accumulation during liquid cultivation
were strongly decreased for both l-arabinose and l-arabitol (Figure A,B). No effect, however,
was found for growth with, e.g., d-glucose or d-xylose
as the carbon source. A reintroduction of lxr3 into
the Δlxr3 strain restored growth on l-arabinose and l-arabitol (Figure 1 of the ).

Effect of deletion of lxr2 and lxr3 on growth on different carbon sources.
(A) Radial growth on agar
plates after 3 days and (B) biomass accumulation during liquid cultivation
on different carbon sources (1%, w/v) as indicated for lxr3 (△) compared to the parental strain (■): GLC, d-glucose; ARA, l-arabinose; AOL, l-arabitol;
XYL, d-xylose; XOL, xylitol.

Deletion of lxr3 Affects the Total l-Xylulose
Activity and the Regulation of l-Arabinose Metabolism
The prominent effect of the lxr3 deletion on the
utilization of the carbon sources l-arabinose and l-arabitol was further investigated by determining the total l-xylulose reductase activity produced in cell free extracts in the
Δlxr3 strain. l-Arabinose-induced
cell free extracts were prepared from mycelia after replacement to
minimal medium as well as rich medium with l-arabinose as
the inducing carbon source. Deletion of lxr3 led
to a significant reduction in NADPH specific LXR activity after replacement
to both media containing l-arabinose (Figure ), while NADH specific LXR activity remained constant (e.g.,
0.6 nkat/mg on l-arabinose-containing minimal medium). Again,
the deletion of lxr2 had no negative influence on
LXR activity, indicating that LXR3 is responsible for the major NADPH
specific l-xylulose reductase in T. reesei during growth on l-arabinose as the carbon source. To examine
if a deletion of lxr3 has an influence on other genes
involved in the l-arabinose catabolism, we performed further
transcriptional studies. This analysis shows that the transcript levels
of xyl1 and lad1 are considerably
upregulated in the Δlxr3 strain during the
whole cultivation period compared to that of the reference strain,
while upregulation of xdh1 is found only at a later
time point around 48 h (Figure A). This change
in the transcription profile was also reflected by the elevated total
enzyme activities for l-arabinose reductase, l-arabitol
dehydrogenase, and xylitol dehydrogenase in the cell free extracts
(Figure B).

Effect of the deletion of lxr2 and lxr3 on total l-xylulose reductase
activities. Mycelia were
pregrown before the medium was replaced with rich (YP) or minimal
medium (MM) containing either 1% (w/v) d-glucose or l-arabinose for 6 or 15 h. NADPH-dependent LXR activity was tested
in crude protein extracts for QM9414 (white bars), Δlxr2 (gray bars), and Δlxr3 (dark
gray bars).

Consequences of the deletion
of lxr3 on the expression
of other genes of the l-arabinose pathway. (A) Transcript
levels of xyl1, lad1, xdh1, and lxr3 relative to the expression during growth
on glycerol at 24 h and normalized to tef1. (B) Total l-arabinose reductase (white bars), l-arabitol dehydrogenase
(dark gray bars), and xylitol dehydrogenase (light gray bars) activities
were measured in QM9414 and Δlxr3. Strains
were either precultivated on glycerol and replaced with l-arabinose (5 and 9 h) or cultivated directly on l-arabinose
(48 and 72 h).

Characterization of T. reesei LXR3
Functional analysis supports the
role of LXR3 in l-arabinose
catabolism. To characterize the enzyme with respect to its l-xylulose reductase activity, we expressed LXR3 recombinantly in S. cerevisiae and investigated substrate specificities and
enzyme kinetics. The purified enzyme reduced l-xylulose with
a Km of 16 mM, a Vmax of 367 nkat/mg, and a kcat of
11.4 s–1. For NADPH, we obtained a Km of 0.13 mM, a Vmax of 250
nkat/mg, and a kcat of 7.75 s–1.

LXR3 also exhibited activity with d-ribulose (Km = 105 mM; Vmax = 266 nkat/mg; kcat = 8.24 s–1) and with polyols d-sorbitol (Km = 250 mM; Vmax = 58 nkat/mg; kcat = 1.8 s–1) and xylitol
(Km = 100 mM; Vmax = 33 nkat/mg; kcat = 1 s–1) and weak activity with d-xylulose, l-sorbose,
and d-fructose (Vmax &lt; 30
nkat/mg). No activity was recorded with l-xylo-3-hexulose,
the substrate of LXR4 in the oxidoreductive d-galactose pathway,d-sorbose, d-ribitol, d-arabitol, or l-arabitol. The enzyme was also strictly
NADP(H) specific, and no activity was observed with NADH as the cosubstrate.

Phylogenetic Analysis of l-Xylulose Reductases
The fact that T. reesei LXR3 is quite dissimilar
from A. niger LxrA, while both are in vivo functional l-xylulose reductases, prompted us to investigate their phylogenetic
relationship. We also included the other three T. reesei LXR proteins, LXR1 (d-mannitol 2-dehydrogenase, which also
exhibits l-xylulose reductase activity), LXR2, and LXR4 (l-xylo-3-hexulose reductase), and used them as a query in a
BLASTP search against the NCBI database. The resulting best hits were
pruned from duplicates, and 182 protein sequences were subjected to
a neighbor joining analysis and rooted to the corresponding ALX1 from Am. monospora and two other proteins from different yeasts.
The result (Figure  and Figure 2 of the ) shows that the fungal
LXR proteins form three major clades: one basal clade leading to a
large clade that contained the A. niger functional l-xylulose reductase LxrA and the l-xylo-3-hexulose
reductase LXR4, another that contained LXR1, and a third that was
split into two subclades containing LXR2 and LXR3. Branches within
the LXR3 clade showed poor bootstrap support and displayed paralogs
in many species, particularly Pyrenomycetes (also Trichoderma
virens and Trichoderma atroviride but not T. reesei). This suggests that l-xylulose reductases
and related enzymes have proliferated in Pyrenomycetes and thereby
apparently adapted their substrate specificity. From this analysis,
it is obvious that the trait for l-xylulose reductase has
evolved independently within the family of short chain dehydrogenases
for enzymes of the l-arabinose pathway and the glucuronic
acid pathway and that even the fungal LXRs involved in l-xylulose
reduction in the l-arabinose catabolic pathway have evolved
in different clades of SDRs.

Scheme of the phylogenetic relationship of T. reesei LXR3 to other in vivo functional l-xylulose
reductases,
including the l-xylulose reductase LxrA of A. niger and ALX1 of Am. monospora found in yeast outgroups.
Also included are LXR1 (d-mannitol 2-dehydrogenase, which
also exhibits l-xylulose reductase activity), LXR2, and the l-xylo-3-hexulose reductase LXR4. The numbers below nodes indicate
the bootstrap value. The bar marker indicates the genetic distance,
which is proportional to the number of amino acid substitutions. The
detailed phylogenetic tree is found in Figure 2 of the .

Discussion
Most of the genes and their corresponding
enzymes involved in the l-arabinose and d-xylose
pathway have been characterized
from the two ascomycetes A. niger and T.
reesei. Although the overall sequence of reactions consisting
of four oxidoreductive steps and a final phosphorylation is conserved
(Figure ), a comparative functional analysis
reveals a number of species specific adaptations such as the presence
of a single enzyme (XYL1) for both l-arabinose and d-xylose reduction in T. reesei, but two rather specific
reductases for l-arabinose (LarA) and d-xylose (XyrA)
in A. niger., Here we identify a
further difference and show that T. reesei uses a
novel l-xylulose reductase LXR3 in l-arabinose catabolism.

In the past, different enzymes responsible for l-xylulose
reduction were identified in the family of SDRs. The first enzymes
responsible for l-xylulose reduction were found in mammals,
where their absence blocked the pathway for d-glucuronic
acid leading to the accumulation of l-xylulose in blood and
urine. The molecular background of this condition, pentosuria, was
recently elucidated. To date, two fungal
LXRs have been functionally verified to be involved in l-arabinose
catabolism, including the NADH-dependent ALX1 of the yeast Am. monospora() and the recently
identified NADPH-dependent LxrA of A. niger. Although it was assumed for many years that
the LXR step is NADPH-dependent,, recent investigations
in A. niger showed that the NADPH-dependent l-xylulose reductase activity is not needed for rapid growth on l-arabinose. The situation is obviously different in T. reesei where the strongly reduced NADPH-dependent l-xylulose activity as a consequence of lxr3 deletion leads to a severe reduction in the level of growth on l-arabinose and l-arabitol as carbon sources. The question
of whether the NADH-dependent activity in T. reesei is too low to replace the NADPH-dependent activity as suggested
for A. niger remains., Future research
will clarify if a NADH-dependent LXR is responsible for the major
conversion of l-xylulose to xylitol in A. niger. A NADH-dependent l-xylulose reductase step would also
have consequences for the redox balance. Although the overall process
of l-arabinose assimilation is redox neutral, it leads to
an unequal use of cofactors with two reductive NADPH-dependent and
two oxidative NAD+-dependent steps. Interestingly, the Vmax of purified LXR3 is much lower than that
of purified A. niger LxrA (Vmax = 10833.3 nkat/mg) but higher
than that of purified LXR1 (75 nkat/mg).

The l-xylulose reductases and related proteins appear
to have undergone an intriguing evolution: the presence of members
of Eurotiomycetes, Dothidiomycetes, and Pyrenomycetes in both large
phylogenetic clades suggests that there have been early duplication
events that were followed by gene losses in the former two classes
with the exception of the Pyrenomycetes where the gene losses were
less intense. In addition, the substrate specificity of these proteins
appears to have undergone readjustment as, e.g., LXR3 is not able
to convert l-xylo-3-hexulose whereas LXR4 is able to do so. As a consequence of this evolution, T. reeseil-xylulose reductase LXR3 is more closely
related to T. reeseid-mannitol dehydrogenase
LXR1 than to A. nigerl-xylulose reductase
LxrA. Originally, we assumed that LXR3 might also be responsible for
the conversion of l-xylo-3-hexulose, the product of LAD1, to the corresponding polyol d-sorbitol
in the oxidoreductive d-galactose pathway. This would be
analogous to the findings that in T. reesei other l-arabinose pathway enzymes such as XYL1 and LAD1 function in
this oxidoreductive d-galactose catabolism. However, our
results show that LXR3 is not able to convert l-xylo-3-hexulose.
We have recently identified yet another SDR LXR4 that is involved
in this step in oxidoreductive d-galactose catabolism.

A major consequence of the lxr3 deletion is the
disturbance of l-arabinose catabolism. Its deletion results
in a specific upregulation of genes of the l-arabinose pathway
acting upstream of lxr3, i.e., xyl1 and lad1, while xdh1 that is responsible
for the step downstream of lxr3 is only upregulated
to a later time point. This would imply that the inducer for l-arabinose catabolic genes xyl1 and lad1 is produced upstream of lxr3, while the inducer
for the upregulation of xdh1 accumulates at a later
time point..

Supporting Information Available
Overview
of the in
silico and expression analysis of the 20 candidates (Table
S1), the complementation of lxr3 in a Δlxr3 strain (Figure 1), and a detailed phylogenetic tree
of different LXR proteins (Figure 2). This material is available free
of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi301583u_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
§ B.M.: Department of Biotechnology, Delft University
of Technology
and Kluyver Centre for Genomics of Industrial Fermentation, Julianalaan
67, 2628 BC Delft, The Netherlands.

Author Contributions
The manuscript
was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have
given approval to the final version of the manuscript.

Author Contributions
D.M. and
S.H. contributed equally to this work.

This study was
supported by the Austrian Science Fund FWF to B.S. (P19421) and Grant
131869 of the Academy of Finland. S.H. is a member of the Ph.D. school
program Applied Bioscience Technologies AB-Tec financed by Vienna
University of Technology. S.H. is also supported by the Austrian Science
Fund FWF (P24219).

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Martina Marchetti-Deschmann
for providing an Implen
Nanophotometer.

Abbreviations
SDRsshort chain dehydrogenases and
reductases

LXRl-xylulose reductase

ESTsexpressed sequence tags.

