Cyclooxygenase-2
(COX-2) expression
is associated with the development of many cancers,, and
the enzyme plays a key role in the progression of chronic gastrointestinal
inflammation to cancer. Predictably, treatment
with COX inhibitors decreases a person’s total risk of cancer. Prevention studies as well as animal models suggest
that increased COX-2 activity is both an early event in carcinogenesis,
which contributes to the cellular transformation to malignancy, as
well as a sustained event in some colorectal and lung cancers that
can be associated with metastasis and poorer clinical prognosis., As predicted by these data, inhibiting COX-2 activity with non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) or COX-2-specific inhibitors over
time reduces a person’s total risk of colon, breast, lung,
and prostate cancers.

Despite the
promise of these drugs in cancer prevention, the gastrointestinal
toxicity associated with long-term NSAID treatment and increased cardiovascular
events associated with COX-2-specific inhibitors limit their clinical use. A better understanding of the
specific downstream contributions of COX-2 to carcinogenesis could
lead to new treatments that bypass these undesirable effects.

The product of COX-2, prostaglandin H2 (PGH2), is converted enzymatically into other prostaglandins, and indeed
PGE2 is a well-described promoter of carcinogenesis. However, depending on the animal model, deletion
of microsomal PGE2 synthase-1 can either prevent or accelerate tumorigenesis,
indicating that the contribution of COX-2 to cancer, particularly
to cellular transformation, is probably multifaceted.

Besides
enzymatic conversion, PGH2 also spontaneously
rearranges in aqueous solution to form the highly reactive levuglandins
LGE2 and LGD2. The γ-ketoaldehyde levuglandins
(LGs) constitute about 20% of total PGH2 rearrangement
products., Newly formed LGs react almost immediately
with free amino groups, such as those in lysine,, which leads to stable covalent LG-protein adducts measurable by
mass spectrometry (Figure ) or protein–protein
cross-links., Following COX-2 activity, LG
adducts of protein form in cells and
in tissues. Proteins rich in lysine are
thus especially susceptible to adduction, and due to the perinuclear
localization of COX-2 and a PGH2 half-life measured in
minutes, we speculated that it would
be possible for PGH2 to cross the nuclear envelope before
rearranging to LGE2, allowing formation of the LG adduct
on the lysine-rich histones.

Structure of the LG-lysyl adduct and the fragment
ions monitored
in positive ion mode (+H).

We have identified LG-histone adducts in multiple cancer
cell lines
as well as rat liver, with highest measurable amounts of adduct on
the H4 histone. Adduct formation is dependent on COX-2 expression
and activity, and we have found a small-molecule salicylamine derivative
that scavenges LG to reduce adduct formation on histones without affecting
COX-2 activity. Lysines, with their short side chain and positive
charge, are critical for histone ionic interaction with DNA, and we
find that this interaction is decreased with the introduction of a
bulky negative charge from LG. Covalent histone modifications are
a major method of controlling gene expression. Changes to lysyl modifications of histones, are associated with human cancer. These findings link COX-2 induction
with perturbation of normal DNA–histone interactions and provide
a novel role for the enzyme in carcinogenesis.

Materials and Methods
Materials
All reagents and chemicals were purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich (St Louis, MO) unless otherwise noted. Methanol
and acetonitrile were from Fisher Scientific (Pittsburgh, PA) and
were HPLC grade or higher. 14C-Arachidonic acid (AA) was
obtained from PerkinElmer Life Sciences (Boston, MA). The following
γ-ketoaldehyde scavenger molecules were synthesized by V. Amarnath
as previously described: pentylpyridoxamine
(PPM), 3-methoxysalicylamine (3-MoSA), and 5-ethylsalicylamine (EtSA).

Treatment of Cells
To stimulate COX-2 expression, A549
or RAW264.7 cells were treated overnight with 5 ng/mL IL-1β
(A549) or 10 μg/mL LPS and 10 U/mL IFNγ (RAW264.7) in
serum-free medium. When indicated, cells were pretreated with indomethacin,
aldehyde scavengers (glucosamine, 3-MoSA, PPM, or EtSA), or vehicle
(ethanol for indomethacin, H2O for scavengers) for 45 min
and then given 20 μM arachidonic acid (AA) or DMSO vehicle for
1 h before lysing.

Histone Extraction
Cultured cells
were lysed in hypotonic
buffer (10 mM Tris/10 mM NaCl/3 mM MgCl2) containing 1
mM pyridoxamine and 100 μM indomethacin to prevent the artifactual
formation of LGE2 during the lytic process. After allowing the cells to swell on ice, membranes
were disrupted by addition of Triton X-100 (0.5% final concentration)
and vortexing. Nuclei were isolated by centrifugation for 10 min at
1000 × g, and the resulting pellet was washed
with PBS. Histones were extracted in 0.4 N H2SO4, precipitated with trichloracetic acid, and washed with acetone,
following ref ().
With this method, histones are the predominant proteins and contaminating
nuclear proteins are reduced (Figure A). Histones were resolubilized in dilute NaOH,
and pH was neutralized with HCl. Protein concentration was determined
using the method of Bradford. For tissue, a portion of frozen liver
was homogenized in buffer containing 40 mM sodium citrate and 1% Triton
X-100 with 3 mM Trolox and 100 μM indomethacin. The supernatant
was separated from settled debris, and nuclei were pelleted at 500
× g and washed. Nuclear pellets were frequently
transferred to fresh tubes to avoid contamination by floating lipid
debris; any remaining was removed with a cotton swab. Histones were
extracted as above. All centrifugation steps were carried out at 4
°C.

Sample Preparation and Mass Spectrometry
Histone samples
were prepared for mass spectrometry by addition of ammonium bicarbonate
to 5 mM final concentration before digestion to single amino acids
by protease step-digestion as previously described. In the case of immunoblots, proteins were digested directly
off the nitrocellulose through incubation of the nitrocellulose strip
in 30 μg/mL Pronase in ammonium bicarbonate buffer and later
addition of aminopeptidase. All samples were centrifuged at 2000 × g for 10 min after final digestion to remove precipitate,
spiked with 0.2 ng of 13C-lysyl-lactam internal standard,
and purified on prepared tC18 cartridges (Waters Corp., Milford, MA).
Samples on tC18 cartridges were washed with water and then 30% methanol
before being eluted in 80% methanol and concentrated by evaporation.
Samples were evaluated by electrospray ionization (ESI) LC–MS/MS
on a ThermoFisher TSQ Quantum triple quadrapole mass spectrometer
in positive ion mode and quantitated by isotopic dilution as previously
described, with the exception of a reduced
flow rate of 0.1 mL/min.

Measurement of PGE2
A
sample of cellular
media was taken just prior to lysis and centrifuged to remove any
cellular debris. For PGE2 analysis, samples were spiked
with 2 ng of [2H7] PGE2 as an internal
standard. Prostaglandins were isolated and derivatized for analysis
by GC–MS, operating in negative ion chemical ionization (NICI)
mode and monitoring selected ions as previously described. For the [2H4] PGE2 internal standard, m/z =
528. To account for the deuterium-protium exchange at the position
C12 of [2H7] PGE2, the summation
of the signals obtained at m/z =
530, m/z = 531, and m/z = 532 was performed.

Autoradiography
A549 or RAW264.7 cells were treated
overnight to stimulate COX-2 expression and given 20 μM 14C-AA (116 μCi) for 1 h. Histones were isolated as described
above and separated on 4–12% SDS-PAGE gels (Life Technologies),
which were stained with Coomassie and exposed to film for 2 weeks.

Salt Extraction
A549 cells, 60–80% confluent,
were stimulated and treated with AA ± 500 μM EtSA before
cells were scraped in lysis media for nuclear isolation as above.
After addition of Tritox X-100 and vortexing, 1.5 mL of each sample
was aliquoted into an eppendorf and centrifuged to separate nuclei.
Pellets were washed with PBS, and all buffer was removed. Nuclear
pellets were resuspended in extraction buffer containing 0.6, 0.9,
1.2, or 1.5 M NaCl (with 10 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 3 mM MgCl2, 0.5% NP-40, and protease inhibitor cocktail) and incubated for
10 min on ice as in ref (). Following this extraction period, the nuclei were centrifuged
at 16,000 × g to obtain the soluble fraction.
This was sonicated, denatured at 95 °C, and analyzed by SDS-PAGE
and Western blotting, using Ponceau stain to visualize proteins and
confirm equal loading and anti-H4 antibody (Abcam, Cambridge, MA).

Statistical Analyses
All data were analyzed using Prism
software (GraphPad, La Jolla, CA). Data are expressed as means ±
SE, and statistical significance was determined using one-way ANOVA
followed by Tukey’s post-test or Dunnett’s multiple
comparisons post-test, when appropriate. A p value
of &lt;0.05 was considered significant.

Results
Levuglandins
Form Adducts on Histones in Cultured Cells and
Whole Tissue
With mass spectrometry, we have identified LG-lysyl
adducts on histones in RAW264.7 macrophages (Figure A) as well as A549 cultured lung epithelial cells (Figure C). COX-2 is upregulated in these cells upon cytokine
stimulation, and addition of exogenous AA leads to formation of LG-histone
adducts. Formation of these adducts is blocked with indomethacin,
further indicating a COX-dependent mechanism (Figure A and C). Very few LG-histone adducts are formed in these
cell lines without addition of exogenous AA, and PGE2 analysis
of cell media from each group indicates there is comparatively little
endogenous AA mobilized following induction of COX-2 (Figure B and D). Although few adducts are formed at basal
levels in our cell lines, we find the LG-lysyl adduct in rat liver
histones (Figure E), where levels correlate
with COX-2 expression, demonstrating COX-2-dependent adduct formation
under physiological conditions.

LG-lysine adducts are found in cells and
tissue, dependent on COX-2
activity. RAW264.7 mouse macrophage (A) and A549 human lung carcinoma
(C) cells were stimulated to express COX-2 and then given 20 μM
arachidonic acid (AA) or vehicle. A subgroup of cells was preincubated
45 min with 50 μM indomethacin. As a measure of COX activity,
PGE2 was determined by GC–MS from cell media prior
to lysis (B and D). Nuclei were isolated, and histones were extracted
and digested to individual amino acids prior to LC–ESI/MS/MS
analysis. *p &lt; 0.05; ***p &lt;
0.001 by ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post-test (n ≥ 5). (E). Histones were extracted from nuclei of rat liver
and analyzed as above for LG-lactam adduct. COX-2 protein was analyzed
by Western blotting and plotted against lactam adduct levels. Each
point corresponds to one liver, and shown is the line of regression
(r2 = 0.7237). Pearson r = 0.8507; two-tailed p = 0.0152. (F) LC–MS
chromatograph of histones isolated from a rat liver with relatively
high COX-2 expression (COX-2 band intensity of 117 arbitrary units).

LG-Histone Adducts Are
Restricted to Specific Histone Isoforms
Using 0.4 N H2SO4 to extract histones results
in a relatively pure preparation, with histones corresponding to known
molecular weights (Figure A; ref ()). Incubation of 14C-AA with stimulated A549 or RAW264.7
cells led to a 14C-containing band in the histone preparation
that corresponded with H4 and H3/H2B, despite the fact that other
histones are represented in equal or greater quantity (Figure B). We treated stimulated RAW264.7 macrophages or
A549 lung carcinoma cells with 20 μM AA for 1 h and directly
digested and analyzed the SDS-PAGE bands as labeled in Figure A. The H4 band yielded a predominant peak corresponding
with the internal LG-lysyl standard, while lower or no signal was
seen in the H3/H2B band and no corresponding peaks were seen in other
bands (Figure C and D, data not shown). Thus,
there is consistent evidence for formation of an LG-lysine lactam
adduct on H4. The radiolabeled AA product adducted to H3/H2B probably
includes structures in addition to the LG-lysine lactam. These results,
from two separate cell lines, suggest that there is specificity in
the reaction of LG with histones.

LG-lysyl adducts are predominantly detected
on histone H4. (A).
A Ponceau stain of a sample A549 histone extraction is shown, along
with band identities. Histones were extracted
from nuclei in 0.4 N H2SO4, resolved on 4–12%
SDS-PAGE gradient gel, and transferred to nitrocellulose. H3 and H2B
tend to run together as one band. (B). RAW264.7 or A549 cells were
stimulated to express COX-2 and given 20 μM 14C-AA
for 1 h. Cells were lysed, nuclei were isolated, and histones were
extracted, concentrated, and resolved on SDS-PAGE prior to transfer
to nitrocellulose and exposure to film. Shown is the Coomassie stain
of the SDS-PAGE gel (left) and the result of autoradiography (right).
We have observed that Ponceau, Coomassie R-250, Coomassie G-250, and
silver stains each preferentially detect different histone or acid-soluble
proteins. (C, D). RAW264.7 (C) or A549 (D) cells were stimulated to
express COX-2 and treated with 20 μM AA for 1 h prior to histone
extraction. Then 350–400 μg of total histone was loaded
onto 4–12% SDS-PAGE gel and transferred to nitrocellulose.
Individual bands were excised horizontally, and proteins were digested
directly off the nitrocellulose by serial incubations with Pronase
and aminopeptidase. The results were analyzed by LC–ESI/MS/MS,
and the chromatographs of the H3/H2B and H4 bands shown against the
LG-lysyl internal standard. The H2A chromatograph is shown as a representative
negative result; no co-migrating peaks were seen in any other bands.

Scavenger 5-Ethylsalicylamine
(EtSA) Reduces LG-Histone Adduct
Formation without Affecting COX-2 Activity
We have previously
characterized a number of small-molecule γ-ketoaldehyde scavengers
that did not inhibit COX-2 and then further determined a subset that
was free of cytotoxicity. From this subset,
we then screened a number of these scavengers for the ability to reduce
formation of LG-histone adducts. In RAW264.7 cells, only the scavenger
5-ethylsalicylamine (EtSA) was able to block adduct formation (Figure A). EtSA also inhibited LG-histone adduct formation
in stimulated, AA-treated A549 cells, without affecting PGE2 production at the highest concentration tested (Figure B and C).

Scavenger EtSA blocks LG-lysyl adduct formation
in RAW264.7 and
A549 histones, without affecting COX-2 activity. (A) Scavengers were
screened in RAW264.7 cells for the ability to decrease LG adduct formation
on histones. Scavengers used were glucosamine (GA), 3-methoxysalicylamine
(3-MoSA), pentylpyridoxamine (PPM), and 5-ethylsalicylamine (EtSA).
Cells were stimulated to express COX-2, pretreated 45 min with 500
μM scavenger or vehicle (H2O), and given 20 μM
AA for 1 h before lysing and extraction of histones. Histone proteins
were analyzed by LC–ESI/MS/MS for LG-lysyl lactam adduct, n = 2. (B) Stimulated A549 cells were pretreated with 30,
300, or 1000 μM EtSA prior to 1 h with 20 μM AA, and histones
were analyzed for LG-lysyl adduct. *p &lt; 0.05 by
one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s multiple comparisons post-test
(n = 3–5). (C). A549 cells were stimulated,
pretreated for 45 min with 1000 μM EtSA or H2O vehicle,
and given 20 μM AA for 1 h. Media was analyzed by GC–MS
for PGE2 (n = 3). There was no effect
on PGE2 production at lower doses of EtSA (data not shown).

Formation of LG-Lysyl Adduct
on Histone H4 Decreases DNA–Histone
Interaction
To examine the functional effect of LG-histone
adduction, we performed salt fractionation of A549 nuclei to determine
histone solubility. In this assay, loosely bound histone is released
at lower salt concentrations than tightly bound proteins. We found that in stimulated, AA-treated A549
cells, histone H4 was eluted at lower salt concentrations than in
stimulated control cells; this was reversed after treatment with the
scavenger EtSA (Figure ).

LG-lysyl adduct formation
on histone H4 decreases DNA–histone
interaction. A549 cells were stimulated and given DMSO vehicle (C
lanes) or 20 μM AA for 1 h (A lanes). A subgroup of cells was
treated with 500 μM EtSA 45 min prior to adding AA (E lanes).
Nuclei were extracted with 0.6, 0.9, or 1.2 M NaCl buffer, and the
supernatant was evaluated by Western blotting for histone H4. Shown
is a representative Western blot (A) as well as the pooled results
of 4 experiments (B). Different exposure times may have been used
for the 0.9 and 1.2 M bands. ***p &lt; 0.001 by one-way
ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons post-test. NS,
not significant.

Discussion
This
study, establishing that COX-2 catalysis can cause changes
in DNA–histone interactions through formation of LG-histone
adducts, suggests a new hypothesis for the contribution of COX-2 to
the etiology of cancer. Oxidative damage is known to cause N6-formylation of H1 histone, and epigenetic
modification affecting COX-2 transcription is well-described, but the LG-lysyl histone adduct we describe
here is an entirely novel finding that links inflammation and COX-2
activation with histone modification.

Here we demonstrate COX-2-dependent
formation of LG-histone adducts
in cells and tissues. Whereas COX-2 blockade by treatment with indomethacin
decreases LG-histone adduct formation in A549 or RAW264.7 cells, this
method of antagonism cannot separate the myriad effects of other COX-2
products from the effects of the LG-histone adducts. Therefore, we
screened a number of small molecule levuglandin scavenger molecules
for their ability to decrease LG-histone adduction. LG will react
with these molecules 3 orders of magnitude faster than lysine, and we have previously shown that scavenger
treatment decreases total cellular levels of LG-lysine adducts without
affecting PGE2 production. These scavengers are orally bioavailable, and able to decrease total LG-protein adduct levels when given to
mice in drinking water. In future studies,
aside from allowing investigation of LG-protein modification independent
of COX activity, use of these scavengers may bypass the cardiovascular
and gastric side effects seen with COX inhibitors.

Interestingly,
not all histones are targeted, but cellular LG adducts
seem to preferentially form on the H4 and, to a lesser extent, on
H3/H2B. Whether this specificity is a reflection of histone availability
in the nucleosome, accessibility of lysine residues, or a more favorable
microenvironment for adduct formation remains to be shown. Incubation
with 14C-AA in cells led to a stronger autoradiographic
band at H3/H2B compared to H4, while LC–MS analysis indicated
that H4 was the major form adducted by LGs. This discrepancy can be
explained by several mechanisms. Protein-associated radioactivity
would come from any product derived from 14C-AA, including
LGs but also PGJ2/PGA2 cyclopentenone or arachidonate ester adducts. In addition, the occurrence of LG-lysyl adducts is almost
certainly underreported with our current approach. Our internal standard
and mass spectroscopy method are specific for detection of a single
LG-lysyl adduct with an m/z equivalent
to that of the lactam structure, but the initial Schiff base intermediate
of LG-lysyl adducts can oxidize to form other structure such as hydroxylactam or intraprotein or protein–DNA cross-links,, which would go undetected in our method. For these reasons, the
autoradiograms cannot be quantitatively compared with the LC–ESI/MS/MS
results as they do not measure the same molecular structures.

H4, along with H2A, H2B, and H3 histones, comprise the histone
octamer around which DNA is “packaged” into nucleosomes.
The interaction of histone N-terminal tails with DNA is critical to
DNA compaction and organization and is dependent on the numerous positively
charged lysine and arginine residues present; a mesoscopic model demonstrates
that H4 tails are the most important in mediating internucleosomal
interactions. A single lysyl acetylation
on K16 of H4 modulates chromatin compaction and interaction of numerous
chromatin-associated proteins; constitutive acetylation of this residue
confers a folding defect comparable to deletion of the entire H4 tail. After LG-histone adduct formation we do find
disruption of histone-DNA binding, resulting in increased DNA extraction
in a salt solution. This decreased histone–DNA interaction
may increase DNA transcriptional access to previously silent oncogenes
and contribute to the development of cancer.

The complex patterns
of lysyl acetylation and methylation comprise
a “histone code” that regulates chromatin access and
transcription; it is plausible that irreversible
adduction of lysyl residues could disrupt this code or directly alter
the access of DNA-interacting proteins. Changes in histone modifications
are known to result in altered DNA methylation, deregulation of oncogenes,
genomic instability, impaired DNA repair, and defects in cell cycle
checkpoints., Changes in lysyl modifications
of H4 in particular are a common hallmark of human cancers and are
associated with a global loss of DNA methylation. Further elucidation of the effects of LG-histone adduction
on histone modification, DNA-histone interactions, and transcription
should increase our understanding of the molecular mechanisms whereby
COX-2 contributes to cancer development and progression.

Author Contributions
∥ These authors contributed equally to this
work.

Supported by
the Center for Molecular Toxicology, NIH P30 ES000267, American Cancer
Society PF-09-127-01-DMC (E.J.C.), GM15431, and the Thomas F. Frist,
Sr. Chair in Medicine (J.A.O.).

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful for the
valuable advice of Scott
Hiebert.

Abbreviations
LGlevuglandin

COX-2cyclooxygenase-2

NSAIDnon-steroidal
anti-inflammatory
drug

PGH2prostaglandin H2

PPMpentylpyridoxamine

3-MOSA3-methoxysalicylamine

EtSA5-ethylsalicylamine

AAarachidonic acid

ESIelectrospray ionization

NICInegative ion chemical ionization

