Influenza A virus is a member
of the Orthomyxoviridae family of enveloped viruses
with segmented, single-stranded, negative-sense RNA genomes. Each
year, influenza A infects an estimated three to five million people
worldwide, killing up to 500 000 people. Moreover, influenza pandemics have occurred several times
in the past 100 years. For example, the 1918–1920 “Spanish
Flu” claimed more than 50 million lives. Few diseases have had a greater impact than influenza on
public health and global economic output. In 2012–2013, the
United States had an unusually bad flu season, with overall vaccine
effectiveness about 47 and 67% against influenza A and B, respectively. Currently, few drugs treat influenza; neuraminidase
inhibitors are essentially the only therapeutics available. Moreover, sporadic cases of drug-resistant influenza
viruses have been detected worldwide.− The once widely used
adamantanes are now mostly ineffective toward currently circulating
influenza (H3N2). Thus, it is important
to develop novel antiviral treatments as well as more effective vaccines.,

RNA structure plays key roles in many viruses, including influenza.
For example, a panhandle/corkscrew structure in influenza genomic
viral (v)RNA required for RNA transcription, replication, and packaging
is formed by annealing the 5′ and 3′ ends of influenza
vRNAs. Beyond this vRNA, knowledge of
influenza virus RNA structures is limited. vRNA is coated with viral
nucleoprotein (NP) much of the time, which may melt secondary structure. At various stages of infection, however, regions
of vRNA are free of NP and may form functional RNA structures. Influenza
positive-sense RNAs are predicted to contain extensive conserved and
stable secondary structure. In particular, segments 7 and 8, both
of which are alternatively spliced, are enriched in predicted structures. A recent survey of predicted structure in influenza
B and C discovered evidence of conserved structures in coding RNAs
from spliced segments. Interestingly,
in all three viral species (influenza A, B, and C), predicted conserved
structures occur at or near splice sites, suggesting common strategies
for the regulation of splicing. Knowledge of influenza virus RNA structure
can inform experiments to reveal function, enrich understanding of
molecular mechanisms underlying the viral life cycle, and facilitate
development of new therapeutics.

Segment 7 of influenza A encodes
M1 protein and is alternatively
spliced to produce M2, M3, and occasionally M4 mRNA (Figure A)., M1 and M2 proteins are essential
in the viral life cycle. M1 (252 amino acids) is the most abundant
influenza protein. It is the matrix protein that connects vRNPs to
each other and to the viral envelope. It also determines the directionality
of vRNP transport. M2 (97 amino acids)
is a transmembrane ion channel protein that permits the flow of protons
from the endosome into the virion interior to facilitate viral uncoating., Temporal control of splicing is required for generating various
mRNA isoforms that must be present at differing abundances over the
course of infection. Furthermore, the
alternative splicing of segment 7 is complex, and except for M2, the
products of spliced mRNAs are not well characterized. For example,
the M3 mRNA 5′ splice site more closely fits the consensus
5′ splice site motif than the M2 mRNA 5′ splice site,
the latter of which has C rather than G at the 3′ end of the
5′ exon; this finding is surprising because M2 is essential
for viral replication, while the M3 protein has yet to be observed. Additionally, some viral strains have an M4
mRNA 5′ splice site. Normally,
M4 mRNA is not translated, but when the M2 mRNA 5′ splice site
is disrupted, M4 mRNA can produce M42 protein, which can functionally
replace M2 to support efficient replication in tissue culture cells
and exhibit pathogenicity in an animal host. M2, M3, and M4 mRNA share the same 3′ splice site. Multiple
factors, including viral polymerase complex, NS1 protein, and cellular
splicing factor SF2/ASF, have been implicated in helping to regulate
alternative splicing of segment 7.,,

Location and predicted structures of the wild-type RNA.
(A) Diagrammatic
summary of mRNA splice variants. Gray boxes represent coding regions.
Bold lines represent noncoding regions. Thin lines represent introns.
M4 mRNA has two different open reading frames. It was only observed in a few viral strains. The M4 mRNA 5′ splice site, GAG/GUUCUC
(nucleotides 118–126 with/as splice site), is not present in
the consensus sequence. (B) Predicted multibranch model and hairpin model. Base pairs are color-annotated
with information from base pair counts from an alignment of all available
unique sequences (see ). Conserved nucleotides are shown in blue (see color annotation
key).

A 63 nucleotide fragment in segment
7 containing the 3′
splice site, key residues of SF2/ASF binding site, and the polypyrimidine
tract required for splicing exists in an equilibrium between a pseudoknot
and a hairpin structure. The conformational
switch places each splicing element into different structural contexts.
Interestingly, a similar pseudoknot/hairpin conformational switch
was described at the 3′ splice site of segment 8. In addition to the structure at the 3′
splice site of segment 7, a region 79 nucleotides downstream from
the 5′ splice site for M2 mRNA (nucleotides 105–192)
was predicted to have an especially stable and conserved secondary
structure (Figure ). This sequence and predicted structure are conserved within influenza
A viruses that infect human, swine, and avian species. A multibranch
model was predicted for the consensus
sequence of all wild-type sequences available in the National Center
for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) influenza virus resource. A possible alternative hairpin structure was
also hypothesized for this region, with equally conserved base pairing
and similar predicted free energy. This putative alternative hairpin
for segment 7 is attractive: a region 51 nucleotides downstream from
the 5′ splice site of segment 8 folds into a hairpin conformation
in solution. Here, data from nondenaturing
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, enzymatic/chemical mapping, isoenergetic
microarray mapping, and NMR indicate that only the multibranch structure
forms in solution.

Experimental Methods
Preparing the Wild-Type
and Mutant RNAs
The consensus
sequence for the intron region of M1
mRNA was deduced from all available unique sequences from the NCBI
Influenza Virus Resource. This sequence
was also found in wild-type sequences of human, swine, and avian influenza
viruses (GenBank accession nos. CY147367, GQ404614, CY037901, CY021382, CY009453, and M63525). The RNA
was transcribed using the AmpliScribe T7 high yield transcription
kit (Epicentre) from a double-stranded DNA oligonucleotide template.
The antisense sequence is 5′-GAACACAAATCCTAAAATCCCCTTAGTCAGAGGTGACAGGATTGGTCTTGTCTTTAGCCATTCCATGAGAGCCTCAAGATCTGTGTTC TATAGTGAGTCGTATTAGAATTC-3′. The italic letters are complementary to the T7 promoter sequence.
DNA templates were removed using DNase I after incubating the reactions
at 37 °C for 4 h following Epicentre’s protocol. RNA was
purified using denaturing 8% PAGE and, when required, 5′-end-labeled
with [γ32P]-ATP. Two mutants were made and labeled
in the same way.

Denaturing and Nondenaturing PAGE
Nondenaturing 6%
PAGE was run for all full-length constructs. The gel was prepared
and run with 1× THEM buffer (66 mM HEPES, 34 mM Tris, 0.1 mM
disodium EDTA, and 10 mM MgCl2, pH 7.4). End-labeled RNAs were renatured by heating at 90 °C
for 2 min and then slow cooling to 37 °C, at which point the
RNAs were incubated for 20 min in 10 mM Tris (pH 7.0), 100 mM KCl,
and different concentrations of MgCl2. Electrophoresis
was conducted at 15 W for 12 h at 4 °C. Dried gels were analyzed
by exposing to a phosphorimager screen.

Denaturing 6% PAGE (7.5
M urea) was run for the same RNAs prior to end-labeling. The gel was
prepared and run with 1× TBE buffer. RNAs were denatured by heating
at 90 °C for 2 min in gel loading buffer II (Ambion) before loading.
The gel was stained with 1× SYBR Green II (Invitrogen).

Enzymatic
and Chemical Mapping
RNAs used in all mapping
experiments were folded in 10 mM Tris (pH 7.0), 100 mM KCl, and 10
mM MgCl2, as described for native gel analysis. All mapping
experiments were carried out at room temperature.

Enzymatic
mapping reactions were adapted from manufacturer’s protocol and carried out on 5′-end-labeled RNAs.
Optimal enzyme concentration was determined by titration. The digestion
reactions were stopped by ethanol precipitation.

DMS, CMCT,
and SHAPE mapping reactions were adapted from published
protocols, and carried out on unlabeled RNAs. Reactions
were stopped by ethanol precipitation. Modifications were read out
by primer extension using an LNA-modified primer (5′-GAALCALCALAALTCLCTALAAA-3′) complementary to nucleotides 176–192.
The primer was synthesized according to published method,, 5′-end-labeled with [γ32P]-ATP, and purified
by denaturing 8% PAGE.

DEPC reactions were run as described
by Moss et al. End-labeled RNAs were
incubated with 0.69 mM
DEPC, followed by NaBH4 reduction and aniline cleavage.
Reactions were stopped by ethanol precipitation.

Digestion and
modification products were fractionated on a denaturing
8% polyacrylamide gel. All gels were dried, exposed to a phosphorscreen,
and imaged with a Bio-Rad personal molecular imager. The intensities
of the product bands were quantified using ImageJ, and the bands were considered strong and medium when the
integrated intensities were ≥2/3 and
≥1/3 of the strongest integrated intensity,
respectively.

Isoenergetic Microarray Mapping
Microarray probing
was conducted on the wild-type RNA with isoenergetic pentamer and
hexamer 2′-O-methyl oligonucleotide probes with LNA and 2,6-diaminopurine
substitutions. Universal microarrays
with 861 probes divided into two microarray slides were used. Negative
internal controls were U, UUUUU, and spotted buffer. Microarrays were
printed at the European Center of Bioinformatics and Genomics in Poznan,
Poland.

Radioactively labeled RNA was folded in 10 mM Tris-HCl
(pH 7.0), 300 (or 100) mM KCl, and 10 mM MgCl2, as described
above. RNA in folding buffer was incubated with the microarray at
4 °C for 18 h to allow hybridization. Then, buffer with RNA was
poured out, and slides were washed in the same buffer for 1 min at
0 °C and dried by centrifugation. Hybridization was visualized
by exposure to a phosphorimager screen, and quantitative analysis
was performed with ArrayGaugeV2.1. Possible alternative binding sites
were predicted using RNA–RNA thermodynamics with the RNAstructure program.,

NMR Sample Preparation
The 61 nucleotide sequence corresponding
to the multibranch structure was transcribed from a double-stranded
DNA oligonucleotide template with antisense sequence 5′-TmGmGATCCCCTTAGTCAGAGGTGACAGGATTGGTCTTGTCTTTAGCCATTCCATGAGAGCCC TATAGTGAGTCGTATTAGAATTC-3′. The italic letters are complementary to the T7 promoter sequence.
The last two nucleotides of the 5′ end were modified with C2′-methoxyls
(annotated by “m”) to reduce nontemplated nucleotide
addition at the 3′ end by the T7 polymerase. Transcription was carried out in 40 mM Tris (pH 7.0), 10
mM spermidine, 0.01% Triton, 10 mM MgCl2, 40 mM DTT, 4
mM each NTP, 1 U/mL inorganic pyrophosphatase, with 5 μM DNA
template, and 120 μg/mL recombinant T7 RNA polymerase in 20
mL reaction volume. Recombinant T7 RNA polymerase was expressed and
purified from BL21 cells. The reaction
was stopped after incubating 4 h at 37 °C upon adding 800 μL
of 0.5 M EDTA. RNA was purified by denaturing 8% PAGE and dialyzed
into 20 mM KH2PO4 (pH 6.5), 80 mM KCl, 0.05
mM EDTA using Millipore Amicon Ultra-15 centrifugal filter units (MWCO
3 kDa).

NMR Experimental Conditions
The RNA was renatured by
heating at 90 °C for 2 min and slow cooling to 37 °C. Then,
it was put in a Shigemi NMR tube with 10% D2O. NMR spectra
were acquired on a Varian Inova 600 MHz spectrometer. One-dimensional
imino proton spectra were recorded at temperatures ranging from 0
to 25 °C. Two-dimensional NOESY spectra were recorded at 0, 5,
12, 20, and 25 °C with mixing time ranging from 100 to 250 ms,
processed with NMRpipe, and analyzed
with Sparky. Subsequently, up to 4 mM
final concentration MgCl2 was added in NMR buffer. RNA
was renatured by incubating at 37 °C for 20 min after adding
MgCl2. 2D-NOESY spectra were then measured under the conditions
described above.

Optical Melting Curves
Absorbance
versus temperature
melting curves were measured at 280 nm with a heating rate of 0.5
°C min–1 in (A) 20 mM sodium cacodylate (pH
7.0), 0.5 mM EDTA, and 100 mM KCl; (B) 20 mM sodium cacodylate (pH
7.0), 0.5 mM EDTA, 100 mM KCl, and 10 mM MgCl2; (C) 20
mM sodium cacodylate (pH 7.0), 0.5 mM EDTA, 300 mM KCl, and 10 mM
MgCl2; and (D) 20 mM sodium cacodylate (pH 7.0), 0.5 mM
EDTA, and 1 M NaCl on a Beckman Coulter DU 640 spectrophotometer.
Melting curves were normalized and analyzed with MeltWin 3.5.

Results
Native Gel Electrophoresis
and Enzymatic/Chemical Mapping
The two potential secondary
structures of M1 mRNA are identical
at the basal stem, but nucleotides between positions 127 and 170 are
folded differently. Comparative sequence analysis does not favor one
structure over the other (Figures B and ). To distinguish between the structures,
native PAGE and enzymatic/chemical mapping experiments were performed
on in vitro transcribed wild-type RNA and on mutants
designed to stabilize the multibranch (MBmutant) or the hairpin (HPmutant)
conformation.

Figure  shows native PAGE
of the wild-type RNA and mutants. All RNA ran as a single band, indicating
that the wild-type RNA and mutants each fold into a single conformation.
The mobility of the wild-type RNA is the same as that for MBmutant
but slower than that for HPmutant. The three constructs are of the
same size (see denaturing gel in Figure B)
This suggests that the wild-type RNA folds into the multibranch conformation.

Native
gel of the wild-type RNA and mutants. (A) The native gel.
RNAs were folded in 10 mM Tris (pH 7.0) and 100 mM KCl with increasing
MgCl2 concentration (0, 10, and 50 mM). (B) Denaturing
gel of wild-type and mutant RNAs.

Figure  shows enzymatic/chemical
mapping
results for the wild-type RNA. Enzymatic mapping used RNase A (cleaves after unpaired pyrimidines), RNase
T1 (cleaves after unpaired G), RNase If (cleaves after single-stranded residues), and RNase V1 (cleaves after double-stranded or structured regions).
Chemical mapping used DMS (modifies N1
of A and N3 of C when unpaired), CMCT (modifies N3 of U and N1 of
G when unpaired), and DEPC (modifies an exposed N7 of A). SHAPE mapping was used to identify flexible regions. The results
agree with the predicted multibranch structure but not with the hairpin
model. In particular, A142 and C143 were heavily hit by single-strand
sensitive probes, which is inconsistent with the hairpin model. Also,
U133, C148, C149, C154, and G165, which are single-stranded in the
hairpin model but paired in the multibranch model, were not hit by
any single-strand sensitive probes.

Mapping results of the wild-type RNA.
(A) The multibranch model.
(B) The hairpin model. The color annotation key is given at the top.
For single-strand sensitive nucleases and small molecule probes, filled
and open shapes indicate strong and medium hits, respectively. For
RNase V1, bold italic letters and regular letters
indicate strong and medium hits, respectively. For microarray probing,
solid and dashed boxes indicate the center of strong and medium binding
sites, respectively. The predicted free energies of folding, ΔG37°, for the multibranch and hairpin models
are −29.1 and −25.5 kcal/mol, respectively.

Mapping results of two mutants provide additional
evidence for
the multibranch structure. MBmutant was designed to stabilize the
multibranch conformation (and forbid the hairpin) by changing the
A132–A151 pair into a CG pair (Figure ). This mutation results in a predicted free energy, ΔG37°, of −35.3 kcal/mol for the multibranch conformation, a gain
of −6.2 kcal/mol in stability compared to that of the multibranch
structure of the wild-type RNA, without a change in predicted ΔG37° for the hairpin (see captions to Figures  and ). Thus, the equilibrium constant of
the mutated sequence for folding to the multibranch conformation is
predicted to be 8 × 106-fold more favorable than to
the hairpin. As shown in Figure , the mapping
results of MBmutant are very similar to that of the wild-type RNA.
There were significant differences only in P2: in the wild-type RNA,
nucleotides A131, A132, A150, and A151 were hit by several single-strand
sensitive probes (Figure ), whereas in MBmutant,
this region was unreactive to single-strand sensitive probes, as expected
for the multibranch conformation but not the hairpin conformation.
Thus, the enzymatic/chemical mapping results for MBmutant are consistent
with the multibranch model but not the hairpin model.

Mapping results of MBmutant.
(A) The multibranch model. (B) The
hairpin model. Color annotation is the same as in Figure . Mutations are indicated by arrows. The predicted
free energies of folding, ΔG37°, for the multibranch and
hairpin models are −35.3 and −25.5 kcal/mol, respectively.

HPmutant was designed to fold
into the hairpin conformation by
changing the CCAA tetraloop in P3′ into GCAA, predicted to
be more stable by −0.4 kcal/mol at 37 °C. Also, three
mismatches along the stem were mutated to canonical base pairs by
A132 → G, A145 → G, and U162 → A changes (Figure ). These mutations make a very stable hairpin conformation
with −40.6 kcal/mol predicted free energy at 37 °C, making
the equilibrium constant for folding to the hairpin predicted to be
8 × 1010-fold more favorable than to the multibranch
conformation (see captions to Figures  and ). The enzymatic/chemical mapping results for this
mutant are consistent with the hairpin model but not the multibranch
model. As shown in Figure , G141, A142, and
C143 were not hit by single-strand sensitive probes in HPmutant as
they were in the wild-type RNA (Figure ).
Additionally, nucleotides that are expected to be single-stranded
in the hairpin model of both HPmutant and the wild-type RNA, including
nucleotides 148 and 165, were only hit by single-strand sensitive
probes in HPmutant. These observations suggest that the wild-type
RNA does not fold into the hairpin model.

Mapping results of HPmutant.
(A) The multibranch model. (B) The
hairpin model. Color annotation is the same as in Figure . Mutations are indicated by arrows. The predicted
free energies of folding, ΔG37°, for the multibranch and
hairpin models are −25.1 and −40.6 kcal/mol, respectively.

Isoenergetic Microarray
Probing of the Wild-Type RNA
A complementary method for probing
RNA structure, isoenergetic microarray
mapping, was also applied. The isoenergetic
microarray uses pentamer and hexamer 2′-O-methyl RNA probes
modified by inclusion of LNA and 2,6-diaminopurine to provide similar
free energies of binding to unfolded complementary RNA, independent
of sequence, and to stabilize the binding compared with unmodified
probes., Thus, probe binding interrogates primarily
RNA folding rather than differences in thermodynamic binding affinity.
The average predicted free energy of binding for the modified library
to complementary sites on the wild-type RNA is −9.2 ±
0.8 kcal/mol at 37 °C, compared with −2.4 ± 1.6 kcal/mol
for an unmodified DNA library. The stability enhancement averages
60 000-fold, and just as important, the sequence dependence
of free energies, compared to unmodified probes, is reduced; this
greatly simplifies interpretation of binding results.

The isoenergetic
microarray binding results on the wild-type RNA are consistent with
enzymatic/chemical mapping results and also support the multibranch
structure (Figures  and ). Five unambiguous strong binding sites were
revealed: C143, C163, G165, A166, and G182 (center nucleotides of
probe binding sites). Except for G182, most nucleotides at binding
sites were also hit by single-strand sensitive probes, confirming
their accessibility in the structure. Strong binding sites with possible
alternative binding sites include nucleotides C126, A142, and A147,
which also react with single-strand sensitive probes.

Interestingly,
when microarray probing was done in 100 mM KCl/10
mM MgCl2 instead of 300 mM KCl/10 mM MgCl2,
no detectable binding was observed. This suggests that the wild-type
RNA folds into a very compact and stable structure at 100 mM KCl/10
mM MgCl2. Evidently, the 300 mM KCl makes the binding sites
in the RNA more accessible. This increased accessibility of RNA induced
by higher KCl concentration was also observed in a conserved RNA structure
in the NS gene.

NMR Spectra Are Consistent
with the Multibranch Structure
The consensus sequence of
the wild-type RNA was cut after G121–U176,
and two GC pairs plus a 3′ dangling A were added after G121–U176
to stabilize P1a (Figure A). NMR spectra were
taken for this 61 nucleotide RNA in 20 mM KH2PO4 (pH 6.5), 80 mM KCl, and 0.05 mM EDTA. Figure B shows the imino region of a 2D-NOESY spectrum acquired at 12 °C,
with 100 ms mixing time. Base pair types of the imino resonances were
identified on the basis of their proton chemical shifts as well as
typical NOE cross peaks to amino and nonexchangeable protons. More
definitive peak assignments would require isotope labeling, which
is beyond the scope of this work.

2D-NOESY spectrum of the multibranch structure.
(A) The 61 nucleotide
construct of the multibranch structure. (B) The imino region of a
2D-NOESY spectrum recorded at 12 °C, with 100 ms mixing time.
RNA was folded in 20 mM KH2PO4 (pH 6.5), 80
mM KCl, and 0.05 mM EDTA. Base pairs involved in observed helical
walks are shown by colored dots (red = GC, blue = AU, green = GU).
Four helical walks are shown by different color, which corresponds
to the color of base pairs in panel A. The inset shows the region
between 11.8–12.8 ppm with increased contour level to show
the imino cross peaks of G129 to G130 and G135 to G146. The imino
cross peak between G130 and U152 is not apparent from this plot but
can be seen with contour level lowered. The evidence of connection
between G130–C153 and A131–U152 is shown in .

NOE cross peaks are formed between imino protons in adjacent
base
pairs. Four helical walks consistent with the multibranch structure
were observed for this RNA. No NOE connections to G119–C178,
U123–G174, or U137–A145 were observed. These pairs are
adjacent to loops or the end of the structure. In P1a, the imino cross
peak between G121 and U176 appeared to be split, suggesting conformational
exchange in this helix. The signal for G171 was weaker than that of
G173, consistent with G171–C126 closing the multibranch junction.
In P2, the imino cross peak between U152 and G130 was weak but could
be observed with the contour level lowered. A131H2 and G130H1 gave
a clear NOE peak (), confirming
the connection between G130–C153 and A131–U152. The
imino cross peak between U133 and G134 was broad. In P3, no NOE connections
were seen, which is consistent with A166 being hit by single-strand
sensitive probes (Figure ). P3 may be a dynamic
region. Adding up to 4 mM MgCl2 in the NMR buffer did not
significantly affect the spectrum (). Some NOE peaks appeared weaker, possibly because MgCl2 made the multibranch structure more rigid.

Optical Melting Experiments
Reveal Similar Melting Profiles
in 1 M NaCl and in 10 mM MgCl2
Figure  shows melting profiles of the wild-type RNA in
100 mM KCl with/without 10 mM MgCl2, in 300 mM KCl with
10 mM MgCl2, and in 1 M NaCl without MgCl2.
Addition of 10 mM Mg2+ to 100 mM KCl increased the melting
temperature by ∼14 °C. Increasing the K+ concentration
in the presence of Mg2+ had little effect. The melting
profile of wild-type RNA in 1 M NaCl is similar to that in 100 (or
300) mM KCl with 10 mM MgCl2. Similar agreement was found
for melting of a cyclized group I intron. Chemical mapping of the cyclized group I intron and of the specificity domain of RNase P RNA in 1 M NaCl and in 10 mM MgCl2 have
also shown good agreement. Evidently, 1 M NaCl is a reasonable approximation
for buffers containing Mg2+. This supports the common practice
of using thermodynamic parameters measured in 1 M NaCl− to predict RNA secondary structures in the presence of Mg2+.− For the RNA sequence studied here, free energy minimization with
1 M NaCl parameters and no experimental restraints predicts all the
base pairs shown in Figure A when slippage
of ±1 nucleotide is allowed.

Optical melting curves for the wild-type
RNA. The absorbance was
measured at 280 nm in 20 mM sodium cacodylate (pH 7.0), 0.5 mM EDTA,
and 100 mM KCl (blue line); 20 mM sodium cacodylate (pH 7.0), 0.5
mM EDTA, 100 mM KCl, and 10 mM MgCl2 (black line); 20 mM
sodium cacodylate (pH 7.0), 0.5 mM EDTA, 300 mM KCl, and 10 mM MgCl2 (green line); and 20 mM sodium cacodylate (pH 7.0), 0.5 mM
EDTA, and 1 M NaCl (red line).

Discussion
Functional Implications of the Multibranch
Structure
On the basis of predicted thermodynamics, sequence
comparison, and
bioinformatics, the multibranch structure was predicted to be one
of the most thermodynamically stable and conserved structures in M1
mRNA. The experimental data reported
here confirms these predictions. This agreement contrasts with a similar
68 nucleotide region that is 51 nucleotides downstream from the 5′
splice site of segment 8. In that case, the bioinformatics approach
predicted a multibranch model, but chemical and isoenergetic mapping
revealed a hairpin structure in solution.

The multibranch structure in segment 7 is typically only 79
nucleotides downstream from the 5′ splice site for M2 mRNA
(Figure ). Intriguingly, in all of the spliced
segments in influenza A, B, and C, unusually stable and conserved
structures were predicted at or near the splice sites,,, which indicates that these structures
may play common roles in the regulation of influenza splicing.

The average canonical base pair conservation of this multibranch
structure is 93.6% (Figure  and ). In particular, the hairpin loops of
P2 and P3 have most nucleotides with greater than 97% conservation.
Although the base pairs in P1 and P1a are less conserved than those
in P2 and P3, roughly one-third of the mutations retain canonical
pairing. When mutations lead to noncanonical pairs, about one-third
are CA pairs (). CA pairs are isosteric
with GU wobble pairs, can have a high pKa, and preserve the A form RNA helix. In general, variations in sequences and structures
of mRNA are highly restricted in coding areas with cis-acting functions,
presumably because of the necessity to maintain both protein and RNA
structures. The special conservation
of this multibranch structure suggests that this motif is functionally
important.

mRNA secondary structures can play roles in the modulation
of splicing,
for example, by hiding or revealing splice sites and other regulatory
elements or by modifying the spatial
distance between cis-acting elements. Splicing can also be regulated via protein-induced RNA conformational
switching, or small molecule binding., Many alternative splicing processes are associated with RNA secondary
structure formation in pre-mRNA.− Previous studies have postulated
roles for RNA secondary structure in the regulation of splicing in
influenza and other viruses.,

While not present
in the consensus sequence studied here, the basal
helix of the multibranch structure in many influenza A strains contains
the M4 mRNA 5′ splice site, GAG/GUUCUC (nucleotides 118–126),
where the slash represents the splice site. Additionally, there is a putative human intronic splicing enhancing
sequence, GGGGAUU (nucleotides 171–177),
within this structure. In both cases, the regulatory sequences are
embedded in secondary structure, where they would be expected to be
less accessible to splicing factors., Interestingly,
at the 3′ splice site of the M2 mRNA, a pseudoknot is formed,
which also buries splicing regulatory sequences in structure., Thus, likely inhibitory cis-regulatory structures are at or near
both splice sites of the M2 mRNA. Such structures could facilitate
temporal control of M2 production, which occurs late in infection.

Mutagenesis studies carried out on segment
7 of influenza A virus
in the Shih group are supportive of the
proposed role for the multibranch structure in modulating alternative
splicing of segment 7. The sequence used in their study contains the
M4 mRNA 5′ splice site GAG/GUUCUC (nucleotides 118–126).
When G120 was mutated to A, the virus was still viable, but the amounts
of alternatively spliced products were changed, and the viral growth
rate was attenuated. Similar results were observed when G121 was mutated
to A. In contrast, when G121 was mutated to C or U, the virus could
not be rescued. These results are consistent with the structure shown
in Figure A, where G120 → A and G121
→ A mutations maintain base pairing, but G121 → C/U
disrupts base pairing. The mutation results thus also support the
proposal that this multibranch conformation is important for regulating
alternative splicing of segment 7. Changing this RNA structure may
affect the alternative splicing process or even diminish viral viability.
This has significance for designing attenuated live-virus vaccines. The structure presented in Figure A provides a basis for further tests of functions for this
motif.

Potential Tertiary Interactions and Dynamics in the Multibranch
Structure
Three-way multibranch loops are common RNA secondary
structural motifs, which are important in organizing tertiary interactions
in large molecules. They have been extensively
studied in Varkud satellite ribozymes, the hepatitis C virus internal ribosome entry site,− hammerhead ribozymes,, the P4–P6 domain
of a group I intron, and so forth. Comparison
of the secondary structure in Figure A with
3D structures of other three-way multibranch loops suggests possible
tertiary interactions.

Three-way multibranch loops usually fold
by coaxial stacking of two of the three arms., It is possible that small rearrangements in the multibranch structure
(Figure A) would allow P1a to stack with P2
and connect with P3 by a U168 A169 A170 triloop closed by C167–G171.
Both A residues in the triloop could form base triples with adjacent
G129–C154 and G130–C153 pairs (). CG/A base triples are sterically possible. Such a long-range interaction was observed in
RNase P and rRNAs− and is characteristic of UAA triloops.

Extensive enzymatic and chemical mapping
data are consistent with
potential tertiary interactions and dynamics in this multibranch structure.
For instance, the 3′ side of P3 was extensively hit by single-strand
sensitive probes and bound by oligonucleotides (Figure A). Moreover, no NOESY helical walks were detected for P3
(Figures  and ). These observations indicate that this helix is relatively flexible.
It agrees with the potential 3D stacking, in which G156–C167
does not form, P3 becomes a relatively weak helix, and A166 becomes
reactive to single-strand sensitive probes ().

The other potentially flexible region of the multibranch
structure
is P1a, where most nucleotides on one side of the stem were hit by
both RNases V1 and If (Figure ). Also, no evidence for U123–G174 was observed,
and more than one conformation was seen for G121–U176 in NOESY
spectra (Figures  and ). P1a may form a weak and dynamic helix, by shifting the
pairing between CUCUC (nucleotides 122–126) and GGGGA (nucleotides
171–175), thus placing the putative intronic splicing enhancer
GGGGAUU in different structural contexts. This dynamic region could
serve as a good target for protein, small molecule, or oligonucleotide
binding, as illustrated by medium microarray binding on both sides
of P1a (Figure A). More sophisticated NMR
techniques can be used to measure RNA dynamics, as exemplified by some studies conducted on riboswitches., For instance, 1H/15N-heteronuclear exchange-sensitive
NMR allows the detection of structural changes occurring within the
time frame of 15N-longitudinal relaxation.

In P2, A131, A132, A150, and A151 were hit by DEPC
only when the
RNA was folded without Mg2+. None reacted with NMIA to
a detectable level, but A132 and A151 reacted with DMS in the presence
and absence of Mg2+ (Figure A).
High reactivities with DMS and negligible reactivities with NMIA of
adenosines suggest that the Hoogesteen edge of the adenosines are
buried and nucleobases are stacked on both faces. It is possible that A132 and A151 pair in a sheared configuration
(trans Hoogsteen/Sugar-edge), with two hydrogen bonds
forming from the two amino protons of one adenosine to N3 and O2′
of the other adenosine, respectively., In this way,
the N 1s of A132 and A151 are available to be modified by DMS, but
the ribose groups may not sample a conformation necessary for reactions
with NMIA. In the absence of Mg2+, A132 and A151 can be
accessed by DEPC, possibly because of lack of tertiary interaction
and relatively weak stacking with adjacent AU pairs. In the presence
of Mg2+, however, long-range contacts with other nucleotides
may occur in the position of the sheared AA pair, thus protecting
N7 of A residues in this region. The A131H2 to U152H3 and the U133H3
to A150H2 cross peaks are both weak in NOESY spectra (Figures , ), suggesting
that the imino protons of the four residues are exchanging with water.
It is possible that the two adenosines in the sheared AA pair are
rapidly exchanging positions.,

An imino cross
peak between G146 and G135 was observed in NOESY
spectra (Figures  and ). A147 may form a base triple with C136–G146 by
interacting with its minor groove. Three hydrogen bonds may form to
stabilize this interaction, including from N7 of A to H22 of G and
from two amino protons of A to O2 and O2′ of C, respectively. This kind of CG/A triple has been observed in
rRNAs and a group I intron.−

Implications for Therapeutics against Influenza
Isoenergetic
microarrays identified oligonucleotide binding sites in this multibranch
conformation. Most of them are in flexible regions of the structure.
Microarray probes can also bind to regions that are not hit by single-strand
sensitive probes,, as apparent for nucleotide G182
(Figures  and ). G182 is flanked by eight non-GC pairs on its 5′
side and four on its 3′ side. Evidently, the four modifications
of probe 182 allow it to invade the P1 helix. Following strand invasion,
U114 and U117 may further enhance hybrid stability by forming base
triple interactions with A183 and A180, respectively. Thus, microarrays
can reveal binding sites not apparent from secondary structure prediction
or from enzymatic/chemical mapping.

Several approaches have
been developed to target RNA secondary structure for therapeutics,
including RNAi, antisense RNA, and aptamers. More and more RNA structures that can be used for therapeutic targets
in major human diseases have been found in recent years., Influenza A is a significant public health threat, with evolved
resistance to current vaccines and treatments. The potential biological
function and sequence/structure conservation of the multibranch structure
identified in this work makes this region a new attractive therapeutic
target. Probe binding sites found in the microarray study are therefore
promising for use in a chemical genetics approach to test for function
and for designing oligonucleotides as potential therapeutics against
influenza A infection. The loops identified may also be targetable
with small molecules.

Supporting Information Available
Hybridization
results on isoenergetic
microarrays for the wild-type RNA; table of NMR chemical shifts; NMR
evidence of connection between G130–C153 and A131–U152
in the multibranch structure; imino region of 2D-NOESY spectrum of
the multibranch structure in the presence of Mg2+; putative
tertiary interaction in the wild-type RNA; gel results of enzymatic
and chemical mapping of the wild-type RNA; base pairing frequencies
and nucleotide composition by alignment position; and microarray hybridization
results. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500611j_si_001.pdf

This work was
supported by NIH grant GM22939 (D.H.T.), NIH grant 1R03TW008739-01
(E.K. and D.H.T.), and Polish National Science Centre grants UMO-2013/08/M/NZ/01062
(E.K.) and NN301788440 (E.K.).

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
CMCT1-cyclohexyl-3-(2-morpholinoethyl)
carbodiimide metho-p-toluene sulfonate

DEPCdiethylpyrocarbonate

DMSdimethyl sulfate

DTTdithiothreitol

EDTAethylenediaminetetraacetic
acid

HEPES(4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic
acid

LNAlocked
nucleic acid

NMRnuclear magnetic resonance

NOESYnuclear Overhauser effect spectroscopy

PAGEpolyacrylamide gel electrophoresis

SHAPEselective 2′-hydroxyl
acylation and primer extension

