FeS clusters are ubiquitous in Nature, existing mainly as 2Fe, 3Fe,
and 4Fe structures., These clusters aid in electron
transfer and also serve as structural and catalytic units. Over the past decade, a great deal of research
has been undertaken to understand the mechanism of the enzymatic synthesis
of these clusters. Numerous enzymes, mainly associated with the synthesis
of [Fe2S2] and [Fe4S4]
clusters, have been identified in both eukaryotic and prokaryotic
systems.

The biosynthesis of larger
(&gt;4Fe) clusters is less understood.
This work focuses on the synthesis of the large P-cluster of the nitrogenase
system. Nitrogenase catalyzes the reduction of atmospheric N2 to NH3. The enzyme consists of two separable proteins,
the Fe protein (NifH) and the MoFe protein (NifDK). NifH is a γ2 dimer containing a single
[Fe4S4] cluster bound between the two subunits
and one ATP binding site within each subunit. NifDK is an α2β2 tetramer and contains two different metallocenters
per αβ subunit pair: a P-cluster ([Fe8S7]) bound at each αβ subunit interface and an FeMo
cofactor (FeMoco, [MoFe7S9C-homocitrate]) bound within each α subunit. During enzymatic turnover, NifH binds to NifDK
and donates an electron to the latter in a process involving ATP hydrolysis.
Electron transfer progresses from the [Fe4S4] cluster of NifH through the P-cluster to the FeMoco portion of
NifDK, where substrate reduction occurs. For nitrogen fixation, this
process is repeated eight times in a cycle known as the Lowe–Thorneley
(LT) scheme.

The P-cluster (Figure ) can be viewed as two [Fe4S4] clusters sharing a common S atom, and the structure of this
cluster is redox-dependent. Consistent
with this view, recent research− has identified the precursor of the P-cluster as two neighboring
[Fe4S4]-like clusters per αβ subunit
pair of the tetrameric ΔnifH NifDK. As the
name implies, ΔnifH NifDK is generated by deleting nifH, a gene that encodes NifH. Because NifH is necessary
for FeMoco biosynthesis, the resultant ΔnifH NifDK lacks FeMoco and contains only the P-cluster precursor, which
is a pair of [Fe4S4]-like clusters.

Structure of
the P-cluster in (A) the DTN-reduced (PN) state and (B)
the IDS-oxidized (P2+ or POX) state and (C)
proposed structure of the P-cluster precursor in
ΔnifH NifDK.

The in vitro enzymatic synthesis of the
P-cluster
occurs when ΔnifH NifDK is incubated with NifH,
MgATP, and a reductant [typically dithionite (DTN)]. The mechanism of this conversion is currently unknown but
likely involves a NifH-mediated, reductive coupling of the neighboring
clusters on ΔnifH NifDK. To investigate the
mechanism of this synthesis, a magnetic circular dichroism (MCD) spectroscopic
study of the [Fe4S4]-like clusters in ΔnifH NifDK, poised at different redox potentials, was undertaken.
This study reveals that the [Fe4S4]-like clusters
on ΔnifH NifDK can be reduced to the all-ferrous
[Fe4S4]0 state. Subsequent increases
in the redox potential of the all-ferrous clusters result in the nonenzymatic
formation of P-clusters in the absence of NifH and MgATP.

Experimental
Procedures
Unless noted otherwise, all chemicals and reagents
were obtained
from Fisher Scientific or Sigma-Aldrich.

Cell Growth and Protein
Purification
All Azobacter
vinelandii strains were grown in 180 L batches in a 200 L
New Brunswick fermentor in Burke’s minimal medium supplemented
with 2 mM ammonium acetate. The growth rate was measured by cell density
at 436 nm. After ammonia had been consumed, the cells were de-repressed
for 3 h and subsequently harvested by using a flow-through centrifugal
harvester (Cepa, Lahr/Schwarzwald, Germany). The cell paste was washed
with 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0). The ΔnifH NifDK,
ΔnifB NifDK, and wild-type NifH proteins used
in this work were purified as described previously.,

Sample Preparation
All MCD samples were prepared in
an Ar-filled anaerobic chamber (Vacuum Atmospheres, Hawthorne, CA)
at an oxygen level of &lt;4 ppm. The
Ti(III) citrate solution was prepared as described previously. DTN-reduced protein samples were in 25 mM Tris-HCl
(pH 8.0), 10% glycerol, and 2 mM dithionite (Na2S2O4). Ti(III) citrate-reduced protein samples were prepared
by incubating protein with 12 mM Ti(III) citrate for 5 min and subsequently
removing excess Ti(III) citrate with a G25 size-exclusion column.
Indigo disulfonate (IDS)-oxidized protein samples were prepared by
incubating samples with IDS for 5 min and subsequently removing excess
IDS with a G25 size-exclusion column. Samples were then concentrated
to ∼70 mg/mL in a Centricon-50 concentrator (Amicon) as described
previously, transferred to MCD sample
cuvettes, and frozen in a liquid nitrogen/pentane slush. All samples
contained 50% glycerol to ensure the formation of an optical glass
upon freezing, and they were kept on dry ice during transit.

MCD Spectroscopy
MCD spectra were recorded with a modified
CD spectropolarimeter (model J-715, Jasco) interfaced with a superconducting
magnet (model 400-7T Spectromag,
Oxford). Sample temperatures were monitored with two thin
film resistance temperature sensors [model CX1050-Cu-1-4L (Lakeshore,
Westerville, OH)] positioned directly (1 mm) above and
below the sample cuvette. The linearity of the magnetic field was
monitored with a calibrated Hall generator [model HGCA-3020 (Lakeshore)]
placed directly outside the superconducting magnet.

MCD sample
cells were constructed from optical-quality Spectrosil quartz [170–2200
nm, 1 mm path length, model BS-1-Q-1, Starna, model SUV R-1001 or
FUV (Spectrocell, Oreland, PA)]. Each cuvette
was cut into the appropriate dimensions to fit the sample holder (2.0
cm × 12.5 mm), resulting in a sample volume of approximately
160 μL.

MCD spectra were recorded at a rate of 50 nm/min
and a resolution
of 10 nm. Two different photomultipliers were used, one with a spectral
range of 200–900 nm and the other with a spectral range of
700–1050 nm. Because of the strong absorbance of DTN, all of
the spectra
presented herein start at ≥350 nm. Because optical glasses
formed at low temperatures often generate a strain-induced background
CD spectrum, the CD spectrum was recorded in zero magnetic field to
determine whether the background signal was excessive. To eliminate
interference by any background CD signal, the corrected MCD spectrum
was obtained for each sample by first recording the spectrum with
the magnetic field in one direction and then subtracting from it the
spectrum with the field in the opposite direction. All spectral intensities
were corrected for path length and sample concentration.

Analysis of
Magnetization Data
Magnetization curves
were recorded at a set wavelength and temperature while the magnetic
field was linearly varied from 0 to 6 T at a rate of 0.1 A/s with
a resolution of 2 s. MCD magnetization data were analyzed by a previously
published fit/simulation
program. The program allows the calculation
of best-fit saturation magnetization curves using experimental data
as a basis set and is valid for any spin state, half-integer or integer,
at any specified temperature.

Experimental data were analyzed
by fitting the Spin Hamiltonian parameters (g for S = 1/2 and D and E/D for S &gt; 1/2) and the effective transition moment products, Mxyeff, Mxzeff, and Mxyeff, with a scaling parameter Asatlim = γ/4πS, where γ
is the magnetogyric ratio. The effective transition moment products
represent the planes of polarization that reflect the anisotropy of
the g factors. Because the initial slope of the magnetization
curve is dependent on the g factors, the transition
polarizations relate the transition dipole to the g factor axes of a powder or randomly oriented sample.

Results
ΔnifH NifDK contains two P-cluster precursors
(i.e., two pairs of [Fe4S4]-like clusters) and
exhibits several highly unusual and fascinating properties. A previous
MCD spectroscopic study, on the as-isolated
ΔnifH NifDK revealed the first unusual property
of this protein. As expected, all four clusters exist in the classic
[Fe4S4]+ state in the presence of
DTN, exhibiting an S = 1/2 EPR
signal. Oxidation with IDS converts
all four clusters into the EPR-silent [Fe4S4]2+ state. However, contrary to all past studies of [Fe4S4]2+ clusters, which have always shown
them to be diamagnetic, the [Fe4S4]2+ clusters in ΔnifH NifDK are paramagnetic.
This observation suggests that the clusters possess an unusual structure
or coupling, which is different from that of any previously investigated
[Fe4S4] cluster. Moreover, the unusual structure
or coupling may be instrumental in converting the neighboring [Fe4S4]-like clusters into an 8Fe P-cluster.

The [Fe4S4]-like clusters in the as-isolated
ΔnifH NifDK exhibit another fascinating property.
Addition of the strong reductant Ti(III) citrate bleaches the S = 1/2 EPR signal that is associated
with the
[Fe4S4]+ state, making the system
EPR-silent. This observation suggests
that the clusters may be further reduced to an all-ferrous [Fe4S4]0 state. The [Fe4S4]0 state is highly unusual. To date, only two [Fe4S4] proteins, namely, NifH,, and 2-hydroxyglutaryl-CoA-dehydratase, have been shown to exhibit the all-ferrous state.
The all-ferrous [Fe4S4]0 cluster
in NifH is paramagnetic with an S = 4 spin state,
as verified by Mössbauer, EPR, and MCD spectroscopic techniques.,, To determine whether the clusters
in ΔnifH NifDK can similarly exist in the all-ferrous
state, MCD spectra of Ti(III) citrate-reduced NifH and ΔnifH NifDK were recorded and compared. The two spectra (Figure ) are nearly identical except that the intensity
of the ΔnifH NifDK spectrum is approximately
4 times that of NifH. This ratio is consistent with the stoichiometry
of the clusters in each protein and reveals that all four of the clusters
in ΔnifH NifDK can exist in the all-ferrous
[Fe4S4]0 state. To further verify
the identity of the all-ferrous clusters in ΔnifH NifDK, magnetization curves of the spectra of both NifH and ΔnifH NifDK at 720 nm and 1.6 K were constructed and compared.
The near-identical nature of both curves (Figure ) further supports the conclusion that all
of the [Fe4S4]-like clusters in ΔnifH NifDK can be reduced to the unusual all-ferrous state
and also implies that these clusters have an S =
4 spin state.

MCD spectra of Ti(III) citrate-reduced ΔnifH NifDK (red) and Ti(III) citrate-reduced NifH (green).
Both spectra
were recorded at 1.6 K and 6 T. The sharp inflections around 420 nm
in both spectra are likely due to a minor heme impurity.

Magnetization curves of Ti(III) citrate-reduced ΔnifH NifDK (red) and NifH (green) recorded at 1.6 K and
720 nm.

A spectral property that has been
associated with the all-ferrous
[Fe4S4]0 cluster is its color. In
the past, both synthetic and protein-bound [Fe4S4]0 clusters (including the [Fe4S4]0 cluster in NifH) have been shown to exhibit a red hue.,, This characteristic has been
associated with the presence of a transition around 500–520
nm in the absorption spectrum. Contrary to this trend, the color
of the Ti(III) citrate-reduced ΔnifH NifDK
remains brown. However, a Gaussian fit of the MCD spectra of NifH
and ΔnifH NifDK reveals the presence of nearly
identical transitions in both spectra, including one at 510 nm (Figure
S1A,B and Table T1 of the ). This observation suggests that the red color associated with the
all-ferrous cluster is not just due to the presence of a transition
around 500–520 nm; rather, it is also due to the intensity
of that transition relative
to the intensities of the neighboring transitions.

Interconversion
between the [Fe4S4]+ and [Fe4S4]2+ states of as-isolated ΔnifH NifDK has been shown to be completely reversible. The [Fe4S4]0 state in NifH is likewise reversible with the more oxidized 1+ and
2+ states. To test whether the [Fe4S4]0 state in ΔnifH NifDK is similarly reversible with its oxidized states, a Ti(III)
citrate-reduced sample was oxidized with IDS followed by the recording
of the MCD spectrum of this sample. When compared with the spectrum
of the IDS-oxidized as-isolated protein (Figure A), the spectrum of the IDS-oxidized protein
following Ti(III) citrate reduction (Figure B) is obviously completely different. Therefore,
increasing the redox potential of Ti(III) citrate-reduced ΔnifH NifDK converts the all-ferrous [Fe4S4]-like clusters into a new set of clusters.

Comparison of the MCD
spectra of (A) IDS-oxidized as-isolated ΔnifH NifDK and (B) IDS-oxidized-after-Ti(III)-citrate-reduced
(OAR) ΔnifH NifDK. The spectrum in panel A
was recorded at 1.6 K and 6 T, while the spectra in panel B were recorded
at 1.6 K and magnetic fields of 6, 5, 4, and 3 T. Note that the intensities
of the spectral features at 500 nm decrease much more rapidly with
a decreasing magnetic field than the intensities of the spectral features
at 800 nm.

To investigate the nature of the
new clusters, the MCD spectrum
of the IDS-oxidized-after-Ti(III)-citrate-reduced (OAR) protein was
recorded at 1.6 K and different magnetic fields. Recording the MCD
spectrum of a single paramagnetic species at one temperature and various
magnetic fields typically results in a series of spectra that undergo
uniform decreases in intensity with a decreasing field (different
directional polarizations arising from anisotropy in the ground state,
however, can produce wavelength-dependent differences). That is not
what is observed with the OAR protein (Figure B). Specifically, the spectral intensity
around 500 nm decreases rapidly with a decreasing field, while the
intensity around 800 nm exhibits only a slight decrease. Magnetization
curves (Figure ) recorded at 1.6 K and at
500 and 800 nm further illustrate this difference and suggest the
presence
of two different species with two different spin states. The steep
initial slope and rapid saturation of the magnetization curve at 800
nm suggest a high-spin state, while the gradual slope and the slow
approach to saturation of the curve at 500 nm imply a small spin state.
These magnetization curves also illustrate that, while the spectra
of both spin states contribute significantly to the overall spectrum
at 6 T (βB/2kT = 1.26 at 6
T in Figure ), the spectrum at 1 T (vertical
dashed line
in Figure ) is dominated by the spectrum of
the high-spin
species.

Magnetization curves of OAR ΔnifH NifDK
in IDS, recorded at 500 and 800 nm and at 1.6 K. The dashed vertical
line indicates the magnetic field of 1 T (note that on this graph
a magnetic field of 6 T corresponds to βB/2kT = 1.26).

Figure A shows the OAR spectrum recorded
at 1.6 K and 1 T, which approximates the spectrum of the high-spin
species. The spectral range was extended to 1100 nm for better characterization.
There are two telling features in this spectrum. First, the spectrum
is very broad, lacking sharp transitions. The broadness of the spectrum
suggests that it originates from a large cluster, which would have
many overlapping and unresolved transitions that result in composite
broad transitions. Second, the transition at around 800 nm is very
intense, larger than any of the other inflections. While most FeS
clusters yield MCD spectra with intensity in the 800 nm wavelength
region, the majority of these spectra exhibit intensities at 800 nm
that are lower than the intensity of the rest of the spectrum. Therefore,
the intense transition at 800 nm is a characteristic of the unknown
high-spin cluster. The spectrum in Figure A is very similar to the spectrum of the IDS-oxidized ΔnifB NifDK in Figure B.,, ΔnifB NifDK
does not contain FeMoco, and therefore, the spectrum of this protein
in IDS (Figure B) represents the sole contribution
of its
oxidized P-cluster species (P2+ or POX; S = 3 or 4).,, It is clear that the spectra in panels A and B of Figure  are nearly identical. Consistent with this identification
is the strong similarity of the magnetization curves for both spectra
(Figure ), suggesting that both spectra arise
from
the same high-spin state. The small deviation of the OAR magnetization
curve from that of oxidized ΔnifB NifDK at
low fields is likely due to the presence of a small contribution from
the second low-spin component [labeled X (see below)] to the overall
trace of the OAR curve.

MCD spectra (extended to 1100 nm for better
spectral characterization)
of (A) OAR ΔnifH NifDK, recorded at 1.6 K and
1 T ,and (B) IDS-oxidized ΔnifB NifDK (i.e.,
the P2+ spectrum), recorded at 1.6 K and 6 T.

Magnetization curves of IDS OAR ΔnifH NifDK
(red) and IDS-oxidized ΔnifB NifDK (blue) recorded
at 800 nm and 1.6 K. The lack of complete overlap of the two curves
in the region of 0.5–2.0 T is likely due to a small contribution
from the low-spin component (X) in the composite spectrum of OAR ΔnifH NifDK.

The presence of P2+ can also be monitored by EPR
spectroscopy.
The spin state of P2+ has been predicted to be S = 3 or 4. This assignment is partially based on its EPR
spectrum in the parallel mode. At low temperatures, P2+ exhibits a weak g = 11.9 signal, which is associated
with an excited state., Figure  shows the protein concentration-normalized, parallel-mode EPR spectra
of IDS-oxidized ΔnifBΔnifZ NifDK (containing one P2+) and OAR ΔnifH NifDK [predicted to contain ∼20–25% P2+ (see below)] at 10 K, both of which exhibit the characteristic g = 11.9 signal of the P2+ cluster.

Parallel-mode
EPR spectrum of IDS-oxidized ΔnifBΔnifZ NifDK containing one P2+ per
protein (blue) and OAR ΔnifH NifDK predicted
(from its MCD spectrum) to contain 20–25% P2+ per
protein (red, or ∼45% of the blue spectrum). Both spectra were
recorded at 9.384 GHz with a modulation amplitude of 1.0 G, a temperature
of 10 K, and a microwave power of 50 mW and have been normalized for
protein concentration.

Finally, it has been demonstrated that
the amount of P-cluster formed during its biosynthesis can be quantified
by the amount of acetylene reduction activity generated upon addition
of FeMoco (along with NifH, DTN, and MgATP). Table  lists the activity obtained when isolated FeMoco was added
to as-isolated ΔnifH NifDK, the OAR protein,
and ΔnifB NifDK. The ΔnifB NifDK protein contains two P-clusters and acts as a reference, representing
100% activity regeneration. As can be seen, activity cannot be regenerated
in as-isolated ΔnifH NifDK (possessing no P-clusters),
while approximately 20% activity can be regenerated with the OAR protein.
Therefore, consistent with the outcome of the MCD analysis (see Figures  and ) and the EPR spectrum
(Figure ), these results show that reducing
ΔnifH NifDK to the all-ferrous state triggers
the [Fe4S4]-like clusters into an irreversible
mode, which
allows the subsequent formation of P-clusters upon oxidation.

Comparison of the Activity of MoFe
Proteins upon Addition of Isolated FeMoco
protein	C2H2 reducing activity (nmol mg–1 min–1)	percentage
activity (%)	
ΔnifH NifDK (as isolated)	0	0	
ΔnifH NifDK (OAR)	213 ± 38	20	
ΔnifB NifDK	1083 ± 138	100	
Percentage
activity was calculated
by setting the activity of reconstituted ΔnifB NifDK to 100% and comparing the activity of reconstituted ΔnifH NifDK with that of reconstituted ΔnifB NifDK.

A comparison between
the normalized intensity of the pure P2+ MCD spectrum and
that of the OAR protein in IDS (Figure ) shows
that the latter protein contains
only ∼20–25% of the P-cluster in the holoprotein. To
help identify the remaining
FeS clusters, the OAR protein was subjected to one more redox change
back to the DTN state. It is well-known that, in the presence of DTN,
the P-cluster exists as PN, a diamagnetic state with no
significant MCD spectrum., Therefore, the DTN
spectrum of the OAR protein should not have any
interfering contributions from the P-cluster. Indeed, the MCD spectrum
of reduced OAR ΔnifH NifDK in DTN (Figure , red) is clearly that of a single paramagnetic
species, as its intensity decreases uniformly with temperature at
a constant field (Figure S3 of the ). The
overall structure of the spectrum, namely, the broad derivative-shaped
curve, is centered at ∼600 nm with a small positive inflection
at 700 nm, which clearly identifies the paramagnetic species as a
classic [Fe4S4]+ cluster. An essentially
identical spectrum is obtained by directly increasing the redox potential
of the Ti(III) citrate-reduced protein to the DTN state (Figure , black). A comparison of these spectra with
that of the original, as-isolated ΔnifH NifDK
in DTN shows that all three spectra have essentially identical inflections
above 450 nm (Figure ). The main difference
among the three spectra
is their intensities, where the spectrum of the as-isolated protein
has a little more than 3 times the intensity of the other two spectra.
In other words, ∼30–35% of the clusters exist as the
[Fe4S4]-type
clusters upon oxidation of the all-ferrous state of the protein. Given
the proposed conversion of 20–25% of the remainder of the clusters
into P-clusters (see ), there is
a yet-unknown FeS cluster(s) that comprises 40–50% of the total
cluster population in this protein.

MCD spectra of as-isolated ΔnifH NifDK in
DTN (magenta), Ti(III) citrate-reduced ΔnifH NifDK following equilibration with DTN (black), and OAR ΔnifH NifDK following DTN reduction (red). The difference
in the &lt;450 nm region for the black spectrum may be due to the
presence of a small paramagnetic contaminant, likely a heme.

The spectrum of the OAR protein
can be used to characterize one
of the remaining unknown FeS clusters, labeled X. As discussed above,
the OAR spectrum (Figure A) appears to be
composed of two overlapping
spectra. One spectrum in OAR has been tentatively assigned to P2+, while the other spectrum is assigned to the unknown X,
a species with a low-spin state. Figure  shows
the difference spectrum obtained by subtracting the MCD spectrum of
approximately 25% pure P2+ (Figure B) from the spectrum of OAR ΔnifH NifDK (Figure B) at 1.6 K and 6 T. This difference spectrum
roughly approximates the spectrum of X but does not correspond to
any previously published spectrum. Because the identity of this cluster
is unknown, its relative concentration cannot be estimated. Nevertheless,
it is interesting to note that X has several spectral properties that
are analogous to those of the P-cluster: (i) both clusters are paramagnetic
with an integer spin in IDS; (ii) the spectra of both clusters in
IDS are very broad, characteristic of large FeS clusters; and (iii)
both clusters are diamagnetic in DTN.

Approximation of the
MCD spectrum of X obtained by subtracting
the spectrum of IDS-oxidized ΔnifB NifDK (i.e.,
the P2+ spectrum, shown in Figure B) from the spectrum of OAR ΔnifH NifDK (i.e.,
the 6 T spectrum in Figure B). Both spectra
were recorded at 1.6 K and 6 T. The intensity of the spectrum of ΔnifB NifDK used in the subtraction was reduced to 1/4 to approximate the concentration of the P2+ cluster in the composite spectrum.

Because X is EPR-silent and has a very small spin state (see
below),
there is also the possibility that X is diamagnetic and not paramagnetic
in IDS. The major argument against this assignment is the MCD spectrum
of X, which is much more intense than the spectra of typical diamagnetic
species. For example, the spectrum of X is &gt;10 times more intense
than that expected from a conventional [Fe4S4]2+ cluster. However, the
possibility of X being diamagnetic cannot be completely ruled out
by our data.

Using an approach analogous to the one used above
to approximate
the MCD spectrum of X, the magnetization curve of X was similarly
approximated. The success of this procedure is aided by the apparently
large difference between the spin states of the IDS-oxidized P-cluster
and X, as well as the presence of previously published magnetization
curves of the oxidized P-cluster at various wavelengths. At 800 nm,
the magnetization curve of IDS-oxidized P-cluster has been shown to rapidly reach the saturation limit, after
which it only slightly increases with an increase in magnetic field
strength. Therefore, above this saturation point, increases in recorded
magnetization are mainly due to X. The extracted magnetization curve
of X was simulated for various integer spin states, with the best-fit
simulation occurring at S = 1 (Figure S3 of the ).

Taken together,
combined MCD and EPR spectroscopic studies have
identified three different FeS clusters generated in the OAR protein.
This identification was facilitated by the fact that both EPR and
MCD spectroscopic techniques respond to paramagnetic states, with
EPR spectroscopy responding best to half-integer states and MCD spectroscopy
responding equally well to half-integer and integer states. While
MCD spectroscopy also responds to diamagnetic states, it does so with
much lower intensity than it does to paramagnetic states. Thus, the
apparent lack of additional paramagnetic MCD and EPR signals of any
other FeS clusters does not negate the possibility of the presence
of one or more diamagnetic states being generated, but not detected,
in the OAR protein.

Discussion
The results presented
here are summarized in a flow diagram (Figure ). ΔnifH NifDK is
just one of two proteins shown to exhibit a paramagnetic [Fe4S4]2+ state. The
other protein, NifEN, is also associated with nitrogen fixation and
is instrumental in FeMoco biosynthesis., NifEN has
a protein structure homologous to that
of ΔnifH NifDK but contains only a single [Fe4S4]-like cluster
at each α/β subunit interface instead of two
found at each α/β
subunit interface in ΔnifH NifDK. ΔnifH NifDK is also only the third protein shown to exhibit
an all-ferrous [Fe4S4]0 state. As
demonstrated above, the all-ferrous state is a necessary intermediate
in the proposed nonenzymatic synthesis of the P-cluster in ΔnifH NifDK.
As such, this is one of the first examples demonstrating a clear mechanistic
function of an all-ferrous [Fe4S4]0 state. It is also interesting to note that, while the MCD spectra
of the [Fe4S4]+- and [Fe4S4]2+-like clusters in both NifEN and ΔnifH NifDK are virtually identical, the clusters in NifEN cannot be reduced to the all-ferrous state.
This is consistent with the suggested necessity of an all-ferrous
[Fe4S4]0 intermediate state in the
formation of the P-cluster, a reaction not associated with NifEN.

Flow
diagram showing the spin states of the different FeS clusters
in IDS, DTN, and Ti(III) citrate from different preparations. The
different states of the clusters are placed along a reaction coordinate
to show the irreversibility of the system following reduction by Ti(III)
citrate to the all-ferrous state and subsequent oxidation with IDS
or DTN. Note the different colors of the [Fe4S4] clusters in the as-isolated protein (red), the Ti(III) citrate-reduced
protein (black), and the OAR protein (blue). These different colors
are used to signify that these [Fe4S4]-like
clusters differ from one another [i.e., the clusters in the as-isolated
protein are paramagnetic in the 2+ state, the all-ferrous clusters
in the Ti(III) citrate-reduced protein cannot be converted back to
the cluster type of the as-isolated protein, and the OAR clusters
are diamagnetic in the 2+ state].

The nonenzymatic synthesis of P-clusters requires a specific
series of redox changes (Figure ). The neighboring
[Fe4S4]-like clusters in ΔnifH NifDK, poised
in either DTN (i.e., [Fe4S4]+) or
Ti(III) citrate (i.e., [Fe4S4]0),
do not spontaneously form the P-cluster. Furthermore, P-clusters are
not formed during the reduction of the [Fe4S4]-like clusters from the 1+ state to the 0 state. The only mechanistic
change that generates P-clusters is an increase in the redox environment
(to either DTN or IDS) of the [Fe4S4]0 clusters. This observation suggests that there is a redox, structural,
or mechanistic change specific to that step that is necessary for
P-cluster synthesis.

Two possible mechanisms can be proposed
for this synthesis. One
mechanism involves oxidation of the all-ferrous [Fe4S4]-like clusters, while the second mechanism involves oxidation
of atoms
or ligands associated with the [Fe4S4]-like
clusters. To understand the first proposed mechanism, a notation
will be introduced to specify the clusters in different redox and
structural states. The two clusters in the two αβ subunit
pairs will be labeled Cnm. In
this notation, C identifies the cluster source (in
the α or β subunit), m represents the
charge on the cluster (2+, 1+, or 0), and n represents
the structure the cluster has at a given charge (2+, 1+, or 0). Therefore,
the cluster that resides in the α subunit with a charge of 2+
(i.e., [Fe4S4]2+ state) but with
the structure of the cluster in the 1+ state (i.e., [Fe4S4]+ structure) would be labeled α1+2+. Using this
terminology, the mechanism for the one-electron reduction
of the cluster on the α subunit from the 1+ state to the all-ferrous
0 state would be represented asThis equation reflects the fact that electron
transfer (the first arrow) occurs faster than structural rearrangement
(the second arrow). Reduction of the β subunit-associated cluster
would undergo an analogous change but not necessarily in synchrony
with the reduction of the α subunit-associated cluster.

Conversely, oxidation of the α subunit-associated cluster
from the all-ferrous 0 state to the 1+ state would be represented
by the equationAs stated above, the resting state
of the
cluster pair poised in either DTN or Ti(III) citrate (i.e., α1+1+β1+1+ or α00β00, respectively)
does not lead to P-cluster formation. Similarly, P-cluster formation
does not occur during reduction of the 1+ state to the all-ferrous
state, implying that the intermediate states α1+0 and β1+0 (eq )
are not instrumental in P-cluster formation.
Therefore, the only states that appear to be involved in P-cluster
formation are α01+ and β01+, which are generated during oxidation (eq ). These transient states have the charge
and electronic/vibrational characteristics of a 1+ cluster but the
structure of an all-ferrous 0 cluster.

Equation  states that during oxidation,
each cluster in ΔnifH NifDK exists in one of
three states (C00, C01+, or C1+1+). Therefore,
the pair of clusters on a given αβ subunit has 9 (3 ×
3) different possible configurations during oxidation. Of the 9 configurations,
5 (α01+β00,
α00β01+, α01+β1+1+, α1+1+β01+, and α01+β01+) contain
the required C01+ state and, therefore, are most likely involved
in the mechanism of P-cluster formation. However, while configuration
α01+β01+ might be
involved in P-cluster formation, there is a very low probability of
neighboring clusters simultaneously existing in the highly transient C01+ state. Therefore, the 4 remaining configurations are more likely
involved in P-cluster formation.

A logical question is why these
configurations promote P-cluster
formation and not the analogous configurations (containing C1+0 in place of C01+) that occur during reduction (eq ). The difference may originate from the structural
and energetic differences between the [Fe4S4]+ and [Fe4S4]0 clusters.
The X-ray crystal structures of the clusters in ΔnifH NifDK are currently not known. However, the crystal structures of
both [Fe4S4]+ and [Fe4S4]0 clusters in NifH have been determined
and shown to differ., Compared to the structure of
the [Fe4S4]+ cluster, the structure
of the [Fe4S4]0 cluster has two large
S–S
distances (3.80 Å), an increased Fe1–Fe3 distance (2.79
Å),
and a shorter Fe1–Fe4 distance (2.57 Å). Optimized density
functional theory calculations support this structure
of [Fe4S4]0 and show the presence
of three equivalent Fe atoms with one distant Fe atom., A recent Fe extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) study
on NifH similarly shows a deformation
of the [Fe4S4]0 cluster relative
to the [Fe4S4]+ cluster. There are
also differences in the vibrational frequencies for the various oxidation
states of the [Fe4S4] cluster in NifH, as each
one-equivalent reduction step decreases the different stretching frequencies
by approximately 20 cm–1 on average.

Fe EXAFS studies have been performed on
the [Fe4S4]+-like clusters in ΔnifH NifDK, which reveal that the pair of neighboring [Fe4S4]-like clusters are not typical. While one of
the clusters
has the standard [Fe4S4] architecture, the other
cluster is distorted, likely with a coordinating light atom (N or
O), as well as a cysteine in place of the normal bridging sulfide., The proposed elongation of one of the Fe bonds, present in the all-ferrous
structure and/or the distortion of one of the clusters, along with
the increase in vibrational frequency, may facilitate fusion of the
two clusters when one of the paired clusters becomes oxidized to C01+.

A second possible mechanism for P-cluster formation involves
oxidation
of a ligand or atom associated with the all-ferrous [Fe4S4]-like clusters of ΔnifH NifDK
instead of a direct oxidation of the clusters themselves. In this
case, oxidation would initiate a shift of the cluster or metal–ligand
bond breakage, resulting in fusion of the two [Fe4S4]-like clusters into a P-cluster. Unlike the first proposed
mechanism, in which there is an oxidation change of the Fe atoms,
this mechanism involves no cluster redox change and, therefore, is
more consistent with the presumed overall reaction mechanism for P-cluster
formation, where all the Fe atoms remain ferrous. This reaction can
be depicted as follows:Because
this reaction is initiated by an oxidation,
the absence of oxidation in the metal cluster suggests that the oxidation
occurs on a sulfide or ligand of the polypeptide.

Summary
Under the experimental conditions used in this study, at least
three different FeS clusters are generated on the OAR protein. One
of the clusters is proposed to be the P-cluster, which represents
∼20–25% of the total FeS cluster content. This low yield
is not totally
unexpected. Enzymatic synthesis initially generates only one P-cluster
in ΔnifH NifDK, followed by a very slow (&gt;1
h) generation of the second P-cluster. A similar partitioning of synthesis of the two P-clusters may occur
in the nonenzymatic process.

A second cluster generated in the
nonenzymatic
reaction is labeled X. While the identity of X is unknown, it has
several spectroscopic characteristics similar to those of the P-cluster.
Given that both clusters are paramagnetic in IDS and diamagnetic in
DTN, as well as the fact that the spectra of both clusters in IDS
are broad, X may also be a large cluster with a structure similar
to that of the P-cluster. It is tempting to infer from this observation
that X is either a mechanistic intermediate between the [Fe4S4]-like cluster pair and the P-cluster or a faulty cluster
formed by a mismatch of neighboring [Fe4S4]-type
clusters. In either case, X may be an intermediate in the generation
of the second, slow-forming P-cluster in the enzymatic reaction. To
test this hypothesis and determine whether the all-ferrous state is
an intermediate in P-cluster biosynthesis, we are currently conducting
a study of the enzymatic reaction, which is analogous to the MCD study
described here on the nonenzymatic reaction.

The third cluster
formed in the nonenzymatic reaction is a classic [Fe4S4] cluster. The
great degree of similarity between the MCD spectrum of this cluster
and that of the [Fe4S4]+-type clusters
in the as-isolated protein (Figure ) illustrates
a conservation of the overall
electronic structure between the two clusters. Why some [Fe4S4] clusters remain after the series of redox changes
is unknown, but they may represent clusters that failed to fuse to
form either the P-cluster or X. However, most surprisingly, the [Fe4S4]-type clusters in the as-isolated protein (labeled
in red in Figure ) are actually slightly
different from those
after the redox cycle (labeled in blue in Figure ). Specifically, the [Fe4S4]-type clusters
in the as-isolated ΔnifH NifDK possess the
highly unusual property of being paramagnetic
in the [Fe4S4]2+ state, whereas the OAR [Fe4S4]-type clusters exhibit the diamagnetism characteristic of classic
[Fe4S4]2+ clusters,, which is illustrated by the absence of paramagnetic species other
than the P-cluster from the protein (see Figures  and ). Clearly, reducing the
cluster to the all-ferrous state and then increasing the redox potential
eliminate the unusual coupling that is associated with the paramagnetic
[Fe4S4]2+ state and revert the cluster
back to the conventional coupling that is associated with a traditional
diamagnetic [Fe4S4]2+ cluster.

Supporting Information Available
Plots showing Gaussian
fits of the spectra of Ti(III) citrate-reduced NifH and ΔnifH MoFe protein, a table of the areas under the major
MCD absorptions for the spectra of Ti(III) citrate-reduced NifH and
ΔnifH MoFe protein, and MCD spectra of the
OAR ΔnifH MoFe protein in DTN and Ti(III) citrate
reduced in DTN, at both 1.6 and 4.2 K. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi401699u_si_001.pdf

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
Parallel-mode,
X-band EPR spectra were recorded by Brian Bennett
at the National Biomedical EPR Center (supported by National Institutes
of Health Grant P41 EB001980) of the Medical College of Wisconsin
(Milwaukee, WI).

Abbreviations
MCDmagnetic circular dichroism

NifHFe protein of nitrogenase

NifDKMoFe protein
of nitrogenase

FeMocoFeMo cofactor at the active site on the MoFe protein of nitrogenase

IDSindigo disulfonate

DTNsodium dithionite

nifBgene that encodes
NifB, a protein necessary in the initial synthesis of FeMoco

OARoxidized-after-Ti(III)-citrate-reduced.

