Photoswitchable
proteins can
elicit a change in biological activity in response to light. Just as fluorescent proteins have been employed
as tools to monitor cellular events, photoswitchable proteins offer
a means to control them. Channelrhodopsins, a family of naturally
occurring or engineered light-switchable ion channels, are gaining widespread use in neuroscience because they
allow precise spatiotemporal control of action potential firing in
neurons. There are many processes in biology that exhibit complex
spatial and temporal patterns akin to electrical signaling in the
nervous system, but for which no known photoswitchable effectors analogous
to the channelrhodopsins exist. Structure-based design of novel photoswitchable
effectors would be greatly facilitated by the development of protein
scaffolds that undergo large, well-defined structural changes upon
illumination.

Domain swapping, defined by Eisenberg as the process
whereby a
secondary or tertiary structural element of a monomeric protein is
replaced by the same element of another copy of the same protein,− must produce a large structural change in the hinge region, the
part of the structure that must reorient to alter the oligomeric state
of the protein. In addition, domain swapping may be coupled to complete
folding–unfolding transitions of protein structure. Consistent with the large and well-defined structural
changes associated with domain swapping, the process is associated
with radical changes in protein activity. For example, domain swapping
can effectively turn on and off protein splicing, membrane interactions, an ability
to mediate stable cell junctions, and
the process of amyloid fibril formation.

Here we report domain swapping in a circularly permuted variant
of photoactive yellow protein (PYP). PYP is well-suited for photoswitching
applications because it is small and water-soluble, folds reversibly,
and undergoes a large change in conformational dynamics upon conversion
to the light state., Our intention was to couple the
light-driven conformational change in PYP to a functional change in
a target protein sequence. Loh and colleagues have described how protein
function can be controlled by coupling folding of a target protein
to unfolding of a control protein by setting up an antagonistic folding–unfolding
equilibrium between the two proteins., This type
of mutually exclusive folding can be achieved by inserting the target
protein sequence into a surface loop of the control protein so that
the attachment points are too close together for the target protein
to adopt its normally folded conformation unless the control protein
unfolds, or unless it undergoes a domain swap. To make folding and unfolding of the control protein light-dependent,
we required a loop in the control protein for which the ends were
much less constrained in the light state than in the dark state. Analysis
of the changes in conformational dynamics of PYP between light and
dark states suggests that none of the native loop constraints change
dramatically. We therefore designed a
circular permutant cPYP in which the original N- and C-termini were
joined in a new surface loop and new N- and C-termini were created
at positions 115 and 114 of the original sequence. This protein underwent a normal photocycle, and the constraints
on the ends of the newly created loop were found to change substantially
between light and dark forms.

In
this study, a cPYP variant was created (designated c-E-helix-PYP)
in which a heterodimeric coiled-coil-forming sequence (E-helix), [(IAALEKE)2IAALE] is inserted at the newly created surface
loop. The E-helix sequence was designed by Hodges and colleagues on
the basis of extensive data on sequence properties governing coiled-coil
formation.− The E-helix sequence binds with high specificity
and affinity to a complementary K-helix peptide [Ac-WG(IAALKEK)2IAALK-NH2] but must adopt a helical
conformation to do so. The distance between the loop ends in the dark-state
folded structure of cPYP is too short to permit the E-helix insert
to adopt an α-helical conformation. Thus, we expected this state
to show weak affinity for the K-helix. Our original expectation was
that the enhanced flexibility of the light state of PYP would then
permit the E-helix to adopt a conformation competent for K-helix binding.
Instead, we discovered that c-E-helix-PYP undergoes domain swapping
that leads to the presence of both monomeric and dimeric forms of
the protein. The two forms interconvert extremely slowly (weeks) in
the dark but do so rapidly (&lt;1 min) under blue light illumination.
Domain swapping produces a change in the hinge region of the protein,
so that only the domain-swapped dimeric state can bind the K-helix
peptide. This novel type of light-driven protein conformational change
produces essentially complete on–off control because the high
thermal barrier to interconversion means the active (binding-competent)
state cannot be accessed without exposure to light.

Materials and
Methods
Gene Synthesis
DNA encoding c-E-helix-PYP (codon optimized
for Escherichia coli) was synthesized by BioBasic
Inc. (Toronto, ON) and inserted into the pET24b(+) vector using Ndel
and HindIII restriction sites. The expressed sequence was

Protein
Expression and Purification
The expression
and purification protocol for c-E-helix-PYP was adapted from the work
of Devanathan et al. DNA (0.2 ng) was
transformed into BL21*(pLysS) competent cells and plated onto agar
plates containing 30 μg/mL kanamycin. The following day, a single
colony was used to inoculate 25 mL of Luria-Bertani broth (LB) that
had been supplemented with kanamycin (30 μg/mL). The 25 mL overnight
culture was used to inoculate 1 L of LB supplemented with 30 μg/mL
kanamycin. Cells were grown at 37 °C to an OD600 of
0.6 and then induced with 0.5 mM IPTG. The temperature was adjusted
to 18 °C, and the cells were grown for a further 1.5 h. At this
point, 25 mg of activated chromophore dissolved in 1 mL of ethanol
was added to the medium. The synthesis of the activated chromophore,
4-hydroxycinnamic acid S-thiophenyl ester, was conducted
as detailed by Changenet-Barret et al., except that the product was not recrystallized. The cells were then
grown for 14 h before centrifugation to separate the medium from the
protein-containing cell pellet.

The pellet was resuspended in
lysis buffer [50 mM sodium phosphate, 300 mM sodium chloride, and
5 mM magnesium chloride (pH 8.0)] and frozen at −20 °C
until it was purified. The resuspended cell pellet was sonicated in
pulses on ice for 5 min and then centrifuged at 12K rpm for 1 h to
separate the supernatant from the pellet. The pellet was then resuspended
in lysis buffer containing 6 M urea and subsequently centrifuged at
12K rpm for an additional 1 h. The protein-containing supernatant
was then applied to a Ni2+-NTA column that had been equilibrated
with lysis buffer containing 6 M urea. The resin was washed with 10
column volumes (CV) of lysis buffer containing 6 M urea. The resin
was subsequently washed with lysis buffer containing decreasing concentrations
of urea, followed by high-salt buffer (i.e., lysis buffer supplemented
with 2 M NaCl). The resin was then washed with 5 CV of lysis buffer
supplemented with 5 mM imidazole to elute nonspecifically bound proteins.
The protein was eluted by increasing the concentration of imidazole
to 200 mM.

The eluted protein was dialyzed extensively against
40 mM Tris-OAc,
1 mM EDTA, and 100 mM NaCl (pH 7.5) [1× TAE and 100 mM NaCl (pH
7.5)] at 4 °C. The dialyzed protein was concentrated to ∼1.5
mL using an Amicon ultracentrifugal device [10000 Da NMWL (nominal
molecular weight limit)] (Millipore). The protein was then applied
to a Superdex 75 10/300 GL column (GE Healthcare) running in 1×
TAE, 100 mM NaCl buffer (pH 7.5). This permitted physical separation
of the dimer and monomer for subsequent experiments. UV–vis
absorbance spectroscopy was used to determine which eluted fractions
had the highest ratios of absorbance at 446 nm to that at 278 nm.
A value of ∼2 was typical for both dimeric and monomeric c-E-helix-PYP.
The identity of the sample was then confirmed by electrospray ionization
mass spectrometry (ESI-MS). Additional dimer was produced as needed
by incubating 500 μM c-E-helix-PYP in the dark for 18 h [1×
TAE, 100 mM NaCl, and 1.5 M Gdn (pH 7.5, 30 °C)], followed by
size exclusion chromatography as described above. The monomer could
be produced by blue light irradiation of 10 μM protein [1×
TAE and 100 mM NaCl (pH 7.5, 30 °C)], followed by size exclusion
chromatography as described above.

UV–Vis Spectra and
Thermal Relaxation Kinetics
UV–vis spectra and kinetic
measurements were performed using
a PerkinElmer Lambda 35 or 25 spectrophotometer or using a diode array
UV–vis spectrophotometer (Ocean Optics Inc., USB4000), in each
case coupled to a temperature-controlled cuvette holder (Quantum Northwest,
Inc.). Protein concentrations were determined using an extinction
coefficient at λmax (∼446 nm) of 45 ×
103 M–1 cm–1. Thermal
relaxation experiments were conducted at 10 °C to prevent interconversion
between monomeric and dimeric species. Irradiation of the protein
samples was conducted using a Luxeon III Star Royal Blue Lambertian
light emitting diode (455 nm) operating at approximately 700 mA (∼50
mW/cm2). Changes in the absorbance spectrum at 446 nm were
monitored to determine the rate constants for thermal relaxation.
Monomer data were fit to a single-exponential function. Dimer data
were fit to a double-exponential function, or in the case where kinetics
were measured as the K-peptide was added, global fitting was performed
using a triple-exponential function (see Figure S9 of the ). All fitting was performed
using IgorPro (Wavemetrics).

CD Measurements
CD experiments were
conducted on an
Olis RSM100 CD spectrometer. Dimeric c-E-helix-PYP was prepared at
a concentration of 12 μM in 5 mM sodium phosphate (pH 7.5).
Monomeric c-E-helix-PYP was produced by illuminating the dimer sample
with blue light. This allowed for a direct comparison of CD traces
without any changes in protein concentration. A cylindrical quartz
cell with a path length of 0.1 cm was used for all measurements. Samples
were fully dark adapted before they were scanned in the far-UV region
from 260 to 190 nm at 30 °C. The integration time was 1 s, and
three scans were averaged to give a final spectrum. The spectra were
converted to mean residue ellipticities and smoothed using a binomial
algorithm provided in IgorPro (Wavemetrics).

Sedimentation Equilibrium
Samples of purified monomeric
and dimeric c-E-helixPYP were prepared at concentrations of 5.5,
11.1, and 22.2 μM in 1× TAE, 100 mM NaCl buffer (pH 7.5)
and analyzed by analytical ultracentrifugation in sedimentation equilibrium
mode (AUC facility, Department of Biochemistry, University of Toronto).
The absorbance at 446 nm was monitored at 4 °C and speeds of
16000, 19000, and 22000 rpm.

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
Labeled c-E-helix-PYP
(15N, 19F, and 15N and 19F) was prepared as follows. An expression plasmid was transformed
into BL21*(pLysS) cells and plated on LB-Agar containing 30 μg/mL
kanamyacin. A single colony was selected from this plate and transferred
to a 50 mL LB culture containing 30 μg/mL kanamycin. The following
day, 6 mL of the overnight culture was centrifuged for 15 min at 4000
rpm, and the pellet was resuspended in 50 mL of M9 medium (not isotope-labeled).
The 50 mL culture was grown at 37 °C and 250 rpm until it had
reached the midlog growth phase (OD600 ∼ 0.5–0.7),
after which it was centrifuged as described above. The pellet was
used to inoculate 1 L of 99% 15N-enriched M9 minimal medium,
supplemented with 0.3% d-glucose, 0.1% 15NH4Cl (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Inc.), 30 mg/L kanamycin,
10 mg/L thiamine, 10 mg/L biotin, 1 mM MgSO4, 1 mM CaCl2, and 1% Bioexpress cell growth 15N medium (Cambridge
Isotope Laboratories, Inc.), and the culture was subsequently grown
at 37 °C and 250 rpm until it had again reached the midlog phase.
Protein expression was induced by the addition of 0.5 mM IPTG. The
temperature was adjusted to 18 °C, and the cells were grown for
a further 1.5 h, after which 25 mg of activated chromophore dissolved in 1 mL of ethanol was added. The
culture was then grown overnight. The following day, the cells were
harvested by centrifugation at 4000 rpm and 4 °C for 1 h. To
incorporate 5-fluorotrytophan into c-E-helix-PYP, 60 mg/L 5-fluoro-l,d-Trp (Aldrich) was introduced into the bacterial
culture 1 h prior to induction. Here,
the activated chromophore was added at the time of induction of protein
expression by addition of 0.5 mM IPTG, and growth was halted 2 h after
induction. The protein was purified in the same manner as unlabeled
samples (as described above). The expected masses of the proteins
were confirmed by ESI-MS.

NMR experiments were conducted at
CSICOMP (Department of Chemistry, University of Toronto) on an Agilent
DD2 700 MHz spectrometer equipped with an HFCN cold probe. Spectra
were acquired with a 15N NH HSQC-TROSY Watergate pulse
sequence from the Varian “Biopack” library. All spectra
were acquired at 37 °C with 2048 points spanning 8928.6 Hz in
the 1H dimension and 256 increments spanning 2202 Hz in
the 15N dimension. Sample concentrations varied from 200
to 400 μM, and the number of transients collected was varied
from 8 to 80 depending on the concentration available. Size exclusion
chromatography was used following acquisition to confirm that monomer–dimer
interconversion did not occur.

Spectra were processed using
the NMRPipe processing suite. FID signals
were zero filled to double the original
data size and apodized using a sine window function prior to Fourier
transformation. In the indirect dimension, linear prediction was applied
to double the original data size. Analysis was aided by NMRViewJ (One
Moon Scientific).

Peptide Synthesis
Automated Fmoc-SPPS
was conducted
on a CEM Microwave Peptide Synthesizer (CEM Corp.) using Rink Amide
MBHA resin (0.4 Loading, AnaSpec, Inc.) at 0.1 mmol scale. Coupling
was performed using HBTU [O-(benzotriazol-1-yl)-N,N,N′,N′-tetramethyluronium hexafluorophosphate] (AnaSpec,
Inc.), DIPEA (N,N-diisopropylethylamine)
(Sigma-Aldrich Inc.), and a 5-fold molar excess of amino acid (AnaSpec,
Inc.). Peptides were purified by high-performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC) (Zorbax Rx-C8 semipreparative column) using a linear gradient
from 5 to 65% acetonitrile/H2O (with 0.1% trifluoroacetic
acid) over 30 min. The molecular composition of the peptides was confirmed
by ESI-MS, and lyophilized peptides were used for subsequent reactions.
5-Iodoacetamide fluorescein (5-IAF) was purchased from AnaSpec, Inc.
K-Helix-F labeling was conducted by reacting 1.1 mM 5-IAF with 1 mM
peptide in 5 mM phosphate buffer (pH 8.0) followed by HPLC purification.

Native Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis (PAGE) Analysis
Native PAGE was conducted with 12.5% polyacrylamide gels. A running
buffer of 25 mM Tris with 192 mM glycine (pH 8.3) was used. Gel images
were quantified using ImageJ (http://imagej.nih.gov/ij/index.html). Fluorescently labeled complexes were electrophoresed under the
same conditions. They were then visualized with a Bio-Rad PharosFX
Plus Molecular Imager equipped with an external 488 nm laser and a
530 nm band-pass filter. Equilibrium constants were determined using
c-E-helix-PYP at varying concentrations that were incubated under
constant blue light illumination, or in the dark with 1 M Gdn HCl.
Guanidinium was removed by rapidly diluting the samples with native
buffer [1× TAE and 100 mM NaCl (pH 7.5)] and then concentrating
the sample in an Amicon centrifugal filter (10000 Da NMWL) (Millipore).
The rate of monomer formation under illumination was determined using
20 μM dimeric c-E-helix-PYP that was irradiated with a mounted
high-power light-emitting diode (LED) (455 nm) purchased from ThorLabs.
The light intensity was controlled with a variable current LED driver,
and the fraction of cis-isomerized protein was monitored with a diode
array UV–vis spectrophotometer (Ocean Optics Inc., USB4000).

Results
c-E-Helix-PYP Exists as a Slowly Exchanging Monomer–Dimer
Pair
The circularly permuted form of PYP containing the E-helix
sequence as a loop insert (c-E-helix-PYP) was expressed in bacteria
and purified under denaturing conditions. After Ni2+-NTA
chromatography, c-E-helix-PYP was applied to a gel filtration column.
In contrast to other c-PYP constructs we have investigated, which
elute as a single peak, we found that c-E-helix-PYP eluted as two
well-separated peaks from the gel filtration column (Figure a). We identified these two peaks as monomeric and
dimeric forms of c-E-helix-PYP by sedimentation equilibrium ultracentrifugation
(Figure b). Both monomeric and dimeric forms
behave as a single species by ESI-MS under denaturing conditions and
have a characteristic PYP UV–visible spectrum (Figure c), consistent with both species being holoproteins.
Because the PYP chromophore is covalently linked to the only cysteine
residue, the dimeric form cannot be the result of intermolecular disulfide
bonding.

Under standard buffer conditions (Tris-acetate, pH
7.5, and 100 mM NaCl), we found that monomer–dimer exchange
occurred on a very slow time scale; no appreciable exchange was seen
in 1 week at 30 °C when the sample was dark-adapted (Figure S1
of the ). However,
the monomeric form could be produced by diluting the protein under
denaturing conditions and then removing the denaturant. Likewise,
the dimeric form could be produced by concentrating the protein in
the presence of denaturant.

(a) Size exclusion (Sephadex G75) chromatogram
of c-E-helix-PYP
following purification by Ni2+-NTA chromatography. (b)
Sedimentation equilibrium data confirming the two peaks in panel a
correspond to monomeric and dimeric species of c-E-helix-PYP. (c)
Electronic absorption spectra of the dark-adapted monomer and dimer.
(d) Far-UV circular dichroism spectra of the dark-adapted monomer
and dimer.

Characterization of the
Monomer and Dimer
Because of
the slow rate of monomer–dimer exchange, we were able to use
biophysical methods to characterize the monomer and dimer separately.
The UV–visible absorption spectra of monomeric and dimeric
c-E-helix-PYP are essentially superimposable (Figure c), indicating that both species have a properly folded, wild-type-like
chromophore binding pocket. Far-UV circular dichroism, however, indicates
that the dimer has more helical content (Figure d).

We recorded 15NH HSQC-TROSY spectra of dark-adapted
monomeric and dimeric forms of c-E-helix-PYP. Monomeric c-E-helix-PYP
shares a large number [∼100 (Table S1 of the )] of overlapping resonances with c-PYP (Figure S2 and Table S1 of the ). Because of this, we were able to
assign most of the c-E-helix-PYP resonances (except those of the E-helix
insert) by inspection. We also found that dimeric c-E-helix-PYP showed
significant overlap with cPYP (Figure S3 and Table S1 of the ). This indicates that
dimerization of c-E-helix-PYP occurs with relatively small changes
to the environments of the assigned residues, which consist mostly
of those in the PYP core (Figures S2–S4 of the ). There are differences
in the spectra of the monomer and dimer, but these occur mostly for
cross-peaks that have no corresponding cross-peak in cPYP. Also considering
the CD data (Figure d), we attribute this
to a conformational change in the E-helix loop insert upon dimerization.

We considered whether formation of the dimer by c-E-helix-PYP may
be occurring via interaction of two E-helices. Although homodimerization
of E-helices in solution has been observed, the interaction is very
weak for E-helices of this length (three heptads)., Moreover, we found that adding the complementary K-helix peptide
to a solution of dimeric c-E-helix-PYP did not lead to monomerization
(Figure S1 of the ) despite the fact that E-helix and K-helix peptides alone interact
with high affinity (Kd = 70 nM)., Instead, the very slow rate of monomer–dimer exchange is
consistent with domain swapping in which a large number of intermolecular
contacts are present at the dimerization interface. Domain swapping
results in very little structural rearrangement outside the hinge
region, as intramolecular contacts in the natively folded monomer
become intermolecular contacts in the dimer.− Thus, domain
swapping would explain the very high degree of similarity of the monomer–dimer
UV–vis spectra and monomer–dimer NMR spectra.

(a) Region
of a 15NH HSQC-TROSY spectrum of the c-E-helix-PYP
monomer (red) and the monomer containing 5-F-Trp (blue). Residue numbers
are indicated. (b) Model of the c-E-helix-PYP monomer with residues
whose NH chemical shifts are affected by fluorine substitution (except
those on the same strand as 5-F-Trp) colored blue. Residues shown
in the HSQC detail (a) are labeled and shown as sticks. The fluorine
atom is shown as a green sphere on a stick representation of the 5-F-Trp
side chain. The E-helix sequence is colored magenta. (c) Same region
as in panel a of a 15NH HSQC-TROSY spectrum showing the
c-E-helix-PYP dimer labeled with 15N only (green) and the
heterodimer sample (blue). The heterodimer sample is a mixture of
three molecular species: (1) dimers made from two 15N-labeled
monomers, (2) dimers made from two 19F-labeled monomers,
and (3) dimers made from one 15N-labeled monomer and one 19F-labeled monomer. Species (2) is invisible in the NH HSQC
spectrum, but both species 1 and 3 are present. The same subset of
resonances is affected by fluorine substitution as for the monomer.
(d) Model of the c-E-helix-PYP domain-swapped dimer with one monomer
colored white and the other green. The E-helix sequence is colored
magenta. Residues affected by fluorine substitution are colored blue.

For domain swapping to occur,
a hinge loop in the monomer must
become disengaged to allow for reciprocal exchange. Previous reports
show that domain swapping is sensitive to mutations in the hinge region., cPYP does not domain swap, and it differs
from c-E-helix-PYP only in the loop connecting the original N- and
C-termini. We therefore hypothesized that the hinge region was the
E-helix sequence. This hypothesis predicts that dimer formation occurs
via swapping of the N-terminal β-strand between monomers (Figure d). Such swapping would be expected to result in
a change in conformation of the E-helix linker, which would be consistent
with the differences observed in monomer–dimer HSQC spectra
and CD spectra (vide supra).

A Fluorotryptophan Probe
for N-Terminal Strand Swapping
c-E-Helix-PYP has a single
tryptophan residue, which is located on
the N-terminal β-strand that we propose is swapping (Figure ). We therefore made use of a 5-fluorotryophan (5-F-Trp)
probe to test this hypothesis. We first produced 15N-labeled
monomeric c-E-helix-PYP containing 5-F-Trp. We found that introduction
of this probe did not affect the protein globally [the majority of
HN chemical shifts were unaffected (Figure S6 of the )] but caused specific chemical shift
perturbations at residues that are near the fluorine atom in space
(Table S2 of the  and Figure a). These residues are on the
N-terminal strand and adjacent strands in the central β-sheet
(Figure b).

We then produced dimeric
c-E-helix-PYP from an equal mixture of 15N-only-labeled
and 5-F-Trp-only-labeled monomers. This mixture is expected to contain
differently labeled c-E-helix-PYP dimers, i.e., 25% 15N/15N dimers without 5-F-Trp, 25% 5-F-Trp/5-F-Trp dimers without 15N (which do not contribute to the NH HSQC spectra), and 50%
5-F-Trp/15N dimers. If N-terminal strand swapping is occurring,
we expect the 5-F-Trp probe of one monomer to be inserted between 15N-labeled β-strands of the other. We should then expect
similar chemical shift perturbations as seen in the doubly labeled
(15N and 5-F-Trp) monomer. Consistent with the N-terminal
strand swapping hypothesis, the 15N/5-F-Trp dimer produced
these same chemical shift perturbations (Figure c and Table S2 of the ). These data also indicate that the β-strands adjacent to
the swapped strand cannot be involved in swapping. If these strands
were also exchanged between monomers, their 15NH chemical
shifts would not be perturbed by the 19F label.

Blue Light
Accelerates Domain Swapping and Promotes Monomerization
To
estimate the equilibrium constant for dimer formation, we required
conditions that increased the rate of exchange between monomeric and
dimeric states so that equilibrium could be reached in a reasonable
period of time. It was found that increasing the temperature to 30
°C and adding 1 M GdnHCl to the solution permitted equilibration
between states to occur overnight (∼14 h). These conditions
do not cause complete denaturation of the protein as evidenced by
the persistence of a normal UV–vis absorbance trace (Figure
S7 of the ), but
presumably, they induce some fraction of the sample to transiently
unfold. Native PAGE permitted separation of the monomer and the dimer
species, and quantification of band intensities permitted calculation
of the dimerization affinity (Figure ). Using
a range of total protein concentrations, an average value for Kd(dark) of 10 μM was obtained (Figure
S8 of the ). Because
an increased temperature and 1 M GdnHCl would be expected to decrease
the helical content of the E-helix insert, and domain swapping is
expected to be promoted by the incompatibility of the folded E-helix
insert with the monomer state, we would expect these solution conditions
to decrease the propensity of c-E-helix-PYP to form a dimer compared
to those seen under native conditions.

Both monomeric and dimeric
forms of c-E-helix-PYP undergo typical photocycles as measured by
UV–vis spectroscopy (Figure  and Figure
S9 of the ). Blue
light irradiation causes the intensity of the absorption band at 446
nm to decrease and that of a new band at 350 nm (corresponding to
the cis, protonated chromophore) to increase. When blue light irradiation
ceases, a thermal process restores the trans, dark-adapted state. For both forms of c-E-helix-PYP, the thermal
back reaction has a half-life on the order of a few seconds (Figure
S9 of the ). The
light state of PYP exhibits greatly altered protein conformational
dynamics relative to those of the dark state. Previous work suggests that irradiation produces a partially unfolded
state that can be mimicked by addition of denaturant., By varying the intensity of blue light to produce different steady-state
fractions of cis isomerized protein, we found that the rate of dimer–monomer
exchange was dependent on the square of the total percent cis protein
(Figure b–d). This finding is consistent
with monomerization occurring from dimers containing two cis chromophores.
With sufficient light intensity to produce a 70% total cis content,
the dimer could be fully converted to the monomer in &lt;1 min, in
the absence of GdnHCl (Figure c). Thus, the
barrier to strand swapping, which presumably requires the breakage
of numerous H-bonds between the N-terminal strand and the rest of
the β-sheet, is greatly reduced when both monomers in the domain-swapped
dimer are in their light states.

Blue light greatly accelerates
the rate of domain swapping, and
native PAGE analysis of blue light-irradiated c-E-helix-PYP, at 30
°C (in the absence of GdnHCl), showed the protein had a greatly
decreased tendency to form domain-swapped dimers [Kd(light) ∼ 300 μM (Figure  and Figure S8 of the )]. For example, at a total protein concentration of 20 μM,
equilibration in the dark (with 1 M GdnHCl) leads to more than 50%
of the protein being in the dimer fraction, while equilibration under
blue light leads to &gt;98% monomer (Figure ).

(a) Analysis of monomer–dimer equilibration using native
PAGE (20 μM, 1× TAE, 100 mM NaCl, pH 7.5, 30 °C).
Pure dimeric (i) and monomeric (ii) samples are shown before equilibration.
Irradiation of a dimeric (iii) or monomeric (iv) sample produces &gt;98%
monomer. Dark equilibration overnight in the presence of 1 M GdnHCl
from either the dimer (v) or monomer (vi) produces ∼60% dimer.
(b) Steady-state UV–vis spectra of c-E-helix-PYP obtained with
different intensities of blue light. (c) Observed fraction of monomer
produced over time (as measured using native PAGE) from a dimer sample
(as in panel a) for the different illumination intensities shown in
panel b. (d) Monomerization rate constant (calculated from the data
in panel c) as a function of the total percent of cis isomer. The
rate constant is clearly not linearly dependent on the percent cis
(···) but is a function of the percent cis isomer squared
(—).

Blue Light Induces a Functional
Change in c-E-Helix-PYP
As noted above, the E-helix insert
is a capable of forming a heterodimeric
coiled coil with a complementary K-helix peptide. In c-E-helix-PYP, the E-helix apparently functions as the
hinge loop sequence and is expected to undergo a change in conformation
upon oligomerization. CD spectra suggest
that the E-helix becomes more helical in the dimeric form (Figure d). We investigated the ability of monomeric and
dimeric forms of c-E-helix-PYP to interact with the K-helix peptide.
Addition of 1 equiv of the K-helix peptide to a solution of dimeric
c-E-helix-PYP leads to an ∼15-fold slowing of thermal recovery,
but no effect is seen with the monomer (Figure S9 of the ), suggesting that the
K-peptide interacts with only the domain-swapped dimeric form of the
protein. A K-helix peptide containing two Leu-to-Ala mutations (Ac-WGIAAAKEKIAALKEKIAAAK-NH2) that shows a much weaker affinity
for the E-helix sequence, does not have this
effect, indicating the interaction is occurring via formation of a
coiled coil (Figure S9 of the ). To visualize K-helix binding directly, we synthesized a fluorescein-labeled
K-helix peptide [K-helix-F; Ac-CAAA(IAALKEK)2IAALKGW-NH2]. Figure b shows c-E-helix-PYP–K-helix-F complexes
analyzed by native PAGE. Strong fluorescence is associated with dimeric
c-E-helix-PYP when K-helix-F is added, but not with the monomeric
state (Figure b), even at &gt;100-fold greater
protein concentrations.

Native PAGE analysis of c-E-helix-PYP–K-helix-F
complexes.
Coomassie staining (left) showing the migration pattern of the dimer
and monomer. Fluorescence image (right) (488 nm excitation, 530 nm
emission) showing that fluorescein-labeled K-peptide interacts with
only the dimeric form of the protein. Protein concentrations were
(i) 18.7, (ii) 7.5, (iii) 0.75, and (iv) 0.4 μM.

Discussion
In principle, photoswitchable
effectors can be designed by fusing
a photoswitchable protein to a target protein of interest. The photoswitchable protein undergoes a change
in conformation or dynamics upon illumination, which can in turn affect
the conformational dynamics, and thereby activity, of the protein
of interest. This strategy for engineering photocontrol has been successful
using several natural photoreceptors, including LOV domains,− phytochromes, cryptochromes, and photoactive yellow protein (PYP).− To produce a large change in activity, the photoswitchable protein
must fully inhibit the target protein in one state and release it
in the other (usually the light state). Most photoswitches are based
on constraints that make one state closed or incompatible with binding
and one state binding-competent., For example, the J-α-helix
of the Avena sativa LOV domain detaches from the
core of the LOV protein upon illumination, and this conformational
change has been used to control interaction with partner proteins.
A problem with this strategy is that the binding-competent dark state
may be accessed thermally. Indeed, Yao
et al. have used NMR relaxation dispersion measurements to measure
the degree to which the detached J-α-helix state is accessed
thermally and thereby to estimate the available free energy for light-driven
allosteric regulation by A. sativa LOV.

Light-driven domain swapping provides
a solution to the problem
of dark-state thermal activation. In this scenario, two protein conformational
states that cannot interconvert thermally at room temperature can
be induced to interconvert by blue light. When one state can interact
with a partner protein and the other cannot, essentially on and off
switching can result. The behavior of the system described here is
shown schematically in Figure .

Schematic diagram
showing domain swapping and K-helix binding of
c-E-helix-PYP.

Coupling domain swapping
to photoisomerization in c-E-helix-PYP
is based on observations made by Loh and colleagues, who found that
insertion of a structured domain into a surface loop of a control
protein can lead to domain swapping of the control protein when the
locations of loop ends are incompatible with the folded state of the
control protein., In a circular permutant of PYP,
the locations of the loop ends are light-dependent. The light state of PYP has characteristics of a molten
globule, so that a folded target can
be accommodated in a surface loop relatively easily. Thus, the light
state of c-E-helix-PYP has a tendency to domain swap that is weakened
compared to that of the dark state. While the light state may be able
to bind a K-helix, as we originally intended, it is short-lived (∼1
s); thus, optical control of K-helix binding is seen primarily through
the light-promoted conversion of the domain-swapped dimer to monomer.
Slowing the photocycle with a targeted mutation may lead to photocontrol
of K-helix binding by a monomeric form of the protein.

Because
the mechanism for photocontrol of function occurring here
depends on the compatibility of the insert sequence with the constraints
of the cPYP surface loop, but not on the sequence of the insert directly,
a wide variety of protein–protein interactions could in principle
be photocontrolled in this manner.

In addition to altering the
relative stability of monomeric and
domain-swapped dimeric forms, light has a dramatic effect on the kinetics
of domain swapping, decreasing the half-life from weeks to minutes.
Depending on the intended application for a specific photoswitchable
effector, more rapid domain swapping in the dark and/or an increased
dark-state dimerization affinity may be desired. Both these characteristics
have been found to be sensitive to point mutations in proteins that
undergo domain swapping and so could likely be introduced in this
system.

Interestingly, recent structural
studies of red and far-red light
signaling by bacteriophytochromes suggest natural systems may have
evolved an analogous mechanism for tight optical control of transcriptional
processes. Bellini and Papiz have reported
that a bacteriophytochrome from Rhodopseudomonas palustris (RpBphP1), when irradiated with 760 nm light, undergoes protomer
swapping with a transcriptional regulatory domain RpPpsR2 to form
a heterodimeric complex. The swapping involves numerous intermolecular
contacts and does not appear to occur in the dark, suggesting light
switching involves lowering of the activation barrier for swapping.
Light-induced domain swapping may thus provide a general mechanism
for optical switching of protein function where a very low background
signal is required.

Supporting Information Available
Native PAGE analysis of equilibria, 15NH HSQC spectra, NMR chemical shifts, and denaturation data
and kinetic data of PYP switching rates in the presence and absence
of K-helix peptide. This material is available free of charge via
the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500622x_si_001.pdf

This work has
been supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council
of Canada and the National Institutes of Health (Grant R01MH086379).
NMR instrumentation at the Centre for Spectroscopic Investigation
of Complex Organic Molecules and Polymers was supported by CFI (19119).
J.M.R. was supported by an Ontario Graduate Fellowship.

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

