Potassium ion (K+)
transport is a major determinant of bacterial growth and survival
through its role in regulating cytoplasmic pH and cell turgor. The
Kef system, which comprises both KefFC and KefGB (in Escherichia
coli), is a ligand-gated K+ efflux system critical
for the bacterial response to electrophilic insult., The
thiol-containing tripeptide glutathione (GSH) acts as an inhibitory
ligand of Kef, holding the channel closed. However, in the presence
of electrophiles, GSH chemically reacts with these species forming
GS-X, which activates the Kef system resulting in K+ efflux
and concomitant H+ influx. Consequently, activation of
Kef results in a decrease in cellular pH, protonating nucleophiles
in DNA and proteins and minimizing their reactivity with electrophilic
species., The GS-X conjugates subsequently undergo
metabolism to less toxic species in enzyme-mediated detoxification
reactions that also regenerate cytoplasmic GSH., Hence,
Kef is part of a synergistic bacterial protection system, in which
the electrophiles are detoxified and, in parallel, their effect is
neutralized by modulation of the cellular pH (Figure ). Previous work has established that the rate and extent
of activation of Kef are critical determinants in the survival of
bacteria after their exposure to toxic electrophiles., Therefore, perturbation of Kef activity is potentially a novel target
for antibiotic drugs, but such compounds can be developed only with
a thorough understanding of Kef activation at the molecular level.

Cartoon
of the synergistic actions of the Kef system in E. coli. The Kef system, which comprises both KefFC and
KefGB (in E. coli), is a ligand-gated K+ efflux system critical for the bacterial response to electrophilic
insult. Glutathione (GSH) acts as an inhibitory ligand of Kef, holding
the channel closed. However, in the presence of electrophiles, GSH
scavenges these species forming GS-X, which activates the Kef system
resulting in K+ efflux and concomitant H+ influx.
Consequently, activation of Kef results in a decrease in cellular
pH, protonating nucleophiles and minimizing their reactivity with
electrophilic species. The GS-X conjugates subsequently undergo metabolism
to less toxic species in enzyme-mediated detoxification reactions
that also regenerate cytoplasmic GSH. Hence, Kef is part of a synergistic
bacterial protection system, in which the electrophiles are detoxified
and, in parallel, their effect is neutralized by modulation of the
cellular pH.

A combination of crystallographic
studies and classical bacterial
genetics has provided a mechanistic model by which GSH and GS-X bind
to Kef and modulate its activity. Kef proteins are homodimeric and
possess a carboxy-terminal K+ transport and nucleotide
binding (KTN) domain, which contains a Rossmann fold that binds a
nucleotide molecule., The GSH/GS-X binding site resides
at the interface of the two KTN domains. A number of key residues
bind the peptide component of both GSH and GS-X and anchor the molecule
to the Kef protein (Figure ). Three critical
residues were identified by classical bacterial genetics, R416, R516,
and N551 (E. coli KefC numbering)., Mutations
at these positions caused a phenotype equivalent to that seen after
the loss of GSH from the cell and were thus implicated in defining
the GSH binding site., Crystallography in which apo and
ligand (GS-X)-bound structures were described identified these three
residues as defining three critical points of contact with the peptide
backbone of GS-X., A structural transition that was
proposed to be associated with gating identified a critical role for
F441 (in E. coli), which caps the pocket in which
GSH is bound. This pocket is proposed to be unable to accommodate
the steric bulk of electrophiles that are conjugated to GSH such that
F441 is displaced, and this is believed to be the trigger for activation
of K+ efflux. Although the
crystal structures provide only a static snapshot of the protein, genetic data supported this model for the role
of F441 in both E. coli and Shewanella Kef KTN domains.

Comparison of the GSH
and nucleotide binding sites from EcKefC
(A) and SdKef (B). (A) Mutagenesis studies have identified Q412 from
EcKefFC as a key residue for GSH binding, and mutation to a larger
residue (Q412K) results in loss of GSH binding. This observation is supported by crystallographic data.
(B) Q419 in SdKef is predicted to form interactions with GSH similar
to those of Q412 in E. coli, and the Q419K mutation
also causes a loss of GSH binding, indicating that it plays a similar
role in Kef from both species. A homology model of SdKefC, generated
on the basis of the GSH-bound EcKefC structure (Protein Data Bank
entry 3L9W),
supports these data. The figure was created using PyMOL.

Initial studies indicated that inappropriate gating
of Kef might
provide a mechanism for bacterial growth inhibition, and
thus provide an opportunity for the development of antibacterial drugs
with a novel target. A challenge that must be met is the fact that
Gram-negative bacteria possess very large pools of GSH that could
impede the binding of any potential drug. In vivo studies led to the observation that the formation of relatively
low concentrations of ESG in the cytoplasm provided strong activation
of KefFC despite the presence of excess GSH. However, to date, no direct quantitative analysis of the binding
of GS-X ligands to isolated Kef KTN domains has been undertaken. Determination
of the structural parameters influencing the binding of GS(X) adducts
to Kef is an important step in understanding the gating mechanism
and for the development of assay systems for identifying novel synthetic
modulators of Kef activity. To address these aims, we have developed
a novel biophysical assay, which relies on steady state fluorescence
spectroscopy, facilitated by a fluorescently labeled GSH-based probe
containing the dansyl chromophore, that allows both qualitative and
quantitative detection of binding to Kef. The probe exhibits solvatochromic
properties, in that both the wavelength and intensity of emission
are dictated by the nature of the probe’s environment. This
probe also exhibits attractive photophysical properties for use in
biological assays; excitation is achieved by irradiation at 340 nm,
and an emission λmax of 573 nm is observed in free
solution. With the transition from a hydrophilic to a hydrophobic
environment, a dramatic shift in the λmax is observed
(530 nm). This system has been employed to evaluate the affinity for
the Kef ligand binding domain displayed by a range of natural and
synthetic GS-X analogues. The results correlate with data obtained
using isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) and differential scanning
fluorimetry (DSF). Consequently, we have demonstrated that the fluorescence-based
assay is a useful tool for the development of lead antibacterial compounds
that target the Kef system.

Experimental Procedures
Strains and Plasmids
The strains and plasmids used
in this study are described in Table S1 of the . Expression construct pTrcSdKefH6 of the Kef gene from Shewanella denitrificans OS217 (accession number NC007954.1) encodes 608 amino acids
with an additional C-terminal LEH6 tag. The synthetic clone
was codon optimized and cloned via an NcoI site at the 5′ end
and a XhoI site on the 3′ end into a pTrc99A backbone by DNA
2.0 Ltd. Site-directed mutants were produced using the Stratagene
QuickChange protocol. A soluble construct of the regulatory domain
was obtained by introduction of a second NcoI site into pTrcSdKefH6 by site-directed mutagenesis at the 3′ end of the
membrane domain-encoding region followed by digestion with NcoI and
ligation. The construct, designated SdKefQCTD, included the Q-linker
starting at K391 and fused at the 5′ end a further sequence
encoding 10 amino acids (GHELEVDIEP),, corresponding to a putative regulatory loop from the membrane domain.
All constructs were confirmed by sequencing on both strands.

Potassium
Efflux Measurements
Potassium efflux experiments
were performed as described previously. Potassium efflux was measured, using an ion selective potassium
electrode (ELIT 8031, Nico2000) and a lithium acetate reference electrode
(ELIT 003n) with a four-channel ion analyzer (ELIT4), in 2 s intervals.
Freshly transformed cells [either E. coli MJF335
cells lacking KefB, KefC, and GshA or MJF645 cells (lacking KefF and
KefG in addition to KefB, KefC, and GshA)] were cultured in K115 minimal medium, containing 1 mM GSH, at 37 °C to an
OD650 of ∼0.8–1. The cells were filtered and washed with K10 buffer before
being suspended in 5 mL of potassium-free K0 buffer. The
cells were added to 30 mL of K0 medium in a stirred vessel
held at 37 °C with equilibrated electrodes inserted. After 5
min, the electrophile was added to a final concentration of 0.5 mM
[except for methylglyoxal (MG), which was added at a concentration
of 0.8 mM]. Rate constants were obtained
by fitting exponentials to the change in potassium concentration after
addition of the electrophile using Origin version 8.0 (Originlab).

Protein Expression and Purification
pTrcSdKefQCTD was
transformed for expression into E. coli strain MJF373,
which lacks the gene for the catabolite activator protein (CAP). CAP
is a common contaminant in immobilized metal ion affinity chromatography that could not be removed by size exclusion
when the Kef constructs were expressed in other strains. The culture
was grown at 37 °C in LB (500 mL, containing 0.1% glucose) until
an OD650 of 0.8 was reached. After the sample had cooled
to 30 °C, expression was induced with IPTG (0.8 mM) for 4 h.
Cells were harvested by centrifugation and resuspended in 20 mL of
phosphate-buffered saline at pH 7.4 (8 g/L NaCl, 0.2 g/L KCl, 1.15
g/L Na2HPO4·7H2O, and 0.2 g/L
KH2PO4) containing an EDTA-free protease cocktail
(Sigma) and stored at −80 °C until use. Cells were lysed
with a French press (SLM Aminco) at a pressure of 18000 lb/in., and cell debris was removed by centrifugation.
The supernatant was incubated with 10 μg/mL DNase (Sigma) at
4 °C for 30 min, filtered (0.45 μm syringe filters), and
loaded onto a prewashed 1 mL column of Ni2+-nitrilotriacetic
acid agarose (Sigma). The column was washed with 40 mL of buffer A
containing 50 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol,
and 20 mM imidazole. Bound protein was eluted with buffer B (equivalent
to buffer A but containing 300 mM imidazole). The peak fractions as
determined by UV–vis spectroscopy were subjected to buffer
exchange using a PD-10 column (GE Healthcare) and buffer C containing
50 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7.5) and 150 mM NaCl. The concentration
of the resulting protein was calculated using UV–vis spectroscopy
and analyzed for purity using Novex NuPAGE 4 to 12% Bis-Tris SDS–PAGE
gels (Invitrogen) with NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen). Kef
was further purified by size exclusion chromatography using a 10/300
Superdex200 column (GE Healthcare) in buffer C for fluorescence and
ITC experiments.

Fluorescence Measurements
Measurements were performed
in buffer C, using a 100 μL cuvette with 3 mm excitation and
emission path lengths (Hellma GmbH &amp; Co.) at 20 °C and an
Edinburgh Instruments FLS920 spectrometer. Samples containing SdKefQCTD
and DNGSH were excited at 340 nm, and emission spectra were measured
from 395 to 670 nm. The steady state fluorescence anisotropy was measured
with excitation at 340 nm and emission between 540 and 560 nm. Competition
experiments were performed using samples pretreated with excess DNGSH,
at a 2× protein concentration, and titrated with the ligand under
study.

For qualitative competition measurements, a Perkin-Elmer
luminescence spectrometer was used with excitation at 340 nm and emission
spectra were recorded from 400 to 600 nm. Samples containing 6 μM
SdKefQCTD and 5 μM DNGSH were prepared. A decrease in fluorescence
intensity after the addition of the desired competing ligand, at a
final concentration of 1 mM, was interpreted as an indication of binding.
The data are represented as ratios of the fluorescence intensities
before and after the addition of the tested compound at 525 nm.

Analysis of Ligand Binding by Fluorescence Spectroscopy
The data were fit using a standard saturation isotherm (see the  for further information).
For DNGSH fluorescence, λL was measured directly
and found to be 572.5 nm. Inverse titrations with high SdKefQCTD concentrations
allowed a good estimation of the emission maximum for the bound form
(λML) as 530 nm with a quantum yield (Q) of 4. These three parameters were kept fixed during the fitting
while Kd and n were optimized.
A mutated protein bearing a Q419K mutation that abrogates activation
of Kef by GSH adducts was used to measure
background binding. The level of nonspecific binding was observed
to be very low, and thus, no routine corrections were performed. For
competition experiments, depletion of DNGSH (L) as well as of the
competing nonfluorescent ligand B was taken into consideration during
the analysis (see the ). Data were analyzed according to Thrall et al., using a Kd of 6 μM for
DNGSH (derived in this study). The dissociation constant for the competing
ligand B, KB, and n were
optimized using Matlab2012a (Mathworks) taking dilution of ligands
and protein during the titration into account. Equations are shown
in the .

Differential
Scanning Fluorimetry (DSF)
Stock solutions
(100 and 10 mM) of the ligands under examination were prepared in
H2O. A protein master mix was prepared containing SdKefQCTD
(40 μM) and Sypro Orange (1:1000 dilution, Invitrogen) in buffer
C. Ninety-six-well plates (Axygen) were prepared using the protein
master mix (22.5 μL, 12 μM protein) and ligand (2.5 μL,
1 mM ligand) (total volume of 25 μL). Assays were performed
using a Stratagene Mx3005P qPCR machine with the integrated FAM/SYBR
Green I filter (excitation at 492 nm, emission at 516 nm). The initial
temperature was set to 25 °C, increasing in increments of 1 °C.
The Tm was identified by fitting to the
Boltzmann equation (Prism 5). The change in unfolding temperature
(ΔTm) was calculated as the change
in Tm relative to the Tm of the protein and dye in the absence of ligand. A Student’s t test was performed to determine whether the changes were
statistically significant.

Isothermal Titration Calorimetry (ITC)
SdKefQCTD samples
were dialyzed overnight (molecular mass cutoff of 14 kDa) against
buffer C. Ligand stock solutions were prepared using the same buffer.
All solutions were degassed with a ThermoVac instrument (MicroCal)
before use, and measurements were taken at 25 °C with a MicroCal
iTC200 instrument (GE Healthcare). The ligand solution was placed
in the syringe and the protein in the sample cell. The ligand was
titrated into the protein solution (20 injections, 1 × 0.4 and
19 × 2.0 μL). The interval between injections was typically
180 s. In some cases, the syringe was refilled and the experiment
was continued until saturation was reached to allow assessment of
the baseline offset. Control experiments were performed by titrating
the ligand solution into buffer. Data were analyzed using Origin 7.0
(OriginLab Corp.) with a one-site model. All binding experiments were
repeated at least three times (see Table ).

Affinity of Ligands for SdKefQCTD
electrophile	GSH-S-conjugate	Kd (μM)	no. of sites (n)	method	no. of repeats	
–	DNGSH	6 ± 2	0.6 ± 0.2	emission peak	8	
 	 	8 ± 2	1.1 ± 0.8	anisotropy	3	
 	 	19 ± 6	0.7 ± 0.2	ITC	4	
–	GSH	900 ± 200	0.83 ± 0.04	emission peak	4	
N-ethylmaleimide (NEM, 14)	ESG	12 ± 3	0.7 ± 0.2	emission peak	3	
 	 	23 ± 4	0.38 ± 0.05	ITC	3	
methylglyoxal (MG)	SLG	900 ± 200	0.71 ± 0.04	emission peak	4	
N-tert-butylmaleimide (15)	5	0.4 ± 0.2	0.7 ± 0.2	emission
peak	3	
 	 	6.7 ± 0.27	0.41 ± 0.04	ITC	3	
1-octen-3-one (22)	12	4.4 ± 0.5	0.81 ± 0.05	emission peak	3	
Values
of the dissociation constant, Kd, and
the determined number of sites per subunit, n, are
shown for binding experiments with GSH and GSX on
a soluble fragment of Kef from S. denitrificans measured
by fluorescence emission spectra, fluorescence anisotropy, or ITC.
In addition, the names of the corresponding electrophiles are listed.

Chemical Synthesis
All reagents were purchased from
Sigma-Aldrich or Alfa Aesar and were used without further purification.
The UV light was provided by a Philips HB175 Facial Solarium (UVA,
365 nm, P = 4 × 15 W). Reverse phase column
chromatography was conducted on a Fluka Ltd. silica gel 100 C18 reversed
phase column. Analytical TLC analysis was performed using Merck 60
RP-18 F254S aluminum-supported thin layer chromatography
sheets and visualized using an ethanolic solution of ninhydrin. 1H and 13C nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra
were recorded on a Bruker Avance 400 (400 and 100 MHz) or Bruker Avance
III (500 and 125 MHz) spectrometer. Optical rotations were recorded
at 20 °C at the sodium D line (589 nm).

DNGSH was synthesized
from GSH and N-allyl-5-(dimethylamino)naphthalene-1-sulfonamide
via the photochemical thiol-ene. Glutathione-S-conjugates were synthesized
from GSH and a range of electrophiles in H2O or a H2O/methanol mixture and sodium hydroxide, via 1,4-addition.
Further details of synthesis and compound characterization are provided
in the .

Results
and Discussion
To gain insight into the binding of GS-X to
the Kef carboxy-terminal
domain, we required a protein that was more biochemically tractable
than the KefFC system that we had previously characterized from E. coli,, which consists of two proteins
with only weak affinity for each other. KefF is not required for the
activation or inhibition of KefC by ESG or GSH, respectively, but
poises the system to have higher activity. The instability of the KefFC dimer of dimers in extracts was previously
found to interfere with biochemical analysis. Thus, we sought to identify homologues that do not require a KefF
protein. After screening the NCBI organism database, we identified
several species that possessed a KefC-like protein (Table S2 of the ) but no KefF (S. Ekkerman,
C. Pliotas, S. Kinghorn, S. Miller, and T. Rasmussen, unpublished
observations). Heterologous expression of the Shewanella Kef homologue (hereafter termed SdKef) in an E. coli strain lacking both KefFC and KefGB resulted in a high rate constant
for K+ efflux after addition of the electrophile N-ethylmaleimide (NEM) (Figure ).
Mutational analysis confirmed that key residues identified from genetic
analysis of E. coli KefC (Figure ) were also critical to the activity of SdKef (Figure S1 of
the ). To facilitate
ligand binding studies on the SdKef protein, a soluble construct of
the cytosolic regulatory domain was produced. To improve stability,
the construct was extended to include the Q-linker and the regulatory
loop from the membrane domain (residues H266–P274), which has
been shown previously to improve stability. We have previously shown by static multiangle light scattering analysis
that purified SdKefQCTD exists in solution as 52.0 ± 2.5 kDa
particles corresponding to complexes of 2.0 ± 0.1 subunits (26.4
kDa per monomer) (S. Ekkerman, C. Pliotas, S. Kinghorn, S. Miller,
and T. Rasmussen, unpublished observations), which is consistent with
the crystal structure for KTN domains.−

Potassium efflux via
Kef systems. (A) K+ efflux profile
for different Kef systems. (B) Rate constants derived from the exponential
fitting of the raw data. Efflux of potassium from E. coli strain MJF645, which lacks both the chromosomal Kef systems and
glutathione biosynthesis, transformed with plasmids expressing different
Kef systems. The efflux was triggered by NEM (arrow). Note that the
electrode measures the amount of K+ released from the cells
(i.e., an increasing level of K+ in the medium indicates
Kef activity). Efflux mediated by SdKef (red), EcKefFC (blue), or
EcKefC (green). The black line is the K+ release profile
observed with MJF645 cells alone treated with NEM (arrow). All cells
were grown in the presence of 1 mM GSH.

Design and Synthesis of the Fluorescent Probe DNGSH (3)
A robust biophysical method was required to measure the
binding of ligands to Kef. The development of a solvatochromic fluorescent
probe allowed the use of fluorescence for both qualitative and quantitative
detection of binding of ligands to Kef. On the basis of our knowledge
of activators and inhibitors of Kef, a fluorescent probe (3) with a GSH core and the dansyl chromophore was designed (Figure A). The dansyl chromophore was chosen, as it is
known to be sensitive to the nature of its environment, and the biophysical
properties of dansyl-labeled amino acids have been extensively studied., In addition, it is a relatively small fluorophore and is therefore
less likely to completely disrupt ligand binding.

Synthesis of DNGSH (3) and effect of the polarity
of the solvent on the fluorescence of DNGSH. (A) Reagents and conditions:
(i) allyl amine, DIPEA, CH2Cl2, 100%; (ii) GSH,
DPAP, TCEP·HCl, THF/H2O, 40%. (B) Emission spectra
of 45 μM DNGSH in different mixtures of distilled water with
dioxane.

Because of the potential for S- to N-acyl transfer, synthesis of an S-dansylated derivative
of GSH required the installation
of a stable linker moiety. This aim was achieved via the reaction
of dansyl chloride (1) first with allyl amine. The allylic
double bond then provided a synthetic handle for reaction with GSH
via the photochemical thiol-ene reaction. Optimization of the reaction
conditions, most significantly through the addition of a reducing
agent, afforded the desired probe DNGSH (3) in 40% yield
(Figure A).

When the fluorescence spectrum
of DNGSH (3) was measured
in a range of solutions with varying dioxane:water ratios, the fluorescence
intensity increased with the proportion of dioxane. In addition, as
the amount of dioxane in the solution increased, the λmax underwent a hypsochromic shift of up to 45 nm. These observations
indicate that changes in the fluorescence properties of DNGSH reflect
changes in the hydrophobicity of the environment experienced by the
probe (Figure B).

Binding of DNGSH to SdKefQCTD
Detected by Fluorescence Spectroscopy
Titration experiments,
in which DNGSH was incubated with increasing
concentrations of SdKefQCTD, were performed to confirm the ability
of DNGSH to act as a solvatochromic fluorescent probe for the Kef
system. When DNGSH bound to the protein, the fluorescence quantum
yield increased and a substantial shift in the λmax of the emission spectrum was observed (Figure A). The λmax of the unbound probe (λL) was found, under our experimental conditions, to be 572.5 ±
1.2 nm, and that of the bound probe (λML) could be
approximated at high SdKefQCTD concentrations to be 530 nm. Under
similar conditions, the relative increase in the quantum yield upon
binding of DNGSH could also be estimated as Q = 4.
This set of experiments indicated that DNGSH was indeed binding to
Kef and that the probe was highly sensitive to the changes in the
nature of its environment in both the observed λmax and the intensity of emission. Titration of DNGSH to SdKefQCTD (Figure B) or the inverse (Figure C) provided binding isotherms. In addition, the steady state fluorescence
anisotropy was measured, which also changed upon binding because of
the decreased mobility of the ligand bound to the protein (Figure D). Binding experiments with the SdKefQCTD Q419K
mutant (Figure B), which has previously been
shown to be insensitive to activation by GS-X, indicated that this mutant is unable to bind the GSH moiety of DNGSH.
These data are consistent with the crystal structure of the KefF–KefC–CTD
complex.

Changes in fluorescence when DNGSH binds
to SdKefQCTD. (A) The
emission spectrum of DNGSH is modified by the co-incubation with SdKefQCTD,
consistent with a hydrophobic environment for the dansyl group. (B)
The emission peak position was measured upon titration of DNGSH to
21 μM SdKefQCTD (○) or to buffer as a control (●).
In addition, a titration of DNGSH to 7 μM of the SdKefQCTD Q419K
mutant is shown (⊕). (C) Change of the emission peak position
or (D) fluorescence anisotropy upon titration of SdKefQCTD to 5 μM
DNGSH. Fitted curves are shown as lines.

Data were fit to a single-site binding model, which accounted
for
the change in quantum yield and depletion of free ligand (see the  for details). Good fits
were obtained with this simple model, and no indications of cooperative
binding were seen. This is also reflected in the Scatchard plot (Figure
S2 of the ) and a
Hill coefficient (nH) of 1. The number
of active binding sites, n, in relation to the total
protein concentration, [M]0, was lower than estimated from
the total protein concentration of SdKefQCTD, which was optimized
in the fits along with the dissociation constant, Kd. For titration of DNGSH to SdKefQCTD a dissociation
constant (Kd) of 6 ± 2 μM and
a number of active binding sites (n) of 0.6 ±
0.2 were obtained on the basis of changes in λmax (see also Table ). Anisotropy experiments
confirmed these results with a Kd of 8
± 2 μM and an n of 1.1 ± 0.8. Binding
of DNGSH by ITC (using ∼55 μM protein; four repeats)
resulted in a slightly higher dissociation constant of 19 ± 6
μM (Figure ). No significant deviations
from a single-site model were seen in ITC experiments (Figure ). However, as observed in the fluorescence experiments,
the number of active sites was fewer than one per monomer (n = 0.7 ± 0.1). The apparent reduction in stoichiometry
may be due to partial unfolding of the protein.

ITC ligand binding experiments
with SdKefQCTD. Titrations with
DNGSH (left) and ESG (right) are shown with SdKefQCTD concentrations
of 55 and 60 μM, respectively. Residuals are shown for a single-site
binding model. Representative curves from a single experiment are
shown.

Competition Experiments
Using DNGSH as a Probe for Ligand Binding
With confirmation
that DNGSH binds to Kef, competition experiments
were performed with the most extensively studied Kef inhibitor (GSH),
the strong activator (ESG), and with the weak activator (SLG). The
protein was preincubated with a slight excess of DNGSH and titrated
with increasing concentrations of the competing ligand. On displacement
of DNGSH from the binding site, a decrease in the fluorescence intensity
and a shift of the λmax back toward the free probe
in solution were observed (Figure A). Titration
curves showed that ESG had a higher affinity for Kef than either GSH
or SLG (Figure B). Analysis of the data resulted
in the following values: Kd(ESG) = 12
± 3 μM (n = 0.7 ± 0.2), Kd(GSH) = 900 ± 200 μM (n =
0.83 ± 0.04), and Kd(SLG) = 900 ±
200 μM (n = 0.71 ± 0.04). The Kd values for GSH and SLG could not be accurately
determined as only a low degree of saturation could be reached in
the experiments. ITC experiments (Figure )
confirmed the fluorescence results for ESG. A slightly higher dissociation
constant [Kd(ESG)] of 23 ± 4 μM
(n = 0.38 ± 0.05) was found in comparison to
the fluorescence results. Only small signals were seen in the ITC
for titration with GSH and SLG, which could not be analyzed as expected
for a very low affinity ligand (data not shown). Regulatory ligands
GSH, SLG, and ESG have been investigated in detail physiologically.,, These new binding data can readily
be integrated into the physiological analysis, namely that GSH is
present at a concentration between 10 and 20 mM in the cytoplasm,
and thus, a low affinity of Kef for this ligand can be accommodated
mechanistically. However, to achieve rapid gating, one would predict
a much higher affinity for GS-X than for GSH. MG is a poor activator
and must accumulate to high millimolar levels to activate KefGB, and the low affinity, comparable to that for
GSH, fits with the known facts regarding MG activation, namely that
strong activation by MG requires both depletion of GSH and formation
of a large pool of SLG.

Competition experiments.
(A) Changes of emission spectra with increasing
concentrations of ESG at concentrations of 47 μM SdKefQCTD and
112 μM DNGSH. (B) Changes in the emission peak position with
increasing concentrations of ESG (●), GSH (gray circles), SLG
(○), compound 5 (◇), and compound 12 (⊕). Fittings are shown as lines.

Requirements for Binding and Gating
To explore the
effect of ligand structure on Kef binding and gating, a series of
ESG analogues were synthesized (Scheme ; see
the  for further
details). The binding of these ligands (4–12)
was compared to that of GSH and ESG using a qualitative version of
the fluorescence competition assay (Figure A) and was independently validated using differential scanning fluorimetry
(DSF) (Figure B).

Investigation of ESG
and analogue Kef binding. (A) DNGSHbound:DNGSHligand ratios of fluorescence (FB:FL), from a competition
experiment performed with 1 mM competing ligand (n = 3). (B) Changes in melting temperature in the presence of 1 mM
ligand relative to that of protein alone. (C) Investigation of the
relationship of fluorescence and thermal shift data. A plot of FB/FL
vs ΔTm indicates a correlation between
the Kef ligand binding observed using each technique separately. (D)
Structures of ESG and its analogues 4–12. Error
bars represent the standard deviation (n = 3). Significance
of changes evaluated by a Student’s t test
(where ****p ≤ 0.0001, ***p ≤ 0.001, **p ≤ 0.01, *p ≤ 0.05).

Synthesis of ESG
Analogues 4–12
Reagents and conditions: (i)
enone, NaOH, H2O/MeOH, room temperature, 18–97%.

The qualitative version of the fluorescence assay
employed DNGSH
in competition experiments, in which binding of a ligand results in
displacement of DNGSH and a consequent decrease in fluorescence intensity.
The binding of the ligand is represented as a DNGSHbound:DNGSHligand ratio [FB:FL (Figure A)], with a higher ratio indicating a greater affinity for Kef. In
this assay, GSH and SLG have low FB:FL ratios, consistent with weak
binding to Kef, as expected from the data described above. ESG and
all of the ESG analogues show high FB:FL ratios, consistent with an
affinity for Kef greater than those of GSH and SLG, with N-tert-butylsuccinimido-S-glutathione
(5) showing the greatest Kef affinity (Figure A).

Similar trends in Kef binding were observed
using DSF. The low
affinity of GSH and SLG for Kef results in a negligible change in
protein melting temperature between free and ligand-bound states [ΔTm (Figure B)]. Compound 5 was observed to show the greatest ΔTm, indicating tight binding to Kef. A plot of ΔTm versus FB:FL (Figure C) reveals a good correlation between the binding affinity for Kef
predicted by the DNGSH-based fluorescence competition assay and ΔTm observed using DSF. Dissociation constants
for compounds 5 and 12 were determined using
the fluorescence competition assay. The GSH adduct of tert-butylmaleimide (5) has a Kd of 0.4 ± 0.2 μM (n = 0.7 ± 0.2)
[Kd = 6.7 ± 0.3 μM by ITC (see
Figure S3 of the )] and of 1-octen-3-one (12) a Kd of 4.4 ± 0.5 μM (n = 0.81 ±
0.05). These compounds have binding affinities for Kef that are significantly
higher than that of GSH, suggesting that additional affinity for Kef
results from the electrophile component of GS-X. This affinity might
be as a result of hydrophobic interactions between the conjugate and
Kef. Alternatively, the increase in affinity might reflect an enthalpic
increase in affinity resulting from a conformational change in the
Kef protein and/or entropic gains in affinity resulting from the release
of structured water molecules that are lodged in the Kef protein prior
to GS-X binding.

Analysis of the structure binding relationships
of the series of
ESG analogues (4–12) reveals that GSH adducts
formed with either rigid (4–9) or flexible electrophiles
result in compounds that bind with similar affinity to Kef (for example,
compounds 6 and 12). However, these assays
do not provide any information about whether the adducts activate
or inhibit Kef activity. To determine whether ESG analogues 4–12 activated Kef, an analysis of the electrophiles
[13–22 (Figure B)] corresponding
to GS-X conjugates 4–7 and 10–12 was conducted in a whole cell K+ efflux assay (see ). This analysis revealed
that compounds containing bulky and rigid ring substituents (5–7) showed similar activation of efflux of K+ to ESG. Compound 8 possesses two ketone groups, similar
to the succinimide of compounds 4–7 but lacks
the substituted nitrogen atom. Compound 9 possesses only
one ketone group and no substituted nitrogen atom. Both of these compounds
showed reduced binding affinity for Kef and little or no activation
of K+ efflux, respectively. These results suggest that
rigid ligands that lack sufficient steric bulk are not able to activate
the Kef system. More flexible compounds 10–12 display
affinities for Kef similar to those of the more rigid compounds (e.g.,
compounds 6 and 12) in both the fluorescence
and DSF assays (Figure A,B). However, the
electrophiles corresponding to these compounds displayed markedly
different abilities to evoke K+ efflux. Compound 16 caused significant K+ release, whereas compound 22 was less effective at causing K+ release (Figure ). The physical parameter log P (P = octanol/water
partition coefficient) (Figure S4 of the ) gives an indication of the lipophilicity of the
compounds and thus the likelihood of penetration into the cytoplasm,
which is the site of the GSH binding domain on SdKef. Compounds that
are very lipophilic may have very much lower concentrations in the
cytosol because of their partitioning into the lipid phase of the
membrane. Most of the electrophiles (15–22) exhibit
calculated log P (cLogP) values much higher than that of NEM (14), which causes rapid loss of K+ via Kef after
its reaction with GSH and acts as a reference
point for permeation into the cytoplasm for the other electrophiles.
The data indicate that all of the electrophiles (13–22) should make ready access to the GSH pool and react to form GS-X.
As all of the electrophiles react rapidly with GSH to form GS-X, this step is also unlikely to be rate-limiting
for the overall observed K+ efflux. Thus, failure of the
electrophile to elicit K+ efflux represents a lack of Kef
activation rather than a lack of GS-X formation. It is interesting
to note that N-cyclohexylmaleimide (17) and 1-octen-3-one (22) have very similar cLogP values
(see the ). However, N-cyclohexylmaleimide (17) causes rapid K+ efflux, whereas octenone (22) causes little
K+ efflux. Therefore, these data suggest that tight Kef
binding alone is insufficient for activation of the Kef system, resulting
in K+ efflux. Rather, the structural nature of the electrophile
also plays an important role in determining whether the Kef system
is activated, with a degree of steric bulk and structural rigidity
being mutual requirements for efficient Kef activation.

Dependence
of SdKef activation on the structure of the GSX adduct
formed with different electrophiles. (A) Rate constants for K+ efflux as a function of electrophile structure. Potassium
efflux experiments were performed with E. coli strain
MJF335 transformed with wild-type SdKef and grown in the presence
of GSH. All electrophiles were added to a final concentration of 0.5
mM. (B) Structures of the electrophiles (13–22) employed in the K+ efflux assay.

Conclusion
We have developed a simple, fluorescence-based,
system for evaluating
the binding of ligands to Kef. Using this system, in association with
other biophysical techniques, we have provided the first quantitative
determination of the affinity of GSH and ESG for Kef (from S. denitrificans). These data explain the ability of ESG
to displace GSH and activate Kef, despite the presence of a vast excess
of GSH in a cellular context. We synthesized a collection of GSH derivatives
and evaluated their binding to Kef using the fluorescence-based assay.
We determined tert-butylmaleimide (5) has a Kd of 0.4 ± 0.2 μM,
as the highest-affinity Kef ligand reported to date. Analysis of the
structure–activity data for these ligands revealed a mutual
requirement of steric bulk and structural rigidity to give effective
activation of Kef. This information will be valuable in the design
of nonpeptide ligands for the Kef system that will aid the validation
of Kef as a potential therapeutic target.

Supporting Information Available
Details of bacterial strains
and plasmids used in the study, homology of SdKef to Kef systems from E. coli, analysis of ligand binding by fluorescence spectroscopy,
analysis of fluorescence competition experiments, details of chemical
synthesis, supplemental Figures S1–S4, and 1H and 13C NMR spectra of reported compounds. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5001118_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
∥ J.H.:
Department of Pharmaceutical and Biological Chemistry, School
of Pharmacy, University College London, 29–39 Brunswick Square,
London WC1N 1AX, United Kingdom.

Author Contributions
J.H. and
S.E. contributed equally to the work.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
Kefpotassium efflux system

GSHglutathione

GS-Xglutathione-S-conjugates

Q-linkerlinker between
the membrane and soluble domain residues 391–408 (SdKef numbering)

SdKefKef from S. denitrificans OS217

SdKefQCTDC-terminal domain, including the Q-linker
of SdKef

SdKefCTDC-terminal domain, excluding the Q-linker of SdKef

EcKefFCKefC from E. coli

DNGSHS-{[5-(dimethylamino)naphthalen-1-yl]sulfonylaminopropyl}
glutathione

ESGN-ethylsuccinimido-S-glutathione

SLGS-lactoylglutathione

KTNK+ transport and nucleotide binding

MGmethylglyoxal

NEMN-ethylmaleimide

MALSmultiangle light
scattering

ITCisothermal
titration calorimetry

DSFdifferential scanning fluorimetry.

