Multicellular animals evolved
from unicellular ancestors more than 600 million years ago. This critical transition required the presence
of systems for cellular adhesion, cell–cell communication,
and intracellular signal transduction. The cellular components that
mediate these processes have surprisingly deep phylogenetic roots;
much of the machinery is present in three distinct unicellular lineages
(choanoflagellates, filastereans, and ichthyosporeans) that are closely
related to metazoans.− Thus, many of the genomic innovations that were required for multicellularity
were already present in the immediate ancestors of metazoans.

In animal cells, tyrosine phosphorylation controls vital processes
such as cell growth, differentiation, and survival., The
components of phosphotyrosine (pTyr)-based signal transduction (receptor
and nonreceptor tyrosine kinases, pTyr-binding domains, and tyrosine
phosphatases) are abundant in choanoflagellates, the closest living
relatives to metazoans. The genome of the choanoflagellate Monosiga brevicollis encodes a diverse set of tyrosine kinases
(TKs), including homologues of the mammalian Src, Csk, Abl, and Tec
nonreceptor kinases.− The M. brevicollis Src family kinase MbSrc1 has
enzymatic properties similar to those of its mammalian counterpart
and can functionally replace c-Src in mammalian cells., On the other hand, the regulatory properties of the two Src kinases
are different. Whereas mammalian c-Src is inhibited by phosphorylation
on a C-terminal tyrosine (Y527) by Csk, phosphorylation of MbSrc1
at the equivalent site by the M. brevicollis Csk
does not significantly inhibit activity. Similar results were observed in the choanoflagellate Monosiga
ovata. This lack of Csk-mediated
Src regulation is more pronounced in the filasterean Capsaspora
owczarzaki, which represents a sister group to metazoans
and choanoflagellates.− In Capsaspora, the Csk homologue
(CoCsk) does not have any detectable tyrosine kinase activity and
is incapable of phosphorylating or inhibiting the two Capsaspora Src kinases (CoSrc1 and CoSrc2).

The previous results for M. brevicollis and C. owczarzaki suggest that, while Src and Csk TKs evolved
prior to the divergence of filastereans from choanoflagellates and
metazoans, the function of Csk as a negative regulator of Src evolved
afterward. To understand the early evolution
of the Src–Csk signaling pair, it is necessary to analyze kinases
from additional organisms. Apart from Capsaspora,
the only other known filasterean species is Ministeria vibrans, a free-living marine protist (Figure A). A polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based survey
in Mi. vibrans identified 15 genes encoding tyrosine
kinases (seven receptor TKs and eight nonreceptor TKs). The nonreceptor tyrosine kinases were further
subdivided into six families, most of them representing groups common
to both Capsaspora and mammalians (Src, Csk, Abl,
Fak, and Fes), with one kinase (CTK1) that consists of a tyrosine
kinase region without any other modular domains. The eight receptor
TKs in Mi. vibrans form a unique family designated
RTK1, which does not share domain architecture with any other known
RTK family, including those of Capsaspora.

(A) Mi. vibrans. (B) Phylogenetic tree
comprising
four cytoplasmic TK families. An alignment of 363 amino acid sites,
which covers SH3, SH2, and TK domains, was used for the tree inference.
The Bootstrap values with 200 replicates are shown as branches. The
scale bar shows 0.1 substitution per site.

In this study, we have characterized the two Src family kinases
from Mi. vibrans (designated MvSrc1 and MvSrc2) and
the single Csk homologue (MvCsk). We have cloned, expressed, and purified
the proteins to compare them to their mammalian counterparts and to
those in Capsaspora and M. brevicollis. MvSrc1 and McSrc2 have a domain arrangement similar to that of
mammalian and Capsaspora Src kinases, and the regulatory
tyrosine residues are conserved. MvSrc1 and MvSrc2 are enzymatically
active toward tyrosine-containing peptides and proteins, and MvSrc2
unexpectedly also has significant serine/threonine kinase activity.
As seen previously for the Capsaspora homologue of
Csk, MvCsk displays no detectable activity toward MvSrc1, MvSrc2,
or a general tyrosine kinase substrate. Mutation of a single residue
in the SH2–kinase interface of MvCsk restores partial activity.
Thus, while choanoflagellate Csk enzymes are active (but unable to
regulate Src kinases), the known filasterean Csk enzymes appear to
be inactive. The tight regulation of Src family kinases by Csk appears
to have arisen more recently in evolution, after the split between
choanoflagellates and multicellular animals.

Materials and Methods
Reagents
and Antibodies
Nickel-nitriloacetic acid resin
was purchased from Qiagen. The anti-phosphotyrosine antibody (clone
4G10) was purchased from Millipore. The anti-FLAG antibody, Anti-FLAG
M2 Affinity Gel, leupeptin, aprotinin, phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride,
sodium vanadate, and bovine serum albumin (BSA) were from Sigma. The
anti-V5 antibody and glutathione-agarose-linked beads were purchased
from Invitrogen. The QuikChange site-directed mutagenesis kit was
purchased from Agilent.

Cell Culture
A living culture of Mi. vibrans was purchased from the American Type Culture
Collection (ATCC) and
maintained at 17 °C in ATCC medium 1525.

cDNA Cloning and Alignments
Mi. vibrans total RNA was extracted by Trizol
(Lifetech), and cDNA was generated
by SuperScript III reverse transcriptase (Lifetech). The MvSrc1, MvSrc2,
and MvCsk cDNAs were amplified by polymerase chain reaction with degenerate
primers, and the full-length cDNAs were obtained by rapid amplification
of cDNA ends (RACE). Amino acid sequences
were aligned with ClustalW and formatted by BOX-SHADE (version 3.3.1
by K. Hofmann and M. D. Baron) in UCSK workbench 3.2. Phylogenetic
tree analysis was performed by the Maximum Likelihood (ML) method.
RAxML was used with the LG model. The
amino acid substitution rate was shaped by the Γ distribution
implemented by the program.

For insect cell expression, MvSrc1
and MvSrc2 were cloned into the BamHI and XbaI sites of pFastbac-HtC
(Invitrogen), inserting residues 95–555 and 79–596,
respectively, to produce N-terminally His-tagged enzymes. For mammalian
expression, full-length MvSrc1 and MvSrc2 (555 and 596 residues, respectively)
were subcloned into the XbaI and BamHI restriction sites of p3X-FLAG-CMV
(Sigma) to produce N-terminally FLAG-tagged enzymes. The cDNA for
MvCsk (456 residues) was subcloned into pGEX-4T-1 (GE Healthcare)
using EcoRI and XhoI restriction sites for bacterial expression. A
point mutation was made in the pGEX-MvCsk construct by site-directed
mutagenesis (G236N). V5-tagged MvCsk was expressed in mammalian cells
by being subcloned into the BamHI and XbaI sites of pEF1/V5-HisA (Invitrogen).

Protein Expression and Purification
His-tagged MvSrc1
and MvSrc2 proteins were expressed in Spodoptera frugiperda (Sf9) insect cells using the Bac-to-Bac system (Invitrogen). Recombinant
MvSrc1 and MvSrc2 baculoviruses were used to infect 600 mL of Sf9
insect cells in spinner flasks for 72 h. Cells were lysed in a French
pressure cell, and His-tagged proteins were purified on 4 mL of nickel-nitrilotriacetic
acid resin, as described previously. The
proteins were stored at −20 °C in 40% glycerol. Full-length
GST-tagged MvCsk was expressed in 1 L of Escherichia coli BL21(DE3) cell cultures. Cells were lysed in a French pressure cell,
and MvCsk was purified on glutathione-agarose-linked beads. GST-MvCsk was eluted with 20 mM glutathione
in 50 mM Tris (pH 8.0) and stored in 40% glycerol at −20 °C.

Mammalian Cell Transfection and Western Blotting
Mammalian
HEK293T and Src/Yes/Fyn deficient cells (SYF) were maintained in Dulbecco’s
modified Eagle’s medium (Cellgro Mediatech, Inc.) with 10%
fetal bovine serum (Sigma) at 37 °C in 5% CO2. Cells
were transfected with TransIT transfection reagent at 50% confluency
with a ratio of 1:3 (DNA:TransIT). The cells were harvested 48 h later
and lysed in buffer containing 25 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 100 mM NaCl, 1
mM EDTA, 1% NP40, 5 μg/mL aprotinin, 5 μg/mL leupeptin,
and 1 mM Na3VO4 for 1 h at 4 °C. Lysates
were centrifuged at 14000g for 15 min at 4 °C,
separated by 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(SDS–PAGE), and transferred onto a polyvinylidene difluoride
membrane. Proteins were detected by Western blotting with anti-phosphotyrosine,
anti-FLAG, and anti-V5 antibodies.

Tyrosine Kinase Assays
The activity of MvSrc1 and MvSrc2
was assayed using [γ-32P]ATP in phosphocellulose
paper binding assays. Reactions (25 μL)
were conducted in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 10 mM MgCl2,
and 0.25 mM ATP, with varying concentrations of peptide substrates
and 100–500 cpm/pmol of [γ-32P]ATP. The following
peptides were used: Src peptide, AEEEEIYGEFEAKKKKG;
EGFR peptide, AEEEEYFELVAKKKG;
Abl peptide, EAIYAAPFAKKKG;, and Kemptide, LRRASLG. Substrate targeting was tested with the following peptides:
SH2 substrate, RRLEDAIYAAGGGGGEPPQpYEEIG;
SH2 control, RRLEDAIYAAGGGGGEPPQFEEIG;
SH3 substrate, AEEEIYGEFGGRGAAPPPPPVPRGRG;
and SH3 control, AEEEIYGEFGGRGAAAAAAAVPRGRG.

The activities of mammalian Csk, MbCsk,
and MvCsk were measured using [γ-32P]ATP and poly(Glu4-Tyr) as a substrate. After varying
lengths of time, aliquots of the reaction mixtures were spotted on
Whatman 3MM filter paper squares. The filters were washed with 5%
trichloroacetic acid at 55 °C prior to liquid scintillation counting.
Phosphorylation of MvSrc1 and MvSrc2 by MvCsk (and of c-Src by Csk)
was tested by incubation with [γ-32P]ATP for 30 min.
The reactions were terminated by the addition of SDS–PAGE sample
buffer. The samples were analyzed by 10% SDS–PAGE and autoradiography.
To test for MvCsk-mediated regulation of MvSrc1 and MvSrc2, the enzymes
were incubated together with ATP for 15 min at 30 °C. Aliquots
from this mixture were then tested for Src activity with [γ-32P]ATP and Src peptide. This reaction proceeded for 5 min
at 30 °C, and Src activity was quantified by the phosphocellulose
paper binding assay as described above.

Immunoprecipitation/Kinase
Assays
Cell lysates (2 mg
of total protein) were incubated with 4 μg of the HRP-anti-FLAG
antibody (Sigma) for 1 h at 4 °C. The complexes were captured
by a 2 h incubation at 4 °C with a 30 μL bed volume of
protein A agarose (Roche). After being extensively washed with PBS
(Mediatech) containing 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, each agarose–protein
complex was divided into three tubes. Duplicates were studied in a
radioactive kinase assay using Src peptide (AEEEIYGEFEAKKKKG).
Activities of the proteins were calculated and expressed as the picomoles
of phosphate transferred. The remaining samples were analyzed by SDS
gel electrophoresis, transferred to a PVDF membrane (Millipore), and
probed with the HRP-anti-FLAG antibody to confirm equal immunoprecipitation.

Results
Cloning MvSrc1 and MvSrc2 from Mi. vibrans
We used PCR to isolate cDNAs encoding two Src-like kinases from Mi. vibrans. These kinases, which we have designated MvSrc1
and MvSrc2, are closely related to the Src family kinases from the
filasterean C. owczarzaki and the choanoflagellate M. brevicollis, as shown in the phylogenetic tree in Figure B. The Mi. vibrans Src kinases
have the same basic domain structure as M. brevicollis MbSrc1, Capsaspora CoSrc1 and CoSrc2, and mammalian
Src: all contain an N-terminal myristoylation sequence, followed by
a unique region, SH3, SH2, and catalytic kinase domains (Figure  and Figure S1 of the ). This domain arrangement is well-conserved, because
in addition to functioning in substrate recognition and targeting,
the SH3 and SH2 domains are involved in autoinhibitory interactions.− The kinase domains of MvSrc1 and MvSrc2 are approximately 60% identical
in amino acid sequence with the human c-Src kinase domain, while the
noncatalytic domains have lower levels of identity (SH3, 55.2 and
44.1% for MvSrc1 and MvSrc2, respectively; SH2, 37.6 and 44.6% for
MvSrc1 and MvSrc2, respectively) (Figure ).
In mammalian c-Src, phosphorylation of a tyrosine in the C-terminal
tail (Y527; chicken c-Src numbering) by Csk produces an intramolecular
interaction with the SH2 domain, leading to enzyme inhibition.,,, This C-terminal tyrosine is conserved in MvSrc1 and MvSrc2 (Y546
and Y589, respectively). Activation of the Src family kinases occurs
through autophosphorylation of a tyrosine in the activation loop (Y416;
chicken c-Src numbering). This is facilitated by disruption of the
autoinhibitory interactions through either binding of a ligand to
the SH2 or SH3 domains or dephosphorylation of the C-terminal tyrosine.,, Autophosphorylation also regulates
the Src kinases from Capsaspora and M. brevicollis., MvSrc1 and MvSrc2 both contain a tyrosine
in the activation loop (Y435 and Y478, respectively), corresponding
to the c-Src autophosphorylation site.

Homology between human
c-Src and unicellular SFKs. The Src domain
structure is shown schematically. The percent amino acid identity
among the SH3, SH2, and kinase domains of human c-Src and various
unicellular Src family kinases are shown below the structure. The
positions of the autophosphorylation site (Y416) and the negative
regulatory site (Y527) are indicated.

MvSrc1 and MvSrc2 Are Active Kinases-
We
expressed MvSrc1 and MvSrc2 in Sf9 insect cells using recombinant
baculoviruses and purified the enzymes by nickel affinity chromatography.
We tested for tyrosine kinase activity using a synthetic Src substrate
peptide. Both enzymes were active, with MvSrc1 displaying approximately
10–20-fold higher activity than MvSrc2 over a range of enzyme
concentrations (Figure A). The specific activity
of MvSrc1 measured in these experiments (47.5 pmol min–1 μg–1) is lower than the activity previously
measured for autophosphorylated mammalian c-Src (430 pmol min–1 μg–1) or M. brevicollis MbSrc1 (145 pmol min–1 μg–1), although it is comparable to the activity of the mammalian
Src-like kinase Brk (37 pmol min–1 μg–1). The specific activity
of MvSrc2 is substantially lower than the specific activities of these
other kinases (2.4 pmol min–1 μg–1). The activity of MvSrc1 was somewhat higher in Mn2+-containing
buffers than in Mg2+-containing buffers, while MvSrc2 did
not display any preference (Figure S2 of the ). We investigated the substrate specificities of
MvSrc1 and MvSrc2 using synthetic peptides containing substrate motifs
for a variety of kinases (Figure B). The substrate
preference for MvSrc1 was similar to the preferences previously observed
for mammalian, M. brevicollis, and Capsaspora Src kinases,, with the highest activity toward
the Src peptide substrate. MvSrc2 preferred the Src substrate, but
it also displayed a significant amount of activity toward Kemptide
(LRRASLG), a substrate for protein kinase A, a serine/threonine kinase
(Figure B). In contrast, MvSrc1 was inactive
toward Kemptide. Phosphorylation of Kemptide by MvSrc2 was confirmed
by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time of flight (data
not shown). The activity of MvSrc2 toward Kemptide showed a dependence
on peptide concentration (Figure C). We were
unable to achieve saturation in these experiments, but the Km value appears to be in the millimolar range.
The level of phosphorylation of the Src substrate or Kemptide by MvSrc2
was reduced to background levels in the presence of 200 nM dasatinib,
a small molecule Src inhibitor (data not shown). Serine/threonine
kinase activity has not previously been reported for a purified mammalian
Src kinase or for a Src kinase from any of the unicellular eukaryotes
previously studied.

MvSrc1 and MvSrc2 are active tyrosine kinases. (A). The
activities
of MvSrc1 and MvSrc2 at varying enzyme concentrations were measured
with 0.7 mM Src peptide and 0.25 mM [γ-32P]ATP using
the phosphocellulose paper binding assay. Reactions proceeded for
9 min at 30 °C. Note that two different activity scales were
used for MvSrc1 and MvSrc2. (B). MvSrc1 and MvSrc2 substrate specificities
were investigated using synthetic peptides incorporating recognition
motifs from four protein kinases. The enzymes were incubated with
0.25 mM [γ-32P]ATP and 0.8 mM peptide, and reactions
proceeded for 8 min at 30 °C. (C) The activity of MvSrc2 was
investigated at various concentrations of Kemptide, a PKA substrate.
The concentration of enzyme was 2 μM, and the concentration
of [γ-32P]ATP was 0.25 mM. Reactions proceeded for
9 min at 30 °C.

The SH2 and SH3 domains of mammalian Src family kinases play
important
roles in substrate recognition., Thus, protein or peptide
substrates containing SH2 or SH3 ligands (or both) are phosphorylated
much more efficiently than substrates lacking the ligand sequences.
MvSrc1 and MvSrc2 displayed higher activity toward a peptide with
an SH3 ligand than a control peptide in which the key proline residues
within the SH3-binding sequence were changed to alanines (Figure A,B). In contrast, MvSrc1 and MvSrc2 showed no discernible
preference for a peptide substrate that contains an SH2 ligand (pYEEI).
This pattern of substrate targeting is similar to that of the Src
family kinases from M. brevicollis and Capsaspora., The lack of SH2-dependent substrate targeting
could potentially be due to an inability of the MvSrc1 and MvSrc2
SH2 domains to bind phosphotyrosine. To test whether MvSrc1 and MvSrc2
have the capacity to bind pTyr, we performed an in vitro binding assay. We immobilized a pTyr-containing synthetic peptide
on Affi-Gel resin and incubated the resin with MvSrc1, MvSrc2, or M. brevicollis MbSrc1. (We previously showed that the binding
affinity and selectivity of the MbSrc1 SH2 domain was similar to that
of mammalian c-Src.) After washing the
samples, we measured binding by Western blotting (Figure C). Each Src kinase bound selectively to the immobilized
pTyr-containing peptide, suggesting that the SH2 domains of MvSrc1
and MvSrc2 are functional.

Substrate targeting. (A) MvSrc1 (1 μM)
was tested with synthetic
peptide substrates containing SH3 or SH2 ligand sequences or matched
controls (100 μM). Reactions proceeded for 10 min at 30 °C
and were analyzed using the phosphocellulose paper binding assay.
(B) Similar experiments were conducted with MvSrc2 (5 μM). (C)
Binding of MvSrc1, MvSrc2, and Monosiga MbSrc1 to
an immobilized SH2 ligand. Enzymes (500 nM) were incubated with Affi-gel
15 resins containing either the EPQpYEEIPIKQ
peptide () (pY) or the unphosphorylated
peptide (Y) in buffer containing 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 250 mM NaCl,
5 mM EDTA, and 0.1% Triton X-100. After 45 min, the samples were centrifuged
and washed four times with binding buffer. Proteins were eluted by
incubation with SDS–PAGE sample buffer. Bound proteins were
visualized by Western blotting with the anti-His tag antibody.

Autophosphorylation on the activation
loop is a hallmark of Src
family kinases.,, In mammalian Src, this modification increases kinase activity by
destabilizing the autoinhibited conformation. To test for autophosphorylation
of MvSrc1 and MvSrc2, we first dephosphorylated the purified proteins
by treating them with YOP tyrosine phosphatase. We then incubated
the kinases with [γ-32P]ATP and analyzed the reactions
by SDS–PAGE and autoradiography. Autophosphorylation of MvSrc1
and MvSrc2 was readily detected after 5 min (Figure A). To measure stoichiometry, we excised the protein bands
and analyzed them by scintillation counting. Under these conditions,
MvSrc1 incorporated 0.46 mol of phosphate/mol of enzyme and MvSrc2
incorporated 0.13 mol/mol (Figure B). We also
tested the effect of autophosphorylation on enzymatic activity, using
a synthetic peptide substrate. Dephosphorylated MvSrc1 and MvSrc2
showed background levels of activity, while the ATP-treated enzymes
were active (Figure C).

Autophosphorylation of
MvSrc1 and MvSrc2. (A) Enzymes (1 μM)
were treated with immobilized GST-YOP phosphatase for 30 min at 30
°C. The YOP was removed by centrifugation, and the enzymes were
incubated with [γ-32P]ATP. Samples were removed at
the indicated time points and reactions stopped by mixing the samples
with SDS–PAGE sample buffer. The reactions were analyzed by
SDS–PAGE and autoradiography. (B) Bands from the gel shown
in panel A were excised, and the stoichiometry of autophosphorylation
was measured by scintillation counting. (C) MvSrc1 and MvSrc2 were
treated with immobilized GST-YOP phosphatase for 30 min at 30 °C.
The YOP was removed by centrifugation, and the samples were assayed
directly or after incubation with 0.5 mM ATP for 30 min at 30 °C.
Activity measurements were performed with the Src synthetic peptide
substrate and the phosphocellulose paper assay. Note that two different
activity scales were used for MvSrc1 and MvSrc2.

MvSrc1 and MvSrc2 Are Inactive in Mammalian Cells
The
unicellular homologues of c-Src show variable levels of activities
when expressed heterologously in mammalian cells. M. brevicollis MbSrc1 is active in mammalian cells, and it can functionally replace
c-Src in a transcriptional activation assay based on phosphorylation
of Stat proteins.,Capsaspora CoSrc2
phosphorylates itself and other proteins when expressed in mammalian
cells, while CoSrc1 is inactive. We expressed
FLAG-tagged MvSrc1 and MvSrc2 in human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293T
cells. Cells expressing the enzymes showed weak tyrosine phosphorylation
of ≈125, ≈50, and ≈25 kDa proteins, but these
proteins were also phosphorylated in untransfected 293T cells (Figure
S3 of the ). No significant
autophosphorylation of MvSrc1 or MvSrc2 was observed in these experiments,
despite robust expression of MvSrc1 and MvSrc2. We obtained similar
results in Src/Yes/Fyn-deficient fibroblast cells (data not shown).
It is possible that the N-terminal FLAG tags of MvSrc1 and MvSrc2
interfere with subcellular localization and substrate recognition,
although an N-terminally FLAG-tagged version of mammalian c-Src showed
robust activity in these experiments (Figure S3 of the ).

Cloning Mi. vibrans MvCsk
A C-terminal
Src kinase (Csk) homologue was cloned by PCR. MvCsk possesses the
conserved SH2, SH3, and kinase domain arrangement seen in metazoan,
choanoflagellate, and Capsaspora Csk proteins (Figure  and Figure S4 of the ). The amino acid sequence of the kinase domain
of MvCsk is 52.2% identical with that of the human Csk kinase domain,
and the sequences of SH3 and SH2 domains are 40 and 48.3% identical
with those of human Csk (Figure ). A multiple-sequence
alignment of MvCsk with homologues from humans, Xenopus (frog), Ephydatia fluviatilis (a simple sponge), M. brevicollis, and Capsaspora shows that
MvCsk contains the key catalytic residues, and all six residues previously
identified as being important for mammalian Src recognition (Figure S4 of the ).

Homology between human Csk and unicellular Csks. The Csk
domain
structure is shown schematically. The percent amino acid identity
among the SH3, SH2, and kinase domains of human Csk and various unicellular
Csk kinases are shown below the structure.

MvCsk Has No Measurable Activity
We amplified the MvCsk
cDNA from a Ministeria cDNA library by PCR. We cloned
full-length MvCsk into a bacterial expression vector and produced
the kinase as a fusion protein with glutathione S-transferase (GST). After purification of GST-tagged MvCsk protein
by glutathione-agarose chromatography, we assayed activity with a
generic tyrosine kinase substrate, the synthetic peptide poly(Glu4-Tyr). No activity could be detected for MvCsk, in contrast
to mammalian Csk and M. brevicollis MbCsk, which
were produced under similar conditions in bacteria (Figure A). The lack of MvCsk activity was similar to results
obtained previously for Csk from the related filasterean Capsaspora. Next, we tested the activity of MvCsk
toward purified MvSrc1 and MvSrc2 in an in vitro reaction
with [γ-32P]ATP. As a positive control, we conducted
a parallel reaction with GST-tagged mammalian Csk and a kinase dead
form of c-Src. No MvCsk activity toward the Ministeria Src proteins was detectable, although mammalian Csk phosphorylates
c-Src under these conditions (Figure B). Mammalian
Csk was unable to phosphorylate MvSrc1 or MvSrc2 (data not shown).
Expression of MvCsk in HEK293T cells resulted in no tyrosine phosphorylation
of MvSrc1, MvSrc2, or other cellular proteins (Figure S5 of the ).

MvCsk lacks kinase activity.
(A) Purified MvCsk, M. brevicollis MbCsk, and mammalian
Csk (mCsk) (200 nM) were assayed with poly(Glu4-Tyr) (1
mg/mL). The reaction mixtures contained 0.5 mM [γ-32P]ATP. Activity was analyzed at various time points by scintillation
counting. (B) Purified MvCsk (1 μM) was incubated with MvSrc1
or MvSrc2 (1 μM) in the presence of [γ-32P]ATP.
Prior to the MvCsk reactions, MvSrc1 and MvSrc2 were pre-autophosphorylated
with 1 mM unlabeled ATP for 1 h. A positive control reaction was conducted
with mammalian Csk and a kinase inactive mutant form of the c-Src
kinase domain (with the C-terminal tail). The reactions were stopped
after 30 min by addition of SDS–PAGE sample buffer and analyzed
by autoradiography. Aliquots were also analyzed by Western blotting
to confirm the presence of MvSrc1 and MvSrc2 (anti-His tag) and Csks
(anti-GST). (C) MvCsk does not inhibit MvSrc. In vitro MvSrc1 and MvSrc2 reactions were performed in the presence or absence
of MvCsk. Reaction mixtures contained 1 μM enzymes, 0.5 mM [γ-32P]ATP, and 0.4 mg/mL RCM-lysozyme as a Src substrate. After
20 min at 30 °C, reaction mixtures were analyzed by scintillation
counting.

Mammalian Csk phosphorylates the
C-terminal tail of Src, stabilizing
the autoinhibited form and reducing its kinase activity., Although MvCsk did not display any activity toward a general tyrosine
kinase substrate or MvSrc, we tested its ability to regulate MvSrc
activity. MvSrc1 and MvSrc2 were incubated with MvCsk in vitro, and MvSrc activity was measured in a radioactive kinase assay (in
control experiments, we confirmed that MvCsk itself had no activity
toward the Src substrate peptide). No inhibition of MvSrc1 or MvSrc2
was observed in the presence of MvCsk; instead, MvSrc activity was
modestly increased by MvCsk treatment (Figure C). Similar results were obtained previously for the C. owczarzaki Src and Csk enzymes.

Molecular Basis
for the Lack of Activity in Filasterean Csk
Kinases
Previous structural and biochemical studies of mammalian
Csk kinase have highlighted their significant differences from Src
family kinases. The isolated tyrosine kinase catalytic domain of Csk
has low activity. In contrast to the
autoinhibited structure of Src, the Csk SH3 and SH2 domains bind to
the kinase N-lobe to stabilize an active conformation. The β3−αC loop in the Csk
kinase domain interacts with the SH2 domain, and mutations in this
interface decrease Csk activity. The
SH3–SH2 linker region is also important for Csk activity.

The availability of two inactive filasterean
Csk kinases (from Capsaspora and Ministeria) allows a comparison with multiple active Csk enzymes, including
those from mammals, sponge (a simple metazoan), and the unicellular
choanoflagellate M. brevicollis. The sequences of
CoCsk and MvCsk were strongly homologous to the sequences of their
counterparts in mammalians and choanoflagellates, and the important
residues for ATP binding and catalysis are conserved in the kinase
domain (Figure S4 of the ). On the other hand, several residues in the SH2–kinase interface
and the SH3–SH2 linker of CoCsk and MvCsk diverge from the
sequences of the active enzymes (Figure A).
In particular, CoCsk and MvCsk contain a glycine residue at position
236 (MvCsk numbering), but in mammalian, Xenopus,
sponge, and M. brevicollis Csk, this residue is an
asparagine or aspartic acid. In mammalian Csk, substitution of this
residue with alanine led to a loss of kinase activity. To test the importance of this residue in MvCsk,
we introduced the Asn residue found in mammalian Csk. We produced
a G236N mutant form of MvCsk, expressed and purified the GST fusion
protein, and tested the activity against a synthetic substrate peptide.
The mutation caused a partial recovery of MvCsk activity, as measured
toward poly(Glu4-Tyr) (Figure B).
The level of activity for MvCsk-G236N was 19% of the activity of a
similar preparation of M. brevicollis MbCsk or 3%
of the activity of mammalian Csk. No activity was detectable toward
MvSrc1, MvSrc2, or the Src substrate peptide (data not shown). These
results reinforce the importance of SH2–kinase domain interactions
in Csk activity and suggest an explanation for the low Csk activity
observed in filastereans.

G236N mutation restores MvCsk activity. (A)
The structure of rat
Csk (Protein Data Bank entry 1K9A). Amino acids colored red are residues in the SH2–kinase
interface that are conserved between Capsaspora and Ministeria Csks but diverge from active Csks. The position
of N226 in rat Csk (at the position corresponding to MvCsk G236) is
indicated by an arrow. This figure was prepared with PyMOL. (B) Purified
wild-type GST-MvCsk (gray squares) and GST-MvCsk-G236N (black diamonds)
were assayed with poly(Glu4-Tyr) (1 mg/mL). The reaction
mixtures contained 0.5 mM [γ-32P]ATP. Activity was
analyzed at various time points by scintillation counting.

Discussion
Filastereans, the sister
group to metazoans and choanoflagellates,
consist of two known species: C. owczarzaki and Mi. vibrans. Genomic analysis of Capsaspora identified 103 putative tyrosine kinase genes, of which 92 are predicted
to be receptor TKs. The 11 remaining TKs are predicted to be nonreceptor-type
kinases. A PCR-based survey of TKs in Ministeria showed that the repertoire of nonreceptor TKs
is similar in the two filasterean species. Of the 10 common families of metazoan nonreceptor TKs, six are present
in at least one filasterean. In particular, the common domain architecture
of the Src, Csk, Tec, and Abl families (SH3–SH2–kinase)
was established before the divergence of filastereans from choanoflagellates
and metazoans. This domain arrangement is conserved throughout metazoans,, and experimental alterations to the domain structure lead to improper
regulation and alterations in substrate recognition.

Here, we have focused on Src family tyrosine kinases.
In multicellular
animals, Src kinases play important roles in the regulation of cell
growth and proliferation, survival, adhesion, and migration., Inappropriate expression of activated Src (as in cells transformed
by the viral oncogene v-Src) leads to increased motility, uncontrolled
proliferation, and anchorage independence. Thus, the activity of Src
family kinases must be tightly regulated. Phosphorylation of the C-terminal
negative regulatory tyrosine (Y527) by Csk is a unique aspect of Src
family kinases that has been conserved throughout the evolution of
metazoans. When the Csk gene is knocked out in mice, Src is hyperactivated
and early stage embryonic death occurs.

Although Csk-mediated Src negative regulation is essential
in metazoans,
studies of ancestral forms of Src have shown that Src can operate
without strict control in protists. The Csk homologues from the choanoflagellates M. ovata and M. brevicollis are able to
phosphorylate their cognate Src enzymes, but they do not impose negative
regulation., In C. owczarzaki, the closest relative to metazoans and choanoflagellates, Src is
enzymatically functional yet Csk lacks any detectable catalytic activity. In this report, we have studied the Src–Csk
regulatory pair in Mi. vibrans, an organism in the
same phylogenetic group as Capsaspora. Ministeria Src1 and Src2 are active tyrosine kinases (Figure ). MvSrc1 had an approximately 10-fold higher specific activity
than MvSrc2 toward a synthetic peptide containing an optimal Src recognition
sequence. Both enzymes phosphorylated an SH3 ligand-containing peptide
at a rate higher than that of a control peptide but did not show a
preference for a peptide with an SH2 ligand (Figure A). These results mirror those obtained for C. owczarzaki CoSrc1 and CoSrc2 and M. brevicollis MbSrc1, strengthening
the idea that the coupling of the SH2 and kinase domains developed
later in SFK evolution.

An unexpected observation was that MvSrc2
has significant Ser/Thr
kinase activity (Figure ). Moreover, the peptide
phosphorylated by MvSrc2 (Kemptide) lacks the acidic residues commonly
found in TK substrates. The sequences surrounding the presumed autophosphorylation
sites in the activation loops of MvSrc1 and MvSrc2 differ. MvSrc1
contains the sequence LITDDEY, while MvSrc2
has the sequence IITKNDGAY (Figure
S1 of the ). Thus,
MvSrc2 may be less dependent on acidic residues as specificity determinants
than other TKs. TKs normally show high specificity for phosphorylating
tyrosine residues, while other eukaryotic protein kinases target serine
and threonine residues. It has been proposed
that primitive enzymes in general had broader specificities than modern
enzymes, allowing fewer enzymes to carry out the processes needed
for ancestral organisms. Some modern
protein kinases, such as MEK1, MEK2, and Wee1, designated dual-specificity
kinases, have the ability to phosphorylate both serine and tyrosine
residues., These enzymes usually have relatively narrow
substrate specificities, and their amino acid sequences more closely
resemble those of Ser/Thr kinases than those of TKs. It has been suggested
that dual-specificity kinases served as an intermediary step between
the more ancient Ser/Thr kinases and TKs: after duplication of dual-specificity
kinase genes, the new enzymes lost the ability to phosphorylate serine
and threonine, leading to the birth of the new tyrosine kinase subgroup.,, MvSrc2 may therefore represent
an intermediary form of a tyrosine kinase; it is a tyrosine kinase
by amino acid sequence homology, yet it is able to act as a dual-specificity
kinase. Additional studies are needed on the Src-like kinases of earlier
ancestors (e.g., ichthyosporeans) to test for the presence of dual
specificity or determine if the phenomenon is specific to MvSrc2.

We previously reported that the C. owczarzaki homologue
of Csk (CoCsk) lacked detectable enzymatic activity, in contrast to
all of the previously studied Csk proteins. Here, we show in the filasterean Mi. vibrans that
MvCsk is inactive toward a general TK substrate or MvSrc proteins
(Figure ). MvCsk was unable to inhibit MvSrc;
treatment with MvCsk actually caused a slight increase in MvSrc activity
(Figure C), perhaps because of the disruption
of an autoinhibitory interaction. The availability of the two inactive
filasterean Csk kinases has allowed us to identify a region (the SH2–kinase
interface) that is a critical determinant of Csk enzymatic activity.
A mutation in this region (G236N) partially restored MvCsk activity
(Figure B). These results help to illuminate
the evolutionary history of Csk activity. Csk may have evolved as
an active enzyme that lost its activity in the filasterean lineage.
Alternatively, MvCsk and CoCsk may have emerged initially as pseudokinases
and gained catalytic activity after the split between filastereans
and choanoflagellates. In this view, the original role of MvCsk and
CoCsk would have been similar to those of other pseudokinases (scaffolding,
activating other proteins through domain binding, or targeting of
active proteins to specific cellular locations)., Csk may have been subsequently co-opted in metazoans to provide
negative regulation of Src family kinases. A more complete understanding
of the physiological roles of MvSrc1, MvSrc2, and MvCsk in intact Mi. vibrans cells awaits the development of experimental
tools to manipulate gene function in filastereans.

Supporting Information Available
Five supplemental
figures and
legends. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi4016499_si_001.pdf

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Arnau Sebé-Pedrós and Iñaki
Ruiz-Trillo (Department of Genetics, University of Barcelona, Barcelona,
Spain) for the electron micrograph of Mi. vibrans.

