The G protein-coupled
receptors
(GPCRs) are essential mediators for transducing a wide variety of
extracellular signals to the inside of the cell. Receptor activation leads to G protein-mediated signaling,
which is then terminated when the receptor is phosphorylated by a
G protein-coupled receptor kinase (GRK) and bound by a protein called
arrestin. The interaction of an arrestin
with a GPCR has been perhaps most extensively explored for the dim
light photoreceptor, rhodopsin, with visual arrestin. The general surfaces and residues that interact between
the two proteins have been identified, and these are briefly reviewed
below.

Mutagenesis, peptide inhibition,
electron paramagnetic resonance
(EPR), and fluorescence spectroscopic studies implicate residues in
the concave sides of both the N- and C-domains of arrestin in receptor
binding.− One especially interesting region has been the finger loop of arrestin,
a stretch of 13 amino acids in the N-domain (residues 67–79),
which sits in the middle of the N- and C-domains on the concave surface
of the protein (Figure ).,− On rhodopsin, mutagenesis and peptide inhibition
studies have shown the receptor C-tail (with the GRK-catalyzed phosphates
attached) and intracellular loops 2 and 3 are required for arrestin
binding.−

Model showing sites of rhodopsin and arrestin tested for
interaction
by TrIQ studies. (a) Chemical structure of the fluorophore monobromobimane
(mBBr). (b and c) Models showing the cytoplasmic view and transmembrane
view, respectively, of opsin M257Y (PDB entry 4A4M). The sites of cysteine
residues used to attach the fluorophore bimane (T242 and T243) are
indicated (green spheres at the Cα atoms). (d) Model
of arrestin (PDB entry 1AYR, chain A). For these studies, a single Trp residue
(inset) was introduced at each of the indicated sites, both in the
finger loop (residues 67, 72, and 79; red spheres at the Cα) and in the 160 loop (residues 157–164, blue spheres at the
Cα), to act as a possible quencher of the bimane
fluorescent probes on rhodopsin.

While specific residue–residue interactions between
arrestin
and a GPCR have not yet been defined, there is mounting evidence that
there are likely several types of receptor–arrestin interactions.
Specifically, fluorescence studies have implicated residues at the
tip of the C-domain implicated in low-affinity interactions with rhodopsin, and recent nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
studies have indicated that arrestin interacts with different states
of active rhodopsin differently. In this
work, we present evidence of a real-time physical interaction between
sites on rhodopsin and residues on the N-lobe of arrestin that has
not previously been reported to interact with the receptor.

The structure and conformational dynamics of both arrestin and
rhodopsin have been extensively studied using site-directed labeling
approaches, in which individual cysteine groups are labeled with a
spectroscopic reporter group, and these probes then used to glean
information about the dynamic changes in the protein at the site of
attachment. Spin-labels and EPR spectroscopy [so-called site-directed
spin labeling (SDSL)] have been used to map conformational changes
in rhodopsin, as well as arrestin.,, Insights have also been gained
from conceptually similar site-directed fluorescence labeling (SDFL)
studies, although the latter have not been conducted on both proteins
nearly as extensively or systematically.,,−

The SDSL and SDFL
approaches have defined key aspects of GPCR activation
and G protein coupling. SDSL studies showed that rhodopsin activation
involves an outward movement of TM6,,, and subsequent SDFL studies showed this movement
allowed G protein binding by exposing a “hydrophobic patch”
on the receptor that makes critical interactions with the C-terminal
tail of the Gα subunit of transducin., Note that other biochemical studies also suggested TM6 movement
during rhodopsin activation, as well
as the location of the Gtα C-terminal binding site
on rhodopsin. Ultimately, these interactions
were more precisely defined by further SDSL studies and crystal structures of active rhodopsin coupled with
the Gtα C-tail.,

Here,
our goal was to assess if exposure of this cleft and “hydrophobic
patch” upon TM6 movement during rhodopsin activation might
have a similar role in arrestin binding and to define sites of direct
contact between the two proteins. Our approach employed a novel SDFL
approach that utilizes tryptophan-induced quenching (TrIQ) (discussed
below). In TrIQ, we assess the ability
of Trp residues engineered into arrestin to quench the fluorescence
of a bimane fluorophore [monobromobimane (mBBr)] attached to different,
engineered cysteine residues on rhodopsin.

To conduct our studies,
we introduced the individual cysteine residues
into a background construct of rhodopsin that contained no reactive
cysteines, called θ,, and also mutations
to make it thermostable (N2C/D282C) as well as constitutively active
(M257Y).− The use of this rhodopsin mutant provided a number
of advantages. The M257Y mutation made it possible to measure stable
binding of arrestin to opsin (rhodopsin without retinal), binding
that was not lost during MII decay. Also, the absence of retinal prevented
any rhodopsin photobleaching by the laser used for fluorescence lifetime
measurements. Further, the N2C/D282C mutation stabilized the unliganded
opsin in detergent micelles. We also
used a constitutively active form of arrestin (R175E) to circumvent
potential problems of receptor phosphorylation heterogeneity, which
could complicate both the arrestin binding studies and receptor purification.,−

Our results show that Trp residues introduced
into the arrestin
finger loop can quench the fluorescence of a bimane label on TM6 of
opsin. Unexpectedly, we find that some Trp residues placed in the
arrestin 160 loop (residues 155–165) on the N-lobe can also
quench a bimane at site 242 as well as one residue away, at site 243.
Analysis of the steady-state and time-resolved fluorescence TrIQ data
identifies several instances in which the Trp on an arrestin molecule
is statically quenching the bimane probe located on the opsin. These
results identify distinct sites of direct physical interaction between
the two proteins, further supporting the mounting evidence of structural
plasticity in the arrestin–rhodopsin interaction, and hint
at how arrestin could bind to an opsin dimer.,

Materials and Methods
Materials
All restriction enzymes,
ligase, and DNA
polymerase were from New England Biolabs. All tissue culture media
were purchased from HyClone, except for polyethylenimine (PEI), which
was from Polysciences, Inc. n-Dodecyl β-d-maltoside (DM) was purchased from Anatrace. 1,2-Dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-l-serine (DOPS) and 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphate (DOPA) were purchased from Avanti
Polar Lipids. Monobromobimane was obtained from Invitrogen. The 1D4
antibody was obtained from the Monoclonal Antibody Core at the Vaccine
and Gene Therapy Institute of Oregon Health and Science University,
and the competing 9-mer peptide (corresponding to the 1D4 epitope)
was obtained from the Biotechnology Core Facility Branch of the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (Atlanta, GA). The BL21-CodonPlus(DE3)-RP
strain of Escherichia coli was purchased from Agilent
Technologies. Yeast extract and BactoTryptone were from BD Biosciences.
Profinity eXact and HiTrap heparin columns were from Bio-Rad and GE
Healthcare Life Sciences, respectively. Amicon Ultra protein concentrators
(10 kDa cutoff) and nitrocellulose filters (0.45um) were from Millipore.
GTP was purchased from Roche, and [35S]GTPγS was
from PerkinElmer Life Sciences. Frozen bovine retinas were obtained
from Lawson and Lawson, Inc. (Lincoln, NE). GBX red light filters
were purchased from Eastman Kodak Co. Band pass filters and long pass
filters were purchased from Oriel (Stratford, CT), while cuvettes
were purchased from Uvonics (Plainview, NY). All other chemicals and
reagents were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich.

The following buffers
were used throughout. ROS buffer consisted of 70 mM potassium phosphate
and 1 mM magnesium acetate (pH 6.8). PBS consisted of 137 mM NaCl,
2.7 mM KCl, 8 mM Na2HPO4, and 1.46 mM KH2PO4 (pH 7.4). MHE consisted of 5 mM MES, 50 mM
HEPES, and 1 mM EDTA (pH 6.8). Wash buffer consisted of 10 mM Tris-HCl
(pH 7.5), 0.1 M NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 0.1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT,
and 0.01% DM.

Cloning and Mutagenesis
Opsin Cloning,
Expression, Purification, and Fluorescent Labeling
As described
previously, rhodopsin
mutants containing alanine substitutions in the “hydrophobic
patch” on TM5 (L226A and V230A) were made in a “Cys-less”
background nonreactive construct, called θ, in which the native
cysteines C140, C316, C322, and C323 were replaced with serines., For SDFL studies using opsin, a background construct, termed φ,
was created in which the aforementioned M257Y, N2C, and D282C mutations
were introduced into θ, using overlap extension polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) in the pMT4 vector. The individual cysteine mutations
for attaching the bimane fluorophore (T242C and T243C) were subsequently
introduced into φ using QuikChange mutagenesis.

Rhodopsin
mutants were expressed in COS-1 cells and purified as previously described., Briefly, COS-1 cells were transfected with 30 μg of plasmid
DNA containing mutant rhodopsin per 15 cm plate using 0.1 mg of polyethylenimine/plate.
Cells were harvested ∼60 h post-transfection. Cells were solubilized
using 0.6 mL of 1% DM in 1× phosphate-buffered saline (1×
PBS) per plate of cells. After solubilization for 1 h, the lysates
were clarified by centrifugation at 100000g. The
clear lysate was applied to 1D4 antibody-coupled Sepharose beads and
incubated for 4 h at 4 °C. The beads were then washed sequentially,
first with PBS with 1 M NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2, and 0.05% DM,
then with 0.05% DM in PBS, and finally with MHE buffer with 0.025%
DM. The opsin was then labeled with a 10-fold molar excess of mBBr
in the same buffer overnight at 4 °C. The labeling reaction was
quenched with 1 mM l-cysteine for 30 min on ice. The beads
were washed sequentially with the following buffers: 0.025% DM in
MHE buffer, 0.2% DM in MHE buffer, 0.025% DM in MHE buffer, and finally
0.05% DM in 5 mM MES (pH 6). The labeled opsin was eluted with 0.1
mM rhodopsin 9-mer peptide (TETSQVAPA)
in 5 mM MES, 140 mM NaCl, and 0.05% DM (pH 6).

Arrestin
Cloning, Mutagenesis, Expression, and Purification
The visual
arrestin R175E mutant, cloned at the C-terminus of a
modified 77-amino acid prodomain region of subtilisin BPN′
(proR8FKAM), in the pG58 vector was a generous gift from K. Ridge. All of the arrestin Trp mutants were made by
QuikChange mutagenesis. All the mutations were confirmed by DNA sequencing.
The mutants were expressed in E. coli BL21(DE3)-RP
cells (Stratagene) and purified using a Profinity eXact column (Bio-Rad),
followed by ion exchange chromatography using a HiTrap heparin column
(GE Healthcare) as described previously. Briefly, this involved growing the BL21(DE3)-RP cells transformed
with the pG58 expression vector containing the prodomain/arrestin
fusion mutants (arrestin R175Q for the pull-down studies and R175E
for retinal trapping and SDFL studies) in 1 L of LB medium in the
presence of 100 μg/mL ampicillin at room temperature to an A550 of 0.6 and then induced with 30 μM
IPTG for 16 h at 16 °C. The cell pellet was resuspended in 50
mM Tris-phosphate (pH 7.2) containing 50 mM NaCl, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol,
0.1 mM PMSF, and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and then disrupted
with a French press. The supernatant obtained after centrifugation
of the cell lysate at 100000g for 45 min was loaded
onto a 5 mL Profinity eXact column. The column was washed with 20
column volumes of 100 mM sodium phosphate (pH 7.2) and 20 column volumes
of 100 mM sodium phosphate and 300 mM sodium acetate (pH 7.2). The
cleavage of arrestin from the prosubtilisin tag was initiated by passing
1 column volume of 100 mM sodium phosphate (pH 7.2) containing 100
mM sodium fluoride (elution buffer). The fluoride-mediated cleavage
reaction was allowed to occur for 2 h on ice. Tag-free arrestin was
eluted off the column by passing 5 column volumes of the elution buffer
and further purified by cation exchange chromatography using a 1 mL
HiTrap heparin column. The resulting arrestin protein was &gt;95%
pure,
as assessed by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(SDS–PAGE).

Arrestin Functional Pull-Down Assay
Preparation of Rod Outer Segments (ROS) and Rhodopsin
Phosphorylation
ROS were isolated from bovine retinas as
described previously., All the steps were conducted
at 4 °C under red lights. The
rhodopsin concentration was assessed by difference spectra in the
presence of hydroxylamine (ε500 = 40800 L cm–1 mol–1). Stocks were snap-frozen
and stored at −80 °C. Phosphorylated ROS (ROS-P) was prepared
as described previously. We consistently
obtained between five and six phosphates per rhodopsin using this
procedure.

A previously described centrifugal pull-down assay
was performed to test the binding of constitutively active arrestin
mutant R175Q to wild-type rhodopsin., In these assays,
12 μM ROS or ROS-P membranes were incubated with 3 μM
arrestin in 20 mM HEPES and 140 mM NaCl (pH 7.4) for 15 min at room
temperature. The samples were kept in the dark or activated with light
using a 150 W fiber-optic light source (&gt;495 nm), and then the
reaction
was quenched immediately with a 10-fold molar excess of ice-cold buffer.
Bound arrestin was separated from free by centrifugation at 100000g for 10 min. The membrane pellets were solubilized in loading
dye and subjected to SDS–PAGE, followed by Coomassie staining
to visualize the amount of arrestin that bound the receptor-containing
membranes. For the pull-down assay in the presence of the Gtα peptide [VLEDLKSVGLF], 100 μM peptide was preincubated with
the receptor for 10 min at room temperature before the addition of
arrestin.

Retinal Release Assay
The effect
of the mutation of
rhodopsin “hydrophobic patch” residues on arrestin binding
was studied by a retinal release assay, which was based on the observation
that arrestin could inhibit the release of retinal from rhodopsin,
upon light activation., All fluorescence measurements
were taken using a Photon Technologies QM-1 steady-state fluorescence
spectrophotometer with excitation provided by a 295 nm LED (OceanOptics
LLS-295). The temperature was held at 20 °C using a water-cooled
PTI four-position cuvette turret connected to a circulating water
bath (VWR Scientific). Rhodopsin mutants L226A and V230A were expressed
in COS-1 cells, regenerated, and purified as described above. Constitutively
active arrestin R175E was added at twice the molar concentration of
receptor and incubated with 0.25 μM “wild-type”
(θ) or the “hydrophobic patch” mutant rhodopsin
in a reaction mixture containing 20 mM HEPES, 140 mM NaCl, 0.05% DM,
and 0.3 mM DOPA (pH 7.4) in the dark for 30 min on ice. The samples
were placed in a 10 mm fluorescence cuvette, and the intrinsic Trp
fluorescence was measured using a λex of 295 nm and
a λem of 330 nm. A 98% neutral density filter was
used to attenuate the excitation light to avoid photobleaching of
the samples. After an initial dark-state fluorescence measurement,
the samples were irradiated with &gt;500 nm light from a 150 W fiber-optic
light source for 20 s, and the subsequent increase in fluorescence
was measured over time. After 90 min, 30 mM hydroxylamine (final concentration)
was added to cleave the Schiff base and convert all the remaining
photoproducts to opsin and free retinaloxime, to yield the maximal
Trp fluorescence. From the values of the fluorescence in the dark
state (Fo), the fluorescence prior to
hydroxylamine addition (F1), and the maximal
fluorescence of the sample (F2), the percent
retinal trapped was calculated by the expression [(F2 – F1)/(F2 – Fo)] × 100.

Steady-State Fluorescence Spectroscopy
The fluorescent
measurements were taken with the PTI steady-state fluorimeter (described
above). Typically, a measurement involved using 0.25 μM bimane-labeled
opsin in a 10 mm black-jacketed cuvette, which was excited at 380
nm, and the emitted fluorescence was measured from 400 to 600 nm using
1 nm increments. Each data point was integrated for 0.2 s, and the
average of two scans yielded the final spectrum. Arrestin mutants
were added at concentrations of both 2 and 5 μM, and the fluorescence
was monitored over time. The spectra were obtained every 1 min to
monitor the time course of arrestin-induced fluorescence quenching
(if any), until there was no further reduction in the bimane fluorescence.
The excitation band-pass on the fluorimeter was kept at 1 nm and the
emission band-pass at 5 nm. A 20-fold excess of arrestin over opsin
was found to be sufficient for complete arrestin binding. For the
experiment with the Gtα peptide, 100 μM peptide
was added to the opsin mix and incubated with the receptor for 10
min at room temperature before the addition of arrestin. Spectra were
acquired and visualized using the PTI software program Felix; the
fluorescence spectrum of the buffer was subtracted whenever necessary,
and the dilution factor upon addition of arrestin was taken into account
during data analysis. The spectral data were plotted and analyzed
using SigmaPlot version 11.0.

Statistical analyses of these
data were conducted as follows. For T242B quenching, a two-way (dose
× mutant) analysis of variance (ANOVA) revealed a significant
main effect of the mutant (F11,59 = 86.45; p &lt; 0.001) and dose (F1,59 = 10.63; p = 0.002) but no effect of the dose ×
mutant interaction (F values of &lt;1). Post hoc
analyses identified arrestin Trp mutants 158–163** and 164*
as differing significantly from arrestin R175E (*p = 0.002; **p &lt; 0.001), and for T243B quenching
(b), a two-way (dose × mutant) ANOVA revealed a significant main
effect of the mutant (F11,47 = 18.39; p &lt; 0.001) and no effect of the dose or dose × mutant
interaction (F values of &lt;1). Post hoc analyses
identified mutants Y67W**, F79W**, V159W*, E160W**, E161W**, and D162W*
as differing significantly from R175E (p &lt; 0.05;
**p &lt; 0.001).

Time-Resolved Fluorescence
Spectroscopy
The same sample
in the same 10 mm cuvette that was used for the steady-state fluorescence
measurement was used to measure the lifetime of bimane fluorescence
using a FluoTime 200 spectrometer (PicoQuant GmbH). The samples were
excited using a blue (405 nm) diode laser passed through a neutral
density filter to modulate the intensity. The measurements were made
at “magic angle” settings (54.7°) to avoid photoselection
artifacts. The excitation aperture was set to the minimum, while the
emission slits were set to 1 nm. To eliminate scattering, the emission
was monitored at 490 nm through two &gt;470 nm long pass filters.
The
decay spectra were recorded over a range of 0–180 ns using
the PicoHarp 300 time-correlated single-photon counting system. The
instrument response function was determined from the scatter at 400
nm from a solution of Ludox to be ∼64 ps full width at half-maximum
and was used to deconvolute the lifetime decay data with high resolution
(&lt;50 ps). The system was controlled using the PicoHarp software,
and the obtained spectra were fit using software from the manufacturer
(FluoFit). The spectra were fit to a three-exponential decay. The
“goodness of fit” was evaluated by plotting the residuals,
and a χ2 value of 0.9–1.1 was considered acceptable. The amplitude-weighted fluorescence lifetime,
⟨τ⟩, was calculated as ∑αiτi, where αi is the normalized amplitude factor for each
lifetime, τi.

Transducin
Purification
Transducin was purified from
bovine retina as previously described, with slight modifications., ROS membranes were isolated from bovine retina as mentioned above
but were finally suspended in 10 mM Tris-HC1, 0.5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, 0.1 mM PMSF, and 1× protease inhibitor cocktail
(EDTA free) (pH 7.5) supplemented with 0.3 mM EDTA, flash-frozen,
and stored at −80 °C. The frozen membranes were thawed,
dounced in a tissue homogenizer, and centrifuged at 70000g for 30 min. The pellets were washed with the same buffer twice and
then twice with a hypotonic buffer [5 mM HEPES (pH 7.5) with 0.1 mM
EDTA and 1 mM DTT]. Gt was then extracted by resuspending
the washed pellet with hypotonic buffer containing 200 μM GTP.
After three rounds of extraction, the extracts were analyzed by SDS–PAGE.
The extracts were pooled, concentrated, and buffer exchanged into
20 mM Tris-HCl, 0.2 M NaCl, and 2 mM MgCl2 (pH 7.5) containing
1 mM DTT and 20 μM GDP, in an Amicon Ultra 15 kDa cutoff centrifugal
concentrator. To the concentrated protein was added glycerol to a
final concentration of 10%, and the sample was then flash-frozen and
stored at −80 °C.

Transducin Inhibition Assay
The binding of arrestin
to opsin was assessed by testing its ability to inhibit opsin-induced
transducin activation, as measured by a GTPγS incorporation
assay. Briefly, bimane-labeled opsin
mutant was diluted to 0.25 μM in 20 mM HEPES (pH 7.4), 140 mM
NaCl, 0.05% DM, 0.3 mM DOPS, 1 mM MgCl2, and 0.1 mM EDTA
and incubated with the arrestin mutants (5 μM) for 30 min at
room temperature. The reaction was started by adding 0.1 μM
Gt and 4.5 μM GTPγS with [35S]GTPγS
as a tracer (2000–10000 cpm/pmol). The reaction was allowed
to proceed for 10 min at room temperature, following which the free
nucleotide was removed from bound by applying the mix to 0.45 μm
nitrocellulose filters in duplicate in a Brandel cell harvester attached
to a vacuum pump and washing the filter with ice-cold wash buffer. The filters were then removed, and the bound
radioactivity was measured in a scintillation counter. The data from
at least two experiments (each measured in duplicate) were averaged
to determine the counts for each sample and then further analyzed
in SigmaPlot.

Quantitation of Static and Dynamic Fluorescence
Quenching
The fraction of fluorophores undergoing static
versus dynamic quenching
upon binding of arrestin to bimane-labeled opsin was calculated as
described by Mansoor et al. Briefly,
this approach analyzes the steady-state fluorescence quenching data
together with the measured fluorescence lifetimes of the fluorophore
(bimane attached to specific cysteines in opsin) in the presence and
absence of a quenching tryptophan (introduced at specific sites of
arrestin) to determine the fraction of the static quenching component
in a fluorophore–quencher pair. For this analysis, we calculated Fw/Fo and τw/τo, where Fw and Fo are the peak fluorescence intensity
of the samples with and without the quenching Trp residue, respectively,
and τw and τo are the amplitude-weighted
fluorescence lifetimes of the fluorophore with and without the quenching
Trp residue, respectively.

The relative fraction of Trp–fluorophore
pairs not in a static complex was calculated usingThe relative fraction of Trp–fluorophore
pairs involved in a static complex is given bywhile the fraction of those undergoing
dynamic
quenching is

Model Construction and Docking
In brief, modeling the
rhodopsin–arrestin interaction was conducted using DSViewer
Pro and Chimera. For modeling the interactions of arrestin with monomeric
rhodopsin, coordinates from the M257Y/N2C/D282C rhodopsin mutant were
used (PDB entry 4A4M), after the retinal and all other nonprotein components had been
deleted. For modeling the interactions of arrestin with dimeric rhodopsin,
two models were used. The rhodopsin dimer with opposing TM1/TM4/H8
helices was generated using coordinates from PDB entry 4A4M, which were subjected
to the “sym” command in Chimera, followed by slight
tilting and movement of one monomer versus the other. The rhodopsin
dimer with opposing TM4/TM5 helices was created using the appropriate
TM4/TM5 dimer coordinates obtained from PDB entry 1N3M, onto which was substituted the structure of PDB entry 4A4M using the “Match
Maker” command in Chimera.

Arrestin models used p44 arrestin
as a template (PDB entry 4J2Q), onto which the sequence from full length arrestin
was modeled (PDB entry 1CF1, chain A) to generate the structure for the missing
part of the 160 loop in the p44 structure, and then residues 1–9
and the C-terminus (residues 361 on) were deleted to better match
the original p44 structure.

The Modeler function in Chimera
was then used to generate other
models of the 160 loop for the region of residues 153–167,
and the model that most resembled the structure resolved via the EPR
DEER studies was then used. Initial guesses for docking of the arrestin
to the different rhodopsin models were generated using PatchDock (http://bioinfo3d.cs.tau.ac.il/PatchDock/), followed by manual
docking to meet the criteria described in the text, while ensuring
little to no steric overlap in the final model.

Results
Our goal was to further define mechanisms for how arrestin interacts
with the GPCR rhodopsin and to identify precise sites where these
two proteins are in direct physical contact. We focused this investigation
on the area around TM6 of rhodopsin, as this region is known to undergo
key structural changes required for binding and activation of the
G protein, transducin, and we hypothesized a similar mechanism may
be involved in arrestin binding. Below, we summarize the results of
our studies.

Biochemical Mapping of the Arrestin–Rhodopsin Interaction:
Arrestin Utilizes the Same Binding Site on Rhodopsin as the Transducin
Gtα C-Terminal Tail
To test the hypothesis
that arrestin binding employs the same cavity in rhodopsin exposed
by TM6 movement (see above and Figure a),
we tested if a high-affinity peptide corresponding to the C-terminus
of Gtα (Gtα peptide) competed with
arrestin in binding to ROS rhodopsin membranes., The data from these centrifugal pull-down assays show that the Gtα peptide does inhibit the binding of constitutively
active arrestin (R175Q) to light-activated rhodopsin (R*), by almost
90% (Figure b). The Gtα peptide
also reduces the level of binding to the phosphorylated, light-activated
receptor (RP*), although to a lesser extent (∼20%), presumably
because of the higher affinity for the arrestin imparted by the phosphates
in RP*. Together, the data suggest that arrestin, in some way, utilizes
the same patch on rhodopsin as the C-terminal tail of transducin.

Evidence
that arrestin and the Gtα C-terminal
tail both bind to the same crevice on rhodopsin. (a) Model showing
the location and mechanism of interaction between rhodopsin and the
transducin Gtα C-terminus (red). Previous TrIQ studies
showed this binding requires a “hydrophobic patch” involving
several residues on TM5 of rhodopsin. The model was made using coordinates from PDB entry 3DQB. Two of the residues
in the “hydrophobic patch” on rhodopsin, L226 and V230,
are depicted as gray spheres at the Cα position.
The sites of attachment of the bimane fluorophore to rhodopsin (sites
242 and 243) are depicted as green spheres at the Cα position. (b) The ability of a peptide corresponding to the Gtα tail of transducin to compete with the binding of
arrestin to rhodopsin was measured. The data show the Gtα tail peptide inhibits the binding of arrestin R175Q to light-activated
rhodopsin, R*, measured in a centrifugal pull-down assay. Interestingly,
the Gtα peptide does not compete as effectively with
RP*. (c) Mutations in the “hydrophobic patch” on TM5
of rhodopsin reduce arrestin-mediated retinal trapping, especially
L226A.

We further assessed the role of
this region in arrestin binding
by altering residues in a “hydrophobic patch” on TM5
of rhodopsin, which becomes exposed by the TM6 movement.,, Transducin activation and the
affinity of the C-terminus of Gtα for rhodopsin are
profoundly affected by mutation of residues in this “hydrophobic
patch”, L226, T229, and V230,, and the crystal
structures of the Gtα peptide bound to active rhodopsin
show direct contact of these residues with leucines on the Gtα peptide.,, We reasoned that if these residues play a similar role in arrestin
binding, mutating them should also impair arrestin binding.

Given that the recombinant “hydrophobic patch” mutant
receptors are DM-solubilized, and thus less dense than the ROS membrane
preparations from bovine retinas, we could not use the traditional
centrifugal pull-down assays to measure this interaction. Instead,
we monitored the release of retinal from the receptor, which is impeded
(∼50% of the retinal is trapped) when arrestin is bound to
the receptor. We used this approach to
measure the binding of arrestin to three different rhodopsin constructs,
a minimally reactive cysteine mutant, called theta (θ), and
mutants L226A and V230A (each constructed in the θ background).
As expected, arrestin R175E caused &gt;60% retinal trapping for the
θ
“wild-type” rhodopsin (Figure S1 of the  and Figure c), similar to what is observed for wild-type arrestin–rhodopsin
interactions. In contrast, both “hydrophobic
patch” mutants showed some differences in retinal trapping
compared to that of the θ wild type, with the effect of the
L226A mutant being the most striking, as indicated by the greater
increase in fluorescence during MII decay, and only a slight increase
in Trp fluorescence after subsequent hydroxylamine (HA) addition.
These results indicate that the ability of arrestin to trap retinal
in the rhodopsin “hydrophobic patch” mutant L226A was
impaired (presumably because of impaired arrestin binding), as would
be expected if arrestin employs part of the same interaction mechanism
for binding to rhodopsin as the Gtα C-terminal tail
does.

The results described above suggest the cleft exposed
in the rhodopsin
cytoplasmic face exposed by TM6 movement provides part of the interface
for interaction with arrestin. However, these experimental results
provide only indirect evidence of this interaction. To more specifically
define both where and how arrestin makes contact with this region
on rhodopsin, we next turned to studies using an SDFL method, called
TrIQ (Trp-induced quenching), as described below.

Identifying
Sites of Arrestin–Rhodopsin Interaction Using
Tryptophan-Induced Quenching (TrIQ): Two Trp Residues in the Finger
Loop of Arrestin Can Quench the Fluorescence of Bimane Fluorophores
on TM6 of Opsin
On the basis of the results described above,
we decided to introduce the bimane labels onto the receptor at sites
close to, but separate from, the “hydrophobic patch”
on the base of TM5/TM6 (L226 and V230), so that arrestin binding would
not be impaired by either the mutations, the incorporation of the
label, or both. The two sites we chose, T242 and T243, are also near
the end of TM6 and thus good candidates for efficient labeling because
the fluorescent probe used for TrIQ studies, bimane, exhibits significant
Förster resonance energy transfer with rhodopsin’s agonist,
retinal.,,, Thus, to avoid this complication, we used a retinal-free,
thermostabilized, constitutively active form of opsin, M257Y, that
adopts an active, meta II conformation that can bind and activate
transducin.

We first tested the
finger loop on arrestin, which lies in the middle of the two lobes
of the protein and marks one extremity on the N-domain (Figure d), because we suspected it might bind in the same
TM5/TM6 pocket as the Gtα C-terminal tail. The finger
loop region has long been thought to be involved in receptor binding,,, as it undergoes movement upon
receptor binding,,,, and its flexibility is important for interaction
with rhodopsin. Interestingly, in agreement
with the idea that the arrestin Gtα C-terminal tail
and finger loop may bind to the same spot on rhodopsin, we note that
the arrestin finger loop (Figure d) has a
sequence somewhat similar to that of the Gtα C-terminal
tail (Figure S7 of the ) and, like the Gtα C-terminal tail, has been proposed
to adopt a helical structure upon binding rhodopsin.

These mapping experiments were conceptually straightforward.
Arrestin
mutants were made with individual Trp residues introduced into the
finger loop (Y67W, I72W, and F79W) (Figure ) and then bound to opsin containing a bimane label on TM6 at site
T243C (termed T243B). Evidence of fluorescence quenching (indicated
by a decrease in fluorescence upon addition of the arrestin mutant)
would indicate proximity between the Trp and fluorophore.

Figure  shows representative spectra from
these initial studies. Importantly, the control background arrestin
mutant, R175E, which contains only one native Trp (W194), caused no
quenching of T243B fluorescence (Figure a).
In contrast, adding arrestin mutant Y67W to opsin T243B caused ∼40%
quenching of fluorescence (Figure c). This
quenching was position-specific, as another finger loop Trp mutant,
I72W, showed no quenching of 243B (Figure b), and a third Trp mutant in the same loop, F79W, also quenched
the bimane fluorescence, by ∼35% (Figure d). Importantly, the labeled opsin samples did not contain any free,
unbound fluorophore (Figure S2 of the ), and each arrestin mutant could bind the receptor,
as indicated by the ∼3 nm shift in the observed fluorescence
emission maximum (from ∼461 to 458 nm), even when no decrease
in fluorescence was observed. These initial studies show clear evidence
that the base of the arrestin finger loop can bind near site 243 on
opsin.

Site-specific quenching of opsin T243B fluorescence caused by the
arrestin mutant with Trp residues at different positions in the finger
loop. Steady-state fluorescence emission spectra of opsin T243B in
the absence (black) and presence (red) of the indicated arrestin mutants.
(a) The control, arrestin mutant R175E (which has no introduced Trp
mutations) causes no quenching of the bimane label on opsin. (b) Arrestin
mutant R175E/I72W also causes no quenching. In contrast, the presence
of Trp at site 67 (c) or 79 (d) in the arrestin finger loop causes
∼35–40% quenching of fluorescence for the bimane probe
at site 243 on opsin. Note that all of the spectra show a slight (∼3
nm) blue shift in the bimane fluorescence emission maxima upon addition
of arrestin, indicating that the local environment around the probe
has changed, presumably as a result of arrestin binding.

Identifying Sites of Arrestin–Rhodopsin
Interaction by
TrIQ: Evidence That the Arrestin Finger Loop and the 160 Loop Can
Interact with Bimane Fluorophores on TM6 of Opsin
Encouraged
by these results, we next tested if the Trp residues on the arrestin
finger loop could quench a bimane one residue away on rhodopsin, at
position T242 (T242B). Interestingly, no quenching was observed for
any of the finger loop Trp mutants for the bimane at site T242B (Figure a). There could be two reasons for this: either
the bimane at site T242B faces away from the quenching tryptophan,
or the arrestin mutants do not bind to the labeled opsin.

Arrestin finger
loop and 160 loop can both interact with probes
on TM6 of opsin, as indicated by their ability to quench the steady-state
fluorescence and inhibit Gt activation for the bimane-labeled
opsin mutants T242B and T243B. Interestingly, both types of arrestin
mutants show specific sites of quenching for the bimane labels on
the base of TM6 of opsin. (a) Ratio comparing opsin T242B or (b) opsin
T243B fluorescence in the presence and absence of finger loop Trp
mutants (red bars) and 160 loop Trp mutants (blue bars). Specific
sites of quenching are observed at both arrestin concentrations (5
μM, darker bars; 2 μM, lighter bars). (c and d) Ability
of arrestin mutants (5 μM) to bind the bimane-labeled opsin
mutants, assessed by their inhibition of transducin activation (measured
as binding of [35S]GTPγS to transducin). Statistical
analyses of these studies are described in . In brief, a two-way (dose × mutant) ANOVA
indicates the results from both arrestin concentrations used above
in panels a and b can be compared. Subsequent individual t tests identify the Trp-containing arrestin mutants with significantly
greater fluorescence quenching than R175E (*p &lt;
0.05; **p &lt; 0.001) in panels a and b. Individual t tests were also used to identify arrestin mutants that
significantly inhibit transducin activation (stimulated [35S]GTPγS binding) in panels c and d (*p ≤
0.03; **p ≤ 0.007). All experiments shown
here used the indicated amounts of arrestin mutants discussed above
and 0.25 μM bimane-labeled opsin and in 20 mM HEPES (pH 7.4),
140 mM NaCl, 0.05% DM, 0.3 mM DOPS, 1 mM MgCl2, and 0.1
mM EDTA and were performed after the incubation of opsin and arrestin
for 30 min at room temperature.

We also expanded the studies to test if these two sites on
opsin
interact with the 160 loop on arrestin, as we suspected this region,
located at the outer extremity of the concave surface of the N-domain,
might also be involved in binding the receptor (see ). The following arrestin mutants with individual
Trp residues introduced into the 160 loop (T157W, D158W, V159W, E160W,
E161W, D162W, K163W, and I164W) were tested for their ability to quench
the bimane probes at positions T242B and T243B on opsin (Table S1
of the ).

In
contrast to the finger loop mutants, a number of the arrestin
160 loop Trp mutants show significant site-specific quenching of bimane
at position 242 on opsin (Figure a), with
arrestin mutants E160W and E161W showing the most quenching (∼35%).
At position 243 on opsin, the arrestin 160 loop Trp mutants exhibit
a broader range of ability to quench the bimane fluorescence, with
the amount of quenching varying between ∼10 and 25%, and the
residues in the middle (E160W and E161W) showing maximal (∼20–25%)
quenching (Figure b). Formally, it is possible
that some small fraction of the quenching could be due to tyrosine
(Tyr) residues in arrestin (such as Y67 or Y250), as Tyr can also
quench bimane, although it does so much less efficiently than Trp
and only at much shorter distances than Trp (A. M. Jones Brunette
and D. L. Farrens, manuscript submitted). Moreover, such Tyr quenching
would also be systematic and occur in all of the arrestin samples,
including the control, R175E. While the bimane label at site 243 does
show a small amount of quenching by the R175E mutant in Figure b, which might reflect some slight quenching by
Y67 on arrestin, the difference is not clearly significant. Thus,
our statistical analysis of the TrIQ data was conducted by comparing
the Trp arrestin mutants to arrestin 175E, in order to identify which
mutants quench significantly more than the control. Interestingly,
the diffuse nature of our quenching results for the loop 160 mutants
agrees with recent double electron–electron resonance spectroscopy
results that show an increased plasticity in the 160 loop region upon
binding rhodopsin.

These data were
also subjected to statistical analysis. The results
of a two-way (dose × mutant) ANOVA reveals no dose × mutant
interaction (F values of &lt;1), thus allowing a
comparison of the 2 and 5 μM data. Post hoc analysis of these
data was then conducted to compare the effect of the Trp arrestin
mutants with the control, arrestin mutant R175E. The significant results
identified by this analysis (*p &lt; 0.05; **p &lt; 0.001) are indicated in Figure .

Our operational assumption is that the binding of opsin by
arrestin
in these experiments is at (or near) saturating levels, because experiments
using both 2 and 5 μM arrestin show almost identical results
(Figure a,b). Unfortunately, we were not able
to increase the arrestin concentration in the reaction mix above 5
μM, without some precipitation of the protein. Thus, we took
care to ensure our analysis does not depend on whether we are at 100%
saturation and instead focuses on the instances of substantial quenching.

All of the Arrestin Trp Mutants Can Bind to the Bimane-Labeled
Opsin Samples to Some Degree
The positive results (cases
that exhibit measurable fluorescence quenching upon arrestin addition)
are straightforward to interpret; they indicate that the Trp and bimane
are in the proximity of each other. However, a lack of quenching cannot
be reliably interpreted as a lack of Trp–bimane proximity,
unless it is certain the arrestin mutants have actually bound to the
receptor.

Thus, we next tested if the arrestin Trp mutants could
bind to the bimane-labeled opsins. Our approach was to measure their
ability to block G protein activation., These experiments
used Gt purified from bovine retina (Figure S4 of the ) and a well-established
G protein activation assay, based on [35S]GTPγS incorporation. Importantly, the results from these studies
can be directly compared to those of the quenching experiments described
above, as they used identical buffers and receptor and arrestin concentrations.

Opsin T242B could bind all the arrestin Trp mutants tested to some
degree, as indicated by their inhibition of Gt activation
(Figure c). The arrestin mutants with Trp
residues in the 160 loop clearly inhibited transducin activation to
an extent (80–90%) larger than that of the finger loop mutants
(∼50%), perhaps because of a lowered affinity for the latter.
It is possible that a “weaker” interaction with the
finger loop Trp mutants and T242B could contribute to some of the
lack of quenching by these mutants. For opsin T243B, essentially all
of the arrestin Trp mutants could bind at roughly the same level,
as judged by their ability to inhibit the incorporation of [35S]GTPγS into purified transducin [greater than ∼80%
(Figure d)]. Taken together, these data, although
noisy (because of the weakened ability of these opsin mutants to activate
transducin and the absence of the agonist,
all-trans-retinal), suggest that all the arrestin
Trp mutants can bind to the receptor to some degree.

The Arrestin
160 Loop Makes Direct Physical Contact with the
Base of TM6 in Opsin, As Indicated by the Presence of Static Quenching
in the TrIQ Data Analysis
The steady-state TrIQ data (described
above) indicate the relative proximity between several sites on arrestin
and the bimane-labeled sites on opsin, but they do not explicitly
prove the two sites are in direct contact with each other. To better
define the proximity of the Trp to the bimane fluorophore, we analyzed
the TrIQ data to classify and quantify the types of fluorescence quenching
occurring in each case. The goal was
to identify instances of static quenching, which occurs when a fluorophore
and quencher are in physical contact with each other, before (or during)
light activation.

Identifying instances of static quenching
in a sample requires analysis of both its steady-state fluorescence
intensities and its fluorescence decay rates. Thus, we measured the
fluorescence lifetimes of the labeled opsin samples in the absence
and presence of bound arrestin Trp mutants, using the exact same samples
and conditions used for the steady-state fluorescence and G protein
activation measurements in Figures  and a,b. The lifetime data were fit to a three-exponential
decay (Figure S5 of the ), and these values were then used to calculate the amplitude-weighted
lifetime, ⟨τ⟩ (Tables S2 and S3 of the ). These ⟨τ⟩
values, in combination with the steady-state fluorescence quenching
data, were then used to determine the fraction of dynamic and static
quenching for the fluorophore–quencher pairs, as previously
described.

These analyses show
that for opsin T242B, the majority of the arrestin
160 loop Trp mutants exhibit some static quenching (Figure b). Given the high time resolution (&lt;50 ps) of
our lifetime instrument, these data indicate that some fraction (as
much as ∼20% in the case of arrestin E161W) of these bimane–Trp
pairs is either in contact with each other before (or within 50 ps
of) the moment of light excitation. In contrast, for opsin T243B,
the majority of quenching by the finger loop Trp residues appears
to be dynamic in nature.

TrIQ analysis indicates the arrestin finger
loop and 160 loop can
interact with the base of TM6 in opsin. (a) Schematic illustration
of the concept of static vs dynamic quenching of fluorescence. As
shown, analysis of steady-state quenching and fluorescence lifetime
data can be used to identify sites of “static quenching”,
i.e., sites of direct contact between the fluorophore and Trp that
occur before (or during) light activation. (b) Results from analysis
of the steady-state and fluorescence lifetime TrIQ data. The presence
of static quenching in the results (blue component in bars) indicates
where the Trp residues are making direct contact with the bimane fluorophore
on opsin T242B. (c) The same analysis indicates that the arrestin
finger loop also interacts with the base of the helix, as seen by
the strong quenching of T243B fluorescence, and weaker quenching at
other sites.

Discussion
Displacement
of TM6 is a key structural change that occurs during
rhodopsin activation., This movement exposes an interhelical
cavity, or cleft, that allows the C-terminal tail of the G protein
Gα subunit to make critical contacts with a “hydrophobic
patch” consisting of residues on the inner face of rhodopsin
TM5.,,, Here, we present evidence that suggests this same
cleft and “hydrophobic patch” play a similar role in
permitting arrestin binding. Through use of the TrIQ fluorescence
method, we then identified two distinct parts of arrestin that are
near or in contact with the base of TM6, the finger loop and the 160
loop. Insights gained from our results are discussed below.

Arrestin Uses
Part of the Same Binding Site on Rhodopsin as
the Gtα C-Terminal Tail
We first tested
if arrestin and transducin share part of the same binding site on
TM6 of rhodopsin, by seeing if a peptide corresponding to the C-terminal
tail of the transducin Gtα subunit (Gtα peptide) could compete with and block arrestin binding. Indeed,
this was observed: the Gtα peptide substantially
blocks the binding of arrestin R175Q (a constitutively active arrestin
mutant) to light-activated rhodopsin in a pull-down experiment (Figure b). This result suggests that arrestin uses at least
part of the same binding site on rhodopsin as the Gtα C-terminal tail.

Interestingly, we find the Gtα peptide is less able to block the binding of arrestin to the light-activated,
phosphorylated rhodopsin [RP* (Figure b)],
indicating that only part of the binding affinity is provided by interaction
with this region on rhodopsin. Binding of arrestin to RP* has been
proposed to involve a multisite interaction between the two proteins
and a strong affinity of arrestin for RP*, and our data are consistent with this model. Note that the inability
of arrestin to bind in the presence of the Gtα peptide
is unlikely to be a result of any significant structural change in
the receptor caused by the peptide, because structures of metarhodopsin
II with and without the peptide are very similar, with a root-mean-square deviation (rmsd) of 0.27 Å
for all-atom alignment.

Arrestin was also less able to bind
and trap retinal in rhodopsin
“hydrophobic patch” mutants L226A and V230A (Figure c), suggesting that arrestin, like the Gtα tail peptide, requires interactions with this region on TM5 of rhodopsin
to bind. A similar impairment of the ability of these rhodopsin mutants
to activate transducin was previously observed, because of the resulting
∼3 kcal/mol lower affinity for the Gtα tail
peptide caused by the alanine substitutions in the “hydrophobic
patch”. Together, these two lines
of evidence suggest that arrestin and the Gtα C-terminal
peptide share a common but not necessarily identical binding site
on rhodopsin and that at least some of the arrestin binding affinity
may similarly require interaction with the “hydrophobic patch”.

The Arrestin Finger Loop and 160 Loop Bind Close to the “Hydrophobic
Patch” on the Base of Opsin TM6
To better localize
the interactions mentioned above, we next tried to identify specific
sites of interaction between arrestin and opsin, near where the Gtα peptide is known to bind. We used a constitutively
active mutant of rhodopsin, M257Y,− and a constitutively
active arrestin (R175E) to conduct these studies in the absence of
light-sensitive retinal. Although the use of constitutively active
mutants for both proteins could conceivably affect some interaction
between the two proteins, we propose that the fundamental contacts
are still maintained, given the relatively high binding affinity we
observe, and the fact that M257Y opsin and active opsin both have
been shown to bind a high-affinity peptide corresponding to the C-terminus
of Gtα in the same way. Our approach used the TrIQ fluorescence method, with which we sought
to identify quenching of fluorescence labels on M257Y opsin upon binding
by arrestin mutants containing strategically placed Trp residues.
We have previously established that TrIQ can detect interactions between
a fluorophore and the quenching tryptophan in the 5–15 Å
distance range., Here, our goal was to use distance
constraints obtained from our mapping studies to model the physical
interaction between arrestin and opsin based on the pattern of site-specific
quenching observed.

The two regions on arrestin that we tested,
the finger loop and the 160 loop (see Figure d), displayed different quenching profiles for the probes on TM6
of opsin. No fluorescence quenching by the arrestin finger loop Trp
mutants was seen for opsin T242B, suggesting a lack of proximity between
these two sites (Figure a). However, one caveat
about this specific subset of our data must be noted: the finger loop
arrestin Trp mutants also showed less ability to block G protein activation
by opsin T242B (Figure c), and this might
be because they were not bound to the receptor at saturating levels.
In fact, this might be expected if there is some steric clash at the
interaction interface between the finger loop Trp residues on arrestin
and the bimane attached to the receptor at the interaction interface,
lowering binding affinity. Nevertheless, these mutants do still show
statistically significant (∼50%) impairment of transducin activation
by opsin T242B; thus, one would have expected to see some change in
fluorescence if they were sufficiently close to cause considerable
TrIQ. In contrast, two of the Trp residues in the finger loop of arrestin
(Y67W and F79W) appear to be close to position 243, as indicated by
the substantial quenching observed, whereas Trp residue I72W shows
no quenching (Figures  and b). This is understandable from a structural standpoint, as
both Y67 and F79 are nearby, at the base of the loop, in the arrestin
crystal structure, while I72 is farther away (Figure S8 of the ). These data provide a
clear example of site-specific TrIQ.

Interpreting the data from
the arrestin 160 loop Trp mutants is
more straightforward. All of these mutants appear to bind both opsin
T242B and opsin T243B, as shown by their ability to inhibit opsin-mediated
activation of transducin to some degree. Thus, when fluorescence quenching
is not observed for one of these mutants, it is reasonable to conclude
the result is due to a lack of proximity between the Trp and bimane,
and not to a lack of binding. However, we note that because some of
the arrestin Trp mutants fail to entirely block G protein activation,
we have based our conclusions and modeling of the arrestin–rhodopsin
interface only on the results that clearly showed significant fluorescence
quenching.

The 160 loop mutants also showed an interesting pattern
of quenching,
with the maximal TrIQ effect seen for Trp at positions 160 and 161
(Figure b). In fact, when we calculate the
fraction of quenching due to static interactions, we present clear
evidence that several residues in the 160 loop are able to physically
contact the fluorescent probe at T242B. Recall that the presence of
static quenching indicates that a quencher–probe pair is in
a nonfluorescent complex on the time scale of light excitation, in
our case ∼50 ps. Overall, the results suggest that arrestin
binding places the finger loop and the 160 loop near positions 242
and 243 on TM6 of opsin.

Comparison of These Data with Those of Other
Studies and Possible
Implications
Gurevich and Benovic have proposed the presence
of at least one “activation recognition” domain each
within the segment of residues 16–145 and between residues
145 and 191 of arrestin. Because receptor
activation exposes the TM5–TM6 cytosolic face, which contains
T242 and T243, it is possible that the two sites we have studied,
the finger loop (residues 67–79) and the 160 loop (residues
155–165), might be two of the proposed activation recognition
domains. Thus, the involvement of the arrestin finger loop is not
surprising, given the various lines of evidence pointing to its role
in receptor binding.,,,,,,,, We also note that during revision
of this manuscript, a paper appeared with a similar conclusion, based
on extensive arrestin mutagenesis and modeling.

However, our observation that the 160 loop of arrestin
makes direct contact with rhodopsin was not anticipated, as it has
not previously been strongly implicated in binding. There are, however,
several clues suggesting it may be involved, including observations
that a peptide corresponding to residues 151–170 of this region
inhibits the binding of arrestin to metarhodopsin II, and the fact that binding of an anti-Myc antibody to a
c-Myc tag inserted into this loop abolishes the binding of arrestin
to RP*. We also note that even if the
binding affinity of the 160 loop is enhanced by the introduction of
hydrophobic Trp residues, our results still indicate that this region
of arrestin has access to, and can bind, these sites on opsin.

Interestingly, the sequence of the 160 loop falls into a category
of polypeptides, termed chameleons, that are thought to have a context-dependent
structure, indicating a possible functional role., Consistent with this, there is considerable structural plasticity
for the 160 loop in different crystal isoforms of arrestin, and recent
double electron–electron resonance (DEER) EPR studies also
find considerable plasticity in the 160 loop upon the binding of rhodopsin. Other EPR studies looking at the mobility of
a spin-label probe at residue T157 of arrestin found a slight loss
of mobility of the probe upon the binding of phosphorylated rhodopsin. This is consistent with our result, because
although we see some quenching of fluorescence by T157W, it is not
very strong, possibly indicating that this site is not juxtaposed
at the binding interface.

Possible Models of the Arrestin–Rhodopsin
Interaction
Our experiments were designed to map the arrestin–rhodopsin
binding interface and use the distance and orientation constraints
obtained from TrIQ measurements to model this interaction. However,
modeling the arrestin–rhodopsin interaction is challenging
because of the extremely flexible nature of the arrestin loops. In
fact, the same loop may even adopt a number of different conformations
upon binding to rhodopsin. Such ambiguity
mandates that any model of the arrestin–rhodopsin binding interface
based on presently available data will inherently be suggestive at
best. With these caveats in mind, and assuming there are no large-scale
rearrangements of arrestin or rhodopsin, below we discuss our structural
models of the arrestin–rhodopsin binding interface generated
from analysis of our current data.

Finger Loop Binding Mode
The most likely mode of binding
involves the finger loop docking into the cleft exposed in the rhodopsin
cytoplasmic face upon receptor activation and TM6 movement, as shown
in Figure A. This model is consistent with
other data suggesting the importance of this region in arrestin for
binding, as well as our current data, in which we see arrestin binding
is impaired by Gtα peptide binding (Figure b) and mutations in the “hydrophobic patch”
(Figure c and ). Such a binding orientation could also provide
favorable contacts between the numerous hydrophobic residues on the
tip of the arrestin finger loop (I72, V74, and M75) and the “hydrophobic
patch” residues on the inner face of rhodopsin TM5 [L226 and
V230 (shown as gray spheres in Figure A)].
Interestingly, this docking model also places a number of other hydrophobic
residues on the arrestin finger loop (V74, M75, and L77) in direct
contact with a string of hydrophobic residues on the inner face of
rhodopsin TM6 (A246, V250, and M253), suggesting this region may act
as a previously unanticipated “hydrophobic patch” specific
for arrestin. We propose this arrangement likely reflects the “high-affinity”
arrestin binding mode.

Possible arrestin–rhodopsin binding models. On
rhodopsin
(orange), the sites where the fluorophore bimane was attached on TM6
are shown as green spheres, and the sites of the “hydrophobic
patch” residues on TM5 are shown as gray spheres. On arrestin
(gray), the sites where Trp residues were introduced into the arrestin
finger loop are indicated with red spheres and in the 160 loops with
blue spheres. The spheres reflect the Cα position
sites for rhodopsin and Cβ position sites for arrestin.
(a) Model of the arrestin finger loop binding to the cleft in the
rhodopsin cytoplasmic face, near the “hydrophobic patch”.
Note that with some rearrangement of rhodopsin loops, this docking
mode can also accommodate the finger loop adopting an α-helix,
as has been proposed from NMR studies, as shown in Figure S10 of the . (b) Model of the arrestin 160 loop binding to the cleft in rhodopsin.
Interestingly, although binding orientation a or b is consistent with
the biochemical data reported here, neither orientation can by itself
explain all of the TrIQ data shown in Figures  and . One possibility is that the TrIQ data
reflect heterogeneous binding (binding in which both modes a and b
occur simultaneously to different receptors). Alternatively, the TrIQ
data can also be interpreted to reflect the binding of arrestin to
a rhodopsin dimer. One possibility is shown in panel c, which illustrates
that a rhodopsin dimer with a TM1/TM4/H8 interface satisfies the same
individual arrestin–rhodopsin orientations shown in panels
a and b. Interestingly, it is also possible to satisfy the TrIQ data
using a model in which arrestin binds to a rhodopsin dimer with a
TM4/TM5 interface, as shown in panel d. Other models involving large
structural changes cannot be ruled out. Models for M257Y opsin (PDB
entry 4A4M,
chain A) and arrestin (PDB entry 4J2Q, chain B) were generated using Chimera.
Further details are provided in the text. Space-filling representations
of each model are provided as insets in the bottom left corner of
each panel.

Docking of the finger
loop into the cleft is also consistent with
our TrIQ data, as it models the Trp residues introduced on the edge
of the arrestin finger loop (Y67W and F79W) to have access to (and
thus be able to quench) the bimane probe at position 243 of rhodopsin.

The 160 Loop Binding Mode
Our data are also consistent
with an unexpected, alternate binding mode, in which the arrestin
160 loop docks into the cleft. As shown in Figure B, such an orientation is sterically allowed and would also
satisfy the TrIQ results. We note that the TrIQ data clearly show
a number of Trp residues in the 160 loop form static quenching complexes
with the bimane probe at site 242 on opsin, indicating direct contact
between two molecules. This was initially surprising, because it is
hard to imagine a single 160 loop conformation that could make this
possible for all of the different Trp residues. However, this anomaly
could be explained if the 160 loop adopts more than one conformation
upon binding opsin, as has been suggested by recent EPR studies. Thus, we stress that the model shown in Figure B is only suggestive at present (given the highly
variable structure for the 160 loop) and is unlikely to reflect a
high-affinity binding mode.

Evidence That Arrestin
Uses Heterogeneous Binding Modes and/or
Binds to Rhodopsin Dimers
Either binding mode discussed above
is plausible and consistent with the data presented here. However,
together they present a conundrum, as neither model allows for an
orientation of arrestin in which the Trp residues on the finger loop
and 160 loop can both access and quench the bimane probes at positions
242 and 243 on opsin at the same time.

In either model, one
set of the Trp quenchers is too far away (almost 30 Å apart)
to be optimal for the TrIQ results we see here. More importantly,
the orientations involved do not allow equal access for both sets
of Trp residues to quench the bimane probes. Although arrestin has
been proposed to undergo a significant conformational rearrangement,
none of the changes indicated by recent structural data produce movements
large enough to allow both the finger loop and 160 loop in arrestin
to be in the proximity,,,, as would be required for our data. Thus,
our TrIQ data cannot be readily explained by the exclusive use of
only one of the monomeric binding models presented above.

There
are several intriguing possible interpretations of our data.
One is that arrestin binding is heterogeneous; that is, some fraction
of the arrestin binds in one orientation and the other in the alternate
(for example, panels a and b of Figure ).
In other words, there is a mixed population of receptors in which
some arrestin is bound with the finger loop placed inside the cleft
in rhodopsin, near the base of TM6, and others with arrestins having
the 160 loop positioned into this cleft. We note there is mounting
evidence supporting this possibility.,

An alternate
possibility is that the data reflect the binding of
arrestin to dimers of rhodopsin. We find arrestin can be docked to
a rhodopsin dimer in such a way that both sets of TrIQ data can be
simultaneously satisfied, if it straddles a dimer in which two rhodopsin
molecules are facing each other at their TM1 and TM4 helices, with
the H8 forms next to each other in an antiparallel fashion (Figure c). With such an arrangement, the probes at positions
242 and 243 on TM6 could simultaneously be quenched by the Trp residues
on the arrestin finger loop and the 160 loop. This suggestion is consistent
with existing experimental evidence that arrestin can bind to opsin
dimers. Moreover, multiple techniques
(EM, cross-linking, and crystallography) have suggested a TM1/4 dimer
is indeed a biologically significant oligomeric state.,, Intriguingly, we also found that
both sets of TrIQ data could be satisfied when arrestin is modeled
straddling a rhodopsin dimer with a TM4/5 interface (Figure d), an orientation for which there is also significant
evidence for both rhodopsin,, and other GPCRs.,

In summary, we provide
models consistent with our data in which
arrestin binding utilizes the same crevice exposed on rhodopsin activation
as does transducin, and we propose that at least part of this binding
requires interaction with a “hydrophobic patch” on TM5,
and perhaps a second such patch on TM6. Moreover, using the TrIQ approach,
we have identified two sites on TM6 of rhodopsin near this crevice
that make contact with two sites on arrestin, the finger loop and
the 160 loop.

As discussed above, because it is not clear how
the two extreme
ends of the N-domain separated by almost 30 Å could interact
with or lie near the same site on rhodopsin, we propose that our data
reflect the fact that arrestin binds in different orientations, binds
to rhodopsin dimers, or binds in both possible ways. We currently
cannot rule out any of these models, based on the data presented here,
nor can we rule out the possibility that some large-scale structural
change occurs in both proteins upon binding that would allow the quenching
we report here. More work is needed to identify other sites of contact
to better triangulate and refine the models, and to test the idea
of monomeric versus dimeric interactions.

However, although
more sets of interacting pairs between the two
proteins will be required to determine the exact mode(s) of arrestin–rhodopsin
interaction, our studies described here do provide preliminary structural
constraints that can be used to design further experiments and begin
modeling the arrestin–rhodopsin interaction. We also note we
have identified conditions under which arrestin can bind ligand free
M257Y opsin and in so doing form a stable, long-lasting complex (Figure
S9 of the ). These
mutants and conditions may prove to be useful for forming complexes
that are stable enough for cocrystallization or electron microscopy
studies.

Finally, we are hopeful that our use of TrIQ to map
protein–protein
interaction sites can be adapted to other systems. With further refinement
and calibration, the general approach we outline here (defining sites
of contact between proteins by analyzing fluorescence lifetime and
steady-state fluorescence quenching data) should prove to be applicable
to the analysis of other interacting proteins.

Supporting Information Available
Spectra for the retinal trapping
experiments, the determination of free label in TrIQ experiments,
an SDS–PAGE analysis of the G protein transducin purification,
an example of the how a peptide corresponding to the Gtα C-terminal tail inhibits the TrIQ observed upon arrestin binding,
alternate models for the arrestin–rhodopsin interaction, including
one in which the finger loop of arrestin takes a helical conformation,
and fluorescence quenching ratios as well as lifetimes for each Trp-containing
arrestin and bimane-labeled opsin pair (tables). This material is
available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi401534y_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
† A.S. and
A.M.J.B. contributed equally to the final aspects of this
work.

This work was
supported by National Institutes of Health Grant R01 EY015436 (D.L.F.)
and Training Grants 5T32GM071338 (A.M.J.B.) and 1T32EY023211 and 5T32GM071338-08
(C.T.S.).

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank the late Dr. Kevin Ridge (University
of Texas, Houston,
TX) for providing the initial arrestin plasmid and Dr. Ujwal Shinde
for thoughtful discussions and suggestions.

Abbreviations
TMtransmembrane helix

TrIQtryptophan-induced quenching

mBBrmonobromobimane

GPCRG protein-coupled
receptor

ROSrod
outer segment

Rrhodopsin

R*light-activated
rhodopsin

RPphosphorylated
rhodopsin

RP*light-activated,
phosphorylated rhodopsin

GTPguanosine triphosphate

GTPγSguanosine 5′-O-(3-thiotriphosphate)

Gttransducin

Gtαtransducin Gα subunit

DOPA1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphate

DOPS1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-l-serine

DMn-dodecyl β-d-maltoside

PDBProtein Data Bank.

