The Eph receptors
play an important
role in developmental processes including cell migration and axonal
guidance. This group of receptors is the
largest of the receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) family. The RTKs can
be activated through the binding of extracellular ligands. In the
case of Eph receptors, there are two classes of receptors, A and B,
which mainly interact with the ligands ephrin A and B, respectively;
cross-interactions between EphA receptors and ephrins B have also
been reported., The binding of ligand leads to
the creation of receptor oligomers (dimers and/or higher order oligomers). There is also growing evidence that RTKs also
form (inactive) dimers in the absence of ligands. This preformed and
inactive dimeric configuration has been discussed for several RTKs,, including the EGFR and FGFR, and has sometimes been referred to as a pre-dimerization
state. For EphA2, data also support ligand-independent
clustering of the receptor., Furthermore, it has
been postulated that Eph receptor dimers can switch between active
and inactive configurations through a rotation coupling activation
mechanism,, and indeed recent mutational
experiments highlighted more or less activated forms of the dimer
compared to the wild-type EphA2 receptor in both ligand-dependent
and -independent configurations. Taken
together, these studies emphasize the importance of a better understanding
of how EphA2 and related receptors may adopt alternative dimeric configurations
and of how they may pass from one dimeric configuration to another.

The structure of Eph receptors is typical for RTKs. It is composed
of an extracellular region that interacts with ephrin ligands, and an intracellular region containing a juxtamembrane region, a
tyrosine kinase domain, and a steril-alpha motif (SAM) domain, often
followed by a PDZ binding motif. The two regions are linked by a transmembrane
(TM) helix. This TM helix plays a role in the dimerization of the
Eph receptor,,, a feature shared by numerous receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs). Several studies have emphasized the role of
the TM helix dimer and changes in its packing mode in signaling by
RTKs including EGFR, and FGFR3, in addition to other cellular receptors including the insulin receptor. In
particular, recent mutational studies of the closely related EphA2
receptor have suggested that switching of the TM helix dimer between
two packing modes is a possible mechanism underlying EphA2 signal
transduction. Given that association
of TM helix domains− is central to RTK signaling, understanding the nature
of TM helix association is a necessary component of understanding
mechanisms of signaling.

Structures
of EphA1 and of EphA2 TM helix dimers in phospholipid
bicelles have been determined using NMR., The EphA1 TM domain forms a right-handed helix dimer interacting
via an N-terminal glycine zipper motif (A550X3G554X3G558; see also the sequence in Figure ). The importance
of the Small-X3-Small motif was highlighted more than 20
years ago in growth factor receptors. It is the main interaction motif of the first NMR structure determined
for a TM helix dimer (in glycophorin A) and has since been studied and identified in numerous TM domains. Although there is a high frequency of glycine
and small residues in the 58 TM helix sequences of the human RTKs, direct conservation of a common interaction
motif is not apparent. This diversity may reflect differences in local
structure of the TM domains and/or different modes of activation for
each RTK. Thus, the interaction through the Small-X3-Small
motif is not the only mode of association available to TM domains. Indeed, the EphA2 TM domain has been shown to
dimerize via a heptad repeat motif. On
this basis, it has been suggested that changes in helix packing mode
may underlying signaling mechanisms by EphA and related receptors,
with interactions via different motifs corresponding to active and
inactive states of the receptor.

A number of experimental techniques exist for measuring association
of TM helices, including TOXCAT and related
assays,, biophysical approaches including FRET, and analytical ultracentrifugation., Computational methods (including molecular dynamics (MD) or Monte
Carlo (MC) simulations) provide a complementary approach for exploring
the energy landscapes for association of TM helix dimers and have
been applied to model systems such as the TM domain of glycophorin
A.− Simulation approaches have more recently been applied to studying
TM helix dimers from RTKs such as ErbB., Polyansky
et al. have suggested a modeling framework to predict and analyze
TM dimer interaction in which MD simulations and potential of mean
force (PMF) calculations play a central role. A number of these studies have employed coarse-grained (CG) models, and have shown that CG models yield similar free energies of dimerization
to those from more detailed atomistic simulations of the well-studied
glycophorin A TM helix dimer (compare, e.g., refs () and ()). Recent studies of, e.g.,
the integrin TM helix dimer, glycophorin
A, and the protein adaptor DAP12 have shown that by combining CG and atomistic
simulations a detailed view of the nature of helix/helix interactions
in TM helix dimers may be obtained.

In this study, we explore
the EphA1 TM domains using MD simulations
in order to gain insights into their mechanism of dimerization and
how it may effect the activation of the receptor. There have been
a number of MD studies of the dimerization of EphA1 receptor TM domain.,,, Here, we have used CG MD simulations to calculate a one-dimensional
free energy landscape for the association of the EphA1 TM domain in
a phospholipid bilayer. This suggests two metastable states for this
system, consistent with recent results for other RTKs and with models
of the activation mechanism involving alternative packing modes of
the TM helices. We have used unrestrained MD simulations to compare
representative models from the free energy calculations with the NMR
structure of the dimer. These simulations suggest a pathway for interconversion
of the two packing modes via rotation of the TM helices, which, in
turn, may provide a pathway to link a potential inactivate configuration
to the activated state of the receptor. Atomistic simulations of representative
structures from the CG energy landscape allow refinement of these
models and provide a more detailed description of the underlying helix–helix
interactions.

Methods
Unrestrained CG Simulations
Starting from the NMR Structure
The NMR structure of the
EphA1 dimer (PDB ID: 2K1K) was converted into a CG model. Titratable
amino acids were
in their default ionization states. The CG force field used was a
local modification, of the widely employed MARTINI
force field., A harmonic restraint was applied
to backbone particles to mimic secondary structure stabilizing hydrogen
bonds, with an equilibrium bond length of 0.6 nm and a force constant
of 1000 kJ/mol/nm2. We then added 269 DPPC (or DLPC) lipids,
water molecules, and counterions using the self-assembly method., After an initial 5000 steps of steepest descent energy minimization,
the simulation was run for 100 ns to allow the lipids to self-assemble
around the protein. All simulations were performed using GROMACS (http://www.gromacs.org/). A Berendsen
thermostat was used with a coupling constant of 1.0 ps. The reference
temperature was 323 K. Electrostatic interactions utilized a relative
dielectric constant of 20. Lennard–Jones and electrostatic
interactions were shifted to zero between 0.9 and 1.2 nm and 0 and
1.2 nm, respectively. A Berendsen barostat with a coupling constant
of 1.0 ps, a compressibility value of 5.0 × 10–6 bar–1, and a reference pressure of 1 bar was used.
The integration time step was 10 fs.

PMF Calculations
As described above, we performed CG
MD simulations to yield a structure of the EphA1 dimer. This structure
was subsequently used as a starting point for PMF calculations. Thus,
we initially ran a 200 ns CG MD simulation during which 271 DPPC lipids
were allowed to self-assemble to form a bilayer around a pair of restrained
TM helices (aligned with their long axes parallel to the z axis and separated by 7 nm). Titratable amino acids were in their
default ionization states. Five 1.5 μs simulations were subsequently
performed with these helices unrestrained, yielding dimers interacting
through their glycine zipper motifs. One such dimer was then used
as a starting point for PMF calculations, increasing the separation
of the centers of mass of the glycine zipper motifs as the PMF reaction
coordinate.

The PMF was calculated using the umbrella sampling
technique. Twenty-four independent simulations,
each of 7.5 μs in duration, were run for the PMF calculation,
i.e., the simulations corresponding to the 24 windows were run such
that the initial configuration of one simulation did not depend on
the outcome of the preceding simulation. Each independent simulation
corresponds to a different separation distance of the center of mass
of the glycine zipper motifs on each helix. The time step was 40 fs,
and the reference temperature was 323 K. The starting structure for
each window in a given calculation was the same. The center of mass
of the chosen motif was restrained along both axes in the plane of
the bilayer. The restraint was harmonic with a force constant of 1000
kJ/mol/nm2. In one axis (y), the restraint
was centered around zero separation in each window. Along the other
axis (x), the center of the restraint varied from
0.4 to 2.7 nm, in 0.1 nm intervals. The restraints were applied to
the chosen motifs of the starting structure at the beginning of the
simulation; the helices moved rapidly (within 5 ns) to the vicinity
of the center point of restraint for all windows. It is important
to note that the separation of the two helices, i.e., the starting
point to launch each simulation is set independently of the other
adjacent simulations. Thus, during each simulation, there is directional
increment in the initial separation: there is only a constraint on
the distance between the two helices. To estimate the convergence
of the system, we have used the approach of Yang et al. Then, the PMF profile was calculated using the
weighted histogram analysis method (WHAM) as implemented by Grossfield (http://membrane.urmc.rochester.edu/content/wham/, version 2.0.9), and errors were estimated using the uncorrelated
data (see , text
and Figure S1). For unrestrained CG simulations, we used either systems
extracted from the (restrained) PMF simulations or CG models derived
from the NMR structure.

Structure Selection for AT Simulations
From
NMR Structures in DPPC Bilayer
We performed clustering
on all of the trajectories using the g_cluster tool with a cutoff
of 0.2 nm. This analysis revealed 2 different configurations. The
major cluster (representing 95% of the ensemble of trajectories) corresponded
to the helices interacting via the glycine motif. The representative
structure for this cluster was extracted from run 4 based on the NMR
structure. The second cluster represents only 3% of the whole population
and defined an intermediate state between States 1 and 2 (see  below for the definition of these states).
This structure was characterized by a glycine zipper distance around
0.9 nm and a crossing angle around −10°.

From PMF
Structures
We have extracted the last frame
from one run of the CG simulation to depict State 1 (see ). This structure
had a crossing angle around −20°, and the glycine zipper
distance was around 0.5 nm. For State 2, we selected the most representative
structure from the unrestrained simulation with a crossing angle based
on a structure centered around −5°. This structure has
a glycine zipper distance around 1.2 nm.

AT Simulation Details
The conversion from CG models
to AT representations was as described previously. This method uses a fragment-based protocol to convert CG
protein and lipid molecules. Water and counterions molecules were
added to equilibrate the systems. For each converted system, a 5000
step steepest descent minimization was performed followed by an equilibration
phase. For this equilibration, we gradually decreased the restraints
on the protein backbone, passing from a constant of 1000 to 250 kJ/mol/nm2 in 4 ns. We then completely removed restraints to run production
simulations for a duration of 50 to 70 ns, depending of the system.
The simulations were performed using the GROMOS96 43a1 force field.
Long-range electrostatic were modeled up to 0.1 nm using the particle
mesh Ewald (PME) method. The same cutoff
distance was used to model van der Waals interaction. The reference
temperature was 323 K. All simulations were performed at constant
temperature, pressure, and particle number using semi-isotropic pressure
coupling with the Parinello–Rahman barostat and the V-rescale thermostat. The integration time step was 2 fs. We also created a system with
a single EphA1 TM helix in a DPPC bilayer using as a starting point
a CG model of ideal α-helix embedded in the bilayer using the
self-assembly methodology described before. This was then converted
to an AT representation and used to launch a 1.2 μs simulation.

Analysis
Representative structures of the dimer were
obtained using the g_cluster tool. Contact analysis was performed
on simulations that corresponded to low-energy states on the relevant
PMF profiles. The fraction of the simulation for which each residue
was in the closest 5 residues to its partner on the opposing helix
was calculated. Crossing angles, interhelix distances, and residue
contact calculations were performed using locally written code. Structure visualization and some analysis were
also performed using VMD.

Results
Stability
of a Single EphA1 Transmembrane Helix
To
avoid biasing our simulation by using the structure of an EphA1 helix
extracted from the NMR dimer structure (PDB ID: 2K1K), we instead used
an ideal α-helix model to depict the TM domain. To evaluate
the stability of this structure, we performed a long (1.2 μs)
AT simulation of the single helix inserted in a DPPC bilayer. Using
the do_dssp utility from GROMACS, we analyzed the
secondary structure of the TM domain as a function of time (see ). For the first
0.3 μs, the α-helix was stable (apart from the two extremities
switching between helix and coil). Subsequently, we observed transient
changes in helicity, but overall the secondary structure of the TM
domain stayed stable throughout the simulation. These transient changes
may reflect limitations of the force field, as revealed in long simulations. Due to the relative simplicity of the CG model,
we considered that an ideal α-helix was a good starting model
for the EphA1 TM domains to be used in our subsequent PMF calculations.

A Free Energy Landscape for Helix–Helix Interactions
To understand the free energy landscape for helix–helix
interactions within a EphA1 TM helix dimer, we undertook potential
of mean force (PMF) calculations based on a reaction coordinate corresponding
to interhelix separation. These were aimed to provide a (one-dimensional)
profile of the free energy of interaction of a pair of parallel EphA1
TM helices in a lipid bilayer as a function of the interhelix separation.
As a prelude to these calculations, we performed five simulations
(each of 1.5 μs duration) starting from two parallel EphA1 TM
helices inserted initially 7 nm apart in a CG bilayer containing 271
DPPC molecules. A dimer was formed in each of these five self-assembly
simulation within 20–800 ns. In four of the five simulations,
the helices interacted via their N-terminal glycine zipper motifs
(i.e., A550X3G554X3G558), as is the case in the NMR structure. (One self-assembly
simulation did not yield a stable dimer.)

On the basis of the
self-assembly simulations, we used a TM dimer in which the helices
interacted via the N-terminal glycine zipper motif as the starting
point for the PMF calculation. In these calculations, we progressively
moved the two helices apart, using the separation of the centers of
mass of their glycine zipper motifs as the PMF reaction coordinate.
These configurations were used as starting points to launch 24 independent
simulations, each of 7.5 μs in duration, with each corresponding
to a glycine zipper separation window of width 0.1 nm with the reaction
coordinate ranging from 0.4 to 2.7 nm (Figure A). The profile shows
a globally stable state at a glycine zipper separation of 0.5 nm,
which we will refer as State 1. The profile also shows a metastable
state at a glycine zipper separation of 1.2 nm, which we will call
State 2. Cluster analysis was used to produce a representative structure
of each state. In the State 1 structure, the glycine zippers pack
against one another (Figure B). In contrast,
in State 2, the glycine zipper motifs face away from each other. Thus,
State 1 is similar to the NMR structure of the EphA1 TM dimer. In State 2 (Figure C),
the helix–helix interactions are predominantly via residues
T544, A559, L563, and V567. Thus, the one-dimensional free energy landscape suggests at least
two possible modes of interaction of the TM helices within an EphA1
TM helix dimer.

(A) PMF profile for the EphA1 TM helix dimer. The reaction
coordinate
is the separation of the centers of mass of the glycine zipper motifs.
A stable minimum is seen at a glycine zipper separation of 0.5 nm
(State 1), corresponding to the NMR configuration. A metastable state
is seen at a glycine zipper separation of 1.2 nm (State 2). The error
estimation of the PMF profile (red curve) is superimposed in orange.
Above the PMF profile, the sequence of the EphA1 TM domain, from G542 to R572, is shown, with residues forming the
glycine zipper in red and additional residues involved in the dimer
interaction presented in (B) and (C) in orange. (B, C) The EphA1 TM
helix, in CG representation, with particles colored according to the
fraction of the simulation for which the particle was one of the closest
five particles to its corresponding particle on the other helix for
the simulation windows corresponding to (B) State 1 and (C) State
2. Red corresponds to a particle that was one of the closest five
particles to its corresponding particle on the other helix for the
whole simulation; white corresponds to a particle that was never one
of the closest five particles to its equivalent particle on the other
helix.

To help understand the differences
between the two states, we analyzed
helix crossing angles and the structural dynamics of the two restrained
dimer simulations (Figure ), i.e., of the
two 7.5 μs simulation trajectories for the glycine zipper separation
at 0.5 nm (State 1) and 1.2 nm (State 2). For State 1, the main crossing
angle is −21° (Figure A,B), corresponding
to right-handed helix packing. Significantly, two minor populations
are seen with crossing angles of −3° and +3°, and
the time course of the crossing angle shows frequent switching among
all three crossing angles. For the State 2 simulation, two overlapping
major populations are seen, with crossing angles of −5°
and +3° (Figure A,B). Thus, it can be
seen that even in the restrained simulations corresponding to individual
“states” along the free energy profile there is flexibility
in the helix–helix interactions, as indicated by the multimodal
helix crossing angle distributions.

(A) The most representative structures
for States 1 and 2 with
helix crossing angles of −21° and −5°, respectively.
The glycine motif residues are shown in red. (B) Helix crossing angle
distribution based on 7.5 μs restrained simulations starting
from State 1 (green) and State 2 (red). The insets on the right show
the corresponding helix crossing angles as a function of time. Note
that we have calculated the crossing angle from residue Val549 to Val567 on each helix to limit the calculation to the
helix core.

Unrestrained CG Simulations
of the State 1 and State 2 Structures
To further characterize
the dynamic behavior of the two states
(and also to check that artifacts were not introduced by the reaction
coordinate restraint in the PMF calculations), we used several representative structures extracted from each
state (three for State 1 and two for State 2; see Figure A and ) as starting points for unrestrained CG simulations,
each of 1 μs in duration. Starting from three State 1 structures
(selected to correspond to the three peaks in the crossing angle distribution
in Figure B; see above), the three unrestrained
simulations yielded comparable crossing angle distributions, with
a major population corresponding to a crossing angle of −21°
and two minor populations peaks at −3° and +3° (Figure A). Thus, these crossing angle distributions are
the same as that derived from the State 1 window of the restrained
PMF simulations (see also ). For the two representative structures extracted from
State 2, one of the unrestrained simulations yielded a population
with a main crossing angle of −5°, i.e., the same as that
from the State 2 window of the restrained PMF simulations. Nevertheless,
due to the relatively short time simulation, we cannot exclude that,
after a longer simulation time, the TM domain may pass from the metastable
State 2 to the more stable State 1.

(A) Helix crossing angle distributions
based on the 1 μs
unrestrained dynamics for the most representative structures for States
1 and 2 in a DPPC bilayer. (B) Helix crossing angle distribution for
the four simulations (each of 1 μs in duration) using the NMR
structure of the EphA1 dimer in a DPPC bilayer. Inset figures show
the dimer structure, with red particles depicting residues forming
the glycine zipper and orange particles showing additional residues
involved in the dimer interaction for State 2. The transparent envelope
depicts the surface of one CG helix.

Indeed, the second unrestrained simulation starting from
a State
2 structure (with a crossing angle of +3°) leads to a clear switch
to a distribution of crossing angles similar to those seen when starting
from State 1, with a major population centered around −20°
(Figure A). Examining the crossing angle as
a function of the time revealed a shift (at around 200 ns) from a
value centered around 0 to one centered around −20°, i.e.,
from State 2-like behavior to State 1-like behavior (see ). We have repeated
this simulation three more times, changing initial random velocity
seeds, and in each case observed the same behavior (see ).

We further
analyzed the four unrestrained simulations that showed
a transition from crossing angles centered around 0° to crossing
angles centered around −20° in terms of the distance between
centers of mass of helices and of the residues in contact along these
trajectories (Figure ; also see ). This revealed
that the EphA1 TM helix dimer can indeed switch from a structure in
which the glycine zipper is pointing away from the helix–helix
interface (i.e., State 2) to a structure in which this motif forms
the interface (i.e., State 1). This transition from State 2 to State
1 passes through an intermediate conformation in which residues involved
in the State 2 interface (A559, L563, and V567) are not completely released, whereas the residues comprising
the glycine motif (i.e., A550, G554, and G558) interact together ( between 530 and 715 ns and  after 153.5 and 117 ns).

Detailed view of one of the unrestrained
simulations (duration
1 μs) starting from a State 2 structure, with the vertical arrow
at ca. 220 ns indicating the start of a switch to State 1. (A) Snapshots
of the dimer illustrating the progress of the simulation. Red particles
depict residues forming the glycine zipper, and orange particles represent
residues involved in the C-terminal dimer interaction seen in State
2. Tan empty spheres represent the phosphate groups of the lipid molecules.
(B) Diagrams depicting the number of contact at the dimer interface
as a function of residue number (vertical axis) and time (horizontal
axis). In between the helix 1 and helix 2 diagrams, the red curve
shows the interhelix distance as a function of time.

The transition between the two main states is also
seen if one
tracks the distance between the centers of mass of each helix (Figure B). Thus, for State 1, this distance fluctuates
between ca. 0.8 and 0.9 nm (see Figure B after
620 ns and  after 715 ns). In contrast, for State 2, the interhelix distance
averages ca. 1.0 nm and exhibits only small fluctuations (see the
first 200 ns in Figure B).

Unrestrained
CG Simulations Based on the NMR Structure
It has been suggested
that the EphA1 dimer may adopt multiple conformations. In the context of this and our observations
of switching between the two states defined by the PMF calculations,
we performed CG MD simulations starting from the NMR structure (2K1K) of the EphA1 TM
dimer embedded in a lipid bilayer. The results show that over 1 μs
of CG MD simulation the distribution of crossing angles exhibit a
major population centered around −20° (Figure B), i.e., the same major population as that for
the State 1 simulations. This is not surprising, as both the State
1 and the NMR structures exhibit right-handed crossing angles and
in both structures the helices interact via the glycine zipper motif.
The crossing angle for the initial NMR dimer is somewhat larger (ca.
−30°) than the modal value of −20° seen for
the simulations, but the experimental value is clearly within the
range observed in either the unrestrained State 1 or the NMR-structure-based
simulations. The structures within the NMR-based simulations remained
close to the initial NMR structure. Thus, the average Cα RMSD
from the NMR structure is 0.43 nm, although, of course, there were
considerable dynamic fluctuations during the simulations, with RMSDs
ranging from 0.2 to 0.7 nm. Significantly, the representative structure
of State 1 (see above) had a Cα RMSD of 0.46 nm from the NMR
structure, suggesting that the PMF-based and NMR-based simulations
were sampling the same region of conformational space.

Interestingly,
in all of the simulations initiated from the NMR structures (especially
in run 3 in Figure B), a minor population
was observed with a positive crossing angle, i.e., left-handed packing
of the helices. On closer inspection, it can be seen that this minor
population corresponds to an asymmetric dimer. In this asymmetric
dimer, one helix interacts through its glycine zipper motif, whereas
the other helix interacts mainly via residues of the State 2 interface,
i.e., A559, L563, and V567. (Indeed,
this asymmetric dimer conformation constituted the main population
for one simulation in NMR structure initiated simulations in a thinner,
DLPC, bilayer; see .) Thus, CG MD simulations based either on the PMF-derived
stable and metastable states or on the NMR structure reveal complex
and dynamic behavior of the EphA1 TM dimer, involving both the canonical
glycine zipper interface as well as a more C-terminal interface and
an asymmetric conformation. Interestingly, two recent computational
studies of the conformational dynamics of the EphA1 TM dimer reveal
comparable behavior., Both of these studies also found
the most stable state to correspond to the NMR structure (i.e., a
right-handed, glycine-zipper-mediated packing of the helices). Interestingly,
the simulations of Li et al. (using an implicit bilayer model) also
revealed a left-handed dimer conformation with a leucine zipper interaction
motif.

Two-Dimensional Conformational
Landscape for TM Helix Dimers
To characterize the pathway(s)
between the two states, we generated
a map of the conformational landscape as a function of crossing angle
and the glycine zipper interhelix separation from the multiple restrained
simulation trajectories used for the PMF calculations. It is also
useful to map the unrestrained CG simulations onto this crossing angle/separation
landscape (Figure ). For the unrestrained
simulations starting from State 2 models (Figure A), after fluctuations between −10° and +10°
at a separation of ca. 1.2 nm (i.e., State 2 behavior), the structures
switch to a separation of ca. 0.5 nm with a crossing angle fluctuating
around ca. −20° (i.e., State 1 behavior). We also note
that the trajectory of the switch between States 1 and 2 passed through
an area centered on a glycine motif separation of 0.8 nm and corresponding
to the asymmetric dimer. This path broadly follows the more populated
areas of the underlying 2D map. For the NMR structure initiated simulations
(Figure B), in three of the simulations the
helix dimer stayed mainly in the State 1 region of the map (i.e.,
at a separation ca. 0.5 nm with fluctuations in the crossing angle
between −40° and +10°), whereas for the fourth (run
3 in Figure B) simulation, the dimer evolved
to a separation of ca. 0.9 nm, again following the underlying 2D landscape,
corresponding to an asymmetric intermediate between States 1 and 2.
Thus, the 2D map of the conformational landscape of the unrestrained
simulations is globally in agreement with possible pathway(s) for
interconversion involving an asymmetric dimer (separation ca. 0.8
nm) intermediate between the stable between the stable (State 1) and
metastable (State 2) states identified from the one-dimensional PMF.

(A) The
trajectories of the unrestrained CG simulations starting
from the PMF-generated structure of State 2 are shown on top of the
conformational map from the (restrained) PMF simulations. Thus, the
map of the conformational landscape of the helix dimer is shown as
a function of crossing angle and the glycine zipper interhelix separation.
This map was obtained from the different trajectories used for the
PMF calculations. For each 0.1 nm window from the set of PMF trajectories,
the crossing angle was calculated, and the relative frequencies are
shown on a blue–green–red colorscale. (B) The trajectories
of the unrestrained CG simulations starting from the NMR structure
are shown on top of the same conformation map as in (A). Stars depict
the final configuration of the dimer for each trajectory. In plotting
these trajectories, we sample averaged positions (based on 10 steps)
every 0.5 ns.

A (Simplified) Model for
Interconversion Between States 1 and
2
On the basis of the simulations and analysis presented
above, we can propose a (simplified) model for interconversion between
the two major states of the EphA1 TM helix dimer, as summarized in
Figure , in which States 1 and 2 may interconvert
via an ensemble of intermediate states that have a glycine zipper
separation of ca. 0.8 nm and that includes asymmetric helix dimers.
This suggests that the repacking of the dimer may occur via mechanisms
of either concerted or decoupled rotations. In the case of the concerted
rotation pathway, the upper parts of the dimer (i.e., residues from
T544 to A559) undergo a combined sliding and
rotation movement, leading to the creation of the glycine zipper (). This yields an intermediate structure in which the glycine zipper
interacts at the dimer interface in addition to residues L555, A559, L563, or A567. The interconversion
of States 1 and 2 can also occur via decoupled rotations. In this
case, one helix rotates (e.g., Figure A and ) to create an
asymmetric dimer (as also seen in our simulations based on the NMR
structure) and subsequently the second helix switches to form an alternative
symmetric dimer. Thus, in both cases, rotational motions about the
helix axes provide a potential mechanism for interconversion of States
1 and 2.

Schematic representing the putative pathway(s) of interconversion
between States 1 and 2 derived from the unrestrained dynamics simulations.
See main text for further details.

Model Refinement with Atomistic Simulations
To increase
the resolution of our description of the two TM dimer states and their
dynamic properties, we selected representative structures from the
CG simulations and converted them to atomistic resolution (see ). Thus, two structures from the unrestrained
CG simulations (one structure representing State 1 and the other,
State 2; see  for
details of the structure selection method) and also two structures
from the NMR-based CG simulations were selected. These four systems
(protein and lipids) were converted to atomistic models. For each resultant system, we performed a short
(50 ns) AT-MD simulation (which was extended to 70 ns for the model
based on State 2 to obtain a stable structure). For each of the four
simulations, the dimer structure evolved during the first few nanoseconds
(the Cα RMSD increasing between 0.25 and 0.45 nm). The State
1 model and the two NMR initiated simulations all retained a negative
crossing angle (i.e., right-handed packing), whereas the State 2 model
retained a crossing angle of ca. 0° throughout their respective
atomistic simulations.

The atomistic simulations reveal exploration
of the crossing angle versus glycine zipper distance landscape even
though the time scale was small in comparison of with the CG simulations.
Nevertheless, the AT simulations agree quite well with the (CG) map
of the landscape (see ). Furthermore, the AT simulations explored a substantial
range in term of glycine zipper separation, covering the majority
of the distance range seen in the CG simulations. Thus, the simulation
started from a structure from the NMR run 4 CG simulation described
the State 1 configuration with a glycine zipper distance mostly around
0.5 nm and a crossing angle centered around −20°. The
residues at the interface are mainly from the motif G546X3A550X3G554X3G558, along with some interactions of residues F553, L557, I559, and I565 (Figure A). The AT simulations starting with structures
from PMF State 1 and NMR run 3 described an intermediate state between
States 1 and 2 in which residues involved in the glycine motif as
well as some residues involved in State 2 packing were present at
the interface (Figure B; also see ). In particular,
these two simulations reveal that residues T544 and of
E547 can form inter- and intrahelix hydrogen bonds (see ).

Atomistic simulations starting from two structures were selected
from the NMR-based CG simulations and two structures from the unrestrained
CG simulations based on PMF models (one structure representing State
1, and the other, State 2). In each case, a contact map and a representative
structure of the helix dimer derived from the last 10 ns of the corresponding
AT simulations are shown. For one helix, the surface is represented
as a transparent envelope. Residues shown in red and orange are as
previously described.

Significantly, the atomistic simulation based on State 2
revealed
a (partial) TM helix dissociation event. During this event, disruption
of the T544 interaction initiated a structural transition
in which the glycine zipper distance increased to 1.7 nm. This disruption
was driven by the creation of an intrahelix interaction between the
carboxyl group of the side chain of E547 and backbone amide
of T544 (see ). This interaction was also identified
by Bocharov et al. At that point, only
the C-terminal residues continued to interact (Figure C). Extending this simulation to 200 ns did not result in
a complete dissociation of the helices, as a number of residues, e.g.,
R572, R571, S570, F568, or V567, continued
to interact (data not shown).

Due to the short time scale of
AT simulations (&lt;100 ns), we
have not explored beyond a small, local fraction of the energy landscape,
so these AT simulations were more important to refine our CG models.
Nevertheless, the atomistic simulations suggest that by starting from
different structures yielded by the CG simulations one may explore
the conformation and local dynamics of the EphA1 TM helix dimer, highlighting
a stable right-handed (State 1) conformation, intermediate states,
and a (incomplete) helix dissociation event starting from the (metastable)
State 2 configuration.

Discussion
Mechanistic and Structural
Implications
Our simulations
have revealed two different states of the EphA1 TM helix dimer, as
was recently also suggested by Li et al. In the current study, it was also possible to characterize potential
paths from one state to the other. This allows for an improved understanding
of the transition between the two states, emphasizing a potential
asymmetric dimer, as also suggested recently for other RTKs (e.g.,
refs ( and )) but not previously
for EphA1 or its close homologues. This has possible mechanistic implications
that are consistent with a number of experimental and computational
studies.

The State 1 configuration of the EphA1 dimer is in
agreement both with the NMR structure and with other theoretical studies.,, In particular, our model reveals a dimer with a principal
interaction around the glycine zipper motif A550X3G554X3G558, as seen in the NMR structure.
This interaction is extended to residues in N- and C-terminal parts,
e.g., G546 and L561L562 or I565L566 (see Figures  and ). We note that Bocharov et al. proposed that
this dimer may adopt different conformations and may be quite flexible,
as suggested by high chemical shift changes. Furthermore, other models for this dimer also imply configurations
with a large range of crossing angles, e.g., ref (). On average, the crossing
angle for State 1 is around −20°, in comparison with a
value of −35° in the NMR structure. From our unrestrained
CG simulations, this difference in crossing angles does not seem to
be due to changes in membrane thickness. It is conceivable that it
may reflect differences between the bilayer and bicelle environments,
especially, e.g., interactions of the termini with lipid headgroups
and also the possible effects of membrane curvature, as was suggested
by a recent computational study of an unrelated system, but further studies will be required to explore
this more systematically.

In contrast, the State 2 configuration
exhibits an interface spread
along the whole helix (interacting via residues T544X2E547I548X2V551X3L555X3A559X3L563X2L566V567). Bocharov
et al. postulated that the EphA1 dimer could adopt a second conformation, proposing a second interaction site for the
EphA1 dimer structure at two different potential positions: around
the GG4-like motif A560X3G564 or
via a heptad like motif IV549X5LL556X5LL563. Our model is broadly in agreement
with their second proposed motif. We note that this is also in partial
agreement with a left-handed model of EphA1 presented in recent studies
by Li et al. We have not observed long-lasting
dimerization through the A560X3G564 motif, although this motif was seen in transient helix interactions
(e.g., Figure B). It is useful to note that
the presence of a sequence motif does not seem to be sufficient to
predict and explain TM dimerization. Furthermore,
a sequence alignment presented by Muhle-Goll et al. indicated that
this latter motif in EphA1 does not seem to be conserved across different
receptor tyrosine kinase families. We
superimposed our model of State 2 obtained from AT MD simulations
with recent left-handed dimer structures obtained by NMR for EphA2
and PDGFR (Figure ). The Cα RMSD is
0.3 nm between our State 2 model and the EphA2 structure and 0.33
nm between our State 2 model and the PDGFR structure. Furthermore,
this structural alignment confirms that those residues at the interface
in the two experimental left-handed structures also interact in our
State 2 model. The interface of this model also seems to be in partial
agreement with recent MD simulations of the Neu TM dimer in a DPPC
bilayer. The crossing angle obtained
in our model for State 2 is distributed around 0° (between −5°
and +3°). This value is smaller than that seen in NMR structures
for a left-handed dimer (between +15° and +23°). Although we cannot exclude the possibility
that the CG force field may have an influence on the crossing angle
values, models constructed with other methodologies present crossing
angle values in the same range; for example, models presented by Volynsky
et al. have crossing angle values around 5° (see Supplementary
Table 1 in ref ()), and Prakash et al. have angles distributed around 0° (Figure
4 ref ()). More recently,
Li et al. proposed left-handed models for the EphA1 dimer with crossing
angle ranging from +5° to +11° (Figure 4 ref ()). This suggests a convergence
of computational approaches.

(A) Sequence alignment of the EphA1 TM helix
with those of two
recently determined TM dimer structures, namely, for EphA2 and PDGF.
(B) Structural alignment of the EphA1 TM helix dimer (structure in
tan; our model of State 2 was extracted from AT MD simulation starting
with a State 2 structure having a crossing angle ca. +5°) with
recently determined NMR structures for left-handed TM dimers of EphA2
(structure in green; PDB ID: 2K9Y) and of PDGFR (structure in yellow; PDB ID: 2L6W). (C) Schematic
diagram depicting potential movements of the EphA1 receptor domains
relative to the membrane. On the left, State 2 may lock the kinase
domains in a configuration where some phosphorylation sites are not
accessible and so the receptor is in an inactive state. On the right,
due to the greater flexibility of State 1, the kinases sites are accessible
and so may be phosphorylated, thus allowing the receptor to adopt
an active state.

Overall, our results
suggest a rotational mechanism for the transition
from State 1 to State 2 (Figure  and ), with
the TM helices rotating relative to one another along their respective
axis. Such a rotational movement has been proposed for other related
systems, e.g., refs ( and ). For example, Beevers et al. also noticed small rotation phenomenon
during their 100 ns simulations of the Neu TM helix dimer, and Prakash et al. also postulated this type
of rotation for the ErbB2 receptor TM domains. This rotational mechanism may sometimes also lead to an
asymmetric dimer. Recently, Volynsky et al. highlighted asymmetric
conformations for the FGFR3 dimer, and
Reddy et al. also found an asymmetric dimer for FGFR3 mutants using
MD simulations. Bocharov et al. also
mentioned that the TM domain is involved in a micro- to millisecond
conformational exchange and found that
Glu547 can play an important role in the dimer interaction,
interacting with Thr544 and thus presenting a substantive
chemical shift difference as a function of pH. In our proposed pathway, the evolution from State 2 to
State 1 involves the interactions of Thr544 and Glu547. These two residues can be involved in both inter- and
intrahelical interactions (see ), so it may be that the creation of intrahelical interactions
weaken the interhelical interactions (), facilitating the passage from
State 2 to State 1, perhaps leading to a partial dissociation of the
dimer, as seen for one AT simulation (Figure C). This implies a reorganization of the area around residues 547–550,
in accordance with the variations of this area noticed by Bocharov
et al.

These observations are consistent with a rotation-coupled
activation
mechanism for the EphA1 receptor. Although
one must exercise caution in extrapolating from the behavior of a
TM helix dimer to the whole EphA1 receptor, we suggest that the rotations
of TM helices along their axes may result in a rotation of the kinase
domains. State 2, through an interaction stabilized along the whole
helix, may hold the kinases in a locked position, whereas the C-terminal
part of the helices in State 1 seems to be more flexible and may provide
greater freedom for rearrangements of the juxtamembrane and kinase
domains (Figure C). In the case of State 2,
the locked conformation may hold the kinase domain close to the membrane
and so obscure phosphorylation and activation sites, as suggested
by studies on EphA3 and EGFR, whereas State 1 would provide more flexibility
to expose the different sites to be phosphorylated (Figure C). The substantial ectodomain is also flexible,
so it is more difficult to infer an effect of the TM dimerization
mode on it. Nevertheless, it has recently been postulated that a large
rearrangement of the ectodomain occurs between the activated and inactivated
states for the EphA2 receptor is linked to changes in packing of the
TM domains. Using this model as a template
for EphA1, we suggest that the State 2 conformation will lock the
ectodomain in a preformed inactive state where the two ectodomains
are staggered, as seen in a structure of unliganded EphA2 ectodomain
dimer. State 1 will allow greater displacements
of the FN2 domains near the membrane to adopt a wider spacing between
the two FN2 domains, as seen for the ligand-bound form of the EphA2
dimer. Thus, State 1 may be related to
an active state, whereas State 2 may be linked to an inactive state, as has also been suggested for FGFR3 and EGFR. A comparable
mechanism was recently postulated by Bocharov et al. in their “string-puppet”
model for the FGFR3 receptor. A question
remains: does the free energy landscape of the dimer directly drive
the adoption of active vs inactive states? Due to the size of the
cytosolic and extracellular domains, we doubt that this is the case,
but the dimer energetics may determine the passage from one state
to the other. Thus, receptor activation may be the result of fine
dynamic balance at each level, extracellular, membrane, and cytosolic,
and it is the reinforcement or the antagonism of these different components
that would drive a global movement. It will therefore be important
to model the whole receptor to better understand these combinatorial
and multifaceted dynamic balances.

Free Energies of Dimerization
Our PMF calculations,
based on the glycine motif separation, reveal two states of the EphA1
TM helix dimer, and these are supported by unrestrained simulations.
However, there are difficulties inherent in comparing absolute dimerization
free energies both between simulations and experiments and between
different simulations. In particular, experimental as well as theoretical
analyses of TM dimerization may be quite sensitive to parameter changes,
making quantitative comparisons difficult at present.

The free
energy difference between the fully separated EphA1 TM helices (at
a separation of &gt;2.5 nm) and the dimerized State 1 is ca. −60
± 2 kJ/mol. This is significantly larger than an experimental
estimate of the association free energy of −15 kJ/mol, as measured
using FRET in DMPC liposomes. It is important
to remain aware that estimates of the association free energy of TM
helices may be sensitive to both the exact extent of the TM helix
construct and to the membrane (or membrane-like)
environment employed., Furthermore, FRET is, to some
extent, an indirect probe of dimerization free energy, corresponding
to a finite local concentration, in contrast to the limit of infinite
dilution when the helices are separated. Thus, it is informative to
deconstruct the disagreement between experiment and simulation.

As a point of reference, one may consider the free energy of dimerization
of the TM domain of glycophorin A (GpA). Experimentally, this can
range from ca. −30 kJ/mol in, e.g., C8E5 detergent micelles to ca. −15
kJ/mol in plasma membrane-derived vesicles. Computationally, estimates include ca. −45 kJ/mol (from atomistic
simulations in a membrane-mimetic dodecane slab) and ca. −30 to −40 kJ/mol via CG simulations in lipid bilayers.
Thus, both experimental and computational estimates range quite widely.

CG simulations have been used to estimate PMFs for a number of
TM helix dimers, with free energy differences between the fully separated
TM helices and the dimerized state as follows: −30 and −45 kJ/mol for GpA, −21 kJ/mol for ErbB1 to −33 kJ/mol for ErbB4
homodimers, and −58 kJ/mol for
the neuropilin 1/plexin A1 TM helix heterodimer. Thus, our estimate for the EphA1 State 1 TM dimer is comparable
to estimates for related systems using the MARTINI force field.

From a purely simulation-based perspective, sampling in our free
energy calculations was checked by calculating the statistical inefficiency
following Yang et al. This allows one
to define the converged part of the simulation. Using this criterion,
we considered the last 10% of the simulation as fully converged (see  Text and Figure S1). Furthermore,
the depth and shape of the PMF profiles generated are similar to those
for GpA, calculated using an either atomistic model or the MARTINI CG model.

Although our multiscale approach reveals key aspects of the dynamics
and energetics of the EphA1 TM dimer, our understanding of this system
remains incomplete. The PMF profile is based on a one-dimensional
helix separation and so depends on the reaction coordinate chosen
(here, the glycine motif separation distance). Other reaction coordinates
such as crossing angle, helix tilt, etc. may have an influence on
the energy profile. Therefore, in the future, we would like to extend
these studies results to 2D PMF calculations, possibly combined with advanced sampling methods, in order to provide a fuller characterization of the free
energy landscape of helix–helix interactions in this system.
Another point on which to reflect is the stability of the State 2
model in our simulations. Even if our CG results compare reasonably
well with other computational studies, many of these studies are based
on the same force field. Indeed, during the short AT MD simulations
starting from the State 2, we have seen the early stages of helix-dimer
dissociation. It would be interesting to perform longer time scale
simulations on TM dimers using different force fields (in a study
comparable to recent work on small water-soluble proteins) to enable a more critical comparison of TM
helix modeling at different granularities.

Wider Implications
Overall, this study suggests that
the interaction of TM helices in EphA1 RTK dimers is intrinsically
dynamic, reflecting a complex energy landscape for interaction with
multiple local minima. Our study provides a novel interpretation of
previous experimental results,, showing two states
for EphA1 dimerization. We suggest that there is a rotational pathway
to pass from one state to the other. These observations are consistent
with a rotation-coupled activation mechanism that has been postulated
to govern the EphA1 system. This provides a potential mechanism for
signaling whereby both extracellular and intracellular events can
be linked to a repopulation of the underlying TM helix dimer landscape
rather than a simple process of switching between two states. Related
models have been suggested for EphA2, FGFR3, and EGFR., This
suggests a degree of convergence on a model in which the TM dimers
of RTK tranmembrane dimers readily exchange between conformations.
Thus, these studies stress the need to fully understand the dynamic
behavior of the TM dimers of RTKs from a mechanistic perspective and
also to exploit our understanding for the design of, e.g., peptides
that target receptor TM domains.

Supporting Information Available
Additional
analysis of the
simulations and movies of the State 2 to State 1 transition. This
material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500800x_si_001.pdf

bi500800x_si_002.mpg

bi500800x_si_003.mpg

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

