Dendritic
cells (DCs) are the
first participants in the long series of events in host–pathogen
interactions leading to activation of specific T-cells., Dendritic cell-specific ICAM-3 grabbing nonintegrin (DC-SIGN) is
a C-type lectin present mainly on the surface of immature dendritic
cells. It is responsible for the binding
and uptake of a multitude of pathogens, such as HIV-1, ebola virus, hepatitis C virus,Candida albicans, and Mycobacterium tuberculosis() via oligomannose-dependent interactions.
Upon recognition of LewisX carbohydrates, DC-SIGN also
associates with distinct signaling molecules to induce differential
production of cytokines that in turn lead to enhancement or suppression
of proinflammatory responses. The mechanisms
by which these diverging signals are generated are poorly understood,
although it has been suggested that the molecular structure of DC-SIGN
might be altered differently upon binding to the two different classes
of carbohydrates. Thus, the characterization of the bound carbohydrate
geometry is fundamental to understanding the interactions among DC-SIGN,
other elements of immune cells, and pathogens.

In addition to
its normal defensive role, DC-SIGN plays a role
in the actual infection processes of some pathogens, including HIV,
SIV, and hepatitis C., Therefore, many groups are developing
strategies to block the sugar binding site within the DC-SIGN CRD
to prevent its use by pathogens.− Others are using pathogen glycan
recognition to deliver materials to dendritic cells in order to harness
the immune response for anticancer therapy. Development of these disease-related reagents also benefits from
a better understanding of ligand recognition by DC-SIGN.

Structurally,
DC-SIGN is a type II transmembrane protein with a
short cytosolic region, a transmembrane segment, and an extended extracellular
domain (ECD).− This extracellular domain is divided into two structurally
and functionally distinct regions: a neck region, involved in the
tetramerization of the receptor,− and a calcium-dependent
carbohydrate recognition domain (CRD), which is at the heart of the
molecular recognition processes mediated by DC-SIGN. This CRD is responsible
for the interaction with highly glycosylated structures present at
the surface of pathogens, mediating internalization and presentation
as a part defense against invasion. DC-SIGN
interactions also have a higher level of complexity in that they include
multipoint attachment, made possible by DC-SIGN’s tetrameric
state and its organization into clustered patches at the cell membrane.− However, all of these begin with some fundamental difference in
glycan interaction at the CRD level, and understanding this may lead
to new ways of mediating the effects of autoimmune and inflammatory
disease.

Natural ligands of DC-SIGN consist of mannose oligosaccharides
often found on pathogens or fucose-containing Lewis-type determinants
common to humans. In all cases, the binding occurs in a Ca2+-dependent manner.− Many crystal structures of DC-SIGN bound to carbohydrate
ligands have provided data on bound conformations of both mannose-
and fucose-containing ligands., For Lewis oligosaccharides,
most data suggest the structure to be rigid and compact, with the
fucose ring stacked on top of the galactose residue. The conformation of LewisX carbohydrate determinants
bound to antibodies was, for example, found to be compact and extremely
similar to that observed for the free oligosaccharides in solution.
This could suggest that the recognition and binding of the LewisX carbohydrates by their protein partners does not induce significant
conformational changes. However, in at
least one case, the general structure of the LewisX motif
bound to DC-SIGN departs to some extent from that observed in solution
or in antibody complexes, the crystal structure of DC-SIGN with lacto-N-fucopentose III (LNFP III, a pentasaccharide containing
LewisX at the nonreducing end), raising the possibility
that DC-SIGN selects a somewhat different conformation (PDB ID: 1SL5). There is also
the possibility that this difference is induced by more remote interactions;
the structure shows a distance of 3 Å between the O2 of the LewisX galactose and the Glu286 side chain oxygen of a DC-SIGN molecule
in an adjacent unit cell (Figure ), indicating
a potential hydrogen-bonding interaction that allows the ligand to
bridge between two DC-SIGN molecules. Given the interest in using structures of native ligands in their
bound conformation to develop therapeutic mimics of carbohydrates,
further investigation of bound LewisX seems to be justified.

Crystal
structure of DC-SIGN with a LewisX derivative
shows a potential hydrogen bond between the galactose O2 and the carboxylate
oxygen of Glu286 of the DC-SIGN in an adjacent unit cell (PDB ID: 1SL5).

NMR provides an alternative approach to structural
investigation
of protein–ligand complexes in solution and free from effects
that could arise in a crystal environment. Using NMR, we present a
comprehensive model of the DC-SIGN–LewisX binding
interaction. To obtain an extended picture of the LewisX–DC-SIGN interaction in solution, we performed a full analysis
of the interaction with the CRD by NMR spectroscopy and computational
techniques. Ligand binding was analyzed during titration using cross-peaks
in 1H–15N HSQC spectra to identify protein
residues involved in binding and saturation transfer difference (STD)
NMR to identify binding epitopes on the ligand. Transfer nuclear Overhauser
effect spectroscopy (trNOESY) experiments provided additional information
about the conformation of the ligand when bound to the CRD. The experimental
data were used with the HADDOCK ligand docking software to generate ligand–protein structures,
and the CORCEMA-ST protocol was used
to predict STD intensities from the atomic coordinates of models for
the ligand–protein complex and to score the various LewisX–DC-SIGN structures. These studies demonstrated that
the fucose residue of LewisX strongly interacts with DC-SIGN,
the galactose and fucose residues are stacked more tightly than reported
in crystal structure, but the free and bound LewisX conformations
still differ significantly.,

Materials and Methods
All enzymes and chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich unless
otherwise noted. Uniformly labeled 13C-d-glucose, 15N-ammonium chloride, 15N-Ala, Phe, and Lys, and
deuterium oxide (D2O) were purchased from Cambridge Isotope
Laboratories. LewisX was purchased from CarboSynth.

Protein Expression
For the uniformly 15N-labeled
samples, a pET28a plasmid (Novagen) containing the coding region for
amino acids 250–404 of the DC-SIGN CRD was transformed into
BL21(DE3) gold competent cells (Stratagene) and expressed in M9 media
containing kanamycin with 15N-NH4Cl (1 g) as
the sole nitrogen source at 37 °C. Once an OD600 of
∼0.5 was reached, expression was induced by addition of isopropyl-β-d-thiogalatopyranoside (IPTG) to the culture at a final concentration
of 1 mM. After 6 h, the cells were harvested by centrifugation at
5000g. A 13C,15N-labeled DC-SIGN
CRD sample was prepared similarly using both 15N-NH4Cl (1 g) and U-13C-glucose (2 g) as the sole sources
of nitrogen and carbon, respectively.

For the 15N
sparsely labeled samples, overexpression of the protein was also done
using Escherichia coli BL21(DE3) gold
competent cells (Stratagene) in 1 L of M9 minimal medium containing
1 g of NH4Cl and 20 mL of 20% glucose at natural abundance. All 19
amino acids except for the label of interest were added as natural
abundance materials at 0.1 g/L of culture. Growth was started with
a seed culture using 20 mL of the M9 minimal medium in a 125 mL Erlenmeyer
flask in a 250 rpm shaker at 37 °C overnight. The following day,
the seed culture was inoculated in 1 L of M9 minimal medium in a 2.8
L culture flask, and growth was continued in a 250 rpm shaker at 37
°C. At an optical cell density (OD600) ∼ 0.3,
0.1 g of the 15N amino acid of choice was added to the
medium. At OD600 ∼ 0.6, 1 mL of 1 mM IPTG was added
to induce protein expression. The culture was then grown overnight
to OD600 ∼ 1.4 at 18 °C. The cells were harvested
by centrifugation at 5000g.

Protein Purification and
On-Column Refolding
Cell pellets
were resuspended in pH 8.0 buffer containing 50 mM Tris and 150 mM
potassium chloride and stored at −20 °C. The resuspended
cells were thawed and lysed by three passages through a french pressure
cell at 18 000 psi. Inclusion bodies containing DC-SIGN CRD
were then isolated by centrifugation at 45 000g for 1 h at 4 °C, and the supernatant was discarded. The insoluble
inclusion body pellet was washed twice with 25 mL of pH 8.0 buffer
containing 50 mM Tris, 10 mM EDTA, 2% Triton X-100, 500 mM sodium
chloride, and 2 M urea and once with 25 mL of pH 8.0 buffer containing
50 mM Tris and 10 mM EDTA. Each time, the suspension was homogenized,
and inclusion bodies were recollected by centrifugation at 45 000g and
4 °C for
30 min. The washed inclusion bodies were resuspended in 50 mM Tris,
10 mM imidazole, 300 mM sodium chloride, 6 M guanidine hydrochloride,
and 10 mM β-mercaptoethanol to a concentration of ∼5
mg/mL. One milliliter of the protein solution was then added dropwise
to 20 mL of slowly stirring Ni-NTA resin. The resin was packed in
a 3 × 18 cm column, and the resin-bound protein was subjected
to an on-column refolding procedure as described by Veldkamp et al.
with one minor modification. The second
wash step of the refolding procedure was made a two-step process to
more gradually change the redox potential by adjusting the l-glutathione reduced (GSH) to l-glutathione oxidized (GSSG)
ratios from 0.5 mM GSH and 1 mM GSSG to 1 mM GSH and 0.5 mM GSSG.
The protein, eluted with 25 mM Tris, 300 mM sodium chloride, 300 mM
imidazole, and 2.5 mM calcium chloride, was then dialyzed twice into
1 L of pH 5 buffer containing 20 mM MES, 100 mM sodium chloride, and
2.5 mM calcium chloride to precipitate the misfolded DC-SIGN CRD.
The dialyzed protein was centrifuged at 5000g for
10 min, and the soluble, properly folded protein was recovered and
subsequently concentrated, giving an overall yield of ∼0.5–0.7
mg. Refolding was repeated with additional aliquots of resuspended
inclusion bodies to obtain sufficient protein for the experiments.

Tetramer Sample Preparation
Additional preparations
of unlabeled constructs forming a tetramer were made in the Warwick
laboratory of Daniel A. Mitchell as previously described. Soluble recombinant DC-SIGN tetramers corresponding
to the full extracellular domain were expressed in BL21/DE3 cells
containing modified DC-SIGN cDNA fragments cloned into the pT5T vector
and induced via the T7 promoter using 100 mg/L IPTG. Following growth
at 37 °C for 150 min, cells were recovered via centrifugation
and sonicated. Inclusion bodies were recovered via centrifugation
and solubilized in 6 M guanidine hydrochloride, 100 mM Tris, pH 7.0,
0.01% v/v β-mercaptoethanol and centrifuged at 100g for 30 min to remove membranous debris. Protein was allowed to refold
via dialysis in loading buffer (10 mM Tris, pH 7.8, 1 M NaCl, 5 mM
CaCl2) with three buffer changes. Refolded protein was
isolated via affinity chromatography using mannose-Sepharose, with
washing in 10 column volumes of loading buffer and eluting in 10 mM
Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM EDTA. Further purification was performed
via anion-exchange chromatography using a Mono-Q column and AKTA liquid
chromatography system (GE Healthcare) with loading in low-salt buffer
(10 mM Tris, pH 7.8, 2.5 mM EDTA) and eluting in a linear 0–500
mM NaCl gradient with high-salt buffer (10 mM Tris, pH 7.8, 2.5 mM
EDTA, 1 M NaCl). The protocol for the generation of the DC-SIGN extracellular
domain, containing seven tandem neck repeats, consistently yields
tetrameric complexes, as determined via equilibrium ultracentrifugation
and homobifunctional cross-linking with bis-sulfosuccinimidyl suberate. Ultracentrifugation studies indicate that tetramer
stability is high across a broad concentration range.,

NMR Spectroscopy
NMR spectroscopy was carried out on
spectrometers operating at 21.1 or 14.0 T. The 21.1 T instrument was
equipped with a Varian VNMRS console and 5 mm cryogenically cooled
triple resonance probe. The 14.0 T instrument was equipped with Varian
Inova console and 5 mm cryogenically cooled triple resonance probe.
Once the instrument temperature had equilibrated and the optimization
of field homogeneity was completed, acquisition was initiated. 2,2-Dimethyl-2-silapentane-5-sulfonate
(DSS) was included as an internal reference in each sample. NMR samples
consisted of 1–2 mg of protein (specific concentrations given
in descriptions of individual experiments below) in 100% or 10% D2O buffer containing 25 mM Tris, 100 mM sodium chloride, 2.5
mM calcium chloride, and 50 μM DSS, pH 7.5, for the STD/trNOE
and titration/assignment experiments, respectively.

Sequential
backbone assignments of the U-15N,13C-labeled
DC-SIGN CRD (500 μM) were made at 37 °C using three-dimensional
intra- and inter-residue coherence transfer experiments, HNCA, HNCB
(HNCACB with tauCC = 7 ms), and HN(CO)CACB.− The assigned 1H–15N-HSQC of the DC-SIGN CRD (BMRB 19931)
was used to identify residues involved in ligand binding during the
titration.

The DC-SIGN CRD (100 μM) was titrated with
increasing concentrations
of LewisX (500 μM to 2 mM in steps of 500 μM
and 5 mM to 20 mM in steps of 5 mM) and monitored by 1H–15N HSQC NMR. Total chemical shift change for each protein
residue was calculated using the following formula

Dissociation constants were determined by fitting chemical
shift
curves as described in Barb et al. and
by surface plasmon resonance experiments (). Additionally, where significant line broadening
could be observed, the off-rate for LewisX was estimated
using the following formula, where Δυmax is
the chemical shift change on full complexation and Δυ1/2 is the change in line width at 50% complexation

Saturation transfer
difference (STD) NMR experiments on the DC-SIGN
tetramer interacting with LewisX were performed with a
50 μM monomer (12.5 μM tetramer) and a 1:100 protein/ligand
ratio. The sample was irradiated at both 0 and 8 ppm, and saturation
times were incremented from 1 to 4 s in steps of 1 s. Transferred
nuclear Overhauser effect spectroscopy (trNOESY) experiments of the
DC-SIGN tetramer with LewisX were performed with a 250
μM monomer (62.5 μM tetramer) and 1:20 protein/ligand
ratio and a mixing time of 150 ms. All data were processed using NMRpipe and analyzed using Sparky and NMRViewJ., The α-anomer
proved to bind more tightly, and the NOEs for this anomer were calibrated
using the 2.39 Å as the N-acetyl-glucosamine
(GlcNAc) H1–H2 distance. Methyl NOEs for the fucose H6 and
GlcNAc N-acetyl were scaled by a factor of 3 prior
to distance calculation.

Computational Docking
Models of
LewisX bound
to DC-SIGN were generated using HADDOCK. Ambiguous interaction restraints were defined for active residues
identified as involved in binding using the NMR titration (protein)
and STD data (ligand). Distance restraints based on trNOESY data were
used to constrain the conformation of the bound ligand. Additional
distance restraints based on the observed coordination of the fucose
O3 and O4 to the Ca2+ ion in other DC-SIGN or DC-SIGNR
structures were also included. Initially, 1000 structures were determined
through rigid-body docking. Simulated annealing was performed with
the 200 lowest-energy structures followed by water refinement using
default force field parameters except that the radius parameter for
the Ca2+ ion was increased to produce typical oxygen coordination
distances. During the flexible docking, the ligand was allowed to
be fully flexible. The beta strands of the protein (residues 355–367)
were specified as semiflexible, and the loops of the protein near
the binding pocket (residues 311–316, 344–354, and 368–374)
were set as fully flexible. Semiflexible residues are allowed to introduce
side chain flexibility during the third stage of simulated annealing
and backbone flexibility during the fourth stage. Fully flexible residues
are allowed to have backbone and side chain flexibility throughout
all four stages of simulated annealing. The best structures were chosen
from the refined structures based on lowest energy and fewest distance
restraint violations.

Evaluation of Docked Structures
The best four DC-SIGN–LewisX complexes and the
crystal structure (PDB ID: 1SL5) were evaluated
using the CORCEMA-ST protocol to simulate STD build-up curves., Input parameters for CORCEMA-ST reflected the experimental conditions
and also included the NMR-determined association rate constant (kon = 105 M–1 s–1), SPR-determined dissociation constant (1 mM), and
estimates of the free and bound ligand correlation times (0.25 ×
10–9 and 80 × 10–9, respectively).
The tetramer was considered to be symmetric, and no corrections for
the effects of anisotropic tumbling were applied. In order to account
for selective saturation effects, proton chemical shifts of the aromatic
and methyl resonances of DC-SIGN CRD were predicted using SHIFTX2. The resonances excited by the saturation pulse
were limited to those within 10 Å of the binding pocket and with
predicted chemical shifts within ±1 ppm of the saturation frequency.
Experimental data were normalized relative to the intensity of a 1D 1H experiment collected immediately preceding the STD data.
After normalization, the RMSD between experimental and simulated points
for each resonance was calculated using the 1–4 s STD intensities.
The best overall complex was determined to be the one with no RMSDs
more than three times the average RMSD (of all four structures) for
any given residue and the lowest overall RMSD for the entire ligand
at both saturation frequencies.

Results
Chemical Shift
Titration
Chemical shift perturbation
of protein resonances provides a qualitative indication of residues
involved in ligand interaction. Figure A shows
a portion of the 1H–15N HSQC spectrum
of the DC-SIGN CRD monomer in the presence of 2.5 mM calcium chloride.
Cross-peaks are superimposed for the same DC-SIGN CRD sample with
2 mM (blue) and 20 mM (red) LewisX added. Fitting a protein
chemical shift vs ligand concentration curve for DC-SIGN with LewisX (as described in the ) as well as SPR data indicates a binding affinity of around 1 mM
(). 1H–15N-HSQC peaks for the backbone resonances were assigned using
a 13C,15N-labeled sample and traditional triple
resonance experiments (BMRB 19931). Three additional samples prepared
with labeling of single amino acids (15N-Lys, 15N-Phe, or 15N-Ala) facilitated assignments through association
of cross-peaks with these specific amino acid types. The total chemical
shift perturbation for each DC-SIGN residue is plotted in Figure C. The protein residues with chemical shift changes
&gt; 0.075 as well as those that disappeared upon adding ligand were
deemed to be involved in binding for the purposes of docking experiments
(Figure B). Interestingly, Val351, which has
been previously implicated in LewisX binding, did not appear to be affected.

(A) A portion of the 1H–15N-HSQC spectra
for DC-SIGN with no ligand (black) or with 2 mM (blue) or 20 mM (red)
LewisX are overlaid. Shifted resonances are presumed to
be close to the binding site. Peaks that disappear or have the largest
total chemical shift perturbation are labeled. Fitting of titration
data gives a ∼1 mM dissociation constant. (B) A representation
of the crystal structure of the DC-SIGN CRD (PDB ID: 1SL5), with residues
perturbed by titration with LewisX identified. Residues
with the largest perturbation (&gt;0.075 ppm) are indicated in burgundy,
smaller perturbations (&gt;0.05 ppm) are indicated in yellow, and
residues
with peaks that disappear are indicated in blue. The residues shown
in burgundy and blue (labeled) were used as ambiguous interaction
restraints in HADDOCK. (C) The total chemical shift perturbation for
each residue is plotted. Residues with peaks that disappear upon ligand
binding are indicated by a light gray bar marked with an asterisk.

Transferred Nuclear Overhauser
Effect
Unlike many ligands
investigated by NMR methods, glycans can be quite flexible. Primary
degrees of freedom are the torsion angles about the glycosidic bonds
connecting both the galactose (Gal) and fucose (Fuc) to N-acetyl-glucosamine (GlcNAc), and these can be altered on interaction
with the protein. Transferred nuclear Overhauser effect spectroscopy
(trNOESY) provides insight into the protein bound ligand conformation
because of the heavy weighting of NOEs by the longer correlation time
of the complexed ligand compared to that of the free ligand. To improve
reporting, we have used the more slowly tumbling tetrameric (CRD plus
stem) form of DC-SIGN with an effective molecular weight of 160 kDa
as opposed to 20 kDa for the DC-SIGN CRD. In Table , we report distances between pairs of protons affected by
glycosidic torsion angles derived from trNOEs and compare them to
the distances seen in the crystal structure of 1SL5() and in the conformations believed to exist in free solution. There is some disagreement between the distances
derived for the bound LewisX in the crystal structure and
the distances indicated by trNOE measurements (Table ). In particular, a long-range NOE was measured between galactose
H2 and fucose H6, and the derived distance (4.7 Å) was found
to be larger than that in the crystal structure (3.9 Å). Also,
the trNOE-derived distance of 2.6 Å between fucose H1 and GlcNAc N-acetyl is much shorter than the crystal structure (3.7
Å). The NOEs measured across the glycosidic linkages also indicate
some deviation from angles in the crystal structure. The trNOE distances
determined for a bound LewisX conformation also differ
significantly from the free conformation recently measured by solution
NMR by Zierke et al. (Table ), indicating
preferred binding of a conformer different from the dominant solution
conformer. These experimental observations
provided additional restraints on poses determined by docking algorithms.

Transglycosidic Distances Measured
in Crystal Structure 1SL5, Free LewisX, and by trNOE
residue and atom	residue and atom	PDB (Å)	trNOE
(Å)	free (Å)	
Fuc H1	GlcNAc H2	3.5	 	 	
Fuc H1	GlcNAc H3	2.6	2.7 (+0.75)	2.8	
Fuc H1	GlcNAc H4	4.5	 	 	
Fuc H1	GlcNAc HNAc	3.7	2.6 (+0.75)	3.8	
Fuc H5	GlcNAc H3	3.1	3.0 (+0.75)	 	
Fuc H6	GlcNAc H3	4.4	3.1 (+1.50)	 	
Fuc H6	Gal H2	3.6	4.7 (+1.75)	2.8	
Gal H1	GlcNAc H3	4.5	2.7 (+0.75)	 	
Gal H1	GlcNAc H4	2.4	2.5 (+0.75)	2.3	
Gal H1	GlcNAc H5	3.8	 	 	
trNOE
distances were used in
HADDOCK docking of LewisX to the DC-SIGN CRD. In HADDOCK,
the lower error for all trNOE distances was defined to make the minimum
distance 1.80 Å; upper errors are given in parentheses.

Saturation Transfer Difference NMR
Saturation transfer
difference spectra can give a qualitative identification of binding
epitopes on ligands of interest. During the experiment, saturation
of magnetization of protons on the protein is transferred to protons
of the bound ligand in roughly a 1/r6 fashion.
On returning to the solution state, the ligand carries this saturation
information, where it can be observed as a reduction in ligand resonance
intensities, even with ligand in great excess. Frequently, steady-state
reductions in ligand resonance intensities are taken to reflect proximity
to the protein surface, with the larger intensity loss taken to correspond
to a smaller distance between particular ligand protons and the surface
of the protein. However, a number of other factors can affect the
intensity of ligand resonances, including the time the ligand remains
bound to the protein and the actual distribution of transferring protons
on the protein surface. Longer residence times allow diffusion of
the saturation throughout the ligand, making identification of binding
epitopes less definitive (this makes tight-binding complexes ill-suited
to this technique). Proton-poor regions of the protein binding site
may also produce less intensity loss on the ligand. Such effects make
it important to consider interpretation of STDs at both qualitative
and more quantitative levels.

STD intensity loss for various
LewisX protons at a series of saturation times are given
in Figure A. To allow a qualitative interpretation,
the STD values at the longest time (4 s) were mapped onto the LewisX structure as shown in Figure B, where
red indicates large STD intensity loss and purple indicates low STD
intensity loss. These results indicate that the fucose residue is
most proximate to the protein surface, with H2 experiencing the strongest
perturbation of any part of the ligand and H1 and H4 also experiencing
strong perturbations. The N-acetyl group of the GlcNAc
also demonstrates close proximity to the protein surface, whereas
the remainder of GlcNAc and the galactose residue experience smaller
perturbations. This qualitative identification of interacting parts
of the ligand provides another source of information for docking.
However, because of the complexities mentioned above, more detailed
analysis of STD data was implemented as a means of scoring docked
poses.

(A) Experimental STD build up for saturation at both 0 and 8 ppm
with saturation times from 1 to 4 s. (B) Representation of LewisX with the average intensity of maximum STD transfer (normalized
relative to a 1D 1H experiment) shown on a color scale
with red as the most intense and purple as the least. (C) RMSD between
the simulated and the normalized experimental STD intensities for
each resolved resonance.

Computational Docking
The determination of the structure
for the DC-SIGN CRD–LewisX complex was accomplished
using the docking software, HADDOCK. This
package is well-suited to this type of problem because it allows use
of more qualitative data, such as those coming from STD-based identification
of binding epitopes on the ligand and chemical shift-based identification
of residues in the protein binding pocket. In addition, it allows
entry of pairwise distance restraints from trNOE data. One additional
piece of information was used. The location of the fucose within the
binding pocket was further constrained (2.5 ± 0.2 Å) using
well-established distances for the fucose O3 and O4 to the Ca2+ ion. These are constant through many of the structures involving
fucose binding and are not likely to change significantly in solution.
The data entered into the HADDOCK procedure are indicated in Table  and Figure . Procedures
for docking are described in the  section.

Evaluation of Docked Poses
HADDOCK
provides scoring
of various poses based on interaction energy and clustering of repeatedly
recurring poses. However, once a set of proposed structures for the
complex are provided, STD data can be turned to a more quantitative
use by simulating STD build-up curves based on the exact location
of protein and ligand protons in each pose. We used simulations generated
using the CORCEMA-ST package to do additional scoring. Figure C compares back-calculated
STD build ups using various poses to experimental data. Figures displaying
resulting structures were generated using Chimera (http://www.cgl.ucsf.edu/chimera).

Simulation of STD intensities
based on proton positions for the protein and LewisX in
the crystal structure indicated reasonable agreement between the crystal
structure and the experimental data, as characterized by low overall
RMSD between the normalized observed and simulated STD intensities
measured for 1–4 s saturation times. However, the RMSDs for
fucose H1 and H2 during saturation at 0 ppm were quite large (Figure C). Four HADDOCK structures with no distance restraint
violations greater than 0.5 Å and total energies and HADDOCK
scores in the lowest 15% were chosen for STD simulation. Although
all four HADDOCK structures have significantly improved fit to the
fucose H1 and H2 data, only structures 1, 3, and 4 have low overall
RMSD between the experimental and simulated STD data. Structures 1
and 3 have outliers more than three times the average RMSD (Figure C). Furthermore, structure 3 has an unusual LewisX conformation missing the favorable fucose–galactose
stacking interaction. We regard the remaining HADDOCK structure (structure
4) as our best representation of the solution-bound structure.

Discussion
To date, there have been many crystal structures of the DC-SIGN
CRD binding to both oligomannose and LewisX ligands,, as well as some showing binding to the CRD plus stalk fragments,
that are oligomeric., These structures have demonstrated
that both mannoside and LewisX ligands bind in the same
pocket of the DC-SIGN CRD but interact with different sets of residues
within the binding pocket. However, potential interactions between
the ligand and the DC-SIGN molecule in an adjacent unit cell have
been observed in many of these structures, raising questions about
the possible influence of these interactions on the conformations
seen in the binding site. In this study, we used NMR titration and
STD to probe the ligand–protein binding interface as it exists
in solution and combined information from those experiments with bound
ligand conformation information from trNOE experiments. Using these
restraints, we were able to model the DC-SIGN–LewisX complex using HADDOCK and validate
these structures against the experimental STD data using CORCEMA-ST.

C-type lectins, which contain an EPN (Glu-Pro-Asn)
tripeptide motif,
are known to preferentially bind mannose, fucose, N-acetyl-glucosamine, and glucose, but they usually have little preference
for larger oligosaccharides., DC-SIGN has an EPN
motif and binds some of these monosaccharides, but, like several other
EPN-containing C-type lectins, it has enhanced binding for certain
higher-order oligosaccharides. In particular, it binds 2α-mannobiose
in preference to mannose; it also has a preference for the LewisX trisaccharide over fucose, whereas other C-type lectins prefer
the fucose monosaccharide. This indicates that DC-SIGN may also be
interacting with the branching GlcNAc or even terminal galactose despite
the absence of a common galactose interaction motif (Gln-Pro-Asp).,

Crystal structures of the DC-SIGN CRD with LewisX bound
have consistently shown the fucose residue to be bound to the Ca2+ ion within the binding pocket. Binding to Ca2+ via fucose is not surprising since there is evidence that this association
is present even for free fucose in solution. In most cases, interactions with other sugars in fucose-containing
oligosaccharides appear to be minor. There is one LewisX case in which the galactose is near the protein surface, but the
GlcNAc in this structure (PDB ID: 1SL5) is oriented away from the protein. However, this crystal structure (1SL5) also shows a distance
of only 3 Å between galactose O2 of the LewisX and
the Glu286 side chain oxygen of an adjacent DC-SIGN. This close contact is typical of hydrogen bonding and could
indicate distortion of the preferred binding orientation and conformation
of the ligand.

The best HADDOCK structure, based on docking
and STD scoring, is
overlaid with the crystal structure in Figure A. There are many similarities, but there are important differences.
The HADDOCK structure brings the galactose residue down into the binding
pocket, which also pulls the GlcNAc down closer to the protein. As
mentioned earlier, one of the key disagreements between the simulated
STD data for the crystal structure and the experimental STD data is
a large RMSD for fucose H1 and H2. In particular, the simulated values
were much higher than those observed experimentally. In the HADDOCK
structure, the fucose has been tilted slightly away from the protein,
resulting in lower simulated STD intensities in much better agreement
with the STD data.

(A) Crystal structure of the DC-SIGN CRD (green) with
LewisX (gray) bound (PDB ID: 1SL5). The conformation of the bound LewisX in the best HADDOCK structure (pink) is overlaid into the
binding site. (B) Expanded view of the binding pocket for the best
HADDOCK structure with interacting residues within 0.4 Å of van
der Waals contact shown as sticks and labeled. The fucose of LewisX is the ligand residue closest to the calcium ion, the GlcNAc
is above the fucose, and the galactose is to the left.

Figure B shows an expanded
version of the
binding pocket with primary interacting residues highlighted. Despite
the altered positioning, several potential favorable interactions
are suggested. Many of these involve hydrogen-bonding contacts, for
example, between fucose hydroxyl protons (HO4 and HO3) to carboxylate
or amide oxygens of D367, N365, and E347. Side chain terminal protons
of K368, N349, and N365 are also in a position to hydrogen bond with
fucose oxygens, O2, O3, or O4. The slight move of the GlcNAc residue
toward the surface of the protein does suggest a better hydrophobic
contact between the N-acetyl methyl of GlcNAc and
a methyl of V351 (2.4 Å proton to proton). Although we did not
see a chemical shift perturbation of the backbone amide resonances
of V351, close contact does not necessarily produce shift changes.
Additionally, the galactose, which appeared to be interacting with
an adjacent DC-SIGN molecule in the crystal structure, is now well
anchored into the protein surface. Important contacts include possible
hydrogen bonds between Gal O6, O4, and HO4 and side chain protons
of K368, K373, and D367 respectively. Although not oriented optimally
for hydrophobic contacts, the side chain of F313 makes close contacts
on one side of the galactose, whereas the side chain of L371 makes
probable hydrophobic contacts on the other side (C6 methylene protons).
These favorable contacts may help to explain why DC-SIGN preferentially
binds to the LewisX trisaccharide over the fucose monosaccharide.
The other protein residues identified as being involved in binding
by a large chemical shift perturbation or disappearance are also in
close proximity to the LewisX.

As shown in Table , the conformation of
the bound LewisX molecule is also significantly different
from what is observed in solution. Compared to the conformation of
free LewisX determined by Zierke et al. (also based on
solution NMR data), our distances between fucose H1 and the N-acetyl methyl of GlcNAc are shorter, and our distances
between fucose H6 and Gal H2 are longer. The latter deviation is seen in the crystal structure as well. There
are other solution studies of LewisX-containing ligands
bound to proteins that suggest only minor variations in bound geometry
from solution geometry. Studies of sialyl-LewisX binding
to P-, E-, and L-selectin, for example, show only the glycosidic linkage
of the sialic acid to galactose to change upon binding. However, the interaction of selectins with sialyl-LewisX is influenced strongly by sialic acid binding, in contrast
to the interaction directly with the fucose in the DC-SIGN–LewisX case.

We cannot exclude the existence of other bound
conformations, including
that found in solution or that shown in the crystal structure. Much
of the binding data is qualitative, and significant deviations between
the more quantitative STD data and its simulation remain. Both the
ligand and protein interface exhibit significant conformational freedom,
and experimental data may well represent an average over several sampled
structures. Nevertheless, the docked conformation shown must be a
major contributor to this average. It has reasonable molecular interactions
and presents a best fit to available data.

An important aspect
of the structure is the direction suggested
for linkage to additional sugars found in potential native ligands,
in other words, the direction in which the reducing end GlcNAc leaves
the CRD. In our structure, the GlcNAc residue is constrained in orientation
by both its own interactions with the protein and the bidentate interaction
of the Gal and Fuc residues with the protein. The orientation of the
reducing end GlcNAc anomeric oxygen is out and slightly to the right,
as depicted in Figure . In contrast, while
the 3,4 hydroxyl oxygens of the bound mannose of Man4 in
structure 1SL4 are involved in Ca2+ coordination, much like fucose, the reducing end of the ligand, when
the protein is similarly oriented, extends to the left. These differences
in orientation are depicted in Figure . In
a more biological context, the multiple CRDs of the membrane-bound
DC-SIGN tetramer must interact with multiple glycans displayed on
a membrane surface. Here, relative directions in which CRD binding
sites are oriented must mesh with cell-surface glycan density and
conformational distributions. Differences in reducing end directions
could, therefore, have implications for how mannoside vs fucoside
ligands on natural targets such as bacteria, viruses, and immune cells
are differentiated.

Crystal structure of the DC-SIGN CRD (green) with Man4 (teal) bound (PDB ID: 1SL4). The conformation of the bound LewisX in
the best HADDOCK structure (pink) is overlaid into the binding site.
The reducing ends of the ligands (highlighted in gray) are oriented
in different directions, which could affect the binding of larger
glycosylated targets containing these terminal ligands, especially
to full DC-SIGN tetrameric receptors as presented on cell membranes.

Conclusions
Solution-based NMR data
combined with molecular docking has produced
an improved picture of how the LewisX trisaccharide binds
to the CRD of DC-SIGN. In addition to commonly used restraints based
on STD identification of ligand epitopes and chemical shift perturbation
identification of residues in the binding pocket, simulation of STD
build-up curves proved to be a useful way of scoring docked poses.
The selected structure satisfies experimental data and produces a
physically reasonable set of molecular interactions. The structure
does depart significantly from that shown in a previously determined
crystal structure; however, that structure had additional interaction
between the ligand and a protein molecule in an adjacent unit cell
that may explain the departure. The changes in the way the reducing
end of the trisaccharide emerges from the binding site could have
implications for target recognition in the larger context of tetrameric
DC-SIGN interacting with glycans displayed on a membrane surface.

Supporting Information Available
Surface
plasmon resonance experimental
methods and results. This material is available free of charge via
the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5005014_si_001.pdf

The research
reported was initiated with support of a bridging grant from the Consortium
for Functional Glycomics. Continuing support was provided by the National
Institute of General Medical Sciences of the National Institutes of
Health under award nos. R01GM33225 and P41GM103390. The content is
solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily
represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
Molecular graphics
and analyses were performed with the UCSF
Chimera package. Chimera is developed by the Resource for Biocomputing,
Visualization, and Informatics at the University of California, San
Francisco (supported by NIGMS P41-GM103311).

