Histidine
kinases (HKs) are
common components used in signal transduction pathways that regulate
diverse responses in bacteria and fungi, including nutrient acquisition,
metabolism, virulence, adaptation to the environment, and cell development. Their absence in mammalian organisms makes them
potential targets for novel antibiotics and fungicides.− Essential for the infection by some prokaryotic pathogens,− bacterial chemotaxis, uses a HK, CheA, to convert the
sensory information detected by transmembrane chemoreceptors to the
form of a chemical signal (phosphoryl group) in the cytosol. The ligand
occupancy of the periplasmic domain of the chemoreceptors modulates
the autophosphorylation activity of CheA. CheY, a response regulator,
receives the phosphoryl group from CheA. Phosphorylated CheY subsequently
interacts with flagellar motors, resulting in the reversal of the
rotation of flagella and cell tumbling. Because the net direction
of the movement of the bacterium depends upon the switching of the
flagellar rotation in response to attractant or repellent gradients,
CheA acts as an input–output element that couples sensory information
to the swimming behavior of a bacterium.

CheA is a dimeric protein
with five domains. These include the
histidine-containing phosphotransfer domain (P1), the CheY binding
domain (P2), the dimerization domain (P3), the ATP binding/catalytic
domain (P4), and the regulatory domain (P5) (Figure S1 of the ). The P4 domain of one
subunit utilizes ATP to transphosphorylate a conserved histidine residue
in the P1 domain of the other subunit. The P2 domain binds CheY and facilitates the subsequent phosphotransfer
from the P1 domain to CheY. Free CheA undergoes basal autophosphorylation
at a slow rate. The P5 domain plays no role in basal autophosphorylation
but is essential for the regulation of CheA autophosphorylation. The
interactions of the P5 domain with chemoreceptors and a small adapter
protein, CheW, result in dramatic changes in kinase activity: the
rate of autophosphorylation of CheA increases several hundred-fold
by the apo or repellent-bound (“kinase-on” state) receptors,
while the attractant-bound (“kinase-off” state) receptors
suppress CheA autophosphorylation.− Thus, environmental
stimuli appear to shift an equilibrium between the kinase-on and kinase-off
states in chemoreceptor patches, thereby allosterically modulating
net kinase activity and flagellar rotation. The P3–P5 domains, connected by two short interdomain linkers,
form the kinase core that is able to phosphorylate an isolated P1
domain and supports chemotaxis in vivo when supplied
with the P1 domain in trans.

To elucidate the mechanism by which CheA is regulated in the
CheA–CheW–receptor
ternary complex, significant progress has been made recently in structural
studies of these proteins and their interactions.− These studies depict the architecture of the signaling complex,
the platform where CheA is regulated (a structural model of the signaling
complex is shown in Figure S2 of the ). More recently, our computational and mutational
studies have revealed that two interdomain linkers of CheA play important
roles in CheA’s enzymatic activity. The P3–P4 linker
that connects the dimerization and ATP binding domains is essential
for both basal autophosphorylation and activation of the kinase. Because the autophosphorylation reaction takes
place at the ATP binding site (the autophosphorylation active site)
that is ∼25 Å from the P3–P4 linker, the mechanistic
role of the linker in affecting the catalytic site is not clear. Here,
we investigate this interdomain linker and find that the P3–P4
linker is able to initiate long-range structural and dynamic changes
toward the catalytic center of the P4 domain, and the P4 residues
that are affected by this linker are crucial for the basal autophosphorylation
and activation of CheA.

Materials and Methods
Protein Preparation
Genes encoding P4 (residues 356–540),
P4l (residues 346–540), and P3P4 (residues 290–540)
of CheA from Thermotoga maritima were subcloned into
vector pET22b (Novagen), and the expressed proteins with C-terminal
His6 tags were purified using Ni-NTA affinity chromatography
(Qiagen). Purified proteins were dialyzed against the buffer containing
50 mM Na2HPO4 (pH7.4) and 20 mM NaCl and concentrated
to a final concentration of 0.5–1.5 mM. Strain RP3098 was used to express Escherichia coli proteins. CheA, CheW, CheY, and Tsr-containing membranes were isolated and purified following published
protocols. All site-directed mutants were generated by QuickChange
mutagenesis (Stratagene).

NMR Spectroscopy
NMR data for backbone
assignment as
well as 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC spectra were
collected at 50 °C on a Varian 600 MHz or Bruker 800 MHz spectrometer.
Sequential assignments of the P4l resonances were accomplished
with a 2H-, 15N-, and 13C-labeled
sample using TROSY versions of the triple-resonance HNCACB and HN(CO)CACB
experiments. Except for some regions
[the P3–P4 linker and the ATP lid (residues 490–510)]
that appeared to be exchange-broadened, a total of 142 of 154 non-proline
backbone residues of the P4 domain were successfully assigned. TROSY
versions of the HNCA and HN(CO)CA spectra of 2H-, 15N-, and 13C-labeled P3P4
mutants were recorded for assignments. The assignments of the wild-type
P3P4 and P4 constructs were previously reported.

CPMG Relaxation Dispersion Experiments
Relaxation dispersion
(CPMG) experiments were performed at 50 °C using an ∼1.5
mM U-[15N,2H], ILV 13CH3 sample on 500 and 800 MHz Varian Inova spectrometers equipped with
standard room-temperature triple-resonance probes. 1H CPMG
experiments were performed using the relaxation-compensated CPMG pulse
sequence, with a constant-time CPMG evolution delay of 15 ms, and the 15N CPMG experiments
were performed using a TROSY CPMG sequence, with a constant-time relaxation delay of 30 ms. Data were collected
at ∼15 different CPMG frequencies in an interleaved manner.
Errors in the relaxation rates were estimated from repeat data points.
The data were processed using NMRPipe and visualized using SPARKY. Peak intensities
were quantified using FuDA. The CPMG relaxation dispersion data were
fit to a two-state model using CATIA (http://pound.med.utoronto.ca/software.html).

ATPase Assay
The basal autophosphorylation rates of
CheA variants were measured as previously described., An Amersham Ultrospec3300 spectrophotometer was used to monitor
NADH oxidation at room temperature. The ATP hydrolysis rate was determined
by calculating the slope of a linear decay in NADH absorbance at 340
nm using the extinction coefficient (6220 M–1 cm–1) of NADH.

CheA Activation Assay
The activation
of CheA by Tsr-containing
membranes was quantified according to the published protocols.,

Nucleotide Binding Assay
The binding of ATP analogue
TNP-ATP to CheA enhanced the fluorescence at 541 nm when the nucleotide
was excited at 410 nm. The dissociation constants between CheA variants
and the ATP analogue were measured at 25 °C on a Varian Cary
Eclipse fluorometer as previously reported by Stewart et al. The buffer used in the measurements contained
50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 100 mM KCl, and 10 mM MgCl2.

Results
To specifically investigate the role of the P3–P4
linker
(residues 351–355), we performed NMR experiments on two P4
constructs from CheA of T. maritima: P4 (residues
356–540) without the P3–P4 linker and P4l (residues 346–540) with the linker residues. Most of our
atomic-resolution understanding of bacterial chemotaxis has used proteins
from the hyperthermophile T. maritima whose chemotaxis
system has components similar to those of mesophilic bacteria. The primary structure of the P4 domain of T. maritima CheA is 51% identical and 73% similar to its E. coli counterpart. Figure a shows
two superimposed 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC (transverse
relaxation-optimized and heteronuclear single-quantum correlation
spectroscopy) spectra taken from these
two constructs. The addition of 10 native residues at the N-terminal
P4 domain causes some significant changes in the NMR spectrum. The
largest chemical shift changes are observed in the resonances of residues
D392–T394. These residues are located at the interface between
the P3 and P4 domains in the crystal structure of the dimeric P3P4P5
kinase core (Figure b). This observation argues
that the interaction between the P3–P4 linker and the P4 domain
seen in the crystal structure exists in solution rather than being
a crystal packing artifact (ref (), and see below). Interestingly, some other resonances
in the NMR spectra show smaller, but significant, chemical shift changes.
When mapped onto the structure of the P4 domain, these changes appear
to propagate from the linker–P4 interface through the middle
helix of P4’s three major α-helices toward the catalytic
center of the P4 domain (Figure b). The structural
difference in this region is not seen when comparing the crystal structures
of the P4 construct lacking the native linker and the linker-containing
P3P4P5 construct (Figure S4 of the ).

Comparison of the 1H–15N
TROSY-HSQC
spectra of P4 and P4l. (a) Overlay of the 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC spectra of P4 (black) and P4l (red).
Resonances showing significant chemical shift changes upon the addition
of the linker are assigned and numbered, and the direction of the
peak movement is indicated with an arrow. The assignments of the rest
of the resonances are shown in Figure S3 of the . (b) These residues (green) are mapped
onto the structure of P3P4P5 (Protein Data Bank entry 1B3Q). The P5 domain
has been omitted. The location of the gray P3 domain is shown, but
this domain was not included in the constructs from which the spectra
in panel A were taken.

The relaxation dispersion (CPMG) experiments we performed
on the
P4l construct showed that for several amide protons (residues
360, 390–398, 400, 401, 403, and 439) and a few amide nitrogens
(residues 391–395, 517, and 518), the transverse relaxation
rate (R2,eff) depended on the frequency
(νCPMG) at which refocusing π pulses were applied
during the relaxation delay (Figure  and Figure
S5 of the ), indicating
that there is conformational exchange on the microsecond to millisecond
time scale in the protein. Consistently, all of these residues (residues
360, 390–398, 400, 401, 403, 439, 517, and 518) are either
in the helix or near it, and all the data could be fit to a single
two-state process (reduced χ2 = 1.2) with an exchange
rate constant kex of ∼1250 ±
100 s–1. The population of the minor state could
not be defined because exchange is fast compared to the change in
the chemical shift of the nuclei between the ground and excited states. In addition to recording CPMG relaxation dispersion
profiles of the P4l construct, we have also recorded data
sets using the P4 construct that did not contain the linker. Notably,
both 1H and 15N relaxation dispersion profiles
were significantly reduced in the P4 construct, as illustrated in
Figures S6 and S7 of the . These results indicate that the deletion of the linker strongly
damped relaxation in the residues that were microsecond to millisecond
dynamic in the linker-containing P4l construct. Thus, the
P3–P4 linker affects the dynamics of the residues of the P4
domain.

Relaxation dispersion curves show that there is millisecond time
scale conformational exchange in P4l. 15N CPMG
data for the amide nitrogen of residue 392 are shown in the left panel,
and the 1H CPMG data for the amide proton of residue 403
are shown in the right panel. Data recorded at 500 and 800 MHz are
shown as red and blue dots, respectively, and the solid lines are
the best fits to a global two-state process.

Chemical shift changes with different magnitudes and directions
are also seen from the same residues of the P3P4 (residues 290–540)
construct, when we compare the spectra
of the P3P4, P4l, and P4 constructs (Figure ). This observation suggests that the behavior of the interdomain
linker and its effects on the P4 domain are influenced by the presence
of the P3 domain. Bilwes et al. reported
that a linker-containing P4 construct (P4 residues 350–540)
had very low kinase activity when compared with a dimeric P3P4P5 construct.
The structural differences revealed by NMR may account for such a
dramatic difference in enzymatic activity. In addition, chemical mapping
studies have shown that some P3 residues are important for kinase
autophosphorylation, signaling complex assembly, and CheA activation. These results suggest that the state of the
P3 domain may affect the conformation of the linker, thereby affecting
CheA activity.

Differences in P4 amide NMR resonances in three constructs.
Shown
is a representative region of the 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC spectrum of P3P4 (blue) superimposed with the spectra
of P4 (black) and P4l (red).

To further assess the structural and dynamic effects of the
linker
on the P4 domain, we introduced single-amino acid substitutions (R354D
and M355A) into the linker of the T. maritima P3P4
construct. The corresponding E. coli CheA mutants
(R325D and M326A) displayed different decreases in rates of basal
autosphosphorylation (reduced by 95 and 58%, respectively) and activation
(reduced by 99 and 91%, respectively) of E. coli CheA. The 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC
spectrum (Figure S8 of the ) shows that the replacement of Arg354 with Asp dramatically changes
the dynamics of the same resonances of the P4 domain as well as some
resonances of the P3 domain, resulting in missing peaks and significant
line broadening. The interdomain linker is in two different conformations
in the crystal structure of the P3P4P5 dimer. In one conformation,
the interaction between the linker and the P4 domain is a salt bridge
formed by the conserved Arg354–Asp392 pair, while the salt
bridge is broken in the other conformation (ref () and Figure S9 of the ). Moreover, despite different
linker conformations, the Arg-Asp pairing is seen in all the structures
of our previous MD simulations (Figure S10 of the  and ref ()). Thus, we suggest that breakage of the Arg354-Asp392
pair by mutation might give rise to more states that coexist in solution,
resulting in the observed resonance broadening. The spectrum of the
other mutant, M355A, of P3P4 (Figure S11 of the ) also shows that changes in the linker
produce small but significant chemical shift changes to the region
close to the catalytic center of the P4 domain.

In an attempt
to clarify the significance of the NMR data, we mutated
some P4 residues whose resonances were perturbed by the P3–P4
linker and tested their activities in E. coli CheA
both alone and when activated by assembly into complexes with E. coli transmembrane receptor Tsr and E. coli CheW. Figure a shows that single-amino acid
substitutions at the linker–P4 interface (residues 363 and
364 of E. coli CheA, corresponding to residues 392
and 393, respectively, of T. maritima CheA) dramatically
impair the basal autophosphorylation activity of CheA. Furthermore,
we chose to mutate several residues situated along the middle helix
of P4’s three major α-helices (residues 368, 369, 372,
and 375 of E. coli CheA, corresponding to residues
397, 398, 401, and 404, respectively, of T. maritima CheA). In the crystal structures of T. maritima CheA, these residues are exposed and do not interact with other
residues. Thus, these single-amino acid substitutions seem unlikely
to cause dramatic changes in the structure. However, these mutants
also exhibit severely decreased basal autophosphorylation activity
(Figure a). In addition, we notice that a
cysteine mutant (I388C) of Salmonella typhimurium CheA (corresponding to residue 400 of T. maritima CheA and residue 371 of E. coli CheA) from previous
work in the Falke laboratory falls into the same region and showed
an ∼70% reduction in basal autophosphorylation activity. In the kinase activation assay, these mutants
also show impaired activation by the E. coli transmembrane
chemoreceptor Tsr (Figure b), indicating that
these residues are important for CheA activation, as well. Moreover,
panels a and b of Figure  show that kinase
activation appears parallel to kinase basal activity as these amino
acid replacements disrupt CheA autophosphorylation activity to relatively
the same extent in the basal and activated states. These results echo
our previous observation that the P3–P4 linker is related to
both basal activity and activation of CheA.

Mutational
analyses of the residues affected by the linker in E. coli CheA. (a) ATPase assays (standard deviation; n =
3) for the basal autophosphorylation activities. (b)
CheA activation assays (standard deviation; n = 3)
for the activation abilities. (c) Mapping the mutation sites onto
the structure of the P4 domain.

Crystal structures of the P4 domain in complex with ATP analogues
show that the P3–P4 linker and the influenced residues are
not involved in nucleotide binding (ref () and Figure c). Our NMR
results also show that the linker does not perturb the chemical shifts
of the residues responsible for nucleotide binding (residues 405,
408, 409, 412, 413, 449, 453, 531, etc.) (Figure S3 of the ). In addition, we tested
the affinity of some of these mutants for the ATP analogue TNP-ATP and found that these amino acid replacements
did not significantly alter the dissociation constants for the analogue
(Table S1 of the ). Therefore, these residues may be involved in interactions with
the P1 domain and/or activation for ATP hydrolysis.

Discussion
In the previous work from our laboratory, some differences in the chemical shifts of the P4 residues were
observed when the spectra of the P4 and P3P4 constructs were compared,
but the significance of this observation and the physical interaction
underlying these chemical shift differences were not clear then. In
light of our recent results describing the importance of the interdomain
linker, we focus on the P3–P4
linker and establish the structural and functional connection between
the linker and the catalytic center of the P4 domain. The results
from our current NMR and biochemical work indicate that the interdomain
linker is able to propagate long-range structural and dynamic changes
through the middle helix of the P4 domain to the catalytic site of
the P4 domain.

Prior NMR and mutational
studies, have characterized the interaction between
the P1 and P4 domains
and identified a group of P4 residues that are important for the binding
of the P1 domain to the P4 domain. These residues include some of
the residues influenced by the P3–P4 linker. Thus, it seems
that the role of the linker and the perturbed P4 residues might be
related to the P1–P4 interaction. However, we find that it
is imprudent to make such an assignment. Some NMR chemical shifts
of the P4 residues perturbed by the P1 interaction might result from
unproductive collisions as both disulfide cross-linking and pulsed dipolar ESR experiments have revealed that the P1 domain is in the vicinity
of the P4 domain of the other subunit, rapidly and nonspecifically
colliding with the P4 domain. Also, a lack of kinetic data and structural
details about the mechanism of CheA autophosphorylation prevents one
from distinguishing the involvement of these residues in P1 binding
from the catalytic events that lead to autophosphorylation. Recent
mutational studies of the P1 domain of CheA support a P1–P4 complex model derived from computational
docking and molecular dynamics simulations. In this model, P1 interacts with some P4 residues surrounding the
ATP binding site. More work on the P4 domain may assign the involvement
of different groups of P4 residues to either function.

Colleagues
in the field have argued that signal transmission along
the chemotaxis receptors involves a coupled series of frozen–dynamic
transitions from the ligand binding sites, through the HAMP domains,
methylation region, and CheA/CheW interaction regions.,− The structural model of the chemotaxis signaling
complex derived from EM images and X-ray structures (Figure S2 of
the ) describes a
scenario in which two trimers of receptor dimers manipulate one CheA
dimer with the help of two CheW molecules. In this context, it is
possible that the dynamic events in the receptors change the conformation
and/or dynamics of the P3–P4 linkers and further affect the
kinase active site via the middle helix of the P4 domain.

Supporting Information Available
Structural models
of CheA (Figure
S1) and the chemotaxis signaling complex (Figure S2), additional NMR
spectra and assignments (Figures S3, S8, and S11), structural alignment
of the P3P4P5 construct against the isolated P4 domain (Figure S4),
additional CPMG relaxation dispersion curves (Figure S5), differences
in microsecond to millisecond dynamics between the P4 and P4l constructs (Figures S6 and S7), the Arg354-Asp392 pair in the crystal
structure and simulation structures of the P3P4P5 construct (Figures
S9 and S10), and dissociation constants of CheA variants for TNP-ATP
(Table S1). This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi4012379_si_001.pdf

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
NMRnuclear magnetic resonance

TROSYtransverse relaxation-optimized
spectroscopy

HSQCheteronuclear single-quantum correlation spectroscopy

CPMGCarr–Purcell–Meiboom–Gill

HKhistidine kinase

Ni-NTAnickel-nitrilotriacetic
acid, nickel-charged resin

Tris2-amino-2-(hydroxymethyl)propane-1,3-diol

ESRelectron spin resonance

TNP-ATP2′(3′)-O-(trinitrophenyl)adenosine 5′-triphosphate

HAMPhistidine kinases, adenyl
cyclases, methyl-accepting proteins, and phosphatases.

